AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION

OF

THE SliSKRUTA SAMKITA

Vol. 1.—SC'7RASTIIAjVAM.

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION

OF

PBE ;gPSH RUTA SAMHITA

BASED ON ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT.

-it-

EDITED AND PUBLISHED
BY

KAVIRAJ KUNJA LAL BHISHAGRATNA

TH A FULL AND COMPREHENSIVK INTRODUCTION, TRANSLATION
Of DIFFERENT READINOS, NOTES, COilfAKATlTB
VIEWS, INDEX, GLOSSARY
&

PLATES.

( IN THREE VOLUMES. )

Vol. I.-SUTRASTHANAM.

CALCUTTA :

No, 10, KASHI GHOSE’S LANE.

PrlDled by J. N. Dose.
Collejc Squore, Colculln.

(AV Rtghljt RrsnTfdJ

WAHAMAHOPADHYAYA KAVIRAJ DVARKANATH SEN, KAVIRATNA,
( In Durbar dress )

;i 1!

— ~ -

nifyriivnM i

T '•’’: r.rri-iy rr y/r-'r/.r :; T T rf: t- VU<^r.

Tr>’u:?r5TT^ !

tr^nf 'ir TirTn'^rmr^i^fn I'^n

'TrnV^n‘’-:iJ'”7‘:rfynn7rnrr~?ti

nJ3?n; fT7“PT?tirT; i

tr?T<f^^r^^KT^rr^r7rxf^^f^ «[vprt^f

an; i7.T:rT;;Ta^r {trnrfh Tpn? ip^r^T fenrr ii^i!

1 J.v- If »S'

i»i'.5{ jj;:} :.i.} f'rr,*,:. attain'ii nts

THIS WORK

IS

M.MIAMAfUM'ADHVAVA KAVIJU/

SKI nVAKAKANATH SEN, KAVIRATN^

rv

rits «uati:fui. and humum: pupil

KUXJA LAL SHARMA.

PRliFACE

II

does the results of researches made by our ancient
Rishis in the land of their origin, may contribute no
small amount of useful information to those bodies.
“We have many things to learn" obsen-es Lt. Col. C. P.
Lukis, M.D., F.R.C.S., Principal, Mediail College,

Calcutta, “from the people of this country in respect
of medicine and medical science,” and we doubt not
that an accurate knowledge of the contents of this
splendid monument of the Ayuiweda in quarters where
it has ever}’ chance of being utilised and improved
upon will make the human race better equipped to
combat the ills of life.

A few remarks on the method we have adopted in
editing this work are necessary by way of explana-
tion. We have carefully collated all the available
texts of the Sushruta Samhita, whether printed
or othersvise, expunging from tlie body of our work
all texts, which, though not proved to be wholly
spurious, are of questionable authority, and putting
them in foot-notes as “Different Readings" or “Additional
Te.xts.” In cases of doubt or discrepancy of opinion
we have thought fit to abide by the decision of
our revered preceptor, Mahamahopddhydya Kaviraj
Dvdrkdnath Sen, Kaviratna, and inserted within
brackets explanatory clauses, where a strictly literal
translation of texts would not convey their true meaning.
In many instances it is impossible to find in the English
language equivalent words for the technical terms of the
Ayuia^eda. In such cases we have put approximate
English words within brackets, after the original Sanskrit
terms. For example we have translated the term Ojah
as albumen. But the Ojah of the Ayurveda is a disputed
thing. It may mean something like but not exactly
albumen; glycogen, which contributes largely to

in

the reproductive activity of the body in certain instances,
would appear to be the more correct description. In
cases like ,this we have not put before our readers
any suggestions of our own, but left them free to
draw their own inference. And for this purpose we
further intend to append to the last volume of this
work an index and a glossar}’ illustrating the possible
meanings of the- Ayurvedic terms with English and
Latin synonym^, wherever possible. The tme meaning
of the Ayurveda can be better explained or understood
only with the light of modern science, and we leave it
to our European colleagues to catry on the research on
the lines we have suggested with regard to this ancient
system of medicine, which a better knowledge of its
principles and methods will enable them to do.

By a lamentable oversight, the terras V^yu, Pittam,
Kaphah and Dosha have been translated as wind, bile,
phlegm and humour in the first few chapters.

For the sake of convenience we have divided the
entire work into three volumes, the first containing only
the Sutrasthanam, the second Nidanam, Sharira and
Chikitsd, and the third Kalpa and Uttara Tantram.

We have adopted the diagrams of surgical instruments
from that most valuable work of the Thakore Saheb of
Gondal, called the Historj^ of the Arj’^an Medical
Science, for which I am particularljr indebted to His
Highness.

In conclusion, we beg to convey our sincerest thanks
to our preceptor's son Kaviraj Jogendran^th Sen Vid}’-^-
bhusana M. A., Dr. U. D. Baneiji L. R. C. P., M.-R. C. S.
(Lond), and Lt. Col. K. P. Gupta M. A., M. ^D., I. M. S.,
Professor J^nakinith Bhattdchdrya M.A. B.L., P.R.S.
for having kindly examined the different portions
of the manuscript. I am grateful to Dr. Surendran^th

IV

Gosv.imi B.A., L.M.S. loo, for the kind intertel he
has all along taken in the publication of this work and
for various intelligent suggestions, which have been of
considerable help to me.

My thanks are also due to numerous learned authors,
ancient and modem from whose writings, I have found
it necessaty- to make frequent quotations.

10, Kashi (iiiosEs I.A.SE. Kl'SJA LAL inn.'^ir.vGKATNA.

it> D'ctvihtr, 7507 .

CALCUTTA. J Kttfirnj.

INTRODUCTION.

Sushruta His age and personality A few
preliminary obser\’ations regarding the technique of the
Ayurvedic system of medicine are necessary at the
outset to correctly understand the aim and scope of the
Sushruta Samhita. Who was Sushruta ? When and
where did he live and flourish ? These are questions
that would naturally suggest themselves to the readers of
the following pages ; but they can only be imperfectly
answered like all similar questions respecting the lives
of our ancient worthies. In a country like India
where life itself was simply regarded as an illusion, the
lives of kings or commotiers were deemed matters of little
moment to the vital economy of the race : and all histories
and biographies were looked upon as the embodiment
of the flimsy vanities of life. Lives of saints and canonised
kings had been made use of in certain instances as themes
of national epics. But they were intended more to elucidate
or enunciate the doctrines of certain schools of Ethics or
Metaphysics than to record any historical fact or event.
Authentic history we have none beyond chronicles of state
events and royal names in some instances ; and tliose which
are usually found in the Sanskrit Pur.inas arc strange com-
binations of myths and legends, which often contradict
each other. Hence the utter futility of attempts to c-vplain
a historical fact by the light of a votive medal or tablet
unearthed perhap-. from the niitis of one of our ancient
citic*^. Such an endeavour <;erves, in most casc-s. onlv to
make the '• darkne^- visible." and the confuvion mo;«-
confomiikal.

11

ivTnont'rrioN,

Identity of Sitsbruta and Divodtisa :-“It >' »>i' y
to assert that Sushnilawasof the race of Visbv.lniitra. The
Mahabharatatii (t) reprosonlshim as a son of that royal sage.
This coincides wnlh the description given of him in lire present
recension of the Sanihila, Tire Garuda Pnranani (c) p1acc«
Divodasa as fourth in descent from Dhanvantnri. the first
propounder of medical science on earth, whereas the
Sushruta Samhita describes the two as identical persons. Rut
this apparent anomaly in the Samhii.-i can be accounted
for, if we consider that in some parts of India the custont
still prevails of appending, for the purposes of better identi-
fication, the name of one's father, or of a glorious ance.stor
to one’s name, and it is iherclore not sm prising thni
Divodasa (the preceptor of Sushruta), who was a firm
believer in the doctrine of psychic transmigration, should
represent himself as an incarna'ion of Dhnnvnntnri, and
assume his name and style in the u<unl wav. Beyond this
meagre genealogv we possess no trustworthy information
regarding the life and personality of Sushruta. the father of
Indian Surgery.

Age of the Sushruta Samhita We have no means of
ascertaining what the Samhita was like as Originally written
hy Sushruta, the present being onlj' a recension,or rather a

(i) nnnitt-ilsu rn^irsi ^gspnaur i

MahAbhSnUam— Annsha-vin P.arvn, Cli. IV.
r^stifkaufuTTfj t

nhro: frgrp^i a

Oatuda Poranitm, Chap. 139, Vs.

ISlUulH-n ION.

iii

of »ci.ciiMf>i)s, tnndc by N.iR.ujima (i). .Ml opiiiioDb
Concur in iilcmilyinf: liitn witli Mu- cdcbr.UCiI (inindcr of
;!tc M.uihy.nnik.i rcltool of pliilo'-opliy — a fact

wliicb inaU’tially a^^!^t^ u*- in lixiny tin: aye of ilic pro^ciu
Santbita. A few tpioiaiiom frotn tlic Vricblba (old) Sublnnia
ate all tltal are picrcrvcd “f the oriyinal Sainliit.i. IJiil
tbcii gcnuinencf'^ is ol a problematic cliaractcr, and we arc
not sme whether thc\ aie the produclions o( le.-ser liyIUs,
r)t i>l ancient though Ic'-s renowned Cotnincntalors, atlii-
hntcil to the master to invest the-n with a greater sanctity
and anthori'y — a practice which was ipiilc coininon
ainoiig-t the hdrliographcis of Ancient India.

Date of Nrfgrirjuna : — At all evenis Nag.irjuna wlio
redacted the Snshnila Samhila lived about the latter part ol
the foitrth centnry before the Christian era ;( 2 ) and the

tl) “rift nu rjfl^ rtftirnpsrjiin vtTit^ I pfnrir^Tit-

rrrt'’

l>allai>.i'> Coiiiiiitrnl.aiy, Siin.r'lh.'in.Tni, Cfi. I. 1,

D.itlan.i. nicnieins the names nf Jejjada, Gaj'atl.i'si ole., .o tlio roiliiclors
• >f the oiiginal SamliitiS, and rejects as s mri<)iis or of tjuostionnhlc autitority
the tests wliich c-tniiol Iso found in their editions of the work. .Most
protuhlv the .aulhorit.aliso verses are tjiiotations from the Vriddha Suslirtilii.

Uceeii'ion or PratisamsWr i consists in curladini; sutemenis that have
lieen m.ide inordinately elnlKir.tte, anti in dilaline n 'on trullis tluil have
hecn very suceinctly tle.dt within the origin il Ik.-U. .\ Keil.iclor or
l’falis:iiiiashail.'i makes an tild laitik new again.

§3thti' 1

n=ft' n

A Samliiut, on the other fuind, deals with aphorisms contained in the

Vedas. ,

P^ifncn: i

(2) tfyt wrr^ft: rrTf*rfl't: i

-mirt n

p -q »tnn^: * n

RAjatnrangini I. Taranga, Vs. 172-173.

IV

INTKODUtn'ION.

original or Vriddha Sushrula nniit have been wriUen al
least two centuries earlier in order to acquire that hoary
authority and prescription of age, which alone could
have given its right to a recension at the time. Several
scholars on the authority of a verj- vague and general
statement concerning the recension of the Samhita
in Dallana’s commentary, ascribe the authorship of the
Uttaratantram flatter portion of 'the Sushruta Samhita) to
Nagarjuna. We. on the other hand, hold the Uttaratantram
to be neither an interpolation, nor a subsequent addition,
but that it forms an integral portion of the book as it was
originally written, though not planned by the Rishi.
In the first Chapter of Sutraslhanam Divoddsa formally
divides the Science of A'yurveda into eight subdidsions,
such as, the Shal3’a (surger j-). Sh&lakya (portion treating of
diseases restricted to super-clavicular regions such as the
ejres, etc.), Kaj-a-Chikitsa (general diseases such as, fever,
etc.), but does not speak anything about them in the first five
Sthanas or subdivisions of the book. It is only once in
the 25th chapter of the Suirasthanam that he mentions
the name of Netravartma (diseases of the c\-clids) in con-
nection with the classification of surgical operatiom. It is
impossible that Divodasa would fall short of his duties
by omitting to give instructions on all the subdidsions of
the Ayurveda as he promises at the outset, or that Sushruta
would leave his Samhita, which is pre-eminently a work
on surgetyq incomplete by banishing ophthalmic surgerj-,
lar3'ngotom3- or fever-therapeutics from his work. From
the general plan of the book we can safely assert that
Sushruta dealt with easier or more elementar3' topics in
the first five subdivisions of his Samhita in the manner of
our tuodern progressive readers, reserdng the discussion
of those requiring a more advanced knowledge and skill
for the Uttaratantram. The Uttaratantram has not been
included ivithin the five original subdidsions of the Samhita
inasmuch as it embraces and more elaborately discusses

ts IKVUH >

V

Ir :iii)».Utty hclon;: ti>. IT ;><<' bm nicHlciii.illy
tt'.ctuu'iictl in ihv'>M; mbilivivioij^. Hciicc il n more ol
the ti.untc <’! .'in .fpjjrnrli.v o: Kjppicmcoi, .irisiiig out of (}r‘
exiucnric'' rf the 0(i;:in:\I *-nh(livi^iMti;- ft is pioli.ihle iliai
N-ii: trjtioa have rerljete J ihi.s part of the S.ifnhit.i

in tonmron with it^ other prntiojts tn

Western opinions on the subject : - The tom-ensub

of oj'inioiib to (rlace Nagarjnii.) in the lirbi

ipi.ntrr ef the tltirt! Century H. C. fi). and for fixing
tiudmita as a coinomporat v of S.ikva Sinlta HiKhlha. It
is eontcinied tlial lire age iinnrediatcly preccdiitg Sakya
Muni v.as a period of liecadenco in Hintiti ihonghl : and
lire Snsiinita Sanrhit/i nrn't have heen lire fruit of a revived
in'.elicctual neiivily 'vhich usually follows tire advent of a
irew creed — an assumption which is m favour of the
hyp illrcvis of ftreck iitflucnte otr lire Hindu systeirr of
trredicine. But great irren there had bceir in India before
Buddha, The age which iurtrrcdiatcly jrreccderl the age
of Buddha uas by n<> irreaus an age of ilccndeirce projierly
speakirrg, lire age which followed the riownfali of Buddiiisnr
sliow.s, on lire coniraiv, .signs of true deeadenue Iirdi.i had
had eirrincni (ilrilosophcrs and scietrlibls alirrosi coirleiirpo-
raneouslv with lire great Buddha. I'he chronological factb
collected above from the Malrdhlr.iralairr. airJ the (ianida
Puranam could hive been eoitslrued to prove that lire,
age of Svtshrula was prior to that of the Malr.ihlraralanr
but for the internai evidence furnished by the Samhilri
itself as to the probable dale of its composition which we
shall Itave occasion to deal with later on.

Extraneous Evidence Sushruia is mentioned in the

(1) MahAmaliop^dhyaj-a Kavirrfj Ovdrakit NAlh Sen KaviriUna of
CalcnlUi subscribes to this opinion — Tr.

(2) Bacl’s Buddhistic Records of the Western World. Vol. 11 . P. 212.

• Stein’s RAjatarangini.

(3) Laiita-Vistaram — Kdja K. L. Milter's Edition, Chapter I.

Vi

ISTKODUCTION.

Vdrtikas of (i) KAlyayana {4 Century B. C.) and \vc )) 3 vc
no hesitation in saying that the original Samliila was
wiitten at least two centuries before the birth of Buddha.
\Vc are equally ready to admit, on the other hand, that
the final recension of theSamhiui by Nagarjuna, at least llie
form in which we have it, was made about the second
Century B. C.

Two Nffgarjunas Several scholars, on the authority
of Dallana (the celebrated commentator of the Sushrula
Samhita) endeavour to establish the identity of N;ig.irjuna
(the redactor of this SamhilA) with his namesake, the
celebrated alchemist of the tenth Century (2). But ilicir
contentions fall to the ground when we know that many
verses of the Sushruta Samhita occur in the works of
Bagbhat, (Ashtangahridayam) and Madhava (Nidanam),
which are two of the works which were translated by the
order of the Kaliph (3) in the eighth century'. The internal
evidences of the book do not supply us with any nuthcJuic
material to compose anything like a biography of this
father of Hindu Surger)'.

Internal Evidence:— The line in the Samhita. which
has formed the veritable bone of contention amongst
scholars of all shades of opinion as throwing n light upon
the probable dale of its composiiion, uccuis in the Sli.irir.i —
Slhaiiam, in cinnectioii with the ilevelopment of the faaal
body and reads as “Subhuti Gautama said that it is the
trunk that first developed.’'

Conflicting testimonies and the uncertain indication
of materialB at our disposal It is a matter of historic

(1)

KiljnSyana’.^ V&ilikas lo Pitnini’s Grammar.

(2) 1

Chaktiv T)uUn. — Uashftyandhikara.

(3) r. C. Roy— Hindu CbcmUliy- p. XVIII* (1902),

TNTROntTCTION.

vn

certainty tliat Subhuti was one of the personal disciples
of Sakya Sinha Buddha, and that it was customary
amongst the contemporary Buddhists to append the appeia-
tion of their (i) lord (Gautama or Bodhisattva) to the name
of a proselyte to accentuate his wisdom and sanctity in the
world. A certain section of scholars is never tired of setting
up this line as a conclusive evidence of the fact that the
Samhita was, at best, a contemporary production of early
Buddhism. But they shut their eyes to opinions of
Shaunaka and others on the subject quoted exactl}' in the
same portion of the book, which places the date of its
composition at least several centuries earlier. Shaunaka,
who was the sixth in remove from the immortal Vydsa in
direct line of discipleship, was the author of the renowned
Shaunaka Samhitu of the Alharvan. These facts lend a
very plausible colour to our hypothesis that the original
Sushruta Samhita which, was first composed perhaps con-
temporaneously with the latter portions of the Atharvan,
naturally discussed the opinions of Shaunaka and other
Vedic embryologists, while Nag^rjuna, at the time of
redacting that book, quoted the opinion of his contemporary
Subhuti for the purpose of giving him an equal status with
the Vedic Rishis, if for nothing else.

Greek Influence : — As regards Hellenic influence on the
Hindu system of medicine and on the Sushruta Samhita in
special, we must disabuse our mind of all sentiments of
racial vanity and proceed to investigate the case in a
scientific and unprejudiced spirit before giving a more
detailed account of the contents of the Sushruta Samhita.

(I) Mgfiij'ma Bodhisattva was well practised in the art of compound-
ing medicine. Nfigddtma Bodhisattva by moistening all the great stones
with a dmne and superior decoction changed them into gold. — Bael’s
Buddhistic Records of the western world Vol. II.

trsnRfhsHWt i

g' h vtsifl sr Mi >tihtir*ii.‘eid n

Anuvfik 19. 45. 46. 5.

vni

INTKOnUCTlON.

Sushruta and Hippocrates From the very appnreiii
similarity which exists between the contents of this Saiiihit;i
and the aphorisms of Hippocrates, many western scholars
are apt to conclude too hastily that the ancient Indians
drew their inspiration in the healing art from tlie medical
works of the Greeks. But the reverse may be said of
the Greeks as well with the greater confidence because such
an assertion is supported by historic facts, and confirmed by
the researches of the scholars of the west (l). According
to all accounts Pythagoras was the founder of the healing
art amongst the Greeks and the Hellenic peoples in general
(2). This great philosopher imbibed liis mysteries and
metaphysics from the Brahmanas of India. Mr. Pocock
in his yHo'm m Greece identifies him with Buddhagitrns or
Buddha, and it is but an easy inference to suppose that
he carried many recipes and aphorisms of his master’s
Ayurveda witli him. The sacred bean of Pythagoras is
thought to have been'the {3) Indian Nelumbium (Utpalaui).
We know that simultaneously with the birth of Buddhism,
Buddhist Sramanas were sent out to Greece, .Asia minor.
Egypt and ether distant countries to preach their new
religion. They were known to the Greeks and
there is good reason to believe that the Greek Simnoi
(venerable) were no other than the Buddhist Sramanas (4).
Now a missionary usually leaches the sciences of his
country- in addition to the preaching of his gospel. The
distant mission stations or monasteries of Buddhism were

(l) There is no ground whatever to suppose ttiat Sushruta borrowed
his sj-stem of medicine from the Greeks. On the contrarj-, there is mucli
to tell against such an idea — Weber’s Ilistorj' of Indian Literature.

(a) The Origin and Gromh of the Healing Art — Bedroe P. 162,

(3) Pratt’s Flowering Plants. Vol. I P. 57.

(4) These Simoi (venerable) whom Clement of Alexandria has
narrated to have rendered worship to a pj-ramid originally dedicated to
the relies of a god, were the Buddhist Arhats (venerables) Sramanas.

Lalila-Vistaram — Rija RAjendra Lala Milter's Edition, Cli. I.

isrK'>>»i:. TioN.

IX

the jMiiii vi iUic" li‘'t ntrilimniiic culture

in lii't.int lam!>. .HKi Hippr'crntcr-, tlmiiph ’ic did liis utmost
to iihcrair iiu'diial scirnce from the thtaldoin of s icoulntivc
phili'vyj'hv. yri miv;lu have thoujjlu it necessary to retain
only thn;e irutits tire A’vitrvcd.r which PyllraRoras and
the fhiddhistic brothcrhon.l might Itave iinjiortcd into lii>
coontty. and which tin tmt exactly appertain to iltc domain
of pure metaphysics. Of comse. it is ipiitc possible for men
of different naiinnalitics to arrive at tlic same truth or
conchnion inilcpetidcntly- There arc coiiicitlcncc.s in science
as in art and plrilosoplty. (t ) (iraviiatinn and ciiculation
of blood (l) were known to the Indians long before
the births of Newton and Harvey in Enropc. The cele-
brated atomic theory was preached in the Gangetre valley
some live hundred year.s before tlie birth of Christ (3).
Uul well may we ask those, who still .adhere to this Hellenic
hobby, to look at the reverse side of the picture as well.
It may he .<-laiod without the least fear of contradiction
that the Charaka and Sushruia, through the Channel of
.■\rabic, Pcr.vian and Latin translations still form the

(l) rrfl ttm rjrj rro’ rj^tfsnjr?; rgrWJJ I

■stnssjS nTptr.tiVi Kifrt rjS att: ^ n .

Sidflh'inlu Shfroiii.ini (U!Ki**k.uacb.’Iry.iy.i) (ioloflliyAya-

(a) vtujmrf. ’pqrltiirnt’fipnx I gsejj-

sirsrrpp rp5pp vftf a gifw Ktri fim:, brni^r

TWWm; 1 rrmBsfnsnt 1 (Bhavaprakdsha).

The IlSrita Samhili. which according to certain scholars, is older than
the SushruUi Samhiti, refers to the circulation of blood in describing
Vfinduroga (Ana’mia). The disease, he observes, is caused by eating clay
whicli thus blocks the lumen of veins and obstructs the circulation of blood.
Bhfivamisra, the celebrated author of BhAvaprakfisham, and who is a
century older than Harvey, has the above couplets bearing on the subject.

(3) Vaiseshika Uarshana by Kanfida.

2

X

INTRObtJCTlOX.

basis of all systems of scientific medicines in the world (i).

Of these, the Sushruta Samhita is the most representative
work of the Hindu system of medicine. It embraces all
that can possiblj' appertain to the science of medicine (2).

Susliruta prior to Oharaka : — The general consensus
of expert opinion is to place Charaka prior to Sushruta in
respect of time. But the Puranas unanimously describe
Sushruta as a disciple of Dhanvantari, the first-propounder
of medical science. The long compounds (samdsas) used
by him, the prose and metrical portions of the Sushruta
after the models of Jaimini, Patanjali, and other philosophi-
cal writers who had adopted prose or metre according to
the exegetic or rationalistic tenor of the subjects in their
works, have all been cited to prove Sushruta a contemporary
of the Darshanas, or of Buddha. But these maj- serve, at
least, to fix the date of the recension by Nagarjuna, i.c., the
Sushruta Samhita as we have it, but can never help to
determine the chronology of Sushruta, the disciple of Dfian-
\-antari “who was churned out of the primordial ocean in
the golden age (Satya Yuga) (3). On the other hand, if

(l) A. “The great works of Chaiaka arrd Snshrola were transialed into
Arabic, under the patronage of Katiph Altnansnr, in the seventh century.
The .Arahic version of Sushruta is known by the name of “ Kelale-
Shawshoore-al-Hindi.'* These translations in their turn were rendered into
Latin. The LaUn versions formed the basis of European medicine, which
remained indebted to the Eastern sdence of medicine down to the
seventeenth centniy." — History of the -Aryan Medical science (ThSkorc
Siheb of Gondal) P. 196.

B. For the indebtedness of Arabic school of Medicine to the works of
Indian masters, see Puschmann 1 ’. 162.

C. Bedro’e, Book IV. Ch. II. aS6 — 299.

(i) Dr. Wise (Hindu system of medicine).

Gamda Parfinant. Onp. 142. Vp.

INTROmiCTION.

Xl

llic leslim'tnies of the Puninas have any historical worth,
we can safely place him somewhere in the Satya Yuga, (age)
at least in those dim centuries which immediately succeeded
the composition of the Atharvan. Charaka, too, in connec-
tion with his discourse on the development of the foetal body
has cited the opinion of Dhanvantari (i) on the subject
(the same as promulgated in the Sushruta S'amhita) &
referred his disciples to the Dhanvantari school of surgeons
(meaning Sushruta and his school) in cases where surgical
aid and knowledge are necessary ; this proves that Sushruta
was before Charaka.

Sushruta as a Surgeon : — Sushruta was emphatically a
surgeon, and the Sushruta Samhita is the only complete
book we have which deals with the problems of practi-
cal surgery and midwifery. Almost all the other Samhitas
written by Sushruta’s fellow students are either lost to us,
or are but imperfectly preserved. To Sushruta may be attri-
buted the glory of elevating the art of handling a lancet
or forceps to the status of a practical science, and it may
not be out of place here to give a short liistory of the
Ayurveda as it was practised and understood in Pre-.?uhsrutic •
times if only to accentuate the improvements which he
introduced in every branch of medical science.

Commentators of the Sushruta Samhita : — We would
be guilty of ingratitude if we closed this portion of our
dissertation without expressing a deep sense oi our obliga-
tion to Jejjada Achdrya, Gayadasa, Bhdskara, Madhava,
Brahmadeva, Dallana and Chakrapdni Datta, the celebrated
commentators and scholiasts of the Samhita, who have
laboured much to make the book a repositorj' of priceless

(i) I

Charaka, Shfirirasthdnam. Chap. V.

Charaka, Chikitshdsthdnani. Cliap. V.

INTRODUCTION.

XII

wisdom and experience. Dallana lias made use of all the
commentaries in revising and collating the texts of
Sushruta Samhita.

Origin and History of the A'ynrvcda In the science
of medicine, as in all other branches of study, the ancient
Aryans claim to have derived their knowledge from the
gods through direct revelation. Sushruta in his Samhita
has described the Ayurveda as a subdivision (Upanga) of the
Atharvan (i), while according to others the science of the
Ayurveda has its origin in the verses of the Rik Samhita
(2). Indeed the origin of the science is lost in dim anti-
quitj'. Death and disease there had been in the world since
the advent of man ; it was by following the examples of
lower animals in disease, that our primitive ancestors
acquired by chance the knowledge about the properties of
many valuable medicinal drugs. There is a verse in the
Rigveda which shows that the lower animals were the
preceptors of man in matters of selecting food stuffs and
medicinal simples (3'. Individual experiences in the realms
of cure and hygiene were collected, and codified, and thus
formed the bases of the present Ayurveda. The verses in
the V'’edas clearly mark each step in the progress of medical
knowledge. The properties of a new drug were always
hymned in a Vedic verse with a regularity which enables us
to put our finger upon the very time when a particular
drug of our Materia Medica first came to be of service of
man (4).

(1) .Siishmta Samhit.-t, SuirasthKnnm. Ch. I. 3.

(2)

Uharan.a Vr-utux by Vj’Aw.

( 3 ) 1 ’Rif? I I \%

(4) A. sit: mu: 1

AlKarx-an S.iinhii/t
u. -See Mi.. Hml I, 2 11. 4- /■ 9- 25. 2? and 36.

IXTROmiCTlOX,

xin

Discrepancies accounted for Verses on medicine,
hygiene, and surgery, etc. lie scattered throughout the four
Vedas, Those having bearing on Medicine proper occur
most in the Rigveda, and perhaps it was for this reason that
Agniveslia, wlio was a physician, has ascribed the origin of
the Ayurveda to revelations in the Rik Samhita. Precepts
relating to the art and practice of surgery are found most in
the Atharvan (i), which amply accounts for the fact of
Sushruta's opinion of holding the Ayurveda as a subdivision v
of the Atharvan, as he was pre-eminently a surgeon himself.

Different kinds of physicians Vedic India, like
Ancient Egypt, recognised the principle of the division of
labour among the followers of the healing art. There were
Shalya Vaidyas (surgeons), Bhisaks (physicians) and Bhisag-
atharvans (magic doctors), and we find that at the time of
the Mahdbharatam, which nearly approaches the age of our
author, the number of the sects had increased to five which
were named as Rogaharas (physicians^, Shalyaharas (sur-
geons), Vishaharas (poison curers), Krityaharas (demon-
doctors) and Bhisag-Atharvans (2).

In the Vedic age (before the age qf Sushruta) physicians
had to go out into che open streets, calling out for patients
(3', They lived in houses surrounded by gardens of
medicinal herbs. The Rigveda mentions the names of a v
thousand and one medicinal drugs (4). Verses eulogising
the virtues of water as an all-healer, and of certain trees and
herbs as purifiers of the atmosphere are not uncommon in the
Vedas. Indeed the rudiments of Embryology, Midwifery,
child management (pediatrics) and sanitation were formu-

Rik Samhita I M. 116-16.

(2) Mahabhfiratam. .Shintiparva. RijadharmAnushishan Pan’fidhySra.

(3) I

Rigved.a. IX M. 1 12,

(4) tm ^ ’Isr:! friTO Rik.

XIV

iNTKonucnox.

lated in llie age of the Vedas and Brahmanas, and \vc shall
presently see how from lliese scanty and confused materials
Sushruta created a science and a Samhita which invite the
admiration of the world even after thousands of years of
human progress.

Origin of A'ynrvedic Snrgery In India, as in all
other countries, curative spells and healing manlr.as preceded
medicine (i) ; and the first man of medicine in India was
a priest, a Bhisag Atharvan, who held a superior position to
a surgeon in society. The first Aryan settlements in the
Punjab were often assailed bj- the dark aborigines of the
country, and in the wars that ensued surgeons had fre-
quently to attend to the .Aryan chiefs and soldiery. So in
the Rigveda (2) we find that legs were amputated and
replaced by iron substitutes, injured eyes were plucked out,
and arrow shafts were extracted from the limbs of the
Aryan warriors. Nay we have reasons to believe that
many difficult surgical operations were successfully per-
formed, though some of them sound almost incredible.
But although the aid of surgerv was constaiulj’ sought
for, surgeons were ^not often allowed to mi.v in the
Brahmanic society of Vedic India. This is hinted at b}'
our author when he says that it was during the wars be
tween the gods and demons that the .Ashvins, the surgeons
of heaven, did not become entitled to an}' sacrificial oblation
till they had made themselves eligible for it by uniting the
head of the god of sacrifice to his decapitated body. The
story of the progress of Ayurvedic surgery is long and inter-
esting, but it must suffice here to mention that with the

(1) Bedroe’s Origin of the Healing Art, and Sir John Lubbock’s
Prehistoric times^

(2) fsmBrrt n

* 4 V 4 «

Rik Satnhita I A. S Ad. lS6 S. u6. 5.

iNiHoni.rTios.

XV

tcmtn t>! jxr.icc, Uu* vinnU .Aty.in M'ltlctmiU'-p.rcw in niimhcr
.uiil { ii'‘-pcii;y. An-! :!ic jich At v.iii imlilcs now irnvcllcd in
c.irti.ij'.v', anil a-- ihcro wcir consiniu accidents there
atoM- a elas- (d Mirpc -n’' U'lr> exchisivcly dcvi-ted themselves
to lilt' ttoatmeut of injinei! .atimals. ‘I’lie siiitiivin', now no
longer tcipiiicd in r.nnpi- ami on h.iitle fields, had to attend
on the riel) Jatlies at iiamnial t .sstle-i during parturition, the
magic deb tor (Bhisag Atliarsanl who could assuage fever and
concor; le\e potions iil being held as the greatest of them
all. But the Vcdic Aryans had a legulat aimonry against pain
and suffering, which is in no way infetior to our present
d.iy .Mateiia Meiiica. Hut of that we shall speak later on
in connection with the therapeutic-- of .Sushnit.'i.

The scope and nature of Sushruta’s Surgery So
much fiir the In'storv of \'c(lic Snrgeiv. It is in the Su-
shruta Snmhit.i that we first come across a systematic
method of arranging the surgical e.Npericnccs of the older
surgeons, and oi collecting the sxattered facts of the science
from the vast lange of \'edic. literature. Su.shrnta had no
desire of abandoning the Vedas in the darknc.ss and pushing
on an independent voyage of discoverv. The crude methods
atid the still enuier implements of incision such as, bits of
glass, bamboo skins etc., laid down and described in the
Samhit.i, mav !>-■ the relics of a primitive instrnmentalogj'
which found favour n-iih oui .iiicesiors long before the
hymnisation of any Kik verse. Practical surgery requires
a good knowledge of practical anatomy. The quartered
animals at the Vedic sacrifices afforded e.xcellent materials
for the framing of a comparative anatomy (2). Sushruta
devoted his whole life to the pursuit of surgery proper, to

(1) I

rjm rTftrrr q

Rik SamhiUi. X M. 145 S. I.

(2) Vide Ailareyn Br-'ilimana 1 , 2. 11 , 12. Ill, 37.

XVI

INTRODUCTION.

which he brought a mind stored with luminous analogies
from the lower animals. It was he who first classified all
surgical operations into five different kinds, and grouped
them under heads such as Aharj-a (extractions of solid
bodies), Bhedya (excising), Chhedya (incising), Eshya (prob-
ing), Lekhya (scarifying), Sivya (suturing), Vedhya (punc-
turing) and Visravaniya (evacuating fluids). The surgery
of Sushruta recognises a hundred and twenty'-five different
instruments, constructed after the shape of beasts and
birds, and authorises the surgeon to devise new instruments
according to the exigencies of each case. The qualifications
and equipments of a surgeon are practically the same as
are recommended at the present time. A light refresh-
ment is enjoined to be given to the patient before a surgical
operation, while abdominal operations, and operations in
the mouth are advised to be performed while the patient is
fasting. Sushruta enjoins the sick room to be fumigated
with the vapours of white mustard, bdellium, Nimva
leaves, and resinous gums of Shala trees, etc., which fore-
shadows the antiseptic tbacilli) theory of modern times. The
number of surgical implements described in the Samhita is
decidedly small in comparison with the almost inexhaustible
resources of western surgery, and one may be naturally led
to suspect the au’henticity of the glorious achievements
claimed to have been performed by the surgeons of vore :
but then their knowledge of the properties and virtues of
drugs were so great that cases, which are reckoned as
surgical nowadays, were cured with the help of medicines
internally applied. “Surgery^” says Tantram, is mutilation
not doctoring (i). It should only be employed when the

(i) A. ^ spgfiTOT i

.'smnd' f% ruforrfSi 3^: 3^1; 1

fm rm qlhSwtwfsijti n

INTRODUCTION.

XVll

afTecled vital energy is not strong enough to alone effect the
cure that the surgeon is justified to handle his knife. We
find in the Samhita that ophthalmic, obstetric and other
operations were performed with the utmost skill and
caution.

Plastic and Rhinoplastic Operations : — Doctor
Hirschberg of Berlin says — “the whole plastic surgery in
Europe took a new flight when these cunning devices
of Indian workmen became known to us." The transplan-
ting of sensible skin-flaps is also an entirely. Indian method
(Sushruta, Sutrasthdnam, Ch. XVI). It is Sushruta who
first successfully demonstrated the feasibility of mending a
dipt earlobe with a patch of sensible skin-flan scraped from
the neck or the adjoining part.

To Sushruta is attributed the glory of discovering the
art of cataract-crouching which was unknown to the sur-
geons of ancient Greece and Egypt. Limbs were amputated,
abdominal sections, were performed, fractures were set,
dislocations, hernia and raptures were reduced, hiemorrhoids
and fistula were removed, and we take pride in saying that
the methods' recommended in the Sushruta Samhita some-
times prove more successful than those adopted by the
surgeons of modern Eurcpe, as we shall have occasion to
observe later on. In the case where the intestines are injured,
Sushruta advises that “the protruded part should be gently
replaced by following ivith the finger.'' A surgeon should
enlarge the wound in it, if necessary, by means of a knife.

vug^ fg^g^ u
^*ui’ tii? gnpini f? imunS i
TT^ttf^ k n

Mahanilatanuam, Palola X. V.s. 72-74.

B. Sec the Article on “Heredity and some of its Surgical Aspect.'. "

By F. C. Titrell, 't. n. The Mctlical .\dv.\nce Vol. I.XIV. June 1906,
Page 357.

INTKOIUTCTIOX.

xviii

In tin; case where tlie intestine is severed, the severed
parts should be held together by applying living black
ants to their ends. Then their bodies should be cut off
leaving only the heads to serve the same purpose which
in modern improved European surgery an animal tissue like
catgut is expected to fulfill. After this the intestine should
he fairly replaced in the abdominal cavity and the external
opening stitched and properly dressed. We abstain here
from a lengthy description of the different methods recom-
mended bj’ the Sushruta in cases of abdominal and
peritoneal wounds. We only ask our readers to compare
this Chapter (II Chikitsasthanam) of the Sushruta Samhita
with the Chapter in any work on European chirurgery
which deals with the same subject. Certain medicinal
plasters were used to be applied to localise the shafts of arrows
embedded in the limbs of wounded soldiers and their exact
locations were ascertained from the inflammation caused
by the application of such a plaster with a precision which
would be sometimes welcome even in these days of Rontgen
1 ays.

Lithotomic Operations; — In the.se rases, elaborate
instructions have been given for making the perineal
incision, as well as about the care and general management
r.f the patient after the operation. In n cn-.e of Shukra-
shmari^ (seminal or spermatic concretion) the'^ Torma-
tion and existence of which have been ver^- recenllv
. discovered by English pathologists, Sushruta enjoins that
the stone, if in the Jirelhra, should be removed with the
help of Aniiyasan am a nd urethral enema tas. failing which
the penis should be cut open and the concretion extracted
' with the help of a hook. Kavirdj Uniesh Chandra Gupta
in the introduction to his Vaidyaka Shavda-Sindhu remarks
that he and Dr, Durgdddsa Gupta M. B. translated the
Chapters on lithotomic operations and instrumental parturi-
tion of the Sushruta Samhita for the perusal of Dr Charles
the then Principal of the Medical College, Calcutta!

ISTlvtinft I lt>N.

XI.N

"Dr. Cli.'irlcr' luj;lUy ])r;uVeil the plo^:l‘^,s nl delivciy in
di'.Va-nll t.iM’x ;nnl even cfln^e^<e(l ilr.ii with all hix f;ieai
experience in inidwilery and Mirpery he nevei had any
iilca I'l the like hciii): fnuiid in all the medical works lhal
cainc under his oliscreation.''

Amputation : — Amputations were freely made and
i neilicmerl wines were piven to the patients as ajT^uijJie-
tic". f t). 'I'hese eonehisively show lhal the snrgeiv o
Siishrnta docs not rest content with the mere bmsting or
ojieninp of an abscess. and the healing of the incidental
womid. bm lays down [rrocesses for major operations as well.
The removal of the cjcni rix until it becomes of the same
colour with the surrounding skin and the growth of hair
thereon are suggestions which we liml nowhere else.

Ophthalmic Surgery Of the seventy si.x vaiieties of
ophthalmic diseases, Snshruta holds iliat fifty-one are surgical
(ITlara Taniram Ch. VUIt. The mode of operation which
is to be performed in each case has been elaborately de-
scribed in the Sandiita, and does not unfavourably compare
in most instances with modern methods of ophthalmic
surgery. Sushrula w;is aware of the fact that the angle of
reflection is equal to the angle of incidence, and that the
same ray which impinges upon the retina serves the double-
purpose of illumining the eye and the e.xlernal world, and
is in itself converted into the sensation of light.

Midwifery : — It is in the region of practical midwifc•r^■
that one becomes so nuich impressed with the greatness of
Sushrula. The difTerent turning, flexing, gliding inovenu-iUs,
the application of the forceps in cases of diflicult labour and
other o bstetric operations involving the destruction and
mutilation of the child, such as craniotmnii, were first
systematically described in the Sushruta Samhita long
before fillet s —and forceps were dreamt o Lin Europe, and
thousands of years before the birth of Christ. Sushruta, who

(i) r'or llic use of Saiunollim'; (an.xM belies) fur surgical pui )<>M:s. s<.c
lilioja Prabandlia by liallAln I’undil.

XX

iKtkoduction.

advocates Ciesarean section in hopeless cases of obstruction. ^
lays down that the instrument should be employed only in >
those cases where the proportion between the child and the }
maternal passage is so defective that medicated plasters, j
fumigations, etc., are not sufficient to effect a natural delivery.^
His directions regarding the management of the puerperaL
state, lactation and management of the child and the choice
of a wet-nurse are substantiallj* the same as are found in
modern scientific works of European authors. A feeling of
pride and joy moves our heart when we contrast these
glorious achievements of our ancestors with the meanness of
results which modern Europe has gained in this department
of midwifer)-. In those old days perhaps there were no
hospitals to huddle patieuts together in the same room and
thereby to create artificially s^^icetnic poisons which are
now so common aud so fatal in lying-in rooms, A newl}'
built lying-in room in an open space abundunlly suf plied
with the rays of the sun and heat of the burning fire for
each individual case, the recommendation of a fresh,
bainfaoo-chip for the section of the cord ate suggestions
the value of which the west has yet to learn from
the east.

Dissectioit; — Sushruta. himself a practical surgeon, was
the first to advocate dissection of dead bodies as indispen-
sable for a successful student of Surgeiy-. The Pnruschitt ass > f
ancient Egypt rerhaps learnt theirart from the Purusachettas
(Dissector) of ancient India. With a candour less common
among western scholars Dr. Wise observes that, “the
Hindu philosophers undoubtedly deserve the credit of having,
though opposed by strong prejudk-e, entertained sound and
philosophical views re.-pecting the uses of the dead to the
living, and were the first scientific and successful cultivators
of the most important and essential of all the departments of
medical knowledge, practical anatomt^. A bungling surgeon
is a public danger and Sushruta says that, “theory without
practice is like a one-winged bird that is incapable of fUghl’’,'

INTRODUCTION.

XXI

Study of Practical Surgery: — To give efficiency in
surgical operations, the pupils of Dhanvantari (Sushruta etc.)
were asked to try their knives repeatedly first on natural
and artificial objects resembling the diseased parts of the
body before undertaking an actual operation. Incision, for
example, was practised on Pushpafala (c gcerbeta ma xima).
Alavu ( Longenaris Vulgaris) or Trap ’usha (cucmis pubescuas),
evacuating on leather bags full of water and on the urinary'
bladders of dead animals, scarification on the hides of
animals on which the hair was allowed to remain. Veu^eo-
■lion, was practised on the vessels of dead animals and on the
stalks of the water-lily ; the art of stuffing and probing on
bamboo reeds etc. ; extraction of solid bodies on Panasa
(Artocarpus Integrifolia) and such like fruit, scraping on
wax spread on a Shalmalt (Bombox Malabaricum) plank,
andLsu ^uring o n pieces of cloth, skin or hide. Li gaturing
and bandaging were practised on dummies, cauterisation
(both actual and potential ) on pieces of flesh, and cathe-
terisation on unbaked earthen vessels filled with water.
It is almost with a feeling of wonder we hear him talk of-
extirpation of uterine excrescences and discourse on the
necessity of obserring caution in surgically operating upon
uterine tumours ( ^aktdrvudj ). These facts should be
borne in mind as they would help us a good deal in account -
intr for the numerous anomalies that are to be found in

O

the anatomical portions of the Samhita.

Study of Practical Anatomy We have stated be-
fore that the quartered sacrificial animals afforded
e.vcellent materials for the framing of comparative anatomy.
The Aitare3'a Br.ihmana contains special injunction for the
quartering of such animals (i) and we are told that the
preceptors availed themselves of the religious meetings to

(l) The Ail.'ire>-n. Btaliman.i clescnlx;> a particular way of •liridinf;
the i)rj;aas and viscera 'if the sirrilicLil animalb which was kept secret
nmonji the priests. Ailarcya Ilr.ahniana Vtlf I.

XXII

INTKOOCCTIO::.

deinon^lraie ihe IcsSons on practical nnatoniy. Wc come
across such terms 35 the heart, sloinncli. brain, inlestiiies,
anus, liver, spleen, uterus etc. in the Rigvcda, and the
Aitarcya Br.ihmana t U- There is an entire hymn tKikt
devoted to the subject and treatment of Bhtjn’si.s (Kaj.a .
Yakshmi) ivhich becomes utlcrlv untntelligihle in the
absence of .m accurate knowledge about the structure of
lungs, and mechanism of the human heart. The \(.dic
A’rya fully understood the resultant nature of the human
organism. The Rrk Mantra, which to this d.iy is recited on
the occasion of a funeral ceremony, amply testifies to the fact
that he used to look upon his mortal frame as the product
of the combination of the five physical elements (e;.
He understood the effects of different drugs upon diges-
tion and the office which the tendons, mnsclts. flesh
and nerves, etc. respectively serve in the economy. It is
in the Sushruta Samhita that we find a systematic attempt
at arranging together the facts of anatomical observation.
The age of Sushruta. the A'charyic age of the Ayurveda,
was a period of scientific investigation. The sturdy Arvan
colonists exchanged their simple mode of liHng for luxuiy
and ease. The number of general diseases was great>. In ''

n ) A. rrat fjsfifiTTs.w

kik XamliiU V, X'll,

qlmrpn ; Ihid

15, \ i(lc Aiiarc}Ti Drahmnm I 2. II 12, HI 37 .

(2) Tlic n^ilurc »»f ihc human IkkIv oj* ihc ri>uUmj: cfit-ri nf l!ic oun-
binaiion *jf lh<f five elemeniaU brjvrv clvorly in ihe verve.

5tfe rta ^ trfjrfTnnTt^.*: i

Rik Snmhila X M. 16 S. 3.

Which beinj; translated read- Let Im eye go to the sun, let hi^ hrciuh-
\^ind mix uiih iW wind ftf the aini*^Vlicie. ami tt» the 4.y. t^atlh and il,v
cereal- the wliich luve -prunj; *rtu i,f them. \c.

INTKOnUCTION.

XXIII

vain did ihc Iioly Karada (i) preacli tlie gospel of plain
living and high thinking, and exhort them, like Cato,
to return to their simple mode of life. The long peacel
brought opulence in its train and wealth begot indolence/
and disease. Men like Bharadvaja, Angira, Yamadagnii
Atre\-a, Gautama, Agasi j’a. W-imadeva, Kapisthala, Asa-j
marlhya, Bhvugava, Kushika, Kapya, Kash3'apa, Sharkara-
ksha, Shaunaka, Manmathayani, Agnivesha, Charaka,
Sushruta, Narada, Pulast^'a, Asita, Chyavana, Paingi and
Dhaumya etc. began to write Samhilas. Each hermitage was
a College of Ayur\eda, and the empirical method of investi-
gation was introduced- into each department of the science
of cure.

Anatomical Anomalies in the Samhit A Having
got so far in our analysis, before passing on t'o the stud)' of
the Anatomical portion of the Sushruta Samhita, we must
try to account for the many anomalies and dis c uepancieA -.
that have crept into or have been suffered to remain in the
present recension of the book. Take, for example, the line
in which Dhanvantari is made to speak of three hundred
bones in the human organism. It is impossible that the
human frame, in so short a time, has got rid of so many of
of its skeletal accessories simply through disuse, or because
of their becoming superfluous in the allered condition of its
environments. More absurd is it to think that Sushruta,
who discards all authority except the testimony of positive
knowledge, would wnle a thing which none but the blind
would believe in a dissecting room. The spirit of the age
in which be flourished precluded the possibility' of such an
error.

Anomalies accounted for -.--In ancient India, subiects
chosen for the demonstration of practic-al anatomy were
always children (2). and naturally those bones, which are
(r) Vide Aitarer-n BrShmana VII. 13.

(2) The injunction of the Hindu Shdslras is that ‘-corpse of persons
more than 2 years old should l>e Iiumerl." Cremation of dead Itodies being

XXIV

INTROWCTION.

fused or anasiomised ituo one whole during aduU life, have
been separalelj- enumerated — a circumstance wl«ich may,
to some extent, account for the excess in the number of
bones described in thisSamhh.-i (if- Likewise thelhcorr- that
Sushrula might have included the teeth and the cartilages
within the list of skeletal bones comes very near ihe iriilh,
but it does not reflect the whole truth either. The fact is
that the orignial Sushrula Samhit.i lias passed through
several recensions ; and we have reasons to believe that the
present one bv Magarjuna is neither the only nor the
last one made. The redactors, according to their own light,
have made many interpolations in the text, and when
Brahmanas. they have tried to come to a sort of compromise
at points of disagi cement with the teachings of the Vedas 2 ).
Therefore it is that we come across such statements in the
Samhitd as “there are 360 bo nes in the lunnan body. <(->
it is in the Vedas, hut the .«cicnce of siirgen-.recogni'ses three
hundred skeletal b,>nes.” What lends a greater colour tntlie
Ifypothesis is that Sushrula. who, iu the Chapter on Maima
Sh.iriram, has so accurately described the union.s of bones
and ligaments, anastomoses of nerves, veins and arteries etc.,

ol/ligatori’ on Gownimcnn as a.- on priva;e induaduats, ii almO'i
impossible 10 secnie a (ult-gtowt) analomicat snliieci in ttinninic India
the mote so when wc consider that the Hindus look upi>n the non-crema-
tion and mutilation o( a corpse with a peculiar horror as it prevents the
spirit from purging off its undeanness in the funeral fire, and Uars itr
access to a higher spiritual life. Naturally in later and mote cere-
monial times the interred corpses of infants, less than 2 rears old. had
to he unearthed and dissected for anatomical pnrpo,=es ; .and thc.so ponions
of the Sushrula Samldvd might have been modified by the suli-'vtjnt-nt
commentators in order to conform them U> occnlar proofs. — T. U.

It) Sec Grays Amatomy OS?!') P- tiSS and 301 Figs. 2.}S and 262.

(2l “’*TOn Ihlvt; 'sm; w iti. md * r'

Yishnn Smriti. Ch. 96. 55,
Charaha. SliSrita.thSnam.

INTUOnUCTION.

XXV

nuisL Iluve described their courses and locations, as otherwise
it would have been quite impossible for practical surgeons,
for whom it was intended, to.conform to the directions of the
Samhita in surgically operating on their patients’ limbs, and
to avoid those vulnerable unions or anastomoses as enjoined
therein. These Mannas have been divided into three
classes such as, the Sadya-pr.ina-hara : Kala-prdna-hara,
and Vai kal^-a-k ara, according as an injury to any of them
proves instant.aneously fatal, or fatal in course of lime, or
is followed bj* a maimed condition of the limb concerned.
The fact is that the study of practical Anatomy was in a
manner forbidden in tbe reign of Ashoka Piyadarshi
inasmuch as all religious sacrifices were prohibited bj' a
royal edict (i), and the subsequent commentators (who
were also redactors on a small scale) of the Sushruta
Samhita, in the absence of any positive knowledge on the
subject, had to grope their way out in darkness as best
they could; hence, this wanton mutilation of texts and
hopeless confusion of verses in the Sbarira Sthanam of the
present day Sushruta Samhita, which should be re-arranged
and restored to their proper chapters before any definite
opinion can'be pronounced on the anatomical knowledge
of the hoi}' .Sushruta.

Sushruta as a Biologist In the first chapter
of his Shirira Sth.inam. Sushruta discusses the question,
what is man, wherein lies his individuality, why does
he come into fieing, wlw does he die .at all ? Like
all Indian philosophers, Sushruta argues the question
down from the universe to man. The factors or laws,
that govern the evolution of the universe in its phy-
sical aspect, are extended to cover the evolution of the
physical aspect of man (organic evolution). There is but
one law and one force which run through the three plains
of mind, matter and spiril^PhysioIogy, that fails to look

(l) Journnl of the Asiatic Society of Calcutta Vol. VII. P. 261,

4

XXVI

tXTKOOUCTlON.

into Ihc iiuiurc of fife and itb background and tries to ex-
plain away this inlelligenl, living force as the product of
chemical action of tlie organic cells, is no Physiology at
all. Cell is not life, but there is life in a cell. Cells may
called the true bearers oriife.' I3r. Weismann insists that it
is more correct to speak of the continuity of the general
protoplasm than of “tlie germ cells," Professors Geddes
and Thomson observe iliat, “1110 bodies .ire but the torcbcs
which burn out. while the living flame has passed through-
out the organic series uuextiuguisiied. The bodies are tite
leaves which fall in dying from the continuously growing
branch. Thus ailhough death take inexorable grasp ol the
individual, the continuance of the life is still in a deep sense
unaffected; the reproductive elements (cells) have alreadt'
claimed their protozoan immortality, are already recreating
a new body." But to invest these reproductive cells with
immortality, and to deny the same to the individual self,
which directs and controls these protoplasms, and is before
and behind them, is like the statement of Prof. Hu.xley
when he admits the chance of the physical transmigration
of the organic constituents of the human body, and yet
denies the possibility of an individual self continuing in any
other form. “It is sensibility,’’ observes Sushrula. “that
precedes the senses ; and self, the sensibility proceeds from
the self to which all such conditions are referred as minc."t.

Sttshruta’s Theory of Cosmogony is based on the
old Sankhya Duality of Prakriti (Objective) aod Purushn
(Subjective). The two are coeval and co-extensive realities.
Out of the Avyakta (unmanifest) or Prakriti has evolved
the Mahat. the animated cosmic matter. Out of this
cosmic matter has evolved Ahamkara (the sense of indivi-
duality or more correctly egoism) which is divided
into three kinds such as the Yaikririka (phenomenal,
thought-form), Taijasa (kinetic), and Bhutddi (pertaining
10 the first form of matter). This Vaikdrika Altamkdra
m coinhinatjon with the Taijasa -A.hamkdra has fathered

INTKOJrtTTION.

XXVII

ihc eicvon >icnse organs, which, in combination with tiie
Biuiladi, have produced the five Tanniatra.s or proper
scnsibles of touch, sight. Iiearing, etc. The material
principles of sound, liglii, taste, smell, etc., are but the
modifications of these five T.anin.itras, of which .-\lcn.sha
(ethereon), V.-lyu (ether), light, and sound, etc. are the gro.sser
forms. In other words, these Tanmfilras may be defined
as the atomic essences of the material principles of sound,
light, ether, etc. In addition to these, Sushnita, like
Kapila. admits the e.xistence of a kind of atr-m-like units
of consciousness, which he calls Purusha. The combination
of the sixteen aforesaid categories and the Purusha is
for the e.xpansion and liberation of the latter. A human
being (individual), who is the fit subject for medical
treatment, is the product of the combination of Purusha
with the five primordial materia! principles (Mahabhutas).
The Purushas, real selves of beings, the sources of
their vital energy, and the controllers and directors of
all organic or mental actions, .are e.xtremely subtile in their
essence, and manifest themselves only through the
combination of the seed (paternal element) or ovum
(maternal element). It is the Karma (dynamics of acts
done by a person in a prior existence) which determine.s
the nature of the body it will be clothed with, as
well as the nature of the womb it shall be conceived in,
in its next incarnation.

Nature of Self Self is a simple substance, and, as
such, is immaterial. Force is substance and substance is ‘
force. It is endued with constructive intelligence, and,
like gravitation or cohesion, can permeate a material body,
without, in anjf way, disturbing it. It is adaptative or
elective, or, in other words, elects that kind of selves for
its parents as are best suited to the purposes of its being.
Man is the outcome of an influx of a self, a force, a dynamis
with its path determined by the dynamics of the deeds
of its prior existence. To think that vitality starts from

INTKOnUCTION.

xxviii

pTOloplasm is insanity. Chemically c.xamined protoplasm
is but, C, O, H, N and S. But no amount of C. O, II, N
and S put together will constitute life. The idea that
life has nothing prior to it, that the force which controls
the co-ordination of man’s economy perished with the death
of his organism, is quite puerile. Life is expansion and
not creation, and, as such, is linked to those unseen
realities which constitute its prior and future selves. We
see only the middle link in the chain ol existence which
we call life, but take no notice of the preceding or succeeding
ones which are invisible (i). The grosser material bod}-
is linked to a finer, immaterial one, in as much as nothing
can exist .vithout being attached to its amecedem. So
at each conception there is the influx of a new self, for
the lifeless constituents of a human body can not create
a man, no matter how many chemical or physiological
actions may be postulated to run to their rescue.

A'yurvedic Embryology -.-Before entering into the
discussion of Sushruta's theory of conception, wc shall take
a little more trouble to enunciate fully the Vedic theories
on the subject. “The child is the fruit of the combination
of sperm and ovum" (o'. It lies with its head downward
inside the uterus, a fact which facilitates its passage out of
and protects its form front the effects of any injury done to
that viscus. (3) The eyes of the child are originated.

(!', virot 1

Bh.ngav.at Gitd II 2$.

(2) awifqtt : )

to: n

Afitangn Ilridayatn (Vaghhat)

ShSriia Sthdnam. Ch. I. j

(3I mmq , tixf i* -

■’ e ciTOTf vm 1

Aiteriy-n Brdhmnun VI. jq

INTROHUCTION.

XXIX

.1? ihc cephalic portion of tiic fetal body is first developed.
The factors, which arc essential to the development of
the fetal body, from the time of fecundation to the
appearance of the characteristic sense-organs, have been
described in a verse of the Rig Veda ti). In the Vcdic
mythology each organic function is consecrated to the
tutelage of a presiding deitj'. and a Vedic Aryan loves
to call a thing oftener by the name of its divine custodian
than by that of its own. Rightly translated, the verse
would read as follows “May Vishnu (the presiding
deity of ether and nerve force) expand thy uterus, may
Tvasht.-i (the presiding deity of heat and metabolism)
bring about the full difierentiation of the limbs and the
sc.x of the foetus, may Prajap.ati (the presiding deity of
the ovum) sprinkle thy uterus, and mayst thou conceive
through the blessing of the lord of human destiny. May
Sarasvati (goddess of intellect)* and the Ashvins, the
surgeons of the gods (the presiding deity of fission, etc.)
help thee in taking the seed.” Now, the development of
the fetal body takes place after the pattern of its father’s
species, and this conformity* to the pattern of its species
represents an act of intellection. Hence, the aid of the
goddess of intellect has been invoked with that of the
celestial surgeons, who preside over the process of
cell-division, so essential to the formation of the fetal
limbs. Divested of its allegory, the verse would mean

(I) fifstg i

nsnqfwwn m ?>cTg % n
rm w -ap? i

irvT ^ rfwrwsrr n

^ Pawra) "'rfHpn i

d h nw »frf% ii

Rik Sainhiti X. M. 184, S.

XXX

IXTUOmiCTION.

that the sperm led into a healthy and well-developed
uterus through the agency of the Vayu (increased acti\ity
of the local nerves) meets the maternal element (ovum)
in that viscus. Then the impregnated matter undergoes
a process of fission, and takes shape after the pattern of
its father’s species. When we thitik of so many idle
speculations as regards the process ot fertilisation, which
obtained credence so late as the beginning of the i8th
century in Europe, and the controversies that arose
between the Ovists, Performitts and Animalculists (i). we
cannot help regretting that the Ayurvedic Embryology,
which started under such happy auspices, could not fully
solve the problem of fertilisation even before the advent
of the Tantrik age. The fundamental principles with
which the Embryology of the Ach.iiyayas (Sushruta.
Dhanvantari, etc.) rvas started are substantially the same
as have now been discovered by the researches of the
Western workers. Sushruta in hii dissertation on the
subject showed the illegitimacy which la\- at the root of his
predecessor’s theory { S’ndrirasthanam Chap. II. ) and took
up research exactlv where the Vedic Rishis had left off.
He clearly demonstrated the fact that “by a physiological
process known as Rasapika (meta’oolism) the lymph chyle
is metamorphosed into sperm in men. or into ovum in
women, in the course of a month. The catamenial fluid
is carried down into the uieru.s through it? proper ducts.
The sperm or ovum is thus the quintessence of a man's
or a woman’s body. The sperm meets the ovum (A'rtavam)
in the uterus, which resembles a lotus-bud in shape, and
whose aperture is shut up with a mucous deposit as
soon as fecundation takes place. T’ne most favourable
time for fecundation is between the fourth and twelfth
day after the appearance of the flow (Garbhakala)" as has

IiJ For a sbr.r. hinnr^- of the Theories of Feniiissrtioa. Vide Evoin£ii;ir,
•>i Ses. (Prof, t . Geddesaod J. A. Thomf^ia) Qiap. XTI. pp, 169—171.

INTKOIiUCTION.

XXXI

been Inlely clemonslnileil by ihe researclicb of Prof.
Von Ou. (I).

Sexual Diamorphism Some light is thrown on the
relative preponderance of the sperm and ovum in the birth
of a female child. “When the maternal element prepon-
derates the child is female ; when ilie paternal element is
stronger the child is male. When both tlie elements are
equal, the child is of no sex '" In theory at least Sushriita
admits the possibility of the birth of many children at a
single conception. "When the seed is divided into two by
its inherent force (\'.iyu), twins are born in the womb’’ — a
statement which points to the irresistible conclusion that
multiplicity of birth is the outcome of the multifarious
fission of the seed in the womb under certain abnormal
conditions. Sushruta gives a reason for iieiieving that, in
exceptional circumstances, and without sexual union, the
unfertilised ovum may give rise to perfect offspring, thus
giving a prevision of the modern theory of parthenogenesis.
Pathological parthenogenesis has occasionally been noticed
in higher animals. Oellacher has noted this in respect
of hen’s eggs, and Janosik has observed it in the ovarian ova
of many mammals such as the guinea-pig, etc. (2) Sushruta
extends the probability to the human ova under certain
conditions. He admits the possibility ot conception
without the admixture of the male germinal element,
though be observes that like all asexual genesis” the
development does not proceed far in the case.’’ From
such a hypothesis it is but one step to the theory which
enunciates the possibility of conception without proper
sexual union.

But to understand his theory' of sexual diamorphism, it

(1) Vide the cliart of menstrual wa\c prepared I))' Von Ou given in
Man and Woman (Havelock and Ellis) Chap. XT.

(2) The Evolniion of .Sex Cli. XIII. P. 1S5.

. R . Gedde* attd f, Tfinmjtsotu ^

SXXll

IXTRODOCTIOK.

is necessary that one should fully comprehend the meaning
of such Ayurvedic terms on the subject as Ichchha Sliakti
(will-force^. Shukra-Vahulyam (i) (preponderance of the
male reproductive element) and Shonita-ViUiuIj’am (prepon-
derance of the female reproductive element) etc. Sushruta.
in common with the Rrahmanic philosophers of Ind,
believed that distinction of se.\- has evolved from a pri-
mordial hermaphroditism. Manu in Iris Institutes has
emphasised the fact (2). though in a highly’ poetic style.
He observes that ’“the Purusha (Logos), by a stroke of Will,
divided its body (animated cosmic matter) into two, one
of which was male, and the Other female." The Tantra
says that, “the male part was endued with an energy
(force) of its own, which is called Pitlik^. Shakti ; and the
corresponding female part, with the one. which is called
Matrik^ Shakti. Pitrika Shakti is a disruptive force ;
Matrik.r Shakti is a constructive energy. Though the
conception of force in Sanskrit sciences is but partially
phy’sical. the nearest approach to the connotations of the
Pitrika and Matrika Shakti is made by’ the terms Ana-
bolism and Katabolism of the Western phy'siologists.
Sanskrit physiology recognises the two opposite poles of
vital force in a living organism, and has not taken
inconsider.ite pains to determine their e.xacL locations in man
and woman. M.itrika Shakti, it observes, predominates in
the left half of a woman's organism, which is negative as
regards vital magnetism. (3) Now, Sushruta says that, in
cases where female offspring is desired, the enceinte should

(1) Shirirwsihinam Ch. 11.

(2) ■

’(ref mm g irg; n

Msntj SamhiiA Ch. 52.

(3> TO n;

S5md5 Tilak Taniram.

iKTROnUCTlON’.

xxxiii

snuiT through her left nostril (the expressed juice of certain
herbals), while the same should be administered through
her right nostril where male issue would be the object. In
other words, the anabolic (Matrikd) or katabolic (Pitrika)
forces of a mother's organism can be so adjusted with the
help of drug-dynamics, as to determine the sex of the child
in the womb. The birth of a male child is usually pre-
saged bj’ the appearance of the milk (which according to
Sushruta is metamorphised menstrual blood) in the right
breast of the enceinte ; and where that has been effected
with the help of suitable medicines, it must be presumed
that the Katabolic pole of her life-force has been acted
upon, as desired.

The original hermaphroditism, which forms the anterior
condition of all subsequent sex distinctions, and the character
of the two opposite poles of vital energJ^ have been very
clearly set forth in the Pauranik allegory of Ardha-
Narishvara(i). The figure, observes the Pauranik rhapsodist,
is half male, half female ; half life, half death (since, death,
in fact, is the father of life) (2) ; half anabolism, half
kataboHsm ; with the crescent moon, the pre mise, the
symbol of progressive evolution on its brow, is made to sit
on the eternal bull, the representative of the immutable
law of the universe (lit : — the four-footed order). The Rishis
and Rasasiddhas of aucient India were fully aware of
the fact that, conception is effected only at an enormous
sacrifice on the part of the mother ; that the Matrikd
Shakti is the real manufacturer of life, and that the Pitrika
Shakti (paternal element! evokes, or calls it into play only
through its disintegrating or disruptive effect by separating
the two opposite life-poles, that lie neutralised through
■s,, contact. It is love that governs these two complementary

(1) Vishnu Purfinam Ch. 7. Vs. lO-ll.

(2) qrm: emfir nm: 1

Mah&bhdralam.

5

XXXIV

iNTRonurrioN.

forces of life and death (i) (though in fact they represent
the two different aspects of the same energy) and controls
its evolulionar)' rhythms through the desire of seeing
itself many though one in reality. Does not modem biology
endorse the same view when it says that tlic reproductive
cells, as protozoons, are immortal, and that bodies are the
natural appendages which blossom lorlh and fall off round
these cells for the fructification of their innate purposes
of being (2)?

A little more investigation into the biological thesis
of the Risbis would be necessary for the clear comprehen-
sion of “Shukra-Vahulyani” and ••Shonita-\’dhul3‘am” of
Sushruta and other Tantras (3). Man is both animal and
spirit ; and the /llyurvedic physiology recognises two distinct
sets of apparatus in his organism answering to the different
phases of his existence. The one helps him in performing
the organic functions, which are so essential to his animal
existence, and keeps intact the co-ordination of those inter-
nal functions with the incidents of his environments. The
other is attuned to the finer forces of nature, and responds

(I) The Erolwion of Se.x. Ch. XVUI.

Pn’f. P, Gtildm awl J, .-I. ThonnoH.

(2) “The body or itiimn’', Weismnnn s,rys, “thus appears to a certain
extent os a subsidiarj" appendage of the true bearers of the life, — the repro-
ductive cells". Ray Lanbester has again welt expressed tliis : — “Among the
multicellular animals, certain cells arc separated from the rest of the consti-
tuent units of the body, as egg-cells and sperm-cells ; these conjugate and
continue to live, whilst the remaining cells, the mere carriers as it were of
the immortal reproductive cells, die and disintegrate. The bodies of the
bigber amtnals "which die, may from this point of view lx: regarded as
something temporary and non-essential, destined merely to carrj- for a time,
to nurse, and to nourish the more important and deathless fission-products
of the unicellular egg.”— Quoted in the Evolution of Sex (It Geddes
and J. A. Thompson) 1901. Chap. XVIII.

( 3 I (a) ^ifw 1

Bwg): fefh; ii

SrfradK Tilak Tantrum.

(II) Sushruta S,imhitS (ShSrira Sthinam Ch. Ill )

ixTK’ontirTioN-.

XXXV

to ilic call of In's iiiglicr or piyciiic self. The one is
organic, the other is psychic. The one chains him down
to the phenomenal, and is poverned by the laws of growth
and decay ; the other opens on the region of absolute
realities where growth and decay have no room to be.
Growth is not the only condition of life. Man may exist
without food(i)or respiration, onlj' if he can manage to dive
deep into the realities within himself. Between these two sets
of apparatus there is the Jivatm.a, which, by its own peculiar
energy (the will-force), can operate in phenomenal or organic
plain, or recede from thence into the psychic one, thus
being in contact with the world of the senses, and the one
that is beyond the darkness of death. Death, in fact, is
the grand usherer to life, which is only the rise of the
curtain over the life’s drama, all equipments for which are
made in the green room of death.

man can not propagate at will. No amount of willing
on the part of the parent-animal can help him in creating
progeny. 'Pile self of the child, who is about to come into
life, choose.s its own parents, according to the dynamics of
its own acts or Karma, from the region of the lunar Pitris
or quiescent life, if it be warrantable to use such an expres-
sion (2). The self of the would-be child mixes with the self
of its human father, and hovers over the reproductive cells
of the latter's organism, and regulates the intensity of its
father's sexual desire, according to the nature of the sex,
determined necessary for the fruition of the purposes of
its advent into the world. A greater intensity of its
father’s desires ensures the preponderance of the Pitrikd
Shakti (katabolism) in the impregnated ovum, which

(1) a. dlw rij n ^ f%f%: rrai ^ 1

^ sHi: iwreRt 11

Skanda Parfinam quoted by Shridhara Svfimi in his commentaries
on the Vishnu Purdnam. Ch. VI. V. l6.

(2) ^»JIV1I I

Sliruti.

XXXVl

INTRODUCTION.

determines the male sex of the child, while such a thing,
on the part of the mother at the time, is followed by the
relative preponderance of the Malrika Shakti (anabolism)
which accounts for the femininity of the issue. Equal in-
tensity of sexual desires in both the parents, creating an
absence of the relative preponderance of the Pitrika and
Matrika Shaktis in the impregnated ovum, leaves the sex
of the child practically undetermined. The relative prepon-
derance of the Pitrika or Matrika Shakti, as evidenced by
the greater or less intensity of the sexual desire of either
of the parents, which results in the speedier emission of the
paternal or maternal element (sperm or ovum) during an act
of successful fecundation, is contemplated by the term
“Shukra-Vahulj'am," or “Shonita-Vahulyam,’’ by the framer
of the Samhitd, as may be full}' substantiated by a couplet
by the venerable Daruvahi (i).

So far Sushruta is at one with the modern Western
theory of preponderant kataholism or anabolism in the
ovum as the determining factor of the sexual diamorphism
to the extent that seeds or reproductive cells are the bearers
and not the manufacturers of life, onl}’ containing those
categories which foster life, and help its evolution into an
organic being. To deny this would be to admit the chemi-
cal, or physiological basis of life, which, as a theory, was
never acceptable to the biologists of ancient India.
The number of reproductive cells may be increased by'
suitable dietary, and to say that the immortal reproductive
cells, as the creators of life, come out of the mortal, organic
food stuff, is to say that darkness is the father of light. The
question of the immortality of the seed (germ plasm) has

(i)

^ HU: n

DSwbShi tQQowd by AruTiadalta in bis commentaries on Vrfgbhat).

INTR0I>rCTfO.V.

XXXVII

liccii claboiatcly {li5cu??c<l in llic cotnnicnlaries on the
Sankhya Dar?hnnain(i).*ri>eOjah Vindii^(gt.'rni cells) pulsate
with the vibrations (rhythmic movements), which are the
relies of the primordial ethereal vibrations, which ushered
in the birth-throes of the universe. As such, they arc
essential to the evolution of life : and man, as an offspring
of the universe, still retains them in his reproductive cells
as the best condition for calling out the life in his offspring,
when its self enters into the impregnated ovum in the
mother’s womb. I^ife is the essence of self, and not the
product of any chemical or physiological process. It is an
influx ; and microscopes and spectroscopes may not
expose to view the hinterlands of birth and genesis.
Perhaps it was this theorj' of will-force and intensity of
parental desire as determining the sex in the child, together
with the facts of parthenogenesis observed in lower animals,
from which Sushruta was disposed to extend the analogy
to the human species, and believed that conception without

sexual union is possible in women.

The conception of the nature of these Matnka and
Pitrika Shaktis is more clearly set forth in the Pauramka
mj'th regarding the origin (etiology) of fever , Sushruta
relates the story as follows t-Daksha, the father of the
universal mother, (or constructive metabolism in man
insulted the divine father, her consort (destructive meta-
bolism), by witholding his quota of sacrificial oblations.
The wrath of the insulted deity broke out in the shape o
a morbific heat (hyperpyrexia) which is fever. The process
of digestion in man has been often compared to an act

(i) (A)
(B)

Sinkhya Sutra Ch. I.

122 .

Ibid. Ch. III. 3-

« « ^ 3

SdnUhya Pmbachana V*hya (Vijnin Bhikihn) Ch. I. S. I.

fer'

INTROnUCTlON'.

xxxviii

of Homa sacrifice (i) in the Aj’urveda. Stripped of its
allegory the myth ma}' be explained quite in a pathological
line. It means that when the Pitrika Shakti, the process
of destructive metabolism (Pita, father ot Shiva in Hindu
mythology being the god of destruction or disintegration) of
the body is not properly served by the factors, which
nourish its constructive metabolism (Father of the Matriki
Shaktit, the excrements and excretory process of the body-
are arrested (by the wrathful deity), and the heat generated
in consequence is fever. Fever, then, is a disease of defective
digestion and excretion. Whenever this Pitrika Shakti is
disturbed or not properly served there is fever, and heat
is one of its essential effects.

With a precision and love of details, which mark the
best days of Brahmanic literature, Sushruta lays down rules
of diet and conduct to be observed by the enceinte, from
month to month, during the whole period of gestation,
and gives medicinal recipes for the development of a
partially atrophied child in the womb.

A perusal cf the Chapter on Manna Shiriram would
leave no doubt for tlie conclusion that anatomical know-
ledge was cultivated by singeons and .soldiers alike. A
knowledge about the locations of the vulnerable joints, or
nerves, or vein anastomoses where a blow or a little
pressure may enable him to make short work of his man
could not but be dearly prized by the soldiery at a
time when the fate of a war was often decided by
the success of a single champion, and we have reasons
to believe that a scientific system of wrestling was
formulated in the light of the Sushruta Samhita, and
practised by the gentry' of ancient India much like

Clmr.-tka SamhitS,

iNTKOnUCTION'.

XXXIX

the Jiujilsu (Skr. Yuyutsu, the intending fighter) of
modem Japan, (i).

Sushmta’s Physiology : — But if Sushmta is ad-
mired so much for his practical and scientific cast
of mind, it is his writings on Physiology, which is
practically the same as the one adopted bj' all schools of
the iiyurveda) which have appeared as a stumbling
block to the intelligence of manj' a Western and
and Eastern scholar. European Sanskritists have thought
fit to translate “Vayu,” “Pittam” and “Kapham” (the three
main physiological functions) as air, bile and phlegm.
But nothing could be more misleading, or erroneous than
that. A right understanding of the science of the Ayur-
vedic medicine, in all its branches, hinges on a right concep-
tion of the Va}^, Pittam and Kapham, so we should like
to clear up the nature of these three physiological factors
before proceeding farther in our enquiry.

Antiquity of the division: — A reference to these
three physiological factors of Vayu, Pittam and Kapham,
under the name of Tridhatu, is first met with in the
Rikveda, (3). Sayana explains the term as a synonym for
Vayu, Pittam and Kapham. I’he Vedic physicians possessed
at least a considerable knowledge of the piccess of diges-
tionfqk the circulation of gas in the human organism, and of

(l) It is CHiious that the phonetic an<l etymological resemblance
between Sanskrit “Juyutsu’' ancl Japanese ‘’Jiujitsu” (would be fighter)
should be so close. Perhaps it was the Buddhist missionaries (anil they
were not always peaceful hermits) who had carried with them a system
of scientific wrestling from India, which was subsequently developed in
Jaiian. Comi-are with the complete Kano, Jiu-Jitsu (Jeudo) by II. Irving
Hancock and Katsukuma Higashi. Chart I and III.

(3) * ' ' uwjtfr n

Rik. Samhita. I. 3. 6.

Sdyana c\plnii>s it a*-

mgwtq •siu'irqqti gt?' qvu' t

(4) tiiq; tf-Ttrogr I mut tt; Mqfn,

ultrnm u: vra; 1 qfsfktn

u ug ufqu'uftt, I •qerumrtn w

qlsfqm u grs: 1

Chluindagy-a Br.'hm.an.

xl

INTRODUCTION.

the properties and functions of flesh, fat, muscles, tendons,
ligaments and cartilages. But to the Achdryas of the
Ayurveda belongs the glory of first formulating a systematic
ph3’siological science, to which end Sushruia ns a surgeon
did contribute no mean a quota. In the light of Western
science the actions of living matter, vaiied as thej' are,
may be reduced to three categories, via. [a) Susteniative,
(b) Generative, and (cl Correlative functions. The second
is not co-extensive with the entire c.xislence of a living
organism, Sushruta observes some such distinction among
the functions of a living organism when he denominates
the living body as the “three supported one’’ (Tristhunam),
and describes the normal Vayu, Pittam and Kapham as
its three supports. We wonder how the term Vayu,
meaning nerve force, can be confounded with the same
term meaning air, since Sushruta derives the former
from the root “Vu,’' to move, to spread. Vayu, according
to Sushruta, is so called from the fact of its sensory and
motor functions such as, smelling, &c. But the Vayu in
the Ayurveda is not wholly' a physical or organic force, it
has its spiritual aspect as well which does not legitimately
fall within the scope of our enquiry. It is safe to aver
however, that the Ayurvedic physiology, like its
sister science in modern Europe, is concerned more
with the invisible molecular components of the human
organism, than with the workings of its gross members.
The holy Agnivesha warns the students of physiology
against the danger of regarding the human system as some-
thing other than the aggregate of molecules (i).

Charaka SaoihitA Shiriraslhananj, Ch.ap, VII.

IKTROBOCTION.

J^li

The three fundamental principles of V^yu, Pittam
and Kaphah:— The actions of living matter vary and
so may be reduced to three categories. They are
either — (i), functions which affect the rnaterial composition
of the. body and determine its mass, which is the balance of
the processes of waste on one hand and those of assimilation
on the other. Or (2), they are functions which subserve the
process of reproduction which is essentially the detach-
ment of a part endowed with the powers of developing
into an independent* whole, or (3), they are functions in
virtues of which one part of the body is able to exert a
direct influence on another, and the body, by its parts as
a whole, becomes a source of molar motion. The first
may be termed Susteutative, the second Generative, and
the third Correlative functions. The above is the sum and
substance of the works which a living matter has to perform.
But setting apart the processes of reproduction as a
subject for future discussion, we shall now try to
examine what the other two functions are as understood
by Oriental thinkers. In the Mahfibhfiratam the Pr&na
.vdyu is described as a force, akin to electricity. It is some-
what like a flash of lightning (1). This fact atlonce shows
the errors of confounding Pr&na vdyn with an effete material
— with gases generated during the processes of digestion.
Shushruta describes it as a force, (2) which sets the whole
organism into motion. Self-evolved, it acts as the principal

(1) n sjuurt without 1

iwt: ^ 1

MahSbhfiralam. ShAnti r.irvii S. 39.

(2) I'orcc may be defined as lliat »vhich lends to produce motion in
a body at rest, or to proriucc cliangc of motion in a body which is moving.
— Dnschanel.

6

INTRODUCflOS.

xlii

factor that detennines the genesis, coiuinuance and disin-
tegration of the living body. It is the primary cause an
all-in-all that governs our organic as well as our cognitive
faculties. Its special feature is that the vibration, that is
produced in it, instead of travelling like light in a transverse
direction, takes a course as the controller of the correlative
functions of the system. It maintains an equilibrium between
the Pittam and ShleshmA which are said to be inert, (i) But
for this adjustment the living body would stand in imminent
danger of being consumed like fuel by its internal heat
or fire. Taking into consideration the various functions the
living body has to perform, Sushruta attempts a classifica-
tion of Vd^m into Pr^na, Udana. Sam^na, Vydna and
Ap^na, which, in detail correspond to the divisions of
functions performed by the Cerebro-spinal and Sympathe-
tic nerves of the Western physiology. Tdntric literature
abounds in the descriptions of the Nadichakras (nerve
plexuses) and contains a more detailed account of the motor,
sensory, and mixed nerves according to their differences in
their functions and relations. In short, the terra Vayu may
not only be rightly interpreted to mean the nerve force, but
is often extended to include any kind of electro-motor or
molecular force (as when we speak of the Vdyu of the soil),
though the term is loosely applied now to signify gas or
air. The Rishis of yore gave the name of V.dyu to the
bodily force in the absence of any suitable nomenclature,
little suspecting that it might be confounded with the
atmospheric air by the foreign translators of their works.

(i) A I

Charaka, Salrasthinam. Chap. XII.

n fira' w,; i

Incn is Viuam, ineil is Kaphah, inert are the Matas & DhSlns Like
cloncls, they go wherever they ate carried by the V4yn.

INTRODUCTION.

xHii

' Pittam : — The function of the Pittam consists in
metamorphosing the chyle, through a graduated series
of organic principles, to a protoplasmic substance like
sperm in men, and the ovum in women. Thus we see that
the Pittam of the A'yurveda corresponds to metabolism
of Western physiology. But by a confounding carelessness
of terms the e.xcreted portion of Rasa and blood though
ultimately connected with those normal ph3’siological
processes has been respectively st3ded as the Doshas or
defiling principles of Kaphah and Pittam. Again, as in the
case of soil, the terms V£3'u, Pittam and Kaphah are extend-
ed to denote magnetism, kinetic energy and humidity of its
molecules. The circulation of blood is connected with the
Pittam, while the circulation of 13'mph ch3'le iRasa) is
related' to Shleshmfi the two combinedl3' forming what
is called the sustentative function of the Western
Physiolog3'.

Tlie term Pittam, which, by its etymology, signifies
the agent of metabolism, has been loosel3' used b3' our
Ayur\'edic physiolgists to denote two different organic
principles from an observed simi1arit3' in their nature and
functions. Pittam in Sanskrit means both bile and meta-
bolism of tissues as well as the bodily beat which is the
product of the latter.

Hence a few commentators lean towards the view
that Pittam is the heat incarcerated in the bile, and
the principal agent in performing digestion (i). The
real import of the term ma3' be gathered from the
five subdivisions of the Pittam, made b3' our Rishis
according to their functions and locations, and which are
called the PAchaka, Ranjaka, S^dhaka, A'lochaka and

Madhukostw.

xUv

INTRODCCTION.

Bhriijaka. All metabolic processes in the organism,
whether constructive or destructive, are called Pittam,
which is said to be in the products of those processes
whether serum, bile, blood, albumen, etc., which are either
essential to the substance of the body, or to the proper
performance of any organic function. Hence we learn that
Pittam is latent in Lasikd (Serum), blood, Ij’mph chyle,
albumen etc., and in the organs of touch and sight. In
other words, metabolism goes on in those principles and
regions of the human organism (i) either as a sustentative
or as a cognetic physiological process. First, we have the
Pachakagni or the heat of digestion, which is situated in
the r^ion between the stomach and the intestines ; ( 2 ) and
being a liquid 6re or fluid heat incarcerated in the secre-
tions of the liver thile), it is primarily concerned in digesting
the four kinds of food (as they meet it in the abdomen).
Thus wc sec that the P.ichakagni of our Ayurveda is the
same as the bile of Western phj’siolog}’, its other function
being to differentiate (precipitate) the nutritive essence of
the food from its uuutilisable portion, and to act as an
excremeutitious matter. It is this Pittam, which makes
metabolism in other parts of the body possible, (3) bj-
helping the organism in acquiring fresh energj-.

(1) w. 1

b

B 5 gbh. 1 t (Sutrn SthSnatn ch. XII.)

( 2 ) The assists in emulsifying the f.sts of the foods, and thus
rendering them capable of passing into the lactcals by absorption *. The
bile has been considered as a natural purgative’** .The bile appears
to have the power of precipitating the gastric proteoses and peptones,
together with the pepsin, which is mixed up with them. • ’ ♦ As an
excrementitions substance, the bile may serve as a medicine for the separa-
tion of certain highly carbonaceous substances from the blood.

Kirk’s Physiology Ch, XIII. pp 377-37S.

(3> itmsirtvEfgirefl. >

■asTlfh mu b

Bdgbhat Sutra ch. XII.

INTRODUCTION.

xlv

The second kind of Pittam is called Ranjakaor pigment
Pittam from the circumstance of its imparting the
characteristic colour to the lymph chyle as it is transformed
into blood by coursing through the liver and spleen, where
it is located (i).

The third kind of Pittam (Sadhaka) is situated in the
heart, and indirectly assists in the performance of cognitive
functions in man by keeping up the rhythmic cardiac
contractions (2). Perhaps it is this view of the heart’s
contraction that preilisposed many of our ancient i)h3'sio-

(l) A. The coloaring mailer of the bile is derived from and is closely
related to that of blood, since the qualities of the bile pigment secreted
arc markedly increased by the injection of substances into the veins which
are capable of setting free hxmoglobin.

Kirk’s Physiology— {Metabolism in the liver.) Ch. XII. p. 505.

a. There seems to be a close relationship between the colouring
matters of the blood and of tbe bile, and * * Iwtween these and that of
urine (urobilin) and of the feces — Ibid Ch. VIII. p. 376.

C. It seems probable that the spleen, like the lymphatic glands, is
engaged in the formation of blood corpuscles. For it is quite certain,
tl at the blood of the splenic vein contains an unusually large number of
white corpuscles. 1 1 1 lu Kottiker’s opinion, the development of colour-
less and also coloured corpuscles of the blood, is one of the essential
functions of the spleen, into the veins of which the new formed corpuscles
f»ass, and are conveyed into the general current of the circulations.

Ibid. Ch. XII.

(2) A. The contraction (of the heart) can not be long maintained
without a due supply of blood or of a similar nutritive fluid. * * • The
view that is at present taken of the action of the heart is * * that in heart
muscle, .as in protoplasm generally, the metabolic processes arc those of
anabolism or l)uilding up. which takes place during dixstole of the heart
* • ' and the katabolism or discharge which is manifested in the contrac-
tion of the heart. Kirk’s Physiology (metabolism of the heart). Ch. VI.

n uT'r*nf5 1

mtro 'SSfTi' n

Bdgbhat Sutra. Ch. XII. 13.

nsTROnUCTION.

xlxn

legists to hold it as the sent of cognition ( VtidHhi
Stliauam j. (i)

The fourth, which is the Alochaka or the Piltam of
sight, indicates the metabolic process in the substance of
the retina (Drishti) which gives rise to visual sensation. (C;

The fifth is the Blir^’akA^i or the Piltam in the skin
which produces perspiration or helps exudations from the
skin b}'- evaporation In short it is the Pittam which keeps
active, under certain circumstances, the secretions from the
sweat and sebaceous glands oi the human skin.

Kaphah Sushruta ts o le in holding with Foster that
“the animal body dies daily, in the sense that at every
moment some part of its substance is suffering decay,
is undergoing combustion.’’ The etymological significance
of the term Shariam (Skr, Shri, to wither up) testifies to
his knowledge of the combustion that goes on within the
human system. Three kinds of fire are detected in the body,
which are sure to feed upon its constituent principles in
the absence of proper futi in the shape of food and air.
It is food and the fundamental hi dily principle of Shleshm^,
which is cooling or water}- in its essence, ih.at fly to the
rescue of the organism, the latter (Sleshmd) surcharging it
with its own essential luiniidity and keeping intact the
integration of its component molecules.

The Rasa, or lymph chyle which is formed out of the
ingested food, prevents the internal bodilv fire.' from

(l ) The seat of the moon is at the root of the palate and that of the
son is at the root of the navel ; the place of the air (or breath) is aliove
the Eun, and mind dwells above the moon. Chittam (or the passage
between the mind and the spiritual sonl) dwell'; above the sun, and life
dwells aI)ove the moon.

Jnina Sanlealini Taniram, International Journal of
Tintrik order (New York) Vol. V. J;c. 5 p. 109.

(2) It is -suppased that the change effected by the light, which falls
upon the retina, is in fact a chemical alteration in the protoplasm, and that
this slimakitcs the optic nerve-endings. , Kirk’s Physiologv- Ch. X\T1.

INTRODUCTION.

xKni

preying upon llie vitals by coursing freely through the
whole organism. The Rasa, thus generated, undergoes
a sort of purification, the purified portion being called
Prasddablmta, and the excreted portion Malahimta, such as
are found as effete products deposited in certain pores of
the body. Kaphah or Sleshma is that portion of Rasa which
fills all the intercellular spaces of the body% thus holding
them together in a kind of cooling embrace (Skr. Slish to
embrace) and prevents ( i ' the dreadful combustion which
would otherwise have been caused by organic heat.
Our Acharjas have classified the Kaphah into five different
kinds such as the KIcdaka, Ai’alainvaka^ Vodhaka and
Sfilcsmaka according to their different functions and
locations in the economy.

Dosha : — The lymph chyle, born of the digested food,
and which courses through the body, potentially contains
the elements which build the different tissues of the
human organism. Under the influence of metabolic heat
it is progressively transformed into blood, flesh, fat, bone,
marrow, semen and OJa/t. In other words, under the
process of physiological metamorphosis, the lymph chyle
sets free that part of its constituents (2) which possess blood-

(i) A gurRimem; — Bagbhat.

Charaka ChildtshasthAnam. Chap. 15.

(2) A. SicRg 't'Miawiji; 1

n

BhSva Mishra.

rmmfr qtqyfft 1 « o « yt ffhnnsftrff u 1

Chakra Datta’s commentar}- on the Charaka Samhit5. Sntrasthinatn.
Ch. XXVIII.

xlviii

INTRODUCTION. '

making properties, and arc ultimately transformed into
blood — (its unutilised or excreted portion being eliminated
through the natural apertures of the body), and so on,
through the progressive series of metabolism to Ojnh
Dhalii. Thus with the derangement of the bodily V.iyu
which causes the free coursing of the lymph chyle through
its vessels, the Pitt am imetabolism of tissues), in any parti-
cular part of the body, is also affected by reason of its
incarceration, and thus causes an increase or diminu-
tion in the excreted portion of the Rasa, which is another
name for Kapham during the progressive metabolism. Thus
we see that V;iyu, Pittam, and Kaphah, which, in their
normal state, are the three supporting principles of the body
are transformed into morbific diathesis by increasing or
diminishing the bodily heat, secretions, or excretions.t

Thus congestion and inanition (atony) are the two
main forms of disease recognised by the Ayurvedic Patholo-
gists, the former being held amenable to resolution or
elimination, and the latter to local feeding or nourishment.

Agni and Dhdtvagnis : — We can not better conclude
this portion of our dissertation than by speaking a word or
two about Agni. Sushrula raises the question whether there
is any kind of fire in the human organism other than the
Pittam ; or are they identical ? Sushruta holds that the Pittam
is the only fire present in the sj'stcm, in as much as all acts
from the digestion of food to the disintegration of tissues are
performed with the help of the Pittam, which includes
within its signification what is connoted by Anabolism and
Katabolism of Western Physiologists. But Agnivesha and
certain sections of the Ayurvedic Acharyayas hold that there

t A utwu; \

n

Bhivaprakisha Part I.

B rutfim qtqnfpfit urflt i

Charaka SatraslhAnam Chap. I.

INTKonUCTtO.V.

xlix

arc five Anjali-fuls of Agni (i) in the human organism.
This discrcpancj’ is best explained away by including one
Vava measure of Agni (enzymes, ferment) in the five
Anjali-mcasurcs of Pittani.

The Ayurvedic Physiology recognises the existence of
another kind of Agni, which is called Dh^itvrigni (proto-
plasm) and which it classifies into seven different kinds.
Arunadatta, the celebrated commenialor of the Asht;inga-
hridayam, holds that there are as many Dhatvagnis as the
constiiuaits '>f the body. (2)

(1) fqrra— Charaka Samhita.

(2) A q?

»frr \ qigTirfH; 'trg^n-

qmfq qTfqqi^rntHm; 1 tnrqqrsrnirH h»i:

xfiqi: I Arundatta.

It. qqt ^ fQTiBft ^sfqtnrnfii 1

Tqg ^ q'gifqsmr^lfn 11 Ibid,

r. ^qf qgsnqt 1

■qifvnergqri 1

1 %roit qitq rrfy tRjfff n

^r«tJ!n^ifq(gn?Pif ^ra; r

r?cm wT^Ttsfi?! mrfqqjnf 1

yw yrfi’OT: B
im: q(.tT: 1

(Turni q: ^ jpii’ qq; n

qroiqiTsnl^twiH : -^flfW 1

«>

Chanika Samhitfi, ChikitsIUthfinam. Chapter XV,

1 ). yfrfirf^ virnff qraff ftfqt? 1
qqnqrrfq^: vrap qiPn fqr? irei:?^; n

Vid Ibid Cliap. XX.

7

INTRODUCTION.

The commentator of the ChhAndagya Bhasyam has
emphasised the identity of the Pittani and the solar heat.
In fact it was a docirine of faith among the Rishis that
the solar heat pent up in the solids is transformed into
organic heat (Bhutdgni) which, becoming liberated in the
stomach, produces the heat of digestion, (j) All these
are but different forms of solar heat. The Dhitvagni
and Udaragni lie inert in the organism. It is the Vayu
that sets them free and makes them operative.

The Dhdtvagnis (protoplasm) of the muscle are not of
the same kind as that of the arteries. We cannot resist
the temptation of quoting a few lines from Toster'-s
physiology on the subject.*

(i) A. jmt >5

€1 rang NURirauiriRt i

ChWindogj’n Updnishad,

B. ’trTtm m3

rrctBPiRi 1

Chhdndogya Bhfcj-am.

^ These facts .and other conpiderations, wliich laiijht he brought
forward, lead to the tentative conception of protoplasm ns licing n
snl)fitnnce(if wo may use tlie word in somewhat loose sense) not only
nnatnldo in nature but mil)jeet to ince.ssnnt change, existing indeed as
tlie expression of incessant molecular, i. c. chemical nnd physical
change, verj’ nuicli as a fountain is tlie expre.ss'on of incessant
replacement of water. We may picture to ourBelroB the total
change, wliicli we denote hy tlie term “metabolism, ’’ ns consisting
on the one hand, of a downward scrie.s of i.Kntabolic changes) a stair
of many steps in whicli the more comple.x Inxlies .are Broken down
with the setting free of energy into simpler waste bodies, and
on the other hand, of an upward scries of changes (anabolic changes)
also a stair of many steps, by which the dead food of varying
simplicity or complexity is with further assumption of energy
limit up into more and more complex Bodies. Tlie summit of the
double stair we call “protoplasm” whether we have right to apeak
of it ns n single ho<ly tin the chemical sense of that word or as n

iSiKutn'njoN. It

'\h,n 11 1'- Jioiv Ihcii -t.tu-'l Uic hiiic-

lion' 'uti'i Mpitii-c.nion- ,‘! titc Vriyn, Pittam .tml Kaplmh,
il will .xjjjv.iT Umt AVh-ii y;iy;''^ of Uic Aynrvcdn coiUcm-
pf.Ucil tlt:cc diftctciVv .'cl> t'f }>iinci i!c^ ill tlic (lomniiis of
HiuKY.y anil PatIn'Iop.y. Wiyo. Piitam. anti Kaplialt atn

ill I 'liic M.>y •*! • \\ lii tlirr vk' rrjjnnl

t! t!"'’ 'rty >-i(niiiil "f Uu tnir, i^r n" •iiilinuinn ii>- well

«>. tiic t-'iniii 't ttr;" in i i'lu t v. (• i Mti iml til irc*i'ii( I'll.

K"!! :! If lui*- K' a ►uii 'I'' i nP-tinc’' forminf: tlw Kiiniiiiit,

il-- vj.i'-’fllt ■- (Il !y t< iiip-ir.iry . fil '‘in' iii'’lniii'(' il i- iiim'Ii'. .it

ill'’ n' it i- uniii. 1 ' 1 '' tii.nt'r. uliii'Ii i' j>.i' • inj; tin (lir plmK:

"f life, f'llt-i lip tin- .1' 1 '‘ii'liii;; [ii tin- tup iitnl fnrlh'viili rolls

<lo\\ii on til" i‘lli< r riilo • ^

rnrtli'-r tlir ilr.nl f.“>il iu>-lf f.nrly. Put f.m from iK'iiif; wholly
••tah!" in r.lnr.irtor, In-comi ^ m.ii,- aiol mnro t omph-x liviii},' innlorial.
It liocomi"* tiioro ami inoro oxplo'-ivo nn'l wIi'Mi it roach'-K llm mmi-
niit it"- o-piililiriniii i-ovor-lhrown .anil il mitii.ally oxploilo“. Tin' wliolt:
ilowiiwnnl st.air of i'V( lit- l■"<'^ll•l in f.n;l to Ih,- n '■rrirs of i‘xpl'jt<ivcH
liy iiiCAiiJi 'if tvlii';1i 111" oniTf,''' lat'-in in tlm ilcini fooil niul niiKiiii’iitoil
hy tlm toiK’lm'i through wliioh tlio 'lonil fooil hccoincp living
prolopla'-in, i-i K t froo. Some of ihoii' fieoil energy in iikciI up
again hy the material it-elf. in onler l*i carry on thi- same vivitiealion
of (Icail fmiil, the re“l leaves the lioily ns heal or nmlion.

Tf this he ndinittcil il ahiiO'-t inevilnlily follow-, llml what we
Imvi; c.illc'l proloplaeiii. ran not lie always the hPiiiie thing : that
there intiHl la; many vnrieti'-s of protojilaam with iliirerent ipmlitiea
iiiid with correspi'iiding dilTereiil molceiilnratrncline mid TOinpimition.
U(<ing the word ‘•protopia-m’' in this aenpe. il i- oin ioiin that the
varieticH of proloplaam are mtmeroiiH indeed, nhiiosi. inniitncrahle.
The molecular protophimn. which hriiigH forth a conlractilo kata-
Ptnlc must differ in nature, in composition, that is in eoiiBtruction
from glandular protoplaHiu whore kala-Htatc ia a inolhcr of
ferment. Further the protoplasm of a swiftly contracting striped
muscular fibre must differ from that of the torpid, smixith, iinstrialed
fibre, tho protoplasm of a hnmtin muscle must differ from that of
a sheep or a frog, the protoplasm of one miiselo must differ from
that of another muscle, in tho sumo kind of animal, and tho pro-
toplasm of Smith’s biceps must differ from that of Jono’s — Foster,

lii

INTUOnucTION.

called Dhaitts or fundamental principles of tlie economy,
when in virtue of their correlative and sustentalivd func-
tions, or with the help of their subservient processes of
metabolism and lymphatic circulation, they ensure an equi-
poise among the different vital and physiological processes
in the whole economy which is essential to its perfect
health. Biologically considered they arc but the primary
subtle dynamics of organic life, or as S.iyana e.xpresscs it,
the three fundamental principles of the body.* But when
this healthy equilibrium is disturbed either through the
agency of any extrinsic or idiopathic factor, when any one
of them is abnormally augmented or dominates the other
two, thus altering their mutual relation in the economy,
naturally certain palhologic,d conditions arise which form
the esse of a disease ; t or in the parlance of the Ayurveda
they are said to have been transformed into Doshas or
morbific diithesis. Even blood, which, according to our
Acharyayas, forms one of the fundamental principles (Dhdlu)
of the organism, may be designated as a Dosha (morbific
diathesis), when owing to its congestion in any particular
organ or member of the body, it brings about a disturbance
in its general vascular system and produces pathological
conditions which are offshoots of its own deficient or
disturbed circulation. They are denominated as Malas, f
when observed still in grosser or superficial principles of
the organism producing those excretions, or organic
lesions which appertain to the sphere of morbid Anatomy.
Thus we see that the Ayurvedic principles of Vayu, Pittam
and Kaphah embrace both the biological and pathologi-

Sfiyana’s Commentary Rig V. 1 A.
t jqimt; \

Chaxaka.

I^TRODUCtlON.

liii

cal principles of the organism ; or in other words, the
Ayurvedic physiology elucidates and investigates the
causes through which the same principles, which sustain
life and the organism, are transformed into the dynamics
of disease, lastly pointing out the grosser excretory changes
and organic lesions in the external or superficial plane of
existence, which form the subject of morbid anatomy and
are sometimes confounded with the disease itself. In the
Vayu, Pittam and Kaphah of the Acharyayas we have at
once a complete picture of the finer sustentative forces of
the human economy as well as their antithesis, the construc-
tive as well as the expulsive forces of the inner man, to-
gether with an exhaustive analysis of their grosser products
which legitimately fall within the sphere of morbid ana-
tomy. A real knowledge of the nature and functions of
the Vayu, Pittam and Kaphah may be useful in giving a
deeper and clearer insight into the principles of true biology
6r pathology. It is incorrect to translate Vdyu, Pittam and
Kaphah as air, bile and phlegm, except under certain cir-
cumstances. V^yu, Pittam and Kaphah are air, bile and
phlegm only when they are transformed into Malas or
grosser organic excretions which are supposed to be
so very intimately connected with factors, pathogenetic
or pathological, but they are not air, bile and phlegm in
those planes of their functions which determine the genesis,
growth and continuance of the organism, as well as its
death, decay and disinteg ation. The knowledge of a
region without that of its antipodes is but a half knowledge,
and the principle of V.-lyu, Pittam and Kaphah is the only
one of its kind that tries to embrace the whole sphere of
organic existence.

Ojah-Dh^tU : — From what has been stated before
it will appear that during the process of tissue-formation,
the lymph or chyle, under the influence of Pittam, or
metabolic heat, is transformed into the same, the refuse
or un-utilisable portion of it being passed off through the

Uv

IKTROnUCTION.

apertures of the body, ns excretions. The Ojah-Dli.-ilu is
present in the rcproducti\e energy that lies latent in every
organic principle, via. lymph, blood, muscles, bone (synovia),
marrow, and in the male female reproductive elements.
Hence it is not a matter of surprise when we find in Ayur-
vedic works this Soma, or Ojah-Dhatu mentioned as lying
diffused in the human organism and described as the essence
of the lymph chyle, blood, &c. (i). The terms Ra^igata
Ojah, Raktagdia Ojah are therefore used perhaps in the
sense of modern serum-albumen, blood-albumen, &c. The
male & female reproductive elements, according to this
view, form the essence of the bodj' as a whole, and the Ojah,
which is abundantly found in these protoplasmic cells, is
the quintessence of a quintessence. The muscle of the
heart .alone, according to Charaka. is chiefly associated with
this energetic substance, which is of a bloody yellowish
colour &. possesses both cooling & heat-making virtues. (2)
In diseases caused by defective assimilation it is said tb
be ejected through the kidneys and to pass off with the urine
(as in certain types of Prameha) (j), whereby the patient
gradually loses strength, flesh, and healthy glow of complex-
ion inasmuch as these are but the accompaniments of its

(1) i

Hirfr B

Vigbhat.

(2) fu^frr Kanflqq 1

u’srra' rmrsimr p

Charaka (Sutra Slhfinam) Ch. XVII.

(3) .t. sign? \

5RT rra^*H n

Charaka (Sutra Slhinam) Ch. XVlI.

Charaka (Shirira SthSnam) Ch. IV.

INTRODUCTION.

Iv

healthy continuance in the human organism. “Health and
strength,” obser\'es our Rishi,” reside latent in the Ojah-
dhdtu, as butter (Ghritam) lies latent in milk, (i)

Dallana Mishra, the celebrated commentator of the
Sushruta Samhitd, has defined Ojah as a fatty substance
completely combustible in its character. Thus in the
course of tissue combustion its excess quantity is deposited
especially in the female body as f it which produces that
peculiar softness and elegance. (2) The presence of Ojah
in urine is said to induce Madhumeha (3). Taking this fact
alone into consideration one is inclined to the belief
that Ojah must be something of the nature of sugar.
As a consequence of these different interpretations of
Ojah the question arises whether there is present in the
human organism any such common element that produces
either of these two important oxidising materials, viz. fat
and sugar.

It is a demonstrated fact in modern Physiology that
glycogen is found in other tissues and organs besides
in the liver. Tissues of embryos and of young animals
as well as newly formed pathological growths may be said
to contain glycogen. The activity' of the heart, as well as
the development of the fetal body (4) is largely dependent

(i) A. ^skIw* stIu' 1

Bhitvaprakfisha. Part I.

I). ^5; I

BhAvapmkAsha.

(2) wflsi; q'auu'U’rt uigmufhPnfwnTw e'cstm

Dallana Mishia.

(3) See Note 3 (B) Poee iiv.

(4) nuw 1

^ gvi 11

Charaka SutrasthSnam, Chap. XXX.

Ivi

INTRODUCTION.

upon this Ojah-dhatu which may be best translated as
glj'cogen in the parlance of Western phj'siology. In fact,
our Acharyayas have used the term “ojah’’ to denote that
vital principle in the organism which is essential to the
maintenance of a healthy combustion in its tissues and to the
due performance of their normal functions and activities, no
matter whether that principle is patent in the form of proto-
plasm, protoplasmic albumen, glycogen or mucosin (Prahrita
shleshmd)* in accordance with the difference of their func-
tions, geneses, and conditions of protoplasmic metabolism.
In short, they were cognisant of the fact that fat and sugar
are evolved out of a common basic principle in the organism
as has been very eruditely' demonstrated by' Dr. S. N.
Goswami, B. A., L. M. S. in his treatise on Purasavanam t
It is far from our intention to thrust this opinion on any
one ; we have simply stated our conclusion in the matter
and will welcome the result of fresh enquiries on this subject.

• A. tnsutt} ^0 gw 1

wo g a

Chaitika SamhilA Snlraiih 5 n.im, Clnp. XVII.

n. g^wifq i

Clakradatta'^ Comiticntarj- S. SamhiiS, SnlraslhSnam Chap. XV.

+ “From these extracts u appears to a> still more vividly that our
coautiymen did also discover, like Dr. Pavy, the importance of
fat and sugar in the animal economy, as well a.= the mode in which the)'
can be elaborated from one common principle. (76-7S). A comparative
study of the two systems of medical .science, Indian and European,
has led u? to arrive^at this conclusion ; if we. therefore ore not inclined
to identily Ojah with albumen, as it has been done by some modem
Indian commentators, we Kave reasons to believe that the aforesaid
extracts have not as yet received sufficient consideration from them, as
forming the nutrith'c basis of the procreative elements ; in short the subject
has hitherto been neglected or, at least, been placed in the back-ground,
rom want of attention on the part of those whose business it was to investi-
gate into the truths of Science. To hold that Ojah is kept in deposit in
the heart, as a reserved food material, for the maintenance of its own work

INTRODUCTION.

Ivii

Sp.ice does not. permit ns to give Iiere even something
like a satisfactorj' synopsis of tlie p)i3'siology of Sushrnta.
It is enough for our purpose if we can create for our readers
an interest in the various ph}’siological problems discussed

our author in this part of his work, or in his description
of the various physiological processes, which are esseritial
to the health}' continuance of human economj’. But if
Hindu physiology is startling in its demonstration of the

as well as for the production of germinal .seed, is to admit that efficiency of
reproduction depends entirely upon the efficiency of this important sub-
stance in the body.”,

(76) I

TPrg frisrmnrrri'^Pi ^ 11

ftnrg n

^T^Ttrpirr^ni iwfh- 1

(77) smr

(78) ftsftsciinr q' wnsi: 'T'twmmm

j^eit tnfft ^t>I n??f7T I

—Ibid,

76. Those who partake of heavy and cooling food abounding in adds and
salts, of new rice, and beverages, or constantly enjoy sleep and luxuries, or
neglect the exercise of body and mind, or who habitually abstain from the
use of corrective medicines, help to accumulate in their bodies phlegm,
bile, fat and flesh ; and these interfere with the functions of the ^■ 4 )■u,
which causes the Ojah to he displaced from its proper place down in the
bladder and produces glycosuria.

77. As Ghee pervades the whole of milk, so Tcja (ojah) permeates
all the tissues of the 1>ody.

78. Teja (Ojah) too is combustible : in course of tissue-combustion, the
excess quantity of it gets deposited cspedally in the female body as fat
which produces softness and elegance,

8

Iviii

INTKODVrCnON.

fact ihat growth is not the only condition of life, that vitali-
ty is somewhat independent of the phj'siological processes,
that the inner man, with the help of Yoga, can long survive
even without food and respiration,* and that death and
decay maj- be arrested to a considerable degree bt- com-
pletely stopping many of those phraological processes in
the bodv.t which are considered so very essential to living
by the savants of the West, then Hindu pathology is unique
in its conception of the nature of disease,

Snshrata’s Pathology : — What is it in a man, asks Sush-
ruta, that falls sick ? What is that that we treat medictnaliy ?
The body or the mind ? Sushruta says that, “anything that
afflicts the inner man (self or Purasha) is diseaset and
that disease has its primary- seat in the inner spring of
vitality from which it fiows out to the surface, the external
bod}'”. In man, as in everything else in the universe,
the direction of the inherent force is from the centre to
the circumference. The shock is felt first at the centre of
Htalily, whence it is transmitted outwards and thus affects
the energ}* which holds the molecules together, Dvyanuks and
Tryanuks (Binary and tertiary atoms) of which the gross
bod}' is composed, and faii:her opposes the dissolution of
those molecules into their elemental constituents in the living
organism. Even in cases of external injuries such as snake-
bite. etc. the potency of the virus is canied at once to that
centre from whence it is almost iastaataneouslv transmitted
through the external channels of the bodv to its surface.

I’aOuibti \lbn=up 54 i 29—50 A.

SajhiWJi iaohiti. S2-I2. Qnp. I.

iNTRonnmoN,

lix

otherwise vvhai purpose does i!ic v.-tyu (nerve force) serve in
the human economy ? What do those myriads of Chaitnnya-
v.ihini Kadis (sensory ncives) exist for in the human
system ? In all diseases the subjective sensations arc tlie
first to be experienced. "I am ill,’’ "I feel hot," etc. are the
voices of sensations, which form the "esse” of the disease.
Disease then is a force and not m.alter.’

Pathology of Tridoaha Susliruta, though adopting
the Vedic pathological dictum of Tridli.itu, Jtns expressed
a very clear opinion on the subject. He observes titat the
relation between a disease and the deranged V:lyu (nerve
force), Pittam (metabolism) and Kapham (unutilised product
of the system), and the pathogenic factors which lie at the
root of that disease, is not real but contingent. These
morbific principles may permeate the whole organism
without creating any discomfort, and it is only when they
find a distinct lodgment, and arc centred in some distinct
part or tissue of the body, that they become the exciting
factors of disease.

Drag Potency The ne.xi question whicli naturally
arises in connection with such a tlicory of pathogeny, is
what is medicine, cr in other words, what is it in the drug
that cures ! Sushruta, after closely investigating all the
theories on the subject, inclines towards the opinion that it
isthepotency of the drug that is curative, though he observes
that inasmuch as potency cannot exist independently of a
drug, a drug is of primary interest for all practical purposes
in therapy.

Dmg-D3manUBation is the potency of a drug

that cures a disease”. The potency is administered best

* That Hahnemann’s theory of disease was long before fore-
shadowed by Snshrata, will appear from the above extracts from his
works. Hahnemann observes that, when a person falls ill, it is only
this spiritual self-acting viual force, everywhere present in the organism,
that is primarily deranged by the dynamic inlluence of a morbific
agent inimical to life — Orgenon.

iNTKonurTiov. Ixi

lliose forms of mental or nervous distempers for wliich
Mcsmer rightly uiiw receives so much honor. Since
ihc crcatiriu of man, the touch of tlte “Saintly” lias been
credited with the viitue of curing the sick; and A'vcslia
(anto-hypnoiisml and Sam.ndhi (higher pliascs of clairvoy-
ance) have achieved many miracles in the art of healing
in India, which was the first counliy where it was first
successfully practised for the welfare of man.

Saraaliodhanam and Samsliamanam All kinds of
treatment may be grouped under two heads such as Sam-
shodhanam and Sanijhamanam, i.c. cither the body should
be cleansed (Samshodhitam) of the morbific diathesis with
the help of emetics or purgatives, or steps should be taken
to restore the deranged Vayn, Pittam and Kapham to their
normal condition with the help of proper medicinal drugs
without resorting to any eliminating process. Rut in cases
of iuflamm.rtion, Sushrula enjoins iliat. Instead of any Sam-
sl.amannm remedies, diaphorc.--is should be first resorted to.
In cases where couiuer-irritaiUs are indic.ited ami in parts
which are diicctly accessible, leeching and cauterisation
should be practised with a due regard to tlie season of the
year and the requirements of the case. We find in his
Samhita a detailed account of the several species of leeches
with their habits and habitats.

Forma of medicine: — Powders, lambatives, decoctions
as well as medicated oils, Ghriias, confection and wines are
the forms in which, according to Sushruta, medicines
should be given. The different di ugs such as roots, leaves,
etc. should be culled in the seasons proper to each.
He classified the soil into five different kinds for the purpose
of growing drugs of different therapeutic properties.
Even the virtues of different flavours and colours were
ascertained with regard to their respective actions on the
deranged morbific principles of the body.

Raad^yanam ; — The Ayurveda being the science of life
and health, the holy Agnivesha, at the very commencement

Ixii

INTRODUCTION.

of the therapeutical portion of his work, ' has described
several medicinal compounds, which improve general health
and arrest the ravages of time. Theoretically speaking the
science of the Ayurveda recognises no preordained limit to
human existence. Life can be prolonged with the help
of suitable medicines. By dint of observation and patient
researches our Rishis devised many such adjuncts which
can rejuvenate an old man, and supply those vital elements
to an old and exhausted human body, which ebb away,
with the progress of years. Hence, we find many
rejuvenating medicines to have been prescribed for men in
health which would arrest decay and guard against the
approach of senility by increasing the fundamental vital
principles of the body and preventing Vayu, Pittam and
Kapham from being transformed into morbific diatheses.

Diet— “A good and proper diet in disease is worth
a hundred medicines and no amount of medication can do
good to a patient who does not observe a strict regimen of
diet.” Our Ayurveda, instead of being content with specify-
ing the nature of diet in diseases in general, mentions the
names of articles, which should, or should not be taken in
any specific malady, judged by the light of their properties
of aggravating Vayu, Pittam or Kapham. The dietic or
therapeutic properties of a large number of articles of
human consumption, as well as the chemical changes they
undergo in the digestive apparatus of different mammals,
ha\e^ been studied and analysed, and so we find in our
physique, medical Samhitas, such injunctions that barley-
corns passed undigested with the feces of a cow or

u

iTOfh' ^Ipei' i

tr jwnt Tmfbrt Tmrm' ii

Samhllfi Qiikitsd Slhfinnm Cli. T,

introduction.

Ixiii

horse, should forin the diet of a Prameha patieut * that
the milk of a she-camel should be given to a patient
suffering from a cutaneous affection, and that the flesh
of any carnivorous beast or bird should be given to one
suffering from pulmonary consumption and so on. It
was a cardinal doctrine with A'yurvedic dietists that the
longing of a patient for any particular kind of food
in a certain disease, emphatically shows that his organism
is in want of those elements which enter into the
composition of the article ofifered. Hence elaborate
dietetics were formulated, which cannot but be acceptable
to the most fastidious patient.

Therapeutics: — The exclusiont of salt and water from
the food of an ascites or anasarca patient as laid down in
our Samhitas shows that our Rishi possessed a higher
chemical knowledge regarding the effects of organic matter
on the human system than many of us are ready to
accord to these pioneers in medical science.

Medical Botany,— After therapeutics comes the subject
of Medical Botany. Sushrula divides the whole vegetable

« mi’sr ewnd. nm rrrRt rr^r; i

Char.ikii Samhiti, Chikilsfi SthSnam. Ch. VI. 23.
t The etncacy of such exclusion has been lately demonsUated by the
researches of Dr. Benjamin Ilomiman (Lectures, Sanitarium, Park st.
London.)

t A. i

5irni<*drrni sraft n

Charaka ChikitshS Sthfinam Ch. XIII.

Ibid Chap. 13.

Jpa ugp ^ 'dlTTspi* gift’d! at ii

Charaka Chikitshd Sth-dnam Chap. I-,

Ixiv

INTKOnUCriON*.

kingdom into Vriksha, Gulma, Vanaspali and Viriidha. This
classification has been minntelj' worked out in' works on
Hindu Botany wliere we find such nice subdivisions as
Agravija (whose loplings are only planted), Mulaja (whose
roots only are planted), Parnaj-oni, Skandaja, Vijaruha (ger-
minated from seeds) and Sanntirudhajn. But the botany of
bushruta is more of the nature of a Materia Medica than
a work on Botany proper, though sometimes he mentions
the habitat and describes the foliage of certain plants so
that they maj' be distinguished from others of a cognate
species.

The uses of metals and minerals for therapeutical pur-
poses in India are as old a, the Rigveda * itself. Sush-
ruta de:jcribes the methods of preparing oxides, sulphates
or chlorides of the six metals as the case may be. Mercury'
has been only once mentioned in the Snmhita and then very
%aguely too. Processes for the preparation of alkalis and
the lixi\iation of ashes are very elaborately described.
Beyond these the chemical knowledge of Sushruta scarcel}'
extends.

Hygiene and Public Health: — .^s a writer of Hygiene
and public health, Sushruta emphasises the importance
of cleanhness of both spirit and body. W^ater whose
disinfecting virtues have so often been hymiiised in the
Vedas t forms the subject of discussion of an entire
chapter of the Samhita. Outbreaks of epidemic have been
attributed to coiitraiy' seasons to the floating of minute
particles of poisonous flower pollen in the air, and to the
sm or unnghteous conduct of the community. Earthquakes, ‘
amines, and physical phenomena, which are at present attri-
buted to magnetic disturbances of the earth, have been

Ixad cryjtals (inclnding dinmond) gold and
tinned in (he I. i6. I. 29 . 1 55. anj iv ,0. of the

mineral poisons arc nicn-
.A.tharva SnmhitA.

Rik Samhiti I. 23 «. 19,

Twofold division of Time <tc It i< n lnndAmcntal

dicttini <4 .S.idmit .1 tli.i; iii ,( oj iii"(Iicnl irc.jfiiKMil tlie
then {'rrvailiiiit 'c I'-'m <if tin* v<’>t •■hoiild h;- tal:cn into
account In hi^ Sainliit.i 'vc lind tn-.» distinct classificntions
of vea-'in*. r>iic h.i'cd on ilic peculiar pliysical pheno-
mena wliirh di‘:in;jui'li the difTcrcnl reason'; of the year, a fad
nhich emphatically prove-, that Su'-lnutn was an inliahitant
of the Mih-llimnlayan (lanpelic Doah. the other is for the
purpose of showing the respective accnmnlntion, aRprava-
tion and Mibsidencc ol morhilic diatlteses' (Doslias). In
tlic same manner tlte difTerent quaiiers of tlic day and
night have Iteen minutely charted or set down to show the
spontaneous aggravation and subsidence of the deranged
Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphab during the 24 hours. The
influence of planets as to the prodndion of certain diseases
such as smnll-pox, measles, scarlet fever, &c. is almost a
proved fact. As it governs the prevalence and non-
prevalence of certain maladies, the aggravation and
9

Ixvi

INTRODUCTION-.

non-aggravation of certain existing disorders as well owe
much of their origin to this potent factor. The vegetable
kingdom from which we glean our daily food is also subject
to this influence, and hence the discrimination we exercise .
in selecting our food on certain da3's of the lunar month.

Countries have been divided into Jangala or A'nupa ac-
cording as their physical features partake of the character
of a dry plateau or of a swamp or marsh, a Sadhdrana
one possessing features, which are common to both. Diseases,
which are natural or are spontaneously relieved in each of
these kinds of country have been treated with that scienti-
fic insight which marks modern medical works on sea-side
or spring sanitariums. The rdrtues of the waters of different
rivers of India were ascertained for the purposes of practical
therapeutics. The therapeutic properties of the milk of
a she-goat, she-buiTalo, mare, cow-elephant, or woman, as
well as of any of their modifications such as curd, whey &c.
together with the properties of the flesh and urine of the
several groups of she-animals, which are indigenous to
the land, were studied and analysed, thus placing at the
disposal of a practical physician a list of dietary' in
difl'erent diseases to soothe the taste of the most
fastidious patient, and which is at the same time potent-
enough to cure the distemper he is suffering from without
the help of anj- special medicine. Thus it is that we find our
Vaidyas prescribing the flesh of man^' carnivorous animals
as a diet in consumption, goat’s meat in phthisis, goat’s
milk in colitis and Tittira’s flesh in fever &c.

Diseases of the Kidneys and Bladder:— In treating
of the diseases of the kidneys, bladder and the urethra,
Sushruta lias described the symptoms and the colour of
the urine in each specific variety without laying down any
mode of testing the urine. But we know that Sushruta has
enjoined his readers at the very outset of his work to refer
to other allied branches of the science for information
which is not contained- in his book. In the same manner

INTROIUTCTION”.

Ixvii

we can accor.nl for ihe absence of any insliiiclions as
regards the feeling of llie pulse as an important auxiliary
in making a correct diagnosis. We need but repeat the
statement that the readers of this Samhita must look for
this information in the Kamida's Nadi Vijnanam, which has
made our Vaidyas such e.xpert sphygmologists.

Kalpa: — In the Kalpasth.-inam of his Samhita, Sushnua
has described the symptoms of hydrophobia and snake bites,
etc as well as those developed in cases of vegetable poisoning,
together with their therapeutical treatment and remedies,
which, if rightly studied and investigated, may 3'et throw a
new light upon the subject.

Sushmta as an Observer It has been lately dis-
covered b}' a German phj’siologist that tubercular bacilli do
not thrive in goat’s blood. The importance of goat’s milk
in colitis as an efficient agent in checking ferment in the
intestines, or of the close contact of a goat as a powerful
auxiliary in curingtuberculous phthisis was first demonstrated
by Sushruta. Not only this — but the inhalation of the
air of a cattle-shed and especiallj' the fact that e.xhaIations
of goats, bodies tend to destrov the phthisis germs did
not fail to attract the attention of the Indian Rishis ; the
fumigation of the sick-room with antiseptic preparations
such as (Asthdnga dhupas) is purely Indian

in its origin and in no way inferior to the modern introduction
of Cogghill’s respirators. The microscopic germs that are said
to propagate septic fever otherwise called
are found ver}-^ often to disappear under this Indian
device where no medicines produce anj’ impression. Thus
manj’ a wonderful discovery like the above hails from the
dimness of a bygone age. Many truths lie embedded
in the vast medical literature of the Brahmanas which
claimed close attention and devout study, even by the
western savants. We have not laboured in vain if these
pages can help a little to revive the old genius of the
A'j'urveda, or help the progress of human Science one step
onward towards the attainment of its goal.

PLATE No. 1.

7. GaTbhashanV.u yanira. 8. Jalodar yanlra.

. 9. Kakanm'k'ha yan'tra.

ll.Much'uli yantra.

12. Nadi yantra.

SEE CHAPTER Vll.

voO

SEE CHAPTER VI)

PLATE No. Ill

r

.-n:'

8. Antarmukria kartariLa.

SEE CHAPTER VIII

PLATE No. IV.

9. KrUharika sliastra.

ll.Man^ala^ra snastra.

IS.Nakka shaslra.

15. Suchi shastra.

19.V'rihimakha shastra.

10. Kushapalra shastra.

12.Mudrika shastra.

14. Shararimukha shastra.

16. Trikurchaka shastra. ,

17. Utpalapatra shastra.

18. Yetaspatra shastra.

, 20 .Vridhipatra shastra.

SEE CHAPTER VIII.

CONTENTS .

CHAPTER r.

Origin of the Ayurveda : — Tlu' oiglii ilivi^iun^f nf tlic iirvcilii
nnd tlio dinrnctoristic fontiires of ondi of iIomu — Ilisloiy of Surgery
and its primarj’ importance — Gradual exteii^ioii of tlio Ayurveda —
Definition of Pnrnslin — ClaBKification of ilip nioliile and llio im-
mobile — Definition and classification of ilisoase— Clasaificalion of
Oslmdliis — Tlie four factors to bo employed in snceessfidly coping
with a disease — The four stages of a disease ... ... 1 — 15

CHAPTER II.

Initiation of a student of the Ayurveda t— tlnalificationa of a
student of medicine — Mode of initiation— Compact betweeu tlie
preceptor nnd Ids disciple — I’mliibitcd periods of the study of the
Ayurveda ... ... ... ... ... 10—20

CHAPTER HI.

Classification of the Ayurveda &c. Tlic disirihutiou of its
linndred nnd twenty chnptor.s among tlie live subdivisions of tin’s
Samliita— A synopsis of tbe contents of tbe ebapters allotted to
each of its subdivisions— Skilful and unskilful iibysieians— Tlic
mode of studying tbo Aynrverln- Duties of a pupil aflor baving
fiiiisbcd tbe study of tbo Ayurveda < ... ... 21— .S2

CHAPTER IV.

General explanations Necessity of a elear exposition of Hie
Ayurveda — Defects which flow from tionexposition of the s.iino-
]liitic„s of a student of the Ayurveda ... ... dfi oo

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER V.

Prcllminafy surgical measures ; — Classification of surgical
oporations — Accessories which arc to be collected at the outset
—Qualifications of a surgeon— Modes of incision, etc. at the different
parts of the body— Measures to be ndoptecl after surgical operations
—The prophylactic Mantra— BirecUons for dressing wounds and
voinoving haudages accorvling to the nature of tUo prevailing season
of the year — Acts and articles prohibited to a patient with n
gran\i\nling wound — Measures for removing the pain in a surgic.d
wound ... ... ... ••• •”

. CHAPTER VI.

Characteristic features of the different seasons of the year
and their Influence on health and drugs t — Time and its traits
Etymology of the term Kala (time) — Tlivisinns of time and classifica-
tion of the sonHiiiis of the yi-.ir, with their respective fentuvos.
Classification of the seasons of the year for the purposes of the
Ayurveda — Inception, aggravation or subsidence of the deranged
Vayu, Pittam and Kapliam according to tlio nature of the prevailing
season of the year — Aggravation or subsidence of the same in tho
different quarters of the day nud night— Causes of epidemics — Pro-
phylacUo measuros — Features of natural or unnatural seasons 45 — 55

CHAPTER VII.

Surgical appliances, their use and construction 5 — Jshimltcr
of surgical instruments — Names, dimensions, use and functions of
surgical appliances with points of their respective escellonce or defect
Minor surgical accessories — Excellence of Kankamuldia ... 56 — 03

CHAPTER VITI,

Surgical instruments, and their names, use and construc-
tion t— Moile of Imudling the different surgical instrnmonts.— Ttieir

cornniondatOe features— Sharpening, edging and tempering, do., of

roSTlNT*.

iii

■■'lit;;.-.-.] .Hit] i.inihM ..f f .. c • ivlicr.- llu-v t.lutiM ,r

’'"‘I’-".'''? ... ... ... ... r,4_7n

Practice nf Mirf;cr>'
■ iiit.il't.- fruit.., rii-.

cn.-\PTi.:R IX.

I— r*' ;< liiiu; of ‘"Itti’i x

"U .lllMlIllil i ,iliil

... 71 - 7.1

CHAPTF.K X.

Esscrtlial quallfic.allons of .a physician before he formally
enters his profession!— Mi-.iti.- of iliairiii.-i. — 'I'liiiifra ln w> o >K,.rvi'(l
ill uiMkiii); a xli.iKiKi'-i- — Cnrr. jialliiitioii mul itu-iiruliility of iliHi-nn-H —
I'roliihitc'l r>.n(liKt of n i]iyhirinii ... ... 7^ — 77

CH.U’TKR Xr,

Mode of preparing alhalls, and their eomparafivc excellence
as incising, excising or scraping agents .\lknli« for cNtoriiiil
npi'Iiention or inl'-mal ti<o — Cn.-'cs xvlioro nllciiiis prove injiirioim — Tlio
three potencies of nlknlis for exleriial nppliciition — Coininendnlile
or (lefi'etive fc.aturcs in nn alkiili— Moile of itw nppliciition, nnd iifter-
nienturc' — Syiniitonis of nntisfnctory cnulorinntion — I'crKonn who
(.honld not lie treuted with alUnlin — l)nnK'-rn whicli attend itn
nhiiFC ... ... ... ... ... 78 — 87

Cll.XPTKK XII.

Actual cauteries i — AcceHi>orieH to nn m-t of cnulerisaliou — Pre-
liminary measures — Symptoms wliieh manifest thomBeIvcs ns tho
skin, or fiesh, or a vein, or joint is cauterised — Scats of cauterisation
in different diseases— Different modes of cauterisation— Charactoristio
symptoms of bums and scalds, etc, — Rationale of treating a burn or
a scald with heat — Medical treatment of bums nnd scalds, etc.—
Symptoms wliicli appear when the nostrils, etc. of a person is choked
with smoke— Its treatment— Medical treatment of sun strikes, and
Bcorchings by hot wind, etc. ... ... 88 — 97

IV

contents.

CHAPTER XIII.

Leeches and their use i — Persons wh(' may l)c leeched — ^Mode
of oxtinotiug the vitiated lilood in siicdi eases — Mode of apply-
iiiji the Iceehos — UlasHilieation, and mode of eolleeting and heep-
ing tile leeelios — Hud leeches and their charactcristies — After-
inoasiires ... ... ... ... ... '. 18 — 'lOa

CHAPTER XIV.

Origin and characteristic features of lymph chyle s — R'’
luciilion, eoMiM' and inolainorphosiK into hlwid — Menstrual hlood
and its naline — Snoees.sive inetaniorphosis of the fundamental
principles of the ImxIv — K tynioliigy of the Uirin Dhatu — -Blood •
Swellings wliicli slnmld not la- Idcd — Two kinds of hlood lotting
^ eneseeliiMi. its mode and dilVereat nspoets — Misclucf created hy Ihc
vitiated iduod not c.vtraeted froni the .system — Oauses of excessive
hleeding and its elVect upon the system — Symptoms of satisfactory
i'leeding an<l its iH-nefmial reholts — ileasurc-s to be adopted iu ctiscs
of excessive oi- s<anly tileeding — Medical trctitment of cxcessivo
liloeding — t .irimis instructions ... ... ... 106 — H*’

CHAPTER XV.

Development or non-development of the excrements and
constituent principles of the body: — Natiiro, locations and functions
of the Norninl \ ayu. Pit tarn nud Knpliniu, ns well as of the lymplt
chyle, Idnod, fat, marrow, semen, ami ojah (.alhiinien), and the sjTiip-
toms wliieh mark their ineveasc. dccionso, or dislorlgment iu the
human system — I'.tiidogies of obesity and thinness ... 120 — -140

CHAPTER XVI.

Piercing and bandaging of the lobules of ears i — Evils wliicl
attend the accidental Imriing of a (ocal vein— Medic.al unguents am
lmts-l)i(T,.ro„i prueesses of I.riiiging about tlic adhesion of i
lafnr. ate.l .■rtr.l,,bo -plattie and rhiiiOidaKtie oiierations ... 141— Jh

f'lvrrvTf..

CHAPTKK XVn.

r>i:,tinc{iOn I'clwctn r.tipfurAtJMf! And nnn-r.uppurAtitin
InfiP- iyi''-" "f iidl nimi.it<'ry I'V tlic

d-TAn;:' ■) V.i\u, rilt.'Ui. ‘ . mill !ln’ •yiii]ii'nti'' wlii'-li murk Ili"ir
H'j'ivliv.' til •.’.•'ll typ. — t !l);n,.<(ori-ti'> i‘ym itom-; of n

.>r n.i'i '-iijn'iir.iti'tl •'V.illitij; — IIiiiI“ on in
< 1 'ipj '.it.iti -i •'Vi'llinit — H mI' "f <>)«'niii;; :m iiL it»

ini'.rmiii iti'ry t t.iC'' — r<i iiin(r ttid nn.i -tlti ti-ini; of n p.itii’Hl I'lifuri'
t.iiniii;; iilT in til" i- '<— f'iA-siiir.itii'ii of “iiroicAl (i nTr\liiinH in
c. mill 'linn M'idi .m ... ... ll’il'i — 101

CHAPTHK' XVIII,

DrcsTvintp: and bandApc: of nlccrs ;— fln-sirn-nl imi ..f im'ilicinnl
pI.i'-ti tH ili'f'i'rilinL* 111 tlmir tliii kin'"-. applii'.ilinn iiii'l fnni'tinn — I't-c
of tli<- diffiTcnt lypr.'i of plmli.-ri — .\rli' !i“' "f lianil.ininn — liiinilnj^os
nii'i tlioir nnini"' an.l applii Af ioiii— T-or — .Modo of introilncinn ii
lint — nvliow.iK of li.'iinlnf.'rn tn corilin;; to llw mil tiro of tlin nicer
and llto pri'vailinn “oanon of tlie year — l.vili. of non-liandnfjinf' —
licnclUv of li.indajrin;; — Ca^oi- v.ln ro iMinlaKinK in proliildli'il — IlintH
on (lie proper Inliriention of tlm lint — Incidental remarks on llic
Itanda^ing of fractnred or dinloeated bones ... ... IG'2 — 175

CHAPTER XIX.

Nursing and management of an Ulcer-patient : — Xntnrc of liis
lied and cliamlier— Arlicl'-s iiroliildled tonnnleer patient — Propliylnxis
against monsters and demons — l)iel and condnel of an nlcor-
patieiit ... ... ... ... 170 — 182

CHAPTER XX.

Salutary and Non-salutary effects of regimen, etc. t — Clnssi-
ficalion of all articles of fare according n.s they are wliolosomo or
nnudioleseinc to Urn linman Hyslom, or are relalivelj' wlioic.somo
or olliorwita. — I'oodstniT — Incompniiliilily tlimugli comldnalion —
InjuriouuncHs tlirongli conibinntinn — Incompatibility throngli pro-

CONTENTS.

paration, quantity or ttavour — Effect o£ winds im ttui tniiiian uyntcin
as they blow from tlic diffcrcnl quarters o£ tlic licavoii ... 18.1—

CHAPTER XXI.

The deranged Vayu, Pittam, etc., as the exciting causes of
ulcers : — Seals of Vayii, Pittam, etc. in tbo liiiman iMtdy, and tbcir
functions — Different kinds of Vnyu. Pittam and Bhlcslinm, and tboir
functions and locations in tlic economy of nature — Factors width
aggravate the deranged Vayu, Pittuiii nml Kaphani. and their
periodicity — Symptoms of the deranged Pitlnm, Kaphaiu and blood
Expansion of the deranged Vnyu, Pittam, etc., and diseases duo to
their incarcemtion in the different parts of the body — Disease its
development and occasions which ncoc.ssitale tlic calling in of medical
aid — Tlie nature of medical treatment in the ease wberc two or all of
the Vayu, Pittam and Eaplinin are involved ... ... R’f 211

CHAPTER XXII.

Secretions from boils and ulcers t — Shapes and scats of hoilt
etc. — Sjnnptoms of bad ulcers — Secretions from ulcers — Prcsmnptior
as to the derangement of Vnyu, etc. from the nature of tlio sccretioi
— Different kinds of pain which mark the different types of ulcers—
Colours of Ulcers ... ... ... 212 — 2U

CHAPTER XXIll.

Prognosis in ulcer cases ; — Easy ciimhility of an ulcer — bynq
toms of an ulcer which readily granulates — Symptoms of dillicu
or incurable tj’pes, as well as of those which admit only of palliation ■
Symptoms of a purified, granulating or healed ulcer — Factors wide
lead to tho reopening of a healed ulcer ... 220—22

CHAPTER XXIV.

Classification of diseases according as they are medical t
iurgical : — Furtlior classification of diseases according as tiicy a
congenital, etc. — DiseasoB duo to mental, pliysical or providenti

• i >

t if

••/■^ V-.. , j':t'M, :*..*

4 ?‘,M'n j; xav

t f?! ir.-r~.-. rf l;-.;f:f!f*} r J-i r*lif -i !’ t ■ ■-■ «>!.t 1 '

'' ■ r ' » 1 V ‘ ‘ ' r ■ T ■ < • ‘ • r •*-•;- • ^ ^ . -t ) ! r-

rflAPTKK' aXVL

}■ i f'}r tiii • n r! in tftf rr(Mt;(trti ! ■

• -! f •■ ^ ?* • !;••■■■.• 1 ■• ! t’ ' •! ><:*.. ( .■■to i > < ■ riifilit-

f ••' - : : r- -Ttl. ■ _1 r.i) J- 1.-' .i -VI. •'•,■!•• T.'"- .lli' lli'-U

‘ l' ;. »'• Jl f !v . I. ,•<•.•■< 1!' ) ir. !l-. ) >1_\ — W )iit )l

>; •.» 1 ?, ,1 i!.^ ( ii-.itft (!'>•' f' l li<- i! 1 )I'<-<M<i til (li-

'..I* !• -iAt'’ I ; . • '.t.','- 111.,: If.'- <if -iii .-'ni-v fii>iii 'iirh

:. V,,,-. i ... ... ... ... ... ■J47-‘l'>r,

CUAPTKH XXVII.

Extraction of spUnlers t— Tift' I'll ilifli ri nl of cJttnir-

tir.'i— T" << !'-■ ' '1 ' i-f fl'linti r^ frulii nil Iy K-B of

u i iiinK— M<-i' ;it< ~ 111 III' rul'iliti'*! nfli r llii- ••xlrni'tloti— Mmlr of
• xli.'.itim; rjillnli'r- fruiii villi'-, <ti'.— I'uit’trh of ii<>l r.vtractlnf;
:i i-l'IiiiU I from li wtiiiiiil ... ... ... 2rii3 — 2(15

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Favourable or unfavourable prognosis of an ulceri — Fatnl
or mifiiviiiirnlilo tiyiii )tiiini- — Ailviunliility of nlinmloiiinn Ilic jinliont
v.'livn tlii-iii) imfuvoiimlilo flyiiniluinH nppuar ... ... 250 — 209

viii

ros'TrS’T.s.

CHAPTKK XXrX.

Fnvournbtc or unf.ivour.iljle prf'f;no‘.!r- in
from nicsscnRCrs, onicn-i, birds of bippy or evil .■»vij;or)r P”'
rtiiiic pioilioti;4 from ilri ton''. < !r. — Ui-iui 'ii' A foi drr.Td-'

iinilor tlio (jirciiiiisliini'' iplinn nf

(.’HAPTPK XKX.

Prognosis tli.it c.in be obi.iincti from ttie perverted functions
of the five sense orpins i - Arivlit.i' <-r iii'-nlul

loiiit', — 1 nfii vi.iir.ihli' 1 _\ iii[.t.iiii' ill oxnni rtioii ivitii tin- fni.'illli* "'
honring, tmicli. t.isto, sim'll i.r .-iglit ... ... ‘-M-l— ti'<‘

CIIAPTEK XXXI.

Prognosis to be githcred from the .ittcred condition of
fc4iturcs ; — tUlu r .Ari.silm FYmpliiiii.< in vi'niojlit'it ivitli .tHlIiinn.

Cniigli, nn.l (K.lciiwi, , , , ...

Cl I AFTER XXX II.

Prognosis based on the pcrycr.slon of the external appearances
of the body and other Arishta symptoms ... ... ‘d'.i.'!— 2t'7

CHAPTER XXXI II.

Incurable diseases, and Incurable symptoms developed in con-
nection -with diseases of the nervous systems, morbid urethral'
discharges. Leprosy, Haimorrhoids i — Fistula in nno— Urinary
concrebons, DiniciiU lalnnir, Ascitca, Fever, Dyaentory, I'lilliisis,-
^(lominnl glands, AIipccbs. Cliloro-sia Un'inoplvsiH Tiisaniti’ and

... ... ... 2n8-.no2

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Mode of preservlng the life of a king whose soldiers are on
nc march ,-n,o four factors of medical treatment— G oihI whicli

(■(.(NTKN'T.s,

IX

K’biilli' I'loin a Hiiti'^l’iiuioiy r»iiil>inutioii of nil IIk’m' lour fiicloru —
ConuucndnWe features in a physician, pnlioni, ruodicino and
nurse ... ... ... ... ... .30.T — 307

CH.-\PTRR XXXV.

Clinical Obscr\'atIons : —Chrneterislic features of a long liveil
or short lived luati. or of onn with an average duration of life —
IMiysieal teiuperaiueuts aiul diinensions of tin; liiiilis and iiieiuliers
of the hody— Curalile, iucurahiu or Mippressilile diseases — Sym-
pathetic and Primary dise.ases — Dilfi-reut kinds of digestive
cajiacity — Tlirco stages of man— llelative prepondornnec of Vayii,
Pittam and Kaplmiu tluriug different stages of life — Classilicatioii
of countries according to their physical feature;) ... 308 — .328

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Miscellaneous remedies for swellings : — Plasters for establish-
ing suppuration in swellings — Plasters for bursting, pressing out the
pus from, or asepsising swellings — Aseptic pastes — Fumigating com-
pounds— Healing pastes — Compounds which favour granulation in, or
destroy the supergrowtlis around an ulcer ... ... 320 — 335

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Destructive traits of the different kinds of soil commended for
the growth or culture of medicinal herbs : — Examination of the
soil from which medicinal drugs nro to bo gatliorcd — Examination
of drugs— Motlo of collecting drugs — Commondablu tmits in a room
to bo used ns a drug-store ... ... ... .336 — 341

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

A General Classification of drugs according to their therapeu-
tical properties t — Enumeration of thirty seven different groups of
medicinal drugs— Their uso and indications ... ... 342 — 367

X

CONTI-.XTS.

CHAPTER XXXTX.

Drugs possessed of cathartic or soothing effects : — Eitiotics
Purgatives— Drugs possessed of both emetic ntid pnrgntivc properties
— ^Errbincs — Drugs wliich respectiveh- sootlie the deranged ^ aja>.
Pittnni and Knphain — Mode of administering mcrlicines...

CHAPTER XL.

Drugs .and their flavours, virtues, potencies, and chemic.al
actions : (lisfpuMiiinnH ns regir.N tbe priniarv importance of drugs,
or tlieir flavours, potency, or cbeuiical reaction in respect of
curing diseases Causes of different kind.s of digestion — Conclusion
as regards the primarj* importance of drugs in curing n
disease ... ... .gG4— .374

CHAPTER XLI.

Specific properties of drugs : — Classification of drugs according
to the preponderance of the vinnes of elemental matter in them —
CharacteriBtic features of drugs of dominant earth matter, etc. —
Periodicitj of drug action — Reasons why purgative drugs move the
bowels Pnetors which lead to the aggravation or subsidence of the
deranged ^ ayu, Pittam and Kaplmni— Potency- of dnigs... .375— .381

CHAPTER XLH.

Specific prop^ies of flavours Reasons for the clnssificatii
o avonrs— Relation of the elemental eartli matter ivifh the flavou
easons for the primary derangement of Vayu, Pittam, etc.
wi^ptoins and aggravating factors of the deranged ^'ayu, Pitta
nndKaplmm-l irtues of the different kinds of flavour, such as swo

different combinations of fiavonrs ... __ 382—3

I ONTKNTS.

XI

CHAPTER XLIII.

Mode of admintstcring emetics CnmiiDiiiulH of Murlnim fruits
Coiiiponiuls of JiiiiutnUn ••• ... ... 30-1 — .300

CHAPTER XLIV.

Choice of purgatives ; — Most cfliciciil inirgalivcs— Piirgiilivc
compounds— i’tirgnlivc soups — .\snvns, wines, K.iuvinis, nnd Tuslio-
dakns, etc.— Instructions ns to (lie way of ndministcring purgntivc
compounds of Unnti, etc., in the innnner of Trivrit compounds —
Trivril Ashtukam— Mode of using purgative fruits nnd milkj’
exudations of trees— Adiuinistmtion of purgative medicines tliroiigh
the media of wine, etc. ... ... ... 40U— 417

CHAPTER XLV.

Rules to be observed in respect of liquid substances Water
group— Modes of purifying different kinds of water and tlioir virtues
etc.— Milk group— Virtues of (he dilTcront kinds of milk — Curd
group — Virtues of the different kinds of curd — Tnkra group — Modes
of preparing ditferent kinds of Tnkra, nnd their attributes — Properties
of butter, Kilat, etc. — Ditforcut kinds of Ghritns (clarified butter), and
their properties — Oil group nnd the properties of different kinds of
oil— Properties of the fat obtained from aquatic or domestic animals
— Honey group — Classification of the different kinds of honey and
their properties — Sugar-cane group, nnd the properties of the different
preparations of sugar-cane juice, such as treacle, sugar, etc., — Wine
group — Properties of the different kinds of animal urine... 418—468

CHAPTER XL VI.

Different kinds of food and drink :— Descriptions of Shall [
Dhanyam, Shashtika, Vrihi, Kudhanyam, Vaidal, JIudgn, Sesamum,
Barley, Wheat, Shiinvidhanyam etc. — Properties of Dhanyos according
to their maturity — Description of the Verudha Dhanyas— Flesh group ‘

t'o.vrj-.xTs.

Xll

ics o£

glassification of llesh-Tfio Visbkim jj.oup-Gencral ].ropcr.ics

tc-nn Prfltnda-

andl,okr°ir^ tl'c animals of the Pratu.Ia groiip-C'avc (hvelling,
nso of "d Prasnha group of animals— Beneficial

of aaimnl" ' "’•ii *" l^l'thisis-Dcinilcd classification

— Groun of W P'^opertics o£ dirtorent fruits

JZtlr ’ P-P^^rties-Flou-or groups-Tl.e

bulbons plants— plant-S and their properties— The group of
potash etc P Sroup o salts— Genera! projicrtios of nitrate of
nfir^on ofT,!:?^^ other mctnl.s-Deter-

-Drinks and hcl other than fho-e iierein incntionoil

-i-o:,;:: ^

typos of indigestion-lfr I- '’®‘'‘"’"~^-' "’Pt"nis of tho different
which mark acts of ov' '"•'"’’'O — S3nuploms

a meal before a prcvilns ont eating, or an act of eating ■

liongri* even when sufforinr^ '''Sested— Boason of one's feeling

g from indigestion ... 469— 57I

THE 8U8HRUTA 8AMHITA

SU^TRASTHANAM.

C H A P T E R I.

Well, we* shall now describe the origin of the Science
of Medicine, as disclosed by the holy Dhanvantari to his
disciple Sushruta. (Vedotpattimadhyarys^*!^)’

Once upon a time, when the holy Dhanvantari, the
greatest of the mighty celestials, incarnated in the form
of Divodasa, the king of Kasi, was blissfull)" seated,
in his hennitage, surrounded by a concourse of holy
Rishis ; Aupadhenava, Vaitarana, Aurabhra, Paush-
kalavata, Karavirj^a, Gopura-rakshita, Sushruta and
others addressed him as follows : — "O Sire, it grieves
us much to find men, though otherwise well befriended

* The present work which originally formed the subject of a discourse
by the holy sage Dhanrantari to his disciple Sushruta, has been compiled
in its present form by the venerable Nilgfirjuna, and is accordingly designated
as the Sushruta SamhitA.

2 THE SUSHRUTA.SAMHITA. [Chap l-'

b}' their kin and relations, falling a prey to ' diseases,
mental, physical, traumatic, or natural, and piteously .
wailing in agony like utterly friendless creatures on
earth ; and we supplicate thee, O Lord, to illumine our.
minds with the tniths of the Eternal AyurA'eda
(Medical Science) so that we may faithfull)’’ discharge
the duties allotted to us in life, and alleviate . the
sufferings of humanity at large. . Bliss in this life
and hereafter, is in the gift of this eternal Ayurveda,
and for this, O Lord, we have made bold to approach
thee as thy humble disciples.” To them, thus replied
the holy Dhanvantari : — ‘Welcome to all of ypn
to this blissful hermitage. All of you are worth)'
of the honour of true pupilship or tutelage.”

The A'yurvecJa (which forms the subject of our
present discourse), originally fonned one of the sub-
sections of the Athaiwa A’^eda ; and even before the
creation of mankind, the self-begotten Brahma strung
it together into a hundred thousand couplets (^Shlokas),
divided into a thousand chapters. But then . he
thought of the small duration of human life on eartlp
and the failing character of human memor}*, and .
found it prudent to dirnde the whole of the Ayiuveda
into eight different branches such as, the Salya-
Tantram, the Salakya-Tantram, the Kaya-Chikitsa, the
Bhuta-Vidj'a, the Kaum^r-Bliritya, the Agada-Tantrami
the Rasa\ ana-Tantram and the V^jeekarana-Tantram.

Chap. I. ]

St.*TRASTHA’NA^r.

3

Xow about tlic characteristic features of each of
these branches of the Science of the Ayurr-eda ; —

The Salya-Tantram* — The scope of tin's
branch of Medical Science is to remove (from an ulcer)
any extraneous substance sucli as, fragments of hay,
particles of stone, dust, iron or bone ; splinters, nails,
hair, clotted blood, or condensed pus (as the case
may be , or to drarv out of the uterus a dead
foetus, or to bring about safe parturitions in cases of
false presentation, and to deal with the principle and
mode of using and handling surgical instruments in
general, and with the _ application of fire (canter)’-) and
alkaline (caustic) substances, together with the diagno-
sis and treatment of ulcers.

The Sharlarkya-Tantramt— embraces as its
object the treatment of those diseases which are restricted
to the upward (lit ; — region above the cla^^cles) fissures or
ca\dties of the body, such as the ears, the eyes, the
cavity of the mouth, the nostrils, etc.

The Ka^a-Ch iki-tsaf (General diseases) $ —
treats of diseases, which, instead of being simply

* Any foreign mailer, lodged in n human organism and proving painful
lo it, is called a Shalju.

t The name is derived from the Sanskrit term ShaUki, a probe or a rod,
the use and application of tlie instrument being primarily included within
the scope of this branch of the Ayurveda.

t The term K£j-a literally signifies the vital heat or fire which runs
through the entire system, and hence the Kfij-a-chikits5 deals with diseases
which may gradually invade the root-principles of a living human organism.

4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA LOwp,-l.

restricted to any specific organ, or to any particular
part of the body, aflect the entire system, as bever,
Dysentery', Hsemoptysis, Insanity, Hysteria, Lepros),
unnatural discharges from the urethra, etc.

The Bhuta-Vidya' ■Demoniacal diseases)
lays down incantations and modes of exorcising
eHl spirits and making offerings to the gods,
demons, Gandhanus, Yakshas, Rakshas, etc. lor
cures of diseases originating from their malignant
influences.

The Kaumarra-Bhritya (Management of
children) — deals with the nursing and health}' bringing
up of infants, with purification and bettering of
mothers’ milk, found deficient in any of its
characteristic traits, and also with cures for diseases
peculiar to infant life and due to the use of vitiated
mother s milk or to the influences of malignant stars
and spirits.

The Agada-Tantram (Toxicology) — deals
v.ith bites from snakes, spiders and venomous
V. onus, and their characteristic sjTuptoms and antidotes.
It has also for its object the elimination of poison -
■whether animal, vegetable, or chemical (resulting from
incompatible combinations) from the system of a man,
ovetwbelmed uith its effects.

The Rasaryana-Tantram ( Science of
-Hejm-enation )-bas for its specific object . the

1 , )

Sl'TKASTHA’KAM.

5

prolonirrvUon nf lunnnn life, and the invi^^orntion of
memory and the vital or/it-'ins of man. It deals with
recipes which cnahle a man to retain his manhood
or yovithfnl vitiour up tf> a irood old ape, and which
generally serve to make the human system invulnerable
to disease and decay.

The Va'jeekarana-Tantram (Science of
•Aphrodisiacs — treats of ineasiires by wliicli the semen
of a man naturally scanty or delicient in quality
becomes shorn of its defects ; or is purified, if
deranped by the vitiated humours of the body 'such as
wind, etc. ; or is inviporated and increased in quantity
(if pure and healthy); or acquires its healthy and nonnal
consistence tif thinned and enfeebled by indiscretions
of youth . [In short, it deals with thinps which increase
the pleasures of youth and make a man doubly endearing
to a woman].

Thus the entire science of the Ayun'eda is classified
into the eight preceding branches. Xow tell me, which
of them is to be taught and to which of you ? Said the
disciples : — “Instruct us all, O Lord, in the science of
surger}^ ( Shalya ) and let that be the chief subject
of our study.” To which replied the holy Dhan-
vantari ; — “Be it so.” Then the disciples again
said ; — “We are all of one mind in the matter,
O Lord, that Sushruta shall be our spokesman and ask

6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA' ,

f Giap. I - .

you questions conformably to the general trend of, our
purpose. AH of us "vrill attentively hear what you -unll
be pleased to discourse to Sushruta, [and that vril) sat e
you the trouble of teaching us indMdually]". To which
replied the venerable sage — “Be it so. Xow listen,
Sushruta, iny dear child. The object or utilit}* of the
science which forms the subject of our present discus- -
sion, may be grouped under two distinct sub-heads such
as (i) the cure of diseased persons, and (2) the preserva-
tion of health in those who are not afflicted with any
sort of bodily distempers.”

Tire ennnological meaning of the term “Ayur-,
veda” may be interpreter! to denote either a science in
the knowledge of which life exists, or which helps a
man to enjoy a longer duration of life.

The primary position of surg'ery : —

[As regards time and importance among the other allied
branches of the Science of hledidne]. Hear me discourse
on the Science of Surgery (Shalya-Tantram) which is
the oldest of all the other branches of the Science of
IMedicine (Ar.nirveda’) and is further corroborated by the
four classes of testimonies, v/s., Perception, Inference,
Analog},' and Scriptural Truths (Agamas). The
primary; position of this branch of the Ax'urveda,
(as regards its time or origin), may be inferred from the
fact that Surgery lends her aid materially towards the

SirrRASTHA'XAM.

/

healing up of inumintic ulcers.’ Tlic second
ro;e:on lor such un iiihuonce ni.iy he deduced
from the rcplaccmcnl of the severed Iiead of Yajna.
It is told that the pod Uudra, severed the liend of
the God of Sucritice (Yajna), Whereupon the pods
approached the celestial Ashvins, and addressed
them us follows : — "You twins, O lords, who are
to he the preatest of us all, connect the head of
Yajna wiih his decapitated trunk." To them, replied
the divine Ashvins : We shall do, O lords, as yon

command us to do." Then the celestials propitiated
the god Indra in order that a portion of the oblations
offered in the course of a sacrilicc, might l)e allotted
to those heavenly twins. The .Aslm'ns reunited the
severed head of Yajna to his body as prayed for.
[Hence this branch of the Ayurr’eda (Shalyanga) is the
oldest of all its subdivisions].

The primary importance of ^the
Shalyam : — All hold this Tantram to be the
most important of all the other branches of the
Ajmrveda, inasmuch as instantaneous actions can be
produced with the help of such appliances as,

* Ulcers incidental to blows and sword-ents had to be dressed and
attended to in the wars between the gods and the demons, long before
the appearance of any physical or idiopathic maladies such ns, fever, etc. ;
and Surgery contributed all that was demanded of her towards the healing
up of those ulcers. Hence this branch of the A\-urvctla is the oldest of all
the allied branches of the healing art.

8

THE SUSHRUTA SA:MHITA [Clwp. l/

surgical operations, external applications of alkalis,
cauterisation, etc., and secondly _ inasmuch as it
contains all that can be found in the other, branches
of the science of medicine as well, with the superior

adontage of producing instantaneous effects by means

of surgical instruments and appliances. Hence it is
the highest in value of all the medical Tantras. It is
eternal and a source of infinite piety, imparts fame-
and opens the gates of Heaven to its votaries,
prolongs the duration of human existence on earth,
and helps men in successful!}- fulfilling their missions,
and earning a decent competence, in life.

Gradual extension of the A’yur-
vedic Knowledge: — Bramha was the first to
inculcate the principles of the holy Ayurveda. Prajapati
learned the science from him. The Ash\-ins learned
it from Prajapati and imparted the knowledge to
Indnv, who has favoured me (Dhanvantari) with an
entire knowledge thereof. I, for the good of mankind,
am read}' to impart it to those who seek it on earth.

The King of Karsi gives a brief ac-
count of himself in verse: — I am the

supreme and original god mam'fest in the form of
Dhanvantari. It is I who warded off death, disease and
decay from the celestials. Formerly I was an inmate
of the region of heaven, now T am incarnated on earth

Chap. L]

SUTRASTHANAM.

9

with the A'iew to teach the Science of Sur^en' witli
all its allied branches of stiid\' to men.

In the present science (Ayurveda), the Puimsha (self-
conscious organic individual ) is described as the resultant
of the combination of the soul and the five primar\'
material principles. All medical acts such as, surgical
operations, administration of medicinal remedies and
applications of alkaline substances, or cauterisation,
etc.), are restricted to the Pnrtisha alone.’'

Why is it so ? The answer is, simply because the
created world is composed of two distinct classes,
such as the mobile 'and the immobile.t These two
classes, in their tum, are further sub-divided for the
purposes of the science of medicine into the two
orders, Agneya (hot; and Sav.my;' (cold). Hence
the world is composed of five material principles,
though characterised by the twofold virtues, Agneya
(hot) and Saumya (cold).,

* 1 1 mny 1« qiicsiioncd v. liy llicy should Ik- rmirincd to the I’uru do?
Such a query may l>c successfully met by the statement that the Ihitudu
alone is the receptacle of health and disease in ninlradi-linciion to the
Self or Ego.

t The vcgclahlc \eorhl Irelnngs tn the l.ailer e.rtegory, while -ar.iniaK,
posvessed of Incnmolion, Kdong to the former.

I. It m.iy Ih' aigued here, Cince cvcryth.ing in the universe i' Ci mpestsl
of the five fumtimcnt.al m.itviial principles ! td v.itili, u.iter, fire (lu.’.i j.
air and shy (ether) ]. it is not competent to .issrrt th*.; the enhfis.e is
 n=.r<t^.] of the twofold attriluttes, ,\gn<y.t (ho' or hety) anl S'any.t
(coM w.’.tcry), alone. T.ut ••inco fire (hiMt) or wa’rt (,'oM' J
in .all ihin-,;s in tlio iinivcrs..- ir. iv.vt.-.p ■•■tton 'Vit'i ■! ■■ t'rtn-stt < ,iir i f

lO

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chtip. I.

Further classification of the mobile
and the immobile The animated ^^ml•ld may
be dh'ided into four subdivisions, such as the Syedaja
(bom of sweat or heat and moisture i. c. abiogenoiis,,
the Andaja ( egg-bom or oviparous ), the Udbhiijfi
(vegetable) and the Jarayuja (placental or vhnparous).
The Pumsha or the subjective personalit}’’ (man) is the
greatest of them all, because all other fonns of life
made to minister to his wants on Earth.

Disease ; Its Definition ; — The Pumsha
(man) is the receptacle of any particular disease, and that ^
which proves a source of torment or pain to him, is deno- ,
minated as a disease.' There are four different types
of disease such as, Traumatic or of extraneous origin
(Agantuha), Bodily (Sharira), Mental (Manasa) and
Natural (Svabhavika). .A disease due to an extraneous
blow or hurt is called Agantuka. Diseases due to
irregularities in food or drink, or incidental to a
deranged state of the blood, or of the bodil}^ humours
acting either singly or in concert, are called Sharira.
Excessive anger, giief, fear, jov', despondency, envy,
miseiy, pride, greed, lust, desire, malice, etc. are

olhcr fundomcnlAl material principles, it is nni improper to classify all
iiiuler ilie liead of luit or cold, n llnrd factor licini^ non-existent. Hence tlic
worlil po^-ic^sed of the twofold virtues, hot and cold.

A di^asc may Ixt defined as something which afUicLs the I’urusha
(‘.clf-conscious personality), or those things or incidents which combine to
aflVicl the I’umsha are u^^tiallv inlcrprcMcd to connote that meaning.'

( 1 . i

STTKASTllANAM.

1 1

included within the calcirorv of mental (Manapa;
dislem])cip ; whoivas liunt;cr, Ihirpt, decrepitude,
imbecility, death, pleep, etc. arc called the natural
(Svahhavika'i dcr.inuemonts of the body. The Mind
and the Body are the peats of the abovesaid diptempcr.s
accordiu” ap they are replricled to eitlier of them, or
afibet both of tliem in unison. ‘

Sanishodhanam Cleaupiu;:). and Sainshamauaui
(Pacification of the derau'^ed or agitated Iiodily Inunour.s
yiviii" rise to the disease , ami the re,^imen of diet and
conduct arc the four factors wliieli sliould be duly
employed in order to buccessfully cope with a disease. f

Food is tiie principal l'a<-lur which materially contri-
hntes to the slrencilh. complexion and vitality (Ojah) of
animated beintts. h'ood consists of six different tastes

♦ The Sell '>r iliL •if . I (i.i'im i. .itKi\c- nil imm.'in concerns and,

as such, can never U,' allected hy .rny ili-.e.isc.

t Ctenn-int; (S.imsh'xlh.in.iml U -if Iwi kiniU, w,-. I'NS rnil and Internal.
Isxtcrnal punTi'caliim cunsi.’ts ia rniiihryin^ su<'h nie.i>ures as siirj^tr.il
operalions, caulerivalion of ihc affeete-l pan or <’r^.in, external use of
alkaline prcp.araiions and molicried pl.ister^, the internal one includint;
such measure^ exhihilion ol purj;.iti\e.. and enieticx, apjrlication of

intestinal enemas (Asthfi )anami and hlood letlinp. Diet compri.ses four
diffcrenl factors such .as, foo'l, drink. lamlKilivc, etc., which, for tlte purposes
of the Ajatrveda, are again grouped under tliree different heads, such as
the pacifier of the deranged lardily humours (Doslia-prashanianam), thcra-
ireutical (Vyddhi-prashaminam) and health-giving (Svaslha-Vrittikara).
Achira (conduct) appertairus to three different factors, such as the body,
the spcecit, and the mental acts. Tlic abovesaid merrsures, duly employed,
are potent enough to combat all sorts of bodily distempers, if the
special cxigencic-s of each case arc carefully taken into consideration.

12 the StiSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. I.

(Rasa) [which amnot exist independently of the subs-
tances] in which they are inlierent. These substances
which are called the Oshadhis may be dit'ided , into trvo
classes such as the mobile and the immobile. The
immobile Oshadhis in their turn, admit of being grouped
under four sub-heads such as, the Vanaspatis, the
Vrikshas, the Vinidhas and the Oshadhis ]moper.

Those trees which bear fruit without blossoming
are called the Vanaspatis such as, the Plaksha and the
Oudumvura;. Those that bear both fruits and flowers
are called the Vrikshas. Shrubs and creepers that trail
on the ground are called Vinidhas, whereas those plants
which die with the ripening of their fruits, are called
Oshadhis proper such as cereals .

The mobile Oshadhis or animals are diidded into
four classes such as the viviparous, the oviparous, the
sweat-begotten, and those that arfe born of decomposed
vegetable matter. Man and oihen mammals belong to
the first group ; birds, snakes, andueptiles belong to the
second ; ants, worms, etc. belong tci the third ; while frogs
and Indragopas belong to the fourtliv For medicinal pur-
poses, bark, leaves, flowers, fruits, rroots, bulbs, the ex-
pressed juice, and milky or resinous secretions of plants,
etc.* are obtained from the vegetable world. The

<: The U.-C* of ».iil c^prc^^^xI out of tlrug^ and stied>, xs n’cll as of their
abliCi or alkaline prc )arations arc likewisjc indicaik'd.

Cliap. I. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

13

skin, nails, wool, blood, flesh, fat, mairow, bones,
are procured from the animal world.

^Metals and minerals such as gold, silver, gems, and
Manahshila (Realg-ar), as well as pearls, clay and
Kapalas fbones\ etc. should be included in the list of
the earthy substances. ”

Gale, windfall, sunshine, shade, moonshine, dark-
ness, heat, cold, rain, day, night, fortnight, month,
seasons, and solstices, etc. should be deemed as the
works of eternal time, which, by virtue of their natural
effects, contribute to the accumulation, augmentation,
pacification or diminution of tlie deranged bodily
humours (such as, wind, etc. .

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — Physicians should look upon tliese four factors
of Ifood, conduct, earth and time , as the accumulators,
aggravators and pacifiers of the deranged bodily humours
and of the diseases resulting therefrom in man. Diseases
due to causes which are e.xtraneous to the body ma\'
affect the mind or the body, Wiien it would affect the
body in the shape of any traumatic disease ('such as an
inflammation due to a blow or a sword cut', it sliould
be treated medicinally like the rest of the physiral mala-
dies, while the remedy should consist in the enjoyment of

• Oxide of Iron, Mnd, yellow sulplmr.ilt; of .iricnic (Orpimcnl), tall.
Gairika (ferruginous cnrlh), UasSnjiin.a (antimony) should regarded a-
appertaining 10 ilie el.us of c-.ulliy subsianccs.

14

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

liap., t.

pleasurable sounds, touch, sights, taste or smell where the
mind would be found to be the seat of the distemper.

Thus I have briefly dealt with the Purusha, Disease,
Medicine, Appliances and the Specific Time. The term
Purusha should be interpreted to include within its
meaning the combination of its five material com-
ponents, and all things resulting therefrom, such as the
limbs and members of the body, as well as the skin,
the flesh, the blood, the veins and the nerves, etc.
The term Disease signifies all distempers incidental
to the several or combined actions of the three deranged
bodily humours and blood. The term Medicine signifies
drugs and their ^'irtues, tastes, potency, inherent
efficacy ' Prabhava' and reactionarv' properties Vipaka'’.
Appliances f kriya denotes such processes as, surgical
operations, injections, emulsive measures, lubrications,
etc. The term Time signifies all opportune moments for
medical appliances.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — The primaiy principle of the Science of medicine
has thus been briefly stated and udll be fully dealt with
in the following one hundred and twenty chapters distri-
buted among the five main sub-divisions or Sthflnas
of the present work. These hundred and twenty
chapters vnll be found to be elaborately discussed
according to the specific import or sigrrificauce of tbeir
denominations under the sub-heads of Sutra- Sthfinam

CK-.p. I. i

SUTRASTH/iXAM.

15

(Definitive Aphorisms or Fundamental principles,
Xid^nam 'Etiologv , Sharira-Sthrinam AVnatomy and
Physiology , Chikits.-i-Slh;inam Therapeutics, and
Kalpa-Sth^nam Toxicolog}' . Subjects other than the
preceding ones will be discussed in the closing chapters
of the book byway of an Appendix 'Uttara-Tantram'.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — The man who reads this Eternal Science of
Medicine (Ayun'eda-Shastram) discoursed by the self-
ori.gined Brahma and propagated by the King of Kdsi,
becomes noted for his piety, is honoured by the kings
on earth, and attains to the region of Indra (the lord
of the celestials) after death.

Tlia-i tnds the' lirM cliaplcr of lli-- Sutra-SthSnam in
Samliilfi which dt-al- «i(li (tic origin of the A’vurvetla.

tlie Sushruta

CHAPTER II.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which deals
with the rites of formal initiation of a pupil into the
science of Medicine (Shishyopanayaniya-
madhyaryam).

Such ah initiation should be imparted to a student,
belonging to one of the three twice-born castes such
as, the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the Vaishya, and
who should be of tender years, born of a good family,
possessed of, a desire to learn, strength, energy of action,
contentment, character, self-control, a good retentive me-
mory, intellect, courage, purity of mind and bodj^ and a
simple and clear comprehension, command a clear insight
into the things studied, and should be found to have
been further graced with the necessary qualifications of
thin lips, thin teeth and thin tongue, and possessed of a
straight nose, large, honest, intelligent eyes, with a benign
contour of the mouth, and a contented frame of mind,
being pleasant in his speech and dealings, and usually
painstaking in his efforts. A man possessed of contrarj*
attributes should not be admitted into The sacred
precincts Of) medicine.

\

Mode of Initiation A Brahmana preceptor
should initiale a disciple or student in the following way
— A square sand cushion or platform, measuring a cubit .

riup. u. 1

srrix'ASTIJ.VNAM.

'7

in IchrUi and breadth, should be laid out on a plot of
smooth, level and saered •ironnd under the bcniirn in-
fluence of any auspicious phase of the moon or astral
combination such as. the “Kaianam," etc. and in a direc-
tion of the compass which is held most auspicions to that
end. 'I’ln' j-nshion or the platform should be ])laslered
over with a solution of water and cow-duni; ; and blades of
l\.usha jrrass should be strewn over it. ’J'hen thc^ods, the
Bnihmanas and tlie physicians should Ije worshipped
with oblations of flowers, fried paddy, gems and sun-
dried rice. Then having drawn straight lines across
the Sthandilam so as to meet the top of the furthest
side ofthe square, and having sprinkled them over with
boh’ water, the preceptor should lay down a blade of
Kusha grass tied up in the fonn of a knot, known as the
Brahmana, along the side of the sacred cushion to his
right, and kindle the sacred fire close to his seat. Then
having soaked the twigs of the four sacrificial trees of
Khadira, Palitsha, Devadaru and Vilva, or of Vata,
Oudumvara, Ashvattha and Madhuka in curd, honey and
clarified butter, he should perform the rite of Homa
according to the rules of a Darvi Homa ceremony. Then
libations of clarified butter should be cast into the sacrifi-
cial fire with a repetition of the Mahd Vy^hriti Mantras
preceded by the mystic Omkira. After that, libations of
clarified butter should be cast into the fire in honour of
each of the gods and Rishis (celestial physicians) invoked

p

THE SUSHRUTA SA^IHITA'. ( Chnp. 11.

i8

bv repeating the SvShA Mantra, and the disciple should
be made to do the same. *

A Brahmana preceptor is competent to initiate a
student belonging to anj' of the three twnce-bom castes.

A Kshatri3"a preceptor can initiate a student of the
Kshatriya or the Vaishj'a caste, while a Vaish^'a
preceptor can initiate a student of his own caste
alone. A Shudra student of good character and
parentage may be initiated into the mysteries of the
Ayurveda b}' omitting the Mantras enjoined to be
recited on such an occasion.

Then haring thrice circumambulated the sacrificial
fire, and having invoked the firegod to bear testimony to
the fact, the preceptor should address the initiated dis-
ciple as follows “Thou shalt renounce lust, anger,
greed, ignorance, vanity, egotistic feelings, en\y, harsh-
ness, niggardliness, falsehood, idleness, na}’ all acts that
soil the good name of a man. In proper season thou shalt
pair thy nails and clip th}' hair and put on the sacred
cloth, dyed brownish rmllow, live the life of a truthful,
self-controlled anchorite and be obedient and respectful
towards thy preceptor. In sleep, in rest, or while moving
about — while at meals or in study, and in all acts

The libation- should Ire offered as follo«-s — SvdhA (obeisance) to
lirahm^, Sv5h^ to Praj'ipaii (the lortl of the created Iteings), Sv5hA to
Ashrins, Sv5h.'i to Indra, SvAh5 to Dhanvantari, St'Shi to Bharadt-fija,
and SvfihS to A'trej-a.

I tl. t

sn'RASI IIA'XAM.

'9

tliou <ball . be j^iiided by my directions. Tliou shall
do wbal is pleasant and beneficial to me, olbcrwise
Iboii sball incur sin and all tby study and knowlcdffc
shall fail to bear their wished for fruit, and thou sbalt
rjain no fame. If f, on the other band, treat
thee unjustly even with tby perfect obedience and
in full confonnity to the terms agreed upon, may I
incur equal sin with thee, and may all my know-
ledge prove futile, and nevei have any scope of work
or display. Thou shall help with thy professional
skill and knowledge, the Brahmanas, tby elders,
preceptors and friends, the indigent, the honest, the
anchorites, the helpless and those who shall, come
to thee rfrom a distance , or those who shall live close
by, as well as thy relations and kinsmen [to the best
of thy knowledge and ability], and thou sbalt give them
medicine [without charging for it anj' remuneration
whatever], and God will bless tliee for that. Thou
shalt not treat medicinally a professional hunter, a
fowler, a habitual sinner, or him who has been degrad-
ed in life ; and even by so doing thou shalt acquire
friends, fame, piety, wealth and all wshed for objects
in life and thy knowledge shall gain publicity.”

Prohibited periods of the study of
the Ayurveda: — The day of the new moon, the
eighth day of the moon’s wane, the fourteenth daj’^ of the
dark fortnight, as M'ell as the corresponding rla3's in

20

fHE SUSHRUfA SAM Hit A'. I Chap. ll.

the bright one, the day of the lull moon, and the meet-
ings of day and night such as (morning and evening) are
occasions when the stud)' of the Ayurveda is prohibitetl.
■Similarly, a clap of thunder heard at an improper
season (months of Pousha, Phalguna and Chaitra), or a
flash of lightning occurring at a time when such pheno-
mena are naturally rare, or an e\'il befalling one’s countr}-,
relations, or king, should be deemed as occasions
prohibiting the study of the Ayur\'eda. Moreover,
one should not read it in a cremation ground, nor while
riding (an elephant, horse, or any) conveyance, nor
in a battle-field, nor in a place of execution. A festi-
val or the appearance of inauspicious omens, and the
days of the fortnight usually avoided by the BrAhmanas
in studying the Vedas, as well as an unclean state of
the body, should be regarded as occasions prohibiting
the study of the Ayurveda.

Thus ends the serund ch.ijHcr of ilic SuinislhAntiin in ilic Sushruiu
SamhilA \Nhich Ireals of ihe formal inilialion of a sludcnl inlo ihc Avurx criu.

22

THE SUbl-lKUI A SA.MHllA.

classificalion unci order of the sUidy of the Ayurc-cdu.

4 Dwells on general interpretations and explanations
of subjects studied. 5 Treats of prcliminar}’ preparations
for surgical operations. 6 Deals wth seasons and their
influence on health and drugs. 7 Treats of surgical
appliances. 8 Describes surgical instruments. 9 Gives
practical instructions for surgical operations. 10 Dwells
on the duties of medical men preliminar}' to their
commencing practice. 1 1 Phannacy of alkalies

(potential cauteries). 12 Cauteries and the nilcs
to be observed in their use. 13 Leeches 'how
and which to use). 14 Blood. 15 Dwells on

the study of development and non-development of the
humorous constituents of the body and excrements.

16 The ceremony of piercing the lobules of the ears.

17 How to distinguish between suppurating and non-
suppurating swellings. 18 Dressings and bandages

of ulcers. 19 Tiie management of patients with ulcers,
etc. 20 The salutarj- and non-salutary efl'ects
of regimen, etc. 21 The decisive modes in the

treatment of sores, etc. 22 The opening of abscesses,
etc. 23 General rules to be obserr'ed in the treat-
ment of curable and incurable (surgical diseases;.
24 The nature of diseases in general. 25 The (eight
different) ways of using surgical instruments. 26 The
exploration of splinters lost (deep seated) in the
body. 27 The extraction of splinters. 28 How
to know favourable and unfavourable terminations

Ch.iii. 111. 1

SUTRASTHA-XAM.

in surgical diseases. 29 TIic favourable or unfavourable
prognosis in diseases as known from messengers,
omens and dreams. 30 Prognosis from the per-
version of sense perception. 31 Prognosis based on
the altered condition of features, etc. 32 Prognosis based
on the perversion in the e.vtemal appearances of the
body. 33 Palliative treatment of incurable diseases.
34 The precautions to be taken (against dangers,
such as poisoning of water, etc . by a medical
man for the safety of a king whose army is on
the march. 35 Clinical observations made by ph)’’-
sicians. 36 Miscellaneous subjects connected with
the treatment of injuries and surgical diseases.
37 The e.vamination of the soil for the selection
of vegetable products growing on it to be used as
medicines. 3S Classification of drugs according to
their therapeutical uses.. 39 The two classes of
drugs which cleanse the system [by evacuating bad
humours] and drugs which pacify the irritated humours.

40 Drugs, their flavours, properties and maturity.

41 The properties of drugs specially considered.

42 Flavours. 43 The choice of emetics. 44 The
choice of purgatives. 45 Liquids. 46 Food and
drink.

From their investigating the (pathological) causes
and S3Tnptoms of diseases, they are called Nidanain,
(etiolog}") and are sixteen in number.

'sjl

24

THK SUSIIRUTA SAM HIT A'.

I Chap. 111.

Chapter i Causes and symptoms of diseases caused by
wind. 2 Hceniorrhoids. 3 Urinarj' calculi 4 Fistubu.

Skin diseases 'Kushtha). 6 Urethral discharges.
7 Abdominal tumours and dropsy. 8 Abortion and
unnatural labours. 9 Abscesses. 10 ICrysipelas and
Carbuncles. 1 1 Tumours i2Scroial tumours, Fracture?
''and dislocations) i.j Diseases of the male organ of
generation caused by Sluika. 15 Minor .and mis-
cellaneous' diseases. 16 Diseases of the mouth.

The great sage has devoted ten chapters to the
subject of Anatomy and Physiology’ (Sharira-Stlianani)
for medical men and contemplative saints to learn the
component parts of the human bodv. They are ; —

Chapter i Cosmology. 2 Healthy and un-
healthy) condition of male and female germs, 3
Development of the feetus. 4 .Analytical descrip-
tion of the foetus. 5 Component parts of the body. (>
Investigation of each vital part. 7 Description of the
veins. 8 Venesection. 9 Arteries. 10 Pregnancy
(child-birth and management of women in child-birth
and of children).

The diUsion of Therapeutics, fChikitsitam) includes
(amongst othersi the modes of treating diseases bv
medicines, expiatory’ ceremonies, ^propitiatory rites, and
tranquillizing efforts. Forty chapters have been devoted
to this ditision. Chapter J Treatment of two varieties

(■Iui>. III. ]

.SrTKASTll/VNAM.

-’5

of ulcers. 2 Treatment of instant wounds and ulcers
resulting tlierefrom. 3 Fractures and dislocations, .j
Diseases of wind. 5 Grievous maladies caused by wind.
6 Htcmorrhoids. 7 Urinart* calculi. 8 Fistube. 9
Skin diseases. 10 (irievous skin diseases, ii Urethral
discharges. 12 Warts, pustules and sores caused by
urethral discharges. 13 Diabetes. 14 .Abdominal Dropsy.
15 Abortions and unnatural labours. 1(1 Ab-
scesses. 17 Erysipelas and Carbuncles. 18 Tumours.
19 Scrotal tumours and Syphilis. 20 Minor diseases.
21 Diseases of the male genital organ caused by
Shuka. 22 Diseases of the mouth. 23 Swellings.

24 Prophjdactic treatment against diseases in general.

25 Miscellaneous diseases. 26 Tonics for \irile debility.
27 Tonics for general debility. 28 Remedies for increasing
mental powers and duration of life. 29 Remedies for
innate maladies. 30 Means for removing wordly distresses.
31 Treatment of diseases where oleaginous substances
are useful. 32 Treatment by diaphoretics. 33 Emetics
and Purgatives. 34 Treatment for mishaps from the
injudicious use of emetics and purgatives, 35 Nozzles
and pipes, and enema apparatus. 36 Mishaps from
injudicious use of enemas. 37 Enemas and injections.
38 CU'-sters. 39 Treatment of complications in general.
40 Inhalation, fumigations, gargarismata, etc.

From their proposing remedies against poisons, they
are called Kalpas, and are eight in number.

4

26

THE SUSliRUtA SANtHITA'. [ Ciui-. III.

Chapter i Preservation of food. 2 Vegetable and
inorganic poisons. 3 Poisons from organic creation.
4 Snake poison. 5 Treatment of snake- bites. 0 Rat-
bite and its treatment. 7 Emitting the sound of
kettle-dnrms (for the elimination of poison}. S Antidotes
for and treatment of venomous insect-stings.

Thus a synopsis of one hundred and twenty chapters
has been given. Now here follows the supplementary
dhasion called after its own name (Uttara-Tantram).

The Chapter on Sympathetic diseases is placed first,
as this division has for its main object the description
of such diseases and their treatment. 2 Diseases of the
joinings (margin of the eyelids) of the eyeball. 3 Dis-
eases of the eyelids. 4 The Sclerotic of the eye. 5 The
Cornea. 6, The eyeball, as a whole. 7 Diseases of the
pupil. 8 Treatment of eye diseases. 9 Prophylac-
tic and curative treatment of wind affections of the eye
and ophthalmia. 10 Treatment of Bile affections of the
eye and ophthalmia. 1 1 Treatment of Phlegm affec-
tions of the eye and ophthalmia. 12 Treatment of Blood
affections of the eye. 1 3 Treatment of affections in
which scarification is needed. 14 Treatment in which
paracentesis is needed. 15 Treatment by incisions.
16 Entropium and ectropium. 17 Treatment of the
diseases of the pupil and -vision. 18 General rules
regarding ophthalmic medicine and surger}'. 19 Treat-
ment of traumatic affections of the eyeballs. 20 General

chni.. in. ]

SUTKAS'J'HA'NWAf.

27

signs and s3'inptoms of ear diseases. 21 Treatment
of ear diseases. 22 Signs and symptoms of nose
alfections. 2 "^ Treatment of nose affections. 24 Treat-
ment of nasal catanli. 25 Signs and symptoms of
cranial diseases. 26 Treatment of cranial alTections.
These (t\vent}'-siv' chapters) form the end of the
eight divisions of the Aytin'eda, called Shalikyam.

Chapter 27 Signs of diseases caused by the Nava-
grahas. 2S Prophylactic treatment of diseases caused
bj' Skandha. 29 Treatment of convulsions caused bv
Skandha. 30 Treatment of Sakuni alfections. 31 Treat-
ment of Revati affections. 33 Treatment of Piitana,
33 Treatment of .Andha Putana. 34 Treatment of
Sheeta-Putan 4 . 35 Treatment of Mnkhamandika.
36 Treatment of Naiganiesha. 37 Origin of the nine
Grahas. 38 Diseases of the Vagina (and internal female
genital organs). These twelve chapters together with
what is included in (the last chapter of the division on;
anatoraj’, Torm the fifth division of the Ayurveda)
called Kaumara-Tantram.

Chapter 39 Fevers and their treatment. 40
Enteric Catarrh and its treatment. 41 Consumption and
its treatment. 42 Diseases of the abdominal glands and
their treatment. 43 Diseases of the heart (Angina
Pectoris'' etc. 44 Anasmia and allied diseases and
their treatment. 45 Haemorrhagic affections and their
treatment, 46 Apoplectic diseases and their treatment.

28

THE .SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA.

( a«p. in.

47 Diseases from excessive drinking and their treatineiiL

48 Symptoms, causes, and treatment of excessive thirst. 49
Causes, stnnptoms and treatment of vomiting. 50 Causes,
S3Tnptoms and treatment of Hiccough. 51 Causes, symp-
toms, and treatment of D\’spnoea. 52 Causes, symp-
toms and treatment of cough. 53 Aphonia. 54
Entozoa. 55 Causes, sj'mptoms and treatment of
retention of excrements. 56 Causes, s^miptoms and
treatment of Dj-speptic and Choleric diarrhoea. 57
Anorexia and its treatment. 58 Causes, s3Tnptonis
and treatment of C3'stic and urethral affections. 59
Causes and treatment of urine diseases. These /t\Yent3'
one chapters describe the remaining diseases of
K^yuchikits^ ; (which forms the third division of the
A3'urvedah

Chapter 60 Causes. S3-mptoms and treatment of
dishes causetl by superhuman powers. 61 Causes
symptoms and treatment of Epilepsv. 62 Mania.
These 'three chapters form the Bhuta Vidva (the fointh
ditision of the A3'urv eda).

Chapter 63 on the different varieties of flavour.
64 General rules for the preser\-ation of health. 6:;
Deductions and inductions drawn from the texts and
study of the Atauveda. 66 On the \-arieties of mor-
bid elements (humours;. These four chapters are
to be understood as being supplementart", and as orna-
ments to this division.

nnl>. III i

SI' rKASTU.VNAM.

29

riii? last <livisinn tVoni iis superinrily over llie
oilien-^, llie srcai snpes liave enllcd the I'AcelloiU
^^'iUavaIn). Troin the infonnatinn it jjives on varied
r^uhjccl?, it vailed the best, the permanent and liie
last.

In tin’s division wliicli is called the last, lliere arc
included I'onr divisions I'ot' the Ayurveda) viz, Sh.lIaUyani,
(ircatmenL of diseases of parts situated above the
clavicles), a Kaumrtrabbrityam (manattemenl of children),
KayachikitSvl ifeneral diseases) and ^ Bhuta-Vid}':!,

The division (named) Vajeekaranam (on the strength-
ening of virile power, etc.) and Ras.lyanam remedies
preser\ing vigor, etc.) have lieen included in the
(fourth) division (of this treatise called ChikiLsa.

'i'he doctrine of antidotes comes under the head of
Kalpa of this treatise andShalyam surgery , is incident-
ally treated throughout the book. Thus these are the
eight limbs divisions, of tne Science of Medicine
proclaimed ,;to the world by the original god. Those,
who study them with due care and make use of the
knowledge witli caution, shall preser\-e the lives of
men on this earth. It is imperatively necessary that
the book should be read ; and after having read it one
should attend to the practice (of the science). Tlie
physician who has learnt these both, is fit to be honour-
ed by kings,

30

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. f Chap. 111.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject ; — A physician, well versed in the principles of
the science of medicine (Ayur\'eda), but unskilful in his
art through want of practice, loses his wit at the
bedside of his patient, just as a coward is at his
wit's end to determine what to do when for the
first time he finds himself in the ranks of a contending
army. On the other hand a physician, experienced in
his art but deficient in the knowledge of the Ayun'’eda,
is condemned by all good men as a quack, and
deserves capital punishment at the hands of the
king. Both these classes of physicians are not to be
tnisted, because thy are inexpert and half educated.
Such men are incapable of discharging the duties of
their vocation, just as a one-vinged bird is incapable of
taking flight in the air. Even a panacea or a medicine of
ambrosial virtues administered by an unpractised or ig-
norant physician, will prove positively baneful as a
draught of poison, or a blow with a weapon, or a thunder-
bolt. A physician, ignorant of the science and art of sur-
gerj' and emollient measures Sneha-karma', etc. is but
a killer of men out of cupidity, and who is allowed to
carrv- on his nefarious trade only through the in-
advertence of the king. A physician well versed in the
principles of surgerjq and experienced in the prac-
tice of medicine, is alone capable of curing distempers,
just as only a two-wheeled cart can be of service in a
field of battle.

Chill). III.

SUTRASTHA'N'AM.

31

Now hear me, O child, describe the mode of studying
' the present science of the Ayun'eda.) The pupil haw’ng
worshipped and recited his daih' prayers should
calmly sit near his ])receptor, pure in body and
mind, who should teach him a full Shloka for couplet
of the Ayur\'eda), or a half or a quarter part thereof,
adapted to his intellectual capacit}'. Then he should
make a full and elaborate paraphrase of the
recited couplet or any part thereof, and ask his pupils
individually to do the same. When the pupils have
paraphrased the same to the satisfaction of the precep-
tor, he should again recite the same stanza or couplet.
The passages or shlokas should not be recited too
hastily, nor drawled out in a timid or faltering voice, nor
with a nasal intonation. The voice should be neither too
loud, nor too weak, but each sound should be clearlj*
and distincth' uttered, and the lips, the eyes, the eye-
brows, and the hands, etc. should not be lifted or moved
to keep time with the recitation. No one should be
allowed to pass between the pupil and the preceptor
at the time of study.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject ; — A pupil who is pure, obedient to his
preceptor, applies himself steadily to his work, and
abandons laziness and excessive sleep, will arrive at the
end of the science (he has been studying .

A student or a pupil, having finished the course of

32

tHE SUSl-lRUTA SAMJBITA. L Cl.ap. Ill;

his studies, ^YOuld do well to attend to the cultivation of
fine speech and constant practice in the art he has
leanit, and make unremitting efforts towards the
attainment of perfection (in the art).

Thus ends the third Chapter of the Sutmslhnn.-im in the Sushriiht
Stunliitd which deals with the Classification of the Ayurveda.

CHAPTER IV.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which deals
wth General Explanations (Prabha'sanfya-
madhyavam).

The endeavours of a man who has studied the entire
Ajmn'eda fshastra) but fails to make a clear exposition
of the same, are vain like the efforts of an ass that
carries a load of sandal wood (without ever being
able to enjoy its pleasing scent).

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — A fooUsh person who has gone through a large
number of books without gaining any real insight into
the knowdedge propounded therein, is like an ass laden
with logs of sandal-wood, that labours under the W'eight
w'hich it carries without being able to appreciate its
Hrtue.

Hence the preceptor will clearly explain each shioka
or a half or a quarter part thereof as contained in
the present work, divided into a hundred and twenty
chapters fas w'ell as in the concluding portion of the
Uttara-Tantrara appended to it) ; and the student or
the disciple shall attentively hear ever3'thing explained
or discoursed on by the preceptor. Since it is extremely
difficult to classify drugs, taste, \irtue (Guna),
potency (Virj'a), transformator)' or reactionar)' effect
5

34

tHE SUSHRT.ttA SA.MUlTA'.

[ Cl).ip. IV.

(Vipdka), fundamental bodily principles (Dbatu) bodily
excrement (Mala), hollow \dsccra (AshaYtv\ vital parts
(Manna), veins (Sira), neives (Snayu), joints (Sandhi),
bones (Asthi) and the fecmidating principles of semen
and uvuni) tmd Ko extricate any foreign matter lodged in
an ulcer), or to ascertain the nature and position of
ulcers or fractures, or the palliative, curable or incur-
able nature of a disease, etc. ; and since these subjects
perplex even the profoundest intellects though a
thousand times discussed and pondered over, not to
speak of men of comparatively smaller intellectual
capacity, hence it is imperatively obligator)' on a pupil
or a disciple to attentively hear the exposition of each
shloka, or a half or a quarter part thereof, made by the
preceptor (while stud)nng the science of medicine).

For explanations of truths and principles quoted
from other branches of (science or philosophy) and
incidentally discussed in the present work, the student
is referred to expositions made by the masters Cof those
sciences or philosophies), since it is impossible to deal
with all branches of science, etc. in a single book (and
within so short a compass''.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — By the study of a single Shastra, a man can
never catch the true import of this (Science of Medicine).
Therefore a physician should study as many allied
branches of (science or philosophy) as possible. The

Clwp. IV. 1

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

35

physician who studies the Science of Medicine from the
lips of his preceptor, and practises medicine after having
acquired e.vperience in his art by constant practice, is
the true physician, while any other man dabbling in the
art, should be looked upon as an impostor.

The Shalya-Tantras (surgical works) vnitten or
propagated by Aupadhena^'a, Aurabhra, Sushruta and
Paushkalavata, are the bases of the works or Tantras
written by others (Karawr3'a, Gopura-rakshita, etc,'.

Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Sutrasthrfnam in the Sushruta
Samhitd which deals with General Explanations.

CHAPTER V,

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
Preliminar}' measures '^in connection with the curative
remedies of a disease).' (Agropaharaniyam-
— adhy^am).

The entire course of medical treatment in connec-
tion with a disease may be grouped under three
subheads, as the Preliminarj' measures (Pur\'a-karma) ;
the Principal therapeutical or surgical appliances
(Pradhana-karma' ; and the After-measures (Paschat-
karma). These measures will be discussed under the
head of each disease as we shall have occasion to
deal with them. As the present treatise principally

* Several authorities hold that acts such os fasting, administration
of purgatives, etc. should be included wntliin the preliminary measures ;
application of absorbent (Pdehana) or healing medicinal agents, within the
second or the principal measures ; and the administration of tonics or
restoratives ivithin the third or the after-measure group. Others, on the
contrary, lay down that measures adopted for the absorption, lubrication
(pacification by the application of oily substances) or elimination of the
deranged bodily humours by sweating should be grouped under
the first subhead (Purva-karma), the administration of active purgatives,
emetics, etc., under the second (Pradhdna-karma) and the gii-ing of rice
meal, etc. to the patient under the (Paschdt-karma) last ; while according
to others the active medicinal agents emplo)'cd to cope with the deranged
humours in the incubative stage of a bodily disease till the appearance of its
first characteristic 3>Tnptoms, should be denominated as the Preliminari-
measure ; measures employed for the subjugation of a disease in its patent or
fully developed stage as the Pradhdna-karma, and measures employed to
guard against the recrudescence of a disease and for the restoration of
health in a patient is the sequel treatment or the Paschdt-knrma.

f Oi.ip. V.

38 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

his face turned towards the east. His limbs should be
carefull}' fastened (so as to guard against their least
movement during the continuance of the operation).
Then the surgeon, sitting with his face towards the
west, and carefully avoiding the ^^tal parts (Mannas),
Veins, nerves (Snayus), joints, bones and arteries of the
patient, should insert the knife into the affected part along
the proper direction till the suppurated part would
be reached and swiftlj’ draw it out. In case of extended
suppuration, the part opened (length of incision) should
be made to measure two or three finger’s widths in
length. An incision (\ rana) which is wide, extended,
equallj’ and evenly dirided, should be deemed the best.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : An incision which is wide, e.xtended, well
dhided, does not involve any -^ital part, etc. of the
patient, and is well-matured as regards time, is the
best of its kind*. Courage, light handedness, non-shak-
ing, non-sweating, sharp instruments, self confidence
and self command are what should be possessed b y
a surgeon engaged in opening a boil or an abscess.

Two or three incisions should be made if a single
opening does not seem large enough for the purpose.

Certain commentators interpret the conplet a.s follows • boi
or an abscess which is wide, esienilcd, well defined in its shape, equall

suppurated mall Its parts and does not involve any s-ital part of the bod

IS the fittest thing for a surgeon's knife— Tr.

Chnp. ]

StTRASTHA-XA.M.

39

Authoritative verse on tiie sub-
ject ; — ^The knife (lancet) should be freely used
wherever a fissure, sinus, or a cswnty would appear
in a boil, so as to ensure a complete fiowng out of
the pus accumulated in it.

Lateral (titjak) incisions should be made in regions
of the ej'e-brows, temple, forehead, cheeks, eyelids, lower
lip, gums, armpits, loins, belly and the groins.

An incision made in the region of the hand or root
should be made to resemble the disc of the moon, while
those about the anus and the penis should be made
semi-circular dialf-moon) in shape.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject ; —An incision in any of the abovesaid regions not
made as directed, ma}* give rise to extreme pain, pro-
longed granulation (healing) and condylomatous growths
in and about the ulcer, owing to an inadvertent eutting
of the local veins, or nerves. In a case of artificial
or instrumental parturition, in ascites, in piles, in
stone in the bladder, in fistula in ano, and in diseases
affecting the ca^^ty of the mouth, the patient operated
on should be kept on an empty stomach (before the act).

Then sprays of cold water should be dashed over
the face and the eyes of the patient to relieve the pain
and the sense of exhaustion incidental to the operation.
The sides of the incision should be firmly pressed (so as
to ensure a good outflow of the accumulated pus) and

40

THE SUSHKU'l'A SAMH ITA.

f Gwp. V-

the margins of the wound should be nibbed with
the fingers (so that they may have a level surface
and be of uniform structure throughout.'; Tlien the
wound should be washed with an astringent decoction
(of Nimba, Triphald, etc.) which should be wiped and
made thoroughly dr}’ with a piece of clean linen. Then
a lint plug (Varti) plastered over with the .paste) Kalka
of sesamum, honey and clarified butter, and soaked in
disinfectant (lit : — purif}nng medicines such as

Ajagandha, etc.) should be inserted deep into the cavity
of the wound. After that, a poultice made of offi-
cinal substances should be applied over it and the
whole should be bound up with thick layers of tow
(Kavalikas — such as the leaves and bark of the Indian
figtree etc.) which are neither too irritant nor too
cooling in their effect ; and finally scraps of clean linen
should be wound round them. The limb, [or the affected
part] should be subsequently fumigated with the fumes
of pain-killing (anod}Tie) substances and also with
those of drugs which are supposed to ward off all
malignant spirits (from the bedside of the patient.)^

Then it should be fumigated with the drugs, kno\m
as Guggulu, ^ acha, white mustard, Saindha^■a
and the lea^ es of the Nirava tree, soaked in clarified
butter. The residue of the clarified butter [dripped

Even ihe bedsheeis, elc« of the paiienl bhould be fumigated as above.
This fereshado^vs the germ theory* of the modern days Tr.

Clinp. V, ]

SrTRASTHA’NAM.

45

downi and collected from the fumigating compound
described above], should be nibbed over the
region of the heart and other vital parts of the patient,
and the floor of the chamber should be washed and
sprinkled over with drops of water j^reviousl)' kept in
a (new) pitcher for the pur iose. The rites of protection
from the influences of baneful spirits, should then be
performed by reciting the Mantra which runs as
follows : — “I am about to practise the prophylactic incan-
tation for guarding thy person against the malignant
influences of Rakslias and conjured demonesses, and
may the god Brahnnt be graciously pleased to approve
of its performance. May the Gods and deities and mini-
sters of grace disperse and confound the hosts of
wrathful Nftgas (celestial serjjents), Pishachas, Gnndliar-
vas and Pitris that might be maliciously disposed
to strike thee in thy sickly confinement. May the spirits,
which stir abroad in the night and roam about in the
sk}*^ and on earth, defend thy person in recognition of
thy ferv^ent devotion to them. May the concourse of
Brahma-begotten sages (such as, Sanaka, etc.), the saintly
and canonised kings (Rdjarshis) in heaven and the sacred
mounts, streams and oceans of the earth protect thee
from evil. May the fire-god guard thy tongue ; the
vnnd-god protect thy breath ; and the Moon-god,
Paijanya, Vidyut dightning) and the spirit of the clouds
preserve the healthy coursings of those ^fital winds in
thy organism which are respectively known as Vy^na,

6

42

THE SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA'

Apina, Ud5na and Sam^na. May Indra, the presiding
deit}* of all physical energies, keep thy bodily strengtli
immaculate. May Manu defend the two side tendons
at the nape of thy neck, as well as thy taculty of
intellect ; the Gandharvas, thy faculty of desire ;
Tndra, thy fortitude ; ^■aruna, thy faculty of cogni-
tion ; the Ocean, thy region of umbilicus ; the Sun-
god, thy eyes ; the Quarters of the Heaven, thy ears ;
the Moon-god, thy mind ; the Stars, thy complexion ;
the Night, thy shadow ; the Water, thy vigour ; the
Oshadhis, thy hair ; Infinite Ether, the space which
is imprisoned in thy body ; t'asundhani, thy body ;
Vaish^•ana^a, thy head ; Vishnu, thy moral courage ;
Purushottama 'the foremost of beings), thv energy of
action ^dynamical action of purposes); Brahma, thy self ;
and Dhruva (immutable being), thy eyebrows. May
these divinities, which perpetually reside in thv body,
ensure thy sate continuance in being and mav thou
enjoy a long life through their grace. Mav the gods
such as, Brahma, etc., confer blessings on thv head.
May the Sun, the Moon, the twin sages Xarada and
Parvata, the fire-god, the wind, and the other celestial
helpmates of Indra, bring thee good. IMav the pro-
phylaxis devised by Brahma keep thee from e\il. May
thou be spared to witness the return of manv a long
and happy year on earth. May such abnormal phvsi-
cal phenomena as, drought, deluge, excessive downpour
of rain, and excessive germination (or wholesale

CliJ)'. V. ]

si'Tkasthanam.

43

cxiinrlion of sucli vcnnin as) rats, mosquitoes, flies
which invariably portend evil and mortality in a
community, as well as blooily feuds among kings,
abate and cease. May thou he relieved of all pain and
miser}*. We close the jirayer with a "Svaha" (obeisanee'.
The present Vedie mantra exercises an occult power
in reliering ailments which arc due to the malignant
influences of conjured up she-devils. May thou acquire a
long life through the protective cnerg)* of the pro-
phylactic prayer dit ; — incantation ; now read by me.

Then having protected the body of the patient with
the recitation of the above Vedie Mantra, the surgeon
shall see his patient taken to his own chamber, and
prescribe the proper course of medicine and diet .accord-
ing to the exigencies of each case. The old bandage
should be loosened on the third day of the operation,
when the wound or the ulcer should be washed, and
a fresh bandage should be wound round as before. The
b.andage should not be loosened on the day following
the lancing of a boil, as such a measure might give
rise to a sort of excniciating pain and formation of knots
in the wound and retard the process of granulation
(healing). On the third day, the surgeon (Vaidya) should
prescribe the proper medicated plaster, diet, etc. after
fully considering the strength of the patient, the nature
of the disease, and the then prevailing season of the year.

A wound should not be tried to be healed up, as long as

44

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’ [Cb^p. V.

the least morbid matter, or pus remains in its inside, as
it would lead to the formation of fresh canties in the
surrounding healthy tissues, and ultimately to a
recrudescence of the disease.

The authoritative verses on the
subject : — Accordingly a wound or an ulcer should
be made to heal up after the perfect purification of both
of its inside and exterior has been fully brought
about. Even after the healing of the wound the
patient should studiously avoid all sexual connections,
indigestive rnands, fatiguing physical exercises and
indulgence in emotions of grief or fright, or in ecstasies
of joy, until the cicatrix has acquired enough toughness.
The dressings and bandages should be untied and
changed everj* third day in winter, in spring and in the
season of Hemanta, and on each alternate day in summer
and in the rains. But a physician (surgeon) should
not be guided by these rules in cases where there would
be reasons to apprehend imminent danger, and in such
cases the wound or the ulcer, like a house in flames,
should be checked as speedily as possible.

Clarified butter boiled with Yashtimadhu, and
applied tepid to a wound, incidental to a surgical
operation, is sure to alleviate the excruciating pain that
is usuallj- experienced in such an affected part.

Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Sulrasthdnam in the Sushmta Samhit^
v,bich treats of Prelitnmar)* measures.

C II A 1' r K K VI.

Now wo .'•ball discuss tlio Chnplor which Iroals of
the ch.anclcrisUo fcaUircp of the <lilTcreiu ycnsons of the
year .and thoii inllncncc on health and driics

( R(tucharya’dhya'yam).

Tile Ktcmnl Time is without oripin, middle, or end,
jolf-hegotlen, and the lord of all attrihntcs. Contrariety
or non contrariety of the natural aitrilnites of dnifts or
substances endueil with characteristic tastes, such
as sweet, etc,, arc bronpht about by time ; and time
is the principal factor that controls the births or deaths
of bcinfts.

Etymology of the term Ka'Ia (time);—

The Kala or the Eternal time is so called from the
fact of its not sufTcring even one of its own minutest
particles or subdivisions (Ivahi) to perish, though
perpetually moving, and in constant motion in itself ; or
it derives its epithet from the fundamental quality of
its destroying all beings and laying their dead remains in
heaps in succession. Some assert that the name is due
to the fact that time blends fkalanam) all beings with
miserj' or happiness according to their respective acts,
or to its leading all beings to destruction (kala).

The Sun-god, by his peculiar motions, divides
eternal time which is measured by years (Samvatsaras)

THE SUSHRHTA SAMHITA. [Owp. VI.

46

into (increasingly progressive but smaller subdi^'isionSJ
such as,Nimeshas (lit : — time taken in closing the eyelids^',
Hashthas, Kalas, Muhurtas, days and nights, fortnights,
months, seasons, solstices, years and Yugas.

Time taken in articulating any of the short vowels
(such as A. etc.), is called an Akshi-Nimesha. Fifteen
Akshi-Nimeshas make one Kashtha. Thirty Kishthas
make one Muhurta. Thirty Muhurtas make one day
and night. Fifteen days and nights make one fort-
night. A fortnight is either dark or bright. Two fort-
nights make one month. The twelve months such as,
Mdgha, etc. are divided into six seasons such as. Winter,
Spring, Summer, Rains, Autumn and Hemanta, each
consisting of two months.

The two months known as Tapas and Tapasya
(Magha and Phdlguna'i constitute the season of winter.
Spring consists of two months called Madhu and
Madhava fChaitra and '^’’aishika . Summer is marked by
two months known as Shuchi and Shukra ' Jaistha and
Ashddha'. The rains or the rainy season is marked b}’’
two months called Nabhas and Nabhas^m (Shravana and
Bhidra}. The two months known as Isha and Uija
(Ash-\dna and Kilrtika) constitute what is called the
season of Autumn. Hemanta is marked by two months
called Sahas and Sahasya (Agrahiyana and Pousha).
These six seasons are respective!}’- characterised by cold,
heat, rains, etc.

Chap. \’I. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

47

The two Ayanams are ushered in b)' the sun and the
moon changing their respective courses in the heavens
t'pjissing over the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn) as the
measurers of time. The rains, autumn and Hemanta
lollow one another in succession when the sun is
over the Tropic of Capricorn or is in the Winter
Solstice /’Dakshin^yanam) and the moon gains in
strength in tin's part of the year. Rasas f Serum or
sap) possessed of acid, saline and sweet tastes, grow
strong and become dominant when the sun is over
the Tropic of Capricorn fDakshinayanam) and all beings
gain in strength and energ}' more and more. Winter,
spring and summer mark the passing of the sun over
the Summer Solstice 'Uttar^yanam . Tlie sun grows
stronger in heat and light, and saps rasas, of bitter, pun-
gent and sour tastes increase in intensity, and all animals
graduall)' begin to lose strength and energ)'.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject The moon imparts the moisture and humi-
dity to the earth which is soaked up by the sun in
his dail}’ course, while the wind in conjunction
with the sun and the moon, contributes towards the
presen’ation of animal life. The successive change of
the two solstices marks a year.

Five such complete years count as a Yuga. The sub-
dirisions of eternal time from the minutest Ximesha to
a complete Yuga, are constantly revolving like a wheel.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Clm,). VI.

48

and this constant or perpetual revolution is called the
wheel or C5'cle of time (Kala-Chakra) b)’’ certain
authorities.

The six seasons such as, the Rains, etc., have been
again adverted to in this chapter for the purpose of fully
describing the accumulation, excitation i^aggravation) and
pacification of the bodilj' humours, such as wind, etc.
According to some, the rainy season consists of two
months known as Bhddra and Ash\’ina ; Autumn consists
of the two months of Kdrtika and MSrgashirshya ; He-
manta consists of the two months of Poushaand Mdgha ;
spring consists of the two months of Philguna and
Chaitra; summer, of Vaish^kha and Jaistha ; and Pr^^•Tit,
of Ashadha and Shravana.

Oshadhis < Medical plants and cereals '1 sprout
during the rains and are enfeebled in their properties.
Water becomes muddy or turbid and the earth is
covered over wth fresh deposits of washed off or silted
mud. The sky becomes overcast with clouds, and
the vdnd, charged with an excess of humidity, dulls
the appetite and organisms of beings. Hence the
food of beings which principally consists of tender
and new-grown vegetables of feeble potency, consider-
ably vitiated by the turbid water partaken of as drink
during the season, proves acid in its digestive reaction,
and germinates excessive bile in the human system.
In autumn the sk}-^ becomes cloudless, the mire is dried

Chap. VI. ]

SUTRASTHA’NAM.

49

up, and the bile originated and accumulated during the
rains, is liquefied bj'' the raj's of the sun and gives
rise to bilious diseases.* **

Plants and vegetables (Oshadhis) that grow or sprout
during the rainy season, are matured in course of time
and ripen in their virtues and potency in the season of
Hemanta. The water becomes clear, cool and heav}^
in this season. The sun’s rays become feeble and mild ;
and the winds moistened with frost and snow, make
the human system a little numb and heavy. Hence
water and vegetables partaken of in Hemanta are
divested of their properties of acid reaction after being
assimilated in the human system, but they give rise
to an accumulation of phlegm in the body owing to
their heaviness, sliminess, and cooling and oily character.
In spring, the phlegm thus accumulated in the bod3' is
liquefied and ushers in diseases due to a deranged state
of that bodil}' humour .t

The said plants and vegetables, in their turn, lose
their sap, moisture and nutritive element in summer,
and become drj' and extremely light. In the same
manner water becomes drought-making [produces a
state of parchedness in the organism — Ruksha] in its
virtue, and considerably loses its natural coolness and

* This should be legurded as the excited, aggravated or agitated state
of biic (Fitla) in the parlance of Ajairs-eda.

1 This is called the excited or agitated .slate of phlegm (Kafa).

7

50

THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITA,

( C\vx\y. VI.

nutritive properties. The sun’s rays diy up tlic natural
moisture of the human system, and accordingly water
and vegetables largely partaken of in summer, give rise
to an accumulation of wind in the system owing to their
lightness, diymess, or expansive and drought-making
properties. Subsequent!}' wind thus accumulated in the
summer, is agitated b}- the rains and cold winds in the
forepart of the rainy season 'Pravrit ) when the groimd is
flooded with water and thus gives rise to diseases which
are incidental to a deranged state of the bodily wind.’'

The fundamental bodily humours such as, wind,
bile, etc. augmented and accumulated during the rains,
Hemanta and summer, should be checked as soon
as they become aggravated (manifest themselves) in
autumn, spring, or in the forepart of the rainy season
(Pr.-irat .

Diseases which owe their origin to a deranged state
of bile, phlegm and wind, are respectively amelio-
rated in Hemanta, summer, and autumn by natural
causes, [such as the variations of atmospheric or earthly
temperature, rainfall, etc,]. Thus far we have discussed
the accumulation, excitation and pacification or
allegation of the deranged bodily humours.

Likewise the features, which specifically mark
the different seasons of the year are observed to

* This is called Ahe exched state of sviad tVayn).

ctup. VI. I

Sl‘TR.\STHA“XAM.

.SI

charnolcrisc the difi'erenL parts of a complete day and
night, [or in other words] traits peculiar to siting time
e.Khihit themselves in the moniing ; the noon is marked
by all the characteristics of summer ; the evening by
those of the rainy season ; the midnight by those of
autumn ; and the hours before dawn by those of
Hemanta. ,\nd similarl)-, like the seasons of the year,
the diflerent parts of the day and night are marked by
variations ■ of heat, cold, etc. [or in other words] the
deranged bodily humours such as wind, bile, etc.
naturally and spontaneously accumulate, aggravate, or
subside during the different parts of the day as they do
in the different seasons of the j’car [represented b)*
those jiarts of the daj’ and night as stated above].

Water and vegetables retain their natural properties
when the seasons are natural, and do not exhibit con-
trar)' features, and they then tend to increase the
appetite, ^^tality, strength, and power of the human
system. Contrary or unnatural seasons are but the
consequences of sin committed by a whole community
and portend the workings of a malign destiny.
A season, exhibiting unnatural or contrary’- features,
affects or reverses the natural properties of water and
vegetables peculiar to it, which, drunk or partaken of,
cause dreadful epidemics in the country. The best safe-
guard lies in not using such dehled water and vegetables
when an epidemic breaks out in the country.

52 -

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Ch;ip. VI.

Sometimes a town or a city is depopulated by a
curse, anger, sin, or by a monster or a demoness conjured
up by a spell or incantation. Sometimes the pollens of
poisonous flowers or grasses, etc., wafted by the
winds, in\'ade a to^m or a ^^llage, and produce a
sort of epidemic cough, asthma, catarrh, or

fever, irrespective of all constitutional peculiarities
or deranged bodily humours agitated therebj’. Towns
and villages are knowm to have been depopulated
through malignant astral influences, or through

houses, wives'”, beds, seats, carriages, riding animals,
gems and precious stones assuming inauspicious features.

Prophylactic measures In such cases
migration to a healthy or unaffected locality, perfor-
mances of rites of pacification and atonement, (wearing
of prophylactic gems and drugs), recitations of mantras,
libations of clarified butter cast into the sacrificial fire,
offerings to tire gods, celebration of sacrificial cere-
monies, obeisance with clasped palms to the gods,
practice of penances, self-control and charity, kindness,
spiritual initiation, obedience to one’s elders and
preceptors, and devotion to the gods and the Bramhanas,
and obsers^ance of such like rules of conduct may prove
beneficial to the affected community.

Marriages with girls of prohibited description have been known
ns well to have ashered in an epidemic which devastated a whole town or
n countr}’.

t - •• VI

SrrKAsTHANAM

53

TIic characlcrlslic features of the
seasons wlUch do not exhibit un-
natural traits (metrical texts) Cold

winds iroin llic nortli blow in tlic senson of
Hem:nUn. The <iiiarlci's the shy arc enveloped in
smoke and assume a dusky aspect. The sun is hid
in the frost, and lakes and pools are frozen or lie
covered over with tiakes, or thin layer.s of ice.
Crows, rhin(K'er<tses. bufi'alocs, lambs and elephants
become evciled ;ind sprightly in this part of the j'car ;
and the LtKlhra, Priyan.uu, and Punn:i},'a trees begin to
blossom.

Winter c.vhihils the same features as above, .only
in a greater degree of intensity ; and the quarters of
the sky are agitated by strong gales c>f wind and
showers of rain.

In spring, when the summits of the mount IMalaya
arc besmeared red with the moist foot-prints of the
brides of the Siddhas and the Vidyadharas, anti are
perfumed in contact with the sweet-scented sandal
forests, the lively south-wind is roused up from his lair
and winnows gladness to damsels burning with desires,
and kindles up the flame of love and appeases the
amorous anger of the beloved pairs by turning their
fancies to themes of love. The quarters of the sky are
cleared up and look jo3Tul. The woods are decked
with the full-blown flowers of the Kinshuka, lotus,

54

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VI.

^ akula, mango and Ashoka trees. The bee bums and
the notes of the Cuckoo are heard to reverberate
through the skies. The south rvind fans this king of
the seasons, and the forests are hung wth the festoons
of tender and sprouting leaves in his honour.

The sun s rays become stronger and more intense in
summer. L-nhealthy winds blow from the south-east.
The earth is heated ; the rivers run narrow and shallow
in their beds ; the quarters of the skv glare with a
blazing light, the birds Chakrav^as v,dth their mates
roam about in quest of cool ponds and reservoirs of
water , herds of deer are tormented and overtvhelmed
with, thirst ; trees, plants and creepers are scorched by
the intense heat, and withered leaves drop off from
the trees which alone serve to make the identification
of then parents possible.

In the .orepart of the rainy season (PrarTit , packs
of detached clouds, spangled with lightning and driven
before the gales ol the west-wind,, come thundering over
and envelop the skies. The Earth is robed in^green
vdth luxurious growth of com, enlivened here and
there b\ the dark crimson of the cochineal insects
(Indragopa';, and Kadamva, Njpa, Kutaja, and the
Kelaki trees begin to flower.

During the rainy season, the rivers overflow their
banks, tumbling down the trees which grow on them.
Ponds and lakes are decked with the full-blown Kumud

Chap. Vr. ]

SUTKASTHA'iVAM.

55

and Nilotpala flowers. The eartli is covered with profuse
vegetation. All distinction between dr}'- lands and
reseiv-oirs of water becomes impossible, and the sun
and the planets are enveloped in dark clouds that
shower torrents of rain but do not roar.

In autumn the sun’s ra)'S assume a mellow golden
tint. Masses of white clouds are seen to sail the dark deep
blue of heaven. Ponds are decked with the full blown
lotus flowers, agitated b}'^ the wnngs of the di\dng
swans The high grounds become dr}--, while the low-
lands still retain their mudd)' character. The level
plains are covered with shrubs and undergrowths,
and plants and trees such as, \’'ana, Saptjihva,
Vandhuka, Kaslia and Asana, flower in abundance.

The bodily humours such as wand, etc. are disturbed
and aggravated by the contrariety, excess or vari-
ations in the characteristic features of the seasons.
Hence it is prudent to check the deranged phlegm
in spring, to conquer the deranged bile in autumn, and
to subdue the deranged bodily wind in the rains, before
they develop themselves in any patent or manifest
bodily ailment.

Thus cmls the sixth dmptcr of the Sutm.sth.tn.tm in the Sushruta
Samhit.t which treats of the chnracteriMic features of ilic se.tsons and their
influence on health and drugs.

CHAPTER VII.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
Surgical Appliances, their Uses and Construction.
(Yantra-Vidhimadhya'yam).

Surgical instruments number one hundred and one *
in all, of which the hand is the most important, inas-
much as (all of them depend on the hand for their
principal auxiliary') and as none of them can be
handled wthout it ; and further because all sur-
gical operations pre-eminentl}' require its co-operation.
Any foreign or extraneous substance, which finds a
lodgment in the human system and becomes painful to
the body and the mind alike, is called a Shalyam ; and
surgical instumients are the means of extracting it
(from its seat or place where it is embedded '.

(Surgical) Appliances maybe divided into six different
groups or types, such as the Svastika, the Sandansha,
the Tala, the Nadi Yantras, and the Shalakas, besides
those that are called the minor or accessory appliances
(Upa-yantras).

The Svastika instruments (forceps) in their turn, are
divided into twenty-four sub-classes ; the Sandansha
instruments (tongs) into two ; the Tala Yantras

* According to certain authorities hundred is here indefinitely used for
a large number,

VII. 1

SUTR.ASTHA'NAM.

57

into two ; the Nadi Yaiitras 'tubnlan into twenty ;
and the Shalakas (liongics; into twenty-eight ; while
the Upa-yantraB admit of being dinded into twenty-
five different types. These instnnncnts are all made
of iron which may be substituted for any other
similar or suitable substance where iron would be
unavailable.

Tile mouths of these appliances are usually made to
resemble those of birds and beasts, and hence they should
be made to resemble the mouths of some particular
animal in shape, or othenvise, according to the advice
of old and experienced physicians surgeons , or accord-
ing to the directions as laid down in the Shastras
fMedical books of recognised authority , or according
to the exigencies cf the case, or after the shajie and
stnicture of other appliances used on similar occasions.

Metrical texts; - Appliances should be made
neither too large nor too small, and their mouths
or edges should be made sharp and keen. They
should be made with a special eye as to strength
and steadiness, and they should be provided vnth
convenient handles.

Appliances of the Svastika class should be made
to measure eighteen fingers in length ; and their
mouths should be made to resemble those of lions,
tigers, wolves, hyenas, bears, cats, jackals, deer,
En'^rukas (a species of deerj, crows, cormorants

5S THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Onp. vil.

Kururas (a species of bird'i, Hjisas (a species of sparrow',
ATiltures, falcons, owls, kites, herons, Bhringar.ljas
(a species of bird';, Anjalikamas, Avabbanjanas,
Nandimukhas, and such like beasts and birds. The
two blades or halves of a Svastika should be welded
together bj* means of a bolt resembling a Masura
pulse 'lentil; in size, and the handles should be turned
in\\'ard in the shape of a mace, or an Ankusha. Appli-
ances of this tyjie should be used in extracting
any thorn or foreign matter which mav have entered
into the bones.

Sandanshas tongs are divided into two classes as
the\ are soldered together with or without a boll.
Ihej* should lie made to measure si.xteen fingers in
length, and should be used to withdraw anv thom-
like substance from below the skin, flesh, veins or
nerves.

The Tala Tantras which measure twelve fingers
in length, may lie di^^ded into two classes as the
single lala and the double Tdla. The former
resemble the scales of fish in shape, while the latter,
according to certain authorities, are made to resemble
the entire mouth ot a fish of the Bhetuli species. These
Yantras are used in extracting splinters from inside
the nose, ears and other external channels or passages
ot the bod5\

The Jfadi Yantras (tubular instruments like s'vringe,s

ciup. vn. 1

SUTKASTli/VXAM.

59

enemas, etc. with a passage or aperture running
through their entire lenglh'i are constructed in
a variety of shapes and for various purposes.
Some of them are open at one end, while others
are open at both. These instruments are used for the
])uq)osc of CNtracting any shalyam that has pricked
into the e.Ktcnial canals or j)assages of the body, or for
inspecting the seal of affection as in i)iles, etc., or for
sucking /blood, etc. from any an'ectcd ])art , or simply as
accessories to other surgical appliances. The length and
circumference of a Nadi Yanlra should be made to
commensurate with those of the passage /Srotai or outlet
of the human sj'stem into which it is intended to be
introduced. We shall describe, later on, the types of
Nddi Yantras which are to be used in connection
with such diseases as fistula in ano, piles, etc. or
in tumours and ulcers, in Mutrad\Tiddhi (Hydrocele)
in Niruddha Prak^lsha ( Phimosis ), in Niruddha
Guda stricture of the rectum) and in ascites,
as well as those to be iised for the purpose of
injecting anything into the urethra, the bowels, the
vagina and the uterus, or are used in connection with
medicated inhalation, or with those that are knowm
as the Alavu Yantras (gourd used for cupping).

The Shalaka-Tantras 'bougies; are of various
shapes and serve a variety of purposes. The lengtlis
and girths of these instruments should be determined

bo

> 11 *

according to tlie necessity of each individual case.
Four probes or directors 'shalaka, in two pairs, are
used for the purposes of searching ■Eshana) pus
in a suppurated part or limb, or in connection with
uplifting, cutting and thereby ^^^thdrawing a shalyam
from the part it has pricked into, or witli a view to
transfer such a body from one place to another
Chalanam', or for the purpose of extracting it
( Shalj’am^ from the afTecterl part. Tlie mouths of the
two types of these directors respectively resemble those
of a Gandup^da earthworm' and of a Sharapunkha
'Tephrosia Purpurea, Pers while the otlier two are
respectively headed like the hood of a serpent and a
fish hook. A couple of directors are used for the pur-
pose ol withdra^\•ing a foreign matter '^Shalyam'i
imbedded in any outer canal of the bodv iSrotas'i. The
top-ends of these directors are bent do^\■n a little, and
they resemble a lentil seed in size. Six tj'pes of directors
or probes are used in cleansing 'the pus from an affected
part of the human organism ; and their top-ends are fitted
with caps of loose cotton. The three sorts of directors
used in applying alkaline medicines, are shaped like
ladles, and their mouths resemble the cavities of little
stone mortars (Khala.) Of the six sorts of directors used
in connection with the process of cauterisation (Agni-
Karma) three are mouthed like the Jamboline fhiit,
hile the other three are faced like a mace or a spear
(Ankusha;. A kind of director used in removing nasal

fi'.'l'. vn.l SI'TKASTllA'XAM. 6j

Ivtmoun?, is moulljcd like the half of the kcnicl found
in the inside of a Jujube*slone, with a little dip in the
inidillc, its lip or end having a keen or shuq) edge.
The ends of the type of probe used in applying
.-Vnjananis medicated collyria’ to the eyelids arc
wrought into two small round lobes like the Matara
])ulsc and are blunted, while the sort of probe
used in cleansing the uretlira, is made round like the end
of the stem of a IMjilati flower.

The Upa-yantras or minor surgical
accessories - include such substances as rope,
the Venika (braided hairt, silk thread, the bark and the
inner-skin of trees, creepers, linen, Ashthila 'stones', large
oval shaped pebbles, a hammer, the palms of the hands,
the soles of feet, fingers, tongue, the teeth, the nails, hair,
the mane of horses, branches of trees, a magnet, alkali,
fire, and medicine, and such acts as spitting, straining
(kunthanam;, e.vhilaration and intimidation,

rWetrical texts ; —These accessories should be
applied to the entire body of a patient, or to any part
thereof such as, the arteries, the ^^scera, or the joints,
according to the necessities of each case to be
determined b)’ the surgeon.

The Functions of Surgical Instru-
ments are striking out (Nirghatanam-lit with-
drawing a Shalyam by moAong it to and fro),
injection or filling, binding, up-lifting, cutting and

62

THE SUSHRL'TA SAMHITA'.

[dial). VII.

thereby withdrawing a Shalyain, resetting by means
of a Uvirling motion, removing of a Shalyam from
one place to another, twisting, expanding, pressing,
puril^nng of a passage, drawing otT, attracting, bringing
to the surface, uplifting, lowering down, applying
pressure all round a part, or an organ, agitating, sucking,
searching, cutting or clearing, straightening, washing or
flushing, stuffing the nose and cleansing. They number
twentr’-four in all.

Metrical texts The intelligent surgeon shall
exercise his judgment and determine the nature of the
siurgical operation required in each indiridual case, for
surely the shalyas requiring a surgeon’s aid are infinitely
varied in their character.

An appliance Yantra which is too thick, or ; made of
inferior metal and hence not substantially made, or too
short or too long, or does not admit of being easily
handled and is incapable of taking in the entire
Shalyam, or is cur\ ed, loosely fitted, or soft-bolted, or
loosely tied up vith cords, 'Should not be used in
surgical operations'. These are the twelve defects of a
surgical instrrunent.

Metrical texts The use of an instrument
devoid of the abovesaid defects and measuring eighteen
fingers in length, is commended in surgical operations.
Shalyas which are manifest and risible to the naked
eye, should be extracted with the instnunents of the

f vn 1

srTlv’ASTll.VNAM.

f>3

t'in)in-niiikh:i (linn-inoullitnl) lv)>v, while Uukc lliiU (.'nn
not he :^ccn. slunUil he icinovcd wjlh thu iiclp nf Uie
Knnk;»-nuikhns hcron-iu<nuhcil ) inptrunK’iUs, ctr„
ncTordiiit; l»> tke <lirei-lif»ns k.hd ilown in the Shiislms
lne(li^■al nr suri:iral works nt lecn^nised authority),
riic Knnka-inukhns are the host of all other types of
instniinenls, innMmieli as they can he inserted and taken
out wiih<nit the least dinienlly, arc ca)>alile of drawinp
nut a Shalyani with the preatesl ease, and are applieahlc
to all parts of the human body he they an artcr>' or a
Inmc-ioinl.

Tlui>' <-iia« l)ii' ''\onih rliipiri III! Snii.i'-'.ll'in.iiii of ilio Sti‘ilitul:i

S.oiiliii.'i uliifli tuMi. of ill" 0) i H-, rotoiiiKiioii .mil ilitni'iiKtiiii'. of viiii;ic;il

nvpli

66

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap, mi-

Now we shall deal with the mode of handling
the abovesaid instruments. — The Vriddhipatram and
other instruments for excising (Bhedanamf should be
caught hold of at a part between the blade
and the handle. In acts of scraping the \ riddhipatram
and the IMandaMgram should be handled with the
palm of the hand slightly turned up. The instruments
for secreting should be caught hold of at the roots
of their blades at the time of using them, while in
the case of a king, an old man, a timid or a
delicate person, a cliild, a woman and specially in the
case of a prince of the royal blood, the Trikurchakam
should be used when any secreting or exudating opera-
tion would be necessary. The handle of a Vrihi-
mukham should be kept concealed within the palm
of the band and the blade should be caught hold of
with the thumb and the index finger (Pradeshini).
rile Kutharika should be first supported on the left
hand and then struck uitb the thumb and third finger
of the right. The Ara, the Karapatram and the
Eshani, should be caught hold of at their roots. The
rest of the surgical instruments should be grappled
according to requirements.

The abovesaid instruments are shaped like tilings
which their veri’ names imply, as have been al-
ready described. The Nakashastram and the Eshani
measure eight fing ers in l eiigtb. The Suchi (needle)

•. ni. ^

Sl''rRASTn VN'A.\{.

^>7

he <li.'>rnhi'<l ].tlci on. I’Jtf lop-einl^ of the \'nflihh:i
:\n(i the DaiU.oShnnkhu Denial pincm arc a little
hint down anti their farc.'t arc niatlc to resemble
sli.aq) ihnn)-:, nr llie junvly sprouted loaves of a
barley plans The tnp-en<l o]' ati Ivshnni clnselv
le-einbles the month ol' an earth wonn. The leiiftlh
o! a Mtidriic.i shtuild he made etiual to that of the
l<)p phalanqes ot the indi;x (ineer ol‘ :i tnnti of
avcmtie hei£:h^.^ A Shar.lrimukham measures ten linpers
in Icsipth. 'flic rest of the instniments arc sno.stly
made to measure si.v finpers in Icnpth.

Commendable features in a Surgi-
cal instrument : —Instniments that arc fitted
with handles of en.sy prip and arc made of poorl and
pure iron, well shaiicd, sharp, and arc set with edpes
that are not japped and end in well formed jioinis or
lops, should he deemed as the best of their kind.

Curvature, bluiuiic.ss Kuntlia — lit ; - incapable of
euUinp hair , unequal sharpness of the edge, rough-
edgedness, over-thickness, over-thinness, over-lengthi-
ness, and over-shortness are the tlefective traits in a
surgical instrument. Those possessed of contrary' features
should be used. But a Karapatram set with a very
rough (dentated) edge may be used for the purpose of
sawng the bones.

A surgical instrument meant for excision ('Bhedanamj
should be set with an edge as thin as that of a Musura

68

THE Sl'SHEUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. Vlll.

pulse (lentil seed', while an instrument used in scraping
should be set with an edge half as thin as that of
tire former. An instrument used either in connection
with the measures of secretion or cutting by uplifting
(Vyadhanam) should be set with an edge as line as the
human hair, while an instrument of incision should have
an edge half as thin as that of the former.

Surgical instruments should be tempered with one
of the three substances such as, alkali, water, and oil.
Instruments used in cutting an arrow, a bone, or any
foreign matter (Shalyam' pricked into the human
body, should be tempered with alkali, whereas those that
are made use of in cutting, cleaving, and lopping off the
llesh liom an affected part), should be tempered with
water. Instruments used in opening Vyadhanam)
a vein (Shira) or in cutting open a nerve Snayu,
should be tempered with oil, and should be whetted
upon a species of stone-slab resembling a Masha pulse in
colour, and their set edge should be protected byjnitting
it in a sheath made of Shilmali wood.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : -.-Vn instrument, well-ground, well-shaped, fitted
rvith a convenient handle and capable of (laterally)
cutting a hair in two and made according to measures
laid down in the Shastras, should be alone used in a
surgical operation.

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

Chap. Vin. 1

69

The Inferior or substitutive instru-
ments (the Anu-Shastras' : — The skin of bamboos,
cr}'stals, bits of glass, Kuru\nndas (a sort of crystal)
leeches, fire, alkali, nails, the leaves of trees known as
Goji, Shephalik;! and Shakapatra, the tender sprouts
of com, hair, and the fingers, should be included within
the categor}’’ of the minor instruments of surger)' and
(which may be used in certain instances in substitution
for the principal and usual ones.

Metrical texts The four articles such as
strips of bamboo skin, crv'-stals, bits of glass, and the rock
lino^\•n as Kuru\nnda, should be used by an intelli-
gent physician in incising or e.xcising 'Bhedanami opera-
tions, where the patient would be found to have a dread
of the knife, or too young to be surgically operated upon
with it, or where the proper instrument cannot be pro-
cured. The nails of fingers should be used in operations
of incising, excising or extracting in (substitution for the
instruments enjoined to be used for the purpose), when
such a course would appear feasible. The processes of
applying alkalis, leeches and cauterisation will be dealt
with later on. In Diseases affecting the eyelids or the
cavity of the mouth, operations for the proposes of
secreting or evacuating ithe accumulated pus or
phlegm), may be performed with the leaves of
Shdkapatra, Shephilika or Gojis. In the absence of
a probe or director, searching may be done with the help

70

THE SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA. I Clwp. VUI.

of a finger, or with a hair, or with a com sprout
An intelligent physician should deem it his im-
perative duty to get his surgical instruments made
by a skilful and experienced blacksmith, and of
pure, strong and sharp iron ^steel'i. A physician, skilled
in the art of using surgical instruments, is always
successful in his professional practice, and hence the
practice of surgeiy* should be commenced at the veiy
outset of medical studies.

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Sutrasthfinam in the Sushnita
Samhitfi trhich treats of Surgical lnstruments.

CHAPTER IX.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
practical instnictions in surgical operations (Yogya-
Sutra).

The prece)5tor should see his disciple attends the
jiractice of surger}- even if he has alread}' thoroughl}'
mastered the several branches of the science of Medicine,
or has perused it in its entirety. In all acts connected
with surgical operations of incision, etc. and injection
of oil, etc. the pupil should be fully instructed as regards
the channels along or into which the operations or
applications are to be made (Karma-patha^. A pupil,
otherwise well read, but uninitiated into the practice (of
medicine or surger}') is not competent / to take in hand
the medical or Surgical treatment of a disease . The art
of making specific forms of incision should be taught by
making cuts in the body of a PushpaphaM la kind of
gourd , AUvu, watermelon, cucumber, or Ervaruka. The
art of making cuts either in tlie upward or donmward
direction should be similarly taught. The art of making
excisions should be practically demonstrated by making
openings in the body of a full water-bag, or in the
bladder of a dead animal, or in the side of a leather
pouch full of slime or water. The art of scraping should
be instructed on a piece of skin on which the hair
has been allowed to remain. The art of venesection

72

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. C Ch^'p-

(Vedh}"a) should be taught on the vein of a dead animal,
or with the help of a lotus stem. The art of probing
and stufiSng should be taught on worm (Ghuna) eaten
wood, or on the reed of a bamboo, or on the mouth of a
dried -Aldvu (gourd). The art of extracting should
be taught by •withdrawing seeds from the kernel of
a Vimbi, Vilva or Jack fruit, ns well as by extract-
ing teeth from the jaws of a dead animal. The act
of secreting or evacuating should be taught on the
surface of a Shdhnali plank covered over with a coat
of bee’s wax, and suturing on pieces of cloth, skin
or hide. Similarly the art of bandaging or ligaturing
should be practically learned by tying bandages round
the specific limbs and members of a full-sized doll made
of stuffed linen. The art of tying up a Kama-sandhi
(severed ear-lobe) should be practically demonstrated
on a soft severed muscle or on flesh, or with the stem
of a lotus lily. The art of cauterising, or applying
alkaline preparations veaustics • should be demonstrated
on a piece of soft flesh ; and lastly the art of inserting
sjninges and injecting enemas into the region of the
bladder or into an ulcerated channel, should be taught
(by asking the pupil) to insert a tube into a lateral
fissure of a pitcher, full of water, or into the mouth
of a goiurd (Alavu).

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject ; — An intelligent physician who has tried his

rhnp. -IX.

SrTRASTHA'XAM.

73

prentice hand in surgeiA* ton such articles of experiment
as, gourds, etc., or has learnt the art \Yith the help of
things as stated above, or has been instructed in the art
of cauterisation or blistering (application of alkali) by
experimenting on things which arc most akin, or simi-
lar to the parts or members of the human body they
are usually applied to, will never lose his presence of
mind in his professional practice.

Thus ends the ninth chapter of the Sutrasthinam in the Susliriiin
S.vnhiUt which treats of Instructions in Surgical operations.

CHAPTER X.

Now Ave shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
the essential qualifications of a physician before
he formally enters his profession (Vishikha'-
nupraveshaniya-madhya^am).

Aph)"sician haA’ing thoroughly studied the Science of
medicine, and fully pondered on and A-erified the truths
he has assimilated, both by observation and practice, and
haA’ing attained to that stage of (lucid) knoAA'ledge, AA'hich
Avould enable him to make a clear exqAosition of the
science (AvheneA'er necessarA'), should open bis medical
career 'commence practising) Avith the permission of
the king of his conntrA'. He should be cleanly in his
habits and AA-ell shaved, and should not alloAv his nails
to groAV. He should AA'ear AA'hite garments, put on a
pair of shoes, carrA’ a stick and an umbrella in his hands,
and walk about Avith a mild and benignant look as a
friend of all created beings, .ready to help all, and frank
and friendly in his talk and demeanoiu’, and never alloAV-
ing the full control of his reason or intellectual poAvers
to be in any Avay disturbed or interfered with.

.A physician, having met with a messenger of
happy augur}’’, or having been encouraged on his journey
by the notes of auspicious birds or sights, should go to
the house of his patient. [Then, haA-ing entered the

Chap. X, ]

SUTRASTHANAM,

IS

sick room], the physician should view the body of his
. patient, touch it with his o\vn hands, and enquire
(about his complaint\ Several authorities hold that these
three, (inspection, touch and questioning; largel}^ form
the means of our ascertaining the natiue of a disease.
But that is not correct, inasmuch as the fiA’e sense-
organs of hearing, sight, etc. and oral enquir}- material-
ly contribute to a better diagnosis.

Diseases, which are to be diagnosed with tlie help of
the organ of hearing, will be fully treated, later on, in
the Chapter on Vrana-Srava (secretions from an ulceip.
The wind (Vayu), making the blood ebullient, forces it up
with a distinctly audible report and thus affects the sense
of hearing. But this will be dealt with later on in the
abovesaid chapter. The heat and coldness of tlie body,
or the gloss, roughness, hardness, or softness of the skin
of the affected part as in fever, or in an ocdematous
swelling of the body, are perceptible by the sense of
touch. Fullness or emaciation of the body fcachexia),
state and indications of vitality, strength, com]de.\iou,
etc. are perceived by the sense of sight. Secretions or
discharges (from the inflamed mucous membrane of
the urethra) in Prameha etc., should be tested with
the organ of taste.' Tlie characteristic smell emitted

* The or any Ktlicr i.i'U- of llic di'Cluioc' 'honlil infciicd

from the fact of llicir KiiiR oi ivn Kin" "'.itrncil with "f ri-

ot flic-, etc.

THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITA.

r Chap. X.

76

by an ulcer in its critical stage ('Arishta) should he
determined with tlie help of the organ of smell.

^Yhile such facts as the time or season (of the llrst
appearance) of the disease, the caste which the patient
belongs to, and things or measures which tend to
bring about a manifest amelioration of the disease,
or prove comfortable to the patient (Satm5'amj
as well as the cause of the disease, the aggrava-
tion of pain, the strength of the patient, and his
state of digestion and appetite, the emission of
stool, urine and flatus, or their stoppage, and the
maturity of the disease as regards time, should
be specifically ascertained by directly interrogating the
patient (on those subjects). Though the abovesiiid five
organs of sense, like the three fundamental •vital humours,
help us to make the correct diagnosis of a disease,
still the objects locally perceived by these senses
should not be left out of account in ascertaining its
specific nature.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — A disease WTongly observed or incorrectly
described, or wrongly diagnosed, is sure to mislead a
physician.

HaHng made these observ^ations the physician will
try to cure diseases that are curable, adopt palliative
measures in cases where palliation is the only remed)'
that can be offered, and give up a case which is beyond

''•“r Sl'TKAS'niA'N'AM .

all incdiral IruatnUMil, and n)oslly t))r)sc which arc of more
than a year s s-lantlinj,'. Diseases aileelin^f a Br.lhmana
Well versed irj ihe N edas, or ;i Icintf, ora woman, or an
inlanl, or an old man. or a thnid person, or a man in the
royal ser%-ice. or a ennntne' man, or a man wlio pretends
to possess a knowledjje «>l' the science of medicine, or a
man whi> conceals In's ilisease, ora man of an excessively
irascihle temperament, or a man wlio has no control
over his senses, or a man in extremely indipcnl cir-
cnmslances of lile or without any one to lake care of
him, are apt to run into an incurable type though
appearing in a common or curable fonn at the outset.
The physician, who practises his art with a regard to
these facts, acipiires piety, wealth, fame and all wished
for objects in life.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — A physician should abjure the companj' of
women, nor should he speak in private to them or
joke with them, A physician is forbidden to take
anything but cooked rice from tlie hands of a woman.

Tlius ends the tenth CImptcr of Ihe .SulraslhAnam in the Sushnila
Sainhil/I whic/i treats of the essential r/ualificalions of .a physician.

CHAPTER XI.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of the
pharraac}’’ of alkalis or potential cauteries (Kslia'ra-
pa'ka-vidhi-madhya^am).

In cases that require incising, excising and scraping,
alkalis or alkaline preparations are of greater importance
than surgical instruments and appliances (both principal
and secondarj' or substitutive', as they are possessed of
the Hrtues of subduing the three deranged bodily
humours (such as wnd, bile and phlegm ).

The etymological signification of the term Ksbara
(alkalis) is based on their property of corroding (the skin
or the flesh of an affected part of the body), or on their
peculiar quality in destroying the skin and flesh where
such an effect is desired Since a varietv of substances
enter into the composition of Kshara i alkahV, they are
endued with the virtue of subduing the three deranged
bodily humours. Owng to their white colour, Ksharas
should be included ^^^thin the category' of cooling
substances (Saumya't.

But since many drugs or substances of a hot or fier}'
natiue fAgneya) enter into their composition, Ksharas
(alkalis) are endued with the properties of blistering,
burning, suppurating ( Pdchana), opening etc., without

< , ■

,VI

srri.'AsTn.vNAM,

79

iinoU'it);; .iny » onlKiilii tiMu to ilu'ir ycnciic
natuu', .'Mu! iu'in <• llu'yaic Iju'hxkvl within the hVl of
llio’-c '•nlv'taiu t .' whifh :irchot!i In^t aiirl i(K)h'n!,' 'Satnnva
:nnl A^nwyn in their \iitnr'-. They aic punpcnl in
<i: a lu-at-mahint: uHciu-y. iiTitanl, dij’cstive,
ronn>i\c, atn<nl)ent. li( ttefaeient, itnproNc imhcalthy
xirc- and entmilaiinn, and act as styptic and
{>ar.dy.'in!r aj^ents. They exercise destniclive action
on animal ti^snc^. riicy arc antitoxic, anthelmintic
and possess the property of enrin;: mucous accnnni-
lations in tlie intestines. 'J'hey tend to reduce fat and
phlepn and they have the virtue of destroying skin
diseases. In large (hr'-es, alkalis have the efl'cct of
dcjlroyiniT the \irile potency of a man.

Kshitr.i (caustics may be grouped under two distinct
heads according to their mode of administration ■, such
as the I’nitisclniniva for e.xtcmal application' and the
P.lnia alkaline potions . Alkaline preparations should
be extemnlly u.sed in such skin diseases as Kitima,
Dadni, Kiks, Mandala, Fistula in ano, tumour, bad
ulcer t Dushta Vrana , sinus, Chamia-kila, Tilkalaka,
Xacchya, \'yanga, jMasliaka and e.xtcmal abscesses
and hcemorrhoids. In eases of wonns and poisoning
as well as in the seven fonnsof diseases which affect the
cavity of the mouth, such as Upajihva, Upakusha,
Danta-Vaidarbha, and in the three types of Rohini,
e.xtcmal applications of alkalis act like substitutive

8o

THE STJSHRUTA SAMHITA. f Cliap. XI.

surgical instruments. Alkaline potions or an)' other
internal use of alkalis, should be prescribed in cases
of Gulma (abdominal glands', Ascites, loss of
appetite, indigestion, flatulent distension of the abdomen
wn'th suppression of stool and urine, urinar)’ calculi,
stone in the bladder, internal abscesses, worms in the
intestines and hoemorrhoids, as well as for subduing
or eliminating any sort of poison from the system.

Alkalis or alkaline potions will ]irove positively
injurious to a patient laid up with fever or haemoptysis,
to a man of bilious temperament, to an infant, or to an
old man, and they m'll work similar mischief in a weak
person, or in a patient suffering from vertigo, insensi-
bility, syncope and Timira (darkness of vision). These
preparations of .Alkalis should be made in one and
the same way by filtering ; and we resen'e the full
description of this process for another occasion.

Alkalis for external application are prepared in
three different potencies ; the mild, middling and
strong (extremely irritant'. .A physician wishing
to prepare such an alkali, should first purify his
body and mind, and observe a fast on a day in autumn
marked by auspicious astral combinations. Then
having ascended the brow of a hill, he should select a
full grown -Ashita-mushka (Ghantit parulj tree of middle
age, and growing on soil recommended in the works
on pharmacy and not anywise affected. Then having

Chap. XI.

SUTRASTHA’NAM.

Si

formally invoked the spirit of the aforesaid tree,
which bears no white flowers) the physician should
fell it on the day following, — reciting the Mantra which
reads as : — “ O thou possessed of might}- w'rtues, O
thou endued with tier}' potency, may thy potency
never decrease or vanish. Stay here, O thou blissful one,
execute my work, and after the performance thereof
thou shalt be at liberty to ascend to the heavenly
regions.”

Then having performed the Homa ceremony with
thousands of white and red flowers, the physician
should cut the wood of the abovesaid tree into
small pieces and put them in a place pro-
tected from the wind. Then haw’ng placed pieces of
unslaked limestone over them, the physician should
bum them to ashes with the lighted faggots of dried
sesaraum plants. Then after the fire has fairly
burnt itself out, the ashes of the limestone and the
Ghanta-pdrula wood should be separate!}- collected
and stored. Similarl}' the wood as well as the
leaves, roots and fniits of Ivutaja, Palasha, Ashva-
karna, Prfribhadra, Vibhitaka, Arag^•adha, Tilvaka,
Arka, Snuhi, Ap;CmjIrga, Patalrf, Xaktam^Ia, ^'risha,
Kadali, Chitraka, Putika, Indra-'\’'riksha, Asphota,
Ashvamaraka, Saptachchhada, Agnimantha, Gunjrf,
and the four species of Koshataki, should be burnt
down to ashes.

82

THE SUSHRUTA SA^lHITA. [Chap. XI.

Then a Drona measure of the ashes thus prepared*
should be dissolved and stirred up in six Drona measures
of pure -water or cow’s urine, and be filtered
twenty-one times in succession. The (alkaline water
filtered as above ; should be kept in a large caldron
over a fire and boiled by gently agitating it A\ith a
ladle. It should be taken down from the fire when by
gradual stirring, the saturated water would appear
transparent, slimy, red and irritating. It should
then be filtered through a piece of clean linen,
and the dregs thrown awav. After this a Kudawi
measure and a half 12 Palas of the Iabovesaid(
saturated or alkaline water should be taken out
of the caldron, and the rest should be again kept boil-
ing over the fire. Folio-wing this, substances kno-wn
as Kata-Sharkara. the ashes of the burnt limestone
previously obtained, Kshirapakas (fresh water oysteisl
and Sankhanabhi. should be burnt red hot in
equal proportions, and then immersed and pressed
in the Kudaba measure of alkaline water previously
set apart in an iron basin as above described.

Then haring inunersed eight Pala measures of the
substances kno-nm as the ShankhanAbhi etc., in the
abnvesaid alkaline water, the physician should boil
it by continuous and steady stirring, care being

* Two fcLTls of the byur.t of Ghanl^-pdrnla and one pait of the
nibes of Kutajju etc.

Qiap. XI. ]

SUTR.ASTHA'N.A.M.

83

talscn not to make it of too thin nor of too thick
a consistency. Tlien the basin or the caldron
should be taken down from the oven, and its contents
poured into an iron pitcher, carefully coverin.ij its
mouth after filling it. The alkali thus prepared is
called the Kshani (alkali of middling potency, which,
if prepared without the subsequent addition lit ;
throw-over) of the ashes of Katasharkar.i, etc., poes by
the name of mild alkali 'Mridu Kshrlra). Similarly, alkali
prepared with the addition of the powders of the dni.^s
known as Danti, Dravanti, Chitraka, I..;inpilaki, I’ntik.a-
Prav;ila Talpatri, Vidha. Suvarchika, Kanaka-Kshiii,
1 linen, Vaclrt, and Vi>h;i, or with as many of them a- are
available, eacli weieliine four Irdns, is called the stron.’
Kshara (extremely initatini; alkali). Theo; alkaiim' jne-
paralioii- of dillvient potenc ic'. slu-nlil I'e se’.er.aliy lo'.-d
in raM-" wlieie vheii ailmiir.'-ti.Uio'a'- would be cbe.Tb-
indicated. An all, '.dine ptcpar.ition. ,\:;y ay cab' •’•■d,
-houldb'- 'tttniclheited b\ .’ildni;' to c. .I'b.vbnc v ;

V .ate:' -atnr.'.ted with att .elk.'-’i) -a-' be'i-'c .b- ■. •■■■:d,

Aut horitnl iv'c vnrscs on

jeel : r: M

■■ ■ ,1 d ■■ •

the f;tib-

t .

t . o

( . '

THE.SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. LQiap.XI.

84

too mild, of excessive whiteness, excessive strength or
irritabnity, of over-sliminess, excessive stickiness or
thickness, insufficient boiling, and insufficiency of
component ingredients.

A patient laid up witli a disease amenable to an
application of alkali potential cauter}* or caustic) should
be kept in a spacious chamber, and should not be ex-
posed to draughts and to the hot rays of the sun,
[Then the physician having secured] the nccessaiy’
appliances etc, as already laid down in the Chapter V,
should \'iew the part of the patient’s body to which
■ the alkali is to be applied. Tlie affected part sliould
be then*" rubbed or scarifiedt with an alkali, and covered
overt with a piece of linen. The alkaline prepara-
tion should be applied with a rod or director* and kept
undisturbed for a period needed to articulate a hundred
long letter sounds).

Wletrical texts :--The perfect burning (blis-
tering should be inferred from the black colour of the
skin of the affected part. ^ladhuka and the substances
included within the Amla-varga (group of acid drugs)
pasted with clarified butter, should be applied to allay
the incidental burning sensation). A plaster composed

♦ In a case bronght about by (Pitta) ascendency of the deranged bile,
t It should be scraped with the alkali where the skin would appear
hard and benumbed owing to the action of the deranged Wtal winds

; In a case of deranged phlegm (Kafa) the affected part being marked
bv itching and swelling.

XI. 1

Sin’RASTHA'iVAM.

85

of the shreds of Amlti-K.lnjika, sesannini and Madlnikam
taken in equal parts, and pasted together, should be
applied to the part burnt with an alkali ; in the event
of the latter having failed to produce tlie desired effect
owing to the disease being deejdy seated. i^Iadhukani
and the Kalka 'paste of sesannnn mixed with clarified
butter would cause such an incidental) ulcer to heal.

Now you may ask tlie question how can an acid
substance, which is fierj-in its virtue and heat-making in
its potency, tend to subdue the effects of an alkali which
is possessed of similar virtues and properties, instead
of augmenting them, as can naturally be apprehended ?
Well my child, the question can be fairly answered
b)' stating, that substances of all tastes enter into the
composition of an alkali except the acid one. The
pungent (Katu) taste is the principal taste of an alkali,
while the saline fLavana''. forms its minor or accessory*
flavour (Anurasa). Now this saline taste in conjunc-
tion with the acid one renounces its extremely
sharp or irritating property and is thus transformed into
one of sweetness or of soothing virtue. Hence it
is that an acid taste tends to allay the burning incidental
to an application of alkali (potential caustic) in the
same way as water tends to put out fire.

An operation of perfect cauterisation with an alkaline
application brings about an amelioration of the disease,
or the disease is entirely subdued, accompanied by

86

THE SHSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. XI,

lightness of the limbs and absence of secretion from
the affected part ; while an insiiflicient buming [of
the part] is generally attended by symptoms of
‘ig&rn'^’ntion of the malady and also gives rise to
local pain, itching and numbness. [On the other
hand], e.vcessive burning [of the part] with an
alkaline preparation may have a fatal tennination, and
is attended by such symptoms as buming, suppuration,
redness, secretion in and from the seat of affection.
A feeling of languor jUnd fatigue comes upon the
patient accompanied wilh thirst, swooning and an aching
sensation. An ulcer incidental to a bum by an alkali
should be treated with a special eye to the nature of the
disease and the deranged bodily humour specifically
involved in the case.

A weak person, an infant, an aged person, a man of
timid disposition, a patient suffering from abdominal
drops} with general anasarca or from haemoptysis,
a pregjnant woman, a woman in her menses, a person
suffering from an attack of high fever or urethral
discharges, or emaciated with chronic inflammation
of the lungs, or a person subjected to fits of faint-
ing or abnormal thirst, or a person suffering
Irom \irile impotenc}', or whose testes have become
deranged either upwards or downwards, or a woman
suffering from retroversion or introversion of the
uterus or prolapsus of the vagina, should be deemed

>;i. '■

srri^ASTJl.VXAM.

unlit

f< >r

hein'..'

c.uitciis

cd with

alkalis

!\lore-

o^r!

their

applic.uion i-

not to Itf

sanclioncd over

1(U- Vc

'in-.

ltd vc-

, ji'ini-.

cii-tles oi

tender

Itones tir

ratlila

UC-.

sutme.'

. ailciics.

thioat. timhiiicn-,

, ftenitals.

rccitm

- of

Sto'a-

fcMcrna

il clianncls

)'arl;

s t'tnered

<ivor with

a thin

lavci of

lle-lt, inside the

nail- and

other

\nln

cnthlc

p.TII- of

the hotly.

nor in

diseases

of the

, cxccpliiie tliose

which afici

Ll the e\

:elids.

AlicahV liiil lo pioducc any iK-ncliciai effci-t. in a
]ialiont MilTcnn” from n.dcina nf ihc liinlis, or snflcrint;
I'roin lionf-aclii.-. or laid up with a disease afleclinj' the
joints or the licail, or in a person of iinjiaircd appetite
wlio has Io>t all relish for food, even when their use
is otherwise indicated.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject ; .\n .\lkali administered l)y an iftnoranl ]ihv-

sieian is to iie dreaded more tlian poison, (ire, blows
with a wcajion, thunder-bolts, or deatli itself ; while
in the hand of an inlelliffent physician it is potent
enouuh to S]K’edily subdue all serious diseases in which
its use is indicated.

TJius ends ihc ck'VLMilli Chapter of the SutrnslhSnam in the Susliniln
Panthitfi whiclt treat- of the I’harinacy of .MUalis.

CHAPTER XII.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
cauteries and the rules to be observed in their use

(Ag'ni-Karma-Vidhimadhyayam).

A fire (canter)' ) is better than an Alkali as far as its
healing property is concerned. .A disease burnt with
fire, is cured for good and knows no recrudescence ; and
diseases which ordinarily bafile the skill of a surgeon
or a physician, and never prove themselves amenable
to medicinal or surgical remedies, are found to yield
to fire (cauterisation .

The following drugs, articles and subsUinccs should
be understood as accessories to an act of cauterisation,
VIZ., Pippah, the e.\creta of goats, the tooth of a cow
(Godanta), Shara, a rod, the surgical instrument known
as the Jami a\ austha, articles made of copper or silver,
honey, treacle, oil, or any other oily substance. Out of
these, Pippah, the Godanta, Shara and the rod should be
Onade red hot and) used in cauterising the affected part
in a disease which is restricted only to the skin ;
similarl) the surgical instsument known as the
Jdmvavaustha, as well as the appliances made of
copper or silver should be used in a disease which
is seated in the Jlesh. Honey, treacle and oil should
be (boiled and; employed in cauterising the disease

SUTRASTHANAM.

Onp XU. !

S9

wliirh afTocu; any of ihc voin^, nerve?, bones or bone-
joints.

Cantcrisnlion is admissible in all seasons of the
year except snmmcr and auinnm; but no such distinction
should be obsen-ed in cases of impendinp danger, when
it should be practised with the help of such appliances
of a contrary cooling) nature, fas wet sheets, cooling
drinks and cooling plasters, etc.]

In all diseases and in all seasons of the year, the
patient should bo fed on a diet of slimy (mucilaginous)
food before actually applying the cautcr}’ ; while the
patient should be kept on an empty stomach before the
act where the complaint would be a ease of DIudagarbha
^false presentation), fistula in ano, h:emorrhoids or a
disease affecting the cavity of the mouth.

According to certain authorities the processes of
cauterisation may be grouped under two heads according
as the skin or the flesh is cauterised. Tlie present work
does not la}' any injunction against the cauterisation of
any nerve, vein, bone or bone joint (as stated before).
A burning of the skin is accompanied by a peculiar
bursting or cracking sound. Tlie skin becomes con-
tracted and emits a fetid smell. Similarly, in a case
where the flesh is burnt, (the affected part) assumes
a dove color of (blackish brown), marked by pain
and a little swelling, and the incidental ulcer becomes
dry and contracted. In the case where 51 nerve or a vein

12

90

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. Xn.

is burnt, the nicer presents a raised (elevated) and
black aspect with the stoppage of all secretions ; while
an ulcer incidental to the cauterisation of any of the
bone joints has a parched red hue and becomes hard
and rough.

The regions of the ej’e-brows, forehead and temple-
bones, should be cauterised in diseases affecting the
head as well as in a case of Adhimantha (Ophthalmia).
In diseases affecting the eyelids the eye should be
covered over with a moist piece of Alaktaka (a thin
pad of red pigment principally used in dyeing the feet
of ladies) and the roots of the ej'elashes should be duly
cauterised. Cauterisation is specificall}’’ enjoined to
be resorted to incases ofglandular inflammation, tumour,
fistula in ano, scrofula, elephantiasis, Charmakila, warts,
TilakAlaka, hernia, sinus hcemorrhage, and on the occa-
sion of cutting a vein or a bone joint, as well as in
the event of the vital wind (Viyu) being extremely
agitated and lodged in the local skin, flesh, vein, nerves
and the bone-joints and giving rise to excruciating
pain in and about the ulcer which in consequence
presents a hard, raised and inert surface.

The modes of cauterisation vary according to the
seat of the disease, and number four in all, viz., the
Ring, the Dot, the Lateral or Slanting lines, and the
Rubbing modes.

Oiap. XII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

9 ‘

Authoritative verse onthe subject

A physician, after having carefully considered the seat
of the disease and judiciously ascertained the patient’s
strength and the situations of the Marmas (the vital
parts of the patient's) body, should resort to
cauterisation vrith an eye to the nature of the malady
and the then prevailing season of the year.

The part, after being properly cauterised, should be
rubbed with an unguent composed of honey and clarified
butter. A man of bilious temperament or with a quantity
of bad blood lying stagnant and locked up in any part
of his body, or of lax bowels, a person with any foreign
substance (such as a thorn or a splinter still lodged in
his body), a weak or an old man, an infant, or a man
of timid disposition, or a person afflicted with a large
number of ulcers, as well as a patient suffering from
any of the diseases in which diaphoretic measures
are forbidden, should be regarded as a subject unfit for
cauterisation.

Now we shall describe the characteristic sym-
ptoms of the several kinds of bums other than those
caused (for surgical purposes). Fire feeds both
upon fatty and hard fuels, [such as oil and logs of wood
etc.]. Hot or boiling oil has the property of permeating
or entering into the minutest nerves and veins, and

g 2 . the sushruta samhita. [ Chap! xn.

hence, it is capable of burning the skin, 'etc. Accord-
ingly an ulcer incidental to such a burning (scald) is
characterised b}' extreme pain, etc.

Bums may be grouped under four distinct heads "vaz.,
the Plushtam, the Dur-Dagdham, the Samyag-Dagdham
and the Ati-Dagdham. A bum characterised by the
discolouring of its seat and extreme burning and mark-
ed b)' the absence of any vesicle or blister, is called the
Plushtam, from the root “plusha" to bum. A bum,
which is characterised b)' the emption oflarge vesicles or
blisters, and assumes a red colour, and is characterised by
excessive burning and a kind of drawing pain, and which
suppurates and takes a long time to heal, is called the
Dur-Dagdham (bad bum or scald). A bum, which is not
deep (superficial) and assumes the colour of a ripe Tala
ftmt, and does not present a raised or elevated aspect
and develops the preceding symptoms, is called the
Sani5'ag-Dagdham (fully burnt one). A bum in which
the flesh hangs doam, and Avhere the veins, nerv'^es and
bones are destroyed, accompanied with fever, bmm-
ing, thirst, fainting and such like disturbances, and
which leads to a permanent disfiguration of the body,
retarding the healing of the incidental ulcer which leaves
a discoloured cicatrix even after healing, is called the
Ati-Dagdham (over burnt one). A physician should
try to heal any of these four tj^es of bums vn’th the
measures already laid down before.

Ctwp. XII. 1

SUTRASTHANAM

93

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject . — The blood of a raan is agitated and made
hot by fire, and the blood thus heated tends to
excite or causes it to raise the bile. And since fire and bile
(Pittam) are similar in their taste, essence, elfect, potency
and natal factors, the effects of Pittam (burning sensation
etal, are naturally aggravated and augmented through a
contact with fire. Blisters or vesicles crop up in
rapid succession and mark the seat of burning, and
fever, thirst, etc., supervene.

Now I shall describe the course of medical treat-
ment to be adopted for the cure of bums. Hot and
dry fomentations, as well as warm plasters should be
applied to a bum of the Plushtam t}’pe, and a course
of hot food and drink should be likewise prescribed for
the patient. The blood becomes thin when the body
is diaphorised by means of warm fomentations, and water,
in virtue of its natural cooling properties, tends to
thicken the blood. Hence warm fomentations or appli-
cations exercise curative, virtues in the case of a
bum of the foregoing t}’pe, and water or cold appli-
cations produce the contrar}’- effect.'*

Both wTirm and cold measures are to be adopted
in The case of a bum of the Dur-Daghdha type, the

* By artcstinp the radiation of the incarcerated heat and thereby
favourinR the deration of the local temperature and the inercasc of the
bnminR sensation.

94

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chnp. XII.

medicinal remedies consisting of cold applications and
unguents of clarified butter/

A plaster composed of Tugakshiri, Plaksha, Chandana,
Gairika, and Amritam 'Guduchi), pasted together •wnth
clarified butter, should be applied over a bum of the
Sam3'^ag-Dagdha type, or the flesh of domestic or
aquatic or amphibious animals should be pasted and
plastered over the affected part. A bum of the
present tjqie, marked by excessive burning, should
be medicinall}’’ treated in the same manner as a case of
bilious abscess (Pitta-vidradhi),

In the case of a bum of the Ati-Dagdha (over-burnt)
type, the loose or the dangling integuments (skin)
and flesh should be removed, and cold applications should
be made over the ulcer. Then the affected part
should be dusted over with pulverised Shali rice,
or a plaster composed of the pulverised skin of
Tinduki and clarified butter pasted together, should be
applied over its surface.! The affected part should be
covered over with the leaves of Guduehi, or of lotus, or
other aquatic plants, and all measures and remedial

Cold applications and cooling measures should be resorted to in the
case of a deep and excessive bum, while the contrary should be held as the
correct remedy in the case of a slight and superficial one.

*]* Several authorities prescribe Tinduki bark and human cranium
powdered together and mixed with clarified butter, while others prescribe
a decoction of Tinduki bark.

Chap. XII. 1

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

95

agents, indicated in the case of a bilious er^^sipelas,
should be resorted to in the present instance
as well.

A plaster composed of bee's wax, Madhukam,
Saijarasa, Manjisthd, (red) Chandanam and Murva
pasted together and boiled with clarified butter should
be regarded as beneficial to burns of all types to
promote rapid healing.

In the case of a bum from boiling oil, clarified butter
or such like substances should be externally applied
and all measures which promote diymess of the
part (Ruksha) should be adopted without the least
hesitation.

Now we shall describe the sjmiptoms which become
manifest in a person [whose nostrils and larjmx]
are choked with smoke. — The respiration becomes
laboured and hurried and the abdomen is distended
accompanied by constant sneezing and coughing. The
eyes look red and seem as if burning. The patient
breathes out smoke and fails to catch anj’- other smell
than that of it. The sense of hearing is considerabl}’-
affected ; the sense of taste becomes inert ; fever,
thirst and a burning sensation supervene ; and the
patient drops dovm utterly imconscious.

Now hear me discourse on the course of medical
treatment to be adopted in the case of one

96

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. [ a«p. XIJ.

over-powered wth smolce.—Rmetics in the shape of
clarified butter mixed with sugarcane juice or milk
saturated with the juice of grapes, or lumps of
sugar-candy dissolved in an adequate quantity of
Vi'ater, or any acid potion slightlj* sweetened, should be
administered to the patient. The contents of the
stomach are speedily discharged bj' vomiting ; the disten-
sion of the abdomen is removed ; the smell of smoke in
the breath is mitigated, and the accompan5’ing fever vilh
(its concomitants) of sneezing, languor, thirst, cough,
laboured breathing etc. is abated, and the patient is
restored to consciousness. Gargles iiaving a sweet,
saline, acid or pungent (katu) taste restore the sense-
perception of the patient, and gladden his mind. Medi-
cated snuffs in adequate quantities should be adminis-
tered by a well-read physician to such a patient, wliereby
his head, e)’es and neck would be able to resume
their normal functions. And a course of diet, which is
light, emollient and not acid in its reaction, should be
prescribed.

Cooling measures or applications should be
prescribed or made in the event of any part of the body
being scorched by excessive heat, or by being exposed
to a draught of hot and parched \vind. Similarly, hot
and emollient measures or applications should be re-
sorted to where any part of the bodj' has become frozen
or shrivelled by snow or cold -vsinds. A person struck

Ch.ip. XII. 1

SUTRASTHANAM.

97

by lightning should be regarded as beyond the pale
of medicine.*

• Additional texts Where the scorching would be found to be consi-
dcmbly extensive : otherwise such measures os lubrication with medicated
unguents etc, should be adopted in a case where the patient is picked
up alivct

Thus ends the twelfth Giapter of the Sutrasthdnam in the Sushruta
SamhilA which treats of Giutcries and the rules to be observed in their use.

CHAPTER XIII.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats
of leeches and of how and which to use (Jalaukar-
vacharan iyamad hyaryam) .

Leeches should be apph’ed where the patient
would be found to be old or imbecile, or a woman,
or an infant, or a person of an extremely timid disposition,
or a person of a delicate constitution, and ns such is
not fit to be surgically operated upon, since this
mode of bleeding is the gentlest that can be possibly
devised. The blood Htiated by the deranged "svind
(V5yu\ bile (Pittam), and phlegm (Kaphnm) should be
respectively sucked through a horn, by leeches and a
gourd appliance (Alavu-Yantra) or with whichsoever
of them is available at the time, irrespective of the cause
of such vitiation, whenever such bleeding or sucking
would be found to be imperatively necessary*.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject ; — A cowhom is described in the Shastras as of a
hot or heat making potency, and as possessed of a
slightly cooling (Sm'gdha) or soothing (Madhura) pro-
perty. Accordingly it should be used in sucking the
blood vitiated through the action of the deranged bodily
wind. Leeches, which are bom in water, are possessed of
hladhura (sweet or soothing) properties, and hence they

ciwp, xni. )

SUTKASTllANAM.

'90

should be used in sucking the blood Wtiated through a
deranged condition of the bile (Pittam\ The gourd
(Alrfvu) is pungent, parching and irritating in
its potenej" and should be therefore used in sucking
the blood vitiated through the action of the deranged
phlegm (Kapham).

IVIode of application The part from
which the blood is to be sucked should be first scarified
or slightl)' cut in two or three places, and then the
mouth or the open end, of the horn, covered with a
thin piece of muslin tied round its edges should be
placed over it and sucked wth the mouth through the
aperture at its tip or top-end, or with a gourd appliance
equipped with a lighted lamp placed in its inside.

The term Jalauk^ (leeches; may be etymolo-
gically interpreted to mean creatures whose life
{kyu) or whose longe\dty is in, or depends upon, water,
whereas the derivative meaning of the term
Jalauka (leeches) is based upon the fact of their dwelling
("Oka” — dwelling place) in water (Jalam). Leeches may
be dmded into twelve distinct species of which six are
venomous, and six non-venomous. The six venomous
species are named Krishna, Karvur^, Alagard^,
Indriyudha, Siimudrik;! and Gochandand, The leeches
of the first-named species (Krishna) are marked by thick
heads, and of a colour resembling powdered lampblack.
The leeches of the Karvuri type have extended or

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chip. Xlll.

loO

elongated bodies like the Varmifislies, and are
indented and thick at the ^\■aist. The Alagardi
leeches are hair)', thick and round at the sides, and black
at the mouth. The leeches of the Indraj-udha species
are marked on the surface \nth up-pointed rainbow
coloured lines. The skins of the Samudrikas are black-
ish yellow, dotted over "ndth white spots of a variety
of shapes. Leeches which are pro\ided with narrow
mouths and are marked by bifurcating line at the
bottom like the scrotal sac of a bull are called
Gochandan^s.

A person bitten by any of the abovesaid venomous
leeches has an irresistble inclination to scratch the seat
of the bite which is marked by a considerable swelling.
Fever, ivith burning, retching, drowsiness and delirium
supervenes and ultimately the patient loses all conscious-
ness. The remedy consists in the administration of
an anti-toxic medicine known as Mahagada, as snufis,
potions and unguents, etc. A bite by an Indri}'udha
usually proves fatal. Venomous leeches, as well as cures
for their bites, have thus been described.

The non-venomous species include Kapilas, Pingalfe,
Shankhamukhis, Musikas, Pimdarimukhis and Sararikas.
The Kapilas are colotned like Manah-Shila ( realgar )
at the sides, and their backs are tinged with a
glossy hue like that of a Mudga pulse. The Pingal^s
have a reddish colour, are roimd in shape and

Chap. Xltl. ]

SUTEASTHANAiM.

loi

capable of speedy locomotion. The Shankhamukhis are
marked by a blackish red hue like that of the
liver, are provided with sharp elongated mouths,
and are capable of sucking blood mth the greatest
swiftness. The Musikds are coloured like the common
blind moles, and emit a fetid smell from their bodies.
The Pundarimukhas are coloured like the Mudga pulse
and are so called from the fact of the resemblance of
their mouths to the full-blowm lotus hlies fPundarikas).
The Sara\nkas have cold bodies marked w'th impress-
ions like lotus leaves and measure eighteen fingers’
wdth in length, and they should be employed in
sucking blood from the affected parts of lower animals.
This exhausts the list of non-venomous leeches.

The countries, such as Turkesthan (Yavana), the
Deccan (Pandya), the tract of land traversed by the Ghaut
mountains (Sahya), and Pautana {modem Mathura), are
the natural habitats of these leeches. The leeches,
found in the aforesaid countries, are specifically non-
venomous, strong, large-bodied, greedy and ready
suckers.

The venomous leeches have their origin in the de-
composed urine and fecal matter of toads and venom-
ous fishes in pools of stagnant and turbid water. The
origin of the non-venomous species is ascribed to such
decomposed vegetable matter, as the petrified stems of
the several aquatic plants known as Padraa, Utpalam,

102

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

t Clnp. xin.

Nalina, Kumuda, Pundarika, and the common zooph3'tcs
which live in clear waters.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject. — The non-venomous leeches swim about in sweet
scented waters, live on non-poisonous weeds, lie on the
leaves of flowering water plants instead of on the dank
and oozy beds of pools, and suck blood from the aflfected
part of a human organism without causing anj* discomfort.

Leeches should be caught hold of vdth a piece of
wet leather, or by some similar article, and then put in
to a large-sized new pitcher filled with the water and
ooze or slime ofapooL Pulverised zoophytes and powder
of dried meat and aquatic bulbs should be thrown into
the pitcher for their food, and blades of grass and
leaves of water-plants should be put into it for them
to lie upon. The water and the edibles should be
changed e^■er3' second or third day, and the pitchers
should be changed each week, (the leeches should be
transferred to a new pitcher at the end of every
consecutive seven days).

The authoritative vei*s6 on the sub-
ject : Leeches that are venomous, thick about the
middle, elongated, of slow locomotion, look fatigued,
do not readily take to the part they are
applied to, and capable of sucking only a small quantity
of blood, should be looked upon as not belonging to
the proper or the commendable type.

Chap. Xin. 1

SUTKASTHAKAM.

103

Tiien ha\nng seated or laid down the patient sufier-
ing from a disease which requires the application of
leeches, the seat of bleeding, if not pre\iously ulcerated,
should be roughened by dusting it over with a compo-
sition of loose earth and pulverised cowdung. Then
the leeches should be taken out of their receptacles
and sprinkled over with water saturated with mustard
seed and pasted turmeric. Then for a moment they
should be kept in a basin full of water, and after they
have regained their natural -sivacity and freshness, they
should be applied to the affected part. Their bodies
should be covered with a piece of thin and wet linen,
or with a piece of white cotton. The affected part
should be sprinkled over with drops of milk or
blood, or slight incisions should be made into it in the
event of their refusing to stick to the desired spot.
Other fresh leeches should be applied even wdien the
preceding measures should prove ineffectual. That the
leeches have taken to the affected part may be inferred
from the mouths of the leeches assuming the shape
of a horse-shoe, and the raised and, arched position
of their necks after they had become attached to
the seat of the disease. While sucking, the leeches
should be covered with a piece of wet linen and
should be constantly sprinkled over with cold water.

A sensation of itching and of a drawing pain at the
seat of the application would give rise to the pre-

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. f Cinp. xni.

104

sumption that fresh blood was being sucked, and the
leeches should be forthwith removed/

Leeches refusing to fall off even after the production
of the desired effect, or sticking to the affected part out
of their fondness for the smell of blood, should be
sprinkled with the dust of powdered Saindha\’a (rock
salt.)

After falling off, the leeches should be dusted
over vith rice powder and their mouths should be
lubricated with a composition of oil and common salt.
Then they should be caught by the tail-end vuth the
thumb and the forefinger of the left hand and their
backs should be gently rubbed with the same fingers of
the right hand from tail upward to the mouth with a
A-iew to make them vomit or eject the full quantity of
blood they had sucked from the seat of the disease.
The process should be continued until they manifest
the fullest sjmiptoms of disgorging. Leeches that,
had vomited the entire quantity of blood sucked
as above, would briskly move about in quest of
food if placed in water, while the contrary’’ should be
inferred from their Ijdng dull and inert. These
should be made to disgorge again. Leeches not
made to emit the entire quantity of the sucked

The leeches, though a blissfal dispensation of Nature in themselves,
instinctively draw off the vitiated blood from a diseased part, attacking the
healthy vital fluid (red blood) when the former has been completely tapped
or socked.

Chap. XIII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

105

blood stand in danger of being attacked wth
an incurable disease peculiar to their genus, and
which is kno\\Ti as Indramada. The leeches should
then be put into a new pitcher, and treated as before
laid down, after the)'- had fully emitted the sucked blood.

An ulcer incidental to an application of leeches
should be rubbed wth honey or washed wth sprays
of cold water, or bound up with an astringent (kashaya)
sweet and cooling plaster, according to the quantity of
blood removed from the part.'

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject The physician who is fully conversant wth
the habitat, mode of catching, preservation and appli-
cation of leeches, can well aspire to cure the diseases
which )neld to them or in which their use is indicated.

* In case of foil and proper bleeding (Voga) the ulcer should be
rubbed with clarified butter technically known as the Shatadhautam (lit:
hundred times washed) Ghritam (clarified butter), or a piece of cotton,
soaked in the same substance, applied as a compress over the part.
The ulcer should be rubbed with honey in a case of insufficient bleeding,
while it should be s\-ashcd with a copious quantity of cold water if
excessive bleeding (Ati-Yoga) should set in. Similarly in a case marked by
the absence of any bleeding at all (Withyd-Yoga) a sour, sneet and cooling
plaster should be applied over the ulcer.

Thus ends the thirteenth Chapter of the Sutrasthinam in the Sushruta
Samhita which treats of Leeches and of how and which to use.

CHAPTER XIV.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
blood (Shonita-Varnaniya-madhyayam).

The food of a human being, which is usually
composed of the five fundamental material principles,
admits of being classified under four different heads
[as, drinks and edibles, etc.]. It has six different
tastes or is of two [cooling or heat-making] potencies,
or consists of eightfold properties, [u/b. hot, cool,
dr)-, expansive, slimy, mild, sharp, etc.] and of a
A-ariety of other active or efficacious virtues. The
food is fully digested m'th the help of the internal
heat and ultimately assimilated in the system, gi\dng
rise to Ijnnph chyle (Rasa) which is extremely thin
or attenuated in its consistency and which forms the
essence of the assimilated food.*

The l)Tnph chyle (Rasa), though running through the
whole organism, has its primar}’- seat in the heart, whence
it flows through the twenty-four vessels which branch
off from the latter (heart) to the remotest parts and '
extremities of the body. Of the aforesaid twent5’--four
vessels, ten are up-coursing, ten are dorvn-coursing,
and four have a lateral direction. The Rasa or the

• It is free from all sorts of impurities such as fecal matter, etc., and
permeates the minutest vessels and capillaries.

Chap. XIV. ] . SUTRASTHANAM.

107

lymph chyle, thus flowing out of the heart, constantly
soothes, maintains, and irrigates by transudation the
body, and further contributes to its growth, and supports
life o\ring to the dynamical effects of causes which
lie beyond the ken of human understanding. The nature
and course of this lymph ch5de, which runs through
the whole system, can be inferred from the growth,
attenuation, or other modified conditions of the body.

Now it may be asked, whether the Rasa, which
permeates the entire body and limbs, and which by
flowng through different chambers (risceras) of the
body is thus in constant contact with the e-xcreta and
other morbid humours, is of a cooling (Saumya) or
heat-making (Agneya) potency ?

The question may be answered by stating that, since
the Rasa or lymph chyle is a fluid, and possessed
of lubricating, vitalising, moistening, and nutritive (lit : —
supporting) properties, it must be included within the
class of Saumya (cooling) substances. The Rasa, though
a Saumya fluid, obtains its characteristic pigment
(R^gam) in its passage through the spleen and liver.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject;— The Rasa or the lymph chyle, coloured
through the effect of the healthy normal dyeing heat
of the body, obtains the name of blood. The Rasa
is transformed into the catamenial flow in women which

Io8 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XIV.

Catamenial blood, though originating from Rasa
which is of a cooling potency, is fierj' or heat-making
(Agneya) in its character ; and the fecundated or
impregnated OATim (Garbha) is both cooling and heat-
making in its properties on account of its partaking of
the nature of both the menstrual blood (o'vmm) and
semen which are respectively possessed of the two
preceding Aartues. Hence several authorities hold the
blood to be identical wth the life blood or with the
vital principle of a liadng organism, and being such, to be
the product of the five fundamental material principles
(P^nchabhautikam).

IVIetrical texts: — In blood the properties such
as, a raw or fleshy smell, fluidity, redness, lightness
and mobihty, which respectively characterise the
fundamental principles (of earth, water, fire, air, and
sk}') are to be found thus representing those specific
elements in its composition.

The chyle produces blood. From blood is formed
flesh. From flesh originates fat which gives rise to
bones. From bones originate marrow, which, in its
turn, germinates semen.

The Rasa which is originated from the digested or
assimilated food and drink pre-eminentl)'^ strengthens
all the fundamental principles of the bod}’’.

The Purusha or self-conscious personality is Chyle-

Kiv. )

SrTKASTnANAM

109

bom in iLs oiipin.nnd hence an imellif^cnt per^Dii should
carefully preserve his bodily Rasa 1 lymph chyle) by
ndopling a proper regitnen of diet and conduct.

The term I'asti is derived from the root "Ras", to
5:0, and the substance is so called from the fact of its
continually flowintj tliroueh and penneatinj: ever)’ vital
principle of an animated orj^nism.

Tire Rasa is successively transformed into each of the
six remaining fundamental principles of the borly, and
continues in the shape of c.-ioh for the period of three
thousand and fifteen kalis five days according to our
mcKlcm computation . Thus the Rasa is converted into
semen, or into the menstrual blood onim) in women,
in the course of a month.'

* The s-necetyve Uevetopment of the funilnmcnial nr root principles
of the iKKly follows 3 (liMinci oriler. Tlie cs-.cncc of the assiniil.iled food-
matter under the heat of rlipcstion qoes towards the fomuitinn of chyle,
and is ultimately transformed into it, its carrelcrl and effete residue Ircing
passcsl out of the organism in the shape of stool, etc. Tlie cliylc thus
produced is calletl the immature R-asa. or the Ras.a in it.s na-sccnl stage.
Subse<locntly it enters into the bodily principle of Rasa, becomes matured
l)y the natire heat of the latter, and is rcsolveil into three factors, or in
other seords, its cicrctcd matter is transformed into phlegirt, its thick
or condensed portion is transformed into and assimilated in the matured
Rasa of the body, whereas its subtile essence is meUnnorphosed into
blood. The blood, thas newly generated, is merged into tlfc fundamental
organic principle of blood ; and there by the heat of the latter
it is again resolved into three factors, err., il.s excreted portion is
transformed into bile, its thick or condensed portion is transformed
or assimilated into the fundamental organic principle of blood, and
its subtile essence is metamorphosed into flesh. The flesh, thus
newly formed, is merged into the fundamental organic principle of flesh,
and there, by the native heat of the latter, it is resolved into three

no

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XIV.

Authoritative verse on its com-
putation; — In the present work, as well as in other
works of recognised authorit}', a month is calculated to
consist of eighteen thousand and ninet)' Kal5s.

The said Rasa courses through the whole body in
invisible currents of zigzag shape, like the waves of sound,
or in (an upvivird direction) like flames of fire, or (in
a do'vs’nward direction like rivulets of water.

factors, fir, its excreted portion goes towards the formation of such
excreta as are foand to be deposited in the comers of the eyes and
inside the integuments of the prepace, or about the region of the ghuts penis,
its thick or condeased portion is transformed into the organic principle
of flesh and. its sabtile essence is metamorphosed into fat. The fat,
thus newly generated, enters into the organic principle of that atme, and
there, by tbe aative heat of the hitter, is resolved into three factors,
nr, its excreted p'rrtion is discharged throagh the pores of the skin in
drops of perspiration, its condensed portion is assimilated in the organic
principle of fat, and its subtile portion is metamorphosed into bone.
.Vgain the bone, in its nascent stage, enters into the organic principle
of bone, and there, by the inherent heat of that prindple, is resolved into
three factors, rir, its excreted portion goes towards the formation of hairs,
mastnehes, etc. its thick or condensed portion is assimilated into the
organic principle of bone, and its sahtile portion U metamorphosed into
marrow. The marrow, in its ruvseent state, enters into the organic
principle of that name ; and there matured under the native heat of
that principle, it is resolved into three factors, t i:, its excreted portion
contributes towards the formation of gelatinous matter deposited in the
comers of the etTes, and the oily secretions of the skin, its condensed portion
is assimilated into tbe organic principle of marrow, and its sahtile portion
is metamorphosed into semen. The semen again, in its nascent stage,
enters into the organic principle of that name and there matured under
its nauve heat is resolved into two factors, fir. thick and thin. The thick
portion is assimilated into the organic principle of semen, the thin one being
metamorphosed into (albaraen). Semen, like gold a thousand times purifled,
casts off no dregs. Hence certain anthorilies hold albumen (protoplasmic
matter) to be the eighth or the culminating principle of the Body.

Chap. Xrv', 3

- SUTRASTHA'NAM.

Ill

Now it' jnay be asked, since the Rasa is naturally
transformed into semen in the course of a month, what
is the use of administering medicine which has a
stimulating effect upon the organs of generation
f\''5jikaranam.) The answer is, that such medicines out
of their ovm specific potencies and w'rtue help the
speedy conversion of Rasa into semen and its profuse
emission [on the desired occasion] like purgati^'es aiding
the drastic ea'acuation of the bowels.

Again it may be asked, how is it, that semen
is not found in an infant ? Since perfume in a flower-
bud is imperceptible to the organ of smell you may
as well ask whether there is any perfume in it or not.
But what does not exist in a thing can not be evoked
in the subsequent course of its development. As the
perfume in a flower-bud lies latent in its early stage
of gro%\'th but becomes patent only with the growth
of its seed organs, so semen or catamenial blood
lies in a potential state in a male or a female
child, and appears with the growth of beards and
mustaches, or m'th the enlargement of the breasts,
uterus and vaginal canal and the appearance of pubic
hair.

The same Rasa, originated from the assimilated food,
seri'es onlj' to maintain the vitalit}' in the old and
spontaneously decayed subjects owing to an e.xhausted
state of the inner Antalising principle, natural to old age.

1 12 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tC^P- ^iv.

The abovesaid principles (of Rasa, blood etc.) are called
the root principles (Dhdtus), inasmuch as they maintain
the integrit}' of the human organism (and guard
against its speed)’’ dissolution). And since the strength
or weakness of the abovesaid bodily principles
absolutely depends upon the richness or poverty of blood,
we shall discourse on the latter condition of the blood.

The blood, ^^tiated by the deranged bodily wind
(Va}^!), becomes thin, frothy, transparent, quick- coursing,
and expansive, assumes a vermilion or black hue,
and is divested of its slimy character ; whereas vitiated
through a deranged condition of the bile (Pittam), it'
assumes a blue, yellow, green, or bro’vsTi colour, emits a
fishy smell, becomes thin in its consistenc}’’ and is shun
by flies and ants. Similarly, blood, vitiated by the
deranged phlegm (Kaphara), becomes cold, gloss)*^ and
thick, assumes a colour like that of the washings of
Gairika or that of a flesh tendon, takes time in secreting
or in running do\vn, and is marked by ap increase of its
slimy character. The blood, 'S’itiated through a concert-
ed derangement of the three bodily humours, is marked
by features peculiar to each of them, and assumes a
colour like that of Kanjika (sour gruel), and emits a
fetid smell. Similarly, the blood, ■vitiated through
the joint action of any two of the (beforesaid) bodity
humours, is characterised by features peculiar to each
of them.

Chip . xm]

SUTKASTHANAM.

The blood in its healthy and natiu^l state is possess-
ed of a \i%id red colour like that of an Indragopa
(Cochineal) insect, and is neither too thin nor too
transparent.*

Cases where blood-letting is pro-
hibited : — A person afflicted with an oedematous
swelh'ng extending all over the body should be deemed
unfit for bleeding. An intumescence occurring in a weak
and enfeebled patient owing to an excessive use of
acid food or in a person suffering from jaundice or laid
up with hasmorrhoids or abdominal dropsy, as well as
in an enceinte, or in a person suffering from Pulmonar)'
consumption (Shosha), should not be bled.

Blood-letting, with the help of a surgical instrument,
may be grouped under two distinct heads, according
as scarification (Prachchhanam) or venesection (Sira-
V5'-adhanam) is resorted to for the purpose. In such a
case the knife or the instrument (Shastramj should be
driven straight and speedily so as to make the incision
straight, narrow, unextended, and of equal and slight
depth throughout, (so as to reach only the surface
layer of the flesh and blood), and not to injxire in anj--
way the local veins, nen-es, joints, and other \ital parts.

Bleeding performed on a cloudy day or done with a

♦ Additional texts Later on we shall have occasion to speak of
the principles known as the life-blood (essential conditions of Wlalily—
Sk. Jiva-Shonita) and of the process of blood-Iclung.

15

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. [ Chap. Xiv

II4

WTong incision, or wth Ml exposure to cold and wind,
or performed on a patient not pre\*iously‘ diaphorised,
or on a patient wth an empty stomach, is attended
wth little or no outflow of blood owing to the thickened
condition of the blood.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — Blood-letting surgically performed on a fatigued
or exhausted subject, or on a person in a swoon,
or an}’A\'ay poisoned or intoxicated, or on a person
suffering from extreme constipation of the bowels accom-
panied by suppression of the flatus (Vd-jm) and urine, or
on a person of timid disposition, or on one overcome nnth
sleep, is marked by the absence of any outflow of blood.

The vitiated blood, failing to find out an outlet, gives
rise to itching, swelling, redness, burning, suppuration
and pain in the part (to which it is confined).
On the contrar}', blood-letting performed on the body
of a person excessively diaphorised or heated, or by
an ignorant or inexperienced surgeon, or with an
injudiciously deep incision, is attended wth haemorrhage,
nhich may be followed by such dreadM results as
Shirobhitdpa or Aiolent headache, blindness or loss of
sight (Timna ■, Adhimantham (ophthalmia), loss of ■sital
principles of the body (Dhatu-Kshaya), convulsions,
paraljsis (Ekdnga Vikara), Hemiplegia (Pakshagh£ta),
thirst, a burning sensation, hic-cough, cough, asthma,
jaundice and eveu death.

XIV. )

SrTK'.\STH.VN.\M.

115

Aulhorllallvc verses on the sub-
ject : — Thc’icAirc- ^liouUi he perfoniicd

im n iioi in an oxlrcnily hoi or cold season,

nciihcr on one who is too much heated or im-
properly diaphonVed (hefore the act). The jnilient
should be yiven j^rnol .Yavaen) before the operation.
A spontaneous cessation of red flow would indicate
that there has been a free discharge of blood.

.•\n act of complete and sticcessful blood-letlinp; is
followed by a feeling of lightness and alleviation of pain
in the aflected part, by an abatement of the dise.asc,
and a general sense of checrfnlnes.s.

person, accustomed to blood letting, enjoys a kind
of immunity from all types of skin diseases, sarcomata,
aneurism, a-dema, and diseases brought about by a
vitiated condition of the blood such as, Ovarian tumour,
Carbuncle, Erysipelas, etc.

A plaster composed of lil.l, Shitashiva, Kustha,
Tagara, Pdihd, Ag.-iradluima, Bhadraddnt, Vidanga,
Chitraka, Trikatus, Ankura, Haridrd, Arka, .and Nakta-
mala, or three, or four, or as many of them as
are available, pasted together and soaked in mustard oil
saturated with common salt, should be rubbed over
the mouth of the incision. By this means the blood wll
fully come out. In a case of excessive flow or haem-
orrhage, the mouth of the incision should be gently rubbed
with a composition consisting of the powders of Lodhra,

136

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

f Chap. XIV.

Prij’angu, ^ladhuka, Pattanga, Gairika, Sarjarasa,
RasanjaTia, Sh^lmali floAvers, Shankha, Shukti, Masha,
Ya^■a and Godhuma, and firmly pressed \vith the tips of
the fingers. As an alternative, the mouth of the incision
should he gently rubbed with the powdered barks of
S^la, Saija, Arjuna, Ariraeda, Mesha-shringi, and
Dhanvana, or the edges of the wound should be lightly
dusted with the burnt ashes of a sillc cord (a piece of silk
rolled up in the form of a cord;^ and fimilv pressed
with the tips of the fingers ; or the mouth of the
wound should be lightly touched -.^-ith the powders of
Lakshd and Samudra-phena, and its edges should be
similarly pressed together as above. Then the wound
should be firmly tied up (with a, piece of silk or
linen; plastered over with a paste of the substances
mentioned in connection with the bandaging of ulcers
lA'rana). The patient should be kept in a cool
room, covered over with a wet sheet and constantly
soothed with sprays of cold water. A medicinal plaster
of a coohng ^^rtue and a course of cooling diet should be
prescribed for him. The wound should be cauterised
with fire or an alkali, or the vein should be again
opened at a point a little below the seat of the
first incision in case where the abovesaid measures
should have failed to check the flow of blood. The
'patient should be made to drink a decoction compound of
drugs of the Kakolyidi group, sv\-eetened with sugar or
honey ; and his ordinary drink should consist of the

SIV .

sri'KASTIlANAM.

] I '

blood of Uic Mna (ir coniinoii dcvr, or of a sheep, hare,
or biifl'.do. A dicl ('t»inpirsed of boiled rice, soaked
in or .siUiratcd with clarified buller, should be pros-
cribed. and Ihe complications should be subdued
accordiu" to the nature of the deranged bodily
humours respectively involved therein.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject:- ICxccssive hlocHl-letting is followed by imi)aired
appetite and an agitated condition of the vital V.lyu
owing to the loss of the fundamental principles of the
body, and, accordingly, to recoup the health of the
the patient a course of dicl should be ])reseribed
which is light and not excessively hcal-making, and
wliicb contains a fair amount of cniollicnl and bloorl-
making matter, and is marked by little or no acid taste.

The four measures indicated for the stoppage of
bleeding arc known ; as the Sandh.lnam (process
by contracting the affected part), the Skandanam
(thickening or congealing the local blood), the
Pachanani (process of setting up suppuration in the
wound) and the Dahanam (process of cauterisation).

Drugs of astringent tastes are possessed of the
property of bringing about an adhesion (contraction) of
the wound. Cooling measures such as, applications of
ice etc, tend to thicken the local blood ; alkalis and
alkaline preparations produce suppuration in such a

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Owa. XH'-

vrotmd or ulcer, vrhereas cauterisation has the property*
of contracting a vein.

Remedies and appliances possessed of the \'iTtue of
bringing about an adhesion of such a wound should be
used where applications for thickening or congeahng
the local blood would fail ; whereas the suppurating
measures should be adopted in the event of the
former (Sandhanam) proring ineffectual. With any of the
three of these preceding measures a ph\’sician should try
to check the outflow of blood incidental to an operation
of bleeding, and lastly the process of cairterisation
should be resorted to in the event of the preceding
ones haring proved imavailing, as it is pTe-eminentl}'
the best means of checking the bleeding.

The least residue of the vitiated blood continuing
in the affected part may not aggravate the disease
but prevent its perfect healing. In such a case bleed-
ing should not be again resorted to, but the derang-
ed residue should be subdued by means of paciftnng or
absorbing remedies.

Blood is the origin of the body. It is blood that
maintains vitality. Blood is life. Hence it should be
preserved with the greatest care.

The Vayu of a person who has been bled, and
which has been aggravated by constant cold applications

rvip Niv. ■<

SrTKASTHANAM.

llf)

nuy jiivc ri^c U\ a swelling of the incised part
characterised by n piercing pain, which should be
lre;Ucd with an unguent of tepid clarified butler.

Tl.u. cr.-U ihc f (.'.'-.iinrj Ilf tl;c Snlf.i'-’.iLin.^in III llii: SiiUiruCi

S.ini!.i!.i n!iic!i Iic.ilv (.f liltvfl.

CHAPTER XV.

Now we shall describe the Chapter which
treats of development and non-development of the
humoral constituents of the body and excrements

(Dosha-Dhartu-IVIala-Kshaya-Vriddhi-

Vijnaniya-madhya^am).

Since the human body is constituted of humours,
(Doshas), excretions (Mala', and the fundamental princi-
ples (DhatuS; of blood, marrow, etc., hear me discourse
on the features which are peculiar to each of them.

The Varyu. — The imparting of motion to the
bod}'^ (Praspandanani), the canydng of the sensations of
the respective sense organs (Udvahanam;, the passing
dovm of food to its proper receptacles (Puranam), the
separation of excretions from the assimilated food matter
(Viveka;, and the retention and evacuation of urine and
semen, etc. (Dharanam should be ascribed to the
functions of the five kinds’' of Vajui (neive force)
which support the body.

The Pittam. — Pigmentations or colouring
(fiagaknt), the digestion of food and metabolism of
tissues (Paktikrit), the vitalisation and nutrition of the
protaplasmic cells (Ojaknt), the origination and preser-

* They are called Pr^na, Uddna, Samfina, Vydna and Apdna.

<>>r- XV. 1

Sl’TK'.A.STllA'X.A.M.

121

valinn nf (Teja-Kril), Uic pcniihialion of heat

ajul ninintenanre of the lcm))cmi»re of tlic bcnly (Ushnia-
Krit), aiJtl the uripinalion of the faculty of intellection
(Mcdhd'Krit) ^houhl be rcpanled as the functions of
the five kinds* of Pittam. which coniribvile to the
preservation ol the body ihronph its ihennogcnetic
potency Apni-Kannub

The Shlcshmar. — The function of the five
kinds'! of Shleslnn.I is to lubricate the interior of tlic
joints (Sandhi-Samshlcshanam) to contribute to the
ploss of the luKly (Suchanain), to aid in the fonnation
of healthy granules in sores (Ropanara), to add to the
size of the body (Pnranam’, to build fresh tissues
Vrimhanam), to impart a pleasant or soothing sensation
to tlic body tTarpanam), to increase its strength
'Valakrit', and to give finnness to the limbs fSthairya-
krit), thereby contributing to the welfare of the body
by supplying it with its watery element.

The Rasii or the lymph chyle exercises a
soothing eJTect upon the entire organism and tends

* They ate nametl as Uanjakn. I’Ach.ako, Sfidliak.a (McdhSkril and
Ojakrit), Alochaka and Wiriijaka.

1 They are known ns Shleslmmk.a, Kledaka, t'odhaka, Tnrpako,
Awhmvaka.

;V. A— Titc Vfiyu, PiUam. and Shleghm5, (Kaphhsm), though ordinarily
translated as wind, bile and phlegm, differ in their meaning from their
usual English synonyms. We rcscrs'c the treatment of these subjects for
a separate place in another part of the book when we shall haw
occasion to deal with the essentials of Ayurvedic rbysiologj— Tr.

l6

122

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. [ Chap. XV.

to contribute to the increased formation of blood.
The blood, in its turn, increases the healthful glow
of the complexion, leads to the increased ' formation of
flesh and muscles and maintains \'itality in .the organism.
The flesh contributes ton'ards the stoutness or rotundity
of the limbs and occasions the formation of fatty
matter in the system. The fat gives rise to the
glossiness (formation of oily or albuminous matter) of
the body and primarily contributes towards the firm-
ness and grovlh of the bones. The bones, in their
turn, support the body, and contribute to the formation
of marrow. The marrow contributes towards the for-
mation and increase of semen, and fills in the internal
carities of the bones, and forms the chief source of
strength, amorous feelings and hilarit5^ The semen gives
rise to ■valour and courageousness, makes a man amor-
ously disposed towards the female sex, increases his
strength and amativeness, is the sole impregnating
principle in the male organism, and is possessed of the
virtue of being quickl}* emitted.

The excreta or the fecal matters of a man are in-
dispensably necessar}' for the preservation of the body-
They contain the ■wind and digestion (^beiug primaril}'
connected ■ftith the movements of the bodily Vajm and
the feeling of hunger). The urine fills the receptacle of
the bladder, and is possessed of the property of ■washing
or draining off the waste or refuse matter of the organism ;
whereas perspiration tends to moisten the skin.

Nv. j

SUTRASTILYNAM.

123

The Artnvani (nieiii^lnial DiomI; is endued with the
same pruperticp a? its arterial namesake, and is one of the
essential factors in a woman which makes Impregnation
possible. 'J'hc latus or imprepnalcd matter (Garbha)
senes to make patent the fcjilnrcs characteristic of
pregnancy. The breast-milk in its turn tends to
bring about an e.vpansion of the mammaj (of a
woman , and jnaintains the life of her child (b)'
su])plying it with the ncccssarj* and nutritive element
of food). These V;iyu, etc. should be duly prcscn'cd
in their normal condition.

Now we shall describe the symptoms which
attend the loss or waste of any of the foregoing
principles of the body.*

The loss of the bodily Viiyu 'ncn-c-force) is followed
bv a slate of latiguor, shortness of speech, uneasiness
or absence of hilarity, and loss of consciousness. The
loss of rPittam) is jnarked by a dulness of comple.vion,
diminution of the bodily heat and an impaired state
of internal fire (digestive heat). The loss of phlegm
(Kapham) is marked by dr^mess, a sensation of internal
burning, a feeling of emptiness in the stomach and other

* Such a Ids’! or perceptible clctcrioralion of any of them should I)e
ascribed to the use of excessive cleansing or cathartic (Samshodhanam) and
pacifying (Samshamanam) measures, or to a repression of the natural
orgings of the Ixxiy, or to a course of violent or overfatlguing physical
exercise, or to amorous excesses, or to the use of unwholesome and
unsuitable food, or tQ,gnef, etc.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chip. XV.

124

cavities or chanibers of the body, looseness of -the joints
(a feeling as if the joints were all broken), thirst, vreak-
and insomnia. In such cases the medical treatment
should Consist of remedial agents which are capable
of directly contributing to the grovdh or formation
of the humour so lost or deteriorated.

Similarl)' the loss of l3miph chyle is marked by
pain about the region of the heart, Angina Pectoris,
with palpitation of the heart, a sensation of
emptiness or gone-feeling in the viscus, and thirst.
The loss of blood is attended vnth such symptoms as
roughness of the skin, and a craving for acid food
or drink. The patient longs to be in a cool place
and asks for cool things, and the veins become loose
and flabby. The loss of flesh is marked by emaciation
of the buttocks, cheeks, lips, thighs, breasts, annpits,*
neck, and the calves of the legs. The arteries seem
loose and flabby, and the body seems to be diy^ and
inert, accompanied by an aching or gnawing pain
in its members. The loss of fat is followed by such
S}Tnptoms as the enlargement of the spleen, a sense of
emptiness in the joints, and a peculiar diymess of the
skin and a cra\nng for cold and emollient meat. The
degeneration of the bones is marked by an aching pain
in the bones and bone-joints, a wasting of teeth and
gums, and a general drjmess of the body. Similarly,

* The nrmpits loot thin, narrow and contracted.

XV. 1

SUTHASTHA'NAM.

125

the loss or wcietc of marrow is cliaraclcriscd by the for-
nialioji of a lesser qunnlity of semen, aebiner pain in the
bone? ami breaking paiji in the bone joints which have
become marrowless. The loss or waste of somcn is mark-
ed by ]iain in the jienis and the testes, and by incapacity
forfcvtial iiUercourse. In such eases the emission of semen
but rarely happens, and is then perceptibly deficient in its
quantity, the emitted matter consistinp of a small quantity
of semen marked with shreds of blooil. The medical treat-
ment under the prcccdinp circumstances should consist
of remedies of such medicinal virtues as are found to
directly and immediately contribute to the formation
of the bodily jirinciplc (thus wasted or lost).

The loss absence. Buppression or scanty forma-
tion of fecal matter is attended with a sensation
of pain at the sides and the repion of the heart,
and the upward coursinp of (the incarcerated 1 wind
or flatus, accompanied with a rumblinp sound
about the region of the liver and the intestines.
Similarly, the loss, absence or scanty formation) of
urine is marked by an aching pain in the bladder, causing
it dribble or to come out in thin and scanty jets. Here,
as in the foregoing instances, the remedial agents
should consist of drugs which directly contribute to
the formation of urine. Similarly the waste, absence or
scanty formation of perspiration is followed by such
sjTnptoms as numbness about the pores of the hair, and

126

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Ch:ip. XV.

dimness of the epidermis (skin\ The sense of toucli is
perceptibly affected, and perspiration is entirely stopped.
The medical treatment in such a case consists in
the application of medicated unguents, lubrications,
diaphoretics, and adoption of measures (that tend to
produce a copious perspiration"'.

In the case of loss or waste of the catamenial
flow, the menses do not appear at the appointed
time or are scanty. The vagina seems stuffed and
painful. The medical treatment in such cases consists in
the adoption of alterative or cleansing measures, and in
the administration of drugs of a heat-making {Agneyal
potency or \'irtue.

The loss or waste of breast-milk is characterised by
a shrunken condition of the mammie, and suppression or
scanty secretion of the fluid. The medical treatment
in such cases lies in the administration of drugs which
generate Kapham.

The atrophy or wasting of the foetus in the womb
(during the period of gestation, is marked by the
absence of any movement in the uterus and the non-
distended condition of the sides or walls of the abdomen.
The treatment consists in the application of Kshira
Vastis enemas of medicated milk into the region of the
uterus) in the eighth month of gestation, and prescribing
courses of emollient fare for the patient 'mother)*

* Several e<JJtiQns tend invigorating diets, egg, etc.

Chap. XV. 1

SUTRASTHj^NAM.

i27

Now we shall descaibe the s)’'mptoms which mark
the excess (excessive accumulation in the body) of any
of the fundamental humours, ])rinciples and excrements
of the body.

The quantities of these humours, principles and
secretion, are abnormal^ increased through the use of
substances that primarily contribute to their formation
in the organism.*

An excess of Vayn in the body is marked by such
symptoms as roughness of the skin, t emaciation of the
body, darkness of complexion (lit ; blackness of hue), a
little tremor or trembling of the limbs, longing for
heat, or for hot things, insomnia, thickness or increased
consistencj’’ of the fecal matter and decrease of bodily
strength. (Similarly, an abnormal) increase of Pittam
is characterised b)' a sallow complexion or a
yellowish colour of the skin, a general burning sensation
in the body as well as insomnia, a craving for cold
contacts and cooling things, diminution of strength, •
weakness of the sense organs, fits of fainting and
yellor\mess of the conjunctivse, stool and urine.

An excess of Kapham in the body is marked
by such symptoms, as the whiteness, coldness and
nurhbness of the body, hearnness of the limbs, a

‘ Several Edilions read it xs an addilional lexl.

1 Several Edilions read roughness of speech.

128

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Ctei-. XV.

sense of drowsiness and lanj^^or, somnolence, and a
feeling of looseness of the bone-joints.

Similarly, an increased germination of lymph chyle
(Rasa) in the body is manifest by such characteristics
as, nausea, water-brash, and an increased flow of salivary-
secretion. A plethora of blood in the system gives a
reddish glow to the complexion and the white of the
eyes, and imparts fullness to the veins. .A^n increase of
flesh is marked by the rotundity and fullness of the
buttocks and the lips, as well as of the penis, arms, and
the thighs, and an increased heax-iness of the whole body.
An excess of fat in the body- imparts an oily gloss to the
skin. The sides of the abdomen are increased in bulk,
and the body emits a fetid smell, and the person is
assailed with cough and dyspnoea. An excessive forma-
tion of hone (abnormal ossiOcation is attended with such
symptoms as the cutting of additional teeth and the
abnormal development of any of the bone- structures. An
excessive formation of marrow gives rise to a heariness
" of the eyes and to the members of the body.

An excess of semen in the body is marked by an ex-
cessive flow of that fliud and gives rise to the formation
of gravels (concretions) in the bladder which are knon-n
as Shukr^shmari. An abnormal increase in the forma-
tion of fecal matter is attended -with distension of the
abdomen and colic pains in the loins and the Intestines.
An excessive formation of urine is manifest by constant

Cliap. XV.

SUTRASTHA’NA^.1.

129

urging for micturition and distension of 'the' bladderj
attended by a kind of gnawing of aching pain.

Similarly, an increased secretion of perspiration is
attended with an itching of the skin which emits a bad
odour. An excess in the quantity of catamenial blood'
gives rise to an aching of the limbs and an excessive flow.
So also an excess in the quantity of the breast-milk is
attended vn'th frequent secretions of that fluid, and with
inflammation and pain in the mammae. Aji excessive
growth of the faetus in the uterus tends to abnormal!)'-
swell the region of the abdomen, and is accompanied
by anasarca, or dropsy, of the lower extremities
(phlegmasia dolens;.

These abnormal excesses of the aforesaid humours
and principles, etc, of the body should be checked or
remedied with corrective (cleansing) or pacifying
measures as would be indicated by their respective
natures, so as not to reduce them to a smaller quantity
than that in which they are found in the nonnal and
healtli)' state of a body.

Metrical text ; — An increased quantit}- of a
bodily principle gives rise to a similar increase in the
quantity of one immediatefy succeeding it in the
order of enumeration as stated above ; aud hence an

An abnormal flow (cnch to .stimuhtc the voluptuous .scns-nlion of .n
wonuin to n considerable e.vtcnl, is followed by n sense of rcaclion;irj-
wcahncss. It emits n fetid smell and orifiinates ovarian tumours. .

17

130

tHE StJSHRijTA SAMMITA. [ Chtip. XV.

increase in any of the fundamental principles of the
body should be checked and reduced to its normal
quantity.

Now we shall describe the characteristic features
of the strength'giAing principles of the body, as well
as the s5'mptoms that mark their loss or waste. The
quintessence of all the fundamental principles of
the body, starting with Ijunph chyle and ending with
semen, is called the Ojas, which is identical with what
is termed “vital power.” Tliis Anew of oneness of
\-itality with protoplasmic albumen has been adopted
in the present work'

This Ojas (albumen) or strength-giving principle
sen'es to impart a firm integrity to the flesh (and the
muscles), exercises unbounded control over all acts of
A-itality, improves the nmice and complexion, and
helps both the external toperativel and the internal
rintellectual) sense organs, in duly perfonning their
natural functions.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject; — Ojas (albumen being of a white colour belongs
to the class of Somdtmakam (cooling) substances.

* The Sanskrit term “Ojas" has a variety of meanings. Primarily
it means protoplasmic matter as found in cells (Vindus). Secondarily
it means albumen ns we shall describe later on in the chapters on
etiology and therapeutics of Prameba. Several authorities hold a contrary
view stating that Ojas {albumen) forms only one of the essentials of
vitality and that the two are bj’ no means identical.

Clni'. \V. •

SrT!?ASTUAN.\NJ.

131

%

It is cmilint:, ()lc;i ,'inons, and firm (Stliira), contriljiilos to
the fonualioii atul :n‘f>\vth of flesh, maintains its inlejjrity
or holds it finn.and is mobile t»r capable of movinpabont
from one place to another within the orpanism. *
It is further soft and shiny, and is possessed of the most
cflicacioiis virtne and should be reparded as the most
important clement (seat) of vitality. 'I'he whole hotly
with its limbs and members is j>enneatcd with Ojas,
and a loss or diminution in its n.atnral tpiantity le.ads
to the pradvial emaciation (and ultimate dissolution) of
orpanism.

A blow, a persistent wastinp disease, anper, prief,
cares and anxieties, fatigue and hunper, aic the causes to
which should be ascribed the wastinp or disapjjearance
of this strcnpth'pivinp jirinciplc (albumen) of the body.
The bodil)' albumen, through the agency of the above-
said causes, is wasted through the channels carrj'ing the
diflerent fundamental principles of the body. Albumen is
transformed into strength which radiates from the heart.

A deranged or vitiated albumen (Ojas) is characterised
firstly by its dislodgment from its proper seat or locality
(Visransha), secondly, by a change or modification of its
native virtues in contact with the deranged humours
or disordered organs (Vyapad) and thiidly, by wasting
awaj' (Kshaya\

* Several editions read Knsam, meaning it to be possessed of a sweet

taste.

132

THE SUSHKVTA SA.\iHrrA. [Ou,.. XV.

The first of the preccdintj properties dislotlgmcnt)
ghes rise to such syuiplonis as looseness of the
bone-joints, numbness of the limbs, disloclgment of
the deranged humours from their respective recep-
tacles and suppression of the ibodily and intellectual)
functions. To the second of the foregoing propcrtic.=:,
(change or modification of its natural virtue through
contact wth the deranged bodily humours etc.) should be
ascribed such symptoms, as numbness and heaviness of
the limbs, dropsy due to the action of the deranged
bodily V^yu, discoloured or changed comple.vion, feeling
of malaise, drowsiness and somnolence. The lliird pro-
perty of the deranged albumen, loss or wasting), brings
on fits of fainting, loss of flesh, stupor, delirium and
ultimately death.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject; — A deranged state of albumen is marked
b}' the three abovesaid properties of dislodgment
from its proper seat (Visransha) ; by a change of its
natural ^-irtues through contamination (I'yapad and
by wasting ( Kshaya . The first of these properties
(nsransha) is characterised br' looseness of the joints,
by an inert state of the body, by a sense of fatigue,
by a dislodgment of the deranged humours from their
natural seats, and by a suppression of the bodilv and
intellectual fimetions. Xumbness and hearnness of
the limbs, malaise, a discoloured comple.vion, drowsiness,

Chnp. XV. j

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

133

somnolence and dropsical swelling brought about by
a deranged state ot the bodily V;tyu, should be
considered as natural consequences of the Vj^Apad
^change of the natural virtues of albumen through
contamination). The loss or waste of Ojah (albumen) is
marked by such symptoms as fits ' of fainting,
emaciation of the bod)’’, bewilderment and distraction
of the mind, delirium and loss of consciousness and
ultimately death.

The medical treatment in cases of dislodgment or
flowing out external secretion) of albumen from its
natural seat (Visransha), as well as in the event of it
becoming contaminated by the vitiated principles of
the body, should consist in improving its quantity by
elixirs and remedies possessed of rejuvenating properties,
tending to increase the quantity of such fluid (albumen)
in the body. A patient who has lost all consciousness
lowing to an excessive loss or waste of albumen)
should be given up by a physician ^as incurable).

The oil)'^ or albuminous matter found within
the components of the other fundamental principles
(Dhltu) of the body as metabolised by the
internal heat and regularlj* metamorphosed into
the succeeding ones.) should be grouped under
the- head of tier}' or thermogenetic (Agneya)
substances. This fatt)* matter (Vas4) predominates in
the female. organism and produces its peculiar softness.

134

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. ( Clnp. XV.

beauty and pleasing shape, causes the /growth of scanty
but soft hair on its surface. It strengthens the eyesight
and increases the energ}'^ of the body, improves its
power of digestion and heightens its glow and com-
plexion. Fat is deranged by such acts as, an abuse of
astringent, bitter, cold, parchifying or Vistambhi
(indigestible food which remains stuffed in the
stomach) substances, a voluntaiy repression of Uie natural
urging for evacutions of the body, by excessive sexual in-
dulgence, and fatiguing physical exercise, or by the
draining action of any particular disease.

An instance of dislodgment of fat from its proper seat
or locality is attended by such symptoms as roughness
of the skin, loss of the natural healthful glow of the body
and a breaking or an aching pain in the limbs. -Anaimia
- or.a lyadual emaciation of the body, impaired digestive
function and"^staTtting or domiward course of the
deranged humours, mark the case where the bodily fat has
undergone a change in its natural properties through any
foul contamination. A case of loss or waste of the bodily
fat is marked by such symptoms as, impaired digestive
function, didness of sight, decay of strength and aggra-
vation of the bodily Vayu, and alwa3^s ends in death.

The medical treatment in the latter case (loss of fat)
should consist in the administration of oily or emollient
drinks, use of medicated unguents or lubrications,
Pradeha ("plasters of oleaginous substances) and

«■' ir- ^

sn’K’Asrn.vNW.M.

'35

r.nn'Au’k.i (\va;;lu-v) nml a iliVt cdnipnVinj: lipht, coolinp
ami u t')!'Conl;ctI articK"- k! (<»k1.

mctrlca.1 texts : — A pcr.'-on siiUciiiii^ from
a <>l atiy of tiu* riumlitiiciU Iniinoiirs or

imuIaiTic-nlal priti<’iplc>^ or c.vcrcim.'iUh of the hrxiy,

well as (MIC Miirciiii!: Irom loss of Ojah albnincn'
nnUitally i iavcs for driiil; and foml tiial lend lo con-
IrihiiU’ dinclly lo ihe I'onnalion of ilic mailer (or IxMlily
prin( i]>le so losl or wasled. Conversely, llie particular
fotn! or flrinlc lonf,'ed for by a person snfTbnn;:^
from n loss or waste of any of the abovesiiid fluids or
principles, sliould be looked npon as possessed of
a curative virtue in that particular case. Such a
person devoid of consciousness and divested of his
bodily and intellectual functions llirou;,'!) a deranged
stale of the l)CKlily ^‘.•^yu nene-force) and e.vtremcly
weak and enfeebled owing to the loss of the vital fluid
should be regarded as past all cure.

Etiology of Obesity Obesity or loss of
flesh (Karsha) should be ascribed to changes in the condi-
tion of the lymph chyle. The Ijanph chyle derived from
the assimilated food of a person, who is habituated to a
course of diet which tends to promote the quantity of
the bodily Kapham or is in the habit of pampering his
belly even when a previous meal has not been thoroughly
digested, or who is addicted to a habit of sleeping in the
day, or leading a sedentarj’^ life, or is averse to taking

f 36 The SliSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XV.

any sort of ph}"sical exercise, continues in an immature
state and is transformed into a serum of sweet taste which
moves about m’thin the body, engendering the fomiation
of fat which produces excessive stoutness. A person
aflhcted with obesitj" develops such s}’^mptoms as short-
ness of breath, thirst, ravenous appetite, excessive sleepi-
ness, perspiration, fetid odours in the bod)', wheezing
sound in the throat during sleep or sudden suspension of
breath, inert feeling in the limbs, dulness or heaviness
of the body, and indistinctness of speech. Owing to
the softness of fat, a fatty person is unntted for eveiy
kind of work. Capacity for sexual intercourse is dimi-
nished tin such a one), owing to the obstruction of the
passage of semen by phlegm and fatty deposits ;
and the growth of the rest of the root-principles
of the body such as, l)’mph chyle, albumen, semen,
etc., is considerably arrested owing to the deposit
of fatty matter within the channels of the internal
passages of the body, thus seriously affecting his bodily
strength. .\n obese or excessively corpulent person is
likely to be afilicted ndth any of the following diseases
such as, vu-ethral discharges, eruptions, boils, carbuncles,
fever, fistula in ano, or n-ith any of the diseases which
are caused by a deranged state of the bodily Vi)ni ;
and such attacks are invariably , found to terminate
in death. Any disease in such a person is apt to develop
into one of a wolent and dangerous t)'pe owing to the
obstruction of the internal channels with deposits of fat.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. >:v.

138

fimctions of ^itality, and is also incapable of enduring
thirst or hunger. The bodily strength suffers a gradual
diminution, and diseases, incidental to a deranged slate
of the bodily Vayu, make their appearance, and the
patient has to meet his doom from an)' of the following
diseases as asthma, cough, Shosha (phthisis), enlarged
spleen or liver, abdominal dropsy, dyspepsia, abdominal
glands and haemoptysis. An)' disease appearing in such
a patient develops into one of a violent t)’pe owing to
the loss or diminished condition of the bodily strength
or protoplasm (Prtoa).

Contrarily, conditions or factors which produce
obesity should be avoided. A case of patent obesity
should be checked \vith a medicated compound, con-
sisting of such drugs as, Payasya, Ashvagandha, Vidiri,
Viddrigandha, ShaUvari, VaH, Ativala, N^gavalS and such
other drugs of sweet taste. Diets consisting of thickened
milk, clarified butter, curd, meat, boiled Shall rice,
Yasthika, wheat, barley, etc., should be prescribed in the
case ; and sleep in the day, sexual indulgence, physical
exercise, etc., should be prohibited. Enematas of nutri-
tive substances can be likewise given with advantage.

On the other hand, the l)'mph chyle of a man, who
partakes of food belonging to both the abovesaid classes,
courses through his organism and strengthens the root-
principles of his body, thus giving a middling or health-
ful rotimdity to his limbs owing to its properties being

Clinp. XV. ’

SUTR.XSTH/V.N’.AM.

139

equipoised. A man possessed of such a body is capable
of all kinds of work and movcnicnt. He can fairly stand
the inclemencies of u'calbcr and the keenness of hunger
and thirst, and will cpiin in strength and cnerg)'. Care
should be always taken to have such a well equipped
body of moderate si^ie.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — Excessively corpulent and excessively lean
persons arc alike condcmnable. A body which is
neither too stout nor too lean, but strikes the mean
as regards plumpness, is the best. A lean frame
should have the preference to a stout one. The enraged
or aggravated bodily humours drj’ up the fundamental
principles of the body, such as the lymph chyle etc., just
in the same way as a well-kindled fire will evaporate
the water contained in a basin placed over it. Since
'the temperament, constitution, size and the fundamental
principles of) the body varj-- in different individuals ;
^and since the body, in its turn, undergoes such
gradual transformations as infancy, youth and old
age), and changes its state each moment, it is absolutely
impossible to lay dowm the exact quantity of the
deranged humours, excrements and fundamental
principles (of lymph chyle, blood, semen, albiunen,
etc.) that way be found in the human organism.
Hence it is necessary for a physidan to ascertain their
state of equilibrium (their continuance in normal state and

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XV.

140

quantity) at any particular time ; and which should be
pronounced only in cases where signs of perfect health
would be ^^sible. An experienced physician would
naturally draw a contraTj-^ inference from the improper
functions of the organs in an indi-sndual. A person
with an uniformly healthy digestion, and whose bodil}’^
humours are in a state of equilibrium, and in whom
the fundamental \’ital fluids course in their normal
state and quantity, accompanied by the normal processes
of secretion, organic function, and intellection, is said
to be a healthy person.

An intelligent physician should preserve the state
of health, in a healthy individual, while he should
increase or decrease the quantity of the bodily humours,
vital fluids, or excrements in a sick patient according
to the exigencies of the case until his health is perfectly
restored.

Thus ends the fifteenth Oiapter of the SutmsthSn.am in the Sushruta
Samhitfi which treats of the Development and Non^development of the
humoral constituents Of the l)odv.

CHAPTER XVI.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of the
piercing and bandaging of the lobules of ears (Karna-
Vyadha-Vandha-Vidhlmadhyaym).

The lobules of the ears of an infant are usually pierced
through for protecting it (from the evil influences of
malignant stars and spirits) and for the purposes of
ornamentation as well. The piercing should be performed
on a day of bright fortnight marked by the auspicious
lunar and astral combinations, and in the sixth or the
seventh month of the year reckoned from its beginning
(BhAdra), The cliild should be placed on the lap of its
nurse, and benedictions should be pronounced over it.
Then having soothed it and lured it wnth toys and
playthings, the physician should draw down with his
left hand the lobules of its ears with a view to detect,
wnth the help of the reflected sun-light, (the closed up)
apertures that are naturally found to exist in those
localities. Then he should pierce them straight through
wnth a needle held in his right hand, or wnth an awl (Ar5),
or wn'th a thick needle where the appendages would
be found to be too thick. The lobule of the right ear
should be first pierced and then the left in the case of a
male child, w'hile the contrarjf should be the procedure in
the case of a female. Plugs of cotton-lint should be then
inserted into the holes of the pricked ear-lobules, which

142

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, [ Chap. XVI.

should be lubricated or rubbed with any unboiled oil.
A copious bleeding attended with pain would indicate
that the needle has passed through a place other than
the natural i^and closed up) fissme described above ;
whereas the absence of anj* serious after-effect would
give rise to the presumption that the piercing has been
done through the right spot. Anj-’ of the local veins
incidentally injured by an ignorant, bungling surgeon,
may be attended ^\'ith sj-mptoms which will be
described tmder the heads of Kdlik^, iMarmarika, and
LoMtika.

Karlika' is marked by fever and a burning pain
in the affected part and swelling. Marmarika gives rise
to pain and knott)- (nodular) formations about the
affected region, accompanied by (the characteristic
inflammatory) fever ; while in the last named type
(Lohitika) symptoms such as, Manyd-Stambha (numb-
ness of the tendons forming the nape of the neck},
Apatanak a U-pe of tetanus), Shirograha (headache) and
Kama-shula (ear-ache: exhibit themselves, and the}*
should be duly treated with medicinal remedies laid
down under their respective heads. The lint should
be speedily taken out from a pierced hole which is
marked by extreme pain and swelling, etc., on account
of its being made with a blunt, crooked or stimted
needle, or owing to its being plugged with a deep and
inordinately large lint, or to its being distmbed bj' the
aggravated bodily humours (Doshas), or to its being made

rhtr-. Nvr.}

SrTKASTUAXA.M.

M3

at a v.Toiif^ plncc. An untna-'nt rninposcd of Madhiika,
Kranda root«, ManjisUi.1, Yava. Tila, honey and clarified
butter pasted to^^ether, slundd be tliickly ])lastered over
the aflcctcd part until the ulcers arc perfectly healed ;
after which the lobules of the ears should be again
]iicrccd through according to the directions laid down
before.

The lint should he removed, each third day, and a
thicker one should be inserted in its stead on each
successive occasion, and the part should be rubbed
with funboiled oil) as before. For the expansion of
the fissures, ^sticks of Nimba or .Apamarga, or rods of
lead' should be inserted into them after the subsidence
of the accompanying symptoms and deranged bodily
humours dn the locality).

IVI etri cal Text ; —The fissures thus expanded
may ultimatel)’ bifurcate the lobules of the ears owing to
the efTects of the deranged bodily humours ' Dosha), or
of a blow. Now hear me discourse on the mode of
adhesioning them (with suitable bandages).

These unions or adhesions admit of being briefly
dndded into fifteen different kinds, viz., the Nemi-
sandhinaka, the Utpala-Bhedyaka the Valluraka, the
Asangima, the Ganda-kama, the Ahaiy’aya, the Nin-e-
dhima, the VySyojima, the Kapata-sandhika, the Ardha-
kapita-sandhika, the Samkshipta, the Hina-kama, the
Vallikama, the Yasthi-kama, and the Kakaushthaka.

144

, THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch.ip. xvi.

Out of these, the process, known as the Nemi-

sandhanaka, should be used in cases where each of

the bifurcated lobes of the ears would be found to be

tlrick, extended, and equal in size. The process, known

as the Utpala-Bhedyaka, should be used in cases

where the severed lobes of the ears would be found to

be round, extended, and equal in dimensions. The

process, Valluraka should be resorted to in cases where

the severed lobes of the ears would be found to be

short, circular and equal in size. The process, known
/

as the Asan^ma, should be adopted in cases where
the anterior surface of one of these severed appendages
would have a more elongated shape than the other.
The process, known as the Ganda-Karna, consists in
slicing off a patch of healthy flesh from one of the
regions of the cheeks and in adhering it to one of the
severed lobes of the ears which is more elongated on
its anterior side than the other ^Plastic-ope^ations). In
the case of extremely short lobes, the flesh should be
cut off from both the cheeks and adhered to tliem, the

r

process being knovm as the Aharyaya. The lobes of the
ears winch have been completely severed from their roots
are called Pithopamas. The process known as the
Nirvedhima should be resorted to in such cases b}'
piercing the two Putrikas (Tragus and Anti-tragus ' of
the ears.

The process known as the Vyayojima should be
made use of in cases where one of the bifurcated

(l-y. XVI. )

sivi'kasthanam.

M5

lobes of the car should he found to he dissimilar to
the other as regards its thickness or thinness. The
proecss known ns Kapala-Snndhikn, consists in hrinj;-
inp about an adhesion, on the posterior side, between
one of the bifurcated lobes and another, which is
elongated on the anterior side of the car. The adhesion
is so called from the fact of iLs rcscmhlinp the closing of
the two leaves of a door (Kapatam). The process
known ns the Ardha-Kapata-Sandhika consists in bring-
ing about an adhesion on the anterior side between
the shorter one of the two parts of a bifurcated ear-
lobe with the part, elongated on the posterior side, like
a half-closed door.

The ten aforesaid processes of adhesion may be
successfully brought about and their shapes can be
easily pictured from the meanings of their respective
names.

The remaining five sorts such as the Samkhiptam etc.,
arc seldom attended with success and hence are called
impracticable (As:idhayas'. The process Samkhiptam
has its scope in the case where the auricle (Shashkuli)
has been withered up and one of the bifurcated lobes
is raised, the other being reduced and shortened. The
process of Hina-karna should be adopted in cases
where the supporting rim of the lobe (pinna) has been
entirely SNvept away and its exterior sides and the cheeks
■ are sunk and devoid of flesh. Similarly the adhesive

19

THE SHSHRUTA SAMHITA'. I Chap. XVl.

146

process known as the Vallikarna is indicated in
cases where the lobes are short, thin and unequal.
The adhesion known as the Yasthi Kama is indicated
in cases where the thin and severed ear-lobes are nin
across with veins and made of knotty or nodular flesh.
The case in which the ear-lobe, being permeated with
a little quantity of blood, is fleshless and ends
in a narrow tip or end, furnishes the occasion for
KakusthakapAli.

The five abovesaid adhesions, if followed by swelling,
inflammation, suppuration and redness of the affected
part and found to be secreting a sort of slimy pus
or studded over witli pustular eruptions, may be
apprehended as not to be attended with success.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — The exact middle point of the external ear
should be pierced (with a knife) and the severed parts
, shordd be pulled dov,Ti and elongated in the case where
both the parts of a bifurcated ear-lobe would be
found to have been entirely lost or eaten away. In
the case where the posterior one of the two bifurcated
parts would be found to be longer or more elongated, the
adhesion should be effected on the anterior side ; whereas
the contrary’- should be the case where the anterior
one would appear to be more elongated. Only the
remaining one of the two bifurcated parts of an ear-lobe
would be pierced, cut in two and adhesioned on the top.

XVI. ]

SITTRASTIIA'XAM.

M7

in llic case where the other part would be found to
ho pone. A stirpcon ivcll-verscd in tlic knowledge of
surpen,' '^h.lslrns should slice off a patch of linng
flesli from the cheek of a person devoid of ear-lobes
in a manner so as to liave one of its ends attached
to its fonner scat feheek). Then the part, where
the artificial ear-lobe is to be made, should be slightly
scarified (wiili a knife), and the living fiesh, full of
blood and sliced ofT as previously directed, should be
adhesioned to it (so as to resemble a natural ear-lobe
in shape).

A surgeon, wishing to cfTccl any sort of adhesion
other than those described before, should first collect the
articles enumerated in the chapter on Preliminar}'
Measures to Surgical Operations, together with milk,
water, Dhany.'tmla (fermented rice boilings), Surifmanda
(transparent surface-part of wine) and powders of
earthen vessel. Then the hair of the patient, whether
male or female, should be gathered and tied up in a
knot, and the patient should be given a light food
(so as to keep up his strength without hampering
his digestion) ; after which his friends and relations
should be asked to hold him firm. Then having ascer-
tained the particular nature of adhesion to be effected
in the case, the surgeon should examine the local blood
by indsing, excising, scarifying or puncturing the
affected lobes as found necessar)’^, and determine
whether the same is pure or vitiated. Then having

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Ctm].. XVI.

148

washed the blood with Dh?lny4mla and tepid water,
if found vitiated through the action of the deranged
(t'^ayu), or with milk and cold water in the event of
the same being contaminated by the deranged Pittam,
or with Suramanda and ^^•arm water in the case of its
being vitiated by the action of the disordered
Kaphara, the surgeon shall bring about the ad-
hesion by again scarifying the affected parts of the
ear, so as not to leave the adhesioned parts derated
(raised), unequal and short. Of course the adhesion
should be effected with the blood being still left in the'
parts that had been scraped. Then hadng anointed
them rath honey and clarified butter, they should be
covered rath cotton and linen, and tied with strings
of thread, neither too loose nor too tight, and dusted
over rath powders of baked clay. Then directions
should be given as regards the diet and nursing of
the patient, who may be as well treated with the
regimen laid down in the chapter on Dvi-vraniyaia.

^ Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject; — The patient should be careful not to disturb
the bandage and avoid physical exercise, over-eating,
sexual intercourse, exposure to, or basking in, the glare
of fire, fatiguing talk, and sleep by day. For three
consecutive days the ulcer should be anointed with
unboiled oil ; and cotton soaked in the same substance
should be placed over it, which is to be altered,
each third .day, till healing.

Chnp. XVI.]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

149

The incidental ulcer should not be tried to be
healed up as long as the local blood (blood in the
ulcer) is not fully purified ; or so long as there
is hiemorrhage from the seat of the affection or
the local blood continues feeble. An ulcer, adhesion-
ed ^vith the least of the Va5'u- vitiated blood
continuing in its inside, will spontaneously burst or
break open afresh. It will be again attended vnth
pain, burning, redness and suppuration in the event of
its being closed with a little quantity of Pitta-deranged
blood incarcerated in its inside. Adhesioned even with
a little quantit}’ of Kapha fouled blood in its cavity
an ulcer is marked by itching and numbness. An ulcer
adhesioned with the continuance of an active hgemor-
rhage from its inside is marked by a b^o^vn or blackish
yellow swelling. An ulcer, adhesioned at a time when
the local blood, though othersAnse good or pure, has
been thinned or weakened through excessive bleeding,
is followed by a corresponding emaciation (thinness)
of the adhesioned part. The lobule of the ear thus
adhesioned should be gradually pulled down and
elongated after the complete healing of the local ulcer
and the subsidence of its concomitant symptoms, and
after the cicatrix has assumed the colour of the
skin of the surrounding part. Otherwise the adhesioned
part may be characterised by pain, swelling, infla-
mmation, burning and suppuration, or the adhesion
may again fall off. An adhesioned ear-lobe, un-

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chsp. XVI.

150

accompanied by any of the distressing or unfavourable
symptoms, should be gradually elongated by rubbing
it with an unguent composed of the milk, fat, and
marrow of any such animals and birds as the Godha, the
Pratudas, the Vishkiras, the Anupas, or the Audakas as
would be available, and clarified butter and the oil ex-
pressed out of the seeds of white mustard, boiled with
the decoction or Kvatha of Arka, Alarka, VaH,
AtivaU, Ananta, Apamilrga, Ash^agandh^t, Vidari-
gandhd, Kshira-Shukla, Jalashuka and the drugs form-
ing the group known as the Madhura, which should
be previously prepared and carefully stowed in a
covered receptacle,

lYIctrical texts J — ^Then the above medicinal
unguent should be applied or rubbed over the lobe of
the affected ear, whereby all the disturbing or unfavour-
able symptoms would be subsided, thus favouring its
firm and steady growth. Similarly a plaster composed
of Yava, Ashvagandhd, Yashtydhva, and Tila, pasted
together might be rubbed over the affected ear-lobe uith
advantage. Oil prepared and boiled with the essence of
Shatdvari, and Ashvagandha, or Payasya, Eranda, Jivana
and milk increases the growth of an ear-lobe. The lobe
of an ear, which refuses to grow in size in spite of being
fomented and lubricated as above indicated,, should
be scarified with slight longitudinal incisions on its
anterior side (that is on the side nearest to the cheeks)

o.sp. XVI. }

Sl’TUASTUANAM.

151

and nol on Ihe jipslcrior one, as such a procedure might
he attended with dreadlul results.

An eardohe should not he tried to he elongated just
after the adhesion of its two severed parts, inasmuch as
the centre of the adhesion, still being raw, might
cause them to fall off again. Thus an ear-lobe under
the circumstance should be gradually elongated, only
when it would be found to be marked by the growth of
hair on its surface, and the hole or the perforation has
assumed a circular look, and the adiicsion has become
firmly effected, well-dried, painless, even and level in its
entire length.

The modes of bringing about an adhesion of the
two severed parts of an ear-lobe are innumerable ; and
a skilled and experienced surgeon should determine
the shape and nature of each according to the exi-
gencies of a particular case."

• Additional Text ; — O Sushrala, ngain I shall deal with diseases
which affect the lohulc of an car under the circumstance described al)Ovc
The deranged bodily VAjai, I'iltam and Kapham, either jointly or severally,
give rise to several types of diseases which affect the lobule of an car. The
deranged VA>ti produces numbness and an erysipelatous swelling and ul-
cer about the alTcctcd ear-lobe, while an erysipelatous ulcer in the
locality accompanied by swelling, burning, suppuration, etc., should be
ascribed to the action of the deranged Pittam. Heaviness, numbness and
swelling of the ear-lobe accompanied by constant itching in the nfieeted
locality mark the action of the deranged Kapham. The medical treatment
in these cases consists in effecting a subsidence of the particular deranged
humour by means of diaphoresis, lubrication, Parishekas (medicated
plasters) or blood-letting os the case may be. These measures should be
moderately applied and a nutritive and invigorating food should be pres-

•j^2 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVI.

Rhinoplastic operations : -Now I shall
deal vrith. the process of affixing an artificial nose.

cribed for the patient. The physician vpho is weli familiar with the actions
of the deranged bodily humours as described above, should be looked upon
as alone entitled to take in hand a case, which falls under the head of one
of the preceding types.

Now I shall enumerate the names of the several diseases which affect
a severed lobe of the ear and describe the symptoms which each of them
develops in succession. They are known as Utpdtaka, Utputuka, Shydva,
Bhrisam-kanduj&ta, Avamantha, Sakandnka, Akundaka, Granthika, Jfim-
STila, Srfivi and DAhavdna. Now hear me discourse on tlie nature of
niedidnal treatment to be adopted in each of them.

Remedies ; — A plaster composed of the drugs known as Apimdrga,
Sarjarasa, Patala bark and Lakucha bark pasted togather, or a medicated
oil prepared and boiled with the preceding substances should be applied
in a case of the UtpStaka type, whereas a case of the Utputuka type would
prove amenable to a medicinal plaster consisting of Shampika, Shigru,
Putika, the fat and marrow of a Godhfi, and the milk and bile of a she-decr,
she-bufialo or sow, pasted togather ; or to a medicated unguent com-
posed of the aboves,aid substanees duly boiled with oik Similarly, a medi-
cinal plaster composed of the drugs known as Gauri, Sugandhd, Shydmfi,
Anantd, Tanduliyakam, or an oil prepared and boiled rvith the extract of
tire preceding drugs, would prove beneficial in a case of the Shydva type of
the desease. In a case of the Vrisham-Sakundakam tj-pe, the affected
part should be rubbed or lubricated wth an unguent or medicated oil
prepared with the boiled extract of PAthS, Rasinjanam, Kshoudmm, and
warm ICdnjikfim, or a plaster composed of the same drugs and substances
should be applied over the diseased locality.

In a case of ulceration, the ulcerated ear-lobe should be rubbed with the
oil prepared and boiled with the drugs known as Madhukam and Kshira-
kdkoli, or with those which form the group known as the Jivakddi-Varga ;
while in a case where Vringhanam measures are to be adopted, lord pre-
pared from the fat of a Godhfi, boar, or snake might be used with advantage.
In the Avamanthaka type the diseased ear-lobe sh onld be washed and
covered with a plaster composed of the drugs known as Prapaundarikam,
Madhukam, Samangd and Dhavam, or rubbed uuth oil prepared and
boiled with the same drugs. Similarly, a case of Kandu-Juta (accompanied
with itching) would yield to a plaster composed of the drugs known as
SahadevA, \nshvadcv&, and Saindhavasalt pasted with goat’s milk, or to the
medicated oil boiled and prepared with the same drugs and substances.

Oup. \V 1 .]

SUTRASTUAN'AM.

'53

First the leaf of a creeper, long and broad enough
to fvdly cover the whole of the severed or clipped
off part, should be gathered ; and a patch of li\ang
flesh, equal in dimension to the preceding leaf, should
he sliced ofl' I from down upward'' from the region
of the check and, after scarifying it with a knife,
swiftly adhered to the severed nose, Tlmn the cooh
headed ph}'sieian should steadily tic it up with a
bandage decent to look at and perfectly suited to the
end for which it has been employed (Sadhu Vandha).
■file physician should make sure that the adhesion of
the severed parts has been fully efrected and then
insert two small pipes into the nostrils to facilitate
respiration, and to prevent the adhesioned flesh from
hanging dov.Ti. After that, the adhesioned part should
be dusted with the powders of Pattanga, Yashti-
madhukam and Rasanjana pulverised together ; and

In n cv'-i; of tin; Gi-.-viithikn 1)7)0 (nccompanioil by the fonnation of knotty
^;ro^vlhs in its inside) the knotty growths or glandular formations should
In; first removed, and the affected locality should he bled with a surgical
instrument and dusted with piwdcrcrl Saindhava salt. Likewise, in a
case of JAmvala t)^*:, bhxxl-Ictting should be resorted to by scarifying
the seat of the disease, which should be then washed with a spray of milk.-
The ulcer should be healed after the perfect purification of its internal
morbid contents. A ease of the Sr 6 vi (secreting) type wonld readily
yield to a medicinal plaster composed of the drugs known as Madhuparni,
and Madhukam, or of Madhnkam pasted with honey, or to the medicinal oil
prepared and boiled with the same drugs and substances. A case of the
Dah)amfina (burning) type should be treated svith a plaster composed of
the drugs known as the five Kalkos and Madhukam pasted together and
mixed with clarified butter, or with a pasted compound of the drugs which
form the group of the Jivakadi Varga with a <iuantity of clarified butter
added to it.

20

THE SUSHEUTA SAMHITA. [Chap- XVI.

154

the nose should be enveloped in Karp^sa cotton and
several times sprinkled over ■nnth the refined oil of pure
sesamum. Clarified butter should be given to the
patient for drink, and he should be anointed with oil and
treated with purgatives after the complete digestion
of the meals he has taken, as advised (in the books of
medicine). Adhesion should be deemed complete after
the incidental ulcer had been perfectly healed up, while
the nose should be again scarified and bandaged in the
case of a semi or partial adhesion. The adhesioned
nose should be tried to be elongated w'here it would
Call short of its natural and previous length, or it should
be surgically restored to its natural size in the case of
the abnormal growth of its newly formed flesh. The
mode of bringing about the adhesion of severed lips is
identical with what has been described in connection
with a severed nose with the exception of the insertion
of pipes. The physician, who is well conversant
with these matters, can be alone entrusted with the
medical treatment of a King.

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the Sutra-Sthfinnm in the Sushruta
Samhitfi which treats of the Piercing and Bandaging of ear-lobes.

CHAPTERXVIL

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which deals with
the mode of distinguishing between suppurating and non-
suppurating swellings. Ama-pakkafshanfya-
madhyaryam.

Diseases such as, Qranthi (Aneurism), Vidradhi,
(abscess) and Alaji (inflammation of the edge of the
cornea) etc. are ushered in by a preliminary, swelling
which subsequently develops symptoms peculiar to
each of them. These diseases differ in their s5rmptoms
and outward shape. A swelling which may appear at
any part of the body, and is roimd, elevated, even, or
uneven in its (surface) is called a Shotha (swelling).
It restricts itself to the skin and flesh of its locality
and is characterised by the several or concerted
action of the deranged bodily humours. The Shothas
(swelling) admit of being divided into six different
types according as they are caused by the action of the
deranged VA)ti, Pittam, Kapham or blood, or are due
to the concerted action of the three fundamental
humours of the body, or are of traumatic origin.

Now we shall describe the symptoms which
mark the respective actions of the humours in a
swelling. A swelling due to the action of the deranged
Vdyu assumes a reddish or blackish hue and is shifting
in its character. It feels rough and soft to the touch.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ojnp. XVll.

^56

and is marked by a sort of aching pain (peculiar to the
deranged Vdyu) which vanishes at intervals.

A swelling, due to the action of the deranged
Pittam, assumes a yellowish hue. It is soft and
fluctuates under pressme, and is marked by an accu-
mulation of blood in its bod3^ It swiftly shifts from
one part of the body to another, accompanied 'by a
burning, sucking pain. A swelling, brought about
through the deranged condition of the Kapham, assumes
a grey or whitish colour. The skin becomes glossy and
cold, and the swelling veiy' slowly changes its original
site, if it shifts at all, accompanied by pain and itching.
A swelling engendered through the concerted action
of the three bodily humours successively manifests the
s3Tnptoms and assumes the colours respectively peculiar
to each of them. The s3Tnptoms which mark a sweUing
due to the action of the vitiated blood are identical with
those which are exhibited in a swelling of the Pittaja
t3rpe with the exception of the blackness of the part
(and an increase of heat). A swelling due to an
external blow (traumatic) manifests symptoms peculiar
to'.the Pittaja and blood-origined t3'pes.

A swelling, which does not yield to internal and
external remedies on account of an excessive accumula-
tion of the deranged local humours, or through the
insufficient or contrary effects of the remedial agents,
shows sign of suppuration.

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

157

Chap. XVII.]

Now hear me describe the symptoms, which respec-
tively ’ mark an unsuppurated, suppurating or sup-
purated swelUng. The imsuppurated or immature stage
continues as long as the skin of the swelling retains
its natural hue, marked by a little pain and heat in
its inside, and coldness, hardness and a slight elevation
of its surface.

The suppurating stage gives rise to a sensation of
pricking pain in the affected locality. The swelling
seems as if it is being pricked wth needles, or bitteil
or wandered over by a host of ants, or cut \vith a
knife, or pierced with a spear, or thrashed with a club,
or pressed vnth the hand, or scraped round vath fingers,
or burnt with a fire or an alkali. The patient complains
of a sort of sucking, burning pain in the swelling of
a fixed or shifting character. The patient, as if stung
by a scorpion, does not find comfort in any place
or position. The hue of the local skin is changed
and the swelling goes on increasing hke an inflated
leather bag ; and fever, thirst, a burning sensation and
aversion to food etc. gradually supervene.

The suppurated stage is marked by an amelioration
of the local pain and a yellowishness of the skin over the
swelling, which cracks and seems too big, thus giving
rise to folds in the integument. The ^swelling exhibits
fluctuation under pressure and shows perceptible signs
of diminution. Moreover, it yields to pressure and

1^8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Clwp. xm

reaches its former height when the pressure is removed.
The pus or the suppmated matter changes its place, or
shifts from one part of the swelling to another imder
pressme like water in a bloated leather bag. The
distressing symptoms gradually subside ; the patient
again evinces a desire for food, and feels a constant
inclination for scratching the affected part which is
characterised by a sort of aching pain. Sometimes,
as in cases of traumatic swelling or in those brought
about by a deranged condition of the Kapham, the
suppurating process is restricted to the deeper tissues
of the affected part and hence fail to exhibit its
characteristic symptoms— a fact which often misleads
a physician (smgeon) as regards the true state (lit : —
whether suppurated or not) of the accompanying swell-
ing. But the knowledge that a process of suppuration,
occurring in the deeper tissues of an affected part, is
accompanied by alleviation of the pain and swelling
which becomes as compact as a stone and cold to the
touch, and the local sldn resuming its natural colour,
would unquestionably ward off aU apprehensions for
error of judgment.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject A physician (siugeon) who is fuUy conversant
with the s}mptoms which are respectively exhibited
by (an inflammatorj’-) swelling in its unsuppurated, sup-
purating and suppurated stages, is alone worthy of the
epithet ; the rest are but impostors. Since there can

Clmp. XVII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

159

be no pain without the intervention of the deranged
; and no suppuration can set in \vithout the
action of the deranged Pittam ; nor pus, \vithout the
action of the deranged Kapham ; it is evident that a
suppurated swelling is marked by the combined and
simultaneous action of the three deranged humours of
the body.

According to certain authorities, the deranged
Pittam gets the preponderance over the local Vdjm and
Kapham, and transforms the blood into pus out of its
own preponderant energy.

The incision or opening of a swelling in its inflam-
matory or unsuppurated (lit. immature, unripe) stage
is attended vnth the destruction of the local flesh, liga-
ment, bone, vein, or joint, and is usually followed by
excessive hasmorrhage. The incidental wound becomes
extremely painful. Many distressing symptoms begin
to manifest themselves in succession and cavities are
formed inside the wound which may lapse into a
case of Kshata-Vidradhi (a t)T)e of ulcerated abscess).

On the other hand, a fully suppurated swelling, left
unopened for a long time out of fear or ignorance by the
attending physician, is attended with symptoms which are
fraught with dreadful consequences. The accumulated
pus, unable to find an outlet, is' infiltrated and attacks
the deeper tissues of the affected part, and forms
large cavities or sinuses in their inside, thus converting

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. KVIl.

l6o

the disease into one of a difficult or incurable
type.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — ^The physician (surgeon) who opens an nnsup-
purated or unripe swelling out of ignorance, as well as
the man who neglects a fully suppurated one, should
be looked upon as the ^•iIest Chandala for his 'WTong
or incorrect diagnosis. The patient should be pro\'ided
with a meal before the surgical operation, or strong
wine should be given him, if he is found to be addicted
to the habit of taking any. The effect of a good meal
under the circumstance will be to keep up the strength
of the patient and to guard against his s\vooning during
the operation, whDe the effect of wine anil be to make
him imconsdous of the pain. The rule as regards the
feeding and anaesthetising (wine gidng) of the patient
should be strictly adhered to, since the internal
\Ttal principle of a man is invigorated by the strength
of his body which is the product of hTnph-chj’le, the
essence of food, and the quintessence of the five
material principles. A swelling, no matter whether
limited or extensive, spontaneously runs on to suppma-
tion, if not medicinally treated, or left to nature. The
base of such a swelling goes on extending. It becomes
unequally suppurated and reaches an unequal elevation,
thus affecting the deeper tissues of the part and swiftly
running into one of an incurable type. A swelling, which
does not yield to the application of medicated plasters

NVII ,

SnrKASTIlANAM.

n.i;..

j6i

or t(» coircclivc or lilood-lcUint; measures, speedily arid
uniformly sappurales, and is marked by a small and
rcslrirted base and n < ircnlar iir conical elevation. As
a lilazinp lire fed by pnsls of Ihvonndrle wind soon
consumes ;i withered forest, .so the incarcerated pus, in
the ab.sence of any outlet, attacks and e.at.s away the
healthy flesli, veins and nerves of an or/^anism.

Surpical acts in connection with an ab.sccss (Sbotlia)
may be ilividcd into seven kinds such as i. mutila-
tion (Vimldpanani) of the swelliiift by massap;c,

AvaBlicchnnam (Idcedinu or ajrplication of leeches)
.V Upanaham (poullicing) Patanain (openinp or
incision) 5. Shodbanam 'purification of lire intcnial
morbid matter of an incised boil with corrective
medicines') 6. Ropanam (hcalinp) and 7, Vaikritdpa-
bam (restoring of the natural colour of the skin to
the cicatrix' .

Tllll^ tinK ilu- M;vcrilci'iilli C’Ii,i iUt irf ilic .Suii.islli/ni.im in llii’
Sii.lirin.'i .S.imliit.'i «liirli Uc.iiv ■•flum i«> ili'iiiiniii'-li '.ii[) )iiralinf;

;ni<l n'lTi’Miinnir.iliitf; •■wi.'llinr;'.

CHATTER XVI 11.

Xow we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of dressings and bandages of ulcers (Vrana'Icpaiia-
Vandha-Vidhi-madhyayam).

A medicinal plaster should be regarded as the
general and most important remedy in all cases of
('inflammatory*) swelling. We shall presently discuss
the nature of plasters to be used in each specific form
of disease. .A. bandage plays a more important part (than
a medicinal plaster) as regards its healing and curative
efficacy, inasmuch as it materially contributes to the
purification and healing of an ulcer and keeps the
joints steady. .\ medicinal plaster should be applied
from do\™ upward or in a direction contrary to
that of the local hair (Pratiloma). It should never
be applied 'SO as to run down with the local hair),
since a plaster, applied as directed above, would firmly
stick to the surface of the affected part, and naturally
percolate through the follicles of the hair and the
external orifices of the vehicles of perspiration
(Sudoriferous ducts), thus permeating the organism
with its own native potency and \irtue.

A medicinal plaster should be removed or replaced
by a fresh one as soon as it has become dry,
e.xcept in cases where the purpose of its application

\ \ in.

sfTK \>r!I WAM

Mi;

NVvHiai lie I'lutnl In he the «li,n\ ini; ol pi^ to a dclinilc
head < ridayita\ y.i Vrana).

A <iiivd nu'diiinal pla'^tcr will prove ii^clcys or
ahouivo, and ;nay avl a> a eatislii; or t orrosivc af^ent.
A nKahvin.d jil.c-lcr a<lniits ot luinj; f;ronpcd under
any of the iluvc Mihhcad^ oi Pralcpa, Pradelm and
Alcpana {.uvorditn; to its ihiokiu ss or cnnsisleney) do.

medicinal plasters : -A medioinal plaster
of the Pr.ilcp.a olass is applied thin and cold, and
is made to he endued with an ahsorhinc; iVishoshi)
oj non-aiisoihint; .\vislioshi‘; properly according to
the nature of the cHect desired.

On the other hand, a medicinal plaster of the
Pradcha class w applied either thick or thin, warm
or cold, and acts as a non-ahsoihent.

A medicinal plaster of the Alcpana class stands
midway between a Pralepa and a Pradeha.

Of these, a plaster of the Pralepana class is
possessed of the cflicacy of pacifying or restoring the
deranged blood and Pittam to their normal condition.
A plaster of the Pradeha class pacifies the deranged
Vdyu and Kapham and tends to bring about the union,
purification, and healing (of an ulcer), causing the

' A>: in llif case of. T I’kUyilavj-a ulcer, dcscril<cd before, ivhcre the

withdrawing or gathering of pus to a definite head is desired.

(‘h-.p, will.)

Sn'RASTH.VNAM.

1(’5

10 brini^ about Uiu purinculion of the (local deranged
humours). In diseases caused by a deranged con-
dition of the V.lyu, Pillatn or Kapliain, medicinal
plasters should be respectively mixed with a quantity
of clarified butter, measuring a sixth, quarter, and an
eighth part of their respective (juantities.

It has been said that the thickness of an Alopa-
nam should not be made to exceed that of the
newly-fiaycd skin of a buffalo. Under no condition,
should a medicinal plaster be applied at night,
inasmuch as such a measure would arrest the esc<ape
or radiation of heat from the swelling in virtue of
its own inherent humidity, and thus bring on an
aggravation.

IVIetrical Texts : — In diseases, which are
amenable to the application of medicinal plasters of
the Pradeha type, as well as in swellings resulting
from the ^^tiatcd condition of blood and the Pittam,
or in those which are of extrinsic origin, or are due
to the effect of a poison or blow, the plaster should
be applied cold, by day. A plaster should not be
applied without removing the pre^^ous one, nor over
the one applied on the day before, as this would
increase the local heat and aggravate the pain and the
burning sensation on account of its greater or increased
thickness. A medicinal plaster, pre\dously used, should
not be tnpistened and applied again ; it should be hpld

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XVIII.

1 66

as absolute^ ineffective owing to its virtue having been
previously used or soaked in.*

Articles of bandag^ing- Now we shall
enumerate the names of articles which are required
in bandaging ulcers. Tliey are as follows : —

Ksbauma (cloth woven rvnth the fibres of Atasi
plant), Avika (blankets made of sheeps’ wool),
Dukulum (loom-silk\ Kausheya (silk), the Patroma
(a kind of cloth made of the fibres of N^ga trees,
which grow in the provinces of Paundra and Magadha),
the Chinapatta (Chinese clotli), Antarv'alkala (the
inner bark or fibres of a tree), Charraa (skin), the
Al^^^m Shakala (the skin of a gourd), the Lata-Vidala
(lialf thrashed Shyamd creepers), string or cord,
the cream of milk, Tula-phalam (cotton seeds) and
iron. These accessories should be used in considera-
tion of the exigencies of each case and the time or the
season of the 5^ear in which it occurs.!

This portion of the icM ha', been mnilted hv Chakrapani in liip
commentar}' entitled the Bhannmuti,

1 In a ^^^•eIling or ulcer caused by the deranged \'5yu and Kapham.
the l)and.age shouht consist of a piece of thick clotli ; whereas in summer
it should consist of thin linen, .Similarly, a band;ige, tied rounil any deep
or hollow part of the IukIv, should consist of a piece of thick cloth. The
contrary rule should he observed, when the seal of the liandage would be
at any (lexible part of the body.

Similarly, in the rase of a snake bite, a ligature should be firmly lierl
almye the punctured wound with a string or twi.sted cord of cotton, while
a fractured Imne should be set right by twisting bunches of half-thrashed
hliyfim.'i cree K-t (I.at.'iyitLal.i) round the seal of fracture, .-k local hteniorrhagc

('(u;.. Win. i

srTRASTIlA'XA M.

1^7

Bandages : ’I'lu- lourlccn (lilVcrcnl lurnis (if
h;nulai:e arc naincil as llic Ko>lia (a sheath (ir scahhard),
the D.-iiiia (a coul or chaplet . the Svaslika (cross), the
Attuvelhta a twist), the I’raloli a wimliiijf street or
road), the Mandala (rinij), the Stlia”ika (a hetel-ht)x),
the Vainaka (doiihle or lwin\ the Khattii la bedstead),
the China (a streamer), the Vivandha (uouse), the
\'itana (canopy) tlie Gophan;} tcow-hom), the l’anchan,"i
(live liinbedh Their shapes can he easily inferred from
llic meanings of their names.

Applications :~Otit of these, the Koslia or
the sheath-shaped handaije slioukl be lied round the
thumb and the phalaiif'cs of llie lingers ; the Dama or
cliaplct-shaped bandatje, round the narrow or utibenl
])arts of the body ; the Svastika or cross sliajrcd, round
the joints, round the articulations or the Marmas known
as the Kurchakas (Xavieular h'tjamenls) round the
eye-brows, round the ears and round the region of
the breast. Similarly, the bandage, known as the Ana-
vellita, should be used when the seat of the affection
would be found to be situated at tlie e.vtremities diands
and legs'. A bandage of the Protoli class should be tied
round the neck or the penis ; the Mandalam ring-

shouW !«; arrested liy binding the Kirl with niilk-creani, while llie nirecle-d
part in a case of Ardita (facial iwralysis) as well as a broken tooth should be
Ijound with strings of iron, g'lUl or silver, \Varls, etc. should Ite bandaged
with ICIa (cardainom skins), while dried gourd skiiis should lie used in
Isindaging ulcers on the head (scalp).

THE SUSHRtJTA SA^iHITA^ [Cha],. XVIll.

1 68

shaped), round the circular parts of the body ; the
Sthagika (betel-box), round the glans-penis and the
tips of the fingers ; the Yamakam, round the confluent
or contiguous ulcers ; the Khatta (bedstead-shaped),
over and around the cheeks, cheek-bones, and the
parts between the ears and the e)’e-brows ; the Vitdnam
over the skull, the Gophana (hom-shaped), round the
region of the chin ; and the Panchangi, round the part
Ijnng above the clavicles.

In short, a bandage of any particular shape should
be tied round the part of the body to which it would
be found to be most suited. Now we shall deal with
the Yantranas (fastenings of bandages) which admit of
being di\ided into three different classes according as
they are fastened above, below, or obliquely round
an ulcer.

Kavalikar (Tow) Any soft stuffing or tow
(such as the leaves or the bark of trees of medicinal
^^rtues) between the medicine applied over an ulcer
and the bandaging linen is called the Kavalika (medi-
cated tow). The tow or the Kavalika should be
placed thickl}’- (on the seat of affection) ; and then the
physician (surgeon) ha\ing pressed it with his left
hand should* place a piece of straight, soft, imtwisted.

* Girefully examining whether the applied remedy had been uniformly
dibtribuled -o'-cr the diseased surface and whether the contemplated
pattern of Ixindage would be actually bulled to the caic.

Chap. XVIII. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

169

and unfolded or unshrivelled linen over it, and then
firmly tie up the bandage in a manner so as not to
leave any knot over the seat of the ulcer, or to cause
any discomfort to the patient.

Introduction of lint A VishesWka flint)
saturated with honey, clarified butter, and a medi-
cinal paste should be inserted into the ulcer. Care
should be taken not to introduce the lint extremely
dr)"^, or oily (oversoaked in a lubricating or oily medi-
cinal preparation), inasmuch as an over- lubricated lint
would give rise to an excessive formation of slimy
mucus in the ulcer, whereas, its parched substitute
would bring about the friction and the consequent
breaking of the edges of the nicer, like one mis-
placed or VTongly inserted.

A bandage should be tied in any of the three
ways of Gadha, Sama and Shithila fastenings
according to the shape and seat of the ulcer.*
A tight bandage '^Gddha-Vandha) should be tied round
the buttocks, round the sides, round the arm-pits, round
the inguinal regions, round the breast or round the
head. A bandage of the Sama pattern should be
fastened round the ears, roimd the extremities (hands

* Additional text : — A bandage, tightly tied ronnd an ulcerated or
atTected part of the body without causing any pain or discomfort to the
(Kiticnl, is called a Gfidha-Vandha, while the one which is loosely bound is
called Shithila, the one neither loo tight nor loo loose l>cing called a Sama-
Vandlia.

22

170

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. (Chnp. XVIIl.

and legs', round the face, round the throat, round
the lips, round the penis, round the scrotinn, round the
hack, round the bell}* and the chest. A loose bandaging
(Shithila-Vandha) should be the rule in the region of
the eyes and locations of important joints or unions.

An ulcer, brought about or characterised by the
sjTiiptoms of the deranged Pittam and occurring at a
place where a tight bandaging is indicated, should be
fastened 'u-ith one of the Sama-Vandha class, and with
a Shithna bandage where one of the Sama tj^e would
be indicated ; whereas it should not be bandaged at all
in the event of a loose bandage Shithila-Vandhal being
indicaterl. The same rule should be obsen-ed in the
case of an ulcer caused through a diseased or contami-
nated state of the blood. Similarly, in the case of an ulcer
produced through a deranged condition of the Kapham,
a loose bandaging, other\\ise enjoined to be adopted,
should be substituted for one of the same pattern.
A tight bandage should give place to a lighter one
under the same circumstances, and such a procedure
should be deemed as holding good even in the case
of an ulcer caused by the action of the deranged
Vayu.

In summer and autumn, the bandage of an ulcer,
due to the A-itiated blood or Pittam, should be changed
twice a day ; while the one tied round an ulcer of the
deranged Vdyu or Kapham, should be changed on each

.Mtt

' 7 '

.ir.d .mi

!'V {t;c .v I'-iMi i.; xiv: ilrr.Miynl V„'vu. rhn'.iM hi:

h. -iMii.-.i'ci! tv, :ir n ti.iy. ’* Tli<>u i thy «n\)

.i;;i5 \'.',!y o: .nlupt the prr< ‘riliotl nilc' *if
to the fMyt'iU ;r ■ c.vr."

inr.lu at',-.! 5:nt {.uh- 'i> liavr ntlV cl<ic;iry luil
rv.thc: tr:s<ir- ;•> .'MM.nunt the hir.tl ‘;tui ;tji(l suvlluii;
\vljr;c n tM lu’ lun fly huiitul.orhmiml

M-' \v:;!i iim lrMlr uniloiin .•.tc.nluK: • S;un.i- Vaiiillia),

: ;c;'!.nxi5 by a ttyht nr «ii’cj> l.asiriu'd one (j.idha*
VatitSha . A !o lK\n«l.f.;e, injuiltciou'-ly iir-ed in a
c-M'd wlierc a t!i:iit or a miKlcualcIy linn hanilnfjc
have been would eatbc the medicine lo

i. vll o'T Irom the hm. and bi llie consequent

irirlion and laceration oi the edye^ ol' the ulcer,
l^imilarly, a moderately linn and stc;idy bandage
Sama- Vandlia fastened in a case where a light or loose
bandage should have been used, would fail to produce
any cn'ect. A proper band.ige would lead to the
subsidence of jiain, and the soltening ol tlie edges of
the ulcer, thus bringing about a punlicalion of the local
blood.

Evils of non-bandaging ; -.\n ulcer,
left uncovered and untied with a suitable bandage, is
soon assailed by gnats and Hies. It is moistened by
sweat and cold wind, etc. and stands in danger of
being irritated by deposits of many foreign matters

172

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. [Chap. XVIIl.

such as, the particles of bone, dust, weeds, etc.
Moreover, a constant e.vposure to heat or cold brings on
A-aried pains, the ulcer develops into one of a
malignant t}’]')e, and the applied medicinal plasters
are dried, encrusted and speedily fall off.

IVletrical Texts ; — ^A smashed, lacerated, frac-
tured, dislocated, displaced bone, or a vein or a ligament
similarly jeopardised, may be soon healed or set right
with the help of a surgical bandage. The patient is
enabled by such a means to lie dowm, or stand up or
move about \nth ease. And an increased facility ol
rest or movement leads to speedy healing.

Cases where bandaging is prohibit-
ed : —Ulcers should not be bandaged at all that are
due to the deranged condition of blood or Pittam,
■ or to the effects of a blow or of any imbibed poison,
and characterised by a sucking, burning pain, redness,
or suppuration, as well as those which are incidental
to bums, or to the applications of actual or potential
cauteries marked by a sloughing or phagedenic character.

lYICtrical Texts : — An ulcer due to a scald in a
leper or a carbuncle in a diabetic patient (Pidaka'i as
well as a fleshy condylomata due to a bite from a
venomous rat, or any other poisonous ulcer should not
be bandaged at all. The same rule should be obserr'ed

Different reading Pricking, burning pain.

Chip, xvm.i SUTRASTHA’NAM.

in the ease of a dreadful suppuration about the anus, or
in that of a slouphinp ulcer. An intelligent physician,
familiar with the specific features of ulcers, should
obsene the shape of the one under treatment, and
prop^iosticatc the result from its seat or locality and
the nature of the deranged bodily humours involved
in the ease. The season of the year in which an ulcer
is first seen to apjicar also determines the nature of
the prognosis.

Bandages maj* be tied up either from above, below,
or from the sides of a diseased locality. Now I shall
fully describe the process of bandaging an ulcer.* First
the Kavalik^ or tow should be thickly laid over the
seat of the ulcer and after that a piece of soft and
unshrivelled linen should be placed upon it, and the
bandage should be loosely or tightly tied up according
to the directions laid down before.'

The lint and the (inserted) medicine should not be
over-lubricated and must not be inordinately oily in as-
much as such a lint or medicine would give rise to the
formation of excessive and abnormal slimy mucous in
the ulcer. On the other hand, an extremely dry lint
would set up friction and laceration of the edges of
the ulcer, like the one ^\Tongly or improperly inserted

• Sevora) aulhorilic!. iuch .t. Ga)ad5i.i, ISrahmadeva, eic. hold this
portion of thf text to bo an inlcr )olaUon. Both Uallana and ChakrapSni
have included it within their commenlarioi with nearly the same remark.

174

THE SUSHRUTA SAMlllTA’. C Chap. XVHl.

into its cavity, causing numbness, e.vcessive exudation
and unevenness of its surface. A lint, properly
satmated %\itb a medicinal plaster and rightly inserted
into the ca\'ity of an ulcer, leads to its speedy healing.
All secreting measures in connection wth an ulcer
should be continued or stopped according to its condi-
tion, whereby the nature and shape of the bandage
should be determined as well. An ulcer, due cither
to the deranged condition of blood or the Pittam,
should be dressed and bandaged once a day which may
be extended to a number of times in the case of an
ulcer brought about by the deranged Kapham and Va}^!.
The pus or the local morbid matter should be secreted
by pressing the base or the bottom of an ulcer and by
gently moA-ing the hand along it in a contrarx' direction
(do^-n, up\vardi ; and all bandages around joints and
Gudasandhis) should be duly tied up.

The rules laid down under the head of adhesioning
the parts of a bifurcated ear-lobe would hold good in a
case of severed lips as well. The measures amply dis-
cussed in the present Chapter should be extended by
means of inference, analog}- and judgment to apply
viulatis mutandis to the bandaging of a fractured or
dislocated bone.

An ulcer, properly bandaged, has a greater chance
of not being affected by Mng don-n, sitting up, or an}*
other movement of the patient, nor by the joltings

ctnp. xvm. :

SUTUASTHAN.AM.

175

ofn convc3*ancc he niaj’ ride or be carried in. An
ulcer afTccUng a vein or a ligament or the skin (super-
ficial) or the flesh or the bones cannot be healed
without bandaging it. An ulcer situated in aii)' of the
internal chambers (cavities) of the body, or occurring
at any junction of the limbs or organs, etc. or having
its seal in a bone and whether of a deep, superficial,
malignant, or corrosive charaeler, cannot be brought to
a successful termination without the liclp of a bandage.

Tliui ends the ci(;lileenili C'hnptcr of the Siitmsilii'mam in '.he Stislirula
SatnhitA whicli iro.xis of the ilrcssing nnd landnpinc of idcers.

CHAPTER XIX.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of
the management or nursing of a patient witli an ulcer
etc. (Vranito-pa-saniya-madhya^am).

First of all a suitable chamber should be sought and
selected for a patient, sufTering from an ulcer. It should
be roomy and spacious and situated in a commend-
able site.

IVIetrical Text : — Diseases, which are physical,
mental or traumatic in their origin, can never attack
a person who dwells in a clean and spacious chamber,
protected from excessive lieat, and strong gusts of wind.

The bed should be spread clean, ample and
comfortable, uith the head of the beadstead turned
towards the east, and proHded with some kind of a
weapon.

metrical Texts In a spacious and well-
spread bed, an ulcer-patient can toss about and move
his limbs with the greatest comfort. The reason for
the head being turned towards the east is that the
patient may easily make obeisance to the (demons
and) celestial spirits, who inhabit that quarter of the
sky. Thus the patient shall lie in comfortable posture,
^attended upon by his sweet-talking friends and relations.

Metrical Text : — The friends and relations
of a patient shall alleviate the pain of his ulcer wnth
pleasant and interesting topics, and b}" solacing him
with the prospect of a speedy recover}-. An ulcer-
patient should not sleep in the day time, as it
tends to aggravate the pain, swelling and redness
of the ulcer, increases its exudations, and gives rise
to itching and heaviness of the limbs.

The patient must carefully protect the ulcer when
moving any of his limbs, such as standing up, or
sitting down, or turning on his sides, or while moving
about, or speaking in a loud voice.

Metrical Text ; — An ulcer- patient, even if
Jie feels himself strong and capable, should avoid
a standing or sitting posture, as well as locomotion,
and day-sleep." These acts done to e.xcess, or a long
confinement to bed would aggravate the bodil}’- Viyu,
thus causing pain in the ulcer.

He should studiously avoid the company and touch
of, and even conversation with, women vith whom he
can legitimately have intercourse.

Metrical Text The sight of a woman etc
might lead to the secretion and emission of semen and

* Different reading : — RWinc; In a carriage or on horseback, and
garrnlousness.

178 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIHTA'. f C!wp. XIX'.

give rise to all the distressing symptoms, Avhich are
consequent upon an act of actual coitus under the
circumstance.

Prohibited diet ; — A diet consisting of
newly har\-ested Dh^nyam, Alrfslia pulse, Sesanuim,
Kaliya, Kulattha, and Nishpaba should be avoided
by an ulcer-patient. The pot-herbs known as Haritaka-
shSka, acid, saline or pungent substances, treacle and
its modifications, cakes, dried meat, dried pot-herbs,
goat s flesh, mutton, meat of animals which are amphi-
bious in their habits or which live close to water, lard,
cold water, Knsharit a composition prepared with
sesamum, i\I^sha pulse and rice), Payasa (a sweetened
preparation of rice, milk and sugar boiled together),
curd, milk and whey should be regarded as unwholesome.

IVI©t.rica.I Texts : — Vegetables and articles
which belong to the groups commencing from the
one technicall} known as the Nava-Dhanya-Varga,
and ending with the one known as the Takra- Varga,
should be understood as possessed of the propertv of
increasing the pus in an ulcer and of aggravating the
deranged bodily humours. If in the habit of taking
wine, an ulcer-patient will do well to avoid the use
of spirituous liquors, such as ilairaya, Arishta, Asar-a,
Sidhu, Sura and its varieties. .An ulcer may develop

• The species of svine which are made of the expressed juice of grapes
and are antacids in their virtues, as wcU as those mentioned under the hr-ad
of Haanopt}-sis, may be given to an ulcer-patient.

Chap. XIX. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

179

into one of a malignant t>T)e through the use of a
wine which is acid in its taste, or is sharp, dry and
heat-making in its potency, or is followed by
almost instantaneous intoxication.

An ulcer-patient should avoid all things that retard
the progress of a rapid cure, such as wind, dust, smoke,
exposure to heat and cold, over-eating, unpleasant
sounds and sights, envy, humiliation, fear, anger, grief,
scheming, keeping of late hours, sitting or lying in an
uneven posture, fasting, garrulousness, physical exer-
cise, leaping or a standing posture, locomotion, ex-
posure to cold winds, ingestion of unw'holesome, in-
compatible or indigestible substances, and flea-bites
on the affected localit)\

Metrical Texts : — The food, partaken of by
a w'eakened and emaciated ulcer-patient, is not full)'
digested owing to the above mentioned, and other
multifarious causes. The undigested food riolently
disturbs and aggravates the bodily humours, which move
about in the body and give rise to swelling, secretion,
burning pain and suppuration in the ulcer.

An ulcer-patient should always be clad in clean
and white garments, have his hair and nails closely
clipped and pared off, and live in humble devotion
to the Brahmans, to the gods and the preceptors. The
rites of benediction and dhnne peace should be done
unto him. Wherefore ? Because the monsters and

jgo THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. IChap. XIX.

demons of mighty prowess, who are the attendants
of the gods Pashupati, Kuvera and Kumdra, roam
about in quest of prey, and visit the bedside of an
ulcer-patient out of their fondness for flesh and blood,
being attracted thereto by the smell of the secreted and
morbid matter in the ulcer. These evil spirits come
to take away the life of a patient in a case which
is doomed to terminate fatall}', while in a successful
case their advent is due to the desire of extorting sacri-
ficial oblations from him.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject These honour-seeking evil spirits should be
worshipped and propitiated witli the whole heart ;
and offerings of burning incense sticks, edibles and
sacrifices, etc. should be made to them with the
greatest humility.

The evil spirits, worshipped and propitiated as
above, spare the life of a self-controlled patient (out
of compassionh Hence he shall be kept in a chamber
furnished with flowers, garlands, weapons, fried paddy,
and lamps kept continuously burning. His friends and
relations should regale him v,nth fond and loving
topics to drive away the feeling of sleepiness with the
prospect of a speedy cure.

Metrical Texts A patient, constantly
cheered with the suggested prospects of a speedy

Chnp. XIX.] SUTRASTHANAM. l8i

recovety, and beguiled with pleasant and congenial
discourses, soon gets rid of his complaint.

Morning and evening, the physicians and the Brah-
mans should perform the rites of benediction, over him,
as laid down in the Rik, Yajuh, SSman and the Atharva
Vedas.

IWetrical Texts : — For ten consecutive days,
the room of the patient should be diligently fumigated,
morning and evening, with the fumes of mustard,
Arishta-leaves, clarified-butter and salt made into a
kind of incense stick.

Drugs such as Chhatr^, Atichhatii, Languli, Jatild,
Bramhacharini, Lakshmi, Guh^, Atiguha, Shata-viiyayi,
Sahasra-virj'a}'^ and white mustard seeds should be
placed on the head of the patient.

lYletrical Texts : — ^The patient should be
fanned with bloving chowries so that the ulcer
may not be in any way thrashed or lacerated
during the fanning. The ulcer should not be
scratched or pressed. The patient should be carefully
watched, while asleep. Demons, that get abroad in the
night, fly from the .presence of an ulcer-patient pro-
tected as above, as herds of deer fly from the forest
where lions are found.

Regimen of diet and conduct An

ulcer-patient Ihing on a diet consisting of old and

i 82

THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A'.

[ Ch^ip. XIX.

boiled Shali rice, not extremely liquefied, and
treated wdth clarified-butter, and taken with the
cooked meat of animals of the J4ngala species, soon
gets rid of his disease. A diet consisting of boiled rice,
the pot'herbs kno\TO as the Tanduli}'akam, Jivanti,
Sunishannaka, Vdstuka, immature Mulaka, Vdrt^ku,
Patola and K^ravella, fried with Saindha\'a (rock-salt)
and clarified-butter, and seasoned with the expressed
Juice of Dhddima and Amalakara, or of Mudga soup
treated as above, should be prescribed for the patient
Barley powder, Vilepi, Kulm^sha and boiled water,
should be likevnse given to the patient for food
and drink. Fatigue or physical exercise causes
the ulcer to swell, while the keeping of late hours
increases the local redness. A sleep during the day
under the circumstance would give rise to pain in the
affected part, while a coitus may bring on the death
of the patient.

An ulcer-patient, not given to sleep in the day,
and living in a room protected from gusts of wnd,
and strictly following the instructions of his ph}’^sician,
(surgeon) is healed in the course of a veiy' short time
and vdll enjoy a long life through the observance of
the abovesaid regimen of diet and conduct. This is the
dictum of Dhanvantari.

Thus ends the nineteenth Chapter of the SutrasthSnam in the Snshruia
Samhit5 which treats of the nursing or management of an ulcer-patient.

M A 1> T !•: R XX.

X<nv \vc, slinll <liM uss Uu* Clinjitcr wlu'rli treats of
the sahilnr)- and itoii snUilary eOccls ot rei,dinen, etc.

(Hila’hfllya-maclhyayam).

.\ero5(Hnq rerlain cniinL-nl ineilieal authorities, an
artiide or a substance which is bc'nelicial in derange-
ments of the bodily V.iyu may jwcwe jmsitivcly injuri-
ous in a I’iltaja afTertiim ; hence it is impossible
to name an article or substance which is nbsolnlcly
or miiversally wholesome irrespective of the nature
and type of a disejise, and of the deranged bodily
humours involved therein .

But We cannot subscribe to the foregoing hy-
pothesis, since I)y nature or combination, things
substances' are, or become endued with properties,
which prove absolutely beneficial or unconditionaJl)'-
harmful or exert a mixed virtue (both beneficial and
injurious) according to the diflcrcnce in the nature and
tj'pe of the disease in which they are employed. Things
or articles such as, clarified-butter, water, milk and
boiled-rice, etc. may be denominated as absolutely
beneficial owing to their congeniality to, or natural
suitableness to the human organism.

Similarly, substances such as fire, alkali and poison,
may be designated as unconditionally harmful in virtue

184

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XX.

of their burning, suppurating 'lit : boiling) and fatal
effect upon the organic bodies in general. A substance,
which is innocuous by nature, may prove equally injuri-
ous as any active poison through an injudicious or
incompatible combination ; whereas a substance or an
article, which proves beneficial in a derangement of the
Vdyu, may prove otherwise in a disorder of the Pittam.

Articles or substances which may be safely included
within the food stuffs of all human beings are the mem-
bers of the group 'Varga) known as the red Sh^li, the
Shastika, the Kanguka, the Mukundaka, the Pdnduka,
the Pitaka, the Pramodaka, the Kdlaka, the Ashanaka,
the Pushpaka, the Karddamaka, the Shakunahrita, the
Sugandhaka, the Kalama, the Nivara, the Kodrava the
UdcHlaka, the Shy^mdka, the Godhuma and the Venn,
etc., as well as the flesh of the Ena, the Harina (copper
coloured deer), the Kuranga, the Mriga, the Mriga-
raatrika, the Shvadanstrd, the Kardla, the Krakara,
the Kapota (pigeon), the Lava, the Tittiri, the
Kapinjala, the Varttira, and the Varttika, and such like
beasts and birds. The varieties of pulse which form
the articles of human food are known as the Mudga,
the Vana-Mudga, the Makushtha, the Kald3’'a, the
Masura, the Mangal5’’a, the Chanaka, the Harenu, the
the Adhaki and the Satina. Similarly, the different
species of pot-herbs, which may be safely used by a man
to give a greater relish to his food, are named as the

NN. 1

SUTRASTHANAM,

1S5

Chilli, ilie V.fsluka, the Siinisliannnlca the Jivanli, the
TaiuluHyalia, and the Mandukapnrni, etc. Clarificd-
huttcr, the sail known as tlie Saindhava, and the
luscious juice of the poinejfranatc and the Anialakam,
should be pcncrally deemed the most wholesome articles
of food.

Similarly, the practise of self-control, residence in a
room protected from the strong fpists of wind, sleeping
only at night, tepid water, and moderate physical exercise
should be regarded as absolutel}' conducive to a better
prcsen’alion of health.

Wc have already enumerated the names of sub-
stances which arc absolutely beneficial or uncondi-
tionally injurious to human health. Things which are
both wholesome and injurious are those, which, for
example, may prove beneficial in a distemper of
the bodily Vayu though otherwise in a Pittaja affec-
tion. The Valli fruit, the Karaka, the Karira, the
Amla-phala, the salt, the Kulattha, the Pin5';ika, curd,
oil, Virohi, cakes, the dried pot-herbs, goat’s flesh, mutton,
wine, the Jamboline fruit, the Chilichima fish, the flesh
of the Godhd, and the Var^ha (rrild boar) being eaten
simultaneously wth milk, furnish an e.xample of articles
which may act as deadly poisons through incompatible
combinations.

IVIetrical Texts An intelligent physician,
considering the nature of the disease, the strength and

24

1 86 the sushruta samhita.

[ Qnp. XX.

temperament of the patient, and the state of his diges-
tion as well as the seat of the affection, the physical
features of the country and the then prevailing season
of the 3'ear, should prescribe a diet which he thinks
the most proper and suitable to the requirements of
the case. Since the conditions infinitel)’ varj' in the
different tj'pes of diseases and even the same conditions
do not obtain in one and the same type,* physicians
generall}’’ prescribe a diet of their own selection, one
determined with regard to its general effect on health, in
preference to one that has been laid down in books
of medicine.

If asked to prescribe either milk or poison to a
healthy person, a physician would naturally prescribe
the former, and thereby, prove the absolute wholesome-
ness of milk and unconditional harmfulness of poison.
Thus is verified, Sushruta, the correctness of the dic-
tum, that things such as water, etc., are absolutely
and unconditionally wholesome or othei^vise, by virtue
of their respective natural properties.

Things which are unwholesome
through combination : — Now I shall enu-
merate the names of substances which become positively
unwholesome through incompatible combinations. The

* The propriety and impropriety of a particular diet should 1)C deter-
mined with a full regard to the antecedent and attending circumstances
of a particular malady.

Chap. XX. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

187

flesh of any domestic (Gramya) or aquatic (Anupa)
beast or bird, as well as the flesh of those which live in
marshy ground (Audaka), should not be eaten vnth
boiled rice prepared from paddy which has com-
menced sprouting, or with lard, honey, milk, treacle
or M^sha-pulse, The pot-herbs, known as the
Rohini and the Jdtu-shdka, should not be partaken
of in combination wth milk and honey ; nor the
flesh of a heron, eaten simultaneously with Kulm^sha
and the spirituous liquor known as V^runi. Maricha
(black pepper) and Pippalis should not be eaten in
combination with the pot-herbs known as the K^kam^chi,
The pot-herbs known as the Nadima and Siddhi should
not be simultaneous!)'' eaten wnth curd, and the flesh of
a cock. Honey should not be taken immediatel)'' after
drinking warm water, nor meat and bile should
be simultaneouly eaten. Sur4 (wine), Krishar^ and
P^yasa should not be taken in combination. Similarly,
Souviraka and sesamum paste, fish and modifications
of sugarcane juice, treacle and K^kam^chi, honey
and Mulakam, treacle and the flesh of a wild boar,
or honey and boar’s flesh should not be taken in
combination.

Similarly, milk and Mulakam, mango fruit and
Jamboline fruit and the flesh of Godh^, Porcupine and
hog should not be eaten together. All fish, specially
those of the Chilichimi species, should not be taken -n-ith

i88 the SUSHRUTA SAMHJTA'. [Chiip. XX.

milk; nor the fruit of a plantain tree should be simulta-
neously eaten with T^la fruit, milk or whey. The fruit
known as Lakucha should not be taken with milk, ciu*d
or meat soup, nor with honey and clarified-butter, nor
immediately before or after the drinking of milk.

Incompatible preparations of food:—

Now we shall enumerate the names of sub-
stances, which become unwholesome through incom-
patible preparations. Flesh of pigeon fried with mustard
oil should not be eaten. The flesh of a Kapinjala,
Myura (peacock^ L^va, Tittira, and Godhd, boiled
with castor oil and bn a fire of the twigs of castor
plants, should not be eateft. Clarified-butter, kept
in a vessel of Indian bell metal for ten consecutive
days, should be rejected as unwholesome. Honej’-
should not be used in combination with an article
or substance heated by fire, nor in the seasons of
spring and autumn. The pot-herbs knovm as the
K^kam^chi, boiled in a bowl in which fish or ginger
had been previously boiled or prepared, should be
rejected as positively injurious.

Similarly, the pot-herbs known as the Upodik^
should not be eaten by boiling them with the levigated
paste of sesamum. The flesh of a heron prepared
Tsuth hog’s lard should not be taken with the pulp
of the cocoanut fruit. The flesh of a Bhasa bird, roasted
on a spit over a charcoal fire, should not be eaten.

Clinp. XX. 1

SUTRA.STHA'N.AM.

189

Objectionable proportions Now we

shall enumerate the names of substances which become
unwholesome b)' being mixed in objectionable pro-
portions. Two oily substances (such as oil and
clarified butter) or honey and any of the oily
substances, mi.xed in equal proportions, should not be
taken ; nor should rain water be drunk immediately
after having taken honey and clarified-butter.

Incompatible tastes, potencies and
chemical actions : — Now we shall describe
the substances enumerated in couples, and possessed of
different tastes, which prove incompatible to each
other through their respective tastes, potencies and
chemical actions 'Vipaka). Sweet and acid tastes,
or sweet and saline tastes should be deemed incom-
patible to each other in respect of their potencies and
inherent properties. Sweet and acrid tastes are incom-
patible to each other in all the above three respects.

Similarly, sweet and bitter, or sweet and astringent
things should be deemed incompatible to each other in
respect of their tastes, and chemical action. Acid and
saline things are incompatible to each other as regards
their flavours. Acid and acrid things are incompatible
as regards flavour and chemical action. Acid and
bitter, or acid and astringent things, are incompatible
to each other, both as regards their respective flavours,
potencies, and digestive or chemical transformations.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. [ Chnp. XX.

190

Saline and pungent things are incompatible to each
other as regards their respective flavour (Rasa) and
digestive (chemical) transformation.

Similarly, saline and bitter things or saline and
astringent things are incompatible to each other
in respect of all the three abovesaid relations and cate-
gories. Pungent and bitter tastes are incompatible
to each other in respect of flavour and digestive
transformation, whereas substances of pungent and
astringent or bitter and astringent tastes are in-
compatible to one another as regards their re-
spective potencies, flavours and digestive (chemical)
action or transformation.

Degrees of incompatibility ; -Sub-
stances that are incompatible vith, or antagonistic to, the
system through a difference of degree or intensity, as
well as things which bring about an extreme dryness
of the organism, or those which are extremely oily in
their composition or are characterised by extreme
cold or warmth, should be categorically rejected.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — ^Things or substances which are incompatible
to one another in their respective tastes, potencies and
reactionar}’^ transfomration should be denied as abso-
lutel)'- unwholesome, while the rest should be consi-
dered as possessed of mixed ■virtues (wholesome or

Cliap. XX. ]

StiTRASTI-lANAM.

191

injurious under certain circumstances) as described
before.

By taking substances which are incompatible to one
another as regards their tastes, potencies and digestive
transformation, a greedy and intemperate person
becomes adlicted wth disease and weakness of the
sense-organs, and ultimately meets with his doom.

Anything, which being taken enrages or agitates the
bodil)' humours wthout causing the assimilated food
(effete matter) to be evacuated out of the bowels, or is
possessed of a taste contrar}' to, or other than what is
necessar}' for the purposes of vitalization, should be
looked upon as the primarj' source of all bodily dis-
tempers.

Diseases, brought about by a food or drink composed
of incompatible substances, are amenable to the use of
purgatives, emetics, or pacifying (corrective of the
deranged humours) medicines ; and such a diet, even
when found unavoidable, should be preceded by the use
of drugs or substances potent enough to neutralise its
baneful effect.'

A meat, in the composition of which substances of
incompatible virtues and potencies largely enter, fails to
develop any distressing or harmful s5miptoms in subjects
who are habitually addicted to it, or who takes it in

* This couplet occurs ulso in the Chotnkn Samhiltf.

192

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. XX.

small quantities, as well as in persons of 3'outhful \'igor
and strong appetite, or in those ayIio have become
invigorated by the use of oil}’’ and albuminous food and
healthful physical exercise."*

The effects of the winds : — Now we shall
describe the effects of the winds on the body, (as they
blow from the dfferent quarters of the heaven) .

The East wind The East wind, which is cool
and sweet in its potency, is hea^'}’ and charged with salt;
it aggra\’ates blood and Pittam and gives rise to an acid
digestive reaction. It specially aggravates the disease
in a patient suffering from a wound or an ulcer, or from
the effect of any poison, and affects persons of Shleshmdla
temperament. It is highly efficacious to fatigued
persons, as well as to those of a Vatala (nen'ous) tem-
perament, or who are afflicted noth any sort of Kaphaja
disease ; though it increases the slimy secretion in their
ulcers if there be any.

The South wind : — The South vnnd is b'ght,
sweet (produces the same soothing effect on the
organism like a thing of sweet taste) and is followed by
an astringent after-taste (Anurasa'i being antacid in its
reaction. It is the best of winds, gives \igour to the
eyes, increases the strength, and soothes the blood and
the Pittam -without aggravating the bodily Vajm.

” Different Reading — In a child or in n man of voracious appetite.

Clwp. XX. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

193

The West wind : — The West wind is pure,
non-slimy, drj', rough to the perception, and keen. It
absorbs the albumen or oily principle of the body. It
absorbs or dries up fat and Kapham, produces a
parched condition in the body when exposed to it,
and speedily diminishes the strength of a person.

The North wind The North wind is cold,
crisp, mild, of a sweet taste terminating in an astringent
one. It does not in any way enrage or agitate the
deranged bodily humours. In healthy subjects it
increases the strength and the running secretions from
the different orfices of the body (such as the nostrils
etc.). It proves extremely salutary to patients suffering
from consumption, cachexia and the effects of poison.

Thm cmls the twcnliclh Chapter of the SulrasthAnnm in theSushruta
‘tamliitrf which treats of ■etlutar)' and nonsalularj’ effect'; of the regimen.

25

CHAPTER XXI.

Now we shall discuss the Chapter which investigates
the nature of bodily humoiu^, as exciting causes of
ulcers (Vrana-prashna-madhyayam).

TheVayu.Pittamand ShleshmS should be considered
as the primarx- and the most essential factors in the con-
stitution of human organism. These fundamental and
Antal humours, occupying respectively the lower, middle,
and upper parts of the body, maintain its integrity. The
human body is supported by the three fundamental
humours in the same way as a dwelling hou«e is
propped up by three supporting poles or slays ; from
which fact, the body is called the three-supported one
iTristlinaarai by certain authorities. derangetl con-
dition of these three fundamental humours may bring
about its dissolution or death, while on their con-
tinuance in a normal state depends the ritality of tiie
organism. These three humours, in combination with a
fourth, the principle of blood, determine the origin,
preservation, and dissolution of animated organism and
permeate it Avith their respective properties till the
moment of death.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject ; — There can be no organism \rithout Vd\-u,
Pittam, Kapham and blood, which are necessarj* to

NNI..

srru.\sm,\NAM.

I

l')5

roiibianlly mainuun its inie^rily. The terms Vata
(\.iyu), I’itlam and J'hlcslun.i Kaphaiii' arc respec-
tively derived Irom tlie ruots ‘Va", to move or smell,
' Pa’pa.' to burn or to beat, and “ Sblisha,” to embrace,
with the suuix ’Ta’ thereto added."

Scats of the bodily humours Now

we shall descril>e the locations of the foreiroing vital hu-
mours. ’flic V.-lyu may be brielly described as locratcd
in the reenons of the jielvis fShroni , and the rectum
(jiida . The Pittam has its seat in the region between
the stomach .-^mashaya) and the intestines (Pakv;isbaya)
which is above the jK-lvis and the rectum and below
the umbilicus, while the Kapham is ensconced within
the cavnty of the stomach Am.ishaya.

Xow wc shall di\ndc the locations of each of the
vital humours into live parts : — The five localities of
the Vayu will be described under the head of Vata-
Vy.'idhis ner\'Ous diseases), while those of Pittam are the
liver and the spleen, the heart, the pupils of the eyes,
the skin and the intestines (Pakvashaya;. The Kapham
is located in the region of the breast, the throat, the
head, the joints and tlie stomacli (Amasliaya). The fore-
going regions are the seats of the vital humours in their
normal state.

* Frtnii lhi> shuuldlK: inftrrcfl l!iat niulion .md .‘'nidi arc tlio naluml
aUriUuio of ibc \iir\l \Y»yu, heal ami Imrnin;^ arc llio-c of I'lUam, and
union and inicT;ralion arc lh<r*c of K.ipluini.

196

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Cinp. XXL

Metrical Texts:— The vital humours fV^^yu,
Pittam and Kaphara) maintain the integrity of the
animated organism by creating, assimilating and
diffusing strength in the same wa)' as tlie moon, the sun,
and the winds maintain the integrity of the terrestrial
globe.*

The Pittam : — Now it may be asked whether
the Pittam is identical with the elemental fire, or is it
something other than that ? The question may be
answered by stating that the Pittam is the same as
fire. Since such symptoms, as a burning sensation,
digestion (boib'ng', and all other characteristics of fire
can never exhibit themselves in the human body with-
out the inteiv’ention of Pittam. Pittam therefore is called
internal fire.t

Consequently, an enfeebled action of Pittam is re-
medied by the administration of drugs and substances
which are akin to the elemental fire in their attributes,
while an abnormal or excessive action (secretion) of
Pittam is subdued by cooling measures as an over-
kindled fire is subdued by moisture. There is no other
fire (heat making factor) in the organism than Pittam.

* The moon lavc.s the earth ard imparL" to it the viialisinf; principle
with her own ambrosial light- The sun draws off the moisture in virtue
of his own aiiraciive force* and the \5yu dislribaie> the heat and moisture
over its surface,

+ The analog)’ is based on the healing (and metabolic) actions of
Pittam, and docs not extend to its liquid secretion (bile). But since the
former attributes permeate in its entirety, it is designated the Internal fire.

Chap. XXL ]

SUTRASTtiANTAiM.

197

The Parchakargni By the ordination of fate
or necessity (unfathomable natural causel, the Pittam,
located in the region between the stomach (Am^shaya)
and the intestines (Pakv^sha5'a), helps the digestion
of the four kinds of food (such as drink and edibles
etc.) partaken of by a living subject, and purges off the
residue or impure morbiferous matter in the shape of
urine and excreta after the completion of the process.
Even thus located, it keeps up the temperature in
its other distant locations (skin, etc.) in virtue of its
native heat-giving attribute. Hence this Pittam is
called the Pachakagni (digestive fire or heat) in an
animated organism.

The Ranjakargni -.—The function of the
Pittam, which has its seats in the liver and the spleen,
consists in imparting its characteristic pigment (Ragakrit)
to the Ijonph-chyle and is hence knowm as E-anjakagni
(lit ;^-d3'’eing fire or pigment bile.)

The Sa'dhaka'gni : — The Pittam seated in the
heart is denominated as the Sadhakag^ (performing
or operating heat or fire) inasmuch as its action
is to bring about the fniition or realisation of
one's desires.

The Alochakargni : — The Pittam, which is
located in the pupils of the eyes, is called the Alocha-
kagni (the Pittam or fire of sight) as its office is to

THE SUSHRHTA SAMlllTA’.

[Clmp. XXI.

198

catch the image of an)’ external object presented to
the eyes.

The Bhrarjaka'gni The Pittam, which has
its seat in the skin, is called the Bhrajakagni (illuminat-
ing or irradiating heat) inasmuch as it absorbs the
substances used in the shape of unguents, lubrications,
etc. and irradiates the glow of one’s natural complexion.

IVIetrical texts :~The Pittam is a keen, sharp
and warm liquid, of a blue colour (in its nonnal state),
or yellowish pn its deranged condition). It emits a
kind of fleshy smell and is possessed of a pungent taste
which is transformed into an acid one when deranged or
\ntiated.

Seats of Shleshma' Kaphani': — Xow wc
shall describe the locations of Kaphani. The stomach
(Amashaya), which is the seat of Ivapham, occupies the
same position as regards its location to that of Pittam
as the sim holds in relation to that of the moon. And
since the stomach ' Amashaya) is situated above the
pancreas (Pittdshaya ', and is endowed with a property
(cooling; contrar)’ to the primar)’ ^•irtue (heating) of Pit-
tam, and, since the heat emitted by the receptacle of Pit-
tam is naturally radiated in an upward direction, the four
kinds of food, brought in to the stomach (Amdshaya), are
boiled and transformed into a soft placid mass (ch)Tne),
like rice boiled in a bowl full of water placed" over a

THE SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA'. [Cb;.p. XXi.

198

catch the image of any external object presented to
the eyes.

The Bhr^jakargni The Pittam, which has
its seat in the skin, is called the Bhrajakagni (illuminat-
ing or irradiating heat) inasmuch as it absorbs the
substances used in the shape of unguents, lubrications,
etc. and irradiates the glow of one's natural complexion.

Metrical texts : — Tire Pittam is a keen, sharp
and warm liquid, of a blue colour dn its normal state),
or yellowish dn its deranged condition). It emits a
kind of flesh}' smell and is possessed of a pungent taste
which is transformed into an acid one when deranged or
vitiated.

Seats of Shleshma' Kapham : — Now we
shall describe the locations of Kapham. The stomach
^ Amashaya), which is the seat of Kapham, occupies the
same position as regards its location to that of Pittam
as the sim holds in relation to that of the moon. And
since the stomach .Amashaya/ is situated above the
pancreas (Pittashaya), and is endowed with a property
(cooling/ contrar}' to the primar}' virtue (heating) of Pit-
tam, and, since the heat emitted by the receptacle of Pit-
tam is naturally radiated in an upward direction, the four
kinds of food, brought in to the stomach (Amashaya), are
boiled and transfomted into a soft placid mass (chyme),
like rice boiled in a bowl full of water placed' over a

fluj'. NNl. !

Sin‘K.\STnA\\'A.M,

199

Inmiiiii; oven, riio lood, thii.s broiifilil down into the
slonuich, Ls easily moistened, disintegrated and digested
by coining into contact with the oily secretions of the
sioinacli (Am.isliaya).

IVletrical Texts The Kapham is originated
throngii the sweet, slimy, watery, e.vudating character
of the foorl brought into the stomach (Am.lshaya) ;
and hence the (vapham becomes endued witli similar
attributes.

The Kleclakam .—The ICapliam, even tliougli
princi)>ally iocivted in the stomach, permeates its four
other distant localities with its peculiar watery or
Inimid essence in virtue of its inherent attributes.

The Avalamvaka : — The Kapham, located in
the region of the chest, protects the joints of the arms,
the neck and the sternum, and enables the heart to
perform its natural functions with the help of the
lymph-chyle derived from the assimilated food and its
own intrinsic potency.

The Vodhakam : — The Kapham, situated in
the throat and at the root of the palate, lends its aid to
the perception of tastes by maintaining the moist or
humid character of the tongue.

The Tarpakam : — ^I'he Kapham, situated in
the head, cools and bathes the different sense organs

200

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

rciwp. XX J.

with its o\vii humid essence, in virtue of its natural
humid attributes.

The Shlmeshakam The Kaphara, situated
in the joints, keeps them firmly united, protects
their articulation and opposes their separation and
disunion.

Metrical Texts : — The Kapham is white,
heavy, oily, slimy and cool. In its normal state, it
is possessed of a sweet taste, which is followed by
a saline one in its reactionary transformation (chemical
reaction) when deranged or vitiated.

Seats of blood : — The seats oi blood are
in the liver and the spleen, as stated before, whence
it helps its other receptacles to serve their proper
functions.

Metrical Texts : — The blood is red, oily or
glossy, a little warm, and is possessed of an attribute
similar to something of a sweet taste. It is heavy, and
it emits a fleshy smell and resembles the Pittam in its
reactionary process, or in other words, those factors,
which derange the Pittam, vitiate the blood as well.

These are the locations of the deranged humours,
which are respectively accumulated in them on account
of the aforesaid causes. The deranged humours e.vhibit
such symptoms as, fullness and stuffedness of the abdo-
men, or of any of the viscera (due to the action of the

Quip. XXI. ]

SUI’KASTHA'N'AM.

201

deranged Vajai ; yellowness of the affected part (due
to the action of the deranged Pittam and diminution
of the bodil)' heat, heaviness of the limbs, and a sense
of languor .due to the action of the diseased Kaphara),
and a natural repugnance for causes (factors) which
lead to their respectiv^e aggravations or accumulations.
The medical treatment should be commenced as soon
as the symptoms, peculiar to their accumulation, would
become manifest.

Humours and their aggravations

Xow we shall enumerate the causes which agitate and
(aggravate) the deranged humours. The bodily Vayu
is aggravated b)’ such factors (conduct, practices and
diet, etc.) as, wrestling with a wrestler of superior
strength, Wolent gymnastic e.xercises, se.xual excesses,
excessive study, a headlong plunge into water or a leap
from an inordinate height, running, a violent pressing
blow, leaping over a ditch, a bounding gait, swimming,
keeping of late hours, carrj'ing of heavy loads, e.\'cessive
riding, walking a long distance and the partaking
of a food into the composition of which pungent,
astringent, bitter, light or parchifying articles, or sub-
stances of cool potency, largel}* enter. Diets consisting
of dried pot-herbs, Vallum, Varaka, Uddalaka, Kara-
dusha, ShyimSka, Xivara, Mudga, Masura, Adb^ki,
Harenu, Kalaya, and Nishpava tend to aggravate the

bodily Vayu.

26

202

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

r Ch:ip, XXI.

Fasting, unequal or irregular meals, over-eating,
voluntary suppression of urine, semen, and tears, or of*
the mucous secretions from the nose as in a lluent
corrv.a, a forced stoppage of defecation, eructation
or sneezing are the factors, which may be set down
as the aggravating causes of the bodily Vayu.

IVletrical Text The bodily Vayu is naturally
aggravated in a cold, cloudy or windy day, in winter,
during the rains, in the morning and evening and
especially at the close of digestion.

Symptoms of aggravated Pittam

The Pittam is aggravated by anger, grief, feiu', fatigue,
fasting, acid transfonnation (reaction) of the assimilated
food, or deficient gastric digestion, unnatural sexual
indulgence, partaking of a food consisting of pungent,
acid or saline, keen, heat making or light substances, as
well as of those whose digestion is followed by a
reactionary acidity. It is aggravated by the use of
sesamura oil, or of sesamum paste. Kulattha, Sarshajia,
Atashi, the pot-herbs known as Haritaka, fish, the
flesh of a Godha or a ' goat or mutton may lead to
its aggravation, if taken injudiciously.

Similarly, the use of curd, whey, Kurchika, (in-
spissated milk), Sauviraka, different kinds of wine,
Amla-phala (sour fruits), or Katvara (curd mixed with
oil; and excessive exposure to the sun, may be followed
by the same consequences.

Chap. X\L ]

SUTRASTHANAiM.

203

metrical Texts In addition to all these,
the Pittam is spontaneously and abnormally aggravated
in summer, in autumn, at noon, at mid-night and
during the process of digestion, as well as by the
partaking of hot or warm substances.

Symptoms of the deranged Ka-
pham : — The deranged Kapham is aggravated b)’
sleep in the day time, or by the following of lazy or
sedentary habits. The partaking of food, composed
of substances which are heavj’^, slimy, sweet, acid
or saline in their taste, or of one consisting of substances
which increase the raucous secretions from the fissures
of the body, may be likewise set down as aggra-
vating factors. The use of food grains, which are
called the Hayanaka, the Yavaka, the Naishadha,
the Itcata, the Masha, the Malnimasha, the Godhuma,
the Tilam, or of rice cakes may lead to its aggravation.
Curd, milk, the Krishara, the Puyasha {sweetened rice
porridge;, the various preparations of cane-sugar are
things which produce the same result. The flesh of
beasts and birds that are aquatic in their habits or live
in swampy lands, as well as lard, have the same effect,
if used as food. The use of bulbs and lotus stems
or of Kasheruka, Shringitaka, Madhura-phala, Valli-
phala as well as eating before digestion or the par-
taking of food consisting of both wholesome and un-
wholesome substances may aggra^^te thisbodily humour.

204

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. f Ctu,.. XKl.

Metrical Texts ; — The Ivapliam is naturally
and spontaneously aggravated in the morning and
evening, in Hemanta, and specially in Spring, and just
after a meal. Likewise, it is aggravated by the use of
cold food or drink, etc.

Symptoms of the aggravated
blood: — [Ou-ing to anatural similarity between blood
and the Pittam, and through a natural aflinitj' between
their attributes], causes, which tend to aggravate the
deranged Pittam, tend to aggravate or agitate the blood
as well. iMoreover, frequent meals or repeated use of
food, into the composition of which cool, liquid and
heavy substances largely enter, are followed by a dis-
tuibed or aggravated condition of the blood. Sleep in
the day time, anger, exposure to the glare of the sun
or fire, over- fatiguing labour, an external blow, ingestion
of indigestible or incompatible substances, and eating
before the full digestion of a prerious meal, may as
well be set down as causes which tend to aggravate
blood.

Metrical Texts : — As the bodilj' humours are
never aggravated independently of the blood, their
^aggravation goes together with a disturbed or agitated
condition of the blood. The aggravated condition of the
humours gives rise to pain and moves the wind : Va)^!)
in the bowels ; it further occasions acid eructations,
thirst, burning sensations, aversion to food, vomiting

4

X\1. :

sr rfv’ \srii.vx.\M

->05

.uul n.ni^ca. Any oi tlic.-c hviupt(iin> hliniilcl he rej^Mid-
cil .IS Uie second occasion whidi calls tor medical aid.

Expansion of the deranged hu-
mours : Now we shall <lcscril>e the expansion
IVa.saram of the derainjed luimonrs. The denmited
hnmoiir.s, aeitravated l»y the al)ove mentioned causes,
expand and nverllow the limits ol' their re.siieclive
loealilie.s in the same manner ns, cxdtes, soaked in
any rerment or enzyme and kept standiiifi over
ni.dit. lerment .and rise throndi the acquisition
of new and unseen attributes. I'lie V.iyu, which
is (msses.sed of locomotion or extreme mobility, shotdd
he looked upon as the cau.se of their expansion
or over-dowinj'. J'he \‘avu, thout'h an inanimate thin.",
in reality is posso.s.sed of tlie (piality of “Rajas"
(creative or cohesive ener[(y), and tlie (piality of the
Rajas is the only e.ssential or motive principle in the
universe.

As a vast and mighty expanse of water, which
has been divided into two expanses by a dam or
barrier, will sweep awav the latter and unite again
to form one sheet of water ; so the deranged humours,
sometimes singly, sometimes in combination with two
or all of their species, or in unison with blood, expand
and over-run the organism in all directions. As for
example, the A'ayu, the Pittam, the fvaphnm and
the blood are singly expanded, whereas the bi-hu-

2o6

THE SL'SHKUTA SAMHITA'. f ^‘>■'1* -'<>:>•

moural expansions involve the siiuultaneous overhow
of the two deranged humours, or of any deranged
humour and blood, as the Vayu and Piltam, Vayu and
Kapham, Va5'u and blood, Pittam and blood, and
Kapham and blood. The tri-humoural expansions,
which involve the blood and any two of the deranged
and enraged humours, may be classified as the expansion,
of - i) the Vayu, Pittam and blood, (2) the expansion of
the Vi)'u, Kapham and blood, (3) the expansion of
Pittam, Kapham and blood, -4) the expansion of Vayu,
Pittam and Kapham, <51 the expansion of Pittam,
Kapham and blood, the diflerent types of expansion
numbering fifteen in all.

Metrical Texts;— The aggravated, or the
abnormally irritated deranged humours, whether per-
meating the whole or half of the system or restricted
to any particular part or member of the body, give rise
to disease in the place of their incarceration, like rain
clouds pouring down in the quarter of the sky where
they are formed. The deranged humours, not excessively
(slightly, aggravated, lie inoperative coaling the internal
passages (Al^rgas) of the body and thus bring about a
fresh disease, if subsequently agitated by any disturbing
causes.

Tlie deranged and aggravated Vd)^!, having moved
into anj' specific seat of Pittam, should be medicinally
treated as a case of Pittaja aggravation. Similarly, the

>l‘TN'.\sni VNA.M

• .x; V\}

2(\-:

(ir K.ipli.iin, t lKiiiijiiii;

Ituii K' t livo nl.ii c.' with r.n li ullicr. sliutild lie inctii-
V Hudly .i*- Uic hiiiuour in wliu.'C it

I he \ -iyii, iliiis .«L’.;t.n.iteil .ind '’Vpatidcd. tciid^
dev;. itc iKnn n;,dit .iiifl .,'ivo ri-'-c to a

HI di.-'leiitiiiii ol the ahdnmcii. .iceoinpaiiicd hy
.1 nnuhliii;; oimd in llie iMte>iineH 1 ‘lie Ihllam, tiiuicr
llic .‘■iiiiil.u eoiiditinji. .'ivi-.t tiM- to liiMt, and a ?oil ol
.'■neiJiny. Iniruni!.' p.nii in llic allicted part, to;t‘;lI'‘^'' ''illi
.1 -■'cn.'-alion ol r.idi.tlioii or evaporation o) heat iVoin il.s
i'lni.icc rile Kapil, nil, under tlie i ireiiiiistaiuf, would
Ur-hcr in .i coinplvlc ;ivci>ioii to lood, incitnc.ss of the
liinit.'^. \oiiiitiif,' ;ujd imjiaiud dii'otion. The preccdiiii,'
>yinptoins, eaused hy the .i;'^'ravation aii.l expansion
of ilie liudily Imniouia, ^liouhl lie tlie third occasion
lur inedk-ai trcatnient

Stha’na-SatTJshrayam : -Xow we shall
emnuenite tlie names of the peculiar diseiuies, whicii are
orijtiuated by tlie denim'ed and expanded humours,
incarcerated in the dilTerent parts ol the body.
These humours, coiilined in the alidomen, give rise to
Gulina abdominal glands) tuinoiirs, internal abscesses
(Vidnidhi), abdominal dropsy, impaired digestion
in the bowels, constipation 'Analia', cholera 'Visu-
chik.i and dysenterj'.

Lodged in the bladder, tliese humours usher in
Prameha (morbid urethral discharges), Ashmari (stone in

3o8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’. ICh.vp. XXI.

the bladder), Mutrakriclichhra (stricture of the urethra)
and Mutrdghdta (retention of urine), and diseases
affecting the renal secretion, etc. Restricted to the
penis they tend to bring in syphilis, Niruclha-prakasha
(phymosis) and the local inllainniatory diseases
known as the Shuka-dosha, etc.

Similarl)^, lodged in the region of the anus, these
deranged and e.xpanded humours beget listula in ano,
lucmorrhoids and polypus growths about that
locality. Confined in the region of the scrotum,
they give rise to hydrocele and other types of scrota!
tumours, etc. Restricted to the region above the
clavicles, these humours originate diseases peculiar to
that localit}’’, while erysipelas, cutaneous affections
(Kushtha'i and other minor diseases supervene, when they
restrict themselves to the flesh and the skin (lymph-
chyle) and blood. Altecting only the fat, tliese
humours tend to original.e Granthi (Aneurism), Apachi
(scrofula), Arvuda (tumour’, Galaganda (goitre) and Alaji
(inflammation of the eye at the edge of the cornea'.*

Lodged ill the lower extremities, they bring on
elephantisis, V4ta-Rakta (a kind of leprosy'', Vfita-
Kantaka, etc. Permeating the whole organism, they
give rise to such diseases as fever, Sari angaroga, etc.
which invade the entire system.

* Additional text: — Kcuching down and cunDnwl in the bone-syblcins of
the body, they produce \'idradhi (absccbscb), .Anubhiiyi, etc.

1 i.^i. XXI. !

Sl'TUASTllANAM.

201 )

Tlic ;ij,'i^r.ivatc(l and expanded Innnonrs, lints firmly
cn.M-onccd in the dilferenl parts of the hwly, exhibit
the pvemonitnry symptoms of diseases which will be
lullv dealt with under their respective heads. The
nvani^e^lat^on of these premonintry symiitoms should
be considered as the fourth occ.asiou for medkxd
irealmenl.

Disease-Its Development :-Xow we

♦

shall deal with the full development or manifestation
t)fa tlisease.The full manifestation of a disease, such as a
swellini', inmour, aneurism i^Granlhi"), Vidradhi (abscess)
and erysipelas (Visttrpa) etc., fever or dysentery, signifies
the complete development rtf the clniracleristic symp-
toms, which should be regarded as the fifth occasiou for
medic.al treatment.

The sixth occasiou for the calling in of medical aid
should be considered to have arisen when a swelling
(abscess, tumour, etc.) would burst and exhibit the charac-
teristic symptoms of an open ulcer. A persistent
lingering or continuance of a fever or dysenter}^ etc.,
should be considered as marking, or forming one of its
particular stages, and which may run into one of an
incurable type, if neglected or not sufiiciently cared for
at the outset.

Authoritative verse on the subject:—

The physician, who fully knows about the accumula-

27

210

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA,

[ Ctu ). XXI.

tion (Sanchaya), disturbance or aggravation rPrakopa),
expansion (Prasaram), and differentiating traits of the
deranged humours (Bheda), and is well conversant with
the specific localities in which thej* are respectively
confined in the course of their expansion (Sthfina-
samshrayani), and with the symptoms which they respec-
tively exhibit in connection with the incidental disease
(Vyakti), is alone worthy of that epithet.

The deranged humours, checked or subdued in their
accumulating stage, fail to exhibit any further or subse-
quent development, but, if left unremedied, they gain
in strength and intensity in the course of their further
development. The humours, deranged either singly, or in
couples, or in a triple combination as regards one or two
of their virtues, push on, follow and blend with humours
similarly deranged as regards their qualities and com-
binative numbers.

The medical treatment in a case, where two or all
(three) of the deranged humours are involved, consists
in conquering the strongest one in the combination, but
so as not to enrage or aggravate the minor or the weaker
humours in the group and specially so in a case of
Sannipita.-*

The comhinalion of any iwo of ihe Inxlilv humours with ihe viii.iictl
blood may likewise W interpreted to signify a SAnnipdiika (trihuniouml)
con^bination,

I hj)- XM- 1

SI'IUASTUaNAM.

-M I

A concourse of dcranj^cd Iniiuours, aUcclinj,' and ap-
pcarini^ in a pailicular pari of llie body, is called a boi!
or an ulcer (Vranaj which “is derived friiin the root
“Vri" to cover and is so called from the fact of its
coverin;^ a ))articular part of the body or from its
laivinj^ a cicatrix which remains the whole life-time
of the patient.

1 1.>;. 1.1. a. t! c • l..n.ii-r >'( 111.- SiiiM.ii ai .uii iii iln- Su.luiil.i

riil.il.i -Oii.'li lii.il . ililn llu- inline "I I he lluiiiiiuf,

II -e 111 .111 >1.1 it-

CHAPTLR XXII.

Xow we sliall discuss the chapter, which
treats of secretions from boils or ulcers of
different types. (Vranasrarva-Vi jnarniaya-
madhya^am).

A boil or an ulcer has its seat fjenerally in one ol
the eight following components or principles of the
body such as, the bone, the skin, the flesh, the veins,
the ligaments, the joints; the viscera and the Mannas
(^•ital parts of the body). A boil or an ulcer of any
t}T3e may crop up or appear in any one of the above
mentioned localities.

A boil or an ulcer, which is confined only to the
skin, readily yields to medical treatment, while the
remaining types, as well as those, which spontaneously
suppurate and burst, are hard to cure. A boil or an
ulcer usually assumes a shape which is either diffused,
rectangular, spheroidal or triangular ; while those,
which are irregular or indefinite in shape, (or have fonns
other than the precedmg ones , should be looked upon
as belonging to types which can be cured only with
the utmost difficulty. Any Vrana (burst or incised
abscess) in a patient, who obsen^es a strict regimen, and
who, from the outset, is placed imder the medical treat-
ment of an experienced physician (surgeon), will be
speedih' healed ; while an ulcer, affecting a person of

ciui). XX n. 1

SU'l'RASTHA'NAM.

213

irrcpuliir habits and treated by a <iuaclc or an ignorant
physician, will develop into one of a malignant type,
which can be healed only with the greatest ditliculty,
on account of it becoming aggravated l)y tlie deranged
bodily humours involved therein.

Symptoms of Dushta-Vranas Malig-
nant ulcers (Uushta Vranas) are known by the following
indications : — They are either too narrow or too wide-
mouthed. The}’ feel either extremely hard or soft to the
touch and present either a raised elevated) or a de-
pressed aspect. They are of either a black or red, yellow
or white colour, and are characterised by extremes
of temperature. E.xhibiting strange and unusual fea-
tures, they are checkered with networks of veins,
ligaments, etc., and are filled with putrid and sloughing
flesh and fetid pus. Indefinite and irregular in shape,
they are found to exude a sort of dirty, fetid pus,
which runs into fissures and cavities, following an
oblique or upward course. They have a cadaverous
look and smell and are characterised by extreme pain
and burning sensation, attended with swelling, redness,
itching and suppuration. Pustules crop up round these
ulcers, which largelj' secrete vitiated blood, and linger
unhealed for an inordinate length of time.

These ulcers may be divided into six classes [accord-
ing as, they are severally caused by the deranged
bodily humours (Vayu, Pittam and Kapham), or are

214

. THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. I Clup. XXII.

due to their concerted action iSannipata), or to the
effects of a blow (traumatic) or to vitiated blood.],
and should be medically treated according to the nature
of their respective e.\citing factors.

Secretions from ulcers -.—Now we shall
describe the characteristic secretions from all types of
ulcers. Secretions from a contused or lacerated skin,
as well as from an ulcer confined only to it), whether
spontaneously bursting or surgically opened, are thin
and water}’ in their consistency. They are character-
ised by a raw (ileshy) smell and a yellowish colour.
An ulcer, affecting the flesh, exudes a slimy, thick and
white secretion like clarified-butter. .A. copious quantity
of blood flows out of a vein recently cut, while the
incidental ulcer, in its suppurating stage, secretes a
copious secretion, like water flowing out of a hydrant,
which is moreover detached, thin, pendent (ropy),
and slimy in its character and has a brown or frosty
hue. .An ulcer, confined onh' to a ligament, secretes
a sort of cold and thick secretion, like e.xpectorated
mucous, though sometimes marked with streaks of
blood.

A bone, injured, fractured, or suddenly cracked by
idiopathic causes (derangement of the bodily humours),
loses its internal marrow and appears as if washed (loses
its natural gloss;. It assumes the colour of an oyster shell,
whereas the secretions from an ulcer, which is seated in

riup. x\‘U. •

SUTKASTIIA'NAM.

215

a bone, arc cohl and marked by streaks of blood and
lumps of marrow. An ulcer, situated in any of the bone-
joints, does not exude any secretion under pressure,
but secretes a sort of slimy, pendent, frothy and blood-
streaked pus, when tlie affected limb or part is Hexed,
expanded, raised or lowered, as in running- /moving
about), sitting or standing erect, or at defecation.

An ulcer, seated in tlie abdominal cavity (Koshtha),
e.vudes a secretion, wliich is mixed with urine, fecal
matter, pus or blood, and a thin or waterx' (serous)
fluid. The secretions from an ulcer, affecting any vital
part of the body, need not be separately described, as
such a ])art naturally involves the organic principles of
skin, flesh, etc, ; and Iience an ulcer, invading it, must
necessaril}' exude a secretion, which is peculiar to anj^
of the aforesaid bodily principles (skin, flesh, etc.'/ that
has become affected.

The deranged Viyu makes the secretions from an
ulcer, seated in any of the seven abovesaid principles
such as, the skin, flesh, A'eins, ligaments, bones, joints
and the abdomen, respectively coarse, and rough to
the touch, broum, grey, frosty, or white like the cream
of curd, and coloured like the washings of an alkali, like
that of meat or paddy husks. Similarly, the action of
the deranged Pittam should be inferred from- the secre-
tions assuming the colours of a Gomedha (a species
of bluish yellow agate), or that of the urine of

2i6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Clwp. XXII.

a cow, or that of water saturated witli the bunit ashes
of conch-shells or that of Kasli.-tya water or that
of the wine known as the Madhvika or that of oil,
according as the skin, flesh, etc. are respectively affected.
The action of the deranged blood, in changing the
nature of the secretions of ulcers in the seven abo\'e-
said locations, is identical w’ith that of the deranged
Pittam with the exception, that the secretions are
characterised by an extremely fishy smell.

In an epidermic (confined only to the epidermis
of a part) or superficial ulcer the action of the
deranged Kapham manifests itself by imparting a
butter-like or a K^sisha (sulphate of iron) colour
to the secretions. They have lard-like hue or a
colour like that of rice paste, or that of w’ater tinged
with sesamum, or a colour like that of the internal
juice or water of a cocoanut, or a coloiu" like that of
bog’s lard, according as the flesh, a vein, a ligament,
a bone or a joint is attacked. On the other hand,
through the combined action of all the three deranged
humours of the body (Sannip^ta), those secretions
become coloured like the w'ater tinged with the
soakings of sesamum seeds, or the internal sap or
water of a cocoanut, or the juice of the Erv^nika or the
transparent surface laj'er of rice gruel, or the w^ishings
of the Aruka fruit, or the water tinged w'ith the fhuts
of the , Priy^ngu, or like the liver or the Mudga pulse.

riup. wii. 1

-SP’I'KAS'rHA'N'.AAf.

217

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — An ulcer, situated in the cavity of the ab-
domen and secretin" an exudation rcseml)llnff paddy
luisks in colour, as well as one located in the viscera
of blood (spleen or liver — RakWshayam) and exuding
a secretion like alkaline water, sliould be deemed
incumble. Similarly, an ulcer having its seat in the
cavity of the stomach (Amashaya), or in the region
of the Trika, (articulation of the clavicle with the
intraclavicular notch) and exuding a thin, water}'
secretion, coloured like the wasliings of KaHya pulse,
should be regarded as belonging to the same type
(incurable). A physician should only take in hand the
treatment of an ulcer-patient after having examined
the abovesaid nature of the discharges.

Pain and its character : Xow we shall
describe all the different kinds of pain, which are
experienced in the several types of Vrana (ulcers)
described before.

Vartaja pain Pains of pricking, piercing,
thrashing, cutting, expanding, gnawing, churning, shoot-
ing, tingling, burning, breaking, bursting, pinching,
uprooting, uplifting, quivering, aching of different
types, shifting, stuffing, benumbing, indurating, contract-
ing, and pains of a spasmodic character are usuall}'-
felt in ulcers. A pain, which comes on or vanishes

without any apparent cause, or is varied and shifting

28

THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITA'- f

218

in its character, should be ascribed to the effects
of the deranged Vajm.

Pitta ja pain : — A sensation of burning is felt in
the ulcer accompanied bj' a sort of sucking pain. A
feeling of inhaling heat or vapour, and a burning sensa-
tion nraning through the whole body, should be looked
upon as the resultant of the deranged Pittam. At
the same time the body seems as if it had been
stre^vn over \\-ith bits of glowing charcoal. The
heat or (the temperature of the affected locality)
shows a steady rise, and a pain like the one
incidental to the application of alkaline water (caustic
solution is e.\perienced in the ulcer.

Raktajapain : — The pain and other specific
features of an ulcer due to the vitiated condition
of the blood are identical with those developed by
one of the Pittaja type.

Kaphaja pain : — .\n ulcer, characterised b}'
numbness, heaviness, coldness, itching and a slight pain
in the affected part, and which seems as if it has been
plastered over with a paste, and which proves insensible
to touch, should be ascribed to the action of the
deranged Kapham.

Sannipartika pain ; — The sjnnptoms, de-
scribed under the head of each of the preceding
humoural types of ulcer, simultaneously exhibit

Gup. xxn. 1

SUTUASTIIANAM.

2i9

themselves in the one brouj^ht about by tht; concerted
action of all the deranged humours i,Sannipatikam),

Colours of Vranas Xow we shall de-
cribe the colours assumed by the several types
of ulcers. An ulcer, due to the action of the deranged
Vfiyu, is rough and black, red, or ash-coloured, or
is tif the colour of a bone, or a pigeon. ,Vn ulcer, caused
by the action of the deranged blood or Pittani,
is coloured either blue, yellow, greenish-brown, black,
reddish-tawny or tlame-colourcd. .-Vn ulcer due to
the .action of the deranged Kapham is white, grey
and glossy. An ulcer, due to the combined action
of the three deranged bodily humours, may assume any
colour peculiar to them

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject ; — Not only in the cases of Vrana, but in all
(inflammatory) swellings of whatsoever t3rpe, the
physician should carefully observe the nature of the
load pain, and the colour of the epidermis.

Thus ends ihc iwcnly-second Cluplcr uf the Sutnisth.'inam in the
Suslirula. SamhilA whicli irciils of scctclion from dift'ercnl t>'pcs of ulcers.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Xo\v we sliall discuss the chapter which deals
with the Prognosis of an ulcer (Krityafkritya-
Vidhi-madhya^am).

A boil or an ulcer appearing in a patient who is
young, muscular (in frame', strong, or is possessed ol an
indomitable courage and fortitude, proves readily amen-
able to healing measures and applications ; how much
more so when one appears in a patient in whom all
these four conditions simultaneously obtain.

An ulcer in a young patient is speedily healed
owing to the fresh and \igorous vitalizing principles
of the body ; whereas the one, which appears in a person
of strong and muscular build, finds a speedy and success-
ful termination owing to the inability of the incising
instrument to cut deep into the hard and tough muscles
of the affected part and to reach down, or in any way
destroy the underlying veins and neiwes, etc. A strong
and vigorous patient can easily endure a considerable
amount of burning pain, etc. and does not feel distressed
bj'- a strict regimen of diet, A man of stupendous
endurance and fortitude can sustain the fatigue and
worr}' of even the most painful surgical operation.
Accordingly, a boil or an ulcer, appearing in a patient of
the above said description, is easily and speedily healed ;

\NIII. ’

J-M

'\vhcrc.i> llio olio. iv)iich allcci'' fillicr lUi oUl, cinaciulcti,
<)r liuiiil pcir'Hi 'If ('lie "i ^luall >Uci)i;ll) iUi<l ciulur.iiu'c.
lakes lime to heal.

15ull> (ir uli'ci.-'. 'vhieli appeal in llie iei;iuns <»1 tin:
IniUock.^ ^pliik). nr alxnii tlie ami^, and the (>ii;an> ut
ol ;.;cneratiu)i, ui mi ihc hack, Inrcliead, cheek, (»r
lips, nr in ihe leuion cil' the esleriial eai.', <ir mi
the levies ctv the ahdmueii, <ir in ilie cavity ol the
month, or about llie naj'e ol the neck, or above
the elavieles, can he easily healed. Tho^e, that are
.'^ealed in the eyes, or in the puni-s, the nostrils or the
e,\terior .ni^le of the eye, or in the cavity oi' the curs,
ahtlomen or the umhilieiis, or about any suinre ol the
body, hips, ribs, arm-pits, clie.st, hreusls, sides, or the
joints, as well as iho.-e, that scc'rele iroihy Iilood or pus
with a i^uritliiii' sunnd, or contain any loreitrn matter em-
bedded in their inside, are healed only with the ctreatest
difiicuky.

Similarly, an abscess or an ulcer appearhi}' in the
nether re;^ion of the body and pointini; upward, or
the one appearing on the c.xlremity of scalp (Rom.tnta)
or about the end of a linger-nail, or in any of the
vulnerable parts of the body, as well as the one
affecting either of the thigh bones (femurs), should be
looked upon as equally hard to cure. Liltewise an
abscess or an ulcer affecting a bone of the pelvis
'Shronikanda- Acetabulum), as well as a fistula

224

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chap. XXIIf.

scribe the types of diseases whicli are usually held as in-
curable. An ulcer (Vrana) cropping up like a fleshy
tumour, painful and containing pus in its inside, and
which is characterised by a copious secretion, witli its
edges raised like those of the genital of a mare, should
be understood as belonging to the incurable type. A
condylomatous (papillomatous) ulcer which is soft and
raised like the honi of a cow, or the one wliiclr is
moderatel)'' raised or elevated at its base, and secretes
an exudation of vitiated blood, or a thin slimy secretion,
should be likewise regarded as incurable. An ulcer
with an embossed or heaved up centre, and one dipped or
fissured at its extremity should be regarded as past all
remed)". .An ulcer covered over with shreds of ligaments,
and looking as if studded with loose shreds of hemp,
should be given up as incurable. Similarly, an
ulcer due to the deranged condition of any of the funda-
mental humours, and secreting an exudation composed
of coagulated blood, fat, marrow and brain-matter
should be deemed incurable.

Likewise, an ulcer, in a weak and emaciated person,
which is located within the cavity of the abdomen,
(Koshtha i and which assumes either a black or yellow-
ish colour, and exudes a secretion composed of urine,
pus, blood and fecal matter, which finds its outlet both
through the upward and do\\Tiward fissures of the bod)^
(the mouth and the anus) making a rumbling, -gurgling

t ,.p. SNin 1

srTKASTUANAM.

22 ^

v)r vviuch Mimiltancoui:ly scorolcs pii-s and blood
throii.v'Ii both the clianneL';, should i)crfitardcdas hcloiift-
iiiit bJ tlic hiciirablc class. .\ii ulcer in an emaciated
]Mtieiit, wliicli is situated either on the head or in the
throat, and which is narrow-mouthed and is Iniversed
by a network of capillaries, and studded with
(Icshy i)r papilIi)malons eruptions, siionld he re,r;arded
as incurable. A distinctly audilde sound or report is
heard in these ulcers which are found to he char/'cd
with wind.

.Vn ulcer in an emaciated patient, which secretes
l)lood and pus, ami is attended with iiulif'e>tioi}, coiiiflj,
painful respiration and non-relish for foml, as well as a
c;ise of fractured skull, attended with couijh, dys]ma;a,
secretion of brain-matter, and symptoms peculiar to tlie
concerted action of the three deranited humours of the
body, slronld be i,nven up as past all remedy.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — A traumatic ulcer, which exudes a secretion
of fat, marrow or brain-m.nltcr, may prove amenable
to medical treatment, wliereas a liumoural ulcer under
the circumstance will prove incurable.

An ulcer appearing at an}' part of the body other
than a vital one (Marma), and which is found to invade
its successive elements though without affecting any
vein, bone, joint, etc, should be regarded as incurable.

29

226 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clwp. XXIII.

Just as a tree, that has grown old and that has spread its
roots deep into the soil, can not be uprooted, so a disease
can not be eradicated that has gained in strength and
maturit)'' with the process of time, and that has graduall)'
invaded the different essential principles of the body.
A disease, which, having been neglected at the outset,
has run on to one of a lingering or persistent type
by invading the successive elements of the body,
and has thereby gained in strength and intensity,
baffles medicines, (of tested and marked efficacy),
just as malignant astral combinations tend to nullify
potent incantations.

Symptoms of cleansed healthy
ulcers : — An ulcer, not belonging to any of the
above said types, may prove easily amenable to the
curative efficacies of medicines. In other words, an ulcer
of recent origin is easily uprooted like a tender sapling
of recent growth. An ulcer, which is imaffected bj’’ any
of the three deranged bodily humours, and which assumes
a dark brown hue along its edges, and is characterised
by the absence of any pain, pustular eruptions or
secretions, and which is of an even or of an equal
elevation throughout its length, should be regarded as
cleansed (asepsised or healthy), and divested of all
morbid matter or principle (Shuddha-Vrana).

Symptoms of Healing Ulcers An

ulcer, which is dove-coloured (yellow'ish dusky), and is

Chap. XXIII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

227

not lardaceous at its base, and is further characterised by
the absence of an)’’ muco-purulent secretion along its
margin, and which has become hard and surrotmded
by shreds of dead skin, and presents symptoms of
healthy granulation, should be looked upon as in
course of healing.

Symptoms of Healed Ulcers:— An ulcer,
mth its edges firmly adhered and characterised by the
absence of any pain and swelling and not appearing
knotty or glandular to the touch and that has left a
cicatrix of the same hue with the surrounding skin,
should be considered as perfectly healed.

Causes, such as mental excitements, as excessive grief
and ecstacies of joy, anger or fright, as well as an exter-
nal blow, or excessive physical exercise, or an abnormal
excitation of any of the deranged humours, or an
impaired digestion, may tend to reopen an ulcer
recently adhered and healed. Accordingly such acts
and conditions should be avoided by an ulcer-patient.

Thus ends the twenty-third Chapter of the Sutmsth^nam in the
Sashruta Samhiti, which treats of the prognosis of ulcers*

CHAPTER XXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which deals
with the classification of diseases according to their
specific natme (Vyafdhi-SamuddhBShiya-
madhyaryam).

Diseases may be grouped under two broad sub-
divisions, such as Surgical, and jMedical, that is those
that yield to the administration of purgatives, emetics,
oils, diaphoretics, and unguents.

The use or administration of medicated oils and
imguents, etc., is not prohibited in a surgical disease,
while a case, w'hich is e.vclusively medicinal in its
character, does not admit of the adoption of any surgical
remedy. Only a general outline of the nature
and sjTuptoms of all diseases wiU be found to have
been briefly laid dowm in the present work. This work
includes within its scope subject matters which have
been fully dealt with in other books (hardng onl}’ a
general bearing upon all the several branches of the
science of medicine).

It has been stated before that anything that afflicts
either the body or the lining personalit}’ — self, or
both, is called disease. This pain or affliction

Oiap. XXl\'. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

229

may be either physical"* in its character (Adhyat-
mikam), or due to any disturbance in the phj-^sical
environments of a man f Adhibhautikam), or to the
acts of God (Adhidaivikam) etc. This three- fold
pain may be ultimately transformed into an)' of
the seven kinds of diseases such as, the Adi-vala-pravritta,
Janraa-vala-pravritta, Dosha-vala-pra\Titta, SanghSta-
vala-pravritta, K^la-vala-prawitta, Daiva-vala-pravritta
and Svabh^va-vala-pravritta.

A'di-vala-pravritta The disease temred
Adi-vala-pravritta is ascribed to any inherent defect
in the semen or the ovum of one’s parent, which forms
one of the original and primary factors of “ being " and
includes leprosy (Kushtham^, hemorrhoids, phthisis etc.
This t)T)e may be divided into two sub- divisions,
according as the disease is generated by the deranged
paternal or maternal factor at the time of incubation.

Janma-vala-pravritta The Congenital
or the Janma-vala-pravritta type usually follows
such causes as an improper conduct on the part
of the mother during the period of gestation, etc., and
embraces such defects or maladies as (congenital)
blindness, deafiiess, dumbness, nasal-voice, and such
monstrous aberrations of nature as congenital cretinism,

* Certain commentator; interpret the term “Atman” in “A'dh}-5tmikam”
to mean body only, and accordingly designate all phenomena that may be
manifest in the body as Adhydtmikam.

230

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXIV,

and the births of dwarfs and pigmies, ITiis type,
in its turn, admits of two sub-divisions, according as
the disease is due to the action of the deranged lymph-
chyle (Rasa-krita), or to an ungratified desire of the
mother during gestation, or to her gratification of
any improper longing or conduct during pregnancy
(Dauhridyam).

Dosha-vala-pravritta -.—The Dosha-vala-
pravritta (idiopathic) type is due to the action of
any of the fundamental bodily humours deranged by an
improper diet, or resulting from the dynamical energies
of the mind, such as (Rajas and Tanias, etc). This
tj’pe may be classified under two sub-heads, according
as the disease is found to have its origin in the Amdshaya
(stomach), or in the Pakvdshaya (intestines), and each of
these again may be further di^nded into two main
sub-dlNasions such as the physical and the mental. The
three preceding kinds of diseases include wnthin their
category disorders which are called mental or psychical
(Adhydtmikam).

Samgharta-vala-Pravritta The Trau-
matic t}'pe (Samghdtha-vala-pra'vritta) includes diseases
that are caused by an external blow or are due
to wrestling with an antagonist of superior strength.
They may be sub-divided into minor divisions,
according as the disease is due to an external
wound, or to the bite from any fierce beast or

□up. N'XIV. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

231

poisonous reptile, etc. These types bclon^r to tlic Adhi-
bhautikam tyj^e, i. e. (brought about by physical
causes).

Karla-vala-pravritta:— The Periodical type
(K;tla-vala-pra\Titta) includes diseases that arc brought
about by the variation of atmospheric heat or humidity
with the change of the seasons, and admits of being
grouped under two different sub-heads, according as the
seasons, which usher these changes in, e.vhibit natural
or contrar}'’ features.

Daiva-vala-pravritta The Providential
I'Daiva-vala-pravritta) type includes diseases that are the
embodiments of curses, divine wrath or displeasure, or
are brought about through the mystic potencies of charms
and spells, as described in the .A.thar\\a-Veda. This
t3'pe may be divided into two minor divisions according
as the disease is due to such acts of God as when a
man is struck by lightning, etc., or to the malignant
influences of demons and monsters, and these may be
further grouped under two main sub-heads, according as
the disease assumes a contagious character (epidemic), or
is purely accidental, and restricts itself to isolated
cases (sporadic).

Svabharva-vala-pravritta The Natural
or the Spontaneous (Svabh^va-vala-pravritta) type
includes such natural organic phenomena as,

THE SUSHRUTA SA^IHITA. [Chap. XXIV.

232

decrepitude, death, * hunger, thirst, sleep, etc.
These phenomena are either Eialakrita (timely) or
Ak^lakrita (untimely). They are called Kalakrita when
they occur at the proper time in persons who strictly
observe the rules of health, and Akdlakrita, when they
appear at the improper time (morbid or premature)
as the effects of unhealthy li\ing. These diseases belong
to the Prondential or Adhi-daivikam t}’pet. Thus we
have classified diseases into their several types.

The deranged bodily humours such as, Vajm, Pittam
and Kaphara should be looked upon as the primar\’’
sources of all diseases, inasmuch as symptoms charac-
teristic of each of them may be detected in the case of
a disease of whatsoe'S'er type, (which usually abates
with their corresponding subsidence), and also because
the Shastras have ascribed to them the fatherhood
of all maladies that assail the human frame.

As the three qualities of Sattva. Rajas and Tamast
are inherent in, and inseparable fi-om, aU the pheno-
menal appearances in the universe which are, in reality.

* Accorduig to certain authorities “Death ’ may also mean death
of tissues,

t Several authorities on the other hand include such diseases as thirst,
hunger etc,, within the Adhy^imika class inasmuch as they are but the
indications of the want of certain vital principles in the body and
appear in the mental plane (Adhydtmika) only as longings for
water, food, etc

i The Sattva Illuminating or p^xhic principle. Rajas : Prin-
ciple of Action and Co-hesion. Tamas : — Principle of Nescience or Illusion-

Chap. XXIV. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

233

but modifications of their outi qualities, so the three
fundamental bodily humours underlie at the root
of, and run through, the course of all known forms of
bodn_v distemper.

The deranged bodily humours (Dosha'' in contact
.with the different elements, (Dhathu) and excrements
'Mala) of the bod}’, together with the difference of
their locations and pathological effects, give rise to
the different forms of disease."*

The nomenclature of a disease depends upon where
the affection of the several elementar}’ principles of the
body by the deranged bodily humours lies, and which is
accordingly styled as it is seated in the lymph-chyle, or in
the blood or the flesh, or it is in fat, bone, or in the semen.

Rasaja Distempers Distempers such as
aversion to, and loss of relish for food, indigestion,
aching in the limbs, fever, nausea and a sense of reple-
tion even without food, heaviness of the limbs, diseases
affecting the heart, jaundice, constriction of any in-
ternal passage of the body (MArgo-parodha), emaciation
of the body ^cachexia), bad taste in the mouth, weak
feelings in the hmbs, premature whiteness and falling off
of the hair, and symptoms indicative of senile decay,
should be regarded as having their seat in the deranged
l}Tnph-chyle (Rasa).

* This answers ihe question, “how can the deranged bodily humours
bring about a disease of the .Adhi-rala-type— a disease which Ls specifically
due to the derangement of tlic innate and prinury factors of life.’’

234

THE SUSHHUTA SAMHITA. LChap. XXIV.

Raktaja Diseases ilaladies such as Kush-
tha (cutaneous aifections in general', Visarpa (erysipe-
las), Pidakd (pustular eruptions', IMashaka, Niliki,
Tilakalaka (specks), Xachhya (tans), Vyanga (stains),
Indralupta : alopecia), enlarged-spleen, Vidradhi (ab-
scess), Gulma 'abdominal glandsl, Vata-shonita (a kind
of lepros}'), Arsha (piles), Arvuda (tumours), aching of
the limbs, menorrhagia, hajmoptysis, etc. as well as
suppuration in the regions of the anus and the penis
should be deemed as hai-ing their origin in the
blood , Raktaja' contaminated by the deranged bodily
humours.

IVI arnsaja- Diseases Similarly Adhi-mansa,
Arsaida, Arsha, .Adhi-jihva, Upa-jihva, Upakusha,
Gala-sunthika, Alaji, Mansha-sanghflta (condvlomatous
growth), Astha-prakopa, Gala-ganda, Ganda-raala
(scrofula), etc. should be regarded as diseases having
their seat in the flesh, vitiated by the deranged bodily
humours.

Wledaja- Distempers :--Diseases, such as
Granthi, Vriddhi, Gala-ganda, .Ar\uda, and Ostha-prakopa
are due to the action of the deranged fat. iladhu-meha
(diabetes), obesitv and abnormal diaphoresis, etc. should
be regarded as ha^ang their origin in the humour-
deranged fat of the body.

Asthija- Disease : — Adhydsthi, Adhi-danta,
.Asthi-toda, Asthi-shula and Ku-nakha, etc. are the

Chap. \XIV. j

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

235

diseases which should be regarded as the outcome of
the deranged bodily humours affecting the bones.

Wlajjadoshaja Diseases -.—The vanishing
of sight, epileps}', vertigo, conjunctivitis and the appear-
ance of a broad-based ulcer about the Parva-
sthanam and a sense of heaviness in the thighs and
knee-joints should be regarded as having their seat in
the deranged marrow.

Shukra-doshaja Diseases such as, im-
potency, entire aversion to sexual intercourse, Shukra-
shmari fseminal concretions), Spermatorrhoea, and other
seminal affections, should be regarded as having their
seat in the deranged semen.

Cutaneous affections, constipation or looseness of the
bowels, and diseases impeding or arresting the proper
functions of the sense-organs or in an}' way bringing
about their aberrations, should be regarded as respec-
tively located in the receptacle of the Aeces and the
sense organs.

Thus we have briefly enumerated the names of
diseases, the specific nature and symptoms of which
will be fully discussed later on under their respective
heads.

Authoritative verse on the Sub-
ject The deranged and aggravated humours, freely
coursing through the body, give rise to a disease at the

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

1 Ck4>. XKIV.

2^6

place in which they are incarcerated owing to an
obstruction in their natural passage.

Now it may be again asked, whellier the relation
of a disease, such as fever, etc. with the derangetl bodily
humours is constant and inseparable, or otherwise. All
human beings would be in danger of perpetmilly
falling ill in the event of the said connection relation,
being constant and unscparable ; but in case of their
separate existence, it is but natural that their charac-
terstic symptoms should separately manifest them-
selves instead of being simultaneously present with
fever, etc. as they are found to be in reality. .And
accordingly the theory, that diseases (such as, fever, etc.)
and the deranged bodily humours have a separate
existence, and are not pnma jacit intimately co-relaied
unth one another falls to the ground. On the
other hand, the assumption of their separate e.xistence
imadidates the incontestable conclusion, that diseases
such as, fever, etc. are fathered by the deranged humours
of the body.

Hence it may be safely asserted that no disease can
occur without the direct mediation or intervention ol
the deranged bodily humours. Yet the connection
(relation) which exists between the two is neither
constant nor separable. .As the physical phenomena of
lightning, storm, thimder and rain can not happen
independent!}’’ of the sky (cloud ) ; and yet they'

Chap. XXIV. J

SUTRASTHANAM.

237

sometimes do or do not occur with the presence of a
cloud ; again as bubbles, though in reality but the
modilications of the underlying water, do not swell
up on its surface at all times, so the connection
between a disease and the bodily humours is neither
universally separable or inseparable.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject We shall describe the nature, intensity and
quality of diseases with their complications and give
the number of their different types. Diseases
[omitted to be mentioned in the chapter on Nidinara
(ictiolog)’')] 'vill be found fully dealt with in the sup-
plementar}' part of the present work (Uttara-tantvam).

Thus ends the twenty-fourth Cluipter of the SutrusthAniim in the
SushruU S.unhiUl wliich trc;its of the classification of diseases according
to their specific nature.

CHAPTER XXV.

Xow we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals
with the eight different forms of surgical operations

(Ashtavidha-Shastra- Karmanya - ma-
dhyayam).

IWetrical Texts : — Bhagandara, Shlaishmika
Granthi, Tilakalaha, Ar\’uda, Arsha. Charma-Kila,
Jatumani, Maiisa-Saingliata, Ga]a-Sunthik\i, Valmika,
Vrana-Vartma, Shataponaka, Adhnisha, GpiuJanslia,
Mcinsakandlia, Adhimansaka, as well as ailments due to
the lodgment of a foreign body in the tlesh or a bone,
and a sloughing of ligaments, tlesh or veins are the
diseases in which incision iChhedyam should be made.

Bhedyam ; -Excision Bhedyam) should be
resorted to in the following diseases, viz., Vidradhis, the
three tj’pes of Granthi other than the Sannipatika one,
Visarpa due either to the deranged Vdyu, Pittam or
Kapham, Vriddhi, Vidarikd, Prameha-pidaka, swellings
in general, diseases affecting the mammary organs,
Avamanthaka, Kumbhika, Anushayi, Nadi, the two
types of Vrinda, Pushkarika, Alaji, Kshudra-roga (all
minor cutaneous or pustular diseases), the three
tj'pes of Puppata, Tdlu-puppata, and Danta-puppata ;
Tundukeri, Gildyu, and the diseases which are caused
b}' suppuration in the local flesh or anj' soft part of the

[Chap. XXV.

SUTK.-\STHAN.-\M.

239

body (^such as Hstula in ano), as well as stone in the
bladder and diseases due to a derangement of fat.*

Lekhyam : — The surgical operation kno\vn as
scarification ^Lekhya} should be resorted to in the follow-
ing diseases, viz, the four tj’pes of Rohini^ Kilasa, Upaji-
hvi, diseases ha\’ing their seat in the deranged fat,
Danta-Vaidarbha, Granthi, Vrana-Vartma, Adhi-Jihv^,
Arshah, Mandala, Mdnsa-kandi, and Mdnsonnati,

Vyadhanam ; — The Surgical operation kno%\Ti
as Vyadhanam (aspiration'; should be made use of
in connection wth a vein, or a case of Dakodaram
(abdominal dropsy), or Mutra-Vriddhi (hydrocele).
Diseases, in connection with which the probe or the
director should be used, are Nadis ( sinus) and ulcers
OTth an)' extraneous or foreign body lodged in their
inside, and those which follow abnormal (lateral or
oblique) directions.

Aharryam : — The process known as Aharanam
(extraction or drawnng outi should be adopted in the
three types of Sharkar4,t in drawing out any morbid
matter from between the teeth or from the cavity
of the ears, or in extracting any foreign matter from its
seat of lod^ent in the body, or a stone from the

’ Granthi (gland), Galaganda (goitre), Vriddhi (scrowl tumour) Apachi
(scrofula) and Arvuda (tumour) are the lat-origincd diseases contemplated
as instances.

t Such as urinar)’ calculi, calcareous deposits on the teeth, and P^da-
SharkarS.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. f Chap. XXV.

240

bladder, or in drawing out feces from the constricted
anus, or a foetus from the uterus, (as in the case of a
false presentation or difficult labour).

Srarvyam Secreting or evacuating measures
(Srav3'am) should be adopted in the following
diseases, viz, the five types of Vidradhi excepting the
Sinnip^tika one, Kustha of whatsoever type, derange-
ment of the bodily V^yu with pain in the affected
region, inflammatory swellings restricted to an}’^ particu-
lar part of the body, diseases affecting the ear-lobes,
Shleepada (elephantiasis'', blood poisoning, Arvmda
humours), Visarpa ('er5'sipelas), Grantlii (glands due
to any of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam, or Kapham) the
three tj-pes of Upadansha (sj^jhilis), Stana-roga (in-
flammationlof the mammae), Vidarikd, Shaushira, Gala-
ShalukA, Kantaka, Krimi-dantaka worm-eaten teeth),
Danta-veshta (inflammation of the gums), Upakusha,
ShiMda, Danta-puppata, diseases of the lips originated
through the action of the deranged blood, Pittam or
Kapham, and a variety of other diseases passing under
the denomination of Kshudra-Roga (minor ailments).

Seevyam : — Suturing ''Seevya'' should be
resorted to in the case of an open ulcer due to
the action of the deranged fat after its \ntiated
contents (morbid matter) bad been fully scraped out, as
well as in the case of an uncomplicated (curable"' Sadya-
"Vrana (wound or instant ulcer) at any of the joints

XXV. 1

SrTK.XSTHAN.A.M.

241

which '.irc coiiiicclctl with the acts ot inovuiucnt or loco-
motion.

Conditions of Suturing:— An ulcer in-
cidental to the application of fire (cautery), or any al-
kaline preparation (caustic), or treated witii any poison-
ous drug or substance, or from whose inside the em-
bedded Shalyam (foreign matter) has not been removed,
should not be sewed up without being tlioroughly
cleansed and puri lied asepsised inasmuch as any foreign
matter, whether a hair, nail or a particle of dust or bone,
lying embedded in its cavity, might set up an abnormal
suppuration, accompanied by extreme pain and excessive
secretion. Hence such ulcers should be thoroughly
cleansed (and all foreign or indigenous morbid matter
should be extracted therefrom) before being sewed up.

Mode of Suturing : —Then having pressed
the ulcer up into its proper position, it should be
sutured witii strings of any of the following kinds, viz,
of thin cotton thread, of the fibres of the Ashmiin-
laka tree or hemp plants, or of the .-Ytasi, Murva or
Guduchi, or with strips of leather, plaited horse-
hair or animal sinews, into any of the officinal
shapes (of suturing) known as the Gophand, Tunna-
Sevani and Riju-Granthi, etc. or as suited to the
shape and position of the ulcerated part. The margin
of the ulcer should be gently pressed close with
the fingers during suturing. A round needle to

31

242

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

( Clia j, XX\ .

the length of two fingers’ width should he used in sew-
ing up an ulcer occurring about any joint or in a part ot
the body where the flesh is thin and scanty. A needle
of a triangular body tri-hedral), and measuring three
fingers’ width in length, is recommended in the case of
an ulcer appearing at any fleshy part of the body.
A semi-circular or bow-shaped needle should be used
in a case where the seat of the ulcer would be found
to be on the scrotum, or on the skin of the abdomen, or
about any of the Marmas vital parts).

Needles of these three shapes should be so construc-
ted as to be fitted with sharp points capable of being
handled with the greatest ease, having a girth equal
that of the stem of a Malati flower.

The needle should not be pricked into a part too near,
or too remote from the fissure, or the mouth of an ulcer,
as there might be the danger of the suture being broken
off (at the least pressure or movement in the first
instance and of genesis of pain in the second. An
ulcer, thus properly sutured, should be covered
over with cotton and dusted over \\dth a pulverised
compound consisting of the powders of Priyangu,
Anjanam, Yasthy.<hva and Rodhra, or with the ashes
of a burnt piece of Kshauma cloth, or with the powders
of the Sballaki fruit. Then the ulcer should be properly
bandaged, and measures and rules regarding the regimen
of diet, and conduct previously laid down in the chapter

Umi-. XXV. j

SUTKASTllANAM.

243

on the nursing ol'an ulccr-paiient (Cli. XIX.) should
he adopted and observed.

The eiglil kinds of surgical operations have thus been
brielly described. Tliey will be ilealt with later on in
the Chikilsitain.

Defective Surgical Operations:— These
eight forms of operations may be attended with dangers
of four diflerent Icinds such as those arising from an
insufiicient or over performance, or from the slanting
or oblique deviation (of the knife or the instrument),
or from an act of self-injury on the part of the
physician.

.A physician ( surgeon . making a wrong operation on
the body of his patient either through mistake, or
through the want of necessary skill or knowledge, or
out of greed, fear, nervousness or haste, or in conse-
quence ofbeing spurned or abused, should be condemned
as the direct cause of many new and unforeseen maladies.
A patient, with any instinct of self-preservation, would
do well to keep aloof from such a phvsician, or from one
who makes a wrong or injudicious application of the
cautery, and should shun his presence just as he would
shun a conflagration or a cup of fatal poison.

On the other hand, a surgical operation, carried to
excess, (or a' surgical instrument inserted deeper than
what is necessary , is attended with the danger of

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. I Cluj.. -XXV.

244

cutting or destroying a vein, ligament, bone, joint, or
any vital part of the body. A surgical operation by
an ignorant surgeon brings about, in most cases, the
instantaneous death of the patient, or consigns him to
the pangs of a life-long death.

The sj'mptoms which generally manifest themselves
in connection with the injudicious hurting of any of the
five vital parts or principles of the body (such as the
joints, bones, veins, ligaments, etc.) are vertigo, delirium,
loss of bodil)' functions, semi-insensibilit\' ( comatose
state), incapacity of supporting oneself, cessation of
mental functions, heat, fainting, looseness of the limbs,
difljcult respiration, excruciating pain or pain peculiar to
the deranged Vayu, secretion of blood or a thin watery*
secretion like the washings of meat from the injured
part, or the organ, with coma or inoperativeness of all
the senses. A vein* iShiia)any way severed or injured is
attended with a copious flow ( htemorrhage of deep red
blood, resembling the hue of the cochineal insect, from
the ulcer ; and the deranged local Vayu readily exhibits
all its essential characteristics, and ushers in diseases
which have been enumerated under that head in the
chapter on the description of blood.)

Similarly, an injured ligament gives rise to a crooked-
ness or bending of, as well as to a gone feeling in the

* Other than the one sitaated in any of the abovesatd \-ital parts of
the body.

Chap. XXV. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

245

injured limb or organ, attended with pain and loss of
function, and the incidental ulcer takes a long time
to heal.

An abnormal increase in the local swelling, together
with an excruciating pain, loss of strength, breaking
pain in the joints, and in-operativeness of the affected
part, mark the wounding of a flexible or immovable
joint. -Similarly, in the case where a bone is hurt or
injured in the course of a surgical operation, the patient
is -tormented with indescribable pain, day and
night, and finds no comfort in any position what-
soever. Pain and swelling specifically mark the affected
locality, and thirst and inertness of the limbs add to
the list of his sufferings.

A case of any injured Sira-Marma ( vital venal or
arterial combination or plexus 1 exhibits the same
symptoms which characterise the hurting of a single
vein, as previously described. Loss of actual perception
(anaisthesia^', and a yellowish colour of the skin mark
the case where the injury is confined to the vital
principle of the flesh.

A patient, who is discreet, and is not in a special
hurry to end his earthly sojourn, would do well to
shun the presence of a bungling, unskilful surgeon,
who can not even keep himself unhurt in the
rniir^p nf a siiren’cal oneration.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ICtvn). XXV.

246

The evils, Avhich attend the oblique insertion of a
surgical instrument, have been described before ; and
accordingly care should be taken not to leave any room
for the occurence of those evils in connection with a
singical operation.

The patient, who may mistrust his own parents, sons
and relations, should repose an implicit faith in his own
physician, and put his own life into his hands without
the least apprehension of danger ; hence a physician
should protect his patient as his own begotten child. A
surgical case may yield to a single incision, or may
require two, three, four or more than that number to
effect a cure. By doing good to humanity with his pro-
fessional skill, a physician achieves glor}-, and acquires the
plaudits of the good and tlie wise in this life, and shall
live in Paradise in the next.

Thu* ends ihe t^^enly•^^flh Chiipler of iht SuLrasih^nam in ihe Su*hruui
Samhitii which Ueala of ihc eight formbof Surgical operations.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Xow we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of the e.xploration of splinters lost or deep-seated in the

organism (Pranashta-Shalya-Vijna'niya'-
madhyaryam).

DGfinition : — The term Shalyam is derived
from the root "Shala or Shvala'^ (to go swiftly) joined
to the Unadi affix' "Yat." Shalyas may be divided into
two kinds according as they are e.xtrinsic ' Agantuka)
or idiopathic (Sharira) in their origin.

A Shalyam usually serves to act as an impeding or
obstructing agent to the entire organism, and, heneo, tlu?
science which deals with its nature and ehanicteriulivn
is called the Shalju-Shastram (.Suvgovyl. An idiuinUhio
(Sharira) Shalj'am maj'^ be either a hair, nail, oml)olirted
blood (Dbdtus)’*, etc., e.xcrcinenls (Mala), or donmged
humours of the body tDosha), while an e.Ktrinsic
Shalyam should be regarded as one which afllicts the
body and is originated from a source other than any
of the preceding ones, including particles of iron and
bone, stems of grass, scrapings of bamboo,, and bits
of horns, etc. But an Agantuka (e.Ktrinsic) C;
specifically denotes an article of iron, ina:,.

• Embolism and Thrombosis have been included wit!
the Ajmrvedic Pathologists.

24S

'THE SUSHRUTA t^A.MHlTA. I ^Iwp XXYI.

pre-eminently serves the purpose of killing and is the
most irresistible of all metals. Since any amount of
sharpness can be imparted to the point of an article
made of iron and since it can be easily discharged
from a distance, iron is the metal exclusively chosen
in the construction of darts or arrows.

ClaBsif ication of Shafts : - Arrows (Sbara)
may be divided into two classes according as they are
feathered or unfeathered ; and their barbs are usually
constructed in the shape of trees, leaves, flowers, or
fruits, or are made to resemble the mouths of birds and
wild and ferocious animals.

Flights of arrows: — The flights or direc-
tions of an arrow (Shalyam) may be divided into five
different kinds, such as the upward, the downward, the
backward (coming from the back), the oblique and the
straight. Either through its diminished momentum, or
through any external resistance, an arrow may drop
down and penetrate into the skin, arteries, or any
internal channel of the body, or into any bone or its
cavity, causing a wound or an ulcer (Vrana) at the spot
of its penetration.

Symptoms : — Now hear me describe the symp-
toms which are exhibited in connection with an arrow-
wound (Shalya’* -Vrana). These symptoms may be

* .-Vn anow otan iron barb, from “Shala” to kill.

XXVt 1

sirrK’‘,\sTnA'N.\M.

2.\C)

grouped under two sub-heads, such as the specific and
'^I'uc -genenU. Tlie general characteristics are as
follows : — 'rile ulcer, which is marked by pain and
swelling and presents a raised or bloated aspect like
a water bubble, assumes a dark brown hue and appears
soft to the toucli. The seat of the ulcer is seen to be
studded over uith pustular eruptions and a constant
bleeding sets in from its inside. The specific symptoms,
which mark a Shalyam lodged in the skin, are the hard-
ness and extended character of the local swelling and
the darkness (discolouring of its skin.

In a case where the arrow Shalyam) is lodged in the
flesh, the swelling increases in size and the incidental
ulcer refuses to be healed and cannot bear the least
pressure. Suppuration sets in and the ulcer is charac-
terised by a sort of sucking pain.’'

All the preceding symptoms, with the exception
of swelling and sucking pain thirst according to
others), manifest themselves in a case where the arrow
(Shalyam) has penetrated into a muscle. Similarl}'-, the
distension, aching and swelling of a vein mark a case
of an arrow-lodged vein. An upheaval and swelling
of its fibres together with intense pain characterise
a case where the shaft (Shalyam) has lodged in a
h'gament. The internal passages or channels (Srota) of

* According to certain autboritiei the patient is tormented with a sort
of unquenchable thirst.

32

THE 3USHRUT A SAMHITA'. I Chap. XXVI,

^50

the body are choked up and become inoperative, when
the shaft is lodged in any one of them. A flow of red
and frothy blood with a gurgling sound, accompanied
by thirst, nausea, and aching of the limbs, sets in
when the arrow is lodged in an arteiy (Dhamani).
Similarly, pain and swelling of diverse kinds mark a
case where the shaft is embedded in a bone. The
appearance of goose flesh on the skin, a stuffed
sensation inside the cavit}- of the affected bone, and
a -violent piercing bone-ache, mark a case where the
shaft has found a lodgment inside the cavity of a
bone. A pierced joint exhibits the same symptoms
as described in connection with an arrow-lodged
bone, with the exception that the patient is incapable
of flexing and expanding the affected joint. In a
case where the shaft 'Shalyam) has lodged in the
abdomen (Koshtha), the bowels become constipated ; the
abdomen becomes distended with a rumbling in the in-
testines and the suppression of flatus and urine ; and
ingested food matter, as well as urine and feces nre
found to ooze out of the fissure or mouth of the ulcer.
Symptoms, similar to those above described, manifest
themselves when the arrow is lodged in any of the
^^tal parts (Mannas of the body. The preceding
sj'mptoms are but faintly exhibited in a case of super-
ficial penetration.

An ulcer incidental to the penetration of an arrow

' wvt,.

sl'rK'ASTIl/»N.\,M

251

: tlu- i!iu'‘ lii(n o! liu' IuimI h.iir, in* iIjc
;!u< -U. it) ,iny iii!.>;n;,tl cJj.tuncl ni' thcluHlxyor in a vein,
i;;n, ot ,1 tnii; < !c, <>r into ,1 c,i‘.ily nfthc linnc, and
jtnt sn .my A.xy .sikv'.cd by Uic aclinn ni' the doiaiijicd
i-<-.i]ly imttxtnt >. tn.iv i.jSvtdiiv and .'-puniancnii .ly heal ;
bnl il nt.w htc.i’; n]-,;n anil heronie j^aiilhll afted) if tlie
’.■ibly hunt' HI]',, bceomc dcian;;ed and aijeravaled )iy a
blow nr phyaVal c\'cifi.;c.

Localisation : flic cvati poM'tion td' a bhtul
.''Italy. til)' einheddeil in Uie .4;in shotild be ascertained
by apjilyiiis; a I'la. tci conijK) erl of clay, .M.tiha-piilse,
Yava, tuidhunu .md euw-dunjt over lire injured limb
or }).)it. I'iie part limb) shoiiUl be duly lubricated
with oil, and diaphorised (by romentiiifj or applying
heat to it,s svirl'acei belbro the plaster is apjrlied. The
'-bait bhalyam shouUl be considered as lodijed in that
part whicli would be marked by* jtain, redness, or swelling
^amnmibhiii after such :rpplicalion. As an alterna-
tive, the alTected p;irt should be plastered with clarified
butter, comnron clay and sandal paste. Tire embedded
sliaft (Shalyam is then e.vactly locrated at the spot
where, owing to the heat of the affected part, the
clarified butter, or earth, or sandal paste would be
found to hiive melted, or dried up.

Similarly, the mode of localising a shaft (Shalyam),

‘ Sii x-. iiui to oloiruct ilic Coursing of ilic blood or $crum in the
locality.

252

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. f Chap, XXVI,

embedded in the flesh is as follows : — First, the patient
should be duty lubricated and diaphorised with medi-
cinal agents suited to the requirements of his case.
Then, the part or the limb having been thus reduced
with depletive measures, the shaft would be found to
have been dislodged from its seat and to be moving
about ^Avithin the deeper tissues of the affected part},
giving rise to pain, redness and swelling. In such a case
the exact location of the shaft should be fixed at the
spot where the pain and swelling, etc. would occur.
The same measures should be adopted in the case of a
shaft (Shalyam) which lies embedded in the cavity of
the abdomen (Kostha), or in a bone, or joint, or muscle

In the case of a Shalyam lodged in a vein, in an
arter}', in any external channel (Srota) of the body, or
in a ligament, the patient should be made to ride in a
carriage with a broken or lopped off wheel and dragged
up and down in it on an undulating road The pain and
swelling, etc. incidental to the jolting, Avould occur at
that part of his body, where the shaft (Shalyam'i is
embedded.

In the case of a shaft Shalyam) lodged in a
bone, the affected bone should be lubricated and
diaphorised with oil and heat respectively, after which
it should be firmly pressed and bormd .up. The seat of
the pain or swelling, caused by such a procedure, would
mark the exact locality of the embedded Shalyam.

SrTKASTllA’NAM

253

XXVI.

Similarly, in tlru case of a shaft (Slialyam) lodged in a
joint, the same Inhrjcaling, diaphorising, compressing,
and expandirig measures should he adojiled, and the
painful swelling caused thereby would indicate its e.xact
locality. Xo definite method can be laid down as
regards ;iscertaining the exact location of a Shnlyam
lodged in any of the vital parts of the body (Marma',
inasmuch as they are co-existing with 'the eight different
locations of ulcers, such as, the skin, the llesh, the
bone, etc.)*

General rule : — A painful swelling, occurring
at any part of the body and incidental to such physical
or natural eiideavour.s of the patient, as riding on an
elephant or on horse-back, climbing a steep hill, bend-
ing of a bow, gymnastic exercises, running, wrestling,
walking, leaping, swimming, high-jumping, yawning,
coughing, singing, expectorating, eructating, laughing,
practising of Prandydma (regulating the breath prelimi-
nary to the practice of Yoga), or an emission of semen,
urine or flatus, or defecation, would clearly indicate
the exact location of the embedded shaft iShalyam).

Authoritative Verses on the Sub-
ject : — The part of the body, which is marked by
pain and swelling, or which seems heavy and is marked

* Accordingly measures enjoined to be adopted in connection with a
sh-oft (Shalyara) lodged in any one of them should be applied mntaVin
mutandis to cases in which these Marmas would he found to be similarly
affected.

254

THE SUSHRUTA 3A.MHITA'. [Chip. xxvi.

by complete anccsthesia, or the part which the patient
repeatedly handles, or constantly presses with his own
hand, or which exudes any sort of secretion, and is
marked b}’’ a sort of excruciating pain, or which he
involuntarily withdraws from, or constantly guards
igainst (an imaginar\- painful contact), should be
regarded as clearly indicative of the exact location of
the embedded Shal)'ara.

A physician, having tested with a probe the cadty
of the incidental ulcer or the interior of the affected
locality, and found it to be characterised by little pain
and absence of any aching discomfort or unfavour-
able symptoms and swelling, after a course of proper
treatment, and after having been satisfied as to its
healthy look and the softness of its margin, and after
having ascertained that any remnant of the embedded
arrow can not be perceived with the end of the director
b}’- moNung it to and fro, should pronounce it free from
any embedded foreign matter (Shalyam), which would
be further confirmed by the full flexion and expansion
of the affected limb or organ.

A particle of soft bone, horn or iron, in an^-wise
lodged in the body, assumes an arched shape ; whereas
bits of wood, grass-stems, or chips of bamboo-bark,
under the same circiunstances, putrift- the blood and
the local flesh, if not speedily extracted from their seats
of 1 odgment. Bits of gold, silver, copper, brass, zinc, or

( uvp XNVl.

Sl'TRAsrU.VNAM.

255

Icul, anylu)\v inserted into a Inunan ori^anisni , arc soon
melted by the heat of the Pittani and arc assimilated
and iransfonncd into the fundamental principles of the
body. Metals or subsumecs of kindred softness, and
which arc naturally cold, are melted aird beconre ainal-
;4amated, under such circumstances, with the elements
of the orijanism. A hair, or a particle of hard bone,
wood, Slone, bamboo sevapim;, or clay, which remains
lodvjed in the body as a i'halyam, does not melt, nor
underi^o any chanye or deterioration.

The physician, who is fully conversant with the
live different courses or llii'hts of an arrow iShalyam),
whether feathered or unfeathered, and has minutely
observed and studied the symptoms due to its lodg-
ment in any of the eight different seats of ulcers (Vnina)
in the human organism isuch as, tire skin, etc.), is alone
worthy of attending on kings and nobles.

Tiiu,-. end-, ilic itttnly-aiMh Clupicr <if iIil- Sulriulhinaiii in ihc
Suihruta SaniliilS wliicli lri;al.> of cxploMlion of ^plinlcrs.

Ch;ip. XXVII.^

SUTRASTHAWAM.

257

penetrated into the deeper tissues of flesh, should be
extracted b)" setting up suppuration in the affected
locality. The putrid flesh would loosen the fixture of the
Shalyam, the weight of the secreted pus and blood
causing it to drop down.

The seat or the locality of a fixed Shal3’^am
should be opened by an incision in the event of
its not being ejected even after the establishment of
the local suppuration. If the Shalyam fails to come out
even alter the incision, the affected part should be
pressed with the fingers, or medicines, endued with
the virtue of exerting pressure, should be applied
over its surface. A particle of any fine matter,
accidentally dropped into the eye, should be removed
with sprays of cold water, or by blowing into it with
the mouth, or by rubbing it with hair or the fingers.

A residue of digested food or mucous, a remnant
of any food matter (Ahirashesha) misdirected into
the nostrils, or any small splinter loosely pricking thereto
(Anu-shalyam), should be expelled by breathing hard,
or by coughing upward through the nostrils (Utkisha),
or by blowing through the nose. A morsel of food,
acting as an obstructing Shalyam in the cavity of
the stomach (Amdshaya), should be ejected by
rubbing (Pratimarsha) the fingers against the lining
of the throat, or against the region of the epiglottis,
while such a morsel brought dowm into the intestines.

33

THE SUSHRUT-A SAMHITA. [Chap. XXVII.

should be evacuated by administering purgatives
(Virechanain).

The pus or any other morbid matter found within
the ca\'ity of an ulcer should be removed by washing
it, while incarcerated flatus, or obstructed scybala
or retained urine, or obstructed fcetus, should be borne
down and expelled by means of straining.

Any deranged Vayu or waterv' secretion incarcerated
in any part of the body, as well as poisoned blood
or ^ntiated breast-milk, should be sucked off with the
mouth, or rvith a hom.

A loose, unbarbed arrow, lodged in a wound with
a broad mouth and lying in an Anuloma direction,
should be m’thdrawn by applying a magnet to its
end. A shaft of grief, driven into the heart by any
of the multifarious emotional causes, should be removed
by e.xhilaration and merr)'- making.

A shaft (Shal^'am), whether large or small, may
be uithdrami from its place in either of the two
ways known as the Annloma and Pratilonia. The
Anuloma consists in withdrawing a Shaij'am through
a way other than that of its penetration, while the
conlrar}' is called the Pratilonia.

A Shah’am lodged in a place Ijing close to the
spot of its penetration (Andcheenam) should be
e.xtracted through the way by which it has entered

ciup. xxvn. ]

SUTRASTHA’NAM.

259

(Pmlilonia). On iho other hand, a shaft or Shalyani,
piercing deep into any part of the body, but not
coining out by the other side (Par.lclieenam), should
be drawn out through a way otiier tlian that of its
penetration (Anulonia).

A shaft, piercing deep into any part of the body
so as to reach the other side of the wounded limb
or part, 'but not cutting out clean through it owing
to the diminution of its original momentum), and
remaining protruded in the heaved up flesh, should
be extracted through a channel other than that by
which it has originally penetrated (Anuloma), and b}'
stirring or striking it with the hand or a hammer.
The heaved up flesh should be opened with an incision,
when found possible of being so opened, and the
embedded Shalyam should be drawn out by stirring or
striking it with the hand as laid down before.

A Shalyam, lodged in any soft part of the abdomen,
chest, arm-pits, inguinal regions or ribs, should not be
cut open or struck with hammer, but should be tried to
be removed with the hands through the waj" of its
penetration i^Pratiloma), in failure whereof the Shalyam
should be extracted with surgical appliances (Shastra)
or any other surgical instruments (Yantras).

Authoritative Verse on the Sub-
ject : — ^A patient, fainting away (during the course
of such a surgical operation), should be enlivened by

26 o

THE SUSHKUTA SA.MHITA. [ Chap. XXVll.

dashing cold water over his face. He should be solaced
with many a hopeful and cheering word, and a nourish-
ing diet such as, milk, etc. should be given him, and
his vital parte should be protected.

Then having extracted the Shalyam, the incidental
wound or ulcer, the blood haHng been wiped of, should
be fomented with heat or by apphnng warm clarified
butter to its surface in the event of it being found fit to
be so treated i.e., devoid of pain and unattended with
further bleeding). Cauterisation should be resorted to
where the condition of the wound would indicate such a
measure. .A.fter that, the wound should be plitstered
(Pradeha, with honey and clarified butter, and bandaged
with a piece of clean linen ; and ilirections as to the
diet and nursing of the patient should be given (as
preHoush' laid down).

A Shalyam, lodged in a vein or a ligament (Snayu).
should be extracted \rith the help of a probe. The
shaft iShalyam), lodged in the body and hang buried
under the incidental swelling, should be extracted by
firmly tying blades of Kusha grass around its body.
A shaft (Shah-am;, lodged in a spot situated anywhere
close to the heart, should be withdrawn by the way
by which it has entered ; and the patient should be
enlivened with sprays of cold water, etc. during the
operation.

Ch.ip. NXVII. I

sutrastha'N’am.

261

A Shaiyuni, lotlged in any other part of the body
and that is dilVicult to extract, and that produces pain
and local inflammation, should be removed by cutting
the part oj)en. In tlie case of a shaft ;.Shalyam) \vhicli
has pierced into the cavity of a bone, tlie surgeon should
(irmly press the aflected i)one with his legs, and pull
out the embedded shaft with all his might by gripi)ing
it with a surgical instrument, in failure whereof a
strong man should be asked to firndy catch hold of
the patient, and the Shalj'am should be pulled out
with the help of a gripping surgical instrument as before.

As an alternative, the bottom of the shaft should
be tied to the string of a bow, strung and full}' bent
down ; and the Shalyam should be ejected with the
means of a full twang. As an alternative, a horse
should be harnessed in the fashion known as the
Panch^ngi-vandhanam Oit. bound in the five parts of the
body), and the end of the Shalyam should be bent doum
and tied to the bridle. Then the horse should be
so whipped as to raise its head first, thus pulling out
the embedded shaft ^Shalyami from its seat of lodg-
ment by the jerk of its head. As an alternative, a
high and tough bough of a tree should be lowered down
and tied to the bent end of the shaft as in the
preceding case. The bough should be then let loose,
thus pulling out the shaft (Shalyam) with its rebounding
force.

262

THE SU5HRUTA SAMHITA'. [ c^^'P- XXVll.

A shaft (Shalyani), lodged in a bone and lying pro-
truded in the heaved up local flesh (situated in a place
other than the inguinal regions, abdomen, or arm-pits,
etc.), should be stirred by striking it on the head with
an Asthila a round stone, — a short hammer according
to certain authorities), or with a stone or hammer, and
should be taken out by the way of its penetration.

The feather of a barbed shaft, lying embedded in a
bone situated at a part of the organism where the
existence of such a foreign matter is calculated not
to create any special discomfort, should be first crushed
by putting pressure on the heaved up or protruded
flesh, and the shaft then should be gently pulled out
of its seat of lodgment.

In the case of a bit of shellac being accidentally
pricked into the phai^mx, a metal tube should be first
inserted into the passage, and then a heated metallic
rod should be reached dorni to the obstructing shellac
through its inside. The shellac, thus melted by the
heat of the inserted rod, would naturally stick fast to
it, which should be then condensed by an injection of
cold water poured dorni through the aforesaid tube ;
after that the rod should be wthdrawn thus carrj’ing
awa}”^ the melted shellac at its end.

According to certain authorities, any other obstruct-
ing foreign matter accidentally introduced into the
pharjmx should be withdrawn with the help of a rod.

soaked in molted wax or shellac, and then inserted into
that passage, all other procedure being the same as in
the preceding instance.

In the case of a bone Shalyam (such :is the bone
of fish etc.) having accidentally stuck fast in tlie
throat, a bundle of hair, tied to a string of thread,
should be inserted into the gullet of the patient, the
ph3’sician holding the otlier end of tiie string in liis
liand. Then a copious ejuantity of water, or of any
otlier liquid substance, should be poured down into his
throat, so as to entirely fill his stomach. .Aiter that
some kind of emetic should be given to the patient,
and the string should be pulled out as soon as the
bundle of hair would be felt to have struck below the
obstructing bone or Shalj'ara, which would naturally
come out with the pull. .As an alternative, the top
end of a soft twig, as is generally used in cleansing
the teeth, should be bruised into the shape of a brush,
and the thorn or the Shalyam should be removed with
its help. The incidental wound should be treated by
making the patient lick a compound of clarified
butter and honey, or of the powders of the Triphal^,
saturated wth honey and sugar.

The body of the patient should be pressed or rubbed,
or he should be whirled round by the ankles, or general-
ly measures, calculated to induce vomiting, should be
adopted in a case where he would be found to have

264 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ ctop. .vwii.

swallowed a stomachful of water (as in a case op ^rort'n-
ing). As an alternative, he should be buried'unddf the
ashes up to his chin. ••

Strong wine should be gir-en to the patient, or he
should be slapped on the shoulders, so as to cause him
to suddenly start in a case where a morsel of food would
be found to have obstructed and stuck fast in his gullet.
A tight gripe about the throat of a person with a creeper,
rope or the arm of an antagonist, tends to enrage the
local (Kapham), which obstructs the cavil}- of the
passage (Srota) producing salivation, foaming at the
mouth and loss of consciousness. The remedy in such
cases consists in lubricating and diaphorising the body
of the patient with oil and heat, and in administering
strong errhines (Shiro-Virechanam), and the juice or
extract of meat which is possessed of the virtue of
subduing the deranged V 5 yu.

Authoritative Verses on the Sub-
ject: — An intelligent physician should remove a
Shalyam with due regard to its shape, location and the
adaptability of the different t}'pes of surgical instru-
ments to the case rmder treatment. .A physician should
exercise his own discretion in extracting feathered
shafts (Shalvas) from their seats of lodgment, as well
as those that are difBcult of extraction.

A physician is at liberty to exercise his on-n skill
cind wisdom, and to devise his own original means for

Chip. XXVII. )

SUTUAS'rilA'NAM.

265

tl}c \;xtraction of a Slialyam with the iielp of any
surpitj;}!- mstnnnents when the abovesaid measures
would pi;ovb abortive. A Slialyam, not removed from
the bod}’- and left in its place of lodgment, brings on
swelling, suppuration, mortification of the affected part,
and a sort of excruciating pain, and may ultimately
lead to death. Hence a physician should spare no pain
to extract a Slialyam from its seat of lodgment.

Tl\a< ends ihc uvcnly-scvonth Chapter of the SulraslhAnain in tlie
Sushruui Sainhili, wtiich lre:its of exir.iclion of Slialyaiii,

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which deals
with the favourable or unfavourable prognosis of an ulcer.

( Vfparitarviparita - Vrana - Vijnarniya -
madhyaryam ).

Metrical Text Certain fatal or unfavourable
symptoms (Arishtas)* unmistakabl}^ presage the death
of an ulcer-patient, as a flower, smoke and cloud
respective!}'' herald a fruit, fire and rain. In most cases,
the ignorant cannot interpret aright these fatal symp-
toms owing to their e.vtremely subtile nature, or out of
ignorance or stupidity, or because such s}'mptoms are
very closely followed by the death of the patient.

These fatal indications serve as .sure precursors
of death in a patient, imless wrded off by the
blessings of holy Brahraanas, who are free from
low desires or animal propensities, and are also
accustomed to practise the Toga and other reUgious
penances ; or death may be averted with the help of
men who are initiated into the mystery of concocting
life-giving elixirs (Rasayanam .

* The symptoms which .ire developed by the deratiijcd bodily humours
in the organism of a man at a time when they have passed beyond all
medical cure, and when the Ijody serves ns a mere passive back-ground
for those phenomena, aw.aiting its impending dissolution, arc called

ArUbtsf.

Chap. XXVIII. )

SIJTRASTHA.NJAM,

267

Many such iiulicalions do not prove instantly fatal
but bring on death in course of time, just as diseases,
supposed by some to be due to the inlluence of malig-
nant planets, take lime before they become patent out
of their incubative stages. An attempt to cure a doomed
patient is only repaid by failure and the ridicule of the
world, and hence an intelligent physician should make
it worth his while to Girefully obser\-e and study these
fatal indications. A contrariety of the natural smell,
colour, t.isle, (sensation, sound, touch, etc.) of an ulcer
indicates a near and fatal termination of the disease.

An ulcer emits a pungent, sharp, or fishy smell under
the respective inlluences of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam
and Kaphani. .An ulcer, deranged by the action of
the vitiated blood, emits a smell like that of iron
(Loha-gandhi), while one, originated tlirough the
concerted action of the deranged humours, emits a
smell characterised by the distinctive features of each
of them. On the other hand, an ulcer, due to the Joint
action (of the deranged Vayu and'Pittam), emits a smell
like that of fried paddy ; one, due to the action of
the deranged Vayu and Kapham, emits a smell like
that of linseed oil ; whereas one, brought about by
the action of the deranged Pittam and Kapham, smells
like sesamum oil. All those odours, marked by a
somewhat fishy character, should be deemed the natural
odours of ulcers, and any other -smell should be held as
a contrary or unnatural one.-

368

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXVIII.

An ulcer emitting a sweet smell like that of wine,
or fragrant aloe wood (Aguru), clarified-butter, J^ti
flower, Champaka, sandal, lotus or any celestial flower
(I^ivyagandha), should be regarded as the precursor of
death. Similarly, a smell like the one which character-
ises a dog, horse, mole, crow or a bug, or like the one
emitted by dry, putrid meat, or resembling the smell of
earth or slime, should be likewise deemed unfavourable
or fatal in an ulcer.

A phj’^sician should give up a case where an ulcer,
though it has assumed a blackish, saffron or Kankustha
colour fa sort of mountain earth) through the action
of the aggravated Pittam, is divested of the burning,
sucking and drawing pain, which is peculiar to that
morbiferous diathesis. Similarly, an ulcer, which, though
brought about through the action of the deranged
Kapham, has become cold, hard and whitish as natural
in one of the Kaphaja tj’pe, should be given up as soon
as it is marked b)’’ a burning pain. Likewise an iflcer,
due to the action of the deranged Viyu, and characterised
by a blackish hue and a thin secretion, and which is
found to invade the vital principles of the body, should
be abandoned by a physician, whenever found to be
entirely devoid of pain.

An ulcer, which makes a gurgling or groaning somid,
or one which is characterised by an extreme burn-
ing sensation, or is confined to the skin and the flesh.

Chap. XXVIII.]

SUTRASTHANAM.

269

and is marked by the emission of wind with a loud
report, is sure to have a fatal termination. Likewise,
one, which is characterised by e.vtreme pain, though
not otherwise seated about any of the vital parts of the
body, or which is cold on the surface, though attended
with an extremely burning sensation in its inside and
vice versa, should be deemed the precursor of death.
Similarly, an ulcer should be regarded as fatal, that is
shaped like the barb of a spear, or a Kunta (a kind
of barbed dart or spear), or like a banner, chariot,
horse, or an elephant, or like a cow, an ox, a temple,
or a palace.

A wise physician, with any regard to his own repu-
tation, should abandon a patient laid up with an ulcer
which appears to have been dusted over with a sort of
pulverised crust, or who has been suffering from one ac-
companied by loss of flesh and strength, cough, difficult
respiration and aversion to food. An ulcer, which
occurring at any of the vital parts of the body secretes
a copious quantity of pus and blood, and refuses to
be healed even after a course of proper and persistent
medical treatment, is sure to have a fatal termination.

Thus ends the twenty-eighth Chapter of the Sutrasthdnam in the
Sushruui Samhitd, which deals with the favourable and unfavourable
prognosis of ulcers.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Xow we shall discourse on the Chapter, which
treats of favourable or unfavourable prognosis in
diseases, kno^^^l from messengers, omens and dreams

etc. (Vi paritarvj parita- Duta-Shaku na-
Svapna- Nidarshaniya-madhya^am).

Metrical Texts The favourable or unfavour-
able termination of a disease may be predicted from
the appearance, speech, dress and demeanour of the
messenger sent to caU in a physician, or from the
nature of the asterism and the lunar phase marking
t e time of his arrival, or from the direction of the
^VInd (.Imla) blowing at the time, or from the nature
of omens (Shakuna) seen by him on the road, or from
the posture, temperament or speech of the physician

A messenger belonging to the same caste as the
patient- should be regarded as an auspicious omen,
whereas one from a different caste would indicate a
fatal or an unfavourable termination of the disease.

A eunuch, a husband of many wives, a messenger

despatched to call in a ph>.iclan

in the cas T ° community would faU ill ; a householder.

of a bX " i - Brdhmana. in the case

would be ^d so on; while an inhingement of the rule

would be looked upon as an esil omen.

aap. XXIX, 1

SUTRASTH/VNAM.

271

sent on a different errand and incidentally calling- at a
physician's house, or one who has quarrelled on the road,
or messengers who come riding on camels, donkeys or
in carts, or on foot in one unbroken line, should be
looked upon as inauspicious messengers.

Similarly, messengers, who call at the house of a
physician, holding in their hands a rope, club, or
any other weapon, or who come dressed in black, red,
yellow, wet, dirty or tom garments, or with the upper
sheets placed or arranged on their right shoulders
(Apasa-vya), or clad in single cloths without such upper
sheets on, as well as those, who are possessed of addi-
tional or smaller number of limbs, or look disturbed and
agitated, or whose bodies are in any way mutilated or
such, as look fierce and haughty, or speak in a rough
and harsh tone, or utter any tenn implying death,
should be regarded as augurs of e-ril.

Likewise, a messenger, tearing off a blade of grass or
a chip of wood with his fingers, or handling the tip
of his nose or the nipples of his breast, or pulling the
ends of his cloth or hair, or the ring-finger of his
hand, or brushing his nails and hair, or standing
with his fingers in his ears or nostrils, or \vaiting
with his hands placed on his cheeks, chest or head,
or about the regions of the arm-pits, as well as
one, who has arrived at the house of the physician
with bits of human skull or stone, or \ritfa ashes, bones.

272

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. t Clwp. XXIX.

paddy husks or charcoal in the palms of his hands, or
one, who digs into the earth with In's toe-nails, or
wantonly breaks stones or brickbats, while waiting
at the physician’s house, should be regarded as a
messenger of evil augury.

A messenger, who at the time of visiting a physician
for his professional help conies smeared with oil, or with
red sandal paste or mud, and carries a red garland or a
ripe but sapless fruit, or any other thing of like nature
in his hand, or brushes together the nails of his fingers
or touches his legs with the hand, or carries a shoe
in his hand, or who appears to have been sulTeriug from
a foul or loathsome disease, further one, who breathes
heavily, or weeps or behaves contrarily, or stands with
the palms of his hands united and his face turned to-
waids the south, or waits on one leg on an uneven
ground with the other raised and placed on a higher
support, should be looked upon as the precursor of
evil.

A messenger, reporting his errand to the physician
while he is facing the south, or who is in an unclean
state of the body, or engaged in kindling a lire or in
killing an animal, or is remaining in a nude state, or is
found to be lying on the bare floor of his chamber, or
performing an afiection after attending to a call of
nature, or anointing himself with oil, or perspiring, or
sitting with his hair dishevelled, or in a state of mental

(Clui-. XXIX.

SUTKASTHa'NAM.

perturbation, is to Ijc looked upon as a jnesseijifcr forc-
btxlinj; evil.

A mcsseuj'er, seckin}( the interview of a physician
while he is engaifcd in olfering obliitions to his departed
manes, or to the gods, or one wlio calls on him at noon
or at inidniglil, at morning or at evening, or during the
happening of any abnormal physical phenomenon, or at
an hour under the inlluence of any of the following
;isterisms (lunar mansions), viz. the Ardra, the Ashlesa,
the Magha, the Mula, the two Purvas, and the Bharani,
or on the day of the fourth, ninth, or the sixth phase
of the moon (whether on the wane or on the increase),
as well as on the last days of months and fortnights,
should be considered as a messenger of evil auguiy.

A messenger, hot and perspiring from being seated
near a blazing fire, and calling upon a physician in the
midday, should be deemed as an inauspicious one
in the case of a Pittaja distemper ; whereas a
messenger of similar description should be looked upon
as foreboding the favourable termination of a disease, if
due to the action of the deranged Kapham. The favour-
able character of a messenger should be likewise deter-
mined in diseases originated through the action of the
deranged Vayu,* etc. ; and an intelligent physician' is

■“ A .mcsicngcr, visiting a phj-sician in the afternoon or during a- heavy
rain or storm, or at a lime when the vital wind is naturally disturbed and
agitated, Indicates an unfavourable prognosis.

35

274

THE SUSHRUTA SAiMHlTA. [Ch.ip. XXl.K.

at liberty to exercise his own discretion in determining
the omen. Similarlj’’ in a case of h.emoptysis, dysenter}’
or any morbid discharge from the urethra fPrameha^,
the first interview between a messenger and a physician
near a reservoir of water is an omen of happy augur}'.
A learned physician shall thus determine the ominous
character of a messenger in connection with other
diseases as well.

Messengers of happy augury A fair
and handsome messenger, who is clad in clean and white
garments, and belongs to the same caste or spiritual
clan (Svagotra) as the patient himself, forebodes the suc-
cessful termination of the disease (for which the medical
aid is needed). A messenger, calling on a physician either
on foot or in a bullock cart, and who is contented,
intelligent, capable of acting according to the rules of
decorum, time and circumstances, and is independent and
original in his thoughts and ideas, and carries ornaments,
and other auspicious articles about his person, is alone
capable of rendering the best services in connection
with the calling in of a physician. A messenger, for the
first time, inteiwiewing a physician, when the latter is
complacent!}' seated with his face towards the east, and
on a clean and even ground, should be regarded as a
messenger of happy augur}'.

Raw meat, a pitcher full of water, an umbrella,
a Bramhaua, an elephant, a cow, an o.x and an article

('IU U WIX. 1

SITKASI'I[AN'.\.\(.

275

ol a white colour, should be deemed auspicious sights bj'
a physician on his way to the house of a patient. A
mother, a cow with her calf, a small pitclier of water, a
decorated viri,dn, lish, unripe fruits, a Svastika (a cross
shaped relii'ioiis insignia), sweetmeat, curd, gold, a
vessel full of sun-dried rice, gems, flowers (according
to certain commentators a well disposed king), a blazing
lire, a liorse, a swan, a peacock, a bird of the Chasha
species, chantings of Vedic verses, claps of thunder,
blowings of conch-shells, notes of lutes, sounds of
chariot wheels, roar of lions, lowings of cows and
bullocks, neigiiings of horses, trumpeting of elephants,
cacklings of geese, hootings of owls, and the pleasant
conversation of )erson3 going to the palace of a king,
should be regarded tis luckj* siglits and sounds b}’ a
physician on liis w,ay (to the lionse of a patient).

Similarly, liarmonious melodies of birds chirping
on the boughs of healthy Kshira trees, bent under
the weight of fniit, and looking gladsome with their
dowr}' of beautiful blossoms and foliage, or notes of
birds perched on the terraces of palace towers or on
the tops of banner poles singing melodiously, or birds
following the messenger with their songs or singing
seated from the auspicious quarters of the heavens, or
following him on his left, should be equally regarded
as sights and notes of happ)'’ foreboding.

A bird, seated on the withered trunk of a blighted

THI* SUSHRUT.A SAAJHITA'. I Cliap. XM-N.

276

or thunder-blasted tree, or on a thorny knoll covered
over with creepers, or on ashes or stones, or amidst
ordure or husks of grain, or on dried skeletons,
and singing in a liarsh voice with its head turned
towards the blazing or inauspicious quarter of tlie
sky, should be deemed as portending evil.

Similarly, birds, which are possessed of names of
masculine terminations are happ}’ omens if seen on
the left b\' a physician on his way to the house of
a patient, while birds, on a similar occasion, whose
names have feminine endings, are auspicious if seen
by him on the right. A dog or a jackal, seen run-
ning from the right to the left, is a happy omen,
and so is a mongoose or a Chasha bird if seen on the
left. A hare, a serpent, or an owl, seen on either side
of the road, is an inauspicious sight. The sight and
the sound of a Godha or a Krikal^sha an animal of
of the lizard species' are both inauspicious.

If a man, other than a messenger of inauspicious
character but possessed of features alike unfavourable,
should happen to cross the way of a physician, just
starting on a professional call, he should be regarded
as equally indicative of evil. The sight of a vessel
full of Kulutha pulse, or of husks of grain, or of stone,
ashes, clay or charcoal, or of oil, is inauspicious.
Similarly, the sight of a vessel filled Avith red mustard
or with -wine other than which is clear and mild

Chnp. XXIX. ]

SUTR.ASTHA'NAiVr.

277

(Prasanna) should be deemed an omen of evil
augury.

Similarly, the sight of a parched corpse, or of a
withered tree or PaMsha branch, is equally inauspicious.
A ph5'sician, meeting a member of an}"- of the vile or
degraded castes or a blind or indigent person, or a man
inimically disposed tow^ards him, should consider the
character of the disease to be unfavourable.

A gentle, cool and fragrant breeze, blowing from
the direction of his destination, should be regarded as
an auspicious omen by a physician. A wind, w'hich
is hot, dr)’-, and is charged w'ith the fetid exalations
of putrid matter, and w'hich blow’s from the direction
of his starting point, should be regarded as an evil
omen.

The w’ord "cut,” used by another and accidentally
heard by a physician fon his w’ay) to the bed-side of a
patient laid up m'th Granthi (aneurism) or Arvuda
(tumour), should be regarded as a good omen ; w’hile the
term "open”, heard under similar circumstances and in
connection with a case of Vidradhi (abscess), or Gulma
(abdominal gland'', or Udara (ascites), should be regarded
as an equally atispicious portent. Similarly, the term
"stopped” is commended in a case of dysenter)' or
hasmoptysis. Thus the physician should interpret
the auguries according to the nature of each indh’idual

case.

27S

THE SUSH K UTA SAM H ITA'.

A curse, imprecation, or wailing like “woe to me",
as well as sobs, groans, reports of defecation or vomit-
ing, the brayings of an ass, the frightened sound of
a camel, an obstacle or impediment in the path of
a physician, or a sudden breakage, collapse, or the
falling of any article from a cupboard, and a sad
or dejected spirit of the ph\’sician without any assign-
able cause, should be regarded as evi! omens at the
time of his starting.

These omens should be obser\'ed or attended to
at the time of first entering the house of a patient,
or at the threshold or within its walls, but not after
the physician has once commenced tlie medical treat-
ment. The sight of a knot of torn hairs, ashes, bones,
wood, stone, husks of grain, cotton, thorns, a bedstead
with its legs upturned, wine, water, fat, oil, sesamum,
dried grass, straw, a eunuch, a deformed person or one
with a broken limb, a nude man, or one with a clean
shaved head, or clad in a black garment, should be
regarded as eril omens by a physician, whether noticed
by him at the time of starting or after getting into
a sick room. Pots or utensils placed in pendent brackets,
and foimd to be spontaneously moving about vithout
an}' definite cause, as well as any other fallen articles
digged in, smashed in or thrown out of the
sick-room ; a physician sitting dejected and gathered
up in his seat, and the patient sitting wth a down-
cast face, or pricking his body or at the bed clothes

Chap. -K.VIX. ]

SUTKAS'l'HA'NAM.

279

while talking with the pliysician, or shaking his hands,
back or head, or taking hold of or placing the hands
of the physician in his own, or on his breast, or interro-
gating the physician with an up-turned face, or
pressing his own limbs, when he is interrogatal by
the physician in return, should be considered as
unfavourable signs.

The patient, in whose house a physician is not
duly honoured, can never rally. The due honouring of
a physician leads to a speedy recoverj\ A messenger
of good omen forebodes the favourable termination
of a disease, while the contrary’ is indicated by a
messenger of the opposite type. Hence a physician
shall carefully observe the ominous character of a
messenger (despatched to seek his aid'.

Dreams : — Now I shall describe the dreams,
which either being dreamt by the patient, or by his
relations, portend fatal or a successful close of the
malady. The patient, who dreams of going towards
the south on the back of an elephant, or on that of
any carnivorous animal, or of riding on a boar or
on a buffalo, or sees himself carried towards the
quarter by a dark woman with dishevelled hair and
clad in a blood- red garment — laughing and dancing, soon
meets his doom. A dream by a patient that members of
vile castes have been drawing him southward, or that
ghosts or anchorites have been embracing him, or that

28 o the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. iClrap. XXIX.

sarage beasts \vith diabolical faces have been smelling
his head, predicts that his earthly days are numberetl^
while such dreams occurring in a healthy subject
indicate an impending disease.

Similarly, the patient, who dreams of drinking oil or
honey, or of diving into a bed of dank or oozy slime,
or of laughing and dancing mud-besplattered, is at the
threshold of death. A dream of liarnug entwined a
wTeath of red flowers round one's head, though other-
wise nude or stripped of clothes, or of seeing reeds,
bamboos, or palm trees growing on his chest, portends
the impending death of a patient. On the other
hand, such dreams, occurring in a healthy subject,
forebode the advent of disease. Likewise, the patient,
who dreams of being eaten up by fish, or who fancies
himself again entering into the womb of his mother,
or thinks he is falling from the summit of a moimtain or
into a dark and dismal cave, or as being carried away by
the current of a river, or assailed and or erwhelmed by a
pack of crows, is already a doomed being. The dream
of a clean shaved head, or of falling stars, or of dying
lamp light, or of the extraction of one's own eyes, or of
shaking dirine images, or of earthquakes, purgings, vomit-
ings or falling out of one’s oxsti teeth, is alwa}’'s fatal.
The patient,who dreams of climbing a Shalmali, Kinsuka,
or Pari-bhadra tree, or of ascending an ant-hill or a
funeral pjTe, or of witnessing himself bound to a sacri-

XNIX. '

Sr rUASTUAN'AM.

281

ficical slake, or of rcccivinj' or eating, cotton,
kvigaicil scsainuin paste, iron, salt, sesamum, boiled
rice, t)r drinking oil or wine (Snr.'i), as the case may he,
sltonhl consider himself as a doomed being, while such
dreams in a healthy subject indicate llie impending
attack of a dise.ase.

A dream shouhl be regarded as inelleclual which
is (juite in conformity witlj the physical temperament of
the dreamer (such as, one of scaling the heavens
by a person of Vataja temperament ; one of seeing
a blazing fire, a Hash of liglitning, or a meteor-fall
by a man of PitUaja temperament ; and one of wit-
nessing reservoirs of water, etc. by a man of Kaphaja
temperament; as well as one whicli h.is been forgotten
or followed by another of an auspicious type or is the
outcome of premeditated thought like one dreamt in
the day time.

A fever patient dreaming of friendship with a dog,
a consumptive one dreaming of making friends with a
monkey or a monster ; a hysteric patient who dreams of
making friendship with a ghost; a Prameha or dysenterJ^
patient dreaming of drinking water ; a leper dreaming of
drinking oil, or a Gulma patient dreaming of a tree grow-
on his belly, should count his days as numbered. A person
afflicted with any disease of the head, and dreaming
of a tree growing on his head, or one suffering from
vomiting and dreaming of eating sesamum cakes ; or

36

282 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCtop.XKiX.

an asthma patient, or a person, alTlicted with thirsty
dreaming of making a journey on foot ; or a jaundice
patient dreaming of eating a food prepared with
tunneric ; or a person suffering from hiemoptysis and
dreaming of drinking blood, should be considered as about
to depart this life. A patient having had any of the
aforesaid dreams, under the circumstances, should get
up in the morning and make a gift of Masha-pulse,
sesamum, iron and gold to the Brahmanas, and repeat
the blessed Tripdda Giyatri fMantras.)

Having dreamt a bad dream in the first watch of the
night, a person should meditate upon aholy or auspicious
subject, and then lie down again with all his senses full)'
controlled, and repeat the Jlantras sacred to an\' of the
gods. An e\il dream should not be related to another.
The dreamer of the dream should reside in a holy
temple for three consecutive nights, and worship the
deity wth the most fervent devotion, whereby its evil
effects would become nullified.

Now we shall describe the dreams, which are
of auspicious nature. Members of the twice bom
castes, gods, cows, bullocks, kings, one’s own living
friends and relations, a blazing fire, a Brrfhraana, or a
sheet of clear water seen in a dream by a healthy person
predict or predicts to him a pecuniary gain in the near
future, while such dreams occurring in a diseased person
indicate a speedj'^ recovery of the disease he has been

Ci'.H'. XXI.\. !

sutkastha'N.vaj

2H3

sulfcring from. Similarly, (ircains of meal, Hsli, garlands
of while tluwci'S, clollis and I'ruil predict a gain or a
speedy ctire, as the case may be.

Dreams of ascending tiie lerniee of a royal
palace, of climbing a tree or a hill, or of riding an
elephant predict similar rcsnils as above. .V dream of
one's sailing over a river, pool or sea of turbid water
jiredicls a money gain or cure, according as one is
healthy or diseased. .V dream of having been bit
or slung by a serpent, by leeches, or by a bee, indicates
bliss or cure, according to one’s good or bad Iiealth
at the time. The man, wlio usually gets such auspicious
dreams, should be looked upon ns a long-lived man,
and may be unhesitatingly taken under medical
treatment by a physician.

Tliiis <.'nil> ilii- uvomy-iiinili ('tinpiiT <if lln- Suiraslhinain in lltc
.Saiiiliil.'i, ttliic'lwli-.ils nith oj iinfavnuiahle pir.gno.via

fioin i)n.-aivni;r»>, l.iidv, iinit-na ric.

CHAPTER XXX.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of the prognosis that can be obtained from the perverted
functions of the five sense organs (Panchcn-
d r iy arrtha- V i p rati patti - mad hya^am ) .

Metrical texts : — perversion or contrariet)"^
of the functions of the mind or brain (Shilam), and
of the organs of sense-perception, is called ArisEtam
(an unfavourable symptom foreboding death). Now
hear me describe, in brief detail, the S5’Tnptoms which
are called Arishta (fatal indications).

The man, who liears a variety of divine sounds
even in the absence of any of the celestial beings,
(such as, the Siddhas, the Gandharvas etc.), or thinks
that he is hearing the uproar of a city, or the
meanings of the sea, or the nunbling of a rain
cloud, n-ithout their actual presence or pro.vimity, or
who is incapable of catching their sounds even when
they are actually present and sounding, or assigns to
them causes other than the actual ones, should be
regarded as a doomed being. The person, who interprets
the uproar of a city or the rustling forest as sounds
emanating from other sources, or rejoices at the voice
of his enemies, and is annoyed at that of his own
devoted friends, or who suddenly loses the faculty

Sl'IHASTJI.VNWM.

i! .ji. xs;x.

2i>5

ii! IjcMDiij' willioiii ;iny niimilc.-'l or i;n>^')ble rcn.^on,
sliuuM l)c (Iccineil a.s ahcady <m ihc ihrc.^liolil ol <!catli.

TIjc man, who Iccls told when loui'liin;^ a hot
or warm Milutaiue, and, o.vv .y/'.w;, complains of
a burnin.it sensation even when snUerin.i' from a boil,
or a posiule of the Kaphaja type characterised by
numbness, shiverinj:, etc. , or sliiveis when the tem-
perature of his body is felt to be considerably In'j^h,
should he looked upon as already on the jioint of
death. The person, who has lost the faculty of touch,
and does not feel any pain in any part of the body
wl\en it is struck or amputated, or feels as if In's
body had been strewn over with particles of dust,
or sufiers from discolonition of the skin which becomes
marked willi blue or red stripes, and wlio is harassed
by hosts of blue Hies after a balli or an anointment,
should he regarded as one who has already passed the
confines of life.

Similarly, the man whose body emits a fragrantsmell
without having been rubbed with any kind of perfume,
or to whom a sweet tiling tastes acid, and an acid tastes
sweet, or who exhibits symptoms of a general per-
version of the faculty of taste, or in whom (articles
of) different tastes (administered in their officinal
order of enumeration) tend to aggravate the deranged
bodily humours, or bring about their pacification and
a dulness of appetite if partaken of in the inverted

286

THE 3USHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Cimp. XXX.

order, should be regarded as a departed soul, like
the one who has lost the faculty of taste.

The man, who deems a fetid odour to be a fragrant
perfume, or one fragrant to be fetid, or one who does
not feel any discomfort even at the smell of a burning
lamp wck that has just been e.xtinguished, or who has
entirely lost the faculty of smell, should be looked
upon as a dead man.

The man, to whom the twin attributes of heat and
cold, pleasure and pain, as well as the peculiarities of
weather (as storm, drought, snowfall, etc.), and the
different quarters of the sky appear to be reversed or
inverted ; one who has lost all distinctions (of joy and
miser)', storm and sunshine, heat and cold, etc.), or to
whom the specific attributes of things appear to be
contrary and reversed, should be regarded as on the
point of death. The man, who sees stars ablaze in the
broad day-light or fancies seeing the fier>' orb of
the sim by night and the mellow disc of the moon
by day, or who seems to witness the phenomena of
rainbow and lightning even in the absence of any
rain cloud, or the formation of a lightning-spangled
rain-cloud even in a clear blue sky, is sure to be
speedily gathered to his rest. The man, who observes
the feflectefl images of chariots, palaces and aerial
cars in the heavens, or sees the embodied images of
the fire and sky gods, or to whom the earth

Chap. .KXX.]

SUtRASTIiANAM.

287

appears to be enveloped in frost or snjoke, or
enshrouded in a sheet of fine linen, or chequered
with cross lines, or blazing with fire, or flooded with
\\-ater, or to whose sight tlie Pole Star and the asterisni
Arundhati (one of the Pliades) and the IMilky Way
remain invisible, should be reckoned as already with
the dead.

The man, who fails to see his own image reflected
in a mirror, in the moonlight, or in hot water, or sees
but distorted reflections of himself or of any other
animal, or of dogs, cows, storks, vultures, ghosts,
Yakshas, Rakshas, Pishiichas and N^tgas, should be
regarded as about to depart this life. The man, to
whom fire appears to be free of its natural accom
paniraent of smoke, or that it is possessed of a colour
resembling the hue of the breast feathers of a
peacock, should be regarded as doomed, (if happening
to be suffering from an}”- disease). On the other hand,
these phenomena indicate the approach of a disease
in one, who is found to be as yet in the enjoyment
of apparent health.

Thus ends the ihiniclh Chapter of the Suirasthinaiii in the Sushruta
Samhitd which deals with prognosis from the perverted functions of the
five seme organs.

CH AFTER XXXI.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which .
deals with the prognosis to be gathered from the
altered condition of features (Chha^a'-Viprati-
patt i- mad hyaryam) . *

Metrical Text: — The man, whose complexion
suddenly assumes a brown, red, blue or yellow shade,
should be regarded as already gathered to his rest. ■ The
man, who has lost all sense of modesty or propriety,
and whose complexion, and whose strength (ojah) and
memor)' have suddenly undergone discolouration or
e.xtreme deterioration, should be counted with the dead.
Little chance there is of the life of a patient whose
lower lip hangs down wiiile the upper one is drawm or
tinned up, and both of them have assumed a black
colour like that of a jamboline fruit. The patient,
whose teeth fall out or which have assumed a reddish

♦ Pbj'sicians of ihc AjTinedic School, however, observe a distinclion
beLwetn ChhiiyA (shade of complexion), Prabhi (healthful glow of the
complexion), and Varna (natural colour of the complexion) itself. The
Chhiyi or the shade of one'-, complexion may be easily distinguished
as clear, rough or cool, etc. and can be detected only on a close \new.
The Prabhi, on the other hand, b visible from a dbtance and admits of
of being divided into seven different types, such as red, yellow, while,
brown, gieenbh, pale, and black. The Varna or the natural colour of
the complexion of a man b found to be either fair, black, dusky leamng
towards the fair, according to bb race and habitation. The term also
includes natural modesty, look .and ease.

cii.ip. XXXI. I

SU'rRASTlJA'NAM.

or a dark brown colour, or a colour like that of a
Ivhanjana bird (dark blue), should be reckoned as already
gathered to his fathers.

The patient, whose tongue has become furred,
swollen, or inert, or is of a black colour, should be
considered as already at the gate of death. The patient,
whose nose has sunk or become bent, cracked, dried,
or who when breathing makes a gurgling sound through
the nostrils, should be given up as lost. A patient
is certainly quitting this life whose eyes appear to ‘ be
contracted, or unequal, oblique, or inert, insensitive to
light or touch, sunk in their sockets, or bloody, or
marked by a copious lachrymation. The patient whose
hair appears to have been glued to his head whose
eyebrows are contracted and hang down,' and whose
eyelashes are listless should be considered as about to
leave his mortal frame.

The patient, who is incapable of swallowing any food
or of holding up his head, and who looks with a kind of
fixed stare, with all memories of life full}’- obliterated,
should be deemed as dying on that very day. A wise
or prudent physician should give up the' medical
treatment of a patient, no matter whether' strong
or weak, Who is found to be fainting away, every
time he is lifted, up or seated. The patient, -who
constantly extends or draw’s up his lower, extremities,
or keeps them in a gathered up posture, should be

37

The sushruta samhita. [ cimp. xxxi.

^90

looked upon as rapidly succumbing. A wise physician
should abandon a patient, characterised by the cold-
ness of his breath and extremities and a hurried and
intennittent respiration, or who is found breathing with
his mouth open, or lips separated.

Similarl)’’, a patient affected with a kind of stupor
or insomnia and remaining drowsy, all day long, or
fainting at the least attempt of speaking, should be
counted with the dead. The patient, who licks his upper
lip, or is troubled with eructations, or holds conversa-
tions with the departed, should be deemed as already
entered into the region of the dead. A man, spontane-
ously bleeding through the roots of his hairs (pores of the
skinl otherwise than in a case of poisoning, should be
deemed as dying on that day.

A patient, affected with an up-coursing pain about
the cardiac region, like the one which distinguishes a
case of Vatashtila (appearance of a stone-like lump
rising or seated within the thorax and ascribed to the
action of the deranged Vayu), accompanied by an
aversion to food, etc., should be already reckoned among
the dead.

An idiopathic swelling (Shopha) first occurring in
either of the lower extremities in a male patient not as a
complication of anj^ other disease*, as well as a similar
swelling first appearing at the face, or about the region

Such as Chlorosis, Ascittsj, Hoemorrhoids.

Clup. XXXI. 1

SUTUASTHA'NA.M,

291

of the anus in a male or a female patient, is sure to
have a fatal termination.

.-V patient, suffering from cough or asthma
attended with dysentery, fever, liic-cougli, vomiting
and swelling of the penis and the scrotum, should
be given up as lost. lixccssive perspiration, burning,
hic-cough, dj'spna-a and hyperpyrexia with a burning
sensation of the body, are undoubtedly capable of
extinguishing the vital spark even in a strong patient.
Similarl}', a patient, with a black coated tongue and the
left eye sunk in its socket and a foul smell from the
mouth, should be given up as lost.

The mouth of a man, who is on his way to the
mansions of the god of death, becomes filled with tears,
the legs are wet with perspiration, and the pupils
of the eyes roll about or become listless.

The patient, whose limbs become all of a sudden
abnormally light or heavy, is sure to go to the region of
the son of the day-god (Yama.; The patient, whose
body emits a fishy, dirty or a fragrant smell, or smells
like fat, oil. or clarified-butter, is on the way to the
mansions of Death.

The patient on whose forehead lice freely move
about, or whose offerings the crows do not eat, or who
does not find comfort in any position or place, goes to
the mansions of the god of death. A patient, who has

292

THI£ SUSHKUTA SAMHITA'.

Xh.iiJ. XXXI.

become emaciated and enfeebled, or has been sufTerin"
from a complication of such diseases as fever, dysentery,
oedema, etc., one supervening another pre-e.xisting
malady, should be deemed as beyond the pale
of medicine. A ravenous hunger or an unquench-
able thirst in a weak patient, who refuses
to be appeased or satisfied witli sweet, whole-

some and i)alatable food or drink, sliould be re-
garded as a fatal indication. A patient exhibiting
such symptoms as diarrha-a, an excruciating lieadache,
colic in the intestines, thirst and gradual failing of
strength, stands in danger of imminent death.
Death is due to the transitory character of life,
or it may be attributed to irregular conduct, or
to the deetls of one’s previous existence transfonned
into the dynamics of fate.

Ghosts, evil spirits, Pishachas and monsters of
various shapes and denomination, constantly lead men
to death. These evil spirits, owing to their natural
killing propensities, nullify the efficacies of medicines;
and hence it is futile to take in hand the medical treat-
ment of a man who e.x'hibits an}' of the abovesaid fatal
s}Tnptoras, and thereby testifies that he has fallen into
the clutches of such e\il spirits.

Thus enic the Thirty-first Chapter of the Sulrasthfinam in the Sushruia-
Samhitfi which deals with prognosis from per\ertcd fe-.rture3.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Now \vc shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of the prognosis based on the perversion of the external
appearances of the body (Svabharva-viprati-
patti - madhyaryam) .

.•V contrariety of the natural features of any part or
member of the body should be looked upon as a fatal
indication. The blackness of a limb or a part which
is naturally white,* or the whiteness of a blackt part,
or a naturally redt part, or member, etc. assuming any
other colour, or a hard§ part becoming soft, and
vice versaW, or a movablell part suddenly becoming
fi.xed, and vice versa,'" or the contraction (flexion) of an
extended part, or the extension or expansion of a
contracted (flexible; part, or a shorttt part suddenly
becoming elongatedJt, and vice versa, or a sudden
hanging down of a part or member of the body which
does not naturally§§ hang down, and vice versa\\\\,
or a sudden increase or decrease of natural temperature
of any part, member, or organ of the body, as well
as its sudden glossiness, roughness, numbness, discolor-
ation, weakness, or weariness, should be looked upon as
fatal symptoms.

The’ teeth and the cornea, t The iris, t The tongue and the
palate, etc. § Bones, teeth, etc. It Soft parts such as the flesh, fat, etc.
IT Joints, etc. ** Nose, ears .and flesh, etc. tf Head and forehead, etc.
++ I’upiLs, etc, §§ Hair, nails, etc, iji Perspiration, urine and feces, etc.

294

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clmp, XXXII,

(Similarly) a limb or a part of the body, hanging
down from its natural position, or becoming raised or
twisted round, or cast obliquely from its natural seat, or
dislocated, or protruded, or drawn inward, or suddenly
becoming light or heavj'- without any definite or
assignable cause, or a sudden eruption of a coral-
coloured rash or Yyanga, should be regarded as indicat-
ing a speedy dissolution of the patient in whom they
are exhibited.

Likewise, the appearance of veins in the region of
the forehead, or an eruption of postules on the ridge of
the nose, perspiration on the forehead in the morning,
copious lachrymation without any ocular complaint,
a sense of being dusted with dried and pulverised
cowdung over the face, or the flying of pigeons, Kankas,
etc, over one’s head, or excessive micturitions or
motions of the bowels from an empty stomach, or a
suppression of urine or feces even after a hearty meal
or draught, is fatal. So also, pain and aching about the
breast and the chest, emaciation of the extremities
and an oedema of the middle part of the trunk, and
vice versa ; or an cedema of the upper trunk and
emaciation of the lower part, and vice versa ; or an
cedema of the left half of the bod}"^ and emaciation
of the right, and vice versa ; or hoarseness, huskiness, or
loss of voice, discolouring of the teeth, nails or of the
sldn, eruption of white patches on the chest, etc, of the

Chap. XXXII. ]

StfTRASTHANAM.

295

body, should be deemed as signs which forebode the
approaching dissolution of an individual.

Moreover the patient, whose semen, or expectorated
or fecal matter does not boat on water, or who sees the
distorted or bifurcated images of objects, or whose hair
shines with a gloss as if anointed wnth oil, finds his
relief in death. A weak dysentery patient with
a complete aversion to food, or one who is
tormented with thirst even when suffering from
a cough, or a man suffering from chronic catarrh
with a complete loathing for food, or from
gastritis (Sula) with aphonia, and vomiting frothy
blood and pus, should be regarded as past all cure. A
patient, enfeebled and emaciated through fever, cough
and an oedematous swelling of the face and the extre-
mities, and showing the greatest aversion to food,
and the muscles of whose calves, shoulders and thighs
have grown loose and flabby, should be considered as
awaiting the call of death.

A patient, suffering from fever, cough, and vomiting,
or passing with the stool, in the evening, undigested
food matter eaten in the morning, would die of asthma.
The patient, who falls to the ground bleating like a
goat, and exhibits such symptoms as a rupture of the
testes, numbness of the penis, drooping of the neck
and introsusception of the penis, should be considered
as past all cure. The patient, whose heart is first felt

296 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ( Chip. XXXir.

dry followed by becoming covered witli a slimy
moisture of the whole body, as well as one who strikes
a stone with a stone, or a piece of wood witli a
piece of wood, or who cle:ives in two blades of
dned grass, or one who bites his lower lip and licks the
upper one, or draws Iris ears and tears his hair, or dis-
honours the gods and the Brahmanas, as well as liis
o\\n physician, friends and relations, should be regarded
as beyond the pale of medicine.

Similarlj', a disease, due to the influence of a malig-
nant planet occupying, either through its retrogade or
zigzag movement, an inauspicious posirion in relation to
the natal asterism of the patients, is sure to tenuinate
in death. A man, struck by lightning or a falling meteor,
baffles all medicinal skill. Similarly, a disease due to
the fact of one's own house, wife, bed, seat, con-
veyance, or riding-animal assuming any ill-omened
features, or a disease originated through the use of gems,
utensils, garments, etc. of forbidden or inauspicious
character usually ends in death (Aristam).

Authoritative verses on the Sub-
ject : A disease, appearing in an enfeebled and
emaciated subject and refusing to yield to a course of
proper medicinal treatment, and which becomes rather
aggravated by the administration of proper medicinal
remedies or antidotes, necessarily portends the death of
the patient.

Chap. XXXII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

297

A Mah^vy^dhi’* (lit : — a deep seated disease) sud-
denly abating in a person in whom nourishment
fails to produce any perceptible effect forebodes a fatal
tennination. The physician, who can detect and fully
interpret these fatal indications, is honoured by the king
for detennining the curable or incurable nature of a
disease.

* Any deep seated disease, which seriously aflects the vital principles
of a man, is called Itahivycidhi. Diseases such .as Prameha, Vduivyadhi,
Shosha, etc. have also hcen included within the category in the Chapter on
Kfi}’a-chikilsh4. A general amelioration or recovery in these cases being
natural, on account of their deep-scaled character, a sudden abatement
is usually fraught with fatal consequences. (Arisbtam.)

Thus ends the thirty-second Chapter of Sulrasthanam in the Sushruta-
S^mhirn which deals with the prognosis based on perversion of tlie
natural appearances o[ the body.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which treats of
incurable diseases (A'varaniya-maclhyayam).

Metrical texts : — Hear me describe. Oh child,
the diseases which being attended with many a
distressing and supervenient symptom, and being
treated without rejuvenating and restorative medicines,
speedily assume incurable character. The following
eight diseases, viz : — Maha-Vata-vyadhi ('paralysis
or diseases affecting the neiv'ous system in general'.
Erameha (morbid discharges from the urethral, Kushtha,
Arsha (piles), Vagandara •fistula in ano', Ashinari
(stone in the bladder;, Mudha-garbha (false presen-
tations) and the eight kinds of Udari (abdominal dropsy -
are, by their verv" nature, extremely hard to cure. A phy-
sician with any regard to professional success should aban-
don a patient laid up with any of the preceding diseases,
marked by complications such as, emaciation of the
body, loss of strength, dyspncea, palpitation, wasting,
vomiting, dysentery and bic-cough, fever and swoon.
A case of Vata^yddhi developing s}Tnptoms, such as
cedematous swelling, complete anesthesia of the affected
part, breaking and pals}’ shaking) of the affected limbs,
distention of the abdomen, rvith aching and colic pain,
usually ends in death.

Chap. XXXIII. -j

SUTRASTHANAM.

299

A case of Prameha, attended with indications
as are to be found under the head of that disease,
as well as an increased secretion of urine, charged
with semen, albumen, etc. and eruptions of specific
abcesses (knowm as Shariivika etc.) is- sure to have
a fatal termination.

A case of Kushtha (leprosy) characterised b}' sponta-
neous bursting of the affected parts, hoarse voice,
and blood-shot eyes, and not proving itself amen-
able to the five-fold appliances of emetics, purga-
tives, etc. (Pancha-Karma), usually ends in death.
A case of piles attended with thirst, aversion to food,
colic pain, excessive haemorrhage, anasarca (Shopha)
of the locality, and dysenter)’- is soon relieved by
death.

A patient suflFering from an attack of fistula in
ano, characterised by an emission of flatus (V^yu),
urine, fecal matter, worms and semen through the
ulcerated locality, should be given up as lost. A
patient suffering from the presence of stone, gravel, or
urinary concretions (SharkarA) in the bladder and
attended with oedema of the scrotum and the umbilicus,
retention of urine, and colic pain in that organ, is
soon relieved of his pain by death.

In a case of false presentation (Mudhagarva) an
extreme constriction of the mouth of the uterus

300

THESUSHRUTA SAMHITA. fClwp. X'XXIII.

(os uteri), development of tlie peculiar pain of child-
birth, which is known as Makkalla, tonic rigidity of
the vagina, and situation of the placenta (Apar.1) at a
wrong place (false pregnancjO and other symptoms (con-
vulsions, cough, dyspnoea, vertigo etc.) described in the
Chapter on the Etiolog)' of that disease, forebode the
death of the parturient woman.

patient suffering from abdominal dropsy (ascites)
marked by pain at the sides, aversion to food, cede-
raatous swelling of the limbs, dysenterj' and fresh
accumulation of water even after he had been tapped,
or evacuated with the exhibition of purgatives, should
be given up as incurable. A case of fever in which
the patient becomes restless and tosses about in the
bed in an unconscious state, and lies extremely pros-
trate, or is incapable of sitting or of holding himself up
in any other position and is besides afilicted with rigor
though complaining of a burning sensation within,
is sme to end in death.

Similarly, a fever patient developing such S3Tnptoms
as, the appearance of goose flesh on the skin, an aching
gathered-up pain in the cardiac region, blood-shot
or congested eyes, and breathing through the mouth
should be deemed as already at the threshold of
death. Similarly, a case of fever, attended with hic-cougb,
dyspnoea, thirst, fits of imconsciousness or fainting, and
rolling of the eye-balls, proves fatal in a weak and

< XXKIU.!

SUTUA.STIIA'N’AM.

30 1

emaciated paliciU, who is fotind to breathe liurriedly
through the moutli.

A case of fever proves fatal in a patient, found
to be restless or to lie inert in an unconscious
(subcoinatose) state with dull, clouded, or tearful eyes,
or prostrate, somnolent and extremely emaciated. A
fever patient and especiall)* an old one extremely
enfeebled and emaciated, readily succumbs to an
attack of dysentery in which laboured respiration,
colic and thirst supen’ene.

An attack of Phthisis (Yakshm.1) leads its victim
to death in whom "lossiness of the eyes, aversion
to footl, expiratory (subclavicle) dyspna-a, diificult and
up-drawn breathinti (Urdha-Shvasa), and painful and
and excessive micturition (diarrha-a according to others),
manifest themselves. A patient suffering from an
attack of Gulma (abdominal gland), and on the verge
of death, exhibits such symptoms as laboured and painful
respiration, colic pain, unquenchable thirst, aversion
to food, loss of consciousness, anaemia, and the sudden
obliteration of the Granthi (tumorous or glandular
formation).

A person laid up with an attack of Vidradhi (abscess)
and exhibiting such fatal symptoms as distension
of the abdomen, retention of urine, vomiting, hic-
cough, thirst, pain of a varied character (such as aching,
excruciating, etc.) and dyspnosa, should be regarded

302

THE SUSHKUTA SA.MHITA'. t Chip. XXXIII.

as to have approached tlie goal of his life. A patient
suffering from an attack of jaundice or chlorosis
marked by yellowness of the teeth, nails, and of the
conjunctiva}, and seeing ever)'thing yellow, is not
expected to long survive the occurrence of the attack.

A person laid up with an attack of Hrcmoptj’^sis,
largel)' vomiting blood, and viewing cverj’thing red or
blood- coloured with his blood-shot eyes, should be
regarded as about to depart this life. A person, insane,
extremely enfeebled and emaciated, and sitting up sleep-
less in the night, or with eyes constantly lifted upward
or cast down, ivould be soon relieved of his earthly
suffering. case of Apasm^ra (epilepsy) proves fatal
in a person, who is extremely emaciated, and whose
eye-brows are constantly mo\ing and whose eyes seem
fixed in an unnatural (oblique) stare,

Thos ends the the thirty-third Chapter of the SuLrasthtinani in the
Sushrata Sarahit.i which treats of incur.alde disexses.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of the mode of preserving the life of a king whose
soldiers are on march (J ucta-Seniya- madhyaf-
yam).

Metrical Texts : — I shall presently describe
the measures, which a physician in the king’s service
should adopt with a view to protect the life of his royal
master, specially from acts of secret poisoning, while
mobilizing his armies to invade the territor}’’ of a
neighbouring monarch accompanied by his chiefs and
ministers.

.V common practice of the enemy under such
circumstances is to poison the wells on the roadside, the
articles of food, the shades of trees (shadorvy places) and
the fuel and forage for cattle ; hence it is incumbent
on a physician marching with the troops, to inspect,
examine and purify these before using any of them,
in case they be poisoned. The symptoms and medical
treatment will be fully described and discussed later on
in the part, entitled the Kalpa Sthanam.

Men, learned in the lore of the Atharva Veda, hold
that death may be attributed to a hundred and one
different causes, (lit : deaths of a hundred and one
kinds) of which one (which is that of an old man

304

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. lOnp-

naturally and spontaneously expiring) is called natural,
while the rest are unnatural or traumatic in their
origin. Physicians conversant witii the curative virtues
of drugs and minerals, and priests well versed in the
Vedic IMantras, should jointly ])rotect the king from
death, whether due to idiopathic {Doshaja} or
extrinsic causes.

The god Brahmd disclosed to the world the .Atharva
Veda together with the eight allied branches of
Vedic literature and the science of medicine. And
since a priest (Bnlhmana) is well-versed in the aforesaid
branches of study, a physician should act subserviently
and occupy a subordinate position to the priest. Tlic
death of a king usually leads to a political revolu-
tion or to popular disturbances and brings about a
confusion among the vocations of the different orders
of society. The growth of pojnilation markedly
suffers through such aitastrophies.

As the external features of a king resemble those ol a
common person, while his (king’s) commanding majesty,
sacrifice, forbearance and fortune are super-human
(in their nature and intensity), therefore a man should,
who is prudent and seeks his own good, think
reverentially of his king, and propitiate him wdth
tokens of loyalty and allegiance as if he were a deity.
A physician, fully equipped with a supply of medicine,
should live in a camp not remote Ifom the • royal

Chap. XXXIV. ] • StiTRASTHANAaNi.

305

pavilioiij and there the persons wounded by shafts of
arrows or any other war projectiles, or suffering
from the effect's of any imbibed poison, should
resort to him (the physician), conspicuous like a tri-
umphant ensign for his fame . and professional ■ success.
A’ physician, well versed in his own technical science,
and commanding a fair knowledge of other allied
branches of stud)' as well, is glorified by his king
and the Brdhmanas, and is like a banner of \actor)' an
ennobling ornament to the state.

The physician, the patient, the medicine, and the
attendants (nurses'i are the four essential factors of a
course of medical treatment. Even a dangerous disease
is readily cured, or it may be expected to run a speedy
course in the event of the preceding four factors being
respectively found to be (qualified, self-controlled,
genuine and intelligently watch fuP.

In the absence of a qualified physician the three
remaining factors of treatment will prove abortive like a
religious sacrifice performed with the help of an
Udg^tri,* a Hotri,t and a Br^hmana, in the absence of
an Adhvaryam.J A qualified physician is alone capable
ofrelieving the pain of many a suffering patient, just as

"*■ UJs^tri ; — One t'f the four piincipal pricdls ai a i>acriricc, wlio cliaiib'
the liyinn;> of the S^ma Vedtu

t Hotrl — A priest, who recites Ihc (Riks) praycris of the Kik X'etla at a
rcHgiou^ sacrifice.

^ Adhvaryyu— A priest of the Vayur Veda, whose duty is u> CA:st the
^icriticial i>casl into the fire.

39

3o6 the SUSHRliTA SAMHITA. [ Ciiap. ^XXIV.

only a helmsman is capable of taking- his boat across a
river even without the help and co-operation ol a single
oarsman. . -

Qualities of a physician A physician,
who is well versed in the science of medicine and has
attended to the demonstrations of surgerj^ and medicine,
and who himself practises the healing art, and is clean,
courageous, light-handed, fully equipped with supplies
of medicine, surgical instruments and appliances,
and who is intelligent, well read, and is a man of ready
resources, and one commands a decent practice, and is
further endowed with all moral A'irtues, is alone fit to
be called a physician.

Patient : — The patient, wlio believes in a kind
and all-merciful Providence, and possesses an unshakable
fortitude and strong vital energj% and who is laid up
with a curable form of disease, and is not greedy, and
who further commands all the necessary articles at his
disposal, and firmly adheres to the advice of his
physician, is a patient of the proper or commendable
type.

IVledicine ; — The ^proper) medicine is that which
consists of drugs grown in countries most congenial to
their growth, collected under the auspices of proper
lunar phases and asterisms, and compounded in proper
measures and proportions, and which is pleasing
(exhilarating to the mind- and has the property of

Chap, XXXIV. 1

SUTRA.STFIA'N.\M.

307

subduing the deranged bodily humours without creating
any discomfort to the patient, and which is harmless
even in an overdose, and is judiciously administered at
the opportune moment.

N u rse : — That person alone is lit to nurse or to
attend the bedside of a patient, who is cool-headed
and pleasant in his demeanour, does not speak ill of
any body, is strong and attentive to the requirements
of the sick, and strictly and indefatigably follows the
instructions of the physician.

Thus ends ihe ihiriy-foiirtli Ch.apier of ihe Sutrasihinam in tl)e
Susliruta SamhilS, vvliich (rents of preserving (lie life of a king whose
soldiers are on march.

t KXKV.

SUTUASTllA’NAM.

300

with the occipital region lully developed and protinded,
will enjoy a longer span of life. Men, on whose bodies
sandal paste and similar preparations begin to dry
up from the head downward, while those applied over
the chest become absorbed later, should be looked upon
as persons endowed with an uncommonly longer dura-
tion of life.

The medical treatment of such a patient may be
unhesitatingly taken in hand by a physician. Persons,
e.vhibiting bodily features other than those described
above, should be looked upon as short lived men,
while those, who are possessed of features common
to men of both the above mentioned types, should
be considered as keeping the mean between them
as regards longevity (IMadhyamayuh;.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — .-V man, with deep-set bones, ligaments, and
veins, and tough and thick-set limbs, and firm and
unflinching sense organs, as well as one whose body
gradually develops a more and more symmetrical
shape, should be looked upon as a long-lived man The
man, who has not ailed for a single moment even from
the day of his birth, and has been getting more and
more strong-limbed . everj' day through the culti-
vation of his inborn sense and a better knowledge
of the laws of health, is sure to live to a good old age
in the full enjoyment of his senses and intellect. ,

310 I'UE SCSiHvM'TS SAMlUT/u if..;., v.\\v.

IVladhyamaryiili ; Xriu-, hoar uic •Icscrihc
i-he botlily features of a juan of a mean or aver-
age duration oi life Qladhyamiiyuh'. rite man, the
intogvuncnls ol whose lower eyelifLs are marked will)
two or three well-marked and exterulcil lines or
lurrows, and whose legs and external ears are thick
and lleshy, ami the lip <if who>e no,>e is turned .a
little upward, and who has np-poinied hues directly
running through the middle <n his haek, is expected to
live up to the ripe old age of seveuly year.-'.

Specific traits of a short-lived
inan :---\ow, hear me describe the speciue ir.iits,
which characterise the hixly of a s!iort-li\ed man.
A man with short phalanges of iiiigers, a narrow
hack, and external ears nbinnmally iniscfl up from
their iiatiinil seaLs, ami who puxse>sed <if a I.irge
penis, a higlr no>e, a hreiist overed with ringlets
ol curly h.iir, ami who c.xposes tlie gums of liis
teeth, or whose eyes roll while talking or laughing,
is not expected to see more than twenty-five summers.

We shall now give the exact measures of the diflerent
limbs and members of the bodv for the better
ascertainment of the duration of life of a patient
under investigation.- -The legs, the arms, and the
head are called the limbs of the body, while their com-
ponent parts are called the members (Avayavas).
Ihe great toe of a man, or the one next to it, measured

Cli.vp. XXXW ]

SUl'KASTHANAAi.

3ii

with his own lingers should measure two lingers’
width in lengtlj, the lengths ol‘ tlie other toes (the third,
I'ourth, and small ones) successively dinrinishing bj'
a lilth jrart of that of his middle linger (Pradeshini).

The fore-sole and the sole proper respectively should
measure four lingers’ width in length and five lingers’
width in breadth. The heel of the foot (Parshni) should
measure live fingers’ width in length and four fingers’
width in breadth. The foot itself should measure
fourteen fingers’ width in length. The girth of the foot,
as well us the circumference of the middle parts of
thighs and knee-joints, respectively should measure
fourteen fingers in width.

The part of the leg between the ankle and the
knee-joint should measure eighteen fingers’ width in
length, while the part between the joint of the waist
and the knee-joint should measure thirty-two fingers'
width in length, the entire leg thus measuring fifty
fingers’ width in all. The length of the thigh is the
same as that of the part lying between the heel and the
knee-joint (Jangha).

The scrotum, the chin, the (two rows of) teeth,
the e.vterior line of the nostrils, the roots of the
ears, and the intervening space between the eyes, should
respectively measure two fingers’ width in length.' The
non-erected penis, the cavity of the mouth, the two
rows of Teeth, the nose, the height of the neck.

512

THE SUSHRUFa .SAMIirrA’, [Ciu;., XXXV.

the ears, and the forelieud, and the space intervening
between the pupils of the eves measure four fingers'
wdth in length.

The entire length of the vaginal canal should ir.easurc
twelve lingers’ width. The space lying between the penis
and the umbilicus, as well as tlie one interv ening between
the chest and the upper end »>f the throat (lit : neck),
like the one lying between the tij)S of Uie two
nipples of the breast, should measure twelve fingers'
widtli in length. The length of the entire face should
measure twelve fingers' width. The girth round the
wrist and the fore-arm of a man should measure twelve
fingers.

The girth round the knee-joint is si.vteen fingers’
width iuid the length between the wrist and the elbow
should measure sixteen fingero' width. The part of the
arm between the elbow and the tip of the middle linger
should measure twenty-four fingers' width in all. The
length of the entire arm measures thirty-two lingers’
■width, and the girth round the thighs should measure
thirty-two fingers' widtli. The palm of the hand should
measure six fingers' width in leugtlr and four fiugers’
Avidtli in breadth. The space between the bottom
of the ball of the thumb to the root of the index
finger, as well as the space between the root of the ears
to the outer comei or angle of the eyes, should measure
five fingers' in length. The middle linger should

SrTKAS’l’llANA.M.

measure live lingers’ wicitli in Icngtii. The index and
llie ring-fingers respective!)' sliould measure four and a
half fingers in leiiglii, the thumbs and tiie little fingers
respectively measuring three and a half fingers.

The fissure of the mouth should measure four lingers
in length. The girth round the neck sliould measure
twenty fingers. Mach of the cavities of the nostrils
should measure one and three ( uarter parts of a
finger in length. The region of the iris occupies a third
part of the entire area of the cornea. The region of
the pupil should measure a ninth ])art thereof.

The arch extending from the hairy extremity of
the templar region to the middle point of the back
of the head should measure eleven fingers. The distance
between the middle of tlie head and the terminal
point of the hair)* portion of the neck should measure
ten fingers in length. The girth of the neck measured
from the back of one ear to that of the other should be
fourteen fingers. The length of the pelvic region of
a young woman measured from below the anterior
side of the thigh joints should be found to be equal to
the breadth of the chest (Vakshah) in a male subject
(twelve fingers).

The thigh of a woman should be eighteen fingers in
breadth and equal to that of the waist of a man. The
entire length of a male human body should be a hundred

and twenty fingers.

40

3t4

THE SUSHRUTA SA.\iHrrA'. L Clup. A.XXV.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject An intelligent physician should regard the
organism of a man of twentj'-five or of a woman of
sixteen years of age, as fully develojied .in respect of
the maturity of the seven fundamental principles of the
body such as, serum, blood, Sic). The dimensions
of the dilTerent limbs and members of the body, laid
down above, should be understood as to have been
measured by the standard of one’s (man's or woman's)
own finger’s width, and a person, whose limbs and organs
are found to correspond to the above-said measures, is
sure to live to a good and hearty old age, as a
necessary and befitting sequel to a happy and prosperous
career in life. In the case of a partial correspondence
of one’s limbs and organs to the above-said measures
and proportions, a man should be regarded as having
an average life and prosperity. A person whose limbs
fall short of the abovesaid measures should be regarded
as an indigent and short-lived person.

Physical temperament (Sarra) Now
we shall describe the characteristic traits of the
different preponderant principles iSara i or temperaments
of the human organism. A man, who is possessed of a
good retentive memor}-, and is intelligent, valorous and
cleanly in his habits, and whose mind is graced with
such rare and excellent virtues as, purity of thought, and
a fervent and unflinching devotion to gods and the
reverend, and who exerts himself for the furtherance

Clup. XXXV. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

315

of the absolute good, should be regarded as a man of
Satvasara (psychic or illumined) temperament.

A man with gloss}", white and close-set bones,
teeth, and nails and who has begotten a large
family of children, and shows a marked amative ten-
dency, should be looked upon as a man in whom the prin-
ciple of semen decidedly preponderates. A man with a
thin and sinev"}" body, and who exibits traits of excessive
strength, and possesses a deep resonant voice, and a pair
of large and handsome eyes, and who is successful in
every walk of life, should be looked upon as one in
whom the principle of marrow preponderates. A man
with a large head, and a large pair of shoulders, and
having firar teeth, bones, cheek-bones, and finger-nails,
should be considered as one in whom the principle
of bone preponderates.

A man with a large and bulky body, and who is
capable of enduring a large amount of fatigue or
physical exertion, and who naturally talks in a soft
and melodious voice, and whose bodily secretions
such as urine and perspiration are characterised by
coldness should be regarded as one of a fatty tempera-
ment. A man with an erect and upright frame, and

<d

deep-set bones, and joints in thick layers of llesh,
should be regarded as one in whom the principle of
flesh predominates.

A man, whose finger nails, eyes, tongue, palate.

THE SUSHEUTA SAMHITA'. I Clmj., XKXV.

316

lips, palms of bands and soles of feet are glossy, and
tinged with a shade of red, should be looked upon as one
in whom blood forms the essential and predominant
principle. A man Avith a soft, smooth and pleasant skin
and hair should be considered as one in whom serum
(Tvak) forms the essential principle of the body. In
respect of worldly success and longevity, men of
each of the aforesaid types should be successively
judged inferior to men belonging to the one pre-
ceding it in the above order of enumeration.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject :~A qualified pbvsician should e.vamine the dura-
tion of life in a patient with the help of the aforesaid
measures of limbs and the essential bodily principles,
before proceeding to take up his medical treatment, and
his professional success should be decidedly increased
thereby.

All the diseases, Avhose names have been specifically
enumerated before, may be grouped under any of the
three different heads as the curable, the suppressible
(Yfipya) and the incurable dit : fit to be pronounced
as hopeless).

Each of these different t)'pes, in its turn, should be
carefully observed so as to determine whether it is a
primary or an independent disease, or merely an
accessor)^ or sympathetic one, or the premonitory indica-
tion of an incipient distemper in its incubative stage.

( 1,1^ .XXXV.

SUTKASTM.YNAM.

3J7

An Jnpasargika (syinpalhclk;) disease is merely a
symploin developed in the course of an original or
primary malady, and which has its foundation in the
very nature or component factors of the pre-existing
tlistemper. A disease, which manifests itself from the
commencement of a case and is neither an accessory
symjUom, nor a premonitory indication of any other
distemper, is oiled a Prak-kevalam (primary or
original) one. A disease which indicates the advent
of a future or impending malady is called a Purvarn-
pam (premonitory stage or indiotion of a disease).

The medicinal remedy to he administered in any
particular cjise should be selected with an eye to the
curative virtues of each of its components, so as not to
clash with the nature (cause) of tlie disease and its
accompanying symptoms, and to prove simultaneously
soothing to both of them. On the contrary, a violent
unfavourable symptom should be first attended to and
checked in a case where it would be found to have
grown stronger and more distressing or dangerous than
the original malady in course of which it has been
developed.

A primary or independent malady, unattendetl
with any of the distressing or unfavourable symptoms,
should be treated according to its indications and the
nature of • the deranged humours involved therein,
while in an incubative disease the treatment should

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. .'Ciwp. XXMV.

318

consist in subduing a premonitory symptom as soon as
it would make itself manifest.

Authoritative Verse on the sub-
ject ; — As there is not a single disease, which can
make its appearance without the participation of any of
the deranged bodily humourSj a wise physician is en-
joined to administer medicines according to the specific
features of the deranged humours involved in a disease
whose nature and treatment have not even been de-
scribed in any book on medicine. Tlie different seasons,
of the year have been described before.

Wletrical Texts In the cold season, a
disease should be treated with measures and remedies
endued with the rdrtue of destroying or warding off
cold, while in summer the medicinal treatment sliould
consist of measures and applications capable of allaying
the heat. The medical treatment of a disease
should be commenced just at the opportune moment,
which should not be allowed to expire in vain under
anycircumslances whatsoever. course of medical treat-
ment commenced at an inopportune moment, or not
resorted to at the advent of its proper time, as well as
over or insufficient medication, proves abortive even in
a curable tryie of disease. The proper medical treat-
ment (of a disease) is that which successful!}' copes
with the malady under treatment, and arrests the
recnidescence of a fresh one by way of sequel, and not

sl-trasthawam.

Ci.u-. XXW 1

3‘9

lli.it, which, thoii;4h suhcluini^ ;i piirticular distcnipor,
i.s imnicdialdy lollowcd J)y a now one.

Il has l)ccn dcinoiislralcd hcforc lhal tlic food of
a man is dij^cslcd only with the help of the digestive
tire or heat tl’;iehakagni), which may be divided into
four dillerent kinds (states). One of these kinds is due
to it not being in any way aflecLed by the deranged
humours of the body, while the other three are respec-
tively ascribed to the fact of their becoming so deranged.
The digestive lire or heat becomes irregular or fitful
(Visliamagui) through the action of the deranged Vayu,
becomes keen, through the action of the deninged
Pittam, and dull or sluggish, througii the action of
the deranged Kaphani. The fourtli kind fSainaj
continues in a state unalVecled In' any of the morbid
humoural constituents of the body owing to their
maintaining the normal equilibrium.

Samargni and Vishamargni.:— The diges-
tive heat, which fully digests the ingested food at the
proper time without the least irregularity, thus
reflecting the continuance of the bodily humours in their
nomial state, is called Samagni. The digestive heat
which is irregular in its action, and which sometimes
helps the process of complete digestion, and produces
distension of the abdomen, colic pain, constipation of
the bowels, dysenterj-, ascites, heaviness of the limbs,

320

THESLiSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Cwr- XXXV.

rumbling in the intestines, and loose motions (diarrhaa)
at other times, is called Vishamagni.

TikShna'gni The digestive heat, which helps
the digestion of even a heavy meal within an incredibly
short space of time, is called “ Keen ” (Tikshnagni) and
Avhich becoming abnormally augmented begets an
excessive or voracious appetite (Atyagnij, helps a
glutton to digest his fre(iuent meals, and produces a
parched throat, palate and lips, heat and other dis-
comforts.

lYIanda'gni The digestive lire or heat which
causes the tardy digestion even of a scanty meal, and
produces heaviness of the abdomen and head, cough,
didicult breathing, water-bmsh, nausea, and weariness
of the limbs simultaneously with the taking thereof,
is called dull or sluggish (Mandagni).

Metrical Texts The digestive lire of the
Vishama kind brings on diseases characterised by the
derangement of the V.-hm. A keen (Tikshna) digestive
fire brings on bilious (Pittaja) affections, while a sluggish
( Manda) fire gives rise to diseases marked by a
deranged state of the Kapham. Endeavours should be
made to keep the digestive fire of the Sama type
'normal or regular appetite' i in an unimpaired state,

* There is a diflerence beluecn “Agni " and “appetite. Agni include:!
bile and pancreatic secretiuns, and hence indicates Uie stale of one's diges-
tion. Api>eUle, though not an unerring indicator of the process, is the
clVccl of Aijni.

ciui>. XXXV. ;

SUTRASTHANAM.

321

The one known as Vishania (irregular) should be cor-
rected by a diet consisting of eiuollient, acid or saline
substances. In a case of abnormally keen digestive
lire, the medical treatment should consist in prescrib-
ing purgatives and a diet in the composition of
which sweet, cooling, and fatty or albuminous
matters largely enter. The same treatment should be
adopted in (AtyJgni) as marked in cases of voracious
appetite, and a diet consisting of buffalo-milk, or its curd
(Dadhi) and liquid bufTalo-butter should be prescribed for
the patient in addition. Nineties should be administered
in a case of dull or sluggish digestion (Mandagni),
and the patient should be restricted to a diet consisting
of articles of a pungent, astringent or bitter taste.

lYIetrical Texts : — The fire, that bums within
a person, is godly in its subtle essence, and possesses
the divine attributes of atom-like invisibility, weight-
lessness, etc., and is the digestant of food. It takes
up the lymph chyle of different tastes for the
purpose of digestion, and is invisible owing to its
e.\treniely subtle essence. The three 'vital Vayus
known as Prana, Apana and Samana, located in their
own spheres within the organism, feed it and keep it
burning.

The three stages of man may be roughly described
as (i) infancy or childhood, ( 2 ) youth or middle age,
and ( 2 ^ old age or dotage. Childhood extends up to the

41

THE $USHRUTA SAMIIITA. [Cinp. KXXV,

sixteenth year of life, and children may be divided into
three different classes, according as they are fed on
milk, or on milk and boiled rice or on boiled rice
alone. A child lives exclusively on milk up to the first
5'ear of its life, it is fed on milk and boiled rice (hard
food) up to the second year, and is thenceforward
nourished with boiled rice (hard food).

The middle age of a man extends from the sixteenth
to the seventieth year of his life, and exhibits the traits
of growth, youth, arrest of development and decay.

The process of growth or building goes on up to
the twentieth year of life, when youth or the age

of maturity sets in and holds sway over the body of

%

a man up to the thirtieth year of his life, — the strength,
semen, and all the organs and vital principles of the
body attain (their full maturity at the age of forty.
Thenceforth decay gradually sets in up to the
seventieth year of life. After that the strength and
energj’ of a man dwindle day by day. The organs and
virility grow weak and suffer deterioration. The hair
turns to a silvery' white, the parched skin looks shrivelled
and becomes impressed with marks of dotage (crow’s
feet-marks). The skin hangs down and becomes flabby,
the hair begins to fall off, and symptoms of alopecia
mark the smooth, sheen and balded pate. The respira-
tion becomes laboured and painful. The body, worn out
like an old and dilapidated building, shakes with fits ot

XX w.

SUTKASTllA’N'A.M.

323

lli^lrc^aing couj^h. Such ;i man is incapable of all acts,
and (Iocs Ixjl iniperfcclly perfortn all btalily functions,
tie has ipown old.

The dose (if medicine should be increased with the
a:^e of a palienl till the ai;e of decay, and reduced after
the e.vjiiry of the seventieth year to the quantity
( which is usually prescribed for an youth of si.vteen).

Authoritative verses on the Sub-
ject : — Kapham is increased during the years of
childhood and Piliani in middle age ; while an increase
nf V.tyu 'nervous derangement' marks the closing years
of life. The use of strong or drastic purgatives, and
cauterisation are alike prohibited in erases of children
and old men. They should be used only in weakened
or modilied forms if found indispensably necessary.

It has been stated before that the body of a
person is either stout, thin or of an average
(middling) bulk. -\. stout person should be reduced
in bulk with depletive measures, while a physician
should trj’ to make a thin patient gain in flesh, A
human body, which is neither too thin nor too stout,
should be made to maintain its shapely rotundity.

We have already discoursed on the strength of the
body. Now in a particular case under treatment, it is
primarily incumbent on tlie physician to enquire
whether the - patient is naturally weak, or has become

324

THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITA'. I Ctap-

so through a deranged condition of the bodily humours
or old age. And since it is the strength ol a patient
which makes all remedial measures (such as cauterisa-
tion, etc.) possible, it should be regarded as the
grandest auxiliary to a medical treatment of whatsoever
nature it may be.

IVletrical Texts : —There are some men who
are strong though thin ; while others are weak,
though stout ; and accordingly a physician should deter-
mine the bodily strength of a patient by enquiring
about the capacity of his physical endurance and
labour. Sattvam or fortitude denotes a kind of (stoic)
indifference of one's mind to sensations and sources
of pleasure or pain.

A man of strong fortitude (Sdttvika temperament) is
capable of enduring everything, or any amount of pain
by repressing his mind with the Iielp of his will or intel-
lect. A man of a Rajasika turn of mind (strong, active,
energetic) may be made to patiently submit to a course
of painful medical treatment by means of persuasive
counsels and the logic of the inevitable, whereas a man
of a Tamasika temperament (a worldl}* cast of mind
characterised by Nescience) is simply overwhelmed at
the prospect of bodily pain.

Later on, we shall have occasion to deal with the
different types of ph^’sical treatment and of remedial
agents in general. .4. particular countrj’, or a season

O-JJ.. aSXV i

SU rUASTH-VNAM. -2S

ol ihc year, a p.ulinilar diio.vi-c or a peculiar nio<lc of
liviiii*, any patlicular kiiul of physical labour or
exercise, or the specilic properties of the water of any
particular locality, or day sleep, or a juice of any parti-
cular taste, is or are said to be coirjteirial tS.itnrya) to a
nratr, or a nran is said to he naturalised to these condi-
tions aitd environinenis, when they fail to produce any
iirjurious elVect on his health, thouj^h naturally unwhole-
sonre to others.

lYletrlcal Texts thinj,' of any taste what-
soever, or any kind of habit or physical exercise is
said to be conj'eitial to a nran which, instead of in any
way tellinj' on his health, contributes U) his positive
pleasure and comfort.

Features of an Anupa country:— A

country may be classed either as an Anupa, Jdngala ora
Sadharana one, according to its distinctive physical
features. .\n Anupa ;,watery or swampy) country
contains a large number of pools, and is wooded and
undulated with chains of lofty hills traversing its
area, and which is impassable owing to its net- works
of rivers and sheets of accumulated rain-water rippling
before the currents of the gentle, humid air. It is
inhabited by a race of stout, shapely and soft-
bodied men, susceptible to Vdtala and Kaphaja diseases.

Features of Jafugala. and Sa'dha'rana
countries : — ^The country, which presents a flat

Ow)). XXXV. ]

^VTRASWANAM.

327

of the 'physical features of the latter place. A
disease of recent growth or origin unattended with
any distressing or unfavourable complications, and
unsuited to tlie nature of the countr}’’*, the season
of the year,t the temperament, t and § the adopt-
ed or congenial or naturalised traits of the ph3’^sique
of a patient with a regular and unimpaired state
of digestion (Samagni), and who e.vliibits traits of
strength, fortitude and longevity and commands the
co-operation of the four commendable factors of a
course of medical treatment, readily yields to medicine,

A disease, which is marked by features other than
those described above, should be regarded as incurable,
while the one e.vhibiting traits common to both
the abovesaid types, should be looked upon as e.v-
tremely hard to cure.

In the case of a former medicine proving abortive,
a different one should not be resorted to as long as
the effect of the first would last, inasmuch as a mi.xture
or a confusion of medicinal remedies tends to produce a
positively injurious effect. A medicine or any medicinal

* As ihe development of a disease due to the deranged Kapham
in a countrs' of the JSngala q-pe.

t As the attack of a bilious distemper in forewinter, or of a \''5taja
malady in autumn, or of a Kaplutja affection in summer.

4; As the appearance of Kaphaja disease in a patient of bilious
temperament.

i the appearance of a Kaphaja disease in a subject Jiabituatcd
to the use of viands of pungent taste.

CHAl’TKK XXXVI.

Xow \vc <liscour^c on the Chapter, which
treats of miscellaneous remedies for swellings, etc.

(IVIfshraka-macIhyayain).*

lYletrical Texts:— A medicinal plaster, com-
posed of Matuinnga, Agnimantha, DevarUru, Mahaush-
dham, Ahinsni, and Ka'sn.i pasted together and applied
to the seat of the aflection, leads to the resolution of a
swelling, due to the action of the denuiged Vayu.

A plaster composed of Dur\‘a, Xalanuilam, Madhu-
kam, and Chandanam, as well as plasters composed of
drugs of cooling properties, t brings about the resolution
of an inllammalory swelling of the Pittaja type,
and proves similarly beneficial to a traumatic swelling,
or to one which has its origin in the vitiated condition
of the blood.

Measures, laid down in connection with a swelling
resulting from the effects of poison, would lead to the
resolution of a Pittaja swelling as well.

* The nomenclature of the chapter is haicd, according to certain
authorities, on the fact of its jointly treating of eight principal processes
of absorption, suppuration, spontaneous bursting, etc. of a swelling ; while
some there are who hold that the name of the chapter is derived from
the (act of its contaim’ng remedial measures commonly (Mishrakam )
beneficial to swellings anti ulcers.

t Belonging to the groups { Gana ) of medicinal herbs, which go by
the names of their first components, such as the Krikalyddi group (Gana),
the Utpalidi group etc.

42

Chap.XXXVi.] . SUTRASTHANAM.

33 ^

Da'rana Plasters : — A' plaster composed of
Chiravilva, Agnika, Danti, Chitraka, Hayamiraka and
the dung of pigeons, vultures and storks (Kanka) pasted
together, would lead to the spontaneous bursting of a.
swelling. An alkali, or its ingredients should be re-
garded as a powerful auxiliary in bringing about the
spontaneous bursting of a swelling.

Pidana Plasters : — A plaster composed of
the roots and bark of slimy trees (Shalmali, Shelu,
etc.), or of barley, wheat, and Mdsha pulse powdered
together, would increase the secretion of pus from
an ulcer, or a swelling that has burst.*

Shodhana Plasters A Kashdyat (decoc-
tion) of Shankhini, Ankota, Sumanah, Karavira, and
Suvarchchald, or of drugs belonging to the group
(Ganas) known as the Aragvadddi-Varga, should be
used in washing and purifying (asepsising) the contents
of an ulcer, or a secreting swelling,

Shodhana Varti : — A lint saturated with a
plaster of Ajagandhd, Ajashringi, Gavakshi, Ldngaldhva-
ya, Putika, Chitraka, Pathd, Vidanga, Eld, Renuka,
Tri-katu, Yavakshdra, the five kinds of salt,-Manahshila,

■ • The plaster should be applied all round the swelling, leaving its head
free and exposed.

t .A. decoction with one part of a drug mixed with four, eight or six-
teen parts of water, the whole being Ijoiled down to a quarter part of the
entire quantity.

'ri-IE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XXXVl

332

Kasisa, Trivrita, Dauli, HariUla and the Saurashtra-
mrittik.1, and inserted into an ulcer or an open swelling,
brings about the purification of its interior, and these
drugs and substances should be regarded as the ingre-
dients of Shodhana Vartia (aseptic plugs).

Shodhana Kalka A kalka (aseptic paste),
composed of the preceding drugs and substances, is
possesed of the virtue of purifying the interior of an
ulcer, or open swelling.

Oil or clarified butter prepared with the aforesaid
Ajagandha, Ajashringi, etc, and K.-tsisa, Katurohini,
Jitikanda, and the two kinds of Haridr.i, and applied to
an ulcer or open swelling, purifies its interior. The
medicated Ghritam prepared with the e.vpressed
juice of .Arka roots, Uttanil, the milky juice of
Snuhi plants, drugs abounding in alkalis, Jdti-roots, the
two kinds Haridnl, Kasisa, Katurohini and the aforesaid
plug-drugs (Sodhana-Varti) pasted together, should be
regarded as possessed of a virtue similar to the preced-
ing one.

A medicated oil prepared with Mayuraka,
(Apang), • Rdjabriksha, Xintva, Kosh^taki, Tila,
Vrihati, Kantakari, Haritala, Manahshil^, and the afore-
said plug-drugs (purgative drugs according to others),
should be used for the purpose of purifying the interior
of an ulcer. A pulverised compound consisting of K^isa,
Saindhava, Kinva, Vach.1, the two kinds of HaridrA,

Clu)). XXKVl.l

SUTRASTllANAM.

A ^

ooo

and the component drugs of the aseptic plug
powdered together, should be used for the pun-
lication of the cavity of an ulcer. For the same
puqiose a condensed extract (Rasa-Kriya)* should be
made of the essence of the drugs belonging to the
S;iis;iradi, Patoladi, and Triphahidi groups.

Dhupanam : — A wise physician should fumigate
(Dhupanam) an ulcer with the fumes of a compound
consisting of Sriveshtaka, Sarjarasa, Sarala, Devadciru,
and the drugs belonging to the S.'tlsiiradi group,
pulverised together and made into an faseptic) fumigat-
ing compound.

A cold infusion (Shhita-Shritam) of trees (Vata,
Audumvara, Ashvattha, etc.) which are cooling and
astringent in their virtue, should be used in healing or
setting up a process of granulation in an ulcer.

The Ropana-Varti -.—Plugs of drugs such as
Soma, Amrita (Gulancha), and Ashvagandhd, or of those
belonging to the K^kolyddi group, or of the sprouts
of milk-exuding trees (Kshirivrikshas such as, Vata,
Audumvara, etc.) and inserted into an ulcer tend
to help its granulation (Ropana). A paste (Kalka) of
Samang^, Soma, Sarala wood, Soma-Valka, (red)

* The process consists in mixing the drugs with water weighing eight
or sixteen times their combined weight, and then boiling them down to
an eighth or sixteenth part of the entire quantity.

334

THE SUSHEiUT.A SAMfHTA. C Clup. XXXV7.

Chandana, and dnigs belonging to tiie K^kolyadi
group, is reconnnended for the healing of an ulcer.

A medicated Giiritam, prepared with the Pritliak-
parni, Atmagnptd, Haridra, Darnharidni, Alalati, Sit.-i,
and drugs belonging to the Kakolyadi group, is renowned
for its healing properties. .A medicated oil prepared
with Kdldnusjiri, .Aguru, Haridrd, Daru-Haridni,

evaddru, Pri}angu, and Lodhrn, is possesed of a similar
efficacy.

A pulverised compound consisting of Kanguki,
Tnphal^, Lotlhra, Kasisam, Shravana and the barks
of Dhava and .Vshvakania powdered together, is
possessed of a similar healing property. The use of a
puherised compound consisting of Priyangu, Sarjarasa,

shpa kasisa, T\aka, and Dhava powdered together
IS commended for the healing of an ulcer. A condensed
e.xtract (Rasakriy^) of the bark of milk-e.\uding
trees (such as Vata, .Ashvattha etc.) and the
drugs kno\\n as the Triphala, should be successively
used for the healing of an ulcer.

Utsardanam; — ^The drugs known as Ap^m^ga,
Ashvagandh^, T^lapatri, SuvarchhaH and those belong-
ing to the Kakolyddi group, should be used for the
growth of flesh in an iflcer ( Uts^dana ).

Avasadanam : — A compound consisting of
Kasisa, Saindhava ( rock salt ), Kinvani, Kuruvinda,

Cli.. ). XXXVI. ;

SUTKASTIl/VNAM.

335

Manahsliilii, llio shell ol' a hen's egg, the blossoms of
J.iti tlowers, the seeds of Shirisha, and Karanja, and
jio\Yders of the abovesaid metals ( Dhatus ) mixed to-
gether, should be used in destroying the fleshy super-
growths of an ulcer < Avasadanam ).

A wise physician should use all the drugs and sub-
stances as have been enumeratcil in connection with the
healing or establishing of suppuration, etc. in an ulcer,
or as many of them as would be available at the time.

Thui cndi dm tliitly-biMli Cluiptcr of ihc Sulr.iblWn.iin in llio SusIttuUT.
S.iiuliil4 which ttcala of inisccll.mcou-. tcmcdic-. for iiilhmninlory swclliuBs.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clwp. XXXVI.

n 4

Chandana^ and dnigs belonging to the Kdkolyadi
group, is recommended for the liealing of an ulcer.

A medicated Ghritam, prepared with the Prithak-
pami, AtmagupW, Haridni, Daruharidra, Malati, Sit.1,
and drugs belonging to the Kakolyadi group, is renowned
for its healing properties. A medicated oil prepared
with IvaUnusari, Aguru, Haridrd, Daru-Haridni,
Devadiiru, Priyangu, and Lodhra, is possesedof a similar
efBcacy.

A pulverised compound consisting of Kangukd,
Tripliald, Lodhra, Kasisam, Shravana and the barks
of Dhava and Ashvakania powdered together, is
possessed of a similar healing property. The use of a
pulverised compound consisting of Priyangu, Sarjarasa,
Pushpa-k^sisa, Tvaka, and Dhava powdered together
is commended for the healing of an ulcer. A condensed
e.Ktract ( Rasakriyd ) of the bark of milk-exuding
trees ( such as Vata, Ashvattha etc. ) and the
drugs known as the Triphala, should be successively
used for the healing of an ulcer.

Utsardanam ; — The drugs known as Apani^rga,
Ashragandh^, T^lapatri, SuvarchhalS and those belong-
ing to the Kakolyddi group, should be used for the
growth of flesh in an ulcer ( Uts^dana ).

Avasadanam : — A compound consisting of
K^sisa, Saindhava ( rock salt )/ Kinvam, Kuruvinda,

Clu i. XXXVI.;

SL'TRASTHA'NAM.

335

Manahshila, the slicll of a hen's egg, Ihc blossoms of
J.Ri llowers, tlie seeds of Shirisha, and Ivaranja, and
jjowders of the abovesaid metals ( Dhalus ) mixed to-
gether, should be used in destroying the lleshy super-
growths of an ulcer . Ava&tdanam ).

A wise physician should use all tlie drugs and sub-
stances as have been enumerated in connection with the
healing or establishing of suppuration, etc. in an ulcer,
or as many of them as would be available at the time.

Thui cn(l> llio iliicly-aiMli Cluplcr of the Sulr.nth.tnaiii in the Suahrul.-i
S.iinliiti wliich tieali of iniaccll.vncou', reinvdic.i for inllaininalory iwellinys.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which deals
with the distinctive traits of the difierent classes of soil
commended for the growth or culture of medicinal
herbs (Bhumi-Pravibha'ga-Vijna’niya-
madhyaryam).

These are the general features of a ground which is
recommended for the culture of medicinal plants or
herbs. A plot of ground, whose surface is not broken or
rendered uneven by the presence of holes, ditches, gravel
and stones, nor is loose in its character, and which is
not disfigured by ant-hills, nor used for the purposes of
a cremation or execution ground, and which does not
occupy the site of a holy temple, is favourable for the
growth of medicinal herbs. A ground which possesses a
soil which is glossy, finn, steady, black, yellowish or
red and does not contain any sand, potash or any other
alkaline substance, and is favourable to the germination
of plants and easily perv ious to the roots of plants
growing thereon, and which is supplied with the
necessary’ moisture from a close or adjacent stream or
reseiA’oir of water, is recommended for the growth of
medicinal plants and herbs. Plants should be regard-
ed as partaking of the virtues of the ground they grow
upon. A plant, growing in such a commendable site,
should be examined as to its being infested with worms

flui-. XXXVII. 1

SUTUASTHA’NAM.

337

or insects, or ;is to its bciiifj unywisc infected with
poison, or cut with :in unn, or iiffected by winds,
atmospheric heal, or an animal's body. It should
be culled or uprooted in the event of it being lound
sound, he;dthy, deep-rooted, full-bodied, and of
matured s;ip. The gatherer should look towards the
north at the lime of culling.

A plot of ground with a pebbly, steady, heavy, dusky
or dark coloured soil, and which conduces to the growth
of large trees, and yields rich harvests of com, should
be regarded as permeated with the specific virtues of
essential liarth-matter,

A ground having a cool, glossy, white coloured soil,
which is adjacent to water, and whose surface is covered
with a lavish growth of glossy weeds and luscious
shady trees, should be considered as characterised by
the essential properties of water (Amvuguna;. A
ground having a gravelly soil of varied colours, and
which contributes only to the gennination of scanty and
yellowish sprouts, should be looked upon as penneated
with the attributes of essential fire (Agniguna). A
ground with an ash-coloured or ass-coloured (grey), soil,
and on which withered looking, sapless, large-holed trees
of stunted growth, somehow eke out a miserable
existence, should be considered as being controlled by
the specific properties of air (Anilaguna) ; while the
one having a soft, level surface with large trees and lofty
43

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XXXVii.

338

hills cropping up at intervals thereon, and which is
covered with growths of weeds and under-shrubs, and is
endued with a dark soil, kept moist and sappy by the
percolation of inHsible (subterranean) water, should be
looked upon as permeated with the essential properties
of sk}' (Akishaguna).

According to certain authorities, the roots, leaves,
bark, milky exudations, essence and fruits (seeds) of
medicinal plants and herbs, should be respectively culled
in the early part of the rains (Pravrit) and in the rainy
season proper (Varsha\ autumn, (Sharat), fore-wnter
(Hemanta), spring (T'asanta) and summer (Grishma).
But we cannot subscribe to that opinion inasmuch as
the nature or essential temperament of the earth is both
cool (Sauraya) and hot (Agneya). Accordingl)' drugs of
cooling A-irtues should be culled during the cold seasons
of the year, and the heat-making ones in the hot season,
as they do not become divested of their native Aortues at
those seasons of the year. Medicinal plants of coohng
An'rtues, AA'hich are groAvn on a soil of cool temperament
and are culled during the cool seasons of the year,
become intensely sweet, cooling and glossy. These
remarks hold good of other medicinal plants and herbs.

Herbs of purgative properties, Avhich are grown on
a soil permeated with the specific A-irtues of Avater
or earth matter, should be culled as the most effective
of their kind. Similarly, herbs of emetic A'irtues should

Chnp. XSXVII.] SUTRASTHA'NAM.

339

be culled from a ground permeated with the essential
virtues of fire, sky and air.

Herbs exercising both purgative and emetic virtues
should be culled from ground exhibiting features
common to both the two aforesaid classes of soil.
Similarly, herbs possessed of soothing properties
(Sanshamanam)* are found to exert a stronger action
in the event of their being reared on a soil permeated
with the essential properties of sky.

All medicinal herbs and substances should be used
as fresh as possible, excepting Pippali, Vidanga, Madhu,
Guda, and Ghritam, fwhich should be used in a matured
condition i.e. not before a year\ The milk)’- juice or sap
of a medicinal tree or plant should be regarded as strong
and active under all circumstances. Herbs and drugs,
that had been culled or collected within the year, might
be taken and used in making up a medicinal recipe in a
case where fresh ones would not be available.

Authoritative Verses on the Sub-
ject — Medicinal herbs and plants should be recognis-
ed and identified with the help of cowherds, hermits,
huntsmen, forest- dwellers, and those who cull the fruits
and edible roots of the forest. No definite time can
be laid down for the culling of the leaves and roots of

* Herbs or drugs, which in virtue of their own essential properties
soothe or subdue a disease without cb'minating the morbid humours
or without exercising any emetic orpurgative action.

3^0 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITa'. [ Chap. XXXVII.

medicinal plant$, etc., such as are used in compounding
the recipe, which is called the Patra-lavanam, and which
covers, wthin its therapeutic range, diseases, which are
peculiar to the entire organism (such as Vata-\yddhi,
etc).*

As soil admits of being divided into six different
classes according to its smell, colour, taste, etc. so'
the sap of a medicinal plant may assume any of the
six different tastes through its contact with the peculiar
properties of the soil it grows on. Tastes such as,
sweet, etc., remain latent in water, which imparts them
to the soil in a patent or perceptible condition.

A plot of ground, exhibiting traits peculiar to all the
five fundamental material principles (such as the earth
water, fire, etc.), is said to be possessed of a soil
of general character (S^dhdrani Bhumi), and medicinal
plants and herbs partake of the specific \'irtues of the
soil the}' grown on.

Drugs, whether fresh or old, and erriitting a contrar}'
smell, or in any way affected as regards their natural
sap or jiuce, should not be used for pharmaceutical
purposes.

The virtues of such medicinal drugs and substances
such as Vidanga, Pippali, iMadhu, and Guda, improve

• Hence the doctrine, as regards the colling of the different parts of a
medicinal plant such as, the leaves, roots, etc., in the different seasons
of the year, naturally falls to the ground.

Chap. XXXVII. ] SUTRASTHANAM.

341

(after a year}. Accordingly all drugs and medicinal
herbs, excepting the preceding ones, should be used
fresh and unsoiled, or uninjured by insects.

Blood, nails, or hair etc., of animals, (officinally laid
down to be used in our Pharmacopoeia), should be taken
from young and healthy animals, and the ordure, urine,
or milk of an animal, (enjoined to be used for medicinal
purposes), should be collected at a time after it has
completed its digestion.

The pharmacy and the medicinal store of a physician
should occupy a commendable site and an auspicious
quarter of the sky (North or East), and the collected
medicines should be kept tied in pieces of clean linen, or
stored in earthen vessels and hollow tubes of wood, or
suspended on wooden pegs.

Thus ends the thirty-seventh Chapter of the Sutm-sthanam in the
Sushrula Samhitfi which treats of the Classification of grounds for the
culture of medicinal plants and herlis, etc.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals
with the general classification of drugs according to
their therapeutical properties (Dravya-SangTa-
h a n i y a- m ad hy a^a m ) .

These drugs are usually made into thirtN’-seven
different groups (Gana) which are as follows : —

The Vidarrigandhardi Group: — Thedrugs
known as Vi(Hrigandha, Vidari, Sahadev^, Vishvadeva,
Shvadanstr<(, Prithakparni, Shatavari, S^riva, black
Sdriva, Jivaka, Rishavaka, Mahasaha, Kshudra-Sah^,
Vrihati, Kantakiri, Punarnavd, Eranda, Hansapach,
Vrishchik^Ii, and Rishavi, form the group known as the
Vidiri-gandli^di.

IVletrical Text : — ^The present group of dnigs
subdues the action of the deranged Vayu and Pittam
and proves beneficial in phthisis (Shosha"', Gulma, aching
of the limbs, Urdha-Shxasa and cough.

The A'ragvadhardi Group The drugs
known as Arag\'adha, Madana, Gopaghont^, Kutaja,
Path^, Kanlaki, Pdtala, Murrd, Indra3’ava, Saptapama,
Nimva, Kuruntaka, Dasi-kuruntaka, the two kinds of
Karanja, Patola, Kir^tttikua, Guduchi, Chitraka,
Shclngshta, and Sushavi form the group kno\ra as
the Arag\'adhadi.

Glut), xxxvnr. ]

SUTK.ASTIIA’NA.M.

343

Metrical Text -.—The group uiulcr discus-
sion destroys the deninged Kapluun and the ellects ol
poibou and proves benelicial in cases of Meha (morbid
discliarges from tire urellir.i), Ivushtlv.i, lever, vomiting
and itching of the body and acts as a puril3'iiig
(aseptic) agent in tlie case of an ulcer.

The Varuna'di Croup : —The drugs known
as Vanina, Artagida, Shigru, Madbu-Shigru, Tarkari,
Mesha-Shringi, Putika, Xaktamala, Morata, Agni-
inantlia, the two kinds of Sairiyakn, Vimvi, Vasuka,
Vivsira, Chitraka, Shatavari, Vilva, .Ajashringi, Darbha,
and the two kinds of Vrihati form tlie group known
as the Varunadi.

Metrical Text : -Tlie group is possessed of the
efficacy of reducing the deranged Kapbum and
fat and proves efficacious in cases of cephalaegia, Guhna
and intenial abscesses.

The Viratarvardi Group The drugs
known as Ah'ratani, the two kinds of Saliachara, Darbha,
Vrikshadani, Gundrd, iXala, Kusha, Kasha, Ashma-
bhedaka, Agnimantha, Morata Vasuka, Vasira,
Bhalluka, Kuruntaka, Indivara, Kapotavanka, and
Shvadanstra enter into the composition of the group
known as the Viratarvddi.

Metrical Text The group subdues all dis-
orders incidental to the deranged state of A'’ata and

344

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clmj). XXSCViH.

proves curative iu Ashniari, Sharkani, Mutra-
krichhra, Mutnighdta and urinary troubles.

The Sarlasarrardi Group The group of
medicinal drugs, known as the Silasaradi, consists of
Sdlasara, Ajakarna, Khadira, Kadara, Kalaskandha,
Kramuka, Bhuijja, IMeshashringi, Tinisha, Chandana,
•Kuchandana, Shinshapa, Shirisha, Asana, Dhava,
Aijuna, Tdla, Shaka, Naktamala, Putik^ Ashvakama,
Aguru and K;lliyaka,

Metrical Texts : — The group of the drugs,
known as the S^lasiradi Gana, destroys the germ of
Kushtha, absorbs the deranged fat and Kapham and
proves beneficial in morbid discharges from the urethra
(Meha\ chlorosis or jaundice (Pandu).

The Rodhra'di Group The group of medi-
cinal drugs known as the Rodhradi consists of Rodhra,
Sdvararodhra, Palasha Kutannata, Ashoka, Phanji,
Katphala, Elabdluka, Sallaki, Jingini, Kadamva, S^la
and Kadali,

Metrical Texts: — The group is antidotal to
the deranged Kapham and fat, is astringent in its
properties, removes vaginal and uterine disorders,
neutralises the effects of poison (anti toxic) and
acts as a st3’’ptic and purifying agent in a case of ulcer
and arrests all secretions and excretions of the body.

The Arka'di Group :--The drugs knoum
as the Arka, Alarka, the two kinds of Karanja,

Chap. XXXVIII.] sutrasthanam.

345

N^gadanti, Mayuraka, Bh^rgi, R^sna, Indrapusbpi,
Ksbudrashveta Mahashveti, Vrisbchikali, AlavanjJ and
T^pasha-Vriksha, enter into the composition of the
group kno^vn as the Arkadi Gana.

IMetrical Texts:— The group known as the
Arkadi destroys Kaphara, fat, and the effects of
poison. It acts as a vermifuge and a specific aseptic
agent in the case of an ulcer and proves curative in
diseases of the skin.

TheSurasa'di Group; — The drugs known
as Surasd, white Suras^, Fainjjhaka, Aijaka, Bhustrina,
Sugandhaka, Suraukha, Kdlam^la, Kishamarda,
Kshavaka, Kharpushpi, Vidanga, Katphala, Surasi,
Nirgiuidi, Kuldhala, Indurakamika, Phanji, Prichi-
vala, Kakamichi and Vishaniushtika form the group
knowTi as the Sura&fdi Gana.

IVletrical Texts: — The group acts as a
vermifuge and is an aseptic agent. It subdues the
deranged Kapham and proves beneficial in catarrh,
non-relish for food, asthma and cough.

The IVIushkakardi Group The group of
medicinal drugs knowm as the Mushkak^di consists of
Mushkaka, Paldsha, Dhava, Chitraka, Madana,
Shinshapa, Vajra-Vriksha and Triphala.

metrical Text:— The present group is
possessed of the therapeutic virtue of destro5'ing fat and
44

346 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. x.K.KVin.

removing the defects of semen. Meiia, piles, jaundice,
chlorosis, gravels and urinar)' calculi in the bladder
are the diseases wliich yield to its curative uiliciic}’.

The Pippalyardi Group : -The group of
medicinal drugs known as the Pippalyidi consists of
Pippali, Pippali mulam, Chavya, Chitraka, Shringavera,
Maricha, Hasti-Pippali, Harenuka, Ela, Ajamoda,
Indrayava, Path^, Jiraka, Sarshapa, IMaha-Nimva-Phala,
Hingu, Bhdrgi, Madhurasa, Ativisha, Vacha, Vidanga
and Katurohini.

IWetrical Text : — ^The present group acts as a
good appetiser and is an absorbant of intestinal mucous
and unassimilated lymph chyle. The range of its thera-
peutical application includes catarrh, deranged Kapham
and Vatani, non-relish for food, abdominal glands, colic
and gastralgia.

The Ela^di Group : — The group of medicinal
drugs known as the Eladi-Gana consists of Ela, Tagara,
Kushtha, M^nsi, Dhyimaka, Tvaka, Patra, Naga-
pushpa, Prij'^angu, Harenuka, Vyaghranakha, Shukti,
Chanda, Sthauneyaka, Shriveshtaka, Chocha, Choraka,
Valaka, Guggulu, Saijarasa, Turushka, Kunduruka,
Aguru, Sprikka, Ushira, Bhadradaru, Kumkuma,
Punnaga and Keshara.

Metrical Text:— The therapeutic virtue of
the group consists in subduing the action of Vdyu and

Clui.. XXXVIIl.) SUTI^ASTILVXAM.

347

Kaphain and in nc«lralisinj» Ihe uiTccls of poison. It is
a cosmetic and arrests the eruption of pimples
and Ollier ve/'ctations on the skin such as rash, urticaria
etc. and checks the itchinjf sensation incidental
thereto.

The Vachardi and Haridrardi Groups

The groups known as the V'ach.ldi and Haridriidi
Ganas, respectively consist of Vaclut, I^Iust.i, Ativisha,
Abhay;l, Bhadradaru, Nregakeshara (Vachiidi), Haridra,
Daruharidr.-t, Kalashi, Kutaja seeds and Madhuka
(Haridradi).

Wletrical Text:— These two groups are the
purifiers of breast milk and specifically act as the
assimilators of the deranged humours of the bod)', tlieir
curative properties being markedly witnessed in cases
of mucous dysentery (Amutis^ra).

The Shyarmardi Group -.—The drugs known
as Shyama, Mah^-Shyam^, Trivrit, Danti, Shan-
khini, Tilvaka, Kampillaka, Ramyaka, Kramuka,
Putrashroni, Gavdkshi, RAjavriksha, the two kinds
of Karanja, Guduchi, Saptala, ChhagalAntri, Sudha and
Suvamakhiri, form the group known as the Shyiim^di
Gana.

Metrical Text;~This group is possessed of
the therapeutic virtue of curing abdominal glands and
acts as an anti-toxic. It proves beneficial in AnSha

348

THE SUSllRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Qap. XXXVllI.

fepistasis), abdominal dropsy and diarrhoea and is one
of the most reliable purgatives in cases of obstinate
constipation of the bowels with suppression of urine
and distention of the abdomen (Udavarta).

The Vrihatya'di Group :~The drugs Imown
as Vrihati, Kantakarikd, Kutajaphala, Patha and
INIadhuka combinedly form the group known as the
Vrihatyadi Gana.

Metrical Text : — The group is a good digestant
or assirailator of the deranged humours. It subdues
the deranged YAti, Pitta and Kapham and proves
efficacious in cases of nausea, water-brash, dysuria and
non- relish for food.

The Patoladi Group: -The drugs known
as Patola, Chandana, Kuchandana, 3Iurva, Guduchi,
P^tha, and Katurohini form the group known as the
PatoUdi Gana.

Metrical Text The group is a febrifuge and
anti-to.xic, and its therapeutic action consists in destroy-
ing the action of the deranged Pittara and Kapham. It
restores the natural relish of the patient for food,
removes vomiting, and proves beneficial in ulcers,
and itching er}'theroatous eruptions.

The Ka'kolya^^di Group: — The drugs known
as K^koli-Kshira-K^koli, Jivaka, Rishabhaka, Mudga-
pami, M^shapami, Medd, MahdmecU, Chhinna-ruh^,

Gui.. XXXVin.) SUTUASTUANA.M.

349

K-.irk-.vtu-Sljringi, Tug.ikshiri, I'adnv.iku, Prapaundarika,
Riddld, Vriddhi, Mridvik.t, Jivanli and Madhuka, com-
binedly ibrin llic group known as the I\;ikolyddi Gana.

Metrical Text The group of medicinal
dnigs under discussion subdues the action of the
deranged Piltaiu, hlootl and V.iyu. It increases the
(luantity of milk in the breast g-alactagogue) and
favours the accumulation of phlegm (Kapham) in the
body. It is a restorative and an elixir and is endued witli
the therapeutic virtue of augmenting the virile potency
of a man.

The Ushakarcli Group .—The medicinal
drugs and substances known as Ushaka (alkaline earth)
Saindliava salt, Sliilajatu, the two kinds of Ivrfsisa,
Hingu and Tutlhaka enter into the composition of the
group known as the Ushakiidi Gana.

Metrical Text:— It destroys kapham (mucous),
absorbs the fat of the body and proves curative in cases
of stone or gravel in the bladder (urinary calculi),
dysuria and abdominal glands (Gulma).

The Sarriva'di Group The drugs known
as Sirivu, Madhuka, Chandana, Kuchandana, Padmaka,
lidshmari phala, Madhuka-pushpa and Ushira, com-
binedly form the group known as the &trivddi Gana.

Metrical Text The group under discussion
allays thirst and proves curative in a case of hasmoptysis.

350

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA. [ Chip. XXXVm.

Its therapeutic virtue consists in curbing an attack
of bilious (Pittaja) fever and in specifically alleviating
the burning sensation (D^ha) of the body.

The Anjanafdi Group : — The group known
as the Anjanadi Gana consists of Anjana, Rasanjana,
N^gapushpa, Priyangu, Nilotpala, Xalada, Nalina,
Keshara and Madhuka.

Metrical Texts ; — An attack of haemoptysis
readily 5'ields to the curative xfirtue of the group under
discussion. It is anti-toxic in its character and allat’s
the internal burning sensation of the body.

The Parushaka'di Group:— The group
known as the Parushak-tdi Gana consists of Parushaka,
Drdksha, Kat-phala, D^dima, R^j^dana, Kataka-pbala
Shdka-phala and 'fripliala.

Metrical Text: — It subdues the deranged
Vayu, allays thirst, acts as a cordial, increases one’s
relish for food;and cures the diseased or abnormal com-
ponents of urine or its defects.

The Priyangva'di Group :— The group of
medicinal drugs known as the Priyang\-adi Gana consists
of Priyangu, Samangi, Dhdtaki, Xaga-pushpa, Chandana,
Kuchandana, Mocharasa, Ras^njana, Kumbhika,
Srotohnjana,Padma-keshara, Jojanvalh', and Dirghamula.

The Amvashtha'di Group :— Drugs known
as Amvashthd, Dbataki flowers, Samanga, Katvanga,

Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHANAM.

351

iMadhuka, Vilva-peshika, Rodhra, Savara-Rodhraj
Palasba, Nandi- Vriksha and Padma keshara, enter into
the composition of the group known as the Amvashthadi
Gana.

Wletrical Text : —The two medicinal recipes
or groups prove beneficial in a case of deranged Pitta^
favour the healing of ulcers, bring about the adhesion
of fractured bones and prove curative in cases of
dysentery where the stools are found to consist of
lumps of thick and matured raucous (Pakvatisara.)

The Nyargrodha'di Group .—The drugs
known as Nyagrodha, Audumvara, Ashvattha, Plaksha,
Madhuka, Kapitana, Kakubha, Amra, Koshdmra,
Chorakapatra, the two sorts of JamAni, Ptyifia, Madhuka
(Maula), Rohini, Vanjula, Kadamva, Vadari, Tinduki,
Sallaki, Rodhra, Ssivara-Rodhra, Bhallataka, Pal^ha,
and Nandi-Vriksha, combinedly form the group known
as the Ny^godhridi Gana.

Metrical Texts : — This group proves bene-
ficial in cases of ulcer, cures all disorders of
the uterus and vagina, favours the adhesion of
fractured bones and all sorts of secretions of the
body in addition to its astringent properties (Sangrjfhi)
and proves curative in a case of hcemopt)'sis. It is
an anti-fat and assuages the burning sensation of
the body.

352 THE SU5HRUTA SAMHiT-'i;. 1 Cio-. X-'lKVliL

The Guduchyafcii Group The dru^s
kno-vvn as Guduchi, Xinava, rvaistum-vTini, Chai:-dai7a,
and Padmaka, combinediy form the group kno'am as
the Guducba'adj Gana,

lYIetrical Text:— It is a good appeu'ser. and
acts as a general febrifuge and successfully combats
such sjauptoms as nausea, '.vant of reHsh :or food,
vomiting, thirst and burning sensation of the body.

The Utpalardi Group:— The drugs knov-n
as Utpala, Raktotpala, Sumuda SaugondHka, Emmlaya,
Pundar&m and Madhuka constitute the group known
as the Utpaladi Gana.

lYIetrical Texts:— This group is possessed of
the therapeutic \'iitue of allamng thirst and corrects
the deranged Pittam and the \dtiated bleed. It
assuages the burning sensation of the body and proves
curative in cases of vomiting, in Hridroga (Angina
pectoris, in syncope, in htemopusis and incases of
poisoning as well.

The IVIusta'di Group : — The group of
drugs known as ilushtadi Gana is composed of
3Iu5ta, Haridra, Dani-Hari£te, Haritaki, Amlaki,
Vibhitaka, Kusbtha, Haima\'ati, Vaeba, Patha, Karu-
rohini, Sh^gashta, Ativisha, Drawdi, Bhallataka and
Chitraka.

Clui). .NXXViii,] SU l'UASTllA'N’A.M.

353

IVletrical Text:— The J^roup under discussion
destroys the deranged Shleshnni, cures uterine and
vaginal disorders, purities the breast milk of a motlier,
and acts as a good digeslanl (Pachana).

The Triphalar Group The drugs known
Haritaki, AmVaki and Vibhilaka, constitute the group
known os the Triphahidi Gana.

IVletrical Text The present group destroys
the action of the deranged Vayu, Kapham and Pittam
and proves curative in Meha, and in diseases of the skin
(Kushtham). It is a good appetiser, improves the
eyesight and proves beneficial in chronic intennittent
fever iVishama-jvara).

The Trikatu Group ; — The Trikatu group
consists of Pippali, Maricha and Shringavera.

IVletrical Text ; — It destroys fat and Kapham,
proves curative in cutaneous affections, leprosy
(Kushtha), and morbid discharges from the urethra, and
is possessed of the virtue of curing abdominal glands,
catarrh, dullness of the appetite and indigestion.

The Pfmlakyardi Group The group
known as the Amlakyadi Gana consists of Amlaki,
Haritaki, Pippali and Chitraka.

metrical Text The present group of medici-
nal drugs acts as a general febrifuge and may be used

45

3^4 SUSHRUTA SAMHrfA. [ Chap, xxxvilf.

with advantage in fevers of whatsoever t5’pe. Moreover,
it is an aphrodisiac and acts as a general tonic or resto-
rative and appetiser, destro3’ing the deranged Kaphara
and improving the eyesight.

The Trapva'dI Group The group known
as the Trapvadi Gana consists of Trapu, Sisa, Tamra,
Rajata, Krishna-Lauha, Suvama and Lohamala.

Metrical Text The present group is
regarded as a good vermifuge and possessed of the virtue
of neutralising the effects of chemical poison originated
tlirough incompatible combinations. Its therapeutic
range covers jaundice, chlorosis, Meha (morbid secre-
tions from the urethra), Hridroga (heart disease), thirst
and maladies incidental to the effects of poison.

The Larkshardi Group ; — The drugs kno\ra
as the Laksha, Arevata, Kutaja, Ashvamara, Katphalam,
Haridra, Daru-Haridra, Ximva, Saptachchhada, Malati,
and Tra5’^araana form the Likshddi Gana.

Metrical Text : — This consists of astringent,
bitter and sweet taste (Rasa) and acts as a good
vermifuge and a purifying (aseptic) agent in cases
of bad, malignant or indolent ulcers. Diseases due to
the deranged Kapham and Pittam prove amenable to its
curative properties, which extend to cases of cutaneous
affections (Kushtham) as well. Now we shall describe

ciup. XXXVIU.l SUTUASTIIA’NAM. •^55

Ihu five j^rovips nic<liciii;il rootn (Muluiii), each
consisting of siinilar number of coinponenls.

The Svalpa Panchamulam Group —

Tlie group known as the minor group of live roots
(Svalpa- Panclia-Mula) consists ol the roots o( medicinal
plants known as the Trikantaka, the two species ol
Vrihati, Prithakpanii, and Vidarigandiia.

Metrical Texts : — The compound possesses a
taste blended of astringent, bitter and sweet. It is a
tonic and aphrodisiac, subdues the deranged ^^'^yu and
proves soothing to the deranged Pittam.

The Mahat Panchamula Croup

The one known as the great or the major group of
five medicinal roots (Mahat- PancUa-ilulu) consists of
the roots of such trees as Vilva, Agnimantlm,
Tuntuka, P:'itala and K.'Ishmari.

Metrical Texts : — It is bitter in taste and
subdues the deranged Ivapham and Vatam. It is light
(easily digestible) and appetising, and acquires a sub-
sequent sweet taste in its reaction (Anurasa).

The Dashamula Group -.-—The two
preceding groups in combination form the one techni-
cally known as the Dasha-llnlam (the ten roots), which
is possessed of the virtue of destroying the deranged
Vata, Pittam and Kapbam. It proves beneficial in cases of
asthma and difficult respiration. It acts as a good

356

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XX.VVIII.

digestaiit in respect of undigested lymph chyle, etc and
is used with satisfactor)'’ results in all types of fever.

The Valli-Panchamulam Group:—

The group consisting of the roots of the five medicinal
creepers known as Vidari, Sariva, Rajani, Guduchi
and Aja-Shringi, is called the Valli-Panchamulam.

The Pancha-kantakam Group •.—Simi-
larly, the group consisting of the five medicinal
(thorny) shrubs known as Karamradda, Trikantaka,
Sairij'aka, Shatavari, and Gridhranakhi, is called the
Pancha-Kantaka.

Metrical Texts The two preceding groups
prove curative in Haemoptysis and in all tlie tliree
types of anasarca or oedema (Shopha). Moreover, it has
the incontestable virtue of arresting all sorts of urethral
discharges and is a potent remedy in all cases of seminal
disorders.

The Pancha-Trina Group The group
consisting of the five medicinal herbs (of the grass
species) and known as Kusha, KAsha, Nala, Darbha,
Kindekshuka, is called the Pancha-Trina.

Metrical Texts : — Cases of Haemoptysis, renal
defects or of uninary diseases are foimd to speedily yield
to the curative efficacy of the compound internally
administered through the medium of cow’s milk.

Metrical Texts : — ^The first two of the afore-

Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHANAM.

357

said groups of Panchamulas (viz., the Svalpa and the
Vrihat Panchamulas) are possessed of the virtue of
destroying the deranged Vata, while the one standing in
the bottom of the list (Trina-Panchamula) is endued with
the property of killing the deranged Pittam. Those stand-
ing third and fourth in order of enumeration (the Valli
and Kantaka Panchamulas) subdue the deranged Kapham.

The groups of medicinal drugs and roots have thus
been briefly described, which will be more elaborately
dealt with later on in the chapter on Therapeutics.

An intelligent physician should prepare plasters,
decoctions, medicated oils, Ghritas (medicated clarified
butter) or potions, according to the exigencies of each
individual case.* The groups enumerated above should
be therapeutically used according to the nature of the
deranged humours involved in each individual case.
Only two, three or foiu: drugs of the same medicinal
group, or a similar number of drugs chosen from the
the different groups, or a group of medicinal drugs in its
entirety, or in combination with another, should be
used according to the indications of any particular case,
as the physician, in his discretion, would determine.

* Additional Text These drugs m.sy be duly culled in all seasons of
the year, and should be stored in a room protected from smoke, blasts of
cold, udnd and rain.

Thus ends the thirty-eighth Chapter of the Sutrasthinam in theSushruta
SamhitA, which deals with the classiHcation of drugs according to their
therapeutical use.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of medicinal drugs possessed of cleansing (cathartic')
or soothing efTects (Samshodhana-Samsha-
maniya-madhyaryam).

Emetic Drugs : — The drugs known as
Madana fruits, Kutaja, Jiinutaka, Ikshvaku, Dhaniigarba,
Krita-vedhana, Sarshapa, Vidanga, Pippali, Karan-
jaka, Prapunn;lda, Kovidara, Kon-ucHra, Arishta, Ashva-
gandhii, Vidula, Vandhujivaka, Shveta, Shanapushpi,
Vimvi, Vachd, Mrigervaru and Chitra, etc. are possessed
of emetic properties. Out of these the fruits (seeds) of
plants preceding Kovidara in the abovesaid list
(from the Madana fruits to those of the Prapimn^da")
and the roots of plants from Kovidara to its close,
should be used.

Purgative Drugs The trees, plants, herbs
and creepers, etc. known as Tri\Tita, Shyima, Danti,
Dravanti, Saptala, Shankhini, Vish^niki, Gavakshi,
Chhagal^ntri, Snuk, Suvarnakshiri, Chitraka, Kinihi,
Kusha, Kdsha, Tilvaka, Kampillaka, Raniyaka, Pdtala,
Puga, Haritaki, Amalaka, Bibhitaka, Nilini, Chatur-
angula, Eranda, Putika, Mah^vriksha, Saptachchhada,
Arka, and Jyotishmati, etc. are possessed of purgative
properties. Of these the roots of plants, which precede

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. t Chap. XXXIX.

and Jiladuhka (iMaul) trees, the gummy exudation
(Nir>’'^sa) of Hingu plants and L^ksha trees, as well as
salts which are but the saline modifications of earth,
Madya (wines) wliich are but the modified products of
Asava (fermented liquors), and secretions of cowdung, or
cow’s urine which should be understood to mean the
animal excrements, in their crude or natural state, should
be used where errhines are indicated.

Samshamaniya Drugs : — Now we shall
enumerate the names of drugs and substances which
soothe or pacify the deranged humours or principles
of the body involved in any particular disease
(Sanshamanara).

Varta-Samshamana-Varga;— The follow-
ing drugs, viz. Bhadradiru, Kustha, Haridra, Varuna,
Meshshringi, Vala, Ativala, Artagala, Kachhura, Sallaki,
Kuverakshi, Virataru, Sahachara, Agnimantha, Vatsd-
dani, Eranda, Ashmabhedaka, Alarka, Arka, Shatd-
vari, Punamava, Vasuka, Vasira. K^nchanaka, Bhargi,
Karpasi, Vrishchiaali, Pattura, Vadara, Yava, Kola,
Kulattha, etc, and the drugs forming the group of Vid^-
gandhadi-Gana, as well as those belonging to the first
two groups of Panchamula (Mahat and Svalpa), are
possessed of the general virtue of soothing (restoring to
its normal state) the deranged Vata,

Pitta-Samshamana-Varga The drugs
known as Chandana, Kuchandana, Hrivera, Ushira,

dfcip. XXXL^. ] SUTRASTHANAivi. 361

Manjishthd, Payasya, Vid^ri, Shatdvari, Gundra,
Shaivala, Kahlira, Kumuda, Utpala, Kadali, Kandali^
Durv^, Murva, etc. and the drugs forming the groups
of K^kolyddi, SariA'idi, Anjan^di, Utpaladi, Nyigro-
dhadi, and Trina-Panchamula groups generally prove
soothing to the deranged Pittam.

Shleshma^ - Samshamana - Varga

The drugs known as Kaleyaka, Aguru, Tilapami,
Kushtha, Haridra, Shitashiva, Shatapushp^, Sarala,
Rasna, Prakiryy'd, Udakiryyi, Ingudi^ Suman<th,
Kakddani, Langalaki, Hastikarna, Munjrftaka, L^ma-
jjaka, etc. and the drugs belonging to the groups of
Valli and Kantak Panchamulas and those composing
the Pippaly^di-Varga, Brihaty^di- Varga, Mushk^di-
Varga, Vachadi, Surasadi and Aragfwadhddi groups
are generally possessed of the efficacy of restoring
the deranged Shleshma to its natural state.

The choice of a medicine whether for cleansing
or soothing purposes should be detennined by the
consideration of the strength (intensity) of the disease,
and the stamina and the digestive function of the
patient under treatment, A medicine (of a soothing
or Samshamanam efficacy), which is stronger than
the disease it has been applied to combat with,
not only checks it with its own soothing virtue but
usually gives rise to a fresh malady, on account of
its • surplus energy- being not requisitioned into

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clwp, xxxlx.

362

action, nor its being used up by the weakened and
conquered original distemper. It is thus stored up in
the organism for the working of fresh mischief, A
medicine, which proves stronger than the digestive
function of a patient, impairs his digestion, or takes
an unusually greater length of time to be digested
and assimilated into his organism. A medicine, which
is stronger than the physical stamina of a patient, may
bring on a feeling of physical languor, fits of fainting,
loss of consciousness, delirium, etc. Similarly, an over-
dose of a cleansing (cathartic) medicine may work
similar mischief. On the other hand, medicines of
inadequate potencies, and accordingly unequal to the
strength of a disease, as well as medicines in in-
adequate doses fail to produce any tangible effect.
Hence medicines of adequate potencies should be alone
administered in adequate doses.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject : — A prudent physician should prescribe a mild
purgative for a patient enfeebled by the action of the
deranged and accumulated bodily humours and laid
up with a disease in which such a cleansing (cathartic)
or emetic remedy is indicated. The same rule should
hold good in the case of a patient enfeebled through
causes other than physical distempers, and whose
bowels are easily moved, and in whom the
fecal matter, etc. are found to have been dislodged

Chap. XXXIX,] SUTEASTHi>fNAM. 363

from their natural seats or locations. Decoctions
(including extracts and cold infusions of medicinal
herbs) in doses of four Palas weights, and pastes and
powders in doses of two Palas weights, should be
prescribed in a disease of ordinary intensity. Corrective
medicines (Purgatives and Emetics) may be safely
exhibited even in a weak patient with loose or uncon-
stipated bowels, if they are found to be stuffed with a
spontaneous accumulation of fecal matter (Dosha) etc.
inspite of such looseness or easy motion.

Thus ends ihc thirty-ninth Chapter of the Sulrasthdnam in the Sushruta
Sanihiti, which treats of drugs of cleansing (corrective) and soothing
properties.

CHAPTER XL.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which
treats of drugs and their flavours, virtues, potencies
and chemical actions. (Dravya-Rasa-Guna-
Virya-Vipa'ka-Vijnaniya-madhyaryam).

Certain professors of the Ayur\'eda hold that a
medicinal drug or substance is pre-eminently the most
important matter with which the science of medicine is
concerned. First because, a drug, as a substance, has a
definite and continuous e.vistence, which its attributes
(such as, taste, etc.,) do not possess. As for e.\ample
the tastes, etc., which characterise a fruit in its unripe
stage, are not perceived in its ripe or matured condition.
Secondly because, a drug is real (Nitj'a) and invariable,
whereas its attributes are but transitory and accidental
at the best. As for instance the real character of a
drug cannot be destroyed whether it be powdered
or pasted. Thirdly because, a drug or a substance never
can lose its omi generic character. As for example,
a drug possessed of attributes peculiar to the fun-
damental matter, earth, can never be transformed
into one of watery attributes — a truth which does
not hold good of its attributes. Fourthly because,
a drug or a substance is an object of all the five
senses of a man, whereas its attributes of tastes, etc.

Chap. XL.]

SUTRASTHANAM.

365

are respectively accommodated to the faculty of
special sense organs. Fifthly because, a drug or a
substance is the receptacle of the attributes of taste, etc.,
while the latter are the things contained. Sixthly because,
a dictum of medicine can be commenced with the name
of a drug or substance. As for example, it is quite
natural to say that the drugs such as Vidari Gandhd, etc.,
should be pressed and boiled. But it sounds preposterous
to utter that the. sweet taste should be pulverised and
boiled. Seventhlj' because, the greater importance of
a drug or substance has been laid down in the Shastras
of medicines inasmuch as medical recipes have been
described by the names of their component ingredients
such as Matulunga, Agnimantha, etc., and not
described as the tastes of Mdtulunga, Agnimantha etc.
highthh* because, the attributes of tastes, etc., depend
upon the drugs and substances (of which they are the
attributes) for their progressive maturity. As for
example, the taste of a drug or substance varies with
Its growth and is different in its raw (immature) and
ripe (mature) conditions. (Hence a drug is more im-
portant than its attributes of taste, etc.) Ninthly
because, a drug may prove curative through the eflicacy
of one of its component parts or principles as in the
case of Malui\Tiksha, the milky exudations of which
are possessed of therapeutical virtues, which cannot
be said of its taste.

Hence a dnig or a substance (Dra\7am) is tlie most

r Cnjp. XL.

^66 THE SUSHRUTA S.AMHITA'.

important factor (which the science of medicine has got
to deal with). A substance or drug necessarily implies
action and attributes with which it is intimatelj* con-
nected and of which it is the priraaiA' cause, or to put it
more e.xplicitly, these attributes have an inseparable
inherence in and are intimately associated with the
substance b}' way of cause and effect (Samavayi-
Kiranara).

Others, on the contraiTi', who do not endoise
the above opinion, accord the highest importance to
the attribute of taste (Rasa) of a drug or sub-
stance. Firstly because, it is so laid down in the
Agamas (Vedas), which include the science of medicine
(Ajnirveda Shastram) as well, and inasmuch as such
statements as “ Food is primarih' contingent on its
tastes and on food depends life ” occur therein.
Secondl}’^ because, the essential importance of taste
may be inferred from such injunctions or instructions
of the professors of medicine as, “ sweet, acid and
saline tastes soothe or pacify the deranged bodily
Thirdly because, a drug or a substance is named after
the nature of its taste, as a sweet drug, a saline sub-
tance, etc. Fourthly because, its priraar)' importance
is based on the inspired utterances of the hoi}* sages
(Rishis) which form the sacred hymns and verses of the
Vedas, and such passages as sweets to be collected for
the purposes of a religious sacrifice," etc., are to be

ciu).. xi- :

sn'UAiiTll.VNAM.

luuiiil ill them. lienee la>lc is the m<> t impfnt.mt
factor in the ^cic^K■e of mctHciiic and ^^fm^ llie jnimmy
•.vltribnte of a medicinal duivt. But, liter on, we i^liaU
have occasion to sjieaU of that.

Certain authorities however, (who leiect the two
aforesaid theories', hold the poleiivy \ iiyam) ol a
drug to be the most impoitnnl factor in medicine inus-
much as its therapeutic action, ivliellier purgative,
emetic, or botli, or cathartic, or pacifying, or astrin-
gent, appetising, pressing (drawing to a delinilc iiead}
or lupvefacienl, or cousiruciive, tunic (vilali.'-ing)
or aphrodisiac, or inllammalory, ab.sorliing, caustic,
or bursting, or intoxic.Uing, sopurilic, killing or anlito.'cic,
depends upon its potency. The potency of a drug
is either cooling or heat-making owing to the two-
fold (hot and cool) nature of the temperament of
the world. According to several authorities the
potency of a merlicinal drug may be classed as either
hot or cool, emollient or dry, expansive or slimy,
mild or keen, so as to embrace tlie eight difier-
ent attributes in all. These potencies of medicinal drugs
serve their respective functions by overpowering
their (drugs’) tastes with their specific strength (inten-
sity) and virtues. As for example the decoction of
the roots belonging to the group of the Mah4-
Panchamulatn, though possessed of an ' astringent
taste which is subsequently transformed into a bitter

au ), XL 1 SUTUASTIIA'NA.M. 369

expansive potencies, fail to pacify the deranged Vayn,
though otherwise they may prove soothing to that
deranged huinonr. Similarly, tastes, which are or-
dinarily reckoned as pacifiers of the deranged Piltam,
fail to produce that effect in llie event of their being
endued with a keen, light or lieat-making potency.
Likewise, tastes, which are commonly found to soothe
the deranged Kapham, tend to aggravate it in tiie
event of their being possessed of potencies which
are respectively lieavy, coo! and emollient in their
character.* Hence the potency of a drug i.s the most
important factor in the science of medicine.

But certain authorities dissent from the above-said
view, and attach the highest importance to the process
of digestive (chemical) reaction (Vipaka) for the
reason, that all ingested food, properly or improperly
digested in the stomach, proves wholesome or otlier-
wise to the body. Certain authorities on the subject
hold that digestion develops all the several tastes.f

According to others, tastes such as, sweet,
pungent and acid, follow upon the completion of
the process of digestion (by way of reactionary- result
or transformation),

* Flavours such as, sweet, acid and saline, subdue the deranged VYijti.
Tastes such as, sweet, bitter and astringent are anlibilious in their cflicacy,
while those, which are pungent, bitter and astringent, are antiphlegmagogic
in their virtues.

t The process of digestion is followed by a reactionary taste, which may
be either sweet, pungent, acid, astringent, bitter or saline.

47

370

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

[ Chap. XL.

It is needless to say that tlie hypothesis is based
on erroneous data, inasmuch as the fact of acid
digestion (acid taste developed at the close of the
digestive process or reactionary acidity) is contrar}'
both to the properties of matter and tlie collective e.v-
perience of the nice embodied in the dictum of the
Shastras,and which should be rather ascribed to the
acid taste of the Pittam remaining in an undigested
or unassimilated condition owing to imperfect gastric
digestion. The probability of a saline digestion (a
reactionary saline taste following upon the close of
the digestive process) should be necessaril}"- presumed,
if the fact of an acid digestion were to be upheld
as a tested and corroborated principle of medical
science. The hypothesis of an acid digestion (re-
actionar)' acidity) does not preclude the possibility of
a similar saline one owing to the participation of
the natural taste (saline) of the bodily Kapham in
the process of digestion, as is said of Pittam in the
preceding instance. Hence the theory that only three
tastes, such as sweet, acid, and pungent are developed
through digestive reaction, appears to be imtenable, and
naturally points to the doctrine that a sweet taste
(partaken of by a man) brings on a sweet tasted
digestion ; an acid taste (reactionary acidity) begets
acid digestion, and so on, a taste of whatsoever kind
partaken of by a man imparting its specific character to
his digestive reaction.

Qjn. XL,] SUTKASTIIANAM. 371

Those, who adhere to the last nariicd doctrine,
cndeavourlo substantiate it by the iollowin.i^analoyy,and
argue that as milk kept boiling in a basin placed over a
fire does not change its natural sweetness (with the
change of its temperature), as cereals such as Shali-
rice, wheat, barley, Mudga, etc, sown broadcast in
the ground do not part with their inherent, generic
attributes (through their successive stages of develop-
ment), £0 the tastes of food-stun* do not alter
even after being boiled in the heat ol the digcsti\c
organs.

Others, on the contrary, assert that weak tastes
arc naturally merged in the strong ones in the course
of digestion. And since the consensus of expert
opinions on the subject serves only to increase
the confusion on account of their differences and
bigoted antipathy, we shall judiciously refrain from
indulging in idle theories on the subject.

Only two kinds of digestion (digestive reactionarj^
tastes) have been noticed in the Sh^stras, such as,
the sweet and the pungent, the first being heavy
and the second light. The specific properties of
the five essential material principles of the world such
as, the earth, water, fire, air and sky may be roughly
described as heaviness and lightness, the two attri-
butes which appertain to their fundamental natures.
Heaviness forms the characteristic attribute of -earth-

372

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. XL.

and water, while lightness stands for the essential
properties of fire, air and sky. Hence the digestion
of all food-stuff may be described as either heavy
(Guru) 'or light (Laghu).

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject :~Of substances under the process of digestion,
those, which are characterised by attributes, specifi-
cally . belonging to earth and water, are called
substances of sweet (heavy) digestion ; while those
which are permeated wnth the specific properties of
air, fire and sky are called substances of pungent
(light) digestion (easily digestible articles of food).
We have fully stated the text of the controversy
as regards the primary importance of drugs and
their tastes, virtues, potencies and digestive reactions,
as well as the views of those who build their theories
on the separate or exclusive importance of any of
the five afore-said factors. The wise and the erudite
set an equal importance to each of them, and ascribe
the curative efficacy of a medicine to the co-opera-
tion of all these five factors. -A drug or a sub-
stance sometimes destroys or originates a deranged
condition of the humours through the dynamical
action of its native or inherent properties, sometimes
in virtue of its specific potency and sometimes by
natural taste or digestive (chemical) reaction. Digestive
reaction is impossible without drug potency. There is

Ch.li). XL. ]

.SUTRASTIIA'NAM.

373

no potency without u taste, ami taste without a drug
or substance is an absurdity. Hence a substance (vegeta-
ble or otherwise) is the greatest of them all. A taste and
a substance are correlative categories from the time
of their origin, like a body and an embodied
self in the plane of organic e.vistence. Since an
attribute per se can not be possessed of another attri-
bute, the eight kinds of potency (properties) can
only appertain to a substance and not to a taste,
which is an attribute in itself. Substances are digested
in an organic body and not the six tastes simply
for the reason of their being invisible and intangible
in themselves, Hence a substance is the greatest of
all the aforesaid five factors (of substance, taste,
virtues, etc.) and the attributes lie inherent in the
substance.

Unscrutable and unthinkable are the virtues of
drugs (medicines), which are above all rules of
syllogism ; and hence drugs (medicines), which have
been observed to be efficacious from time immemorial,
ns well as those laid doum in the scriptures on
medicines, should alone be used in the course of a
medical treatment. A learned physician should think
it a sacrilege to logically dispute the efficacy of a
medicine of tested virtue, and which has been adopted
after generations of careful obsen^ation and is instinc-
tively pronounced by men as a beneficial remedy.

374

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA.

[ Chap. XL.

No amount of logic will alter the nature of things,
nor persuade the drugs of the Amboshtha group to
exercise a purgative virtue. Hence an intelligent physi-
cian should adhere to the ofiScinal recipes given in the
books on medicine, and not introduce innovations,
however logical or probable, into the realms of
applied or practical Therapeutics.

Thus ends the fortieth Chapter of the SutrasthSnam in the Sushruta
Samhitd, which deals with drugs and their flavours, \irtues, and digestive
(chemical) transformation.

C H A V T K R X L I.

^o\v \vc shall discourse on the Cliaptcr, which
treats of the specific properties of drugs (Dravya-
Vishesha- Vi j Ha'll iya- m ad liyaryam).

The five fundamental principles* such as the earth
(Kshithi), water (Apa), fire (Teja), air (jMarut) and Sky
Oionia) enter into the composition of all substances

the World, and the predominance of any of them in
^ particular substance determines its character.
•Accordingly a thing is denominated as a substance of
‘dominant earth principle, or one marked by a pre-
dominance of fire, air or ether.

Parrti) iva Drug's : — A thing or substance,
^'^ich is thick, pithy, compact, dull, immobile, rough,
hea-\-j' (Hjirj to digest\ strong smelling and largely has
a sweet'taste marked by a shade of astringent, is called
a substance of dominant earth (Parthivam) matter.
Such a thing increases the firmness, strength, hardness
^nd ro^ndity of the human body, and is possessed of
gravity (the virtue of moving the bowels).

Alpyam Drugs J— Similarly, a thing or subs-
tance, which is cold, moist, glossy, devoid of keenness,
takes time to be digested, is mobile, compact, soft,

These may be translated .as Solid, Liquid, Oas, Ether, and Etheriou
in the parlance of modem science.

376 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

[ Chap. XLI.

slimy, sappy^ and is largely endued with an acid, saline
or sweet taste marked by a shade of astringent, is called
a substance of dominant water (Apyam) principle.
Such a thing soothes and imparts a glossy character to
the body, keeps it moist, favours the adhesion of its
parts, and increases its liquid contents.

Taijasam Drugs A thing or substance,
which is heat-making, pungent and keen, subtle in
its essence, permeates the minutest capillaries, and is dr)’’,
rough, light, and non-slimy in its character and has strong
properties and a taste which is largely pungent marked by
a shade of saline, is called a substance of the dominant
principle of fire (Taijasam). Such a thing naturally
evinces an up-coursing tendency in the body, produces
a burning sensation in its inside, helps the process of
digestion and spontaneous bursting (of abscesses),
increases the temperature of the body, strengthens the
eyesight, improves the complexion and imparts a
healthful glow to it.

Varyaviyam Drugs A thing or substance,
which is subtle in its essence, and is dr)’’, rough, light,
cold and non-slimy, increases tactual sensation and
is endued with a largely astringent taste marked by a
shade of bitter, is called a substance of the dominant
principle of air (Vaya'viyam). Such a thing removes the
slimy character of the internal orgam'sm, produces Ught-

Chap.* XU. ] ■ SUTRASTHA'NAM. 37^

ness, dr}’nes3 and emaciation of the body, and increases
the speculative or contemplative faculty of the mind. •

Aka’Shiyam Drugs A thing or sub-
stance, which is smooth, unctuous, and is subtle in
its nature, soft or pliant in its consistency, e.xpansive (in
the internal organism), porous, soundy and non- slimy
in its character without any definite taste, is called
a substance of the dominant principle of sky
(Ak^shiyam). Such a substance produces softness, light-
ness and porosity of the body.

It may be inferred from the foregoing illustrations
that there is not a single substance in the world but is
endued with certain curative virtues. Drugs or
substances, used in specific combinations and according
to the indications of a disease under treatment, prove
curative in virtue of their native virtues and potencies.
The time, during which a drug or a medicine e.xerts its
curative virtues, is called its Kala or the period of
action. That which immediately results from' the use or
application of n' medicinal remedy is called its Karma
or physiological action. The principle, in virtue of which
the action is performed, is called its potency or Viryam.
That, in which the action takes place, is called its
receptacle or Adhikaranam. The means by which it’ is
effected is called its agency or Upiya, while that what
it accomplishes is called its therapentic effect orPhalam.

Of these the drugs of purgative virtue are possessed

48

378 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XU.

of attributes which specifically belong to the earth
and water. Earth and water are heavy, and natur-
ally gravitate downward owing to their heaviness.
Hence it is inferred that purgative drugs are largely
endued with the specific attributes of earth and water,
in virtue of which they are more strongly attracted
towards the centre of the earth (granty). Drugs endued
with emetic properties are possessed of attributes which
fonn the characteristics of fire and air. Fire and air
are light, and naturally ascend upward owdng to their
lightness. Hence it is inferred, that emetic (Vamana)
drugs are largely possessed of attributes, which are
upcoursing in their nature. Drugs or substances endued
with both emetic and purgative virtues are charac-
terised by attributes belonging to both the aforesaid
elements (earth and fire).

Drugs, which soothe the deranged bodily humours,
are permeated with qualities which specifically belong
to the principle of the sky. Astringent (Sangrdhaka)
drugs are endued with attributes, which specifically
belong to the air owing to the drjfing character of the
latter element. Appetising (Dipana) drugs are largely
possessed of attributes which belong to the material
principle of fire. Lekhana (Liquefacient) drugs or sub-
stances are endued with attributes which belong to fire
and air. Constructive or restorative (Vringhanam) drugs
or substances are endued with attributes which sped-

Chip.. .\LI, 3

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

379

fically belong to earth and water. These inferences
should be carefully remembered at the time of prc'
scribing medicines.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject; — The deranged bodily Vavu readily yields to the
curative eflicacies of drugs possessed of attributes,
specificall}' belonging to the earth, fire and water, while
the deranged Pittam is speedily soothed or restored to
its normal state by drugs having attributes, specifically
belonging to the earth, water and air. Similarly, the
deranged Kapham is pacified by drugs possessed of
attributes which characterise the sicy, fire and air.

The bodily V^yu is increased by the use of dntgs
possessed of attributes which specifically belong to the
sky and air, while the Pittam is increased by the use
of those which are largely endued with the specific
attributes of fire. The bodily Kapham of the body
is increased by the use of drugs - which are largely
endued with the specific attributes of the earth
and water. Thus having ascertained the dominant
attributes of drugs, a physician should use them for the
pacification of two or more of the deranged humours of
the body according to the exigencies of a case.

Of the eight-fold potencies of a drug, such as
cooUng, thermogenetic, oleaginous, heavy, parchifying,
plastive, keen and slimy, keenness and thermogenetic

.380

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

f Clmj). XI.I.

potency, should be ascribed to the attributes of
fire ; cooling potency and that of engendering slime,
to the predominance of the attributes of water in a
drug or substance ; oleaginousness, to the predominance
of the attributes of the earth and water ; plastive potency,
to the predominance of the attributes of water and the
sky ; parchifying potency, to the excess of the attributes
of air ; uon-slimy potency (Vaishad)’am), to the predo-
minance of the attributes of earth and air ; and hea^'>"
and light digestion, to the same cause.

Of these, oiliness and thermogenetic potency prove
curative in respect of the deranged Vayu, while cooling
potency, plastive potency, and that of engendering slime
subdue' the deranged Pittain. Keenness, parchifying and
nou-slim}’^ potencies conquer the deranged Kapham.
Substances, which are heavy in digestion, destroy the
deranged Vdjm and Pittam, while those which are light
in digestion (easily digestible substances) prove curative
iii respect of the deranged Kapham.

Of these, softness, coldness and heat may be per-
ceived by touch. The properties of sliminess and its
opposite may be perceived b}' the eyes and touch.
The properties of dr^mess and oibness of a drug
may be perceived with the eyes ; keenness of a drug
from the fact of its producing pain in the mouth ; and
[heat and cold, by the sensation of comfort (pleasure) or
discomfort — A. Text] The fact of heav}^ (insufiffeierit)

SLTUASTHA'XAM

5SI

>hou!(J be inl'cnctl Jrcin the Ijcqucnt,
pa^binj,' of irlool .iiul urine, a.; well as from the espec-
loralion of Kaphain. while the eofilr.irv shotiM he
prcjuincd from the constipation the howcls, rclciUhm
of urine anddisordcis of the ahiloininal V.jyn (latnlciice,
tlislcnsion of the abdomen, ete.l, A sperilie taste is
detected in material principles of similar proper ties.
As for e\ainple, a drtiq or a stibstance, which is heavy
and endued with a .sweet taste, shonhl be deemed as
belonipn;' to the qroup of the earthy matter (lar;;'ely
po£Se.<scd of attributes characterisinf' earth- matter).
Similarly, a substance, which is sweet and oily in its
character, should he lei^arded .as belonfiinj' to one in
which the principle of water predominates.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject Properties, which characterise drugs and
substances, may be as well found in a human organism,
and the nonnal continuance, aggravation or dimi-
nution of the deranged humours is due to the action
of the drugs (substances).

Thai ends ihc forly-firil Clupicr of the Sulriitldium in the Suslintla
Simhitd which trcalj of specific properties of drugs.

CHAPTER XLII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which treats
of the specific properties of flavours (Rasa-
Vishesha-Vijnarniya-madhyaryam).

The properties of sky (Ak^ha), air (Pavana), fire
(Dahana), water (Toya) and earth (Bhumi) are sound
touch, coloiu:, taste and smell, each of the preceding
elements possessing properties less by one than those
of the one immediately succeeding it in the order of
enumeration.*

[Since a matter is designated after the name of
the preponderant natural element, which enters into its
composition], taste is said to be a water-origined prin-
ciple. All material elements are inseparably connected
■\\nth one another, and there is a sort of interdependence
among them, each one contributing to the continuance
of the other and jointly entering, to a more or less
extent, into the composition of all material substances.
This water-origined flavour (Rasa), which becoming mo-
dified through its contact with the rest of the material

*To put it more explicitly the property of sound belongs to the sky
(Akisha). The properties of sound and touch appertain to the air (VdyuJ.
The properties of sound, touch and colour form the characteristics of Fire
(Teja). Sound, touch, colour and taste form the specific properties of
water (Toj-a). Sound, touch, colour, taste and smell mark the earth matter
(Bhumi),

Chip. XLII.]

SUTRASTIIA'NAM.

383

elements, admits of bcin^f divided into six different
kinds, such as sweet, acid, saline, j)ungenl, bitter and
astringent. These, in their turn, being combined with
one another, give rise to sixty- three diflerent kinds.
A sweet taste is largely endued with attributes which
specifically appertain to the material principles of
earth and water. .\n acid taste is pre-eminently possessed
of attributes, which belong to the elementary principles
of earth and fire. A saline taste is mostly endued with
attributes which characterise tlie elements of water
and fire. .A pungent taste is largely possessed of
attributes, which mark the elementar)’ principles of
air and fire. The specific attributes of air and sky
predominate in a bitter taste. The specific properties
of earth and air should be regarded as dominant in an
astringent taste.

Tastes such as sweet, acid and saline are endued
with the virtues of subduing Vayu. Tastes such as
sweet, bitter and astringent are possessed of the virtue
of subduing the deranged Pittam. Tastes such as
pungent, bitter and astringent tend to subdue the
deranged Kaphain.

The Viyu is a self-origined principle in the human
organism. The Pittam owes its origin to the bodily
heat (Agneya), while the origin of Kapham is ascribed
to the presence of watery (Saumya) principle in the
body. Tastes such as sweet, etc. are augmented by

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHif A. L Chap. XLir.

3S'4

caus^ in 'which they have 'thefr ongin,'and prove
soothing or pacifying in respect of causes other than
those which produce them.

. According to certain authorities, there are only two
kinds of tastes, ovnng to the two-fold (hot and cold)
nature of the temperament of the world. Of these
the . tastes such as sweet, bitter and astringent are
cold in their properties, while the pungent, acid and
saline ones e.xercise fiery or heat making virtues. The
tastes such as sweet, acid and saline are hea\y and
emollient in their character, while the pungent,
astringent and bitter ones are dr}’- and tight The
watery (Saumya) tastes are cold. The fieiy (Agneya)
ones are hot.

Coldness, dr}mess, h'ghtness, non-sliminess, suppress-
ion (of the mrine or ordure) form the characterstic
properties of the Vayu. An astringent taste should be
considered as possessed of the same properties as the
Viyu, and hence it (astringent taste) increases the
coldness, dryness, Ughtness, non-sliminess and arres-
tiveness of the latter with its specific coolness, dryness,
lightness, nomsliminess and arrestiveness.

Heat, pungenc)', dryness, lightness, and non-slimi-
ness form the specific properties of the Pittam. A pun-
gent taste, which is possessed of the same properties as
the Pittam, respectively increases the heat, pungency,

Clup. XLri] SUTKASTUA'NAM. 7 , 8 ^

dryness, lightness aiul non-sliininess of the latter with
the help of similar properties of its own.

Sweetness, oiliness, lieavincss, coldness and slimi-
ncss form the specilic jwoperties of Kaphain. A sweet
taste, which is possessed of the same properties as tlio
Kapham, respectively increases tlie sweetness, oiliness,
heaviness, coldness and slimincss of the latter with
the lielp of similar properties of its own. A pungent
taste is endued with properties which are contrary
to those of the Kaphain, hence the sweetness, oiliness,
heaviness, coldness and sliminess of the latter, are
respectively destroyed by the pungency, dryness,
lightness, heat and non-sliininess of the former. These
have been cited only by way of illustration.

Chai'acteristics of Tastes Now we

shall describe the characteristics of tastes. A
taste, which is pleasant, proves comfortable to, and
contributes to the life-preservation of a man, keeps
his mouth moist, and increases the quantity of bodily
Kapham, is called Sweet (Madhura). A taste, which
produces tooth-edge and increased salivation, and
increases the relish for food, is called acid (Amla).
A taste, which imparts a greater relish to food, pro-
duces ^ivation and softness of a part, is called saline
(Lavana). A taste, which produces a burning sensation
at the tip of the tongue attended with a tingling of the
part and headache, and is instantaneously followed
49

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chnp. XLII.

386

by a running at the nose (fluent coryza) is called
pungent (Katuka). A taste, whicli gives rise to
a- sort of sucking sensation at the throat, removes
the slimy character of the cavity of the mouth, gives
rise to the appearance of goose-flesh on the skin, and
increases the relish for food, is called bitter (Tikta).
A taste, which brings about the dryness of the mouth,
numbs the palate, obstructs the throat, and gives
rise to a drawing, pressing sensation in the region of
the heart, is called astringent (Kashdya).

Specific virtues of tastes Now we

shall describe the specific virtues of tastes. Of these,
the sweet taste is possessed of the rirtue of increasing
the quantity of lymph-chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone
marrow, albumen (ojas), semen, and milk in a
parturient woman. It materially contributes to the
growth of bones, strengthens the eyesight, favours
the growth of hair, improves the complexion of the
body, brings about the adhesion of fractured bones
(Sandhanam', and purifies the blood and the lymph-
chyle, Likewise, it proves wholesome to infants,
old and weak men and ulcer-patients (suffering from
Endocarditis — Urah-Kshata) and is most coveted by
bees and ants. It exhilarates the mind as well as
the five sense-organs, relieves thirst, swooning and a
burning sensation of the body, and originates Kapham,
Similarly, it favours the germination of intestinal

Chap.- XLir. '] ; SUTRASTliANAM.

3^7

parasites. Largely and exclusively partaken of, it brings
on cough, dyspnoea, flatulence (Alasaka), vomiting;
sweet taste in the mouth, hoarseness of the voice
(aphonia), worms in the intestines, tumours, elephantisis,
Vasti-lepa (mucous deposit in the bladder), Gudopolepa
(mucous or slimy deposit in the anus), and Abhisandya
(ophthalmia), etc.

Acid taste ; — ^An acid taste should be regard-
ed as a digestant of assimilated food, and is endued with
resolving, appetising and carminative properties. It
sets in the natural emission of flatus and urine,
restores the natural movements of the bowels, lessens the
tendency to spasms, and gives rise to an acid (digestive)
reaction in the stomach, and to a sensation of external
shivering. It originates a slimy or mucous secretion
and is extremely pleasant or relishing. An acid taste,
though possessed of the aforesaid virtues, brings on
tooth-edge, with sudden closing of the eyes, appearance
of goose flesh on the skin, absorption of Kapham and
looseness of the body in the event of its being largely
partaken of to the exclusion of all other tastes. Owing
to its fiery character, the taste imder discussion
sets in a process of suppuration in cuts or bums, or in
incised, lacerated or punctured wounds, as well as
in those, which result from external blows, or are
due to fractures, swellings, or falls, or are brought
about as the after eflects of any idiopathic distemper.

388

THE SliSPiRUTA SAAIHITA. [ ci.ap. XLli.

or which are tainted with the urine of any venomous
animals or througli contact with any poisonous animal
or vermin. It gives rise to a burning sensation in the
throat, chest. and the region of the heart.

Saline taste : — A saline taste is possessed of
corrective (purgative and emetic) virtues, favours the
processes of suppuration and spontaneous bursting of
swellings, brings about the looseness or resolution of an)'
affected part (ulcer), is heat-engendering in its property
and proves incompatible with all other tastes. It
cleanses the internal passages or channels of the
organism and produces softness of the limbs and
members of the body. A saline taste, though possessed
of the aforesaid properties, may bring on scabies
urticaria, oedematous swellings, loss or discolorati on of
the natural comple.xion of the body, loss of virile
potency, distressing symptoms affecting the sense-organs,
inflammation of the mouth and the eyes, hajnioptysis,
Vata-rakta (a kind of leprosy) and acid eructations etc.,
in the event of its being largely partaken of to the exclu-
sion of all other tastes.

Pungent taste A pungent taste is endued
with appetising, resolving (Pachanal and purifying
properties in respect of ulcers etc.), and destroys obesity,
languor, deranged Kaphani and intestinal parasites. It
is antitoxic in its character, proves curative in

Chap. XLli. 1 SUTRASTHANAM.

^89

cases of Kushta (sltin diseases) and itches^ and removes
the stiffness of the ligaments. It acts as a sedative
and reduces the quantity' of semen, milk and fat. A
pungent taste, though possessed of the aforesaid virtues,
may bring on vertigo, loss of consciousness, drjmess
of the throat, palate and lips, burning sensation and a
high temperature of the body, loss of strengtii, tremor,
a sort of aching or breaking pain, and a neuralgic pain
(Vata Shula) in the back, sides and the extremities, etc.
in the event of its being largel}’’ partaken of in exclusion
of all other tastes.

Bitter taste : — A bitter taste seia-^es to
restore the natural relish of a person for food and brings
on a sense of general languor. It is a good appetiser,
and acts as a good purifying agent (in respect of ulcers,
etc.), and proves curative in itches and urticaria.
It removes thirst, swoon and fever, purifies mother’s
nnlk, and is possessed of the virtue of dr 3 ’ing up urine,
ordure, mucous, fat and pus, etc. A bitter taste,
though possessed of the aforesaid properties, may bring
on numbness of the limbs, \\T3--neck, conrailsions, facial
paralysis, violent headache, giddiness, and an aching,
cutting and breaking pain, as well as a bad taste in the
mouth in the event of its being largel)"^ partaken of in
exclusion of all other tastes.

Astringent taste An astringent taste is
possessed of astringent, healing, styptic (Siam-

tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. C ciuip/xi-ir.

o9ci.

bhana), punYying, liquefacient, dtying and contracting
virtues. It lessens secretions from mucous membranes.
An astringent taste, though possessed of the above-
said properties, may bring on the peculiar type of
heart disease known as (Hridroga) parchedness' of
the mouth, distention of the abdomen, loss of speech,
wiy'-neck (Manya Stambha), throbbing or quivering
and tingling sensations in the body with contraction
of the limbs and convulsions, etc.

Now we shall make a general classification of the,
drugs according to their taste.

IVIadhura-Groups The drugs forming the
groups kno^TO as the Kdkolyadi-Gana, as well as
thickened milk. Ghee, lard, marrow, Shdli and Shashtika
rice, Yava, Godhuma, Masha pulse, Shringataka,
Kasheruka, Trapusha, Erv^ruka. Alavu, K.llaukata
Ankalod3'a, Piyala, hushkara, Vijaka, Kdshmar}'a,
Madhuka (Moula), Draksbd, Khaijura, R^jadana, T^la,
Narikela, modifications of the e.xpressed Juice of
Ikshu ("Sugarcane), Vala, Ativald, Atmaguptd, ‘\'’idciri,
P3'ash3'a, Gokshuraka, Kshiraraorata, Madhulika, and
Kushmanda etc. are generall3'’ included within the
Madhura group.

Acid Groups : — The fruits known as
Dadima, Amalaka, M^tuldnga, Amrutaka, Kapittha,
Karamarda, Vadra, Kola, Pr^china-Araalaka, Tintidhi,

Uup. XLlt. 1

SOTUASTHAN'AM.

39 «

Koshaiuni, lihavya, Rir.ivata, Vctraphala, Lakviclia,
Anila-Vetash, DaiitasluUha ami curd, whey, Sura,
Shukta, Sauvira, Tushodaka ami Dhanyainla, etc. are
generally included wiiliin the acid group.

Saline Group The diflerent kinds of
salt such as, Saimlhaba, Sauvarchala, Vida, Pakya,
Roinaka, S^imudraka, Paktrima, Yavaksh.ira (nitrate
of potash), Ushara and Suvarchika collectively form
the Saline group.

Pungent Group : — The component drugs
which fonn the groups known as the Pippalyadi
and the Surasadi-Ganas and Shigru, Madhu-sigru,
Mulaka, Lashuna, Sumukha, Shitashiva (camphor),
Kushtha, Devaddru, Harenukd, Valguja-phalam, Chanda,
Guggula, Mustha, Langalaki, Shukanasa and Pilu etc.
and the components of the group known as Salasaradi
gana collectively fonn the pungent group.

Bitter Group The component members of
the groups of medicinal drugs known as the Arag\'a-
dhddi-Gana and the Guduch)'adi-Gana together with
Mandukparni, Vetra-karira, Haridrd, Ddruharidrd,
Indra-yava, Varuna, Svadu-kantaka, Saptapama,
Vrihati, Kantakdri, Shankhini, Dravanti, Trivrit,
Kritavedhana, Karkotaka, Kdravellaka, Vdrtdka,
Karira, Karavirg, Sumanah, Sankha-pushpi Apdradrga,
Trdyamdnd, ■ Ashoka, Rohinij - Vaijayanti, Suvarchald,

392

TOE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Clup. XLIL

Punarnava, Vrishikali and Jyotishmati, etc. collectively
constitute the bitter group.

Astringent Group : — ^I'he component mem-
bers of the groups known as the Nyagrodhade-Gana, the
Amvashtadi-Gana, and the Pri3'angvadi and the
Rodhradi Ganas^ Triphala, Shallaki, Jambu, Amra,
Vakula, Timduka fruits, Katakha fruits, Shaka fruits,
Pash^abhedaka, the fruits of trees known as the
Vanaspatis (lit : lords of the forest, such as the Vata,
the Ashvattha etc.) and most of the component members
of the group known as the Salasaradi Gana, as well as
Kuruvaka, Ko\iddraka, Jivanti, Chilli, Pdlanka and
Sunishanuaka, etc. and grains and pulse of the Nev^ra
and Mudga species, collectively form the astringent
group.

These tastes, in groups of different combinations,
number sixty-three in all ; as for example, fifteen,
computed by taking two at a time ; twenty, computed
by taking three at a time ; fifteen, computed by taking
four at a time ; si.x, computed by taking five at a time
and six, being severally computed, thus making up an
aggregate of sixty-three.

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject : — The man, who gradually habituates him-
self to the use of each of the six aforesaid tastes,

, Ch.ni. XLII. ]

SUTKASTHA'N’AM.

393

enjoys a sort of iniiminity from their injurious action
in the same manner as, a stroncf man, who makes Iiim-
self successively accustomed to the action ol the
lliree deranged humours of In's body, is not easily
alTected by their pathogeiictie properties.

Tliu> vn.l-, iIk- foiiy-vccoml t li,i i(ir «f llii.' .Suir.islli.tnam in llif S'lisliriil:!
Sainliila, «liicli IumI'. nf llic > K:cilic prnpcnie' nf (Uv.^nr'i.

chapter xliii.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter, which
treats of the mode of administering emetics

(Vamana-Dravya- Vikalpa-Vijnarniya-
madhyaryam).

Of all emetic fhiits the Madana (seeds) should
be deemed as the best (most active). Madana
fruits should be dried in the sun and powdered.
Then a Pala weight (eight tolasl of the powder should
be stirred in a decoction of Pratyakpushpi, Sadct-Pushpi,
or Nimva, and given to the patient ^vith honey and
Saindhava salt, for emesis. As an alternative, a potion
consisting of the powders of raw Madana fruits, stirred
in a decoction of Vakula and Ram}’'aka, and heated in fire,
should be administered with the addition of honey and
rock-salt. A gruel, consisting of sesaraum rice and
powders of green Madana fruits, boiled together, should
be given to the patient. Likewise matured though not
ripe Madana fruits should be stored in a box made of the
blades of Kusha grass. The box should be plastered over
vnth a composition of cowdung and clay and kept buried
in a bushelful of Yava, Tusha, Mudga, Mdsha pulse or
Shdli rice for eight consecutive nights. Then having
extracted them, fully burst out, with the heat of the
covering grain, their kernels should be separated from

Chap. XLIII. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

395

their seeds and dried in the sun. Then having pasted
them with curd, honey and the levigated paste of
sesamum they should be again dried in the sun,
after which they should be kept in a clean vessel. A
Pala weight of the aforesaid prepared powder should be
pounded in a decoction of Yastiinadhu or of any of the
drugs of the Koviddr^di group over night, and given to
the patient on the following morning, through the
medium of honey and Saindhava salt. The patient
should take it looking towards the north or the east, and
the following benedictory Mantra should be recited on
the occasion.

Metrical texts ; -“May the gods Bramha,
Daksha, Ashvis, Rudra, Indra, the earth goddess, the
moon, the sun, the fire, the wind, the concourse of holy
sages (Rishis) and the material elements ^^ith the
curative properties of drugs they originate and nourish,
preserve thee. May the potion prove wholesome to }ou,
as the elixirs prove wholesome to the Rishis, the nectar
to the gods, and ambrosia to the good Aagas.

This emetic medicine should be specially employed
in cases of catarrhal fever, catarrh, and internal abscess.
In case of insufficient or unsatisfactory' action of the
potion, the drugs known as Pippali, ^ acha, and a paste
of Gaura-Sarsapa and Saindhava salt should be added to
it. It should be administered warm and in repeated
doses until the symptoms of \yould fully

THE SUSHRLTA SAAIHITA'. tCl.ap. XLIII.

306

appear. In the alternative, povs-ders of Madana kernels
soaked in and saturated with their decoction and
subsequently dried, should be administered through
the same vehicle (decoction of the Madana kernels) ; or
milk cream boiled with the kernels of Madana fruits
should be administered with honey ; or a barley gruel
made with milk prepared as above should be prescribed
for the purpose. This emetic measure should be
resorted to in cases of Hmraatemesis or in Ha^nionrhage
from the bowels or generative organs and burning
sensation in the heart due to the action of the deranged
Pittum.

Milk, boiled with tiie kernel of a Madana fruit, should
be curdled, and the cream of the curd or the'-tauxl-itself
so prepared sliould be used for emetic purposes in cases
of water-brash, vomiting, syncope and dyspnoea. The
essence (Rasam) of the seed pulps of Madana fruits
should be pressed out and condensed in the manner
indicated in connection with the extraction of oil
(Sneha) of Bhallataka, and the patient should be made
to lick that condensed essence in cases where the
Pittam would be found to Jiave shifted into the
natural seats of Kapham. Sun-dried and pulverised
Madana fruits, mixed with a decoction of Jiranti, may
be administered in its stead.

A decoction of the kernels of Madan seeds (Majja),
saturated with powders of Pippali, Y^di or a potion consist-

ciu .. xf.in, ]

SrTRASTlIA'N’A.M.

397

iiijf oJ same powiler mixed with a decoction of Ximva
or Rupika, siiould lie prescribed in cases of lymplialic
(Kapliaja) diseases due to acts of Santarpanam (use
01 emollient remedies), or the emesis in such cases
should be elTected with a decoction of Madliukam,
Kashmari and Dnlkslia' saturated with the aforesaid
powder. Thus the emetic remedies made of Madana
Iruiis are discharged.

Pulverised Jimutalca tlowers may be used in the
same manner and through the same medium or with
die same adjuvants and for same purposes, as the
preceding (Madana fruit). Jimutaka Iruits should be
pulverised in their raw or unripe state and dried in
the sun, and a gruel made with milk boiled with the
same powder should be given to a patient for emesis ;
or milk-cr^m, boiled with the powder of Jimutaka fruits
(lit flowers*) powdered in their mature or hardened
(Romesha) state, should be given ; or the surface cream
of milk boiled with the powders of full grown (Aroniasha),
greenish yello\v Jimutaka fruits, or a Sura (wine) made
of their decoction should be prescribed. These emetic
remedies should be used in cases of disinclination for
food through the action of deranged Kapham (l 3 'mphatic
derangements), cough, dyspnoea, jaundice and in phthisis
as well, like the compounds of Madana fruits described

Fruits include flowers.

398

THE .SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLin.

before. Mature Kutaja or Kritavedhana fruits may
be used for emetic purpo.ses in similar combinations
and through similar mediums as the Madana fruits
described before. Powders of Ikshrfku fruits (Kushiima),
■similarl}^ prepared with milk, curd, etc., may be used
for emetic purposes in cases of cough, asthma, vomiting
and non-relish for food due to the action of deranged
Kapham (lymphatic disorders).

The emetic compounds of Dhrfm^rgava flowers
are identical with those .of the kernels of Madana
fruits, the former being regarded as specifically indicated
in cases of chemical poisoning, Gulma (internal gland),
abdominal dropsy, cough, asthma, as well as in diseases
due to the action of deranged Kapham (lymphatic
disorders). The pulps or kernels of Ivritavedhana seeds
should be soaked in the expressed juice of emetic
drugs and subsequently reduced to powder. The
powder, so prepared, should be strewn over an
Utpala or any other flower and the patients should be
made to smell it in the case where the Kapham would
be found to have changed its seat with the bodily
V^yu. Likevnse, in cases of excessive derangement of
the bodily humours, the patient should be given a
stomach ful of barley gruel and then made to eject the
contents of his stomach by causing him to smell such a
medicated flower. Stemutatoric (Shiro-virechanam) or
emetic or purgative drugs prove most efBcacious after

Ch,l;\ XI.III.

SUTRASTHAN'AM.

399

being soaked in or saturated with tlic expressed juice of
their own.

Authoritative verses on tlie sub-
ject : — Tiius a genera! dulline ol tlie leading
characteristics of the emetic drugs in general has been
given. .\n intelligent physician should choose an
emetic reinedj' in consideration of the season ol the
year and the strength of the dise.ase, and should try to
set in the process of ejection in a patient either with
the help of the expressed juu'e, paste or powder ol
the prescribed drug duly administered through the
medium of an article of foorl or drink, or through an
electuar}'.

ThuicmU ilwforu-ti.ira (luptcr of ihc .Sulf.ialiSjum in the Sushrula
S.xnihili which dcaU viiiti ili'.- clioici- nml ij{ .ulminlitfrin;; cmclics.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Xow we shall discourse on tlic Chapter, Avhich
treats of the choice of purgatives (Virechana-
Dravya-Vikalpa - Vijna'niya - maclhya'-
yam.)

Metrical Texts Of the purgative roots,
the roots of reddish Trivrita should be deemed the
most effective. The barks of Tilvaka and the fruit
known as Haritaki are the most potent of all
purgative barks and fruits. Similarly, the oil of
castor seeds (Eranda-Taila), the expressed juice of
Kavavellika and tlie milky exudations of Sudha plant
are the most effective of all such purgative oils, ex-
pressed juices and milky exudations of plants, etc.
These drugs or substances form the principal purgative
remedies (in our phannacy), and we shall discuss the
mode of their administration in successive order.

A purgative remed)' consisting of the sound and
matured roots of Tri^Titam, soaked in the expressed
juice of the principal purgative drugs and subsequent!}’-
pulverised and mixed with a considerable quantity of
Saindhava salt and powdered Xagara, should be
administered through the medium of curd or sour
rice gruel, etc. to a patient, suffering from a disease
due to the derangement of the bodily Vajai.

asp. xr.iv ]

SUTRASTllA'N’AM.

401

The same powder mixed with modifications of sugar-
cane juice (such as treacle, sugar etc.), oi with
decoctions of drugs belonging to the Madhunidi group
(Kdkolyddi-gana), or with milk, should be prescribed
for a patient laid up with Pittaja distemper. In
diseases due to the deranged action of the Kapham the
same powder should be administered with a decoction
of Guduchi, Arishta or Triphala, or with the addition
of pulverised V)'osha and cow’s urine.

One part of the same powder ( Trivrit), mixed with one
part of old treacle and the drugs known as Trivarnaka,
and Trj’ushana, should be administered for purgative pur-
poses in a disease (due to the concerted action of the
deranged Vdyu and Kapham). As an alternative, a
Prastha mea sure (four seers) cf the decoction of the
Trivrit roots, mixed with a Kudava measure (half a seer)
of their paste, and a Karsha (two tolas) weight of
Saindhava salt and Xagara, and boiled together, and then
formed into a condensed compound should be used ; or
one part of the paste of the same roots, mixed with half
a part each of rock-salt and powdered Ndgara, should
be administered through the vehicle of cow’s urine. A
compound consisting of one part of each of the following
drugs viz., powdered Trivrita roots, Ndgara and Haritaki,
and a half part of each of such drugs as powdered
Mancha, Devad^ru, Vidanga and ripe Puga nuts,
mixed ^with rock-salt, and administered through

51

402

THE SUSHRl^TA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XLIV .

the medium of cow’s urine, should be considered as an
effective purgative (in diseases of whatsoever type).

Powders of purgative drugs taken in adequate
measures and soaked in their own juice should be
boiled M*ith their roots and made into pills (Gutikd)
kvith clarified butter and administered as occasion
would arise. .\s an alternative, powders of pur-
gative drugs pasted rrnth clarified butter boiled
with their roots should be made into boluses, and
the intelligent physician should administer them
through the medium of clarified butter, prepared as
above, whenever necessary. A quantity* of treacle
should be kept boiling over an oven, and a (hall part) of
the pu'verised purgative roots should be cast into it, a
little before it is completely boiled. Then the basin should
be taken off the fire, and powders of aromatic drugs
known as Trijdta strewn over it, and the compound sub-
sequently made into boluses (Gutika) of adequate size
according to the requirements of the case under treatment.

One part of any of the pulverised purgative drugs
(such as the Trivrit roots, etc.) should be boiled with
four parts of their own decoction, and one part of pow-
dered wheat steamed in the fumes of a separate quantity
of a similar boiling decoction, should be pounded with a
quantity of clarified butter boiled and prepared with

* The quantity of old treacle should he equal to the aggregate weight of
the other drugs in the compound under similar circumstances.

Chap. XLIV. ] SUTRASTHA'NA.Nf.

the same decoction. Then havini' cooked a quantity of
thin treacle in a separate utensil, powders of wheat
and purgative drugs prepared ;is above, should be
cast into it, immediately before l)eing completely
cooked, and the vessel should be taken down from
the oven and allowed to cool. Then tliis confection
(Modaka) should be perfumed with aromatic drugs
and regarded as ready for use. In short, this purgative
Modaka is good food as well.

Purgative preparations of IVIudga,
etc. ; — ^The soup of Mudga pulse saturated with the
decotion of a purgative drug, and taken with clarified
butter and rock salt, acts as a good purgative as well.
Similarly, soups of other pulses (such as the Musara,
etc.) soaked in a decoction of any of the purgative
drugs and drunk with the aforesaid adjuvants, exert
purgative virtues. Drugs possessed of emetic properties
may be used through the preceding media of pulse-
soups as well.

A bit of sugar-cane should be longitudinally split,
and then paste ofTribhandi should be placed in its
middle ; then it should be tied up (with the blades of
Kusha grass), and plastered over with a coat of clay, and
inserted in a gentle fire of dung cake. After that, it
should be taken out of the fire, fully roasted ; the juice
squeezed out and cooled, would prove a good purgative
to a patient laid up with a. Pittaja distemper.

404

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. f aap. Xr.IV.

A compound consisting of equal parts of sugar and
powdered Ajagandha, Tvaklcshiri, Vidari and Trivrit and
licked with honey and clarified butter, proves curative
in a fever with thirst and a burning sensation of the
body.

A compound consisting of one part of pulverised
Trivrit and a quarter part each of the drugs known as
Tvak, Patram and Maricha, and administered with
an adequate quantit}-^ of hone}' and sugar, should be
regarded as a good purgative for delicate persons,

A Pala weight of sugar should be boiled with a half
Kudava weiglit of honey, and Trivrita powders to the
weight of a quarter part (of the combined weight of
honey and sugar) should be added to the boiling
compound at the later part of the cooking. The
remedy should be administered cool, and looked upon
as a good purger of Pittam.

A compound consisting of equal parts of pow-
dered Trirat, Shy^m^ (Vriddha-Daraka), Yavakshiira,
Shunti and Pippali, and taken with honey, acts as
one of the most effective purgatives in diseases due
to the action of the deranged Kapham,

Over-ripe Pathya, Kishmari, Dh^tri, Dadima and
Kola fruit taken with their seeds or stones, should
be boiled (with a quantity of water weighing
sixteen times their combined weight). The decoc-
tion thus obtained should be boiled with (castor)

Clap. XLIV. 1

SUTU/XSTII/ifNAM.

405

oil, and the juice of Amlaphahi etc. (to the wci^lit of a
quarter part thereof), should be added to it. The
whole should be boiled together until reduced to a
considerable consistence. The powders of the three
aromatic drugs (Trisugandha) and Trivrit* should be
then added to it, which shoukl be adniinistered to a
patient as an electuary with honey. This remedy
will prove a good purgative in respect of a delicate
person of Kaphaja temperament.

A compound, consisting of one part of powdered
Nili fruit, one part of powdered Tvak and lila, and
two parts of pulverised Trivrit, and mi.vcd with an
adequate quantity of sugar, and taken with honey
and the juice of Amlaphalam, should be regarded as a
purgative remedy possessed of the virtue of destroying
the concerted action of the three deranged humours
of the bod3^

A compound, consisting of equal parts of powdered
Tri\Tit, Shyam^ (Vriddhadaraka), Pippali and Triphald
and made into a confection (Modaka) (with the addition
of honey and sugar), should be regarded as one of the
most potent cures (purgatives) for Sdnnipata (simul-
taneous derangement of the three ^^tal humours),
hccmoptysis and fever,

A compound consisting of three parts of Trivrit,

* The weight of honey and pulverised Trivrit should be equal to a
fourth part of the entire quantity of inedicine taken at a time.

^o6 the SUSHRUTA SAMPHTA. [ Chap XLIV.

one part of Triphald, one of Yavakshara, one of
Krishna (Pippali), and one of Vidanga, pounded
together and used as an electuary with the addi-
tion of honey and clarified butter, or made into
boluses (Gutikii) with treacle, proves curative in
cases of enlarged spleen, in Gulmas due to the action of
the deranged Kapham and Vayu, in Halimaka .Chlorosis),
as well as in cases of abdominal dropsy, etc. The
present remedy (purgative) is one of the most harmless
purgative compounds (of our pharraacopcefa). A pur-
gative compound consisting of Shy^ma (Vriddhadaraka),
Trivrit, Nili, Katvi, Mustd, Durilabhd, Charya, Indra-
yava and Triphala, administered through the vehicle
of clarified butter, essence of meat, or water, is com-
mended to persons of dr}' temperament.

Preparations of Purgrative Asavas
(Wines): — ^AIl purgative drugs* should be duly
boiled in water. Three parts of the decoction thus
prepared should be mixed with two parts of cold
powdered barley (Phanitara) and again boiled over a
fire. Then after boiling it, it should be taken down
from the oven, cooled and poiured into a pitcher
previously coated inside nith a special plaster.f Then
according to the difference of the season (cold or hot),

* Several authorities exclude the pLant known as Sudhd (Manasd),
while others stick to Trivrita alone in exclusion of all other drugs.

t A new earthen pitcher is first washed with water and dried in the
shade. Then its inside is coated with a plaster of honey and powdered
Pippali and is fumigated tvith the fumes of Aguru (Eagle wood).

Chap. XLIV. 1

SUTRASTilA-NAM.

.}07

the pitcher should bo kept buried in a heap
of paddy for a month, or a fortnight. It should
be taken out and understood to be ready for use
as soon as it would emit a winy or fermented
odour. Asavas (fermenting liqiunirs) of animal urines
and alkaline substances should be likewise prepared
in the foregoing niaiiner.

Preparations of purgative rice Surar
(Wines) etc. Quantities of Masha pulse and Shall
rice should be respectively first soaked and washed in a
decoction of purgative roots. Then they should be dried
and pounded together and made into balls, which should
be subsequently dried in the sun and again pulverised.*
Alter that a separate quantity of Sliali rice steamed
in the vapours of the aforesaid decoction, and kept
apart, should be made into cakes. Then three parts
of these, cakes should be mixed Avith one part of the
aforesaid powdered ball. The compound thus obtained
should be soaked in an adequate quantity of that
purgative decoction previously kept apart in an earthen
pitcher of the plastered type, described before. The Sura
should be deemed ready for use, as soon as it would
emit the peculiar honey-like smell. Surrfs of emetic
drugs should be likewise made in the same manner.

Preparations of purgative Souvira-
(Barley Wines) : — Trivrit roots and drugs

For imparting to it the nccesaaiy Enzyme,-

4oS 'i'HE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chsp. XLIV,

belonging to the groups of Vidarigandha and major
Panchamulain, as well as Murv-a, Sh^mgasht'b Sudha,
Haimavati, Triphal^, Ativisha and Vaclia should
be mixed together and then set apart in two
equal parts. A decoction should be made of one of
them, Avhile the other should be reduced to a state
of powder. .After that, a quantity of well thrashed
and huskless barley should be soaked in the aforesaid
decoction for seven days, and should be subsequently
dried and fried a little. Tlien three parts of the
latter and one part of the aforesaid powder (powdered
Trivrita roots etc.) should be mixed together and soak-
ed in the aforesaid cold decoction of those drugs.
The nuxture should be then kept into an earthen
pitcher of the foregoing type and administered in ade-
quate doses as soon as the characteristic winy smell
of the mixture (Jdtarasa) would be detected. The pre-
paration is called the purgative Saurnrakam.

Preparations of purgative Tusho-
dakam (fermented liquors of barley Avith husks): — The
drugs enumerated in connection Avith the foregoing
preparation should be mixed together and diAuded in
halves and kept in tAVO separate vessels. One half of
the mixture should be AA'ell- thrashed and tied up in a
piece of clean linen AAdth a quantity of unthrashed
barley in husks and should be boiled Avith a decoction
of Ajashringi in a separate basin. Then barley in husks

Clup. KLIV, )

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

409

slu)ukl be jojninitcd iVtim ihc rest t)rilic t'Mm[H)Uunts ot
the mixture after it lias been llioroiij^hly enoked. Then
three parts of these barley ;^n»ins i-ubsciiueiitly thnished
should be agiiin soaked in their decoction, and a fourth
part of the aforesaid pulverised drug's >ucij as the roots
of Trivrit, etc.) should l)e added to it, and the entire
mixture should be kept in an earthen pitcher of
the before mentionc<l type. This preparation is called
Tushodakani (lit : Washings of husks , and should be
used as soon as the characteristic smell of fermentation
(Jatarasa) would be emitted from the pitcher. The
processes of preparing Sauvirakam and Tushodakani
have been described. They should lie used after the
exinr}' of six or seven nights from the date of their
being in the pitcher.

The rules and processes regarding the preparation
of Trivrit compounds hold good in cases of similar pre-
parations made of tlie rest of purgative drugs (such
as, Danti, Dravanti, etc.)

The roots of Danti and Dravanti should be first
pulled up and collected, after wliich they should be
dried in the sun. After that, they should be mixed with
honey and pasted Pippali and placed in a box of Kusha
grass firmly tied up and plastered with a layer of cla}\
The box should be put into a fire of dried cowdung
cakes. The compound inside the plastered grass box
should be cooked according to the process of Putap4ka,

52

410

THE r^USHRL'TA 5AMHITA. f Chi?-

and should be taken out and used in diseases due to
the action of the deranged Kaphani and Pittain and in
combination and through vehicles describetl in connec-
tion with the purgative compounds of Trivrit.

Pastes -Kalkas) and decoctions of Danti and Dra-
vanti should be boiled with clarified butter, and Chakra
Tailam (sesamum oil pressed in an oil mill). The clarified
butter, thus cooked and prepared, would prove curative in
cases of Er}-5ipe]as, Kaksha, burning sensation of the
body and Alaji, while cases of llelia, Gulma, retention
of flatus, (kapham) and obstruction of the bowels
would prove amenable to the oil above described.
Diseases due to the retention of urine, semen and
VaNTi or fecal matter readily \ield to one of tlie four oily
substances ''Chatuh-sneha, oil, clarified butter, lard and
marrow) cooked and prepared w'th tlie paste and
decoction of Danti and Dravanti.

A compound consisting of Danti, Dravanti, Maricha,
Kanakahvaya, Yavasaka, Vishva-veshaja, !Mrid\Tk.<,
and Chitraka powdered together and successive!}* soaked
in cow's irrine for seven days, should be administered
for purgative purposes, through the medium of clarified
butter. A diet of powdered barley, stirred in honey,
should be given to the patient after the assirailarion of
the abovesaid medicine. Diseases such as indigestion,
pain at the sides, jaundice, enlargement of the spleen
as well as those due to the combined action of the

Chi;,. XLIV. )

SUTUASrn.VNAM.

4»I

ilorani;ctl Kapluuu ainl Piltatn readily yield lo the
curative cOicacy of this pur>;ativc rcmc<ly.

iwcnly pulverised PalhyJs mixed with the powders
ol Dauti and Chiiraka roots, each weiithiu^t a I’ala in
weight, as well as with two tola weights each of
powdered Pippali and Trivrit, should he cooked
with eight pala weights of treacle. I'he com-
pound thus prepared should be made into ten large
balls ol confection (Modaka), each of which should he
taken on every tenth da}'. Warm water should be used
for drinking and bathing purposes while using the medi-
cine, which does not entail any strict regimen of
conduct (as non-exposure lo cold wind, etc,). It proves
curative in dysentcr}', jaundice, pile and cutaneous
aflfections and subdues the three deranged humours of
the body.

Trivridarshtaka : The nine following drugs,
viz. Trikatu, Trijata, Musta, Vidanga and Amalaka
taken in equal parts, and eight parts of Trivit, and two
parts of Danti roots should be separately pulverised and
sieved through a piece of thin linen. The powders thus
prepared should be pounded together and mLxed with
six parts of sugar and a little quantity of honey and
rock salt." Cold water should be given to the patient
after he had taken the medicine, which proves curative

• The term little (Ishat) in the present instance stands for a quarter
part.

413 .

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLIV.

in. colic pain in the bladder (Vasti-Shula), thirst, fever,
vomiting, anasarca (Shotha), chlorosis and vertigo. It
does not entail any strict regimen of conduct like otlier
purgatives and acts as a good eliminator of poison, Tlie
compound is called the Trivridashtakam and is specially
recommended in Pittaja affections. Persons, suffering
from diseases due to the action of the deranged Pittam
and Kapham, should take the medicine through the
vehicle of milk. The medicine should be prescribed
for rich persons, om'ng to its dietetic character.

Purgative barks The e.vternal skin of the
Lodhra bark, to the exclusion of its inner lining, should
be taken and, pulverised. The porvder, thus prepared,
should be dirnded into three equal parts, two of which
should be soaked in a decoction of the same (Lodhra)
bark and filtered twenty-one times according to the
process laid down in connection with the preparation of
alkalis- The remaining third part of the powders should
be soaked in the aforesaid filtered decoction and
subsequently dried in the sun, and again soaked in a
decoction of the drugs, which collectively go by
the name of Dashaniulam. The medicine should be
prescribed in forms (wines, electuaries, etc.) pre-
viously described in connection with the TrhTit
compounds.

The mode of preparing and administering purgative
medicines out of barks endued with similar \drtues has

>p.xLiv,j: , • sutrastha'nam; ’ ' 413

been described. We shall presently deal with those
made with purgative fruits.

' Fruit Purgatives : — Sound and stonelcss
Haritakis administered in the way of Trivrit com-
pounds prove curative in all forms of disease and
in malignant sores and internal abscesses. They are
the best of elixirs and improve the intellectual
faculties. Hsuitaki and Vidanga, as well as rock salt,
Nagaram, Trivrit and Maricha mixed in equal parts
and taken with cow's urine, act as good purgatives.
Similarly, powdem of Haritaki, Bhadra-ddru, Kushtham,
Pu^-phalam, Saindha\’a salt and Shringaveram taken
through the medium of cow's urine, act as good purga-
tive. For purgative purposes, a man should lick a com-
pound consisting of the powders of Xilini fruits, Negara,
Abhaya and treacle and subsequent!}- drink a good
draught of wann water. A compound composed of
Haritakis pasted with a decoction of the drugs con-
stituting the group of Pippalyddi and a bit of
Saindhava salt, exerts an instantaneous purgative action.

Haritakis eaten with Ndgaram or treacle and with
a bit of rock salt added to it, is an excellent stomachic.
The specific virtue of Haritaki consists in restoring the
normal condition of the bodily Vayu (laxative), in
rejuvenating an used up or exhausted frame, and in
soothingly invigorating the sense organs. Haritaki
destroys all diseases, which are due to the use of

414

'I*HE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ciup. XLIV.

sweet or riclily cooked dishes (Santarpaiiani) such as,
thirst, etc. Amalakain is cooling, and refrigerent ; it sub-
dues Pittain and Kaphain and is antifat in its virtues.
Anbhitakani is cooling ; it subdues Pittain and Kaphani,
The group of medicinal fruits known as the Tripliala
consists of Haritaki, Amalakain and Vibliitakam, which
are collectively marked by an acid-astringent taste with
a shade of bitter and sweet. Powdered Triphalri
regularly taken with clarified butter of a three quarter
part of its own weight acts as a regular panacea and
is endued with a rejuvenating virtue.

All fruits possessed of purgative properties,
should be used in the manner described in connection
vinth Haritaki with the e.vception of Chaturangulas. The
Cbaturangula fruit should be collected in the proper
season, and then kept buried for a week in a bed of
sand. After that, they should be unearthed and dried
in the sun, and their stones or seeds (lit. marrow) should
be taken out. Then the essential oil of the seeds
should be e.xtracted by pressing them in an oil- mill like
the seeds of sesamum, or b}^ boiling them with water
(hot e.vpression). The oil is a good purgative for a
child up to its twelfth year.

Hot water taken after having licked a compound
consisting of Castor oil saturated with powdered
Kushtha and Trikatus, acts as a good purgative. Castor
oil taken with a decoction of Triphalas, double its own

Chap. .KLIV. ]

SUTKASTHA'NAM.

415

measure, or with milk or extract of meat, acts as a
good purgative, which should be prescribed for infants,
old men, or persons debilitated from the effects of
ulcer cachexia, or of delicate constitution,

I have finished describing the preparation and appli-
cation of fruit purgatives. Xow hear me, O Sushruta,
discourse on similar milky exudations of plants and
trees, etc. which are possessed of purgative properties.
The milky juice of a Sudhd plant is the strongest
of all purgatives, which being imprudently used
by a medical ignoramus, may be attended with
dangerous consequences, while the same in the hands
of a judicious physician proves strong enough to dis-
integrate a mighty accumulation of deranged humours
and to successful!}' combat many an irremediable dis-
temper.

One part of the decoction of each of the drugs
constituting the group of major Panchamulam and
Vrihati, etc. should be mixed with one part of the milky
juice of a Sudha plant (thus forming an eighth part of
the whole compound). After having boiled it over
a charcoal fire, the compound should be taken mth
two Tola (kola) weights of any acid liquid (such as wine,
sour rice gruel, cream of curd, etc.) in the manner of
Trivrit compounds. A gruel made of rice saturated with
the milky exudation of a Maharaksha, or a sweetened,
porridge-like preparation of the same substance (Utka-

4i6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chap.XLIV.

rilca) made; with treacle, should be deemed as possessed
of purgative projrevlies. As an aUernative, an electuary'
composed of sugar, clarihed butter and the milky juice
of a Snuhi plant, sliould be used for purgative purposes.

Powders of Pippali soaked in the milky juice of
the same plant should be used with rock salt for moving
the bowels. Powdered Kampillakam made into boluses
witli Snuhi juice may be as well prescribed for the same
end, Powders oif Saptala, Shankhini, Danti, Tri\Tit and
kernel of Aragvadham, should be saturated with cow’s
urine and then soaked in the milky juice of a Snuhi
plant successively for seven consecutive days,* A smell
of the jjowder thus prepared and strewn over the
flower-garlands, and clothes worn by a man whose
bowels are easily moved, acts as a mild purgative.

The use and preparation of purgative remedies
concocted until roots, barks and milky exudations of
plants, etc. have been described, which should be
prescribed after carefully considering the nature of
the case under treatment and according to their specific
indications.

A compound consisting of three Shana weights
(one tola and a half) of powdered TriATit, three

* The mode of preparing the jxirridge is as follows : — First the wheat
should be saturated with the milk}- juice of a Maha-Vriksha and then
macerated. The powder should be then cooked with miU and treacle and
made into a thick porridge. • •

ChAp. Xl.iv. ]

.SUrUASTilAXAM.

p:

SlUna wciglils of powactcd Tiiidiall pulji. ajul Utt<c
Shina weights of powilcicd 1 ipj ah

Va\-akslUra, mixed ami pt>muK«l logclhcr, rloodd U;:

licked with huiicv and chuilied biUtcT, ‘>r they luni.d

be made into a confection with treacle for jmigativc
pur^ioses. The medicine does not entail ativ ijiM
regimen of diet and conduct. It is one o! the m,o-t
effective remedies (of our jiliarm.tcopo-.’a) and jirove-
curative in Gulinas, enlargemctil of the •■plccn, com.'h,
Halimakam (chlorosis), noii' relish for foinl aval
in diseases due to the action of the <lcian;;cil
Kapham and Vdyu. .V wise and intelligent phy.-ician
should administer purgative medicines thiongh the
vehicles of clarified butler, oil, milk, Madya twine-
cow’s urine, meat essence, or through the exprcised
juice of drugs, or through articles of food, or in
forms of electuary. The six kinds of purgalir cs are
the milky exudations, expressed juices, pastes, rlecoclions,
cold infusions and powders of medicinal drugs or
herbs, and each of these preceding factors should he
deemed stronger than the one immediately following
it in the order of enumeration.

Thus ends the forty-fourth Chapter of the Sutrasihinam in the Sushmu
Samhiifi, which treats of the choice of purj^alivcs.

Chapter xlv.

Now \ve shall discourse on the Cliapter, which
deals with the rules to be observed in respect of liquid
substances in general (Drava-Dravya-Vidhi-
madhyafyam).

Water Group : — Atmospheric, or rain water
is possessed of a non-patent taste. It is ambrosial
in its nature, pleasant and beneficial to life. It is
enlivening,* * * § inn'gorating or strength-giving, f re-
frigerent, frigorific, antipyretic, anti-hj-pnotic, and
conquers vertigo, drowsiness and fits of fainting.
It is most wholesome to the human body. After
having fallen upon the surface of the earth it acquires one
of the sis different tastes according to the nature
of its receptacle such as, a river, or a Nada (a river
with a masculine name), a pond, a tank
a Kupa §, a Chunti (1, a fountain, an Artesian
spring a Vikira H, fallow land (Kedar), or a pond
covered over with a growth of aquatic plants

* Enlivens the Ixxly during fits of turning and such like cases,

t Imparts strength to the exh-austed or emadated frames.

t A tank or a large well with its sides protected by buttresses of
masonry work.

§ A well with flights of masonry stepjs descending to its bottom.

S An ordinary well, unprotected by buttresses and unprovided with
steps.

^ A flow of subterranean water dug out of a bed of sand-

Ch.ip.XLY.) SUTKASTHANAM. 419

(Palval.i). Certain authorities maintain that iicavenly
or atmospheric water havinif I'allen on ,1 red, brown;
grey, yellow, blue or white coloured soil, respectively
assumes a sweet, acid, saline, pungent, bitter or an
astringent taste. I 3 ut the theory is not a sound
one in as much as the comparative predominance
of the attributes of the live material principles in
a particular soil detennines the taste of the water
contained therein. Water, cont.'iined or collected in
a soil marked by a predominance of the attributes
of earth-principle, acquires an acid and saline taste.
Water, contained in a soil marked by a predominance
of the attributes of fire, acquires a bitter and pungent
taste. Water, contained in a soil marked by a pre-
dominance of the attributes of air, acquires an
astringent taste! The sky is devoid of all tastes, and
hence, the water contained in a soil, which is largely
possessed of the specific attributes of that element,
is characterised by the absence of any taste whatever.
Only the last named kind should be used for drinking
purposes where atmospheric water would not be
available.

Atmospheric water (Antariksha Jalani), in its
turn, may be divided into four classes such as,
rain water, hail water, frost water or dew, and
snow water, of which the first is the best for its
lightness. Rain water may be divided into two
classes such as tie Gangam and the S^mudram,

420

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA'.

[ Chap. XLV.

according as the rain-cloud is charged with vapours
evaporated from the bosom of the Ganges or the sea.
Gangetic rain generally descends in the month of
Ashvina, but both kinds should be subjected to a
test. The test in the case of Gangam rain water
consists in exposing to it, for a Aluharta (fort5’-eight
minutes), a quantity of undiscoloured Shali rice in a
silyer bowl which is not extremely softened by boiling.
To ascertain whether it is Gangetic rain water or not,
Gangetic rain water should be ascertained from the
fact of the aforesaid Shali rice not being in an}' way
affected in its colour ; whereas a change in its
colour, under exposure, as well as the fact of its
being formed into shreddy or seedy balls mi.xed with
slimy secretions, would indicate that the rain water had
been formed of the vapoins of the sea .Simudram), and
should be regarded as extremely unwholesome. Rain
water from a cloud entirely formed of sea-vapours and
collected in the month of Ashrina, is as wholesome
as what is technically known as Gangetic rain water,
but the latter is the best of the several kinds of atmos-
pheric water.

The means of collecting atmospheric (rain) water
is as follows : — broad piece of clean and white
b’nen should be hung out in the open air, (with a stone
placed across the middle to dip its centre of gravity).
The rain water thus collected should be kept in a

Ch.ip. XLV. j

SUTUASTHA'NAM.

421

vessel. As ail akcnialivo, rain water llowinj' from
tlie waterspouts of a house should be collected
in a clean receptacle, and subseciuentl}' jioured into
a golden, silver or an earthen vessel. The water thus
collected can lie taken at all times, and may be
substituted by any other terrestrial water in the
event of its not being available at the time.

Terrestrial water is generally marked by a pre-
dominance of the specific properties of the sky, and
admits of being grouped (under seven sub-heads such
as, well-water, river-water, lake-water, tank-water,
fountain water, spring (.Artesian) water, and Chunti (well
unprovided with masonry steps) water. Atmospheric
or spring water should be used for their high eflicacy
during tlie rains (Varshu). All kinds of water may be
used in Sharat on account of their clearness. Lake or
tank water should be used in Hemanta ; well and foun-
tain water, in spring* (Vasanta) and summer ; and
Chunti water, as well as all water not of recent origin,
nor due to an e.xcessive down-pour or inundation,
should be used during Prdvrit.

Wletrical Texts ; — He falls an easy victim to
internal and external diseases (cutaneous affections),
etc., who drinks of or bathes in a pool of water,

* The “ rains ” in the present passage should be interpreted to mean
the end of the rainj’ season or the month of Ashvina, and not the montlj of
Bh5dra, as its use is specially forbidden in that 'month.

422

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. XLV.

which is full of poisonous worms, or is saturated
with urine or fecal matter, or is defiled witli germs
of vermin or decomposed animal organisms, or is
covered over with the growths of aquatic plants, or
is strewn over with -wathered and decomposed leaves,
or . which in any way is rendered poisonous and
contaminated, as well as he, who drinks and bathes
in the freshl}- collected water of a pool or a reservmir
during the rains.

A sheet of water, which is entirely covered over
\rith the growths of aquatic plants such as, moss,
zoophytes, water weeds, lotus leaves, etc., or which
looks turbid owing to ooz}’- mire, or is not e.vposed to
the currents of fresh air, nor illumined by the sun or
the moon, and is possessed of a definite smell, colour,
and taste, should be regarded as contaminated or
defiled (Vyapannam), Water may be affected with regard
to the six categories of touch, sight, taste, smell,
potency, and chemical transformation or re-action (lit :
digestion). Roughness, sliminess, warmth, and the
production of a shivering sensation (lit : tooth-edge)
are the tactual defects (Spaisha-Dosha) of defiled water,
whereas a varied colour, and the presence of mire, sand,
and shreds of moss are the defects, which mark its look
or appearance (Rupa-Dosha). A distinct taste marks the
water, which is affected as regards its taste (Rasa-Dosha),
while an unpleasant smell is the characteristic

CKip.XLV. ] SUTKASTIIA'NA^^. 423

of the Wiiter, which is aflected as regards its
smell (Gandha-Dosha). The water, which being taken
gives rise to thirst and to a sense of heaviness of the
limbs, colic, and a llueut corj’za, is said to be affected
or vitiated in its potency (Virya-Doslia', whereas
that, which takes a long time to l)e digested, or is
retained in the stomach for an inordinate length of
time, is said to be affected as regards digestion or
chemical transformation (Vipaka- Dosha). Atmospheric
water is free from the abovesaid defects. 1 lie defiled
or contaminated water should be purified by boiling
it, or by heating it in the sun, or by immersing a
red-hot iron, or hot sands or stones in the same, and
its smell should be removed by jierfuming it with the
N^geshvara, Champaka, Utpala, or Pdtala flowers, etc.

IVletrical Texts Water should be drunk
perfumed in a golden, silver, copper or an earthen
goblet, or in a bowl made of bell metal or of precious
stones. Contaminated w'ater, as well as rain water
accumulated in an improper season, should never
be used for drinking purposes, inasmuch as it
tends to derange the fundamental humours of the
body, and is positively injurious to the human s)'stem.
The man, who drinks, or bathes in, any contaminated
water without previously purifying it as before directed,
' incurs the risk of being speedily affected with oedema,
jaundice, cutaneous affections, indigestion, dyspnoea,

424

THE SUSHRUTA SA^IHITA. C Cup. XL\^

cough, cataixhj colic pains, abdominal glands, ascites or
an}- other dreadful disease.

There are seven modes of purimng water such
as, by immersing the Kataka fruits, the gems known
as the Gomedha, the roots of lotus plants, or
of aquatic mosses, a piece of linen, or a pearl, or acr}-5tal
in a pitcher or vessel containing it. The bottoms of a
water pitcher are made of five different shapes such as, the
Pbalakara (rectangular wooden stool), the Tr}-ashtakani
(octagonal wooden tripod), the iNIanju Valayam (ring
made of the blades of Manju grass), the Udaka-Manchika
(wooden scaffold for a pitcher) and the Shik}*
(pendent bracket;. There are seven ways of cooling
water, such as by e.vposing a water pitcher to
currents of air, immersing a water pitcher (tied round
with a piece of wet cloth) neck-deep in a vessel full of
water, churning it with a stick, by fanning, or siphoning
it by means of a piece of linen, or by burying a water
pitcher underneath a bed of sand, or by keeping it
suspended in a pendent bracket

Metrical Texts The water, which is devoid
of all smell or taste, and is pure, cool, limpid,
transparent, refrigerent and pleasant, should be regarded
as possessed of all the commendable traits. The water
of rivers, (which drain the Jingala countries) and
flow into the western sea, is fight, and theretore
yholesome. The water of rivers, which traverse

Chap; XLV. ]

SUTKASTHANAM.

425

the marshy (Anupa) countries and empty themselves into
the eastern sea, is lieavy and therefore not com-
mended to be used. The water of rivers, which run
into the southern sea, is neither too heav}'’ nor too light
OAving to the fact of its traversing countries which
have a Sadharana character.

The water of rivers, which haA^e their sources in the
Sajhya mountains, begets cutaneous affections ; while the
water ofthose, which rise from the Vindhya mountains,
produces Kushtha and Jaundice. The water of rivers,
which rise on the mount Malaya, begets rvorms and in-
testinal parasites, while the water of those, that
have their sources in the Mahendra mountain, begets
elephantisis and abdominal dropsy. The water of rivers,
which rise on the Himalaya, produces angina pectoris,
(Hridroga), anasarca, diseases of the head, elephantisis,
or goitre in persons using it for the purposes of life.
Similarl)'-, the water of rivers, which drain the eastern
portion of the country of Avanti, or flow through its
western part, begets piles ; while the water of those,
which rise on the mount of Pdripatra is wholesome,
strength-giving, and conducive to health.

Metrical Texts : — The water of clear and
swift-running rivers is light, while the water of those,
which are sluggish in their course and are covered
with mosses and other aquatic plants, is heavy. Tlie

water of rivers, which run through Marudesha (Modem

54

.^26 the SUSHRtiTA SAMHITA. C CIup. XLV.

Marwar) is possessed of a bitter saline taste^ or is
endued witli a sweet taste blended with a shade of the
astringent, and is easil}’ digestible and strength-giving
in its properties.

Ever)' kind of terrestrial water should be collected
early in the morning, since it is obtained the clearest
and coolest at that part of the day ; and since these
two attributes by far form the most commendable traits
in water.

IVIetrical Texts : — ^The water, which gets the
light of the sun in tlie day and reflects the moon in the
night, and which, moreover, neither produces Kapham
nor a parched condition in the body, should be regarded
as one in virtue with the atmospheric water. Atmos-
pheric water, collected in a good and proper receptacle,
has the virtue of subduing the three deranged humours
of the body, and acts as a pure tonic and elixir,
its virtue var}'ing with the excellence of tlie vessel in
which it is contained. The cool and limpid washings
of the gem known as the Chandrakinta Mani (the moon-
stone) should be regarded as possessed of the ra3'stic
virtue of warding off the attacks of monsters and
demons, and of subduing the deranged Pittam. They are
beneficial in fever and in cases of poisoning marked by
a burning sensation of the body, etc.

Cold water usually proves beneficial in epileptic fits.

uu,,. .\U.) SfTR..\STr^A'^’A.^^.

4-7

in liot seasons, ami in a hurniu^r ijcnsatioii of tlic body
due to ilie denuiged action ol the Pittani, in blood-
pobonin^^, Inemoptysis, abuse of wine (Maddtya),
Joss of consciousness, fali.i,n,e or e.vliaustion, vertigo,
fuinaka and vomiting. The use of cold water
should be avoided in pain at the sides (pleurodynia ?),
>n catarrh, in rheumatism, in diseases of the
lar\ n.v, in distention ol the stomach by gas or air, in
eases of undigested f:eccs, in the acute stage of fever,
and just after the exlnbition of any emetic or purgative
reined}, in hic-cough, and immediately following upon
an oil} or fatty drink (Snehapa'na). River water pro-
duces Vayu and a parched condition in the body, and
is light, stomachic and (Lekhana' liquefacient. On the
contrary, that which is heavy, comparatively denser in
its consistency, sweet, and cooling, brings on catarrh.
The water of a lake (Sarasam; quenclies thirst and is
strength-giving, liglit, sweet and astringent. The
uater of a pond or a tank (TadJga) produces V^yu,
and is sweet, astringent, and pungent in digestion. The
^Yater from a Y^pi (a large tank) subdues the deranged
^ dyu and Kapham, and generates Pittara, and is pungent
in taste and is found to be charged with a solution of
alkali. The water from a Chunti is a good digestant,
sweet, and parchifying, though it does not give rise to
Kapham in the system. The water from a well (Kupa)
generates Pittam and is appetising. It subdues the
deranged Kapham, and is light and alkaline. The

TilR SUijHRUTA SAM HIT A,

;ch.ii< XLV.

428

water of a fountain is light, appetising, and pleasant,
and destroys Kapliain. The water of an Artesian spring
is sweet, and subdues Pittaiu. It is antacid in its
digestive reaction. The water fronr a Vikira is light,
appetising, pungent, and is charged with potash (Khara).
The u-ater accumulated in an open field, or in fallow
land, is heavy to digest and tends to augment
the deranged humours of the body. The water of
a P.alvalam is possessed of the same virtue as the
preceding one, witli the exception that it greatly
aggravates the deranged humours of the bod3^
Sea-water has a fishy smell, and a saline taste ;
it aggravates all the three deranged humours of
the body. Tiie water of an Anupa (marshy) countr}' is
the source of many an evil. It isextremeh- condemnable,
as it increases the slimy secretions of all the bodily
organs, etc. The water of a Jaiigala country' is free
from the preceding baneful traits. It is faultless, acid
in its digestive reaction (Vidrilii), is possessed of all com-
mendable traits, and is pleasing and refrigerant. The
water accumulated in a i^.-idharana country is light,
cool, pleasant and appetising (Dipanam),

Warm water subdues the deranged Vdyu and
Kapham. It is antifat, appetising, diuretic, (Vasti-
shodhak) and febrifuge. It proves beneficial in cases of
cough and dyspnoea, and is wholesome at aU times.
Water boiled down to a qu.'uter part of its origiiral

Chni>. XLV. i

SUTRASTHA'N.A.M.

‘1 29

quantity and then cooled down with all its iVotli and
ebullitions removed, is li.qhL and limpid, and may be
safely commended to the use of all. Water, boiled
ovenii^bt, should not be knowingly given to a
thirsty person inasmuch ;is it has actpiired an acid
taste and will augment the intenial Kapham of the
body, and becomes positively injurious. Water boiled
and subsequently cooled down should be given to a
person suffering from any of the diseases due to an
abuse of wine or to Pittam, or from a complaint brought
about through the concerted action of the three
deranged humours.

The water found inside the shell of a cocoanut
is heavy,* demulcent, cool, pleasant and appetising etc.
It is diuretic, (Vasti shodhaka) spemiatopoietic, and
subdues Pittam and thirst. The use of water boiled and
subsequently cooled down is recommended in dysenter}',
burning of the skin, luemoptysis, diseases due to the
abuse of wine, or to the effects of any imbibed poison,
as well as in thirst, vomiting, catarrh, vertigo and loss of
consciousness. Water should be taken as little as
possible by a person suffering from any of the following
diseases viz., loss of relish for food, catarrh, water-brash,
oedema, any of the wasting diseases, impaired digestion,
abdominal dropsy, cutaneous affection, fever, diseases
affecting the eyes, ulcer and diabetes (Madhumeha, etc).

Light according to JeJjada.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

[ Chap. KLV.

430.

The lYIilk Group The milk of a cow, she-
goat, she-camel, ewe, she-buflalo, mare, slie-elephant,
or of a woman, is what generally comes to the use of
man."'

The milk is the white fluid essence of drugs and
cereals, which enter into the food of the aforesaid milk-
giving animals, and is therefore the best of all nutritive
substances (literally life-giving). It is hea\y, sweet,
slimy, cold, gloss)', emollient, laxative and mild.

Hence it proves congenial to all sentient animals.
And since imik is kindred in its nature to the essential
principles of life and so very congenial to the panzoism
of all created animals, its use may be unreseiwedly
recommended to all, and is not forbidden in diseases
due to the deranged action of (Vayu) or Pittara, or in
ailments affecting the mind (i\'Hnsa), or the vascular
system of man. Its beneficial and curative efficacy
may be witnessed in cases of chronic fever, in cough,
dyspnoea, phthisis and other wasting diseases, in
Gulma (abdominal glands), insanity, ascites, epileptic
fits, in vertigo, in delirium, in burning sensation
of the body, in thirst, in diseases affecting the heart
and the bladder, in chlorosis and dysenter)', in piles, cofic
and obstinate constipation, in Grahani, Prar-ahika,

* From the construction of the present sentence in the original texts, we
are warranted to include the milk of a doe, or of a she-mule, or of a cow-
rhinoceros in the list, as they sometimes prove beneficial for external appli-
cations.

Chap.XLV.1 . StjfRASTHANAM. 43'

miscafriage aud other diseases peculiar to the female
reproductive organs, and in hemoptysis. It is a
refrigerant and acts as a bracing beverage aRer physi-
cal exercise. It is a sacred, constructive, tonic, spermato-
poietic, rejuvenating and aplrrodisiac. It expands the
intellectual capacities of a man, brings about the adhe-
sion of broken or fractured bones (Sandhdna) rejuvenates
used and exhausted frames, forms an excellent enemata,
increases the duration of life, and acts as a vitaliser. It is
an emetic and a purgative remedy, and imparts a healthy
rotundity to the frame, and which through its kindred or
similar properties augments the quality of bodily albu-
men (Ojah) and is the most complete and wholesome
diet for infants, old men and persons suffering from
cachexia witnessed in cases of ulcers in the chest, as
well as for persons debilitated from insufficient food,
sexual excesses or excessive, physical labour,

Wletrical Texts Cow-milk is demulcent
and does not set up or increase the normal qiiantit’
of slimy secretions in the internal channels of the bod)
It is heavy and is a good elixir, and proves curative i
luomoptysis. It is cold, and sweet both in taste an
chemical reaction. It subdues both Vayu and Pitta'
and is accordingly one of the most efficient of vitalisii
agents,

Tha nulk of a ahe-goat is possessed of propert
similar to those of a cow, and is specially beneficial

433

fHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

[ CIwp. XLV.

persons suffering from phthisis.* It is lights astn'ngent,
appetising (Dipana), and is efficacious in dyspnoea, cough
and hmmoptysis (Amlapitta — A. T.). The milk of a
she-goat proves curative in all diseases owing to the
smallness of her limbs and her agile liabits, as well as
for the fact of her drinking comparatively a less quantity
of water and living upon bitter and pungent herbs.
The milk of a she-camel is parchifying, heating, light,
palatable and possessed of a little saline taste. It
proves curative in oedema, abdominal glands, ascites,
piles, intestinal worms and Kushtha, and is a good
antito.vie agent. The milk of a ewe is sweet, demulcent,
hea'vy and proves aggravating in disorders of Pittam
and Kapham. It forms a good diet in Kevalavata
and in cough due to the deranged condition of the bodily
Vdyu.

The mUk of a she-hnfifalo is sweet in taste, tends
to impair digestion and increases the slimy secretion
of the organs. It is heavy, soporific, cooling, and
contains more fatt)’^ matter than cow’s milk.

The milk of a she-animal with tmbifurcated hoofs
(Ekashapha) such as, the mare, etc., is tonic, light,
parchifjfing, sweet and acid in taste, leaving a saline
after-taste, and proving cmative in cases of rheumatism
restricted to the extremities.

It has been recently discovered bv a German nbvsician that tuber-

Cluj). XLV. J

SUTUASTHAN'AM.

433

Tho milk of a woman is cold and sweet, leavinj' an
astringent after-taste. It proves beneficial as an errhinc
and acts as a good wash in eye diseases. It is whole-
some, vitalising, light and appetising. Tho milk
of a she-elephaut is sweet though it leaves an astringent
after-taste. It is sperinatopoietic, heavy, demulcent,
cooling and tonic. It invigorates the eyesight.

The milk of a she-anini.al, inilched in the morning,
is heavy, cold and takes a long time to bo digested
owing to her entire repose diterally want of physical
exercise or locomotion) during the night, when cooling
attributes preponderate. Similarly, tlie nhlk milched
in the evening is found to be possessed of refrigerant
and e)’e-invigorating properties. Moreover, it restores
the bodily Vdyu to its normal condition owing
to the physical labour undergone by the animal
in the day time, exposed to the rays of the sun
and the currents of free air. Cold or unboiled
milk is extremel}’- heavy, and serves to increase the
slimy secretions of the organs, whereas by boiling
it is freed from those injurious traits. , But this
rule does not hold good in the case of woman’s milk,
which is wholesome in its natural or unboiled state.
Freshly milched warm milk should be regarded as
extremely wholesome, which, being cooled down, loses
its efficacious virtues and becomes unwholesome. On
the contrary, over-cooked milk is heav}^ and fat-making
55

^24 the SUSHRUTA SAiMHITA. C.Chap. XLV.

(lit — imparting stoutness to one’s bod)’’). The milk,
which emits a fetid smell, or has become discoloured
and insipid, or has acquired an acid taste and looks
shreddy and curdled, or tastes saline, should be regarded
as unwholesome and injurious.

The Curd -group : — There are three kinds of
curd such as, the sweet, tlie acid, and the extremely
acid curd. Milk curd generally leaves an astringent
after-taste. It is demulcent and heat-making in its
potency, as well as spemiatopoietic, -vitalising and
auspicious. It proves curative in Pinasa (nasal catarrh),
intermittent fever (Vishama Jvara), dysenter}’’, non-
relish for food, difficult urination, and general cache.xia.

Metrical Text : — Stveet curd greatly in-
creases the slimy secretions of the organs and the
quantity of fat and Kapham in the body. Acid
curd deranges the Pittam and the Kapham, while
the extremely acid curd \itiates the blood. Curd,
which has been not perfectly curdled (Mandajatam)
is acid in its (digestive) chemical reaction, acts as
an inordinately strong purgative and diuretic agent,
and deranges the three fundamental humours of
the body.

Curdled cow's milk is demulcent, sweet in digestion,
appetising, srength-increasing and acrid. It subdues the
bodily Vayu and imparts a relish to one’s food.
Curd prepared with the milk of a she-goat is light.

Chap, XLV.]

SUTRASTHA’NAM.

4.^5

and subdues the deranged Pittam and Kapham, It
proves curative in Vita and’ wasting diseases, and
is a good appetiser. Its beneficial effect is witnessed
in cases of piles, dyspnoea and cough. Curd, pre-
pared with the milk of a she-buffalo, is sweet in
digestion, and spenntopoietic. It pacifies the deranged
Vijoi and Pittam, and serves to augment the normal
quantity of bodily Kaphanr. It is specifically a
demulcent substance. Curd prepared with the milk
of a ahe-camel is pungent in digestion. It is found
to be charged with alkali, and is heavy and a purgative.
A continued use of curdled camel's milk proves
curative in Vdta, piles, cutaneous affections (Kushtha),
worms in the intestines, and abdomimal dropsy.
Curd prepared with the milk of a ewe proves aggra-'
vating in derangements of the Vayu and Kapham,
as well as in cases of piles. It is sweet in taste and
its chemical reaction increases the slimy secretions
of the organs, and tends to derange the bodily humours.
Curd,, prepared with the milk of a mare, is appe-
tising. It proves injurious to the eyes, and tends
to augment the bodily Vd)'u. It is parchifying and hot
in its potency, and is astringent in taste. It diminishes
the secretions of stool and urine. Curd prepared
with the milk of a woman is demulcent, sweet in
digestion, tonic, pleasant, heary, and specially beneficial
to the eyes. It subdues the deranged humours and
is specially efficacious in its virtueSj and is the best

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'.

(Chsp. XLV.

436

of all kinds of curd, and of all emollient remedies
(Santarpanam). Curd prepared with tlie milk of a
ska-elephant, is light in digestion, subdues Kapham,
and is heat-making in its potencj'. It impairs digestion,
leaves an astringent after-taste and increases the quan-
tity of fecal matter. Of all the preceding kinds of
curd, the one prepared A\ith cow’s milk should be
regarded as the best in nrtue and quality. This curd
well filtered through a piece of clean linen, imparts a
relish to the food, whereas the curd, which had been
f prepared with boiled milk, should be deemed the
most efficacious. The cloth- filtered curd subdues
the deranged V^yu. It is demulcent and restorative,
though it tends to increase the Kapham wdthout bring-
'ing about a similar augmentation of the Pittam.
The curd prepared with boiled milk subdues the
deranged Vayu and Pittam, imparts a relish to the food,
and acts as a good stomachic remedy. It increases the
strength and the root principle of life. The cream
of card is hea\y and spennatopoietic. It subdues the
deranged Vdyu, impairs digestion and is phlegma-
gogic and aphrodisiac. Curd made without cream is
parchifj’-ing, astringent and arrests stool and urine
(Vistambhi), It increases the bodily Vayu. It is appe-
tising and is comparatively lighter, a little astringent in
taste, and imparts a relish to food.

The use of curd is generally prohibited in (Vasanta)

Chap. XLV.]

SUTRASTHANAM.

437

spring, (Grishma) summer, and (Sharat) autumn, whereas
it is recommended during the rains (Varshd) and in the
forepart of winter (Hemanta), arid in the cold season
proper (Shishira). The residuary sediment of curd
(Mastu) is frigorific and refrigerant, light and purifying
to the internal channels of the body. It has a sweet
and astringent taste and is anti-aphrodisiac. It
destroys the deranged Vdyu and Kapham, and is
pleasant and palatable. It acts as a speedy purga-
tive, and imparts strength to the system and relish
to the food. In this group have been described the
wrtues of the seven kinds of curd such as, the sweet,
the acid, the extremely acid, the curd of incomplete
curdling, the curd of boiled milk, curd cream, and
the creamless curd, as well as the residuary sediirrent
(Mastu).

The Takra Group -The Takra (whejO is
sweet and acid in taste, and leaves an astringent after-
taste. It is light, appetising and heat-making in its
potency, and has a parchifying effect upon the organism.
Its curative efficacy is witnessed in cases of chemical or
combinative poisoning, oedema, dysentery’-, diarrhoea,
jaundice, piles, enlarged spleen, abdominal glands, non-
relish for food, intermittent fever, thirst, vomiting, water-
brash, colic and obesity. It subdues the deranged Vhyu
and Kapham, and is non-aphrodisiac. It is sweet in
its digestive reaction and pleasant to the system. It

438 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XLV.

proves curative in difficult urination, and in diseases due
to the abuse of emollient medicinal remedies and
applications.

Metrical Texts : — compound made of equal
parts of curd and water and subsequently churned so as
to have the contained cream or butter completely
skimmed off, and which is neither too thick nor too
thin, is called Takram. It possesses a taste blended
of the sweet, acid and astringent. Waterless curd,
churned with the entire butter or creamy sub-
stance inherent in it, is called Gholam (a kind
of whey). The use of Takram is prohibited in the.
hot season, nor should it be given to a weak person, nor
to one suffering from an ulcer, or laid up with an attack
of hccmoptysis, or to one suffering from epileptic fits,
vertigo (Bhrama), or from a burning sensation in the
body. The use of Takram is recommended during the
cold months of the year, as well as to persons suffering
from diseases due to the action of the deranged Kapham,
or from suppression of stool or urine, etc., or. from
the effects of the deranged Vdyu.

Again sweetened Takram soothes the deranged
Pittam and aggravates the Kapham. Acid Takram
subdues the Viyu and produces Pittam.

Metrical Texts : — In a case of deranged or
disordered V^yu, acid Takram should be drunk mixed
with rock-salt, and with sugar in disorders of the Pittam,

.Chap. XLV. 3 sUTRASTHANAM. 439

while in a case of deranged Kapham it should be mixed
^Yith Yavakshdra and the powders of the drugs known
as Vyosha. Takraknrchika (Inspissated milk) is astrin-
gent i,Gr4hi), parchifying and hard to digest. It produces
Vdyu. The Manda or the residuary' sediment of a com-
pound made of the aforesaid Kurchikl and Dadhi
Takram (curd-whey) is lighter than Avhey. Kilata* is
heavy, hypnotic, spenuatopoietic and subdues V4yu.
Similarly, Ulorathat and PiyushaJ are. sweet to the
taste and restorative and aphrodisiac in their properties.

Fresh butter (Navanita) is an albuminous substance,
and is light, sweet, cooling, demulcent, pleasant, appe-
tising, slightly acid and astringent. It subdues the
deranged V^yu and Pittam. It is spermatopoietic,
antacid in its reaction, and conduces to the improve-
ment of one’s memoiy' and intellectual capacities.
It proves beneficial in cases of consumption, cough,
dyspnoea, ulcer, piles and facial paralysis.

Butter (of a few days standing) is heavy. It
increases the quantity of fat and Kapham, and imparts
strength and rotundity to the body, and proves especially
wholesome to children. Butter made of thickened
milk is the best of all oily or (Kshira) substances. It

* lioileil mUk curdled and subsequently heated and made into a oaste is
called Kildta.

t The milk of a cow recently delivered of a calf is t>! ,

Idl the scvemll. day after its birth, while, it is subsequently called Momhr
Ull .1 « perfectly purified and becomes fit for the use of n«n. • '

440

THE SUSHRUTA SAiMHITA. [ Chap- XLV.

is sweet, cooling and astringent ; and imparts softness
to the body, improves the eye-sight, and proves curative
in hemoptysis and eye-diseases.

Cream subdues the deranged Vdyu. It is
a pleasing (Tarpani) tonic, is spennatopoietic, demulcent,
palatable, hea'\'y and sweet in taste and digestion,
and proves remedial to haemoptysis.

Metrical Texts : — ^The ^^^tu^ and properties
-of these modifications of curdled cow-milk have
been described in detail since it is the best of all kinds
of milk described before. The virtues and properties
of similar preparations made from the milk of other
animals should be regarded as identical with those
of the milk of the animal out of which they have been
prepared.

Clarified Butter (Ghritam) Ghritam
or clarified butter is Saumya or cooling in its essence
and potency, and is mild and sweet. It slightl)’’ in-
creases the slimy secretions of the organs, and acts as a
lubricating moistener, proving efficacious in Udivarta
insanity, epilepsy, colic, fever (chronic) and distention
of the abdomen from the suppression of stool arid
urine (Anriha). It is appetising and subdues the Vdyu
and the Pittara. It improves :^emory, intelligence,
complexion, voice, personal beaut)’-, amiability of features
and the principle of strength (albumen, Ojas) in the body.

Chap. XLV. 1 SUTRASTUANAM. 441

It is vitalising, rejuvenating, sperinatopoietic and licavy.

It improves the eyesight, increases the quantity of bodily
Kapham and the duration of life. It is sacred and is
regarded as an appeaser of adverse fate. It eliminates
poison from the body and wards off the invasions of
monsters and demons.

Wletrical Texts :--Ciarified batter made
of cow milk is sweet in digestion, and cool in
its potency. It subdues the deranged Vayu and
Pittam, and serves to eliminate poison from the
system. It improves the eyesight and possesses
excellent tonic and invigorating properties. Cow-
butter, in its clarified state, is the best of all kinds
of butter. Clarified butter made of the milk of a
she-goat is appetising (Dipanam), eye-invigorating and
strength-increasing. It proves a wholesome diet in
cases of cough, dyspnoea and consumption (any wasting
disease), and is light in digestion. Clarified butter
prepared vdlh the milk of a she-buffalo is sweet, heavy
in digestion, and proves remedial in haemoptysis. . It is
cooling and increases the quantity of bodily Kapham,
and subdues the deranged Vdyu and Pittam. Clarified
butter made with the milk of a sbe-camel is anti-to.vic,
appetising and pungent in digestion. It subdues
the deranged V4yii and Kapham, and proves curative
in cedema, worms in the intestines, cutaneous
affections, abdominal glands, and ascites. Clarffled
butter made with the mili „ a ewe is light in

THE SUSHRUTA SAMUITA. [Chap. XLV.

442

digestion. It does not enrage Pittam, and proves
beneficial in cases of rigour, phthisis (Shosha) and in
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vayu
and Kaphani, as well as in those which affect the
female organs of generation. Clarified butter made
with the milk of a mare (lit any female mammal
with unbifurcated hoops) is light in digestion, heat-
making in its potency, and astringent in taste. It is
appetising, anuretic, and subdues the action of the
deranged Kapham.

Clarified butter made with the milk of a woman
is possessed of eye-invigorating virtues, and should
be regarded as the prototype of divine ambrosia
on earth. It is light (in digestion), anti-toxic, stomachic,
and constructive. Clarified butter prepared with
the milk of a she-elephant is astringent in taste,
and brings about a suppression of stool and urine.
It is bitter, light, and stomachic (Agnikara), and proves
curative in cutaneous affections (Kushtha), poisoning,
worms in the intestines, and derangements of the
Kapham.

Butter churned out of thickened milk and clarified
(Ksbira Gbritam) is astringent, and proves beneficial in
eye-diseases, haimoptysis, epileptic fits, and vertigo.

The condensed upper stratum of clarified butter
(Jlirita-manda) acts as a laxative, cures aching
pain in the vagina, ears, eyes, or in the head.

' S.TR..8TH.NAM. 443

is tecommeBded to be Bsed .s aB ertbme, bb enema
OT as eye-drops.

Old ctetiSed butter

rrr;-:

^ . eats eves or bead. It is appetising and is,

r—l be .ed . e,e.drope uud eueutu,

and for sternutatory purposes.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
1 get: -Old or matured clarified butter proves
curative m Timira (Gutta Serena), dyspnea,
cataab, fever, cougb, epileptic fits, and Kusbtam, m
cases of poisoning, mental aberration, and hysteria
ascribed to the influence of malignant planets.
Clarified butter matured from eleven to a hundred
years is called the Kumbha Gritam (Pitcher clarified
butter), wbile that, which is older than the one of
the preceding kind, is called the Haha Ghritam
(the great clarified butter). Kumbha Ghritam is
said to be possessed of the mystic potency of
warding off the invasions of monsters, while the Maha
Ghritam is highly efficacious, sacred, and specifically
curative in the disease known as Timira. It acts as a
prophylactic against the malignant influences of all
c'vil spirits and baneful planets, and should he taken

444

Tllti: SUSIIRUTA SAMIlllvV.

( CLap.

by men in whom V.lyu prodomiiuUca. It subdues iho
deranged Kapham, and improves the strengtli and
intellect.

The Oil Group : — Oils, which belong to the
category ot' fiery (Agneya) substances, are hot or heat-
making in their potencies, irritating, aiul sweet in taste
and digestion, and are constructive (Vrinhanam), and
pleasant. They e.^pand through the entire system im-
mediately after being drunk or nibbed tVyav:iyi),and are
subtile, clear, heavy, and laxative (Sant). 'Hicy tend to
expand the bone-joints and contribute to their free and
easy movements (^'jk^1si). Tliey act as spcrmntopohtics
(Vrishyam), and purify the skin, improve the memory,
and impart softness to the skin and complexion. They
are flesh-making and strength-imparting, and increase
the firmness of the body. They are possessed of e 3 'e-
iuvigorating virtues, and are anuretic, liquefacient
(Lekhana), bitter and stomachic (Pdchana). They cure
Vdxai and Kapham. They are vennifuge and pro-
duce a slight Pittam, leaving an astringent after-taste.
They relieve aching pain in the head, ears, and the
female organs of generation (Yoni), act as purifying
agents in respect of the uterus, and prove curative in
urticaria.

The use of sesamum oil is recommended in cases of
cut, cleft, punctured, severed, lacerated, blistered,
thrashed or contused wounds and ulcers, and in bums

Chap. XLV. ]

sutrasthanam.

445

and scalds whether due to the application of heat
or any vesicant alkaline solution, as well as in bites
of wild beasts and birds, etc,, and act beneficially in
baths, unguents and lubrications.

Metrical Texts Oil should be used in
snuffing, and as enematas (l^asti), eye-drops, ear-drops,
as well as in seasoning soups, curries and cordials, etc.
It pacifies the bodily VAyu,

Castor Oil is sweet, hot 'in its potency"', irritating and
appetising. It leaves a pungent astringent after-taste,
and is subtile. It acts as a cleansing agent in respect of
the internal channels of the body, and is wholesome

to the skin. It is spermatopoietic, sweet in digestion
(Vip4ka), and rejuvenating. It purifies the semen,
vagina, and removes vaginal and uterine disorders, and •
contributes to the presen-ation of sound health. It

improves the memorv', complexion and intellect (of it-=

^ser), subdues the bodily Viyu and Kapham, aiic

the system from all mj„io„s principles b,
inducing purging. ^

obtained from the seeds of Nimba,Atasi M

Jiniutaka, Vrikshaka TfrUo n- ’

H,.,-,. ' Arka, Kamo

Hastikama, Prilhvika Psiu v • ^

nmviKa, p,iu, Karanja, Ingudi S

‘re irritating, light, non-heat-making in th.i

pungent in taste and digestion. They act^

in .seasr::::

446 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chap. XLV.

deranged A^.lyu, or Kapham, as well as in cases of
Kushtha, Prameha, head disease, and intestinal parasites.

Wletrical Texts ;—KahaTmia (Linseed) oil is
sweet. It subdues the bodil}’’ and is strength-

gi^dng, and pungent in digestion. Devoid of any eye-
invigorating properties, it is hot though demulcent, and
heavy. It increases the Pittam.

Mustard oil is light, and acts as a vermifuge. It
proves curative in itch and cutaneous' affections,
reduces Vdyu, Kapham and fat, and is pungent, appetising
and Lekhana (liquefacient). Oil obtained from the seeds
of lugudi is a vermifuge, and is light, and slightly bitter
in taste. It proves curative in Kushtha and parasitic
disorders, and affects the strength, semen and the
e)’^esight of its user. The oil obtained from Kushumbha
flowers is pungent in digestion and leads to the derange-
ment of all the bodily humours. It is irritating, and acid
in its reaction (Vidahi). It is devoid of any eye-cleans-
ing property and brings on haimoptysis.

The Oils obtained from the Kirdta-tiktaka, Atimuktaka,
Vibhitaka, Ndrikela, Kola, Akshoda, Jivanti, Piydla,
Karvudara, Surjavalli, Trapusa, Erv^ruka, Karkaru,
and Kushmdnda seeds, etc. are sweet in taste, potency
and digestion, and tend to pacify the deranged Vayu and
Pittam. Cooling in their potency, they increase the slimy
secretions of the organs, impair digestion, and help the
copious eracuation of stool and urine.

Cfep. XLV. 1

SUTRASTHANAM.

The Oils of the Hadliuka (Maula)i KaBliuiary ami
Palislia seeds arc sv\-cet and astringent. They \v,tcily
the deranged Kapham and Pittam. The oils of the
Tuvaraka and Bhallitaka are heat-tnaking, swed
and astringent, and leave a bitter afier-taslc. I’hey prove
curative in diseases due to the action of deranged \ .ij ti
and Kapham, as well as in obesity, Meha, cutaneous
affections, and intestinal wonns, and cleanse the system
both by their emetic and purgative actions. The Oils
obtained from the piths (Sdra' of such trees as, Sarala,
Pevadirn, Gandira, Shinshapi and Agnru, are bitter,
pungent and astringent in their tastes, and act as
purifying agents in respect of bad ulcers. They prove
curative in skin diseases and destroy the deranged V.lyu,
Kapham, and intestinal worms. The Oils obtained from
the seeds of Tnmvi, Koshamra, Panti, Dravanti,
Shyami, Saptala, Kilika, EampiPaka, and Shankbini,

i

\

are bitter, pungent and astringent in their tastes. They
serve to cleanse the system from all impurities and

baneful principles through their purgative properties.
They act as purifying agents in respect of malignant
ulcers, and prove curative in diseases due to the

deranged V^yu and Kapham, as well as in skin-diseases
(Kushtha), and parasitic complaints. Yavatikata-oil
tends to subdue all the deranged humours, is slightly
tater, and acts » a good elixir. It is appetising,, acid,

and hquefecenl. It is h„„. a„d rvholesome a'atl,y,an,)
and scre es i„ in.p,„., ^ '

^^8 Tiili SUSIIRUTA SAMIinX LCL.i.. XLV.

Oil from Ekaisbika seeds is sweet, and extremely
cooling. It subdues the I’ittam, increases the Kapham
and aggravates the V.-tyu. 'Dre Oil of the seeds of
mango stones is slight ly bitter in taste, and extremely
aromatic. It subdues the Vayu and Kapham. It is
parchifying, sweet and astringent, palatable, and not
highly Piltnm-rnaking.

IVIetrical Texts ; — The therapeutic properties of
the oils from the seeds of fruits, which have not been
specifically described in the present chapter, should be
considered as identical with those of the fruits or
seeds of which they have been so pressed out. All the
vegetable oils (Sneha) described above should be
regarded as possessed of the \nrtue of subduing the
bodily Vayu, and they possess some of the properties,
which specifically belong to sesamum oil. SeBamum
oil is the most commendable of all oils inasmuch
as, .the 3:er3’’ word, which signifies oil (I'ailam), is
etymologically derived from Tilam (sesamum).

The oil, myosin (Vasd), fat, marrow, and Ghritam
obtained from animals, which live in villages (Gramya),
or frequent the marshy swamps (Anupa), or arc aquatic
(.■Vudoka) in their habits, are heavy, heat-making in their
potency, and sweet in taste. They subdue the bodily
Vd3’u, while those obtained from Jdngala (such as
deer, etc.) or carnivorous animals, or from those
possessed of unbifurcated hoofs, are light, cool in their

450

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIHTA'. fChai*. XIA,

Argliyam, Auddalakam and Dalain." Of these the
honey obtained from the liives of bees, Icnown as the
Puttikas, is hot and parchifying owing to tlieir habit
of sucking the juice or sap of flowers and plants without
eliminating therefrom other foreign or poisonous matter,
that might have become naturally or accidentally
mixed with it. This kind of honey is intoxicating and
acid in its re-action, and tends to aggravate tlie ^'dyu,
blood and Pittam. It acts as a liquefacient or dis-
cutient agent. Honey, known as the Bhrdmaram, is
extremely heavy owing to its extremel}' sweet taste
and slimy character, while the one known as the
Kshaudram is extremely cool, light and liquefacient.
Honey known as the Makshikam is lighter, dr^-er and
more elTicacious than the honey of the preceding class
(Kshaudram), and proves specially benencial in cases
of dyspnoea, etc. Honey, known as the Chhatram, is

* (l) The kind of lioney obtained from hives of large, yellow bees,
is called the I’auttikam.

( 2 ) The kind of honey obtained from hives of bees of the Bhraiiiara
species is called Rhr.'lmarani.

(3) The kind of honey idilained from hives of small, tawny brown bees
is called the Kshandram.

(4) The kind of ln)ney obtained from the hives of large, brown bees of
the MakshikA species is calleil M.Akshikam.

(5) The kind of honey obtained from the umbrella shaped hives of bees
of the Chhatra species is c.alled ChhAtranu

(6) The honey obtained from the hives of thin-mouthed bees of the
Argha species often found in ant-hills is called A'rghyam-

(7) The kind of honey obtained from the hives of small brown bees of
the UddAlakam species is called AuddAlakam.

(8) The kind of honey found accumulated in leaves of honey-bearing
plants is called DAlam.

452

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. C Chap. XLV.

Honey- is ■ not collected from the flowers of any
particular species. On the other hand, the honey-
making bees cull it from the sap and juice of flowers
and plants, which are incompatible with one another
in respect of their nature, taste, virtue, potenc}" and
re-actionar}' (chemical) effect. For these reasons, and
further from the fact of it being prepared by
poisonous bees, hone}"' becomes positively injurious
after contact with heat or fire, and accordingly the
use of hot or boiled honej'- is forbidden.

Metrical Texts : — On account of its poisonous
contact in its origin honey exerts a similar injurious
virtue. Used in a boiling or heated state, or in
a hot countr}', or during the hot season of the
year, or in a heated state ^of the body, hone}* is
sure to prove fatal like poison. Honey is specially
made injurious by hot contact owing to its placidity
and coolness, and further for the reason of its
being collected from the sap of a variety of
flowers and plants. Atmospheric water (rain-water),
like heat, serves to impart an injurious character
to all kinds of honey (except the one known as
the Arghyam Madhu).

Metrical Texts : — For emetic purposes honey
may be administered with any other hot substance,
inasmuch as it is intended in such a case that
the imbibed honey, instead of being retained or

s.ouW.e-eieoteclu».ediatelv

dijcsted m*e stoma*, sho

after its ass' . ■ a

Uadigested iron^^ ,,«aaccs

peater d-om ort * ,

^"T«*cUa,easaa«,r«^^^^^

otmrdigestedhouoy ‘ , ,,„„ge {\'ipdlta)

Urepoisoaous nature of tire *e
it undergoes therein in contact urlh ho
in general. Hence, undigested honey is os a .

poison.

The sugar-cane group -.-Sugor cone is
.nett in taste and digestion, heacy, cool, demulcent
slrength.giving, spermatopoietle. and dmrettc. It
produces Kapham in the body, and proves remerhal
in imnoplysis, and helps the germination o! rvonns
ill tlip. intestines.

Wletrical text ;— There are many species of
sugar-cane such as, the Paundraka, Bhiruka, Yanshaka,
Shataporaka, Kdntara, Tapasekshu, Kastekshu, Suchi-
palraka, :s;aipala, Dirghapatraka, Nilapora, and
Ivoshakrit. Now we shaU deal with the specific

• Tliough Ihe use of honey with hoi substances is not forbiddin In
lucli case., Mill many an experienced physician of the Ayurvedic school
thinVs it s-ife to icfrahi from its use, lest it iniyht be retained in llie
Mumadi fur a considerahle lime, or find out a downward outlet and pass off
wilh die siuol.

+54

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA. t

virtues of each of them. The Sugar-cane of tlie
Paundraka and Bhiruka types is cooling, sweet, demul-
cent and constructive. It produces Kapham and is
laxative without giving rise to imperfect gastric diges-
tion. It is heav)' and spennatopoietic. The Sugar-
cane of the Vanshaka species is possessed of similar
properties as the two foregoing ones, though a
little alkaline in its constitution, while that of the
Shatapora species is a little more heat-making than
that of the preceding class, and is found to subdue
the deranged Viyu. The Sugar-cane of the K^ntara
and Tdpasa species is possessed of the same virtues
as that of the Vanshaka class. The Sugar-cane of
the Kdstekshu species is identical in its properties
with that of the aforesaid Vanshaka class, though it
tends to agitate the bodily Vd\'u. The Sugar-cane
of the Suchipatra, Nilapora, Xaipala and Dirghpatra
species produces V.1)'u in the system, and subdues
the Kapham and Pittam. It is slightly astringent
in taste and indigestible (gives rise to acidity after
digestion). The Sugar-cane of the Koshakara species is
heav)' (in digestion), cooling and proves curative in
cases of hmmoptysis and wasting diseases in general.
Sugar-cane is extremely sweet about the roots, sweet
at the middle, and saline at the tops and joints.

The juice of a sugar-cane when eaten raw is not
marked by any acid reaction after digestion. It is

Chap. XLV.l

SUTRASTHANAM.

455

spermatopoietic, and subdues tbeVdyu and the Kapham,
and is pleasant to the taste. The juice of sugar-cane

otherwise pressed out is heavy' in digestion, is long
retained in the stomach, and is followed by reactionary
acidity, and arrests the evacuation of stool and urine.

The juice of ripe sugar-cane is heavy in digestion,
possessed of laxative properties, keen, and demulcent.

It subdues the V^yu and Kapham.' The inspissated or
half boiled juice of sugar-cane (Phanitam) is sweet in
taste and heavy. It increases the slimy secretions
of the organs, acts as a flesh-builder, and is devoid of all
spermatopoietic properties. It brings about a simul-
taneous derangement of the three bodily humours.

Common treacle is found to be charged with a little
alkali. It is sweet in taste and not too cooling. It
acts as a demulcent and purifier of the blood and
urine. It subdues the deranged Vdyu and, to a slight
extent, deranges the Pittara as well. It increases
fat, Kapham, and corpulency, and is possessed of
tonic and spermatopoietic properties. White and purified
(Shuddha) treacle is sweet in taste, and purifies the
blood. It subdues the deranged Vayu and Kapham, and
is one of the most wholesome diets for man. Its efficacy
increases with its years,

Tlie cllttetentmodiacaUons of treacle sucli as tire
Matsaadika, Klramda, a„d Sharkara (sugar) tvlrich are

progressrvlyraorereaned, should be deemed as gain, 'ug

45 ^

THE SUSHRHTA SAMHITA'. ! CIi.ijn XLV.

morti in their cooling, demulcent and aphrodisiac pro-
perties, and getting heavier in digestion in each of the
successive stages of refinement. They are successively
more frigorific, and beneficial in cases of luemoptysis,

IVIetrical Texts To the properties considered
as specially belonging to each of these modifications
of treacle should be attributed its power of producing
its own refinement and efficacy. The virtues of
sugar such as, laxativeness, etc., should be regarded as
proportional to its refinement, freedom from alkaline
saturation, and the actual quantity of sweetening matter
(lit. substance) contained in it.

Sugar prepared from concentrated honey (Madhu
Sharkara) is parchifying and liquefacient. It proves
beneficial in cases of vomiting and dysentery', is
pleasant, has a sweet and astringent taste, and is
sweet in digestion. Sugar prepared from a decoction of
Yavasa Sharkara (Duralabha) has a sweet and astringent
taste, leaves a bitter after-taste, and is possessed of
laxative properties, and subdues the deranged Kapham.
All kinds of sugar tend to assuage burning sensations
in the body, and prove curative in hcemoptysis, vomiting,
epileptic fits, and thirst. The sweet and concentrated
extract (Phanitam) of Modhuka flowers should be ,
regarded as parchifying. It produces ^'a\'u and Pittam,
and subdues Kapham. It is sweet, astringent in its
digestive transformation, and deranges the blood.

S«TR.8THXNAM. «

^aavaVarga (Wines

Mlstedesof , pe.t« refel.

They S™®*'’ ^ „M p«g»tives, euWue the

to one's food. TUe^ t ofoasing, exbdatat-

4etaegedWyuandKepham,aed»eTleesms.

ing and diuretic. ..

They are light in digestion and give rise to a knfo o
They are hg t.^t.maUmg,

re-actionary acidity. Tl y V

,.«ate the sense otgans, exp^

increase the discharge ot unne a •

spedftcaUy deserihe the propert.es of each
of wane.

, metrical Texts. -.-The tvine taotva as fte
madvirliata and prepared frorrr thejrrrce of such taB

as grapes and raisins, does irot give nse to any so

ot reacUonary addity after its use, and accordrng y
is not forbidden by -learned physiciarrs even m
cases of liMiroptysis. It has a stveet taste, and
leaves an astringent after-taste/ It is parchityrng, light
and easy of digestion, acts as an aperient, and
proves curative in chronic fevers, phthisis and other
wasting dieses.

The wine prepared from the juice of the date palm
(Kharjuraml possesses properties, which are slightly
different from those of the preceding kind. It tends
to enrage the bodily Vdyu, is clear, and imparts a relish
, to one's food, and reduces fat and Kapham. It is light.

4S8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. ?CLV.

has • a sweet and astringent taste, is pleasing and
aromatic and increases the agility of the lirnbs and
organs.

The wine known as the Sura (made of rice-
paste and other fermenting drugs) proves curative in
cough, piles, chronic indigestion and diarrhoea, and
retention of urine. It subdues the deranged Vayu and
is tonic and appetising. It purifies the breast milk
of a woman and proves beneficial in all t)'pes of
diseases of the blood, as well as in wasting diseases.
White Sura is used with benefit in all cases of cough,
piles, diarrhoea, dyspnoea and catarrh. It builds up new
flesh and tissues, and increases the quantity of blood.

i

It is galactagoguic in its effect, and increases the quan-
tity of Kapham in the body. The wine known as
the Prasanna (the cream or the limpid surface of
Surd) may be taken until advantage in vomiting,
non-relish for food, aching or colic pain at the sides
or about the cardiac region, constipation, suppression
of stool and urine or flatus, as well as in all cases of
obstinate constipation and derangement of the bodily
Vdyu. The wine prepared from barley (Yavasura)
generates Pittam and tends to enrage the bodily Vdyu.
It is dry and slightly generates Kapham. The ivine
prepared from Madhulika (a kind of small barley)
is heavy and generates Kapham in the bod)^ It
is long retained in the stomach, and arrests the

, 'VUe AUaViVv

evacuation of stool a\u ut Uecs etc.)

piepated from the ^ ^ pitnluccs Kaphum.

It is possessed o ^p siuudlancou..

Uuou-n as J^damculal bodily ivumoms.

deiMigement of Hw ^Ul,,dyo)

is ptoot to ttetoste, acts os . P

! • n<^^sessed of apbrodme propalK

^ the Jagala (tbe underlying dregs or

"TT “m t ^ttilsct ant. >.cat...,a«,.,

:t,olv.alctsasa.,esta„tMtfs^^

sod ptoves beaeBcial in cough, thhst ami phlh.s.a. H >

A to the taste, cutes diatth.a,«cntton^

:omach, piles ami cede, m. It fonus and suhdues Ac

tanged Vayu as tvelh 'the tvine hnotvn ;ts the
Yattasa continues long undigested in the slo.nach
ovring to the fact of it being pithless. U )S a
good appetiser and tends to enrage the deranged
Yiyu, and acts as a purgative and diuretic (tonic.— A. I . >

It is hearo^ and slightly intoxicating. The wine
known as the Guda Sidhu {prepared with the boiled
juice of sugar-cane and TOhataki flowerSi etc.j bas a
sweet and astringent taste, and acts as an appetiser and
digestant. - Sugar wiue (Shavkard Sidhu) is sweet
in its taste, increases one's relish for food, is appe-
tising and diuretic. It subdues the deranged Vayu and
is exhilarating, sweet in digestion, and increases
the action (lit ; rouses up) of the sense organs, Tlie

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Ctwp. XLV.

460

\\nne known as the Pakka Rasa Sidliu is possessed
of properties similar to the preceding kinds (Sharkard
Sidhu). It improves the complexion and imparts
strength to the system and relish to one’s food.
It is pleasant, laxative^ appetising and proves beneficial
in cases of Kapham and piles and reduces swellings.
The wine known as the Sheeta Rasika Sidliu (pre-
pared from the unboiled juice of Sugar-cane in con-
tradistinction with the preceding kinds prepared
from the boiled juice of sugar-cane), acts as an
anti-epispastic, and a digestant and vocal tonic, proves
curative in oedema and abdominal dropsy, improves the
complexion, removes the suppression of flatus, urine
and stool (Vivandha), and proves beneficial in cases
of piles. The wane known as the Akshiha Sidliu
(prepared from a decoction of Vibhitaka with treacle
etc. and improved with the flowers of Dhfltaki)
proves beneficial in cases of ulcer and jaundice. It
is light and astringent, and has a sweet and astringent
taste. It subdues the deranged Pittam and purifies
the blood. The wine known as the Jamvava Sidhu
('wane prepared from the expressed juice of the Jambalin
fruit, a decoction of coriander seeds, treacle and
Dh^taki flowers, etc.) is anuretic, reduces the quantity
of urine, has an astringent taste, and tends to enrage
the bodily Vajm. The wane known as the Surasava
(Asava distilled with wine instead of with water) is keen,
pleasant, and diuretic. It subdues the deranged

462

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA’ [Chap. XLV.

unpleasant, unpalatable, and tends to increase the
slim)'' secretions of the organs. It enrages the deranged
humours of the body, takes a long time to be digested,
and is followed by an acid re-action. Old Wine is sweet-
snielling, acts as an appetiser, and brings on a relish for
food. It is pleasant and a vermifuge, and cleanses the
internal channels of the organism. It is light and
subdues the deranged Vdyu and Kapham.

The species of wine known as the Arishta
(fermented liquor) is highly efficacious owing to the
concerted action of a variety of drugs entering into
its composition. It proves curative in a large number
of diseases, tends to subdue the deranged humours of
the body, and is a good appetiser. It subdues the
Vayu and Kapham and is laxative and not hostile to the
Pittam. It proves beneficial in colicpain, distention
of the stomach, abdominal dropsy, fever, enlarged
spleen, 'indigestion and piles. Asava wine prepared
from the drugs known as the Pippali, etc. (Pippalyidi
Asava) proves curative in Gulma (abdominal glands)
and diseases due to the deranged Kapham. The
Aristhas of other therapeutic ^nrtues wall be
specially described later on in chapters on Therapeutics
(Chikitsitam). .An experienced physician should pre-
scribe the different species of wine such as, the Aristha,
Asava, Sidhu, etc., in different diseases in considera-
tion of the therapeutic properties of drugs, which" enter

464

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLV.

gardecl as the only wine fit for use. Wines may be
divided into a variety of species according to their
different tastes and strength. The potency of a
wine promoted by the bodily heat of a man
courses upward through tlie arteries, and ultimately
reaches the heart ; and thence, through its own subti-
lity and expansiveness, permeates the entire organism
and gradually attacks and overwhelms the organs of
sense perception, dethrones the mind from her throne of
reason, usurps the permanent seat of intellect, and thus
brings on intoxication.* A man of phlegmatic tempera-
ment (Kapha-prakriti) can carrj' his wine well, and
symptoms of intoxication usually appear later in him.
A man of bilious temparament (Pitta Prakriti',
imder such circumstances, gets easily into.xicated,
while the man whose temperament is marked by
a predominance of Vayu is often found to be
tipsy after his first cup. A man of a S^tUnka frame of
mind exhibits under the influence of wine, a decided
predilection for fine dress, jollity, and acts of purit)' and
compassion. He sings, or reads, or evinces a strong
desire for female company. A man of a R4jasika frame
of mind becomes extremely melancholy or pugnaci-
ous in his cups, indulges in despondent reveries, and
evinces suicidal tendencies ; while wine in a subject of
a T^masika cast of mind exhibits the latent and innate

* These couplets emphatically prove that the framers of ancient
Ayurveda were fully conversant with the circulation of the blood — Tr.

Chap. XLV.]

SUTRASTHANAM.

465

vileness of his soul. Such a person generally sleeps
when intoxicated, falsely boasts of his own excellence,
and evinces a desire for women with whom connection
is forbidden by both social and canonical lasvs.

Fermented liquors known as the Shukta (treacle,
honey, fermented rice gruel, and curd cream kept in a
new and clean vessel underneath a bushel of paddy for
three consecutive days) bring on an attack of Incmoptysis.
They disintegrate the lumps’ or knots of accumulated
Kaphara, are digestant and prove curative in jaundice
and diseases due to the derangement of Kapham. They
are light and verraifugenous, and strong and heat making
in their potency. They act as diuretic, are pleasant, and
pungent in digestion. Bulbs and roots pickled in Shukta
acquire the properties of the latter. Of the Shuktas
prepared with treacle, juice of sugar-cane, or honey, each
preceding one should be deemed heavier and as giving
rise to greater secretions of internal organs than the one
immediately following it in the order of enumeration.

The different lunds of fermented rice gruel known as
the Tushamvu and Sauvira are pleasant and appetising
beverages. They prove efficacious in cases of jaundice,
worms in the intestines, dysentery, piles, and in diseased

They are possessed of purgatfve

(Bhedi) properties.

is

The fermented gruel knowm

a good appetiser (tonic-D
59

as the Dhdayiujiam
owing to the fact

466,

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XLV.

of its being a preparation of paddy. As a plaster, it
alleviates the burning sensation of the skin, and as a
potion it subdues the Viyu and Kapham, and allays
thirst. Used as a gargle it forms one of tlie best remedies
for reducing Kapham owing to its keenness. It is light
of digestion, acts as a deodorant, removes the sense of
e.xhaustion and bad taste from the mouth, allays thirst,
acts as a good appetiser and dissolvent, is possessed
of purgative virtues, and is advantageously used as an
enemata (Asthdpanam). It is veiy wholesome to sea-
faring men.

The Urine Group The urine of cows,
bufialoes, goats, sheep, mules, horses, and camels' are
commonly hot and bitter, and leave a saline after-taste;
They are light and are used as purifying agents, and will
prove curative in diseases due to tlie derangement of the
or Kapham, as well as in worms in the intestines,
obesity, poisoning, abdominal glands, piles, ascites,
cutaneous affections, oedema, non-relish for food, and
jaundice. In general they act as cardiac stimulants
(Hridyam) and appetisers.

Authoritative verses on the Sub-
ject ; — They are all pungent, strong, hot, light and
have a saline after-taste. They act as blood-purifiers
or disinfecting agents, reduce corpulencv', act as vermi-

* The urine of a cow, she-buBalo, ewe and she-goat should be taken
and used, while similar secretions of the male should be taken where
man, camel and elephant should be indicated.

467

Cbt). XLV. 1 sutrasthanam.

fugesandare anti-toxic. They subdue the deranged Vdyu
andKapham. They prove beneficial in cases of piles,
ascites, abdominal tumours, cedema and non-rehsh for
food. They prove beneficial in jaundice, and act as
cardiac stimulants, and are possessed of appetising,
purgative and stomachic virtues.

The urine of a cow is pungent, strong and hot, and
does not generate Vdyu on account of its being saturated
with alkali. It is light, stomachic, slightly generates
the Pittam, and subdues the Vayu and Kapham. It
proves beneficial in cases of colic, abdominal glands,
ascites and distention of the abdomen, and is used for
the purposes of purging and enematas (AstlrdpananP. In
cases, ^vhich prove amenable to the use of urine, the
urine of a cow should be used to the exclusion of that
of any other animal, even to that of an ox.

The urine of a (she) baffalo proves beneficial in
piles, abdominal dropsy, colic-, cutaneous affections,
Meha, imperfect action of emetics or purgatives,
constipation, cedema, abdominal glands, and jaundice.

The urine of a (she) goat has a pungent, bitte
taste. It slighly agitates the bodily Vdyu and prove
curative in cases of cough, dyspnoea, consumptior
and cUoro*. The mine of a ewe contain
a -all, and has a bitter pnngent taste. It subdues th
d^ed vayu und is h^t-mahing i„ potenc
U proves beneScal in cough, enlarged spleen, abdom

468 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. XLV.

nal dropsy, dyspncea, consumption and in obstinate con-
stipation of the bowels. The urine of a horse is
appetising and pungent in taste, strong and heat-making
in its potency. It subdues the deranged V.lyu and
Kapham, and cures mental aberrations. It is usually
recommended in cases of ringwonn and worms in
the intestines. The urine of an elephant has a bitter
and saline taste. It is keen and purgative, and subdues
the Vdyu and enrages the Pittam. It is commonly
used in the treatment of (Kildsa) leucodenna and
in the preparation of alkalies.

The urine of an ass tends to neutralise the effects
of poison generated through the chemical action of
two different substances in the organism. It is strong
and proves curative in cases of chronic dysenter}'. It
is a vennifuge and subdues the Vayu and Kapham,
and is appetising. The urine of a camel proves
beneficial in cases of oedema, leprosy, abdominal
dropsy, insanity, worms in the intestines, piles and
in diseases due to the action of the deranged Vayu.
Human mine is strong anti-toxic.

I have now briefly described the properties of all
kinds of liquid food or drink. An e.xperienced physician
should prescribe them for the use of his king according
to the nature of season and the country in which the}^
are to be applied.

Thus ends the forty-fiflh Chapter of the Sutrasthdnam in the SushruUi
SainhitA which treats of liquids.

CHAPTER XLVI.

Now we shall discourse ou the Chapter which
iMts Of food and drink (Annapana-Vidhi-
madhyaryam).

Having made obeisance to the holy Dhanvantari,
Sushruta said ‘.-“You have stated before that food
delermines the origin of beings and forms the chief
source of their bodily strength and complexion, as well
as of the albuminous (Oias) principle in their organisms.
Pood primarily depends upon the six different
tastes. Moreover tastes are inherent in substances.
Again the substances, with their specific tastes,
virtues, potencies and reactionary or chemical
transformations, tend to diminish or increase the
deranged humours and the fundamental principles of the
hotly, as also to bring about a normal equilibrium
amongst them. Pood is tbe primary’ cause of the origin,
continuance and dissolution even of such beings as
the divine Brahmi, etc. Life is impossible without
fcofl. Food is the source of tbe grondb, strength, and
he.aUhtul glow of organic beings. It is food that

mmarts strength to the organs of sense and makes thi

« Ull'

alive in their respective fields of action. It
iv&tanya) of diet ,vl,ich brings abc
-H .ee, lb. l),et on.,, be divided into four kinds snch

iile

470

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLVl.

solid food, (Ashitha) drink, Leedham (food taken by
licking), and the Khdditam (food that is che\vn and
assimilated only for the enjoyment of a specific
taste). A variety of substances enters into the
composition of our food, which admit of being
grouped under various preparations and necessarily
involve the co-operation of a large number of dynamic-
al forces. I am eager to learn of the substances and
their specific inherent properties, virtues, potencies and
transformations (chemical reactions) which constitute
the daily food of human beings, inasmuch as a ph5'sician,
who is ignorant of them, is quite helpless in checking
or curing any distemper and maintaining health in indivi-
duals. And since food (diet) determines the origin of
all created beings, instruct us, O Lord, on the proper
regimen of food and drink.”

The holy Dhanvantari, thus addressed by Sushruta,
replied as follows : — “O child, hear me discourse
on the proper regulation of food and drink as
requested by you. There are several species of
Shili rice such as, the Lohitaka, Sh^i, Kalama, Karda-
maka, Pdnduka, Sugandhaka, Shakundhrita, Pushp^n-
daka, Pundarika, Mahishdli, Shita-Bhiruka, Rodhra-
Pushpaka, Dirghashuka, Kinchanaka, Mahisha-mastaka,
H^yanaka, Dushaka, and Mahd-Dushaka etc.

Metrical Texts — ^The several species of
Sh^li rice are sweet in taste, cooling in potency.

SUTRASTHANAM-

Oup. XLVl.l

47 ^

. .tUlotVoscNvUou^

light of digesto'. ™4 ,„a digMly gonontlo

the.. ,,,to«ufc»th.uUcnd to

Vii. hod „4,,teetUe tlhonliiy of fooo'

conslipetethota«te ^_„hiuto) h U-o >"0.l

efficacious, and su evc-inviJioram'K'*

«c,spe™atopofetfc,totago.^^^^^^^^^^

cosmetic, tohic aod pleasant. It nnp

its eihcacy Has Heen .ttne^^ - ^

aai nicer, and in all otHetdtscascs, U « a h

■ fectant and antUodc. ^0 other spemes d
ttl. in their properties front the p.cccdmh •

„e successively interior in <in.ahty tn then order of

enuiueraUou.

shashtma Group t-fhc several spcccs of

Shashtiha, Kangulra,Mnlrnndalra,Peetaka, Pramortaha,

lttlralalta,(esana-Pnshpaka,Mah4-Shashthilra,Chnrnaka,

Kuiavaka, aud the KedarSka, etc.

metrical Texts:— They (.Shashtikas) are sweet
in taste and digestion, and pacify the Vdyu and the
Kapham. Their properties are some%Yhat identical with
those of Shffii rice inasmuch as they are constructive,
tonic and spennatopoietic, and increase the Kapham.

. The Shashtika is pre-eminently the most efficacious of
all the other species, and leaves an astringent after-taste
in the mouth. It is light, mild, demulcent and imparts
strength and firpmess to the body. It is astringent and

472

THE SUSHRUTA SAxMPIITA'. [Chap. XLVI.

sweet in digestion, and exhibits - properties similar to
those of the red Shdli. The remaining varieties are
inferior in quality, each succeeding one being inferior to
the one immediately following it.

Vrihi Dharnyas : — The several species of
Vrihis are known as the Krishna- Vrihi, Shdiamukha,
Jatumukha, Nandimukha, Ldv^kshaka, Taritaka,
Kukkutandaka, Pdrivataka, and the Pdtala, etc.

Metrical Texts They have a sweet and
astringent taste, are sweet of digestion and hot in their
potencies. They tend to slightly increase the secretions
of the internal organs and bring on constipation of the
bowels. Their general properties are nearly identical
wth those of the aforesaid Shashtikas. The species
Krishna- Vrihi is the best of them all. It is Hght,
and leaves an astringent after taste, the remaining
\’nrieties gradually deteriorating in quality from the
one under discussion.

Sh^li rice, grown on burnt land, is light of digestion,
has an astringent taste, is parchil^dng, tends to suppress
the emission of mine and the evacuation of stool, and
reduces the deranged Kaphara. Sh5li rice grovm in a
Jangala countrj^ has a taste slightly blended of the
pungent, astringent, sweet and has a shade of bitter. It
subdues the deranged Pittam and Kapham, (generates
Vayu — D. R.) and is a good digestant and stomachic.
Shall rice grown in a Kaidara or marshy country has a

Chap.'-XLM.'i

. SUTRASTHANAM.

473

Weet teste wlK a sliade of the astringent. It is tonic
and 'spermatopoietic, aphrodisiac and heavy of digest
iion.- -It reduces the 'quantity of excrement, subdues

the Pittem', and increases the' Kaphara.

Rice of once transplanted paddy plants (Ropya). oi;
of those transplanted . several times in succession (Ati-
ropya)i 3 'light, easily digested and comparatively more
efficacious. It acts as a constructive tonic and is not
follo'.ved by any reactionary^ acidity after digestion.

It destroys the deranged humours and is diuretic. Rice of
paddy plants, sprouting Irom the stubbles of a previous
harvest, is parchifying. It suppresses the evacuations of
stool, has .a bitter and astringent taste, subdues the
Pittem, is easily digestible and generates. Kapham. 1
have fully described the good and bad, species of grain
belonging to the Shall group. Similarly, 1 shall speak
of Kudhdnyas, hludgas and Mdshas, etc.

The Genus Kudharnya The several
varieties of Kudhanyam are knovsm as .the Kora-
dushaka, Shyamaka, Kivara, Shantanu, Vaiaka
Udddhka, Priyangu, hladhulikd, Nandimukhi, Kura-
vinii GaveiJhuka, Varuka, Todapatni, Makundaka,
and Vcnu-yava, etc. ' ■ ’

metrical Texts l-Tkey generate heat and

taste- Theyare parchifyi

■ns aadpuagent ot digestioa; sabdae the Kapham and

474

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIA'I.

tend to produce retention of the urine, and . enrage the
bodily Viyu and the Pittam. Of these the species known
as the Kodrava, Nivara, Shyam^ka and Shdntanu have a
sweet and astringent taste and prove curative in Sheeta
pitta (urticaria). The four (black, red, yellow and white)
varieties of Priyangus reduce the Kapham and
produce a parched condition in the body, each preceding
species being superior as regards its \4rtues to the One
immediate!}’- following it in the order of enumeration.
The species Madhulik^s as well as the one kno\\Ti as the
Nlndlmukhi is sweet, cool and demulcent. The species
Varuka and Mukundaka are largely possessed of
absorbing virtues. The species Venu-yava, is parchify-
ing, and heat-making in its potency and is pungent of
digestion, brings on retention of the urine, subdues
the deranged Kapham, and tends to enrage the bodily
A'’d3'U. The several varieties of pulse (Vaidala) commonly
used as food are known as the Mudga, Vana-Mudga,
Kalaya, Makushtha, Masura, Mangalya, Chanaka,
Satina, Triputa, Harenu, and Adhaki, etc.

IVIetrlcal Texts :~They are generally cool and
pungent of digestion, and have a sweet and astringent
taste. They generate the Vdyu, arrest the flow
of urine and the evacuation of stool, and subdue
the Pittam and Kapham. The species known
as the Mudga does not excessively generate Viyu
in the system but tends to piuify and invigorate the

475

Clup,XLVI.l SUTRASTHAfJAM.

organ of wion. The green species is the best of ail
the varieties of Mudga pulse. The properties of
Vanya (Mudga) are similar to those of the common

variety.

The species of pulse known as Masura is sweet of
digestion and constipates the bowels. The species
Makushthaka is vermigenous, while the species Kalaya
generates V^yu copiously. The species Adhaki subdues
the Pittam and Kapham, and does not excessively
agitate the V^yu in the organism. The species know
as the Chanaka generates Vdyu and is cooling . in its
potency. It has a sweet and astringent taste, and
produces a parched condition of the body. It subdues
the Pittam and Kapham, corrects the deranged
blood, and tends to bring on a loss of the virile powers.
The species known as Satina and Harenu are astring-
ent in their virtues and tend to constipate the bowels.
All the varieties of pulse except the Mudga and the
klasura tend to produce a distension of the abdomen
caused by gas or air in the organism (Tympanites or
Adhmdua).

The pulse known as the Misha has a sweet taste,
is heavy and pleasant, laxative, diuretic, demulcent,
heat-making, aphrodisiac, and specifically sperma-
lopoietic, tonic and galactpgoguic. It subdues the
\'4yu and increases the Kapham. The species known
as the Adasindta (Rdjamasha) does not produce Kaphait)

THE SUSHRtJTA SAMHITA.T Chap. XLVI.

•476

•and is neither laxative nor .• diuretic on account of its
astringent nature. It is sweet in taste and of digestion;,
pleasant, glactogoguic and improves a rehsh for -food.
The properties of Atmagupta and Kakanda seeds are
similar to those of the aforesaid M^sha. pulse. The
species knonm as the Aranya-masha is astringent in
taste, produces a condition of parchedness in the
system, and is not. foil owed by any reactiohar}’’ acidity
after being digested. The pulse known as K^atfha
has an astringent taste, is pungent of digestion and is
possessed of astringent properties. It proves cura-
tive in cases of urinarj' calculi arising from seminal
derangement (Shukr^shmari), abdominal glands, cat^h',
and cough. The species known as the Vanya-Knlattha
subdues the deranged Kapham, and proves curative in
cases of Anilia, obesity, piles, hic-cough and dyspnoea.
It may bring on an attack of hcemoptysis, and proves
beneficial in diseases affecting the eyes. Tilam has a
taste blended of the sweet and the bitter -with a shade of
the astringent. It is astrigent, heat-making, and produces
Pittam. It is sweet of digestion, demulcent, tonic,
and curative as a plaster for ulcers. It is bene^
fiicial to the skin and teeth, - improves -the intellect
and'.digestion, is aiiure.tic and hea\y, helps , the -growth
of hair, and subdues the deranged ■Vi}m. '

Of all, the different varieties of s^sa^mum, , t he black. ,
species is the best in respect of efficacy. The white

j ■ vitwcs,

^vliWe t\ie remawing .

i„Cerio, quality. . „,a a.Vnn80>u «

Barley 3 yV)ducs lire dcraugcd

teste, and pungent of d^gj^ ^encficwl to ulcers ;

PiUamandRapto of stool and

and like sesanrurn.rn ^

- • nf fl'itns imparts nrmnt»
tteem»onof te

:::=^«=r:r--;5-

lesped of *= preoei'"? q»a''f'“'

meal is s«et,heaa7, tooic, tejuV>*nt, .

topoietie, and improves the relish for food. 11 rs
dmuteoi arid extremely coolirrg, suhdues the l ayu
and Pittairr, and generates the Kapham. New wheat is
laxative and brings ahont the adhesion of fmclnted
bories or kelps fenrientation fSandkanakritj; '

The Skimvas (Beans) kave an astringent taste and
produce a condition of parckedness in tke • s^ stenis
Tkey are, antitoxic, discutlent, and reduce tke Kapkam
and tke power of slgkt. Tkey are imperfectly digested
and acquire a pungent taste in digestion, Ihougl)

tHE SUSHRtlTA SAMHITA. [ Chip- XtVf;

478

ordinarily sweet in taste. They cause evacuation of
the bowels and emission of flatus.

There are four variteies of Shirava such as, the white,
tire black, the yellow and the red, of which each
preceding species is superior in virtues and qualities to
the one immediately following it in .the order of
enumeration. The Shimvas are heat-making and
pungent both in taste and digestion,

Tlie two varieties of Saha, as well as the species of
beans known as the Mulakashimvi and the Knshimvi,
are sweet in taste and digestion, and strength-giving.
They tend to subdue the action of the deranged
Pittam.

Raw and unripe pulse beans (Vaidilika Shimvi)
produce a condition of extreme parchedness in the
system, are long retained in the stomach and but imper-
fectly digested. They are relishing but can be digested
only with the greatest difficulty, causing the stomach
to distend before being digested.

Kasumbha seeds are pungent in taste and
digestion, and reduce the deranged Kapham. They
are extremely unwholesome, owing to the fact of
their being imperfectly digested. Linseed fAtasi)
has a sweet taste, is heat-making in its potency, and
pungent in digestion. It generates the Pittam and
subdues the Vayu. White mustard (Shveta Sarshapa) is

Chip/XIAIO .SUTRASTHANAM. .}79

pungent in taste and digestion, strong and lieaMnaking
in its potency. It gives rise to a condition of parcUedness
in the system, and diminishes the Viyuand the Kupham.
An excessive and continuous use of while mustard
may bring on an attack of hajinoptysis. Tl\c projrcttics
of red mustard seeds are similar to those of the white
species.

A crop of Dhdnyam grown in an unnatural se;ison,
or in any way diseased or blighted, or gleaned before it
has ripened, as well as the one raised from a soil
naturally uncongenial to its growth, or recently harvest-
ed, should be deemed to be of inferior quality.

•The use of new (harvested within a year) rice tends
to increase the secretions of the internal organs, while
that of a year's maturity is light.*

Itice threshed out of paddy, which has commenced
sprouting, is heav)’’, and is long retained in the stomach.
It can be but imperfectly digested and lends to affect
the organ of vision.

The maturit}', preparations (Sanskara), and measures
of com ftom Shili rice to mustard seeds described
in the present Chapter ate as follows [Rice of two
ysais standing should bo regarded as well matured in
Umeand excellent in quality. A thing, whieh is hard to

Sic* of more than two
imtriiiTc eltmcnis.

years standing becomes divested of all its

■^gp THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Ch'ap.iXLVi.

digest like Vrihi, is made light by frying. Measures
for use should vary according to the keenness of one’s
appetite.] ' '

The meat. Group : — ^Xow I shall iiescribe
the properties of the different species of edible. meats.
Tlie flesh of animals such as those which, are
aquatic in their habits (Jaleshaya), or frequent marshy
lands (Anilpa), or dwell in callages (Grdmya), or are
carnivorous in their habits (Kra\yabhuja}, or are pos-
sessed of unbifurcated hoofs (Ekashapha), or dwell on
high ground (J^ngala), is generally used as food. Of
these each succeeding kind is superior to the one
immediatel}' preceding it in the order of enumeration.

Again these animals may be roughly grouped under

two broad sub-heads such as, the Jangala (li\nng in high

/

ground and in a jungle) and the Amipa (living in

marshy places, or near pools and water- courses). The
Jdngala group may be further divided into eight

sub-species, such as the Janghala, . the Viscira, the
Pratnda, the G-uhdshaya,the Prasaha,the Pamamriga,
the Vileshaya, and the G-ramya. Of these the Janghala
and the Viscira are the most important. The following
animals belong to the Janghala (large-kneed' group — viz.
the Ena (black deer), the Harina (red deer), the Rishya
(blue deer), the Kmnnga (antelope', the Karala,
the Kritamala, the Sharabha, the Shvadanstra, the
Prishata, the Chitrila (Spotted deer), the Charushka,

a.p.sw..l 'sutrasthWAM. -1^'

te Mnga-mttnU, ac

a sweetandastnngenttaste,^ o

Ua.nU.atlve,™d.««„aW...a. U,«

subdue AeViyu and the Wtam.

metrical Texf-Tte vemsuu of ti.e V,.u

sueciee is su-eet and astriugeut iu laste, audpalaUb.c

and proves curative in diseases due to tbe deruugu
conaion of the Pittam. Wood and Kaplv.uu. U a.lnu-
gent in its effect, imparts strength to the sy=lcu»,
improves a relish for food and is a tebntuge.

The venison of the Harina (red) species is ssvecl

in taste and digestion, appetising, aromatic, cool,
Tght, and suppresses the discharge of stool and
urine and pacifies the deranged humours. Deer
which are black are called Ena, while those which are
red are called Harina. Those, that are neither red nor
black, are designated as Kuranga. L'he venison
of the Mriga-raitriki species is cooling and proves
Q^mtive in cases of hetmoptysis, Sannipata diseases
(due to the concerted action of the three deranged
humours), consumption, dyspnoea, cough, and hiccough
and creates a relish for food.

Birds such as the Ldva, Tittiri, liapinjala, Vartira,
Vartikd, Yartaka, Naptrika, Vitika, Chakora, Kala-
^’inka, hlayura, Krakaia, Upachakra, Kukkuta, Sdranga,
Shata-Patraka, Kutittiri, Kuruvlhuka and Yavalaka
belong to the Vishkira species. (They are so called
Or

482

THE SU.SHRUTA SAMHITA.

fawp. xi.vi.

from the fact of their pickinjr up their food
after scattering it first with their hills and claws
(Skr. kira, to scatter)]. The flesh of a bird of
this group is light, cooling, sweet and astringent
in taste and tends to pacif}- the deranged humours
of the body.

The flesh of the Lava is light, has a sweet and
astringent taste, is pungent of digestion, and
possessed of astringent and appetising properties.
It is highly efficacious in diseases due to the concerted
humours of the body. The flesh of the Tittirs is
slightly heav}', heat-making and sweet in taste. It is
spennatopoietic, appetising and astringent. It improves
the intellect and complexion, and subdues the three
deranged humours. The flesh of the yellow (Gaura)
Tittiri proves curative in hic-cough and dyspnoea,
and subdues the deranged V^yu. The flesh of the
Kapinjala is light and cooling, and proves curative
in cases of luomoptysis, and is recommended
in diseases brought about through the deranged
condition of the Kapham or Vdyu (Manda-A-rfta^.
The flesh of the Krakara or of the Upachakra
is light, pleasant (palatable), spennatopoietic, and
appetising. It subdues the VdAn and Pittam and
improves the intellect. The flesh of the Mayara is
astringent and saline in taste, and is beneficial to the
skin, helps the growth of hair, improves the voice,

Chup. XLYl.l SUl'RASTHANAM. .\i>3

intellect, appetite and telisli for lood, and impatl'i

strength and vigour to the oigivns of sight and hearing.

The ilesh of a cock is demulcent, heat-making,
and spennatopoietic. It acts as a diaphoretic, im\'aTls
tone to the voice and the organism, subdues the
deranged Vayu, and is useful as a good construcU\ e
tonic. The flesh of a domesticated cock or fowl is
possessed of properties similar to those of its wild
prototype with the exception that it is heavy, and
proves curative in rheumatism, consumption, vomiting
and chronic (\''ishama-Jvara) fever.

Birds such as the dove, pigeon Bhringanlja,
cuckoo, Koyashtica, Kulinga, the domestic Kulinga,
Gokshada, Dindimanaka, Shatapatraka, Matrinindaka,
Bhedishi, Shuka, Shiriki, Valguli, Girisha, .Vlahva,
Dushaka, Sugrihi, Khanjaritaka, Harita, Datyuha, etc.
belong to the group known as the Pratuda.

metrical Texts -.—The Pratudas live on fruit,
and their flesh has a sweet and astringent taste.
It generates \ dyu and produces a parched condition
in the organism. It is cooling in its potency and
reduces the Pittara and Kapham. It suppresses the
discharge of urine and reduces the quantity of stool.
Of these the flesh of the Bhedashi tends to vitiate
the humours and to derange the three excrements of
Urebody. The flesh of the Kina Kapota (wild dove)
IS heavy and has a palatable, saline and astringent

4S4 The SUSHRUTA SAMHmY. [Chap. XLVL

taste. It proves beneficial in lueinoptysis and is sweet
of digestion. The flesh of the Knliiiga is sweet,
demulcent, and spennatopoietic, and increases the bodily
Kapham. The flesh of the domesticated Ivulinga is
highly spennatopoietic, and proves curative in cases of
hemoptysis.

Animals such as the lion, tiger, wolf, hyena
arboreal leopard (Vriksha dipi^ cat, jackal, bear,
and Mrigaer\-aruka (a jackal-shaped, deer-eating species
of tiger) belong to the group of the Guhishayas
(cave-dwelling mammals).

IVIetrical Texts ; — The flesh of animals belong-
ing to this family is sweet, hea^y, demulcent
and strength-giving. It subdues the deranged Vayu.
It is heat-making in its potency, and proves beneficial
in diseases affecting the eyes and anus.

The Prasaha Group Birds such as,
the Kaka, Kanka, Kurura, Chdsa, Bhasa, Shashaghati,
Uluka, Chilli, Shyena, Gridlrra, etc. belong to the
family of Prasahas (Carnivorous birds that suddenly
dart on tlieir prey).

Metrical Text : — The flesh of birds belonging
to this group is identical in its virtues, potency,
taste and digestive transformation vnth those of
the aforesaid carnivorous mammals, such as the lion,
etc., and is special!}’ beneficial in cases of consumption
and kindred wasting diseases.

C.p,XtvU S«TRAStH.NAM.

4S5

= « n*T>iio Animals snc\^

The Parna-Wlf g Vtilcsha-SMyika,

, the M»dgu, tte belong to the

family of Sarna-Sbigas flit •

animals).

metrical Texts '.-The «esh of anim*,”'
n is s^Yeet spematopoietic and- heav)
TdigelL, It is intlgmating to the eyesight and
beneficial in cases of consnmption. It is laaatn-eanc
dinretic and cures cough, pile and dyspnoea.

The Vileshaya Group :-Animals such
as the Shvavit, Shalyaka, Godhfi, Shasha. Vrishadansha,
Lopiha, Lomasha-Kama. Kadali, Mrrga-Prryaha,
Ajagara, Saipa, Mushika, Nakula and Maha-Vabhru
belong to the group of Vileshaya (hole-drvellers).

metrical Texts -.-The general properties of
the flesh of animals belonging to this species
are to increase the consistency of stool and unne.
They are heat-making in potency, sweet in digestion as
those of the preceding group. They subdue the Vdyu
and generate the Pittam and Kapham. They are
demulcent and beneficial in cough, dyspncea and
cachexia. The flesh of the Shasha is sweet and astringent
in tirste. It reduces the Pittam and Kapham and
neither produces nor subdues the Viyu owing to
its moderately cooling potency. The flesh of the Godha,
is sweet of digestion and has a pungent, astringent taste.

486 the SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA. [O^p.

It is tonic and constructive and pacifies the Va>*u and
Pittajn. The flesh of the Shalyaka is tasteful,
light of digestion, cooling in its potency and anti-toxic,
and subdues the deranged Pittam. The flesh of the
Mriga-Priyaka proves a wholesome diet in diseases
due to the action of the deranged Vayu ( Vavai-Roga),
while that of the Ajagara is beneficial in piles.

Tlie flesh of a Sarpa (a species otlier than those
specifically described ) is curative in piles and derange-
ments of the Vajm. It is a vennifuge and anti-to.xic (a
neutraliser of chemical or resulting poisons). It in-
vigorates the eye-sight, is appetising and sweet
and improves the intellect. Of these the flesh of tlie
Djinicara is appetising, pungent in digestion, sweet in
taste, and extremely efficacious in eye diseases. It is
laxative and diuretic, and subdues the deranged Vavu.

Domestic Animal Group Animals
such as horses, mules, cows, bullocks, asses, camels,
goats, sheep, imd iledapuchhas (fat tailed or Turkish
sheep} etc., belong to the group of domestic animals
(GramyasK

Metrical Texts : — The flesh of domestic
animals is possessed of constructive, tonic and
appetising properties, is srveet in taste and diges-
tion. It destroys the deranged Varai and produces the
Kapham and Pittam- Of these the flesh of the goat is

Chap. XLVI. 1 SUTRASTll.VNANt. .1^7

moderately cooling in ib potency, does not inca-ase Vlic
secretions of the internal organ^, is heavy and vlennd-
cent, subdues the Pittam and the Kapham, and i. henc
ficial in nasal catarrh. The llesh of sheep (mutton) i^
constructive, tonic and heavy, and gener,ite> the
Pittam and Kapham. The llesh ol the Medaputhih.i
is aphrodisiac and Iv.is properties similar to tho.ao
of mutton.

Beef is holy and refrigenint, proves curative in
dyspnaa, catarrh, cough, chronic fever and in cases
of a morbid craving for food (.\tyagni), and destroys
the deranged V^yu. The flesh of an animal with
unbifurcated hoofs (Ekashapha such as, the iiorse atul
the mule etc.), has a slightly saline taste, and is possess-
ed of properties similar to those of mutton. The flesh
of an animal belonging to the Jdngala group is said
to increase the secretions of the internal organs.

The flesh of beasts or birds dwelling remote from a
village or pool tends to slightly increase the secretions
of the internal organs, while the flesh of an animal
living in a village or near a resen'oir of water, e.v-
cessively increases that secretion.

The A'nupa Group Animals, which are
generally found to frequent marshy places (Anupas)
maybe divided into five groups, such as, the Kulacharas
(frequenting the shores of pools and lakes), Plavas

488

THE SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA. fChnp. XLVi.

(divers or swiinniers), Koshastha (concluTeroiis aquatic
animals such as, the molluscs etc.), the Padinas
and the (piscatory) Matsya.

Of these, the elephant, the Gava\'a, Iniflalo,
Ruru (an animal of the deer species which casts its
antlers and wanders roaming about in the forests in
autumn) Chamara, Srinv.mi (an animal of the Zebra
species with green and red stripes), Rohita (red
deer), boar, rhinoceros, Gokama, K.-ilapuchchaka,
together with the Xynku (a species of antlered deer)
and the wild cow, etc., frequent the cool shores
of swamps and lakes, and are accordingly included
within the group of Kulacharas (shore-dwellers).

The IVletrical Texts The flesh of an
animal of this group is spermatopoietic and
destroys the deranged ^'ayu and Knpham. It is sweet in
taste and digestion, cooling, tonic, demulcent and
diuretic, and increases the quantity of Kapham.

The flesh of the Elephant tends to produce a state
of extreme parchedness in the system, and is lique-
facient and heat-making in its potency. It vitiates
the Pittam and has a palatable acid and saline taste,
and destroys the Vdyu and Kapham. The flesh of
the Gavaya is demulcent and sweet in taste, and proves
beneficial in cough and is sweet of digestion. It tends
to increase sexual capacity. The flesh of the Buffalo
is demulcent, heat-making (in its potency), sweet,

Qup. XLVI. ]

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

spemiatopoiclic, plcasunl ■.uul heavy v\ vh..c.lK'n U
increases strength ami virility ami imparts rmnne.-.
the tissues, ami is hypnotic ami galaclagoguic. I he
flesh of the Rum is slightly sweet ami leaves an
astringent after taste. It is heavy, spermatopoietic ami
pacifies the Vdyu and Kapham.

Similarly, the flesh of the Chamara is demulcent,
cures an attack of cough, is sweet in taste and rligcslifu
and subdues the deranged V.^yu and Pittam. I he tleslr
of the Srimara is heavy and spermatopoietic, leaves an
astringent after-taste in the mouth and tends to snbtUie
the deranged Vayu and Pittam. 'rUe flesh of the boar
(Baraka) or common pig is constructive, tonic, sperma-
topoietic and diaphoretic, and imparts a greater strength
to the system. It is heavy (as regards digestion), demul-
cent, cooling, refrigerant, and pleasant, and destroys the
deranged Vayu. The flesh of the rhinoceros has an as-
tringent taste, and is pleasing to one’s departed manes in
the shape of an oblation (Pitry-am). It is sacred, imparls
longevity, tends to suppress the discharge of urine,
produces a condition of paichedness in the organism, ami
destroys the deranged Viyu and Kapham. Tim flesh
of the Gokarna is sweet, demulcent, mild (soft), sweet
in digestion and proves curative in cases of Inemoptysis,
and generates Kapham in the system.

The Plava Group -Birds such

62

as the

490

■nn-: sushkuta samuita. i xlvi.

Hiinsa, Sdrasa, Krauiiclia, Cliaf;ravalca, Kurura (belong
also to the Prnsaha group) Kacl;lniva, Karandava,
Jivan Jivaka, \'aka, ^’alaka, Pundarika, Plava, Saniri-
inukha, Nandimukha, Madgu, Utkrosha, Kdchdlcsha,
Mallikaksha, Slnikldkslia, Pushkaraslidyikd, Kondlaka,
Amvukxikkutika, Mcgharavu and Shvetacharana etc.
belong to the Plava faniil)*. These birds are found to
move about in large flocks.

IVIetrical Text ; — ^The flesh of any one of
this family is cooling, detnulcent, and spennatopoietic
and destroys the deninged \'4yii. It proves beneficial
in cases of hiemoptysis, is sweet in taste and of digestion,
and IS possessed of laxative and diuretic properties.
The flesh of the Hansa is heavy (of digestion), heat-
making, sweet and demulcent. It tends to improve the
voice and complexion, and imparts strength to the
system. It is spermatopoietic, tissue-building and tonic,
and proves curative in nervous diseases (Vdta-Vik^ra).

The Conchiferous (Koshastha) Spe-
cies .Animals such as, the Shankha, Shankhanakha
(a species of small bivalve molluscs), Shukti, Shambuka
and Bhalluka, etc., belong to the Koshastha (conchifer-
ous) group.

The Pardina Species Animals such as,
the tortoise, alligator, crab, black crab, porpoise, etc.,
belong to this species.

Chap.XLVl.l stJtRAStHANAM. ' 491

metrical Texts:— The flesh of animals of
the Shankha and Kurma orders is sweet in taste and
digestion, cooling in its potency, demulcent, and bene-
ficial to stool and the Pittara. It destroys the deranged
Vayu and produces Kapham. Of these, the species of
black crab is strength-girfing and heat-making in its
potency, and tends to destroy the deranged Vdyu. The
white species is laxative and diuretic in its effect, and
tends to bring about an adhesion of fractured bones
(or produces fermentation). It destroys the V^yu and
Pittara.

The Piscatory Order The piscatorj'
group may be roughly di^aded into two broad sub-
divisions, such as the Marine and the River (fresh water)
fish. The species such as the Rohita, Pathina,
PataU, RtLjiva, Varmi, Gomatsya, Krishna-Matsya,
Vagunjdra, Jdurala, Sahasra-danstra, etc., belong to the
fresh water family.

Metrical Texts : — The fresh water (Medeya)
fish (river fish) are sweet in taste, heav}’- of
digestion, bring on haemoptysis and destroy the
deranged Vdyu. They are heat-making in their
potencies, spermatopoietic and demulcent and tend to
reduce the quantity of stool. Of these, the Rohita
leaves an astringent after-taste, and destroys the
deranged \aj-u. This species lives on such aquatic
plants and herbs as grow in fresh-water pools

492

The susHruta sA^ihita. [ chap. xlv.

and do not inordinately generate Pittam. The
Pdthinas produce Kapham and are spemidtopoietic.
They are carnivorous and somnolent in their habits^
tend to vitiate the blood and the Pittam, and originate
dermal affections. The species of fish known as
the Murala is constructive, tonic, spermatopoietic
and galactagoguic. Fish bred in tanks or ponds are
palatable to the taste and demulcent in their effect,
while those reared in large lakes are usually found to
gain in strength and size, wliile the species reared in
shallow water is weak and stunted.

The Sarmudra (IVIarine) Species

The Timi, Timingila (a species of large whales) Kulisha,
Pdka inatsya, Xirdlaka, Nandi-Vdralaka, Makara,
Gargarka, Chandraka, Mahamina, and Rdjiva etc., con-
stitute the family of marine fish.

Metrical Texts : — Sea fish are heayj'-, demul-
cent, and sweet, and do not inordinately produce Pittam.
They are heat-making (in their potency), and sper-
matopoietic and beneficial to the stool, and destroy
Vayu and generate Kapham.

Sea fish are e.vtremely strength-giving in their
effect owing to the fact of their living on animal
food. Fresh water fish are possessed of greater
tissue-buUding properties than their marine kindred,
while those which are found in wells and Chuntis

Chap. XLVl. 3

SUTRASTHANAM.

493

are said to be possessed of greater camdnative (Vatagbna)
virtues than the two preceding orders. Fish reared in

tanks (Vipi) are superior to the two preceding species
owing to their greater demulcent and palatable pro-
perties. River fish are heav}' at the middle, owing
to the fact of their moving about with the help
of their head and tail, while those which are
cultured in tanks and ponds (Sarah and faddga)
are specially light about their heads. Fish,
which are found in hill streams or fountains, are
extremely hear^}' about the parts a little below the
region of their head, on account of their being con-
fined within narrow limits and the consequent absence
of any lengthy sweep. Fish reared in large tanks
(Sarasi) are lighter in the foreparts of their body and
heary in their lower parts, as they put their entire
pressure upon their breast at the time of swimming.
Thus I have finished describing the specific properties
of the flesh of animals that frequent su'amps or
marshy grounds and which increase the secretions
of the internal organs of a person using them for food.

Dried or putrid flesh, as well as the flesh of a
diseased, old, emaciated, poisoned, or snake-bitten
animal, or of one of extremely tender years or struck
Mith a poisoned dart or weapon, or of that which
has fed on unnatural food, should be carefully
avoided inasmuch as dried or putrid meat ig

494

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA. [a.ap.XLVi.

shorn of all its potency. The flesh of a diseased or
snake-bitten animal would be found to be poisoned or
vitiated in its properties ; that of a wounded animal is
affected, that of an old animal is enfeebled in its
potency, and that of an extremely young animal is
immature in its \'irlue and hence would prove positivel}'
injurious to the S3'stem.

IVIetrical Texts : — Dry meat is heavy, brings
on catarrh and a non-relish for food. The flesh of an
animal killed by poison is fatal. The flesh of an
animal of tender years may produce vomiting. The
flesh of an old animal produces cough and dyspna^a,
while the use of that of a diseased animal may be
attended with a simultaneous derangement of the three
fundamental humours of the body. Putrid meat pro-
duces nausea, while the use of that of an enfeebled or
emaciated animal tends to aggravate the Vayu.

Meat falling under a categor}' other than those
described above should be deemed as good and whole-
some, The flesh of a female quadruped, or of a male
bird, or of a small-bodied creature of a large-sized
genus, and rice versa, is principally recommended
to be used amongst quadrupeds, birds, and animals.
Similarl)’- the flesh of a small-sized creature amongst
large-bodied ones of the same species should be pre-
ferred as food.

OiAp. XL,VI. ]

SUTRASTHiYNAM.

495

Now we s\\a\\ discourse on Uw heavy or li;^hl
character of flesh obtained from diflercnt \vatb
of the body of an animal. Of the different fuiulamenl.d
principles of the body from the blood to the semen,
each succeeding one is heavier than the one im-
mediately preceding it in the order of einumieration.
Similarly, (of the different limbs or organs of a
quartered animal such as), the thighs, the shoulders, the
loins, the head, the legs, the fore-extremities, the waist,
the back, the skin, the kidneys, the liver and the
intestines, each succeeding one is respectively heavier
than the one immediately preceding it in the order.

Metrical Texts :~The head is heavier than
the shoulders •, the shoulders, than the waist ; and the
waist, than the back. Similarly, tbe upper parts of
the Sakthi (thighs) are heavier than their lower ends.
Of the seven fundamental principles of the organisnr
(such as the l>Tnph chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone,
marrow, and semen) each succeeding one is heavier
than the principle immediately preceding it in the
order of enumerarion. The trunks of all animals
are heav3^ The lorrer part of a female frame and the
upper one of a male are respectively heavier [than
their upper (fore) and lower (hind) parts,]

The head and breast ^of a bird are heavier than
Jts other limbs. The trunk or the middle part of a
bird is so equipoised as to facilitate the movements

496

THE SUSHRUTA SA.MHITA'. fOiap. xrA’r.

of its pinions in flight. The flesh of a fruit-eating
bird produces a state of extreme ])archedness in
the organism (of a person using it as food,) while
that of a carnivorous one acts as a good constructive
tonic. The flesli of a bird, which lives on fish,
produces Pittam, while that of one, which lives on
paddy (Dhanya), subdues the Vdjm. Of the animals, that
live in dry land or frequent marshy places, as well
as of those which are domesticated, or are carnivorous
in their habits, or are possessed of unbifurcated hoofs,
or live by darting on their preys, or dwell in holes,
or are possessed of long legs, or eat by pricking, or
are in the habit of first scattering their food with
their claws, the flesh of each preceding one is fighter
and tends to give rise to a lesser secretion from the
internal organs than the one immediate!}'- following
it in the order of enumeration.

Of animals belonging to the same genus, the flesh
of one, which attains to an abnormally large size,
should be rejected as inferior in pith or substance, and
heavy as regards digestion. The flesh about the
region of the liver of all animals should be regarded
as the ver}’ best in respect of its dietic proper-
ties, in absence whereof the flesh of a young animal
not at all used up, or afflicted 'wfith any disease
and just quartered that day, should be regarded as
coming next best.

Qup. XLVI- 1

SUTRAStHANAM.

497

Authoritative verse on the sub-
ject; -The age, body, development of limbs, tem-
perament, nature, sex, • constitution, size and habit
of an animal should be taken into consideration
before determining whether its flesh is wholesome
or not. The measure in which it may be used
as food with decided advantage to the organism and
to what extent it mil purify or improve its virtues,
should also be considered.

The Fruit Group (Phala-varga) ;--Now we
shall discourse (on the specific virtues) of fruits,
such as the DMima, Amalaka, Kapittha, Vadara,
Kola, Karkandhu, Sauvira, Shimvitik^phala, Matulunga,
Amra, Ararataka, Karamarda, Piydla, Lakucha, Bhavya,
Pdrivata, Vetraphala, Prdchinimalaka, Tintidika, Nipa,
Kosharara, Amlika, Niranga, and Jamvira, etc.

metrical Texts (We may describe the
general properties of fruits by saying that) they are
acid in taste and heav)' of digestion, heat-making in
their potencies, (expectorant) of (Kapham), generate
Pittam and subdue the V4yu. Of the fruits enumerated
in the above list the Dadima leaves an astringent
after- taste and does not generate the Pittam to an
inordinate degree.- It acts as an appetiser, brings on

CWU and nhattdra.ca Ilari^hchandxa exclude Dddlma (po„
.r^a,c) fron. the hs: of Viuakant agenlx, while Jejjadicharx-i J
uptoton that ,t netlhcr generate nor subdues the Piilam. ^

63

498 the sushruta samhita.

f CIwp. XLVl.

flesh and a relish for food, is palatable to the taste, and
tends to constipate the bowels by (imparting; a greater
consistency to the fecal matter). Didimas may be classi-
fied into two distinct species according as they are sweet
or acid to the taste. The sweet species subdues the three
deranged bodily humours, while the acid one subdues
the Vayu and Kapham. The fruit known as the
Amalaia has a taste blended of the sweet, pungent and
astringent ones wth a shade of the bitter. It is laxative,
spermatopoietic and beneficial to the eye-sight, and is
capable of subduing all the three deranged humours
The Y^taghna ^irtue of this fruit should be ascribed
to its acid taste ; its power of subduing the PitLam,
to its sweetness and coolness ; and its efficacv* in
subduing the Kapham, to its affecting the tongue as
a dr)' astringent substance. This fruit is by far the best
knowTt fruit as possessing high therapeutic properties.
The Karkandhu, like the Kola or the Vadara, generates
the Kapham and Pittam in its imripe or immature
stage, while in its ripe or matured stage it is sweet,
demulcent, purgative and subdues the V^yu and

Pittam. The fruit knoum as the Sauvira is possessed
of properties similar to those of the Vadara ; moreover it
is sweet, demulcent, and subdues the Vayu and

Pittam. The Shimvitika-frnit is cooling, astringejit
and palatable and has an astringent taste. Tlie
Kapittham in its unripe stage produces hoarseness.
It is astringent and subdues the Kapham and increases

Ch.t55« XLVI. ]

SUTRASTHAN'AM.

tl\e Vayu, while in its ripe staue it subdue, ib.c
■ Vayu and Kaphani, is heavy, and Ivas a hweel and
acid taste. The fruit known as tlic Matulunsa
light, acid, appetising, and pleasant. It proves hcnclkial
in cough and asthma, brings on u leli.^h for food, allay s
thirst and cleanses the throat. The rind of aMdtnlnnga
is a bitter vermifuge and is difficult to digest ; it subdues
the Vayu and Kapham. The layer ol skin dil. lU‘;h),
immediately underlying the rind of the MiUuhmga,
is palatable, cooling in its potency, demulcent and
heavy of digestion, and also subdues the \.lyu and
Pittam. The membranous or cellular covering, which
envelops its seeds, is light, stomacaic, astringent and
palatable. It produces Kanham and proves curative in
cases of piles, abdominal glands (Guhnu) and vomiting.
The expressed juice of the Matulunga is recommended
to a person suffering from colic pain (g'aslralgia), indiges-
tion, constipation of the bowels, impaired digestirm as
well as from disorders brought about through the derang-
ed condition of the Vayu and Kapham, and more so
in cases where the patient has lost all relish for
food. An unripe Amra, in its first stage of develop-
ment, tends to generate the Vayu and Pittam,
while one with closed pollen (Vaddlia-keshara type)
generates the Pittam. Ripe Amra is pleasant,
cosmetic, relishing and tonic, helps the formation
of fresh blood, and leaves an astringent after- taste.
It is sweet and heavy, is a tissue-builder and tends

500

THE 3USHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Clwp. Xl.VI.

to increase tlie formation of semen and also snbdues
the Vayu and Pittam. The Amrataka (Hog-apple) is'
spermatopoietic, is surcharged with a kind of oily matter
and tends to increjise the Kapham in the system. The
Lakucha tends to destroy the semen, is long retained
in the stomach, and serves to derange the three funda-
mental humours of the body. The Karamardakam
is rehshing and acid in its taste, allays thirst, and
generates the Kapham. The Piyalam is hea\y, cooling
and spermatopoietic. The Bhavyam is pleasant, taste-
ful, astringent, and acid in taste. It cleanses the
mouth and subdues the Pittam and Kapham, It is
astringent, heavy, cooling and is long retained in the
stomach.

The fruit known as the Paravatam is sweet
and relishing, and it destroys the Vayu and a voracious
appetite. The Nipa, like the old Amalaka fruits, tends
to neutralise the effects of poisons originated through
the chemical combination of incompatible substances
in the organism. Unripe Tintidika (tamarind) subdues
the Vayu, and tends to generate the Pittam and
Kapham in the organism, while in its ripe state it is
astringent, heat-making and stomachic. It destroys the
Viyu and Kapham and restores a relish for food.
The Koshamra is possessed of properties nearly
identical with those of the Tamarind. The properties
of a ripe Amlika fruit are the same as those of

a^. XLVl, ) SUTRASTHANAM. 501

it further acts

““ ivl! TbemZa has a J^veetandacid taste,

taptoatt and leftesWng. and gives a relislt

is heax7, difficult to digest and subdues tte a)U.

Jamviia tends to allay tbiist and cutes cobc pam, u -

btasb,vontitingandasthntaiitsubduestbeact.onotbe

detangedViyuandKapham, removes constipaton of lb

botvels, and helps to create a healthy secret, on
of the pittam. The Airayata and Dantashatha
(different varieties of Jamvira) are acid and tend to
bring on an attack of hemoptysis.

The fruit (of such trees as the Ashvatha,
the Piaksha, the Auduravura, etc., which pass
by the general name) of Kshira-Vrikshas as well as
those which are known as the Jamva, Biajadana,
Todana, Tindnka, Yakula, Dhanvana, Ashmantaka,
Ashvakarna, Phalgn, Parnshaka, Gangemka,
Pushkara, Varti, Villa and Vimvi, etc. are cooling,
and astringent in their effect. They subdue the
Pittam and Kapham, tend to produce a condition of
parchedness in the system, and have a sweet and
astringent taste.

Of these the fruit of trees ’svhich belong to the
genus KsMri-Vrikahas is heavy and cooling, and
is long retained in the stomach in an undigested
sliUe. It has a sweet, acid and astringent taste and
docs not inordinately derange the V^yu. The fruit

502

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chap. XLVL

known as the Jamvava generates the V:tyu. It is
astringent, and subdues the Pittam and Ivapham, while
the Rajadana is demulcent, sweet, astringent and heavy.
The Todana is acid, astringent, and sweet in its taste
and is parchilying and subdues tlie Pittam and Vayu.
It is (heat- making^ in its potency, easily digestible
(light of digestion), astringent, demulcent and appetising
and further generates the Pittam. Unripe Tinduka fruit
is astringent, and heavy in digestion and produces Vrfyu
in the organism, while in its ripe or fully matured
stage it is sweet, and subdues the Kapham and
Pittam. The Vakula fruit has a sweet and astrin-
gent taste, is demulcent and astringent in its proper-
ties, imparts a greater firmness to the teeth, and removes
the viscid condition of the membranes. The fruit of
the Dhanvana has an astringent taste, and is cooling
and palatable and subdues the \'ayu and Kapham.
The fruit of the Gangeruka and Ashiaaiitaka is
possessed of similar properties as the preceding ones.
The Phalgu fruit is long retained in the stomach in
an undigested state, has a sweet taste, and is hea\y
of digestion, refreshing, and demulcent in its effect.
Raw or unripe Parnshaka fruit is e.xtremly acid in
taste with a shade of the sweet, leaves an astringent
after-taste, is light of digestion, generates the
Phttam, and subdues the Kapham ; while in its
ripe state it is sweet in taste, subdues the Vaym
and Pittam, is s^veet in digestion and cooling in its

503

Chap. XLVI. ] SUTRASTHANAM.

potency and proves curative in cases of h;cmoptysis.
The Pushkara fruit is s\Yeet, and is long retained in
the stomach in an undigested state. It produces the
Kapham and is tonic, and heavy of digestion (hard
to digest). Raw and tender Vilva fruit subdues the
and Kapham. It is keen, demulcent, astringent,
and appetising, has a pungent, bitter and astringent
taste, and is heat-making in its potency, while in its
ripe state it leaves a sweet after-taste. Further it
is heavy of digestion, can be but incompletely
digested, and is long retained in the stomach, causing
it thus to distend and producing the emission of a
fetid-smelling flatus. The Vimvi fruit, as • well as
that known as the Ashva-karna, is galactagoguic.
They destroy the Pittam and Kapham and prove
beneficial in cases of thirst, burning sensation of the skin,
fever, haemoptysis, cough, asthma and consumption.

The fruits such as, the Tala, Narikela, Panasa
and Mancha, etc. are sweet in taste aird of di-
gestion, and subdue the Vdyu and Pittam. They
are cooling in their potencies, and act as constructive
tonics. Of these the fimit of a Tala is sweet in
taste and heav)' of digestion. It subdues the deranged
Pittam. The pulp found inside its seeds is sweet

of digestion and diuretic, and it subdues the Vayu and

Pittam. The Narikela fhiit is heavy of digestion,
demulcent, anti-choleric, sweet, cooling in its potency,

504

'I'HE SUSHRU'm SA.MJIITA'. I Cluj-: XLVi.

Ionic, tissue-building, pleasant, laxative and diuretic. It
subdues the Pittani. The Panaaam is sweet and
astringent in tiista, demulcent mid heavy of digestion.
The Maiicham has a sweet and astringent taste, not
cooling in its potency, proves curative in cases of
luemopt3'sis, acts ;us a spermatopoietic and improves the
relish for food. It generates the Kaphain and is heavy
of digestion.

Tlie fruits such as the Drakshas, Kashmaryas,
Madhukas, Kharjuras, etc., have a sweet taste, arc
heavy of digestion and prove curative in cases of
htemoptysis. Of these grapes are la.xative, beneficial
to the voice, sweet, demulcent, and cooling in
their potency. They prove beneficial in cases of
Inemoptysis, fever, asthma, thirst, burning sensation
of the skin, and consumption. TJie fruit known
as the Kashmarya Phala is pleasiuit and diuretic.
It purifies the blood, improves the intellect and growth
of hair, and is rejuvenescent and subdues tlie Vayu
and Pittam. Kharjuras are possessed of the %T[rtue of
arresting all bodily wastes. They prove beneficial in
Urakshata, are pleasant, coolingin tlieir potency, refresh-
ing, heavy of digestion, sweet in taste, and prove
curative in cases of haemoptysis. The flowers of
Madhuka trees are tissue-building, unpleasant and
heavy of digestion, while their fruit subdues the
Viyu and Pittam.

vLvn sUTRAStUANAJ^l-
Cbap. XLVl.J

. h ^ tUe Vatima., AkaUoda, ADMatato,

Fruits such as tue vaua

w Pichu mochaka, and TJvumana,

Kichula, Picuu, „ntencv. heavy of

demulcent, heat-makrng VQ

digestion, constructive, tonic, and sweet mtast

subdue the Vayu. Pittam and Ivapham.

The fruit knovTi as the Lavali is astnngen
slightly bitter in taste, improves a relish or oot , ^

;\,eLnt, a^atic and ..esMng to t c .vUoU

system. It subdues tbe Kapham and P.ttam.
ftutesueh as the Vaakam, and the Statapakyam, as
well as the stems of BhaUataka trees, are hard to
digest and are long retained in the stomach m an
undigested condition. They tend to produce a state of

dryness in the organism, derange the Vdyn, are cooling

in their potency, sweet of digestion, and prove curative
in cases of hmmoptysls.

The fruits known as the Aixavata and the
Dantashatha have an extremely acid taste and tend to
bring on an attack of haemoptysis. The fruit known
as the Tanka is cooling in its potency, has a sweet and
astringent taste, is heav>^ and generates the Vjlyu.
The fruit known as the Aingudam is demulcent, and
heat-making in its potency, has a sweet and bitter
taste, and subdues the Vdyu and Kapham. The
Shami fruit is heavj'-, sweet and heat-making, produces
a state of parchedness in the organism, and helps
the falling off of hair. The Shleshmataka fruit is
64

5o6 the SUSHRUTA SAiMHITA. [ Chap. XLVI.

heav>’ of digestion, generates the Kapham, and is
sweet in taste and cooling in its potenc}'.

Fruits such the Karira, Akshaka. Piln and
Trinashnnya have a sweet, bittei and pungent
taste, and are heat-making in their potenc)-. They
subdue the A^'dyu and Kapham. Of these the Pilu
has a bitter and astringent taste. It generates the
Pittam, acts as purgative, is pungent in digestion, keen,
heat-making and oily. It subdues the Vayu and
Kapham. The Arushkara and Tauvaraka fruits have
an astringent taste, are pungent in digestion,
heat-making in their potency and prove curative in
cases of worms in the intestines, fever, constipation
of the bowels (Anaha) and Meha. Fnuts such as,
the Karanja, Kinshnka, and Arishtaphalam (Nimva)
are vermifugenous and pimgent in digestion, and
prove curative in cases of Leprosy, Guhna (internal
tumour), .A.scites, Piles and Prameha. The Vidanga
fruit produces a state of dr}- ness in the body, is
heat-making in its potency, light, and pungent in
digestion, subdues the Vdyu and Kapham and is sh’ghtly
bitter and anti-toxic. The Abhaya (Chebulic Myrobalans)
proves curative in cases of ulcers, is heat-making (in
its potency), and acts as a purgative, tends to reduce
corpulency and subdues the deranged humours. It is
appetising and imdgorating to the eye-sight, has an acid
and astringent taste, and proves ciurative in cedema and

sdtrasth«naM- 507

^ frail is possessed
The Aksliam tniit

cutoneoffi affections. ; Mion), and pro- :

rfpnreative properties,. a

“ “TpoSly Prodnees hoarseness (Aphonia),
making in the sight, has an

'=^'""irs«l-.r.«ffestionandsuhdnes

astringent taste The Pnga fruit snbdnes the

Pittam and Kapham. The

'trr::— —

impudtte,has a slightly sweet “d
Jd is possessed of laxative properties. The Ir™
and vegetables snch as the JitUrosha, the 3atr
IJ, the Katana Phalam the Ka— ,
Uvanga and the Karptii-a etc..ha^e a bi P
gent taste, subdue thirst and Kapham, are bg
,, digestion, and remove bad odours from the month
,,u\ cleanse it of all impurities. The Karpura has a
^li.ghlly bitter taste, is aromatic, cooling in its potency,
a, id light in digestion. It is possessed ot liquefacient
properties and is specially recommended in dry'ness of
the mouth and fetid breath. The Lata-Kastnxika is
•imilar in its virtue to the Karpura and is cooling and
both laxative and diuretic. The pith of the Piyala fruit
hat. a sweet taste, is spcrmatopoietic and subdues the
V.ivu and TitUun. The pith (the kernel found inside
live ieevW) of the Vaibhitaki fruit is intoxicating and
siihduo the deranged Vayu and Pittam. The pith
c.; the kernel of the Kola fruit has an astringent

sweet

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XI.Vl.

508

taste, subdues the Vdyu and Pittam allays thirst and
alleviates nausea and vomiting. The kernel of the
seed of the Amalaka resembles the last named pith
in its properties. The kernels of such fruits as the
Vijapuraka, Shampaka and Kosliainra are sweet in
digestion, appetising, demulcent, and subdue the Vayu
and Pittam. These kernels of seeds sliould be regarded as
possessing identical properties as the pulps of the fruits
from which they had been extracted. All fruits with
the exception of Vilva are efficacious in their ripe and
matured condition. The latter (Vilvas) have been
enjoined to be eaten unripe for medicinal purposes as
well as with a view to derive a greater efficacy
from tlieir use. Unripe Vilvas are astringent and appe-
tising in their effect, heat-making in their potenc}',
and have an astringent-pungent-bitter taste.

Fniit, which is blighted or tliat affected by any
ocher disease or that which has growTi in an improper
season, or raw or over-ripe, or worm-eaten, sliould be
rejected as unfit for use. Here the description of
the fruit-group is ended.

The group of Potherbs Now we shall
deal with the properties of potherbs. The fruits of such
creepers as the Fushpaphala, Alavu and Kalindak des-
troy the Pittam, generate the "^^^yu, and slightly produce
the Kapham. They tend to increase the discharge of
the stool and urine, and are sweet in taste and. digestion.

Chap. XLVI. 1

SUTUASTHANAM.

509

Of these the tender Knsbmandas arc light in digestion,
heat-making in their potency, and contain a greater pro-
portion of alkaline matter. They are appetising, diuretic
and pleasant in their effect, and tend to subdue the
action of all kinds of deranged humours, and prove whole-
some in cases of mental aberration, such as, insanity, etc.
The Kalindak tends to reduce the quantity of semen and
impairs the eye-sight. It generates both the Vdyu and
Kapham, while an Alavu is a purgative, produces a con-
dition of parchedness in the system, is heavy in digestion
and extremely cooling in its potency. The species,
knornr as the bitter Alavn, is unpalatable and has an
emetic property, and subdues the Vdyu and Pittam.

The fruits such as the Trapnsba, Ervarnka, Karkaru,
and Shirna-Vrinta are hea\’y’ in digestion and long
retained in the stomach in an undigested state. They are
palatable, cooling in their potency, generate Kapham,
tend to facilitate the discharge of stool and urine,
contain a little alkaline matter, and are sweet in taste.

green and tender cucumber subdues the Pittam,
"hile one which is of a pale yellow colour acts as
^ stomachic. A ripe and yellow Trapusham tends
to subdue the Pittam only in the event of its possess-
an acid taste. Similarly, ripe Ervarukas and
KarkiruB generate the Vdyu and Kapham, have a
sweet taste, and are found to be charged with alkaline
matter, They are appetising, relishing and do not inordi-

THESUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLV[.

5'0

nately generate the Pittam. A Shirna-Vrinta (water
melon) contains a little alkaline matter, is sweet, and
purgative. It generates the Kapham, is pleasing and
appetising in its property, and proves curative in cases
of Anaha and Ashthild.

The spices and herbs include the Pippali, iMaricha,
Shringavera, Ardraka, Hingu, Jiraka, Kustumvuru,
Jamnraka, Sumukha, Surasd, Arjaka, Bhustrina,
Sugandhaka, Kdsamaraddka, Kdlamdla, Kutheraka,
Kshavaka, Ksharapushpa, Shigru, Madhu-Shigru,
Phanijhyak^, Sarshapa, Rajika, KuUhala, Benu,
Gandira, Tilapamika, Varshibhu, Chitraka, Mulaka-
Potikd, Lashuna, Paldndu and Kalaya, etc.

IVletrical Texts Potherbs have a pungent
taste, are relishing, and heat-making in their potency,
and subdue the Vayu and Kapham. They are
variously used for seasoning food. Of the above-said
spices and herbs, the unripe or immature Pippali is
hea\y in digestion, sweet in taste, cooling in potency
and generates Kapham.

Dried Pippali subdues the V^yu and Kapham,
acts as a sperraatopoietic and slightly soothes the
Pittam. Green or imraatured Maricha is sweet of diges-
tion, heavy and phlegmagoguic in its effect. Drj’-
Haricha has a pimgent taste, is light of digestion and
heat-making in its potency. It is anti-spermatopoietic,
destroys the Vayu and Kapham, and slightly subdues

Cb.ip. XI A’ I. }

SUTKASTHANAM.

511

the PitUvm. The white Maricha is neither too cooling
nor too heat-making In its potency, is more ellicacious
than the two preceding varieties and is specially
invigorating to the eye-sight. The Nagaram destroys
the ^^iyu, has a pungent taste, and is sweet of
digestion. It is heat-making in its potency, acts as a
s])ormatopoietic and aphrodisiac, is pleasant and imparts
a relish to food. It is appetising, light of digestion,
and charged with an oily substance. The Ardrakaui
has a pungent taste, is heat-making in its potency,
acts as a pleasant sjiermatopoietic, subdues the Vdyu
and Kapham, proves beneficial to the voice, and relieves
colic pain and suppression of the stool and distension
of the stomach. The Hinga is light of digestion,
heat-making in its potency, acts as a digestant, and
is appetising. It subdues the Vdyu and Kapham, has a
pungent taste, is demulcent, lax'ative and sharp, and
relieves colic pain, indigestion and suppression of
stool. The Jiraka (whether white or yellow) is sharp
and heat-making in its potency, pungent in digestion
and imparts a relish to food. It has a pungent taste,
is appetising and aromatic, increases the Pittam, and
destroys the Vayu and Kapham. The species, known
as Karavi and Karavi, like the Upakunchikd, are
possessed of properties similar to those of the aforesaid
Jiraka, and are variously used in seasoning dishes
and condiments. Raw or undried Kustumvari (cori-
ander seeds) is sweet, aromatic and pleasant, while in its

512

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. IChap, XLVl.

dried state it is sweet in digestion, acts as a demulcent,
allays thirst, and alle\'iates the burning sensation of the
skin. It has a slightly bitter and pungent taste, tends
to subdue the deranged humours of tlie body and
purifies its internal channels. Jamvira is digeslant,
sharp and acts as a vermifuge. It subdues the Vdyu and
Kapham, and is aromatic, appetising and pleasant. It
tends to remove the bad taste in the mouth, and
lUeviates cough, dyspnoea and diseases due to the action
of the deranged V^yu and Kapham or due to poison.
The Surasa generates the Pittam, relieves the colic and
pain at the sides, while the Sumukha is said to be
possessed of the same properties with the exception that
it neutralises the effects of poisons brought about
through the chemical combination (of several incompati-
ble substances in the organism). The herbs known as
the Surasa, Arjaka and Bhustriua destroy the Kapham,
are light of digestion, and tend to produce a state of
parchedness in the organism. They are demulcent,
generate the Pittam, and are heat-making in their potenc)’
and pungent in taste and digestion. The herb called
the Kasamardaka has a bitter and sweet taste. It
subdues the Y^yu and Kapham, is a digestant, cleanses
the throat and specially subdues the Pittam. The
Shigru has a pungent, alkaline, sweet and bitter taste
and generates the Pittam, while the Madliu- Shigru
TOriety is laxative, has a bitter and pungent taste; is
appetising and removes oedematous swelling of the

1 i

SIV{

1UAM11AN,\M

A •.>

rile S.ir?hapa UcjU.'-, ,is well ,i'* Ihu.c known
Gittdira and Vega, can lie Insi impel kelly di ;c’..lcii.
llicy lend k> ^uj^jne.^s ihc ei;tchai,i;c o( blool aiul
mine, p^hIik c a >!.ile *>i diyno;* in llic orf;aiiibin, arc
bh.irp ,\nd Uealnn.vkiii^ in iheii piilciuy, anil bcrvc lo
ilcr.imidhc ibuc himlamcni.il lumuniib ol lhc Imdy. I'lic
herhb eallal Chltraka ami Tiiaparui me lij^hi 01 ' dige.s-
limi!, .md bUluUic the Kapham and iLdctna. The
hell) known .i> the Varahabhu Miiidiies ihe Vayu ami
Ivai'ham. It ))U)\eb henetieial in eabc.s of ledema,
•dtdommal diop.sv ami jiilcb. The Mulaka-Potika Inii
a pungent hitler table. It ib ple.ibanl. appetising, light
and throat-cleansing, tends lo impatl a greater relish
to toyd, and aubdue.s the action of all kinds of deranged
humouts. Raw or immature Mulaka of the larger
species is heavy in digestion and long retained in tlic
stomach in an undigested state. It is irritating and
lends to produce a dcrangemenl of the three humours
of the body, while boiled with oil or butter it acts as a
demulcent and subdues the Vayu, Pittam and Kapham.

Dried Mulaka subdues the action of the three
deranged humours. It is anti-toxic and light
{of digestion). All dried herbs with the exception of the
preceding one generate the Vayu and take a long
time to be digested.

The properties described in connection with the
Mulaka bulb in its different stages of groivth and

6S

514

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA. C Clwp. XLVl.

cpnditions can . also be attributed to its ilowers,
leaves and /ruits respectively. Mulaka Ilowers subdue
the Pittam and Kapham, while their fruit subdues
the Vdyu and Kapham. Basona is demulcent,
heat-making, sharp, pungent, slimy, heavy and
laxative. It has a palatable taste and is tonic,
spermatopoietic,and tends to improve the voice, intellect
and complexion and to bring about im adhesion ol
fractured bones. It alleviates heart-disease, indigestion,
fever, Vivandha, Kukshi-Shula, Gulina, a non-relish
for food, cough, asthma, piles, Kushtha, dulness of
appetite, swelling (Shopha), worms and diseases due to the
Vayu and Kapham. Palandu is not e.xcessively heat-
making in its potency, has a pungent taste, is
hea\y, tonic and appetising. It slightly generates
the Pittam and Kapham. It subdues the Vayu.

The species, known as the Kshira-Paldndu, is
demulcent, cooling in its potency, and relishing, imparts
a steadiness to the fundamental principles of the body,
is tonic, promotes the growth of flesh, improves the
intellect and increases the Kapham. It is palatable,
heav)% slimy and proves beneficial in cases of
haemoptysis. The potherbs called Kalaya subdue
the Pittam and Kapham, generate Viyu, are hea\y
and sweet in digestion, and leave an astringent after-
taste in the mouth.

*The leaves of plants and trees known as the

Oi.vXI.Vt ■

SUTRASTH.VNAM.

5«5

Ciiuchchu, Jiiihik.j, r.uuni, jivatui. Xamli,

Bhallilaka, Cii.ig.il.iiUrj, Vuk>Ii.idani, I’hanji, Sh.ilinali,
.''hclu, Vat),bhp.itj-pra,-ava, Sltana, Karviul.ira and
IvovkUiu cU’,, have an a^uin,i;cnl, sweel and bitter
la^lc, ajui prnvc cuialiNc nj ii.i nn))n>>i.N. 'I'iiev .sulnliie
the Kapliain, j^cncrate llic V.iyu ajul arc a>tfinjiciil in
their action and lijtlil ol diijolion (eai;ily iHi<cstiblc}.

ihc^e, the Chiiclu'hu i.s liijlil ol' di.ijotion, aiul
acts as a vcnniliiitc. It is slimy, proves bcnclicial
I'J ulcers, i> sweet and aslrini'ent in taste and
action. U lends to subdue the action of tlie three
det.uijted humours (Tridosliaj. The Jivanti her!) is
beneficial to the eyes and subdues all kinds of
deranged Iiuniour.s. The leaves of the Wikshddani
plant subdue tlie V.fyu. J’hanji leaves are slightly
tonic. The leaves of trees or jdants belonging t(i
the Ivsliira-Vriksha or to the L'tpala group are cool-
ing in their potency, astringent in tlieir taste and
action, and prove beneficial in dysentery, (intestinal
Ineinorrhage) and h.'onioptysis.

The leaves of the Punamava, Varuna, Tarkari,
Uruvuka (wiiite ciistor), Vatsildani, and Vilva etc., are
heat-making in their potency, and have a sweet and
bitter taste and pacify the deranged V&yu. Of these, the
Punamavd are specially possessed of the virtue of
remo\nng cederaa (Shopha).

The potherbs, such as the Tanduliyaka, Upodikdy

'I'lIR SUSHRU TA SAMHITA'. fClup, XIA'I,

516

Ashvavala, Chilli, Pulankya, and Vastuka etc,, are
laxative and diuretic, and have a sweet and alkaline
taste. They slightly generate the Vayu and Kaphain,
and cure haimoptysis.

Metrical Text : — Of these, the species known
as the Tanduliya is sweet in taste and digestion, and
proves curative in cases of hajmoptysis and somnolence
(due to the effects of poison, wine or vitiated blood).
It is antitoxic and extremely cooling in its potency,
and produces a state of parchedness in the system.
The Upodika species is sweet in taste and digestion.
It is spemiatopoietic, anti-narcotic, cooling, laxative,
demulcent and tonic. It generates the Kaphani, and
subdues the Vayu and Pittam in the system. The
species called the Vdstuka is a pungent (in digestion),
vermifoge, and is tonic. It improves the intellect and
digestion and is alkaline, laxative and relishing, and tends
to subdue all kinds of deranged humours of the body.
The species Chilli resembles the Vastuka in its proper-
ties, while those of the P^lank)^^ is identical with
those of the Tanduliya. It generates the
produces a state of parchedness in the system, and
tends to suppress the discharge of stool and urine.
It proves remedial to the deranged Kapham and
Pittam. The potherbs Ashvavala produces a condition
of dryness in the organism and tends to suppress the
discharge of stool and urine and Vayu (emission of flatus).

c\i»p. XlA'l. ]

SU'l'RASTHA'NAM.

517

The potherbs (leaves of edible plants) such as the
Maudukapavni, Saptala, Sunishannaka, Suvarchala,
Brahma-suvarchala, Pippali, Guduchi, Gojihva, Kaka-
machi, Prapuunada, Avalguja, Satina, Vrihati-phala,
Kantakiika-phala, Patola, Virtiku, Karavellaka,
Katukika, Kevuka, Uruvuka, Parpataka, Kiritatikta,
Karkotaka, Arishta, Koshdtaki, \'eti'a, Karira, Ataru-
shaka, Arkapushpi, etc., are light and palatable, and
prove curative in hceinoptysis, ICushtha, Meha, fever,
dyspnoea, cough and create a relish for food.

Wetrical Texts ; —The Afandukapami and
the Gojihvik^ species are alike in their properties,
the former being astringent and beneficial to the
Pittam, sweet in taste and digestion, cooling in
Its potency and of easy digestion. The Sunishannaka
species is easily digested and is unattended with
liny acid reaction. It is astringent in its action and
tends to subdue the three deranged bodily humours,
and it also arrests the evacuations of the bowels.
The Abulguja has a bitter taste, is pungent in diges-
tion and subdues the deranged Pittam and Kapham.
The potherb Satina is slightly bitter and astrin-
gent in taste and tends to subdue the three deranged
humours of the body. The Kskam^chi herb
is neither too cooling nor too heat-making in its
potency and removes cutaneous affections. It
subdues the deranged . humours as the , preceding

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. {Chap. XLVr

518

species. The fruit of (the tu'o species of; Vrihali
plants has an astringent and bitter taste, and is
light of digestion. It is vennicidal and proves
curative in cases of itch and cutaneous diseases
(Ivushtha), and subdues the deranged V.-iyu and
Kapbam. The leaves and fniit of the Patola creeper
have a bitter taste. They are beneficial to ulcers,
pungent in digestion, heat-making, spermatopoietic,
relishing and appetising. They subdue the deranged
Pittam and Kapham without producing the Va3’u. The
V^rtakam subdues the Vayu and Kapham. It has a
bitter and pungent taste, is light, relishing and
appetising. Matined Vartakam is alkaline (in its
taste) and generates the Pittam. The Karkotakam
and the K^ravellakam are possessed of properties
similar to those of the preceding species V^rtakanP.
The herbs and creepers such as the Atarushaka,
Kiratatikta, Parpataka and Guduchi together with the
tender shoots of the Vetra and the Ximva, have
a bitter taste and subdue the Pittam and Kapham.
The leaves of the Varuna and Prapunndda destroy the
deranged Kapham and give rise to a condition of
diymess in the system. Thej' are light of digestion,
cooling in their potency, and tend to enrage or agitate
the bodily Vayu and Pittam. 'The potherbs known as
Kalashakam are appetising and pungent in taste and tend
to neutralise the effects of poison originated through the
chemical action of two incompatihle substances in

5 ^ 9 -

cw

, i-V! -\N^-

‘ u\vA

U«

,cev

V\Ae

^1 U'S^ — , V

;,ud Vvg^^'- CtvW'i'-^ ‘ ^ ^^^^,\VVC 5

\;w\'>\'‘

•AU^^

WAS

v.v=w- ',y c-.v\to' ^"'' ,, u ", i„ °'

„i v.'s'-'=- bciK"'® ;„ case5“'

aca. ":':"„.«.cy. ’"

cal

^ _.a, I

a\V.^) ^ '

.. W-i'-" - ...atcto'i’ i„ laile

■ jwa'i"' ^“!' "mc, »« W "“'

VLvlu^''^' , cooVu''g ° tbev

l'« '^“'’ rucv '«“'■" “ oi ’" lie *»

yiiw"’- '., con»’°” , ,.e aaA8>=”“' s,veel»“'

"VetW “ licraal*” ‘ s^taw. -

""■' '’1 t"' as«i'’8“'‘ ®

,y At '2
■l\\e. V'
bWtet
tasve

as

vi-eW^^
Ws
is
(^a'i'

tWe

one .potency - ^ ag.

ea'tnge

V\ag in

r nOt

et'-y > (^do6^ '^\\Q

'tti - "t -- ■“

fftavn'-®^’
Wnon'^^

ecies
and

5^0

THE StJSHKHTA SAMIHTA'. [ Ch.. /. XLVr.

tion but is diilicult to digest. 'I he species known
;is K. day am (leaves of the Mutara ])ulse is purgative
and sweet in taste. It produces a state of dryness in
the organism and e.xtremely generates tlie V'ayu. It
tends to dislodge the deranged humours from their loca-
tions in the upper part of the body Sramsanam).
■file Putikaranjas are heat-making in Uieir potency and
alleviate oedema and anas;irca. They are pungent in
digestion, easily digestible and subdue the Viyu and
the Kapham. The leaves of the Tannajla are sharp,
heat-making (in their potency'; and bitter, astringent
and pungent in taste. They tend to aggravate the
Pittani, are aromatic, prove beneficial to the voice, and
remove viscidness in the organism. They pacify the
Kapham and Va3-u in the system, are appetising, pun-
gent in digestion and deodorant, and tend to remove
the fetid smell in the mouth, cleanse it of all impurities
and alleviate ail itching sensations e.xperienced inside its
aivity. This ends the description of potherbs.

The Flower Group : — The flowers of such
trees as the Ko\nd<-ira, Shana, and Shalmali are sweet in
taste and digestion and prove curative in cases of
hiemopt^'sis The flowers of the Vrisha and Agast3'a
have a bitter taste, are pungent in digestion and
alleviate a wasting cough (Phthisis). The flowers of
the Madhu-shigru and Karira are pungent in digestion.
The3' destro3' the Va}m and increase the discharge of

Clu ). XLVI. J

SUTUASTHANAM .

521

stool ami urine. The Agastya llower is neither too
cooling’ nor inordinately heat-making in its potency
and proves specially beneficial in cases of night-
blindness (Xyctalopia). The flowers of the Rakta-
Vriksha, Ximva, Mushkaka, Arka, Asana and Kutaja
trees subdue the Pittain and Kapham, and prove
curative in skin diseases ( ICushtham).

The Padina has a bitter and sweet tsiste, is
cooling in its potency, and subdues the deranged
Pittani and Kapham. The Kumuda has a sweet
taste, and is slimy, demulcent, pleasing and cool-
ing in its potency. The two varieties of the same
species knowm as the Kuvalayam and the Utpalam,
slightly differ from the preceding varieties in their
properties. The Sindhuv^am is renowned for its
virtue of destroying the Pittam. The Mallik^ and
Malati flowers have a bitter taste and subdue the
Pittam owing to their sweet scent. The Vakulas, like
the Patala flowers, are sweet smelling and pleasant, their
pleasing and odoriferous property instantaneously per-
meates the whole system. The Xagam (flower), like the
Kumkumum, is antito.xic and subdues the Pittam and
Kapham. The Champakam is curative in cases of
hemoptysis. It is both cooling and heat-making in its
potency and subdues the deranged Kapham. The
Kinshukam, like the Kurantakam, subdues the

Kapham and Pittam.

66

THE StJSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap.XLVi.

522

. A flower should be understood as possessed ,of
the same properties which are natural to the ’ tree or
plant on which it grows. The (tender stem) of the
hladhu-Shigru is pungent in taste and subdues the
deranged Kapham.

The Kshavaka, the Kulechara, and the tender
sprouts of Vausha, etc., generate the deranged Kapham,
and tend to increase, the discharge of stool and
urine.

Metrical Texts : — The Kshavakam helps the
germination of worms in the intestines. It is slimy and
sweet in taste, and tends to increase the secretions of
the internal organs. It generates the V^yu and does
not inordinately increase the Pittam and Kapham in
the bod3^ The tender sprouts of Venn generate
Kapham and are sweet in taste and digestion. They
can be but imperfectly digested and produce the Viyu
in the organism. The}’’ have a slightly astringent taste
and tend to produce a state of extreme parchedness in
the s}'stem.

The Udbhida Group Mushrooms are
generally found to grow on stacks of straw (Palala),
or are seen vegetating on the stems of bamboo (Venu) or
sugar-cane (Ikshu , or as sprouting up from beneath the
surface of the ground (Udbhida), or growing on a
heap of decomposed cow-dimg (Karisha.) Of these,
those which grow on stacks of (decomposed) straw

Chap. XLVI. ]

SUTRASTHANAM.

523

(Paldlam) are sweet in taste and digestion and' tend to
produce a state of dryness in the organism. They
subdue the three deranged humours of the body.- Those
which vegetate on the stems of sugar-canes (Ikshujam)
have a sweet pungent taste. They leave nn astringent
after-taste in the mouth and are cooling in their
potency. Mushrooms growing on decomposed cow-
dung (Karisha) should be regarded as possessed of
properties similar to those of the preceding class.' They
aggravate the are heat-making in their potencjy

and have an astringent taste. Those w^hich vegetate on
the stems of bamboos (Venuja) have an astringent taste
and tend to enrage or aggravate the bodily Vayu.
Mushrooms which grow on the ground (Bhumija) are
heav)’- of digestion and do not inordinately generate
the Viyu, their tastes varjdng according to the soil
they grow on.

Pinyarka Group : — The Pinyaka (levigated
powder or cake of linseed or mustard pressed in an
oil-mill), the Tilakalka (the levigated powder of
sesamum of which the oil has been similarly pressed
out), and the Sthunika-shuska-Sh^ka (leaves and sterns
of plants pasted and made into pills or balls) tend to
enrage all the deranged humours.

Wletrical Texts; — Sthuniki balls are long
retained in the stomach in an undigested state,
thus giving rise to a distension of that organ, and

524

THK SUSHKUTA SA.MHITA'. (Ch;ip. XIAI.

tend to enrage or aggravate the bodily Vdyu.
Aloist Sind^kis are the (leaves and stems of the
Mulaka, etc, slightl)’ boiled and pasted with pungent
and aromatic spices and then made into baUs.)
There are two hinds of Sindakis the dr>' and the
moist. They generate the Vayu and are appetising,
and tend to impart a greater relish to food. .All
sweet or palatable potherbs are purgative and heavy
of digestion, produce a state of diymess in the organism,
are generally indigestible and long retained in the
stomach in an imdigested state, causing it to distend.
They are marked with a shade of the astringent in
their taste.

Of flowers, leaves, fruits, steins and bulbs, each
succeeding one is heavier (of digestion) than the one
immediately preceding it in the order of enumeration.
Potherbs and leaves of edible plants which are found
to be rough or putrified or worm-eaten, as well as
those growing on an improper or incongenial soil, or
making their appearance in an unnatural season of
the year, should be rejected as imiit for use. Tin's
ends the description of the Pushpa-shikas.

The Bulb Group : — Xow we shall discourse
on the xartues of edible bulbous plants or herbs (Kandas).
The bulbs of plants and creepers such as the \'idiri-kanda,
Shativari, Visha (bulbs of the lotus plant), Mri'nala (the
upper stem of the lotus plant), tShringataka, Kashenika,

Chap. XLVI.J

SUTRASTHA’NAM.

525

Pindaluka, Madhv^Iuka, Hastyaluka, K^sthiluka,
Shankh^luka, Raktdluka, Indivara and Utpala etc.
alle\'iate hfeinopt)'sis, are cooling in their potenc}-,
sweet in tlieir taste and heav}' of digestion. Thej’
tend to increase the semen in large quantities and
augment the quantity of milk in the breast of a
human mother. The bulb known as the Vid^ri-
Kanda has a sweet taste, and acts as a construc-
tive tonic and is spemiatopoietic. It is cooling in its
potenc)’’, beneficial to the ^'oice, and imparts strength
to the system, ft is e.vtremely diuretic and subdues the
Viiyu and Pittam. Tlie Shatavari has a sweet and
bitter taste and is spermatopoietic. It subdues the
Vdyu and Pittam, the one belonging to the large-
sized species being palatable and appetising and
tonic. The latter improves the intellect and proves
curative in cases of mesenteric diarrhoea (Grahani)
and piles, and is spermatopoietic, rejuvenating, restora-
tive, and cooling in its potenc}^ The under-sprouts
of this creeper (large-sized Shatavari) have a bitter
taste and subdue the Pittam and Kapham. The
Visham* proves curative in cases of haemoptj’sis,
and is long retained in the stomach in an undigested
state, though it falls under the category of sub-
stances which can be but partially digested. It

• Bnlbs of lotus plants— though certain authorities aver that the inner-
lining or membranous fibres of a lotus-stem arc called Vlsha, the
outer covering being Icnotvn as the Mriodlara,

526 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [Chap. XLvr.

is tasteless or insipid, generates the Va)fu, and is hard
to digest, producing a condition of dryness in the
organism. The bulbs known as the Shringataka and
the Kasheruka are heavy of digestion, are long re-
tained in the stomach in an undigested state, and
are cooling in their potency. The Pindalukam gener-
ates the Kapham, is lieavy of digestion, and tends to
enrage or agitate the bodily 'Viyn, The Surendrakanda
is pungent in digestion, generates the Pittam and sub-
dues the Kapham. The sprouts of the Venu are heayj’^
of digestion, and tend to enrage the Kapham and Vd}ni.

The bulbs (Kanda) known as Sthula-Kanda, Shurana-
Kanda, and Manaka, etc. have a slightly astringent
and pungent taste, and tend to produce a state of
dryness in the organism. They are heavy of digestion,
and subdue the Pittam, and are long retained in the
stomach in an undigested condition.

IWetrfcal texts : — The species knowm as the
Manaka is sweet, and cooling in its potenc)' and
heavy of digestion, while the one called the Sthula
Kanda is not inordinately heat-making in its potency.
The spedes Surana is usually found to be curative
in cases of piles and rectal polypi and condylomata.
The bulbs of such aquatic plants as the Kumuda,
Utpala and Padma have an astringent taste and
are sweet in digestion. The)'- are cooling in their
potency and tend to enrage the V^yu and pacify

C!ui». XLVl.]

.SUl'KASTHANAM.

527

or subdue the derunged I‘iU;uu. The bulb known as
the VrAhukiuula is puni'enl in taste and digestion,
and is possessed of spennatopoietic, tonic, rejuvenating
and restorative properties. It subdues the Kaphain,
and proves cfiic;ieious in c.ises of Melia, skin
di>e;ises {Kusluhani), and in ailments due to the
presence of parasites in the intestines. The top-
piths of Mich trees, as the Tala, XVirikela, Khaijura
etc., are sweet in taste and digestion. They prove
curative in cases of hiemoptysis, and are spennato-
poietic. 'I’hey subdue the Vdyu and generate the
Kapham in the body. Edible bulbs, which are ex-
treniely tender or immature, diseased, decomposed or
sprouting in an improper season of the year, or are
worm-eaten, should be rejected as unfit for use. This
finishes the description of the bulb group.

The Salt Group (Lavana Varga) The
diflTereut varieties of salt such as the Saindhava, the
Samudra, the Vida, the Sauvarchala, the Romaka and
the .\udbhidam (prepared from vegetable alkah'), etc.,
should be successively deemed as more heat, Vdyu,
Kapham, and Pittam making, and more demulcent,
sweeter and more purgative and diuretic, considered in
the inverse order of enumeration.

Saindhava salt is beneficial to the eyes, palatable,
relishing, light, appetising, demulcent, slightly sweet
in digestion, spermatopoietic and cooling in its

-28 the SUSHRUTA SAAIIUTA'. [Chap. XLVI.

potency. It is one of the most potent auxiliaries
in combating the action of the deranged humours
of the body. The variety called the S^mudram
fsea-brine) is sweet in digestion, and not inordi-
nately heat-making in its potency. It is not indiges-
tible, but purgative, slightly demulcent, and does not in-
ordinately generate the Pittam, and is good in attacks of
colic pain (Simla). The variety known as Vida salt is
a little alkaline (in its taste) and is appetising. It tends
to produce a condition of drjmess in the organism,
and proves beneficiiU in cases of colic (Shula,) and in dis-
eases affecting the heart. It imparts a relish to food, is
sharp and heat-making in its potency, and restores the
deranged bodily Vayu to its nonnal state (restoring or
setting aflow the nerve-current by remoring any
obstruction). Sauvarcbala salt is light of digestion,
heat-making in its potency, and pungent in taste. It is
appetising, has an agreeable aroma, removes any riscid-
ness from the internal organism, and proves curative in
cases of abdominal glands, colic pain and incarceration
of scybala in the bowels. Romaka salt is sharp
and intensely heat-making. Its action permeates
the whole system immediateh* alter its use, and is
pungent and bght of digestion. It subdues the
tends to increase the secretion of the internal
organs, enters into the minutest capillaries of the
body, und is purgative ;md diuretic. Audbhida
salt is light, sharp, and heat-making in its potency.

530

THE SUSHKUTA SAMUITA.

f Chiip. XLVI.

known as Usliarakshdra is heat-making in its potency,
and subdues the deranged Vd)'u. It tends to increase
the slimy (mucous) secretions in the organs and is detri-
mental to the strength of the body. The variety called
P^kima tends to reduce obesity, causes a free
and increased discharge of urine, thus fully reliev-
ing the bladder of all its contents (lit : bladder-cleanser).
The alkali known as the Tavkaiiokshdra (borax) tends
to produce a condition of diymess in the organism,
generates the Vdyu, subdues the Kapham, and is appe-
tising in its property. It is moreover known to bring
about a derangement of the Pittam, and is sharp in its
potenc}\

The IVletal group Gold has a sweet and
agreeable taste, acts as a tonic or restorative elixir, im-
parts rotundity to the body, and subdues the action
of all the three deranged humours of the body. It is
cooling and antitoxic in its potency and invigorates
the eyesight. Silver has an acid taste, is laxative and
cooling (in its potency), presents a glossy or oily aspect,
and destroys the Pittam and Vjtyu. Copper has a sweet
and astringent taste, and acts as a liquefacient and corro-
sive agent. It is laxath'e and cooling in its potency.
Kdnsya Indian bell- metal) has a bitter taste, and acts
as a liquefacient agent. It subdues the Kapham and
Vd5’u, and is beneficial to the eyesight. Iron generates
Vayu, is cooling in its potency, allays thirst and subdues

cnap. xLXr.] SUTRASTHANAW.

jol

the deranged Pittam and Kapham. Zinc and lead are
vermifugal, as well as liquefacient and corrosive. They
have a saline taste. Pearls, corals, diamonds, sapphires,
Vaidurya (lapis lazuli), crystals, etc. are beneficial to
the sight, and cooling in their potency. They are anti-
to.xic and act as liquefacient or corrosive agents.

1 hey are possessed of sacred prophylactic virtues, and
bring good luck to men who wear them, and cleanse
their wearers from all impurities. Thus the description
of the salt group is ended.

Metrical texts ; —The intelligent shall deter-
niine the properties of cereals, flesh, fruits, potherbs,
etc., (other than those described under their respective
heads in the present chapter), which should be deter-
mined with the help of their respective tastes, as
well as from the natme of the predominant material
principles which enter into their composition. Tlie
Shastika, barley, wheat, Rakta-Shali, and the pulses
such as the Mudga, the Adhakia, and tlie Masur.i
should be regarded as the best and by far tlie most
nutritious of the cereals w'hich fall under the respective
heads of the Paddy Group (Dhanyavarga). The flesh
of the Lava, Tittiri, Saranga, Kuranga, Ena, Kapin-
jala, Mayura (peacock), Vamii and Kurma (tortoise)
should be regarded as the best of those of all other ani-
mals respectively belonging to their own species. Of
friiits, those called Dddiuiva, A malaka, Drdkshd,

532

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLVI.

Kharjura, Parushaka, Rcijddana and Matubinga
should be considered as the most commendable
and efficacious. Of potherbs those known as the
Satina, Vdsluka, Chuchchuka, Chilli, Miilaka-Polika,
Mandukaparni, and Jivanii should be regarded as
possessed of the most commendable properties. Cow’s
milk is the best of milks, and similarly, clarified butter
made from the milk of a cow should be considered as
pre-eminently the best and the most efficacious of
clarified butters,

Saindhava salt is the best of all other salts.
Dhdlri and Dddiinva fruit are the best of all
the acid kinds ; Pippali and Ndgara of all pungent,
and Palola and Vdrldkavt of all bitter vegetable
substances. Honey and clarified butter occupy
the highest place in the fist of all sweet articles.
Pugaphalam and Pariishakam are the best of all
astringent fruit. Sugar is pre-eminently the best of
all the modifications of the sugar-cane juice, while
IMddvirka and Asava (grape-jmce) are the best of all
cordials. Similarly, the com (lit ; paddy) of a year’s
standing or matured for a year after being harvested,
is the most efficacious. The flesh of a young animal,
as well as well-cooked rice prepared, that day, fully
ripe fruit, and fresh and tender potherbs should be
deemed as the best of their respective kinds'.

The kritarnna varga Now we shall fully

Chap. XLVL]

SUTRASTHANAM.

533

deal with the properties of cooked and prepared
food (Kritaniias). A gruel (jVIanda) of hied paddy
seasoned with powdered Pippali and Ndgara proves a
wholesome diet to a patient after the exhibition of pur-
gatives and emetics, inasmuch as it is digestant, appeti-
sing and agreeable, and tends to restore the bodily Viyu
to its normal condition. Peyd is diaphoretic, appetising,
light of digestion, diuretic (lit : bladder-cleanser). It
alias’s thirst and hunger, and tends to remove the sense
of fatigue and exhaustion. It serves to rekindle an
impaired appetite and restore (lit : soothes down) the
deranged ¥^[301 to its normal condition. Vilepi acts as
an emulcent food and soothes the entire organism. It is
tonic, and imparts strength and rotundity to the frame.
It is light, astringent, appetising, agreeable, quenches
thirst and satisfies hunger. The Yavdgu, when cooked
■with meat, potherbs and finiit, is hard to digest. It is
otherwise agreeable, soothing, spermatopoietic, tissue-
building, and tonic. Alanda is prepared b}’ carefull}'
excluding all the residuary shreds of its component
substances, while Peya is cooked without any such
e.xclusion. A gruel, which abounds vith such seedy
shreds, is called Vilepi, while the \-ariet3', which is
slightly fluid and extremely seedy in its consistenc}',
is named Yavagu. The preparation known as the
Payasa (a sort of porridge cooked by boiling rice
wth milk and sugar) is long retained in the stomach
ui an undige^led state and is heav}' ol digestion,

534

THE SUSHROTA SA.\HnTA. [Cfup.XLVi.

though it tends to inipurt strength to the Ijody, and
generates fat and Kaphani in the organism.

The dish called Krishar.-i (a gruel cooked by boiling
rice with llesh and sesanuun) generates the Kaphain and
PitUun, imparts strength to the Ixjdy, and subdues the
Vayu. A meal consisting of white coloured, well
threshed, sweet smelling rice, which has been washed
with rare and properly boiled, and well stniined
afterwards, is digested with e;ise and in the shortest
space of time, in the event of it being eaten
hot or warm. On the contrarj', a meal consisting
of uucleansed and unwashed rice improperly boiled
and taken cold without having been properly strained
takes a longer time to be digested. Fried rice is
light and aromatic, and generates the Kapham. Rice
boiled and cooked with clarified butter or any
such fatty substance, as well as with meat, acid, fruits,
or with any kind of pulse, forms a rich and heavy
food which helps to build up new tissues, and imparts
strength and rotundity to the bod}*. Rice boiled
and cooked with milk (in a manner other than
that of prejiaring the Piyasa) acquires properties
similar to those of the preceding one. A soup made
of any sort of fried pulse (such as the Mudga,
etc.) without its husks is fight and wholesome.
Similarly, potherbs (Sh^kas) well boiled and well
squeezed and subsquently cooked vuth oil or any ohter

Cluji. XI.Vl. I

SUTRASTH.VXAM.

535

laulaccous substance are wholcsuine, while those whicli
are cooked in a dilTerent manner should be considered
as possessed of contrary virtues.

Meat is naturally spennatopoietic and imparts
itloss and strentith to the system. Moreover, that
which has been cooked and prepared with clarified
butler, curd, sour j^ruel (Kanjika), acid fruits
(as the pomet^ranate etc.) punj^ent and some aromatic
condiment, (as black pepper, etc.) should be considered
as a very wholesome diet, though heavy of digestion.
It is possessed of relishing, strength-giving and tissue-
building properties.

The condensed soup or e.vtract of the afore said
meat, thickened with milk curd and clarified butter,
and seasoned and cooked with such aromatic condi-
ments (as black pepper, asafoetida, etc.), tends to
aggravate the Pittam and Kapham, and acts as an
appetising, constructive tonic. The meat, which has
been several times fried aith clarified butter and then
boiled in warm water and afterwards prepared dr>' with
such condiments as Jiraka, etc. (so as to have aU the
butter and seasonings fully absorbed in its bodj'-
— Parishushka-Mdnsa) should be considered as a tooth-
some, exhilarating, emulcentfood, though heavy of diges-
tion. It imparts firmness to the limbs and increases a
relish for food, improves the appetite and intellect,

536 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Ctwp. XLVI.

builds up fresh tissues, gives rotundity to the
frame, and produces an Increased quantity of semen
and (ojas) albumen in the organism, Tiie meat cooked
and prepared in the foregoing manner, when minced
and made into cakes, is called Ullupta-M^nsam,
which • resembles the above-said Parishushka-M^nsam
in its properties, though it is lighter tlian the latter owing
to the fact of its having been cooked over a charcoal fire.
The same meat, cooked on an iron rod over a charcoal
fire, becomes a little heavier as far as digestion is
concerned, inasmuch as it is roasted wdth clarified
butter, etc.

The varieties of cooked meat such as, the UUupta
(minced meat), the Bhaijita (fried), the Pishta (made
into balls or cakes), the Pratapta (roasted with clarified
butter over a charcoal fire), the Kandupachita (dipped in
mustard oil and powdered aromatic condiments and
roasted and done to a honey colour over a charcoal fire),
the Parishuska and the Pradigdha go by the general
name of Shulyam (cabob). Of the varieties of
Shulydm, those which are boiled with oil should be
considered as heat-making in their potency, heav}'' of
digestion and as generating the Pittara, while those,
which have been fried with clarified butter, should
be regarded as light, appetising, agreeable, relishing,
beneficial to the eyes, and cooling in their potenc)^.
They also subdue the Pittam and are pleasant to the

''.'wj). .\'LVI. !

Sl'TKASTII.VXAM.

537

Uislc.* A tiu'n iiiwt sou ) is a pleasant toiuV, and proves
beneficial in cases of dysjniaa, cougli, and consumption.
It subdues the Pittam and Kaphani, destroys the Vdyu,
and has an ayrecable taste. It is wholesome to persons
of Weak memory and reduced semen, as well as to those
sulferinif Irom cachexia peculiar to chronic fever, from
i^etieral emaciation of the body, from ulcerative endo-
carditis (L'rakshataj, or from <lise;ises affecting the voice
or the albumen (oj;is). It is known to bring about an
adhesion and reduction of fractured and dislocated bones,
and increases the quantity of semen and oja (albumen)
in subjects found wanting in those two important
principles of life. Meat-soup, prepared with the juice
of the D.idima, etc., and seasoned with pungent
condiments, increases the quantity of semen and tends
to subdue the action of all the three deranged humours
of the body.

The use of meat of which the essence has been
previously extracted fails to contribute to the growth
and strength of the organism, and is long retained in an

• AddUionsI text ; — In the dish known as the PratapUm, the meat
)> first fried with clarified hullcr, then pasted and flaTOnred with the
addition of curd, pomegranate-juice etc. and is again cooked with clarified
Imtter, Ajaji, and Simudra salt over a charcoal fire, each of the preceding
substances being added to it in succession during cooking over a gridiron.
Meat luted w ith sesamum paste and cooked wdth the .addition of flavouring
condiments to a hone}- colour is called Kandapakkam, while the one soaked
in asafoKtitki and water and cooked over a gridiron over a smokeless fire by
sprinkUng water over it with the addition of pomegranate Juice, etc, is
called Shulyam.

68

THE SUSHRUTA SA^rHlTA'. [Chap. XLVI.

■538

undigested state in the stomach and impairs digestion.
It is insipid, generates the Vdyu in the organism,
and tends to produce a state of parchedness in the
body. The dish knoum as the Khinshka Mansa (a
kind of dried meat) is very hard to digest (heavy of
digestion) and proves wholesome only to men of strong
digestive powers. The cooked meat called the Veshavttra
(boneless boiled meat subsequently pasted and cooked
with treacle, clarified butter, black pepper, Pippali, and
Shunthi, etc.) is heaiy of digestion, demulcent, strength-
giving, and alleviates diseases due to the action of the
angry Vijm. The dish known as the Sauvira is soothing
to all the fundamental principles of the organism. It
speciall}' removes parchedness of the mouth, allays
thirst and hunger, and is palatable and cooling in its
potency.

Mudga soup subdues the Kapham, and is appe-
tising and agreeable. It forms the most wholesome
diet to persons whose systems have been cleansed wth
the aid of purgative and emetic remedies, as well
as to those suffering from ulcers. The soup known as
the R^iga-Sh^dava (which is another name for Mudga
soup prepared with grapes and expressed pomegranate-
juice': is light, and imparts a relish to food. It is
not hostile to the deranged humours of the bod}-
but ''slightly subdues their action). The soup of the
Masura, or of the .^ludga, or of the Godhuma or

c'iu ). .\'r.\7. )

SrifRASTIWNAM.

539

of llic KulatUia j)iilse, prepared with salt is inhostile
to the Piltain and Kaphani, and is speciall}' re-
oonnnendcd in nervous diseases (Vat.-f-Vyadhi,. The
soup Ql tlio Masura etc., cooked and prepared with raisins
and ponie^mnate-juice is beneficial to patients sufiering
iroin V.'ita- V3'adhi. It is relishing, appetising, agreeable,
and ligiil (of digestion). Sonjjs of Mudga, etc.,
prepared with Patola or Xiinva tend to reduce the
tpiantitj- of fat arul Ivaj)ham in the organism, subdue
the Piitani, are appetising and agreeable, and prove
curative in cases of Kushtha (cutaneous affections) and
diseases of parasitic origin, Mudga soup prepared
with Mukika removes dyspna'a, cough, catarrh,
water-brasli, fever and a relish for food. It tends
to reduce fat and Kapliam in the org.inism, and proves
curative in diseases affecting tlie throat.

'J’he soup of the Kulattha pulse cures diseases due to
the action of tlie deranged V^yu, as well as asthma,
catarrh, and Tuni, Pratituni, cough, piles, abdominal
glands (Gulina and Cdavarta. Prepared noth the
expressed juice of the Dadima or Amalaka it acquires an
agreeable taste, pacifies the deranged humours, and is
light, appetising and strength-giving in its virtues. It
proves curative in epilepsy and obesity, and subdues the
deranged Viyu and Pittam. Mudga soup cooked with
Amalakas acquires an astringent property, and proves
beneficial in derangements of the Kapham and Pittam.

THESCISHKUTA SAAfHITA'. fCh-ip. Xf.vr.

54 ‘>

The soups of the Yava,Ivola and Kulattlia pulses destroy
the Vayu and are beneficial to the lar)'ux. Similarly,
soups of all the pulses, which go b}' tlie name of Shami-
Dhanyas, increase the strength and rotundity of the
body. Khala and Kamvalikn soups are respectively
agreeable and subdue the Vayu and Pittam.

All soups cooked and prepared with the expressed
juice of pomegranate should be known as strength-
giving, demulcent, imd heavy of digestion. The)’
subdue the Vayu and Pittam. Soups, made and flavoured
acid by the mixture of whey, produce the Pittam
and tend to vitiate the blood and besides aggra\'ate the
efiects of any imbibed poison lurking in the system.

The soups and gruels respectively known as the
Kharayusha,* the Khara-Yavagu,t the Shadavaf and
the P^aka should be prepared with the advice, and
according to the instructions of a physician. The soup,
which is cooked or prepared without the admixture
of any salt, condiments (black pepper, pungent
spicesi or an\’ oil)' or lardaceous substance, is called
the Akrita-Yusha (unseasoned soup), whereas the one
which is cooked and seasoned with the foregoing

Mudga soup prepared vrith whey, horse-apple, Amrui (oxalis
cOTOicutala), cumin seeds, black pepper and the roots of Chit^ (Plumbago
Zeylanica).

t Gruel prepared in the manner of Khara-Yusha.

nchT ■'^“P the composition of which things of sweet, saline,

-tnngent, amd and pungent tastes largely enter.

XLVl.

Sr rUAM llAXAM.

54 «

spices ami suhslances oil, clariliccl batter, etc.', is
called a seasoned soup (Ivril.i-Yusha). Of the soups and
extracts of meat resiiectively cooked and prej)ared with
the modilications of cow-milk (curd, whey, etc.), Kanjiku
and acid fruits (pomegranate, etc.) each succeeding
variety should be deemed lighter and more wholesome
than tile one immediately preceding it in the order of
enumeration. The soup cooked with tlie cream of the
curd and the expressed juice of the D.ldima is called
Kamvalika soup. .Vrticles of food prepared withsesamum
and its levigated cake, or those in tlie composition of whicli
dried pot herbs, rice tlireshed out of sprouting paddy
or Sindaki (a species of potherh-i tiescribed before) enter,
should be considered as lieavy of digestion. They subdue
the Pittam and increase the Kapham. The Vatakas
resemble the Sind.ikis in their properties, but are heavy
of digestion and admit of being incomjiletely digested,
giving rise to a kind of acid re-action. The varieties of
soups known as the Raga* and Shddava are light, tissue-
building, spermatopoietic, agreeable, relishing, and
appetising in their properties. Tliey alleviate thirst,
epileptic fits, vertigo and vomiting, and remove the
sense of fatigue or exhaustion.

The variety of food known as the RasaUf is con-

* Is made of sugar, Saindhara salt, tamarind, Sarjiksh^ra, Pantshaka
and the expressed juice of Jambuline fruits ; while the Sh4dava soup is
prepared with salt and acid and sweet fruits.

t A sweet aromatic preparation consisting of acid buflalo-curd, refined
sugar, milk, powdered cardamom, camphor and black pepper.

542

TIIR SUSPfRUTA SAMHI'I’A'. [ Ctap. xr,Vl.

structive, tonic, (leiwulcent, spcnnatopoictic and relishing?.
Curd sweetend with treacle is agreeable. It generates
the Vdyu in the system, and tends to increase tlie oily
principle in the organism. Powdered barley soaked in
clarified butter and made into a dough with water,
which is neither too thick nor too thin in its con-
sistency, is called Mantha, which acts as a tonic
immediately on it being partaken of. It allays thirst
and removes the sense of fatigue and e.vhaustion. The
Mantha, treated with treacle and clarified butter, proves
curative in cases of difficult urination and obstinate
Udstvarta. A Mantha prepared with sugar, raisins
(Drtlkshd) and the e.xpressed juice of sugar-cane, removes
diseases due to the derangement of the Pittam,
Mantha, containing raisins and Madhiika fruit, success-
fully combats diseases brought about through the action
of the deranged Kapham. A Mantha saturated with
the three aforesaid substances (acid and lardaceous,
sugar and raisins) tends to restore the stool to its
normal condition.

The Pa’nakas : — Well diluted treacle (Panaka),
no matter whether it has been rendered acid or
not with the admixture of Arala lemon juice), is diuretic
and heavy in respect of digestion. Water saturated with
treacle, Khanda (unrefined sugar), sugar or grapes, and
made acid with the admixture of any acid substance,
and scented with camphor, should be deemed the

Chap. XLVI.]

SUTRASTHi¥NAM.

543

best ol refreshing beverages. Water saturated with the
(expressed juice of) grapes removes the sense of fatigue,
allays tliirst, and alleviates epileptic fits, and burning
sensation of the body. Water potion flavoured with the
(expressed juice of) Kola or Parushaka is agreeable and
long retained in tlie stomach in an undigested state.
The lightness or hejiviuess of a potion (Pdnaka'i should
be determined according to the quantities, properties and
preparations of the articles and substances that enter
into its composition. Here ends the description of the
specific properties of varieties of prepared food, etc.
(Kritinna).

Now we shall describe the Hrtues of the articles of
confectionaiyf according to their tastes, potencies, and
digestive reactions.

Confectionary — Such as is made with the
modifications of milk, is called the Kshira Bliakshyas
(flour dissolved and stirred in milk with sugar, etc.)
It is tonic, spermatopoietic, agreeable, appetising and
aromatic, and tends to impart rotundity to the frame.
It subdues the Pittam and does not belong to the
group of inconpletely digestibles. Of these, tiie
variety known as the Ghritapuras ‘'articles of food
prepared by putting clarified butter in doughs of
coni- flour) is strength-giving and agreeable. It subdues
the Vayu and Pittam, is spermatopoietic, and hea\y of
digestion, and tends to create new flesh and blood. The

544

THE SUSHRUTA SAMlllTA'.

[ Chap. XLVI.

articles of food known as the Gaudikds (prepared by put-
ting treacle into doughs of corn-flour) are flesh-making,
spennatopoietic, and lieavy in respect of digestion.
They subdue the Vayu and Pittam and generate the
Kaphain and do not give rise to any reactionaiy acidity
after digestion. The articles of food bolonging to
the groups of IMadhumastakas, Sanya\'as, and Pupas, are
heavy in respect of digestion but are flesh building in
their properties. Modakas are extremel}' indigestible.
Sattakas tcurd cream saturated uith unrefined sugar
and powdered Trikatus, and then filtered through
a piece of clean linen, and seasoned with camphor and-
pomegranate seeds) impart a relish to the food. They
are appetising, beneficial to the voice, hea^y in respect
of digestion, extremely palatable and strength-gmng.
They subdue the Vayu and Pittam (Kapham accord-
ing to others . Vishyandana* is agreeable, aromatic,
sweet and demulcent. It destroys the Vayu, and
generates the Kapham and is hea\y, and strength-
gi\ing. .Articles of food or confectionaiy made of
powdered wheat fSdmita act as constructive tonics,
and subdue the Vdyu and Pittam. Of these, the variety
known as the Phenaka Klidj^ of our present-day
confectioners) is agreeable, extremely wholesome and
light. Cakes stuffed with hludga-Veshav^ras are long

* Powdered wheat treated with milk, clarified batter and treacle, and
made into a paste neither too thick nor loo Ihin in its consislencj" is called
Vishi-andana,

I. XL\'I. I

.SUTKASTllAXA.Sl.

545

rcUu'ucd ill the stomuch in an undigested state, while
iho.'o containing minced and pasted meat (Veshavdras)
are lieavv and llesh building in, their properties,
Confectionar)* known as the Palalas (a preparation of
treacle, jrasted sesamum and coni Hour) generates the
Kapham ; while the Shashkulis i Luchis and Kachuris
of our modern confectionersi tend to increase the
I’iilam and Kapham in the organism. Cakes made
of powdered rice i PislUakas; are heat-making in their
potency and tend to enrage or aggravate tlie Kapham
and Pittam. They further give rise to a reactionar)
acidity after digestion, and are specially hea\y in respeci
of digestion', and are slightly strength-imparting. Con-
fectionary made of Vaidalas (such as the Mudga pulse
etc,/ has an as^ugerit__taste, is liglit in respect oi
digestion, subdues the V^yu and Kapham, is_j»ur-
gative^ and tends to restore the Pittam to its normal
state, though apt to be long retained in the stomach in
an undigested state. Qikes made of Masha pulse
are tonic, spenua^^^tic_ and heav)' of digestion,
similarly, those tliat are made of Kurchikd are heavj'
in respect of digestion and do not inordinately
generate the Pittam. .Articles of confectionary made
of sprouting Mudgas, etc., are heavy of digestion,
generate the V^yu and Pittam, give rise to a re-
actionar}^ acidity after digestion, and tend to bring on
nausea and waterbrash (Utkiehsha), besides producing a
parched condition in the organism, and also affecting
69

546

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Clwp. XLVI.

the eye-sight. Confectionary fried in clarified butter
has an agreeable taste and aroma, is light,
spermatopoietic, and tonic, subdues the Vfiyu and
Pittam, and tends to improve the complexion and
invigorate the eyesight. Similarly, that which is
fried in oil is heav}- as regards digestion, pungent
in its digestive reaction, and heat-making in potency.
It destroys the Viyu, generates the Pittam and tends
to affect the sight and produces cutaneous affections.
Confectionar}' made of fruit, meat, modifications of
sugar-cane juice (treacle, sugar, etc.), sesamum and
Mdsha pulse is tonic, hea\y of digestion, tissue-
building and palatable. Ajticles of food fried in
broken vessels of baked clay, or cooked over a
charcoal fire should be considered as light in respect
of digestion and iis possessed of the virtue of aggra-
rating the bodily Yayu, while those that are prepared
with lumps of curdled milk should be considered as
• heavy (of digestion ) and as increasing the Kapham.
Kulmishas ( half boiled Chanakas or gram) generate the
^'ayu, produce loose stool, and are heavj’- of digestion,
and tend to produce a condition of parchedness in
the organism. Articles of food made of fried barley
(Yatyai prove curative in cases of Udavarta, cough,
catarrh and Melia. Dhana - fried barley) and Ulumva
(Mudga pulse etc., boiled over a fire) are light of
digestion and absorb the e.vcess quantitj’ of fat
and Kapliam in the body. Barley powder (dissolved in

n...p. xi.vi. I

SUTI^ASTH/YN.AM.

547

water so as to form a sort of thin, pasty potion)
is llcsh-buihliiifj and spcnnatopoictie. It allays thirst,
acts as an instantaneous tonic, subdues the Pittain,
Kapham and Vayn, and is possessed of piirfiative pro-
perties. Made into thin pasty balls or linnp.s they
become heavy as regards digestion, while transformed
into a thin potion with the addition of a copious
({iKUitity <)f water the}' are known to acquire a contrary
virtue (light). Barley powder used as lambative is
easily and speedily digested owing to the softness of
its consistency. Fried padd}* alleviates vomiting and
dysenter)', and has an astringent sweet taste. It
is appetising, tonic, and light of digestion, allays
thirst, constipates the bowels, and tends to restore the
deranged Kapham to its normal condition. Pulverised
fried paddy alkM’iates thirst, vomiting, and a burning
sensation of the skin, arrests perspiration, and proves
curative in cases of luenioptysis and Drfliajvara (a t)'pe of
bilious fever characterised by unquenchable thirst and
hyperpraxia). Prithuka (thrashed or pasted paddy) is
heavy of digestion, demulcent and flesh -building,,
and increases the Kapham in the system. Taken
with milk it acts as a tonic and is laxative and
destroys the Vayu. Immature or newly-harvested rice
has a sweet taste, is hard to digest and acts as a tissue-
builder. Old or well matured rice brings about the
adhesion of fractured bones and proves curative
in cases of Meha. As a large variety of substances

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XLVI.

548

enters into the composition (of our daily food), a
physician should prescribe a course of diet for his patient
after carefully considering the nature of the food stuffs
and the properties they acquire through combination
and seasoning, as well as the natural longings of a
person for a certain kind of food during the preponder-
ance of certain deranged humours of the body.

Anuparnam or After- Potions Now

we shall discoiurse on drinks and potions which are
found to be beneficial when taken after a certain kind
of food (Anup^nas.)

Certain people oppressed with an acid taste naturally
long for sweets, while others in full satiety of sweet
articles have a relish for acid things. Hence something
acid is good for the eater of sweets, and sweets are good
for men who have partaken of an acid food.

Cold water and warm water, Asa^■a (wine), Madya
(spirits), the soup of Mudga pulse etc., the juice of acid
fruits, sour padd)"^ gruel, milk and essence of meat
are generally used as drinks after a full meal. Of
these, that alone which would prove beneficial to a
person should be given him in an adequate quantity.
The intelligent physician should determine the kind of
after-drink (potion) required in each case after taking into
consideration the nature of the disease under treatment,
the season of the year, and the properties of the solid or
liquid substances that enter into the composition of the

« ; -.iV NlA't.

Sn'KASTMAN.WJ,

549

(If ,01 lOixl^ ai .iltcr-polioiis, cIc.Tr licavfuly
'.itiiii'^lOicrio) uaUT, licpt in a pure vc:-.vc4, should he
dcciiicd the best, ituisnuicli as s\K'h water coiUrilniles in
evety way to the ucltaic (i> oiiidiioivc to the bodily
yio'Allti of a pcj.'ou lhnu);,4ioiil liis life, and all the si.v
dillcinU taste.' are inhcicDl in that heavenly tliiid,
iJjjclly wch.nc .'talcd the rule to he observed in respect »)f
aiter'poljon.-. now we shall dilate upon their specilic pro-
j'VTtics. Hot water should he taken after any oily
or laidaceous siihstance other than those known
a'> the oils of I'hallilaka and 'ranvaraka. Certain
authtnilies hold that the sOJjj» of Mudga pulse and sour
lice liHiel (K.imika^ sln)uhl he respectively taken (in
■>uinnicr and winter) after bavin;; taken a larj;e
(juanliiy ol oil in the couisc of a meal. Cold water
shoulil he taken after cakes and hone}', as well as
alter curd, IViyasii porrid;.'e, and also in cases of
poisonini; and derau;;cnienls due to the effects of
wine, .\ccordini; to several .authorities tepid water
should he taken after any kind of cake (preparation
of rice paste etc.

Milk or meal essence should be prescribed as
an after-potion to persons habituated to meals of Shali-
rice or Mudga pulse, or who have become fatigued
with the labours of a battle or of a long journey,
or who are oppressed with the heat of the sun
or of a blazing lire, .as well as to those who would

550

THK SnSHKTITA SAMHITA. [ Clup. XLVI,

be found to be overcome from the effects of ])oison or
vine. Sour rice or cream of curd should be drunk
after having taken Masha pulse, etc. Wine (Madya) is
the proper after-drink for jiersons addicted to it, which
is also recommended after a meat diet. Cold water or
acid fruit juice (such as that of the pomegranate, etc.)
forms the best after-drink for those who are not in the
habit of taking wine. Milk is ambrosia to persons
enfeebled with arduous study, or e.vcessive sexual iuter-
course, and to every one after an exposure to tlie sun
after a long troubled journey. Wine (Surd) is the after-
drink for enfeebled subjects, and water saturated with
honey is the potion for corpulent persons. Healthy per-
sons may use a variety of desserts and beverages during
and after meals. Things which are demulcent in their
virtues and heat- making in their potency should be
considered as a wholesome diet in diseases due to
the deranged Vayu. Substances, which are heat-
making in their potency and tend to produce a con-
dition of parchedness (Ruksha) in the organism, should
be prescribed as a wholesome diet in diseases brought
about through the action of the deranged Kapham.
Similarly, those which are sweet and cooling in their
potency, prove wholesome in Pittaja distempers. Milk
and the expressed juice of sugar-cane are beneficial to
persons suffering from haemoptysis. Tlie Asavas (wines)
of the Arka, Shelu, and Shirisha are beneficial to those
suffering from the effects of any poison,

('

\j.vr.

^ITKASTIlAXAM,

55 '

N'ow m; >h,ilJ 'cj‘,u.«U’!y tk'-criiic llir .iflur-ilriiik.s
l<> i c u!;cii .iltff luivin;; tlic aiticlo ol' Jbtjd dealt
wUh under tlie M-uial j.'ump:- di>» ii.-.'ed lieloie. I'lican'rl
-dup d! Indian Jujitlie.' ( Knl.i) ■'liould I)e taken alter
a naa! « <i! any <j( liic alurc-.-aid ecrcais hiieii
a-, ti l* S!inkaii]i,jiiv.im, KmilMnyaiii. eli-. Sour Ljiiiel
^hitiild lie u. id allei a meal <*! Minima ilil>e, or ol' any
.'innlai ;:rain. I'lie A>a\a iv.im .<! the I’ipiiali dioiild he
nail .lUei a meal nl the limi; ll)i;,'lied veni>on.s. or ul'
tl'.e :l<>ii oi thti-e oi the iJhaiuaia laiiiily. Kola
and \'ad.ita vviiK' -lumld lie ii.'ed alter Iiavini^
taken the cooked tie.'h o ilie lowK <il the Vjslikira
■'['cue.'. The wine ol K>lina*Vnk>lia .'lunild he used
alter a meal t oii.'-i>tnie ot the lie.-ii ol tlie I'nittida
.'pecie.i. taicoanm and date palm wines sliould he
tbeil alter Iiaviiii,' eaten the lle.-h of liie cave-dwelling;
i;;uh.«-.'liaya' specie^. Kri-hna (jandha wine should
he ii>e<l alter the llesh ol the I'ama-AIii^ja (arhoreotis)
I'aindy, Ashva,;;andh.i wine should he taken after
the liesh of the i’rasalia species. Plialas.ira wine
should be taken after the llesh of any of the hole-
dwelliny tVilesliaya) animals. I’riphal.i wine should be
taken after the llesh of an animal with unbifurcated
hoops ilvkashapha). Khadini wine should be taken
after the llesli of an animal with bifurcated hoofs.

The Asava (wine of Sbringataka or Kasheruka should
be taken after having eaten the flesh of an animal of

552

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA'. f Clup. XLVI.

the Kulechiira (frequenting the shores of lakes etc.)
species. The same wines should be regarded as proper
after-potions after a meal consisting of molluscs
(Koshastha), or of the flesh of an animal of the Pddi
(lizard) family. Asava of sugar-cane (vinegar) should be
taken after having eaten the flesh of an animal of the
Plava (diving) family. Mrinalam wine should be
taken after any Nadeya fish (whose habitat is the
river). Matulungu wine should be taken after the flesh
of any of the sea fish (Samudra). Padma (lotus bulb),
wine should be taken after acid fruits. Pomegranate,
or Vetra wines should be taken after astringent fnuts.
The Asava of Kanda [Khanda— D, R.] treated with the
three pungent drugs known as the Trikatus should be
taken after sweet fruits. Sour and fermented rice gruel
should be taken after Tala fruits, etc. The wane of
Durva, >fala, or of Vetra should be taken after
pungent fruits. The Asava of Shvadanstri or of Vasuka
should be taken after Pippalis, etc. Dan’i, or Karira
wines should be taken after Kushm^ndas, etc. The
Asava of Lodhra should be taken after taking the
Chuchchu, potherbs etc. Triphald wine should be
taken after the Jir’anti, potherbs, etc., and the same
rule should be obsened in respect of Kusumbha
potherbs.

The Asava (wine) of the drugs known as the Maha
Panchamula should be taken after such potherbs as

Clup. XLVI.J

SUTRASTHA'NAM.

553

tlie Mancliika-panii, etc. Wines of acid fruit should be
taken after the pith or marrow of such trees as
the Date-])alm, Tdla, etc. The wine known as the
Sur^sava, or fermented rice gruel should be taken after
an excess of Saindhava salt, etc. Water may be taken
in absence of the proper after-drink in all cases.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject. — Atmospheric or rain water is the best of all
drinks and cordials. That kind of water is whole-
some to a person to which he is habituated from his
birth. Hot water is beneficial in derangements of the
Vayu and Kapham, and cold water is good in diseases
which have their origin in the vitiated blood, or in
the deranged Pittam. An e.xcessively heavy meal,
as well as the one which usually tends to derange
the fundamental humours of the body, may be easily
and speedil)" digested with the help of a suitable after-
drink. A proper after-potion taken after a meal brings
on a fresh relish for food, increases the bulk of the
body, acts as a spermatopoietic beverage, disintegrates
the combination or accumulation of the deranged bodily
humours, soothes the organism, increases the softness
of the body, removes the sense of fatigue and e.xhaus-
tion, brings on pleasurable sensations in its train,
stimulates the appetite, subdues or pacifies the deranged
bodily humours, allays the thirst, improves the com-
ple.xidn, and imparts tone and vigour to the system.

70

554

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [CK-ip. XLVl.

Any beverage resorted to at the commencement ot a
meal tends to produce a gradual emaciation of the frame;
the one taken during the course of a meal guards
against both its thinning and corpulency, while the one
drunk at the close of a meal sen.-es to greatly add
to its growth and rotundity. Hence, drinking at meals
should be most judiciously determined and taken with
the greatest forethought and discretion. The food carried
down into the stomach of a person unused to such
liquids long retains undigested and resists being con-
verted into ch3'me or being digested, and becomes a
positive source of discomfort. Hence, the use of an after-
potion is imperatively obligators- on all human beings,
e.vcept those suffering from dyspnoea, cough, ulcerative
endocarditis (Urahkshata), ptyalisni, aphonia, and
from diseases affecting the part of the bod\' situated
above the clavicles.

After the use of an after- potion, a long walk, a
lengthy conversation, singing, sleeping and reading
should be refrained from, in order that the imbibed
potion may not affect the stomach, and (aggrarate the
bodih' humours) which taking lodgment about the
regions of the throat and chest may give rise to a
secretion of mucous, impair the appetite, develop such
distressing s}Tnptomsas vomiting etc., and produce many
other distempers as well.

The lightness or heaviness of a food stuff doe’s not

rh»i<. XIA'I. '

SfrUASrilAKAM.

555

go coiUnin- to nature.* These properties clepeiui more
upon the nunie ol' cooking or preparing them than upon
the nature of the substances themselves;* more upon
the (luantily in whicli they are taken than tlie mode of
their cooking or preparation ;t ami more upon the food
(lit. boiled rice) .itself than upon the (piantily of its
use.t ami more upon the lime (of its maturity) than
upon the food,^

The ([uestion of lightness or heaviness of a food
slutr alfecls the iille, the unhealthy, the luxurious,
and men of delicate constitution and impaired appe-
tite, and such nice discernment of the properties of an
article of food is not imperatively obligatory on strong,
healthy men of active habits and good healtby digestion,
who are habituated to hard and solid fares, and who
can tolerably alVord to dispense with such thoughts
altogether. Here ends the description of the group of
after-potions.

He;ir me, O my child, discourse on the rules to be
observed in connection with eating. The kitchen

* If it be a-sked why the flesh of an animal of the Jamghila family is
l(j;hl ? The answer would be because it is naturally so.

• As for example, t'rihi com is naturally heavy of digestion, but
fried Vrihi seeds arc light.t As for insUuice, a heavy food should be
t.aken till the appetite is but h.al/. satisfied, syhilc .an article which is light
with regard to digestion may be eaten to satiely.J As for instance,
of the varieties of food such as the Manda, Peya, Vilepi, Bhakta and
Pishtaka, each succeeding one is heavier than the one immediately preceding
it.S As for e.\amplc, newly harvested rice i.s heavier than the one of a
year's standing.

556

THE SUSMRUTA SAMHITA. tOup. XLVl.

should be niude spacious and kept clean iuid pure,
and none but the trusted ones should have access
thereto. The physician should get the food or diet
prepared by experienced cooks (so as to imparl to it
the taste and the coloiu he desires), and have it
kept at a cleim and pure spot, concealed from the view
of the public. .After that, the food having been made
innocuous by the admi.xture of anti-toxic medicines,
and freed from all poison by reciting (an .Arthavan)
numtra over it, and having been besprinkled witii the
water of mystic incintation, should be sen ed ( to the
king).

Serving of a ivical Now I shall describe
the mode of serving out the diflerent dishes. Clarified
butter should be served out in a vessel of steel (Kanta-
Loha) ,* Peyi, in a silver bowl ; and all kinds of fruit
and confectionary (such as the Laddukas), on leaves.
The preparations of meat knorvn as the Parishushka and
Pradigdha Mansam should be serv'ed on golden plates ;
fluid edibles and meat essences in silver bowls ; Katvaras
and Kharas in stone utensils ; and cool boiled milk
(Payah) in copper vessels. Other drinks, wines and
cordials should be given in earthen pots ; and Raga-
Shadavas and Sattakas, in cool pure glass bowls, or in
vessels made uf ciystal and Vaiduiya gems. The cook
should place the bowls containing preparations of pulse,
boiled rice and lambatives on clean, spacious trays

XLVl, )

St’TKASTIfANAAl.

557

til lancilul (lesion, ami spread lliein out in (Vonl (of
llie kinir. . All kinds td' dcsserls, confectionary and
dry viands should he served on Iiis right, while all
soups etc., meal- essences, drinks, cordials, milk, Khada-
Yusha, ami l*eya should he pl.iced on his left.
Bowls containing preparations of treacle, Uag-a-Shadava,
and I'attaka should occupy a place midway between
the two sets of bowls described above.

The intelligent physickm, well con\'ers;mt with
the rules of sen ing dishes as above laid down, should
attend upon the king at his table, and spread out on the
purilied level lloor of a solitarv*, beautiful, spacious,
blissful, perfumed and llower-deconited chamber, and
the king should partake of those sacred and pleasant
dishes, served neither hot nor cold, and cooked and
seasoned in the desired mode, and possessed of their
specific tastes.

The pllysiciati iti attendajice should sec that the
king first p;ulakes of the sweet dishes, then of the acid
and s;dine, and of the pungent and other ones at
the close of the meal.* First or at the forepart of a
meal, such finiit us the pomegranate, etc., should be eaten,
after that, Peyds and boiled rice and prepared dishes, as

' Till- W-slL- of swccl vinnilsisilcn .U the oiil.set wouhl nalumlly go to
suUliie the V^yu localdl in the -iioiiacli ; iicid or .s.-jlinc l.xsie parlnken
of ill llie niiilille of a ineiil would rouse I ) the fire of digestion located in
the iKincreiii (Agn)^.shaya), while the pungent taste enjoyed at its close
would tcnij to subdue the Kapham.

558

THE SUSHRUTA S^AMHITA. C Chap. XLVI.

well as confectionan’. Certain authorities maintain that
solid or thick viands should be eaten at the outset,
while others aver that the contrary should be the
rule. Of fruits, the Amalaka has the greatest humour-
destroying properties, and is the most hannless of them
all. Amalaka (fruit) is therefore recommended at the
outset, middle and the close of a meal. Such things as
the Mrinalam (the stem of a lotus plant), the Visham (the
lotus bulb), Shdluka, Kanda and sugar-crane should be
eaten at the beginning of a meal, and never at its close.
A man, who is well-read in the Science of medicine
(Ayurv eda), should sit during his meal in an easy posture
on a high seat and partake, at the right time, with his
body erect and his whole mind engaged in the act
of eating light, wholesome emollient and warm viands,
which are congenial to his temperament and abound
in fluid preparations, with an adequate quantit}'
of boiled rice, neither too hurriedh' nor too slowly,
even when feeling the pinch of a keen and piercing
hunger.

Food eaten with a good appetite tastes pleasant
and relishing. The food which is congenial to one's
temperament begets no discomfort after the eating.
Light food is soon digested. Emollient food gives
tone and vdgour to the system. Warm food improves
the appetite. Food eaten neither too slow!}- nor too
hurriedly is uniformly digested. Food abounding in

Clup. .VI.VI.l

SUTKASTHA'NAM.

559

lUiid compui^ciUs ii» nol impmfccUy dij'cslcd, iior is
allcndcil l)y any acid reaction. Moderation in food
leails to a hajipy and perfect ditiestion and tends to
nvainiain the fundamental principles t)f the body in
their normal state.

Dnrinfi the cold months, wlien the nights are longer,
'iuhsiances, which tend to subdue tlie bodily Immours
which are naturally deranged during that season, should
be eaten in the morning, while during the seasons, when
the days are inordinately long, things which are
congenial in those seasons should be eaten in the
aftentoon. (In spring and autumn) when days and
nights are etpial, the meal should be taken just at
the middle part of the day and night.*

A meal should not be eaten before the appointed
time^ nor before the appetite has fully come.
Similarly, over or insufilcient eating should be equally
refrained from. liating at an improper time and before
the system feels light and free brings on a large
number of diseases, and may ultimately lead to death. A
meal eaten at an hour long after the appointed time
tends to aggravate the bodily Vayu, which affects the

* Thin rule holds good in the case of persons, who eat a single meal in
the course of a day and night. Tltosc, who are in the habit of eating two
liicals a day, should eat a light half meal at one and quarter Prahara in the
morning and another between the third and the fourth Praharas in the
afternoon (Panjiltfikdra). According to Jejjada, the meals should Ite
between the third and the fourth Prahara both in the day and night.

560

THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITA. [Chap.XLVi.

digestive fire, and offers serious obstacles in the way of
its digestion. The food thus digested with difficulty in
the stomach creates discomforts and destroys all desire
for a second meal. Insufficient diet gives but in-
adequate satisfaction, and tends to weaken the bod)'.
Over eating, on the contrary, is attended with such dis-
tressing symptoms, ;is languor, heaviness of tlie body,
disinclination for movements, and distension of the
stomach, -accompanied by rumbling in the intestines, etc.
Hence it behoves a man to take only as much food as
he can easily digest, which should be well cooked and
made to possess all the commendable (adequately
nutritive) properties. Moderation in diet is the golden
rule, besides taking into consideration the demerits of
a particular food before partaking thereof and the
nature of the time (day or night) it is eaten.

Boiled rice food (Annam ) which is impure and dirty,
infested with poison, or out of which another has
eaten a portion as well as that which is full of weeds,
pebbles, dust etc., which the mind instinctively repels,
or cooked on the previous day or which has been
kept standing over-night, as well as that which is
insipid or emits a fetid smell, should be similarly
rejected. Also food which has been cooked long ago,
or has become cold and hard, and has been
rewarmed or which has been imperfectly strained, or is
burnt and insipid should also not serv’e as food. More

' .M.VJ. I

SUTK'ASTHA'.VAM.

.111(1 more palalable dishes should be successively taken
in the course of a meal. Durinj' tlic course of a meal,
tile mouth should he l'rc( ueiUly rin.scd or ^jar^led
inasmuch as the jialale thus constaiuiy beii^i,' cleansed
becomes more susceptible to t.aste, and anything csiten
thereafter is relished the better and gives all the
pleasures of a first morsel. The p.date a/Tected with a
sweel taste at the outset fails to appreciate the tastes of
the successive dishes. Hence, tiie moutii should be
washed at interv.'ds during the meal. Sweet food eaten ■
with a relisli pleasurably affects the mind, brings joy,
energy, strength, and happiness in its train, and
contributes to the growtii of the body ; whereas the
one of a contniry clianictcr is attended with opposite
effects. The food, which does not satiate a man even
after repeated eating, should be considered as agree-
able (Svddu) to him. After finisliing a meal water
should be drunk in a quantity which would be beneficial.
Food adhering to the teeth should be gently drawn
out by means of a tooth-pick, inasmuch as if not
removed a kind of fetor is produced in tlie mouth.

The Viiyu is increased after the completion of
digestion, the Pittam, during the continuance of
the process, while the Kapham is increased immediately
after the act of eating. Hence, the Kapham is to be
subdued after the close of a meal, and the intelli-
Tcnt eater should attain that end by partaking fruit
7 ^

-62 the SUSHRUTA SA-\IHITA'. [ ckp. XL\7.

of an astringent, pungent, or bitter taste, or by
chewing a betel leaf prepared with broken areca nut,
camphor, nutmeg, clove, etc., or by smoking, or by
means of anything that instantaneously removes the
\iscidity in the cavity of the mouth, and permeates
it with its own essence.

Then the eater slrould take rest, like a king, till
the sense of drowsiness incidental to eating is removed.
-Alter this he should walk a hundred paces and lie down
in a bed on his left side. After earing, a man should
enjoy soft sounds, pleasant sights and tastes, sweet per-
nimes, soft and velvet}* touch, in short anything that
ravishes the soul and enwraps the mind with raptures
of joy, since such pleasurable sensations greatly help
tire process of digestion. Soimds, which are harsh and
grating, sights, which are abominable, touches, that are
hard and impleasanl, smells, which are fetid and dis-
agreeable, encoimtered after a meal, or the eating of
impure and execrable boiled rice, or a loud side-
splitting laugh after a meal is followed by vomiting.

The after-meal siesta should not be long and
continuous ; basking before a fire, exposure to the
sun, travelling, driving in a carriage, swimming, bathing
etc., should be avoided jxist after the close of a full
and hearty meal. A diet which abounds in fluid
courses should be refrained from. Only a single taste
should not be enjoyed in the course of a meal.

Clup. XLVI.

SUTKASTH.-lfNAM.

563

Cookeil potherbs, hoiletl rice of inferior quality, anti
a course of diet aboundinf^ in acid taste should be
avoitled. Articles of one taste should not be eatetj
in lar^c quantities at a time, nor articles of various
tastes should he constantly indulged in. A secjjnd
meal .should not be eaten on the siime day in the event
of the appetite having become dulled by a previous meal,
baiting with a previous meal only partially digested
seriously impairs the tligestive functions. A man
of dull or impaired appetite should refrain from eating
heavy articles of food, as well as from partaking of
large quantities of light substances. Cakes should never
be eaten, and a double quantitiy of water should
be taken if they are eiiten at all out of hunger,
by which their safe digestion would be ensured.
Of drinks, lambatives and confectionar}’ (solid food),
each succeeding one is heavier than the one im-
mediately preceding it in the order of enumeration.
Heavy articles of food should be taken in half measures
only, while the lighter ones may be eaten till satiety.
Liquid food, or that which abounds in liquid sub-
stances should not be taken in large quantities. Dr}'
articles of food taken in combination with a large
number of other substances fail to do any injury
to the stomach. Dr}' food (Annam) taken alone
can not be completely digested. It is transformed
into lumps in the stomach, is irregularly chymed,
and produces deficient gastric digestion followed by

5^4

THE SUSHRUTA SAAIHITA [Chap. XLVI.

a reactionar}’’ acidity. The injested food, whether
of a character that stamps it as belonging to the
Vid^hi group or not, is but incompletely digested
and gives rise to a reactionarj" acidity in the event
of tlie Pittam being confined in the stomach, or in the
intestines. Dry food (cukes, etc.), incompatible food
combinations (milk with fish and so on), and those, which
are long retained in the stomach in an undigested state,
tend to impair the digestive functions (Agni).

The Kapham, Pittam, and Vdyu respectively pro-
duce the types of mucous indigestion of chyme
(Am^jiruam), acid indigestion (VidagdhiCjimam), and
indigestion due to incarcerated fecal matter (Vish-
tabdh^jirnam). Certain authorities aver that there is a
fourth class of indigestion, known as the indigestion
of unassimilated chyle (Rasa-shesha). Drinking of an
abnormal quantity of water, irregular eating, voluntary
suppression of any natural urging of the body, sleep
in the day, keeping of late hours in the night,
partaking of a light food with a strong appetite are
the factors which interfere wth the proper digestion
of food and develop sjmiptoms of indigestion. The
food taken by a person under the influence of envy,
passion, greed, or anger, etc., or by a man suffering
from a chronic distemper, is not properly digested.

Types of Indigestion A case of indi-
gestion in which the undigested food matter ac-

CU-u \l.Vf. ]

Sr’TUASTHA’XA.M.

565

ijiiirc:j a >\vccL laalc i.s called ciiynioii.i (or iiuicous)
indi^otion (Am.Jjirnain), llial in wliicli the uiuli-
.:;csled load aniiilres an add table in Ihe stomach
is called \'ida.i;dha indif'cstion. The form in whiciv
the food matter brought down into the stomadi
is partially or irrej(tilarly digested (one portion being
dij^cbled, the other being not) followed b}' a pricking
or piercing pain in the stomach and entire suppres-
sion of the llatus, is cilled Vishtabdha indigestion.
The type known as indigestion of unassimilated chyle
is characleruscd by the absence of any acid or sour
eructations, hut the patient feels no inclination for food
inspite of the norm.il character of the eructations, if any.
The lyi)o is further characterised by pain about the
region of the heart, and water-brash. The unfavourable
svmploms of indigestion are sialden loss of conscious-
ness, delirium, vomiting, water-brash, languor with a
gone-feeling in the limbs, and vertigo, etc., which may
end in death.

Fasting is beneficial in a case of Amdjirnam indiges-
tion. Ejection of the contents of the stomach gives relief
in a case of Vidagdha indigestion. Fomentation will
alleviate a case of Vishtavdlia indigestion, while in an
indigestion of unassimilated chjde, the patient should
be confined to bed and fomentations and digestive
medicines should be administered as well. In a case of
Vidagdha indigestion the patient should be made to

566

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLVf.

vomit the contents of his stomach with the help of
wami water saturated with salt, while in a case of
chymous indigestion the patient should forego all food
till he is restored to his natural condition. A patient
suffering from indigestion whose system has been
cleansed and lightened with the abovesaid appliances
should go fasting till he is restored to his natural
condition as regards the strength and humours of the
body.

The eating together of both wholesome and unwhole-
some articles of food is called promiscuous eating
(Samashanam). Over or insufficient eating at intervals
and at improper seasons goes by the denomination
of irregular eating (Visham^shanam). Eating before
a former meal is thoroughly digested in the stomach is
called Adhyashanam. These three kinds of eating are
injurious, and speedily give rise to a variety of diseases,
or may be ultimately attended with fatal consequences.
The drinking of cold v ater helps the speedy digestion of
a partially digested food, which has already been attend-
ed vnth a reactionarj' acidity, inasmuch as the coldness
of the imbibed water tends to subdue the deranged
Pittam, and the food thus moistened by the water
naturally gra^^tates into the intestines.

The man, who complains of a burning sensation in
the stomach, throat or heart, shall find reh'ef by licking
a paste made of honey and powdered Haritaki, or of

XI.VJ. 1

SrrUASTHA'NA.Ni.

5^>7

jiulvcri^c<l H.tril.ild an<l Dr.ik>h.J. The mail, "'ho, thoujjh
aiul clhiljjenL with lhc}»low ol' iicallli, appreheiuis
an altai'k ot' indii:e>lt«)n iti Ojc mtiriiiii}', may sifely
pailakc ut' a wholesdiuc iniihday DJcal alter Iiaviiij'
taken powdeicd Ahhay.i and Shuiiti. Appetite may
he e\perieiu ed c\eii in a jtalc iT indigcblion, wlien the
chyle ur IoihI matter, accumulated in the blomach and
pie.s'cd up»)n by tlie deranged hninonri:, is emdined to a
coiner oT the vitcus witlmut ob^lructing the jiassige u(
heal of ilie local lire. This viV.irions appetite kills
its duped victims with the swiftness of a ])oison.

Specific properties of matter ;-Xow

we shall ileal with the actions of several properties of
matter, and from tiiem should be inferred the nature of
the properties which are inherent in various kinds
of matter.

Coldness- -is pleasumble, exercises styptic
virtues, alleviates epileptic tits, thirst and a burning sen-
sation of the hotly, and arrests perspiration. Heat is tlie
reverse in its action to coldness. It greatly helps to set
in the process of suppuration in boils and abscesses.
Oleaginousness imparts a gloss or oiliness, and acts as
an emollient tonic, and cosmetic. Pareliedness is the
opposite of oleaginousness ; it produces stypsis and makes
a to tactual perception. Slinn'ness is

vitalisiW, tonic, heavy as regards digestion, and tends
to proikice Kaphain, and brings about the adhesion

568 'I'tiE SliSHRUTA SAAIHITA-. C Chap. XLVI.

of fractured bones. The quality of absorption (\’'ishad)
is the opposite of sliminess. It absorbs or soaks up
all mucous secretions and helps the process of healing
a sore or ulcer. Keenness or sharpness begets
burning and suppuration, and arrests secretions.
Mildness or softness is the opposite of sharpness.
Hea\iness produces languor, increases excrements, and
is tonic, pleasing and flesh-building. Lightness is the
opposite of hea\nness. It acts as a h’quefacient and
healing agent. The ten \'irtues with their actions
have now* been described.

Xow- hear me describe the other ten properties of
matter mth their specific actions. Fltiidity is moisten-
ing, Compactness is thickening and obstructive.
Humidity is like sliniiness. Roughness is like absorp-
tion. Odoriferousness is pleasiurable, subtile, mild and
reb'shing. Fetidness is the opposite of odoriferousness,
produces nausea, and brings on a non-relish for food.
Laxativeness restores the normal condition of the
humours- Narcotism changes the condition of
vitality. Expansiveness (like that of wine) is the
property in \irtue of w^hich a drug or a substance
instantaneously permeates the whole organism and is
subsequently digested. Evolution or Emanativeness is
somewhat identical in its virtue with expansiveness
\vith the exception that it permeates the organism
in its tmdigested state, aud tends to disintegrate the

570

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLVI.

lymph chyle carried away by the vital Vdyu known
as Vy^na tends to strengthen all the fundamental
principles of the body.

Kapham is the excreted portion of the lymph
chyle, the Pittam is that of the blood, the waxy
impurities found in the tympanum, etc., are the'
excreted portions of flesh. Perspiration is the
excreted matter of fat. Nails and hair are the
excreted portions of the bones. The waxy deposits
found in the comers of the e3’es, and the oily secretions
which sometimes mark the skin are the excreted por-
tions of marrow. With the dawn of day a man wakes
from sleep, and his heart unfolds like a lotus flower,
and so remains till sleep folds up his eyelids. Hence,
the root principles of the body continue non-
humid during the state of waking. Accordingly, a
man may partake of a meal at night, even if the
food eaten in the day continues tilt then undigested,
without the fear of committing the physical sin of
Adhj^ashanam (super-eating). But the reverse is the
case in respect of a similar conduct in the night
when man has recourse to sleep and his heart
remains constricted in a state of unconsciousness,
and the root principles of his body become loose
and charged with humidity. Hence, it is beneficial to
fast on the following day in the event of the food taken
overnight being found to be not properly digested.

Clinp. XLVI. 1

sutk.\sthanam.

571

He, who carefully peruses these niles regarding
the regimen of diet as approved of by the holy sage
Dh.invanlari, the greatest of all the Rajarshis ( royal
hermits), becomes great in wisdom, and is sure to be
glorilicd with the proud distinction of being the medical
adviser of his king or his nobles.

Thus ends iho furlysi.Mli Clinplcr of the Sutr.i-stlilnuiiJ in the Suslirula
Suinliiti which treats of Fixxl and Drink.

Here ends the Sutrastharnam.
