ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT E7 AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 3

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 4-6
Jan. 7-29, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTO


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record scries offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) 'war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U,S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No. United States v.


>ular Name


No. of
Defendants


Karl Brandt et al.
Erhard Milch

Josef Altstoetter
et al.

Oswald Pohl et al.
Friedrich Flick
et al.

Carl Krauch et al.

Vilhelm List et al.
Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

Otto Ohlendorf
et al. ■*

Al fried Krupp
et al.

Ernst von
Weizsaecker et al.
Vilhelm von Leeb
et al.


Medical Case
Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)
Justice Case

Pohl Case (Ss)
Flick Case
(Industrialist)

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)
Hostage Case
RuSHA Case (SS)

Einsatzgruppen
Case (SS)

Krupp Case
(Industrialist)
Ministries Case

High Command Case


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,
1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.


Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemmed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24/ 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted, largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the ,
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, arid ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and.skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to exteraely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawatej potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
burns.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskommissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blome: Deputy (of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrcr (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef dcs Hygienischcn Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef dcs
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppcnfuchrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

•

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldemar Hoven:' Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Wehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation. . •

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of^Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Frcyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtraedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


P


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician On the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviat'ion Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin. - •

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four cqunts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,

Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hovcn, Gobhardt,

Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,

Handloser, Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyscng, Beiglboeck, Oberhcuscr, and
Poppcndick. •

The English-language transcript volumes arc arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes arc numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use, (~~

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.

These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reichsgesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.


The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed


by translations
original docume

or additional
nts, such as:

certificates. A

few exhibits are

Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368 \

403 —*

NO-817

546

NO-3347

616 PS

•


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reichegeaetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number £or each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

7


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law-10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits arc listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case are closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically‘prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til 19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminals
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


8


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 3
Target 1

Volume 4
Jan. 7-10, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD

«Q


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 4


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


7-10 January 1947 pp. 1167-1521


7 J on 47 -“-EKir-l-i-Foster-ABG


CORRECTED COPY


Official transcript of thv. American kilitary Tribunal
in the matt.r of the United States of America against
Karl Brandt, ct al, defendants, sitting at liumberg,
Germany, cr. 7 January 1947, 0930, Justice 3©ais,
presiding.


THE MARSHAL: The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal 1 .

Military Tribunal 1 is now in session.

God save the United States of America and this Honorable
Tribunal.

There will be order in tne courtroom.

THE PP.ESID-7: Mr. IJarahal, will 70 U ascertain if tne defend¬
ants are all present ir. tho court.

THE MARSHAL: Jiav it ploaso Your Honors, the defendants arc all
present in tho courtroom.

TOE FRESIDE 2 .T: Tr.o Socretary-Gonoral will noto on the minutes
tho dofondants aro all present in tho court.

DR. EXE;: KOGON Resumed
DIRECT fcftLXUMZOH (continued)

TOE PRiSlDECiT: The witness on the stand is reminded that ho
is still under oath.

IE. McHANEY: !!ay it please the Tribunal, the prosecution will
continuo with the examination of th„ witness Kogon.

BY HR. KcHAHEY:


Q. Mr. Kogon, at tho conclusion of yesterday's session you had
explained to us the manner in which experimental subjects were select¬
ed for the medical exp. riaent: in the Buchoxwald camp. Will you toll


the T


ribuaal whethar^any non-German nationals were experimented on.

jtY -7-

A. the &(jfericental subjects who had boon scloctod for

^ ‘ vc

-wck 4 6 ^ there .ore not only Germans but also Folcs, Russians and
frenchman, particularly'during tho last years.

Q* ’<'cre there any prisoners of war experimented on in Block 46
to your knowledge?


- 1167 -


7 Jar. A7-iT-3ill-i-2-?o at er-ABG


v’oart Ho. 1


A. Tos.

UcM, will you please explain to the Tribunal in your own
words exactly


- 1167-A


t Jan i --IH.-.-1-2-? o e ter
~ \-z r_. i


r v those typhus erperiaocte vorc carried ^it.

i.. After 40 to gO P«'pie. sonetiaes up V lit. Vd beer, detailed f-.r 8
otr.oa if exper'.ceat3. ,n«-third if thee vere separated, 'vo-thirds of
- - + r-i either va:cix. .ei vith a pr tcctivc treatment or ithe.,js*
tc; vith it if it was a subject. Those people vhc vere protected
rgrinst typhus renaiced in Sleek 46 for several weeks until the Sickettsle,
the cauoc tf the classic typhus, vas used to infect then. Together vith
thcr., the first selection, that is to say, the first third, was also in¬
jected. Ihojr served cs so-called control persons vith the help of whoa it
w:s possible to ascertain whether the infection vrs taking, what course the
dice.- s« would trice in their c/scs, so that the course could bo corpnrcd with
-: ct which had app-i red vith those vh« hed been vaccinated vho had also boon

B

in.'uotod. Infection was carried in different ways. hither tyohus vrs
transferred through fruoh blood, vhich vrs injected intravenously or it
*re injected iatrrr.usculi rly. At the beginning even by lacerating the
sklr. by -urns of c cut into the ara. In the initial stagos tv» cubic
ccr.ti loters frosh blood infected vith tyohus v»>ru usod for Infection,
ur.iosc one vts concerned vith cn infection »ith on infoctiouo solution.

Tv, cubic centinetcrc cf fresh blood vhich contained typhus vrs then,
theruforj, usually injected into the veins, later on that dosego vrs re¬
duced to l/20th of 1 cubic Ocntinetor because tho large cuantity of 2
cubic centimeters would pr-jv«.r.t any secu-ity, penctri to any security
relieved by protective v. ccirn tlcn. Ivor. l/ 20 th of r cubic ccntinctor af
typhus containing fresh o-d vrr- usually enough If it was injected into
the the veins t or dtee typhus to « very high dogree. In the courso of
years the tyohus cultures which wore used at Buchcnv*Id had been culti-
V; =ea to nan and they had increased their strox.gth, their

virility to r very considerable degree, so that the snellcr Quantity was
P>.r:'*.ct enough. A suggestion vhich I hed nrdc in 15-.4 tt Stursbannfuehror
-r. Ding, neatly, that in order to increcse the scientific control 1 h» should
reduce tho cuantity of these injections to the extreno ainiaua so that the
E *>-cnlled cvelling value should be atsc-rteln-'d — in other words, so tliat


7 JfcU 47-i.-l=K-I-5-rae«

C r '* 1 «

•.hi. rrtifieUi infection should be most lilee the artificial infection
•fcrctigfc life, fbrt suggestion was turned down by hin since he believed
thi: ir - thrt crse ~ 5 cinvincicg proof would exist for the effectiveness
of the protective aeane vhich vtr c being us.d.. A third category ^ the
reriaontel cersons was used to nalnteln the tyohus cultures, those were
.he so-called paesege persons, acountlng to three to five persons per nonth.
They wore' only infected for the purpose of making sure that typhus containing
frosh blood would elviys be availtble c t nil tines. Very nearly nil of
those persons diod rad I do not think that I an exaggerating if I sny that
of these cocos were fatal.

fitness, do you aeon to say that they deliberately infected three to
five persons e aonth with tyohus Just to have the viruses alive and
Available In blood?
a. Just for thrt pj.rticuicr purpose.

Ci. "ra you tell the Tribunal approximately hov many cf those persons died
vhO were infectod Just to koep the viruses alive?

a. Of the so-called pas Sago porsons, thoro ves, as I have rlrcndy said,
three to five per aonth who were used, thrt is to sty, during the period
when : was working for Dr. Ding-Schuler so many every nonth until the end
of the 3uch.er.vr Id Concentration Camp. That is to soy, beginning with April
19*53 until Mt rch 1945. Before that, a6 far as the previous porl >d is con¬
cerned, : only know that pas.rgo persons hed also been used but I do not
knev the figures.

Q. ::ov, witness, were expert.entel persons also lnfactod with lice?

A. as far as Is known to r.e, there was one single instance when on experi¬
ment took Place in Buchcnwild where an original infection with typhus was
ctrrii,! out with lice. The c-ntegi .us lice had been brought from the
-mstitute of the OKK of Krakow, by a courier. They were taken t* Block 46. .

were kept in aatll cages which were applied to the thigh of the experi¬
mental persons and a number of persons, the number of when I do not know,
was infected. Soos of our c«nrades were allowing a few lice to escape in a
rcca of Block.46 but they did keep these lice under control end they reported


-


7 Jfs 47-fd-ZSt-l-4-7o« ter

" -jr: 3a. 1


t- the Cep- thrt Jleelcf ieber, typhus currying lice, fci & esepoed fro- this

• * •

n re. Cep j Arthur Biotech laced lately reported this to the cenp physician,
~r. E vac, vts wi ct thrt tine representing, taking the piece of Ur. Eing
-Schuler, end 3r. Eovcn, folloving Eictsch's eevi-.e, ordered the destruction
whose infected lice. A second dispatch frea hrekov vrs rlso burnt
lecture CM did not wish th*t such exporinents should lead to high endengcr-
• ent for the canp red should be continued.


7 Jat-;-^GZS-2-l-C30k

CtutS i'o. 1.


3- ~nd ysu say th- ; these typhus infected lice case fro- the typnus
and virus reeearca Institute of the 5X3 at Cracow?

— Yes.

<• —1 do you knew the na_o of the Director of that Institute?

— 7r5 ~ •"« correspond once betvoon Dr. Ding and the Institute for Typhus
and Virus Roaearcc in Crccow, I know tint tnis was Dr. Ryer.

!Tow, going hack for a nonent to the persons who wero infectod with
ty.nus cirus in order to keep the cirus alive, can y->u stnte whethor the
persons wr.o died as a result of that acti n are includod in the dinry kept
by Dr. Dice?

... The passage persons, as far ns I can recollect. ,»ro not listed In
tno diary. ?.iey w«ro, snail wc * $-, r. uniter of courso.

Co.. you tell the Tribunal wncro tno typhus virun cisio fro., which was
used ir. the c:up?

... Tae virus wno obtained fioa various sources. ..t the beginnbg froi.
t .e Soaring Uorks and tr.e Robert Xoch Institute ii. Berlin. .Theso first
calturoB w..ich and been produced accordirg to tho Glldcnoistcr and Hongon
procoss tur.-.cd out to bo. however, insufficiently virilo. In othor wordo.
infection did.-, t tako. r..us the new uothod of infection wnich I have dco-
cribod wat doptod. th t is. iatr-vonous inj-ctior. of fresh blood infected
vitn typhus, and the cultures required frou theso pnoengo persons were ob¬
tained when taoy and lost their effectiveness, and sonotiuos theso cultures
wovld die down .r.d were obtained from the OXH at Cracow, from tho Typhus
Institute, tc t is. of the D1H at Cracow.

v . I believe you have probably, told us sonotaing r.bout whero tho typhus
vuccinoa co-o fro- out would you bo good enougn to go over that natter again
for us?

... Tac various vaccines vaich were to be tried out c*u.o first of all
fr0a 3 ® fcric « tfork ». secondly, froo the I.G.Farben Works, and were mostly
concerned witu caon*-therapeuticals. In those series of oiporiacnts. menthy-
lene blue and rutenol, p^rcicol end nitro uridine was experinoatod with.
•5irtner_ore. t-ere cane frot. tne State Institute at Copenhagen n vaccine that


- 1171 -


- Jar.-: :-<2S-2-2-Cook-AHJ
Coart He. 1

was cade froc the liver of sice, and there was ar. Italian vaccine
cade fron the lungs of alee, and lastly a vaccine cade free the lungs
of dogs, according to the Carticuccno system developed at Bucharest.

Did you obtain a vaccine froc Sye-r's Institute at Cracow?

A. Aid then there was tho Weigel vaccine developed at the OKH
Institute at Craccw. Inis was also in fact used continuously because
it was considered tho best of the lot, since in every series of exper-
i-.^nts a few persons, costly about 10 , usually were treated with tho
Weigel Vaccine cade free the intestin-s of lice.

Q. And did you ever obtain any vaccines froc thw Robert Koch
Institute?

A. The Roburt Koch Institute, as far as I can recollect, sup-
pliod vaccine at the beginning, together with tho Bohring Works, or
they supplied infecting substanco. There I an not quito euro.

Q. Can you tell tho Tribunal whether those experimental sub¬
let a suffered to any appreciable extent during tho course of those
typhus experiments?

A. There we cast be Tareful and draw a dividing line between
tho general psychic condition of the soul of thoso cxperinental per¬
sons and the physical condition, which they experienced through this
disuasu. Sv^ry can in th.. cacp knew that Block 46 -.fas a dreadful
piacu, and the fewest people in the cacp had an exact idea regard¬
ing wr.at was going on in Block 46. A dreadful horror would fall
upon any one who would b, brought into any sort of connection with
this block. As persons were Selected and taken to Block 46 through
the sick bay then they knew that they wore concerned with a lethal
or fatal affair. Tho norror which was attached to this block was
hat cade things even worse for tns-a. Apart froc that it was g„n-
Cr: ‘ n y kruwn in the. canp that in Block 46 this Capo Arthur Diotsch
was jc<_rcising iron discipline. Then, the cat of nine tail 3 really
rulc-d suprv-cu. Svervone, therefore, who went to Block 46 , as experi¬
mental persons then looked for th<- expected death and under certain


- 1172 -


? Jar.-i'-G2S-5-3-Cock-AEG
Coart Mo. 1

circumstances a very long, drawn cut and frightful death, which he
-.as i-arining ail of the tine, and he would also have to expect tor¬
ture and complete removal of the last remainder of personal freedom.

It was in that psychological condition that these experimental persons
. ,-c waiting in the- sick beds for a period of time, the length of
whicr. they did not know. They were waiting for the day or for the
right when something would b. done to then, something of which they
did not know what it night be, but of wr.ich they expects they would
have some frightful forn of death in store for than. The infection
was so thorough that there was always the most horrible fora of typhus,
and it happened quite often there- were frightful scenes which the
Capo Arthur Oiotsch would keep dam with iron discipline, because the
patients were afraid they wer given lethal injections. . Aftor a cer¬
tain period when the actual illness had set in after the infection,
ordinary symptoms of typhus would appear, which, of course, as is
known, is one of the cost frightful illnesses. The infection, as I
have already described to you, and particularly during the last two
e.-vd a half years got so that there were almost always the most hor¬
rible symptoms of typhus. In some cases there were outbreaks of in¬
sanity, delirium, people would refuse to cat and a largo percentage
cf them would die. Those who went through that disease in a lighter
Cora lived because their constitution was strong, and because the

vaccine was effective, 'cut they woro forced to observe tho death

%

struggle of the others at all tines, and they Were living in <an
atmosphere which it is hardly possible- to imagine and just what
happen^ to these p-oplc who survived the typhus was something
which they did not know during the period of convalescence. Would
they remain in “lock 16 to used for other purposes? Would they
Ve used -as assistants? Would they be used as surviving witnesses,
of the special experiments and would they have to fear death because
of that? All of that was something which they did not know and which
aggravated the conditions of these experiments.

- H?3 -


7 J'n-::-CSS-2-A-Cook-ASG
2 ourt ::o. 1

Sow, Ur. Kogon, do you knew whether Dr. Ding ever made a
report or. the.a- typhus experiments which you have described to the
Military Judical Academy?

A. 3vory experiment carried out in Block 46 in Buchonwald was
t down in accurate minutes. On the strength of the notes made in
lock 46, temperature diagrams and reports and final results served
for the cocpiling


-1173-A-


7 Jan-Ii-GSS-a-h-Cook

3-'- . So* 1.

of a report to the Chief SS aaptsturab r nnf\i<a ar of the SS and was sent
V him together with tic copy. Those copios vor_> aln* destined for ™ v -
oti.-r depart^cit which was also interested ir. tho experiments. In other
words, if wo v.r. concerned with ar. experiment which was carried out in
*. horr-tion with the 3chrln£ Yorks or in collaboration with tho i.’ilitary
.jxAoey or the Hoich ftinietry of tho Interior, then that department would
be contained in the distribution chart of tho original report.


? Jan-3E-3-l-?itrgcrQld-AB}

v

c rc ;;o. 1

fhwn you say that the reports were sent to the. Chief Hygien¬
ist of the SS; whoa do you naan?

A. 7..- Chief Hygienist of the SS was SS-C-borfuehror Professor

Doctor Mrugowsky,

•

Q. You said the original of those reports together with copies;
did Ding ctt-.ch distribution lists to the copies noting to whoa they
should be sent?

A. In practice, this changed. At tho beginning of ny activi¬
ties as Dr'. Ding-Schuler's clerk, he took these reports to Berlin
personally. And they were distributed frea there; without oy know¬
ing details as to whore they Went. Lator on, on frequent occasions,
t .eSe reports together with the corresponding nuabor of carbon copies \

for each individual wesv sent off. For instancy it would state on
the distribution chart, "To Reichs Medical Officer of the SS, To the
Chief of Department XVI, S3-Oborfuehror Professor Docor ltrugowsky."

Thor, cano ono original and four carbon copies. There were evon copies
for Ministerial Director Dr. Christensen, Reichsainistor of the Interior,
Profossor Lockenann and the Behring works.

Or in other cases, if no wore concerned with the experimental
Department V at Leipzig, and reports went to Oborfuehrer Poppondick,
it would say for Messrs. Firm of iiddaus, or Stunnbannfuehrcr Doctor
Corner. '

Can you remember any instance in which a written report on
the typhus experiments was in fact noted for distribution to the
Military Medical Academy?

A. Ine contact with the Military Academy in Berlin is known to
-e ''von two or three instances. In the first case, wo were actually
: '.cerned with a meeting. It was the third Military-Medical Session
or Meeting in Berlin. During this meeting. Dr. Ding was making a re¬
port about typhus experiments. I do not know whether he actually
openly mentioned during that meeting that there were experiments
going on in a concentration camp. I expect I guessed from subsequent

- 1175 -


an-3H-3-2-Fitzgexald-ABG


;c .rh -o. 1

events, hew ever; at least, it was apparent by near, s of suspicion
since Dr. Ding told me in June, 1943, that professor Rose spoke a-
gainst those experiments and objected against these experiments quite
openly before tin entire Congress. He described these experiments as
uperfluous. And Dr. Ding, ar he told me later in June, 1943, and
tnc Congress had been Ln !Iay, had rather a difficult position against
:rofessor Rose because the German scientists who wero assembled thore
mist have been quite clearly aware of the facts since at the end. Dr.
Ding found only one way out—tnat of hiding behind the secrecy of
the Raich.

Tho two other cases only concerned typhus. In one instance—
r.o, I beg your pardon, I must correct cyself— in both cases wu woro
not really concomcd -dth typhus. Tfo woro concerned with tho pro¬
duction of blood plasma and tho examination of the old blood plasma
vhich tho Military Acadcsyy at Berlin had entrusted to tho Concen-
tration Comp in ajchcnwald in order to have it examined in Block 46.

;. titnoss, I think wo will hold tho explanation of the blood
plasma experiments until a little later on in the examination.

Right now, I would Liko to go back again to this meeting of the
I Military ’ edleal Academy at which said Dr. Ding made a report on tho
typhus experiments. I Trill ask you if Dr. Ding was rather excited
at the objections interposed by Frofossor Ro3u at this mooting?

A. Dr. Ding had boor, in a condition of considerable excite¬
ment for a nunb.r cf days. During tho first weeks of ay own work
with him, I had not actually formed any close relationship to Dr.

Ding. In spite of that, he- told a.’ on thr^o or four occasions,
f. ain and again, and then under considerable excitement, using
C-U*se3, rr.-.at he thought of Professor Rose, and that Professor Rose
-■- -d^r-d turn against the experiments carried out by Ding on human
beings in public. I should not like to repeat some of the expressions
which he used.

'■ And you say that after Rost had made his objections that

- 1176 -


? Jwi-E3i“3-3-?itzgorald-ASG
Court :k>. l

Ding 'ou Id only say to the acting that the experiments wore top
EeCret?

A. Dr. Ding told -e that he r.ad no wy cct at the end, but to
t,i! this r rofessor, using corresponding expressions on that occas-
' % that there arc certain spheres which even a professor would
r-ave to respect; therefore, he would oc compelled to keep certain
matters secret.

'• And when do you recall that this r*.ting of the liilitary *
Uodical Academy took place at which Ding made hia report?

A. To ay recollection, this was in Hay, 19

'.'.an, .fitness, can you toll fren the remarks node by Dr.

Ding after this (sooting whether Professor Rose's objections were
interposed on acral grounds or shall wo say on scientific groundj?

03 nt «*>J«ting to the scientific value of these experiments?

.. I can only repeat ay own impressions based on the state-
nts rnde ly Dr. Ding. Perhaps some would h. inclined in ay
position as a prisoner to overestimate from a human point of view,
tr., r-sistanco put up by Frofessor Rose. It was my impression that
it was both for scientific as troll as human reasons that ho objuct-
uJ. ‘.fter Ding's statement, Professor Rose said that animal experi¬
ments with typhus had produced clear-cut results and that the human
experiments which had been made, did not in any individual point
-/ce.d the results of animal experiments. Therefore, from the
scientific point of vie.:, tr. had to be superfluous; in fact, even
otherwise. rt rvd this is what Ding had been saying had been unneces¬
sary. Shis also was interpreted by me as being from the human
point of vi_w.

'• Kow * Witness, I an going to ask you if anything happened
v *" r t.iio meeting which made you change your mind about the human¬
itarian motives of Professor Rose on the occasion of his speech?

A. Approximately one year later or maybe nine months late>r,

3r. Ding was showing me triumphantly an order from Professor

- 1177 -


7 Jaa-3H-3-4-Fitzgcrald-AflG

r.iri. :.o. 1


’’rugcwsky dealing with a new series of experiments which were to
carried out in Block C6, this time with the so-called Ibson-
vaccint obtained from Copenhagen which had been produced from the
li-'.r of nice. Ibis vaccin.. had been supplied for tho very purpose
experiments in the concentration carp at Buch^nwald by Professor
.cose. He had made a corresponding application to lErugowsky. Dr.
Di.'* thought and said laughingly, -you soc Kogon, now ho too has
given in."

I must say quite openly, I was flabbergasted because Professor
Rose * s


- 1177-A -


? '*»a- 3H-'-4—Fitxger?ld
'—rt 1 .

resistance pat up In k-ay. 1943. bed been considered by re a sysptos of the
eurviv-1 of the ethics of Gernun scientists and nedic-1 nen. This experi-

;_er.*. vith the Ibsen vaccine, did in fact, afterwards tike place and an

*

I agnation of thic contradiction in Rote's attitude adopted in the Third
iicil Congress in 3rrlin is one I cannot comprehend. In ry book, "The
: St"t. ." I left thi3 question open although I nentioned it.
v 3° ■ ou recall whether any of the cxperinontal subjects died during the
roursc of the series of experiments requested by Rose?


7 Jan 47-::-?IC-4-i~::ochan
Court T»o. 1


... That is so xrthingo which I Cannot ascertain today according to
ry. I believo that thero w?.s ono porson, but I an ronlly not suro.

".t'would havo to be cseortainod free tho diary.

o. hut ho su_£ostad, that is Hose suggested, using a Co.p6nhofi.on
7-ccir.o cado free, tho liver of mico in 1944; is that ccrroct?

;.. Yob; I think it was ir. January or February of 1944.

'Tow, witness, you havo mentioned a book and sinco ycu brought
tho point up; is it truo th-t you havo written a book on your experiences
-.r.-’ y see obcorv-tians in th. Tuchonwald Concentration c-mp?

... "ot in that form, no. I havo writton a book, c~llod "The SS
-tato" concerning tho 3ystar. in Gorman concentration c*=aps, but that loos
r.ot dool With oy personal onnorioncos. It describes tho structure of
t’io cans and in this cwmoction Buchonwald, horo I myself havo lived
t..r c:h and which I havo surriv- i, w.*a always usod as a proper or.anplo.

jid did you dor.l in this bcok with tho typhus experiments ct

‘ J

c .r/’ald at sono lonc.ht?

Yon.

’. Do you kn-Si whether this book has' i>ec;*no cvoilablo to defense
c u; "el In this case?

... Tho book has been for salo now for c for; nooks end it is per¬
fectly poosi lo that tho dofonso counsol may havo rood it.

f’ow. iu connection with tho typhus oxporlEonts in Block 46, I

%

wish thrt you would toll tho ''ribunal what ccnnocticn tho dofondar.t
"oven ' ad with thoso experiments?

... :& I alre-dy r.er.ti* lai j^pstorday. Dr. Hovon was Dr. Ding's doputy.
Dine was absent fran "uchonwald quito frequently. Dr. Hovon could not
F.tn"t an:* sorio? of. oraorimor.ts ~n his -wn initiative as Dr. Ding was tho

• ’ f, no nuthoriz,d to start sue* axporim-onts and ho was under Dr. !lrugowsky's
';rc. Dr. : ovon w.*»r- responsible for tho supervision of th3 carrying ou
.one oxperinonts, the visits to patients, tho roperts by moans of
tjip.-raturo curves, diary notos and report sheets; in other words to socuro
orderly record of theso experiments. Secondly , Dr. Hovon was indirectly
ccnncctod with typhus experiments insofar as tho request for soloctoos,

- 117 '-:-


? m- 4“-: :-7JC-4-2-3Soo han

.r*. I

this was cr-otir-.os, as I already emphasized, nado through thB camp

^fcyslcira.

*cw, I want to ccmo back for a ricr-ent to tho experiments with the
r.h'iror. v ccinc, requaated by Professor Pcse ard I -..-ill ask you to lock
at page 2C of tho Dins Si-ary, vhich is Prosecution Exhibit 237, and soo
.7 this ro.'roshqs your rocrllocticn as to whether any of tho
..... rluent.al eujocta died. If it plo-so the Tribunal, tho corresponding
translation of tho 2nglish toxt is or. pago 49 of tho Document book and r.t
tho batter, -nd t~? of pare 50.

(?afo 2:5 of tho Dinr Diary is shown to tho witness.)

"ill you neu state, after rofrocMcg your roccllocticn with tho Ding
diary, whether any of tho oxperinor.t.al subjocts died during tho c cur so of
this Ci-aanhoy.on V"cci.nj o.iporinor.ts?

I 0 olrous :os. ter tho ond of

this oorioa of oxporlroor.ts ard after tho result cf many serious illnocsos
ir. that sorloo of oxporirionts, I say six fatalities csor-g thirty, which
; on .t t',ro::ty air ir. nractiso b..cauco four droppod cut early because of other
Stor this ro3Ult, as I was saying, hod become known to us in
I!1 ck 5C, I, togothor with a nuwbor of r.y cccrades, doctors and scientists
discussed this affair at great lor.th. It no*.; becomes cloer to no end I
y.i rocolloot tliat thoro wore aero fatalitios and that wo wero nest donrosoad
° b Clls f ct, particularly conr.octed with so inpertant and significant
a Goiontiot Q3 Profecscr Hoso.

-• Dew, vdtxess, will y u or.tion for tho record tho nsnes of a fow
3f t: ‘ oc ® aclor.tista, who warn xrrkisc with you in Block 50?

4* 1 W 1H frontier. Loot*. ;r Dr. Ludwig Flock, Lonborg; specialist in
ti.o field f research nr.d tho ccabating of typhus; Dr. Karl Hokcwitschka,
-’ra=io, Dactoriclofist; Fref. Dr. Alfred "alachawsky tho Pasteur Institute;

' ,r * -tiounc Suaro; Prof. Dr. "aitz, of• the University of Strassburg;

• v - Linzen, Anstardon:; and Dr. .'.arionno Viopilcwski cf Karlsruho.

t; go back to the typhus experiments; can you tell the Tribunal
u ~ pr x lately the total numbor of inaates experimentod on with typhus?


- 118 ?-


- Jen W-?JC-i-3-Mceh8»-/33
Jo'j; .Jo. 1

•

A. The total nuobor cf experimental subjects, who went through
flock 46, Including the so-called passage persons, totalled nearly
one thousand persons. Of these more than half were passage persons
used for typhus experiments.

Q. And can you tell the Tribunal approximately how many people
died free the typhus experiments, as distinguished from thu so-
called passage experiments.

A. That vari.d from case tc case, it varied very much. There
was one series of experiments with a chcao therapeutical preparation
from I.G. Farbon and a series of experiments in which among tho per¬
sons, who w^re immunized, nearly as many died a 3 among the so-called
control persons; in a concrete case there were 56.55S among the control
perrons. Among the immunized persons, who had been treated with this
agent, before they were injected and sinco it was a chemical thera¬
peutical agent, after the injection 53.32 or 53.42. If there were
t jr.ty persons in each series, twenty more immunized control persons,
twenty who were treated with tr.is agent and twenty who wore vnccin-
at-d with another agent, so that a comparison could bo made, then in
.acr. group of twenty people, more than ten died.


- 1131 -


f Jan 4?-y-3-2>5-i J -‘aIo7-A2G
. _rt -o. 1


1 . ffould 70 a say that the total mirier of persons who died as
a result of the typhus experiments would exceed one hundred?

A. As far as I can recall the total nunber of deaths from typhus
ex-orinents in Euchenwald, not including the passage persons, was be-
.cen 150 and 160.

h’ow, let's pass on to soce of the other experiments at
Puchenwald. What can you tell us of the para-typhoid A & B experi¬
ments?

A. The experiments with para-typhoid A and B took place at a
tine, a3 far as I can recall, I had just entered the pathology sec¬
tion in Buchenwald, but I an not quite sure of the time but in any
case I was not yet so directly informed by documents as was later
the case. I knew of one example when para-typhoid A bacilla were
given to prisoners in 31ock 46 in potato salad and tho effects of
this food wore observed. As far as I can recall, tho report was
s.:t to Professor Lockearnn in Berlin, I believe, of the Robert
Kocr. Institute. Details about the oxperir.onts with yellow fever,
smallpox, para-typhoid A and B, typhoid fever, and a few others
I cannot givo ’oecauso, as I have already said, I did not have direct
information from my own activity in Block 50 and our entire attention
■it that time was directed to tho typhus experiments in Block 46 .

Q. Car. you statu whether or not any experimental subjects died
as a result of any of these other disease experiments, that is, other
than typhus?

A. A number of persons, a comparatively small number, diod as
a result of other experiments. A very large scale series of oxperi-
-:it3, for example, was introduced with yellow fever, but the infec-
• io:. did not take and those experiments, which as far as I recall,
i-.clud -d over 14C persons, were discontinued. The number of deaths,
of course, depended on the nature and the tanner of execution in
<-ach individual experiment. There was an experiment which affected

only four -arsons and all four night die - did die in this case -

- 1132 -


7 jan '7_f;-s::-5-2^:aioj^;=G

✓

-O.ii -rO. 1

and other experiments with 40 or 50 persons where there are only two
cr three dead. Ih* total nuabor of deaths in all experiments, with
•tho exception of typhus experiments, according to ay recollection,
*’SS considerably loss than the number of deaths free, typhus and from
. transfer of typhus cultures through passage persons.

1. Do you knew anything about experiments with poisons in the
Suche.nwald Concentration Canp?

A. I know of two such cases. In the or.o cas_ it ras about
the turn of the year 1943-44,or in the late fall of 1943, and the
second case was probably in the summer of 1944. In each case
Russian prisoners of war were used for these experiments. In the
first ease various preparations of the so-called alkaloid series
were put in noodle soup, and 4 of those prisoners of war who wore
in Block 46, who of courso had not idea what was going on, this
r.ooJle soup was given to thus. Two of those prisoners became so
sic : they vomits, one was unconscious, the fourth showed no
symptoms at all. Thereupon, ail four were strangled in the crema¬
tory. They were dissected and the contents of their stomachs and
otls.r effects Were ascertained. The experiment vac occasioned by
the — was ordered by the SS Court, by the SS investigating judge,
Sturnfcannfuchrcr Dr. Horgon. It was carried out in tho presence
o r Dr. Ding, Dr. L'orgen, Dr. wehnert, SS Hauptsturafuchror and SS
- ud " > cnd ono of t! ‘ c t-rec ceap loaders, I do not know whether it
was Stumbannfue.hrer SS Schubert or SS leader Florstedt. The second
experiments -

Q. witness, before continuing with the Second expo r invent,. I
.o-.Ier if you could tell the Tribunal the reason for carrying out
is : ciso;, experiment w-ich you have just mentioned?

A. In the summer of 1943 there wa3 a trial going on under the
C0!;rt iri Berlin against the former caaoandant of Buchenwald and
later co.Tvnan5ant of Lublin, concentration camp in Poland, SS
StandartenfUehrer Koch. It was reaching its clioax. The invest!-


- Jan A7-i :-FHi:-5-3-lkloy-AHJ

oura Ko. 1


ration had lead to very serious charges against Koch, unless the ro-
•nrk that S3 Ov . rgrup:-cr. fuehrer Frinz haldcck, then head of the SS
Iturabschnitt Fulda-7/crra, was personal!” combatting Koch, and that
this personal antagonism of the two non had brought about the trial.

- r. by the nan. of Koehler, a Hauptscharfuehrcr in 3uchcnwald, ras
rr-sted by jr. Morgan and kept in custody in tfic Buchcmreld Concen¬
tration Camp. This Hauptschcrfuchror saemed to have testified some-
-ning against Koch. Two or throo days let^r this Hauptscharfuehrer
Koehler was found dead in hie cell. A few houre before he had been

quite healthy. He acuaed to have taker, poison. Dr. I .organ stated
that Dr. Hovon, together with the guard, K&uptsch&rfuohrer Somur,

had killed Koehler in the presence of a scientist fron Jena. Koehler
was disaoctod in the dissecting rcoc and two of ny comrades were
present at this autopsy. The head of the pathology section -.fas there
end in the stomach of the dead nan drugs from the alkaloid scries
:/erj found. The mount and the specific type was not known, in
orj.r to dotuitair.e the fatal dosagu of poisons of thi3 type'the SS
Court ordered an experiment on four Russian prisoners of war, the
experiment which I have Just described in Block A6. On the 20th of
Cot vibe r, 19A3» Dr*. Hoven was arrested at Dr. If organ's orders and
remained under the custody of tho SS court until the end of JIarch
915 - I know th- dat exactly because on that day, which w.n3 a
ravjrfay afternoon. Dr. Hoy n came to Block 50 on his motorcycle,
ask.d n about Dr. Ding ZC: :l_r, tho was not there, and wont away
again quite depressed and half an hour Inter I loarnod from the
hospital, the prisoners' hospital, that Dr. Her/or. was expected to
- rr.sted himelf.

1. In other words, Koven was susp/cctod by liorgan of having
one away with tho witness against Koch, is that right?

A. Yes.

<. How, will you explain to the Tribunal about this second
poissr. oeperim-nt?

- USA -


7 Jan 47-U--KM-5-4-!laloy-A33

jour - So. 1

A. In the s usaor of 1944 - I an not quite sure about the tine
~ r - in S» whose rvao was already Schuler, at that tine cane fran
*H;rl’n and .old ----- he had a very unpleasant task to carry out. It
"trv&l? secret he said, and after a few hours without ay
askod > ho told «J in his rocu, he told no details about it.


- 1184-A -


f'l *


-6-1- ir.. :uck


- -lift p ir.t rut fch-.W.t this tine tloro wr.s re 11- nrtMr"


i ? --r,


. xc li;±t bo, .Jriv t. r rffici 1 , that Dr.


Ic . 1-r. v ulc r. t 1 ve t lil no in crdor 6r g^t ::y r.Avico. Ho
r k -:-Iiz-- Quito clor.ly that tl - c-.ugg of i> ti- r.nl Srciclif. •- s
rj w s i kihg for safety.

Hu c id, "Kcgca, A> Vru goo any wry t. >;t no cut of tl is
*uainoea? i a: suppose A tK^urt r. pcis-n loro cn Russian prisrn-
:i v r. I ..:ust r^:rt r\t 1 toly. It is a direct

trior fr 1 :ru~-\:slr. . I don't lavw t:v I cm ~ut ut cf it.“

Tu ::-V0 no tlx proscription, tlx clonic. l f.rrrml -f this
p. ifim, .i:‘. I r r.s tc ;ut tl is prescript! r in on envoi' ou mil sor.l

; • In tl o has to I . t rbl t ror.d it.

c lo nr.no. I ;>ut t! pre .jti-n in tl ~ onvolopo.

.o wo ro irtcrri'pto .1 ir. tils t .He. I .< .1/, f hi. mly, Yew
u t.y *i int f view." I iuct * . 1 .' hero th t in lmf c nvers -
' * * & nl :1 s fe I 1 -u tried tr r:..ko clor.r tr him ti nt thoru wr.s
tl-r W.-.J f-r l:in than tc Ac r s uucfc ~.c p'ssiblu f r r the
; lit!cal .prls* nors, but tlrt r.c ;• hunan boinr;, if tloro w.s r.

*i ua c ro I_ .:uct rofusc t carry vt irrirral cr.ioro.

He l .v 'lx 1 r.t :o wl on I said tl t nd soi *., "I knew your
, ’ Ccrr.l idor.ir. Y; u knew that I don't boliov© in

• nyti ir. •*; tl ; f is is Ut f tl .. qu-sti n f r :\o; tl -1 I cr.n

ill c 11-Vr.Cu vsitl tl p litlc.il pri3 r.or3. ,:

Ir. tl is c so, t) ir c .so f tho prison, lo wont in -ror.t
i cto .jxA oxcitunont i tic c..;p lo...‘cr, Stur. :brnnf uol ror
cl rbort, v.l :1c :.-u inf* no 1 bof re? nA by tclophrno, and tho
ji nt, Ob rfuehr-.r I'ist.r, lad b, n inf rood, n’ in tho
: scr.co < i urtl pore n -- I d'r.'t krrr 7r^other it v/. r- tho
c phrc-ci . — tloy went t« tho crcr-.r.t ry, n t t .31 c!: C-6.

- “Wssi n pris ncrc rf nrr r”.in, f- vr pocplu h.-A * ocn tr.hen

■i-re m tho coli-r in v/1 ich wore tl u -.6 1 • cks <n tho w..lls -n

*

v.'iicl ti u ye plu wore str- jx~lc l. I* «,gu f*ur purple, those fur

1185


r , j - -3-2-: in .buck

J . ^ • —

Ruesinns, w ©to .1 Llr.it6crod tl'is pciscn. I dr net knew 1"~ it

. •'. ini stored, -.s Ding-Scbulor Ir.tor tc Id ro, tho:* diod in

*

very si rt tiro* 3 07 woro diasoctod r.d jumod. j. written
r-_J rt n this ttor I>r. Dir..; did n^t send t Gorlin. he t*ld
"■.0 J J t r<_ 5 r-rt tlis V -irujrwsky rrr.iiy. Din.' w s n't *nly
.-oitod r.'if ut cl i3 :ir.tfcor, but r.f terv/r.r :s ho v.\ s vary socr: tivo
vii it. he .lid net vnnt no tr t .Ik r.Vut it rjnyrrro. Fren
: its rxvX indie.-tiens in lie c^nvoranticn I lor.rnod thr.t there
Vvi’o oxjxjrincnts -- thr.t there wrs s *.e c nnoctim with experi¬
ments in t]^ C ncontrc.tj.' , n Cr-. ; > Sr.c! sonh-.uson re r Or. rionburs
vl 1 c) ru wslcy 1 .1 cr.rr ut in Ding's prosonco. ‘risnors

%

must 1 vj buo . shet with j> iacned builota tl:oro bocr.uso Dinp
r 1' Rvasi-.v. prlsncr cf \i r 1 rJ succoodod in Irvin*: r.

I a ink it w , nd r.ttr.ckiny .ru- wc!:y, but thr.t tho
, risen-.r I .1 boon subdue . 1 toiirtoly.

ir . n; c ro Dm,^ did r^t vr.nt ti 1:- vc rnything ::«*ro t' \

Ida .r.tt-r ovon in iv prosonco. *. alert ti,:o lr.tcr tl 0
rescript if n ,n\ tho ro. 1-.1 onvulp> were burned m r.* prosonco
. . 1 lei it • vor ■ crjidlo in ny prosonco nd burned it.

c l* 1 t lc rr tho entente.

b 1 v. \m w .nythin: .b ut experiments in Tluchonwrld
t: incondic.ry b mbs?

.iv ii)!!):;' T- bof ro «. ponir. • now subject in tic oxrjelrv.-
i r. f tl is witness, tl C.-urt will rocoes.

(id-Cuis v.l.c t-)


1186


7 Jan-S :-DJ G-7-1-? ut ty-ABG
Court i'o. 1


THE IViHSHAL: Tro Tribunal is now in session.

7. Witness, I had just asked you before the intermission whether
or not you know anything about experiments conducted at Buchcnwald
with the phosphorus content of inccrxiiary bceibs.

A. I did not hoar the Goman translation. Will you please re¬
peat the question?

Q. It is coning through now?

... As far as I can recall, I was toll by Dr. Ding in the Spring
of 1944 that he had been given orders by frofecsor Dr. lirugowaky in
collaboration with the firm Kadaua & Co. at Dresdon-Ratebcul to carry
out experiments on hunan brings with regards to the effect of a drug
against the contents of phosphorus kautchuk incendiary boobs. I had
the impression as if the idea for this experiment had cono frero Dr.
Ding and had been given to Dr. krugowsky by him, and then he had
obtained the approval to carry out this experiment. On the part of
t:.. *'irra i adaus, negotiations wero led by a cortain Dr. Koch. He
ha a drug which he called R-17 and which was given to'the Goman
population aftor attacks which incendiary boobs.

By :ny of OborsturabannfuehrcT Dr. Koch and the higher Iolico
leader of the Dresden sector, the contents of phosphor incendiary
fcoabr wero Sent to Buchorsrald, and four experimental persons from
Block 46 who had survived other experiments had this phosphorus
i:?jid applied to their forearms, and the whole mass was then in¬
flamed and then was treated in the various manners. In the case of

one- experimental subject water res used in order to wipe off the

•.

liquid, ind in other cases a damp rag was applied and in the last
c r - was applied. Several experiments were- carried out on

* .iSe four subjects.

la o.-.e instance the drug R-17 was applied immediately after
had been inflamed, and in another instance after approxi¬
mately five- minutes and in another case yet after thirty minutes.

• :-er the mass had burned the ana, serious bums developed which


- 1187 -


? J“_~-i.7-DJG-7-2-Putty-.iEG

Jourt Uo. 1


-./ore, still observed for two weexs afterwards. Tfco experiment was
conducted by the Special Section 5 at Leipzig, and photographs were
token of the wounds. And previously oeperi-

I


- 1137-A -


i.iase


w -j.*:-7-2-Putty

; . i

xi or. animals had beer. carried cut .-.a Block .'.9 on rabbits,
experi-xats "cr; ccn-'ucted in she sc~c ra -nor, and tho varies results
•;c ■: also photographed, and tho photojra hs i*cre compared —'.th each
other, and they rerc put Into an clbun that was e::actiy described, and
i rosvlts vero sent tc Dcrlin — tsro copies. One ms sent to Professor
~ovs'.sf, and the other ms sent to Cfcerfuohrer poppcniicb, but I an
.. t .y.ito sure about that. I believe that Cfccrfuohror Poppondick rust
r-iy have received a report n this --alter because Dr. Ding intended to
Tito an article about this in a ,r. a .sedical journal,

$ 2to*, you have aenticaod an albuu report. Did you o- . t is report?

A I have personally aalo th; report after having it dictated tc uc
' y lr. Dixv,

3 ^ '--11 ask you l: tho locuaont 7ich I -..ill nc.; have handed to you,

' tic:, is Document :.'C-579, is * •> re; ;-t on those inconiiary bc:& experi-
•to .. ich <;u have describe '.

..cl. I -.-ill as‘: I tat tho criminal of this dociu-nt be passed
-• -ho Tribunal,

3 I didn't hoar arty ansmr to tho question.

A X-?. It is a carbon coy of the ropert with tho original photo¬
raphe.

. cH/dSYt ,1 off or Docuaent '.'.-579 as-Prosecution Iniibit 288, and

1 ack that the cri ;i ir.I •_ yvscc up to the Tribunal for 1 jtion.

I *ri;i ash tar.t th- Tribunal t m p -rtic-lerly tc Pegc 15 and icllwrin"

* jehibit itGclf. . I think you *.rould find

... lectures aorc easy to lisccrn i.. the original-docu: oat. Pago 15 and

•

-C arc pictures burns on 1 ... auras of hu .

Vi cxp:rlui-.ntal subj-cts v'.io verv

' *.iuh chis phosphorus?

A I ers rally have seen all th. criiijntcl 3ubj.-cts bocceasa tills

errpcriicnt was carried cut in the private roox cf Dr. Dins in lock 50 and

library of th ; nic Insi c la lee’: 50. Btf reason r

lies


7 r: -:.-3V3-7-3-Puifcy

.t .1

■ the cx-cuticn ir. Slock Ip ^ .-._st tho eaqxsrinontal cuv. c ^s that

- - located chore and who were destined a or other purposes - 1 ' j»vo
v rod bar ooo uuch excite lent.

Q '.cro those boras very severe?

A os for ns I cor. recoil th^ywaro v:sy severe in three cut of tho
. a* eases.

* Di the experimental subjects suf.'cr a-*v pain?

„ Fro:. Capo Arthur Dietsch it had jeer. ca. ected that the persons

uoro to bo .iven an anesthetic as c-. cn as tiujy cn:c into Block 50 so such

* •

violent scenes c "Id be avoided, and ir. '1 e!: 50 vhich -..-as cc ylotcly
iVere. t fre . leek li6 it was tc bo avoided, that th*. perooiis -..ere- hand¬
cuffed, as wan the ccraca practice in 6. The persons \roit thus,

:, in tho first OSf oricent, but I lm only seen tho p .rsens*

• rncaally Itncssod . exp v.v, ml I havo soon thou bc-

- * as veil as after artls. le ;ac, at leant, chirin? the first oxperin nt
. mens were ;iven an anesthetic and after ab^ut half an hour they

.V. c .nscicuancss and ca .plain. 0 a vttt very severe pains. 1'cu cruld
c.;c that they wore really suffering v.ry badly. I :eust c n ns that I
r-jcnall; aft.r havin,; looked at tho ;v.:to.^-a;>hs, that I personally alaost
h.ca-a nick.


11S9


" • - 7- - „-a-i-dc -rd

-i.i

1 L- :* u w wictler the injuries r/> ich tl cy rocoiv.-l
. u pur. xicnt?

Ir. ttw c.so i rf the w-ur.ds, it is c ■piotuly

rs«i »lc tl..fc tfcoy -..-ill ovor bcOeuo ccnplotoly 1 oc.lod; very
eee.rs nust L'v. re c.ino* hoenusc tl o wrunds wore bi . nl wore
.oop .s fr m few c r tu. ?nd r. I If conti .voters.

Dr- y u kr w w: ether nny » f the oxoon-vont:.1 3i;b.i etc

(

l' ur pure; ns v/oro r-turnc . t- 31' ck -iG, nl I ir net
'■’v. v i\i ytlin.: Vut t’oir future frvto v/1 ic! .v.ltod t} or*, tlcro.

net knew if tl:oy wore used f • r furtl cr oxperiraonfca.
D y u 'n r; ti u n..bi n-.lity rf t! <. orporinor.t 1 porarns

. ’J

'• He; he wo v Jr, U f ur were tl, *rrjjn tri. ■\~;u w? iob vra
■'•.7 1 : * .r.’onc. cm in- is n‘. tl r t they woro Gorr.i 1 ns.

in.’., it str.fcv f .t tl o purprso rf tloro oxpurirerta
: i; tu3t curt- 1 - cl o ic'l prop r ti ns c r tl - Sr.!:.vs Cr. pny
it; tr. tin-; t; u burns?

.. Yus.


j-.c ' r \ u n j:. the rid ’lord pl.-.srar. oxperixionta y/ 1 icl
- ti ao -* r.iiur tl.is ;i min . ;r. cT.r.-cti n with t; j "Hit ry
’c .1 ..c. ’.o: ; . . t y u ’ti \t ub t eso oxporliionta?


• O

'• . ... fchu

cbly, . ry


blit ry ..c ./.o.iy in
lit .re; 1 4.c;-

ru t tl is tl’ -.o.
r f ru' - r;s!:y tl u


Sorlin? I .-xi nc t sure --
'oI d- r.* t 'tick the n.v

In the yo r 1C , tKy nrv’.o
•

i: bio _) 1 . :-x. c'.ncomc«’


w ra

I

the

wlich


' - ^ 6 3 orlin Steel '*o test.' rn o::pori r .iont 1 eobjects;


: -» ’ ' nsfusl ns woru t- fcrko pi co, rxv.l it • ,r : bo

i.. if tl .is b 1 -vpi'.SIT. Ctui pr hr.Civ b u . : dninisterod

J vit * ufc - vin ny ill off, .ts - r. the subjects. In pr.rticulr.r

- t. r-_ ul.. ^ ny offoct < f sl ock ir. tho c..sc rf the exporinen-

i sibjocts. drfi.s were selected by ..rtl ur Lietsc! , *'ut I
. 119 C


cnet sr.; £ t wlr.t ccte^cry rf prisnors tloy bolrn^od tr.

' o'\ - juliovc ti -.t t; is \n.s loft t tie porsm.".l -locisi-n.

•

-n- uzpcriBORts were carried rn f-r r. r-.tlci ln scried of
• 1 roLorix r crrroctly until t: o first sent* f t3o yorr

5. *4i , the rop'i-t ut tic foisibility cf this blc-d pi. ST v

r^-nlr-rl-/ eont t "orlin fee Dr. tfrujrwaky v/itl . cr.rbm copy
f v fcl'o --c. iorjy.

C;n y- v - sr : w ’ otK r ry -f tl , porc'nr wfc wpro sub-
Jufit.i t.- tils rid bier pL.K^: tr -rofusi.-ns suf force :.r.y ill
uiff.-cta?


X c /• r.cr.ll fr s tie rep' rts wl icl I h vo ro-.d th.-.t
80.tor..Z C'.fioa — aovoj 1 c. aplr.inta by Arttur Diotach wore n-.do,
.. .. cure .m series rf nuftora cf li is eld bleed pL-.aur. wore
-fcciw :• 8 dice rtinuo . Iho oxperinontal subjects v/or .


1 ‘ t) -.*>0 c ooe, rnd .'.ppcrortly 1 ... cor. used in ctkur oxperi. entc
n . Ir-ch '.6. U, •.•u in 31cck 50, discusaod the iu.ttor; t! t fr-n
sc u: bific p int f view end fr r. r. prr.ctier.l print f viow,
sic ox..v-ri;icnta did not lvvu r.ny specific v iuo bocr.usu perrons
81 w » oftoct c r vr} liod fr- so oxporlnonta, it
0 ' Id n t be clor.rly certain :.s t vr} -\t spoclfic effect tho
.vaults 1 .1 boon crusod.

•1 / v st. t! on, vr.tnuss, tir.t sno f tl c ox?orir:ontr-.l

\ 'i;s wl-< woru subject- tl t ti e typkus oxpormontc . r *. tr

- if bl ; :1 pi-s*.!: oxp-riuonts .-vuntw lly die 1?

J ‘ 1 buliev- 1 c i*uc 11 -- I : quite cortr.m tl t 3 r.o


t 0 •* * cific c uses c v 14 ne t *j. clc: ri? do-


*


'-c. 1 u r.. poi*? n diu’ c.r rji iru edi.-tc result rf tVuro


: 1 ici


tl i w rl?, '• u c vld nrt tell nl.otl.cr tl o c-arc
c d> j t tl e t pu f tl o pruvic»*s oxpcri ior.t r tie rW
■= *■ ^xporifjwxt; is tl fc ri 1 t?
l - t is c rr-ct.


1131


cr. .. - £ . •£ - ^ t cr.tcri vy rf prisonora tl oy bolcn£od tc.

• r, - .ulioyu tint t: is v;.s loft t- lis porsrn-.l -lucisim.

.. .. uxporinants wore carried on fer r p .tl cr lrn*‘ p.ric'v of

t no. i i*o_orio.r crrrucfcly until tl first nrntl . f c: o year
.4. , fcl-u rop'i-t .'y ut tire feasibility rf this blc-d pi. rrar.
- ro-ulnrly sent t<- Berlin tr Dr. ITrujrwsky v/itl .. cr.rVn c' Py
f r tho •-cj’.'iorjy,

'• C:n >" :v sr : w * o tlv. r ny -f t), uorsrnc vb wpro aub-
J.otv. tr t! is 'Id bier ;L.rr. tr-j* of usir ns suffered cj\y ill
u fi.CtS?


A c " r ' crli  i rep'rts which I h vo ro:.d that
sovur 1 c-sea -- sovu: 1 c aplr.ints by .--rtl ur fciotsc! wore rv\do,

: curt .ir. series ' f nuhbors 'f tl is eld bleed •jtjr.siv. wore

. cuiw 2 ‘ ? .ice rfcinvo . Il o oxpcrinontnl su’-Jocta v/oro infoctod
1 * :) P0 c 0o£ » •'*- r-P^-ror tly 1 ul eon used in other exponents
- cl' -.6. U, ro in 31cck 50, discuesol tho :.u.ttor t! t fr n
- c u * ifl c pcint f view .nd fr r. :• practical point f view,
ciu axp.rinonta did not lv.vu any specific v luo bocc.uso porcine
• 3 no effect cr whr diod frea tboao oxporlnonta, it

o "Id n t bo clearly certain t id at specific offset the
r-cults 1 .1 boon caused.

'• 3 v Sts-to. t! on, witness, that seno f tl c oxporinontr.l

cts vd-c woru subject- 'tl t tho typhus oxpor monte . n\ tr

1 : bl d pi sc oxi-riuonts ovontvr lly died?

I bulicv- i c • roe:.11 -- I : quite certain tl t s'r.o
*• ciilo o usos c Id net b. clcr ri; l«j-
: 1 : ‘bc. i O r.. p..xs n dio ’. :.r an in .odi.. to result rf tl o.eo

:-b£i ns.


t: 2 v rdj, u c vld r.< t tell wi_ctl.cr tho cause rf
* ; f tl w previews expert* or.t r tho rid


• - • - * -xpv.ri:!oi:t; ic
A * '-3 c rrcct.


tl t


ri l't?


1191


j *' v knew i.pprcxlnrtoly Y'r nc.ny lnnr.tc.ff ror srb-
ct.. t fciis rid bl \ pitest?

n;. sinylo experiment .. yr-up ,r fren 12 t £0
ra ns vr- sc-'., *jii it r-lwi.ya vr.no ^.t f.r *.s I enn roc 11

• .c; fit five svcl series v;oro selected.

v, it y v rucc.ll rx.y oxporinunts v;tl bl- • :1 trjrcr
t~ 1 os c nvr.loaccncu t prcduco .. ; crun tr be uso.l ;.s r.n
tw-t xin?

in 31* cl: 3C tie v V :. rpiesh LVr: t- v' r , tlrt is tr
sr.y, r 1 Vr. C ry rMc! lrr.i been plr.cel r.t tie iiapcsr.l rf
ic : *o volr-r D et r Elion we':. It v ? n t vndor Dret'r

ic u?.or. Mis Stum. .nnfuohror D-ctr r Ellor.Vclr wc’.r fliroctly
i . un.te. tt u ct:r r" r vjly. ‘ f • un ut fr'.u U'ct«r
, ■ ■ r ors tr . rv r vs! i t :c t typlnc aoruxa r ' tl-o
vcl onwnli Gtncor.tr. bi- n C:„\ip in rdor t' su ply tlo 'crlin
s. t: . *.r»d t;\r SS ! apit Is. -pproxinr.tuly trw..rcl tVe on', f

* rutier f lSe-, until tic spring f 19>*5, the typhus ccnv.l-

reel co 12 '1 cl: .-3 — >2 w».c t-fleon tr- u then rof'olr.rly, nl it

t f av.-lly be : ;v»eon 250 . ni 500 continot^rs f blend wl-icb vr s

i : sort- i • r '. :/l ic: s t.Ver. tr thuso p. ti.nts.

• j acrit t* 31- ck 50, • n
■ lur.ovei* . c urier ..rrivui ir n .'orlir. it rc.r iispr.tclod fr- n
•3 ck 50.

u -r v Ur. w?ot!wr :*r.y 'i tloso c nv.loaconco p'-tionts

lo l s .. rosnlt r £ c f. .tucl blr ~1 ?r r th - purprso f

- '.in;; it irt sorm?

■»

- . r r.lly ti.. crnvr.loscqr.co sorun -- 1 b wr.a r*-.r’o r. prr.c-

’ *'• i~ fr i c r.v .Icsccncc pr.ticnts vrl- woro C'-ivr.loscan"

H • • r, in tl is c..Sw, t: • l:-.r circr-cst. :*.Cea

nconfcrr.ticn crjip, . iu’. in pr.rticulnr 3i- ck i6,

-sc .is e ctnsidore i. Trv/.r.l tie er_I f 19ei v;e T7er-.. 1 - st

-.'.-tt.r- v.c f Iru s, -n.’ tl« fcypl.us c nvr.lesconce p'tients

1192


7 Jn -.7- - —rd.
. 1


t 11 c!: -.0, rcunl tlis tin., v?oi\. 7.1 s~ rcr.ll;- suffcrin;: frn
;• liaclsos, tfc su t/ 1' 1 d boon sont t- Bucl-«ror Id C^ricontr*-
c- n C;. .. in ;rrrc:^rta. Is bucr^io incro'sin-sly hauler tr- rind
n" Iru - 2 , .. • result cl t! is, trjcin" t! .• birr a fr« t: o cn-
• ■ c,: c-. p:ti_nts, vn or circuus truces, rsrot n c::trr.-

i.rjry burden :n tY. ^r.txcnfcs. ..t tlis tine, l..r :o runbur
1’ Cl 0 .< -lcr.Cs Hod. nr wo vo r, fc’- w scuo tlin" replies, tl* t I
• u : Irv. A;* S'.11 in rc^crl c tl w r/r us-. ntcluk oxperi-
»:Ab, iV . « sjucific cr.uso i' fcMLs c ill nr t v^r* or.sil *
:.acurC'ino.I, nC it wr.a c» tylotclj ii soil • fc< .eoorfcr.Ui it.


1193


Jan- - - ---9-1-51'r:l^y
C-urfc N— 1

Q* The translnd n c-nxu thr ugh that in this cns_ where there were

>

o- ir_s •' at nth ®ch as ir. the cast af the fb sph rus-Khntcbuk experiments
7 •• c uidn't det.noire the enue- ef death. I t,ke it you rnean net the
. s ':-r--s-ICpntenuk oxj»-ri_v.nts but rath-r the wn !_• bl A plasma experiments?

A. los, the exp-ri..-ntE which I *rde. I or: r-f-rrinv t the experiments
ut the tr-nsfor f plasua. I h-ve made a mistake.

Q. N-w, witness, wer- th.ru .t’i-r ccosi ns when ble d was tok-n frem
:. U r the fticfconwdd o ncantrr.tdL n Crap f r the purp.s- f Baking bl cd
pi", sun?

A. Thor- Kv.ru quit- c lar^e nujbor f cases. Jin iay -xp-ricnco in
particular Sturabarnifuchr-r "Ulenb ck syst-aatic-ally Sv.lv.ctod the invalids and
1 pris n-rs ..h rcr in t.u o.-c'll-; saail c.onp h rriol- c nditi ns;

-- thw: t g-fc 61. c : r ti». St H spital -nu t,i_r purp- ;sqa. In tho
r -C-.U--' st all c*up at Juch-nvnlrf, th-r- wer- s-vonto-n barracks; and th-y
•.,.r li Itu • t v_ry narrow spr.co. ..r.und this peri d f ti.n- when Dr.
j . ,.t c ... st-rt-d taking bio d, thcr- v;-ro appr.xin-t-ly ten th usand pe plo.
They '...re cr wded in a Very norr .w space in barracks. Ther« w.ro ns many a s
fi-t.-n hun red p- pi- in .no narr.w b-.rracke vhich was h-rdly on ugh f r r ur
hum rod fifty. The p-. pie v-r- lyin^ in very snail bunks; nc’ th-y vr-re perched
t ,-thor there. In this sv.ll coup eh-re >.-s c special barracks f r the
invalids which was filled prlu'rily by Fxunchnen. Arcund this time the
*■ camp Was aLa-sfc exclusively ccupied by Frenchmen.

pe cle r,r_ t id t; th„y w uld be given sp-cial f .vd if they

:.c_- r-d t.xrs.lvus ro“£ i: .'ur th-ir bl d. In the little camp ,rig:r us

si rv-.ti n v s pr.vailin . 31 ck 50 was directly ndj irons t. the little canp.

- were —. t c ntr I ns then: in -’ll p-ssibl- rospacts.

- - r: •_ ne.ab._r i Frencbv.cn, in.'lids rx.c Id p- -pi- r-p.rt-cl and gav- their
-• this cas it was a r.-ttcr f 150 t 2CO cubic c-r.ed -wtors. However,
"■*’ - T ~ VJ i -tty as ouch ~s (jOO cubic centinv-ters were taken away fr. ra them.

They wer* given a piece f sausage. Th-n it was

- 119U -


a _dcc_ .1 liv-rwurst,


7 J: - -J?-9-2-31akle 7
e art 1

_ ! Ci - c -Jir hardly be described as liverwurst; r they w.re given Blutwurst,

,hr kind f suusag-, which ms I a nuch better quality. They were also
iv - - 1 t f broaa. I believe they were given three hundred grans.

This was carried on until -pril, 19^5; and the prisoners r-rc in such
i :: th-t there wtr- alvcys a sufficient nurib-r f peeal- who v lunte^red
il1u t.:«-ir bl- -d t-ker., ir. spite f the n nstr.us c.r.ditiens in the little
c x 'nd in their exhausted c neiti.n, just in rder t be able t get this
:-ie C o f : itle Jic.cc .f sausage. The blo.dnras sent by c. uriers

1 T-. 1 B the SS h spit :1 at leriin; ar/ it was taken th-re by then.

Q. v u v: uld sa; t. .n t*. : r. LUenj^ck and bis associates were engaged
in aellin. bread and snusag- f'.r blood?

A*. 'Tell, th-t is r. t aiit- - c'.rrwCt descriptirn. They doivandod blood;

* t u.y told th- pe .pie t givw their bl d. Sc-cdlcd grades in the
x ical s.rvice in the hospital at . rlin then went into the little canp and,
zb th-y a rcsSod it, they drow the bl d fr s th, pris.n-rs. Then
r. Jllenb-ck g-v* the ^ris ners whe were w-rking in this lab r-t<ry the
in. r.rti n th-t they w.re t 3 - th-t the people w uld be reimbursed in food
1 r their sacrifice. Up n ti.o demand f the pris nors vh: were working with
the , 1 «e issued an rder t the c“- • h cpital fr-r. *h.r. the oread and the sau¬
sage w..rc then furnish-, t. Thro- pris n-rs in his gu-st l'berat ry in Block
50 received th.eir rati ns, fr . chcunents which I had, the rations which
h? \ been sent f r bit:<! d.n.rs by the SS; and thoy sucrcitt.d these ration allo-
v; ,C_C u Dr. Elloabeck, a ski a hi. t sue that th.s„ invalids and old people
in t..u little c .. p V.-Ul i n this fixed allowance.

Dr. EU-nbeck did not nave the atttta rity t issue .rders in the c.ncen-
trati a c- . BucheBw-ald. He was a guest there. In lock 50 t.iis rde-r w.as
... f .rg.tten; and the people were r.iven what har tfecaao ccwaett pr.atice in
c ..c_:._rati n ca p, which in ..any inst-nces depended n the te.r.peraEent
: V. ^_n wh had the auth rity there.

5. Dc you kr. Tr ur. er rfh.se orders Dr. Elienb_ck t k t.iis bl' d?

- 1195 -


7 jo - -J?-?-2-31aklcv
; art. Sc. 1

; c c hardly be Ascribed as liv.rvrurst; r they were given Blutwurst,
nr. Jr.-r kind f sausage, which na3 f :: nuch better quality. They w oro also
iv - n - i t f broad. I bcli.v. they '/ere giv.n thre- hundred gr-ns.

Uds was carried on until ..pril, 1915; and tb. prisoners were in such
4 th-t tfc.ru v.vr. always a sufficient nunb-r f ac-ul- who v lunto.red
. ..o t.ieir bl.-d taken, in spito f the r. nstr.us c r.eitions in tho little
c and in tr.cir exhausted c nditi.n, jutt in rder t be able t get this
< vC0 ; broad and this lictl. piece i sausage. Tho blocd'was sent by c. uriers
fr-.-. the SS h spitul at ieriin; and it was taken th-r. by then.

Q. Y u v: uld sa* th~i» t‘c ' r. Dlljn.j.ck and has associates wore engaged

in s.llin bread and sausag- far bleed?

A*. ’.Toll, th t is r. t cuit. a c-rr.ct descripti:n. They doivandod blood;
a,.l Lh.y tv Id th. p. p ie t b iv. t'.v.ir bl.:d. So-called grades in the
ue leal a-rvice in th. hospital at : rlin then went inte th. little canp and,
as th.y .x : ross.ri it, they throw the bl K fr. : tho pris.-ners. Thon
Tr. All.nb-ck gnvu th. ,ris ners whe were working in tills lab.r-tcry the
ini arti n tint they w.r. t s.. th't th. poapie w uld be roinbursed in food
f r tliuir sacrifice. Up n t..c demand f th. pris n.rs vh were working with
thei., he issued .an .rder t the c‘ :y h spital fr-r. where the oread end th. sau¬
sage vr.ro thon furnished. Thro, pris n.rs in his gu.st labtr?.t:ry in Block
50 received th.ir rati ns, fr . . dccuacnts which I had, th. rations which
ha 1 been sent f r bit ?d d-n.rs by the SS; and they submitted these ration allo-
• v. Dr. EUonbcck, caking fcL; t soe that those invalids Id people
in t; o little ca p w.ul n this fix.d allowanco.

Or. Eli-nbeck did n.t have the auth rity tc .issue rd.rs in the c neon-
-rati n c~ p Buchenwald. Ho was a auest there. In "leek 50 t.iis rdor was
forget ten; and tho people were .iven what har boccce cut n praties in
c -c.r.trati r; ca p, which in .-any instances depended n the tunperna.nt
l u-n wh had th. auth. rity there.

Q. T>; y^u kr.w ur- .er rf. s. -rders Dr. iU.nbeck t <: this bio d?

- 1195 -


-'F-?-3-5IakL.y

I; urt . 1


... I*, via under thJ orders f his chief, Kru £ cwsky.

-• j a si;, whether any £ those blood den rs in the little camp
'0 oucfcumrcld di-d f.ll Tri.v the taking cf the ble d fr-.i then?

qu.sti n sh.;;s that it is Very difficult to £ -.in a rJil c..ncopt
xit le c at BuchenHol ’, The people died there in nr.sSeS. During
r;i i>" fc t;,u c:roses wer_ lying in the blocks ir.kce because they uore threwn
ut f the bunks by the -th-r ns n.rs s that thcyr.uld have r. little m re
- c - JVva thc lr ’" 1Lcsfc .^ccs .f cl thing were t:rn nw-y fr-there by thr.se
r:. wanted U survive. It is impossible t: ictomino if directly and ira.ao-
dir.tuly r.s a result X the t-Jcin„ f bio::! anyb dy died because cany pc .pie-
fell vm and died while walking ar m' the little caip.

iut it is bey n any d ubt t .any r .e wh has known the c- nditions there
ur6 ! L t-kinj f bit , ever, i it g Ve a a-.all rx.-8ure f strength to
t;, ‘ c - ^ V 1 - ' s f ' r •» * ,r8 c.nccmod, w s .a c nsl.'cr-blu c ntributing

f'ct r in the doath af toy . 1 * th sc pocplo.

*• itfc,ss, I think y u ik.nti nod .at an earlier : >eint in thc

cxa.iir.ti n her. that a rop.rt w-.s Sent t- Poppendick in conr.octicn with
;.rt*in experiments n the hr^sexuals by Dr. V-rnet in Buchonwcld . Viill
v u tell the Tribunal what y u kn.w r.j ut tn.s. experiments?

.ar.r: .a, r - r.y su.t. or 1 I9uh Dr. Mag bold TVS that
300,1 r <krwd t ass ist a P-.dsh Sturab-nni uehTer, LY. Varn-t, in the
-Xecuti n i such _‘xp_ri .nts,

^i-r. arcs I saw tiu exchange .f letters; and the rder was issued di-
LJ °' s ‘ prencick . 1 tl’.e wh—lo subsequent ccrrccp.ndunce. \s

.-r '3 i: - as between Dr. Ding arid tepp. lick, I had either written or road

- - r. - v _ r they arrived* rids Danish Sturab.annfuehror , Dr. Varnot,

: ck 50 an* 4 rcqu_ste<! Or. Din; t furnish hi. . ja*is n-rs fer his
• -t tr.is period f fci e Dr.. Din; want-.d to have ns little as possible
... t:.xn;s til t .utsido his field of ccnpctcnce; and the ref oro
" : : hir p~ the ca p physician. Dr. Schidlauski. Thun incocd Dr. V rnet

- 119o -


—JI -9-c-Blakloy

c urt . 1


" ppr 3d£nla ^ expcrfront-1 objects through the cc_:p h. spital

uris -re. ? r what reaa ns the reports then still -.ere sub dt ted over

I cannot say any. ore -1 this die.

 tioe ‘ - i -^ v ' ro - t «'• - Suchenwald; and the rest .1 tho tine
" s : * ~ s 1 " h ~ w p ^* th- cxp.-rLxntnl Section 5 at Luipsig whore
. . • ic\c had nuth-rity. There th. oxperirents tJwrsulvos had the aim through

t.z tr-nsplint-ti-n -i &la.nds t. cause a ch-ngc in n-j secuals and tc cause
c. *l-t cnangu in these pcvplo. The SS physicians in the ca.jp constantly
a.-.de t.-o bluest j kes ab ut this sort f operation. Two pors.ns died in the

c rs - fcJu - Pcr*ti .ns which Troro carried ut.


- H57 -


-- ' -;.-?:c-io-i-co«&

.t ;••>. i

Ik:/ ritnos3 you stated that you s~y so^o of tie correspoudonco
— w. Poppoadick ~.nd Schulor in connection :ith thoso hcjroono ozporloonta.
... I jUovo that I c-r. roc nil that. I sru tho first lottor from
P r.'oniick which contains the order to Schulor t~ assist Dr. Yernot and
'•■'t I »~o "Iso soon tho furthor c'.rrosotrdo.aeo. If I ronwib.rinc

- -ctly tho fir3t letter stated th-t contact had boor. 03tablinhcd with
r* -Why -nd that Dr. Ding-Schulor canid ass is Dr. Varnot. It i3 nuito
•wsiblo that Dr. Din-, in nccrrdanco with instructions by Poppondick, on

turned to I'ru*:rvnky far this approval.

*.. 'itr-osn, I -ytn ash you if yn» V.vo opr soon bc.f-ro tho lottor
via . handed t-. you and this is dccaant Vo. 1300.

/.. I hare aeon thin lottor.

*• Did y u -oo it In tho ooacontruti: a ervop at Buchois; Id?

... I havo soon- this i ittor only 1 . tho Sucko.nw-li C ncontration Canp
la .'lock 50, end I hove n t soon it since that tiao.

1. ::c”..t:: \*o Offer t io docu.-r.t as Prcsocuticn .ixhibit -:o, 259.

* —

• • •

* • 1 • 111 n: '*» 7-u, witness, If y:u eavo this lottor to tho Office of
lef rf Oounsol?

... :rc, I did n- t.

:n. : If Your Honor, plo-so, - offor this docur.ont

r - 'isoirn, r.ot on tho idontiflc-tion cf this witnoss, but ns -

c.-pturod Xiy tho lllied 7—cos and rocoiv by this offico in tho

la- e--.rso of business. I -r-t tho quocticn to the witnoss to cor rev-

1 ““-to f o tost ir-ay which ' o -! urovi ucly piron with rospoct to corrcs-

• •

vith h “ d fr-r. Poppondick t- Die... This lottor as not
: :v« tho witnoss -ad at this tirn I a ul<! liko to road into tho
cu ent :: . l."00, which is Prosocutirn Sr.hlbit 259:

Itj - 'latter is dated 15 July, 19d4, fraj tho dofondant Poppor.dich

• * .. It is :n tho letter: ad Ef the Reich Physician 5S and Police.

• . -': :.-t::zzo Sasoorch SS StumbonnfUohror Dr. Yor not:

IS Stumconnfuohror Dr. Dins,

- '-.cor.tr at ion C-r.p

Buchounald:


- 1193 -


? Jar. 4?-:.-?'C-10-2-Cock
-- 1

■ar 3v. ra-ie Din-::

3y request of the HeiChsfuehror SS tie Danish doctor S3-Stuhaf.
r. Varnot has boor -jivor. opportunity to continue his h:rucn; research
", oarticainrly tho lovol >:or.t cf tho artificial elend. Tho
Tolchef-ebror SS -nt Icip-tas certain rosults frece tho tr-atr-ont of

i ;. , ith Yarnot's *t' iflci-l J.cn.1. Tho tochnical proparatio::s
: o t; ?;uch a point that oxpori;;onts on hyr.an b.i.uco can bo
artod vrithin .a roa3onablo sp^co of tine.

: .‘*a SS-Strindartonfufcror >. Lclling iafor. od no tho CC Yoiicer-
•4c‘ a :*.ml J has boon directed to raJeo available Z prisonor" far SS
Stumbannfabhrefc V-rnot'; oxpori’tcnts* Thoso nrlsonora i ill bo r.ado
- * - i ' “ by tho physician t any tlco.

"SS ^tuba". Varnot ir.tjcds to m to*Buchoramld shortly in orior

• a’:; cort«ln aooooflary preliminary t.ats on those prisoners. In caao
ttoro trill bo special labor at or teste, ;• u oro roquoatod to assist
’■•rrot '.ftthin tho ocopo f your posoibllitioa.

"P rticularn oaVarnot'a rosoarch. oro soat today to tho c-jcp

tohonacld for his inflection*

"'•ith cordial ro -rdo and

Hull Jlitlor
By orders
yours

Signet.iro: Pcppondicl:"

w:a. ireiurxr:

0 B 6 , you hava hoard this docicsmt road and you
J - - : 'to that fivo vrisr-.orr -.roro to ivado available.

• ■' 1 “' your testimony horot-f'-ro her * jatl -rod a so-raw's at hi.qhor

fl ‘' ' ' Off Of this lot tor d • ; 'll .still thin?; they used r . than

r ’nr f'.r tho hrcrosoxua.l exoori: rents?

r t there ..ust havo boon a.t least fourteen

a.jop:o in tho course f tho tir o .*rc:i tho su. nor cf 1944
*- •‘ippr-tciirvtaly "obruary, 1S-15. Thon Dr. Vajrnot did :nt appear any
* at Duehonvnld.


- 1153 -


7 Jan 47-->FJC-lQ-3-Cook
: urt "o.l

*. /jid you state that r.:o of theso persons operated on dial, is
,'x.t corroct?

Tao porsons died.

', Vcs thoro a roper t r.ado on tho result of those ozpori^onts?

... 3ot.:oor. Dr. Ding and Obarfuolaror Popponiick thoro was '3

• . •-* letters in t&'.ch Ding outlined his report on tho operations
» Mot at Buchonnald, ab.nit all of his activities until, ^ reports

rf.ro r:ad quito cans id or ably frai tho roports which noro sutadttod
”t oxpori*:onts in Block *16 rogulnrly to tho Chiof Hycionist, Dr.
.'Sru-ovrsky. Tho nroviously nonticnod roorrts voro irovidod -.?ith all
uocossary dacinonts and tho lottors to Ponaordick vruro only gonornlly
entiohod and it was loft to V-rnot hinsolf to Pubr.it 7ery nuch noro
Jotailod roport a.

I I think y u hrrvo statod oarllor that Poppondlok also
rocoivod a report or. tho phosphorous burn oxpurlnonts, is that right?

I boiiovo I or. uito aortaln that I can recall it.

Wov, Ur. Kocar., c".n you amplify on tho position of Krufiowsky
•rl- rc.poot to tho oxpurhsonto carried on in tho Euohorn*old Concentration
Ca p, and 1 rarvi tr. lncluio oxporlnonts Othor than thoso of typhus?

Tho rolati nshlp botwoon Dr. Ding .and Urugatsky w a not tho
ca o at .all tlnos. Dr. Dina had p rticlpntud in tho Froneh oaupalgn
in 1940, and at that tir:o ho was tho porsonal adjutant cf tho SS
Divisional Uodlcal Office, Gonzkon. Gonzkon had a special waaknoss for.
Dine rind ho was protoe tint hin. Until tho cp ring of 1943 Gonzkon worked i
ir. tho Hodioal Office of tho Tfaffon 3S and ho was tho nan in ehargo
thoro, and ilrugowsky *.ho had tho "'f Stumbannfuohror-at tho tino and
Dine who was Kauptaturr.b-nafuo’iror, both of whcc woro subardinatod to

• This I could r-ther fr" tho exchange of lottors botwoon Gonzk.n
-d’ Din.': and frar. stataxmts by Dr* Ding. Thoro was a certain rivalry

" ion Gonzkon and rirug-'wsky. l-rueswsky kopt on advancing in grade
■’* D-or.zkoc v.-s pushed asido r.aro and :.aro. 7r.o Department, P.cc.nn
'-•oral IS, in liodical iiain Office of tho "affon SS was eivon r-ro and
ro indopjndor.co. finally, llrug'wsky boc r.o indopondont of Gonzkon


- 120C -


7 > : 7-;.-r jc-i o—Cooic
; ” . 1

-vJ ho bac-sno the direct nen ir. charge of Dr. Ding. This happened
-npraci'-^tol” bo two on April and June, 1942. Dr. Ding still triad for a

ti.'.o to !:oor Goczkor. ns his G’ r iof, tint is Chi of of Tr.o Doportnont.

..o triad t figuro cort'.in nssi-^rtonts nnd .-.t lo-.st in sono rospocts
!:oo; : l~ indoooatlont fror llrugmsScy* It "-s c-llod tho Chiof in Chrjjo
"octior. of tho Dopartnont for spociol r.ssigisaonts rj*i r.pproxir.ntoly
- ’ tint tine, in tho cursor cf 1943, I hrd sovor.nl tiros tho

i: 'rossion tint Dr. Dinr did not know h i n solf -ny r.oro to when ho
rv ox-ctl- eubordin-'to ir *11 dotails.


- 1201 -


7 Jaiwary-iS-DJ G—11 -1-r i t zge raid

C-u.-t 2Io, i

k However, in the late summer cf 1943, the situation had become
ccm; letely clarified. lirugcwsky became the sole chief of Dr. Ding and
every experiment which was carried out in Block 46, whatever concerned
it, orders wore given fer it by Dr. ifrugowsky, that is tc say, they
‘o cr '.Gred by him, or they wore suggested by firas or by Ding. They
wo then officially approved by Dr. Mrugowsky. Dr Ding could not
start any series cf experiments in Block 46 without first obtaining the
-pjrov 1 -r the order cf Dr. lirugowaky.

I believe in the beginning of 1944 ho “Is.- bocrune the Chief
Hygienist of the SS Gonzkin still wrote private letters tc Dr. Ding.

This exchange of letters was vary cordial. Genzkun complained about
tho conditions with regard tc the ruthority in the main mciical cffico
in Berlin. ..nd if I recall c rroctly, and I cn net quite sure in this
matter, Genzkcn, at cne tine, accepted a private invitativn of Dr.
Ding-Schuler tw cornu to Buchenwald end tc inspect his shop, as Dr. Ding
expressed himsolf. He was referring tc Block 46 ar.i 50.

If this visit were suggested by Genzkcn and it took place, and net
by order cf t:.e Roichphysician Dr. Grawitz; then it must hove taken
place toward tho end of 1944.

Q Can you state that Genzkun was informed of what was geing on
in 31cck 46 in the Buchenwald Concentration Camp prior t., ..ugust, 1943?

.. That is a conclusion which results in the actual fact. Until
approximately ,.pril cr June, 1943, Genzker. was the official chief of
>. Ding-Schulcr. He g.vc his approval for the establishment cf the
Department fer Typhus and Virus Research cf the Hygiene Instituto cf
the .affen-SS at Buchenwald.

Q -nd 1 think you testified that Schuler remained ir. contact
•utr. Genzkcn aft-cr the sumne-r cf 1943?

.. Yes. Tne ccrrospcndence lasted until the end cf 1944 cr the

beginning of 1945-

< Sc thot Guizken continued tc be informed of experiments in


Block 46?


12C2 -


7 Jenuary-M-DJG-ll-2-FitiBgercld
' art Kb. 1

4 . In this 'correspondence, between Dr. Ding-Schuler and Genzktn
experiments were alacst never mentioned at all. Dr. Ding-Schulwr tcld
Gaufcen about his plans tc become a lecturer at sene university, and
in that connection there were always phrases like, typhus expori-
ments heve shown this and th t." There were never any exact statistics,
.hero were always things that were mentioned. These wore not reports.
However, Gcnzkon knew that Dr. Ding-Sc'nul-r was new Chief of the Departing
for Typhus and Virus Research end had b_on whena the vaccine w:s produced

Q How, iir. Kcgon, wo have mentioned th- name cf the Defendant
Hcvcn from time tc time luring the course cf this examination. How¬
ever I wish y.u would new outline tc the Tribunal a more complete
picturo cf Hcvon's position in the carp. Tell us exactly what he did
and whether or not h-. was connected in any way with what night bu called
the Euthanasia program in the Camp. In other w.ris, t-11 us wh't you
knew about tho Dofeniant Hoven.

It i3 very -difficult to Jcscribo it in short. I shall do that
in a v>_ry few sentences provi Ing th t I may make certain corrections
which do net concern tho matters cn hand, but which night make Dr. Fovon
appear in a certain light.

,.pprcxin tely from 19U cn. Dr. He von was the Coop Physician at
Buchenwald Gcrtcontrnticn Camp. There was else a local physician thorc
cf the l.affon-SS. Occasionally tho two functions wore coerdinatod.

The local p ysician of the 'iaffen-SS and the Camp Physician, fer c
certain period cf time, rs f'r as I knew, worked together. Dr. Hcvon
was else tho* local physi;ir. cf the \irffen-SS. Fnxa tho very beginning
when ho arrived rt tho camp, ho did not shew any p-rticular interest
in tho medical ortters at the ctop, perhaps because ho did not feel
himself certain in the field. Ho stated thrt quite publicly. 1 dis-
:-Vered lator he had male his medical examination at a very late time
and under quite peculiar circumstances wllch did net call fer a v^ry
deep knowledge cf medical matters. Fer example, if I am informed
c.rroctly, or if I 'm ccmpletoly inf.rmcd cn this point, he has never


- 1203 -


7 Jpnuary-4HWG-ll-3-Pitzger£ld
0 art. So* 1


personally perforce! any operations. Dr. Hoven was a wan who wanted
tc leed as good and as confcrtable a life as possible. ..hen ho coxae
into the prisoners' hospital, ho fcur.d the prevailing conditions there.

Wo clearly showed tc him that a certain category cf prisoners, namely
the political prisoners, the prisoners with the rod triangle, were giving
all the ordoro practically. These political prisoners administarod
the whcle iispunsary internally. The SS-Physicion was not cole to take
car-, cf all the details and have central cf all those things. ,.s a
result cf this. Dr. He von did not oval arJco the t tt<mpt ;t the very
beginning to do anything ebeut it. He just appointed ccitain political
pris n-rs and said everything was to be male available to then. That
included foe:’., clothing, pictures, paintings, otc.

Furthonaor, Dr. Hoven, without any leubt, had siuo sympathy for
these p-liticcl prisoners who v«ry quickly realised that in .him they
i;ad found a useful tool to obtain more power against the SS in running
the crr.p. Within n very brief period of time. Dr. Hover., without cf
c ursi being able to Seo sll the reasons for wh;t was soing cn, found
himself caught in a r.ut or intriguo and h*. bcc.nu the tool cf this
c togcry of prisoners.

..s a result of this. Dr. Koven, until the time of his arrest tnd
even afterwards, was one of the most popular people with that cctogory
of prisoners. Hu was one cf the m-st popular SS physicians. He lot
the prisoners have their own way nest of the time.

.'.nwhen members of Ihu illegal camp admnistrr tion on the part
cf tiio prisoners tcii ti cm th t c was to have this traitor, who wa3
considered a traitor by this crtwgcry cf prisoners, then he had it dene
r.s if a similar crier or suggestion had been given tc him cn the part
-f the SS in this c pacity as camp physician.

-it. iicH..NEf: I think we missed a word cr twe in the translation.

I vs:uld like to dec r th: t up. Did you testify thr.t the illeg"! innate
gvvomxent, the political prisoners, cn occasion used the Dcf«jviant
Kcvcr. tc execute the sc-cclled trfdtors tc the inmate government?


- 120W -


7 .ry-K-DJG-U-3-FitzgerrO.d
're. 1

THE WITNESSs Yes.

HR. L'cHjJ'IEY: I dc not think this was clear in the translation
thet caac ever.

Deis t:.. ’curt wish to adjourn r.t this tine?

THE Ft.SSIDEMT: The Tribunal will now recess until cno-thirty.
( .. recess was taken until 1330 hours.)


/??7

7 JMw’^S-12-3^febhm (:"D)
Court Iio. 1


(7ho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 7 January l'7h7)


IS !«. ro"M


. »«.;


3x:.:ct- ::iurr:i tici. (continued)


Q 11*. Uogon, before tho rocoss, you *:cro minting to the Tribunal
certain facta, vliich ytu Irnotr about the defendant "over.. I you to
continue *.dth r a tor;/ and 3tato again hovon’a relationship to the so-
called illegal irrato sovornnont in Buchennald. I suggest that you ;x>r-
hapa o:;>lain a little noro fully ..'hat the illegal inrvato governnont was,
since that aubjact has boon referrod to onco before by another '.-itncis
boforo t la Tribunal.


A The 33 in tho concentration ca ns lsposcd a certain «»unt of
aolf atodniotration on tho ;>risonora. It van r.ot in a position itnolf
to acblniatcr ovoryt-dns n the ccun and to hoop it running reliable*.

Tho real ; o;ibo a of tho earn fron tho 33 side u*oro always corv-
parati’.oly fov pooylo in Sucherarald; lor o::r. rlo about one hundred on'
t.-inty five pocnlo. In any cesos, ho wvc -, there w-ro 7,000 to 30,000
priaonora. 'r ia internal solf ’ninistratior. of prieonors kopt nornal

•

lifo, ia order rvithin tho bloc ha; tho nanago.cnt of tho labor detail,

dood supplies, diatributior. of food, laundry, tho rintonrnco of certain
dice! lino for the roll callmd sirdlnr thin;y.. This xra- thotask of tho
f Their a onto tioro tho senior ‘-loci: Ir. ho

d v-;-~ >ioc!:3, tho capos, tho forcror. for the labor 'eta' la end sonior
ear.;, innatea o£&Q^£throe senior cattp i be Tho so-called Ll-l

ro3;xjnsible to the n Z for internal cor/iiticna
/y f ‘ |., Jf- : rrc’ y'tic s thoro las tho so-called ^or.trollevr' 1
- n * L ^-r r * -o -’-in, \t\\ o had a sort of internal _olice authority.

-A tho early poriod of iho conp3, the 33 appointed prisoners who

nui^tabixs. for tha^c/functions. •* up frequently tho 33 lihod to work

il. •

jirofo33ional criminals, the so-called "greer. 1 prisoners, becauso


1206


7 Jar^.-OTS—12-1-i jechan

Court Ho. 1


♦'>oy troro Green" triangles on their lert breast and ri^ht am bands.
The ^roiCcssional


7 Jtn-..-SJ&- 12 - 3 -;...eina
Court s • 1 .


criminals were generally bitter onotice of tao politic::! rrisoners, who wore
rod triangles or. their breast end were called the "rod" ones. In :.l_.ost nil
ca~ps thor. w_r. violent conflicts between the "rods" rr.d the "green*". Talc
flgating we carried out as was possible in tae cvu_p conditions. ?fc*r woe
no l;.w for usi it wns r. Jungle of conflicting interests in i li.iud r.ron.
IV.oy v.r. carried out «ita ..urdcr.

?ac "greens", .s well r.s tao "redo", in i 11 the concentration cr..ps tried
to get control of tac intern. 1 ctup administration, ta* oo-callcd self
fuL.i. istmtior. of the prison.rs. ?..v SS die not stop tain fighting Pinco it
suited ta.wir principle, "Devour ni Rule."

In 3 ucneawald, aft.r fanr y-ars. fro- 1337 to 191*1, it was possiblo to
force the "greens" ».ck completely \ .£. to .oJeo the-a cort of pariah class
In the coup. 7 ae-o four years of conflict war r.t by nu.erous r.urdern 'r.
bot.. oides. If one of tac two classes, .he "greens" or tho "redo", were
oclo to win over s. SS doctor for t..ia fighting, talc woo one of the host
7 lu .bin near.o of assorting' tuuusclvcs.

Tno "greens" ruled any c.v pn, the "ruls" ruled only Snxonhruoon, D. chnu
nod Such on void; nd 3 ucnen»ald pri.arily during there four years. Tao
■•jrovr.o" repeatedly, vita tao aid of SS officers, w^r. able to gain control
;e..porariljr. The consequence every ti-e was ta t doteno, r.nd in two c: ceo
’ver or.o aundred, so-called prominent politic:J prisoners wui\ hilled by
-•*“ SS nd denunciation of tne "greens."

r.xe internal iA ini t rat ion of tr.e prisoners was expanded rvoro r.nd ...ore
e t..v SS, tnrouga corruption and 1 ter t.. rough t..e agents at the front, wap
i..pcdei in ta- execution of t..vir duties in concentr tion ca_ps. Svery
opportu.-.ity to put ^:r. ov.r directly or indirectly ir. the hands of tho
riconers vac .aken . dvrottego of.

?..e lending class- in t .is prisoners* self ui inistration w-ic, if tho
”re_o" • ,r in control, ilways t.i» cou—unift party would h ve strict die-*
eicllac in it. :vr blocks within tae cf-.p and it governed intern:.! conditions
.'Ceordint to its own vi.wc . rod its own decisions. T-e heads of t.:ls re.cjiino


- 1207


7 Jan-—-G3S-12-3- ?.e chr.a
Court :«'o. 1.


nl_ost always were dot orpine d exclusively by the Co. -ur.ist ■: rty. Only
in the last years — ir. the last two years — was there a certain inter¬
nationalization of t-.is oo-ceilod illegal ca .p ad inistrntion.

The illognl cncp administration. which generally consisted of an inner
circle of ut the cost a dozen con wno kept contact with all forces in the
ca-p and had a Very intensive oxtendod intelligence service, poruentod the
rnr.Jc6 of tne SS, ns well «is tile ranks of t.-.o prisoners. There van no
important ovor.t in the cu.:p. no sattor of whr.t wart, which the illogrd cn;p
ad-inistr .tion dia not within n very short tico — generally within a few
-oconts — learn aoout froc so-called co:_and runners.

The two ..air. centers within toe ca..p self nA-ir.i strut ion. which tho
illegal ca.p ad-inistration used, was the prisoners' office nod tho hospital:
the office, because there all inferation about t.uj prisoners wns colleotod
nd wns prated on to tne SS fro., tnoru. “or cxra.pl e, if socoono new c..:-o to
tne concentration ca. p, thoy he co-.o fro- the political section after a few
Steps to the office. . detailed questionnaire bad to be filled out there
nd these questionnaires Were sent or. to the SS. but tho con of tho illegal
ca-p administration received detailed knowledge free tho office, which they
i wdir.toly chocked with what tho cou,nnd runners had reported fror. tho
interrogation of the now arrivals fro., the politic 1 section.


1.(36


7 Jaiu-13-I-A-ATD-«aloy
Court Ho. 1

The prisoners hospital was more tba executive center of the illegal canp
administration, and the means were available to dispose of undesirable persons
in the canp. The hospital in all concentration casus is one of the,—was one
of the nost feared installations. Most of the prisoners did not <fero oven to
approach it. The reason was a double ono, on the one hand nost people in the
prisoners* hospitals were killed by the SS, or the so-callod selections took
place thorc for gassing, for death transits, for executions of all kinds* and
the second reason many people knew that the internal conflict in the canp ms
carried out through the prisoners' Hospital. Dr. Hovon worked with the politi¬
cal prisoners, with the illegal carp administration, and to make it even more
precise vrith those of the illegal 'cn-p adninistration in Buchcnwnld. The
a gents who woro sent by the illegal canp administration to tho prisoners'
hospital, almost all of whom belonged to thj CoiT-.unist Party, if thoso nen
nado a suggestion to Dr. Hoven, whatover it concerned, after a short timo

after Dr. ftovon had begun his activity, they could count on tho3o wishes being

•

carriod out, Furthermore, if cortain political prisoners, who wuro in dangor of
their livos, woro to bo saved by removin' tter. from the political soction
tlion Dr. Hovon was always willing at tho noro suggestion to givo hi3 signature
for 3uch an act. In this connection, I must onphasiso once noro that Dr, Hoven
had a triplo fur.ation in tho Buchonwald Canp* He was canp physician, and an
such wan subordinate to tho so-callod directing physician of concentration
car V 3 in tho S.S.W.7.H.A. in Berlin, Dr. Lollingj second. Dr. Hoven, from time

0

tc tine represented Dr. Lolling in his function a3 dirocting physician of
concentration camps. That .-as only for a brief period; and in tho third place
Dr. Hovon was deputy of Dr. Ding Schulor, to supervise tho criminal station
in Block U6. In this triplo function,—renorally, it ms only a double function
th first and tho third, Dr. Hovon had toward thu SS camp a'ministration, Dr,
Hoven was more or loss independent of the SS car.; .administration. Ho cooper¬
ate! with tho canp administration, which consisted in part of personal friends
<'f his, but generally he sias largely independent. So if the suggestion was
na ;o to Dr. Hovon that sanaone should be declared unsuitable for transport he
cent such a notice to the political soction of tha S.S. and the person in


7 Jer.r-13-2-A-.\73-: >.lov (:SD)

Court Ho. 1

question was uithdrarm froa a transport Tor a certain v?rio:' of tire.

In o;m caao, *.ihich ia only one of nurcrous eases, in : arch or April—

in April I9f;3, I tics to bo sent to Ausclnrits to be passed. 3one of

friorum, Ttio were in very close contact with tho illo~al cr.:p adrin-

istrntion, imc&Latoly Trent to it, f..*o con in the prisoners' hospital

T/ho belonged to tho illegal car.p adainistration and who !sicr.r no vroll,

•

3U.,costed to Dr. Hoven, T.-ho did not 'now .e at all at that tii.o, tint
I T.-co an acuto T.B. caso. Dr. Hoven -avo Ids si w naturo, and it v/as
reported to tho political section tlv t I ;:co not able to bo .ronoportod.
This :;as dono three ti-ves because tho 'ostponersont by tho political sec¬
tion -./as for threo or four ■..*oe!:3 only ir. such caso, until finally I cai-o
w tho vaccine station and qy liquidation -.ms postponed to tho ond of tho
war by tho 3.3.K.A. In such casos Dr. Hoven :ms a tool of tho illojal
corqj edninintretion. Ox of tho -x>st striking caws, which -as s;-stenatic
for conditions thoro, was in 19UT -..hen the second carp leader Plauol
auclt'only too!: steps a'adnat tho politi ;al prisoners in tho canp, replaced
tlion in '.ho prisoner-. self-cdn-ni3tratior. by official crininals, and tlwn
l'tor bocano a violent :tru', lo a air.st tho reds. Tho ;x>Iitical prisoners
approached Dr. Hoven, one* in tho course of a f<r./ r.onths in which a fcr.:

c'oson prorinont political prisoners wore tilled by tho ^recr.s, it was

•

os-.'.bio to overthrow tho relo of tlio roans b* intriyaos; and Dr. Ho von

•

nidod in breaking tho rule of the croons b7 a counter terror. ro.i that
tiuo or. thoro as never a rr-.lo of tho “.-cons ir. tho internal administration
tlio Crr.p Euchonwald n-ain. Dr. Hover, in his function as : ' :p physician,
of c our jo, also carried out su 3tior.s and instructions of tho 35. Tho
i- iaouera al-a;.-s tri d, rs far ra -ossiblc, to 3avc eo.ic free these death
a-lens which ::-ro ordered. It happened tut -eerie ..ho re dialdkod
la tho carp . .re included *.r. the ranks of the Tenth candidates. As condi-
rro Dr. Hoven could not know anything about these things. Tho

* m *

euthanasia pro^ran, which T - ore, which as called l2j? 13, .

• •

- v - a3 lean recall van in 19;not Z9h2, but I an not quite certain, —in
:%ia :or. four transports of about 90 people jeeh wero s;t up, which


1210


7 Jna-13-2-t.-JITD-Tl-.loy (13^)

Court IFo. 1

03 ;;o Xc "- rncd vor 7 qtiichly v ro 3 ant to an institution c
to bo C‘-3Sod, end in tho Tir~t transport thara were = J
•cc inonfc


t or near 3orr.;ur~
rja nunbor or


1210


7 J^no-13—3-K-n TTWSaloy

Court Jfe. 1

polltical prisoners, of which I shall mention only on u , a rood friend of nine-
tte security director of Salzburg, Dr. Bichiny. The people were gassed at
Bernburg. Their property, including thoir false teeth and the pieces of broad
which they had in their pockots, after six or eight hours cane back in tho
trucks that the people had been taken away in, cane back to Buchenwald. The
progran lli F 13 was carried out through tho prisoners' hospital. I myself never
had a function in tho prisoners' hospital. knowledge comes from my close o
contact with raenbersof tte illegal cam? administration and with friends of
such taonbers. Other death programs took ulaco in the oaop on occasion outsido
of tho experimental station in which tho camp physician had some function or
another cither of sulootion or of execution, I personally do not know, to what
extent Dr. Hovon was involvod in oach of those individual cases. I must point
out that tho camp physician always had two or three assistant dootors of tho
S.S., and it happonod repeatedly that those assistant doctors were cithor
stron S.S. non or independently of tho responsible canp physician, woro also
tools of tho illegal camp administration. This, as far as responsibility is
concerned, the programs woro a little confused, and a former prisoner from tho
priaonors* hospital who experienced thoso thinrs hinself would havo to testify
about then. Tho bust would bo a nan who had a similar position to mino, a

prisoners' clerk, doctors* clork, bocauso through tho hands of theso clerks
wont all tho records.


v


1211


? JJp-lh-l-Hinabuck


C-urt No. 1

5. ftr, the inv-lic tr n.p-rts »hich y „ tav. maft n-d in cannocti a
trith Action U P 13, can y u »teU «ith certainly th-.t H-v_n tea. -b ut them,
transp rts?


Yes, I knew th-t Tor the ioliorin? re-son: Suddenly I believe with
the third transports a very l-rg t raaber of prominent politick prisoners were
to be incorporated in these transports. The SS made out the list and turned
it over to the prisoners office so that the persons concerned could be infonnod
the evening before that on tlo next aermng -t 8 : 0 C o'clos'.c after the roll
c.-ll they were to be at -.ho c-aip et.

Cur intelligence service always gave us tho opportunity to know the
special significance oi such -n.;our«e.^nts. ..hen the l:st of this transport
mS :<n0Wn by Ul ° ille * al c top administration nn appeal r.r.s made .at once to
Dr. Koven, and 1 know that it was th-nke to tho intervention of Dr. Hovon with

tho &? ca.np administration th-t this group of politic -1 prisoners were taken
of tiie transport list.


I also knot fro. l» clerk, of u,o prisoners Hospital that Dr. Koven

ted S °-'° Mns t0 d0 rlth •«“> • » r 13. -.t « nuch l-.tor tl.ro, in the first
i-ys after the liberation of tho Jor.oontr.-.tlon c-=p Suchonw-.ld -bout on tho

1' th of ..prll 191,5, l MS ivon carbon copies of. on exctan s e of letters xhich
• : Oven hod tad .1th tho chief physiol™ of tho celled mental institu¬
tion i„ Bamourg, e certain Dr. Htarl. This correspondence shorn clearly that

IIOVOn “ ''"“*»• «tioo. In Vh-t funoton -nd to «t»t extent

his activity went, I cannot say.

Q- 'tow, you hav. mentioned an Irat-nco when Koven *as instrumental in


" ’° Vi ““ H0dS frar " ,:c °* h «« transports. Do you knee of any
occasion when Hewn san to it ttat so* Oroen. or perhaps sore other inmates
‘•eiv included in these transports?


... 1 do not too. of iadtndnal o-.se, but I do know the fact; n TOa
ce-ui-r phenomenon in tta e-. ttat people .he »e.c undesirable to the iliega
' 1 " mr ‘ SlrlUo " W reason, out who, for any reason cold not be killed


-"12


7 - buck

Court Ho. 1


within the crap, wore fwt on such lists for do-«th transports, so th-t the
oa-th of these- people occurred outside of the C'np of Buchemvrld.

How, while I have been saying this, I remembered one cr.s., r. political
senior cowp inmate I none ’Volff, a forcer Gorman nation;'! captain, according
to the opinion of the illeg -1 c.-urp nctoinistration based on a numbor of indi¬
cations tegun to r. or!; with the- SS against tho illcg-1 camp adninistration,
With the aid of Dr. Hovon this senior c.anp inaatc I\ -.sasnt to a comp at
the Celtic 3ca.

I believc I con rcc-11 tlrt r. Koven ovun sent a latter to-'thu camp
physic in* 1 there to inform this cap physic! n abov. .olffs quality in the
Euchanvald enrap. After a fen aonths we learned through transports prisoners
that olff had died thero.

Q. Can you st-U whether .any nen-ore. n nati.nals rforo included in
thooa inv lid transports?

A. Tin: stc:< transports wit*' out distinction included .all nationalititos.

..t the end, in the Buchonwalc. com? r;; hac ropres ntativos of no less than thirty
nations,

Q. ::ovr, point *> r ck for a aottant to dovon's relationship to tho so-called

•

Hods, do you st tc in t Uovan .orked with the Reds bocaus ! had bo..n
corrupted by them; that is, .^Lvcn clothing, food and jifts of various kind?

... ^ is very difficult to ujt.r-.in the motives of r. human being

:tcn rds ar.d during an -ction. I c-r. oniy judge fro.; facts which I know and
frtii; st tcic.nts which »..r. an to, I can only conclude that both aotivos, tl
! 01 10 1 active and tho i otiva of corruption, K..re active In t ic case of Dr.
Hovcn. If Dr. Hoven a>ivs..d my rksir., and he expressed arny de*sires, then
these wishes wore always fill_-j.

Q. Did he ask for my J.i;s for liis girlfriend perhaps?

... That too happened, -a-tists w w rc piv^n orders, icsigmi-ntE, to work
f0: * “ EoV ? n * Soneti - s th ^y r -re people rhcc Dr. Hover, had s-vod from death
’-r-nr.-orts who tried to foresee all th_ wishes that Dr. iov^:i h d. In other


: is


7 J '.n-A.-JP-lii-3-N inabuck


Court Ho. 1


words, he hi self expressed such .ddhos constantly ar.d all possible .advantages
were giv„n him by such people whew h_ had saved.

Q* °° you ^iow whether Dr. Hover, personally killed any of these so-called
traitors to the Reds?

... I cannot testify pr-cisUy in which casta Dr. Hoven Jirectly,
personally, killod such spi-s. I heard rcpe-todly fro,: the political prisoner*
uorkin in the prison-rs hospital r;.c i .re n> frionds, that Dr. Hoven himself
killod people.

0. Did you hear in ixn~t x-mxr thi3w-s done?

... In most cases by injections of chtnic*Is which were either poison
or were ,L\en in quantities ol. enough to induce death; for example, ovipann -
triun phenol, but it also h- i*ned V. t air was injected into the heart so
that sir w..ibolisms occurred,

Q. Can you give th- Tribunal any accurst. oatiM tu of the number of
p.oplo killed by Hovon in Duc.iorwrld?

... That is not o sy to s.ay. I must make .a distinction. It happened
t "" t - ^rd was disposed of l:i order to cake room, or in the courso of
a T3 program, whole rowr . aonorfl killod. . do :..>t 3"y thit this
hap; Affing Dr. Kovon>s ..eriod or • s his r-.spa. cd ovary case,

but during his period too, such klUin a occurred r\.po.atddjy. A medical
assist ;.t ;i*r..ed ‘..ilhoLa, .a 31-uptc.a.: rfuuhror, could h.'.Ve c-rrio 1 then out too,
or I .ig S6 e-nip lc •dor Gust, - violeic anti-Somito, took from th_ remaining
Jews who Were Still in Buchonwald, took five or six who l he had noticed on sonu
occasion or other because t. -: . _• Sent them to

t!w pris,rx.rr hospital n • the. killed there. I knov. that such things
haop:r.ed repeatedly, also, dur'r.g tu p.-riod wh .n Dr. iovoa s camp physician.

:or n. ics, that is, real or susp.ctwd traitors, dnrin,; Or. "oven's period
• ‘■' uld ustr ate th’t up to - hundred p.rsons v. re killed.

Q. Do you know of a..;} c-s_s of killings in which Hoven w-s implicated
tfuch. were unconnected with the struggle between the Reds and the* Greens?

i. 1-i


7 Jen 47-A-in..-lS-l-?utty
Court Ko. 1


A. At the nocent I can reneaber c single case vhich, however, was not
nuite independent of the internal conditions in the crop, It concerned

citizens. In 1943 a few Poles in the ce=p were suspected of having
prepared soce rctlon against the SS. The Poles who were considered the
leaders of this pl6t were taken to Block 46, were loolcted there. I and e
few of ay conrados, since I had already he working for Dr. Ding a few weeks,
tried to help theso ccura.des. Two of then who were Polish doctors, I kndw
very well. We tried to Sftvo then. It was r natter of hours and then two
doctors, Dr. Koven and Dr. Ding, wore not there but wore expected back at
the ceap. No onu could got to then except nc. When the two dostors er-ao to
the Pathology Section. I nporcechcd then. I believe Dr. Koven saw no
personally for tho first tir.o in the c«:p. Dr. Ding had already known ne
lor r. fov Weeks end I spoke to Sturnbnnnfuchror Dr. Ding end Keuptstura-
fuahror Dr. Seven and asked tho:: not to kill these own. Both of thon asked
no why I undo this suggestion. I said, "Theso non are Polish patriots and
there is no rei son to Kill thou." I was told. "They rro Polish Notionalists,
Polish Chauvinists." I said, "I know tho two doctors." ©nc of then was
Hr. Chicpiolowski whoa I have already uvntionod. I sold, "I know the two
doctoro. They are good Polish patriots." The answer was thit "it doesn't
-ike any difference." I said, "Sturr.bcnnfuohrer end Hpupts turn fuehrer, that
is exactly tho Halt which is iaportmt." They laughed. They said, "Vs
will see whit can be dene."

The interview lasted perhaps five cinutos. Th6 two doctors lof* the

Pathology Section i nd went to the prisoner's hospital. The Polish were

*.ikon there froc Slock -.6 for a last interrogation in the presence of three

prisoners of the prisoner's hospital. Dr. Chicpiolowski who spoke Gernan

better — he had tekon lessens frou =c before — was able to rnsver noro or

lose and was spared. The- ethers were killed by injections. Vho actually

•

■rilled the other three persons, whether it was Dr. Ding a Dr. HoVen, I did
'• t see nyself. It was said in the canp that each of the two doctors had
■-iiicd one of tho prisoners, one or two, but I cannot say nyself.

<4- And, of course,Nit is true, is it not, that Eoven was cor.neoted


:_15


? Jan 47-A~LEK-15-2-Putty
Court So. 1

vlth the death* vhich took place In Sleek 46, which, of course, vas not con¬
nected with the struggle between the Beds and the Greens in the crap?

A. Yes end no. Insofar ea Dr. Horen wr.s Sr. Ding's deputy and ie Grid
tc have carried out action* in Block 46 within the serieo of experiments, no.
Insofar ra certain political cr other prisoners were r.ore or lose snuggled
to Block 46 through carp intrigues to he killed there end if such ections
then were errried out by Dr. Koven, yes. I know of one erse of th. letter
type. Chore were two pis oner a weed Hay end Fricdeannn. Standirton-
fuohror Koch from auehomrnld had Syphilis. He would r.ot lot hiwsclf bo
trotted by the SS doctors, but ori3on„rs fro= the prisoners* hospital
tre-.ted hio. They were not doctors theaselvos end .acquired their nodical
knowlodgo only in the prisoners* hospital. On* of tho» was p.n iron worker
boforo. Thoy treated him so th-.t ws satisfied. Lator tlirough the
investigations of Dr. cry an this w-s about to b .coao known. The two men
«ho wore very pronlnont rs-mb-rs of the illegal camp attainistration were
sent to the outside eotavid at Gcsslar and had thori shot while trying to
usenpu there. Of course, they • d not try to escape* Two people, this
*y and Priodemnn, whom I cant.or.ud, were witnesses of this happening;
they were cent to 3uchon:-nld. hon Standsrtonfuobrer Koch learned about
it, thoy wore sent to Block 16. Tx»j wore incorporated xt\ -n oxporiaont.

Thoy survived the typhus. Thoy *-cro released as healthy. Thoy cane
directly to the prisoners* hospital free Block 1.6 and r.ore killed there o n
Mio next day; that is, they wore rcaovod as witnesses.

3 Now, hitriv.ss, I think ny original question to wnich you Ir.vu given
response was not very good. It was compound. Your answer was, "Yes
r.d r.o." I take it that you n»“Ji to say that the activities of Block L6
-re nt ti-xs connected ith tho struggle botwooH the liuds and the Greens?

Ie that right?

A Y63.

3 You do not Bean to say that Hovon was net the .assistant to Ding
in tho operation of Block L6? He ws, in fact, his assistant, was ho not?

A fis deputy.


1216


7 (!~D)

Court iro. 1

o And hover. supervised the operations or “lock J;6 during the t;V.os
•her. Ding v/as absent?

» *

Yss, IT ho felt his duty. Hover. res often at flock 1*6.

V i'orr for a last question- you ^rationed tho YD, the tuberculosis

cetion, a favr rdnutos ago . I --oru'or if you c uld or loir, to tho Tribunal

vhr.t that r.:tion ms cr.d vher. it coo!: pl-cc.

A repeatedly, 1 boliovo, £r r; 19;.1 or., 73 patients trouo killed by

injections, I !m; that 1 ryself -.ho us consider:d an acute ?' case Tor

9 •

soaotinc, although I \ran not 3ick at all, .:ac repeatedly txrr.od in the

prisonous* hospital to tratch out; that I should not bo inclv.dod in such

• •

nnarfcorrinction action, and, therefore, during the period in quo3tior. I

stayed array iron tho Tf station, '."ho ?T station -.vs at tho oano tine an

asyltin for those political prisonous f .\o -..-anted to hide, only thoy Jir.d

to bo crro.'ul, on tho oth r liand, a .ain:t ■ sing -.eluded in such an

oi.-torr.dncticn Asti on. They could kido ttoro boccuso tho 31 had on enorcous

fear of contn ion, and none of tho:: ont reel the T3 Station, souotiaoo not
■

ovor. tiio .3 doctors.

Q Vi’oro those tuberculosis x-tioncs !dllod uijht r.t the carp or '.-ore

A

thoy included in tho invalid transput e'.i -pod jlsj.rhcro for c::tcr.xLn-
ation?

A In the crxip itself.

Q '-rc non-Gorr.cn nationals included nr.or. those inratefl Icillcd?

A Thors vm no distinction.

• IbHAHff: I hvo no further ucstions at ‘-ids tino, your Honor.


1217


7 Jen 47-A-LHM-16-1-Board
C-urt So. 1


Cf.OSi ZtetEAEIOS

BY'DR. SELIl:

DR. HiXTE: (Fa-the defedont Kandloscr). Perait ae to begin the cross
examination, Hr. President.

C. Witness, if I understood you correctly, yesterday you arid that in
April 19*3 you were in the office of Block 50 under Doctor BinG?

A. In the so-called business office, in the business roca.

‘ft* ?rou y cur ovn knowledge -- your ovn knowledge dates fron April 1943;
then, to what is this knowledge oupo-sed to refer? The knowledge of the
events which you Juvo stated here?

A. Well, os for os Block 46 is concerned, ay knowledge criglnctec
rbout April 1943. It is freu the information of ay friends in the camp.

Q. Thrt is whet I wonted to find Ait. Your ovt. knowledge or your
ir.for:.;ption, I should like to distinguish —

a. (Intorpoeing) Just a moment! Hay I edd something to thio? The
knowledge of those incidents which took pljcc outside of Block 46, of courco,
always occurred dlroctly in the camp.

Q. I am interested in ny Question — of tho knowledge of events In
Block *6.

TKa PRaSIDaMT: It BFpenro there is some difficulty in tho defendants
hearing the translations. Tho cross examination will be suspended for a
*:oncnt to give then on opportunity to renody the situation. The Tribunal
will bo in roceos until the difficulty is remedied.

(a recess was token.)


l°lo


7 Jan 47-A-REH—17-1-Blekl ey
Court Ho. 1


TKL -IARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

q. Witness, in the diary of the Section 4 Typhus rnd Virus Research
which you know of, *nd on the 2nd of January 1942, there is rn ontry,
"Investigstion of Typhus Vaccines, Concentration Ccap Buchenvald Selected'.'.
l<as this deternination ctill in effect at the period when you were In
Suchenvald?

A. As far as experiments W6re carried out at 3uchenveld, that is
correct. !f, in excess of this, free the Hygienic Institute of the Vpffen
SS at Berlin and froa the nedica.1 office of the Vaffen SS or from other
organizations of the SS, experiments were carried out, this cano to ny
knowledge.

Q. I should liko to know about typhus vaccine research, end ao far no
that goon it vne the same during your period as in the beginning of 19<2?

A. Yos.

Q. Is it true; is it correct if I say that the Section 4 Typhus and
Virus Research In Buchonvnld received from the flrns end other placeo,
institutes, vaccino which vno still being dovoluped, that Is, still
roouirod investigation?

A. The description "Department for 7^-phue and Virus Research" was an
internal SS description. The agoncloe which wonted to have their vaccines
tested, no r.attor if they wore being developed or If they hrd nlroady been
perfected, never turned to the Department of Typhus and Virus Roaoarch pt
Buchenvald. The directive for tht execution of exparinente always cfr.e
iron the Hygienic Institute of the Waffon SS at Berlin, in particular from
Oberfuehrer Kruguvsky.


7 JaiW.—DJC—13—1-Cook ('3D)
Court Ifo. 1


0 ^ i? - s Trobrbly corr .ct that viicre a typhus vaccir.c *.ras con?loto?y
developed and hr.;', boon used for yours ”ith sv.ee- -.s, there ties no r.o-’d to
uso Duchorr/nld oithr directly or through Berlin?

- 'Uch vaccines :ore only used for control pur C3ss and -or- only
furnished for tJir* par ose, for oxanolo the ai-olsoho vaccine 0 ; Greco/.

Th. fc is tot I vented to find out. is .nr as the foisol typhus
vaccine £*on the T^rp’ us end. Virus lesarrch Institute of the CIS! in Crnco/
is poncornod, this v s a vaccine which*. s not 3ont to bo t-nt'd but which
Dr. Bing or hired free Cracow,

’• ;:ith - r V orforod it fron Cracow directly or Dr. Din- did
through tho hyonic Instituto of the ,'affon ~Z at Gorlin.

1 Uoir if there is a connection botveon the ;action in Duchoir.v.ld
and tho 0.3! Institute in Cracow, th t is Lruo of Dr. >.- 2 r r.s far as typhus
v-ccino is concerned, nay 1 not nisuiio tlia.t this connection -ran inoti-atod
>• .JveS^rM or Gorlin. In other cords, that tho inter: :ts -as only on
tho aido of rftqhoTMslcl, t'.ic "/-jionic Inatituto of tho 'affon G3?

•'* * : *- vo :rDfibvn of ary fact which - i-fct prove the contrary,
tills Horning you tcsti'iod tV.t to tost tho offoct In pro-
vontivo vaccination, lico wore orforod fron Cracorr, and you oxniwiosd tho
r.i:ni ’Won or you sail positi\oly, I fcr.’* rerorbar oxr.ctly - that fiio
is a shipment fron Dyer’s inatituto, is tto.t correct?

It -s a c !ii v ent of tho C::i fiou tho Institute at Crnco.:. hrperi-
ivntr.l series in ’hrchox/ald 'id r.ot of.;* teko ’loco in or or to tost tho
Wvonoss of t-phuo vaccino, but also to tost tho of ectivonoss of

2 cos

”’ v " t *'"° infectious 'atoriel cans fro:, tho f.obort hoch Institute r.t
Gorlin and also fro:: other Inc os, an! that this infectious at-rial Ixrdly
•' y offoct on tho oxpaririontal suVocts. in the ca:o of lice infecting
i ' -’ lo =’ : r* * So-to find nit if through diroct

l:i/ td r ii--ctoc! lico frox Grace:: r.s info'tio:: could he caused at
xld. Infectious Datorial fren f:c ho' _rt loch Institute at Berlin
rover, itself ineff ictivo because tho culturos apparently bed lost their

1120


7 Jan-A-0JG-l8-2-Cook (!SD)
Court Ho. 1


virulence.

0 :) id you yourself c^rperienco

/. :ro


r - 7:5011 ho -* do rou .’mow that this -“3 a ahiyxnt or infected lice
fror. 'raco;r?

/. I know that fro;*. two difforont eourc 3. Tho first aourco
conaitcd of ry political friends in tho prisoner's hospital who vora there
at tho tino tho oxpsrtaonta vara carried ovt and Ao or. their o'.n pert had
tho cloneet contact with tho Capo Arthur attach. Tho a ;cond sovreo
' fM tho dincuaaiona with ".turnbr-nnfuohrcr 3r*. Dine during tho tino triton
I : vrith Iii::. As I havo already previously nontionsd ho had a mrfcor
°: 00 - caUcd 3 °i°nUfic works trhich ho v i re- aring and which ropoatodly
dealt i/itli ho of'oct of tho infection. Tho creation of tho rodua of the
infection has boon very therm# Jy cy.acv.aaod in tho presence of apecia.Hata
fror. 316c!: 50. Thon although tho oxvriient with infoet d lico was discuaacd,
t .«aa told by Din t thna lies hre oomont fror, Croc., -.a ftp
ns tlio first sow :o ia concern:;*. I have also discovered that tho lico *.rcro
odiatly after tho conclusion*? tho fii-it xporiaont. That was
ir. two cases boenuae there wore two oliiptsonta.


: i'.:t you a.v- is also in-^Un-'a diary, only fro *, your tosti oivy

* lA3 ■ orhins cno rd - ht hrvo co ™ to the conclusion that you had e:cporioneod
M t yovrooif, that you had. your own !awslotfco. Tho diary aays: .Pofcro
ho entr-,hov.t the testing of tho effect by nerna of the lico, that Iron
'ho I^uia Search Institute Von Dohrin* at l«fxr 3 , lico and typhus
raocino .r:» sent, *::.; foUcr.in; that t.'wv. of - --r . i -.action irlth t^nw
mroct d lico ^uld bo undertaken. *inco 3r.-c«r and faifrorg are n,ro or

1 ancl3lnco «*. i- itu, -s in both -it: i -..-ant to

- i-:* the •= -cat not o a aittfaj, which rraa diet the->e lice could

c • n -Act you have said.

l - ^ . -'v. third: it is possible ;J it . 0 -- c indicated in tho diary

' at it caao frea the 'dring orhs?

1 :=*.cr.; fror a c ortfiin lecturer, Dr. Iteaa, who OTS correa ending


If 21


7 Jan—: , .-DoG-lS-3-CoOk (!CD)

Court lSo. I

4 '

vlt'.! Or. Dine later on, I bcliovo in tho " nr 19U3, '•’as ordered to roport
to tho Institute at Ier^or-j, and according to y knotOodso, Sturabannfuhror
Dr. Dins only-fror. that period of tir» on had sor.c reorc intensive corroa-
pondcnco -..ith I-yi3ors. I have r. vor hoard arything about it, t'.:at the
irJoctod lice had co.oo free: Jor.torg, and to tho contrary I hxvc only laard
that they had boon obtained 2 ro:; Oracoi.*.

;i. cll.ir.'f- If it plcaso tho Tribunal, I vnuld like to asJ: that in
the future -rhon a portion of the diary is being ?ut to tho -..Itne-.s in an
oTi'ort to undertake or to shake 'ads :wrory, that t!w excerpt fron tho diary
be r-.V loud and not .wrophmod in t':e language of the attorney. Mso
it arid o helpful to tho Prosecution if ':c are iven tho date of tho
entry so 1 s t roan also folio-..' tho cross exaednation.

fPd oIDJKT: Tho objection by counsel of the Prosecution is ’.roll
rrhen. honew tho reeftor consol rill elcaoo

•

read tho ontry in tho diary an; .ivo particular rof eronco to tho dates,
nnd counsel should refer in reading fircn the diary to tho page of tho record
in aJ.ch tho ratter is contained. It c-ld facilitate counsel folladng
it.

c further suggest that nhor. rdferono i3 nado to tho .tiary that tho
'./itnoas bo furnished :ith r. cor- o' the "crrrr. docunont so that he can
r fresh his recollection fror: the diary.

* JVo^idont, shall I ropoat varything or should tliat
'•o ; rule for the future?

i -r.:?- I third; v ;• car. proceed fra: *h re you left off with-
'>rt repetition.

- rffceTt

. Thor. I only -.rant to ostcblish ;Vt this tcstl-ony itch ;-ou ;r.vo
‘ ~ n - ~ i2 obtaining of tho lico s net ' - d on err own ’no-.rlodgo

cr. in.oma.tion f rcr. a t c.rd. person.

• •• *

• oSi

,)T " ■ 1 vo no wither questions to put to this : lines s.


1222


7 Jan-JL-4)JG—13—3-Coofc (13D)
Court Ho. 1


iy*

- ••


.TJTZ:


r : 'itncss, you described to us tills uorrjn- what you loicr.: about tho


T Jnnurr^'-.k-DJC—lS-ii-Cp:?:
C urt 2to* 1


pretest of Professor Rose t the third Mlifcary It die -1 ^.ting. Yeu -.Iso
described to us thr.t Dr. Dir.; . as wry each .cited lor ■, • vut this
called Dr. Rose seel- a do not aunt to repeat thoo hero.

Yuu -Iso stile that you still eonnot understand th- c r.cmuiction to be scon
in tho protest of Professor .lose, the letter assign u.nt which ostensibly
C'- 1Q £ror How » 1 slvouli like te ask you question, only or.e queStioon,
bi-t before you answer this quenti.r, I just let you knot.* aotut -. strxtenunt
of Professor Rosv without tr_ no. L.v c o cf which you t.ill r.-t o.. in n position
to ansv„r the quest! .. properly. First the question. It is ?s 1 allows:

Ds you consider it paseittL. in view of Dr. Ding's r. n>r that ho would
follow a roconncrxbticn - f Professor RjSe te usl th- Copotthugen vaccino for
hu.-.n exp^ri:vnts in the duchomnld Concentration Csipj thr.t he c»nn 6 od
this for a roc mendrtien to use hunns .or experiments in Buehcnwald?

flef..ru y ju rnstvr I shell inf rr you of the follv.ln- state ent of
Fr>.fjss'.r Rvsc, which I sh-ll ..'V. t.- . r v„ laUr ; In the f'll cf 19^3
Professor rtot’e h-.d n- 1,0 tire*' no in Ccp.nh.agen to begin vacciiv Dro duct ion
t.. rw. On tils cc.aci.n rv_ l. 'm.d ef the new vaccina vi;loh » an highly
rece.uendod to hin by Ibsen. He passed cn this recou.tunfaticn and effected
the use rf tho vaccine out sine. it vns n c cplctuly fiif-ront type cf
vaccine than had been hereto: r. w.d, tha .actual v.accjr.o oxprts opposed
1 ', but ;rof-ssor Rose id n.L rtici at,, in this nlt-iroaticn. Then when
•., 1 . r urce suggested the t.. ti.s f t.ls vaccine in hu an experiments, the
ir. , f .;cs j, hcr^ver, r-orine- c mected with tho v-ccia* oeo.ruro ha
10 i-t. Hew r-.-pant ay quastion: r» Ding's

-r, do yr.u consider i- .-xs.aoIu t..f.t Jiu changed his reca.j»ndation cf
iV - :s i* Rose to use tin. Cop-*nh.r-,n vaccine ijuinst t.vphuc ta a roconmend-
: use this yaocini tmn .rr* ri.-..r.ts ::i till concentration coop

/•


.•u-:hwr* 1 . 1 ?


7 Jan-£-0 JC—ts ^craid

Icurt :ro. 1


A - r rc,'. the statenents or f turr-b • ffifaehrcr “r. Tar.', 3uch a vroblc::
has not bccono ajneront stall. An far. s the character of Dr.

3 chu?.er is concerned, I ..ould consider it raito possible '.at ha ni"ht
havo dojic 3©nothing of tills 'ir.d. -ho circa -stances, lur.arecr, :.v .•: such
that such r. request tot.st the Ibsen vaccine at fuchonrald was not ovor
=akor. to hi: porsonoUy. ' fron E riin to err

out :uch a series of orqjjrliaats.

As r result of this, the -roblon cculd not ajrvcr ob;’active as fra*
jornod. llo or.!;* told -.a feet that

Professor :oso ha' advocated that t*is vaccine bo tostod on Invar. boings
in th,. ..nn’aid Cohcontrntlon Da loso : ' Ivon in. Bity

oinion, t!ioi*oforo, tho IT ron-o :.s - ri tho question, .cerrd-

in" to rr :s:<r.;loDing-'chuler, subjectively A ht have been able to
i'o so>at’iL'n; of this :=L».; objactive? , : .r. :; c•inion he its at in tho
wait' on to c'.o so.

*o »t t.’iat v-ccino lr. laser. j- p rin-nts did not co;:c
iron Vofoaaor Rose at nil

•*• Ui".n-Jcl«il r brought tho order fron one f ' ''is nur.erous visits

• _ .

irlin. :*o.; it orisi rated, escaped .y !3XR7lcd;,o. This is another
reason for tl t I, ; - , o -ld not co th tho striking

influence.

0 dhc ;•:> , ttttnois, this norning you sold t tho 1 -r

cr.TQ directly fron : nr; nrshy?

To r. Ding—Schul*.r. Ding-5clnd r • Jld bo thdt ho had boon $ivdn
■h( order by : ru;o s!q.-.

"on personally cannot say obj ctivoly lYofcseor -oso -shed Vo feasor
ru to s tart tills a rios of xporiaon'.s?

' -i -o tho statcasnt oT r . ■■ j■ _ - no.

.. IVTiZ: Thank you. I have no, nr.:. rq Lons.

■: tternoy TlcBcin-vfor ..

itnrss, you said ‘ n h-ril, 291$, oaro to D~. Ding as clerk'

A ‘-'hat is con* ct.


122 h


7 Jav-A-O JG-a5-2-^ltz -jerald
lourt :fo. X

f : You r.l3o said that at the end or 19'<2 or the bo'Linin' of 19ij3,

• . .Lnc licAo a sun .estier. to produce t”-hus vr.ecino. Is that correct?

♦ •

A Yo3.

I rust point cut to you that Dr. Diaj, as ocrly oa the end oT If ’ 1,
: a at the hob.rt Aoch Institute. !so vro ordered t!:cro in orf.sr to study
ilclc ci3tor's mthod Tor the production or typhus vaccine. Do you
h.ovr about tlict?

/. Yes.

' -vt, il ft the end of 19':2, or at the bopinnin^ o.' 19)0, he '..'.as
or r (1 to ruiOo oist r lor tide ur v>3e, f cr. the ’ocision to produco
t-phus vaccine mat ’.it.vo boon rvclc lo ” ho-ore the or.d or 19h2 or tho
jo n in; o 19li3.

boo n dir sronco in the r r. ^in^-'chulor to start

* vi vcooino, nd in a decision to test t-phus vacoino and to produce
it .• * tier: in the concor.tr • r, . ; ihv’.nr

ha not c ■ . n ordered to re ort to :: lo; aiator at D.rlin, but on t\;o

:.S. :.C --S also ssnt to tho FWtow Institute at -in. That wjj
onco i: ■ r 19W. o bo.'oro tho c stab? the vent

9

<\* 1 50 t. uchuir.v.iy,

« You, yourr l.*, cano to Dr. Ur.;. onl; r. .pril, 19.VT

A Yea.

f : "o ’ t’o :*our !mo\; about -vents belor- that tire"

' ■ >ta2-3chttl.r ’linsolT, in’ also
•V i-ry not S ••hieh ho yrsev.-" - nedo r Masolf. .hr* T point out
eh.ul-r, chirir- tho last halT year *»ororo our liboratL .

* -t I ••rite a ;lister * f • •

r or’or to <lo this he -rvo » ail doett ents -tile's, he h. t ‘.s

Oht3, I res able tosoe .’11 o.' tho 'ii erer.i things '
c-c-wsad or xtino.

-t-.i h : ;o Aocuronts did not. shoe.' t’.vt the order to report to
-• och Institute an A Lie Pasteur Institute in Paris )ia$ not * sen


L'-iu.d


1225


7 j£nusry-“-DcG-19-3-Fifc*Scral<!
Court 1


tc kirn the effect rf typhus vaccine, but t; study the producti n of
typhus vaccine.

It was shewn by the cecu.Kr.ts.

Q V:hy did Dr. Bins explain t. y.u at the end of 19u2 end 191 j 3» long
before the tioo when -*.ccurving t. y ur nrsuaption, the tLcisi.n tc produce
vaccina was made, the express purp s. of studying the pr ducti n -f typhus
vaccine?

A I ocliuvw that chore is - different concept bottr-on the defense*
counsel and ryeolf -is t. t'K v rd "px\ ducti. n n . There is little different
concopti’n* 3y pre '.ucti-.n I •.an the direct inscdiatc producti,n; not
the preparati.n f r th. prudueti :n. fherof < *rc, whon I s tc.ted tho decision
frr th.* producti n, I - ant an’. I till *.n the dccisi n tc establish this
depart ent, with a sub-’-port: >-nt f r the product! n i vrccino. I did
n. t refer t tho properat’ry study if Dr. Ding s? h- theoretic lly w uld
boc« 10 acquainted with th- quooti n f producing the vaccine.

Q Y.u Ju:t said that Dr. Din*, vhen y.u re re t writ. his life history,
2.".vo you his diary. Thj frcs-C'ition, yesterday, sh >iod y*u a diary. Is
this tho diary which y.u Just iionti.ned, «*r was th-t another cno.

A There is » striking iff_r-r.ee between the two diaries. The '■iary
v. ich was presentod tc .k y-ater a; is tho ix. which Dr. Din -Schulor
started. Tint is tho diary .i XL ck i:j which was oxecntcd under his super
visi.T.. 7ne diary t • nulch I ac r. *.r referring c. nclstod ox y.nrly cilondars
in which tt*. Ding nlacst dr.il}' rr do various sorts cf entri.s for a period
of y.a ra. Those ontri_s consisted ei private and official x.attors.

Q hhon did yi.u soo tho fficial diary of tho S.cti n for lyphus and
Virus Research in auchentrxVd l’-r the first tiro?

A The diary which was prosenud t re yestcri-y, is tis. Diary of
1. ck L6. I had s-,n thnt f»r tho first tire after I had - Ved to Bl-ck fiO.
•u-.r 1 tint, utdor n. cLrcu,.stances, is bef .re the 15th i av ust, 19h3.

Q iVhr.t did the diary lok like tho first tiro y.u saw it? "ore loose

l^av_3 fastened together in th-- i.l:’ors? *h?t did it lo.k like?

1226


" o’“nu _ ry—-DJG-19-ii-FitageralU
C urt lie ■ 1


A had exactly the s?.. -• f n: .s today.

Q Could one sue wheth-r t is diary ms kept constantly cr whether
it was written all at _r.ee?

A I knew the hiet-ry -f this diary frer. the statouenta of Dr. Ding-
Schulor hi:?olf, and also fr. thd statements f Cape* Artnur Dltschj as
v.vll ns tho physician's cleric in Block 16, a Certain Gr.dcsinski. I als^ kn'w
cn the basis cf the d.cuxnts which w-ro started fr. 4 th- very beginning
of the -stablishr.nt f th*.t block zv.' or. the basis f th- ix.rs.nal notes
rhich Dr. Schuler aide in nis private diary. Ho ictr.ted cs ar ns I aan
recall the first half cf 191*2. He dictated the -.’Jciy cf Block h6 until
that poried f tisc and all at the sa.-.e tine. Fr r*. tlict tiao an, tho diary
was filled regularly fr- -xporiicnt t' oxpori. ont.

3 Y u say that Dr. Di»v. iotatud the bcinnln* of th- diary about tho
nidrtL. ol 1912?

•» In the first half ef that y-ar

Q In the first linlf f 19U2. Think you.

Thon I nust point out th- f il.wing cantradictli.ni

Tho Dir.ry bears th- hor.di.* "Diary of th- diviii n for research of
spitted fevor and virus at tho Institute ef tygiono of the VAffon-SS,"

Da you have that pl-acu in the diary?

A. Yes, . •

1 ‘ ul< y u pie os u l>.k t th* entry -f 9 Jura try 19u3? Thoru yuu
xin re ay "By order of thj svu^uon general cf the Vnff.n-SS, SS-Gruppenfuohrer
end njcr Oenornl (Goncrallautnant) jf the hafen-S^, Dr. Genskon, tho hithov-
to existing spotted fever research s tat in at the concentration camp Buohoa-
'■‘1 : bccu.!os tho Dpoo.rtrxnt for Spotted Fever and Virus Research." Th
that correct.

A That is correct.

■} This shews up to that date the recti.n had tho title ve just read,
toe -itlc of the diary boars this nn o which is given acre than a year
Itter. You cnsie to Buchcnrald only ir. April, l?li3?

A H . That is hon I cass tc Dr. Ding.

1227


7 Janurry~-DJG-19-5-?itz u fcr Id
c urt ::o. 1


Q To Dr. Ding, y,:. -'c: in ;»u_:i£t, l?h3, cc r in : . to whrt you slid,
y.u sow tho diary for Mi txo. lour ir.f r -.—,: is tl . i. .v-.s wrltU

in th. first hr.If f 19L2. j u hive tint infer., ticn ir a third p rty?

A »h, 1-st part -i your . f ur qu-sti :.s -

3 It is correct that y.u id g-t th«. inf'.ro.'ti n free the third party,
and the thur p int was ri&ht t.o?

A I :iust mkc so x nsre explicit str.t.-_nts r. that p-ir.t. title,
"Dcparfc'ent f r Typhus ond Virus .tv.icirch" .ns, is far or I kn:v su jested
by Or. Ding himsolf. It was :i •. perhaps sugosv.' t , by SS-Gruppen-
hr.r Oenskon. Hw had n t been rdared t. --rt th t narx. Th relation-
shin f ; nzkcn and Dir. » Ilk that. The initiative. in thin;s f
that Jon ': cue fr u Dir. .


I-on.; bef re th. c ncrctx usV.bliiiVA.nt l this '-part -;vl, Ding ccupiud
hiraolf v.lth a plan of -.n innitnto vhlch vns n t nly u be on expcriitcnt.nl
ot.ati . n which r..as 1 t_r .i th« cli.de-1 e..ar t.xnt, but ho fronted a largo
ludjo-n. ont bar-ii. in t r -eh root' i..p rtince v or ti _ auspices f

•he 'y. ionic Institute f tlv- ifi..-S6. I j n t k.i w, :ut 3 c .aider
it vrri'oL, in trio ccu:»_ chi r. that tile pi in fra _jr.rt.k-nt C.r virur
-n typhus rose arch ' \s n '« rly c. poeod .nt-h“lf yo-r r- th v actual
uf f.'ol nt £ tiv. •'up-.rtf.--nt by Din., but already y_rr pr-vj suly.


v .


-h. i. is an. t:*.r cirouasbiiic- eh .ntlilts ;.o t.
■ • CnkOTf ir.r ■ u O ho oxn. If Dr. Di:.-

.


pt.

-r i'.pr t mr the

4

, vay r.lro.a !y
th. sribility


:


1 't.r


th_ c' .lioh-_nt f thy


-ptra-nt, butbefro r\jr activity
-! ry rritton.


• - ■■ - - . B .- J.: f Block L6

■ MuTLt .ostin_U for yUrvl u .r .r f,r S.rliu, :ut . Jy.f.r Slock

'• it : ;_-r my th.r £1 . ...

1220


7 J- vj-ry-A-DJGr-l'-Se?itz£«-r 1c
C urt !. . 1

Thi - i ry if it h- b^cn estinod f r Berlin r ny iicr SS author¬
ities, it ul J hnvo hid to bear the title xaxich --11 :*ts to Berlin
• • re c ssiblo th* * Dr. Dj n is I hive

ir-vly emphasized, ..-.y hive h- th- first pig: r_-writt-n . ith i n.v.*
title.

Q ' itn-ss, you toiv . ; u>, - .. - :m_ f ihc cusl....ary _ i;.n*:ti, n which
-11 roprrts in these isifcters t-_ rl5.a hie, but y u i nt ny what "isign-
iui :» y .u .Kent, ’ ill y u ri .-so t_ll us that?

A >o subaittod many kin s . r-p. rts t. E-rlin ini they .‘©alt
with ..xcorpts f -a diary . -n iiic.tl n.turc fer th. Berlin Central .^n-
ciw8, n the upp.:- l—'t . iv.v t put tlx n tico, "Secret

Oi-ry, ,/u-o-r S ini Sr" in:* .e :u i also incluu the fil „rrk ..f the kind
drcuicnt and i d-eenyoi rx fch- xre n «h vis dictatin , an the p,.rs :i

ah: is vritln c .

-1 D text ter 8 c nc.rnin, t yhus exp.rir. nts in SuCh-ni . h^-r a secret
r t. p scc:>-t ttaijp?

A It was ilx.-nys cl-v U* i3 "oecr.t", •

1 itneoa, y u v r. .'u e c-/i:v hen y u s^iit excerpts r:v. diary
i in fiicial n tur. tc h.rlin, .hi: 'coi^n-ti n -is j-.it a ih- Utter r

excerpts. Of t. . i ned tw Iirins. no is tho private

■ : n ' ire —

: * jt *» *mfc-r i caleJX • rr, tut in j

Q liu. Oecrnd is t; a rr k c. t.-.s eh:vm t v .u yerter':.-; , .me! which
1 • $xiet t.ld us that thu Inrj y u h-vo befora

-

1- ■ tiKrj r.r. r.os. • y.e in :i-ck 50 at ilock i:6? mi. kept

■ rkr?

u 1 !rvo n,:V '- r this J i-ry r.t -r. dieexa sin:, tero was not

sn o 'Vieill iiii-y.

Q Let me interrupt y u. lu .iust t Id us th-.t yca-c. n&iier it ]> s-

i'- fc.-s th, first p?. o f till. !i ry r.is rewritten me! t.-t. thit is

ltc - JSib L.. That: r enable because it rxs n t an

122 ?


7 J -r.u'.ry-A-DJG—19-7-?i tz goraid
Court Nj« i


official di-ry. Th t can oc scon because as an official diary it r.uld
have the notation "secret" an' cth_r in.’icnti ns_

•

- There is a little aisunderstanding h.rc ifcich cr-n be clarified
very easily. Let us first cf ell •’-roe t> the descritpion of "Official",
Dr. ln was the departoant chief an! the chief of Block 1,6. If he gave
the rdor t* kcop a diary, and if h_ ^von dictated this clary hiaaclf,
anc’ this diary was n official diary ns far as Block I 16 was c.ncorncd —
it had. no connvcti.n with superior agencies— it was a internal official
dLary. It wasn t n private diary of Dr. Ding-Schuler. Tfltonovor wo had
scr.o correspondence with Borlin and the dcscript! n, and secret diary
number s» and so, was pl~cod at the upper loft corner of th- letter, then
the r-forence referred, at all tk:-s, to the so-called postal diary.


123 ) .


7 Joiraary—A-DJC-~-20-l-l!cehan
C.urt J!o# 1


t The nail, which arrive*. iad u:icfc left, was Scgr.gr.tod according tc
nutiborj that.was with a sh. rt stasxiy of its content* like in any attar
pinnt. It was provided with a wr.xy cf its contents end this nuuber
of the postal diary or th. secret diary was pLac.d in to. left upper corner
and too wrd secret diary nu=c.r sh.ring. Nzw, if , diary . f Block ho,
\.„ic'n is under discussi n hero, lmd s.rved as a docu .nt for Berlin in
such a ray that th.ro rai.ht have b..n an official ref.r.nce t. it, thon
.very tine that svnc reference was rro to it, I w.uld have had t. enter
into the secret postal diary th* this dccwc.nt w -uld have £ r._ into the
diary in the for: of a Secret diary nunber.

Q The diary itself, cv.n if it was only an internally official diary,
vr.s a r.corJ jf tte agency and it w.uld have tc have the nc*tntion"sccrot"?

A In B1 ck U 6 there vras nothing that was not secret. If the diary
at any period of tirv, ? r for any purpose, had been sent outside)- rf Block
ho cr Block 50, then naturally it w ul h ivu had the classification of
floe rot#

Q In Bl.ck 50, tile S3, the typhus vaccine was proceed; is that righff

A foe that is correct.

Q The currospondonco ab ut the production of th. typhus vaccine is

n ' t jntir ‘- 1 >'» ■ t least te a lrg. extent as the correspon dence shews, was
n-t secret; i3 that right?

A ..s far os fully technical orgnnizati ml thin 6 s w.rj c nceraod, that
L ° rifehU the ordering of writing paper » other things from

in thosoj cases t:-,. secret stamp was not appli.d. lien r portfl t ut
’ h ° arr *' Unts '' f vacc in.s or toe product! n of vaccines or similar items
mir ° C0, ^ ornod * this corrospondonca was always classified a* secret.

•1 us a natter of c.ursu, in .wry section th.ro are things which boar
ll ~ 3 ' “' p sccrotj out » niti..ss, j :u Just slid that in Block US everything
te1 bj “' R Sccrct " nd ^ 3lock 50 net everything was secret. lou tcld us
y.sterday that you from tzL* to get «* diary from Block ho in order
- <:e entries fren it for reports; is that right?

A les, that is correct#

1?31


7 J.arW.-BJG~20 -2-^chan-lBD
Court he. 1


Q Bho diary then c arc out of Block 2:6 Proa tine to tico, which
only secret cotters an? wont to Bloch >0 wirich also had other rocor.'o.
a res,

• ^

)id not the diary alone, ir. view or the 'act tVt fron tino to

tira it ant to Bloch SO, *ould it not V.vc to havo the notation secret?

A It would not havo had to to to-' aecrot, beenuso it was only ?r. Ding-

Schulcr who could bring it personally Tror. bloc!: 1^6 to Block SO and

ho "3 very, very c .-refill. Be only -eve it to no .'or ono hour or porhaps

on- and ono hair hour3 or/' thon do nr. need it bee!: egain.

I bcliovo that \K> can leave this point. You said boT<ra that the

diny in Block U6 was lrcpt by the clerk Cadosinski?

A r a:’csins!ci.

ould you pleas- spell tho nano?

• •

A c-A-b-c-c-i-; .

P. Can you -ivo no Oa.dczins!ci 1 3 present address' 1
A I havo naked Tor tho -woiont resident or Gadvtinaki, who survived
tx c::'p and I have discovered that he h -urned to roland. Ilia t Wros.s
c.-n bo obtained through tho Polish Pod roso idth U.l!.r..P..A. in Barlsruho.
Ao'i onbochstrasso $, Bo is eorr .3 nonding -.-ith tho Poles there.

0 U.W.IU’.A. in Karlsmho?.

- HogTJnbachstrasso with two g' s.

Tho number? —-


'• -’ivo.

•• ” ou * itness, y sterdry ir. your oxari nation ;-ou said that

" ou Ir •' ortn °>^’.t |he<^erisunts in Bloc!: J t 6 , which . onerally wont
- rugowiky. ?l se tell tho Tribunal whore tho rc >ort3 wont that did
no - :o to :ru".cu*3k5':


V-T


t!»


In ono case, or in tiro ca3os, art of di r.ionco in

v • * •

-h -'or •.■it reports tool: -'lace bet .wen )*'. Bing and agencies, which
' 0t °- tiC "l '•‘ith iho office oP hr. ^ugenreky. Cn one occasion with

-era Teeleriological Surgi al laboratory o' the I. G. Farbon --orks and


in


•-sc w th the Behring orks at Barburg. Airthervorc, as Par as


1232


7 January-a.-DJG-2C-3-ifcohan
Court f.’o. 1


I pen recall, the first report ab ut t hi activities of Stunabannfuehrer
Vra-t was not sent to Mrogo; s;-.-, out it was submitted directly to Ob^r-
fuchrer Poppendick.

q Thank ycu. Yesterday, witness you said that aside from typhus,
oxxori -nts were carried ut n 3uclk..-nrald with yollo.v fever, seiall-pcx,
dypthcria, typhoid A and 3, etc., etc. hhat kind oi ^xporiei-nts wore they;
were they protective vnccinati.na?

A Those oxp-rLr-nts teefc place at ? tir.o before ry activities with
Dr. Din^-Schulcr. I kn v loout cheu and a nur.ber of details about the
cxp.riw.nts through his: end I board *.i ttea in p^-rt fru.i ether prisoner
comrades.. Beside the a .Ur vith tho potato salad, Plnsphcrus Knntchuk
cxp.rinv.nts, which I have -.enti ned, I cann t n».kc any precise stator,ants
on tlkj subject, however, in excess of this, I knew vnly tho v-ntrios in
th- diary - in the diary cf 81.ck LS, irtiich ycu have just discussed. Hewever
I know th~t the yollwW f^Vw.r uxperinent s»riv.s was discontinued because it
was co iplotcly unsuccessful.

q Then, I nay conclude that .verything that y. u testified ab ut thcoo
c .pjrijnonts yesterday, rath one «. .ccptiin of t!»o potato salad. oxp-rir>_nt8,
y u knew only froc hoar-say, fra: third parties.

A I :ni€t state that I h ve r-ver even been present in a. single oxpor-
i vnt, with the exception of the lurticulturo experiments, I ms nut in
BLek hit as a spectator cr as n participant. In this respect, I have always
bwen Connected with thv.se tilings thr u h Dr. Ding-Schul.r cr through a
D !lt I have obtained this Knowledge, which vor la v vy precise,
ti’.r ugh what I have heard fr.~ c..ra«*os who wire c n...ct.,d with these
oxpurine.nts.

Q Did yur ccnrades till y;u anything about whether the vaccination*
s - 11 pcx,etc., sc called totra voccinos, wore ..it* capsules as
Wu!V u5t »d T ’ith vaccinations oi the troops?

A I canrecr.il the expression, "Usual Capsules". I cann.t say if it
referred to the Pox innoculr.ticns.


1233


7 Janiriy-*i-DJG-2 O-i.-^fcch-n
Ccurt No. 1


Q Y;u knew of fch» tctra v.ccicas?

A Yes, Out I can net s:;* .1th certainty if it referred


t. that.


? Jan 4?-*A-MAA-21- 1-Maloy-
COURT I

■ •

Q. tfitnoss, you also said yesterday that Dr. Ding
iron about the fall of 194* on no longer wanted to have
oral instruction from Mrugb'wsky for sxperlaiQnts;do you
remember that? You also told us yesterday that Mrogetraky
during the period in which you worked in 31ock 50 in
Buchenwald, that Xrugowsky was In 3uchonwold two or at the
most three times?

A. I didn't say that. I have only stated that I
personally wrote — that I have seen Kragowaky p.irponally
two times, and also porha.8 even throe tines.*

* Thnt y° u Qn * two ar throe times; and the work
report of the section for typhus or typhus researoh for
104, which 1s In the document book on Pago 1, on Pago 4 of
the work report on Pago 16 of the document book, the visi¬
ters are listed. If you look at the next page, Page 5 of the
wor/. report, Pago 1? o*' the document book, you will find
about in the lower third the entry from tho 4th of Soptonw
bor, "Inspection In tho Village of 'X' with tho Hoad of
the Hygiene Institute SS-Standartonfuohror lecturer Dr.
Xrugowoky, with the Standortarzt of the V iffon SS Weimer-
Buohonwald and with the St mdertarzt of the Waffon SS
Weimer-3uchonwald and with tho adjutant of tho commandant
of the 3uchenwald Concentration Camp." Do you find this
entry?

A. Yos.

That is tho only entry about the visit of
Hnccwaky to Buchenwald then —

INT£RPRET£R: Just a minute.

MH * aoHANSY: If Your Honor, please, I wish to point
cut that is not the only entry, in fact it is not the entry
ia rugftrd 110 Mrugowsky's visit to Buchenwald. it occurred


12*5


? Jon 47- I'iA.-c- 21- 1—Maloy-^K
COURT I

on tho •"'rd of September in the section precceding what he
was reading. Page 18 of the English document book, right
at the top of the page.

Q. You will also find, Witness, on page 5, the head-
ing "Official Trips" under Homan Humoral IV, "Official
trips by head


12^5a


7 Jpr. U7-A4U^-2L-2-Kaloy (32)
Court Fo. 1


of the Bepartnent for Spotten Fever and Virus He search." and you will
find under this heading a single conference with Krugovsky in Berlin;
or. page 6 , ct the top, free the 29 th of Septenber to the 4th of
October. Bid Dr. Bing ever say anything to you about when and on
vhnt occasion he got the oral orders fron Krugovsky for his experi¬
ments if he saw him so seldon, as the work report indicates?

A The report which is in front of ne, rad to which you have referred,
deal8 with the year I 943 —
k Yes.

A 3ut that Is not 1944 or I 9 U 5 .

A Fo. 1943.

A Foil, ig42, but only the yehr 1945. I have not read nil of tho
whole report now, but tho fact is that in accordance with the entry
here Krugowsky visited 3uchenvnld on tho 4th of Soptonber, and no I
hw nlreadi- pointed out, he visited Buchcnvnld very rarely. I ny-
oolf have only scon him two or three tinoo, rad I do not believe that
he paid any norc frequently. This any have htvpczxd ns often as three
or fourtinos all yepr, however, it nay have boon six tines, or oven
non:. During tho timu before,1943 —
r < Let us stick to 1943 .

A He has even lived in Berlin. I an referring to Dr. Ding. I n
this report from the 28th of Septenber until the 4th of October there
is one of the conferences which seer.ed inportrat to Br. Din--. The
report is not made with the sane thoroughness and preciseneso ns a
business report which night have been written about an experiment in
3lock or it night have been sent to Berlin. The Sturcbannfuehrer
t:.r t you have, that is in this case ne, and the second clerk who


Vrote up the second report from the hand of his private diary, he


' rve UB the proper notes, and it was


1236


7 jar. 47— x-y.Act- 21- — Maloy—

COURT I

then summarized by tho socond clerk. It Is significant th<t
it has not been stated in the entry of concerts conferences,
Dr. Ding had at Berlin with Dr. Krugowsky at this time. From
late fall 194 Dr. Ding has not contended himself with all
instructions for tho experiments, instructions which he used
to bring along from Berlin, but he also demanded written
orders.

Q. 'Vo havu got away from ay question, Witness, I asked
you whother it is truo that Dr. Ding wa3 in Berlin as

t

seldom as the work report indicates; I may point out to you -
a. Dr. Ding?

Q. Dr. Ding in Berlin. I may point out to you that in
this work roport comparative discussions and trips of
comparatively loss importance are entered.

a.Tho trips which Dr. Ding took to Berlin, especially
after he got oral instructions onf for his experiments
would have been extromely Important.

Q. But I hear from you that you did not write this
work roport yourself?

4. I wrote it on tho typewriter.

Q. Did you set it up?

a. I had help to composo it.

Thon will you please explain to the Court for what
reason you did not include the trips of Dr. Ding to Berlin
in th. work report, while ether much less important trips
wore included?

The defense counsel overestimates the working
Procedure of the S3. The results of this procedure, however,
cannot bo taken seriously enough. This report was written
-r.ly for one purpose, on tho part of Dr. Ding, to give as
extensively as possible report of his activity to


12*7


7 Jar. 47—^'.:a!oy—

00033? I

Dr. Hrugowsky in Serlln. It Is quite an extent of ovor-d -ing
things, which has been shown lr. such reports. Secondly, if
such important things as experiments on human beings h.id
to be carried out, then this was in no way


I2*7a


7 Jan

•C. urt'-’c. 1

•

.cc• r.: plisied in sue!- • sold f.n. as t! o defense c-.unsol so ovis tr
sure. At tLat p-ri'v*. :f tlx nest *f tho IS ler dors were quito
untxi-.ros if the end :f tfcu V.r.r, and tho fate that wculd c.\v:? it tier.,
;.nJ there w s relatively little speculating d, note th. t effect.
Ii.structi.ns v;oro frequently issued rather freely md I • wo soon
Uscussiens abi ut th. subject, in r. cr.sir. teno, si tli.t .v.y oars
«ro still standing . n und teday when I tiibk ;.d ut it, hew tie f. U
if 1-iL.uei bo in is was boirr discussed. Dr. Din^- ;;.y l j. V u boon in
3erlin, • n.'. at a :ie surest: on hu r >o’. rn oxporii ontnl 3eriu3
witl lis chief drujcwsky, Onl fria 19*5 cn he boot, o afraid tr
'• quito C’.naidon.bio or.tont under r.y influence, ..nd fr«:U tl on' rn
he do.ir.ndod written d'crncnts.

‘/itnoss, .*• u just t id us that during 1943 Dr. Dinp
'ie v.n ti w*.rry nb ut t)o 'utc :.o f tl u ear, is that ri .ht?

Yor. nis w-‘rk rupert, ; rwov^r, c ncurr.s the year 19-i3,
it c;.cs up tr the on; f the yoar 1903, and thorof< ro
uuct ’ a vo' boon sot up in 19;.., is ti. t ri ;! t?

If it v * * not c ;:p-sol intc tv;, halves, than it was
ni; c, i ijc sod in J.jufc.ry 13 ..;,

bduld y u please livk .tt tho first pr.-« if th.o w. rk
opr: t, tho date?


1238


? Jan 47- A-KAA-22-1-N1nabuck- aX
COURT I


A. Yes, it is stated here, "Vfeimar-Suchonwald,
January, 1944."

Q. Yes, that's what I mean. You tell us that in 194.''
already Dr. Ding was afraid about the outcome of the war?

A. Yes.

Q. In January 1944 he set up this work report?

A. Yes.

Then he really should have put special value on
it and you, who wero his advisory would have urged him
that it was important to lncludo the trips to Berlin in the
work roport so that you would be able to prove whon and on
what occasions ho received his orders for the experiment?

A. I havo not always advlood Dr. Ding, not at all in
all matters. I havo taken every opportunity which offored
itself to mo to influonco him. Secondly, Dr. Dlng-Schulor
was an extraordinarily light hearted person. Sven during
thu last months, prior to the end of the war and before
the visible collapse, ho could got away with r. whistle
over all risKy things from case to caso. This did not
prevent him to be most deeply depressed at other times.
However, the trend not to think over the approaching
catastrophe seriously alw iys got the better of him. There¬
fore, from the beginning of 1944 Schuler became more :nd
:::0ro aw ire not to do any superfluous things anymore, and
alvaiys to be covered by written orders. That this might
hive had an effect on the report for 194*, that he had
construed documents for trial later on, that is completely
out of question, about the possibility that some day he ml git
placed in front of a court he became aware of the first
-*~»u In August, 1944 in the course of a long discussion
between him and myself.


12*9


7 Jan 47-Ar MAAr2 2-1- Ni nabuck- AX
COUnT I

Q. Witness, in April 194* you cane to Block 50 as
clerk?

A. That8 right. Not in Block 50, no. In April 194
I cane as physician's clerk to Dr. Ding Schuler in the
department for


12*9a


7 Jea U7-A-KAA-22-3-Hinebusk (3S )

Court Ko. 1

pathology, because after all, he had cot intended me for 3lock 45
red 3l6ck 50 had cot been completed as yet. In 31ock 50 ns c build-
in- I ceae or. the 15 th of August I 9 U 3 .

i '.'hi was your predecessor in the position which you held f r0n
April 1943 on?

A There was no predecessor because the production of vaccines
only began from that noath on, and I was only his physician's clerk
in Block 50, and that I would becone a priva-te secretary some weeks
later was a setter for which no reasons actually existed in the crop.

* Tosterdcy, Witness, when you were describing how you rot the
diary when tho records were destroyed, you said that you took a
bundle of records out of the sack together with the diary. Would
you please tell the Tribunal whnt kind of records they were?

A Key I first of all corroct you slightly? If I remember correct¬
ly, I did not ray that I had taken this diary with a bundle of
r.cordo out of the sack, but that I book a bundlo of rocords out of
tho bag and that I saw the diary lying there and that I also took it.
Those other records were in part, fever charts, and sickness charts
rnd correspondence which I looked ovor later or.,
i What hae happened to these records?

* I have turned all these records - Just liko tho diary - I have
kept then with no and part of then, and I have placed part of then
nt tno disposal of the AAaericra authorities whenever they requestod
U * 1 8 ‘* 111 hoVe mother part in ny possession in ny epartnent
at Oberurocl, and nost of then, for excr.ple, the case histories
vnlch show the course of a disease with a patient or group of
patients together with the original siesaturo of the controlling
S3 physician in Block 45.

' Witness, do you know the nnae, Grawitz?

Tea. Gravitz was the Belch Physician of the S3.

I What connection was there between Dr. Gravitz and Dr. Ding


7 Jen 47--KA-22-3-5inebaclc (3S)

Court Ho. 1

A Dr. Gravitx was the supreme chief as Reich physician SS. The
=€diccl officer of the Vaffen SS. to vhich the hygienic Institute
of the Vaffen SS belonged, was subordinated to bin. Dr. Ding was
departaentel chief end until I9W1 he was the chief department ?*, 4
herd in the nodical office, and therefore was subordinated to the
Reich Physician SS, Dr. Crawltz.

m

Q, Were there personal relations between Dr. Crawltz and Dr. Diig?,

A Dr. Ding told se on several occasions that he had also visit¬
ed the Retell Physician SS in 3erlin. and that he knew D r . Crnwitz
nnd that under circumstances he night expect a certain amount of
support from hie, but however, this support was not so intensive
ro ehat which Cenzkor. had -Ivon hia. because Centken was personally
devoted to hie. furthermore, around this period of tiao; that is,
:roa the Kiddle of I9U3 on, Krugowsiey.. occupied such an iaportant
position that it appeared dangerous for Ding-Schuler to go over
the head of his immediate superior, Hrugovsky, and to have too
nuch direct contact with Grrwltz.

; Vou say too such direct contact. Vo. there an exchange of
corrospondonco between Dr. Crnwitz and Dr. Ding?

A It is not quite easy for ae to recall each and every ono of
the8e det Pi 1 a, because nlaost every record which was sent to
Krugov sky boro the heading on the left top, "Reich Physician SS,
the Chief Hygienist of the SS. Director of the Hygienic Institute
of the Vaffen SS, Professor Dr. Joachim Hrugowsky, SS Oberfuohrer."

I almost wore out ny fingers trying to constantly repeat this
Tterhesd title. Therefore, I cm not state exactly anymore how
° ften DiD€ wrote to trr.wltz personally. However, it has happened,
x. D id Ding got direct instructions from Dr. Crawl tz?

A I do not know 'any case of that kind,
x Do you know Grawitz personally or only V nose?

A I only know hia by «a^e.

1<*1


7 Jrn U7-Ar-KA^22-^inabuck (SS)
Court !To. 1


; Yes Grnvitz never in 3acheav=ld?

•v I have already emphasized that.I do not know exactly if
Cruppenfuehrer Ger.zken or Gruppenfuehrer Gravitz cade that partic¬
ular visit at Bucfconyald in the year 19^3.

3 Did Dr. Ding coke any use of these experiments with typhus
and other vaccines?

A X«y 1 ask in what respect?

% That is, that the course and the results of these experi¬
ment b were recorded?

A Yob.

^ Y hero were the results of these experimente recorded?

a In the diary or in specirl books.

^ T herefore, it is not r scientific use?

a '.To notation. The documentary record is in case hiotories,
fever charts and documents covering expcriacntnl sorioo, and in
the diary of Slock U6. furthermore, in the reports which were
submitted tc J’rugowoky at 3orlin and to the oth*-r agencies which
hr.ppcnod to be interested in thee. •

< You Just said, Witness, that the Testilts were recorded in ••
the diary of Block M>. You have this diary before you. Would
you show r.t n plnco ir. which results of the experiments were
recorded? I do not aeon that so rnd so many died as indicated in
the diary, but what the result of the experiment was in regard
to testing the vaccine; that is, the result?

« Then we would have to reach an rurrecccnt about the concept
of result because n corpse is also to me a sad result of an experi¬
ment. Therefore, It is the value which has been coined by the
experiments end the evaluation which resulted for certain vaccines
v ’*iC& had beer, applied after the experiment.

^ Yes.

A T heoe evaluations can only be found from the overall records
which were begun after every experimental series, end

l2Uj>


V J:.n *.7-..- -22-5-..ir.; uck

C vrt * c. 1


w lar v nuu' cr .'f cx-> ri xntr.l 3ories. in .'r.rticulr.r, n ns
ccr.si' n, ' l."r' v bl- ck'- r.r* w. s built f-i* uV : lu.ti.nr :r»l it -v ?
lrcoil r.t t! v. iisprs .1 cf ti o hygienist, r n.\ no- r • r-C_.it
wont t- 31; cK -13,

Ir. ti dir.r; tlosa results wor,. n- t rocr r iu.'.?

.. l't ,

'3 ‘ > iE£ID3f , V: ..t tils ti : v ti o Tribun: 1 will roccsr nr til
V s :30 'cl cl- t 'urr v ? min-. wl on t:. cr ss ox-sdn.*.ti n
r«su el.

(fi e I'riburu.i . II uriwi until 8 J. nu* r- 19-.7, t 0930 irurc.l


3 J nc-47-M-MAfc-l—1—?OBt er
Court I


Official transcript of the ^ooriocn
.Military Tribunal in the natter of
the United States of aterica, against
Dari Br^adt, ot al, defendants, sitting
at Uurnbcrg, Oomany, on 8 January 1947
0930, Justico Beals, presiding.

The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal Ur,


God save the Unitod States of *ne. '_cn and this Honorcblo
Tribunal.

.Thoro will bo ordor in the courtroco.

THE PHBSIDSrT: Hr. Marshal, you ascertain if tho defendants

0

aro all presont in tho courtrooc.

TES lUrSH^L: K c& it ploaso your honors, tho defendants are
nil prosont in tho courtroco.

THE PHSSlDaTC: Tho Socrotuiy-Gonorol will n-to. for tho
rocord tho nrosonco of ^11 tho dofendonts in tho court.

Counsol urv prococd with tho cross-oxfoination.

DH. 2U92T EOGCl? (Hesiod)

CR0SS^IXA.I3Ari0:f (Continuod)

BY HR. XL&hlEG ( c ounsol for tho dofor-dont krugovoky):
tfitnosc, yostordoy you had told us that Krugovoky had
boor, to Buchonwold twice or cortninly no noro than throo tinoo.

'•ill you plcnoo toll this Tribund how long thoso visits of
Hnv.'Jirnly hal lasted in cuch individual casoT

liny I first of ull cosio bock to what .1 suid yostoni.y
OXU. state agin that I h .vo not said that Mrugowsi^ had boon to
3ucliouvnl& two or three tines but that I hnvo soon hin two or
throo ti .es. Those visits lasted f roc ono to throo hours in each

did Jtrugovsky carry out during that
50 or Block 40, or what?


8 J.T&-47-? l-lWt-l-Z-Toat cr
Court I

Buchcnuald, visits I experienced, Kmgowsky was announced. ho
arrived at the ccciondants office. Jrm thoro he went to 31ock
50 into tho rooo of Dr. Ding. He inspected on one or two oc¬
casions tho ontiro flight of rooas in Block 50 and ho stayed in
t:-.o ordorly rooo for a brief poriod. That is vhoro I w Q3 working.

On one occasion ho dictated in Dr. DingU room n 1otter which I
had to take down and on tn other occasion ho dictated a tolcprlr.tod
uocsego. Ho had a brief consultation with Dr . Ding which I did
not attend and then frea thotolophcno in tho library in 3lock 50
I had ordors to got in touch with 31ock 46 uni informed Slock 46
that tho v ioitors wore on tho way. Thon tho gontlusor. wont to
31ock 46 on such ono individutl occasion and ftor ocao tiuo
thoj- rotumod, aftor at loaot half an hour froa Slock 46. On two
occasions they roturnod to 31ock 50, and or. ono oocnsion th<y did
not ccno book to Block 50, and or. tho occasions whon thoy did
cono back to Block 5C brookfaot vao usually sorved to thou in Dr,
Ding‘c roon, end after mother briof convorsation Krugewsky wont to
his motor car no«r Block 50 In ordorto depart.

Did Krugovsiy belong to any dopartaont of tho concen¬
tration ernpo?

a, Hot according to ny knowledge, no.

0. . Did ho have my sort of influonco on tho administration
of concentration camps? Did you huvo any observation of that
typo?

Ho was a na:bor of t he depart.ent of tho Hoicks Plvyci-
cirn SS, the chi of Hygieno Department. This chief hygiene depart—
iont was under (ho coca.and, as far as I knew, of tho SS Chief
Loadership Dopartaont and only in ports to tho SS Chief odniniotrativo
Dc : v rtao.it in Borlin. 2:0 SS Chief administrative Department war.
the control dop n rtcont of the entire oilnistration of the SS. In
tr.is control department there was also Department which was adminis¬
tering concentration cenps. Krugewsky did not

1245


8 47-M-Iiii—1-3-Poster

Court I

to ay laovlodgo hove any influence directly cn the Ministration
:: concentration c<nps»

Did you nako any observations to tho effect that ho
tcA my influence upon the selection of detainees?

as long as the exporiuer.tal subjects were selected ir.
tho actual caap at Buchonvald Hrugowsky did certainly not have any
bud-- an influenco, neither boccusc of his Jurisdiction nor in fact,
lr.tor on, went ho oxporiuontal subjects wont through the Reich
Crir.in-1 Polico Department or SS Cmpponfuohror irobo respectively,
frou whoro they were to bo pl^cod at our disposal, tho applications
in question wont fom Dr. Ding, that is t o oay cppllcations rcfojw
rin^ to tho number of pornons who wore noedod, wor.t from Dr. Ding to
Krugowsky who in turn would'pass theu on and Dr. Ding would thon bo
infomod by hiu to the effect th Q t tho ojpo.-inontal poroono would bo
avnilr.blo.


3J--v-J -2-1-Putty

Court *'c« 1

Q. .’.itncss, you have repeatody to th*. Exparis«ntal Acs. re!. Do; art^.t
dumber 5. Tihore was th-t located?

A. Research Dcpartn.nt 5c -.1 7 was it Leipzig.

3* i.hat die the Research Dc^artnont 5 have to do with t.x c;:>ri:r_r.'.s
at 3uchcn>mld?

A. ‘.'ro:a this Research De^crta-nt Reran Numeral V in Leipzig 1 nly heart!
in connection with the two experiments, these toositoor utchuk incendiary
ixcibr, and aiso in connection, the cx.rerir-.iti dealing -with the transplanta¬
tion of islands in Hoaosoxual persons. A direct connection between that Expe¬
rimental Jopartmont or Research Dopftrtocnt r and Buchonwcld ’ie not actually
exist. The channel of orv’.ors ' ont through .op r cniick.

Q. Did you in connection vith Dopartient 5 ever hear t;-v. "von Toonl"

A. Ho, never.

Q. y® u knov. that tins Asearch xT>nrt...v.nt which you arc always rv.fi.rrin,
to ns )cpnrti.xmt Aoman Kuixral V was not called IXparUnu.t Koran . unv.r"l V,
but th"t this "V" meant a large V for Victor a:*! :xant the nine "von Tend"?

A. No, I didn't know,

3. On pnj.,u 112 of your booh, r. it.iess, you mention a Lr. Nounnnn
from tiio Hygiene Institute.

As ICS#

p. How do you knew that Dr. KotUBUl . n.n^r ol the Ify k iono Apart¬
ment?

A. Dr. Novuaimn was ir. th. opartoont, in the Patholo -ical ix.partcx.nt
in tie concentration cav it iuc jenimld r.ivrc he worked. The capo there,

-••• Dr. start r of tho Hysiono Department

in Bur?.In. v

3. toon was it that .ioiucn . i is workji.g at the- Pathological I..stitu:._?

•v. According to my r.colActior b-for. 19-1.

3- for- 19el. Thank you. Do ,.cu ..now Dr. Reichelt?

i 1 ' • , ' ou r - r.fw.-ring to the Air Force i^sdicnl ‘•nicer. Dr. Rcichol


12A7


3 j.WB-2-2-Putty
Co rt No. 1


that is;

3 , I or. that Dr. Rcici jit who *. .s Dr. Ding's deputy in slock 50.

A. Yes. K-it is ri;ht.

3 . Do you know his pr-s^nt wiser*.■'bouts?

A* He is living at C-a'jcrndorf near Weinar.

3 . Viha.t is the n&ne of th- village?

A. Oab-rndorf n^r.r hcir.ar.

r

Q. Thank you. 7.71?.t is yovr V* - t r. Ding's cxr'.ct r, witness?

A. As I have tvi-dcy, Dr. Di..g was : iv.~d, v-ry reckless

*

nan without any nornl princ-. i.s, without r-licious convictions, v/itfoout my
metaphysical >-licfs. To j Icnowl.r\>, or ru*.so:.s of -...0. -ion and a rapid
career Ding wont into the SS. '.is .u,- lcrl bick.rroun and owlidy.o was
comparatively aoall, but h h- a certain oonc.ption for ?. .n itfuJ prcll ma-
tical, "• - licnl problcrpiticcl t -;-..cr for which ho would promiso hltr.Cul£
a.'v'nt" ,o0 ior ilia own purpos-. I’u vant-c to U-comc 3 voll-lwarncK! . an of
rc u tv. anon it the moclcnl public an. particularly sho<' -0 ?. uu varsity.
Apart from that, hu triv- to „x ; ,loit cv-ry possibility m order to -nl rge
hie own personal reputation.

During t’.w perioi whun Dr. Ding var Coop Physician at duchoro aid Dr.

Dir.;, did fotr very horrible thin s. un the otn r harfn, as •>. p . l.eician,
h ; rov&sl the hygiono conditio s in fch. :-*y for th st tl . so -vhat.

It \ms luu to hiir th*t an 0 .vin- thwr.tru was installed. 'Awn he was in
contact ‘ ith prisoners, th-r. • as c-. A. o' ,ro Jucin v - vcr. ki.. and ple-a-
.titudo, but I no, . rt .• . r., .Perfectly sui Dr. Ding would

hriv. eacriiiw* 1 . any mn if .s career 1 : *.e been in ieop-: d; in any decisive
that arm. He was wbject an’ accessible t© certain pur suasion
‘ r ‘ c;it"ln orgua.nts. In Block 50 he 1 -It saaowhat at hosu boenuse then. . re
:,Ui “'"•«* scientists and univ.rsit;* 1 . : , a.ui right .rc.. th- ori "y.o" he
r : -r ■ Block 50 is so . sort x scientific territory, t . -r.*itor; of

- -• thy concentration ca , .. r-.-.t. - us, tbs inaates of 'lock 50


1243


5 Ja’J-i L—Ji-2-3*-Putty

Courfc ?:o* 1

with considerable kindness. For instance, southing which is xcroi * lor
a concentration ccatp, he impressed us as a -ntlcnen, Upon ry su lestion
he At niiaost overything which he could consider is reasonable; he. i" every¬
thing reasonable for us, out he was afraid of accepting any very serious
responsibility for his actions. At ta- scree ti-»e he maintained the closest
possible contact, with the capo of block Ut, who was an ene.ny of .iiroct "11
of ’is, and from conversations -d*.'. • -, so. lies icaling with extremely deep
sublets, he was capable oj join serai ht .o Capo ..rthur Dictsch in Block 1*6
to t“lk to him in a manner which is only custon: ry amongst cri inals.

Dr. Ding loved his family* loved his wife and loved Ids two children.

Ho looked after thcr. la the bes. .:os3ibl manner, out h. also hat' di>furent
relations, and, in my opinion, h_ would have been perfectly capable of leaving
that family 1 a. hind had the possibility ri;.:. for hiii. personally to begin a
new exictanco after the cn o 1 -h. war abroad. Dr. Ding had a ch-ract-r which
was full of contra ictions.

Q. itnecs, what was your ru<‘ oh. oth.r prisoners' attitude in Plock
50 regarding the production of vaccine?

A. ay I request tlx. Dofuns Counsel to be more pivc co

to tie. word "attitude"?

}. Did j ou c the ?roduction o 'g*~

rary in th. interest of concentration c . :s end in the incor-sts of the
ro.ul -iqn Tid til- troops as s-u..c..i.a. vS'.raole; th"t is to cay, .11 you and
th .taints in Block 50 Jo uV^rj*tldj v ir. order.to advance t..i3 production
of v cine, cr did you not?

A. \.'o in Block 50 wore i u rs. Vt n.r<- tol b^iort this Block
’•"a. op„j._ up that r.e wore roucer;~e with th. f roi:uctiori ol typhus vccciix
Siting troops of th* affon«6S at tlic front. T.e aero perfectly
tr that wo w.-ra faced with a ver Sk.

• - us luring the first general Ducting, "Guritl », 1

croolCG is happening h:re, if there is any kind of sabot- mun, , : ,


1249


5 Jan- -. T F~2-i;-Futty
Court No. I

then you must bo aware that before anything ha; pens to w on”. ..., ye
all V.11X be- put against the wall."

Thu first stage of the vaccine production was purely cxycrifflcntnl. T.’e
had a method which was rore or less stolen from the Fastour instiM-v*. at
: .ris, and t/o had to try tn-t -_thod in lock 5 0 for its effectiveness.

Thus- cxp-rii'-nts on animals lest- --r .about four months. Vc wor- con¬
tinuously under pressure fro. )r. Dir.', who ras exacting «w ngibl- results
vwr; quickly. During th.s- jont.is so... c vr bacteriologists and the manager
of this production, irian Chiepieloi.sky, .itii a- coll icorating decided
that as quickly as poscibL. so. e vaeci.v. li 0 ht production should be turned
out which could ultirvatolj else do i- . v ccine, out which ..us'- not do any
harm.

.ay I point out to the Def-.ire counsel that th- work with the cause of

•

typhus, the Rickettsia Prowascki, that is to say, the c“us- of the cl rsior.l
typhus, the typhus cx/mthew.icus, is v-ry difficult, icicnco has not yet
lscov-red the types of this ecus- for c«rt"in. There is a large table of t lie
r.orpliolo £ ol tills Rickettsia. H is nev-r quit- certain ant never quite
ascertainable what is Rickettsia :rov.aacki, that is t o say, 'in dr the
nicroscopo. A t is difficul to ancert- n which shap- ‘..’oul' .lake Certain
that you a e concerned with the ecus*. — with the g-rm of the Rick-Hsia
typhus. This fact enabled \:s to o v.ay r- went.

i'hen Dr. Ludwig Fleck c. v to >lock 50 at Buchunwald, h- s id ir. his

c pacitj as a strict scientist -ftei* t..- first consultation with us when he
sail the typhus .ras which i _ i -i\ r.ce ' from raobit lungs, these Were not

Rickettsia and that wt -r - . rno wit i soiae oth-r type o. i*riiu Tto

as!:.’ hi not toco.-. • te this toowl. rs * . Din under -ny

circa -st-necs but to rak. ar. exp-ris-nt with is to try with us to jet througn
ficult matter in sow- bearhblo fashion. During the two y_ars vher.

-*'• Flock worked until tbo r. : 1-ck k - cir t.

Earlier when the Institute of the 0:h a . ir. laakow sup., lie ; vs with infected

1250


s J a—:J F—2 -5—?u t ty
Court NO* 1

lungs of mice and infectious material produced fro.- the intestines :: v.ic.
could it be ascertained definitely that Rickettsia Frowazeki wore c ontained
ir our animal materiel after vaccination.

Following that w_ did ore due c a vaccina which be yon any doubt was most
effective. It could only be produced in s. ill quantities, Dr. Ding, on the
other hand, demanded, putting n.mself under the pressure of th- dcnnncls undo
on him fro the Hygiene Institute in Berlin, th t we should produce largo
quantities of typhus vaccine for the ight: . troops. Fro:.i that moment wo
pro duced systematically two t;-p-s of vaccine, or.e type which was perfectly
harmless whichwould do no -age, but had no value either. That was pro¬
ceed In largo quantities, and that vaccine wont to thofront*


1251


5 -JI'3 , -'i-Beard

Court ?’o. 1

A second type was produced invery snail quantities; it turned out t x hijnly
effective* It v;as only used for special cases, and issued for very special
cases. And, ?*e, jursdves, us d it sa-.-ti os at the Concentr-t i .r. a., p

Buchenwalcl for tho vaccination of cur co redes whe iters verkin t .eiv.es
places in the caiap. .e, too, in 31ock 50 were repeatedly v accinated v.ith
tnat vaccine. Doctor Ding-Schuler never hoard cf the sc constellations; rarely
vu v.vro faced r/ithcritic.*1 phases, which, in the Sorio-Baotoriolc ical !.cpart-
I'cnt of .Slock 50, there wr. dead, as it h-. er.s during any such •'re uction.
But, since he did not have an; real bfteteri 1--; icol kna ... not

hnvo the possibility of discov-rin. the deep secrets of this production. Ho
r.as absolutely, and in c vorytn.n^, dcix.kd:'.;< on the report vhich the-.xperts
frui. 31ock 50 gave to hin. Apart "ru that, it was in koopin; with his
vTucklass aannor that he sould ^o by external visible success, a. d whan ho
saw 30 or hO liters of vaccine hieh Ik. was able to end te Berlin he vas happy.
He vns hardy concornod during the lattor period with tho vaccination of the
SS troops, and that thoov people i he, nevertheless, fall ill in Russia
cuffwrin not only fro typhus, so- %. thin- which is always a possibility, but
die, in spite of the vaccinations, in lar{,o nuv>crs. Tho ino."l‘eCti\*enjSs of
our vaccine, in other words, of tho vaccir.c sent oy us to th*. frunt ..i ht be-
coiu apparu.it, and th„ cutsido expoi-ts such as eight have seen at the disposal
t,llc ht then bu sent to Bucher.wald. Thoy right have invusti at- d tho

affair, •• .d tho; would then ha- ascertained that this vaccir.c had hardly
ix'_u produced. I know no sue! doYelotsont occurred, an* until ! arch 19L5
tlu r.::*ir. ••'venture c ntir.u-c.

Q. fes, witness, you hat r Sac ironhausan

a ' ’or ii to Doctor Ding's stcr/, a Russian had attacked Dr. Iiigoiraky with
a K :ll ~* not qui' idorstaud tho story, houl

Ct - ,J V '-o th- Tribunal?

... Doctor bin,- told .c._ in coruk.cti>« with the sccr rl :it

- r. the four Russian arisocura ofw ar ir. the crottatoriua at

1252


j -JW?—3-2-c ard

Court No. 1

Buchcnwald, that he together with lirugorsky, had been at the Sachs- i-.uscn
- scr.tration Ca»p outside Berlin, and had attended a poison e xperiment
voich had taken the; following course Supposedly tht Rursians rX :.o eastern
front had used poison bullets. It had hoc- ^possible to li.' out went typo
f poison had been used. How, it ha; been wished that various Nisons shtuld

triv- out on the prisoners in tlv- oor.ccntrcticn Ca-.p in such a vay that
tU prisoners should be si:<*. witi. rrc.i bullets ir. ord.r to ascertain the
elects. During one such wx.xri ~nt * s . s alar exv-ri ;. r.t, and Doctor
Dine did not speak very precisely ir. this sublet, a Russian prisoner of tar,
6rc ° r thc vlctiws succeeded in producing a weapon, a knifo, which 1m
had on hiet, and this prisoner tec a o. pt-d to attack ‘Tucovsky, but oftor n
certain a..cunt of struggle h« ted bo-n hoi : ccwr., The scene hr.; boon
iXpronely exciti., and h,, Din , id n-t -rish ever again to be ux-cse to
ouch an affair. It was ay first, thought when Dim told no this story th-1
the Sb iuad attempted to subnit the possibility oi poisoning infantry bull t ,
•m: that tile story that the Russians had used such bullets was pure iwa.ina-
tion.

Q. .itnoss, yesterday y.u spoek abev durinr Doctor in. 's oxpori: onts
u Sachsenhaussn four persons had been uuployud; is that correct?

A. I can net r.aonoer bavin xutisnod the figure feur, ncr can I state
lor certain that we v .re, in this c s , concerned with f ur prisoners.

Doctrr Dim .u-ruly said thus arch an ox.‘-Ti.ent or sieilar expori:.ient had
t;.ke;i place in his presence at Sachsenhcusen.

Q. I aa not at the icu ; .1 ©I Sachaonhausen, I an spooking of

3ucitcnv.\~ld.

A. Yus, i n Buche-nwald l „re Wore fcur prisoners.

Q* - -ss, do you want say that Doctor to!-- you that these
»-!■! lenbs took place on *rugowskysrer'i-rs?

A. Yos, he raid that.

0. But, trie diary says that "Vie were cuncernod with a scv.c« .1 _xrerir.cnt

12S3


8 Jan-^-JB-3-3-^t:?xd
Court NO. 1

on six persons, and tin. ore’ll- c . r r Reich Criminal police Department

sad rujov.-sky." Is that true? Can you r-eri-cr that?

:H. JfcHANEY: I request t,.^ witn-ss be shewn the diary.

D.'. 'Le ; ING: hill 01 .r.Sv.1 hand tis-. witness tho

diary, pie sc.

(The diary was handed to *th~ witness.)

Q. On the 26th of Octobwr 19'. . Have you got it?

A. Ko, I have not f:ur. it -it, ..ill y u t^ll t- tin: pa o?

Q. * n tl1 - Oenan ttocu:c. b'-olc it is pa e c 55; pa„e 20 «f tho oripinal
diary.

MR. HcHAREYt Pago 51 f the £n*>lish Docunont Book, your cr.

.. Special experi --.X n six . ,rs ns accorin., to instructions of SS-
Obcrfuchrur Cr. hrugowsky and RXPA. It is a verbal report• The diary state:
that there • i*» six people; then, y re col wdion that thor^ were four is
won.. Thu instruct • fro : n sky n . the Reich Criminal Police Depart*
:• Jl,b - c ' c htra<Hct, in any \-a.v, v • v s id; imriy, that tl»

instruct I do era fr i «ru^evsky; i.-ect i. struct ions ivi„. tl - Reich Gridin
-.ep-rt lent to Doctor Din lac,. Thu instructions

c^-iu t'nr- u h rugrewsky.

*)• Did Doctor Din c:.^ -ir^ctly fra. Sachs, .nhnuseR rhe. .. told you
in ,/.v t excit :c:it tnat ho had r.ceipt o.'_ v.. it to y v for ,‘illin up?

u ‘ bulioVu t. . i user. icd b.on

r;l,k ,ixr t! ’ L D-ctor Din. \v . air .a preva -urly »iv-.r. hints uc u.m

... t .. Sachs.-naauc. n when ... s

:• s. ere ivc .osr. I sc. Doc tor Din* told

v.. t h. c l; n t tell - t' . circusstr. c.r ei the -zc_ri e-nt that he war

• lace, 1 r 3 . it

1* for rt S 5 cj'.Se nhause.i • us fr*. . .r
i u.n is sr.jthin I io not. : :o. .

125h


ha- t i; : e-ip. f ;r th_


3 -Jr-Mi-Be-rd
Court ”c* 1

y u know wtfc.ro t is p..xs.n :~i pi*c 'uc_

A* ivCa


1255


a «fcn ii?-?:-s.v—hr -1 - Bioiaoy

Court iio. i


-> Acccriinc to your account Sc‘..:l' c-rt, . ester, and a fourth ran
-ore present during that experiment. Is that correct?

... »ith reference to the Carp Cenaandant SS Obcrfuohcrcr Messer,

1 a; ;ot certain. That the first earn loader JS Sturnbaimfuchrcr ha::

Cch h sent is sooothing - :xv r because Dr. Ding in ry pre-

ore J caller! Schotert by telephone a', told hi:"Maxie, you’ve jot to cone
C’J’.: ri.^ht away."

Did Dr. Ding net toll you lao r tfa .t. sort of prison *c- wro
concerned vriti ?

A. He.

Q. "las there a rep-rt to th Soldi Criminal Polico lopartaont about
this o:r criuont?

A. ‘Ot through ry hands.

Q. You, .Witness, a r .. that 'ini qjreod to

thx'o orr.ortecnte, to the exporinonts carried cut by Varnot. Frwa vrt.oro
•’id yni have t.i!s ? notflodgo?

••• ’ r * Is rop rt. 1 to . u^c58’7 about tnc ox.-ex-iuonto uhich

rxro carried ut at Buchonrald.

. ; .’i Other vfor;u, you are v^roly .'rtr.rin^ the cr veluaion frrn tho
fact that Dins imported to .Irujo-.rj ; that Iru-cr.sky wr.s ayrcoablo to theso
rh.it its?


A. It rras Dr. Ding-^chulor*o practice that evoxy important matter

y. ccause it tar :<nown to him tlmt krugoi

* 0 |oly ccui: be -ot to put anc t rr; a ta-itihs, Itr used U

001 with : - i "cv ryt .• , on ow occasion Jr. Bing

• t : ...

reports t.o J.in in tfct natter, nutting on paper the yrjgrcf

r or matters, if there were- w objoc . •. here .as ...m-.l

rose, norsjal procedure. In s articular instance I therefore drurr ti

--.:cl.:s:c.r. from the report node to lirugowslv that ho ins ajreca’-.lc tc that

0 -.<or_:ont. In addition to ISrugowsky as Dr. Ding’s chief in that ratter.

1256


Jrji Dlakley

* ^ 1


dturutann fuehrer Dr. v ornet's expedient cit. net ccno under tho jurisdlct-
_cn of Dr. Ding either, and I cannot, therefore, state for certain that it
c-.io under the jurisdicti-n of Ijugonsky. iirosoKsky's approval rugr.rdihg
Lr. king's participation, however, scc.ed jiven. It appeared tc sc that it
.. been given but that participation -..as me; ely assistance in the shece of
a nero rganisaticnal type free the outside,

Q. Yesterday, ./itness, you ix-nticnod Dr. LUcnbcck who had worked in
t;sis laboratory, •‘culd you ploaco toll t..e Tribunal -..hat the loading- acti¬
vities of D r . siicnbeck were in the jucst laboratory?

... Dr. Lllenbock, SS -‘auptsturnfuchrcr and later SS star. fuehrer,

».as possibly c/on rs. rv anbitious than Dr. Ding-Sclwlor. Ho was mere con¬
ceited, ilore eoncoited to a very considerable degree than Dr. Schuler, ^buso
Ltio sen, as far as the outsi-lo world was concerned, were frioncs. As it is
in 1 •• ttbitious . . , tnoy koto fighting against ooch other,

iwvortholoca, behind each other's hack. H wa3 Dr. Ding.'c concern and
ron - tl-nt gradually Lllorbock might grab -leek 50 for himself and that
radually ho . achiovo a hotter reputation with "n- raky t . , Dr.

l - .» hiv.! tt tho tine himsolf.

ii t ro, ho told nc about tho respective stagos of Dr. Illonbcck's
rerk in 3orlin ns for as he , Ding, could judge it, A;o situation thoro-
ferc appears to be this— Sllcobcck care to lirugcrsky -.dth a number of su<;g-
t 'tCi changes of initiative, which IlrugctrslQ approved. The so-called uost
ratojy in 31ock i>0 was installed, not by any neons thu only place and
r-ctiv! ty for Sturnbamifuchror Dr. Sllor.fccck.

P; * Witness, I an merely in- r_ ted In finding out what va.s the work,

Xm2: ' v: *t carried out by ZUonbcck in ti is guest laboratoxy vliich you
referred to yesterday.

• C hcnical -esearch of blood. -’or iiistar.ee, the ascortai.il of the
c , the blood of human beings, being subjected to various afcag-
: OS auction. For that purpose, for Instance, prisoners fi-oaa the quany
' c ‘-ere ordered tc report ^llenbcck. The way be used U put it


5 Jar. hl~'.-2---k-3- Slakley

'■ vort :io. 1


•.as that he shouted: "Get rac a few cf t..-sc dopes o? yours for blued sup-


Th.cn after that heavy tsork in tic quairy, these people were brou¬
ght to hinj and then they had to pcrf.r.i physical exercises in front of him
until they were cxi,ousted, Thereupon the tired was taken fl-ca then; and the
e^fgon contont of that blood taken fren persons with an oxhauctod condition
ira- : thus ascertained. That's one example. r urt .craoro. Dr. Ellortbcck hud to
Bake tho preparations nocosoar/ for ho ntu. f the cure of edemas. I
heard through Dr. Ding that it tras suppose! that starvation odewus 3hould
be produced artificially, although thor? wasn't any actualy necessity for
-‘is since they rtoro ir. oxlstonco by tho sc-re; but apparc itly it v/io
loairod that tho oondit: ns under wlvicl: Uief occurred ehrv.ld e isolated
in order to bo able to study the.: .»rc ficicntly, an! DUcnock was thon
to produce cures for them, further.tore, Ellortbcck dealt with donvalr scor.t
Tho bleed of convalescent pjrscns was -aken free cxporinontal—

Q. Yos, well, l<-t no interrupt yea. - o dealt with that j'cstcrdny.

Thank you voxy nuch. »c don't have U c .:-o bar! to that. I \t : truly in¬
terested in hearing frea you that research was carried out and was the main
activity c nnootod with this starvation c -‘era.

iiwW , witness, y.s’.orday you sail that the ;rdcr for t: .so inccn-
iar/ bo«b oxpox*iwents cane from Dr. Lragowsky. u id not Dr. Di ; . t 0 u y 0U
tMfc before these experiments he had been to see the liighcr Police Leader .*
vcr. .oorsch cf Dresden? Have you ot tiiss iecuacnt bock beforo you still?
nay 1 ask you to open it to t 2 last pc.;c of the work .:i_ report.

1 can remember without Ircking at this report that Jr. Dinj-Sch-

-id talk to tho Higher Police Loader v:n '..oorsch pars-noil;- and was

c :.itadt vrith him. He repnr-.ed to .iru^owsky at cv_ry stage of the devol-

- just as it was tlsc habit at this tino and just as it was Ms cndcu v-

* - thr.: particular stage not to d: anythin'; without the i:-. • - f r,

i: ' ; iMe, the approval of Hrugowsky.

.. Co ter day, .fitness, you rcfcrrccd to ike vaccine r ducct at

1258


Jar. J' -r.-SJ-h-U- RLafclcy
C'- rt li. i

fiic itubort Koch Institute and you described to us the C x-Jil _:..o. ! stcr

.;aa:;ah vaccine; it that correct?

-*

A* Yes

Q* —ere did you {jet the Co::-Gilda..cis ter-Haagon dcsignat i :i fron?

A. -icht fron the beginning it was called that in Block 50; and it
pii also contained in scientific publications. Again, as vaccine acccrddn:

*; the process of Cox, Gildcacistcr and flaagen, it was reflected. 7hc Ancr-
ic:-: Cox m 3 rvaned in that comccticn bccaut j he var the first nan to trans¬
plant ‘-ickottsia Pruwaack i to the yelks of chicken eggs.

Q. You road Dr. Ding's report to tho iilitary J!odical Academy, didn't
i :u, the report?

A. Yv.s. *My I as! you which re rt you aro talkin' about?

Ci. The report which Dr. D n.; node boforo the Military ifadioal Acadosy
abwit his oxperinonts.

A* No, I 'id not rend that « « ho third Military Hodlcol confer¬

ence ,ith which wo aru hero conccmoti t .placo, as far as I can recollect,
■'ou-ia: the first half of ilay, 19h3, in ’k.rlin. Mirim.; t»:c sccon half of
the kaonth of April. I was attached to Dr. Ding-Schuler as nodical clerk; and
■y ~ork with hin began only c i tho 2nd or 6th of Jun.-, 1910 after L'r.

1 rotum iv a Berlin. It was then that told no duri very first.

\V; -r -iy work for hin ab ut this confcro.ico; tut I raist ray in tint corni¬
ce -n that botween tho tine of Dr. Ding's return fr n Berlin and the bog-
niinc of ^ clerk's work for hin, c.uvt is to say, between ho v.nd of Kay or
Uq 00c ' nt ’ half L ^y» and the Ji f Juno, - saw Dr. Din cr ito frequent-
<•' and had ordors and inrtr.icti. - fro.. ±n.


s J'.n Price

Court No. 1


In the report which Dr. Dir,;. Ci durir.. this Congress and which,

of course, we have in writing, he always referred t_ this

v.' Ccir.o as being produced according to the Giider.eistcr-

Kv on process, without the addition of the nsce of the seaoric< a Cox.

Is it kn;*r. to you that , apart from that, Dr. Ding always referred

to the Gildonei8tcr-Haagen vaccine?

*. It is perfectly possible end perfectly eXplic ble, considering
Dr. Ding's holts, that he did describe it thus. It is quite
possible th t it was only through the scientists in Block $0 tr. t
the other designation become clcsr to hie. Ir. cl-«ck $0 r.t ai*y rite
the v ccine wc.s always described -? being produced recording to the
Cox-Gi 1 dunei s t - r . nd Hc-.gori process,
i. Did Block 46, Lr. litn-sc, !xv« an I .el aUhlo ir. which
oxperinontnl onkr is wv.-v kept?

A. No.

. uld you pie? se leak at th. (fiery antry for the i'3rd A U&rch 1943?

i to tell r.. the page? You Guns-n document Pago 44?

Q. Th t, la ri v.t.

MS. i.cH.;r.lY: ?.’.u 44 in the English docur.unt ouk, Your Honors.

BY JR. :-LiX 1..G:

>• — i-.r.c*. b.tviejn S3 otumbai.nfuwhr-r Bern---old, SS Stur-.bai.nf uul.rer

Dir.p., r.d 3S Houptscharfu-hrer Schlesinger, ir. the office's

■ lent i. 5, •• o T.H.A., Economic and Adminlstr t

•

Dopartiiser.t, about t he robbit aid guinea pig and nice c ill ction
I .r -xpi.ri.tonf- L nnir.l purposes for the experiments1 depart::.-nt.

Did the keeping of such anlnols for tn. o::p-rlc.nt-.l J*.t> rtce-nt ev.r
become known to you?

A. At tr._ tic. c-ntionu . : runecs did tike pl-c- about the

questi ,f .epia:. Is ‘or tn two Juonrt .or.ts dealing with
■.v. v . ui- at vi• .- r.uwcrch — t‘ t is th cleric-L h.--t-ent r.d the
. . —that filed.

: to t-ke place under the c&alnistr five chiefs' responsibility;
Stur.obchnfuufcrer iernawald, who was a very distrustful person and

126a


c» m


jr r. 47---5-2-PKP- Price
>urt So. 1

. , 0 client wish th_t prisoners from Block 16 'nd Block 50 be removes
, r - his jurisdiction to a considerable extent, -s it *er_, should
b~ ir. position to dispose of r' o'oits. He knew the conditions in tho
czr p very intin?toly nd he kr.~w th-t we would just e-'-t thus, r bbits.
T iv rc wes a consider:bi~ fight ootween tho rdnLnistr. tivo chiefs
.nu those S3 non who vt~rc under oar iiifluencc :nd who also wore
inter stud ir. getting rabbits which were n^ 2 nt to b- experiment'. 1
-jin?.is into the frying pan. I rust »dd th.M wu wore living under
conditions which got us to the point wh re w- i..re oven on ting
infected animals. In tho cours. of those n.pOvi -ions it was lirv.lly
decided thet this experimental anir.-1 depart lent would only u.
fit ftichod to Block 50 bucr.usu Lb die not of*er any f-cilitieS for a
control through the ndniniatretive department of the concentration
car.ip t Buchonwali.

How do you know n • tios.s -o intis , in

such detail? It was on thu 33rd of 'Inch 19d3 that they took place
and yju didn't got thuro until much Inter; you didn't join Dr. Ding
until much lrtor.

A. toy I point -ut to th- dwfer.so counsel thrt in a concen¬
tration coco nothing was core intensely dealt with, nor, thou-mghly
talked noout tntn .Tatters rd-ting tofoed. The negotiations
concerning those rabbits went on for ? lull six months. After thu
boginning of ay work with Dr. Ding I took prre in th-se nogoti:tiono
in very vivid manner, becru.. when the prisoners considered th-t
an extraordinarily good ->rop sitiun I’ifht i ran tho beginning of
increasing our food supplies. As ur. aside, you might b. --bio to
see fro® this vih/.t circumstances: interfered with the scientific
V’ilue of experiments c -.rriud out in a concentration cn®>. Ih-rc
•- - no stag; during these negotiations which I didn't trice b'ck
ri.ht to thu Very beginning of it.

.. You therefore knew the negotiati .s, rc i
f'tU negotiations, only by hearsay?

A. Frur. the conversations of all persons concerned with the

1261


3 Jnn-47-I .~5-3-PKP-Price
Court I

•

exception of StrunbehnfuehEor 3onnewald.

Yosfcerday, Mr. Witness, you bed tdkod about the lot;or-
hoad, which you described as the D bloatod head*. It was Reich
Xodical Officer SS Chief Eygione Officor, Hygione Instituto of tho
Vrffor. SS, Chief Professor Dr. Joachin Mrugoswky. Shis letterhead,
war Suit used by Ding or were you t hon referring to arriving lottors
which had such letter heading as thffc ?

u. Yostordny I didn't oxpross nysolf too accurately. *.£ion
I uno speaking I was noticing that I had used tho word "lottorhoad"
but I didn't want to correct ny B olf in ouch a ccqporativoly iuaatorirl
affair. I rsa talking about the addros3. Loft top thoro was tho
lottorhoadj that was throo linos long and it was n Department for
Tvphus and Virus Hooo c rch in tho Hygiono Instituto of tho Vaffou S3,
Voinar/Buchonwald." On tho right hand sido thoro wan tho doto; then
follouod vunlornoath tho nddroos, which rar. up to oovon linco, so
that in thocaoo of full foolscap shoctc I had only ono ninglo lino
loft for tho tost of tho lottor aftor I had wrltton tho dato and tho
address. Tho actual addross was also bory slightly difforont than
ns I dOscribod it yogtordoy. la particular, Hrugovsky was not
"Professor" but "Dozont Locturor"; but on tho othor hand, his
dcublo iofttor titlo was quoted quito frequently in its ontiroty.

He was a Dr. of 3otuny and a Dr. of Modlcino.

“ . Do you also know tho letter heading v.sod by Mrugowsl^'
hir.solf what did tho;.- look like?

A . They chungod. It depended upon ihe function in wh'ch

Hrugov/fd-y uas writing to Dr. Ding. You cee, Dr. Ding also hud fcc

functions of a hygienist for die prohibitod territory "S" of tho

Vctffen SS under Hirt. When Hrugowsky, as Chief Hygienist, wroto

- Br. Ding, then, ns far as I cji rocollect, tho lotterhc, ; d read

rx followsj Chief Hygienist of the SS. If, on the other hand, he ■>

■ rctc in his capacity of Chief of the Hygiene Institute, then he war.

reforroft to as such; tho signature was quito frequently

1262


£ jr.n 47----5-4-PK?- Price

•J-urt I... 1

"krugonsky, Department Chief".

Q. This question of Seven linos, tbit »is therefore nr.

%

invention which Lr. Ding was employing, wasn't it? In lirugowsky's
own letterheads it was never used; is thit c rre-ct?

A. No; out then I d.-n't s_e .ihy it should have b«__n un
invention of Cr. Ding's.

Q. '..ell, iftor ell, th't is ur.ioporu.nt.

Dr.. rL£GC[;.G: I hr.vo no further cuosti :r.s.

DK. i-ERXEL: Attorney Iforkol for Defer., uit Gmirken.

3Y DH. ML7K£L:

Q. '.itness, recording to your t-stinony it lr s bee ... certain
that there wore two .!iffor-r.t types of typhus stations p-r* ting «t
BuchoiW&ld: a) the experimental station or clii.icr.l st'tion at
Block 46, end b) thu production st'tion in.Block 50. Is th't correct?

». The v'ccine production at tier. ii. Block 50, yes, Uvt ia
quite right.

Q. Do you knx. since vihor. the exp.risentsl at'tion at Block 46 exist .t. ?

A. Thu beginning of this experiment--1 st'tion :.t Block l t L goes

b'ck to the Last months of the ye'r 1%1. The proper, tiono 'n tfu

v -r y first experiment a took plr.ee in thu 3tcne blocks Hoc. 44 ant*

49. According to ay memory, it nan at the beginning of 1942, tftor

appropriate installations hra bvun nrde in Bi'ck 46, t.Vt t he .ntire

• •

‘.per tion'.l level of the- experiments -no th- app'. r'tus was trms-
ferrv.: to Block 46.

... n.-v! the production plant 't Block 50, wnen did th't begin
i?.c activities?

"• August 15, 1943.

<• 14 was at that time th: t production started thore I take it?

«. It was at that point that these operations w-_re started
'• 1 h*vu described earlier. Th't is to s-y, the part pr-^-r ti n

: r "induction.

i. These two blocks w«re entirely separate plants. Apparently
t,ncrv w s only the personal union in the shape of a joint chief,

1263


g J.?n 47 j -->- 5-PKP- Price
"j a*. No. -


Ding-cChulcr, rid in the shape of the joint offices; is t r: t
correct?

n . As far as the- physical Situation w _ concerned, both blocks
were separated, yes. Each one of those stone blocks stood on a
different side of the canp there ir. the si-, row. These two depart-
-.nts had na jr»int personnel, for instance. That is to say, the
prisoners who worked in Block ut hrd no business wh't-Ver in
51„ck 50, and prisoners worlcdUc in Block 50 hrd r.o business in
Black 66. The Joint chief was Dr. Ding-Schul.r, any collaboration
only developed because of various circunst.ancos. There was no joint
oflice. iho Office which h*.s been t:Iked about n.re was in Block 50
on’ it had on its part nothing to do with 31ock 46. The coll borrtlon
between the two blocks consisted, fios c.s- to case, in the fresh
blood of typhus patients to the extent of two cubic centimeters w uld
b. t ken to Block 50 by Capo Arthur Diotsch rad there transplanted
or v'.ccirv t-U on to guinea pigs. Secondly, that instructions which
Dr. Ding-Schuler would ive to the oflice ir. Block 50, 's lr ns
they concerned Block 66 fr-xu l!i. point j\ view of orgtaia • t iona 1 or
technical ortters, were passed on Iran th. office to 31eck 66 by
a-ans of a field telephone.

4. If you were t- look *t the document book, ’ itr.eflc — and 1
an talking "bout Pcge 61 — that is Page 6 of Ding's ulary — then
yju will find .n entry of Janu ry 9, 1963, and thor- it s-ys that
th nan- of the experiment" 1 station was changed irxa. Typhus
Ex;-riiaor.tal Station, Bucheira Id, t- D-paruaent for Typhus and
Virus Research. Y u yourself dcittedly didn't get there until
Apr_l 19/.3 but, nevertheless, are yau -ole z • t_ll us .r.d confirr:
r - vs hat this entry is correct and that th~t alteration had
-tUy taker, place as early as January, 1963?


1266


8 J.“n —'■ i- 3—1—Lesser
Court I


A . According to all the information which I had avail ablo-
ir. the camp that entry is correct. I can by no moans state that tlio
9th of January is correct but I con donfirm that it was in Jmuoxy
1943 that this hopponed.

Cim confirm from the files of too office at 3lock 50
Kiint the lottcrhcad of these two night have road before January 1943
end what it night havo road after January 1943?

Juct wh nt it read before is something I cannot confirm.

I cannot now reuenbor to at. *t that tino corroipo.ido.nco w G s handled
by Dr. Ding in the offico of Block 46. She corrospondonco was mostly
kept thoro, toe, unions it w ft n lator or. transferred to Block 50, but
I redly c;n not now ronoubortho lottorhoad. aftor the beginning
of uy work I ofton wroto, as I oorlior told you, following Dr. Ding«n
instructions, quito rogulatty: "Deportment for typhus and Virus
Rosoareh," comotinoo " A ttachod to tho Hygi«mo Inotitute, tfaffon-SS"
or Bonotfcios only "Kygicno Institute, Vaffon-SS, Berlin” and
undornoath that, " Voiaar/Buchonvnld.»

Q. . . 2 o you know anything about L.o quo*tion in connection
with othor o»'orir:onto, namely osporiaonto with poison, phosphorous,
incondiary bombs, etc., if tho naco Gontkon was ovor nontionod?

A . It WaB nuvor mentioned.

Hhooo oxperinonts did not start until tho Into autumn of
1943, if I understood you corroctly?

Yos.

^ • 0 nO Inst quostion. You stated in your testimony that
;ou can nut say for certain whether the Defendant Genzkcn or Seichs
..O'.ic i Officer, Grnwits, had boon to 3uchenvoid. Defendant Be:; atom
states, aid is most emphatic about it, the* ho has neither visitod
Jloci: 15 nor Block 50 nor tho Concentration C cap Bucher.Wald at .11
ti:io during tho wor. Vhat do you think you can baso your


1255


3 Jon-Ii-S-l-i^D-Lesser
Court I

ncmcjptiou on that Gonsken had bean present in the Dyphus atation i
-it Bwchonvold?

A. licrely upon, the rejected written invitations which
Dr. Bin;,-Schuler, dent to his fornor chief and, as ho used to put
it, "Fr.thorly ?riend Gontken", to look at the "workshop" at
Buchor.vold* I want to rcaark in this connection


1265a


8 Jan^6-2«4*-%VrD-Lessar
Ccurt No. 1

that the "officer tone" was frequently employed by Dr. Ding, even in less
serious natters. I can not confirm to yen that Grupponfuehrcr Genzkcn actually
followed ary of thoso invitations in reality.

Q. Thank you very much. I have no further questions.

D”. SUERR (Assistant for Defendant Poppcndick*s dofense counsol)r

Q. Witnoss, did you see Defendant Poppcndick in the canp .hiring your
stay at Concentration Canp Euchenwald at any tine?

A* "o#

o. Did you know hin personally?

• A. No.

Q. Yostorday you were talking about typhus experiments. Did reports about
typhus experiments go to Defendant Poppcndick?

A. No. At least not fron Dr, Ding-Schuler.

Q. I 3oo. Then with ruforcnco to the subject to Dr, Vcrnct. Yostorday
y-U mo ru talking about exporinonts on homosexuals nade by Dr. Varnot and you
TAsro talkin': in that connoction about 2 fatalities. Is it corroct that tho
cauao for tho doaths of thoso 2 experimental persona was on ono occasion a
phlci.mon infaction and on tho second ocoa3ion rrunoral body weakness?

... That is perfectly pos3i' lo. Tho caso of doath3 did not happen in ry
a; i. ro of ..ork, in that sphere, I nuan, which I could survey personally. From
th .riso.ior3» sick-.ay I h<*ard that 2 experimental persons had died. It is
possible that thoso occurred in connection with experiments or partially fron
other onuses.

Q. But you state in your bock, "Thu SS Statu" and I an sure you rommbo
this, that tho matter was different.

V. 'hat do you moan, I stato in ny bock?

•

f :« That ono loath wasduo to phlogaon and the other death to general body
.^ness in connoction with those cacprinents of Dr. Varnut.

A. 1'ay I ask you whether, in this cross—examination hare, I an being
“ ined about tho correctness of qy past published statements in the book
1 ->5 State" or the correctness of ry statements before this Ivilitary


're unal?


1266


6 Jan~6-3-»ATD-Lesser
Court to* 1


Q* In other words, in your statcfosnt you are not referring to your book
-ny acre. You have hoard that statement from sene other person?

A* I am not saying that I an basing ryself tero on the statements mdo
ir. ry book or that I an not basing tyself on it. I can say at this moment
that vrhat *T said at this particular pli ce on that tremendous subject I had to
leal with, what I actually said was on the strength cf what details are now
it ny disposal* If, therefore, we are concomed with the statements in ny
took, I would havo to go homo and look at ny docur ants bcforo I could give you
i clear and reasonable answer to your question. In this particular case,
therefore, I an net under ary olrcunstancos basing qyself hero in this court¬
room, on that book, which I have written*

Q* Vfitnoss, did tho corrospondonco pass through your hands addrossod to
th Experimental Department at Leipzig?

... The correspond'.onco always wont either to ropj-ondick or to Oborstum-
’ nnfuohror, Or* Klich-.rt, or to the Hi her Police an! SS Loador von 'foorsch.

[ cannot r^nomber havin • carried on a correspondence with the Experimental
Station V, or, as wo W;ro calling it, (Roman Vu . .ral Five) V, or ovor having
bo.n ''iroctly in touch with it, in fact. Otherwise I wculd very probably
knew the oxaot ad !rcs3*

'!. HO you know whether Defendant Poppcndick was merely in contact with
that oxporirwntal station or whether he wasits responsible hoad?

A* That I do not know. I assumed that he was undor the jurisdiction of
Mv Raichs Medical Officor-SS and that he was the .Xpert concornod.

*!• Hbvr do you know that Dr. Varnct actually belonged to this Experimental
!>-. .rtr_nt V?

A. In correspondence th. ‘.ascription rocurrc'' qiitu often*

!-» out this experimental station was n^vor !escribed ary more clearly?
t .' ia jither called Department V or Dopartmcnt V (Roman Numeral Five).

•>* Yes*

• Thank y?u. I have no further questions.

JUXE 3HJS : Tho Tribunal will recess for fifteen minutes*

1267


5 J:n 07- - -7-1- cci : n

C'urt c. i

(-. rccorc -j. s trJcon.)

T* f •- G- i-J (Counsel for *;c.ier.<2..nt K^v^n.)

* .'itnc ss, you told u. ir. Actr.il r.bout the coopo tier, cf
c; „ dofcndmt Kcver. v/ith the illoo ..2 cr::p »vl lir.istr. tie’* of the
c r. centre tirr. cr. ip :.t Bucl onvrrld. Did I imdorstml you correctly -
Did his cooper:, ti on consist of, fir.*t, to --'.ho su ;:-sti r.s tr the
ill *:.] d inistr- tion of the c;_:p .nd tl«,n realize thef into
eta : ■'/’ then cover t.cte cf tie illeyr.l 'd iniatrr.tlon, nn»l,
fccrr-Uy, did he tr.ncl;.tc or ders of the ££, r.ec^rdih * to the
ruiyect tens rf t l e illc. 7.1 c.-.r rAsiinistav. ticn?

; Tie flret point ic correct. Suggestions of t: . illc-cl
c . .j r.a.:iniotr; tion wore . ctue.lly crrductei nd !o vctiv 1 ly > Iso
c-vervd the rc..llz ti n of arch orderr by t: ille.y; 2 c 1 :? 1 in-

f

ir.ctr' tticn. I : c'r you t' repo t the second point?

T exorcise orders of tl«. Si, recordin' to the aujjoc-
ti.-ns if the ille *. l cr.np :.d-iniatr; tion?

••honever tie S p issued jy orders for tie cr_ip, vrliol
referred to tie hos.it . 1 , tr tie imir.t s or wit* ro/urunoc tv*
ounlal -.ent rations in t'c. c.j:p, tl cr tie illoy 1 c;-.p .. rti .inlrtrr.-
ticn i edio.tely referred tie * to Dr. i.ovon vhonovor ho v.s
present -r.i .s!cad hi » to try ithor to ar.- 0 porernn who were in
.ner, tl .t ir tr sr.v,. tl .. : fro punishr:cnt rctirns, or 3  t! e
litirc c:. t wop effected, 1 c wr.p o.aVcd to He vie. to these
u.rir-.a by r.ppcolir.r to th cr./*? ir'tr tion or to It.vo tl era

c lett]- witldr-.vn.

X r»tv c . c tr tic action 1- ” 33. Dcct r, do -rr 't.cw

•

p-ccn 1 m tr- ye r 1 ££ 2 ?

I ’now tl r.t in 10*;i or well r In 1D42 : r. tr r sports
- ■ - cl vtir..ld. 1 Jo not ! nor tl t thee- tv* ct *nf ' ' the
p - t. .tion !•: F 13. I xtc.z f tJ.. opinion t!; t cnly ti - s omd

c; n, th t is tie one of 19*. 2 , w. s dosiTv.tcc.

1268


in th. t or.


e J.n •-?- - -7-2- -cei.cn

Court :, c. 1


Doctor, I .j. not referring tr tiro individual transports
'•ufc vl at 1 iooji tl .ro were tr-- rriurs wi tl reference tr l: F 12,
<'nc cf tier- fro;. tic r.nn ti cf . . y tc Juiy, l’J-.l, nd then tVerc
second order isauod by Eirolor in tlx yc-.r I 3 2. Dr y*u
• tl t?


Y^s.

D. yir :mor tl . .t during tl u first action, wl icl t 1c
,.l..Cc rU v/r.s ordorud in tlx }\..r 10 * 11 , tlx innc.tos wcr. rxloctud
l). . cc . isa’cn cf physici.na cr .m-; fr~ Dcrlin, c nriotin^ cf
C. ixc >hysici.'ns?

a Yus, I Icncv/ tint*

Do yru furtl ,r laicr tl - t tl.. lefvndrnt Kov..n in tl-
y-. r of 1941 t«. s not tl o first c r.p pi sici.-ui, *'ut tl t r.t fcfcr.t
ti c Dr. Blrnl:;. v/:.s t:.. first cr. p pi • sici. n?

.. Yv.s, 1 lenew tl t.

Dr yru ’mev tl : t . n erd-r wtlst. 1, ri"in-tiiv; fro '

Ki lor, v;itl rcforcr.ee t~ t’. e first action 14 F 13, tl .t in
.’ition to tl v insrjK :nd crippled, 11 tl J^re cf tl o c-rc.n-
tr. tarn c:. p Duel ..nr; Id were tr be selected?

• ik Yw.e, I lev v tl t tco.

uo *.xu furtf r ’now tl t rn tie ’v.ris of .an order rf

• ,l - l ' r tils • cti n 1. F 13 w .s only lm.ro to s v.ll circle cf

fWIrers nd LS pi t rici..ns and tl t it w.s forMdJon under tic
.nm shier, t of doctl to infer: oti cr poopic r.V.vt th. t?

y i le. m-:l tint frort ti ^ :xnborc cf tic ill„y..l c . -p

inl3tr tioji, vf 3 a t: *.t tley hi k rn.. tl t fr • 3>r. 1'ov^i

r 61 i: p rt.


. r J t! t brings x cc tic next question; dr y u ’m.-
; t] i lofandCJit ! uvwii, r.ftvj bejn- infer : cut t£ first

- 1-. r 1Z nd it: cxfc_-t, ~ot into cent ct t-itl tl f-r cr

r C; .p Direct, r ~r;.c xr cf tl.^ illt~ 1 c:. p r.d mistr t er.
OcV:s; C. pa loader C. tel' tl*. - *b-'Ut th Is ir.t.i c-


>Jv.i r.


o J;n -17- - - -7-2-
icurfc -. 0 . 1

.coin, ccntr..r” to tr.. c.xpresse rd-jr cf i i.; ler?

I know tbi.fc mu I knew it fp thac Vys.
u. - -V Artier know trr.t Krr.wncr md C.ln r.jrt» with
Si dof nd • b I.evon to pre -nt tie deliver*- of Jer.s fer tl r t
l'Vl\ * so?

tv r •vr.'o.ior mu .;u-uat Cel r did thr.t. Tfrey ro. c) eel
n r./jrow ent v.it'r Jr. lioven tl. t over^tl ins w •' tr *oc d re in
crier t irevont ti is .ctlon :c f .v ..s pee?iblo.

'I D< you rise knoy t*.. t tl.ia v r dr r.« by tl dofendmt
npv\n? Dc • :u r ti er Inrv t> t t: is ..ction, v.Licl v.:.s tried tc
■j«, prc'cntod ; tl ill. 1 c.usp u lnlctr.ci n, w s duclynt.ted
11 p 1-: r. tl r t; ..:i 1-. F 13?

I o. nnott new r y exactly v.-J.otl cr \t tl t ti*:o 1 know
th.t cl ecu tv/< letters wePu It is ooggible, since

I yaolf .t : l-.t.r J..t». wi cnover tl is qucstim c. o up md tl .!•
r yo-.rc Inter, 1 repoutodl. oxc!.n-.e tlx w-bors m.l li tters.

C*n y u describe t- tlx Trlbur. 1 wl :.t ::o;.coroa or cwi
tv.r -erruros v:cr^ token md v;l on it v; ? provontod tint : 11 Jews
wore delivered for tl osu tr. nsports?

.. i cm a.-.; tl o folicvin : in tl*’ t ccnrocticn; no '.id our
\.rt 3" so.) th::t 210 Jews, vie were for :r.ny yo rs in tlx crncon
cr. ti r; c:. > due! ervuld ml \;1 r -:.dc -.n; frionds in ti c c . p,
r '> I 1 ix p rt :.t prrfo33i ns, fer instrncc, prefossrrs,
plysicims, .v.tlrrs, p'liticims, r sue! Jews vlo wor f : pee
iipcrtmco 'ir tie ."ulrp-:en t of * »cro liber. 1 socialist
i'<-turo, -vj a: v t it ei..t tie" wore s'*, ruck cut *r'. ti list
-cfcLofi 1-. P 13. Tlx SS cd’jiniatrr-tim of tl*.. ennp,
y i” . md nrtly by Dr. r. • , wr.x tol clocrly tl

'• uu xr of Vur 1 p-rt. T t buildings f r tlx w. r effort wcr« to
-•r.ct ! cuts-.e cf tbu c; p. Tlcy were tcld tl r.t tl.cao bv.£ll-
~ s c >i n c be oructo if .* curt;-.in : ■ i , nb rf building export

t t our uisoosr.l. jtppr xix tcly 210 n tree Jews, rs i

170


Urcri^uJ ther '-efrre, wer^ dosisr.r.tcd :.s >uildin- experts. Tfltfc
c icirr.s re tl-y woro in tl.o corcontr ticn cr.-p, tlo SS did
:C invoeti^r.tc sucl reports zn l cloy were I r.rily cCtl tr d-*
t >n.. -.ko tl.crcu^d inyoatifT.-.ticn, since r;ost cf ti er.,

, L .-At n tie SS non, knev/ nctl.inc *-•> ut tiosc oxpert
pr. fesfliona.


6 Jan-iWP-Q-l^Burns
Court No* 1

TJfcse Jews often hat* already worked. in quarries and in imildiii. details and

l-ticipited in the forcec laoor for the erection oi barracks r.:u* therefore
sa ' a knowledge which enraled them Lo us that knowledge in cn emergency
-r. ! n case thij were investigation. . hether the SL camp administration
rc-ortet? this necessity to keep these builders to the Berlin So head office
or vbother or. their own initiative merely o-i the basis of the su^cs tl on of
Dr. HoVon and the suggestion of sc«y ot.iers made the nccor ’in; order, I do
not knot/. It is a f act ti. t tot so 210 Jw. s a. roxlmately remain* in the
c o* OUchoroiald r\nd rvarl; all of c’.c.. st-yuf there until 191:5 and survived
*hi3 terrible period I knew noth!.: j-r- bout the collection in -has saving
notion.

Doctor, you stated bofor- t rt t; is savin, actionvns done with tho

oo-« on of the illcx'l -• • sirostration and Dr. iicven. I aa just b>

foraod, !r, President, that co-oporati t trnns should

like you to concern •. ith it once ere.

A. An I s : tod, on the basis of sug.ostion and intervention of C'*pos

*r; * on th. basis of suggestion of Dr. Hovon in mutual co-oour tion.

3* it.ieos, do you know that the Jofo . ant Hoven carric ’ out L'urtlior

nn-.s In order to: v there Jo'.s, atvly, gettir. 0 into con .ct with tho

. physician Dr. Lol ing "uv th t ho i hie, prepare a work ".bout .anthro-

iolo ical r-acur. ment: in order to bo .able to strike theSi Jo .vs iron the lists'.

A. I don't know this fuc . liowovor, l do know that Dr. ’oven selected

*. c rl n number of these Jews and safe^o: r 'ed th.j» especially by keeping

e 11 Hin ti._ limits of the i -arc hoc 1 and housing the.-, there, for

1 ,a ‘ 1Cu » j' 1 tik. tuberculosis station August Kohn blare, l: was tr. asfcrred as

-' ll-, nousc or orly into Bloc . *ror there he was later tr rrod

,0 ioor 5C n. also thus surv: e • ir. t*.. ca p.

Q. Doctor, o you further b.;c% . - . i.. spltu o! all c sui

•'*’ - ' eiundr t uovon to tiler i Lth ti.. illegal carp aciniru.strr.tion tuck one

be!ore aeprrturc oi t ;e transport, it was f.-u.vJ . _Uve:. politic-

r -'- ■-•Iv i.a important positions t.re on the list an* t . r. *urther

1272


5 Jcr.—’--JP—c-2-3urns


:ourt Ko # 1


r -suros wire taken?

- <trow that and I already sencior.ed it yesterday.

Q. Doctor, with reference to the sccsurcs which the defendant Hoven
100 ’ ,,3 * cfchs ' r vith cap ndjain^stration knew it by soix* of these

rw-sur-s that at the begihnin& of 1 9L2 th.ro was still a largo amount of
J1...3 in the concentration cajp Buchonviald?

A. That's absolutely correct*

q. .fitness, during your interrogat or. by the w>ur of t .10 prosecution
you ere asked what the defendant .lover. had to do :rith the action Uj F 13 .

In this connection you event ionod an exchange of correspondence. Do you
:nov? tn-.t t.iis correspondence refer.od to thv action Ik F 13 in the year 19li2?
A. ' aetlwr th fc first or t.:_ second transport actually left, I think cno
ort • 1 lJ- ve. Thu ot ..r transports r^re prevonto and as I was assured
b; tlvu hospital in trie basis of intervention cf Dr. Hoven.


1273


S Jan 47-X-XAAr-9-l-P U tty (BK)
Court Fo. 1


\ I now come to mother point, Doctor, you spoke about the
conditions and the experiments In the so-called "little ca::p" .

Fill you please tell the Tribunal in what year these experiments
took place in the "little camp" ?

A It was in the year of 1944 red I 9 U 5 .

X Fell, that wns at a tine when the Defendant Eovon was already
prre 3 ted?

a Yea.

\ You further spoke about the fact that the Defendant Eovcn in
tho year of I 9 U 3 was arrested because of a suspicion of having
poisoned the SS Undcrocharfuehrcr Koehler. Do you know, Doctor,
that the Medical Institutes in Jenn and Berlin established n
nicotine poisoning as the cause of death, rr.d that investigation
by criminal counselor Fohnrr showed that Koehler had smoked about
n hundred cigarettes shortly before h 0 death.

A I know this .connection. I rloo know what part Dr. Vehnsr
plpycd in thin trial. A number of interventions wero started in
order to liberate Dr. Hoven and get hin awry from the Jurisdiction
of the SS Court. Dr. Vchner was one of the protectors of Dr. Hoven.
Dlag, an well ns p number of inmates who wero in contact with the
aeabero of the SS Court, told me whrt means were used in this trial.

v Doctor, please lot me interrupt you, but this trial docs not
really interost us here, and we do not want to take up the time of
th< Tribunal, but you know as r fact that such statements wore
established?

a Yes.

\ Witness, do you further <nov that the proceedings against the
Defendant Hover, were based on the case of Kuschair Kuschnp.rov, and
•hat this case wns also part of the proceedings?

•1 Yes, I knov that, too. Kuscknir. Kuschnarev is the correct

pronunciation.


J. n -.7-"-\...-9-2-?uttv
C urt i T o. 1


Can ycu Cell the Tribunal who uuseknia - ucchnarov was
:r. whe t part ho placed ir. the cr_:p?

. auschnia Kuschnorov was c. '.Vhito Russian o .1 grant. As
... of tl vjco o uL grants of Tsarist, Russia, lo callod hinsolf a
fci*. «r General. Hv, had boon ovictcd fror: Yugoslavia, wont to
auserai, end >.s wo lmcv. fro..: our cc irados in tho .'.uatrian Polico,
1 .v.v. sc ..o confidential sorvicos. Fer r reason vd icl vo never

. Kusclnl. Kuochanarov was sent into tho concentration caiip
i buclunuald and that already ir 1CDC ho know it within approxi-
;oly ono year to awaken tho inproasicn of . docent 1 -us r being,
.i t tr know about r. nunbor of things Sn tl ^ csr.p. Suddenly
h- atart-d to ccllr.bcr t_ wit! tie SC, : nd those prisoners who
c.. v into so.!o contact with hi;: wore dollvcrod to tho £ £ by :alc In
f 1: or ccrroct ct. tc.wnts be ut then. : iiochnlr. ICuscl nr.rov soon
oC .. very 1 'portrnt position or. t. rsp, boing furtl‘>« rod^
f c. urso, :y tic SC. *t tils otr *, no dcubt, ho would have
hilled if tie S£ hadn’t safeguard*:.’. In. in a very opocial

bar* d wire whore the Innate o bad their own
i latration cr.d vrtore the S- Died: Fuol rcr was only occ..cion-
11; present, ho could not yet away fret tl.o justiot. wile*, the
wei■ Id ! ..v^ noted out to hizi. K_, therefore, w s hopt
t! Cl ir. a littl building in the .’..rdons which norallyh.ro
.cccssiblc by the ..rlsonors.

-Vr Johov..l Witnesses vvlo were there, ho denounced .. few
l'.ter to the S“ Kc.ua tl oy had s "c copies of tic Bible
‘e their pos. essicn. Ttr c two Joho . h Witnesses woivi su* sequent
- 1 r god.

he IIuscl r.ia -uschnarev did not f^el hi self s..fc ir. tho

as, tl SS pro toted ii tc the C. pc of tl ruv.tes office.

* lt-i. KU3clnareV tier, beer: 10 tie chief of enu of the ir in

-tr. 1 -fficwS of tho illegal ccaip administration. Every actlv-

illogal camp adniair tr. tx n ire tl at
- 1275


i.’ _
'JA W


H3 .e! t -'ll Was


8 J :r. -17- -

Court Me. 1


I-S-'utty


..vie i .poasiblc ..s :'~r ..c tl*. office vr.s ccrcorncd, md tl is in
, r..c d t .:cr.nt tfcr.t the entire illo"c.l r.ppr.rctus v 2 ls.id lr:.:c t
;.t Iv.-.et tv.nby-fivc pruccr.t.

-’cr » ny weeks there rolled terror in tl.. concontrr.ti--:
c ... f duel cnv;. Id, csyocir.il;,- wl or. Xuachnir. Xurclnnrov v/r.s
:.LcC>.‘ tc instruct the r.rrivln^ Russian prisoners cf wr.r .ic
ir.~ tr t! . dirocti-'oa of tie cr.r.di:ir.istrr.t ten ..n.*. tr invest
t- tier.: tc see who tier tl^rc were prliticr.l cr: i-.iaar.rs nr.cnf
ti on or v/1,other there v.sr* cry convinced, pr in-nt brlsl ovilcs
rf r. y spocir.l i .pert.rco re>cnj tl e *»ucclnr.rcv covld do tlr.t
tl.c sic •.f *.lr. ‘mewled e Russi-m, cev did this job oxtrc., i oI
void, :r.d on tie b r.r cf lie don tiona l.undroda of prisoner
of v..r wore ro.jovcd re:.: th» ao-c:.llc:\ ;: prlaenor-of-vw.r cr-ip" ct
she c rceiitr. tl- cr.... of due, envc.ld end were aubaoquontly l r.iv
fc» die vis n.i-ci-v. r c.. aod within tfco liiaita
t!. berk.-’. wire enclosure of tl concentration ec_-.p f 3 ucl or.v.*
••’’MS el fcoen Ur.dred Rusoir.n prisoners f wr.r. -n;/ visiters
v.l c ecu u tr tl ecnccntrc.tior. coav cf due’ or v.v Id voro t.*l:cn tie.

e e; v/e i'. ro.lly us- 1 ..r ;a oxll*'J ti f r ncrrr.lly 11
..rcrx.m prison era cf w;.r who wex\. rorvu' fr the Strl: -, fre
t! e prirrncr-of-wc..- c . s .md wore s-nt the concentre fci<-n
c. .p v'it!.out uxor r.cturlly cnt.rin. tl - cr- :p wore i.L’.odir.toly .

It eel .1'. • v.scln..rcv, tlcr-f r r«., uvon fr * tl; t a pi ore ins
tie c.u.. , select. <1 h:s vlctL a wlcre thoru wore r.pproxlnntci;
tl -us* uj ji } t iu dro.L .r . r.e the use jj-' fi hundred of tl ese

nors, t! — c. people px v« ther.solx s a oxcollont con-
r eca rf bh. c tl _r Innc.tes 12: tie cr.:p. 3 ne tried to find no. r.
’- n or.cr t re., vc this r. ;or.t of tie SR. Ter . .xtl s tkoro wc.s

acini . . - . , c; 1

action r. v.i..ct ; in -./ruled h..vc b-c. ...e conspicuous, end nor.surcr
. w .. ‘Ottin- such c.cticni ...


127ft


!*•


-


e J:r. •;?
C urt ’'o


. - .-?utty


One day after 11 preparations n thwpr.rt cT the illegal
c .. ad*:inisfcr..tlon againct ..utclni rusclnnrov rorc -ado In
5- - 1 :spital of tie innatos, end tl.es*. pro pm binns v/or- uadu in
umucuont with Dr. Hovon, Kuschni; *m£chnarcv .s careless :nd
\?ji s into tl-«. hospital ecnplcinin' cf a cove re ho: dV.cl.o in rrdor
t r. cuivo sene dru^ 03-inst it. ,.f tor an lour ml a It If l.o
r ... lo..d.

I think I cm recollect tin- Dr. Ilt v-n at tl. t ti.. 0 and dur-
those hours was pro sent in tie hospital rf the caup. It is
Known to ;io t! t t) ^ IL C urt Ixwoatiry ted t! is c: ro against Dr.
i '. and accused M. f lor a ainct i-ua clinic. Kuschnorov.


1277


8 J^uary-I-DJG-lO-l-aeRrd

Court H|« 1

Q In order to clarify one natter, Doctor, you said that Kushnia
Eu-chnorev was a Tsarist White Russian; in that case, he was not a member
of the United Rations?

%

A According to what we knew from hin and from the files of tho Pol¬
itical Department through our illegal spying system, ho was not a member
of the Unitod and Allied Rations.

Q Would further inmates,, especially members of tho Allied Nations ,
9 r rather would many of ouch menbors of tho Allied Nations have boon
killed if Kushnia Kuschnarov had not tcor renovod?

A Thero is not tho loast doubt about that.

Q Was thero another possibility to exclude Kushnia Kuschnarov, and
thoroby prevent further nrrdere of members of tho Allied Nations?

A The possibility — tho political prisoners of tho concentration
ciapo of tho 55 voro in an absolute ctato of emergency. Thero was no
trace r,f Justlco for then because the non belonged to the Illegal camp
•dolnir.tration end there was no other possibility to protoct them against
d’\nf.*rn -thor than tho possibility of self defense. I personally, no a
convinced Chrlstirm, do not deny thoco non the right to act ia that state
'' ^“orecney, and to remove dangerous men who hnvo caucod tho lose of
ilf* of n-my non in tho ennp in collaboration with tho S3. I am, thorc-
fjro ci tho opinion that Kushnia Kuschnarov vac Justly killoi, add that
•'■ ro wor '' no other possibility or way ts romovo him under tho circumstances
Nticting -.t that time. Sspeci lly since wo did net succeed in sending
Eucr * ift il'Jochnarev on the transport sir.co -.ho 35 lr. tho camp uoed hin as
one ->{ ttaoir main tools.

£ Did tho defends Hovoa only, during the Inst period, collaborate
Vl ’ > * tho carp adniniotratica against tho SS, oi' was that already

■ • '--.no r.t the tine when Germany did not think of defeat?

A Doctor Eevcn from tho very beginning of Ms activities as camp
--v i -i-ir. cooperated with the illegal esnp administration. I do not kr.sw

the first period, that is to cnyV during the first month, that it

1276


6 J r.uary-M-DJG-lC - 2-3 o ar d
Scurt 5c. 1


»n; clP'-r to kin what functions were exorcised by the political prisoners
i- * hc Concentration Carp c f Buchenwald with wkon he personally cooper-
.tci in the can? and with when he had dealings. Later bocause of a number
e: c-r.ncctionr, this connection certainly boesne clear to kin.

3 - n ° w cone te the caso of the Poles. Itoctor, did you know that
>ctor Ding, shortly before hi3 death, during his arrost in Freising had
cinitted to have killed the Polish physicians?

A That is not known to ne.

Q Can you define your attitude with roferonce to the credibility
cf this admission or. the baoio of your knowledge of the facts?

A The faco that lector Dinr had p^.rt in tho killing of thC30 Polee
Ij beyond doubt; th-t he, hinaolf kill, d thcoo Polich physicians, and
‘.hi other Polish prisoners who woro kill.' 4 . Doctor Hoven, I cannot say
with certainty both natters nro possible. There are, however, living
"litical pris-.noro of tho forner Concentration Car.p Buchenwald, who actually
present during the killings, end who were either in tho seno roon or in
rn ljoining roon, nnd who could give the exact information about that
r.Mt'r. In particular is Dsctor Xarinn Chloploiowsky, who ic tho only
r:rviving rictin, and hi- would bo in a position to testify with regard to
that nattor.


Q If I understood you correctly during your examination, you non-
tlcmd that this killing of tho Polish physicians was not independent of
'*.J fight cf tho illegal camp administration?

A That is correct.

$ How was this killing connected with the fight of the lllogal camp
ini atration?


A F^om *hc Penceotration Gn=p Auschwitz, ohoitl./ before that, tho
hliZ h d l ' oen sent to Puchenwald. It was reported from the innates of
viar.rvi* t} {Wgt arongft those transported there were aero so-called Fascist.
*" d ' * aust mention kcre that by saying Fascist, ‘ that the expression Fascist


:-used at that tire, during the tine I was in the carp c& it is still

today. Whoever had no special orthodox convictions was very

1279


6 Jnnuory-K-DJG-lO-o-Beard


'zliy designated as a Fascist. However, it vac established that sono
cf th: Poles who ware brought to Bucher.wald fror Auschwitz had been boating
ccpl ir. the Concentration Carp Auschwitz; that they were really terror-
i=ir..- thoir corrades in Auschwitz, and th. delivered sore of their fellow
inn-.toc to the SS, and they were gassed subsequently. Ve did not know
•hr wires of the individuals, the guilty ones. Because of a nunbor of
intrigues in the Concentration Carp Buchonvald it was said that an entire

of those Poloe coring fron Auschwitz wero in collaboration with Polish
p*-trie to who were in the Concentration Car.p Bucher.wald and that they in¬
tended or had rade \reparations to tal:o over the leadership incido the
c-.-'p on their part; that is to rcrove the illegal people of the illegal
c " r, P ’tdr.iniotration in Buchonvald. I do not knov how tho SS carp ndnin-
i.'tr-.tion received that infomation, that this .-roup of Polco were pre-
r rir. • a ore action acainst tho SS, and which could only bo believed by
t;. "" boc-uco an open riot in tho concentration cnr.p whs corpletcly
or* cf the question. At any rate, this infomation which got to tho S3
through ch-nr.olc unknown to .re. was sufficient in causing that action about
which I spoke yesterday: nnroly, that four or five Polish patrioto woro
brought to Block 46, and with tho exception of Doctor Chiopielowsky, wore
rrbr .quontly killed.

Q Doctor, do you know that the dofondar.t Koven received and protoctod
: 1: MarLan Chiepiolovoky which you n ntionod; that he promoted hir as
1 ler of tho hospital in Vornigerodo?

A I know that Doctor Marian Chicpiclowsky beesr.e the leader of tho
" ;l ' 1 ir - Vornigorode because of his position in the hospital in Bucb-

”*•1'. That w-.s not possible without a fom.al npj rovl of Doctor Hovon.

- 1; -h:k it U quite probable that sore nen of the horrit-1 spoke to Hovon
1 ir * rntfcl, r. I do not know all the details in that r.-ttor.

S, i nov cn-t* to th c~so of Friedmann and May. fth reference to

’■’* ?' fsonc, were we concerned with Gemnns cr rer.bera of the United

iiti-is?

v ' re c - nc -rned with two Gcrr.-n criminals, so-called professional

1260


9 Jonuary-M-DJG--10-4-3eard
Court Ho. 1


orlr.ir.fi-

3 V>. 3 it further known to you that these two people ns well as two
pr-liticnl detainees and five Jews were killed by these two pooplo7

A What is known to no is that those two, Friodosonn and Kay were
kr.ovn ae infar.ous boaters in the ca=p, »nd that a nur.ber of victins fron
ry part of the canp oust have boon attributed to their acts of guilt.


12c 1


3 Jon. 47-H-U-l-PHP-2l0kl®y (BH)

Court So. 1

3 la it known to you that In the case of thin killing of two,
the politicrl coaalttee, that ia to say, the illegal canp ndrinls-
trntion, collatoroted?

A That becane known to ne at a later stage during the tiae when
I was detained in that cpr.p. Vhen this case of Priedenmn and

erne up before the pre trial Judge of the SS legal court, Stura-
be.nnfuehrer Kohr, and where it played on icportnnt part, I nnde
inquiries fron aeabers of the illegal ensp adninlstration and
discovered that they had been interested that these two people in
the sick bay for prisoners once they had beer, released rs cured
and therefore had not perished in the sick bey should be killod in
the flick bay.

k You have repeatedly aentioned that defendant Hovon was Ding'#
deputy during Ding's nbsenco; and rt the end, during iiroct oxaalnn-
tion, you actually aentionod that defendant Hovon hod boen Ding's
nnoistnnt. 1 pro suae that whun using the word "assistant" you
wore trying to expreso it thnt this happened vhon Ding won absent?

a I becnae nwnre of having used the word "assistant" yoofrda.v.

It doesn't originate frcei ac. I didn't uso it. It vac soacono
clue who U3ed it. Dr. Hovon wns Dr. Ding's deputy.

v In It correct to say that Ding, particularly became of the
inactivono83 of the defendant Kovcn and because of the lack of
typhus experiaunt s, wrs chosen by Ding ns his deputy?

A That is correct, in as far ns Dr. Ding, who, ns I have
emphasized, vnp very aabitious, did not have to b< p/rald of any
competition fron Dr. Hoven.

•. 'rest rday you aontLoned that Defendant Hoven cuite often coae
to Block 46. Is it correct that in this 31ock 46 the carpenters'
ar.i ohoearktrs' shop was installed?

A In Block 46 there v*.s an illegd, sarll but vc-ry


1282


3 Jan. 47-~-ll T 2-?K?- Blnkloy
Court No, 1

effective| tailor and shoemakers' shop, too, which had bwun
installed for Dr. Ding and Dr. Hovenj thr-t is to say, naturally
..Khout knowledge- on the part of the SS f-dninistr: tiwn of
t*;e cap. In the latter Koch-Hoven trial of the £ this natter,
t; , played an important p-rt. I can remember the hr.sty
ei forts which started in order to remove these two workshops
nhen tne natter, as we would say, was about to blow up in the
c-jr.?. There was continuous work for Dr. Hoven and Dr. Ding
on in these two workshops.

Q. Dr. Hoven presumably visited these workshops
frequently, didn't ho?

«. lie was in comparatively close contact with the Capo
in ‘'Lock 4o, Otto Di^tsch, wno was responsicle in Block 46
=nt -dio was oft. er to supply the i>5 leCd -.-s with tv-r. more goods
tl^’-n th-y wet wishing to have theaselvcs. Otto Dietsch at
Mr.t tine mA ’ Ire: :/ been in detention for a pjriotf'of twenty
y.-s's.

Q. tr.un, Dt. Kogon, you mentions a throo-fold
•mi.ri >: the defer: nt Koven ct the cacp ;t 3uc.Vrrw Id. First


3 Jan-4f-JMl-fla-Blakley
Court iJo. 1

of '11 you sr.id h_ was can;- physician; secondly, Ding's deputy, an , thirdly,
or son- short periods Dr. Lolling's r p: s-ntativ:.. in or-Lr to elucidate
t is point, I leave a for questions to pr-s_r.t. First of all, o you know how
io:.. '.cfoniant Hovon r^pr^s-nted Lolling?

. k . To ay recollection only lor a Vv.y brl^f period. Unless I nm mistakcr
i a.ounU. to about six or eight wo.is. I nssura that this wns in 19i;3.

}• But then, if I no; tell you that it was only four w.eK3, noult - you
bvli-Vc thftt that could be correct, too?

A. Yes, certainly.

Q. .in' if I go on to tell you that .'of ndant Hovui r.o deputy for Dr.
I.olhr^, was not in a position to give orders nn! had no executive pow-rs, vvoul'
you cunsi■ .r that too to b< correct?

A* Yv.e. I oan re- :.;tx.r th-t on 01 *. occasion th~re was r.n i.iveqtigation

o f aeuG sort La order to establish whether Dr. lov^n'o authority -o dr.

»

Lolling'? deputy on.ole ' nir. to i;< or.Lrs; ri.other he InC ;.iv_r. or Lra; and
i -• uj !.~ been entitled to jiv. ord rs. liothin,; is knovr. to iv about

tl 'uv llr of this affair. ri:„ .a-dic.al clerk ol Dr. Hov„n can give you the
l.ifoir.ation you require.

D.t. 1. i X: Thank you v w ry such. I have no further qu stions.

H- *'• S). uT: la t .-: - ..ay nr..v,r cross vX-.-ination of th 3 witness?
Kl. GdCrtG FhOfcSCH-.e-h : Y-s, *• “oreseJuar.:., nse counsel for Viktor

'rck.

r .: ..ISIDt-.T* Aill counSwl*3 cross xvin tion be brie or will it
on ei- than soven ndnut-s?

• : xr. eit, i hav_ only a v ons. I

" 'il -iiLnk fiv rdnutes would suf-ico.

:R0S5 EXA.

. a

itnwss, . a Just, enllco about the action in to i , l-.M,
Jt-n place a;. 1 which ecu Id e traced fc-.ck to *:ii 1 r order;


1264


a J3-JP-11-2 a-D lskloy
Court ..o. 1

is that correct?

a. .’av you talking a .out Action 1W-13?

Q« Yes..

a. first of all, I was told, sir, in th<- concentration cr._ f * at fluchcnml
- , r-conelly, I believe that on one occasion I heard through friend
Forimnc Rooahild, the medical clerk in ttft sick bay for prisoners, cm saw

nt to thr _ct.

3* Y° u » - , * r ’ Witness, have an opportunity to s.-. the wor Infc of this
Ki ler or \.r?

A# !fo#

Did you h-ar -x>ut th. wor 'i.. o» it. fro- any other rson?

A, : c“n. 10 1 msv.cr youi qe.. A ar..

• • lur or-Jor co.-. to your knowL. . . i»

vour ; ri.nda?

... riic n roximtv. contents.


12c5


3 fan 47-A-?JC-11-15-31akloy
Court No. 1

Tfill you ploasa toll the rritun&l tho approxi:..ate contents of
this ordor?

A. I 3hall have to say that I hove very llttlo rocolloction of this

attor. First of all, I cannot toll you exactly what tho sources of :uy
fesculolgo oro—wacea I cannot rocolloct for cortain.

'/oil, thon, c^n you rouanbor that tho persons had boon cloarly
losifnatod in that order who woro row to bo sont away on this transport?

.*• 1 hnew fren pr-.ctic-l oxpcrionco gr.thorod whon thoso transports
*W0 put together that Jews and Invalids tmro solootod; that is to 3ay,

.’ow and invalids of ovory nationality and c-togory; in othor words,
litlc 1 , c iolnal, eo-callcd anti-social, Johor ah's •"itnoooos, and so

. I do not k Cron docuit ataxy orldonco what tho dotal lod
dull-.nations woro.

> T!iu last sjuo.’tioT'« .fioro did thoso tT-:'*v-rta go?

... A Scharfuohrur who accot.pnniod tho first transport and thon
i.f ru half a day lat,r roturnud with - fow last buloigiaca of tho victins
eiovflodgo fur tho first tir» of tho feet that this nr.u r. gassing
,c 11 -; 1 -; tho northo-st of Buchor-wald, approxi -atoly in that dirocti-n
-ir;iy orxo, and that tills w-a a lunatic aoyluri or Banitorlu. 2 . Lator
0i ' uisc vorod that thcro woro t'ro s nit riui.c whiol. had bo a
o 1- ,t4 ; r t: !r pur iuso, o*;o at IHsborf., r second -o-.o, if 1 ro ei.bor
:•! tl; , r.o"u- Pirna, and tho aaio of tho third I c n no longor roc lloct.

>/?. 7?.0ZZT,' I havo no furthor quostions, !'r. Pronldont.

'•”■3 rTJriD? 1 ^: Win Tribunal •11- racors until 1:30 o'clock.

(A roc;S3 vrs takon until 1330 hfurs.)


1266


£ J-13-1—Gr o s 9-JP

C'-uxs I


Correct Copy

Arrzaycoir ssssio r

(The hearing rccoavonod at 1330 hours. 8 January 1947)

FJCZir KOGCS - HosucoA
CROSS ZXAXIb’ATIQ - (Continued)

BY H?.. TIP? (For the dofondant Schroodcr):

CJ. I still want to ask a few questions to the witneesi This
corning in your interrogation you have mentioned a Luftvoffo physician,

Tt. Hoichclt, will you cIopsc toll the Tribunal when Dr. Roicholt
arponrod f'r the first tire at Block 50 at Buchonvald?

A. As far as I can ronccber approximately April or !'ay 1944,

Q. What ran!: did Dr. Rcichclt h' Id at that tiro as far ns you con
rcsor.bcr?

A. Oborotaboprzt of the Luftwaffe.

Q. If I hevo undoroto'd you c^rroctly ho vor- the Luftwaffe u i-

(otr.l

A. Ho w-ro the luftwaffo unlfor.:,

Q. C r .n y»u toll nc to whnt Luftwr :o conrand Dr. ?.oichelt belonged
*r whit Luftwaffo headquarters hod o r.t hie to Buchonvald?

A. I fcnov that Dr. Roichclt who cent by tho Hygienic Ir.atituto of
the ’.'riffon S3 of Borlin to tho department for typhun and virus rooonrch
at Suehonwnld and for tho specific pur o 0 c -f producing vaccino and that
he, along with may others fr».c tho Luftwaffe, had boon attached t' the


Q. i’f\t have I understood you correctly, witness, if I ony that
‘•-•in has not boon a medical officer fro- tho Iuftw«ffe but a forr.cr


luftwr-ff physician who had beer, attnchcc to the Vrffc: ~S who probably,


1 <U !y final quest'.. Can you toll r.o if Dr. "oicholt through

^ 1 4 |

•'is c itire" activity at BeJlIenvald wore tho uniforr. of the Luftwaffe?


wore the Luftvnffo unifor ?


g Jaa-Jt-32 >12-1—Gro ss-JP

Court I

A. Ho was wearing the uniforn of the luftwaffo until the very
or.d - fiwi tho auttgin of 1944 until the spring of 1945, Ho was
caking efforts to he transferred to the SC and ho was hoping that ho
vruld obtain the rank of Saup taturnfuohrer in tho S3.


I2i:7-*


C Jan-jr-SE! :-12~3- -ross-JP
Court I

q. To conclude now. Although ho was wearing the uniform of the
liftvTffe, ho o^vi/.usly still belonged to the '/affen GS7

A* ^ 0 ° the point of discipline he belonged to the Kygionic Ins¬
titute of 3orlin*

C. I do not have any further quostior.g.

CHI P72SIDS1T: Is thorc nay furthor crone en-nin&tior. of this
vitnoi-3 on tho port of my dofenso counool?

-horc boing nono, Frosecution cay proceed.

rsdi-izc: tsahitatio.*

3Y II. KC3AI3Y:

-r. Eogon, I nn not euro that wo mdo perfectly clear on tho
direct oxr.ain-tin i .lust how the horcono oxporir.onts wore carried out.

C;j: you ox Inin to tho Tribunal how thono cxperlc.cnto vox*o conductod and
Vfert wno dor.o to tho oxporinontnl subjects?

A. Hoy I ask you to put your question, tho first part of your
question, oro prociooly because you want to Jnow how voro thooo oxoo-
rlscnte carriod out. That part has been doocrlbod in dotall.

Q. Did they opornto on tho oxporl ontal cubjocto?

A. Tho nodical oxperironto woro carried out on tho oxporincntnl
pirrono by it - by econo of ir.Joction of it - by neons of giving the.:
irugc,

Q. they transfer glands fro other porconc to tho oxpori ontal

aut.l at-. i tho henocoxuol experiments or did thy trnnopl at -rtificinl

itl-nds?

•

' In tho enao of tho hor.o 0 exu».l operations thoy were carriod out, if
• r. properly informed, by operations 'i various tvpco, Ir. nany c*con
‘•lficiol synthetic glor.de were transplanted. Tho former first nontioned
operations woro r.ally of a preparatory ncturo, preparatory for actual
vrr r.mcly, for putting artificial glands In,

you soy whether tho two persons who diod, died as n rosult
ilr '=t r r ir direct, fror these homosexual experiments?

• C osume t:. ‘* the exact information about this ta be givon throum.


1288


3 Jan i7-A-EH!£-12-3“Gross
Ccurt Sto* 1


the medical clerk of sick bay based on the general condition in the ccm/ 'uA
the special condition in sick bay, as well as special conditions connected with
this experiment. I believe to be entitl d tc U;e assumption that the experi-
aent led tc the death cr part of the cause cf the death of those two experi¬


mental subjects


5 jan-ArCZS-lJ-l-Feldt
Court Ho- 1 .


How, Hr. Zogon, to go to tee typhus errerinents very briefly, !:•. it
not true thi t reports of the typhus experinonts in Block 46 weru sent to tno
office of the Roich physician S3 and Police Dr. Grawitc?

A. That is correct.

v Ar.d Poppondick got a copy of that report?

A. Yob.

Did tho typhus experiments in Block 46 contir.uo whoa Ding aado trips
avty froti Buchonwald ar.d Hovon wi.s in ch- r.;c?

A. Yoa.

You hove mentioned tn. ruuao ROeihild. Do you refer to Ferdinand

Roochild?

... Yea.

v Cur. you say waothcr Roonhild io w*ll inform'd on Action 14>'13 in

*• m _

Bueno i.wold?

... I tnlnk I cur. any that -.ny reaction connected with 14 f 13 lj known
to Ferdinand Roechild. That ia because he bundled tho corrcapondonc. f*».J
loo becuuao ho worked in the prisoners' nick bay and also boenu e ho wno in
cloao contact witn tno lending con of the lugj .1 cabinot administration or
their roprcoor.tutivco nnd deputies, i.i od also because ho la a .’U'in v:no would
wi.tch ratters vita gr-KX care.

Con you also say th»-t Roonhild If well inforccd on tho activities
of Hover. ir. hucncnwr.ld?

... Y.B.

MR. KcEAHSY: I h. vo no further questions.-

IKE PESSIDSKT: .^ny crors examination or. the put of the dofor.se counsel
uj to the redirect examination by tho Prosecution?

Tneir being none, the Prosecution any c:li itr next witness. The wit-
'•-op 1 b excused.

R. &HAHEY: The Prosecution would llko t..ic tlr.c to call :• witness
10 testify with respect to the activities of Dr. Eu/:c:. Xogor. rX ST*'bourg
-utsvviler, -.nd ; trail concentration cn=p by tho :~~c o: Schirr.cc>. it::


i 3ES-13-13”2-Feldt.

Court Jo. 1.


respect to tytnus cxpcrUcnts. vc fc vc .at yet concluded our proof on c o
typhu* experiments :.t Buchonwald. EOvovur, tfle *-it:.9ss vr. jn vo would
li/j to cull to the stis desirous of returning to str ab urg • t the
earliest opportunity, i :A for th. t reason wo wold like it t..i 3 ti...o to coll
Gerog Hirtz to the 3tnr.d.

.'•2 PP-ESIDStiT: Tno H:.ra;. 1 will su_:.or. the witness Georg Kirtz t the
stand.

KH. El-DY: This witness is French citizen, y Jur Honor, but ho will
testify in German.

GEORG HIRTZ. a witness, took the stand imd tostiflod a. follows:

TH2 PRES IDS J?: ?nu wit-os- will r i -e r.is rignt hand. Will t.io onth
to r.dciniat erod to tno witnooo in Froach or 3er. r.?

K RDY: Tu.. Tribunal wants t» know if tile witness & r. tr.ko the
>utd In French.

iHS VZT2ISSS: Yoo, I can repent the »atr. in Fronch.

THE PRESIDE.:?: I didn't no nr the translation.

THE Ml HESS: Tot, I cm repent the ontn ir. Fror.cn.

THE PRESIDE 'T: I understand that the witness is t\ Froacnaan. Will tr.e
vitfiesc nnow.r?

•HE KITE 3: Y>.s, I nu ?rer.cn citizen.

THE PRESIDENT: I will idaluistor tr.e onth in Sn.;lisr. and it will bo
trar.eluted into German.

I ttve-r that t.;o evid nec I shall give sljull bo the truth, the wnolo
trut.., * nd notning but tne truth, s. help me God.

(Tr.e wltneso rcp.nted the oath.)

"r.£ F.-CSIDS.;?: Rak the vitnesn if ... dOe-j so sv-.s.r.

l.-I£ alTirSSS: I sWear.

r.-ESUS. ?: Tne witness will be seated.

DIRECT EX.. U.miT

- • 5 P.DY:

• Witness, your nuuo is G.org Kirtz, ir it not?

— Ye:, '..;it is correct.


- 1291 -


8 Jea-A-3ZS-13-3-Jcldt-JP

Court I

Q. You spoil your last name H-i-r-t-z, i s that correct?

A. Yos, that io correct.

Q. You wore horn on July. 27* 1907, wore you not?

A. Yos, that ic corroct.

Q. Witness, where wero you horn?

A, I wa3 horn la Saarbruockonhoin in lower Alsaco.

Q. Nhat is your presont address witness?

A. :'y proscnt address io at Srstoin in lowor Alsaco.

Q. You axo a Fronch citizen,.witnoso?

A, Yoo, I an.

^v. Vitnoos, will you kindly tell the Tribunal what is your educational
tnckground? *

A. I went to tho elementary school up to tho ago of nlno years. From
nlno to covontoon yoars I viol tod the high school and junior collogo,
and thon I started in phoraocy. Aftorvardo I workod in a bacteriological
laboratory as an assistant, and I coupletod ay studios by graduating
nc a doctor of natural scionco.

Q. Jltnoas, you received n degreo of phurmacology at tho !*nivorcity
of Ctroosbourg in 1929; is that corroct?

A. In 1939, I was iesued my state diploma ns a pharmacist, and nftox^-
wnrds I was givon onothor diploma in 1933.

That ic, in 1923 you rccoivod tho dogreo in pharmacy, witnocs?

A. 1929.

'fltnoss, what did you do aftortho c^npletioi of your educution
until tho timo that you were placed under arroct by tho Gestapo?

A. I worked in my own pharmacy, which also includod anothor lnbora-
tM-y which also cor.t?ired another testing 1-borrtory.

Prior to your erroct by tho Gestapo, were you evor arrested for
•*n J convicted of any crimes, witness? ^

• Fo, novor.

Q. 'hoa wore you nrroctod by tho Gostnpo?

A. On the 11th of In;/, 1943.


1292


8 Jan-A-GT3-13-4-Feldt-JP
Court I


Q. 'ill you tell the Tribunal the circunstonccs *.f your arrost?

A. 3io charge against =o stated because of decomposing tho German
Dili tax? strength and of tho attaapt to oscapo.

z. Aftor you vere placod undor arrest by tho Gestapo, whore vero
you i prisonod, witness?

A. -irst of all I spent two or three days at tho Auguotino prison
at Colanr.

Q. "nd thoa?

A. -%id thon I was transferred to tho concentration canp Schirmcck,

Q. "ould you toll tho Tribunal whoro the concentration crusp
Schimock in located, witnosa?

A. Tho concentration canp Schiraock is located in tho Vosges valloy
near tho Alpino border betwoen Franco and Go many,

Q. Is that within closo rnngo to tho concentration canp tfatswoilor?

A. Eio two concentration comps bolong togothor.

Oj 0 r .vji\ you arrivod at the concentration carp, whet was tho first
duty assigned to you?

A. Veil, I was locked in tho bunkor firot of all for a period
of eight days.

Q. 'hid then?

A. And then I bocTno a nurso at tho hospital.

^hon did you becoao a nurso in tho hospital in tho ciddlo of
Kny 1043?

A. I arrived on the 11th of "-y, and eftcr 8 days in tho bunkor —
thoreforo that wee on the 20th of I ny that I b econo r. nurse.

Q. In y'.ur oxpcrionco as a nnlo nurso at the hospital, Doctor,
r > you faniliar with the activities connected with experimentation
progrras on human boings?

A. Tee, in the course of tho week after cy p "rival, a transport
" f " oll0 i arrlvoA * I* contained approximately 20 to. 25 con. Tho
- r -'•= rt arrivod on a particular day which did not fell or. the seme

ip J as tho day


12S3


5 Jan-. - GZ S-13“ 5- ?cldt
Court ;«o. 1.


on wivicn other prisoners used to arrive. Those Polos dinot r.rrivc in tho
usual way : nd voru not processed ir. the usual way upon their arrival, Sut
thoy w-r t i;-.odi .tcly trkon into r. barrack and lock there. The bnrruck hn«*.
boon ostablie.cd for that p:rticul r purpose. It vnr, r. coi„:..on barrack v.oich
nru been divided into two s*cti -ns by iv«x.nB of boards.


-lc9V


g Janu3ry-A-3oG-14-I-Kupperstein
Court No. 1

0, After the Pbieo arrived in the caap and were placod in the barracks,
what happened to then, witness?

A First of alii the Poles had to wash their barracks several tinea
with Lysol solution. I shall rofer to this fact later on. Several days
liter, two German Luftwaffe physicians arrived by car, and then they woro
•occapaniod by a Genian wonan. Then they called the Chief of the Mcdica 1
Offico — it was a nodical student by the nano of Adler — and I, as
veil so the previously nentionod Poles, and then vo had to stand at atten¬
tion, Tho ewap loador and his deputy wero likovlso pror.ont at tho foraation.
T:o c*r.p leader, his deputy, Adler, and I wore given the usual Robort
Koch Institute produced vaccine, and wo were lnnoculatcd with this vaccino,

Tho 20 to 25 Polos, on the other hand, wore injected in the cheat nuocloo
with a yollow-grnyioh liquid, which tho physicians had brought along in
littlo glaocoa which woro aoalod with cotton wool. Boforo rocoiving this
injection, tho Poleo woro not subjocted to any nodical exanination, nnd
nil tho lnjoctiono woro given with tho emo nc< die without any further
disinfection fren ono person to tho noxt. Tho Polos were thon cont tack
to thoir barracks and the barracks woro guarded; nobody bocldoc mycolf,
vho had to brind thoir daily food, had accoso to thcc, nnd 1 also had to
chock on thoir tenpernturoo.

Q Vitnesc, when this ycllow>-gray fluid was injected into these
Pollnh victlno, was that the vlrvlont virus of typhus, 03 you understood
it, or was that a vaccino injection?

A 1 cannot tell you that, but thoro aro two facts which show that
tr,e v -iccino was virulent, nanely, bacauso the nurcc who had contact with
•non had boor, innunisod through a tosted vaccine and, on tho othor hand,

1 v ' vo nontionod the fact to you that upon their arrival the Polos had
*° vn *^ their barrackc with a Lysol solution. This was for the purpooo
• billing fleas and bugs. Tho othor soctior. of the barracks, because
* previously told you, the barracks was divided only by a wooded
1 nrlitioft, was specially occupied by sono prisoners, and when it wuo dis-
--^red that tho washing with Lysol had not killed all the insects, then


- 123 ^-


8 JP-T.-A-IVJG—14—?—Eu _~por stein
Court I

tho other half of the barracks vas immediately ovacuatod.

0 .. L'ow, witness) you have told us that tho “oles were taken hack
to this isolated barracks after those injections, conplotoly out off
fror tho rest of tho canp. Tow, will yr, u tell us what dcvclopod after
that tir.C?

A. I had to take the tenperature of tho roles throe tiros daily.
Aftor 36 to 40 hours, tho tcnper*>turo began to incroaso very nuch, to
39-40 rad still highor, Tho reaction of the individual Poles was not
nlvr”3 tho swno, which can also ho explained hecause tho pcoplo there
were ’tot homogeneous enough. They were young, partially still strong
people amongst thoc, and there wore oldor onos who, it could ho soon,
hrd lived in a concentration carp nlrordy for n long tino. On tho
oocond or third day, I already found two cornsos dead in thoir hunks.
Tho fever kopt on for about six to seven or eight days. Towards tho
ond of thir period, conditions of oxcitouor.t and shock rad fonr rad
speaking rufoct, and other oyaptoes wore found, and fron that moaont
on I was unable to follow tho oxporiuor.t any further boc*uso I was
roliovod of y duty no a nurse and was sent to punitivo con, any.

Q. doctor, you eared for thoso Polos ond took thoir toepor'-turoo
throo tines a dry. Tow, as a result of C"ring for thoso Folos rad
taking thoir temper.nturco, did you submit reports or. your activities
In that connection rad, if so, to whom did you report to 7


129 c


3 Jao-ir-G2S^l4-la--Bipporstoin.
Court Ka. 1.


— Tno te_pcrature report wr.s rocordod an fevar charts by ..o lr. tho
evening and they w r then ..aniod ov^r to the &- p Con.-binder - t his office.
During t..is ti_e to Wnich I a referring, tno latter :.ust kvo ind tolephand
contact with tho initia tor* af tho- o experiments.

0.. Did y u understand th..t these cxn.ri .ents ver- ini tin tod by Dr.
Haj-gen?

-• Upon tno arrlvil of the tw> physicians I wrs told by tho prisoner,
.Ulcr, that t..lo v.s Luftwnffo Oborttubs rst Hnsgon and his assistant,
luftwuffo Stnbaarts Fraofo. Tnis was nit the first tluo th t they per-
f'r.-.od nuen nn cxpori._ont r.t Schlraock.

q. K-w, dll theso reports that you turnod In to tho C"-..-p Cotuandor's
offlco — were tney in turn for* .rdud to Pnforsor Bongon?

probably; but I did not k. >v t.. t exactly. I only do Jenow thn

• /Dot.iao later, in tno flrr.t li.yt of tno a oath of Juno, Hongun and Ornofo
:iln COJ-O ti Scclrtiodc nnl took a blood tost froa tho rales who hod ro-

coiaod, aa well na .ysolf.

q. Y>u refer ti tho foot that after yau loft this particular bnrrncko
ue u -edo nuroo. yau ha hvard af ather oxperl -onta: can you toll tho
Tribunal about tnaoo?

... Ir. inly know wiic.t ;.y ooarudo .viler fid ^o: that tnls wan tho oocon .1
ox.erluont if this kind at Sc?; 1 rock.

q. Wore Kongon, Graofo :r Cracdol clad in tho unlforcs of officors Jf
tno Luftwaffe vhor. y'u -aw thor.T

A. Both of ther. w. ro wearing the bluo-groy unlfors of tho Luftwnffo.
v II-w, witness, dl y>u undumtanl thejo oxveri. entu th: t wore con-
iucted upon th. ru 20 ta 2^ FoI-jb t> bo erperiuents with tyj-nua for research,
In car.r.octiia with tho disease, tyr-ius.

••• Y»b; th^ru wasn't tno slighted doubt in it for _.o, because after cl

• hat tiac I ha alrot.iy lj years of pauruicolagical activity behind ce.

Witness, y->u h: vc stated that on the tnird day after tho injection,
lv * ^-o Foloc died ns c result af the experiments. Now, did you boo
-•J iao corpsos yourself, personally?


- 1297 -


3 jf\n-..-C3S-l 1 t-2a-Ett perstein.

Quirt .:<• 1.


... Y08. I h vc porsomlly tied those wo corpses ii.t > r .per t -. ■: :.!

; ..y w_r.. burnod :t tno erectory o: litzweilvr.

..fter those first tw deaths, di . r.ny other deaths follow!

... I could «,ot 8>a,nr 1 5 t.r.t f ct. cut I only know t.v t rs Ion,: ::a
I wuc present nt the experiment — oni I was urablo t > see the end — mere
cere only tnoso two fatalities.

You n.vu st .tod tn* t there oxpcrl ontol suUjc.H nufforod frot
itntlon for about five or six d ye -ft.r tr.o v ccl.v.tl .... cpo^ch dl.D-
or ert, etnmnoriand focli:.--* »f anxiety .-Tip, rol. llow, lo you know
whether or not as r result of there oxporl.onta on the exr.orlccntJil oubjocts
v-o ourvivod, wr.cthcr any ill effect! resulted t - tx.eir rj.yoic; 1 c>hditiont
... I will n vc to as moo that these w.rc the results of tno is.J«.cti on,
bcc.uoo .‘/lor as well ar uyrolf, wno hr/ uecn lusui.lxoi wit.; tr..- ununl and
coi on typhus vaccine, ’.ii not fowl such re cti ns. Jhene speech lofoots
>f wnich I h vv already spoken probr.oly revalued in tno fora of ota: erit.K
with tw • ;r throo Polos.


1£9<5-


Jar. h7->.-S— 15-1- Gaylord

; a* to. 1

'. .' : ow, witness, you »?rc later relcx.-d fra: tie Schir .c: Concc.itav.t-

;ca Ocap . On what day were you released?

... I was released—i do not re_e >cr the exact Jay

*s released a little -ore after four -onL’ia after qy arrival. That la app-

!• :: .ooly around tJ.e 15th of August.

. .y wore y otl, witheso, t! : 3 por

,v. Xiic Gestapo naa corrupt a. y v- .id -iven ever ii . t! it

•

ate ?rmod in jeweler and '•old i or to _• . ct rcloao.-.

Q. I.’ow, witness, at the tiac }T*xr role c, wero > ; c .

-- •• ^ ""Om stateoont that you wid r.ot diacloro what ye : ha sot i
; n through Curias your . f iapriaorc ent at th concont • . n canp7
A. I had to swear anti I hod to ci-n that under throat of life L.-
nrcccre'tont in protective custody that I :.x l it’.i nobody discuss v&at I
o» « he! lived through, I o not nood to tell you that ouch an oath woo
under Torco and that it ioc- .;ot hcuo ary nooning for no.

*• i; ' v > witness, those 20 to 2b' Polos t.at aoro Injected at 12u Schir-
^c'.. c oncontration Cap an! later suf.croC those intense fovers, did any of
u.o.c .ic:plo volunteer for thono c peri * .is?

A, I do Slot think so. \‘.c »coplo cno trans » rt. •

^ locked up. i*otx no min the; to fell into

.orsaticn. Nobody asked then in b? jrasorxc th.y ranted to vcluntocr for
tixoc oipori cats or not.

. I have sic fiirthor quest!,. :

• - . ESlDEr?: Dd any o' 5Ju ofc.u-o counsels iris. 1 > c.*. ss-csiuvino

- ,

.-roe cod.

SrSRING: Hr. KcHancy, t..c ribunal ii
r not -...is witness can testify as t: whether :>r no* :c we the
- any f thuso rf!ic-rs who co ducted these caper! c,.ts av wJictlkr r
• ;a other the;- ha &:$• ci sue-' :n with ary of ebr- c - ants
- - -cc!..


J:-l .-15-2- Gaylor

. rt . 1


:_-ia. -rr :m. ?;chakst:

.. Jitncsa, will you tlic innal who ctmductod t . st t;?huo
.rr.'Ji’i- onts at the ^chlruck ^ -uco-itr - . Jap.

... Aa I hove already told ... there \ c Xuftuadfr . ratabcaret
on, the L rerst f tha were acc .. an

an .iatant whose nano, - thi . 1 . u Lein re ..

Q. That rauo la a.wjile.’ c-'.-O-.-J-L?

Tea, tint is correct.

... And you uuiorst cl that . Jr . • . • . .... on?

A. I rather hart the Lwproaai n . siotaut bacauso it

\r.z aho who preparod the hypertonic »c ont *. cf *r- th i J-rU :.r
•fore *;ivc;i and porCnnoc’. .tho usvol tasks ilch art usually per.cr.isrt
b;- on assistant.

Q. 7C the Tribunal; , he c. er.u> i- tho nly ’act which

Itncsa. *hc connection or too -r tho
ir f tho dofondzmto with Haa c rill .. ocr at a later a . Pro-
eccuti h.a no furthi* q < stio c be .• . L..

. 1 : Ten . ay -nocco .. * 1.0 lt..Q8: ]

:*••» h:: : ■ •: . ofioo, 1 wean like, at thio ? at,

c« *» cu mt 1 0 - 201 , V.t ! c . ' .: .

•ribrncl will recall that t*v. wit.ncs .< . v. eel fid rith rcr.xci t.

certain p'.iaon ojqoriumto carried i :.s ti:c Gc neon trail n C?. ue'-.on-

i . u will rcooober t .t ire. t l : us o' tl.. .> ^rin-

wwlcd -ut in tho Tea nee •. orjen, for nc, la Aooafccr l?li3j
aj -‘ '-r't those experinontu wore c ’ue ' to see Wb. t'. . r r .c *cfon-

c.: had act .nisterd : is a t L ?. sneer aqain3v luch, tho con-
Cenmtcv_p c<- maunder in “ucherr.rai , tt.o waa loin- .'ivsccut’of.ro
' u*t; and that f . It wee,

-ctd j<dB :i was odaLniSw-aU. tr tiia, an-, tiion . .-o ’ 't on to
* :• .^aic'rlua and or.ccuted, a J.r trhio. . tw. si.s ^ro . vr r.aci uj- n

. h0 . I - •


-130&.


Jr_-: i'7-A-S -15-3- Gaylord
c v.rt :ro. i


and Pr:secution -xhiblfc 267, on P:. c l-.C -JT the English . ciaront '

-iir.i note is an entry of the 30th and 3ist of -eceaber 19'i3 an; it roads:
"Special teeperinent on four persons in tie case isch/Hcven. .• .* f SS

ft

Gru; pciifuchrcr -ajor General He c, tho j.tpcrL;cnt t r.-.r carried <-ut in t e
• co of ur. - r .en and Dr. .'ah:;.c p is n
..orinonts chare cd in Paragraph 6-E of tho Indictnent, an ’; f cc jivc ala*
in P .rr.jraph 11 of the Indietuont. Zm o are throe instances f c... urunaits
ulfch .soi3on charred in that paronrarh on' I 'ddn-: it id it :c ;/cll if 1
just road that parerraph fr a t c ’let • t r» I c f V .•■s:

"(K) Exporinonts with i iscn. I.i r about ‘-cce-il.r 1? 3 ant’ in or
about October 19Ui, oxporiuonts wore conducted at th< Buchor/ald fr.noon rati¬
on Cwv tc inveati ato the effect of various • r nr v
The prisons were aocrotly aliini stored to cr. ori ental subjects in ti.;ir
food, ’‘ho victims died as a result o ' t i ;.is;n r .voro killed 1 • _ -
lately in order to por--.it a:to jsi.s. In or abrut ^optonber 19Jdj, oxporlaon-
tal mibjoc :-o show with poison ballots and suffc; -o and oath.

Tho Gefon Gonzkcn, Ochhar’t, aru c-tsi ;. , fcppondick ore obarfO d
vrltli special roopcncibility f itica in thoso crinoo."

V.ov tho first experiment in Dccot-bor »!;3 at Duchcmrai! is cvrtod
fl«rt by tho entry in tho >i:i Diary for tho yn: an 31ct .-f »:ce ,v
iy :3, dttd aloe of c. irso by the testimony >• dch tho witness ?> n has given
boib this Tribunal.

T!r. TEESHKifT: hat war tho r.usf or asnod tc this exhibit?

-i. :;cHAM:i: This c.j ii L Is i r .scc -i< n Exhibit 2 0.

.icw the see n-! p is n -x,.:ri c:J, a ut vich Ko : ;cn tos*tried
'" v: the vno charred in tho InOiotuont as ccurrin in October 19U$i

-ribanal will rente: • hat Kejon s ated that f ur ere ns were
r> Aiise.cred seno secret poisonous powder by D ng in the C v.nt ri-.n, an
- recall. His attention was then dircctoil t; tho entry in th jy

23 ec .oior l?JJj. That is on i'a-;c -1 of J.c “ocuncnt Serb -r.dch r r.-’s as
r lwra: "Special cxpartnoot . . :r.- ncccriin- tc las.tr cti .. Of


-I3CI-


8 Jan ,-15-Ji- Oa-icri
C-.'-irt ; . 1


c* OborfUchrcr lecturer Dr. I&usonslgr ani ?.'Z-A kopbrt on this raD;

Tho tribunal v.ill alro recall that .o rdtn^s Zcgjn testi.icd i. at Lj„ :

» afore thin a is on client -r. Gctc/ or, Urn • .a' ala a n

:ttt * 5icn i )riacncrc flhot rtth ?*«» 'mileis & t Sachscnhauscn n.;.r ra.dcn-
bur » - 1 Uat JiRr rolr * tod ti - 73c >cc cncoc t hi., an! that ' toitifiod
ant ftmeenreky rs there, awl there ;


alont one f -ho "uaaian prison- -rf tar tr-inr to a Mac :inr vrfy , n that
occasion.


-1303-


3 J~n. ‘.7-A-16-1-PX?- Lesser

C:urt. ;.o.- i


".:.c is th*i third experiment chrrgod in the Indictment and Document Number
:,0 201, Prosecution Exhibit 290, is our proof in support of th-t chcr t in the
Indictment. This is a letter .ran the Defendant Iju^onsJcy directed to the
Cridnoio£ical Institute to the attention of Dr. Lilacnn, It is dstet 12
September 19V. nnd you will recall thet that ccrrobor-tes in .very ict'il the
Uati.cny of the witness KofQa since the poisor. experiments about which he
low in 3uchenwald occurrud in October 19V.. This letter reads:

"Subject: Experiments with Acanitic nitrrtu projectiles.

"T- the Cri.dnologic-1 Institute
Utn: Dr. ..idiaann

"3orlin

"In the presence a i Sir-Stumb'.nnfuehrer Dr. Dino, Dr. Udncnn and
the ur.'Jorsitncc, experiments .ith Ac.aitin nitr. to projectiles -.mere

conducted on 11 September 1W, on 5 persons whe hr. A ' ocn condemned to
.'o-th. n.o proJectiUo in question were of 7.65 millimeter caliber
nil;d nith crystallized poisor.. 7a« vxporir.-nt 1 subjects, in a lying
position, ttfro each shot in the upp-r j*rt of the left ... i s

>l *-« of them were clc nly shot through. Even fterw.rds, no effect
: *•— to bo observe.:. Ihwse two orporloontOl subjocts woro

-•‘-T !,rc -xuapted.

"Tho untrhhcu of the pr-Joctilo did not show any peculi rities.

ortcric fe.jol ris .f one A the subjects n-.s injured.

« U ht 3troau of blood issue- tree the wound. Sut the blvo'iir.j
•• ape : 'ftcr h short tine. Tie Lost of bl.x w.s ostia*ted *s haviru:
a t t.-.e a 3 t 3A •" liter, ..d consequently w; 3 -n r.o cc-unt r.fcnl.

1 • ’* the 0 ndoanod .--urrrisin . gigII rity.

..t first no puculi ritivg appeared. ..ft©* 20 t i 25 cdlttfeu* a Bator
u ti:r. rv\ . elicit ptyciism sot in, but st-np-d ff In. «fi r AO t_ /.5

-.ir;;Vs a str^nrer seliv-tian set in. The poisoned persons sw.il .od
• ^ t.-ely, out later tie flow ~l s- lien bee* s. s. stronr th t it caul!

-Ver be JV rcorne by swallowing. Foc.ny snlivc flowed .'rr. t::eir
i cooking nd vonitin.; set in. After 58 minutes the pulro
'‘ Hi A thun no longer fca fc-lt. Tho third had a pulse- rr.tc of


8 Jan. 47-«-L6-2-PK?- Lesser

Court H . 1

7t. ..fr-r c5 ninutos his blood pressure was 90 over 60. Thu sour._s ..ore
.xtres: iy IsKi. .» r^cuctijn of blood pressure wer evident.

"During the first hour of‘the p&rLacnt the pupils eii r >t show • r.y
changes. «fter 7£ ninutos the pupils .f -U three showce - .xediu... dilhtion
t: tn-r -lit:. retarded li .ht r-'.ctiv.. Simultaneously, a'.xini.-. roapir; tion
uitt. hor.vy bre*. china inhalations s-t in. Tr.is cub3ic e Mtor - f.w dnuws.
The pupils C3j.tr- cted -foir. :.nd th-ir reaction improved. After 65 Tir.utuc
thu p.'itulltr on 1 nchiilco t-nd:n refUx-s of the nois.ned subjects
^viv r.efitivu. The upper .'ou>ziRi.l r.flor.eS of th. third w-ro still

•

positive, u .ile the lower aoie t.. . tive. Alter roxin tcip 90 .uir.ut .s,
cr.e of the a objects _ in ct r- or.’ thin,; h y vil,; this m s ce.xp ni.d
by r.n increasing motor unrest. Then t*:e heavy hr.-thing changed int./ r.

IM, uccoloratuc r.ssirr tior., cc .cni.J !>;• uxtreto n- uson. Or.e of the
poisoned p.roor.o trie: L: vain to vanit. Io do so h- introduced f.ur
fin-.rs A his !.• ni up to the truckles into his t'..ro“t, but novur-thu-lcss
c-il n-i vOi-i t. His foe. .. . I Lufll.ec' .

"* h0 ltKr ‘ WJ oxp«ricA.;-.tol subjects i/u air.’ Jy e.rly uhoen p: le
lace. Ihe other sy>jptJcB wvin the s'o.. The actor unrewt incr- s.„ po
such th t thu persons flun L - thems-ilvos up, than down, rolled thoir wyos
3- e ; rimless notions with th-ir hiuulc r.nd nr3. Fin: lly th

• It tion subsided, the juoilo dilute, tc the ssclwo, ni the c-nduaned

* • f'l-S6, _ 88eter op-s_:s rxf urir.: ti.n ».r. jbs.rv-u in o:.e • SO.

123 :. ninutc of thu projectile.

"Suancry: Iho projectiles :illc with r.pr-xis- uly 38 adlli rauo
or nconitir. 1 itr sc in sol* ' l^rn h ', in spite A only insignificant
injuries, - diy eifjct ..iter t^o hours. Hois ::dr. eh wed d. t- IS
Ar.uUz ‘li.1 injury. vi*. reactions n.r.: a-.liv u n, alt rctian
:! in. .upila, ne-i .tiva tendon r.flvXeS, jsotor unrest r.d extrc.no nnus«r."

(Cicned) sx v

SS-Lacturer Cborfuehrer • rri
Office Jhief"

• ! ^v te ettechncnts to the letter ~re pictures of the pr-jectil. which
’ ' 6 ‘ —- the 5 victixs.


-13-^


£ J*r. 47-/»-lb-3-PK?- Lessor
C-':a*t • 1

7n"C constitutes the pros! of the Prosecution or. the crines ch'-rged in
prr.mph 6(K) -nd correspondingly in Parf ~rrph 11 of the Indie tant.

JUIoi SSRII'G: Lr. iicH'ney, ahrfc uefcnl nto i- you conci.^r to
bo proven to hnve o-*.n £ipllcct_d by the proof which you h ve adduced?

.5. If the tribunal olecse, of course the Del --r.cant

Iru -*sky is, accordin' to our judgment, ixnlicnt-J at n nlnixun in the
Second poison exporioont r.d th- poison bullet • xpcriru.nt. Those two, ccordin
to the testLaony of Kogon, are related cxporltants. The inst;ncu ; the
p is :dng of the 4 Russian prisoners of war to tost the eff-ct of certain
ru's used by the Defendant Hovon in doing rar.y with witness for the 3S

C.urt Koch y,.-. s c3rr i c j 3U t also by Din,- who was the sub-riir to of

Urugowsky. to hevo, in turn, charged GonzwR, Gubhnrdt, :.:v! Poppendick. Of
thos , Gobhnrdt r.d Poppondick *.iv ac.abers of the »'n- office in which tho
Defendant .!ru jusky v»as active, thet is to soy, the office of the r.eicho
Physician, Crawitz, Gonzkon, it is true, was in the nodical dor rt-.ent -f tho
'..iffen-SS ’which was subordinate to the t.-cclieC SS Stunduauptant r.d
r. t. • the .oCe.’Oed Grnwitz.


6 J-n — .-16-lc-lerser

0 rt c. 1


..•cor&to'ly is .:r.y bo tlet t! . f roaccuticn will recede frcr: itr
waition Witt rospcct to Gor.s’'cr.. I.cwovcr, I do rot, r.*. tl la
rial tc 39 on the record in ttr.t rcnr.rcl. Jo i.-vo ,«ro-
: 1 t. , - t in!:, all of our cviicr;cc wit! rospoci to t! cri :oa
0: r.rr-d m f-rcyrr.pl 6(K) end I tc! 0 ic tV.\t it ic ,-r.ttor
* -*r i .enu a to vi ort ttr.t ovidonco r'-ns r.yr.Scflt- luito
clocrly it runs c-r.inet --rv-rwarcy vory dirootly rml joracn liy,
..lac, tr t ic l-pUcr.tos GohK rCt .r ■ Po;?_ :rC! c) If
.• cb; r.t loca directly hoc;.ure of ti e positions t).o; hold and

,.i:c c. -re •..ill ’>0 additional proof -.via rospoct tc. Gohl'.e.rdt,
a to lie ’ey .-sition, r.a tc rofUcrl cxpcriiiortr.tlcn -n cor.-
ccs.tr.fci.cn cc-:p innetou of whatever kind, I fcrko at that if tl 0
^rococution provee tl-.t G 0 ’*:.rdt v • to offer t a clo rto h-uao
tlrcu ‘1 t/licl* odicr.l oxporiuenc c .tion u cn ccncontrr.tirn c:.:;p
in!.:t.r l\A to ho clorcod, tl t then wo Ir.vo protty directly
l pl'ioutc.l lia in tlx ’’Jclo eery- of the proyre. 1; :nd *r ttr.t
cor auction I vreuld lilro to ro in-i tl 0 Tribunal of ono w f tlx
doe*.or tr v:! ic! v-ort in under tlx list: rd 0..r SxporL'onto, ono
f t:. lottora in 19 -.-: :.:-cro - fcMnlc 5 poracna wore ro-

It'cstod fer cxpcrii.ontc.tion nitt . oortr.ln type of r, raid tl.. t,
2 ' tUr 1 ol,: c '” 1 fcJo oortionts nd r. >rov. 1 in p rt, ns T rcionbor
cf ' c fe, ‘- Cr - ln - 2 olicc, rnd Gw hi erdt, end, I tl In’:

« one — 01uoc?:« oi tt - . . that

1 1U :crt ‘ b: fcl ‘- tt t t: o' woi\Un cf tko lutt.r \xry

°lc..rl : indicc-fcod tint ti c Dofendmt Gc-'hardt v. r ii cvcl ..

Saltier. rr, i„ . £ £ tt.t i c w.c c. 11,J upm to yiv. Mo
ir " v,; l 8t 61 l!sc c - concuiitr. ticn ccr.p inrc.toc f-r Modicr.l

rticul.-j i'- iiko to r.servo .:ui- cr^nc-ntc re tl ror. oct. tr tlx
Gciiz'.xr on this ,x.r 3rr.pl cf t! Indlctrxxt until wo

’ 110 c - ui to cc.r>. full tV hill rr. if > crfci .r.s

• :


1 - - 16 - 2 ;

C vrt i.c. 1


-• ' of tic Indie teont With roapoct to Genzkon.

JU.,C : 1.1 LSr j -’rrscci tirr. ;c. reserve its .\rjii
r. t point.


-13C7-


8 jnn-u-Ji-17-l^feohan

Jcirt 'o. 1

I .-oul ; Iik>; now to iv 1 i :to tii. record tne r,.st of f-. Ding ci'ry, whici
is PToaccution Exhibit 237. At the rick of reputing jus a little, I on
goin t . to rt rt ca page U6, rith the entry of 13 and lb April Wi.3. I .v. quit,
sur. till v. mvu road that part into th. r.cor-', oecaus. it *, ;ls i th
ASridin Cr-nulr.t and Rutcnol, tr.o of the "ru #which were us. t. r-.w-utically
ir. treating typhus. The Tribunal •.rill roccli that the pap-r, i rit .ti by

-n which boars trv. rubber st-..p c* Top.xndick rith his of
rtpprov 1 for mblication, deals with this sa.-. subject and tWjSw a-^ experi-
hts« I quite :-ur. a rune into tho record, cons ;u . ly, l an

st rti.ag .rith 2? ..pril 19b3 to 1 \a, 1913, t-xt on pa.-. U6 oi the Ti^lish
Docuin nt Book i

"27 ..pril 1*3
1 ’ ay L3

"Unit or SS-SturabarmfiuIr r Ding order, i to Paris to ; r? ure
laboratory rat.rial Tor the »Dupartr^nt for Spotted Fover nr..* Virus ..s, rch*
awl tho Hygiene Institute."

"15 Juno ;,3

" T/ -••-Ir.-rapeutic /xp.rl . nt 'O tracr.in*

''Or: su gestlon or tho Hebert Koch Institute, 3-rlin (FTof Dr.

’ • ) th - wffoct of a rww ’Thornpettikur.' or the Hno-r. t.ricr - OtrhORin

shou1 ' or. huo&ns. For this purpose, 20 perron? o the series

"Otr-oaini 2c persons for control (10 iaauniscd, 10 not Irani ) woro
i:.:ectoO 1 Juno 13 respectively on 13 Jutk. 13 with 2 cn. .-eh of ty >hus
i'-cteri: St, -wiling in a physical salt solution, jiv..n in potato salad.

• ' - slltr.tly, 23 v ion. FUrtheracro, ...

"2o July b3:

" r " ‘ rta ci ' c ' 1 — his'.or coe.i L.twd cf the series f OtrhOr n* an; sent
t‘ ■- ri in."

"5 August 1*3;


-ljOo-


8 Jra-xr- Jx’-17-2-Ho c haa-JP
Cr.-Jt I


"Charts and case history C'-rpletefi of the control scries and cor.t
to 2 c 11 in n


"10 August 43:

"Delivery of the records to RC. - (Reich Hirhar irodical Counsellor)
CHRIST I a;' 321' ir. the 52(1 (Reich !iri B try of the Interior). (The oxpo-


rinor.tr 1 oorion was concluded,

"1* death (control-not~in=unisod).-

:tod ?cvcr_ vocclnc__e:r. rjr.ontrl Berios Til .


"28 :>;• 43:


18 Juno 43:

"Carrying of snotted fever vaccination for inrun*cation with the
following va.ee in o;

1) 20 I'ornono with vaccine -Acid"

2) 3D orsc.no with vocclr.o "Acid Adsorbnt 3 of tho Anhnltiniochon
Sorurvorko G.a.b.H., Berlin W 7

3) 3D percono with vaccine "Veifl- of the 1 stitutc for nrottod
1‘cvor or.d virus research of tho ouprcce coainnd, -rcy (CEK)
Crake w, (Syor).


1309


g Jro-Jr-TJ^i7-la-?:o ekan-JP
Court I


"27 Aug. 43:

“Infection of

<30 persone of the series “A 3 id"

20 porcons of the series "Arid Adsorb"

20 persons of the series "’feigl"

10 persona for cortrol

"by intrnrenouo Injection of l/4 cc= ooch. Vholo
Wood of n spotted fever side.

All cxporinontol persona set very serious spotted f.ver."

“7 Cept 43:

"Ch-xt ond ense history c<nplotcd. The or^vorinonUd rcricc
vna concluded.

"53 dontha (16 with *Asid«)

(18 with 'A3id Adsorb'd 1 )

(9 vith • Voi&l 1 )

(8 control)"

"9 Sept 43:

"Ch-xto and c -00 historios dolivorod to Berlin.

"0 lov 43

17 Jon 44:

i=r.^. i=j »_tion.ex;x>rlrent vl th ^roc-ihci "• crir .on

"According to on lmunlcntion plna of the “rncnkol high tent
lanunizhtio-' for humnr.g, th cor ntobility of yrnankol~?on>ol-Tcxnid
on huv.rao wno tost-d.

"At first 15 oxpcrinor.tul persons vore vaccinated in periods of
14 dnyo throe tir.on with incoa rro.onkol-Al,?.?, ( Vivonkcl “omol-.Toxoid
nbcorbud in nlunlnco hydroxide).

’’After n po.uoo of 14 dnys the vaccinations vith "Xr 1 onkol-Fornol-
"wxoid nn follows ar.d they list tho days or. which additional vnccinn-
tior.a of typhtt* woro given. I re sorry, thnt is tho vnccir.o with
Fraonliol-?ornoi~Tcxoid. They give th. ncour.t of injoctions rad tho
'•‘’tee they wore f;i-cn,

”17 Jon *54:

"Observation of vaccination ro'ctioue C".-ploted nr sc:, nv.-y. "


1310


. Jar. ~-A-S~.f-17-lB- Hcehan
Court 1


?rcn 19 Novcnbor, 19ii3 to 2$ ovcCbcr, 1?10, wo have he cn«7
as he Bhospherus Kautsclwk Ince n d ia ry J ccb a.*qicrix:cnt. That, if the
Tribunal pleaso, is charred in Paragraph 6 of he Indictront _ s ch'.rgod

against the sooe defendants > p .la orfaenfc . tents, that id
' r- cn, Gonhard and Popuendicic. The witness Hegen testified bent th.eso
irjxxnts and we also introduce ', a report n those oxpcruicn'.i, That is
Prosecution Exnibit 2GS. *hat is Js) report ich c ntains t.io ilcturc shots
u. or. the rabbits once the burns ..tiro ua-'o n. phosphorus kautschul: lVrn tho
incendiary bocb and also on trie forcamr * hunan Ijoings.

*ho testinony of Hegen end the entries in thr "in; diary constitute tho
priof of tho Prosecution cn tho chai-.o in c.unt si_r of tho Indtctr.ent and
c^TSc^uaitly fulfill count 11 of tho Indict .out.
fhl3 antry of the diary reads os follows:

"19 Mcv. h3
25 Nov. h3:

"Phoophtrua Kautschuh Incendiary Kxptrinont"

"To tost »ho preparation "It 1?' on au; ,'honphrrua burn: 1 an’ U* toot
•Lclnacin* ointrent and 'Ethinacir. v^rr.' T r the liter treat t . i*

J . .:« Dr. Kadnus ’.forks in Boddboul

burning tc.-cts wore carried out . ivc experimental port ■ n tho
. (Vo Mentioned Jat d with phosph .ms autor , which *rr.s t. on r.:; ;ui
"li£h incendiary, foun -1 near Leipni^."

"5 Jan. Jili«s

ret col delivered to the '.cick :jediccl’> fTiccr f ti c SB with the
roq’;..s). to forward it to the Dr. hadaus


s -17-1 c-!fe c han-JP

Court 1

Tho Tribunal will recall that the witness Kogor. testified that re¬
port was sent to tho defendant Poppendick,

The next entry is 30-31 He center 1943 end is included in the Koch/
Sores cneo end I will ocit rending that again.

■'21 Toe 43

15 Jnn 44:

9-OA9.0.4. plps ne.

"3y ordor of the ailitnry acodocy of -cdicino, Pori in, 18
cnnoulcs of blood plane.-, were tost id or. 18 cxperincr.t-1 ooroonn for
their conpati'oility on huanne."

"29 Jon 44

19 Fob 44:

"3y ordor of tho nilitnry aendesy of ncdicinc, Forlin, 30
aoro eapoulcn of blood pi noon wore tested on 30 experimental persona
for their con ntibility on hue an s."

"33 Fob 44:

"Tost papers sont to Reich medical offieor of 3S by courier.
Trccinc r.liminnry experimental oorioa foianr."

"33 Jan 44

31 Jon 44:

"To tost conpntibility nnd the Irounii-.tlon offoct, 5 r>. rronn
were imimieod by throe v iccimtionc with spotted fever vaccino "Yoiiarr"
(Producor: Hygienic Institute of tho ’’offon S$, doorrtnont for spotted
fever nnd virus rooenreh)

Or. 23 Jrn 44 0.5 cc

On 27 Jrn 44 1.0 cc

On 31 .Tna 44 1.0 cc were injoct-d.

"“ubcmtnnor v.o in the loft nnd tho right u-per »rc r.r cctivoly."

“35 Fob 44:

"20 porsor.s (15 innur.ixcd nnd 5 f«r control) were lnfcctod by
BubcutnnCOus injection of 1/33 cc s otted fever sic’: fresh blood.

"Donor: G... Hr. 713, 36 years old (6th dry of sickness)
Stnnn 3u IT/ Fnssngc 13

"All thos infected fell 3ick with slight to serious spotted fever"


1312


8 Jan-A -2 HI I- 17 - 2 c-};cehan-JP
Court I


"5 Apr 44 :

'•Court and case history cor plctod-"

"25 Apr 44 :

"Tho experimental series was concluded:

5 deaths (l Asid)

(l Wolenr)

(3 control)

TC PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal will now re coca


1313


J-.VJ .-D JG~1?-1-Le nhar \t

Ccert No, i


.jtrrxoo;: sissio:.

(The hearing reconvened at 1520 h.urs, 3 Jim :ry 19h7)

THS DIFUTY ILRS.L1: .*11 persons the court-roca will p2 to
fin their seats. You will all rise,

(The judges of the Tribunal enter)

TIE DF.IVTY Lt-RSilAL: TRIBIWA1 . : is again in session,

Wt. McHAIJEY: I centime: r.ith th-- present ticn of thu DJHG diary,
and wu era now up to the entry f 9 ilarch Id; ti 39 Ihrch Id;, appearing or;
page L9 of the English Document rooks

Spotted fev.r vr.ccin*. wxp.ri;.~ntnl series VIII (eight)

Suggested by Colonial !. lie 1 Corps of the nir-'orps, Prof ROSE
(Cber3t nr*t)

PR. MoHANEY: But here, if I nay ray, pironthotic lly, is the
entry in the DING diary concerning the Seriu3 of experiments suggested
by the Defendant Rose. This war also -.oalt with at so.ao longth by tho
"itress KOG.’JI, And we see, ns a x\ cult of this siturtlon n tho pert of
th Jefon ant Rose, that thj .xp-ri^.-ntr wore actually carried out, nd
resulted in th-. death of six (6) human boiii,*,s. And, Ish >uld aioo lik to
: , that at this tine, tho Dafon&nt Rose was suborjinatod to the Defendant
Schroedor, vh , ty this tivo, was Chief ,f the Uodlcal Luft-v.affo, rinm
Ii- had rjpLacod Hippko on tho 1st of Jararry 19ldi, and accordantly, ho
alrc 5s responsible for this scri. c f experiments.

"26 XlayUx- Withdrawal blood to pr. :iuco spotted 1 Ver can vile scout
1 /| •J’uic lih rerun.

. -.ScHENSY; Which br viaUid by thu lwttors "F.F.R.S."

To produce rFRS, >5CO cc blood irero t * Ken fr c 15
spitted c r.valeECents between th.; U.th and 21 st day after the .v.r had sub-
r: - and rout oy courier to tho SS nr.in headquarters (SS Fuhrungsh luptt mt)>
•■partkuntal # ; roup (Antskruppe) D, opcirfeicnt (lent) X VI (bleed, e :s_rv lion)
,lttonti ,Jk SS-Ii .uptstumfubhror (Capt) Dr. SLI£IBLCK - Berlin, Lichr n*cl«!..

And, I w uld remind the- TRIBUNAL that the defendant GE^KER vac
.te, and throughout tiv. n 2- c.urse cf these exporin-nts. Chief of


-131A-


ft janinry-A-0JC—19-2-Lehnhar't

Crort K". 1


“(Aats&ruppo) P", and, consequently, these expsrit-sonts were carried ut
aider his jurisiicticn.

The TRIBUNAL will recall that the witness KOG..N t.stified that ru~e
of these convalescent* died, and th-.t in his judgae-nt, it cov.l n t bo
rleten: nod whether the deaths resulted free: the TYFKUS experiments tc which
•:;;cy w.-re subjected or to the vi th-’ra*x^o£>rlcod which produce i this serum:

22 ifcy Ut-

16 Jun hi:

By order of the nilitary ‘.cade -5 f r :vi-icine, Berlin, !Jj capsules
of blood pinona were tested on 1 * 1 - .ype>rin>nt-.l persona for their
cctipctibility on hunans.

19 Jun Uit

"Tost protocol sont to tho highest hyf.ienist 0 Th t "highest
hygienist", of course, if do fen lint 0E:iZK5N and the " Blutsont';>-i.cncv -v.n) "
tho Medical Acadoay of Berlin, which or course was the organisation under
the llr-ct on of the Defendant !LtKDIOS3R. And hero again, on those bloc !
pl-.siv. experiments, the witness KOGAN testified that the persons died as a
r-.sult or the chock, whor. this whole blcod plasua was n tainiotorv 1 i hut .
"19 June Uit

"Test protocol sent to the nif.h.st Authority of tho Reich nodical
officor of th. SS nr.d police, Berlin.

' Ding

S jtted fever v-cci. -xp-ri-.. nc -1 scries IX

17 July L.-

2 J-il

Th. spotted f.v.r vaedn. "Tein-r"n produce:! by th. upartaont
f r spotted fever an', virus research of th liygicne institut* of the
7 '‘ 1 1 ■ 5S| "oLr.ar, 3uchonwald, was t.st.d according to r r
tibility on hur.nnc.

Tris vaccine was produced fit: rabbit lur^s cccorSin; to u:-_ neoes.n
:-Girj-r it contains virus (Rickettsia Browazeki) of cvlf-is la ting
ty F® ^-oned and bloated with 2/00 foraol.

20 persons were irmuni”od or. the following '.-ted with 1 cc each


- 1315 -


3 January -*WDJG-19-3-I4fcnharr't
;--urfc i


17 July 1911

22 July 191x1*

27 July 19U*

The vaccinations were, r.-./c subcutaneous cr. the right respectively
tiv. left upper am,

7 cr comparison 20 persons wore ir-.iunizcd at th- s*i.o tixac with
vaccine "VoltJL”, produced fro lice by the arry supre.no cneoand (OKU) in
Crakot. according to regulati. ns.


• J r. -7--A-FJC-19-U.-I^hnl^rdt
C- urt . i


Furtheraore, 20 persons Bur. considered ; .r control.


Thj 40 experimental persons xore infected o; subcutuieoue ir.j.ctijn
.'f 1/10 ce spotted fever sick fresh bio id each into the ri J.t upn.r ara.

A’. persons fell sick r.a follows:

a) "iitiner" 9 slightly

7 Slightly zociua

A aiodi ua

b) " oi*l« c sli-htly to rWi’

6 -nediuu
fc seriously

c) Control 1 audios

19 Seriously

17 Oct l+.: f


Thu i.xperine.ital series .. s concluded.


4 f*ov /.A:


Chert and c a*, history cmf luted
2/. deaths

(5 *..M, hl)

(19 Control)

K. UcHEKS'f: The translation notes the signature _f
"Dr. Klubor". That, ,f curse, should be “Schuel r"l

,r ..ithir .«-■!. ■ol ■ a>■; tU ..v r -.v- l. ; -c rt

o-nu (FIRS)

13 Oct 44:

31 Oct 44:


T ' produco HRS, ZO.f lit. rs bl <1 ..ere t:.<en lrxn 44 spotted
f*wr c-nv-luscents bU..u-n the ii.th an« 21st icy after the fev.r !wi sub-
si<.V.J, and sent by c urier t. t3S .ain ..ecdqurrt rs (SS Futr.run.sha uotarat)
Departuwnt .r,up (Amtaruope) D, D. v.rtvnt (tt) X’l (blood conservation)

SS Sturab.nuusurer Unjor) Dr. ELLZl^K, Berlin- Lichtcrf.ldo.

Kluber

2c Oct 44:

Specie 1 expericent in b persons according to instruct.i..r.s ;
SS-Obvrfuohr r Lcctoiv-r Dr. ISUGClSKf and FJ?« (Rcc.rt or. this r 11y,.


- 131 ' -


8 Jan A7-«-FJC- I9-2a-Lc ;.nh: rd t
Court Jib. i


Th--r ~.utic •-xo-.rin.r.t <.it- spotted iove r vr.ccin. :

13 Hov 44:

By order of the hi-host hy-ienist jf the fallen SS of 12 Aug
U., is to be ooteminod whuth.r t t*s course of spotted fever sickness
c;n h tempered by tho intravenous -r intramuscular injection ol spotted
ftv-r vaccine.

For the cxp«,ri::4,ntal series 20 p.rsona *wr mnRid^rcO., ,f t.hnr.e
10 for int'veiwus injection (Seri-s A), 10 fer intr.'.-ausculrr injection
(Series B) tin! in addition 5 persons lor c-ntrol.


8 Jac-A-JF~20-1-Putty-J P
Court I

"On 13 November 44 tho 25 experimental persons were infcctoa by sub¬
cutaneous injection of l/lO cc each spotted fever sick fresh blood,

"All ^Orsons fell sick of follows: sorios As 10 serious, Series B:
1 medium, 9 serious, Control : 5 serious.

22 Dccombcr 1944. Tho experimental soriC3 was concluded,

"2 January 45: Chart and case history completed. 19 deaths (9
sorios A, 6 sorios B, 4 control,) 0 that highly cuccossful experimental
Berios ordered by the Defendant Krugovoky killed ninetoon out of tho
tvonty-fivo poraono experimented ujx>n. This concludes the very illinu-
r.ating Ding diary, and I think whilo perhaps tho report submitted to
the Tribunal in connection with tho Froosing experiments givo ono of
the shortest accounts ir. criminal history of seven nurdorc—you will
reaembor that they wore shown in an n;..cndix attached to tho report—
cortninly thin Ding diary givoc \is o-.o of the most dotailod reports
of tho nurdor of a largo number of holploso human boings, and I think
it would be appropriate at this point to sua up what tho Ding diary
nhowo. It is a littlo difficult nt tinos to bo quite ouro of tho rocultn
reported in tho Ding diary. Vo sonotincs cannot toll what tho procioc
rosulto of this or that oxporiaont was, but n capitulation which I huvo
had nr :‘o on this diary shove that in the typhus expofinonto from tho
fifth of January» 1942, through tho last entry in the diary to tho
soc'-nd of January, 1945, no loos than 729 persons woro experimented on
with typhus and woro infected with virulont typhus. As a result of
thoco exporinento r.o loco than 154 of those persons died no a rooult
of thoso typhu3 oxperinente, and I wish to nnko clear, as testified
to by tho witness, Kogon, that those figures which I havo just roud
o:f do not includo those unhappy pooplo who were selected and infected
with virus simply to be euro that s living virus was available to tho
ersons conducting those experiments or infection in the typhuc
oxporiuonto themselves. I think Kogon described those as tho "passage
group", pnd tribunal will recall that he stated thnt between threo to


1319


8 Jar.-A-FJC-20-1- -Pu tt y-JP
Court I

fivo persons wero seloctod each month from tho period of his ontranco
in Block 50 in April, 1943, until Karch, 1945, for tho sinplo purpose
of infocting with a living typhus virus so that infoction material v
would bo continously available in human blood for the father infoo-
tion of pcoplo in the vaccination typhus exporimnntso

That moans that we would havo to add to tho doath toll of


1319 (a)


3 Jax>-A-?JG-2C—3-Fut ty-jP
Court 17 Ce.so 5

154 persons a figure between ninety and one hundred twenty additional
people who died a3 a result of the so-called virus passage experiments
since Kogon testified that between ninety and ninety-five persons died
as a result of the typhus infection.

On the yollov fever vaccine experiments which arc reported on page
42 of tho English Document Book under the date entry of 10 January 1943
a very large number of pooplo were cxrorirented on with yellow fover.

Tho results of this experiment r, r ,- not etated ir. tho diary, tho notation
being at tho end of tho ontry: "Production nbondonod boenuoo of Military
situation. Of course, what they wore saying thoro who that tho Gorman
Araod ?orcos wero losing out i 2'orth Africa, and that, consequently,
tho noed for a yellow fovor vaccino was no longer critical*, Tho ambitious
was lords of Germany, of courso, oxpocted to have thoir soldiors in
IV-.kcr and in the wo3tom aprroachos of 1'orth Africa whoro yellow fovor
is CXtronoly prcvolont. Of course, that explains tho reason why thoy
showed such a koon interest in yellow fovor vaccine.

Tho snail pox c typhus, typhoid A and 3, that is, paratyphoid, choloru*
apottod fever and diphteria oxncrir.ontc reported under an ontry of
24 March 43 to 20 April 43 tolls us that 45 porconc were subjected to
thnoo experiments with tho result not stated.

Tho incondiary bomb experiment porforned, as tho diary stated, upon
five persons, tho entry being that of 19 roveeber 43 to 25 For cab or 43,
with tho result .’ot stated. However, tho witness, Kogon, enlightonod
uc on that oubjoct and described rather vividly tho suffering of tho
Persons that wero subjected to this experiment. Ho stated, that thoy
•to still boaring the 3cnrs as a result of those burning tests*

*ho two poison experiments reported in the diary of the 3Dth of
December *43, and the 26th of October, *44, show that ton persons wore
e>:.:orL'lcntod upon, and tho witness, Kogon, has testified that all ten
<-itr.cr C .i d as a result of the poison or were immediately killed in or-
icr to perform autopsios upon their bodies.


1320


.-are. .ns i.. * lev r - . uu.'ji. jj ;,c


■ .* n JC-2D-3-*' -itty

v JU* *' J •

il.ic J-U : ! bus. ..J, i.aolv - tha
old blood plas.-a e*perL-unts on behalf of the defendant Hand loser's military
oedical a cade/ay or the withdrawal of blood froc typhus convalescents for the
purpose of poking a serun, which was done for Dooartcent D of the SS Fuehrungs-
hauptwat, headed by the defendant Gonzken, nor does it cover tho withdrawal
of blood in the "little caap" to rake blood plasm, where, as tho witness,

Ko; on, stated, the inmates were dying like rats.

At this tiiivc the Prosecution «oulc. like to have tho witness, Kdrchheiacr,
colled to tbo stand.

JUDGi SEStlNG: libzt is the nationality of this witness, hr.

Hardy?

'JR. HAHDY: Gorman nationality.

JUDGE SEBRING: AU right.

FRir<. KIRCHS2USR, n witness, took tho stand and testified

ao foLlowa:

3Y JUDGE DEBRINC:

Q. You will o'- r.' in yaur place at tho witness chair, hold up your
right hand and bo sw »rn, repos ring oft.r 30 :

I enuftr by God, the ALsighty and Cmnisoiont, that I - ill speak the
pure truth and ».ill withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witness repeated tne oath.)

JWKL S-fcrvI!*;: You ray be seated.

UIHi^CT £\*.2KAT1CN

BY :r. HARDY:

.itnees, your noma is Frits Kirchhoinur, is it not?

A* Lb.

Q. Y-ur Last rv..v*. is silled X-i-r-c-h-h-u-i-o-e-r-?
n. YUS.

Q. Your wer^ born on 10 2irch 1911?

A. Yes

“b'-rc w-.ro „ ju born, witness?

A. In Hvilbronn bn the .f-ckcr.

*• -ou are now German citizen, witness?


- 1321 -


8 JarJ.7-A-Fjc-20-i-Putty
Court lio. 1

A. Ye a.

Q. .iould you kindly tell us whet your present address is, witness?
A. Frankfurt on the -air., Offonb-.che-r Landstrnssc 5A3.

Q* Did attend the public schools in Heilbrcnr.?

A. Yos.

Q. When did you caipiote your education?

A. 1925.

Q. Viould you kindly tell the Tribunal, witness, what you did fron
1925 after the completion oi your education until you w.rc arrested by
the Nazis r.nd imprisoned?

A. For a short tine I visited a caaxric.ol school, and then in
1926 went to South Aceric-. Fron there I a.nt to the United States where
I dor.lt with skins. In 1932 I returned to Gernany. I beet bo n buyer for
* d6parbxnt store, and I w .s dismissed from the dep-.rtoent store in 1935
becr.uso ol the Nurnborg laws. U til ay arrest 1 lived by soiling leather
goods.

Q. witness, durirv* iU this period of tine your aajor occupation
that of a salesman oi loather g^ods?

A. Yos.

witness, prior to your arrest by the Kasia in 1936, rn.ro
you over beforo that line either in Genarny, South «oerico, or the United
Suua in the cust dy of the oolico?
n. Yea.

Q. i.inn wra tnat, witness?

A. TUU won in 1928.

Q. ..here?

A. Ci.ic-.fo,

I. Hon lon^ wore you in the custody of th. police, witness?

A. F>r twenty-feur hours.

Q. Will you kindly toll the Tribunal tho re .s_r. why you were in the
custody of the police in Chicago?

at ti;v - thcro " f >s prohibition cr.d Ins arrested by trie
Z 1 -ice it. a drunken stute.


-


8 Jan-A~?JC-20—5—Fut ty-JF
Court I


Q. ?hank-you- witness. Kow, witness, when wore you placed undor
arrest by tho Hazis?

A. On tho 29th of Deceebcr, 1936.

Q. 'Jhat W23 the reason given for your arrest, witno6s7

A. H&cial violation,

0.. You are a Jowiah witnoo3?

A. Yoo.

Q. Aftor your arrest by tho Gostapo in Scccsbor, 1036, whoro woro
you first iirpri3onod?

A, In tho Gestapo prison in Cologne.

^ How long did you re=ain in that prison, witnoos7

A. Coven aonths*

0* ^hon whoro woro you trnnsforrod to7

A. Thon for six Booths I was in h'ittlich on tho I'osol.

Q. And thon?

A. And froc thoro I vent to Hauaonsoor in Cchloawig-Holotoln, and
froc thcro la 1936, Doccnbor, 1936, —or no, rather Docoobor, 1936, to
Buchonveld#

Q. A n< i you regained at Fuchonwnld until the liboration by tho
Allied Forces in April, 1946, vitaoac?

A. From tho 11th of April, 1946, I was liboratod by tho Aaoricano

In Buchouwald,

Q. Thorofort, you wore an inonto of tho 3uchonwnld Concentration
Cano for a poriod of exceeding six yoars, witnosc?

A. Yoa.

witnoss, vhon you arrived at tho 3uchonwald Concentration
Canp, what wao your first duty?

A. As a racial violator I vns sent to the punioheont cocpany whoro
• or nearly throe years I had to '•err. in tho quarry carrying stones and
brewing thon .

Aftor the end of three years working in this ctcno quarry, the
F*nisheent c-opany, did yn U thon receive a new assignment?


1323


3 Jan 47-n-?JC-2C-fc-?ut ty
Court No. 1


After being volaased fro= the punisha.at ca -?~Ay, I bec.'rae the
socallod orderly in tho hospital.

Q. How long did you renain as ord^rl y in tho hospital b rr~cks?

Until'being transferred to Block 47. I beg your pardon. I aoant
to say Block 49 and 44.

Q. Then about tho beginning of 1942, in the first norths of 1942,
you wero transferred to 31ocks 44 and 45?

A. Yos

Q. In what capacity did you aurvo in Blocks 44 and 49?

A. I was attendant at the b th rooc.

C.. Now will vou UU the Tribunal whr.t Blocks 44 and 49 were, witness?
A. Block 44 and 49 was \r. oxpcri.*.ntol station for typhus oxporinxints.
Q. Did this oxperinoatil station in Blocks 44 aid 49 later oovo to
Block 46, witness?

A. After a short tis* Black 44 ani Block 49 was sunt to Block 4o.

Who was in chv.-go? ’.,ho was the officer in charge of Block 46,

witness?


A. Stunnbannfuuhr. r Dinc-bchuler.

4. Did he iisvo any assistant doctors under hira?
A. His doputy was Dr. Hoven.


8 Janus. v-A-DJC— 21-1-Bv nrd
Covrt NO. 1


Q Now, "itn-.SE, in your capacity sc a nurse in Block bS, wera you
in a position to know, that is, f*». your cwn knowledge that uxpcrWnts
r. r being conducted on hu^-.n beings is, “lock 16?

A Yes.

Q i.'hat type of oxp-ri-nents wore bcinr conducted, lattices?

A Srjx-rl^nts were boir. : , co: uctcd vrttn typhus, ycllc* fever, and
infections rith lice were enrri-.d on*.

Q Hem, th.se infections with I\Ce, witness, did you ever witnors nny
im:tco at duchummld Conc-mtr.tir. ;e-u being subjected to the infection
■ith lice.

A Yes.

q W112 you kin-'.ly tell the Tribunal ..hat you raw at P.lock 1;6 in con¬
nection ». 1 th tho lnf.,ctlor. of Aixuat js n.tn lice?

A .. courier brought t Uo i ; .. ?hc .. non sont

Into U r. ,/ing In naked st-.t u »: • the: had to rit doim, :the/ /ore

lie, boxes re fcL i onto U.-lr 1, with rubber bands.

q How lorv; did thoi iw.t . r.. ... ..n that position, witru so?

A • pprOxin-'-tely twenty r.'nu’.-S.

; A ' • wy, witness, th-.t you puysonally , »oso

lnwtM w ’ ro cnQint ' 1 t° t»*-» chair mi fc-> t these cages d Uco w„ro nttachod
by ruhojr hair's to thoir l.t-.t; is that ocrrect?

r ’ id yo ’ ; vcr 5t; “•’£' fc.-ir v *niccted by any tjUioc othur than

with lie-., .■itileSS?

A los.

Q. •* 1 ' : “°d W»a tn-.t?

A -*'c. ,ro inject, d Jr. thu upp-r *j—.

Q ' fc't. r.ro they Inj ctod tn, wltr. ss?

h typhus, typhus culiur-.

' "' :4 cv ' r *' itn -ss any rf tn- _• irantes being cr.bJoct 5 a to In-
!-.°tlo:is with infected blood?

- 1325 -


8 Jecu?x;'-A-DJ5-21-2-BerTd-HP
Court I


-a. Yes* by controlling, I sa v cuch injections ooing curried out*

Q. row, witness* you have told us that incates wore infected with
live. You said that a courier brought those lice to 31ock 46 in
Buchonvald. Do you know where those lice cane from?

A* According to what the courier said, these lico ca~c fron Krakow.

The couriers c«no along pnd rang the boll in the Slock 46. I oponod
tho door and they gave ce tho packages, and then renainod for a fow
ninutes oiioking cigarottoo.

Q. Bow, witnooo, when thooo innatos were boing infected with lico
and wore chainod to their chair3, who was present at that tine?

A. Thooo woro prosont: Tho Capo Dietsch, Doctor Hovon, and ono
of floor of tho Yohxmacht.

Van Doctor Ding-Schulor prosont, witnoss7

A, *>.

Q. -'ow, vMtnons, no r» ronult of thono oxporiconto, thooo injoctiono,
which you, yourself, now: do you know whothor or not any of tho lnantoo
cubjoctod to thoso cxpcrlncntn died no a r cult of then?

A. Suring ny tlno in Slock 46, I sow a.proxinatoly twonty poroono

do ad*

Q. i'ow, witnooo, you oay you saw thcoo pooplo dio* Verc you in a
position, p^rconally, to ooc the dond after cuch ox^ricents had boon
conducted?

A. Ton*

"oro your duties as a nurso directly cohnoctcd with tho caro
tho Inuntea subjected to these exporincntP?

A. 1 had tho tosk to bath the innatos, to care for their bolongingo,
Pnd I therefore had oxccos to overy ward.

i r ow, witnceo, you otatod you had to cpto for thoir belongings
well os tailing care of then physically. You wero in a position to
deternino vhnt typo of prisoners were boing subjected to these ex, crincnts,
Vi rz y u not?


1326


8 'Jan-A-OJG-21—2-3eard-J?
Court I


A. ’Thcro wore all sorts oi prisoners.

S* ? ou to11 U8 » vitcess, what procoduro was carried out when


1326 -*


8 january-A-DJ(Wl->-3e or d
Court lie. 1


victim was brought to the Bleak 16 to bo experimented on; that is, dl the
vie tin first report to you and surrender his clothing? Toll us th~ entire
details of what happened to t.x intatus uccn their arrival in -flock 16 ?

A .'if'-or the inmates arrived at Block L6, they had to undress co:aule-
tely. I noted down tbjir personal -f-cts and noted their personal data,
and then the inmates w^rc bet hod an . received clean pajamas .nd were then
brought into tho ward rooms.

Q How, witness, you stated th: t you wrote down their personal data
fron tho Inuetus} therefore, coul you -ell the Tribunal whether or not any
Polish p-ople were uswd in th-so uxporlrcnta?

A Svory sort of prisoner was used for r„

Q That is, nil nationalities, witness?

A All nationalities.

Q How, witnose, were political prisoners used for those exporinontr,
free your knowledge, in connection with >our <’.uti«.s?

A Yes.

Q hero eriniml prison rr us d?

A Yes.

Q !’ow, were you »blc to ctor-in., itness, whether or not th.co
crininnl prisoners use ! in theso experiments wort criminals condemned to
dit or to death for crir.uc they '..omitted?

A Yoa.

Q Kero any of thv.ro cr rii nal a vsud, that were, in fact, condounul to
-tenth 7

A Ho.

Q now, witness, you hav, stated in your tir.v that ycu saw twenty
deaths. How, after a person iwd wliat hapjwd to him? Did you ' ny
conduction with the corpse after completion of th. experiments?

A TSk. corpse was taken inuc tha bath roou, I than had to write hie
nar.t.r c: i-ic- si -e with ink, art 1 then, an then had to uliv.r his personal
-s •re after th corps, .s laid or. a stretcher and sent into

- 1327 -

r


8 January-A-WG-21-U-Beard
Court No. 1

the Berguo of fee hospital,

Q And, y^u sny, witness* th't you personally, yourself, wrote a
micber on tho &jad person?

A Yes,

Q That you had twenty or uore cf such experiences; is th t correct?

A I could net give you thn exact data but there were .-.t least twenty
p.rsons,

Q Now, witness, you arrived in Slock U6, in other words, were assigned
to duty in Dlock 16, in early 191-2; is that correct?

A Yea.

Q Did you then later rocoiVu a xxassi ;raaant for duty in Dlock 50?

A Yes.

0 . :. r nen ' 1 \ that occur, witness?

A That w :'s early in 19h3 "bin I received the taek to start -n Block 50
Kith the Capo there,

Q Then, you rtn.-inod in Block 50 u. sil your lib. ration in April 19h5;
in that correct?

A YvjC,

Q In your position within t!w cercortration cvcp did you sue the
defendant Hoven?

A Yuc.

Q Will you look over to the dock and identify He von, witness?

A The fourth fror the l: t ir. tho ls;*t row,

3 Would you stand up, witness, an-* walk out hare tc tho riddle lor

identification purposes?

(Witness walks t v tho floor.)

The fifth on.,

Q ..11 right, witness, you ny xj coat. d.

V:. H.JIDY: I r quest, your ! r, that : record show tha Witness
Prop.rly identified tho defendant hoven.

- f.v’SIDL'.T: The rccor ‘ will sh*c that the witness identified the


- 1326 - ‘


6 Janu ary-A- DJQ-21-5 -3e
Court No. 1


defendant Foven in the dock.

q Now, witness, durine yo;ir ti.:c in Block US, do ycu personally know
of aiy visits of a Doctor nosed »irugn:wsky?

A Mrufcowaky was th^rc on c.t least tiro occasions, there in Slock ij6 -
onco ir. Block li6 and later in Alock 5^; that is twice as far as I know.


3 JaraiaryW k -DJG-22-l-8aynas
Court 1*04 1

Q Did you sac hir yourself on my of the visits to 31ocic h6?

A I eld not rosily see fcin in Sleek bo.

Q i«horu did you Sio hn, witness?

A In block 50.

Q • tot w“-3 the occasion when you saw ‘.La? Did ho co;o to ycur office,
or whore you v*crc stationed, or cli ’ you happen to see him casually, or
under whet circumstances?

A fch orderly in Block 50 for Stumbannfuchrcr Dr. Schuler, I had
to Serve coffee, whenever Dr. Mrugewsky was there for b visit.

Q Now, witness, do you boli.Vc that you could recognise Dr. Mrugowaky
in tho dock?

A Mo#

Q You don't think you could rcco^niso him?

A No, ao v-ny thing* h-vc ampcnc to t th t I do not think that 1

; • (rugous y's fnc t that I j | nti \ pooporly.

Q Thon, now do you kn.w sir t Vronsky visited Buchoimaltf Woro you
tcld that tint wes Dr. Stragowsky, or was ho a fioous person *nd when ho enmo
ho was much talked about?

A 'ihcn.Vvr in Block 50 or bo visitor arrived, a lew ’ay3 beforo
that ww -<tro told to keep cv. rythi;... cl* i. rjid in order to make the best
inpr-orion on the visitor. Sturnbonoluchr-r Schuler gave rae t;o order to
Itccp everything in or' r and sparkli.v ly clean for the occasir.ii oi n visit
of torugowoky#

Q Now, witness, in your work ct Buclwnwald, Id you have a cloto
reL'.tirraid; to the defendant Hnren, whe- y, u have Just identified?

.. Personally I did not have very *:uch tc do with 3r. Heven.

Q Did hu visit Clock U ..'ten?
loo, v_ry often.

~ - in charge of block 16 w..-. never Dr. Ding-Schul.r went cn a

trip?

A '/es.


- 1330 -


8 Jan-A-3JG—23-2—Eeynes—JP
Court I

Q, And on such occasions wore the cxporlronts still going on?

A. She oxperiment was etill carried on, whothor Sturrsfeannfuchror
Dr. Schuler was there or not.

Q. That is, experinonta were feeing conducted who:*. Dr. Hoven was
in charge of -=lock 46, In tho afeacaco of Dr. Ding7 1 3 that corroct?

A. Yea.

IS. HA'JJY: I hovo no further quostiona, Your Honor*

THE HCSI1EHT: Does any of tho Counsel for tho dofcndnnto dcairo
to crone cocrrino thin vitnooo?

CROSS SXA2:r.’A?I0H

BY in* FLSK.1KQ (Counool for dofeadant l'xugovsky):

Vitnoss, «ould you doacrifec to tho Tribunal in what nnnnor tho
bathing installation in Block 46 or before in 44 ond 49 vno oporotod?

A, Tho toothing installation vno vory pricitivo. For thevory firot
oxporiaont — thorc wore approximately 60 or GO cxpcrlrontn — wo only
hod one feasin with one shower . Since our toollor wao hcatod fey noann
of coal, it wan hardly posgifelo to hath all patlcnta no regularly no
should h.avo fecen dono.

$4 So, you did not toath nil pntlontc tout only a part of thoo?

A* I toathod oil the pntionts, tout not always in tho proscribed
period when It should havo tooon necessary,

Q. You wore spooking nfeout yellow fever experiments, witnoas.

K Yea.

0* Aftor tho vaccinations, did any peraonc rocoivo yollow fever?

A* Ye 3 , aono of then toocoro ill. The yellow fever experiments, an
vr.a told nc fey Capo Arthur Dictach and the clerk, were ooon diacontinuod
because, apparently, they did not Show tho wished for roaulta.

Q. Kov do you know, witnoas, that in the caao of the yollow fever
"•xpcriuciit—which y^u have described ns as experi-ont—we ore really
concerned with experiments and not .lust with protective vaccinations?

A. ifeo Capo of the tolock pnd all nurses told no that during tho
Chirac of coverartions. In addition, I had insight into the ease histo¬


ries.


1231


6 v*r3-i-I7G-22-3-Hnynec-JP
Court I


v-ich wore always aado ir. three copies by ono inseto.

Q. Aud what was said ir. these ease histories?

A. Esporinont, Series Such and Such. I cannot recollect the cr.nct
designation, since as a nurse end or'orly I had nothing directly to
do with these exporinents.

Q. Ahd your otatcsnont that these voro not protective v-ccinntirrs
Is based bo roly on what you hnvc been told by othcrol

A, :ro. I saw patients lying in b-<l r infected with fovor.

Q. Vith fever, but do you know whothor t.neso '-atior.ta had yellow
fercr or whothor this was Jurt a reaction '.ft:r the vaccination?

A. I cannot wy th f -t with cor tain ty.

tton you only know that thcoe patients had fever?

A. Too.

Q. Do you know whether, after thoso yellow fever vr.ccinationc©
blood testa woro nado on thoso persons?

A. lfe.

That is not known to you?

No.

m. SI&HlXtfGt Thank you, I have •« further questions.

THE PTSSIDDiJ?: Any other crocs origination on the part of "Do fence
Counsel?

3 . GA'fLIK: Dr. Gavlik, or. behalf of the defendant Hoven.

H2SHCT! I'll ask Counsel how long his cross ex agination
will probably continue.

S:. GAUL2: Ferhtps ter. or fift:cn cinutoo.

TF. FITSHC*:: The Tribunal will cow recess until 9:30 o'clock
tocorrow Homing.

(“he Tribunal roccrsed until 0930 hours, 9 January, 1947).


1332


9 Jan-H-G3S-L-l—? o ste r
Court Fo. 1


Corrected Copy

Official Transcript of the ^aeriean Killtary
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of aaerica, against Earl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting nt Sumberg, Germany,
on 9 January 19U7, 0930, Justice Seals presiding.

-HZ *'A H 55 A L; The Honorable Judges of Kllitary Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session.

Cod save the United States of *nerlcn pc. d this Honorable Tribuxytl.

There will be order in the courtroom.

-HI rHaSIDIin:: Hr. Marshal, vill you ascertain that the defendants
rr. all present in the courtroon.

IE3 I-.AHSKAL: May it please Tour Honor, rJl the defendants r.re
nr« o<mt in the courtroon.

"kf PKZSITEl’T: The Secrotnry-CuBird will r.oto for the record
the fact that all the defendants are present in the court.

"itcaun-* of trrirsportnticn diff’.coities one of the Judges is late.

-< * n :t irooe.u »1 th the taking of testimony, ‘out the court has
rn ri'udnciew.nt to nnko and wo will proceoJ with thnt.

In the rmil« r of the need for an established procedure for obtrirv-
in.; wi-itt. n otateaents froa persons having knowledge of fncts decr>-
11 -y the defendants to bo arterial rnd of probative value to their


respective def-noee having beon called to the attention of tho
:• Ui-.fl, a.ic the re nbers of the Tribunal having act with representn-
tives cf th.. prosecution rad with a cocaittce of defonso counsel,
nr.:! thcr^r/tur the representatives of both the procecution and
counsel for the defen^nts having presented to the Tribunal a
rr'.tiu and Li ned outlin. of a authod auturll;* satisfactory to
th prosecution and to the dafindnnts' counsel, whereby vritten


rtnt. :cd «-in> .* r.“’ tf of yiv' : 1 ’.re vf.l«w -rJ otbor-

•-k be offered in evidence before the Tribunal and

d In (vidfXGw if in the juigaent of the Tribunal they should
•ji do received, notwithstanding the fact that such otatecents nay be
r ' * 'ey t-.e i><-r*oa slaking the sane without having beer, sworn to
ir * nr. officer a/ any oersor. having by virtue 0: an office lawful

xj e*

itncrity to administer nn oath ir. due fora of law.


5 Jar.-*- SES-1-2-70s tor
Caart Ha. 1.

'.V.w Tribunal has considered tho written stipulation si,;ncd by
representatives Of the prosecution's staff no 1 by roprcaontativor. of
e unaoi for the dofendcnfcs end dosircs the following order in connection
vli.. tno subject nattor ta r.of: First, it is ordered by Military ?ri-
suiol 1 tn-.t the rule heretofore promulgated and ndoptod by tho Tribunal
CiKer.-in,: tno roquiromenta to be obsorvod by tno defendants In tno pre-
u.rati»n >f written statements by dof^nso vitnossos "in liou of oatn" be
xd uu sane is hereby rescinded. Socond. it is further ordered by
..i.it,<r;’ Tribunal 1 that the following rule concerning t..e subject sitter
naove referred to shall bo. md tho s/ure is Ur by ndoptod and "proaul/Titod
b> ti.o .riounnl for tho infor=Ati on of ell c>nc.;r;;.d."

a. St: tomcats of witnesses mdc "in liou of on mth" aay be ndalttod
ii. oviloneo if otnorwito cocpetont ar.d ui.dBsiblo and containing sti.tos.nts
.'•.li;, nrobrtivc value if tno following- conii:i>ns ,rj r.ot.


9 J-.:j-5f-J?-2-l-FeI<lt

C UTB SO. 1


1. Tho witness shrill have si ate' ur.< seat- :_nt >_for ..i-nsc. c ounsel.
i thus, and Jefens- counsel shr.ll hive ccrtifi- .* th-roto; or

2 . Ths witooss shall have si r st t-nont b-for n notary, an

shall hnv- c-rtifiel th-roto; or

3. T-U. witn-3s shill h-vo signed the stat.n.r.t b-for- a bui-..'lister,
in* - e bur; lister shall i.ave c-rtifi-:’ th.r-U, in cac_ u-ith-r ufjnst.

c • •• '1 nor n notary is re ily -vr.ilabl. without ,-r-at i;K v d.ncu; cr
ii. rhe witness shall have : i . ! a Ut« . KJer.. - o np-jtent
-•la c-a..' authority, an sue. aix...rit> shall hnv- curtific./. thereto in
casu th. •dunces is incarcerated ir. r ..risen c-cip.

5. Th. stntaunt "i:. lieu th" il r nt-!: preamble which

ririi st. t., "i, (util, v.' n ’dress c thewitnew^oftor first boon

W r -'“t I ••ill oe liable . -r .:nni»s».e.tt for rwkin. a f Is. sl*,U;.i.nt in

to .. *cci r. v.. I V ? tnUaont is tr mi ( ! an
•» ' •:. > ay St tia.nt la o'for subedssion as ovi '-nc- before

M u.wl 1 , fnlaco of Justico, Hura . , . ,

6. Tho signature cf thu ritsaoss shall b. foil r- 1 by a certificate

1 • * bofa signature of (statir. 0 tho Mr nn : thu witness)

1 »/ (rtit.. th. .. >- of tho i ’ontifyin,. person r cf:ioor) is hereby
L - r ' witnessed by s.* (To Uj folic*- by th- ate an place of the
t.iu ctitoc-nt an' eh- signature an ’ witness or th- . .rcon r

’f-' -r ' »-tiryin fc th samj).

— 0

(• ) 1. If special circxis o-s coopliarce with arc* cna nf the
:. i . .is i:.poseibl..- u.v*tuy Jur \.i.r- c-, th-n ea\:.s- count 1 may
• el n t. t.*. Tribunal : r a special >r-'er .-r>Y. ! 'i.. L for tho taking
• rv t iiwnt .if a ’astro rdWss c coming rotiliti ns tr c .-pile ’

- op-exile in-tnec.

ly, . : -

- ac adopt-,' - uin.vxacua by th.- Tribunal V- i c.r rat- h tho

in tne j urr.al of Jilit"zy Tribunal 1, * s thereof,


9 ~ P-2-2-Fcldt

C-urfc Ho. 1


t .c with correct translations thereof into th_ Geroori lrtn_u?%o, properly
c.rt-iu- by tile Secretary General, be delivered to each of the defendants or

• r_sp-otive c unsel.

• Prosecution any now {recce

: . H.J4DY: Defense coins i f-r th- defendant Jfcvcn was cress
01 th0 ««*“ yost. relay. 1 w n ’or if h- has ccoplute * i.i: cr ss
.x- •inatifii.

TK4 13ESIDENT: .my iurtlieT cross exardnati n i this viernsa by any
„le:t‘-.nt's CeunSul?

FRITZ XIROfflSi:-., - Recuo c'

CdOlS dUllUlCN (Continue'*.)

BY \\* 6...UK: (C.unsel i\r Deiw . ‘nt Hoven):

> itr.oae, I xn sub tit tin U yew ■’ -orient No* 2o5. It is tin
i-ry : Wv. Division fir Typhus .an*. Virus Research at the Hi.ieiu. institute
fan SB* It in at Fa; e UO of the English Docucent Book* l.itnoas,
c u f.. tiu. entry of the 11th of February, 19U2?

Yes.

It Is n th, 30th < I i 19u2. It is n Fa . JjO of tho

• r v 'in _nt Beak. Did you fin' that, Witness?

Y u 3«v mi entry there that "the lice m their cages :uct b.
lately, an the let _r oc. :e leaky Airinj tr'ns rt an ', tlwrofore
r «-r.c . ar..er of upii-nic in Cx p Buchomrald."

*•• Yes,


> .ith reforonco t l iris i.nrtn, of the iic„, I h no question

• iph Hart, don't you?

I .a.

\ fou also knew the chiof r.urco at tho 73C st-tion, ..illic Jollinek,
Hie' "Ju-.b «?


*»•


.


9 Jrtr.-:>-Jr-2-3-?cl't
Court No* 1


1. to you knc« thr.t Hart «ad Joi:;nck infers the .'o.'onaant Hove
u. . 'bliycry of the lieu and -ate. 1 hi t. ....... ■>.


9 Jan U7-3-l-:i-PKP-Putty-LJG

Court I

Q. Do you know tte t the Defendant Hoven appeared in Block h6
where tiese cages with three thousand lice were contained?

A. Yes.

Did you at that ti-e listen to a conversation between politi¬
cal inrates and the Defendant Hover, vv.ero it wa3 said that those cages
wore leaky and that, therefore, these lice would have to be exteinninated?

A. Yes. I remcncer that conversation. It was with tho clerk,
Liebrand.

;. And do you kncrw t -»t after ^ the Defendant Hoven burned
these lice ir. the oven of t.*» big roow. which was before the tailor and
shoo shop?

A. Mo. Dr. Hovon didn't burn the- hinself.

Do you know then — well, I want to put to you anothor ques¬
tion first. But you do roaerwor that this conversation with reference
to tho burning of tho lice was carried on with the Defendant Hovon?

A. »0ll, the aattor was as follows: Liobrand and anothor fow
son, a...ongst the®, I, knew of tho pain vtoich thoso peoplo experienced.

Q» -fitness, you probably aro nixing up something. Iico was
sent on two occasions. Please tako a look at this diary.

A. I vras only onco present when thoso lice wore used.

3* And that you have told toe up to now only roforrod to an
incident with lieu, lico that have actually boon U30d?

A. Yes.

Do you know that before thoso lico wore applied, anothor
dultvory of lico had arrivod which was ccnplotuly dostroyed?

A. No.

«. And now I an cooing to tho second delivery of lico of which
you know, during which part of these lice were actually applied.. Do
* '* • riC ' v those lico were taken by a technical inspector of the

Aray who was supposed to supervise these lice and the way they wore

used?

A * I cannot say with certainty whether this officer of the Armed


9 Jan !i?-3-l-H-FK?-Put,ty-LJj

Court I


Forces was actually a technical officer or not. He brought these
lice along accompanied by two couriers who after these lice were
delivered left the block. Ho7fever, the officer remained.

Do you know that this officer or inspector — it makes r.o
difference


1338 a


9 J:.n 47---3-2-PKP- Putty
Court No. 1


a suoposed to supervise the wr.y these lice nor- applied?

,i. - don't know whether he was supposed to supervise it. At any rate,
a present.

. 1 >o you know that Ding know and was informed of the arrival of this
r ■ indent and that ho ordered the execution of this experiment?


„ 3- /ou know anythin.: about on agreement between the politic:! inortes
in particular Gollinek with the Defendant Hover, to the effect th: t this
technic i inspector or officer was to bo remov-d in oroer to bo able to
t.jtroy these lice once nor-?

a. No <>t that tirw Gollinek had r.o scccss to Block 46.

.. U, h« didn't vo to h;ve access to Block!6. This rouoont was
on*: lee Block 46, nd contact w: node uith the cotor pool, • nd this ::
r’llcer r the technical inspector '..-.s given a cotor c:r, * :.i he was then told
I: t "Hero is a car for you, ind if you are not willing to take this c r,

■ m h .ve te> wr.lk to ;,.in'r, "which w.-is Un kilarotero an y. Do you
.m » • .yt.iiri about th't?

«. I Ja.crt th.t this officer approxir. tcly \t the ildile of the experiment
1 :• Bi^ck 46. I know nothing about an agroucent with Cellir.ok.

• Jut /ou o n confirm thf t this olficer 1-ft tho ai ok t t Idl

A thw eXTOricent?


• . u know that ' t tho time th :.t Devon untonxS the r iota whore

•’ x>,rir.-nts were conducted, the Capo Dietsch had j lr-ndy applied tho so
t the trvr irt of the experiment: 1 subjects?

r •'her th t rbaut six persons had PlrtAdy r-c-iv-: those lice,
•t thuis - Uttl : ? en't it tho cra~ that thur« wore two
' ' th t there Wer two r-s of chairs where the irmr.tes

r '.d >nu r :h h c. lroady b,cn findso. a with, • n-J then the- Capo


• ir. dy arrived t the second r-w?

• o quite impossible for cr.o row to be ficishut. -lr.v’y since
s -1 ys sv tod opposite to another.

1339


9 Jan. Ul~ >3-3-?aP- Putty

Court No* i

... But you rc.-2ocbor that six persons wore approxim.tely finished with?
. A. Yo ■. pproximn t«ly.

DO y ni knew that the Defendant Haven after entering the room could
cotcr.-inu thr.t among the experimental subjects there tins one political
ira-tv. by the name of hacht?


9 Jen. 47-:—?JC-3-lA-rutty (3Z)
Court !’o. 1


And did the Dofendrufcsubsequently order imediately thrt thio
politicrl innate V n cht was to be sent pvay?

A Yes.

; You rlrerdy told ne, witness, that the inspector left the room
during the expericcnt?

A Tea.

; 13 it correct that the Defendant Eoven icaaedirtely thereafter
Cave the folio win,; - order : "Trice the lice away; bum the cr.»eo"?

a Ho, After these lice were applied, ve discussed tho beat way
to rc -ovo those lice,
x Zxcuse at. Who do you nepn by "vo*7

A It was tho clerk, Leibrrndt, c nurse whoso nanc I don’t roacabcr,
rnd I, rnd we decided that one such case wro to bo destroyed, that
the Un. v-.ro to be put into r basin, and then to .:o to Dr. Eoven
rnc 1 ttfll thrt thio mant r danger for the entiro ernp, nnd that It
vould be liuch better to burn these lice. Thio wro rcturlly done in
thi C v ln of thio Block.

\ I r:. no - ' coning to cnothcr point. Is it correct that tho
T'f'.nu r r.t Eoven ntvtr actually had an injection needle ir. his hand
for vrecin* tion*

A I never cn*r thrt.

% Ir. it correct thrt the Defendant Eoven never concerted "ny
lm\rtlono on crierlnentnl subjects?

A "o, not he hiaoelf.

I The Defendant Eoven plaits thrt he w«s present in 31ock US every
-"E• nrintrined, howevex thrt ho visited the tailor pr.d shoe
rro v h'ch i’ps -there, r. n.-~-.icu"r loseph f Ul, tho we- - ployed
' fv. V t r.ro concerned with Josef Enlttel who wps to be sent rwny
' r -fjosport end was hidden by the Defendrnt Eoven in the workshop
-3cr*. • r , is that correct?

• l a. I* l- correct that Knit tel worked there. However, 1 know
r * ot in * bout these connections with reference to the transport of

13U1'


? Jn . — Tj 0-V lA-r utty (3K)

Court To. 1


Halttel.

v And how r.bout the visits of the defendant Hoven into this
workshop!

-•v Tes. Hr. Hoven repeatedly visited Slock 4o. With the excep¬
tion of two occasions he only visited the tr.ilor nnd shoe shop.

x -Sac. if I understood you correctly, witness, thrt the Defendant
Eoven only visited the hospital ward on two occr.sionc.


? Jen 47-’ F-F JC—3—24-Tutty
Court He. 1

... Yes. I only sr.v: him visit the w: rJ cn twe occasions.

. ..nd new will ycu please tell the Hi . 1 xibunnl cv. len, you were in
Block 46?

... I remained in Block 46 until the beginning of 1943, onJ I -..as then
transferred to Block >?, that is. Spring, 4j. At that time Sleek 50
hr.l net be- n furnished yet, and I h i tc furnish it.

. Then hew long excotly were ycu in Block 46?

... Fran the time lc-cving Block 49.

- 11 , i\ a t e exact :-.t-, t^ut one ye : ml a qurrttr?

... Yea.

i. Th .t is really freo tn, end .f 41 until tbo i i.ednj: ;.f «4^, and
luring that period ycu only sow t Dofe-xlint iioven cn only t..c occasions
in the hospital ward?


S J a :7- -
Court .16. 1


1- 11 : cr


Is it co:r«_ct ti t tic Jowl si in: to, ..ugust Ycln, wrs or.—

I yod tl ere c. nurse?

i- Yo s .

I Do yeu knew fchr.t tlo dofordrjit Kovon r. :on - others trans¬
ferred t: is ..u-ust llcln, and .. few ctlor Jews in Block -16, sinco
tl.o;* were supposed tc bo transported to ..uscl witz?

Yus.

Do you tl.inlc it is ppasi* lo, v/itr.ese, t!..t the tw< or
tlruu visits of wlich you spoke, t*. . visits in tl v v/. rJ rcon,

> oru intended for t; ir pur;* so of C po Di.tsck tow: r£s ..uniat
. o’, n?

I c;.n net s. y tl. t sinco I vr s net presont person lly
in tl rOon;

Y Kowevor, -cu err. net exclude, tie possibility?

A ’'ca, it ccvld 1 . v- un pogsi lo.

Is it correct tl t 61 o C »o Di„ t3cl- r.ctu.l conplutoly
i:ulopunclontly?

In t! u r;;cfiizdtior. of tLo Blue!: .G io l - £ . freu 1 ..nd.

11 v/ovwr, ho ccnducfcrd n csjtU us wx 4 ,cri:*.on to without tk.u c.pprcv;.l
i . tl - roaponsibl, pkyaicirns. Ku w;.s .n ex..cutlVo orgen

De ye u laicw tk't ti e defendant l!ovon only bocr.ueo of
i>- m uats y tie poll ticr.l inr-.tco w..s r.o:.in~ t.. 1 >\t ho in-; tl oir
r presort. tlve?

o.

Y;u den ' t !n u tl . t?

Yoiter*: ; , you st.. ud t? e.t tl \t r only rno 'o. sin in
' : -i, nd one si wor. It , id ore fe.ru, y c ul 3 n< t
•uct tl. ‘...o5 s of the in. . e in tl • pr.rcri' £ per ,‘s.

<! t ctly do y.-u uanr. ’ y ' tl.s - f nuScr .beU

13-3


S J :r. -.7- - 11: -;.cr

Court - -. 1

“or tl o purposes the therapy of typhus, they 1 v.d to
vo .. lul:c .. ;ro bufchy .jiu -c-.ucc cl the insufficient op.;ortun-
tios, 1 cculd not br.thu the - ; proscri -sd periods.

1 '-.he v?..s boiir; tie re pro sunt-ti vc in Block -15 after tie

rarest f tie defendant Iioven?

I think it wr.e the c np physician r.fc tl. s
1 L-o you ’aiou his natw?

. 1 .‘wliovo it v;:.c Dr. Schicdl uchi.

. . ; fLIK: Thank you. I 1 vo no further quostlmo.

’ ?^SIDJa T: .ny further cross ox. j*K?tirn of this wit¬
ness by ojiy of defense counsol? — rj-lirccfc u*:. :in: tt n rf
Ilia witness by the Ire so out. ion?

RT-DI.tfCT SX./‘L*. TlOil

y r. :i>Y:

uifclocs, ycu : -o st. tod te th- *.cf.n:-e counsel's
Otion, . i-.: .i- had jwracno.lly r.d inietoroJ • ny injections

w

you know whott ur -

r.orc t. carry out tie -x,\.rl; tents to . fin's tor injections
t tl otS era work in*" In 31ook -.0?

o .us c of c Diobscl wl - tf . :: r

1 : spite f .11 liberties wl ic! ho ir,’ ye , ho c i.U not
i It LL rolf be cerduct ny sue! oxpv.ri fcnts cn fls ovn initia¬
tive.

Ehortfcrc, In tl. :..:c f Dr. Din- before c .•

Dlebscl Cfvid ct, it net : . r. ,

.s tl .t c rrect?

~ Ye e .

. u xrcennlly a..- Dr.
t • :

few, witness, .

T:t Section in 11 ck -lo '«pj t: n tie ti ius you

1344 -


3. ViSxto.i tl


J.cn 17 - - -_-?-G ii. I v-r

C urt -.c. 1


s~o l iu?

ilur^ is i possibility since 31 cck 16 ! d two fleers,

. 1 cevld net possibly soo every visiter tl . t c.j o ..I nc.

.. witness. Would you say tUa tK.t Dp. E 0 vcn, or.
would you -.rslL.iv- tl- t ^r. Jicvun in Ms capacity .-.s Deputy to Dr.
Dine* visited the section wl or*, experiments wore boir.y conducted
in Block -,G frequently, ti r.t is, tM til-a ul on y u per3i.iw.lly
llil not see ! i::?

It is possible tl t I e visited t 13 uop.rtiient on fre¬
quent occncions. r, teat • f 1 is -ir-itr wore intondpd frr

i!:-- c, .wluro thv tail r i v rl s' wore locato .

V'\i, d you !.t< •• in your limited cap. .©it: in tl block
specific duties Of Df. ErVell Cl n sis ted <f in fcj .fc
c nnuotion? in ct; „r u- r witn . . , vd t wcl ;ht did you -i"e
t Dr. be von rlenovor 1 .. issue n rrdor, nd wl ~t respect w;n
i-' • - M.s by Diwtaoi., or did Dieted ake lie report tv. H.-von
. lie exp rixntr, tfcut vor. conducted in tie ; baenco f ur. Ding?

Sutler Dieted 1*0.1 rte tc Dp. i. Ve , well, tl ir is

e!;l in tl t is p c.i le. i WOVeP, We C Id SoU fr . tK cl ;.rt

t di . id icl Dietsch h d In l or posoossi n how tl% ox-
ii,..enl;c v/ei*o t ro'ro£Mr. .

'£■ i would you .*.•• in tl . Din tl. t i r.

* i i 7 c c r.ai.ured tlec ^ ;ndin/ .fice:- -f *j 1 cl: -16?

•» £•- s •

u, witness, did Dr. 3 : o' ... t:- t rev lit In ny

tl.e S. V t O 1 the So typ! US XpcPl. eHUS?

*• i c. im.i; say s to ti t since darn- -:y w rk 1 v; s

' Cei'fX'incea with l cts n ever X*lnr • t• t i J .Ire dy been


in your knov/lcd o thn tlo
rv ..c tit u t. prevent -r t. s.-M z


*- J ;


1345 ,


od * t H -. no' ti initia¬
te typhus dx ori.: 1 ts


-!• CL


9 Jan -AA-h-U-Gal lagfaer-L

Court I

A. According to rry knowledge, no.

Q. Mow, *.dtness, the defense counsel for the defendant Koven
is trying to present a picture of Hoven as a Sir Galahad in Suchon-
wald, saving and doing good for political prisoners, and doing no
wrong. Is that a corx*ect picture?

A. Among the inmates he had a good reputation.

v*. Now tell mo, witness, your personal view 01 the defendant
Hoven in his activities in the Suchorrwald Concentration Camp. Did
you consider him, as I have said before, a Sir Galahad or do you
consider him an inferior person or did you consider him a man scheming
for his own gain? nhat was your personal opinion, witness?

A. According to my opinio:: the .ain motive of his work to us and
the main raotivo of saving us was based on reasons of corruption.

HR. HARDY: I have no furt sr questions. Your Honor.

DR. GA»fUk: Mr. President, I shall ask you to permit me to put
a few more questions as to the other aspects which have cono up on
his ro-diroct examination.

THE iSL-SIDE;:?: Tho defense counsol wi 11 ro-cross examine tho
witness.

RE-CxCSS EXAMINATION

BY DR. QAi/LIK:

Q. witness, wore you at any ti a present v-hon the defendant
Hoven issuod any ordors to Capo Diotsch at the boginning of tho
typhus experiments?

A. No.

Q. You, oreforu, do r.ot knew hothor the defendant Hovon over
issued any such oraors to Diotsch?

A. No.

vi. f ho Prosecutor put the question to you whothor tho defendant
Hovon over tried to prevent the execution of the typhus


Court I

? Jar. U7-i.-iiAA-l:-5-Gallapic^*-LJ}

experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. In this connection, I should like to put to you the testimony
of the witness who proceeded you, a Dr. Kogen. This witness testified
that all the typhus experiments started, or rather were started by
Dr. Ding?

a. ^us. Dr. Ding was the chief. Yes, t.vat is correct.


9 Jan 47-«-hrH-5-I-Gpylord
Court Ho. 1

5* therefore, did the defendant Kovon, after these exo-risents had
started; in other words, after the experimental su.^ects veru already infected
did he h/vo any possibility to prevent the experleenttl

A. So.

Then r ouwetion vpb put to you, witness, whether Diotzsch rent rny
reports to the iofondent Hove:..

a. Yoa.

<\* Did you ever heir th-1 Dletzsch nedo such reports?

A. It WT-a ir. the uenr.or of Di.-tzoch to report regularly to his chiefs.

Q. -hen you have to differentiate the following: there were purely
jidniniotn-tlvu natters In Block 4G.

A. You. Theoe ndr.inistrrtive natters were cf vary, very slight eigr.l-
fiennoe. Everything vno running Tory, very saoothly, oo there was nothing to

10 dleuussod with rcf«-ronc* to /dniniatrative natters.

'i* If r o you sold, vitneoc, everything wi s running oo onoothly, thon
i deputy cr r representative had to nek- no suf-goutiuns rt rll?

A. ! wj 8 r.oroly sneaking jf rdnlnietr-live natters.

Think you. I h/vo no further Questions.

.Ju F'RBY: The Drooocuticn hr s no further Questions t r.ut to this
vltneoa, your Honor.

-F. : . yfi.SIjJLi'1: Th-- prosecution will orocced. The witness io excused.

• KC RAKEY: If the Tribunal please, ve l • vc kcvcrrl ooru documents
to nut in with rosnect to the typhus *xc rir.entr nt Buchor.y/Id; one cf which
io HG~4fc4 on prgo 59 of the -nrlish Document Book, and this will U rraae-
cutlon Exhibit 291. This is / etc-totunt cv rr. t: by Alfred Bnli-dhowski.

Bh. HELTE: Ir. Jtelto, counsel f:r the defended trn&Uaer. The d.cu-
ont which ^he proacc.eor .'v. . t: atJc-.ed in ou“ D-cu'.eht Book Lears the
httifoer 46*.; the translation si id before *,£&.

f4r. rt^iient, I r6k th* t this statecent be only admitted under the
Q-ndition th->t Hr. Balachowski be called here pa ■ witness » nd be cu ’;c t to
Tr-af-exnin: tion. The very extensive str tc -r.t f Dr. Brlrch'vski ia hr Bed,


9 Jan 2—Grylord

Court Ho. 1

recording to his own words, to r l f rge p;rt, on reports of the third arty.

Ihv :ii rjicr in which the witness nrkec the statement does not show hew far his
6tf to&ifts tru based on his ovr. knowledge cad hie own ctserv; ticn, end h>w fnr
this vro net the c*s t . Tho High Tribunal, in their ruling of the 21st of
Ddcenwor 19*6 and which was also confiracd today, has atrfred exretly hew tho
cut .ission of affidavits wr.s tc be carried cut. According to this ruling, tho
proratlo of tho affidavit should hc.ve the wording: "I hereby establish tho
following facts under oath which ; re known to n.* frea ay cwn knowledge." I any
nB «' U0 th«t this ruling fpolio* to affidavits which are being eutaittod by tho
fr-secuti&n ao well ae to nffiorvita submitted by tho defense. The stetcaont
of Dr. Belnchowski i» obvi i sly not ‘n cuclimcc with this rule. I, thorofore
telieve thit lr. order to estrMish tho objective truth, it is necessary to
cronino this witneoo pereOnrlly; rt any r'tc, to give tho defense tho pcsr.l-
iilty to cross-cxrninc that vitr.oes.

• ;1 “ i.C IJ'.'Vi: If it clorco6 the Tribunal, I ry not aware of any
rullr.:; ot the Tribun* 1 with roopect to t> •* precise v.rding tf tho erthallo
..'vccpt (B concerns strtoaents a«do by witnesses for tho defonso--stnto.TSnts
not under Or th. The only point which ! think worthy of diocutrior. raised by
:r. H ulte ie tho question whether or net 3. lachovrki should be brought tc
Kurnbur,: , nd eubjuotud to crose-oxi^iw tion, il this document is rdaitted. Vo
K, ‘ Vu l'eCilivod Very extensive and orclfinged tcctinony free tho »It nose i.'cgor. and
1,u vt c oubjuctod to f rr thor intensive cross-uxanination. I think thnt there
-re very fow now natters in this affidavit, th< t is, nr tiers which vert not
covered by the witneoo hegon. rut v.» »re interests! in putting in this rffi-
df-.vit; first, eoc usi it corrjbont.s whet tho witness testified t hero, and
co i i-f ttur of fnct, Aagon ::en* lined tho n\.e of rrlrchcvshi re bei:u cn of tho
; pi- /'to v. rktd with • ir r :i:aw 5 j, - nd ni*. s . thins it •-ds to the weight
: flu prosecution's crr t .

It's suite true, ind revealed on the face of this affidavit, that
*' -hews ft I la n t taking “'ll ->: tho statements heroin fro perc^nei knowledge;
• u t lc t0 °c. v . be did not see cli these things ary _jr_- than the witness dogon


9 Jen 47-K-iErf-5-2-0rylcrd
Court Mo, l


s i"' the;. That, of course, dees not nitigate the ednittpnee of this document.
Vo, therefore, sutr.it th« t it should to admitted et this tiae, rod I think it
would be rnther difficult end unfortun: te to hrve to cell Prlichovski freo Pprii
t Hurnborg. Of course it cer. to done, tut I don't think it enn to done teforo
the prccucuticn pirns to rest its cr.se; so if the tribunal rulos tint it's
necessary tc brine hi" here as condition to the admissibility of this affidavit,
it would hrvo to te done rt a tine following next Wednesday or Thursday when
thu or-Becutior. expects to ocr.plote its cnee in chief.

THL HilSIDiMT: Vo will now trke r recess.

(A recess vi s tnken.)


135C


9 January-iS-D JG-7-l-Haynes
Court Ho, 1


Tli PRES HE NTs The Tribunal is o' tho opinion that the Prosrcu ion
Identification 291 having been cade and stated by the witness under oath,
should bo adnitted in evidence.

The defoliants, of course, nay by ar~uccnt attack its probative value,
and if the defendants desire, as part of their cross exauination, to ro- '
*)o«nd interrogatories to Alfred Bala ch cnrsky, tho witness, to bo a ns xrcci
by hiii bofora a Co.uucsion.r to bo naued by the Tribunal. Tho Tribunal
•i.oiad jive serious consideration -o an xch application, with the under¬
standing that the ansvrerc to the interrogatories cade by the ..Itncso should
bu oonsidorod as defendants' cross enaxt-utioa of tho witness \.iioi: .licy
arc received.

Tho offered affidavit trill * o .. . i ;tc In evidenoo.

at

.If. IS HAiEY: Prosecution 291 roads as folloirs:

"Statement Cone, rning Export, .ante orf.uscarch about aamlhc.-ntou 3

• V‘>us at Duchcnwald Canp, oado 'ay Alfred ?^lachOB«ky, Doctor of Science,
laboratory chief at tho Taris Pasteur Instituto, arrested 2 Jrl*, 19 J 13 by

i^topo 00 sect on chief of tho Underground Hot Buckuaater-Proopor (7.F.C.
awl charged vli. parachuting xid clocking ci arcs, establishment and trans-
r iM. 1 of secret radio stations, assistance to cncry amenta ar.G to air-
j: who landod on French soil.

"!:old in custody at the Gertaan • ricon Prosit* until 30 h vanor 19 Ij3,

•ru .awed to Conpiegno ervup, hold A _-ro until 16 January 19 'h.

u Dop rlad on 16 January 19Jih :ucheir.iald cwn (serial nuribpr ’*OJii.?),
nt on 10 i-c- raaiy 19.'di to tf.. ra tuit . I r t back c ..]•

1 . f ny 19Jd . r to 0 . $0 (^icno-Inatltut dor“ofi - ),

1,11 “ :u - r’l’oduct-on of the vaccine again. ena.it;i c c. a uus trphus ..ti c Gtraon
-••uy,

"Ub rated at ruchcnwnld ca.D 0:1 11 April 106 at 1600 h .■ 3 by the

• • Ai- ; (rat t. n). .u : to ranee on 2li April 19.'5.

"I. Functioning of block 3/ one . Block i»J, to w: ic : was a

.. or, was in charge af S Jtursijaaniuohror Bruin i... von 1 rj

1351


9 January-} i-D JC—7-2 -I Jayne s
Court !fo. 1

tliir officer, rjhc subsequently has coal tied suicide in his cell, r. 3 chief
.£ block hC, wnoro all the prisoners ef the* crap, irho had be u chosen as
* subjects 1 for various sc-c slice ‘scientific* experiments, iroro living,

"Tclnti ns bo tween both blocks, IQ and uo, were continuous, as tlic
secretariat (''oschaoftszimer) war share . *J: and ms held by tho Austrian

political internee Sugonc Kogon (serial number c 093), an living at fcchen-
. irurkstrasse 123, Obcrurccl-Taunuu, .. or Frankfurt a.r. Orinc tc the * reninont
.Id b: it block $0, Kc- to coll .eidor-

.-. ili mrbor of data and document: , •. hid; .c has saved nearly entirely and
which l.c line turned over, it tho tiia of rSa liberation, to tho U,S. Arry
rcychological Service (Lt. R’senber;:),

"2, I have boon personally informed of th oxperinonts rhich took,
plaoo in block i»6 by;

"1) lnromation riven to no :>cr*onally by Kugeno Kogon, through
oU. report.': tiuru boing transmitted,

"2) by information given ly Hans Bouneistcr, assistant eocrotary
blccl ‘ Qenvan political iitornu (serial auofcir 13hS), vdio tc ped all
r.’iDrtn,

"3) by the d - ign r iTilhola J< aeh, a (kroon political : it< race
~ "V'-' 5?5U), who calc ur all oh accoopaniod tho repents

i’ risicnts,

"Ii) by the Analysis slips which vro s.-nt t.c the hue criolcgicol
laboratory directed by Profossor Luc'..ip /leek, cf Lno», a Polish-Juwioh

ia r • 0 (--rfi'-l nutibor .to'O. All sick and typhus-infoctoe pooplo
th< ‘?oil-t*oUx test, carried out try ny conrado, Doctor Rone
, r< ich p litical int .. rneo (serial nunbar 2 £,{t 99 ),

"*• hu laments which ;ivo much ;:orc utailed iaforaatien and which
11 -: ! * pohsuusi n cf Eugene Kogon, who succeeded, in particular, in _ :tting
*J.o diary of the erpcrjaicnts which were cf value tc t^c Go roar.

• 1 defense.

"!'• Bio following personalities arc nenbers of the Superior Ccaaitteo

1352


9 Janaary«ni-DJG-7-3-Hayncs
C art Ho. 1


?: hie Section*:

r« Handloscr, Inspcctcr-C-encral of the ..'ohrnacht Itcdichl Service.
"Dr. Conti, SS^DborstgruppcnPuchrur, (Ob^rsruppcnfuc-uvr).

"Dr. Poppcndick, SS-Gruop^nfuchrcr
"Dr. Gaonaken, SS-Grupponfuciir-r.

»£. 'H:e entire section was placed une’er the protectors- ef Hitsilcr
hinsolf, vtfio accorded personally icitili . r thp carrying o f
research, which, by the way, interested hiri vox/


9 Jan- M- S3 S- 7- la- Sayne s
Court iio. 1.

aucn. All decisions were ssd e under the cover ox* -.is undisputed and ovax'-
vhelmin^ autnority.

" 6 . Initiatives referring to any experiment ana to be reported to tho
V.S. No. 5 in Loipxig, vnich suncequently arranged for t-.eir execution, ont
only in block 46 ox* 3uchenwuld camp, but also in similar blocks whicr. oxi 3 tod
in otnor cump6 (Belson, Struthoff. Auschwitz, Dacnau, etc.)* An Inspector
wuc specially noi lgned to th. supervising of all t..i- work. It vm S^-Ober-
fuehror krugoweky, a tall Prussian, whoa I saw several times at tho carm
1 ot o:; 20 k-.rc.i 194p, when ho Just had inspected tho ext oral nation block
llo. 6l.

"7* Anotner personality w..o war interested in tho so oxporimor.to but did
not participate officially tnwroia was tnc Zrbprinz :u y, ldock and Pyrouoht,
SS-Obcrgrupponfuchror, Gone ml of the Vtoffon-SS. Foliccli'uohror for Hesso und
Thuringia, redding nt Kassel. Ho visited block 46 overul times.

"8. Is. Buchor.wald camp itself, the director o* tho oxporinonto ordered
oy the V. S. No. 9 of Leipzig was SS-SturmbM.nfuohrer Diug von Schuler. Only
in quite except local emsos did ho take any person .1 initiative and ho did not
carry out tho orders vnic.» ho received. After every series of oxpcrlnor.tn,

•;o .md to hnnd in u detailed report, wni . . was typed at block ^0 by 2 . Xogon
or fifinn Baumolster, and to w..lch graphs or photostats w_ro attached. The

%

! noto.jra : ..ic work was done at block 50 by the Dutch internee Johannes Robert
(serial numb r 3 103 ), now reoidlng at AoptoTUam. Scholdostraflt 5$, no well no
cy another Date.'., a friend of .is, v:.o worked as Schroibar (clerk) nt block

46 .

"9. If tr.. scientific direction of block -6 vj. ir. ch rgo of tnc SS-
Sturabcnr.fuchror von Scnlor-Ding, all tho practical execution of tho
experiments was entrusted to t..e Kapo o: block 46. tno Qe-naim political
i.'.tornoe Arthur Dietzsca, residing nt present at Dctmold (Lippo-Ootmold,
ritioh Zo:.o). When nc luft the camp, he married • prostitute of tho
Buchonwtld trot.‘.el.

n l . Diets sea symbol isos tac brute ir. every physical and moral respect,

135U


? -.12: f- r. =rv> 00 « (32)

Court "o. 1


md he hrs killed with his o*a hands several thousands of internees
cf every nationality.

"11. la Vyty, he had collected 20 : ears of pricon. Arrested in
ICcUj p: p tisa when he vat a Schupo policen/-, he hrd been sentenced
then to 15 years prison (*uchtha.ue) for having sold State Police
docuaents to the Cor-uniats. ~ept in prison by the Hitler re ire,
he vns sent at lest to the Bachenvrld cacp, where he was renovnod
because of hi# bestiality. He first was '3ink*ieuf#r' (buyer) at the
P.cvier (hospital) of the errro, -here he aade the acquaintpnes of
Schuler, v ho, prior to the (in I 930 ) vrs the SS-Lagerarst (chief
physician) of the Sevier of -Mchenwald cr.p,

"12. Sohttltr vent to the front in Septeabor 1939, participated in
the battle 0 ? xrrr.ee, and van ocr.t in 19 1 *! on r nedicrl nission to
tK Prstsur Institute In Paris (service of Tr. iiroud ), in order to
study th« re the new aethods for producin. vaccine against cxrnthenn-
tous typhus out of rabbit lunas («o-crllcd Giroud cothod ( ).

"13. Hi via. returned to 3uchanwald in October loiil, the Syrian
Schulir takes ch-rge of 31ock Ul ( r t the tict), md la looSdn.; for a
devoted h« lp< r in ord-r to carry out the pro r"; r cuircd by his nov
position. Kc askid for volunticrs to rsaist hi:., hut nobody voluntccr-
(d. At last, Schuler cplled directly on Pietsch, who accepted. Thio
nev pocition at or.ee 7 rvc Dietsch conslderabl advantages in the
car..n. The rl.jht of life rr.i death of the. internees, for he had
practically, if not the riaht, then at 1-nst the norns to recruit
••hon ho v»rtcd ae 'exjerir.entrl subjects'. Bictsch -re tolerated
7 Co-i.u.J.et fraction of the cr.no, which hrd discretionary powers
rt Suchenvpld, as he Vd th po-.d to clindr.-te the cnenits of the
Party ir. the shortest tlno.

Brut*l, stupid, cruel, r erdist pnd p drunkard, he received ac
r reward for his object activity considerable np.terinl advantages,
superior cv- to those received by the SS thenselves; h« vielded a
- : lscr- tio.vr* -tower over the ernp; he had cbsolute authority , and

1355


5 Jen.- i—C-5-7-9'-K*r2.e8 (3K)
Court To. 1


ever. Remitted hlneelf to be rude to«rrd SS r.or^-co"lssior.cd
officers.
f j


1355 a


9 Jai>-M-53&-7“3 a "3oynos
Court no, 1.


"1^). Ho signed aimgreoucnt vita the SS who entrusted hie wita tr-is
or., according to which he undertook to execute person.-dly everything
w.'.ic.. would bo aekel of hin.

”l6. Ii.is kind of 'ugroocont • van cn exception at the cn~p mid was
asked only ef u few intornoos wco wore completely ievotod to the SS and who
Curried out on tnclr behalf a dirty Job. Tais was also the caso for th^

Ce—or. criminal (green patch) Knpo of the «Crem toryi, wr.o or.Joyod an ex¬
ceptional regime und roceivei a bonus of 200 cubic contl-etrcs of alcohol for
ov«.r y risiner w.io was oxccutod ir. the b. somer.t of Lis building, which had
oeon transformed Into a;, elocution chn-bor. He wns a notorious necrophllo
wi.o had fiund there u position where he could give way to his norrlblo vlco
wltnout cny rontrr.int. In the morning of 11 April 1945 , ho loft with the
last SS--.on i.nd was probably oxocut-c on the road by his 8S friends.

"17. A-.oitg the interne » w..o were woll inf r~cd about the occurrences
at block 46, one chauld also .\uoto Dr. fc.rian Ciopiolowsky (a Polish
political li.ternce, uorial number 347). He waa interned there to be put to
death with two other follow countrymen of his, who perished. Ciopiolowoky
war. saved by Schuler, who appointed hin os his chief of production of the
v.cclno, at block 50 . He made uao of ills poritlon to co..~it sabotago of tho
; reduction with a very liutlnblc c oldr-bloodcdness and efficiency. On tho
otaor l.utd, no exerted ..is authority in order to protect as far no rosciblo
the internals, to li-it the executions, t» nullify the experiments, to
ful*l:y thw results, mi alw: ys prove- ti~rolf t • be a very Jolly comrade.


1356


9 Ja n~I :-JF- 8 -l-Kuppersto in
C.urt Ho. 1


'•-5. ;.t Suchcnwal-', thv ->rxri -ntnl Block, established-t the beginning
in buck 11, was transferred to blocks Id 19, sa finally, in ..cvcmbor 191*2,
to block 16. Ads latter adaptation was final and t he clock was bio to lodge
pt-rmincntly a'o ut 1*00 isolates.

" 19 » block 1*6 was an isolate .lock, sumun’ec by barbed wire, with
■'.jv.rs c..v -.fin cws which wexv always closed; tr*. int-rnocs never left it ami
w-re n t suaiatte t- any roll call, .h~n ent^rinr fcl.'ck 1*6, th..y v: r- thdr
ca ,ip aortal member. ..11 of them recciv . an thvr ;r.e whichvr.6 listed on the
cxpcriiieut files. Those wfu -lie-! (nearly all of then) r.r. listed n the
ca*up files.

"20. In f.en^r.l, the internees 3..:-vir.i as 'Quine-. Pigs*, 1: they survived
an exp-ri wnt, Were put te icath at it*s end b> an injection of .ru 3 sic acid
(1 cubic c.nti etre, intrav-n.ualy) r f 10 ccj c.ncentrato’ Kien. l solution
(intra,car dire).

"214 In ‘ucomb.r 191*::, 1 r.-vt s n that 3 strait jackets wore put on the

cr or ltse blick tai5 wrs fii - pharmacy ol bl.ck 50 by the

Luxu.'.b ur- 'elitical inUrnco Vict.r ilOLPJ (serial nu.~fx.r 3. : *11), new resi-
'lr.t 1*3 Avo, lo la Liberty in iAUieU'b urg.

" 2 -* At block 1*6, froitt<i,3 -nJ aut.r.-vic pist. Is we re ale at tho dis-
p ca„ x DILTZSCH, in r .r t pr-.-r.C ray intvnual or external r.v;lt at
’ - ck. : wru A re .It oal* nm-s-i, "ftr r.. o*n", wull ", , . Selooted

f r thoir o ’ily strength, in rtWr to usslc th. s wh i . t- a y.

"RECfLfT 2" r I SLEJACTS ?0fi 3LOCK 1*6".

The list i th- int~r.ioca m.icatere utilize as Tuiii-a 4 u : .s at bloc#
s -stabile... or th. 1 .ices if : h- "I .lititch- ...teilunr' 1 and c .nprisod,
ar. a motor .* principle, butth- "gr^e.." nus (sri inals). In r.aciicc, tho
r<-- e.rd i th. R-vi.r (hcs>it:d) rh.r. ->» in livi ual c :nv. c-.tian took
p h t:ie inUrna-Saty £ thv ap B ISSL (chief of tl & .:.vi r).

1 t ify tl.- lis. accc: in his wishes a.; t substitute another
- r - s- .i u Hstc-'. In this way, c-raain political i-:t rr.e-s 'ie ' at

1357


9 Jan- - JP—S-2-XupjJersto in
C urt So. 1


'•* The SS-physician HOVE!-, «hu *ras in char - f the Revier, plnyed
p-rt the liquidations of block" 1*6. In r.'cr t, caacuflr. _ the
-xp-rl... nor, real sick, c nta.i uslv sic!:, ~_r specially typhus cases,
were aocon ate ' at bleclc 1.6.

•r:. :: s CJtfRi D cot .vr lock 1*6 concerning gx^-t^ .hots ivii-us".

"2U. ... Cultures f typhus# Th_ pr ’.-.•ctiv.n f nnti-typh i v:;ccim.

;r. e use of cultur .s OeRsistiny .f infected huar.n bl> J with which the


aninals (Guinea pigs, nic., mb its) wore i inoculate ' an i.< s. organa

(r.arr'.v, lun^.s) :;.r. then collect, f r r Veti n purp-scs."

It reads "onti-typhtij it bvi vsly sh ul "anti-t^'ius".

"2; . So'HUL’R establish rt loch '*6 a c rtain mrab-r cultures vhoso

virulence. a.\ behavior wuiv. v *. oi- ,c< ir.. ♦ his opini n, an’ which

ho cn.L’Bu I, 3u I. .Bu XU (?u «• 3ucIiorvw: , i' , .)« Thus he c ul iav . strong,

rms, rith auch and such cii ideal cliarao tori sties.

1 Iv- "Ctivity e* thi'Sw st cks c ul b- iuci-cs- by "pasoa c".

"26# Every Ictcrninu cultutx - naintninu * be-* "pasoa^e", waning

•

t)i inoculati n of. 0.5 t. 1 cubic conti et.*c infoctj bic * ffr tin
Individual be are r f cultur. t a in ivi *.ual. Oen.r lly t virulent blood
van r ,;o. 5 t 6 aye aft-r t.io inoculation (rhich t »: place r Ufih in-

n), the second day after t:-... a poaranco of the oxar.t oma.

"27. .yphus in.culati n by intravenous xer.ns it the indicated ces
always av« t. t'.ie 'iseas. .a v,rv s-ri ur character, an !eath invariably
occurrod bwti.-Uen tho 10th t.' 30th day Ur tr.e in cul-Li . inaction.


" 2 ., F r ev.ry list-’ oult»r. (i hav- b -niA. t net. it. c-rt'inly
l-‘a. 12 i.i t.i files vf bl o!: .6) tv, jj.'-.ru-^s ~t L.ast were sacrifice*.

- > • lock 1*6, a.. - rs.

" 2 V 1 e exp-ria-rtt .1 fiUr, c Ir r. hi ck 1*6 fil.s . f j,; lays prior

' lb-rat*- r. . f tn- c: ip, ir. 'icat.s :i~ number : cultures, t'.x various
- s ’’n t,*. c ursc f the o-rlaents#


1356


9 Jan-; :-J?-8-3*-Xuppor3tcin
Court Jte. 1


..TS COSfCEJUnC T Y .d- - Cl- THE V-.'XDJES."

" 30 . Tiic Germen army aa.Cc us . several vaccin-s a_.air.st. -xanthu. etous
typhus, vaccines c-f inequal v-luo, an the ccuparativo value cf these
varies v ecir.cs was oxpori-'.cntod or..

"31* Sosi cs th. vaccine which was pr ucc n a rathor lar :o scnlo
(25-30 litres a m. nth) at block 50 by -a- s--call- ’ Gir u-.* -eh. ‘ (raeoit
XUlY ) j t*iw Xiuan arr,y air na o usw f vaccines -f Polish ( ei„i Instituto,
of Cr:co». a.*'. Iwcw), Italian (cricken - i>ry. ), G-man (Ha.ibur;. Tr adeal
Institute), FJrcr.ch (Pasteur Instituto) D-r.ish (rice lun s) ritrin.

"32. In : ay 19U*, the V.S. f Ldpzi loci - t carry ut i pertant
uxpe-ri- -nto concerning th- c,.j.v.r-blo v-.luc f these vari ua v-ccinos at
the Buchenwal.’ block u6. .»cc rdi.a t- t- re, rt type ’ at block 50, 156
int-rn—s vr-r- sacrifice ' in tis-ct' rs- .. this checkin, .

"33> ThiOv sublets vr-r- f.ivi -c*. i:.t t lets; thv first l.t (20
inturncos) was -xclusivd: us-' f; r checking purp s-s, rn.’ tno p- pi- were
in culatu with v ri-us typhus cultur-s without h vin* bo-u vcclnatoC


135V


9 Jan,-8-la*-cl-ATD-Kuppers tein
Court :to,

previously. The other lot (136 internees) were vaccinated '.rith the various
vaccines mentioned before and at variable doses© 15 days after the last
vaccine injection, all subjects were inoculated with typhoid" — that should
be typhus — "by 1 cubic centimetre of blood in intravenous injections; this
Mood came out of the culture carriers, under the usual conditions,,

"31© From the 10th day on, the test persons began to dLe, 33 indicated
by the record of the experiment, which I have seen myself, accompanied by
an explaining graph. The vaccined subjocts hold out longer, and this resistance
was related vdth the dose and the nature itself of the vaccines which woro
used in the experiments©

"35« Tho Y<eigl vaccinos (obtained by the crushing of lice) ware the
most officiont and gave to the peoplo subjeotod to tho experiments a real
immunity, Tho few survivors of those exp:rL >nts wero murdered, according to
tho rulo of block U6, by intracardiac injoctions (10 cubic ccntimotros) of
concentrated solution, givon either by the Kapo DIETZSCH or one of tho nursoa
rccruitod by him©

"36. Tho report on theso experiments, which Hans BAUIEISTEH has shown
no, has boon sent to Leipzig at tho ond of ..u,-ust or tho beginning of
September 19U»,

"S2!vCLOGICAL EXPERIMENTS CONCEXillO TYPHUS."

"37- It was a strict rule at block 30 not to take an;* scientific
initiativo, not to carry out any personal experiment and not to givo any
suggestion to Schuler, who always a ired us for advice in order to inprovo
tho vaccino, ~'o know that the least initiative had S3 a result the intro¬
duction of new experiments, which meant the death of comrades XOCON,
Cr-lPIELOV.’SKr, and myself insisted .s much as .re could that those of our block-
corirade3 who had a scientific responsibility strictly observed these rules
which, on tho .'hoi., were followed,

"38, However, Dr. Prof. Ludwig FLICK of Lwow, Jewiah-Polish political
internee, serial number L93U, deliberately mentioned to SC : lTLF"v in July l?Uli
that he believed to have observed modifications in the serological reactions,
when a sudden rise of tho agglutination percentage in the Toil Felix reaction

1J60


9 Ja n. —5—2 a-tf-h TD-Ku ppers tein
Court Ko. 1


fron l/liOO to 1/800 occurred on the 3rd and kth days of tha disease,

"39. Imaediatoly, SCHULS" sent a report to Leipzig asking for experiments,
and the authorization was given very soon<.

"IiO, On 6 September 19UU, 20 non subjects roro innoculatod at ’.look h6
and sorological observations were nr.de fron day to day.

"Ul. The '.F. reaction did not appear to bo specific, only 2 subjects of
the 20 showed it.

"U2« Of tho 20 internees which were innoculatod on 6 Septembers

- U died on 20 September,

- 8 diod on 21 Septcnbor,

- 5 died on 22 September,

- 2 diod botwoon 22 September and 11 October
( - 19 doad).

Tiiore was only 1 single survivor, who probably has boon nuxxorcd. The aygluti-
ration percentages have boon observe! fron day to day by ry corarado, Dr. H no
IDTAT, who gave no all infomationr or: tho subject,

t:. n.v RrE’P'Si<‘dn , t Fotpei’ir ^jnts concerning the chenical reaction
of certain substances, in order to euro oxanthoaatous typhus, woro aloo r.ado
at block 1:6 of Buchonwald, as shoTm by a report typed by Eugono KOilCN at
block 50.

vliU. A cortain nunbor of theso cxpcriixmts have b u on evade on requo3t of
tho I.G. Farbonindu3trio of Frankfurt an 'lain, particularly by Prof.
UUTENSCELAFGrB, who had TOTEISEL granules, acridine and nltroacridino oxpori-
aontod on internees at block h6. Thu report nontions a mortality percentage
of 53? for the acridine and of 56? for the nitroacridino.

"Ii5. Other substances havo oo-n sent for experimental purocsos by tho
BEHHIMWonke of Karburg, and Dr. HUGS of the Hamburg Tropical Institute took
a 3trong interest in this research.”

This is dated, Paris. 2h I-Jay 1916, and signed by Dr. Alfred 3,.LACrF,7S!:i.

I would like at this tine to introduce document, HO-659, which .Till

i rosocution Exhibit 292. If the Tribunal plea3e, this document has boon

1-61


9 J^-8-3a—,4-ATMuppe rs tein
Court No, 1


delayed in translation. It was neant tc be inserted on page 20 of the English
Docucont Dock. Or. page 20 you will find the certificate on these docucants.
They were copied by Frofessor Robert <EITZ, whose nace was aentioned by tho
witness Xogon, when he testified, as being one of those working in block 50,

I believe it was. and he certifies that he copied these fover charts and
clinical reports from the originals in BuchenwalcU


? Juaiaiy-H-'DJG-9-l-Iehnhirdt
C urt .... i


This exhibit consists of seven i.v<-r charts which cti fr BLC. ;. .'*6
in the Buchenwald Concentration Car.p, an- these shew the incidence of sick¬
ness of the inaates inolulater. ritii typhus c

Or. five charts, narely those c-.mcratcd n 59G n "591'’ "c^l' ! *c tni
"658", a red cross sliowcd the patient died. For instance, or. the — T will
pass the original up to the 7R131N.J., ( 'r '*cHe:ioy passes ' cunont to the
President),

BGl. .£ HAKEYt (c<>ntinui:0 Pati.nt , n o52", is the fever chart on
top, and y.u will soc a snail r, crcs: * c! or of the r~d f.ver line
on that fever chart.

I c!on»t think it's neccrsrry t.. t 3 road *.ll -f thu tr.ns3t.ten that
hr.3 boon handed up to the TRI7U ie'.Lj as you can see th exhibit c.rmlsts
aoctly of fevur Charts, H.a v-r, the back or : rre f there f.Ver harts,
will bo found notes written In Ink, :.n ’ these ,riv. th« prepress ef the
’•iscuso.

For oxsuple, on the s.coi.d pare of th. translation of this document
thoy i.ive r. running account of clinical observations. F r instance, it
reads up m the top:

"oxanth.n 13 nantorcal like rcsc-rrblancc f betn thighs
19th-22nd exudation l th. . xirth.lentil
sizer* rcsoolos the 2 Hh • xnnUic.t ho.arn rrh.agic

;yu3 13th heavy ctijunctivitlc, oyeliis swollen, From

23rd ten. is ey>s

t.nruc 13th r-.;is:, wl.it. coating, » l^cs fr o, joint
rud’;,^.*, OA 2i5t epirtaxix

heart 20th nltr. systolic unur

2lith r urn's low, pcrtduliur. rytijn - pulso
low, soft, regular

sple«n 22nc* vnl-rgud, palpable, 23rd . re-sure runs!live

livvr 22nd « "

state of

health 16th" —

These numbers, "l^ and sc on, apparent 1; 3 in-*. th_ v/
fr.13.iv.ing the date f incolulaticn,

" 16 th slight headaches, srenoss f liebs, nwcr.ts,

1363


o Junx"rj'^ / -DJQ^?-2-Lihnh2rdt
f. urt - • 1


"19th heavy headaches, aching back

2l3t giddiness, 22 nd fainting spcels, telirious during the
night.

2 Uth facial tick around the ncuth and lower ,i *.v t :ightj
cifficrilt breathing."

I think that is a sufficient reading af this Jocmor.t- The
r~st of this translation, consists cf substantially the same sort cf deo^-
“riptive iar.tv.rial} that is, clinical observations ua arsons who underwent
the experiments in BLOCK 16 in Suehcrmald*

At this tine, the Prosecution • mli 1 l..c t h'.ve the witness Edith
SCHXTDT callad to the staM.

. THE PRESIDENTt The liARSHAL will rou on the witness Edith SCH'CFT.

?(T.. !.C HANEY: If the TRIBUNAL please, this witness i*i a FREICH citizen.
However, she is from ELSA£S, an:’ cr.n tot 1 fy in GERMAN, so 3 think that
will simplify natters.

.. EDITH SCHM1LT, a witness took the ar.r, * and testified as follows:

D! Ti:E rREiilDEI.Ti The witness will rire and hold up her right hand.

(The witn.ss rest and raise-! h r right hand)

THE PPJvSIDEtfT: You swear to sjxonk vitheut h*tu cr fo-.r, to say the
truth, all the truth, and only the truth. You have raised your right hand.
Now, say "I SO WEAR".

(Tho witness r_;.e'-x.d t'U> on? a ni the w.rdei "I SO S.VEAR")
THE PRESIDENT: Ycu nay sat 'e.-m.

DIRECT IX.JJIHA7I:.

BY JR. ?C HAltEYi

Q '..itnoss, your nur.o is r*.ith SCHJTD7?

A Yes.

Q Y.ur Last nans is "SCHKTCr"?

A l‘es«

Q You ware born on August 26, 139??

A Yes.


Q and jnu were bern ir. bC*Ui..IS, France.
A Yes, 3364


9 Janu: ry-!WX’B-9-3-Iehnir’.rdt
C urt He. 1

Q Are you a French citizen?

'A Yes.

Q Will you tell the TRIBUNAL whit ycur education ms been?

A I ntfc nded the MlflDE school in SiiARGEiUEKD and HAG2HAU. Thun, in
1721, I took ay first BACCAI^UR2*Lo; that is, I graduated from S2C0MY.RY
scheol. And then, I was a volunteer student at the f*Ltt!flycoZ03XGAL Institute
at che University of STRASSBOURG.

Q Vint work have you dorc si:.ce y:u _r ’untod fro-. Strnsb. urj; University
of Strassbcurg?


9 l:7-iI-£ .- 9-1-:. - Ichnharu*

-ourt -fo. 1


A. In 1928, - left the University of Strasbourg. (pause) ."c, ir.

1929 (pause) 5zxusa -.e. "nd then 1 work< •*. r.t tho IhSTTJR Institute in

/.•-RIS. Afterwards, I rent bac.< tc the- Uriv.rsity of Strzzssb.'u-... I

rorkod at the PH.iT....COLOQIC..L Institute there. Since 1929, I \i: » t work

*>ro since qy uothor vjs- ill, c;v then I rent to the HICi.M; Jj.uUtutc

in Straasbourj, in 19U2, in f cbrunr-; - .roz-kc-: there u .. cr Trof.

In :y work there, * rr.s in charco of the ocrlological - 'inctori^lojical

r

CJU 1 -SC of the students; irxlteorvdentl;-, alone.

And what sort of r: . i . 7 v td _ . ... f. ti y _ n?

A. its I said, I hud the cci-icl^ic.al-bactoriolc-leal cour:^ of the
students,

Q« -ml how 1 n 3 .ere j Prof. Bar n, trass-

hour;?

“• Ir ™ *ho 1 st of *obruury, 1 .°' 2 , until the Lim'iYxCX.

Q» MflO H :.'s fir " U ,> no"?


»

it#

j.oo.


Q.

"Uucenu Haugen"?


A

Xeo


0 ..

'..as ho an officer in tho

ur/w -r:'.


A.

-eJ| he lore the. u.iiforw

of tho LJ'AL

AM..

Q.

w, witness, did lfaae;cn

work In his

Laboratory at Jtrasr-

on

. ollov l jver.


A#

1*03,


1 -.yi. uA?


A®

1*03


tit

And ther. On *yphus?


•••

res.


•

•'as he working in ur. ‘ r "w

z-t tc develop

vaccinon Or x. .use di-


scales?

A. Yes.

.. :• courso of ;* ur i : iih •• . ‘0 yo u k. . - vh ther

13 ^


9 Jan it7-4MSV:-9-2-A- Lohnharit
Court He. 1

lie ever per for nod any nodical experiments on Centretior. Caep i nan tee?

A. Yes.

Q« -ill you tell the TRIBUNAL ut.r.t you lnorr about those :::per-
toontfl be-ginning with the first?

A. The experiments, as far as 1 recall, extended fra > ab :t 1 ay
1?«3 lo July 19)1*. T nc first knovrlcd o of c::. >orinents on human beings, I
received in about ~ay 19i*3• But first in reference to o: porir.cnt3 v/ith
influenza vaccines produced fr the lun^s of ncusc structure injected

- of the Conp SCK1&2CK. •*!:cn’I fojactod tc Prof.

!lna;;o:i and to hie Assistant, S3 ; bwr-Arts dr. i'oliuit OR’;!’. , that that v/ns
a CRHE> Dr. GREFS to] I no, in ... p:vec:.cc >r»f. Haagon, uld

calm rjysclf, that tho ex;. riaonts uld n - ‘ o purfortvod on ihuatoa but
on POIES. when 1 said (pause) objected *o) that that v;.. . :c thin-,

del "No, I " : that

. v n fc true; . that I was to bo quiet, '^his

vaccine v/as later, v.hon its hard. :nes:. ir.' been ascertain used on
personnel cf the University of Strar jboirg, v/1-.e volu tocr: .


9 January-ii-D JG-lG-l-Less er
Court !!c. 1


Q Hot, witness, in ccnn.-.cticn witi t u se experiments at the Schirncck
Concentration Caap, did you have any rcas.n to believe that ayy-hus experi¬
ments night also have been conducted there, as well as influenza?

A Yes, I assumed it but I vns not able to get any evidence to that
effect.

Q iJhy die you assume that, witness? TThat nado you thiuk that they
alght be expe riaenting with typhus at Sckiracck in 19W?

A I saw what materials wore taken ;c Schimcck and I said to sysclf,
"i'hore wust be typhus experiments there, too."

Q Ycu moan by route rial that y. u saw typhus vaccine? being taken to
Schirncck?

A Yes.

Q, IJar.T witness, y u have tol- u. a. out the cxpcriia ntr at Dchinrack.

Do y x w of any othor oxporimen . . inaat 3d by Dr.

Ilaagcn?

A Yes.

Q V.'ill ycu plm.se tell us about these?

. A At the ond of 391*3 I saw a letter which Prefursor Hor. L n trote to
fico through Profoscor Dr. Hirt, Anatomical In¬
stitute at ; irg. in this 3 *, inmates of tho c caop,

iu, wore requested in order to carry cut typhus uxparffflcnts.

A aocont lettor case tc ry knowledge. In this lottor Frol aa r. son
\.t to that the human material which hem been . ent hie v. .s not suitable for
rfnonts. A *.rt of th< c nc n cr-ap inmates of, 1 believe

, arrived at dchiro ck :•: * whicl would n t have

•reduced the sane results froa typhus vaccinations. Part of l

the way. Ihrrovpon frxiess r ?r. : an an dc: av ;d concen.ra-Lon ca.*jp
id,sonars in the health c ruiitic . ••

: Sow, witness, I would lik t this • and have

■*- • o’l to y u Deeunant KUaber h‘0-121 and ark u if this ir . . 1-ttcr which

• ar; first Dr. Haakon tc Dr. Hirt. If Tour Honors pi-asc, this is cn page

1366


9 January-! '-4)JG-10-2-Lcsscr
C urt :;o. 1


7 • the Typhus Docur-vnt Book, (Co.-;* ci :.ocua.nt is sh itn to ;;iV:ss).

A Yes, that is tho latter.

.C H/.ICY: I offer Document Iteber ."C-121 as Prosocut.. n 'xh3 bit
293 and I u uld liko at this point to read it into tho record. It is a
It--tor to Professor Dr. Hirt, Anatc-.ical Ins-.-ituto of the h-ich /Avrsitj,
Strasbourg. "ho letter is froa Dr. Kaagon is Hirt. Ihu cate dost act appear
.. the translations however, it is on the original. It is "c . , 191*3:

"On 13 November 1913, on inspection \.ns an.’.c of the prisoners that were
furnished to vc in order to icteraim ti:oir suitability f r the t-cts which
have been plannud f^r tho cp* ttud • r v ' • -. Of 100 pri! n rs that

have boon : elected in their fonur caao, 18 died duri -rt. Only

12 prisoners r.rc in such, a cenfit on eh: hoy can be used fer tlieso osqjcr-
leonts, provided they can be brought into r. state f vigor. This should
tftlro about 2 to 3 uonths. Thu re. sii..i. pri; < acre are hi such a c nditicn
that they connct be used at -.11 r id. ;c .cp res.

"I right point ut that the orporS-aor s are f. r the nur.ioso of tcct-
. . vaccine • Such oxporlnonts nly 1.:. to fruitful results when

they arc carried cut with nomallj nourished auhj.cts wh sc physical
poworo nro ccnporablo with these j- the ecIdlers. Thuroforc, ox
"itli tlx pioocnt r up of prisoners cam. v ,‘iold usable result: , articularly
ainco a largo part of theu arc apparently afflict C -.dth oaladios which r.iako
thou unsuitable for those exporioanta.

13'-S


9 Ji;r>-2i-G2&-ll>-lar-Lcs3cr

Court Ho. i.


“ long period of rest and of good nourishment would not alter this fact.

"I request, therefore that you send mo 100 prisoners of ago
botvoon 20 to UO years, who are healthy and who arc so con¬
stituted physically that they furnish coaparaolo aaterial."

■SoU Hitler J '

"Staff Faysicion
■Professor Dr. 2. :-i,n f on"

how, witness, will you continue to toll us want you learned about
these experiments following your Jtnowlu o of tr.ir, letter vnich I h'.vo
Just read?

. ftcr 1 n;,i aoor ‘ t - ls lottor I paid nil the uore attention to What

was going on in the typhus laboratory. It war n ..svhat difficult for ;. 10 oinco
I was the only worker wno was not raccinr.tcd gainst typhus so that I would
bo kept away fr-a t.ic work. I would like to reairk tnat I wan the only
.Uwttir.n in the Institute. In spite of thni I learned that typhus vaccino
was being producwi with Rlckottslu Pruwr.ocki and egg yolh culture. This
vnccinc was dried by a special method and I rssa.o th. t it wan dissolved in
solution before injection. In any c so. there fluids were taken

nlor.. when Frofossor Haakon went t> the Concentrnti ,u Cav.p Ifrttwoilor, which
iiapponod rather frequently.

Dll Kflogen alpo cultiv/ to in ..is L-.boratory nt Strasbourg r virulent
typnus virus?

... Yes, on guinea pigs, in toe brains Of r-ir.ca pigs.

i- -n ale no take tnc.o guinea pigs to Shi swell er wltn al .?

... Yet. they w.r. used to infect t..o Tic.nors. ..r for as I know, prrt
' f tno risoners v.ra iij'ect-d and vrcci.uatod erf part jf thonw.ro so-cnllt*
"contr -1 pers:r.s n w..o wr. nst vaccinated.

v How, witness, jou st' to th t these experiments were carried out at
.e- tewoilcr. How do yju know ta t fact?

I saw tae list.

..ad wno had ar-do up tnis list?

1370


9 Jea-K-GES-10-2a-Les8cr (BK)
Court Yo. 1


A The assistant of Dr. Haagen.

0, And what was the nane of the assistant of Dr. E&agcn?

a It was r wonan, Hiss Crodel.

i -And that nrne is spelled C-r-o-d-e-l?

A T£8.

i < Did you see the notes prepared by Kiss Crodel on the typhus
exp«rlnent3 rt Yrtzveiler?

a Yes.

Were you able to ascertain rnnroxi.urtcly how cany nen hrd been
exporiuented on?

A Yes, froc 1?0 to 200 orobebly.

v And you wort also able to detemins, froa these notes, that coao
of the ee expcrtr.entnl subjects had not been .riven r protective
vp.ccino before they vcr. injected with typhuo?

a Yes,

v Were you able to dotsraine froa those r.oton of Kins Crodel,
onuroxin'toiy how erny of these txpcrlr.cntrl subjects died as a
result of tlx cxncrinont6?

n Y s, I eluding thi control persons there von. about 50.

* Cm you -ive us the miroxir.*'te' v dr.tc when these oxperinente were
carried out ir. the Patzveiler erno?

a ac frr re I recall, these experiments rraet have been c sped ally
in the sprin- of 19 ^ but it is oocsiblt that they begrn the end of
I 9 U 3 , I cr.-. not say exactly. Ir. any cast I know that when I cr.v
Crodel 1 3 notes it was spring or sunn r, I know that the pur. w nc
ahinin - or. tho ?r ts.

; I'ow r YMa Scteaidt, could* you tell fro, sccin.- these notoo of
Miss Crodel what the nationalities of the experimental subjects were?

« I do not know nuch about that but I do know that v-psies were
used for this purpose. As far rs I know, persons of rll n-tior.nl Hits
vtr, used. I know only of on, tine I heard Professor Hnr t -en talking

1371


9 Jea^i-*:-G3S-lC-2 e-Le s ser (3 Z)
Court "So. 1


on the telephone rad he sni.d~.lhat p Dpnish doctor wps to he expected.


1371 n


ilcy

Court No. 1


Q. Now, witness, can y u tell us wfc*it color the Danish —
r £ PST'SIDENT: The Danish witness west: bo accept: ' cr excepted?

A. She was to bo t_xc>pt . a t t ir.clu
Q. MU. you tdl fcfcu Tribunal -.hat c-lcr this virus \t.ri 1 ha.-I
tl.at a U3u by Has gen in thus*, .xxri c-n s?

A. Yell wish grey. r. tli-• irh „r<o liqul , r. t ’: ick, .:jt :;.in.

<1, Now, witness, y •» ksw-* <*'ot r n. rt.« tv ,:v .;n. e by ifca.on . n
tr.is typhus cvr».*-3.ir.s?

A. Yos.

Q. Do y u know rher- t\„Sw r.p rts a.iv Sent?

A. I canntt 3ay - xactly, but as far is I k»-*w all letters v/orclr n
Hv .on t Luftwaffenarxt -itto, Bcrlir.-Dahloa, Xrcnprinzcnstr*, 52 or 56.

Do y.»u know whether Haakon correcp n V with the a:-, l et r in the
Lufuni o by thu nnro of RoSv? ,

A. Yus.

. as this corrwsp ndonco very frequent?

A. I so not kn r that.

Q. Do you know whetheris ci rrospc n 'onco vor c nc. mud typhus
-x.vri.-onts?


A. A3 far ar I know, yos.

Q. Do y u know whether il s -wr a !c any visits t StrnocVir;:?

A. Yos. I son Dr. A s. i.i Strr.ssb mv nysulf. I rr.as i trocuccJto hin.
.. Hot : any t» as h . u sc.n l*i in Strassbourg?

A. At 1- ;ct theei v ? ur ti. ,s.

Q. Mil you 'oscribo wnat R .. .. : i

-hnt ; 'u .„r_ intr. Iucg-* to hin?

... - hat 1 rtr._T-b..r -st vivi - as his noclo. -o ‘. as 1 31 .a:.

"it ', vory u . _* appearance m his unifcrc, a h. > ro a --ncale.

1. Did h wear a :-ar' at that T L ?


1J7T


9 Jm-l-k-JP—II—2—>.r lojr (3K)
C curt To. 1


v Vhr.t vp s Professor Hose's dccernor when you net hie, did he
strike you -b r proud and elegant nan?

- Yes.

% Did he sry "Etil Hitler* when you were introduced to hirst

A Yea, twice, when I wrs introduced to hln and then he shook
hands with ne and then he raised his arc r-ylr..

t; Do you know whrt Hose's rank was at that tiae in the Luftwaffe?

I believe Professor Enagen spoke of Gcnerclrxzt or Oen< rrlober-
nrzt, 1 dor . 1 1 rtaecbcr txr ctly. X don't know the Ocrcan titles veil
enough.

Z. Tov, do you know whether a general of the Luftvrffc, other than
Hooc ev.r visited Hrr-on in Strasbourg?

A One dry when I tb in charge of i..t strolo *icrl course I wre told
to keen _y students oulct since r very hi h, - I believe the highest
physiclcr. of the Luftwaffo was expected.

% Do you rsneahir aTjproxl=> ttly when was that?

a That r.uot hr.ve been about Juno I 9 UU.

v Is the nrr.c Sehrordcr fuelliar to you ?

A Yes. It was the naac Schroedcr which I believe I heard.

v That is you were told that Schroedcr was violtin* Strasbourg on
till 8 occasion that you have centioned?

'• Yco.

\ Do you know the nrce of the woosn who cerv, 1 re secretary to
Ea» gen?

A Y> c, thi secretary of the Institute.

% Who wpb it thr.t served rs personal secretary to Officer Eravxa in


Strasbourg do you know that*

« Era » . had, ore eight sry, t^o secretaries, hiss Syer, who wr.s
secretary of the Institute, rad Hiss Crodel.

V Did you know hiss Syer?

A YU, very veil.

. v Did she ever tell you that Eargen corresponded with Hoetock?

1373


9 Jan-M-JB-ll-3-Maloy
C- urt No. 1


A. Yos,

Q. Do you know what that con .spondencc c xicurnoC?

A* No*

Q. Going back to the visit cf Hos. tc Strasbourg, can ycu fix the
dates c i thosw visits, appr:xi../stJly?

A/ It must have oecn 1913 cr 19Uu I believe too first


1371


9 Jen 47-a-£K2£-ll-le-ifelcy
Court Me. 1

r 4

visit was in the summer of 1%3, before the 31st cf July. I was in the class¬
room tc see whether everythin,? was ready for the course, when I was intro luced
tc Professor Rose.

And what about the second visit, could that have been in 19A4, the
souend end third visit?

A. 1 bcliuvo sc.

.. Is the name ?r.lessor bickenb-.ch familial' to you?

A* Yes.

Q- V.’as ho connected with tne University cf Strasobcurg?

A. Yea. He was at the internal section cf tho University cf Strassbcurg
and was at tho Research Institute, ns far as 1 recall he was a professor there.

Q. And do ycu knew anything concerning his activities at Strassbcurg,
what research wcric ho was ccnr.uct^d with?

Yes, it was ooid that irefeasor Bide was working on gas
experiments.

Q. Do you knew whore those experiments wore bein.* conducted by him?

a. I cannct 3f»y. I only knew that ho h*i a laboratory in the eld forti¬
fication of Strassbcurg.

Q. Di ! y.u «.vtr hear thit Bickonbac:. want t . tSwoU.tr and conducted
suuo gas experiments there?

A. 1 knew nothing about thet.

Q. Is thu name #.u.ju3t Kirt familiar tc ycu?

i\. Yes.

Q. '"as he eennoetod with the mat.mic institute at St: -.sab.-urg?

A. He w.’if tho prefosser cf the Anatomical Institute.

Q. What wea tho name cf cne cf his assistants; l! : he havo an assistant
whe wrro the uniform cf • Luftwaffe officer?

“• - -r that., i .... but whothor that wes the

-ne in the Luftwaffe or net, I don't knew anymore.

Q. Dw ycu knew the name Tam-er?

A. « Dr. Wiaser?


• •


“ :, d he wes an assistant t; ir-fesscr Hirt?


? Jan A7-K-E; &'-ll-2a-Maloy
Court He. 1


A. As far as I knew, yes.

Q. Did ycu over hear ci* ic you knew anything about any cf the gas
experiments conducted by Hirt and Winner?

A. About what, please?

Q. About the gas experiments conducted by Hirt cr Winner?

A. Yes.

Q. What du you knew about those experiments, if anything?

A. I dc not knew much. It was only raid that Professor Hirt—Winner—

I don't knew that. But that Professor Hirt was conducting gas experiments in
Katzwoiler and it was else said that he was undertaking autopsies cf people
who wore net dead yet.

Q. Did you hoar what typo cf gas that they w^re experimenting with at
JJatzw oiler?

A. Ho.

Q. You never heard the nemo cf Lost gas mentioned?

A. Nc.

Q. Were Dr. Hirt and Dr. Haagen rather close friends?

A. Yes, I think sc.

.MR. HANEY: I have nc further questions at this time,

THE PRESIDENT: j.t this time tho Tribunal will recess until 1:30 ©‘clock.


1376


9 Jan 47_A_iEM_l2.-l-Meehan (PJC)
Court I


ccRsicTLE Copy

ATfiaHOOK Sic SICS

The hoprlns reconvened at 1330 hours, 9 January 1947.)

TEE. MAE"HAL: Tho Tribunal is p^ain In session.

MR. MC KAKEY: The Prosecution has no further cuesticno to put to
the wltneso at this tino. If there lc any cross cxaslnatlon, they can
proceed.

TEL PRESIDENT: Is there any crosa ox n r.i-atlon of this wltnoos by
defonoe cou"sol?

CROSS IX1MIHATICI

m. u ANo PRI3ILLA (Dofenso cour.acl for Paul Rostock):

<i Wltneoc, whon acket' by the Prosecution, you epeko about Profcooor
Haagon'a occrotory Dr. Olga Lycr, durla tho loot porlod; did you speak
vlth or occ Dr. kycr?

A Y 0 o.

^ Can you toll ac Dr. Iyer 1 o ndc'rcoo or where aho le working now?

A Yea. Clinical Dcraatologlot, Str'-cobourfi, Brc-Rholn.

\ Would you plC"oc apcll the latter?

A 3_r_c-R.h-c-.l-n.

U, Thank you. I have no further queotiona.

?T ER. MARX (Dofcnco counool for Professor Schrccdcr and Dr. Bockor-
"rcynorp):

Witness you were speaking before about a vlnit -f tho nodical
chief of the lajftwrffc at the lr.stltuto of Professor Harden?

A Yes.

You caid that thla visit took place In June of 194?

A According to tay rccolloction, ycc.

H And thore is a possibility that this visit took place or. May
22nd or 23rd,

A TyV^J^pcosiblc, ‘tc^

*v DUttOO Profcccor Scfcrocdcr personally, cr wore you ccrely

*.cld he wpV> -there?


1377 *


9 Jan 47-A-l HJL.12-l~Mcchan (FJC)
Court I


A I only a&v hio overcoat, which had large vhito opnulcts on it
end I was told bo were concerned with the highest chief of the hygiene
cyoton of the air force. I believe that I can roxcabcr that the race
Schrocdor was aentioned.


9 Jan 4?-A-a;:i-12-2-;&tfhan
J~urt He. 1


Q. Dc you knew whether thv nodical chief was see -.rani j by an a;j it a?
I beXiuva sc.

Q. H c w leng, accerding tc your roc.lltct.icn, iii thir. visit 1 :-:t?

A. ..L least two h urs, possibly thro- .

Q. •«na 1 xv f ease r Schroder along tc rather with ir-lesscr Haagen?

A. Of that I have no kn.wlodgo.

Q. Hew, I sheuLl like to ask y u with r iv-renew t. t:.o experiments vn
hunan beings, • xperi-nents with typhus, her* : .•> clr .i y finished ir. the year
1913?

A. He, in the year 1913 they hal r. t be.:, ce.vplctc2. They continued
until July of 1%U.

Q. Hew dw y^u knew t!:is late; hew dc ; u knew that 3w exactly?

A. i iu vo sown *rcft8s r kongc.: depart frc.- Hatzwidler so ft on with
Ids ontiru material. In August 1914 Pxvfoastr Hoejun loft Stras.itt.urj t -
.•othor with hia owneriicanta. That io hew 1 can state f.r certain tf.nt th«. : .to
t as in July f l'/ll.

Q. nOc rding t ycur knowledge wore experiments cn human b . i I

with reference t. opiic-cic jaundice?

A. lie, nv , I kn.vi n. thing ab.ut it.

'j. Was ho exclusively ccncemed with nnieal uxperi.wits?

A. Aa far as I know, w nly ccncornoi with . 1 cocporimonti nr.l

rlcroacopic uxpcri: -nts.

Q. Sc I understood y u perfectly with r-.l'urtceo t Hepatitis Er.doi.icti?

A. Yes.

Q. S: 1 undurst I y u c rrcctly witii r _iervr.ee t that?

A. Yes.

Q. De you knew if thorc was a certain Stnndartcn Captain Dr. 7h ir.on
"ftor Juno of 1911 in that institute?

A. Yea, ho was in thu institute for -w. lays.

p y u kn w, cr is I whether in rdcr t

experiments -n human beir.g3 an cr lor f the ajcncy cl* ti.u Luftwaffe was in
oxiet a aco?


-13?:-


9 Jan 47-.v-E2J-12-5-^oehan -
Ocurt 1


A. i'.s far as I knew, yes.

Q. Well, my question is based or. t.-.e fact that t*- js experiments were
supposed tc be carried cut by it. crier cf a different agency; the . rJer cl"
the Raichs F.e3carcn Counsel or seme such .rency. ji . y u see any l-.tti.rc vdtl;
*:r.y headings tc that effect; 1 a-.cn official headings, it may h-Ve bevr. acme
frun the Reichs Research Ccun3el or f rem Gcerring cr fr.cn th-. Reich? liarohal
or 3»me such agency?

A. I have seen such letterheads- v .ry fr-.quuttly but nft-t was contained
in the letters I have nc knowledge rf.

Yos, but diu yeu see :-.n; letterherIs with tno titl .s Chief ol’ the
tfedical S-rvico f the I.uftttl': - cr Ins; -ct rate f t ;e Luftwaffe r .A deal
InspucUrato cf th.- Luftwaffe?

... That is something 1 c-uld i.et swear tc, but I .. i..ilid.

Q. Ever sinco 1941, y^u wore octivo there. Did
morning?

... Sinco 1942) February 1, 1942.

Q. De you knew enything about the cooperation ef .ivfess-r Haegcn with
?rrfossors Gcnzkun, Duchr.er, HuOort ,r Kalk in CvUiucti.r. with i.opaldUs?

A. No.

Q. Or cn any oth >r luesticr.c?

A. Nc, not at all.

Q. Dc those nauos mean cnyt: ::. *. ycu?

n. Nc •

Q. Gunzkcn, Buchner, Hubert, Kalk?

A. Nc, nctning.

Q. Y.u r«ai n.thin.; about them?

A. No, nctning.

Q. Where exactly !: I Professor Haagan w-.rk in the institute) In what
institute did he work in the Universtiy cf Strassbourg?

A. iiu was pr sor at the Hygienic Institute r.t

Q. Processor :t the Hygienic Institute, at Strassl ■

A. That is correct.


-


9 Jen ■ 47-A-SL'-IZ-A-Hcehar.
Ccurt H . 1


Q. Extraordinary. «t the (University Strasbourg, at the Mudic-il
Institute, there was another department rilled itesesre:., has there r.ct?

A. Yes; Research.

Q. Under whoa was this Research Department; irefeaser Puurk.nl-.ch?

A. Yes.

Q. Who wa3 the superior of rrvfuss.r Buck-Jib-'cn; r.us it DcKamp?

4. That is something I net know; I d: not kne» wes arranged.

Q. I have no further questions.

BY OR. HEINZ FRITZ (Counsel J r Ircf-srcr so) -

Q. Witness, thi3 n. miiV you testified that according tc your recol¬
lection rrefossor hose waa in Strassb urg on thr*m r four reeatior.s?

A. Yus.

Q. i'rcfosscr Re- so tcll.i that );e wao there cnly twico and that war once
at the time raonticnod by y u in 1943 and cr.cc in the y.ar 1914. In it possi¬
ble that titis statement of irofoss.r h sc is correct?

... In ay opinion, I have se«n Professor R so cn three cocaoiena, but .
would uct swear tc it.

Q. Can you toll ao anything with reference t .unit of rrofesaor
Rcso in the summer cf 1944 .and can you give no an jeact statement ;o u the
tirno?

A. Ni, r.c, I cannot !o that.

q. Am: trier subject; ic you knew .f the typhus Vacclnos cf th< ?astour
Caacblanca an l Laeray f the Institute id Tulin?

<>• Yus.

Q. Do you know that 1 . scinos ri. in-it.-l frem living weaken

virus?

... Y . . . also knew t t y wuro n t used bocausu thoy wort t

laugcivus.

Q. D you knew, witness, that H'.ao at Up this s rt of

Blau, since the vaccines cf that rrynr. w.rc r.:t consider i off .stive?

A. In has work Haagcn based himself just as rach cu French work ju t y ; :
he did American w.rk, according tc C^x.


9 Jan 47-«v-SI^-12-5-iit ohan

Court lie. 1


<• Dc ycu knew that he wanted tc develop % vaccine fer typhus -f
ft^rdnat pcx and yellow fever?

•v. 2 watched him real articles, French articles, -h ut these v .ccines.

I once discu33cd the question with him very briefly. I knew tluit n- was c.n-
eultim- those works fer hi3 experiments, but t what extent he was basine
hi if elf up-n then, that is something 1 I, net knew.


. ---

Ccux-fc 1


Do ycu It* or; civ 6 ,iu pro; 1c. will v. e i. . r f

;i.v onu ~e ,-cn writ ro-.jMin; a* w.y tl. ro.cCou Sc it, 61 o
: • ciio;i of 1'uccn '^cin-'s ^ c*. «sc v- cci: os?

* Con't unicrr S:na your w quite.

I *. a sp^--i!;ir.: 'uferc a: v ccir.c *f livfcir workonou

. .. . ha - wi ccfc&j you wlotl or, when :o..lin ; vitfc tl o ro-
33..rc; of 61 ir v_coiiia, tie rs.in proMo.i Christ lr. si re ctlorx
. vulr.ur. '-liit/ of c: v J-v. .j >o:.i ?

.. ‘ 1 « io od.n,

J.y lonu institute A’ tie I’niv.i. t. of i>tr a*' ir \.. i t:?. -oJ
>;• '-<c* :'js?

-Ti 61 25t! of tz Co., or, lv

r . Do yci !?ic\ 1 of -uuy -o f tier© vor- .6 61 .:s oco .•.-«»?

.. F* ur o u.

C-a» you o Cl lx IV oC)cr fc’.c fi.a.ue of 61 .• .'orJ t ’

Yus.

: g<. do-a.

Dr. Eclcatoia^ ttu otvolo* . : j « 1

Sol i.lt., 6! . liber trr; cx-rl: or norv.'dit eviteS ‘ic.-ml epor 6cr

r

tl o Xnacittoto,

1-ov f.r \i z w -y/aora Zm tiltuto ftor .lie f». r.; -w . ‘:lo
C' afc^.iUv. 6c work?

II u L ■'( r . < c;.l clinic,

•uia \ l on -. 1 ' cl o ow.ci .-i. •' . r 6‘. Vviu.’x. stint onto

of Clio Inotituto 3t_rt?

«us6 l«VO 300n • -

unuoroc.-x^j ^our reply,
i o- i in «u us6, '

.n. 7 I : •;.« no fur6; . V i — : 5.

.‘7 IT- *.-• y fir'd r cr .ss ax x/..-c- : c61 ’ s vitrusp


■j 1-7-. —-Ic-C-i xn. uck

C • 5 . 1


jy cr.y cf the cic.'or.sc cc.jiscl*

( . ~ i*a ly)

-

J! ill. - T- 7r:-s ,ci n ’-i . cacti. ■ :• L-:~

c. not'.

(..-itr.ocs crcurud)

.1. h. ijJW Tribune.! !. « n^ticoH il .i fc! ;rorc t :S - .1- r i*

t’ typhus oxporistortc : t ;’.v, uo.i .6. c. .-cell nr; tl .it

i b, ul o rluonta o an due tv . u . • i.. o ncontxvfcion

Cl-,.- .nd tic ox^vrlnoatw c: iuint v . t - • . C >oortr*.tlo»

Cut’.J. indict ior.t so st u.

..t tl i : toil . .... Will 1*0 BO! ... Cl OfJR-

co ruing tl o tie-., vl U-r -n c- .n.c :.c:i ~ tl - ;; .-1 u? ox.mru.cuts

;• •' . lid 1 is C-'.* -> • *r r . .

iv oMuct & Tri'JVii-i .. tun* to 70 :f t*. o.c oiuout b k v ; re

»,o find I>ccui-ont 0-J70 rrl icl ’.ill orfoi\»l orovitlon.il: r
. ,cv ’:J. r, . • ..u k. . *' If : at: i " r v - cl

. \ . 1 . . h\ It vi' ic! . >:

. . . 1

ft..bo:

. I*

. n i'1'iu..VAfc on tic L'Ot- .U * cf ~u- ;t in.; 6 concoinJ" * lev
.sr-r.n-r. oxporiiionta pi*u>r.. n .mvlu. t. ry >.u - bcar/c is
r .l . .*( cl :.v) Cr neon•» o. . - ccrt..iii -tiLi- . ib'l ! Vxt.»

.scorning hiodlacl l.. orLuente • : *, * ' •

2, V v -

J f . . vi . Of 30 xii.ru: •• ' 1 i. t., : , ' ,.

xpi .- 1 . cuts ..v r.

'Zxr\ijOilte wi-l ruot. . .r v an ..

~b b! . u:uc*i r CcsiCvntr i. ,i C p
. in ti . f-: .'ii. Op m .

; c.,nclt-r t is: i.y.-iuro s’ r £ * -eftv.. Tie rr : ’i.fw.-. cr a •!


Court I

9 -an !*7-A-HAA-13-3-Hinabuck-LJG

University of Strasborgh, requested through wolfram Sieves of the
•Ahnenerbe* tlrt 100 concentration camp prisoners be made available to
him for experimentation on the effectiveness of spotted fever vaccines.
Cbcrgrupponfuehrer Oswald Pohl, Chief of the TtTHA, had requested tho
number of prisoners sent to tho Hatzvoilor Concentration Camp and tho
experiments were conducted by Dr. Haagen there.

n h. Again in tho Sinner of 19U*, Haagon obtained 200 additional
prisoners for tho spotted fovor experiments. In each case it was
specifically required that the experimental subjects bo in a physical
condition couparablo to members of tho A mod Forces. This was because
the vaccines wo a boing developed primarily for tho Arax.d Forces. Haagon
was working under tho auspices of tho Kcdical Service of tho Luftwaffo.

"5. I had nothing to do with the physical selection of tho prison¬
ers used in thoso oxp-rimonts. That was handled through Amtsgruppo D
of tho WVHA, which had administrative control of all concentration camps.
However, I do know that experimental subjects w^r u simply pickod out
and assigned for oxp rimontatior.. They wero not advised of the danger
of tho oxp..riraunts, nor could they refuso to go.

"6. I an not familiar with tho technical details of tho experi¬
ments but -I know that they were carried out. KorwOVer, I an sure that
some of tho prisoners died as a result of tho experiments. As a anttor
of fact, tho experimental persons worn at times not in good physical
condition 53 requested and soma of thorn over, diod boforo tho experiments
began.

"7. To tho best of my recollection, Haagen also oxp-rir.vnted on
human boings at !latzwoilor with oth .r diseases such .is yellow fovor,
influenza.


9 Jan Klnabuck

Court; Ho. 1

A

epidemic jaundice, nephritis virus and cholera.

. SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Karl Prandt, Reich Ccocdssar for Health
and -auitation, Ger.eraloberstabsarzt Dr. Siegfried Handlcsor, °:-.iof of the
i.cdical Services of the A raed forces, C noralarct r . Paul Ros .ocl:, L'onn-
Issioncr for S c ienco and Research aid Gcncralcbcrotabsarit D r . Oskar S c ;,r-
ocier, Chief of the Medical °ervico of the Luftwaffe, certainly k..ow of
-r.c experiments by haa ; cn on human subjects. These non wore informed of all
fundnnontal events in medical and scientific research and these oxper-
Incnts could not have been carried out without their knonlcd,,o'and app¬
roval."

DR* SERVATIUS: hr. President, I should like to reserve the right to
cross exanino the defendant who nado this affidavit.

.'RESIDE WT: The counsel's request will be denied if it is intended
•* a roquost to crcs.: oxnnlno tho dofenuant, *\idelf Brondt, at this tine
but without prejudice to his making tho request at eono later dato when it
nay bo .ioro appropriate.

:tR. HARDY: we turn now to pa; o 73 of your Honors' do cun ant book whore
vs find D ocunont Humber NO-305 rfiich is oi.’crtd at this tine as .rosecution
.... Li it Number 295. Hero wo have the honorable *rofcs3or Rose rocolving
- letter fron Dr. Haagon address-d to %onunt iVofisior Dr, Rosa, datod
. wuno 19ll3, care of tho Inspectorate of Odical d.;rvicc of the Luftwaffe.

" Hoar -r. Hose, In completion of r telephone call I rccoivod a
lclicr today by hr. Oiroud, copy of v.ich is i-tachod. H reveals that not
only 12,5 pureont of tho vaccinated animals nay bo used, but that this number
cone or ns rabbits which died on account of an infection. calculation is
n * therefore Uit, as Hr. Oiroud indicates, 30 to hO persons arc still
''' l a -=i monthly for the .ianufacturinj oi 100 thousand doses. Best Regards,

'-U Itlor, Yours."

; x reason tliat th - signature 'ice* not appear in that these wo file
• . !c3 of the Haagon file wiiich wire found by the Allied f orccs tdicm they
hivai .d and captured Strasbourg, -e tun. now to tho next document which is


? Jar. !i7-i'v-S.i’-13- 2L Ninabuck
Court 'Jo. 1


rrofcsspr Rose’s answer to the lrti r of .-xagen.

This is Dorlin dated 9 June 19i:3. "Scar It. Haagen: !Jy best thanks
f.r jOtZi : our letters dated U ant- 5 June and the proapt execution of :y
r-quest. I have compiled a proposal for the Inspector," ... In this in¬
stance he is referring to the medical inspector of the Luftaaffo, and on
uis dace of 9 June 1913 that office was hold by CfccwUtaawfc Hippko...
BbM0d on i ' our o^Sinal pa. era, v.ich I enclosed and requested . in to urge
tie °.uof of the ..odical Sorvico of thu -ehrnacht to order the production of
spotlod fever vaccine for aU arncf forces in the “astern Area. I do hope
uo shall succeed in this uatUr." A*t, here .:o find Professor ^oso siting
to Haqgon and referring to tho nodical inspector of the Luftmafo and also
referring to the chief of th. . f the n pc- fej • is ,

ho defendant 1‘andloscr. Ti.ey were going to ord.r production of spotted
V :• vaccine 1 1 of th X forces in the “as tom Area. There is

littlo dcubt j’rof .sscr n oac engaged in sud. a. tremendous task as this and
•fat lie doesn’t havo cavpl.to knorlod c o. th. activities of Haagen and
is one of the primary responsible .xrscuu: in connection irifch the rogran to
furtiicr tlio production of tide vaccine; ia_oIy, ujcperiuontaUon at Nats-
‘tiler In order to a.cure a vaccxno r.' icli can bo produced n such quantity to
: i; ' 'crunds stated herein. I co..c nuo to road tho second paragraph.

"Did you hear anything from Department I relative to its position
- * dttc? (translated coons »‘addle or -enter'). It »dll alee cone tino
until ‘2 F* produces its nor research order -a Anthony is nn a duty trip
for oovoral ith test r- pares, Udl HitlOr, Years signod Rose."


-13?c-


) Jcuu-J-i*-i-A-ATD-?errin
Court No. 1


This document is Prosecution Exhibit 295 — pardon ao, it is Exhibit
296, Your Honor, pardon ac, I haven*t introduced it. It is Exhibit number
296, that is Document number !l>-306.

Nw, in this last paragraph, Your Honor, tre find tha gontloman referred
to having complete knowledge of tiw various orr'.nizations and whether or not
a now research order will bo produced, and ho has cognizance of tho where¬
abouts of the chief of tho nodical dopartaent for research of tho Luftwaffo,
Anthony, and his deputy 7ns Beokor^Froysongj and I want to point out that
that figure "2 F" has been tho ono that has beer. significantly roferrod to
throughout «ur presentation*

We turn now to tho next dooucwnt, pago 75, This is Doounent nuflfcor !iD-
12J), which is offorod as Prosecution Exhibit number 297. Here wo find tho
dofondant Siuvers addressing a letter to Dr, Baagon dated 30 Soptonbor 19h3.
It rOvads as follows!

"Door Profossori I confirm rccotpt of your request of 16 August 19h3.

I shall bo glad to help you and have accordingly contacted tho propur aourco
to hnvo tho dosirod personnel placod at your disposal. H 11 Hitler, signed
Slovens,"

This is a confirnation of Haakon*s request for personnel to bo usod la
aonnuotion with his experimental program,

Tho next papo is docur^nt which has been Previously introduced into
evidence before this Tribunal, It has Prosecution Exhibit number 189, This
« 3 , if you will rjcall, tlx* report, or letter, frera Koagen referring to the
f.aot that thus wero the urgent research l^sks important for the war effort
uvi of military importance that were listed, and I wa^t to again call your
attention to Suction 2 where they referred to the subject "Typhus". Wo havo
tho familiar initials, or familiar oodo letters of that Rc Two 3 which is
th offioo of Beckor-Froysong. I won* - bother to r".d aqjr further into this
iocumeot, It has been previously explained in detail.


Ti>j next dooua nt i3 on page ?S, on which Hr. ’tcHaney introduced this
1 :rrdn;-,‘hAs prosecution Exhibit Humber e?3, during th: iiroct examination of


the witness Schaidt; th refare, it . ill he unnecessary for re to road it.


9 J^.r..-lU-2-A-T.T3-?errin
Court So. 1


However, you can recall that this is the document in connection with th. pro¬
curement of prisoners for tta oxp.rinonts. Therefore, Your Honors, I request
that you turn to Pago 79 of your doCurent bock,

Document IC-122, which is offered a3 Prosecution Exhibit IJumbor 298. Wo
havo hero a letter dated 3 Dococbcr 19U3, originating from Professor Rose,
which is an extremely interesting letter. It is directed to Dr. Haagon, It
statesi

"Dear Mr. Haagon, Many thanks for your latter of 8.12. I regard it as
unnecessary to make renewed social request to the SS main Office in addition
to the requost you have already made. I request that, in procuring- poroons for
vaccinaticn in your experiment, you requisition a corrorponding nuriber of per¬
sons for vaccination with tho Coi>jnhagcn vaccino. This ins the advantngo, as
ill so appeared in th_ nuchoinrald oxp riaenta, that the testing of various
vaccines simultaneously givos a cloarvr idea of their viluo tlvan the testing
of ono vaccino clone. V.'ith host wishes, Hcil Hitler, Yours."

!(ow, it is obvious fror. tho locum. nt. Your Honors, that iTofosnor Rose hu(
dicta tod tho letter, and where th-; signature should bo it says "dictatod by
Frofossor Roso and si<»nod after his departure." It is obvious that It was dic¬
tated by Profossor Roso and ho was either called away on a trip or something
of the liko and thun it was si;nod by ono of hi3 deputies, and tho signature
that WR3 illogiblo but appoars bolow th. r.nark "dictate by iTofesscr Roso
■»nd signed after his doparturo."

I want to call to th.. attention of tho Tribunal the rteattrs in tho first
ooctlon of this luttori "I regard it as unnecessary to cako renewod spvdal
request to thu SS Main Office in addition to the request you havo already
: " Thoro sjoms to bo considerablvi knowl^dgo on the part of the r,an who

•ionies iny knowlodgo of thv details of tho work of Dr. Haagon. Ho was the man
tanlos that he know that axjwrimentations wouli be going on with human
. inga and there would bo virulent virus used. Again he states t "I request
■-at. in procuring persons for vaccination in your ocpurirvnt, you requisition


9 Jan.-Jl-3-A-* ITVrerri r,
Court No, 1


a corresponding nurior of persons for vaccination with tlu* Copenhagen vaccine.
Now, you can very well recall that defense counsel in the cross examination
of Kogon referred to the DexdshuCopeQhegen vaccine in connection with Buchun-
wald, and in that connection he said that Rose never initiated any proposals
to Mrugowsky or to the r^leno Institute. I call the attention of the Tribunal
to that sentence, and I wonder now if Professor Rosa will have the sane
statcnjnt to mke in connection in regard to the work at Natzweiler, And
ho boob on again, and ho saysi "This has tho advantage, as al30 appeared in
the Buchonwald experiments, that the testing of various vaccines simultaneous¬
ly gives a eloarer ide» of their value than the testing of one vaccine alono,"
Being a layman, it nay bo an erroneous assunption on ny part, howovor, I
vrould think that 3uch a statement would indicate that Rose was completely
aware o' the work at Buchonwald, and that in suggesting tho testing of various
voccinoo sinultano-


-13 ?-


9 Jen 47-A-?JC-14-lA-?errla
Court Bo. i

oubIj- in *rder t- test the officcy of oco vaccine against another, it
would seer, to '.e it would be aeeossrry t. use i. virulent virue in connection
with than© oxperiuontE. Sow, eftcr euch a letter ia this, Prof. se or Hose
cones to us and telle us that he hid no kncwlodge that n virulent virus
wis being used, that he vie ccoplotely unrw re of euch a thing. I vondor.

Wo turn now to page 60, Document nuater BO-311, which is offered
r.s Prosecution inhibit He.2SS. This is n letter frer. the president of
the Koidtye Hose rch Council addressed to Professor Haagen.

"Honored Professor: The retort in triclic:to which w o due hero
leBt fill unfortunately has not yet arrived. At the beginning of the
Oev yoi r vo hove to rend-r n rooort of the results ourselvcc so that wo
rro obliged to requost irvedieto eur.ittunco of those r*.ecrdo. ’ e invite
your i ttoution to tho fret that th«. 1 eh of tijis stated*: of /ocount
:ny cossitly offset a dineontlnu/ nco cf tho ce-i f ;n«.d priorities.

"Short reports rro rcouoetud of ..bout hi If a tyoivrltten page, avoiding
nil unnecessary detrils. Only the p'rtlculrr result* aro to be shewn,
not the intor.tl.no rnd projects, thore conditions had prevented tho

v

fortho-uln,: of r.ny result, give short xol-mtiun. Moil Hitlor, signed by
n run meted "Prouer." Tbio is i. letter which is enviously referring to
Fongon. Ao you will reorll in one other part of tho presentation, Kfmgtn
v.-o rrthor lax in oono of hio rep-rtin, . ?hoy are now insisting that Ho
sutait bio reports so that he can continue to receive hio outtidy fron
P.olchs Ivjcui rch Council for this r.ll-iaportact cri Inal ork >f hio.

In this connection, we Ijrvo the next docuncnt.which lo document
liO-138, Vhlch is Hp: gen's answorc. Shis is offered/ mc Prosecution
ixhlbit Buaber 300, Your Honor. This is ad reseed to the President of
tho F.oioh Hooeorch Council regarding the letter of 12 January 1P4-. It
otr.toE us follows:

'"Inclosed I iz forwarding tSroc copies of r rooort ooncerr.iv: the
rreaent stetue of ay experiments, which are being carriod out with
/••/ich r.taeirch Council r.e«ns:

"1.. Apider.ie Influenza.

"2. Spotted Fever

'3. Lpidc ic Yellow Fever.


- 1390 -


9 Jan l7-A-PJC-Hi-2A-Farrin
Court No. 1


"At the sane time I have sent two copies of the report on 2. and
3. to the Chief oi the War Economy Bureau of the Aosearch Council.

Si.r.ed Dr, Haagen,"

Wc turn to next page which is a continuation of the same Document,
Your Honors, and we find the reports»

"In supplement to =y report dated lh August 19U3, I beg to inform
you that thu research work is concerned with experiments on epidemic
influ-naa, prcduction of typhus vaccines, and etiological study of
epidemic Jaundic , pas3 word * Icterus Strasburgi.

”1. Epidemic Influena;., Ir.*;unization experiments have b«.en
undertaken with a product free from bacteria, obtained from the lungs
of mice. The vnccino is obtained from filtration ro3iduo and admini¬
stered to huron beings by intra-ruaculur injection in quantities of
1,10 to 1.5 cubic contimoters and at intervals of about ono wook. A
typical reaction to the taccino could bo observed on so:»c 200 subjects.

A Certain number of thorn shewed mild forms cf influenza with neuralgic
*nd rheumatic oynptono, a mild catarrh of the upper larynx, fover and
decroaso in tho number of white corpuscles.

"Tho vaccine is composed of various cultures, for oxamplo, several
human influenza virus cultures -uk! a pig inflttuna virua culture.

"After these oneouraging observations, attempts are now being made
to obtain this vaccine in a forr that will perrit its con. Lon. For
this tho v action drying process dov loped by r*> is u3od.

"It could bo shown by oxt^risents on animals that Infected mouse-
lungs, when dried in the vacuum apparatus and kept in ico at. about.

•' nus hO degrees, are si »11 infectious a U.r a year.

"Thu cultivation experiments on the impregnated -»nd inegated
hon's eggs have boon c.rriod on. They result in a very rapid multi¬
plication of tho virus of tho ogg, The virus is detectable in tbo
vitoiine sac and in the allanto s as w v ll as in tho organs of the embryo,
^inoculation from eg.; to «,g<* must be eff^cWd at least every two cr\
three days for the eggs dio quickly. From this ogg product, vaccir.o
is now being aado and its possibilities examined in comparison to
'hose of mouse lung vaccina.


Court I

- «J;n U7-A-: ^A-15-l-Frico-LJG

"Experiments for tho production of a liv^ typhus vaccine are being
carried on."

I want the-Tribunal to note the words: "live typhus vaccina are
being carried on."

"Particular attention is given to tho conservation possibilities
of vaccine obtained in a dried form. For this vaccines which had been
stored for five or six months were used. So far, the result could bo
observed on oight persons. Four weeks af.or the innoculation, a protein
agglutination contents of 1:2000 could b- observed in a few cases. This
Uads to tho conclusion that the dried vaccine c , n be kept a long ti o
without losing its antigenous property. It is possible in my case to
obtain '.dth this vaccine contents surpassing in v:lue by far that obtained
hlthorto with tho usual dead vaccines. ihuse experiments arc imdo with
a muriatic culture. Experiments .re now being made to find out .'hothor
similar results can bo achieved with Provasck's epidemic culture. Tho
intl-infoctious effect of dried vaccine will be further experimented on
human beings.

"3) Epidemic Jaundice.

"in a Large nu her of jaundice cases, liver extracts and gall v/ero
examined for tno prosonco of a virus. 3y innoculating mice with matorial
from 3uch patients, it has bo-n possible so far tc isolate thr-e virus
cultures. The first culture has boon brod on as many as fifteen successive
mice; tho ot.ier two on throe to five successive mice. Tho mice wore
infected and shov; tho characteristic syoptcos of a virulent diseaso in
both the lungs and the liver. The virus can bo successfully bred from
nou3e to mouse by intra-nasal instillation as wall as by intrap, ritonoal
injection. Intranasal instillations too result in typical ilt.rations
of the liver, when a strongly marked loan color is conspicuously apparent,
w hil* a Microscopic view reveals round cellular infiltrations round tho
blood vessels.


1392


Court I

9 Jan ii7-A-:iAA-l5-2-rrice-LJG

"In preparations obtained iron liv-r and lurg extracts which havo
been colored with Victoria blue, forns arc visible which, according to

w r ^ • •

their size, color and shape, can be described as elementary corpuscles.

"It is now being studied vhotlvor, in the case of the virus cultures
isolated so far, wo arc in presence of a new, independent virus, possibly
a specifically hepafcifc virus, or rather a virus already known, 3uch 03
the virus of influenza.

Hcil Hitler \

(signed) Prof. Dr. E. Haagon"

This report was sent to no less than the President of the National
Research Board, and clearly indicates the work of Haagen and can well
establish tho fact that .all thoso high representatives of the organiza¬
tion, the Reich Research Council, wore fully aware of his work and what
it meant in a criminal senso.

rfo turn now, Your Honors, to page 85. This is Document No. N0-13U,

|

*hich is offorod as Prosecution Exhibit No. 301. This is n letter —
it doesn't carry too much significance — dated 3 February 191U, and
it is muroly Haagon's asking his colloaguo at N itzweilor tho follov/ing:


1393


9 Jan-A-JP-15-la-Fr ice

Ccurt No. 1

"At the request -f y* ur tv . c- p .ecters —", purely thw vvcrl: of Hanlon,

f

and hero he is sending s.-nc trur x .vt-rs t _akc the care and the recording;
of the reports simpler. He continues aad says: "I w ul - b_ very gratcx'ul
to you if y..u vruld sen'’, ao a list .f th;sc vaccinate , statin* their age am!
when they were vaccinated." Then he lists the nar-xis as sc-n n the ’-cun.ont:
Kauthcn, Kramer, Roscf, Paulson, Nales, an loo.

The next d«x:unont, Document No. NO-302, which is fforod as IroSeCUtion
Exhibit No. 302, is a report by Ha-. «.n t. the C-:. an Ir-in-chief of tho
iAiftwalfo, dated 27 April 19UI. The report refers t a letter of the 8th
of January 19U», and again, Your Boners, We soo the familiar code letters
Roman nutvaral 2. a, which at this ti. o, this date, was the fficc of
3ockcr-Froison^:

"The clni ;f the Bchrin;. Plante that the wh.le cnbryc c uld be used fur
tho production ef typhus vaccine fr chicken o a has bccnie-oxr vin. Tho
experiments wore ma u n ab ut tv. hundr- ' « s which ver- infected c nsccu-
tivoly. Eho Rickettsia pr wciMki and ala Rickottsiis of the iriatlc typhus
variety wore uead .as virus cultures, Tlw vaccination f tho u ;{*s was carried
out in the sa.:o way ns in th propnpati i f the- vitelline-sac vaccine, figo
of tho ombryos at ti o nf vaccination: 7 days; further incus at in L tf ter tho
infection: 5 days. The ombryos wur<- then r cesse ’ separatelyxc r In. to the
proportion of Rickettsia in the vilallino-sacs. Org- .ic spool-- n tests id
t reveal the reser.ee T Rickettsia with certainty even when th* findings
cencorninj the vitalline-sacs were positive. It was the sa::.e with tho total
ec lsi.ns cf the embryos. In order ta ascertain whether not they had an
infecti us character, n mal embryos (vitlolino-sics) w.re vaccinated with
i tal emulsions su as t< obtain an in rcasc even if th. presence f
Rickcttsia-c ntents in the embryonic tissue ’.-as r.. lor., -r traceable with a
aicroscopo. For this purpose a 5.0 ctn "Pander" soluti n was added per enbryo
tio this mixture v/as shaken f.r an teur. After these Had been incubate’
f r five lays, test compounds wore . a . fr - the vitellinc-sr.cs f these eggs.


-i:9h-


9 Jen—k—JB-35"2a--Price
Court No, 1


In no case could the presence : virus be prove: thr.utjh those eel s;
n- positive results were obtainod either by using nicresccpes r b; r.ny
:th-r .xthod,

'•The zb \o experimental results therefore correspond with u’.o vinicn
•f Professor Oil ‘mister, president f the Rcbert-Kcch Institute, rejects
tho possibility of using the whole w ;bryo for the preparrti n .-£ vaccine.

If, however only such chicken onbryos are use*. wh.se vitellino-s-.es or.,
rich in Rickettsia, the n 'inp of the total embryonic tissue w ul ir.r ly
influence the quality »f tho vaccine, since t:ic a J itienal iluti n bt- inc 1
by tha trtnl embryonic tiS3Uo c n Ua~r. be *isrc. "vrdo .. Sine- t - 'ofroc .>f
iafoctioucnccs ;f tho vitteline-s ac tiscuoo usui by the Bohring i : Ir.::ts cannot
be tot^r.iinoi: fre • hore, wo c-nn.t cci«'c, 'seech r. the uxrxdnr.bivns i.n hand,
whether the vnccino in question usud by tl- Bo.iri:* Plants has t;. sawo effect
Mtho vacci :• • niy . a .. vittuUrw-sacs rr. custoaary up l

Referring t r.n exporiront carri-t.vr u. ,h b; tho h-borW; c.: Institute several
ytors h e, it away bo loft un cci -il.vti.-r t:.. increase r .i.coicn oil u>' t
by tliu Bolu’iJq. Plants by usln- # th«_ rh.le c-lbryi '~o 3 r. i i*rojudico the
efficacy « f the vaccine. In


Jan-'J! Up)

Court *'o. 1

line with my previous findings which ar being confirm* once. &«* b; the
f xamination cn hand, we ar*. obliged to share for the time being -.he
opinion of the Robert-Foch Institute which admits only the use of vaccine
•octractodfrom vitelline-sacs, for the addition of the total embxyonic
tissue, which is very poor in Rickettsia to sey the least, ;*uld be
likely to introduce a serious factor of uncertainty b^aus*. of the large
limits within which the Rickettsia contents are bound to move.

(Signed) Cberstabsarzt Prof. Dr 2. Haagen".

flow the n-.-xt document is on Pago 88 of v cur Honors' document book.
Document No. N’O-123, offered as Prosecution Ixhibit No. 303. lids ic
dated 9 Hay 194/., from Professor Habgen to Hauptaat SS through his dis¬
tinguished Strasbourg colleague, Frofosror Or. ‘irt, th collector of
skeletons, . natoadcal Institute cf th- Reich University Strasbourg:

"I enclose herewith a corbon ccpy of a pap* r on our • jcporimonts with
a dry spotted fever vaccine. The paper was o nt as a manuscript to the
chief of the Luftwaffe radical Service with th roquest for permission to
publish it."

I vdsh to point cut at this tine, '’our cnor3, that cn 9 Ray 1944 you
will recall that the defendant Schroeder assumed tin job as Cfdef of the
Medical Service cf the Luftwaffe, in <erly «44. \t this tint this was the
position of Schrocdur:

'It cenotitut-s a report concerning further uxp rim.-nts with a «{*ctt« d
f* v r vaccine which has not been made sterile hy chemical agents r by
heating, . s m^y o< n from thi results, it has bo*n possiblu to produce
a vaccine which provides not only an enti-t-xic ircunity but also a
d> finite anti-inl'.'otioua irmunity which is of a particular practical
significance. How v r, it is cl* arly point d rut that th* vaccination in
followed hy a rathor long f>v< r reaction ?ni th refer* its introduction
cannot yot be rocoim* ndod. Further t*.sts »r now in progress to niter the
vaccine so that, without losing its antigenic property, it will produce sc*
weak a reaction that nc general indisposition will result. 71.03* tests
"ill be made by reducing the dose or by 'taring the vaccine for a longer
interval.


- 1396 -


O Jan-..-G3&-15-2V?rico
Court a'o. 1.


To carry out this research, experimental subjects vill r,: ir. be :.cc
I, therefore, again request that subjects be furnished f me f- r this . ur-
p>ae. In order to obtain results vnich are exact ns.d valch car. V
.tatiotlcally evaluated, I usk th. t two hundred persons jc furnish. t • no
: >r innoculation. I cay point out tn t thoy cust be ir. a physical c r.Iition
like tnnt of aembers of the .trmed Forces.

"It io aignly desirable t- t I a.ain co per~i:icd to carry out thu»o
eoepwriueRts at Cr-ip ih.tawcilcr.

(3i ;nod) Prof. D.\ 3. Fan.-on".

Tain io Hoai.ob'B coco:.d request f.r isw.tofc to \ u oi. Defame will
brin,; up, and it io quite Ovious t.or.t t..i* letter a .pa re i.tly indie. 1 *, c? tho
use of n virulent virus ‘.id not uppeir. ?..in 1 < tter vm indicate th t
t .u w«.o .-er^ly oxpcrl«>ntatloi. witn tuo \ icciro r.nl vncci.iatior.o v r« a"*.o.
Hotfovor, wo wont to i..prc»i« lojo t..c Tribui. 1 :..it t.n a.'-r . efvr.ee on the
part of those dofo.idnnto wl i ' e tUo nboor.ee o: n v 1 rules.t virus. We Save
.mi soverul wltnonucs here t testify on t. i* *eu... at ry vl enco ir.tr w

‘.uood t day that lo conclusive enou^n t c.v-w i those cxp.riuonti' v.r».
rot of the nature that thoy ao state.


9 Janurry-A-DJC—16-1-Burns
Ccurt ;fc# 1


turn a fc T.i:. ta the next ocm.r.t, pv :J 8? ^f your Miners' D>cu*.. t oik
an’ in this Cv.nn,ction hire friend Tolfrm Sievero writing to l'r. E >,i.

This document is NO 0C8 and it is offerer -s Prosecution's Ex bit . 30b,
illtod 1? Uoy Subject — Ts.ls letfc r is r. Iressod to Osw l'l t..l • I

an eerry, tho latter is a-Vress -d- to Onri ‘ ftshl. Y. u ..-ill r-c-ll fchrt L'r.
L>llinj was cautioned considerably ,:t t: - U; tir .ijy of gor., That *. is tho
- n that ..ra in the place fr f. ur t six v.cfcs.

"To the SS-Ob.r.;ruppcuTujhioi no d-r.ral f the . . feiv-SS .CHL Chief
of U* SS-Ec .no. ic : ait.clr.atiin : Offic.. Subject: Production of a

now typo of spottc l-fcvcr v.ccj- . Latt. r : 25 Octob r X9Xs3«

"T>-ar ObwrtTuppjnfurl.r :v:

"In coaipliuhca with our roqu-ct of jO t* t ao *• 2?b3 v u "p-.'r.'Ved n 25
October lVb3 ttte carrying ju* f jxjxjrv: nt; f r ahu , r ;cu:ti •>. f a rut;
ty,» of* spottod-fover vaccine, tin*’ f -r this purr . tra.irf. av'’ UK suitable
ri Nntzw liar. Lth acaiattaec of tho Chief f Cffico D-23I
SS-St uriirtoiJu-Sii’e-r Dr. Lolliit , -h. vac . :ti , n your r .rs, tho oxj>..r-
laonta huvu 5<- Cf.r bu.n carried .at with tho .-r.- t. 3t succasc. yrc.ii the
fin.' : s A the roport on hand it can o- rver. th-t success bar boon rchtivud
.t' liy in ,ainlng an .r.ti-texio iircunity ith this #:rc, u. is - rrhich
rh '.I bu > f tn« uroatoat prr.cMe.nl ir r proi net l rsit 1-infocticuo

fcnunity* Tho ir.jecticn, huT.-ev. r, ij tv 1 f J1 -it/ *.v r-re-Oti u cf
' rr.irly Its..- ’urati.n, s t: -.i at •. tr.duiai u i.r pr. active irj ct. -.o
in its prusont fer « .

K-.U..-.S It.vo been initiated nr. 'a rdor t c v .rt t;*u v..cci v a. *l.t extent
U«t, whilst fully imintninlng its smti-^cnity, the wwt: w vdll bo

£- • 3-nh, that a c ..si lerabl* ‘.uri l h r.n r-1 c-.n it . till

1 • r tnko .lice . At t s f t..ls car. tx achi ve ’ b.

• tho vaccine, as well a: « rin t - v ccin. i -r a i ... .*■ purl

"Tho n. v vaccine is alive y ir. rr. ecs^ f r.anufactur., s -t A’xrth.r
•Kp.rlronta c uld bo iro.di.atdy strrtod if fux-tn r suitable pors -ns arc n

•3. I r, • .

: 'tsmoilor for this :ur t * sc. I- t -chi.-.v results as -xact


9 January-A-DJ3-lo-2 -Burns
Court Ko. 1


as"p>ssiblo an*' also statistically valuable, 2CC persons t; cl Y v, * b.
i'ui-mehod b is tit* for -njcctl^ns. It is a S air. necessary, h .. ver, t.r.t
tii'J letter by physically in each tho s*u.c c.niiti n as uuBbcm of the Vuhr-
v.cht. Should there by urgent reasons why 2CO experimental oers s c-ju ;t
ta transferred to Natziwilor, then these experiments c aid Cj carri. ■; . ut
in an thc-r c. rcontraticn carp, ever, tfc: ugh this * ul • create the gr. tost
difficulties. In that oasj the vorc id

to bo tiio task cf th*. sciontists uBplcycd, nlth.ugh they arc, at the sio
tire, unicr c -ntract tc Straub ur,: University for tneir locturin. x r.:,
as thu results which nru ^finitely obtainable are f the utv-rt i ,*.p. rtnncc
for maintainin'; our sol ’.ioru in goo! h- olth.

"Ao I nv reported t y u, the ’ircctl.r of the xp.ri: r.s lies in the
hands of tho Director of the Institute f Hjv.’.r r the Reich University
'f Strasbourg, Professor Dr. Haugen, Chief J.LiicJ Offic.r (Oborrtabsarit)
ml c naulting Hygienist tj an air fleet, ih was charge \ v.lth this task by
ao Reich Marshal, Pros! .ut fti : uich lose arch Council. Actor'in* to
rvrulati i.s Dr. rtaagon nust r\.|-rt tc ‘he Chief f thu I'o-lio.al S^rvi-u >{
th. .*ir Forco ccncornin,. his vvrk, in cmeet' n with which it urt bo
r-mtiunud with ffhuco supp rt the rc ri. 1 ; *x.in- carried ut, ih . j\ in the
f *«'®t place tho Helch R< search Council, an: sec i *ly the 5S# I rcqu.:t y. ur
keisi-n of on« cf tho following Ja t. e nns. as nupj -rtin* a er.cy :f the

sa>

(a) fh; Pcich-loa^or SS

(b) rho SS-Eoiirnic .»dninintrati : '.ai:. Offioo

(c) The Instifcotu for Military Scientific Research c! . .a fo«>-SS.”

ThaMs the iVHA.

« ! o'GL S£3R] X}: ?!r. Hardy, will you ploace read tho last line? Aro
v u re a ' ’ a, fiv:r, tho iriginal cr roa i:..- .*r a tr nslo.ti :.?

”• ilJ D!’: I nr r-.a ‘in- fr. . tmnslati :i.

SE!*R "0: I wish that translation#

: :• - -. 1 . ft cays "Sopor

• » - 2 f the ri,*ii»al, ,f


1 ‘ -


9 Jgixu£ ry-A—PJG—1S-3-Sums
C. art ,io. 1


JUDO- SE3RIHG: Ho.

HB. IL-RDY: The very Last I ,c.

•TOWS oSBBIKG: *1 .

•bbrjiaacd rx suok rtin£ agency f the SS." I sh-ul lixo f r jo - t o
trrmalatorc, if I acy, if fcj has th. arigind Canaan, t
IHTiJRHCTZR* "I request for a tecisi n sh tbur t
sh ul 1 bj doci.TnaWH ..s SS.

"(a) The Roich-lca'k.r SS

(b) Tho SS Ec n -i: and ..Mn strati : .in Office

0

(c) r ‘dlltazy Scientific Reserreh f tto -r.j."

.y*J.V| I think r c_. _ - ' D».tt-r .f th. w v‘ " f" vac

'■■ ■ 1 ■ "which" r 1 in c nnoct

•

Brur’.t i' r infor.iti.n. He r-ctiv. " n the initials npp.ar. iurn p ./ tu
1 » ur ! r, D CUV. nt Kosher '.C-'C/. It , ffer is ftxoocutl n»s

libit iJ.. 305. It't. i 1 -. ■

19Ui.

"Su : cr 'ucti :i . . •

feVv r.

"iv.' r Cearr.lc Si.;v rat

thanks f r aonCin; ». t ie cr- . y -rr : i.: i; 1?U»

V SS Ob_rtjruppenfuehr r f hi. I l Ve nf nu- the f. ic -..u Lr r SS, .s

rt ...

app-Jjitotl ai . rtiit* flee f tho SS, Baiehafttateor SS wna f ; i:.i-n

SS a

-'.re ver it -at ht then .-.is, r sd : ih . .^icnpfuUir.r SS ■, -ro v lly
thi -y.pjrin. nts.

Hell iitlerl
hi jw 1 : I.udclf 3r *r. ‘t. n

t . letters, y > r . r, i c t . 1 ria-.cc . tl.. ;i

r • r •


9 J .mnry-.’.-DJC— l6-ii-3ur;:s
Csurt i!c. 1


\c ".'ill c-o later thr.l ell of tlic-se rrudsa: whct:. r th. - the

H-'.che .1oc< '-.rch Council of the Luftwaff., or the ".ehruicht, r .e SS, r
whatever they nay be hero, durir. the tiao cf the xperi r. r t.L.y U ;;,r
sir us of SCCuri nr the. ill • 1 - £ . •

an! h re n. w they ve c noistor. Jy --y ^ it. *. o turn i. r t? : • -cm- nt 3 > 7 ,.
You will n c- in tho D cuaen*. P. k, y ur F« r. r, tint p .vs 92 tu. r 3 rro -
tho 3?_ie loounents which h-Ve orro-vouflly fc..r. rut in twice ' c : yni

will turn 1 1 91, it's tacuwnt . ::o-l 2 ?. u »;il ;

*fl xhibit fi . 306, ; r ' 2 : .1.'. 19U':, it'r :• r

•«irt, /jntoedcal Institut . , «

rr-. v ||rv ,*0n t- Fv i'_sa r Hir •

"Subjocfc, Th I'csts .

"t.'ith ref runco t in! In \i, lifir.-ti r ‘ y c r.w ■ ! f 4 '!iy
19J»l»j I wish ton :viso yhit if tor the vnccin.iti ■ t r : . ! rotot i>

. .. baervod In th preliminary xparlnonts, ... .t tKre
sh-ul; ho little or n. inturruyticn f w

"Uowuvor, in the oubraquont innoculiti virulvnb ■jvttcd fover

which ir< to bo m V f-r tho , a rj-vr- ’ t o. 1 th' pr t c* iv. v vl*n, io
must c unt tn sickness inrfciculirly in th c.r.tr 1 r u; which h'3 tit

in rf-r tn establish ur.equivccall” w e f -•tivenoss f h -■ Uctive
. 0 p^rscan sill be u*

5C for tho c intrc 1 inn cuj .fiei r.

"I sh uj ' like tc | ir.t u* • i • *t if -xccsi r U t tl»o30
uX]:vt‘iak.rts be cirri* ut t r .rr -r.i ... re ;kyalc *1 c :. ..'tx C. rible

wlUi 'hat !’ r, r? f th hr- v.t,

:*il Hitler:


: .• :


9 Januory-A- JC— -17-1-Ray
C urt He* 1


:H» HARDY: N v you will recoil i ajr.fcl ' i:. c i
f the '.ocunents it n t inlicrto whether r n t there r<zs any un. f
the settee’. Aver virus. They requestor’ theSe rris n< r;: U be br:u t ut
th.re neroiy to test their vaccine, out r. w hove a letter f i . x. r-
i:entor ov ..If clearly ut lini: 5 ... Lrt

th sec 1;' vr~.ro, raph;

"In the suosequont innocttloti r.s .ith virulent 3, tte ' v r uo.’cnoro

e fbr the jmrp so f test;.-.. the protective vaccine,."

v.'e olsc 3 .J tint they or. f.o..iHor vitn the Contr 1 ir^up ve.lch uas

-u ntJ rv i by r. H-.oren, - ... r .. leh v. . at 3 uchcmrjl , the • '. so

•

• •i t. - thot “Rosultud ii ninoty-fii . r coat fatalities” . turn
1 •• ■ <nt Nmbcr *:c— 12 >, th ch f :r rccuti

H » 307 • This ie it* ' 7 July 1 $!:!;, Ti.it i: 01 rher lett .r U» aor.u
subject in crnnocti n with Hop. un. It is i;n,.r vtl r th
f Ob.rstabs rzt ir-i\.:e r r. H* . a on' V, Cr

"Experiments vrLth 0 tvw ri ; ’ tp.uus \ u-cim II. R.j rt.

"To

"Airfie t Physician l.ich.

"Thor, arc r. ibj.cti ns oi:u.: .blltthIn, f th. •• ron ur,

Hovuver to coll ittontl n t; the fact ‘h • th pro sc at*. L 1 :i ' th iu.uctisn
r suite in 'io-rot. 1 on 2 fiff.r s fr the us ml j r^Sbato io.. voccinnti

results c ..cernijir typhus on’, -x.c i*. r -v ifficult f r th r r t

.

pruaontatiun of t.o vaccinati n-resuits i. m ~ :v-..r-.. rv r

•fever-curves all exporinuntil subjects n oe si -.n . r t:- 0 1 trol
per ccds m tho ther si Supple, ocory • those vvon . r.cv . rwinKr
of p raona that fell ill r r -

it v; ul iiov-j been better if both in r*. : ind been eiio rote ’ up t. b>.
ti •- v.hor. the cerplete an ’ c .ostint ~bser.ee f fev r ul' oil uxparir>_ntil
subjects vros rcc .-nize

the

' > t .. full appr»val. . :


9 Janu.ry-.'.-‘,JG-17-2-ltey
C art No. I

no manuscript an' the intiiels "A5", but hare •. e hive the •—Ileal c ••
f the Luftwaffe which :n the fcto 7 u till r.-tice in I 9 I 1 L after the lofcn’ ir.t
Schroder ha taken over ns Chief f the le.i-.al Service of the Lufti.-nffo,
appro vin; the >ublicaun f thi* letter : ; the lot Ur clo ... i.. Lc ec-a
that this j.ufclicati.n cr ivaort was sent f-.r approval was *ci: sd with

the o :p-ri"or.ts which were conducted .-n huaan beings when th,. Cor tr 1 lr up
war used. Vie see down here about nino _r ten li\ s etartin tl* words,

"Of the 0 ntrol pers .is the _ther ai’c. n

'iio tvrn n ». t. the t. xt Ttactt or.t, : «ir H..i: rs, r. 97. It is
L .cun-nt Number NO 129. This ia offered .-.a Prcaocuti Sxhi 5-, 300.

It is a i-ettcr fr !)r. Hirt t H-na n t: .* 19 September 19„. Fvr n no,
Y.urH.n r, til re era t M t\. • e. \. % ; r the ri, ir. 1? (Ori Inal

in hmidad Froaecutien Counsel)* Tho &ri{.in'l c ntains the a to ,f 10 July
in the into umlorrieHh. It ia -.'o’ 10 Jul; 191L
"IrofoHSer Han unr
"y !o'.r Colleague :

"Thu '.oicnrfuehrer SS roqu ;• : *.! -1 y r ublic ti t. p .it it. th. f..llow-
in • par.v raj h*

"Rot.i arch was c.n uct. * by r .r u it!; thi assistance ' the Shi f
vt‘ tlu -niciicrvl Service .f thw Luftwaffe or vail »r with ti. orsirtar.co f
til.' Reich Rosoarch C uncil (R-ichsf rsohunsrat) ar. ».ie furth-roC ty the
So y. . Lc ha fuehrer SS ro nally as .-ell \y *r.- SS ic nc ic an' .. ‘•.iiiistr-it.ivc

"-’n Office, r.‘ the Institute f r *il 4 uiry Scientific R. sc arch .r tho
• affen-SS."

, . • . v ryt *y wants • . - it

f r r c n dieted by lha ui\ an.*. ..v: they state her- th-t j -ichs-
fuehrtr SS requests that they rh -r. }U. ‘he n. search was c 1 . net- 1 !*/

:• or an with tilt assistance cf the C!d»f f the "dical Servlet f the Luft-
■ the tofondnnt Schroodur with the assistance
ur.cil, an r. anizati -n in whicl any f a* e fen ante in •.he ckur.

. ranRest ok, on' Blew t • • •.!*- SS asks


5 Janucjy-A-lJO-17-3-Ray
C'urt lie, 1


for tl ir usual ccapliiaents# .. turn n w t*. the next D-cuocnt .. v c ?6.

>t ir* !:• cisr-nt r.ur.ber NO 131. It is rffare ' as Prosccutlcn:.; afcKic U .

30t5, afcad 29 ..u, ust 19U», • fros the high conmnd ..f tho Luftmfft,

icil Sorvico, Office of the cf.r.’-.nt Schroodcr, .

"Sotted fever research or Mi'."

Tbit i3 a I 'rtsso ' to (1) Chief Staff Sur : ;eon, Pr 'css r *, Kaagon

• Intel tuto cf Ky. ione of tin; P.eichs Diversity

of Strassburf.

(2) Scicnco a:. Ros-arch Gn*i| i tix . e !Lcel
Acad-qy rf tie Luffcwiffe.

(3) Chief of the Helical Service 'the Luft-

r.tffc, riauskalt#

"1. Tho research do all r. t.lth t‘ - r tt f. v r vaec trun

vitelline sac cultures is to l. c htl .u . :h.r f r th li,kll r.querted
for the research fun are o-in vine. I or. y vr is; sal."

tl« v, this i r raph c n'.-ins "Chief of th- .any Ho lie -1 Service#" 2
want o p .in* it. the trawl . is rr • us# it's "Chi- t- ehmacht

Hectical Servlco" or "Chief f the Ir . -errea." At thi: t th ro is

quite a 'Jocropaocy bucau: . r. Hat. 1 .r io r. 1 ry.r Cl. f f the c.Ileal
Service of thu Arr.y# He ropj that j t • ueh

Chief f thu I’edical S rvUe f th .chrr.acht an'.this r-.e^t ; arr ra- . rinulrf
r a llnvrat

"II. .v • ecisi r. as to thu t

plant conn t yet bo nvc tecaur. the Chi f f the vhnaach* \l .ioal Service,
rh: li ne is eonpetont t .cio upn th- ,v cur-n.nt f vaeclt.-s hat n t
t taken a otan*' in the latter#

«m. Plooso I-vis-: wn th r It r

cpiViaic , l-ev.ailin. at Hat-veil r \t roSwnt is c r.nect-' witn tn vaccine
r . irch.

" v. •_ rep rt f 21 Juno l n hh in which th. i.w ti

• , : ti • Sh .1 V ■ •

r'Ct/uT'. is t bo as f Hews."

The sl:rv turu ce ns t* to ill.fill-# Th. si-nature is ' a ='n Kahn «k
Was Chief f Staff f r Schr odor, .x# fcHaney has an -


-


9 January-.-.- JG—17-u-Ray
C urt 1!,* 1


in canne-cti.n with the translation _f this ..cuaalrts. You will n tico ,n
the letterhead r the headin^ cf the letter it says “Hi,;h Co.i_-.ar. -f the
Luftvnffa, (Chief i* the repeal Service." An ‘ it says, "Cede xsijn ticn."
Tint cede \>ei rnati >n contain# tur fardliar lo ral tv.-. -2A.

Th t is -'.Is the ffice of Beck. r-Yr. ./sin . I want t p*int ut in this
letter, X ur K.-ners, that Imr- .anti n is “a Us that the _cisi - of the
Chief f thu ..ohmacht ic ’leal Service has r. t been obtained in’, tint he
al-no is c. ipetent to .’cciY u ; ,r. the ;:r cur., t-nt f vacciru . Her, this
research work and its entire ex-erie.-ntal . r ra:-. was initiate ! in the first
instance by the 'ofen ant HandloSor *00 tho c-n’.iti ns in trie act started
to exist an’, nore n w r. Ic3s than the Luftwaffe is statin- that th y looked
tc the - 'leal Sorvici .f the Luftwaffe fra \clsi n. ... air. we n tica
in yara. < rar*l throe it saysi "Plc.so a via. whether it ray te assuraod. that
th- spotted fever opii'cnic rovaili.i at N(i'spoiler at present is c . nn. .ctod
rith tho vaccina rosearch," but ; 0 have . into.'. ut this letter ir :ii(:not?
by •. deputy f Schroodor. Ucw fr such a re. ark as th?* it is quite
evident tlwt the writer L3 fully smart * the face Chat -a virtdent vnccino
is bo in;; used in c- nnoeticn with thu wXTerL.ent. He is c neorned .and
rants to knew whether r n t tiicy inv b.,r. careless in .vnt v r ty the- use
f the virulent vaccine an ccci unt .is hi.\xn which ccasi n« * tho opi-
V;nlc ’it !»?.' tine pr. vnUiv 'r. • c ncc-nlrati n cn.*p itself apart froa.
thu expurip utal work. '.u turn n i , "ecu c.at UHiabur 110 132.

THE t "SinSKT: The Tribunal . .11 n w recces.

(A rocecc vua^taken).


-L.C5-


Court No. 1

9 Jan U7-A - ld-1 - LJG - Beard

1 HE AliSH&L: The Tribunal _s again in session.

•?.. HARDY: Your Honor, it has just beer, called to ay attention that
u-.on completion of the presentation of the Typhus Experiments we will
then preened with the presentation of the evidence in connection with
the ..ercy killings or the Euthanasia Program. I did not have the
opportunity to contact the General Secretary and ask hire to nave the
books ready for that ti-e. I suggest now that we continue with this
presentation, and reccorcnd that the books be brou ht to you as soon as
thoy aro uvailoblo* that is, if yeu have not already :ot the %

Wo will nov; turn to page 99, which is Document Ho. 132, and which
is Prosecution^ Exhibit N . 310. This is or. the letterhead of Chief
Staff Surgeon, Profes^r Dec r ii. H . .gen, Strussburg, and it is to the
High Co -sand of tho Luftwaffe, Chi»f of the radical Service, Saalow, Post
Zosuon-Land. Tile oubjeot io: Sotted fovor rosoirch oi'der.

"Aeferonco: Your c nunicatlon datud 29 lunist And, in

rofurencu to tho co a dosi- na.ion: In adoiticn to Ujj other lettor to
m ,-ur .ral II a, the office f Bcck^r-FToyau. • ap . r, thereon in the
original.

"In roply to cor auticatior. of 29 August UUh, .:v..*ruoh IT', wu
h t'ob> infer.: you that :;o connection existed between the ca:us of spotted
fever in Natzv.oiior and the ox.-' ir.iti ns dollin’ aith 'he ape Ud fevor
vaccin. that is to be tested. In thus. c-.sec it i3 rathe* a question of
illness tint h 2 .i been carriod in Uxo c : i r a tho utoida, i!hoy have
no influence on tho ccurse f tho inv ti.Viticn."


-


9 Jan-A-DJG-19-l-Blakley (pkp)

Court No. 1

This is sppsr-.otly s dsrifttne l^tcr tc Shu incuisitiou of the chief
asiical service of the, Luftwaffe in previous oocunmts.

•v, now turn to Docunent !toj»r S0.133, .hich is offered ss : res.,cation
Exhibit tafer 311, dated a October I«, fraa H s.- E .-„, Canp Surgeon of
thn concentration canp at Dachau, “avaria.

"Dear Comrade: I have instituted sotted favor research at th.
Natzweilnr Ooncantratton Camp. Ih* Dutch prisoner drew up tho fnver
curv-is for this investigation and, according to information l rom Ur.

Rod.., took those curves along. It was agreed that thus., cruvoo which
war- else prepared for would b. sent to s after the t mination of

th. investigation. I kindly request that you s nd th*m to ne . rxl, moreover,
to ray a It ornate address: Ourlazer. tt der Luftwaffe (8) Oberschrieborhau
in the Rios, ng-ibirge.

notj thft asterisk in connection with the Dutch prisoner, and, at
tho bottom, th: nsao "Ciwdint (physician) appears. In the testimony of
tho witness Schmidt the Tribunal ask. d \hothor or net the prisoner as
• xcopted was a Danish prisoner, I b U-:ve. This is n Dutch prisoner who
assisted Hnugan in his • fork , another d otor.

" r ' uov. turn to Oocum-nt Number !X)-135 in answer to the letter of
Kaagnn. 'o offer this as Prosecution Exhibit Number 312, dated Dachau, 30
October, 1944. "In r- f* rmce to your cocnunication of 21 October 1944,

I incuirod of th-. Hutch prisoner physician (Crediet) con corning tho
f v " r Curves d. sired by'you; and enclos' d I r. sending you the fev r
curves which nr., n tend hero. Accordin' to C (or Cr. diet), the riginnl
curves are still it Concentration Canp Katzsoiler. Block 8, Diphtheria
Rocc.. Hail Hitler, th* 1st SS Coop Surg.wn, one ntration Carp Dachau. 11

Tho next document on Png- 102 of yrur Honors' document book is NC-
136, which is ofi :r d as Prosecution Exhibit "uabnr 313, dated lo
H'ovetnh. r 1944. Tnis is r. 1- tt*;r bout curv s and apparatus w the chief
surgeon at tho Natzwniler Concentration C?-rp. 'Dotr Collwguo: To ray
graft surprise I no to that in spite of snvoral reQuests the following
apparatus:

"1 Autoclave

‘'I Ttean vessel

’’1 Round dry ft'-riliz^r


1407


9 January—'e-;JG-19-2-3laklcy
C urt Ur.i 1


loaned to ycu or y ur predccess r, r. ELasa, have not y*.t boon s<jnt back.

\u- to the b-sib :*aca«e tc the institute, I !Uv have urgent hood of the
apparatus. I wish t; rtninr y M u f the fact that this apparatus ras net
delivered f-.r y investi/ati-.-ns i • "utsv.jl.r but f r the use f the Cnn,~

Sur o on* I Must a belt that I was re-.tip ast nishe • that y ‘^sire has n t
yet been cc:’. lit 1 with an*’ that wo are n t yet in possession of tiv. apparatus.
I thoruforo request that the apparatus bo sent back at nco.

"In regard t the fever curves I have a'Urc3sc ' tho Ctip Sur.ein at
achau. Ho infvnas re that th feVer curves arc still in yvur I 'ssossion.
Sinco these fev^r curves wor. prepare - esjeci lly f r ne an since I need
then f-r rokin,* a rup >rt t- the. rtoich ?u< hr.r SS an.' th.- Reich .Jslutcr • f
tho Intcri* r, I a ain request, tr.-t v.u ^r.: ::e those cunvc i <.’lately."

rl.v:, y ur It n r, nh. 103 ro ,v:ve . cur.ent .Wu-.b-r '0-333, which is
offered provlsinally as Exhibit v Sir 31U« "his is an affidavit

“4».i • r^rr-—.  .

' '^n. CTfO’'".'ITEs Ccuns,l r t. . ‘efWant Hat» >he prosecution

is about t sua.it an -.ffi avit f 01 a fy^r. I bject t th. uco f this
affidavit cn tha tnci3 f the transl-vi n ;diicn 1 have, nssunln that tho
criminal c rrqjfpomls t the translnci n* if, r. Aval ,

'ocujjent hr.3, you will tin th* th. 'ns*, s.nteoco us n t ray «. wh-.t

■ r.c«

r a :s, in tho translati n w.iich I have h.r«, "In Strassbair, n t .o ld*h f
B vea.be v, 19Ji6, sworn ar. s* a. (Si nature) 01.*a Syor." Therj is n athor
in He ti.n ab ut the otaU:a:nt; it in f.llofce . ,-nly by Uvc transl-tkn

certificate f chv 20th f vCe-fc-r i?L6.

I beli.ve, thor-f re, that this - Lven her Is hot

• . 1 ssibl ,vi l nco acc r'i . ..rvci. Tne last sentence In th- stnto-
reads; "I ten t aaka sux « chon -s* a It secuis t. to require clari¬
fication for what Teas n thi *11 less rake chanrt>s. Th- S tatocont

itself a the Sec ur. pa>- f the G.r.aan an: islation contains th. f. Uowinr
Sentence; "I a b:it that I also ha.' tc icn.* reports tc tho OKT, The Hi.-h
H -:n: . * if t: ahraacht.* I:. the sen nc rocu . . thi5 auer.il :. and
the aontenc f Hawing tte qaotsti . susud t in icatc tint thli an


l.OS


9 January-A-: jc— 19-3-Slakl*y
C urt '.l', 1

afl ' ltion v " ich w * s mdc r-as.ns cf c...^dicrcy and which I can explain
nly if the witness is here p_rs.rr.lly.

In the last par<a;jraph the witness says that her tosti-i.ny c nsiatod
f r» patfo. Intho translation which I have here, in ho ri * lo .f tho
second ,m o, it nays: "Pa e 2 of th. ri.inal," that I -aust aosuix that
the statement as ;n o by th- -.itn-sr Ey-r c .asists f tw . a ..s,

■ heth r this is of any significance can be suttlefl nly if the witness
appears hero. For that r-ns.n I request th-t the witness be call. • personally
in srdor to clear up the V ri ns objecchich ! have prosontc

k. RvKS FRIBUIA: r. .ri. of on Rosi, ck. I

join in tlu-.^flicati.j» . f ty c 51.a uo 3fa}t : : «£&tj fV-l ’reus n. On

•

the see m! pa o of the docua-nt tho gy.r affi avit c. ntalnr a ir-ct'char^o
a ainot :y client, Ir.f. Rostock. t is oaf hero that Kaa xn received a

subsidy frt:: the Heich Research Council t <-r his ex-x.rir.unts an' that tho
c rrospondicc r.ns sl,v. ’ by ostcck. 1 - is alt sal • that Han«on was in
t uch with Restock. These tw. chin s hnvo n.t appoarc<’ as yet in my form,
ncith.r in that tho pronveuti- n has assert.d that R.rUck was n. t!io
vans ..-c A' th. Reich Rv,scare . incll, n r lias t.v pr-aecuti u as yet oub-
,ittf’ .a ’ cic.ont which ri. ht allow o% to > nclu'o a c'rropj: n once with
Han ,-on*

If the c-'rrosp.n!cnce* is not available and this affidavit is token
n to of by tho C.urt, then c.ul • nclu’o that Rost ck was ini' nne-1 of
wh t Haag n f. Then it c ui hav . ci ntiflc c r r n nco

U -I: r subject. F r . :• • it La* crtnnt anc’ ask tho

TrJ >unal to call the »ltik.sr f crocs exauinatien.

<. :n.: r. Tipp f r : h. afonso : Um of on mt Sohroodor.

r, Prooiclont, I J .\ colleagues. 3 aIso a nsi.lor

it al>c iutely essential that the witness a; t - ar here personally so that
aert-ir. centra, ’.icti ns aria in fro- docun-nts hith.rt presort.:,ay bo
cl< re ' up. Oti r.a e 2 of th. (kitnn translation tho witness says that every
threw r.-nths reports :n th-. -xperi; mts want t. tn b. v’ f tn» ret¬
race f the :ic ileal Service f the Luftneff. Such re - .rt. v.- - *. yet


-.09


9 January-..- JG-19-L-31aklcy
C urt He. 1

boon pro sun tod by the zrosocuti a. If -_hes_ re.orts arc net avvilcblc, if
th.rc. is anly this testir ny cf this witness, the C-urt r ulf. hr.vo te con-
clu’o that thu hoc' f the 'Sudical Service f the Luftwaffe, the -.ofon.nnt
Schrr., r, r his a-cut was infers;.-: about th. otails f th - oxporinent.

These t vmts are ,.f ecisivo i..., rtancu f„r the J cfonc!ant SbhrooCcr,
at least fur this point :f the in’icfcxnt, Thcrofrra, Ik • 1 - have te cress
exoaino the vdtneas. Thur.f ru, I request tot thu witness ’vj calid to the
C urt.

!i. ILai Yj If it plee 30 thu Tribunal, th ,ri;.ary prahle . scctus to
tjo .no f translation. This cuxnt, the ri in.il, is in th. French
Ian u". oj an*’ it has bu.n translated int. *... li.-h ns well r.r into a.r-nnj
an’ obviously se^ of the Ocr n tranoluti :.c rre rithor l.os;.

Jl w .Vcr, I *dsh tc pass it n to tnc Tribunal f.r c narration. 3 want

•

to P int out tiv t th.. eh-:, e rr Ltiolcd by tho affiant.

Thu tocunent was typed an' cc a?3u-‘ by tha invest!, it.-r of tno staff and
th..n tho affiant rca ’ it ever an’ ,laco‘. h*:r initials wherever ai.c crrroctod
it. I a : it that the oath ar- \ .s n t jx ar in the Gtnrn translation,
which is annthor errtr .n the . *ri *f t.«. trannluti n '.opcrtiMit; but it
... r, htwovor, on the ri . : :i. English islati

I concede that there is a nist'.ke in ro v r.rf t the .r.e pa .r the French
lun.-a~ ; an’ it w.ul Vc necessary that I contact "r. Fav.r . r. I -.a
ouro that it .vast have boon a t>, raphit il e-rr r .«r an enfssirn. I can
h^vc that rectified.

As fo Mi-, attack n the ..art cf the ’ofonso s. that they .sire to
cress -xasi'.ne thu witness, no hav net Vee a 1« t brln her h.rc ta Iiurn-
bor-; on: I sulr.it that it ri S . he feasible to carry out on rr’or sinllar
ti the _ .o i f tho Tribunal this .ornir. a:. 1 inWrro~atori«s any be rent and
s!‘e r.ay answer sajr.e an J return the * the Tribunal r to the -*cfc.;so
c.ur-.-l,

THE . .-ZSI'3.Ti Tihnt reason is there, C unsol, th t the witters cannot

- • he .e-ru froa Strassbour- ti testily ir. arr n before the Tribunal?


10


9 January-A-OJG-19-5-B lafcley
Court No. 1


HAOTj Just a moment, yccr H... r , 3*11 have to c r.

XcKoncy about that. He has core of the details.

'*• *iONEr« If the Tribunal feels that it is ’esirable to bring kiss
£ y' r :are J w® *hon endeavor tc fo so. It aay be a bit difficult to get
her here before we comploto the remainder of cur case in chief. Conse¬
quently, I vould suggest if the Tribunal i ,,ls that it is imperative to
havo hur brought hero that the- prosecution U pt netted to run" into ovl-
'•onc» this affidavit while r. serving th: ri ht to put a-L’itiorv.l questions
to Idas Zycr if ah. c,n o to Nurnbu>g a takes tho stand. In otiwr words,
wo sr.a3 1 go ahead and put in our affidavit new; aw ■ then when Miss dyer is
brought hero, which will probably .<. after the coelution >f .'ur case in
chi. f, tho prooocutien car. o iv.n rl-Jit tc initiate ohe examlirtlon
of tlic witness. After wo hate r oxaaimtion, then she can bo

crous lX iwI . d oy tho del', us. c un: -1.

THE fn&SDENTs In aiy event the tv is 0 f th oounbui apparently

njx.d r vi..iu;.j h transi tion into Ooraan; p-.sribly the translation into

Knslish.

.’K. {crLIKhTj I ion't think thc.ro ic aiy : - ri u: Ifflculty about the
Oon.ui translation. Thoy vr. pointing' cut c-rtiin conflicto p.ar.htlyj
! not think they run of t). 3 r,

. k\sr.K\T: Apparently’ the c'oouaunt 4o.<8 consist j .


i-.ll


9 Jan 47—A—S* -20-1- Putty
- Court ?Jo. 1

Ihe only portion signed by the. witness on the second page except
for the verification end the swearing the document, there are no
statements of fact apparently on the second page.

IP.. HARDY: That is correct, your Honor. I night add, your Honor,
that if wo could possibly — the Tnglish seens to b»< r catp ritivoly
good translation by Vr. Fardnchet. The Garttsn is translated by another
translator conversant in the French and German languages, rnd reading
the English into tho records free the translating unit her* nay prevido
a better translation for the purpose cf Defense Counsel.

TI'X P.iESIDD'T: It night bo cf -.ssistanco t Counsel and Tribunrl
if the translators would road tho top p»r.grph on the second prgo signed
by tho affiant. Translate that both int German rnd English. I would
like to hP&r tho English tn nslation on it.

HR. HARDY: Doos th< Translation Doprrta<nt hnvo -.ny.n* conversant
in French there at this tine?

THE TR NSL/TOR: "I hav* carefully read the \b:v< deposition; it con¬
sists of on . prgo, I can say that it c nstitut* a a. corroct and
truthful dopcsiti ;n. I have ntd* this deposition irm ly, and I havo
not n pr raised r ny reward for it. I had an pp-rt unity to make
chang* s ;.nd corrections in it. Sworn .and signed it Strasbourg IB
fl worrier 1946. Olga >^yar."

THE PRL';ID'NT: This translate n simply- calls - tt- nti n to thu f".ct
that tho affiant had th* opportunity to cake chang* s. TV tr-nsl tti.n
d re net say that she d <sir«:d to r.tk- .any chang- s in it. Seco chr.ngcs,
slight changes, in the affidavit an n t* a, but th- certific: t- merely
states th-t tho epp rtunity was : ff rded th* .ddir-nt tc aako changes.

It so ras to me, Ciunsol, that lids witness, in vi* * of that she
stat<d

*7


9 Jan /.7-A-EU-20-2-. utty
Court Ho. 1


in the affidavit, concerning certain of the defendants shculd be fcr urht to

MUrnbcrg to testify before the Tribuiud, if feasible.

:2i. rt.jiDY: The rrosocuticn will :aokc -.very effort t carry ut that

request, your H-.nor. ..t this tine, y.ur H-i. r —

THE ‘.KsSIDIJITi I uirlerstcod Counsel f r the inaocuti-,n tc any that

thi» phase X the ease wculi bo cumpleto! this ^ftcrnnn.

JH. ft'dtDY: That'n correct, y.ur Hon r. i,c hav. the presentati n .f tho

typhus experiments. The document l. k hero ehzull bo ccoplctoi this alWncon.

Wo have a marc twuaty pages to cunjlotc.

THE iBSUDKNT: I am n t 3i.ro fr.r the rrguacr.ts introduced by Defenso

Ccunaol whether they hat ether cbjocti. na t. tho transliti.n. »,uld it net

bo feasible t< postpenu the renting f tlis affi lavit till tcru rr *. Tnko

it up then out f rdor if y u pr coed with rrmttIJng ol9e this evening. In

thu meanwhile, t»io transUtisn can b- v-rifi. i. The entire translati >n ^f tho

document fr a English Inti Goman can then bo verified.

. r j\. 'w.liY: Yea, y ur hencr. i turn new tc page lot of your H ners*

•

• •

document he i which is Document NO-885, which i- :fforal as »rsocuti»n
Exhibit 31A. This i3 -n affidavit. It r a Is as fcllcwsi

"I, thu ur. Icrnignoci, Dr. Vict-r liU’.uio Schuh, Joj i 1 at.atoi
1. 1 wqs b rn n .kpril 23, 191N in Hunsbach and am n French citizen,

1 attend-- I tin hi ;h school in Schlettstait and th University -f Strasbourg,
whurv in th. y.ar 1 938 a degree f Dne r f cJicir.i was i:f erred upon no.
-y special field l.. baetvri.lv y.

4 . After 3 hart practicei with war! us pr f -is rs, I was in 19tl named
JJcionti fie .‘.naintant in tho -«-!icai fUs.arch Station Which w^a located in tho

1


- 1-13 -


9 Jan-A-JP-2 0-3-Putty
Court No. 1


Hygienic Institute of Straabma* BniMroity. Thc head of fro,,

earlier 19h3 was rrcfesaor Eugcn "aa.en."

TSS * 82SI Zm: 1 believ e /our translation reads "19!*", Counsel.

A ' VA? ' Ys Pardon Ee > y our H ' nor > Pardon ~_e. «Hc was Oberstabsarst and
Hygienic consultant of the Luftwai fe. As I was fna the end of iphO a
member of f«j underground Comniat Party and as I was interest.c in tin; fate
of my conrades i-aorisonod in Ifetzweilor an J Sehiraeck, I trioc to et inf.r-
■nation about Haagtn's activity. Haa.arj i .. explained hi-mself - ras an
open secret that ho had the intention of corryift; out cxpc.'i vnts on
prisoners in u ataweilor and Scbir.-vack.

3. I commissioned ..’r. Robert .oyer, who r-as Administrator of the
Institute and belonged to a resistance roup and who had a lot to do with
Haagon arid his Assistant, r. Grafc *::< vac on good terms with those two to
spy on thoir activity in thc tto c r.cer.tr tlon cups. Moyer was specially o bio
to do this job because liaa, «n hi cattle In t o Institute, at the cost of
tho state, i’or experimental pur.iosor, ft truth he h.mthe tor his own
v.bi , .ntl ho counter: or. Meyer for tho illogsl butchering of t . . .

T.ith Grafc, too, eyor had co.e to a rather „ood unburstirdir .

!u ?ro: 19h2 until 19hi, that is, until thu depart*, n of Hnar n frou
Steaabour , I received free Ueyer current inforration about lhon and

>rtant i•.formation conccr* other natters through layer, tco. I
fta an absolutely reliable c uractor *nd, for this r daikon, ] can
civ ;it tn<i truth and rightness of hie a nl .-ration. Meyer was killed during
an air raid in September 19 hh.

$'• Early in 19h3» Frolosrc:- ..au. asked ao to stujy with thc l.oil-


- 1 -. 1 -* -


9 Jan-ER5'-20-<i-Putty

Court No. 1


Felix reaction about thirty blood cests which h- gave to no. I
r^nbor veil that all the had a Slavic sound with the
exception of the names Buck, Wolff * nd Hirts. This r.;acUo>, r* quested
by Haagen could only concern a spotted fever research. Git fo told tr.o
that this concerned itself with measures tc standardise experiments
with Hn.ogon's vaccine.

6. In the beginning of 1944 .after a long absence from Strasbourg,

I visited Mr. Moyer to get seme information ir a him. On this
occasion Moyur told ma that Orafe had in his pms-nco i dnitted that
Haagen hr. d tested this n*™ vaccine initially. Later, th.ugh, they
infected prisoners of ernentration ca ops with living spotted fever
virus.

7. I know that the rco arches d* 3cribrd und< r 5, worn mad. in the
concentration comp f Schirm ck /.nd that Orafe tc ak a diract part L»
all of them. Haagen ' nd S r fo spr. nd the rur. r in the Institute
that nobody should h* v- any thoughts against thc-s* xp* rim nta

since nc Uovtians but nly Pci--a worn U3ud as human guinea pigs.

Fr-'oi Moyer I have 1. rri-d, too, that H-ago together vith raf .sa r
Hirt made son* tri Is -f combat g»n ( K-mpf stoff) (L at) in Hr-.t/.woiler
n J»wish priseners.

8. Haagen lot it bo knewn u 11 p«rs n« 1 *nd -von to the
charwomen that everything they L amed oith r fficially r un¬
officially must bu kept very anent -nd that - br- k f thir Secrecy
* uld bo punished very suveriy. I knew that fKn th- p .o P .i aha used
t work thoro."

Uiis -affidavit, yur Honor, ret*, well c-rrLnt-.s the
d cumontary evidence rood in th* record h- r* t day. I r kW turn to
n cunont numb'-r N0-304 which will hr ff-r d ns ?r u- cuti. n's
Exhibit number 315. "his is dated 2.? V verier 1946 in th. English
translation. That is on error. The ririn-1 is 22 Ikvcabor 1942.

T bis document concerns —


- 1415 -


Court No. 1

9 January 19k7-A - 20-5 - LJ2- - .-utty

JuDGS SEBRZNGt 22 Novorfcor?

H*. HftRDIs 22 October I9U2. 22 October 1-12. This document,
your Honors, concerns the yellow fee or work. This is addressed to the
Inspectorate ci the Modical Service of the Luftwaffe, who at this tir.c
vra8 Hippke, rvg .rding re- > .rch -rdors:

•'For the establishments af the ruse-rch larorat.rivS f tho Hygienic
Institvto tho op* oratus nnaod on the enclosed list was rdored about
a year ago at tho fira Frans D-rgnunn and haul 4 .ltnann in Berlin. ..a
1 a,. now infom-d by the fire then i3 no possibility of nanufict.iring
>.nd, therefore, no possioi ity : d t .Very unlvSi tho apparatus is
indicated on tho 33-pricrity list. Sincu the- a; j aratus is all needed
by L. In. lh —" tho fardliar coco leturs of the signature of Anthony —
"for tho fabrication of vautlntu it it, requested to grant this jr*.rity
to tho fire B nd Altnann for the uxecutlcn eft • •.

"Furthermore, it is r.qv.es'ud to pi cc at dis, 3al . emits for —"

I have a letter out ,-f ny hbeic here. "Furthornoru, i* io roqu-stud to
pl.icu at tho disposal >r its for iren in thu s ablest p.sAMu tickets
for thu current procuring >f s: oiler iliancua .dc fr. i Iron, ar, fur
instance, wire llanoos Is 1 cages, t.cks, noil tools, etc.

.it tho rtoaont 100 kps. or* .ranted.

"nt the saitc r .it 3 r.ev sketch fir tho dir»cti n of uj.. is submitted
vhlch Is to bo or.c'.os-d ir he packages f yellc* foVer vaccine with *.hu
request of quick dic.-atcfijso that the- oir.cti n f r use 1 'lit bo printed
"cw .' 1 signed, "£x hs arzt Frvf ' r -. hugen H .gen "

Nc.y, in this conn -ctiun as , art of s document t>- huvu thu


3 Juiy-xr-C-IS-SG-b-Putty,
court ::o. i.

attachaent mentioned. "Direction foruso for the yellcw fever vaccine cat tor
of the Eygenic Institute if tee University ~f Strasbourg. Attenuated live
yellow x'over virus from ~icc brains. Contents of Package: 1. glass tube of
driod vaccine (color racing according to blood composition of brninc, from
wnito. to reddish.) 2. glass tube containing 2 ccm. distlllated, sterilised
vmtor *" Continuing on to naao the contents of the packago. wc have tho
soction on t.io preparation of tae vuccinol It gives us the detailed in-
formtlon whicn would be of interest to tne Tribunal, but I ref rein frou
r-odlng it here.

Tno third sect! jn iu the procoos of vaccination. "One rackago providoo
tiity iaocullutions. Use u sterile point for each inoculation.

Vaccination is administered on t.-.c upp-.r .-.ra li:o vaccination ngrvinst small¬
pox. Cleanse era with ulconol, other or spirit (not with tlncturo of
iodine.) Dip vaccine point in tube, superficially .orate., skin end thon-
*u..^3y rub in vaecino with point. Let It dry. bandaging. ..ftor uoo,
i.io vaccine Oiiould bo rendered harmless by boiling or by diuping tube into
a liquid disinfectant. l<o vaccination ir uot followed by skin reactions.
General oyioptomn are usually absent. Occa si-rally, did houdnehoo or
physical discomfort occur. ~ny serious reactions, especially mnnifo-toti no
of Jaundico or albu-ln must be reported luodintoly to the Health Irfopoctor-
nto through official channels, mentioning Op. llo. ■

.Now wc turn to the next page, 112, document nutb. r IXV-297 vkica is
dated 14 July 143. J.iie is offered as Frooccuti-n's Exhibit Jo. 316.
"Subject! Resoivrc.. Order f or Yellow ?ov«.r Vaccine," and her. in tn. refer¬
ence wo aoe ntdir. our fa.?-illar code letters, L. In.' 14, nnd thon in paren-
•.r.oeie "2, Rooan Rumb^ral II, 3." _t t:.is tL_e it wr r Anthony addres^od to
3tabs..rst Professor Dr. 2. Knngon:

"I.-.e‘ I..8poctoratc of the hodicr.i Service of the Luftwaffe requerts die-
cj..ti:.uance of ta- furtn^r current production of yellow fever vaccine ar.d of
' formerly precciibed avail ability of port; ,n£ of vaccine.


9 Jarr-..-0ZS-2G-7-?utcy.
Court m. 1.


"It is, however. requested to keep tno equipment (unii-r.ls, yellow
fowr cultures, instruments, stock of wrapping nntcri .1 cr.d vossol for
C9!iBignao&t, otc.) roady for use so that it aoy be possible r.t any tiiso
to restart production of yellow fever vaccine to t:io formerly provided
oxtent on order of L. In. 14.

"The Ir.spoct orato requests tno continuance of thv work for feho
technical dovolopoint of the procoduro of vaccination and of tfco producti>n
of vaccine."

Now l copy Of t;.is letter was sor.t — it snows on tno docunent thlo
info rent ion — to Pr.yslcian tor .Ur Fleet 3. ;Ur flru Physician VII,
aoforonco 4, Professor .tose.


- Islfc -


Court I

9 Jm U7-A-! iAA-2i-l-: ‘ochan-UG

In this connection, wo have tho next Document, which is very
interesting on yellow fever, *io. 139, offered as Prosecution Exhibit 317.
Tnis is dated 7 .‘‘arch 19UU. It is a letter from the High Command of the
J.'avy, Dr. Grunslco, addrossed to Dr. Haogcn at Strasburg:

"in connection with my letter of 26 February and your long distance
telephone call of 6 March, I must advise t.-at the Japanese Cberstabsarzt
has in tho me-antii.fi contacted Cfoorstarst Professor Dr. Rose of the
Luftwaffo nodical Service and that tho latter has precised to secure
l'or him from Strasburg all the accounts concerning tho yellow f«.Vur
virus experiments which are important to him. Therefore, Cbv.r3tarzt
Dr. Roso will give you further dotails. I thorofore aslt that tho matter
be considorod closed betvtoon us."

Hero wo have Professor Rosb aidi:ig tho Japanese doctor in securing
ill tho accounts concerning t*uc yollow fovor virus oxp-rimonts. Tho
fact that Profoasor Rose would .;ivo all of the accounts of the yellow
fuvur virus experiments to tho Japanese doctor indicates ho* must*have
bvon in pretty close cont vet in ordor to fulfill this roquost.

Wo turn now to tho noxt docuoont, Occident Ho. 310, which is offered
as Prosecution Exhibit 318. This is datod 19 April 19M and is frem
Haagont

"Subject: roduction of TVphus-vacciro•

"To: Air Fleet - physician Reich.

"enclosed horuidth I a a submitting tho copy of a letter 1 addressed
to the Roich inis ter of nviation and Suprona Comandor of the Luftwaffo,
'heroin I suggested tao establishment of a Typhus Vaccine Production
C^nUr at the Hygiuno Institute of tho Reich University at Strasbourg."

Tnen, "Subject: Production of Typhus-Vaccine," addressed "To the:
2oich I-iinistor of aviation and Supremo Ccenondor of tho luftwaffo.


Court I

9 J -n U?-A-' AA-21-2- feehan-LJG


,uirtorraas tOV-zQo rt-ra i Chief of medical Service cf tho Luftwaffe," ^ho
was at that time the defendant Schrocdor.

'The. following suggestions or.. _adc regarding the establishment of
i production station for Typhus-V.ccini for th.c Viahrmacht at the Hygiene
Institute of tho -oieh University .t Strasbourg, b-.sod on . ronthly
production of vaccine for 10D,IXX) persons.' 1

Now, thu next page contains wh~t is necessary to sot up

the instituto: linon, tools, furniture and tho like. ,.o pass on to page
1L7 of Your Honors* Document Book, at the bottom of page 3. It pertains
to Specialists concorning p-rsonnol:

"1. Spociclist-Bactoriologist for assistance and roplacomont duri ng
ay absence, on trips in connection idth ny duties as consulting hygienist.
Hu must be able to tako cv-r all responsibility so that this work .nay con¬
tinue undisturbed. I am considering Staff Fhysician Dr. Kairies, assistant
Professor and lecturer at the Hollo University, for tho time being attachedlo
a wnacr-Anay as Consulting Hygienist. Staff Physician Kairies has been
on "active duty since the beginning of tho war. according to his statement
replacement is available. I have already contacted Herr Cberstabsartz,
lecturer Dr, Scheldt of tho Office of the Chiof of the ■.dical Service
of the V/ohrmacht on this cubj-ct, Viill you pie .se request the release or
detachment of Dr. Kairies thron-pi the ordinary channels?"

You will note, your Honors, that Hoagun hero states ho h is contactod
the office of tho defendant H* adlcs.r and contactod Dr. Schnidt, who was
subordinate of the chief of tho L die ml Service of tho Wohmacht, defen¬
dant Siegfried Hanolosor iio .Iso requested some technical assistants,
which arc listed and he states

Ihe abovc-.-wntioned assistants iccording to Staff Fhysician Kairies
»ru especially skill-d for the work planned. The other two technical
issistnnts should bo assigned directly by thu hohraacht. Ho needs one-
skilled assistant chemist to bo also assigned by tho fchmacht and one
junior assistant to help the assistant chociist.


-Ui2C-


9- Jan U? :^&-21-3-4fcohan
Court Vo. 1


He continues to state the oth.r .rsonncl required, .it the b*tto= of
the page, the last . aragraph ?o. 17, sa.o page .o. 113, ho status:-

In order to bo effective the production center nust bo declared
a v ar essential incusti-y . T e costs are to be jjet by the Yiefanaacht.

All expenses the Institute has to bear in the course cf the production
of the vaccine are to be repaid by the 'ifehrmacht. The personnel status
*111 oe kept by the Wehrcocht. The roots are placed at disposal by the
University of Strassburg. The costs for water, current and gas are
charged to the University."

Here is Haagon proposin., tho est^li.. '.o:it of a vaccine production
institute, which is based on the rase its of his experiments, which are
done for the benefit cf t o fehmacht. lie states that iho brunt of
t> e coot will have to bo borne by tkeV.chr. icht.

Tho ne::t Docuno/Yffn this DocunoiS^ cole, Ko. 13 , Prosecution
Exhibit 319 concerns . keport on ,.e Succor: js ith T.A.B.- Ch 0 l. /nccinea,

e

dated Strassburg, U Av 0 uj t lyljb. Too subjoefc is:

"OKL, Chief of the luftv.aflo lodical Sorvice.

"The following T.A.3.-C ho 1 - V«;c c i: ws :ru o used:

"02-OC, 10,30 and 22c, • o .tier Obviously pertaining to a nuutjor
fren 1 to 10.

"It op oars t: .t no strom reactions • , 0 produced by lies. 03, 05,

1 and 30. One unit reported 1 to 2 days aba once from ork as a roout
•f 05, which would soera to inc-icate a stronger general reaction. The
unit3 *hich were vaccinatod i.h 2 had r. etiens of the most oxtrano
: rn; teuperaturos rose to Ul 1 C. a org« r o: t less vaccinal
RW? o unable to work for two to tiiroe .. . . Cne unit reported 60 to 70
|<sr cor.t bedridden with a corresponding dacroase in employability. further-
re, nausea, vomiting, shortr.es ; oath and .varalysis of the lover


Court I

-'an Ii7-A- AA-21-i*-;ieehan-LJG

extremities '(ire reported. Concerning No. Cl; there are varying reports:
some raise no objection to it; others $• -to that it was generally agree*,
able with only slight local reactions. Three units, however, reported
noro pronounced local and general reactions with rising temperatures;
one unit reported that almost all those vaccinated had more pronounced
lrcal and general reactions; however, there was no effect on enplcyability.

"Nos. 06, 07, 08 and 226 resulted throughout in such strong reactions
that their usability is questionable. No. 06: in one unit a loss of
on^ day by 5 to 7 por cont on account of fuvor; in one unit 90 por cent
fuv«r up to 38.5 0, and less of ono to two days; in one unit 90 per cont
very 3trong local and general reactions) in ono unit even 30 por cont.
Furthermore, ono unit reported 90 por cont local and general reactions,
with fovor up to UO par cc.it. Particular phenomena reported wore ulcera¬
tion and several cases of chills. Such strong local and gonoral reactions
occurred throughout ono unit after the first injection, with temperatures
l'rom 39-hO C up, that tho troop doctor did not continue and canploto
the vaccination series. Only a fuw units reported no particular reactions.
No. 81 a hrgo number of units reported up to UO, one to two days loss
of v/ork. Ono unit reported t: at, of 300 ersons vaccinated, 50 per cont
suffered general disorders, 30 por cont shewed a decreased capacity for
*ork, DO to 15 per cent woro bedridden for one to two days. Particular
symptoms roportod woro: inflammation of tho stomach and intostinos,
diarrhea, canker sores, a rash (like mcaslos), chills with crarp3 and ono
case of inflammation of tho brain.

"-he following T.a.B.-C .ol-Vaceinjs Vo delivered for distribution."
Hie operation numbers arc here given. "Cfc the b .sis of the reports, it
must bo assumed that all Operation Kuabors wore used. Furthermore, there
ir- ~ VuI V dissimilar reports concerning the efficacy of the individual."


Ih22


Court I

9 Jan U7-A- 'Aa- 21-5—.ioehan-LOG


Hero additional mashers arc listed. n ; rti ernore, Nos. 15, !j.-, J ; H
55, W 59 and the two unidentified nnafcers nay bo apprais-d as a*r.._’V lu
v.itn inor local and general reaction; tho reactions caused onu to two
days loss ox work, but their frequency was not noted. Essentially, the
sane observations *.rero reported concerning the retaining Op-rations
nu.-bors; strong ior very strong local and general reactions, fever up
to hO, transitory loss of --or;:, diarrhea, chills, shortness of breath,
near-collapse (two cases), and ono-tMrd of t oso vaccinated \lth
No. 102U sufCorod loc .1 infiltration.

"Comparative study she s tbit c.-.o Asid Vaccines appear, on the
average, to be considerably loss ogrooablo than the Behring Vaccines,
even though the reactions to scc.o of tho latter surpass unduranco.
Without further stud;, it. cannot be determined .dut causes strong
reactions to usable vaccines. V o .a.v«ral i= r.>ssion is that, in
particular, tho Asid Vaccine in Us -r front font -..ill have to be ro-
Jacfcud for vso b, tho hohr -;c!it, since it is to bo feared that tho oco.*i
of t..o reactions could c us- considerable 1. ssos and dccrcu3e in tho
employability of Uio vaccinated units. Sc e of t:>o Bohring Vaccines
also resulted in injury to l!.u goiwrr.1 sl-to of health, which caused
one to two d osao8. I r ports, it is neoossazy,

3j ‘ course, t. consider too dissi liar opinions of the individual troop
doc-tors concerning tho strength of tho reactions. As is correctly ou-
phaaiaed in tho report of kcr/a irrt XIV, the advantage of tho co inod
T.a.B.C holera vaccinations c .. ovorostioated since tho troops

c,n bx vaccina cud in the shortest possibl riod of ti-xj. On tho

hand, this would bo possi >n?y itn te-porarily inactive units,
rusont-do; vacc ines could not be reCo-a:-nd,d for activated or
•birl-to-be activated troops since it e vnnot be pr-dicted, on tho
b sis oi‘ o: lienees to dat^, -t r the troop will rurain fully
employable after tho frocuont strorvg


r.23


£ J\n 47-A- -21-6-Mjclr.n

Cvrt Wo. 1

r«.'ccicns. ..s lens -s ti v. vr.ccinc 1-idustr cnnncfc proclvco r.
rtccino wiich decs not result 'in str:r.- reactions, such as tl o
B. v.\ccino, tl.c Vj;ccmo will 1 vo to bo ro-

| jjoted for the Wcdr.iccit, os unusr.blo. n

! *


- 1U24 -


Court I

9 Jan U7-A- AA-22-l-Ka r.os-IJG


If Your Honors ploaso, exclusive of the document that has to bo
submitted after it has be_n corrected and another witness or two in
connection with the typhus ox'uriments, this c cr.pl ^t-_-s tho presenta¬
tion of ovidenco in connection vith tho typhus, yellow fever, snail
pox and cholera, and the ot. er experioants as charged in tho Indict¬
ment, Count II, 6(j) and Count III, 11.

The Prosecution has clearly shown tho program of experimentation
in Duchunwalu and HatzKeilur concentration camps. Ho have shown by
tho to3ti.iiony of tho witness,s and tho overwhelming amount of evidence
that experiments wore conducted for the benefit of tho Gorman armed
forces to investigate the effectiveness of typhus and other vaccines.

Tho testimony of the witnesses, as well as the supporting documents,
has conclusively established that a virulent virus was used in both
camps during tho co»rsa of those oxpvri xrnts and th.t as a result
thereof nur,»rous deaths occurred.

Tho weight of tho uvidor.co has also shown that tho Tfohrmocht,
the SS, tho Reich Research Council, v.o Luftwaffe and other organiza¬
tions participated in on active manner in tho entire program.

At this tl-no, .r. 'cHanoy will continue tho lrosecution's cuso
in chief with tiio pi’eSentation of evidence regarding tho so-called
mercy killing program.

DR. HOF A.’W: (Counsel for defendant lokorny): On 29 Kay 1°U6,
wc wore told that applications for witnesses and documents woro to be
mido as 300a as possiblo. Accordingly*, I have hith-rto nosed throe
y.itnossos — an . e .. ex*t. Dr. Aing; tho witness Aiska; and the witness
Miss r:rton, the s.c.'otary of «ho defendant lokorny. I sent a Tele¬
gram to xiiso -i-rtcn before Christmas asking h,r to co j hero and tal k
to her nero. On tho basis of this conversation, - roquostod her as
a witness on 2 January 19U7. During rc* conversation with h_r, sho
said that up to th t ti o no or.e — that is, not the Prosecution


ili25


Court I

9 Jan h 7-A-?’AA-22-2-Hayno3-LJG
either — had examined hur.

Coday I havo boon, inforaod by the office for the Defense Counsol,
Lt. Garrett, that the two first mentioned witnesses have been approved
and are to bo brought hero. ?:e third witness, i£lss Horton, on tho
other hand, had bocceo a iTosocution witness.

I ask for a decision of tho Court th'.t tho Prosecution can
exaiid.no tho witnossos I have naaod for tho first ti-e in cross oxanina-
tion and that Miss Horton should not bo considorod a Prosecution
witness.

I have submitted ny application in writing. I have handed it
to tho Gonoral Socrotaiy.

MR. McHANEI: If the Tribunal pla.so, this comes as scraowhet of
a surpriso to the Prosecution. I have nevor hoard of Frauloin Horton.

I cortainly havo no intontion of ca-ling hor as a Prosecution witness,
and — I an quite sure about it — no one on ray staff has talkori to
her or so much os knows of her. I don't know where Defenso Counsol
has obtained his inforraatlon, but this aust be sorao mistako sanewhere,
bocauso I know nothing about it. I an qu: to sure that nono of tho
attomoys -..-ho oro participating in this proceeding havo so much as
talked to hor.

Ivaybo by socu coincidonco sooe other section nay havo soro interest
in hor, but I havo groat doubts about that. Certainly the Prosecution
in this enso has r.o int.-reat in tho witness at all, ar.d as far as wo
are concerned, she is a Defense witness, and wa shall not 3poak to
hor.

THE PRESIDE!?: I vill ask the Cou:sel for tho Defendant if
that statement complies with what no desires or if there is anything
-.130 he would like tho Tribunal to do about the ntt<r.

D?.. HOrF.tAHN: I obtained qy information fren Lt. Garrett, the
liaison nan botwoon tho General Secretary and us. He gave ad a slip
of paper on which it says. One and Two — that is, Jung and Lisk —
approved. T:roe — that is, Horton — Prosecution.


11:26


Court I

9 Jan kl-k~ AAr22-3-aaynes-LJQ

ITffi PRESDEOT: It is now almost tine for the Court to recess.

X would suggest that Counsel for the Appellant and for the Prosecution
gAn information about this natter cf this witness and take the matter
up before the Tribunal at tho opening of Court tomorrow morning.

I would soy in addition that applications for documents and wit¬
nesses have been functioned on by the Tribunal at tho earliest possiblo
moment. As far as I know, all such applications that have coao to tho
Tribunal have now boon functioned on and have been returned to tho
Secretary General. There havo oaen some unavoidable delays, of course,
from timo to ti o, pertaining to certain natters because tho Tribunal,
as everyone olse, is occupiod long hours in official duties which
render it difficult to take up natters outside of Court, but I think
that all applications such as th t havo now beer, functioned on by tho
Tribunal and aro in tho hands of t ;o Secretary General. It is tho
(Jcairo of tho Tribunal to oxpodito all such natters as much as possible.
Procood, Counsel.

DR. FRITZ (Counsol for Defendant Roso): Mr. President, I have
quite a brief matter on Document Book 12, which wo Just canplutod a
fow minutes ago. Document 139 was road. That is a letter of Idunsger
to Profo3sor Haagon.

raE ‘v-SSIDSIT: ifill you adviso tho Court as to tho page of tho
document book on which that dociutcnt is found?

D". raiTZ! 113- In this letter it says that Professor Hoso

pronicod t!io Japanoso doctor to secure for him all important informa¬
tion, including yollow lover virus ox-'ori^nts, fren Strasbourg.

Nor; my client points out to ma that the Prosecution changed tho
word Host'' to "experiment". That is southing entirely different from
the German word "Proben", which, accordi:-,. to cliont is "sample"
in English.


11:27


r

4 • •

9 Jen v7-A-:Vw'-22-4-H; jncs
Crurt ttc. 1

T."* “R2SIDENT: I wri Id suggest that, wi th thu eth:r natters
that nro tc be investigated t right, thu nr. ttor rf thu ccrroct
trc.nalc.bion of tho dccutiont be also taken u ti ls ovenin- end
reported to the C urt In thu rxmlng.

The Tribunal will new rocess until 9:30 o'clock.

(The Tribunal adjourned.until 0930 hrurs, 10 January 19-i7.)


- 1423 -


10 Jon 47-K-GES-»L3-Foster -PM
Court Ho. 1.


iorrected cop y.


Official transcript of the American 2£llitary
Tribunal in t re natter of the United States
of America, against Karl Brandt, et al
defendants, sitting at Nurr.bcrg, Germany, on
10 January 1S47, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

THE MARSHAL: The Honorable Judges of Military

Tribunal 1. Military Tribunal 1 is now in session,

God save the United States of Amorica and thto

Honorablo Tritunal.

Ihoro will be order in the courtroom/

THE PRESIOslIT: Mr. Morshal, ascertain if the

defendants nro present in the oourt.

THE MARSHAL: May it plen3o Your Honor, all the

defendants are present in the oaurt,

THE PRESIDENT: The Sccretnry-Oonoml will note for

the record the presence of all the dofcnda.nt6 in tho court.

DR. HOEFMrtlC: (attorney for the dofcrtdnnt Pokomy):

Mr, President, in reference to my application yontorday

concerning tho witness Morton, I have tho following

explanation to cako. Lt. Garrett has told no that the

infornatlon that tho witness Merton was a prooocutlon

wltnoss was a misunderstanding. Independently of this,

tho prosecution lias told no that they :’o not intend to

oxaraino ay witnesses before they appear before the oourt.

Therefore, I consider ay application settled.

THE PRESIDE'.' T; The record will so show.

MR. HARDY: May lt please the T r l'cunal, two of the

problems that we will clear up tho first thing tills morning,

.c, the tran^tlcn of two documents we wish to delay for
. v •

Qn or two while we ”ro getting them pro¬

cessed,’ nnJ in the meantime prosecution would like to call
a witness as to the sulfanilimide experiments at Rnvens-
fcruck. This witness has Just been able to arriv. :: Hurnbiv
nr..', we have previously introduced two affidavits from tho


1429


10 J PJ1-M-GES- I-l-Fo s to r-PH
Court No. 1.


witness, Sofia .ir.^zka, hcr.ncao Is. .it this tlao wo would
like to call the witness Sofia «a_.zkr. for oxaainatlon.


1429 (a)


10 Jaa-.V015-1-2-?o?t cr
Court So. 1.


Kay I explain, '/our Honor, fine will ,lvo nor nano » r-. .oko tr.o oath in
r liun and will testify in G-rann. The ^entlena r.-rc i3 r. Polish interpreter
THS rHSSIDZtfTl Ta- witness Sofia lactfcn ir present ir. court. Th. wit nee-
will raise her ri^t a-nd. You will tmr.slrto the 'ath to «w witness no 1
rend it.


I, Sofia fcuozkn, do 8*lcrxly swear that the evidence I Eh-.11 dvo shall
cc the trut.., tnc wr. <lo trut:. ar.d nothing but the troth, »o help no God.

(Ihc vitnesi r.pentcd tnc outn.)

::-X PflESlDS. ?i Th- vitno»s -ny be seated.

I will now u.L-i..liter tneoatn to t»-c interpreter. False your rl.^Jt
•u.nd nnl rop. at uiter _o:

I a*< solemnly nwanr th t I will p, ri r:i .<■ i.utioa as interpreter to the
rribunul to t:io V. o*. C7 ntllity .nd ■•kill, u. nolp -e God.

(Th- int-nra>T repeated oath.)

DIoSCT 2X...I'...?*!I,\


BY l.R. K-PD'/J


Witness, for t — convenience of tc^urt w-uld you testify bef ore
t..in 7ribun;d ir. ti.c G. r:--n lur..;r.. o?

A. I prop'rod : t rtify in Ger e«:..
i,. Witoust. your rui..o in Sofia HL<-zk{i?

... ly nr-.o li Sofia :v,,zka.

*v You spoil your 1 .nt nu~o >K.-G-3-1K.T


You v r borr. in . ove b-r 30, 191.5, U u t correct!

Y<-8.

.. I»u v. r born in Cmc<v, the du.-triun p rt of Polandl
•w. Y-u, I v .r. b <rr. ir. Cracow,
v Wit:.e&», v.. t is ; our ;.ro3^nt alir-esT
... Cracow, Stluk

v IC&w. witnc&B, frou 1916 to i$e- y-u studied nt the public -i f >o

ic.:.;l nd junior college, th t is, the Gyur* iin. in On cow, ir th t c-rrrct?

1430


10 Jan-Ir-OiS-l-J-roGtcr,
Court ITo. 1.


— Yob.

q. You ,Trc 4 ufttod la 1924 ftot. the Gyr-nasiun?

-. Yes.

v In 192 h lid you or.tor tho aodicnl school of t.:o University -.f

Cracow?

, ... Y-s.

I. You completed your studios nt that university i r . 1930, Is thnt
correct?

... Yes.

<• Bi-n lih you receive your acdical dogroc fro., tr-tt university?

... Or. tno 30 th of jui*., 1930 .

ind you arc now /• jodlcul d'*ctjr, is that correct!

... YeO.

Ifow, fri 1930 to 1932 wrrv you rototia ■ • interne ut tho nodical
clinic in Cr.icjw!

... Yob.

..t who m..o tlcu Vvr. you . t t.ic X-Sny Im tituto 0: Cracow, public
ncalth, public lBBumnco /.os;.it;.IT

Yo».

-fter you c-..plwtod ytur lntorncshlp i:. 1932 did y u do post¬
graduate w,rk at cao X-ftiy Ioctituto if University of YlocnaT

... Yea.

You 1 tor attended t..o University of Utrocht?

... Yus.

?ro- 1932 t 1939 Aid you h Id . position up assistant at tho X-Fay
iXj..rtncnt of tno Public InEumnco System in Cracow? .

... 1934 » 1535-

How, titer thtot did you 6crvo nr c.ilcf paysicion in chi r,->) «.-f the
X-R: doturt -ent of the C' tu.lic Brothers Eoapital in Cracow?

Yor.

V/...t j.vfixd of tL.c did tnt>t cover!


1451


10 Jan—M-GSS-1-4—Fo o terv-pH
Court No. 1.


As January 1936 until I was arrested.

£s At the saae tine fros 1939 to 1941 did you also
do private consulting practice ns n n X-Ray specialist in
addition to your hospital work?

As y 08>


1432


1C Jcttt-K-JP- 2- 1-Gal lafen or-PM
Court No. 1.

5x T .«*ltness, when and where were you arrested?

As Cracow, In April 1941.

5s Will you toll ae what v->6 the reason for your
arrest. What was the reason for your arrest, witness?

A: I wn6 with ay aothor and ay\*rother when I \; r s
arrested as .n suspect for ^longing to a secret
organization.

5: You were arrested, I presune, by the Gestapo,

Is that rlght7

A: Yos.

5s After your arrwSt where wore you sent for
lnprloonnant?

A: I was oont to the Protect rate Police In Cracow.

Q: Then woro you actually sent to the Ravonsbruck
Conoontration <r.:::;?

A: I wao taken to the Ravonsbruck Concentration coup
on 13 3optember 1941.

4s Did you remain at the Ravonsbruck Concentration
C.-np until when, until May 2nd, 1945?

As On 26Apr11 1045 I left the co..ip, and I was
taken to Swodon whore I arrived on 2 May 1945.

Qs Now since you have been liberated fron the
concentration camp what hnv. been your duties to d-cc?

As I had six weeks quarantine in Sweden. «ftor
wr.t I came to the hospital at Goetebcrg, where I
worked first «s an extra assistant - X-ray assistant,
frou July until the 31 December 1345; from 1 January
13-15 or* until 1 July 1246 I worked ae a doctor In a
Swedish therapeutic hospital In Stockholm In the X-ray
section with a Professor Dlesholm. In July I went back
to C.lo a ne, and then to Cracow. 2*'ow I -a employed a.6
chief physician of the X-ray section of the Public


1433


10 Jarv-&-JF-3-l—Gal laghe r-PK
Court No’.l.

Ir.3uracoc Fund Hospital in Cracow.

C: Witness, are you a ^eaber of any aodlcal
society or organization at the present tine?

A: —os. I belong to the Polish X-Ray Physicians
Society, and I an also a nenber of the International
Federation of University Wonen.

Q: Now, witness, you say you entered the concentration
cr.rep at Rnvensbruck in Septenber 1941?

A: Yes.

Q: ’..’hat duty or duties were assigned to you no a
prisonor In the coop?

A: Aftor four vook6 quarantine, I was assigned to
tde hardest statistical work. I worked in the State Building
after chat I was sent to the factories, first, to straw
plating chop and aftorwrde to a sr.nual c? .p where I had
to work day and night in a shop in town, .^ftor a perio'.

^ two v/Owks I was taken into a hospital as a charwoaan.

In July 1942 I was sent back to the hospital and I was
\orklnj In the X-r^y section. I stayed in the hospital
one yoar, froa 24 July 1942 until 21 July 1943, and on
t at day I was cent to Dachau Station ~s a suspect, and on
cr.at day h-vln_ been sent to the burner. I remained In
tnc bunker for eight weeks in •* dark coll, and I wr.a
ubj^ctod to the oxtrc.oo oxaalnations vhllo in custody.

•iftor ol^ht woo-13 I was released from the bur.kor, and
- was put in a penal column Wiere I worfcod as a wood chopper
:or elght months. In Hay 1944 I was sent away to
l<cu~3randonburg, where I was to be c.ployed ns a factory
irkcr. nfter one month of work in the factory I was
•t back to the hospital lr. Non -3randenbur._, because the
- tor li*d become sick there. Or. 2 Sopt__ber 1'4-s I wrs
• -estod •'.ad puj in a bunker in Kcu-3rn.ndcnburs because


1434


10 Jan-tt-JP-2-&- Gallaghe r-PM
Court No. 1

the supervisor, Frieda, ha-', found a letter In my possession,
and I took the letter away from her, and destroyed It. I
remained in this hunker for nineteen day6, and I *,rs Co
ho hanged. «fter the nineteen days I was sent hack tc
Ravcnsbruck, and because It was only a harmless letter
which tho German nurse Anna had admitted, I was only
punished for ay Impudence with four days Bunker In
Rrvensbruck.

Q: Witness, you sr.y you wore working in the capacity
r.e an X-ray technician for the hospital in the sick quarter
of the concent ration on eg? at Ravcnsbruck for a period of
one year, thrt is, from July 1 42 until July 1943, Is
Chat correct?

A: Yes, sine- July 1942 to July 1943.

Q: Now based on your extended time In tho concentration
camp at Rrvensbruck and for the t lr.vc yctf spent In the sick
quart or In affiliation with other patients In there, do you
have any kftowlodgo of the medical aapotiaontrl program
which In -'s being conducted there?

A: I was g lvcn the opportunity to observe tho

experiments there because I worked in the hospital at

d:j same time, an also In the X-r~y section I had to

trkc the X-ray pictures cf those wh. had thoir bones
•

0 :;.rated on, and I co.;l_ see them ayself.

Ci: Now, witness, we will taka these things up slowly
'nd by dc 0 rees. First of all, do you kn w vhr.t was the
so-cr.Uod oulfonlltsald- or infection experiment?

A: The experiment began or, 1st of «ugust 1942 when
operation took pl"ce. The irst operations wore
infectious operations, on which the sulfanilamide >ro-
'* rr ions wor- used.


1^35


10 Jon-M-JP-3-5-G*2llaghor-Py.
Court No. 1.


(Jj Now you any tills sulfanilamide or infection
experiment began about 1 august 1942, end they wove
crrrlod on then antil whnt date? tfhon did they finish
writing on that particular type of experiment?

A: All the oxperlaents were ended In March 19-13, end
-den an . thor group wns aided on 16 .-uuust 1943, which
\r.B carried ut In the bunkers.

3: Now di *. thpy have a fc roup of experiments also
roferred to as Bone Tr^nsplont •'tion experiments?

A: There were aioo bone operations, in ay opinion
three typos of bone operations. In the infection bono
transplantation, for the removal of the bone, and was
callod "bone splinters".

C: Now when did these bone transplantation experiments
be^in with the removal of the bone?

A: tfhon tile Infection experiments wore In pi'OgroBs,

• •

r few weeks Inter the bone experiments were begun.

C: In other werds, with suci* oxperla.nts, the tine
°* the Infection wxperia.nts and the b ne experiments
ra.a alon D-rallel, or a laultancously, is that correct?

A: Yus, and at the sr.ao tlaj ether rjoas wore prepared
Tor the so-called aseptic operations.

Q: Now, witness, did you or or hc~r af Nuaole a.:’,
f'-i’vo oxperlaente?

As In the tone experiments wore incorporated ohoso
operations when they continued with the muscle experiments
ad with the experlaents on tile nerve.

Q: Now, In other words, witness for theaost part

experlaents wer^ ir. progress during your time on

in the hospital at Rovonsbruck?

A: Yea, I was there the wtolo tiao.

Z: Do you have any ;-.n,wlod_ e ,r Other experiments


1436


10 Jon-H-JP-2-4-Gallaghcr-PM
Court Nc* 1.


consisting of removal of whole extremities of the boSj*?

«: Yea, such experiments were also carried out at
;iu some tine oni somewhat later than the first experiments
that is, I think they* wore about the beginning of 1943.

Q: Now, witness, durln c the course of these Aseptic
experiments, did you observe the type of medical care
which wao being administered on the victims?

*: They were taking c"re of the patients during
the first few days, afterwards ithoy remained without
my proper nodical care whatever for their recovery, or
without my scientific control.

Q: Thon would you sry these girls who were subjected
to tlueo experiments after the a rat lay ,r two were v^ry
badly no. lecte '. medic oily?

h: Yes.

Now nftor they were operate . on, or rS ter the
rivet Infection exp.rimer.t, how 1 ->n was it b^for* choy
wore administered sulfrnllnmldo?

a: Tu that extent, of course, I know it was only
done Just a few d~ys, *>nd l«tor the; receive', drugs, ouch
r.a norphino, if the/ h^d very ro-t pains.

Q: Now, witness, did you ev„r hear, or enow of your
own knowledge, or do you h-ve -r.y reason t^ b-llev. chat
toc-nus had been deliberately administrated as - test in

• course of ttuse cxperlm»_nts?

*'• I saw one case on r Vercnlc-' Krsk~, who r.ccord-

• n to a clinical picture was infected with tetanus, ov
•led under appearance of tetanus.

Hi In your position ns a doctor, will the applioa-
tlpr. of sulfanilamide prevent ttio tetanus infection from
•• lin b thw victim?


1-137


10 Jan-K-JP—2-5-Gal laghe r-PM
Court No. 1


A: Yea, an attempt was node with sulfanilamide.

Q,: Now in your position as a physician do you think
that sulfanilonldo would prevent this totanus infection
causing a very severe Injury, or causilg the death of the
victim after the sulfanilamide had been applied?

A: These were only experimenta. I do not know
from a medicinal viewpoint tir t totanus can be cured
vlth sulfanilamide.


1437 (a)


10 Jan Ji7-M-SS- 3-1- Gaylord
Court No. 1


Q» Now, witness* in the course or these experiments, do you Inc xt
the number of Polish frirls subjected to such cxperir.cnss?

A. There vr^re altogether 7h Polish 3 iris who w*ro operated upon.

Also* there vras one Gcraan Jehovah's -r.esc and one Ukrainian rl; al-

togothoi 76.

3, Now* witness, do you c.ow rheth-r cr not any of those 75 person:,
subjected to those experiments, di; as a result thereof?

A. Yes, five died becaus. of tltcso crporlBants.

0 . Do you Inc:: the nauas of tho five .Iris that die! as a result of
thtao c:porljncnts?

A. Yes.

Q. '..hat arc their nascs first?

A. Tho first wis rronlka Kras!:a. SI* dl • fron to tonus infection
u!Jch was civen her.

Q. ‘low wltnoc.:, you have stated that ‘"cronifca Kr.rkn Gi ul as a result,
of fihoe inonta. How woo

MSc of Y/oroniKa Kranks, as you know it, ivin; in detail t.. operation:;

;or ornod upon her, th troa ... rocoivud* and in veer opinion*
the causo cf her death.

a. After a few days of tor «... epor v.

m ao,neared which lasted only a brief tL;o and which led to death. Tho
aiscaoc lasted only a fen/ hours. She ii- und r typical craps caused by
tetanus.

Q. Now, witness, do you thi that t 1 .. .:dbi«

-is particular victla, ..'orsnika Krasica, coali lia\\ b-n sav !?

A'. Frci -.t 0 / view, coo c ul . : i i: that if one gives

tetanus, enc should -.ivc Peru* a .ainst tetanus; but here, sulfonamide ./as
TiVw,: on an experimental basis ar.d nodicin 0 has had no cxpcrv-nco as to
mid >lps air- tetanus. Il lied.

Q. Now, witness, would you 3aj . Id

i-Mably have saved the life ?f .(cronilie Arasfca?


14C-6


1 C Jan U7-i:-SV.- 3-2- Gaylord
Court ifo. 1

A, He, amputation,no; in tetanus?

Q. Not:, witness, do you foci that this infection in tl: car. of
Veronika Kroska, that death vr.s just a method by which they were ... tab-
1.shine some of the scientific points i:: tin course of ur*>or orient?

A. Y cs ,

0. In other words, do you fool that Veronika Xroak - docn-d to die
Iron tin nooont she underwent the o -•>• rlncrt?

A* Yes.

t). Mow, witness, you hav U;a liraaka, do

you know the nor.es of any of the it .r it r— the ranainin.: four that
iltd as a result of thceo -x»>. .d^ento?

A. Yes, i know tho nanus.

Would you ivpe t Mio names, : lease?

%

A. Zofia Kiccol an:! Ante la Iefan ttricz, nlfroda Prus, • r
urownka.

•

< ; -'oronika Kraska. Jlow .ipuld yr U kindly outlino, Ik anno nannor,
your opinio* as to th. Lath .•! .x.zLJ.ra urtwroka?

... in ilini , : r-

wto hod boon infect : nith ;an run . a j u , 23 >oar

1 , heal hy in. D • 308 . ?•-. :•

i.; ucanc ilaokor and core swell ., . k care f r -al. for tlx

fir:t fow days. «M*ter th.t, b alien to Roca L nhur she laa

lay;' in unbelievable pains mi 1 ... ip.'iSi*.

• ' 1 witn s* > do y

; CGi« h oho was loft IU o for Jay- without any vl lical aid all?

A. Yes.

pcrooruilly?.

A« Yes.

. hen Ion: iid you observe her w*iiit . c nui> ion of


1459


10 Jan H7-H-5T7-3-3- “ayloro
Court No. 1


inercdihlo pajri?

A. Site' r/as there four or five days before chu died.

Q. Do you think, in your opinion, tlxro nos anythin: -•>. e could
huvo been done inoodiataly to have savo> : tho life of K rowslta?

A. Yes, yes. Her leg - have be . as utated la ly in

order to save her life.

Q. Now do you say that 3he t;u c< . y loft in this r ou 1. r
own natural reoourcuo, that, is, by r rsalf, ju-t to cor for hoi-self?
ir thot corract?

A. Y c s.

Q. Novr, witness, do you no* oi wy
of tiiio ycunc laly while aho was In t .is Root No. h that oi^it be of
interest to the Tribunal?

A* 1 and others obr.c. we tfavo her wha

, . vo her vater, wu s .*oke to r !.

1 tulkel U' a pri: • , 1 skod .-c, "..bat <‘c you

• 1: ., Cv.ri oho be saved?" And "Ye3, if they auputato." And she

1 ” , «t don't think so

i ' , i . Olr* y." This

s'iovr.; clearly, that it could <j c U-llo . V.i.-.t they did m t want to ar.p-
-t*.te in tit CISC ci huruwska to a :• i’ .

1 . How, witness, you liavo .. a ... . anctlvr cno of t.. ..iris tliat
iod way a r;i rl na-od urvioln Lofauceics?

A. Yos.

. ycu kindly toll tl r , id* , hat

0 : '*iticiui were existing duxinc the COUTSO of ’he cxporlnontutt v. :n this
•/ un- lady and what wns tho can..- of :-r tenth?

In ty opinion, Ariel.-, Lcfanrwicc was icfccl naa nalignun,

-- ’ kept swollins non and noro. f is c: sho died of

- ling, oho was not given th correct m . .. v . ds should


10 Jen Ii7- !>.' -3-1;- Gaylord
Court Ho. 1

h ”- bccn ticJ ff cr an aeputati. Should have ’..cui cirriod out to save
hoi*.

Hon, dect r, you have stated that in this c n’ition . vu felt
Ur.t tho bicod vorscls 'xjceuo cor;'. '.. * and th^rc wore hau.-rrha f gri.c
sc rt.

A. Yoa, there v/_ro hc:;orrha>3 ir _rc *ct! vessels,

Q, llorr .^s there anythin; done r.t all for this ysunj 1 >?

A, If anythin" was Cone, it urn nly in the first tv;. Cays or
three ays when we ha: no accessj aftersar s , she xtvs cc.rvlwUly neg¬
lected so that vyc could -ot in and lc<k at it. nC that is how I vac
s‘:lc to observe it.

0. " 't; .touI I you say that the Conti. a ;ainful and aiocra lc

one?

A. Yoa.

0. How, witness, th «’ urth i.-i led aa a rosult f these
xjjcrir.onts, hor nrno is Ai>fia Hiccl. 1 y u toll us a' ut the
conditions oxistin.: during tho „;r. crii:ontatdr.n upon this ycunj lady
uiacli finally resulted in hor loath?

... Sofia Kiocol died .In tin
lar eases.

N( f s hs .1*1, l.; Loo 1, treated with sulfenilanidi
/rope, rations?

A, Tho first two or thruo lays when so had no acce. s to her, oho
• ; '*3 ^ivon drufco. Later, n. thine '~s d-r.o f r her either.

Q, nJ you say Ur.-, sho was ivon u._ aulfonilnoido preparations
f ;• a peri'-.' If t’.TO or threo lays and the:; cu-. l * _ly f'>rjo ton tlurc-
oft-r?

A, Yes.

o, ..».ll then froi jh conditions ce that, would you think, :.s a
loctor, that the reason was that tl-cro tre an effort boin£ uidc to test

-.i.-.t would haven if the patients were jiver. cnly a lintt I a urt cf

14-41


XO Jan 47-.iS-3-5-C-3ylord - PM
Court No. 1

sulfanilamide?

A: Yea.

$: Now, witness, would you kindly toll us what

hr.pt'Onod to .nlfrcda Prus, the other girl that died as

0 result of these experiments?

A: Alfred^ Prus was also affected with oedema

•

malignum. Aflreda proved to be stronger than Klecol
and Lofnr.owlcz, and for that reason she lived a fow days
longer. For that reason, she was also taken to Room 4
to die there holpleesly. The beautiful, young, 21 year
old girl, n university student, sacrificed her life lr.
ter*rlble pain and died of hooorrngo.


10 Jan. 47-K-4-1-PKP- Gross
Court No. 1


Now you soy th-t this girl was only twenty-one years of ir e . '

Is that correct 7
A. Yes.

Q. Did you know her very well, witness?

A. I knew her well on)y frxo the ctup.

Q. ’..hut did you say? 1 as she a beautiful girl, witness?

A. Yes, a very pretty firl - twenty-one years old - a university student.
Q. A very intelligent c irl?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, witness, did you kn-w .ass Kuaoierczuk?

A. -aria Kusaierczuk is the naac. That is the friend of Alfredo Prus.

She was also o university student. The two wore infected at the anno tiao
and the two wero in two different roa:s. Uaria Kuaoierczuk is tho only ono
that survivud tho actual i.-.ioction and is livin . She was sick in the
hospital for a very l<m t tiro, nA she was released when she wns not yet
honied. Only transitions carried out each iter helped the wound to heal.
The trnncplation was not carried out by the doctors -he conducted tho

•xparlaonts, only by tho doctors who worked in tho hoepitnl auch lator. That
was Dr. Troitio.


Q. New, witnoas, you t Kies Kuaoiorczuk » only survivor

°f tho UX; • ; ante or oodeori nr.liyr.a-.. Is th-t correct?

A. Yos.

Mi. Hardy* If it please the Court, Marla Kucaiurczuk w s ono of
tho witnesses that Oopoared before this Tribunr.l early in the case.

Q. Now, doctor, ther were Iso roups of iris infected with
streptococcus end staphylococcus?

... Yas. There was la r ,;o groups of iris who were infected with
streptococcus and staphylococcus.

Q. ’.ere these girls treated better, the cases you MttUnod?

Wo they riivron or.y sur;iccl aid?


A. These giris survived and ted pains and their lo s .r.ve out pus

:.J they did not die. For th t reason they were riven bandages free tin

o tine when tho doctors felt like it. Scectinos they wait* three days

Is-i?


10 Jar.. V7-U-4-2-PKP- Cross
Court No. 1

sometimes four days. There was a terrible odor in the rocn of pus. The
girls waited to get help in the night. There was no personnel. They had
to help each other.

Q. New, witness, who were the doctors who performed theso experiments
on these girls that you have told us about this morning?

A. Vhen the preparations were oc.de for the operations we were told
it would be the Professor who would come and look. That was the last
days of July and A Professor did coco th«"t 1 was able to seo cr.d lator we

learned it was Professor Cebhsrdt, head of Hohcrdychon Sanatoria.

Q. Now, did anyone assist Professor Gcbhcrdt in the course of those
experiments?

A. Yes. Professor Gcbhnrdt ccae with his assistant. Most of
the operations were carried out by Dr. Fiachur. Thoro was also a second
assistant of Professor C^ibhardt.

G. 'r.ho was th. t, do you know?

A. I have forgotton the name, the nano of the Socor.d assistant.

Q. '..as there anyone else who assisted in thoco experiments, usoistod
Dr. Fischor in the perfomance of tho experiment? in the enmp?

*. In tho camp our doctors who worked there holpe.' in the thing,
and ospecially Dr. Horta Oborheusor and Dr. Rosenthcl. nt that tine Dr.
Schydlauski was tho chief physicicn.

Q. Now, witness, you have stated that in some cases girls subjected
to theso experiments received postopor: tivu care and tro'tmont. Was this
postoperative core nd trertoent done by the ca.p doctors or was it done
by Gebhardt, Fischor, and Obe-rhouser?

A. Tho Hohenlychon doctors only cane for tho oper tions nd everything
afterwards they lult to our camp doctors.

Q. In othor words, the doctors ttet porformod the experiment merely
performed tho operation and then cccpletely for.ot tho patient, is that
correct, witnuss?

A. They cane to nr.ko a big official visit. Then the patients wore

put in clean rooms with fresh dressings but that happened very seldom.

144 ,


10 Jc.n 47-X-4— 5-PKP—Gro s s-PH

Court No. 1


Now, In connoction with tho bone experlncnts,.
witnoss, would you toll us In your own worla what you
know of tho bo no experiments?

A: . In ay evidence - In ay X-ray evidence - I had
thirteen beno operations. That is, thirteen casos of
persons whoso bones had been operated on. In ay opinion
there were throe kinds of Bone pcratlona. They voro
fraoturce, bone trrnsplantatlon wl th removal of tones,
and so-called bone splints. The tlrls were operated
on sovorrl tloee. The operations vuro to bo asoptlo
but because of ne D lljenco and lack of aseptics tx.-o of
thou developed osteoaynlltls.

Q: In connoction with these bone cases did you
over personally have conversation with Dr. Obcrheusor?

As Yes.

Q: Will you tell to the D lot cf that conversation,
doctor?

A: It w* s the case of Kryetynn Da bekn. She was sont
to ao for an X-ray picture. Shortly after the operation -
a fow days after tho operation — she had both her legs
In plaster. I took X-ray ploturos fnd from that on both
logs snail pieces, about 4 to 5 cc. long, had been t“ken
from tta fibula - had boon cut out of the fibula. I road
on the cast that on one log porlootcum hr.d remained and
on the other log periosteum had b^on roaovod together
with bone. Because I was of the opinion that attwiapt
was made to check regeneration I asked Dr. Obcrhousor,

■How do you want to get regeneration of beno If tho bones
arc removed with periosteum?* I was c lvon the anewor,
■That is Just what we went to check."

Q: Now, witnoss, was there anyone “Iso who underwent
the removal of their fibula In the sane way that Krystyna

144b


10 Jttft-M-4-4-PKP-0ro6S-PK

Court No. 1


Fabaka did? Any otter girls?

A: Yes. 1 know of another case. That was
Zofin Bnskjn. She wns operated on in the same
or epprowlmatcly, the sane way.

Qs Sow, do you think with your knowledge of
medicine, being an X-ray specialist, consequently
hr.vin . good knowlod, e of bone work, do you think that
such on experiment wns n^cess-'ryl

Ai No.

Q: Then, witnoss, is it »n experiment or is it
a oubjoct oo.-uonly known in text bo kc and not necessary
to experiment on a thing* of this nature?

A: Yes. Ev^ry student knows that. You learn
that in tho beginning of your studies.

Q; Now, witness, you have stated that thoro
wore throe typos of bone operations - bone transplant¬
ations, bone fractures, and bone Incisions. Now
in thosu cases of b»ne fractures would you kindly
toll the court of the conditions in connection with
those experiments?

a: I recall two cases exactly. Janlnn knrezewskr.
and Loonnrda Blon. In tho case of bath of the so girls
on the operation table several fractures wore inflicted
on the tibia in tte operation and afterwards clomps were
put on Marczcwakn. In tho case of Lconrrda 31en nono.
Both 0 lrls were given plaster casts and were in tte
hospital. Plaster casts did re, t remain ldng - not
gIx weeks - only two or three weeks and were removed
-nd ttese bone8 healed without dressing. Hnrcsowska was
op or a tte on ncc more and the clamps were removed.

Those ware typical fracture operations.

Q: as tho result of those operations did they


10 Jan 4?—K-4—i-PKP-Oroe 8-PK

Court No. 1

lnpodc locoaotion of thj two girls oporatod on?

A: At tho tla3 wher. thoy wore In the coop, yos.
hr.vo not aeon thorn now.


1446 (a)


10 Jnn-lt-GES- &-l~Perrlrv-FK
Court No. 1.


5: Now, witness, of the third typo of bono experiments
that you have stated, the so-callod bono incisions, would
you kindly tell us what you know of that type of experiments?

A: A few were operated on for bono Incisions* but I
remember one case exactly. That was Barbara Pletrz$k, tho
youngest of theso who wore operated on, 16 years old. She
was operated on six tines. At the first operation*
incisions were made twice In each Tibia. Uien who was
taken to an operation again and pieces of tho tibia were
cut out where the incisions had been made beforehand. Once
I was given an cr.dcrwhon the operation took place that I
was to stay in the X-ray room, and I w.e brought a ploco
of tibia that had boon cut out and an incision had boon
mado in this plooo before; and I had to tako an X-ray
picturo of this piece of bono.

Q: Now, witness, ns a result of these throw typos
of bono operations, did anny of these girls develop a
condition of ostconyelltloV

A: In the time when I saw the experiments «nd was
able t check on then two had secondary infection from
lack of asepsis and treatment. They hnd osteomyelitis.

That was harla Orabowskr aryi Hcrla CcbaJ.

Q; Now, witness, we h-vc mentioned a third experiment,
the muscle and nerve regenor°tion or operations. Vould
you 2:mdly tell the Tribunal, Doctor, what you know -bout
those experiments?

A: The group of muscle experiments were rather largo.
The girls wore operated on several times, oi>i th» youngest,
olcdxicvjowskn was operated on most often. At the first
operation muscles wor- cut out and at tho second and
third thor places cf musdlos — always at the sne place,
s that the legs got 1 thinner and weaker all the time.


1447


10 Jan—K-GSS-o-3-Perrln-FM
Court No. 1.


2i Now, witness, do you know what the purpose of
these experiments on muscles and nerves was; from your
observation do you know what they were seeking for?

A: No. Why these operations were carried out, I
cannot understand. Whether the cut-out pieces of nuscle
wore taken to HShenlycben, I do not know.

0,1 Veil, then. It might be reasonable to say that
these experiments wore merely carried out as a hlstorllogl-
cal report of the various stages of tissue reaction, la
that oon*ect?

A: I imagine so. I know that In bone experiments
that was the point at Issue, the regeneration question.

Q: Now, witness, you have referred to other operations,
special operations, of the removal or whole extremities
ancl so forth. Would you kindly tell the Court what you
know about these other spoclal operations during your
time at Ravonsbruok at the hospital?

A: Abnormal patients, that Is feeblo-mlndcd or
Insane, about ten of them wore seledted. Ihey wore
taken to the hospital and prepared for operation. I
personally know of two cases which wore operated on. Tho
one case that was a le tt amputation. I know that tho nurses
* I'om tho hospital brought the woman to the operation room
and after some time the nurses took her to tho special room
the "Stuebohcn", whore the dead were kept. That was fron
theoperation room, she was taken directly to this little room
where the dead wore kept. The door was locked, and then
together with another comrade who worked In the tospltal,
Kusmierczuk, I went Into this room and looked, and I saw
a corpse covered with a cloth and where there should have
-'eon two legs, I saw only one leg through the cloth, .ifter-
ward6 the nurses came and themslevcs personally, without


10 Jan-UuOlS-5-^P^-Perrln
Court No* 1

the aid of prisoners, put the body In a coffin and
carried It out lr. order to preserve secrecy. Then, I
know of a second case. Again an abnormal woman was taken
Into the operation room. This day I know Dr. Fischer
wont Into the operation room. After some time, Dr.

Fischer, after tho operation, got Into his car — he
always come by oar with a ohaffeur — and one operation
nurse brought a twndle wrapped up In linen about as big
as on arm might be and Dr. Fischer personally took It on
his lap and drove away. Then the prisoner, Guernhelo, came
to no. “You know whot happened today Sofia? Tho whole arm
with ohouldor blade was taken off*. Those were the two
cases of special operations which I personally know about.

G: Mow, wltneso, are you of tho opinion that Doctors
Gebhardt, Fischer ocdOberheuaer,whoa you hnvo outlined as
tho ones who workod on and performed these oxperlmonts,
no u lected their duty as a physician toward the patlonts
and that their neglect was the dlreot ocuso of the death
of the five girls we have mentioned here this morning?

At Yco.

Q: Now, witness, do you know whether or not any
other girls died as a result of these experiments or died
because they had been subjected to the experiments?

A: I know that clx who had been operated on were
shot after tho operations.

Q: Kow many did you say, witness?

A; Six.

G: How, witness, do you think that this neglect of
or re on behalf of Doctors Oberheuser, Gebhardt and Flsohor

contri-


1449


10 Jan*-5-Oa~^TD-F6rrin
Court No. 1

buted to tha nutilation and cripp ling result of nany of those girls who had
been subjeotod to the experinent?

A Yos,

Q Did this negloct go so far that even in so-called aseptic operations,
infection occurred which caused lasting and nu til a ting osteomyelitis?

A Yes.

Q Now, witness, in connection with the five eirls, are you of tho
opinion, fron your knowlodge of thaso fivo girls who diod, that that that
was tho direct result of the work of the three people, Oebh&rdt, Fischor and
Oborhousor?

A Yos.

Q Now, witness, you have statod that six girls after being subjeotod to
thoso oxpurironta were shot?

A Yos.

Q Now, could you toll no who tho r or not Dr. Oborhousor in hor position
as oarap physician could havo protected the six idrls who woro shot in upito of
thjir ouboission to thoso exp^rinonto?

A Two of thorn Rosalia Outok was still sick in tho hospital after the
operation when sho was takon for execution. Dr. Oborhousor postponed it,
Anothor, Auiola Sobolowska, was callod fbr oxocution, but oho still had to
havo an X-ray picture takun — ths execution war postponed! thorofore. Dr.
Oborhousor twice was ablo to postpono th; oxocution,

Q Then do you fool that sho could havo pastponod, in hor high position
as com> physician, tba oxocution of those girls for ar. unllaltod longth of
tino?

A I think so, yes,

Q Now, witness, was thoro an ettonpt nade after tho ocnplotion of all
thoso exp-rinents to corplotely wipo out all thj girls who had boon oparatod on
in Ravonsbruck Concentration Canp?

A Yoa.

Q In other words, these girls woro all to bo executed after conpletion


of the oporation?


1460


10 Jaiv-5-2a-M-A7D-Perrin-PM
Court No* 1.


A: Yea. They all believed that they would be
exeouted.

Q: Now, witness —

A; And they were confirmed in that opinion by tho
death sentence that were executed or. their operated
comrades, that is the six that wore shot, and finally
in February of 45, again all who had been operated on
were called together, and they were told they would bo
put on a transport to Oross-Rosen, and Oross-Roson as we
knew from tho " Voelk soher Beobnchter* was already in
Alllod hands. Thorofore they knew that they were going
to bo klllod, ait thoro was already disorganlratlon in
the oarap and the girls hid. Ihoy took othor numbers and
woro able to save tholr lives.

Q: Now, wltnoss, did any of tho young Indies oub-
Jootod to theso experiments voluntoor for tho experiments?

A; No.

Q: Were any of tho young kilos over pardoned or
allowed to return to their homos from the concentration
oarap after subjection to theso experlnents?

A: Yes, there was one enso, Okonlowska, she was
onllod to tho front office, and she was told, "You have
boen pardoned. You will be set free and sent horao", and
It was done.

Q: Now, witness, I realize n considerable longth of
time has passed, but do you think that you could possibly
identify Doctors Gebhardt, Oborheuser, and Fischer in this
dock to your right?

A: Ye8, I oan try.

Q: Would you kindly arise from your choir and cone
down onto the floor and go over to the dock and pick out
“hose three people? Point to them and narae then as you


1451


10 Jon-5-2a-&-ATD-Porrin~PM

Court No. 1.

ohoose whichever one they say bo.

A: Yea. (Witness compiles)

Q: Wltnoss, you have sold that the aw furthcrest
over la Dr. Flschor, «a that rlgfrt? Will you stand up,
translator? You have anld that the person sitting next
to Dr. Flachor la Dr. Oberhcusor, la tint rl^at?

A: Yes.

HR. HARDY: I respectfully request that the record
show that tho wltnceir has properly Identified the
defendants Flsohorrrid Obcrheueor.


1451 Ca)


10 Joiv-5-3a-M-*TD-?errln
Court No. 1


THE FRESIEENTi The record will so show.

MR. HARTTi I have no furttor questions. Tour Honor.

BT MR. HARD!I

Q Doctor, would you attaapt again to identify Dr. Gebhardt? Did you
identify the first, aeoond, or third nan as Dr. Gebhardt?

A It nay be that I an not quite certain. Professor Gebhardt looked
different at that tine. I had an opportunity twice to see Professor Oobhardt.
Ke had much zero hair at that tino, a rounder faoe, *»o was younger, and ho
did not hold his Ups ooaprosaed so nuch.

Q Witness, was Dr. Gebhardt an oxtreeely heavy nan when you saw bin

at Ravonebruck?


1462


10 Jan. 47-U-6-1-PKP- Kupperstoin
Court No. 1

H. Ho looked hotter — especially his tr.ee.

MR. HARDY: I b'vo no further questions, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho record will also show th't the witness did not
correctly identify tho defendant Gobherdt.

Is thoro any cross-examination of this witness by any of tho counsel
for defendants?

CROSS £X«i!Ilu*TION

BY DR. SEIDL (Councol for tho dofondr.nts Gabbardt, Oberheuser end Fischer):

Q. Witness, you spoke of "an assistant of th- dofoadent Gcbhnrdt"
whoso nano you do not remember?

A. Yob.

Q. Is it possiblu that it was Dr. Stuepfe^or?

A. That is possible; I did know the naao but I havo forfcotton it,
but if you will mention the name "Stuapfog£er", I n;r«o, I know that nnme.

Q. It was c very tall iran, with many awards.

A. Yus; it was r. ^ood looking, tall man — taller than Dr. Fischer.

Q. Other witnossuo have testified that in addition to the phyeici:ns
which you mentioned, there were the f dicing physicians, who conducted
opontions. Do you know the nano Tronaor?

A. Ho.

Q. Do you know tho nano of Itliacok?

A. Ye 3 ; Dr. Kliiunck. Yus.

Q. Krve you ever hoard tho nr mo of Dr. Hartrv.nn?

A. No.

Q. Did you over ho r tho rvu* ol Dr. FiUmnn?

A. No.

Q. You spoko about operations which were carried out in the sunoer
of 19A3, in the bunker?

A. Yos; I know th't such operations wjre c-rriwd out.

Q. Do you know who conducted these coentions?

A. Among tho doctors who carrier out tho oporrtions I did not see
Dr. Fischer. I w '3 under err -t in the bunker *t that ti..o nd I happened
to bo on the corridor.


-11*53-


10 Jim. A7-M-6-2-PK?- Kupperstcin
Court No. 1


Q. So, you neither saw Dr. Gbbherdt nor Dr. Oborhouser?

A. At that tine, in tho bunker, I did not 300 those throb people.

Q. I now cone to the case of '..cronika Kraatei This is tho experimental
subject of whom you stated tnut she died of t-tanus?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you over see, in tho hospital, any cultures of tetanus baccilli?

A. No.

Q. Did you over see that Woronika Kr_skr. was injected with tetanus
baccilli?

A. How could I ocu such n thing if it was dono in tho operation roan?

I saw tho symptom* of tetanus -hen she wrs in bod.

Q. Do you know when Weranik* Krcske was operated on?

A. It was in October 1942.

Q. Do you know exactly when those tetanus symptoms started after tho
operation?

A. Aftor a few days.

e

Q. Do you think that it is ccoplotely out of the question that the
totnnus, as you mentivX'.od, was r.ot the consequ-nco of on intended infection
with totonus baccilli, but the consequenco of an accidental uncleunlinoss
of the wound?


- 1151 -


10 Jan Kupperstoin

Court Mo. 1

... Ho; when she was taken to toe operation I looked at her super-

^ f «

ficially and thcro were no wounds, no changes in the skin* They lintl to
hero the skin clean.

0. Do you noon to say that './cronika Kraska , when she showed those
tetanus synptoos, was not woundod at all?

... Doferohand; Soforc the operation? Mo.

Q. llo. ..hat I ixan is whether, when the tetanus sy.ytons occurred ,
aho hud no wound at all?

On the body — on tho corpse — as far as I can rouerdor, I saw
no wounds.

Q. Thon how can you say that, n the ca o of ..oronika Kraska,
a totanus infection was carried ou', with intention?

... Dr. hosonthol said, in our labor a to zy: "It is totanus infeotion."

Q, But ho did not tell you that this totanus infection was in¬
tentionally carried out?

A. '..'cronika Kraska was takon for operation. «ftor tho operation,
'.'cronika died with tho synptoue of totanus. ..crcnikr. Krahka, boforc
tho operation , was healthy.

0, Dut according to what you aro sayii\: new, I have to assuric that
V/oronika Kraska was operated on before her doath.

... './oronika Kraska was o.x>nc those \to were oporated on.

Q. .foil then, how can you o^cludo toe feasibility that t)» totanus
Infection did not couo obout acci ontally, because cf tho unciaon state
of tho wound?

... I can only soy that she died tilth system of tetanus. I know of
coses whore aseptic operations woro carried >ut and tho pooplo sot
osteomyelitis, but bocausc I saw toot t. c people woro infected with oodena
aalienua, or Gan^reno, toy shouldn't they have been infected with totAmn
too, ospecially whon Dr. Rosenthal talked ab'ut it?

Q, So, fren the fact that staphylocci, streptococci and ^ancronc-
prcducinc baccilli were used, you conclude fren this fact that totanus


-11*55-


Jan Ii7—M—S 6-24'.- Kupporctoin

irt Ho* 1


:illi were urod also?


» •*■ 08 ,


Q. But that is a conclusion?

... Yoa, of courrc. One person died wf totrnus.

0 # But wh.-.t I want to know ic Mother you =;ui occlu '.c the feet
Mat, accidentally, a tetanus infect! n in that connection — in conn-


.ctlon with the operation


could havo cu about?


... 1 cannot ossuao that th.ro was tetanus by accident in the oper¬
ation rooti.

Q. You further stated that, in the ca. o of two voacn, certain
liiibs wero rcaovod; with on« «ann, a loj, aul with another wa-an, an arr.?

.’•« Yoa.

Q. ..re thoso all the eases of this kind which you lmou?

... There wore only these two cares of uhleh 1 personally know,

0. In that ease, I should like tc crow ycu tho Exhibit 232, which
i: on a tldavit rode ey you on the 5th of Apr* 1.


Q. There you state, anonj other thin s, t‘.x following: " .. few pro -
tcotivo custody ; rlnon<.rs were select .j. .r ^ht to tho operating tablo,
wrf op rations woro porforc-.u upon th.. entire ic;., and cui.-tkics tl;o on tire


-11*56-


10 Jfin-33~-63-5-Eu?reratoin
Court So. 1.

who -nputatod. Afterwards the vlctlna were hilled with owipan, and the
lc* or tho irr. was taken to "ohenlychen."?

A. Tea; that it true.

000 rawnt, witness. And thor. you continue that, "thcro wero
approximately ten cuch operations carried out.- I an now aaHne you. how
do you know thot there were ton enact, -nd not only two, no you said be-
foro?

A. About ten wero prepared, vid I personally taw two.

Q. Vh«t do you undorttnnd by "prepared"?

A. Taken to the hoo- ital, and rut in a rooc and thoy waited for
tho onoration.

Q. But tho other . l.:ht wero not opemtod upon?

A. I poroonally did not ac tho-.

0 . You cannot any that with certainty?

A. I can only oay that I enw two for cortaln, and I o-.w tho othoro
when thoy woro prepared for operation.

r .* So It won not corr. ct, what you atatod in your affidavit, that
ton euch ororationa wore carri.d out?

A. Ton wero prepared for or,orntion and I aav two of then.

The first oaao which you aay that you saw -ourtolf lo the or?pu-
tntion of a lee?

A. Tea.

<v -o "0« >c^ow who conductod this operation?

A. No: I did not ooo which of tho doctorr wunt in tho oporation roan.

Q. Tho aocond c-.bo wnc tho "Ofutotlon of an ar-?

A. Ac f»r as Gcr^a ^ornhoLs told no about it. I only saw tho bundlo
that wac carried out. Tr. Flechor o crated at th-t tiro.


- 1167 -


10 wan-23B-63-6-Ku^. erstoin


But you did not ace what wa* in that bundle?

A. Fo. Gorin 'Juornholn told nc that. I soy oxproaaly. I doscribcl
how It happened.

Ye “* *' ou «r a kc about cusclo pad bone oporatlone. Can you rny
who w*B conducting thooe oxporirent. -nd at what tiro they wore conducted?

A. Tho rueclo operations, like nil the other., wore botwocn insist
1942 and March 1943. Vhon tho bono oporatione bora, thoy continued with
nuaclo oporationa. Which doctor perfomod which operation, I do not know.

I woo not in tho oreratin.; roor, but I krow which doctor went into the op¬
erating roon. Thon tho patient, that is, the perarn who hnd boon propared
for operation, a hoalthy r°roon, wr.o tnkor. in, and thon oho w-.o brought
out after she h"d boon oporatod on.

7.o you otill ror.crber how often thic 7r. Sturpfer.-or, whon you
nontioned, cane to Tavcnobruck for tho pur ; :noc of conducting thoao expori-
r.onto?

/v. Loco often than Lr. Fiachor. Rather often thoy both cnr.o to^othor.
It wao noro t tho tin© whon bone opor-tiona wore prefnn.ed that tho oo~
cond acaiotant, hat ic, “r. Stunpfor. or, alao car©.

You mate that norvo oporationa were carriod on?

A. Yet.

Whrt kind of oporationa woro thoy?

A. I ronenbor only one caao; that it Brrbara rictnovoka. Hor I 05
wna oporatod on, and I think that a nerv© operation w«a perforcod bccauce
oho had (laroncoo of the) per^neus.

Q. Tho sulfonanidc exporinent, therefore, waa not conducted with


10 Jan*-6-lb-?WiTD-KuFper3teln
Court No. 1

this woaan?

A ?foj that was an aseptic operation.

Q Do you renenber who conducted these aseptic operations?

A Who operated on her. specifically? No,

Q In your first affidavit, you nenticned the naaes of the individual
oxperinental subjectsj is that correot?

A Oh, all the naaes of the operated persons, yea,

Q Among then, Dokirdla Popinska was acntioned?

A Yea.

Q Are you quite sure that an operation was carried through in her caao?

A Yesj of course. Not one —

Q I beg your pardon.

A In the caso of Popinska there wero sovoral operations,

Q Many operations. And how was it in the caso of Pilagia Bieschaliki
was she operated on?

A Yes.

Q Aro you quite sure of that?

A That she was operated on? I know for suroj yos,

Q You further otatod that towards the ond of April, you wore liberated
frco the oanp at Ravonsbruck and brought to Swoonn. At that tine, war. the
torrain or tho area whore Rave ns b ruck was under Goman docination?

A Yos. transport left tho oaiep on the 25th of April, and tho Rod
Army oane to tho canp, as qy ccctradcs told no later, on the 30th of April-

Q Tho Red Arqy only caao into tho oanp on tho 30th of April?

A Yosj that is what ny ccarudos told no.

Q And you wore brought to Swoden by the mediation of the Swodish
Red Cross?

A I went with a transport whioh the SS people took to the Danish
border, and only froa the Danish border on, were we taken over by the Danish
Rod Cross, and turned ovor to tho Swedish Red Cross,


-11*59-


10 Jaiw-6-2b-J4-ATD-Kuppe rs toin
Court No. 1

Q And the SS people brought you to the Danish frontier?

A We were taken to the Danish border by the SS#

Q Do you ranenbor that a few days before the transport froa Ravens-
brock, there were representatives of the Swiss Red Cross in Ravensbruck?

A No.

Q Another few final questions. Do you know whon Ardlia Levanowitch
was operated on?

A Yosj October or the end of Septecber. Beginning of October* Octobor
was tho period of operations.

Q Do you know how rany tw>a»n woro operated on?

A In ny opinion, six.

Q Aivl how nany died?

A Fivo

Q And tho only surviving wooan, according to your opinion, was
Kuznorchuk?

A Yos.

In your affidavit you stated that ’taria Kusniorozuk was tho oxporl-
nontal subjoot who had tho moet sovore nutilationsj that was your opinion,
yostorday?

%

A Yco.

Q You must know that Kusniorozuk was here interrogated in this court

room?

A Yos, I hoard about it.

Q Can you ronmber whon Sofia Kiocol was oporated on?

A Also in October.

Q And Alfreda Pros?

A Also in Octobor.

DR. SEIDLt I have no further quostions.

THE '.’RESIDENT* The Tribunal will recess.


- 11 * 60 -


10 Jan 47-M-7JO-8-l-Ie seer
Court So. 1.

JUDG2 BZALS: I« thore any further crosB-oxauicatlon of this
witness \>y dofenao counsel?

IS. 7L3(MIHG (Counsol for tho Defondant Kru^owsky):

Q. Vltnooa. you formerly said that during the operations was a lack
of anopsia. Will you ploaso doscribe to tho Tribunal why you conclude such
fact?

A. Boforo the operations all those natters s-oaod to hero boon dono
oorroctly. After the operations thoro was gross no.^lf-oncoj b-uidagos wore
not Dtorillssd and the lnctnconts were not storlllsed either. Tho patlonto
wore loft in terrlblo roans. Thoy wero crowded toother without any proper
nodical aid, wltho-t any care whatsoever. Booauso of tho blackouts the window
ohuttore had boon closod during the ni^ht and the air In tho roore was
torrlblo,

Wao thoro a difforcnco between the operations In tho oporatlon roon
ond In tho bunker In this conncotlon?

A. Tho operations which wore carriod out in tho bunker woro carrlod
out at a tlr.o whon condltlono In tho bunker were, of course, horrible.

Thoy had nothin#: whatsoever to do with nn operating roor.

Q. How nany poroone woro lnfoctod with the Individual kinds of culturoo
lnfoctod with etroptocecoi an*, other culturos like that?

A. As far as I know, 13 bone transplantations woro C/rrlod out, 1
nervo oporatlon and 6 anaerobes, and the further onos c n bo divided Into
nuncio oporatlons and lnfcctin« operations with stroptococci and
otaphyloooocl.

Q. You rlsundorstood no witness. Vhat 1 noant was that during tho
annorohe lnfoctlons, how cany persons woro lnfoctod with the dlfforont
kinds of cultures?

A. In ny opinion, 6 anaerobe operations.

Q. f>lx peroone?

A. Yob, six persons.

Q. With annorobes? •

A. With nnaorotes.

Q. Anl how about stroptococci and others?


1L61


10 Jon 47-K-?JC-8-2-Le•e or
Court So. 1

1. I havo Just explained to you that the further total nunbor of
74 was divided bctwoon streptococci end st«phylooocci and ausclo opcr-tlona.

Q. I sh/v*ld lllee to know fron you how the are dlvldod—how n-uiy persons
woro Infected with each?

A. Exactly how r.any nusclo nnd how nany streptoooccl wero carrlod out
I cannot state In detalli

q. You cannot stato that. Did you hear, witnoss, whothor during theto
oporntlons tho wounds were artificially lnfcctod with piocos of filaso,
pieces of wood, and oth-r partlclos?

A. During the dressing ve saw that with the flowing pus thoro
woro also other bodies.

Q. Did you soc, In tho case of Veronika Krasko, anything like that
happening?

A. Wo.

Q. Thank you, I have no farther quostlone.

JUDOS SEALS: Is thore any further crooe-cxauinatlon of thlo
witnoss on the part of any dofonse counsel! Thore boln-: none offorod, lo
thoro any rodlroct examination by tho Frosoeution?

HR. HARDY: Tho Frosocutlon has no futhrr quostlone to put to thlo
witnees. Your Honor.

JUD1S BSALS: Thore beln.- no further orarlnation of the witnoss,
tho witnees nay bo oxcuocd.

KR. McHAHST: If tho Tribunal pleaso, wo have a nunber of points to
clear up ar.d sono what ni,*ht bo terned miscellaneous docuncnts to put in
boforo proceeding to tho charro of Euthanasia in the Indictncnt. Perhaps
tho firot thinr wo nl^ht dit-unsc with is tho statement nnd.* by Dofcnoe
Counsel for Fokorny at the conclusion of yesterday's aoooion, that tho
Prosecution v-s intorested in intorrofrotin, - cortaln witness which ho
had requosted. That ratter has been str-.i ditonod out to tho satisfaction
of both the Prosecution and Dofonse, »nd resulted froc a oi sunder standing
on the port of tho gcntler.an In charge of tho Defense Inforr.otion Ccntor.

As n nr.ttir of fact, the Prosecution has no Intention of exanlnin.; this
witnoss requoeted by the defense. Ini^ht say, however, since this subjoct


--1*62-


10 Jaa 47-K-?JC-&-3-l0£ser
Court Hoi 1

tec toon brought u F , that thore will bo isolate! occasio-.s whcro both tho
Frosccutlon end the Defense have endeavored to locate a certain individual.
To sire two specific exanplo#, X would cention the n*r.es of Sriek Elppko,
tho Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftvp/fs prior to tho tiro that
Sohroodor took over in 1944, and 2u-en Haven, the doctor abut whon tho
Tribunal hae hoard eone proof in connection with typhus exporinents at
tho Hatswoilor Concentration Ceep. As I recall, either ono or both cf
thoso non have been repeated as defense wttneosos. The fact is, however,
that the Frosocution has been endeavoring for oonc nonths oast to loento
Hlppko and Hadron. Vo havo now found than, thro'-ch the efforto of our
own investigation fltaffs, and in these casoa and in such sinilar c*\oco no
ray arioo, the Prosecution intonds to interrogate theso non prior to tho
tiro that they are nade availa'le to defenao couneel.

Tho second point which we sight attenpt to olarify at this tlao io
tho ioauo of lntorprotation rnisod with rospoot to Docunent Hunbor N0-129
which was uSnitted as Prosebtion 4*hibit S-h-SI? lets yostordayi Tho *
Tribunal will rscnll that this docunent concerned yellow fever and tho
dofonoe counoel for Rooo took loouo with the interpretation of tho Ooraon
word "probe" (pi-r-o-b-e). The full eontencc in which that word appoarod
wao translated by our department as follows!

"In oenneotion with ny lottor of 36 Tobruary and your loiu-
diotance telephone call of...."

JUDOZ 33ALSJ On what po$o of tho docuncnt bock is that docueent

found?

VR. McHAHST: It io on pa^o 113 of tho Typhus Docuoont Book,

Tour Honor. The full sentence reads!

"In connection with nay letter of 26 February and your Ion*
distance telophono call 6 March, I aust advise that tho Japaneoo
Oborstaboarat hao in tho noantine contacted Oberstarit ?rcf. Ir. Rcso
of the Luftwaffe Medical Sorvico and that the lattor hao prcaisod
to c.'curo for hin fron Strasbourg all tho accounts ccnccminr tho
yellow fover viruc expcricenta which are iepertant tc bin"


1453


It Jan 47-M-FJC-8—1-Le 8 sor
Court Eo. 1

Eow the dispute centers around the interpretation of the Gercan word "probe"
which ve have translated as "experiments Hose and his dofenso couneel
ur;;e that the word should he translated "sample" and that the sense of
tho oentence would he that Rose had proeieed to secure information con -
corning the yellow fever virus sacples which arc important to tho Japanese
ncdical officer.

I think that the prosecution nust take the position that this
interpretation Is a natter of argument and that we auet consequently Insist
that tho Interpretation as presented to tho Tribunal bo adnittod no the
position of tho Prosecution. I do not »hlnk, as a natter of fact, that
It Is a point of great laprctonce but in any ovont I have buforo us a
Gornnn-Englis dictionary. It is Caosell'c Few German dictionary b;

K«irl Broul. It Is the edition of 1939 and on p-ge 461 wo find the
Orman word "rrobe" -nd the English definitions following tho word are,
first, "trial,""experiment;" "probation.■ "p-off", "toot"; "exhibition;"
"ordeal;" "assay;" "pattern," "tannlr," "s-eclnen;" and so forth. Thoreforo
It is apparent that the word can be tr-nslatcd In the manner in which wo
have translated It and thoreforo I submit it lc a question of argument and
the defonso oo"nool for Rone Is, of course, .at liberty to urge that the
contest of tho lottcr or to ar.xia on the b sis of other grounds that tho
correot interpretation Is "oanplo" but under the circuuctoncoo I do not
sue that the Trosocution c«n concede the point although wa do not regard
it as of paramount importance.


1464


10 Jar. li7-i>-S./-9-l- i-alcy
Court Ho. 1


..'o thcrof rc urgo that tho translation as submitted be accented by the
Tribunal. Of ccurso, the translation itself is net in cvidoncc, and defense
c unallccn urge now and whon he presents his ease as *c have stressed tho
acaning of tho word, or that it is icproporly translated.

D?-. riUTZ: (Dofense Counsol f«^r defendant Hose): Hr. President, I an
not vtcII oneugh conversant in the -relish language in -rder to aka an ex¬
pert statement in this caso. However, according tc the Goimon toct, in ny
opinion thoro cannot be ary doubt at all, but in this caso the word "probe"
is used to ir^ly on object . r a sortie \&ich thorcf.>ro would have to be
translated with tho werd "sample". For tho -n'lish description for tho word
"probo" in tlio sense of actions f jr available orx.rincnts, and so on, it lias
a completely different sonso or nooning. ..t a later period of tino in this
trial, preba’ ly when iloso will bo h ard as a witness in his orm caso, I shall
refor again tc this natter.

TIC, l.’JSID irr: Uefondant .Jose W11, of courco, be sworn as a witness
in ids own caso, and naku ary oxy lara itl n . ti.is letter he desses to
nabo.

lir. hclLfEY: Tho next natter which was 'crou&xt into iscuo yesterday
las tho affidavit of 01 ^a Uyor. *.s I recall this document was withdrawn
after sene confusion had arison with rcspcc . to tho German translation of
tho dcounont, tho original of which is in french. »c have had the Gorman
re-translated, and think it is now correct, -c have had tho English, which
is in your Honors' dccunont beck on Page 103,— mo have had tho English rc-
chockcd, and it is substantially correct as contained in the document
book, and tho ninor ccrrcctins which need to bo made I will asl: l^avo of
tho C curt to read it and indicate tho s._all corrections, which can bo en¬
tered by Your Hc-nor on your copy in xh bock.

This is document Ho. 8G3, and is fferod as Prosecution Rrhibit He.

320. *t is effored provisionally, inasruch as we havo yet to submit the
certificate by General Taylor concern!.'.;; the right of Tc.vargor an. ' thers

to administer oaths. It is also offered vrith the un erstandirv, that the

1465


10 Jan h 9-2- laloy

Ccurt No # 1


prosecution -.till uakc an honest cnicavrr t. brine: the- . itnuss flyer t Hum-
* a '" to testify. Jo have already oaken 3tcps in that direction, and I hepo
\.t will bo possible to jet her here before the prosecution concludes its ease,
:f that proves to be iopossiblc I would like to have it understood that the
prosecution reserves the ri.ht to sufcnit additional questions to tho it-
ncss -oar '/hen sho arrives.

TKi HiiGIDr.lfT: That right 'fill bo reserved to the prosecution.

•R« liclu.NLYs Tho affidavit reads as follows:

"I, the u .doraicned, £Yk3 Ol^a, 'oinj duly sworn, depose and state:

"1, I was bern cn January 17, 190? in tracs!>ourg-CchUtiche?a (Bas¬
kin* t-Yonco) and I an a French citizen. 1 *.vnt to the "Lucie ^rjor"

College in s tranb©urc. «ft.r I fulfilled vari-.uo functions, I was secret¬
ary to Prof, Pautrior until June 1910.

"2. x ontcred the service of *.of. ..ujone Reason as s.crotaxy ;f tho
tyglcno Inotituto of the Strasbourg faculty :ji th> r.rnth cf Kovotibwr
151:1.

"3. 1 iiad to do all th con-os..cnuonco cad hero is a eaall corr¬

ection, an interlineation- "1 had to do all tl>o oorrcs-,?cndoncc of tho In-
ctituto, ovon the coorot oorrosptndonoo

"li. Vlion I star tod to if rk for Prof. Hasten, I saw a letter , which
hod boon written before I cono, rolatinj .c osporinents on yell or; fever
uailo by Ilaacon in an insane osyluu n. or Berlin. I think I can r cuohbor that
it iros in Borlin-Rcichcnau. I add that tc.-sc aporiconts had boon nado on
human patients and certain naeos and remits were ncnticne.I.

"5. I Icnow that c epari-tonts on spotted fever had been aaue on in-
c -°° of Natswcil.r Concentration 'Jap. I /new about these copcriiacnts
fr u two lctlurs which were dictated to do by :-oai.cn in tho boci»ni:ie of

In first letter which was a irucccd tc the SS rt a -plant in Berlin
trough Prof. Hirt, Hoagon asked for _olthy prisoners (200) for his a.per-
iojnte. The second letter was also addressee to the SS Hauptont in 3orlin

stated that those prisoners were in a bed staoc oi health and that

1466


10 Jan hi 9-3- -cloy
Court 'fo. 1

a Croat part of thc-n had died durinc the journey. i.t the sane ti:~, he
asked for another 200 prisoners in s° r <- health, of the sane constitution
as tho St Idlers cf the G crnan my.

"6* Fr xi Haagon's c orrospondcncc, uhich I did cysolf, I Jmair that
orporluonts were node on influonza and epidemic jaundice. Other details
arc unknown to uc.

"7. Hep rts w*,ro na 'c every three ■ .nths cn all tho experiments to
tho C.iicf and inspector of the *: helical S.rvico cf the Luftwaafe' and to
tlio 'Roichsforschun^orat» and to a Luftwaffe bureau in Bcrlin-Dahlen, fron
which Haakon depended diroctly and .dw.*c ':o had to co fr cn time to tine,

I add that I heel to send rep-rts to th 'Hi^h C c'.uand ef the ..'chrtacht',
;rcn the report cn spotted fcv».r, uliich ./as s^nt to the Inspect rate if
tho Luftwaffe, it rna cloorly uniorstanda.Ic that o^erLaents had been laado
cn human boin s,

"6. Hoa cn rocoived a subsidy fe.' his export..onts fron tho *?.oichs-
forschun^orat 1 in Borlin. I think I can rc:*.'.' ;r that tho


r


146 ?


10 January-i-DJG-9-la-Ialcy
Court No. 1

correspondence wis signed by .ref. hostock. Prcf Rest-ck was in ccnstant
touch with Haagen end they made numerous oral reports tc each ether.

Hanger, used tc visit Restock in Berlin.

n 9. Tref. Rose, Inspector of the 'nodical Sorvico of the Luft¬
waffe', erne tc Strassbourg twice to visit Haagen; the first time at the
beginning of 1942; the second tint at tho beginning of 1944. Since Haagen
showed him the whole Institute, I suppose th:t he spoke tec, of his experi¬
ments on human beings ani gave him tho result of theso experiments.

"10. It was net n secret that Prof. Haarcn went wc.ch week tc Hatz-
woiler with his female assistant, Brigitte Crodal and his m&lo assistant,

Dr. Grcofe, to carry cut his experiments with spettod fever. then we woro
protesting cno dry rgeinst theso experiments cn human beings in Schinnock,
Greofe answered us: 'Ono uses only Teles and nc ..ls'.ticns nr.d the Poles a ts
not humr.n beings 1 ".

It is signed "Olga Eycr."

Thuro is a ccrrocticn in tho statement node by Olja ^or, that is
tho paragraph immediately pr-cooiing h»-r signature. Ihorc was a sentcnco
cmittcxl at tho ervi of that paragraph, reading, "Sworn and signed in Sttass-
bcurg on 18th Ncvcmbor 1946."

THE .RESIDENT: faint was thrt irt-, counsel?

iffi. UcH,.NEY: 18th November, 1946.

I would new like tc gc bock tc '.ego 54, —

THE .RESIDENTS Just a a-aent, dc any of tho defense counsel disagree
with tho revised transi tion tf^thia dccumoit? (No response). If there
are nc objections counsel m y preoeod.

Dh. N1TE: Dof-nse c.un3ol Ndtc ler H’ndloecr. Ur. resident,
the affidavit cf Olga c^er scans tc have bo«-r. given in the French language,
end up tc new I have net sc-c the original cf this affidavit, end therefore
I would bo greteful U the prosecution if they would lot me have the original
fer a short period cf tine.

I wcul ’ like cc add the following, free thv statements of the prose¬
cution I .assume that fer the time being ho is presenting this affidavit,

1468


10 January-l*-DJG-9-2a-il'-lcy
C-urt He. 1


end that under the prevision that the Witness Syer will appear hero fer
cross-ex-ndnatiem If I have understood correctly then this has uy approval,
because in the other case the Tribunal would have to nuke a ruling.

THE .RESIDENT: Counsel for the prosecution >ill doubtless exhibit
the original exhibit to Dr. Halt©. Counsel has st- tod that the attendance
of the witness will bo pro curred before the Tribunal if possible. It is
hoped the witness will bo present tc testify frea the stand.

DK. NrXTEs The address of the witness has b.en given tc us by the
witness Schmidt on the witness stand, the Dermatological Institute cf the
University of Strasbourg.

THE i RESIDENT: Yes.

UR. UcH..NEY: If counsel Nalto pi®" 3 *© retain tho original of the Eyor
affidavit for any length of ti;.© I will ?sk him to return it to tho Secre¬
tary Central, as it is n^vr in his cuatody.

THE rhESIDHWT: Dr. Hulto stated he desired to ex .nine the affidavit
for a short time. If it is net returned at tho ond of this session, Dr.
Nolte wiU return tho original affidavit U tho Offico of the Secretary
General.


1469


10 J^-KWUM^.TD-Putty
Court No* 1


MR* I£C HA NET l I would like now to ask the Tribunal to turn to Pago %
of the Epgli3h Document Book where we find Document This is an

affidavit of Ferdinand Ro omh i l d, and the Prosecution is quite anxious to
have Roomhild appear and testify bofore the Tribunal. Unfortunately, however,
Mr. Roomhild together with an investigator of the Office of Chief of Counsel
was in an automobile accident yesterday, and I an not sure that wo will bo
ablo to get Mr, Roomhild hero before the completion of our case. As a matter
of faot, wo do not yet know how soriously ho may have bocn injured, but I
would like at this tine, since we have proaentod our evidence on the typhus
experiments and have heard some testimony concerning particularly the
Dofondnnt Hovcn, to offer this affidavit at this tine with the understanding
that the Prosecution will secure tho presence of Hronhild as a witness bofore
the Tribunal, if that is possible. If ho has not beon soriously injured,
why, it nay bo. possible to got hin hero early next week boforo wo comploto
our ovidenoo, but for tho purposes of continuity of tho rocord, and bocauso
wo ore not sure that wo will bo ablo to got Hr. Rounhild horo, I would like
to havo his affidavit admitted at this time and road into tho rocord.

THE PRESIDENT! That procedure may bo followed. If the witno33 arttvsf,
ho nay later be sworn, Tho affidavit, of oourso, will bo roooivod in evidonco
only provisionally until it is dotorsdned whether or not tho witnoss may bo
present, Tho affidavit is also sworn to boforo a V. S. civilian, I presume as
yot no cortificate has beon filod to qualify him to administer an oath.

MR. MoRUSYt That*3 correct, your Honor,

DR, OAWLIK: Mr. President, Dr. Gawlik for the Defendant, Hovon. I
request that the decision which has just beer, raado to examined once more.
Roomhild lias boon called a3 a witness by tho Prosecution, For tho time boing,
it has not bocn determined if tho witness, Roeahild, is injured, to what
extent he is injured, and if it would not be possible that ho can already
appear here within tho next few days. Tho Prosecutor has himself stated that
the witnoss, Roenhild, may probably alrea^ bo heard here in tho beginning of
next woek.


1*70


10 Jan,- lCu2-lt-ATD-pTitty
Court No. 1


It las boon the usual procedure before the International ’iilitary
Tribunal that an affidavit could not be read when the person in question
a pp oared as a witness. Before the Inter national Military Tribunal affidavits
havo been'refused because of this reason. I roquost that this proooduro bo
also continuod in this trial, and that the reading of this affidavit bo
postponed until at least it has been dot-mined if the witness will bo ablo
to appear here.

The affidavit could still bo read during the next weak, and it could
also be read after the conclusion of the jyoaontation of tho oaso. It must
be added, furtherooro, that I must insist under all circujwtancos, to tako
tho witnoss, Roonhild, into cross examination if the affidavit should bo road.

Tho affidavit contains a muchor of obvious aistakos which tho witnoss
will have to oorroct in any case. I, tharofore, would consider it a consldor-
ablo limitation of tho rights of sy client if the affidavit should bo accoptod
in this oaso without I having the opportunity of aaklnr statements to tho
witness. I, thoroforo, request that it bo considered that according to tho
Englloh Document Book tho affidavit has boon given in tho English languueo.

Tho witnoss is a German and his irothor languago is Oorran, It is, thoroforo,
i.y opinion that no intorpretor was consulted. I thirtc that in a caso of this
kind it must be shown unior all circuustanoos by the affidavit that thoro a
srorn intorprotor was uao$, or that tho witness is so convorsant in tho
English lnngungo that ho can givo a statement of such importance as tho affi¬
davit of Roaahild represents in tho trial against ny client. In tho way in
rrhich the affidavit was taken, it is incomplete in that ro 3 pect. It must,
furthermore, bo addod that it is not shown by tho affidavit that tho Amorioan
civilian, Fred Rodoll, who adndnistcrod this affidavit is capable cf ncfcri re¬
storing oaths. This would have to bo done in any caso. However, in aiy case I
roquost that tho reading and tho presentation of this affidavit bo postponed
''Iso in view of ny previous statements.

1 !ir, PRESIDENT! I advise Counsel that tho Prosecution requested that tho
affidavit bo a-biittcd provisionally only and subjoct to calling tho witnoss
eo his personal attondance hero night be pro cur od. Ho <fces not propose to

auboit tho affidavit as a direct exhibit in tho case at this tin a.

1471


10 Jan^OO~3-«^TD-Putty
Court So. 1

MS. 'CHANEY* I assure tte Tribunal that the Prosecution is a anxious
to get Mr. RoonhUd hore as is the Defense Counsel.

JUICE SEBHIir.: Shore is ho at this tiaoj Mr. MCHanoy?

MR. McH.NET« Sir f I dnn»t know. Wo received a talc phono call Into last
ovoning stating that Mr. Rodell, an investigator of tho Offico of Chief of
Counsel, was injured in an autoaobilo accident near Heilbrunn and is hteself
now in the hospital,

JUDGE SEDiUWi Is he tho Rodell who is supposed to have adrdnisterod i.’t
this oath?

^NEY* That»s correct, yes, and ho did not at that tino havo any
infonoation at all about tho whoroabouts of tto driver of tho vohicle or of
Mr. Roonhild, and expressed scrau concern booause of that. I think it is
simply a question of whon tho affidavit is to bo road into tho rocord. T.'o aro
anxious to road it now bucauso wo havo doalt at groat length with the typhus
oxpurinonta in this part of tho record. Wo would liko to get our ovidencoo
qs closo tosothor as possiblo. If tho mn appoars horo, wo know thoro has
boon no projudico. Tho Dofonso Courool — if ho oan»t appoar, thon I tako it
that tho affidavit would bo admissible in ary ovont.

THE PRESIDENT* Do wo understand that the witnoss, Uoonhild, was
accoopanyir.;; Hr. Rodell in this auta*>bilo trip?

MR, 'CHANKY! That»s correct, yos, sir.

THE PRESIDENT* Touudo not knaw whether the witnoss was injured or not?

MR. ’CHUiEYt We know nothing about the witness, tir.t*3 right,

THE PRESIDENTi Under all eirouastanoaa, tho affidavit will not bo road
into tho record at this time, but oan bo postponod until early in tho week
to asoortain whothor or not or whon tht witnoss, RocnhUd, may bo proeont.

Mil. MCHANEY* I turn —

THE PRESIDENT* It is, the ruling of course without prejudice, tho right
of the Prosooution to offer thj affidavit at saau later tine for consideration
of tho Tribunal whjn tho proper certificate has boon filed if it oan be

ascortairwd that tho witness nay not bo in attendance.

1472


10 Jan-10-J>-ATD-Putty
Court No. 1

!?R. !CB&IRIa I turn then to Document >0-1190 which is not contained in
your Honors* document fcookj and I an bavin- the translation passed up new.
This document was filed in loose fora in the defendants' inforration center
yesterday. It is offc-rod as Prosecution Exhibit 321 and is simply a list of
prisoners who were assigned as experimental persons in connection with tho
Danish typhus vaccine experiment in Duchenwald in the middle of 19U»»

Tho Tribunal will recall that the Danish typhus vaccine was tho Copen¬
hagen vaccine, and that an experimental series was carried out at Duchenwald
in tho niddlo of 19U» to toot tho effectiveness of the Copenhagen vaccine at
tho suggestion of tho Defendant, Rose, and we find in Proaocution Exhibit 321
a list of forty-throo rvLooa of persons who woro assigned as experimental
guinea piba.


14?3


10 Jan-M-GSS-ll-l-Earro v-PH
Court No. 1*


The docunent 16 headed Secret. It carries in the
loft hand corner the initials RKPA whloh, as I understand
it, is tho Rclcfcs Criminal Police. The date lino Is
1/olnar-Buchenwald, 4 March 1944.

■List of the Protective Custody Prisoners, and
habitual Criminals selected and released for the Experiments
with the Danish Typhus Vaccine. 1

THE PRESIDENT: What is the term "protective custody
prisoners", Counsel?

MR. McJHaNEY: Protective custody prisoners — if I
understand the term ooxrootly,. your Honor, are primarily
If not exclusively political prisoners. Thoy aro
prlsonors who are In a concentration cnsr> undor a
protoctlvo custody order which no I understand It was
lasuod by the RoiohselchorheltspolUol, the BSHh. Hoydrloh
was first the Chlofof that organisation, and following
that timo, Kaltonbrunner, and peoplo oould bo committed
to a concentration onnp undor those protoctlvo custody
ordors and I submit that In the oontoxt here usod It
moons political prisoners because It says "of tho protootivo
oustody prlsonors and habitual criminals" distinction bolng
drawn botweon orimlnals on tho ono hand and protoctlvo
duetody prlsonors on the other, persons who wero thought
to bo dangerous to the state.

THE PRESIDENT: Were these Protective custody prlsonors
Gorman nationals or did that Include nationals of othor
nations?

MR. McHhNEY: Oh 1 I’m quite sure that It Included
all nationalities Insofar as they were.

DR. FRITZ: (Counsel for defendant Rose): Mr.

President, cay I moke a stnteasnt to clarify this point
boforo the Tribunal? Frlsoner6 under protective custody,


1474


10 Jon-K-GES-ll-l-Xarrow-PH
Court No. 1.


according tc the Oermn lflw are those habitual crininnls
who have boen punished so often* so severely, that their
release would neon a danger toV the public even after they
had lived through their tens. Therefore, they were called
In “security oustody* after having fulfilled their punish¬
ment. nfl far as I know, this law Is Still effective today
because I have heard of cases where even at this tine people
aro placed Into protective custody by the German authorities.
Therefore, these persona did not have anything to do with
polltloal prisoners.

MR. Mo HANEY: If I nay suggest to the Tribunal, this
Is a natter of


1474


10 Jair-W- J5S-11- 3- Xor row
Court H>. 1.


nrgunont. We certainly do cot accent tho st-.tonontn Juot —''.do by tho Aofenee
c-unsel and I can't oollovo tort ho soriiiuly is su,;,CEtiuf: that protective
cust >dy prisenoiB aru United to t.-.oso crii_inr.l8 woo have boon aontcuccd by
an or-inary Ckr.aa court and h-vo served out their ordinary tor of 1..' ria‘»r>-
-ont and then eont to a concentn.tion crura. It's truo that thrt harpcRod and
tnoso indeed t. ro tho criminals w..o by and 1 rro wero in concert rati n cn...pB.

I‘-n no oxpert on Gorrma law. We rro making Bono ondoavor to look into tho
nattor about Just who wna ir. those concentration cor.pB. But in any event,
it ia Juat a natter of OTfc-ucent ns t. what tho wordi noon. Vo oubuit that
thoy do in fact include olitical pris-nors, Aofcr.ao counsel to tho contrary.

THE FRSSlDSilT: Sale qu«Btl »n will not ho concluded by what hno boon
said at this ti..o but will bo l.ft opon for further ar.-ujiont and invoBtifatlon.

Coos the counsol dosire to nddross tho Tribunalt

DR. PELCXh-df (Counsel f or defendant Schaofor)i I tn. only taking tho
floor for tho roason boccuco I h vo already ;*/o a roquest oovoral lays ago
that tnio record ho corrected. I:i the interro.atl »n of the witnoBo Viohwofr,
t..io crl-lnal v,.o uppeared her. who hi bosn sontoncod oanjr tit-oo boforo,
thor.. hao already boon a . intake lr. translctir- . Th.r. hno nlo> boon a
iBtrvko in translation. »j uat -ako n difference botwoen the ntatonent
"protoctivo cuntody " ral "eafokcoj ln£". "rrotcctlvo cuBtody" 1 b u political
•oonsuro which was uaod by the police » r -oncioB and by political nuncios. It
1 b correctly translated "protective custody", x’.o "safekeeping" it on ordor
by the German courts by virtue of r l'*w about tho ordor of safokooping. Bits
safekeeping is only ajpliod to cri..inola w..o, bocausu of their froquent
derelictions, near, a dnngor for tao public in the criminal sonao and who
tburoforo arc boin,* .lacod lnt j life Ion* c- nfina* ont by ai court. Thin Bnfo-
kooping or confinement Ib oxa-dnod from tlno to ti?. Eowovor. it is a purely
logal crininalictic order, rurthercarc, the basis of tclB law can bo found
before tho time of 1933. I do not know if this 1 b a procedure also in other
countrioB.

TaS PRSSlDEHTl '* t are the Ger-.-a words translated "protective

1475


10 Jo:>-H-GZS-ll-3-Xwrov

Court So. 1.


custody" in tho original docunontT

XR. Mo&*.K2Yl Will tho translator — will tho interpreter rand tho
words waich hare boon translated •protective custody prls^ncre"?

UfUUUULflRt It is stutod ■Sichorungsrorwnhrun£ B .

DH.PSLCKX.dn.': Tho translation to nc soons to bo wron*; in this on so .

It should rood "security onclosuro" perhaps. Ir. any cnsu, tho Gornr. word
in tno original docun* nt Is ■Sicncrux^srorwruiruiv;*. "Sichorungsvorvohrung 1
cannot, In any onso, oe translated as protective custody.

XR. KcE-HITi I think wo'ro spondia s - a lot of tlno on n point which is
not particularly tutorial. I will try to h vc tho t .nnslati >n chocked.

I would rather subnit it liku it is and avoid any further r.r runout and o':-
codo a point v.:icn I don't think is anythin,; aaterial. We don't ndnit that
they wore oil crL.innlt and wo don't nd_.it they wore all Oornon nationals.

JUDGX SXBRlSGl Can you too anything to tho contrary einply fron tho
paper it self I

XR. KcH-JET: Corf*inly not, y>ur Eonor. I void suggest that a reading
of tho nacot here eight lndionto to tho Tribunal tiv t there aro oono boro
whoro it would bo stretching tho point very far to bo eonsidorod Ocr.nn
not to ■ but wo, of courno, havo no proof tret they nro Qor.nn oltieono. For
instnneo, Senubrowski, lio. 20, boin.; one.

Tho docucont is si nod "By ordor of Otto, Krlnimlrnt."

I co...o now to on ontiroly difforent subjoct. That is, wo nro aoving
on fron tho typhus experiments.

TaS PX3SIDS.iT: At tnis tU-u t-.o &>urt will t-Jto its noon rocoss.

(A rocoss ¥36 taken until 133^ hours),

I


1*176


io j an U7^-©s-l2-i?oidt (:sd)

court ;ro. i


corjccri) copt


AFTlUiCO'.; S7Z310U

• •

(The hearing reconvened r.t 1330 hcur3, 10 January 1$>J>7.)

Tin .RI3IDTKT: At this tino the Tribunal desires to sta.to th-.t
at tho close of the evidcnc- for tho ->osccv.tion, :rhich it i3 antici-
patod will bo ended nost •rcoh, tho Tribunal will recess until a *,rock
fron tho follcr.dn^ Monday, This ill allot: tho defendants an op.-ortunity
to refco final ni-operations to 30 into t’.toir cvidcnco end -..ill alien.' all
parties concorncd to study the -vidoncc vliich has already boon introduced.

I would also liko to a 3k c unsol for tho dofondant3 if thoy ha.vo
undo any ayconent anons thonsolvjs or if thoy desire to nako any a^roc-
nont as to tho order in '.diich thoy trill prosont tho rospoctivo eases
for tho dofondants, Tho Tribunal nctos th t sono of tho dofor.dants rro
ohar;;od ottfy under t.n or three or four soprrato counts, vhilo others
aro ohar^ed under rare' counts.


If dofonso counsel dosirj to discuss tils at tor anong thonoolvcs

* • •

rnd nalco any su—osti ns to tho Tribunal, tho Tribunal, of course, with-
out bolng bound to follow any suggestions, will pivo such suggestions
caroful consideration

DR. 3CHVATHE: (Counsol for dofendant Brandt): I thank tho Pros-
idont for tho opportunity to preparo our dofonso. Vo havo not discusssod
tl»o distribution e*»ns oursolvos but ire shall do so novr and wo shall


proparo a su 3 'jostion to tho Ccurt. It will perhaps bo that bccause of
tho brief ti:» required, tho stsll eases will bo takon first, so that

0

thoro •■rill bo .ore tino tc preparo tho longer eases, but perhaps so:x>
othor intouost will bo decisive to t ako tho oro inpertrnt caso fir :t.


which


tho srsallar eases. It is a qu.-stion of tlx».
understands th t counsel -.dll do3ii-o
thonsolvas and tho Tribunal, of courso,
order of ca see but sirrply would bo pleased


rc3


1C Jan Ii7-Wr-12-l-7cldt (ISD)
Court !'o. I


to hear suggestions iron counsol.

The Prosecution nay proceed.

IfaHAKET: The Prosecution would li!:e at this tino to su’jnit
cortair. docuronts for adnission into cvidcr.co, dealing with orrpori-
nonts carriod out


11*77 •-


10 Jan 47-A-iX~12-2-?eldt
Court Ho. 1

In connection with biological warfare. These documents uro not contained in
any one of the b«-und document books. Accordingly, ve will sutait and pass
thca to the Tribunal as they ere offered.

!Tnu first document will be H0112, which we offer cs Prosecution exhibit
322. I would surest that the Tribunal simply nark the translations with the
exhibit number and perhaps insert then at the end of the last docunent book,
and they will then have the exhibits in the proper order.

This is a tolotypu sent by SS Obergruppenfuehrer Koopo fron Posen, 5
Juno 1943, to tho Roichefuehror SS end Chief of the German Police, Borlin.

It roads:

"Urgont, To be subr.itted iouedlately. Top secret. Hy Rolchsfuehror.
Tho representative chief of the Reich Physicians Loaguo, Dr. Blohno, roportod
abcAit 14 days ago to Gauleiter Greisor in an exclusively inter-offico mooting
In which I also partieipatod, about a highly iopurtent special nission froa
the Roichnarshnl. For that purpose Dr. Blohno is sotting up n larger insti¬
tute noer Posen. According to hlqkrdor ho has to work on tho sano nnttor on
which ny former coll, b-ret:r, SS Sturabannfu».hror Dr. Me-. Straoeburger, had
successfully oxperinentod olnco 1937, first on ay instructions and later on
tho ordor of SS Oborgrupponfuehrsr Hcydrich. Strassburger has also informed
you thereof several tioos, ay Rsichsfuchror. As Blohoo indicated in that
mooting that ho still needed capnblo and skilled collaborators for that our-
poso, I thought of Stratsburgor, who no longer ccncorns himself with that
highly important mattor, rs h* is working as a surgocn in a hospital in
Munich. Kny I suggost that Strasslurger be put at the disposal of Dr. Blohae
for said experiments with the purpose of acting as your representative in
this institute of vital importance. As Strasslurger has groat knowledge and
experience in this sar.o field at his disposal, Dr. Bl^hme'c work would pro¬
gress factor ond probably bo avre prcaising. Straseburger w^uld bo enthusi¬
astic if he could coopornto in that matter. Dr. Blohme is going to stay in
Munich until Monday night. Strnssburgor's address is" and then follows the
address and telephone number. "The Senior SS and Police Leader with the Reic
"egent in P,stn in the Military Administrative District Room 21. Signed:


ii? a-


10 Jen 47-A-j*-13-3-7eldt

Court Ho. 1


Koppe, SS Ober,nnippcnfuehrer and General of the Police,"


- -


10 Jan-EBH-13-l-Pums (!SD)
Co *rt Ho. I


The Tribune! -rill recall that 31arc's naro has been heretofore

Derationed in connection with that of Groiser— that is to 3ay, in con-

• •

ncction with the extern nation of tubercular Poles in 'Tarsaw, Poland,
and wo nor; sco that the defendant BXono had at a t ino prior to 5 Juno
Ii3 rocoivod a highly ira portent noosago from the Soichsrtarshal and a a
'•'o already know fron the affidavit of Blono ho ’ran concerned with re¬
search in the biological warfare. This doewaont concoms tho collo-
boration of a nan naned 3trrosbur-er in this roscarch work, which is
to bo carried out in an instituto headed b- tho do?ondant Dlcno noar
Posen.

TIE IKSIDflfT: I notico in this document that tho nano of Dlone
la spoiled *.dth an "H".

• • •

IT.. I’cHAlGY: That*8 correct, your Honor; we 3u'.xiit, howovor,

that this is in fact the defendant Slo o, t/hoso nano in fact is Slone.

In other 'rorda, wo sug-gost that this is a ilatako on tho part of tho

sender of tho .uosago Hoppe and I thinl: th t -..111 probably appear to

bo obvious in subsequent documents. To turn now to !!o. -113, trhich

till bo Prosecution Exhibit —

TIE HtSmilT: Do you want to present this second docunont as

an oxliibit?

liR. KcIL^oT: Tc3, sir, that's 322. Tho next trill bo No. -U3
which till bo Prosecution Exhibit 323. This is a lettor dntod 10
Juno 19h3 fron tho dofondant Rudolf Srandt to 53-Cborcrupponfuohror
Koppo, Higher 3S and Polico Leader, Posen.

"Dear CTocrgruTponfuoIavr:

"The Hoick L-ador.of tho 33, ncichafuohr.r SS, lias rccoivcd

• •

your tolotypc Ho. 8875 of 5 Juno 25U3. Ho noted it with interest.

I would assume th-t yovr suggestion concemijtg Dr. 3trassburgor trill
bo complied with. But for the tico being, don't lot any action bo


talccn.


■Hoil Hitler
(signed) Brandt


1C Jan-VBK -13-l-3uras (!SD)
Court !to. I


Thoji second:

"To tho Chief of tho security Police SC-Grupoenfuohrcr Kaltcn-
brunnor.


11*30 A


10 Jan-E3r-lS-2-Bv.rn8

Court Ko. 1.

"Tho Reichloo.der SS intends to talk about it to the Roichnareh.“.l soon.
Handwritten initial "3".

Of course, the Reichanarsh"! referred to in tkcro is Cooring. Vo turn
now to Docucont No.-114, which will he irosccution Exhibit 32*1. It io a
lottor fron tho Roich *hyslciol SS Dr. Grawitz to Hclchofuohror SS Solr.rioh
Hixualor, dated 1 Auf^ist 1944.

"Subject of tho letter: Counter-neasuros against biological warfare.

"Roforenco: Konorandun SS-Oberfuehror IWt. Dr. Iirugowsky

"Snclosuro: Ono Monorandun.

"Top oecuro "with Hinnlor's initials.

"Rcichsfuehror:

Tho Deputy Roich Relath Loador, S.\ Grupper.fuohror I ref. Tr. Blotao,
has oskod our Chiof Medical Offlcor of Hy.^loncc SS- Oberfuchror lrofoesnr
Ir. Hrugovsky for a correlation of tho nost important sciontiflc ratorlal
concerning counter-roaourcs against biological warfare.

"SS-Oborfuchror Kru,- ownky has worked out the inclosed noaormdun
which, in c-nsidoration f ito i.-rortancc, I don't want to nogloct to subnlt
to your, Rolchnfuohror, for your informtion.

"I call your attontlon particularly to rp. ®-lw.

■Soil Hitler
"Grawits"

"l.*oto in pencil attached to thio lcttor.

" Lottor rocoivod for our files without this narorandur. on 9 January
1945".

Wo now turn to Iocur.cnt Fo-1308 and if the Tribun-1 rlcaso, wo would
liko 0 offer this docurcnt at this tiro in ^rior to koop tho record con-
oooutiYoly although tho prosecution has not conplied with the ruling that
all doounento bo subnlttod to defonsc counsel 24 h<-urs prior to the tino
of their ouhaioolon. Vo, thoroforo, would liko to offer thio docuncnt in
ovidenco now oubjoct to a sasonablo ofjedtion on the part of defense counsel.

THE 13B3I£3T?i The docunont nny bo so offered without prejudice to
tho objoction of any of the defendants at a seasonable tine.


-UiJl-


10 Janur.ry-A(-£/JG—13-3-Burns
Court No. 1

SR. M3HANEY: The document is sub. lit ted as Prosecution Exhibit 325*

It is noted "To? Secret." "Official Note." It's dated 23 September 19h3»
aigned by Kliewo,

Easrly in September 19U3 Military Science inquired what protective
measures had been taken against the use of bacterial weapons; a roport
was to be cade to Chief of the 3urccu for ..raad Forces 'tetters. The Chief
of .awed Forces ’Jadical Corps info me d kilifry Science on 15 September that
tho circle of "Blitzarboiter" would hove to ronain very limited, and that
tho Chief of .rraed Forces Matters would be informed directly by the Chief
of Anted Fcrcos Vertical Corps. Th-n Stabsorzt Prof. Klicwo was directed
to naku a roport on 21 SopUnter. ;.s r.r.s to bo oxpcctod llnisterialdirigont
PTof. Schunann also appoarotf, supposedly as a listener. Content of tho report
preparation of thfr «iffcront c-untri >a for brcurtial war, possibilities of
using bacterial weapons, (a) by airplane, (b) by afconts, saboteurs. A
mass uso of bacterial wonpons has not tekon place so far; this ia also rnthor
improbable an far as a onts of mann disonso ire ccncernud. But the activity
of agents has increased stoa-lly, with oactcria ns wall as with poisons,
Numerous oxanplos wero given. Then tho mraor-us safety precautions were
rcontiorvjd which the Chi..f of ..nxd Forces ’^dical Corps, Ar.jy todical In¬
spector .and .any Chief Physician had issu-ri.

"Th.n ’Mnistorialdiri^ent Sc human said that the Fuhrcr was ruroly
not sufficiently woll infor.xdj that he should be inferred unco ncro. Uo
cannot play tho part of indifferent s^ctatorsj wu must also prepare tho
mass utilization cf bacterial .iat rials. Es.ocinlly .eoerican v ould hr.vo
to bo attack-d simultaneously with .li/fcront husan and animal «isoaso agents
ns woll as with ,-lnr.t parasitos. 7.V Fuhror has t~ _* wen to tho plan. For
this purpooo th- scientists T.wix tc ubait a brief but complete paper on
onony preparations and an sabota> activity of the entny with bacterial and
poisons. Furthomore, they vexv t. .n icatu tee methods of introduction,
and the requisite number of pcrsc:x.cl, laboratories, instrisunts, airplanes,
submarine, etc., for the preparation an the attack. Those disclosures
were to bo made jointly by tho Chief of tho Armed Forced Medical Corps,


10 Jamary-rf.-jJG—13-U-3um3
Court Ko» 1


Veterinary Inspector, Chief of urcod '/orces Matter*, Reichsfuehrcr of the
SS and deputy Reichaar*tefuhn>r«"


li.8>


10 Januari'-A-DJO-13-1 a-5ums
Court He. 1

That, if I may say parenthetically, the Redchsarztefuhrcr Deputy —
the Deputy Reichsarztefuhrar, is the defendant Blcme.

"General Reinicke intends to speak tc General Jcdl early in October
whether a new assault is in order, and how it is tc be made. Tho association
"blitzarboitcr" is meeting with little success; it works toe slowly; in
particular, chemical Warfare of Aray Ordinance Office has failed. Once
and for a all r responsible agency for the field of bacterial warfare must
be established. Chief of the /.race! Forces Medical Corps has been asked to
inform the Chief of .'.mod Forces Matters in writing with regard to tho
sabotage activity With regard tc the sabotage activity with bacteria and
poisons discovered so far. Signod, Kliowe, 23 Soptaihor 1943."

Tho second page cf this indietaunt is alsc a tep aocret memoranda
signed by Kliewo. It's detod Berlin, 25 September 1943:

"Concerning ti.c session cf the ..ssociaticn "Blitzcrboiter on September

1943.

"In tho prosence efi

Cel, Hirsch, Chemical ‘warfare, ..ray Ordnance

Mini at orialrat Stantien, Chemical i.arfaro, «ray Ordnanco

Prof. Blccio, deputy Roichcr.rztcfuhror

Stabsarzt Frof. Kliowe, «my UeOicel Inspectorate

Stabsveterinar Dr. Deitors, Veterinary Inspoctcrato

Stabsvetcrinar Dr. Kegel, Veterinary Inspectorate

Roglcrungsrat Dr. Bayer, Military Scienco

"First, roading tho protocols cf tho lost session. Then further expor-
monta in the field of human bacteriology were rliscussod. It is intonded
in Octcbor 1943 to drop frem various helots cn seft ground xx— agent Jars
cf e cortrin shape, filled with a rad liquid and r«i sand. The delivery
cf the glasses is the responsibility of the Reich Ministry of /dr, *ir Forces
High Command GLC-E7 1 V, to bo filled by tho Aray Medical Inspectorate.

Tho experiment is tc ahew hew large an area cf dispersion bacterial material
has, liquid and solid, filled in Jars. Then c larger quantity cf bouillon
of prodigious bacteria, abcut 500 liters, of vTying viscosity is tc be


-U84-


10 J«.nua ry-A-DJG- 13 “ 2 a 8 urns
Court No. 1


rcinod dcwr. froa an airplane. The "— »h.t is interpreted as — "spray
tank is to be used. The sprayed gers are to be caught cn agar plates
placod over a large area.

"Since it is net known under itoat conditions .nhalod aerosols or dis*
parsed droplets of certain pathogenic genas cause disease in man, i’rof.

Blcne suggested experiments on human beings. Experimentation in the labor¬
atories of the ..caduny of Military Mciicinc w;.s rejected. The questions
will be discussed ag.'in when I ref. Blcae visits ay laboratories in the
..cadercy.

"Until 15 October 1943 the ..ray Medical Inspectorate is to report in
writing on the fiold uxpoi iocnts to bo mMo.

"Veterinary Inspectorate lacks interest in further field experiments
since the ..ugust 1943 experiments with foot and mouth disease had furnished
unequivocal results.

"The production of a faccinc -.gainst rinderpost is not planned. If
the enemy is tc introduce rinderpest into Gcmany, only tho veterinary
precautions can be carried cut.

"iiilitcry Science will undertake in Cctobor 1943 « fiold experiment
with potato booties near Speyer. Tho beetles will bo dropped in a rigid
stoto, so that they will not creep into tho ground at once. iOTodiat^ly
after thoir release they will bo collected. Furthermore, tho bohavior of
tho booties at different heights, at changing temperatures, rnd with stong
winds will bo tostod.

"The J.-.paneso bootio will arrive from Japan in about four weeks;
then the attempts at cultiv tion oxporim-nts will begin. « who t paraait
is tc bo imported fran humania and Turkoy, to be used fer experiments in
cultivation experiments. Experiments are also being plr.nnod with the antler
moth, a butterfly, which is supposed tc h*vo destroyed 43,000 hectares of
paster in a ycor. Next session cr. 24 Novc-rbcr 1943. Signed Kliewo."

The Tribunal will soe from this file aonorandua which I have Just read
that the n3sccip.ticn "Blitsorbeiter" was concerned with the problccis arising
in the field of bacteriological warfare. ».e f nd th t the «ray Medical


10 January-.'.-?JG-13-3*-Burns
Court Nc. 1


Inspectorate is proninently ropresouted n this c oca lssion. Of cour30, tho
defendant Handloser »i? the Chial* cf the ..my Itodical Inspoctorato at this
tine. Tie also see that the defendant Plort, whe had received a bacterial
warfare comission frcei the Roichsnarshol Goerin*, has suggested that exper¬
iments bo cade on hunan beings. Vo turn now to 'ocuoent NO-1309<• It is
offored as Prosecution Exhibit 326 and unc'or the same conditions that Pros¬
ecution Exhibit 325 has been accepted into evidence, namely, that tho do-
fonso couneol shall have tho right to raise seasonable objection to this
document.

THE iilESI r 'ENTi This oxhioit rill bo roc-ived under tho same conditions
as thoso previously offered.

I®. ’fcH-.NETi This again is a aincranduu signed by Lliowo, ctotod Berlin,
23 Fobrurry 19Uii

"Secret. Official Noto."


-Ui86-


10 Jan-A-Jr-lii-l-j'oehin.

Court Ho* 1

"Subject: Concerning Conversation with Profossjr clone cn 23 February

19U*.

"T .g Association "Blitzarboiter" has hat nc meetings since 2h Scptenlx?r
19ii3» In order to f ind out whether in the uantine additional experiments
were made, I had an interview with xrof. Blomc, who is also a member cf the
association* Ho discloses the following: The attempts at dropping potato
beetles fro., airplanes rat with favor bio success. The beetles wore dropped
from a height of 8,000 s* and re.mai.ed clivo. Further experiments with plant
parasites arc being planned* He has until new made no oxpori ents in the
field of human medicine. These, ho.Tjvcr, are ivcossery, and ho plans to
make thorn* A now Institute under his central is boin. built nuar Poson, in
which biological weapons arc to bo ctu iod and testod. Field ‘r.rshal
Keitol has given the pernissi-.n to builej Roichsfuchror - SS and Gonoralarzt
Prof* Brandt have nasurwd him of vast cup-ort. By request of field, Marshal
Keitel, thu Anred Forcue arc not to luiv.. a responsible share in the expe¬
riments, sinco oxpuriraenta will c.lc> bu c.nci ct^d on human beings*

Prof* Blomo vf.ul ‘ like me to collaborate qs advisor, since I havo already
mado some preparations and sincu 1 nr nolo to derive from tho results tho
precautions nocossary for tho Araod Forces* Prcf. Bltmo did not knew that
tho Chi^f of the He lical Corps rr.d tiio In s; ctor of lurry J.odical Service
havo repeatedly issued procauti jnary icr.sures for tho units. Ho ask-d
for copies of these*

"Prof. BlOGKi rirhtly rejects U»e Association "Blitzarboitcr" bocause
it works toe slowly air becauuc thu circle cf participants is too largo:
for this reason socr.cy caunrt bo gcarantoed* In particular, Frof, Blome
sees no obstacle in tho u*npl ya at of the Chum cal Warfare Section of tho
Array Ordnance Office. Therefore, ho wishos to :oake the suggestion to the
Reibfcsoorshal and Gcnoralarzt rr- f.jssor Bren t, that tho association be dissol
vod and he be pornitted (nrt hr-v; b t’-.c vr.trpoeiticn of the- Cho.’ical
Yfnrfare S"cti- n jf the Yura y Ordnance Of_ice) tc requisition airplanes for

-01*07-


10 Jan-Ar^JI^-Ui-S-^oehan
Court No, 1

experimental purposes c'irectly fr u tua Air Force Kiniatry. As a ratter of
fact, the Ordnance Office has so far been only an impediment ir. this respect.
As early as 5 April 19k3» the Chief of the ' edical Corps infonaod Chemical
Warfare S ction of Ajoy Ordnance Office *..hat experiments will bo necossnry
for the esti. ate of precautionary .measures. So far no action has boon taken
with respect to the suj estiens. In several documents and in the conferences
with the nrned Forces, Operations Staff, it was continually pointed out that
the Chomical Warfare 6-cticn of A^-ry Ordnance Office r.as working too slowly,
whereas the cno.iy was w>rking a. at industriously in this field, lYcfosser
Blo-.e is of the opinion (as ara nowadays ether bacteriologists and biologists)
that biological weapons (plant parasites activators of hui»n and animal disea¬
ses) can bocaao a very serious ha sard to us. Therefore this fiold must be
oxaroined more extensively and intensively than before. Especially necessary
is an oxair.inatlcn of our vaccin , tbo pestilential virus (plague) raccino in
particular. Experiments must accordingly bo made on huaan boings. ^urthomor
certain niaconccrtions Cwncorr. ng t..* effect of maximum doses of several
poisons can bo corrected cnly by cr.-porlmer.t8 on human baings. As soon as
Prof. Blono has conferred with the Relcar.arsnal and Gcnerclnrzt Prof. Brandt
ho will notify m,

"In conclusion. Prof. Blono naked. if tho Chief of tho • odical Corps or
tho Inspector of .^ruiy Medical Servico ore aw; re of the fact that 1*,000
casus of pestilence (plague) hove scared <nte European part of Turkoyj
ho rocoivod this information fra- a n.;:n.sontativc of tae 1.0. Farbon Industry
Ho has no further information on the sublet. (Note* Oborfeldarzt iackort
has hoard somethin.’ about it, tut ns far cs ho knows tbu rumor was not
confirmed,)" (Signed) Kliowe,

Hero wo find that not .nly is the defendant Q lor* concerned with hxman
experimentation with bacteriological weapons, but also the Reichs Fuehrer SS
Himr&or an' that gentleman in t iu d.cck, v -rol jssas he was just thuoroticall.
an SS man, Karl Brindt, has assure d Alorx of dirat sup; rrt. I would suppose


-12x33-


10 JazW.-JB-lh- 3-Kcehan (IBD)
Court Uo. 1


that thoro wero a nunbor of reasons *.iiy Prof essor Karl Crmdt '..’ns

sought for support in this natter. First, ho ".ms at this tino the

•

Roich3 Corsni33ionar for Health and '.bdicrl natters. Hj had also, I

think, by this tine rccoivcd his comission fron tho Roichs Ilarshal

concerning chordcal uarfaro, hich tho Tribunal ’.Till rocall -.ms concerned

•

auong other things with lost gas experiments on hunan boings. It is

interesting to note that in February of 19 U!j, by r-oue3t of no less

a non than .'iold I'arshal Koitol, tho arnod forces would not participate

•

in thoso propoaod oxporimonta, since experiments wore also being con¬
ducted on human beings. Now, how, in tho faco of that perhaps solf-
3aving declaration of tho part of Koitol, defondant in caso nunbor ono
boforo tho International Kilitary Tribunal, con any of tho non in tho
prosont dock say "No, to stood on too high a placo to know of thoso
mattors of experimentation on human boinga"?

I ary again th-t Fiold nrahal Kiotel tos informed and -.roll knew that
nodical experiments had boon mrdo on hunan boinga and at least at this
sonovriiat la to dato, wfcon tho military u*ospoct» for tho German ' 'ohmacht
vroro not oo good, Koitol showod a one oqueaniahneaa at tho participation
of tho arnod forces in medical experiments, Go, I take it that tho
dofonoo on tho part of such *coplo as Karl ">andt, Hr.ndlooor, Rostock
and Schrocder that thoy did not know such things woro going on cannot
bo truo.


*. r o r.130 soo at a littlo later point in tho srao nenorondun of Fob—

ruary 23, 19 Ui that Blase vrishos to rials tho suggestion to tho Roicho

•

Karahal and Oonoralnrst Professor Brandt that tho Association, "Blitz-
arbolter" bo dissolved and no, Slooo, bo permitted to requisition nix'-
planes for experimental purposos. Again wo soo tho important position
of tho Dofondant Karl Brandt.

Tho fow sontoncos at tho bottom of tho first p'go of this docunont
aro quite inter~sting, particularly in viow of tho next docunont
whoro it says: "Furthomcro, certain rdcconccptions concerning tho
offcct of maximum doses of several poisons can bo corrected only by


10 Jen-A-J3-U;-3-Inchon (!SD)

Court Ho. 1

oxpcrironta on hunan boir. 33 , Aa 3oon as Irof. Slone has confer rod with
tho Poichsnar3hal end Goneralcrst Prof.


11:69 A


10 Jan-A-JP-lli—ii-i!wohan
Court No.l

B r andt, he will notify me."

It dees not take a very vivid i~iaginatic.n to sac that thoy woro all con¬
cerned with the use of poisons by cr.osy agents and s abet ours and Bloao insist-
that since wc have a misconception concemin the effect of fneso poisons,
wo liavu to experiment on huaar. beings and that no great issue will bo made

if thoy sourht out volunteers who tjouI bo v.illin^ to have thabsolves poisoned

•

so they could dotermine tho offoct of maximum doses, as they put it. In con¬
nection with this problcn, wo also sco the nanc of Karl Brandt mentioned
in association with no loss a aorson than Roichs ..arshel Goorin^,

I move on to tlic second pa»> cf this Dicumont, which is aether uemorandu
this ti o initialed by one "RS". It is dated 22 !tay 19lh, hoadotl "Top Secret,
Army JXodical Inspoctcruto no. 131A • It is free. tho "Stabsarzt FTof, Kliowo,
Military !iedical Academy, Berlin, Regarding* Import of /^.tivitiost

"It has boon learned fretho vc.ri us reports of cur agents that England
believes Germany is preparing for hoctoriolo-icol warfaro on a largo 3calo.
England furthermore balievo trxt reprisal c nsists in tho application of b*c-
toria and thoir poisons. Therefore, .bv_land c’osirus knowledge cf tho typo and
of tho scope of 'bacteriological operations* in military circles. on.:iand
wants to know tlie typos of bacteria with which wo work and tho vaccines wo
produces on a large scale. Proa a Qonforonco of American an, Russian scien¬
tists in Cairo in September 19L3 it is also to bo gathered that tho enemy
powers are continuing to prepare for bactcrlolopicul warfare. Therefore, our
defensive end protective measures havo been treated in mere detail, Speochoa
about tho necessary protective and deft asiv*. r,a surcs have been made beforo
now division surgeons an ! at the advisory c uforenco at Hchonlyc!;on. Further¬
more, a nebulizer with mctor-v'rive has boon '-uilt which sterilizes and disin¬
fects tho air in the rcca. Tho apparatus can also be used, simultaneously for
purpose of decontamination. As soon as the various axpori.oonts have boon
completed, the Apparatus will be jCEonstrctort to the ..ssociaticn."


-11.70-


10 Jan i:7-..-7 TC-15-l-?.-.y
Court Mo. 1

Ve soo fro.’ this docu.-ant that Professor Kliw w s donnectod with the
lilitary radical Ace.deny which tr.s under co control of the Defendant
Hnndloser, Tfe also soe that 3jw3ches and reports were given at the
advisory conferences a Hohenlychen, and, as the Tribunal rill recall, wo
have heretofore introduced proof of th_ ?o rth neetinr of the v utaxy
Medical ..cadeny which was hold, as I recall, soto ti » in May 192J* r.t
Kohonlychon, You will ronvaaber that we subnttod a rather Ion: list of
naiTos of various arsons who attended that aeotinr. This docunent indicates
that they taadu some reports on bacteriological warfare neasuros at tho
neotinj; at Hoh-nlychon. The rvxt part of his exhibit reads as follows*

"Association, >lj >ay 19UU

"(1) Cclonol Hirsoh states that tha last sossion of 2h Kovorber 192*3
was cancolod be Muse of an :ir raid, lie rof-rs to dirt’ tiv., according
to which tlio ..r ry Fi'h Co .. nd wants to rec.«ivj a comprehensive roport
15 ..uiust and 15 Oct o’^r by ..rrxy Ordnance and that Chief of Medical Corps,
Veterinary Inspector, nl military Seiancu .ust previously sub it intorin
roports to the Association. Those intoriu rer-orts ha vo not boon submitted
to datoj it is I loro’ >y ordered that they ■« subnitted to th-’ ..ssocintion
without delay, during the week after hitsunsiio at the latost. In tho
fuiuro tho ooni-annual dntoa 111 bo lCl.«ril and 10 Octo’-ur, so that tho
final roport ca. o u turned in to thu High Conan * on th.- date due.

"(2) rrofossor Slorvi 3u -osts that Colonel Oeist, Graduate _n ; inaer.
Chief of the bureau for ’.evolo; »nt in tn. facnnical r uroau of tho icioh
.‘iinistor for Ar..ianunt an* ar .reduction, bo a&dtted into the association
booauso that office Must be inferxd a’ out tho field of our oxperinental.
Colonel Hirsh orders a request tru .ryy "i h Coaaand accordingly,

"Department 1*

"Booausa fo the absence of tho socialist tfco questions about the
progress tho research aust be handled through official channels, rrofossor
lo-.e vdll roport on his intended protective measures and research.


-12*91-


10 Jan U7-s k -r JC-15-2-Ray
Court Ho, 1

"Department 2:

n Stab3veterinar Dr. Nagel informs us that the liquid preparations for
foot and mouth diseas? mentioned in the last ccaprehensivo report ha3
already boon surpassed, so that tho problem of storing it is of no further
interest to us. Tie have boon successful in developing a dry preparation
which can still be effective in a 1 to 10,000 dilution. Terrain experiments
oven on a small scale are not being planned at tho moment; they are connected
with gre at risks because of tho drn^r from tho air, Chemical warfare of
..rmy Ordnance considers con.rol oxpori..onts with finoly powdered, -'ilutod
dry-preparation advisable, Thoro is a plan, dopondin: on the consent of
Veterinary Inspector to conduct theso experiments on the bacteria field East.

"The reprosontativo of tho Rwich Marshal, Frofossor Blome, informs us
that tho work on tho dovelopacnt of a vacciro for diser.so (rindorpost;
Ruhr-dysontory"—question mark by translator-"aro in progroas."

"Dopartaont 3|

"Rogiorungsrat Dr. Bayeri Research on the 'angers of tho turnip woovil,
the turnip bug, :nd tho antlor, .Ives no clear results as yot. Tho exporr-
monts on patato stalk rot r.rv' ,>otato tubjr decay havo boon postponed.,
Exporinont3 with Soptoria tritici havo boon negative so* far; on the other
hand, blight sooms particularly dangerous and will bo tested a.'re inten¬
sively.


-1U92


10 Jan 2i7- A-S .-15-lA- Hay
Court .'o. 1


"The cxgcrincnts on the Cancer involved in introducing n_, ds arc

otill in an initial state,

" In general the wish has bean caressed to nculd the defense upon
the feed situation and th^ c tale of disoesa in England. The nocoss-
ary stops will to token.

"Chonical ..'arfarc of ..ry Ordnanoo reports that tho boUb AC J>CAB
dovolopee jointly with General .Ur Hate rial CZ 7, has already shown
splendid reoults."

.'o turn now to ^ocuiiont Itexbcr 6 hi which will be Prosecution's

E:diibit 327. /.(rain, I an not cv.ro, and rat or think, that the dofenso
counsel has not receive ! tho Gor.xm cc;o o.‘ this and conscquentl;' it
is offored subject to objoction taker. b the Defense counsel.

THL PH-G1DEOT: Tho doounont rill ho rcooived under tho cone ob-
jocticn as tho last.

HR. McHAiGYx Has tho Tribunal received a copy cf tho translation 7
6 kl- thin is docuucnt nuoher NO 6hl which will bo i rojocution*a Ex¬
hibit 327. Tho first page Is shyly a facing shoot with the na:x of
Profossor Blonu on it, ^ho socuml pa o of tho dooormnt in a tclotypc
to S3 Standartcnfuohror Dr. Brandt, that is Rudolf Brandt, datod Aug¬
ust 16 , 1 ? Itlx:

"Professor Blonc requests on a.v intuont with the leichsfuohror -SS
in order to mix a report, after 23' ..ugust 1911, rinco variou: data cann¬
ot bo cade available beforo that tine.

I tens to be reported:

"(1) Use of noxious insects by tu. ore ay,

"(2) Spreading of Colorado Beetles 'jy t!« onc^.

"(3) Poison experiments in co;ucc -:;i with tho report of 21 July
undo to Roichr fuchxvx*-S«J. irofessor Jlt-ac is urged a. ain to
teat the p .i3cn larv-dintcly.

"rrofessor Blent, desires ay participation but I an sunaonod to
Gauloitor Hofer for August 2h. n


-1A73-


10 Jan Ill-2- - R- y

Court No. 1


3 of this indicates that trie docuncnt vas cent by Sievoro,
but I would like to see the -ricixol before. (?h^ criminal iras ahonn to
l!r, ZScHanoy) Y..s, I think that is Siev^rc, Sf Standartonfuohrcr* It is
ratlur an interesting pcint about tliis dccuaont, iten Ho, 3, p icon ex¬
po rinents in ccnncction with tile report cf 21 July naefc to the Jioichofuchrcr •
i'rofescor Dloo- is urc>.U n^ain to t-st U.w prison immediately. I. a; pears
that certain poison oxperiuents have been carried out >>y the Defendant
Bloi.c on which ho was to nako a report tc the Roichsfuehivr, and rc-
f.rrin^ hack in that cameo tlen tc the previous exhibit 326 vdiero I str¬
essed to the Tribunal that part cf Micro's .iccor ndun on 23 l’obruaiy
1966 in uhich he states that since*

"Further iere, certain nicconcoptions conccrnin,; the effect of
ro xlnun doooa of several poisons can be corrected only by experiments
on huuon boin;;a"

And I sup-cat to the Tribunal that theso cxpcrlnonts woro in fact
carriod out after 23 February 1966, and that Prcaocution's Exhibit 327
indioatoo tlmt tho Defendant Blorx is. tc nakc a rop rt on the so
poison oxporinonta. I would nr.( liico t<. ffer for judicial notico ty
tho Tribunal an uxoorpt fron tho Jud^cont cf the International iiilitary
Tribunal, and this oxcorpt ia taken frtn pa^o 16, 691 of tho official
English Transcript, This excerpt reads :s f-Uovs*

"G< viot prisoners of war wore also r.ado the subjoct of nodical
experiments of tho nest cruel and inhuman kind. In July 1963 c ..-erimon-
tal v/ori: was bosun in preparation for a campaign of boctoriolo-icol war¬
fare i Soviet irisenora .f rs\r v re used ir. these nodical oxpcr’-.cats,
which eu>rc often than not pro7od fatal."

If the Tribunal please, tiw xrosccution has n . supplied a German
c p; o' this excerpt to tho Defense Counsel, and I tako it that it is
not nscoacnxy ncr required by tho rul^s, I wculd do so nonoally. How¬
ever, this has been gotten to^other r thcr hurriedly. I take it then
that no prejudice has 1 cen done by tiic Prosecution by not having rubnitt-


-i'.96-


10 Jan 15-3.'-- Ray

Court Ho. 1

o<l It to then.

TIG ? R SS I £ E HT: The defense C ons-l v:uld ' c entitled to rccoivc
a copy -f the extract frua tho r.c.rd of the Internati *nal lilitary
Tribunal, or othor natter* it which This Tr ibunal is required to
take judicial notice.


-US5-


10 Jan. 47-A-16-1-PKP- Board.

Court No. 1

UR. UcHfKEY: Wo thus sec that the International Military Tribunal in
its Judgomont, bos nado a finding of feet; thet bacteriological
warfare experiments wore carried out on Soviot prisoners of war, nnd that
3000 of them proved fatal, Vio submit that the defendant Blcoe wes very
vitally concerned nnd connected with the bacteriological warfare experiments,
and is thorofore effected by this finding.

I would like to present into evidence two Additional documents on the
proof of the Euthanasia Experiments. First of those is Document No. 1063.

This is a very long end c cop re hen sivo report cade by the Bureau of Invcstigatior
of War Crimes at Amsterdam.

DR. SEIDL: (For the defendants Fischer, Cebhardt, -nd Oberhouaer). The
Prosecution intojKls to submit Docuount No. 1063 in evidence. I object to the
admission of this evidenco. It is true that article 9 of Ordinance No. 7,
of tho Military Government, which is competent for this Tribunal, facilitates
tho admissibility of certain documents. This Ordinance speaks of depositions
and decisions of military . nrt othor courts of tho Allied .Nations, This is
not such a report. I speak furthor of tho courts of investigating
commissions of the United Nations fer Mo r Crimes. It must be investigated
whether Docuaont No. 1063 observes tho conditions of ..rticl- 9 of Ordinance
No. 7. I assert this is not the case. This Docuaont is nothin,; but a
compilation of letters nd record's of interrogations by police officials,

<md ilailor docu«on«. U,rri», to th „ rirot Whr * !;mMbcr 19i5>

this is obviously a letter * darosswd to the Minis tor of Justice of the
Netherlands, end at the end of this letter it says;"! a at *11 timos ready
to swear to this tostinony." It is, therefor*., apparent that tho report was
not sworn. This document I cite only :s *.n uxnmple. It contains no other
information th't the report of this letter was prepared in the presence of on
official of the dar Crimes Cxxiission. The document c r. be called c


-U96-


10 Jan •'7-a-'i/_-16-ln-3ocrd
Court rfo. 1


Cccipilation of rocir^s of tl -j .esc various sorts, but ono cannot
sr-: that t! is is cn cffioicl roport -f cn Investigating Ccmission
f r V.'cr Cri -os for the United Nations. I, thoroforo, roquost
th-at this dccunont net bo admitted in oviuunco.

”R. ‘'cK i«3Y: In rdor net tr c nfupo tie argument, I would
like to ignero the romrks nr.do by the dofor.se counsol r.s to
tho contents f this rop rt. It if lr^.iatorlal ns to what the
forn .'f tho ropert i:ay bo or its centonts, Ifco ouostion is:
whether or not it i? Admissible in ovidonco or whether it is
ontltled tr bo Judicially n ticod by tho Tribunal, hrticlo 9 cf
Ordinanco »c. 7 states that the Tribunal shall always tako Judicia
notice of official Govom::or tel dcoun..nts and reports of tlo
dnltod fj.ti ns, including tho acts and documents of committoes sot
up In tho various i.lliod c'untri^s for the Investigation of war
crlr.os, and tho rocirds and findings cf c alliter” or other
tribunal. It ia, Lewov-r, the nets and dccunonte of a onxriittoo
sot up in one cf thw allied ccuntrios; nmoly, that cf tho ilothor-
lands, and each page cf this dccumont, the original of which lo
in Dutch, boars the official stamp .f this coinittoo, It is quito
apparent that It is a roper- cf cn official ocn-.lttoe sot up In
tho iSothurlr.nds, and it represents r. very painstaking and prolong¬
ed investigation, a.nd, ccntrr.ry tc w>at tho dofonso o.cunsol has
said, I think that this rop*-rt includes verbati« extracts from
str.touonts taken fren witnesses rathor heightens the prc‘*rtivo
vc.luo i'f thu dcoiccent itself, ref er than dotraots fro.i Its ad¬
missibility. *• great nun or cf thoso rop-rts nedo by investigat¬
ing ccix’issions are nothing ucro than a running account of tho
Conclusions of investigating cccriiosicna, but here th. Tribunal
Is pr*. vidod with these facts end statements upen which tho cannitfc
bo.sos its roport. Iho Presocuti'-n is not ccrcomod as to whether
tlis dccunont bo accepted as an exhibit. Wo b old prefer it that
way because it then gots in exhibit nunbor, and is mere easily


10 J :.n 17-.-.- hw16-2r.-.:o. rd
Court Ho. 1

identifiable in tic record, and that the Tribunal tnko judicial
n tico cf It o.a required by Article S ef Ordinance He. 7. Wo
h-.vc n intention cf roadins ttls very lcr.£ ropert into the record.
We simply include it with the theugh t that it ainht bo cf erne
r.ss istance ti the Tribunal in lee kin;.; over and doturninin^ the
extensive boo po of ti.« nodical experimentations cn hunaa * loin^s,
a.)d hi is rooort elvers seven difforont c-ncontrati n canps. I
woulu like tc pass up tc the Tribunal tho cri-lnr 1 drounont,

(®w cVeununc was delivered t* the IVibun. l.)

>R. SriDL: I ala 1’. lik^ ;o neke tie following statement in
ro;r.rd c the Prciocuti na or n -rticlo 9 r f Or . 1 • noo Hr.,

7 apor.ko rf ro.xrto f lnv atiG-atin*: c znlaaicna f r th ttoitcc'.
Krti na f r ...r Crlixr, accordin'- t•• th intc rpr. tati; n rf that,

I understand it t< -.oca r^-p. rts rod n't just the reprrducth n
rf p- lie- lm-vOti.: ticn rwC'rla or rf letters r ai 1 llrr d ©ur.onta
'• report cans t> - cu-.s'i- .nd cvr.luatlrn of tl.u invest* T-tin. - :
o isal n 3ot up t. investigate these < . 1 xe. T ^ ) u - '.in' 1 -f
U it doou unt, D ciLxnt . 1063, re la as f-ll-cs: "Ih .t in
tl lr c..i-, :.t le. st, there is nc rep.rt, no evaluation ~f the
r u suits f tl invert! ?.ti'n. M


- 1193 -


10 Jan 1x7- U-G'J- 17-1 - Olakly

^ourt Bo. 1


In the trial before the International l-ilitary tribunal reports
of auch investigating ecrxiiscions w.rc acceptod; but thoy
were not tt-roly a cmpilatdon of police records or of letters to the
authcriticc. They wv.ro Always the result ol an independent Invertirjavicn
of tho ccaniasion concerned , which, sinilar to the activity of a court,
had evaluated tho notorial presented aiu had investigated it to d.tcminc
to what extent this tutorial had evidential value. Thcro is p question
of such an evaluation in this report, y B the heading alcno shews, it
ia only a conpilation of indivichitl dt cunents of police invertigatien
rocorda, of letters to tho Ministry of Justice, without any investigat¬
ion having boon nado as to whuthjr the individual Jccuixnta really cscjc
freo tho persons concerned and withe - the ccocaissians' hiving evaluated
the value of tho anterial.

TIC : hSSIIE T: The Tribur dl has ha;' no epyertunity to investigate
this document, a it contain atato'xnts concerning tho dof-ndants in

this proceeding?

VR. llcKAfCYi Yes, a ninbcr of U»c facts reported in hero consumed
c.vpcrincats with which we havu dealt in this casv.. Oth-r statcaunta go
beyond that and concern other uattcro which we have not hero cpociflcally
toadied upon.

TIC PI£SILKJfI: .The Tribunal will rccoas av this tino.

THE li.vPSH.vLi Tribunal Nusber 1 will rocoss for a short tino.

• (A recess was token.)


-1L99-


10 January-.:*^) JO—13-1-Burn 3
Court Ho. 1


TH: XWSILJ 4 The Tribunal is again ir. session.

'.'iB rRESESJfTi Concernin, tho exhibit that was effered by the prose¬
cution, the Motherlands' exhibit, the Tribunal having had insufficient
tire to have oxaodnod this exhibit, will reserve its ruling upon it's
admissibility, »

JR. 'EHaNEVi Tho prosecution wruld now like tc offer UO-UUL.

THE IIlESirSNTi Here's tho original exhibit.

!R. ’CH.-HEYI As Prcsocution Erhibit 323. The report by tl»c Nothor-
lands was efforod as 328 out sinco tho Court —it ni^ht bt, if tho Tribunal
please,— it wight be better to pruaorvo that number after being offered as
Prosecution Exhibit 328 pcndlnj the ruling of the Tribunal on its a*iiss-
ibility.

THE PPESI">EOTi That's correct. Tho rflorcd exhibit will be mrtrhod
Prosecution Exhibit 329.

JO'.. CHAMEY* .'ocisaont HO-hUj, will therefore, bo Prosecution Exhibit
329. This is another affidavit by tho defendant Rudolf Brandt. I Bight
that this is boing offered provisionally unt 1 such tine the certificate of
Cunr.ral Taylor is Airniohud U the Tribunal with respect to the richt of
■ alter Rapp tc n&dnistor an oath, Thv affidavit rends as follows*

"I, Rudolf Irondt, bein^ duly sworn, Vo;ost and state*

"!• I bavo horetoforo givon affidavits concerning low-pressure, froct-
ing, seawater, spotted fovor, sterilisation, lost and Jaundice experiments.

s

An I havu stated, those experiments wore conducted on c ncontratl'/n camp

Irantoo*

"2. Before an axperir.ont could be c nductod on inmates of = c ncentra-
ti°n cvp, Himmler's permission hod to bu s-curod. HinaUr was very inch
inUres to - 1 in nodical natters, and it i./s easy for the Aycic:..jis concerned
to obtain his permission. This was particularly* Uk. cr.ee if it oocnod that
thu 0 xporiiuent concomed a ght aid toe war effort.

"3. Fr is oners tc bo oxperirvntud on .orc selected by Oswald rohl. Chief
of tho Econorlc nnd Administration Main Office. (T7HA) Unless ho eld it
himself, Hicrtler urod tc order oc to infers fohl that a certain mr-f^r of
.u-ioontrs should be kept re- iy for a p:rticulir c xperinent. Tho t e . 1 .. t be


1C J&nu' rywi-O JG-lS-2-3umc

Court He, 1


experiments on wore ganorally earmarked by Hlatler —for instance, Jews,
Gypsies, Folcs cr criminals condemned to eath. The individuals ti, bo used
wore selected at the canp exit of the groups specified beforehand by Hiau-
ler. Later on Htr-aler no lcrv-or ordered th^t only volunteers condemned to
rianth aero tc be used, and it is quito obvious that concentration camp
1 mutes n-rv illy did not volunteer fer the said purpose. They simply wore
oclocto ’ and oxporlmonto on withtut asking thoir ccnsont. fh_ physicians
and other persons involved in theso experiaunta appealed to Hinrilar sinco
it was impossible to got volunteers. No one involved in th-sv, experiments
could fairly boliovj that only persons volunteering for that purposo were
used,

"li. Ir. setae oasos prisoners c ndoerud to Joath wore used for those
experijn-nts, but not always. In th, c vrsc of the low prossuro and frooting
oxporiiwr.ts Hir. lor ordor tho death scntanco to be caasutod to ioprisonnont
for lifo for those who shoul survive tho ex.xrinonts. This Uircctivo,
however, did not apply to ft>los, Russians and Jaws. Priscnors of aov-rnl
naticnnltios woro used for tho experiments. Usually n n-Ocr.mn nationals
wore used ’wnupo of Hloilar*a racial theories.

"5. A num»r of people close to Hlaolcr wore woll informed of those
experiments. Karl Brandt, Qr.-wit* ant’ Cobhardt wore Cvnsultcd on this
nut tor by Hiilcr. The afcnxxntionjd were ac ibers cf tho SS-Cru,\ onruolirur
Corps, and ofton tho cxpcrii^nts woro topics of icsuccion in private talks
at Qrupponfuehror cwotin^s. Such a fundamental nattor as wore thoy cx.ori»
monts on human bo in s sir. ply could net ,o on at all, without tho non knowing
of it an’ taking a positi n with respect tc it. I'ruycvieky and Foppondick
both nom’e-ro of Grawltz* office, as woll as Sicvira, wore no fsrul‘ar >dth
these experiments as I was by virtue ’ t:*o orders I receive!. hurt Blcwe,
in hie capacity f deputy to Conti met have bean a s well infrrjc : ~.s Conti
hlisolf . Kigh-rankin reprotur.tativ o of the Luftwaffe, the Artjy, and the
Navy wore also involved in this affair, because nany of the uxperi aunts
*.oro c.n’uctod on behalf cf the .chr\'cht, Fippko, Schroe^r, -n’ llch
certainly id know nbcut the lcw-;recsurc, freezing and sua-m tor ox r dri-


10 January-di-. JG—16-3-3uras
Court No* 1


ift-nts as well as the experinents conducted y Haagen at Natsreiler. It
wuuld n.t oc sticking to the truth if cno were to say that these experiments
exclusively an affair of the SS. Signed Rudolf Brandt."


-15' V-


10 January%*v-DJG-19-1-Cook
Court He* 1

■R. XHAKEY* This affidavit, of course, surs up in a few words what
has bee tea so abundantly apparent fro; the proof heretofore submitted to
this Tribunal,

The Prosecution will have occasion, I think, before wo finally rest
our case in chief to present parhap s a few additional documents concerning
nodical ox-^riaont-ati n. However, at this tine wo turn to a soaewhat diff¬
erent phase of the case and th'.t is tha so-called "euthenasia program" carried
out in Germany botwuon the suraur of 1939 and the end of tho war.

DR. FBISKIIUnfs Mr. President, Tho Prosecution has no objection to
qy interrupting this presentation briefly at this moment with r question
concerning the statttunts or dofonso counsol. I have already yesturday
mo Jo a writton request to tho Tribunal with regard tc this question '/hioh
will bo unknown at this tioa to the Tribunal#

Tho Tribunal has in the ns anti~j announced after the noon recess that
a postponement will take place after tho conclusion of tho presentation by
tho Irosucvtlon. How, os tho Tribunal has suggested, the dofonso will commit
each othor about th:ir procedure to ~o followed. However, for the pvapevra-
tion j£ this diocusrion I would request that two additional joints bo clar¬
ified at this tinsi

firsts Ki r how Ion, will the postpone -ent last?

Lut ur take an examplei If as tho »*osecutlon has planned It “ill
concludo it*s presentation on tho c ain^ Thursday, that will bo tho 17th, and
wo should have an additi'-nal ton c.ya for cur preparation, and tho recess
would be ovur on th-. 27th. If wo havo undcratoc’ th. Tribunal corrootly,
with this limitation ol ti.-^, then ...o - ro quorUm roa'ins opens

\qu\t will happen if up uni 1 the 27th of January the iuieJiso has been
urr > cont'.ct the wltnsssos wiiich i called. soisi hSS boon

re iched yet a’jcut the intorrention of witnesses by the ofense, 'nd as far

as I know net a sintlo witness fear the defense has arrived in tho .Toantiiui

•

in Humbert# 1 roco; nize the difficulties which exist in order to bring
those witnesses heru until the end of this t.‘ e limit whicn will be the 27th.
However, on the other ham', I rquost that -he followii. be • nsi rads


- 150 >


10 January-..-LJG-19-2-Cock
Court 1*0. 1


If I — supposed to develop the theory of ay defonse, that is, if I ^ to
state in brief words what I wont to prove in order to disdain the a^gegntions
by tho Prosecution, then I oust knew if I an actually in a position to
provw this. However, I can only know that If I can previously talk to
the witnesses when qy client has requested to appear in his defense. I an
afraid that tins will not be possible by the 27th of January. I have, there¬
fore taken it upon aysoIf to surest, that the opening sp-ech, and in this
case I mi only spuakin of the client when 1 ropresent, that I will o.ily
want it ler ay cliont at the beginning of ay presentation of evidence. I
assume that up to that time - ro ays and weeks will pass, and tho same
thin , will ap.-ly to tho <Lfor.se c.u.ncl w.ioso tum c«r.j3 later and they will
bo able te aoko their openin stole:.at end to also prepare their evidence
proporly. I b.li vj that thi: should be su-;.ortod in order tr .ct out J
this otlority, and nay I point out in conclusion, that also the lrosccution
when it aaJo it's openin,, speech rlroadjr had tho documents available u,xm
which it was br.sud an* also on tho br.cio of interrorations which ha ’ takon
place in the pre-trial procoduro, on* believe'- that it wcuT* be certainly
able to actually prove that which it had claLaad.

IR. !fcH..NEY» If tho Tribunal pl-r.so, I as n»t sure I ot tho sr option
of hr. Pulchcann. If 1 und.-ratan’ it ccrrcctly ho is asking that the Tribunal
pom t each defense counsel to make his epunin statement and then present
his ovo lance, instead of each of the nimtocn dofonaa c un ol cr'dnj s 'no¬
thing in tho nature of an o.cnin,. state ont on two days, or ..’WCYcr auoh
tirao is nllT'od to thur. fer that. Is that correct?

THE F.lESIlENTt It is correct

Hr. IfcHANEYi I don't '.now that I *r proporod at this ti)» toex.roso
a jon.ral opinion .n this sublet. It w uld inconvenienco the xrosucuticn
to the extent that we would not bo advised of tho nature of the efenna
bo inf' put up by each def-ndant until immediately before ho togan tho /rosent-
ntion of evidence. In otter tv ords, we have ;ctton nothing in th: way .*f a
bill of p-rticularc, nor have wo been a '.viced, as the Lfondants ther.seIves


10 Janu?a-/-.L-DJG-19-3-Ccuk
Court K", 1


were, by the indietaent as givin infomati-n about what their defense
will bo. It will naturally take ui a little time to propare our cross exam¬
ination, our doeueonts an! rebuttal which will go in while tho dofonso is
presenting it's case, so it oa^ be this w vie! work an in position or hard¬
ship on the prosecution is to it's course or procedure. However, unless
tho Tribunal wishes to make a ralin at this tine, I would be .”la>l to con¬
sult Gonural Taylor on this setter and s ocurc his opinion, and I also lrould
like to stato that it soems to me that defense counsel had hat! a consider¬
able period of tl-io. The indict ent itself was fil*C, as I renumber on the
5th of November, in ihich was givon in quito so;* detail tho charges as
against tho defendants, and tho trial began on tho 9th of Doccnsbur, and we
still havo cone days to run plus adjournment, a minimum of seven ’ny°» for
further preparation by tho dofonao, so I don't seo that they havo boon
tacnlly imposed upon with roapuct to tho aattor of tiao.

Hew as to brin in.; tho witnassos to Humborp, I dcti't suppose that
those nir.otoon c’ofcnso counsel arc ;;estln., that wo should havo in Hurn-
borg within the next wook, or fit least prior to tho time tlio first defense
counsel be -ins presenting his e'efonso, all of tho witmssos whioh tho <!o-
fondants propose to use. I do not know ovooicely hew many witnesses -hoy
havo requested, bit I think it is rather a substantial number, and tho move¬
ment of nil C thosu witnesses t- Humber^, and th- maintenance of all of
thoso witn sees in Hurnben;, urtll tho close of this trial, would 1 think,
bo an Impossibility. If I have th.- nur.bor tbj ,’*rfon ants havi. ecid.od on,
nn 1 the order in which they arc . resenting tiieir caso, then I c ul work
out son*; sort of schedule for the r v-iocnt of tho witnesses, Prosecution
also inton 3 to begin a roview of tho caso on e by defendants, and sou, if
in certain instances it woul l not bo .essitlo to stipulate certain facts,
which would obviate tho necessity of the appearance of cort-Jr. tithe ssesa
Hero also I think any procedure should bo modified fra- to ti-w to znc^t
thv. facts end difficulties, and I think it is calling upon th. Tribunal to
!o quite r. lot to set forth these r ics before these difficulties arise.


- 1505 -


10 J^^iary-.\-JJG-19-i.-Cook
C urt No. 1


THE .'RUSE'EOT: The Tribunal is amre of those questions which will
arise and 'a to the recess, after the frosecution closes, wh^ch is now next
Thursday or Friday, the Tribunal c-uld be in recess until a week fro a tto
folloftin. V .V?y, and if the case of the .^osecution rests ary Ion. < r than
thie, a nettor cf 3 recess will again be considered by the Tribunal. As to
the uponir.- stater-nts by the defendants, at the present tint the Tribunal
Is of the opinion that whon tlx. dofenso opens its casts, each defence ccunatl
shculc nako s..c statcrcnts concern.:.™ his dofcnce, and what he cx,<jctc to
prove. Th. t w uld not Unit hir nocosuariiy, -jonuso when that particular
defendants ca3o is called the defendant could then nako ccoo further state¬
ment, if 1*, was f-rund advisable or n-ccssary in the prc-tocti'-n el 1 the rights
of hir client to <b so.

The Tribunal is aware of the difficulty in the ruttor of vr’.tivnsos and
has en 'o:iv r-J to be liberal in approving tho application lor the irir.ftirg
of witnorous and ocmcnts. Those have e..x to the Tribunal cn: havo been
approved by the Secretary Gcrvral nod a f-w have boon donied, cn-' with this
a> r jpki^''l uoi ; that tb.'so requests wore carried into effect by the ,roper
offIc lair c neerning opLration.

The Tribunal at this ti ro has ini jrnitien, ond c artninly as c vnccl
for tho frosocution has nr id, i- comot be oxpootod th it a lr.r> nur:or of
witness.. - br ught t hold hero an indefinite tino.

V/hon th natter of the or’.er in which do ion nr.te* c.aeor will bo , resontocl
and icb-nr.jncJ upon is docidod then it v.uld n-.on to ru- that srrnu^ononts
for tho Lr'curuaont cf these witnesses can then be nt o .riUi c. opvcnil
atte -j:t tt -rocurc at tho orriicot .xsaiblc tiro the witn..ss win- will \x
first cellod tc tho stand. That is also a untter in which as / quastions
wi 11 arise doubtless and ifcichwiU hove tc uo determined when t-Iioy do
arise.


‘ho Tribunal ant! the Prosecution Jus cooperative an ’ is of the

opinion thrt tnc defense s’. Mi- h vc every reasonable opport-nitj to ;TQCuro
such witi »: S03 and .ccu.-,nts as ore dc ^ noceseary for the presents n


-lj>OC-


10 Jonuary-a-'UQ-l9-5-cock

Court Nj, 1


of i proper defense. Joes this answer the question propounded by ; r. Pclch-
r.unn?

!iH. KUCOANNx Jr. President, I have under stood your onsror. However,

I an afriid that again at a Inter period of tine there will still . a*'.-
itionel ifficulties in procuring tt.o rdtnesses, because if thu .fitnesses
are only brought hor > when the case of the iivlvi 'ual dofenbint Is caught
before th. Tribunal, or a short ti c . fore that, then tIds will be i.vo ssiblu
for technical lifficulties .hich prevail in Gera any at this tiix., also because
of the cold nod railroad a nlticrs, and this also will ’cc.r^o rather an
impossibility.

THE HU2SI yii Here 1 w;u..’ sa j that *.hon the defendant "A" p.roaonts
his defense, r.nd if you h:vc cortnir -Itnussos w hich hv desires and which nrs
not tlv;n nviila’:l.., the natter of the evidence tv *o intro uccd by him in
his dofonso will not .o definitely clcttr', but that if a witness is not
th^>n available, but will be available later, thu Tribunal . uld still h<ld
his euro opera until h n::y present his witnosa.


- 1507 -


Court Bo, 1 -

10 Jan 4?-A-fcAA-20-l-reldt (EuO

EH. PELCDUB5: But than It vlll fcapoen, Hr. President, that tho
opening stateaent of each defame counsel vlll be very, very brief,
becauco nobody wants to clala anything that afterwords cay be lnoossible
to be proven. However, Z believe that It could still be considered,
the suggestion «-hlch I have Just cade, that the opening statecer.t be
cade before the cresentation of evidence for each defendant. The only
objection of the crosecutlon to that is actually only that it vlll then
have only a short ties before the actual cresentation of the evidence,
and It vlll only be able to recognize the line of the defense at that
tine. However, the sare objection has been raised fros the very
beginning to the oresentatlon of the prosecution. The Tribunal vlll be
able to recall that I hove stated that the crosecutlon does not even
let It be known In the lndlctcent the charges which aro cade against
the Individual defendants, and therefore It is not correct, either. If
the prosecutor states that the defendants already had a sufficient tine
since the lndlctcent was handed to thee to preoare thslr offense.

Kothlng at all con bo seen froa the lndlctaent.

TKL rtiSIBLn: At the ©resent tleo the Tribunal, while It cay
change Its ruling, le of the orlnlon that each defendant should nako
some opening stoteeont when ae defense case Is called. But as I stated
a aomont ago, that defense nay be aapllfled within reasonable Halts,
because at that tlae each defendant will be In a better oosltion to
otote exactly the evidence which he expects to offer.

EH. F1LCXMAES: Hr. Preaident, because the translation was not
quite coeplete, cay I recent your words thus. It will be left to tho
defense counsel at the beginning of his cresentation of evidence to
extend and to further broaden his onenlng stoteeent. ‘hat is what I
presuce that the President stated, but it has not been translated cor¬
rectly.


15CB


10 Jan i»7-A-4&iA—«i3-2-Fcldt (DJG)
Court :fe. 1


TH2 PRESLJS.Ts Of course each defendant hiving aado hia opening
statooont at the opening of the deftnao nry, when the ceso of that
individual defendant is called, nnplify the statement; he ary retr-nt
curt;in parts fro-, thrt statement; he auy then state with noro cxr.ct-
noaa exactly tho proof that ho expoeta to offer.

But the Tribunal ia *f the opinion that it would be helpful to
overyeno if at losat sccc brief opening at.toaent wero aado on tho
opening of the. dofunao by all tho defendants. Cf ocursc in nil th-ao
rulinga of tho Tribunal it aiat be nedo to appear to the Tribunal that
each dufenso counaal, in what he is doing, is acting in entire good
feith with the Tribunal. ;.hcn that appears, th_ Tribunal will endeavor
to eccord each defense ocunaol end erch dcf.ndcnt ovury reasonable
opportunity th t it npporrs ho should h?vc.

U>. MbH/.&Yi One final word before wo .»vc on t Euthanasia. 1
trust and hope the t defense counsel is not -welting the oovunent of
the witnesses t. I.Xirnberg before contacting thus in finding out «hrt
they know about thin o.se, because if they rare doing that, it is
going to a-cn th t c call r great number of people horu who will not
bo prepared to offer rny r-levant testimony to the case -nd will Just
burden ev-ryo;iu. It rill also sen that ae call n greet nunb-r of
people hero who >dll not be prepared to offer any relevant testimony
to the c r .eo and will Just burden everyone. It - ill also a.an that
dorensu counsel's ease will be wuch slower in being presented to the
Tribunal if thoj dry th-ir contacts until that date. So I have
assumed thrt -hen they hnvo put in a rcqiicst fer r witness thet the”
hrv. in some manner, either by telephone or aril or by r. trip to see
the witness, atr.hlish._d that the -itness h s something relevant to
th ease to testify tc. I hop-. I r n not —

T!C RnSiatfl: />s I stated a few accents ago, in considering any
requ st by defence counsel, the Tritun-1 vouli have to be assured that
defense counsel hed rcted in entire good frith, that during this
.•vriod counsel for the respective defendants


10 Jan -20-2-F..1 .t

C:urt Y . 1


hr. vo . j.\c ov.ry off rt pcs si' lo tc ccntrct the wltncssoo and
ascertain what they will say. Cortninly It wrulil net be reason¬
able ti roquoet witness frer. a distance wlth.cut fcr.vin my
idc :.s t whet he w uld testify. Crntr.cts rhruld cortr.lnly ba
ii".lo */ telephone, by pops nr.l application, by lottor, an :
p esi ly In ether ways. ^ofor: counsel wculd bo expected tc
exert ovory p ssl’ lu offert In r.scortninin*; at the earliest
p ssible dr. to wt- t witnesses tl oy wanted r.nd what they rr uld
testify, an. then (lotor.tinu whether cr not such toetln ny w~uld
be relevant <.r acturinl, cr pcssi’'ly whether cr n t, r.s was
st: tel n :unt ..7 by ctunsol fer the frcrecutlcn, what tho
witness cl ■) t testify t what ni^ht bo r. ;rood t ml stipulated
by the Prococut 1 n.

Dh. S..U r.r.i l’r . .’resident, nr.y I express nysolf m the
questl. Which We are di ccurc’ny? Iho Prcsecutit r. hr.s stated
that tho dof-nso cfimsel c uld get r clorr picture abcut their
witnoccec threuTh letters, thr a ph tolopl no, cr by rx.kln-r trips.
In neat c- rer this is qi ltc irpcssiblo fer us, bocnuco first cf
all, if wo try tr f.nk quo cairns by letters, wo will find cut very
littlu, ml wo will net ’.o able c £r.in a clear picture cb ut
what the witness nay kna r r.y net knew,

i n t neol tt. vr.etu any w r s r.b;ut tho subject of tho
toloph nc, baor.ueo with. . toleph no I will be unable t.- c:ntact
dlotmt places, and If I have succeeded In aottiny the rl;;ht
emnoctl r., then I will bo interrupted after naybu five or ton
.dnutoe. JY.u only th.inn th't Is loft .per tc no, then, are tho
trips, mi 1 r.ust stet the f'-llcwin in this c nnoctiens

«->- ut : year zxt\ a half a 7 wo wore rfforod nr ter vehicles
for trips f this kind. Of course, we have never obtainod those
nc ter vehlclor. Tr :irJ:c- those trips t lay by railway la cm-


plotoly lripcssiblc f r us, because wo dofenso c
have tc r.ttonl tie sessions h-re. 1 cannct bo


uncol, after all,
sway fer a weak


- 4510 -


10 Jan 47-*-U\A-2>4-Fcldt (DJG)
Court So. 1


and th :n only licdt nysolf to reading the record eft error Is. And with
tho corviitions proveillng on our railroads today it is alee quite
impossible to get anywhere by train. For cxamplo, in tho last week 1
required aware then eleven hours to teko a trip fren horo to Munich,
and I arriv .d at l&inich at throo o'clock in the looming, instead of
at 1900 hours in tho evening. If that happened to ae in another city
whoro I am a stranger, then with the cold which is prevailing right
now I could stay in the station all night.

All theso conditions aro so difficult for us that under tho
conditions under which we havo to work hero in Nufcnbcrg it cannot be
expected of us that we bo constantly traveling from Monday to Friday.

1 wanted to point out these difficulties so we will havo clarity on
that subject froo the very bcgisuiing, that wo will plainly bo unable
to fulfill this demand.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal well recopiitos tho difficulties
suggested by counsel. Tho only thing the Tribunal roquircs is that
every reasonable effort be aado by counsel in ord.r to procure tho
attendance or their witnesses and exp^dito the trial. It cannot bo

expedted that tho Tribunal will order that ovory possiblo witness
who night havo sosu. evidonco material or more or less material must
bo brought to Numberg. Tho difficulties of transportation work both
ways.

Now, besides tho methods offered, which of courso are cooplioatod
and difficult and in sect ways inadequate, it would appoer that on
semo occasions, at least, a letter could be written to see*, lawyer
in tho town who could interview tfeo witness. 1 an Just suggesting
those things. They rro matters which every lawyer knows. Many of
the applications for witnessos rtiich havo been made have boon applic¬
ations for the attendance of men who would answer letters. It is
very evident froa the neats end the positions occupied by the witnesses
that they would cccnunicato what evidence they would or would not give*


1511


10 Jan ry-A-*iAA-a>-5-Fcldt
Court No. 1


The Tribunal does not intend to demand the impossible or in any
•ay to bo even unreasonable in view of all the. circumstances. But
at the snnu tiao it is necessary that the trial be reasonably expedited
and not unduly prolonged, always with duo regard to tho ritfits of the
defendants to present their evidence in the best manner possiblo to
thus. As specific questions arise, the Tribunal will always bo open
and will listen with attention to any reasonable application for relief
in any specific circumstances.

As I said a accent ago, the caso of each defendant would not
necessarily be dosed when he had offered all the ovidenco then avail¬
able to him. His ease coull be held open to offer evidence which
became available at seme subsequent time. 1 knew nothing nore that
th«. Tribunal can soy at this tine.

W. UcH,JI3i In the few minutes remaining to us this afternoon
I should like to begin with tho presentation of evidence with rospuct
to the so-called "euthanasia program" as it was carried out in Germrjvy
from about Septeaber 1939 until about April 1945.

It is alleged in Count 2, Paragraph 9 of the indictment as follows:

"Between September 1939 and April 1945 the defendants Karl Brandt,
Blcoo, Brack, and Hov»-n unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly ccsnittod
Khr Crimes, ns defiaod by Artidc II of Control Council Law Ho. 10,
in that they wero principals in, accessories to ordered, nbottod,
took a consenting part in, and wore connected with piano and enter¬
prises involving the cxecuticn of the so-callwd "euthanasia program"
of the German Reich, in tho course of which the defendants heroin
nurdorod huain-do of thousands cf human beings, including nationals
of Gorman-occupied countries.


1512


10 Jin li7-/.-U\A- 21-1—Perrin (15D)
Court i!o. I


"7.'.i3 prograa involved the sy-tcactic end secret execution of
the aged, insane, incurably ill, or deforced children end other persons
by gas, lothd injections and dive s other rwans in nursing hones,
hospitals and asyluza, »uch persons •.■•ore regarded as 'usoloss on tors*
and a burden to tho Qarvan ttot ntchlnp. Tho relatives of tho so vie tins
were informed that thoy diod frocs natural causos such ns heart failure,
Gerrcn doctors involved in tho buthanosia progron -..•ore also sent to
tho .Eastern occupied countries to assist in tho rcss er.tcradnntion
of tho Ja.•s,"

Tho snro facts r.ro char ;od on paragraph lh of count III of tho

indLctnont as constituting a criro against hunanity, I would like to

note cloar at the outset th t tho Prosecution doos not take tho position

that :;o 3tr.to can validly or.tct a law do ding with euthanasia, I

understand th t eoas for: cour.tM.es haw outhanasJa laws, It goes with-
• •

out saying, ho;rarer, that any such lai: -.rauld havo u> bo carriod out

under .roper a-fuguards. Tho Prosecution doos take tho position that

tho Corcan Hoich never enacted a eut-Vaasic lar or to put it -oro broadly,

no autlana.sia la ; uvs over proaulg tod ir. reiy fora, 0 man courts lir.vo

already so hold ropoat dly ardt-.oio Ju ’yents will bo brought to tho

* •

attention of the Tribunal in duo oourso, !o fvrt-'ur contend, own

though it bo asmi :d, nrguondo, th*t a valid Oercvn law was pronulgat-

od, thoro no right, soral or logoi, to apply such an aasisaod law to

non-Oersra natlorris, pooplos of G rasa occupied countrio3, ’lore again,

•

\kj aro not trithout legal precedent, as it was hold 'y a United States
military Court in tho Hadanrr case that tho application of tho so-c-llod
outliannsia to non-G_man nationals was a crino and several defendants
wore condcnnad to death. This Judgocnt '.dll also bo presented to tho
Tribunal in duo course, Tho Tribunal has already acard considerable
testimony concoming tho operation of tho euthanasia proper ir. this
case, such testimony war 1 concerned with t!»c infeaous action known as

1513


10 Jan 17—:7lA-21-2-orrin (ISD)
Coyrt :£o, \


“I’l - 13", *.'o havo h_nrd tho witnesses frcisig, Kcff, Ferdinand
Paul, Itogon testify concerning tills action :, 1U ? 13°, *r.d thoy have
note it canly door that this action wa applied to non-G-man nationals.
They have also .v.do it clear that this systematic -xocution of peoples
incarcerated in concentration carp a was applied r.ot slnply to tlioso
tliought to be incurably insane, but also those effliotod with other
dioaaaes, oven extending to pooplo who had had nenbers of tl»oir body
cr.putc.tod*

Proof in this caso shall rmfco it anply clone that tho action !, Uj
F 13" was a part of the euthanasia progress, and I will remind tho Tribunal
in tit t regard tht tho witno :s Togo:; has only rccontly tostifiod of tho
uovonent of concentration carp innatos free tho Euchomrald Concentra¬
tion Coop to tho euthanasia institute at Goroburr; and tho Tribunal 'rill
hoar this nr re again and again an tho doevuants ar o presented on this
portion of tho caso. Thor- can bo no dioputo that Demburg aj-ong others

was ono of tho institutions in utdoh tho e:scutlor. of tho insano, tlio
0

aged, and other persons was carried out XT.dcr tho outhanasia program,

Coforo proco-ding to tho prosentation of ovidonco, I respectfully

ask tho Tribunal to tnleo Judicial notico of tho Judgment of tho Interna-

•

tiorval .111 tray Tribuanl in tho caso of tho United States cf Arwrica,

•

franco, Great Britain, and tho 1 ESP. against Hermann Uilholn Gooring and

othovs; tho portion of the Judgoant hich coals with tho so-called out!>*

anasia program is to bo found on pr. .3 16/16 to 16,917 and pa go 17007

of tho official English transcript, f.iese oncerpta have boon included

in tho first euthanasia docunor.t book iiich is no*.: bofor tho Tribunal.

They exo on pago 1 and 2 , Tho first encorpt which is the ono appearing
• •

on images 16,916 aid 16,917 of tho official English transcript is on pago
ono of tho English ^ocurcnt Boo!:. It roads as follows i

'.Toforonco should rleo bo -ado to tho x>licy hich was in existence

• •

in Ocrcary by tho surrvr of 151*0 , und_r which all aged,

. l$lli


10 Jr.n 17-.--’
Court lu . 1


-21-3-^rrln


insane, in. ixicurcblo poc. lo. ’Usuloec or.tora', rcro trnr.sfurro-1
t a^oclr.l Institute ns whuro they woro killed, ml their roln-
clvua lnftr.'u.l that they had died fr m.tur 1 causes. Ti e
victi a wore n t c nflnod t Gorman citi ona, but include! f r-
oi^n lr.br rorc, wh* were n. 1 n,*%r t.’ik t wrrk, mi v:oro tl orof ro
uouloaa t tlo Gun u w..r u'lohino. It hna boon oati.rc.toi tl ;\t
r.t locat s ;:c 276,000 .xj .1 vor, Icillel in tl la :amnor In nurp-
.n , l :.:oe, l.aplt&ls :rl asylums, vl icl were under 11 . JurioUc-
fcl.n f tLi def undent Frick, In l.lr or.prcJty :\a inJt:t..r f the
Intori. r. i* w rony f<rol;-n «t rkora wore include i in this t*t:.l
it Ir.f boon quite i . ' aciblo t Jotor ino."

Thu a oe nd excerpt ic fr p.“*> 17, )"7 f tl . - ffioir.) dnT-
llat transcript, n It r.ppo; re n pr.;:u tw -f tl j Xii^liok D-. cu-
nont 3 k. It ro.. U :.c fill-wa:

"Durin : fclu. war nuraln ’ 1 :\a, hospitals, arl &syluno in
vrl iol. outl r.nr.ai»\ wus pr.'.ctico r t iwocribou oltewlioro In tl ia
JuJ-*o ont, c:;io under lrlck’a Jurl i.’.ictiin, l u V ’ kn wlo ;o
tint lnscno, nick end r.*;od pc . lo, 'useless or.turr', wore boinr
ayst. r;ticr.i:y put t loath. C . pi lnt: f then Mur-ltin ronche!
li , but ho ;i» n tl in,; tt rt p tl-u,.. i. rup. rt .f tl o Creel rl vd
Wr.r Cri ua C lacl n ostl r.fco'. tl ' t * > 7f,0.»0 ; ontr.lly doficiunt
nnd r. rod . u pie, IV r wl no wolf-.ru ho w.-.s rusjxnsiblc, fell
viebla tf it."

I w uLl cull tl «. Tribune J'a r.ttontln t thj fret th't those
fin-tin r by tl o intern. Uni' Uit.-.rj '-V hum 1 Irrwa nr Jlrtlno -
tlrn botw.. i 0 . i . , -ti ur.lr, au' Joctw nn: executed thr* U/?l tho
cutt.mt.sir. pn^r.'.., n. n n-G^r -n nr.ticnr.la.

'‘l u auc nd uXCerpt .r.kea n dlstir.c fci. n wl r.tovur, mi r.ll rf
tl.^ao (ixoochlona r.ru dorcribod with tl o » rl a urJora 11 .

We turn n •./ t< P «50-?a ^»hich wo cffor nr ’rtaoQUfcicn

x’. lb It 530. I> ir ia cn pago 5 f tl English w.cioio - .

ilia kcunur.t w-.e prcaontod in ovidonco in tl tri.-.l bef thu


1315


Court So. 1

10 Jan 47-A-lAA-21-4-rcrrin (230


International K11itary Tribunal. and was there adnltted oi USA Exhibit
dumber 342. This It a letter da tad 1 September 1939, and the letterhead
of A. Eltlor.

THE PRESI3EST: Vhat la that data, count#1, Xy nage hard - It la
inooaslblo to rdad It.

lih. KC HAXETl I vlll mass the original uo. Tour Honor.

DE. S1R7ATIUS: Kr. Praaldact, thla document la Just being lntroducad
na a letter of Hitler. I vould Ilka to otata at the very beginning that
It la not a latter. A latter la addraaaed to an addraaaoa, but I claim
It la a decree. It vn* coeollod with the eaalatence of Karl Brandt. I
only ^t to atate hare that thla la not a latter, but that It la a
decree. I vould like to esohaslse thla at tha very beginning.

KB. KC HAXSTl I take It that that la a natter for argument whether
it la a letter or a decree. In any arant, I would like to have the
document poaaed uo to tha Trlbicol, and they can aea for thecalevea Juat
what the docunant iooka Ilka. In any event, It la dated Berlin, 1 Septem¬
ber 1939. It read* aa follow*:

"Relchalelter 3ouhler and Dr. Brandt-■ The tranalatlon

I don't know whether that should be "K.P." or not ■-are charged with

the responsibility of enlargl;-; the authority of certain ohyalclana to bo
designated by none In ouch a manner that persona who, according to human
Judgment, are Incurable can, upon a cost erraful diagnosis of their con¬
dition of sickness, bo accorded a mercy death. Signed A. Hitler." with
a handwritten note at tha bottce "Given to =e by Pouhlor on 27 Auguat
1940, signed Br. Ouertnar."


1516


J -22-Gilla^hsr (ISO)


!«. IIcHiHZr: A3 to tho date or. tho top or tills docunont allows tliat

la 1 So.-tcrijor 1$3? , this letter of "Trlass" or order, ina issued on

•

tho very dry of Qerrmjft attack or. ?ol-nd, on the day -.lien tho highest

\rcr lord of Germany c .rtainly was not concerned with hunerttarian and

ougonic natters. This d-to rlcno proves that tho noasurcs to bo

crwlod out ..-ore not intended for tho bor.ofit of humanity, but for tho

bonofit of tot-3, war. The other day tie Iicnd.-rltton note on tho botton

of Uvo lot tor Shan* that Guertr.or, tho I Inis ter of Justice, rocoiv.nl
it alnost cno y^r after its lssuanco. If tho persons irtio woro chared
tho responsibility lor tho oxccutior. of tho to Lis true tions vould
luxvo conoid red this pioco of apor to constitute a 1 aw, thoy would
not liavo hesitated to aubrdt it ir:*dirtc3y to tho highest lojal rutli-
ority in tho Iloioh in 'illeh tho sphere of influonco would havo ’.ridoly
affected this program.

it tills tioo I nsk tho Tribunal to recall tho affidavit of tho Jo-

fondant Harl Drandt, which was dccur.er.t l!C-l;75* introducod as :Yooo-

cutor's Inhibit Ko. U; "Iso tho .affidavit of tho dofondmt Viktor

Oracle, which ur* docunont WWJ20, introducod a Prosocution's Rx-

•

hibit Ko. 3h, end tho affidavit of the defendant Haro, which :.?.a

• •

doettont H0-ij71, introduced as Pron edition's inhibit Ho. 238.

•

In vraernph five of tho -ffidavit of Karl rrandt, ho adttLta liio

connoction with tho luthenasio pro^rac. So it is with tho lofondant

• • •»
Dr-ck in paragraph fivo of his affidavit, rrosocution'3 Inhibit .Vo. 3h,

rnd, defendant Moto in parcgrnjfc five of Ms affidavit, Prosecution's

.Inhibit Ho. ZJ6, admits liis knowlod^ of tlio rrogr- itself, rnd in tho

roi: which was placed by tho dafoadoata fcrl Srrnrit and Brack. Her tho

convonior.ee of tho Tribunal wo h-ve included tho affidavit of Karl Crar.dt

^ VlStor th ° -Socumoat Dock on peg* four and page seven

rospoctivoly. The “ffidavit of Slone should bo included in one of tho

following docaa ont books on 3othcnasia.

I now offer into ovldooco Docuorrt " 0 - 253 ,

Tie: BlISl r .2L* Jint a nocont, counsel. Receding tho ronarka node


1517


10 J-ru-ry - , .-DjC-2:-l-Ocll—her (ISD)
Coixt Ifo. I


by Dr, S_rmtiu3j of-course, tho do’cripticr. by tho Pro3ocution cf this
document or l:ttor ia not binding, -ho docmont socclbs for iisolf
chibjcct r.t nil


10 Jrrarry W.-DJi-22-l-OalIar.her (1SD)
Court lio. I


tl-.s to crguoont, to which it ixnr actually is. Counsel tho pages in
tho Docurcnt Book furnished tho court is not meberod.

IR. IcFJUnnST: is not nurfcorod?

Tld lOOin: 13 not nunb.rod, Tloaao explain this port which
VT.3 loft OUt.

:r.. IidLUBEf: If tho court pleas*., at tho conclusion of today's

sossion, if you trill plcaso hend yow books -> cck, I shall soo that
/

they cro nunbored.

DR. fTBTBOCf.KN: r. Prosidont and .'r. IxManoy, I an do'onso oounaol

ho re for Braclo-Vlktor Brack. Tho nrosocuticn now intends to note tho

(• • ••

chart—! r. Prosidont, tho prose cut! n nor intends to nako tho chart tho

subjoct of discussion. I objoct to tho aftxtsion of tho chart as

ovidonco, rnd I shall dvo a foil re son for ry objection. Tho chart

ms conpilod in tho c our so of a prelirdnaxy procoduro by tho gontlonon

of tho prosooutior. as fror. tho dofondant Brack and as a skotch without

any further docunontcjy support, rnd tho official relations botwoon tho
poroons for trtiich tlioy r ro intorostod was shwm to tho Irooocution In
tld a ir.ttorj in this tray thora is tho picturo of coordination, subordin¬
ation, organisation, and systcr. bct»A>on tlio dofor.dr.nts Brack, K rl Bran it
and Bla» and of Prick and so on; an organisation \rhich Ir reality r.ovcr
oxiatod. Tho affidavit itself not compiled by tho dofondant Brack,

but by ono of tho interrogators. 1 *. wr.c only submitted to tho dofoivlant

\ •

Brack on the 12 Octobor 19U6 for his signature. It was corpiled freu
tho itatoaonts of five or six of his ...terrog-tiens. At that tine Brack
had protested -ydnot tho contents and tho fornulntion of tho affidavit
bocauoo of vising inappropriate Inrrji words, which had bocono corrplotoly
incorrect. It '.“3 so axrdttod by Brack to ono of tho interrogating

•

Officials that tho text of tho affidavit ™s not correct on all tho points,
and did not agreo or. all points in tho tort of Ids affidavit, and on
te.o points tho affidavit contained a conclusion which had boon drawn
by tho prosecution; also iron the translation into tho l-.glish language
also stored zero linendst difficulties. !•©:•over, it was further stated that

1516


10 <‘ SD >
Court Ho* I


it rad not so rsich tho -fords ?a rzih :r ‘-he


aorjiisiS oT tl>o doclnrr.tion.


Since, hwrover.


1$IZ A


10 Jora:ry^-~JG-22-3-Gall3.;;hcr
Court Ho. 1

it had bean taearraetly lntxodacad, in reply to this Brook ho, aloo objected
to thu chance of the fcrsulati-.n that took place on scoo points. Howrrsr, .
Brock at that time -ns physically and Dentally In a very bad condition, and
therefore, to did not realise thrt the affidavit submitted tc Mb, together
with tho chart, c otained mssorcus ads takes, oisurJerstandin; r, and in¬
correct statements. Ho therefore gave in to your official anr* signed tho
offidavit. Tilth this story as I hr.ro just described it to y.u, tlvo affidavit
anJ tho chart, which was pert of tM affidavit, is not a correct declaration
which cre w out of the defen lint Brack hiasulf, and thorofore, it soor-s to
bo arv'. to have lost its local adMssibility as tvi J cnco.

UR, JCH.JETI If the Tribunal :lonso, the arguaont soon* to be some¬
what confusing by tho fact that a ..rent nutter cf the remarks mae'e by tho
defonso counsel wore a dire a sod a.ainat tho document, -hi eh has already been
n'kaittod into ovldonce, nancly, tho affidavit of Viktor Brack. I did not
^ulto understand hia objectiwn at tha ctnrt.

TH FRZSI'ZHTi Of c urro, in the aatlor of tho affidavit already re¬
ceived in evidence ns ma * by the defendant Brack is subject to any attack
by him, -hich h.- nay have tha jrlvilcce of ■»« -hen ho takes the witness
stand, as to his physical and jcrttrl oondititns at that tine. Ost the ether
hand, tho prosecution must be .repored to establish that chart new undor dis
ucssion is correct.

!«, FRBEBOWiiNIfi Hay I still mkc another stateaont.

THE FlESt£>r:« Yos.

rR, yRUZRCHiWii then tho affidavit was presented, tho cbirt war not


-151P-


Court So. 1

10 Jan 47-l-KAA-22-la-Gallaghjr (Z3i)


enclosed with the affidavit. The chart vns only submitted no a document
to the defendant 5rack two days ago, and therefore ho was not able to
previously take nny stand whatsoever in connection with this chart.

DR. SUjVaCIUS: Dr. Servatlus for the defendant lari Brandt. Hr.
President, ! have Just found out the objections which exlot against the
admissibility of this affidavit. I therefore object to Its use against
Lari Brandt and I ask that the prosecution be reouested to Present the
original interrogation and files so comparison enn be node to vhnt he
has personally stated, end what hat later been out into the affidavit.

MU MC HA25.lt X would like to repeat that the affidavit, if I an
correct, is already a oart of the record, so I don't understand the
objootiono being made to the affidavit itself. 1 now want to offer into
evidence the chart, which is being offered as signed by the defendant
Viktor Brack, "his affidavit is true, and it contains some descriptive
notorial which ve will read into the record, but the affidavit itself
has long slnc% been admitted, and is Prosecution's Xxhlbit Ho. M.
Document *0-630.

TKL PRhSIEX:!i Kr. ..cEaney, is this chart which is now on the »*nll
a correct fucsislle of the chart—

KR. KC KAKEY: Yes.

TKr. PfcaSlIOK: —of the smaller chart which you are Prewiring to
offer in evidence, or is it a composite chart made froe several cherts,
ac wus the case in regard to the composite charts that were referred to
at the inception of the trial?


1520


10 J^nuiry^i.JO-23-l-Gaylcri
Court ?Jo» 1

15i* ifciUNEIi The c.-urt room c.v-.rt which is used for tho convenience
of tho c jurt only purport a to be a reproduction cf tho chart -drawn and
signed by the defendant Brack, Tho bis chert, of course, is nit offered
into ovidonce. It is a copy of the smaller chart. Tho smaller clv’rt, which
is signed to by the defendant Victor Brack, is tho document be in; offored
it this tise.

THE FnESr SKTi Of course, it's very important to all concerned that
any chart effored *rrt rtcoivod in evi-’ence, studied by tho Tribunal and
the rcspoctive parties, is in fact correct.

At the tire, the Tribunal will rccoss until nine thirty o'clock on
Monday morning. The counsel fa- the prosecution should nako ov^ry effort
in the ncantisw tc ascertain vhethor cr not this chart is, as a aattor of
fact, n correct ropresuntaticn of the facts, and wo will take tho matter
of tho presentation upin tho corain;,

MR. IfeHAHEYi I W3uld Ukc, before tho Tribunal adjourns, to correct
tho record. It was stated that tho affidavit of Brack was ^ooraaont NO-320,
Prosecution Exhibit 31. That is, in fact, an affidavit of Victor Brack.
Howovor, taw one with which vs aro hero concornod is another affidavit by
Brack which is Docurwnt N0-W6 which was adaittod as iroeecution Exhibit
160,

THE FV'"SI?. fTi Tho Tribunal will now recess until li.n.-’ay morning.

TIE U. 1 RSHAL 1 Tho Tribunal will not recess until nine thirty Mon '.ay
morning*

(The Tribunal adjourn:'* until 13 January 19ii7, at J?30 hours,)


1521


Roll 3


Target 2


Volume 5


Jan. 13-16, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. v* KARL BRANDT at ol
VOLUME 5


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


13-16 January 1947 pp. 1522-1870


/f?7

13 Jfo-Vt-OSS-1—hotter (3K)

Co-art No. 1

Corrected Copy

Official Transcript of the -aerlcsn Military
Tribtsipl in the natter of the United States
of Accricn, against Irrl Brandt, et nl,
defendants, sitting at Sum berg, Gercmy, on
13 January 196, 0930. Justice Beals preelding.

?KZ Ki ogmTj The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal X.
Military Tribunal I is now in session
God sare the Un*ted States of xnericn and thio
Honorable Trlbunol.

There vi11 be order in the courtroon.

THS FKESlIUKTi Mr. Hnrshnl, ascertain if rll the defendants nro
present in court.

THE KARSHALl Kay it please. Tour Honor, all the defendants wo
present in the court.

TKZ PRESIDENT! The Socretary-Geaeral will note for the rocord
the presence of all the defendants in tho court.

DR. SBHTATIUSl Mr. President, you asked how tho dofoneo wo going
to conduct their defense. *e arrived at an agrooaont that we nro
going to do that as the defemirate are sitting in tho dofondonte'
docket rad in the tone wny as the prosecution has nmed tho
dofondnnts. If there should be any snail chmgos anong a few
dofondrnts rad if a few defenso counsel should nake sono changos
In the nranor in which they pro going to present tholr caso, wo
are going to advise tho Tribunal about it in tine.

THE PRgSlD32*T: The statecent of counsel, of courso, will bo
included in tho record.

Tho prosecution cay proceed.

MR. KclUFETj If tho Tribunrl please, I think at this tino wo


ruling by the Tribunal the adalsslblllty of twa

which wne offered as Prosocution
report by a coldt too of the Netherlands
of certpln war crises. Is tho


have


ruling on th, t docunent thio Doming?


13 Jan-h-GS!-1-2-lister.

Court So. 1 .

13 JP 2 SIDSST: The Tribunal Is not propped to cake a ruling on that
docuoont tais sorning. Giro no again. if you ploaso, tho nunbor of that
dOCUSMft.

AcH-»! 3 T: That is Docunsnt SO IO 63 which wus offored as Prosecution'
Sxhlbit 326 . The other docua»nt as to which there was an objoction Is tho
chart of ths ornlsatioa of ohs so-called Euthanasia progrnn oi b -nod and
sworn to by the defendant VikiOr 3rack. That is Docuoont NO 253 " hlcn wa *
offered as Prosecution Exhibit 33^*

T:£E P-K1SID2.-.T: ifcs thi prosecution chocked that exhibit or oxnninad it?

MH. hcHalST: I an cm/t:.cod, Tour Sonor, ns I recall, tho quotation
MVS waother the wall caert u>w bor'nd the witness box is a facsinilo of tho
chart drawn by tho Defendant Viktor Brack. and I aa prepared to stato that it
is. In othwr words, this gi c eh«rt «* drawn by tho prosontation ooction
l’roj the stall cert.

7.X PnSSlES:.U .J rsneober the objection urgod by tho dofonso
counool war tno original. chart was not a true rotrocontntion of the facts.

I any bo wrong about that.

KH. acElKETt That tho original chart was not a truo roprosomntion
of tho facts?

TSS FKESIDEJfT: I unierstund the dofonso counsel urged that tho
Dofondnnt Brack in sr.king Lis affidavit la preparing the chart had proparod
one which he now conte;iis wae not accurr.to. ©oncoming that, X any bo in
error.

KH. acKlKTf: Veil, if tno rribuuvl ploaso, ho has done two tilings.
Firstly, ho has plvor. us an affidavit which is Docuoont SO U26, which doa-
crlbes nt soao .\ongth tac operation of tno Euthanasin Program. That docuaont
aas -vlrcudy bovcv ..dsittod as Prosecution ScLlbit l 60 . ©jo only docuoont now
beforo tac Tribunal for a ruling is tho chart, .is to that, I con soo no
grounds for objection. ©10 chart wne drawn by tno Dcfondnnt Viktor 3rr ek or
at least und» r ..is direction, and is si f 3iod and sworn to by ths Dofcndant

Viktor Brack, and consequently wc suboit it is admissible.

15&>


13 J»»-G£&-J'->-lo»ter
Court Ifc. 1.


THS P?SSnJ2:Tl Will counsel noko an objection to the ndaission of tho
chart, will ho steto hi* objection o»uIn.

DR. TBOISCHJUID.' (Counaol for tho Defendant Viktor Brack): Mr. President
during tho Jrilay to salon I pointed out thi.t Defendant Brack because of hia
physical aid aornl condition at that tico was not in a position to cor.aldor
the dotaila of Lis statement and tno chart walch ho drew, and still rocognixo
it oxactly. Ho has now found out that this eh: rt, through tho nannor of it a
proaontation, there arises the impression between the Chancellory of tho
Fuehrer and the Dofondnnt Brack, there is an organ!xntionnl coordinntionnl
relntl >nahlp walch in actuality dll net exist. At the tiao whon ho wt.b
interrogated had he boon at t:.it tico in full physical health and had ho boon
In a position to consider tao anttor carofully, ho would havo polntod out to
tno prosecution that a number of connecting linos in this chr.rt aro wrong
oad orronoaus.

DR. 8AUNQI (Per the Dofonlant 3loao)i Hr. Prosidont, us dofonso

counsel for tno Dofendont 31 -Bm, I da not object to the odniosibility of this

chart. la order to avoid tho prosocutlon having to toll us lator, howover,

tfa-.t wo hd accepted t;.is ca rt as being correct by our boing quiot about

it, I should llko to point out tho following at tho aocont. In this chart

an tho loft sido there is a yollow squnro with tho designation "Dr. Conti".

Underneath that in tho scr.ll *qunro thorc is tho notation "Offico Dr. Llndon"

That is tnc square which was Just polntod out. To tho rltfit of this squnro,

in brown color, there is a scalier squnro with tho doslgnntlon "Blono".

This a ..all squoro ■Blouo* is connected with tho largo squnro »Dr. Conti" by

greon lino. Vhntcvor tais groon color should soon X don't know yot. X

should llko to point out now that tho defendant, Dr. Blonc, cannot recognise

the fact that ..is anno be Boatload in t.iis chart at all slnco officially ho

nod nothin,, vhi.tuvor t j do with tho ontlro Iu\aa asla program. At n Inter

date, as soon as tuo Defiant Brack will bo colled to the witness stool, I

ahnll ask tho Dcfoalnnt 3rr.ci: mow this browr. square with tho doslf-nntion

"Blopo" could ha\o been put into the chart at all and whether it isn't

correct that bofore siting this ch_rt ho objoctod agplnst it i^aodi/toly ad

1524


13 Jan-H-Zfr-L-Weater
Court Ho. 1 .

declared that tr.o n a n o of 31ooo docs not belong In that chart ainco accord¬
ing to hi* knowledge Blono hoi nothin.: tfcateror to do with Suthanaain.

fhut* gontloaon of too Tribunal, is not an objection to ti.o odniaai-
bility of to* canrt but ;ocr.ly in explanation and *0 thr.t I can ci:.o book
to the *000 cat tor at a 1 -tor date when the Defendant Brack le callod to tho
vitnoaa atond.

InE PKSSE :£JTl ?-..o Tribunal u-dcratani* tho poaitiin «f tho Defendant
Blo-o. w..ica position la entirely correct, and tho righto of tho defendant
to quoatlon tho accuracy of t-»> chi rt. The court rocegnlzoa tho poaition of
t.'.e cmnael for tho Defondant 3lo:w, w.-lch pOoitiia ii entirely correct and
th- rights of the defendant will be prvaorvod tc hia to quontlon tho
accuracy of tho chart a* to hiu.

DH. SS3TATIDS (Counoel for tho Dcfondant Karl Brrndt): Xr. Prooidont.

I ;ilo o'ejoct to this ch rt and tho connecting lino thor.ln, especially
oinco thor. can bo o.;c objection na to the way t..la cn rt ora drawn up.

It lo couplet. ly incorrect with referenco to tho poaltl>n of Kf>rl 3rnndt in
particular, tho inprosslon ia bo in*- nwnkvnod that all tho officoro under-
n nt.. Kr.rl 3randt who are nentionod thor. w. r. actunlly aubordinnto to hln.

It will ohow ltaolf Inter that tala la not correct In nny way, thrt rather
the office of Souhlor mi entrusted with the oxecuticn.

TH 2 PH3SIDZHT: The Tribunal uxklcrstands the posit.on of counsel nnd
the odhisslon of the chart in evidoace will not bo binding upon tho defend¬
ant* wae i ay Inter question ita accuracy. Moanwallo, tho chart will bo
ad.-ltted in oviuonco.

JUDiZ SK33U0: Ant will tno exhibit nxabor bo too re, Mr. hoHhnoyt

»H. r<c!-wKST: Sx.ibit 331.

‘•2. l«£JKl T-;la chart slvows the largo organization walah wan set up 1,
tho Dofondnut Xrrl Brcoit cal 3ouhlor ond others for tho oxocution of tho
2 ut:.«naala Frogran. In onl.r to explain t..lo chart I would like to read
certain pare*;rapes of Document 150 -26 wnloh it an effldavit of she Dofondant

Brack and ana already been rd-dtted int ovi or-:o na Proaecutlon Exhibit l 60 .

15£h


13 35-1-5-ra«t-r

Court K . 1.


Tala Is on pc ,-o 10 of tho Sn;lleh document book. I rood froa prjneroj 4:

■4. Tao Suthcnnsic PrJjma was initiated In tho suaaor of 1939.

Hltlor issued c socrot order to Prof. Dr. fi-rl Brandt, Hcich Conoissionor
for kudlcol '-cd Eeolth Kcttors. nno at ti*xt tino personal physician to the
Fuehrer, cad to Pci 11 ip Bouhlor, caergin,; thou with responsibility for tho

t

dlliCfc of nucr. 1 toings who wr«- not cblo to llvo, th/ t is, tho according
of a :a.rcy doatn to incurably insane porsons. Prior to tho issunneo of
t. is socrot order Bouhlor had a conforonco with Dr. 3randt and Dr. Loonardo
Conti, tao Reich Chiof for Public Health and Socrotaiy of State in tho
hini try of Interior. On too basis of tais ontor of Kitlor, 3ouhlor and
Brandt won. to seloct doctors to carry out this program. Inr.sauch as tho
inecno asylu-s r.nd otn^r institutions wor. functions of tho hinlrtry of
Interior, Dr. Herbert Lin.’on bocaao tho representative of tho Ministry of
Intori or. Dr. trl 3roait .nl Jtotllip Bouhlor appointod Prof. Dr. Hoydo aid
Prof. Dr. Kietscho nlon,; wit., sovorol other nodical non to aid in tho oxo-
cution of t.:is Butnonosia Pro,;rr_.. ■


1526


13 Jar. L7-i:-2-l-SJ- Beard
C:art Ho. 1


■5. Professor Sr. Karl frendt a; in charge of the nodical section
cf tho Euthanasia Pro. raj. In this capacity, as shorn in the. chart I have
Crzm dated 12 SopUefcor 19U6, Dr. — 1 2rondt appointed as his deputies
.rof-srer ixyde a«l refossor Jliotochc. n charge of tho a- iniatrativu off-
ico under Brandt rj first Ur. * ohne and later .r. Allors. Three different
nans were used by .randt's soctacn in order to disseise fw activities
ef the organization. The na^s of tie oryanixations aro as follow:

•

"Reich Association - " -spital and Kursinc lstabliafcjcnts
"Cncritablo PounJatio’4 fer Ii-stitutional Care
"General Patient Tranopert Corporation.

"6. In the early sta a of this ? o^ra:, Dr. Karl r randt visited
.•hi!lip Bcuhlcr and discussed with hi . aany details of this nrc;,rar..

As a latter of fact, aftor such rxotiiv.-a botixcn Brandt and Dduhlcr, I
rcco-vcd .any or'-rs, or. ©"to • frea douhlcr tlicn fron brandt directly.

■7. In y capacity as Chief of Cffico 11 of Souhlcr's Chancollcry,

I uia erdcrod to c-arry out tho cd-oinis .rativo details of the Euthan¬
asia . rejran. Hy deputy « j .'amor >ianko»burs, «»» eventually bocono ny
successor, that is, in thw bosLming of 19U2 when I Joined the haffon-
SS. Van Kovner, Rhinhold Vorbor,, and ^ sior ISyvcLvum ~ o .-auabors of
ngr staff.

■C. In the Mnistry of Interior, J*. Unden wrs in charge of tho
iuthanasia frogrea and hie depot; was °ouncc_lor Pranko. -*ho department
for Public Hoaltn of tho Hi.iictr r of Interior had authority over all
insane as Iujs of the *cich, end in this p.’flition, ny department as voll
ar fx c.ficc of Lr. 'rrnvlt ha*, close liaison in order to c..:icicnly oper-
ate this Euthanasia Pro-;ran.

r.z r»C3xns

"S. i. or or of doctor Lirr'en, tie directors of all insane asylums

in the -cich had to fill out tpuctie.aircs :-r each patient ;ri«uin their

irx. tut ions. Thc3 c qucsUonair.c crafted by rouble.*, Hoy o, Jlictscho

end ethers in several »>f tho-r jsigr conferences, ‘hen tho questir. tnir-s

It 27


13 Jar. U7-U-2-2-S'.: - Beard
Court jo. 1


-acre .or-areoi to the Ministry cf Interior to ho distributed to the various
Lisaa- asylura and 3i rl lar iasti-ctioa*. -Y.oorotically w octor Linden's
office had the questionnaires returned an- then forwarded thai to th- ad-
edniatrative section of the office of Doctor Brandt. The Pro'jrau m so
arrange-' that photostat* of each questionnaire were to bo sent to four exports
to 'ctoreinc tho status cf oaeh patient. *ho .>ancl of oxperts oonsictcd of
about 10 to 15 d-ctora. I do not r oixr tho narcs of all tho .’Xfltocra of
tJda panel but Doctor Pfonsmcll r, "ccior Schumann, D oct,r .althcusor, and
Doc-or itenraux aro fresh in qy u-covy -n this connection, -ach of tlvosc
experts indicated by in*in a certain c'-.nent on tho questionnaire v.-hether
or mt the .aticit cculc! bo tranafonvd tc an observation stati n and
eventually i. illcd. then tho qucs-io.nairc rra forwarded t-> a chief ex¬
pert. Accordin', to the regulation, tho chief c^jort »n3 only entitled to
oidc. tho transfer of the atlent uh. n all four experts voted for tlvo
transfer. 7,iis chief c*q>crt also rarLod t-u. questionnaire an then sub-
c ttod it to Doctor Lin: cn xho ord-rod t3« insane asylun to transfer the
patient to cno of th- observation institute ns. Off-land I can rcsioiibcr ,
a one oJ.crs, tho ra:fc;3 of tlic follcnn; observation institutions: Lclfinc-
Hens, Xor.ptcn , Jona, liuch, A msb-r;;.

"10. At thee Latitutions —o pa.ionts were und^r tho observation of
the ’.«itr in charge for a porioc one tc throe uenths. Tho pJiyoician tad
the rl^it tc exoapt the pationt .*r t - pro; ra:: if ho decide:' that tno
patior.t v.-s n*.t incurable. If he a r _d t th Ui. pini n of the chief cxjxirt,
the Patient uas tra-ssfe red to a sxallid -uthanasia Institution. 2 con
nrarfccr th- aa ._c of ttoso outoanasla Institutions:

GrafenccV: - under dr. S r hu—nm


1528


Court Kc. 1

l

13 Jan U7-M - 2-la - LX - 3eard


"3randeri'urg - under Dr, gmMcke

■Hartheia - uider Dr# Rennaux

■Sennettoin - under Dr# Sehsalenbaeh

"Hadan .r (I do not roc-sdber under *h oae leadership)

■Borr2 erg - under Dr, Bchnke or Dr. Decker.

"in the* institutions the patient was killed by neons of gau by
the dootcr ir charge. To the best of ray knowledge, about fifty to sixty
thousand r tfsons w_-re killed in this way in the period free Autumn 1939
to tha Sursar jf 19U1.

"11, Tho ordsr issued by the Fuehrer to Brandt and Bouhler was
n'crct and never publishjd. The Euthanasia Program itself was kept as
secret as possible, and for this reason, relatives of a person killod
in tho courso of tho program wore never told the real causo of death.

The death certificates issued to tho relatives carried fictitious
causes of death such as heart failure. Ail persons subjected to tho
Euthanasia Irogron did not have an opportunity todocido nhothor thoy
wanted a norcy doath, nor their relativos contacted for approval or dis¬
approval, Tho decision was puroly within the discretion of the doctors.
The program was not rostrictod to those c.asos in which tho porsen was
"in «*trtiai»",

" 12 . Hitlor's ultimate roas n for the establishment of tho
Euthanasia Program in Oermany was to eliminate those pooplo confined to
in3ano asylums and similar institutions who could no longor bo of any
uso to the Reich. Thoy weru considered useless cators and Hitler felt
that by exterminating thoso so-called useless eaters, it would be possible
to relieve men.; doctors, aalo and fanalo, nurses, and other personnel,
hospital bu<£s aral other faxilities for the use of the Arued Forces.


1529


Court Ho. 1

13 Jan U7-M - 2-2a - LJG - Board


“13. This cccnittee, which waa also a function of the Euthanasia
Pro gran, w^« an organisation for the killing of children who were born
cent ally deficient or bodily deforced. All physicians assisting at births,
midtives, and maternity hospitals were erdereji by the 'linistry of Interior
to report such cases to the office of Doctor Linden in the 'linistry of
Interior. Then experts in the nodical section of Doctor Brandt's offico
wore ordered to givo their opinions in each caso. As a natter of fact,
tho complete file on each case waa sent to the offices of Bouhlor and
Doctor Brandt in ordor to obtain their opinions and to decide tho fato of
each child involved. In many cases these children were to bo operated
upon in such a manner that the result was either ccoplete recovery or
doath. Death resultod in a majority of these cases. The program was
inaugurated in tho sm*.r of 1939. Bouhlor told cm that Doctor Linden
had the order to ask for tho consont of the paronts of each child con¬
cerned. 1 do net know hew long this program continued sinco I Joined tho
nofion-SS in 19U2.

BET.SEN THE

6icfercHiK.


"lii. In 19iil, I rocoivod ar. oral ordor to discontinue tho Euthanasia
Program. I received this ordor either frea Bouhlor or from Doctor Brandt.
In ordor to preserve the personnel rolioved of these duties and to have
the opportunity of starting a new Euthanasia prograa aftor tho «nr, Bouhlor
requested, 1 tihink after a conference with Himlor, that I send this,
personnel to. Lublin and put it at the disposal of SS Brigadofuohron Globoc r
nik. I then had the impression that these people were to bo used in
the extensive Jewish labor car-ps run by Globocnik. Later, however, at
the end of 19L2or the beginning of 19U}, I feund out that they were used
to assist in the mass extermination of tho Jews, which was then already
cormon knowledge in higher party circles.

“15. Among J oc i oc , who assisted in the Jewish extermination


program


1MO


13 January-* l-DJG-2-lb-Bcard
Court Ko. 1


wore Ebjrlo and Schumann. Schwann performed medical experiments cn prison¬
ers in Auschwitz. It would hove been imp-ssible for these men to partici¬
pate in such things without the personal knowledge nd consent of Karl Brandt.

The order to send these oen to the East could have been given only by Himm¬
ler to Brandt, possibly through B^uhler."

I think that is a sulficier.t reading of the pertinent soctions cf the
affidavit cf Viktor Hermann Brack.

How, I would like to return to the ch rt. You find tho defendant Karl
Brandt ?s the h< 1 cf tho pregr a in the box at the top center of the chart.
The Trlbuncl will plcrse refer to tho ch: rt cn the wrll behind the witness
box, nd lb. Hockwdd will use his pointer tc indicate the appropriate place
on tho chart which is under discussion. Ureter this program are the ergani-
rtions which arc used for camouflage purposes. First we have the Koich
..sscciaticn, Hospit-1 end (.’ursine Latr.bliahaent, The Charitable Foundation
for In: tltuatlcn&l Care, snd Taticnt Transport Corps. Then there is the
..dminl.-'tr’ticn Office with its Department for t>Jestionnair«s. Over to the
ri:ht are the a.-c lied tep experts h’oylo and Hiotsche, and about fiftoon
othor experts, :m:n/; than, i'f-.nnaucll r. Down below tho Observation St ticns;
nnd then bulcw, the so-called Eutlr oral:. Institutions where tho victims
wore ictu lly exterminated — deluding Hadnaar, Grafcnock, Bemborg, Scnnc-
stan and Hrrtheia. In connection with Bcmb^rg, the Tribunal will rocoll
the witness Eugcn Kogcn'n testimony that transports loft Buchcnwrld in 19U
mi 1942 tc go tc Bombwrg, which was cno cf the Euthanasia Exterminating
St tiens. These nemos, and the names cf the chief lectors cf these institution
"ill occur again *nd again in the testimony which will bo presented.

•‘ 5 it is pointed cut in tho Brack affidavit, and a3 s(xwn cn tho chart,

th.re wr.s a very cleat collaboration in the exocuticn cf the pro ;ram, botwocn

tnc defer, lent Karl Brandt end Scuhlcr, wheso name appears in the- right hand
• •

corner cf the ch?rt. Under Bcuhler you will find the defendant Brack, his

deputy BlarJtcnfcurg, -nd Hegoner, Verfeerg, and Hefolaan; all cf these play,

as the evidence will shew, a very active p-.rt in the execution cf tho progr^A

in cclinb_rrticn with Brandt's subordinates, -s dcsely -s Brandt with the

1531


13 January-:l-OJG“2-2b-3oari
Ccurt Ho. 1


Chief Bcuhler.

Cn the left fund sido of the chert you find the act up of the i.cich
Ministry of the Interior undor Prick, showing cniy the offices which ere
connected with the Euthanasia rrogr e, Here it was Conti, the Secretary cf
State for H-filth Matters, nd j.uich Hefiltn Lcador, whoso deputy wes tho do-
fondant Bleat. Linden, shewn An the same box with Conti, was cost active in
collator: ting ih Brandt and Bcuhlor in the program. Linden provided for
tho distribution of the questionnaires in tho different insane asylums all
over Ccranny, end hed then filled cut a.»d lorwr.rded tc Dr'ndt in tho „.imini-
strttivc Cfficos, shown in the lower left center cf th- eh rt by dotted linos
connecting tho two offices. Together with Brmit rnd Bcuhler, Linden, isc
directed th- orgeniMticn fer the killin.; cf deficient children. The set
up, cf which, is shewn on the cuter left ton! siic of the chart. The ccnncct-
iort between ocuhlcr's o.lico, Karl Brandt, Ur.don, and this orgnnisctlon is
shewn .n tho rhctcst.tic copy by special dotted lines, r.d in green rnd bromi
cn the onl rgod copy cn tho w/vll.

Conti, Bouhlur and Linden, \rv nc longer living; nil cf the- having ended
their lives by ccaaitting sulciJo.

I think it slight bo well if I re-uupto.sisod the manner in which ti coe

questionnaires eper ted. "he quustiennaires -..ere ando up in tho ..Jr.inistrativo

Ofiico under «llors, end h- h spuci.-l office for questiennoiros under th- t.

Ho then sent the quosticnnrdros tc Linden's office in tho Ministry cf tho

Intori-r. Tho questionnaires wore then sent tc the insane asylum all cv-r

Coxa ny, end the cuesticnn ires were then filled cut by the dcctcrs in those

asylums. Tho question ires were sent b .ck to Undsn; Union, then f 'raod

thus cut to tho sc-c llod -Xpert s. «ni these -xperts, in feet, wort in a lot

cf ccsos !irectors -f cth.r insane csyluos in Gcracr^. In other •'ords, they

•ere tfccushtrul .acu ji net t= have the 'iiectcr cf :n asylum 'expertize' his

cwn patients, but directors cf cth<-r asylums vcrc 'txptrtizing* theso quost-

larmairoa. The questionnaires then c-so bade --ni then wore fin lly 'expertized*

Heyiw and :ttotsche, the tep experts, -n * an ultimate decision was reached

3 tc wh t tc dc "ith tho patients cn the basis of these questionnaires. Then

1532


13 Jena ry-WWG-2-3b-Board
C urt Ho. 1


it eprcura, t le'st, in the ci-rly stages „f the program, that it was docided
to pcssibly exterminate the patients, cn the b- si a of the questionnaires,
were sent to one cf these Observation Institutions. Tne order coming down
free Linden's office, having been in the 0'oserveticn Institutions, and no
ch-r..;- having been Bade in the decision to exterminate the patients, they
sen. then picked up and transported U no tf the mercy killing stations down
below.

Jr. Hccbwald will continue wit!, the presentation of tho ovidenco for
the prtsecoaion.


Jan. /.7-M-3-1-PK?- Blakley
Court ho. 1


UR. HOCgJLE: May it please tho Tribunal, I went to
offer into evldsno* Document fiO-470, which will be Prosecution
Exhibit 33*. This document is on affidavit of PcuUno Knoisslcr.
■Affidavit: I, Pr.uiine Kr.ciaslcr, being duly sworn, depose and
state:

"1. I w“S born on 10 March 19CO ct Lurdjaaovfca in the
Southern UkreijK.. In 1920 I becaso r Geracn citizen. Fren ny
sixtn to cy /.Ifteenth year I wet tutors' in cy parents' house in
Russia. In k 920 I aovod to Duisburg on the Rhino, whore 1 studiod
nursinf.. I. w s trained for hy Job till 1923, and on 4 January 1940
I wes hive by the Ministry of tho Interior in Berlin. For 15
years 1 worked for the Magistrate 0 f Berlin r s runlcipal nurse.

In April 1937 I Joined the NSCAP. I was a .-aoeber of the NS
Frau-msetoft, of the KSV, of tho Reich Air Raid Protection
LefijUo end of thj Reich Nurses' League.

”2. Hy vxp-ricncos cs c sick-nurse and tho fact that I hod
be on working f jr aany yoars in different Conn-, hospitals .and
nursing extablish.aer.ts in connectic: .ith the so-called outhannsia
progroo enable ~u to depose the following st'tocant concerning this
prograa.

"3. In 1939 I was suaotonod by the Chief of PoUco to
report on 4 January 194C to the Ministry of tha Interior, situated
in the Koiuabus bull ling. There c nan c-.Uod Blankenburr talked to
our group, which consisted of 22 or 23 persons. He discussed
the inportar.ee and the ^crocy of the euthanasia progran and
explained to us tbet the Fuehrer h~d worked out a euthanasia
law, which, ir. consideration of the war, w-a not to be pubUshod.

It was cooplwtely voluntary for those present at the ce-ting to
assure their cooperation. Konc ol those present had any objections
to this prograa; and Slonkonburg swore us in. la were sworn
*-o secrecy and obedience; end Blankcr.burg called our attention to
ti.e f-ct that any violation of the oath would be punished by death.
Dr. Bonne was present it this aucting.


13 Jan. V7-M-3-2-PXP- Blakloy
Court Ko. 1

«4. l*cn the ae-vins was over, we took thu bus to Schlosa
Gmfoncck, whoru w* w«r« received by tho director of tha eatcblishoont,
Lr. Schuannn. t.c only started to work at ,Gr?f*ncck in liarch
1940 , while the aole personnel ted been workinr then. before.

"5. It a one of ay dutioe to eccocparvy Ur. Schwonnigor,
who also wca a auaber of the "Charitable Foundation for Institutional
Core," to the different astablishuunts free which we fetched
patients to brine then to Gr-feneck. I*. SchworBii'or, who wca in
charge of our transports, had the lists of ncacs of all tho patients
who wero to bo trenaferred. Thusu lists had to correspond to the
lists of p^tiontc proprrwd by tho directors of the establishoonts
froa which th« p: tlwnta w^re to bo transferred, lho patients who
wor- tr'noferre 1 by us wr» not 11 particularly serious cases.

They wero, of course, cent* lly ill but very often in • ood physical

condition. Sr.ch tr'.s.spcrt consisted of about s-v«::ty persons; "nd

no used to h vo such transports almost every Jr.y. Uy -ctur.l

duty in connection with those transports was thrt of an accospnnying

nurse.


1525


13 Jan 47-::-??C-3-'-*-31akloy
Court !fo. 1

■6. After their arrival at Grofonock tho petionts wore house! in
boJiackr, ’’horo Dr. Schiiionn acl Dr. Btti-iarit oxa.-lsod tho^ suporficiolly
on t.*o teals of e quoatlomilro. Thoso tco doctors had to pronounco tho
final decision a a to -..hjthor a pa'.iont was to bo 6iesoJ or not. In indivi¬
dual casoa tho natior.te woro oxauptod fra: boin^ eassod. In :usst crsoc
the pationt: woro kill<.d within 24 hours of tor tholr arrival at Grnfonock.

I 5tayod for aL-oat a year «t Grnfor.ock aod only know of r fow cocos woro
patients woro not -naiad. In nost ersor tho potionto wore Givor on injoc-
tlon of 2 ccn. ’"orphiu.: Skonolru in boforo bolnr cos:ad. Idioso injections
woru nado by the doctor. Tho C' , =»ii-€ *ee enrriod out by apjclal 3oloctoi
non. Dr* Honnocka dis-octod none of tho victims. Insane* childron botwcon
6 and 13 yosro of af.o woro alro IncluJod in this pro,Ton.

’"hon GrrfenocL was closed, I wna sont to Kcdosar and ctnyol thoro
till Wtt. Tho s ao work m done ct Kndc; at with tho only difforonco
that tho patients wo"o no lcnnor eoaaol but killed -y Voronol, Lurdnol,
an! J'arphlu. Skopolr- in. dtproxlnatoly 70 pationta por doy woro klJlod.

Tho M roc tor of HnSrswr wna firat Dr. 3«r'Mrdt, tho Dr. Boornock.

"7. ?ro^ ilrda-rr I »-a trmaforrei to lrrroo norr K'iifbour:n
nhoro I continual ny work. Dr. Volostin y-lthruocr was tho diroctor of
tiiia oxt-tllshrant. Tboro tho pr.tioi.te woro oithor killod by :x>nr.s cf
inactions cr toblatn. This pro.nrm w-.a c-rriod on until tho collnpoo of
Ooxnaay.

•8. I know that In thu .iffor-.nt ont-bliohr-ontc whoro I wna

A


1536


13 J.-n .17-i!-?JC-3-afc-51aJeloy
Court Be. 1

Stationed wo rocolvol Instruction free ISr. llaakonbur:;. Durlas ny activity
at Orrfcnock, this aTtcbli3fc-iant was Tlsitod by Dr. Karl F anlt, Dr. Conti,
Dciebslciter Bouhler, and Hr. Brack. I also knc the the "Charitcblo Founda¬
tion for Institutional Coro" was coanoctod with certain ustablislirants at
Lublin.

"(Sltwxi) Paulin? r-nolsslor."

7ilS f?BSI0K7T: I r.otlco on Po£0 18, tho last lino of tha first
ParaGraph, it s-ys "Dr. Pohno w~s prosont at thi3 rso-ting," accordinc to tho
iocuont book which I ha.ro •

:?*, HOCJf.'^LD: I boo ycur pardon, your Honor?

T!3 PTCIDSTT: I note that on Paco 18 of tho doc inant book, tho
first p/*zo of Docunont JJunoor If)-470• in tho last conploto lino or tho first
P"xa3r*?h - Dr. Bohno Is roforrod to.

:n. HOCJn.XD: Ko, this la not a doctor, sir. This la l^. Bohno,
who Is shown on tho chart as a ruebor of tho adninlstrativo offioo of
Dr. -rl Brandt.

t'S ■’KriDDfT: Is that lntondod to lniloato t.‘.o ’.ofondant Blcno?

'Tl. HOCT'AID: Bo, this does not lnllcato tho dofondant 31o:«,
sir. This lr a dlfforont porson.

THJt PTvZSlDffn': Yjry -oil.

D3. 33TV.7IBS: Dr. Sarvatlus, counsol for dofonlant Karl Brandt.

*‘ r * ftanldant, wo oro horo araln concamol with an affidavit which woo not
sworn corroctly; ar.i I nek you again that this


1537


13 J: a--3^-J.lfc-Blrkley
Court 5o. 1.

document only be •'.daltted under the usual reserratlon.

CH2 This document will be admitted provisionally, pend¬

ing the fllln.T of a certificate showing proper authority on the part of
the person who administered the oath.

HE. KOCmOLI: The ne^t document I want to offer into evidence la
locunent So.-8«3, which will be Prosecution S.hlbit 333. This document
la a voluntary deposition of Prisoner of Vr LT 151C Corporal Ludwi
Lehner, report on the crlae of nurder perpetrated on children in 1939 at
the asylum In S^lflnx-Bsar near Munich.

■In the fall of 1939 I vltr.escod a crioe which upsot evon oe, parti¬
cularly by the •'ey it was carried out. although at that tloo I wao already
usod to aany thin.-, bavin left the Cachau concentration canp only r
fsw nonths beforo. I took a vow at that tieo to roFort tho cotter to
the authorities as soon as conditions would porcit.

■At that tlno tho public was rlvon the opportunity to visit lunatic
asyluss* proeunably in the frservork of a very doflnlto propaganda pur¬
pose. Sarin* bcoa a student of ps7cholo*7 In 19M to 1938 during ay pro¬
fessional education. X was, of course, interested in the way an asylum
Is run. I the reforo joined ono of these raided touro which, as far as I
know, were, by the way, suspendod soon afterwards because thoy arouoed a
reaction on tho part of tho public contrary to the ono that was dosirod.

(I saved tho ticket of adclsolon.)

"laail* After a Tieit to several other hrspital wards, tho direc¬
tor of tho asylum himself-—'whos* n»r.o was Pfaaanuollor as far as I rcnc.*'-
^■r—loi us to a children's ward. The rooc .-avc an inprossion of clcanli-
naoo and core. In -bout 16 to 25 little bods lay a corospor.din" number
of children of about one to five yoars of a*o. In this ward xfannnuellor
■ plained his views in detail. I daresay that I roaceber the following
resumes rather exactly since they wore, clthor out of eynioiac or due to
clumsiness, suprisln.:ly frank: 'Those creatures (he meant tho said
children) of course represent for do, as a Fational-Soolallst, oercly a
burdon for our healthy n-tionnl body. Vo do not kill (ho o-y possibly


153S - .


13 Jen-TBE-j-Z^Blakley
Coart Ho. 1.


have said: 'Vc co not handle the setter') by sj*bb of poison, injec¬
tions. *-nl ao forth. That would sorely provido now propaganda nnterlal
for the foreign press and for certain ^entlcetn In Swlttcrl-jid (he proba¬
bly referred to the Red Cross). Ho, our netted Is nuch sinplcr *nd noro
natural, aa you c*n sso.• Hith those words he pullod one child out of
tho little bed while a nurse, apparently on perranent duty In thla ward,
aselatod hln. Vhlle he then showed the child around llko a do.ad h-rc,
winning cynically, ho stated with tho air of *n export eorethlm: llko:

•It will taka this one, for example, still two or three days. 1 I shall
novor be able to for. et the si.At of that fet. crlnnin* nan, holding tho
whlnlnc skeleton in his flsshy hands, surroundsd by the other childron
who were st-rvlnc to death.

■Furthoraoro, the ourderer declared that not abrupt deprivation of
food but procreesive reduction of rations was applied. A lady who was
alio taklrur part In the ,-uldcd tour, hardly able to control hor indigna¬
tion, asked if a quicker killing by Injections, and so forth, would not
at lonot be sore huaane. Thereupon, Ifannnueller praised his nothod once
noro as the aore practical one in ro.*ard to the foroini press.

"Tros a certain rceark, which ur.fortun* tely I cannot roproducs ex¬
actly froe nenory. one would conclude that in this ward childron who wore
not Insane wore also bein* killed, n-eely, childron of Jewish parents."

I okip tho next para-Taph -and read only the si.-mature "L. Lehner*
on the bottoe of rare 23.

:a. SSRYATIUS: It. Sorvatlus. couneel for the defendant Br-ndt. Kr.
TrcBidont, I Just notlcod that tho docunont was rcroly signed but not
oworn to. Th> witness scans to be In custody In London. I don't know
for what reason, I nust reserve tho ri,*t to cross examine that witnoss;
and I Should like to ask you to adnit this docunent only under tho condi¬
tion that the r-roeecutlen subclt this witness to us.

MR. "OCHWiri Tour Honor, I respectfully suVilt that this do cun on t
contains only corrobor»tlvo evidence; and wc therefore refrained fror rut-
tin. this witness on the stand. This document is a report Iron fre British

1539


13 Jan-SK-3-3fc-31 / »lJ'
Court So. 1.


-'*r Crlres la terror tloa Unit la th^ London district Corner; and the
a 1 (tantare of the deponent was wltaceaed by n 3rltish Intelligence offi¬
cer. X tve been adviced by coopeteat Srltleh authorities that the Srl-
tiah latclll.-eace officer held tha rank of a r.ajor or lieutenant colonel


15-10


13 Jen «7- --.—-3- lcrBlsL* ley
Court he. 1


end is poirii ttod to mLinictcr -n oath.

jH. SSSVATIUf: !!r. resident, the facts vrt ich wero just

uontionod by the notibcr of the prosecution cannot Jo soon fren
the dccuaort; end that is tho ossontial fact. The dccunont speaks
for ittolf; 'out those facts cannot o soon fron the document,

izr. rkESIi>BHT: Will jxu hrad u.. th„ criminal, ploaao? (D^ci
nent handed to tho -’rcaldont.) Th > drcurwnt will be rocolvod pre-
visimr.lly. It ices net indicate that the witnoes w..s sw-'rn; and
the authority of th_ certifying offlcor should bo shewn In some
nannur w! ich Is not indicated by tho docuaunt. At least the
lot tors " 1 . 0 ." are net explained,

■ I.. HOCK .'iD: The prosocetim will moke ov^ry effort, sir,
tr provide such an affidavit,

I t_m r..w t' Document Hum' or i'0-1135, which will bo Prosocu-
ticn Lx. lbit ’Ifc first pr .30 cf the document is r. canfir.ir.tif

“In ucocruanco with the doci t ion of th.o State ^Jniatry of the In¬
terior (Public Health Division) cf 6 January 19 vO I h-'.vo, uprn
crier of the do ich *secciaticn of Rental Inotitutiona and as
ros.)cnoib*e c' icf of the Gonorrl •' tionta Transport Cojapany O.n.b.
t .«r ch..r . of the tranefor of the v.ticntr enumerated in tho lie
bolrv; tu 1 . Roicl institution. Bglfinf (d .to, illegible); (rlgnr.-
t'ir >1.1 3 Mo), Co.-iissicncr ol General Transport C-ipra;- n.b.F,'*
I wont to point rut c-ncornin r, *cga 1 that «is noce Reich
••.sacclatl-r f -cntal insti tutiem. 1 ' rrd « nr.-io "General Pr.tiontr
Transport Compeny O.n.b.H." nr*. tw: uf the throe codo nnnos
"rid eppo: r -n the chart, in thcaiJdlu of tho chart there cn the
wall.

'iho next pr Pf.Te 2 cl the document, is a transfer 'ic ;o-
rondum, n£ roads: "Knndod c"ur wore:

'1. id 9 p.- tiontc wit! tl .:r s.r clothing, ur.dorwonr, arnoy,
and '.«.lcn;;in^s.

1*19 f ‘ilcs with personal records (case histories),

' 3. « list of tho w ncy accounts for oach pc tiunt,

1541


J. rgOulp


15 Jen .:7-::-L!/_-.-5-2c-Blcorlor
C'urC l»c. 1

* cc undo out fer this pur peso.

!, 4. Hat cf the nr. ujs.

""cir.x.;-Hc. r, 30 j-u’Uft 19-iO. Sipneturc : Oborscl wuotor
Letto rclta."


13 jaxvJ>a-ifc^nw:ook

Court Ho.


DR. HXHFALDi Page 3 of the Document Book to page 8 of the Document
Book Is Transport list Ho. 2, Dispatching Institution: Zglfing-Haar -
Carried out on 30 August, 19U3, and on page Ho. 8 of the Document shows 150
persons wore transferred.

The next page is again a compilation and there again these code nones
op?oar, signed in Eglfing Haar, by the Cornissioner of the Ocnoral Transport
Company, a. b. h.

Wo haro another transfer asno on pago 10, of 121 fenale persons with
thoir own clothing, and unde nr ear, as well as other belongings, and (2) 121
files with ccvor, (caso histories with personal record), (3), a list of the
mount of nonoy, (U) a list of valuables, (5) a list of the nanus, signod at
Eglfinc-Haar, 3.9.1910, aignaturoi Oborscfaroster Lotto Zolta.

And on pages 11 to 16, wo have Transport List Ho. 3, oarriod out on
3 Sopttsjbor, I960, and on pago 16 of the docunont, pago liO of the Docunont
Dock, it shows 122 persons woro transforrod.

Tago 17 givos throe lists, two lists of womon and ono list of woman
of the Jewish moo, to which is attrohod the nano of Israol. In Nazi Gcmary
ovory Jow had to uso his middle nano and tho nine of Israel or Sarah. I want
to draw the attention of tho Tribunal to No, 7 of th: first list, Silborberg
Hclnuth Israel, Poland, a foreign national, and No. 3 of tho wonen's list,
Goldnann .lobokka Sarah, froo Plane!, and Mo. 13 of the nun's list tho nano of
Huns».l r.u-blf Israol fron Boh-mia and »toravia was crossed out, /.a this docu¬
ment shows tho 16 nalo and 19 fenale Jews wore transforrod on tho 20th of
September- 19ii0.

Pagu 16 is tho 8th transport list, carried out on 23 September, 19li0,
and nonas the tubercular and insane wcoon of Zglfing-Haar, (handwritten),
and shows twelve wce:on, twolvo wenon in all, and a handwritten note on the
bottcai "Thu above parents reooived today* Tho transport loader of tho
General Fntienta Transport, G.U.3.H. Eglfing/Haar, 23 Sopterfccr, 19U0 -
(signature - Dr, Bauaierr,)"


15-13


13 Jaxv-W-iiH’.TD-Coek
Court Ho# 1


Page 19 is another confima -on nado out on 3 October, 19k0# Here the
5Ann codo reuses appear and it is signed again by the Comiasioncr of Qonoral
Transport Company, n.b.h# Xraus.

Pages 20 to 22* 9# Transport List Ho# 5, carried out on 20 September
19bG # 88 persons were listed, t«t thore is a noto that 11 of theso patients
were fron Xlingo muons ter, and three have died, therefore 7k totally, that
means 7U totally free Sglfing-Haar.

Pages 23 to 26 are names on Transport list No. k, carried out on 20th
September, 19b0, and 102 persons, as page 26 of the decunont book shows, wore
transferred#

Page Ho# 27 of the document to page No# 39, is Transport List No, k,
carried out cn 11 Ootober, 19U0, and contains 79 nanos, ono duforrod, thoro-
foro 78#

D’?« FBESCKIMCfi Counsol for Dr# Viktor Brack,

I :should like to point out that in our document book this list oannot
bo found, and wo arc not in z. position to follow tho statenents of tho
Prosocutor#

DR. ®CW?ALDi I an sorry. Tour Honors, I havon't chockod tho Goman
Document Book# Tho lists will bo h.ndod to tho counsel for dofonso as soon
as they arc available#

TH5 PRESIDENTi Counsel will axpodito as auch as possiblo tho furnish¬
ing of this list to tho dofonso counsel, and the conplotion of this docuoont
book, which is evidently incocploto, and tho copy to bo fumishod dofonso
ccunsol#

DR# IDCBfALDi I shall prooood in tho presentation of Docuoont No. 1135 ;
page 31 of tho docuoont, pego 55 of the document book, which. Your Honors,
is another confirmation nade out in Sglfing-Haar, on tho 28 of Hovcobcr, 191*0,
aivl is again signed by tho Ccnnissioner of General Transport Company# ”• g« H.
this tir.e by D. Herr.eeke#

Pago 32 gives tho 13th Transport list. No. 7, oarriod out in F.glfing-

!iaar, on 28 Kovonbor, 19aO, listing 16 persons#

1544


13 Jar^4>-3-i*-A.T>C -ok
Court So# 1


Page 33 of the docinant is another confirmation dated 2 Dcoceibor, 19h0
and again signed by the Cccxdsslonor of Genoral Transport Company, n*b,H»..

Page 31* °f the docunent is transport List No, 8, carried out on 2
Deotcber, 19LC, listing 16 persons, and page 35 is another confirmation,
dated 17 January, 191*1, and is again signed by tho Commissioner of Goneral
Transport Company, n* b, H, this tino by E, Xuoppor,

Pages 3 6 to 38 is the 15th Transport List, No, 8, oarrlod out on 17
January, 191*1, listing 73 persons#

Pagos 39 to 1*1, is tho 15th Transport List No, 9, carried out on 17
January, 1911, listing 80 persons, and page 12 Is a confirmation of tho oarao
thing as I have already road into the record, and is signed, Eglfing-Haar,

25 April 191*1, with a typewritten notoi "Tho Cocrdssionor of tho Oonoral
Patients* Transport," signature, E# Xuoppor#

Pags 13 givos a list of tho 25th of April, 1911, a list of non, llstlr.
37 parsons, and pages 11 to 1*6, aro a transport lict of tho 26th of April,
19U, this tlnj wcoon, 96 persons woro listed#

Pago 1*7 is another confirmation. That has on tho top a handwritton
r^ark, 19th transport, signed Eplfing, 29 April, 191*1, by E« Kuoppor, Tho
Cocrdssionor of tho Oonjral Patients' Transport, 0,n#b#H#

Pagos 18 and 19, giro a transport list carried out on 29th April,

19lil, listing 57 persons.

Pagos 52 to 5U#. aro Transport List No# 20, listing womon, oarriod out
on April 29th, 191*1, 77 naacs.

Pago 57 is Transport List No# 21, carriod cut on 29 April, 19l*l, list¬
ing 32 persons, and page 58 is Transport List No, 21*, carriod out on 29 April
191*1, listing 21 * persons,

Pago 59 i3 another confirmation, da tod the 20th of June, 191*1, signed
by tha Commissioner of tho General Pationts Transport, C. c# b# H#

Pago 60 is Transport List No# 21, carriod out on 20 Juno, 19l*l, llstit
22 pdrsona#

I turn now to Poouaent No# 1133, which will be Prosocution Exhibit No,


335


15«i5


13 JMvJH*TO-Cock

Court So* 1


THE PRESIDENTi Is teat Docunont found on pcge 86?

PR. fECFFALDi Pago 86 of the Engl ish Docunont Book, yes.


t:e ft


>Cflie


I*


Tho ranker of the Document Is 1133, the nunbor Is


isperfoot?

m. WCi&LLDi 1133 as appears froa tho second pago, "State Ministry
of tho Interior, Munich, 12 Hoveaber, 19U., pencilled note illegible,

Ro ids tore ’l

"To Director Dr. Pfamrsiullor,
or his toputy
of tho Asylun.

Sglfinc-baar

"Sugjecti Transfer of patients in tho asyluas.

"Tho prosont situation necessity tos tho transfer of a largo nunbor of
patior.ta in tho asyluas. Ey order of tho Roioh Dofcnso Oocniesar, I order
tho tronsfor of 120 patior.ta freo your institution. The transfer will
probably tako plaoo on 21* October, 19hl, thj Charitablo Patlont Transport
Corp, in Borlin, and/or its transportation n&nagor, will oontnot you with
r.gard to tho sulaotior. ar.d tho picking up of tho pationto, whloh will tako


plaoo on ny ordor.

"The transport is to be . roparod by tho dolivorlng institution. Inc
oaso tho institution has no railroad sidinc, the transportation of the potion
to tho next railroad station is to bo done by tho institution. Rootless


pntionto are to bo trentod by adequate ooans for a trip of sovural hours. Tho
pationts, as far as possible, aro to bo handod over in their own undonrear
and clothing. Their entiro private property is to be sort along with thon
well paaked. In so far as thoy havo no privato olothing, the delivering in¬
stitution is to loan urdorwoar and olothing.

•Tho personal records and case histories of the pationts aro to bo
handod ever to tho ran in ohargo of the transport. Those whe pay the oosts
aro to be informed by the delivering institution that further paynents boyon*.
tho day of toe transfer arc to to suspended until thoy are roquestod by tho

receivin': institution. In easoe wtere tho patients aro eonrdttod by the court?

1546


13 nJj-£JWTB-Cook
Court No# 1

this information is to be transmitted to tta penal authorities, along with t
with tho file number, Thj next of kin will be imediatoly notified of the

transfer by the receiving institution# If in tho meantime a relative should

• •

inquiro of the delivering institution, the latter is to reply, if the nano
of the rood vine institution is noi known to it, that tho patient was
transferred by order of the competent Reich Defense Comissar. Hoe idea, tho
new institution will contest tho relatives as soon as possible#

On behalf of

(Signature) illegible#"

Tho third page of tbs document is again a certificate, whieh is
slnilar to tho eortlfioato whioh wo presentod In dooumont no# 1135, signed
Eglfixv, 21 Ootofcor, 191*0, S, Puppo, For tho Charitablo Patients Transport
Corporation#

At pagos U to 7 of the Doounont aro the 11th Transport List No. 5,
oonpdotad on 21* Ootobor, 191*0, listing 120 persons.

That finishes the Docuaont <3ook No.

• •

DR, SERVATIUSi Nr# President, in ay Document Book this list doos not
soon to bo cooploto. It stops *ith No# 97 and thcro should bo 120 nanos,
Uaybo tho Prosecution can doer that up#

DR# HXXWALDt Thoro is ono pago nissing# I prosumo' that in tho copy
of Dr# Sorvatius one pago, which is tho last pago of tho document, is missing
DR# SERVATIUSi I shall roodvo tho root of the nance#

DR# ICCttfALDi I want to prosont, if lour Honors ploaso, Document
3ook No# 17, and as tto first part of Docuaont Book No, 17, whieh I shall
take up now —

TJS PRESirCNTi Befci*o wo got to tho opening of this Document tho
Tribunal will recess, and roquoots that tho Prosecution during the roooss
Period be ready to show to the Tribu n al tho original of Docuaont No# 1063,

If tho docuaont is convenient, the iroseoution will hand it to tho Tribunal
at this time#


1S47


13 Jar^-Jj-6-M-lTD-Cocic
C.art Mo. 1


D?.» fCCTALDi If tho Tribunal please, I want to road from page no. U.

TM . “ESIDEVTi We have stated that the Tribunal will new roooss but
I have asked that the original docunont No. 1063 be subnitted to tho Tribunal
now bofcre the recess.

DR. iDCiFAUli Your ffcnora, I havo boen inforned that this docunont
is in possession of the Secretary General.

THE FHESIDBMTi Will you procure the docunont and hand it to tho
Tribunal -tiring the recoss in the consultation rooo. Thu Tribunal will now
recoss.


1548


13 Jan. ’47-*%-S-l-FZ?-P6t *-7 (3S)

Coart Jo. 1

rnZ K-SSHALi The Tribunal le again In bcsbIcc.

DR. 3DCEHLLD: If the Tribunal please, I wrnt to road fron Docunont
Book Ho. 17, prge Ho. U of the Document Book, nnd I offer into
evidence Document BO-I313 which will be Prosecution Inhibit 33&
"Schwrrtsoe ce/r Kltsbuehl,* anted "20 August 19bO. B

■Deer Director,

Tho berry rains during the first heIf of ny vacation had the advant¬
age of giving ne sufficient lei sure for reflection, end I rc very
grateful to you for your grdrt kindness rod consideration in giving ne
this tine to nrke up ny nind. The new censures ere so convincing
that I thought I could let personal considerations go by the board.

But it is mother thing to approve of esesures of the State with
full conviction, and socsthing elso to carry thee out onssolf, in
their final consequence. I * renindod of the difference which
exists between Judge and excutioner. Therefore, in spite of all
Intellectual insight and goodwill on ay part, I can not escape the
realisation that according to ay personal nnturo I rc not suitable
for this Job. *s vivid ns ay desire is in cany cases to inprovo upon
the natural course of ovents, as repugnant it is to ac to carry this
out as a eysterrtic Job nfter celd-bloodcd deliberation and according
to scientific objective principles, and not urged ty nodical feeling
toward the pr.tlent. Vhat has endeared to ne the work in the Children’ 0
House wpu not the scientific interest, but the physician's urge, rcidst
our often fruitless labor, to help and at least to improve ntay of our
cases here. The psychological evaluation, and the curative and
pedagogic influence were always auch closer to ny heart then anatoo-
icnl curiosities, no natter how interesting they were. And so it cones
stout that, although I an sure that X can preserve ny full objectivity
in giving expert opinions, I yet feel nyself sonehow tied enotionnlly
to the children ns their nedicrl guardiio, and I think that thio
optional contact is not necessarily a weakness fron the point of view


1J Jworry U7-*.&.l_rs?-CPutty (Btf
Court lo. 1


of r Vetloael Socialist physiclcn. However, It hinder* oo froa
combining thle new duty with the one I here hitherto errried out.

■If thle should force you to plr.es the word In th# Children's
Houss Into other hreids, It would certdnly be r prlnful loss to
as. However, X


15 ^ «


12 Jan.47-i>6-2-PKP- Putty
Court Ko. 1

consider it .uoro eight to see clearly sad to recognize in tino that I ca
too soft for this job, instead of disappointing you later.

■I tov-w tb*t y-ur offer to oe is a sign of special confidence, and
I cannot honor your confidence in any bettor way than by absolute honesty
end openness.

Heil Hitler
Your very devoted
(signature) F. Hoclzel

(Rubber stcas): Dir-ctor' to of the i^lfing-Hoar Ins: no Asylua of the
regional -.saoci'.tlon of upper-Bavaria. (Handwritten): Received 29
August 1940, 16CJ hours. (Initiwlod) Pfannaucllor."

I turn now to Document :X>-1310 which will be Prosecution Exhibit
337, ' dr ft octet! September 20, 1940:

"To the Bavarian State Ministry of the Interior, D-p^rtaont for
Health Services, Munich, Thu Minor Street, "d:tod"Sglfing, 20 September
1940, Subject: Tr-nsfor of Mentally Ill Jews. Reference: kinistorlnl
Decision of 4 Septeaber 1940. So. 5236 a UU. Inclosures: 1
list of Jewish U-r., 1 Us*, of Jewish Mosul.

"In compliance with the “bove-st'.ted decision, I run turning over to
you a list of the ianctes concontr-ted in the acnUl institution of Eflfine-
H'-T, “.d t .r cs thoy t .re full-blooded Jews of Guram and Polish
nationalities as well :s stateless Jews.

"Thu Rent" lly iU Jewish lmotes »«r. transferred by the P"tior.t Trans¬
port Corporation on 20 Septeaber 1940 to cn institution s«,rvinr r.s
a collecting center. I aa reporting to the St to ministry that froa now
on isy institution will fo-d only Aryan nontcl p tivnts. In the future I
shall refuse to accept nuntally ill full-blooded Jews.

"There is still one acntr.lly iU full-blooded Jew in our institution
who is a active of the Protectory to Boheaia end Moravia, end whose transfer
te *n institution of the Protector te should be surgiatod as soon s possible.

(Initial: ) p"


for Pfannsuuller.


1550


13 7-1—Lessor

Court Mo. 1

The Tribunal will certainly re cell that I read free Document NO-1135- this
list of Jews, pointing out the 2 names free Poland and tho naj.te of the Jen froa
the Protectorate, Eoheeia-Jforavia, and tho Ho. 13* *ose naso was c rossod froa
tho list. Tills docuoer.t refers to this list.

i turn now to Document XO-1312, Prosecution Exhibit 3381

"Tha director of the Cental Institution
of tho District Association U.-por Eavarla

igl-' rv:-Banr

■Contract

■I Iiavoboen instructed by the director of the mental institution
Zglflng-Hoar, Obermediai&alrat Tr. Ffanatuollor, with regard to the
kind ol work and ay duties in tho special ward of the children's ward
of the -untal institution a*r» ia vhich children of the Ketch

Coouitteo for tho Scientific Approach to > -voro Hereditary and Donstitucxotval
De-isss arc cenfincd. I declare tc carry out ay duties in this wr.rd according
to tho Instructions issued by ny chief and I coni Ira that my attention
lias been callod to the fact thst tho troatoont of the children in this
ward is top secret and is to bo kopt cs such. 1 have been instructed
thr I have boon ordered oosoluto secrecy os to the incidonts which
■ill hccroe known to me during tho troaujont of tho children of this
ward, and t.iot tho law provides that cny breach of secrecy will be
punished rlth tho death scnt-nco. I havo icon wworn to absolute secrecy
by hand shake. I shall observe it -aost strictly always and towards everybody.

■Eglfxny, 26 April 191:1

(signatures:) "Dentleis-r Sana
■Spindlor *tria
■Lang Enra

It- next d-euxent, '.fozjvr KO-1311, which will bo iTosecutier. Exhibit 339,
is another document swearing toacivry one of the officials of tho insane

asylum:


1551


13 Ja.'.—Stw«jr-7—2 -LjsS'. r

Court Ho. 1

■Obligation"

"I, the ndersigned, hawo beer, obligated by i-anshako instead of
by an csth, cn ti;«. port of the cirecocr, to rcceivu and to copy rxit ors
concernin'. Jio heich *iich have to be kept s-cret. Such papers are
of special confidential nature. I tare with undertaku to ke-p all
paper-. «' ich should beccue known te under the heading 'Top Secret' strictly
eecree, an rxver to b iv. anyoiu. kncwled.^ of ttarn without specific order
free U.z director of the Institution, Cr. Pfannonoller. My attention has
been called tc th fact that if I should not keep this oath of secrecy,

I will face prosecution by the Cestapc, and that I will have to count

with t .o possibility of thu death penally if I should either ccrelosely

or Al cr.-.tely civulge nattor: r.ch haw boco.x known to :x as 'Top Socrot'."

"Eglfing-Kanr, 20 February 19 !j 2
(signature) "Eric* Frank"

This finishes Document Book Ho. 17. ;<r. Shillor will no# proceed in
eubnii/ ij. t: w vidor.co wnioh is contalnod ir. Loeurent Book No. lJi, Second
fart.

S' JLLT: If it placs^. t-x Tri i:ial, I should not liko to offer in
ovl&nco Docvrcnt u&bcr NO-1131 as Prosecution Exhibit Ninbor 3h0. This
docu mt c; s.'rtr of a nur-bor of.

H13TI * Ti Has the Tribunal recoavod copies of fart T)ocunant Pook?

K« S*I1L5R« I boliove the Secretory' (ka nl has bcon furnished with
copies of this Docueent Sook, Your Honor, Book lh, f-.rt 2.

T'j. ELiSIdENI* K search ir >.in x.de for the copies of this Jocimont
Bo ir. ij^lish. I would like to ash the rrcsecution a question aacut
Doccsunt Book Hu bar 17— tta lirst a ement in tho book, Doc-.tk.nt ’uji.ber
"0-li?l,—that ias not offeree in videnco this Earning, Has it already .eon
recoivod in evidence?

£ : X\i.at Yes, Your Honor, -his is already Prosecution Exhibit i.uaber

238 .


isr-2


13 Jan-:S-J3-7-3-l£sser
Court J'c. 1


T!FTc-TSl'Etfr: Two of tiw copies hone ad to th. Bunch ar- .jocunont Book
Mueiber lh, Pfcrt 1, \ .le two copier r loot Eock Kcabor 1L, Part. 2, We

art etill short two copies .f Dccur^rt Book, Part 2..I was nisinforrod.

The Tribunal hzt tlk. copies of Docu vnt Book 1L, part. 2.

!G. S ILLTRt The first docujent in Oocusont Bv>ok Hi, Part 2, is Docuamt
Timber MO-1131, is that correct, Yox’r Ifcnor? This is anoth-r docm.ent similar
to tie ores already read tj y }r. Hoch ald. That is, it is on order froi tho
State Ministry cf tho Interior at ’.un_ch, 12 ”Ov*abtr 19ii0, tv Dir ctor Dr.
Pfanr-.aioiljr, ordering thj transport of 1W> patients fron tho Institution
Eglf*ng-Haar.

THE FRESHESTi Whit is tho nu-ioor of this Exhibit?

HR. STOLLERi This is Prosecution Exhibit Nunbur 3h0. On the noxt pngo,
th.*.t is page 9 k , m boo again a rocoipt, the botten of »hich is dated
"EtHin.', 15 Movcabor lpliO" (sij.iMuro) "E* Fuppo, For tho Charitablo rationt
Transport Corp". Pages 95 and 96 consist of Tmnspirt List Ho. 6 from fifing
Hv.r, dated 15 tovonb.r 19L0, rivin. e total of 57 patients. pagg 97, 98, and
99, cetisistu cf Transport List fio. 7, dated 15 Kov«'.bor 19ljO,>Lth a total of
3 L pat ents.

Tun ins to pi e o 100, I now introduce in evidence eocuuent LWaur NO-1132,
another order fron the State K«nietry of tho Interior. This will be ?rojvCutioi
Exhibit Nuabor 3U1.

On Ir .c 101 again wu have a receipt ire:: fifing, 13 February 19iil,
(si^aturo) l. Puppo, For th Charitable Potivnt Transport Corp,

Turniti to pigo 103, pi~cs 103, lCi, and 105, consist of Transport Li3t
•fc . 13, c-. loud on 25 February 19ul, consisting of 77 patient .

Turmn, to page 107, Your Honor, pr-gos 107, 108 and 109, consist of
r-.>3. rt Ust j, 13, coaplotod on 25 February 19U1, listing a total of Ik
patients.

Th- n.xt oocusent is Docuctnt Kuaher NO-llUL, on part 110 of the Locurfcnt
3":<, "hlch 7 r.:w oifer into ovid nee -.s irosacution Exhibit 3Jj2. This


1552


13 Jar.-:c. -7-t-Iosscr
Ccir t Me, 1


ilocu:^i.t c isists of ccrrcs K ndcncc, that is, inquiries ns to th. vhoreabouts
of verUu: innate* .f nuntal institutions:

•Copy"

"Kevoabor 1 st, 1?!*0

■Therapeutic LsUblisli».nt of '-cx-neck by uerzjur 0
"(icntl.jvjni

■» learned that ry -roth-r, Frau Gertrud S.nJer, is supposed to
^ 1,0 l^n^.r in *croeck. As her only child, and as an African
citizan who has eontri >uW'’ to this costs of qy aether's upkeep,

I r-qu..st you kindly to give ae an indication as tu the present
where twcuta of ny wither.

•r should be Very thankful if yau would tlvt ac ouch indication
by return air sail. ?lcsse charge any eventual expenses to «y
privileged frozen account »dth the Eayorischo Voreinshank in
' u-rsbur b -.

"Respectfully,

(signed) "Hans Senior
c/o Topsy's
112-01 Queens Blvd.

Forest Hills, N.Y., U.S.A."

or. the n,xt page w, find tiv. reply:

■COM" %

•hr. 528?

"1 -nc?.osure

•To: The .jnsgawnt of the Ihoropeutic or.d Slursing establishment
•2slflni-Haar

•trtnsait:«d with request hznd-o Uroctly, the prosent loc ticn of
&ortru_ Sunder being untauwn in -his establishnent.

"Tmrn. ck, 3 icccsbcr 1?1:0

"71k. u-r.-_ _-\.nt cf the The raps utic and ^ursine


13 Jar -St-Jr-7-5-leseer

Court Ko.l


"No. 9S6L


Estabiiahoint of norneck
(«i£Zd) ")r. Tapst

•draft


■net. 7


!• »lth 1 oncloauru tr?.«=ittod tc thj
iuolic Utility Sick Transportation G.n.o.H. Berlin
PctBdaskjrplatx, 1,
with request for attention,
clgliin^, ? •fcconber 19i*0,

The *.uvv:ori.nti"


. 12 . 1*0


1555


13 January-tf-BJG-S-l-ltoohan
Court He. 1


On rcru 112 another such inquiry:

"Copy - Elsa S?ra Hochhaiaer - Mainz, 1 Dccaober 1940.

"Tc: The U&itagcecnt of the Therapeutic and Huraing Establishment
Eglfing-Haar.

"I beg to inquire herewith whether my c,usin Herr Oswald l eis f rca Doid-
enhein in dor Pfalz is in ycur establishment. Ho reported tc oa sometime age-
free the Therapeutic end Hursing Establishment in insbach th't he was boinG
transferred tc Eglfing. Directly I wrote him three times enclcsing a stamped
envelope fcj answer, without . ocoiving my news from hU. A parcel sent to
hiu wta also returned to me.

■I request ycu kindly tc let at have seno nows as seen ns possiblo as to
his a tat., cf health rnd as te whether he la still staying in ycur establishment
1 should like tc prepare him a Christmas treat.

"Thanking ycu in advance for ycur prompt notification, I am tost respect-

e

fully, (Signed) Elsa Lucie Sera Hochhciacr, Mains, Martinstrr.sso 38A- En-
clcsods return postage 12 Pfennig straps. Ko. 8823 V.k.H. tr.nsndttod to
The rutile Utility Sick Trnnsporteti n C.o.b.H. Borlin W. 9, rotsiom^rplat*

1 with request for attention. Eglfing, 6 Dcc«obor 1940, The Umsgaaen^

Ffsiuaueller."

On page 113 there ia a reply draft.

"6/12/40. Mrs. Elsa Lucie Sara Hcchhoimer, Uoir.z, llartinstrnsae 38./1
Zjlfir.-, 6 Decutbor 1940, Subject: Feis Os—Id Israel. Your letter of D«c-
«ber 1, 1940.

"*"« have forwarded ycur loiter tc the competent agency because the name
'f th- receiving center is unknewr. tc us."

I shall new skip a number cf such inquiries and r-plies and I as ycur
Honors tc turn tc page 118 cf tho Document bock. This is ancthor inquiry:

"UcBBingen, 4 December 1940, Tc: The Therapeutic ani Nursing ortablish-
~' jnt , ijinag/Haar near Ganich. Subject: Bertha l-oil.

"'.Ik Therapeutic and .Cursing Establishment Keufbeuren informed mo uper.
request that r=y crusin, Mrs. Berta Vfoil, neo Rosenbaum, cf whem I an. tho sole
rUctiv.^ still living in Germany, has been transferred U ycur establishment.


13 January-if-DJj-8-2-Ifcohan
Court Sc. 1

* beg f:r pexairsi.r. tc call upon ycu asking how she is and cn which days of
the week I cay visit her. Tarhaps ycu t re furthenare in a position t„
tell ac whet is the best twsslble way tc reach Eglfing free Munich. Thanking
j:u in advance, Ucj t respectfully, (signed) Bonne Israel hcscnlaun, roturn-
staapl-

Cn pace 119 wo have the reply:

"Draft adt. 6/12/4Q. Ur. Beane Israel fccscnb&ua, Moaaingen, Eglfinj,

6 Decicber 1940/

"Subject: '..oil Berta Sara tc letter free 4/12/40.

"Bertha Sara Veil has been transferred togtthcr with a collective trans¬
port of Jewish inflates t_ scoe other establish&ent according tc a docisl. n of
the Ministry cf tho Intori-r. The na;c of tho nev sstablishncnt is net kn.wn
tc us. Tho relatives snail bo inforaed by the receiving cvmt-r."

How, turn to the next Decucont cn page 126 of the Decuoent beck. I offer
in evidence Document }!.. 1143 as i'r sccution Exhibit K.. 343. This consists
cf eleven lotters <f inquiry* as to the whoroab.uts cf former inmates of Ejlfinf
Haar Institute. It is intor-sting to n.te that theso inquiries are net raaJo
by private individuals, but by Gevemsont agencies, that is Reich Gcv< maent
agencies.

C o.p y

"bcursburg, 3 Docuaber 1940

"Kc. 6513, Sttto elfaro ..gcncy Hermstrassc 1, Telephone 3761.

liain Franconia.

To the Mental Institution - Eglfin,- - Haar, near Munich.

"Subject: V elf art servico for ri.uannn of Schcellkripptn.

"i.cccrding tc information received frees ti.c -ental Institute Lehr in
S«pt«cber cf this year tho above i: been transferred tc tho Mental Institu¬
tion Eglfing-Haar upon order cf tho State Ministry cf tho Interior. Up.n cur
rder to the district office Bavaria of the Hatic.*el ..ssocicticn cf Jews in
Germany in uunich, tc nakc the payments tc that institution, w«. rtctdvod tho
answer that Naucann was Rot any a-ro in Eglfing and that his whereabouts


Ktr '- ®»* and that for that reason no payments would be cade.

ill ycu please infers; so whether the atet courts arc correct, since no-


13 Jcnurry-a-DJG-fi-3--ccj«in
Ccurt Me. 1


thing is knew here ..bv-ut a further transfer. (Signal) Kcettnite, mdt 10

December 1940 K, l«*e. 8399 V.k.H. returned to the State ’..elfcre «goncy Itoin-

Frcncenlt in i.uerzburg, with the information, thet, cn 20 September 1940

Wllhalo Israel Hcuaann has boon transferred tc another institution with a

Collective transport cf Jewish patients, according tc a decree cf tho State

Ministry cf the Interior. The name cf this institution is not kn.wn to us.

fifing, 10 Dccceb.r 1940, Management: (Signature) illegible.".

C c p y

"The 3«nior Public Frcaocutor - Landau in the ,'elatinnte 13 December 1940.

"Tc the Office of the Mayor - Landau,

"Subjoct: (lacing under .guardianship: Albert Israel Tillaunn, bom
22 February 1886 in Ducrkhcia, latest rcsidcnco in L-ndtu. Y-ur file Nc.

Dat. 10.

■Will you please inform ac abcut the preset whereabouts cf TilL-nann,
According f inform-tlcn roceivcd from tho a.ncr«cnt cf tho Mental Institute
for Uppar-Bavario in iglfing-Haar he has boon transferred tc an unknown in¬
stitute n »ith a Cwll-ctive transport cf Jewish patients on 20 Sept nbor 1940.
Dr. Zoiler, Certified: (Signed) Hceussul, Clork cf tho adainistrtticn of
Justice.

K-xt page, aoven:

"Subject: (lacing under guardianship: «lbcrt Israol lillocnn.

"Copy: To tho Uontal Instituto - Eglfing-Haar, with tho request tc inform us
as scon as possible, whether tho present wheronbeuts cf Tlllmenn era kn wn,
cr upsn wheso orders ho has possibly been transfarred. Landau in tho Inla-
tir.ate, 23 December 1940, By order if tho Buyer:"

"Handwritten - Draft I JO December 1940 V.K.H. returned tc tho May.r in
Lv.iau in thw lalatinato (ifale), with tho following information:

"The prosent thereabouts cf ..lbort Israel Tillocnn rrc not knewn here.

The tron3f;r to k place uper. tho order of tho SUtc Ministry cf the Interior.
ErlTiag, 30 December 1940, ..cting for tho Maneges, .nt: (Initialed) S".


15L8


13 J.in-’J-Jt —?-ln-*fcc na n
Court Ho. 1


The Tribunal vdll new turn t* 13? ol t tu. -n xnt Bock. This ia

anotojr letter.


■Cow


Kurun&or c , 27 Soft. 19l*0

■Thi. Lori Mayor of the City of the Roich i-arty Rallies (Stc.dt Ccr Roichaportoi-
Uge Health Tkipartacnt) Ret Vioacn-rund Sefiw, jem ir. Nurc.ibur~ on 3 Jinury


1391, last * si lonco Kur^sborr;, Foiruorkt 1]*, Tho above •aonticnad wr.a ’iaehart
fra the a-ntol institute Brlnngon on lo 8optorcbor 1910 and trn; forrod to tho
wntal institute i-lfing. (Order ef the Str.to Tept.) Custody Ordlncncj accor¬
ding to article 80/11, F Fennl t;do, cv fo. Ha 3Al. G.R. t<J tho ontal
I n atitui. F^lfini, with tho roqoeat r c. short stntcn.nt whether a ctengo
has taken pl-c. in tho coiditi i. : the aioi.. j.*urw. .o-rg, 3 January 1911, Suprefc
fToa-'Ctter* By order, signs li olgnatur. ? .collar."

Tho answer ia on tho next pagoi


■?irat draft, ndt. 9 January 15 : *1, . o. 182, v.k.H. back incluaive 1
docuaont.

"tv tho Cutroao Fror.cutor In huroicr B , with the inforaati.i that Sofie
Sara rtieson .rund in accordance- with n doc*ai< n ef the Rolch Mi ictor if tho
Interior wca transferred in a collcctivo transport ef Jewish patents on
20 3e*tc_ibcr 19h0 to an institution unknown to ue. E 0 lfing, 9 January 1911,

Thu ‘ ircctor: Initialled.■

Thda cloorly whews that tho secrecy of th- pregrsa at ih.a tLeu was auch
that even Ih-r Mich gcvorrexnt o.'fioore and uinistors wero not being lnfonaud


as to the vxtet disposal of thu patients.


The Tribunal will new turn to ps_,o 136 of tho -ocroent Book.


Th'- n.xt --ocujxnt which I now off* r An evidence ia Ixicuoont No. 113U as
.rcsccutier. exhibit fw. 331*. This el author ordtr of thv State .lniotry ef the
Interior to .iroctor -r. ifannrueller, ordering hi to tren^j - t HO patients
137 is another rccoipt.

Turnin', t. pag* 139 - pages 139, iiiO aid U*1 consist o: transport list

; • 10 c - Jeted on January 2i*, 19ol and having a total of 100 patients.

1559


13 Ja;>J|-JB-8-2a->feehan


Court Jfo. 1

Turning -o pa 50 .13 of the -ocua--nt rook, pc os 113 Hali and Ho consist of
transport 1 rtr No. 11 , coeplotee m January 2j, 19U1, havin. a total of 100 •
patients*

Tho Tribunal 111 n~« turn to pc,«. 1 17 cf the ixeunent book. I now of for
In evidone- II. :urru.t :fo. 1136 as -rcsccutian Exhibit No. 3h5* This is a list
of trar.fi. .r.s of uentsl petiente fror. Zglfir.i.-naar, Notic- tho last ere at
the better of thu ja„.., Trnap-:rt 20, dated 2 Juno 19ll. Tho nuabor tronspa'-
tod in that trr .snort is ;ivji as 1 , 857*

ba. St.tVAT 1 US, (Attorney for tho ofondant 5randt)i president,

in thu >^cuA-nt b> k which has be-n _iv..n us these aro a nunb„r <:f lists
lackin,. - cunur.ta 1136 and Ul'5, further, ©re a 'ccuaent, naiwly No. 868 is
slssing# IT they should be to ui ot : la tor tiro, I sh.uld bo in a

position to raiso objocticnc perhaps at that tirw.

!3t. SKlUERt Y>ur Honor, oar-jtt Nos, 1136 and 111*6, tho first im
docurwnta referred to by r. Serv-.tius, •. .r. such that th«y c uld not Ixj
ainoo raphod in Ooraan. 1 beli. v. thor- w.rc pencil notations or nunothin,.
of that nature on then, therefore, tiu.y -.r.rc phot;stat.d* Boil* bulky, thoy
wor- dcliv-rod t. thu u fondant's information Contor, I boliovc, on Thursday
of last N..k. They have at least rdnetoon eopios dollvurod to tho crowtant's
lru'mti>.' Contor . \.ith roapcct to th. third doou-aont. No* <J6'1, that docu-
nent »Mlo it rcxnins in thj index has «cn c-aittod fran the "ocunont book
1' both Oorjan and English *nd wi31 not to offorod in ovidonee.

?'•!& . XI EITTt Aft-a- all tho oxad ration has tranepirod if tho ofeneo
Counsel has not rocolvud clear copies, the oclssion will bo rcctifiod at tho
earliest possible dote arid if thoy have rccoivod U»e copies, that .rill be
satisfactory*

7.. SHIL 1 ZH: I bow go to tfr. noxt bocur. >nt on a L o 11*8 and offer in evi-

*nce -cis^nt 1139 as rrrsecution Saefeioit 3 L 6 . This is a letter free

.f ~'x.jucUvr "To the Ht-ich CcMdttua fer the Scientific Approach and

Tr.-.t:. r Severe H-re Sitary nr Constitutional biseifos. Berlin 9, lost

1560


13 Jen-K-JP-8-3»-Meeban (ffi)

Coart Ho. 1

Office Box 101, Zglf ing, 17 January lgUl, Subject: Obligatory
Registration of deforced ar.d other ne*a-born patients of tho Mental
Institution of Eglflng-Eea-r. Enclosures: 3 Registrations.

■According to the errcngerents egreed upon at the conference of
10 Decenber I 9 UI In Berlin V g, Tosstrnsse 4, you received enclosed
3 notice* of ccaes hospitalised in the Children's House of tho
nentrl institution of Eglflng-Baar, which by virtue of the decision
of the Reich hlnlstry of the Interior IT-3, 30 8/39 1& August 1939
are to bo reported."

THE PHESIDBT: I hr vs 18 August.

XR. SCHILLER: I ns sorry, Tour Eonor, that should be 18.

"Hell Hitler" (initialed) illegible, pencilled: Have been register¬
ed: 1) Cterny Oertrud 8 Jnnunxy 35. 2) Hernsterner, Edwere, 2
January 1938 and 3) Trenker. Oertrud. 7 Mry 1938."

I rale Tour Honors to turn to --the next pngo of the docunent book.

I offor In evidence So. 1142 as Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 347. This
is r lottor free Pfrnncueller concerning Jewish locates of his
Institution.

"Strrped: To be filed.

"To the Oencrnl Sick Transport Conprny O.n.b.H., Berlin V 9 , Pote-
draer Platt 1 , 28 Pebruary 1941.

■Jewish lnnrtes of Institutions. HE: Tour lettor of 25 Pebruary

19 ^ 1 .

■The enclosed lists have been corpletod by adding the roquostod
data, ns frr rs this has been possible. We reenrk In this connection
that vrrlous prtients had been adaltted to this institution ns
transient patients for only a few days. (Initialed.)"

TrZ PHISIIBE7: That Docuasnt is Initialed "2". What identifies
It as being written by Dr. PfrnnnuellerT
X?. SC.-TLLZRs I »n sorry, Tour Honor, this Is one of the docunents
taken fro the files of Dr. pfanncueller. It Is ny understanding
that this 1 u one written rt his direction. I will retract the


1561


13 Jn, jt.JF-6 3*-Mtehsp (3t)

Court Ho. 1


steteomt tkrt It Is fror- Pfrnanuellsr, however, betides the
orlrtncl docur^nt, ns I en now gives to


1561 n


13 Jan«#-JWWia-l feehan
Court :;o« 1

understand, contains tbo I nit Id "Z* and art . fannouellcr, which do.s not
Show on th- translation and the letter "Z" is not the initial referred bo,
but has eaa_ cthur conxx-t^tion unknown tc at the present tinu.


1562


13 Jen li7-+-3!-9-l-Kaloy (BZ)
Coa-’t Fo. 1


I now Introduce In evidence Document Fo. Il4l r.s Prosecution
Exhibit Fo. 39. 1* e letter fror. ? ro r.t Truehbelsser, Legal

Advisor, Reich Profeaelonrl Group to the director of the cental
institution. It is dated 25 April 194ls
■Subjects Heritage of 3erta Sara Vertfceiser - hnvinc died on 3
Deccr.ber 1940 in the lneene ssyiun Chela.

■The there tenporrrily admitted Vortheiner has left tho territory
of the Reich.

"I an esklng for infornrtlon ne to wlu.ro to Vertheiner was trans-
ferred froc there on 2C Septenber IS 1 ®. Signed Hell Hitlers Ad-
□inistrrtor of Legacy.

■dtd 28 April I9U1. V.

■one following handwritten*

■letter back.

•3.A.V. was traneferred according to a decroo of tho Bavarian
Strto Ministry of the Interior of 4 Septonber 1940 Fo* 5236 n 44
in r collective transport of Jewieh lnnntee fron our institution
to ar. institution unknown to us. The trmsport of the patients
was carried out by tho Gonernl Prtients Transport Cocprny, O.n.b.

H., Berlin V.9, Potsdrasr Plrt* 1, to which you nay turn with
nil further questions.

■signatures 27 April 194l Pf."

The next document is Document Fo. 1138. Tour Honors, this has

been inoorrectly stapled in the docunent book; thet is, page 152

should cor.o before prge 151. I should like to strrt, therefore,

on pryc 152. This is Docunent Fo. 1138, which wc offer cs Brosecu-

tion Exhibit To. 349. This docunent consists of correspondence

betweon Pfanraueller rnd the Reich Coonittee for Scientific Hesor.rch

of Bcssiditnry rnd Constitutional Serious Diseases.

■Reich Cocnittee drted

for the Scientific Research 30 April 1941

of Hereditary rnd Constitutional
Serious Diseases

■To Hr. Dr. Pfnnnnualler
Mental Institution


13 J.-n U7-*>-2M-tt-2-i >loy (5K)

Court 1*0. 1

Bfilfins-Hnnr norr Ku&leh
Post Offic© box 31

"Subject; Child Aiar Krric Tkclaaier,

born 5 ”y 1938 In V#laach, PfAffenhofsn."

::-3 PE2SXIBS?! This docucent vhlch la contained la tho book

before ne. It contains the date 5 Kay 19U1 at the head of the

docuoeat end reads, "The answer to your letter of 30th of April

19»»1. B

;G. SC~ILLZR: Tour Eonor, that le correct. Page 152 should bo
the firet pege of the docusent, and is dated 30 April I 9 UI and
the reply carried a later date, and that is 5 Kay 19^1. I* that
cle>*r, Tour Kcnorf

(no -udible response.)

•I have received a report or. the child Anna Krric ThaL-irier
who was transferred by you on 11 Juno 19*C to tho Associated
Institution Schoenbrunn, Station and Post Offlco Roehn:oos.

"I request a acdlcal report with prognosis on the child, insofar
as It Is still possible at this tine.

Holl HI tierl
as deputy l

Dr. Klein.

■Strap* Hoick Cor.-it toe for the Scientific

Rosearch of Hereditary and Conetltutlonal
Serious Dlsorses.”

Sow, turn to page 151, Tour Eonor, and this Is the reply*
■Zglflnc, the 5 Hr? 19 1 *!.

Drrf t

dtd. 5 Kry 19ll.

To the

Reich Con ittoe
for Scientific Research
of Hereditary rnd Conetltutlonal
Serious Dioceses.

Berlin V 9

Post Office box 101

■Subject: The child Anna Karle fhal'vicr.


13 Jrn 47-K-3t-9-3-Kalsy
Cuurt So. 1


-orn £ Hr* 1936 In Wolnzech, Pfaffenhofen.

The ar.tvcr to ywr letter of 30 April 1941
Dr. H/M

■The child Anna Marie Thalnaler vas In our Institution free 17 Kerch 194C
until 11 Juno 1940. At that tine she «m undor observation In the children's
house end on the letter date vts


13 Jsn-SaE-SA-^-IIaloy
Court Ko. 1.


river, to her father who declared hins.'lf ready to take the child, who va6
rre-atly in need of nurain , to the Associated Institution Schoonbrnun,
post-office Hoehruoos near Dachau. Tee special psychiatrist in cur
children's ward who had treated tho child has boen drafted. Frca our
fileo, however, It can definitely be ascertained that the *-irl io Buffer¬
ing free feeblerlndedncss together with raroryanlc disturbances, (loca
of tonue) duo to an attack of Bonin, oncophalitie in February 1939. The
child evince# a spastic collapse on the ri«ht eldo, but no nthor neurolo¬
gical findings ercopt for a dlvorae atrablen. She can ait and ctand but
not walk not even if aaslotcd: she doeo not apeak and. has horo learned
to oat with the spoon. She it very nuch In nood of care and auitod for
the Institution Schoenbrunn. In ey opinion tho child Is ono of thcoo we
obsorve and treat in our institution according to tho ro.rulatlono of
Hoick Cowlttoe for Scientific Hca-arch of Hereditary and Constitutional
Sorlouo rieeasos. Tho epocial ward of the chlldror.'a houoo was not yet
opened at tho tine we traroforred the child.

■Sell Hitler!

(el,;nnturc ) 3."

The Tribunal will now turn to the next docurent, pn.;o 154, of the
Toca:ont 3ook. I offor this in evidence r.» Tocuuont Jo. 1140, .rooocu-
tion SrhlMt 350. This docur.ont cor.aicts of aeveral letters fron ifrjia-
miellcr to the General iationtc Transport, G.r-.b.H., concerning' inauirloo
by relativoc.

•I r a f t !

"To tho General rotients Transport 0.^.b. ,, .

SflfliV, 2 Kay 1941.

*Subjects 3uchbinter Hilde Sara, born 1 August 189; Vith 1 cnclo-

guto.

"Attached wc ara sending you a lettor concerning Hilda Sara 3uchfcin-
dor with the request that you handle this there. 3uchblnder vno trans¬
ferred by you to another institution on 30 September 1940 in a collective

transport cf Jewish institution patients according to a decision of tho

-566


13 Jca-33~9a - 5 -Keloy (30
Court To. 1


State Ministry of the Interior.

Hell Hitlerl*

On the text pf^e ve here a siailrr letter dated 3 May 191«

Subject* Schvrrs Heinrich Israel.

P rra 15b of the Document Book is pa interesting document which I
now offer in evidence ps Document FO-1137, which will be Prosecution
Sxhibit " 0 . 351 . This is a docunent concerning the entry of children
into mental institutions.

"hinieterial Gexette of the Reich and Prussian Ministry of the
Interior.

Po. 23 of U June I 9 U 1 .

Recognition of the need for institutional caro of children with
eevere congenital afflictions.

Circular of the Reich Xinister of the Interior of 30 May 19 1 *! -

IT V I 9/UW»5.


1567


13 J"3 Ijt-* w JA-9-iwu , x°y (ST)
Court ‘‘o. 1


■With reference to the circulnr of 18 June rad 1 July 19 1 * (H<-ich
Unisterlal Gazette IT. page 1205, lU37> I request the social wel¬
fare associations to recognize In Indigent eases the necessity for
institutional care in the lnetitution determined by the Belch
Cccnif.ee in those cases in vhlch the Seicb Cocnittee for tho
scientific eurvey of eevere afflictions through heredity or predis¬
position approaches the district physician for coonltnent of a
child to an institution; this apolles especially to the state (Inndee)
velfcre association. insofar a. they have to ^sinister the in.titu-
tlonal cere in the sphere of the so-called extraordinary welfare
burden (for instance, in accordance with Per. b. Pru.s. Hegulntory
Decree to the TV) (See OS 1932 *>7; 1937 103) or pay the

expenses.

•To the social welfare associations rad their supervising r.uthor-

ltlM * * Belch Kinisterial Octette IT, Page 100."

The next docent begins on page 157 of the Socunent Book rad I
now offer In evidence Document 11^. at Prosecution Bxhlbit So. 352.
On Page 157 transited for the heading "List of reported children
according to the Circular of tho Belch Kinistor of Interior about
disposition of deforced (and einllrrily afflicted) new born b-blce."
Pages 157 to page 1&2 of elx of these lists.

The Tribunal will now turn to p»ge l6U. Tou will notico that
Kusber 95 "Schnirer Valter, in the institution •sitherlzntion."

The word "authorization" la these lifts of patients would seen to
sera that the patient had been narked for death; that is for n
nercy killing.

On pr.-c 165 you will notice Prtlente 103 w* !° U - * ln tho
next colunn we have the feature nark, "BUt'^rixatlon."

TEB FKISID3PTt Tou say that is true in reprrd to the persons
eopeariag on urge 163 . rs we 111

1568


1? Jna. U7-K-K/Jr-S^2V;>loy (3T)
Court So. 1


K3. SCHLLZBl There la one. So. UU, on prge l6>.

Then under "released to*. "x In the Institution" end "authorisation".

“urnin- to pc^e 1&7 of the Docuatat Book you will note the lerge
auaber of prtienta after whose nnce ia written the word "authorised."

In the third colicn it says " in the institution", and the next
word "authorised".

Sow, I would like to turn to ptge 172 of the Document 3ook t the
Prosecution lntroducea in evidence Prosecution Exhibit So. 353* Thin
is one of the docuc«ts referred to by Dr. 8ervatius, obviously which
we have (riven in photostat fore. Thie document is r list of centnlly
ill children, who wero wilfully put to death.

I should like now to turn to pact 177, where the Tribunal c-n notice
the Inst nunber is 171, thrt is 171 of ouch children.

The Tribunal will turn to pr.ee 179 of the Docunent Book. I should
like to Introduce in evidence Docunent Fo. 1129, *•


13 Jrn 47-^?^C-9-lc-il-J.oy
Court Ho. 1

Prosecution 3skioit Ho. 354. This document consists or r. r.uobor of lottors,

I fc.lloTe about aino lottors frcn Pfrasaualler to the Hospital and Nursine
jstabllahaonts, . o oncoming quoAticnnoiroa.

Prro :.79 is * lottor datod SelfInc, 19 No7or.bor 1940.

It ir Crossed "To tho Teich Association Hospital and Buraiac
SstaMiataonts. Borlin, *7.9, attention: Tarty ca ralo Prof. Dr. Hoydo."
"Su'.ioct: 102n! shipeont of registration forrs -300 piooos.

Nor.. 129.501 to 129.800

ros lottor of 12 Nova-bor 1940.

Door party cam do Prof. Dr. Hoy do,

Zndoaod, I rr. roturnlnc to you tho 102nl ahipnont of 300
rociatration for-a, nos. 129.501 - 129.800 eftor oxojiiuction.

Holl Hitlor!

Dr. Pfannaillor."

On ?r£o 180, a airllar lottor datod "fclfiuc, 22 NoTarhor 1940."

Tho Court will notico opposite tho word "Subject;" lOGth Shljront
of roriatr-tion ferns, 258 piocos."

?Pi:o 181 a airllar lottor rofors to tho 104th ahijront of 300 olocoo.
On Paro 182 anothor lottor rofora to tho 105th shipiont of
roristr-tion Coma, 300 pioco3.

On P--o 163 anothor lottor free Srlflnc frer. Dr. Pfanrriuollor to
Dr. Hoydo, rofora to tho 107th shipumt of roriatration fomo, 300 piocos.

On Taro 184 still anothor rofora to tho 108th ahipoont of

9

re; latration forr-c, 300 piocos.

Tho Tribunal will new turn to Paco 18?• This ls tho l® ot lottor
in this doeiront end rofora to tho 158th shipment of registration f orris,

200 piocos, Noa. 161.001.

On Peso 188 tho noxt document No. 1130, »hich 1 should new like

to error in oridoaco rja Prosocution %hiblt No. 355. This docuiiont

consists of 19 lottors fron hospitals concorning questionnaires.

•Poich Association

Hospital and nursing Sstabllsfcionts.

1570


13 Jm 47-/tf?JC-9-2C-Udoy
Court So. 1


13 Jan^9-!o-“ iTD-teloy
Court No, 1


This illustrates tte practice of sending the questionnaires to custo-
ctrs of otter nontal institutions. So tte Director of Eglfing-Haar did not
pass upon — pass judgment upon tte patiants of Eglfing-Kaar*

Tte Tribunal will now turn to Pago 195, You will notioo a lottor to
Dr, Ffanwaiollor, and thr.t page is signed "Heil Hitler, By orderi Niotscho
"on: of those exports in tte euthanasia progran.

oedtting reading a lar'-e nunber of ttesc letters to Dr,
Pfannnucllor fren tte difforent hospitals, and fron Niotschc and Hoydo con-
ccrnirv: shipeent of questionnaire photostats.

If tte Tribunal will row turn to Page 207, which is tho lost page or
this locunont, I should aoroly liko to call tte attention of tho Tribunal
to tte hi^h nurbers row roprosuntedj under "Subject:" "Shipoont of
Questionnaire Photostats ?ios. 183 851 - 18U 050," Signed "Hoydo."

Tho next docusent No, 826, on Page 208 of tho Docunont Book, which
th. Proaocution wishes to offer in ovidunco as Exhibit No. 356«

"Copy

"Tho Hatch Dofonso Cosnissionor
for tte Sorvico Cocnand III
To tte

Mental Institutions located In Wohriknjis III.

Subject: Transfer of iiwatos of tho Mental Institutions,

"In order to siiyllfy tte aininistration, in tte courso of reorgani¬
zation of Mental Institutions, I 3tell ordor tte transfer of a groator nunbor
of imates of tho ?*mtal Institutions in tte noar future. I shall ordor tho
transfers fror. caso to case as tte; boccno nocossary. Tho patients will bo
transferred in concentrated transport jroups accoaponiod by thoir records. The
dispatchin in institution will not incur any expenditures for tho transport.
Tte oaci records will be returnad after exinination by tte roooiving insti¬
tution, The relatives will also be inforned by the receiving Institutions,
Thoso who pay for tte imates support are to bo a J visod that further payments

are to be interrupted tesporarily froa the ti-ae of transfer until their

1572


; ! . *: Sfc-

13

Court No* 1


ai^nod: Stuertz."

Fa; o 209 f tho Document Book is another docunent, that is Docunent
Ho, 1696-FS, which tYa Prosecution offers In evidence as Prosecution Exhibit
No, 357, This is a lottor free Dr, Conti to tho Minister of tho Interior,
conoerninc questionnaires. It also has attached to it a fom of questionnaire
and a docunont on procedure b

"Tho Roichainister of tho Intoriorl 16 ftovonber 1939,

To the Head of

Hospital (for cental casos)

Kaufbouron

or his Deputy in
Kaufbcuron.

With roeard to tho necessity for a systornisod ooonooic plan for
Hospitals and Nursing Institutions, I request you to


1573


13 Janua ry-lf-0 JC—9-1 o-Malcy
Court No. 1


fill cut— M This is a typographical error. It should be “out." —"the
attached Registration Fores immediately, in accordance with the attached
instructional leaflet, and to rctuna then tc a ei If you yourself are net a
doctor the Registration Fores for the individual patients arc to be filled in
by the superIntending doctor. The fillin' up of tho questionnaires is, if
possible, to be dene on c typewriter. In the column "Diagnosis" I request a
statement as exact as possible, also a short description of the condition if
feasible.

"In order to expedite tho werk, the registration ferns x'or the individual
p tients can be dispatched here in several p rts. The last consignment must,
however, in any case i.eve arrived at this Ministry at the latest cn 1 January
1940. I reserve for myself the right, should occasion arise, tc institute
further officii inquiries on the spot through my representative.

(sd) Dr. Conti."

On Page 210 or thu Document Book, Tour Honors, "bout tho middle of the
page, on the right hand side, is a notation fer an answer. The notation says
"Rccj" with an asterisk. *t the bottom of the p-go the asterisk is rope, ted,
and it srys:

"•Germrn or of similar blood (of Corean blood), Jew, Jewish mLxod breed
Grades I or II, Negro (nixed brood)."

This obviously shows tho racial connotation of tho outliannsia program.

In the aiddlo of the page it als s.yai "Nationality," living a blank for
the nationality to bo put in.

Ke.r the bottom of the pc go is says:

"Regular visit end oy when (address)

"Guardian or nurse (Same, address)

"Responsible lor payment:.Since when in that Institution*"

It might bo questioned as to whether individuals for whom nc ono was
responsible for payment retained a fair chrr.ce cr any ch-.nco cf cintinucd life.

Or. Page 211 of the Document Bock, near the bet ten cf the page, about the
up:


feurth lino


1574


13 Janu. ry-M-DJG-9-2o-lL-Icy
Ccurt He. 1

■banner of employment (detailed description cf • ork)

■Fennr-nent Stoplcysont, independent worker," end "yc3" or "no."

"Value cf ■ erfc (if posriblc compared with average performance of healthy
person)."

Again this shews th:t where the individual would result in acme economic
benefit tc the Leich or to the Reich Govornaertt, that this w s not purely a
natter of nodical and scientific interest.

On Page 212 of the Document bock, Tukllc Utility, ambulance Transport¬
ation G.s.h.H., Dept. Il/d, H/K-"

THS iRZSlDENTt Before continuing with this document the Tribunal will
recess until 1:30.

(A rwcess was token until 1330 hours.)


1575


13 Jen UT^-EWC^WtSaatuck (!SD)
Court To. I


CCREZCT3) CO?T

ajtimjo::: zzz ic::

" " # »

(The tearing rcconvonod at 2330 hours, 13 January 19L1)

THS I'.’jr-IL'.L: The Tribunal is again in session.

IB. SCKILiSRt If the Tribunal plocsc, I should now like to con¬
tinue reading Tocuaent l69o-n. That is on page 212 of the docuront

• •

boo::, pa;o U of said document. Dated 12 Coy 192:1, Public Utility,
Anbulrr.co Transportation C-.n.b.H. to -ho Oiroctor of the Hospital of
the district Association of Swabia, Tcufbouron, Ban.ria.

"D^ar director: Dy order of tho Toich Defomo Corrdesionor 3
nust rerevo rental cases fror. your institution and Jr or. tho Trane h at
Irrsoo to anotlver institution. total cf liO persons tro to be
transported, 70 on the l*th of June and 70 on tho 5th of Juno.

I for.rcrd you horrlth Transport 'lots os. G,T, 10, and 11 in
triplicate. The additional naceo on tho lists cro Antondod for
possible defici s (discharged oanYvlo, diod, otc.)

"Tho narking of tho patior.ts is nost suitably done by noons of a
• *

strip of adhesive ta», on which the nano is -ritton in ink-pencil, to
be pan tod bofr.roon the shoulder blafoi. :.t the aaro tiae tho naan is
to bo put on ar. article of clothing.

"Tho hospital reports and. personal liistorios aro to bo preparod
for the transportation and handed to our lirector of Transport, Terr
Tup-ar, in the sano way too personal possessions cf tho patients, ns
■ 'oil r. s r.onoy and articles cf value.

"I onclose -roparty inf on;.tier, can's end nforration car:'3 as
to tho defrayor of the snpor.sos, which accurately filled out, mist bo


Cur director of trans-


157&.


13 Jan 4?-X-at-10-2-S in^udc

Court 3;. 1

iU«iW«. Public Utility Ar.bulenco Transfer trtKn G.a.b.E."

On page 214: "Provincirl •.aeceirtion for S-cirl Uolfrro, Sv»bir;

X-'ornse, Augaturg 1, P.0. 3ox Regierunsetreaident, ac'drcaaed to Directa- Dr.
Faltlhauaer J the Hospital, aruT-euren. Your reference: 2080. Your letter
-f 12.11.40 AUfiaturg, 6.5.1541, c-ccernlng the trrnafer of Polenta.

"I hrve the honor to inf ore you that the feacle patUnto trrnaferred froc
y.ur lnatituticn on 6.11.1940 t- tho inatitutlona in Grefeneek, Bornburg,
S-nnen.tein end Harthein ell died in Kov«ber of le.t year. Sign. ture,
illegible."

Pac-e 216. -Copy. Kinietry of State of the Interior. Oborregiorurgarat
Oua, dated llunich, 24 3ov*:tor 1942, to tho Director of tho KoiMtnl, Kauf-
ieuren, D:otor of Hodioine, Dr. Faltlhauaer. To Head Phy.iclin Dr. V,

Leiniach, Gutnthurg. m letter cf IZ.11. 1942.

■Door Doctor: In y-ur letter of 13.11.19*2 you ronueeted ne to tend
•ultable epileptic# for the carrying out of ycur ro.e».rch vrk. I had an
opportunity of di.cuMii* thle vlth tho Oberoediziualrat.n Dr. Fnltlhnu.or and
Dr. Pfnnnnucller. Both vill willingly deliver yu suitable patient.. For
Ttrious reasons patient, free the Institution at Hrufbenren are priaarily to
be choe.n. If tfcla Institution ha. no .ultoble ar.terlel, I n»treo to the
transfer natlcnt. free tglfing-Krrr to Gucnibure for your re.oaroh work.

I reeuwat you to get into touch vith Dr. Falthaueon. Hell Hitler, algnr.ture,
Gaua."

Bov turn to peg® 216 -f tho document book end I offer in evidence Djou-
vf.t rmabor 30-826 a. Broaccution inhibit Sunter 358. Thi. vould seen to be r
fern letter froa Ccnti t- adniniatrat-ra of various uonta inatitutiona.

"Copy. Tho Reich Kini.ter of the Interior, Berlin. 24 October 1939, to
the Chief of Blank or official deputy at Blank. Vith rogerd to tho necoasity
of c^rdinttin,: tho cental institution, through plrnnod econcoy I repeat you
U fill .ut the attached cue.tionnairea iccedletely according to the enclosed
instruction leaflet rnd to return then to ne." This if aifned by '-rder, Dr.


Conti.

On page 217, 216 and 219 v* ace the different page. of the enclosed


15 Ji-a 47-A-iJt-10-o-Sinebuek
Gcort Sc. 1


leaflet. Cs page 219, the first pnra.pranh, "All octientB •rc tc be enmrnted
vfc., (1) ere Buffering fr-n the following illnesses and cannot be copicyed, or
for nschanical work only (plucking »nd sinilur v rk), in the institution."
Dropping tc nunber 2, "ere interned ns criminally insane cors-ns, or (-1) aro
not of Gsraen nationality or ere not -f Oorstn or Gwian-releted blood, indi¬
cating the raaa and nationality."

On p-go 220 we find a p.,-c headed: IxoliJiatlonsi that is, explanations of
the leaflot. The lost pnregranh reads ns follows:

•In coses of patients being newly admitted after the deadline date,
Questionnaires are tc be filled cut as well end t - be sent to at collectively
every yoer -n 1 February (for tho deadline date A 1 January) and 1 Au*;uBt
(for the doadllne date of 1 July)."

In view A this paragraph it iy be auostlcned whother ths authorities
cerwd ns to whether or not the A ct rs o.uld psrforn r g of A diagnosis in r few
days for tho patients newly r.i.ittod after the doedlins.

This oonplefss Docuncnt -k 1*. prxt II. Kr nssocirto, Mr. Robbins, will


- 1573 -


13 Jar. U 7 -A- 10 -la-CT-iIinabucle (WG)
Court Ho. 3.


continue with the presentation of evidence in Document Book U.,

Part HI.

HR. BOBBIES: Bey it pie.,, the Tribunal, X — «t*

Ihanber 337WS a. Prosecution Exhibit 359. The first part of this
docuMlt is a notice printed on green paper which acconp-de, the quecUon-
Mire and rarely atate, that notlfieatlon ie te bo nade of all patient,

*ko fall in the following four categoriess

»1. Those who suffer fron co=unlo.ble disease,”, listed there;

2) those -*o have been innate, of the Institution ior at least five year,
er 3) those who are confined a, crirdnally insane persons; or U) those who
do not possess Conan cltlsenship or who are not of Geraan or related
blood. State race and

TIE PRSSIDaJT: ?ron what pago of thin document took aro you
reading* counsel?

HR. ROBBBS: "....citizenship." The footnote on the docua.nl ...

THE MSIDarr, Counaol, fron what page of thi. docunont book aro

you reading?

HR. ROBBING: Thla 1. page 223, yeur Honor, of Docunont Book Huabor
3. The footnote at the botton of tho page dofinoa raoo, aaveral cate¬
gories of race, as Gomana Mid those of related bleed, Jew, part Jaw,
firat rod second grade, negro, part negro, gypsy, part gypoy and ao forth.

I will neroly refer to tho last parsersfh of the sane ereon noUce on
page 22k of tho document book. It reads as follows:

"Fresh cases of patients to bo reported fron year InaUbutlcn after
the date as specified aro te be siniUrly reported on questionnaires and
collected and sent to no ty the 1st February (aa of lat January) or lat

August (as of 1st July) of each year.”

I rill cedt reading the next part of the docunont which is similar
to a docunont read ty Hr. Schiller. The docunont that he read was 1695-
re. It norely contains instructions as to tho filling out of tho question-
naire and is signed by Dr. Conti as deputy.

1579


13 J=n &7-A-1 D-41S3 - Knabock
Cr.'rt -!o« 1

tidnl part of tho aaro docent, 3o?l-?E, is fcwntl cn 7 c 225
of too &ooant beck* It is a lector e ",37 Linden. It is ~n tho¬
le it. rhe ad of the Roich idnisery of t.ie Interior, dated Berlin, 10
Hctccbcr 19L2, to tho Director of toe - t . ertt . rivate Clinic in Bonn,
ru .cruinc too survey of tho institutions" Tor tlio care and treatment of
the inaano of ailfypos.


- 15 -*-


13 Jon II7-V.-H-1-3 - Patty

C'.urt Ho. 1


“Supplementin ' ny above nentioned letter, it is laid Jum that tho
Institutions for the Care a*! Iroatcant f the 2nsan$ are to notify mo ty
tho first of February (as cf l3t January) amdby the first of Aujust (as
of 1st July) of oach year after the last ratification, in other « rds, durinc
t; ' 1 st six conths what patients they have rccoivod,

“I take this opportunity of rcltcratinc this directive. At tho seno tine
I noto the following:

"Fer special reasons I now stress the necessity of making a c»a?3xtc
roport of all patients in the Individ al institutions.

“I, thurofcrc, rcqu.st that in future notification bo endo cf all
patients irrespective of the f r.a or levjtr. cf illness who havo been received ^
into tlio Institution since tho laot six .-nt: a ncticc." .

• I especially exutoct horo that u ; tificaticn bo nado of all patients
irrespective of tho Cm or loi^th cf illness." Continuing reading tho lottor:

"In order to cbviato certain difficultloo which might arico in regard
to patients rcceivod into the Institution a few days before the 'ate ac of
which reported orvl on whra ac thin- can bo said as yet, 1 an in a^rcccont that
a questionnaire bo filled cut especially ft such patients rfio on tlio said date
leva boon in tho Institution for one month. In this -way persona who Icvo bom
rocoivcd onl; tcup rarily can o eliminated

" For tho next date of notice, i.c., lTobruaiy 19>*3, I roquost in
addition that y-u includo in your re? rt also all th.se iantes of your In¬
stitution fer when hiterto, in accordance rrl th :y earlier direct!vo, femo
havo not boon sent.

■Tho notificati ns should be sjjo as bedare by collet .ion cf Uic
questionnaire as prescribod and which can be obta nc fren ao, and which
are to be collected arti forwarded tc :x> as of the socd-awiual date stipulated.
Only tho Latest fern f Questionnaire 1 with tho printed reference 10b07-
U1.2 C is tc bo used (fern cncl-sod). Utg old questionnaire f:r s in y ur
p 3sossion can be used for other pur?, res.

" I request the nest careful cablation f those fcins with regard to


-15 dl-


13 Jar. 1:7—U-2-S - ia»ty
Ceurt- He. 1


all coluins, zs insufficient c eviction requiring n.corsary fu rthor inquiries
vill only involvo a ditiinal wor 7 : for you.

“In fcrv»r*ing the questionnaires I on tc be Informed r-g'larly of
any chances which have taker. -jlacc In the ueantiuie in regard to patients al¬
ready earlier rep /ted, fer instanco, through death, discharge, transfer to
ether institutions, otc. This rep rt can be node as of the chtes in question
cn a list in duplicate, hewover, always giving the full naao, elate and place
of birth, to *h\ch Institutions transferred, ate.

"Should it occur that such chan, os hr.- e not take place, then a
notification tc this effect should bo nac'a by the date in quosticn,

"Tho supervising authorities of the Institutions haw boon nc'^fiod.

By Or or. Seal of tho Rolohsulniater of the Interior. (Signed) Linden."

I should next like tc offer ato evi once hccucont No, 120-CUl as i'rcs-
ocution'a Exhibit 360. Thlo is n fara letter vhich war used to notify- re¬
latives of the transfer cf pationts fra .cntal institutions, The orifinal
contains blank? as indicated in tho translation. It is on tlie letterhead of
the Dirootor of tho State '-ental Institution, to tho Attorney General in
(blank), and it roads as f-llorai

"By virtuo • f a docrco cf the i-oich CcuoLsoloner for the efonsc tho
patient (blank) has been transferred today u.c (blank) to another institut¬
ion, whoso nano and address is not yot knnsi to do. *hc institution in which
the patient sha 1 bo ac cep tod will notify you accordingly. I a si: yru to
resist free further inquiries.

"Ir. ccsc you shcull not rcoivov; any cca.unicatio . froo the institut¬
ion Thiel, has acceptod the patient, I roe .trend tc take inquires with the
• utio.nt transport C rpsration, Sorlin " 9, Tots'aoerplatc 1,"

I noxt offer int. evi once "ecunent llo. liO-828 as Prosecution F.xliib-
it 361 which is a typical letter Infcrfdar; pfuenta cf tho eath of thoir
* on » -his particular latter einj date;’ 2: February 191:0, State Huntal In¬
stitution Pran_onburc cn tie Havel,

•v -tar r. Or.,


-1532—


13 a U7»>H-3-S~'- Putty
Court Ko. 1


r; 0 r e ; -ret t. infora ycu that year son, who in the n^mtinc ilad to
bo transferred to our institution, has lie-: hero unexpected as a re¬
sult of afccecsod tonsils on 17 February. .To arc sorry tc say that all our
neileal efforts euro in vain. He died softly and without any pain. ^ith
his serious and Incurable diseaso death naans relief for hin.

«“uq to the present dnnj/r of cpidcuic hero, the body of the de¬
ceased had to be crenat-d laaottately aeccn'inc to polico request. ..’o are
asking you to inforc us at ycur earliest convenience whether ycu want the
urn with tho cw-thly regains interred at any special cc etcry. In that
easo wo ask ycu to nau; tho couctory end cl'*° lts correct address so that
wo can havo tho ura transferred to the aOdniatraticn of that coaotcry. If
you havo no special wishes as to tho twryia” or if ycu fall to infora us
within a nonth, wo will havo the urn buried h.ro free of charjos. Tho
bolcr^inLO of the docooscd had to be burned duo to tho dan;,or or sproad -
ins of disoaeo.

rj 0 enclose two copies l* the death, certificate which you will ccro-
fully koop in cr.’cr to subdt the.; eventually to the authorities.

Hcil HTTIiai

by order slcnocl Dr. Hoycr."

Evidence which I will present later show that letters such as
this, identical lot ter s, wero wdl«-d. to several persons in the sane locality,
At tlaos it was stated that tho patient Clod fren appendicitis when, as
a natter cf fact, tho pondix had been m-v;d as nueh as ten years
previously.

Tho next doeununt which I wild like to iifor into evidence is Dr cu¬
rrent KO-029. I top ycur pardon. Ti da is s -ill art rf u ocunont 828, and
it is found on Fa^o 22? of Secernent : ;k Sc. 111. This also a typical let¬
ter. I will net burdon the c ourt with rjadiny it since it is vary simil¬
ar tc tho previous letter.

The next document mich is coatcioicd in the ^oeuaont 3 ok is ;.’o.
210-1150, I do not purp.rt to offer this decunont in evidence at this tine.


- 3583 -


O I-*


3 Jsn l»7--ll-i-S.f- Put£y
irt Ha. X

This drcCTcnt has hocn offered in evidence cs Prcsccuti-a's Zstotoit Ho. 321.

I should new like to offer into evidence ^ccuacnt 628-F5 as exhibit
So. 362 found on Paa* 233 cf 'ccu.*nt 3c-k He. 111. It is on the letter¬
box of the Country Asyluc, brandeefcurG on tho Havel, an: is an.ther typ¬
ical lottor.

TIC PRESIDENT: ••'hat nucx' cr do you assign tc this Exhibit?

RC3BIH5: This is He* 326-1S, , ur Honor.

TIE ilCSIIOffi «n exhibit, uhat mti-cr do you assign it?

UR. R0E3IKS: He. 363

THE rl&SIECNT: Have you aiv 361?

UR, BOBKDBI Tho previous iooma , b. S28, was Exhibit Ho. 361,

X hollovo.

This istypical of the thcr letters in tlw record. 1 *ill not
road this docunent at this tine. I s .vld no-* like to offer in evidence
Docunont N0-6U0 a* Prcsccuti n Exhibit 363. It is feund cn ?ajo 235 of Me
Dvcuuont B. ck. It is 'n tho letterhead of the Stato Eontol Institution,
Grafonook, elated 6 Aunist 191x0. It is addicted to Frau Barbara Cchrddt
and is sicned by Dr. Roller. It road as felloes:

"Deer Frau Schuilt:

..'o ore v.r/ s rry to have to inftxr.: you that yen dau. ,-hter Franziska Sch¬
eldt -.ho uaa a-ved cn 26 July 19W in the c urso cf noasurcs tal:en by tho
Roich Cardssloner for Defense to this institution, eudionly and unexpect¬
edly died hero cn 5 August 191x0 duo tc a swollin;; cf tho brain.

In viorr of the seri es cental illness, the life cf the deceased noant auf-
forin . T'u rrill, therefero, hare to accept her :cath as '.olive.ranee free
hor sufforincs.

As thcr is at present lancer -'f an cpidccLc — ^resuninr; a svollinc, cf
the. brain—" 'at tho lecal institute , tho pclico authorities ha-re
cnlorcd tho i^odiatc crcnati n cf the body."

I Till net read the next para-raph. The fr.llcwinc para;raph roads:
"Feasible inquiries sh ull be m'.o in vritia", as visits ho:o arc at


13 Jan Putty

Court Ho* 1


present ftrbidden for reasons >f tho cl-a^or of an epideoic."

I Trill odt rootling the rcaainicr cf the letter.

I sheuid new 11 c to offer int- evi once Docuser.t ?£>-3 — I bec y ur

pardon — Jocwront No. 110-637 as -r.-sccntin -edribit 36U, which is a list

of obituaxy neticos centainc! in a Leipsi': newspaper, 19hO, I rr.ll n.t lurdon

the "curt by reading all cf thou. - o first tno reads as f’Uows:

*

"After fee.: ful uncertainty we received t ay fr = Lins n tha w «nubo the
sad n.-us cf the sodden death of -V oar dio, --rs. Jrhanna 3 okhardt, nee
:holler, torn It liarch 169U, died 20 Soptorfccr 19U0. She has already boon
craaatod In Lins."

The socend cno read as f allovsi ■

■After wanks cf uncertainty we -t the unc .icoivablc news . f the ou-don
;sath f ny beloved s.-n, *lfrc • Chester, died cn 12 ^rptadxr. !1 c has
olroody been cremated in Lins -n the >.ira'>o.* ^

Tho third iten is particularly interesting*

■Fren Lins/Danubo vo received tho sad not* that jr 3 cod l.us and, iaul
K-calico, veteran .f the -V rl bar l?lli to 1917 , is tu longer alive and
olroody hdc icon cronatod thoro."

Evidence which I will presort later 111 shew that not oval votcrans
of World bar No. 1 ware oxunpt £rra tho ^utbenasia rrc-rata. So. h roato:
"After nods of uncertainty wo received tho r.*.o cf tho sudden doath of
cur beloved sen, “obort Schnoll, '-.arer of tiro cross of honor. 16/lZ fer
war veterans, born on 12 Kay 1097, died 27 Scptcabcr 19L0. Ho has * eon cro-
nat., already in Orafomek, district of .uonsin^cn."
lie. 5 reads:

"After days f uncertainty we received tho untoliovatic nows of the
5 ud.cn death of ey '•ear wife, >cc3. Zllc Ocorlits, no; Rosenbaun, born 6 "arch
1901, died 2 li -optc^bcr 192x0, after she had already been crcnatcd in Grofen-
cc'c."

I Trill sleip to tho thirteenth .rotica tthich reals as fellows:

"Hard and unbelievable was tho nan. ._ t*:C sudden death cf k/ bclovod iius—


-1535-


13 47- A-11-6-S.’-Putt.” (USD)

Dourt ITo. I

band "ritz Paul Sberlein, bearer of the Iror. Dross from World
r ar 1. The quiet burial of the urn which has be ;n trans¬
ferred frca Linz/Danube has taken place on 5 October 1940.

14. Hard and unbelis -abb was the news of the death of my
dear husband, Martin 30tt, at the age of 48 years. The
cremation has already taken place at Uorthein near Linz/’

Danube.•

It will be noticed th t No. 18 refers to death at the
Institution Sonnenstoin near Pirna.

I should now like to offer into evi^e-co Document No.
3*»65-PS ns Prooecuticn DxhiMt 365 , and it i3 to bo found on
39 of this Document Dock. This is an affidavit by Dr.
rano Aaaa-3ructeauell*r. It -ecda as follows:

•I, Dr. Irene Asa:- •ruclcmuellsr, mod. counsel, born in
Munich 21 Docembsr 1907, residing t Ansbach, leuchtwanf.or-
strasse 3 R . hcre .ith d-.clare under oath:

*hile I studied nedioine fro-. 1929 to 1933 I • or:ced ns
trainee at the lunatic asylum Oohc-sce during ay vacation.

I did this -ut of love *or the orofcssior. in the usylxn for
the centally deranged.

During ay study of :jdi-ine I did not specialize ir. psychint*y;
I o-ly toc« the csychi9t.ic courses prascribed within the
syllabus of -.edicel studies.

In 1934 I or.<cd as junior assistant for eight ,-.onth3.

0* 15 !*:rch 19p5 1 reed' A n a-'Sition as assistant doctor
at the Ar.sbach asylum. I~ ‘-ir to secure this mosition
I became a -eaber of the ?.*iuenschaft in 1935. I knew that
I would cot be accept d an wh:rc without Joining an orpan-
ization because I h 1 •sc LC ap'llc tions which were all
rejected. ?rom the day I started my job to .y discharge
in 0ctob*r 1945, I was the doctor in charge of the deport¬
ment for the cost sev.re cases. In the course of ay service

1586


13 Jan 47-A-l1-6-3 -Putty USD)

Godrt No. I

In the Aaabach aayluai additional duties v,era ielegate^
to ae ? for Instance, in 1939 ih the tnginfliig of the
war 1 was also


15«6A


13 Jan 47-A-ll-7-S?7-Bitty (KSD)

Coart I'o. 1

%

put in charge of the most severe male petients.

in 1940 'a children’s ward w-s added to -ay responsibilities.

The typ.3 of insane entrusted to -ay care were mainly the
following: schizophrenics. aoiloptics, manic depressives,
ser.il s and como-rativeiy rare cocas of paranoia and para-
lysis. Among the childrm the lar-rcr number ware idiots with

deformity and hydroceoholies.

The Ansbaoh Sanatorium hid a capacity of 1400-1500 beCa.
Usually the number of Mtionts was 1100; but during the
», r additional patients from the territories hit by the war
w ».re constantly brourht ir. end the highest number of patients
V," 1600 . 7 ron 1935-1938 '« Or. Karl von ?oisllin 's

h,ed of the asylum; Or. "erbert Schuch from 1938 to tho
end of the ymar 1945- On the basis of :y experiences ns a
trainee, I introducsd occupational tfcernphy 7 in my words
and -educed medicinal therephy as far as at all oosoiblo.

Thi petients physically suitable were occupied with wash¬
ing, sowing and worfc in the forflen. Professional ability
and the irofessimnol most of the individuol patient wore
ta*en into con-idsr?tion s v>r os possible. but in gen¬
eral occupoti'-nnl tharom'.y '• « lv W* *°- DUod ln ^
interact of the institution. Those ootients for whoa
OC 'upationel thoraphy v - 8 not indlc-ted were treated with nodiclno
snch «a f*raldohydo, vcronrl, lu-.innl ^tvd einll-r opietoi.


15S7


13 - 12 -l- 2 <ard

C..urt io. 1

-in ^ cases th.se patients rere „iv_n electric abode treats, insulin
32 X!lc treafcrent and in css- cf -;il-?Ucs rattle snake venom injections.

T.oeu discharged free ny ward'rarely wore ceaplotaly cured pr-tientaj the
asjority were improved cases. Ihssopitients rare transfer d te ards for avc-
^ oad llcht cas.s and discharged fr a there. Bctwc-n 19b0 and 19U2
altogether e orexicauly 2U0 to 300 departures took place. The patients wore
Bhippei te the institutions at Sonnanstoin rear iiruAlbo in four r five
transport of dnut sixty osch for the ur^Se of *>rcy killinaa. The history
of the so killings is as follows:

"In spring or suaner 1*1:0 ft cardasion htodod by r. Steirccyer arrived
at -ur institution and stu:. nrpationts. Thu corals -

Bicn consisted cf a total rani -r of 25, ~*,n 3 tn^'. were at lonst two ixdical
Actors, to a-ovu acnticittd r. Stcirevyor ant' an th-r Jeetor wh> «s
p>int© -Ut, t. bq ’ey Btsbors cf to, -tju? as an assistant to r, Hoydo, director
of t.x . sychiatrlc Clinic in rer* *ir.;;, a nui;-r of sulcal students and cle¬
rical staff. The curaitsi ft rennin-d at ur institution for tore- days, during
this tire tocynodo suraarius fcaau histories. ..ccrrdin t r. fchuch appro-
xiaauly a quarter of a year H r a list -f inratoa m our institution, nado
up ’ey toe emission, was rcccire tr us and Instructions that tooso patients
natx’i ah uld -v kept ready for trrns/.r te another institution. In the caso
cf this first transport 1 did not kne* the real renaing of this transfer to
ancth-r institution. All to hundred patients on the list wore thentreutht
te 5cstein in cno transport. I d. not recall, however, if r. Scltuch
topt tack a nisab.r of the best acrtxrs aaon S toe paUents on too list from
this first transport as he did with to. fcllcwin t transports. After six weuks
:r a quart.r cf a year a sccoid such list was rocoivod at the institution
rhic - a,.-in included a nusbor of vrluot- workers iscnx the patients. Sinco, .
La curatiro it had bccaao iavnm In our institution that these transfers ,
were ur, .rvJcen for the psrpes. of =.rcy killir, s, ' r. Schuch crossed about LO
nr- -s free; to. list which re t ros.ntc<i either valuable work-rs or 3 till very


-15S3-


13 Jan-A-JP-12-2-3aard (ISD)

Court !To. I

strong personalities. Therofore only 60 to 70 Instead of
cho rsquast -:d 100 were sent to Sonnenstein. Till 1947
t’ o or thrs3 additional lists *. arc received and the res¬
pective transports carried out.

'As for as I can Judge the choice of the patients was
not ma’e in a consistent manner according, to the degree of
illness of the patient otherwise it would not hove been pos¬
sible that hopeless cas s varo not on the list end that
physically • bis and -.ora or lc- s clover worfcors were. Dr.
Schuch r.a - all as his medical co-worKcrs wore uoset about

at •

thsso noroy Killings, and it is ay opinion t t >r. Schuch
lodged oratcots . ith the authorities against tho shipment
of psti-.nts doomed to " . This is also confirmed by tho
fa;t that Dr. Schanlcnbeoh, ns f r Jr as I know cfflliatod
with the 7 oichsorboitsc.o-.oinaohslt for lunatic asylums and
ploniootontiary of the ioh Ministry of tho Interior, dur¬
ing his arosonoo in Ans’ -ch, violently accused nr.d threatened
Dr. Dchuch baooU&i of the lsttoA sa’ootara of tho ncrcy
::il lings.

'This discussion bat? :cn Dr. Scnalonbach and Dr. '.chuch
probably tooK place oither in 1941 or 1947 eft-r seviral
transports had boon ccTried out.

•The transfers for the purpose, of Killing stomped in
1942. 1 believe that this • s caused by difficultly in
rcr-rd to foro* m nolicy.

’ (sign :d ) Dr. Ir~.no ..s&a-SrucKmuoller. ’

I sho : 1 c li’co *v" to orf -,r into evidence Document
!*o. 720 -3 Prosecution's tnhibit "o. 366, on aaga 243 of
Documant 3o‘K “o. 3 . This is ?n Tidnvit by Jr. oritz
3ch.nidt.nnnn, being July worn:

'1. I was born in "a. ich, G many, on 15 January 1886
and ctudi.d n.dicina ?t the University of Uunich from 1905


13 Jan-A-JP-12-2-3enrd (’3D)
Court To. I


tl U 1910 , I graduated frox the UniTsrvsity of Munich. I
joined the SSOAP In Key 1937. Moreover, I v.ob e iioobsr of
the IIS Ore intention or TMbllc rolfara, the IIS Civil Sor-
I(lH , League, the belch Colonial League, the Saleh Air
,-ld Protection League, the S3 War Veterans League. Uy
party ITuabsr Is soaeahore above 5 alUlon. I nee Ulocklelter
of the local group HAA1 since 1938. Since 1912 I »orKed at
the rental Institution


13 Jan-A-J.-12-3-Bcard
C urt o. 1


£0171 0-4L.AB, with an interrupt! n durir. the first we:Id wer. I have boon
ojuty rector of this institution since 1932#

“2. ~uo to tay pcoiticn ar -y .orsoaal c ritact with fioraaim .fonmuellr,

1 gains. fir-rucchin.; kr.cwlod^o of matters cci.ee rnmg the institution. Freo
tino to tinfc I hod conversations ccncornin the Eisaion -f the inatituti n with
ffanmuellor, tho last director of this institution. In ny capacity of oputy
inictor, I had tho opportunity tc read a cajcr part of the corresp ndenco
a‘ resaod to th. acteinistriticn. I received Tiers fra the director. In his


absence, I had to handle ur ;cnt .matters.

"3. uc to ny position, I ai.-xd kn-wlcdc of tho transfer f vjtionts
tc Reich Institutions. After a few tenths I found out that pr.tiunta were killed
in tnosj s -called «lch Institutions. I f >und this -ut thr u h .‘uvcral remar¬
kable death notices which tho relatives of tiu. pationta recoivori, and through
c nvoraaticna with .famcuellcr.

"L. ••lte/ofchcr axut 12 transports with approximately 80-100 pationte
n..ro transferred frer. thu Hunted Institution EG17IIJ0-HAAH# Eesidos thoao
tru.af.rs, an exclusively Jewish transport 1-ft cn 20 Octcbor 19h0, presumably
for - .dish Institution. It r.:\c a natter of 158 Jews who iiad conu to EOLflNO-
HAut ^r. 13 S Jte-.er 19 Uj, presumably fer an Institution in th.ir n ac country.

7 th. »-iit f ay recollection, the transfer of these foroignore occurred upon
or lor cf tho La r Office, "lun ich, w ich '.celared these people unfit for work.
-.11 of thi.au 56 foreigners were mentally ill#

"I h: v. road tho above tf/idivit in tho German Langunjo consisting of 2
(two) y.\ es end etaclare that it is true and correct to the best of ny knowledge
•ind belief. I was fiven th- opportunity to acka chan es and corrections in tho
above affidavit. The affidavit was _iv n b> rx freely an.: voluntarily, without
Fr-ei^. or reward and I was subjectod U r.: expulsion or duress of any kind.

■(silked) r. Schnidtoann."

Still a pert of th. -'oetBortt ho#, Ho. 270, are th following lists attached


-1550-


13 Jan-A-J*-12-l#-3card
Court Ho. 1

and at tho «,nd of the -ocua-r.t,, naooly, j r.ge 250, “ocUr 3raimn.aohl mokes the
follow! n stctcccnti

'•’I, iroctcr of the 0r,‘-r Bavnr*-... ..r.tol institution EGLFING-HAAR, doctor
ntodicil hfi'oll. Ant.cn von Brau ncuohl , hove rnwn up tho above list cvnsiiting
of 6 (six) ;»i -s in th, G.rrr.n lsnyun .. acccrdinp to tlv. ledger an- lists
of tho Institution EGLFING-HAAi., ni;.: testify that these stc.tcnu.nt3 correspond
with tto original.

"(Sirncturo) ’r. v. Braunauohl,"

Thw list on pn^o 21,5, r.t the too of the r n o, oontain th- noixn of 15 Jo-
wish -xn from the Institution EGUIHC H-AR transform i on 20 Soptou'jor 191 j0.

And, horu t would like tor-for hack t- r. d.cunant introduced this ucrtinr; by
"r. IIbBb , Ob is ocuft.:.* . 135, - -1 .f th. First oc t Book,

to establish that cert. nationals ;f for I untrio8,

Silb-rbor,., Kolaut, which i: . . 10 on tho ocin.nt before yu, y ur lfcrnor.

Is listed ns a .ollsh rational. Also 1* at tho • of the pa , octcr
Ooltbonn, is listed in tbo previous d. . lish national*

T.iT iltESI BtfTt You ire ivfcrring to this prior cxhi .it?

'3. RO riKSi Y< ur Honor, th t is ocurvnt Wo. 135,'hieh is ,n secution's
Exhibit 01 c it is fain' 1 on pojv. 1,1 of T .<-ujcnt Bcok X 0 . 1 concerning thu
Rithinrota r-. ran.

7h- list .-.t tho bottxs of pr„ 3is huadod "Jewish women frcct tho
Institution 3UF1H0 H.wJi tr^nsf-.-jv i on 20 September 19h0*, and contains 19

Th. Hot on ptt.ro 21,6 ?f th. Er. lish ocuj^nt Book is hooded, "82 Jowish
ren »*n-s oth-r Institutions (ns fer ns o-.-es are available) transforrod on
20 Scyto, ,r 191,0. Tho list r. too folirwir.. pat'- if headed. "76 Jewish wenon
fr th-r Instituti.ns (as f r ns nr. s avail-.bio) transforrod ^n 20 f^ptombor
I7l0," an: centres tho na-ns of 35 wootn. Hanes 36 to 76 cr- listed as unknown.
°a tho follow!:! pa e 21,8, out . tho third reixxnt Book, ire tw' lists of
15 noses each, "Ur. or tho design-ticn 'called for*. The fir3t nnjco is listed
18 1 • 11 s} - nati:.ml wh w.s transferred 16..-.191U,. The second nan*. listed is


- 1591 -


13 JruwY-Jr—12-5-3« ord

C'urt :fc. 1

. Galicia nati-nal. The third, frcr tho Ukraine, and transferred 18.9.1 9lii»

It will ba no tod that each of tfc. nc_«;s of th. 30 names listed or. that K-E«
i P _ £ fer-i-n nationality, .*nd, sc ar- .hcs. listed on page 2U9; the list
cm win a the nemos of port ms o£ forci;.n nationality, and the date on which
th-y were transferred. The su-x iry at the tottco of the pa,.c st-tos;

•Transferred on 20 Septonber 19U0 wero: 156 Jews (82 non, 76 woron) from various
institutions. Thirty-throa Jews (1L er., 19 women) fron EGLPluG HAAfy Transferr¬
ed tc a concentration carp on 2 August 19Uii, 1 Jew (1 can). Total 192 Jews
(97 cex., 95 wosen). Under the doai nation »called for' on 18 September 19blj
arc carried 56 foreigners (15 «»n, hi wccion)*.

I should r. w like to offer in evidence : ocisacnt Ho. 366b *S as irosecution'
s Inhibit go. 367. It is found on pego 251 of Tocunont Book No. 3. It is on
affidavit by r. .‘lax Leuss^r, and it reeds as follows*

"I, ,r. ’lax leussor, ccwoissioncd as head of the sanatory and rucovory
h.nc Anavach, aft.r bo In.; Ally sworn, declare anti dopese the following

".T :. 1923 to 1936 I was a resident fcysicinn at the lunatic -aylvta in
Srlar. jn an- n July 1, 1936, was died iced on account of iry previous membership
in the «..nocrntlc -arty. Later I was a v .urwral practicionor in icwuaoraniai
fr . 1939 - 19ll I "ao a :xdical cr.vy of iccr and was released In 19h2 after
an ,v;t jobiL. accident} I returned to .orscormia and lived ivictiun in 3rd Kiisin-
*en aft.r havin; loft icrcurania without . .-r.ussion because I oxpectod that it
would bcccsx iclieh if the wnrw.ul lost. In Hovembor 192.5 3 mo comissioiwd
chi * f the lunatic asylum at Anstach where I as now working. JJy prodocossa*
r. iiu^pert Schuch, who was removed by the Anarlcan Military Government
for in; a forty renter and h.ad.of the institution during the war and who
was rrusUd In January 19L6. ilo is now in the cipp at Aschoffonourg*

■ y kncwlcd;- about th- occurrences in the lunatic asylum at Ansbach during
ta- -.r ar. brae: - . on information, whic. 1 received in the first place mostly
fp . r. So'nuch, tut also free Frau r. Arm, a r .riesanann, who was working
'Sylua, but was removed on accrunt cf his membership t ,, ind


-1592-


13 Jan-*-JI-12-6-S card
Court Ifo. 1

the nursin; .ersonn- 1 . ;.t tiw r-se-at 'J the j-varian 'inistry 1 »iu Int.rior-
I r .v’«- a .rt ani subnitted it U tb- inistry. I or repeating and confira-
la.- this report in a c.ndcnscd fr-:

■ IA cct ittco of physicians, ann-unc- . oy the Reich Ministry of the
Interior a; . wared at the lunatic asylum at .jisbach with the or*cr to oxnaino
th*. possibility of acco^-aod-ati: incurable ,.atior;ts at a uh.r place.

It doaarihd h- assignor., nt cf a social office roc-a, access t th- casw-histor.
files, obtained also oral rop.rt fr a the physicians f tn- asylum ut ov-
only evasive answers to a 11 quactiuis with regard t- the r..al vu-foac of thoir
investigation. ..ftor four -‘vjr. their activities were c nclu.’o<*. U.-jn their
departure the neuters stated that they had cco.-U- a list of such patients
who were ;;oin to . transferred to nth.r iastituti ns. After n while a lottor
of tho ilcich Mnlstry of the iat.r or arrived with tho diroctiv- t. unku a
nuabur of patients, who w.ro list- * 1 • n- -e, ready f or tr-ns;.rrt-.tUn -n a
certain date. At the sa:v ti. j v.rd rrived that tho transport ms to bu car-
ric ut y tb. utual Cor? rati-n. rv. tr~nport took . lace on the Cat- nnnod
in tho lot Ur. Acer r In, t tb. story of U . transport :-nna>r the patients
wore- ban. re: : to the insUtuti i in notr *imo (fax :.y). This

pr coduru -as related several ti ‘..h-n it econo K n -*> 1 that the transports
served only the .arjosc. f 1 .lq-.il -win Ucu.-blt pstlonts inc-nt icurusly,
further directions cccin_ fr *-rUn arc supple tr hnvobjon aa-ota.od an
nuch as possible.

"In 19L3 and 19liii a nua.or of children it ore killc*’ in the osylun by
puttin t. ..a t. sleep with lininal. These children»er«, sup,used t: ■- cooploto
l J iot.a and in a-J-’itisn t sh w sorlcus btdy cef.rAtios on account of which
it was tt o LX.eCtod that th-yw ul«’ ic freatoaors or inhalnticn pnounonU.
The killir. s took , laco by virtu- tf !r_ctiv. of the noichrdnistry of the
Int.rior, which reached tho a~n.tra. f • - asyl-or, by ray f tb. usual office
chann-ls. A ;r.vi ;ua ccosultat .cn f tt-■ ar^nts did not take plncc* w .


- 1593 -


13 j2n-A-J?-13-l-~J eklo y (KSD)
Court '< o. I


’As for as I could learn approximately 300 adult patients
were re loved in the ebove mentioned v.ay. The transaorts
supposedly toox piece froa the end of 1943/1941 to 1944.

The total of patients in the asylum at the beginning of
the war numbered 1430; at the end of the war, 1000. This
number includes sic!c children. During these years aporoxi-
awt-ly 150 children me processed in the asylun (admitted,
di-d, rel.assd, trarsferr-d to other institutions or still
staying at Ansbach). 1 was told that approximately fifty
of these w-re Silled in th. -bovc mentioned sinner.

At what time in 1943 those killings started Idid not lenrn.

•’;e h’>ve in our fil-s only th- Journals which contained
tho d*te of admission and rel.tse, respectively dnto of d-^th
cs well as the diagnosis, further the cr.se hlstori-s Kept
about the patients. Ail th- corr-spondonoo, ospooially thnt
with th- ar-nci-s in ~.rlin, v.s supposedly d-stroyed before
th- entering of the African troops. Dr. Sahuch's story
about this is cr.dlblc recording to my conviction becauso
ho r-peatedly express-d hia regrot toward me that the doc-
um.nto which he assuaes would exonerate him do not exist
ny ore. I understood him to any that he himself destroyed
th e uoon orders from above. (signed) Vax Leusser.’

I shauld next like to off.r into evidenco Document "um-
t r ’’C-P17 °s Prosecution Exhibit Camber 36 C. It is ‘'ound
on par- 554 of the docu . it book and is en affidavit by Dr.
Otto Gutokunst. It r-ads as follows:

'I, Dr. Otto Gut_.:e::3t, swear, depose and st-'tc:

•1. I was born o.a 7 7-hru-ry 1878 at 1' rbach n/l*.

’’rom 1884 to 1836 I att-.a-ed u w lic school at ?,utlin{-n and
aft .rv.nrls until 1896 iir h school there, ^rom 1896 to 1992
I studi-d medioine at th- ’Jriv-rsiti„s of Tubingen, B-rlin,
and Tiel. I ?ass-d the ;-dical state examination in 1901 -


1594


13 Jen-A-J?-13-3la:<loy (USB)

30urt Ho. I

1902 at Tubingen whore I elso too* the doctor’s degree.

•Since July 1934 I * oricod at first *s n aedio^l council
lor at the aentol institution of Vinnsntol. Since 1 Fobru-
9 ry 1935 I was deputy director of the acntal institution of
vfinncntolj effective ss of 1 May 1935 I appointed


1594 A


13 Jar.-..-Ji-13-3-31aklcy
Ccurt So* 1

directcr of that institution. I writeC - such until Nvcn.cr 1955« I ^oir.cci
tn, .5-h on 1 • ay 1933. I else r n-a xr of the Reich I^-iuo -f G-rrian
Ml S-rvar.ts, the National Socialist .to.-lots Vclfarc, the NS-Alth.rrcn Bund,
the Reich Colonial 3und, Ml th. luV»- for the Gorans A--roacU

" 2 . ay virtu. of oy kncwL-cl.c -.s a -sychiitrist nr. 1 ny cxp-ricncc of vxny
yours® staniin. in varius Wxerttenb-r; ental institutions, I «r ^ to
Mkc. t-v. xoUuwin. stit-. -ntx :* h.ad of the institution in ..inn-nUl I bocano
f-aiiiar *dth the tuthan-sin .re. rr on in -V ruary 19h0.

-3. pm• =y instituti.n a total of 395 patients *.ru trr-oferr-d. 2h of
hr- 1 burn transferred shortly '-ofor- fren tbu instifti r.c Of CoJ^.w,
gotteatunst.r end Stetten to Wnncotolfor roasons of oaa'uflr o. loot* those
transferred cn 3 June 19U0 was also itoinrich ifnuacr, born 20 Juno 1936.
rfaus.y, she was born in Gr-.t-^ustrin, was still nn Austrian rati nrl rn tho
day of transfer. It is pcscibi- thrt U.wr i-r-lji nationals won. anon, the 2U
patients who for reasons of c% ifl-. ! b^n trsnsforro ’ t stltution."

h. GIC..G FROESCHJ.. its r. fr sch. mii, counsel f-r Viktor Brook*

The affidavit which was Just raac. is not contained in ny docu »m. b okj and
neither ia it contained in ti» docucuit books of fcbo other nfcnco c unsol.

T . ROB 1 . 5 * I'n sorry; I did r*>t ch-ck tho bocks porsonallyj ut I
-rAll attain th-.t doe - t for tho lufonso counsel. Th.rc arc only about throu
ram sciences of tho docur-nt, if 1 my t*. pora ttod t. continue roadie it.

TH- i JSI EOT* The c unscl -icy c nfcinuc ending the iocur^nt but will
*u;..ly c ius Df the docuaont to th- f cfer.su ccunaol ?t tho earliest Possible
acaont.

:a. R0 1.5* Yes. "As I learned fr;* tnc Personnel accanpanyin* tho
transxrts, all patients transferred fr.n y institution worufeJUjit tc tho
Castle of Graft neck where euthanasia was- e carried out.

*h. I rover received an instruct; n to tho - ffect tnat foreign nationals

•arc to bo oxoaiptod frc= euthanasia

■5. Cfi t. - bails cf the quwsSionnr-iros, it was i«possibl. fertile exports


1595


13 j3Q-u-JM>3-Blakley
C-ur* Kc, 1

cr top experts to forr an exact nodical opinion ~n the physical ot-U. cf the
•patients or to recognize their nationality

1 should like- no* to turn to ttu. next dccun-r.t, which is 3867-rS, and offer
it -s oftibit Hid. or 369. It ia * un*' on ;a-.e 256 of the tocujant beck.

■I, Eriv-st Gent or, aalu mirs- at Sell- un:' .fie c Anstalt, ;jis>.eh, nfter
havin boon duly sworn, -.to hereby rrJee the follow in st-W-nt:

■I was wjployed at the Hoil- unci *flc_«. .'rnstalt, ..nsbach (a public ins¬
titution .'-r thu caro an: trent—nt f the insane), fren 1929 to 19li5. Pros
1920 to 1923 I care for the p.-.tior.ts in the wards; but in 1928 until 1939 I
was entrusted with tho care of th. convalescent patients and raevally Ixicamo
fully alloyed in the office of he inetitution. Tho director of this insti¬
tution was r. Hubert Schuch. Ir. the autuan of 19^0 a ccndssion of ab ut thirty
persons, ccnsistir.; f doctors an' s-crotari -1 staff, visited t’.io institution.

I krv*n and it was ..mril kncwlod'Cthat thuRv, people hid been ceaaissionod -y
the toich * irvistry of t ho Interior, Berlin, to visit such lnstitutijns as ours.

I personally announced tho arrival of these persons to tho director* The cwid-
Bsion stayed about three, days and, to tho best cf cy knowledge, lid not inspect
iry ef the wards. Instead thoy were a lietod a separate rooa and the caso histo¬
ries o: the patlonts wore >rou,',ht tc t<x.a ar.J wore discussed with the ward
doct.rs* uring the tiro the ccrsiiosion stayed, individual patients were
brought to tho edednistrative beildini cf the institution; anti it can only
. issue*. that it was for the of their boing insp-cted by tho comrde-

sion*

".'iftor the cc-nission loft, a:tut thr.j aonths olapsed and then dir-ctivos
■on. rxcciv.d* Those I saw personally* They case in tho fora of letters fron
the Itcich . inistry f the Interior, Ur ..oichsarboitsgenelnsCncfts Hoil - und
• fl. c «nstclt, 3. rlin, statin, thre on a certain date sixty to eighty pationts
•hecr. na-.os w„r«. listed alphabetically, wen. to be suved fro.- tho institution.

destination was given. it»ut a week later tho institution delivered the
pationts to the railway station, to, other with their full ease histories and


1536


13 JftJwWI -13-Ji-r lnk loy
Court :.'o* 1


lnvcntcriz- ‘ personal effects. They were brought in busws clos. u. to thu two
cc.tch.-s, on. which was set nsi-.’c fer tho :„nr.nd the cthor fer the woaon.

I eaa i.n z in chackin. the lists -f patients ant attondir. to tho
-•elivury cf thuir ha . a.je, it is net . jssibl. fer as to state vh~t:vr these
,-ticntc v-r. in a condition to trnv.lj but I do knew that sa.o c ftfcan had tr
Carrie, to th* carriages, which w„r_ trcUn jy "icrsonen-zu. " coaches. Theso
as far es I can ronoaber, Just th. tri c.aches, without a loccuetivo,
located or. a sidin; which was cr-.tin-.rily us. ’ f r tree,; loadin and eff-
loadini. It struck ; e as stran e t'r.-c. tn« "aalc nurses" *io rccolvod tho patients
frua tho director cf tho i.Jitituti u «v.rc silent an' r.va dr ct answers to
the questions w- ,.ut to t *»■.=. ot . f e r^U sol nil interest,

"At to. ti « this rans.ort prtients c’i n:t a,,.oar hub ici.uo .ocauco
patients wore frequently rxvj fr.n no institution t c anath.r i., r 'or to
■naku rocn fortreu, casualties.

Evon the fact that in this ease nc destination cf the transport was jlvcn, oo
•Jvnt w. c.ufc? n.tify rclstivas upon inquiry, did n t c-ncom us unduly as

A

everyer*. noted in accordance with orders received. Irobably atxut ao.nth aftor
this first transport left, our suspicious wor«- nr used scausc ecu unientions
nrrlvc.' fr u .-wlativos of th. p-.Uonts, c a. lainin that they hedtsun coved

A

without thuir knowledge or consent an that they had since boon netifioil fron
Schlos: Harthei. , near Line, r.n * fro.’ Another institution in Souwnstoln, in
Thurir.rin, tont the patients ha lie . Official and . rivtte inquiries ns to
th. vh rcabouts of tin patients hv' t- bo answered by us in n standard letter
•hich boliuVw was officially pr^scri-cd. This containc:: lr. effect tha

fcllcwia.. inforaatinnt

"' il ~ «^na vc .nt ha nc juris icticn over the novc.nt jf i.eoo r 3tier.ta.
f r ''urtbor information, cent act the Ge7»innustxige Krankentranr rt -.s-llschnft,
flin, wh directe tho transfer of these patients.' (This is ns near s I can
r - •• -r che text f the letter*) In connection with these transports I roaccber
• cf a r. Schnalcrbach v?3 frequently aentioead*


1597


13 Jan-A-JP-13-5-3lnkl.iy (23D)

Court No. I

■I estim-ta that in nil five transports of this kind

• •

xera s-nt out from the Ueil-und Pfligc Anstslt, Ansbsch,
botwaon the years 1940 and the beginning of 1942. I would
like to "“id th-t "11 of our doctors end the entire hospital
personnel wore firaly opposed to and condemned this action
when eventually the truth transpired, (signed) Srnst Ganzor. ’

I should neat like to offer into evidence Document
Number 3816-PS as Pros-ctuion Exhibit Kuab.r 370. This is
found on Pago 259 of Document Book Number 3 and is an affi¬
davit of Gerhard Schmidt. It reads ns follov.s:

•I, G-rh«rd Schiidt, director of Haar-^glfing Insane
Asylum, after having be-n duly sworn, do he-uby make the
following statement:

•I w«a lic-nscd as M.D. by the University of Berlin

(1930). In 1935 I b-caee an ssistant at the Institute for

local Hedioino in Berlin. 1 orked in 3avaria since 1937

at tho Public Hospital, Ilunich-So tombing, and al3o «t the

les.crch Institute for Psychiatry in Munich. Since 1935 I

•

have been familiar with the system of public asylums, mental
hospital^ ^nd similar institutions in Germany. I know that
oublic Institutions of this k nd were under the supervision
end control of the provincial administration of the Lander
at the Hstrict lev-1. All these public institutions were
under the supervision and control of the Belch Ministry of
the Interior ir Berlin -t the highest level. The Belch
”iaist-r of the Interior wps, -a I mow, Dr. :ilhelm Trick.

As Beich Minist-r of the Int-rior, he was ahi-f of the med¬
ic-1 dea^rtm at of the ieich Kinistery of the Interior from
1933 until August 1942 when ho became 1-ich Prot-ctor of
Bohemia and lloravin.

’Aft-r the b_ginnine of the war in 1939 I learned from
colleague, Dr. Lemberg r, uho was in charge of -n asylum


1598


in occupied Poland, tint it y.ns olenned that the inmat as
of his asylum should be billed. About 1940 I boepao ec-
o UP. in ted 'or the first tine r. ith the fret thrt inflates o' nvyVmt
in G.rarny itself wore being Killed. I baonmc acquainted
with this fret first through an industrioli&t. A short
time Inter I liarned it froa ay collogues 2 nd froa many
oth.r p-oalo -- it \.as c so-called open secret t.Vt such
killings were not


1598 A


13 Jan-A-J?-13-6-31aKlay (!!SD)

Court !To. I

on l y planned but were actually being carried out. 1 wea ad¬
vised about these haooenin{3 not only by <ny colleagues but
also by relatives of people who had been Killed.

•It is typical that, despite the fact that this whole
affair was an open secret, e psychiatrist who was in the
Institution of Haar-lflfing, v.here such things happened,
said he could not rive any offioiel ansver. The orfunisntion
of tass Killinrs was as follows:

•First, the physicians of aental end similar asylucs
had to fill out ouestionnairts, which were sent to a central
agency in Berlin. Then the order cane back from the cent¬
ral agency in Berlin that the persons listed should bo tawen
out from one asylum end sent to another asylum where they
were Killed. The Killing w-s done frequently by injections.
Tor those organized .ness Killings the authorities used dif¬
ferent administrative procedures. I «an give the following
exaaplas for the Killing of childron:

•The nansa of newly born children who wero deformed or
portly paralyzed or lantally deficient were sub pitted to the
health authorities and finally to a leich agency in Berlin—
9 P.0.3. 101. A short tine after the reports wore filed,
the county health authorities of the respective districts
received an order that these children should bo sent to a
special institution for soecial nodarn theraohy. I Know
from hundreds of oases at this 'special nodarn thoraphy'
i.-'S nothing less than die hilling of these children—for
instance, in the institution cf Haar-SGlfir.g and others.

‘I read dozens of such orders which said that this pro¬
cedure of assignment of such children to institutions was
'ir. arreoment with the leich Minister of the Interior'.

•Another method of hilling so-CBlled 'useless eat3rs'
was to starve them. This ;:s done particularly in a oeriod

1599


13 Jan-A-J?-13-6-3121:1 2 y (HSD)

Court No. I

when, for reasons I do not i now, the billing Itself was not
possible becausa, possibly, of transportation difficulties
fron one institution to another. •


* 3 January-»-D'JG-14-l-Ccck
C: *rt :.’c. 1

" M t the end cf 1943 a conference took place in the Bsvrrien Ministry
zf the Interior which is under the direct supervision cf the Hcich Ministry
cf the Interior about the procedure for etarving such pec pic tc death. In
this ccnfcrer.ce, the directors cf the asylums were instructed that 'uncless
.-tors' who c-uld not uerk very such, should be killed by slow starveticn.

TTis method apprrontly was considered very good, because the victims would
appear to have died a 'natural death'. This was a wey.cf CMfc.uflaging the
killing prcceduro.

"1 knew frea the files cf th%- institution whore 1 am new a director, that
several hundred pc pie were starved tc death. In an?lysing the whole aystuc
_f these cass-killinga, I cun sUU * a psychiatrist, laaili’.r with such eases,
that hundreds cf the people killed wculd have been absolutely nblo tc perform
t certUn cacunt of simple . erk under supcrvislcn—aacn,- thca, according
tc cy knowledge, sec.o people wh. had brrin injuries from the First '..crld Var.
nSci;g the people who were killed were also aged people w he were a little
fucble-nlndod. So frr as the children were conctmod, they had nainly brain
diseases, but net heredit* ry diseases, except in :.aao very few casos. In any
normal society, such children, mentally deficient and aged pvcplu, would have
been treated and eared for in tho proper way and net killed ro 'useless ontern 1 .

Signatuic: Dr. Serhordt Schmidt

(Director of Hear Enplfing Insane
Institution)

DR. SIRV.TIUS: Ccunsol Ter Karl Brandt i

Ur. Frosident, I sh uli like to rcstrvo the right to cross examine the
witr.uss whe cade this affidavit.

ifr.. hOBdlHS: I think ouch a procedure is entirely proper. Tho defense
hu 3 a rlrht to make application tc the Tribur.'-l fer examination cf the
*itness.

*H2 i-KSSIDrXT: That is right. ‘

lfe. RCEBIJJS: I should like tc stress one point cf the affidavit, nd that
.3, that net even veterans of tho First World bar wore ox cop t free the
wthenasia pn.gr:.-.. This ccrrcborotes the st.tcaot earlier today, -nd which
a??^rs cn pao., 236 cf the Decuo-nt 3csk, th,t ..crld ‘ ar veterans -«rc subject


16CC


lj Jar.uary-A-DJG-li.-2-Ccck
Ccurt Kc. 1


tc the cuthoncsie progran. According to the Nazis tc be a soldier is the
greatest cf ell glories, to be a Nazi scliier tad tc f-ce the dangers on the
field of battle, but when the Gcraan soldier returned frc-i tho battlefield
unable to wort, he could fi*.d hinself classified as a useless eater, destined
for the euthtnasia station.

The next document which I should like to offer in evidence is document
No. 3882 FS, as Frcsecution Exliibit lie. 371, which is found on page 262 of tho
Dccucent Bock No. 3. It is an affidavit by Dr. Joseph Jordans, rnd reads
as follows:


V


loOl


13 Jnn-33S-14A-3-Coofc
Court 7o. 1.


•I, rr. Joseph Jordans, born on 19 Korea. 1201, liviar nr« at .1:.-
eodingen, 3aden, Rocaniestrasse 1 , n«ke th. following statement vafior
oatfcJ

•I nn p doctor of nedicir.e and n doctor ox* l°w. it fresont I rr
tho Public Health official of the City of Bfcondln^on. Baden. Troa Jan-
-nry 1940 until ?1 March, 1942, I was a doctor in on adult section of
t'.:a rublic asylur ir. Vicslach near roidelbor.j. Thorc eristod in tho acy-
lns a sect ion for children ae veil, in which killiW of children were per-
forced durin. th- year 1941. How oany children were killed during the
yc»r I cannot say. The killing were performed by injection.

'These injections vero riven by a doctor and nurses. of the oo-
callod Iation-1 Socieliet Kurnos Crcmiration, who caao for tho purros#
fron 5<rlin. The orders to perfom the killings wore issued fr-n the
Reich Ministry of the Interior in 3-rlin. Our neylua was controlled by
•:;« Ministry of the Interior of 2-den which was under the supervision of
the Ministry of Interior at Borlin. But the cacrisolon which core to
Vlsslach for this special purpose care on orders froe a certain Ir.

Linden. Who was xr. official of ho Hclch Klnlstry of the Interior at
Berlin.

■The whole aanipulatlon was known to thft personnel of tho inotltu-
tien. Transports of chll ren care to our aeylun fron tine to tlao fror.
other institutions. The children who were klllod were not all original
Urates cf our aaylun. Tho children wore lnbecilos or foeblcnlndcd.

"I ay self was transferred fron Velslacht axondlngen at the end of
March 1942 because it b«cv.a known th-t I was opposed to the killings*
After I left, one of ay patients, -n adult nan. a -orpay. vao killed by
injections. “e was oa the list of these nersono who w:ro to be shipped
«t for killing at another asylu-. but I ea»ed bln four tines. I-ced-
i-.t-ly after I left, he was killed according to cy vlf*. who was at that
tlce still at Vies Inch. This ran was in no way feebleminded. In f'Ct,
institute node TOO norko out of hi- because he vac an export backet
“ofctr. His -iiling was art of the ixoak— »* w11 •»•*—


1602


12 Jan-3E-14Jr-4-Cook
Court To. 1.

•After I cat# to Jhocdirurea In March, 19<3, I learned froa uy cnl-
laanifi that a einilar -ro-Tart exiated there, thourh the : at lento were
■hi;red to the institution at Gr*7eneck to he killed.

/e/ Joeo'h Jordans.”

I should now like to offer in ovidence joeunent 3995 IS, «• ?rr>-
accution Exhibit So. 373. Since thle is rexti-lly re.etltiouo of what
haa already been read I do not ;ro-©se to read the docunont in lt'o
ontiroty.

1R S3RVA1IUS: Couneel for rr. Terl 3randts

This docunent, ae far aa I can aoo, vaa not rworn to. It seyo
undorneath it: "read and airrored, -ad then the signature Zr. Ludwig
S;rnuer, -nd then the tlrmnture of Robert Kerv.nor, who waa counsel for
the rrcaocution in the


1603


13 J n vfc

C:ur- " • -

prcc.iuru before th- *ntorn:.ticnal ^litcry Tribunr.l, eftcr that
cc; ,« an explanation th tit «:r :m m cn th 23rd ~f -pril, 19-.5,

• 5 V Ilonry xir.stoin. “Vo the r this is an Interpreter or not I cannrt
. •- ybo th. c'una_ 1 frr ti c *r. secuticn con clarify that -.lat¬

ter,

; a. RO" *IHS: I s ay it Jl-rte tlo Tribunal, tie affidavit at
6U bo.im.inT shews thatit is in th. nature of am affidavit,
ainc« it states: I, 'Dr. oudwi Sprruor, swear tr the fr lie wins
Str.tcrjonts, and apparently it r a aitwd ^uf .re hr. Ko.pnor,
cnl swrrn tc before both Mr. Kc.poor and Captain Miohinolosa,
ana Captain Auokinoloas, by the way, ia an ^orican Offlcor, who
It appears fron thu prior affidavit on pa x 262 , n:.n c. nliltary
: IJuttc.nt t< the oxocutiv- trial Counsel of tho Internets nal
"illtar: Tribunal, :tr. Ded-, and it appoaro at tie better, cf the
dc cur.ont. referred to that ho vr«j a Captain in the Judre Advocate
General'r Do..art .out,

O.u S~fr..TIUS: :!r. President, tho dreunont In the . rlginal
.or net toll U* < ro tlrn th. c >.c, cad 1 , tho:vf r ,

cbj.ct to tho submission of this -Jeounont. In that case, tho
witness c-n bo called hinnolf. *« is an important witnusc since
he l^ia 1. 1.1 -1. position -Ufcl can Hake important rtnto^ur.ta as to
1 w this prcccduro was actually carried out. It will show itself
that a me: er cf actions voro run parallel to ono another, tho
outhenaair* pT‘ jrexi c.cccrdin:; to the docile cf the Puehror, them
the J wish action, ml then th- action of tho sc-callcd 14 S 13,
Thiel wr.c nonti nod pro views ly. *pcrt f r h that, thore wi.a tho
,-r ccodiny rf the Hoich Sxocutivo Counsel, ro?crdin:: Jewish child¬
ren. I think th: t tl is witnoac, sinco bo status that ho was
frequently in ocrlir, w.uld bo ablo tc nnko in^rtont -tateronta
lr. that regard, -n .1 I think it w~uld ncrc prepor if thu witness
appears here personally and that this affidavit net bo admitted
lnt. ovidonco and net be rord. It is net £ statj-nont which w.s


16C-1


Ic Jen. ,7-/ -14-2^-C .-V
Crurt Mi . 1

S ’.vrr tr, r: ti .r It was -indo In view of an cat) .

IK- "F.SSIDr T: You will sub-it tfco original docuriont to tl.o
tribunal for ox .uini.ticn.

(Tho dreuaicnt it handed tr tfcj Tnbimrl).

:*R. R01 I. J £- hay it plon: o ti c Tribunal, t' Pr aocutlon
j-.-.a n ' bj'.cti r wfcr.tovor t- 'of-: cu C' unsol nr.kin application
t tfco Tribunal tr call the witness, Br. Lulwij Spraucr tr ’’um-

bjr^.

Ill'ERPlCTEP.* ’.feuId sak c-u-aol t ropo t th ctato-uunt. It
did net cr.no tl rrxxri in Corom.

tR. so It’S: May it please tfco Tri’Minr.l, tf.u Prraocutlcn
’r.e nr rbj etion wlr.tover t' dofonro counsel nr 1 :in- applior.ti n
t tfco Trl unr.l fer brirvrln*. tl witnooa to burnbor: to tostlfy,
Tlr.t is r. rijJ t given tc hi i under llitrry Otv-mr.ont Ordnrjico
1 . . 7. Kevovor, I c nn t sov that it has anything to dr whr.tovor
wit! th. adniaribllity f the affidavit. Order or Artiolo l-M,

I ..lievc, rr perhaps it la lid of tfcu ••rticloe 'f War pr.aaod
by Crn roaa, gives rn /r y Officor, who ia dotr.ilort to nrjco rn
lr. oaticr-ti-n, th- authority tr i-it-.iniator enths, rnl It r.pv.-ra
l*r :: thu face of tfco affidavit that the Cr.ntnin vfcr ad.-lnlatorod
tli oath wco a .ichor rf the- cr.cl f: rcoa and war r. nou* or of
the Jud-t -dvccato Ounorc.l'c Copertnont.

TV. PRSSIDriT: Th- dceuncut le yrrh.-My ad...icelblo in
evidence aru tl; cbjocticn is cvcrrul.Hi,

11 • frlhurv. 1 will now rcco3J.

short rooocr wr i tahun,)


1C 05


13 Jca
r^qft ’ • 1


(A roc css too taken)

-■“ T-S33EHT: At this tio: X dos re tocr-jouncc that fribmax :'o. -
vi 1 r., t convene for the further trial of this ease until cloven 'dock
V-aV.’W norning.

?# nce'IiS: -ley it plea o the Tribunal, Docuncnt 3695-PS reads as follows:

■1 J ;j r . Luiwi_ Sprauor, bom 19 October 1WU, non living at Konstanz,
l! 0Pl SalHUnranoUcr-jassc 2, swear to too following statement:

■I ,'MSCtI m state o.xaination as a deettr in 1907 at -roiturr:. -rot*

1919 o.: I worked as a civil servant. Ouri-C tho It years i raked a3
. district physician at Stocked:, <fc»AIrch, . ms tans. I Joined «io H.S.

In 1‘33. ?rca 193U to 19hl l was too highest mnkin* ncdical officer
in Baden. I hat the title of a ..inistcrial Councillor. !iy top superior nos
the ..cio’.: .Viator of too Interior, D r . Trie!:. as rrick's subordinate I
frequently - about once in every 2 or 3 - fltta- went *o Berlin to toko part
la ccnfarenccs, rwctin.s, otc. in toe held -Inis try of too Int.ri'r. T. .
conferorxos took place in toe Reich linistry of tho Interior, Untcr ton
li. ... 72-71:, later in toe Roich Ulnistoy of too Interior, Voss-Sta-csso. At
tho eccasicn sf such a stay in B.rUn, IHnistortal Director Dr. Undca of too
Icier, liiniatry of toe Interior told that toe introduction of a law on
futhanaeia tax intended. For rvasens pertain! :: to defenso policy tho in¬
curably njntnlly ill w.m to bo lfcpddatod in order to mko roe. Tor healthy
people. Tho institutions thus fr\.od mwld bo required by tho SS to accon-
redatc national political o&icaticnol ho-ois.

■For the carrying out of all toes. aoasurts, a transport cccpoi Xf ra
f cun led riiich rorkod togoto-r with tfw sc-callcd -oich coanittoc for .lo-
acaret <.n "creditor/ ^uacaptibility to Severe DiXwasce. 5>.is Roich o<:%-any
pa her . (l by liniotorial Di r ctor Dr. Ida-cn.

■In tho c our so cf toe so ixasur-s, v ■ a;o-t 19^1 to 19Ui, ticusands
of ; re. ns ~;rc brougit free institutions _n laden to institutions such as
Badaaar, Orafonok, etc. and liquidated to ere. These doatos were rot only ccn-
fir. t c ncatally ill. Under too son: ?rc rcc , at tho insti„at -n of
r "inistry rf the Interior, eld staple especially and also young


■dx .ci


1506


13 "’aa L7- A-l5-2-€V.'- Gross
Court Jfc. 1


once, iiio rrcrc ill, began tc be act caide.


1607


13 Tan-A-JP-16-l-rinabiicic (!SD)

court Fa. I

'Among the 3eo?le who were billed in the course of
this p roe ran -..ere not only mentally ill, but people who
suffered from arterioscl ero.i,, . tuberculosis, cancer, and
other illnesses. It he: to do mainly with olaer people who
.ere put in public institutions and, it is true, at the cost
of the State, and v.ho were further cerad for in suitable
oanDeny, naturally at General cost. Those people were
brought froa oublic institutions ir. 'V.den to vada.nor, Craf-
nock and other institutions and thoro >\xt to death. In
vrhat aanner they were ".illcd I do cot Knew. In this way,
roan was mado in the institutions, and especially for
the Y.'ehr.uach- and for the .national socialist educational
institutions.

•The sholo program was camouflaged from inside to out
and falsa death cortifio*tos node out.

•In tho yoar 1941 to 1942 I protested energetically
twice opainst tho murders. And, it is true, I turned to
TrlcK's deputy, Dr. Oo-ti, - ho was right in Strasbourg,

Conti onnlain'd to .no nt that timo that, those waro nattoro
concoming tho loioh Ministry of tho Intorior, which had
nothing to do with no. I considored this aa an order,

•which I could not counto act. T hs second tine I was re¬
jected by Professor ritsohe in Heidelberg, who woo al30
inrticip’tinr. in this o ©from.

•Tho nambsrs of tho loich canaittoo who were acting as
oert of tho orogran, oro fro quant ly conposod of SS people.
Incidentally, archbishop C-roobor also protested against the
nits of mrAer in the Institutions, naturally without auo-
o as, I myself did not ;?et to aoe this communication, the
personal consultant of the Ministry of tho Interior of 3aden
made the reply. .Iced, aoorovsd and signed, Dr. Ludwig
seraser. ’

1608


13 Jan-A-JP-16-1-27inabucic (M3D)
Court Nc. I


I should r.3xt liJce to of fir into evidence Document
K0-P18 as Prosecution Exhibit rusher 373 on page 265 of
Doouaent 3oofc III, which is e eupnieasntary affidavit to
the one Just riad.

A A A A

1, Dp. Ludvig Sprauor, being duly sworn, depose and
state:

•1. I was born on 19 October 1884, and livG at the
pr-sent time at Conatanoe/Bafien, Selnanweilorgosse 2.

•This affidavit is an addition to the sworn statement
which I -ns ic in


1608 A


13 j&n-A-J • -16-2—Mnabuck

CaUrt So. 1

Sur; - or. cn 23 April 19L6, which statjbont is known oncer cunwri r ( . 3*96-

.S.

!»2, I fcnrd the DMtx of .r.f, r. Karl Brandt far the first tine at a con¬
ference in t.vj U. die of 19b 1 in 3ar?in. At this enferenoe I learned that
Karl .r. r.dt and Ihillpp Beuhlcr arc thl lea --at fi -uros lu the --utnnnasia
.r ra:i« The conference was called by r* Union on behalf -f tec opnrtmont
cf the Interiar and probl.ns ef institutions and aryluns wor- so raitt . ' r.

Lir.iea eir.ctotl the proceciin.;s#

"3, To the boat of ay ki». wlc jjc and belie t, .hiHip Bouhlor ns well as
Tref, r. Karl I remit sore tie- lc iir._ ;1 .ores in this so-called Euthanasia
.rejme f rcr. 19U1 to the collopeo -l xr mny.

The connection between thv- o.arta-nt efthu Tnt-ricr end .r:’f. Karl
Wuilt, in th. frnrwwork of th- Euthunrola irc^r.o, war. teat Karl drar.dt
guw criers to Conti and Linden, r'lia wexv passed -n by those persons on
’.half f --he c.arVjont efthu Int rior. Brandt was the dradnatinu U ure with¬
out 'cubt,

"5# I in not fanlliar with on. diivctiv-t whatever which . xcludo forai-
{c;rs fra*. Ui. euthinacia *-rom."

7tv; n-xt par rr.ph osroly states f..rt t e affiant ha6 r-ad the statorent
ini un -lorstmds it t> bo t rw, an:l th t ;.o .ns ndo it v luntarily. Signed,
Cnstafloo, 19 S^venber 19b6, r. S.rcuor.

I #. d: next lik.. to cfl r in eviicnco .‘.ocuncnt Kuabor NO-JI20 as
• • n Exhibit 37b on pa. 267 of th. A. lish I euwat ok. It a letter
si r«.d y Schlaich in.' addrusse t teh inist.-r of Justice, r. Frank,
datv; Vrlin, 6 S^terwer i9h? — e::cucu x, f-itcd Stotten, 6 S . tcacbor, 19b0.

"ear ? v ich . inis Ur L The -_rnn*ej, vhch at prcc.nt in taken n ucntal
pitiajtc f nl idnds h-.ve caus .<* a fcoli.. cf a C'.rtpleto lack of comidunco
in .ia- lcj - unj, ir^o ,r;uis cf th-- people. Vitheut ask In. their relatives or

r-'ia,.. * TS’.nt, such patients arc min. transferror' frea thee*. i. thor
lastitutior^, fr a *h-r\ than _fte.- 1 ^urt rhil, theyitc^ivo in'. i". 1 .n, that
the lerrcn concerned had die I of s-.im iscas_. Canai-iorin the r'.undance cf doati


1609


13 Jcr.-A-J. -lo-O-tfin-iauck
Court So. 1

ri ticoS, the people aro convinced, tact these ill people ere tcin_. e'ene
secy with.

■Siroo cn 10 an/ 13 Soptcaacr alee fr r. he institution ur. Icr ny direction
75 each ti c of ho patients entrusted t. are to be tmnsferre 1 such an

institution, I take tho ,-rlvile w t. ash the question: Is it possible that
suchr. censure is carried -ut, clt »u_h o ~ rtirunt law hes iecr. proirol^atcd?
Isn't It the .'uty cf every c it lien to r^sitt under ell circumstances any act
not Justified by law, even fer iddtn by lar, even if they ere carri d -ut by
state ac-nciosj

"On ncccur.t cf tho cosplote sccrcc; i »C c-_;tufla o un Vr which the nca-
surus ere ccmed out, net cnlyt wildest nt .re aro created amcn^st the ,;oo-
plc, (for oxe-iplo that also »».oplw '\nabl_ to work cnacc.unt f ae;o injuries
rccolvcd durir. tho wcrlk war hive jetn dono wway with or are to jo d'r.o away
with) but also the iwpnaoi n, as if .» totally arbitrary ranner prevailed
at the selection of thu t cr ..ns cencor od.

"If tr. st.t». rcallyahnte t carry’ tut tho xt raination of those or at
Isas*, of s %. tfuntcl patients, shouldn't a lew bo } rouul ;ntod, wbiofc can bo
jttftifivdbvf.ru tho people, which r uld Ivl everyone thuasurro^c f caroful
examination wtath-r he is due t:« c* . r ntitled t live, an J * ul*‘ also
eivo tflen.l’tivc$ a cnonc. to be hrrd, in a slrtilar way as ,rovidod by tho
lev fer th-. prevention of H^riditarily .XTcetod .rorct.y?

"T.’ith ror.ard ts tv patients antruiU.’ u the can* of ovr institutions in
tho future I urgently pray tc do t-v.rythir^. p.sniblc tv ouspur.: 1 the carrying
out of this acssuro* until a clear i«. a situotiin hae been established*

Hi’il Hitler, si .-*d Schlaich."

•*h- * tli. letterhead A "L. 5c'.l“ich # Chief cf tho institution fer
Pueblo nded and Epileptics." Cn t a bett-x. cf the let-or is a n: ta

"•* z: ?y of this letter I forwarded with th- see- nail t. the Chic r f tho Reich
Ounce lie ry, Roichniniater r. L--vxrs."

1 n : ..Per in ovilance -ocunent Ktmber NO-827 as <rcsocutlen ix!dbit


1510


13 JOT.-..-JI \'i.13buck
C -urt Ko. 1


 375 cn W 269 of dccncnt ,cck. This is a letter on the

litttrlicid f the Cberpraesidcnt of Crondanburs .rowings, .’^iniscrr.ticn . f
.rcvir.ciol -Vxiiaticn, lOtsdns, 25 ..pril 191:0, ai t t»e by v . ;._oin, Governor,

a -^ B80d w th - Kouc fer Girls, attention Hoad of Institution or . e;>uty
in Office, lorsonal.

■Subject: Transfer of locates .-f ental I n etituticns.

■flith reference t- ti^ dreu^r O.r. '.iol.SoAo of the ^ich Coodssio-
ocr for -ofonsc for the Corps ..' a _UI, dr.W 20 January 191:0, which is already
Icvirato y-u eta <xpy ofwr.ich is 3 lain ettac.*,-! hereto, I instruct you, by
the order of the k fl ich C<nud*i.,iKr for -o.-3nce, to - vc fre r y r if'titution
the clients omuorstci in attached list iritb two co r ioe *hich :r. vneleaed
.iso. tients wi. fotqasd on U Hty 19l*0 noon by busses of tho

.-.•. 1 .-. Transport Corporation wbo rill tJ t in Uuch with you,

* r,rt tron t is 0 be pruporx -.y th. irctitutUr. corln tsi

restless tior.ts an. to bo troaU< preliJnoriiy with proper ;iru,c fra
tr >a .:-t xt ndir ovtr several b urs.' Th. patients are tc be handled over
u fsr e ostfibl., In th.ir an uv'emtar anc clethin, and ctj t x properly
“ rlt so that their identification rill o guaranteed. Tltc in tire .r.'w.to
funds and possibly, tho clients' »r. r ncj is tc x handed over, »®U packed.
l: ther. to no private clothing the institution o vine the patients will
t ler. nr onroar and clothing The ^-tient T*-ns;ort C.r,-ration will
res nsiblo Tor tho return t* clctWL. one .ind.nr.cr which have been
P«t at ■£., dlsj ;snl as a loan; its list has to 0 suited. Tno personal files
- histories i the patient* aro to * J handed over tc tfc. trrns.crt leader".
* Ci.culn next like t. effur in o ovidenco Tccusent ‘>906 as .r:cocution
-- Kwuor 376, This is a len, dccuaant c-r.tli.uia fr a^o 271 to pap
’ l4 ‘ ,r ‘ ; *“ ovio'onco 1 ofere the International llitery Tribunal,

rosurted by t^o :retish .rcsocutor. The first part of the doounont.

Li J0,ti,n that toe -ocu ,-rx Honbor -906 contains several separate

ran a, is a letter fren Lin.'en tc Heinrich SoHacr, ' .tad Berlin,


1611


13 Jen-A-JP_i6-5-^inabucl< (KSD)
Court Fo. 1


31 heccabor 1940, and reads as follows:

•Dear Party Canada Sellaor: inclosed herewith I sub¬
mit to you an incident coroarning tha a'fair about which
you have been inform^ by Party Comrade Blandonburg. •
■Jrenthotically I night note that Blandonburg, as tho evid¬
ence has already shown, was assistant to 3rack, and later
his successor....'about which you hava been informed by
Party Co rado Blandonburg fran the Chanc-llery of the
?uahrcr. As you .nay see fro-, tho presentation of ?rau

»:„ r io Xehr, aha would li<w to Lrew whether it is possible

•

by 7irtuo of a leich law to deliver huaan beings from

their lnourabl© sufferings, I ask you to examine if ther-

ore any nolitioal objections against "ehr, and capeciolly

if cool-lsostioal ties orist in her c-e.. 3hoitt this not

be the onto, I, ’or .y cart, would not raise any objections

against your verbal furnishing of tho d-sir-d disclosures

to ’lehr, Kell Hitler, Lindon.*

Th-re is a hand"..citten not- at tho bottom. ’Orts-

grupponlliter Party Conrodo Popp is of tho opinion that

?reuchr can bo informed; sho is qui-t and reasonable.*

As soon on tho face of this 1-ttar, that if a oerson nodo

inquiries to the loich Ilinistor and if it wore determined

that theru wore no political objections against a person,

it iicht bo explained to them vorbally is cr.o they v/oro

quiet and reasonable, juct what was taking place.

•

Turning to pa'-o 272, still a part of Docum-nt I’umbor
>906, is a file note, si nod by Scllaar, dated 1.10.40,
and r.ads as follows:

•visit from party :c:bcr Blankunbare, Berlin. Action

barins In tho n ar tutor.. So far hardly any oishops

hove occurred. 30,000 dispatched. -further 100,000-

120,000 are waiting. Tho circle of t :ose who axe initfctod

is to be kept very small. If necessary tho Kreisloitar

1612


13 Jen-A-JP-l6-5-”inabuc'*c (2’3D)

Gourt 22o. 1

is to bo notified ir. good tine. Initiate Kanaol when
possi 1 :!-, supply a stat-.e«-nt “ran t e Gau. 1) Institutions:
2) )o?tor's attitude; 3) "here is the institution situated?
4) 'ho is th- "roisloitor? The Fuehr-r gevs. the order.

The dcc.'eu is r-edy. At pros-nt only clear cas-s, that
is lOO" on^s, arc being settlod. Later an expansion will
ta‘<o nlacc. ?rox now o-' notification viill bo fiven in
aore seholestio fora. Infomcd arc: 'Two nan .& follcw
which are illegible. Sign.d SolLaor.


1612 A


13 Je&-Z3S-17—1-Lo##er
Court ». 1.

The next part of Eocucent Berber E-TO6 is'found on .arc 373 and is
ft letter froe Martin joroann r.ddrcssed to the G*uloitun.~ Franconia, da¬
ted “erlln, 34.9,40, on the letterhead of Stc Satior.nl Socialist Gornan
Voriccrs dirty, The Fuehrer'* deputy Chief o' “'iff:

•Tour lotter of 13 September 1940 vn# *iven to no by iarty
nenbor °offmnn. The Corais#ir>n which was vorlcin* at Neucndctt-
clsnu, is undor tho control of Heichal *r “-uhler or io act-
in* on hi* order#.

"The text of tho notification# of relative# varies in It#
cocpoaition, as I vac once sore assured yceterday; it can,
however, naturally happen eonetines that two fanilicc living
close to each other receive eirll-rly worded lettors.

"It i# natural that the r#jrea«mtativca of Christian Id¬
eology speak against the Connlssion 1 # r/uvci; It rust be eq¬
ually natural that all Iarty Office# ihould, n# ruch an nocoo-
trvry, support the work of tho Corniooion.

•Pell Hitler. 1

■M. rVirnann."

On the following pa^e, ra.ro 374, otill «f Soeunent Hur.bcr E-906,
ii an extract frona report by tho Ereioloitunf; of Brian.*#, ao can be oeon
fr-o the ori.*inol docusent. It roado a# follow#:

"2. Ellnlnation of nentally deranged:

"Cn orders froa the Kinistry of the Interior, oi-med Gchults or
Schultso, a cocciesion, emoiatin.:, ason.: others, of a Borth Goman doctor
oci r. nunber of students, appeared soco tino WV at the local snnator-
i — and nuroinc hoce. It examined the chart# of the rntionts of tho in¬
stitution. Sono tire lator the director of tho inotitution was infomed.
that a certain number of ratient# v«ro to be traneferred to another in¬
stitution on orders froa the Reieh Tofence Coanissar, that a 3orlin Tran-
srort Cor^nny waa to carry out the transfer and that the head of the ln-
etitutirn vac to follow the directives of this ernrany which was in pos¬
session of ■« list of none#. In this way three trannports with a total of


-1613-


13 J.v.-j_).--17-2-IcBser
Court Ho. 1.

370 patients have boon transferred In the nr an tin# to S-nncnstoin near
rirna and to the Lin* district. A further transport le to lonve in Jan¬
uary of next year. In the beginning the head of the Institution did not
know at all whoro the transports vent pad he ignore a It even now officia¬
lly. Ho received no infomatlon on the subject fron anybody* He norely
had inatruciiono to »ply to tho inquiries of the patients' rclativoa that
tho new inatitution would .pet in touch with then and inforn then of their
adniaaion. Strangely enough, various rclatlvco r<coived notification af-
tor the transfer that thoir patients had died. In aor.o coses rncuuonia
and in others an infectious disease varo <;ivcn ao thi C"uuo of death.

At tho s-ne tire, the rol-tivcs voro further informed that it had boon
noceaoary to cronate tho body *nd that, if they wero intercatcd, thoy
could have the clothlne of the deceased eont to then. The rorlatry of¬
fice of 2rlan*en v-e also info mod by the lnotitution of tho varioue
casoa of .death, and a#‘aln either pne-mo-.in or an infectious dlsoneo vae
^iven ao the caueo of death— Hint sere which had n* connection with the
previous oedical historr. so th-t it la to be assured that wo aro con¬
fronted with false statenonts. The p-opilation io torrlbly disturbed ab¬
out tho tranefor of atiento, bocauso they connect it with the c^soo of
death which aro becaning known in rapid succession. Ihoy opoak, partly
openly, partly in secret, about an clinlnatlon of patients for which thcro
is no lc-al foundation. In these war tiros such unrest aoan-: tho popula¬
tion has a doubly unfavorable effect. Koroover, the ov. ntc described
above .rive the church and religious circles cause to rorivo their attl-
tudo against Satlonal Socialise."

A hand writ ton note at the bott*-. of the rfj>ort roads as follows:

"Original extr-ct fror the situation roport of the Krolololtunr
~rlan.-en of th» 36.11.40. A copy was not --do.■

The next -art of foment Surbor T-906 is found In the Biddle of
ta.-e 375 and io an extract of «• report of tho Kroislcitor of Ansbaoh, aa
is chowr. fror. the original, and reads c follows:

■•CO. Miscellaneous.... *


-06ii


13 Jan-33S-l?-3-Lossox
Court l*o. 1.


Then follows <i paragraph oa price policy, vhich I ahull not read, Then
follows the paragraph on rental institutions, roadin.; »e follows:

■Mental Institutions:

■a? removal of -otlonts of ucntal institutions to other distri-
cte oould naturally not reeain hidden fron the public.

"It also appears that the established enreissions work too has¬
tily, are not always licky, and that several Dietakoo eccurrad. Nor
can one prevent Individual cases fron becar.inx known and a oken ab¬
out.

■The following casos should naturally not have occurred:

■1. Through an oversight one fanlly received two urns.

"2. Cno notification of ■oath in'icatod appendicitis -s the caueo
of death. The appendix, however, had already boon renoved ten years
previously."

Still reading fron tho re-ort of the Krelsloitor at Ansbach, saying tho
following cesos should not hive occurred, ho Hots as:

"3. Another cause of death quoted was a disease of tho s>lnal cord.
Solatlves of the farlly had vlsltod the patient, then in -crfoct
physical health, only oi.-ht days heforo.

"Ono foaily scrired a notification of death, although tho voa-n still
llvos in the Institution today and enjoys perfect physical honlth.
■Soao tico a*o» an obituery notice was inserted in tho local

1 Frankischc Zoituxus" by the relatives: •_ hCs been taken

away fror us by a tr~-lc fate.'"

Those are the thin-’o that tho rireisloltor of Anobech cays should nover havo
happened in the Suthanasla pro^raa.

"Vith these highly delicate ..■

tho report continues,

■it Is difficult to sake suggestions as to how to counter a further
s;raadlac of f'-ctc or ruaors arising fror. fcan as v .,11 r 8 cor.-letely
1 -vesta' rurers. It would be necessary, at least for the Krclslei-
tcro, to roeelve confidential inforaato-. about tho acasures thensol-
. * 4


-lb15-


13 Jan-S3H-17-<-Le*Bcr
Court 5c. 1.


VCB. In addition, the cor...e tent Ireielelter should oi S r * c notified.

~t the ir.-e tlr.o "8 Jho relative*, in ordar V- enable hir to observe
the effect rn the rel'tivoa. V> *at<£ thoir beh-vlova, end, if ne¬
cessary. intervene In a *ult-.ble ranner."

■=cll r itler!

•(ei.-naturo tile -lMe) '

Tm following ie •'n excorrt frnn the soc'nd -aeo of a letter, -a
-hnwn by the original docur.ent, frm 2. Vais, Ilroialelter. Tho trmolntion
unfortunately* atartc in the nlddle of % eentence. H»wor, the original
Aacunent ie consist*:

•f»rlllo* were refuain.: tc tend thoir tick to institutions
bi they did not know whether they would rot than back alive.

The diatrict phyelcion In dumber,- had infora#A hln th-.t in
the city of Surnber^, 3 ch-T-rc* for rurder ho/ been I referred,
by the relative* of *uch aick ;©rcone.

"The I arty ha* not received »ny conplalntc or
-ccuantlon* of thio *ort, ur to now."

•"oil n itlorJ

(ai.Tiaturo) ■*. Vila. XroieUitor."

Pho next port of tho Tocunent >906 which I should like to refer to,
ia that contained on loro 277, which la o lotter doted 5 Korch 1941,
which I will not rood on'* ot the botton of ie*o 277 la n fllo noto which
I shall not t"ko tire to rend. Turnin/r to laro 27e I should liko to rood
the letter e-p«arinr on thot pace, otill o part of >>cunont 1-906, fron
Sell-ur, Chief of tho Sou St-ff Office, oddreed to Sturnbam fuehrer
Froidrlch, Kurnber--}

"Subject: 'Jnrcet of tho population of Abater.: ouin.; to the
conspicuous evacuation of the innate a of tho
Ottllionholn.

"Ac I hac already Informed you by telephone, the evacuation of
further inn-tor of the Ottilienhein hue caused. ruch unr lesson UKaa.

I enclose herewith for your inforcr.tion the conj rchoneive report of


- 1616 -


13 Jar. li?-A-EK-17-5-Iesser

C- rt Sc. 1


*ho Krcislcitor, -iarty arcbor Gcistncr, and I will inforn you in duo ccurao ef
further inquiries to take place. I havo just rcccivod a telephone ncssaco fr:n
t>c Ortacrupporilcitcr of tho !EDAf in Abaters, Party ner-ber Kirchluf, who is
enployod as foreman in the >hma Lanclan and also lives there, about an incident
.‘.ich has disturbed the population in Absbers to oxcopticnal dojroo. In
bubors, which is part of tho area of tho f.rccr Kreiclcituns of Gunsenhausen,
the Abbey of Ottilicnhcln is situated in tie aMdlo of tho isarkot place. In
this Ottilionhein were housed a fen liundrod mentally dcfcctivo pooplo who, as
far as thoy wero fit fer any work, wore c:nlcycd n the faro of tho Ottllicn-
heis. T.icso non tally dcfcctivo pcrs:ns were originally sent there by tho
various Country Jolfarc Cbrganiaations. Already last year 25 inaatos wore ro-
ctved in tho course of the well known noasuros, Of thoao, 2li died while 1
imate was a rain brought back to tho Crwtilicrfcciu. This was allojodly a case
of inatos for when tho Country .’olfnro Creonisation ef Swabia had to provide.."

And thon ccoos tho in ter oat Lx part of tho lottors

"Last Friday tho inuatoo of tho Ottilicnhcln fer whose cost tho C( untry
uolfaro Orsaniration of Uppor Franconia and :'d'.Clc Franconia had assumed the
res. .cibility, were taken away in two lrr;.-o cars. Tho raacvnl wao carried out
under tho direction of a professor frea Erlangen by tho poroonnol of that insti¬
tution. Tho people were taken a-ay in tho aost ccnspicu:u5 manner inarinablo.
Instead of tho buses entorin: the courtyar ’ to pick up tho inmatoo who wore to
be rcr.ovod, the vohides wen: stationed outeiua the Ottilioahoia in tho Olddlo
ef tho . arkot placo. The inrotes :f the Ottilicnhcln to be ronovod who had
beer. th:rsu£Oy stirred up, had t. bo ta'.rcn t: the vehicles one by cnc and by
tho uso ef force. The wh-;lc population f AVeberj, which is str n. ly Catholic,
ha’ cor.rrccatod and watched tho incident, cryinr loudly. That certain circles
node appropriate psychological use ~~ this incident cannot bo ro;;arc!cd a3 a
surprise. Party noebor Kirchhuf reported that there wore oven party nenbero

these weeping onlookers and that, in tho general exit event of the pooplo,
C’-’-'-air. remarks were nadc *ich trust be regarded as irresponsible. It

sayia. that tho paster ef tho Ottilionhein hinsclf helped to cronto the


-1S17-


33 Jan h7-V.--2'-17-6-Lc33cr
Court He, 1


app rq;x jatou taosphe re by haring the uc.plc itio wore to bo renovod brought to
the Ab 'xiy church for confession and c.'^ur.icn in the nerninj and hr.vir.; then
practically carried to the altar with the help of the nuns.

"I shell n cm otic do tailed inquiries about the incident through the
Lanr'xat. I consider it nccoasary, hewer/or, to advise the ccnpotont authorities
to use ac:. what ccro tact in the removal of thoao persona who juat have to bo
c lloln ato-', as a Reich defenau aoaauro, aa it is not nocosoary to create unnccos
aary difficultica and play into the bands of ur opponents. Aa nc^n as I re¬
ceive tho report, I shall pass it to the GaurtaVaant (Gau Staff Office)."

■Hell Hitler,
signed by "Sollncr"

Tho neat lottor, cn po-*o 280, atill a part cf tho aano docuaont, D-906,
ia a lottor with tho aubjoct hoa'inj: "Incidents cn tho occasion of tho
latest rcnrval of non tally defective tots us free tho Ottllionhoia Ababarc"
flipped by Firchhcf, roforrol to i:. : , evioua letter, and dated 2 $ Fobrunry

19hl, reading as fellows:

"To tho Kroialoitunc of tho USDA*, TToisaenburj.

"With rcforonco tc tlio tolophene c ?nvoreatlon acnticnod abovo,
the doolrod ro x>rt about tho recent incidents in Alabor; a
few days ago ia enclosed herewith r your infernatian.

"V<o would liko to roquest you not to pass on tho original cf
this report to tho Oendarnorie Officer .'fis tor in Aba bong Ccr
ovontual examination of tho par.icipating spectators, aa the
Qrterruppo fear 3 that Pfiator, who lr Judged and regardod as
strongly Catholic by uo, nay net tire offectivc stops against
his cwn fellow believers in this natter.

"The lccal Crtsgruppc itself, however, is of tho opinion that tho
Ottilierhoin will servo a much —-ro useful prupcso if it io
cleared of its presort irtutcs an’ placed at tho disposal cf tho
State as a military hospital or 3.::c ther institution of Military use."

"Htdl Kitlcrl
(si;haturc) "Kirchhoo"


Court He. 1

13 Jar. hl-k -17-7 Lesser


?ho next following document is the report contained in Xirchhof's
letter and is one of the nest runorkahle docurxnts that I have seen. It
is a confidential report on the r3=ovul frees Erlangen of the innatos of
the asylum and it shows between the lines acre eloquently than words
the subjugation and the terror and the fear in which people lived under
the Nasi regime. Obviously, Xirchhoff, the writer of this letter, lived
In such mortal fear. The report contained in the previous lotter roads
as followsi

"In the course of last Friday, 21 February 191*1, a bus frjn Erlangen
took 57 inmates of the Ottilionhol* Absberg away in two parties, allegedly
for an ex^aination at the clinic at Erlangen. Inthe bus itself thoro
ware a dcctor owl three nurses who loadod these people on to tho bus and
supervised oach transport.

“A great nasbor of spectators congregated each tins thoso people
wore ,:ut on the bus and it is reported that the loading did not tako placo
in the courtyard but in front of tho gate* Tho "iWest sconoe imaginable
are reported to have takon place then, as scee cf these poople did net
board the bus voluntarily and wuro therefore forcod to do so by tho
accccipanying porscnnel.

"Ihore wore poople who......."

Paronthotlcally, those people *»o fought net to be taken on the bus to
the Euthanasia Station,

»..woro isfcociles and feeble minded and woro said to have othor

epileptic illnesses as w»U, and whose upkeep the state and othor Public

• . ♦ • w • , •

m

•


-1619-


13 Jan A7-A-17-3-LJG-L-sscr (!5D)

Court ::o. I

Bodies heve so far had to fcorovidai for cither completely,
or et least for the greater part.

'I was able to learn In this connection that the
Country Orranizotian of Swabia fetched eight such oersons
baefc last autumn, and that seven of these wore said to

have died very shortly afterwards of influenza end 1 cm

^ •

blood pressure, which sot in. Only one person returned
to the Ottilienheim in Absberg.

•This .tatter gradually become Known to Absberg, and
as a result a great crowd of people gother-d also on the
occasion of that lost action who, I have heord, allowed
themselves to poss r^marKs oeninst tho‘ Notional Socialist
State. I was unfortunately unnblo to find out the names
of tha spectators concerned, os all spectators who hod
taKen port showed great roticancy towards me about this
natter during iy investigation.

•'These inoidents during this action, which is, after
all, nacjssary, or. to be considered a 11 the -.ore bconusc
:7en Party members themselves did not shrink "ron Joining
in the l»vaontatia»s df tha other woeoing 3p-ctator3. The
fact th-t\ a certain fr oup of the'spec to tors conoornod
gave expression to their former convictions


1620


13 Jan-A- JP-18-1-! reohan (MSD)
Court No. I


and did not r:frain fran minimizing and oriticising the
gr>,at necessity of the n-asuros takan and introduced in
the course of Reich defense, wps only to be ercpectcd from
these people.

’It is said that a section of these people even went
so far as to formulate and die B «aiii"t« nore or less the
following assertion. 'The State must bo in a bad way nw,
or it could not happen that those poor people should siap-
ly be s-nt to their donth solely in order that the moans
which until now have been us-d for th- uokeop of these
people ore node available for the prosecution of the 7ar'.
This vijw originnt s predaninatly froa the Cntholio pop¬
ulation of Ababerg.

'It is ovon s aid that those poor vlotina - as they
are r-gorded by the clergy and the religious inhabitants
of Absberg - were token to the Cetholio church for confess¬
ion and covmnion shortly before their departure. It seems
absolutely ridiculous to attonpt to absolve by an oral
confession tho possible sins of people, some of whom com-
piately lack all mental powers.

•Although of the 57 people that were fetched away,
thire were some that h?d bev,n employed by the Ottilien-
-:in in tho kitchen and in agriculture and, cs it happens,
could only corry out these tasks under supervision, the
measures t-kon can, for that reason too, not be understood
by the population. As this measure is gradually becoming
.cnevin now, yeste lay ol ;ndy 7 such peoplo wore taken back
K :’ relating into th-ir households, so that they allegedly
could no longer be inoluiod in the action. To bo added
to this is the fact that about H days eight strangers
thoroughly inspect-* the Ottilienh-ia and made not^s as
to the size of th- roans, etc. 3ccauso of all those reasons,

1621


13 Jen-A- J?-18-l-::--han (?:SD)
Court No. I


the oooulation of Absborg now fears that the OttilicnhcLn
aey possibly be evacuated and nsdo cvsilabl3 for other
puroosos. • da:cd 24th ?ubrucry, 1941, signed Eirohof.

On the following pe^o appears another report on tho
same incident, which I will not read. Tho same is truo
of page 286, still c part of tho British Dooaaent D-906,
also pago 287. On page.288 appeers a letter, signed by tho
Itreisleiter of Gouleitung Trsneonia


1621 A


13 Jen-A-J?-18-2-Mcehnn (USD)
Court So. I


dated March 7, 1941, which roads as follcws: »

' tsgording: a^oval of inmates of the Bruckberg
institution.

'The Ortscrupaenl .iter of the Bruckberg Ortsrruppo,
?rrty member lauaehcl. makes the following report:

'The news of the removal of some of thn inmates of
the 3ruckberg Institution hes caused the greatest unrest
-.none the copulation of Bruckt.rg, unr.st which «ns further
incr-as-d by the fact that sane of the inmates to be re¬
moved, namely, thes. who in the opinion of the inhabitants
are still in their right minds', came into nearly every
house to say good-by.. One could almost be l.d to beliave
that it is a question here of a farewell c-rri;d out on
orders, but I cm inform id from reliable sourocs thrt the
inmct.s felt of their own record thrt it was their duty to
o y goodby, end thflt probrbly one imitated the others.

Ap' t from the fact that one recognizes clvrrly In these
ccs.9 her./ far the ordinary German is reoeptiv. to the solu¬
tion of t is question to h.reditary disease, I n3kcd before
for ay enn opinion “or weeks from all sid.s and what at¬
titude tho Party t-.c.s in this matter.

'Ortserupnenl-iter leuschel is furthermore of the op¬
inion that he should 6peak about the removal of tho inmat.a,

0

if oossiblc at the ne t meeting of Party mcmbor3, in order
to give the facts -nd above all to squash, the rumors that
have arisen to the effect thrt the inmates would very coon
b. put out of the way, done away with or poisoned.

•I, however, -m of tho opinion that it is bett.r now
as 'refore not to tall: -bout tils matt-r at all and I ask
you to notify me accordingly if yoi hold different vi.ws.

’As I evaluate th. situation, n certain amount of
unrest will naturally continue to arise, which will b.

1622


13 Jon-A-J?-*18-2-?!eehan (MSD)

Coart No. I

.sp-ciell 7 fost-r-d by attecKs, the sooner -will oala bo
restored hero too. H-ll Hitler, (signed) the I'-reisl-iter.

The next part of document 906, appearing on pages 290
and 291, I *ill aait reeding. On page 292 appears a
letter sign-d by Dr. Schumann and addr-ssed to the at-
t.ntion of Professor H-yde, reading as follows:


1622 A


13 J*n- A-TP-13-3 -Hj chan (:!3D)
Sourt !’o. I


'Dear Professor Hcydu: Idnclosud I submit to you a
relative whosa two sisters h£70 died at air piece.

•I -s: for information, v/bether in this coao the writer
is to be brought he. : .'ora liscussion, or '..hither as usual
tho necessary precaution is to be used especially in
.“Plaining that the death of ths t. o sisters ocoured in a
mtu-al ' ay.

•’e have sent a copy of this litter to Dr. HeCelnann
because he is interest-d ir*. such letters and since he
consider-dparticularly to ri7e reasonable hints in the
let tea to th3 relatives. Toil Hitler, ' (signed) Dr.

Schumann.

Page 294 is mer the end of Document D-906, however,
since it Is 3 r©petition of %hrt was river, befo e, I
villi omit re-ling it.

On ■‘Qpe 295, I offer -s -videnoo Document 660, os oro-
: ration •>.hlbit 377. T is docunent is os-cr-t letter
signed by Scllmer, r-r rvihf icntal insitutions. The
notu-e of the letter is of such a s^or-t nature tint even
tha nvus of the adirjcs.s Co not appear on the letter.

Dbo folio- i.-tc is fo rsor.cl inform: 1 -ion. Pl-.v

destroy this sheet after-aris.

Tor sometimes, the inratea of mental Institutions are
visited by a con-.issi-n hich functions upon the order
jf some very high office. The commission has the order to
find out %hich inaatis should be selected for transport to
certain ot er institutions. The commission bases its decision
on tlia records of the institution. The p.-tients who are
*f:r. transferred ere anamined a;ain in tho intitution desig¬
nat'd >'y the commission -n’ then the decision is m?:i *..hether
they should he freed 'ro: t .sir sufferings.

The dead body itsalf is to b6 cremated and the ashes

1623


13 T en-A-13 - 3 -He eh an (!SD)

Court To. I

are placed at the disposal of the relatives. Snail mistakes
in notifying are naturally always liable to occur, and in
the future it will not s -e possible toe void than either.

The coonission itself ic anxious to avoid all mistakes. I
could Pive you further i.-fornation but I would like to ab¬
stain fron it and beg you to look ae uo when


1623 A


13 Jm—b—!fcehan
Court So, 1


y:u visit the Gauleitun^.

"1 believe that we as Saticnal-Sociciists can wclccrx this action, which
i« f-r tbs affected Individual exiracr inarly serious,

I bo* you therefore, tc oppose all rioters -.id rir.'rlinis with the incossary
•aphasia by jr.sontin.; our point of view in regard t; these uatt«.rs,"

The ruxt locumont, which I sh ulc like t. :ffor into evidence, is No.665,
irosecution Exhibit 378 snd it a on ?a C o 296 of the 1 ocuacnt 3cok
jfc. 3 , I will net read the entire cbcvr*;:it, but only the last paragraph. It
is signed by Kreisleiter G.rstr,,r an: tlztcC Foaruary 2b, 19bl. Or. the lottcr-
bcaa io too iiS,U, Nureeberg, Ibe last par:. 0 t a,to reads as follows:

■1 shall new hive detailed invosti ations rsdo *>y th, Landrr.t with regard
to this incident,* the Incident boitv. ti>o roaovsl of tho irwetos fro* the
Ottilion h:r.u, "but it also souks necessary ta uo to draw th- attention of
the reapensi le authorities to the f“.ct that s.-cchow sore that sh uld bo usod
in tin ro ;-vr.l of such people who aru to be -\no -.way with in the courso of the
•loich defence, as it is not nccuasary tc. create unnocossory difficulties and
t r . play' inV tho anls of our cp.cr.unto, .io s;-n os 1 chr.ll nave tho r-part,

I shall tr?ns*it it t-> the staff office,"

Tho w.xt couosnt, which I sh.ui: li:.c to offer, is Mo, 781 as irosecu-
ticn Sjftittt 379, Ctfuirln* ,n.r.299. 1 eiU wait rcadin thia r*CUaont r.a
it describes jener lly the outinnasia pro-raa aw! is a ropotitior. of what
alrcr.ty has been road,

Tho caioo is true of ^ocuunt No, 781, which 1 w uld liks. tc effor as
»rcs;cuti,n Exhibit He. 379, a«.po:ri i y..x 302.

Tho last d current in tha -cuaont 3aek No, 3 is No, 78], I should only
like tj re; thw last pa ; a in th do a-sent I ..k, which is .a^ 303*. It io a
latter sir.n-cl by 31ankontur.:, aarke ’ "ernfi uitial*, tc thv OouL.itun;. ?rancont'
of tho NS"Ar, dated 8 -arch 19bl, The reads as frllrwsi

■‘or special reasrns I request yru t suit-it a cccplcto list cf all
workhouses and ether institutions withir. ycur Gau which serve os shelters for


162b


13 j-.n-.W'--l8-5-''cehan
Crurt . 1

%

social in:' antl-secial olerxnts.

the acski tir:c I request inf-mati n s t tin. is in ehnr,;s -f por-tin,. the
iastitotlcn in quorti: n an.' h w nany innate 8 arv sheltered there,

"^.incc tiu. cajpositicn cf th> r n s irzaates varies quite extensively,
acc-r-in^ to ?r*.vi.us experience, I ah.ul’ also like to receive i.ifcmation
n that subject, if possible. I * lace s. ccir.l ot..i\asis or. leariiin,. wheth-r,
f. A t. the lack of other h usin. faciliti-s - which I know t. be. the case in
inUviuur.l instituti ns - incum.lc cas»s f insanity as well an 1 i.ey are
ale. kc.-t there.

lease, sen ' =c the list within U wo-ks.

HeU Hitler."

Si .nod "Blankvn'-ur*."

This c-nplotus the presentation of ccuaont Sock Nc. Uj, enc. if tho
Tribunal piece., »*• have a wit xjss t put en, and since it Is rvnrly ti. o
tc a . urn, I su est wo wait until •-> min. tv cxanlnc tho witness.

,'t. *il036C' : .tfJtc !tr. .rosi ont, r. roe sc dean for tho dcfon.'nnt Brack,
it - c.uc uf'in of the rua lin. of -ociicent "—9C6, the *rosecuti.n hhs read
a let. r fro-, “r. £chunann to Huy-L,, which was r. t ccntalnod i«» the .Jucuttont
3cck. This n^poars f i pcrtanco for tho 'oftnso, and I reque t the prosecution
»c«. that w. bo -ven this docunent. i w uld ale _c ..rntoful to the .rosecution

t

if La . r^sentin, the individual J cuvw; t, they w^ulcL alsostetc the pa c -c in
the '.cr-an ocuamt Book, uflauro t.:e scri.s in the Gcrr.an x-cu.var.t 3-ok vary
c.nsi.'.ra';?.y from tho pau nuB>.rs in the Enlish . ccuoont Book.

'E. P.C2' i.iSi V.o will ob*. in the Srr.Ui&ann ldttar for ,’ufens. counsel,
wd I an boitj it was aited fr o. tho xck. T*o will also sec if it is not
pcssi lo at the cac^ tir» to soo that l'.*. an.jlish ,\a,;os roferr-t’ to rre referred
l*'- '-he jurnan Document Bock.

1 .nil FHTi The n r-as aablc. I

t-;-i ‘..j. r rccuti. n will cro.-ly with the roqu.it if possible,
h-.n did you expect tc call ycur witness?


13 Joa-.i-J.-lS-^-’teehan
C.urt Ko. 1

!3. BGB8IKS: We wcul* prefer tj wait until the first thin- in tho
aora’ng#

TiLMnSSE SKTt You aro adrisv ‘ that Trimnal >0.1 will recess until
U o'clock toncrrow oc-min, . Tty. trib« d rill recess until th-.t h ur.


I 62 e


Court So. 1

14 Jan 47-K.iUA..l-J_yo«i*r


CCEHECTZT COPT

Official Transcriot of the A-uJrican .Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United Statee
of Anerlea against Karl Brandt, ct si,
defendante, sitting at iMernborg, Garnery, on
14 January 1947, 0930. Juatlce 3eula presiding;.


7KL .JlaSKAL: The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.
Military Tribunal I is now in sosslon. God eevo the United States of
America and thie Honorable Tribu n al. There will be order in the court-

rooo.

THS P8SSIUSKT* Xr. Marshal, ascertain If the defendants are oroeont
in the courtrooo.

TBS MARSHALI Hay it ploaao Your Honor, all the defendants aro
crosont in tho courtroc*.

TKZ PRISIDEST: The Secrotary Ooaoral vill note fer the record
proeenco of all the dofoodants in the oourt.

Tho jroeecutlon aay proceed.

MR. HABIT: May it please tho Tribunal, during tho examination of
tho witnoss Kogon roforonco was cade to a nan naaed Ferdinand Rocnhild,
vho was socrotary in tho hospital barracks at Buchonwald. Kogon stated
that that nan Bight aoro epociflcally toetify as to Base of the activi¬
ties within tho hospital barracks. Tho proeecution respectfully rooucets
that tho witness Fordinand Rooahild be called to tho otond at this tiao.

THS PRISI3Z.KT: Tho Marshal will euaaon tho witness Ferdinand
Rocahild.

(FERDIKAIH) RCL.MEILD, a witness, took tho stand and tcstlfiod as

follows.)


ST JUKE SL3?.Z5G<


right hand and bo sworn. Roooat after no:
and Ctanlociont. that I will sooak tho pure
nothing,
oath.)


14 J rn -17—1-2-Pcator

Cturt He* 1

*

1EE ?3-3£ID3*T: Ifco vitnoss will bo sor.tod.


DIRECT ZX..'I2f.-.Hai


;r::n. jy.rdy:


q ..ltn.as, y ur nrxio lc Pcxvllnrxid RroilhilA?


1 Y'u were *>crr. cn 11 -prll 1903?

1803.

o 'Jhcro wore yru b: xtx, witness?

4 Prankf-i t rx: Ir-ln.
q Ytu rjo cltl-v>n rf Oorermy?

Yoa.

q Whr.t la yrur ,>rweont r.ddroaa?

.. Ec’Jul Strr.aac 15.


16. S


l*i Jar. -17-:'.-:— -2-1-1. r.rrcw
C* urt !!c. 1

r : '/5 tn-ac, what is ycur educational background?

I went t< a kick schorl. Sfcoi I studied for a fow years
in Frankfurt n th- Main and I lat-r bocorto a .merchant.

« '*4.on did y u ccu^.lotc ycur education?

„ In tl- year of 1925.

--ftor 1925 ycur cccup-ti;n was that cf u nor cl ant, wit¬
ness?

.. Y. a, f.r s' :;ot\. o 1 u.s uno:, .l-.yed,

itor eh- c .plcticn cf ycur education uid until your
trrost in ...rch, 1935, wtat was y ur o iplcyaont? Ukot did you
on. "ago in during that tiao?

I .idn't quite understand tie Ooruan translation.

W: lid ye u kindly . utlir.o for us, witness, what ytur
a .pic y. :-n t war between the dr.tos »f the cc::ploticn of ycur odu-
cati r. and urlVl 1935?

;■( r ji:vo ti .M I w rl*«d as a cerrosp. rlont end thon I
v. rked tfitll 193 1 in ay cwr. usin-ss, together with a friend cf
Ino.

r Did ; i vur ‘joc r:» associated witt the Qomnn Cors.iunls-

tie Party?

.. *; 7 or a nco Docuribur of 1954 I worked with thu ill 03 a 1

; .jiunistie Port} cal spread illegal leaflets.

Ij o'-hor a*rds, witness, y.u wore encased in political

activitl " rlcl * Wv "\ c*nstruod tc bo onti-Hazi?

. Yus.

4 »nl f r that roae:?i .ax*o you placed under arroat?

*• On March. 20 , 1925, I was arrested and w i.h indicted
■..cause ;;f pr .paring tc ccr-ult treason. In Ucvun'.er, 1935 I was
scnt-ncod tc three years ponitentiary, a s-r.tonco which I sorvod
until March, ls',3 in the panitontiary of tassol. Aftor serving
i: sontonco i w..c t: tho c neentrati^n canp cf Duchonwald

tt-erj I ror—inod ovor sin^ 2 , 19c«, until ay liberation -

-,ril 11 , 19*15.


i-, Jan 47-1:*::;- -2-2-Kcrrcw
C:urt K_. 1


0. 1V.cn you wore an innate cf the 3ucV.onwr.ld Cmcontration
C:_ 1 *«r a ported of apprcxinatoly sovon yoara, is that correct,

witness?

1 . Yus, for about soven yoars.

k w, prior tc ycur arrest in 1955 wore you ovor arrestod
:r in thu custody of th- polico?

.. He this was ny first sontonco.

Mew, roturning t: the Buc'onwr.ld Cencontrntien Canp,
what was your first duty in thU coup?

-t first I did physical work m thu canp of 3uchonwcld,

I wont to tl > quarry, end then was put r. various difficult tasks
until finally, in th. year of 1959, aftor having wrrkod in tho
Lffico f r sc no tiuv md ir. tho photr graphic dopartnont of tho
coup, I ber: dork in tho hospital cf.thc cancontrcticn canp.

" did yei boc r.u clork in the hospital barracks

of cl o concentration canp?

rt In the oujrior of 1959.

V/oi'o y ur duties thu:-o cr clorl: solely of un aduinistra-
tlvo nature?

;.t first I was activo ac u clork in tho First Mel Dopart
cr.t and then lntor on \tr .s sent tc tV. sr-ccllod ad:;inistrutivo
effice where i h.d daaiingc with rogistratirr.a, etc., end also
f r jc.:o yoar: 1 had to tako ccro cf tho nenios belonging to tho

innate#.

•hr;, witness, in th- spring cf 19C0, approximately ono
Seer of6-r you were assigned tc duty in the hospital barracks, did
bee ..c the first clerk in the coup.... in the first canp

,ry»icl.n's office?

.. Ihe'first clork - yus, * became that in tho suranor of

13-.5.

-hen wore you assigned t duty as a subordinate clork

- r - first cor.p physician's office in 19*i0?

iLyo


O H


. Jon -i?-!:-: — -2-3—-arrow
_urt Sc. 1

The Goman translation isn't coning through vory wo 11.

I ropoct, witaass. Differentiating bctwoon your dutlos
c a dork in the hospital barracks; woro you in 1910 assignod as
_ cleric in the office of the first coup physician?

Ti; u year of 19-13, yos.

How, in your duties in tl e cc. up as a clerk was D r. Hcvon
Gseigned thv.ro to duty?

For scuo T/ocks I c.rkod fer Dr. I'cvor who then, at the
beginning of Soptoebor cr tl. end of August of 193. «m arrostod.
Q Hvw, witness, who was thu first coup pfcroicion in 19*10?
In 19-10, it war Dr. Dlioss, end after that, Dr. Koobrlch.
S*ui tl. to Inter Dr. Popp is cl: caao t. vs. As far as I ror:eW»«r it
cu3 inly then ti-t Dr. level’ esuo t us,

\\ - hr. Hcvon r.sristLnc under any of the throe doctors

you havj Jui t ncaed?

/. Dr. on war at first tic -oc nd coup physician and
tlon later ;ccc .o the first coup physician.

^ When did ar. Woven Ducoao the first canp physician?

That probably was in the spring cf 1941.

-ari ycu cc ntinuod to worl: in the cffico under Devon, is
that c rruct, and hoc.'-o his privato socrotary in the suunor cf

19-13?

Y.s. Ohtil August, 19-13 A was dork in tl « tddnistru-
tlvt o flee and thon I >ocaue his socrotary.

Suaiing up the)., witness, jru uoro nsc’gnod tc the ccnp
1 :cpJtd for a perird of tlx yocrs. Tl t is, fren tl. spring of
19h>- vnti - the ii'jor-'.ti'ii in -915. I*’ that correct?

A lea.

In ur dutius c.s r. dor':: and tu socrotary wore you in
a r c-lti n t-_ road classified ccrrospcndcnc j and rope rts?

A Y~3.

I .rcur:-, witness, that you knew Dr. Eoven vory well?


o>


J on 47-
ou. t lie.


H-rX -2-4-Sarrcu
1


i, I ••eliovo tc know Ha ratlwr soil,

Wit?wcs, ct t: is tli-w will you ploc-so stop down from tho
nitr.LC 2 liCX ^nd gc ever tc the defendants • deck and point t^ tho
*’( u kr.' v tc o Dr. Hovont
.. Ho is in tbo laet r<w.

a What is l-lt location?

A Ifcu fift! nan in tho ltit rrw,

"3. IL’.RDY; I respoctfully roquoat, Yc.ur I*, ncr, ti nt the
roc-rls shew tlfct the witness identified tho defendant He von

pr perly.

Tl : PRSSIDSIT: Pi* a wl lch end of tl o lino is Dr. He von tho
fifth aon? Fr* u y ur ri^.t or fre.n tho loft?

; pz • tbo right - tl~ fifth uan in the lc«t rew,

Z z PRSCIDHJT: Tho ruccrd trill chew that tho witness

Ctrreetly identified the dofo-'.dcnt h von.

. n. S.’.:iDY: Did Hi von w»cr .. Zl unif r vl llo in tho coup?

.. ' Y-s.

What was 1 is rank?

A ..t tl.o end ho was. Heuptaturufuol ror.

0 . i'uo t< ycur pcaiti.n and ycur ..eaccictUn with otbor
ln.iatoa and fr' x 3 onoral knowledge aKuftho onop d you know
anything ai> ut nodical oxporiuonts cenductcd at tho Buchonwald
c neontration exp?

I nl> knew Out the ac-called typhua oxpurhjonts which,
woxo carried tl.r ugh in l> .cV .6.

r D yu knit the nxi-u Dr. Ding-Cel ulur?

A Y v a.

n • j, i, r> Ding-Schulor t' «- ctananding fflcor r£ tho typhu
ctatD n?

A Yws, yes,

"* In tills p* oitlcn as c .t.-nu-nr: fflcor cf ti e typhus

staticn was t)r. luvor. tho deputy tr Dr. Ding-Schulor?

1632


14 J:n 47-:0--2-5-Lrpv
Ccvrt Ho. 1


A Ho wr.a it least the ccllabcrctir and prcbcbly ruproaont-
i ! l w! lie 'thu lit tor wr.c absent.

q or, R. oil-il'l, did Dr. !>* on participate in tho Selccticr.
f i:u a toe t_ be oubjoctod t« tho oxperinonts in tho typhus atr.tl
A Yv.a.

o ulJ you kindly toll the Tribunal Lew tl ..so aoloctiena
■ere :iuo.

va.onovor c. aoi«lta'cf oxporir.©nts wr.s irtonclod r. corti in
nu.:‘-f ln.iitua nn»*e requested. Tl . aoloctin thon fcllrwod
y uain; tho c:.rd irox oyato.: wild ro had in ur ad inistratlvo
effice. Tl.- non wore tl on erdur-d t r.ppoar nd were Vr. uyLt tc
fib* blcqk.

K_w, ill tie 'lwf«ndcnt H v-n «v_r atriko cnytnu off tho
11-S- f tKoo t Vo tranr.farrod t 3ltck 46 because T the ln-

fiuoncc of tho pi llticol pric nors?

Corti.Inly. B*.uy wore » . fitly a5-oallod criminal innotap
end 1 .•/. aoxuila. In cnly vory rcr- cr.aoo wore there any political
,jrl 2 nera a i nj th-.a,

Ui.ro r.i.y cf the Innate* used In the oxperlnonta

v.lur.tocrn?

X u con hardly apeak ftvHUt viluntoera in a or-to liko

thet.

l.'ore any l' those iiuoatoa uaol pord.no r-ftcr succoaa-
fully urdorg-inj such oxperlnonta?

L U-, I ccn't ro::o:i‘vr any such coco.

Cl , .; 0 re tho lnnntoa uaoil ell hoolthy poreena?

A They hr.d t* bo healthy. Otherwise they wouldn't hove

• i 4

3» :••• w the experinonts,

'faro tho lnratca usou in theta oxperiuonts, witness, oil

nacUnalltios?

A Ikoy wore, r.rstly Gomans ainco jenbors cf fcrolga

— “ *■

r.atl ns wore always considered cs political innot03.

lo33


Coart So. 1

14 Jan 47-*i-hAA-2-6-JCarrov (SEK)


Q. In the course of those expcriscnts conducted at 4S can you
cstlsate how aany rlctlas died as a result of the experixaents? That is,
all the oxperinents.

A. It is very hard to estimate the nuaber but I would say that it
reached the nuaber of three hundred.

Q, Sow, witness, after the inflates had boen sent to Slock 46 for
experimental purposos and if an innate died, wero roeorde then kout as
to tbo causo of his death? ‘

A. Yos, then a doath rooort was Bade and the causo of death was
always designated as eoaothlng different - not al«*ys tyohus.

q. In othor words, =ost of the doath certificatea statod that tho
innate died of natural oausos. Vould that bo a correct t osunotion?

A. Certainly.

Q. "ltnoss, are you faaillar with tho torn "Action 14 F 13"?

A. Yos.

Q, bill you kindly toll tho Tribunal what "Action 14 F 13" waa?

A. I hoard about this action by way of 'Citing only later aftor
I received Insight into the secret files. In tho sunaor of 1941 thoro
appeared in Suchonwnld a delegation Oiich prosuaobly caoo free tho
Reich Crieinal Offico in Borlin and which seloctod tho inBatos, osooci-
ally crlalnalo who coeaitted sexual violations, but aoong thca wore
oolitical inflates. These oorsons wore sOloctcd - they used very cynical

ronarks whilo selecting then - and thon at tho ond of 1941 - tho summer

be ed .

of 1941 - wore sent to/transoori/to an unknown destination. A very few

hours aftor thoir departure their personal belongings cnao back - aaong

thea tooth - so that we wore quite sure that these inmates were doad.

Frca a conversation between sec of tho case loaders in tho room vhoro

thoir Tcrc.;nai belongings were, a conversation which one of tho inflates

heard, theoo persons were killed by way of gas. A


1634


1 -. «.n -/i-'..

Civrt ~ . 1


. -2-7-.-.n*' v


3wC r. sucl trr-s' rt, which we -ssoc*jl«d In /c_;'-r, 1S-U,
c r.tr.i LJ - lor *u nvri.cr cf p itical lnrit s. . t t! r.fc tir:o it
v -3 n vl u* t t> anks tc i>r. 1 ’ on that tils transport iltln't
-ctuo'-ly lor.vu. Dr. Krvun c.t that ti o n;s undor thu influonco cf
6fcu , litiot 1 circle a in thu cn y. In tl o ^utUL^i rt 1041 an
i. v.stiji t- n vc 3 c niuctod cn rll Jowa *y tho caap ph> sicicn and
61.0 wo a «xc-dncd. Th.-ao that wore unfit t r laV-r wort si rted
ut. We didn't kn w f r what purp-ao this oxta-dnaticn rtr.s curriod
tfcr<ug:. ..o r~.y have tfceud.t thr.s tl . so ^ocylo wh wore unfit for
iu*j. r vculd rocoivu lota«.r tx.cke tc dn.


1$35

%* I

m irn^m 4


1 l Jrr.uir7-i*-0JG-3-i-Kuppcratein
Court No. 1


Tho list of thcao Jews unfit for work was sent to the political dc-
^srtcent 2nd, in the spring cf 19A2, there followod threo or four trnns-
p:rts rnd they were sent away. There personal belongings and thoir teeth
■wre sunt back end wo wore certain that these people went the same way. as
the others. I lcernod, fra* correspondence which 1 yw later, that we were
there concerned with an action which was conducted in Barnburg, and where
c certain Dr. &<.rl was particularly active.

Tho aurdared persons wore later reported by Bachcnwald as later having
:ivd r. natural doth. I ay a elf saw copies cf those death roports. 1 think
this concerned an amount of six hundred acn.

Q. l.uro rll the physical axaxsinaticns cf thuso Jews made by Dr, Koven
end his assistant, in order to determine their capacity for work?

... I don't underst nd your question.

Did Drv Hovon examine those Jow that were i-.tor sunt to Bomburg?

A. Yes; all Jews whe woro in the ooap voro exaainod to sec whethor
th-y sure fit for work or not,

Q. «nd they wore oxaainod by Dr. Hovon or his assistants?

n. Yes; they woro exoainod by both of tho camp physicians.

Q. And, as « result of theso physical oxrjsinations, dc 1 understand
jcu tc say that lists wore ^sdc up by Hovcn which cent ined substantially
tl’ . rvacs cf all those who later wore sont to Bcrnburg for extermination?

A. YeS.

1. In the seme instances, witnuss, didn't Hovon rar.vo the names of
:3. of the inoatos free tho list if sc requested by the illogal camp mnn-

aC«oat?

... .henever the loading political circles of the camp expressed any
*isa of that kind ani cc-amic tc-J it to Dr. Hovcn, Dr. Hevui usually com¬
plied with their wishes.

Q. Hcwcver, witness, ycu say th t, regardless of the interference with
the political prisoners, about six hundred Jews wero transferrul tc Bemburg

extermination; is that correct?


12. JarEiary-ifr-QJG-3-2-Kupper stein
Court So. 1


Q. You sty that, after they left in scoo transports Tor Bcmburg,
th-ir clothing, personal effects, false teeth and so forth, wore returned
t: 5uchcnwald; is that right?

I don't quite understand jrcur question.

Q. rt ftcr the inmates woro transferred to Bernburg for oxteroinntion,
thoir personal effects were retumod to Buchcmwald?

Yos.

Q. Aero c°ld teeth and false limbs includod in those offocts that wore
returned to Buchcnwald?

These personal bdonjinga went to : room md I don't know what
* happened to then. The dd, I'n sure, was then sent to Borlin.

Q. .Jid you say, witness, that tho hospital records show that theso
Jews diod of natural causes In tho canp itself?

A. rtv t is tho way they wore reported to havo died.

Q. ’.hat was the nationality of tho Jews? t

A. They wore Jews belonging tc owory nationality; twstly Germans,

,.us trims -rvd Idea, and there wore seme Czochs caong then too.

Q. Hew aany of these Jews wore docthly ill, witness?

A. Ifcst of thoso prisoners wore not in tho hospital os sick persons.

The last transport cent; inod o total of 15 or 2) people, end you could not
3ay th: t theso people woro doothly ill.

Do you know of any casco, witness, of the uxternination of inmates
jufforln; with tuberculosis?

A. Yes; in the year of 1941, there was a largo scale action. lie had
r.coivod a so-callod "inv.-lid" transport froa Dauchau, rnd the cacp was
full cf theso people. Then, in about July 1941, an ccUcn started which was
conducted acstly by Dr. Sisen. Theso inor.tes idle, it was concluded, were
afrUcted with tuberculosis, vcrc accepted for create_nt in the hospital
«!..n.ver they reported for treat&jit, and then killed by injections cf cvipan f

Q. Witness, approximately hew many were killed with these injections
in the tub credo sis acticn.

... I cannot Jve ycu the exact number, but there were approximately


Ik Jtamsry-^i- 0 JG- 3 ->-*uppar«tcia
Ccarfc So. 1

A. Can you estimit.., frca your observations, hew nany cf these people
Ti^ru inourchly ill frca tuberculosis?

... Me doubt the percentage of the tuberculosis-sick was very high in
the Cw?p, but the largest amount cf these people wore only undernourished
a»J, in better living conditions, could have been saved without any doubt.

Q. '.itn^ss, this Dr. risen, who worked on this extermination of tuber¬
cular cases, — was ho a subordinate of Dr* Heven?

A. ..s I knew. Dr. Hovtn at that tlac was the first canp physician. Dr.
sison uas always tho second coop physician.

Q. Vitr.ejs, goin^ back for e moment, to th. transfer of inaotes as a
result of th. work cf this ccaxadssicn or delegation free Burlin, tho first
transport thst left in tho sumcr of 19A1, will you tell ua whet was the
acticnality of tho people included in that transport?

rt . Ycu nean the first transport?

Q. That's ri^ht.

... ,.t th-t tico thero were only Ccraans. 1 cannot raaonbor having soon
fer-igner among then. ;.o wore then not concerned with Jews. Vo hod tho
iepr.asion that o new gas was tried out in that caso, and that, for thot
[.urposo, persons wero selected when they wanted to clininoto — mostly social
criainals.

Q. :.’ow, witnoss, did Dr. Hoven evor personally kill any inoates in
the he opi tel barrack?

A. Yes.

Q. In connection with Dr. Hoven's killings, did ho kill inmates who
"ere, supposedly, unable to live swch Ion er?

... Yos.

.. In what manner did ho kill th.se sick irea:tos?

... By way of injections.

'. ore any of these inmates suffering fraa an incurable disease?

... Ircbably only a «u-.n part of then, and I'a sure th't oost people
cculd h-ve been saved under more favorable conditions.

'1. bore these ins tes laborers, mostly suffering frca nrlnutriticn

163J


-.•i jehaustion?


12. J?jTuary-K-DJG-3-^.-Kuppcrstcin

* C-'JTt He. 1


A. Yea; nest cf th«o.

Q, H(M did Hoven get than, in order to kill thee?

,.i Either these persons were treated at a hospital for scac time, or
th^y reported for treatment, or else they were found in a state of collopso
anl brought to us.

Q. Thm, I take it, witness, that the hospital was i a very crcwdod
ccaditic® at th t time?

... The hospital wes always overcrowded. The furnishing cf the hospital
■pa insufficient, considering the amount of piti«its w« had to treat.

Q. Tnen, witnosa, would you say that inaotes reported to Hoven for
trectcent, eid instead of administering m.iical treatment, they wore killod?

n. That happenod in many casus.

Q, How many, cpprcrla-taly, were killed by Hoven with this procoduro?

Th r t is hard to say. It is very hard to define an exact number,
since this Jttunds ov^r a ported of two yoars. However, you can estimate
tht * fiimro of a thousand would not bo too lew.

q. hhat was tho n- tionality of the victims killod by Hoven?

... Every nationality.

.. New, witness, in connection with this prccoduro, did tha illegal
c:q- arnarooent have anythin? to dc with this work cn the p-rt of Hoven?

... Certainly. In the year cf 1942, there was o violent fight in tho
c-jsn 1 c-wuun the so-called -croons" end "rods"; that is, tho criminal and
political inmates. During the course of these fights, Dr. Hoven was influ-
mced b. the political irnrtos, and he bed tc giv. thca his support. ..
r.uii jt of criminal inmates were then eliminated in this manner, and lest
their liv,.s. Nc doubt, it would have be-. very bed fer the time if Dr. Hovon
hid net suppertod these political powers in the camp, end I do net believe
that the era? would have been in a position to save another 2D,(XX) people.

If the criminal inertes w-uld have assumed pewor ft that time.

Q. New, witness, I don't believe you understood qy last question. In
:.r. -.cticn with Hov«n's Wi tli ng the people who were suffering free exhaustion
-«i --lautrition, did the illegal camp management have any ccnnecticn with


th t particular procedure?


1 sy.


IU Jesus ry-If-DJG*3-5-Kupp erst ein
Ccurt Hoi 1


The illegal JKnageaent had ncthing tc do with that.

Q. in other words, witness, tho 1,000 cr sore incites who were sick
needed nodical treatnmt, and whe were ready tc be killed by Hcvcn, on
the initiative of Hovon, with no requests froa the political prisoners or
the illegal ceop nanagcccnt; is that right?

... Yes; certainly. Tho political carp aanajaaint h ! no intoiost in
seeing tc it that these people should die. In the cases whore valuable pccplo
were bbcx* then, people who were wall known, it wr.s alwrys possible to soo to
it that Dr. Hcvcn saved th«a, but there ronlly wasn't a possibility to care
for tho mass cf these huaan beings.

Q. Hew, witness, did Hover., in connection with this fight between tho
-reds" and the "rreens", «v„r kill to-called "traitors" at tho request of
the illegal cciap nanaruaent?

9 y request, is perhaps the'wrong expression, but he wr.s sc nuch
under tho influence cf tho political pliers in the cop, that those persons
who wort dangerous for the casp, tho so-called “spies", had tc be clirainctod

by hie.

Q. Did Hcvcn over idll llwaUs by order cf the Co*p Ccoacnder?

A. I R33UBO SC.

c;. Did ycu knew a aan by the nano of Gavrilovitch?

Tos.

C.. bill you tell tho Tribunal about the case cf Gavrilovitch?

Gavrilovitch was a .clish inaato, who cane froa ..uschwitz with a
. lich transport, end who saii that he w:.s a apccfc-list on typhus. But
we in later thet this tan was lying, an! it w.ull have resulted in a shetw
ftr tho ccap physicians and the other physicians there, if this aan was «vor
use! there as a typhus specialist. Dr. Hcvcn was very bitter qbcut it, rnd
therefore rsistreated that acn, so that, according tc -y knc.wle'.ro, Gavrilo¬
vitch died, a short peried thereafter.

Q. New, witness, hew nany inaetes wore killed by Hovoi, or by erder cf
Hcvcn, in the <rfap; that is, including all the incidents werhave covered this


That is a question which I cannot answer exactly.

I 6 J 1 O


lh Jan l:7-H-t-l-S— Leaser
Court Ho. 1


Q. .'culd you say that, a .-xdcratc fi.nrc v ale' be tr :r three thous¬
and _<ecpl«?

... It is p<-saiblo. that such a nnnjcr mbs actually reached b*.t ycu
list act forget that the '.oath flmrc c ul n.t have boon lower evon dis-
roctav'ing the activity -f Dr. Heron.

a. ‘hen, witness, y: u wculd say that 7 u cculd not actually say
tlic nuubor, but it was a vaat iuicr o. .>0 pic , killed by Hevon?

... He d ubt the fi-;;uro was vary hi£>.

:H. JUtDT: I have nc flirt iicr quest! ns, Yur Honor.

.RSSDSOTs ~ny ere as-elimination of this witness n the ert of
.efenac counsel?

CHCS3-^.b'J3i y.7I0H

■ ■■ — » — • • ••••

•jY bi:. 8L.W/.TIUS (C-unscl for Cofcn ant 5arl Brondt):

.'itness, j u havo suite ! that tho first transport cons is toe! of
cri'ii:. 1 .<rls rw.-s w.. eh *.ro sent to Ztar.&uiv. end ace or’in to y.ur
. ini n, or occcti'inc to tiio .pinion -f the or. ?, the o ;>lo in this
tavns; :-t uoro Intoa&ri for as export cats. Cn what .'.id you ' aso tlda .
r/ini n?

... I taw y stated that inmtor s oonsrorsati r. f

C-- . .'ere til' actually watclw ! U aso la by _aa. In a iti .1 wo mTU-'o
cencluai ns which w_rc absolutely just .'lot!.

0 .. .all, ycu did net establish that j vrii^nts were only tho

fact that the die *. by as?

... Certainly, ' ut the selection f tl- vie tins lc! u3 to arrive at tho
e tnclusi n that especially pc pla f low .cntality were selects'. an' that
s no o rt f an u.pcrincnt i;as carried ut.

Isn't i- .. ssi'L. to'.t to.se pc. lc were Just killed because they
were cri.Inals an., tint it was 1 no n a : Vinner in tfhich a nass kLllinc
"sually carried. cut?

... T:u have to be very can-dhl in usin t’;c r.rl 1 :rirdnal a in this
case ’ ceruse there was n: Judicial s .stem ”Mch . r. vidod. that a an sh.uld

1 6ia


lit Jan hl-i'.-L-Z-S - Lesser
C;urt Kc. 1


• c I-illrd in that -vainer. Mr non, n t oven a criminal porsen , .as lcj-
olly ia tl-at coup. Ho was cnly the re r. the '^sia cf preri us c nvicticna.

Q. ..ere there prisoners there nho \r-ro so-called "saferuar in;, cust-
ccV“ prisoners?

... Vhc a c -callc ‘ pccplo v ro in safeguard custody nl, arrived at
tie cij at a later ported. r hct trs ep.r .sLaatcly in tivc ,cr\r 1 ?J*J , in tho
spring of 19li3; before that there tt a r ; -nc single crlninal ..rlarner in
crap.

0. -at y u said that the or’.or care free trie «‘eich Crlrdnal toTflco in
Berlin?

0

loo. H: d~ubt tnc a iiisoi n f the s*-called safeguard inuatos cano
fr a the ,: cich Crininal u ffico'^drlin.

..itness, d y*u knew a nan *,y tho ar.ia cf Dictzsch?

*38.

U liat ’.inf activity i>- o::orcioo in t:«o ca-p?

... .hen I cnxia tc tho h spital, ‘'ictsoc i vas a olc.lc. He later bo-
ca~: buyer f r tho n-i-ds cf tho a’ol: an’ t. cn later, as a clerk, care into
tho eorinoatal ataticn. *han a liv civ!, iurt.il tho end of tho cacp, he
beesno a ■c-onlto;) Cape cf tic e^xsrluantcl c tat i n ter tho ale!;.

1. he. t did y u think ab ut hi;:?

... Very little.

•i. In txhat nay * , u ixsan that?

... I ti.iujit that he wia a .ran with ut scruples rh: was capable i f
aL:at anythin, aad 1 - 1 * f brutalities.

Q. y u kr u rf any visits in t!u ca p cf hi;;hly placed .xirsvnal-

itios?

.. i.c cap r«ns ften visit- ’ li h_r do lea ’ere; f r instance, tho
1 ir._ physician, w. L llin,, v.r. /ton ca*; int tlic cap. ..u tr.s the
'1 lea.‘ins SS fuehrer I porsona ly sa*.:. -N- f _r vis it d re vc. /ten wont
-Ire’.: ;>0, t- tills ‘‘yphus Institute.

'i. “id • u ovor see tho i>o.cn.!aat .Carl randt ir. the cop?

161x2


li. Jen l.T-ii-h-JS - Lesser
Cenrt .k m 1


A. He.

Q. Xcu did net sec hi=?

A. ..re yu sure yeu aro act -istrkc:.?

Qm 1 do net believe that I have st-r. bin.

A. How if biotzach weal', ’ey that he had hear.', that ranv’.t iris thoro
would this statcxnt be c-rrcct?

Q. It is ? ssiblo.

:a. :CHJCY: If the TMbvnd liloracil e-J.it. t- the qaostten. !b is
o’virusiy asking the witness t' teJ i/cther rat ho trail! believe
Diotasch if Dictzsch t.stifle:! tc a cort in fact bef re this drltunal. The
credibility ef Dictzsch is, ef c urec, -» tie t c Tribun:-! and not to this
aitrc,3B.

TIE . PJ-SIQJfT: Objocti a Y«-.nxIod. v.":iacl :*.ay procood.

0 . .ill yeu please anstw the qr~sti:n? I r-.'.at, o: you tldnk that
Diotssch.'s statcscont is credible?

A. It .'opondn rn That y u ash hia.

3. yu arc f the cpin-.on that iu. is n.t very ere 11 ' 1 - an. ho Icos
act li’.c tho tmth?

A. It is ssi'.lc thr.t he !».s r. tucfiwr f thir. s aVut which he wants
to !ccop quiet.

Di:. dIP.'/ATIVS: I have no furtiver questions.

X*.. :TlCSCK...!rrI, (C unsol -'r tku -afendant Vir.TCT. !OACX):

0, -itnoss, yu tR.ro s.icaldjv; at tic bejinnin -f y ur oaaidnaiirn
?i tic fact that yeu receive' i-isi ht -it the Acti-n Ui F 13 by 1 *!dn at tho
secret files; did I un'.crstcnl y.v. c.rrcctl. ?

• Yos.

Q. Y:u iara then s;:cakin f the 1 act diat in the suvcior f 1?!:1 a
“ reds si'n caste fre tho ..oich Criminal w lfico?

A. I assure ’, that it carte fr.:: tb- -oicli Crirdnal Offico.

..Yu assur.o that, "cw I T_,tcl t- ask yeu whether yu evor ear a
^idticn order in these secret fil-s :i t._ sj-cn th cf which tie trans; rt vrhicl

I6h3


li Jm 1*7-1'-WHT> Leaser
C art He. I


IT.? sent to Zemburr in the gunner of I9':l rrZcrec! by any Berlin Office?

... ..s I sail tefere , in tiw s-.t-xr 'X 12h3 : I '.ccanc tho first
clerk mZ anly Cr .i. that perioZ rrnerds iZ I hove the ; ssibility t; leek
into the files. Liter I f uoZ cirrus .n'cncc, I think, cf tho loadin';

ysicion with this ^r. *-’-rl and tr~: this c rrcsprn'enco it could bo scon ,

-a far as I canxo-icnhwr, that as sin f these Jews '..ts inton Zed. I c< picZ
this c-rrcs. n'cncc end I kept it in tix h.spitai. I S'.’c it ts cy C apc,

.usscr, tlio now Vico-, resident f -burin ia.

0. ••*»£ ceulZ it bo soon fr-: tliis c xv.s 'n'.cncc that any hi-phor
a;crxy in Z.rlin actually er -ro.l tills ret ;:?

;.. .s Zar as I can raxa.^r, y^s.

<i. Can ; u still rnv:' .r the a cj.cy that ordered tte.t?

;.. I ciicvc it was c rrca. nd.o.xo ith tlx leadin’: physician,

Dr. Lollinc.

Q. -r. lxllinc?

A. fos.

0. ’ you soo any ccrrcs. n xncc 1 1 the •■cichsfuohror-So?

A. Vhcrc were corto in Zocr-cs of tlio -oichofuehror-SJ ccntainc * in this
correspondence but I cannot raaailor h-.vin n .en aivt- ln*; with raferonco to •
this action.

Q. "ocs tho scat h:l true in tlx car . f tho Jewish action, that is,

tilth


16Ui

I


li. Jan. LESSER

Court No. 1


reference to the Jewish action you found no order where you could see fron
whore the order originated?

A. Do you nean those invalid transports to Bemburg?

Q. Yes.

A. I an sure that this was ordered by a higher agency.

Q. 3ut you did not see an order?

A. 1 can not now exactly renoaoor this correspondence but it could
clearly bo »*»n thit this action was planned and ordered.

Q. But I was interested in what agency this order originatoc fron and
that is sooething you cannot tell ee?

A. No, I can not.

Q. Thank you, I have no further questions.

DR. GA'.LIK (Counsel for the Defendant Hoven):

Q. hitness, do you know Dr. Ko-on?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know hia well?

A. Yos.

Q. Sinco whor. do you know Dr. Kogon?

A. I aado his acqueinUnco in the year 194.0 in tho c:.ap after he
arrived there in tho yor.r 1933; ®vor sinco then I kr.ow hin vory woU and
wo am friends.

Q. Do you think that he is a credible personality?

A. Yos.

C. Thank you. I now case to another point. You signed an affidavit
for the Prosecution, is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. In what language did you sign this aifidavit?

A. I saw it in English and ir. Ceram but I know English sufficiently well.

Q. Now will you please answer =y question— in what language did you
Birr. Liis affidavit?


Is English your aother language?
A. No, German. idliS


u. Jar.. 47-!Hwfc-6-SB- LESSER

Court Ha. 1


Q. Do you know tho English language?

A. Sufficiently well in order to understand the affidavit.

Q. thereupon is your know .edge based?

A. What knowledge do you naan,—of English?

Q. Yes, of the English language.

A. I learned English in school end I later studied it at the University
end then I further learned it...

Q. Wo 11, now, toll no how cany years did you actually study English

at school?

A. Six years.

q. how nervy yaars did you study English at tho university?

A. For throe years.

UR. UcH/dfEY: four Honor, I cannot soe what pertinenco tho knowledge
tho witness has of tho English language hue to do with this caso. Tho affidavit
which ho cade out hao not boon submitted to the Tribunal and will, of course,
not bo. I think wo are Just wasting tL'jc interracting the witness about
his knowledge of tho Sn t Iish lanugo ond 1 thorofore object to this last
examination.

THE PRESIDENT: Objection ovorruled.

Q. How long did you study English?
a. For six yoors.

C. Until what year?

A. Until cy satriculation.

Q. Ant; at the university?

A. For approximately three years.

Q. Until what year?

A. Veil, until 1925, end I lator reed English.

Q. And to what extent did you busy yourself with tho English language
alter thtt date?

A. I read English literature.

;. I now present to you this affidavit, in the Gorman language, and I
should like to ask you to translate this affidavit for ce into English, in
order to test your knowledge of thc^vglish language.


U. Jar.. Ul-iL-Lk-7-S><- LZSS31

Court No. 1


DR. GA’..LIK: Ur. President, this can bo faun'* in Docuraont Soak-
12 in the English language; it is tho affidavit of Roachild.

THE PRESIDENT; Is there a copy of this document book 12 an tho
Socrotrry's desk?

DR. Gn..UK: It is on page 54 of the English Docuaent Book No. 12.

]&. UcHnNEY; If the Tribunal pleeso, I do not like to take up
tine caking these objections. I havo objected to the aatori-lity af the

.. . , , . ff nr liah but since that is boing

oxviinstion of tho witness's knowledge of a

adaitted, I would like to raise objection to this test. The affidavit was
signed in English and presonted to tho witness in English. It is obviously
no tost of his ability to road and understand the affidavit in English by
asking hin now to translate out of Gcraan into English and if we wanted to
call up oxacplos wv could do that out of our own translation department.

THE PRESIDENT: It appears to the Tribun' 1 that a fair tvet of the
■Itausa's knowledge of English would be to submit to him tho English
affidavit and roquost him to translate it into Gcrnon.

3T DR. GA UXs

q. j)o you think you will be able to translate this affidavit into
terra n?

i. It will be difficult for mo to translato this into Gcman.

Q. Please confine yourself to answering ay question with yes or no.

Aro you ablo to translato this affidavit into English?

A. No, not that.

Q. Thank you. Now I rja giving you tho English text.

JUDGE S23RIMJ: Couns i, at what pago does this appoar in the
Zn-lish Docucont Book rnd ir. the Doutsch?

DR. Gn'.iLIK: That is page 54 in the German...I am sorry, page 54
ir. tho English.

THE PRESIDENT: On what page of tho Gorman Docuaent Book is this
affidavit found?

DR. GnuLIK: Page 57, Ur. President.


14 Jan 47-M-IH-6-l-rtaloy

C-ort So. 1


SHE PEoSISIST: The witness will proceed.

SEE VITSiSS: Sfu.ll I start translating!

q. Tea.

A. Affidavit. I, Ferdiarnd Hoechild, under orth, depose the following
«d declare:

On the 11th of April, ISC-,, — that la vroxy;. I v»a turn In 190?.

I vra born lr. Frankfurt on tho Hair., and started natlonrl economy at the Uni¬
versity, cocpletlng ny education. I worked at e nerchant flrn in Frankfurt.
Before the yerr of 193-. I va.a not active In «jyr political circlee. In the
year of 1934 I became antedated with the German Communistic Harty and became
vithin the frcaevork of vritix* leaflets vlth reference to the oia-
trertnent of political priaonora.

Co the 22nd of Kerch 1936 I vaa arrested. In Kovcabor 1935 I vr.e sen¬
tenced to three yoara hard labor on c charge of fcifih trecaon. I vaa nlrccd in
the prison hoapitrl at Vehlhoiden, and on tho 2nd of April 1938 I vns trans¬
ferred to the iuchcnvrld Concentration Crc-p. Free thlo date on I vea clraai-
fisd as t political prisoner and reni.lr.od innate of the ouchenvrld Conccn-
trrtl.n Carp until the literntion of the camp ty tho -werlcrr.e in April 1946.

?cr the first year In the cuchcnvnld Concentration C -.p I performed manual
labor. In the summer of 1939 I vra claimed to the prisoners' hoanitnl ao a
c’/nrk.

<v Vlll you r.o on to the next pc*o, to the aodlcrl crx rloenta.

A. Ktdical experiments /1 the Suchenvald Concentration Crap. At the
I-ucher.vrld C.ncentr» ti-n Camp no die 1 1 experiments Jt typhue and vlme took
place in clock 46. I received iy inf-rna.tiun on the hroionince ir. cloak 46
fr. . v/rioua po-pla, vh. ^ri h -iru-lly worked in my office and v«*re later trans¬
ferred t- clock *5. A8 far p.a I cat renumber the names of aor.o of theae
<i-5le rre c.a follows: Alfred Leikam, StutVcrt, r'rrl crauer, Halle, the Crmo
•i elide -6, Arthur Dietsech. Also I v r a in my cepeclty c« secretary and clerk
lo c.-cp hoapital end was pieced in charge jf coney teloxy;ir.«; to patients located
In click -.6. Since I had theae personal obligations, I had also to visit


^lock 46 on vrrl-us occasions.


1616


Court So. 1

14 Jan 47-K-S-2-3-X-Kaloy (£30


Q, bitneas, doesn't It rean in Goman "to the administrator of
personal property; due to holding these personal belongings," it Bays
here?

A. Yea, holding these personal beicngingc That is all right.

Q, Please continue.

A. Block 46 vhb established as an experimental station for research
on spotted fever and virus, Dooeaber 1941.

THE PBiSIIEST: The Tribunal is of the opinion this test has cro-
ceedod far enough. It has foraed its ovn opinion concerning the
knowledge on the part of the witness as to the English language. V 0
will proceed to something else.

Q, Vitnoso, you stated that tno defendant Hovou In tl.c year 1941,
that is the spring of 1941, became the first camp p.’iyaiolan. I no~ sug¬
gest to you that the defendant Eovtn only in July 1942 becane the first


casp physician


A. I cannot rocolloct the exact date when Dr. Hoven becano the


that

first ca&p physic .an. at ary rats I do know/during tho action or Honor
which took place in the suaaer of 1941 Dr. Hoven had already clayed the
leading part in the hospital. As to the exact date when he did becono
the firet ennp physician I couldn't toll you.

0. In the spring of 1941 there vac another porsen who wae first


esap physician?

A. It is pcusible. I cannot recollect. If you could tell me tho
person?

Q. Do you knew Dr. Blanka?

A. Yes, I forgot. Dr. 31anke was physician after Dr. Popltsch.

I forgot him.

v Is it correct the defendant Hoven only in July 1942 beenne tho


first camp physioltn?

A. I cannot give you the exact date. I cannot tell you exactly

when Dr. 31anko vac transferred.

Q. Is it possible the date of July 1942 is correct?

A. It could be. I cannot say so exactly.

1649


Court So. 1

14 Jan 47-K 5-3~IHH-Haloy (IS!)


Q, But you vould adait a possibility, wouldn't you?

A. Veil, I do know that Dr. Blank* was earn physician.

Q, 3o you know that Dr. Eovan was at first the Strndortarrt
physician and had nothing to do with tha carp?

A. That is net quit* correct. Later the carp physician and Stand-
ort physician wore amalgamated.

Q, That is correct. But I Just want to suggest to you that the
activity of the Staedort physician has nothing to do with the camp?

A. Yes, that is perfectly correct.

Q. Vhat were the tasks of the Standort physician?

A. The Standort physician had to look after the SS and had to
exercise a certain control function over the carp physician. At tines
when the caap physician wasn't available-

Q, That doesn't interest ae. I want to know the pore activity of
the Standort physician.

A, I don't know exactly what the Standort really did. At any rate
he had to cdninlcter to a large circle of peoole, even outside the conp.

Q. I now cone to the selection of the subject for the typhus expori-
sents. In this connection I an going to put to you the testimony of Dr.
logon, who said something entirely different than you did. On this oege
197 cf the Oercau record the witness Dr. logon stated that the selection
of the experimental subjects did not agree at various tires end he


Coots So. 1 .

14 Jan 47-K-7JC—S-la-kaloy (Z3C)


tail there vara four different methods. She first one, that la during
tha early period, there vara voluntary subjects. These vara the first
tvo experiments. Secondly. Sr. Ding asked the camp physician or the SS
caep adnlnlstratloa to put peraona at hie disposal for the experiments.
That la caep phyalolan and SS adnlnlatration. The third method was that
the Helch cr In Inal police office vaa taking charge of it, and during the
last exporloenta fron various concentration canps and prisons in Germany
tranaporto vara aent to Suchenveld.

Q, I aa nov asking you, la this description of the witness Eogon
correct?

A. Certainly Dr. Eogon Bust know such sore about these things than
I, since for years he vaa Dr. Ding’s secretary and as such tas Informed
about these methods.

Q, Veil, I vut speaking about the first tvo experiments.

A. Yes.

q, And if I understand you correctly, witness, you said that Dr.
logon, as secretary of Dr. Ding, has more knowledge about this matter,
shout the selsction of the experimental subject, is that correct?

A. Yes, no doubt.

q. And then I further understood you to say as far as this testi¬
mony differs from the testimony of Dr. Eogon, you who really did not havo
the some knovlodge as Dr. Eogon since you wore not in Block 46 were er¬
roneous and you would prsfer to believe the statement of Dr. Eogon.

A. That oiCy could refer to facta of Block 46, tut I really know
Ir. Horen better than Dr. Kog:n; then since Dr. Hoven came, the activity
vae In our block. With reference to typhus experiments rr. Eogon knows
aore about them than I do.

q. Vitness, do you further know that Dr. Hoven, if he would con¬
cern himself with the selection of experimental subjects for the exocri-
aeat, he did so at the express cocnar.d of the legal ceap administration?
I want to put to you that this is what the witness Eogon concerned, or.d
I ask you to consider this vhen making your reply.


1651


14 Jan 47-X-7JC-5-2a-Xaloy (EX)
Court I


A. It la possible that the demand of the legal caap management, the
political leadership of the camp, played a part during this selection,
but that can only concern a part of these persons who were used for
theso experiments. It could only concern suoh personalities vho could
ha7e endangered the caap. This personality, however, existed. I per¬
sonally had nothing to do with the selection, and I personally did not
lent* the leading people in the can?. Eow well Dr. Kovon knew these lead¬
ing people in the caap I do not know. I doubt whether he knew then all
very well.

Q. That is just what I tinted to ask you, witness. Considering
the circumstances in the concentration caap yen cannot say that overyone
knew the legal caco management, and conversation %fcich wno carriod out
with defendant Hoven with the legal caap adainletration - you did not
attend them, did you?

A. Certainly I wasn't present by a lot of things.

Q. Then if it was concerned here that the defendant Roven, as fu¬
st he selected pxrt of the subjects for these esperlaents, did so at tho


request of the legal caap
A. Tos, certainly.


, can that be correct?


Q. I don't know vhere you got your information from. Did you get
it froa Dr. Eogon?

A. I don't quite understand you.

Q. bhere did you have the Information? Listen, I just want you to
answer ay quostlocs, and nothing else.

A. There was a possibility in this typhus experinental station to
save people, people that were looked for by the caap adainletration. It
often happened that they disappeared and then often Dr. Kogon agreed to
save these people. That is <piite clear to ae.

Q. It is then correct, or you at least cannot exclude the fact that
the defendant Hoven, as far as he is concerned hinself with the selection,
lid so with the recuest of the legal camp aanageaert?

A. I thinh it is possible that he considered certain of their wishes.

IHZ FESSIDZST: At this tiae the Tribunal will recess until 1:30.

1652


14 Jan 47-A-UAA-6-l-Mehan - a

Court No. 1


CT COPT


AFTERNOON SESSION

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 14 January 1947)


TOP, MARSHAL: The Tribunal ia again In seaaion.

CROSS EXAMINATION (Continued.)

3T DP.. CA'TLIX: Counsel for Defendant Hoveo:

Q. "fitness, you were then speaking about the death reports.

Is It correct that the death reports were issued by order of Dr. ing,
or his superiors, or don't you know that?

A. As far as I know, there was an order of sooo superior agency
that the typhus experiment s should not come to public knowledge
and that no doubt was an order cooing frc* higher agencios, so that
typhus was never mentioned as the cause of death.

Q. I now ccrao to another point. Ho you know, witness, that the
Nurses teingartoer, Rudolf Schwarz, the laboratory assistant, Karl
Brnuer and you were supposed to be sent to the same carp by ordor of
Demandant Koch and that was a camp rfiere «lalter Kramer and Karl
F*lcha were killed?

A. I am now hearing about that for the first tine i nd I am now
hearing for the first time that I was in the sate danger. At the time
Karl Folchs a»d ^lter Kraeaer were arrested, there was only Adolf
Schwarz and Arthur Dietsch present; the others wore not.

4. Tou, therefore, don't know that the Defendant Moron hod tried
to provent that?


A. No.


C. I now cane to Euthanasia, U F 13 and I believe, witness ,
th t considering the lmgth of tine that has elapsed in the meantime,

mixed up. I should like to put tho following
that two actions, 14 F 13,

year of


1653


Court Ho. 1


1941 and the other in the year of 1942; do you know anything about that?

A. I have already stated that in the year of 1941 there were
• *c transports of original and partly political prisoners and they
were sent on the transport for that action and then there was another
one in the year of 1942, in the spring; they were Jewish invalids
^counting to approximately six hundred. I think Dr. Kogon' e statement
also referred to these two transports.

Q. ell, I ac not referring to the individual transports and I
ax not referring to Dr. Kogon, but what I mean to say is that there
were two orders; one was in the year of 1941 and after this first
order of the year 1941 for this action, 14 P 13, "ere to

be transferred?

A. I did not see these orders. I have already said that only in
the year 1943 u a cleric, I had an occasion to mceivo insight into
secret filoo. I oorely saw this correspondence with Dr. tisole.

q. From your answer, I tako it that the statement ttat Dr. Kogon
made in that rogard could bo ccepletoly correct and that you from
your own knowldgo, cannot give us tho necessary statements; did I
understand you ojrrcctly?

A.It say woll be th; t Dr. Kogon did not receive certain
infonaation ihon working with Dr. king.

r 4 . During this firot action, in tho year of 1941, tho inaatuo
wore solocted by a Berlin coexaission and not by tho Defendant Hoven,

A. Certainly; at this time it was this action against sexual
criminals and political crloinala.

q. And tho Jews were to bo added to that?

A. No; I do not know anythirg about that. I know that during
this transport there were no Jows present.

Q. Quiuo right; I was Just cooing to that and I wanted you


1654


U, Jan 47-A-MAA-6-3-Mchn - S w

Court Ho. 1

to confirm that fact. But, you consider it possible that according to
that order, in the year of 1941, all Jens were to be transferred,
es it Mas confirmed by the witness. Dr. Kogon?

A. I think it is entirely possible, howevor, I do not know of
this order.

Q. And now you, yourself, sai$ that you, from your own knowledge,
know that Jews were actually wot transferred?

A. Not during this first action; no, during this first action,
as far as I know, tbore were no Jews.

q. well, do you also know - and that is something that Dr, Kogon
ccnfiracd - that this was only due to the work of the Dofendant Hovon
with reference to orders of the ill-'gal camp managers out in collaboration
with tho Defondant Hova n working against this action, li. F 13?

A. I don't know tho collaboration of tho Dofendant Hovon with
the caap illegal smnagieont v"ry exactly. I aa sure that Dr. Hovon
oust have boon able to postpone the nattor, because it is a fact
that in 1942 cheao invalid Jews were actually transf«!irod, but a largo
nuatoor of these Jews remained in Buchonwald; yes, these that wore fit
for work.

Q. And beyond that thero wore others, as Dr. Kogon confirmed. Dr.
Kogon told us about a ao-called building action which was intundod to
save J«iws?

A. But th?t was much later. It was approximately in the autumn
of 1942 and in 1943" that all Jews were trained aa buildors end wore
then sont to Auschwitz and there a large part were exterminated; but
that was ix>t really an extermination action as it was the case in
B-;rnburg, but this was one of the many transfers into other camps. Tho
fact that fcransfor to Auschwitz meant to many Jews was obvious,

but I do not believe that the transfer of Jews to Auschwitz had any¬
thing to do with the order 14 F 13.

Q. I am now askii^ you, is it not possible that you are

1655


14 Jan 47—.'»-i£AA-6-4-¥eeh an - rm
Court Noi 1

asking an error? Try to refresh ycur memory and think about it very
carefully, witness, because Dr. Kogon confirmed that this action
referred to 14 P 13?

A. I don't believe it.

Q. However, you are not excluding the possibility?

A. But, there were two separate actions.

Q. *111 you please answer ny question? fto you want to exclude
the possibility?

A. If this action ....

Q. lou can answer the cpestion with "yea" or "no"?

A. I cannot answer it with "yes" or "no", just like that.

Q. Cno meant, but I take it that you do not exclude the possibil¬
ity 100 percent?

A. No, that is correct.

Q. 0o you know that during this first action, 14 F 13, the
Defendant Hoven selected, or 1 ter saved Jews, Czechs and Poles by
receiving a thesis on anthropological measurements from Dr. lolling,
and (here did that take place; in tho pathological department?

A. Yoa.

Q. But what detail in Buchcnwald are you referring to; I am
caking if you k'«ow about it?

A. -fall, the possibility exists that pooplo were actually savod
by Dr. Hoven.

Q. Now, is it furthor correct thet during this first action in
the year of 1941, the Defendant Hoven was not yet the first cnap
physician? I am reminding you that at the beginning of no 1 cross-exao-
ination you pointed out it was Dr. Blacke.

A. I know that in the autumn of 1941 rfien the two ‘-ospital Capos,

elter Kraem-r e«l Karl Feichs were arrested, at that tine Dr. Hoven

hed not yet the power to save them. He would have done so if ho could.

You could collect freo that that at th?t time he

1656


14 Jan 47-A-4LU-^-5-*«han - 3W
Court Mo. 1


was not yet the first caesp physician, although I do not reeosber
exactly who was the casp physician at that tine, I thought it was
Dr. Blancke.


1657


14 Jan 47—A-JP-7-l-#inabnek - SH
Court Ho. 1

Q. Until what tine do you think Dr. Blancke was caap physician?

A. Dr. Hovno only became ca=p physician in 1942, but at least
at th* beginning of 1942 he had a vary strong position in the camp
sinew at that tine he included hie self into this fight between the
criainal end political prisoners. s far as I know Dr. Blanche was the
so-called standart-physician and the first cacp physician at that tine,
but he was only the first caap physician in a noednal character. The
real leadership of the caap was at that tine in the hands of Dr. Hoven
already.

0. You further stated, ifltnoss, that the second transport did
not leave, and th»t was duo to the influence of the Defendant Koven.

-ill you pleaso doscribo to the Tribunal what the IXjfondant Hoven
actually did in ordor to prevent the departure of the second transport?

A. As far as I an informed, in Nov other and Docmabor of the year
of 1941 a further transport was intended and in this transport there
won. soc.n leading political 1 mates included which apparently oidangored
the cacp adainistrotion. The fact thet a largo influence ms exorcised
on Dr. Hovsn at th»t tiw i» knom to oo, or rather, brewac known to oo
and ns far as I found out. Dr. Hovon did not giro his approval for this
action. At any rate this action then roally was dropped entirely.

0. How many persons did this transport envulop?

A. I cannot say that since we could only find out thu arount of
people in tha transport when the lists wore cocpilod.

Q. But there w*ro nany hundrods?

A. Yes, certainly there should have been nany hundreds.

Q. And it is therefore correct to say that owing to the intorfur-
•nce of the Defendant Hoven reny hundred Jews wnro saved froo certain

death?

A. Sot only Jews, but at that tine wo were r.ainly conc«rr»d with
Aryans, and it is quite sure that Dr. Hoven did an enormous aoount of
work in favor of the instates in tbo caap .

Q. Perhaps you can tell the Tribunal about further services of tho

1658


r


14 Jan 47-A->JP-7-a-f»inabuck - sw
Court So. 1

Defendant Hoven for th* benefit of the caap?

A. * know that ma'y -oabers of French and Dutch origin who were
to be aont to Katxweiler in this so-called Night and Fog Action wore hold
back by him. Aooug then thero was the IXitch painter. Flak, the IXitch
sports instructor, Jan Robert, and a mater of other Frenchman. No dcubt
they have to tha/ik Dr. Horen for being saved.

Q. And it is further correct that the Defendant Horen when saving
these foreigners risked his own life?

A. I aa sure it was rery dangerous for hia.

f>. I now case to the second action, the second action called 14 F 13.
lou were speaking, when examined, about a correspondence *hich referred
to Action 14 F 13. D o you know that this correspondence referred to the
second Action 14 F 13 in the year of 1942?

A. I hod re. son to believe thet this correspondence referred to
all such actions.

Q. ’Tell, how large really ns this correspondence? How nany letters
did you roally see?

A. There were about two or three copies.

Q. Just two or three copies, ’'’hat year did those copies can* fran?

A. As far as I rmeober they case Tran the year of 1941.

Q. Again?

A. 1941.

C*. 4sll, is there a possibility that they roally originate from
1942, or do you want to exclude that possibility?

A.That I cannot say with certainty any longer.

Q. °o you further know that this second action, 14 F 13, which ims
ordered for the year of 1942 was not actually carried through in Buchon-

-nld?

A. I only know that the i-rralid Jews were eerrt away to Semburg, and
that they were all exterminated there. I don't know whether this action
was planned against all the Jews or only against the invalids, or

whether this action


1659


14 Jan 47—A-JF-7-3-* inabuck - St

Court Ho. 1

■as Just confined to the invalids through the interference of Dr. Hoven.

Q. *od you >ieither k'ow— well, you only k<&m the transports, but
you don't know whether these transports belonged to the first or to the
second action of 14 F 13?

«. ?fc, we assueed that it was all concerned with the santo action.

Q. You were speaking about the tuberculosis action and you said in
that connection correctly that this action was conducted by Dr. Eisele
but you further said, "/s far as I know, during the first action, the
Defendant Hovai woa the firet caap physician".

", ^ince at that tiae I had forgo-ten the none of Dr. Biancke; he
could have been the first cosp physician at that tins.

Q. You were then speaking about the killings. The Defendant Hoven
partly adnits these killings but is it correct that these killings had
nothing to do with the Action 14 ' 13?

A. I don't believe so because these were aoasures which were a
habit in the coop.

Q. "ould you Just repeat your answer?

Q. I don't believe that these cirrent killings have anything to
do with o*y action like that.

Q. So you answer is no ?

A. Well Just repent your question once more.

Had these killings anythin to do with the Action 14 v 13?

A. Those killings did not only take place during the tiae then
this action w-s running.

Q. Ifay I 'interrupt ? Hnybe you can first answer oy question with
yes or no, and then givo a reason.

A. *ell then, no.

Q. The Defendant Hoven cainteins th'.t he only killed persons by
recuest of the legal canp rvma^wwnt. Tho witness Kogon confirmed that
fact. He cited one c»se here in detail and he made it very clear that
it was necessary to kill


1660


14 Jan 47-WP-7-4- Hinabuck - 3*

Court Bo. 1

persona in order to save the majority of the decent innates. He described
in detail the case of Katinier* Kurowsks, and the witness Logon further
spoke about a state of emergency in the caag>,®d I an now asking you, can
you say with certainty that ptrrons wore killed without it's being ordered
b7 tho legal camp management or conducted by the legal canp management,
or can you merely say that, "I don't know it".

A. But I do know it.

MR IfcHANEY: If the Tribunal pleaae, I think the witness is entitled
to know tha t he ie being questioned with respect to information given by
the witness Kogon; that Kogon teatified at a minimus that, so far as he
knew, the Defendant Hoven had not ccoaitted killings unconnected with re-
ccaaendations made by the illegal camp government, kit Kogon very clearly
stated in addition that ho was not personally info mod on the activities
of Hoven in the caap hospital, and he therefore was not testifying with
rfspec’t to alleged killings by Hoven in tho canp hospital. The witnoss
hore was in the cae*> hospital and has testified as to killings by Hoven in
the canp hospital, and I therefore siixait that it is unfair to tho witness
to put Kogon's testimony to hi* in the fora which defense oounaol has dono.

THE PRESKCTT: There is merit in counsel's objection. If this witness
is to be cross-examined at further length, the questions being based upon
tho testimony of the witr*ss Kogon, the witness should be penal tied to
re-id tho testimony given by Kogon in order that ho may see exactly what
Kogon testified to. This cross examination has oontinued at considerable
length on mattors which do *ot appear to be particularly material, with
a great deal of repetition in the cross examination.

The Tribunal does not desire in any "ay to limit counsel in the
cross examination of a witness, but it is not the purpose of cross exam¬
ination to indulge in arguments with the witness. Counsel may proceod.

Q. (By Dr. Gawlik) Tou further mentioned the case of Dravinovitch?


A. Gavrilovitch was the


Ill Jan-A-J ?-V$-Kinabuc k
Court No- 1

Q. tens you pres.nt during tl^t incident?

A. I c~ »' thon tiv.- orac&t Bv. jn wca carried fr or, th_ room.

4 , Veil, your reply ioj no, that you only arrived thereat tho tiiao ho
was carried away?

A- I know about this era.. I was told about it. I saw how this ann was
walking inside, .and th.n I had to leave the roes for sane ofiicial reason, and
as I l~ft again, this aan was carried out.

-ell, if I understand ycu correctly you wer n't there wh>n he wna
alstroatod?

A. No.

Q. TToll, isn't there a possibility —

'U. OA LIKi bell, I have no further .;u<stions about this c as..

T :Riil r ®iT» Is there any further cross examination 6 f the- wit no 8 8
on tr*. jr.rt of any of thod.fcr.se counsel?

C:tC6S XA.' H'ATJCN
31 Dfl. Jd ZSLt (Counsel for Defendant Oc-rakcn)

3. ’ itrv<ss, you know thnt in :uchunva.ld in collection with tho typhus
experiments thoro w.xx two stations in th. carp, one research or clinical
ot'tion in Dlock Ii6, and then tiv. .reduction station in clock 50?

A. Y-8.

3* 0o you know anythin a > ut the faot that in January 19U3# according
to an -ntry in tho diary of Din^., preparations x.r^ made for tiv. roduction
block 50, and that at that tisv the experimental station ch-ng.d its narao
fror - exp.riajntal station to dcjxirtoent for tho research of tyohuc .and virus?

A. I den't know anythin; a br ut tho davclopaont of this instituto sinco
Or. Kogen *3 much b.tUr inforvd cb ut these natters than I an-


1.62


1L JarWi-JP-fl^l-Putty
Court !io. 1

Q. tfoll, in that cas- you can rx.ich.r say anything about tho l-ttcrhaad
of tho Institute before or afUr that .-orlod of ti_-<?

.U h-.n s^cictly this Institute received that nsne. I can't tell you

exactly.

Q, Did you youraolf s_th- Dof-ndant, Gonsken, at any U - in buchenwaje

A. No,

DR. 11H:3Li Thank you. I have no further questions to tho witness.

T'2 htASHSHTi Any furth_r cross oxr—ination of this witness?
q-a ;oune-l for tho Prosecution any oxxwination, rc-excaination of this withess

redirect? „ .

.Unr ii^TT StA IKATrCN

BY :R. H.UDT*

Q. itness, in eomwetion w.'th tJ is tubercular action, whether or not
Hoven was first or second cnap physician? i.as ho a higher-rnnkin lean or
doctor than Eis-lc?

A. T.9., certainly. Z/en b-for> Jj c !iciclly becaao tho first caop
physician lu. had decisive influence.

Q. .itness, and do I understand you clearly in answer to aif questions
ar.-J the quesLions of the Defense Couns-1 for Hoven that Hoven ael-cte’d tho
Jews in 19lil after physical exaninntion, that said Jews w_rc placed on' a list,
"hi that substantially Uk saac Jews on that list were later transferred in
191:2 to ernbur; for extern! nation?

A. Ho at least participate* duriri. tho eX^aination. It is possible that
tha lists at .ivat tiiu were still signed by Strndartonfuohror Br-ndt.

It. HARDY t I have no furtvr questions. Tour Hauer.

T' -K.GICHNT 1 Do any Defense Counsel desire to cross eXaiino this
witness upon th. testimony ho has just jiven?

TR. GA'LICX: I request puulssion to ask orv. question, your.'-ionor .

Ti2 PReAILErTi It will bo - ranted.

1363


1U Jan-AoJF-8-2-Putty
Ccwrt Ho. 1

RECROSS ~JLV 7KATICN

BY DR. GAIUJCKi

5, You said that the possibility existed that the defendant Hoven was
the Second comp physician during the TEC action — and I must correct myself
If I understood you correctly, you stated that during the T3C action Dr.

Blancke bed beer, the first ccsap physician at that tine. Icanwr asking you
did tho defendant hoven have tho possibility to prevent-tho TBC action which
was cnrrieC out by Dr. Liscl-? pitas- answ-r the qu-stion now with "Yes" or
"Ho".

A. No.

DR. a'i/LIKt Thank-you.

THE PRlSHStfT: The Tribunal has noticed during the past few minutes
3 ecu oppor-nt difficulty with tho - 1 -ctric lighting system in the courtroom.

If it should ha. en that the electric lights are extinguis. -d, ovoryono in
the covrtro? will remain quietly in his scat. The guards will imcdiat-ly stand
at thoir post .and ruaain standing tSwro. The witness is excus-d.

(Witness oxcused)

T1IS PT.-SnEIiT: The Prosocution nay procood.

DR. HC.HhALD: If it pleas- the Tribunal, tc-ould proco-d with tho proson-
tation of th. evidence on the euthanasia frogr*a ir. Book Ho. 1 5» I road
frea t .19 first page of the document book and offer into evidence Document No .
629-FS which will bo Prosecution .Exhibit 300, dated 3 July 19U0: "stamp:

Reich -nistry of Justice, 9 July 191:0, Lopnrtmunt: IIl/lV.

To the Roich i inister of Justice:

"I havu a schixophran- son in a urtteuo-rgian nental institution, I n
shocked about the following absolutely reliabL. information:

"Since sor.e w ks ins an- .croons nr- taken from the institutions nllogodly
on tli. rounds of military evacuation. The directors of th- institutions are
enjoin-d to absolute secrecy. -Shortly afterwards the relativ-s ar. informed
-rr.t tJvj sick parson had died of encephalitis. The ishes are avilabl- it Bo


U* Jan-A-JF-6->Putty
Court Ho. 1


desired* This is plain ssurder just as in the concentration ca=ps. This censure

V

uniformly connate s from the SS in Berlin* Tfv_ institutions dare not inf ore
th- authorities. Inquire at once at Rottoiunionstcr Schacs_nri_d, .inzortnl, n\1
in ''urttc* berg. Have the lists of tvo months ar,o submitted to you, check upen
t:.- inaatos rt-.o arc Ui-.ro now and ask where the missing persons v»nt to. For
s-ven years now this gang of murderers defiles the German nano* If ry 3on
is sir do red, woe! I shall take c~re the those crin-s will be published ir.
all foreign newspapers. Tho SS rjy d.ny it ns they always do. I shall donand
prosecution by tta public prosecutor.

"I cannot '.ive ny nan- nor tho institution whore ay son is, otherwiso
I, too, won't live aueh longer.

Hull Hitlor

Oh- rre 1 giorungsrat" — which means n
higher Ooverroont ofiicial — "M. At tho same tiao I write to Hitler.

(penciled note) To Spates S cretary Froislur with the request to collect such
letters. 10 July 1910.

I v.ant to turn now to Document 626-FS. Your Honor, that is on Pago 7 of
the Doeoa nt 3ook. I want to point out that DAcunont 626 — no. I

i.i sorry. Ms is on Page — I a* sorry. It is on Fnge 8 of tlx. Document Book.
Docu -nt 626-FS is identical vith Document NO-829, but by mistake wa only
partly included in the Docie:ent Book; th..\.fcre, I .an prepared to read 626-fS
»od I tti not going to introduce Doausunt 329.

Doeumuot 62o-JS will b- Prosecution Exhibit 331.

"r.u. iros_cutor - general. State>art, .iu ust 1, 191*0. To tho i ini3tor Df
Justice 0 tiv. ; v .ich, Berlin 8, ilhuln.tr. 6$. Reference 1 inforuation -about
unnnti ml r~~ t. oi inmates in asylais." In brack-ts: "GrafeOeck case.

Bnclosedt 2 copies. .

"Inadoition to ay resort of tlx. 15.7.191*0, *nd aftor ;-y reception by

Moratory cl i> t - U Dr. Fxvislcr on the 30.7.191*0, I send you herewith copies

of an excerpt fro a letter addrtssod to the tresident of tho Special Court

in St- ci^art, as well as of a private not- s-nt to oc. Both letters confim

165


li< Jan-A-JF-8-ii-Putty
Court Ho. 1


the fact that th, ayst«nous events which took placo in sooo nodical cstablish-
Bonts brou ht about a : trong agitation caon largo groups of jwoplc ind that
church circles particularly u-ddl- with the setter. If it rare to be confirmed
that —a wundid in the Tiorld ar as -11 as private patients, to rhoo thoir
relatives had still kept a faithful attachment, hhd boon submitted to such
r\ rx;isur-, I f_nr there would ensue frer. it v-.y serious consequences and an
unb-arcble position for th- Judicial a l.orities, unless the matter is very
soon nnc clearly settled oy lo^.l provis ons. I'croover, it ou^ht to bo con¬
sidered that the. -atter could be taken u. by on-qy propaganda. Furth-r on Gra-
fenock , which is a r- ou. esta.lisixi-nt wif.out coauunal cnar ct-r, poss-ssos
an own registrar's office (and appar-ntly c special crematorium, too) and
the nmorous and stereotyped dead certificates doliv-r-d thoroao well as
in 8<xiu ot...r ortablishr-nts in Saxony, ::r-nc\>nbirg and ..ustria — fron 60 to
70 since ay 19i*0 only hnv- be.n received Vr the prob-.t c-urt and court for
the prot-ction of ward in Stuttgart — struck the .authorities of th- voluntary
Jurisdiction.

"Tlua* I apply for instructions as to how I hav- to tackle thoso presont
and possibly* future information oases.

3y order Sign.d Holshantr."

I rmnt to introduce as th- next document Docinont 830 on Pago Ji.
lilt will be rrcs-cution exhibit 362, your Honors. "Copy.

".'or s-veral w->-ks nc* th-r- are rcioro in th- localiti.s sround
Graf-n-ck t v t -v-rything could ■> t be. -11 right in the castlo. lho Mono for
itopL- Castle Grnfonock th-r- has b—n dissolved, and no* tho nou area
surr ur.din, ta- ntiro co-.pl-x is isolated by the SS. Only now and then busses
with sick p-rsons can h- s-.n arriving. They are said to be pati-nts fro i tho
-;.t 1 I -stit-ti:ns ZwicfalUn and iro.< si. liar institutions who are wrought
to t;u astle, who w-ru never soon again, and whor one is net p-rm tted to visit
either. frequently* ascending £ ok- cr uf-s surpicior,. .it first t - population
sup;- 3ed that it was a question oX th- -“ti-r.is b-in. us-d as test suoJoCts for


Hi Jar>»W>6-5-FMtty
Court N 0 . 1

jwlson ’6 &r that expcri-wRts cor.cc:ni-x* the healing of persons poisoned with
g-s if^ro auppoowd to bo exucut-d. Allj.edly, only ouch pati-nts .are used who
no lon^r havw any relatives wh*tso»v,r anti wfcc h-.v^ only a ver; short ti-vo
to live any :ore, anyhow. I hoard this ~.ut four i*xks a e o. In the rv.antino,

I still l_arrx.dti»j following: —“

1 si refraining from reading about thu s.veril cas_s which nr. losted
hero tuv- only ant to point out t'x. date, 25 July 19U0.

The next document is on i-to 10 of the Document Book, your Honors,

:{0-839, wliich will be Prosecution 1*ii it 383. In brackets: A "rived on 8
Dace .ber from Chief Iroaecutor at Zwiclnu, and I road this short parngraph on
the first po. s of the doc »jnt;

"Or. 11 November 1910 trial cas up boforo the 10th Cri. inal Divisional
Court of t!. i Land; oricht Zwickau against tho worker ^runo Has of Zwickau with
th; iiirpor »s ccnfinu hi to a u .t'l institution. Some days boforo tho
cossion 1 discussed tho if. lr -it.. U:c president of tho 10th CrLminal Divisio¬
nal Court, director of Landgoracht Dr. Pfinko. Cn this oocasion I told 1dm
confidentially that Rogioningssanitectsrat Dr. Lalendoorfor'of tho Sto.to
’(ontal Institution In Untorpocltpach mentioned in a provious discussion with
t.v.' s-.jo topic oi confining a djfon ant thet in choking tho question nhother
• r^or a.ould be confined, „c viewpoint of .uthanasia ns pjrfontwd today,"
aat also to vo considered. Dr. Pfink who was very .astonished .about t.ds
inror.-t on t : had t-lkcd to - to feasor of .an institution oi this placo.

Dr. FfLn.x also told oo tho na.x n*t I cannot rocolloct it today. Ho told him
that ho h-d the creates*- renames: ho had bo«n ordered to dispatch sorao .
c ildr-r vh' i«ar, lc bleadndcd but oth-ndsu fit for life, who had boon
hoc itaiia.d i. hi 8 i.-stituticn. Ho did not know where the children went to.
So-et « laj^r ho would be it.formed that 1 1. y had died. Ho had scroplos to
fix- ether caildron transports b.cnur: ho did not know if ho was not oing to
U uilty ci aiding and abettin. .cur dor. Dr. Pfinko thought that th s it had
to be assumed chat oulhan a*in was .actuall; perform d; hu expressed tlx opinion
* . .t t: s f-ct could not possibl; c without :.aflucncc upon the cri inal oourtr

1^67


14 Jan 47-A-JB-8-6-Putty- „

Court Ho. 1

when examining the question, Aether A person is to be confined or not.

Dr. Pfinke asked ce to inf oca the chief public prosecutor confidentially
•bout hie report. This I did immediately."

I as skipping the last paragraph and quote only the date: "Zwickau,

5 December 1943. (Signature), illegible. Prosecutor."

The next dccucwt I offer into evidence is Document 622-PS on j»8 e
Mo. 12 of the Document Book, Prosecution Exhibit 384: "The Advocate
General, Naunburg, 13 September 19U), Secret Reich natter. To Reich
Minister of Justice. *ttention Herr Staatssekretar Dr. Freisler.

Subject: The death of persons committed to sanitoriuas.

"On the basis of this order givon to ae on the occasion of my verbal
report on 10 Septenber 19W), I report:

"In the middle of June 1940 the Brandenburg on Havel Land-sanatorium
infoirvd the Naunburg prosecuting authority as exocutoxy authority of a
nuaber of casos in which persona who were committed to a sanitorium accord¬
ing to paragraph 42 of the Reich criminal coda had died in the said
institution. In threo cases it concerned persons who had been contuncod
to jail, and being not of entirely sound mind, were also oomaitted to an
institution; in two casos they were persons of no sou>d mind against whom
the sentence pronounced only the cocoitocnt to an institution. Thoro was
a further case in which a person whilo serving hia Jail s«*itenco had
hoccar insane and thereupon was transferred to an institution. In one esse
''acute Nephritis" was reportod as the cauco for death; in another case
it was "heart failure"; in the remaining cases a more dotailod report
was lacking.

"The multitude of the casus, but especially the cirainstance that
always the saao date, that is, 14 June 1940, was given as tho day of
death, appeared strange to the Attorney-General in Naurtourg, particularly
as a cause of or death had boon given in at least two cases which iculd
not permit the assumption of mass death resulting from catastrophic events,
as for example fire and explosion or similar accidonts. The Attomey-

Gorr ral therefore felt irriuced to notify me of the circumstances."

1668


Hi Jan-A-JP-9-l- T -oard.

Curt He* 1

C ~ . r-.w turning to pv> 15 “Rd -"ant only to r-ad frea thi .eiddl- of tho
pig- — point M

■1 J a, 2120/20. The Russian laborer Jos-f Garasirnswit, of i ouraorkt,
oom l!i a y 1892 in Eteinzy, district of ■ filar, was s-nt-ncod to .’oath for
•ardor, by tho c:urt of is.izos at ifaunaurg (o) on 13 Deccebar 1921. The death
s-ntoncc u-z. co-.jutod to life iEpriscosent c; an act oi rac<., lion uorasinowil
beci.iij th- :russian in;st_r jf Justice ordor-d his trrnai-r to a

V}

sanatorium according to a deer— 7 S-pt-nber 1923. On 15 Sa^t-a-er 1923
Oeraaiuowit* was transferred to taJ 1’ictlobcn sanetoilies. The At ornoy-
Oenar -1 at Cnueburg was nctifiod o.* t:u sanatorium at various ti os, for
instance on 23 August 1939, on 7 uotober 1931 and on 7 October 1935 that a euro
for tho pnti-nt would be itpoesiblo.

"On 15 Juno 19li0 the arandonb r& c.H* Land-S'intoriua rop.rted that tho
piti.nt, w. enly a short ti -- . r-vi.m cly hne boon transform d to firandonburg
i.H. for art .inistrntivo reasons, has died t.-r> ofc.heart failure on lit Juno
191*0."

Tho iwxt document will bo »o. NO- 836 , on page 17 of tho Document Book,

••ich *.111 bo Irosocution's Exhibit No. 385. I only want to road the firot

■linos:

•';iv_ .,‘t mcy General, Stutt art S, 12 October 191*0. To tho R<jich
st r cf Justice. Subject: Unnatural d-ath of iraiatos of aontal institu-
tlcns with referenco to Uv. pn nal r., rt of Giief Public Prosecutor
(Ct rstaatsa.a.wlt) HOLZHAEtftSi tc St-U Secretary Er. FRISLj?."

i .:i: is a six ilir report to ties which have Own road int the record.

•'* sliilor r^ :ert is No. 613-PS, on 20 of the Docu:.wnt Book, and which will

be Exhibit :fo. 3861

■Tho Pr-sccutcr General. ;c th> .^ich Ulster of Justice.

"I report further in th: at- -r re u ~rdint tho clirlnatin3 of unfit life:

Th> nexi docunent is on p- - 26 of the Docur.unt Book Ho. 62li-PS, and

■irtch rill b. Prosecution's Ixhioit >57. It is fror thjj

1369


lb Joi>-A-J?-9“2“3card
Court Ho. 1


■Directorate of the County Asylun > aldhoia (Sax.). Tc: T « ; inis tor of
the Interior for Saxony.

"I forward to you herewith requests fren tho ofiicos of the Attroneys
Ar.-ral fer Chcanits and Dresden respectively, and bog you to answer thens, as
*o em't handle those requests.

■Th. shoemaker .n-thur Tilly 2rlor (bom 22/0/ 08 .ns sent to i*r sylun
on 30/7/3 9, aftA-r hiving 6s.rv_d his e_nt.r.cc at the Wnldhoi*. cricon. Ho is a

blind jan nnd a dangerous had uni cri—nn.1, who was ordered tc bo kopt in

•

sucurity detention and placed in an asylum. Except fer his cri inal disposi¬
tion, £. had no -v-nt 1 disease; h_ was sent to this nsylun b-caue*, apparently,

■>

tho polico wrnt.d to get rid of tie. blind ..on. I submitted a r-quust to the
ministry to have 2. placed insecurity dot-ntion. Ho* .ver no decision waotak-:
concerning cois r.qu.st, bocaus. 2 . was r.-nsforrod with acooLL-ctlvo transport
of p-.tis.nts of tho Charitable Patient Transport Corps.

n T!>c dentist Dr. Hermann irsing (born 15/0/03) "as sent hero from tho
Drvjsdc.-. Jail on 15/UAo according to article f*2 b of the pond code; ho
a-.s transferred out ’gain the following day (on 16AA0) with a collective trnn*
port of petionts of tho Charitable *ationt Tr-nsport Corp. Ho xo n psychopath
ind a chronic norphia addict. is rulati* .s have inquired n great may tines
by letter :r tolophon about his transfer rad his present whore-bruts.

"F r t!i_ director of the n.sylint cn behalf ofi"

Tho ixxt d-cuxnt is Document Ho., KO-038, cn page 28 of the Docuiunt
S. k and it will b« rros-.cuticn's Exhibit He. 338. It is lYc.a th- Chiof
Prosecutor, Chennits, and is dated 3 D»cc-.ber 1910 , and it is tc Uk Attorney
General or official Deputy. The su>3_ct is:

"Report cn Irregularities in th- entai Institution Haldhoia and in
Jthor sL il-r estnblishrfcnts."

1 want only to read a short pax*graph — thr forth cn- dem:

"In tho case nf Gebsattcl tho cri Inal court was preparing a r.trial

■iftor tho tiao tb; condcaned perron had already bun transferred and had died."

167C


Ik Jon-A-J?-9*-3-eeard.

Ccurt 1*0. 1


I turn now to pa^o 31 of the Document Book. Document No. NO-SliL, which will
be .rea-cutien's Exhibit No. 389.

“0*1: 0tl2U>-T£SGEHlOfTSre. 1 SID OT»;

hich nosns the pr.sidcnt of a id,her court.

■Franhfurt, 16 fay 19ul. To tlv- ...ister of Jusfcico. Top secret.

“Subjoctj Report on the genor 1 situation in the area tf Obcrlandesgo-
rlcht (.ain District Court) : j «enkfu*t/? .tin (Ordinance of 9 Itecurabur 1936.

"Snclosurv-si 2 further ce^its .-f the r-yort.

“I bolievo that I should n iplify y situation report of the 3rd inst, as
to the attitude ot the population with roagrd to the extermination of lifo
unfit to live.

"In places where there ore ental institutions, and in their vicinity,
soneti. -s, h-ir-ver, a von in whol- districts like for inotrnco in the rthoingau
constant talk is going on regarding the question cf extermination of life
unfit tc live. The vehicles which transport the patients fro.a their institu¬
tions t . tr-xsiont stations and free tb-re t o e xt.nrination stations aro known
to t.ie P' -vi ce. 1 an told t..rt oven c il r^i call out when such transport
c-'ra p‘.ssl Thoro are scoe non. -c be .r.ssed. It is said that on the way from
11./jeiist r to Hadaaar daily 1 to 3 l'-rge buss s pass thr<U'-h I*.burg with
rov^re iiukrcs wldch brin. the autos to V.o extermination institution
R-.d- or. the story go-s that t«*. arrivals are at cnce untir.ly unerossad,

; per shirts arc put or. the .a and they or, uxn taken into a s chamber wh-ra
they an. :iquidated with prussic acid and an additional narcotic gas. The bodic
are said tc b. taken on a conveyor b-lt ri:iit into n cremation roora, six at
a tie xne- an. ovunj tr.c arh-s ar- distribute ' into 6 urns 'or.<'. Sent to the
r. litiv.c. ,Very day one car. See -s. thick saoko ftax? the tien hall over

Had-sar. rhen? is further talk that in sen. cases the beads or. other parts

*

>f the bodies arc cut off in ..order to have then anatomically oxRainod.

"Th. personnel engaged in the liquidation in thes_ instituti- ns which


• i'o been br u*ht in free other places, is absolutely shunned by th populace

1671


9

Ui Jan- A -J ? - 9 -U--floard>

Court r> • 1

Xho porsonnol Eits in inns evenings end iabibos strongly in alcohol*

■Apart free the outward r... v.arancc, which occupies the phratesy of tho
pv-ul'Ce, ib. population is une~sy -socially as regards the question vhothcr
old peopl., viv. hov„ acccoplispcd thiais in life and now, in their old ago,
hare bocca- feeble-aind-d, ore also to be liquidated. Ther- are ruaors that
hfojs for the aged are ».lso to be evacuated. It is said that the population
is waitin' for a legpl regulation ivir.. a definite procedure so as to ensure
that such ol»'. .XMSplc who hare occ,.\. .'o.fcx.-.ind-'d shall not b_ included in
this action.

" “It is also maintained that patients *io were kept L. private homos «ro
tc bo botch- d and done sway with. Further non. it is o.lieved that patlonts,
who havu dcre useful rerit all along in the insUtutions and whos- mental life
has definitely tat died down cc!spL_t_ly, are also b-ir.,. liquidated.

v l havo norely rope-ted ruaors viuch are current fttfjng the popu¬
lation, even in as big a clt; as *—ankfur acccrding to information I have

received. I =a rv:t in i positi-n to check t .ie informstio:n.

■Finally I w uld like t.» point out tfollowing* In a Gau Krona
Cord -renee in '.ymkfurt, on 30 ajril l?hl, the Gnu iress office thief,

OWIX 1 drew the attenti n ef Ure chief editors tc the fact that obituarios
ha 1 lately been noted in th«/ dnily press of the district wldch in future will
n-» len -r be allowed to be printed; for instance:

■a) Deceased, according t lu reatien fro' the rental institution...

■b) Ar already -x^-cted *. v re ini OEOd that.

■c) Aft.r a lon< pc.iod of OncortsnLty.

"Inci ’-int-l-y th_ Chief of th_ Gru .Yeas Office explained in a closing
r :-ark that in wartime an increase in deaths due U- illness is natural, and
thus also, f course, an incruas- cn (baths in rental institute ns.

"(signed) UKGEhrmP..

■F«r file n ts 10K1KE

"The Stat. Secretary asks for a rcxi.-t-Iy the following lett.r to

1572


Hi Jrvn-A-*-5-3oardi
Court No. 1

3Ct»HL£P.i

"In addition tc the reports which tho....subcit regarding tho situation
In ttair districts, tkzy also o-nUen tiu. ruaors which disturb tho population.
Hill yxu pleas. informs r%^ u?»ther you nr- int_r_su,d in being informed rcgrxd|nj
such ruaors which have bo-n indicated t. a. as such. 1 shall th-n p-rait
aySGlf tc submit tc ycu th_> c nt_nts of such reports.

"(signed) illegible."

Tho noxt dccua.nt is cn p~ ,e 3?* of t. Dccu-aint Book, and is t’o.i 0-82*5,

•nd which will b- Prosecution's Exhibit No. 390.

Till h JSIDLNT* Your Exhibit Ho. 389 which is dated 16 i ay 19l*l —

R. HOC" Just a dnuto, I ant to check. 16 ; ay 19»«1 — it nay be

Bc.n .'re tiw ;*c-te, 17 ’ ay I9i»l.

THB P iEDElffi Very v„U, proceed.

IR. Hcc: .JUi The n-xt occurent ir cn pag- 31*, fc>. K0-GU5, which will
be Pr\ scout ion's Exhibit Ho. 390. I want to cutrdt this -..itiwut reading it.

It Ic letter f rew th. .. f tenv-y Gcnor-l, Kcoln, dated 20 Gotobor 19!*1, and it
is to the rtcich mister of Justice and th- subject is: Extirpation of
life unfit tc liVw. Tnie is r. smil-T rap rt to the previ<us ono.

T i- next c’i»ent is n rase 3? of tfy. fctcin-nt Book, i»o. NO-001, and
Which till ;riSv.cution's i/hiait He. 391.• it is dated:
nuren, 25 N« vc:bcr 191*0.

"IXiar Frau Such 1

"It tr-babiy ic the si:^last way i r v. to direct this letUr to y^u with
th_ r_uv_3t t_ f rv-.rd it to ycur husband :r tc hand it t> hi., wh-n ho returns
h -v r y u Lhink it better. D ris «rr:t- uc o w tlx. ago that h- ic in

Maud.

■Thu >r »1- • which or in. a _ . y u ---day is not a fx.rsor.al natter but

it c. iic-rrn. all f us and it v..uld s—i! to te b- the hardest f nil those

*hich have had to tackle s: far. Until nw n thins c ulii shako ay confidence

ir. t^e successful c v-rcuain^ of all di£ tculti-s and d-ngers which the "Greater

Cor -v" is are ting cn its way, and vieh i. faith in the Fuehrer. 1 have

1673


12* Jcn-u-JF-9-6-2oTrd

Court So. 1


unswervingly f night ay w.ay thrcu.h taick .ui thin; but that which loons up
before os ax sirtply takes t«ve \ r.und rea under our feet -.a a young 100?
party -.ceixa*, r. co-v;rkcr in the laice icr racial p-.licy, said to ae yesterday
"Und uatedly you knew about th. ^ensures presently usee by ua to dispose
of incur-bl. ins mo persons) still, perhaps you do not fbliy realise tho
nsnnbr and the scope <-f this, nor tha horror it creates in people's iiindsi
Hero, in uorttoaborg, th- tragedy tokos place in Gr-feneck, in the .»lb, as a
re cult cf hi eh the nar*c cf that -lrco hr: teken on * rrst oednous nooning.

In the be Inning on*, instinctively refuse'! 11 believo tho tale, cr in any caso
consider tiw rur. ra cxtrcrx-ly aar. gurofcod, On the occasion of our last
bueiness -ctin^ at tho G;u 8choc 1, in Stutt;art, abut the aid le cf October,

I was still inferred by a '>.eU ini jroed' .xrsen that this involved only
idiots, strictly spoakinf., and that a lie at ion of 'Euthanasia' applied only
to* oosos wiiich have been thoreo^hly tested. It is entirely impossible now to
*v“ko anybody bollove trv- aversion ml individual cases established with ahsolut.
certainty spring up like mushr .-.is. Oft- t deduct porhnp6 20 Z but oven if
;nu trld t do duct 50? this w ulc cut h-lp, Th- t-rribl. and danger, us port
is not sc much th. fact in itself; if c law had be_n created on the order of
the sterilisation law which subjects certain categories of sick ^oplc to
the -root -horcugh -xininatien by uxper.s, prtionts in whoa thoro is no longer
1.1't ever, a spark of reco-leCti -n or of huaon fo-ling then, I ou convincod,
fc^lin^c Weuld clou down after the initial indignation and poopli .light have
bcco*x roe-'.ciled with it, poxtaps quicker train with tho sterilisation lew.


U Jan 47-A- FJi-lO-l-Blakley-
Court No. 1


Perhaps after a f*w years one eight not even have understood any
acre why this merciful law had not born introduced long before. But
considering how matters are now being handled, the effects are truly
unfathenabio free every point of view. Opinions aay vary on how far non
can arrogate to themselves the right to decide on the life or death of
their fellowaen; but one thing should be sure anyhow: This right must be
strictly established by law, and it rust be administered with utmost
consclentiouaness or else doors will be opened wide to the most danger¬
ous passions and to crime. It was a well established practice, for
instance, to gst rid of embarrassing relatives by ddclrrlng them insane
and lodging them in insane asylums.

"I am of the opinion that then the people have the right to know
about the l»w the same as they knew of the sterilization law. The most
awful thing in the present case is the 'public secret* which creates a
fooling of terrible unsafrty. It could not posaibly be axpectod to
guard the socret indefinitely even though he who gives it away b-comos
liable to capital punishment, as is said to be the caso in this instance?
It was oqually unheard of to expect people to believe in the mysterious
1 ■ pidooica' to which the relative was said to have succumbed; a mistake
which novjr can be made good again.

Thoso who are responsible for these measures, do they haw no
concept of the noasuro of confidence they have thereby dostroyud? Every¬
body must at once arte: •that then can still be believed? f»re is this
path taking us and whore should th- boundary line bo established? It is
not that only hopeless idiots and mentally deranged persons wore affected
but, as it seems, all mentally incurables will gradually bo included,
also epileptics whose mind is not at all affected. Frequently there
ere among them persons who still take sane part in lifo, who accomplish
their modest measure of work, who are in contact with their relatives
by sail, persons who, when the grey motor car of the SS rolls up . know
"here they are to be taken. And the farmers on the Alb when they soc

these cars pass know also where they are going, and day and night they

1675


14 Jan 47-*-?JC-Blaklejr- aw
Court Bo. 1


son the seoke froa th* c rectory. ’•« also knew that anong the raental
ineurablra thire are aany


1675- A


14 Jiffl d7-A-?- T C-l&-2-31nklo7
Court Ho. 1


persons of hirhoat istolloct, thoao who -xo doroacod in port only, and
ttxoso nhc -to dor-ncod periodically "baly and who for poriods in botwoon
havo a porfoctly elonr rial, with onhancod rental onorcios. Tos it not
or.ou.h to atorilizo than, and la it not horriblo to think that abovo pH
11:030 tho s-.rord of !>roclos p.t Gr~f onock is suspondod?

9

"Tiilo I pr. ‘./ritlnr down pll this, I or. again so ovorwholnod by tho
•>.stlino#8 of those thine* that I fool I or hpric: p b>d droan fren which
I U3t awo acain. And to think th.pt Just now wren ora to ccca forward
for n hu-.o cp..;ai^nl And what ia the canves .atorial for. tho Catholic Churchl

"How tho poopio still clinc to tho hopo that tho Tuohror doos not
Jaw about thoao thinga; that ho could not know, othorwlaj ho would hovo to
t'ko action a.olnat it; that in no ease doos ho knew about tho nannor and
oxtont of thoao thine® which tako placo. 1 fool, howovor, it :aiat not i.o
on that wey :aich loneor or thia oonfidenco '<d 11 bo ohattorod also. It afcill
is so aortas to ca» ocroas thia confidonco Just n tho ai^plo poopio.

'.Of ccurco, tho fUohror doos not know of itl; and this weapon vo ^uat
ho;? shirts.. ns nothing olaol To cannot do thia, horrovor, by trying to
throw dust into pooplo's oyoa, ns lone w wslblo to qulot thou with
w'torfuros and hushing up when thoy ask ua, with oxcusos vdilch wo do not
boliovo ouroolvo3. I nr. also convincod that wo 'fill W bitterly for thin
nttor-'t to stultify tho pconlo's sound fooling of roslstonco p.r.inat thoco
tapponin s pad to oiloaco it; it is tho foolin; of right and Justico
without whioh pooplo inv-ripbloy ooo pstrpy. Amin, ono :ai3t not pornit
thj wpvo of indi;np.tion to boccrx* so strorv; that it br;nks or. opon path
f.-r ltsolf by forco or that it, which uould bo \rorao still, bo.ins to
c ifliro us fr-r; inward out. Tho .attor :.ust bo brought to tho Fuehrer's oars
-jforo it is too Into; an- thoro ::uct bo a wry by which tho voioo-cf tho
Cerran pooplo enn roach tho opt of Its Tuohror!

Thich could still bo nddod on this subject; but I boliovo 1 have nnld
what is o32ontinl; and I do not vent to abandon tho hopo that tho unifiod
stron-fat thoea who rocognizo tho d-njor cloarly end who rustar tho
*.ocos3ar7 courogo will holp us to flirf tho way cut of this labyrinth. I do
••v-o that you ppd your family *ro wall and,particularly that you pro


1-; Inn •:7-A-?JC-iO-3-Bl^Uoy
Court So. 1

rocoivini good nows free your sons on tho front o»d that despite all you
-to i*Jl lcoJdac forward to a no ny Christras la wartime. I still hero
dauefctor with her two childron hero. Probably she will bo hero throuch-
,-ut tho war, that is, as lone as wo still can livo in tho castlo. Huch
to our ro^rot wo had to dooldo to rent It to tho "oen's Labor Sorvico
last sprlnc; othorwisa no would not havo boon eblo to hold tho farr. finan¬
cially. "o hopo a oca to build a si/Ol houso in tho sardec uhoro wo c-n
Lot alone with oao raid, Tho question only is wfaoro wo aro seine to bo
until that littlo houso is finished. At tho oad of tho wo ok ny dcUehtor-
ln-lnw, on'S^lsh wet-on by birth, will also couo with hor littlo child
•jocquso they oanaot find an n&rUjost In ChOLnitz. Thus, hoforo vrectiae
tho c-stlo, it ot loest trill cnco i-oro to fully utilized.

r Tith klndost roc'trio to your husband also and Hoil Kltlori ycur

(oi-nod) Slao von Lcowin!." Tho nor» is "Loetdas"; this is c printing

I

.’istcJco in tho translation.

Titt rtSSmTs Tho Tribunal will new rooosa for a ton x»»nto.
(A roooss iras takon.)


14 Jan -.7-*-&(-l 1-1-Cock
Court SO. 1


T?2 JUBSULl The Tribunal is a^aln In session.

2E. K0CHVA1S: Hay It pleoae the Tribunal, the lest docuaent read was
Su. 001. I coco now to docucent Ho. 002 on pee *.3 of the Document Look,
which will te exhibit Bo. 392. I do not read the flret two pa*es which are t
letter of trens::ittal of Docuaent Bo. 001 froo 3oeh to Kluoler. I will read
.nly the one pe*;e which la the answer froo Elaaler to Such, who wee the
hl#:hest rerty Jud^s In Gersanyi

■19 Decester 1940.


lox She Chief of Counsel of the BSDAr

rarty Heater Valter Lueh Hunich 33.

Dear rerty College Buck,

hearty thanks for y-ur letter of 7 Decaster 19-.0. The trocoedliwrs In
the piece in euoetlon - I say lnforn you confidentially are carried on ly a
eoanlsslon of physicians In virtuo of an authorisation of the Fuehrer. The
■olactlon Is carried out as conscientiously and Justly as Is hunanly possible
not ty an lsolstod individual tut by a eocnieelon of which overy aanbor first
,*lv«B his decision Independently.

■The SS only helps with vehicles, aotor cars, otc. It Is tho doctors,
experts conscious of their responsibility, who *lve the orders.

■I a^roe with you on one point. If tho natter has beeone so public as
you say. tha process =ust ts faulty. On the other hand. It Is clear that Is
is always a difficult orocose. I shall lnnediately contact the oouoetent
1 head uartors and trine the defects to their notice end adviso then to drop


Ornfoccck.

■ff course Frau von Loewis will nvt to Implicated In this affair.
■Vhon we scat r»ydn, I shall *ivc you sons norc detailed infornatlon
verb* lly so th* t you cr.n Inform Frau von Loevls sore accurately should ynx


have the opportunity.


■Cordial rfrectinrs.
Hell Hitler1


1^78


Tours

(signature illegible)*


14 Jan 47-A-3<-ll-2-Cook
Court So. 1


Che next document is So. 632, pe*e 46 of the Document Book, which will fee
inhibit 393. #

•Reich hlnieter of Juetlce Berlin, 24 July 19^0

To the

Reich Hlnieter and Chief of Reich Chancellory,

Dr. r<anners:

■i.etoe~.cd colleague La..-erei

■Cn the basis of cur discussion of yesterday I trnnsnlt to you the
desired copies.

■as you Informed ae yesterday the Fuehrer rofustd to issue t lrv.
Consequently, I iresune, the necessity arises to discontinue l-redl^tcly the
secret examination of Insane persons. Tho recent crccodurc tooar.o cuMi-
olzed to rapidly end widely not least by the attempted cnnouflrw:e. From the
enclosures you can dccido for yourself how enbarrassin* a situation can be
created and yet tho nunUr -f such lcoulries will Increase.

"It is extraordinarily difficult to reply officially, reference, for
neither to tho fact not to the content of a Fuehrer order can be cade. It is
lcpossltlo for our authorities to prot.nd that the Rolch Justice Adalnistretioi
knows nothin* of the aottor.

"I any assuae that you, osteeutd colleague Banners, adrlsod the offices
concerned of tho desire of tho Fuehrer and I rsk you urgently to inforn ne of
tho rosults of ouch etops.

Hell Hitler!

resovetfuily yours,

(Sl(tnature) Otr. *
for Ouertner.

The next d.cunent ie Ho. 833 -n pa.;e --8 of the Dccur.cnt Book, which will
be Rxhiblt 394.

■Reich Ministry of Justice

Under Secretary Dr. Schle,ielter*er 1-orlin, 27 July 19-H)

(steeped) Top Secret

"Hy dear Kr. Rcieheleltor:

'The Reichsalnistcr and Chief of the Reich Chancery has stated that he har

167>


11-2-Coole


14 Jan 47 -a-»-
Coart Mo. 1

gotten in touch with you again in the affair of hilling persons unfit to lire.

According to the special with of the Reich Minister Dr. fuertner. who hra

left cerlln today f» a brief period, I hare the honor to send you the cooy of

hie letter addressed to Reich Minister Dr. Lacuers, of the 24th Inst.

together with the attached enclosures for your information.

Hell Hitler!

Tour rcry obedient

(signed) Dr. Schlcgclberger

To

The Chief of the Chancery of the fuehrer of t!* KSDat
H r. Roichsleiter Souhler."


14 Jna-3?E-12-l-Gro»■
Court Fo. 1.


The next docunent is on p~,?e 45, 621-X'S, Exhibit 395.

■Letter fror. rr. Lwvtcrs to the Minister of Justico on the Tenths of


Hurting 9 qm I nr. a to s.

The Rcicfcar.ini a ter »nd Chief of the Reich Chancellory, ."'crlin, 2 October


19-CO.


■ an eg 1A 7ES.J-1


To tho Heichsrinieter of Justice
r. Gucrtner

Tear Tr. Gusrtacr!

I herewith acknowledge your lotters of 26 Au,-usi and 35 Sej-Urber
forwarding to nc further arterial about the death of Inna tee of nursing
hones. I forvardod tho enclosod reports of the Chief Irosocutore of
Stuttgart and Fauoburg to tho Roicher.inlcsr of tho Interior - Heiche
Health Loader - for further notion.


Hell Hitler I


Sincerely yours

(signed) 2r. Lomc.ro -

Tho nert docucmt is 62C VS on page 5C of tho Tocunont Booh,


Vroeocution ‘Sihiblt 396.

"The Reich 1'inlsSr and Chief of the Belch Chancellory, Borlin, 9


Octobor 19<0.

Secrot

"To the Reich Emitter of Justice
Hcrrn It. Oucrtner


Var Tr. Quortnor,

The additional r-torlal which you sent no with our letter of 2
October 19*10 concerning tho deaths of lnr'tct of rent'd institutions, I
forwarded to the R:ich Minister of the Interior ~eich Chief for lublic
Health (Beichs.'sundhcitsfuchrcr) - for the -urrosc of further decision.

si mature: "r. La-r.crs"

The next docu-ent is 661-xS, i-rasocution Inhibit 397.

■Tho Reich minister of Justico, Berlin, 4 March 19*11.

To the Belch Minister "nd H, ad of the Reich Ch-ncellory _

-•erlin Tor Goremrent Sccrot.

loGl


l*-Joc-S?H-12-2-Gros8
Court Fo. 1.

Ho: Sxtomiaation of worthless live*

Appendix to letter* of 24-7, 30-8. 25-9, 2 and 5-10-19-;©

Zr.cloourc: i booklet

■Sir,

Tho doubts expressed in your letter of 25 July 1940 to Holch Louder
“oufclor induce ao to forward you tho arterial I h-vc rccclvod during the
pact nontha, on the question of exterminating uaclcae persona, in tho fora
of .otitiona, ro;orte and renor^ada. ftia is in conplioncc with :\a order
of the late Rolch I inlstcr of Juaico r. Ouertner. Although the taking
of nc~aurco against eroona not fit for life dooe not coao dlroctly within
ny aphoro, I eonaldor it ay duty novcrtholeaa, to direct your attention
to the feet, that theoo cattor* nro indirectly connoctcd with o-ny branchoa
of tho Reich Administration of Juatica and undernino tho security of their
work. The following tranche* *ro thoao chiofly involved:

■In natter* conc^mln.- gunrdlanahlr di*a,Tcorente hovo boon cauood
by tho fact that Judge* have opposed tho tr»nofor of lunatic* fron ono
aoylun to mother when thoy w.-ro undor tho enro of a guardian or truetco.

In may ease* tho courto did not rccoiro any official inforantIon, either 1
concorning whereabouts of lnsano wnrde or announcing their deaths, al¬
though the personal affair* and queationa concerning -.roporty which -rioo
froe guardi-nahlj. «nd true toon hip a* nlao tho inorcourar betweon .minrdlnn
"ad ward, and current -oroonol inquiries' by relatione, nnko it ncceoaiiry
for the nuthoritloo to be kojt cmanontly informed of tho whoronlouts
and further f-c of ward*. Since .panrdlnnshlp -ad truatccafcl oomoa to an
end with tho death of the ward, the oaurts often lack n cl< nr ,crco;tion
of tho situation to determine whethor or not the .uardian or trustoo who
has been appointed is still needed. The uncertainty of the f-to of tho
wards i~,odea the la.r-1 30ttlcncnt of property natter* in tho courto for
tho rct ction of ward*. Prequcntly the courto arc anproachod by gunr-
fii'-na or rala.tiw- a -ad asked for information a* to the whereabouts of
wards, but, in apito of all their endeavour*, thoy find thcrBclwo unable

to - iuc adoqu-to information to such inquirers.

2£j2


14-J sn-rH-12-3-Gross
Court 5o. 1.


■While nany Judges hare a suspician of the oeasuros wards havo been
subjected to. they arc Justly hesitant in passing on their nisgivingo to
the inquirers. ns no official directions fc-re been given with regard to
this. On the Other hand, it is incompatible with their duty to rive in¬
correct or evasive infonatioh. In tho wnc way r.urorous doubts have n-
riocn in the sphero of tho Frobnto Courts, for instance on tho question
of ranting inheritances certificates. Tho onclosod booklet I, to which
I beg to refer, gi'*cs information .-.bout theso difficulties />( far as
they refer to voluntary Jurisdiction.

"In cririnal Jurisdiction lUtowiso asbaraoslng positions have
orison, rrocecdings huv.i bocn instituted and c»rriod out although tho de-
fondants were already dec- -nod owing to tho fact that tho prooocutlng
authorities wero nc*er infnmod of tho proper status, krosocutions and
rotrialo could not bo concluded, sinco both delinquents «nd wltnooo 0
h"d "died" in the nenntire. It repeatedly ha'ponod, that condorncfi
porcono, living in • sanatorium or asylum, oscaped tho notice of tho
; to nocut in.; authoritlos, bccauso thoy wore rcr. o*cd fror tho asylums
without a hearing and «cro subseqe .ntly liquidated. Thin proved oorc-
clally csbTrrsBln.7, If the court h-d to decido on a rolon.v-.tion of tho
dotention of tho jerpotrator according to article 42 of STC3. Tho fund-
vrcontal •, rincipl. s of procedure v»ro oeriouslr nffcctod in as

much as ex.art physicians declared that in -1 1 good conscience thoy could
ao longer givo a di- nnsis in dubious eases of the incrcasod insanity
of -ccuscd .-croons, ‘.u order to osta blish a basis for their conflnc-.cnt
in a sanatorium or nsylxc because such confinoccnt, in its result, whs
oquivrlont to the execution of a d.cath sentence without a T.rlox's trial
in court, riffieulties also arise for tho prosecuting authorities in so
f"T r a relatives or third arsons file actions for murder on rorconc who
have disa-.-oared. In attorney general intends to question now as defen¬
dant -a official doctor, who compiled the medical report of a ■dcce-oed"

p-rson, and to investigate tho corroctn sc of his rcrort. For

36U3


lii J’in-v.-JP-12-la^}jps5
Court Ho* 1

details with regard tc the difficulties w'r.ch aru being eAC-untoT-d b> t;._
criminal uris-Jiction, I b-g v refer tc t'~ enclosed booklet!!*

■Considerable nisgiving arise for the judicial authorities in the
carrying cot of proceedings based cn tho Lar against .aalicieus attacks on the
8*.’.tc end party, in bo far as th- dcclar-.ti.no of the accused r-fur to the
killing of perse.is not fit to live* Due to tho fact that erasures taken for
liquidation ar» kept secret, vnri-us mot re are in circux'ticn aocn' tho
populati n, and are tx. ing stirred up and . xr -r t-d beyonr .u.asur- by anti-
stab- elcRwr.ts. The secrecy and sur 1 unc-rt'.inty with r-p.-rd to tho oxtont
of the _'oasures taken, sako a fertile s. il fur the cireulati n -f such runors.
that also mentally iun -1 injat. r or penitentiaries, *r.d oy.n disabled var
vutornns and aged citirons incapable e: verking, as w.ll as politically un¬
desirable persons nr- suoj-ct t> tiw-r- jasvr-s. Tetak- pr co-dings for
nlicicus action in the spreading of suen s*~t -nts, se-us particularly
sort s even if ctne in closed s-ssir ns, ttcaus*. the light thrown en Uvo
individual characteristics of th». css w. uld disclose tho -ntiro pr. bL-n of
too extuninatioa of worthless lives* On tho ctl.er hand unccmpv 1.ur inrti-o
gators will evado just punisoiont thorcay. For dot-ils I refer t th- oiicloood
booklet III.

■Fr.iu bx. r.xrts rhich have bx.n aibiitfc-d to no, and b«c nirj-r us

petitions and cnplicaticns ad ross-d tc- 1 .athcr, that r. vast part of tlio

popul-ti •!. bar u hout th. K-ich is do-ply tr ublcd by U»-se -“sur-s. Th.

caur- r this anxiety is net s. ach to- fact that hunnn btin r unlit f r life

<r- bein v . k.rcifully put tc death, but r-th-r the fact th-t th-s- cures

nre kept s-cret, and, as tn- pi- thinks, in its ignorance 1 th- decree on

which th-y ere. b^s-d, are deprived :i lcqrl found’.ti n.. This giv-s birth

to the fear that decisions : 4 ,ht b- tak-n,ihich are n t fuliy justified. The

c nfidcncc in th- Ceman nodical professi n, <spcci.ally in th- adainistratiens

of sanatoria and asylucs, is bt_in badly shaken* Views are uxpr-ss_d, that

auch cas-s ef death any Oe traced back to nodical «rrors, and t';at i-ntal

1601


U Jan»^-JB-12-2&-Gross

Court :«>. 1

•

peticnts aro being used fr uilitary -xperi-onts, i.e. for the t-atihg of
jxiiscn gas ami ether auana of warfare* Others xaaors reveal the fear that
tho food situation rrust bo prccari ua if such oeasuivs ire taken to liquidate
a few hundred thousand insane people.

"Evidence on th-ac natters has be-n g-tiu.rod together in the enclosed
booklet IV.

■Owing tc thw fact that tm.s_ vaaur-a fer tho liquidation f parsons
unfit to livw arc not within th- ccupotcnc- ef the rtcich ..duini aeration
o f Justico I take the liberty t ref-r th-s- cccuro.ncca to yau.

Signed! Dr. Schlcgclh-rg-r"

Tfc> next daeoBont is NO-189 on pn ; - 56 of the Decuucnt Book, Irosecution .
Exhibit 393. It is a r-port on th. "Inauguration of th- ..'chbiahop of Paderborn
I if: uld Ilk- to road the third page of thia decu-.ent wnich la page 58 of
the Docua-nt Book.

"The KapituLarvikariat, Pr.dorbam, 12 ..uguat 19U1.

"Accort'inj t info raatl tlx. correctness,of which cannot bo doubted,
vl-wat 200C pntionta, children andrdulta havo beer. die pitched for killing and
cr-ontion free th. inatituti-ns f >r ■ontnlly ill and fovblenindod jx.rsoi.9 of
Earaberg, ' aratoin and £ickolb>m in tlx. ■‘rea f th- arch-diocese ;f I'adorborn
In the nauc of tho fifth conm<fcxnt cf cod, whioh had hitherto b-.n tiw b-sc
of penal lcgialati n f all civilised at tea, in the nano of hicrvity, th- rent
fund-.-entrl lews of which are ixln;_. IvrribL. violated in the nav cf the
inr.oc_nt victi.is and their rcl-liv-a n vh i b unolesa pain is b-in. inflictod,

I object t: this syat.aatic r-aes vtiriur. -vor th a , unha]>py hum b.inga who
ar. '.’flstined to be killed yr hav- already be-n killed, th-r. arc my who aaido
fr partial disturbances -re -.n tally c ,letoly clear and wh kn.« what is
geing te happen tc th-n. The cathclic pepulati.n of -ur episcopate has becoao
It. .nsely ci.itatod atxut these happenings which arc absolutely inconprchensiblo
t: then. The ruaicrs circulatin' ab.ut tho last days cf those x-oplc dcstirxd


tc bo killed and bb ut their treatment devoid of all hucanfo-ling at tho station

1685


lit Jarwt—JT—12—3a-Gro8s
Court Ho, 1

where th-y hod to wait for tho death coll and daring fchu transport, rill
still incrcas. this agitation. There are e-tails which chnrothc repotted
bocauac of their drosdfulr-si. Toe faithful part of th. jx«puliti n is doeply
dictr-sscd by the th-ught cf th- jud”_nt 1 God, which, accordin'. tc the
cat. .-lie ccfcociiiaa, this cryin^ sir. of violation ?f th- holiest com-ancfc.nts
of Ood will draw upci our whcl- nnti« n,

"I bog you, vary ostccaoc' L-adusti-upt-ann, tc us- all yrur influence in
rrdcr to put an ond t this a-ss .ur.-. > iiuuc.nt pcopl.

Th- :h-.pitul-rvlk'.r}
slgn-dt B-.u-.ann

To tho Iandeshnptnann Kolbow, aunot-r^*.stFh:.lir.."

This ends for this ti u ny pr-rentatien on Euthanasia, Hr« ifcHancy
will procoed on page 6U ofth. Sxueont Book.

iR. UcHANEYt I *c.uL' lik- at this tin- tv introduce Into cfidencebvo
judgr.v.nts, tno toing an ..uctr.ain C»*urt and the oth-r ooin,- a Goman Court
Judya.r.t, -g ins*, c-rtain dofend-nts ,m. *rcr-recur-d of :iurd-r boenus- of their
participation in tho Euthanasia ,.r.jr--i,

T lT E ISZSIDE.T: Arc thes. u .daunts c-ulmnod in the D cin.u.nt Bock cr
ire they c-per - to?

KcHAlSYx Yes, l]ur Hner, The first cru. - tho booio .n uhich tiio
objection is nb ut tc be ffored - is HO-317, n png- 61*. Tills io net the
Jud^sent but th- indictr-nt cf “.n ..vstrian Court.

DR. I80.vSCHL-.« (d.'f.ns- c uns-1 6f Vikt r Brack): Pr-sident, 1

object t: th- pres-ntati a of D-cu -nt 317. It cannet bo c lcarly s—n I rui this
docu.cnt rhat the Irosecuti n actually - ants tv pr ve with this d euiont.

The evidence c ntr.incd in these decuents, ar.»ly tho irvlictn-n* and the v-rdict
of an ..ustrinn Court, docs net r-fer t- of tho defendants thoris-lvcs,
Theref.T-, it e nnet ao pres.r.tcd as direct -vicenco against any -r any nc,
of the 'ofend-nt-. Furhtorrrrc, this ir/.’ictxnt and verdict c.x fr- tho


icr._ ditto tiae after th. c-pit»ilaticn -id, eh. ref ore, is not a captured oociravnt

16£6


Hi Jin-..-« l ?-12-Ua-'rcss
Court So. I


either which w;rl d be covered b; tone sign.-. turo of the two g-ntleiur. ''v h-^vo
signed this t- pusc-nt prior tc its Tr^aentaticn. it con only b- stated that
fresccutien wants to clarify to th- Tribunal with thus, dccos-nts how an
..uatrim court maintained itcattituda toward this question of Euthanasia.
How-vor, this i:^s net m.»n anythin, but to try to teach the Tribunal as to
what legal c.newptien was minUingdby an Austrian Court and r*n .'.ustriiui
prosccuti.n. Kewowur, to find t<- L» co f.renlatc it it thu ois1jv.se cf tho
Tribunal. Therefore, thor- con tx n. -iwi --'V-e presented fur a is purpose by
Frosccuti r. or by tho Dofons- • Ther».forw, I request that this d‘cu:»ont


be not e (knitted*


Ui J-D-A-JI-13-l-K3rrc*r
Court So. 1


m. KHUDi If the rribunal pleas-, the »rcsocution offers these
judga-nts for t o reasons; firstly sad rivrily to put bofer-j too Court the
Holdings of oth-r rriounols on th- pr-cis- quw.*tion hero r.t issue; ivanoly,
tho legality of toe so-called "euthanasia" program* Cno is c Jud^rv-nt of M
Austrian court. However, I think reference; is aado in the Judgjx-nt to tho
Genian statutes which w-n in ^xist-nco at tho ti o the alleged c ri-u-a took
plsco and there is a discus3Jon in her- ab ut th. ».p lic-bility of th- facts
proved as against tto existing Gotnan low at th t tie-. C‘ course, tho s-cord
judgnunt is that of a Cormn court and t.-_ .vain? upon the legality of the oo-
c ill ad "uvt innista” progr--i under Ocr.cn lrv. ut secondly v. also offer then
for thv purpos. of proving tho facts found in th- jud sent. I "jj not terribly
concerted ab ut the rtcmd point but viii.cut any question the Tribunal is at
liberty to -attach evidentiary txi.hi tc tiu. facts found in those judipaonts which
arc in r. largo part, lncid-ntr ly, Ve-d uecn the confersions oi the. defendants
involved nnd toe judgments or. th-ir face s.»cw that the .acts of tho c ofondants
being tri.jT.n- rt of th road "euthanasia* program. : r or oxaiqjlo, tho first
Vienna c vrt jui£*>nt cor.Cs.ms th- killing of children und.r tlvi organization
which is eViwn or. th. loft hend side of ho chart. Wc'ro offorlA. Ww docu¬
ments for both of those purpos-s.

Tir. Th-s. documents >win„ jut’gr^nts of Austrian courts might

roll be cited as declaring the Ini in era - cf an argument. Th_ ri unal ie of
the uiinion that they should w.t ~ r.cjived as -vidcncc. Their authority
Is t. cIt- ti as th- holdings c vrts, ‘jut tho Tribunal is of the oninion

that they do n, t properly c nstituto cridenco. Conscuqontly, the objection rill
be sustained.

PR. HcH-dnf: If the Tribunal •! s , do I understand that tlx ruling
precludes the reading of this- d>cu wilts? In cth-r words, wo aro pr-s-nt.drith
th. rojl-n ol briiigin^ th->_ icum-ncc t; to- -ttontjon of tiv. Tribunal and vu
certainly p:\-for to o it -iti-r under th- rocoss of judicial notice or by

introducing thus into the record as -vid-neo.

16CS A


14 Jan 47-A-JP-13-2-forro» - sW
Court No. 1


THE PRESIDES?: These docirents as trial records night well be
included in any brief that night be filed on a question of law. Iho
Tribunal does not think that the r-cord should be encucbercd with
procedure as that. They are authorities and decisions an points of
law by other courts and should be cited as such and night bo regarded
by tho Prosecution as such.

HR. UcHANEY: I do not want to labor tho point but I would liko to
c^i to tho Tribunal's attention that Ordinance Ho. 7 does provide
that Judgments in record of ether military tribunals, namnly those of
Allied nations, which -

THE PRESIDEffT: Do you contend that these are Judgments of a court
of any Alliod ration?

1R. UcHANEY: Not at all, lour Honor, but wo toko tho position that
tho Court is at liberty to receive such documents in evidence and to
attach weight as evidence to the findings of such tribunals in spite
of the fact that those arc not findings of Allied tribunals. If it wore
an Allied tribunal I feel that under Ordinance No. 7 thoy would nocos-
sarily b* admissible under Ordinance No. 7. I urging that tho

Court nay receive then.

WE PRESIDENT: Properly c-rtifi« d copies of those Judgments might
bo fil'd with tho Tribunal in support of aigumonts on questions of
law. We Tribunal is of tho opinion that they should not bo received
in evidence. Wo objection is sustained.

JUDGE SPRING: H c w many of then are there, Mr. McHanoy?

MR. UcHANEY: No. 317, on Page 6U....

DR. FROESCHMANN (Defense Counsel for defendant Viktor Brack): Mr.
President, =*y I p.rt»P» .n—r your portion? Thi. objection refer. bo
Booum.nl. Nos. 317, U.5, U.6,U7,577,705,706,707,706 end 709.

WE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has mlcd on th. objection to the
ndnissibllity of Occuc*nt No. 317 only. The other judgment, or rt.at.vor
they cay be he™ not yet been called to the attention of the Trlbunel.
If those other document, ere coolly/like thi. docuomt it eight be


14 Jan 47-WP-13-2-K* rrow -
Court Sc. 1


aaousrd that the ruling of the Tribunal would be followed, but we do
not know if they are stellar or


1689- A


u Jar.-..- JF-13-3-Earrcw
Court Nc. 1


havo points of difference.

r.. : cP-JETt Docuaont So. 317, paga 6!i of tho English docucunt book, is
an indictaant lILd at Vienna, Austria, r.-rinst throe nasod individuals and
also as jert of the s-j-o docuswnt, bo£inrln,- on page 63 if th- English Document
peek, the Court will find th- jnl of t*w .»ustrim court. ?r»- n-xt docu-
rront.

DR. FHOGSCHKJnti Ur. President (interrupting).

T!2 fcaS&TOir* Tho Prosecution jay of a eh ck of tii-xtcord as forr-al
offer of proof.

h?.. IMUillETi Tho next docuw.it is H • 577 at pa:t 79 of tU -nglish
docuaont cook which is an indie to.-ut fil».d by tho Chi-f .ros.cuvor of tho
district Court cf ^vrlin ar»: fer purposes of tho record wo of for this docur.ent
as Prosecution Exhibit 399.

TH£ RlESXBEHTi Is tn- decuxnt of thj sa»- n-.turo as the on- previously
offered?

ItoEAi'Ef* It is, your Honor, This is *n Indietwont fil-d by a
Gora n court <v..?in*t two ra.-twd ixxiviourls f r participation in th- "euthanasia"
pregrra.

DR. FBO.£CK'JJBt I k«U r-iao the so..- obj-ctl-n -g-.n for the snao
reasons.

T:C KBSiBeCT: Objection is sustained.

R. HcH_J2Tt Tho next decor, jit is on pr_o 86 of the English dooueunt
bock Document Ho. U5. T.iia is tJu jud^a-nt .f tho District Court cf Berlin
based upon th. indicto-r.t » ich ~ns previously eff-red as Decua-i.c ko. 577,
Prosecution Exhibit 399. I arm off.r Ifccun-nt -c. I*u5 ns rr-s-cuti. n Exhibit
399.

T ' iRZSXDBVTt Is there tho scaj objection on tho part of def-nso
ceuuroi?

a.. r:C*- Tos.

. u PRESIDENT: Objection sustained.

i6;o


D j=-v-..-,’313-u-Rrrwr

Court Ho. 1


rdLJSTt The next does rent ia Ho. U!i£ cn fegt 103 O* Ush

decuae-.t be ok. This is a 3=4f»>nt in -. criminal proceeding agrinat ono Karl
Violing *ich ia referred to la tte jadjrwnt bv the District Court of a rlln
in Docuaont',-0. t'U5 nod it «n» loacrUd in the docua-nt nook i.*aao tho
Tribunal uiehod to refer to thr. Jud^t. It doc. net deal vith ••uthr.nMU-

.•uid I i*ill not at this ti-o o!f~r it.

XIvj luxt docuoont ia at tags* 105 «f English D-cu^nt Book and is
Document to. !J,7 and this ia n decision « -*1 in the action rvinst Hildo

Xchmlclco nnd I -l&n- Msesordc tfco w. f und guilty oy tho ^strict Ccurt
of v.rlin us a;™ by Doouccnt Ho. Ui5. and tho 1 rcsocutUn ffors this as
Prosecution Exhibit 399.

DR. MSCB^ait I object for tt* sajo r-aaona «hich I hrvo previously

given.

TK: Hl-iSXQCTi Objocti .n sustained.

toHIKE?* The next dseu.au ia . r. pc,c 122 of the ^liah decent

bock find ia Mb. 705 end tnls is t - P»"l nnn ^’»

paragraph 211 a.: , -nd p-.r.^-h 211 n.?. T slu-uld think t.at quit* ?caaibly

tiila deewu-nt and sovunl of th. succjading dreurunts eight bo

ndniasiblu in tho record aa the; rjp. extracts of <*rsin lnw. T!k> Prosecution

offora Decent to. 705 aa Ffcs.cution /Jdnbit 39S.

UR, ,.;T: I Object t t'.us decoaant occauau tbis is n (‘let

but it is a lrw fro~i ttv. 'Irrs crlvlnrl codo and therefore, it c amot bo
pr.c nt..d 8 evidence but p-rhn; ■ nly r.a an nrgment it c-n bo uaoc in that

Bonner in tho plodding 'T th_ * r i-cuticn.

Tffi fBESmBB.t The opinion of tho Tribunal ia that this lr.tr rl&t bo

usod as a setter of nrguaunt and cited by tho rrcsecutian but that it sh.ul l

not be ndKittod in .videnee in tho record. Objection ia accordingly sustained.

R. mvm ... nwxt dccunjnt is on - 123 cf the Ehglish tfccun ok and

ia h'O 70S. This ia an extract froa a report cn the work of tho Cri m.al Coimis-

sicn cn Criidnal Law publishd by tv. Frans ^rtner, Reich i i -^t-r f Justice

16>1


V -13-5-Karrow


Court Hb. 1

In 1935. Tho jcrticulnr extract is cn pa.c 127 of the English Docipoi.t
3ock, tho paragraph ruxt to last it t.v- bottom of the pig-, beginning "Citing
permission to liquidate unworthy lii- is entirely out cf the question." Tho
Prosecution offers this dccu^ant ns xrcs-c cicn Lxhibit 399.

DR. I also ob;-ct to this dement for tho saox roaaens ns

I 6 av- in v.w cns_ of Docua-nt llo. 705.

"R. NaHAiEYi I cay s-.y t.i-t 7. tliak ilior- w-re b lnrg- nuebor of such
excorpts which were admitted inorid-acc bj t .o .nt-raationcl .litnry Tribunal.
However, I think it is L-.rg-ly •*. quo Bid cn of expediency. If the Court prefers
tlwa- lutt-r a tc b- advanced in bn.fs ns - Tatter of nrguaont rr.th-r than be
included in tife. r_c-rd th-t is >rf-ctly satisfactory with tho rrosooution.

nr; SirUTi The Court is -f th. opinion that such a aatWr ^ this
sight b itore prep-rly submitted by >rj- cf n brief in argura-rt r-tb.r than
bo atmttod in-vid-ncc ud tlxreby onotaebur tho :in*ftdy len. record. Tho ob¬
jection t-. tto Tdrdssior. cf ti ls d cuo-nt inuvicijnco is sustained. Of
course, when pr.scnted by cjuns.l rs ant or of irgna-nt tho doouoont fill
then be aanaidoicd and given such woi;J»t ns. Ux Tribunal think# it eh-ulc‘
have ns a cattor cf law.

In this conn-ction I w uld ask Couni-.l for D-f-ixac if th-* wuld adait
the authenticity >f this l-» which r-.s 1-tt stnt.d, and -l this d orvnt which
is at proa-nt be ter- the Tribun-1. If Uk < uf-ndir.ts ad-.at th-t •ctunily
that K-- t.x law - if fchoy ad t th-t dais b«ok emt-ining ti'-ia par-graph. was
actually written tn-n th-j c-ul arop-rly b- used in ’rgu/a-nt. If that would
tx '♦isput-o th-n it ulght w_ll at tla^i bo th- aubj-ct ixattor for proof
but if t.i.r- is no objection by d-f-as. c uns-l - I dox 't jor.n tn-.i such a
book w-.3 written - then it vxuld b- -. -r for nrgur-nt and net loa- fci.o
record as -videnco. Do I und-rat-nd th-.t th- d-f-ns- c'-uns-l ad its th-t such
a occk '. ns writ ton by the can purported t hav- written it?

Dil. F.iO 5CHlfJfHr i*r. President, I a-Vdt that in th. now nnil lc edition
-f the Ccrsrji crLainal cede those provisions w.n. contcin-d as are rt-tod liorc

13?2


U. JRn-v>JM>6^Sarr«i

!• rt jo. 1

in Docurvint 705. IUH» SOTir CURIA .

TIE ifi SIDhVTj Doos any et.t.r ccu;;r_i for the defendants challenge that
5tcto*-nt?

HI. 'cHii ST* I would 11 kw tc .....

TH2 iHTLSI^ti Ts Just a fxxnt, ccuneol.

Ilonring i>*. challenge fraa any oti^r defense c-unr -1 it rill be assvaod
thvt the lew referred to was actually a .r:-n statute at the ti.ac it purpps-ts
to b.. such c st * tutu . In r-grrd t this Zxhlblt 70S is ther- any qu-stion.
That ia on Fn.go 127 - the paragre h roforrw-f t . On 123 it at-tea t’.w title
of the book.

Di;. >d £C: ^.hj Tfo do not rrau. -x ti le point, for sy part. l<o do not
contest it.


1653


1A J«n A?-A-E£H-lA-L4!aloy - aw
Court Koi 1


THE PHESICBrr: la there ary chaliange by any other dcfonse counsel
to the fact ouch a book was written ct the time it is purported to have
been written and by th- person who purports to bo the author? Hearing
no auch ctnllpcgo it ia aaauacd none ia aade, and none will bo received
later. Theao matters then nay bo used aa a matter of argument by tho
proaecution.

Tho objection to th< adniaaicn of Itecument 706 ia auatainod.

1«. JC HANEf: 'o come to Page 130 of the English Document book,
which ia dacucent Ho. 707, which ia nn extract from tho G-man Criminal
Code, Paragraph 211, and I underatand thia to be tho so-called old
version of Paragraph 2U, *oroaa tho ono we have previoualy offrrod as
docun'tit 705 ia the ao-called new voraicn. I offer thia Document 707 aa
Proaecution Exhibit Ho. 399.

THE PRESIDENT: la tho authenticity of thia quotation froo tho old
Statuto admitted by counaol for the dofonae?

UR. GA'l-IK: Tea, jrour Honor.

WE PHESI ENTs Ia th-re city other challenge on tho part of dofunae
counaol to thia atatccont? Wore being nene tho objoction to tho
ndadaoion of thia offer in evitkwico ia auatainod.

UR. 1C HAHEf: The next ia Ifccunont Ho. 706, at pago 131. Win ia
an extract fren a legal cooccntary by Dr. Uidwig Ebemayor and Dr. Adolf
Lcbo. It ia the edition of 1929. to offer thia Jtocua.nt for tho

purpose of re-di'« the extract l*rcn Page 132. We first ■‘ull paragraph
roadst "Euthanasia ia punishable cithT according to par. 211, 212.“
etc. Jo offer thia aa Prosecution Exhibit He. 399.

THF. PRESIECNT: Tt* authenticity of this book or pamphlet which over
it ia, ia it admitted by ccunsul for the defense?

DR. FRCESCHUANN: do not rontest the authenticity of this document.

However, *e want to abate ttat thia ia only the 1-gal opinion of the
throe authors.

THE PRESI-ENT: I understand thia cccecr.Ury is a private woric, and
ms without official authority, and carries weight only rs the opinion

MfiL


14 Jail S=H -1^3-Kaloy
Court S3. 1

of th- author. The authenticity of the hook, tho fact it was published
is not denied or disputed by dofonae counsel.

M3. KC EAFSY: Tho next docunent, 13-i of Tocunont Ho. 709.
which ie an extract fron Jr. von Olshauscn's Comentnry on the renal
Code, the 12th rcrieed edition, which is offortd for tho 'urposc of read¬
ing the paragraph on rr^o 176. 3crlnaing "Vo right to cercy killing re¬
placing the certain crcte of death, which is painful," etc., it is offer¬
ed in tho record as ?rosccution Sxfclbit Yd. 399.

:a. raOSSCHKCIF: I object to this document for the srao reason I

objected to Fo* 708.

THS rHZSirZST: loo# defense counsel challen ro tho fact that such a
publication as this was written, rlnted end nvblished at tho tlad it pur¬
ports to have been by tho person by whos purport* to have been written?

TE. FHOISCHPAIT: yo. Your Honor.

TH2 EHSSITSrr: Is thore any challenge fro= any defeneo counsol to
that feet? Thore being no objection to tho admission in evldonco of this
docunont, tho offer of the exhibit is sustainod.

’5. HC HAIEYs Vo coco now to locucent So. 823 on kngo 130 of the
•ngllsh locur.snt book, and this is offered as Irocccution 2xhibit So. 399.
This ie a '-cry long confidential aceo writton by Irstor ‘rauno on 9 July
19-». Ho was director of the Central Comlttoe for tho Hons-Mlssion of
the Goman Evangelical Chureh. I wish to read only a few oxtr-cts from
this nsno. the subject of which is "rlanncd Sconony Removal of Innatos
fron Montal Institutions."

"In tho course of the last maths, it has boon observed in various
parts of the Rcioh that n .-rent number of innates of cental institutions
H-ro boon transferred for reasons of 'plmmod ccoaooy'; that in sor.o ca¬
sco they are coved s»-cral tires, until «ftor a few weeks the r.«ws of
their death ie received by their rolntives. The uniformity of the era¬
sures and rise the uniformity of circumstances banishes any doubt that
those arc censures . 1 -cned on a large scale by which th* isando of human
be inr.s 'unfit to live' arc being done away with in a certain way. Soco
arc of the opinion that for reasons of ?xich defense it is necessary to
kill off these useless caters. Tho opinion is rise voiced that for reasons


14 Jan-S3K-14-3-Kaloy
Court Ho. 1.


of th. lrpra.ft.nt of ft. Oor«nn raft. It bo —onlla 1 to clftln.to a.
quickly a. poo.lbl. fto dl.eao.d and otborvlae tocmablo ca.es.

„ ..11 .= ft... hftft boln/t .ho are abnomal. Mo=W -hd antlaoclal.

, t u ostlnoted ft. . hundred-thousand and nor. o-oolo n « concerned,
in ft fttld. by iTof.oior SUH to the A-rll Issue of the ^-Volh.dlcn.f
ft. nunber of ft... -bos. liquidation »ould probably do do.lr.bl. 1. Indl-
o.t.d ft excocdlng on. nllllon. There no. ft. probably th.u.ftd. of 0—
Oft. .ho. .lthout l«a ju.tlflct.cn. ho. boon done «ny -1th or .ho.o
donth 1. ftoon.nl. It 1. tftdntor, to -boll.h thl. rroc.dur. ft quickly
poftlbl. ft «h. coral. of ft. jeorl. t. thereby heavUy -demined.

Ih. Invulnerability of hurft Uf. ft on. of ft. t-lllft. of «* font of
Govornsont. If killing 1. to b. ord.r<Kl. mild 1ft. —* bo ft. bftl. of
ouch nefturo.. It 1. Inpo.slbl. that 111 people ex. con.ta.tly don. •*»
.ift .lthout Cft.ful nodical okfti nation and .lthout ft, prot.otlon.

a!., .lthout hear lug ft. opl.lou of tholr rolatftc. and their l.gU »P'<-

ocntutiw .tnply for r«Moni of uacfulnea..-

I ftip no. ft Pago 141 of fto Ml* Poesn.nl Joeh ft. .coond Pft-

ernfh fror the botton of tho

■in order to d.tcftln. fto aapror Irate nsrber of person. h-vlng died
In Grafonrck. 1 call the attention ft ft. fact, that ft. urn of ft. -r.
Eoircr .ho dl.d ft 10 April bear. ft. nurbor A. '»8. .hllo tho urn

of another aft .ho died ft U Mr »•«. *»~ *- *“

bear. already fto nunbor A.1093. U ft- -bole In.tltutlon ha.o In nomal

tiro, not noro thft 1M bod., thl. can only bo ft. nftVr of fto death
coc According to that 595 people died In 33 d*.. Thl. «uld -..an 18
death, per day In an In.tltutlon .1ft .rprftln-tolx ICC bod.. Thl. M
conclusion doc. not ft. to bo Inpoftlbl. U tho 1 W . of tho fact that
ft the course of 1 ft 3 couth. P-tlftt. -eft tran.forred fron Podbur.
Eft to Grafcnock. frft 3 uoh al.o .ft. -drod.. frft Euoftennu.hl. about
150 ftd frft -u.ir 11 cr.bcr.T 1 an tu.tltutton. ft add.tl.-U great uftber not

known to ne."


•A second region -tore tho.o observation. ..re -d. to a .^oaftr «


14 ^aa-S3H-K-4-»:«loj
Crjrt 7o. 1 .


tent, is the country of Saxony* There the State rental Institutions
vore concern'd by these noasuros it first. Those *re the institution
^ohenweiteschcn near Veiterwltl, Groeschwei^nit* near Ltabau, Arnedorf
d Subertusburs and Zedrasch. In th. first rontioned institution the

r.urbcr of dor.th eases w.ountcd:

in 1938 to nbout 60
in 1939 to about 102
until 15 Xny 19*0 to about 134.

In the institution Grosschwcidnltc tho number of death eases *aoun-
ted to:

192 9 50

1929 141

until 25 Hay 19.10 238

While it is true that in norual tir.co about 12 patients died in a

quarter of a roar, in 1940 125 pationto hav 0 already died in tho ouro
reriod of tine. The increased death nuaber of the year 1939 io exclusi¬
vely froo the last quarter. General weakness is no.tlv stated ns death
cause. There is a slrllar situation in the institution Arnodorf, whero
tho r.unbcr of draths arounted:

in 1930 to 101
1939 to 200
until 25 !fc-y 19*0 to 101

This ncens an increase of about three tire, over the norr.al death rate.

It h-s beon established beyond doubt in the S'xon lnstitutiono, by
visits, that the death rate is increased by dc.-rlvln tho clients of food
The food is dirinished. .is it is rejorted by reliable persons, to - dally
value of 22 to 2< Hcichpfcnni*. As it is inyossiblc for the patients to
live on th-t they -re .tIycu a -edicinc (rnralyth by fore?, whereby they
'SO falling into an apathic condition. Hy verbal and written reports it
is olntod out in a drastic way. how tho cationt. cry a^ain and r^nin
their ■hunger, huncer*- Stployccs and nursos who cannot bear that any
Ion. or have stilled sone hunger vithttwir private neanc but tho result


14 Jan-r*-l—5-Kaloy
'-art Vo. 1.


1B eb.olu.el, clonr. Hundred. hwc Ued ■- quick dc.th U con.cuuonco of
tfccso n^asuros.

■3ut this docs not only concern patients, who *ro mentally absolutely
cull, but in the contrary relents. which arc realising rathor exactly
these procedures «d noting the nunbor of florals jor day. Ono report
'escribes th. deathly fear of a P-tlmt who was fully awaro of the fate

in store for hin 'fi<* his follow-sufferers.

-in Swon, the forrer h- Von ronr--.cd In con-

, quonco of thq«c rowuree to -nontnl in.tltntion.'

•Tron thl. .o-clled r.ontnl In.tltntion, too. enro .uddonl, do.th
notlcos. ,1.V lo identic.! fern. to the relative .he did not kno. on,
« r.tout n IrWr. .wins thut th. otlont ho. died of l,flnon».
heart wrokno.a or ..no o.hor dl.co. HI. tad, hod V he oronotod Imod-
l-.tol, VCU.C of d-n-cr of ..orcodlns die,...-., tho clothe, h-d to ho burnt
llko^.o or -or. handed on. to tho IKtlonM fccMl.t MUM ''olfor..-
m. KC »t-’nr: c turn nov to the follovlns >«««■ *• th ° flrot
full para-Trarh:

•Tho -or.on. .V died. -. -r onclo.cd M«.r, rrohohl, -oro not In-
o,,o nt -U tat voro oorol, ln--.ee of .tore non,toned -cnl.cntler, 'Kid-
hoin in Saxony;*

7K3 iPSSlian: Fron what !> aro you reading counsel?

:a. iC ?c* pardon. Sir?

7?3 FBTSI S:7: *hat
I-, re ?xnm i-*-'.

T?S -.rtSI-CT: I thnUf-ht 1 nndor.tood »ou to Co, KS-

tiC EOHTl I think I ««. »“• *• “ “ ^ 1W>

•_U ono ewe n 1. .Old .tat inltl-1 .to : . tad -Ircnd, Ken t-kon
for rolon.0 ftad tho tn.,ltn,lon. At ~ -to the rclr.tlrc do no. kno.
that their do.c-.cd kin ineumbl, nick. The -letter, of condolence-
,c« to V nod. -ccordln, to r. scncrel t .«tcrn .hlch ,crhnr-. *•
for hie-rinded nnd celloptic. Kit it hurt, -hen the letter ’-1*V.

repeat, tho r h™o: -In ,-ltc of --1! -did effort..-c did no.


14 -e-Kaloy

Court He. 1.

succeed in savin* your husband's life.' Sinco the City of n r-nt*.anbury
h-.s its own creentory a ererntion of the dead is quite possible -rTlcu-
larly sinco the SeuenbuTsor Street he* a srccinl exit."

Vo now turn to the nest pn*e of the doeuaent. which Is r^T 0 l- :9 of
the 2 n.-lish Iocur.cn t ~©ok, tho first full iara*rar-h:

■If they are lvin as a reason for this erasure that tho food Blt~
u-tion of our nation requiros tho cllr.ination of useless eaters, I have
to re ly that even in tho case of killing ono hundred thousand persons,
onon* 1000 health.” only one sick would ho killed, which is of no ln;or-
tar.co at all for the food situation. :'or can fcoy offer as a reason that
tho occupation of tho existing buildia-s and roono is considered a wasto
froa tho pain* of vl ‘* w ° r national .conory. After all those buildings
h-d first of -11 been erected for tho side, and at tho outbreak of tho war
tho very institutions h-.vo put at disposal ton thousands of hospital beds
without restricting tho caro of tho sick beyond a oupoortablo ncr.ouro.

It is true that tho sick, too. shall participate in tho burdono of the
war, but thio is still far away frona systematic destruction.

■Vo arc thereforo confronted with an cnorcency stato that affocto
deeply all who are frxiiliar with tho problor. that destroys tho tr-nqul-
11 ty within =-ny families and thr -tens to dovolor into a diuv.or whoso
consequences cannot bo foreseen.

"The content authorities are requested to coo that those disastrous
r-aaonre. be abolished and that the whole co=nl<* questions be first ex¬
cised frorfcc lc-ml. rcdlc- 1 , ethical -ad stato-politic-l oint of view,
before they docldo upon tho fate of tho-s-xnds and ten thousand, of beings. ■

It is sirned "rastor ‘r-unc. 9 July 15-:0."

IKS .H2S1 Z.!? : The Tribunal will now r.ccss until 2:20 o’clock to-
rv'rrow rornln.;.


16?9


15 Jca-47-i:-2:-l-l-?o*tor (USD)
Court 1


C0=?JCT2D CCPT

Official transcript of the ^erlcoa killtary
Tribunal la the natter of tho Unltod Statos
of rfserlca sgainst Karl Brandt, ot al,
defendanta, sitting at Hurnborg, Germany
oa 16 Jmuary 1947 , 0930. Juetico Bools,
presiding.

7i" ,\^ ps -aL: Tho Hoaorablo Judges of killtary Tribunal 1.

IlUitoby Tribunal Is nov la session.

God s.-wo the tfcxlted Statos of ^jerico and this Honorable
Tribunal.

There uill bo ordor In tho courtrooa.

TEE '‘R3SIDEHT: Hr. Xarshol, oscortaia If tho defoadants aro
all prooe.*.t In the courtrooa.

CEE KARShi: Hoy It ploeso tho Tribunal, all tho defondunto
ore nrosojt In tho courtrooa.

THE PRESIDE*: Tho Secretary Got-ral will noto for tho rocord
the proooaco of nil tho defendants la tho co-irtroco. ^ho prosocutlon
aty rocott’. Duo to defects in the sound transnisslon, tho Tribunnl
will toi:o a recoss.

( A rocoss va. taken.)


m -


15 Jan 47-M-2K-2-l^L3860r (^ii;

COURT I

THE PRESIDENT: The Prosecution may procoed.

DR. HOCHViU>D: Tho next doouaent I want to present Is
on pago 157 of the English Docunont Book, 62V PS, which
will be Prosooutlon Exhibit No. 400.

■Tho State Bishop Stuttgart, 6 September'40

■To tho Reich Minister of Justloo

■Dr. Guortnor

■Borlln V

■Wilholmstrasso 65

■Doar Rolch Klnlater:

■Permit mo to Inform you of a aooond lettor I hnvo
sont to tho Roloh Minister of tho Interior oonoomlng planned
extermination of lnsono, foofc-.o, and infirm compatriots.

This thing Is growing into a gre .t dangor and soondal I
would approolato it vory much If you, Roloh Mlnlstor, per
olttod mo to proaont...."

THE PRESIDENT: Apparontly dofonoo counsol Is not
rocolvlng the translation. Is tho transmission systora now
In operation?

INTERPRETER: Yos, Your Honor. It Is.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol will begin the reading of tho
docunont ovor again.

DR. HOCHV.tLD:

■To tho Roloh Minister of Justloo

"Dr. Guortnor

■Borlln W

"Wllhelmstrasso 65

"Doar Rolch Mlnlstor

"Permit mo to Inform you of a second lottor I
have sont to tho Rcloh Minister of tho Interior concerning


1701


16 Jan 47-Ji-£ft-2-l-Lc86er (.JO
COURT I


planned extermination of lnsano, feoble, and Infirm oom-
patrlota. Thla thing Is growing Into a groat danger and
scandal. I would approclnto It very nuoh If you, Roloh
Minister, poralttod do to proaont you next Wednesday, sop-
tenbor 11 , further dotalla about the matter with corrobor¬
ating docunonts. Notification If and vhon I may bo


1701a


15 Jan 47-M-2H-2-2-Lessor(«K)

COURT I --

recolvcd la roquoatod caro of Dean Kopplor, Borlln MW 87,
Holstolnor Ufcr 16, phono 592950.

■Hell Hitler l

•Your

(signature) "D. Wuro"

The noxt docuncnt la on page 158, Document Number NO-
846, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit Number 401.

•Tho Archbishop of
Munich and Freising

■Munich 2, 6 Novoabor 1940
■T 0 tho Roloh Minister of Juatloo Dr. Guortnor

■Borlln

■In aplto of all precautions and threats, It haa
today become an open aocrot that questionnaires aro roquoa-
tod on the lnn.itoa of mental Institutions, their ago. their
regular visits, tho duration of thoir Illness, that tho
designated porsons aro takon in groups, during tho night,
by train or in buasoo to other Institutions, to Orafonock
In Wuerttoaborg, to Harthcln noar Lint on tho Danubo, to
Sonnonstoln In Thuringia, and that aftor about a vooK
thoir noxt of kin are Informed from thero that thoy havo
dlod suddenly. The relatives are at tho sano time Informed
that 'duo to polico regulations or for reasons of publio
hoalth' tho body has boon cremated.


1702


I fJa* JC-2-l-S«Cloy (MSt)

.c.rt Jo. I


Tho rolr.tivos la their grief aad thoir bitterness approach the e'-iroh
authorities end submitting tho written nnnounceaent ask for a church
Jnvrcl. XfeoOtom bishop*, without changing thoir fundamental stnnd-
p. lat with tho regard to creation, agree in such cases to a church
fur.orr.1, because tho creation took plcoo without tho consent of tho
guardian or tho relative, cad against thoir religious conviction. But
loud and louder is tho cry froa tho circle, of tho Goman people for a
it'taaont froa tho Goracn bi.hop. on this fact, the official ox-

toroinction of sick coeptvriots.

Iho fomulo of tho octh of Ollogianco agreed upon in Article 16
of tho Roioh Conoordr.to obligato, the bi.hop. "in tho du UttL onro for
■h« well-boing end interest, of the Corson state to prevent any damage


which night throaton it."

'Iho drohblot op or Sunloh, therefore, fool, that ho hr. tho obllff-
tion by virtu, of tho Roioh Concordat.. not only by >■. oo—ndnonto,
tho un.h-.knbl, belli of ony publlo order (Pop. 2 or original) -ni not
only by tho orlu. of tho dl.tro.oo* poopl. to rot* bofor. you, tho
geloh klniltor or Jp.tloo, tho o.eplolnt on* tho -cauoatlon that for
TO nth. Ina to. o f Ml l-UMU- her. boon don. owoy -1th o, «...
.hind tho noil, or tho inatltutloa. by -nan. of outbnnn.lo.

•Tho Gorran bi.hop. pronounced tho Chrl.tlnn rlo-point on thl.


qu.rtlon in . letter -ddrcod to tho Roioh Rlnl.try of Jurtio. In
!. nhon tho droft for th. h. Oora« Ponnl M - «— oon.ld.rotion,
in -hioh -outWin end th. ont.rainntlon of life -fit to Ur.' «• .

■ontlonod, lb. Gordon bi.hop. ot that tie. rtatod that outheno.lo U
inoo^tlbl. with th. Chrirtlon »r.l H., nddin*. -Tbo 1. truo of
tho killing of tho inourebly In.nno.' 1= option dr.™ up by th.

Gomen biohop. on thl. Ruction, «plcin.d thl. Ucpolnt in < toll In

e mrwrandua eudre...* to tho offioiol P1 — — l " 1 - * “*

«. your 10.0 I" 1936 there nppo.rod th. a. of the

hook -Iho Coning Crnen Ponnl Code' edited by you tbo Reiob R.niotor
of Curt loo: tbi. book contain, on peg. 375 1» tbo poregraph In tbo


1703


15 *n JC-5-l-k' ty (liSB )

Court So. I


no» petition of tho Gorsen biahepa of 11 Auguat I 9 U 0 :

■'Consont to tho oxtoraiattion of ao*erllod lifo unfit to livo ia
out of tho quo at ion j In tho enin aoToroly inar.no poraona and comploto
ldio s aro


1703 A


15 Jan 47_«_IJC_3-a-Malojr (MSS)

Court a‘c I


conce-ned. The Hational Socialist state 1 * trying to prevent tko
prising of such cases of degeneration in the body of the nation
by e-‘eaoiv# ncasures, so th-t they will have to la come sore and more
rare. But the strength of the aoral standard of the prohibition against
killing -ust not he weakened by the fact that exceptions aro made for
reasons of nure expediency in the case of victims of serious ill* ises
or accidents, even if these unfortunate ones are united to the body
of the nation only by their past or by their external appoarance.'

"According to this statement, the Ipiecopate had to assume that
•he endeavors to exterminate life unfit to live would be refuaod any
legal or other state sponsorship. The developrents of the last few
months, which have brought about mass deaths of the inmates of mental
institutions hare frustrated this hopo and caused tho chairman of tho
Fulda conference, Cardinal Bertram of Breslau, onco again to raioo a
warning voice in the nmc and on the behalf of the (eroan blehops in
a lottor addrossed to tho B 0 ich Chancellery, attention Belch Minister
-r. Lessors, under dato of 11 August 1940. 1 aseuno that tho wording
of this lottor from the C-srasn bishops dattd 11 Auguat 1940, from which
1 .nkc tho dato given abovo re arding its antecodonto is known to tho
Botch -<inictry of Justico,

"The inallonahle »nd unchan/ oahlo parngrtiph of tho natural aoral
or'.cr; u ohalt not kill 1 has boon tnkon over without restriction

Into the Christian moral codo. It is loft to God, tho Creator of
lifo, tho sreter of life and doeth, to determine tho hour of doath.

Tho wilful extermination of Hfe, of one's own life by suicldo, of tho
lifo of others by killing, is stircatixcd by tho If* of Cod ns criminal
Interference in tho noral order. Katural as well ns Christian moral
law jtitIts tho state authorities to call upon tho non ablo to boor
arms to defend their fatherland even at tho sacrifice of thoir llvoc.

c state authority furthermore carries as tbo 'order of Cod', 'the
r'-ord not for nothing' and har the right to inflict tho death penalty
for especially rcriaus crimes committed against the moral order. In


1704


15 ’aaary 4%3L?JC-3-3^1oy (MSD)
"j~rt -o I


the Chrutlea vorld ordor, however, a =ore extensive rifht, for inotanco
tho rlfht to kill life unfit to llvo hjr euthaneaio, for roaeona of
eutha&aala or ovon for tho rcaoono of national economy, le not r. ognlted.


1704 A


« T 'C «7JL'JC^JU3*X«ioy (K3D)

"wu -t -o, I

-»on If a 8t-'e lav should exempt such action* from punishment, such a
lav <-©uld not be granted Inner justification within tha Christian world
order,

■According to th* Christian Ideology, 111 and suffering human
Ufa, not only fighting aaS economically valuable life, has a vocation
to fulfill, within the whole of the people, which can. It Is true,
be recognised only In faithfully looking up to divine providence
Even the sick person has a right to be evaluated not only according to
his econonlc value. A# It la known that particularly these Individuals
working under greatest mental tension are In danger of mentnl ex¬
haustion, It Is very likely that among those who are killed through
euthanaula there ere also people who formerly excelled In tholr work for
'he coraon welfare, and those who lost tholr nerves and the clarity of
tholr alnds In the lest World War.

■The civilised nation, even If It does not conelder ltsolf os pure¬
ly a nation of welfare, hat In the school of Christianity, carod In a
generous way f 0 r tho rescue of sick lives. It hea trolnod physicians,
act Up hospitals end mental Institutions, end established in tho
C-orman notion a welfaro system for side persons which sets an
oxaaplc for others. It would be a terrible contradiction to tho *>ast
of our na ti n. If today the etate should be given tho right to extermin¬
ate sick persons, only because the nursing of theso pationte would di¬
vert valua v le nursing pcrsonnol from tholr work on the nation as a whole
or becpuac tho houses of tho sick arc to be emptied for repatriated
compatriots, na is reasoned in tho present case. W e cannot bolleve
‘bat men of nodical science, who chose tho high profession of
saving end maintaining sick life, could turn their medical profession
tc the contrary by aiding tho extermination of sick llvos. It is evon
her r to believe that the nubile administration of law should leave
one of ita highest rlrhts _ the right to condomn to death - to non of
:c*ical science.

"Tho victims of euthanasia arc not criminal but sick people. In


1706


15 Jen 47-K_JJC^_3-X*.loy (MSD)

C urt So. I

Individual cate, inanity can raault fro aloohollan, eexual cxceaaea,
or can otharwiae b# th® Tlctln'a ovn fault. But to ooat case a tho y-
in* apclle#: Heither ha nor hla parent* hare alnned. An* not only
ccsplat* ldlota or other ahaolutaly unworthy life l t concerned. There
ar* thoee non* the* who can work froa tlae to tlae in field and yarden
and in workahop*, auch as tho


1706 A


iz :os C7 >j.oy

Court Ho. 1

o'iloptics. Aal they vero not only irtetes of stnto institution*, i tho
;hurofc RUtkorltioa wore told. It can bo proved that inoatos of purely chari-
ablo institutions wore also oaxr-nrkod far death and killed by dotourinc
t’-a- thrctt-i stnto operated institutions.

■Dear !loich I'iniator of Justlco: It is not sy intention to ralso the old
T-i.“Mon of •-•hothor the stato is tho only seirco of lew end whothor a local
order worthy of havnity can bo built upon tho sloc^n: "That bonofits tho
nation is richt.* But I conaidor it ny duty to point out that it will not bo
of bonofit to our nation, if in wido circles of tho pooplo - tho innatos of
tho inn 1 tut ions ora fra. all Onus end fra; all classos of tho population -
faith in tho world of state officials should cooso. Today this faith is
do', ly abokoa by tho outhanoie presranl Nobody boliovoa that tho petiont
coolly dlod ouddonly of a dieaaeo, of a heart disorso cr of oppondicitis.
Kobody tollovos that tho body hoi to be oreCatod 'for jaibllc hoolth r orisons'
and 'becauso of dancor cf coat-£ion.' Thoao statements cannot hold up unlor
^vbaoiuont lr.vostiGatlcnj which nay bo oxpoo od in str.to b-sod on law
(3oohtstr.-t). In o-riior eocualoatlons tho official oven oxprossod his
Sjtipathy to tho rolativoa. One oan lcrclns tho ca rents tho pooplo nrdo
r’-out this ' sympathy.'"


-1706-


15 Jan-2 .31S-4-lJtc* fcM (KSD)
Court I


*It cannot be lawful and ofbmnmf.it to 0 cr iwtlon, If through
auch a proceeding of the etate health terrlce the 7alue of the Indi¬
vidual huaon life and tho right to livo at all It eo degraded and
thu« the norole of th« nation deeply shaken. There will always to people
who 'r r s -.let ok on pity apeak of a 'deliverance' of the Incurably
ill. But, they become oeek ioaedlately If they are reminded that
•hronfh an accldont or a dieeaee they theeaelvea sight to put in the
ease eltuatlon, oven if they are atlll healthy today. Bat If
eoacono ahould refer to Soltmcho, to tho nan who dedarod that pity
and loving core la nonaenae, then we would have to tell hia that
Kieteche hiaelof daring later mental lilneae had to depend on thla
loving care hlnaclf, and th«U*lo«mche, the nan who has in hie
hooka repeatedly pronounced incredible invective* agalnat tho Gorman
peoplo, doo* not represent for u* an authority on noral quoatlon*

IS. rachscaani, (Counael for Viktor Brack)* Hr. Pr6#idont,
the Docuaont which le Juft being reed by tho Proaoeution, la only
oontalnod In part in our Document took, to that wo are coirpletoly
una v lc to follow the Prooecutlon. X therefore requett that tho
Proeocution furnlth ue with a commieto Itecunent.

MB. HCCHVILDi Tho C'uineol for Dofoneo will rocoivo a conplete
copy of thl* Document.

THT PR1SXH3T! ?h* counaol for tho Proaecutlon ha* atntod that a
c.uplcto Document will forthwith to furnished for tho Dofoneo. he
Prosecution will aec that that la done aa eoon oa poaaltlo.

HR. ECHVALD: I will read from tho bottoa of Pago 163;

■The aon who has in hi* took* ropcetcdly pronouncod incroditlo
invective* against the Scrnan people, docs not reproaont for ue an
authority on -oral question*. Bow such public norale must to under¬
lined, if tho individual huaan life in tho family le deprived of value
and right* in each a Banner according to tho example sot by thoeo
who practice euthonaeia. Or if the individual, lncltod by pure aatcrial-
io=, should get the idea of killing a wealthy aunt, a predecessor on a
hereditary fa.ru, or tone ether


1707


15 JrJ>-;.-i:s-! 4 -a-keUimx

C-urt So. 1.


.ello^-being, Is order to _a_:e a place -for himself or to procure for hioeelf
p.-u ot-ur profit.

■It & asot bo of benefit to our nation if the confldonco in doctors
uuL altogether is institutions is destroyed in *;ho pooplo by the oxt oral nation
af curiously ill p-rsoas, wno ere coatidorod t& bo pooplo'a parasitoe
(Toikasehaodlings.). ?ho compatriots put their sick relatives in the state or
charitable institutions in good faith, the physically ill persona in hospitals
Ltid the mont-lly ill or focblo-minded persons in mental institutions. Tho
state . c;.4.ritcble health o^rrico has accoptcd those pationts in good faith. ,
OOOedy wso is cli*'r-nindod can deny that u gr-at disturbance bus arison in our
pc- lo today, because tho sass dying of mentally ill porsons is discusood ovory-
vhoro and unfortunately the most absurd rumors sro cuorging cbout tho number of
ieatns, the moaner of death, etc. 3xe mystoriousnoss in tho whole procooding
- the patients arc sent f» in the -iddlo of tho nl#*t, taken to tfcwir dos-
tination in cars with the windows covered, they r.ro not allowed visitors —
o.- course doos no; hvlp to silenco thoso rumors. Tho panio has already sproad
to old people's n>mes and sanatorium* for patients suffering fron pulmonary
dioouse.

■I neod not assure you, dear 3»ich Kinlstor of Aistlco, that I hnvo
,.t hit's tie above statements out of pleasure in opposition. In this othloa^-
Wul. n.n-politicol quostion, I considered it my duty to spook, because as a
CaWiol'o blsaop I cannot be silent *Jcn it is c quostion of tho preservation
j. t... -oral basis of all public order, tai bocauso X. ns a <kr=cn bishop, on
ob‘ i tod uad-r .jticlu lo of the Bjich Concordato, to prevent an injury, which
in -y opinion tanm-tans our rm-tioa and to pre servo for our reputation of being
a civilised nation. Vo urderota:xi t if in werti-o extraordinary aoosurco arc
token in order to b ur.rcatoo the security of the country and tho no-wishing of
t-o pooplo. We tell the people that they must bo prepared in wartime to endure
rent sacrifices, oron sacrifices of blrod. in a Christian spirit of sacrifice,
and ve meet with respect i= the streets of tho town the women wearing tho
black veil, who hav u sacrificed a beloved life for tno fatherland. Tno lnalioc
xle b- aio of ta«. -oral ord.r an tho fundamental rights of the irdividunl


-1708-


15 jooifc-sss

Ciu.t La. 1.


cannot howovor bo annulled oven la vartiaa.

■I ask you dear Belch ;inister of Justice for a reply to tho above
sir to-wnt unloia a reply h_■ been la tho aoaatino to tho Joint potltlon

of taw Gwr-^n bishops and saio particular petitions."

(Sigcoturo) &rdintl jculhobor

..rchblshop of jjunich.

rhw next Document on Pc».o l66 of the Docucont Book will bo Proeocution
Sx^lblt U02 and 615-ISl

■The Bishop of Llcburg. Limburg/loan. August 13, I9UI.

■To tho Sulch lilnlttur of Justlco - Borlln.

■Sofir-rdlr^ tho report subulttod on July 16 (Sub. 1Y. pp 6 - 7 ) by tho
Cn ir.x»n of tho Juldn Blsnop's Conforanco, Cardinal Dr. Bstrau. I consider It
ay duty to prosont the following as a coccroto Illustration of dostnictlon of
•o-cclled 'useless llfo'.

■*bout 6 kllouotors from Liiiburg. In tho llttlo town of Hndauar, on a
4111 overlooking ta« town thoru Is an institution, Mtich has foroorly served
various purposes and of lato has boon usod as a cursing hous, this Institution
vc.s renovated and furnished os a placo in woich by consensus of opinion, tho
®yo mentioned 2ut.-.ur.oola has boon systenaticolly practlsod for tenths -
. rox ion;sly since lobruary I9U1*. The fact has bocoao known boyond tho
' -i.-lstrativo district of uicsbcdon. bocouso doath cortificatos frou a Registry
3 4 eaor ,.oonc~b«rg ore sont to the homo coaaitteo. (ioonchberg is tho nano of
t-io it. tltutlon boccuss it was a Franciscan monastery prior to its
coculcrizutl jh in 1603).

"Several tines a week buses arrive in Hadaacr with a considerable nucb«r
>f such victims. scuool children of the vicinity know tais vohlclo and say:
'Thoro cones too murder-box a-a in. • After tho arrival of tho vohlclo, tho
citizens of XiAd+jx r watch tho snake rise out of tho chi; coy and are torturod
-‘ith tho ovjr-prwsont thiu^t of depending on tho dlroction of the wind.

“The effort of tho principles at work hero nroi Chlldron coll each
3:4or comes and say, 'You're crazy; you'll be sont to tho baking oven in


vxva


:ohaa


. z _j. 1.

^nicar.« Those wuo do not want to sorry, or find so opportunity, «y: 'Surry,
novar bring children into the world so they con bo put into the bottling
c-tlncJ 1 Tou near old folk* tcy, 'Don't sord sc to a toto hospital if tor
t. - fceolo-idsded havo boon finished off, tho next usoless actors whoso turn
will cose are too old people."

:HS PRSSIDSJT: Won't you read a llttlo ooro slowly? Tho counsol
for tho Prjsocutton should read those Documents a llttlo sore slowly.

.3. rp » Tos. your E>nor.

■-11 Goi-fourln,: .-.en consider this destruction of holploss boliv.o
as crass Injustice, -si If anybody says th t Oernany oannot win tho war, If
:.ivro Is e Just &od. tnoso orprossions arc not tho result of o lack of lovo
of »vtaoriurd, but of a loop concern for our pooplo. Tho population cannot
;rnsp that systoactic actions uro carriod out, which, In nocordanco with
Paragraph 211 of tho G«au Criminal Codo. uro punishoblo with dooth. Hi fr
autho: ly us a uorrl concept hr.s suffered a sovero shock as a result of those
hopponln«s. The offlco notice t!fct H.S. had dlod of a oontogious disease and
t_ . for the reason ole body uad to bo buraod. no longer finds crodonco and
uch Official notices. wnich aro cc loafer bollcvod, havo further undorulrvod
tne ctniool veluo of the concept of authority.

■Off lei Is of tho Socrot SU to Pollco, it is said, aro tr: in#: to
up. rets discussion of tuu -fedasar oocurancos by nouns of sovoro throats. In
;„ u intoPott of .uoilc ponce. tuls any be woll lntondod. but tho knowlodoO
ru ui conviction :tad tho Indignation of tho population cannot bo chanced by
it, tho convict!» will bo lncru .scd vita tho bittor realisation thrt dls-
cutslon Is prohicited with throats, but that too cations thousolvos arc not
E roc_cuted under penal law.

■Pi.ctL lo<iuuntur.

■I beo you -ost bubbly. Herr a.'ich Idnlstor, in the sonso of tho
report of the Spiscoputc of July l6 of t.ds year, to prevent further tmne-
,;r dsi.'&s of th„ 7ifta co^-rdnent of God."

(Sit ned) Dr. Silfrlck.


-1710-


15 Jarv-^-JP-5-l-uliV'^ock

Court lie* 1

The rwxt d^cutent is on page 188 f tho docuacnt bock, 616-FS, Prosecution
Exhibit U03* This is a lutt-r f rca the cnt'.xlic bishops cf tho diocosos
belonging tc the church pr'.vincos of Cologne and Eadorbern to the Reich
; ioiatry of Justice, and is cn th- saso subject as the letter I road beforo.

The next document, cn page 170 is Ifccic-nt 616-FS, prosecution Exhibit JjOL
to tho Chancellory cf the Fuehrer care of Oberdicnatleiter Brack.

T.sa EIUSSIDEHTi Counsel, isn't that a c ntinuaticn cf the document?

HR. HOCffiAIDi Mo, this is 616-FS. Of, yes, I am sorry. It is not a new
6 euaent. It is page 3 of Docuacnt 616-PS, on page 170 ef the docuiaont book.
This is still Exhibit li03. I read only th- third jngo wf the document.

"To the Chanc-llory cf th_ Fuohrer, oar*, ef Oberdionstloitor Pvaok or
deputy, 2 send yta hor.with *s oth.r evidence t.x c<vy of a petition uvido in
•Vlcgnu on 28.8.29U oy the bishops f the church provinces cf Cologne and
fartorbom. i:eil ititlor, by cr<Lr, tc tlx C5iancollery, 3 October 19lil«"

Tfv- next d-cunont is • n page 171, JKWJ18, FTes-cuticn Exhibit 10J.

"S-cret Reich ..attor, dated 19 Locoeb-r iyl*0, SS Standartonfuchror Victor
3r-.ck, Staff-Loader at Roich-leador Bcuhler. Dear Brack, I hoar thoro is groat
xoitosent -:n the Alb because of th. institution Grafonock.

■Tb, p xl'ticn rcccgnisos tlie „rey auten bile ef tho SS and think thoy
knew * . t is , ing • n at tho c nstantly seeking crematory. *h-t happens thoro
•r 1 secret and y-t is n. longer cn-. Thus the w rst fcolin,. has arisentt:-ro

In or ,iini.n tlu-r- ranains :nly .no thing, t. discontinue the us cf tho
instituti n in this place and in any -v-r.t diss-.'inatc infernatien in a clover
in-' sensible nanrvjr by sh/wiru a-ticn pictures n tho subject of inherited and
nor.tal diseases in just that locality.

"rloy I ask fer a rep rt as t h»w the difficult prcblaa was solved.

Hell Hitler, initial* by Heinrich Hi* lor."

Th. :v.xt d.cu^nt is HO-812, cn pag- 172 tho dccuncnt b.ok, FT.s.cution

Exhibit 1 * 05 .

"Iett-riwad Vikt.r Brack, Cbcrdicnstloitor, datod B-rlin, 18 April 19lil,
Strictly C.nfldentials


15 Jar. 47-M- J?- 5- 2-Nlnabuck- (AX)
COURT I


■My doar party comrade Dr. Schlogelberger: (Handwritten)
Top Secret.

■According to agreement I send you horowlth a folder
with various :brns wanted for tho ascertainment and partial
nodical preparation, anothor foldor with forna for furtnor
clorlcal elaboration resulting from tho doath of tho patient.
The rocords are socrot, however, and I would appreciate, If
you would keep them undor look and key. Sono noro things,
are of course nooessary, for proper recording and administrat¬
ive routine, but I do not believe that thoy are of any In¬
terest to you. Thoroto belong, for Instance the death not¬
ification to tho rolatlvos of the patlont. Thoso aro to bo
kept somehow different according to tho dlotrlot and kind
of rolatlvos; thoy must frequently bo alterod to avoid
stereotyped toxts and thcroforo aaaplo lottor would only
lrrltato. I would liko to call your attention ospoclally to
tho oard files No, 1* and 14; on thoir rovorso sides you
will find a 11 8t of authorities who aro to bo Informed.

■Nhon reviowlng tho files again which you.” put at my
disposal I found some dotalls which ought to be olarifiod
and aottlod; I would bo thankful to you for doing so. There¬
fore I shall forward then to you Individually Monday or
Tuosday noxt week. Moll Hitler, Rospoctfully yours, (signa¬
ture) Brack."

Tho next document is on page 174 of tho document book,
NO-84*, Prosecution Sxhlbit 406, and has again tho letter¬
head Viktor Brack, Obordlonstlelter, dated Berlin, 4 August
1941, to Stato 3ocrotary Dr. Freislor, Reich Ministry of
Justlco, Berlin.

■Doar party comrade Frelsler, Rolohsleltor Bouhlor, who


1712


15 Jan 47-M-J?-5-2-Nlnabuok- (AX)

OOORT I

at present Is absont from Borlln, commissioned mo to express
bis gratitude for sondlng us tho camp reports. The report
of the President of tho .»ppellato Court In Frankfurt shows
that ho consldors tho fora of tho information lottors as
very awkward. I would bo grateful to you If you would lot
mo havo the coplos of tho lottors In question In ordor to
establish tholr dates, booauso Just In that vory Institution
a change of management took place reoontly. I will admit
that tho last nanagor has boon partly wrong tactically. With
ny host thanks for your


1712a


18 Jan 47-H-JP-5-3-Nlnabuck-( ^C)

COURT I

vf/crts In advance. Hell Hitler, your Brack."

I would like to offer now Into evldenco NO-115.

This document is not In the document book but will bo hand¬
ed up. It should be in the Gorman documont book, however.

Hay I read this document, your Honor? It is NO-115 which
will bo Prosecution Exhibit 407.

THE PRESIDENT: Have oopios of this documont boon
furnished to dofonso counsol, 3ornan oounsel?

MR. K5CHVALD: Tho couneol for the dofonso havo
rooolvod coploa of this dooumont. This document is dated
Stuttgart, 19 July 1940. "The Bishop of Vuorttomborg to
Dr. Frick, Rolohamlnistor of tho Intorlor. ■ And I want to
point out horo that this is ‘ho lettor to which Document
Number 626, I think It Is — Just a nlnuto — 62', roforo,
whloh la on page 157 of tho dooumont book.

■Tho» bishop of Vuorttomborg to Dr. Frick, Rolchsmln-
lstor of tho Intorlor. Estoomod Minister...."

THE PRESIDENT: What Is the nunbor of thlo documont
as an offorod oxhlblt.

HR. HOCHVALD: Tho numbor of tho document I am reading,

sir?

THE PRESIDENT: Tho oxhlblt numbor.

MR. HOCHVALD: Tho exhibit numbor Is 407. 62*-PS Is
400, your Honor. Tho documont I roforrod to Just now was
the first document I road today. This is 400, and tho doou¬
mont whloh I am proaontlng nc - . Is Prosooutlon Exhibit 407.

■Tho Bishop of Vuorttomborg to Dr. Frick, Rolchsmlnls-
ter of tho Intorlor. Esteemod Mlnlstor. For some months
now...."

JUDGE SS3RING: COUftdol, will you again advlso tho


171 *


15 Jan 47-H-JP-5-.'-Nlnabucjc-( rt K)

COURT I

Tribunal as to the number of the exhibit and tho page upon
which you said reference to this document was fourd?

•HR. HOCHV.VLD: The page Is 157. The document Is Pros¬
ecution Exhibit 400, 6S*-P8.

JUDGE SEBRING: Is Prosecution Exhibit 407 tho socond
letter mentioned In the first line of Exhibit 400?

HR. HOCHVALD: Yes, sir.


l?l»a


iS Jin- -Ji-5- - innbuck
C urt F-, 1


JOBS; w an- 0* Open what infersrttcn «!c ycu base that statonent, c "nsol?
BOTIAU)* This Is frus the sauo writer en ' it is to, as it is stated

• lU »; f th- .'.uichainiator >S the Interior.

JUKJZ SZBRIHG: The ether is to the tt. icteinistcr of Justice.

•!R. H0C»':JU* Tos sir, but in the text ycu s-c, "Fersdt rt to inform you
of the s.cend lottcr I have sent to the .Wichsimstcr of the Interior."

ju:<2. SZB.U.'JO! .aid ycu Maintain then, that this letter of 19 July 19h0 —
IR 'AX .JXh Yws sir.

JIDU PSUHto —ic tlw nu referred to ?

MR HCOT.&IS* In 623-fS.

THE HEhlDEWri Counsel cay proceed.

HOCS-JUi "The Bishop of ..uerttccbort, to Dr. Frick, Roichndnistor

of the Int-ri'r. istocned inistcr.

t?:r s :v nth* n-.w, upon instruction e£ the Cabinet Guncii for


171-i


Il Ci _ *.7-;i-cX—6—le-Sicebuck
C-Uit Sd. 1


Satiootl Defense, luiM, fesble-ainded or epileptic patients of state or
•rivetc asyiuns ere being transferred to another Institution. Relatives are
informed of transfers only subsequently, area if they thtasolvcs bore tho
exponses of institutional cere. Usually, a fev aor.ths la ter. they are noti¬
fied th t the patient concerned had suecuebec to sr. illness end that on the
grounds of presenting -pideaics. creation h.d beer, necessary. Accordirg to
superficial estinates, there =ust be several hui^reds of these patients sl-
recer frx: Vu^rttenberg along, -<*g then disabled veterans of the world war.
who, in this ccnner, have lost their lives.

■ __ ty nery inquiries froo oountry «4 city k! hy di.ore*

I oon.lder It ny duty to Mil th. Ooveruner.f. rttMtloi. to tho fret thrt
ttl. affair hr. er-t.d r B«t .ttr In our U.tl. country, flr.t of .11.
t .c.u.. or., of tho li-itmtlOB. coot .rood. th. Cr.tl. Orrf.r.ooh, Into -h.ch
prtWnt. hod h..h trrtiferred .hd vher. . oratory rr.d . rorf.trrr'. offlco
hrd hot:. ..UhU.h.4. 1. luMt.d In Vu.rtwoh.r«. Orefence* i. In.tltu-

tuorl * ooorty of th. “Inhere Kl..lon\ r founMtlon of .oMrit-or.. vhloh
in M.-y piece. rr.d fa- n.ry y.rr. .oo.pt. n’4 trie., err. of th. phy.lcrlly
„:.d d.r.tolly 111. Door Iratructlon. of th. «lrl.try of th. Interior of
Vuerttentord, thl. In.tltutlon .re. rt th. outhr.rit of th. oor. trrr..forrod
,o the aoha.tory f.ut. In Uop«r S»hlr. flr.f...«k vr. .ot Mid. for ro-
CO', 1 ^ prtl.dt. *eth.r.d froo all oth.r Iretltutlone. the or-otlo 1. looote
or. or. Mlh.uct- of tho Sortie Alt In r .P<-r..ly pn^ulrtod .ood.d territory,
hut tho pooplo free thl. rlolnlt, .re Ju.t th. uorolnt.ro.ted in vhrt tehee
plroe there. Sb. .loh trrn.port. thrt rro unlo. ded on th. .Mil rrllw

MU. rt hrrbrch rr. dor Uhn. the tu.ee. .!«» =*«" VhiCh

tho octlont. fron di.tunt r,ll«y .trtlou. or dlr.otly fron other
Institution.; the M.h. errmtl.; free the or.Mt.ry vhloh 1. .«• erpn
froo Oerter dl.trrre. - rll thl. 1. dl.turhl.et the oeool. -o n»oh the

□ore, because as one has access to the castle.

-The other reason why such thing, are taJcer. especial* serious in
Vuertteu'.-cr,: 1 . the foot thrt eynpton. of d.^nri-rtlor. ,-re not Infroquer.t 1
.ur little country oror. 1 = fnnilL. of hl«h rtnUl or oorrl


1715


15 J«fi 47-K-SX-6-2a-KinabOCk
C art So. 1

is to soae extent r consequence of lnteraarriafe aoong relatives as o result
of the lo:^c oecluslor. of the country. Thus, through these externlnation
aerfcuros against Institutional patients a *;rert neny fanilies even of the
Intelligentsia ere affected. She very canner of the orocedure is sharply
criticised In these circles and special cooneat Is nade on the falsity of
the stetcuer.ts ,;lver. In this connection. Everyone Is convinced of the fact
th; t the officially stetod causes of de« th are arbitrarily chosen. When
finally. In the official death notice, regrets rre oxpressed that in eolte
of all efforts it ves impossible to save the ©ationt’e life, this is con-
sido.-ed po nockery. Above all. hovever. the qycteriousness leads one to be-
lieve that socothing conflicting with Justice rnd norals le going on and
•nuo cannot be oooi-ly becked aid supnorted by the Govornner.t, like othor
necessary and strict vtr ceosures of the State. In tho nunerous vorbrl and
vritter. netcrtlona received by us, this point is emphasised over and ovor
•gain, oven by tho eouao;. peoplo. It appears also that very lit.lo diecrini-
natior. vao used ir. the selection of patients f<* oxtorolnatlor. at loaet in
tho beginning. Selection vas not limited to iobeciles but rather, especially
raoug enlloptics, thoso oblo to vork voro also Chosen."

I do not vent to aid the vholo document, and only road the last, the

signature, "hell Hitler, (signed) Uura-

Tho next document is on page 176 of the document book, J.0-872, an affi¬
davit of the defendant Gerhard Hose, arosecution Exhibit <••8.

•1, Gerhard august Heinrich R>se, being duly svorr., deocac ar.d state:

■1. I aa the sane Geriu rd August Heinrich Roeo vhc hrs horctofcre
8worn to en affidavit or. 13 Soveaber 19*,6 concerning ny personal history and
ay official position. I have teen duly varr.ed th« t tho folloving statcaont
aay be usod against as in c^irt.

■2. During ay erroer vhich I described in the oforosaid affidavit of
1? Roveaber 19-6 I ccae In official contact tvicc vith Dr. Karl 1-randt durirtr
hio tenure of office. I aa. therefore, able to aake the foil win* statement
or. ay contact vith Dr. tarl Brandt.

■o. I did research v.rfc in nalarld strains, malarial Injections for

1716


15 * 7-A-l. l-5-3a-Kinatuck

Court So. 1


therapeutic malaria on insane# it virious hospitals and oelerial treatment ft
other forms of nervous diiuiei. It order to keep up those neliriol strains,
I hid to vork permanently with a certain insane asylum. It 19-i.. ty patient#
1 „ thi# asylum had to ho evacuated o# the institution wa# taken over and aid
into a Belch hospital or a municipal hospital of Berlin since nary municipal
hospital# there wore destroyed or denoted hy air raid#. I, therefore, ap¬
proached Dr. Karl Lrandt andaeked hiu to out er. insane asylum at cy disposal
tnd to or-tect oy di tiette insofar that to local authorities ehould he allow-
to take over this place and to use it as a goner* 1 hospital. He thor. out an
insane asylum it Thuringia at ay disposal and oroaieed ae that qy oatietts
could remain ir. that institution. He alto nadc arratfionor.ts that this insti¬
tution would not he converted into a general hospital lr. spite of the fact
that with the advp .oinfi destruction of hospitals it Oeroeny, °«r.y attempts
vero ado to convert this esylun isito a general hosoital.

••. Ihi second tine I had to approach Dr. Karl Brandt was in 194i. a
aoot patient# of insane asyluj;# v«re considered hopless cneos - Just irjwtuo
whose condition could hardly he improved - they received only standard food
r »ti«.s of the acral consumer population and not the food for uutier.ts lr.
:c..or.'l hospitals which were confiden tly hl^er. Vith the contii.uou# lower
in* of the food r. tioae In Oeraaiy, rations in insane asylums tccanc so low
that I Could not tear the rosoonsltility of usix* a» lcrial therapy or. lr.sar..
pe.olo i r.d submitted, therefore, to tho Ministry of Food a rccucet that ins,
pi tie?.to under mail riel treatment should roceivo the usual food rations of
patients c-f general hospitals. The Ministry of Food made sooe difficulties
tn. I approached Irrsdt r f ;oin tnd asked him to suooort By rccucst. As a re¬
sult of his intervention, higher food rations were issued to insane x» tient.
vho were under colarirl treatment.

-I have read the dove affidavit, consisting of two pages in the ing-
lish language and it is true and correct to the test of my knowledge and
belief. This affidavit *e# given hy me freely and voluntarily, without
promise -f reward rxA I was subjected to no duress or threat of ary kind.

e

(Ei.,..cd) Gerhard Au,pist Hei:.rich Hi.se.■

1717


15 Jan-M-D«JG-6-l-Pu 11y-KSD (FL)
Court No. I


DR. H0C::.;AU).- The next document is Docunent D-181, Prosecution
Exldbit U09. The first page was by mistake not filed in the document book.

THE PRESIDENT,- Upon what page of the dccuoent book is that docu-
nont fourri, Counsel?

DR. HOCK^ALD.- The second page. The second page of the docunent
which was lilcd in the docuaent book, your Honor, is on page 178. Tho
first page is loose. It would bo in 177-B.

Tho lottcrhoad is "National Socialist Goman Worker's Party, Gauloi-
ter '..ostfabon-South, Rubber staap of Krolslciter. Roforenco: Horoditary
Health Law," datod "Bochua, 21 January 37.

"FollOTiing instructions of tho Doputy Gauleiter, I herewith inform
yew by copy of a circular letter of tho Doputy of tho Fuehrer doted U
January 1937, No. 10/37.

"In tho docroo of tho Roich and Prussiand Minister of tho Interior
datod 22 August 36 rogarding the application of tho law for tto preven¬
tion of descendants with horoditary disoases, Civil Sorvico doctors arc
instructed to consult with Hereditary Hoalth Law being inatitutod ngeinst
a Party aoabor. They will do so before making a application for olorili-
cation on tho grounds of congenital isbccllity.

"Tho quosticn whether the person is an imbecile cannot be ascertained
solely by carrying out an intelligence test, but requires detailed eva¬
luation of the whole personality of tho human boing. This review shall not
only take into consideration the knowledge and intellectual abilitios of
the presumed Imbecile, but also his othical, coral and political attitude.
A number of Civil Sorvico doctors havo up to date attached little import¬
ance to tho roviewing of the personality as a whole. They have up to new
hardly ever called for or used information regarding the political conduct
of tho supposed patient with hereditary disease.

"Now that tho Party by virtue of tto decree of the Roich and Prussian
Hinistor of the Intorior is consulted in the proceedings on aattor of


- 1718 -


15 *'«mary->t-DJC-_6_l-Put ty (MSD)

Coi»t *o. I

hereditary diverge against Party ssebere, It it the tsik of all
Gauleiters to ascertain that the lew regarding hereditary health will,
in fact, he used In


1718 A


15 - -r.*G-6-«uttr

: ’ i . l

the sense in which it wia designed. Scr.od masterly examination is net to be
lene decisive in judgin'; rhothcr e person concerned is an imbecile. T t is,

In fact, to be ascertained as well hew the person concerned behaves in daily
life, whether ho can ■. the dear ads which life makes cn :n average person

ind whether ho can be regarded es a full member of the cosnunity. If tho

\

G'uloitor, on the basis of this examination of the personality as a whole
wf the Tarty sector, ccaes to tho conclusion that the Law For The Prevention
of Descendants with Hereditary Disoases is applicable, ho Bust then investi-
•Ptfc whothor the poison about to be stcriUxed has achieved very 'utstending
merits for the National Socialist Ifeveoent. If the Gauleiter roaches this
conviction and feels that he aist use his influence to prevent tho sterilis¬
ation, he r.i^. repoxt to this department givin; a dotailod explanation of
tho reasons which apeak against sterilisation.

''The hoich and irussien Minister of the Interior has orderod that Civil
Tcrvico doctors will report to hie any cases whore the opinion of tho Gaul¬
eiter differs free thet of the aedical officer.

"So as not to delay proceedings under the Hereditary Health Law unnoc-
ossc ly, I also request information end explanation on oach one of thoso
cases, stating the reasons which have led to tho difforunco of opinion.

"Tho Department for National Hoalth is to carry out preparations for tho
decision of any case concerning Horodit; xy Hoalth which has to bo put before
tho Gauleiter. ;J1 natters of hureditarj health will be t roatod as urgent
and secret.

"1 articular attention will bo drawn in each caso to tho obligation of
maintaining secrecy.

"I request that reports bo node to a. from tine to time regarding expor-
ionco gained in doaling with natters cf hereditary health.

"I request you trait above exposition as strictly confidential and only
fer yvur cwr. personal information.

Hail Hitlerl
(si^iod) Ruschcnburg"

I think it /cos without saying thet according to Nazi doctrine it was

1719


15 J--xuicr:-i4-^*G-6-3-i'i:ttr
C-urt Me. 1

censiiorod that sciaebcdy »» insane or net by whether he was a good Party
member or net.

T.da finishes the presentation of Document Book No. 15. JeHeney
will now ^ cr * "1th the presentation of Document Bcok Nc. 16

THE .IJSSIDSIT: Before ccaaencinc the roadin- cf this document book,
tha Tribunal will be in recess.

(Recess)


1720


15 Js'.i«-7-l-?*-«'.TD-Beard
Court !!o«l


THE MAxWftU Tfcs Tribunal is again in session.

10. MoHAMET: toy it please the Tribunal, the Prosecution gt this
itnt has Introduced a considerable amount of documentary evidence concerning
•ha Euthanasia Program in the Goraan Reich, We first introduood tho chart
which is on thj wall behind the witness box. Brack's affidavit told us tho
nannor lr. which this program was carried out. He told us that Karl Brandt
and - .uhlor were the administrative heads of tho wholo program, Under Bouhler
wo soo that Viktor Brack was hie chief deputy. Under Karl Brandt wo see the
1 >rco corporate code names which were used to camouflage the operation of
tho pro"ranj The Reich Association for Hospitals and Nursing, the Charitablo
Foundation for Institutional Caro, and tho Patient Transport Corporation.

We have put in a number of documents which carry one or the otbor of thoso
DOOM,

To th. loft, wo soo tho Department for Questionnaires under Allors.
nivl, you will recall that ttoso questionnaires wero aont to tho offioo of
Dooter Linden ir. thr, Reich Ministry of Intorlor undor Contij that Linden
lion listributed tho questionnaires to tho insono asyluns and other insti-
1 1 Mona in Oernugrj thoro the questionnaires wero fillod out, and roturnod
again to Linden's officoj and, from LiDdon's offico back to tho offico of
All rs, whoro they wore faraod out to tho so-called exports who studied tho
questionnaires and detorairod in the first instance when such patients wero
bo subjected to Euthanasia, Tho so-callod top experts, Hoydo and NioUscho
nndo a final review of these questionnaires, and the patients night tbon bo
sent to tta observation institutions where the final chock was nado. And,
from there wo havo soon that they wore transported to tho Euthai jia or
Extermination Institutions, including' Grafonack, tortheinor, Hadamar,

R omLurj, and others,

Vc have put in exyaploa of tho questionnaires which wero usodj wo have
put in tho dry fora letters undor tho letterhead of one of the three code
r.-jics or' rin.; transports to be shipped to the extermination centers j wo havt
s .n tho transport listsj wo havo seen the stcrotyped letters which wore sont


1721


15 J: .,-Y-2-i~.YD-Ecard
Court No. 1

by the H3c termination Centers to the relatives of tho individuals exterminated,
where it was told the relatives that the so-callod insane persons had died of
pneumonia or some other disease} we have seen oxa np lx-a of the oa that tho
operators working in the so institutions had to take, swearing then to secrecy,
violation of which meant death} we have soon at least one letter from a
doctor who was asked to participate, tut who was able to refuse} we have
soon letters to the Reich Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Interior ox-
pros sin; tho deep felt indignation of the German pooplo to this program; wo
have soon pitiful lettors from persons inquiring about their relatives in
the institutions; and, wo have seen a to retyped death noticos publishod in tho
newspapers.

Ho now coco to sovoral important documents showing how tho program
oporated in tho ooncontrxtion oaapo} how porsons who wore not in Germany woro
rought thoro on occasions — persons forcibly brought to Germany from occu¬
pied countries and held in concentration camps, and woro pickod out by tho
Doctor*s Cocnission sont out from those sane institutions in Berlin for tho
concentration oanps, to chose their victims for oxtomlnation.

I would first liko to remind tho Tribunal of certain statements made
by tho ofandant Hovcn in his affidavit, which was introduced as Prosecution'i
Exhibit :io. 281. That is Document No. U29, and wo havo includod it in Docu-
njnt ?odc No. 16 beginning on ;>ago 1.

THE PRESIDENT* What la tho number of this Exhibit?

JCl. MoHANEY* This is Prosocution*s Exhibit No, 281.

And, I will now ask tho Tribunal to turn to page b, paragraph 9, whore
Hov<- states t

"I bo came awaro in 19U1 that the so-callod 'Euthanasia* program for
Vila extermination of the mentally and physically deficient was being carried
out in Goroary. At that time the Caap Comandor, Kech oalled all tho import¬
ant SS officials of tte oin? together and informed them that he had roooivod
a socrot order from HLxOer to tho effect that all mentally and physical
•’.ofioiont imetes of the camp should be

1722


1 " .1

rt o# 1

r Authorities fror. Berlin ordered that all the Jewish inmates of the
ucbemald Concentration Canp should be included in this extermination prew
rrn .. In accordance with these ordors 300 to IjOO Jewish prisoners of differ-
nt nationalities wore sont to tte Euthanasia Stationat Bernburg for extornd-
nation* A few days later I received a list of the naaos of those Jews who
wore oxterednatfcd at Derrtwrg froc tte Camp Conxaaivder snd was ordered to issu
falsified statements of death* I obeyed this order. This particular aotlon
was oxecutod under the code nano of ‘lb f 13*• I visited Dornburg on
one ocoasion to arrango for the erenation of two lira too who diod in the
Womigcrndo Branch of the Buchonwald Concentration Canp."

In addition to Jfcvon's statonont, wo have already hero tho testimony

m 0

of Walter Neff, Emost Viohrog, Euson Hogon, and Ferdinand Roonhild,w*th
respect to tha operation of the Euthanasia Program in tho oonoontration camp*
under the oodo name of 11* f 13. And, those camps, I night say, wero wide¬
spread* Viohwog was from Dachau, Noff was from Nattwoilor, and Hogon ond
Roc .did woro from Buchomald*

I tum now to Dccuaont Ho. H>«1$C, on pogo 7 of tho Document Boo^,and
•his will bo Prosecution*s Exhibit No. iilO. The first page of this Document
is not particularly informative. It is da tod March 18, 19l*2. It is on tho
1 tterhoad of Gross Rosen, and it is addrossed to tho Asylum in oaro of Mr,
Gcdonsohwoig, Bombur*;. It is a receipt which is to bo returned to the Con-
•- tration Camp Oross Poson. Wo soo at tho bottce that it has boon stamped
"Asylum Dornburg" with tho si jnaturo of Hiroho, to tho right, showing ho
roooivjd it. Tho next pago, however, is considerably moro interesting.


1723


15 Jan-3-l-M-A7B-Cc< tiA Sr .kc 9
Court- No* 1


This ia a Hat of 'concentration cam imatos who cano fron Gross-
Roson to “omlurr, and this ia a usual mere ran iun which was sent alone to
Gross-Roson with the list. It is dated at Bombur-, 19 ’torch, 1942, to the
Camp Coanandant, Concentration Canp, Oross-Rosom
"Subjoct* Transport of 19 !torch, 1942.

Enclosed you will find a liat of the canp invites who arrived here

on 19 March, 1942, free your concentration canp.

Hell Hitler,

Signed* Hlrche."

On the next pago wo find tho attached list of imatos fron Grosa-
Roson, who wore sont to Bernburg for extermination. That, if the Tribunal
picaso, was an externination station, and an extermination station alone,
RoanhLld tostiflod and fogan has told us in hia affidavit that imatos woro
sent to Hamburg for extermination, ao this, in effect, ia a liat of con¬
centration invites who woro exterminated in Bomburg, and it ia a rather
interestin', list. It includes 57 names. They woro good o no ugh to includo
tho pin co of birth of tho so aon who wore oxocutod in Bomburg,

Tho third naao on tho liat on tho first page, Bajgolnann Isak, indi¬
cated ho was a Jew, Ho oonoa from a town in Poland. I will not road all of
those names. I will Just call to tho Tribunal*# attention that whoro Isak
and jsrcol appears, those indioato Jewish imatos.

Dropping down to tho third nano from tho bottom <f tho first page, wo
'Ini Itoricuso, Earl cl, Warshhau, indicating a Polish National, and the last
nine on tho first pego, Poliak, Heinrich from Lenborc in Poland.

On page ten of tho Doouaent Book wo find again Jews listed with tho
nano of Isrftol* Tho fifth har» fron tho top, Hokel, Josef, listed free
Tamow in Poland.

Ikm dafonso ccurael nay orguo that whilo theso persons listed hare

wore bom in Poland or in Hungary or in Romania, who knews they nay havo

bacons B*rwn oitizono, hcnco wo a to not concemod with tho execution of non-

Gcrnan nations. Fortxmately that argunent is not open to then as wo shall boo

in a ronont. Under the moo of EauMoek, we find .a «n named Raubicek, Karl,

1724


1- Jaa.- end Tidce 9

court ::o. 1


free a place in Hun.-ary. Invidiataly under that is the nano of ibraski,
..ladislaua, fron a town in Poland. At about the niddlo of the page is
SirorskL froe Lublin Po l a nd .

TIE IHESIDSHTi Where is that?

MH. HcHANEYi Al»eot in the middle, just a littlo bit under the
:id He, you Will see the nar* of tor, and it is iasodiatoly under Sorxior.

THE I-RESIEEHTi I would su^gost if you would refer to the numbers -

!R. ItoHuNEY: Yos, indeed. _

THE 'RESIDENTi It would bo oasier to follow.

HR. ,MoH.JEY: Sikorski is 26776. I will just givo the last two digits
in tho mn v or. I think that is sufficient. Sikorski is from Lublin in
Polan’, an' the next mn, 75, ia free a placo in Roumnia, and 76 fron Warsaw

in Poland.

On the next pago, 86, tho first nano at tho top, Storn, is fron a town
in Polan*. No. 67, Weiss, Ignox, is fron a town in Hungry. 92, Woxnioxka,
Ir-nao, is fron a town in Polanij 96 Wondolowski, fron Warsaw, Polandj 96 fron
a t n in Polandj 97 fron roland, 600 fron Poland and 802 fron Eounarda.

I oono now to Docunont U51-PS, on ;>ago 13 of tho Document Book, and
this *ill bo Prosecution Exhibit No. 611. On pagos 13, 16, 15 and 16 we find
a sample questionnaire, which wo have soon sovoral tines before. This was a
questionnaire which was filled out on the unfortunate victims who wore sent
tc thu '-Xto mi nation iiwtitutions. This was a questionnaire whic camo out ol
Union* o office, which was filled in, either in tho asylun or tho concen¬
tration car:. , and based upon this quostionnairo the decision was made by tho
exports as to whothor the .articular individual should bo killed.

I call your attention again to tho fact that on pa B o 13 this question¬
naire includes a space for raco, with a foot-notoi "Gorman or related blood
(cf Goman blood), Jar, Jewish, half-breed of first or second degree.

Negro (half•vbreed), Gypsy (half-brood), etc.-, and on tho same line is a
placo for nationality. If it should be urged by defense counsel that tho
euthanasia pm-ran applied only to German Nationals, then why include a blarfc

1725


15 rw-8-3-H>«C ock end 2b k 9
Court No. 1


on the questionnaire for rationality. It would be a very sinple ratter to
advise evoryora that this progran applied only to Gernans and not to include
fcrel,71 nationals. Ho havo seen not one word in any of the volucdnous
c rrosporvionco we have already introduced which indicates that this program
was confined in any way to Goman Nationals. As a natter of fact, tho proof
is already shown that it applied in a largo degree to non-Gorman nationals
fron its very inception.

I will asic tho Tribunal to turn to page 17, which is a part of tho
sane exhibit, an! we sooto whoa this si=*ile questionnaire was sent. It wan.
included as an attachment to tho teletypo which wo soooon pogo 17. Tho tcilo-
typo is fror. Oranionbur , which was tho headquarters of the WVHA, which had
a tdnistmtivo control of all concentration corps. It is ditod Doccnbor 12,
I9lil, to tho Camp Coecf.rvlant of tho Concentration Canp Gross-Roson, and it
states!

"In lottor top socrot Ui snail ? 13 of 10 Dec. lil, tho sanplo quostion-
nairo ms by aistalce not enclosed. Enclosuro follows today.

Signed* Liobehonschol,

S5 Obersturobannfuehrer."

Liobehonschol was one of tho iaportant loaders in tho inspootorato of
the concentration corps. Thus wo soo that tho sanplo quostionnair i ms ono
stdoh was sont to tho concentration canp, Gross-Roson, to bo usod in connocti<


1726


Court I


15 Jan U7 - H - 8-la - LJ3 - Cook e^l 9
with the action li; f 13.

On the next page, that ie, page 18, «e see the letter fro. Uebohen-
achol referred to in the teletype, and the teletype says "In letter top
secret ih small f 13 of 10. Dec. 1*1", and here we have the letter, dated
Oranienburg, 10 Dec. 19U1, from The Reichsfuehrer SS, the Inspector of
the Concentration Caa*e, and then you see ianediately under that the code
ru u: "Uif 13", that is a secret diary reference, the letter beii* noted

as "top secret."

"Subject: Doctors - Comisslon:

".leforoico - Fonner correspondence of the 12th Novostoer, 19l»l, U* * .

13/0t/U.

"Snclcoure - 1."

Thin is a letter distributed to o substantial nurbor of tho concen¬
tration c« s, sinco this lettor is addressed: "To tho Camp Ccomandnnts
of t o Concentration Carrs Dachau, Sachsonhauson, Buchenwald, Mauthauson,
«usch..lts, Ficasorfeurg, Gross-Roson, fcousngaOM, Wcdorhogen.

".vs the caej. ccct hadanta of tho concentration camps, Dachau, Sachsonhauson,
Buchenwald, r'authausan and Auschwitz were lnforeod in tho corrospondonco
mentioned above, tho Doctors' - Ccraission will visit tho abovo named
c ncontration cajpa for the Selection of prisoners in tho near futuro.

■Tho first half of January, 1*2, la designated for this examination
fer the concentration caaps Flossonburg, Gross-Rosen, Neuon^araoe, Nleder-
ho^on."

I cdjht say parenthetically that the word "Doctors' - Cocmisaion"
is vory ir-ertant, because it is the contention of the ftrosec tion, and
it shall be proved, that the Dcctcrs* Ccnraission appeared in these con¬
centration casps on tho orders and at the direction cf tho organization you
seo on tho wall, that is, tno or^anination under the defendant, Karl
5ra,x3t and Victor Brack. The Doctors 1 Co3?lssion went to the camps at
their orders* Of course, the Inspectors of the concentration camps,
HiBQler's organisation, had to be informed and coop'erated in the program,

1727


o urt I


15 J an - 6-2a - LJG - Cook end Icio. &

and indeed they did it in a very arpla measure as we see free the affi¬
davits cf defendant Hover.. Ho wa3 not under the organization of tho
euthanasia program *ich we see pictured on the wall. Hovon was a concon.
tration caap doctor, and tho reason he is indicted for having participated
in tho outhenaala program is becauao concentration caap doctors necessarily
did so. They did so because they ware ordered, as this lottor itself will
show. They initially picked out free tho insates of tho caap those "ho
wero oligible for transportation to an extermination institution. The
Dec tors' Comdssion which *aa a part of the euthenasia program pictured
on tho wall, then caao to tho caap and was prosontod with questionnaires
such aa the sample sont Grosa-Roson, ihich had boon partially filled
cutwith the ivtsa and other roforences there called for in tho questionnaire.
Tho Doctors' Ccnsission thon filled out additional parts of the i.uostlon-
nairo, and nay have jorhapa cado a closer oxasdnation of tho inmates who
had boon first selected by tho concentration coop doctors, such as Hovon,
ard in this procoss, undoubtedly, a few cf tho inrntos wore woodod out,
that is, not included in tho extermination transport.

But it cannot be said that action li* f 13 was an action of Hlironlor
or an action of tho SS with which tho defendant, Karl Brandt, and tho
dofendaiit Brack had nothing to do. It can't bo maintained, and wo aro
new in tne procoss of proving precisely tho contrary.


1728


15 J ... A7-J^10-1-FSF-
Co'.-rt Ko. 1


Gross


To continue with this letter. The concentreticn camps are advised
that the Doctors' Coaaisaion will visit the concentration camps in the
future. I have rood the pare, raph reading:

"T:*: first half of January 1942 is desisted for this examination
for the concentration camps Flossenburg, Gross-Roscn, & jongacne,
Jiioderhagon."

It continues:

"Since the available doctors hrvo c very hoavy responsibiUty,
tile examinations in the concentration camps must bo shortened ta much


as possible.

"In the enclosure a sample of the questionnaire will be sent as a
copy for the preparatory work. Those forms arc to be mimeographed end


to be filled out. The answering of single questions are taken up in this
sr.stplo which are underlined in red and only these questions h vo to be
answered. Relative to these ain^io questions, the followin. explanation


is givon:

"The question 'physically incur:bio ailment' is not only to bo

•

answered with yes or no if possible, but to be answered with a short
sioaary of the dia.jnosis. In addition, also the question of war
injuries is to be Jetumir.ed because this guarantees a decided
allevi'tian in the examination work of tho Doctors'-Coccdssion.

I

If the space under the question of 'delinquency' and 'previous
convictions' is not sufficient, the answer is to bo put the back side
of the questionnaire as is designated in the sample. Individual punishments
are : te *. emswratod, only those regarding main convictions arc to bo
briefly suamrixed, the single delinquencies are only to bo briefly
ntionec*. These prisoners who c»g into question for examination are
cad.dent frc« the designated questions in the questionnaire.

"a 11 documents rei hospital reports on hand are to be placed at
the isposal if the Coecission u.'on request for ex-anin' tion.

"Th. -d jutmtts of the concentration c«ops Flosscnburg, Gross-Bosen,
in: Kelvin will be verbally ordered huru in this affair at a given
time-.


1729


15 Jan. 47-M-10-2-P1C?- Gross
Court 1


"Following tbs cxsplotion of the examination the inspoctor of
tho concentration camp is to make a report in which tho number of the
prisoners who wore directed for tho special troatnont 14 F 13 are to bo
ncntloned. The exact time of tho trrivr.l of the Doctors'-Ccomissio. will
bu announced in duo time.

SS-Obersturmbannf uehror "

On tho noxt pa jo wo com) to another ono of those lists. In order
that tho Tribunal cay understand Just what this list is I ask that you
turn first to pajo 29 of this saao docuaont.

On pa;c 29 wo find that this is an internal ccoorandum
in tho Gross-Roson Concentration Camp* dated December 16, 1941* If
the Tribunal wiU recall, tho letter to Gross-Rosen was dated Docomber
10, 1941. So, we h vo in a matter of eeoo six days this docuaont hero.

"Subject: Selection of ina'tos.

Rof.: Hone

Enclosure: 3"

It is "To tho

Coosandor's office / concentration crap Gross-Roson.

Tho cup for protective custody forwards tho enclosed a list of
in® tes eligible for transport.

Fr-«\ the ward 70 ina'tes wero selected

Prja the blocks 104 inoates wore selected

Juws 112 inoatos

Total: 293 ira'tos recording to tho status on tho

15 Ikceabor 1941.

Since - transport is planned for a later ito, the roquosted nuaber of
inmates w*s uxceodec by 43, in order to nrko room for eventual losses."
r-.is is si nc. by "SS-Untorstumfuohror" in tho Gross-Roson concentration
coop.

Tho list which bet-ins on p3£o 20 is the list referred to in the
:ocucx.nt which I h ve Just read. The imat^s numbor check out - 29. .

So, we see that this list is on« prepared in the concentration camp
Gross-Roson before the Doctors'-G«ussion had arrived and I sur;cst that

1730


15 Jnr..i7-L-10-3-?A?- Gr.ss
Court “j. 1


it K3 cc o<Jt by the eesp doctor in Gross-Rosen. The list is most
intorustir.. . Or. page 20 ..e see that it lists the "Jews in protective
.-•atotfy* -ivin,* their number, nnao, first none, n dto of birth,

Mt no rationality. I suppose in thu absence ~f other evidence Defense
C.-unsol *„ull hw. us believe that this list, in excess of one hundred
J-ws taken fr^ca concentration csap Gross-Rosen, wore ill Gormn J»ws or
Gcratn citizens. Such is not the caso and I will ask the Tribunal to refer
back new to pace 10 of the Document B^ok and find the nine under
n . 26766, the fifth na&j free the top of pace 10, Rekol, Josof. Pago
10 of tho Document Book, tho nan whose naao is listed as no. 26766, fifth
from thu top of- the pa. e - Josof Rukol. He is listed is boing
in Poland. You will rucill that this list of nines is ono dated 19
March 1942 c-cdna from concentration cnap Gross-Rosen. Tho list from
which We h-ve Just referred xi pa,.e 20 is a list mado up in thu concentration
c rap Gross-Rosen is bein those «li iblo for transport on 16 Docorabor
1941, three aonths before this list of persons on pa ; o 10 and following this,
actually •* rrlved at Bcmburg. Tho name Rokol is on pago 27 of

•-his list - p e 27 under "Poles in Protective Custody". Doos thu Tribunal
fin’ that - "Poles in Protuctivo Custody" on page 27. Tho naao Rokel
is Us- ’ f 11 win number 294. It must be fiftcon names fran the bottom
• th- list. So, cs I stated whon I put in the list of March 19, 1942,

"hi is r. list of Gross-P.osen iro'tu3 who h'd arrived at Bornburg. I

that it can be proved, and is proved, by the uxfaplu which I hrvo
Just iven that foreign n-.tionals, non-Gonaan nation'Is, were includod in
this .xtumin'tion acticn.

Let's return then to p <y 20. First wu find Just "Jews in protective
custody". There is quite a Ion. list of th«a. They run from page 20, pngo
21 u to;- of . 22. Then we cooe to "Jewish rho w,ro habitual criminals".

air. «« .-.re distinguishing between hrbitur.l criminals and persons in
?• ‘ ctive custody, although I suppose here again, and it may be urged
De-funs* Counsel, th*t these in protective custody were also
•-to.nl irLainals. Also, under that wc sea n Jewish who were shirkers".


15 J za.LI-'2- 10-4-PK?- Gross
Court Bo. 1

lazy and wouldn't work. "Jewish who wore shirkers" and "Jewish who
'oflie', the race" dewin at the bottce. Jews, of course, ->ro all thrap
into a ssnarato category from everyone else as wu sco on pore 23.

On pr., > 23 we caau to hard selection in the concentration canp
Gross-Ro-on. hard as *. shell suo to be distinguished from block
selection. Under hard selection w« hrvo the category of prisoners in
protective custody and habitual criminals. On page 2U we have
"Poles in protective custody". Th‘t continues down to the bottom of the
page w .-re w* h've a note "S.A.V.". I must confess I don't knew
what that means. On the next page - P=S° 25 - "o find "Czechs"
ai tnen under that again we find this unique category l'bolwd "shirkers".

On pr. o 26 we find the Block Selection of the concentration camp
Gross-Hosen distinguishing boro from the pr-vious w-.rd selection, both
of which re distinguished from the J^s sulectod. Horo again we find
in the Block selection "prisoners in protictivo custody" and habitual
criminals". On t >. > 27 «u h ve "shirkers". There seuo to bo more
shirkers amonc the block thr.n among the ward. Then tharc is a long list
of "Poles In protective custody", then "S.A.;.." on pare 28 anc’ lastly,
Cz.chs in Protective Custody".

Hon that liot represents what was dorv- at the concentration camp
Sroos-Rasen or. the initi' tion of concentration crop management.

They ro toll by Oronienbur ■ to nake that selection initially of those
-li i le i r transport. Prosecuti n takes the position that that seloctlon
w- n. by the cam., doctors .nd the one in concentration camp
Buchenwai: by the dufundant Hoven. So, the doctors at Gross-Roson
pickei _ut 293, includin' a subst nti 1 nicbor of Poles, Czechs, and
Je«s whose nationality is not specified but who wo have provod fro.
the pr-vious exhibit, docuscnt K>-15S which was Prosecution Exhibit
ill, did inclu e non-German Jews.

.ell, let's sec wh t happened to this list of names initially
electee by the camp doctors in Gross-Rosen.

The next document is on page 30 and is still part of 1151-PS and


\--n. Gross

G irt Xo» 1

Prosecution Exhibit A12.Thit should be Prosecution Exhibit All -nd ay
f-.r=ur roforenco to docuoent Jfc-158 should be Prosecution Exhibit A10.
This is “ teletype :_3sr,.-c again free Oranier.burr, Gated 10 January 19A2,
to "Thu Cv-ap Comar.der of the Concentration Coop Gross-Roson SS
O' rriurabTnnfuuhrer Roudl.

"Your adjutant, SS Oborsciiarfuehrer Suttrop is to report on tho
12.1.19A2 nt the office of tho Inspector of the Concentration
Caape at Oronier.bur t in order to receive verbal directions regarding
a Z*1A F 13."


*733


15 Jcnu :y-lS-DJO-ll-l-K arrow
Court Do. 1


On pa;c 31 «e find a very interestin' document. It is another letter
fraa Lietehenschel to the concentration ca;:p comaancer of Grcss-hosen, SS
Gburaturahannfuehrer Rocdl, Subject: Jtedical ccraiasicn, concerning "Our
letter cf November 12, 1941" dated Oranienfcurg, 10 Jrnuary 1942:

"In pursuance of the above rule ycu arc informed th't the SS Cberstura-
':annfuuhror Dr. -tnnecke will undertake the selection of the inmates in the
concentration canp of Croaa-hcaen, beginning on the 16 or 17 January 1942.

The r.ccoaaixy forrulaa cf notification have already been transmitted to the
c ap; t’i «7 eye tc be filled in - as was ordered in the letter - aa far aa
poslfcltt beforo the arrival of Dr. ktanneckc. T ic adjutrnt SS Oberacharfuehror
Suttrcp ia to report on 12 January 1942 at the office of the inapoctor of tho
concontrrticn camps at Oranienburg to receive r. special verbal directive on
thia matter. Signed Liofcuhenachul."

So wo find that after tho eligible inaatos for experimentation wero
jelected in Grcaa-.jja-n in Decoober, 1941, «e find that tho doctors' ccom-
iaaicn ia tc appear on 16 or 17 Janu. ry 1942, approximately thirty daya lfttor
-ad it ia perfectly app:rcnt that tho doctors' commission was t mrvey those
who hed been selected in Grosa-hoaen in Dccaafcur, 1941, and it is of scoo
interact to ebaorve -he wes going tc to ca thia doctors' ccmcdssicn - Dr.
Jinoeku. It so happens th t Dr. Jurnocko waa in December of last year con¬
victed ti Jeatr. by a Goman court in Frankfurt for participation in tho
"•/.than;ait" program. Dr. Ucnncckc has not yet Loon executed. Ho haa boon
Irojht to Numbers and ho will testify boforo this Tribunal.

The next dccunuit ia cn pc. o 32 cf the decunuit book end we have oevod
prat Dr. -onnecko'a visit to Gross-hcaen end we're now at Bumbur:, tho extur-
aim* n at-ticn. Thia letter is dated iferch 3, 1942 at Bemburg, Concentra¬
tion comp to tho cccaandur personally, Grcca-hcsen. Stamped up at tho top -
^received at Gress-hcson on 5 Jcxch 1942":

"Enclosed wo forweri a list in duplicate cf the 214 ado inmates cf your
cemp which have been put at cur disposal by Berlin. They wore aedicdly
oc nin-d end selected at your camp cn the 19th or 20th J-n 1942 a. i their
personal papers were sent te us by Berlin, ‘..c V«c you to suggest in what


15 Jcnucry-U-GJG-ll-2-Karrcw
C-urt Sc. 1


racnnci this transfer can te best earrried cut by 7cu. In view cf the long
distance transportation by rail is advisable in our opinion. In this case
s: lid bo grateful, if you could effect the dispatch of the 214 inmates
;• roil cn Ifcndey, 23rd Uarch 1942 insuring its arrival here on 24 ’larch 1942.

"Considering the greet number of inmates a corresponding number of guard*
will bo necessary.

"In our opinion the 24 Uarch 1942 would be the most suitable day cf
arrival, because in th«; noontime transports cf inmates from other :oncentra-
tion camps will errive, end a period of intorin is necossary for us in order
tc bo able to carry cut ell this wortc.

"If a transfer by omnibus should bo impossible wo surest that this
transfer ahcull be uff«.ctod in two transports of 107 inmatos each, one on
Tuesday, 24 Uarch end the other on Thursday 26 Uarch 1942.

■ho tog ycu tc infora us definitely of your opinion as to our suggestions
in erdcr tc cmbio us to tako further stops.

Hoil Hitler
Gcdonschwcic."

C donsclr cig apparently was an official at Bomburg.

dew this is swst interesting, ho see that fran the original 293 inmates
adectod by the ennp doctors in Groas-hcsen in the middle of Decoabor, 1941»
ill. cf then have boon carnrrkod for transportation to Bornburg tc bo axtor-
ainated'end v-ry fortunately they included the list of the inmatos who had
’ .cn put ct the disposal cf Bcmbur^ by Berlin and that list begins on page
33 eni runs through pc;c 38. This list else is quito interesting. Naoo No.

2 of the list Loginnin on pago 33, BaJcclncnn, Isaak, born on 4.8.09. '*hat
n ti. nrlity is B- j-clncnn? *.o can r^fer back to page 9 of tho document book
_r ti.v tub: ur 26748 - Bajrolmsnn is there listed as coming from a town in
land. But even more deer is name No. 21, Chiofowski, Johann - No. 21 on
u 33 - Chidvjwski, Johann. If the Tribunal will turn to pege 27, the namo
list site the neat er 1258 under "icles in rrctoctivc Custody - it is the

* * c, three, fourth namu down, ycu will notice that there is a differ-
.. . n-i n . Cn pe e 27 the man's name is spelled Choielcwski, the

1735


15 Jciat ry-^-QJG-ll-3-Karrc»
Ccurt Sc. 1


second ncae being Jan, birth date 9.10.13. The nen listed cn pe&c 33 after
Xc. 21 - the naao is spelled Chi ale* ski, second ms Johann, the birth date
btinc exactly the seao - 9.10.13. I suUdt that these are cne end the same
individual, the nationality being listed cn page 27 as olish.

THE .hZSIDBfT: -t this tine the Tribunal will rocoss until 1:30 o'clock.
(/. recess was taken.)


1736


11+1

15 J vr*-!r-Wr- 12-1—Le ■ aor-J7

Cnort I


Tfce hearing reconvened at 1333 hr or a, 15 January 1947.

nos MARSHAL: Tho Tribunal la again la soaaion,

ME. McHAHBY: If the Tribunal ploaao, before tho raceaa wo woro con-
aldorlng tho nationality of tho Groaa-Rneon concentration ennp lnnntca
who woro liatod for tranaport to tho cxtoroinatlon contor at Sornburg.

That Hat boglna on pago 33 of the Bngliah IV>cuncnt Boole and I had do-
nonatratod that Inna to Bo. 21, liatod on pago 33, waa of Poliah nationa¬
lity by roforonco back to tho Hat eorpilod by tho c-ncontration canp
doctors In Gro&a-Koson In Dococbor 1941,

JUIOS smiBGt Kr. KcHanoy; at tho boginning you rofdrrod to tho
Innnto Bo. 2 and roforrod ua back to pago 9.

MB* HcHJjrrr: Bo. 2, page 9, that la corroct.

JUDOS SEBR IPG: Haro you told ua too nx.bor o C pngo 9?

HR. HcHAPXTt Tho nuobor on pago 9 la liatod as 26740.

JUICE SSSUBOt Thank you.

KR. McHAHEYi It la tha third nooo froai tho top of tho Hot on
pago 9 I do not wlah to labor tho Tribunal by allowing in onch inatrnco how
it can be dotomined that ono or tho othor of tho innotoa liatod on
pago 33 and following nro Poloa or Ctocha but I would liko to givo two
furthor exnnplon in ordor to doronatrr.to how in onch cnoo.

THE mSSIDZIT: Tho Tribunal dofla not doairo to Unit y-u In any
rich nnnncr. Hr. KcHanoy.

MB. HcHABETl Dooa not doairo to,...

THE PUSSIDEBT: To 1 nit you in any such nnnnor.

KR. KcKABST: Bo. 22 on pago 33.


olaboral


THE PRZSI!


-ight be helpful to tho Tribunal if you would


u doairo.


I wish


V? 'indicate, for tho Tribunal's infornation.


Oach


roon on thia list of two hundred and a ono naccs who was a Polo or


1737


15 Jna-ir-Sk-13-l-Lo BBor-JP
Coart I


a Ciech but I will not in each inatanco provo It by roforence back.

TKS IBSSIISSTs It aceea \t> co that would be sufficient, Hr, McHanoy.


1777 (a)


15 Jan 47-A-i«-12-2-lc«»er
Court So. 1


nl. KC EhSiY: So. 22 Is listed as Cichor., Josef.

JUDGE SEBBISQ: Cto vfcat page Is thrt?

rffl. kC EAST: Page 23, Tour Eonor, So. 22, vith the tirth date of March
25, 1910. If the Tribunal vill refer trek to page 24, under "Poles In pro¬
tective custody" at the top of the ruga, you vill see Joseph Cichon listed as
So. 934. Thi t is the fourth naae down fron the top of the list on Page 24,
giving the sane birth date and thereby shoving that the nraed individual in¬
cluded in the list of those sent to Bernburg, beginning on page 33, vrs a
Pole.

By the ease token, the ina/te listed rs So. 23 on page 33, Chrust,

Michel, giving rs birth date 27.6.12, is shown to be of relish nationality
reference to page 26, no, that ie a oiotake. Tour Honor, it is prge 24, tho
prisoner listod ,a 133 on prge 24, Just above the one ve had ner.tionod before,
Josef Oichon. Do you find it? It is the third dovn fron the top of the page,
Michel Chrust, the sine birth dr.to, x^-ust 27, 1912, as a role in protoctivo
custody.

So, on pc go 33, which is tho beginning of the exteminrtion list, vo
have toor icoates of rollsh nation/llty. So. 2, So. 21, Ho. 22, and So. 23.

Cto the next pige, page 34, ths lno* to listed rs Ko. 31 vas relish, No. 42 wit
*>lish.

JUDOi SSbRIKG: Ho. -.2?

MR. kC HaS£T: No. 42. yes. Sir. Ko. 47 vas rollsh; No. 61 vrs Czech;

Ho. 66, Polish. Ch the next page, tlv t Is, page 36, Ko. 72 vrs Ctoch, No. 74
C*ech; So. 79, relish; Ko. 60, rolieh; Ho. 61, rollsh; Ho, 62. rollsh; Ho. 83,
rollsh; K«. 69, rollsh; No. 97, rolith. No. 100, Ctech; Ho. 104, rollsh. Ho.
108, Ctech. On the next page, oige 36, Bo. 112, Polish; Ko. 114, rolish;

No. 117, rollsh; Ho. 116, rolish; Ho. 129, rolish. On tho next prgo, prge 37,
Ho. 131, rolish; Ho. 133, rolish; Ho. 135, rolish; Ho. 137, polish; No. 143, .
Ctech; So. 14*. Polish; No. 146, rolish; So. 149, Polish; So. 150, Polish;

So. 166, rolish; Ho. 160, Czech; Ko. 171, rolish; So. 172, Polish, No. 173,
Polish. On the next p/ge, pc go 38, So. 177, rolish; So. 181, Ctcch; So. ie6,
rollsh; Sj. 190, rolish; So. 191. rolish; So. 193, Polish; So. 196. Czech;


15 Jan 47-*-i.{-l2-2-LeBit-r
Court So. 1


So. 199; kollah; So. 202, fellahs So. 204, relish; So. 209, Eoliah; So. 213,
tollah.

Ihaae d«a igr.- tlona of roll ah end Ciechoslovaklcn nationality ero taken
froa the list sad* up In Grosa-Rosen where the prisoners wore ao designated
as being of relish or Crech a tlonallty. It ahould not be understood that I
have designated all the non-Gersin nationals In thle Hat of 214 n»aea of
lnnates who were sent to Bernturg for externlnctlon, the reason being that tho
nationalities of the very large rainier of Jews initially picked out and n
large oucter of whcc axe included In this llct are not shown; that Is, the
nationalities of the Jews are not specified. However, as can be aoen frop
Exhibit 410, on p«gc 9 and following, a substantial nunber of theae Jews
were born In countries other than Germany, as I have previously Indicated;
rnd ao it la apparent, I think, that a furhter substantial nunbor of tho ln-
urtoe rnong theso 214 Grosa-Rossn Ins tea vero of aon-Gorrr n nationality.

2o that as It nay, we h/ve proved without any question, thnt of the 214 ln-
nnfcoa listod, 51, no loss this 61, were of rolish or Ctechoalovaklnn
nationality, which is npproxin-tely 26 percont of the total nunber lleted
for extermination at -.rnburg.


1739


15 JM>-A-13-l-S-e«h«>-JP
Cnurt I

I turn now to page 99 of the iocuncht Book, whioh 1 b Btlll a part
of 2k»c*nont 1151-PS, Prosecution Bxhibit 411. ^hls lottor orlglnctod in
tho concentration carp, Gro.»_Br, 1<c , and is dated 6 I larch 1942, stanpod
■Secret"*

’Sibjoctl Transfer of inaatoa to tho Hontal Institution to Hr.
Oodenschwing personally, Bornburg:

"In reply to your letter of 3 March 1942, wo wish to inform you that
only a transport by rail can bo oonsldorod, no suitablo vohiclos boing
available, Tho fact, however, that a groat number of tho inoatos aro
not in a condition to narch, w'uld nocossitnto thoir transport fron tho
railroad station by vehicle. The transport will loovo then on 23 March
1943.

■I furthorrore bog you to lnforn no whothor tho lnnatos aro to go to
Bornburg or olsowhore. At prosont, thoro aro still 125 lnnatos who aro
to bo transforrod*

■to accurato list of nrcos will bo handed to tho crmductor of tho
transport."

"Hell Hitler 1"

"Signed ty tho carp co-rondo r of tho o->n con trot ion cw.p Crose-Hoson."

Tho noxt (ngo, pago 40 we find is a tolofypo fron Liobohonschol,
tho nanagor of tho lnspectorato of tho concentration canpo, stntionod
in Oranionburg, datod March 25, 1942, addrossod:

■To tho Canp Cocnaadors of tho Concentration Cari)s, Crooe-Roson,"

■Socroti Report hero through IS, how nnny Inoatos woro trnnsforrod
to dato for si>ocial troatcont 14 f 13. This report nuet includo tinos
of tho soloction, as woll as tho mebor of lnnatos transforrod. In
cvnplionco with tho local circular ordor POL./lZ.: 14f 13/0T./S. of
10 Doccobor 41 in tho future ji numerical ropert on oach soloction is to
bo suboittod lenodiatoly. ■

Vo find the answer to this toletypo froa Gross-Boson on pago 41, it is
dated 26 March 1942:

"To SS Sconooio-Adnlnistrativo Main Offico, Soction D, Oranionburg."

By this ti=o the V7HA under Oswald Pohl, rocontly indicted had

1740


15 Jan-V-SV-l3-2-Koohaa-J?
Court I


taken oror tho adninistrative Jurisdiction of concontrntion caops, that
Jurisdiction was axorciged through Soctioa 2 of tho office of tho V7EA.

Thi« tolotypo la labeled "Secret"*

■Subject: Special treatceat 14 f 13? cnr.corcing: "Tour tolotypo
letter of 25 Haroh 1942."

■in anew or to tho abort lottor, tho cr&nander of tho concentration
ennp CroBt-Hoeon report* tho following! On 19 and 20 January 1942, 214
incato* voro aoloctcd. JTer. thle nuabor, 70 woro tranaforrod on 17 Kerch
1942 end 57 innate* on 18 Kerch 1942. Betwoon 20 January and 17 Kerch
1942, 36 solcctod incato* died. Tho remainder of 51 innoto* oonit* of
42 Jov, who nro ablo to work and 10 othor innate, who havo regained
tholr strength owing to a temporary coation of work (ennp olo*od
botwoon 17 January and 17 Tobruary 1942) and who will thoroforo not bo
tranaforrod." (signed) "The Cairo Comandor, Rodl, SS Oborsturnbannfuohror."

Thl* i* a noat intorottlng Docunont. Tou will goo that tho trnno-
port of tho soloctod incato* fron Oroao-aoson to-.k plnco on two dato*i
70 boing trangforrod on Kerch 17, 1942 and 57 incato* on Kerch 10, 1942.

Vo hero lntroducod alroady, a* Progocution Exhibit 410, tho li*t of tho
57 innoteg, trangforrod on Kerch 10, 1942. That exhibit boglns on page
7 of tho Ibcuaont book. Vo havo alroady oevorod that oxhibit and tho
fact conotitutoa tho socond transport of 57 incatog. I havo cr.untod
then and thoro aro procigoly 57 aar.og in that ligt.

Thig lg a vory rostaling Doctcent. as'it ehowo to cloarly ono of
tho prinary bag*a of soloction of tho incatog to bo oxocutod. It tollg
that 51 of tho incatog woro given a rogpito frnp work fron January 20th
to Karch 17th and rocovortd sufficiently *n that thoy woro ablo to
again porforc work, go that thoy woro not lncludod in thig transport
to 3crnburg for oxtorcination.

How, thon, can tho Dofense naintain that thig Euthanasia pro gran
had os its baaio oonaideration for eugonieg and tho purification of tho
Geraan raco? It ig difficult to understand how the nurdor of fifty-ono
Cxocha and


1741


15 Jao-A-S*-13-3-«ocb8n-JP
Court I


Foloa could haro anything to do with tho purifieatl'.n of tho Gcrcan rnco.
It la alto difficult to under a land an argOBQnt Justifying ncrcy killings,
ao-cellod on tho gromds of eugenics or tho ellnlnation of incurably
lnaaco poraona, vhoa we found that they did not eond to tho oxtomlnntlon
c*p fIfty-ono poraona who wore given a few days rest and then bocaeo
able to perforn work. lo, It la porfoctly cl oar that tho basic consi¬
deration was tho Inability of tho porsons to work, they wore uselosa
eaters and a burdon to tho war ococoay of Go many.


1742


Court I

15 Jan U7-A - H*-l - LJO - kaloy


On Page L2 we find another letter free Bernburg dated 10 March 19l*2,
to the Comander of the corx^ntration ca irp Groas-Rosen, siijecti "Transfer
of insntoa - lour letter of 6 March 'U2.*

■Wo are in possession of your abovo-nontioned letter and forward
the signed receipt. As regards the transport of the 125 inmates wo
make the follow!^ suggestion« Transport the 125 inmates by rail on
23 March 19U2 to the station Chios ten (Anhalt). Froa there we will fetch
the inaates *th notcr trucks.

■He ask you to infora ua in good tine when the transport is to
arrivo at Goesten, so that wo can make the nocessary preparations.

At the same tiae wo ask you to provide sufficient non to guard the innatos
until wo tako thon over. Ho would appreciate it, if your non would also
undortako tho guarding cf the transport as far as tho asylum Bernburg.

In this case tho guards would be taken care c l by us and then again put
on thoir arch to Gross-Roaen. In reply to your inquiry wo wish to
infora you, that the destination of tho rail transport is Ouoston,
whoroaa the final destination of tho ingles is Borrtourg (Saalo), whore
they will rcoain.

Boil Hitler l

Hireho."

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal would like to examine tho original of
that document, counsel.

iH. KcHAHSTi This particular decunont *iich I have Just road is
indicated as boin^ on Pa._,o 27 of tho original which tho Tribunal nos has
before it.

The next doc toe nt and tho next part of this sane document is on
logo U3 of tho document book. This is a letter from the WVHA, Section D,
Concentration Caaps. This is onoof the fora letters which was sont at
tho 3f«»e time to the caap ccuronders of the concentration camp* Dachau,

— the "Du" there undoubtedly should be "3u" — Buchonwald, Mauthausen,
Kouengaans, Auschwit2, Gross-Rc*en — and the "Hie", I an not familiar
with that, and "Ra» would be Ravi^cshruck.


Court I

15 Jan 1*7 - A - Ui-2 - LX- *- “alcy

"Through the report of a caap commander it became known, that hZ
of the 51 lira tea selected for special treatment Hr of 13 becane 'fit
to work again' after some tine which race their transfer for special
troataent unnecessary. This shows that the selection cf theso inmates
is not being effected in compliance dtth tho rules laid down. Only
those innatos who correspond to tho conditions laid down and, this is
tho nost important tling, who aro no longer fit to work, ar* to bo
brought before tho examining ccumissicn.

"In ordor to enable tho concentration oaope to carry out tho tasks
they are set, ovory innate fit to work is to be put at tho disposal of
tho ca.ip. The camp con-ardors of tho concentration camps are asked to
givo their special attention tothia matter." Signed "Liobohonschol."

And hero ijain wo have a document *iich indicates tho true purposo
of tho euthanasia program, tho elimination cf thoso unablo to work.

I turn now to Document No. 907, on page hS of the English
Documont Book, and I offer this as Prosocution Exhibit No. hl2. This doc¬
ument conolate of oxtracta from cortain letters written by Dr. Monnocko bo
his wlfo. The first oxcorpt carrios thu date lino "Biolofeld, 19 February
19U1, Hotol Biolofolder Hof.-

". This morning at 8:30 w* firsVwcnt by cars which wore put at

our disposal free Berlin, to tho county leadership of the NSDAP. Thoro
wo had a mooting of two hours, at itich woro present 5 tho Forty County
Loader, tho County President itestphalia-Scuth and a Gau roprosontativo.
Xomdiately after that we drove to Bethel together with thoso gontlomen
- no wore together 22 persons - whore a now mooting was hold with Pastor
3odelschwiRgh, tho chiof-physician Dr^Schorech and 2 officials from
Bothel, very interesting l ho fow regaining hours cf tho morning we
3,-ent with Dr. 3cborsch as our loader, by inspecting the heusoo which
Prof. Heyde and Herr Brack had allotted to each of us individually. I an
working together with Dr. uischor, the chief physician of Waldheim.


Court I

15 J an L7 - A - li* - 3 - LJG - Haloy


■I ordered the porter of the Kaiserhof to send off the registered
letter, because already at lii:30 we started with our work in B thel
(a car-ride of 20 sdnutes.) Each group consists of two gentlenen and two
ladies working with then."

The next line oust contain a faulty translation. I think it should
read, "I exaained, together with Miss Fischer, altogether 22 fenale
patients,... "

■1 examined together with Hiss Fischer altogether 22 Canale patients
including personal examination free 15«00 till 19«00 h. This is a vory
quota, ihich most of the others did not attain."

It is signed "Your faithful Frit t ," Fritt boing Dr. Fritz Hennocko,
and his letters to his wife. I Just want to call your Honors attertion
to Hennecke's relation to Professor Hoyde and Horr 3rack, which is tho
defendant Viktor Brack, whon they Inspected houses which woro aUotod to
this doctors' comission which was handling patients at th*. Bethel
asylxx:. I recall one of tho documents which has already gono into
evidence aontioned this asylum. If I romrfcor corroctly it was probably
on osylua uzx!or the supervision of acao rolislous organization, which
I think ultimately succoedod in keeping out those doctors' coff*™iosiona
which wore thoro tc solect the victim for tho extermination.

The next lottor carries the date lino ".Toimor, 25 Nov. 19U1, Hotel
Slphant." ' oinar is right clo30 to tho Dachau concentration camp, and
you have seen :.oimr in tho documents before. Tho lottor roads ao
folloro *

"At 7 o'clock tcoorrow aoming wo will be awakened, at about 8
o'clock wo will havo our coffee and then wo will drive out in Schraalonbach's
car, but he himself will soon depart to Dresdon attain, to Thursday and
Friday a coating will be held in Fima within the frame of tho action,
in which problems of tho future will be discussed and in which Schmalenbach
will take part as the medical adjutant of Herra Brack (Jonnarwain).

17 hS

.j


J-o-n-n-e-r-w-e-i-n"


Court Ho. 1

15 Jan 1*7-A - Hi-5 - LJO *- Haloy

And if I aay say so parenthetically the prosecution suggests the
name "J&nnerwein* is another nano used by tho defendant Viktor 3rack in
the operations of the euthanasia progran.

The letter continues:

"No experts will be present.The first working day at 3uchonwald

is over. At 8*30 h this norning »e were out thoro. At first 1 introduced
nyself to the authoritative leaders. Tho deputy of the camp caaaander b
SS-Hauptstumfuehrer Flcrstaedt, canp physician is SS-Cborstunfuohrer
Dr, Hofen."

The proeocutlon contends that Dr. Hofen is tho defendant Hoven, and
I would like to recall at this tine the questions put tc. tho hitness
rtoenhild, "ho testified under direct exanination that Hovcn was tho camp
physician sonetino during the year 191*1, and ho was prosaod to a consider¬
able dogroe on cross-examination with the question, "wasn't it poosiblo
that Hovon wasn't tho caep physician until 191*2? This lottor of Dr.
Necsnecke, dated 25 Novo:fcor 191*1, says Dr. Hoven was tho author! tAtivo load-
or, and that he was the o«s|> physician. Tho lottor continues!

"At first another 1*0 roporto of a first portion of aryans hod to
bo completed by filling tnos out, on which tho two othor cdlloaguos
worked already yesterday. Out of these 1*0 I worked up about 15. After
this wholo portion had boon workod up, Schnalonfcerg left, in ordor to
go to Drusdon and not to return until our work horo is dono. Following
this, the ’exanination* of the ^ationts was carried out, i.o. a . rosonta-
tion of the individuals and a craparis.n with the entries taken free the
files, no did not finish this work until noon, bocauso the othor two col¬
leagues workod only theoretically ,cstorday, so tnat 1 had to «ro-oxanin«
these, wheo Schnaleifcach ( and I nyself this morning) had prepared and
Hueller his persons. At 12 o'clock we stopped for lunch."


15 Je3-ir-15-i“ SV-F inabuck-JP
Court I


Continuing on tho next page:

"Aftorwards wo continuod our oxar.lnation until about 16 o'clock. I
nyself oxminod 105 patients, Mueller 78 patients, so that finally a
total of 183 reports were ready as a first portion. As second portion a
total of 1300 Jews follovod, all of whon do not nood to bo 'oxaninod',
but vhoro it is sufficient, to tako tho reasons for thoir arrost fron
tho filos (often Tory eala*niouaO and th transfer it to tho roports.
Thoroforo it is noroly a thorretical work, which will cortainly koop us
busy until next Monday Indus ire, perhaps trron longor. fron this oocond
portion (Jows) wo coepleted today; I nysolf 17, Muollor 15. At 1700
hours ohorply 'wo threw away tho trowel' and went for suppor.

■Zxactly as tho day I doscrlbod abovo, tho following days will pass —
with exactly tho sno progran and with tho eaco work. After tho Jows,
another 300 Aryans followed as a third portion, who again will hnvo to
bo 'oxaninod'• Thoroforo wo aro busy horo until tho ond of noxt wook.

Thon on Saturday, tho 6 Docccbor, wo shall go hono ....

■Kuollor goos Iv-co fron Saturday noon until Monday noon, Koonlgoluttor
noar Braunochwolg."

This lottor tolls us what thoso oxanlnations oonsietod of; cortainly
a vory cocploto and thorough nodical oxasination at bost. Tho wrltor
of this lottor cron put tho word ■exaninatioa" in quotation narks, which
ho said consistod of a prosoniation of tho individuals and a corparison
with tho cn trios takon fror the filos. If there wore no othor crinoo
lnvolvod in this Euthanasia progrir. I should think that tho emduct of
ouoh oxaDinations on the j»rt of tho doctors why> woro solocting tho
people to bo extominated per so, ie enough to nake this nothing short
of nurdor. It is ridiculous to supp-so that these doctors inducted
any sort of nontal exanination on tho patients that woro being selected
and I again reiterate that the docuaonts show conclusively that the
basis of tho solection was unability to perforn woric. Hero wo so# a
roforcnco Dado to tho Jaws who woro sont froc Buchenwnld in tho s;cnor
of 1943 as R«child toatified, and Kennccko hlssolf lookod ovor thooo

1747


15 Jaa-A--15-2-S*-Fi=abuci>-JP
Court I


1200 Joys who tho Defendant Eovan had already collected together for hie
and they* It should bo noted, vero not oven given the cursory typo of
©xacination oxtonded to Aryans.

As for as oxanining tho Joys wont, tho lotter statos that it ia
sufficient to tako tho reasons for their arrest froa tho filos, so it
is quito cloar that no exaninatlnn Yhatsoovor vas conductod. I novo on
to tho third oxcorpt which is fron Puerstonberg or. licln, 12 January 1942,
Hotol Vogort, Monday.

"I hopo to loam fron Professor SJitscho, what exactly our next 'tour'
will bo. If ho roally doos not tar>w it, I hopo to bo ablo to catch Horrn
Brack In tho Tlorgartenstrasse in ordor to ask hin with rogard to ny
discussion with Dr. Befelnann concerning Earl, your samples aro right
but X will roport it in a way that I will have no disadvantage fron
Karl's nlsfortuno ....

"Kov I will say goodbye to Dr. Schidlausky — thon I will tako a
no to rear and rldo to the hotol. At 10 o'clock Borlin rang no up; Frnuloln
Schwab told no that tho noeting was postponod, but that thoy aro waiting
for no in Borlin tocorrow. All was changod again orrplotoly, but sho
did not know dotalls and said I would hear it tanorrow. What nay bo tho
nattor again? It is awful with tho 'chnrado Borlin'...."

Vo can soo fron this lotter that Ik. Honnodeo hnd nado n tour, as ho
doscribos it, to tho Havonsbruck Concentration Canp doctor at Ravcmsbruck.

And fron vhon did Konnocko rocolro his instruction about to

concentrations Corps? Vas it fron Heinrich Himlor? Hot at all. It
was fron Profossor Nitscho and Horrn 3rack, two of tho noro lnportant
pooplo in tho operation of tho Euthanasia progren.

Tho next lottor is dated 3orlin, 14 January 1942, Hotol Ssplanado.

";y bolorod cothorl That was a typical war-wintor railway Journey
froe Puorstonborg to this place."

Thon follows a rathor long description about his troublos with rail
transportation in ww tins Gem any which I will ol Inina to and drop to tho
latter port of this first paragraph on page 47, whore ho statos:


1748


15 Jaa-Ar-15-3-Sl4-Hinabuck*JP
Court I


■I not Profos bo r Hitache In the Bollevuostrasse who told no that I
was expoctod, o specially Ur. Eofelnann requested to have a talk with no.

Tho nooting was postponed indeed, hut wo would havo a looting in a snail
circle* Profoesor Schnoider w>uld coco too. Hitscho was in a hurry and
so I wont on to Tiorgarter.strasso. I dolivorod tho roports to norm
Hounann, hut kopt tho throe nico covors and tho wrapping paper. Then I
callod tho offico, spoko to Trau Xoyor and askod when I could O'no to
Dr. Eofolnann. Eo ozpoctod no at 14.30 hours. I did not speak with
anybody olso yot. At Horrn Koucann I saw tho copy of tho lettor which
announces no at Grose-Reson for tho 15th to 20th January. Profoseor Hite-
Oho too said — in passing so to speak — that now tasks aro waiting
for r.o, hut whon I asked if I could not go hono first, ho eaid: Of oouroo,
you can arrange it as you like. How I will wait for tho things to oono.

■At 21.40 hours Cafe Szcolsior. After haring writton a lottor of
throo pigos to Karl and also n copy (ondoeod) I an ahlo to oentinuo
to infom you, Ihrrjyt How wo will still go to Gr. Soson. I an allowod
to docido it nyoolf and thoroforo I docido it in this nannor. Listoni
At 14.30 hours I entorod tho Roich Chancellory and tho discussion with
Dr. Eofolnann during which certain problons had to ho roTlowod, stortod
lcnodlntoly. Svorything is fino. As tho proposod bi6 nooting was not
hold, wo oro gr>ing to noot tonorrow in a snail circlo. Dr. Hofolnanr.,
Profossor Hitscho, Profoesor Schnoidor, Dr. Hoinso, Dr. Straub and 'your
husband*. At 11.30 hours I will go again to tho Roich Chancollory.

Tho following prohloD will ho diecussod: Promoting tho psychiatry of tho
youth. In this branch Schnoidor and Einso havo to ho rognrdod as tho
loading oxports of tho Roich* I cc co-advisor as n nan of tho praotico
(with Straub.) Straub is country councillor and coordinator of tho
institution of tho province Holstoin in Kiel and Ohorstabsarst of tho
Vohmacht and is tho hearer of tho party badgo in gold. Eo wants to
resign in Kiol and to direct again an institution in southwestern Gcroony.
lichbcrg? Oh, no, there will be no other nan than your husband. But it
is planned to ostablieh a now regional institution for Herr Straub in our
vicinity,


1749


15 Jec-j-;T-15-4-fliEabuckJP
Court Z


which will bo celsly devoted to the psychiatry of youth. The work In this
newly established or reorganised institution will bo thoro u g hl y furthcrod
ospociclly by tho scientific cooperation and counsel of Schneider and
Hoinso. According to present plans. Idstein is taken to to consideration.

I haro to work with sy special dopartnent for childron which should bo
still furthor expanded in closo cooperation with Schacldor, Helnso and
Straub, and tho 'olinlnation' of this now 'psychiatry hospital of youth'
will bo ccnplotcd by no. Thors wo have alroady tho project of tho futuro
which I hovo always expected froc tho special dopartaont for children. In
addition to very agreoablo flattorlng ror.arks concerning tho porfoct or¬
ganisation of ny special dopartnent for children (ho said that this
dopartnont end that of Hinso aro tho boot onos) Dr. Hofolnann oxprossod
his appreciation for cy work and snid that this was not only his own
opinion but also that of Horrn Brack. Today, as a preparation for tho
noeting tonorrow wo nutually considered how to roorganiso tho Hospital
in Idstoin. Choractorsticnlly not Bern©tat but I or. callod to aid in
settling the so problocs. This is important. It also finds an oxplanaticn
in tho wny Ur. Hofolnann opoko about lorno and what ho thought of ny
opinion. I adrisod against Idstoin ns first thing today and proposod
Cchsuorn Inatoad. Tor this proposal various facts soonod docisivo. If
I havo two institutes for Idiotic childron in tho vicinity I would prafor
to givo utho up to now badly nanagod instituto of Schouorn into bottor
hands, instoad of intorforlng with Idstoin which in Horrn Kuollor hns
a constant rolinblo nanagor.*

Sbv I skip down to tho last paragraph on pago 48.

"At about 17 o'clock I loft Dr. H., who, at tho end askod no to buy
wino for hin; I will of course do it. Ho gavo no bio hone address. Af¬
ter this I wont to Tiergartonstrasso, In ordor to talk with Dr. Hitocho.
Dr. E. hod alroady infomed no about tho c^cploto now chan cos' which
Trauloin Schwab had indlcatod on tho tolophono. Sinco tho day boforo yoo-
torday r. largo dolegation of our action hoadod by Horrn Brack is on tho
battlefields of the Zaet to old in the savlne of our woundod soldioro in
ico and snow. Thoy include

1750


15 Jan—i-15-5-S*-5inabuck-OP
Court I


physicians* dorks, Hadaear and Sonnenstoin, nurses end nalo nurses* a
while detoehaant of 20 to 30 persons. This is a top soerot. Only the so
persona who cannot ho sparod In the carrying out of tho cost inportant
tasks of our aotlon wero not included. Professor Hitscho told no about
that too and rogrotied especially that tho nalo and focal© assistant
nursos of our institution Zichbcrg wore taken away so quickly. Oils is
tho roason that tho great sooting of tho 15 January was postponod until
tho 6 Pobrunry bocauso until then tho rollof action in tho Zest will bo
finishod. Tho host and slnoorost grootings ny bolovod* goidon sunny*
signed: Tour faithful Frits."


15 Jev.*-JP-16~l-Putty
Court I


Lottor So. 4 is datod Koldolberg, 15 Juno 43:

"Just now I finished tfao thing for Borlin in order to Bond it ro-
glstcrdd tonight tho photocopy for tho Tiorgartcc6trp.Bso as voll ns tho
answer to Eorrn Jonnorwoin,■ which wo suggest is tho dofondant Brack.

"In tho lattor I wmto V* lnforc no in tino about Dr. Hofolnann'a visit
so that I personally could he present at tho conforeuco on tho Eichborg.

I enoloso tho copy; ploaso filo it into tho 3crlin lottor caao. I koop
tho original. I want to show it to Profossor Schneidor with vhon I dis¬
cus sod it this corning and who was vory intorostod in thia "rccoenonccnor.t".
Ho hinaolf has nothing to do with tho national Oomittoo. Boaidoa that
I started to work right away this norning at 8.30 I was alrondy working.

I finished a voluninous exploration until 11 o'clock and dictntod it
innodiatoly. Thon I talkod with Profossor Scfanoidor about vory intoroat-
ing things of our future cooporatlon, etc., until 12.15 hours."

I will oait the last paragraph of that lottor. I night onmaont
upon tho word "rooomonccnont" in this lottor of 15 Juno 42. It appoors
that thoro nay well have boon an interruption In carrying out tho Eutha¬
nasia Progran In tho lattor part of 1941. This was cortainly not a con-
ploto cessation bocauso tho do omenta that wo havo indicate that tho
oxtomlnations woro carriod out right on through, but it dooa appoor that
as a roault of tho tronendous indignation which waa otirrod up anong
tho Goman people aa a rosult of thia Progran that oonaidorablo proosuro
was brought to boar to haTo it atoppod. and honco wo find thia word
■rocomcnconont" in the lottor of 15 Juno 42, which nay indicate a
roc'wmonccnont of tho Euthanasia action at this or that placo.

"7 April 1943, Wodnosday." There it a short oxcorpt roading:

■Tho lottor of Horm Blaakonburg, tho answer on ny "report" sent
to fain about a fortnight ago (not yot tho answer of ny tocond lottor con-
corning "certificate") is as follows: -ornor Blankcaburg, Berlin. 1
*pril 1943.

Boar l!r. Honnocko.

1752


15 Jai>-A-JP—162~?ut ty
Court I


■I won Tory glad to have received sone word# fron you. 1 an especially
glad that you ora well and that you enjoy your work. Srory thing gooa as
usual hero. Vo aro waiting for tho thing* to cone, ao Military post
office nunbor of Horrn 3rack is 46,000, of Dr. Hofol r - ann (unfortunatoly
loft out, orror)*. Sipiod ■Blaakenburg."

Blnnkonburg, tho Tribunal will rocall, was an assistant to tho de¬
fendant, Ylktor Brack, and after Brack loft to go into tho arcy or at
least loft Borlin, Blankonburg took ovor nany of his actiritios in Borlin.
That was in tho yoar 1942, as I rocall. Tho letter oontinuos on pago 50:

■Tos, swoothoart, that show* that ny connections to Borlin aro alivo
and kept up; that is Tory ieportant. The nilltary post offico nunbor of
Dr. Hofolncnn was apparently still to bo put in, but unfortunatoly it
was loft out. Perhaps I will bo ablo to loarn it tr<a Horrn Brack to
whan I shall writo soon."

Tho next oxcorpt I shall not road at this tino. Vo coro now to
Do cun on t P0-10O7 on pago 51 of tho doouDont book, and this will bo
Prosocutlon Exhibit 413. This is a lottor again fron tho VVHA, Divloion
D which was in oontrol of concentration cnnps. Stap* Top Socrot. To
tho Carp Cocnandort of tho Concentration Canps." and then thoro tho
list of empst "Dachau, Sachs onhausen, Buchcnwald, Ifeftthnuson, J^o no on¬
to urg, Houongenno, Auschwits, Orose-Roson, Hatswoilor, Stutthof, Ravonobrude,

Hi." —

I don't know, — "Lublin and Borgon-Bolson." Hi. and Hors. I don't
rocall at tho nonont.

■Tho Roichsfuohror-SS and Chiof of tho Co man Polico upon docone-
tration has docrood that in tho futuro only lnsano prisonors can bo
soloctod for tho action 14 7 13 by tho nodical co'uiosions appointod for
this purpose.

"All other prisonors unfit for work (porsons dufforing fron tuborc\»-
losie, bedridden invalids, etc.), aro absolutely bo bo excluded fron this
action. Bodr-riddon prisoners arc to bo giron suiteblo work which can
also bo dono in bed.

1753


15 Jan-A-JP-1 6-3-Pa *. ty«JP
Court I


■Thu ordor of tho Roichsfuehror-SS nust be strictly observed in tho
future.

■Tbo requests for gos-'llno for this purpose will, therefore, bo
discontinued." Signed: "Glucks."

This dnciciont indicates that prior to this dato of 27 April 1943
that, tho Euthanasia Prograc cnco-passed the execution not only of ir.srno
poraons, but persons suffering fror. tuborculoals, bod-ridden indlviduals,
otc boenuso this docuaont statos that in tho future only insano porsons
can bo solcctod, and all other prisoners, even though thoy bo unfit for
canunl work, aro to be put to work with eonothing thoy con do in bod.

This again ir.dicatos the Euthanasia Profrac cannot bo Justified on any
ground of Eugonlcs or nodical considerations.

Dofonoo Counsol for the Dofondnnt, Karl Brandt, points out that I
did not rood tho oxcorpt fr«n tho lottcr wrltton by Dr. Konnocko — it is
«n pago 50, August 14, 1944 — in which the nano of Profossor Brnndt is
sentionod. It is not orldont on tho faco of tho lottor what tho nooning
of it is; contoquontly, I have not road it into tho rocord. It is, of
e*urco, part of tho Exhibit and is in tho rocord, but I hnvo nodo no
pol-t of it bocauso thoro is nothing on tho faco of tho docunont which'
Indlcatoa that it had anything nocoasarlly to do with tho nattor undor
consideration.

I think at this point, if tho Tribunal plcnso, wo will ask that tho
witness, Olga Eyor, bo brought to tho stand to tostify. Sho, of C'.urso,
will not tostify concerning Euthanasia. Ifco Tribunal will rocoll that
the affidavit taken fron Olga Syor wos ndnittod ccvoral weeks ago in
connection with tho activities of Er. Hngon of Strasobourg upon tho
O'r.dition that wo caka an of fort to bring Hiss Sycr horo, so I think
that it night do Just as well to put her on now, and them sho will bo
ahlo to ro turn to Strnssbourg probably tonormw.

THE HISSIIIEHT: Prior to tho socuring of tho witnoss, tho Tribunal


will rocosc.


(Hccoes)

1754


I


15 J:n -j7-. - -lfc-1- -L-J loy

Court l r . 1


H - ’.  R£F. L: Be TrTnmr.l is r.'-r.in lr. sossicn.

V. Io Y• " 7 it pic-so the ri' un. l, tl is witn.se is Proncl.

nr.ticnr.l, i’cwovor, skv. is full; converset witk tho Oemra
1 n;;«v 30 o'l will testify* ir. Ocm-in.

0L3, 2 Y.:a, .r. witness, trek tko str_nl . nl testified r.s frllcws

3Y TI S PSHSIDH T:

Bo witness will rise, fcnLl up kor ri.-kt k:\nd, nnd "’o
a* rr. Rope t : f tor . x »:

I awo.-.r ■':* Or.l, tko -1 l^ ty :n.. Q miscior.t, tl t 1 will
spo:!: tl* > pure trutl rnt* vill witthr lV m*. . \\ n tV in,~.

(TVo witness j*u.jc .tv ’ tko or.tk.)

TT ’ *1-351 >~' T To aor.toc, plo-.ao.

simr sx.’. i n'v

BY 'H. r. :^Y:

A Y-ur nr.%. is Ol-r -ycr, is it net?

A Yua.

1 Y< ur 1 .st n.-.:io is spollou S-y-c-r-?

- Yes, tl t's ri-Ms.

You ror.. *<rr. r n Jnnv ry 17, 1£09?

1907.

here wore ycu *’ero, fitness?

In Str. aa’»ott?c, Franco.

-n.l y u Tv. French citizen?

Y-c.

A . »*k t i 3 y ur present r. '.rose?

In Str .os’ r ur •.

’ice Eycr, will yru ’:in* 1 ? tell the Tri’i*r:.l wk t
- '>c.' ti- n ycu 1 . vt k -/I?

I ..ttonlol tl., crllc> in 1 ilc'.v afcuiri in Str fc*-r«rr
tntil I w. s 16 .

In r»h t yc..r 'i X y-u cor.plot. y*-ur o luc- ti-'n?

In 1S25. 1755


IF J r. 7-..- L„ -iE-2-' l'.!:lc7
Crurt c . 1


q ..'ill yen tall us cfc: t ycu did in the wr.y cf onployrjont
frr^i 1925 until *v. pr«scnt dr.to?

>-r "h ut five jova ^ w. s in ;iy pr. runts 1 usir.css;
md of tor t'rr.t I ted vnricua positions r .a socrctr.ry.

Vihon lid you enter th- or.ploy cf Pr^f. Dr. 3u~on ' r .:^on
s r. secret-ry of tho l-y^inno Institute cf Stress*-rurs?

L On tl« 1st of uovurcr 19<11.

-'id you rorv.in In tl~.t ;>c.aiti'-n until Prrf. !In»3on loft
Strcss'irurc?

i. Yea.

In your position ns 3ocrot. ry to Dr. r-.f.qon, did ycu
fcrndlo r.ll corroa.>rndonco, IncluJin ; corrusperv.lonco rf ; secret
nntur.T

Ywa, *'ut i did not knew thr.t Prrf. rv.y knvo h.vd

ct) ur secret or rruapcndonco in r. Uitlon.

q ‘Jl'erefcr., Witnoa: , ycu art in prcltl-n tc toll ua

r. out ariio of tto <lo toils of nodicrl exporinonts porfomod on
huocn *ioinsa,nre you not?
i. Yoa.

q Will you toll t» c rri'unr.l wt.-.t you knew :’.‘>eut oxporl-
nonts on yellow fever?

J. 'A' yellow furor ox.'orincnts wore carried out until

19-2. Shuy wore stopped in 19-2.

q Dr y u torn tifcoro -rrf. ! T r.:-on orrriol out tt-ao
yellow fovor oxporlrwnts?

. a f.-T c I lav. fow lot tors fr--: rr, ins..no

r.arlis In dorlin, Itton u; n' tkoy - .v a^::o n ’.as of pr.tionta.
q like ro?

Since I do net know oncurfc .Vut it—I rnl lorkc 1 r.t
the nenos—I uen't knew ox-ctiy td: t it w:.s -.-.rut. I only knew
t! .t it w-a ..-rut jr.ursdlco.

-*rw, Witnoss, yru st t~d in y-ur --ffi’r.vit tl t r r «

17.%


l c J r. -ld-c- Ir.hloy

Crurt iJe. 1

thought th t tire so oxpc.rlaor.ta were ir. ocrlin, Reich onr.u. ” u
.:omt ".'ittorr.u; la thr.t ccrroct?

j.f terw \rds I ronor'jcroa th t It wr.s '-orlin, ’/ittonr.u.
i':, U itnoss, you tell t’ o Trl*-unr.l in your run words
viY t you Imrv. c; ut th*- typhus oxporlnents conducted *sy T>r.

Sr-, son#

.. Thu rsodior.l inspoctcrr.to cf tie lAxftwr.ffo yo.vo ‘'r<f,
Ilr. ;on .-.sa .jk onts, ro sorrel .-.sri£7v:ur.ts, r/rut yellow favor,
typhus, hcor.titls, rnC influonzr.

I' w, die* y.:u hmdlo my correspondence or see my
corrcspcndonco in connection with, those oxp»rl ;or.ts v/Mch nl£ht


1757


15 Jar. Dlakluy

Court ilo. 1


%


Infer that experiments ware conducted up. a c.nccntrcticn carp innate*?

... Yes. There were tu; letters, -ref. llaapcn dictated then to as.
h\ the first letter .rof. Haa-cn, thrtutfj .ref. Kirt, a she: c» SS ilain
O'flee fer two hundred prisoners in crd.r tr conduct typhus cr.crinonta vith
these prisoners. In th~ seem! letter '.-ret. Ihm.cn complained tlvat the pat¬
ients arrived in such poor condition tliat thoy could not he use: and that
a part of t!xa lied already did :n the tv.y; and ho rshod for fr.ro hundred
nsro ris. n-.-a in reed health, similar f .elr r.cht s-ldi.ro.

Q. .itness, '.s yeu k .cv where these cn crL.aatr w.rc c- i uc-od?

Tlvc erjpcriicnts w.rc ccnductod in ’lata :il_r, StutuYf.

0. ..s a result of those experiments, id .r f. Uaa «n preparo ro. rts
to o sent to tho unreal caiof si Use nodical r-rvicoa of the Luftraffo?

... 3vory quarter ye r a re. rt •/..« sont ah ut the werk to tho oc dic:l
inspectorate l_ tl;o Luftuaffb.

> I invars tend y:u to say then, -toors, that re rto ir.ro cat t. tho
aoCied •orrico cf tho Luftwaffo ever/ throe vd-.s. Is that c-rroct?

... Yes, an.! -rthcr rop rts. ir i l?hh .n the rep rts v.ro sont be
.ir Tloot Center, Hcrlin-eahlci, Xcc.ii^otrasoo 5?, tn: c pies, with t’:o rc-
W* * • report tc tho Lofton. i Uonl Inspectorate.

'•* 1 ~ ;0 j itness, ycu say that thaco c;:. erL:ontc with typhus on human
'-cincs t ok plr.ee fra 19M on?

Yes.

d. a# it otiviwis fr these r._ i ts sent .v r/ t ■ ntl 8 tin t a livo
*.y hua virus tea Icin used ~n the pris ncr= at ?atr roller?

... Y:- re.. rts Indicated that ut fifty .rioon_rs were infect d ilth
virile at typhus.

0. '•* 7 - '-s\rm fr. n y ur un lav d- ’ c ;:.»t!;er r net any f eh., pris-
a:rs suhjcctod te those typhus o.-q>crLxnts died as a result th- cef?

... I can't say.

1758


15 Jan 47-X-?JC-lBA-l-?oldt
Pcurt :;c. l


Howovor, you do not exclude the possibility that prisoners diod as

* result of thoso oxporinonts, do yen?

A. I assure that it is a densorcus dlsonso.

"• witness, in regard to those reports, wore reports of thoso

typhus oxperl'jjnto sent to the *?eichforschun,- srat?

A. Vos. Tho Hoichfcrschun'srat iasuod resoardh reports on yellow fovor,
to yeti tie and influenza, and tho reports wore sont in ovory throe months.

1. Did thoy also rocoiru reports on typhus?

A. Yob.

*. Yore any reports ovor sont to tho hiji conrand of tho '/ohrnacht?

A. Free 1944 on, tho hi£h c errand cf tho ' ohr.acht vory :zich
interested in tho oxporiaonts and also wontod to have roperti on tho rocoorch
aork that was coins cn.

*1. Could it ho cloarly undo-stood frai thoso roperts that tho Jiuian
uaod voro concontrcticn c*:p in; at os?

A. Vos.

<1. !«c*;, Hiss Fyor, did PrcfassT B - o: ,-.o to 1'atr. oillor often?

A. Ho ront onca a -rook to Hetrrolllor -.ith Mo oscio'.nnt, lUso Krunol.
'itnoas, trill you kindly toll tho TVi*-unnl *rhat y^u knwr about tho
O’ldx'ic Jaundico research, that is, hop titis?

A. Ho-*tltis opidartica, tho rocoarch uerk on hopntitir opido lca, was
ho st-rtad in about Juno, 1944, and 'risers ..oro alco roquortod for this,
b: I don't know whether it "Tor to tho point that tho prisoners tr.ro—
that the -ritenors wore—that tha uork trao actually dono rith priaonors.

I !cn't knar.

1. Than you do knew in y?ur vori: with Dr. Hn on that preparations wore
- aio to oxparLujat with hopatltis on h i an holrvja?

A. The application hed olro-dy boon ~cdc, ut 1 do not know whothor
*>h- w rk h ad already "roan bo. un. I cannot spy.

. Did y & oror hoar tho n/so Dr. Donait?

A. Dr. DQ;on was to bo in char o f tho work or. hepatitis opidonlon*

30 c ”'-0 to Strasshourr for tie or thrao days, '-ut ;fcothor ho was at Stutthof

* ic “ot know. Ho 'ip3 to cone back r ain, and after that tho llfcor-tior. of


-'•rest' ?vr cano.


175?


15 Jan C7-4-?J0-iai-2-7*Kt

Court !T-o. 1

Do you think It is pcssiblo that aftor Dr. Denon’s visit of two or
throo d*jrs to Strasabour- that h« nlfjit h-vo cona free tharo to Katzvoillor?
A. It is possible. I do not know oxnotly.

' • D! - QT or boar tho earn Professor D r . Rostock?

A. Yos, I caw a fow lottora which aarx frer. the Rolch Rosoarch Council
Bi-noi “Professor Rostock" but I do not know what function ho had in tho
Soich Rosonrch Council.

you do ro^or.bor that Hocon corrocpondod with Rostock?

A. Yoa, but I io not know oxcctly whet it KQ3 about.

*.• Did Hocon over visit Prefossar Rostock in Berlin?

A. I do not knew. I ass» so.

"• Kiss 3yor, did you stato in your affidavit that Ha,on visitod
Mistook in 3orlin?

A. Yos.

•• ;: ios 3yor, why have you chanrod your tocti.-.ony in rorard to

Hneoa vlsitine Restock at Berlin?

A. I oonfucol tho noro trith Professor Sol so. I ro~-jnborod that
Afterwards.

!• Than, liiss 2yor, you aro suro that Ha on visitod Dr. Solas, and
ru aro not cort-ln vihothor or not H-aon visits Roetock: is that corroot?

A. ?te, ut I f-savr o that ho visitod hit., too, boonuso ho oorroepondod

oith Mr;.

2* ’ A truss, V you know the orzo Professor Dr. R-so?

A. Yos.

'.'as Dr. Rrco ovor in Strasebrur.?

/.. Profossor Roso v-s in Strasslcurc twico.

"hon did Dr. P.oco visit Strassbeurf?

A. 7or tho first tiro in 19i2 and tfcon I boliovo at tho bo,Annin;; of

-■ hf*t did Dr. Roso dr whilo ho was at Strassbeur;?

“■ Eo viol tod Professor Haion, and Profosaor 2- on showod hi;: tho

-aututo, but what thoy talks! about I do not knew.

1760


4

15 Jan-A-JP-15—l-Sr^pscn
Cc rt He. 1

Q. At this tiio 3is Prof. Rose dressed in tlw unifora of the Luftwaffe?
A* Yes.

Q« 1*0 , witixs:, dc you know the ra^. of Dr. Schroeder?

A. Yes, Frcf. Schrcedcr was at Strasbourg; be was th<-r- onco.

Q. Vihat did Dr. Schroedor do w.ilc h. /cs ot Strasbourg?

A. I a* sorry, I did not undurst-.nd.

3» Wlv.t did Dr. Sohrocder do w.dL. h- as at Strasbourg?

A. He visitwd Prof. Hager.; prof. H‘>n shewed him thu institute.

Q. *hun did Dr. Schrocder vi:it Str-.ob ur : ?

A. It was in 19Ui, as far as I cm r-4_ bur.

Q. 'it not-, w-.o Dr. to hr ex. dor drested .r. t.i. uni f on of tbu Luftirai.c?

... Yus, h- wore the uniform 1 a n-rai - with thito lnpols.

3» Did Dr. 1 a^. n c;:rxnt n t.* vis.U f Dr. Schroodor at ell?

A. FTof. Ha cn told at th*t tlds r-.s Ms top boss.

Q. Now, ritnoss, did y u cv^r Iv- r; ; j-r.V n vo; witness, did y-.u or y n\r
associttuo over nvtust to Dr. Hagen, or his csristant Dr. Graofo, -v'-inst
th- experivunts cn huaan brings?

A. Yes, c plained t Dr. Gr'.fc, r. Or. Gr'ofo told ut that th.
experiments v-rc c n-tucted nn P>l~s, an- h- ad cd th-t Poles wor svt human
buini-s. Ho said KLjS aro not !.un-n -,:r. *.

:R. iLudTfr I havj no furth-r questi as, y ur y ur IK nori
TH5 f?L.SI!Jc .Tt Does D-f-nso Ccun.-M desire t cr aa-oxnmifte this
*itnoss?

CROSS 5X. i!iATl«.'

EY DE? Sd Ci.Cb.--L, W. RC9ER7 SfiiV.TIDS:

3. witness, 'j - told us tl : unt to the Reich Research

Council; htrr Ion- were- these reports?

A. How -iny pag^s do you wan?

3. Yus.


. •


0 :*, two s mc tires throe pa&o«.

1761


15 Jan—il—JP—^19—2—Ssapson
Court !fc# 1


3» '-era ols eh rt reports submitted widch only contained a vciy few ;

phrases?

km No* A for letters w:rt: sent t. .’ref. Hose.

DR. ffi&VATZBSs I do not have any furthor quostions.

BT DEFENSE 00UH&5L, ffi. OTTO .'ElT’j

Q. Witness, have you dop.s-d an affidavit?
km I don't understand
3* You have as do an affidavit?

A* Yes, I undo a report.

3* You have aade a report?
km Yes.

3* With wbcu have you discussed this repxt prior tn writing it?
k, itr* •— I do i'fc know the na.*. my acre; 1'r. Tavorgur I think.

3. to* -ft-n has he talked to you?
km Hu has ir. Strnabmrg cnco.

Q. I asked } u h-w >fton he talked t. yen.
km Twico, he talked to twice.

3. Did he ,'r.k^ an> suggesti-.ns t y-v in Lho c urou of the c ivers-.tionj
cr, did ho ask yvu a ny quostions of a certain kind?

... Ho wanted to know exactly ab.ait the vari us rcs-r.rch assi' r.o.ntrj I
told him what I know.

3. itn.ss, I eta asking y>u that X r the r-astn b-causc -ft.r -11 thj
witness has dopcscd in the fern :f a report an-’ n t in th. fora f qu-stijns
and answers, and I want to ask you at this tic- if ycu have aa.o t.v. r-cord
which we havo an hand h-ro in th- saae for.: i.i;odistcly by y urself, ,r if
y u have corrected it at a later cried of Mac*

... M-, -r. Tavarger took th- thing dewn as I tcld it to h_-a an’ then

they were typed. Cf c -ursc he asked c. ab ut Dr. Schreeder an' whether I
knew of th_s_ pee pi- and what I knew ab ut the;-..

3. And . I’*... with !Y. TavargL Lea — on taro diff.: • •«?


15 Jan^a-JM9-3-6npaoa

C .urt ?fo. 1


A. Yes, this norning.

Q. Y u talked with hi= this namin'?
km ICS.

Q. I want to krv-w if he has interred' tod ye u twice at Strasb urt.
ffc, :nco at Strasb. urg.

Q. And then this record is correct; have yvU seen it today?

A. I read it thr.ugh.

Q. Just as it » as presented te y.u here?

... Yes.

Q. ~nd is that the first reared yen had previously rude?

... Yes.

Q. !fcw, you have stated in this record that also reparts abcut tho
oxporinents w.rc s..nt te the OKff; is ti.r.t correct?
ha Yes#

Q. V.hcn?

A. in 19U1*.

Did yu also Ull that t: i!r. Tavarg-r?

..# I think so.

?• I an asking ycu because in th- rf/idavit, th. poried of tiue in 19 Uj
is rv t sot forth.

... 8ut it vne in 19Ui.

^ I nly want t - kn * if y u also told . r. Tavargor about that in
-traab urg and that this was the case beginning in 19hA?

... I d -*t rai-Jjvr if I teld hia thr.t in Strasbourg; that was tw: years
•go; I oOy b«. -xistakon.

;. That ws t«r.: years ago?

... Ovur t* years since I worked at the institute.

Q. I see. hat y.u want t cxr^sz is c: y u cannot recall th„ d a to
exactly any uorc.

... I can't rea.-dxj daUs exactly; I con give the year, but 1 c n't rivo

1763


15 J J .pa _ n

Court Me. 1


give any exact dates.


!fcw, v u hav„ spoken of research criers, anc cn one occasion about
research assent or the Iufteaffc, and then by research by assignor of
the Reich .'to Be arch Council, an* y.u hav. stated that reports wer- suMiot.d
to those agencies every threo n-nths.

• Yes, three :ientha.

Q. Then yen havo tostifU ! that the OK ins interested in the rop.rts.

... The OKT* wanted to have reports cn typhus.

Q. r-hat tb you xan by typhus reports; what do y u no-n by OKW?

... The Hie* Coe sad of the tahrancht.

Q. Y«s, I believe that with y ur kn. Kludge of the rgnniscticn, y*u
should knew.

Jfcr knowledge waa n:t as exact as kUat. I only know that tlx high
ownnd of th r Bhfe want..' t rtsj I lcarnod that tv a a lottor,

Q. You do not kn w fur exnnplo, wh. signed it?

•*• No, I d^n't recall.

i. Or what ng.ncy in the OJOT dennn-Jed those reports?

... No, I don't know that either.

1. There: r„, it is correct th-t up until Ww year 19lila, well int tho
yur, tho OKVf did net receive any reports?

... Yos, as far a3 I recall.

.»nd see;ndly, it is c rrcct that y.u ar. unable t« str.t. what a>ncy
f the 010 ' ormeud. these reports?

... I cannot str.t. that; 1 da't ru . j.r that.

!• .fay I ad' y u further. If re details w.rc .^von in those rop-.rts a.b ut

quc8tl :n r ^uri-nts n hm-si beanos. I want to draw y ur attention

' U - ,,ln u Yact: In para^r-ph 7 cf y ur affidavit you say that cnco

every seven -.nths r.p rtc w u iv sent tc the .tcich Research ^uncil, ..ir.istry

- th. Iuftwnffc, as well as U tho agency at Berlin. Ibv, y u ad'ed the

11 wing sentence: y u adAr! that I hcr 0 Os sent rep rts to tho OK , and

176i»


15 Jm-iirJW9>Wtt4«:n


Court N-. 1

now the fell wins sentence frooo tiu re - rte *x ut typhus which was directed
to the Inspect- rote -'f the Luftwaffe. It was shown clearly that uxjxriaonts
wore b^in; carried out cn living hu*ar. brings. :.sy I assuau frea this that
y;u arc trying to stoto thst this is th-. report which was xnt to tfuo OXK
in 19U1 j? “his is not clearly stated*

A. I cannot r-ox-bar the nopert tc too CKS axactlyj I do net knew what
they showed*

JR. NELTHt Thank you very ouch.


15 Ja*«—2fi-l--A«A7D-Grc33
Court No* 1


BY DR, FHI3ILIA (for the defendant Rostock)i

Q Before I begin interrogating you I would like to state a fact to
you. You realise that at the beginning of this interrogation you have given
a solemn oath?

A Yes,

Q Furthermore, you rust surely roalize that you are standing before
a very high Tribunal hero where very largo crimes aye concerned and in this
oaso it is a matter of lifo and death of the defendant?

A Yes, I know that,

Q Therefore, you will understand that your tostimory as a witness
is extremely important?

A Yoe,

Q That you roalixo your own responsibility?

A Yoa.

Q You surely roallzo, also, that the eorrospondonco which is not
hero bofore the Tribunal, tho testimony about such eorrespondonoc is
extremely important?

A Yon,

Q How, at tho timo in this affidavit you stated, with rogard to ny
client Dr, Rostock, that Baagon had visitod him regularly in Berlin, Now
you havo •orrocted that today "to tho boat of your knowledge",

A Yoe.

Q You have stated to the Tribunal that your assumption at that timo
was wrong and that tho person hieh you saw at the tint *an Mr, Sols

A Yew,

Q However, then you have answered your question of the Prosecution
when ha asked 70U if Haagcn also visitod Rostock, "I assume that",

A Yaw, I don’t know exactly,

Q That is Just it, I would like you to. answer with yos or no,

A I don’t know exactly,

q Will you pleawo wait until I ask tho question. Do you know from

your own personal observation if Haa-'ren visitod Rostock ir. Berlin?

1766


1? Jan. 20-2-A-ATD-Gross
Court Ho. 1


A Fron ay personal knowledge I do not, krww that*

Q Thank ycu. That is what I understood previously. Now, if you
realizo of what inportance I consider your testimony and, after having
ccrrocted that this was mistaken identity, I would like- to ask you if in'
this correspondence which was sent to the Reich Research Counoil if, in your
opinion, you night also bo nistaken in that information? .

A I do not tollovo so. The letters wero signed with Rostock, but as
far as I resanbor they wore signed Rostock,

Q Now you say, "I can’t state". Is that correct?

A As far as I renenber,

Q You recomber the nano?


A Yes.

Q You also


the contents?


A Ho, I do not rutxmbor the oontonts,

Q Is it possible that this corrospondenco nay havo doolt with tho
following subjoct? That is, it was oorrosporvJonco fron tho yoar 1921 rathor
tho ond of the year, about fours of an influenza opidarlo Whloh was boing
ex poo tod for tho winter 191il-19l5? Do you rocall that purhapo?

A An epidemic was nentionod but whother that was in tho corrospondonoo
I do not know,

Q But you did havo such an opldcnic? Howovor, you cannot toll this
hi h Tribunal with cortainty and undor oath that Frofossor Haugen roportod
to Restock about these torrible experiments?

A Hot to Rostock, Reports to Rostock with nano -

Q Therefore, it *os a coaplotoly different sort of correspondence?

A I don’t understand,

Q Therefore, there is a possibility it was sone other correspondence?

A Yes.

Q Than that which was sent to Rostock?

A I don’t quite understand,

» • *

Q I an just askin; you that certain letters to Rostock, if you can

1767


15 j3.rwO-3-^-^n>Oro 9 a
Court So, 1

remember that, and we discussed the possibility they were concerned with
tho terrible experiments.

A Ttat may be, but we often received letters from Professor Rostock.

Q However, you cannot state that they were letters about those
experiments on human beings?

A No, I cannot say that,

Q Thark you. That is what I understood, I do not havo any further
questions,

Sf DR. MARX (for tho defendants Sohrosdor and Dr, Bockor-Freyeong) i

Q Viss Eyer, what positions did Professor Raagsn oocupy and what
aotivity did he exoroise?

A OborantfUohror in tho Luftwaffe and at tho sane time consultant
lords t until 19UU. Frcn 19Ui on ho was directly undor tho Air Floct
Physicians Center,

Q But now you state - what month of tho year 19Wi did thoso changes

occur?

A I do not ronoebor,

Q You do not recall oxaotly ary more?

A No, I do not know,

Q Tou stated in your affidavit "I knew of tho wholo correspondence
of tho Institute as well as tho socret ccrrospondonco". Thoroforo, you mko
a differonoo botwoon soorot correspondence and the rmaindor of tho oorros-

pondonoe?

A Soorot correspondence I moan tho resoarch work, and cenoral corres¬
pondence had no roforonco to it,

Q Yos. ffawovor, there was correspondence which was classified as
top secret. To what agency was this ccrrospondonco sent?

A To tt» Chief and Inspector of the Nodical Service, and to the Air
Float Center, and tho Reich Roaearch Council.

Q I must ask you to think over very precisely in thi* case what you

have Just stated. You stated this "secret correspondence had been sent to tho

1768


15 Jan^O^-A-ATB-Gross
Court ?fa. 1


Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe. Was it not sent exclusively to the Tloich
Rosoarch Council and offices of the SS?

A No. I know nothin." about the SS.

q I mean that for scientific research —

A It was the Reich Ronoarch Council, the Air Fleet Center, and tho
Chief and Inspector of the Luftwaffe. Those things were generally treated
secret. At least.- narked secret when ths reports were rent in,

Q isny difference botwoen top secret and secret?

A A lotter froa tho Reich Research Council was aarkod specifically
that rosoarch work was to bo dealt with as top secret.

Q Yos, I see. Did ycu hoar about those axporinerts unoxpoetecCy —
at tho tirw tho typhus o pi deni o at !lat:wcilor cane?

A Yos. That wns in 19Ui*

q Was sorw aetlon ta!:on thon by tho Luftr affo Inspector?

A Tho Luftwaffo Medical Inspectorate wanted to krow if tho opddordo
had any r os poet to Haogen's work thoro, Haagon wroto bade it had nothing
to do with it, that tho opidcnic had broken out itself.

Q Wasn't it brought in frsa outsido?

A Ho, I don't renasbsr.

q Kiss Eyor, you furvjor stated that overy three months reports
about experiments woro sent to tha Inspector and Chiof of tho Hodical System
of tho Luftwaffe and tho Reich Research Council. Is that correct?

A Yos. That cay havo been la tor. I don’t krww exactly - after every
throo conths.

q I an rww asking* you - did throo months reports of inportanoo at
similar intervals, which woro addressed to the Luftwaffe - did they not doal
with oxperinonts of consulting physicians where they discussed observations
in groat experiments and nake suggestions for potential changes. Just a
renont for your clarification. After all Professor Haafcen was consulting
fygionist of the Air Fleet Research, is that right?

176 ?


A That is right*


15 Jaa-A-AEWO-e-Grosa-JP
Court I

Q# How, was It that thoso reports conposod thcnsolvos of his acti¬
vities as consultost hygionlst of tho air fleet *Roich B ?

A. 2jc roports were sent In aftor tho tino Profossor Eoagcn undor-
toolc tho inspection - after 1S44 - tho roports woro scat In evory tino*
They woro also kept oocrot.

Q+ Thoro was also work by Profossor Eaagon with Sr. Crodnl and
this work roforrod to a now typhus vaccine. You tainv anything about
that?

A, I typod tho reports but I dor . 1 1 know what was In then bocaueo I
an no oxport. Hovor studlod nodicino.

Q* Hasn't thoro works vMch woro subnittod to havo approvod for
publication? Did you undoratnnd ny question?

K Yob.

Q. Thoro was snao scientific work which had to bo subnittod In
ordor to havo it ozenlnod so that It could bo pornittod to bo publishod?

A. That Is right.

Q. Voro thoro also roports froquontly which Profossor Kaagon hod
conposod togothor with Prl. Crodal, woro they reports which woro auppoood
to bo published which had boon previously subnittod for oxaninntlon?

Yoo» Such roportc woro sont in*

Q. It Is correct that Profossor Heagea roportod about tho status
of his research oxaninntions which had boon eiven to hia by tho Roich
Roooarch Council ovory four ninths?

A. Yos, that is right.

Wore those axnrinntions classifiod bb top cocrot?

A. Tho roports which wore sont in, no.

Q. What sort of reports, do you noan In typhus rosoarch which
voro sent to tho Chief of tho Xodicol Inspoctorato of tho Luftvaifo.

Sana ono or>uld usmo that tho oxporlconts on hunan bolngs woro boing
carried out. You stated In your affidavit that there were reports about
typhus experiments which were sent to the Radical Servic* of the Luftwaffe
and which clearly showed they dealt with experlnents on hunan beings.


What do you sean by that?


1770


15 Jan«-20—‘S-A-ATO-Gro
Court No* 1


A There wore about fifty prisoners who were infected with virulent
vaccine*

Q Are you trying to clain new that this statenent was contained in
a report to the Medical Chiof of the Luft»affo c
A I do not reneeher that exactly.


1771


15 Jen-21-l-A-ATD-Sarrow-JP
Court I

Q. Porhaps it ney bo that you hero =ado a aisteko in two difforor.t
facta, tohon tko Luftwaffe }Cedical Inspectorate asked what had caused tho
typhus epidoeic in Katzvcilor to which Profoesor Eaagcn replied that this
had nothing to da with tho experiments and that this opldor-io had toocn
brought into Eatsvoller from tho outside.

A. Ho. A roport was nado on tho typhus rosoar&h tout slnco I do not
understand enough atoout tho roport I can : t talk about it - I can't oxplain
it to you tout it did indicato that exporinonta woro conductod on hrann
boings.

0. Voll, you conn that this was roclly contMnod in tho roport or
is this only ono of your conclusions?

A, It is a conclusion of nino. I say that I do not understand onouGh
atoout .....

Q. Thoroforo, I can say that it is only a conclusion by you. Hauoror,
that you cen't stnto that this was explicitly oontainod in tho lottor
or roport?

A. So» I cannot svoar to it.

XE. IIARX: I do not havo any furthor quostiono.

IP.. SAUTE: (Dofonso Counsol for dofondant 3lono): llr, Prosidonti
I havo only a few brief questions*

Vitnoss* you haro previously told us about tho rooonrch assignments
which tho Roich Ho so Arch Council had giron to Profossor Kaagen of tho
roports which Profossor Enagon on his part sutonittod V. tho Roich Rosoarch
Council. Eavo you soon tho so assiganonts which tho Roich Rosoarch
Council gnvo to Professor E»agon?

A. Toe, thoro was a lottor which vno narkod "top socrot" in which
tho rosoarch assigenonts woro given nuobors and thoy woro given tho
Priority E.

Q. Savo you only soon ono written assignnont of this kind or eovoral?
I'b talking about assignnonts of tho Roich Research Council.

A. too. All four research jobs wore ©ontalnod in this one lottor.


Sech was givon a nuatoer


1772


15 Jar^l-^^-.-.TD-Sarroir

Court No. 1


Q Then, if I understood you correctly, there were four research
aasigmonta at the sane tine?

A Yes, in the one latter, yes. They were giver. Priority D. /ill four
wore given different nu=bore 0

Q Wore any other assigroents, besides these four of which you have
Just spokon, given by the Rcdch Research Council or did any othor ones cono

to your knowledge?

A No, I don«t believe so.

Q Therefore, tharo woro only four?

A Yes.

Q Do you know w!vo assigned this assigroont of the Roich Research
Council! I on asking this quito specifically - if the nano of Clone ever
appoarod on tho letter of the Roich Rosoarch Council? Dlono - I an spelling
to you - D L 0 It E?

A I do not krew,

Q You cannot recall at all?

A No.

q In tho reports which Profosoor Kaagon thon suboittod to tho Reich
Rosoarch Council was thoro no nano on tho address — tc whoso attention?

A They wont to Dr. Drouor usually.

Q They woro usually sor.t to Dr. Brcuor?

A Yos.

q Can you recall if at any tine ary of those reports woro directed
to Professor Blcno?

A No, I do not.

Q Did you at all, until today, hoar the none of Professor Clone in

connection with theso research assigraents?

A I do not reneabor the nano but it nay very well be. Sonetines I

have a poor nenory.

q And fron tho correspondence which passed through your hands you


cannot recall anything eitter with r^jd to Clone?


15 Jan.-21^-3-A-ATD-Xarrcw
Court Ro. 1


A Ho.

Q I thank you©

I do not have ary further questions*

DR. FRITZ (Defense counsel for defendant Rose): Ittss Eyer, I have
only two questions to ask you*

When you were intorrcgatod by ry colleague, Dr. Sorvatius, anongst
othor things you havo testified that also sees correspondence took piaco
botween Profossor Haagen and Profossor Rose.

A Yes, that is right*

Q Has this corrospondonco froquont or infrequent?

A It was not very frequor.to

Q Thank you.

A Porhapo fivo or six lottora altogether,

Q Thon I havo one additional question. In the affidavit which his
already boon mentioned sovoral tin os you havo stated thero that - under
paragraph 9 - that Profossor Roso wastho Inspector of tho Hodical Service
of tho Luftwaffo?

A That's not right. I did not say that.

Q Howovor, it is statod in tho Gorr-an translation*

A That is a mistake. I didn’t say that e

Q Thon you want to corroct yoursolf?

A Inspector?

Q Yos, I can road it to you,

A Uo t I never said that.

Q Thank you. I do not havo ary additional questions,

THE PRESIDENTi Tho affidavit will bo handod to tho witness to allow
her to road it. The affidavit concerning which tho witness was intorrogatod
should bo handod to her so 3ho nay exardno it,

HR. R.RDYt Tho affidavit is in the French language. I havo a copy
hero and I will hand it to tho witness.

(Affidavit was handod to witness)

1774


15 Je&-.v-2l-4-AZ>-Karrow-J?

Court I

7HZ FB2SIZEBZ: Eoos the witness read the Trench language?

WI5K3SS: Tea.

TES P3ZSIIEHT: Is the affidavit which was Just handed to tho witnooe
la tho Trench language or in tho Gorrj*n language?

VIHESS* Conan. Excuse no, Tronch.

5HB EESHE2T7: Counsel nay call tho attention of tho witness to
tho portion of tho affidavit incoming which ho interrogated hor„

XSU -RITZ: Kiss Syor, under Paragraph 9, it ic statod - and this
is also in tho Tronch text which I have also coon - "Professor Rose,
Inspoctor of tho Hodical Sorvico of tho Luftwaffo", It is nontionod that
ho cane to Strassbourg tvlco.

WIT1ESS: "Oborstarst" 2oso to Strasbourg twice? '/hat it soys hero
in a Mistake. I didn't r.otico it whon I road it through, I hnvo alrondy
told you thet sonobody olso typod it and X didn't road it good or.ough
and that oocopod no.

q. Thoroforo, it is wrong as it otands now,

A, Yoo, it ic wrong.

0. Another sr.all nistako. Kiss 2yor. In tho sano paragraph 9 it
Is stated and you hnvo also ropoatod that oarlior today that Profoocor
Paso had gono to Strasbourg for tho first tl-.o in 1942?

A. Yoo.

q. 7 no fact is tod has also boon testified horo by tho witnoss
Schr.ldt that Profossor Roso cano to Strassbourg for tho first tino in
1943, to visit Profossor Eaagon.

A. Yhnt is possible.

q. I do not hnvo any further questions.

m. KASX (Dofenso Counsol for defendant Schroodor?: Pardon no,

Hr. President, I request that I can ash the witness tone further questions

THE PT,SI3ir?; You nay iatermguto tho witnoss.

UA2X: Kiss 2yor, can you still recall the contents of tho letter
which woro addressod to tho Central Air Physician, Berlin, personally,


with


1775


15 Jos~J-21-5-AI3-Karrft-JP

Court I


a copy for tho Medical Chief of the Luftvaffo? Thatlis, a letter to tho
Central Air SI cot Physician, Berlin, with a copy fr.r tho Modical Chiof
of tho Luftvaffo. Can you still recall such lettors?

A. I rcaocbor that I VToto than hut I do not rcuoaber tho contonts.

Q, Tou cannot recall tho contonts any noroT In your affidavit you
tpolco of "virulont vaccinesVhat do you conn hy that?

A* I just roeenborod tho phraso fron a lottor which I wrote onco.

CJ, Yoll, in ay opinion, in your affidavit you havo talkod about
virulent vacclnos.

A. Toe, that was in a lottor that fifty prisoners voro lnfectod
with virulent vaccine.

Do you know vhat virulont vaccino is?

A. I assuno that tho disoaso was injcctod into tho prisrnovo through
the vaccino but I do not know oxactly. I havo nevor studlod oodicino.

O. Too. Thcro aro two kinds of vacclnos - ono virulont, ono r.orv-
virulont. Thcroforo, in ay opinion, it is a living bactoria. Corroct7

A. Bocauoo it was virulont 1 assumed that it was to glvo tho pri-
sonoro tho disonoo. If it had not boon virulent it would havo boon loos


d-r.goroua probably.


Q. That is a nattor which wo shall loavo to tho oxports. You opoko


of Jaundico oxporlnonts. Hnwovor, you stated that you did not know if


tho patlonts at Yittonau Eron printon Alloo had had Jaundico.

A. I don ? t know. I only saw a fow lottors that nontionod it.
\ iro you nixing up Jaundico and yollow fovor horo?

A. l*o, that was 70 II 0 V fovor.

Q. You know vhat wo noen by yollow fevor?


\ Yollow fovor is a tropical disoaso. Jaundico.

0 , Thoro rxo two kinds of Jaundico. Ono is hopatitis - oonnoctod


with paralysis of tho livor.

A. Hopatitis opidcnic.

Q. veil, there aro still others. Once you ctatod that tho expori-
nont3 with yellow fevor wero concluded in tho year 1943?


15 Jan#-21- 6-A-ATD-Karrow
Ocurt Jfo# 1

A In 19U2.

Q Already in 19U2?

A I boliove so. They were not cccplctod, they were stopped#

Q As far as I know this was connected with tho termination of the
Africa campaign,

A Yos. If it was 19U3 ttat was 19U3*

Q That was 19U3 then. Thank you c

THE PRESIDENTt Any further cross examination of this witness?

Is thoro any rediroot exacination by tho Prosecution?

RFDI3ECT EXAHHA7ICH

HP., HARDYi Miss Eyor, in regard to these reports sent to tho PJLch
comand of tho rfohrracht, could it havo been that the reports woro sent to
tho Chief of the Medical Sorvico of tho OKU?

V/ITIlESSi I didn't understand the quontio:>#

DP. KELTE (Defense Ccunsol for defondant Handloser)* I objoct to
this quostion. Tho witness has ropliod to ry question cloarly that nho
could not rocall to wtat offico of tho (HW thoso roports woro submitted and
I havo askod tho witnoas what einnaturo was placod on tho quostions of tho
OJW and sho stated that sho was unable to rocall and finally sho answered
to ry question that sho could not rocall tho reports to tho OK’.f any noro,
Aftor that, this quostion by tho Txosocutor can only bo of a loading kind.


1777


15 Jan*-21- ^A-^TT-Sarrcx
Oourt ifo. 1


A In 19U2.


Q Already in 19U2?

A I believe so. They wore ait ccopletod, they were stopped.

Q As far as I know this was connected with the termination of the
Africa campaign,

A Yes. If it was 19U3 that was 19U3»

Q That was 19L3 then, Thark you c

TIE PRESIDENT* Any further cross examination of this witness?

Is thoro any redirect examination by the Prosecution?

REDIRECT BXAfflMATICH

HR, HARDY 1 Hiss Eycr, in regard to theso reports sent to tho high
cornond of tho Wohrmacbt, could it have boon that the reports woro sent to
tho Chiof of the Medical Sorvico of the OKU?

YflTTESS* I didnt understand tho qua tie:*.

Dlt. lELTE (Dofonso Counsol for defendant Handlosor)* I objoct to
this quostlon. Tho witnoss has replied to ny quostion cloarly that oho
could not recall to whit offico of tho OKR thoso reports woro submitted nnd
I have asked tho witness what sifinaturo was placod on tho questions of tho
OKU and sho stated that sho was usable to recall and finally sho answered
to ry quostion that sho oould not rooall tho reports to tho OKa aiv noroc

0

Aftor that, this quostion by tho Txosocutor can only bo of a loading kind.


1777


15 v T ci»-A-JP-23-1-Seynes-O?
Court I


U3 PR2SIS33T: Objoctlon sustained.

BT HE. EABUT:

Q, Hiss Eyor, when you said in your affidavit that Dr. Rose was
inspoctor of tho Kodlcal Sorvico of tho Luftwaffe, did you aoaa to say
that Professor Hoso was from the office of tho Inspoctor of tho ilodloA
Sorvico of tho Luftvaffo and -.hat he was not tho Incpoctor?

A. Yo8f ho belonged to tho Kodical Sorvico of tho Luftvaffo, but
ho vp.b not Inspector; at lonst, I don't bolievo so.

q, Kov, in those typhus experiments eonductod by Dr. Haagon in
Satsvoilor, did Dr. Enagen infect tho concentration canp innatos vith
typhus?

K You, vith virulont vaccinoo.

Q* Bov, vhon you say virulont vaccino, do you noan virulent virus?

A. With virulont virus. That io vhat I nomt# yoo.

IP., HARDY: I havo no further quostion, Tour Honor#

IF.. ISITZ (Dofonso Counsol for defondant Roso)i Mr. Prosldont, I
still havo ono additional quostion to put to tho vltncss vhich hno orison
fr'<a tho oxpnlnation by Hr. Hardy.

T~D PRESIIEHT: Counsel nay procood#

B3-CRCSS ZUMVkHJ?

3Y ZSU FRITZS

Q, i!i BB Zyor, to tho last quostion of tho Prosecutor you ropliod
that tho prisoners had boon vaccinated vith virulont virus. To a fur¬
ther question you stated that you noant vith virulent vaccine, ! an nov
asking you vhothor you can toll no tho difference, for oxonplo, *otvoon
virulont vacoino and a virulent racoino virus.

A. So, I nsovnod that tho £0 prisonors in quostion had to bo givon
that diooaao so that the typhus experiments could be conducted on thee
I hare already said that I do not understand about those tnings.

Q. rnpnv you, that answers tho quostion sufficiently.

TE3 EGSI3BTT: Thoro boing no furthor questions, the vitnoss ney
bo

1770


15 J.~ rs-.—JP-22-2-Kayne s.

C urt 1

excused.

(The witness was excused.)

!E. ICKAKiY* I weald new lik- t; ;f-r D eunjnt !iC 991, on jn„o 52 cf
tho £r..,l±sh Droront Book, as Prcsxoticn idubit UU. This is a ucoorandun
.r directive fr..- tho Ketch .'nistcr .1 tie mirier, Berlin, 6 September'
19Uli. It is adlrossed to: (a) Tho *toich Gevorner, (b) The administration
rf tho provincial association, (c) tho Ccunty *residents, (d) tho Police
Prosidont in Gorlin, (o) Tho L rd a;- r .* ,. w «oich Capital Eorlin. It
is e-ncorning ", cntally insane S-.stem workers or.' 1 F-lcs — Circular t’oeroos
offthe vetch • •neater -f tho Int.ncr rf — " and then fcH.ws s.a* s.rt
of nunbor an! letter reference.

"!• tc ths c:nsidcreblo meter cf S-storn workers me* tolas br.ught
int5 tho C^mcn ttcich f r labor _?pl*/ror.t, tte aassignrwnt *f dental cases
cnong tho: i t , German nsylvca is constantly increasing. The pure.so of such
fissignoonts ..ust bo in any cas- the o.ssibly s.-edicct rcccvcry t vrkin¬
ability. Thus, t th Sv cntally Insane pe pie tea a.U the no-ns :f ’em
therapy :ust bo applied.

out due tc lack cf space in Ooraan institatiens, it can net bw justified. that
patients whe ore not emsidorud as curable t. be able tv w.’rk aga n in a
reasonably snvri. fciso ray r.aain p r c'n».r.tiy r fer a 1 ng ti e lu Teman
institutions. In order t. av.id that the following is tr dared:

"2. In the f-Hewing Uct I established f .r each district in the R-ich
a c llectivo list *->r incurable '.art :lly insane c-stern w orkers and iolos.
7h«jy sh uld be csBinned t th s. iustituii ns ircx< lot oly if possible In
cas> this is inpossible ;Hjo tc ur .one; r V transp rtati n difficultios,
the institution in question sh ul' doliver thoir Eastern, i lish patients
t- th. co Hoc ting institution in their resp:ctiva district within at the st
no nth. It is net nccoss-ry t. carry ut the. rcs-vil if the patient is
considered as being abl- to learnt the institute n withir. six weeks at tho -


15 Jnn-A—JP-2&-S-Hayne»-JP
Court I


"3* It is tho task of the collecting institution to decide vhothor
the restoration of working ability night be ©tnaidcrcd within a reason¬
able period of tino.

"4# Tho charge of costs fron the dnto of rogiatration in tho collect¬
ing institution io to bo taken over by tho Hoad of tho Central Financial
clearing Offico of tho Sanitarian in Lins/Oberdtnau, F.O. 3ox 324, which
has to be lnforncd ireodlntely of such assiffunents. Tho fixed rato for
pntionts of tho general class will be paid to tho institutions. Tho
Eastern workers and Polos alroady asscnblci in collecting institutions
nro to bo reportod on a list inr.odiatoly to tho Central Financial Clopr^-
ing Offico. Tho chargo of costs for thoso patients io tranaforrod as
fron 1 Octobor 1944 to tho Contral Account Offico.

"5, Aftor four vcoks of tho registration in tho collecting institu¬
tion, at tho latest, a short roprt on tho pv<snc<ic of tho caoo and
on tho quootion of working ability has to bo sent to tho hood of tho
Control Financial Clearing Offico. It is tho task of that offico to
direct tho transportation of patients fron tho collocting Institutions
to nonrby spocial oeylucs In thoir hoao district.

“6» Ao Polos aro to bo donsidorod only thoso who woro brought into
tho Reich for labor onployrent. This docroo doos not apply to local
Polish population,

"7. Tho loadors of tho Gnu, otc„, nontol institutions aro to bo
lnforr.od by their suporior officials ard tho loadors of wolfaro and pri-
vp.to institutions by thoir ©—potent highor adainistrativo authorities#

Tho roquir-d copios nro oncloscd horowith."

And thoro follows a list of collocting institutions, which wo nood
not nention horo particularly, except nunbor 9: "For Kurhesson, Ho3soy
snd Lend Hosson: Xontal Institution Sadnnnr."

"3y ordorj Kiosbadon, 11 Sopterbor 1944, Lnadoshous."

A copy is notod os having boon rccoivod by tho County Kjntal Institution,


15 Jnn-A-.'r-22 -li-HnyrK. s '

Court Ho, 1

Eichberg, "with tlvj requ-st cckr.: ledge -V t take further st.ps."

This dcunont indicates that dast.ra w.rkurs had been fcrcibly

brought lat Gorrnny, wh- n longer wore able t work and who wen. consi¬
dered ns r. burden n the cental institutions in Consnny were tc be brought
together in c collecting institution end, unless they c uld bo .lischnrcod
in a rxattor .f six w-.eks, they w„r„ b be oxt-r inched .and brought under
tho sc. po of the euthanasia pro^rau. I naw w.uT! like t. offer Document NO
1116 on Pago 55 of the D.cunont 2 ~k as pT-socuti.n Exhibit 1*15.

This is a judgnont, r rather, an extract fr . the review and rocoiraon-
dotions of tho Xputy Thoat-r Judge Advocate in the case .f tho United.

States vs. Klui.n, T.ahlmnn, ct cl, hil at ’ lesbrdcn, Gomany, from 3 Octobor

1915 thr Uih 15 Cctcbor 1915.

I do nut think that it is needful for sv, t road those extracts into tho
record. I'll state briefly that this is a review ,f e Judgment handed
down by a duly appointed 3 j litary cerxlssi.n of the United States ..my in
tho c.aso ef a nttibwr - f Gersr.-s wh woro tried for participatl n in tho -xe-
cuti-.n f parsons of Folish and Russian nati nality at Had/saor Institution,
which, as we know, was one ef the exter dnati n institute ns in thu cutl.a-
nasia pro-.ran. Tho facts here inv lv. th. execution .f in excoss of 1*00
Russians and iclos botwe-n tho dates 1 July 19lij and 1 ..pril 1915 “t Had.xiar,
Gorasny.

Suffice it t- say th't thre- *f tho seven individual, tried were e.ntenced

t be hanged by the neck until don.’, that no was ernfinod t. hard labor

—

f r life rind n. f.r 35 years, no f r 30 years, and no f r 25.

The Court f und. that it had juris ’lcti.n t try thes. indivi hials fer
tho nurdor if persons f nntd nality th.r tr._n that :f tto tryin Tribunal.
In th.r m rds, th_ fact that tsv. p-rs.ns executed were n t f .^x-ric-n na-
tinality did r. *t preclude tho C.urt fr . trkin. juris-'icticn.

THE PRESIDENT: Wasn't that matter settled by tho Ju’gos rf thu

Ir.t-rnati :nal ' ilitnry Trtbur.nl, r. cHaixy?

1731


IS J?n-A-JF-22-5-Hayncs
Court Sc. 1

MR. !«cHiN2f: Sir?

THE r/aan't th't nett.r arro cr loss settled by tho J.ntornr*ti c-

nal Tribunal?

H. JtHAJGYt Yes, I think sc. Tos, !»r. HocbwalJ will n.w proceed to
introduco —

THE PRZSJD3f?s Tho Tribunal will new recess until 9:30
o'clock torerrow aorning.

(Tho Tribunal adjeurnud until 0530 hours, lo Jenaary 191:7).

$


17S2


16 Jan 47-M-ZE-l-l-Foster (FL)
Court No. I


CCKffiCCT COPY

Official Transcript of the American
Military Tribural in the natter of
the UnitaC States of Acorica, against
Karl Brandt, et al, defendants, sit¬
ting at Nuernberg, Gcrcany, on 16 Ja¬
nuary 1947, 0930, Justice Beals, pre¬
siding.


THE MARSHAL: Tbs Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal I.

‘tilitary Tribunal 1 is nc» in session.

God save the Un-tcl States of America and this Hono¬
rable Tribunal. ^

There will oe order in the courtroom.

TIE PRESIDE;:?: Hr. Itorohal, you will arcertain if the defendants ore
all present in the courtroom.

THE MARSHAL: !’ay it plooso Tour Honor, all the defendants aro
smt in tho court.

THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary General will note for tho record tho
prasenco of ail ti»o defordonte in tho courtroom.

Thie morning Tribural I convonos at 9:40 o'clock, a delay which
was duo to aoclenical difficulties in tho recording appliances of tho
court. Thoy bavin* b, ; cn prccptly repaired by tho efficient asonts in
charges of thon; tho court new convc.noa at 9:40 o'clock. Tho prosocution


aay procuod,

DR. IZXjl’ADJ: i In.: It please tho IribUiv.L, t;.e List docuient which
was prcsont'id by "r. McHancy last night was JO-1116 which was prosocu¬
tion Exnibit 415. I also offered into ovidonce a sot of documents which


wore prosocution oxhibitr in case against tfa defendants Wahlmann and
so on, oxcorpts which were read into the record by Ur. IfcHanoy. Tho first
docuant bo on page 66 of Document Book, Your Ho¬

nor, wh.y^fnibo’proeccutibW Exhibit 416. It is a statement of Alfons
Kloin. <J not want to’reod tbis document into tho rocord. Tho next
docu^nil off-r is also an exhibit from the Kadaaar case, prosecution


16 Jan Z*7-il-25-l-l-Fo8ter (FL)

Court No. I

exhibit frea tfco case, !D-?50, on page 69 of the document book and *iU
be Prosecution Exhibit 417. I quote:

"Bcforo at, Capt. Luke P. Rogors, being authorized to aininistcr
oaths, personally appeared Philipp 3lua, who, being duly worn through
tho intorproter, node and subscribed the following stato»nt.

”Uy naao is Philipp Blu?, I live in Frickhofon, Gcraany, I ans


- 1733 a -


16 Jan 47-L4-i LAA- 1-2-Fostor (FL)

- OSt.-


Court No. I


a cousin of Aliens Klein. Since J940 1 had boon in the Hada.'aar Dental
Institution. There I hot to take car® the switchboard until February
1943, when I took over tho burials. Klein ordered as taka over this
Job.

"In November 1942 Klein becaao administrative inspector of Hadajoar
ard he still hold that position ir. August 1944 a hen I left. Klein was
Chiof of tlx Kadaor Institution and issued ell orders.

"Bernotat was district counsvllor (Lrndosrat) and used to visit
Hadoaar froqvontly; there he had conferences with Kloin and ohlraonn.

"Viahlnann was the physician in chr.rgu of Kadanar and conducted
all medical treatments in thj Institution. Every naming a conf»-rcnco
bo two or. ••'ohlnann, Chiof-r.uro,, Ruoff and the female chief-nurse Huber took
place.

"Two or three aonths before I left tho Institution to Join tho Kohr-
encht, Russiand and Poles began to cooo to Hadoaar. Klein told ao that
those Russians and Poles were afflicted with TB. All these Poles and Rus¬
sians wore brought to bard lb on the ground floor. If there wore too
nfifty for this ward they wen. brought to word Ua on tho first floor. Tho
funal nursos Hachbarth and Beilin worked in ward lb, Zacka», Wollr.nd, and
Borkowskl in 11 a.

"Ruoff and Villig gave, as far as I Imt*, injections to all those
Poles and Pessi ms. All these Russians - Poles were dead nbout two hours
after thoir arrival. doth the aalc and fertile nurses info race mo usually
when they wore ready to be buried.

"Tho female nurses informed a* of tho death of these pocple so
that they could clean up the roaas and .-sake tfx beds. I th-n carried


tte bodies down to the cellar


16 Jar. 47 -‘J-!‘aA-I-3-Fos ter (FL)
Court ho. I


"I entered the nr^aus of the dead Into e burial book in Ucrklo'of¬
fice. Iforklo kept a register oi the dead, based on tho documents car¬
ried by the Russians and Poles, •..‘hen tho Russians and Poles arrived,
their documents wero handed over to Klein, who in turn gave them to
Jferkle. Svory morning Ifcrklo gave eu a slip of paper with the names of
these who wore to be buried tho sr»j day.

"With tho aid of a few insane people, I used to carry tho bodios
to tho ocnotory and to bury them there. I used to bury 8 to 20 in one
grave and I used to enter in tho burial-book whoro they woro buried, I
estimate that I buried perhaps one hundred Russians and Poles uhilo I
was there.


lo Jc.a-tr- 22S-2-1—..*chan.
Court Ho. 1.


■jaco ceao c largo transport of aisslana and polo* to Bndaunr. There
oust hnv u bwuo forty or fifty in t-is transport. Xhcy were brought fron
Il-bur f: in trucks. Sve-rybody in tee institution knew, that n largo transport
of Bastions and poles wr.s to arrive fro.. Limburg. X was present wr.cn theso
Russians and Poles arrived, ind they were brought to word 11a and lb. Ruoff
e injections to taoso Russians nnd poles. The nurses undressed the votwp
•nd brought toe- to bed. I re-e-ber for certain, ta-1 nurses 3".ckb rth,
3ewlli- . ad Zochov were present. I i- not quite euro, if the chief-nurso
Saber or the others v«r. there. I took all clothing down to tho collar with
the aid of sou* of the insane. I was pro sent until all these peoplo died,
which lasted about two houxs. I carried then down to the cellar with tho
assistance of a couple of insane; they were to bo buried tho next fry.

“I was a naiib«r of tee ie-.tional socialistic party since 1933."

(Signaturo) Pfcillipp 3lau.

Th_ next I>ocui-vnt So. 7pl of the Socunent book will bo Prosecution
Exhibit hid; it Is Iso r Prosecution SchiMt of the Bnuacor cr>eo; r. ntr.to-
uer.t of JC-rl Tiliig, which I offer into evidence without rending it Into
the record.

So is the next Document no. 73^ dn jx« e 73* '*hica will be Proeocution
Exhibit 41$.

Tn» next Docit-ent - IXocuhent Ho. 72o, v,;lc.. I offer into evidence ao
Prosecution Exhibit 420. This is also . Prosecution Exhibit of the sftdnhftr
case. This is c sugary of tee people killed, the foreigners killod at
Snd mr . r and snows the x’ollovisg: Poles - 60; Russians - 30O; Russians or
Poles - 16; Grand Total 476, of vnica are non - 263; voioon - 197; and
Children - 16.

The next docuwnt is u list of too au.es of the foreigners killed in
toe K n da- nr 3at hn o n slo station, Document 'Jo. 727. voice will be Prosecution
ixaibit 421 on p*-,;es IS to 95 of the Document 3ook. She list is Docuncnt

«>• 731.

-HE PRESIDE.I: flic-counsel will f rocoed r little :.oro slowly with tho

17S6


Id jZS-2-2-..ooCan

Court Ho, 1.


totals of thece Exhibits.

i.R. B3CSM.JJ): I bv‘o your pardon, sir.

THS PRESIDE.'?: Just rood tho title, nuabor and p: ^-e of tho Exhibit
to wnica you arc roforrinfc.

«.3. SjCEILLD: Yos sir. The Document 727 starts on p ^ 60 of tho
Document book and will bo Prosecution Sxhibit U21. It is n list of naaos of
foreign nationals, who were killed in the Hudai r Euthanasia Station. It is
one of tao prosecution Exhibits in ta^ Sndnaar ease. Tale Docuuent is on
Pn^vs 60 to 95 of tco Sn*Alsh Docunent Book.

Th* next Docunont lio. 731 on -a. o 96 of tho Docunent 3ook will bo Pro¬
secution Sxnibit jto. h22, alto one of the Prosecution Exhibits fron tho
£_aa-3cr ccco. It is e statement of Bo inrich jtuoff.

To., next Document. Tour Honors, is Ho. 729 or. Pr. c 99; also one of tho
Pro scout 1 -3 Exuiblts. wnlch is nr. interrogation of the witness Prodorick
Dic ter . n n.

-'HE PHSSDS.T: Vhat will be tho nunb^r of that Exhibit?

*ei. HOCE-i-Ii): This is Prosecution Exhibit U23. sir.

TlK nox*. Document on Pa, o IO5 of tho docunont Book is Ho. 752. w..ich
will bo Prosecution Ex-dbit fro;, tns. Bid&u r caso, o staten.nt of Koinrlch
aioff. It is another statement of Boicrich Buoff.

Tho r.uxt Document, which I offer into avldonco, is on p:-,.o 110, Docv>*
•Jent a >. 0O6, vnioh will bu Prosecution Exhibit U25. It is r. sworn otr.tfr-
-ont of Dtto D.rin.-r r.d I quote:

"3cf>ro -e, .atthlns Scju^ccnor. actin- in accordance witn nrticlo 1
u.d 3 of th. Decree of t-.e C.%nd Dueny of 3 JUiy 1945 c once mi a* U :r Criuos.

red toda;. io October 1546. £0rr ;tto 3vrtnfier. physician, born 29
oovcjbor I9O5 .t £ol— I'-B^r,;, do.dcil«.d in '^lfordin^on, who beine duly
sworn as 1 . wltcest. stated:

"~ E pdysicit-u, I v e assigned for duty to the i.onti.l Hospital Eich-

uw-rt; nvr.r Sltvillo-Viesbcdcz>-2hein f -.u. In t..is capacity. I rerainod in tho

institution fro- 2 ;.:-.rcn l=h2 to 2o July IS^.3. Director of this hcntcl

i?S7


l6 Jfto-.r-GSS-2-3-.ncehca
Csurt Jo. 1.

Institution was the C~lcf Physician SS-Obersturubnnnfuohror Frits kennockc.
Iho First Physician's nr.no v--s 'Alter Sc.--:ldt. He also hold tnc title of
SS-Oborstur-bennfuehror. The institution was built for 600 iruKtea, but
teupornrily accouuodi-.ted 1UCO. It wns c.n open aocrot in tho Gnu that tho
calaf pay sic inn ,.oanccko waa directod by Hlu-lcr to coub tho cental
institutions oil over Goreany for aentclly tick pooplo whoa ho brought, asong
other piece a, to Hadoaro- where they wore gnsrod. Indoed, I could unko tho
observation th t during ay stay nt Hicr.borc tho nnaed physicion Frits
..onnocko was continuously away on travels, -t the tine when hcnnocko vr.s
culaf pays lc lan and SS Alter Scauidt w m first paysiclan Of iho inotitution
the following incident occurod. Into in tho foil of 19 U 2 , which I witnesaod
vita uy own oy«s. Ine day, in toll late foil of 1942, jionnocko snid to no:
Tae first physician Sca-idt will co-o to your station tomorrow and then ho
will fcivu a trec.taont to tho patient Kosslor. Drdor cono fron Berlin to lot
die ua disappear. 1

"Next k-ornin^, nt 10 o'clock &:huidt pivo Kooslor an injection of 5
ecu lauinul. BUi luuinal w-.s injected intrru-uncui. rly. Tae vlctiu passed
out, then ho %*\s coupl>.tely undrossod and brou^nt into u sort of bath roou,
a roou that was laid out with £lr.xod tilos and there ho was 1 -id on tho
floor. The wirdow was oponed. .t 5 o'clock Kessler roccivod r. oocond In¬
jection; tuis vne tho nu evening th.-.t he &ot thrt second injection. When
I was nt the stilt lor. next -orniiv,, 1 ukod u uiJe nurse, vnooo ruuoo w;.s
Sca&af, how Kessler w:is ,\tti.. on: t..o a—wd 5chr.nf shoved no the victin
Kessler, w..o still lay aJecd o.. the floor of the tiled roou. Tho to,.por-
a tun in the roou wns ice-cold. Sch a af told uc th t Kosslor had rccoivod
.•notu-r injection of 5 cc- lu-inr.l ta.t -orr-liy. The third dr.y Kosolor
pr.esod A way. In t.,c death certif icte, pn^u-oni r. wr.s quoted t.b tho cruso
of doi.th. If an autopsy h’d been .j-.de pnsuaonic would have bo-n found to
be tae cause of doeta, indeed. 3y tae injections of luuiacl n paralysis of
the brest^in f ; centers of tae victia was c-usod. The prevailing cold was

unavoidably bound to cruso pneujonia.

1783


16 Jc&->r-52S- 2*h-fcuohcn
&3UT6 VO. 1.

■-11 tiu- nontally dofuatico child. oa rocoivcd by tho Xichb-rp lastltu-
tioa vero nurdercd, com of tseu died n natural do&tu. TfcjBO nontally
defective children w.rc ^urdvred by lunintl injection*, jfcon saying none
of tneso children diod c natural dci ts. I a. vo to correct jyeolf; by for
t.-o ^unteet nisbcr of tac~ voro eurdored by lu-.inol injectioae.

"The First PhysicL n Sca-idt also p. rfor^ofi .-.odical or psoudo-sciontif 1 c
experiments on tho.o aent-.lly defective children. Syeta-aticnlly quantities
of up to 60 cc- corcbr: spinal fluid v. s withdrawn fro- the children by sub-
occipital puncture and in it* place {dr vo* blown ia. tt:i» cr.u*od torriblo
hoadncaos to the children, *o th t for hrlf «. day they yollod loudly rad
voultod. ..ftor air was pressed into the children's cr.nius, the childron
v-r. X-r..yod. .. person- anlf responsible for these exporisonts : ad for tho
-urdor of the contally defective caildron - war tho head nur*o Holono
Sc.iuluerch fro.. Sifabin. This head aurso ori^dar.ted frou './uortteuborg rad
-uat have h.d aur aojo near Stutt fj r.rt. Her oilt in ro^ird to these criao*
vc.* Just r.s > rent li tao ,;eilt of S5-0bur*turubunnfuohrer Voltor Schnidt.

"Ia Into July 19 U 3 . I left :ae institution Sichberg in order to sottlo
dovr. ns a pay#iclcr. in lirchen os dor Sisg. boc..uso l hi & . oved. I otill
ccouo to Eichber,; fev tLoa. .t the occr.sijn of or.e >f those visits. I
hu\rd in the institution tn; t 5 to o S usnita civilian intsrnooo hud been
roceivod by t..e institution .nd h d beea ait. orod there in n nyotorious way.

■j.-.ia ~y state..* at. w.Jch lr. cdl dot ils corr.sponis to tho truth, was
rad to - 0 ; t-oa I h r. sln.ed it with _y o-a; h--ti."

(SiLfcr.vure) 2r. Benin, vr.


1739


1- - r 7- -7JC-3-l-Kerrc*/

Court Eo. 1

The next docir»nt, DC-393, is cn po~o 113 of tha doc unant book and will
bo Prosocutlou Srhlbdt 126. It is c letter frcn Tho Prosidont (Administration
of the District Union, Nassau), dated "iesbaden 15 Mac* 1943, to the District
-'-sntal Institution, Zichbor^/lhino, su-pjoct: Admission of -partly Jowish
minors to tho Institurion:

"By order of the Hatch ittsistor of Intorior I set up in tho District
liontnl Institution fladanar, District Lin'uru/Lahn an oducational Institution,
to which all Jowish or partly Jewish children and youths, who aro new under
institutional car a, in rofcr.iat-riaa or in othor institutions, aro to bo
broucht.

"?or this pur "so ploaso ao:>d mo at your earliest coavonioaco, howovor
net lator than 20 ..ay 1943, a list wit.-, tha na-os of tho partly Jowish .minors;
who aro In tho institution thoro. A ropart of ^iaslnt ixnatoa is 11 Scowl so
roquired.

"Ploaso inform ;» in tho toton l;x^d lately of ed-lasiona of partly
Jovdal ninora to your Institution.

By ordor:

(aifaod) Dornotnt, Landosrat"

lho noxt docunont cn .aro 114 in ?ti-G96 aril will bo rrooocutlon
Jtthlblt. "Kaosol, 4 July 1S45".

"Prosont, Public Proaocutor Kosslor

and Juatico onployoo Horrotor oa court roportor.

Sumonod, tho rotlrod provincial councollor Ctto Schollnann, born 19
Jtovonbor 1080 ir. Kasrol, ror‘ .o: t la Kar 'jl-Hmlosc' aucon, Soon olsrair. 5,
r.’poar j1 and 3total tho follr.-ln , after havin pc : infer.»d about tha
subject of tho osttdnotipn:

"-'or tha follow! .-v. state: Oi-t I ava, b; way of precaution, obyainod tho
conaont of my a oncy.

"-ro:. 1912 on I waa arployod b7 tho offico of t..o covornor (Land-
03hcwpt:«um) in Basso. On 1 Sopta .bor 1939 I ootorod tho sorvico with tho
•ohr .net as a railroad station cax-ondor ct too min station in Kassol. On
- J 'ily 1941 I rns lirisj-d fror the Vohxr ncht bocauso of - sorious accldont,
ord I returned to cy civilian a oncy, -;horo without interruption, until about

'ino 1945, I acted as dap u ty of Landoshgupt :arm Tra u-ol, who had in tho

1790


16 Jan 47-K-FJC-*- 2-XarroV- (AX)
COURT I


moantlne been drafter into the Vfehmaoht.

■1. When I took up ny position, on 1 Juno 1941, tho
so-called planned economy measures concerning the destruc¬
tion of the so-called life unworthy of being lived In the
sphere of care for Insane persons wore In full swing. I
had until that tine heard no details of thoso measures. They
Induced mo, howover, to have a detailed discussion at onco with
tho heads of tho throe provincial mental Institutions, under
our Jurisdiction - Heina, Herkshausen, and Marburg-Lahr. I
onphatlcolly instructed tho heads of tho Institutions to
tako tho position In their reports to tho ministries, otc.,
that lr.sano persora, even If they had only slight working
ability, should absolutely be kept from 'transfor' to anothor
Institution. Tho consoquonoo was that rolatlvoly fow
patlonts wero Included In tho 'transfor 1 . At tho end of
nugu8 1 194* thoso planned economy moaeuros woro completely
performed. They coasoa thoro and as far as I know, woro
novor porforcod. As far as I rono.:.bcr tho lnsano persons
aro said to have boon transported from our Institutions
first to tho various institutions of tho district agency
of Nassau and from thore to tho district mental Institution
at Hadaraarund Nassau. The order for tho 'transfer' of In¬
sane persons did not pass through my office either but to
my recollection come dlroctly from tho Ministry of tho
Interior to the Institutions In quostlbn. As far ns I


recall, this Ministerial agency was camouflaged undor tho
designation of a transport company, tho orders of which woro
all forwarded ns being secret.

".ls tho institution Hadamar belongs to tho district of
Nassau and therefore was not subordinate to the Landoshaupt-
annn of Hessen, I no also not in a position to make a


1791


16 Jan 47-M-FJG—2-Xarrow- ( AX)

COURT I

statement ;about the procedures carried out thero especially
with regard to the treatment of the patients. 1 personally
never visited the asylum Hadanar since 19*0.

"2. On 8 March 194 1 * a decree was Issued froa tho
Reich Minister of tho Interior according to which mentally
healthy partly Jewish minors (froa aporovod schools) were
to be assigned to tho partly Jewish section of the Hndamar
asylum. ’./1th regard to tho scrupulous part that Hadamar had
played during the treatment of Insane porsons I was of tho
opinion that I must bo careful and asked on the occasion of
ay visit in tho Landoshaus In Wlosbadon


16 -02 47-li-?JC-3-3-Karrow
Court No. 1


wtothar propor tro-taant or those .Anor »as caurantood. To this quosticn
tho lawyor of the Institution Laadesrut 3ernotat answered offirelatively.

I was especially assured that satisfactory and eood school!^ wqs
guaranteed. After that I ordered air institutions ot Hcr.burc and '/shorn
to toko core of the transfer cf tho chlldron in question.

"To thoeo neasures wero suhjoctod tho siblLine* Klara, Alfred, 3!oltraud
ad Ananda Cottholf froc Grosskotaentur'’, District Hgr.au, who wero
transforrod cn 1 Oct-'bor 1S43 to Hadaror. Soon oftorvards wo rocoivod
the nows that tho chiidror., who had un to than boon healthy on tho wholo,
diod sud'oniy, Alfred ~n 20 CetcVor, landa on 22 October, Klara on
26 Octobor and afloltraui or 1 7’Ororlur 190". Guo ether pupil noriod "urr
(a partly Jewish child) who tma alto bre^ht on 1 Octobor 1942 fron
Honbure to Kala.-ar, diod thoro 22 October 1943.

"Of course this dlsconcorto’. .no aud I doiiandel tho Hadg-icr institution
in lottor of 12 Hove:!'or 1943 to infer.! .a i i^idiatoi:' c‘-out tho cause of
death, by onclosine tho doath cortifioato. As a roply to this I roooivod
a lottor cf


1792


16 Jen. 47 M-3-1A-PKP- Karros
Court No. 1


18 Novoober 1943 froa tbu -isyiixa Hadoocr tbit the four Gottholf siblings died
of enteritis; with regard to the death certificates I was referred to the
registry office in Hadanar. To ny rvcollaction the latter then confirmed the
death of the children by transacting the death certificates.

"I was not able to forward oy inquiry of 12 Novenbor 1943 to Hacamar any
earlier because in the Quantise -n 22 to 23 October 1943 , the offico buildings
of the district administration in Kassel h'd bcon destroyed by an air raid and
ta a resuly all cseucrcill tr“ffic was held up. Also all the files of the
vjainistr'tion, in particular those concern! £ the siblings Gottholf wore
destroyed, so that I an only eble to speak out the further aana-eaont of


thoso cases fraa ^y orm r-colleo 1 -n.

"Those Strangs casualties OJpconcert- 1 oi so thrt ay scruples could not be
put neic o even by tho official st teawnt of th- Kadoaar Institution. On the
other hand I b d to consider th- fact that tho official atr.tooonts of the
Kadnnar Institution were -t hand and could not bo dianisBed r.a
(Pause for adjustment of sound equi:<a-nt)

If Your Honors pleaso, I'll resuao oy quotation fr a Document NO-896:

"On tho other h*nd I had to consider the fact that tho official str.tenvonts
of the Hadcaar Institution were at hand and could not >e disaisse: as unworthy
-f boliof. I would certainly h“vo net with difficulties for I would never have
.'uccoedod, in case the official at teoonts ha net been ri ht, in obtaining
n rnswer to ay inquiry a ructificati n or clarifioation :f tho procedures,
iothin; els- re.-.ilr.e_ to o. than to av.-id a repetition of such ovonts by means
of provontiv. measures. Zx;.lrinlr. th. state f the c*sc therefore I personally
instructo: the Heads -f our institutions in ..ahorn and Hoabur.; by word of


. „ , «a'aaar under .any circumstances. After that

sjuth to send-no tv-re chiljcn to if*

it did not happen any a-ro in any ciso. If s-ceono had objoctod. to thoso
&.-.3un.s I would have refuse to transfer further air.ors to Had am r, pointing
out what happened to the Gottholf siblings. I uclirvd this usphaticolly to
a deputy of the Nassau district administration, I Jo not rcaeaber his naao


•t the nooent."

I'll skip the rest of the document and read only the si mature:


"Si :ne* Otto Schellmann."


1793


16 Jan 47—H-LJG-4-1—Putty- (.dO
COURT I

The next document on Page 118 —

DR. FROSSCHMANHj Dr. Froesohmonn, Counsel for the
defendant , Vlktoc Brack. Ms. President, as I have Just
found out, the signature of Otto Schellmann which was Just
road into the record was not sworn to. statement Itself
la an excerpt of some unknown German file, which originates
from June, 1946, and contains the interrogation by a prosocu-
tor Kessler unknown to no. I don't know that file. I do not
bollovo that this docucent whlon Is being submitted by the
Prosecution oan be admitted Into ovldonoo especially slnco
the document which was not read in its entirety says on
Pago 126 of the German Document 3ook that the character of
the interrogation by the Prosecutor was very confidential
and that statements wore made which were certainly not
meant for the court.

DR. HOCHW.iLD: As the document Itself shows, this was
a statement made In the presence of a Gorman public prosoc-
utor and in the prosonco of a court roportor. I suggost and
Counsol for the Defense will bo certainly lnformod about
this fact, that boforo the witness gives such a statement,
the witness Is warned by the public prosocutor that In case
ho should not say the truth ho is punishable by law. ‘his
1 8 a very similar procedure which was adopted for the
obtaining of affidavits for Dofenso Counsel In this trial.

I do think that this document 16 perfectly admissible.

THE PRESIDENT: tfjll you pass the original document to
the Tribunal?

DR. aBRV^TIUS: Dr. Servatlus, Counsel for the defen¬
dant, Karl Brandt. «:r. President, the logoi statements made
by the Prosecutor are not quite correct. It Is not correct


1794


15 Jan 47-:4-LJQ-^-l-.-utty-(«iC)
COURT I


to say that whan examined before a prosecutor there Is a
warning that one has to say the truth and that one la
punishable If one does not say the truth. According to
German law It Is the case that whenevor one is Interrogated
by a prosecutor, there is no legal coer9lon to say the
truth. Such obligation only exists If you testify before
an examining Judge who Is commissioned to do that; that Is
to say, if the witness doos not say the truth testifying
before the prosecutor, ho Is not subject to punishment.

In this case wo aro not concornod with a court file but only
a file coming from the prosocutor'a office. This nay be


/


179<*a


Court No. 1

16 Jan U7-?» - U-2 - LJG - rutty

8d«R froa the notas made on the file where the words fhuber so-and-

80 " are contained. I also, therefore, do not think that this document
ia admissible.

THE IRESIDSKT s The original German document exhibited to the Tribunal
consists of two and one-h?-lf typewritten pages in the German language.

It bears no signature but two typewritten names.

D?., HOCSSUDi The original of the document is with the files of the
Frankfurt court, Garaan court in Frankfurt as it was submitted in a
Goman trial. This copy, Sir, was certified t<> by the Gcman authorities
as a correct and true copy. I possibly can get a Goran certification of
the document.

THE PRESIDE:7: The certificate attached to the docunont is simply
a certification by one Patricia A. Radcliff that "This document is the
original of a document which was delivered to me in tho usual courso of
my omciol business os a truo copy of the document fourri in Goman archives."
That does not amount to a certificate th.t tho document is a truo copy.

Dii. HCCH UlOr 3*«t we have a further docurent. Tho docunont rocn
of CCC has a certificate *iich is not attached to tho document ih Goman
^lich snyo that no obtained it; vo certified tho truo cory.

‘ft. jicHANET: If the Tribunal, pleas,., we will withdrew tho offor
until such tic© as thj certificate is -ttachud. It Certainly should bo.

.io do navw one and it is singly on oversight. It is not in tnoro. It
should bo. ..c will obtain it in a very f-* nlnutus onl thon rooffor tho
docunont on that basis.

IHB HiSSIDET: Tho exhibit b temporarily withdrawn.

DR * HCCJf AU)s Ana tho rv;xt document on page 113 is NO-205 which
already' was sotted Into evidence undor Exhibit No. 163. tilth tho
permission of tho Tribunal, I only want to read the first paragraph of
this lot ter fro* Brack to Bipolar.

iKS • is the r.u* t r of this .xhibit which was formerly

introduced into evidence.

17 £5


Court No. 1


16 Jar. U7-M - U-3 - LJG - Putty

DR. HCC&iALD: «he exhibit wooer is 163, ycur Honor. The docuasnt
meter is X0-205. It is on pa*& 118 of the document book. It is a letter
free Brack to BIWlar, dated Berlin, 23 June 19u2:

"to the instructions of Helcb-Lcader 3ouhler I placed some of ry
non — alre_dy so retire ago — at the disposal of Brigadefuohror Blobocnik
to execute his special nisaicn. to his ronewud request I now transferred
additional personnui. On this occasion Brlgadcfuohrur Blobocnik stated
his opinion th-.t tho whole Jsw Action should be corplwted as quickly as
possible so that one would not got cau’ht in tho niodlo if it one day if
sons difficulties should sake a stoppage of the action necessary. You
yourself, RoichsfuehrcV, have already oxpruasod your view that work
should prograss quickly for ruasens of caaouflago clone. Both points
which in principle arrive at tho sa.v. result are more than Justified as
for za ray own ox^orionce goes; jvvurtholess, would you kindly allow oo
to subuit tho follotrir.. argttvjnt: — ■

Tho r.«xt decent is or. 126 o| the doc wont book. It is NO-155
— no. It is 1553-rS. I beg your . urdon. It wi 11 be Prosocution Exhibit
U8. It is a st-'tenont —

THF t?iSinB,Ti You not <oing to put in the docinont No. 206
appearing at 120 ?


1 755


16 Jon 47-H-S2I-5-l-Ray (FL)
Court No. I


MR. HDCfc.'AIi); 206 was already offered into evidence and I run not
going to road it.

I

THE PRESID-iiJT: As what exhibit? \

MR. HOCK'AIl): Just a minute. As Prosecution Exhibit 164, sir, and
I aa not going to offer 501-PS which is the noxt document in your Honor's
docusjont book.

THE Hl£oIE2:T: Has it b.en heretofore offered?

Ml. HXM/ALD: 501 is not offered. It is not offored at all, so that
the next is on page 126, 1553-PS, Exhibit 426. This is page 136 —

1ft. McK/uZiY: If tfcj Tribunal ploaeo, the document wo new of for is
an unswern statement of one Kurt Ge rate in. It was admitted before tho

hit —

THE PRESIDENT: What document is that, Mr. McHanoy?

Mr. Me HAKE‘ft It is 1553-PS beginning on pa go 126. This document was
admitted boforo tho International Military Tribunal as an exhibit of
the Republic of Franco, Ho. 350. It constitutes a number of bills of
lading, or slipc.ont notices covering a certain gas krewn as Zyklon B,
Prussic Acid. That is r shipment notice froo a firm by tho n'no of IX.-
gesch, the manufacturer of the gas, the notice b.ing sent to this ran
Kurt Gerstair.. These wore a number of bills which were attcchod to tho
statement which Govstein gavo on *prii 25, 1945, before a United States
Army Officor. .towover, it doec not appear *r.~t the officer swore. J2r.
Gerstoin be ore t.’v. statuac.it was giver., u-caito that fact, haiever, it
was admit tod beioro tho KT. I do not kncwi whether over objection or not.
In any ovent, as such it constitutes a cart of the record before tho In¬
ternational ililitary Tribunal and consequently is entitled to at lur.st
judicial notice before this Tribunal. Jo h"ve made a very sincoro and
earnest offort to find Kurt Gerstoin and I have been unable to do so.

0

If the defense counsel are interested in cross-examining Ir. Gerstoin,

«e will continue o.'r of farts to locate him after appropriate application


- 1797 -


16 Jan 47-U-ZW-5-1-E27 (FL)

Court Bo. I

and approval of this Tribunal. In any event, mo are offering thic docu¬
ment as a prosecution exhibit at this time. It is a =attcr of mix im¬
portance to the caso because it informs the Tribunal as to the activi¬
ties of the


- 1797 a -


16 Jan 47—k-24—5-2-Ray
COURT I

nan by tha name of Globocnlk, and the Tribunal has seen
from Che letter of Victor 3rack to the R c lchsfuchrer SS
that Bouhlor and Brack put people at tho disposal of Brlga-
dofuehrer Globocnlk, so It beconos a natter of considerable
Importance to the Tribunal to be informed of what Globocnlk
was doing. That la the reason we are offorlng this document
and wo ask th-t It be admitted at this ano.

TH2 PRESIDENT: The copy of the English Documont wo
are looking at shows no certificate that this Is a oopy
of tho record bofore the International Military Tribunal.

HR. MoHAilEY: The certificate on the original which
go-s into ovldonco reads: -I certify that Doounont No. 155^
was introduced Into evidence as Exhibit No. R3 *50 In
tho trial by tho International Military Tribunal of Hermann
Ooering, at al" otc., and signod "Fred Nlobergall, Chlof of
Document Control 3ranch, Offlco of Chief of Counsol for
Tar Crimes".

I think it would be helpful if I had the original doc¬
umont passed up. Tho statement, ns I state, shows that it
was takon boforo two Unltod Statos army officers and was
sent through with a covering nonorandun.

DR. SERVATIUS: (Counsel for Karl 3randt): Dr. Scrvntius
for Karl 3randt, Mr. President. I attach Importance to cross-
examining this witness and I formally oako the application
that this witness be called as soon as he Is found.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel will oxccuto the formal
application for calling tho witness. The court will consider
tho application and doubtless will approve It and summons
the witness and counsel cay be entitled to summon this
witness for cross-examination so that he will not be troatod


1798


16 Jan 4?-M-a*-5-3-aay-(«K)

COURT I


as a defense witness but will bo oallod for cross-oxagin¬
ation. I notice. Hr. McHanoy, that this certificate -

purported certificate - Is a true copy of an exhibit

introduced before tho International Military Tribunal and
that it is not signed excopt for the rubber stamp. Tho
signature of Fred Niobergall is manifestly not a signature
but a rubber stamp.

MR. moHANEY: Wo will rectify that. I suppose tho
explanation Is that


1798a


16 Jan 47-H-EM- 5-.*-Ray- (AX)

COURT I

tho Document Sootlon fools that they process so many of
those that they have a facsimile signature. However, wo
can have that roctlfled. Would tho prosocutlon bo able to
have a ruling on tho admissibility of this document on the
assurance that the certificate will be executed In Hand¬
writing. I am Just informed that they koop closo oontrol
over those mattors. I can assure tho Tribunal that * , *r.
Niebergall can certify to tho facta stated and, If posslblo,
wo would like to have tho question disposed of at this time
and, If posslblo, read the oxhlblt.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho exhibit will be admitted in ovldonoo
when properly cortlfled and the objection la ovorruled.

MR. HOCHUNLD: I would like to road from page 1*9.

This will bo Proaooutlon Exhibit 428 and I want to road
from the first part of pago 1*9 of the Document Book, air.

"July 14 to august 2. 198, socond Imprisonment, In
tho Yolrhnlm concentration camp. Mooring of tho massacroo
of Idiots and lnsano pooplo at Orafonock, Hodomar, etc,,
shookod and dooply woundod, having such a oaao In my
family, I had but one desire, to soo, to gain an insight
of this wholo machine and then to shout It about tho wholo
world. With tho help of two roferoncos wrltton by tho two
Oostapo employees who hod doolt with my case, It was not
difficult for me to enter the Waff on SS. March 10 to Juno
2, 1941, olemontary Instruction as a soldlor at Hamburg-
Laiigonhoom, arnhea and Oranlonburg --

THE PRESIDENT: Will counsel read a little more
slowly?

MR. HOCHW.jLD: I am sorry.

■together with forty doctors. Because of ny twin


1799


16 Jan 47-M-£H-5-^-Ray-( AX)

COURT I

studios, technology and medicine, I was orderod to onter
the medical-technology branch of the SS Fuehrungshauptamt,
Hodloal 3ranch of the Vaffon S3, Antsgruppc D. Hygiene
Department. Within this branch, I chose for myself the Job
of Immediately constructing disinfecting apparatl and fil¬
ters for drinking waters for'the troops, tho prison camps
and the concentration camps. Hy close knowledge of the
industry caused me to succoed quickly whore my predeces¬
sors had failed.


1799a


15 Jen li7-::-5-Ji-S^-nay

Court iio. 1


Thus, it was possi-lo to '.ocroasc c.nai xrchly the death tell of prisoners.
On account cf :y successes, I voiy a-..a deceio a lieutenant. In Docca'-cr
19U, the tribunal which had decreed iy ecclusicn free the HSai? obtained
laicwlcv.c cf havinr entered tho .fcffon SS. Consider?: lo offorts wore
undo in erdcr tc renovo end persecute .e. .ut Suj to ry succcscos I nos de¬
clared ainccro and indispensable. In January l?ii2 I ww appointed Chief of
the Tocimical Dranch of ^isinfccti *n, tfcich ala. include! the branch for
atr;n. pcison ..ace a for disinfeeti n. On 6 June 19h2 the SS Sturubann-
fuoJu-cr Guenther cf the 2SR1 entered vy -.ffico. He ras in plain clcthcs and
I die', not knew hin. Bo crdcrod to : ;ct a hundrocl Jell --.ram f prussic
aeid ant! to nccc-;. any hie tc a . lace which jas nly known to tho driver of
the trech. ..o left f r t..a r.tassiua fact r.- near Colli :. Cttcc the truck
ins leaded, no left f r Irdll n. d/o tv!: :rith us ‘refesser .'fannonstiol,

.X, trdinaxy Irofess r for :•/ icao at tho University f itrdur;; on tho Lahn.
;.t Iublin wo were rocciv ruppenfuaror OlcbccttUt. He told us:

•This is :>no f tho ::ost aco.-ot rattcra t' .re arc n, ti;_- dost acorot.
./hoover talks cf this shall bo shot t vodiately. Yesterday fere tallcativo
.noa &od. 1 Thau he explain_d to us: '..t tho .:r-soat :«.ont (..u ust 17,
19li2) there are tliroo installation:. •

1. Tolcoc, on tho Iuhlin-Lcaborr, r ad, in the scoter of Use iiissinn
dcnarcation line, -laxiiuc; 15,OX- parsons a day. Seen.

2 . SeVider, I do not know exact :orc it ir . soon.

20,000 perc ns per ’ey.

3. Vro: links, 120 111 :;ctcrs northeast ef area-.:. 25,000 persons per
■-X*. Seen.

U. Ihi !onok, near Lullir.. Scon in td* state ef preparation.

Glc* -cnik tho; said, 'leu ill have to handle the sterilization of very
hu-.o quantities of clothes, 10 or 20 ti_jcs the result of the clothes and tex¬
tile collocticn which is c.Jy arraa.cd xr. rdor to c-nccal the s urcc of
tlieao Jewish, Polish, Czech and other d'thcc. Tour thcr duties will Vo to

caaxxa the ncthc-d cf -ur .as dir—' era (vdiich are run at ii;. :resent tiuo with

1800


16 Jan U7-u-5-5-S!-tey

Court ifc. 1


the exhaust cases of an old Diesel -n ir.e), aiplryinr cere ^isen us
mtcrial, bavin.;; a quicker of feet, ;>ruscic acid.'"


1T01


16 Janlf-£3:5-c—i-C-ross (FL)

Court No. I

"But the Fuehrer ar.d Hisalor, who iwro hero on August 15 - ^ho day beforo

I ^ C9T . . t * - * % 1

yesterday - ordered that I accompany personally all those ^ho arc to

^ • -.0 »«*•

see the installations. Thun Professor Pfannar.Stic 1 asked: 'Whftt docs tho
Fuehrer say? • Thon Globocnik, now Chief of Police and SS for the Adria¬
tic.Riviere to Trieste, answered: "Quicker, quicker, carry out th- nholo
program!", ho said. And tixn Dr. Herbert Lindner, Ministerialdircktor in
the Ministry of the Interior said: "But would it not bo better to burn
the bodies instead of burying the*l"

I went to point hero, ■*. respectfully submit. Your Honors, tlr.t tho
nano Extort Lindner should read Herbert Linden who is the parson to bo

scon in tho sow box as Conti on the Uft hand side of the chart. "A

cooing generation 'light think differently of thus* aattersl" And then
Globocnik ropliod: "But, gontlea-n, if ever, after us there should bo
such a cowardly and rotten generation should arise that they do not un¬
derstand our so good and necessary work, then, gentlemen, ell National
Socialism will have been for nothing. On tho contrary, bronzo plates
should bo buried with the inscription that it was we, nj who hr.d tho
courage to achieve this gigantic task". And Hitler said, "Yes, my good
Globocnik, that is the word, that is .ay opinion, too". The n-xt day no
left for Be leek. .. smell special station of two platforms leans against
a hill of yellow sand, in.-xdi-U.ly to the north of the road and railway:
Lublir.-Lvahorg. To the South,Rear tiv. read, son service houses with r.
signboard: "Boleek, service center of tlv. V.r.fon IS.’ Globocnik intro¬
duced a. to S&-;iaupt5turnfuehr*.r Obermayor from Pimasens, who with great
restraint showed ao tho installations. That day no dead were to bo ac-n,
but the & 1 K.U. of tho whole region, even from the large road, was pesti¬
lential. Next to the small station there was s large barrack marked
'Cloak roaa" nrd a door marked "valuables"• .'.ext a chamber with a hundred
'barber“chair3. Thon caso e corridor, 150 meters long, in the open air
”-nd with bar bod ;;iro on both sides. There was a sign board: "To tho bath


- 1802 -


16 Jm-tf-BEH-6-l-Gross (FL)
Court So. I


and inhalations"... .Etefora us ■« sa» a house like a bath houso uith
concrete troughs to the right and left contained gcraniaos or ottor

flowers.


- 18 Q 2 a -


16 Jan-lf-BBH-c~2-Grosa (FL)
Court Ho. I


After eliding c a-cU staircase, 3 snra;o-like rooas on each aide, 4 x
5 -otora large and 1.90 aeters high. At the back, invisible wooden dcors
On the roof a otar of David aade out of copper. At the entrance to the
building, the inscription: Foundation Neckenholt. That was ail I noticod
on that particular afternoon. Kext aornlng, a leu ainutes before 7 , I
-as informed: In JO ainates the first train «U1 arrive. And indood, a
tm ainutes lator the first train caxe in iron Laaberg. 45 cars, con¬
taining 6,700 persons; 1,450 of whoa were already dead on their arrival.
Behind the Uttle barbed -ire openings, children, yellow, scared half
to death, wooen, osn. The train arrives; 200 Ukranians, forced to do
this -ork, open the doort, and drive all the people out of the coaches

-ith leather « i)S. Tton through a huso loud speaker instructions are

•

given: To undress coaplctely, also to give up false teeth and -lassos -
ao3e in the be.racks, Others right in the open air. To tie one's shoos
together -ith a little pioco of string handed everyone by a snail Jowioh
boy of 4 years of c«e, hand in all valuables snd .soney at tlx> window
narked "Valuables", '.ithout bond, without roceipt. Then the -anon and
Sirls go to the lair-drosser, who outs off thoir hair in one or two
strokes, after wUofc it vanished into hugs potato bags "to bo used for
special subjarins oquipsent, doer cats, etc.", as the SS-Untorschar-
fuherer on duty told ae. Then, tho aarch begins: Right and loft, barbod
-ire, behind, two down Ukranians ith d uns. Led by a young jirl of
striking beaut;- they approach, .ith police Captain * irth, I stand right
bofere the -oauh ohsobers. Coapletely n?:<ed t.*ey -arch by, xn, ifanon,
girls, children, babies, even ono-leggod persons, all of thea
one corner, a strong SS-aan tells the poor devils, in a strong deep voice:
Nothing whatever will happen to you. All you have to do is to broatho
deeply, it strengthens the lungs; this inhalation ia a necessary ocasuro
against contagious diseases, it is a very good disinfectant!" Asked what
was to bceora oi thop he answered: •Boll, of course, the on will liavo
to work, b iidin ; , streets and houses. But the -ccen do not cave to. If


16 Jan-L*-£3H-t--2--r-ross (FL)

Court Ho. I


th.y „iah to, they can halo In ha* or kitctan." Once core
bit of hope for coco of the* poor poopLe, enough


I.lttlo


- 1803 6 -


16 Jan-i4-S3H-&-3-CrOSS (FL)

Court No. I

. to oako thoc -arch on without rosistor.ee to ths death chaabero.
Uost of t tea, though, knew everything, the odor has given them a clear
indication of their fate. And then they walk up tho little staircase —
and see tho truth I others, nurse aaids, with babies at thoir breasts,
naked, lots of c h il d ren, of all agos, naked too; they hesitate, but
thoy enter the saa chambers, ost of tbca, without a word, pushed by
the oth,rs behind then, chased by the whips of the SS non. A je-oas of
about AO years of age, with eyes like torches, calls down the blood of
her children on .« cads of t . »ir urderera. Fivo lashes into hor faco,
dealt by t.:o •Vi of Police Captain 4 X h hlaeolf, chaso hor into tho
gna chaabur. eny of tbc^ say their prayers, othors ask: who uill yivc
us tho water .or o-a death? .ithin the ci- bora, tho S3 oross tho peo¬
ple closoly together. Captain Mirth had ordered: "Fill thorn up lull."
Naked e»on stand on tho feet of otters. 7-COO crushed togothor on 25
square actors, in 45 cubic -etorsl The doors are closed. Jfaartihilo tho
vost of tho transport, all naked, wait. Somebody aays to oo: "lialcud,
in winter! Out thoy can dio that way!" Tlx. answer was: "Wo 11, that's
Just what thoy arc hero for!" And at that naaent 2 understood why it
was caLlod "Foundation Huckenbolt". Hockonholt was the nan in charge
of thj D!csjI c.._ ine, tho odaust gases of hich wore to kill thooo

poor dovils. SS-Ur.t rechar fuehrer H cckonholi trios to sot thu Diosol

engine lov» . . it does t start. I Oa-.ain irth cooes along. It is

• •

plain that he Ls afraid because I a. a ... uakdoun. fos,

indead, I oca everything and wait. . .-is registered by ay stop

watch, 50 air.utcs. 70 4nut6s - the Diesel oneLro does not start! Tho
people wait in troir gas chanters. In vain. One can hear thoa cry.

"Same as in a a.-nacogue" says SS-Sturabounfue.-ircr Professor Dr. Pfan-
neotiul, Profosoor for Public Health at the University


- 1304 -


16 Jenuary-l4-DJG-6-la-Gro3S
Court Me. 1


cf Uerburr/Lahn, hdiin- his ear dost tc the wooden door. Cnptaln Mirth,
furious, deals the Ukrenion who is helpin' Keckcnholt 11 or 12 lashes in the.
face with his whip. ..fter 2 hours and 49 minutes - as rc^ist^rod by ay stop
watch - tho Diesel en-ine starts. Up to thrt moment the people in the four
alroady filial chambers were olive, 4 ticos 750 persons in 4 times 45 cubic
cetera, another 25 minutes CP ty. Ifcny of tho pcopio it is true are dead
at that point. One con see this through the little window throu:h which tho
electric lamp rev oris for a axment, the inside of the chamber. ..fter 28
sinutus only a fat are living. .-t-r 32 minutes, finally all are dead. From
the oth-r side, Jewish werr.^rs open the wooden d.crs. In return for thoir
terrible Jo’-, the;- have ’.con prcaitod thoir fruod-m and a snail percentage
of tho valuables an thw m-ncy found. Like stone statues, the dead are still
standing there bavin*- '. can no rcca tc fell or bond ovor. Thcu *h dead, tho
fanilius can still - rocc iiisod; tl.uir hands still clasped. It is difficult
to sopr.rate th»a in orlor to clo^r the chr lor for tho next load. Tho bodios
err. thrown cut Hue, wot with sweat end urinj, the ic-a covered with excre¬
ment and ncnstrurl Viced. Everywhere -nxn tho others, t. u bodies of babies
and childran. But thoro is net tine l Two jozen workers :re cn;r. -d in check¬
in- tho mouths, eponin theor by aeons of iron hocks. "Cold tc the left,
without -.old tc tho rl:ht. B Others check nus and ;eaitolo tc look for nenoy,
diamonds, -old, etc. Dentists with chisels tear out the jold tooth, bridcos
or capo.. In the cunt or cf everythin , Captain irth. He is cn familiar

round her . He heads m- c 1 r*e tin full zi teeth end soyas "Estimate for

•

ycurs-lf the _1 ::t cf ;old. “* is is cnly ffea yesterday and the day toforo

yesterday. «nd ycu waul-: net hulieva what *o find here every day. Dollars,

diamonds, old. But look fer yourself." Then he led me to a Jewulcr who was

in char.;c cf all thoso valuables. ..fter thr.t they took me to one of tho

oenr. 'ers of the Vi- Store of the host in Berlin, end tc a little man whom they

made play the violin, both chiefs of the Jewish worker ccoaands. "He is a

captain cf the royal and imperial (K.u.K) ..ustricn ..rzy, who held the Gorman

Iren Cross 1st Class.* 1 wes uld by Kauctsturcl annfUehrer Oboraeyer. Tho

bodies were then threwr. into l-.r;a ditches of about 100 x 20 x 12 raeturs,

located near the -a cr.emfccrs. ..fter a few days the bcdics would swell up

iaco


16 Jonucry-:*OJG-©-2a-<;ro3s
Court Sol.


:nd the whole contents of the ditch would rise 2-3 actors high because of the

-as os that developed in the bodies. After a few more days the swelling

would step end the '.odios would ccllapse. The next day the ditches were

filled again, and covered with 10 centimeters of send. .. little later, I heard,

they constructed rills out of rails and burned the bodies on them with Diosd

cil and •csoline in order tc make them disappear. ..t Belctk and Trcblinka

nebedy betherud ta take anythin, approaching an exact count of the persons

killed. The figures announced by the B5C are Inaccurate. Actually about

25,000,000 persons were Jews,' however, but especially idos

end Czechoslovakians, too, who »cr- in thoopLden of the Nazis, of bad stock.

Host of thua died anonymously. Ccaaissioostcf so-callod doctors, actually

nothing but young SS men in wnito coats, redo in limcuair.es through the towns

and villc;os of .oland and Czechoslovakia tc Select the eld, tubercular and

sick pooplo and to cause th.ua tc disappear, slicrtly afterwards, in the gas

chambers. They were tho Toloa end Czechs cf (category) III who did not do-

sarvo tc live Lccauav they w-.re unable to '*crk. The i’olicc Ccptfdn birth

asked no not to prepeso rny othur kind of as chamber in Berlin, to leave

everythin: tho way it was. I lied - as I did in each ease all tho tine - that
%

prussic acid had already dotoriorr.t.d in shipping and hod become very danger¬
ous, that I »'s t.Y.rof.re c v li -erf to bury it. This wr.o dono right away. Tho
next day. Captain birth's car tek U9 t: Trcblinka, ab-cut 75 miles N1JE of
barsaw. The install tiens cf this ieat: center differ o£ sc:rculy frea these at
Belcck, 'ut they wera still larger. Tnuro ucro ;c3 chafers and whole mount¬
ains of clothes end und.mur about 35-40 meters high- Then, in our "hener"
a banquet was given, attended by all cf the employees cf tho institution. Tho
OtersturaLannfuehrer, irofesocr . fanncnstiel iC., irofesser Hygiene at tho
University cf uerburg/Lahn, arde a Speech: "Ycur task is a Toat duty, a duty
sc useful and so necessary." Tc me alcno ho talked of this institution in
t..ru3 of “'cauty cf the task, humane cause", end tc all of thee: "Locking
at the w c ies cf these Jews one understands the rrc. tness cf ycur cod work l"


The dinner ir. itself was rather aimpio, but by order of Hisalcr the emplcycos

cf this branch received as such as they w ntwd as far as butter, ac t, alcohol,

1C06


16 Jonir ry-ltOJG-6-3*-Grc3s
Court Ko. 1

etc., wore concerned, -hen »o left ue korc offered several kilc.T3J58 of
butter and a L-r;c nuafcer of bcttl.s of liqueur. I aado tho effort of lyinjj,
sayinr thr-t I had enough cf cv.rythin- fro. - , our own fern, so rfcnnenstiol
tcck cy portion, tco. ..u left for eraaw by car."

.. recess ncs t-Jcen.


16 Jan-!F-r\JC-0-l-31akley (FL)

Court !io. I

THE UA3SKAL: The Tribunal ia again in session.

iR. HOC. T L.AU): If the Tribunal please, I should like to hand over
the certification of the signing of Document 1533-PS signed by Itr, i&o-
borgall.

DR. GEQSG FT103SCHKAHK: Dr. Frooscteass, counsel for Viktor Brack.

Ur. President during thu recess I have Just had the opportunity
of receiving the extensive docuatr.t, 1533, and of reading it over care¬
fully. In slow oi ta- allegations which the witness could guess or .-nako
in the docitw.-.- arc tthich are supporting the allegations of tho proao-
cutlon twards Viktor Brack, I want to request that Kurt Gorstcln bo
called hero ca e witness and then the prosecution discontinue tiic read¬
ing of this do canon t and further that tho part of tho docuaont which has
already boon read bo crossed freo u*> rocord. In ay opinion if things
of such importance are to be aade crodiblo here by tostiaony which has
not boon worn to, such a docuaont ia not suitable for consideration ns
uvidonco before this Tribunal.

TJC FBSSIOSTt Counsel, I undorstar.d, is referring to Docuaont lum¬
ber 1533-PS?

I®. H JoC A ..'A: Ye s, 1 a.. Uay I say soaotldng in addition, Ur. Presi¬
dent? Dr. too*..- and I are not quite clear whether this docuaont was
pro s^r.ted throng the InUrnntiinal iiUtary Tribunal Kuabor 1 and if
it was to!ton into th. rocord. As ior.f as I still in doubt, tho docu-
ra-nt appear? still ae unsuitable to b- presented .ere as evidence.

I aado a .<d stake before. I was xvlorring to tho International IU.11-
tary Tribunal.

THE HG3SIDEM: Tho certificate attached to this docuaont shous that
it was introduced in evidence as Exhibit huaber RF-350 before tho Inter¬
national Tribunal. Th* objection to tho aaoission of tho docuaont is
overruled; and trx; docuaont will be adaitted in ovider.ee in this caso.

It soeas to the Tribunal that th: ^an who oed^ this state oent, Sorstoin,


- 1833 -


16 Jan-14-F JC~3-i-31afcloy (FL)
Court Ko. I


could lx. a very important witrx-ss before this Tribunal and that if ho
is available as a witness, his attendance should be procured. If coun¬
sol for any defendant will request that ho bo called as a witness for
the purpose


- ISOS a -


16 J-n 47-i:»?JC-S-2-31t&loy
Court »?. 1

of cross axmlnntlcn by tha dofanso, tha Tribunal will giro soricua consi-
iorcticQ to to such r. roquost. IU eoxvhllo tho exhibit is c—-ittod in uvidor.oa*
ir». HOCT-rVlD: If ycur Honors plo-\so, I hr.va in the iiomtiro soac
tho certification on Docvra.nt IXJ-Q96, which w-a effarod into ovidor-co ns
IVococutlon 2xhihlt <27. Tha cortiflcrto fr.-c; tho chlof yrosocutor in
7r*nkfurt ir in Gcxtv.n. Hny I rond tha trmslntion in to tho record?

Tho cortificrto ro-^da:

’’Cortiflcnto. I, Tu’lie rr^ocutm Dr. *>ltor ’V~nor, tostify thnt
tho nttrehod ccny is - c rroct *ai true c-py of '.ocur-ant fror Voluno III,
consistin' - of threo or. I rocoirad th, cri‘ir.nl docuraoat in tho ccnirso
of tha oxooution of ar officlitl duties. Tha orl in -1 is rsattM tho filos of
tho -.'rocoodiry o for IJ S-3-4S; nttl it ia no©:', d far othor .'urpasos.
rrwdcf’jrt. •: 1947. Tho ohiof rsocutm Qt tho oounty curt by

erdor (cl-nnturo} Dr. Tfeltor '«Vnor, rrooocutvr." To this is nttnehod tho
strep of tha county court in ?r-n>furt.

ET. 3C3JP.T ST!7 JItJS: Dr. Sorv'tlus for th dBfondnnt Xml Bmnit.

’-•r. Proeldont, tha f-.ct ttrt t is document ITO-oTS hr.s boon oortifiod to bo
• t-uo dcciront by tho court d:©® not stand In my connoctlon with its vduo
cf orldo.noo red tho question sf the irascibility of tho docu.x>at. This
latorrovtion before tho •n*:s;cutler. wo-ili not be *>er:d 06 itlo r.c oridonco
nd would n’t bo rl*itt©d ‘ofra r r--^ m coirt. Boforo n Cornnn court tho
•rttnooa would hr*7o to * i c-llod -rJ. t’-.a ro-di-.' of this intorrojr-.tion would
act bo porrdsnihlo. I ■ jlioro th-.t tho Tri ■•r.-l •.’ill 'u\to tc orocood in r.
si dim r/tanor * oc -to nly ia this .:.■;* -.-ill tha truo rorrolucti*n of tho
intorrof^tion ’a roe or o’.

7H3 TRSSIDffT: Hm c unscl far tho pr^oocution my further msunont
In auppert cf tha introduction of Via exhibit?

HOC!r;/.ID: I*r. 3orry, your Sonar, I didn't horn.

UIB TRESIDSTT: Hrvs ccunsol fer tho pros cutian my fort or ureuaont
•a rapport of tho -.hJ.-.cier. cf this oxhihit?


1*305


16 Jan 47-H-?JC-8-3-31rvkloy
Court No. 1


JIN. HCCa VJD: Tho only nrp£»nt Is that I was iafornod thr.t ovury-
cno who Is heard in such a cace Is vnrnol th-.t ho has to sey tho truth;

y I do think that it Is cfcsolutoly tho procoduro end is r. vory sillier
ono to tho procoduro adopted for tho obteininc of affidavits for tho
tofonso counsol. 1 respectfully sit-lt that tho credibility of tho public
prosocutor who was taklnc this sta.ta.ont, to^othor with tho court roportor
has no loss wolrht than tho credibility of ovory ono of tho dofor.so counsol
who is nor.dttoi to toko an affidavit in tho iatorost cf his clioat for
ovidonoo ia this court.

HI. SE71TTJS: Hr. Prosidont, this is not a caco of tho crodibility
of tho district attorney but of tho credibility cf tho norson who w-s
1 at .rrofatvd. Thoro if dofoaso cainsol is o.titlod to r.ccopt an affidavit,
than tho -erica who is boinr intorroy.tod kno-ts that ho will bo pualohod
If ho -akos any falso atato:»nts. If ncriobody is boin:. intorroeatod
boforo tho prosocutor, .thon ho knows that ho cannot ho punlshod in any
way if fco otatoa tho untruth. Thoroforo tho situation is ocuplotoly
difforont.


«• *\

-Lo-O


IS far. 47-H-?JC-9-l-?ol£t
Court So. 1


1HZ Tho objection to tho admission of the Sxhibit !JO. 427

offored la evidence Is sustained. Tho exhibit will not to odr-ittod. The
Prosecution, of course, fill have tho right tc offer later any other certi¬
fied state: ont or record of this if it is in an* arise amplified as without
projiailco to the offor of tho exhibit in any subsequent forJi as would onto
to bo :nde.

HR, xc HiK3Y: I think the Tribunal's rosaries cover what I was about
to say. TTo will onloavcr to loc-to the porson who gsvo this st.atonont, hevo
hir: sworn, and thoa si a - ntatecant in siller for.o, and uo would liko loavo
to bo atlo to aul It that into the rocord rftjr we oloso our caso in chiof.

T!i2 H13SD2K7: Tho oourso «u^ osted by tho Pros--cut ion will bo
folio rod • Any ofehor oxhl it :*ey to offorod eftor tho oloso of tho caso of
tho Prosecution in oh'of, subjoot, cf oairso, to any cross oxrMnation
or objoctlon by tho dofo: so counsol.

DP.. HOCff'XD! Tho noxt docucor.t I want to offor into oridonco if cn
Pof.o 135 of tho Docuront Bock, Docunont 15CS-PS, which will bo Prcoocutlon
Exhibit 427. Thin roport of tho Cnitod Xatl'ns *.mr Criros Ccrjilssion was
-lroady odnittod into oridonco in tho first trial boforo tho Intornetional
Tribunal undor tho 2xhlllt Jhxibor OS;. 716. I would liko to road fren Annox
3, which is on ?aro 13G of tho dociront. It Is on Poko 138 of tho docunont i
'Dotailed stotoront on tho nurdoriac of iU and a-.o i pcoplo in Goriany.

.nr. ox D.

"1, Tho nurdorls* can to traced bock to a socrot law which wqs
roloosod scrioti u in ru. .or, 194C.

"2. Bosiloe tho Chiof Physician cf ths F.oich, Dr. L. Conti, tho
Hoichsfuohror 35 Kir. lor, tho Raichs Idnistor cf tho Interior Dr. 7riok as
*oll as othor :ion, tho follcwin pcrticlpato on tho introduction of this
s-crot law.

"a. Tho Councillor of tho Kinietry Dr. Horbort Union of tho
Rolch Ministry of tho Intorlor

"b. Dr. St-ohlo-Unfiold, tho Chiof Physician cf Tuorttor-bory.

"c. Councillor of Medicine Dr. Homana Pf-nraiolior, Dl roc tor cf tho
'(uwitoriun and Hursinr Institution 3;.lfinr-Hoar near Munich.

iyii


16 J«*.n 47-i:-9-2-?cMt.
Ccort He. l.


"d. ?rofoaaor Dr. “omor Hoylo, Diroctor of tho PaycMetrie rxA
T ouroloeicr\l Clinic in Huorzburc«

"To ch-rrctorizo Dr. Cor.ti, who w-s bor in Tosain, it cry to -ddod thr.t
•.o c’.’-n-'oa his anr<o frx Loonhrxd tc Loon-xio, r.ccoriln* to tho chrjyjo in tho
Jirr-*a pooplo'a foolin. 3 , tho frioaiahi? cf tho dxia or to tho chr.n£o of fool-
in.-s la tho Bur-po»in OQr.jmity.

"3. I b-vo riro"iy sfc'.toi, thoro •..•oro -ftor c-xoful crlculntlon «t
lo-at 200,000 r/tinly norr$»*lIy dofioloat, ir.bociloa, bosidoa r/jurolo:;ic'l cr.aoa
-nl sofilc-lly unfit >yplo, those ~o:o n-»t only ir.curr.blo cvsoa, nad et lo-.st
75,000 r/;oi pooplo.

"4. Tho r.uriora -»ro :>ilnly ncc--rjliehod ir. "uonai ex/ 'uortta.bor.r -nd
Linz "r. tho Dnubo; cororl r~a-ohr:ibors wit:-. crai-tlor. ahrr.bora diroctly
r.ttnchad woro crrstructod thoro. tbo |-M chadors rx noxt to tho tr-.lr.inr
-rainls ~f tho troops in J'uonalfoa, It in holiovod tint the :ior.tr.lly doficiont
•h" wro r-.urdored thoro vorc usod for ozporlnontin' with nor; poison ^saoo,

"5. Tho transport fr r. tho institutions to tho cr.a chw.bora is c-xriod
ut by SS KeerwAoB. Those c-ll thano2 Lnsuotsico Trnnsjwrt .'..0.,

irlin, l.uotzarjfor. Thla Cc. neny els-, ctoros tho individual ix>dicrl

7-Xj hlstorioa of tho ::ux.!orod 1 - rto: of tho institutions.

"6. Tho lTT^.tos of tho eny rilor -idllo-nlz-d inatituticna w-vo
.■irduroi ripest vlt'.out ur.coptio . Tho l-:\;ur institutions ‘xo partly - to
co:p up tho protcr.ao to tho •it si do world - stiU t bond, but thoy new h~vo
inly fr-.ctior. -f f.j rl ir.-l number cf t. .r ir.-tos; f r oxr; plo thor. cro
only sore 500 isortos iasto-tf S 2,500 i- 3jrlin-5uc:-; in St-dxrodr/

•‘I'.uorlrror. only nb-mt 150 iasto-r: of SCO; in Z-uft ruron/2-yarn rnly 200 ln3tord
r 1,000 otc. Of tho 1-rtor Smutoriiffis -nd lursinr. Institutions tho
Uotrinr waro -Jxondy closed dc-m ccnylotol:* s'cco tiro r^ o; Illon*u/B~don
0 imrtoa; Horlin/Korzborjo 2500 inrvjtos, Kroutztnrv /Oborachlosion 1500 in¬
toe; S^nr.onatoin/Srehsor 8CC irr.-.to?; ’'onoch/Onto-fr'Uihon-S-'yorr. 1111 inn-.tos
JlsW/^io- 3000 i—'tc?, r ad ctaars, rat pr-Vjtly now -Iso Schloswic *>ith

'00 v - do, vtrnthurc "if. 4CC, otc. otc.

1012


16 Jnn-iI-FJC-3-S-?olflt.
Csurt ”c. 1.


"7, Bio follcr..'iii c ; procedure is pcpulcx i-ith oil pooplo, who cro still
porfoctly healthy end who possess tholr owr. flat: tho cacpotont ■ political
lordar" roports thon for wolf-xo purposos; them o physicInn, usually an SS
doctor who oatatlishos "tho feet" that tho old pccplo <-ro no at ally doficlont,
nppoara; ho aur,:oat in Court that thoy aro to ho put undor tutolc^o and that
thoy aro to bo sont to a nursinc fceno. BjIs su^^estlon Is n-turally jwt into
forco. Tho old pooplo nr thon sont fron tho nursing hcc» to tho rs* Ohacbor*.

"8. Partly a Tory lndiroct prf'eexSuro for killinc thoso 'Id po^ilo Is
<iaod . For ax nr pi o n qulto sudd on transfor of a hero fnr need pocplo In e very
short poriod is wory popular, this holer oftor. ordarod »nd carriod out in only
* fow hours, in tho hopo that through tho oxcitenant rlroady a p'xt of tho old
rocplo will bo killod by an apoplectic fit. Tho hero for onod pooplo la alao
froquor.tly transferred into x droc which aro absolutely inaufflciont as far
no sanitary conditions an c;nc^rnod; another way Is that


16 J« n 47-t.-9-la-M-feldt
Court So. 1


suddenly nil the nursing stuff ere celled up for work lr. the Red Cross or in
p uxu.ltIons rectory end the helpless pptients ere left to look ffUr then-
selves.

■vrlttor. in Deceulor 19-1. Signed, Dr. ?. Lr.n£.”

This concludes the present* tlor. of Sccuuer.t rook Mo. 16. The Rrosocu-
tlor. will c' 11 r.ow th- witness Ir. Scheldt.

IE. CAM IK (Counsel for the Defer.dr t Hove:.): Orvlik for the defer.drnt
Horen, hr. rroslder.t, nxhltlt Document 10 907 w s presented pb Inhibit «12
on pirfu 59 of the G«r.r: Document jOok, Yolu e 16, rnd It dtrlt plUgodljr
vlth letter: frou Ir. ..vnecke. Ihia -ml.*: I received r. photo copy of the
document. I h to not .eon rile to ottain the eri/.ir-rl docunor.t. I sr.v froo
this that not the origin* 1 letters w,re presented, but only typed codes of
those letters. I do not consider this ocr.-lssiUe to be prosented ns evi¬
dence as loie! ns the origi.jl letters of Dr. .i«*ncokc pro not rrossntcd. I
therefore roouest thi t Document HO 907 ts crossed out frou the record.

hK. kC EaXLY: The doenuunt to which defenso counsel h* o roforenco lo
on pi go 46 of the English Document rook. The fects pro these: tho letters
of .xenveke were iptwrsntly f-ujld In his hxie or soae othor olnco by Oerann
authorities, ixcerots wore taken fru-. th?so letters end usod lr. the trlrl
against hi., lr. Frr:Jcfurt. ’o obtained the ercvrots only fros the authorities
lr. Frinkfurt. However, i oneche It -.ov la Sutralerg rnd he wi s shown these
excerpts rnd he ht certified thi t they r- true rad correct cxcurots fron
letters which he wrote, -he trVimls ere .ot irt ilcUt to us. I sutalt
th* t the certifierti .r. of ..«..cekc hi self tvkcs this dominant edalssiblo.

JUIOx. SIE-iRlKC: Is ..e eckc to lo oiled re p witness, Hr. HcKnncjr?

KK. hC KAKLY: Yes, he- is. Your Eo-or.

jUXOi SIEaRISG: Defense c-unsel then will hrve opn or tXir.it y to exralr.e
Henieke with respect to these* letters if he so chooses.

DE. CAM IK: Hr. rreslder.t, it is uy opinion thrt tho rroseeution then
should auestlan the witness rbout the contents of these Utters; th-1,
however, it is not cerniesible to present this docuncnt n r« do

lSSlh


not hrve the :ri*-inil letters.


16 Jer. 47-H-S-2c-Lr:-reldt
Court So. 1

7*2. rEiSIDEST: The Tribunal will reserve Its ruling until after the
proposed vi ti.es s Kcnecke hi s testified. hr. AcHaxoy, did I understand that
the exhibit offered cs -.27. Docuaent 1556 rS. vr.c introduced in evidence
teforo the Interactional Tribunal!

HE. UC Ldu-Y: Yes. that is correct. Y-ur Honor.

7HI rRESHttSI: The c-py of the English Document Booh coi.tr ins no cer¬
tificate whatever shovir. i^thiw, of the s.rt. Docs the original docuaent
hove attrehed to it the proper certifierte7

nE. hC HASEY* The original docuner.t hrs —

TEL rEiSIDcLT: I aepn the original oxhillt offered tef.ro this Tribunal.

MB. i.C EaMYi Yes. it h. s thu certifier te of ire* Slobodan statin*
it was offered iu evidence before the Ir.I as Republic of Franco Exhibit 360,

I bolivo. I as sorry. Your Honor, I sisunderstood you. You hi vc reference
to 1666 hS. I v„b spoakin* of 1663 rS, the Oerstein — I da r.ot know whether
the one ve have there does show that i* cese fr<xs tho records of the IMT.

THE *RiSXBZSt: It hi o certificate. It bci<rs a certificate with a
stanpod signature. You should hire the certificate prooerly signed. Thore
was nothing In the in,;lish Docuaent B .ok indicAtin* th; t it hrd over teen
shown to the International Military Tribunal.

HE. HC HAST: Thi t is correct.


16 fen I:7W:-iO-l-S > Fitzgerald
Court :fc. 1


Tlli FnZSIuCJfT: I understand the . rexecution now desires to call Witness
Sugen Schnldt* ,

lit. UeBAlEY: That is correct.

THU IEZSHElfT: The Uarsfcal will sua:on the Witness, .'alter Uugen Sch¬
eldt.

liALTCi ZUGCU SC HI IDT, a witness, took the stand and testified as follows:
3Y T1S . IKSILSKT :

3. The .itness will rise, hold up her richt hand, and be sworn. Jlcpoat
after no:

I srmar by God, the Aluighty and u-niscient, that I ’.Till spook the
pure truth and -.dll withhold and a;Id nothing.

(The witness repeated the oath.)
hiSSILE.vrj 3e seated , plcaso.

Zi:ZCT ZTJLT'jSIkII

DY IB. IScHAtEY:

0. -itness, /our nano is .alter -^cno Schnidt?

A. nano is -alter Zucon Sclaidt.

Q. “re you a Goman citizon?

A. I an Goman, Yos.

Q. You iroro bom on 9 Juno 1?11 ..iosbadon, Ocrnany?

A. 1 was bom on 9 .tone 19U at "iosbadon,

i*. *tc you the alter Sclziidt who ics recently tried for a ciinc
in. rranhfurt before a Goman Tribunal?

A. Yea. I aa the sa:c ->r. Sc’nidt idio was sentence*, to life irpriaon-
aent at irankfurt for perfemin, ialhanasia cn children.

You v. ro tried for tho eric ~-f isirdcr, ..itness?

A. Y s. I ins tried fer audar.

0. hat is the status of your ca*.c not:?

A. I have been called here as a witness, at this tine. I iiavo not node
an appeal up to now.

fi. '.itness, will you tell us, briefly, sseething about .our personal

1G16


16 Jar.-J-a?-10-2-Fitige raid (FL)
Court No. I


history?

A.- In 1939, I joinod tho i.affcn SS, There I reached the gredo of
assistant physician and Sturafuehror. In 1941, an order free the Roich
Chancellery reached no. It was *nt to ay Troop Coaaandcr, I was to re¬
port to tho Roich Chancellery.

Q.- witness, any I interrupt you a coocnt? Before ire coao to those
matters, I would like to ask you, nhothor you have been educated as a
doctor of aodicino?

A.- I started at th» Frankfurt University. I studied raot’icioc thore,
I have taken ~y state examination, I took it there. 1 also oassod my
doctor's examination with distinction.

Q.- hon did you pass your doctor's examination?

A.- I poasod that in 1937 at tho University Clinic.

Q.- '..hero have you practised nedicino since 1937?

A.- In Frankfurt at the University Clinic as voluntary assistant.
Thun in February of 1939, I was »nt to the institution at Eichbort as
assistant physician.

Q.- Jos liichbcrg an insr.no asylum?

a.- oichborg was on institution for the insane and tho iabociloo
owned by tho stato. Afterwards, it was also a sanatorium with a depart¬
ment for little children and later on it was turned into a SS fiold
hospital.

Q.- ‘itness, you stated that you Joinod the Waffen S3 in 1939?

A.- Yes, I was conscripted into the b'affen SS as a noabor of tho
H3JAP unit.

Q.- Hon Ion* were you on duty with tho liaffcn SS?

A.- I remined with thu Waffen SS until 1941.

Q.- '..Tiat aonth of 19417

A.- Until ilarch or April. Than I was caUed back. Then I was dis¬
charged from tho '.affer. SS in Soptcabor 1941.

Q.- ..'.at napooned in Ifercfc or «pril 1941? Mas that tho cfeto on which
you were called to Berlin?

- 1817 -


16 Jan L7-U-10-3-S > ritzgcrald
Court So. 1

A. I did not understand the qu-sticni Jill you repeat it please?
q. ..hat happened in March or April, 19!»1? as that the date on

which you were called to Berlin?

A. I ua s called to Dcrlin in ‘arch, 1?U1, yes.
n. iy chou More you ccIIj'J to Berlin?

A. Dy order of ay civilian offico. It sent by W of tho Adjutant
of tho chruacht.

Q. ..hat did you do in Dorlin. hy were you sent there?

A. I *.as to report there to see a Doctor Dlankcnburg. lio-.rovcr, thia
nan vraa aboeat, ao first of all I went hcao to ty.


1318


l6 Jan-»r-G 35 -lC-l»-?it*«erald.

Court So. 1.


institute. ?rou thoro I was sent with ay chief to Berlin to tho Roioh
Chancellory.

q. you state th t you woro ordorod to report to a Dr. Blankonburg in
Berlin.

ik>. mis tiue it was a uootine,*. It was a nootintf in tho Reich
Cr-.ncullory in wnico about 50 or 60 chiof pnysicinns and directors of tho
Gor^cn insane institutions participated. Furthcrooro. rcprosontr.tivos froa
tno Reich Chancellery, Ministry of Interior, and Ministry of Justice were
also prosont. I was t>ld that.

q. toon did this conference or oeetint tr.ito placo, Witness?

A. I assuuo th t this oust hr re boon in tho early sur-uor.

q. Early suuuor of 19W. is that correct?

-. Of 1941. yos.

q. Was the aootirv; hold in tho Chancellory of tho TUuhror in Rorlin?

a. It was hold in tho yuohror's Cnnncollory in Berlin.

q. ..nd car. you toll us sooo of tho naaos of thopeoplo who attondod
t.iis uootine?

„. Yes. I can rouc-bor th t Profossor Riotscho was thoro and Pro¬
fessor Hoydo. Profossor Scunoidcr. Dr. Hoffoluann, and Dr. von Ho<;onor. The
followir,, uon cauc witn no to Berlin, thoy wore directors: Dr. Pfnnnnuollor,
Dr. ?ulkonhnusor, Dr. Schnoidor. Dr. Schioseo, and Dr. lonnokc. Tho dis¬
trict counsel for Viosbadon, Bornotnt tms thoro. Those pro tho pcoplo who
vor„ there that I knav for ccrt* in.

q. How uaty people would say attondod this uootine?

A. I assuua about or 60.

q. ..t tnx.t ti-o, w. re you Deputy to Dr. Konnokc at tlio Sichbore .‘.syluu?

A. at tout tino. Dr. KoEnoks was tho Director at Sichbore. At ihrt
tL-o; I was still the assistant physician. It was only about half a yoar
liter that I bocaao sonior physician. I roue in od that until tho end, whon
in 1944 . I was appointod Deputy Chief physician. Then I wont back into tho
Held nfpiin until I9U5. ,e 10


l6 Jcn-»-Grs-l»-2r^riS«gorUd.
CJurt log 1 .


Did I understand that you v«.ru rocallod fron the Vnffgiv-SS to
take tele Job as an assistant to Dr. konnoko nt Zlehbcrg?

-• &>. I did not lew anything about that. I only rocoived a letter

fro- Dr. j.cnnekc, that ho intended to have no callod "lndlsponslblo. ■ at
taut tix-o I wrote nil. I proforrod to ronair. with ry unit. Sowevor, ono day
tno order reached uo. It was a tel-gro;.. "Whoro is Dr. Schnidt 0 ? In
accordance with this, Ly Troop Co^endur lu.odi.tolj' sent no on ny way. Ho
sent uo aoix.

Q. Ifeo was chaira.c of tnis nootiiv; in Berlin in the sunnor of I9UIT

— too w. s too Director of the Conference? 0 Conforonce was intro¬

duced by a ..ontlocan I do not rcuoi.bor ony-.oro today. Ho. I cannot rocc.ll
r.io nauu at all. It was then continued by Hoydo, I boliovo, and afterward
by Dr. Koffolnann. It was ooro or loss an open Conference.

Q. too was Dr. Hoydo?

... As far as I know, ho was the University Profossor fron Wuorsburg.

Q. too was Dr. Hoffolrann?

a. Dr. Kcffolcnnn vat a Juristic roprosontatlvo of tho Rolch Chancellory.
at la.at th-t is what I considered hiu to bo.
tont wua done nt this ueeting?

-• It was a uootlru; about tho tothnnasio question, and exooution of
thoso noasures in tao Scr.cin Asyluus on lnoana people.

toll, was any ox lcnr.tlon ,.ivon of tho Dithnnt.sia progTOB at this

uooting?

.... I have not quite understood. ■Ill you ropont tho question, pleaso?

3. Veil, was any orlnsatim given of tho Euthanasia progmn?

A. Tes, a law of taw JUehrer wr.s read to us. ?urthor-oro, furthor
fiocroos wore reed, decrees which were to be tho log;1 basis for tho oxocution
of tho hoasuros. In on this quostion was also discussed.

Q. Do you roconbor tho contont of this docroo or law as you cr.ll it?
tout did it say?

1320


16 Jan-«-JF-ll-l^Gallagher
Court Ho* 1


Q. Do you racwnber what was the contents of this Fuehrer's decree or
law, ac ycu celled it, that did it say?

A. It -as tor the Ircurabla, aid th=c. eoplc «l.o -ere severely stub tt»t
should bo 5 iv „ final wdlcol aid, and it -iso atatid -ho -ere and -■ore not
onpo-orod in th. docrco. Iho docroe -ill aw it boro tho adnroso of .rofosaor

Brandt.

Q. hill you state about this Fuehrer's Decree, whether it*tts directed
to Professors Brandt and Bouhler?

.V, Yes. I have recently seen this Deer.:, and it bore the address of
Professors 3ran:-t and Bouhler. However, I believe that there still had boon

another tocroo vMch did not to-r nny ac- ross c.t .- 11 .

Q. Mow, witrv.es, I do not want you to testify to anythin* that you have
boon shown recently. I asked you if ycu ro.^-Lorcd tho contents of tho Docroo
which was read in this eecting?

A. Yos, tho contents stat d that they vero to bo uinpowcrori to £vo than
a final . icr.l ci;' of buthan.asin on lncura.lc inv-tos or patientr.

Q. Do ycu ro.w bor?

A. I e.j quito cure 1 car. realtor that.

q. do >cu ro.vr.bor whotohr that “x>croc ms rjiructod to Bouhlor and
Brandt?

A. I cannot state it with c ortainty. That is only what I have soon
recently.

q. ;as an explanation c iv~n h*v t-:- .uthancsia pr^ra i vns operated?
Yes. I ruiv bor it this weyj that intonradiary stations wore to to
ostabliahod in indlridnal inrtltutians, an' that fro thore tho pati-nts were

to to sent tc th outhanasia institutions.

q. • ell, did they explain that -uestiaanair-s were bo bo fillod out cn

paper.

A. This action tod already bc-n completed at this period of tir,o.
q. Vhat action do yeu rofer to - what action is that, witness.

lo21


16 Jsn-:W?-ll-2-GaiIagher (FL)

Court Ho. I


A.- I rofor to these intermediary stations. They told oc of that
institution where tha patients had already teen moved. Hcmovcr, then
othor patients tiers to arrive there frera our institutions who noro then
sent from our institutions to the euthanasia institution.

Q.- Do I understand that Sichborg was to bo made a collecting sta¬
tion fer insane porsons?

A.- Yes, that is w.at it was.

Q.- And that thon those insane porsons were to be sont froa Sichborg
to the extermination station?

A.- Yes, they wore to be sont froa us to those institutions.

Q.- And on what basis was it to bo dutonainod that this or that?
patient should bo sent froa Eichbcrg to the extermination station at
that time?

A.- These stations had already boon treated on questionnaires, and
by diagnosis tho Roichsarbcitsgc-yoinschaft, tho Reich Ubor Corporation
had already boon oxanined.

Q.- You aoon to soy, that tto questionnaires had been filled out
on those patients before they arrived at Eichbcrg?

A.- Yos, tto questionnaires had already boon coopletod, and diagno¬
sis had already been .wido bofere th->y com* to Eichbcrg. In a certain
way it was an intonaodiary station.

Q.- itnoss, I shall csk you to pause after the qoostion hr.s boon
put to you before you answer, do you understand that?

A.- Yos.

Q._ How I take it ftoc wfnt you havo said that you know how tho
euthanasia program operated prior to the tie*, that tho patients arrived
at Eichbcrg. Can


- 1822 -


16 Jan^-dl-la-M-ATO-Gallagher
Court Ho* 1


you toll us what was done with respect to as insane person before the patient
was sent to Eichfcerg7

k It was done ttts way. The directors of the individual asylums had
to fill In questionnaires, and these questionnaires were then submitted to
Oerlin. Then special experts gave a diagnosis, ar.d they had to make a
diagnosis of those questionnaires. They then had to decido whether the indi¬
vidual was to be sent to the euthanasia statlonj to an institute like
Hue ns tor, Gas to in, and Eichelbom, ard so on, or, then whether to send thoso
patients who had boon described as positive to an euthanasia option. ■*
of those people were sent to Viotatoin near Muonstor, Eichborg, or Sohouom,
and from there they were to bo sent to Hadamar. That is Just about as much
as I know about our vicinity.

Q Hadaaar was actually a placo whoro patients wero klllod, is that
corroct?

A Tos, Hadaaar was the euthanasia institution.

Q That was the euthanasia institution in your area?

A Yes, that was tho euthanasia institution for our distriot until

August 19U1#

Q Arxi that was the district surrounding tho Woisbadcn aroa?

A Tos, ovorything was sent thcro from ovon other districts. I 'on't

know what was tho basis for this procedure

Q Havo you ever board of the Institution Grafonock?

A No, I had not heard of it. I only know at that time Hadamar.

q I an not asking you what you knew at that tine. I am asking you
row if you heard during the tiro that you wore active in the euthanasia

program of Grafeneck?

A Tho name case to my attention afterwards. However, I have novor
visited tho institute.

q Bell, did you hoar that Grafonack «a> alaa an cttcralnation Instl-


tuto like Ha d a m a r ?


1823


16 Jan-U-2a--«TIWjallasbor
Court Noi 1


A Yos.

Q Did you hear of tho sane thin*- about Brandenburg?

A No, I don't knew that name.

Q Or Harthciaer?

A Toe.

Q Or Sonnenstein?

A Yea.

Q Or Bomburg?

A Tos.

Q Or Do mock?

A Tos, also.

Q What other extermination institutes do you know that existed?

A Otherwise, I don't know. Others cano to ay attention in the courso
of tine thoro.

Q All right, witness. You said that the asylum fillod out quostion-
miros on potionta which woro sent to Dorlin, is that right?

A Yos, questionnaires woro sent to Dorlin.

Q To whom woro thoy sent in Dorlin?

A I can not say that. I havo never sent ary there.

Q Havo you ever hoard of it?

A X/ chiof tho thon Director Dr. Monnoko was in charge of having
thorn sont thoro.

Q Havo you over hoard of tho Reich Association Hospital and Nursing
Establishment?

A You man the Reich Corporation for ffursing arxl Convaloscont
Establishment?

Q I moan the Reichsarboitogoooinschaft fuor Fflego und Hoilanstaltcn?

A They wero asylums for Hadamar, yes, aai also the Gcraeinnuetzige,
and tho Gcmoinnuetxigo Transport G.M.D.K.) also tho Reich Conpary for
Scientific Researchj also a department for amalgamation and hereditary
diseases. l32li


16 Jm^l^v4I^T!W}alUgher

Court 1

Q I thought you probably heard about those. Ho*, toll us what they

»ero7

A So far as I know they wore the executing agencies
Q Thoy woro the agencies in charge of the euthanasia progran?

A Yes. 7/hen I attowied tho conference of the rarty in the Chancellery,
I also askod wto was in chargo of this assignnont, and Dr. Hogoner told no
it was Professor Brandt; that ho had tho nodical direction, and I also con-
tiraied on this concopt.

Q Was anythirx; said about tho connection of Viktor Crack, then?

A About the connection, yos, it was stated that he ma tho nodical
director.

Q Now, you aro speaking of Viktor Brack, or Karl Brandt?

A I an speaking about Professor Brandt.

Q I now put tho quostion to you whothor you know that Viktor Drack
was connoctod with tho outhanasia prograa?

A Yos. Later on tho nano of Viktor Brack was nontionod froquontly,
and Mr. Hogonor told no about it, arri also told no at a later poriod of tino
during a conforoncc that Brandt was not tho director any nore, but that
3 rack was in chargo all by hinsolf.

Q Whon was that?

A It nust havo boon in 19UU.

Q V/os von rtjgenor a subordinate of Viktor Brack?

A It was Hogonor subordinated to Viktor Brack. I only know thi3 fron
Ho goner whon I had a discussion with Hogonor about tho sub Joe t.

THE PRESIDENTS Tho Tribunal will now rocoss until 1*30.


1825


16 Jm-ArUG-l^-l-Gaylord (kj)
Court 1


CORRECTED CCPT
AfTSUCOJi SZSSXCS

(The hearing reconvened at 1340 hours, 16 January 1947)

SALSB ECCEf SCaiXDT - Rosuaod
DIRECT HJUHillOT (Continued)

BY H?, MC HaSET:

Wtnoss, lot's go back for a acoont to tho aoeting »iiich
you state waa hold in tho surfer of 1941 in tho Chancellory of the
fuehrer. Do you nean by tho Chancellory of the fuohror, Bouhlor's
officol VltnOss. you stated that in the smuor of 1941, a nootlng
van hold in tho Chancellery of tho fuohror. is that right?

A. Tos, that is corfoct.

<i. Do you aoan by Chancellery of tho fuehrer, the office of
Bouhl or?

i. I understand it was Bouhlor's dopartoont, foo.

Voro you askod to toko ®y oath binding you to socrecy at


thin nootingj

A. res, secrecy -as demanded froo us and vo signed tho douunont
in fact stating that.

And what was to bo tho penalty if you did not u*4 ntain

socrocy?

\ Rogording tho punishoont itself, nothing was said, but I
experienced it iu tho institute of nine that one of uy ualo orderlies

was sent to a concentration coc».

How what other explanation was givon about tho operation of
the Euthanasia Program at this costing? How- was it explained to you?
A. It i*5T$^ generally speaking, it was a general tr.de


should kh- vhethcr the low in fact was a secret law; and I was
told th^idth respect to the patients who weren't supposed to Jind

out and also centering the ion of the war, they would have to

X y


bo secret


1826


16 J e nuc ry-K-DJG-l 3-1 -Saap sc n
Ccurt Ho. 1


Q. New, witness, you have testified you were fnailicr with the nanea
Reichsarbotsgeceinschaft ard the ch.rtiablw fcundeUon for institutional care
of patients, the so-called sttftung, end the patient transport corporation.

A. Yes.

Q. I will ask you if these were sinply code nanes under which the Euth¬
anasia program was carried out.

A. Yes, they were camouflage; the way I understood it at the time was
that it was the executive departments which wore concerned, the department
of ministry, of the Interior, and tho Reich Chancellory thit is to say.

q. And is the same thing true of tho Reich Ccoaittoo for research of
heredity and constitutional disoasos?

A. Yes, that applies to that too.

Q. V.S3 this Reich Committee for research of heredity and constitutional
diseases concerned with the Euthanasia prolan as applied to children?

A. Yes. I had such a task from the I.tdch Cccrdttco.

q. And the throe other organisations woro concornod with what?

A. From tho Reich Committee certain discasos wore dealt with, crippled
and deformed children, and T. B. and serious tuners of the brain.

Q. New, turning frm this Reich Ccenitteo back to tho Reich ..ssociation,
who are hospital nursing establishment-, charitable institutions for the care
of patients, and patient transient corporation, wore those organisations con¬
cerned with the Euthanasia applied to adults?

... Yes. Those wore the organisations which carried cut Euthanasia on

^rewn-ups.

q. You have mentioned the names of .rof. Harcnor end .ref. Ilictscho;
do you know whether or net they were sc-callcd top exports in tho Euthanasia
program ao applied to adults?

As far as I know, the Euthanasia program was applicable V- grown-ups
and they wore experts.

Q. Hagener and Niotsche were experts; is that right?

Yos. They were the chief experts in fact when I knew.

Q. New, then, let's confine ourselves for the ncuuit to tho Euthanasia as

1527


16 Jar.uary-A-DJG-13-2-Saspson
Court So. 1

applied to fxcwn-ups. l.crc questicnaircs filled out cn prtients in insano
asylums all over Germany?

Yes.

Q. Do you know where these questiennfires ease frea?

Tho questionnaires were sent to the institute through the Interior
Department.

Q. 'i.'culd that be thrcu*h tho Jtinistry of the Interior and Dr. Linden?

A. Yes, I assume so; at any rate in our institute there were a number

of theso questionnaires which were already there.

Qi And after those questionnaires had been completed, where were they
sent?

A. They were sent to Berlin; they ««t to Hadaaar; thet was deno by the
director end you would have to ask hin. I don't know at tho moment where
thoy woro sent exactly.

Q. ‘.toll now, witness, ycu wore active in this procrqn; you surely havo
sooo concral understanding of how it operated; isn't that truu?

A. Yos. This is how it was. In this institute busses would arrivo
which woro dircctod under the so-callod transport community for patients,
and at tho sene tine rows of patients would arrive, and th«.so patients mount¬
ing to an avorac« of 90 to 100 per transport, and a transport consisting of
three busses; these patients were then doalt with; they wero takon to the
busses and rcaevod; tuvi it was net said where the petients wore buinc taken,
tut tho knowledge had beccao cccraen that they went to Hadunar.

Q. Lent to Hadanar, you said?

A. Yes, I said Hadacar.

Q. Hew witness, let's turn for a ascent U, the heich Counittco for ho-
5 torch and hereditary end constitution! diseases. .*111 yeu explain briefly
Just how that prerron operated? lioro questionnaires filled out thoro on thu
children?

». Hew, we didn't dc that. Tlie questionnaires wero filled out by tho
Health departments and tho chief of the children's clinic, and then cn tho
basis of a de-cree frea the Ministry of tho Interior reports were made to


1S26


16 J armary-^-D JG-l 3“3~5 emp zcr .

Court Nc. 1

Berlin. From Berlin there was a committee of doctors, that is tc say chief
experts, nodical officers, and they would thm decide according to the merits
of the case cn Euthanasia and they would then issue authorisations, he called
thun authorisations — these authorisations ware photostatic copies of tho
reports, and then there was an accompanying letter which would ho sent to tho
individual children's department or the corresponding cccoittccs in the Roich.

Q. Woll now, witness, we want to make the operation of this children's
proerca perfectly clear, hasn't it required of doctors, oidwivos and other
people who were present at the birth of a deforced child —

A. Yes, th-t wes also dccandod.

Q. Witness, 1 will ask you to wait until I complete ay quostion and then
give your answer. Di<k;'t theso physicians, doctors, nid-wivoa, at tho hospital
have to make a report when deforced children were loro tc Dr. Linder.'a office
in Berlin?

A. Yes, that was tho situctlon. Those md-wivos, doctors and health
authorities did have to make a report about such serious deformities or ec.ac
sarious brain disaase to Berlin, and then or. tho strength of these reports,
the Koich Cceaittco would decreo Euthanasia through so-callod authorising
orders.

Q. (jid theso authorising ordors took the fom of a photostntic copy of
the report cn which had boon written approved?

A. Yes. The word treatment was considered by tho Reich Conraittoo to bo
—to mean — Euthanasia.

Q. ,nd these phe to static ccpio3 came to ycu in Slchberg?

A. Soco of those photstatio copies did reach us, end ell different
children's departments.

Q. New, witness, 1 want tc put to ycu Document NO 253, which has been
admitted before this Tribunal as . rosccuticn's Exhibit No. 331, and 1 wont you
to study it for a recent and I will then put a question to you.

DR. HCB3iT S3.V..TIUS: If the Tribunal please, I object to the present¬
ation of this document to the witness. The document has not yet teen the

1529


16 Januc ry-A-DJG-13“^-Sampson
Court He. 1

subject cf cross-examination, and I deny quite definitely its correctness. It
night mislead this witness and I, therefore, roquest that it should not be
admitted. First cf all, there would havo tc be a cross-examination on it.

]H. UcHnNEYL If the Tribunal please —

THE il-ESIDOtT: The objection is over-ruled; counsel may proceod.

BY !£-. ICH.JCEY:

Q. Witness, this document which you are new looking at purports to be
a chart of the organisation of the Euthanasia program as it operated in
Co many. I will ask you, based upon ycur kncwled -e and activity in the Euthan¬
asia, if that chart presents an accurate and correct picture of Euthanasia
and its organization.

THE PRESIDENT: I would suggest, Ur. McHanoy, that you ascertain from him
if ho is familiar with reading cherts and if ho understands tho moaning.

BY. Uh. iXc&JiSY:

Q. Witness, I will ask you if you understand th. t chart that is boforo

you.

A. Yes I do. I understand tho chart. I poracnolly do roccgnizo tho
organization of tho Reich Cccoittoc ccnnoctod to Dr. Linden; and then thorc a
connecting line to superior Dr. Karl Brandt; end I knew tho connection to
Bauhler. Brock, Blankenburg and Hogcner is known to me. They woro working
together with Heydo and Nictsche. They in turn had tc collaborate with the
heich working cocedttcc of the clinic and sanatorium*. Then there is the
Stiftung of theso institutions; then there is the transport company for
patients; and those are the organizations which I knew. Tho name cf ..11 era is
known to me, and has been connected tc these organizations; ho was playing a
leading rclo. Then I recognize the nooes of tho experts — ifannraucllcr and
Falthouoer. «nd then r^-erding the observation institutes I know nothin .

From the Euthanasia institutes I knew the names of Grafeneck, Brandenburr,
Sennenstein in Hadaner and Bernau ere known tc Be.

Q. Witness, are ycu eblo to fellow on the chsrt the flew cf quostiennairoa
from the office of iJIers, ever to the offico cf Dr. Linden, and from there
down tc the general institutions, the insane asylums?


16 J-~J>-A-:-:S-14-l-S n »vne« <KJ)

Coart 1

A. To follow tho choaaol flf these questionnaires on the basis
of tho euthanasia progrtn as£% is put before no hero is something
I cannot do.

q. Do you find tho offico of jdlors on tho chart?

«. Yos, I'to got .that.

q. Do you eoo right undor tho offico of ALlcrs a dtpartaont
for quostlonnairos?

A. Too, yoo, I can rocogniio that.

q And do you soo tho ariow running fron this Dtyartnont of
questionnaires ovor to tho d<*>artncnt of Llndon?

i. Yos.

Q. And do you soo tho arrow running frees tho offico of Linden
down to tho insono asyluas?

A. Yos, I con soo that too.

q. And do you soo tho lino running free tho insane osyfruno
to tho obsorrntion stationo. frith tho word •potiont", indicating
that thoso qucstionnlros woro fillod out on tho potianto?

A . Yoc, I can rocognlzo that.

0 „ and do you follow that tho questionnaires wont bock fron
tho obsorrntion station to tho offico of Liodon ond than woro B ont
fron Linden ovor to tho offico of allors, whoro tho top exports,

Hoy do md ffiotscho, exportixod tho quostionnires?

A. Yes.

CU I will ask you if thet is not tho way that tho euthanasia
progr.-ss operated.

A. Tho possibility exists, but I <*= not accurately info mod
about that.

C ; . Lltness. woron't you working with Dr. Koanocko in Slchborg?

A. I worked with Dr. Hcnnockc in Dichborg.

0 „ And don't you know for a fact that Dr. Koanocko sent thoso


-1831-


16 Jai>—A- &ZS - 14-1-fiayre* (XJ)

Court 1

questionnaire* to the office of Licdoa and that they wore then 03 -
portixod by Hoyde and SlotBChof

A. Tob, I know that for cortaia.


-1831t>-


16 Jaa-.v-SSS-lw-2-S.yaes
Coart »o. 1.


Veil, then, *hy do 7311 state tluit you are sot accurately lnforiiod?
Tou were working with tho ana who wr.s doine Just that, w^ron't you?


Ic«, hut the intoroediary dopurtaonts I did not know.


Iftilch intorutdiory doportuoat did you not kaowt


— n.u individual dopartuonts on tho ch&nnol. I only knew th. t Dr.
honnocko sent those questionnaires to 3orlin, and then during ay work with


Konacckc I learned th t ho h:-i connections with Dr. Lindon. whoa ho vioitod
quite of ton, and wita Dr. Rletscho. too, end with Dr. Heydo ns woll, and ho
also collaborated with ..llor, but Just how thoy worked together auonfist
thousclvos X never know.

3 . Veil, witnoss. can you state whether or r.ot the quest!onnairos woro
sont by Hunnocke to Licdon's officoT

— Re did send thou to Xdndon's offico, yes.


4. Can't you also state th t Heydo and Kiotschc oxportlsod thoso


quostionrairos ns t.ie top oxportsf
— Skit I know, yos.

But want you do not know is tr.o channol or tho officosl
... ifc t I did not —


*. Vitnoss. I will osk you to repent thnt. I don't think tho
translation criio through.

... I know th t Dr. konnocko scat the questionnairos to Dr. Lindon
in Borlin — to Linden's office, thr.t is, and I also know that thoro tho
quostionnairos wero doalt with by Siotscho and Koydo in thoir oapneity ns


chief oxperts. I do not know, however, vhr.t tho cr.annol of procoduro and tho
official relation was botwoon hllors and Heydo. I know for cortain, howovor,
tnoy thoy did collaborate.

Q. ^11 rlgnt, witness, th;i sc cat to bo clear onourfi. I will now ask
you whether or not the order to aovo tho patlont fron tho nsylua to Jfrdaanr
or ono of tho otner outhanosic oxtorulnetion stations did not cooo fron
either tno a*ich ..saociatin or tao Stiftucf; or the Patients' Transportation
Corporation.


1632


lo Jao-^-G2&-lU->-aiyno«

Court Ho. 1.

— That order crao froa om cf those Stiftungon, tho working
coi—unlty or the Stlftuag and was carried out by the Transportation Cor¬
poration for patient*, yes.

llJw, vitae 68 , can you sttto that t-iia chart is on accurnto
presentation, on accurate picture of too or/r.aisction of tho euthanasia pro-
erac, with theoxcoptloa vnlca you h .vc anie; that is, that you do not know
tno subordinate offices connect in, Linden vith tho exports?

— Tes.

q. Wth tort qualification, you arc cloor that tho chart is accurato?

dka 7CS.

q. Vlll you picaso hcai tno chart to tho clerk bosldo you? Kov,
witness, you have given us a picturo of now the euthanasia program oporatod ,
os it allied to grown-ups or.d childron. I wont you now to toll uo what
wont on in Zichborg.

... Beginning in 1940 the transports left Zichborg for JtodoiJcr, trans¬
ports of such potlonts os the co—unol Stiftung or tho Association had soloct-
od. Thvy had previously boon dealt with by oxperts, and tho corresponding
ordor cuco fron the hinlstry of tho Interior, and the Transportation
Corporation carried it out.

Those transports continued until npproxiu;toly 19 UI, the spring or pro-
aably tho .arly suacer. Then tho patients fror. other institutes wore firot of
all to go through us as intcrujdiary station and then also to the outhnnnsia
institute r.t Had/u_ar. ifcilst this particular prograc was being otartod up,
Hadoiiar stoppod work. Shat is to soy, wo wi.ro ovorcrowdod considerably, end
it was not quite clear vnothcr another cutncnosia station was being considorod.
That was not tno case, noveror. It stoppod. Apart froa this particular action
there was only the Heich CoiuAtteo station rt Sichborg. Tnero was a npocial
dopartuont for childron at Sichborg, for the killing of deforaod and lo-
bocilic childron.

One understood "doforaod" to seen deforoed bralnB of a sorious degree and
C 0 L.plotc idiocy. They wore given tho doatn of nercy in our inctituto.

1833


16 Jan-_^ 0 ZS- 1 —4-Hyno

Court So. 1.

Tti» order originated with the Hoich Concittoe, and it vr.e paeood on to us
tnrough Horr von Hogenor.

*Bi« ^»ttor continual until 1944. In 1944, towards tho aiddle, tho
connection* with tho Scich Co:—ittov were brokon off. probably it wua the
approach of 2uian troop* toward 3crlic whicn we* ro»pon*iblo for tho
coation of connection*.

•i* Mow, witness, let'* go beck and con»idor what hopponod in Elchborg
with rorpoct to grown-up*, you cone to Elchborg in fcnrch or April, 1941;
i* that right?

A. To*.

.jvL tho .uthanaaia progrtu. had boon opera tin,-; in Eichborg prior to

that ti-ot

... To*, tho euthanasia progrxu- had boon in operation *lnco 1940.
IXirirv; tho initial period of that progrou I wn* not pro*ont.

3* Do you have any information of whet hnppcnod at Eiohborg prior to
tho tloo you arrived thero in )ferch or ..pril 1941?

-• To, I hoard it frou Dr. fcnnocko in tho courso of conversation,
and also fron the calo and fonalo nuro of tho instituto.


16 Jan *.7-A-15-l-IH-Les6er
Court Sc. 1

<• Approxia tely hcv naay pitients were in Eichber in 19-iOT

A. She tnrci’c wns 1500 pitionts.

Q. S-v, were these 1500 Twtieats who wore in itchier* ftt the belajiin
of 1941 transferred out to Endrnar?

A. Sot all of then. Approxia tely 40 to 60 percent, I would say.

CJ. Do you know how fast that transfer tooh nltce and when it vac cua-
pleted?

A. Well, the sltui tion ves that very early in the nornln* the busses
arrived and in the evening, ae fir rs I hid learned froa Dr. hennecko, tho

patients were dead.

Q. I do not think you understood ny Question, witness. I sornt to ask
you how soon after the 1st of January, for instance, 19-.0, had they elimi¬
nated the 60 percont or 760 patients who wore in Htdaaar, I near, in Eichber*?

A. Of these 1600 present in Elchter* at the beinnin A 1940 aonroxl-
nately half went to Hsdenar; that is to say, they were tho owealled incur¬
ably Insane es they were called it tho tine, "hi others, who hid only Just
filler, ill and who wore considered capable of toixv; treated or earn bio of
eerryin* on work and certain other categories, rcaainod behind.

«v. Well, after anorexia*tely hi If of the 1500 patinots hid boon exter-
ain/tod in F-adanar, did new o»tients coao on to Elchber*?

A. Yos. bo received ropca.tsdly transports fron other institutes,
p<rt of which were neant to be trmsferred t- Hadnar but which, because of
the cessation A work in Hndiwr, ro:.; ir.cd in our institute so th* t we h; d
up to 1800 people in our institute ntd were overcrowded.

l*. Well, didn't thoy transfer out sone of these new patients at
Elchber* though, bef ore Ecdiair closed down?

A. Yes, .-t the bccinr.in* a. few of these now patients were transferred.
Thi t h/ppened until August 1941. b'e received the first pi tlento fron out¬
side rpproxiuatfcly /1 the boginals* of June.

<i. June 1941?

A. Yos, July. June end July.

<i. Sow when *n.s Ecdaacr shut down?


16 Jan 47-A-15-2-i*-Lesser
Court Ho. 1


A. la "u^ust 19%1.

Q. Do you know why it v?s shut doVn?

A. X do r.Jt know the ret son.

Ji. Do you know whehfcer or act It resumed operation?

A. Hadaciar did n-t rec-cuence Its functions as a Euthanasia Institute,
at least not in the shape of cassia,;. Thtt I know for certnin, hut later on
I learned that there were injections tula#* used in order to carry on with
Euthanasia in enother fcm.

‘i. Veil, witness, don't you know that that happened in 19o3 r.t Hadnnar?

A. I do not know what happened in Hadaocr in 19*i2 now.

1 ^. I an asking you if you don't know that Hcdenar resuced ooernti-ns in
1942 la externinating patients, whether by injections or by fees?

A. Veil, no. These gas ohaabors at Hadaaer wero dlsountled in 1941 and
the Institute ct Hadeai r was again used as an ordinary eeyluu or sanatorium.

I had been inforued up to that point tut now I know that Kadaanr enployed in-
Jeotions to continue Euthanasia.

Will, that is whr.t I wonted to find out, witness. Don't you know
that that occurred ir. 1942 in Kadacar? Don't you know that they began using
injections in 1942?

A. I do not cuite understand your queetic©.

Q. Didn't they begin using injections in Hodcnrr in 1942?

A. Yes.

Ci. Sow it is quite interesting nb.'Ut those gas chambers at Hndmnr.

Do you know wh/.t happened to those?

A. They wero die :i ntlod.

C;. Do yju know where they were sent?

A. Ko, I do not know th: t.

li. Cr.n you give us an epproxU* te figure of the nunbor of grown-ups
who were sent to Hadaaar fros Sichberg for exteruina.tioc?

A. Troa Eichberg you neon?

k- Yes.

A. Veil, in ny opinion, it cust have enounted tc something like 1,000.


Court Ho. 1

16 Jan 47-A-l5-3-iH-L ettec


Bow vhrt happened vlth respect to growc-aips, after Hadaner shut
down in August 1941, in Lichhefgi

A. Xothlng was going on there.

Ci. Do you r.eac to say thr.t iichtorg hid aprroxlaetely 1500 tc 1700
petlents free August 1941 until the end of the w t r?

A. So. Later on we passed a large meter of cur patients on to other
asylums such os Gutetein and Eadacir because we were ooenlng other estab¬
lishments. We had a new hospital end a new lung ennatorluo end a new field
hospital. It is for that reason that a large number of our patients went to
outside establishments.

Well, where did those patients go?

A. Ta Weilauenster. Gutsteln and Eadamar.

*l» Do you know whether any of those patients were externlnnted in any
one of those institutes?

A. I assume tiut it least the possibility existed thrt they woro
exterminated at Kadascr, es far as I on infcreed today, that ie.

Sow, witness, didn't you know at the tioe they were trnnsforrod
that the purposo was for extermination?

A. So, thut was unknown.

<i» bhrt makes you soy now thut you think soje of then wero exterminated
at Hrdaaar?

A. Because now, during my Internment, I heard of the trial at Re doner.

Witness, lot us go tack to lichfccrg rgr.in ond describe the operation
of the children's w rM, You were in charge of thrt word, weren't you?

A. Yes, I was chief medical officer /t that institute. I was a

department chief medical officer .i the children's section. The Institute

hid orders to give the "mercy death" to these children; thrt is to sry,

Berlin sent us so-called ■authorising documents* end these children, after a

little while, would arrive too. Then we examined the children end if it

turned out correct, the children were assisted in dying. That ie to say, if

they were physically very ill end at the same tine, of course, insane. And

then every month wade a report to Berlin, directly to the Reich Committee,

1637


Court So. 1

16 Jta 47-A-15-*i-iM-Les 6 er


•eat to a postal eddress, and then v* received our mil frcn Berlin which wee
signed by Herr von Kegener. c^uite renei tedly Dr. Hoffelnann or von Hegener
caao to visit us end they would discuss this and that so that we h; d liaison,
in practice, with these two uen only.

While we ere on this liaison with Keffclnann end Hegenor, did you
ever discuss with then the leadership of the Euthanasia orogran?

A. Yes. During the nesting at the Eeich Chancellery when I was present.
I sot together with a nuuber of gentlemen and von Hcgcner was one of then.
Naturally I took an interest in finding out who theso so-called "secret state
tasks" were being directed by. It wns on that occasion that vo* Hegener re¬
plied to ae that Wofeeeor Brandt was in charge, that is to say, nedieally in
charge. This was in 19*. 1. This, of course, renalned ny fire conviction until
1944, when von Hegenor told no, during ono of his visits, thrt this wra no
longer rrofeasor Brandt who was the leading norsonrlity in charge; ho was
then only speaking about Brack.

Vhi t about these visits in 1942 and 19*3 that you ncntloned - did
you also hove soce discussion with thou then about Brandt?

A. Tbit I can't rsuontor. I don't think we spoke about it, or I san't
reaenber it.

Well, how can you say that Brandt »s in charge of tho progran froo
1941 to 1944? On whr.t do you base your statoaont?

A. Merely on this first conversation in the Eeich Chancellery, when I
was told that Brandt was tho leading -inn; and, of course, also upon this con¬
versation in 1944 whor. von Hegener told ao thi t this was no longer rrofesser
Brandt.

.4. Well, did not Hegenor indicate that Brandt had recently left?

A. Bo, he aeroly told ae, "Bo, Brandt's no longer the boes." I think
this heppened after the rttenpt on Hitler's life. I was not Quite sure and
I did not went to ink because Hegenor was always very tight-lipped.

(t. All right, witness. Let’s go back to tho children's deprrtnent at
Zichberg. When was the killing of children started in Eichterg?

A. The action started in 1941, approxin/tely in tho autucr. and it con-

165


Court So. 1

16 Jen 47-X-16-E-Qi-Le««er


tlaued until 1944.

In other words, the children'• faction did not start until after you
cane to Zichterg?

A. Well, it had started already, over since Karch, tut at that tine we
had only a very few children. The station *es really very snail; on the average
we had 20 children there and at first there were only 6. 6, or 7.


1639


i


l6 Jan-A-J?-lS-Hupperstein (31)
Court So. 1


9. And you state that you received authorizations fron the Reich
Committee for Research, on hereditary and constitutional diseases?

A Yes, yes, I received the authorisation, the so-called "authoriza¬
tion."

Q AAnd that was sipied by von Eegener, did you kuy?

A Veil, Eegener signed then. He signed the so-called ■ authoriza¬
tion". The authorization reports, one could eay. And a photostat copy
was attached eo that every patient had a so-called "report".

9. -Bow many children were killed in Eichberg, fron the tine tho
program started in I 9 UI, until it was completed in the middle or lottor
part of 19 W*?

A About 80 children altogether, “hero were some special authoriza¬
tions among them which concerned some adults who were deformed. 1
remember ono cripple who was 30 years old,

9. Vae hie namo Kessler?

A So; Kessler was another man. He was deaf md dumb and deformed,
and he was a psychopathkc^case.too,and no epileptic.

9 Row you mentioned "special authorizations". Those special
authorizations concerned grown-ups?

A Yes; tho so-called "special authorizations", in those cnaoe,
sometimes originated from seabers of their frelly or other agencies.

9. Tiwa whom did these special authorizations come? The Reich
Committee?

A Yes, the Reich Committee.

9 How many of these special authorizations did you receive?

A Approximately 15 to 20.

9 How old were these children who were killed in Sichberg?

A At the beginning, there were only very young children. Later
older children were added, and later on, adults too,

<3, How were they killed?

A Veil, they were treated with sedatives.


-18»0-


16 Jen—A-JP—16- Xspperstein (kJ)
Court 1


Q, T&ct kind of • edotiVMT
•» '•' hod norphln# an£ Ltsainal*


-1840 a -


16 Jan-A-J?-l6-2-Kuppe rstc-in
Ccurt No. 1


Q. Tiore the grown-ups, who wore killed under the special authorizations,
executed in the sen way?

Yes. These adults w_n. us'iily s.v_rcly ill ar.d re re close to dying.

Q. fore any of th.so children n.n-Gxr.n nationals?

... I cannot runoobor that. I don't think that was the casu, hov/.vor.

Q. You didn't have any children bom of eastern workers in Ocr.iany, in

Eichborg?

A. Moj we did not.

Q. lioru any of th_ grown-ups non-Gen nn nationals?

*»• No > I cannot r.o.ubar that. So .tievs authcrizations can. along which
concerned so-colleJ "racial Gomans", but th-y vere not foreigners. That was
in two or thr~_ eases, I think.

Q. I.hat do you near, by "racial 0 .rvans“?

A. Onco they ca:u frea Upjx.r -il.sir, -nd really had (fcraon nationality.

Q. Did you teak. out a list in th. institution at hlchborg on tnosc
children who had been killed?

A. Vo node a .Tenthly report. Hr.T..v<,r, w. did n.t onk* a r.al list.

Q. ..'oil, didn't you nskv a report till eh garo the mux- of the child, and
tho dat- of birth, and diagnosis, and. the date of tho authorization, end tho
date of death?

A. No. Those authorizations crux. fre: ikrlin and wer^ registered, and thon
at th« .nd of ttu, nenth, »: ropertc : fc . na C3 of th. children who, nt that
tine, w^re at this f. ich Comitt-.. In addition, th. nanos of tho children
who, durin- tho cours. of that nenth, u.rt admitted, and then, also, such
children who, during th.- cours. of that . onth, had died, together with their
birth date, and ti-.cn, at the end of tala r./ert, we suwv.rizod which eases
wore still at tho Raich Ccocitt-o.

Q. itness, I will hand ycu Dccua-nt aO-U^S, which has boon introduced
in this ccso as frcsocution Exhibit rfc. 353, and we’ll ask you if this sort
of list is fcollier to you — not this particular list, but a sinilrr typo of
list?


-131*1-


16 Jon-..-JB-16-3-Rupporsto in
C-'urt Vo. 1


!E. JfcttUSI: X; the Tribunal please, tills is net in any one A tlw
Document Socks before you. It was in one of the earlier Euthanasia DoCU out


Books.


... lfo never . a;, such c list. Our report only referred t« six '.w-stions,
which wore contained on that for:;.

Q. ’itn-ss, I’don't une’erstar.' tlx lest £l't_*xnt which you have oada,
ill you repaat it plc.iso?

A. Our reports consisted of answer! a six questions, which -re put to
us by tl. Reich -c -nitto- on a for vhicU receive-! too.

Q. And. what ."-IN. those six questiens?

A. The first question was: 'Iks* v.ny children ware unit ted free. tlio
Reich Cosjaittoe Curing the c urse of vl :& ~ntn?" Then, "Row -any children
rrere r\ t tliC strticn at tlx bop in r. n„ ; tfc. . nth?" "How -\eny such cas-D died
during that .ixnlh?" "How rany were r ;- "Mow vnnv ar- tlur- nt the

tiao?" And these h . t be list.

Q. Y-u never rd- ny report, by nr 01 tn e- »-h3 hod bi:n killed to
the Roich Coarittwo?

A. Yes; tha* .-’s qu-stlcn three . It *.ras askedt "How nany chllc'r-n tiod?'
.jid tVn eho list was cirtn.

Q. n>.y did ;i t ask you fer any dia^n-sis <! the cnos wh. had died?

A. noli, nc; th. Pxich CustLtto- ci ‘n't -ck us th t.

Q. In nay v>nt, ycu'ro clear t«-t j .u never vVo -ny such r-.-rt -s
I hiv- Just pr-s-ut-d ti y-.u?

A. Hot I; a . iioco th- diayi cic -s alrec.;- -stabliche '. at th- 1-lch
Cc—ltt--, th-y ha-.' alr-at'y b-an cxc-dit-d. I esexr-.o that th-;- -rely vant d
to resistor that, then.

Q. Ji-.w, v-itnoss, y u arc f- ill r »atn an .r<’-r, r-ceivod fr-n th- rtoich
‘•’liiis-ry of the interior, c ncornin. . i ios :xl caat-m w • rk-rs, are y. u not?

... Yes. That ca^e in 19A3 or l?: 1 . An -rdor cr_c, according t Inch
people wh- in.ro n t fit for labor sr s *ch -ast-rn workers - h. wore :i‘t h-althy
-and &-uld r.jt be restore!'. t- health, v.-re t. b- transported aerie to whore


-I 8 fc 2 <


16 J"ji— ujTBtoin
C urt Nr . 1


thjy livud. "util U:-t tt c, •< - s-.'.t toch tr-.ii rt o ck t t;v.ir It.
jut gno Icr^o aofJo tx~report \ns tc take pltco. That's *hrit ri
at 6n~ ti


c,

a said


-13L3-


16 Jen 47-A-r~3-17-l-Lchnharit
Court Ho. I

1*3. Mc&CKZf: I want to prosont a locunont to you. It 13 tho
Docent Ho. 891. PrCEocuticr. Schibit 414. It is on oaco 52 of tho
Basil ah Dccuront Book, end on 49 of tho Co—an Docunont Book.

la tho nature of this dccuront forJliar to you?

A. He, it is not. Don't know it.

MS. KeH&HSf: It is on poco 52 of the hock, tho lest per o of this
docuront.

T3 MT7ISS5: Ta-’O •'52"?

HR. HoIUnST: Tfco last paro of Document Ho. 891.

US "I7HBSS: I don't quito undo retard tho pofination of that book.

MR. UcUAHEf: Hill you stand up thoro, and hoi? hir. turn to pa 1 0
49, first?

BBTJITJBSS: "49-. 2iw, 1 have it.

>3. SUttlV: 'fill you turn to tho ?aco?

T-T3 'ITISSS: Yos. I know this dccuront. Yos. That was tho
doourvont that I was spookin' t! ah

1. 3y l&Ianay: Did you rocolvo this docuront fra: Dornr.’ot?

A. That ca.'o to us through channols, fro*, tho O v o^-?rosidont.
h'hat t'V'k placo unon tho rocoipt of this docur ont?

A. That w-e a collodion of thoao lncaao and 3\avorr workora that
fore not fit for work, orvl thoy worn to o oort on a transport to an
ur.’caor> dostinati n.

fill you repeat the answo-, plcaso, witnoss?

A. That was tfc. ordor for c oolloctivo transport Tor lnar.no
Sadorn wirkors who wore unfit fer work, and thoy 'wro to to sont to an
unknown doatlnation.

*. How about tho transportation of thoso Sestorn workers?

A. Thoy woro pickod up by tho 3 -. 0 husoos that previously had
pickoi up tho Ins-no.

3. Iho s-;vo busses that had -rovj uslj trass 'ortod tnoso Insano
w:rkor3 to urtoivination contor3 picked - thoro Sastorn workers?

A. Yos.

Toro tho 3-ro people oporatir, thoso busies?


- 1 %


16 Jnn 47-. r-TZ C-l7-2-Loh rhardt
Court JTa. 1


A* Yos, I rersscbor that I recognized tho s~zso personnel.

'I* Dc you whoro thoso Sc.storn workers woro tokon?

A. !*o, I do not. But, aYtor tho trial had started in Hrvtaoar; 1
n-st assure that a colloction point was located at Hadanar.

Tho docuront stato3 that cortain of tho30 3oStom workors wore
to bo takon to Madarar; it says: "for Kurhosson, Kaussau in Land Hosson
llcntnl Institution. "

A. Toll, tho-., it mist to assmod that thoso pationts woro sont
to Hodman*; q lottor onco was found saylr.- it was to to at Hadonar, thoro
was a collostlcn point whore Bithanasia was carried out.

'I* How xaxny of thoso foreign workor3 vroro sent fra-. SiohborC?

A. On tho basis of this ordor, thoro woro a-proxiratoly two or throo
transports. It nay bo that thoro ms throo pooplo at or.o tiios; but I can
ronoc;bor two, at any rato. I don’t ra v.tor tho third oro. Anl then a one
woro pickol up by tho Labor Offico, -it I don’t know whothor tboy woro cont
to tho ism placo. It as said at thj tiro that thoy woro to bo sont back
to Uaatorn Torriritory. Anl I also know, that thoro was s a a corrospondonco
with roforonco to tho apnvol for tho Jourr.oy. It nay l« that thin occurred,
:vu»y ::oro tiros, hut I really can’t ronar.bor it.

n .« How lato in 1944, did this oxtonlnation of children at
Sichborc contir.uo?

A. You noon until what dato?

<i. Yoa.

A. That was tho rlddlo of tho winter, ocrotlro -round Sopt«:bor;
that was tho tiro whon Ihicsian troops wore advancing toward Sorlln.

Do 70 U knew any other placos whore tho oxtorrlnntlon rf children
was bain.* carried out.

A. Yos, I know Itstoin, Kantonbef and Goardon; but I think thoro
*oro 9 cia n>re.

Do you know what position 7IETCT. 3rack hold?

A. Yos; I qssutio that ho was ontrustod with tho loadorship at tho
Boichs-Kacitteo; that ho really represented tho Hoichs-Karittoo; Dr. Honnoko
s;oko of hin a lot, but I dor.’ know hew ho ot in contact with hin.'


-US-


16 Jaz G-17-c-Lehahaai t

Court No. 1

1*3. !SeH£NX?: !Ca7 wo hare the
SHZ P8SXDS3: "o will tako a


ro pilar
roc ess.


(Recoss was taken)


16 Jan L7-A-16-1-5 biaabuck
Court So* 1

3D l JP.Sa.diZ The Tribunal is again in so sion.

- . .ZSZLZlfT: ^c-s any of tho dense counsel dosire to cross exam¬

ine tho -'itnear?

crcss i-jri-: r

'!*f 2R. &^7..nUS: (Counsel for 7_arl mndt)

Q. -itness, ubat rtetivity di rofoccor j-ar.dt exercise in t'.io -uth-
onaaia oregren?

A. activity did he osarcivo? i . elf <k t the t person¬

ally, but in the session when I -vs initi tel into *..e prepnii I vae told
by -Ir. ogoner to tzj question vho :as d.ar„. of tl acsi^ -:cnt, that
this ma Trofesabr Lir. Karl Jruv’t.

•'i. 2ut you elen't knew ’.ir activity*?

A. ’Jo.

и. ; ncn you ncith r I: >r - 1 , : c.cs v-ro subordinated to hia or
t&ottior on;.* aconcios raro su >crdinntod to ; :u?

A. I cannot say t. at. 2 only bear that he played this loaf ing port
in the tasks which ha., to be accc-plished, that he was to accccpl 1 oso
tasks*

'• TWt aeon tn?t ho ms au.v<osc to Itato thcao tasks. Lo you know what

•coition -rack held?

A. I know Crack as -riccor .v* L u. oich Jc.iiiit. o itself v deb was
an orcanisation of tho uheda tas!:. : do not knosr fr«a when until -dirt tL-io.

1. . as rack a physician?

... I > »<t think so. .nj far a; I k m., no, but I U5u<l to i. ink that
!ic \rs a. pref-ssor.

••itroos, I an sulaittla ; to yni a document; that is, >ocu _nt FO-165
— I ‘ b your pardon — KO-156 —

к. ’iciliKTC: If it please the Tribunal, in oner th t I ny not be to.

1 tc idtli an objection, I t id: lofcnso counsel should bo p^ritted

put only .-»nc question to t .Is :dlr.esa vita respect to this document, if he
i= aio-.'c.: tc put any .t all, and liai. is; is he fa. ili.ar Itli the dacuncnt?


-1BU7


16 Jan ltf-^-lS-2-S - liinaluck

Ccurt Ho. 2


I f.dnk I :3i3t object, however, to tie -.-itn-r-s even '.oir:^ shown the dccur-cnt
in face ol the feet that wo ha . a recoiv. 1 no translation of tiic vocurxnt
which is in ^exuan.

Z personally da not know -reeled. to docunc.it says.

?:■- .ir-SHHh?: T.:c dccunotft is air r.dy ar. cxidbit before tils Tribunal]
is thot correct?

I>r.. S.RVAilUS: !Ir. Prcaidout, I not quite cure v ether it v. o sub-
liittcd. It is a document that aas ;lvor. tc e in *Jio —fonso ".Xqnaatton Cen -
ter anZ it is for that reason t;at I have ■ t ote copioa. I cn sure

-ut it i.lll bocciio evidence, and -• an sura .hat if t; - .rcrocutiun does
not subrAt it I shall have tc sub. t at .rysolf since it is f decisive
itfortanoo.

IK. licWOBTi It is true tint a , ‘cissoi.t ;:0-l?6 was abtair.o. by defense
councol ffccn tio Del ansa rail-*n .enter i.t.crc it Ini boon suit by tho
rrosoevtion. ifcmovcr, v. have so-.t - e nr.f r of docu ones to the *-o-
farise Infor-ntion Center several epe thich h.r'c not ’.can .rrosonted

in ovidor.ee, aM I can cry with r;s?-ct to this particular c c' liont tliat it
has not been offered in evidence by the rescoutien and \lll ik», bo offered
in ovidonco.

Ilru , if defense counsel later niches to prosent tlvc dccuncnt on hin
own ‘iclialf, tint, of cnurse., I sei -:.c illl Vo pcrniasablo. ..a a tccimical
natter ho r.crr has rio c-.rtif icat_ a-, t _.rtic-.lin; tho ilocunsnt. oirovar, j
c!cn«t wish to 'c undorst-jod as ‘ Jeetin: to thu accicicnt on tliu sreund that
it is not authenticated, because • ul' r. vi 'c hin wit. sue; authentication,
•ut tlx fact is, if v* can nako this clear, that I den't have a translation
if the dccuncnt, It has a.\vr b -a translated by the .r’socuti n and J havo
n-iio at Irani, and I do not know exacts • :<b i tide doaooot is, and I aa
.at a 3 -.ee to unJorstand hoi: tho -rlbunal incus ihat it io.

T.Z .!.bSm*T: Tho Tribunal h;s ;c iiifomati-n rhaUver c.nccfnin- this


Socunont. Jtost odiibit that itocuDcat to tho Tribunal now
(document handed to '-curt.)


16 Jan u7->.-l'-3-: TOnabach
Court .; e . 1


^ oli. 7 .’,TIUS: 1 j*. President, I Intend torcr.d tho sec nd pa^o.

T:C i-rLSEoRI: The cccui-c::t say '.c auTxiittod to the i/itnuss with the
quosticn as to rt-.c-j._r or not the s con identify the £ coaont. Bsc
question should /> no further t.on th~t, r.nJ ti*» witness will :aa!;o nc
further aiun:or than aether cr no* ho con identify the docunont, that ho knows

what it la.

m .. JLI:V..TIJS: lx. Presi o..t, th uitnoos ;ill n"t Jbhj*. 7 t o decuaont,
and I cannot suhait it tc hi.: for tie t xi p co. The questi-n wo :a*c concer¬
ns* with io the followin'-: The .rcaceution !v*a hero cubuittod abort —
i^liSIXTr: Tho Horahali Till cinduct d -. it sc V. '.ho dtnoss
rem until Mis preliainajy cotter i- cottlo.I.

(' itnsss oxccrtod five c-arts*. n.)

TIC . .CSHCh T: .To will now her. counsel for l/cfon ’ant Crandt as to tho
documnt and vrh-.t counsel _rircj tv .r.-.-c thereby.

Jh. t.- Vi’.TIUS: hr. . re?i.!cat , c ...-t -•oo eubait-tod frai uliich tho
rosponaibility of Karl ranJt .'or e iuti-uiasio pro-7*0:1 son be oven cr
rathor, ohculd be oc ;n. Tho witness ai Mot tho chart vrx e rroct -r. it
w-a autalttcd basically.

Hero thcro is o letter frui which .t can be roon t’nt 11 ic ea. v t bo
corroot. i-cyU nc*. that the witness is absent I can road tiia short latter
.1/ Mints t- Six linos. It 1-ttc.ri “Chief of tiiu Clionccllory
of tho Fuehrer, T'orlin, 5 Septaaber lf/jC, . dr<eaod to the olo . inis try
of Justice, Berlin.


16 JQn^lA-la-A-^T^Ninabuck
Court No, 1


Dour Dr. Gcertreri ”'ith reference to the telephone conversation of a fuw
days ago I nay state the following: On the basis of the authorization of
the Fuehrer, I, comissionod to carry out the neasures and boizu? responsible
therefore, gavethe reccssary directives to ny colla b orators. Doyond that
the docroo of cortain executive directive does not 3een necessary to mo."

And then cones tho signature. I wanted to shew this lottor to tho witness,
and I wantod to ask hin whether ha still renains at his statement; namely,
that this chart which was subreittod to him is correct according to his con¬
viction.

THE PRESIDENT: Dy when is tho lottor si nad? Tv so signature is it?

DR. SERVA7IUS : It must bo Dcuhlor, but I really don't know tho
signature.

HR. HoHANEYi I an sure I don't know who signed the lottor oithor. It
doosn't look liko louhlor, ’ ut for purpose# at this point I an ready to
adrdt arguondo it's Pouhlcr. Tho .>oint is, that the lottor spooks for itsolf.
Thoro is no possibility, I think, substantial possibility that this witness
has ovor soon the lottor, and of course —

JUDGE SET'.IN:-! Can it bo agreed that tho lottor is not si nod by
thi 3 man who is now in the witness box?

HR. He HANEY: Oh yos, indoed. I an sure that would bo conoodod.

DR. SSRVATIOSi I didn't quite understand tho quostion.

JUDGE SE3RIJO: Can it bo agreod that that lottor is ret tho lottor
signed by tho witness who is now in tho box?

DR. SSRVATIUSi Tfw witness did ret si n it. It was Pouhlor who signed
it.

JUDGE SEDHIH3: Do you contend that that lottor was over brought to
tho attention of this witness prior to this tine?

DR. SSRV..TIUS: Ho, no, I cannot 3ay that. I merely an using it to
subnit it to tta witness, to tell hin that it is in contradiction to
what tho Prosecution tes subnitted before, and whether ho still maintains
what he said before with reference to the chart.


- 1350 -


16 *n^8-2a-A--TD-«Lntf3uck
Court Mo, 1


}«R. McHJJEI: That I thirk, if it ploaso the Tribunal, is the very
point that ha is trying to arena with the witness on the basis of this
letter. There is no prior contradiction by tho witness hinaclf, and it corv-
3 titut03 no inpeachBont of the witness, Tho witness has presumably truth¬
fully stated what ho knows. Tho letter speaks for itself an ' 1 can later be

9

adrdtto J, a»i wc will at that tiuo properly certify it so it can bo admitted.

TIE IltESIiENT: The Tribunal is of tho opinion that this lottor can
nawiso contradict th« testimony of tho witness. The witness statod simply
his opinion that tho chart was correct. Doubtloss this lettor any bo admissi¬
ble in evidence in duo tis., but the Tribunal Is of th- opinion that exhibit¬
ing it to ths witness ao! cross oxaninins the witness on this lottor would
add. nothing to tho situation as it now appears from ths record,

Tho Marshal will recall thj -itnoss to tho stanl.


16 v

Court To. 1.


“ ;-"SI'SKY: Counsel noy proceed with the cross-erminntion.

P (3y ~r. Scrvptius) Vito’ fs. You have said that vou were in ~crlin
for the purroac of n conference. Vhat • ou said later - was thr.t in con¬
tradiction with whet has beer, said at that conference at that tiro?

A I do not understand what you scan by contrast.

r . '/hat hind of directives were .tiv n at that tine about tho crocu-
tlon of the Euthanasia pro.yan?

<1 well, tho 6!*=c directives as were finally cnrri.d out - to rove
the invalids fror tho Insane Asylun to th Zutho-si" Institute and I p.cr-
oonally rocoivod subsequently tho ordorc fror. the *:■ ic'na Coarittcc which
hr.d already born discus"' d during that coding.

<£ lid you at that tiae consider thr.t »n or'er for aurdcr?

A In no way at all. !ort p-oplo can explain tho suicide of tho or-
dors to Ufl that this vac - 1 yd r and that it was a lav of Sltlor't
or a law which had been - had legal value - all thought it vac a law that
had bocr. duly approved, also if ’ditler v*o authorised to iesuo ouch a do-
croo was diccussod and was answered in tho afflrnativo, and ve were told
that this w-c a nattor that vn$ quite loral -

^ Vltncoo, a little slower.

A That it was » legal task of tho Stnto which h-d already beer, plan¬
ned and which vre also being ;l».nncd in other countries and that we world
r.ot ircrir.lnntc ourselves in -ny way, and to the cor.tr-ry that a o'bot-ving
of this order would be - crl-ir.-l offense. She question of secrecy Was
-lco discussed in detail and it w-s rt-ro.’. that this -'as - new law; th-t
the people could r.ot hare knowledge of ouch a law beforehand because
othorwisc the report would bo aubaitted, and that was the reason why this
law could not be .ublishcd; that -t that ti=c we were engaged in war «r.d
that ouch - r -euro would h-ve to be kept secret in the interior.

(I ’/ho were the people th-t were to be concerned by the Suthannsi-
progrro?

A Who v 3 th-t? That these were incurable severe invalids. Incur¬
able- side cati ats. However, it v*s not quic dear to re whore tho li"it


-1652-


16 J in-23P-19-2-F.-7
Court To. 1.


w as to bo 'r«vn. "or r.o oorsonnlly. such n . censure could only bo consid¬
ered In the c~se of denth.

C Vns there nt th t ttr.c .-a:- reation mndc of useless enters nr.d no-
nsurcs to be t“hcn froa n occnocic h»rdshipl

A The vords "us less -'■toro'' I h*wo nctudly mver heard. ».t nil

during the war.

^ •

C V'.o it acntloned. nt that tlco that tho institution h".d to bo fcopt
froo for other purr.oscs -ad hnd to be cvcuat.d and thnt wu tho rc»con?

A The renson for this censure wa* only touohod upon briefly. Kc
were told th~t those wero tasks of the State which h"d xc«o severoly
nocossnry ns * result of tho war, -ad there were tasks that voro 2ugcn-
ic, that is right.


1653 -


16 Jaaucry- 1 .-CJG-2>-l-?afcty
Court ;io. 1

Q Hew about the children?

« the tirac (bore ws always telle eJx-ut tho fin -1 modical aid.

Q .ell, if I understood you correctly, the raott-r was seer, froa a uodical
pcifit cf view. That wea the decisive point of view.

4 . Yea. I have only taker, notice cf tho nodical pcint cf view.

£ New was the procedure actually earned thrcujh froa this point cf view?
.as.-i't this prc,T"= actually conducted le-yon-: their liclts in its execution?

A In its execution tho projr^a was exceeded fcr. I personally have
net seen it, Vut cn the basis of tho reports 1 receive:, I oust soy that there
certainly were excesses.

Q i itnvss, U% was it in ytur institution with i-eforonce to excesses?

A In ray institute thin;s -.ere tray icna .n the Usia as had been author¬
ized ty law.

Q Ycu h-d therapy stations?

a Wo had throe therapy stotion*. Of c ersv, it was not a very .lee view
to watch these transports.

Q Wall, you said th. t later oasUm •-riars aero picked up?

„ Yos.

Q Wasn't that in access of tho criminal order which yuu reedvod?

. I cannct soy that. That Just ccsxu tu .ay knrulod.;-;.

Q Dc you know where tho ca!ir cauu frcai tc transport these pocplc away?

A Free the Ministry cf tho Interior. It was Ivoi to us •} a effico
-f the lilnietry of the Interior.

Cl You soon the Koicnatinist^r cf tho Interior.

L Yes.

Q Ycu further Mentioned that ir. 1961, the ..cti n was concluded,

*-h t It stepped. Do you krv-e the r^_sm f^r that?

.. Yus. I d.. net knew t..o ufficirl ov -o n, Lut 1 have Heard cf it un¬
officially. I have heard that Veil Gale:, hrd raised a pr-test, and that fcr
tnis reuse n tn. whole procedure was loir, at-.ypwd. I wont U. s. tu th't I
cannct say that with certainty, .ut fcr n_ it w s >nywg • ru.3cn.


-135A-


16 January-..--JG-2C-2-1 utty
Court Sc. 1

Q Well, was tr.is procedure actually stepped at the end?

tic. I ima«diately assumed when Kciaar wes beinr closed that sene
other institute v -Id continue with t is task or that the. procedure »..uld he
followed up ir. scae other way. Th t is -lsc what j!r. Vcn He -n-r said when¬
ever no wr.s present.

Q You said that those eastern Ktkori were transported Vy the sane
buses as was th.- ease ’-of;re?

A Yus. These were the scue. buses. They wore Wig black ’ uses, and the
drivers non knom bocauso they used te ccao frequently.

Q Wore they buses cf the Cauleitor's -ificc -r ;.'r. id these buses be¬
long to?

These buses wuro owned ‘j the tr nspert c ^ipany, of the patients'
transport company in Berlin. ..ft-: -.1, th- p-rs-nnul hod raudnod in jv.rt

in Hcdcanr.


-1853-


16 Jaa-BT’H-30-“A-?ttttgr
Court Vo . 1.

1 Wasn't their loc-’l ■-crsonnol there?

A tfo. there wasn't nodical personnel.

Q. You later said eocothing about the t/o ssos with rcfcrcnco to
the prograa. Would you have to differentiate there how it was ur.til the
Action was BtopF°d in 1941, or how it was lp.tor on? Wh?t excesses do
you know of until the Action was atoppod ir. 1941?

A You scan individually?

Q Yes, In your institution.

q There were none at all in our institute. People were being eiov. d
ond transported away.

q In that ease you acted according to dir stives?

A Yes, air. I personally wao not in charge of this Action, hut I
wot only tho director thero, hut as far .as I know by the nursing pernon-
nol nothing indecent ever h“??rncd. Of course, ooco of the patients re¬
fused to enter tho hue s. Of course.

q And weren't these eases extr-v.c cates that were oont for thlo
Suthanr.el" krorrao?

A Yes. Of eoureo, it dopendo whore the li-it in drawn. Ono can
salntain the concept th-t a largo pArt of tho r.ticnts, perhaps, might
have boon inproved throu-;h sodern shock tront«cnt or somo other nodorn
nothods of treatevnt that .a certain change in tho standard of tho disease
could hnvo boon brought about; but in considerably progressed eases of
insanity, in ny opinion, cost of tho atients could not be exchanged to
hove any joy of life.

q 2id -ou nt th-«t tiao hearwout any Action 14 ? 1??

A I have nr.vor heard anythin,- about this Action. I do not know
tho —

q Tidn't you ever hear Anything about it?

A How during ny interrogation I have been asked about tho nunbir,
but I do not know anythin.; about it.

q You w. ro spe-king about special authoimtio-.s which wore given


ir. spccl-L eases?


16 Jan-Z2E-aO-4*-Put ?y

Court Vo. 1.

A Tee.

C. Where did thoao epccial authorisations originato froa *d vho
alxnod th*.r?

A Just like all the othora, b7 J.'r. Yon Hegener.

Q Vith reference to the procedure in Wiesbaden, tho proccodinga
in Viosbadca vhcro you vero sentenced, vna the activity of '..arl “randt
neatlonod?

A lo, only a lct-tcr froo Hitler to 3randt nnd jouhl*r was ircoen-

tcd.

^ la that the lO-callcd Suthrantia decree?

A That la tho decree of tho first of Soptenber, 19M.

Q Z'o "ou know Irofoaaor JJvrl 3r-ndt?

A I have never accn hie.

Q Haven't vnu ."/or seen hie ante underneath written lcttcro?

A Ho.

Q :r. rrocaobcaim, Counsel for the defendant,

Viktor ■'rrck.

<1 Vitncoo, this corning ;.ou were apeaKne on tvo occraione thr.t
Bogencr in the year of 1 ?« had told you that frofroaor ?rnndt did not
have tho ccdlC’L leadership but it vj»o “rack vho held th"t, is thnt


correct?


l6 Joa-^-GSS ZG-b-Putty.
Court Ho. 1.


Ice. Hejenor told no on the occasion of hi* visit at Zichborg in
■44 oftor the plot on Hitler tl ut Braait *ns aot the director of the action
onyaore. and aot the person in char 6 c, os he oxprosfcd hk-solf, hut that
Brr.ok w s he ail in,: everything by hicsulf.

q. Did ho toll you fro. what poriod of tir.c Brock rccoivod too solo
luidur snip?

. k . Ho.

How if I was to tall you th -1 Brack ever sinco hpril. 13^ • «. at
tno front with the ’Jit. on SS and in th t way vr.snot at nil in tho position to
load t.ils luthenasi* Pro, n.a. wouldn't you then think ta:.t you were tho vietd
of a deception with reference to thv n^a of Brack?

... I do ryot bolieve so because ho auat hr.»e ha* soao practical work
ir. the Chancellory beer use the moo of Bn.ck we* discussod t various
occasions even in oouo otu.r connection,
q. In connection with wm.t?

.'.Iso In 1943 .

19U3»

.1. Y» s, ' Iso.

Did you havo opportunity to observo the activity of 3rr.ck within
tho franowork of tho Zutharcsia Jrv«a personally?

.k. I personally did not, but uy chief did.

Then you cannot say personally whether Brrek really hado any ?ox-
sjnal decisions or whethor it 3ouhlcr who did that? Did you understand
_iy question?

... I cannot tell ; ou taut.

you cannot toll ao. lou aorhionod this horning- tho ntuoo of
Hoffolannn arxi tacn Horner, and you nentioned these axes in connection
with toe ?.ticn Co—ittoo. It th t correct?

Tes.

3 . Do you know enythioc about the fact that after Hof foliar, war sent
to too front Hr. oner bccnae tuo so-called righthand of Linden?


- 1853 -


16 Jiu>-.r-S*S~20-Zb-rUtty
Court Ho. 1.


... In. I know that Lisbon in l £+2 visited Uchb.-rfi, that he visited
. •

3r. honnockc. tart on this occasion Br« Linden was also ir.trolucod t > _o as
tho ._rton in chcrgo of tho Euthanasia Progren. 7o what extent ho took over
tootti assi r ;nr.ents, I do not know.

<• You said this coning that 3rtck wr.t tho leader of tho Hoi oh
Co—it too. Whoredid you ,j.in ta«.t knowledge?
jroa a kr. 7or. 5:g»nor.

.r. Yon Sooner, hell, you don't know anythin, about that
personally?

... h’o, Z have never and or^ p-rsonol contact with 3reck.

S3. raJESC-v-JS: In that case I hr.vc no further ^ostlons.


-13J9-


16 J<u>-„-GZS- 21- h- Gel r
Court So. 1.


DH. S-UiZl: Dr. Sautor couneel for tiio defendant 3locc.

DR. S.UT2R:

l. Witness, with roforonco to tho chart which ie behind you. I want
to ?ut to you one question. "hie aoming you confir_td tho accuracy of tho
chart with a few oxcoptioss. Will you plans- take one nore look ut the ch-u-t
next to tho zu-ao of Dr. Coati you see a yellow square, and then a brown
squaro with tho aauo of 3loco, connected vlth the nn- tc of Dr. Conti with a
,;roon lino. Do you kaow what that no ns. witaosst


4 . tt-l. I ol. r.:w asking you, era you fro- y 5U r own :cnovlodo say that
Frofossor 31oao was connected wlt.i tho outar-aasic progrru.?

... I do not know that f.os uy own knowledge. I only know that Pro¬
fessor Blone was Deputy to Conti.

Vhwrw eld you ,;ot that knowlod,:e front

... I was la a position to know that.

T. I* ,;on.rol stt\teu.nt of yours is not sufficient. I want couch
mine pr.rtlcular aoout it. B>w did you know thnt profo-sor 31ooo was active
In tho Euthanasia progrmt

... I don't know thrt.

V Tou don't know that.

JtS. S-CT3R: In that ocso I hr.ro no further quootions.

"HE FH 2 SIDBHT: .jvy furtu.-r questions of tais witness by any of tho
other difonso counsal? ^ny re-direct examination by tho Prosocutior.T

BD-DI3SC? SL-hlS-TIOS
by

hR. >.CH.»;EY:

q. Witness, I hasre cccut four short questions to ;.ut to you. Did
you evur 1 ;ot an order to oxcludo noa-Gwrmn Datiorals frau tho Bithnnrsir
pro f rn~?


-I 860 -


16

Court Ho. 1

A I did not rccfdvo such an order, no* I have not received ary or loro
of this kind. I received none at all*

q TTaa the euthanasia restricted to persons about to dio, that is,
persons whon you nicht describe as being on their deathbed?

A Woll, that was what wo understood by it. If those porsons were
insane, or if they had a sevore aalforaation of insanity or idiocy, anJ
then if thero was additional physical illness.

q Vitnoss, the quostion I put to you is whether onjy such porsons
wero in fact extern!nstod?

A Yes, I assume so.

Q Vitnoss, in your own station at Eichbor;;, is it not truo that you
just statod on cross oxard nation that porsons reals tod Getting into tho bus?

A Yos.

q That persona was not about to dio, was ho or sho?

A Ho. It was like this. I haro already statod that thoro can not bo
an exact lisdt naned with thoso insano people, with insane porsons who
havo bocono cccploto idiots, and they can not be rectified with ary nodical
aid, thoso woro also included in the euthanasia proems.

q Witness, was not tho sroe people in charge of tho outhanasia
program after August 19U1 as woro in chargo of tho outhanasia progras prior
to that date?

A You swan in a leading position?

Q ft,, I scan, witness, did not you rocoivo your orders fron tho sono
organisations after August 19U1 that you di-’ before?

A Yes, received th^n fron tho sano organisations. They woro always
signed ftiir von Hogtaor, by sono of their gontleoon.

KU MoHAKEIi That is all.

DR. SEPJZATIOSt Dr. Sorvatius for Karl Brandt.


1361


16 January-..-*DJG-21-3-G -1: her
Court He. 1


Dh. S2\V/.TIUS;

Q Witness, ytu ycurself aera cnly concerned with children, is th-.t ocrrcct

A (Ho tnsaor)

q Can you describe, witness, whet eases you aero ocncerr.ed *ith which
Iced u tho euthanasia later cn?

There acre all kinds of train rrdf.ro-ti. ns, which else caused e port
of idiocy. T-.uy -era lastly a cultiplu disease which caused euthenr.sin.

Instability v.-cther with hcrulitaiy disxso, or they acre uiltiplo
diseases grossed cs schizophrenia, c severe ina nity vhich is schizaphrenia,

Q I take it there wore no papers t. t'.da effect?

He, those papors aero catrcyed by order of tha r.oich .j-chivos.

n .mother question in ro.crenco to Xeruirn-rs. -id I understand you
correctly to scy that r.. fare! nors were in the institute?

A Xta, «u did have forci nors, hut only a very !, wl they ;.oru part¬
ially nsvtd in ti-r.nl tr:nsports. There wore pr-hc'.ly ten individual trans¬
ports which aoro tee upaniod bj nursin;- personnel, ar.J lat.r en thoj* aoro
moved with those cclltaeivu trrnsycrts, as 1 hnvo stetod ’'wforo.

Q «ero these civilian workers?

A Yes, ae did not hove my ethers. They *cro cnly civilin:. « rkera.

Q hes that after t!o cction nas stepped in 1911?

„ Yes, that vps oven after tho discontinuance.

Q Hca ana it hufero in reference tc foreigners, y.u fcnc« of my such
c: sc s?

A I a-s net there previously.

Q Then y-u don't knew it?

i. He«

Dh. S3\V«T1US: 1 htvo no further quostiens.


lfi Ja»-47-i^:Ai-21-lo-veHagher (XJ)

Court 1

■pa, rr ^sr-T ^; Dr. Toerschacnn for the defendant Brack*

1*. President, the ro-enflinatioa by the Prosecutor has caused no
to put a f ev core questions to tho witness.

sn, soaseacaa:

Cl. Uitnoss, you wore spoaking of tho fact that in the *utunn
of 1941 , that is, after tho stopping of tho action, you voro etill
rocoiviag directives fron Sorlin?

i. Yos.

Q. Did Cheoo diroctivos refor to tho Hoick Couuittoo. or to
tho so-c.-llod eutoar.asia progr;» of insano porrous?

A. Shoy reforred to tho Hoich CoJiittoc.

Cl. Tho Reich Coccittoo, oil right.

33. 502RSC»i*HI: I havo no furthor quootior.s.

E3 PISSIDE7T: Is thoro any furthor questions to bo naked tho
witness? Eioro boing no furthor questions of tho witness, tho
uitnoss will bo oxcuood.

Tho uitnoss cxcuaod.

2?_ O^XIXj Dr. Dnvllk, counsol for tho dofondont Hovon.

Kr. Proaidont, I vent to say the following. Ox tho 10 th of Dc*-
enbor I asked for an extinction of tho witness coning frou Holltnd.

Tho Conoral Secretory told no by wry of writing yesterday that tho
calling of this witness was denied, in view of tho fact that rmny
difficulties prcvrdl in getting the witness boro, and 1 * dealing
with tho foreign Jurisdiction. High Tribunal, I ask you to re¬
consider that decision, and thereby consider the following points
of viou. The cr.se of tho defendant Hovon has a special significance
Tho drfontot Hovon is tho only defendant who for sonotino was a
c^p physician in a concentration ctp. Throng proceedings a-
gainat tho defendant Eovo, it will bo on iraortant factor Just hov
the defendant Eeven behaved towards the noa-Ooman innAcs. Social¬
ly, whether in the case of ncn-Ccruan ir^ates he cou-ittod any crimes.

proper


1863


16 Jra-'7-i-:i A *-21-2a-<rtill^er (W)

Court 1


idtnooscs for the purpose aro foruor non-Ocmon locates of tho
Concentration Cecp Suchcnvold, and it is for* that ream that I
ash that oauo cf theso porsons bo called to tho witness stand.

I hovo no*.’ received a decision on ono such request. If tho

4

person cannot bo called, it will not bo possible for no to
produce c largo acount of natcrid la favor of tho defendant.

Purthomore, I bog you to ccnsidor that during tho proceed¬
ings of tho 1KT non-Goxnan persons voro put cn tho wltnoss stead
and ucro cabined horo. For instanco, tho Svodish citizen Dchlorus
free Sweden, oai tho Dutch citiscn Goldschaidt in the caso against
Scyoc-Inquart, and in such caso also inquiry was nedo.

Furthomcro, gor.tla.cn of the Tribunal, I ask to take con¬
sideration of tho fact that tho Prcsocutlon has already callod
non-Gomcn porsons for tho Prosecution. Ihoro uoro French citisono,
end Polish citisono ox^inod hero, and it is for that roasn
that I think it is important that also on boholf of tho defonso
non-Comon porsons cai bo hoard horo or. behalf cf tho dofonoc.

TTS PRZSIDSBT: Bxo Tribunal is willing to giro tho dofenso
roaoonaolo opportunity for tho calling df witnoccoc 'd'.o arc rr-
vdlftblo for tho dofecoo In this action. I bclicvo vo raiaibor
tho explication contlonod by couneol. It is tho opinion of tho
Tribunal that tho testimony of tho witness would bo fully no
offcctivo if token by we? of written deposition. I hove a noto
to that offoct that wns-^ided to tho ^plication for tho prcscnco
of tho idt.-.cso, togothor with tho fact that tho opplication for
Ills >hy deal; pros coco was denied.

Tho Tribunal will bo vory willing to help in ovoxy way to tho
rospedtivo taking of tosticony of this witnoss, end tho othor
five ’dtnos^oa, if it rpponred to bo


-1864-


16 January—A—D-C—21-lc-G-lli-j'.'-T
Court He. 1


irtcritl 1 of ore thy Ccaaissicncrs, er it bed appeared to -O inpcrt.it .*• tl.o
Tribunal t: which it appeared th°t the Tribunal -tt-.ched ny t.ri 1 esc;

t le-3t in cne like this where rt witness wccld aicply testify th t the
defendant Haven «ce net unkind tc fcrci-n persons wbe. woro ccnfinod in the c?jsp
in wid.eh he w-s the phyaicir., ?nd th-t the testiixny could bo t Jeon with full
effect Li writing. Of course, the Tri' unci is r.w:re tfv.t tho Intemr.ticntl
Tribunal h*d n.;o power rri uthc.lty t.r.i thi3 Tribunal, wi le'., is sLuply c
n tlonal court. If c cun eel »dll prepare iiiterror.-.tories tr \o propounded tc
this vritness, the Tribonrl ‘ill use every rcMcn-hle effort tc have end to
sco thr.t thoy #ue p rope uni od t t. o witness by aoat .-uthcritr.tive officer
prep.-red under oeth tc t. Jee the questions and answers cf the •. itnesa Li such
interre ;r.tcry. If such n int-ire.-tcry is prep-.od, or intorro rtorlys, they
first aheuld he. auVm tt^d tc the Prosecution sc they ary prepf.ro cress in-
tcrrirr.tories, if dosired. I think the Tribunal is sr.vin tL-.c \.y such,
method, end it will endeavor t;> further fr.cilifto such procoduiHJ.


16 Jan L7-A-22-1-5.#- Srrpaon
Court Ho. 1


IfcH'.HgT: I could like for toe record to show that toe certificate
on i^ciEont :.'o; 1556-PS, which was intra-hiccd -s .rcsocution's exhibit
327 has new been signed ty -a*. KobergeU, Chief of the "occaont ranch.

I would like nt this tine to have ti.c xritnoss , -.r. rrits fannockc, take
tho stand.

Eti 7.^SCHgg» .‘ill the Vhrahcl su --ness Ilonnocko. Tho Jit-

ncos tiUI holt’ up .iia ri£ht hair’ an. ’.o intern as ft xritno33, taking the octh
an'_ vepoatin after ac:

I swear by Ged, the A1 ighty and . oniscicnt, t at I will spoak too
pure truth tux:' will withheld an ', a ll nttiin^.

(Tho witness repeated the ath.)

T r. .hdSEkJtf: You ;*y be seated.

di.ec?


0. Yirr nau*e is *-itx kcr.r.oclic?

Frits kunnockc.

Q. Your lest nwa is spollc; e* a-c-.-o?

A. Yes.

t

Q. rou are cf Ooman oitlsensbip?

A. I an a Gtrxn.

1. You nero born 16 October, 1901; in -anaov.r?

... I xms bem en too 10th cf C c tobor, 170b; not the Ifith; it v.*a a too

ic to.

1. Hot.', witness, you ~-rc educe tod in ..c<l*cinc.

A. Ycc.

'Jhc.rc did y u stuly?

A. I studied in JeetuL-ven, karbur.., an' i*rC!j3^urt-on-tho^-ftin.

.. *Jhon did you pass yrer nodical c r . d n a ticn?

A. In the year 1931:.

.Pitre have ycu practice acdiciao?

A. I :r.o .iwiical fracticnnar at too surgical clinic, an. Cer-.ifr..-ro

1566


16 Jn»-47-.i-22-2-S*-Sacpson («J)

Court 1


I was la tho district hospital and uunlcipd hospitd at Heine,
n *cr Hcanovor, and also in tho instituto in 7rcnkfurt-on-th«-Hein.

Did thorc coco a tino vfccn you wont to tho institute et
achborg as a doctor!

^ I cajo to Zichborg on tho first of Jmunry, 1936.

Q. and was achborg a otato ir.sano asylun?

d. Yes. It was a cental institution of tho Provinco of Hosso-
Kasccu.

0„ Did you ultimately bcccoc tho director of tho auylun at
achborg?

Yos.

CU Did you ontor tho oroy in 1939?

d. I olroady participated in nanouvors in tho any boforo that.
Uhon tho wnr broko out I was draftod to tho Uostorn Iront us a
nodiorl of fie or.

Q. Hot' long did you stay in tho onqr witnosn?

d. During tho war free tho 26th of /fiiguot, 1939 until I was
callod indimonsablo on tho 29th or 30th of January 1940.

Q. ttiy woro you dcclarod indispansablo?

Tho roason for uy boing classified indispansablo I did not
rocllzo at first; I only found out about it aftomards; it was ay
participation in tho progr:c.

\~7.~ZSS: May I be poxnittod hore, boforo I xi being interro¬
gated any furthor, to point out a certain fact?

IS. IS KsSaZTl Yes, witness.

LTT.3SS: as a soToroly sick pationt, I novo boon brought fresi
Pr-akfart-oiMiain to ilurcborg. I aa very exhausted, weak physically
Also in a ncatcl ronoct cortain disturbances havo eppoard vita uo,
and so far, sinco occasioaallr I cannot concontrcto ry thoughts, I
as well havo certain lrpses in aaiory. I, therefore, request the
high Tribunal


-1667-


IS Jro>-'«7-Jr-22-&-S»-SiXip*on (Kj)
Court 1


to hindly tcho this consideration during ny Intorrogction. I shell
try to orcrcono these disturbances.

iiS, h&lLdlT: Vltaoss, wo only ash that you toll us *mt you
laiou cad \h&t you reucubor, and you c^r. stato Aon you don't ra;a>-
bcr oscctly.


-1067 a -


16 Jon U7-4-22-3-S2- Soupaon
Court Ho, 1


A, xos.

IKS iTfiSHOT: The witness will not bo under pressure, and he 'dll not
be hurried^ ho no? take Hut tire is reasonable in ardor tc answer questions.
Zi IB. IidlilCY:

0. Hew 'fitness, I askod you why you -ro discharged freu tho any in
January, 19*iQ.

A. Tide disci large terk placol upon iy bcin: classed indispansablo, which
I could not explain, Thon, rrt.on I returned hcuo, I received, a telephone
call to participate in a conference in Berlin. Thic ccnfcronco t rlc place
early in February in Icrlin. 'Usidcs no there were a rprcxiuatcly ten to
twolvo othor physicians rtio had boon invited there and xt.o coro unlcno-.m to
no. ..'o wore told by Dr. Hefolaann, Dohna ai*. '.a-, rack that two iteUcnal
Sccir.list Stnto leadership tad iioucd lew: and ocreos acc-rding to which
tafit lives • ero tc bo oxtcr.d:u,tod. ., w ~« hud been MM-ilod «’oro, wore
os-cod if vo would cot 33 r.o-Lical consultants, .’o were urgcntl-/ roaindod of tho
fact that wo x.cro net t * discus: mytldnc; c!>out it, about tho subject, be¬
cause this natter rras tc? secret. In -his canfuroiico Hrack road a letter rtiooo
contents I cannot we 11 in dcu.il ary re. hciicvor, as far as I can >o-
nasbor, it Jealth with tfcu fact tat all physicians rho wore cooporr.tinc
in thi ild not bo cemittinG car ertainol offenso. tton tho

activities wero discussed.


!Co8


16 Jan^2-l2-»-»ID-S-ivSon
Court Ho. 1

Also what was expoctod of usj it was ttat of -ivinc radical experiments on
iroatcs of nental institutions — insane persons.- The- remainder of the
physicians -ah: were assembled th-rre besides no were all elderly gentlemen,
f.-prr. tber rare sene big personalities, as I was to discover later. Since
these jentlecon also gave their consent unconditionally, I also favored thi3
position, awl I voluntooroi as an consultant.

Q Did you take any oath binding yourself to socrecy nt this noetinr?

A As far as I know, no oath was dcoanded fron us.

Q You never slewed an oath at ary later tine?

A Ho.

Q Tfhoro was this nootin,’ held?

A This nwotine was hold first of all in a rocc of tho Kolu-i.ua Haus,
but tton it was aovod into a rcon of the Roich Clvmncory whero further dis¬
cussions took place, which I have alroady diacussed.

q TTas that tho channeory cf tho fuehrer unlor Dcuhlcr?

A I discovered later on it was port of tho Roich Channoory, which
was known to bo as tho Channcory of tho Fuohror, awl it was undor tho
direction of Douhlor,

q Has Prof. Hiotscho at this Booting in Fobruaxy, 19bO?

A Yos.

Q Was Prof. Stolraaior thcro?

A Steimaior is not a professor; howovor, ho was present.

Q And I tid ri: you motioned Hofclnan, Bohne, ani Brock.

A Yes.

Q Do ycu recall ary of the other pooplo thoro?

A I cannot rccocfcer the individual participants in this first con¬
ference.

q Hew larve a gathering was it?

A As I have said, there were ton or twelve, ton to twolvo persons.

Q Do ycu rrrxcbor who was chaimsn of the roeotinc?

A During ..art of to* ccnferenca in th.- Reich Chancer;/, ‘rack was


the chaircar-


16 Jan^22-23^v-nTI>-S=pson

Court }k>m 1


Q ffow rar^r tiaos have you soon -rack?

A I have soon hin on several occasions after this first conference
whenever I was in Zerlinj I carnet tell yai how auQr tines I have soon hiu
altogether.

q Will you lock at the persons in the defendants' deck and tell no
whothor you aoo “rack?

A Yes.

Q Where is he sitting?

A Ho is sitting in tho second row, an’, ha is the third nan fron tho

left.

MR, HcHiHETi I ask that tho rocord show that the witness proporly
idontifiod tho defendant Crock.

IBS i?£SIDSH7: Tho record trill show that tho witnoss has idontifiod
tho deforvlant Crack.

TE ICESIDSHT: Tho Court will rocoss until 0930 o'clock tomorrow

nomine.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until 17 January 1917, at 0930 hours.)


1370


Roll 3


Targot 3


Volume 6


Jan. 17-29, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et ol
VOLUME 6


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


17-29 January 1947 pp. 1871-2206


/f7

17 Jan-JHS38-i-l-Foster-LJG
Court I


Corrected Copy

Official transcript of toe American Military
Tribunal in tho matter of toe United States
of Arcrica, against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at numberg, Germany, on
17 January 19^7, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.


THE MARSHALi The Honorable, toe Judges of Military Tribunal I.
Military Tribunal I is now in session.

God save toe United States of America and this Honorable


Tribunal.

There will be order in toe courtroonu

THE PRESIDENTi hr. Marshal, you ascertain if the defendants are
all present in toe courtroom.

THE MARSHALi Kay it please Tour Honor, all the defendants are
present in toe court.

THE {RESIDENT: The Sec rotary-Go no ral will note for tho record toe
prosence of all toe defendants in the courtroom.

The prosocution will procood with toe witness on the stand.

FRITZ KEKUEKE (Rosuaed)

DIRECT EXAKIfiATIOJJ (Continued)

MR. McHAMEY: I will ask that too record show that too witness is
■till under oath.

THE {RESIDENTi Tho witness is reminded ho is still under oath.

BY MR. HCHAHEYi

Q. Dr. Mennecke, you had told us yesterday about tho rooting in
Berlin in February 19U0, concerning the Suthanasia Program. You had
told us toe names of some of the persons present at this mooting and
you had also told us where the meeting was held.


A. Yes.

Q. Iou had also stated that the Defendant Brack was chairman of


to your duties in connection with toe Euthanasia Prograp?


1871


17 Jar^WZS-l-2-Postcr (DOG)
Court I


A. The duties and obligations consisted of working according to
the plan which had been worked out: that is, we who wore called upon
os experts wore to cxnrlno the questionnaire which had been flllod out
in the rental institutions after they had been photostated. *.io woro
to express nodical opinion on thou and woro to rotum then with out
opinion to the Berlin agency.

Q Woro you also instructed to pro para questionnaires for patients
in the asylun at Etchborg?

A Every Gcraan rental institution rocoivcd frou tho Rcichsrdnistry
of the Interior foms and instructions to fill out ouch f orns about each
innate of tho institution and to send theso fores to tho Rcichsninistry
of tho Intorior. Porno wore filled out about tho innatos of tho Eichborg
Institution*

Q Do you know what office in tho ‘dnistry of tho Interior you
received tho questionnaires fron and to which you returned tl» quostion-
nairo?

A I do not know that. Theso questionnaires did not cono directly
fron tho -inistry of the Interior to tho Eichborg In3tituto but through
tho provincial adninistration in liosbadon and thoy woro sent back
again via wiosbadon to Berlin.

Q was Bematat the head of tho county adninistration in Viosbodon?

A Be mo tat is thi nano. He was not tho head but tho nan in
charge of tho institutions in the provincial adninistration.

Q Is tho nano. Dr. Unden, Jadliar to you?

A Yes.

Q 'iftiat was Dr. Linden '3 connection with the Euthanasia Prograu,
if any?

A I saw Dr. Unden a few tines at notings and conferences. Every
tino Dr. Linden nado, so to spook, a dead inpressiem on no. He did not
tako any active part. He was not in tho natter. He did not caro about
what was going on. That is how it sccnod*.

Q Is the none, Allors, fan!liar to you?

A Yos.

1072


17 Jta-.-r-S2S-l-3-?o»tor
Court jo. 1.


i 2 ait vas his connection vita toe : 2 uthnnf-sia Pro^rnc?

_ tfcon tne Suthnnasin Pro*ras had boon divided Into various foru

dosi^&ti^n* suca ae Hole a Labor Co—unity for Kontal Institutions, tha
noud of thie organization vas _llers for business unttors.

* Uas a nan nacod 3ohno ono of hit dojutiot.

... I know the nanc 3 ohne frnn tno very first days, fron the vory
first dey in the Coluabus Houso. ..ftcr that I nover siv t.iis :;r. 3ohno n/?iin
and I never hoard anythin* about hie.

3 . You centlonod the nano Roichsnrbolts^ouoinschnft?

M4 Y«-8.

q. Will you toll tho Tribunal »&nt this Holch asoociction did?

... The Belch sarboits^caoinscnaft prlairily dealt with tho supervision
of tho quostlonnalro procedure, that is, this Reichscrbolts*onoinsclmft
saw to it that tuo questionnaires v.ro fillod out and then voro photostntod
and on opinio- erprossod on tho— In ~y opinion thrt vns tho ualn test
of tho Reichsarboitsefo-oinachnft for uontnl institutions.


- tm-


Court Z _

17 47-K-JJC-2-l-5«ard


Q, Ib the oasa Cheriteble Foundation for Institutional Cara, and
the Patient Transport Corpa faalllar to you?

X. The second, the Transport Corpe, I know. but the one which
you aentloned firat, I do not recognise the expression.

Q, Are you fesiliar with the Stiftung?

A. Tea.

Q. And what did theae two organisations have to do with the
Zuthanasia prograa?

A. The Stiftung, in ny opinion, was in charge of the financial oide
of the whole progrea. The Transport Corpe was used when patients had to
be novel froe one institution to another in order to bring then closer
to the Euthanasia institution, and finally to the Euthanasia institution.

Q. Vere these three concerns, that is, tho Beichsarbeitegeaoin-
schaft, the Stiftung, and the Kranken-Transoort-Oesellschaft, caaouflagod
oases for the operation of the Euthanasia progran?

A. The whole thing vae doubtless under the supervision of one
nanagesent. I cannot isaglne that these three offices worked indouon-
dor.tly; they belonged together. They were given those nsees in order to
conceal their activities by the nases, but they wore all ono firm.

Q, You nean the sene poople were active under all three nasoo?

A. That is not what I aeant to say. The actual workers in tho
three organisations no doubt worked only in one of tho fires, *it tho
leaders of the whole thing - there is no doubt but that they were in
one central office.

Q. How, doctor, what do you know about the loaders of this
euthanasia prograa?

A. About the leading persons? The first one ie Hr. Brack, and he

was a leading personality in the progrea. He was the first one that I

got to know, and I also considered bin the leader until the tins when I

learned that over hia was Heichsleiter Bouhler in the saae field. T hen

later, about the beginning of 1941, I learned that Professor Brandt vao

also active in this progrea. Op to that tine Professor Brandt ves known

to ae only by naae. I did not know bin personally, but only as the so-

1874


Court I

17 Jaa 47-1WJC-8 -1-Beard


called personal physician of the Fuehrer.

Q. Ire the nanes Eeyde and Blessche faalllar to you?


1874-a


17 Jiac 47-iI-FJC-2—2-9eerd
gcurt I!.. 1


A Yos.

o '.'uro they the ao-callod top ax ports in this pro~ra:l?

A 7hoy woro call el Oborcutachter — top oxperta In the procron.

o Aro tho mod a Blenkanburs, von Eo^onor, Vorborc end Hefolnann,
faciliar to you?

A Blankoabur c, Hefolnann, and von Ho~onor, I know thoso. Thorr wr.a
another arao that you contionod.

Reinhold Vorbor~, V-o-r-b-o-r-c.

A I can rorsbor v-^uoly o .-ontlorian who nidit have had tho nano, but I
an not suro whothor tho porson whor. I nr. thinking of wan really called Vorborc.

* '.tow, Doctor, rro you farlliar with tho Rolch Cardttoo for Rosoarch
on horoditary nnd contagious disoasos?

A I know tho Rolch Ccxnlttoo for horoditary disownos.

'I ,f hat dooa that organization do?

A Tfccro waa a rtocroo fra. tho 111 ni a try of Intorlor in which .ddwivoa,
hospitals, riatoralty hospit-ls, and ddetors, woro otlicctod In caao of birth
of crippled or fooblc ulnddd children, woro oblicatod to roport to tho Rolch
Ministry of Intorlor; that la, throu,-.h channels, to tho district phyalcian
and ho had tc roport furthor, and it wont to tho Rolch Hialatry of Intorlor
finally, and thon this roport roachod tho Rolch CoJeittoo. Tho actual task
of tho Rolch Cavilttoo waa to aoo that thoso chlldron woro civon n ..orcy
doath, and thoy woro put In special ohlldron dopartzonts In tho raontrl
inatitutIona.

" Ifew, Doctor, I ar. r.oia.~ to havo handod to ycu Docuijont Mo. 253, which
haa boon prosontod to this Tribunal as Proaocution'a Rxhlbit 331. (Iho
docirant Is hr.ndod to tho wltnoaa.) Thl^ 2 *M’;lt purports to bo a chr.rt of
tho organization of tho Suthanr.sin iv-'/-*--.. and I ask you to look at it for
a fox ~crv»nt3. Dootor, do you understand what v«. t ciu . Tt s hcw3?

A Yob.

q Rill you oxplain it to tho Tribunal in ordor that thoro C"n bo no
1 -.ioui J «e».'3tat:llr.'- abcut what tho chart shows?


Court I

17 Jac 47-H-7JC-2-3-3*»r4

A. This chart ahovt is a clear fore the personnel, or*nnitation,
and th. tachalc.1 orpal.atloa or dapptaaat. of tha pro*r«. Bouhlar,
Drack. Blaakanbur,, voa Eapaar. Vorbar, - I ad ao, aura of that nan..
Eafaloaa, I caa conflra ,h... dad... Braadt. I can coaflra that one fro.
tha viator of 1941 until I laft tha aarvloa la 1912. Than thara la
Profa.aor Kayla .ad Prof.a.or Slataoha. th. top .apart., that 1. oorraot.
la th. baglaala, of tha propaa thara vara la edition to tha.o tvo ...
othar ualf.r.lty prof.a.or. at coaf.raac.a la Barlla. I a.miaad that
thay vara al.o to vork a. top axp«t.. 1 r««=bar Profa.aor Dl'lal.
froa Barlla aod Prof.a.or Bl.a la Jaaa. *ad. oaa. I ... a prof.a.or,

*o.a peso I do aot r««t.r, froa Boaa. Th.a thara ar. thra. aaotloaa:
H.lch Aa.oclatlon, th. Touadatloa. .ad th. Sick Traa.port Coaoaa,; v
hav. alraady Ulkad about that, ard It 1 . oorraot. T h.a Ulan, la
char,, of th. offlca; vahav. talk.! about that. Th. roll Doctor Coatl,
Doctor Llcd.a, acd Doctor Bloaa la tha propaa - I doa't knov about that.
Th. .apart, ll.tad b.lov. that 1 . corract oa th. *ol. aa far a. I uadar-
•taad It: th. ll.t corrcpood. to th. fact., a. far a. I kao. th. propan.

9, Th. ouallflc.tloa th.a you har. cda. coa.ld.rlc, your kao.ladp
of propaa. , 1 ... a corract plctur. of th. Mthuul. propaa. vould you

•ey.

A. Yob.


- 'i lb-


1 ?

Court I

^ ~ —U. *“ 3arUn ln F “

or , I —ont to ult , 0 . lection, -or. -• «» —

a— —“* ^ “ 6 " 1 *' , , „

*. This question -» not «.cu.aod .t M
.. cftor thl. -utin, in M»>T. *• " »“

than i° to Sichborg?

A . Yoa, and I took up sqt -etivi* in *•»«« as director of
the institution* and at tho as.* ti-.o as I had been aakod
Berlin, X undnrto* to Ml out —“ *» *“

M ,,U. . *-««“- - flUod ° Ut

nUro. thoro. n» 1 « "•"»* tr “™ llnf flrSt °” iMU ‘ U ‘

tlon - thon to ««- — - —“ “ ftU ° 4

^ 0. Doctor, ho, Ion, vor. r» director of «- -»*»

.. I w* t* iurvicc no dlrootor at tho ond of 1*1 - ~—

d! roc ter of tho Inotltuto on p until tho oollopoo.

3 . Aon you vont to flohhor. In tho beginning of 1*0. ho- mny

ootlonto wro thora In tho ooylunt

4 . m «hu bogi.vd* Of 1*0 thor. ™ thlrtoon to fourtoon

- huralrcd petionta in iiictt>org.

a . ^ quootlonnalroa -oro flUod out on oil tboao patuntat

, 00 . Tooro night have boon twolvo hundrod; I can't any

exactly*

3 . Jhoro woro tin*. quoatlonnolroa thon aont by you,

I0 tho Provincial Kouao at oloabodon, that la, tho
trotivo author!tins of to province, to Borlln to tho Rolch Hlnlatxy


of the Xntjrior


17 Jan--2E-3-2-31aklcy
Court Ho. 1.

patients of his own institution for his opinion.

q Aft or tbo experts had passed ,'* '-wont on the basis of the question-
nairos, then what happened?

A The procedure fron that point on was that the top experts went into
action and expressed their opinions Whether these top experts were given
the opinions of the experts I do no know.

r After the top experts had dcfrd, then what happened?

A I assuae that in ?crlin a list was nado up of the patients who had
boon Judgod positively un J or the prograo and that arrangenonts woro nado
to have theso patients rrnovod fror their institutions to so-callod inter-
BOdlato stations and then froa there they were transferred to tho outhan-
aola institutes. Free the geographical point of view around an euthan¬
asia institution there were several institutions as so-callod intemodlato
stations, collection institutions, .hey h»d to take in such patients,
koop thee a few weeks, soaotiscs only days, and th-'n on the basis of lists
which case froa ?crlin ass then on.

Q Was Slchborg a collecting station in 1940?

A Slchbcrg was arranged as a collecting point in the fr.ll of 1940
or tho spring of '41, I don't know -xactly.

^ ‘actor, how nany of the four* a hundrod patients that wore in Si-
chberg in tho"beginning of 1940 wore transferred out to an extermination
station?

A Approxinntcly 650 or 700.

Q To you recall when they were sent to the cithanasia station?

A ?ctwocn January 1941, that is, fror January 1941 on. I don't know
how long.

lo you know where th-^y were sent?

A To Eadeznr.

Q lid n.w patients coce into Sicfcbcrg aftor these 650 to TOO patients
h«d bocn cent to Endnrar?

A Tea.

'I Was the sane procedure then followed with the remaining patients;


-1878-


17 Ji>n-ErH-?-3-31aklcy
Court Ko. 1.

questionnaires filled out?

A Zo you me-in the one* who were sent to the Sichborg institution, as
new patient? About the«o patient who wore *ont therr to the collection
point we did not fill out any questionnaires. These patients wero al¬
ready subject to the pro/ran. They h"d already been transferred thcro
under the pro/trar.

q Row Ions did thoy stay in 'Sic hers?

A The patients stayed about two celts; soretires it wan three weeks;
and then list* c»r.e fron 3erlin in -hich the n»ncs wore glvon of all tho
potiento who were to bo picked up on such and such a day. The Sichbers
institution was to soc to it that theso patients were ready.

q w ow Ions did this continue, "octor?

A It started in January, 1941. It cn-'od, as far "* I know, in August
1941.

q And that's tho dato that Rada ar shut down?

A Y*s.

q !*ow, what happened in Sichbers *fter HadlDar closed for the tiao
'coins? lid vou Just continuo to koop fourteen hundred or flftoon hundrod
patients in Sichbers until the end o: the war?

A Vhother that rany patients were ~t "ichbors until the end of tho war
I cannot s»y because I nyself was not at tho Institution until tho end of
tho war; but as Ions as I was thorc, his nuuber is *bout rlcht; and op-
oratlono in the Sichbers inatitutio* after Radar-r was closed wont on as
before. That is, tho atients wero treated; and it was a regular insti¬
tution for rogular treatment.

Sow. you had a children's dcpartcent or a clinic in Sichbors, did
you not?

A Tos.

q Va* that in charso of Zt. Schridt?

A Yes.


-1879-


17 J ir.uary-it-DJG-A-1-Bums
Court No. 1


Q Did Dr. Schmidt put children to death thqre on authorization from
the Reicha Committee for Hereditary and Constitutional diseases?

A. As I recently learned free *he trial in Frankfurt, yes.

Q Didn't you knew that was happening while you were director of the
institution?

A I knew the purpose of the Iiu*ona Ccenittce but I never took any
personal interest in this matter.

Q You know approximately how uany children were put to death at
Eichborg?

A Accordinc to the Frankfurt -rial it was about 200.

Q Did Schmidt also receive authorization, so-called special authori¬
zations, with respect to adults?

A I know nothin.- about that.

Q Doctor, let's consider for a few minutes your activities as on expert
in the euthanasia program. Did you receive photost; tic copios of question¬
naires on pationts fre a other institutions?

A Yes.

Q And you passed an opinion on the basis of that questionnaire?

A Yos.

Q Can you tell us cpproxiantcl how man}* questionnaires you passod
on from 19A0?

A lhat's difficult to say. I don't ruaoabir.

Q fccrc you acting as on expor- in 19A1, too?

A Yes.

Q Can't you rive us some idor e r tho number of questionnaires which
passed through your hands ovor that -eriod? ’fould a thousand bo too high?

/. A thousand is not too high.

Q Uiet about three thousand?

A It might be between two end three thousand. That's possible but
I cannot say for certain.

Q Doctor, can you tell us approximately the percentage of these
questionnaires on which you gavo a r'sitivc Judgment?


17 January-iMWG-A-2-Burns
Court Ho. 1

A That varied greatly. This in pert due to the way in which the
questionnaires were filled out. In many esses the questionnaires were
inadequate - were not filled out cccplctely - 30 that one could not fern
a dear medical opinion but I can say appro xi m a tely, all together, that
in about 35 cases I reached a positive Judgment and in other casos a
negative or doubtful judgment.

Q Wore you ever reprimanded for riving a positive Judgment on too
few questionnaires?

A Cnee at a conforcnco in Borl_. Ur. Brack raked me to come to his
room at tho end of the discuaaion. In a roco then Ur. Brack told mo that
it had been noticod tty t ay opinions wore Itrroly negative ~nd positivo
ones wore laeking. Then I explain i to Ur. Brack that I could only act
according to my medical quustionn Ires end according to tho information
-dven on tho questionnaires. If t. ; were not filled out properly so
that ono could not rot a picture of tho case, onv could not cceo to a
positivo decision. This is now I gave Ur. Brack my answer.

Q *nd you did not change ycur attitude as a result of this talk with
Brack?

A No, I continued to chcngo tho questionnaires as I had boon doing.

Q Now, doctor, did this quosti-nn-ire which you rocoivod on the pat*.:»
ients havo e block for tho nationality of tho patient?

A Yes.

Q Did it also havo a blank for tho rcco of tho patient?

A Yes.

Q Did you rcceiv- questionnaires on which you passed Judgment as an
expert which showed that tho patient was a ncn-G'.naan national?

A There wore Gomans aoonj t 1 end patients who were not Cenaana’.

Q here there questionnaires Iso on Jews?

A Yes, Jews wore else included, but cnly in comparatively small

numbers.

Q Now, doctor did ycu ever receive orders to visit concentration caops
in order tc fill out questionnaires for inmates for the euthanasia program?


-1881-


17 J enuary-M-D JG-A-3-Buins

Court Mo. 1


A 1*03, ft-uch orders were issued.

Q When did you first recuivo such orders?

a In tho early suaaer or susocr of 19A0,

Q <ind oho gave you theso orders, doctor?

Who thet was in individual c oa I cannot say. Onco Professor
Nlotscho, Professor Heyde, Ur. Brcc It varied.

Q Do you remoabor whore the o.-ers wore given you?

A That also varied. In tho t inninr it wes orally et conferences in
B-rlin and later eases it wrs by telephone. Scactines by letter.

Q Khat wore you ordered to do In tho concentration cusps?

The inmates were to bo tx mined. Th-t is, questionnaires were to
lo filled out about thee, about thoso inmates whom tho camp doctors would
bring to our attention so thrt wo f:' .led out the questionnaires after
tho cas^ doctors had sdoctcd the inmates in quustion.

Q In other words, beforo you rrived in the camp the comp doctor
had nedo a list of thoso eligible fc- transport?

A Whothor they wore considered by tho transport I cannot say but tho
selection had boon aado.

Q Uid on thoso inmates prescr. cd to you by the cusp doctor you mado
cut questionnaires?

i. Yus.

Q Did you visit tho concentration easy with other doctors frem tho
euthanasia prolan?

A Generally, yes.

Q Con you toll us some of the nm^s of thoso persons who went with
ycu to the concentration craps?

•. Professor Noitscho, Stcinoeicr, Falthauscr, Mueller and several
others whoso names I can't think of -* the accent or whose n.'jaes I don't
rueanber.

Q Hew big were these doctors^ cccnissions usually?

A That also v ried. It dopenuw on the number of inmates soloctod by
the ea op doctors.


Court I

17 &n-«-0JG-ii-ii-3uma-LX


Q. Now, you state you began to go to concentration camps arourd
the suncer of 19U0. How leng did that activity continue on your part?

A. I was in a concentration carp for the last time in the wintor
of 19U1 shortly before Chris teas.

Q. Do you rerMEbar how mapy  -as you visited the Buchenwald
concentration ca^>?

A. Twice, as far as I raaerfcer.

Q. The first tine in the fa.'1 of I960 and the second tine in
the fall of 19U1?

A. No. The two visits were not that far apart. The first time
oust have been in the winter of I960 before the end of the year and
the second tine in the sane winter of 1961 - after the boginning of
1961.

Q. Doctor, in order to refresh your recollection on some of these
points, I want to show you Docuaent NO-907 which has been introduced
os Prosecution Exhibit 6l2. It's on page 65 of the English Document
Book, your Honor. Doctor do you recognizo this docuaent?

A. Yes.

Q. Will you tell the Tribunal what it is?

A. It's a letter "hich I wrote to ay wife. It was found in my
home with other letters and documents and was confiscated. This letter
is dated tfeiaar, 25 November 1961. Yes, I cannot doubt the date if
I wrote it. Then I have to correct ay testimony that I gave before.
Wiat‘s written in this letter must be right, so that I was in Weimar
tho second time in Noverb or 1961.

Q. Keep the book with you. Doc cor. I will call your attention to
it later. Keep the book with you. I will want to call your attention
to seme of tho natters in it. Now, this letter dated 25 Novenber 1961,
represents your second visit to EWchenwald?

A. Yes.

Q. And the first visit occu-red late in I960?

A. That's probably right too.

1663


Court I

17 An-M-OX-ii-U-Buma-LJ}

Q. Doctor, did you fill out questionnaires on aooe inmates of
the concentration caepe who were non-Gertan nationals?

k. Yea.


1883 a


17 J. n 47-
Court o. 1


-5-1-Foldt


Will you toll ua whet ccncontr-tion qnupa you vial tod

fren tho auuuor of 1940 until tl o or.d of 1941?

• •

i. Piret, Oranion^urs-i. oksonba-. son, tl on D.-.clr.u, Duchon-
u..ld, *uaohwltz, Grosa-Roaon, Raven abruck, ouongamo. That

w; a all.

1 :iou, Doctor, bofore put ny next question to you I
wart r.ncln to rufroafc your rocoiloction. Will you turn to

25 of tho bock boforo you? Tlis ia Pdflu 51 of tho ISn^lidh
Document Boole, Your Honor a.

j. Pago 25?

Yos. Bo you find tl , doctor?

i. Yoa.

1 Will you road tbu lector, ploaao?

i. Tli.t ia c. lottor fr< * tlRuichsfuulTor SL to tl.u cr.rap
oounundont of Groaa-Roaon that I would bo tl.uru fro tho 13th
to ths. 17tl*. of January, '42, end would aoluct inuntoa.

r . Booa tl o date pxvon n thla lottor corruapond to your
recollection on tho tlMo you v .sited Groaa-Reaun?

• Yoa, tl ..t -my bo rly t.

Doctor, I v/.nt to call your attention tc tl:o roforonoo
at tl o top of thic lottor nl oro it scya "concernin'; our lottor
14 F 13.“

.. Yoa.

0. Do you* find tl t?

.. Yoa.

be-c tl.-.t jj.n anythin- to you?

• I'o. I aay somethin' about tl. t? I really c;nnct

ur.dorct.jid c.t ..11 that the Huicl sfuohrcr SI should u-.lco such an
;nncunc-:i-ni .bout the aff.-irs of th- proyr^.:. Tl ,.t was not
cuetouary. This nuat have boon an exemption, t: is lottur.

boll. Doctor, don't :*cu knew that .-.11 concontration
c.-jps wore und^r ! »ii*.’lor, .nd o t —


17 Jr.n 47-H-UA, i -5-3-Poldt
Court ho. 1

* Yos, of course • 3ut th..t tho F.eichsfuohror SS should
cencom hlnsolf wild: tfcu Euthanasia ProScan In this amor, I did
not know thrt.

o Woll, hut Doctor wouldn't tho SS, tl.u corpotcnt offico
in t’. o SS have to give advance notico that you wero couin'? to tho
cw.p, ovon though you h. d received your ordorc frou sor.e ono olso 4 .

A I oxplain this as follows: . rlin aaoncy of tho

Euthanasia Procrui asked tho T. r .cl sfuol ror SS to r.-ritc tc tho
ccx.p corx^ndnnt of Gross-Koson to sond th.is lottor to fciu in
order tc Justify uy visit. Ir. other eases, ..c far as I know,
that was nover dono. Only In is caso.

<1 VToxl, Doctor, didn't thoy usually lave to give tho cenp
oanagoaorit souo ..dvanco notice so that the list of persons, list
of innatos on whou questionnr.: res voro to ho filled out could ho
presented to you Dxicdlately ; f tor your arrival?

A Yos, hut such annou: " 'nont s to tho concentration crops,
ns far as I understand It, alw ja cuno dirootly fron the Dorlln
agency of the progrro to tho concentration catip, not through tho
Ilolchsfuohror SS.

n tfow, Doctor, I will nsk you to turn to -V/?o 16 of the
ufcui.iont Book boforo you. If Your Donors ploaic, wo ..re do.-ling
with i’rosocution Exhibit -111, r] ich is Document 1151 ?S, and I
cei now directing l.is attention to Pago 20 of tho English Decunont
Book.

it Pago 16 ?

Q Yes.

A That is a list.

n . Doctor, it appoara from this oxhibit that this is tho
list which was undo up in tho up bofore your arrival .nd thoso
were the innates chich woro presont^d tc you in ordor for you to
iv.ko your examination.

A Yes.


-1885-


17 J.n 47-K-!!>-*.-5-3-Poldt
Court ; 'o. 1


•2 I will c-.sk you to turn through this list end look at
tlo heading a above oach class of innatos. Do you aoo the bond¬
ing "Jews in protoctlvo custody" on ?a-o 16?

A Yus.

Q Turn to Pr.go 18. Do you sec "Jens ul*.o wore habitual
crluinals?"

A Yus.

<\ Than "Jows who woro shirkers,"

/. Yos,

0. Do you know what tl \t nonns?

A Slirkorc, or what d you :zocn?

n . Yos. Vihr.t do thoy an by "Jows who woro shlrkors?"
Do thoy they woro Just lar.y, wouldn't work?

.. 1 can't rnswor th.-t question. I did net think and

tec according to tlau prlnciplos of tla Oost.po. I don't lenow.


C-urt So. 1

17 Joe 47-M-6-l-at-m*««reld


Will you turn to 20 of the docuaent hook before you?

mi. 1* peg* 2* of the English Document Hook. Your Honor.

Do you see -Poles in Protective Custody- on pegs 20. vitness?

A. Yes.

^ Do you see a notation *S.A.V."T
A. S.A.V.

Do you know whet that neans?

A. I do not know.

Will you turn to page 21? Do you see the heading -C T echs-?

A. Yes. Cieehs.

Will you turn to page 23? Do you see the heeding -holes in Pro¬
tective Custody-?

nS. MC KAKiY: It is pegs 27. Ycur Honor.

A. Pegs 23. I see -Poles in Protective Custody".

(J, Md ou th. pert <«•. -CMCh. 1. »ot«.lT. OwtodyM


A. YoB.

Doctor, will you turn to pegs 27 now?
A. Yes.

^ Do you see that list?


A. Yes.

* ih. pr -of .hoi, W-, .»». t»U !>•* >• »»• «* * hloh VM “

,= MM« 1= M«h 1W »»•* «•» “* 0— 10 ,h0rt ' th ”

lu « i. th. ». WHMI* th.se «-•■ *“> — •• l0Ct ° 4 * l “ lhA “" ln -
Doctor. ty c»porl« th. ».* -hlch ve. art. up ..for. y~ -wired In the

CLtp sdth thl. 11.. MglPPl^ o. W.:. 27. It I* .»o~ thr.t * 214 1 “‘"

..l.Cd. no 1... th. u of «. — *— - C -' h *'


that?

v Thr.t f*ur. of 51 oco-Gor::.. artlcuM. out of . .°««1 =< 114

doe. no. loclud. «* of .5. * =» *«" “ tl0 " UW '

I vpuld like to put thl. oue.tlon to you. Doctor. 1. thl.: Docs this

centc. of aoproxlctcly 25 percot of non^cru» natloo.1. ..Uot.d for

1667 •


Coart So. 1

17 Jen .7-H-6-2-iH-fitxgrald


Euthanasia In the Gross-Rosen ca=p the typical and usual percentage of non-
Gercan national* selected In other concentration canps? Do you understand
the Question?

A. Yes. As for nny typical directive* of this kind, there were never
tryr such directives. They were never observed. It io a coincidence that
it happened like this In this case. The proportion was as it is.

v Ho re basically, ay question is. can you give us the aporoxlnate
percentage of the nuuber of non- 0 «ruan nationals lncludod in the concentra¬
tion eanp transports?

A. I cannot give such a percentage.

v Doctor, was the personal data of the concentration conn inn*tes
already filled out vhen you arrived at the concentration canp?

A. Yes.

Vos thet done ty the cajip doctor?

A. He probably ordered it. “ho office no doubt did it.

^ On your visits to the concentration caups, did you deal with the
concentration erno doctor? Was he the authoritative person you sav?

A. I consulted with hio. he *old ce that he hnd selected certain in-
oates. He had dri-wn up a list for ox aalnatl-n. He was not alwnye present
at jy vork but sooatlaas ho cane in egein, but vc were not always together.

V jut Doctor, you would not have been nblo to do your work in an
expeditious uanner unloss innate* were presented to you whan you arrived et
tho caip. I* that right?

A. I do not understood the Question.

v It wr.s necessary f.r y.u to perforn y'«ur work to have these lnnatcs
sorted out end presented to you upon your arrival at the Cairo?

A. Yes.

v You could not have done your Job if you hnd to select eligible in¬
nate* frou all the innate* in the canp, could you?

A. If I had had to select then, no, then I would not be able to ful¬


fill ny tcek.

v Doctor, were all of the concentration canp lavtcs selected

1663


Court Bo. 1

17 Jan ,7-h-6-3-i-Fitxerald


Actually Inland
A. Bo.

vill you explain ycur answer please?

A. ry insanity ve nean a disease which shows characteristic inter¬
ference. with the aentel activity which I will not describe hut I will call
then characteristics. That is what we (Men by insanity. That condition,
in the aajority of case, of innate, in the concentration canps, was not

truo.

v Were any innate, selected only for the reason that they were unable
to work?

A. That is possible.

(i. Vers peoole selected who had disease, other than those of tho

uind, such as tuberculosis?

A. Yes. Such people were also Included.

THE rWiSIDEET: The Tribunal will now recess for a few ninutoe.

(A recess was taken.)


1539


17 JQ&-K- 3S-7-l-Golla#ier.

C5urt BO. I-


?HS h-HSZaI.» Tho Tribunal is now In session.

3Y nR. rtCE-13Ts

Dr. honnoko. can you ,;lvo us an approxiucto fitfuro want nuaber
3 f questionnaires fUlod out on concentration coup locates by the coualoslons
- doctors' co—lsslons In w..icn you «*-ro activo?

Bo. I can not do that.

Vero these questionraires proccssod In tho anno way os question¬
naires froa asyluns?

Tos. that is to soy. they were filled out In the cn-ps, and thon
sent to Berlin; a photostat copy was ntdo, and thoy Wen. "oxportlsod" and
tnon Just as It was dono In tno different institutions whore proccssod.

$. Doctor, was the visit to Grose-Roson in January 1942 tho last
eJneontration ca -? you vlsltod In connection with tho outhnnnsia protract
— Tos.

Do you know whothor or not tho Doctors' Coartssions continued to
visit concentration c(k.pe in connection with tho outlianatia pro^rnn aftor
January 19421

... That I do no know.

'Ay did you stop inking thoso visits7

... In tr.c y-nr of 1942 thoro startod a qunrrol botwoon Borr.otnt and

cyoclf, nd fron thi t period onward sy attitudo towards tno euthanasia

,-ro#yao was far ;-oro distant. Tree that poriod on ny »dvico was not sought

%

afterwards fron Berlin with roforoncc to any such work. Tho roason for that
c j; inly be seen in the qxx.rrol botwoon Bornotnt and tysolf. It wns a quarrol
w^ico finally Iced to -y exclusion, and to a procoodin, s n^yiinst no. Itoon
it load to tho exclusion froa tno Party, and to tho end of ny task as tho
director of tho institution. That hepponod in tho ..utuen of 1942.


1390


17 j^WF- 8 -l-Gcyl°r<I
Court Ho. 1

Q. factor, how -any doctors wero ccnaissinad by Berlin to aado thodo
visits t-. concentration c-npe to select inaatos?

In Dachau, as far as I knew, w_ were ap.roxiaatcly 10 to 12 physicians.

In oth-r places th-ro were less, -.-.ybo 5 to 6 . In a nunbor of cas-s, there
*cru only indivieu-ls activo. It differed.

Q. Hew can y.u tell us approximately the total number cf doctors who

were cocuissicnod tc made those visits?

... I ustinatc that the total of tiws- ..'ysicians acunted to approxima¬
tely 15, aay'oL 10 to 15-

q. ..nd th.ro wes no erd-r, r.s far as y-u know, in January 19U2 stopping
these visits t c nosntration caps oy th- doctors' commissions?

Thorc was nc such order which ondod those visits. At any rate, I
received n knowledge. of it.

Q. .ox! dc you have any iwiicaticn that those visits tp concontrati n coups
ctntinuo ! r.ftvr you left in January 19U2?

A. Ho.

q. iut y-u rise cannot exclude th. possibility that they did c ntinue?

I cannot exclude th- possibility. I think it is possible that thoy
■ere continued.

Q. Mew, doctor, .'id you xxcoivo any special instructions with r-o^ct to
quccticnnairuS filled cut on Jewish inaat-s af concentration cr.»ps?

A. Tos.

5 . Till y-u Ull th_ Tribunal what th- s_ instructions were?

... Or-lly, we »-r- t ld th't it was n t necessary tv, ex .mo Jows thorough¬
ly and tint it w ulr’ bo sufficient if a repert was mdo ab.ut the.a.

3 . '.ho :_,avc yu th sc instructi ns, witness?

A. That too differed. I heard such instructi ns fr n Professor Hoydo,
Fr'.fess r iliotscho, and I think I can remember that r. Brack toe gave no such
instructi ns.

How, witness, I -again w£t y.u to ~x~ nc the extracts fren letters


1391


17 Jan-M-J ?-8-2-Gay lo rd
Ccurt ho. 1


y .u wrot-. to ycur wife. That Is Docownt XO-907, Frcsocuti-r. Exhibit 1*12.
it's on p' ,o 39 of the bock befer- y.u, pa 0 c 1*5 cf the English Docurw.nt book.

it. 39?

Q. Tos. Yes, .. letter fron Bielefeld cm' e letter free Acinar. Hew,
.cter, will you look at the s-ccnd p'r.a reph cf the letter fren Uoinar dated
25 fkvenbor 191*1.

... It only c.nsists cf on- paragraph.

Do y.u fi tv.' th?t part cf the L-ttor st-tin that, "As second portion,
a total of 1200 Jews followed, =11 of wh*n do not need tc be- 'oxc^lnod',' 1
but whero it is sufficient, tc tek- tho reasons for their ar.cst fron the
files and to transfer it to tho reports,"?

A, Yea,

Q. .ore your instructions then siaply tc fill cut these uesticnnniros


1692


Court So. 1

17 Jan L7-* - 8-la - LX - Gaylord


on Jews giving the reasons tor their arrest?

A. Tes.

3. Is it true then that the sense of these instructions was that
no weight should be given to an examination of the Jews?

k. Well, it wasn't inportant to examine the Jews. The important
fact was for the leadership of the program to find out what the reasons
for their arrest were. The situation w*s that these Jows, in evory case,
wore healthy, physically and mentally.

3. I didn't understand quite the last statement you rrade. Witness,
will you repeat that, please?

A. The leadership of the Euthanasia r rogran did not attach any
value to any physician's examination of the Jews since on tho average
those Jows were healthy, physicially as well as mentally.

Q. And were those instructions given you in tho summer of 191*0 Wen
you first made your visit to a concentration canp?

A. No. In tho susnor of 191*0, I had not yot hoard of those measures.
That only followed la*or.

0., And whon, to the best of your recollection, did you rocoivo
thoso ordors with respect to Jews?

A. That was not before the beginning of the year 191*1.

3. Early in 191*1?

A. 191*1.

q. How wore L’.osg questionnaires fillod out on tho Jews?

A. The heads of thoso questionnaires with all the personal data
woro already fillod out. Then from tho criminal files *ich wore available
tho roaaens for the arrest were transferred to that report sheet. That

all there was.

Q. '.»ere you instructed to fill out questionnaires on all Jews pre¬
sented to you in tho carp?

A. les, those Jews that ware presented.

3. And by whan wore those Jews presented?

1C93


Court Ho. 1

17 Jan U7 - K - 8-2a - LX - Gaylord

A. They had already been selected by the camp physicians.

3 . «ere you givdn any other special instructions with respect to your
work in the concentration camps?

A. No.

q. - ne ro you ever warned that you w>uld be severely punished if you
sabotaged the work in the concentration caeps in any way?

A. Hot only with reference to ay work in the concentration camp,
but also with refererce to ny entire activity within the program. Such
warnings were repeatedly brought to qy attention. They either spoke
about ny transfer into concentration ca-ps or senetimea oven shooting
was mentioned.


17 Jan
Court I

q, Doctor, will you refer again to the letter you wrote from
Weimar in Noveefcer 19U1?

A, Yes.

Q. Do you sae the name, Hofen, mentioned there as being camp
physician, SS Cbersturnfuehrer Dr. Hofen?

A. Yea.

q. \faa he one of the eon you worked with in the camp, who pre¬
sented those incutes to you?

A. He had the canp inaates presented to me* I never roally
worked together with hi-a. As far as I know, I only greeted his and
was introduced to him on one occasion and then we parted.

Q. But he was one of the authoritative leaders, as you say, in
the canp who was to assist you in doing your Job?

A. I don't know anything about hi* assisting mo in ny work.

Tho fact is that ho was ono of tho loading camp people, and thoro is
no doubt about that sinco ho roally was the canp physician.

Q. Now, Doctor, will you look again at the lotter. It's tho
socond lino of tho oxcorpt in which you stater "On Ttarsday and
Friday a meeting will bo hold in Prina within tho frame of the action,
in which problome of tho future will bo discussod and in rtiich
Schmalorfcach will take part as tho odical adjutant of Herron Brack.”
And thon in paronthesos is tho naao *Jonnorwoin." You find that?

A. Jennorwein, yos.

Q. What does Jcnnerwoin mean?

A. Jennorwein was tho pseudonym of Mr. Brack.

Q. That was the code name which ho used in connection with his

activities in the Euthanasia Program?

A. Ho generally allowed us to addross him with his real name.

Brack.

Q. Jennorwein was his pseudonym, as you put it?


1895


Court I _ _

17 Jan l»7-4MiAA-9-2-Gross-LJQ

i. Tea.

Q. Car. you toll us who also in the Prograa used pseudonym?

A. No, I don't know of any more.

q. HU you turn to page 10 of the book in front of you, page U6
in Your Honors' Book? The excerpt from the letter which you wrote
free tho Hotel Wegert, 12 January 19U2.

A. Yes.

Q. The second paragraph of the letter states: "How I will say
goodbye to Dr. Schidlausky, then I will take a motor car and ride to
the hotel." Wasn't Dr. Schidlausky tho caap doctor at Ravensbruck?

A. Yes.

Q. What is tho reference to Karl in tho first paragraph of that
oxcorpt?

A. You mean Karl?

Q. Yos.

A. That concerns my brother. This is a personal matter which
at that time was discussod by t y brother, *>o is a lawyor, with tho
Minister of Justico and he had soao dealing with the Reich Chancellory.
That has nothing to do with that Prograa, purely a private matter.

Q. Now, Doctor, in tho first lino of this lottor you say:

"I hope to learn froa Professor Niotsche what exactly our next 'tour'
will bo." Doce tho reference to "tour" noan a visit to anothor concen¬
tration camp?

A. Well, this is Just tho way I expressed myself. Well, this
is just how I expressed myself. Under "tour* in this case 1 really
understood my next activity.

Q. Dec tor, will you turn to page U5 of the Document Book in
front of you, 1:9 of tho English Book, letter No. h, dated Hoidelborg,

15 June 19U2?

A. Yes.

Q. It starts off: "Just no" I finished the thing for


Court I

17 Jan U7-K-»tU-9-3-Groas-LJ3


Berlin, in order to sond it registered tonight, the photocopy for the
Tiergartenstrasse as well as the answer to Herron Jennerwein." That
is reference to Viktor Brack, is it not?

(Interpreter stated thoro was sooe question in the translation
of this last question and asked that it be repeated.)

Q. "Just new I finished the thing for Berlin, in ordor to sond
it registered tonight, the photocopy for tho Tiergartenstrasse as well
as the answer to Herron Jonnorwein."

A. los, with that I Man Ur. Brack.


Court I

17 -fan U7-M-9-la-SW-Gross -lJj


Q. Now, a few lines down you statex "I want to show it to
Professor Schneider with whan I discussed it this corning and who was
very interested in this 'reccenenceaont*'flhat do you Bean by "recom-
E^nc ament"?

A. It was probably concerned with the recoanenceoent of Euthanasia
in the Euthanasia Institute and I nainly thought of Hadaaar since
Hadaaar was located in our area. But I cannot now say with certainty
what exactly I did do an by reccaoencooent". I would assuae, howovor,
that it was concerned with recocrwncoaont of Euthanasia activity.

Q. And was it not rocoeaonced?

A. No.

Q. Why not? Why do you say that?

A. As far as I rocoived any knowlodgo of it, it wasn't roconaonced,
at loost not in Hadaaar. Whether it waa done in othor placos I don't
know.

Q. You only know about Hadaaar?

A. Yos.

Q. Haven't you told us alroady that you continued to receive
questionnaires on pationts for your opinion during tho year 19ii2?

A. Yos, during tho yoar 191x2, I still rocoived then up to Dccob-
bur 19U2. Fhotocopios for cy export opinion. Starting from tho fall
of 19U2, I didn't receive then ary longer.

Q. Woll, but of course wasn't that the tine you had had your
quarrel with Bernadette and this activity was becceiir^ loss in tho
fall of 19U2?

A. Tos.

Q. I noticed in this letter that Professor Schneider is mentioned.
Was Schnoider working in Hoidelberg?

A. Schneider was tho director of tho University-clinic of
Heidelberg.

Q. Do you know whether or not Schneider received tho brains of
some of the persona who were subjected to the Euthanasia program for


Court I

17 Jar. U7-M“9“la-S rf-Grosa -LJ3


axami nation?

A. loa.

Q. Doctor Mennecke, will you look at tho next letter, lot tor
So. 35, dated 7 April 1*3?


1896 a


Court I

17 Jan U7-M-9-2a-Srf-Gross-LJ}

A. lea.

Q. You say: “The letter of Horron 31ankonburg, the answer on ay
•report' sent to him about a fortnight ago ia aa follows: "What waa
the nature of your report to Horren Blankortourg?

A. The connection* in that matter are as follows: After ay
quarrel with Barnardotto, I waa excluded frco Eichberg and again
transferred to the Medical Services of tho Army. I waa sent to
eastern Franco aa front lino physician, then sent to Charkow and
Bo Igor od, and in the smnor of 19U3 I lived tho severe activities
taking ploco near Charkow. At that tine I bocaao ill with Basedow's
disease and it was oxtreoely difficult in tho Gorman Artsy at that tine
to bo relieved free the front and sent back homo even in cases of
severe illness. I, however, had the aim to euro =y diaeaao as quickly
as posaiblo and I thon rosamocrod that at tho time I was oxcluiod at
tho end of 19U2, tho aontion waa made that perhaps after ono-half
year, ay return would be possible and that Dr. Schmidt would bo sant
to tho front. Mow, in ordor to rocoivo an aasuranco that my boing
duel or od indispensable was carried through, I wrote to lir. Blankortourg
sinco I know it was this agoncy of Mr. Blankortourg *hlch could succood
in managing ay boing classified as indispensable with tho adjutant's
office of the Fuehrer. That was tho content of cy lottor to Blonkertourg.
That is what I assuaod. However, I was surprised that in his reply ho
doesn't mention that at all.


17 “-10-1-H' X s

Court To. 1.


r ;r 0 w, r.octor, will you turn to letter aunbcr 99, datod Scptcr.bor 14

1944?

A Tea.

q I ice a roference in thoro to Irofcasor 3rmdt. la that Profcaaor
:>rl 3r-ndt?

A Tea, that ia Profcaaor T-irl 3rmdt. tho poraor.al Dhyaician of the.
ruohrc r.

a And doea thia letter havo anythin* to do with tho outhanaaia prn-
gr-.-.t
A Vo.

q Can you tell ua very briefly vh-1 it concern.?

A Tho T. Hettinger ncr.tion. d in that letter, during pence and during
wnr, waa tho chief phyaicinn of tho inatitution of Soccbcn.chwmd, boat
tho ninck roroat, At tho tine I wa. there a. a pntient, I aront a few
vockt in Hoechcnachvrnd md at th-t tiro e.tabli.hcd connectiona with rr.
lottingor, who wne tho physician who troatod oo At that tino. Ho told
no about difficultioa which ho had with the Prrty. nnd in thi. connection
ho aaid that ho could turn to irofcaaer r-randt. who would do eonothln*
for his and intervene in hi. favor. That 1. all. Thi. hn. nothing what-
aoever to do with the progrue.

q Paw. witneta, cm you toll u. southing norc about thi. co-callod
interruption. and whether or not the progrea wna rcaunod. and. if oo. in
what nannor?

* ao interruption of the i.-nor-i nrosr« o«n hr toon In tho lleht
of nr«r rucorti hut. to fnr n. po.ltl.o knc-lcfeo 1 . concerned. ttat 1.
.onothlng I never hr4. I hoord . f« thine, hj «W of ruuor. lor ln-
etrace. It wp.t .eld thr.t one J«r Hitler In hi. .rccl>l trnln tad gone
fron fcunich to Pcrlln «nd ttat new 'of In ?-*-xl- hi. .poolel tr-.ln
.uddonly .topped, -ften Hitler v-nted to Cno. tho re-.on for thi. .top
•nd turned to the ulndov. ho - cr«d of people .fndlng out.ldo -ho
,erc .etching the lending of n tr«.=ort of In.ono por.ono. Ihc.e pe¬
ople very pl,lnly'erpr«.=d th.lr nnnoyuico .t thi. proeedure. -nd .hen

1900


17 Jan-EHH-lG-2-H-ynoB
Court To. 1.


they then saw the Fuehrer fron the window of hi* special train, thoy he-
esse even norc annoyed. In connection with that rur.or, It was sold that
subsequently Hitler h».d ordered that action to stop,
q That was then the succor of 1941!

A Tes, that oust have been In the soccr of 1941.

0 Your only doflnltc knowledge Is that Endanar stopped operations In
August 1941; la that right!

A Yos.

q 3ut your rlstts to concentration coops continued until Juno 1942?
Is that right!

A Yos.

q And your activity os an expert continued until the sunnor of 1942!
Is that right? ,

A Yos.


1901


Court I

17 Jan-H-JP-10-la-Haynea-L*Xi


was reactivated at Hadacar


Q. Do you know whether the prograa
or olsewhere after August, 19U1, in any tanner?

A. T’no pro gran in its original fore was not started again.
However, the functions of the Reich Cosedttoe were extended. The
Reich Ccnxdttoo originally was concerned only with child patients up
to the age of three years. This age limit was later increased to oight
ywars, twelvo years, and, I think even up to the age of sixteen or
seventeen years. That in itself is one extension which was to bo son©
sort of a substitute for the prograa that had stopped.

In addition, I heard by way of conversation with other collabor¬
ators of the prograa that it was desired that one or tho other physi¬
cians in thoso institutions, in caso ho was roady to do it, was to kill
a patient by injections or ovordosos if ho was convinced of tho nocos-
sity of onding his lifo. This procodure then would have caitinuod
without any organisation or official procedure. Khothor and how fur
any such action was carried through,I cannot say.

Q. Dr. Monnecko, tho Reich Cocnittoo for Rosoarch on Hurodltary
and Constitutional Disoases novar interrupted its program, did it?

A. As long as I havo known anything about this program, no.

Q. And to tho extent that tho program was continued uftor
August 19U1, was it continued by tho s ano people and the sane organi¬
zations?

A. You neon tho program of the Reich Comitteo?

Q. No, I mean the program as a whole.

A. Well, the leadership of tho program still remained in tho
sane hands.

Q. And the Reich Association arid the Stiftungen and tho Patient
Transport Corporation continued to exist after August 19hl, did they
not?

A. At first, yes. "hether they were later dissolved or not, I
cannot say. At least I don't know tho period of time when they were


dissolved.


Court I

17 jan^JP-iO-la-Hayr.os-L.Xl

q. »oil, were they in existence as long as you were corrected
with the program, »toich was up until the ond of 1 * 2 ?

A. In this respect there was no change.

q. Now, Doctor, lot's go back to the position of Karl Brandt in
connection with this progran. Rill you tell the Tribunal all you know
with respect to Brandt's connection with Euthanasia?

A. I know very little about that. As 1 said boforo, I know
that, at the ond of 1*1, he was included in this progran as its
leader. I never saw any letter, written by hin. I never saw hUn
personally. I new hoard hin speak. Ho really did not appear during
the course of this progran. when, in 1*U, I was tr-'ited as a potiont
in the aray hospital in St. Blasion, I found out through convocations
with offloors, that Profossor Brandt had an ossontial part in tho
collection of insano porsons in tho area of Lublin, Poland. That is
really all I con say with rofuronco to tho caso of Profossor Brandt.

It is not possible for no to say any aoro about hin.

Q. Do you romper who told you that 3randt was connoctod with


socij action at Lublin?


17 J:n -:7-K- ? Vx-ll-l-.vu jporstoln
Court Ho. 1


Art was cno of tfco officers r.t St. Bins ion. 1 don't
rouer.be r His nano r.nd I ror.lly don't know who ho wa.s, but I
heard it by way of conversation.

..horu is St. Dlr.sicn located?
i. St-. 31aslcn, S uth 31cck Forests, net for fron tho
Rl ino rnd tho Swiss frentior.

Q Did your infrrjxnt toll you whon this Miblin action
took pl-.co?

L t. cortain period of tine was not uontlcnod, but it
nust concern itself with tino up to 19vi.

n Did ho sny whether cr not this ur»iln. action had any
connection with tho oxtomlnation of tho J crrs?

.i Thuro was tiontirn 2-~.do abeut Jews. Insr.no and Jows,
it was said, woro cr Hoc tod in Lublin in lur~or numbers.

o Did ycu over bear Vilrtor Bruch's nano nontirnod in
connoctxcn with this *Aiblin action?

A Ho.

:IH. TTcIUltBY: I he. o no furt’ or questions at this tino.
flr PRESIDES'T: Counsel will cros3-ex.u;lno thu witnoss. Dr
Sorvatius, counsel for the dofondjnt Karl 3randt.

cross bxa m. tioh

3YDR. SERVATIUS:

Witnoss, a cl art w. s prosonted to ycu fren which tho
or'-anlz. tun can be seen, wlloh prevailed in tho Euthanasia Pro-
fir an; yru flaw tl t chart, didn't ycu?

Yes.

Ufcnt r.ctlvity did •'refoss'-r 3randt oxorciso, according
to your opinion?

I roally cannot answer that question, sinco I knew
nothin" whatsoever abcut his activities. I cnl" knew that ho
had a loadinr position. What kind of lo din^ activity ho hold,

I dc not know.

1904


17 Jan -11-2-Kupporetoin

CcurS “c. 1


o Witness, if 70U don't knew the activity, then you

oomot know whothor it was lending cr not.

, Tfco feet ttr.t it ccncomod a loading activity I hoard.

0. In that wry you only confirr.od this chert according
to what you hoard, with reference to the personality of Professor


or end t.

* As I add before, I only know th: t Brrndt was a par¬
ticipant in this proRren at the ond of 1944.

n Well ti on, you cannot say whether >uM« r had a load


in? position, ccn you?

A Jouhlor is not r physician. fc* 1 l* physician.

It if possible that ntlor, in addition tc li ah inistrativo
- ::o nt, Double r, UA occasioned a phy.icirn as the. second
loedor of the pro^rrr.. I think t\ t is entirely pcssiblo.

n noli, in tl at cr.ro you don't know tho dlstrlbutirn cf
Chu work between Dcuhlor rad *.r Merer Srandtt
A Ho.

n Witness, you woro prosont during the first conference
in Berlin at tl-o Colunbus-Hauc?


<•

n .


Yes.

uur thr.t, It wr9 ccntxnuoa In «. Chttioolloryt


A Yos.

n Whet «> sr.id t.t thrt tl..o, enfl to. w.s your tn.k


interpreted at


17 Joo-k-G2S-ll”l»-lM?5>*rstein
court I*. 1.


to* Colu=bUS-£.US?

A .t tee Colunbus-H .us, -J casK wa not interpreted.

‘.hat wore you told in tee Helen Chancellery?

... In me Helen Ch. ncellery, we w re told th .t we had toon coeriesioned
wim the activity of experts; th. t is to say. to sake n export opinion on
...c basis of tr.e ontrios in me pnotostatic copies, on export ooinion in
t.-,o eonsv of \h9 eutnanasla question That aonat that wo had to docido
vhethur the life was worthy of continuing or not.

’A.-.t do y-.B understand by "not vorth to aontinao"?

u.. inis ox .re$ b ion wns used in the reporte .h * • cro givon to us. and.
wn t I understood by "not vorth of living-, is » in* u» person, with n
.iig .1 dogree of insanity, wno has no real, conception of his own life any
longer, and rao, bocausj of nis very so-oro syaptons of illnoso. is 3iv
turbing uis own life without hiasolf noticing it. and it is there whoro I
understood *fce aeaning of the words •unworthy of living".

So. if I understood you correctly, the ©oint of view of living for
the potion; — that is to say. life for hie — hold no v luoT

A. Tee.

n. ,’io it Bontloncd ;lso. tru.t tfcopo poisons h d no valuo for tho Stato
ary longer, and w ro therefore usolocs enters?

... Tos; that was pointed out too. It was pointed out thit, diring tho
war. in numerous cases. healthy people h d to givo up thoir lives rnd th.ro
severely ill people continued to livo. end woul: contirsic to live unlosB tail
action s' rtod. aid th t. in addition, tho n-rsing situation and the
nourishment situation would Justify tho ©liaination of theso pcoplo.

v vo 11, what wore tho Halts, and whet ox;u:tly wore the directives?

... The measures taken wore toat. basic ly. patients wno hrd not yot
boon la an asylua for longer ohr-n -throe years wore oxcludod froa thet pro-
gran coaplotely.

-. To.' didn't quite undorstord my question, itoat point of view, ns a
•Aysicim, was decisive for you in the selection, and in your Judgaunt?


Court I

17 Jan-*£-(HS-ii-2a-Ku.;porstein

I,hat ware your directives given? Was it the medical point of view?

A. Yes, the aedical point of view.

Q. And how about the other points of view? Thoy were only
mentioned as general observations?

A. Yes.

Q, Hell, how about the oxocution? According to which points of
view did you really select these people, and Judge thorn? Did you really
koop to what was told you?

A. I acted according to purely aedical criticism and purely
medical conviction when naking ay export opinion. And in numerous
casos, I docided on a "No.", or "Doubtful", rrthor than to say "Yob".

Q. Witness, if you docidod to soy "No", couldn't the othor
exports outvote you?

A. Yos.

Q. In *iat manner was that dono?

A. That obviously happonod booauso othorwiso Mr. Brack could
not have roprinandod no, saying that ny ojport opinions wore far too
soft and not rigid orough, ord tho aannor in which this was being
carried out was that a coesaittoo of oxports consisted of throo, tho
thruo of then rocoivod tho same questionnaires, tho tamo photostatic
copies, and had to givo thoir opinion of tho same questionnaires
indopondontly of ono another, and then, with thoir result, send thorn
back to Berlin.


1907


17 Jan >-11-11-EJ- Kuppcrstcia

C vrt :io. 1


ilion, why "asn't ouch a questionnaire circulated? hy s the
prreodure selected that everyone independently rccciv_d a questionnaire?

... The gentlcccn in chanjo ?f tho . r,:.nication co Id c s *° y°u • iuch
n:rc infon-ation cn that p int that I could, since I don't know according
tc '.dust principles and -hat directives tide iielc orococuro to 3 built up.

.. ditness, tie y u knew, when .no o S tlv-o ox'.-or 1 3 contradicted whether
die jud^icnt was negative, mo the nr.thorication rofuscl then?

I don*t knew that. It eortolnly vac net the caso that tdion • no
expert said "lie.", and the the tro sai- "Yes," t. t th:n tic atient in
qu.sticn ’id not fall undor the Euthanasia < r» re.-. . , t: at ic, i tuns
rwt necessary tc have a unanirxus "Yon ; ' * al- the rticiponte f tho cennitt-
c-iatr .rto load the ;oticnt to t.o at.anjia -rogrra.

Q. Vo you, fr - , •• f any certain coo s?

A. .'o.

0. .hon there >k you tain . ur Ir: -lo . ft-«?

... Fra ccnvorsaticno with ti*o ©oUaboretore, cnl fr :.i tho dircctivoo
tihic.; va re elver, us, end which no wo told t- o'-servo.

. . ;eu] now of s c so «b ro x v .. ' - bh "Ho*, on 1 v . ro, in
opitu r that, an authorisation «ca given?

A. Ho.

.. aitnooo, in tho year t J9lu> t v ro c react, -?U, there

tee a stp in llcdanar?

... ...sj in iladacar.

•i. >*j';acqujntly, wasn't th re a basic cheapo in the procolr.re aitcr
‘diet?

A. lea — well, chat ’o you soap Vy n oic chan c", ^ccter?


1908


17 Jan«—ll-lo-M-ATD-Kupperstelr.
Court No. 1


q -Than, for the first tine, did you hoar the nans of Licbehenschel?

A What naae?

Q Licbehenschel.

A I Just now hoard it for the very first tine.

Q Wton, for the first tino did you havo any dealings with the canp
of Oranionburg?

A That was in the suaaer of 191 jQ#

Q 'That was the cause for that?

A Tho cause was directive fron Berlin to go tc Oranionburg with a
nurijor of othor physicians, and there exardno ixrvatos an:’, fill in question¬
naires about then.

Q Who gave you thoso directivos?

A I don't know who, in that caso, gavo then. It nay have boon Mr.
Crack, it nay havo boon Professor Hoydo. Especially aftor such a long tino
has olapsod, I cannot say that.

q Now, you have said beforo, whjn oxaninod by the prosocution, that
in 19U2 you wore in Buchenwald for tho first tino?

A 19 lil.

Q Oh, no) you said 19U2.

A Wall, I was in Luchonsald on two occasions. The socond tino was

19U2.

q Early 19U2?

A Yes.

q Then you further said that shortly before that you had been there
for the first tino, which would havo noant tho and of 19U.?

A Woli, not 19W), but 19U-J that is, after the start of tho
Euthanasia Progran.

ICI. He HANEY i May it ploaso the Tribunal, I aust object to thoso

statenants bein’ nado by the dofen3o counsel. I very clearly |«t tho

question to the witness with respect to the letter he wrote fron Vcinar,

ir. Novcaber 19lil — asked hin if that was tho second ti ao he visitod

19C9


1? jaiu-U-2c-i^TD-Kup?or3teln
Court Jfc>« 1


Buchanwald, the answer bains "Yes". The next question was. "Then, was the
first tir» you visited Ductorwrald, late in 19b0?" The answer was "Yes",
witness has never testified that ho was in Buchenwald in 19U2.

THE ITIESIDEHT. Tho record, in that connection will speak for itsolf.
The Tribunal will now recess until 1*30 o'clock.


Court ?ia. 1

17 JRa U? - A - 12-1 - LJJ - Lessor (H)


M W


:isd err


AFTZRTOOH SESSION

(The hearing roccnvened at 1330 hours, 17 January 19U7)


TK2 I'ARSKAL: Tho Tribunal is again in session*

KcHAJEY: In connection with tbo objeotion that I raised just
before tho lunoha/n rocesa, I would ask, if tho dof^rso counsel wishes to
continue or insists upon the line of questioning which he is adopting,
that tho stenographic notes be obtained on the testimony of tho witness


with rospoot to tho dates on which ho visited Buchonwcld and have thoso
road aloud so that tho witness can be properly be advisod of tho tostinony
ho has olroady glvon.


THE PRES EE NT: Is defonsu oouneel desirous that tho record bo


searched to find that ovidonoo and road it?


DR. SS RVATIUSi I do not intend to put another quostion to tho
witness on that rat tor. Tho rooord will show lator on what tho oorroot
situation was.


THE PT


prooood.


S!«T: Tho rocord will show. The cross omul nation my
Frits JENICCKE (Rosunod)

CROSS EXAMINATION (Continued)


&X DR. SERVATIUSt


Q. Witnoss, you have statod that during tho tino you woro in
St,Blastan in the hospital, an officer had told you that 3randt was
connootod with tho colloction of insano persons and Jews in Lublin?


A. Yos.

Q. That was a aattor which interested you very moh, wasn?t it?

A. Yos; it interoatod not oily noj it also intorostod tho gontlu-
non who talked about it, that whole group of poople we were with.


Q

and you


expert on the subject of insane persons
tho so—oaUed Euthanasia Progran?


that.


mst have boon especi al ly interested in


Court Nc. 1

17 Jan 1*7 •• A - 12-1 - LX - Leaser (H)


A. Yes, I '•os in tores ted in it.

Q. A vary special interest, wasn't it?


- 1911 a -


Court No. 1


17 Jwn U7 -A - 12-2 - LOG - Lesser


A. Yes.

4 . Did you on any other occasion receive sone confirmation of
that mor?

A. Kataaide free this case.

C.. I aa suro that you wouMhava reambered it, wouldn't you?

k. Probably.

Q. I have another quostici to put to you. Do you know the original
decree, where Brandt and Bouhlor vore authorised and where physicians
were authorized to conduct Euthanasia?

A. In the trial at rYankfurt I had an opportunity to read a photo¬
stat* c copy of this decree.

Q. At that ti to, during that first conference in Borlin, was this
decroo proaontod?

A. Ho, not tris docroe.

3. »ut were you told at tnat time that a critical Judjrant of tho
caso history was important for the eelection of the sick?

A. Yes.

Q. Tnat wu told you?

A. Kay I hoar your quo3tion once core?

4. At tiiat tine 7cu did not see tho decroo. You saw it later,
didn't you?

A. Yes.

Q. I moan tho decree waero it siid that a critical jud^awnt f
tho caso history of tho patient would bo node and only then could
Euthanasia bo authorized?

A. There was a special otraorar.dur on the principles to be considered
in forcing tais opinion, and also fer filling out tho questionnaires.

itness, we will cere to that later. I ac now asking you
ivut the decroo itself.

A. This decroo which uontioned Brandt and Bcuhler I did net see
in February 19U0, in borlin.


-1912-


Court No. 1

17 Jan U7- 12-3-A - LJG - l^aoer

3 . Jut ytu saw it later, during the trial?

A. During the trial at Frankfurt.

Q. And what did it contain?

A. It said that physicians were permitted to give "nercy killing"
to insane persons. I do not know whether that was the exact wording.

I can not recall the text. It wasn't much. It was about this much text.
(Demonstrating.)

Q. You said before that at any rate there were ^diccl points of
view which wore decisive for the selection?

A. Yoa.

Q. Now you further state that even in the case a the imar.tor in
the concentration coop, questionnaires had to bo filled out. You furthor
stated that political prlsonora and Juws were expertized in that manner?

A. Yes.

4 . ahat points of view woro docisive in their c'soe?

A. That has alroady boon discussed. The Jews wore not ^dgod
according to their hoalth but from tho point of view <f tho :oasons for
thoir arrost.

Q» So there were political and racial considerations•'

A. Yob.

3. ’iho govo you tho order to use theso points of /low in your
procedure?

A. I also said that before. That varied. Scnctimes it was Profoosor
liiotscha, so.'.etir’os Frofessor Heydo, 'r l!r. Brack. These woro tno people
who indicated tho procedure to bo used.

3. ..as not this co_xl tely in contradiction to What had been oaid
at tho baginning?


- 191 >


17 Jan. Ul. A-12-1A-FKF- Lester
Court So. 1


A. A. least it hau nothing to do with Euthanasia of the ir.sc.je.

q. fc'.ien did you start proceeding according to this point of view,—that is,
racial and political consideration? Wa3 it already during your first
visit to the concentration caap?

A. No.

Q. Well, wnen did it happen?

A. In ay opinion that could only have boen begun in Bachenwald or anybo
at Dachau.

Q. Will you just naac a cate, an approximate date? Las it before tho stop
or after the stop, - I neon the Euthnnasea step?

A. Probably before the Euthanasia stop.

Q. And what -«c tho procedure before that? What was your task in tho
concentration ccrap before that?

A. Tho ox'tmirvtion of prisoners who wore presented, to doteminu whether
thoy were pyacho or pathological.

0 . ..ell "t firot it wes a sedical question and If tor or. it boccco a
political -nil racial quostion?

A. Tos. That is, in addition to the political and rfcial question there
wore Later purely acdicsl considerations, cases which had to bo jud*od from
t;.u nodical point of view.

Q. So Later thtro were two csoo. Thor. wero tho insane poople who,
according to nodical considerations, hai to be exportixod; and tho othoro,
who had to bo Judred accord!nr to political r.nd racial considerations?

A. One cannot ooncmto tho two, they wvro nat cloarly dividod froa oach
other.

Q. hheru-vor you examined a largo mr-.ber of Jews would you ary that nil of
-hoc wore insnno at the saao tine?

A. I have -lready answered that quostion. I have sr id tlv.t it is ray
opinion th-t thoy were not sick et -all — either insane or physically ill.

Q. 3ut you did fill in those questionnaires?

A. Yes, tho so were* the orders wo had froa Berlin.

C;. And who was to expertize and judge those questionnaires?

A. I do not kn cm.


-191—


17 Jan. 47-A-12-2A-PKP- Lesser
Court So. 1

Q. Arc you of the opinion th*t a physician was to do this judgi:;g?

A. I would not know wba* a doctor could learn froe tho questionnaires
filled out about Jcwo.

DR. S3l7*mS: I have no further quottiens to put to the witness.


17 Jan U7-^-iL^"i3-Wialoy (XL)
Court :»c. 1


HI DR. FHOBSCIKAHH* Dr. Frooaoteann, coureol for defendant Victor Brack.

q Jitnoss, at first I bavo a question to put to you; baforo
February 191*0 woro you in oontact with loading circles in Go many who
knew about the health situation and woro ontruated with tho loadership
of tho health situation in Go many?

A :;o.

9

Q Boforo February 191*0 woro you already dealing with the probloa
of Euthanasia?

A Jto.

Q Neither in praotico nor by way of writing?

A As a studont I occasionally road sonathing in quito briof
artiolos mentioning scoothing about Euthanasia, but I did not road a
groat doal in that Hold.

Q So you rpally ccdo no publications about that natter?

A Ho.

Q tforo you a narbor of tho S.A.?

L !*>.

Q Woro 70U a noebor of tho S.S.?

A Yog.

Q What t as your rank in tho S.S.?

A I ta a adjutant of tho S.S. Oborabschnlttc, pfyrsidan of
'fliosbadon.

Q And in tho ;oar 1939, or rathor tho beginning of 1910?

A loo, I was that at that tiuo.

Q Did you at that tloo already taxrr Professor Hoydo?

A Ho.

q You only redo his aoquaintanoo later?

A I not hln only through tho Euthanasia Pro gran in Berlin.

Q Did you at any tina hoar for what roasens you woro askod to
attend this conference in 191*0?

A I never hoard anything positive on that point, but I


- 1916 -


17 Jan U7^'^A-^3-2-«2loy-(n')

Court 2ks 1

«. ^ ^

csauao that the S.S. office of the 3.S. Ofcorabschnitt Rhein in ^iosbaden
to which I belonged, hod, witteut rjy approval rocomended no for this

work#

q 2 fcw, anothor eanplox of questions; this aomins during tho
examination ycu repoatodly us ad the word "Euthanasia Prc-ran", now lot
ua talk a littlo about the Euthanasia problen; you stated bo fore that
at one timo as a student you were slightly interested in tho question
and doalt with it; did you at any tino boforo February 1910 deal with
Euthanasia problenS?

A 2fo.

Q So it was soaothing oocplotdy new for you, sonetldng
ccaplotely now that you had in Fobruary 19^0?

A Tos.

Q Tfhat did you understand at that tino by "Euthanasia?"

A Tho aid which a tkotor gives a sick porson who is dyirg and
wha rakos tho doath oaoior in this way.

q Woll, if I understood you correctly, you noon to say


- 1917 -


17 Jpn-3H-13-3%-tloy
Court Fo. 1.


thnt euthAnnol" docs not conn a shortening of the life, hut r. olid deeth,
a nild ns possible?

A Tea.

<> You hr.ov the Pyich ren-1 Codca, don't ou?

A Tee.

q You Also ’now th t as In nil other countries of the Vorld tho kil¬
ling of hurian bein.to lo forbidden? '*

A Yea.

q And you further Jtiow th*t the criterion of nurdor consists in tho
f-.ct th'.t the will for llfo lr. mother poraon'a cind io being interfer¬
ed with?

A Yea.

q You know thnt. don't you?

A Yoa.

q Tow. you were tho director of a contnl institution for ir.onno . e-
orlt?

A Yoa.

q And According to the general jmrrooo of tint Institution it wna
the tnak of the -hyaicl-n to givo thcripcuticl trentnrnt to the pnti-
ento And to ret tore then to n cort".ln derroo of he-lth?

A Tr a.

q And to try -nd cure thic if possiblo?

A Tea.

Q ldn't you h-vc -ny Dis,-i"in-a -bout vhrt you honrd in Berlin, -nd
didn't -ou thin* th-t it w-.s la contradiction to the prohibition of nur-


A Such nlaglvinr.s often occurred to nc. On the other h*nd, however,

there vro -lw-ya the positive naeurmco of the gcntlen-n-

r . One noaent. I wmt to rvsh you to confine yourself to ny question.
I sh-11 cone to th-.t point Inter. You were snying th-.t in tho yi-.r of
--IO — in Fobru-ry 19-X. you felt no ria'dvinga whatsoever?

A I did not s>*y that.


- 1913 -


1? is-kiioy

Court Vo. 1.


q Thftt is ho'' I understood you.

A X said that fro= tire to tL* - nisfiivin.-s on this question did
core to ae.

^ L'tor, after Februpry 1940?

A Iron the becinnin;; of this activity.

C rid you. during the course of the period that followed, concern
f oursclf with th. o»tha».ln protloa - I '■»»'« thc ™<“ a ' 1

the oroblon; 00 you understand cy question?

* rco. In .o far a. finely Whins law con.idcratlon all detail*
4 orcrcl.ins =-dic,l JodsPont. I c-no to tea r.-ali».tlon that far «-
•elut hopelo.ly lawn, pcr.on. >:« had no fcoll.v of their own life
,. d „o „„rcno.. of their .urroundlnso. that for tho.o pooflo it wo-.ld
to hotter to b. dead than allro. In thl. for= the pi-otlca of which ”ou
c pc*h afr-oorod to no. Sut lh addition to that. owe. which do not fall
into thl. category, which I hare Ju.t do.orltod. oa. . out.ldo thl. oa-
totrory, I »lviyo rejected.


- 191 ^-


17 car. kl-L-13-
Court .*a. 1


-olcy


.c haven't ecno that far, -'cctcr. I nr. enly int^rostod in yaur
arsenal attttudo tc ihc qu sti-n rf tho cuthonasia ^roblcr:. Y.u .wricuely
onnotrod tc that question vh.n I ac!a. :u what ;\u under:tee,, a .cut outtian-
aair.j you said -..-hat ms correct, a&*Jly tc ivo a ycaaiblc aasurcuwo .S a :dl:l
death toward c. severely 111 acre ;•» zivta* fate canr.. t be aljc-ur..cd?


j. Hoc, subsequent!,' to Fobruary 1?UC, die yt'~ ccnccm y .urscl f vfith
the jthia&l attitude due follow ra cl the oppcncata of the cat .aaasia
problcj?

... I cccisilorid the fcllcwln;. at tho tfcoo fra. the .logical y int
of flow; •virrt/i'ne w<r bcisod on tho national beoialisn Ideology o« it ■«.*
accrvdiiv: tc the >' .ti-ral 5ocia. l l •. SdB'locy that a outhonwiR t* rt.-j.: in
tho twnao that it jbs set up i bo «*t up, .. ; ainst thooo icaaur fl f
tho *01 n 1 which .».s .-.ally ilonticsl Wit oialioa t I cgpwa

ti;; idee* of tho u evcrine3nt v a quit inadvisable , and that line its off, ot
:t tv.o inner ettitudo i th-* InHvldunl.

). I C3 ufcin y-u whothor y .u - nc.rt.-.: ycurs-If frith the attitado
•jx ;ro cr tho cp( nente f t! euthanasia probice, tfiethur y :u
trio! t- infora ;*curaclf about their tfwunry 1 . »t ; au

have Jr. t Url . the .i ,h Tribunal nay jo v.r intcrcotinj withruf.i\j:»cc to
ycur* A a-S'-nal ottituJo, bet it . c x.t OM or .y qucsticn. * dr I an
•jure that . -u kn.r that txry,e3 nach veil and :xoiv.ritin a*: t tile ,-r b-
. • woru pulliehe one att rancoo re node uilat
and . e.lical : kin; t!a you iocr that?

... far as literature r. t-; :r.‘;Ic.: I euthanasia I ; t . ver*-

.•a., t . v tho little oeepondinn ' . in.'in;-.: ci.c.

.'.<it / u ! t any l: iro Kbemnycr, hither, and .

-.er?

L. - i ! n-t ravw that.

V • av ;;c renaen .ftcr Fobruaxy 1 ?Ug to c.ncurn y-ursolf ’.-it thus,


- ers?


17 »:

c Q*t J'. 1


... i -i-' iv>t concern ^•solf with t' .u .

.. -v.rir.; tho e-nfcr-oncc jf IVuruaiy l: 1*1 not cnly :>c leal . on v ut
l au yor s :r-.j supposed to 'o proson* t.o is that correct?

... " oemt-o that Sr. Hoffol*»nn is n imryor.

:• a . ut tb r tontl&an fr . the icoic.. dnistry f Ju--icc, weren't
thoy r*r- -nt t. o?

... I c.-nnct say tho aajority of tho ;joutlosicn. I have f. v: Lion
thoir p-rs ns as mil as their nauos.

n't y^j rcixnhcr any leader with reference tc a logoi basis ef
such a cwtla n as l a , cr was a basis ale by no r £ *'o ft'.or gootlonon?

... ‘r.io local basis nos discussed. .. law was :icnti n-;'., a regular law
lol . -• dttc: tide activity, eoclarod it firoo i punishnont ,m . -.to two
t l t ' la law as vali'. and bindin

Q. 'JitU rofuroncc t - this law .u rro opoaldn; of n. w, was tlicro any
anti n o f it droaifc' in tojrwr? l.'i;.; arc j.-u sure that . v aren't
vro&c cb-it tint?

... .b’.ruflr; 1/hO a law no? r-r .

:. I & J -u because r .1.0 a law teas n

n . ‘ — droit cf such a law.


... .hen It c ul. have booi at a later tooting in Jkrlin this lav


.


^ Cfl th-- basis of the statenents that wore todc la February, 19^0, in
i-. Lrge circle, did you think that you were Justified to deprive inseno
persons of tuvir lives end shorten tact in a painless aannerT

.. It wns not ay duty to shorten tho lives of tho ineono.-persons, it w:.s
_y duty to act as u nodical export.

^ 2 X 0 activity, acting as an export, included tho approval of the
ttitudo oi other physiol; ns or tho approval of the acting of other physician
who actually wero to snorten toe liv..s of these insane persons?

A Yob.

^ I :s now asking y.u, did yo foci yruraolf Justified to participate
in such an nffair, if I ay put it that vnyj?

A On tho basis of tho consents of tho lrw, yes.

^ _nd ovorytnlng th t vr.s connected with Euthanasia was called by you
tho so-called 3orlin action?

A Yos.

^ At any rato that It what you said in your letter to your wifo?

A Y os.

This corning. n.rc dy nontior. was t.do that certain circles of porsons
were to bo oxcludod fros this SutoAnuola. At tho nocont wo don't want to
know Ju*”. what circles wero to bs excluded, but want I do want to know ip
vast I n- r.sking you • nd that i* whothor In that discussion in ?obru».ry,

19^0 if theso exclusions voro aontlocol?

A Yes, theso exceptions wero announced fron the very beginning.

■i ~ad now, witness, I want to ask you what circles wan that to extond
to, tied I an reforriog to tee exceptions?

a People who had cot beon tnreo years in institutions, war veterans,

:1 o jxopluctica und i-onilo eases, also all organically sick porsona with
no cental disturbances.

1 -ad was there not u group acong then that wns dosigzv tod s n foreign
group?

A So.

■1 Tuere was no talk about foreigners; or don't you reaeaber it?


- 1 ? 23 -


17 Jan^ry-r-DJa 1 ^- B-Kochan
Court 3o. 1

^ Foreigners wore not sectioned.

^ Aro you sure of th t? you told us yesterday that becau o of your
Piy^ical illness your power of concentration has suffered --onovhnt. I don't
van*, to cause you any trouble and I na asking you rgnin whether it ui^it not
bo pos iblo that tho»e foreigners were discussed and naybo you don't roaonbex
it at the sorent?

: la not aworo that foreigners woro aontionod in this connection.

* vitacss. the Prosecution repeatedly pointed out that the decree of
Hitler, with reference to which ay predecessor hero on the Prosecution ashed
you. was any roforoaco undo at that tiuo that this decree v.s to be kept
socrot; do you know that this decree and the Suthaansia of insane persons
was to bo kept secret?

A I learned of this decree, as I said before, only recently, but that
the whole prograu of Buthann.in was to bo kept secret wo wore told fro,, the
r-ry bvginning. It *c.s to ha kept a top «ccr_t .uetter.

4 Did you not object to the f'.ct that thee directives wore to be kont

secret?

A Yes. but the reasons for thin socrocy wore given as fo'lows! :hcy
wanted to avoid UUT«st att>ng the people, which «. very iurortnnt during the
war and for that reason the thing should not bo discussed.

* This warning, ..nsvwring a question of the Prosecuting Counsel, tl.o
question bwlng whether snbotago wr-s punishable by death in concentration car,
y,u : ns wo red -los- at 2 wore repeatedly told that in such c< sos would bo
tr-nsferred into a concentration c: up and that noroover there was a poosibil
ity of shooting. * y>u rcuonbor that? More you not n little wrong in ox-
pressing yourself? The Prosecutor was a- king you about sabotage; woro you
not referring to the breach of socrocy wnon you =udo that reply? Do you
undorsr .ol the difforonco?

A Tao broach of secrecy is also sabotage considered faja the point of
view on th. whole.

^ But. one coy have a difference of a pinion on th -t. Mh-.t I did want
to know m, tais corning did you properly understand the »r&. -DUbot.v.c"


-1923-


17 Jnnu ry-A-SJ&-l-i->-iXchan
0 :urt Ho. 1


or did you naan the goners! obligation to keep tho =ottor secret?

A 3 y sabotage I neon constant interference and if a top socr-t tetter
f . talked about, that is fron ny point of view constant interference of the
execution of what the top escrot natter wants.

q Vitneec, this earning during the cross odaninntion by tho Sofenoo
Countol of the Defendant Brandt, you voiced tho opinion and you onid that
it v- s rot only hod the uneninous Judgment. but also r. majority dcciolon
was tho basis for an insane person to be transferred to n Suthnnaoia Institu¬
tion?

A Yob, not all tho opinion hid to bo positive.

^ Yes, that is what you said.

A That is why the opinion of tho top export wnt obtained; thoy had no
right to ouropir.ion.

i I was Just going to spook of chat o.uostiou: you voro noaod an oxpert?

A Yes.

4 In. top expert quite ir.dopend.-Jit of you end quite independently of
the jixitf wn*. of the otn.r oxperts hod too rosponsiblo o. Illation r.nd had to
decide w.xothar in fact the condition of tho patient v..e soriouc enough to
warrant the Suthanr.slc of thrt patient?

A Yoa.

^ Did you too in tnis fact n sufficient safoguard that errors with
reforonco to the condition of the patients were oxcludod?

A I a - .v at least en extensive safety v.nt. I know that a University
professor Is not Infallible and oven in the nodical field, but in gonornl
these fccntlecon havo groat experience and one can have a cort-in r~ount of
con: 1 donee in their work. To *.nnt extent tho activity of the top export
over us as exports gave no certain inner confldor.cc that in tho ceco of an
unconscious nlotako on xy part, the top expert would ‘till bo cole to correct
it.


-192h-


17 Jan 47 -A-7J C-15-l-Hi na>nwk
Court Vo. 1

<1 You already said this norning that during th« rurthor course of the
jnc*: you -rb ectiwo a. «» o«p«r.. X, an «r-rt you vara anted to attend
,CU note nttod to boocao an export durlnc thi. OtetUVS of Pobruory, 1940.
upon whose euceastlon were you asked that? Did Professor (ttetsebo surest

ycu or did Profossor Heydo suggest you?

A Ho, those of us who wore invited to attend wors all asked to part¬
icipate in this work.

1 Yith roforoaco to your appoi-taont ns an export, did you receive
a-y writton confirmation?

A Ho.

a Now, Witness, this nomine aal yostordny you ropoatodly spoko about

the tt'eacy in Borlln?

A Yos.

o AaS I want to talk to you about that for a littlo while; Just what
agoncy ycu consldorod at that tiro. You do know thnt in addition to Dr.
3r*nU, Bouhlor was authorized by Hitler by that docroo to authorize certain
physicians to ciwo norcy dooths to certain lncurofclo patients. Now whoro
did Bouhlor hero his offico in Sorlin?

A In tho Roioh Chancollory.

4 ‘/hat street?

A Vossstrasso 4.

ft Correct. In Edition to that offico in Vosstrasso 4, was thoro
onothor offico in Borlln whoro rxjdical quostion3 woro dealt with?

A In February, 1940, not yet; but soon thereafter in Tiorgartonstrasoo
4, tho Reich Association for lAjntal Institutions was 3oJ up.

■; In the Tiorcartonstrasso 4, yos, I on interested in that offico.

Who .:ns active thoro?

A Profossor Hiotscho, Profossor Heydo, Ur. .Ulors, a contain !Ir.

Uounar m whoso n«:o I rocor.ber who worked on tho qartionnairos, and I don't
knew tho names of tho sthom.

1 You already .-»ntionod ono a®* this rvorainf., a.*ran who was ou-nosod
to m thoro. I ar now asking you, was Oborrofiorunrsrat Bohno thoro?

A Bohno? I don't know about that.


- 1925 -


17 Jan 47-A-?JC-lS-2-Nicabuck
Court No. 1


q Ho is unknown to you?

A Yos.

n Did ycu over co to Tiorcartonstrasse 4 personally?

A Yes.

- do you knew how this office wes na»*>d in int«r-offico caxjunicr.tions?

I know this office only unlor tho cc^o, Tiorsertonstrasso 4.

n Ka--o you ovor hoard of thu designation "7-4"? Ta at is, tho abbreviation
for Tiorcortonfltrasso 4?

A I don't ror.ot;tor hocrinc that.

1 Hew, it is corroct that in Tioreortonstrasso 1 thoro was an offico
tf.oro ?rofosaor Hoydo and Profosacr Kiotacho woro nctivo?

A Yos

•j Did this offico hero anyth 1 nr. to do with tho sor.iins of questionnaires
durine tho following ported?

A Yos.

o Only this offico?

A Only this offico.

^ Do you knew tho connection botwooa Tiorc"Jtonstraoso 4 and tho Roich
Uinistry of tho Interior?

A Ho.

o. This :x>rninr, you youroolf nontionod tho nano of tl.o official who was
active in th- Reich Ministry of the Intorior with roforonco to questions of
Aithcnasia. Do you still r«iaj:bor that naio?

A Yos.

1 Dr. Linden. You said with roforonco to Dr. Lindoa that ho w~s a dond
Influence?

A Yos.

'I 3ut ho w'a vory nctivo, wn-n't ho?

A tfoll, I can only say how ho lookod to no, and accordin, to his appoaranco,
I can only s-y that he wa3 rory littlo activo and always envo tho i::proGSlon
cf a comlotoly apathetic porson.

1 Did you have any declines with Linden?

A Ho.


-19 2>-


17 Jen 47-A^rc-lS-5-Bia»boek
Coart I’o. 1

!tot oven question* of tiu 3elch Ccccittoo?

* r don't recall tut I 0 T 0 r h*l onr l«Cttr oonurutlon -. 1 th Mi..

„ Md ,on otor uto w ucotlnti-n «th ?«*« :<> and taft—

•Hotscho?

_ That's Lnpjonod uoro often.
p 2osocially Proffossor Hoydo?

.• ifi lone n* IrofasBor Hoydo .50 still -oricinr. in the proffer
fj Ho* lone, was Profoascr Hgydo activo in that r~° ?w 7
i It :nist hero boon during 1941 that ho loft,
o Do ycu know why ho w« oxcludod?


-1927-


17 Jan ; -l 5 ^-*-»TD-Kinabuclc
Court So* 1


A No, I did not find that .>at,

Q Don't you know who caused his departure?

/. I oxo heard soosth'.ng of a personal dispute botwocn hira and •
another younger physician, but whether that was the reason for Professor
ifcydeis loavinc I doubt very such, cad I don't kno- the naas of the other

doctor* I don't kr»w tho reasons.

Q Wall, what do you thiric of Profosscr Heydo, looked at as a human

bcinr.?

A rrofessor Heydo was an SS Fuehrer and head of the University
Nerve Clinic*

q Ho, I cean his personality.

A Ho was friondly.

n Was ha a convinced adhorcr.t to tho Euthanasia thought?

A Yos, ho was in to res tod in this problem,
q Did you speak to Heydo his career?

A No.

Q Do you know that Kaydo was tho nodical consultant on tho staff of
the Orupponfuchror Eicko? Doesn't Bioko noan anythine to you?

A I know tho none.

q Is it correct that Eicko was tho inspector of concontration camps?
A I de-.'t know, but I do know tho name, Eicko.
q Do you know whether thoro was any connootion botwoon Eicko and

K-yde?

A No, I do not know.

q So you know nothin- about tho quostion whether Heydo was caused by
Eicko or a certain Brtgadofuehrer Gluocks to carry out thoso Boasuroa in tho
concontration cup within tto franowork of Euthanasia?

A I know nothing about that,

Q Didn't Hoydo ever spoak to you about that?

A !fo.

q So I can deduce from your statements that the center point of tho
Euthanasia program was at tte "T-h" wh.ro all the questionnaires am! reports


-192S-


17 ^TO-»fln*buck

Court Ifa. 1

vw or not oxportisod were connoted end centralised, and from then

on sore passed on to othor neonclosj is that correct?

A As for as I knew anythlne about things in Berlin I can say yes.
q in ona of your latter, to your IfeJ that is, the letter of the
lAtk of A~.nir.ry ISM, you spoke of Ox: fact that you could net find the
Mfcndant Brack because he had departed for the East -1th a nunbor of people
belonging to this organisation -M." in order to prepare the action 1 th

reference to Gem&n woundedj is that correct?

ICl. McHAlEJ. I suegost twit the paper bo put in front of tho wit¬
ness so he can soe what he has written.

THE rrSSHJMT. That would bo proper if tho witness could not
rooccbcr the docunont. If he doe. romebor it there is no occasion for


refreshing his ajeory,.

q (By Dr. Froosctaann) I ranted to ask you, did you know at that
,!» that Brack, a Ion; tins before that had -d=ne to tho Eastern front?

That was olroady at Christnas of 19 Ul.

A X can say tho fcllowingl I -as in the Concentration Cnnp Ravo«-
bruck. I hnd boon raring in tho Concentration Camp navonsbruck, I wont
back to Berlin in order to deliver tho queotlonnalres which had boon fill*
out at ttorgartenstrasso he W ™» b ° ! °™ Christnas, ISM. When I cane
to Tiorgarteratrnaso there was quite oonsidorablo confusion there. When I
asked for the reason I was told that a Urge part of the Personnel of the
notch Association for Mental Institutions -as ployed at the Eastern fron¬
ts giro aid to Goman wouMod and that vehicle, of tho Sick Transport
Conpany wore also bine used, and that nan, of the people had left for the

East.

q cut you knew nothin* about tbs detail of Drack to tho Eastern

front?

A I hoard nothing about that.

Q Kitneea, rare you often in contact 1th the Defendant Brack?

A Not very oft®.


-1929-


17 Jan*-I6-1-A-.'»TT)-Putty
Court Ho* 1


q Ihat is your iapression of the defendant Brack?

A I always talkod to hin very pleasantly even when bo reproached no
for belt*; too lax In ny opinions. He did not oppose ny objeotion very
strongly* and in other cases when we had discussed purely business natters
it was always without friction, without difficulties on either side.

Q So he was ready to give assistance and he was pleasant?

A Tea. I never noticed arything to the contrary.

Q Do you know rfiat position Brack really hold in the Chancellory of

the Fuehrer?

A Ho hold the position of a socond administrative offioial, Brack
w&a tho second nan.

Q towdo you know that?

A I learned that. Dr. Hoffolnann probably talkod about it.

Q Isn't it truo that Brook Just as four or fivo of his oolleagues
was ontrusted with a certain sphere and that Douhlor ae the Reichsleitor
in tho Chancellory of the Fuehrer had no doputy at all? Do you know nry-
thing about that?

A On those organisational questions at the top of tho total program
I do not understand thos things.

Q WoU, lot us loavo out tho word "program," I an Just spooking of
tho Chore oil ory of tho Fuohrer, and I an asking you did 70U know what
general task tho Chancellery of tho Fuohrer had?

A I Stmw that the Fuohrer Chancellory was a function of tho Party.

q I cannot contradict you hero booauso this goo® boyond tho frano-
work of tho questions which interest us hare, but I do want to ask you do
you kxxm that Hitler in order to himself fron the Influences of tho
Party croated a Chetv.alery under Bouhler In order to seo to it that
dooisions ware mde and-xaninod by peoplo who had lathing at all to ck with

tho Party?

A T cV> n>t know about that. I did not have anything to do with th.~
natters.

-I93O-


17 Jan,-l6~2-^v-A7D-Pu tty (IL)
Court Hq, 1


Q Do you know that it was Brack*s general task at first to pass
on ccnplainta and applications for narcy and other applications to tho
Fuehrer and dool with thee?

A No.

Q Do you know that Brack in the year of 1939 after tho issuance
of tho Hitler dooroo regarding Euthanasia was askod by Bouhlor to assist
hin in the organization of this affair in addition to his other dities?

A I an not aware of that,

Q And you don*t know that tho Euthanasia activity of Brack was
only a oido activity?

A I always understood that Euthanasia was tho nain fiold of
3rack*s work,

Q That is what I wanted to know froa you. I wanted to know
whothor you aro aquaintod with that all. Do you know that tho activity
of Brack in tho fraruprerk of tho Euthanasia Prcgron only took hln half
an hour daily?

A It is not known to no.

Q Do you know that Brack hod nothing noro to do with it than
answor lottors and questions regarding Euthanasia, thon possed then
on to anothor agency? Do you know that?

A I know nothing about all that.

Q But aaybo you know conothing olso. T.'ao Brack innarly, Ju3t
as you were, convinced of tho Jistifioation of Euthanasia with reforenco
to iroano persons?

A Tec.


Q Did he ropoatodly talk to you about it?

A Not only to ne, but also in circlos ....

Q ?So. I Bean in privato discussions.

A Thoro wore hardly any private conversations between us.

Q Thon how about official conversations? Didr.it Brack at any
tine talk about the mttor that he was noved by sinilar considerations?


1931


1? Jaxw-aA-J-A-ATWMttf

. tlfO^Ul canurmattnm as a>^i wlt»* Urcw w»r of pool
not with ittUri duals.

Q 3o you cun aay nothing farther About that?

A to,

Q What do you urrtteotand by an "adjutant"?

A This is an assistant.

Q To what extant was Dr, Sctaalanbaoh such aa assistant of Brack?

A It was always said Sotaalenbach was tho adjutant of Brack, and
that was thi Uprosolon I G»S 1 alimyn ormiri dorod Mb Brook’s adjutant.


-1932-


17 Jan U7 -JHftA«l6-ia-Putty (IL)
Court too 1


Q So that is ret your personal opinion, but it is sesaothine that
you know froa hearsay?

A It is not baaod on axgr objective experience.

Q Vary woll. Wat nature did your discussion h'.vo, tho discussions
you tad with Dr, 3effelaann?

A I frequently talked to Dr. Hoffelnann. I don't know *Ut
you noan.

• *

Q Well, I an referring to what you said this corning, ttat you

rop'atodly spoko to Heffolcann, and I wanted to know rrhat nature theso
discussions tad,

A I discussed tho Reioh Corrdttoo with Hoffelmnn. Also in
January, *U2, Hoffelmnn called no in and-

Q I don»t want to know any details, Just gonorally.

A Yes.

Q Did you speak about tho questions of tho Roioh Coniittoo? Did
you spool: about tho questions of Euthanasia?

A Yos. Ttat is truo.

Q Was Dr. HeffaLtann very lirply?

A Yos.

Q Ho was?

A Yoo.

Q Did you know Blankonberg personally?

A Yos.

Q Did you tavo any sciontif.’ c conversations with Ma?

A to.

Q According tc you- know! edge, whon did Brack spook to you about
concentration carps?

A As I said, it is possiblo that ttat was tho first tine ttat
Hr. Brack introduced tho concentration oanp activity. That would bo in
the simer *U2, Oranienburg, Sachs enhausen.


Q Sumer of 19l£?


17 Jan Putty (H)

Court Nc 1


A Sicker of «l0, I Bean*


- 1933 a


17 Jar. !;7-A-fcAA-l6^a-rutty (IL)
Court Ho. 1


Q in what connections did he speak about concentration cams at
that tine?

A I can*, say this for a certainty.

Q you cannot say with certainty that you spoke to hin about that
at that tine?

A It night have been Professor Heydo or Professor KLotscho and
Brack.

q flail, I Just wanted to establish that, and that aakes it neces¬
sary for a nurier of further questions. I want to establish that Brack
did not speak to you about any of your activities in tho oonoontration
caopo.

A Activity in the oonoontration carps was discussed with no by
Professor Heyde, Profossor Jtlotsohe and Brack,

Q Well, now, you say again that you did speak to hin about it.

A Yes, but I (tontt know in which case ono person diaoussod it,
or in which case another person, and in which case tho third person.

Q And what was said with reference to your activity vory gene¬
rally? What activity noro you to exercise in tho concentration oaap?

A Filling out the questionnaires.

Q Witnoss, up to that tine you woro norely an expert with rofo-
ronco to Euthanasia of the insano persons?

A Yes*

Q How, if suddenly you are approached and asked to go to a con¬
centration canp and there exorcise so=» sort of an activity, you would
have asked, " <hy? How coae? 'fhy choose no?" Didn’t you ask about the
reason?

A This aiming I said that on our first visits to concentration
casps it was the question if there were psychotic or psychopathic
disturbances. Only at a later tine did our activity in the concantra-
bio zi canps go beyond those question* to other persons#


17 Jan Ii7-^-«U-l6-3a-Putty (IL)
Court lie. 1


Q Tfell, nay I take It that your reply la that In the sumer of
191,0 ycu rare given the order to oxanino inaatos in the concentration
on their rental state of nind as far as they woro in cor Win
psychopathic stagoo? That was ooroletoly in compliance with tho field
in which you had worked in preparation for Euthanasia,

A fee,

Q Did you have ary nisgivings about that, and did you have ary
thoughts about this being aoncwhat abnomal?

A tto.


Q And you think you ean roaccbor on that oocasion that Braolc
gavo you some ordors in that connection?

A Xos. Only I <ton«t know J.i which caso it was.


- 1935


17 e'o--~t : 7-7-Srpon.

i^art ..o. l.


3- Yet, very wall. You already stated tals morning that, with rofcronco
to the aocond action, you wore concernoi with tho examination of Jowa; you
could not state, with certainty, vhother any directives w.r givon to you
by Brock: ls'nt that correct?

— I cannot any with certainty. I cannot say It.

D.'t 7IOZSC2-AL.’: I t vj no further questions.

BY D3. OJfLTX: (D3F22JS2 C30SSSL FGd DSFZKD.Jr H3VXH)

v Jltncss, in agreement with tho Prosecutor, I uadorstood you to toy
th t in the win.or of I 9 ID. and tho second tine in 19 UI, in tho concentration
ca~p you saw tho dofoedaut. Hovea. thoro.

... I aust hovo — I aiit base ay ovldocco on -y letter.

^ lottcr is dated Jovonbor. I 9 UI; I an going to show It to you
lator.

... jd tftnfc occasion I sow Dr. Hovon.

Did you soo hia on tho occasion of tho precoding visit wfcon you
voro bnek?

A. I don't roaoaber.

v Vould you rccognlso defendant Hovon again?

~ 90.

I an now submitting to you this lottor of tho 25 th of Xoroubof 19 I 1 .
,j. President, tnis is Docunent SO ^07* pogc 39 of the Gorman Docunent
3ook and U 5 of th- Sngllth Docm.nt Book, Docunent Book po. 16 . Can you
fled the nano of SS-Ocersturnfuohror Dr. Hovon?

... Yes.

You sty in th t letter Cat.? Paysician SS-Oborsturnfuohror Dr. Hovon —

— Tol, C~? physician.

... :ne nocent plctso. I snould li e to put to yiu that at thr.t tiuo
tho O-p Physician was Dr. Blancko; tho defendant. Hovon, W"a tho soconl cnap
physician.

A. raen I was cisinfornod.

v So is thcro a possibility of an orror?

— An orror on tho prxt of s«ro one else.


ICC- s


17 Jia-j-5S&-17-3-Saiip»on

Court So. 1.


3 . Thank you. Sow. you don't neod the letter any longer. During the
oxaainfttion you said that you o.ily net Dr. Hovon whoa you woro introduced
to hin. Shat can you soy, froc y .r ova knowlodgo, a 0 to whc.t extent Dr.
Hovon assisted you in your activities. I only want facto which you can
rcooObcr.

Ho did not holp u* at all.

Ho did not assist you at all: thank you. It is correct that you
filled out questionnaires fo. all Jews in the concentration ca-pnt
HuchonvaidT

... Those headings had already 000 a fillod >ut in tho cr.p.

I an sutoaittlcg to you tais docunont onco coro; you say in that
lottor that you fillod out questionnaires for 12 cO Jews.

... 1200 Jews. yoo.

I now out to you that thoro wor„ only 1200 Jew# in tho entiro eonp
of Bucnonwald. Thoroforo, you fillod out quostionnniros for r«ll Jowo?

... That was how it was ordorod thon.

v c ry woll. Tou furthor an do a — you nay put tho docunont away —
you further already stated that the quostior. of health did not olny any jftrt
in tho cr.ao of tho Jews.

A. That is right.

;. Is it corroct that only hl-o reason for orreat played r. port?

A. The rontons for arrost wjr„ entered on tho questionmirs.

v Is it corroct that 70 U fouid tho reasons of thoarrost in tho
crioinr.l files?

— Tos.

jy> you know that tao orlninal files were ir. tho political dopartnont
of the concontration ca-p?

... T^s. I don't know tho organisation of tho concontr? tion cn:^) woll
enough to know tao ton. political section; it doesn't aeon auca to do.

;. In any caso, it has nothing to do with crininal files?


Court Ho. 1

17 Jen L7-A-l?-la-£! S-Sanpeon


A. 2*o.

q. It can, therefore, oc seen therefrom that the crap physician
played no part in that decision whatever?

... ’..hat the duties of the ceup physician wore in those natters I
cannot say; I don't knew.

q. oil, if y-u consider the :-ct that the physical state of the Jews
played no part hut the rniy thLr that played a port was provi us sentences
- - ircu that it con easily bo se^n thr.t it did not rest cn the odic.al
decision.

A. Ho.

Q. You further said during y ur cx.ai_inr.ti n that the enup physician
had these inr.tof selected for you. Sov, please consider wh'.t I Just put
to you. ..euldn't you have to correct your reply?

A. 7h_ persona c nee rood w«-rc .resented to ne by tbo cr_.ip physician,
or he he.: the presented to jo end at the sano tine tho qu-sti naairos, the
question of ’ate, had already boon filed.

q. Even in t in concentration c.-.ip of ?uchonrnld in Kovoobor 19lil?
ttoaso differentiate between craps. V.'c are not concurncd now how it was
in ther Cvncontration canpc. I a: only intorosted hew it was in Novoober
19U1 in tiv: c-nccntration coup of Buchom;ald.

A. Tlx. Jo^-ish pris ners w^ra. presented U -x. and at tho oa;v: tino
th: r iic-rdc.

Q. ‘..ho presented th^a te yet"

A. Ball —

*

q. Was it the c.ar.p physician, was it th. labor otail leader, was it
th_ political cc.nissiencr, cr was it by the Gestapo?

-l. It v-.s not tile ca -f> physician. It \—.s the SS ricn who vroru assigned
to that duty. i J cn't knew trvir rank.

q. T hun, I understood you correctly te say that you hevo no cltt-s at
all far tho fact that the carp physician Bade the selection and under ne
c’ .-custances con ycu say that th- defendant Hcven was instru _ntri in this


cc’-ction in 1 'ove:bcr 19U, in any way whatsoever. la that correct?


a. L' it *3 correct that in Eucbenwold there wore only 1200 Jews alto¬
gether, then it is difficult tc say that ary cne had selected 12CO.

Q. Yea.

A. Eut jno can aasino that it was ordered that the Jew? in the concen¬
tration canp -at Buchcmnld all had to hrve questionnaires filled out and
that the c:u.ip physicians cooperated in this, 1 don't believe. I an a
physician -ysclf and I know that th.ro was nothing rf - nodical nature on
these questionnaires.

Q. Duri... your axaal n ation you further answered to a question of tho
prosecutor that you would not have bO\.n in a pasiticn to do your wcr»: if the
imitoo w.ro not presented t. y u by tS* physician. Toll, just tldnk of
what you tele! .ia b.foro. wouldn't you have to correct that answer too? I
80 rof °mn« to the concentr.au n cm:? of Bachonrold in Ncvo .bor 192 * 1 -

.V I did not undersel l tho boglimiQt of your quosti.r..

Q. tfton uxanintd by the rtvsecutcr, you stated the following: Hint
you would not have boon in a position to do ycur work if the iiuv.Us had
not been pr.sontod to you by tho physician.

A. "cw I car. answer. I coon tho fbllowing: In a oencontrati n cr.ap
an indefinite nuabor of jriacners nro prcsor.tod tc ao. If i had to select
lh^- ys.lf, that w uld bo i pcssiblcj end for that reason the roup of
prisoners c ncornod was sot beforehand :md were presented ;is a ;-rrup and in
the casw f 3uchonwald this c nsi( ernti.-n, strictly speaking, was t»w question
of the 1200 Jews.


1939


17 jan^c-l-A-uTD-Ceard

Court No* 1

Q And, in other cases, as I said before, tho reason for arrest
only played a part- and you said, yourself, there was nothing nodical to be
filled out in the questionnaires, and naturally those questionnaires could
be giver, to tho cacp leader without tho knowlodge of the camp phyricdaiic
Is that not correct?

A Filling out the questionnaires?

Q Yes,

A It could havo boon dono without ary nedical assistance, yos 0

Q You further said that tho list was made through official channels
by ordor of tho camp plysician*

A -That list?

Q Tho Ust that was given to you; that is what you said during your
diroot examination. Tho list of por.ons who woro to bo examined, lias such
a list nado?

A Lists woro nado on occasions, but not gonorally. It was clifforont
in difforont cases.

Q Could you say that in November 191*1, in the Concentration Camp
Dxschonwaldj that such a list was conpilod?

A I boliovo that no Ust was nado in Duchonwald at that tJmo bocauso
it was a waploto group of 1200 J<*a. There wasix. doubt about tho limits of
the group.

Q Vary woli; now, I will road to you wtet the Frosocutlon said about
tho case of Duchonwald on the 9th of December 191*6.

Mr. President, that is on page 107 of the Goman Transcript, and page
59 of the English Transcript.

"Tho defendant Ho von, as the Chief Fhysician of tho Concentration Camp
Cf - Uchorwa i' ! i took port in tho program and personally ordered tho transfor
of at least 300 to 1*00 Jewish irmtos bolonrl-ig to various nationalities to
the Euthanasia Station in Dernburg."

I an submitting this transcript to you.

'Cl. HcHAKSY: ’fey it please too Tribunal, I object to ary question put
^ the witness or ary excerpt, which is apparently from the opening statement


17 Jan.»-l5-2-A-uTI>-Eeard
Court !fo. 1


. I


of General Taylor's. It does not constitute proof in the record because it
obviously call3 for an expression of an opinion by the witness, and fron all
indications, the witness's knowledge is United to two visits to Buchorwald,
and which does not include any activities by the defendant Hovon on other
occasions,

JIEGS SSDHIW3: Hand it up Hr. HcHarcy, please.

(The document was given to the Tribunal*,)

DR. GAJTLIK: Pago 50 of tho English Transcript, Hr. Prcsidcnt e

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Counsel for the defendant Hovon is quoting fron
tho opening stateaent of the Cour_el for tho Prosecution, and that is not a
propor subjoct for the cross examination of this witness. Tho objootion is
sustained,

DR. G/.WLIKs I then want permission to ask this witness if tlie dofonrt-
ont Hovon over orderod the transport of tho 300 to 1*00 Jews to Dornburg.

THE PRESIDENT: I did not hoar tho quostion. "ill tho question bo
ropoatod?

DR. QAY2K: Tho quostion I rant to put to tho witness isi Did tho
dofondant Hovon over orlor tho transport of tho 300 to 1*00 Jews to Pcrnburg?

HP.. HcHAHET: If the Tribunal ploascs, I think tho quostion will bo
propor if ho sots soao date or tico, or sicply asks tho witnoss if ho knows
whothor Hovon over transferred, on his porscnal orders, 300. to 1*00 Jons, I
CO rot want roferonco rado to tho oponing statement to tho Tribunal. If ho
will fix tho tine, I think tho quostion is proper.

TiE rPESHENT: Tho Counsol for tho dofondant Hovon will fix sonc dat,
concerning the incident which took place at Duchonwald which tho witnoss
might havo sooo knowledge of, and tho quostion will bo proper.

DY DP. OAWLIKs

Q Did the defendant Haven, in connection with the Euthanasia Program
in Novunber 1911, order tho transfer of 300 to 100 Jews to Bornburg?

A I do rot know.

Q Did tho defendant Hoven havo the possibility in tho framework of
tho Suthanai a Pro-Tan to got such an order?


17 &n«^5~3-A-ATI>-3eard
Court !fco i


A I do not consider it possible that Bovcn could give 8uch an order
because in central the transfer of innates of the institution or caap to the
Euthanasia Institution was done on the basis of the lists fron rerlin*

Q You ore further speaking about sabotage, Tfitness, in stating that
the defondant Bovon prevented the execution of tho measure lii f 13 by a
counter aodon, 13 f li* c The 1200 Jews for wheo you filled out the question¬
naires, according to your own letters, wore really not transported away from
Ducherarald, And, I an new asking you what punishoont would have been given
for such a sabotage?

A I do not belong to the Penal Cocnittee of tho Sabotage Soction,
and never did, I cannot $lva tho prognosis for such an action,

Q Cut you can, you- yourself, say what punishaent would follow if
there was a broach of security?

A If it had boon no, I would havo boon nfrnid of boing shot®

Da, OAYTLIX: lfr<, Fresidcnt, I havo no further questions-,

THE 1 aESIDEfTT: Tho Tribunal will toko n roooss.


19v2


17 Jon. L7-A-19-1-F5G*- Kcrrcw
Court No. 1


IKS KaBSHAL: Toe Tribunal ia a;air. in session.

THE PRESIDENT: Any further cross cxAmlnction of this witness?

91 DR. VCBE&K (Counsel for defencant Elena):

Q. Witness, do you know nhat position Dr. Conti held in the German medical
service at the tin*, of the execution of the "euthanasia" program?

A. Dr. Conti wte ir. tfc. Ministry ^nd in charge of tho medical service.

Q. And did he hove another position beside? that?

A. He was city physician of Berlin. I don't knew...

C. Do you know the rvuno of tho Reich Health Loader?

A. Tos.

Q. Vho Wf s that?

A. That vas ..a^ner. I think Bloeui was tho last one.

Q. Ko > X "" nt to suggest to you that at first Wajnar was the Reich Health
Londor .'.rd nis successor wr a then Conti. Accord!nr to that, Conti held two
positions. Now, if Conti wis Joaling with thu "euthanasia" program, in whr.t
capacity did he r.ct - meaning, referring to tho two difforunt situations
thet ho held?

A. I aa not informed about that. If I should express any opinion it
would be mo roly 'n opinion.

But you do knx» that the execution of the "euthanasia" program was r.
Reich muter ire! uaa dor.lt with in tho Reich Ministry of tho Interior?

A. Tos.

Q. AAd, theref ore, if Conti n r d '•nything to do with that program At would
be in his capacity cs Under Secretory of State of the ilinistry of the Interior
one he wouldn't have doalt with it in s. cap-city of Reich Health Loader?

A. That is to be -ssumed.

Do you kr.jw whot position Dlooo at that time held in tho Reich Health
Ministry?

A. No, I don't knew.

Do you know whether Bloce had anything to do with tho entire program,

“d I acan tho "outhan-aia" program?


a. No, I don't know.

DF.. VvS.ERK: Thank you.


17 Jan. 47 - A-19-2-PK?- Kerr cm
Court So. 1

THE FE3SXDSKT: Any further cross examination of this witness by defense
counsel?

(.'io response)

Any redirect exaninctlon by Counsel for the Prosecution?


9Y 15. HoHUBY:

Q. Dr. Uonr.ecke, you wore put a nuaber of questions by defense counsel
for Haven with respect to your visit to Buchonwtld in November, 1941. Aa
I recall, the record probably now shows that you stated that only Jews were
selected on th- occasion of that visit in Kovusbur, 1941. /.ccordingly, I
wish to put to you cabin your letter of Kovonbwr 2f, 1941, written nt Weimar,
on pogo 45 of the English djciuor.t book. Document liO 907, Prosecutian
Exhibit 412. It is on pa^c 3? ot /cur book, Dr. Uenn.ckv.

A. Yes.

Q. Kow, towards the aiddlc of the lotter you st-tu: "Afterwards wo
cantlnuo-i a>ir oxr.air-.tian until about sixteen o'clock nnd I siyau If examined
105 pati-nto, liuellor 73 patients, sa th: t finally a total of 183 reports
wore ready as a first portion. As second portion * tot: 1 of 1200 Jews followed,
all of whoa do nat noed to bo examined, etc."


17 Jan li7-%^19-<iA-6/-Xcrrcv (IL)
Court Ifc. 1


A las,

Q And down a littlo lower — down near the bottom of this cxcorpt

0 0

it says i "Aftor the Jews, another 300 Aryans as a third portion, who

•

again sill have to bo cxarrinod." - ow after reading that, Dr.Mennocko,
don*t you want to correct the record so that it shows that you did
oxard.no pursers other than Jo~s in Suchenwald in JtevaSbar, 191417

In other words, Dr., you did in fact soloct sono Aryans in NovuEbur
19lil, at Buchenwald, did you not? Exnnino some?

A Yes,

Q Anothor question — did you send tho questionnaires fillod
cut on Jewish innatoc to tho sane offico as questionnaires fiilod
cut on Aryans?

A Tea.

Q And that was tho offioo for tho Reich Association Hospital
anl Nursing Establishments?

A The Roich Foundation for Kontel Inetitutions,

Q Yoo.

A Tiorgortonstr. U.

Q Ycu sent tho questionnaires there?

A Yea,

Q Tho last quostion Dr, "onnocko. Tfould you bo willing to toll
tho Tribunal how you now fool about your participation in tho "euthanasia"
pro gran?

A lee, I an trilling to express :$rsolf on that subject.

I deeply rogrot tho fact that in 19U0 I was drawn into this
Ffogran. But when, aftor tho oollapso, the wholo extent of tho
ext curd, nation of focan beings becano public knowledge of which I had
kncwn nothing up to that dato, I was ashanod that I over had any part
in this progron, even if in a subordinate position, and I an still
ashoned today. That is what I have to say.

::R.'CHAJ2Y: Thank ycu. Dr. Henneoke.


191*5 -


17 Jan U7^19-aA-a.'-Karrcir (IL)
Court ?fe« 1


I havo no further questions.


17 Jan u7-,‘.-2 >-1-1 — Telit
&. irfc .c. 1


Till ---SrilTT: Has ..cfcncc counsel e.^, lurt-cr quest! ns ro^sr'inc; tho
l-~t ; • rtioji o_ tlic ecstin.ny «-f tliic ./itaoso?

*cr the rocord, for in; tho of t_ro - n recess -he fondant !!crta fhor-
houscr infer, e * the tribunal that s’.jc vtts ill an asked that six; he accus¬
ed fre;: furt:.-r presence in court t iaaftor.i n. She requ.fit tcj '.rturtoC,
toutant i7 rheuser not boinp charged under tho euthanasia cunt, sho
is absent fr-.i c.urt f .* t.o bal an ce of this aftnrnacn. The Secretary wn-
rnl T-ill ioto that fact f :• the recur-’. It Trill also * c inclu '.o * In tho
Uranseriut.

7ao co ecu tic a n-j precocd. r'.ic irifeKsa is excused.

:E ILUCf: It Uns ' i.an called tc :y nltouti.n t. • .t an the 16 th
of Jnnuuy, .» Pace 1,7C7 f tho injlis. transcript a nistako was nnlo, in
t*u :• uaent .;o 752 o> net ^iven an w.hi’ it »ui\ar. In fact, it nos adi-
tted as .r 3ccutJ.cn inhibit .*;2u.

JliXi: l.IifO: It appear frer- /.rcico.it > *c tint it -.as aiilto.1

•■s :: .cuti- .1 .bjdlibit li2'a.

•31. -I 3.JET: Tea, sir, it uM ubtodl; : >.vicra in your doom Mt ‘ ok.

ia co Tna ssdo by £w persona tnuaorlbb tho roenrd, so that as it
n v reals , it says: "The next <1 ctsxm* n - \.o 10 cf the ducu,jont o’: is
.Xi7#, tfJok uill ho frcsocutdon 2x&LM tho . adazxxr ease." It
read, ,r ill x .rcaocution £ hihit lj2h, also i'.v.i tl.u Ksrtnmr casa." 1 Just
tnuat t>iat V appear in the rccor'.

7 "C .T: The rcco G iioy crrecU.’. to cVr the fact that the

o±ihit referred to i= nirixrod i rosccution 7-xdbit h2U.

C :UTT: this tl.o the iaxoacuti . tr uld ll’;o to aub.it to tho

-ril rol tie certificate -n'c hy 3cn. Taylor viJ rcrr xfct t- the rijht of
certain c ,.lc. ccc rf t..c Office Of Giicf *.f ^cuncol for bar Grijws to a h inis
• cr aj * octl. T‘ o c-i-tifisatc rcav*^ as f Ho c:

: .rccuti , ? an'. , an' tr rr'er f lu l.il-

I ‘ - a i- ' . 2 ,. .. . . . 301, I nr aathrrizad

' - - -- .rcsccutc charges cf a tree!ties and :nr erlncs a nlns- 1 j-; ers


1-16


17 Jen 7—-‘.-20-2-S* 4 - f-l-d
.art —


aJ the- ur oean axis pnrers and their access.'rios. In the liochcr f
the res. .Tsibiliti -3 conferred on . 5 - by tie above ncntior.ad «rf.era, 3
*.rvc authorised and u-tcil«-l ueifi-rs -f qy staff ts:c are cn r^cf ^rlth uc
in tix> ro r.rcti n a.r^jrcsccation 0 / casea , including att'm?ye, inter:--ga¬
tors, vi t. cr invoctisatcrs or.'. ayonts . f --be Office of Cliiof cf ''amsol
;:r 'or Crhius t- c-neVct intcrr-:~ti -\s or.. Lives ti^tiens, an Li the courso
1 rue:-. ntcrrocafci- ns and Ltvcsti>ati -a tc administer oaths. - list narked
•‘Schedule f tfco nanos cf the attemoye, interroyatrr-j, an.' ether investi¬
gators an.’, a;, .nts of the 01 flee rf Chief of 0 cancel for ..'or CrLaa v>. have
l>oc.. ri-cc’. to a '.ainistor oaths is attachod hereto. 'itl : al y»r-

ac'iS aro outhrrizod to -. ’idnist. r ths, f'.oir rut.es rill be oubuittod to
tfco Scevotcx? Oonerol f r the iafuxuct*.-1 cf , id. r!

Vaylor, jdy,. Gan. SA, Chief of Cr.-.iSvl for or C-Lics."

: :: all not rcc the atta ch ed sclu-dulo. it c.-.isioto of a nutteer of
jo . t-.^sc i«rs-ns rbo arc :.ut I to a.Vlniotcr oaths , and. I would

liic. t file t: - criminal certificate, toother r.lth a c-py thu. oof, *• itl»
i : Secretary Goncral fer t infer.-- d. .1 of tho Tribunal.

2 SSQ)Ii 'ill 70a hand 6! - 1 srtifinaten tc tbo Tribunal, .lease?

£ .....TICS (C unsol for Jofon ant uarl rrndt): o ivr.tius fer


17 Jon 47-; -" -20-lr.-Foldt
Cci'rt “ ‘ • 1


i rl rondt.) "r. ?rosidont, it crcino*: bo soon fron tic document
wkotlcr tloec persons woro already r.utfc rizod r.t the tino they
r.d inistored th. cr.th. *'Oi tl or dc I knew who thor Gun. Taylor
himself has tko r.uthcrlzatlcn to onplcy suck porsens r.r.d 3J.V0
then sucl qur.lificr.tnns which ere noodod ir. erdor to ndninistor
an oath. X think ti .t r. spoctal qualification has to bo provod.

I don't knew nhothor fercicnors, noutrr.l frrolryiors v;ho con
prove no spocir.l qu lificr.t,ens, con be onployod by r.n American
Trx'iunr.l, rnd X wrnt the Tribunal to clr.rlfy those .nr.ttors.

2 " 'TJ’SIDH'T: Tt.o position of dofonsc crunsol for -rrl
brandt is certainly roll tr.kor, insofrr r.s the certificate dr os
not show th.c ruspoctlvc dr.tcs :.t which thoso persons were appoint
cd. In aruor tc validr.to r jn affidrv^t ^r stntouunt takon r.t sono
P"icr date, it must .vpc.'.r tfc.-.t tho person who trek or cortlfiod
the t.ffid. "it w:.s then qualifioti to sc r.cc. It would soon r.lso
that certified copios rf the orders reforrod to niqht v;oll
accompany tho cortificr.to,

A. "eh I BY: If I understand tt.u Tri'unr.l, tboy would like
tr hr.vo included lnfcnar.tion r.p tr the dr.to cf unplnyr.on t rf
0 .eh rl tl.o indivilu Is shewn ^r. thoro by tho Offico rf Chiof -'f
C unsel,

S" T 23 .SI’)EPT: Th t '*ould not bo nocore ry. -Ait cortr in
exhibits by tthu ^rraccwti n wore provisionally efforod and ro-
coivud, 3U'Jc.ct tr a lr.tor sieving that ; t tho tir o thrt partic¬
ular affidavit cr strtoraont w : swam tr rr cortlfiod, tho
porsm wk j administered thu cc th o r redo tho cartific. to was
Chon q r.lifiod tr so act. -s tc nr.ncs on this list cf porsens
'ho 'id not certify any cf tho off id vits or str.tononts which
• avo boon rfforod, the dates cf thoir appointnent ni~h.t well
bu itvr.twricl, because this r.tuid ehev thoir appoint::ont nd
service t this tir.o. But rs t<- theso oxi ibits, offorod oxhibitt
•’ i°I arc still in susponsirn, it w> uld certainly b„ necessrry tr


1948


17 Jm 17-x20-2r-? 0 ldt

C'vrt «c. 1

sl'-w tl tt et tho ti:;o they wore .TT.de tho porsrns wero thor.
qur.lifiod to r.ct r n behalf of tho Pr-socuti n of tl United
St" tea. Just l ow imny of tV-so offered oxhibits there wero, I
dr not roraon'xjr. H -ro woro net r. % qro".t nray,

*11. ”ci:. I'EY: RolT.tivoly row. •

TiT ’RZSIDSIT: oith. r the Tribunal npr doferao oo’unsol will
'it interested in th- dr. toe tho rth.r porsona woro appolntod*

Tr.t atrtoi-unt will bu au* joct t«- tho oxcoptin tl’.t if affidavit:*
r.rc offered r.t later dr. to, then tho srr.c oucctl< n would 'riso
if tho” l:r.d ' talcon h.orotofero.

’c'.:"Y: V/oll, th*t qu<ctl<n ni.qht arise in other creos.
I don't think it rill r.riao in this ono. Sinco this cortiflcr.to
is desired tr ervor tho wh.lo ccr plox of casus which will bo
proaonto.’ horo in Uurnbor", it affects pesos r th. r th.*.r rur own.

V/o will undortrico tr roctif;* tlooo doficioncUs -nd aubr.it
;v.tditirn:.l - vl.lonco with tl ir cortificr.tc t tho lino tl , c'urt
reconvenes *-rnlny r. wool:,

.'-t tils tlrxo I hr.vo four ad’itionrl Wunonte which tho
?rr.aacuti~n wculd lilco to submit in ovidonco with rospoct tc
th Euthr.no rl. br^rrj.:, th i first of which is Docunont «0 l-30,
rlich will bo Presocutim E x > iblt 429,

Ucf on so c-unsol, I thin!:, hr vo not received this docunont
within tie proacribod twonty-four hours bufrro its offer, rr.d
consequently wo r.ro nor; su;»«itsir .«7 it with tho undoratanclino
thrt they can rrJ.se aoasonablo cbjoctions tc ti'.u rxhiisai^n of
tho docunont.

TIZ 9RBSIJ3IT: The dtcuiiont will bo cT.sidorod with that

ur-Jors tending*


17 J' n-4 7-A-2 1- 1-PK?- Earns
Court No. 1


iE. McHhJET: Tha first page of this document is allottcr dated
15 August 1944 froa tho Reich nor king Association, Cental Institutions and

I would like to say that that is the same organization shown on the
chart as tho Roich Association, Hospital end Nursing Establishment.

It's to the Director Dr. Fcltlhausur, the Kcufvcurcn Allgaeu Xentnl
Institution:

'Dear i£r. Faltlhauser:

"Uth reference to ay letter of 11 August 1944 I should be glad
if you would also include the insane Eastern workers whose names appear
on the attached list, end hand them over to the Heed of the Transport
on 5 September 1944. A questionaark behind tho name of tho patient on
the -1st indicates th“t their arrival is not certain.

Kith Kind regards and
Hoil Hitler
(signature) Dr. Schw."

"Thu next Second pr.gu of the sroo document is quite similar, dated

II August 1944 froa the Reich Working Association, Mental Institutions.
Director Dr. Faltlhauser:

"Dear Mr. Faltlhauser:

"The Eastern workers, whoso naaoo appear on the attached list,
will arrive at your Institution by 2 September 1944. Mr. Rohloff,

:ur Head of this Transoort, will transfer these p-.tiunts from your
Institution on 5 September 1944. Plea*. send also nil Eastern workers
»hxa you already have in your Institution and whose names ire untcrod
M th. list with his transport.

Hoil Hitler
Dr. Schw."

- R * McHANEY: The next four pages of tho document are the attached

Usts of Eastern workers, there being a total — woll, it's impossible

sivo tho total. Thor- scorns to bo some duplication of names on

r r -wo of tho lists but this does list tho names of Eastern workers

’' c transported. The next document will be ND-1436 and

1950


17 Jon. 47 -A-21-2-rT.P- Burns
Court Ko. 2

Prosecution Exhibit 430. This is dated 9 October 1944. The address
froa which the letter originates is Tiergnrton in Strasse 4 and the
Tribunal has just hoard the witness Uennicke testify concerning that
address. It's from the Chief of the Budge Office of the Mental Institutions.

"To t.V Mental Institution Kaufbouren

"Corxemirg Easter workers.

1. nssets:

"Underwear -nd clothing rr.y be used by the institution. I should
like you to keep valuables tnd souvenirs for a certain tine ns there is
a possibility that relatives equally employed in the Reich might put in
a Claia. Honey, Also foroign exchange, will have to bo accounted for
to this office.

"2. Cost of Transportation

"Mew arrivals will mostly coco from other institutions as it will
hardly ov^r bo possible to make direct delivery to the collecting
centers. I must ask you to advise the accompanying porsonnol of trans¬
ports fren other institutions that claims for cost of tr.nspart, etc.,
will hnvo to bo referred to no. As a matter of routine I must stress
the fact that this dous not apply if the patients are brou.ht to the
collecting centers straight from their place of work.


1951


Court So. 1

17 Jar. U7-» - 21-la - IJ} - Bums


"3» ?o ms

".itthin a few days we will be sending you foms for arrivals and
jed'-.al statements. .ie are sorry that the printing of these foms has been
slightly delayed."

The signature is apparently illegible. I cone now to Document
!i0-lh27, which will be ft-osec tior. Exhibit li31- This is an affidavit
sworn to by Irrgard Huber. It's offered provisionally as it is swirn to
before .-red Rocell, Interrogator of the Office of Chief of Counsel
and his authority to administer an oath will have to be clarified by these
certificates to be submitted to t..e Tribunal. The affidavit read3 as
follows:

"I, Iragurd Huber, swear, depose and state:

"1. I was bom on 9 June 1901 in Reisach in the District of
.tasserburg Inn and fro^s 19Ui to 1917, of Ur le iving tho Volksschulo,
attondod too continuation school, rron 1920 to 1925 I was apprentice
nurse at the institution Oaversoo and passed ny state examination and was
a st..t* liconsod nurse. Frcr 1932 to 191:5 I w?rkod in the stato institu¬
tion Hadavir ns nurse and after 19Uii as head r.urso.

"2. Cn tho basis of ry long years of sorvico in mental institutions
and ay service as head nurse in the institution Hndanar, I aa in a posit'*;n
to state the following:

"3. In ^ay 19ix3 .^schlings, half Jews -- all children — were
brought tr the institution n-damar. I cannot givo the exact nuibor of
children, but to tho best of :y J-. Pledge there were 15 to 20 girls.

Almost all those children ware healthy. Several had skin eruptions. hoso
children wore all killed by infections, -hen I returned to Hada nr ir.
October 1913 after a 2U day leave, 1 was told that all the children woro
cone.

I! u. free, July l?Ui until the collapse of Germany four hundred Russians
and Foies, men, women and children, all of ihon ostensibly had tuberculosis,
c ’-e z; the cental institution Hadamir. These people were always killed
- injections ivowdiately after their arrival.

1?52 _


Court Bo. 1

17 Jan U7-A - i-2a - LJG - 3ums


(signed) Irnhard Huber"

If the Tribunal please, it occurs to re that this document dealing
with half Jews ties up » th the exhibit which we presented eithjr
yesterday or the day before. Itb the exhibit which wc presented either
yesterday cr the day before. It 1 3 the exhibit I referred to which was
an order dealing with half Jews but it did not show what happened to
thecu This affidavit shows us the original order no ant. Vie 'rod
submitted an affidavit or a statement taken before a public prosecutor
which was not sworn to, ifcich gave similar testimony but which was ruled
out because of the fact that no oath had been administered. This affidavit,
Prosecution Exhibit u31, tios up that bit of evidence. The noxt document
is NO-1W8 which will be Prosecution Exhibit U32. Tnis also is offered
provisionally subject to the acceptance of tho certification by General
Taylor as to tho right of Hr. Rodoll to adalnistor tho oath.

"I, Hermann Vie a so, U. D. swear, doposu and states

"1. I was born on 22 January 1912 in Duessoldorf, Gormany, studiod
At the Xoeln Universty fren 1931 to 1936 with an interruption frem 1932
to 193U, and fi\o 1936 to 1939 at the >4odical Acadoro’ in Duossoldorf
where I passed state examination."

DR. S23VATICS: Dr. Servatius, counsel for Karl 3randt. Hr, fresioont,
we havo not yot rocoivod thoso dex/uaonts. I an Just roceiving ono docu¬
ment and r.y colleagues have not received any at all. Wo havo to work on
such an oxtens'.vo amount of aitcriol that we could not really work if wo
havo 3 one thing in hand. I do not want to stop proceedings but I think
too .jueh i3 being donanded of us and this is why I have tc object to
further exhibits being offered.

1HB lliESTDEHTt I understand this is the last document to be offored
this afternoon. Is thuo correct, counsel?


17 J• , a-S?B-23-l-ri t xgerald
Court To. 1.


1". : C HUTY: It li the last docuscnt which defense Counsel has not
received. I cay he nistoken about that. I as not Certain. However, I
rn sure there will ho no dispute as to the next three docuncnt6 that - r<
to to offered.

HBSI'SJ?: It w«s understood. «t the- tine, that 'ofensc Counool
would urge any objection they ai^ht have l*.ter. They arc received now
only .rovieion-ally. It is expected that the Tribunal will recess at the
close of this afternoon's session until Konday, January 27, 1947. At that
tine Icfonoo Counsel =»y urgo thoir objections.

13. SHRYATIUS: »r. <resident, we will be working on tho docuncnts
airing the adjournccnt. Vo shall be at a ■'lsadv-ntagc since we shall
not be in » position to know wh-t the docuncnts contain. Vo will not
Vnov whether they are finally adritt*-d or not.

THH FRTSX S-T: The dncur.onts will not be finally admitted until cou-
nocl for tho dof*nte have had an opportunity to object to thcr. I un¬
derstand lefcnse Counsel will be furnished with copies of these do assents.

ka. KC HATSY: I will again con*‘nue to road fron tho affidavit which
is rrosecution’s Exhibit 432.

'Cn 1 April 193? I Joined the US A? end held party nunbor 170606?;
ir. 19S6 I bocarir a ncrb--r of the !'SV. Sarly in 1941 I w«s drafted into
the 7fhrracht in tho Grenadio Repine-rent Chit 5e8 In Slberfeld but af-
tor three wcoko w-s -rain classified as doferred. On Toccrbor 1, 1S4?,

I vr.-, egaiu tofc.n into tho Infantry Re placer oat Unit 496 in Hannover;
la Fcbra-ry 194* I cane to the i'.edical Rc-l-ccrent "nit 11, in ?uockc-
fcrrg rad fron there was sunroned by teletype la l.arch 194*; to tho Hoi eh
Chancellory and. had to report there to Herr von Ho >r.-r. Jj' lnct rank
in the firry wne that of l.odie-1 Soldier (Smitactssold-.t.) Fro.u J>y 1P44
till the entry of the Anoricon troo?6. I worked in tho Rental Hehnbilit--
tion Institution (Feilersirhunrsn-.tilt) Kalr.enhof in Idst-in. lurinr
this tire I was Chief kcdlcal Officer of the aboveaentionod institution.

In ay ed acity as Chief l'edicol Officer of the Cental Rehabilitation In¬
stitution I’-alnenhof, veil as expert for tho Reich Coraittca for -.es'^rch


17 ,>a--:?H-32-2-?itzser\ld
Court yot 1.

on Hereditary lieeascs and Constitutional Susceptibility to Severe ~isea-
oci as well •’8 ny professional connection with Herr von Hegener, I an in
n position to Buko the following stntecent:

■•2) In ! arch 1944 I was surooned by toletypo to tbo Hcich Chrnccl-
lory and had to report there to Herr von Hogenor. Herr von Hejener in-
forned no "bout tho so-called 'Sutharnisia. trogr/j' end swore no tc oll-
cr.co about it. It was cade absolutely clear to so that tho Suthnnnsin
Pro :raa was carried out along two separate linos, nanoly■ the hilling of
non telly ill adults who were unfit for work on tho one hand, and the kil¬
ling of so-tally inferior and asocial children or. the other. I hoard
the aar.o of trofossor .r. lari ?ran<t for the first tir.o in this connec¬
tion. It was cade cle-r to no hat Brandt wac one of tho lending r<*rson-
ollties of the entire Euthanasia Ito-tot.

"?) I know for suro that tho Suthan-sia Irorrar for children was
carried on until six weeks before tho Xnorienno narched in."

This affidavit la signed by Hersnn Veasc.

IH. SnVtTlUS: Ir. President, I should liko to reson-o tho ri;ht to
croas-cxarine th-t witness, that I should liko to reserve that right
for • »rl 3r»ndt.

T*T iESSim: The jroaocutlon wlllaik.o avallnbel in court tho Affiant,
He mane Veasc, 1 .1, If possible. In duo tiso, when tho defense ease Is o-cr.

. ,r= . TC "UHT: Tofense Counsel will file an appropriate application?

TZ t-"SIE!T: Tho ‘ofenso Counsel will file such an npollcctic/n.

They will request that the witness will bu called for crjes-cxTiination.

A*, this tine the Tribun-1 will r.«cesc until Xond-y tornin *, January 2F
t nine-thirty o'clock. This recess is t-lcon in order that th: defendants
cay fc-.vo suitable tine within which to prepare their defence, .‘uring tho
co~lr.-~ week, "rfense Counsel will ad.visc the Trlbun-1 "8 to whether or not
they hwc -. reed upon the tine to bo allocated to each counsel for the
rux-osc of n-king his orenin.: statcr.ent. Tefi’nse counsel will be allowe' 1
two days to -oke their opening statenents.

1955


17 Jan 47-i*-7JC-22—L.-?itzcorald
Coart I »o* 1

If Z/Gfanso Counsol conr.ot ejm upon tho allocution of tirui, tl.o Tribunal
will bo aliccato tho tino whoa tho Tribunal ro-convonas on llondoy ncrnin £,
Janeuory 27.

Ho Prosecution will coaticuo its cr.so until it Is cocplotod; tho Dofanso
Counaol '.*111 opon. Aro thoro nay quostioas on tbs i-ort of onyeno?

I would lifco to ask tho Prosocution hew lone it anticipates it will toko
tc closo aft:r tho Tribunal ro-co -ones?

m. ”C soars If tho a*ibuo«l ?lo-so, I “2 qulto suro that it will not
taio .oro than ono trial d»*y. 1 ni-ht stato briofly wh-t wo havo to do boforo
wo closo our caso. 7o have to pros out throo documents With roopoct to
additional *r:of on raritorahip of tho dofondanta cha-cod In Count IV.

T3 IT >SIDY*T: I «M roroly asklcc counsol for a r onoral state ont. Prooo-
cutica '/111 not bo llr-itod. I dcslrn that Tribunal and Dofonso Counaol havo
a <-cnoral idoa no tc what to oxpoot.

171. IX tVJQBf: To only difficulty lr the lon^ht of c r oss-ox r: d nation of
tho lolbr'-nd, Profonscr Loibrand. I do not think diroot oxa'il nation Uill tnko
aoro than an hour or cn hour and a half. 1 an unnblo to nay hew Ion, Defonoo
Counaol plan to crons-oxr. ino Profossor Lolbrcnd. ixcupt for that opon
problo:., I ohouli think wo ft-rt inly should finish on llondoy.

3T. S2T; TICS: ife*. iTosidont, I hnvo only a tochuiccl question in connec¬
tion -.fit:, tho translation. Tho Doex-ont 3ock which wo want to aub;.it :-uoi bo
dollvoro: to tho Trcnclotion Division in advance. Ir. tho trial boforo tho
International Military Hlbunal, this took fra: fivo to six days. TSet would
ram that approximately on tho 22 nd or 22 rd, wo would havo to sub.!*. -11 docu-
r.inta which wo want co sutnit In ovldoncn. Tho adjournment cannot bo usod
to “Ivante, o fer tho Dofonso.

Tho next quostion—

“'T nsiDZT?: Lot rso answer your first question. ' ild it bo nocossary
•tat all ioett»ntn to bo offorod by all tho defendants bo suurlttoi at that tiuo?

T. "TV. nr K: Yes.


T:2 Ti defendants will naturally present thoir casos sopare-

Cruld n“t tho documents which i/ill bo roquirod later bo julxlttod later?

1956


17 Jab " -A-?*C-22-2£-?i t zgernld
Court So. 1


EF. SF7JH6: Tbo first defendants aro in a Greeter hurry than thoso
■boso Cabo ccr-.es up lator. Of ccurso tho first defendants have tho nost
axtonsiva proof.

Ho socoad question, ufcicJ rofera to ovoryone, is rhothor atatorents cad
briefs havo to bo sutuittod fer translation so ttoy c-n bo rood by tho intor-
pretora, cad will bo available in writlr' beforo tho ueeber of tho Tribunal.

7K2 PaZSIDSn 1 : Du I undo; stand that boforo tho International Military
Hrlbun- 1 , tho prolisdn-xy stato-onts of counsel for tho dofond-nts wore
translated boforo they woro dol^vorod boforo tho Tribunal?

ER. SST.VJIOS: accord ire to tho Chartor, such oponinc stntaients woro
Insdnissablo. :.t that tlr-o, it only roforrod to document books and to tho
final ploa. If this :s cpplioablo horo, it wculd nonn that tho adjourn!ont,
for toohnicol reasons, would bo too short.

IH3 TiifUDa'T: It would soon if tho oponinr statsnonts by Dofonco Counsel,
will hafo to bo translated, than th't pro son ts a now problos. to this Tribunal.

ET. SEHV TIUS: Tho L^nriua. o Dlvision askod r» whon I would oubnlt thoso
stetaronts. I said it would toko two or throo days. It has yit to bo wrltton.

It cust lo assarrhlod and distributed. If Saturday and Sunday bo oxcludod, thoro
la not auch tino loft, and I would havo to bo flnlshod ty r * 0 duosday at tho lotost.

TV3 IP.2SID3JT: H-3 Ceumol for tho Pjosocutioc any su»£ortion in connootion
with this ret tor?

in. MoiKNCT: I should think that if Dofinso Counsol could propc.ro thoir
oponinr, statorents, which C assure will not bo too oxtonaivo, in tire, and piosjnt
than to tho lntorprotors boforo hand, so thoy can bocore faniliar with tbo:., in
ordor to Ivo a cchoront ml logical intorprototioa horo In court, ns it is road
la Goman; I should think it would bo satisfactory for thoc to proparo thoso
atatocants in Gorran an" thon havo thou tronsletod ly tho translation dopertront.

I shcwld think thoro mcM bo sore difficulty cottia- thor. procossod end roady
In tino. fji for as ce-tinc tho docuzoonts translatod, I 3oon to havo s fairly
Good rocolloction that tho Intar national Military Tribunal roquirod sonothinfl
rero than fivo days’


1957


Court He. 1
17 Jan


notice bo _ivca to the translation departaant. I have in :dnd t-.:o weeks.

- 0 that as it nay, I can here and now advise dofansc csui-nol that as a
practical natter they trill not bo able to ^ct translate ns returned in
:ivo dr -3 especially if iicre is to be a considerable nurfccr of documents.

TiX T: Has net the defense alrcr^ submitted documents wliich

they desire translate*! t<; the Translati.n Department?

IX*.. SLRV..TIUS: Sc far as I have * ocn infnmod, no docuoor.ts »»avo yet
boon sub nit. ted for translate :n. Tho affidavits arc not yet avail::! lc and
in -a.v cases we havo not yet received tl.ee. do arc in nany cases crnccmo<l
with affidavits cr short or.corpte of ic 'seal lit.rnturo. .othor w

had a 12 -day odjcurrewnt we coul roll sanaj.c. Tfc had roally assumed that
the ‘rose would fLsish i ? the .iiddlo of this week. Ihsn, of couroo,

\:c c:uld havo uanayod b> the ?7th.

Tlvo Lar^uaco Division suy.cstcd that if it wore nccossary they wc-uld
cor!: Saturday and Sunday so that the documents would bo roa'y in ttoo. If,
f-r inotanco, wo would start on U»o 29th, then wo would liavo '.fodnosJay,
Thuredaa and Frida:'. That c.uld bo token up with tho opening ctatuictit am*,
thon the dcllowin-” iionday wo could start with tho roal imltdssion of evi¬
dence. I think that aoult! well he .srna o'! by the 0cfon3o am! alof by tiic
Ianpuapc Division.

:c K.Jtn*: If it please tho Tribunal, tho prcsocuti n certainly
would not lock with favor up:n an;* delay beyond llcnday, a v ok. I havo
stated that *.e "ill take up ap,pr<xioatoly one full trial !ay L closo cur
ease. It was w'c perfectly cl.ar t\rr weeks arc, at least al vst that le v;,
that this adyuruont would take «laco am! that it nijht be as little as one
nook.

Tlic rater ini which has Veen ^inp in the last week approxiJ lately

c-nccmcd L -f the 23 defendants. I an at a loss to soo any ircund fer

further delay. Those Gentlemen do net havo any affidavits yet. :hoy !e

not havo any ! :curents yet. Quite frankly, I dc not kr.-w hew it ic all

^oin* to catch tcoother in these next seven days but, bo that ac it ray, 1

1953


Court Ho. i

17 Jon Ii7-:.-22-2b-El>*?itzr:orol'!


•.MrJ; vc should atteupt to v .ot the exfenao underra;* and soc he- It iocs.

un. SZIIV.'.TIDS: Ur. President, ^ su; ..cation was tc have tv aero Jays,
that is, I -sk that y u start on .'ebnesday instead of Monday. Tho vay it
voul^ happen would bo as follows: 7hc Prosecution would start f-r one day
and then the defease. All wo really rant is an extra two .‘ays. That vould
jjlvc us Thursday and Friday.

T!- .irUSECOT: 1 think it ui;Jit be possiblo fer defense counsel tc be
adequately prepared if the TU'unal would noct cn Monday, January 27, at tho
closia of tho ease of the prcsccuticn. Defense counsel zd^it then bo pre¬
pared to nakc thoir opening statements during tho next trro days. Thon if
further eiuo is required for tho tronslati n of tho dccur.cnta, a recess of
two noro .‘ays could be takon at that tine.

DR. SDnVATTOS: That is a su,r_osti< n which is accoptablc. ..'o would
nrufor -a!dn: ( tho tine a11 at -nco.

'ill. .;SSILe:ff; Tho Tribunal understands the dofonso cour.sol would profor
tho other uothed but tho Tribunal will f« llow tho nothod Just outlined. You
nay have t!iis osauranco: If it definitely op cars tho defenso will bo proju-
diccd by this proccodimj, they aoy havo a furthor rocoss.

23. GA’.LIK: !ir. Presidont, I liavo another question. I stated that :y
cost important witnesses arc in Holland. I understood tho Tribunal tc any
that I noko application fer quo9ticnnairca to bo cent to Hclland. by \oy of a
ccg p issioncr.

T □ I'.ZSZZ'.rT: That natter lay ‘jo takon up infernally bcf. ro no in ry
office in the ::ominc. Vo will consider it and sco what can bo done in
order to satisfy defense counsel.

Tho Triburv-1 will new recess until II nday nornin j, January 27, 19li7.


195 ?


2<r jpa (JB)

Court No* i


COPIEC7£D COPY

Official trroscript of the »nericro Mllitriy
Tribun-1 in the c-tter of the United States
of -aerie*, "g'-inst Karl Sr»ndt, et *1,
defendants, sitting «t Numberg, Gere-ny, on
27 J-nu-ry 19ti7, 0930, Justice Be els presiding.

THE ViRSH'L: Persons in the Court reoo will please find their

aeits.

The Honorable, the Judges of '-aiit^ry Tribunal 1.

»lit«jy Tribun-1 1 is now in session. OaJ s-ve tho United St»tes
of ’meric’ ’nd this honor-ble Tribal’1.

There wiir be ordor in tho courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT: Wr. M-rsh-1, will you ascertain th’t the defendants
rre oil present in court.

THE lftRSH*L: H«y it ple-so your Honors, oil do fend rots -re present
In the Court rooo.

THE PRESIDENT: The Socret’ry-Gonor’l will note for the record tho

presence of ’ll tho dofend-nts in court.

The Tribunol this morning will recess et -pproxln.’tcly 15 ninutos
after 12 o'clock rod will reconvene for this -ftemoon's session ot
2:30 o'clock.

The Tribun-1 h’ving t»kon under ’dvisement tho -Emission in evid¬
ence of Prosecution's offer* Nueber NO 1063, ’ docuoent confining tho
results of investigations C’rried out in the Notherl-nds «s to experi¬
ments ’nd tests n’de by (Torero -iedic-1 practitioners on living prisoners,
’r»J tho results »r Crires coaritted in the folloing concontr-tlon
c-rnns, this exhibit h’ving boon offered ro Prosecution's Exhibit 328,

>nd defense counsel having objected to the "drlssion of this exhibit in
evidence-Tribal now rules th-’t defendant objections to tho -Emis¬
sion dotaseriV-^k.overruled rod the docusent will be admitted in

evidence. Defense counsel, will, of course, be permitted to *rguo *3 to
the weight to be given to the m’ttcrs contained in this document but it
is ’doitted in evidence -* Prosecution's Exhibit 323.


rb.Ttoje«u$i«£.Ery proceed.

MP. fcH'MET: May it pie roe the Tribun-1, the Prosecution requests

- I960 *


2? J-a lj7-i!-l-2-FKP-Foster (Y3)
Court NO. 1


♦h»t the witness, Dr. Vemer Leibbr»nd, be susronod to the stand to
testify.

THE PIFSIDBNT: The V«rsh-1 will su=-on the witness, Werner Leib-
br»nd, to the stand.

UF. IfcH'NTT: The examination will be ccndanted by «r. Hardy.

XIREP LEIBBR'ND, - witness, took the st»nd and testified as
follows:

BY JKX5E SE3PIN0:

Q You will hold up your right hand -nd be sworn, repeating after
re, I swear by God, the Almighty and (fcniscient, th»t I will speak the
pure truth snd will withhold prd odd nothing.

(The witness repeated the o«th.)

DIFECT EX*VTN’TION

BY y®. H*roT:

Q Your n»oe is Worner Lolbbr*nd, is it not?

\ Yes.

9 You were bom on 23 J-nu^ry 18 *> 6 ?

* 1896

Q Whore were you bom?

A In Berlin.

9 You are ■ Gcm«n citizen?

A Yes.

Q Professor, what is ycur present address?

A Erlangen, Maximilian Place 2.

W You are * doctor of medicine?

A Yes.

w When did you receive your medical degree?

4 In 1920.

Q Free fch»t university, doctor?

A Berlin.

Q Now, Doctor, will you kindly outline for the Tribunal what
position you held after the cocpletion of your nodical studies in 1920,
-hat is, outlir« either by year wh*t Jobs you held, what hospitals you

- 1961 -


27 Jan. 17 -M-1-3-PK?- Foster
C-urt No* 1

worked in, artf so forth, up until the present d^y.

A. 1919 to 1920, University clinics of Berlin. 1920 to 19-7,
assistant nodical officer end chief medic-' 1 officer et the San' toriua,
’uostend, Berlin, which -as a psychiatric san'toriua. 1927 to 1933 I
te d n practice of ay own in Berlin and apart froa that I -as one of
the co-foundors of the Psychiatric Welfare Institute of the Municipality
of Berlin in the district Tiergarten, and partly also in the North of
Berlin, at the ’..edding district. 1933 I *as release froa aU ay
official and seal-official positions for political re*sons and racial
reasons. I -as rocoved. Froa 1933 on until the und* tho Third
Roich I first of all had ay private practice and then apart fr» that I
was doing research -ork on medical history and I -rote a mutoor of
important historical works. In 1913 the so-called action Conti,
affected me, that is to say, by moans of the so-called c ivil service
duty it resulted in oy being posted to the municipal town hospital in
Nurnberg, to tho Norvo hard, -here I hrd to occupy a subordinate

position ns a medic 1 expert. There I -ns forced, nd this -as

•

approxiev toly in September 19U, to esocp- froo the arm of the Gestapo
which -as reaching out for me. Uy -if«, for tho MiwUl reasons,
h'.d to escape, and for 7 aonths -o had no food ration cards -hich
continued until the allied troops arrived, ‘..o -ere in flight and
we -ere being pursued in the south of Germany. After tho -rrival of
the *llicd troops, on the strength of my scientific qualifications I -as
in June 1915 called upon by tho military government at Erlangen and
3-do a director of the municipal hospital at Erlangen. Tho Gorscn
govornaent took over ay uaploya-nt end the University of Erlangen,
on the 13th of May 1916, ncairv'.ted no Honorary Professor for History
of Modicir». Th't is the faculty -hich I an representing no-, together
with the -ork of being in charge of the municipal sanatorium.

Q. And, Doctor, at the present time you are a professor
of tho History of Medicine, Chief Physician of the Municipal Hospital
at Erlangen University, is th:t correct?

A. It is not the university clinic as you said, but tho Hei,l und

1962


27 Jan. 7 -H-l-V-PX?- Foster
Court So. 1


pflegoanstalt, the sanatorium of the dUtrict sovorment. In ny
capacity of e university professor I aa reading aodical history.

q. how. Doctor, you state that you hove written several books. '..iU
you kindly toll us the titl-s and subjects of those books.

A. Thu first aorc important work which I wrote was a medical history
Of the German period of rceaticisa, that is to *y, I wrote a aedicrl
historical book covering the perios 1790 to 1830. In 1939 I wrote
c principal works which was the History of Medic* 1 Metaphysics beginning
with the antique period, ending with our oresent period. In 19U
I wrote as a German the first basic rnd princip'l work -bout the
French scientist and priest, Vincent von Paul. Ho was founder
of the French lunrtic csylua t St. U«re. In 1945 until 1916,

I togother with ay students nero ct Erlangen, wrote a r-eaorandua in
cceooration of tho 100 ye .rs existence of the lun- tic r sylua, t
Erlangon, in order to underline the hua'n rights of the ir.s.~no. B-sides
thr*t there is an othitf. 1 dialogue 'bout the health. And than Just
lately I h-ve written * shorter book >out pru-$ocr* tes nodical non,
thrt is to say, doctors wr»o lived before SocrUs tU «nd the tUo
of Hippocrrtes and Plato.


27 ;a»-h-G25-&-l-Lo*a ur

Court is- 1-


* fc . courio of thl. oxnnlnntion I W1 • ?»“ • « U ” l ” ~

, ua noo for to. Tr. 0 W. too Go-. MW OM—i» — * 1933 "*

,. the Gordon wool A.ooctatlon, too Bnrt~»n 3und. pMI “*

coi-proctlco procedure, certification o=d Uvon.inc of Bo4U * 1

education nod toon the offoot of th. Mi Govoroooot or th. G.rnna Mien!
0r W«t.o„ eft.r 19,3- Gov. Prof..tor, ». th.r. o WiW — 1

X9»ociatl3B prior to 1933*

_ x ^,n .tt.-p« ,0 dM.rU. O. briefly «. pWbl. «• “•»“* ° f
MW PtofWoo It. orfcniontlon in G.r=ony. m GorW. ovon n. W,

„ nlddlo Of th. l?th Century, th.ro .or. individual on... of the fW't

of union, of cdtool non. W «r MW. «- * U# ‘ 1 »

odicun or tho MW- M<W-. ...ion wr. ordnni^tion. fornod in

varlou. «o„. .ucn n. Sch„infurt... *rntor,. 3 .nber«. nnd other Wl hut

generally .poahin. you con oon.id.r th. por.onrl MW offioor GtiOdUf «t

Hanover a. b.ln* rich. in W* that tho •.». MW -.«!« vn. on. of

ioolntlon. livln* In r.«uro=.nt M - th.r 1U. a W >” >» «*• W "
for .ooial and political ron.on.. th... entfr. W- to =hw Tho Go roan

doctor ».. Of coarM. orally Uvln. W1 - M. *-M upon th.
.h.olu,l.tlc order of tho Stnto. con^uontly. th. Genua nodical Profc.on
.a. .ub-dlvidod into dlfforont olo..... .trictl, .oporntod free onch othor.
for in.tnnco, th.ro . 0.0 .urcoon. Of th. flr.t and ««oon. of the .ooond
CU... fh.ro .or. about *n W g r U p. of doner.l practitioner, end .ound
doctor. -00 „r. .trictly .oporntod frou tho other, end con.ocu.ntly the
uodlc.1 nan «... in principle, dependant upon tho nb.oluto p... r. of the Stnte.
fhure 1 . n fnnou. .tory of th. yonr *5. approx,..t.ly. -MM to .hi.
a doer in Berlin « dolled to n patient. hod.ldc nnd that h. thou^t. fro.

POllco^h npp.nrod a, hi. hod.ldc nM forced h* to carry out tho vi.it t. thl.
Patient. All the. Mt« brou*at it about that th. Vo.t.rh idea, of froodon.
tetania* . 1 th the S roat solution of 1,39 nnd coda* free franco, .proodind
to Gorneny. too. pWcularly lo the Co- of th. nedlaal PM..—. *—
dceno deal of bonovolont WW. » «• “ r ° 1 '“


27 Jrst -.- 31S- 3-Lo s ? or
Court *3i 1.


vluw of historic truth tho.o is no doubt whatever that the cedical profession
in Gcr-^cy in particular ebsorbod tao democratic ideas of froodon uhd fauam
rights with particularly great intensity. This, in ordor to bo brief, led to
unions in which the difference of classes were naant to bo removed and in
w..lch surg-ons. doctors, general practitioners, oven the studonts of sodicino,
w-re uowting in so-called ccdiccl clubs; but the success of those attontps at
a uuific:.tion was. at least first of all. politically auch isp-dod. Thai,
nowevor. *.s not oven changed by the fact that ns groat a =ar. as Hudolf
Virchow, vnon he was a young doctor, participated in this political novoaent
for the fight for froodoc in r. very • ctivo aannor. Ho was demanding independ¬
ence for tho nodical profossi>n, nbsoluto froodoc for that profession,
independence fr>a all otnwr institutions of tho State, such ns. for instance,
tao Profession of Lawyers had, and no do-acdod, in addition to that, an
Organisation of its own for tho nodical profess on W»ich wo Id bo confined to
the basis of expert knowlodgo and the right to issue its own laws.

The Prussian State, after tno Revolution of 18U8. had consldorod thooo
Ideas ns uost suspicious. Sint State was not at «vll willing to allow such
docand* to becoao successful. It iupedod the corresponding applications undo
by this froedoa aovenont and only in 1873 did succoss cone to Dr. Richtor in
Dresden to unify the existing doctors' clubs. nuub.ring 111. In ono great
union. That was tho Corona Kodicol Doctors' Union nnd that Union, until tho
Third ajich. continued to exist a»i it wr.s only in 193& * Conti dissolved it

q. Veil, witness, you sry that tho Kation A Goran Medical Association
was formod in the early 1870 's. wr.icn tied together all tho old local nedlcd
assjciutions. is that correct!

Tos.

3 . If I understand correctly, the ncturo of tuis organisation was don»-
cratio and its interests iucludod problems of hygione and public health, is

tout corroct!

A. Tos.

q. Sow What was its oxprors purpose — what wnt tho curooso for forcing

tr.is organization? VQs it to ieprove public hoalth and hygiene, to foster

1965


27 Jrn~>r-33S-2-5-Loa6or
Court HO. 1.


medical education and science — is that a correct assuirption. Professor?

A. Tos. First of oil there was on attempt to shape a union according
to the oxc-.plo of the lawyer's Union, in order to maintain tho coral liberty
of the cedi cal profession. lawyers wer. used as on oxanplo for that, and then

S

there was discussion about the social do:*ads of hygiono which, after oil tho
attacks of the industrialisation of tho 19 th century, end considering its
rapid dovolopount. docandod very considerable stops, both on the part of tho
doctors and also forpoor patients and tho general grain proletariat, in tho
ionoo of hygleno.

* Professor, aro you faaillar with tho organisations known ns the
jperlcaa Kodicol Association ard tho British nodical Association?

Oh yes.

* Jxo th-so organisations similar and co..parcblo In purpose to tho
Oerusn i odical Association?

flint Is not to be expressed to simply rnd stralghtforwnrd no all that.
Principally spooking, in America historical dovclopaonts were difforent. I
toon by th /1 tho dovclopsvjnt froa the plonoor doctor, tho craftsivm of tho old
days of tho 18th contury until the formation of tho State was in oxlstonco.

It is for that r.ason that tho nodical profession in tho United States develops,
soaowhat differonily. I aoon because tne sooial revolutionary trend such as
was in oxistonco aeon,; doctors in Oeraony nftor their liberation fron nbsoluto
suppression to a froo domocracy in 1848. Kerens no seen development occurrod
ir. tho United States. But thor* aro certain boundnrios to tho histsry of tho
nodical profession in the Statos. too. The Gcnxm Doctors' Union which I
have contlonod cr.n, up to a point, bo cocpurod with tho formation foundod in
1847 in Pnilndolpnia. waich was cellod the ^irlcan . odical Association, which
on tho otn*r hand, lator on, and today, bear a different character, such ns
tne one wnlch is snown by tee Joint irgnnitntion of nodical officors in Chicago
today, which simultaneously issues the uhst important literary periodicals.

That is a development whica we in Germany did not sxporicnco.

Kow, Frofessor, what happened to tnis national Gorann Medical


1566


27 Ju>-if-G2S-2-U-Le«Eor
Court Jot 1.


..ceociatlon In 1933? Did it continuo to exist in practice or sorely in
theory? Did tac Jnsl Government have any influence upon it?

- So.

q. Thon there was complete disruption among the no_.bo.-s of the Hod leal
association in the advent of the tf-isis, is that correct?

.. Thu Ger.eux Doctors' Union end tne so-called Hurtnann Uni »n. which I
_ust mention yet, w.r., oithor on the 1st of April 1933 or Just a few days
later, dealt with by Dr. G-rhardt Vainer, wuo wus appointed State Comuissnr
.xA coordinated wltn the so-called national Socialist londorsnip principles;
taut is to say, tne liberul state development of thr-t union and tho Hnrtivuin
Union censed in tne course of the general co-ordinr.tion(gloichBchnltung)
under the leadership principlo, — censed to exist as an independent liborol
or, .nisation of tne Ger.-in Kedicol Professi n.

q. Professor, want wos the H rt *mn 3und and »&y wrs it organised?

... Owing to Blouurck's law of insurunco issuod in 1862-1883. rather
contrary to the developuent in the United States, the health insurance syston
developed in Oer. ny. T.ds health insurance systen produced a aost sovoro
social revolutionary disturbance n-oa«, tho health insurance organisations
on ono sido and doctors ard their organisations or. the other side. Tho result
vao that the very powerful uenlta insurance coap'inlet Wer bullying, socially
•pvakkng, too medical profession in G<r.any ard exposing the., to a certain
amount of n crisis. I sanll not go into those facts wnich ensued in dotnil
because it would be a lengthy story, but tho final outco..o, fro:; tho point of
view of organization, was tho foundation of a union for tho taking caro of tho
ccono.dc interests of doctors in Gcr-any by .*.>cns of the very successful and
n. rd-fighting Dr. S’.rtocnn. so that that union then wus nr- -ed after hi.;, Dr.
Eas t .cnn, or Doctors U.ion. and it was founded in I9CO. Once again, it con¬
tinued to exist until 1933 :al once ’gain the Lc dership principles of tho
State COiadssor, G-rhardt J. gner, resulted in its being dissolved.

Q. Profossor, now were matters of profestionri ethics and nnl-prr.ctico
considered and settled prior to 1933?

„. To begin with, even in tne unions and clubs whicc I h vo nontionod,


1967


27 Ji*-ir-G2S-3-5-Ies»er
Court Ho. 1.


tacro wore naturally certain general otnlccl tsA uodicol principles which, in
inc helical Society of 3erlia cad its predecessors. during Albrocht.von Grace's
tiao, led to a special Council of Honor! But tuo professional ethic was not
brought into being until, by law. in 1867. the t-Jdicol chambers wore put on o
logoi basis and whon. in 1359, the so-called courts of Honor for doctors, with
th«ir own disciplinary systoa w.rc being introduced, they hod a Chanter of
ippenl, too. It Was tho so-called court of Honor and in both these dio-
ciplinary instances ther. was one legally trained Judicial official. Tho
disciplinary punish-uents of taoso Oourts of Honor, and this is important fron
tne historical point of view, consisted of the following acr.suros which caild
bo introduced: first of nil. nonet ry fines; socondly, reprimand; and thirdly
withdrawal cf the nctivo end passive right to vote. Tfcoso disciplinary courts
or. tho other hand, boforo 1933 at wiy «*«»• dld iacludo questions of a
gcnoral ~oral aaturo, wuicn were nattors for tho Ponnl Courts to donl with,
und .out certainly not rolls'ous questions and not political questions.


1958


27 Jai-H-JI3-l-lfeehn (13)
Court No. 1


Q How were these natters of professional ethics and malpractice
considered =>nd settled 'fter 1933?

A This question can be -Tjnered on the basis of » statement of
the ethical change in the medical Drofession. The doctor, who for
thousands of ye»rs, even before the Christian era, had the duty of
treating the individual patient to tho best of his ability; this doctor
w'3 now made a biological state officer by the National Socialist sys¬
tem. This is, he no longer decided according to the ethical principals
of pro-Christ!'nity »nd the pre-Christian world in the Interests of tho
individual patient, but he was the agent of a class of lenders who did
not concern thermelves with the individual, but considered the indivi¬
dual only «e an expression of the maintenance of fictitious biological
developments of racial ideas and thus tore the heart out of tho medical
profession, Tho doctor, who h*s no primary interest in tho patient,
who only gives out orders on beh-lf of a fictitious collective oconory,
according to the law of tho Hippocratic o«th, is not a doctor.

Q Professor, wore tho medical societies prior to 1933, represent¬
ing the various specialties, such -s Internal medicine, surgery, ob¬
stetrics, gemotology, dermatology, pathology, physiology, etc., as are
found in other countries?

• There were in Germany v-rioua medical associations, which one
must orga n i Z c first and there were sore profesrion»l org-niz’tions.

Those had scientific interests and they discussed the practical ques¬
tions of medical scionce_ In addition, there were purely scientific
organizations of a highly scientific state »nd high international reputa¬
tion, such -s the Berlin lfcdic-1 'ssoci-tion, the Chemnitz 'ssociation,
the Fatherland ’ssociation in Silesia -nd the Socialist Scientific
'ssoci.-tion3 for the various specialists. T hese associations origin¬
ally, that is ir. the 1850's and l 860 's of the past century, relied upon
professional politics, but in the last dec-de they withdrew from these
politics »nd essentially devoted thesselves to Interr.-tion-l science.

Q 7th’t happened to these various medic’l societies after 1933,
*?re they disbanded?

- 1969 -


27 J•>n- , ‘-JP-3-2-^tech , ’n (IS)
Court No. 1


* They were not disbanded, but their contents ch“nged. The
scientific societies, which I h->ve just nentioned, continued to hold
-eetlngs until the last years of the w->r and within the limits and
scope of their possibilities continued to do good work, which could
have been possible if * free scientific opinion could have been expressed
in these societies, but could not trust ono's neighbor. One belonged to
the SS, another belonged to the Sft »rvd * third night be * soy. Above
i'll, there were n number of scientific subjects, which could not be
touched upon at *11, because they were too d-ngerous. However, one
could not any if one wccepted these subjects. All ron*inod at. p low
level, but it Is r matter of course tht the scientist, who ws accust-
owJd to serve the cause of tnist sincerely, h-vl to lose interest in
participation in these societies 'nd consequently In »ny special fidd,
tho attend-nee »t these naetings w-s reduced in the course of the yo»rs.

Q Professor, how wero physicians licensed before *nd during thr
Ni administration?

A Bofore 1933, the medic-1 licensing of doctors corresponded to
' ruling which 'polled since before 1878; th"t is after graduating from
’ socond-'ry school then- were prooedical studies and as examination aftor
five senwsters Tor tho so-called Tent-can physician, the Tent*n»n phy¬
sician was introduced instead of the Tentroen Philosophicum, which had
been used before. T he Tentaaon physician dealt with nodical science,
antiseptics, chemicals, zoology, etc. after having passed this examina¬
tion, the candidate went into the clinical seiresters. He went for five
semesters and then oassed the state examination. After he o»ssed the
st*tc medical examination, he bee are *> redic'l nractitioner for one
year. After that oeriod, he was licensed ~s « ohysici'n by tho Ministry
of the Interior 'nd row he could t“ke the Doctor's examination. The
Doctor's examination could be taken only after this oeriod.

Q How w.-s this nodical education and training influenced by the
Natl administration?

A The big structure, which I have just described, did not change
essentially after 1933, th't is the Physician was divided into two parts
for p while


1970


2 ? J.-n-H-J?-3-3-'teeh*n (!G)

Court ffe. 1.


but otherwise the duties rea»ined the sure. It seera to do, however,
to be soaewhst synonycous th-t from the very beginning, after 1933, °n
ottecot w-s a»de to shorten the sedic -1 studies *nd for ? very char-
•yjteristic reason the students would be ©emitted to n-rry »s quickly
-s oossible. The so-c’lled young sarri*ge w.-s encouraged -t the expense
of scientific studies; -ivd tthat is very typical, ‘-t the s»wt tino, sub¬
jects were Introduced into the st-te examinations, such «s ract -1 hygiene
end hereditary psychology. lso the history of medicine ws introduced,
but not for purely scientific tenons, but because instructions in medi¬
cal history were, of course, « fertile field for prop-g-nd* in order to
indoctrinate the students with typic'l National Socialistic ideas.

There w-,s -nether very iepert-nt change in the first semester, there
w-s <*n organisation, the N-tion.-l Socialistic League of Students, a
group called National Health or Popular Hc-lth. Its purpose was in tho
first two or three semesters to determine tho suit-bility of the radical
students from an ideologic point of view and reports were made. After
two or three semesters, the students would be advised that he w«s suited
or unsuited.


- 1971 -


27 J?n L7-X-U' »-li-l-Maloy (SB)
Court No. 1


■Iso there w.'j an essential technical change in the university holidys,
which helped the student to digest wh*t ho had hc-rned during the course
of the year, but duties of the students to participate in work in the
country in agriculture and later in factories. Each one included Hitler
youth and Service, aod S. A. Service and otter duties, ('ll these activ¬
ities did not help to promote scientific studies. But I will not counsol
the fact that of course there were other things, those were the arrange¬
ments such as for example the fact that the students were exchanged and
spent tine there before beginning their studies to take a course in
pr«ctic’l nursing, and that other similar students were obliged to work
for the fed Cross.

Q Now, Professor, how did the agitation of National Socialism
prior to the Third fetch influence physicians’ organisations?

A Before 1933 which h«s not been mentioned yet, and consequently
it must be explained, there •were political nedic'l organisations. First,
the Union of Soci-1 Democratic doctors; th't was -n organisation predom¬
inately of Socialist Colloaguos of a medical class and character, the
’in of which was to pronote social hygiene among the working class to
oxtond tho work of tho health officials to hold popular nodical lectures.
This group was directed by Dr. Kollwitt, tho husband of tho famous Oonnan
sculptor, ICaothe Kollwits, who was famous for her statuos of proletarian
life. The more radical organisation, which was tho Socialist League of
doctors, the purpose of this league was ideology. Tho Socialist Democ¬
ratic and the Marxist doctors, who were doctors with Socialistic ide»ls
who were independent of apy party affiliation, but who believed in
Socialist development, they were to be included in this League. Tho he’d
of this org-nisation was the psycho-nallst. Dr. Sinrsel, who later
emigrated to «oeric~n, -« well »s a colleague who had practical exporionco
on hygiene in Pussi’, whose n-oe w-s Lothar Wolff. Unfortunately, it
mst bo said historically that this association in the last years before
1933, carried out the struggle between the S.P.D. and K.P.D., the
Socialist and Comunist parties, and th-it in this struggle they over¬
looked one thing, that the danger caoe fro.-, a different side, from

- 1972 -


27 Jai U7-lM-U-l-K»loy (M3)

Court No. 1.

Nation»1 Socialises.

In 1929 ’t * Hurr.berg p’rty r/*lly, tho N=tion?l Socialist longue
of


- 1972 * -


27 Jan VMi-«AA-ii-2-lalcy
Court No. 1

physicians was founded, which in 1933 b-ceno an executive- force of tho HSDAP,
ana assumed the work of terror against dcctc.i with other ideas.

0 ■- .o was the leading character cr personality or that organization?

S. The later State Secretary, Dr. Leonardo Conti.

0 what did t is all load tc in Gorlin on April 1, 1933/ after the
^swblishrxnt of the Trird Reich?

A Cn tiie 1st of April 1933, I unfortunately v.s obliged to experience
ti.; of orts in Berlin, which is tiv. greatest disgrace of tie nodical profession
rfl'.ich I have been obliged to witness in :y life. I had to see colleagues
au.vly tiicir cwn cars in order to iiavo S cialist doctors and Jevish colleagues
.-.oiled out of their beds in the ivaming, iiistrcat^d, taten to an open spaco
soar tlio Lchrter Station, and tho ; :.ticnalist Socialist colleagues, together
with tho S. A. acn in uniforr had the deciors wixr. they had •.••rested run
around as if in a hippodrcoc. They laughed about this. Ole*, now of 70 and
ever, older were running around with thoir trngucs hanging out, beV^uso thoy
neix thro, tened with revolvers, bccrus- hie- ix.re bit with sticks and bcoauac
there ncro shots now and then. They rove loft without ary care. Sotao of
the: stayed for 2 U or It’ hour3, t un sent hooo, but ia,iy of tin® wore

sent to the notorious S. n. Collars in lied n-:n Strejse. Thoy returned houo
after scuctine pliysically and spiritual 1 . broken.

0 Did I understand you to sa. , .rsfosscr, that nodical ncfl vert taken
out of thoir beds in this nanner by ot :cr .^edierJ. n-n?

A it i3 unfortunately true, And a fer days before tiic first of April
it iiapponod that Jewish colleagues under the pretext that they were being
colled for consultation were called for in cars which they did not lairw, were
taken to the woods, thrown out of the cars -id left there blooding.

0 Nuw, rrofossor, prior to 1933 did nil in the medical profession
believe that Nazism weuld lead tc th- disorganization and downfall of the
t:»cn nodical organizations?

A tf course there were such doctors, for th.. terror originat-d from the
s.r.ll youp at that tino. The majority .1 ti:_ dectcrs roaliz-d tliat this dc-
"elcp.ent Iiad tc load tc a reduction cf the level cf oorality.


1973


27 Jan

Crort Ue. 1

Cculd a physician conduct any insurance practice if he did not belong
;c tho ‘•azi nodical society?

A Yes, he could.

'uaa it possible for the Jewish physician to practice ncdicinc under

the ICazis?

A The Jewish doctors woro at first not seriously restricted purposely;
if they were Mar v-tcrans of 19U: they ct.'ld rcaain insurance physicians. At
first onl; those who wero not war veterans were elialnatod fron insurance work,
and tiioao doctors were eliminated w!u> belonged tc the Socialist League of
I'o. sicicna which I have described, and because it was a Pacifist organization.
For qxa> .plo, that ms the reason \r:> 1 oliainated in 1933, because I was
a .'coif 1st and had belonged to tb- Socialist League cf .hysicians. Cut these
restrictions later bcce.uj of a nor a and «iore terroristic nature. After the
foaoua Ifovc-iber 1938 the Jews were no longer octdttcd, no longer liccnsod.

7*io Je'rs were no longer doctors, tiicy bcca.~ hoalers of the sic!:, lirankcnbc-
handlor. They had to havo n si^, a yellow sign with a Star of David on it.


1974


Court So. 1

27 Jan 47-K-5-l-LHM“Xinabu=k


Of course, In view of the basic anti-Semitic terrorise, these signs
nade these people prey. Of course, the Jewish doctors, as the terror against
the Jews increased, were impoverished. The doctors were not able to live
fr*= their practice. In about, as far as I recall, about 1941 there was a
further disgrace for all Jewish eitiren3 of our country. According to the
-sue regulation they had to add the name Sarah or Israel to thoir none.

These names alsc had to appear on their signs. Then the whole thing deter¬
iorated sore and more. These external regulations were net tl e only thing
which affected the lives of the Jewish dtetors. They were exovsed to con¬
stant terroristic rctions. Froo about 1942 on their lives were in serious
danger. A person was taken here; a person was taken thero; someone dlsao-
peared hero and finally tho colleagues were not seen again btcauso they had
b«un takon away to the last, partly with tho oretoxt that they wore ts bo
used as doctor# there. And many of these colleaguus, nany of my own friends,
vers never hoard of again. They are presumably dead.

Q. Doctor, ore you yourself Jewish?

A. So, but ay wife, and canscoucr.tly I. was subject to tho Nuernberg

Laws.

Q. Now. doctor, what happened to the Jewish patients as a rosult of
this purge on the Jewish doctors?

A. The Jewish patients could theoretically in tho first years be
treated by so-called Aryan doctors, bnc aust, of course, undcretsnd that
doctors courageous enough to continue to treat Jewish oationts could be
denounced and that they were terrorized by the National Socialist doctors,
kut then by special order of the Chamber of Physicians the treatment of Jews
was forbidden. This was camouflaged with a humanitarian explanation. It
was said the Jewish practictior.vrs zmst be guaranteed a certain clientele
and with such reasons an attempt was cade to whitewash these things. It now
became very difficult for those Jewish patients who needed hospital treat-
sent, for in snail cities there were r.o Jewish hospitals. In Berlin there
was still the famous Jewish hospital which had a very high reputation, but
what were conditions like in this hospital? It became sore end nore a

1975


Court So. 1

27 Jan 47-M-5-2-£H*-Sinabuck


transit station for those who vere carried off to eh uncertain fatci It
vas emptied of instruments, of medicines, and also it vas inadeQuate.

For a time it vas still tolerated that Jewish patients, if they
tocic first class acc-cmodations, could be taken into a crivatc senitoriua
if, of course, they took their seals in their rooas because the Aryan
patients could not be oxpected, as it said, to eat their seals together
with the Jewish patients, rut finally that too became intolerable end was
forbidden.

There were special difficulties In dealing with insene Jove. It
vas almost iBpossfclo to find o hospital to put then in and thoro voro only a
very few courageous owners of sanitariums who atteanted to accept such
pationta. There were a nuabor of denominational hospitals, especially Catho¬
lic clinics, which accepted Jewish patients under falae names and took care
of them very veil.

Q. What was the Speur organisation and hov vas it related to physicians
who voro called foreigners or alleged to have mixed blood?

A. This action vas called Action C«ntor. It vpb the following: About
In tho summer of 1942 in Berlin a special drive undor the pretext of tho
so-called civil service obligetlon, foreign doctors and especially aftor the
Jewish doctors had largely disappeared, the Aryan doctors vho \*oro married
to Jews and tho so-called Mlschllngo - that is, porsons of mixed blood -
they were removed from Berlin by order of tho /lain Health Office, together
with the Ministry of the Interior, by force. By force, for one murt not
forget that at that tine there vas an enormous scarcity of doctors; that all
these doctors were working from early corning until late at night during tho
air raids; that many of thorn wore working et hospitals; that many of them
had enormous practices and those practices and this work had to be given uo
within two or throe days. They had to take various subaltern positions. I
ray give the examole of ny own case because it shows the thing very well. I
also had a large practice. I worked as a consultant at a Catholic hospital
and I had to give up all this work within a few days and vas sent to Munich

to the Provincial Chamber of Physicitcs there. There I w aE treated in a

1976


Court So. 1

27 Jan 47-H-5-3-£Si-Kirabuck


very unfriendly vay, tc cut It nildly. That is, in a discriminatory vay.

I was told that I had to go to the Hinistry of the Interior and they would
•ell ne where I was to So sent. The Kinistry of the Interior represented, so
to speak, the Juristic rrn of this operation. There vae the nan in Munich
who doalt with these things, a Ministerial Director Jaeger, a nodical advisor,
Minis teriairat Sehsidt. These ordered ny apoointaont as a so-called war
assistant physician at the Kucrnbcrg hospital in the nerve clinic. It was
noticeable that the nan for whoa I worked thoro was a very convinced national
Socialist and that of esurse, since he knew froa ny record that I vac narrlod
to a Jew and that I was anything but a Satlonal Socialist, that such a chief
had to consider ne suspicious, and he did.

I do not want to ncntlon things which still have to be shown ny ovidonco.
I uurely want to describe the final result. The attention of the Ocstnoo woo
called to ne and as a result I had to flee in Septoubcr of '«&. I doscribo
this case only because it is one of cony.

And now to cone back to the Action Center. This was onothor otep to

wo

destroy people in ay category; that is, about January 1945/wire disouollflod
as doctors and wo vers given special positions in the Organisation Speer os
laborers. I havo heard that souo of these colUoguos succeeded in boing
assigned to cone sort of audlcal Service but according to the regulation
those doctors, Including foreigners, w c ro to bo usd for coonon labor in the
Organisation Speor. That was the purpose of the Action Center.

Q. Was the Action Conti connected with these actions Hltto and Speer?

A. It is not quite clear to ne free the organisational point of view.

The Action Conti, that is, taking the doctors out of their ectivity rnd
putting then in subaltern positions, this Action Conti went through the
Ministry of the Interior, for the nan in the Berlin Ministry of the Interior
who vac in charge of this ratter was a certain Cberfeldarst Dr. Bernhardt.

This Dr. Bernhardt was a Vehrnacht nodical officer, supoosed to bo a Vchr-
Utcht nodical officer, but actually he was an executive n^nber of the Party
vho worked for the Ministry of the Interior tad carried out this Conti action.

Q. This Action Conti was the one th/t started early in 1943, which


1977


Court So. 1

27 Jan 47-rt-S-n-irlM-Sinateucic


instigated eai directed persecution of doctors who were either foreigners
cr persons of the- so-called nixed blood end t-lso those related by carriage
to Jews. Is that correct, iYofessor?

A. Yes. It suet be eephnsized froa tfcj* sociological point of view
that removal of an Aryan, formerly head of a fenily, froa his fanlly -cast
or could seen a death sentence for his wife. One nust realize that the wife,
ee a Jev, had no right to follow her husband to his new position. She hod no
pornission to travel. She could not leave her hooe, but on the other hand,
under the terror which prevailed at that tine she did not cleln welfare which
night have boon duo her. so that In effect the Jewish aerriage partner who
was now isolated sight expect new cetsures which night seen, and this did
happen, that such neobers of nixed aorrleges were s»nt to the concentration
conp at Thoresionstodt. One can imagine with what feolinga and with what
concentration euch an Aryan doctor worked in his subaltern position.

Q, rrofossor, you h*v« stated that the Health Department ceno under the
Ministry of the Interior. Hsw when the Ministry of the Interior undor
Frick assuned control of the Health Department, what ection did he take
regarding reorganization and so forth!

A. Vo have two historical phases. Ve have a transition ohrse from
1933 until about 1935. That was the pod od of the so-called State Couris-
cariat of Gerhardt Vognor. At that time already i.r. Conti become state
secretary in the Ministry of the Intorior of Hr. Frick. c onti now through
hinisterial Director Ouett established Section 4 in the Ministry of the
Interior. This organization under the- leadership orinclple lncludod the
vholo nodical profession down to the aost inoignifleant doctor in the fol¬
lowing ways The Reich Health Office of nr. acitor which had existed for
sixty yeers wot Incorporated to the Ministry of the Interior. The Gcrnan
Red Cross, which in 1934 had the honor of being put under the protection
of Adolf Hitler, was in 1937 attached by lew to the Ministry of the Interior.


1978


27 'an «7-i:-SJC-6-X-?*rtty
Court »>. 1

^ third orc.nlr.tlon ns . Ms recll office. to th. ether •«“*, the
called Eolch CocrtttM far Public Heilth developed fra= this office.

This hid », subsections eseln. One ns essentially . propwendletio
’.eisl factor ctar. People -orbed such .0 Leer*, P.utthe, -.0 -rote on bero-
iltary tiolo_y, etc, end, second, the blfi orBaniatlon of pubUc health.

, there develop* froo the uwlstry of the Interior through the Obor
rorl.runfiapeeesld.nton, fiowrnor, etc., th. hoUth office. Thoroforo. it
is Clear that th. health offioa. received their direct instruction, throw*
._V.se officors free the Hinl.try of the Interior, eul the hoelth officers
vero in charm of all social hyfil.no cere ulth tho or-jfcasis on the racial

olonont.

There -as also a certain connection with tho H.ich labor Ministry, and
than frm tho Eolah Labor Hinletry there wen . connection throw* tho provin¬
cial end Eolch ln.ur.neo orr.nlr.tlon. to the nodlo.1 Inactions. That 1.
-ora or lose the Central ori.ulration ebloh State Seerotert Conti ndrlnl.-
t.red throw* Klnl.t.ri.1 Director Cuott In Section -our. And I ™"‘
rcruet thlo part: there -ere else aub.ldl.ry connection, to tho ortr. hoelth
office, end I cell it that of nr. Lay or th. Comlttw. for Health Sorvlco of
the != 3AP end Its auhsoctlonc, tho K.tlon.1 Scolclict La. ua of Physiol.™
which obtalnod no re and nor. orooutlvo pcor do the Party and two other
or fiend rations such a. tho Hitler Youth enl tho aoloh Leber Service. All
these threads osce tocothar end ware contrellred in tho lindstry of tho
Intorior.

I should, therefore, llho to sun up oneo norc on whet Keyboard llr.
pontl ployed. Ur. Ccntl -as, first of all, State Secretary In tho Hinletry
of the interior. Ho was, second, Eolch physicians lo.dor; that is. ho
represented th. Eolch Chenier of Physicians. Third, ho «s the Chief of tho
Public Hoelth Office of the rsDAP. consequently. there wos not . sinfilo
nellcel question which did not reach Kr. Conti In one fore or Mother and
which ha did not ropul.to; and I too. the specie position which Hr. Prstat
hold rren .bout 1940 on. I believe. Mr. -0 . •«» * intermediary

physician between tho "ohrcacht enl tho civlliea hoelth. His position -as
la,pellrod by his roclvine Instructions trap tho.yuohror, Adolph Hitler,
personally.


1979


27 Jan 47J-.-?JC-5-2-?utty

-ourt :ro* i

4 Wow you haw atatod, iVofessc*, that Dr. Conti was 3oichsa~rzto-
fuohror. Star «uld you say that all physicians in Gorxeny «copt those in
ailitary duty wjto subordiaato to Conti?

A 71th tho exception of the 'Johxcacht and tho SS, yos. Yos. Othorwiso

thoy voro all uador Conti.

o ho« did Conti control radical uootincs and brin^ prossuro to boar on

physicians to Join tho Hozl Party, tho S3 end tho SS?

A Conti, of c-ureo, in his position had tho opportunity to play on all
organizational instructs. Above all, ho could uao tho aowspapora in a
-ropoAcndistic aonso, aad ho did so. Ko issued a number of proclamations in
tho oorticn Kodical 7ookly, end ho also uaod tho Borlin Modi cal Aviation *<»
that purposo if ho hoi cortcin political thine® to put through. For oxanplo,

I cay aaotion ono vary important polemic, I boUovo, about 1942. 1 aaid nt
tho b.einnine cf uy tostluony that tho Oarer* Uodie-1 Profession aa a doco-
cratlc dovol 03 Cont :/as in fnver of tho liborol principlo, and it wot vory
funny after tho whelo noiic -1 profession had boor, put undor tho torroriatio
compulsion of tho Fuehrer principle that aud only in 1942 Conti apparently
hcca.no afraid that «Lo nodical profoaaicn ci-ht bo cocialotoly socialized. As
far aa I can recall, thoro won an effort in thin direction fr=n Loy. Another
v* Q atruckle betwoon Loy and Conti, and Conti in o nonorablo spooch in tho
Borlin liodical Association oppoalod to tho colleagues prosont thoro that
thoy should roixmbor tho old iduas of frealcxa at tho tis» of Albrocht von
Cmowo and maintain tho froodon of tho nalicnl profosaion so that tho aodiccl
Profession ui_ht not be ccuplotoly socialize. I -ntion this oxomplo only
in ardor to show that Conti had tho opportunity of playinL =n all instructs
of this uaaiuth machine, to play Aarovor ho folt it necessary,
o do you Jenev tho asto—

33 PBIDZfT: Tho Tribunal will ^ rocoss for c foH

l3ocoss)


1900


27 J-n ! 1 7-#-S*-7-l-S-'sl-» (UB)
Court Ho. 1


BY UP. H'F)Y:

Q Professor, do you know the n~re "Professor Dr. Kurt Blorae?

A Yes.

<J Wh»t w-s the relation of Blosc to Conti?

A Bloae at first was the leader of the medical educational system
in the Third feich and then he bee-re the representative of Conti in
his capacity "*s feich Le»dor of Physicians.

Q Witness, you h»ro stated th»t the Gero-n fed Cross evontually
c-me under the direction of the Uinistry of the Interior. Can you toll
us wh"t w-s the relation of the Gerr-n fed Cross to the N»*i Party and
tbo 3S?

A Tho German fed Cross w-s developed in the sense of the Gcrer-l
national Socialist attitude -nd coordinated in that manner. As I h"VO
rent toned bofore, in 1931*, under the lo-dership of 'dolf Hitlor it was
coordinated first. It then further h«d connections with the Kchrra-cht.
's far as I retailer, Geseral Homon-nn pl-yed - role with reference to
the connection with the Achrn-cht. Thon approximately in 19b2 something
now happened. Tho SS physician. Dr. Gr-witz, became at the s.wno tino
the managing president of the German fed Cross and that for tho follow¬
ing reason, obviously it w-s attempted to coordinate tho entire Gorm»n
fcd Cross under the soveriegnty of tho SS even in an organizational
basis. I should like to recall the following event -s an ox.-mplo. Dr.
Grawitz sent tho SS Dhysidan Kirr-el to Vienna and ordered him to take
over the Genn-n fed Cross Kospit-1 von Billrodt -nd also the lo-dership
of the fed Cross Hursing Crg-niz-tion of the von Billrodt Hospital
which meant in effect that Grawitz, -s -n SS physician, in his cap-city
as President of the German fed Cross in 19li2 could penetrate organiz —
tion.-lly into that affair and thereby bring the German fed


- 1981 -


27 J"n L7-!VSS-8-2-S«<l^ (Ife)

Court tiot 1

Cross under the SS sovereignty. To whrt extent Or-witz succeeded doing
so, I don't know. I only remember one sore thing. I remember that
there were * number of chief physicians of the hospitals of the German
fed Cross who really were not N^zis in the P-rty sense *nd who being
-fr’id that since the fed Cross w*a subordinated to the SS, quickly
Joined the Party and they believed that in that manner they could escape
any harm.

Q Did not tho dofond-nt Dr. K-rl Gebh»rdt succeed Grawitz as Presi¬
dent of tho fed Cross?

A I found too literal basis for that.

Q Did on© have to bo a comber of the Nazi Party in order to work
for the fed Oross, »s they did. If they wanted to work for tho Oonnan
Government?

« No.

Q Then, you st-ted th«t the doctors who wore working in tho fed
Cross imrdiatoly becarjo rembors of the Nni Party so as to bo in an
advantageous position; is that correct?

A I said that only in reference to the machinations of Grawitz,
of 19li2, and I ro for to ono cone to to esc, something that I know from
ay acquaintance, where one collo-guc of nine Joinod tho Party in order
to safeguard his position -s chief physician »nd avoid being exch-ngod
by an SS physician.

Q Do you know. Professor, of any iaedic«l organization or organiza¬
tions dealing with health and hygior.e -nd public welfare that was not
ir.der the domination of the Nazi Party of the SS?

A In the sw? sense, -3 everybody w’j under the leadership of
Conti, every redic’1 matter, in orier to express nyself generally, was
rostered by the directive of the NSD’P.

Q H?ve you ever heard of the Fuehrer School of German Physicians
’t * 1 th°us in ifecklenburg?

A VTg are concerned with the Fuehrer School ‘Ith-nis in


- 1982 -


27 Jnxi 47-H-7-3-sr-SRBltw
Court !To. 1

Uocklcnburg. According to ny estimation, it r;.s cro. tod in 1955
undwr tho le dersfcip of the d«foad:nt Dlome. Its purpose w..s to
indoctrinate the young physici-ns in tho H.tion 1 Socialist
ideology :nd, s f~r s I know, this w s donu during -n educat¬
ion*-- 1 courso in tfco comp in the sumo way ; s it was practiced
or in tlo some way ns it was demanded of tfc.o university lect¬
urers,

r. Was fchic courso xn the Fuehrer School of German ?hy-
slcinns finally conpulaory for ail young medical students?

A. I cm not very eloer about that. I am not suro whet-
hor or not it was compulsory. I nu.do tl-o acquaintanco of a
number of young physicians whoa I asked about that met tor and
vfco told me that they weren't tloro,

n. nor:, vea it possible for tho young p! yo: clan to read
end attond scientific matings, do research work to improve his
nodical skill and scholar si ip un.or the Nazi roglmo rc well as
fonr.orly?

, . That, of course, was impossible for tho rocsono which
I fcod mentioned before and it became very difficult from a med¬
ical point of view. The young medical stuaont hed to hc.vo much
backbone and had to be couragoous if fco really wanted to livo
only for the completion of fci3 medical education. Tho many dut¬
ies in tho mentioned Party organization, c. nd the fact that his
vacation time could net bo used for tho completion of 1 is ed¬
ucation, all thoso matters naturally in. -o tfco theoretical lifo
of tho man who studied, tho liter: ry possibilities, tl at is to
say, tho reading of the periodicals that of course was still
something that was possiblo for him.

f\. Did tho modic. 1 btudonta havo tobolong to Party Or¬
ganizations?

A. Concretely they did not have to belong but the case was

1983


27 Jan 47-H-Sr-7-4-* Saalr.tr
Court Vo. 1


tfcct whoever did not bo Ion to tho National Socialist Loaguo
Students vca considered r. suspect and If r. student bolongod
to no organization whatever end then h;d tho intontlon to nako
tho State oxem ho often had no altumatlvo but to Join that loa-
guo. In caaoa vhoro h o may havo bu-n known rs antl-National
Socialist, ho triod very quickly to ontor one auch organization,
bo it tho JJSI.K or aomo foraalo association, othortsiao tho edmisa¬
lon to tho oxem v/ould h. vo boon mado very difficult for him.


1984


27 J-m U7-"-FJC- 3 -l—e.-rd (’®)
Court No. 1.


Q Did the radical students h-ve to n-ss *n examination on racial
theories and the Numberg Lws as well »s on =dic“l knowledge?

j*

t part of the ex Tarnation curriculum w-a the knowledge of racial
,nd hereditary science, and within that orter the Numberg Laws were also
examined. Very often these laws had to be known by heart, and whoever
did not know the laws was quite of not passing.

Q Professor, to what extent was it necesssiy to belong to the
M'Zi Party in order to be • professor in »ny nodical school?

A It is necessary here to discuss the change of the so-called
order of habilitation in the Third ftelch. Before 1933 every scientific¬
ally talented scientist could by m-king • thesis, - so-cslled colleqium,
'Td a lecturer could be admitted to the practice of a private lecturer.

The private lecturer was called such for the reason that he was not con¬
sidered a civil servant; he was just a private lecturer who oxorcised the
so-called Sonia I»g»nd, and who remained such until his promotion to a
position as a professor. The Third fcich changed this order in tho fol¬
lowing points: Starting from 193L the Ministry of Education demanded
th-t as many peoplo as possible should habilitate themselves. For that
reason, the so-called Dr. Habll created. » physiologicnl Wonstrosity,
called Dr. Habil—it was something like that. This Dr. Habll did not
obllgo one for anything. From the reserve of these doctors tho re was n
selection made according to the political point of view of those lectur¬
ers, those who would comply with the National Socialist ideas, and who
■ere considered qualified as university lecturers. The technique of
th’t selection was a f«r-branched spy system. There was tho loader of
the lecturers »nd who h»d to be a Nasi. This leader of the lecturers
employed » number of soys in the faculty, who had to see to it, »nd
watch whether those to be selected were really good Nazis. Those who
■ere selected were sent to this c*teo for a few weeks. The leader of
such -a c rvp for locturers was usually a person of little education. I
know for instance, one of these leaders of those lecturer cttt>s w-s "
shoemaker to whom was attached a professor. In this c-vnp, wid this is
a well known fact, there reigned the system of the so-called "Agent


- 1985 -


27 J-n U7-y-?JC-8-l-3e»rd (13)

Court Ho. 1.

Provocptaui-; th-»t is to sty, in this c~=> peoplo wore distributed so
-s to insult the Third fteich, ?nd if scnebody responded to thr.t Insult
the f»ct wea noted down, prvd this list »«s kept, after their period


u yn i7-:>FJo-a-2-?o-ri

-curt Kc. 1

U tto o-^p v-3 corral, this list »rg ;lvon to tho lo-Sor cf tho o-m?, »nd ho
then dooidod uhidh of tho youa& loetor trs *^ro worthy In tho aonso of rintionnl
Stcinliaa to boocno qunlifiod tc-.ohoro of tho youth. Ho thon aont on this
resort to tho liinlstorinl ,'jlriacr in tho Scleh Hinistry of Kuc-.tion, which
ir.s tho Into ]>.rtur Gynocolc.lot, Dr. 3r-.ck, nnd thon tho notorious aithnnnair.
psyohlntrist Dr. Do:,ridi3.

q Did tho lny I>ji lenders over intorfor with university nnl aolic-a
M duo-.tloa“l policies?

i. This quostion mist -Iso bo oh-j-ct-rlzol with n fou words. Tho rolntion

cf tho Krtion-1 S ci-liaa to lun^llnc wna vwy cloao. Sisco, howovor thoy did

act d-j-o -lit this f-.ct is public, \sl in ordor not to inault tho so-c-llod

due tod .wdic 1 nhyslcinsa, tho orc.-nlc-tion of t o ao-c*llod HoUpr-vctlkor

gystx; w-.a rr-iiol. This romt th-t tho bunglers oaild erf-also thcnaolvoa, -ad

r.ro nc loncor c-llol bun lora, but c-dlod HoilprrhtUcor'a, nnd r.a such thoy

■oro liatod «.nd tho list v-a i*on to the Public !lo-lth Offlco, rnd -Xter n

torWn oduc-.tlonnl poriod woro -.Lionel to yrnotlco. But, boyond thnt, thoro

i-j yot -nothor inntltutloa. /. now apoclnl institution wna introducod; thnt

Is, tho phyolcinn tor nnturnl acioncon u-a auVrdlnntal tr tho Bolch Ch-nbor

rf Phyaicinna. Alt! ou'h to wo not required to ’.o through . .Jodie 1 ir.atitulio

Id tho r.cndxdc sonoo, ho only hnd to to.ro two yonrs of oduo-.tion In tho aonao

:f rr.tuml aci-ncjc. It is not indonstnnd- :lo thnt auch nn oronniz\tloa w-.a

conoldvrod sufficient, oron whon it vna aubordin-.ted ly tho Londor of tho

St«to. iju, I only liko t: rcc-Ll th- ti-.~ of Hosa. It is lapossiblo to undor-

stnnd hew thoao ,x»oplo could qunlify to ont.r tho i-odic-l acionco; but, cf

esureo, thoro woro tho ao-c-dtod tr-asitl ^ typos— thoro w -a tho oduc-tod

wdicnl non who stnrtod c':.noctio:.s with this a-.turO. seijneo, -nd i nation tho

of professor 3r~ucho. ?horo wovo vory aorious oiutrovuraioB with rc-doLo

?bi'aici-as who pxotostod n^niust this irtorforonco, -sid I nly wr.nt to rantion

o» pr-otlc-1 ox-^pla, dr. Prukor it cno ti^o :--.lnt-ir.c*i, -ad thnt uns r-thor

-"do, -pprexi. -toly 15-12, thnt by w*y of artur -1 acionco ho could euro syphillia

r.: r. stronc contr-rora; on the p-rt cf Dor--t i-ri3t Soiothof inauod, -ad ho

-icn finnlly h-i t* ~ivo into '^•kor. Koas, r-s oao -f thoso persona who

oxorcieod tho sr-c-.llod pr'toc'iro o-tr'n vir thoso nntuml ecioneo tho:r>'»

1986


27 Jr* 47-K-JJC-8-3-3oar 2
Court 1


jpl, only of tor ho loft for ai-^nad aeti^n v* strrtod c^ainst this so-oaliod
ikiluraktikarj Tboy woro pertly arro ated si no a hceo political connoctiocs
wr a suspoctol i It la firthor known that - u»* liko Stroichor issued q porodlcnl,
r think it wr* orOlod a-wthinc liko "Public Eo-Ith", ond Stroichor, of couroo,
v* stroacly latorostod in ~olicol ..attors, and who did not shy away in hie
eriticia; tc discuaa iajdlc-1 prsbltta with oduc-.tod physicians. It wos clorr,
e :zsidorinc tho torroristic raU^o which stroichor oxorcisoi, that a nunhor of
^oplo holphod bln. Things Ilk. thr.t bc*o~;ij known in SrloAGon boc-uso of tho
ccruoctiona that Stroichor had with tho Cynocolojist, Profossor *:intzon So, I
surr.arlzod acrln tho quostion th't tho acrda*:lc ::odical sclonco had contlncus
Istorforonco thr->u*;h nrccn^stlc -nd •v.lltic-'l tracts, -ad that it was vory
ilfficult t? dofonl ono'o soIf ajalnst thoso intorforoncos sinco thoro was n
ncnbor of acho-lod physioians who woro In a businoss connoction with thoso poo-
plo.


?7 J n itf-V-V‘-^-l-Blukiesr (VB)
Court No. 1.


Q Professor, -re you f.-drill-r with • book writteh In Geram
by Prof» Dr. Ifcll on the ethic'1 code* Dubllshed first lh 1902?

" I know th*»t book; -s « medicel historl®, I know it very wall.

Q K«a net Prof. Stoll considered to be *p. interaction Authority
on codicpl ethics and Jurisprudence »nd highly regarded in his tine by
the Genua medic’1 orofession?

A ifoll wns a very well-known c?n interaction Ally And w.-s a Berlin
nerve specialist.

Q Now, in this book, in this code, did he not w»m "gainst the
adoption of the ohllosoohy of Nietsche by the medic»1 profession?

» In the book About ethics by 'toll which was written in 1902,
there is * chapter -bout experiments on hurt.-n beings conducted by nhy-
sicirns. It is stated there th“t unfortunately in the 19th contwy *
mr.ber of exoeric^nts were c-rried out on hum«n beings by physicians.

Stoll speeks »bout reviewing Approxic-tely six hundred theses where more
thAn a thousand c«ses of tho entire interactional world became known;

And At tho end of these theses ho warns tho medic a 1 world of such ex¬
periment*! imnorwlity; -nd in -ccord-nco with this positive Attitude,


the only thing thpt he stAtes is the following: Every person confronted


with such a theoretic.-l possibility should consider whethor he would sub¬


ject his own relatives «nd


rs of his f-clly in such n menner. He


designates tho experiments which he described in his book ns tho con¬
sequence of a misunderstood Nietsche.

Q Then Moll did point out th»t the trust of " patient in »he
aor.Al intogritv of his physiol-a olaced - gre*t responsibility on tho
chysiciAn to conduct himself so as not to here the patient; isn't thst
correct?

A Yes.

Q Now, did he not point out th’t scientific curiosity temped
the physician to exoerirent without the consent of the pntient?

\ Yes.

Q Then did he strongly warn the physic!in not to experiment on a
p’tient without the eonsent of the patient?


A Yes.


- 1938 -


27 Jin .-.-9-2—Dlnklcy

C’-urt Ho. i


Bow, Professor, you spoke f Dri Guett, Dr. Arthur Guett. Hew, was
he the iirst zjcebcr of the liazi -art;, tc introduce loii doctrines end practices
into the field of ncdicinc and public bedth?

A I assuno that you are s.caking about Guett; and would you -lease
nut that question again, using tl^at none?

•as Dr. Guett the first al»,r of the Hosi Party to intriducc Nazi
doctrines and practices into the field of ncdicinc and public health?

A Guett, at any rate according to his own writing, ssoothing that can
be proved, belonged to these first National Socialist Party ac kers. In his
short writing ab^ut the organisational systou cf the National Sccialistic
public health systc-j, he states at tho beginning tJiat he, as early as in the
your of 192Ii, as a nodical representative in Labia, laid dam tho principles
of National Socialist ncdicinc and tlc.t Inter, in 1932, he adVwcatod and
ropoatod theso principles during a ucctlng in Eisenach.

Q Hrn, did the eventual successor of Guett, Dr. Conti, or his
assistant dofondant Dlorc, nedify .'iiy f th-so policies and concepts cf Guutt?

A i>.y I once ncro clarif. the relation cf Qrandt? C nti was state
secretary in tho I.inlstry of tho Intcricr; Guett wrs :dniotorial Counsellor
in the Doportuent IV which I described before, belonging to tie Ministry of
the Interior.

Q Did Conti thon, and hi3 assistant Die o, carry cn the introduction
if the so;c type doctrines and policies ns Guett?

A There is no doubt about the fact that starting with tho first
f .raulation of Guett until the last doed cf Conti and Dlono, there was nuch
*-!iat had ha.ppcnod in a terroristic way. Otherwise everything that I ccntlonod
about Action Conti ondAction hitte would have been possible.

Q New, you stated that Dr. Guett publishod a beak. Is that tho book
titled "Structure of Public Health, the Third Reich"?

A los, I an referring to that, nnJ frcn that I quoted his own career
politically.

<1 New, in this bock, do y-u recall tret Guett announced that "the
ill-ccncoivcd love of thy ncighb:r has t; disappear, especially in relation to


27 Jen Aa~9-3-31eklcy

Court .io. 1


inferior or os cial creatures"?

.. T;mt is written in this booklet by Guett. That is one of tho control
iiational Socialist fcnraloticns of nodical natters as, for instance, it was
also nc-crsscd by Pref. Koctschcr, who *r 3 active in Nurnberg. He wrote a book
entitled “Fighting i r event ion instead of Jo If arc." These arc the thoughts
which were expressed by the Nazis in the fallowing words; "Ciirietianity did
away vdth nobility and substitute'.', tc.ualit. cf all huuon beings. national
Socialist! dciands tho racial security of substances with tho right blood."

••ad that is entirely in couplionco •dth Guctt'3 fcraulation, which dates back
to 1921,.

•1 Docs Dr. Guett*a Oth-r .Iasi description of inferior or asocial
creatures acre© with the ethics A tho oath of Hippocrates?

A he noant by tnat soaothiiX; winch every National Socialist ixont;
nanoly, that only the healthy biological flow of blood belonging to the Nordic
race is in tho interest of nodical science and that everything wldcli is out-
sido this, every thine i*Jich is outside a biological racial thou^t, oust bo
cuisidorod as inferior by National Socialists.

Q Then you w'uld 3ny, .*rcfcssor, that Guott's description of inferior
social cror.turos is contrary to the ethics cf the oath of Hippocrates? Is
that right?


1990


27 J P-10-l-Cook (UB)

Court Ho# 1.

Q Theh you would ary, Frofessor, thet Guetfs description of
,n inferior social creature is cdAtr to the ethics of the oath of
Hippocrates, is th*t right?

* It is » Johe of norid histoi7 th’t in » book about national
socialist professional ethics d-ted in 19b3, the oath of Hippocr-tcs
^ C ited wort by wort, and that there they referred to the contents of
this oath, »nd they considered theraelvcs oblig-ted by that oath. It is
further » .loke of world history thrt -song the defendants there is one
cereon who wrote - book about «dical ethics in which he quotes the
identical principles of one of the cost f-=ous physicians of the lest
century. Christie Mlhela Hufel-nd, end this is the defendant Mregow-
sky. I hrve to state in this reference th-t the essential points of
the oath of Hippocrates .re that the physician is forbidden under o-th
to ccesrdt arbitrary injustice on his petients or to do him any harm.

The conception of injustice contained in the Hippocratic oath, which is
sigfniflod by the Greek word Medici." is one of the most important con¬
cepts - note - not of the Christian, but -lao of tho Pre-Christian
world. Tho health of the st-t* in tho sense of Pie to is Justico, -nd
injustice which is wmtionod in th-t Hiopocr^tic o*th, end tho physician
is obligated never to h-re the individual, never to inflict -ny “rbit-
r.r/ harm to the individual, th-t is, to do hia injustice. I c-nnot
understmd how this Hippocratic o-th fits in the national socialist
literature of 19li3 and *t tho tine when everything h-pnened as the
evidence here h'S shown.

Q Professor, have not the ethics of the o-th of Hippocrates
been considered to be the log -1 -nd moral co J e of the conduct of * phy¬
sician throughout the world for twenty-two centuries?

A Tes.

Q Now, Professor, free your knowledge of the history of medic .1
ethics -nd cedic»l legal procedure, h-s the nodical profession or the
law of any country permitted experimentation on human beings without
their consent?

A fgain -nd again it was *sked historically, especially during the


- 1991 -


27 Jpn-M-JP-lO-2-Cook («)
Court No. I.


letter period, whether hunm excerirents i r. » large sc pie h'<! existed
before in codicil history, ’nd it is understandable th-t tho nerlod of
the fewiss-nce w-s D»rticul?rly rentioned in th»t connection. Nover up
citil now was it possible to show this evidence historically, «*.d I
nyself believe that the ret’Dhysical connection of the hua^n being to
the tine of the Rennaissmce would not have n»de such machinations
possible. It is, however, characteristic that this experimenting with
bun an beings, «a I rentioned before fros Sfcll, in the connection of n
Eoral sease, became evident late in the 19th century, At my rate in
its beginning I an of the conviction that this was the consequence of a
biological way of thought Which fits in with tho national socialist
program, even in other countries, »nd *o such bee are evident in the 19th
contssy. 'There c-n be no doubt th't even idealistic nacifists md
socialists developed this thought bioloicl!y and oarried it out, and
as they tried to say it, so to speak, the hur-n coll in the 19th century,
by trying to t’ke »w«y from the hun-n being tho ooison of alcohol «s the
f-r-ous August c orel did it, it only necdod • r-ci’l eadnoss to stmt
the fuol for th't and In this way it w:s believed that by a biological
over-organiration th- sufferings in tho world could be dor>o -wy with.
Such an attitude, overest!ration of bicloqulsc, was practiced in tho
second half of the 19th century in Europe .in culture. It only needed
ouch » goal, this sadness -*3 it w-s practiced in Goraeny, to create
such - consequence which c«oe up here in the evidence.

Q How, Professor, in your opinion as o Professor of JJedicnl
History in the previously renowned Osman University, did the majority
of the Genn«n Physicians reject the o-th of Hicpocr-tes and the German
eri-in»l code -nd adopt tho teachings of the H«1 doctrine -nd the at¬
titude of Hitler and of Hir.-ler *s a basis for - new code of medic-1 law
and ethics?

A *s long as there “re ohysici-ns in the world who deserve such
designations, they will always refer to the principles of the Hippocratie
Oath =»d cossider thenselves obligated under th-t oath. Those who did
» 0 t aet in accordance with that oath were either suWued or were crist-


27 J *n-lf-J P-10-2-Cook (19)
Court No. 1.


in»ls. However, it Is a cinotlty under both categories .”nd I think thrt
the npjority of decent hu=pn


- 1992 A -


27 Jan-!f-JF-10-3-Cook
Court 1


scings will then.

Q. Pr . ,ctor, y u b_licv_ tint t-~ v st : a;ority of th- Cvrr.tn

aidicrvl ca w-ulc 1 c_ndont unCor r...j circu.sit*r.ces oxpcria-.utr.tion on

huaan beings wit .ut t»v-ir cuc.nt?

A. to.

)K HARDY: I have no further qu-cticas, Y- ur H-r.crs.

THS HbSLKST: Tbu Tribunal will -> r-ccasruntil two-thirty o'clock this
iftero.on.

(A noon rv-cesa was taken).


1993


27 Jan *17—A-ffW-16-l-Nlnabuck-1 )

COURT .NO. I

(The hearing reconvened at 14*0 hours, 27 January

1947).

THS PRESIDENT: Defenso counsel may cross examine
the witness on the stand.

CROSS EXAMINATION

BY DR. SERVaTIUS: (Counsel for Defendant Karl Brandt)

Q. Witness, you have stated that the undertaking of
experiments on human beings as Is undor Indictment bore can
bo ascribed to biological thinking. What do you mean by
biological thinking?

A. Under biological thinking, I understand the
attltudo of a physlolan who does not tako tho subjoct Into
consideration at all, but for whom the patient has become
a mere objoct so that tho human rolntlob no longer exists
and a nan becomes a noro object llko a mall packago.

Q. You spoke of blologletlc thinking. Do I understand
you corroctly If you moan a dovolopment — a deterioration
of biological thinking?

A. It moans an oxa-;oratlon of tho puroly noohanieal
or biological point of view, a physician is not a blologlot.

A physioian is also a biologist. In tho first lino, howovor,
a physlolan is a nan who assists the human being and not a
scientific expert of biological events.

Q. Can there not be other causes for the exporlmonta,
such as a collective state thinking?

A. Yos.

J \

<i. Witness, you used the expression "order demoniac".

'hat do you moan by that?

A. By demoniac 'order I understand tho following: If I
define as a basis for medical activity merely the sa/eguardl.ng


1994


27 Jan •i7-A-SW-16-l-Ninabuoy-,ir.

COURT I

of a racial aubatanoe of the people, it has the result that
everything whloh falls outside this fiction la being dono
away with. That la


1994a


27 Jan -7—f-Sit-l6-2-.S'lnabucit- (AK)

COURT I

a mild oxprasslon of what actually happened namely, exter¬
mination.

Q. Then you refer only to tho aspect of blood. Could
It not be appllod to tho state, to tho collective aspeot as
well?

A. May I ask you to mention an example so that I
may understand It hotter?

Q. I mean that by ord.- of tho State oxperlmonts wore
undertaken; that tho voluntary act of tho Individual 1 s
replacod by tho act of tho Stato.

A. Botweon tho oollec'ivo ldoa and tho State order
on one aide and tho medical Individual on tho other, there
Is a largo gap whloh la tho human consolonco.

Q. tfltnosa, aro you of tho opinion that a prisoner
who had over ton yoars* sontonoe to aorvo will give his
approval to an oxporlnont If ho rooelvos no alvantagoo there
from? Do you consider suoh approval voluntary?

A. No. According to medical othloa this Is not tho
oaso. Tho pationt or the innate basically brought Into a
forciblo situation by being arrostod, and aocondly, as a
layman he has no possibility at all to weigh tho conooquencoa
of such an Interference. He, as a layman, cannot Judge that.

Q. «ro you of the opinion that eight hundred prisoners
under arrest at various placos who glvo their approval for
an oxporlnont at the saao tine lo so voluntarily?

A. No.

Q. You do not distinguish as to whether the experiments
lnvolvo permanent damage, permanent harm or whether It Is
temporary?

A. No, not even In the latter case.


19C5


2? Jan •i7-^-31#-16-2-Ninabuoit-'«K)

COJRT I

Q. IT auch prisoners are Infected with malaria bo-
cauae thoy have declared thoaselvca willing lo you consider
that It la adnlaa-


1995a


27 Jan 4?-A-SW-l6-*-Ninabucls-(AX)

COURT I

ible?

A. No, because I do not consider such a declaration
of willingness right from a point of view of mo Ileal ethics.
As prisoners they were alro uiy In a ferood situation.

Q. I ask to bo allowed to show the witness a nows-
paper, a aagatlno, "Llfo" of the 4th cf Juno 1945. I sub¬
mit a oopy from the magazine.

(Document handed to witness)

Q. ICont'd) witness, . ou have tho Oornon translation
of the English text. You soj first a picture and unlor tho
picture It says, "In testing low medlo.tnos the prlsonoro
are examined for unfavorable jffoots.' I m afraid I am
In the wrong place. I don't have the toxt for the first
picture. It oays, "An Army doctor Is oboorvlng raosqultoos
biting tho prlsonor Xnlckor' 3kor. ■ ThnV Is right, isn't
It?

A. Yos.

Q. Now, I shall road tho toxt.

MR. HARDY: Tho Prosocutlon rospoctfvilly rsquosts
i copy of the English that Dr. ServAtlus Is now reading
so that wo may follow.

Q. (By Dr. SorvAtlueJ The toxt: roads '.ts follows:

"Prisoners oxpose thee-elves to na larin so that
physicians can study it. In threo penal Institutions of the
United Statos pooplo who are incarcerated as erwales of so¬
ciety are helping to combat ; ther enemlos of society. In
tho Federal prison in Atlanta, In the State prison In
Illonols, and in the correction Institute In New Jersey
about eight hundred prisoners volunteered to lot fthemsol-
VQ8 infected with malaria so that doctors can stul^v tho


1996


2? Jan 4?-ArS*-16— a ^-Hmabuck«( Al)


COURT I

disease. Tho scientists, acting on the instructions of tho
Office for Medloal Research and Development found the
life of prisoners Ideal for -xperlaents on human beings
under control. There


1996a


27 Jen 47-/.-S’T-16-4-»inabuck
Court No. 1


pooplc ell uat tho sijao food, aloop tto aaoo longth of tino and
cto nov^r far away. Tho prisoner^ do not rocolvo any bonoflta
or ;ny pardon for aubjooting thontvlvca to tile Infection. The nak.r-
lc oxperinonta In tho priaon undorllno tho fact that malrrla la
atlll a very a-rioua medical profcl.n.


1997


Court Ho. 1

4

27 J an hi - A - 17-1 - LX* - Putty

“In the United States there are one nillion cases annually. The
ns (Heines available, primarily quinine and atabrine, do keep the aalaria
dorm, but cannot prevent its re cur r i ng after the first infection. The
aim of aalaria research is to find a new drug which say heal the disease
once and for all." That is the text. Now, if you will look at the
ragaaine, there are four pictures. One picture says, "In testing new
medicines, the prisoners are examined for unfavorable effects." The
seccnd from left is Nathan Leopold, still in prison for his participation
in the Leopold-Loeb case. Then the. e is another picture with the following
texti “In malarial infection in the prison in Illinois, Airy doctors
have the patients infected by mosquitoes. The mosquitoes bite through a
guaze-covered opening in a glass cage."

Then if you will turn to Page Ij6, there are two more pictures i
,lV lolont chill is the first step in milaria. The above patient is an
inmate of the Atlanta Penitentiary whero prison malaria experiments were
betun and developed." And below that there is the last picture. It sayss
"Fover often as high as one hundred ix degrees follows the chill in
twenty to sixty ndnutos. Sate of prison cases are allowed to
dovolop to a considerable extent until they are cocfcatted with drugs."

Now will you please oxpross your opinion on tho admissibility of
these experiments?

A. On principle I cannot deviate from qy vie* mentioned box'ore on a
medical, othical basis. I an of the opinion that evm such experiments are
excesses and outgrowths of biological thinking, and I want to point out
•hat when formulating qy ideas, I was in agreement, as far as I remember,
with the view of tho lawyer, Ebarmayer, referring to his book, "The
Physician and tho law," and where, as far as I remember, he pointed out
that the consequences of 3uch an experiment cannot be foreseen; and if as
a malaria therapeutic psychiatrist, if I should speak about m y experience
on malaria cases, I must say that malaria is a very serious disease. As
its consequonce it has coaplicatior such as serious septic thrc*abo3is or
heart muscle excitement which have death as their censecfuer.ee. I an of the


1998


Court No. 1

27 J an 1x7-k - 17-2 - LJG _ Putty

opinion that we are not concerned here with a mere cold but a very
far-reaching disease mere we always have the therapeutic possibility of
death. In conscience, such experiments should be carried out on guinea
pigs and not on human beings.

DR. SLRVATIUSi I have no more ideations to put to the witness.

DR. SAlTCZRr Dr. Sauter for the Defendant, Blooe.

C.iOSS EXAMINATION

31 DR. SAll TER:

Q. Professor, I do not want to discuss with you the subject »hich
has Just been under discussion, the question of general experiments and
your opinion of then. I want to ask you only a few questions concerning
the Defendant, Dr. Blooo, whoe I an defending whas you nontioned sovoral
tines. Witness, in answer to a question of tho Prosecution about the
dovolopnent of tho nodical profession from '33 on, you said, among othor
things, Conti, that is, the later Reich Physicians Leader, in 1936 dissolved
the League of Gorman fhysicians.' I understood you corroctly, did I not?

A. The Gorman Fhy si clans Association was dissolved together with
tho Hartmann dund in 1933 by the St lo Ccmissar, Dr. Wagner, or, rathor,
was brought under the Fuehrer principle. In cy opinion, Conti furthor
carried out an administrative act through the Reich Chaster of Phusicians.

As far as I renumber, the Reich Chat .or of Jfcysi clans only care into
being in 1936.

3. Witness, I should like to submit to you that you have made an
error of recollection. Thie Gerhr: i.agner, who I boliove was tho predeces¬
sor of Dr. Conti, was never State Ccrmissar. That must be a mistake on your
part.

A. No, that is not a mistake on ay part. That is a mistake of Ur.

Ream who wrote a book in the year of 19L3 about this subject, and you can
read it there in print.

Q. Witness, I hear the name "Ranm" for tho first time today, and I
*ill never read his bcok.

A. The book can be found in ? . publishing firm DeGreuter in Borlin.

1-99


2? Jan 4?-A-LJG-17-*-Putty- (jtX)

COURT I

Q. But I as not interested, witness In what this
Mr. Ream or whatever his name Is wrote. I an Interested
in what was actually the case; In other words, whether.,
you do not want to correct your previous statemont that
Dr. Gerhard Wagner was novor State Comalsaar.

A. In that oasa I cannot understand how It oamo
about that on the first April, 19*\ he introduced the
Fuehrer principle In aodical matters.

Q. Witness, I can give you the answer.to that
question. It was not Dr. Gerhard Signer who lntroduood the
leadership,prtnolplo, the Fuohrer Prlnslp, but I must toll
you the following: we had two aodical organisations. Ono was
the Physlolans Loaguo and the other was the Hartmann
Loaguo. Those two organisations — and I am telling you
this now so that you can toll no whether ty rooollootlon
Is moro correct — thoso two organisations woro subordinate
to Sanltaotsrat Dr. Stautor of Nurnborg. Ho was In oharge
of both organisations, and thlo Dr. 3tautor as the head
of the two organisations In oarller tinea In 1933 offorod
Dr. Gerhard Wagner the loadorshlp of thoso two organisations.
Therefore, thoro was no conpulsory transfer, no "glolch-
schaltung. " Please comment.

.L On principle I an ready to take notice of what
you are saying. However, as a historian I want to point
out that such offlco at that period of time had a somewhat
unique character.

Q. Witness, today here wo cannot investigate all
these matters In detail. I only wanted to clear up a question
which the Proeocutlon had submitted to you which today,
after thirteen years, you may not remember very clearly.


2000


27 Jan 47- *- LJ3-17--^-Pu t ty- ()

COURT I

.x. I than* you for what you are saying, and I can
only 3tate that my version as a historian referred to a
documentary basis and that Dr. Racn was probably mistaken
in his book.

Q. Then, witness, if I have understood you. corroctly,
you said that Dr. Conti, who later beoame Rolch Physicians
Leader — that In 19"*6 Conti dissolved the League of
rhyelolans? Do I understand you correctly?


2000 a


Court So. 1

27 Jar. U7-A - 17-ii - LX - Putty

A. In the sense in *>ich I stated before that these organisations
were so-called absorbed in the Reich Chaober of Physicians.

q. Witness, I may put the following to you: the Reich Chamber of
Physicians was not created by a decree of the Reich Health leader, Conti,
but as you may, perhaps, recesher now by a Reich law, by the law, the
Reich Physicians Order — that is a rathor unusual title of this law — in
tho year 1936. That is true.

A. The Reich Physiclaw Order, as far as I reao=her, was issued in

Doceaber, 1935, and came into effect in 1936.

Q. And through this law the Reich Chasbor of Physicians was croatod;
and now I should be interested — bocAuso you said before that Dr. C on ti
had dissolved those organiaaUona, I would bo interested in knowing
whether you know who is responsible for this Reich Physicians Ordor,
this law of the ond of '35 or tho boginning of 1936.

A. That is not known to no.


Court No. 1

27 Jnn 47-/.-18-1- EXi-Lcsscr


Q. Perhaps I nay aid your nen o r y by reminding >’ cu that this Reich
Physicians Leader, Dr. Centi, had no part whatever in this lan, that this
law was worked cut by '..'agner arxl then by 'ledcnkonp and by Dr. Crete, while
the Reich Physicians Loador, Er. Conti, nho was later represented by Dr.
Dlcoo, had no thine whatever to do with veridng out this Roioh law. Can that
be richt?

A. The nancs nentiened arc known to -* and I deduce thcrcfrxj that
Hodonkacp, as a fornor president of tho Hartjann Pure, was coordinated.

Q. Yes. In this connection, Professor, I should like to dovoto cno
question to tho association of social insurance physicians (Xassonacretlichc
Voroinigung) which was nentioned oarlier today. It was a body of public law,
an independent body, and the head or local representative of this entity was
tppposod to havo boon Dr. C nti. Cut now I should like to know, do you know
that this Dr. Conti, in his capacity as head of tho association of inauranco
physicians, was not represontod by Dr. Tic:* by scccono else whoa I Just
uontioned. Dr. Grotc?

A. I think that is very probable.

Q. Another question, Pr fcssor. You were asked today abut tho Jowish
doctors. Aro you aware that tho question of the activity of Jewish doctors,
that is, the rcculaticns of law, the rules an! regulations about Jowish doc¬
tors, had nothing whatever to do with Dr. Dlcno, the defendant, but that
/

thoy wero under the responsibility of Dr. Centi and wero adninistored ex¬
clusively by this Dr. Crete?

A. I cannot r eo e n bor that I said this Homing anythin-, which wruld
ircrininatc Dr. Clone in that way.

Q. Cut what I have Just told you — is that right?

A. That can be right.

Q. Professor, you aado another statement by which y u deliberately

wanted to incriminate Dr. Dlcoo. The statement ran about as follows:

".inisterioldircktor Dr. Quett, fr :: Dr. Ouott there was a straight line in

crescendo to the doeds of Centi and Jl-^c." That is abcut how I understood

2002


g? Jon *i7-W-.£KM-18-2-Lessor-1AX)

C-'UHT I

your statement. Now, Professor Lelbbrand, I am not Interes¬
ted In what you neant by Conti's doods, for he Is dead. I
an Interested only as the dofenso counsel of Dr. Slone In
what you noant to say about Dr. 31one.

.i. I did not w«*nt to accuse Dr. Blone of somethin:
in particular. I neroly nontlonod the organizational ordor
whloh led from Guott fron the Department -i down to the
smaller divisions of the health offlco and how this line
wont over to the Reich Chamber of Physicians. Since, In that
ordor. Biono was tho representative of the Roioh Physicians
Loader, I thought It oorroot to nontlon his nano In that
connection without naming any particular roforonco to him.

Q. Profoaoor Lolbbrand, would you not consldor It
Just to reviso this opinion for the following roason: Dr.
Conti, as you toll uo, aside from other phases whloh aro
bosldo tho point, had two functions—first, Stato Soorotary
In tho Reich Ministry of the Interior and theroforo, under
Frick, head of tho Civil Hoalth JOalnl stration of tho Stato
— of the Reich; and socond, Reich Physicians Loador and
thorafter President of the Reloh Chamber of Physicians.

Now, Dr. Biono, and this Is what I want to ask you — I
bollevo you havo already Indicated it, had nothing whatever
to do with tho State Hoalth administration and in particular
he did not represent Dr. Conti In hla capacity as Stato
Secretary in the Reloh Ministry of tho Interior but only
as Reich Physicians Leader, that Is In the Reich Chamber of
Physicians. Tho Minlsterlaldlrektor Guott, whom you nontlonod
In this line In croscondo, he was concerned only with the
Ministry of tho Interior, only with tho Stato Hoalth adminis¬
tration in Conti's office as Stato Secretary. Hq had nothing


200 *


27 Jan 4?-«-EHK-18-2-Le8sor-(AlO
COURT I


whatever to do with the Reloh Chamber of Physicians and
therefore, Professor, I consider It unjust If, In describing
this line in croscondo, you mention Dr. Blome In connection
with Ministorlaldlroktor Dr. Guott and the Stato Secrotary,
Dr. Conti.

A. Jlth reference to the ordor of organization, I
toofc Into account what you said, namely that Dr. Blomo
should not be lncludod In that column vhloh started with
Guott. 'll th refuronoo to your oxprosslon “croscondo",


«


C:urt No. 1

27 Jan li7-i-2a8-3-3BM-C8S°r


this is acDothinc that nay be revised but this revision will hardly lead to
a better concept about Ur. Diene's ncntality. I, as a philosopher, on of
the point of view that durlnc such ha. ponin-a as we have witnessed, words
always cccc fast and these words ware already '.cine ernsidorex! as dan-crcus
by philosophers when they were poisoned; and these poisoned words which Ur.
Dlosc expressed are contained in hia biography, nancly "The Physician in
the Fijit", and because of this ncntality, the persecution of Jmdsh physi¬
cians, the mco of tho Jewish physicians into doath -- Ur. Blcuo is co-

rcsponsiblo for this ncntality.

Q. Can ycu toU us, Profossor, i«hon this book was published?

A. As far as I renenber, in 1939, boforc tho bocinnihL of the war.

Q. That is wren,';.

A. Of ccuroo, 1 could be nistaken about rich dote.

Q. I an net nistaken. Professor, bccauso in tho book itsolf, ^'hich,
or course| I too rod frtn btdnnim to end, I ascertained that approval
for tho ?rlntine of tho book to liven only at the end of 191a and, Profe-
„r, I consider it iuportant for tho .am roaacn a. ycu coy that w. to
publishod boforo 1939, because at tho tine that the beck to pubU.hod, th.
operation acalnat Jerish doctor, to in ■onaral concluded. X "ill aubtit
tho book to tho Trlbu^l, U to published at tho end of 19U1. Could that

bo richt? That nust be rlcht.

m. iC HAN£Y: Uay it ploaso tho Tribunal, I do not liko 1 i -eject
tut it scorn to no that tho cross damnation is I.ottinc a littto bit out
of bento and inatoac - »ttinc question, tho dotenao o.-unaol is P« ccodlns
to ltcturn the "itness and I "culd nsl: tot -wrense counsel bo asked or
ordered to licit hlns.U to putting questions to tho "Uno»e.

T!C KIESnZHX: Questions propounded by defense counsel are rather
arcunentativo in their nature. If Counsel "ill Just prepend to tho ill¬
ness direct quo 91 lens, it "ill bo too in accordance "ith the rccorrnisod

procedure.

S..OTX2: lr. President, the nature of the questionin; in the ease

2004


Court He. 1

27 Jan ii7-A-l8-ii-SH2*-Lcsscr

of this witness in particular oust, to a certain dogroc, be determined by
the way in which he has testified. 2So jives lectures cf a profosscr, tec,
and not exactly what enc is used to at the testimony of a witness; but that
is no reproach to the witness, only a justi f ica t ion fer the nature of ny
questions. Besidos, Ur. President, up t; new I have only touched upon points
which tho witness has mentioned in answer to questions of tho Prosocuticn.

•ivy I continue new?

0. Jitnoss, ycu also said that all doctors were under tho Reich
Physicians Loader, Conti, with tho exception of fchnaacht and SS doctors.

That is right; isnAt it?

A. Yos.

Q. Cut could you not nako one uoro exception?

A. liiybo ycu would ask no what exception ycu noan.

Q. I dc net want to put the answer in yeur ucuth. ./itnoss, wore all
tho official doctors, and in particular tho electors in tho insane asylum,
undor tho Reich Chanbor cf Physicians?

A. During ay definition this coming 1 probably fer jet thoso phy¬
sicians and 1 nn now including theu.

Q. Official physicians and physicians in insane, asylum?

A. Yes.

Q. This is inportont bccauso of the question of Euthanasia, fitness,
you said that in.1933 there was an Action Centi. If I understood you right,
you and many other physicians tee presumably woro affoctod and placed in a
subaltern position. New will you please answer tho following question. Did
the Reich Chamber of Physicians have anything to do with this Action Centi,
as you call it?

A. I can merely say that the order emanated free the iloich Health

Offico in Berlin and if it was attempted tc determine whe was the responsible

author cf that order one would arrive at a position of t.io liinistry cf

Interior at Schillingstrassc, Berlin. Th-rc was the Obcrfoldarat Dr.

Bernhard, wh: was mentioned by nc this n. rnin c already. I had this Dr.

2005


Court So. 1

27 Jan /i 7 -^-lD- 5 -EHi:-Lc 33 cr

Bernhard investigated by a third party since I was interested in finding
out the real sense cf this action and at this 077 crtunity Dr. Demhard ex¬
pressly declared the banishing of these physicians was not an organizational
question cf the war but this action was ncroly a political action and had
as its purpose to cleanse the Roich Capital free Jews and friends of Jews.

Q. drofeaser, you answored a question which I did not ask. I was net
trying tc find cut whothcr it was a political action but whether the Reich
Chanlxr of ihysicians and the defoliant, Dr. ~lccc, had anythin,, to do with
itj whothcr you havo any reason for thinkin^ that they did;

A. Dee ter, I did net nontion Dr. 31aio in that action. I noroly triod
to devolop the Action Conti historical!; and I brought it in in c-nnccticn
T/ith the iiinistry of Interior, of which Dr. Conti was a aonber, as Stato
Secretary.

Q. Dut witness, ycu sp.ko cf an Action Conti which night oasily give
tho impression that this action was specifically ejiroctod against Jowish
or Social Democratic physicians. Therefore 1 ask yru to stato whothcr ycu
do net know that this action was also carried out in exactly tho sario way
in other professions;


'iJ


2C06


27 J an 47-A-PK?-19-1- 3e ar d- ( dX)

COURT I

I know nothing about the anologlcal developments
of aotlon Conti.

Q. Do you know for Instance that innumerable attorneys,
even those with very Urge practices, wore Included by tho
sane action, snd with the explanation that they wore dispen¬
sable?

<i> I personally, dlln't cxporlenco It.

Q. und, I an interested in th>- use of the first name
Isaac and Sarah; did this apply only to physloiax;8 orUd
this apply to all citizens of Jewish faith?

.i. It applied to all cltlrons of Jewish faith, olnoo
ever/ Jow net only had to uso the first name, but whonevor
he appeared bofero an offico ho had to name this first name,
and at the same tlao list his ldontlty number. If ho did not
do this, nil sorts of things ooull happen to him.

Q. .'rofosaor, today you epoXo of tho ale-treatment
to which Jewish and Socialist Democratic doctors were sub¬
jected to In Berlin on 1 .»prll 19*. Do you have an evldonoo
that the Reich Ch uabor of Physlolana or the dofendant Blorao
had anything to do with this thing?

The Heloh Chamber of Physlolana on 1 .fcrll I9aa
aid not exist.

Q. But Dootor 31omo existed?

I did not know Doctor Blono and I, therefore, do
not r.noM whether he was participating in this matter.

Q. This morning, Professor, you spoko of a training
camp .dtrese; that Is, an institution for tho training of
,-ractlclng physicians which tho defendant. Doctor Slope,
had croatod. .»ro you aware that attendance at these training
courses were completely voluntary, and furthermore that


2007


27 Jan ■i7-«-rS?-19-l-Baard-(AXl
COURT I

applications for those training courses were so nunorous
that not all of those could bo accepted?

A. I think that is entirely possible oonsldorlng the
large propaganda which National Socialise soducod the
young pooplo with at thit tlmo.

Q. Now, I have one last quostion. Professor, as an
example of how the lovel of the nodical profession folt
during the Hitler regime, you mentioned the fact that during
that period a number of parties were accepted. Did I under¬
stand you oorroctly when you added that the so non llOntt
have modloal training but had only etudlod two years, I
bolldve It was. Professor. Do you


2007a


27 Jan -i7-A-rKP-19-2-3oard-(AX)

COURT I

know how many of those who so practiced were accepted into
the Reich Chamber of Physicians?

A. That is not Known to ne.

Q. Then, perhaps I onn toll you. Only ono, a man by
the n/uie of Xerston. I do not know whether you aver hoard
of the nano. This Xoreten was formal?^ a Finnish Modltln&l-
rat. Ho had a good reputation by the treatment of the mem¬
bers of the English and Swedish royal families, and that was
the only one doctor whom Dootor 31ome told me, who in view
of special olroumetancos vas accepted in tho Chamber of
physlciano. If that is true, then, would you really say
that this one case, in view of the special circumstances,
was proof of the fallin^ level of tho nodical profession?

A. I did not stato ut <0 3 that the introduction of
that specific texmlnr.e, u doctor had to study natural
80 ienooe, and I did not soy that was the roason for the
lowering of the standard of the nodical profession. Hovover,
in adiltion to many other plans. I attacked this plan, and
I reported on it historically. I nay bring it to' your
attention that it was established by litoraturo, that in the
year of 19*7, in our periodicals within tho Third Reich,
surprise was utterod that the academic and medical studios
suffered and decreased by quality and quantity.

Q. That has nothing to do with our quoatlon, Professor,
out I must point out that you are again speaking of tho Holl-
proktiker. I want to point out quite clearly that a Holl-
praktlkor is what we use to call a "quack". .»nd, I a6k you
if this is true, that thoy had nothing to do with the Rolch
Chamber of Physicians. From 19*^ — from there, they fornei
their own organization, the league of Hoi Ipraktitkors, but


2008


2 ? J an •.7-A-r:‘Cf-19-2-3oard-l«:<0
COURT I

the jhysiolana with the single exception of Doctor Korsten,
had nothing to do with it; 16 that true*

.i. It Is correct, but I have to point out that the
National Soolallst would have thought It very wrong cf you
Dootor If you designated theeo Hellpraktlkora as "quacks"?
Therein lies the mentality of the entire structure. I admit
to you that the Hollpraktlfcura were not subordinate to the
Roloh Chamber of Physicians, but the fact that thero was a
connection botwoen the educated physicians and with those
Hjllpraktlkora, which you havo


2008 a


27 Jan 47-A-rXP-19-*-BflArd-(AX)

COURT I

designated as "quacks" — such a oonneotlon existed, and
it was not the case before 19''.

Q. Professor, you are mistaken again. I asked your
opinion of the doctors, as to whether it Is true, the Court
nay be Interested In knowing It. The Heilpraktlkers , since
the introduction of freedom to practice, before and after
19 — the only difference was after 19” — In 19*4 a
league was formed and that there was certain requirements for
training which did not exist before. Is that the truth?

A. Yes, before. It was attempted to ban this quack
praotloe. This was attempted through the Reichstag In the
years 1910 and 1911.

Q. And, since we are on tho oubjeot, I do not want
the defendant biome, as D-Jpnty Reich Physician Leador to
be Incriminated by your statement. I would ask you to tell
me, is it true and do you know, that In 19*9, a law was
Issued that for all of Germany tho number of Heilpraktlkers
was reduced to "*000 and that no further admissions wore to
be Allowed so that thoy had to gradually dlo out. Do you
know that?

A. Yes, that Is known to me.

DR. SAUTSR: Then, I have no more questions, Hr. Pres¬
ident.

BY DR. FROESCHMANN":

Q. Professor, this.morning, on the basis of your
knowledge of the history o: medicine, you gave a detailed
explanation to the Court on a oertaln medical question. Hay
I now ask you, on the basis of your knowledge, to tell tho
Tribunal where in the history of medicine or philosophy
or theology for the first time the concept of Euthanasia


2009


27 Jan 47-A-rKP-19-*-Beard-( AX.)

COURT I

crops up?

A. The contfopt of Euthanasia, as such, only means
that to a greater or lesser extent deadly ill patients are
being helped in their last hours, and it is up to the
discretion of the treating physician to conduot this
automatic port of dying with nodical aid at his disposal
and make it, so tocpoak cocfortablo. That is what Euthan¬
asia moans.

Q. BUt, Professor, Just a minute. I did not ask you
for the moaning of the word Euthanasia. Your statomont was
not an anawor to my quostlon. I vantod to ask you to toll
me and to tell the court when you think the torn Euthanasia


2009a


27 Jan. L7 -19-ii-A-FXP- Board

Court No. 1 ,

first appeared?

A. According tc my opinion, and as far as I remember it, it first crops
up in the literature cf the 19th century, at the somont when such things
■ere attempted.

Q. That statement does net quite answer ay question either. You romarkod
quite correctly that Euthanasia, in the normal sense, is the action of
Doctors to raake the last hours of the coring parsons easier. And, I ccroly
wanted to know wh-re end whin in the course cf y=ur historical research you
first hoard this term Euthanasia us-d?

... I cannot answer this question now. Just when tho Grock word
Euthanasia was first wntioiwd — that would hrve tc be investigated
scientifically.

q. Thank you, new, tho prccoduro which you havo Just doscribod, that is,
alleviating tho suffering of dying persons without actually ahortoning thoir
lives. Did this corrcsptV. to the princlplvS f Hippocrates?

A. Thoro is nothing to b« said against thorn.

Q. Now, will ycu plcsso tell the Tribunal when tho ccncoptirn of
Euthanasia and its demand to doctor in tho course cf the last contury or tho
last decade, had been expanded and in what wayt

A. Vfc arc horo concerned with exactly the sans problem with which I
already dealt with Generally this morning. That through an examination
biologically throughout on ono side, and through which I designated this
terning is q demoniac derangod eugenic point .f view became increasingly
stronger in th. th.ught f human b-ings and especially during the second, half
of the 19th century. And, that thon according to those points of view, ho
acted and changed Euthanasia in its basic Burning in order to uso it for tho
purpose _f -xtorninating the so-callod inforicr human beings.

Q. Meaning the consepticn ef Euthanasia, in the wider sense, not at first
United to tho shortening the sc-call«d life cf worthy patients, but only
those persons end. with the approval of the patients?

... ^t first..

Q. And, than subesquently wa3 this effort to apply Euthanasia generally


2010


27 Jan. U7 -1-19-5-PKF- Beard
Court Sj. 1


in cases when scoo one was suffering free unincurable diseases, who wore
spiritually end mentally dead, was this effort made to apply Euthanasia to
thi.se cas-s without the approval of the patients?

That is a vary natural acntal dovolo paint, and its use, as I
jenttoned boforo, the nataphysical connections were attacked. The ooral
biologically reaction was exaggerated. Tho aero it was believed that one was
justified to do this thing, and one of tho cost horrible examples on the
propaganda field was the woll known fils "I ;.ccusc" which dealt with this
prcblon in a very unaodical and unscientific aannor.


2011


27 Jan d7-A-?JC-20-l-Blakloy
Court JIo. 1

a perir.ps wo nay hr-To occasion to discuss this filn Inter; hut now I
carols* want to hoar frcn $rcu .-bout those lOlocod donmds of euthannsia—lid
thoy appear only in Gorcvuiy or did thoy a.ppoar in othor countries, too?

A I already "onticnod this nomine tho questions coneoralnc that point
ulth reforonco to tho historical nodical offoct3 which waro in Gom-ny; but
tho basic problo. is cot tho problon of a nation but, philosophically sporiinc,
it ic an anthropological probloc; that is to say, wo -to horo concornod with
a .otaphysical loworln,. of tho st-ndards of tho nodora hunaa beings sinco tho
second half of tho 19th contury.

ri :;as this problxi donit with only by sodioal :»n or also by Jurists
philosophers?

X nv.t problona?

^ Tho outh-nr.sin problon.

It was donit with by lawyors, nodloal ron, and thoolaalsts. I havo
published « writton thesis in that concoction.

ft is that tho writ!a inoludod in part in your work, "Tho Hunan Mrhts

cf tho Insane"?

A Yos.

^ That arc'x»ntation -lid it adroento of th. oxpandod ldoa of outhanasl-a
advance quite c-norally?

X It was oppressed in tho concopt of life, tho concoot of tho unworthy

of living, and tho life uworthy cf livin... This ccncopt in itsolf contains

tho ldoa that tho sonso cf livia is tho llfo itsolf; and that is wh-t I

%

ccusldor tho loworla. of tr.o stand-rd.

a -;oro not othor points cf viow expressed by aivoc-tos of outhraasia?

A 1 weald ask you to ::r.ko your quostions a Uttlo x:oro concrete in
onior to rofrosh ny usury,

a Has it not pointed out that thoso sick ?orsons, ospocially thoso who
*cro spiritually doad, had no capacity to renlizo tho world situ-tien; that
thoy woro in nc relation -nd no contact with thoir surrounding; and that,
coasoquontly, it w-e not only oxpodient but nocossary that thaso oner croaturos


ic released fra*, thoir suffering?


2012


27 Jan 4?-A-?JC-2G-231akley- (AX)
COURT I


A. Those ways of thought are naturally known to me.

I think that they are the radical expression of a poslt-
lvlstlo attitude. I think they are completely one-sided;
and It la Impossible that as a physician one oan adopt suoh
a one-sided attitude, irrespective of your own roliglous
or phllo8phioal attitudes.

Q. You base this on the oodloal point of view alone?

A. Yes; considering my profession as a medical his¬
torian, whloh deals with nodical history and medical ques¬
tions, this is a nattor of courso.

Q. You admit that from the philosophical and Juristic
point of view suoh a problem might very well bo discussed
dolego foronda?

A. I would not oay dolego foronda; but I would
express myself noro soholastloally and would oay according
to whothor this possibility should bo roailtod In a one¬
sided mannor is oxtromoly doubtful since those problems aro
opon questions which cannot be Immediately solved; and
dolego foronda oannot bo used in.the case of open questions.

Q. Then Professor, I conclude from your statements
that the euthanasia problem was considered by medical men,
lawyers, theologians, literary mon, for many decades, not
to say for many centuries; that this problem turned up
repeatedly and can be called an ancient problem?

A. Yos.

Q. Professor, you have mentioned your writing about
the human rights of the lnsano. hay I ask you to answer
one question In this book which I have before mo? You
mentioned a statement of a physician In 194‘*-44 with the
heading "The Physician In Germany"?


27 Jan 47-A-FJC-20-2-Binkley- { AX)
COURT I


A. Yes.

Q. In this short essay you have this physician,
who Is not namod, In connoctlon with tho visits of doctors
to Insane asylums—you have this physician speak as follows;
"Tho doctor cooes to visit tho jvttlonts and examines the
patient." And thon you ask; "v/ho Is the physlolan, tho
patient or ho?" And thon you say; "This antlnony was true;
tno doctor learned It dally; and whon ho entered that
room, whon ho was surrounded by this misery, ho roallzod
the extent of his guilt." And thon you contlnuo: "But what
oould ho do? Ho could go and protest publicly; ho could
rofuso. But what ho achieved was only the removal of himself.


201 *a


27 Jan 47-A-FJC-20-1^-31 ak ley- (AX)

COURT I

Whom did ho help? And so he stayed; stayed with his unbear¬
able protest."

Is It time that this question from your article was
published In your pamphlet?

A. Yes.

DR. FR02SCHHANN: Then I have no further questions.

JUDG2 S2BRING: The Court would llko to direct a
suggestion to counsel who has Just boon Interrogating the
wltnoso that perhaps for the oiko of the rocord the title
and tho authorship of the book which has boon referred
to should bo road Into the record.

DR. FR02SCKMANN: Your Honor, I am glad to comply with
this wish. Tho book Is published by tho witness who has
Just been oxnalnod, tforaor Lolbbrand, with tho collaboration
of five other non and womon. Tho tltlo la tho Hunan Righto
of tho Inaano, "Ua Dl«» Monscnonrochto dor Oolstoskrankon. ■
The book was publlshod by tho puolishlngcompany, "Dio
Ecko", in Nurnbcrg In 1946. Does tho President want any
□ore information about this book?

TH2 PRESIDENT: That Is tho Information tho Tribunal
desired. That is sufficient,

TH2 PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal would llko to ask Dr.
Servatlus a question. Dr. Sorvatluo, cour.sol for defendant
Karl 3randt, referred to an artlclo In an American magazine
named "Life". It will be advisable to read Into the rooord
tho date and the number of tho magazine from which tho
doctor road.

DR. SERVATIUS: This Isa copy of tho magazine of tho
4th of June, 1945, Volune 18, Number 2*. It la an jkaerloan
magazine, copyright Pan American, copyright convention.


2014


27 Jan 47-*-FJC-20-^-31akley-(AX)

COURT I

THE PRESIDENT: That Information is sufficient to
Identify the magazine. The Tribunal would ask tho counsel
vhothor or not ho proposes to offer this aagazlno In evi¬
dence during the case when Karl Brandt Is presenting hla
case.

DR. SERVATIU8: I would offer It now as Karl Brandt
Doouoont No. 1 and subnit It now.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho magazine should at this tlmo bo
narked ns defendant Brandt's Identification 1.

DR. SSRVATIUS: Certainly.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for dofondant Brandt under¬
stands that this simply Identifies this docunont and that
lator on If counsel doslroo to offor tho


2014a


27 Jr.n 47-^-?J020-4-Blr>:loy
Court Ko.l

docuajat in ovidenco it should than bo forenlly offarod into ovidonco? Doos
c ■ unsol for dofooir.nt Br-ndt uniorst-n3 wh-.t I just arid? Counaol sicnifiod thn.t
v 0 lid uniorst-oi whr.t tho Tribunal no*nt.

mess sroanOTON

3Y D?.. TL’BSCTTE: (fnr dofoed-nt Mrurowsky)

n Profossor, in rjx >wor to tho Inst quostien of Sorv-tius, ny colionnuo
-arv-tlus, yiu nskod if such oxnori::onta c-uld bo cccductod on r.ulnon-pir.s. Do
you ror.or.tor th-t? ; JO you rw-.ro thrt thoro nro quito r*. nur.bor of problons which
cr.nnot bo solve* by -ni: -l ox-’orfcxnts but only by oxpor Hants on hun-n boini^?

/. totumlly.

o is tho hnndlin^ of suc’i p^blo^s essential f-r tho dovolojrant of codicino
rjU tho Good of huivjilty?

A tint is tho pur>3so of nrjciau physiolo lcrl oxporlmnta on hu:ir.n bolnr,s.
q Profossor, do you know of wxportents on hix^-n boincs c-rrlod out in
^sdlcino? H-vo you studio! that: In oncuch dotrll to hrvo r. r.ood knewlodeo of
thio subjooj, rad rro you -bio to soy to whr.t oxtont-such axporLnonta hr.vo toon
coaiuctoi so that you c-n Juif.j tho:: fren tho poiat cf •'low of rirj^ nodiorl non,
not only frer: ycur own othiorl st-ndpoint?

A I think th-t chis question is r quosti -r. fer r j : oclr,Vat who works on
oxporlnonts, oor.o thjr-;outlc-l : -ttors; -nd i don't think thrt I o-n r.-ko rjiy
fin -1 mowor in thrt roopact -.8 r nodlc-A hlstorirn.

n Hr.vo you studiod this subjoct in on-urh detail to bo infornod not only
of utet h--.s boon publishod on tho subjoct but whrt h-s boon published co that
only rji oxport c-uld undorstmt it?

A No.

A profossor, do you knew th-.t in tho coso df scnrlot fovor v.-.ccinos fra:
cc-rlot fovor toxin thoro is n= possibility cf tostinc it cn and thr.t

for th-t ronson in r.-.ny foroUn ccuntrios it is tostei in chlldron's clinlos rod
~ he-on boiaps?

A I think it is pcssiblo.

'I Aro you nwnro tbit such docisiens woro not docidod upon in Gorrinny nnd

tbit coasoquontly thoro is uncertainty thr.t inoffoctivo vr.cclnos woro used ord

on thn nthor hand dangerous v-.ccinas woro usol: tha dmcer of thoso v.-.ccinos

201p


27 Jan 47-A-r JC-20-5-31a.«cley- (AX)

COURT I

was realised only when thoy were used? 'fore not valuable
human lives lost and was there not considerable damage
to health?

A. I am not quite familiar with those questions in
detail. These are questions which belong to experimental
therapy and I cannot say anything final about them.

Q. Professor, do you know of the prophylaxis experi¬
ments in sleoping sickness? Do you know that negroes wore
hired as subjects?

A. I don't know anything about the mattor; but the
first is basically right.

Q. Do you know that in such an important disease
as malaria, work on reagent and animal experiments aro
Impossible becauso the dlseaso cannot bo transferred to tho
animal and the germ oannot be cultivated; and consoquontly

not oxpcrlmontal
human boings in
therapoutlc
of experimental

subjocto?


In almost all civilized countrlos, wore
subjects used, experiments conducted on
malaria, primarily on insane persons by
malaria lnfoctlons but also on hundreds


2016


27 Jan U7-A - 21-1 - LJG - Cook
Court I


A. Already this morning I referred to the literature of Dr. Moll
and aside from that I know the malaria experiments hero mentioned to me
and also these examples which you have just mentioned which are quite well
known to me.

Q. Professor, are you aware that in the old syphilis and gonorrhea
research human experiments were primarily a part of the research, and
that the French Government issued an order for experiments on him an boings?

A. I know theso things partly from the literature of tho French
Philroyo.

Q. Are you aware Profoasor that Joseph Gruenberger with approval
conducted experiments on twolvo persona or prisoners, who in tho case
of survival were promised a pardon, and that he conducted pollegra experi¬
ments?

A. Yes.

Q. Are you aware that Adler, a prizo winner of the Koynl Society for
Tropical Diseaso and Hygiono in 19l0 infected five cancor pationts with
kala agar and that all five died?

A. This caso occurred inl9U0 and is not known to mo, but It is analo¬
gous to othor casos which cans from tho litoraturo of Moll.

Q. Are you awaro that Hoynann, Hoilbrunn and Gungnanu, treated throo
paralytics through inter-cerrobrol penicillin troatoont, that thoy troated
threo paralytics and that all throe died?

A. I do not know about these casos. Probably I have not all of
the foreign literature at ny disposal.

<4. Are you aware that Vief and Stocks in tho United States had
infected two hundrod fifty persons with hepatitis opideaica with well
"ater, in these casos to tost the role of water as a carrior of the virus?

A. No.

Q. Are you aware that in the sleeping sickness research human exporl-
“nta are available?

A. I know about experiments on human beings suffering from sleeping


sickaess.


2017


Court I


27 Jan U7 -a - 21-2 - LX - Cook

Q. Is It true that in sleeping sickness it is possiblo to experiment
on animals?

a. That is a special quostion which I camot answer.

Q. Are you aware, Professor, that in tho ease of Papatacci fevor
experiments can be conducted only on human beings and that there aro many
report? of such experiments?

A. Yes.

3. Are you aware that basis yellow fever research up to 1903, in this
very dangoroua disoase, was exclusively based on human experiments, a
large nurfcor of human experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. Are you aware, Profossor, that in typhus research asido from
3omo old Hussion oxpcrlaonts human experiments were conductod in Hoxico
by Otero, In Indo Chins by Yore in, in Algiors by Sorgent , in

Turkey by Kaadl and in Poland by Sparrow?

A. I think that is possiblo oven though I do not know tho individual
diseaso, but it covers what I harj generally told about thosubjoct.

Q. are you aware, Profossor, that Troua infected prisonors with
living plague bacilla?

A. No.

Q. Are you awnro that dysentery experiments were conductod on human
boings?

A. No, I don't know anything about thoso special cases.

3. Are you aware or do you reecther from tho First World War that tho
official English and American ccumissions investigating fivo day fovor,
worked to a large extent on human beings?

A. No.

3 . -are you acquainted with any reports of infection experiments in
leporsy?

a. Yes.

Q. nre you aw aro that in America internees and recruits wore artifi¬
cially infected with measles?

2016


Court I


27 Jan U7-A - 21-3- LJG - Cook


A. In all countries of the world such infection expericants were
carried out in the second half of the 19th century.

Q. If all of these experiments, Professor, were actually conducted,
and also as you said this earning, and as Moll's book shows, about six
hundred works are published, in which there are thousands of such experi-
sents described, aist not one say that the question of experiments on
human beings under certain conditions is Jixlged differently by other circles
of medical ten as you Judge it froa an ethical point of view.

A. That I cannot say since Moll at the end of his work writes it
is ajart of tho aorality of a physician that he holds back his natural
research urge in order to maintain his basic medical attitudo itoich is
laid down in the oath of Hippocrates nd which nay result in doing ham
to his patient.

Q. But in your opinion. Professor, how should a doctor do work in
the interest of suffering humanity in cases whore, as you havo Just said,
there is no possibility of experiments on humans?

A, The concept of hvasanity is a very dangerous concept. It is most
dangcreus for the physician. Above all humanity for tho physician thoro
la the individual, and the individual unfortunately was very low in thoso
last few years.

Q. I believe that you havo not uito answered ay question. I askodi
How do you think tho doctor is to work, oven in the Interest of tho
Individual, how is he to clear up questions which cannot be tested on
humans and in a teat tube as is the case in malaria, for instance, problon)
vhlch must be cleared up if he is to help his suffering patients?

a. That is naturally a very dif-icult question, but it will always
be of major importance, but there *jst be a certain limit to a risk.

Q. Thank you. Now I cone to another point. This morning. Professor,
7ou expressed disapproval about a bcr. ahich the defendant Mrugowsky wrote.
Hay I ask, have you road this book?

A. Tes.

Q. Bo you know Mrugowsky personally?

2C1.


Court I


27 Jan U7-A - 2Ui - UG m Cook

A. Ho.

Q. Then you do not k®ow hi* ethical point of view?

A. I aaid that it was a joke of world history, tho quite ironical
joke of world history, that the ned'cal ethics of Hufeland were quoted
in the form of an excerpt free his writings with a few connecting words
and that thoso quotations were combined in a little volure, and that on
the other hand we kneer in what organization of degradation he was con¬
nected with these deeds, *iich I an questioning here, and I an only
speaking about the degradation and not tho objective guilt which has not
boon proven yet.

Q. And is there anythin;, exc ^t the facts with which ho is charged

hero 7

A. In the final analysis ho was stilltho Chief of the SS Hygionic
Syst«n, and what the basic nodical othics for tho SS wore has become
historically cloar to ne in the course of the lost few years, and botwoen
thoso two sectors I think there is a Irgo gap, that is tho S* nodical
sthlos of Mr. Haupthold. I my porhaps understand that a nan liko
Mr. Haupthold could be lead to a one sided practice of police medicine
and oould get excited about it, but I could not understand how tho S3
othics could bo brought into connoctlen with tho ethics of William
Chriotian Huefeland.

Q. Professor, you just told us you do not know Mrugowsky at nil?

A. No.

Q. Then how can you expross a Judgment on his personal othical
attitude? Tou are judging only tre- the fact that he bolongs to tho SS.
Before you express such a definite opinion as you a re doing, as you talked
of a joke of world history, must you not first know the personal attitudo
of the peroon you are criticising, and is it not <*iite possible that a
person personally had such an attitude as expressed in this book?

I den't believe that one can hold a leading position in tho SS
and then talk about such ethics if one does not act in ethical cases in

what is called double bockkoepii^?

202C


Court I


27 Jan U7-A - 21^5 - LJG - Cook

Q. But you adsitt that is a poor dpinicn based in no fora on a
personal knowledge of the person "ton you cdticixed?
a. I do not know Hr. Mrugowsk;',

Q. Thank you. I have no sore questions.

THE FHESTDEHTi Are there any further questions to be propounded to
this witness by defense counsel or. cross examination?


2021


27 Jan. U7 -A-22-i-PXF- Saslaw
Cccrt No. 1


Da. TISPZN3-CK: Dr. Tiefenbach, dc 'cam counsel for the defendant Dr.
Schaefor.

9T DR. TIEFEN3ACH:

Q. Witness, I have the following _»stiv,ns to put to ycu in ccnnccti >n
with your statements about the porsocuticr. .f Jews, cf Jewish physicians. In
1938, was it .'angorous to quote Jewish authors in scientific writings?

A. That varied c-naidorably. One can bo fortunate and cno could bo
unfortunate. I personally remember that u a collaborator and cr-worker cf the
"Frankfurter Zcitung" I cnce Bade th. attempt tc quote the naai cf my Swiss
friend Ludwig Binswangor in s scientific article, who was rnly half-nryan,
and then the editors struck .ut that mac.

Q. Do you bolievo that osi-’o free ruacval .f such quotations by the
editors, thoro would have boon any further consequences r had t- oo any
further consequences for a person who cited such a Jewish author in n nodical
scientific writing? Can you give eny oxaaplos to this?

— As far as I tako it, y~u are nly roferring tc tho tlao cf 1938.

Q. Yos, that is *33, '31i, but up '38 — I an asking specifically about
such on advance p.riod as 1938.

/.. Kith reference to tho first years, I would not think that it was so
torribly ang^reusj in tho yo.ar of 1938 it was much more dangerous. As for
Individual examples as the case of Binzwangcr, I cannot think of any.

Q. Would ywu have c-nsidor^d it unusual if at that tine in 1938 you hr.d
aeon Jewish authors quoted in a sci-r.'ific writing?

A. Yes, it would have boon vory unusual.

Q. Yos; and would y< u assuao that a physici'n who, as late as 1938 quoted
Jewish authors in his writings, that this physician agreed with the National
Socialist system, in particular, th~t he would approve of experiments on
concentration comp inmates?

A. New, Doctor, how can cne answer such a question. One has ncthing to do
with the other since there is no sura connection in the life of a personality.
It is completely illcgical.

Q. So that it is net absolutely necessary th t the physician who qucUs

a Jew, who at the some tine expresses that h_ dees net identify himself with t:

2022


27 Jan. 1*7 -A-22-2-PKP- Saslaw
Court No. 1


A. Thoy aru the it:st rtmarjcablc things which nay run parallel to cno
another.

DR. TIEP.uNB..CH: I have nc mere qu. -ions.

THE FRESIEENT: Is there any further cress examination of this witness by
defense counsel? Do counsel for the prosecution hsvo any matter with which
thoy can occupy a few minutes?

HR. H.JIDY: I have four or five qe stiens to put to the witness, ycur Honor,
on redirect.

THE PRESIDENT: All right, prccocd

REDIRECT HXJ IHATIOK

BT HR. HAROTi

Q. Professor, yru havo stated that the nttcr-danco cf ycung physicians wns
not mandatory in the Fuohror Schc'l :f German Hiysiciena. New, I ask you, was
it not a ccnsanrt performance, so tc s> ck, fer a y.ung physician to nttond
Blcoo's sch-il so that he might tx. ablo to proceed successfully in his
profession?

A. Tho latter is naturally v w ry pr v-blo. I romombor similarly that tha
Bine was tho caso with tho Roich labor Sorvico. Thoro woro a number f c
cdloaguos whe thought that this entire rffnir was very horriblo but thoy made
a show for the utsido; they wont th.ro and thoy said it wo6 a very nico lifo
and know vory wo 11 that it w uld bo v.vantagoeus fer thoir enroor. I should
like to see that y ung physician wh -t th't time did net try tc crcato
cuch an iapr-esion in tho interest cf furthering his career.

Q. Hew, Prefosser, y u mentioned the film "I Accuse.” Have you scon it?

A. I did not see tho film but I know its contents.

Q. What did it show. Doctor?

A. Tho film showed, as far as I remember, that a human boing who is

suffering from an incurable multiple sclerosis sh.uld bo killer, rather thnn

kept alive and the propagandists tcc._iique of that film was very dangerous

-:r the reason that in a suggostivu manner tho public was, so-called, .asked to

tike part in the decision so that tho help cf tho public was enlisted in the

ZCZ5


27 Jan. U7 -A-22-3-FKF- Saslaw

Court Ho. 1


J


aic* of that decision and should spent naously arrive at a decision but
beyond that, I can say free ny experience gained by xsy neurological
practices, that over since the day that fila was shown, the wore*, "multiple-
sclerosis" was no longer mentioned by rv j as a physician since I could no longor
stand to mention this doslgnati.n f a disease to cy patients. This film had
a catastrophic sug.-ostive effect on all layrasn and patients.

Q. Do ycu knew by when this fila ras distributed?

A. That is not known to me. I do .vt renumber it.

Q. Would ycu say that this fila t.is rv-dicrlly cr scientifically a sound
and reasonable dociraent?

A. No. Uhdor multiple sclerosis there nr* Just as many cases which would
havo boon in proved and curod, such as tuborculosis casos that can bo cured and
such as chronic alcoholics who can bo cured and it was an intentional
Mllciouanoss if such a caao was takon out and in such a manner
propagated aoeng the public.

Q. Thon y-u w.uld describe it, tkc». r, as a-roly prcpagan J a; is that
corroct?

A. Yes. As for as I knar, there was a fiLj :*opart».nt with tho Ministry
of Propaganda where a physician collaborate! and I think his nano was
TocMlla.

Q. New, Doctor, do yu kn w .f any ether such films?

A. I knew snothor historical film * nich also shews a similar tronc'., tho
Hebert Koch fila, where the pors.nallty cf no _f cur greatest Oormrn
pathologists Rjbort Koch was distorted in an almost unbelievable manner. At
that time, in the interest of Rudolf Virchow, I wrete an article in rdor to
protest against this one-sided description. His s~n was living at tho time.
Gehoiarat Hans Virchcw thanked mo fer it for trying to save tho honor of his
father.

Q. Now, Prcfvss r, do ycu knew anything about the Euthenasia Prograa as
it operated in Germany free the latte* part cf 1939 on?

A. I only na o the experience cf the practicing psychiatrist; that is

say, I know tho slow devclopnsnt of the transporting away of the insane

2084


27 Jan. U7 -A-22-ii-PKP- Sasiaw
Court No. 1


to extcrninati.cn coape and I kncm th; suffering cf the members of tho
families cf the patients who had to . _r being included in th'.t acti.n. The
consequence was that I for years, ha-. , made the attespt tc knowingly falsify¬
ing of the patients which wore given to ny care and sc saved then fr'.m such a
fate as far as pcssiblc. It has not only referred to Euthenasia but it also
referred to the sterilisation measures for years and I adnit that today, I
protcctod ny patients by, for instance, designating schizophrenia ns anothor
disoase and that bheroby I designated epileptic cases as screly "Kino" (?)
cases and further, a nuabor cf so-called "melancholics" I savod by calling
it ft different nano in order to save qy patients from sterlization or a fate
even worse; namely, that f the wxtcr*insti n caaps.

Q. I have cne further question, Doctor. Thon, in suaraing up, I wculd say
cr I may assume that tho typo cf Euthanasia practiced by the Nazis in tho
Euthonasia Program fr-o 1939 on was iu.t that typ- cf Euthenasia .f vdiich y.u
havo oxpross-d c limited approval Ju.ro today; is th-t correct?

i«. No.

MR. H/cRDf: I havo no further qucsHcns.

JUDGE SEBRI'G: itr. Hardy, tho Tribunal is interested in knowing wh-thcr
this film by tho accusod .r similar flics which have occn referred tc hero in
testim ny, hid any fflcial government .-1 .,orx.sis .r approval cr nuth rizat-
itn or whether they were me roly privet*, ventures?

HR. HARDY: I put that quosti n to th. witness, y-ur Hen^r, and ho said
that ho did n t knew wh. the distributer was. I think wo can clear that
up, hewever, but tho film, I believe, h-s b.on r.quostcd by the d».fonso c.unsol
in their ease.

JUKE SEBRING: That is tho r.risen I am asking the quosti'n.

HR. H 4 RDY 1 Tho official governs.nt sancti n is a aettor th-.t at tho
present time I an not ablo tc answer, whether r not it is an -fficial
geverment film. I asked the witness hat qu-sti n an he doesn't kn.w
ftithar. I h-vo n.- further questions on redirect, your Honor.

THE RESIDENT: Dr *ny of tho defense c> unsol hivo any further

questions for the witness in regard the quosti ns recently asked?

2025


27 Jan. h7 -A-22-5-FXF- Saslsw
Court No. 1


DR. FROSSCH~ANN: (Counsel for 3rack). It. President, on the

basis of the redirect examination, I have two more questions to put to the
witness,

RECRCSS UNATICH

BY DR. FROESCHj-JiN:

Q. Professor, y<,u w^re the h~ed .£ a cental institution. In your opinion,
are there insane, persons with a lack ..f consciousness, of un’.orstandin 6 ,
or on tho very lowest intellectual 1-vcl whoso cental understanding dc^.s net
go abevo tho animal level?

Tint is a question which goes boyend the medical franc-work. Wo can only
Judge on th: basis c t reactions with roferonco to various ''egreos of animal
life. Wo are not Justified, however, w consider this comparison ns tho
only one valid. Tho possibility that a change occurs is always thoro and
therofere, ths.ro is nc p;ssibility to ..newer this question in such a cno-
track manner.

Q. Are ths.ro not cases in which r. 'ter years, if net decodes, f observation
in tho insane asylums whore any prospset of improvement is out cf the
question?

A. Cortainly, thoro oro such caSvS but thero is also tho contrary; for
instance, thoro aro cases of schizophrenia who, ovon aftor fifteen or
twenty years, no -‘.ay suddenly for quite unknown r-ns.na c.oo back tc
health. Thoro arc a number f incurable psychopathic oosos who cannot cope •
with life and could novor livo eccia: / outside tho walls cf an institution
and who then suddonly in their last hours aftor a physical c'isoase shew
thoasolvos ready tc communicate with .’jo .utsl.'o world, sc-ncthins which thoy
never had durin;. thoir lives fctfcrc. 1 these thinjs do occur in modicino#

Q. And, n.w, Professor, supposing that n,- could decide whether a caso
of insanity was incurable cr net, do yu consider a unanimous affinitive
answer to this question by a number f mjdic~l specialists independent of
each other, do ytu consider this adc punt*. tc present the factor :f
human error? Did you understand c? q ‘i n?

A. Hay I consider it for a occont' ’laybe you could repeat the last part of


27 Jan. 17 -A-22-6-PEF- Saslaw
Court No. 1

ycur sentence.

Q. Tho last port was, whether you consider such a c_abinati~n ,f svv^rsl
nodical specialists, psychiatrists seme ether field, completely independent
jf each other, who onsor this question cf incurability in tho affirrastivo,
do you consider this on adequate basis for declaring this pationt incurable?

As a philosopher I would still have ay doubts then.

Q. And ns a doctor?

I w..uld. ga by the fact but I would not ,'r-w and c.-nscquencos from that
■hich go error tho limits of tho Oath f Hipocrates.

Q. In his philosophical answer — I *nthor that thocrctically you answored
ay question in the affirmative although practically y u would not participate
In such an undertaking?

A. Yes*

q. Hy last qu^sticn. May I conclude that Uvjrc aro cases of insanity
■her release from tho sufforincs io desirable fr-a tho human point cf view and
In which tho physician alcno is in r position to bring about this release?

A. That is n;t a nwdical question; it is a theological question.

q. I askod you this question bocauso ytu wore Just speaking from tho
philosophical point of view and I assumed that cn the basis of your rich ex¬
perience which you havo demonstrated . ay, y v u arc competent to Judge this
question in tho field rf philosophical and thtol-gacal questions. That is why
I askod tho qiwsti n. Pould y u please answer it?

I bcliovo that tho concopt :t . ,'*jas« has to be discussed in furthor
'cull. Reloaso is net nly rolcas- r n suffering and finally I nust point

out that I think it is a very questi.lo syupUn of a modern hui.van being

*hon ho con do nothing with human su' rirv. but n-.ko tho attempt to do away
■ith this sufforing. Heroin, I think, is one if the nest J ancorous moments
' the Fhysicians ~f this time. Tho sufforing up to tho Nineteenth Century in
the :bstorn countries and in the entire cultivated world has had another
waning but nly tho meaning that that is to be olicimtcd.

Q. And whet about the therapy of he alass cases?

A. I don't quite understand your question.

2027


Court No. 1

27 Jan l7-«532-'7>EHlt-Saslaw


Q. mat do you think of hopolc Jicrapy? If you arc of the opinion
that the therapy is hope less, thon what is tc bo dene with the patients?

A. As long as a huaan boins broaths, I as a physician would still try,
even considering the cost hcpifcaa tl. —.py when according to my practical
experience I haro to assuno that it -reuld be useless.

DR. FiXESCHKt.JCI: I have no fur .or questions. Ur. President, nay I
answer a question of the Judeo concc in;, tbo filn "I Accuse"?

TIE ERLS IDS NT: feu my answer tho question.

DR. FnCESCHL'.Wi: In Gorcany no filn cculd bo shown to the public
without the approval of the Propaganda Ministry Thereforo, if tho filn
"I Accuso 1 , if tho witness knows about this filn, evon by hearsay, then ono
can assuno with certainty that this f' a had tho approval of tho Propaganda
liinistry.

TIE rTSSHJSNT: Arc thoro any f’.rthor questions of this v/itness on re-
cress oxanination by dofonso counsel? ' r ery well, tho witness will bo excused
end tho Court will recess until nino thirty tenerrew nrrnlry;.

(The Tribunal adjeumod until 28 January 19b7, at 0930 hours.)


10

20 Jan-iMSS—1-1-Foster
Court No. I.

n CCB?3£7Z3 COPY"

Official transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of Aaerica, against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Nurrfcerg, Germany, on
20 January 19U7, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

TH5 MARSHAL* Persons in the Court Roca will please find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 is now in session. God save the United States of

An erica and this Honorable Tribunal.

Thore will be order in the Court*

THE rcaSIDEJff: 2lr^ arshal,. ..ill you ascertain that the defendants
are all present in the dock.

THE .AKSiiAL: Kay it please your Honor, the defendant Cborhousor is
absont due to illness.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you any information, 4r. Marshal, as to whother
tho defendant will bu absent for any period of tino?

THE .AP.SHAL: I don't have ary inforoatitn as to whether it is
temporary or pomanont, sir.

THE PRESIDSfTt Is oounsol for tho defendant Cborhousor presont?

Has counaol for the dofondant ary information on that point?

DR. SSIDLi (Attorney for tho dofondant Cberhousor): Toatorday
overling I talked with tho defondant Cborhousor. Yesterday evening
she was still in the bc3t of health. I assume that sho is only
temporarily ill. I do not have ary more exact information,

THE FKESjDEHTx IT appears to the Tribunal that the temporary ab¬
sence of the defendant Cbcrhousor free tho Court Roce will in no wise
jeopardize her case. Is that tho truth, counsol?


DR. SEIDL: That is also ay opinion.


^ TH2 JgSlfiBff s The record -.fill show tho presence cf all tho dofon-
V^uhtS- in court sa^e tho defendant Cborheuser who is absent on account

'iff , v ■ j\

• ss* The jonl}* information given to the Tribunal is that this ab-

sence will probably be temporary, and as the opinion of tho counsel


for the


-he defer-4an>’

.. AV -JX


Cfcerhcusor and the Tribunal is that her absence at


2029


28 Jan-T- (38 - 1 - 2 - Foster
Court No. 1.

this tiro will nrt jeopardise the interests of tno defendant Cber-
heuser, the trial will proceed. Tho Marshal will endeavor to procure
further information by the opening of tho afternoon session as to
tho physical condition of the defendant Cfeerhouser.

Counsel for the prosection mj proceed.

'JR. .eHAKET i iiay it please tho Tribunal, the prosecution would
Ilka to have the Tribunal voice judicial notice of a motion picturo
filu which was oxhibitod to tho International *4 lit ary Tribunal. Tho
title of this film is ".azi oncontration w^ps". °ne part of this
fLLu, uhich originally ran some tiro hours, deals with the outhanasia
institute, liadanar, about which tho Tribunal has heard considerable
testimony in this caso.

Wo have oworpted that portion of tho film and no would liko to
road a certificate evade by Howard J. -cCrackon. It roads as followsi

"I, Hovrard J. -c-rackon, Captain, Ar y, U. S. Serial Nuntoor
01055665, do horoby c-rtlfy thatJ 1. I an en active duty as tho offioor
in charge of tho Reproduction Divis on in tho u ffico of tho Chief of
Counsel for War Crimes, AK) 12l-*v. I hr.vo hold this position sinco
the inooptlon of tho Offico of Chief of Counsol for WarCriaoa under
Brigadier General T-lford Taylcr and previously hold tho same position
in tho Offico of Chief of Cornsol undor .<r. Justice Rebort H. Jackson.

‘ "2. Tho fila Which is about to bo shown is a truo and correct
copy of extracts freo tho fUa B }!a=i Concontration Camps", which was
introduced in-ovidenco ooforo tho International military Tribunal in
tno caso of tho Unitod Statos against Soaring, H^ss, ot al, as ISA
Exhibit Number 79.

"3. Such extracts concerning tho institution at Hadamar and
ware takon free tho aforesaid flic "Hasi Concentration Camps" under
ay direction and supervision. These .xtracts have not altered, dis¬
torted, or changed in


-2030-


2S Jcn-W-GTS-l-J-jOster
Court I'o. 1.


any manner. Signed, Howard J. kcCraaJccn. ■

■Subscribod and sworn to before so this 21 day of January 191 * 7 ,
floronco ... Rowond, Captain, .X. Adjutant, OCC."

The fils itself is othervise self proving siaco it contains at tho
beginning of too fila tw> affidavits by porsons vno were connectod with tho
arJcing of the fila itself.

THS PRSSIDSi.T: The Tribunal will toko Judicial notico of tho filn as
BUfoosted by counsel for tho prosecution.

There being no objection to the shoving of thu fila, the prosecution
will proceed.

(„n excerpt froa the file "tfnxi Concentration Cw:pn" was thon shown
to tho court.)

1 R. hcJLJST: I would now like to submit for the approval of the Tribunal
tho cortificato cado by Goa. r«l Taylor vita rospoct to tho right of cortr.in
ocployoos of the Offico of Chief of Counsol to administer oatho for tho
purposo of tcklng interrogations and affidavits.

THS FR3SIDS.T: I will return tho origli»l ccrtificnto to tho Socrotnry-
Cenoral. Kill you toko tols certificuto.

(The certificate was hnndod to tho Socrotnry-Gen*ml.)


2031


28 Jar.-y-JB-2 L 3-1-Raynes
Court Ho, 1.

THE ffiESIDEHT: Have copies of this certificate been referred to
Deferjo Counsel?

Hi. CHANEY* Tos, they have, -our Honor, in Geman. Tho certifi¬
cate roads as follows:-

“This certificate is r.ado for tho purpose of showing the author¬
ity of certain of tho personnel of tho Office Chief of Counsol for War
Criecs to cdoinistor oaths and properly to attest those affidavits which
wore adnittod provionsally by :dlitary Tribunal I in United States
against Karly Brandt, ot al.

"Pursuant to Executive Ordor 9$hl, 2 Kay 19li5, attached horoto
as Tab A Exocutiva Cfrdur 9679, 16 January 19li6, attached heroto as
Tab A No. IS of the Offico Chiof of Counsel, 20 arch, 1916, attachod
horoto as Tab C, Gonoral Or dor No. 301 of tho :<llitary Governor, 2li
October 19U6, attached hereto as Tab D, and lottor USFET, 2 Ij Ctetobcr
19U6, Subject: Appoint:.:~nt of Chiof of Counsel for War Crinos attachod
horoto as Tab E, I on authorised and have been sinco 29 March 19h6 to
prepare and prosecute chargos of atrocities and war crinos against
leaders of tho European Axis Powers end thoir accessorius.

"In tho dischargo of tho responsibilities conforrod on neby tho
above nontionod orders and instructions, I havo authorisod and dotailud
necbers of my stalf who aro ongogod with do in tho preparation and
prosecution of casos, including attorneys, interrogators and othor
investigators and agonts of tho Offico of Chiof of Counsel for bar
Criaos to conduct interrogations and investigations and in tho course
of such interrogations and investigations to administer oaths.

"Among these when I havo authorized to conduct interrogations and
investigations and to administer oaths, with tho offoctivo date of
thoir authorization, aro tho following personnol of tho Offico cf
Counsol for War Crises*

“Walter H. Rapp, U. S. Civilian, AGO Identification H'unbcr
3-1:16367, Director of Evidence Division of tho Offico of Chiof of
Counsol for War Crimes, authorizod 26 ’iay 191:6.


-2032-


28. Jon-H-JP -2 k 3- Haynes
Court No. 1.


"Horbort H. Moyer, U. S. Civilian, AGO Identification No,
A-liAl69ii, Interrogator, Evidenso Division, Office of Chief of
Counsel for liar Cries, authorizod 15 July, 116.

"Prod ftodoli, U. S. Civilian, AGO Identification No. B-
U32p69, Interrogator Svidonco Division, Office of Chief of Counsol
for War Crises, authorized 10 July 191*6.

"Horny Sachs, U. S. Civilian, AGO Identification No. A-lll698
Research Analyst, SS Division, Offico of Chief of Counsel for War
Cri.»s, authorized 15 July 19l*6.

"Quy Favargor, Koutrol Citizen, AGO Identification No. 20071,
Research Analyst, SS Division, Offico of Chief of Counsel for TTar
Crises, authorized 15 Octobor 191*6.

"Alfrod H. Both, U. S. Civilian, AGO Identification No. X-Ol6251
Rosoarch Analyst, Econcaslcs Division, Office of Chief of Counool
for War Crbios, authorizod 23 August, 191*6.

■Rolf Gcrtonborg, U, S. Civilian, AGO Identification No. D-090061*
Interrogator, Evidence Division, Offico of Chief of Counsel.


-2033-


28 Jan a7^-£S-243-U-Kayrve3
Court No. I.


Counsel for War Crlaos, authorized 5 Ctetctoor, 19b6.

“/Signod/ Telford Taylor, Brigardicr General, tSa, Chief of
Counsel for War Crimea•"

Attached to this certificate are cortified copies of tho ordors
ard directions pursuant to which General Taylor is vosted with author¬
ity to proparo and prosecuto charges of atrocities against loadors of
tho European Axis, and I don't think it nocossary that I read and
analyzo those orders.

I assuaw that tho Court night wish to reserve its decision until
it has had tino to study tho certificate in scene detail and if Your
Honors prefer, you can rosorvo your ruling until a Into dato.

I say that it nay noli bo that Your Honors will prefer to ro-
sorvo your ruling until you havo had tino to study tho certificate so
that will bo ontiroly satisfactory to tho Prosoctulon.

THE FKESOENT: Has Defonso Counsel had an opportunity to oxonino
tho certificate and tho attached oxhibits?

KR. He HANEY t Dofonso Counsol woro furnishod with copies of tho
certificate in Qoraan yestorday afternoon.

THE H*£SIDQfr i Tho cortificatea appear sufficient. Statononts or
affidavits filed by persons authorized pursuant to this cortificato
may bo admitted in ovidonco.

Does Courool for tho fVosocuticn havo a list of certificates nd-
nittod provisionally?

UR. He HANEY: Your Honor, I havo a list of all tho affidavits
which havo gono into tho rocord, Mother provisionally admitted or
not, and this cortificato includes tho moos of all persons who ad¬
ministered oaths in connection with thoso affidavits which woro ob¬
tained by tho Office of Chief of Coun3ol for War Crimes. I do not have
thosa sogregated as to tho affidavits provisionally admitted and
thoso finally admitted, but I will bo pleased to havo such a list pro-
pared and subait it to tho Tribunal.


-2031:-


28 Jan 1*7 2 &3-2o-flaynos

Court No* I.

THE RESIDENT* Could that be presented by 1x30 this afternoon,
do you suppose?

IE. ’.fc HANEY: I think wo could do that porhaps this coming
during the intermission. It might bo possible to present the list.

THE RESIDENT* Vory well. Present that list at that time.

«R. Ke HANEY: I ccoc now to one further document with rospoct
to tho typhus experiments carriod out in Buchonwald Concentration
Camp. This is Docuaont NO 13U*, *hich will bo Prosecution Exhibit

1*33.

Thoso folders which hnvo Just boon passed to tho Tribunal
contain copies of tho documents which will bo submitted this morn¬
ing and I think that thoy are arrangod in proper order from top to
bottom.

This is Document NO 1311 a, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit
U33. It is an affidavit by ono Arthur Diotxsch, whom tho Tribunal
will recall was tho assistant to Dr. Ding in Block 1*6 at Buchonwald,
whoro tho typhus cxporiconta wore carriod out. Tho witness


-2035-


C'mrt So. 1

26 Jar 47-X-343-lb-iEH*2ayne a


lugea Kogcn so testified with respect te Arthur Dletrsch.

Dietrich la caw held In custody by the Sritish and this affidavit vub
attained froe hin. It read* as fcllcvsl

■I, Arthur Dletxech, swear, dapaea and atates

-1. I waa barn aa 8 (fctober 1901 In Plauen i.V. I an a German national,
ny present address la Dataald Ul?P*) 8teinst»ss So. 4. I attended the
following achoala: 4 yeara public school, nine years high school. I wee
graduated in 1919 fraa the JCgl Blgh School lr. Plauen l.V. On 1 April 1920
I entered the Roichsvehr aa a volunteer. Cto 1 October 192? I was prosotod
to the rank of 2 nd Lleutacaat. rcgiaer.t vaa called uu la 1923 in tho
action of the Rolchewehr ifalatt the Seeony governoer.t. At this tine the
Relchawehr vua onlorged by owdeata. t tap or ary volunteers, end nombera of
the Steel Kelsot, the so-called Black hoichsvehr. 7hte organiratlon vae
secret and naintalned Ite svu secret crsonnle. Since I already eyepathixed
with the coals ef the Socialists at that tine, I gavo infonaation about tho
Black Relchawehr and ths scorst arsenals to agents of the workers. During
a search of the house of one of tho events. «y nose v.e found anong the

capers. In order to esenps iodic U-nt, I dssertod froa tho Roichsvehr on
the sane day. On 4 DcccaW 1982 I vae wrested. On 26 Kay 1924 I VM
sentenced to 14 years laprlsci-ont by tho Reich Court for Mgh treason. In
1925 ny penalty was reduced to 10 years. Fron 192? to 1933 I served my
penalty in various prison forts.

-2. In the spring of 1938 about three-ouartors of a year before tho
end of ny sentence 1 was transferred t. the Concentration C-cop lotorvcgen.
Fron 1933 to 1937 I va. lodgsd in several other concentration canps. In
ths sunnier of 1937 I wo. transferred to tho Concentration Canp ^chcnvald,
where I reneined until the liberation by the American Aray. Mot until
then vac I shown the protective custody order which stated os a reason
that I cust stay In tho c<*coatratlo B can? because of urgent suspicion of
activities against ths Stats.

•3. m the su»,r ot 1938 1 — !« *-«» " ° Cl ° rt '

vhere I h.=81od th. until In terrier ” Doc “ tcr 1941


28 Jar,uary-M-D JG-4&3-2b-Hayne s
Court So. 1


I was thrown into the bunker for six weeks on account of iOlcged communistic
activities in the infirmary. In January 1912 I was assigned as an assistant
to Dr. 6ing, alias Schuler. I worked for Dr. Ding until the easy was dis-
bsndod. Uy work consisted of the fo_lowing: in administration and, from
1913, also as superintending nurse.

"1. In cy capacity as adsdnistr: tor and superintending nurse for Dr.
Ding's department at Buchonwald I gained insight into the records, including
those which wore classified strictly secret. Dr. Ding frequently discussed
internal office natters with me. Per the reasons stated above I am in the
position to make tho following statements:

''5. In January 1912 typhus atttiens wore established in blocks 11 and
19 at Buchonwald concentration camp. In January a preliminary experiment
was performed on about five p.rscns. At tho beginning of February tho first
large experiment took place, which involved about 150 persons. Thoao pooplc
wero divided into five groups. Four groups received protective vaccinations
which wore administered by tho nurses of the stations. One group


28 Jan. 47 -4t-2&3le-PK?- Haynes

Court 1


received the Keigl, one group the Behring I, end one group the
Behring 11 vaccines. I can not recall the name of the vaccine
usee for the fourth group. The fifth group received no protective
vaccination and served merely as a control group. At that
time a medical commission came to Buchcnwald, which ir.spocted also the
typhus station headed by Dr. Ding. As fer as I recall, this caxdssion
consisted of throe to four pwoplo. Just for curiousity's sake, I asked Dr.

Ding for the names of thewo gentlemen. Of those names I still renoober the
following: Profossor Gildemoistcr, President of the Robert Koch Institute
in Berlin, rnd Professor. Rose, Uedicsl Advisor to the Luftwaffe in Berlin.
Since at that tine Dr. Ding was not sufficiently f.-niliar with typhus
infection. Prof. OUdeoeister carried it out himself. The infection natter
for the obovo described experiments came from the Robert Koch Institute in
Berlin and consisted of rickottsis cultures cultivrted on an ogg yolk. For
these first exporiaents Jews were used cLmost exclusively.

"6. In Stay 1942 after torxizwtion ol the exporiaents. Dr. Ding o‘do a

•

report in which ho put down in writing the findings of the exporiaents. At
about tho uao timo I read those entries rndin the files I found on tho
first page entries regarding a meeting of physicians that had taken place in
B-rlin. I rucall the entries rugfrding medical Quoting folios:

•'In this meeting in November 1941, in which Professors Handlosur,
Schroibor, Gildemoistor, Urugowsky, Rose, and Dr. Ding took part,
it wr.s dacidod to perform v ccine experiments on human beings, sinco animal
exparlmunts had not produced any decisive findings. Dr. Ding is to bo chargod
with carrying out the experiments. The Buchorar.ld Concentration Camp is con¬
sidered tho most suitable for those purposes. Dr. Hovon is appointed deputy.
Tho above mentioned names are tho cnly ones I still recall, but there wore
several other names nentionod, which, hewuver, hvu escaped my memory. Aftwr
having road the above mentioned entries, I asked Dr. Ding sometime later who
these gentlemen were. He told mo that Handloser was the lCbdie&l Inspector
of the V.'ohrmacht, Gildeaeistor, the President oT the Robert Koch Institute
ir. Berlin, Mrugowsky the Chief of the SS- Hygiene Institute in Berlin,

Rose Medical Advisor of the Luftweffo. Schroiber's function bt. escaped ny


noaory.


23 Jan-*?-CSS-4-1-Gross
Court So. 1.

B 7) Lcto in tho »uoar of 1942 tho oxporiaontol stations 44 and 49 woro
diet ended and block U6 was established instood. In tho beginning of 1943 block
50 was established. 3oth blocks carried tho nnno Hygiene Institute of
tho Vaffon-ss Department for Typhus • nd Virus Research 3uchonwnld. I
remember tnis name fron a sign put at tho entrance to block 50. Dr Ding
designated block 46 as tho clinical dop-rtoent and block 50 ns tho rcaonrch
building proper.

■3) .Jtogothor about 1000 p. rsona wor. used for tho experiments, about
ICO of whoti died. Those figures includo nil tho expcrlmont? carried out nt
the Typhus station. To these exporiaonts bolong typhus, typhoid fovor,
phosphorous burns, tosting of a cocbincd inoculation for s:r llpox, typhus,
typnold fever, Jaundice, diphtheria, and various othor vnccinos. At tho
boginn ng of 19U5 Dr. Ding cnao and asked the stati .n clerk, n Polo by tho
nauo of Gndzinokl, to make a list of nil the sick r.nd dond wno had gone through
the otati n. It is froo th\t list that I rone-bor tho abovo mentioned figuros.

"9) All persons usod in tho experiments hid to bo conplotcly healthy
and of draft ago. If porsoos c/'uo to tho station who did not fit tho physical—

.'HE PRESIDENT: JUst a monent. Hr. hcSrnoy. ploaso, sir. So::o of what
you are reading Booms to bo missing from this document. Will you re d more
•1 early?

R. NCH.JIZT: If tho Tribunal please. I must npologiic for this co -y
v»ich you hr.vo. I sc reading fro- the original translation which in quito
r-adablo. Apparently this was dono by tone G-rnan person not too familiar
vita tr.o English fron the number of omissions. I will read slowly, beginning
with number 9.

"9) -11 persons usod in tho oxporiaents had to bo completely healthy
! --xd of draft ego. If porsons cane to the station who did not fit the physical
qualifications they wero first fattonod so that they approximated the health
level of the Vehrancht.

"10) Reports on too carrying out of nil experiments as well as the
I details of others w-.r_ sent to the fiygiono Institute of the Whffon-SS in Beilin


2039


23 Jan~J*-GZS-h-2-Gros9.

Court So. 1.

Sioro is a lino ouittod there too.

"Those reports containod also the cuubore of porsons who diod fron the oxperi-

centn. Dr. Ding told no once that oil those exporinonts woro carried out on

«

co-^isslon of the Whornccht. ^cording to his voraion. Dr. Din#; v-a on pood
toms with Dr. G*nxken. Medical Inapoctor of tho Vnffsn-SS. Dr. Gcnrkon wr.s
tno superior of Dr. hrugowsky, tho head of tne Hygiene Institute of tho VVXferv-
SS in Berlin, wuo wes again the superior of Dr. Ding.

"11) I rececber the following visits which woro undo to the Typhus stntlOJ
in Buchonwnld: Prof. Gilde-eistor. Prof, Rose. Dr. krugovsky, Dr. Zger. Tho
noovo nc.ud porsons I s.iw uyself in block 46. Dr. Zger was. according to Dr.
Dim;, tho head of tne Vohrc cht Institute of t.ie OXU in Cracow. According to
Dr. Dine, tho following people vioitod tno Concentration C—p r.t Buchonwnld:

Dr. Gonzkor.. Dr. Brandt. porsont.1 physician of tho Fuehrer. I personally have
aoon nnny othor nign ranking porsonalitlos in Buchonwnld, and hovo hoard of
others who visitod this onno coup, whoso tai^js osenpo uo.

(Signed) Arthur Diotxech

26 Dcconbor 1946"

JUDOS S23RING: Hr. KcSacoy. xiro you going to bo proparod to furnish
tho Tribunal with Goman copios of this, as well co the English?

1 JI. McH-KEY: Tos, wo will.

• DR. SZHV.TIUS („ttornoy for K?j1 Brandt): hr. Fresidont, I roquoet that
I bo permitted to bring tho witness here for cross oxaninrtion. I shall i.ako
tho rppropriato request in writing. Tho witness is loc:\tod in tho CcJop of
Stnhruiohlon in tho British Zono of Occuaition and ho has given this affidavit
there in Dut_.old. Thorcforo, it should bo possible to have hin brought horo.

THS ?RZSIDE:>T: Ifao Tribunal will coneidor this whon the roquost is
received.

lit. iicEJET: I sight say on that point that Frosecution will resist or
Object to the calling of Arthur Diottsch to airr-borg. Tho only tern I think 1:
vnich tho dofundant Karl Brandt could snow ouch interest in this affidavit is
tne statement th,4 ho was in Buchonwald. That statement is based not on
personal observation of the affiant, as is clearly stated in tho affidavit,


2040


23 Jto-H-G5S- Gross
Court So. 1.


but to the statement nedo to the Afloat by Dr. Din*. I submit no additional
li,5ht will bo ahows on any matter by having hia in this court room. If Dofor.so
Counsel fccla it nccoasary to inveatignto any other points further I submit
interrogatories will soot tho situation. Vo hnvo hoard the toatinony r.t
great length of Kogon and Fvrdinand Hoohxiild in connection with thoao oxpori-
nonta end I tnink it not necessary to call this affiant to Ihirnborg who ia in
tnu Brit1 ah zono of Cccupction.

THE PRSSlDZmT: Tao application for the attendance of this witnosa will
bo submitted to Proaocution. Prosecution fans stated its objections.

.5. f.cE.A3Y: I couo now to tho prosentetion of four exhibits which nro
excerpts tukon from reports cede by tho hilitary Kodlcd Acedoiy. Tho Tribunal
has hoard mention of tnia Academy several tlnos ooforo and you will recall it
won undor tho direction of tho dofendxt Hnndlosor. It was an instituto which
hold moot Inga periodically ffoa tno last of 19^1 on at wmich g< thurod tho
foronoot uilitnry nodical persons in Germany. It Is not to bo oxpoctod, of
courao, that the reports which wore circulntod by tho Kllitnry Medical Aendomy
would contain tho details of the criminal oxporinents about wnlch tho Pro¬
secution has here submitted proof. Theto reports wore. I nssuno. rathor wldoly
rood ..rd do not ovon carry a staap of ■socrot". However, tho reports do indi¬
ct a that papers w^ro road to tho meetings of this acodomy c oncoming sono of
tho experiments about w.;ich proof has boon bore aubnittod. And, tho Tribunal
will recall with respect to tho sulfanllr—ido experiments that tho dofondnnta
5obh.irdt, Fischer, end Oberhouaor, particularly, participated; that tho affi¬
davit of the defendant Fischer explicitly states that tho report aado of tho
hilitary I odic&l Accdomy lr. Hey 19^3 1144 explain how tho experiments were
curried out and upon wnoa they wore carried out. You will also recall that the
v itnoea Xogon testified that Dr. Ding had givon a report on tho typhus oxpon-
l-or.te at the a .mo mooting of tho Hilitary Helical Association in Kay 19 u 3-
Theoo documents will corroborate the statements nedo by this witnosa a.nd work
Sy the dofondait Fisher.

Tho first excerpt is from-a report on 1st Congress of Consulting 2xport3.
rhnt is, of course, tho Hilitary Xodical Academy, from tho mooting of 1S-19


26 1-Xuppcrstein

Court No. 1,

DR. KELTS: (counsel for the defendant Handloac-r): hr. President,

Ur. HeHaney is just about to present several documents. They are ex¬
cerpts free the printed report about the nesting* of the consulting
physicians. Tho Tribunal knows that Hr. HcHaney has already mentioned
the meetings of tho physicians as typical nestings of conspirators. Ho
has described them in this way. In that. General Taylor also, in his
opening speech, cited thoso meetings as evidence for tho conspiracy.
Bocauso of tho special importance of these meetings, which result in
thoso charges, I, as dofonso counsol for tho defendant Handlosor, who
callod and prosidod ovor those accotings, I had made tho roquest that
tho printed reports about thoso meetings free 192 jO to 19 Wj bo mndo a-
vailablo to no. Tho Gonoral Secretary informed mo on too 8th of Januaary,
that thoso roports of tho mootings woro in the hands of the prosecution
and that thoy tould bo handod to no 2h hours prior to thoir presenta¬
tion by tho prosecution. In accordance with this, I assuaod that tho
roports of tho prosecution would bo caaploto reports - altogothor,
four voluoos - and that thoy would bo proaontod os one. Tho High Tri¬
bunal, in this important chargo of tho accusation which concomc all
of tho dofor.dar.t3, should sco tho reason, tho importonco and tho con¬
tents of thoso mootings corroctly. That is not possible if oxcorpts
aro boing presontod, and tho dofonso bolioves that tho presentation
of tho records of tho mootings should bo presontod in thoir octiroty,
and that thoy will countor tho charges of tho prosecution, that this
coso dools with a collaboration for tho purposo to cosnit crimes; that
is, illogal nodical experiments.

Hr. Kch'anoy, himsolf, has Just told you that those printed roports
do not ovon boar tho stoop of "Sacrot", but that thoy wore Just mailed
by ordinary nail. I have requested the records of tho mootings, and
thu records of tho mootings have been brought h«re. It is net sufficient
Jor thu dofonso if tho prosecution only presents oxcorpts from thoso
records of tho mootings. I therefore request that I bo given the
possibility to present tho entire printed reports about tho mootings
of tho consulting physicians. I would naturally also agree if tho pros-


-20U2-


28 Jan —JP-5-I-Kupp-irstoin
Court Ko. 1.

cution would proscnt all the reports, I hope that these reports will

bo prosonted to the High Tribunal in such a way-that is, in a good

translation — so that it will sco fren the entirety of those documents
and will gain the ir.prossion which the defense wants to present, and
tnoreforc I object to the presentation of excerpts fren the entire ,
documents, if I as not a iven the possibility to present the entire
docuaents aa evidence,

7HE EISSIDEJ?: I ask counsel for tho defendant Handlosor if the
entire roport has boon submitted to him?

DR. IfELTE: Tho records of the Bootings have not boon made available
to no by the prosecution. Through friends, I have personally rccoivod
two of those reports of costings.

i{R, .feHAKE?: Hoy it ploaso tho Tribunal, the prosecution, of courso
agrees with the proposition that dofonso counsel now has the right to
put into evidence aiy othor portion of thoso roports that he caras to.
However, tho prosocution did not fool that it was under any obligation
to submit those reports to tho deforce counsol until tho prosecution
had made its own uso of tho documents. Those reports consists of four
bound volunue, running free 176 pages, up to tho largest one, of 3h5
pagos, all wrltton in vary tochnical and difficult Our in. It would bo
unroasonrblo to a very groat dogroe for us to inpose upon tho Trans¬
lation Department and on tho Court, to have theso docuEer.ts translated
in thoir ontiroty. As tho Tribunal will sco, wo arc intorcstod only
In a voiy snail portion of tho docusaonts. Sc're perfectly willing to
concede that tho I'dlitary iiodical Ac ad cry was concerned with a groat
nustoor of non-criminal ncdical cotivitioo. So*ro simply taking out
thcoe portions which wo think aro pertinent to this case. These volumes
ire on loan to tho -rosocutior. from tho Aoro-4todical Center in Hoidol-
borg, and thoy cannot be put in evidence for the reason that they must
bo returned to that organization. .. will, today, placo theso vol'mes
inttho.custodytof the Defendants' Inf oration Center, on tho understand¬


ing that thoy nay net bo removed from that room except for purposes

of translation, or photostating because thoy must b*. returned to tho

-20h3-


23 Jan-i;-Jr-5-3-Kupporstci n.

Court Ho.

aoro-'iodical Center.

JUDGE SE3RING: Mr. 'IcHaney, docs the prosecution assort to this
Tribunal that it has placed in ovidcncc only such excerpts as it, in
good faith, bolieves is notorial to tho issue, and as correctly re¬
flecting the attitudo of this greup concerning tho point in issuo?

i(R. UcHANEY: Yes indeed, Tour --onor. Be have expended as ouch
tin*) as ko can in reviewing theso voluncs as carefully as wo can. Of
course, free the viewpoint of tho prosecution, wo have extracted
everything, which wo think is portinent to the proscction's caso. As
I stato, thoro aro a groat nicfccr of natters dealt with in theso
volunos which concom othor nodical research — other nodical ac¬
tivities - - of tho nilitary nodical officors in Gernany. Tho
coatings os * understand it, tho noetlngs consisted of a number of
groups of doctors, divided according to tho activity in which thoy
woro particulary intorestod - hygiono, for instnneo - surgery is
another oxanplo - an boforo thoso groups, roports would bu nado by
doctors who had boon corrlssioncd to carry


23 Jin. 47 -M-5A-1-PKP- Supperstoin

Court No. 1


out certain aedic.il teaks. These reports would then be di&ostod end included
in those reports, end, in turn, of course, nodical instructions as issued
by vcpious bronchos of the -.ohrancht would t» based, to r. substantial
degree, upon those reports. For instance, "How to tract people who fro
severely frozen." Instructions would be issued based upon research as carried
out, for ex'ucplt, by Rnschor, Holzloohncr end Finke in Dachau, : nd , as tho
ovidor.ee will show, Holzlochner nede a report to tho aeetin? of the Military
Medic .1 „cadeny» In Decenbor 1942, about tho -oeperinonts in Dachau. Vo h'vo
extracted only those portions which we think aro portinent to our ersw.

JUDGE SEBRING: I don't know th't you catch ay point. H'vo you oxtr'cted
only such portions as you think wore favorable to the 'ttitude of the pros¬
ecution or can you assort that you h-vo all naU-rial portions bearing upon
the issue r.t hand, whether they aiy appe* r favorrblo for the prosecution or
for tho defendants?

IK. McHANSY: If I un.ersf nd your point, we h-vo extracted ell a.ttors,
for uxi'fflplo, der.lir..; with the sulfeniirnido experiments, rs crrriud out by
i^bhardV, rischor and Oberheusur. Wo di not pick out part of tho report
horein contrinod on the sulfanil-a*ide experiments at Rr.vensbruock • nd tako
only part of that, and not extrc.ct -t eU. Now thon, there raay hr.vu boon
other reports on other sulfanilamide experiments, unrelated to thuso,
nhich wore reported *t tho ssr.a meeting, and which we would not -xtnet. I
give tht as an example. I don't know that there were. I do know that
there were other t.*lkc, for example, on cold problems, at the mooting in
eocu-sb-.r of 1942. l.o extracted only t/.vt portion of the cold report as given
by Holzlochner because that is the only natter on cold with which this

trial is concerned. I thinx there aero othe: talks by other pooplo, on
•methods of treating exposure to c^ld.

DR. NELTE: Mr. President. I believe that I have understood Mr. McHanoy
correctly, if he states th t h« has only selected and prosonted those excerpts
"hich, in his opinion or in the opinion of the prosecution, would serve in
sustaining the ’ccusations, and of those which can also serve for tho defense;
-h*t is, in this case, for the realization of the nroper Importance of all
'-’.c actions which wen; coar.ittod. A brief review of the oxc«.rpts which are


28 Jan. 47 -S£-5 a- 2-?K? Kupperstein

,;curt No. i


to bo presented will show that not even the cxcorpts show coopletely the
discussions and speeches, but that, free these reports, only in-’ ividurtl
sections wore selected, of which it is believed th:-t they would serve in
sustaining the accusations. But Just these excerpts froo reports prevunt
that the entire impression of these meetings can bo translated to the Tribunal.
If, in this casu, there are only individual actions concerned, then perhaps
I could understand the point of view of the prosecution. Hcwever, Just in
the ctsc of those reports of the codings, the supposed conspiracy find the
alleged conspiracy is involved, end allegedly, typical mootings of conspira¬
tor s, who are planning nodical crioos, but this accusation which is the first,
you will not bo Able to got the proper impression if y;u lo not only hoar
individual cxcorpts or individual reports, but if you are presented with tho
routings in their entirety. And it is for this reason that I request that
I be peroitted to present r.U tho records of tho Bootings, so 1 ary assume
that tho prosecution has not accident'lly rof-rred to tho parts of tho
cxcorpts which can bo use<. in sustaining the accusation, but this can only
happen if ell tho reports of the meotin.-s h'-vu boon read and translated.

Thoroforu, there must bo translations of the records of these mootings.

Anri , thoruforo, I h'v« pointed to the Aoro-Uedic? 1 Center in Heidelberg,
where these reports of the rv-etings were boin^ kept. I an certain that
translations of those uocuaents can be found.


Court I

28 Jan-H-GES-6-l-Scnpson


3Y THE PRESIDENT:

Those four volutes of the printed report will bo cade available
to the counsel for tho dofondants; they nay read then and study than.

If Counsel for the Defense are of the opinion that the translations
offered are incorrect, or incomplete, or in any natter inperfect and
does not express the true senso of the meaning, counsel for the defend¬
ants may present that matter to tho Tribunal. Upon the opening of the
defendants' trial, counsel for tho defenso may offor in evidence any
further translations of these documents which they desire to offer and
which are pertinent to tho inquiry before the Tribunal. Tho Tribunal
would not direct this burdon of translating all these four volumes of
reports, unloss some reason appears certain portions of them should not
be translated. If translations in English language of these volumos
exists, and can bo cado availablo, that might be done, but whothor
such translations exist or not, of courso, tho Tribunal is not advisod.
lart of tho defendants' own caso, in roprosonting thoir defense, is in
tho prosontation of ovldonce and portions of roports which they doom
to bo material to it, ard thoy should throw somo light on tho situation
to the dofonso counsol. Does that answer Counsol's question?

DR. HELTE: May I ask tho Prosidor.t one question? If it Should
be possiblo for mo to find those four volumes of tho report and have
them mado available by friends of tho dofondar.t3, would I thon got tho
approval cf tho Tribunal, if I should offer it as ovidenco in its
entirety?

THE IRESIDEI.T: Tho Tribunal rill not bo inclined to admit in
e vi do nee four prir.tod volumes in the ‘Ionian language, but counsel, tho
volumos being availabl to him, can of course, read and study them to
any extent nhich ho desires, and thon nay offer in evidence any portions
of the documents, translated in the English language, rich ho deeas
pertinent to his case. Of course it is manifest to everybody that these
volumes contain much material which would be entirely iraaterial to the
matter now pending before this Tribunal. It seems to the Tribunal if
th ° CoUnS01 haa thQM vol « ea available to him, which we arc sure they


Court I

28 Jar.-?I-C-rS-S-i-Sacips#r.

will bo, upon reading those volutes he can take portions of it, or
inpropor translations, or incomplete, or that do not contain


23 Jra-;.-GS&-&-2-Sa_p«5n

Court .'o. 1.


or convoy the true scnao of the zincing, reaody is nvnilablo to hln of offer¬
ing supplemental or -ore complete translntl ’na onr.any of the extracts fron
those documents mica ho doeas pertiaeat to hit caso, but it would not permit
entry of four printed volunoa in the Gvreia language, n largo proportion of
w..ich would manifestly be iu-ctoriul to this inquiry.

3Y -i3. hcEJJEY:

The firat excerpt is Document S>921. w..ica will be Prosecution'a
Sx/.ibit ’Jo. U 3 U, and it is fros the riliti.ry Kodical Acadony mooting hold on
18 end 19 kny, l$h2. de have hero only a very short excerpt concerning a
report undo by the defendant ■—

JUDOS SZ3RI..C: Where do you find that dote?

.a. roE-OST: It la not on the cry: it was loft off.

132 PRISIDE-7: It is i portaat for Dcfonao Counael to know tho date
end pego of the document.

nR. j-cE-ISY: It is on p go 76 of the original; I will paaa it up to
the Tribunal: tho second n&oo frou tne top. The deto is on the front of
tho booklet.

JUDGE S3BRI.JG: Is the date 19 Hoy. I 9 U 2 , or 18. 19 . or does that
purport to cover everything in that book?

IR. i-.cH.-I3Y: Yea, th.t is correct, your Honor. JJkit is n report on
the mooting held on those two dntos and it is n euissnry of tnlks and paporo
sub.iittod to that acting. This exc.rpt is not offored on tho ground that
tne matters hero reported mro purely criminal. I will reed it first:
\-ougowsky indicates that, according to nic investic tiono. Saiga Boons only
to appear ir. Southern Russia, but this u.y change again. Protective
vaccinations «gainst dyaontory, ns perfor-od on 12 .U 00 individuals in cor>-
Ccr.trntijn ca-ps, proved tfli coupleto inofficacy of the cbtorbnt-vnccino froa
tne Behring works, but dyabocta nduinistored to 11 ,COO individuals nrd tho
vc.ccleg of the Saecasiacho Scrum VOrko administered to 3,000 as well r.s
dyscores administered to 4,0-X) individuals had r. very good effoct. Succoss
VR ® *oly Judged though, on the ba 3 is of whether or not an epidoaic in n

2068


26 J;.n-ir-G2;:-o-J-Saapson
Court *?o. 1.


camp stopped or continued. .sid-vcccino wi not testod. Jhagen (Behring
works) was administered to 12,000 individuals three tines 10 cubic conti-
aetors n fortnight, with very good results." Ve si-ply subnit tnis to
snow tsjxt it was reported at these codings that various vnccinos nnd
experiments were being carried out on concentration coup innate*, and hore
tr.cy auntion a very large number, 'do do not of for t..is to show that tho
particular natter witn w_ica they are dealing was a oriuinol oxporinont;

I don't know. It appears tavy wer simply testing vaccine. Ve offer it
sl-ply to show that tho report was node that they were to sting vaccine os a
natter of course on concentration coup inmates on a very largo scnlo.

next document, VO-^22, which it n report on the second mooting of
tnu consulting physicians is front
BY THB PRSSIOWr:

The Tribunal will recoss for a few ..onents.


20h9


29 Jaz-I3K-7-l-Le3ser
Court 'Jo. 1.


TH’ r.AHS^JL: The Tribunal la a rain in session.

TnS FEE«IKT: Before proceeding, hr. i cEaney. I desire to read
3 «ne natters into the record. The Tribunal has received the following:

"28 June.

'Tefendant Oberheuaer is suffering froc anal fissures. She Is be¬
ing treated now and it is very likely that she will be able to attend
court tomorrow or the neat day."

r. Hoska, 1st Lieutenant, Kedical Corps, Prison Physician"

I havo also receiv’d the following:

"3urnberg, January 23. 1947

"Horst Polc/nann. Attorney-st-Law, Tefenee Counsel for Zr. Schaefer.

*Ur. Prooident, Military Tribunal I. Secretary General. Nurnberg,
hr. President:

"Owing to proceedings in Kecptrn (Bavaria) which cannot be post¬
poned becauso iBfortant witness's havr to go back to the United
States, I aa unfortunately prevented froc presenting the opening
otatenont oyself during the dates 28 - 31 January. I entrusted
this to ey collaborator, Herr ?auschnbnch.

"I kindly request you to excuse ey absence from the seasons."

(signed) "Pelckaann"

These natters have been noted for the record, the original documents
filed with the Sccr-tary General.

The rrosrcution cay proc'-ed.

IH. JC EAK5Y: The wt t docua-nt is :-’0-922. which will be rroBecution
^hibit 435. This is a partial translation of the r--p»rt on thr 2nd l.ret-
ing lost of Consulting Physicians, fron 30 i'oveob'r to 3 * c-abor 1942, at
to . crtlcal Acad ry. ?- rlin. The first part of the excerpt which 1 wish
to ro-i is th for.word contained in the r-port wrltt n by th- Vfendant
Handleoser. It reads as follows:

“rroa 30 Kovinber to 3 Z-'c =.hor 1942. the '2nc‘ Work Onfrrencc “-art'
••o- place in Berlin. Th- conference was held for the first tine under
t<! - censorship of the Yehrancht ar.d ccabined 1 ading r.-dical officers.

2050


J6 Jas-Z3H-7-2-I-':sor
Court l*o. 1.


consultant doctors, and specialists fr©= all tranches of the Vohrracht,
as well as Vaffen SS and organizations and associations attached or o-ab-
ordinate to th* V'hrracht.

••A3 in the First Vorh Conference 2ast in May 1'42, the object was to
carry out. within anall groups of consultant physicians of various opo-
cial branches, a study of the recently decre-d nedical conclusions and
directive 3 in the sphere of e- dical sci-T.ce. The second winter of war
os the Sastern Front was before us. It was thus essential that during
this conference also, urgent problces which arose out of the experiences
of the first winter on th* Sastern ror.t, be discussed, kz a result of
the participation of numerous apical officers and consulting \ hysiciano
of all branches of the Vehrcacht as well as the Xaff<-n SS and organiza¬
tions and associations conn-ct--* with and subordinated to the Ur hraaeht,
the scientific conferences were particularly stinulated, osp-cinlly in
relation to those subj' cts concerning which a solution to certain scien¬
tific probleeo resulting fror the peculiarity of the service conditions
within the various branch s of the y.'hrrncht. wao found.

f


2051


28 Je* *i7JS-?JC-8-l-Koohaa
ceurt !fo. 1

"Tbo coopomtioa of tho spocialist on internal rrodicino with Physiological
Cfcouicnl 1-stltuto cf the Kilit-xy Hodlcr .1 &pnifcy rosultod in TrJ.ur.ble con¬
clusions which require spoci-.l nontloa si which oro .f prxticui-x lcport-xce
to the diet of soldiers In 90-00 and wrx, rovrxdiac scurvy. Ihoso conclusions
showed th-t our opinions concerning nnlaitrlticn roouiio rovlslon, prrticulrxly
in rob-rd to thoso In tho for:: of hypoTitadnosoa.

■The world wldo ch.-x~.otor cf this w-x, tho 7-rious cli:;-.tos lr. which co:ib-t
Of grontost oroprrtions is boles carried cn, h-.vo noro and sore drawn tho
goo-oodioal joint of vlow Into tho flold of dobr.to. Tropical disonsus, whoro
thoy nppo-r, h-.vo ccro to to rocogninod by tho troop doctors and hr.vo ontorod
tho ronln of rosorxch *~y consult-nto in ro«r.rd to thoir inportanco, diagnosis
•ni clinical tro-.tri-nt.

"Thus this conforonco hr. ught r.t ut tho tro--.tr at of naay and v-xlous
-roblons. In oortnln rospocts, In Its dlvorslty, it roflocts tho ovocts of
tho war la 1948, whioh took place on tho lands of throo ccatinonts.

"Tho notos on tho contributions and llecussicna had to bo ehertonod.

Thoy aro horowlth fonftad to tho lording radical cfficors and -11 of tho
consulting physio inns. *n»ro tho oulilag principles, which woro norkod out on
tho vrxlous t boras, roqulro rltor-.tion In tho axlsting infor.ratlon lor.flots of
thj roqulro alteration In tho oxisting Information loafloto cf tho H. 3V. 209;
this will lo takon Into account in l.-.tor publications of tho loaflots. Tho
publication of covor notos Is not intoniod, especially sinco ossontlal ohrngos
-xo not fatal noooscory r.s a result of tho conforonco. ao tion should alroady
h«r bo takon In accordaaco with tho oogoluclons ro-.choi rt tho conforonoo,
priding no fuadornntal organizstlsn chragos aro roqulrod.

"Tho *my ^rouj doctoro, tho Army doctors, lording =odic-l officors, as
rail re ccnlting physicians, trill doveto thoir attonti-n particularly tc tho
r^rtlcol application f tho sciontiflc ooceJusl as roachod at tho conforonoo. A
Kail air bor cf ballots Is onclosod f-'r tho lr*r.-,o kct .y hospitals."

This little fc-rotr^rd indie-toe that tho roso-xch, which -.ms oin. crxrloi out
mlor tho auspicos of tho 'Tohrrvtcht nr. 1 - xm ports cf which woro nodo to tho :ili-
--y llodicnl Acodcrry woro not ahip-sbapo ratters, but things which required tho
:l:sasfi scrutiny- anl ettontioa of Dr. Hanllosor hi^solf, -oc.-uho, on tho -r.sls

2052


23 Jon -i7J [-TJ C-8-2-J Icche a
Court !K>. 1

of tills, rosoared instructions a =1 errors koto issued according to which various
jtloat of tho any, navy, air fcrco, otc., woro to ho troated. This foreword
is sicflol by Dr. Handlosor.

yellowing that wo havo an address by tho chief of tho Kodloal Sorvicos of tho
’.ohnncht, vhx: of c our so was tho Dofandant Hanilcsor and it roads as follows:

•Gontlo^en: Tho do^ands and oxtont of this total war, as voll es tho rela¬
tionship hotwoon noods and availability of porsonnol and n&toriel, roquiro
roasuros, also in military nni apical fields, ifcleh will sorvo tho unification
P< 3 * unifiol loadorship. 1 t is not a ^uostion of 'naychine soparatoly r.nd
':-.ttllnc tocothor', but norehlns and battling nust bo dono in unison fron tho


iocinning in -11 fiolds.

a rosult, -a concerns tho nllitary aoctor, tho 7ohr:acht :»iical
Borvico and with it tho Chlof of tho Kodical Sorvicos 'S tho •rohr.r.cht c-;.o
late bolnc. Hot only in ir.ttora of -cracanol and mtorinl — ovon as far as
this is possi’.lo in view of siooial fiolda -and opocial tasks, which raist bo
cf-nsidorod — but also uith r. view to codieni soiontlfio education ad rosoaroh,
cur path in tho -'ohr.--.cht kollcal >rvico :-ist and will bo a unifiod ono.
ipcordincly, tho croup of .xtrtioipaato In this Sooond L’ork Conforonco Saot,
which I hnvo now oponod, is dlfforontly ca.posod fra. tho first \*ork Ccnforonoo
In Hay of thio yoar. Tho.n it was a conforonco of the any; today tho throo
ra^hos of tho Vohr-.-cht, tho 7affon SS ~nd i'olica, tho Labor Sorvioo and
tho Oread nation Todt -ro prytiolpatinc and unifiod.

"Oontlonan: You will suroly pornlt that I croot you with a Choral voloaio
*nd with tho slncoro wish that our carta work vnt bo bloonoi with tho


ho-od for Joint succoss.

-I would, howovor, like tc oxtoal a spocial erootin,. to tho •'.oich Chiof of
Health sorvico, Uc’.or Socrot-ry Conti, whe hrlls tho central loadorshi? of
radical 3or.*lcos in tho civilian soctnr. I soo in his arosor.co not only an
ictorost in our work thoras, but tho ox pros si on of his c-naoction with tho
"ehrracht radical Sorvico and his understanding ef tho 3pocial L-^ort-r.ce of
tho ’’ahma.cht in tho fiold as well as well as at hare. I nooi not or.phaaizo


that wo are C s one in tho rocc-aitien cf tho nocossity to assure and oaco
thj ;ir.i of tho soldiers that ho rood net worry about tho physical woll-boing
o: tho honolond as far as this is within tho real:- ef possibility in wtrtir a/


tho hcnoland as far as


Court I

23 Jan U7-JI-F X-c-3 -Keshan


"In consideration of the enlarged ccnposition of today's group
cf participants, a short review cf the fields covered by forner war
conferences is required.

"January 19U2.

"Caro of '.rounds, infection of wounds. -

"Blood transfusions urrior cccbat conditions. -

"Injurios cauaod by chonical warfare agents. -

"Dysentery. -

"Neurosis, peycho-pathology and organic ailaonts. -

"Transportation of wounded. -

"CCtobor 15U0.

"Gas odeoa; prophylaxis and therapy.

"Decoi±or 19U0.

"Frotoc.tivo vaccinationsj typhus, dysontcry, corbinod vaccination."

I would like to rouark parenthetically that as early us Doconbor
of 15U0, they wore lntorestod in typhus vaccinations and tho Tribunal
will recall that tho so-called Cohesion on Typhus net in Docorbur of
19lil and sot up tho oxperinontal sorios, *.bich wore carried out during
tho following four years at Buchorsrald.

"bay 19U2.

*1. Tlbrfc Conforer.co East.

"experiences, which tho war in the Bast, tho expanse of tho Russian
territories, tho cultural conditions in Soviot Russia and its population,
the relatively Halted ..uans of cervrunication in Eastern Europe and,
last but not l<oast, tho always present danger of diseases which may
3  0 ^ ir.


205U


28 J anuary-U-DJ'3-8-1 t^4£echar.

Court No. 1

free the Asiatic area, bat in particular which the Russian winter sent us,

-ake it necessary that the following themes be considered at this Work
Conference East:

"reputation technique - brain wounds and their care.

"Coordination of neurology and surgery.

"Cheao-therapy cn wound infections.

"Transportation of wounded.

"Typhus, Wolhynia fever, recurrent fever.

"Bacillary and amebic dysentery. Typhoid.

"Diptheric. Tularemia.

"Acute nephritis.

"Freezing.

"Lowering of resistance.

"Handling of psychic roations.

"Sulfonamide treatment of neurological ailments.

"Now, it is interesting to consider the thaacs of today's conference
necessitated through tho further development and the continuation of the herd
war in the Scat.

"As concerns surgery questions and ocporicncos are concerned with tho
field of abdominal surgery, the treatment of lung shots, Jaw shots, shots
in joints, fractures of the thigh and the surgical treatment of severe free¬
zing. the internists put hepatitis epidicica and war nephritis in tho fore¬
ground.

"Of course tuberculosis requires greater attention intho fourth year
of the wcr. Dermatologists and forensic medical sen have been newly added
since tho last conference. The dermatologists, not because venereal diseases
hove particularly increased, which happily is not the case, but their work
will be essentially in connection with questions concerning care after free¬
zing. The forensic medical men have particularly weighty task3. Their t*ork,
which is a necessary support for legal findings, is naturally of greater im¬
portance in the feurth year of the war than it was formerly. Their impending
placement within the army groups will require special handling. The t.ork of


22 Janu;ry-K-DJG-8-2a-iiechan
Court Xo. 1

tho hygienists and trcpfcical-disecse hygienists will be ccr.cernod, among
othor things, with wounds, diptherif and malaria. Obcrkriegsarzt professor
Kliowe will inform you about the necessary knowledge of particular, until
now never discussed, prep?rations of our enemies."

Thrt, if it pleaso the Tribunal, is a reference I autmit with reference
to biological warfare, as you will recall that Kliewe's name appeared on
sovoral Documents concerning biological warfare.

"The pharmacologists, who were not represented at tho previous work
Ccnforonce, have again been called into service, since it is vital in the
fourth yoar of war to recall essential questions ccncorning tho treatment
of injuries through chemicals."

Thit being in roferenco to Cherd col warfaro.

The tuberculosis specialists oro also newcomers. Fundamentally they
work together with the pathologists ruvi physicians. Careful portinent exam¬
inations, which have been carried cut during the war, have thrown much light
on tuborculosis among colored people, who formerly had seldom or never come
Into contact with tho disoese, os also cn tho effects of war conditions on
tno development of lung tuberculosis among cur soldiers and, in close con¬
nection therewith, the problems of reduced effectiveness of personnel and
tho evaluation of matters of provisions arc oxtrenoaly important and will
bo discussed.

"The war hrs led cur treeps into placos, which present many problems
in dosorts and salt steppes, in regard to tho possibility of wator supplies
for largo masses of people. Chemical testing of water and storage of drink¬
ing water havo necessitated special arrangements for this purpose. But the
evaluation of foodstuffs free the point of view of chemical nutriaont, qual¬
itative and quantitative examination also become important when cne remembers
the many various maintenance difficulties which are brought about by tho
great distance from the hccel.nd of the theaters of war, tho limited means
of transportation, and the climatic influence cf heat and ccld. Cf parti¬
cular importance is the question of the value of prepared foods, fer example,
the question of effective nutrition,- the necossity of the classification cf

2056


28 January-U-DJG-e-3a-tfeehan
Ccurt Ko. 1


foodstuffs in simple form with a view to their qualitative valuo.

"As during the lost t.crk Conference, all probluns will be decided and
measures and guiding principles will be established in accordance with pre¬
sent day knowledge. I consider it nest iiuportent that the basis for orders
and regulations in the field of aedical science be created among the con¬
sulting physicians here in the homeland and outside with the troops at the
fronts, and thrt Ceram aedical science be the surer wide basis cn which the
health operation of tho army stands, and in this way does its best to oaintai
the conbat power of the Kehraacht.

"Again a hussien winter with all its difficulties and endless dangers
lies before us. We enter it hotter fortifiod then last year, he are rich in
uxperiencos gained during the last year, and it can hardly be more difficult
than tho winter of 19A1-A2. Cur army is equipped with a winter outfit though
cut in every detail. Tho forosightod procautions taken against typhus oro
particularly extensive. Besides well functioning big delouslng institutions,
numorous similar installations h ve been erected, which allow for the de¬
centralization of tho combatting of lice. Wc have bean successful in greatly
increasing the production of typhus vaccino, and now methods hive been bogun
in the production of vaccine which prcciso oven gror.tcr acccaplishxaont."

and, I could say thet was not done without the oxptrionco gained in
the post-hole of Buchanwald.


2057


23 J anuary-M-DJG-9-l-Ninabuck
Court Kc. 1


"The malaria prophylaxis with atabrinc has proved itself in every
respect and has kept the army at combat strength in particularly nalaria-
infocted regiens. Rich experiences cculd be gathered particularly in this
field, and the work of general hygienic combating of malaria and establish¬
ment of sanitary conditions in the area, which has been carried cut during
the course of the summer in the malaria regions, is especially extensive.
Exhaustive inquiries into the malaria ccnditicns in the various the tera
of war were necessary in order to make studies vhich concern thtosalvos net
only with the lend but also with people, and which led to the determination
of splocn indices in children in the territories in question. The laboratory
train and she High Ceenand of tho Anay, as well as the Dotorizod laboratories
of all branches of the hhmacht, rnd the solaria education troops, together
with the consulting physicians, have performed distinguished work, tho worth
of which will be of value to the indigenous pcpulace in the areas in quostior.
long after this war.

"The combating of diseases in the various theaters of war his brought
about special accomplishments. Its basis had to be nodical topography. The
first part of tho recently published diseaso atlos will encompass all terri¬
tories which night conceivably cccc into consideration as theaters of war.

It will bo placed at tho disposal of all branches concerned as a basis for
their work. If, for obvious reasons, it is to be withheld from open solo for
tho present, it will nevertheless bo placed at tho disposal of German univor-
sitios and clinics at this time as a means of education of the students, and
thereby as a preparation for their future war tqsko. In war tho soldior has
tc look forward; also the doctor who is part of the i.ehnaacht as a soldier,
-vfter three years of war, however, I had to look back, particularly before
this group and review the work of the pest year. A deep-rcctod understand¬
ing must exist of the peculiarities inherent in medical science and soldier¬
ly ways. Tho paths which soldier and doctor must take can be very different;

the medical officer the necessary synthesis must be found so that the
nev-.r-verying goal may be reached in the quickest way."

That is not, in fact, the end of the speech made by Handlcser at this


2056


23 J anuary-M-DJG-9-2-Kinabuck
Court No. 1


=eoting of the Military Medical academy in December of 1942. It continues
two pages beyond where I have Judt left off. You see page S of oriEin.il at
the top continued over on the next page and ends at the top of what is noted
at the bottco as page 3« This translation has been very poorly put together*
However, I shall not read this last portion of the speech but will instead
go to what is noted as page 3 of this translation.

Does the Tribunal find that? The pagination is at the bottca of the
page in the Biddle of page 3 which is on page 48 of the original document.

Vie have extracted a synopsis and a report given by Stabsarzt PrcKssor Holz-
ioehner. The Tribunal will recall that Hclzloehner wes the man who cooperated
with Raschor and Finke in carrying out the frooting experiments in Dachau, and
they took place during the late autumn and early winter of 1942, and horo
Dr. Holzlcehnor is making a report in Doccabcr 1942 on the results of his
experioents at Dachau. Holzlcchnor was p doctor of the Luftwaffe. Tho ex¬
tract is headed "Prevention and Treatment of Freezing."

"In case of freezing in wator of a temperaturo below 15°, biological,
countoraocsurcs oro practically ineffective, »hcther in the case of human
beings or animals. Human beings succumb to reflectory rigidity, increase
cf bleed sug/ r and acidosis, at an eirlicr stago end to a greater extent
then -nimals. At a rcctcl teeperaturo cf below 30° under ouch conditions
of distress at sea auricular fluttur regularly sots in; at under 28 c heart-
failure frequently occurs in human beings. (Cv^r-oxcrticn duo to unequal
distribution of blood, increased resistance and increased viscosity.)

Treatment with drugs is senseless and has nc effect. In the cases of human
brings best results cro also achieved with het baths. Iho fcaa-suit was
developed as a prophylaxis against freezing in wator below 15°."

Of course, it is impossible tc know precisely what Holzlcchnor said in
his talk before the Milit ry Modical Academy on freezing, but we submit that
sven from this short paragraph which was reported in the beck, that it must
have boon apparent tc those who were listening to Holzlcehnor's report that
h - in fact carried cut experiments cn living human beings. Ho gives
rather detailed clinical observations here, even going to tho extent cf


2059


28 Januz. ry-M-D JG-9-3-Hinabuck
Ccurt lio. 1

stating tho temperature at which a man will die.

I subnit that it must have been known to those nen that uxparlncnts
were carriod cut, ever, if Holzloehner said little acre th«"-n this one para¬
graph digest we have cf his talk.

Below thrt extract of the report given by Holzloehner we have comments
cado by Handloser, Bremer, Hippko, Jcrisch and 3ucchner. Hippko, Jarisch*
and I think, Bucchner were certainly ell doctors of the Luftwaffe and the
Tribunal will recall that Hippke was tho very man who, together with Hilch,
ccsnissionod thoso freezing experiaonts on the port of Raschor, Holzloohnor
and Finke, who at that ticc were all Luftwaffe doctors. Sc I subnut also
that tho prescnco of Dr. Hippke, Dr. Jarisch, who was rise suggested b} Hipp¬
ke to ccoperato in those experiments, and Buechner, shews that wo havo a
nunber cf nen present at this seoting who very woll know the manner in which
these experiaonts v.ore carried out at Dachau.

I do not want the Court to understand that these remarks by Holzloch-
ncr, 3rccuir, Hippko, and so forth wero specifically dirocted to tho talk
giver, by Holzloehner. In addition to Hclzlcthncr's talk cn freezing pro¬
blems an additional report was given by Cborfeldarzt Professor Schulz,
Professor Lcndlo,


2060


26 Jen 47-M-?TC-9-la-8inabuck
court :ro. l


rj*S after those throe papers x^ro ro-d, opporontly thon corse tho corcants by
Hondloaor and tho othor ron.

The extract on Hoad losjr's canonts ro-.ds:

"Ennllosor strossos tho extraordinary importance of education also ir. co>
brtlnc ooW offocta and appoals to all :sodic-l officors, in thoir capacity as
loadors of tho ho alt h sorvlcc, to soo to it that throu-J: ovor ropsntod
explanations oach individual Is taught to obsorvo tho necessary precautionary
no'.sure a,"

Bronor said: "Tho Importance of tho static aysraphlcus, which vory of ton ia
tho cnuao of constitutional suacoptitility to froozinc of tho oxtroJltio3 is
pdlntod out." t jA thon ho coatinuoa with camonts or. frostblto.

Klppko oaid: "in all oasos of injury to tho f.oaaral health, through -froozins
it la important to follow up tho admiaiatorinc of a hot t-th and tho restoration
of tho normal functioning of tho akin with holy masao&o. ^oort rsnsdlo* r.ro
unreliable, likowiae othor ro..odl 08 . It la difficult to detsralno tho
intonalty of abort w-.7o trsataont."

;j.A, of couroo, Hippko'e camor.t ia t-.aoi uron tho roport modo by >achor,
Holxloohnor and yinko who had tostod thooo various methods of rewormirv;, ouch
i*J tho hot hatha, body toosoco, heart ranodioa with druca -nd also thla ahorj
*hto troatnont.

I turn now to poco 11 xhoro, undor tho hoodln,. "Hepatitis contagiosa
(opllonlco)" wo find a roport by Oborfoldarzt profoasor Gutzolt.

7.rs noSTOWT: Tho pa,;os in those documonts aro not nunborod.

KR. KC H/JOT: You do not find poco 11? ;.t tho bottcn of tho poeo, in tho

aiiilo.

1KB PP2SID2irT: I havo found that. I will ask now la it tho purpose of tho
Proaocution to ooko this into a document book and nuubor tho docunont book?

”C KLK3Y: ?rO air, wo probably shall not put tho docuxmnta whloh I am
 su'siittinc into a document book. I would suocost that they bo kept in tho
--—or which has boon furnished tho Tribunal and simply insort tho exhibit

ora on tho top of oach document.


28 Jen i7-K-7JC-8-2--:ani*fcucs
Ccurt H°. 1

Tho Trit>\iaftl will roc nil th*t is tho proof on the opldaic jr.undico expo-
rUoats thi.t the arr.o of Cutzelt v*a liostiosod, or i think ho sl^nod r. lottor
ahich i/eat into ovidonce concerainc certnin hopntitie apidonico oxporli^onta.
Tou will nl30 rocnll thnt Dr. Dchr^n cnrriod oat oxporinonta in tho Snch-
soahnunon Coaoor.trntioa Canp under the diroction of tho defendant 3mndt.


26 JcJi47-!!-S”-10-l-ftjtt7

Court Vo, 1


I ainply wish to point out that in tho 1 - st paragraph of this
calk by Gutzuit on opidouic Jaundico, that is to s ay, on Pago
15 — that is tl o li.st p .go of this £ ocu...ont — ho aaya:

"I shr.ll not discuss tho pathological anatonical as well r.s
the currur.t etiological research which v. s carriod out by try
collaborators 0>crr.rzt hr. v oogt and Oborarzt lir. Dohuon by noana
of livor pmeturos end eninal passages."

Ibis excerpt wo subalttod simply to slow tho closo relation-*
ship and collaboration botnoon p. rticulr.rly °utzeit and Dohnon
and derivatively tho Dofondant, *>andt.

I turn now to Docacnt NO-923 which rill be Prosocution Ex¬
hibit 436. T is doou.:unt contains oxcorpts fron tl 0 r.prrt on
tho Third lifting “..at of Consulting Specialists held on 24 to
26-.y 1943 r.t tho rilltary -Iodic..1 ;.c..dony, Berlin. On p-.gc
43 of t 0 original wo f lr£ tho nucl-discussed rop rt jv.do by
Oobhardt and *ischor on cl o au Ifanilroido experiments carried
out c t Kavonsbruock. It roads 3 follows:

•'SS Oruppenfuolxro, Lt. General Professor Oobl.-rdt .nd P.
liacbor: Spocial oxporiuonta on offocts of slufanilanldo.
Conclusions: (1) Suppuration of tho soft p.rta of tic body causod
by bc.ctoria cannot bo prevented oven by Ii*.:odi..to administration
of sulfanilcnido, (2) Tho ccurco of tl o inflcunatory disease of
.crobic producers of abcossoo :nd phlo r:ons could not bo doaon-
itrably influnc.d by aulfanilaiiido. Combined tre-.tnont of gas-
S-r. rone nadu tho inproesxon of causing an 0 si.r course under
’•i> Influonco of aulfanilrxildo. (3) ^urgory continues to be noc-
08s: *7 In tho control of inflar»ations.

Supplementary notos: Powering of wounds with S.A. powder r.r.y bo
hjtrir.cntal if ..3 a result fundrxtont..l laws cf surgery . ro vio-
i d; for example, if tie basic layer cf powder dcos not dissolve
b - fcho liquid of tho tissuo and hindors tho disci rgo cf socrotionc


Court I

28 Jan U7-if-SW-10-2-Putty-L Jj


by clottir^. Wounfetreatod with S.A. f owder are less inclined to flew.
Sork hypothesis » Inf la.—nation of tho mesodermal soft parts tends very
fast to build necrosis. The necrosis whoso surroundings show throebosod
vessels is the place where bacteria aro settling. The necrosis is
difficult to be reached by the Choaotherapeutic agents."

This, if the Tribunal please, is a statement of the conclusions
reached as a result of the criminal experiments carried out on a great
nunbor of Polish women in tho Ravonsbrueck Concentration Camp, four of
whom have boon brought to this Tribunal to testify so that we could all
soo tho outillating results of those experiments.

Iho Discussion under this report by Oobhardt's end Fischor's
oxporimonte do not qualify for on Laaodiato canparison with animal
experiments as performed by sysolf and others because ligature of
vessels eliminated largor muscular parts and provonted tho influonco of
pororally administered sulfanilaaido (cavity offoct.) Iho rango of
locally administered sulfanilnrddo, ospocially of non-solublo onos,
must not bo ovorostiaatod bocauso tho conditions of diffusion aro in¬
sufficient duo to tho poor solubility. Especially raarfanil has to bo
considcrod in this rospoct. Tho poor tokos of infoctiona with gas
gangrono which is strossod by tho locturor colncidos complotoly with
tho findings in animal oxporimonts. Infection docs not start without
special local conditions (doaolition of tho tissuo, interruption of
tho circulation.) Thoso points oust also bo considorod particularly
for surgical troatment, and tosting of sulfonamidos in wartimo surgory
should bo carried out free tho viewpoint of synthesis and not of
antithesis."

This rocark in tho Discussion that "The poor takos of infections


206U


Court I

28 Jan U7-M-S»£*lC-3-Putty-LJB


with ga a gangrene which is strossod by the lecturer coincides complotcly
with the findings in animal experiments" cakes it starkly clear that
the Defendants, Gebhardt and Fischer, told these gentlcmon very pre¬
cisely shat they had done, especially in animal experiments compered with
human experiments and says they had poor takes whon they artificially
infected with gas gangreno the human subjects. He goos on to say to
that, “Infection doos not start without special local conditions
(demolition of the tissue, interruption of the circulation)", and the
testimony before this Tribunal has very clearly demonstrated that that
is precisely the way in which the artificial infection was made to take
by tying off blood vossols at either ond of tho wound so that thuro would
be a fertile fiold for tho infection, infection »hich killed by tho
Defendant, Fischor's, own admission,at least throe poople. And if
the Tribunal ploaso, you will recall that when this sulf.milaaido roport
was mdo by Gebhardt and Fischor, Rostock was chairman of that portion
of tho mooting, and in tho front row sat the Defendant, Karl Brandt,
and tho Defendant, Handlooor, and tho docoasod Dr. Conti.

I turn now to page 5 of this saao docuoont, and wo find that at
tho Booo nootlng ao had boon testified to by Eugon Kogen, a roport
wa3 mado by Dr. Ding on tho murdorous typhus experiments in Buchonwald,
and this roport roods os follows*

"Typhus - Inoculation
SS-Sturmbannfuohrer Ding*

On tho results of tho testing of various typhus vaccines against
classic typhus.

Among tho vaccines used in tho Gorman Army and Civilian Adminis¬
tration for an active protectivo inoculation against typhus with de¬
activated germs, only Keigl's vaccina free lico intestines has proved
its usefulness in husan experimentations. Halo subjects


2065


28 Jrn 47-ir-S w -10-4-R»tCy
Court No. 1

in groups r'f approx irr. to ly oour.l sizo who had not yet oor.o
into contact wit) typhus w-ro under observation to tort the tr>l-
cranco :.r.d protective capacity of vaccines fron ogg y C .lks #
rarabbit lungs rad doe lungs, -o; r.lly largo groups of typhus pat¬
ients \A o had not beer.protcctivoly inocculatod w^ro U30d for
comparison."

Tlo followin'! vaccines Wjyc tostod:

(1) Vaccines fron li o intestine by oigl.

(2) Vr.ccirwa frer: ogg -oiks b-. ^il oixistor, H agon.

(3) flwo vaccines of two aifforent strcngtl s frrn the u ohring
Works according tc tie prreoduru developed by Ottc chimb,

Hero vaccines aro no longer being used.

(4) Vaccino prop: red according tr «urand-Glrcud frrn r. bbit
lungs.

(5) Vaccine prop..red according to ^ombiosco and 1 is colla¬
borators fren dog lungs.

"H-o teluranco of all vaccin s was gcc'l. Fitness for work
was not roduccd. A V.e pertoctivo vacci: tion roducod tho height
of fevor and t' o


2066


28 Jor-ZBH-lG-1a-Fut ty
Court So. 1.


fever period was shortened by about a week in eceparis"n with the non-
vacclnated parallel groups. The protective vaccination v nt particularly
favorable when the Veigl, Gildeaeister and Giroud vaccines were used,
which arc produced fra.-, pure Rickettsia Frowaieki cultures. In the over¬
whelming najority sf cases the vaccination protects against death. It
dees not appear to reduce the frequency of cases of sickness.

"It could not toe -V terninod that the protective vaccination influ¬
enced tho diminished tolood pressure, tout the central nervous system of
the vaccinated groups was l*ss lr.fluencod than that of the non-vaccinatod
onos.

"Tho eranth^na of the vaccinated groups did not b*coar kenerrhagic
and disappeared on the average one week earlier than the er.onthean of
the non-vaccina ted parallel groups. 4

So wc coe that at tfa' sane seating nt which the sulfanilanid.o ex¬
periments were being reported on. 'r. Ting also gave a report on to ty¬
phus experiments at Buchenvald. os wc find that this organization received
at a minimum reports on the fr<>. sing e*perir- nts at Tnchau, the oulfnnlln-
cido experiments at Rnvensbrueck and the typhus experiments at Buchen-
wi*ld.

I cone now to Tocu=<-nt 0-924 which will toe Prosecution Exhibit 477
which contains excerpts fro.- the report on the Fourth 1 eeting of Consult¬
ing Physicians fror 16 to 18 fa;/ 1944 at tho SS Hospital of Hohcnlychcn.
The Tribunal will r-call that we tut In a very long list of nar.ro of
those attnding thlo ac ting at Hoh. nlychrn. Vo find the r< fort interest¬
ing particularly t'causo of an address made by the General ConaioBioncr
of tho Fuehrer for Health and Sanitation, the 'efondant, Karl 3randt, a
nan who will tell you that he had nc connection with the SS. v c was a
rtnbcr by technicality only, tout he was the nun who v lcep'd the nooting
at the 35 c ospital at -ohmlyehen. and his address reads as follows:
'Scntlencn: I an to welcere you here *.• rohenlychrn in the nano of the
r ' Ichcfuohrcr SS cn the occasion of the Fourth ’ oeting of Consulting
Specialists.


2067


2S *"an-^5H-lC - -?a-rut ty
Court "e. 1.

’I a= glad that it was possible to have thic cecting carried out in
spite of the difficult external conditions. The events of war hoi? our
close attention and ae^ ue all In our aceustoced readiness. Thus thic
nccting is particularly rnphaslzcd.

4 That you, "r. Conti, as Belch Shi-f for Public Health and Secretary
of State in the : inistry tf the Interior, also were able to accept the
invitation of the Chief of th I edical Sen-ice of the Wehmacht has to
be regarded as core iaportant than a rere participation in a cooling. I
enjoy it as the orprecsion of a autually cor.pr*her.siv-- unity in face of
the tasPs and achiev cents vhlch are eypect'-d fror us ohysicians at horo
and in the fi-*ld.

■Today this u-ity in g neral is h' supporting ^l'n->nt, but thic la
particularly so within our r dlc -1 profession.

“All of us an bound tc this corr»on caus .

■To b- a physician rear.* tc give Bid and to give aid nnano pledging
enc's self again and again.

■All oth r considerations have to nc< d today in th. feco of thic
lapcralre demand. Our n-solut- and detemimd firht d-rands it. The
Public H* nlth Ser-iC' and the ' edical S rvic* ef th' V-hm-cht arc closc-
1" united.

■&• ncralob<rotabsarzt Hundlocser. you. a soldier and a physician at
the sac: tine, are responsible for th* use and. th« performance of our
a-dical afflc rc.


206a


23 J anu - ry-i'-OHG-lI-l-L cfanhardt
Court No. 1

"The Reichsfuehrer desires that the meeting which you have called will
not fail to have the expected success. I convey to you personally his specia
greetings.

I believe, and this probably is the sole expcctatich of all concerned, .
that this seating which today starts in Hchenlychtn will be held for the
benefit of cur soldiers. The achievements to date of your physicians. Hern
Generaloberstabsarzt, confirm this unequivocally, and their readiness to do
their share makes all of us proud and - I nay also say - confident.

Vi'e have errivod hore with visible good fellowship and in tho spirit
of sutual confidence. The heavy responsibility, which v.o bear at a docisivo
point in this war, holds us strengthened and rendered more acutely by tho
events of tho fifth year of tho wqr, strongly bound together.

Wo are awaro of the value of our work, ho do not hove to stop asido,
but on the cthor hand, wo cannot ccnsldor this as sinply a matter of rank
either. Everybody knows that tho German physicians at homo, as well ns
those in uniform, arc Accomplishing deeds unheard of."

UK. HcJUNEY: Ho was apparently correct when he said he m<a performing
dotds unhoard ofl 1 continuo:

"And are dutifully performing their obligations, I do not nood to dos-
cribo tho readiness for sacrifice of tho practicing physician at heme. All
cf you know his truly hard work by day and night. No terror bombing rostrair
him. Nor, do I need to refer to cur medical officers, who aro fighting in¬
trepidly togethor with their troops, and in numberless hospitals aro heeling
wounds which thij pitiless war has'inflected.

Wc, therefore, realize - and I say so with all empfcasis, with deter¬
mination frankness - that wc too stand in the first lino in the fight
for existence and the future of our German pcepic.

This is our responsibility, *#uch no other profession can take over
frera us, is the more binding.

To deal with it is a fact as sober as it is self-evident and honorable
for all of us.

Where we are standing - where any German physician is standing - no-

2069


23 J anuery-lt-D JG—11-2-Lefcnhardt
Court No. 1

t

thing but this ultimate dutifulness can be cxpectod. This cannot be explain¬
ed way.

We are proud of the fact that wa are net only responsible to tho people
in our ccccon offert, but that this responsibility is bemo by each of us
individually, completely end with it» full weight.

This roaairvdor of cur Individuality has become a noble and thus a most
deeply rooted German duty.

Therefore, I cay extend =y best wishes to this netting out of oy own
conviction.

The extorior fraao-werk already promises success. The preparations
which SS-Gruppcnfuehr*r Gebhardt, our host, has made for this mooting aro
proaising in thaaselvcs. .

Hohenlyhchen, which is for all of us the concept of gonuino modical

%

practice, codical efficiency and of soldiorly lifo, provides the exterior
frarao.

. To this house the recognition end thanks of innumerable injured and
acundod aro duo. This is the innor worth and as such it is to your credit,
Comrade Gebhardt. Tha work of your assistants is also clcsoly connoctcd
with ycur naao. I bolievo all of us lock with appreciation upon your work.

The solemn soriousnoss of this meeting is esaphnaizod by the bostewing of a
docoraticn upon ycu for tho wholo of ycur nodical work, and all cf us ro-
Jclco in it.

The Fuohrer has bestowed upon you tho Knight's Cross of the War Service
Crcs3 with Swords. I as ordered to present this docoration to you."

1«. McH^NEY: So, ycu can see that in this fourth meeting — roughly
in one year after Gebhardt had made his report cn his marvelous sulfanila¬
mide experiments cn defenseless Polish women in Buchenwald — the Dofondant
Cebhardt, in the name of the Fuehrer, new pins cn this man's breast tho Knight
Cross of the bar Service Cross with Swords t

"Permit me to add a few more words to ny repeated congratulations. It
is understock that with the far-reaching frame work our medical field special
results must be shewn, that we must accomplish special taska as the fighting


23 January-tt-DJG-ll-3-I-ehnh:.rdt
Court Nc. 1

forces knew thou also. V.o will learn about such a field hero at Hchenlychon
and Mr. Gebhardt will show and exhibit it tc us. Wo will then extend, with
appreciation, the honour bestowed by the Fuehrer, to the nodical collabor¬
ators and the unnaced assistants, who, shoulder tc shculder with their chiefs
are prepared to work indofatigably and without rest in scientific and soldier¬
ly pursuits.

Whilo in cur nodical activity at hoce repeated operations and treat¬
ments, end painstaking rehabilitation therapy which tries the patience of
pationt and doctor, play a najor part, and often take an excess of tino and
preparation, the physician in the herd strugglo on the fighting front, on
the other hand, is often confronted with making lightning quick decisions,
and his assistants with taking immediate action.

A shot nakos a sharp decision.


2071


Court I

23 Jan-M-JF-ll-la-Lenhardt-LJG


Above all, I ac thinking of troataent of the skull and brain,
besides that of injuries to the largo cavities of the body.

Today, brain surgery is a concept which wants itself regarded
as a special field, this in opposition to Paracelsus' interpretation
that the understanding of diseases and huaan beings should be lookod
upon as an entity. All of us perceive this emergency demand of tho
war, and therefore recognito tho necessity of separate devclopuent
and special working nothods >*rich the war is bringing about.

You, colleague Toennis, know of theso tasks and of these problems.
Your desorts in this connoction aro unique. Not only did you uso non
ways of organisation, with tho holp placod at your disposal by tho
Luftwaffe; but noro than that, your radical kn<*rlcdgo helped to roliovo
the soldier of fear of tho cost sorious injuries and thoir consoquoncoa.
You holpod to strongthor. confidunco in ua physicians and nodical officersj
finally, which is noro docisivo, you holpod thosoldior in soesdngly
hopoloss casos. Thoso, who know your spocial hospital, know about about
your work. It cortainly requires unshakable faith in onosolf and in
one's task, not to loso courago.

Horo, if onywhoro, tho tphysician hlnsolf” is to bo valuod abovo

all.

Tho Fuohror honors this.

His heart is with his soldiors.

But all who are helping tho wundod cay bo sure of his thanks. Ho
had givon cm tho ordor to present to you Jho Knight's Cross of tho
Viar Service Cross »dth Swords.

Gontleoon, wo should bo happy and proud to know that all of our
caros and ondoavors aro thus appreciated. I;-ore is no doubt about this.
And wo, gentleaon, sioply look at it that way.

The field of our work is enonous. The responsibility, of which
we aro conscious is troaondois.

It is good sinply to call thusa things by their names and to look
at them as thoy are. This .meeting is the visible expression of it —
it is, it shall be,and it Bust be so in every respect; the Consulting

2072


Court I

28 Jan-H-JP-5-2a-Ienhnrdt-LoG

rfcysiciana are gathered around their Pedicel Chief. When I look at
these ranks, you Gonoraloberstabsarzt Hareiloser, are to bo envied
radical oxp.-rts, with the best and cost highly trained special knowl¬
edge, are at your disposal for caro of tho soldiors. In reciprocal
action between yourself and your radical officons, the problems of our
radical knowledge and capacity are kept alive.

I have add rod you during the inspections we frequently nado to¬
gether. Your position did not involvo — and I consider this of primary
importance - your renouncing your jfcysicianship. Your interest, which
you kopt alive froa tho tira of your own practice in the field of intern¬
al radicine, has always led you to approach acute problems, homo-Therapy,
hepatitis epidesica, field nephritis — all these became true and serious
problecs, to the work on and the treatment of which you gave all your
support and assistance. All of internal radical scionce and its ro-
aearchos is assisting you on account of the iaportanco of thoso and
similar diseases and Therapeutic noasuros which the evonts of war
doaand froo us. Your Consulting Fhysician, Dr. Outwit, has boon a
faithful assistant to you. Wo all know the influence, which has
emanated free Dr. Outzoit's personality and froo his dopartrant. His
unselfish personal effort, his scientific rosoarch work and importance
as consulting physician to his Chief aro incontestable.

Professor Outzeit l

Tho Fuehrer honors you and internal Medical Science, which you
represented, and bestows upon you The Knight's Cross to the War Service
Cross with Swords. In tho light of the old comradeship, which binds
us together, it is particular pleasure for ra to bo permitted to present
you with this decoration.

MR. McKANEY: So, we get at least a second doctor decor a ted at
this raeting, who was also implicated in radical experiments upon living
human bolngs.


2073


26 Jan Lacharlt

Court jio. 1


n I assume, Gentler.en, that you share ay Joy and that you foal justlfiod
satisfaction la this honoring of nodical officers, it is an appreciative thinks
for tho indofaticablo effort in uhich the lndlvidaul is immediately offactiro
thn'uch his own personality, but la tha lone run vanishes in an aray of nilllonsl
But, wo should to preud of that too.

The front knows that, Tho front knows what wo coan to thon. Calling
for tho radio has lone sioco ceased to to ridiculous. Today it aeans Justified
expectation of holp and care.

in spito of all that, no do not want to over rata oursolvos and wo Want
to to 'jratoful to rococnixo fulfili^nt of our lifo la tho fulfillment of cur
vacation. 'Jho is still ablo to do that today? The war do :~nls of uo always to
to '-oth physiolanr aad soldior. This uo aro ~nd want to v o. .yid cow I conoludo
this train of thought -jri picturos of tho front ar.ain «ro covorol *y picturos of
•.So haioland. It is not destruction of torro-bcr:Mn:a alono, which is causoinc
trouble for and tostin- tho hceolan’ and rosin. rSdltion problona for ua phyal:--
ciana.

?ivo yoara of war aro oho Inc offoettl

’o nust cloarly roco nlzo and oxproas this. -o o^n noot a danger only if
■o tercolvo It. Kontal -and phyalclal ovor-straln c-oso rental an! physlclal
Instability. To ccxibat .and repress thon aro dutioa aa difficult tc fulfill as
t'aoso of tho soldior at tho Front. Only tho outward appoaranco Kill bo difforont.

Hot/ toilsorjo it is for tho practicionor ct haxi to c.aro for tho lnnu-
tara-lo patients with atocach troubloa durin, his consultation hour, how difficult
i: it for hlu in this tl:» of nood to carry out a positivo, but nocoaaary fi.ht, -
tC-lnst Tuborculosis. fcormoue tasks rro to bo accomplished in this fiold and
Uoy aro loino accocrjlisoll But all of us hr.vo to holp, and wo all W"JYt to holp.
tbore aro no Units to ca.potonco. Tboro is no oxcsptional position oithor.

Crd tho mutual solution of all thoso nost difficult problem can bo conaidorod.

'•t totw v/ithou further discussion Aat Tuborculosis, for ox^jplo, moans. *7horo
iiw it not appear? There 13 it not possible that it :U{.ht ap?o-r? Must not
~o physicians stand proparod and concentrate all <x*r attontion on that alono?

It acta without sayinc that tho physicians stand proparod whorovor ho is
a5o ' e '“. Ho is coiibattinr tuberculosis in tho city, as woil as in tho country. Ho

207U


Court I

28 Jan 1*7-A 4 ? X-ll-2b-Lenhardt-LJG

fights against it in adults and in children. He fights against it in
soldiers and in woaen

It is the 'disease* which concerns us physicians, and it docs not
nattor what positions or what sphere of responsibility the individual
physician night hold. If we want to caster the probloc, which the people
and state have given us, we physicians mist face this concept of 'disease
as such* in one phalanx.

Therefore, no difference exists between the practicing physician
and the nodical officer and in the long run no differentiation can
exist acong or against nodical officers. If the Puehror, foreseeing
this, givos his Judgment, we recognize his fundamental decision.

In combatting a disoaso it is cost clearly expressed i In tho
fight against Tuberculosis, for instance.

Ho oro facing it in a cocron effort. Ho hovo to attack It Jointly
and from all directions, and consequently we want to trust the leader¬
ship of tho bost exports. Profossor BoesaiSter, hero your work stands
bofore us. You holpod to take up tho fight against tuborculosls at an
oarly date. During tho World War, you alroady woro Chiof of St. Blasion
kny Hospital. Your temporary duty in tho fortross hospital at Holigo-
larxi assurod your inner bond with tho Wavy. Thon, cano tho toilsome
reconstruction work of tho inflation and post-war poriod, which booidos
a long established and unreserved appreciation of your person, brought
about today's honors. Your infinite knowlodgo and experiences will
hwlp us in this war too, to castor tuberculosis.

Hay I present to you, tho Flottonarzt, the well deserved Fuehrer
decoration. Ho has beatowad on you the Knight's Cross to tho War Service
Cross with Swords.

In conclusion, I think I should tell you a word which building
a bridgo over the past to the present, which find us prepared. It is
Oorhard Wagner's maxim, which cay bo a vow for us for the future too.

The word of deceased will keep cur heart strong:

Faithful to oneself l


2<37S


Court I

28 Jaa-^FX-ll-2b-L«nhardt-LJj


Faithful to the people l
Faithful to the Fuehrer l

THE PRESIDED i The Tribunal will now recosa until 1:30 o'clock.


Iff1

28 January-A-12-1-EHk-Saslaw-(GJ)-
Court Ho.l


Corrected Copy
Afternoon Session.


(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 2b January J9U7).

THE. LIARS HAL i The Tribunal is again in session.

UR. HeHANEY: Wc coot now to Count Four of the indictment which
deals with aeobership in a criminal organisation. That is paragraph
16 of the indictoent. It reads as follows: n Tho defendants Karl Brandt,
Genzken, Gobhardt, Rudolf Brandt, Hrugowsky, Poppendick, Slovers,

Brack, Hoven, and Fiachor aro guilty of membership in an organization
declared to be cr In Inal by the International Military Tribunal in
Caso f/o. 1, in that oach of tho s id defendants was a moennor of Die
Sohatsataffol der National So»lal<stischcn Doutschcn Arboitspartoi,
cocnonly known a» the SS, after 1 September 1939. Such membership
is in violation of Paragraph 1 (d; Article II of Control Council
Law No. 10."

I ask tho Tribunal to tako Juduciol notice of tho following excerpt
free the Judgment of the International “ilitary Iribunal in Caso
No. 1 with respoct to tho criminality of the SS. Thi3 is an cxcorpt
which is taken free the Judgment, pages 16, 958 and 16, 959 of tho
official English transcript and this cxcorpt has boon certified
as being truo and correct by Colonel John E. Ray, Gcnoral Sucrotary
of the International Military Tribunal. It reads as follows:

,l Conclucions: The SS was utilised for purposes which woro criminal


under the Charter involving tho persecution and extermination of the


Jews, brutalities and killings in concentration coops, excesses in

of occupied territories, the administration of the
the mistreatment and murder of prisoners

was a member of the SS implicated
wit.-, the SS the Tribunal includes
officially accepted as members of the SS
of the Allgeocine SS, members of the ffaffon SS


2076


28 Jaa U7-A-12-1-EHH-Saslaw-(GJ)-
Court No. 1


acobcrs of the SS Taifin^opf Vcr*~ nde, and nc=bcr« of any of the
different police forces who were aeabors of the SS. The Tribunal
does not include the so-called SS riding units. The Sicerheitsdicnst
dcs n cichsfuehrer SS (cccaonly known as the SD) is doalt with in
the Tribunal 1 s judgment on the Gestapo and SD.

2076-A


Court Ho. 1

28 Jan 47-A-12-2 -EEM-Sa a lav

"The Tribunal declares to tee cj :inal within the meaning of the Charter
the group composed of those persons vho had teccn officially accepted as mem¬
bers of the SS as enumert ted la the preceding paragraph who become or
remained members of the erganlxation with knovlcdgo that it wee teeing used
for the cooaiasion of acts declared crialnal tey Ar tide 6 of the Charter,
or who vero personally implicated aa oeabers of the organisation in the con-
aisslon of such crlaes, excluding, however, those who were drafted into non-
teership by the State in such a way as to give then no choice in the natter,
and who had cocnltted no such crises. The basis of this finding is the
participation of the organisation in war crises and crimes against hunanity
connected with the war; this group declared crininal cannot Include, there¬
fore, persons who had ceased to belong to the organisations enunerated in
the preceding paragraph prior to Septenber 1, 1939."

The noxt affidavit of each of the defendants charged in Count Four of

the indlctncnt contains adnisslons that such defendants wero nenbors of the

SS following Septcsbor 1939. There is no ground for any of these defendants

to assort that they fall within tho exception ande in tho IMT's finding of

crlninallty where it stated that tho«"J drafted in the nonborehlp of the SS

shall not be considered as having teolonged to tho crininal organisations.

That exclusion was nade by the Tribunal for the reason that lato in tho wor

the ovidonce shoved that certain nenbers of tho Vaffen SS wero drafted in

tho service such like acubers of the Aray. tho Hnvy, tho Luftwaffe, nnd so

forth, but aside froa that exception, which wero not very nunerous, the SS

was essentially a volunteer organisation. In addition to the admission of

aenteershlp in the SS as nade by the defendants, tho prosecution would like

to Buteoit two doouaents which corroborate those admissions. The first of

thoso is a docunent Ho. HO-1437 which will tee prosecution Exhibit 438. This

is a docunent containing excerpts froo the so-called "Dienstaltcrslisto dcr

Schatsstaffcl der HSDAP". This is ir. effect an order list of certain members

of the SS and this first document de. s with nenbers who held rank "SS Obcrst

Gruppenfuehrer" down through "SS Standirtenfuchrer". The rank "SS Obcrst

Gruppenfuehrer". I think, was held by only three men and was tho highest rank

PO~7


Court So. 1

28 Jen 47-A-12~3 -Z?>-Sa£ lav


in the SS other than the position held by Einsler hinself as Reichsfuehrer
of the SS. "SS Stajidartenfuehrer" c -responds roughly to the renk ef
■Colonel" in the United States Arny.

Ve see on page four of this document that the nanes of certain of the
defendants charged with having been cabers of the SS arc extracted in this
docuaent. I night also point out that this order list is dated 9 November
1944. Ve find on page four that Dr. trrl Genzkcn was an SS Grupponfuohrer
which was the rank roughly of a Major General in the United Stctes Aray.
Gonzken vns No. 133 on the order list of the SS. He is noted as having been
attached to the SS Tuchrupg Hauptant, that is, the SS Operational Office,
as chief sf tho Aatsgruppe D is the SS Fuohrung Eruptnnt; and the Tribunal
will recall that ActsgTUppe D was the ntdlcal service of the Vaffon SS, the
chief of which was the defendant Genzkcn. His Party number, that is, his
Uozi Pcrty number, is listed as 39913, a very lev nunber, nnd ehows early
ncobershlp in the Nazi pi rty. His SS nunber is 207954.

Tho noxt coluan shews his birth data us boing June 8, 1685. The sort
column shows that ha was a Lt. Goner«1 ir. the-«afffs-SS nnd showp In tho
last group that ho attained the ran l of Grupoenfunbrcr on January 30, ‘1943.


2C78


28 Jan L7-A-CES -13-13card-(GJ)-
Court No. 1


No. 13U ia Doctor, Professor Karl Oebhardt, and ho is s horn as
being attached to tha D. St. *eichsarzt-SS and ‘olicc Obcrster
Klinikor, who was Dr. Grawitz. His Party No. was 1723317. SS No.

265891*. Date of birth, Dccenbcr 23, 1897. Lieutenant General in tho
Waffen-SS. Gruppenfuchror, January 30, 19L3.

No. 172 is Professor, Doctor Karl Brandt, and he is shown as
attached to the SS Fuhrg., H.A. Party No. 1009617. SS No. 260353.

Date of birth January 8, 1901j. Lieutenant Gonoral in the Naffen-SS.

He clainod tho rank of Grupponfuchror on April 20, I 9 U 4 .

I think it night bo interesting for the Tribunal if I passed up
tho photstatic copy of tho original list free which these extracts
wero taken, and you can see tho manner in which the book w -13 set up.

It starts off listing No. 1^, which is Heinrich Hinrdcr, and so
forth on donn»

(Tho book is given to tho Tribunal)

According to tho rank of SS-Cbcrfuchrcr, which is a rank bctwcon
a full Colonol in tho Unitod States kray and a Brigadier General,
a rank which wo have designated as Senior Colonel, wu find tho none of
Viktor Brack, rlo. 571. “c is noted os attached to tho Staff of tho
RcichsfUohror-SS. Porty So. 173386. And a very low SS No. 19li0. Ho was
born Nov^abor 9, 19&. He is listed as a Sturabannlbchrcr in tho
Reserve, and claiacd tho rank of SS-Oxrfuchrtr Novenbor 9, 19li0.

No. 695 is Professor, Doctor Joachin Urugowsky. ho is shown
as attached to the Reichsarzt-SS and Police. Although his position
is not shown, it corresponds to that of Professor Oebhardt. Mrugowsky
was the Oborstor Hygicniker, tho Chief Hygcnic Officor. His Party No.

is shown as 2100L9, and a low SS No. 25811. He was bom August 15, 1905.
Ho was an Oborfuchrcr, and claiaod the rank of “rupponfuchror
on April 20, 19UU.

Also an SS-Oberfuehrer is the defendant Hclnuth Poppondick, shown
as No. 721. He was attached to the Kcichsarzt-SS and Police. His Party


2079-


28 Jan U7-A-OES-13-l-Eeard-(GJ)-
Court No. 1


No. 993607- His SS No. 363^5- His birthday is January 6, 1902. He
claircd the rank of SS-Cbcr fuehrer on Soptcabcr 1, 19Ui,

2079-A


2 S Jan L7-A-G£S-13-2-Beard-(GJ)-
Court No.l


Holding the rank Qf SS-Standartfuohrcr is ffolfram Sieversn with
the Order No. 1096. % was attached to the Personcl Staff of *hc
RcichsfuehrorsSS Party No, ll*L9S3. SS No, 275325. Birth date, July
10 , 190$. Claimed the rank of Stendertenfuehrer on November 9, 191*2.

Also listed as a Standartcnfuehrcr is the defendant Rudolf
Brandt whose Order .'to. is 1281*. He was attached to the Personal Staff
of the Roichsfuehror-SS. His Party No. 1331536, and his SS No.

129771. Date of birth, June 2, 1909. He claiacd the rank of
Standartenfuchrer April 20, 1911.

Tho next document is Document Ho. NO-ll*38, which will be
Prosecution's Exhibit No. L39, and this consists of extracts taken
free a list siailar tc the ono non before the Tribunal. The first page
thoro shows tho Order free-. SS-Cbcrsturabannfuchror down to SS-
Stumbonnfuehror, and the Order List is dated 1 October 19)il.

On pago 1* of tho Document wo find listed SS-Sturabannfuehrer,
Ordor Ho. 3960, the defendant Fritz Fischer, *io was nttachod to tho
l»2nd Standort, rtiich is c Regioont, as I understand it. His Party
numbor is not listed, indicating ho was not a comber of tho Nazi
Party. Kis SS Ho. is 203578. He was born October 5, 1912. Ho was a
Stunnbannfuehrer in the Reserve, and claiacd his rank of Sturnbannfueh¬
rer on August 25, 19liii.

Prosecution's Exhibits Nos. 138 and 139, rtiich I have Just road
covers all tho defendants charged with having boon numb era of the SS
with tho exception of the defendant novon. These two lists do not
purport to contain the names of all cembtrs of tho SS since they are
nuabored at several Pilli on, as I understand it, and tia defendant
Hoven's nano i3 not included in either of theso two volumes. Howevor,
ho has stated in his affidavit that he was a naabor of the SS and was
attached as camp doctor in tho Concentration Carp of Ravensbruck nft^r
1 September 1939, and this has been corroborated by the testimony
of Ferdinand Rcumhild and Eugen Kegon.


2050


28 Jan h7-A-0£S-13-2-Bcard-(GJ)-
Qaxmt No. 1


I ccec now to docuaent So. KO-Uihl, which will bo Prosecution's
Exhibit UhO. This is an excerpt taken free c booklet called the
SS- The Soldier's Friend * f It was compiled by tho SSeHauptant, which
is the SS Central Offico or kain Office, dated August 1, 19li2, and
on the socond page of this Docunont


2C80-A


28 Jo^-j-GIS-13->-3card
Court Ho. 1.

wo find the oath wnich was taken by all aenbors of the SS. It roads r.s follows

*TES D-TH OF TES SS HZCEOir

"I swear allegianco aM bravery to you, ^dolf Hitlor. aa Fuehrer and
Chancellor of the Belch. I vow to bo obedient to you aai ny superiors appoint¬
ed by you until death, bo help cc God.■

DB. SSEV.TIUS: Hr. President, I do not know if tho wholo excorpts horo
are to bo received in evidence, and W»nt ia to be the ii.portar.co of tho doc\>-
oonta. In the table of contonta it has boon Hated, and haa bcon at; tod with
aouo titloa, that I do not know tho contents of this nrticlo. Therefore, I
would like to roccivo an explanation fron the Prosecution us to what thia
docuncnt la auppoacd to signify.

fcH. hcH..NEY: Frankly, I h.wv nover so nuch ts soon tho book fron which
tula oath was taken. I oli.pl y lsauea r.etructiona that a copy of tho onth
tak on by oenbera of tno SS bo obtni-. ., and tne or.th wna found in thio book-
lot. .a is customary when wo aubuit o .ly n partial translation of n docuuont
wo lncludo the covor pa, o and genumlly tho index. The tnblo of contonta, na
givon in tnin trnnalntion here lndioatoa that this paaphlot donla with a
variety of eubjocts concerning the SS- On nago 1, wo aoo an uttornneo of tho
Fuehror, tho titlo pago; pago 4. tho outh of tho SS which I have Just road.
fo&uB 5 bo 8, porsonnel stating statistics, and toluphono nuoboro. The min
offices of tho Belch SS and tholr tasks. Tho order on ong'igononts and
Lnrringoa, and a groat nunhor of ltous concerning various functiona of tho SS
with explanatory remarks.

Thu only purposo for w..lch wo offer thia docunont ia to show tho SS
oath. Tho Document is apparently-si no 256 pages long.

JUDOS SS3BIKG: Hr. hcHoney, I r jgost that perhaps tho docunont no
candod up to us. has not boon prepare.' in ordor, and that perhaps tho second
?:•>. as it is here, follows tho tablo of contents, and so far as fchnt part of
the table of contonts wnicc refers to "The oath of tho SS recruit", page 4,

-ignt bo tutorial. Do I inko Lqrsolf clear?


2C61


28 Jan-ir- GSS-1>- U- Bea rd
Court So. 1.


*B. McElHSY: I tainic. if your Honor pleases, I will pass up tho
original wr.ich is apparently hero in the court rooa. Although, I an not
clear why since it is U.S.A. tthibit 4U1 of tho International Military
Tribunal. I very seriously doubt if it can bo peracnently kept with tho
record of this Tribunal. If I nay look at it Just a uoaont I will be fib lo to
clarify your question, I think.


2C62


28 January-A-3JG-li.-l-31akley
Court No. 1


UR. UcHANET: I think the arrangccent of the translation is probably
correct. I will pass the bock up to you end you can see for yourself that
the oath of the Sh recruit coees before the index. It is in the nature
of a pocket diary which was issued to SS aen.

(Document handed to Tribunal.)

DR. StRViHUS : I Jc not have any objection to the decumont if it is
only being presented in ord.r to shew the oath which the SS nan, who, after

all, was fighting as a soldier, had tc give.

JUDGE SEBRING: C» n >u say whethur or not, Ur. UcHanoy, this bucks
pretends to have incorporated in it any rules cf land warfare if the German
array had such rules?

UR. UdWIEl: I ean't say offhand, your Honor. By locking at the table
of contanta, I would conclude that it decs net contain any reference to the
rules cf land .arfaro. V. era offering the dccuncnt alnply for the purpose
cf proving the oath taken by SS n«=bcra in .hlch unqualified cbcdicnco i.
nom to the Fuehrer and to the superiors appointed by him.

THa PRESIDENT! The exhibit offered and United to the atatenent of


counael for tho prosecution .ill bo adnittud in evidenco.

UR. UcHnHET i "o ccno no. to Dccuncnt *0-1730, -loh 1 offer as Pro¬
secution Exhibit Ul. This i. tho transcript of an interrogation of the

defendant Karl Brandt taken on 5 Novoefccr 1916.

DR. S3W.TIUS: Dr. Servatiue, counsel for defendant Karl Brandt. Ur.
President, tho dccuncnt .hlch is to be presented here by tho pro.ceuticn is
an interrogation .hieh ha, nat boon sign., by Karl Brandt; and it ha. not boon
reed to hin. Tho tine it took place .as oa the day -hen tho indictment «»
handed to hin. A. a result of thia, the interrogation .as interrupted.

This extensive document, .hieh includes nor. then t.enty pages, ha. only been
banded to ne this «ming; and I have not yet been able to discus, it . 1 th
ny client. It deals .ith a largo nunber of questions .hieh are the subject
of the accusation. It is for this reason that I .ant tc object tc having it
admitted at this tine. Rcever, I an also objecting tc the fact that it should


be presented at ell. The defendant Karl Brandt -ill become a ritnea. in a


28 J anu ary-A-D J G-lf- 2-81 akl ey
Court !Jc* 1

few days, ead then the prosecution can ask him all these questions in the
course cf the cross examination. Those are all of ay statements.

Id. UcHANEY: IT is quite correct that defense counsel receivod this
only this morning. Consequently, I would be willing to have the docuacnt
admitted subject to any seasonable end acre definite objection cn the part
cf Dr. Servntiua. However, the fact that the interrogation is net signed py
the defendant Karl Brandt certainly docs not mitigate .gainst its .•dnissibil-
ity. The document has been certified as being a true and corroct transcript
of an interrogation taken on the 5th of Novtafccr, 19A6, by Ur. Ueycr of the
Interrogation Division, the transcript having been made by an employee of
the Office of Chief of Counsel, a man by the n&mo of St. Rcodcr, who has
cortificd that this is a truo end correct transcript of tho interrogation.

THE PRESIDE?rT: Do you have the original there, Ur. UcHanoy?

UR. McHAHEY: Tho Interpretation Department has it right now. Wo'll
bring it right down. The Court has been advisod by Dr. Sorvatius' statement
that his client will toko the stand and that wo can interrogate him then.

I submit that that has nothing to do with tho admissibility of this document.
The prcsocution is now submitting its case in chief; ^od wc aro privileged
to provo certain of the facts heroin admitted as part of our case in chiof;
and cortainly we need not ruly upon cross examination of tho dofondant Kepi
Brandt if and when ho takes tho stand.

JUDGE SEBRIN3: Khero is Ur. Ueycr at this timo?

UcHASBYr Ur. Uoyar? I suppose ho is in tho building. Ho is tho
interrogator who took tho interrogation. However, I felt that his certi¬
fication of tho interrogation would add nothing to th t cf tho stenographer
who actually made tho transcript. I felt that that was tho critical certi¬
fication.

JUDGE SESRIMj: This Stefan St. Boeder was the stenographer who is
supposed to have been present at the time this interrogation took place?

Id. UcH/uEY: Indeed, yes; tho interrogation so shews on the Tirst

page.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal is of the opinion that tho document offoi

is sufficient in fora to entitle it to admission in evidence; but the Tri-

2084 \


28 Jar.uar7-A-DJG-l4-3-31ckley

Court JJci 1


bunal does net like formally tc admit the document until t)r. Scrvatius had
an opportunity to examine it in the presence of his client, defendant Kfrl
Brendt. Dr. Servatius, if the Tribunal would take a recess for thirty minute:
could you in the presence of your client then check this over and ascertain
if you have any objection to its contents?

DR. S21V..TIUS: I ta prepared to discuss the matter with my client
during the recess.

THE PRESIDENT: Hew much cate rial has the prosecution to offer this
afternoon?

liR. McHANEfs This, if the Tribunal please, is the last document. As
a matter of fact, if it night simplify ratters somewhat, I c^uld point cut
those portions of the interrogation which I wanted to make reforonce to. I
am simply endonvoring to establish whet I think will net be deniod b> the
defendant Karl Brandt and that is that he was a rauebur of tho hoichsforschun-
gsrot, the Reich Resoarch Council. Wo had previously offered in ovidcnco
an affidavit which stated that fact, an affidavit node by Werner Oscnborg;
and the Tribunal refused to admit tho affidavit on the ground thr.t Oscnborg
was available, whereupon wo did not call hie to tho stand and the affidavit
did not go into tho record. That affidavit would have proved that Brandt
was oaanbor of the Reich Research Council. By on oversight thet was not in¬
cluded in Brandt's own personal affidavit; end, consequently, ns tho record
now wtonds, thero is no proof in tho case in chiof that ho wes a member of
tho Reich Ro3ocrch Council. This interrogation contains a series of around
four questions which deal with that and in which tho ndniesion is aado that
he was a member. We also would refer to a very short answer, making refer¬
ence to t certain relationship which Restock had tc the Reich Research Coun¬
cil. Those are the only two things that we would make referenco to at this
time. Of course, we are offering the document as a whole} and if necossary
we would perhaps use it to contradict the defendant on the stand if ho made
any statements inconsistent with answers given herein. But I don't think

membership in the Reich Research Council will be disputed by the defendant

2085


23 January—A-UJ3-1A-A—Blakley
Court Kot 1


or by Dr. Servctius.

THE PRESIDENT: Of course, the document being offered as a whole, the
entire document, would be in evidence before the Tribunal; and the Tribunal
desires that Dr. Servatiua have a chance to e x a m i ne and recheck this docu¬
ment with his client before it is formally admitted. Has the prosecution
anything else to offer?

UR. UcHaHEY: Mo, your Honor, after this document has gone in, I would
simply make a very few remarks about cne or two open matters in the record;
and then tho prcoccution is prepared to rest its case in chief.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will now recess until^sOO o'clock. Dr.
Servctius may consult with his client concerning this document. Here is
tho original.

(A recess was taken.)

•


2066


23 J«n-S3=-17-l-?*14t
Court >'o. I.


r~. S^BTATIUS (Counsel for “.'fondant Brandt): !'r. President, I
lock d through tho doeun- nt and I found that it conAinc an inpnrtant
=istake. In it« introduction it refers to two plana, which are alao
being aentionrd in the record. There are two plana which were ouppos<d
to have been eoeclled in Torsten. There ia a nlstaka contained in that
document. Karl Brandt waa never at Torsten.

Th« si two charts were coSDil'd aftr a diBCueaion lasting one hour.

Tho charts were very doubtful, “urlng these discussions thr charts
w.;ro drawn and the views were discussed which Brandt h< Id about these
sconcico. If this docusent is to br submitted hero th.rs. charts have
to be attached, including the interrogations which v« re rado in that
connection. That happen'd in Fransberg.

This is an cs«<nti%l point, and I should further .mention that another
chart was ouboltt. d here in e'-id.encr which was combined fron those two
original charts. I don't have the chart at ry disposal at tho rement,
but sn"bi* the Tribunal can r M«Vr that Karl Brandt struck out all tho
noteo that went with that chart. In that docuB'nt it is stated that
the correctness of tb «« charts is confirmed. The wordtorrcctnoss* can
only ref'r to the original charts, but not to thr feet that any conse¬
quence can bo drawn fros these charts.

Furthermore then arc nany onissions in that text. In twenty pages
thor. Is nn interrogation lasting about an hour and a half. Actually
norc was said. A few mistakes arc contain- d in tho record its If, es¬
pecially with reference to tho Belch Be search Council. There ~ou find
a wrong date. On Page 11 it says: "0.. When wore you a n nber of tho
-clch ~cs»arch Council? A. It raj- have botti in 1943 or 1944."


2C87


Court I

28 Jan U7-« - 18-1 - LX - Fitzgerald


He nay have beep rdstaken in Ins answer because it was actually J9h2
when he became a nenfcer. In the original interrogation, there are correcting?
sade on page 3 whore dates were altered, so it is probable that a mistake
arose later. Those alterations in the original were made with pencil.

Exactly by whoa they were aade and when, I cannot tell.

There is another obvious mistake on page lU. It also shows that the
document was not co.apiled correctly. It reads as follows:

"Q. I assuno that you referred toa fuehrer decree about that question?

a. Yes, in March of 19Uli. I aa sorry, in february, 19UI4."

It is known that this decree dates from the first of March, 19UU.

There oro further av takes contained in that document. I shall not rofor
to thoo in detail. On page 16, it is c^ntionod that this interrogation
was mndo under oath, but the document itself does not shew* that. ..ccording
to ny opinion, this document cannot bo ackaittcd. For formal reasons, I
object to its admission and I shall ref«r, also, to statements made boforo
the adjournment. That is all I havo to say.

MR. McMnHEY: If tho Tribunal ploase, the rosorks of Dr. Sorvatlus,
at bust, indicate a taoro normal hiraan frailty as far as this transcript
is concerned. I would be tho last person in tho world to say that it is
letter-perfect. You always find mistakes even in the best -»f transcripts.
However, I do submit, that it is as accurate cs any interrogation report
that is opt to be submitted to Brandt, 1 think tho questions indicate it
was in Dorston. That is typographical error. It has rofer orce to a
prison coap known as Dustbin. However, it is immaterial to ne whoro those
charts were made. I do not think it is necessary to have theso charts
attached so the document may be athissablo.

a result of this interrogation, another cnart was drawn up and
sworn to by Karl Braidt. It was submitted to the Tribunal. It is now
in tho record. The so-called ristake or. dates is not really a fault in
the transcript in at least ere instant. I happened to have boon present
during the course of the interrogation and I directed that a question be


put to hie as to when he first became a

2C68


r of the Reich Research


Court I


28 Jon 1*7 - * - 18-2 - L«X3 - Fitzgerald •

Council. My recollection is that he quite cle-rly said 1913 or 1911*. I
an happy to see hi3 counsel corroct that to read 191*2. I, myself, thought,
at the time, he was placing the date rather late. However, that is what
he said. That is what was taken down.

I also think February, 1911, was the date be nentioned with rospect
to the Fuehrer decree which wo of course %-ory well knew to bo March,

1911. Those are things that cannot be controlled. That is what the nan
in response to the question. That was taken down. That is what appears
in this transcript. I subnit that the docuaent is vury clearly adnissible.

THE PRESIDENTi Counsel's objection is ovorrulod. Men the Defend¬
ant, Karl Brandt, takes tho stand, ho can explain it any way ho ploasoa.

Ho can bring boforo tho Tribunal his theory of what was said, (fcvious
mistakes can of course bo oorroctod.

HR. McHaHEYj This, thon, is Prosecution's £»hibit 111. as 1 havo
stated boforo, I do not wish to road tho ontiro interrogation. I would
first like to calltho Tribunal's attontion to a question appearing at tho
bottom of pago 2 of tho English translation, which is tho socond quostion
at tho top of pago 1* of tho original.

"Q. '"hat exactly did Rostock do?

"A. Restock at first took caro of questions concomii*? universities,
that is to say, ho saw to it that tho highoet possible nixnbor of teachers
caao and that the nusbor of students remained high. Lator ho picked out
single tasks which had resulted altogether, practically in contact with
tho Raich Research Council. Among thee were tho questions of Penicillin,
Kripps serum, an woll as those of the whole literature, things that alto¬
gether were meant as an attack against medical education. Restock on ny
initiative, interferred then to stop that. Furthermore, Rostock had had
a series of conferences concerning oven the econcoic aspect, i.e. production
together with what had to be done by the doctors."

The answer to this quosticn merely indicates a collaboration to some

extent between Restock and the Reich R,scarch Council. I submit that the

2C69


Court I


28 Jan 1*7 - A - 18-3 - LJG - Fitsgorald


answer to the question is either garbled or a garbled answer was given;
it is one of the two.


2090


25 Jan l*7-A-FX-l3-la-?itzgerald-(GJ)-

Court Ho. 1 *

In any event, wo read this into the record simply to show that thore
was cooperation and collaboration betwoon the Defendant &ostook and
the Reich Research Counsel.

Tho next scries of questions appear on Page 7 of the English
Translation. It is about the Riddle of Page 11 of tho original.

Q What was your position in tho National Research Council?

A I was a cosher of the National Research Council without any
actual offico until March 191*5.

Q But you were a member of the National Research Council?

A Yes, I was a neeber but without any functions at all. In March
I boliovo It was in March 1915 I was cccnissioncd by a special ordin¬
ance which «s signed by Goering to consolidate tho probluas and tasks
of medical research within the cccpass of the National Rosoarch
Council.

Q Was that not in the year 1911?

A No. It was in 1915 about 2 or 3 weeks previous to my arrest
in Behlcms. This moreover pertains also to what I hovo said before.

Q Aro you sure that you held no offico in tho National Research
council?

A 1 hold no office in the National Research Council Fron 1911
on the lists issued monthly wore sent to no.

Q When did you bcccoc a aefiber of tho National Research Council?

A It nay havo been in 1913 or 1911*.

I read this excerpt simply to prove that Kiri Brandt was, in
fact, a menber of the Reich Research Council. We have been advised
that tho dates given, 19l3or 191J arc a mistake. It should bo 191*2.

Of course that is a matter which can be explained when tho Defendant
takos the stand if ho docs. I would also like to suggest that while
there any bo 3ccc difference about what holding an of fie in the
Reich Research Council is, that there certainly can bo no disputo obout


2091-


28 Jan l*7-A-FX-l8-la-Fitzgerald-(GJ)-
Courfc No. 1

the fact that the Defendant Karl Brandt, along with others heads
of cinistrica, such as Conti, woro ne=bcrs of the so-called
Presidential Council of the Reich Research Council.

2091-A


28 J*n 47-.VPJC-18-2 a-? i tzgaraM
Court ;.*o. 1


Tao Tribunal roqabstod that wo Obtain a li3t of tho affidavits which
wra provisionally admitted duo to tho lack of a cortificato, at that tiiao,

show!at tho authority of cortoia ccployoos of tho Offioo of Chiof of Counsel
♦

to aduinistor oaths In connoction with affidavits.

■ao first affidavit to bo provicion-01 y odaittod w-s DocuiMnt liaobor.372.
It is on affidavit of Rudolf 3ny*it attestod to by ffoltor H. Rapp. It was
provisionally adnlttod as Rxhibit 252.

Docvnont .‘Ks.bor 429 is on affidavit of Doforalant Hovon nttostod to by
irrn Dovrios on 24 Octobor 1946. It w-a provisionally ndnlttod ns Prosocution
Eihlblt 281. Hio affidavit of Urucowaky, Doctront N^bor 423, nttostod by
Horhor Vfcyor, on 17 Octobor 1946, w-a provisionally ndnittod ns Prosocution
exhibit 282.

Docuijont rvibor 370 is anothor affidavit of Rudolf 3r»n<lt ottostod to
by W&ltor Ifcpp and provisionally ndnittod as Prosocution Sthlbit 294.

Docvciont NUjibor 083 is on affidavit of Schuh nttostod to by Cuy
jr.vnxeor on tho 18th of Novonbor, 1946. it w-s provisionally aluittod as
Prosocution sxhdbit 314.


2092


28 Jan hi-n-S Tf-19 -I-Gall a gher-(GJ) -
Court No. 1

Docuncnt NO-883, affidavit of Eycr, attested to by Guy Fav-
arger, 18 November 1916, was provisionally admitted as Prosecution
Exhibit No. 320.

Document NO-Llxlx, another affidavit ox' Rudolph Brandt, attested
to by "alter H. Rapp, on 23 (tetofccr 191x6, was provisionally admitted
as Prosecution Exhibit No. 329.

Document N0-lx7lx, affidavit of Koessler - no, Kncislor, I guess
it is, objected by the Fred Rodolli October lix, 191x6, was admitted
as Prosecution Exhibit No. 332.

Document NO-U27, affidavit of Huber, attested to by Frod Rodoll
h January 191x7, was provisionally adaittod as Prosecution No. 1x31.

Document N0-llx28, affidivit of one TTosso, and was attested to
by Fred Rodoll on 3 January 191x7, was provisionally admitted as
Prosecution's Exhibit No. 1x32.

Those aro tho only affidavits which were specifically objected
to on the grounds that tho porson who attested to the affidavits was
not shown to be authorised to administer an oath. Herwevor, thoro were
subsequent initial objections made on tho grounds of several more
affidavits, which would fall within that objection, although at that
tino specifically raised with the documents, and which arc covered
by the certificate of General Telford Taylor, which wo havo submitted
to tho tribunal, and I might note that there arc five of those.

Tho first ono is Docuncnt 3865-PS, affidavit of S.A. Bruck
Huollor attested to by Alfred H. Booth, 2 «pril 191x6, which was .
admitted as Prosecution's Exhibit 365.

Docuncnt NO-720, affidavit of Schnidtaann, attested to by
Frod Rodcll on 8 November 191x6, and was admitted as Prosecutions
Exhibit No. 366.

Docuncnt NO-817, affidivit of Gutekunst, attested to by Fred
Rodell, 20 November 191x6, was admitted Prosecution's Exhibit 368.


2093


28 Jan li7-«-S^-19-2-Gallagher-(r-J)-
Court No. 1

Document NO- 818 , affidavit of Sprauer, attested by Frwd Rodell
on 19 November 1966, was admitted as Prosecution's Exhibit No. 373.

Docuaent NO-872, affidavit of the defendant Rose, attested to
by Ivan de v ries, 3 December 19li6, was admitted as r rosecution'

Exhibit h08.

That, if the Tribunal pleaso, covers all the affidavits as to
which there could have been any question on the grounds of the
objections there were not raised on 3 January 1967, and, I would like
to have the record now show that those affidavits are finally
admitted into evidence.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. HcHaney, have these exhibits been made to
show the dates on which tho statement or affidavit falls were nado
aftor tho tern of appointment of tho persons who took tho affidavit
or statement?

HR. 1C HAKEY: Yes, tho dates which I read after each affidavit
that it was attested to by so and 00 on such and such a date havo
boon chockod against these dates. In tho certificate as to when tho
naaod person was first vested with authority to adninicter oath, and
all of these affidavits do fall within that tine limitation.

THE PRESIDENT: That is quito correct.

DR. GA.-TIK: The counsel for the defendant Hovon. Tho Tribunal
and counsel, I would liko to draw the attention of the Tribunal
to the fact that I wish refcronco to tho affidavit of the defendant
Hovon NO-629, Exhibit 262, objected for the very reason and since this
affidavit was compiled in the English language, that the defendant
Hoven docs not know tho English language sufficiently, and tho ordor
to make an explanation on the affidavit in its importance to the
Tribunal is at hand, and reciting that sofar as I remember the decision
in reference to the final admissibility would be postponed until such


time that the defendant


23 Jan li7-A-S.7-19-3-Gallagher-(GJ)-
Ccurt .Vo. 1

Hoven will be called to the witness stand, I, therefore, ask you not
to decide today as to the final admissibility, but only at the time
when the defendant Hoven be an the witness stand.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for the defendant Hoven is correct in the
statement which ho has cade. Has counsel for tho defendant Hoven
boon furnished a German translation free tho affidavit.

HR. 1CKANEY: He indicates ho has been furnished the German
translation.

THE PRESIDENT: The ruling on the admissibility of this affidavit
roferred to by tho counsel for the defendant Hoven will bo reserved
until cithor tho Prosecution proves that the defendant Hovon docs
understand tho English language, or when ho is on tho stand and can
bo cross examined, or examined, concerning this affidavit.

HR. *CHANEY: TTould the Tribunal care to make a ruling on the
lists of affidavits which I havo Just read?

THE PRESIDENT: Yos, I was Just cooing to that, to tho disposing
of those oxhibita raisod by counsol. Tho affidavits provisionally
admittod, which havo boon listed and referred to by counsol for tho
Prosecution, will bo admitted in ovidonco as exhibits in tho case.

As to all the other oxhibits which havo been offered and to which no
objections havo been made, they arc all considered as admitted in
ovidonco in tho ease. Hereafter, I shall 3ay, any affidavits that
aro offered in cridcnco to which no objection is aide on the affidavit
reforrod to as an exhibit will bo considered as admitted in evidence
without a further specific ruling that it is admitted in evidence.

UR. JCHANEY: There are three other affidavits at least which
are still in an unsettled state, and the Tribunal will recall that
those were affidavits taken in Austria, and they concern the Soa-'?aUr
experiments at -'achau, and we have been endeavoring to


2095


28 Jan U7-A-ST-19-li-Gallagher)-
Court No. 1


introduce the documents *tich have been objected to on the grounds
that no oath had been adninistcred; that they were unsworn
statements. I think they were provisionally odnitted subject to the
Prosocution obtaining a sworn statement of identical character.
Those have not been forthcoming froa the Austrian authority as yot,
but I aa advised that at least two of them arc in the nail, and we
would like, of courso, pcmission to subnit sworn affidavits from
theso persons when they arc rccoivcd.

2096


23 Jan U7-U-A-15-la-UC-GalIaghar-(GJ)-
Ccurt : 2 o. 1

Iho30 were Prosecution's Exhibits 80 s. 136 end 139 and No. 110.

7 KS PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal's reline will be considered as holding
open the prosecutions request for the privilege of recoiving in
evidence in the caao in chief these affidavits when thoy arc received.

% jr, y'cHMES. k stellar character of affidavit, or rather of
statenant taken beforo the public prosecutor in Frankfurt concerning
certain aspect of the Euthanasia nrograa as it applied to half
Jewish children, as 1 recall, and on that occasion I think that
tho docuaont was not adnittod cv 0 n provisionally, but I would, of
course, like tho privilege or right to subait into evidence as the
Prosecution's exhibit the docusent as soon as it has bc.n sworn to,
it aay have been sworn to, but wo have not procured tho translation
as yet, but it should be prepared end offered very shortly.

THE PPJSID 68 T: Tho Prosecution cay have the right to offer tho
document ihen it is received in proper fora, subject, of course, to

any objection on the part of the defense.

Ul, jfcHftNET: So with that reservation the Prosecution now rost3

its coso in chief.

TJ£ ntESIGEHT: Just a noaent, counsel. Let the record show that
the rrosocution on this date (20 January 191.7) has announced that it
rests its case in chief, the announcement having aado at 3=37 o'clock
in tho afternoon of 20 January, 1907, this being the twenty-fifth
actual trial flay in thi3 caao.

I would like to call the attention of the Tribunal to tho fact
that tho Tribunal has not been Ibrnished with a certain docuncnt,
which was supposed to bo furnished, wisely, a photostat of tho
skeleton collection in Strassbourg, and also certain Geman docunonts
of bn-lish translation which have been presented today.

DP.. GAILIK: Dr. tawlik, counsel for tho defendant Hovon. If the
Tribunal please, and counsel tho Tribunal yesterday ruled that document


2097


29 Jan L7-la-A-19-la-UG-GalIaghi:r-(GJ)
Court No. 1


MO-1063 be adr&ttcd, and wt arc surely conc-mcd with chat report,
the Agency for tha investigation of War Criacs at Aasterdaa.

This report con-

2097-*


Court I


28 Jan U7 - A - 19-2a - UG - Gallagher

tained a r.usber of protocals of *.tnesses, I now rake the application
that the Prosecution should subnit the following witnesses for purposes
of cross exanination:

One: Hans Vondohing in /vpeldoorn, page 13 of the German translation
of tho report.

Second« Jan Antonio van Loewrardcn in Fladigen, page 13 of the German
translation, and

Third: Johannes Peter Schalker, page 15 of tho Qcrann translation.


2098


Court So. 1

26 Joe 47-A-20-1-LKM-Gay lord

ME. KC EAKZT: The prosecution, of course, gr*nts the right of defence
counsel to aeke hie application for the procuring of these witnesses. How¬
ever, ve shall resist on the ground that It constitutes sooething In the
nature of a collateral attack on the report of a duly constituted war crlnos
eoaaisslon of one of the allied nations. These reports ere specifically ad-
siselble under Ordinance So. 7 and I feel quite sure that provision was
insorted to shorten the proof in such ceses as this, and if the defenoe is
to be afforded the full opportunity of going into the conplete basis of such
reports, vhy, of course we will be here for a very, vory long tine. Vo shall
be happy to subult our objections, however, in writing if and when defense
counsel subaits his request for these witnesses. Of course, there would
also be a problea as to whose witness he would be uoon his appearance;
vhethor a prosecution witness under cross exeainatlon or n dofense witness.
That also is a quostlon that we will deal with in our vritton objection.

DR. OAVLIK: I ask to cross-exeaine that witness and further that I
don't want to discuss the report with hio but nerely an interested in the
testinony of tho witness. I «a geing to Question hin about tho points he
testified on and I would not have tho right to do eo if tho prosecution
would not suboit this witness for cross-exanlnntion.

IKi PRISIDIST: Counsol for the defendant Hoven nay renuest that tho
witnesses be sunconed and la his reousst state the purposo for which he
desires the witnesses to be sunnoned. That application would bo subnltted
before the prosecution and the oatter will thon be subnltted for the Tri¬
bunal.

DR. GAVLIK: I ask that *he prosecution subalt this witness to no for
the purpose of cross-exaainAtion.

7HI HULSIDXBT: Th« t request should be included in the application of

the counsel for the sunaonir* of the witness. Should the Tribunal receive

froa Dr. Seidel, counsel for defendants Gebhardt, Oberhnuser and rischer,

n request that he be peraitted to present the cases of those three defendant

together, I assuae thet would also include the request that this opening

stoteaent on behalf of those defeedants be arde at the sene tine as his one

2099


Court Sc. 1

26 Jen 47-»-20~2-IHM-Gaylord


statement. I« there any Objection of this procedure being follcved by
counsel for the defendants named on the pert of eny other defense counsel?

Is thero eny objection on behalf of the prosecution?

hS. HC EaSEY; So objection, Your Honor. Ve think it's a very sensible
suggestion.

THE PRESIDES": It apnoars to the Tribunal that the pirn outlined by
counsel for defendants Oebhardt, Oborhe.uscr and Fischer vould be advanta¬
geous not only freo their standpoint but froa the standpoint of the prose¬
cution of the Tribunal and the recuest is granted. Further, in connection
with the opening statement on behalf of the defense, the Tribunal vould
Inquire whether the defendants hevo cede any arrangement to prosont at
one time discussions of certain general charges against xuny of the defen¬
dants.

DR. SEKVATIUS: Hr. rresidont, there was no agrooaent nnong dofenoo
counsels to distribute certain statements; however, our task will bo dis¬
tributed in such a cannor ns to avoid duplication. Of course, it is up to
everyone's own discretion to present his case in such a nanner ns ho wants
to.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will consider not only tho cvidenco but
the quostion of outlining the defense in tho opening stntor.ente to bo nado
by tho defense. The Tribunal has nllotted to counsels for tho defendants
two days in which to nnke these opening statements and duplications, at
locet as suggested by counsol for defendant Kiri Brandt, will be rather
burdensome to counsel and tho Tribunal and cere duplication would be of no
benofit to anybody.

DR. SRRVAIIUS: Kr. President, due to the fact that the case of Dr.

Brandt and the eesc of Dr. Handlosor arc nore extensivo, there arises the

feet that the first two opening statements will be a little longer. As ftr

as I am informed, the najority of the other statements are shorter so that

the both days which are at our disposal will not be exceeded at nil. Ve

have been informed by our colleagues that they will speak less and give us

this tine to our disposal. There is the defense counsel Prlbilla and that

2100


Court Ho. 1

28 Jen 47-A-20-3-2M-Ga.ylord


applies to counsel for Heron—no. It isn't Hcven, it is Hrugovsky—vho
rgreud to that, so that ve are sure he will not exceed that tlno.

THE PRESIDES?: It's evident to the Tribunrl that thero nust be sone
basic theory to the defense, on the port, nt least, to neqult o nunbor of
defendants. I vould ask if defendants' counsel have agrood rnong thon-
sclves as to the allocation of tiuo. The Trlbun/1 has alloved tvo diye
tnd any direction agreeable to the defendants that will cor.oune no nore
than that tiuo vill be satisfactory to the Tribunal but without boing ad¬
vised as to scoe allocation of tine which has been agreed on by tho defen¬
dants, the Tribunal will not know whether certrin counsel night bo using
nore of the tlno and it vill be infringing upon the tino of other dofondente.
If defendants' counsel this afternoon could prepare sor.o stntenont of the
allocation of tine which would be useful to the Tribunal, then tho Tribunal
would have soncthing with which to folic* in listening to counsel tonorrow.

UR. SERVATIUS; nr. President, I shall eoo to it that a list it con-
piled giving the apnroxinato tine which is claioed by the individual
dofenso counsels.

7 HE PRESIDENT: That is what the Tribunal desires. Any further natters
to bu colled to the attention of the Tribunrl this afternoon?

MR. HC HaHLTj I would ask if oil of the defonse counsels have their
opening statonents translated and whether or not they aro now available?

I have recoived a copy of tho opening etatenent of Dr. Soldi for the
defendants Gobhardt, Fischer and Oberhauser, but I think that is the only
one I have received and I just don't know whether the other defense counsels
have secured translations of their opening etntenents, so I vould be
interested in obtaining espies.

TEE PRZSIDKHTl Hove any of the defense counsels, other than counsels
for the defendants n.ncd, procured translations of their opening stntc-
tiento in the English language?

DR. SERVATIUS: I have been told tfert ny opening etatenent has been
translated end that the .an. applied to colleague Kelte. He too h. - been
told that hi. opanlcc .pooch ho. he.= troa.lctod, that » pMU l *


Court So. 1

26 Joe 47-A-2C-4-IHK—Gaylord


In the :iultigra.ph department.

THE PRESIDES!: The Tribunal would ilso wish copies of thuso opening
statements in English. Would counsel see th*.t copies rre furnished of the
translation of these opening statements in English to the Tribunr1 and ti¬
the prosecution?

ZR. SAiiTER: My tvo opening statements h/ve been submitted about *ight
days ago and ropertedly I have na.de inauiriee of the employees in the
library—not my eeployeos but eaployoes of OCC—vfcnt ve ought to do in
order to obtain translations. Repeatedly, in fret, that personnel infomed
oe that we, ourselves, would not need to concern ourselves with theso trans¬
lations but that the drifts which wo had har-ded in to havo copied would
automatically bo handed over to the Translating Branch and fron tho Trans¬
lating Branch they would then go—tho requisite number of tho English
translations—would go then to both the prosecution and then the Tribunal.

In other words, ns for as we're concerned, it was not only today or yester¬
day but about a woek ago that wo have submitted our nntoriol, end naturally
after that wo didn't concern oursolvos with obtaining translations oinco
we had specificolly been told that we needn't worry about it.

THE rRESIDEST: Counsol is entiroly correct. Having furnished the
opening statements to thf Trnnslotlng Department, counsel vie not obligated
to concern hinodlf further vith the natter.

DR. SAUTEH: I an afraid, Xr. Proeidcnt, I did not understand you. I
teg your pardon, I did not understand what you sold.

IKE PRESIDES?: I stated that counsel for the defense vpo correct in
assuming that after having furnished thoir opening strtenonte in Gorran to
the Translating Doportuent and having been assured that they would be
translated, counsel was not under any obligation to concern himstlf further
in the natter.

DR. SAUIER: Thank you very much. Hr. President.

THE PRESIDES!: Would the S e cretery General investigate the matter of
these translations rad see that these have been aadc and properly distri¬
buted. If there is nothing further to bellied to cur attention this


Court So. 1

28 Jan 47-A-20-«»t-8aylord


afternoon, the Tribunal will rcceae until nine-thirty o'clock tomorrow
corning end vill convent to hear the opening strtenents cf dofer.ee couneele.
Ve understand thr.t these strtecents vill be node by counsel representing
the defendants in the order in which they ere nnned in the indictncnt. The
Tribune! - *111 be In recess.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 0930 hours, 29 January 1947.)


*n>?>OES-i-i^oeter (IL)

Court So. 1

CCPJfZCTED COFi

Official Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the nitter of the United Stato3
of Anoricaj against Karl 3rar.it, ot al, •
dofendants, sitting at Xaerr.berg. Gorrav,
on 29 January 19u7, C930, Justice Beals presiding#

TIE '.'ARSF.'Xi Persons in the Court Rood will p le a so find their

soats#

Tho Horcrablo, tho Judges of 1 military Tribunal 1,

Military Tribunal 1 is now in sossicn, God save tho United States
of Anorlca and this honorable Tribunal#

Thoro will bo ordor in tho Court#

THE {RESIDENTS Hr. Marshal, will you ascertain that tho dofon-
danta aro all present in court 3

TIE NARSH&L* May it pleas a your tfcnor, tho Defendant Oborhouaor
lo absent today in continuation of the illness of which nho nao obaont
yostorday#

THE FRESIDE’JTt Tho othor dofondants aro all prosont?

TIE MfcRSFALt Tho othor dofondants aro all prosont,

THE PRES IDS fT: Tho Socrotary-Gonoral will no to for tho rocord
tho proa one o of all tho dofondants savo Dofandant Oborhousor who is
obs ant on account of illnoss,

Tho Dofondant Oberhou cor»s dofonao will not bo Joopardisod
In tho procoodine this norning. Tho Tribunal will procood*

E7 IDS ICE OH Or THE DrTE'DAHIS

DR.SSRVATIUSj Hr. Prooidont, you asked no to givo you no-
tico about tho tino the individual dofonao ccunsol would need for thoir
introductory sta tenants# By os kin;- around, I had a list conpilod
*hiindudo ovary dofonso ocunsol sinco oono want
to aS^s&rfcifeular statements about it, Fron that list it can bo soon
that tho tino which is at tho disposal — this is 18 rdmtco — will
total h*>5 sduwtos by dofonso counsol li3tod thore. Dofonso counsel
for Blcno, Ruff and Rocborg did i»t givo tho tino required# Individual
dofonso counsel hare'listed acre than thirty rdnutos threo of thaa.


29 JanJS-GES-O.-1-Poater (JX)

Court Kc. 1


Othora nood loss tiac. So that it all equals itself out.

TIE FRESIQIOT: Tho schedule prepared by defense ecus cl appears
to bo fair and adequate. Counsel nay pro oodo


210 U a


29 Jo-hr-DZS-1-3-Foster
Court yo. 1.

DR. SFRThTIUS: Kr. President, I have r. few technical questions before
t.-.o proceedings. First, wit., reference to the stert of the oubuissiin of the
uviuor.co, tnc tine wnicn was r.t our disposal could not be used full” Eince we
vero not nblo to spor-k to witnesses freely ns wo pleased, rod we could only
spook to then for three hours / 1 the z. oot nod which led to the fact that wo
c!uld ;nly open* to two witnesses during one aornin£. The preparation of
Affidavits could, therefore, cot be concluded by _o. Vuh ny client 1 h i-o
not been nblo to discuss cv^ry question with reforoneo to hie exnninnti >n. I
would theroforo be grateful if the Tribunal could tell ue when they oxpoct no
to Sturt with th« subuissior. of ovidonco. * would be prepared- to do co coning
, onlay.

JHE PR2SXDEST: I didn't hour tno Inst statement of counecl.

D. SSRV.-.IUS: I he e not boon cblc to djecurs sufficiently with ny
client all tho questions wnich I went to put to hie in cxminr.tior. nnd I should
thereforo bo grateful if the start of tue sub-isoion of evidence would bo
postpor.od to the coning ..ondoy, which would Oeun ono day of pnuoe, one day
of svSJournaont.

"3 ?R2S!D3:<7! ..t the close of the nr,.-ununts tho Tribunal hns nlrerdy

lotorhlnod to recess unt 1 Hondny.

DR. S'RV rlUS: I have yet nnothwr request, that Is, to cxcuoo tho
defendant Karl 3r-.r.dt this afternoon nnd to-orrow uornin,- to thrt I c r. use
t.*.« tlho in order to prop:ire his ox- .iantion. T.iio is r. procedure which w'o
iso dopted by tno International Kiiitory Tribunal.

.33 fR. SIDS.!"; Tn- Tribunal will -rrur.t c.uneel tho request nbout tho
cxcuolr. of yj\tl Brandt for t. is afternoon and to-orrow.

DR. S SY.-IUS: ::r. Fresi-cnt, -ay I then be,-in with ay introductory
bi tohor.t?

"■3 PR- = ID3.?TI Counsel any proceod.

DR. $3RT..riGS: I auy sr.y that I h-.vo not yot socn the Snell ah toxt of .oy
atcto:ior.t. I tr.irJc it is now boin* submitted to the Tribunal.

3-3 FRZSJDS.rT: The Tribunal now has the English translation of the

2105


f.ctencn?.


29 Joi-Vr-GSS-l-2-Tottor

Court So. 1.


DH. SrP.Y^ZIUS: Kr. president, I have c few technical questions boforo
tao proceedings. First. wit- rofercnco to tho start of the submission of tho
ovldonco, taw ti-e waica was ct our disposal could cot bo used fully einco wo
woro not rile to spook to witnesses frooly ns wo plonsed, nai wo could only
speak to thou for three hours at tho cost find which lod to the fact that wo
ciuld jnly speak to two witnossos during ono uorninfi. Tho preparation of
affidavits could, therefore, not bo coacludod by _©. Vxth ay client I hrve
not boon nblo to discuss ev v ry question wit., referonco to his exxuainntl -n. I
would theroforo be firatoful if the Tribunal could toll uc when they oxpoct no
to start with the eibuission of ovidonco. ' would be propered to do oo conin#;

4 ondny.

->2 PHSS1DEST: I didn't hear tho Inst strtouent of couneol.

D-. S2RT...IUS: I ha*.e not boon able to doecuce sufficlontly with ny
client nil the questions which I want to *xit to hie in examination and I should
thereforo bo grateful if the start of tu« eubuisslon of evidence would bo
postponed to the cooing .;>ndoy, which would neon ono day of pauoo, ono day
sf raSJournoont.

.*>3 F8ZSD5K?: ..t the dose of tho nrguaonts tho Tribunal has already
do to mi nod to recess unt 1 Monday.

DP.. S'RV HUS: I h-.vo yet nnotaer request, that is, to excuse tho
defendant K-.rl Br-midt talc afternoon and tomorrow morning so thrt I c n uto
tie time in order to prepare hia oxnaiantion. This So r procedure which wro
• Iso tdoptod by tr.e International llilitnry Tribunal.

7KS rR’olDSJT; Tne Tribunal will grant c-unsel tile request about tho
azeuein of Earl Brandt for t..is afternoon and tomorrow.

DR. S BY-TICS: i:r. President, my I then begin with ny introductory
Statement T

THS rR"‘ID3..TL Counsel -ay proceed.

DR. S3RV..TICS: I any sty that I h-.vo not yot soon tho Snriiah text of ay
statement. I tniak it is now boinfi submitted to tho 'ribuaal.

K3 rRPSIDS.^: The Tribunal now has the Infill* translation of tho

2105


■latcmont


23 Jrj>-ir-<8S-l-3-JO*tcr
Court So. 1.


DR. S23T-TIUS: Kr. Pr-sidont, I should liico to point out that tho lart
- os havo coat inod too text of the lew to which I rofe-rod In tho boginning
jf _iy statement. It Is an exc rpt from tho Charter of the International
Rilitary Tribunal and an oxcorpt fro- the Law So. 1C. T~ls would unite it
ennior to follow my first introductory statements.

Opening statement on bohalf of the Dofeainnt Earl Brandt.

DR. SZR7.-TIDS: Tho ox/u-ination of t.'.u indictment against tho Dofondrnt
Xnrl Brandt reveals that on sovoral counts it is devoid of foundation, ninco
it leeks in port a legal basis, in part tho factual conditions.

I thoroforo sake a. plication that tho charge against tho Defendant Karl
Brandt bo duel:.rod insufficient.

1) for Is#..a reasons in regard to Count 1 of t.-.o Indiclaent,

Conspiracy to C3hr.lt Vor Crimes and Crlucs against ZucanHy,

2) Por factual reasons in regard to count 11 of tho Indicti»ent.

Whr Cri-es.

C'unt hlgh-nltitudo oxporiaonts
Count 3. freoslng experiments
Count C. ualarlr. experiments
Count 0. son water oxporiaonts
Count I, storilixntlon.

In explanation of this application I cito tho following:

Count I;

The Indietaont of 25 Ootobor under Count I charged nil tho defend¬
ants with tho crlao of a coi-iOn do sign or conspiracy to commit crines .igninst
Qunanity and war crimes.

T..is chargo hac no basis, in law; it is an inndui--Bible oxtonslon of
tho char go transgressing boyond tho limits sot for this trial.

Tho legal licit is constituted by Control Council Iaw 1C, to
-rticlu II of wuich the Indictment refers.

2106


29 Jcn^2-L-*--~n>-Groea

Court So, 1


"This law, however, does not contain any provision that a con¬
spiracy to coacit war crimes or crir>;s against husanity is punishablo ir.
Itself as a separata type of crlnoj tte conspiracy which is ieclarod
punishable there is only conspiracy to oexdt a criao against the peace.

"No charge of such a cries has beer, n&do, hcwevei*.

"The wording and the system of tho law show that tho planning of
war criaes and crimes against humanity is only a Torn of participation and
rot an independent type of crinoj

"Tho linitation of the law is also icrwnstratod by the decision of
tho International Military Tribunal in Trial No, I, whore nmishablo
conspiracy Is also expressly restricted to conspiracy to conmit a crirao
against poace,

• "On this subjoot, tha following is to bo said in detaili
"Since thoro is no chargo of broach of tho poaco, tho Tribunal is
competent to examine only throo quostionsi whothcr tho dofondar.to havo
comittod war crises, whether thoy are s^lty of a crime against humanity,
ar /1 whothor they are punishablo as arbors of a criminal organisation,

"That the law knows only a crime of conspiracy against tho ponco
is shown by Artido II la, which roads i

"TParticipation in t corxxm plan or a conspiracy for tho purposo
of tho oxooution of ono of tho crimes listed above,'

"Thoso crises listod abovo -,ro only tho crimes of Paragraph la
against tho peace#

"No such regulation regarding a conspiracy to corrdt war crimes
and crimes against huaanity is included in tho law.

"That this linitation of conspiracy to "conspiracy against tho
peace" is intentional; is shown ?lso by the decision of the International
Military Tribunal in Trial No, 1, of 1 October 15*6, where charges which
went beyond this wore expressly re Joe tod.

"At tho end of Section 6 of the Judnaent it says*
iCount I, however, charges not only the conspiracy to oorait
v, war; but .Iso to cccrdt orl«s and srlnos ^lMt >


aggressi


29 Jan.-*-ATT>-2-2-<;ro3s

Court So. 1


But the Charter does not define as a separate crime any conspiracy except
the one to coccit acta of aggressive wars. Article 6 of the Charter provides:

*Loadors, organizers, instigator-, ani accomplices participating
in the formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to coredt any
of the foregoing crises are responsible for all acts performed by ary persons
ir. execution of such plan.*

"In the opinion of the Tribunal those words do not add a now and
separato crime to those already listod, The words are d 0 si. 7 r.ed to establish
the responsibility of persons participating in a oemen plan. Tho Tribunal
will therefore disregard the charges in Count I thatjtho defendants conspired
to co-Tsdt war crlais and crimes against humanity, and will consider only tho
cannon plan to prepare, initiate, and *ago agerossi/o war»i

"In tho some nay. tho International Military Tribunal confirms this
concept of the law by saying urvdor No. 8 of tho Judgment 1

•As olroady ctatod, tho Charter does not doscribo ovory conspirno;-
as a separato crime, but only a conspiracy donline with crimos against tho
poaco and listod In Articlo 6 (a).»

"This docision of the International Military Tribunal was ncoossary
in tho faoo of the ambiguous formulation of the Chartor. Tho provision

0

nentionod, concerning tho responsibility of all loaders, organisors, etc,,
who participated in a ccroon plan or conspiracy had boon included as tho
last paragraph of th- r ogulation which had previously nentioned war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

"Law No. 10 , which forms tho basis for this trial, contains no
such provision which right load to doubtsj tho text of the law is dear and
intelligible.

"Law No. 10 knows only certain fores of participation, which are
limed up in Article II, Paragraph 2 . There, undor (d), it is stated, cor.-
caroin^ tho three crimes doclared punishable, - crimes against tho noaoo,
against war, ami against humanity. - that In addition to perpetrators and
ether participants, anyone who’was connected with plans or enterprises

involving its coanissionJ is to bo punishod.

2108


29 J&r^-*fr^ro-2->Gros3

Coart to* 1


"Hera we aro concerned with 'plans* and 'enterprises*j tint is not
the ease as the technical expressions of ^oo.-’con plan or conspiracy*•

"That the phrase : connected with plans' does not necessarily involv.
the concept of conspiracy is shown by Article n la, wharo 'nzdngl is
aentioned before conspiracy against peace is doclarcd Funjshable. This would
be sensjloss if it wore intended to introduce tho concopt of conspiracy,

"The provision of Article II Paragraph 2d, *whoover wa3 oonnoctod
with its planning and execution', means no rely a fora of conspiracy, Tho
bracketing of the words tplami*^ and execution' shows that planning is a
proilnlnary to execution, that is, attempt. The technical torn * conmon plan
or conspiracy* cannot, hewovor, fall undor that heading,

•'Tho system nppliod by Law to, 10 corresponds to tho intent of tho
law. In Article II a clear distinction is nado botwe-vn tho typo of orino in
paragraph 1 and tho forn of participation in paragraph 2, Paragraph 1 lists
as types of crises only the following*

1 ) tho individual criaos of broach of tho poaco,

2 ) conspiracy against tho poaoo

3) tho individual war crime

U) tho individual crino against hunarlty,

"Ttv>ro is no aintion horo of a conspiracy to cocmit war crimos or
a conspirnoy against humanity, Paragraph 2 or Section n, on tho othor hand,
deals only with tho forn of participation in tho abovo nontionod crimes of
Paragraph 1. In addition tc tho principal, accomplice, instigator, accessory,
abettor, tho person with ,^uilty participation in certain organisations, and
the person with -uilty correction with crises against tho peace on tho basis
of an o3pocially high position in public life, there appears, undor d, in a
logical interpretation of this provision, tho porson who participated in tho
preparations for or tho execution of one of the crices undor to, 1

"Law to, 10, which was systematically and carefully worked out, can¬
not contain such a fundaacntal error as to introduce an especially important
type of crime for the first tine in the section do voted to foms of partici¬


pation in cricos


£.09


29 Jan^-2-i-&-A7D-Grcss
Court Ho. 1


"Consequently, wo cono to the conclusion, that thoro is no law under
which the allege- conspiracy for the ctsrassior. of war crises and crinoo
against huaardty, which is hors charged, is punishable. Only participation
in individual crises, proved in individual cases, can bo punishable* The
Prosocution saist present such proof in detail.

"Sirce thoro is nc legal basis for Count I of thu Indictment, tho
charge nust be ieoLared insufficient for legal reasons, and tho caao under
this count rust bo dismissed.

"Tho saconi group of charges against Karl Brandt is insufficient
for faotual reasons*

"Thoro are tho following five counts*

1) Count n A hl.-h—altitudo -.xpcrlncr.ts.

According to tho Prosocution tho low-prossuro exporiajr.ts in tho Dachau camp
bognn in ’larch 19L2 and woro oondudod about tho end of August 191*2. Accord¬
ing to thu transcript (Gornan text, pc go 207), hewovor, tho final roport was
nado to Hismler early as 28 July 191*2, that is, on tho swao day on whioh
the Dofunimt Karl Brandt rocoivod his first official position as Special
Agent of th«» Fuehrer for certain tasks.

Bocauao of this coinddcr.co of tire alono, hs cannot be brought into any
connoction with these oxporl»>nta on the basis of his official position
alone. At that tire there was not as yet ary Chief of the Wohraacht Modicnl
Sjrvico, to vhoe tho Prosocution refers, and at that tlao tho Dofcndant Knrl
Brandt could not yet have beer, in ary official rolntionship to tho nodical
heads of tho Tohmacht oranchos or tho SS*

"The Prosocution has not presented ary facts which night show that
tho Defendant Karl Brandt krur* of and approved those uxporinonts.

"On the contrary, the Prosecution itself subaits that ’linnlor order*,
tho continuation of tho ordersj ono nay conclude th.rofron that ho also bogar.
than.

"The Prosocution further subaits that Hinaler 1 nspeotod the exporl-
nants hicsolf and that ho rocoivod the final report.


2110


29 Jan^B-AE>-2-5-Gross
Court So. 1


that tha Defendant Karl Brandt had no
The Prosecution case ia insufficient


"According to the Prosecution, the f recti nr «3cporiaont3 began, ii)
the Dachau canp following the cooling axperinonta in August 1912 and lasted
until May 19U3. Thera ware two typos of exporiconts: tho water cooling
exporinonts were concluded with a report on 16 October 191*2, and tho.dry
cooling exporinonts were condudod with n report on 17 February 191*3.

"Tho Prosecution has not presented any facts which could prove tho
direct participation of the Defendant Karl Brandt. It has boon established
that ho did not participate either in the Kumborg confuronco on freezing
oxporiconto on 26 and 27 Ootobor 191*2.

"Jbr has it been proved that tho Defendant Karl Brandt, by virtuo
of his position as apodal deputy, would havo gainod knowlodgo of thoso x;
exporinonts through tho Docrooa of 28 July 191*2. According to this Dooroo, th
Dofondant Karl Brandt had to carry out only curtain special tasks on spoolal
instructions i tho Prosocution has not contundod that any such assigimur.t
or any such instructions actually existed and woro carriod out.

"Nor has it boon proved that, as a raanbor of tho ProsicUnl Council
of tho Reich Research Council, tho Dofondant Karl Brandt, gained knowlodgo
of tho oxporir^nts and tho naturo of their oxooution and that he approvod
then, or that ho was in a position to prevent then.

"Nor has it boon proved that tho Dofondant Karl Brandt had at that
tino ary contact with tho Wohmncht Medical Ifcuntein School in St. Johann,
which allegedly oollaboratod with Dr. Itascher in experinents.

"On tho other hand, tho Prosocution has submitted that there was a
research assirrscent fror, the Luftwaffe, and a witness for the Prosooution has
testified that tho experiments wore carriod out b7 Rimlor on tho basis of
a private agroesent with General Kilch.

"This shews that tho charge against Karl Brandt on this count is


insufficient.


2111


Court So. 1

29 Jan 47-M-3-1-2L*. J Heyr.c s


I oc tie now to Count IIC, malaria experimente.

•■vccordlng to the prosecution, the saleria erocrimentB took olr.ee in
Dachau fro: February 1942 until April 1945, at Hinnler's orders. The letter-
fret is revealed by the officiel report on the trial of fTofecsor Schilling
in Dachau, pege 446 of the German transcript.

The prosecution does not present any frets vhlck night lndicrto any
direct prrticipation of the defendant Zirl Brixdt in the aolrrlr exporlncr.to.

The cireunstrr.ee that the defendant &rl Srrndt, by decree of 5 Septem¬
ber 1943, ves unpointed Conciesrr General with more extensive covers and
that he became Reich Cuxzlss:r on 25 August 1944 is not in itself sufficient
proof that, by virtue of this position, he gained knowledge of the typo of
oxpcrlr.tnts. The prosecution has not presented iny espociilly incriminating
frets revealed by the confiscated documents.

-he sane is true of the knowledge of the defendant Karl Brandt ao o
aor.ber of tho Presldlal Council of the Reich Research Council. Hero, too,
no specific proof vrs presented..

Tho or.ly evldcneo egalnst tho defendant Earl Brandt ie si id to bo an
affidavit by tho witness Pohl. who expresses the opinion thst Hinnler die-
cussod his experiments with the doctors in his circle, rohl lieto thoro
saeng others the duo of the defondent Earl Brandt. Pohl does not give any
facts on which he could base his opinion; on the other bond, it noy bo con¬
sidered e fact that tho defendant Karl Brandt did not belong to Hinnler's
circle.

Tho conclusion to be dri vn from the above statements is that the par¬
ticipation of tho defendant Eorl Brandt in the malaria experinents has not
been proved. His non-participation is enph/sized by the fnct that his name
does not npptor in any of the documents submitted and, in particular, that
he vas not mentioned in the Dachau trial against Schilling for malaria
experiments.

it

hxamiru-tioc of the charge therefore shows thot/la insufficient.

I coce now to Count II G, Sec Water Experiments.

According to the prosecution, the sea water experiments took place in


2112


Court lo. 1

29 Jan 47-ft-2-2-i3C~Eeyaes


Dachau from pbout June 1544 until September 1544.

Here alto the prosecution hat not presented any facts which show
direct participation of the defendant Kerl Brandt in these experiments; n-t
even the nene of the defendant Karl Brandt appears ia connection with those
experiments.

That the defendant Karl Brandt's position alono is no proof of know¬
ledge and approval of unwarranted exp*.rincnt8 has already been oxplnined.
Chit feet it confirmed by the prosecotion, since it cakes no charge against
Earl Brandt under Count K, roison Experiments, and Count L, Experiments
with Inccndirry Bribe, although the s mm official relationships oxist here.

The only a turicl which the prosecution his ie tho affidavit of the co-
defendant Sohnefor, who states that the sec voter experiments voro an open
eocret lr. tho "highest medical circles". The only fact which Schecfir can
give as a rcus.n is his report on his experiments to his supreae superiors
who were collaborating with hie. That enyoao else gained knowledge of the
nature of the experiments ond that, la particular, the defendant Karl
Brandt knew of it. cro not proved.

apart free tho contents of this affidavit, the statement of tho co-
defendant Schaefer car. not bo used against the defendant Karl Brandt since
thore has r.s yot been no opportunity for croos-exnaination.

Finally, I must point out that according to the submission of the nro-
secutlor. tho excerlatnts were tho special business of tho Luftwaffe and
tho Navy, in direct collaboration with Hltt.ler. There was thcreforo no
plcco thore for the participation of the defendant Karl Brandt.

These statements show that the charge against lari Brandt on this
count is elso insufficient.

Row, Count 21 X, Sterilisation.

according to tho prosecution, the sterilisation experiment. took place
freu Kerch 1941 until January 1945 in iuschwltr end Knvcnsbrueck and at
other places. The prosecution does not present any frets here, either,
which might prove direct participation of the defendant fcorl Brandt.

The prosecution bases its charge on the feet that, in addition to

2113


Coart Bo. 1

29 Jen 47-St-3-2—iEH-Eayn e ■

general knowledge on the basis of the defendant Karl Brandt'e official
position, material vcs actually presented here which allegedly indicates
Indirectly pcxtlclFetlon in the experiments.

The p- jsccutlen has incontestedly submitted that an X-r*jr snecir.list
froa en office of Bcuhler—that Is, Dr. Echunann-vas transferred for the
purpose of conducting sterilisation experiments nnd that other nersonnel
of this office was sent to the externlnatlcn camps In the lest, vhcrc
sterilisation* were performed.

It hrs not been proved that the defendant Karl Brandt had anything to
do with those transfers. In particular, it has not been proved that he
knew the purpose of the transfers end thus approved and supported the al¬
leged crises.

The fact alono that the Defendant Karl Brandt was givon spocial covers,
together with Btuhlor, by the iuthonaela Decree of 1 Sootenber 19?f, does
not prove thet Bouhler's office was his agency or that he was competent for
personnel anttors In tho Chancellery of the Fuehrer.

Tho affidavit of the co-defendant Brack, which has boon submitted, con¬
tains only his opinion that the defendant Karl Brandt had knowledge of Dr.
Schumann's transfer. Ko facts ere given which sight support this opinion.

Tho rffidrvl ;f the co-defendant Rudolf Brendt, So. <40, nrr * 1 3 f
preeunts an ossertion that, among others, tho defendant Karl Brendt -surely
knew of those sterilisation matters'. This opinion of the witness is ob¬
viously based on the defendant Karl Brendt's official position which he
assumed only after the conclusion of the oxperioent. in Auschwit* and

RavensVruock in 1944 when he became Reich Cosaicsar.

Apart froo the feet that that affidavit does not contain any fact, it

cennot be used against the defendant Karl Brandt because there hr. been no
cross-exe-iinotion.

The prosecution Itself, however, presented Uportr-ot point, in favor
of the defendant Karl Brendt. clearly indicating that ho had no knowledge

of the experiments.

First, it is shown that the co-defendant Brack In letters to Hicnler

211U


Court lo. 1

29 Jen -17-«-3-4-£I>.'Hrynei


repeatedly pointed out, with reference to Bouhler’6 agency, that he- hud
transferred *fcls" peoplo and enpha.slxed that *hc" had nr mooted the exoori-
nents. I refer to pages 562 end 56? of the German transcript.

Koreover, Bouhler hlceelf, la D-cuuent BO 156, eteteo that he alone lo
responsible for the execution of the neacurce to he taken In the Euthanasia
program. The defendant Karl Brandt could therefore not hive hrd any respon¬
sibility in this agency.

Che prosecution's ca«e also ehowe thet the storilixr.tion cxperlncnto
were conducted exclusively by Elunler ae a * etc to oocret of the greatest
lnoortnnco" — I rofor to page 666 of the Oernpn tranecrlpt — nnd that
■strictest eecrecy end the epeclal oblig/.tlon of evoryono concerned lo
onphaelted" beca.uso this wee the preparation for a nasi otorlllzatlon which,
however, nover ccac nbcut. Shot the defendant Ijirl Brandt, In onlte of
thla iptold eecrecy, wee informed of tho erente hae not bcon proved.

Those arguments ehew that the chi rgo against Karl Brandt on thie
count, aleo, le insufficiently eupported.

Insofar as tho chargee on one of the above counte ary, contrary to
thie application, bo declared sufficient oeroly on the breie of an affi¬
davit which hi e not bven subjected to croee-cxaninotion, apnllcatlon le
herewith aa.de to reeorvo tho right after cross-exmlnotlon to eubir.it a new
apoilcat ion concerning the charges.


2113


29 jan-H-JJ^arrcw (IL)

Coart ffa. 1

I now coao to tho presentation of avidencg with rofaronoo to the
oounto of the indictnant concornir^ illegal oxporinents.

Tho prosecution bases tho gonarul responsibility of tho defendant
Karl Brandt in recard to tho undertakinc of Illegal oxporinor.ta on hia
official poation and on tho organisation of his office. T/hat authority
tho defendant Karl Brandt tad in virtuo of tho throo decrees of 20 July
1912, 5 September 19U3 and 25 August 19M, whioh cave his rpodal powers,
Is a natter of interpretation and ovaluation.

Tho evidenoo for tho significance and oxtont of tho powers of the
dofondant Karl Brandt is brought by the prosecution primarily by tho
prooontation of otarts.

Tho Proaocution at first on 9 Zfccocbor 19h$ prosontod a report
ontitlod "Basic irctructiors about tho Qoraan lied!cal Officoa" with a
otart, which waa not sutnittod as evidenoo but waa bonded to tho Tribunal.
Tho report and tho chart aro =dsloadinc in sc far aa it oanrot bo soon
fTcn thon that in regard to tho person cf tho defondant Karl Brandt tho
chart could have had validity at tho oarliost for tho period after tho
third docroo of 25 Aw rust 19&, whon the position of Rdoh Corcdaaar waa
orofttedj at that tino tho amta which fora tho subjoot of tho indict-
nont had for tho asst part boor, concluded.

Tho oorrootnooa of tho "Bosio Instruction" itsulf is also being
contested, ainco on pago 2 of tho axposo it says that tho dofondant
Karl Brandt lad alroady in 19h2 occupied tho position of a superior of
HancOoeor and Conti and tad powore regarding all'officos in Qomony.

For tho inoorrootnosa of thia statcner.t I shall subnit ovidonco
bi* oxanination of tho dofondant hinsolf, and of tbo oo-dofondanta Hand¬
les or, Schrcodcr, and !!rugcw3ky.

Tho prcsocution furthorrero subnittod in ovidonoo six oherta about
the nodical officoa, tho ccrroctnoaa of whioh waa oonfiroed by affidavits,
-inoo tho witnoases could not bo subjoctod to a cross axar&nation, thoao
charts can bo used as ovidonco only against tho person who node then, how¬
ever, as a - 2116 -


29 Jto^WP-i*-2-Karrow (IL)
Court Ko. 1


procaution, I will doal tilth than.

Tio aro idling with the following charts i

"The T:ohr=acht 'fedioal Service" signed by Handlesor of 2li Soptenbor.
19lj6, Docunant ito. ND-282.

"Plan of Organization of Aero ".odical Resoarch" by Professor
Sohroodor. Tharo -ro tro charts, the first ono for tho period fron No-
vocfcur 19H till Docecbor 19U3, mdo out on 2 October 19 h 6 , Doeunont !*o.
:X>4 j18j and tho aocond for tho poriod f*on 1 January 19ljJi, cn, nado out
on 2 October 19US Document \b, !K>-lil9.

There ia firthor "Plan of Or.-anization of tho Nodical Sorvico of

tho SS" by Professor -frurcr.akr. Hero a ^in <:o havo two charts, tho first

•

for tho period up to 31 .’.u uat 191J, aa 'o cut cn 11 October 19li6, Doeunont
No. NO-U.7; and tao aoc-nd for tho porloi fron Soptobbur 1913 on, nado
out on 11 October 19l/>, Dowcont 'D-U7.

And finally* there is the * rorkinc Han of tho Offioo of tho Oo-
norol Corxdssar end tho Reioh Ccrrdssar for tho Helical and itoolth Sor¬
vico" of 7 liovcobor 1?1*$ 5 Doeunont 2JO-6U5. This has aorely boon aignod
by tho .lof anient Karl Brandi,

I shell sub exit ovidoaso that tho position of tho dofar.dant Karl
3randt aa superior aa it is crerroas in these charta ia inoorroct by
jxnnination of tho defendant hiasolf an ’ tho co-dofondants Profossora
Hsn dX o sor, Blcuo* Schroodor- Rostock, 'tujciraky and Gonzlcon* I nay
introduce R-'fiHvite of the* o witnaasoa. .'urthorraoro, as proof of tho
position of tho defer, 'ant Knr? Pran.it, I shall introduco tho rocord of
an intm*vi>r on the Go ram ra Ho on 16 januex? I 9 U 4 , fron vthioh it ia
evident that tho defendant Karl Brandt uxprossly di! not oonaider hin-
solf as tho top of tiia Gamut nodioal apparatus, d«t as "Differential".

The charges against tho defendant Karl Branit than arc baaod cn
tho genoral official ccnnoctiorc which ho had duo to his position. The
chorgoa of participation in unwarranted experiments is based or. the
o ffi cial contact between


- 2117 -


29 janJ.W5^-3-Sarrcrr (IL)

Court ?fc>. 1

the Office for Nodical Science and Research with the rosocrch offices;
furthor, on tho official connection with defendant Sari 3randt lad irlth
tho rosoarch office as a nanber of tho Presiding Council of tho Reich
Rosoarch Council#

I shell 3ub=Lt ovidonco that tho defendant Karl Brandt did not in
this manner gain any general knowledge of all the experiments which woro
conducted anywhor.* and that in particular ho iid not rA in knowledge of
tho kind of experiment and tho conditions. I shall hoar tho follcndng
witness os i For the office of sdonco and Rosoarch I shall hoar Profossor
Rostock and tho lofondant hieself; for tho Presiding Council of the Reich
Rosoarch Council I shall hoar tho business manager ‘lotzol and tho co-dofon-
dants Siovors and Rudolf Bmndt, and finally the defar.dant Mnsolf.

If nncoseary, I Shill also submit ovidonco that general st.ator.onto
in tho affidavits of the oo—lofondant Rudolf Brar. lt oar. bo objected to,
to tho axtont that tho dofondont Karl Brandt had knowlodgo of tho
•XForinonta,

Tho prosocutlon further doduood tho general responsibility of tho


lofondant Xarl Brandt frora tiw knewledco about tho «porinonts which he
"s alleged to have gained cn tho basis of attendance at nodical con.r<>-
00 with locturoo on tho experiments. I shall introduce ovidonco against
this by oxardnatic . f tho do fondant hiraolf.

Furtrormoro tho prcaocutdor. rjfers tc tho personal relations of the
lofondant Kali Brandt to the University of Strasbourg, whoro individual
ambers of the University allc edly have oonductod illogal cctparinonts.

It is jv:t nocossary to introduce ovid«ica a aiiot thoso relations, since
the prosocution has not submttod any facts which show such relationship.

Finally, the prosecution pointed out that tho defendant Karl Brandt
belonged to tho staff of Rtziler and .gave him nodical advido# ovidonco
a ‘ airst this will bo introduced by axardnation of i tho witnesses C.roth-
conn, Hiarlerts adjutant; the witness Zhlich, liodioal Office of tho SD»
and the cc-defendanta Rudolf Brandt, Oofchnrdt and Siovors; and finally
the defendant ilcsolf. - 2118 -


2 9 Jhn.JW?-2*^>-Earrow (IL)
Court 2to. 1


the special rospordMlity in the individual oxporinonts. The
aocuaatlon to the following five oxparlnenta: Count D of tho indiataont,
toatj Count E of the indiotcont, Sulfonaddo; Count F of the in&otnsnt
Transplantations and Rogenorationsj Count H of the indictnont, Jaun.ttco;
and Count J of the indiotnont, Typhus.

In roeard to Count D of the indie taont, Losti

First, tho dofonJant Karl Brandt is held responsible for the oxpo-
rlnonta which wero ollogodly carriod out in October 1939 in Sr.chaonhauoun
to tost tho drug F lCOl. In this oonnootion, a final report of 5 January
191*0 by Growls is roferrod to. In regard to this particular point, a
participation of tho defendant Karl Srondt is not to bo considered, as ho
did not yot hold any official position at tho tino and no foots have boon
produood by tho presooution which oould indloato participation.

In roeard to tho axporironto in Buchoranld whioh wero concluded
in I toy 19U3 and I rofor to tho affidavit of Dlotsch, Dcounont iKL311, no
faoto havo boon producod wither whioh incrirdnoto tho dofondant Karl Brandt.

Tho defondant Karl Brondt is hewovor hold rceponsibio, and tho

• • '

lot a i l s nro given, for tho ccporlnonts whioh as tho prosocution da Ira,
woro oarriod out by Profosscr Kirth in liatzwoilor sinco 6 Juno 192*2, and
which woro allegedly startod on order of tho vfohnaacht and <wntinuod on
order of Kirnlar.

In this oennoction tiw prosocution be a os its caso on tho following

pcint3j

a. on tho ofcenloal warfaro agonte docroo of 1 : larch 19ih f which
it Joes not kswwj

b. on the notations of 11 April 19U* in tho diary of tho oo-
defendant Giovors co no and. nr; siovars inforninr tho dofondant Karl Bran it
about tho oxporiconts of Profossor Kirth;

Further, on tho cl.air. that tho dofondant Karl Brondt had a oenfo-
ror.ee with Hirth about tho details cf those experiments in Katswsllor;

And finally, on tho visits of tho defendant Karl Brondt to


29 Jar>4WP4>4.-arro!r (IL)

Court ?fo. 1


fiictorloe producing ch»rd.cal warfare agents and their antidotes.


<.*••% Xf


29 Jm-!WP-Ji-5-«arrow (IL)
Court No. 1


Against that T shall introduco ovidenca to the' offact that the decroo
of 1 iSUrch 191*U contained only a ccrrdssion for production, but did not,
according to its proper rearing, contain any coords sic n for rjwoarch; I

shall do this by amnin ation or presentation of affidavits of the follow..

• •

lag witnesses; Spoor, Schiober, Xohrl, Quasobarth, and lUolonz, and
through the examination of tho defendant Mrs elf. Further through presen¬
tation of a letter of 11 October 19U; by Spoor to b'aitol concerning atti¬
tude toward proctwtion of gas,

I shall furthoiT»re introduco evidence that the defendant Karl Brandt,
o conclusion of tho expcri.iM.t3 of Profossor Hirth, roooivod


oport on irstruotlons for the troatreat of wounds inflicted by
wurf&ro agwiits which vas distribute to hir. without bain’ in¬
bout the rotted of tho uxporinonts in detail. I shall do so by
ion of tho oc-dofondont Glovers and tho acanination of tho defen¬
dant Brandt hinsolf.

Thereupon I shall introduco evidence that tho defendant Karl Brandt
did not gain any kncwlodgo about ill e ga l oxporironts during tho visit
with Profossor lilrth in Strasbourg. I shall do that by oxanlning tho
do fondant hinsolf. And, further, that ftrefossor Hirth oorylainod to
Cicnrors that tho Defendant Karl Brandt was not paying any rero attention
to hin. I shall do that by axaniring tho oo-iofondant Siovoro.

Finally, I sh^ll introduco ovidonco thit ovon after tho prorralfa-
tion of tho a herd cal warfhro agon to decroo of 1 "arch l?JJi Hirrior gavo
orders for tho execution of oxporinonts with 'J-gas, cr. his cwn, by exa¬
mination of tho oo-dofendant Profossor Ocbhardt and tho witnoss Gens.

Finally, I shall introduco uvluor.ee, by noons of an export, that
oxporinonts with Lost are, within certain limits, internationally oustc—
rary and regarded as porni3siblo by examination of tho ojq'art. I mention
Profossor Flury, but ho is voiy ill and I stell have to oall another
export.

Tto re* cone to Count E of the lndiotoant, Sulfbxxasida. Tho in-


- 2120


2 9 ObiWWrW^-Karrcir (IL)
Court So. 1


dietcant states that froa about July 19U2 to about Septa±or 191*3 oxporl-
aanta to investi^-ato the offootivorjws of sulfonardde were oonductod
illocally at the Ravensbruaok Concentration Canp for tho bonoflt of the
Qoroan ;.r=od Forces and that tho defendant Karl 3randt ics rosponsiblo
for that.


29 Jan U7-»W'Tu^-5^L-«upperstein (IL)

Court :fo. 1


Tho chargo ia baaed on the following, in detail*

1) On tha allegation that the Dofondant Earl Brandt participated
in the ajeting of the Jfllitary 'ledical Aoadocy in Berlin in May 19U3 and
that ho there gained knowledge through a lecture of tho illegal oxporl-
centa* Against to this I shall introduce evidence to the offoot a) that
fron tho report of tho Berlin seating it oanrot be seen that tho oxpori-
nor.ts rare illegal. I shall do that by oxardration of tho oo-defondant
Gobhardt. b) that tho Defendant Karl Brandt did not visit tho Ravons-
bruock Carp and did not participate in tho coeporisonts by oxanlmtion
of tho oo-dofondant Fischor and the dofondant hissolf, and finally, that
tho Dofondant Karl Eran.lt did not havo any oonforonoo in the sonso of
oxporiaanta on hunan belies with tho interested parties by examination
of tho oc-dofondants Profossor Rostock and Profossor Har.dlcscr,

I new cone to Co-ant F of tho Indietnont, Transplantntioio an 1 Ro-
Eonoratiors. Tho indietcont ohr.rces that fron about Suptonbor 19U2 to
about Doocnbor 1913 illegal cccparinonta on hunan baincs wore oonductod
at PAvonsbruock and that tho Dofondant Karl Brandt was responsible for
this.

Tho charpo is based on Ids prosonco at tha sooting of tho !'llitary
Ilodioal Aoa dtt^r in Borlin in ‘toy 19U3* whoro reports wero nado about tho
oxporinonts.

Against this, ovidonco will bo pres on ted that tho Dofondant Karl
Brandt was rot prooont during tho decisive lecture about tho transplanta¬
tions and ttd not gain an y krowlodgo about tho manor of their execution
b7 oxard nation of tho <x—!ofondants Profossor Rostock and Gobhardt and
by tho oxnaination of tho dofondant hireolf.

Ikw, Count H of tho Indictoont, Hepatitis. According to tho
Iniotsant froa Juno 19U3 to January 19hS oxporinonts with ’lopatitis woro
conducted on heson boirgs in tho Canpe Sacha cmhaus on and f&tawcdlor in
the interest of tho (fcram Aroed Forcas. To tha oxtont that tho oxpori-
cents in tho !toclnu roncod ration o asp fbrood tho substance of tho ovidonco


91 ?? -


Court Do. 1


presented by the prosecution, no position will bo takon in regard to
than, sinoo theoo oxporl=enta are not tho subject of tho indictnont.


2122 a -


29 JBr#4*7-^WKi—5-2-Kap?arstc!n (IL)

Court Vo, 1

TTvo Defendant Karl Brandt Is charged with having carried out tho
axporlnonta in Sachsentauaer. thrcu;;h tho physician Dr, Dohnen, when ho
ocoria sioned, and is charged with having krown about and prcooted sinilar
experiments in Hctsweilor in tho yoar 19Uh*

In answer to this, I shall intrcduco evidence to show tho following t
First, that the Defendant Karl Brandt novor engaged in or promoted
rosoaroh on Hepatitis and that Dr, Dobson novor worked on ordor of tho
Eh fondant Karl Brandt, I stall do so by oxardmtion or affidavit of
tho witness Profoesor Gutztdt, of tho cc—dofondant Professor Rostock
and tho dofondant hiroolf.

•

Further, tbit the Dofoncbnt Karl Brarxlt was in no way connoctod v/ith
tlio expo riser, ts vlth Hepatitis which woro planned in Katsweilor and that
thoso wevo not undertaken, by exasinatisn of tho Dofondant hiroolf.

2 t 'i-.nt tho Dofondant Karl Brandt was in to way connoctod with
tho flvi-v f ‘w orJ.T for cr tho diroctlon of tho Hepatitis oxpori-
nonta and thi h, .uathor spoke to nor oorroflpondod with tho business
mnagor of t’.w Reich Rocoarch Council about this quostion* by oxaninS-
tion of the Visions ’ler.Uol, business nanagor of tho Roioh Research
Council and thj dofondant Oiovors.

lu That tho dofondnnt Karl Brandt, with tho oxc^tion of tho
Docunont NO-OlO, that id, ljttor fron Ora vita to Hirnlor, was novor
nontionod in connoctlon with Hepatitis research.

Finally, that tho opinion of tho co-iofor.dant Rudolf Brandt about
tho knowledge of tho Dofondant Karl Brandt of those oxporinents is not
based on actual facts, by oxarri. ration of tho co-lofondant Rudolf Brandt,
v/hc at that tir» mdo this assertion.

I shall further produco an export opinion to the effect that
Hepatitis is not a fatal or painful illness and that experiments cannot
have a fatal effect, by written expert opinion (possible wardmtion) of
the expert Professor "oythaler. I nontion hero that ho is sick in bod.
Under the droumtances I stall have to call another export.


2123 -


29 An UT^’^V-S-O-^upporsteln W

Court Ifo. 1

I new corw tc Count J of the Indetncnt, 35piws. Accordinc to the
Indctaent, the experiments fron about Eec®bar 191* to February 1915
in 3u=hennald and Nataweiler were carried out for tho benefit of the Gor¬
man ;-med Forces.

1. Tho chars® tpixtat Karl Drandt regarding Buotoraald is baaed on
the contention that ho found out about tho experiments, which had already
boon concluded in Petavary 19U2, afterwards, at a =»otin 3 of tho !Ui«aiy
Nodical .'.oadony In Hohonlychon in 19UU through a lecture by Dr.Dinc and
tho airailtanooua protost of Profosscr Rose.

In answer to this, ovidonoa tdll "« Introduced to tho effect that
tho Defendant tori Brondt •=. net present durlne tho previously mentioned
lecture of tho HytfUM Uviolon and tint he «a. not infomed about the
happening 'ey WittUOB of the cc-defondant Dos. and tho defendant

himself.

2. Tho On.”* rgninst Karl Brandt roffirdinc tho experiments in
tintswoilor 4«i based on the fact that a ca r bon copy of the roooarch
asai taunt f.-on tho office of tho oo-iof«knt Professor Gchroodor >ms
sent to the Office for nodical 5donee and Research of tho Defendant

Brandt.

In ansuor to this I shall introduce ovidonco to Ue offoot thnt
fron tho wr itter. research assimnor.t one oould not dotorrdno whore and
undor what kind of condition, tho exporinonta were to bo carried out,
by «ardmtdon of tho oc-dofenbvnts Professor Schroodor, Professor
Rostock, Profosscr Rosa and by the exaction of tho defendant hlrsolf.

v; 0 are km loft with the Experiment® with P6&&1, PW-enaono
experiments, experiments for the preparations of biological mrftiro,
experiments with !J-v,as.

The pros ecutlon touched upon those experinents itflnc its pre¬
sentation, they are, .merer, not contained in the indletnont, therefore
ro position tas to bo taken tdth reference to thon, since they nre net a
subject of the Indictment.


- 2 12 h -


29 Jan (IL)

Court Ho. 1


It the Tribunal should adntt the addition of now chargee, I apply
to reserve rieht to suheit application. for evidence in regard to these
counts.

I new ccco to Count 9 of the Mctnent, to the question of Eutha¬
nasia.


- 212li a -


2? Jan hi-- - ^.-5-l>-Ku;..>crstcin
Court 1


to tor^o or the rroseeutien 1, to the .ITtct that U> W— “ r

» to ..,rU 191.5, 1» tho course cT A 3«=llcl - *«-■ "

t Wx< or hton bdn£S, tototac «»«««' w *° mta ^ "
to connection site t«U •#»* .
to. .«* t. the ustentotien cc. s in , ^

orlcr to au‘: .-rt the iass act.ndnnti n of J-w» t^c.

The c^co in JeteU undor *> *" ^

to. follocln, u=~ billed. °) —* «. «* “ " lL “*

•'cfcrtici'. children; then cencntraticn con Me -
r Utica on, r=l-l reasons. to then for inability to «Mu

a. c,,;e wta» «* a-* » -« <»• *— ai " e

Decree cr 1 So.-tcri.cr 1539; MM •«““ in to °*tlcn lor
the fijcacuti'.n of ttu. ■outhanaaia

;^tot to authorisation to outonedn, cvl -cnee te be .resented to

to (1) tot to Mtoto Karl *tot - -* ««W *

to—t nc, Uhl* stretched ever jeers, Vetoes KUto to ee.nni.totivc
credos .. ncomiix: to Introduces * to cuton-du lev, by -etotlcn er

cma ,i . r to dtos. tetoB., ct to c.-.'or.dents Si-., =«•» «i a
the .tofondnnt htaclfj fttrthor, that tho uth-riaati. n, in a. iu. -- «'<• -' tcrcc -
swerved, « ccnslr'crc.'. by OX state «o cic. concerned tc be e le;elly
btoinylto by or..:.. - r cm tot. r to -ito» Dr. Wre, Dreeb,

Schears, S= site, enrol «rt by to oatooetto or to dotodact htocU,

(3) tot the c nt-.nto or to to rc.'cr.to only tc Ooton dtisons tote life,
erur = critical oxsntantl « of to state I tolth IV a to .-lies! end the
Hto» reint cr vies, to ■* t- - nothin.-, but pels, by oration or tho
feud# htodr an- or to c*«tatot Me Wb tot *» —-
those inlur.I at wort, shoot i*wr «• to cause * their ill health,

-.ere * be eliminate:! ton cenddorntAen for cotonasia, 1 orednaUen or

:- t. C dtacoso. Schoub, 3*ol, ot the eo-dorondant Sreek ml er tho
•0 toast hinseir. tot to M*-» Ksrl Wdt re rcsente, caolusiv.ly
these .ante ct vies, by ac-ninntion tf the dtosses Ocynhnuscr er iohln-.nn

. Schuerir.4Vosi.Db to by stoeissto f an nmdnvit oT dccraann (he is tao

212 ?


29 Jan li7-« -L-.•-5-5-iu.; 4 arstcin

C. irt :* . 1


resent loci lor I the I-cntol Xnstxtatlw-n at rv.thol), ar._ an af. idavit ly Schaur.d
6. That coses of cttthanas> r.p jsed in tlw fell of 19.^1 .n the basts

l' .vile ally establishease ' ist 47 and under the Euthanasia L'ccr>,c

•X!tc forbidden bj direct order cf hitler, Vy oxaninatica of t:ic -.fitnesses
h;ido, Uhlich, -n :ol and th_ cc-dcfo. ‘ant " reel and the defendant hixiaclf;
finr.il., that the Defendant darl Crcr. it, w cn, after the prohibition cf
uuthmkxsia, he hoard that it cos elloco.ll: .-orferaed in 191' t 1016 in
institutions in Saxeny and in .'enormia, reported this fr.ct ias-odintely to
ulil<-r, litlcr a: - . . tin Boirann in ordor - '. I shall

shew that by ex .. witnesses ..i. fa Schaul •

T su; -rt the char.;e of oin .vilty :f euthanasia by virtue of par-
tie! ati .1 in ornnicati n, tho »Y socuta n hxa subnitted an affidavit cf
the co-defendant Brook, which is tlv. D eta . nt NO h 26 . rroof of the incerroct-
i.cos 01 this affidavit, which w;3 nt suhjoot U crcss-cxc. ilnr.ti n will be
ivon by cxr. inati.n I the dc—dofon' t brae': hL-sclf; further by a presen¬
tation f the now charts c nee mod in th. iccocutden of tiw euthanasia pr :ran,

I obeli shew that by the cxa.iinr.ti r. • . cs-dcfondant me , an.', the vit-

masos, or the oubuisnicn of affidavits of these witnesses. «,* -..-ill
further bo iven that the Defendant Karl Brandt had no r .auizatiavol part
at any till*, in the executi n f euthanasia, by exaninati-.n f ti.o cc-defendant
rach an*' the witnass-s h r *an, Erlich, Sclrx. rs; and, furth r, that the
Oofondar.t Karl Brandt had :ie art La ti.. ,r ce hir; of havi;. sick arsons juJ^oc
'■y ix.'crto, by exanination :f the tritnoss l»oi c f tho oo-dofondant Drack.

I shall brin. ;r f that th. cti;-: as ith «r: fess r Ii: 3 c c neern-

iRC transfer f a cental instit iti * . . 1 ' n cincocti si with the cxocutior

f .uf.anaaia; by exaninati.a i idi c -defendant itese and / the defendant
•~s-iy. Finally, I shall brin. r Use Defendant t rl mndt di<l

v have t. assure the cx-cuticn or sc ervisim cf euthanasia in his fficial
c- ocxty as Hitler'r <.sc-rt physician V examination cr affidavits tlsc
it.'.eases Schr.uh, inpcl.

ill. ~ ainst the charge of axt.rirv.di_n under the puis- • ~ cut..anasLa,

-vi donee will to presented (1) that this ooasuro t: k place nly after cut I wans s'

2126


25 1.7-1 -i-_ -5-o-Ku- j<;r5tcin

C urt 1-. 1

-3 - r'.-iVcn in the fill of 19ui, without t3>c participation or tactic-' c
r the Defendant tori lirandt, by mcniilnatA.n cf the Defendant K:rl Brandt
lvhMoir.

I shall brin. -re f that tbs outhanasia nerferuod in the concentration
cops under tho cede ruse of l!i F 13 indicates* a ocaauro uniortekon by the
^c;r.r:dc and. .-dcini3*r'tivo lfcin Of.'ico (JV1L.), and that the oado nanc Hi F 13
is a oica of the filing ays te r: of that Ificc. I shall ahow that by exonin-
r.ticn and affidavit f the vitnoas ■ - rjon, (2) that the :.c mros of tlio Labor
Cfficos, crdcrino c transfer of invalid uoricers to ncntal Institutions, had
oenMetion with the - .c-xy f the Defendant Carl fran't, ’ oaudxwtl n of
tie sritncaa Scldtc and -f the dofWvlcnt hiusolf. I shall further brim: ,>roof
(3) tint "«cti n Draft'dV, oonti tu in tho affidavit of tbo tdtnosa Scheldt,
..Thich vrj n.t sub-.dttcd, io a class-ficati. n which rtpr. sente.' a certain prior¬
ity a) in 1 1 ~ cc.n cic ..roduetirn of ue.’ical cu. plica b) in the repair anil
construe*- t r l r r odloal bvildi.vs. (This included ala the special
a. ltd installations of t?v- "..cU.n Brandt*, which wore built by »arl Tronclt
fr .. 1511 :n in tn-. districts under special danger -f air raids.) I shall

that ,/r f by raaiiination of tio witnesses Schicber, Uoorloin, Itootock,
dsn'loser, Ora*. ., Schrvc 'cr; inf r.aticn iven by thu liroctora -f the henpitoJ
and special installations will bo .Tosenfc 1 shall fUrtl ria .r -f that
thu Defendant Karl Crondt hi * c .vxet . n with in r.’.cr t starve the rick
persona in the ocntul instituti nn i never 'axuCci that t!»c rations for
t^osc.institutions oheuld be rcduc , r f; oxaataatisn tnosi* Daoko.

f-r is tie ahmve is baaed n the affidavit f the witness S. raucr,

.10 01C, the defense objects to the us. ; t.is affidavit until it is ; ossiblo
to cross cxauinc; I reserve the ri t t xkc later vplications in this con¬
nection.

Uvidonco will '■< . resented n the . -dpinp f tho illness.* (an. dofomiti
ri r.ell cs thoir course end life expectancy - as far as they uuro affected by
the -uttanosia Authorisation cf 1 September 1739, by tho cxaidneld n cf tho
expert Irofcsarr Qcuhlc. irofosscr Sieprund rill probably notbo able to

I shoal', her. t confine ysclf to .rofesarr Gcuiac.


a.. c--r before Larch, so


25 J3a - —-5-7-Su..‘.''-rstcir.
rtcurt l'o. 1

a written op inion n euthanasia will to .resents- frea th- ?clnt of
of yJcal history by ^r:fc33cr Dio.-hcpj ITcn thc.-.int of -/Lew cf
forcrsic aorticinc by irafossar . -ullcr-Hc3c-i

Cc nee mine lcjsl, arral and medical ccncc.-.tlcns of the ;.=r. iesibility
of euthanasia I shall subnit a raster cf cxccr.ts f ? r. internal? nal literature,
;rith cois.scr.ts cf doctors, thcalc.ists, end jurists.

T?io question of the rtis.atcaiu: f , .cctcrs f r ..artici.iati n in the ex-
teminat* a -f Jews In the canyc in the -.at has been discuaaod under Coint I,
sterilisation.

I new cecr. v tlio last Count of tho Ir-iicttxnt, licabcrshiy in the Or.-ani-
xrtion of the SS. dvlionco trill bo . resented, cn this oount, that (1) the
Defendant Karl Sran-It was only a .to ferae ac: t'cr f the SS. 3 shall sh-w
that by exai inati n ir affidavit of the cc-^lofo.«dant Diene, and further,
that the Defe sdant Karl frondt exercised ac activity in the Oenoral SS or
till) Yfcffon SS, by exa inatl :n cr offi lav.t cf the vritn. sacs Hcryor, B.?onau,
and 'f »hc co-dofendant Gcnzkcn.

1 aliall brine . re T that the Dofcix’-ant Krrl brandt was net llijilor's
nodical advisor, and that the S3 was forbidden t. c.ntnct hia in ncdloal
ra, by oxaaimtJ k Sant Oobhordt and Oonslflon.

I shall further fcriir r. f tiict the Defendant Karl Drandt was
shuruvd by tho extremists in the -art an' that he vaa opycaod by Hiixdcr,
OoeVbclo, airv’ D^rjann, an'. vi\ icb 'siti n finally resulted in his ' cin,t

c ndanod tc loath, by cx-wlnati r. cr Ii avit f tho wit:.car. S>.r and
tho o:c. .inati.n of tho ’efondant hi: self, further, I shrJ riu;; ;>rccf that
tho Doroix.cnt Karl Drandt war asked far rsristancc by inaorfuit victina of
litical ersecuti n, c ncidcr< *. hin a Utically objoctivo and criti¬
cal nan, and that he .'reacted their interests, by suasion f affidavits of
Cerstcr.xior, — y<.r-T cckhoff, Duerjer-.riia, Schacht, ct cl. I shall finally
rln . r. f that the Dcfcrrlcnt Karl -mr in his external c nduct, tns not
an ex-resist, by suhaissicn cf statements and persons removed frm datlcnal


2123


Sccilion.


29 Jan L7-1 -..-.-5-3-»2j.*cwt«iin
Ccurt 3-ju 1


Aa this is tho and < f =y statcacnt.

TIB »jiESIL^HT. The Tribunal will now recess.

(«. rocuss t/aa taken)


2129


29 Jasuary-4M}JG-7-l-Lesser

Court :?o. 1


THE XJiSHALi The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PfcSSIBEJ.ni For the purpose cf the Hcccrd, the Secretary General
will flit certificate from the physician of Defendant Oberhouser, showing
her absence free the court teday cn acocur.t of sickness.

Counsel say proceed.

DR. HZLTE for the Defendant Handloscr): Mr. President, Your

Honors, the Qjfendsnt H-ndlcser stands buforu you as the lest hi ghost-ranking
medical officer of the Goman Wehmacht.

Tho problem of this case is that he, whe has net fccamitted any individ-
u«l ;ffonsc of these which arc tho subject of the indictment, who has net
jsauou any general decree or any specific order pertaining to tho experiments
u:»dor indictment hore, is considered guilty by the Prcsocution because office;
which wore subordinate tc bia in organizational or military respect, cr
medical officers who were cumbers of such subordinate offices, wore allegodly
In some sert of connection with inn±air_iblu experiments.

Tho fact th( t tho Prcsocuticn has not submitted a single dccumont bear¬
ing tho signature cf Handlosor, neither an order, nor a decree, nor a lottor
which was writton by him or addressed to him, should, in view of the exten¬
sive field cf dutios of this defendant, suggest tho supposition that there
is no pcrcoivably incriminating material against hia.

The defendant will not try to niniso tho importance cf his high and
responsible position; but tho indictment obliges us to explain tho framework
of his position in such detail that the Tribunal can detominu whether tho
crimes which were c*.aaittod are in the field cf that resj. risibility for which
the Defendant Handloser has to answer according to law and Justico.

THE r^£SIDE;.T: Pardon mo a minute. Counsel, wo are short one English
translation. Excuse me. Doctor, you s-.y go ahead.

Responsibility ccrrespcnds tc the field cf duties. Therefore, it i3
first cf all necessary to clear up this field of duties, thot is, the compet¬
ence, the functions, and the duties cf the defendant in his official positions
It oust be examined whether the sphere in which the crimes alleged by tho
Prcsocuticn wore cccrdtted belonged tc th6 field of dutios of the defendant,

2130


29 Jr nur. ry-M-D JG-7-2-L cs 3 cr
Ccurt He. 1

whether he had the right tc give orders cr jurisdiction ever the persons or
offices primarily accused, end finally, whether in fact there was the possi¬
bility cf preventing these crimes by virtue of knowledge cf then.

Only if this can be answered in the affirmative dees responsibility
exist. This responsibility exists primarily tewaro the superior office, tho
is, that office free which the responsibility is derived. Moreover, a re¬
sponsibility exists toward the law, the written law as well as the unwritten
law cf humanity.

The tern responsibility, consequently has a dual harecter: 1), poli¬
tical or ailit: ry responsibility; and 2), legal responsibility. Pclitical
and military responsibility need not be discussod before this Tribunal.

Legal responsibility presumes guilt. Therofcre we must examine wheth.
the facts forming the basis cf tho indictment actually took placo becauso
the Defendant Handlcsor wus guilty cf not having performed the duties incum¬
bent upon him by virtue of his functions.

Tho Prosecution charges tho Defendant Hor.dlcscr first, with having
planned wilfully and knowingly, together with tho other defendants, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, (fact of conspiracy); then it accuses
him cf having carmittod individual war crimes based cn his special respon¬
sibility.

B) Ccunt I): CONSPIRACY

The Prcsccuticn has stated that the case here cr. trial is cr.o cf the
simplest and clearest cases fer th, f cte cf "conspiracy’'. I btlievo that
tho case cf tho Prosecution did not prove a "ccnspirac. \ that is, a wilful
and knowing planning and collaboration cf the persons sitting here in the
dock as well as cf tho offices represented by these persons.

The Prosecution has submitted to the Tribunal a chut showing all

offices which dedt with modi cal matters in Germany. Then it has alleged

connections between these agencies, » dch doubtlessly did exist; but, from

the fact that these connections were of a general and organisational nature

as oust be thu case in every cthe-r country between similar agencies under

the jurisdiction cf one central authority, it has drawn the conclusion that

these connections must also, have existed in those fields which form the sub

2131


29 Januery-tf-DJG-7-3-Les s cr

Court So. 1


jtct cf the indictment. To me it seems to be essential to realize that the
sphere of medical matters includes numerous fields which have not been men¬
tioned et nil by the Prcsecuticn and whose field cf activity has net been
objected tc by a single werd. Therefore, the conclusion must be drawn for -
the present trial, that the activities cf the Genian physicians and of the
competent offices in these fields corresponded with the acknowledged rules
of nodical science.

Indie taent and evidence have made ‘quite particular facts the subject
of a charge, namely: 1), Euthanasia and sterilization, with participation
in which professor Handlos^r was net charged, and 2), Experiments and in¬
vestigations in verious fields of reserrch mainly on human beings in con¬
centration camps. The relations between tho defendants cr the offices re¬
presented by that in fields which have nothing to do with tho incriminating
facts, cennct bo considered as proof of conspiracy in thoso fields which arc
the subject cf tho indictment.

On tho ether hand, the indictment can bo considered to bo well founded
in respect to this point with reference to the legal concept of complicity,
only if - a) it is established that cne or several defendants aro connected
causally and guiltily with the proved particular facts of war crimoo and
crimes against humanity, and b), if this proved committing of brines can bo

derived freo a wilful »nd knowing plan.

In regard to the question of conspiracy, *hich the Prosecution has
dealt with as w independent count of the.indictment, 1 rofer in the legal
respect tc the statements of my colleague, Dr. Serv-.tius, end tc the Judgn*n
cf tho International Uilitary Tribunal, (transcript pages: 1646/6, 16499,
16501, 16502/3, 16533, 16534/5), a copy cf which I submit as Exhibit Ha 1).
In respect to the Tacts, the Chief Prosecutor (p-gc 115 of the record) and
later on, during the session of 2 January 1947, Ur. LicHanoy, (page 989 cf
the reccra) called the meetings of the "Consulting Specialists" a "typical
conference of ccnspiratcrs." In order to prove to tho Tribunal the error
cf this assumption, I have filed an application for evidence: to produce
the printed reports cn the meetings c- the "Consulting Specialists" in the
period between 1940 and 1944.


29 Janutry-tt-DJ:>?-4-Lesser
Court Xo. 1


On the basis of yesterday's decision of the Tribunal, I shall, in ordc:
tc supplement, the excerpts fren the printed reports of the nectings ahich
hr.vo been submitted by the Prosecution, also suteiit extracts. It is of de¬
cisive importance for this count cf the indictment, that the Tribunal know
the purpose, the significance, and the contents cf these codings as thorougJ
ly as possible. For this purpose I submit as basic Exhibit Ha- 2 on affidavit
cf the Defendant Handlcser concerning: "Necessity and purpose of the nodin*
of the 'Consulting Specialists'I have also, meanwhile, named as witnesso
for the legal character of these mootings: a), Professor Dr. Wirth, and b),
Professor Dr. Killian.

C. The Official Position of the Defendant Handlcser.

In order tc explain the competencies, functions, and duties of the De¬
fendant Hondloser, the following evidence is efforod:

1 ) Extract from Array Regulation 21, Number 17-«rmy Physician
(Exhibit HA-28).

2) Extract from ,-nay Regulation, 21, Number ^11-Modical Inspector
of the Aray. (Exhibit Sb.-28o).

which shew the duties of the dofondent as ar*y physician and as *noy medical
Inspector.

3 ) urids.lt ct tho Dependent Handler concerning. "Sphoro or bork
end Uothcd or ;.crk ot the ..dninlstr-.tlcn or th. Nodical Services
ot the ,.rny end the !.«hrsscht” (exhibit K»-29)

In order tc shorten th. cxssiantlon or th. dUondsnl on the .ltn.ss
stand, end, on th. other hsnd, to orient the Tribunal thoroughly on tho spin
or activities or tho PaTundent. It seoae uXj*di<mt to eetolt e detailed atsi
nont or his runctions. I shall road th. arride.lt only in pert, in "grease
with tho Prosecution, end shell suboit the eTHdevit crrieiolly lor tho not:
or th. Iribunel. In this ,lase ot isy case I shell elso rU.r tc the dccusn
sutedttoi by th. Prosecution, doling uith the Fuehrer Decrees of 28 July 1
(Dccuxent iiO-CaO), 5 September 1903 (Jo=u«r.t «Wai), end 7 August 19U.
(Doaustent NC-227), as .ell as to th. aMidel instructions ter th. Chid ct
the »ehr=acht HMical Service.

2133


29 J anna r y-M-DJ 3-7 - 5-Lcs s er
Ccurt Nc. 1

Ty.« following witnesses are to testify to the functions of the Dofendar
Handleser os w«ll as to the offici 1 relations of Hcndloser's offices to the
Helical Services of tho ’..ehrnacht Branches and to the waffcr.-SS:


2131*


Court So. 1

29 Jen 47-*-6-l-EEK-i.aloy


A) the forcer chief of staff of Any Medical Inspcc rate, Goaonlerrt

scHiios-saxocoa,

B) the forcer chief of staff of the Chief of the Vehroacht Medical
Inspector*to, Goner/lerzt V. ¥ U>JIFIJ - B ,

C) the fortser Osneralarzt ia the Any l.edicnl Inspectorate KAHTLEBEN.

In this connection I shall fclst. suhiit affidavits of the co-defendants
GBSZijJ. md iaUOCWSJCY is Exhibits So. ii and 17, for tho connections butwocn
the defendant and the Vaffen SS.


Tho follow* eg docu-isnts are presented and vitness nnned regarding the
official position and the lcportc-nce of tho "Consulting rhyslclnns" within
the hodlct-1 Services:

1 . The basis for the oresontation of evidoncc will be the affidavit of
the defend/nt Etndloser.

"Iho Institution of tho 'Consulting Ehysicicns', which I offer no
Exhibit HA 16.

2 . Tho copies of the Kos. 222. 236 to 23d of the Instructions for Vcr
Medicine, offered as Exhibit KA-19, contain the instructions relating to tjio
group of 'Consulting rhysicions".

3 . The aforccentl nod Dr. Sch-iidt-3ruocJcon, Dr. Vuorflor, and Dr.

Hi rtleber will testify os witnesses wi h regard to tho actual functions of
the "Consulting Ehyslcims".

4 . Tho forcer Genornlarzt and C-r.sulting Internist of tho Any i'.odlcnl
Inspectorate. Gon«r*l<r,t rrof Dr. GUIZi.IT. will also testify as witness on
this subject.

6 . Finally, I shall refer to the nffidrvit. Exhibit 6, not 20. of tho
forcer Gcneralrrzt Dr. rEN.iR.

rv, .., .v Ia.PQctc t- .to Chief of the '..hrn. cht Kcdlcn U°rvl£e

defoodont ho. omt-..roted ia Doc«.--«t HA-29 tho l».tltuU. .uh^rii-
nrt.4 to hU, in hi. epocity o. Arry N.dlo.1 In.po=tor. Ih. promotion h,r
r .ot .uhclttcd th.t vithio oay op. of th..o in.tltuto. to.t. ond .yo.rlnoot.


Court Sc. 1

29 Jen 47-K-6-2-i£fi-M£lcy

vcrc conducted such as are the subject of the indictment. It hrs merely
been asserted that eedlcal officers vho served in or directed these insti¬
tutes were .allegedly in contact VI th offices vhich conducted such cvDorlnente

ivldenco is offered that this assumption of the prosecution is breed on
cn error and also that the defendant Hsneloscr in any case hod no knowledge
of nny connections which these medical officers hid with porsons or insti¬
tutions concerned with such experiments.

Documents of the prosecution regarding reoorts or i nowledge thereof
have not beer, presented.

The following i re named as witnesses for the correctness of the claim
of the defendant Handloser:

a) the former Oberstebsarrt nnd cotriandlng officer of the Army Mountain
Medical School St. Johann, Dr. SCHaEJ? .

b) the former Cbcrstabearst and bond of the research group in tho
..cuntrln J-hynlologicnl Institute of the Army Mountain Hodierl School St.
Johann, Dr. Cr&iiK.

c) the former Oberstabsurt and herd of the Institute for Typhus and
Virus Rosecrch of tho OKH in Crncov, irof. Dr. EK8.

d) the former Oborstr.bsarxt a r ofessor Dr. LaJW, in the Militiry Modical
acadory, Berlin.

c) Dr. Bernhard SCHMITT, former hygienist in the Army Medical Inspcc-
torpte.

also the above-mentioned witnesses Schaidt-Bruoclcon, Uucrflcr, and
Hnrtlobcn.

It is evident from the inhibits Ka- 16 end HA-17 that tho defondant
Hrndloter had nothing to do with the research carried on by tho Vaffen SS.

Tho prosecutor, in readier Document So. 227 (page 152 of the record),
overlooked the official note to I 2a nnd II. 2 contained in Document Book 1.
page 19, which reads:

•The behrcacht in this sense includes the Ar.y, Kavy, and Luft-

veffe, the units of the Vaffen SS attached to the Vehrareht, and the

organisations and groups employed within tho framework of the Vchrna.cht
. 2136


Court Sc. 1

29 Jnn 47-K-6-3-I3Mu:loy

A relation to the Institute for •Military Scientific Heserrch" of the
h'cffcn SS in the "Ahnencrbe" did not exist. ••

In this connection I offer cn effidrvit ty the co-^ fondant SIEVERS
ns Exhibit 15, not 21. Hnndlocsr was neither ft ^e::h«r of, nor in «ny other
function connected vitb the "Ahnencrbe" fad its orgrnizntions. The prose¬
cution his not sufcsltted evldcnco of this cr of my offlcifl connection.

Neither w«re there personal or officii 1 rcliti.nc between the defondrnt
Knndlcser end the "Roich Resetrch Council" or the Inter "Militnry Roaenrch
Association" (Uehrforech\in^t€c::cinsch. ft).

Tho list of the r-e.-ibers of tho board rr.d herds of special branches,
submitted by the prosecution reveals that Kandloser was not represented
In these or^rnitotiens. Clrculi r Letter So. f of the plnnnin* borrd of the
Reich Research Council, dated 7 September 1944, rc^ardln^ the rertion of a
"M ilitf ry Eooecrch association" shows - oce distribution list - that the
Chief of tho behrnfcht Medlcnl Service wna not even notified.

It is ovident fruj *h« affldivit of tho defendant SCHRCE3ER, offered
nc Exhibit EA-22, ns well ns froc tho rffidsvit of the dofondrnt BECKER-
FREYSUSG (Exhibit H-23) that the defendrnt Krndlcsor . Chief >f the .
Vchruecht Kodicrl Service hrd no coupetenco whatsoever no regardo the
rtoenrch of tho "»viitiwn Kedicino Rosenrch Institute", ond the


X


2137


29 Jan. 47 ->:-8-lA-?KP- Kalcy

C-<urt lio. 1


research assignments issued by the Chief of tho Medical
Service -f the Luftwaffe.

IV. Thu ao-ccllti Typhus Conference (Ding Diary

Document .'.’0.-265.

In the extensive cas^ of the Pros-cuti-r* there is only or.o sir-flo
assertion which affocta the Deicndont Hmiloser directly personally end : i
brings hit. into ration with the ur. .xperinents of tMMBa boings.

This is the alleged conference on 29 December 1941, which, to is atr-tod
by the Chief Prosecutor, allegedly laid the basis lor the erininil typhus
experiments :.us:n beings in the concentration casp Buchcnwi.ld. It is
the first entry in the so-called Ding Di'ry (Document 265).

It re--da:

"Conference between «rsy Medical Inspector Generaloberstabt,
Pr.fecaor Dr. Han’losor, Reich Health Leodor, State Secretary,
i^-Crur-nTiehrer Dr. Conti, President Professor Reiter of tho
Health Office, Pr-jsi lent ?r feasor Gildeoeister of tho
Robert Koch institute (Reich Institute for the Combatting
of infectious Disuses), end SS-Stanccrtenfuehror, Ucturor
Dr. Mrugowsky of the Hygiono Institute of the haffen-SS, Beilin,
"It is determined thit it is necessary to examine the
toler nc- in’ .ff-ctiv-ness cf typhus v ccin-a from chicken
vitelline sea. Since aninr.l experiments do not '.Uow for
sufficient -v'lu'tirn, experiments will h-’Vu to bo conducted

on huocn balnea.*

The Defendant Htndleier usph: tically -ordca ving t ken part
in auch n conference. He asks a* t- eaphariiaa that at the end f
L 941 , there wore several conferences recording the typhus epidemic in
the East n the consequent throat to Germany.

lie will testify on this subject personally under oath when called
t^the witness stand. H« denies, hcawvcr, that at that tin* at o
conference in which he took part, n decision was reached, to conduct
typhus experiments on hu-on beings, and also th~-t such a conference

2138


29 Jan. Ll -l£-?—2A-?K?- l^loy
Court Jo. I


r.veals a ri tion tc research experiments of the SS in this fioL

Th- Defendant Ifrugowsky. certifies I•*. an affidavit (Exhibit HA-24)

Ih-t the or.tr3- in the Ding-Di.ry of'29 Do cacher 1941 wa*,forge<! or base ’
or. ar. error.

Further-acre, it is prove-' y on '.ffi r.vit if ?r-f. Dr. Reiter
(-xhitit H..-25) who i4 said to h v- token part in t:ds conference, that
tho entry -f Dr. Ding ia not correct. The witness Dr. Kogan was not
questioned oy the Frosocutien on trvi all-.'cd conference- t-.nl tho entry ..
to th^t effect by Dr. Ding.

The Pros-cution, thcreforo, in this point of decisive importance
for the Defendant H- nllcs-r, relies upon the entry in tho :iary of a
decease-. 1 person wi.: i : net t-.ke part personally in this allscet conference.

Iho .'rosecutler, 3utscq-.ur.tly, sutadttce, it is true, the Dlotzsch nlfidovit
Document No. 1314. This affidavit states:

-r th conclusion of th. expcrlc-nto. Dr. Dinr drew up a rocord
in Jay 1942, in which he put down in writing the results of the experiment
1 re'd th-s* entries at about the :• oc time end found rjson.: tho filus


\a Sheot i. >. 1, -ntrios on a conference of physici'-ns which vs hold

,*vBerlin ....

\ \ ..

y'tX the meeting In Xovc«tbor 1941, in which Professors Ha nil 0 so r,

Schrolb-r, Gil -lot-r, Uru, owsky, R;s , and Dr. Ding took part,
it w-.s resolve to e n'oet vaccine ejqxiriaonts jd hir ’ n beings,
after experice.v» with inLa'.ls ho.: faile te yield clear results."
Cap., Dietcsch Krown tj th- Trixuvil fr-m the presentation of tho
Prosecution "n fr-o .epositi ns a*dc by witnesses, testifi-js on tho .
allefu-’ conference not lroa his ,wn knxlvuiru; for r th t tiao - 29
December L941 - he was not y-t in the section of Dr. Din,, ns ho
testifies hints-if. He n-lies, on th c r.trory, on tho entry in the Ding
diary. If, therefore, this testimony does not h: vc an additional
or ibative pow-r, in cccptrisen with the Ding entry, for the
?roa-cuti,n o 30 , it has considerable probative pc*ier in the
defense of the ItafendonL itnlloser, bocouse it destroys completely
the probative v .luc of the first pfcgo of the Ding diary which has boon

2139


29 Jan. 1? -H-S-3A-PKP- a=loy
Court to. 1


subedited.

Ifcw h.ioneo counsel of the c^fondan*. ilrugwsky, ay c llcai-uc Dr.
rlo. -in •, challcnfiod the adalssibility of tha Dine diary as r.n exhibit.
Althou:;h t!« Tribunal -lid not consider tbs objection Justified concerning
the entire dccuavr.t, nev-rtholoss on basis of tho testia y of Dr. Ko/ on
;n' of the Diotzsch nffi ovit it cust be considered as prove-: thrt tho first
pape of the Ding ui’ry, which is the iiiportnnt point in the Handloscr case
cannot be recornised -s an exhibit.

1. Dr. Ke.on testified that Dr. Dinj dictate the untrioa in tho diary

for tho first naif of the year >f 1912 ell at one tiiw. Diotzech

cor/iras this tostia ny and declares th t this, diet tion to^k

*

pk-cu cb-ut in i!-y 19A2.

2. t .hen it was poir.tod o t in crors-oxaninrtion th'.t the title of tho
diary, "Dop- rtaent for Typhus nd Virus pestarch" which bocaao

p oilK only -t the er.: of J:nu ry 1913, cannot be oxplainod,

Lr- iCo(.on Bd^oiUC the xpiaaMion th t Dr. Dins h^.d tho firot
p-v o of tho ^i-ry re-written L’tor on.


2U0


29 J(o-h-32V9-l-Coak
Court Jo. 1.


Dr. Kogan moor.t tlu.t Dr. Ding ltd only the "hording" of tho diary rc-

%

• rittu:..

Iw Diutsscn affidavit a ..awn th t not only tho "hcadir-t" but tho entire
firs: page wr.s canned In Its contents: for tho d-oto of tho conference In the
submitted text of tho so-c-aied Dia; Diary Is 29 Docc .bur 19 hl. vhoroae
Dlotrscn speeds of n conforcnco In bur 19U1. Furthermore, tho partici¬
pants in tnis conforoa co are listod difforontly. Dietssch auctions Schroibor
Hoso cad Ding as ;articijants, *r.o are not listod ns .-.rticlpAnts in the sub¬
mitted Dins diary.

ror th. ^irposo of rufutn*.l>n of t..u stolen .nts undo in tho Bnlachowoky
affidavit, I quote; (!>ocuxxnt Bo. 484. In. 4):

■la t..c Central COi'.ittoo of this Depnrtuunt wo sou tno following
pursosailtiest

Dr. L idlosor, Jnrpoctor Oonoral of tno liodlcnl Sorvlco of tho
Vent ja-Jk ,

It. C-r.t. •jJ-.?j«r'uppcnfu-hror
Dr. poup.jr.dlck. SS-Cruppuafucnrcr.

Dr. Ctttcfcon, SS-Grutpcnfuuhror,

I shall rub .«t the affidavits of
finigovoky i&uiibU S-r2h)

Conithon (Sxhltit IU 26) rad
Poppordlck. (exhibit Ek-25)-

According; to those affidavits thur. wns no co- ittoo or "central conuittool
in the Soction for Typhus rad 7irus R. mtc h.

D. Count II. 6^ of tho Indict-.oat : El.po-hltltudo SxToriaonts.

Thu Proaocution has charged tho Defendant Hnailosor undur tnis count,
as well as under tho counts w.ich nro still to bo discussed, with

■Spacini responsibility for and participation in those crinos.•

In the documents submitted in tho Prosecution caso aoithur the anno of
Kanlloscr nor any of nis offices Is eontlonad. *fao axporloonts concern tho
Luftwaffe epocifically. Since, according to the Frosocution, they lasted
fron Karen 19 U 2 until ab ut «u«ust 1942. rad according to the RonKrg

21/il


29 Ja&-*-5DS-£-3-Cook
Court So. 1.

affidavit (Docu-^nt SO-l?6) they laotod approximately until tho ond of Hay,
19-2. Eandlosar as Cniof of t no Yohruacht Medical Servlco cnn not hnvo hnd
any oinnoctl n vi*.h theso experiments; uuch loss can ho hnvo participated in
thuu, since the office of Ceiof of too Ychraacht Medical Servlco vat only
created or. 2S July. 1942 (Docuaon*. ; :>-CSG) and. according to the Frosouction
itsolf. tho czFurduonts mat already h vo been concludod at that tiuo.

Tho Fnsocution has cow attempted to prove c connection between tho
.iruy Medical Inspectorate and thosv expert.;cnt* by quotln," a ro ark contained
ir. Docuuont 1531h-FS. which reads as follows;

■Has too letter with the Orauor-Klott report arrivedT"

Following this the prosecutor stated (?«»>» 233 of the record); The
umirty of this reutric is not quite clear. It is truo that we find tho nano
of Crntor uenti <n«d in ta- frcexln,; exporiaonto, ard, as I recall, ve shall
sue tint i'*?r *n ar. tr. y doctor attached to the Instituto ir. St. Johann.
You will -c.V'-.nor r. t<.«c institute war unlor tho authority of Dr. Hnndlosc
In ..In c vvc ..r o h-divrl Inspector", rxd quotuti>n.

Tho ;rlbta>ll w'll certainly not h/ve fnilod to oboorvo taut tho Fro-
•ecut'..•.*• no attempt to j.rovo that tho "era., or- Got. ' uontionod in Docu¬
ment iff! Is idenl 1 uni with tho "Dr. Crr-uor" uontionod In conr.oction wit

tho c ild oxpor'.u^nti. The rrcat dlfforonco in tho nauot proven tho ir>-
correctnoon of tuie ar^iu.nt of tao Frosocution.

It thore':ro on irou the ..rgucents and fro'u tho docuuonts sub alt tod
by the prosecution that the Defendant “• ouloser rnd tho ;.rcy Medical
Inspoctorato oro in no wo? connected wltn the hirfi-altitude exporinontB.

Count II 6 3 of the I .dlctuent ; rr>osln,; Skperiuentn .

Tr. c docu-ants subr.ittod by tho Prosecution on t..ie subject do not nonti
the nnmu of tho Doferdnnt Eondioscr or any of the offices under hlo super¬
vision as having ordered or participated ir. tho oxporiuents conductod in tho
concentration coup of Dachau.

In t..is connection tne Frosocution has only stated that nodical officor
of the ..r.-y (?rou tne aruy Mount Mn he-dical School at St. Johann) pcrticipa*.
in the Luftwnffo auction on ■Viator Hardship and Distress at Sen" of


23 J'j*-;r-52S-5-3-C3ok

Court So. 1.

2o rxd 27 October, 1942. during which Prof. Holzloehner hold a lecture on
fra-xin* oxperinents (Docuuant KO-4C1). The Prosecution has furthor core
statod that 5b rstobsarzt Dr. Crater, of the Ar~y Kountnin Medical school
at St. J ohann , is said to have discussed collebornti »r. with Dr. Haachcr aft or
the ,.ootin»; in Dumber. (Documents 5 D- 31 °, 157 ^PS nod :: 0 - 431 )
ilo letter or otner docuajnt froa Dr. Crenor or ais offico vae prosontod, nor
was any proof presented, tact Dr. Creaer spoke with Dr. Rrscher on official
orders and th-1 there was collaboration with tho.j-.y l;0*_ntiin hodlcal School
at ?t. Johann. But Hint would be necoss ry boforo ono could conclusively
clai- participation of t.w j-_y Kountain Ksdlonl school ot St. Johann, which
was undor the Jurisdicti'n of the Defendant Handloser.

..s th- final report on the fro-zis* cx~ori^onto at Dachau was presented
to the P.eUhsfushrar-SS on l6 October : ; 42. (Docuaont l6l>-PS), the experi¬
ments were concluded boforo tfto participants in the Ifurnbor* conferonco could
nav hoar aecut t-'.wi..

Thoreforo, the Prosecution has prssontod no proof oithcr of Kondlosor'o
"spoci'i responsibility" or of ..is participation or tao participation of tho
-r-y ..ountiin hodlcal School ■ t St. Johann.

Thoreforo, the ca.ro r< r inst the Defendant ^nndlosor on t.-.lo count in
not proved.

By wry of precaution, tao vitnwsnos ulrociy naood, Dr. Cre:xir and Dr.
WUerflor, ore called to testify: That thoro was r olutuly no
participation of hodicol officers of tno jr.y S.our.tain Hodlcal
School ut St Johann in the experiments w.;ich foru tho basin of

tnc charts, and

furth.rmoro: That oven Inter on no collaboration was officially n,:reod
upon or took place,

finally: Tr. t re-.orte w^r- never uado to tho dofendant Kaniloaor or.
unwnrr.ir.tod experiments at Dachau or about proposod collaboration
with Dachau.

Th- Prosecutor has referred (po£e lhS of the record) to the Amy


29 J-^-rt-OJS-9-^-Cooic
Court So. 1.


fruazin, experiments.

The witness. Dr. Sc-’-ceffor and Dr. Cromer wll 1 tcstli'y that there wne
no connvctl a tctwuoa tho freezing exporiricnts nt St. Johann, which j.ro r.ot .
mentioned in the Indictment, end the vx-urii-ont• under Indictment here.

Cour.t I i C af Mu Indictment: halarin psporiments

Document 3oofc 4 of the Prosecution which refera to thlo subject, contdni
no document thot mentions the defendant liuviloeor, which la ti^ud by hiu
or addressed to hie, nor have the vitncsscs who hevo tostifiod on this cr.ttor
■aid anythin.- tnut could incri.-inr.to the dofondant Enadlosor. ?or wnnt
of any concrete incri dentin* assort! n of the Prosecution xwralr.st tho
Dofeedant H'yinlos r. and the offices subordinated to hl.i, it is impossible
for _o to offur evidence in r.is dofenso.

3y way of Precaution: I prosent as Zxnlblt Kd 3) an affidavit of Pro-
feasor Dr. ?.odonsr.ldt, for-«rly "Consulting Kyrionlst" of tho ‘.ruy radical
Znspsoterutc, as proof of tho fact that vitnln thu ^rqy Kodicnl Inspoctornto
experiments in tr.is flold on hunan beings vj never or rod or conducted.

The witness, Dr. VUorflor will testify that roports obout suer. happonin*t
wuru not rccoivod.


29 ran 47--TJC-9-la-C^k
Court K-. 1


Count II t D f the ladictrant: Lost (bustard)

Gas 3x?ori;*ntst

Acc:riln<s tc tho lalict-iaat, Lest (exist-ard) a as exT«ri-*ais ware corduotod
cn oisfe3 during the period fra: 1539 to 1945 in Saohsonhcusoa, !2atr.;ollor

*al othor coacontrnti a cn^sa, on '-oh-If of the Goroon ‘Johr. -cht.

The 4ccic«ats presoatei by tho i'r's&juticn sho= tho follow!at:

1 . Thoro is ao document she wine on cider to or participation of tho
•,;ohmacht in oxporl:.oats in concentration ennpa or on prisoners.

2. ?rof. HIKT's ropo-t about, »nd I quoto: "Lest ox?«ri:*>ats conducted
ca tofolf of tho Wohrnr.cht" is not tho ropnrt seat by HIST in 1940 to his

Com ralarrt, but ratfcor a rop-'rt t tho ".Thnoaorbo" about tho roport which ho
jy.l rovi -ualy Bubaittoi. This is ah-wn by tho third paragraph frai tho oad of
tho roy rt in question.

3. r- u thin royrt it orb bo soon that IOP.T conductor tho oxporlaor.ta,
whioh woro carried "ut on ardor- cf his Ooaoralarxt durinj. r> aosi..*ont back
fcue - ovldOT.tly during tho firat half -f 1940 - nly oa aninals, furthoxuoro,

a two oadotft cf tho :ailtary Nodical In Sorlln. Thoso oxpori:»nto onn

act o thj subjoct Of this ladict-^nt.

•i. -,/hon I3TTT spocifios Dn pato 3 of hia ropert, I quoto: "Ihoso oxporlnon
oould ajt JO errriod om- tj hujaa toln&B, as tho o^ianinc :f tho offensive in
franco called a back to init," ool of qu-to; this proves that in his roport
cc ’iio ouporior Conoraioret ho eculd act rep-rt on oxporij-oi.ts oa hui.on b-lnts -
with the oxcoptl-.a :f tho V.*o ccdots - on tfco < thor bond, tho quostior. roiialns
ppoa, whothor tho ^xpori. Ji:.ta planned but not carried -at by :a»T woro to to
eonluctod in volinto.-rc, which tho tr cadois loubtlose uoro. Consoquoatly this
iecuont lacks nny probative f-’rco far tho caso unior c-^idoratlcn, all tho
ran tho dofondant Handlosor had oa :jrj radical Inapoctar nly Bine o
;or.^ry 1941, so that '.{DVT*3 roport ooull n«t havo v ooa suUJttod to hi i in

capacity. Tho loat-osporfr-onts, dodt with in tho dec- ont which has t-oon
: tt id, havo ao connection With tho fohrr.acht. Tho docu onts spook for
t-OCSOlYOS.

Tho Doc'-cent !K)-o72, eufciittod by tho rreaooutloa, (affidavit :f tho
Dofondant 2udolf 2r ndt) coatalaa tho following 3oatoaco, I quoto*

2U5


29 Jan -i7^:-?JC-9-2a-Cco3c
Court !fo. 1

"A?ert free Karl 5 re nit and the other a'soro nantionod persons,
Haailcsor and Rostock cast also have loom of those experiments."
oal of *uoto. Uth retard to this affidavit, It uust ho said on rrincclple

tortieony of witaossos, end affidavits should rolato only fact tasod on
personal kr.owled_o.

Ito oxproaslun of a~. assumption, cr t supposition ithout &vla£ concroto
facta on which tho assunptiea, or supposition is Uxsl is inailssihlo.

Tho affidavit of Rudolf Br-xdt lnsof-r r.s it is *u-toi doos net rolato such
ooncroto facts, horovar.

I sub:it in oviionco Docuaont an affidavit of Rudolf Brandt, in

which ho docLaron:

"I cannot submit any rctual docurontary proof of
this assumption."

JRhiblt


29 Jan 17-Jt-ffr-io-I- Rinabudc (IL)
fourt "o. 1


n Ia general it must be said for this case and also for later cSsos
that the words of the Indictment, 'on behalf of the '/ohraacht", in then-
selves; that is, without concrete casual facts cannot provo tho existence
of punishable relation to the Defendant Kar.dloeer and his offices.

"During the war all nedical investigations servo the Wehrnacht, but
in the sane way thoy sorve the wounded and sick soldier who fell into
Ocrr-an hands as prisoners of war, and furthermore the;' 3orved the treat-
cent of the inhabitaite of the occupied territories. The standards for
the radical care given prisoners of war wore regulatod by the Regulation
or. Medical Services in '.fartlao and tho Agreement on the Troatoont of
Prisoners of «ar, Article 13-15» "Health Caro in tho Camps« (appendix
to the Regulation on Medical Servicos in Wartime ) and the "Goneva Con¬
vention" for Improvement of tho Lot of the Vfoundod and Siok of tho
Armies in the Field, which ia !:no\m to tho Tribunal, This was also
attaohod to tho Regulation on Uedioal Services in 'far as a aupplcaont;
it was binding on all aodioal officers. I add a oopy of tho pertinent
provision of tho Regulation on )!odloal Servicos in .Vartiao as Exhibit
HA-5 and HA-5-a- ' '

"The affidavit of Dr, Pennor, Exhibit HA-6, shows that tho Dofon-
dant Handlosor issued diroctivoc for tho nodical troatnent of tho popu¬
lation in tho occupied territories.

"Finally a certified statement of the Swiss Colonel Dr. von Erlach
or. tho care which the Do fondant HanQoser gave prisonors of war is also
submitted as Exhibit BA-7" And 1 add tint this coming I received a
statement from the Swiss Colonel Dr. von Erunner to the ;ane effect.

"Sulfonamide Experimental Disregarding the affidavit of Dr.

Fischer, tho document* submitted on this count do not contain any
evidence that the Defendant Ha n dlescr or his offices participated


29 Jta !i7-iWS*~10-2~?anifcuck (XL)
Coart !K>. 1


in the experiments conduotod by the Defendants Professor Dr.Gebhardt,

Dr. Fischer, and Dr. Oberheusep in the concentration camp Ravembrueck.

"The Defendant Dr. Fischer has testified in his affidavit of 21
October 1916 (Document Mo. ?!>-»72),and I quote:

' "hen the sulfonamide experiments began. Professor Gebhardt, ray
cdlitary and nodical superior, told me that those experiments were con¬
ducted order of the Chief of the Medical Office of the TJohiracht and of
the Chief of the Stato Medioal Office . . . •

" On this point I submit the affidavits of Dr. Fisohor and of
Professor Dr* Gebhardt as Exhibits HA-^J and HA-9, which show tho
follovir^x

"a) Dr. Fischor states and I quote:

* It is not correct vhon this affidavit says that Trofossor Gob-
hardt had told me that tho experiments had to bo conducted by ordor of
the Chief of tho !*1edical Office of tho ohraicht. I did not nako suoh
a statement.'

"b) Profossor Dr.C-obhardt statoo:

'It is incorrect that I ovor told Dr. Fischor that thoso experi¬
ments wore conduotod by ordar of tho 'i/.loal Offico of tho Vohriaacht,»

"Dr. Fischor and Profossor Gebhardt will also tostify on tho
witness stand that tho stat-mont ir. Dr. Fischer's affidavit is incor¬
rect, according to which the Defendant Handlccor was present at tho
celobratioR of tho 10th anniversary of the Hohenlychen mental hospital;
furthermore the statement of Dr. Fischer in his affidavit of 21 Novenber
19U5, that Dr. G tump fog? or .raa fro-, the 'High Cosnand of tho Army', will
bo changed to road that he uas a aosfcer cf the staff of tho Raichsfuehror
SS.

"An affidavit of Profossor Dr. Fray, submitted a; FXhibit HA-10
will confirm that fee Defendant Handler or never ordered


29 Jan U7-4^rf-l 0-3:anabuok (IL)
Court So. 1


sulfonasd.de experiments which would have conflicted with aedically
ackncwledged principles. Conesmins this count of tho indictaer.t,
the prosecution has referred to tho necting of ’Consulting Specialists'
of the TTehraacht in Hay 19^3, at which Profossor Gebhai .lt and Dr. Fischor
spoke on tlioir sulfonasdaa experiments,

"Tho Defendant Handleser was prosont during this locturo. Ho can¬
not recollect tho exact toxt of the lecture of Profossor ES*. Gobhardt
and Dr. Fischor. Ho will testify on the witness stand as to whether
an uninitiated parson could have reolinod fron the stateoents nado that
the oxporlnonts on huson beings oenduotod by F rofoscor Gobhardt and
Dr. Fischer had boon based on inc&dssiblo oxporioental aothods. Affi¬
davits will bo subsdttod by othor tntsldors nhich answer this quostion
in tho nogativo. Tho affidavits which havo been roquostod on tin basis
of written informtion havo not yst boon rocoivod.

“In Judging fron tho point of view of crininal law, it nust bo
considorcd that tho uxporiconts had boon concludod when tho looturo was
hold.

"Count n 6 ? of tho Indiotaont: 'beporinonta oonc -ring 3ono,

’Srrolo and I'orvo Regeneration and Bono Transplantations Everything
said about Count H 6 S applios to this oount, frith tho raoark that
tho oxporlironts in question hal boon conoludod, according to tho
Dr. Oborhausor affidavit (Docuoont So. :x>-li87) oarly in 19U3." But I
cust add that a report on this subjoct was not mdo in May, 19l»3 at tho
aooting of consulting physiciara.

"Soawatar Experiments: Docuaont '¥>-hU2 (affidavit of Rudolf Brandt),
Document ?iO-Ui9 (Schroodcr affidavit), then Document l*7i» (Schaofor
affidavit) and Docuaent :S>177 (record of nesting of 19 and 20 Hay
19Ji), and finally, Docunent JO-185 (Profossor Schroedors letter to
Hinnlor of 7 JOno 19IJ;) shew that those wero


29 Jan l;7-H-S^-10-i;-!fLnabud: (a)

Court So. 1

gpocial experiments of the Luftwaffe and the !J*vy«

■Ho documents or other evidence has been sutdttod which proves
a relation of the Chief of the TTehrmacht Medical Service to these experi-
aenta. The Prosecution has submitted only an affidavit of the defendant
Schroeder (Document !*>-hl;9), which says that the Defendant Han dice or knew
about the nodical research work conductod by the Luftwaffe.

"This stateoent, rhioh was given without any concrete reason for
the assertion, has boon corrootod in an affidavit of tho defendant
Schroeder of 2 January 19U7, Docunant Hi-22. This states:

"1. If tho Luftwaffe gave rooaaroh assignments in fields of aviation
medicine, it did not neod tho permission of tho Chief of tho Wohraaoht
Judical Service. 1

"2. It is true that tho Chief of tho *»ohraacht Hodical Sorvico
and tho Amy i.odical Inspootor did not participate in tho discussions
on tho seawater experiments, nor were thoy infornod of tho dotaila of
tho acocution of those experiments.*

"In this connootdon I also rofor to tho Bockor-Froysong affidavit,
HA-23. This voids tho Prosecutions* assertion of tho Defendant Hond-
losar's spocial responsibility for and participation in thoso deport¬
ments*

"Experlnonts with Zpidatdo Jaundice: Tho nano Handloser and tho
offices of tho Chief of tho o'ehrmcht Hodical Sarvioo a:.d Army Hodical
Inopootor aro mentioned in mono cf tho submitted docunonts, disregarding
tho affidavit of Rudolf Brondt (Document 1X5—371). Tho defendant
Rudolf 3rondt tos stated in an affidavit of 21 Doconbor 19h6, Exhibit
HA-11, and I quote:

fTThon I said in this affidavit, ’ ndloser rust havo boon infornod
of it, that is a supposition* I cannot give any facts which show or
nugpost knowledge of Professor Handloser.*

"In order to prove a responsibility of tho Dofondant Handloser in
his capacity of Array Hodical Inspector, the Prosecution


29 Jan 1*7-H-S -10-5-JfLnabuck (H)
Court No. 1


hae ref or rod to a Stabsarzt Do Iran and ha3 stated (record, pago 777),
tha* the latter 'as a z*cber of the Aray Medical Inspectorate while
Handles or was Ar=y Medical Inspoctor.

"As a proof that this statocont is not correct, the affidavit of
Professor Dr. Gutzoit is subsittod as Exhibit HA-12j this affidavit
also corrects the other stattconta connected with tho activity of Dr.
Dotaon. Dr. Dohcon was a oertoer of the Military Medical Academy,

Training Group C, tho comar.dirg officer of which was Genoralarzt Dr.
Schrciber. This group was under tho comand of the oomanding officer
of tho ULlitaiy ModLoal Aoadony, which was an fcdopondont institute and,
aloi^ with nnny other nodioal units, nodical agencies and institutes,
was subordinated to tho Arqy llodical Lnspootorato. Tho statement that
Gonoralartt Dr. Schroibor (Docunont ID-299) was subordinate to Hand-
loo or, which was also put forward at tho nooting of 19 Doctsabor 191*6,
is untruo as far ijs it suggosta his imodlato subordimtion to or
nerborship ir. Handlosor*s agency as tho Anay llodical Inopoctor. Gonoral-
arat Dr. Schroibor was, at that tine, attached to tho Military Hedioal
Aoadeoy and was, thoroforo, subordinated to tho Coman Ling Officer
of the Arsy.

"Oanoralarst Dr. Schroibor was also Plenipotentiary of tho Jiolch
Kosoarch Council for Dpidonic Control, to which Handlosor did not
belong. For this renson Haagon asked Schroibor in a lottor dated
12 June 19l*U (Dscunont ID-299) whether hepatitis resoaroh ».-ould in
future bo fironcod by tho Rcdoh Roaoarch Cornell or vhothor ho ought
to apply to tho liodical Chiof of the Luftwaffe for further funds.

"It was Schroibor, too, aho asked for tho tonporary assignnont
of Dr. Dohnon (Docuaant -D-299) and .o arrangod with tlio Comanding
Of-'icer of tho Military Aoad«y for Dolnen»s assigiment (Docunonts
ID-300 and ND-l2li). The Anjy Medical Inspectorate and


29 Jar. U?-4i-S*^I(>-6-fanBhuok (IL)

Court Ho. 1

Handloaer •aura not responsible for this assignment, so that Handlosor
did not loom of thoso ovcnta.

"There can, therofore, be no question of any direct participation
of the Defendant Handlosor, ncr was Dobcan a nodical officer, for whoso
actions Handloaer would have boen responsible according to tho Indiet-
nont 13.

“Typhus Experimentst 4 he assertion of the Prosecution that by
takir^ part in the oonferoxco of 29 DecaTbor 19Ul, the Defendant Hand-
loser causod the typbais experiments to bo performed on huraui beings
in tho concentration coop Buohonwald, !-* alroatty boon discuasod.

"In this connection, tho Prosocution has aasunod tho existcnco
of a connection botween tho institute for Typhus and Virus Rosoarch
of tho OTH in Crncow and the Ar:y lUx&oal Inspoctoreto, and roforrod
in this connection to a visit of tho hend of tho Cracow Institute
Professor Syor, and tho hygienist 0 f tho Aray 5'odioal Inspootorato,
tho fact that thoruwaa no oomoetion with tho typhus oxporinonts on
human beings in tho concentration oarp Buohonwald, and that tho vitnoOs
lad r» knowlodgo of tho exporiaenta charged hero.

"Tho witness will also tostify that no reports w ro aubrdUod
to tho Dof«itfcnt Handlosor rtoioh oithar prove his connection with tho
concentration oanp Buchonwald or, in particular, his krowlodgo of tho
wcperlmwits on humn beings oarried cut in this carp,

"This applies to typhus axporlr.or.ts as Well aa to y oil cm fovor
sxporlasnta.

"The witnesses Schrddt-Tra jeken and TMorflor will oonfim this.


29 Jan 2*7 H-PJC-41-a.~Putty (H)
Gout Ho. 1


"Tha Defendant,Handlos or, has also nanod Professor Dr, Lang, former
hood of tho Military Modi cal Aoadcry, as a witness that tho blood sorun
prosorvos Motioned in the Ding diary were not sent for tostinp in tho
concentration ca rp puchennald, *7ith regard to the lice shipments for
tho purpose of infection of hirer, beings with typhus nontionod in tho
Ding diary. Professor Syer will confirm as a witness, tho affidavit
given by the Defendant, Ho von, rhich is offered as Exhibit HA-43, accor¬
ding to which those lice shipments did not onanato frem tho Cracow OKI:
Institute but from Dr. HAAS in L*ow, and had nothing to do idth tho
Army Uodioal Inspector or tho Chief of the ^ehraacht Sorvioos,

"The Defendant, Dr, Hrugowafcy, will also as a witnoos testify to
this.

"The typhus experiments of Trofossor Kaogon in litswuilor have no
oomoction with tho Defendant, Handlceor, or any of his offioos, as is
ovidont fron tho documents submitted by tho Prosecution. Tho interro¬
gation of tho witness, Eyar, did not provo that roporto from Prof.

Haag on reached tho Dofondant, Handles or,

"Tho Prosocution Inter subedttod onothar affidavit by Rudolf Brandt
of Hi Hovccbor 19W. Horain tho Defendant, Rudolf Brandt, testifies:

"I quotoi "SS-Grupponfuoliror Dr, Xnrl Brandt, Gonoraloborstabaarst
Dr. Slog fried Handlcaor and other surely knj\: of Haag on* a oxporlnont3
on hurr.n oxporimantal subjects.

"In this connection an affidavit by Rudolf Prandt of 9 January
191*7 is subnittod as Exhibit EA-lU in which hu doposos: and I quotoi


"This paragraph in ny affidavit is not a factual deposition. I cannot
givo any concroto fact on irhich this opinion is basod. I assumed on


trie basis of tho explanation of tho interrogator that it 2nd boon so."

Polygal experiments

"The Prosecution mentioned tho Defendant, Hor.cD.cocr, on22 January


19U7 (Record, page 1021) in dealing with the Polygal experiments.

"In Document Be ok 11 offered in this connection, neither the Defen¬
dant, Han d l e s or, r»r any of his offices is mentioned, Tho Pros oca tor


- 2153


29 JJm U7 !t-?X-01-lPatt r (n.)
court »« 1

in proaenting the Ahnanorbe diaxy (Document 3&6-PS) romrkod with re¬
gard to tho entry of 26 Hays- I quote! "This research Institute was
under the Defendant, HandXoaor, a fact to vrhich re have referred
earlier in the course of this trial."

"TMa assertion is not correct. In Cracow there was the Instituto
for Typhus and Virus Research of the OKH, which was under-the Defendant,
Handle®or. Tho Prosecution itself calls the instituto in quostion
"Instituto for Garnan Distern ✓


- 2153 a -


29 Jan kW-' X-L1^2~Patty (H)

Court No. 1

Research". I offer an affidavit by the Defendant, Sieve:s, as Exhibit
HA-15 from which the incorroctnes3 of the ossortion of the Prosecutor
is evident.

"Tho Prosecution in the course of its case offered documents as
evidence of preparation for bacterial warf&ro. It can bo soon ft-on tho
docunonto that the nodical collaborate", Prof.Dr. Klicwe, a nerber of
tho. "lightning rod" working oorxamity, dealt only with protective non cures
against possible dam go in case of- bacteria warfare. His work and his
reports referred to this natter. Prof. Kliowo was subordinated for this
task to the Amy '.'capons Office. Evidence. The witness, Prof.Kliowo,
who has boon nanod by tho Defendant, Blono.

"In a trial in which tho defendant is not charged with directly
porpotrating, participating in or ordoring b -° oaaontial

td understand corrootly not only hip sphere of offico but also tho
actual mnagooont and tho extent of his dutios and, furt. lrnoro, his „
personality. Only thus will it bo poasiblo to docido whothor crodonco
should bo given to his stat«aont that ho had no krxndodge of tho facto
vMoh the Prosecution allogoo to bo crlrdnal as far as they touched
hia sphoro of offico.

"As ovidonco on this point, I refer to tho affidavits by Gcmoral-
ar2t Dr. Ponnor and tho Swiss Colonel, Dr. von Erlach.

"I shall further offer affidavits by Prof.Dr. Kurt Voit. (Exhibit
HA-30) Dr. Stongole (Exhibit HA-31), the Prior of tho Bonodiotino
Abboy lfaria Laach, Theodor Bo glop (HA-32), Dr. 3. Droxlor (HA-33).

"I havo roquootod but not roceivod an affidavit fron Colonel
Dr. Brunner and tho Prelate, Dr. Krauts, tho head of tho Catholic org.-n-
izatiora. Tho affidavit of Brigadier General Dr. Birchor has not yet
arrived.

"Finally I offer a ncrorandun fron tho fomar Reich Ttudont leader.
Dr. School, which shows the attitude of tho Defendant, Han dice or, toward
the political influences of tho I&rfcy on th> young nodical officers


29 Jan 1*7 -M-P X-U-2-Putty (IL)

2curt So, 1

being trained at the universities. (Exhibit HA-31*)

-Those ctocunents will mke it dear that in accordance with the
personality and the actions of the Defendant, Hanalosor, one nay believe
that he tad no krw&edgo of criminal experioeots and would not have
tolerated any if they hod cone to his knowledge within the scope of hi a

resporoibility.

THE PRESIDE The Tribunal will now recess until 1*U5 °tclock
this afternoon.

(A recess was taken until 13U5 hours)


20 ."as 4?. U-12-1-IJG-S„rp s cn (H3D)

Court Bo. I

ccaaicruj cctt

ilTIHiCCH SiCSIOa

(Tho hear in, reconvened at 135 bcure, 29 January 1W7)

BY TH1 ntisxris*


-he ~ec etrry eneral vill note for the record the* the Defendant's,
Earl Brandt, Counsel, Dr. ServetiUl, has been excused from ettendor.ee
at this aftorn' n'e session. I>r. Servatius, Counsel for the Dofendant
Brandt, h a tt hlo opening stater *»t tnl# corn in/-.

Cntraol nay proceed,

3T Z2. K—3 PHI3ILIA (Defense Couneel for Defendant Faul Boetoek):

H r . Frcaident, Menbera of the Court: In eubslttin evidence


in de'enso of Frofeasor Faul Hcrt-ck, counrel con start fr c the feet
thpt Frof. Sostrck hlroelf perforced n- tri»ln*l experi-onts on
hunan boln/t. Hor has anything been presented by ’he Froaccuticn froa
which it eirht bo inferred that he cither or’e-ed or sufgoctod such ex¬
po- irente. In order to < *ve a trio picture of the activity which F r of.
Bostock ronlly exerclned durin/ the «ar, the dofenso will be-in tholr
oubrlccior. tf evidence v y giving a brief description of Bectodc'e
profeoel rv*l activity In various branches of r.edicine. ?hin in
r.oceosary in order to -ako It clear aloiv what lime Rostock used by
Jar the bet*er port of hie scorgy r -d interest in tho years fron
1939 to 19^6. "uch a doacriptinn will reveal thrt bis activity as
head of the 3-r-lcel University clinic of Berlin, "lc elotrrsso,
hlo activity an an advice surgeon of an Ai-y, hlo work aa the
solo odltcr of tbs Central Journal for Sur'ory or Zcntralblat? luor
'hirurgie^w^jfvhr^j^^onblnod ei-ce 1942 the duties «-o D oP n of tho
Facult Lvcrslty of 3 e rlin, engaged hie ti=o and


-J such ra extent tbit hig activity on behalf of Carl Brandt's


offic


Ich was add


e other v fi rk f»t until thw last year of tho


war, c<\ld of necessity not exceed a limited scale. A n far re can be
recognised aV-this-*' - #, the Frosecution docs not present any ch“rge


C15S


2 'J Zr u 4 ?-l_l 2 _l_UC -_2 c o r. (KoD)

Court *o. Z


a- ale:* -he Professor of Surgery of -crlin U"lverelty, except for the
latter oh-rt certoi*, and only in reject tc this euheidipry activity,
lor the whole


Court Ho. 1

29 Jar. u7-« - 12-2 - LJO - Sasson

V

dur-aticn of the war, up to the or.d of 19L3, he is rarely reproached,
togathor with 350 other advisory aray doctors, to have boon present at
a -uetiDg where aacn^, nany ota rs Gebkordt and Fishor gave also lectures.
Tho question as to hom fir err. legally constitute a charge on those
pr.sont at these lct'jros will be dealt with in detail whan counsel subsit
tviderco cr. behalf of the defendant Handlcser, and counsel for -Rostock
will also refer to thU subject in their defense so fir as it is
rvjcossaiy.


29 Jen / _A-.’P_14-l_S a slHw (KSD)

Court *o. I

lurthareore, a detailed description will be given of what tbo
Scientific and research sccti n with the Cossietinner C-onerel for
Health, which originated in the Writer, 1943, to 1944 under Rsctock, did
in practice do and what it did not do. Counsel will osdeavor to show
that although the attenpt was nedc by Rostock's office during these
laet chaotic years of war to gather scao inforaation on tho work
dono in tho various research institutes, tho inforaation nado thereupon
avallablo to his office v«« such that it did not cnstlo Rostock's
office to be awnro of *h« fact that objectionable experironts on huaan
subjects were porforacd in C-oraan Rcsonrch Institutes.

How that Prosccuti-n evldenco ha* established tho fact that
wrious research orders involving oxpcrlaents on huaaa subjects wero
actually given by a very different organisation naaely tho Rolch
Research Council, it is obvious thrt tho associations of the defondant
Rostock with tho P 0 ich Hesearch Council, which aro nl’ogcd by tho
Prooccutl.-n, aurt be *ho subjoct of .totalled ovidonco, Counsol for Ros¬
tock attach docioivo iaportanco to tho clearing up of this point,
and their ar<unont is that tho E e ich Rosoorch Council w-s under tho dir¬
ection of its prosldcnt, whose instructions wore carried out by tho
hoeds of tho different branches, and that tho defendant Rostock vrs not
a rombor in any of theso letter organs of tho Rolch*Henearch Council.


2157


25 Jen-A-JP-U-Saslew (HSD)

Court *0. I

The sc-called rorornirv body or Pracsidlalrat, in which 3ootock
wee not received c* P r.,-bcr urtil the last year of tho war, and only
Be Trends'* deputy, had, « will he proved, neither knowledge of, nor
influence on, such research orders. It v«s a purely representative
instltuti n which did not exercise any r^l functi na,

~ho possibilities for Bestoek's counsol to sub nit ovider-co are
c nparotlvoly United. To thoir rerret, counsel are not in position
to submit the files of tho division headed by Rostock in ordor to glvo
tho Tribunal a ccaprchoneivo idea f the work which was actually per-
forned in this division. The conpleto flits of hi* division wore takon
by Bootock to Bad Llcfeasteln. Rost-ck war intorro'atod aftor his
capture in Hay or June, 1945, by the 7th Army Interrogation Contor at
Augobury Tarcnkollcr, «d in the courso of his Interrogation, ho also
indicated tho prociso location of the flits of his offico, Sub-
socucntiy ooac Acerlean officers ease to Bad Llobcnstoin and took
those files along with then, ^ho part of these prporo which is
o-'et l-portont ot evidence for the defonso, tho corroepondonco with
tho various orman research lnstltutor, a well ar what we called
tho Research C P rd Index, outvrl-inr all tho information cotsnunlcotod
to Rostock's offico by other agencies. Rortock hao roquostod th*t
this Research card index bo subnlttcd ar evidence, and tho "rlbunal
has approvod this roqu.ot. But unfortunatoly, cq>-rscl for his 4cfonoo
pro rot yet in a position to cry whe’hor thoy will rctuslly rocoivo
thooo flits for Inspection, and whether thoy will thus bo ablo to
subnit extracts as evidence in defense of their client.

It nay per hope be noted in this connection *hat in this trial
thq Prosecution hrvo presented their documentary cvidonco in a nenner
which can only be cull- d exemplary. Particularly those anon tho
’ofenso counsel* who had to w 0 rk their way through scuntp.in G of doc¬
uments ir. the fir^t Hurnberg Trial have highly appreciated that tho
docuaent books wero sufcnittcd in a well ordered and tinoly fashion.

-his encourages thee to hcjpc that it has x»t escaped the a.ttontion of

if


2158


29 Jaa_X-n>_14~S w «l*v (KSC)
Court fio* 2


29 J«n -HJP_14-S-S..l«r (HSI!)
Court So 4 Z


the sifnatUTO of ?-o stock or Is eddreseed to bin.

In crnncction with this question of donee, I think it my duty
as a defonue counsel to ask the Tribunal to five its attention to
the fundamental question of hov evidence in defense of the accused should
be made available to their counsel. The Military Tribunal ihunbor Ono
is tho first Acerlean tribunal of supreme rank before which a nu-bor of
further trials of ,~reat importance are to be oponed in this dofoated
country. But while in your own country, prosecution and dofense are
vory larfoly given equal poesl 1 llities to gather and eubr.it docuaonts,
clrcrastancca are different in tbit caso as a consequonco of foraany's
unconditional surrondor. -ever before in history has a modern stato
boon so conplotely and so "bsolutoly in tho hende of the victors.

Thus ell existing archives and files of Gorman officos and a; cncloo arc
in tho posocssi’n of the Milos. Thsee docuaonte hrvo boon collocted
in largo docuaont conters, whore thoy nro currently etudlcd and
analysed. They aro avallabio to tho prosocutlon in tholr search for
docuaontery ovidonco against tho defendants. C 0 ntrary in Gorman law,
American law provides th't the prosecution only present cvidcnco
against tho defendant. It would only bo Juat and frlr if a decision
of principlo undo by tho Military ?rib\fflal Huabor One of counsol for
tho defense would be ri“cn accooo to thoeo document* to a lar< or
oxtont *han hoe v ocn possible until ncv. It appears tb «t it is not
sufficient for counsel to bo authorised to receive a certain docuaont
which Is nlrc-dy known, but, on tho contrary, tho search for documents
lr. dofenso of the accused should bo rendorod poorlblo by firing counsol
accosB to the vhelo of *hc papers and filis available in each prrtlculpr
caso. If it should bo considered undosirnblc to five Gorr.in counsel this
freedom, Acoricon lawyors cirht be attached to the Corcnn dofenso coun¬
sels and given tho right to soarch for dofonso documents in tho document
center on behalf of tho dofenoe ccunsols. I bolievc that Bastock’e
case i e ono of theoo whore tho Tribunal would very quickly reach a
Just appreciation of his position if tho comcpratively snail, strictly

2169


29 (HSI^

Court »o. I


United cd cocplcto flic cf VI* b=p 11 office covcrln c the lot-tor'o


SI 591


Court So. I


activities of hardly eighteen aontha, could to submitted es cvldoncc.

Under those c ir eucstar.ee s, the documentary cvldonco to bo oub-

aittod by Rostock's counsel would bo Halted to a few documents.

Counsel will present —o chrrto indicating the tlso rolntlon of the

hucan ©xporlconte, which arc tho subject of the indictncnt, to tho pen-

orel duties of tho defendant Rostock. ?hcro cherts will show that by

far tho free tor pert of the trporlocnM vero porforacd long boforo

Rostock's short susldl-ry ectlvlty with *ho scientific end rooorrch

offico, so the t for this rceson elone, there can bo no question of hie

havln#- had eny knowlod/c or responsibility. Furthermore, ft few

effideal's of roobors of his offico will bo presented, other ovldonco

subaitted by tho deforac counsol will bo direct end Orel. Counsel

/111 bo ir. by questioning the defondrat Prof. Bostoch in tho witness

St/md. Ar»ty Rostock's assistant* in hit of'lco, tho oost l-^or-rmt

witness whoso hcitrlrv hes boon authorised, K 0 rr Christenson, hen boon

loeftted end will bo token to iurnber,-. H 0 hrs exact knowlodgo of the

wholo ectlvlty of Rostock within tho ecionco end research offico, ro

well e. of tho correspondence with othor eonclos end ho it, furthermore,

tho sen who suarerlsod tho information In tho research work in tho

roso-rch cerd indox, which wee sontlorcd n aoaont ero. Ancthor witncoo,

Whoso hwerin,- wrs authorised by the Tribunal, is H»«ed *ur-,o Xar^ctho

Boldov. Her whereabouts ere also knewn, rad hor tr-nefor to burnborg

hes been erdcr^d. Free 1936 to 1°*5, she acted es heed nurse in Rostok's

clinic. The has knovledro of his ecitivltios durla-: practical y every

nin/.lc day of tfccso years, end she is, in particular, In a positi n to

,-ivo the Triburel a picture of how mch of Rostock’s work durlw tho

laat a rths of th® war, which elono -'O of interest to tho 'Yibuuel, *"'»

token up by his duties in his clinic, and hew littlo time ho •"’o i‘blo

to devote to Brandt's office. ^»e lest do'onse witness for Paul Rostock

"uthorlrcd by tho Tribunal, Rudolf Hcntxol 1* t h o principal socrcfxy

or HruptfCschaof tsfuahror of the 2«lch 3c a c-rch Courcil. E c Is one

of those who Is best In a position to explain tho complicated froup of

2160


29 J*n •-A-JP-14-4-S«rtL»W (KSD)

Court So. I

question* connected «rith the Hgich 3*-serrch Council rnd


2160 A


39 J®aUP_l4—5-S slaw (X3D)

Court He. I

ito competence and actin# assistants, and he will be able to confirm
in particular that Bostock never took an active part in busineeo
connected with the Reich C 0 *moil.

The crosa examination of tho witness Dyer has eotablihsed thft the
information Kivon in Document HO 883, hxhibit 314, which seemed to »n-
stitute a char, e a-alnst Rostock, wao essentially due to a mistake. Cno
or two affidavits from cc-defendanto will cake it clear that thoir
owq references to Bostock*e rase in seme records of their interrogations
wore not made out of their own knowledge, hut rather from mere
assumptions, This would hrin# the submission of defense evidence on
behalf of the defendant Rostock to a conclusion unless additional
questions ar^iaiaad in the further course of the proceodinfo.


t


2161


29 Jan 47 -A-SW-lS-I-Jeerd (MS3>>
Court I


IS. KASXt (?or the dofendant Scfcroeder.)

IP.. Hr. President, and the Tribunal. the Proeecution

regards Frofcssor Dy. Schrcedor as being "iso involvod, together with
th® rest of the dcfendan*s, in e ce=s n criminal plan which durir^

•ho poriod from Scpteabor 1939 to V' 1 19 5 had »s it air. the commission
of war crime* and crinot a/ainat humanity.

m PHlSHaEsIT: Hr. Secretary Concral, you hrve ,-ivon uo tha C-oraaa
Doc\ssent, it is not the Foolish translation.

("he Secretory (oncral ,?ve the "'ribunal the tn/lieh Document.)

I auf-rvot thft tho dofense counsel start his argument at ain. 'o
now h*vo tho i-tylich translation.

DR. H MX: Tho prcoorution n-t ardo Profoseor IT. S c hroodor aa Njing
oloo involved, toother the rest of tho dofondan*e in a corancn
criminal plan which during tho poriod from Soptonbor 1939 to April 1945
had as its pin tho cos=isoion of war criros and crimes n-ainot
humanity.

Within tho framework of this criminal plan, the dofondant Profoouor
Dr. Cchroeder is also said to h to h«d knowledge of cruel and tor-
montlng experiments on llvliy- huaaa beings or at loast to hxvo tolorated
thorn and not to hovo undertakon arything to stop then, and in nno ca-o
evon to have ordered then himself. Furthermore, ha is char-od with
special responsibility in view of '-is high position in tho nodical
acrvico cf tho Luftwaffe.

It is s eneral principle of tho intern-*1 nal criminal law and
cooss to >o of decisive simificaneo especially judicirlly oxasinod
in this trial, vhothor a defendant, liko Professor Dr. “chroodor
in thio caso, appears to he at all capablo, r.ccordln/ to hl B character
and bio entire personality, of participating in a_criminal plan with an
indefinite number of other non and of declaring hinsolf from tho very
oe' inning to in argreenent vith


2162


29 Jan 47-i-S#-15-2-3e*rd (KSD)

Court Ho. I

the ucdortakirg of a number of criminal action* not yet known to bin.

Vith vhnt typo of personality are vo dealing in tho person
of tho defendant and former Jencral^berstabstarxt of tho Luftwoffo, Pro¬
fessor 2r. S c hrood-r.

All the strivings of this nan w C ro deroted to quiet, sorioua
lifo work and prcfoosional work, moved by Christian spirit. Klo
conception of hit profosaion as a rhyslcinn was always to holp, to
'.orvo, and to euro tho aick. Hi, active cooperation in a load inf posit¬
ion in tho orcctlnr and outfitting- of hospitals and flold hospitals
was in eccordanco with this eonccp.ion; in doing so ho rondcr^d hio
sorviecs without diseririnatlon, to C*tholice as well s to Protestants,
ns will bo proved by the defense by ousblssion of rolovunt confirmations
and by witnesses.

Thorcforu, Professor Dr. Sehrordcr could not bring hiooolf to
Join tho Party or ono of it subsidiary organizations; ho rojected ^very-
thing that Halted porsonal liberty, and ho never undo any rocrot of hio
rojoction of tho brutal aothods of tho Party and tho Hazi government, oo
thnt his frionds frequently had serious fcaro for his freodoo, yes, evon
for hio lifo,

“ho dofondant was furthorworo of such a character that ho was r«> dy
to oacrlfico ovon his official position rad hio office for his conviction.

•ho defonso will prove by ntans of wi tncooco that at tho tiOo when
ho took the official position as Chief Medical Officer of tho Luftwaffe,
in ho beginning of 194, he stated quite openly to xenbors of hio
family as well as to hio subordinates that he would imodiatoly
rcsira from his offieo at ary tlno, if ho should be roquirod to do
anythin r which ho could not rcconcllo with his conoclonco.

It is obvi-us that a zm with such aims ond of such qualities


2163


- -3-3xd (KSD)

Court *o # I

of che meter wculd r.vcr be villiiy to lend hla hand to a criainel pro¬
ject.

Ac a father essential eepec* shoving that Profo«aor Dr.

Schrced.cr uurt have teen Informed about the crl~lr.pl exporlnentc
cn h'uy*n bein z w-ich are the oubject of this trial, the prorecutlon
cltec hie alleged poeitloa aa eecond highest nodical officer In the
Luft”affe and deduces fro- t^ls circumstance, moreover, a special
responsibility of this defendant.

defense vill, on the other hand, nrovo that Schroedor
'•as by no u ana the second highest nodical officer in the Luftwaffe;
thie will eliminate tho further possible sur.poeiticn that he wee
therefore the do*uty of the Chief Nodical Officer. H «d the
latter been true, a necessary ecnrecuencc would h-'-o been th-t lr.
ca-o the Chief Xrdlcei Cfficor wee unavailable, ho would have had to
bo Inforaed about tho 1 tter'a current dutioc.

The Senior Nodical Officer of the Luftvafie wro next in line
after the Chief Hedic 1 O-^lcer at tho tiae, vac n C-onorulotabcarst res¬
ident in a«rlln, vhos Chlof NodicPl Officer Dr. Hippke also
cl-aya appointed as hie deputy.

In the period fros l «obroary 1940 until 31 lecoabor 1942,

Profe sor Ip. Sphroe'er hlueolf, pa Air Fleet Physician 2 did n.t
Y vo any close contact with tho central offico in Berlin,

If it appears already froa the obovo description of the
philosophy of life and of profecri-n of the defondant that is lnpoc—
ciblo that ho should h-vo doclarod hicsolf to bo in orreonor.t with
crinlnal projects or th't he ohculd hare Joined a .roup of non with
criainpl pins, *hcn the contenrlat icn of the corposlti-n of tho
defendants!


21*4


29

Court So. 1 .


doc* snows further that there is no ho_o*onoity of the defendants csoiyc
themselves. Thor.. exist, rntcer, between the defendant Prof. Dr. Schrooder
ned a l.j’e nu_ier of co-defendants tno most 3 ronouncod ideolo^lc-d contrasts
s well .» insur. ountublo contmeta in the conception of tho uodic. 1 pro¬
fession and of too ethical obligations of tno physician. The defend’nt Prof.
Dr. Sc..roedor would never have a^rOod to lvhd uis hndn to any kind of oxpor-
i..ents on livin, hu_nn bolorfs, whose course ho was unnblo to direct nrd whore
it would have been i .possible for ;.i.. to eli:.inato froa tho outsot injuries
to t.'.e health of tho experimental subjects or even danger to their livos by
by appropriate Instructions.

In nddit on to t-.is. Sehroedor was 'personal y closely acquainted with onl;
v«ry few of tho iofondants, vr.o. like him, wore nodical officers of the Iray
or tno Luftvaffo. Some of the other physicians he wns more or loss acquainted
wltxi ir. £. purely professional way: tho usjorlty of tho dofondanto, howovur,
no know only by na~o. not oven personally or through official contacts.

It is clear that under those circumstances ono cannot speak of n;iy kind
of co..»o:. activity or of action a cording to a common ain.

further,ore, tno prosecution concludes fro tr.< fact thnt durln# tho
ti. o in quotion about four so-c llod "Consultation Kootixys" took 'Inca, in
Milch representatives of txjo hi*»est medical offices of tho ’.t’ohr^ncht, of tho
Roic.i Physicians• Le-idort offico. an well as all Consulting Physicians of
tno Vchr.acht participated, to t tcosa , otherin»;s fon-od a >’rt of the cri .innl
pluxir.liv:, w..icr. than took effect in tno oxperlnonts on human bolnrs in tho
concentration co-pa.

la re,- rd t> tnis point, tho defense will prove th t tho dofoxd-nt Pro¬
fessor Dr. sehroedor purtici;. ted ir. -:*ly ono of those meetings in I 9 UU at
Kohenlychon, and txmt at tnis nootiiv- ho wr.n intorustod -or.ly In r.lo
specialty.

How, ns to tno dotailt in ro^ard to the question of experiments on human
beings, there is tao following to bo said:

1 ) defense will prove tat . with the exception of tho exparluonts to
-okc sea water pott le, JJ^iroedor did not know about or pnrticlprto in any of

2165


2? Ja»-^-G39-15-2ft-3oerd
Court Bo. 1.


toe experiments listed ic toe indictment.

2 ) Tti-.t, on the contrary. he hoard for the first tine of tho critics
vuicu ore bclnr charged only ftor toe end of the war, about Octobor-lJove.’.bor
1945 ns c 7 rioooer of w:.r in Sod and, throu-'h pross and radio.

3) It- t in toe period fro- 1 Februury 1940 until 31 December 19 U 3 ho
wn3 continuously o~plojr«d r.s lcodliv* tidied officer of ..lr Fleot 2 r.nd
physically fer distant fro- tho contral office in 3orlin, yithout -ny clooo
contact vith tne hov.ic ;1 Xnspoctor: to.

H*.e proaocutioa furthermore char os professor Dr. Schroodcr with special
responsibility for cxperLionts coniuctod in tho froi-cvork or rosonrch
assifh.'ionts.

1) Concorr.irv tho uffoct of tho sulfonamides

profossor Dr. 0«bLxdt and his assistants Dr. Fiachor and Dr. Horthn ">ber-
r.eutor conducted experiments on this -atter. Outsido of tho ur.provon
nosertion t.-u t ns second hi.host officer in tho Nodical Sorvico of tho Luft-
woffo irof. Dr. Scnroodor must have known about tho experiments, tho pro¬
secution does not suOait any evidence yhutsoever lnsupport of Its contontion.
Tne rosecution con only rotor to an affidavit by tho so-dofendar.t Fischer,
v-ich, nowevor, since it is b'.sod a on error on tnis point, will bo rectified.

The dofunso vill do anstrata tn~t profossor Dr. Schroodor did not knoy
. nyt.ili*: about these experiments. Hw norrd about tnem for the first tluo
tnroupn ehe indictment which wti eorvod upon aim.

2 ) Concerning- tho question of ^follow Fever, Typhus, and Ho patltlo .

The executin' physician in tne throe lnst-nanod assi^-jonte was Pro¬
fessor Dr. San,;on in Strasbourg.

First of nil, the prosecution submits that, qs Oberstobsrrjt of tho
Resarvo of the Luftwaffe and ns Consulting Hygienist of .Jr Floot Center or
TGe Reich, Floet Center. Irof. Dr. Hendon was officially subordlnntod to tho
hodical Insyoctorato.

IBu dofenae wil likewise prove that ihc Hodlcnl Inspoctomto had nothin*
to 0 with tao activity cf SBafpn here in question. The Consulting Spocinllstr


29 Jor-.> 059-1- 3fr-9o*rd
Court Si. 1.


inasfor £-8 they v.r directors of voll-known clinics and scientific
institutes, retained, in. addition to their activity in the Vuhruacht, the
dlroctlon of tffbir civilian institutions , slnco rent rally they ja-re Indis¬
pensable there. It vas the duty of the nodical offices in charge, together
vita tJ« Consulting


2167


29 Jan. U7 «-A-15-l-PKP- Blaklay
Court Ho. 1


Physicians, to find a solution of this double position which was satisfactory
for both spheres of duty. Ir. doing go, one thing had boon established on
principle, the Consulting Physician bore the full responsibility toward
the civilian supervisin' agency for his activity in the civilian sector.

This ctlvity wes in no way subordinate to the supervisory duty of his
superior military nodical offices.

1) It is afferent alro dy irua the documents submitted by the prosecution
that Prof. Hearer, was given two quite distinct typos of orders, bocause
of his previously Ivaonetr: ted -.uble position . Han-on was Oberst-absarzt
in the Reserve Corps of the Luftw ffo, out on the other hand his main
position was t,a ordinary Professor for Hygiene and Director of the
Hygiene Institute A the Reich l.-ivorstiy Strasbourg. Hansen use.' this
latter position, without the chief aodicnl officer's knjwlo>‘ e —

which lid not violate hi a duties — to obtain roser.rch . , iosi l nraents
independently of tn»- Luftwaffe rrrd in ad ition to the orders already
, iven by the Luftwaffe, aosi .resents in tho same fields, ! ut with entirely
different aios.

2) «s early as 1941 ’’nd 1942 fcagsn had received "Research «s^i, icient8"lrcn
tho Luftwaffo, which, however, ore aorc properly describe : ."s "Assignments
for the production of vcocinos", for tho production ef influonsa,

yollcwi fever, and typhus vaccines; accordim to the statue of th.
production at the tiao are tho c nsuspti.o -f money, ho r.skod for
additional c ans . rea for extension of the time Unit of the aasirreaont.

Tho experiments required f ;r t:.is wore exclusively experiments with
animals -n! pure laboratory work; they ‘id not call f.-r experiments on
huacn bcincs, in any case. The vaccines could *. used for protection
against yellow fever or typhus without danger to tho hc*nlth and life of
human boings after having been tested in the laboratory on anionic.

These assignments given out by the Luftwaffo wore ‘, in accordance with
their contents, given out openly; thoy did not need the protection of
sucrecy.

In ccntr*st to this were tho rosearch ossl xocnts which Baa on

reCuivv. I from tho Reich Rosoarch Council in connection with the Institute

2168


29 Jan. 1.7 -A-15-2-?X?- 31sklsy
Court Sic. 1


for Military Scientific Research in his capacity as director of the
Strasbourg Hytriune Institute. Those orders Merc not open; they were sent
cs "Top Secret" unlor the protection of strictest secrecy.

1) In the franc-work of these * • signaents under the protection of
secrecy, Haa-.cn undoubtedly undertook experiments in concentration eenps.

The Jofanso will prove th.t the defendant Professor Dr. Sc brooder '.id
not h*.vo any knowledge of t»wse experiments. This is evident from the followin

a) All of tno requests for priawrr -nJ the entire correspondent on this
matter a'rkcd "Top S-cret" went either directly to the Institute for
Uilit-.ry Scientific Research mb to the Reich Research Council or via
Professor Hirt of Strasbour, , who h'd been included in tho work and
who, r.s confidential Cjent of tho Ahncnorbe Society and a. ont of tho
CP-dofenecnt SieVers, was located in Strasbourg, to the Main Aiminotrot-
iw Office of the SS in Berlin.

b) Duo to the secrecy impose- on this work, Hagen was obliyoc.' to maintain
nbsoluto secrecy about this work toward oil persons who ten: notSdng to

do with that work. Thus, of course, there was no r.ason to infora the
Chiof Medical Officer, since tho production asuirnoents of the Luftwaffe

had no connection with these research assignments to B'.rgen.

c) Tho defense will prove, by c-~ns of excerpts from the correspondence
of Haogun, that this correspondence was carried or. by him in his
capacity ns Director of the Hygiono Institute and not r.s Consulting
Hyieniot of the Luftwaffe.

d) The i -noronce of tho office of the Chief Medical Officer regarding
H-.a,jun's experiments on human heir, s is -vidont from the inquiry
addrusse' to Heston th- Chief of St'ff of the Chief of the Mediorl
Service of the Luftwaffe, Oborstarzt Dr. Kahnt, in June 19AA re ording
the cases of typhus which h:d occurred in the Nctzweil-r ermp. Such an
inquiry would never have been aa<\, if tho office of the Chief Medic-1
Officer had kn»n that Xatzwuilur was a coneentrr-tier, camp, since all
matters concerning concentration comps were handled by the SS as its
exclusive domain, and it refus-d ev u n to report epi emics among

2169

i


29 jcn.47 A-15-3-PK?- Binkley

Ko. 1


cmc«,ntroaion cacp ina'-t^s to other offices, e.g. the tiehraacht, ns was
usually required between nilitqry am! civilian offices - Health Officials,
Hualth Officas, otc. The only cone'usion th:t regains is, therefore, that
over. Oberav.rzt KAKlfT as Chief of Staff did not kn» that Natzwoilor was
a concentration ceap, but amuck! that it wss one of the


29 fan 47-A-?JC-16-l4-31i0cloy
Court ro»l

nroroua tnxTacfc ce^os fcr tho purpose of usine of troopo wvl that It wr.3
newly created durlac, tho v-r.

Tie iefor.so will prove That the defenin&t ?rof. Dr. SCHR0.3)3P. did not
have any porspncl knowledge of this lottor of hie cniof of 3tr.fr, ainco ho
happened to bo on an official trip to Italy at tfco tir-e in question,
a) The Counts in the Indictment ro. -rdinc 9xpori:*r.t3 on hx-an boirvu con-
corni :vj yoUon fovor and hepatitis are elininatod in any cnee since tho
prosecution did not sulci* nay evidence at all to conducted in thoso two
Croups.

Tver- tho docunonts aubr.ittod v .y tho prosecution it in quite obvious
that a eloarly lolinoatci production ansiur-ont for yellow favor vrcolno w-*r
loauol In 1942 «;.J that it was withdrawn after tfco African tfcoator or p»j was
Avon up, lr. July 194d.

Thoro was nc hopatitls roaoarch nerS^aant for V..IPZ: nu tho part of tho
Luffefo r.t nil. Tho oc-'i jusont had likewise boon issued no "?."? Socrot" by
tho Boioh Roeo-vrcfc council.

As tho ou-::lttol docu.or.tn prevo, aoloctei caslntr-nU for tho

oxocution or la oxporl: .onts trtxi tho oircloa of tho ©eta- lishod spoclnlldtc,
without canoi loritt tholr imrZort dp in ono or mother pert of tho \I6hr acht.
Thun Prof. G VIZ JIT and D3?u:! boloa* to tho .Vr.*.y, HiUKh'OT and lllh: to
tho Luftwaffe.

;.o tho witnoon 3Y2R has -Orenfy to.-tlflol bofuro this tribunal, no
export: .onto on hurnn boia a uoro conductor with rrforonco tc tho hopatlti3
neat s'«oat.

7a shall ou'< rtrntiato this jvi’onco oxtonsivoly thr : '* adlitional
uitnuseos.

2o ,-r !r. tho typhus oxporlrwnte on tho b-sla of tho or'.or of tho Raich
Rob oarch Council, tho . relocation noltfcor offers reasons for nor rmvoa a
km* I?. .,o of thoao thin/n. on tho part of tho dofcnlnnt Irof. Dr. SCHR0S33 5 ..
Cn tho contrary, wu shall bo nolo to *o .onstmto by teolt aoquiesconco
unloainhly by th_ tootinany of vltnor-os that


2171


25 jRrw-0£~?\w^TD-51akl«y
Coart Ho. 1


rrcf. r*. STIVER could not have known anythin; about then.

Concerning t» *xporimta to cako sea water pa table, the
following to applicable*

1 ) In accordance with hl> basic attitude toward Mdlcri othiM,
which wa, described in tho introduction, SCHHOEDZP. croons all experiment,
on human beings »hloh could bring about Injun- to tho health or evon doath.
H. draws tho lino of d«arcation ovon more sharply against such oxporimonts
on living human beings, if they could bo undertaken with intent to torture
em with intent from tho outeot to kiU. helther do euoh experiments, as
for example, those of DASCHER end DIH>, according to his attitude have
onythlng to *, with medical aclonco, nor do the pooplo who conduot them
have tho right to claim to ha called phyalciana or aciontlets. Ko consider,
that th<* are criminals and have to bo Judgod accordingly,

2) SCKOED3H oould agree only to experiment, in which, under appl!
cation of ell scientific principle, and precautions, tho ocourronoo of an
injury to the health -a. impossible according to the recognised principle.

of cndloal oxp^rionco*

Hjro it has to bo oonsidorod in hio favor that, in this case,
spoolal circcmctancco provrilol, which nsdo it possible to conoclvo tho
undertaking of exporim-nta in a concentration camp and which, in a sense,

forced thon to bo oxocutod thoro*

Special weight against the defendant is given to the fact that In

the letter to tho Reich 'dnlatar of tho Interior and tho aeichsfuohror SS
of 7 June 19U. he iid not mention that tho experiment. Panned in the eon-
eontr-.tion oamp Dachau.wera to bo oarrlcd out on voluntary experimen t;!
subjects and that he had consented at all to the undertaking of those
experiments on concentration canp incites.

The iofense rill prove that Prof. Dr. SCHDOKXR, first, & over:
thing possible in order to see to it that those experiment, be carried cu
at a Luftwaffe t»spltal or at the hodioal Academy of the Uft»fta a. tro
experiment., amt that only a wholesale, of circumstance., -hloh rill be


29 Jan.-li-3o-A-ATS-31aJcley (31)
Coart JTo, 1


detailed Inter, forced him to desist fror. this original pirn. He
assured himself, however, in nn extenslvo conversation with tho
Reich Physiclen SS Gmwitz that, even under tho changed conditions,
the prerequisites for the experiment would remain the some no in the
originally planned troop experiments, especially the voluntary nature


of the experimental subjects.

3) It is evident, further, from the ordering of the experiments rod
from the clear end defiuite directives issuod for their execution
to the diroctcr of the experiments, that tho defendant Prof. Dr.
Scfcroednr was guided by the aim of eliminating every injury to an
experimental subject rad of continuing tho oxporiuent only to the
limit of the compatibility of the mount of water rdainistored in
each erso, but to discontinue then immediately, when this limit soem-
ed to hav o boon reached and the conclusion of tho experiments occm-
cd deslrnnlo fror. the sub Joe tl re point of view of tho experimental
oubjoct, who refused further acceptance of vrtor if tho experiment
vrs continued, as wall as objectively, according to the physiological
findi.v;o.


Tho defense therefore believes that It c-n prove that tho defendant
Trof. Dr. Schrocdcr in no case went boyond tho licit* which have boon
inposod upon the physlclrn and scientist in tho cxcrcloo of hio
pro'psslov. by the cthicr 1 -ccdicrl and ror-l-hunrn priaciploo of
me lie 1 science recognized throughout tho world.

V 0 arc, moreover, of the ooinlon thrt tho defendant irof, Dr.


Schroodcr, through the order to conduct experiments or. making soa


water potable, by careful prcp-ratlon, by consulting recognized,
proven and experienced scientists, and by the elocution of tho
experiments under the superr 1 sion of a scientifically proven, r.odic-
ally exporionced university professor of sound character, crootei tho
prerequisites for the best scientific work, and that, with tho result
achieved by these means he helped to solve n problem of enoraous


2173


2 $ Je=.-l>-3W-AT>S:P*le7 (3Z)
Court 2To. 1


value for fcuncnity not only Surln* tins* Of vnr but, over and
oboro that, for tasks of psnee, the problec of rescuing hunen beln^o
In distress r.t sec froc dying of thirst .


2173 a


29 Jan 47-i-KAA_l&.l_3-a-nn
Coart *o. I


Mr. PreeideutJ *our -co-era-!

The Defendant GMK3M vas chief of the Hedlcel Ser' ico of tho
Waffen £"> fr'-e tho ti=e it w Pe or-'anisod. Ho wra in efcpr,:o of all the
sedical c?re of the troepa of the Vrffen SS, tht is to oa 7 nodical,
dental, phar&acoutical, and fay-lenie care of the four ori;inal and
later 36 divisions of tho Vaf'cn SS, In hie capacity an Chief of the
Medical Service of the V a ffen SS ho had no scientific reronreh
problocc to rolv©, never act colly raised each prohlooe hincolf nor
ordered their execution. Scientific research and planning vero
not, as tho evidence will clcorly shev, in tho handa of tho Defendant
C-L^'3ll—ci , Hit exclusively in the hand* of tho Reich rhycieiar. “S ur.d
Police Is - , GRjtfI"3. Tho -ole and exclusive tpjk of the Defendant
<SEBZE2 vcc the sedical cpro of the fichtinc ultc of the Vaffon SS
at the front end their ru-cr'eo at h^so. At tho end of tho v*r tho
Vaffen cospricod at at 900,000 sen, tho nodical poroonnol alone
aaounted to over ac,CCO poroono at ho end of ly.. Cli*321! clone
woa rosDonclhlo for th« professional direction and pors'nnl nanaffoont
cf thic peroonnel, tho 61 hocpltolo and the aodioal unite, and
finally for tho ncdlcnl caro of tho ontiro Vaffon SS. It in clear
that V-i< fcufo and extentivo tack, lod and dlroctod by his ulono, loft
his no tiso to ‘ako evon a superficial, net to «onti«n a detailed
intoroct in pny eclontific research or planning.

In the -roEontatlon of =y evidence I shall firct, by oxaslnir^; tho

defendant ta voll ac tho witnoaoee whoc I ha.ro called, precent to

th« Iribucal ovidonee of Gi-TZi-'e non-pertlcipetlon in the alledfcd

concpirocy of tho defondantc. In p-rticular, I shall provo that
%

C-IoZSlu vp 3 ir. p very toncc relationship with GRdVITZ ac well n
HT.CCl£, that he had considerable ccntrcvorsioa with both, and thi-t
consocuoatly both of then considered Mr * persona lnrrata ct i-ccrtn n ,
end so th«t for this reaaon alcne it coot ecen ivprobrblc tht
GSAJflvZ and K1WIM would initiate hie into tho cxperlaonte on
concentration c*c? inartes which those two planned and ordered, or would


3174


29 J'v^-fVniii-16-L-3urna (jp)

Court I

ovan infora hi:, of those experiments.

If jvon tho origin”tor* of those oxporiuente did cot w.t the
Dofcndnnt Gonxkea to he informed nhout thoir oxporincr.ts, tho axocutlna
n^onta could certnialy not invo dono oo. I alr.ll furthorsoro prow,


2174 (*)


29 Jan 47-XJUA_16-a_rnms (KSD)
Court Jo. I


through the defendant, that with one single exception he did not
dlacuss the experi-’e-t, with which he 1 b charred with ary of hlo co-
defendanta or with other persons, and that he did r.ot requrst or rocelvo
enjr scientific reporto or curry on any eorrccpondonco about theeo
exno"lcon‘:. Acldc fron this --sneral point of view of conspiracy and
memborahin in the 32, GIS3QJJ io ch-r/ed with apodal rcaocnaibllity
for allayed partlclpatl'n In the sulforanldo, typhus, phosphorus, rad
polacc experiments. «c !e not charred with actlvo participation In
those exrerlr.en*s. *t 1 B r.ly asserted that, In eplto of allegedly
eonploto kaovlcd'o, above all of the typhus experiments, ho did net do
anythin* arainrt then. Dr. IIX, the directcr of tho Section for
Typhuc and '-'iruc H©ccareh in tho Buchcrxald conccntratlcn carp, and
tho latter 1 e ouporlor, tho co-dofcndnnt MSXCkSET, aro allowed to havo
boon hlo subordinates. It io assert d thd i ontken carried on continucuo
corrocpondonce will DI.E* and w*e thoroforo accurately lnfornod about tho
typhus oxporIsonto; olio that he consciously toloratod and promoted
the svlfonomldo, phoephorua, and poloon experinento. Tho Prococution
attempted tc prow l»g eeccrtlonc refer* in/: participation In tho
typhus ixpcri-ontc by submitting af < idavl*e of tho co—dofondrntc
HOVE* -nd MTCOWarr, by submit tlr./- tho Dli* diary, Kid throu/i the
vltnocs Dr. E:GCJ. I ohall on the othor hand brln^ procf, by oxasinirv;
tho dofonccnt and through defonco w*t«c3eor, that no ouch criminal
rocponulblllty of f onikon con be aooiccd. It will, in particular,
oppo-r fron *hc vldoncc th n t OliiZEJ did not su/'est, tolorato, or knew
any dotallc about either tho establishment of the research lnctituto or
tho execution of experiments on human bclrvc, “ho cvidcnco will show
that P-cich Physician C-BXfITZ ordered tho cxporl=cnto without any
previous cr cubacoucnt participation of tho Defendant GlaZEA-Jl

It io true th- t GLaSGJ.' knew He. DliiG. He did not, however, ordor
Ik, DLiC- 1 a aooitnaont to ^uchonwald, and ho never requested sdontlllc
reports fron him or recolved such reports unsolicited; ho nevtx accepted
DlaC-'s orcaal nal Invitation to visit hie in 3ucboawcld.


20 Jen 47-J.JUA_16_2-3ume (KSlfl
Court Jo, I

Vhrt Ciki 7nj i 1 au.” of Buchorarnld was r.crcly the feet that o station
existed for the production of thetyphue vacclno which urgently
r.oodod >y tho unite of the Jaffen SS, and th»t free about the Spring
of 1343 approclcately 30,000


VAT, _

217 $-*


29 *"hji 47-A_KJuL_16-3-3urr.a (XSS)
Coart So. I


doses of vaccine were to bo produced aonthly. E« never learned any¬
thing about deliberate causing of. infections, series of experimentc,
or deaths running into several dleits, nor has the Prosecution been
able to present any conclusive evidence to this effect. Whether and to
what extent the purely forsal relationship of subordination of the cc-
dofendant IBOCCT-SKY and the deceased ft 1 * EISG tc C-UaUJ incriaiuates the
latter in tho sence of bein'* cr*finally punishable will also be clarified
In the gouts o of tho presentation of evidence.

A? for the eulfonaalde experlcente, the Prosecution believed
that It could deduce criminal p*"ticipatlon of the defendant by
proving that the bacteria cultures usod for this purpose in
Ravennbruoefc and aver- the wood and glass


2176


J


Court I

29 Jan u7— - 16-la - LJQ

• %

particles needed fur tho artificial ccntardnation of the wounds wore
delevered by the Hygienic Institute of tho Kaffon SS.

I shall , rove through defenso witnesses that the execution of these
sulfanamide ex p e r ime n ts was no acre in tho field cf work of tho riedical
Office of the -affen SS than tho typhus experiments, the question -f whothor
the ex. urinents are punishable rooaina open. Moreover I shall ,rove that
nothing waa known 3bcut these or. ..rimonts in the Medical Offico of tho
iiof fen SS either ta the Defendant Genrken in particular know n. thing about
them. Whether, boy nd that, tho ship amt >f b in d r °n° cultures, etc.,
from tho Hy, ionic Institute f the .»affen SS to the c ncentration camp
Ravunabruock in itaolf constitutes a . unishoble action of too defendant
Oensken will also be cleared up in tho course of ay presentation of
evidence. Groover, tho Prosecution has not boon able to rosont any
ovidunco her«, oithor, to tho offeet that Gcntkcn hlnself had anything tc
do with the delivery of tho culturos.

Tho Prosecution, further to su.-port its charges against Ountkon,
refers t the Best nsouttn. at tho Military Medical Acodesy in Borlin in
May 19J:3 and in this connection presented an affidavit by tho co-e'efundant
Fischer stating that Oontkon was present at this mooting and heard
Fischor's report n sulfonanldo axperioents.

Fischer is mistaken. He will not :nlycorrcct this tooti.aony in this
respect himself, but, swrootur, tho defendant an:* witnessos will prove
that Jenakea id not hear Fischor's report. hethor cr n-t tho conclusions
r »wn by the Prosocution from participation in this coating arc at all
pertinent fr<,= a legal point cf view .r not, these arguments dr not
ap r ly to tho Defendant Gonzkon because he did not participate in tho
■sooting.

Finally, cs to counts 6 K and 6 L of the indictment, noaoly poison
ox, orirvants b7 administering poisoned food, etc., and experiments with
i-hos^hcrus incendiary bombs, I am cmplutely at a less to see her tho
defendant could have had axything tc do with these oxporiaents, which


Coart Ho. 1

29 Jin U7~ - 16-2a - LX, -

took placo lr. tho concentration caeai Buchonwald buginning in th. late
fall of 15u3. It hes already beon oetsbliahed rind will bo alphasisod onco
mere during tho presentation ~f evidence that fron 1 September 1913 tho
Hygienic Institute was no letter under the defendant Genzkon, but under
the Reich rhysician SS Srawits. Iho sane is true of tho subordination -if
tho co-defundant Iru^.-./aky. .'ho Prcr-cution's contention that iirugowsky,
*hoa tho Prosecution attempts to aik- urimrily responsible fer thooo
oxioriskjr.ts, w_s Gensken's i*uto is incorrect in this r-3. ect, For

those ox; uriaents took place at a time when ti» Hygienic Institute under
Mru^uwsky had already town token away froa tho defendant Gonzkun.

Nor did Gontken have any kn> wludgo cf those experiments; ho learned
cf then nly threu^h tho Indictcwnt. This will bu shown unequivocally by
tho evidence.

Tho evidence in the Oonzkon case ■ill sh..w that it was not the duty
of tho defendant to conduct scientific research r uxnvrinents on prisonas,
but only .ve nodical cara t. the tr pe of thu Raff an 3S.

Tho case for tho Prosecution rvay at first ,;ivo tho impression that
Gonskon, at L .at by tacit toleration, *rticipated in experiments. Thu
caso for tho Defur.se, «>r. tho -ther hand, t.111 shew that is nrt sc; it will
shew that the Defendant neither r rod such experiments nor tolerated
thorn, n^r kn jw anythin., abcut tho k»oth ds usud in such uxperirunts, but
that ho w.rkod r.ly ca a ;hysicinn, s~ldi«.r, uxl rgmiacr in tho nod?cal
sorvica T tho tfeffun SS.

7HS PRESIDENTi The Tribunal will niv be in rucocs for a fow rinutos.

(« recuse wa3 taken tj 1515)


29 J. ir-„- JSS-17-l-ktfuanc
Court So. 1.


7SZ :.£S^L: 7h<- Tribunal ia u.nic ic session.

CT F.-2SIES-.7: Counsel for Defendants Gebh rdt, Ob^rheuBor and Fischer
eny proceed.

DR. S2IDL: For the 3of.ndar.Ca Dr. &-rl O-bh. rdt. Dr. Herta Oterhouser
and ft-. Frits Fincher.

kr. President. Your Sonora: Tfcc experiments carried out or. behalf of
;r.o Genian Wo hr a ach t ruproront xn the iniictnout a soparato <roup which has
nothin/: to do with tho oth. r actions foruin,: tno r, -ouada of the indlot-ont.
.Jthou.li it .jvy be truo th't tho individual oxpori onto dJffor considerably
in method, and aclor.tlflc roault, and consequences, ono point ia common to
all of tnom: tnoy wore brought about by tho necessities of the war, an 1 their
result* wero to help the hard-fi^itln.{ ar~les . jid the nation, whicn was in¬
i’ ilvod i.i r. life and death stru..*le.

Tae dof.ndr.nta represented by uo /.re accused of special responoibllity
for i>11 >r SOU* of these experiments. In viow of that, I shall leal only with
that part of the indlotnent and testimony, and shall ray no attention to tho
other •.oints of tno indictment.

JTevertheloss it scots nacssc.-uy to bo*,-ln -<ith r. fev fundamental rounrko
with respect to tno str.tc-.nt of th Chi.f prosecutor.

7ho ..rooecution o.-phnsised that the Tribunal hr.a a twofold responsibility
in this cr.ec. Or. the one hnda the defendant a ~ust h vo n fair trial and a
Just aontonce, w.-.lch responsibility, hoveror, ie borno by every ro/nxlar court.
But also, it vr.a stated — and tr.io ia men tore important — tho incrodiblo
facts nr.d iioiva and motives must bo established which .ovod these defendants.
Tr.e insane and vicious doctrines of 5ationnl Sociolian have to bo brought
to li.nt; otherwise there ia the danger of a repetition of such aiadooda,
vr.io„ could not be aurTivcl by tho civilised world.

There cu bo r.o doubt that this intention Isa source of considerable
danger for an objective ann Just verdict. The purpose of nil criminal pro¬
ceedings is the discovery of tho notorial truth, "to first prerequisite for

:nv discovery of t..o truth in a court trial la the impartial oBt.abJlshtu.nt

2179


29 JO a- GI5-17- 3- r. ocean

Court Ho. I.

J

of tho obJ,ctivo facts. ?uis includes all the circumstances, which nro in
direct connection with tho doed itself. It is accessory to ost&bllsh thooo
obj-etivc facts to eolvo the problem of the illo.’Jity of the octi>n and tho
,-ullt of the dofoninnts, <sA to ap.ily tee lew.

It .73ee without say is,: th. t tnc motives thr.t lod to the '.cti'ns of tho
dof jndonts must also bo thoroughly ex.-_inod. The dofonso too is prrticulnrly
ir-torostod in clv./.rin-* up those facts.

It seems, novovor, superfluous, ind imp.rils tho findin,- of n Just
Verdict, to include r.s one of the points of tho trial th o gonerrl political
<j.d philosophical principles , w..lc.. nllo^odly h-'d tho actions of tho
defendants ns thoir consoquonco. In tr.ls trial wo cannot place the political
and


2150


Cwt *c. 1
2 S Jen


phil;s -phieel principle* lee eoeadcntly teside or above the accused oerscr.B.
The object of tac trial is specific actions and not the OMalnetio? of the
Question whether a political or philosophical conviction eight generally to .
f~,i to result in criminal actions or in a certain type of crine.

There is ell the more reason to ooint to this peril since in another
trial, which dealt with siuilor oroblems, the tribunal epocrontly did not
linlt itself to the esccrtclning of the facts which famed the basis for tho
Indictment and the legal guilt of the nccused. but in addition passed, judg¬
ment also af basis for the verdict. I refer to the review of orocoodings
of the General Military Court at Dachau vs. Schilling ot.nl. (Document BO-
666 ), which tho prosecution submitted as inhibit Ko. 125 in the course of
tho testiaony on tho unlrrio experiments and vhoro It says literally in
rarrgraph XIV:

"In oaay respects the accused Schilling was tho aost reprt-henslblo.

Ho voluntarily came to Dachau fully cognisant of tho nrturo of tho work ho
intended to perform. Being the educated and learned poreon that ho wo,
Schilling undoubtedly cuot hnv# realirwd the aenner in which his work
suitod tho need# of the Basis. Although his personal notives may havo
ota-aed from the desire to aid humanity, ho permitted hinoolf to utillsi
Has! method* in contract to other cuinont Geracn artists rr.d scientists
who either flod or refused to make themselves a part of tho Natl systoa."

I believe it is generally accepted that the valuo or truth of a
philosophic system or a specific "Weltanschauung" cannot bo ruled on by a
court cf law. Vhatevor our opinion nay be of the veluo of the Rational
Socialistic theories, there can be no doubt that legal proceeding can no
aore pase Judgment cn tho valuo of this philosophic and political program,
than it can on tho value and truth of historical materialism or any similar
doctrine. A legal proceeding can only coneorn itself vlth tho investiga¬
tion of concrete acts and with tho application of the law to these acts.

Ho vital importance con bo attached to Kational Socialist ideology in the
solution of the problsa whether or not e specific act.or failure to act on
the part of these defendants is illegal end punishable end hence of the


Court lu. 1

29 Jr a -.7-A-15-2-QLH-Jeld*.


nature -f a crime. The introducti-n of ohilosophic rad political princi¬
ple* in e criair-iil nrocooding la always a threat to the finding of factual
truth anc to the passing of a Just verdict - a threat to which to tribunal
ahcwld oxp-sc itself vlthout compelling cause.

Ihero la likewise just aa little reaaon to examine Id this trial funda¬
mental problems of cedical ethica. Opinion vill actually dlffor only very
little herd. The pledge of Hippocrates, "priour. non nocore", ia a funda-
.'.octal part of any nedical activity, and no arguments on the principle are
necessary. The problem of this trial Is not whether the physician, accor¬
ding to the viewpoint of his profession, Is justified In carrying out
cxpurlnonts on living people, and if so, to what extent. The probleu Is
rrtheri does the lav, with regard to specific emergencies caused by the
war, nontl-n special oxtonuatlng circumstances which, ao en exception,
extiipt an other wise forblddon operation from punishment. This, however,

Is not a probleu of nodical ethics but solely a logoi problea. This ouos-
tion will h; vo to bo discussed uore thoroughly after all tho cvldoneo hr*
boon presented.

It would be well also to call attention now to o third poril which
oould, undor certain clrcurstiness, Jeopardise tho finding of the factual
truth with respoct to the defendants, and that Is the only problon with
which the presont proceeding is concerned - and tho ascertaining of tho
guilt of thi defendants. I an roforrlng to the conditions In the concen¬
tration eemps.

It Is true that the experiments were carried out finest exclusively
In concentration comps. Evidence regarding theso camps hi s already been
submitted In the proceedings before tho International Military Tribunal.

In this connectlvn I refer mainly to the testimony of the witness Dr.

Horton (page 14846 of the German transcript). Documents were also sub¬
mitted to this court which aaoeg other thirds describe the general condi¬
tions In these camps. kitnessos were also heard on this subject. The in¬
dictment does not assort that the dofsndcnts ero responsible for the con-

. nevertheless the danger cannot be denied that tho
2182


dltions la these carps


Court Bo. 1

29 Jan •.?-A-ie-C-LSi-7«ldt


impression .f tho conditions in these crops could only too easily affect
t'.c ascertaining rnd evaluation A the guilt of these defendants. This is
another reason for Uniting the subject of this court exar.inction to the
facts for vhlcfc the defendants are tde accountable in the indictaent. The
general conditions in the concentration coops voro entirely outside their
sohere of authority. They vert the responsibility of rgcncica vhlch hnd no
organisttivnal connection with tho Vohrmicht or the Medical Service of the
Waffen SS.

at the end of the vtr the defendant Gebhirdt had tho rank of Major
Oenoral of tho Vaffen SS In the hedical Service of the Vnffen SS. After 1
September 1943 he vr.a ohief clinician of tho Waffen SS. Tho indictaent ac¬
cuses hlQ of spociol responsibility in the carrying cut


29 Januarj-A-DJG-16-Ia-F eldt
Court Mo. 1


of the nodical experiments alleged by the prosecution, lr. several of those
experiments the prosecution was not able to present documents or witnesses
that could prove a special responsibility of the defendant Gebhardt with
regard to these experiments. I shall discuss the resulting legal problems,
particularly with respect to Point I of the indictment, in qy su nn ing up
after the hearing of the testimony.

In other experiments the prosecution could submit several documents
which show at least that the defendant had an organizational or other con¬
nection with the experiments. In part the documents themselves shew that
the defendant Gebhardt learned of these experiments only ofter thfeir complet¬
ion. From othor documents it is obvious that the intended experiments wero
not carriod out at all that the planned experiments cane to a standstill at
an innocent preparatory stago. All the resulting legal problems 1 ahull
also discuss in ay suauing up.

The essential point of the accusations against the defendants Gebhardt

and Fischer are the experiments which were made to test tho effectiveness

of the sulfa drugs. Tha defendants do not dony having carried out these

teepcriments themselves. In doing so the defendant Fischer acted on ordors
0

of his superior Gebhardt. I shall discuss later the pert which the defen¬
dant Cborhauscr had in these experiments.

It can of ccurso not bo my tarfc to show in detail at the present singe
of the proceedings, the reasons which made these experiments nocessary.
Nevertheless a few indications leco to be pertinent at this tino.

Tho sulfa drugs are a German discovery and wore introduced into thora-

pcutics, along with Protosil, in 1932. This was precodod by nine years of

evolutionary research by the German scientist Dcoafh. The success of tho

thorapy was demonstrated by bacteriological considerations and proofs. Iho

diseases were classified according to their type of virus, and the therapeutic

possibilities wore Judged frees this viewpoint; It appeared that diseases

caused by an infection through streptococcus, staphilococcus, auningococcus,

pneumococcus, and gcnocwccus offered tho best prospects fir cure. This was

the opinion of the German military physicians at the beginning cf tho war in

2184


29 Janu=ry-A-DJG-18-2a-Feldt
Court Mo. 1


1939. Although a final clarification of the value of the sulfa drugs had
not ytt beer, established, especially with regard to wound infections caused
b7 streptococcus and staphylococcus cr by the virus of gas gangrene - it was
nevertheless dear that these drugs were a very considerable help in the
battle against wound infection. The experiences during the first war years
s.eoed to confine absolutely the correctness of this opinion. These favor¬
able results


29 Jaa-Jr-SSS-lS-lo-rallt -

Court So. 1.

led to the publication of easy treatises in -edical literature, and the
publications of Frofessor Schreus and his disciples found special attention,
tney asserted the absolute effectiveness of the sulfa drugs spinet the above-
jentloned viruses us wound lnfectors and against gas gangreno. Others, how¬
ever. warned against overrating the sulfa drugs in the treatnent of wound
infection. Until 1941, nine years of clinical experience and bacteriological
research in vitro had thus not —fficed to arrive at a unifora opinion on the
value of a group of drugs with union tho entire aedical profession occupied
Itself lntcnoively in research and practice.

Tuou.th during the first two years of the war the surgical installations
of the field nrny an: tho chonlco-therapy that won coning into uoo had boon
sufficient to seot all domais, tno experiences of tho 1941/42 wintor poriod
in Ruosln, wnicn saw tno dorian ur_ios at tno ©ites of .oscow, wore to bring
up again tho discussion of the offic.vcy of tho sulfa drugs us a resody for
wound infections. It had appeared that evon throo yoors of war nedlcnl oos-
porionco had not boon able to clcrlfy this question fully. But it hnd also
appeared th -1 tu« fat) of hundreds of thousands of injurod soldiers uight
dopend on the right and tlsuly solution of this quosti>n. The situation wrs
beoulng nil tuo sore difficult as there was no hope of solving this question
lo a snort tine turougn clinical observation ir. a my nowpltals. For, uidor
the war conditions at the front, the nuobor of unknown faotors beem-o anny
tl .os nighor tnan in p«.aceti-o. ird tno f:;ct that in tho oanntirao a new
•ulf.- preparation, Ultrnsoptyl, whoso officrcy soao peoplo estinnted very
highly, hod been developed, cospllc ted tat problou still _<oro.

Tho filial clarlficatltr. of tho fficacy of the sulfa drugs for wound

infections had thus becoso a nilitor y -surgical ard choaico-thorapoutic quostior

of vital ihcortaneo. It w-.s a tatter of courso that the stntc hnd no pross foi

the fastest possiblo solution of the probion bccruaso of thu great lossos to be

uxpoctod during the cosing winter. lade.-d, the decision whether it would bo

necessary to reinforce the front-lino surgical installations or whether, in

view of tn*. favorable results of on intensive sulfa trectuont, tho voundod

soldiers could be expo clod to atko the long trip back to tho renr-aron r.ruy

2136


2C Jrn-Jr* JTS-13-2b-?uldt
Court 3o . 1.


mospitols, dope mied on it.

The ?*let SS physician Grnvitz hid boon comisslonod to c--rry out tho
experiments concerned. foe hiring of tho avldonoo will show in 4ot:.il
under what clrcucstr.acos the def-ndac*. Dr. Gobhardt boc'_c connectod with
tnoec experiments.

Lot us point out right now, however, tki.t it was duo exclusively to tho
dofowinnt Fobhmrdt that tno experiments wore not conducted under the condition!

v. .ic.. had originally boon ordered by the Hoich SS physician Grnwits, Tho
orders for those oxporiaonts provldod tnnt tho test porsons were to bo shot
at. Thu purpose vn to cause wsunis under vnrliJto conditions and to work on
thou with sulfa drugs. Thor, is no doubt that in view of infoction thr ugh
clothes p. nicies und oarth the experiments would have boon far noro dangerous
than under the condit'Ons under which they were actually conducted. Instond
of oerth storlllccd pulvorlsod glass was usod. Uftiforn and clothes pnrtlclos
were replocod by ttorllltod colluloso.

As tno evidence has saovn, fouilo aoabors of tho PollA resistance woro
usod as tost persons. All the to't persons had bocn sontencod to donth by
courts-mnrtii 1 because of t.iolr activity in tau reoiat. nce movement. Vo shall
submit ovidonco wit., reference to tno lagul principles of these proceedings,

w. .ich wore instituted in accordance with a docroo of tho Governor Ooncrnl

for the polish occupied territories. Vo shall submit further ovidonco snowing
tnnt tee records of tao poplo sontonccd to death by courto-aartinl hid boor.


referrod to a special pardon board in tae Govornaont Oon ml, which docidod

or. tha fin 1 execution of tao sont-mco. In tau legal evaluation of those fncti

I shell oxa-lne the status of tnoso prisoners with regard to international

law aad also ruiso tns question whut he ring the fact that thoso teat persons

and or had not v->lunte<<rod has on the illegality of tho experiments.

purtaennro, it is tho purpose of tne subclssion of evidence to give tho

court a clear idea of the alnnor by vcieh tho oxporiaonts tacasolvoe woro

carried out, ns veil as of tho inilvidual serlos of experiments and of thoir

results. Lastly, the scientific kaowlodgo gained froa sham and their

2157


zg joi>-u-a:5-i6-3t-?cidt.

Court Jo» i.

pr< ctlc_l effect* will be ahown, particularly in connection with the tvo
report a of the defendant* Qcbcardt and Fiacher, proaontod at n conforcnco
- . the ,r-y j.odicrl ^crdcjy in Jfcy I 943 . T^o directives laauod on tho b.-eie
of t-o»c exporl-onta for tho trer.tsont of wound infoctlons will bo aubuittod
in tho oourao of the argumenta.

But now wo aeould like to point out an error that the chief prosecutor
:-ado in uia description of the aulfa drag oxpcrlnont■ in hia oponing atnto-
-onta. Ho assort* that during too -my aulfa druc ojeporinonta *ono toat
peraona w.r» woundod. but wore r.ot t re--tod with oilfn dru^a. Tho*o oxporinont
wore conducted for tho purpose of comparing tho courao of tho infoctiono
tre toi with aulfu dru«;* with infoctlwa which had not boon chox^ico-
tuernpoutlcnlly tr tiled. Thi* ata* u at la not correct if it 1 * intondod to
conn taat thoae persona w re cot treated x.t nil. Bather, tho facta nro that
all tho toat persona were tr^ ted and, if necoaarxy, surgically. It wrvo also
oba rvod in a f ;r« t nan cuaoa of wocen trontod with aulfa drug* that thla wna
r.ot sufficient to atop a gon-ral aopsla and th t surgical


cr


233d


Court Ha. 1


29 Jan U7-* -19 -1 - LJ> - ritsgorala

truatnont was necessary, In this conn action we ray joint to the statement
of too ex.ert witness. Dr. Alexander, who ccndeded that the lcrgu scars
observed on tost persons were causod by surgical operations to ccefcat
inflomfuatlcns threatening the test .orsons 1 lives.

avidor.ee will further show that, while it is true that the -ofendants
Oobhnrdt anti'Fischer carried cut the ux:«rlBonts, they did everything
they could, to save the lives of the test jorsons and tc dnirizc tho
anticipated harmful effects after the introduction of tho bacteria culture.
If deaths occurred nuvortholaas they occurred owing to circus dances
that could not bo fully foreseen. Fewer deaths were to bo oxrocted slnco
tho defendants Oobbardt and Fischer <r other surgeons of tho nohenlychon
hospital stood ready at all times in erdor tc perform operations at once,
shoui occasion arise. Bvidunco will sfww as woll that oxaerijntnte
wore discontinue 1 at onco if deaths cccurrod. The defendants wore the
non* ru.vy to cnice this docisicn as tho experiments carried out up to
that tine wore sufficient to provide a clear solution to tho problems
raised and to suggest guiding principles that would servo as a sufficiently
firm basis fer military surgery and for tho treatment with sulfa drugs.

I shall new deal briefly with the activity of tho defendant Cberhousor

In those experiments. Sv.teaonts nado in this connection by ti witnesses

oxendnod in court wur, cn tho whole in agroeaint. xcccxding* to thor, the

activity of this dufandant was ossentially confined to carrying out tho

preliminary _xa-inaticns of those Ust persons, chingin ( thoir dressings

in accordance with directives of her superiors and taking tho suitablo

choaico-th«ra 4 .outic erasures. dvidenco will further shew that the defendant

^jorheusor cane accidentally int*o cent.ct with those exporinonts because

her ward in tho hospital of the car*, was elrectl^ adjacent tc tho operating

rec«a, and because, lr. connection with the experiments, she had to vacate

several roars,, in which the test persons were lodged. Since it was also

her duty to tr«it -test persons, and to care for then, she had to be ;:or-

scmlly present during the operating* ir. erdor tc be faoiliar with the

2169


Court I


29 Jan U7-« -19 -2- LX - Fltsgerald

course cl lae urgical incision, as, otherwise, it would have been
lapccsible for her to •llainate ary congestion, for instance, which
be caused by the bandages. Judicial scrutiny of the entire
evideiwe oust answer the question whether the conclusion can be drawn from
these facta that the defendant Cborheusor wanted those experiments ;-orson-
allyi whether, that is, in the sonso cf tne law, she acted deliberately
with regard to these experiments.


r


ZL9 0


29 Jan^^-JMJD-hUgerald
Court So. 1

In the iniictmnt the defendant Obcrhouser is also accused of
special responsibility for porforsdng sterilization experiments* The pro¬
secution was not in a position to present any evidence *n support of this
charge, Theroforo, it will not bo nocossary to deal further with this point
of tho indieteent in the case of the defondant Oberhousor.

Tour Honors, I believe that what I have said will suffioo to show
you tho ain of our defense. It cannot bo up to ae at the presant stago of
tho proceedings to draw the legal conclusions that result fron tho appli¬
cation of tho ccmonly roco;rniaod dootrinos of international law and tho »
gonoral principles that derive from the crirdnal law of all civilized nations
to tho entire body of those faoto.

This will bo possible only in ay suaaation, after tho presentation
of all tho ovidonee. In doing sc wo shall have to take our point of depart¬
ure fron foots that do not first havo t~ bo prevon, bocauso they oan bo
accepted as already known to tho Tribunal. This is particularly truo of
apeoiol conditions brought about through tho war.

But we mist state a t this tire that tho dofonse cannot shun lto
duty to oxanlro in detail whother certain cried ml laws nontionod in tho
indiotaont oan bo appliod to tho faoto of this trial. This holds truo fer
Decree No. 7 of tho Military Oovorncwnt for Oormny, as wall as for Law
No. 10 of tho Control Council. In this connection I point out Articlo I of
Dooreo ffc, 7. According to this provision tho aLUtaiy courts established
on the baois of this dooreo are rot only eaapjtont to try and punish persons
who aro accused of having ccBr&ttod a punishablo act dasipnntod as a crine
in Articlo II of Law Ho. 10 of tho Control Council. Rathor, their conpotonoo
is to axtond also "corepiracy to cc-udt such a crino," that is to soy, to
tho fCot of the conspiracy, as sat forth in detail in point I of tho Indict¬
ment under tho holding, "tho Cc«aon Conspiracy."

2191


Court to* 1


Further, nay I point out at this tiae the fact that Article II
of Law So. 10 of the. Control Council constitutes a considerable amplificatici
of tbo ooncept of conspiracy as it is to be found in Oeman criminal lav;.

It is ay opinioo-which I shall substantiite later in detail - that as a
basic nrincipla tho contact of the defendants is to be judged according to
Oeman criminal laws. Thoy wore living undor this law at tho tine in
question and it is this law that was valid for thoo. In other words I it must
be inquired.


2192


29 J an 47UJ~SV-19-UJrt t *geraid
Court o» I

whether the rhove-nentioced regulatlone fie not violate • principle
which Is the essence of every to ('em eyates of penal lew and which
la expreaeed in the propoeltlon, "nulla peona Bine lego." A rrlce
can he punished only when the crlslnellty and punlahrent were locally
laid down boforo the act w, a cossltted. *hle prlnclplo le valid not only
for the individual le/al facte hut also for the circumscription of the
Loral liability and f©r the reflation that determine the defendant'o
reeponolhlllty for a crlco coesltted hy another.

Jurtheraore, of epecial lTortanca will ho tho oxecinetion of
the question to whet extent the feet that the defendants actod upon ordero
and in a opecial cllltery capacity, exonerates then or et loaot oervee
ee a sltlgatlng olromatance. In thle connection tho rolatlon bot-'eon
Article 47 cf the Gem® Military Crlnlnal Code and tho rolovant pre¬
visions of Lm* -o. 10 of the Control Council will hero to ho Investigated*
The crux.of the local evaluation of tho'-facte that tho cvidonco
has ortehllohvd will, however, he the ocrutlny of tho question whothor
tho model -ar condltlono under which the crises wore conalttod will
alec Justify the asausption of special oxtenuatlnr clrcuostancos,

IE. SAITOLt (Counsel for Defendant Dr, Kurt Slone)

Your Honors, It la sy duty to explain to you in whet way the
defence of Dr, Blose will he conducted.

l) Thw Su>ject cf the I-dlc»ner>- arelnst Ifc. Sloae id hlo allogod
participation In the following cocploxect

1) The Malaria lxperl=«nts, of. Section GC of the Zndlctaent

(Doo. So -k 4)

2 ) The Lost ixporlaontc, cf. Section 6D of the Indlctaont

(Doc. Book 13)

3) Yho Snlfonasldo i-xperiaon*r, cf. Section d of the Indict-

^ »

seat (Doc. Book 10)


219 .' ’


29 Jaa 47-1-19. 2J JIt v orald (KSD)
Court - r c. I


4 ) The Action, a ainst tho tubercular Poles, c£. Section 8 <*

13 of the Xndlctaent (Doc. Bock 9)

B) Che in thane t la Progress, cf. Section 9 & 14 of the Indlctoont
(Doc. Bock 14/1, 14/11, 14/U1, 15, 16, 17)

Ir. re- ard to these five points the Proeocutlon hp# charged Dr.
Bleeo With npecl*.! reBponelbility; In addition, It h e rained the
receral charge of r*nwplr«»cv.

n) The purpose of t^a dofe naa of Dr. Bioce will be ao followoi

1) : Dr. Blcne pprilcir-ted In no way In the calaria experiment.

Ho had no kncvled-e of Dr. Schilling'• nalarla expericontc
in Dachau, he never #et foot In tho latter'# inetitution,
ho rover epoke a word with Dr. Schilling about the
latter'I nalarla experlnon'e, and ho never not hln In
hi# life.

2) : Dr. Sion# had equally no knowledge of the Loot experiment

It vos only here that he heard of then. Particularly,

Blcce never rave a research ojolgnnent to Prof###or Dr,

Hirth concerning Los* get experiment# on living or¬
ganise#; £hnt a#oign=ent frees th# Belch R##e#rch Council
to Profe#tor Birth v*« , i-en by C-#helnret Sauerbruch.
a or vae the riving of euch en aval.-nnent among th# con-
pot#ncl#B of Dr. Blore; the giving of thic aeelgnoont
. to Profecocr Birth v fe l n accor'aneo with tho ueual
prededure, registered «ith he Belt Beoearch Council
under the rsan« of Dr. Sauerbruch; the wlmiltimeouo
registration of that ae#lrn=ent -v-der tho hat* "Bloa#"

• apparently a writing error. Che evidence will prove
thi#.

3)t With the Sulfcnanlde experiments Dy. Blono had nothing to do
eithor; ho learned of then only here in Kurnberg. °n
prinlcple, Dr. Blone was not present and never represented
by an a«ecclate at conference, of phy*lcl®n« where report#


2194


39 J«b <7-i-SV-\3-SJ-?lt vox-aid (^)

Coart *e. i


on this euh«oct -ere allegedly firen; thno ho ne^er heard of those
conforereee, oop«cl»lly olnco thoy v*ro coiyrosscs of SS physicians
or tfohrapcht physicians, vho v ( re rot subordinate to tho H e lch Zwador of
Physicians.


29 j*n ;7-?j !>3S-ic-?l tz^erell
Ccwrt Ho. 1

4) : It is trua that Or. Plena v*& coarsetoi =lth the &len to liquidate tho^a-

aaia of Polos suffering fren incurable opon tubarcillosls, tot not ia a
crlxilnal t-orjor, Just thu ccstrar;: ha opposod tho projoot ijul finally nr.n-
ac>3 to pro-rant Its axocutlos. This w»3 tho exclusive «cco::pli3h=ar.t of
Dr. xas; f ie is olonrly prerod y tho doemsnts already sutrlttod by the
Prosecution ia Docunnt Bock 0,

yuthoir-oro, 3LC53 fou~ht noet rohonoatly and ouscossfally eu'.ainst tho
further plan to oxtontinato thoH&alloctual u«nor class cf Paired by noons
of storilizatlcn; this will also bo proved by tho ovidonco.

5) : ma:; Had no share in tho outhan .cla TroerC. Tho icon ants an 1 * othor

oridonoo uhlob tho Prosoeutloa has eu’:lttod cn tha irc-ija:: and attention

•

of euthanasia novor oaoc :aationoi tho a*:o of Dr. 3LC13. Herortholoss
tho Prosecution has olio ,6d a social responsibility of Dr. 3101*3 la ^ard
to out’.anaeio, apparently basin t is clalu on two facto. One, Dr. HOMS'S
position or doputy of Dr. CtfET and, eoc nd tho chert shown horo, \«iich
wan proporui on tho basis of str.t* onto by the co-Uofoil nt IS3.JK, whioh
bosido tho square for Dr. CCITI hat a littlo s-jumt' 1th tho acco "BLCU".
KovraTor, it has already bejn ostahliahoi that Dr. COhTI was concornod '1th


tho euthoncaln yrtKjrr.


ia his capacity -s 3t-to Soorot-ry la tho


Roloh :i Istxy f tho I-tovior, Hut noror in his c-aoclty ns Roich Lo^Ior
of physic inns* But Dr. BUIS octi/i at r.o tiro as deputy for Dr. 00! HI ns
State Socrotory la enrooity as Roich Loalor of Physicians ->01, in a taroly
aorl-.ua way, also an head of tho ’tala Office of tho Tarty of tfe Intori or


tho oreluilvo Jo^uty of Dr. C0?*II in royard to outhananl


y of_tho ;
a wa<* Kin


istorialrnt


LI?^2‘, wh- a .i-.io oorrootly arioo-rod in tho chart below COrrn’s niaj. Tho
Offico of -ho Roich Loa-*or of Physicians of Dr. 3LCT.3, an a r«ttor cf
prir.oi lo h- nothin^ *hntsoovor to do with tho outhonasia prol an, but
ceuplot-ly orclu'.e-l fra; it; for t:io official physician b on! tho rental
institutions which carried out tho -.uthancsia proc^ot. woro in no woy Gub- f
ordlncto to tho Roich Loador of ll>yiielans. At no tine did Dr. 2LCI3 rocoiv®
or uIto any ro;orts, omors, or instructions concorninc tho outhaacslc pro-
£ratu Ho did not ovon know of tho rlnnnint; of the euthancsic pro^rti -01
of this will also bo proved by witness to bo ex%-la»A. Qxoreforo, it in an
obvious and incontootiblo orror that tho ar;o "3LQLJ - eppwed in tho chart
at all. 219o


29 47-i_3V-20-W«llfleher (KS3)
Coart is. I


This vill else he efflrsed by the co-d©fend_ant Brack when ho iakoa
•he v itae be stand. It has already bets proved that Ur. Blooo vao in
no vay roa^on«i v le for the’ euthanasia progras and that ho had no
cospotoncles of any kind for that prorrac.

Sov, the Prosecution has suhei*ted fer tho ©uthanaMa
pr errps p-rtievlarly extonelve • ntorial in cover el velunnes of doc-
•aaontand cany ''itnoeoeo and affidavits. Xovhere can the naco of
Be. Blog* ho fon«a thoroln, This eheva th-1 tho charges erainct
1^. 31c*o on thie point cannot ha uphold. ^he ovidonca of tho
Frosocutlon against &r. Bloae on thio point vao ■ftflplulfiiy iaaiilflciSJJi
and I thorefere cake application that tho charxot against Br, Blona in
regard tc euthanasia he rojoctod i-eedlately by order of tho Court.


It is sorely a decani of Justlco thrt the Prosecution ehould
not taintoin any eharfco if it is already apparent that it enfanot ho
provod in any v tty. Tho saso ou#t he truo of the charge a.alnnt By.
BIobo in r« ard to the solaria experiment*, tho Loot experlnontc, and
the sulfanilamide •xporl&onte. In regard to those polnto I aleo


hocaore tho Procooution


hoc not riven eo"lcient evidence for its chafgo.

111. A3 ovldonee Br. Blrco plane to ueo the following!

Ko hao nosed nine witnesses, oil of when hero boon approvod by


the Tribunal, Tho suhjoet of their individual toatity'ey h--o boon
etaod in doeil in -y respective a nlicatione, so that tho Brooocution
is inforsod on thie count. Br. Bloso plane to eubcit affldavitc of
cix of tho so witnesses! thee© will be eubnitted for tranolatlon and
inclusion tho document book Br. Xurt 3lose; they vill bo subalttod to
tho Tribunal end tho Brooecutior. in tico.


2197


39 Jan 47-L-?0-3V-C^lle«b«r (XCD)
Court Ho. I


The affidavits of the two witness Dr. Elare end Dr. Scabs h/.vo already
arrived. I have not yet hoard froa the four vttneeces Forvitschy,
Vittzaa-, Dr. Eroening, end Dr, Ell«re. Tkerofore I as not yet
In a position to Infers the Tribunal definitely whether the
affidavits of thoso four witnesses will be aufficlent for ay purposes or
whether I shall ask the= to take the ''itneos stand hero, or whether
I say possibly bo eblo to oet along without one or tho other of theoo
four wltneoaea. .

The regaining throe of the nino witnesses * sentloncd, tho
witness Dr. ^undersann, Dr. Dingeldey, and Dr. Eossehl, soes ao
important that 1 ahculd like to oxanino then ae witnesses in this
eourtrocBa

During the War, Dr, Oundoreenn -m tho responsible supremo nodlccl
officer with tho Belch Governor In tho Hart© Gnu Posen. H t la,

a

th roforo, In a position to *ivo reliable lnforaatlon concerning
tho fi ht a< aiurt tuborculoeis In that Oau and fcartlculnrly to tho
effoct th*t It waa Dr. Bloco who provonted tho liquidation of tons
of thouvwdr. of tuberculocla-lnfected Poles which Gaulolter Groloor
(Pjaen) had suggested.

On the othor h*r.d, the wltnossos W. ZHngoldoy and Dr, Eoonohl
were for aany ytara aeooctates of Dr. Blose and can therefo-o glvo
doflnlto lnfornotlon about the personality, character, prlnolplea and
conduct in offlco, of tho defondant Ik. Blosc.

Finally, - shall Include In thu decuaent book 3losc, none osta¬
tion o particularly fron hlo own books, and they will be translated,
Thua, tho Froescutl-n will also bo Inferred In tlco of this further
ovldonco.

It. is tho intentica of Dr. 31cao to take the stood In his own
dofonoo, and ho will do so after tho vitncssos who ho has callod
are heard*

IV. A^ainet tho defendant Dr. Bloeo, ‘-ho Prosocutlon eubnlttcd In


219P


29 .gQ~VStt-f*llaghar (KSD)

Court Ho. I


•h* sobsIoc of 10 -anuary • waiber cf docaeente which aro not collcctod
in ary docment hook, cad which refer to biolcpical verfaro. It Ha*
not yet boon cade clear whether thla ic tc constitute a aoprrato
char :o a*;alnat Dr. Slono. ?hi 3 conplcx had not boon included in tho
indictecnt and no fonial chances have been rrietd on tho natter elnco.
Sy way of preaecntion. Dr. Si ne will rxpreae hinoolf on tho ouoetion
of biological warfare when he taken tho stand ir. hli own dofonse, and ho
will present tho following factat


29 Janu:. ry -A-DJ&-23-laa-Gallagh cr
Court Ro. 1


1) As far as Dr. BLGdZ is concerned, *11 these measures rare merely German
defenso measures, cent tap!atcd cnly in the eventuality that the cncey should
initiate biological warfare against Germany. These were nevor plans of an
aggrcssive nature on the part of Germany. At loast the defendant Dr. BLOC
knows nothing to that effect.

2) Dr. BLOWS end his so-called "Lightning Rod Committee were rcpoitodly
officially informed by an officer of the German counterintelligence service
that the enemy had developed tho methods of biological warfare to a con¬
siderable degree, and that Germany, therefore, had to uxpect thet tho enemy
some day would apply those methods.

3) Vihcncvcr an opportunity offered itself. Dr. BLOWS counseled against
biological warfare and warned that the German p eople would become the primary
victims of such warfaro.

4) No means of biilogical warfare wore actually o v^ used by tho Gormans;
ovon the preparations for tho def«*iso agrinst enemy biological warfare were
intentionally carried out in such a way that G.roany would in effect never
havo boon able to employ such* means offensively. Finally,

5) net a -Lnrlu experts .nt on human beings was undertaken in this work. All
of this concerned tho biological warfare and will be proved by Dr. Blono.

In Document Book 11, (on blood coagulation) tho Prosecution has further charge
tho defendant Dr. BLOWS with having been infonacd about illegal experiments
with the blood coagulation drug "pclygal" mA also with having, in October
1943, given Dr. RASCHER a research assignmjjt on the treatment of freezing,
which was known under the code naac "Human Rowaraing". In tho courso of his
defense Dr. BLOUZ, will also disprove


i


220 #


29 J?=_i-J?-2a.ln-C-allp g her (*")
Court i'o. I


Tvt cfcor, c, which incidental’y, la not y^t Included in tho
Indie ‘gent. Jc a setter cf fact, bo had no krovledro of tho Illegal
o-porirents cf Dr. IUTCHL?., pad did not gi^o IS. r-ASCS?. pry illegal
research ao element,

V): rinelly, tho Prosecution hae charged the defendant I* - . 3IXK1 froa

tho print of via* of conspiracy . This charge, too, will ho rofuted
bjr IV, 31Cl hy hit own evidence,

A lar; or nushcr of the defendant# Hth "hoc ho tccooo acquainted,
either aa Doputy Selcfc Leader of rhyolclana er ao the r.an charged
with oancor roeearch vithln the 2«ich Hcsoareh Council, ho It
official or prlvato, Eo Dover oryated In any convoroatlor. con-
corn-d vtth tho proposal or planning of illo* al experiment* or
tho ccxnlBtlon of crl-xo, Particularly, ho never participated
'In my ecnrrceco* where report* on ouch natters wore t Ivon or
whore anything ''na planned in tVt direction. *ho proo6=ptuoua
su, cction hy HIKHUa to carry out cxporlr.oato with hucons
to obtain an cffectlvo vaccine again, plague, IV, 3LCK1 did
not carry out. A* no tlco wan ho a scohor of tho SSj at no
tico ho wpc mvor a nodical officer; durin/- tho war ho wnc not
ovon a ncn v cr of tho ^ohrnreht.

IE, GAl“T3: A* this tiao I have cosplutod sy epoclflc o'-rtoaont on
Pr 3ICiCc caso. th> t ctntcacct I hare not oomenttd on tho general
prohlccs w-lch rrico lr tho factual and lefal apcct*, and In tho
terroristic and nodical aspects In &. couroo of thl caso. I <»uld not
=eko such p , cntrnl statcacnt for tho simple reason that only todegr
did I learn whether ejl to what ertent tho dofonoo counsel which pro¬
ceeded ao eoc-entod on tho«. fcncrpl prohloc, and it i posoihlo th.-t.

I uey ho forcod in ny closing spc.ch to deal with the other gon«ral
points of viev.

• •

In furtherance cf that. Hr, President, I aek you now that I ho cred¬
ited with tho balance cf the v cur which would h-vc ho*n allowed to so
for =y two


2201


20 J ra-A—JF-20-2»~^allp£her (KSD)
Conrt I


cliento toi’ey which I did not use, rad at thin tisc I adc th"t it =ay
to added to tho ti-o which vpb allowed to ac for the closing tpooch* I
have finished ry ttr^onent on Dr, Sieve's case,

TEE PH1SII5-S?: Counsels for the defenso nay ho poturod thrt in
•-heir closing armnon*i, tine will afforded thco to rdeouatoly
nroeent ray proper legal or factual puceticno th*t should he thon pre¬
sented to tho "rihnnnl


39 J MS -i-J?-21-l-r-r'7lcrd (KSE)

Court I

IE. SKr. President, before yon co on to the next cnco,

I aok th-t I cay sake a. eufgostion. -osorrev I have an opening otato-
-ent for tho defendant Er. Buff. She caeo of the dofendent Dr. Huff is
rery eiosoly con-ectcd with tho caso of the defond.ant Eonborg and with
the croe cf tho defendant Ifr. felt?. Those threo cap^s fero one whole.
36 tv oca those threo defendants, there io the defendant Brack and tho
dofondant Becker•Freyeong, The dofonso counoel of all thcec dofondnnts,
tofothor with tho defendants thessolyetr, have agreed on the follovingi
after the capo of the dcfendnnt Huff, the ease of tho defendant
Eomberg la to ho presented itaodiatcly, and after that- the ca«o of tho
dofondant Volts. The c—© of tho defendant Braxk and .that of tho defon¬
dant 3ockor-Jrcysong aro to to presented only after tho ease of tho
dofondant Volt*.

This proccduro ccce« expodiont to us. Vc have a^r.ed on this procedure
and I should like to sugroot to the president th-t ho epprovo this
proceduro.

TJu. KLSXZUTl Tho T r ihunal approves tho procedure outlinod hy
coungol. It appears expedient alec to tho Tribunal.

IS. SllfiJ.! Thank you*

m. Attorney Hnuffeann for the dofondant Eudolf

Brandt. Kr. Prosldcnt,


2203


2-> J-raury-A-DJG-21-la-Gaylord
Court Kc. 1


if.. PF£SIDF!.T: First, in the lock, besides 20 physicians, there are
three administrative of fid Is who ore indictod as accomplices in and
accessories to crimes against humanity, client. Dr. Hudolf BRaNDT, took
part objectively, i. e. by outwardly apparent actions, in various crimes
against humanity, by, for exaaplo, writing letters on KXiltL Sr.'S instructions
acknowledging the receipt of letters written by physicians to HliiiLii, or
paasign on such letters to other offices for their infometion.

Purth.-mo c, tlie Prosecution considers Dr. hudolf ERaNDT guilty as
participant in a conspiracy to ccrrsit crimes against humanity. The so-
called conspiracy, in the sense of a general plan, constitutes tho ucst
comprehensive legal concept imaginable; its application, however, as is
apparent froa tho Explanation of the Sentences of the International Military
Tribunal, pago 16881 following in the English text, nust in practice be
United to such legal concept of "participation", as is also recognised
by Goman Law. This punishable partidpoticn prosupposes, in the person
of the participant, objectively spooking, the -xistenco of a condition for
committing tho main crico, and subject ively speaking, knowledge of thoso
circumstances.

Soccnd, in Dr. hudolf BRaIOT, tho Prosecution visualises tho personal
consultant of HIil£L2<, and thus an influential adviser of that pernicious
nan; from this, tho Prosecution deduces that Dr. BRaJOT possessed full know¬
ledge of the criminal actions - experiments, sterilisation, etc., - end also
agrood to, approved of, prcaotod, and thereby was rcsponsiblo fer innumerable
crimes. 1

Tho purposu of z& brief statement today cannot be to go into details as
yot and to enter into a discussicn with tho Prosecution.

In sane of the eases in which Dr. Rudolf -BRaJCT Is accused of partici-
peting, it will be found that ho participated to a greater extent, in others
to a lesser extent. Dr. ERaIOT took no part whatsoever in tho crime of
euthanasia and several others.


29 J-c i7-«l-770-21-l--ae7lor1
Court No. 1

jroa e stanc.;n*.piior ••pr-ticiijr.toe" aotr-'liahia^ tho proviso for c orloe, if ho
trios lictntl-.n fra-. r. oriniarj. or, if, on tho instructions of thu crlUr^O. ho
wrltos r. lettor hL-solf, this pra-otlac. the rur.jor crirw to r. jor.tor cr los. or
lecroo. Althou-iht ho ftod ucior orlor, «vlthou_ht ho w thron.tonoi with vory
sorioua coaso'iuor.cja if ho wor- to refuso to c-'xry cut hi a orlor, ha wy la
^ullty; th. ioraa of his _uilt, h*>vor, dopoada on r. ;jeorX v^xloty of cir-
cu=at»*acoa r.ttoadln^, ench iadiTLdusd crao, rad tho <udc«'a ::mI difficult task is
to oatr.tllrh thia dojroo of -uilt i\ccox\ilac tc lr?J -ad Juetica.

Dr. Itudolf aajOT hirnolf dooe aot assort thr.t ho «m z-oroly imiH's oto-
no.;-rr.p»or until tha oni of tho w-x, rlthcu/Jl in rotu*l fn.ot ho bocrn hla onro-r
with HE:iZR ra r. at on n : rr “.hor in Vo truo aonao of tha woxd, -nd for yo-xa wn.a
nothin* but r atano. iwi.hor.

Hia lntor position hia alow -iao to rji affiotel wltho tho rrvnk of Mlniotor-
Inl Counaollor lid not, how o ror, :mob rny fundn:-or.t»l, my oaaontinl chrn.o in hin
rolrticna v itfc :xfa.3l. Rudolf 3R/J®T rcrr.inol tho lnluntroua llttlo oisployoo;
in tor on, toe, ha ur.a toroly tho tochalcnl Chiof Clork of ono of tho <lo-
pfirtnoata which oxlatod within KEllZR'a ao-orll Personal Staff. Wvo* did
Rudolf ER/jDT occupy tho position cr, any, 10122 r.* a ftdvia^r, r.a tho Proaocutloa
r.ppcrxo tc l:r. w lno{ novor w-o ho present at ono af HUCO-Sa'l discucaiono or
ooaforoncos vlth physicians.

Tho official duties md r.oti-itioa of tho doportz-ant of '4.1 oh nuiolf
SR/jnXT *".a in chart a concomod tho nff»Mra of tho Ganorol SS ( not tho lesion 3S),
tho hondlln;. of np.llo tioas free, tho population rjid oiull-x ;/.ttorn; thoy wore not
howovor, conoornol zith any :;r.ttorr of tho Oestapc or Polico, l.o. the Sxooutlvo
Tho :v*ttor3 which piosol thxoi.li X’DT's h-aio and which art, to he Judcod horo r j •
horo woro outti '.o tha ocopo o' things nontlonod above. Mumricolly epookin ,
thoso oosoa oro infiaitoshhl, car.-oro ’ with the avor-o rv.nthly postal
dlipatchoa of about 3,000 to 4,000.

Tho fact that for yoors ihrlolf EXIST wo* evar-w-rko'. and was no lonpox
nblo to auporviso mttors a wholo «%■ heewn to his dopartnest.


2PC5


29 Jan.-21-lo-A-ATD-Gaylord
Court Mo, 1


and to outsiders as well,

MCr did Rudolf 3RANDT know the alzcat unique mixture in one human
soul of civic virtues and cad crimes against tho fundamental rights of man
and against tho dignity of tho hur n being, as it existed in jmC0£R, a
disregard for which, by sophistical arguments 0 f nere expodicnco and by
biolating tho inalienable principlos of natural and Christian coral law,
must always load to tho collapso of human and moral ordor.

Without disputing Rudolf BRANDT'S ^articij»tion and edit in
I

osspncaj I will try. as his dofenso ccunsol, in the courso of thiB oaso
to explain that tho de. roe of this guilt is farssaaller than would appear
from tho objective external ovidonco.

To prove this striking discrepancy fcetweon extornal dood and innor
guilt, I shall, with tho pordasion of tho Court, call upon tho dofondant
to give ovidonco) furthor, I shal3 axadno tho witness August 'EINE, RUilolf
BRANDT'S dosest associate, and prosont a nunbor of affidavits,

THE FTESIDEOTi I would liko to inquire of tho dofonso counsols
who have not yot preoontod thoir arguments whothor they have any reason
to su.vposo that in thoir nryunonts tomorrow thoy will dosiro to oonsuno any
more time than has appeared upon tho sohodulo which has boon handod to tho
Tribunal this raoming, Are thoro no furthor croups of dofonso counsols who
dosiro to prosont tbiir casoa consocutivoly or topothor other than those that
havo alroftbeen called to our attontior.?

Tho Tribunal will now bo in rooo3S until nine-thirty o'clock
tomorrow corning.


2206

r
