AN OUTLINE OF

Occult Science

By

RUDOLF STEINER, Ph.D.

Authorized Translation from the Fourth Edition

RAND McNally & COMPANY

CHICAGO

1914

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

PAGE

Foreword to the Fourth Edition vii

I. The Character of Occult Science i

II. The Nature of Man 17

III. Sleep and Death 46

IV. The Evolution of the World and Man m

V. The Perception of Higher Worlds 300

(Concerning Initiation)

VI. The Present and Future Evolution of the

World and of Humanity 420

VII. Details from the Domain of Occult Science 444

Man’s Etheric Body. The Astral World.

The Course of Human Life. The Principles 
of Man. The Dream State. The Attainment 
of Superphysical Knowledge. Observation of 
Special Events and Beings in the Spiritual 
World.

Author's Remarks

460

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

O NE who undertakes to represent certain 
results of scientific spiritual research of the 
kind recorded in this book, must above all 
things be prepared to find that this kind of 
investigation is at the present time almost uni- 
versally regarded as impossible. For things are 
related in the following pages about which those 
who are to-day esteemed exact thinkers assert that 
“they will probably remain altogether indetermin- 
able by human intelligence.’’ One who knows 
and can respect the reasons which prompt many a 
serious person to assert this impossibility, would 
fain make the attempt again and again to show 
what misunderstandings are really at the bottom 
of the belief that it is not given to hiunan know- 
ledge to penetrate into the superphysical worlds.For two things present themselves for con- 
sideration. First, no human being will, on deeper 
reflection, be able in the long run to shut his eyes 
to the fact that his most important questions as 
to the meaning and significance of life must remain 
unanswered, if there be no access to higher worlds. 
Theoretically we may delude ourselves about 
this fact and so get away from it; the depths of 
the soul-life, however, will not tolerate such self- 
delusion. The person who will not listen to what

vii

viii PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

comes from these depths of the soul will naturally 
reject any account of supersensible worlds. There 
are however people — and thev* nvunber is not 
small — who find it impossible to remain deaf to 
the demands coming from the depths of the soul. 
They must always be knocking at the gates which, 
in the opinion of others, bar the way to what is 
‘ ‘ incomprehensible. ’ ’

Secondly, the statements of “exact thinkers” are 
on no account to be despised. Where they have 
to be taken seriously, one who occupies himself 
with them will thoroughly feel and appreciate this 
seriousness. The writer of this book would not 
like to be taken for one who lightly disregards the 
enormous thought-labour which has been expended 
on determining the limits of the human intellect. 
This thought-labour cannot be put aside with a 
few phrases about “academic wisdom” and the 
like. In many cases it has its source in true 
striving after knowledge and in genuine discem-- 
ment. Indeed, even more than this must be 
admitted; reasons have been brought forward to 
show that the knowledge which is to-day regarded 
as scientific cannot penetrate into supersensible 
worlds, and these reasons are in a certain sense 
irrefutable.

Now it may appear strange to many people 
that the writer of this book admits this freely, 
and yet undertakes to make statements about 
supersensible worlds. It seems indeed almost

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

IXPREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

IX

impossible that a person should admit in a certain 
sense the reasons why knowledge of superphysical 
worlds is unatt9,inable, and should yet speak 
about those worlds.

And yet it is possible to take this attitude, 
and at the same time to understand that it 
impresses others as being inconsistent. It is not 
given to every one to enter into the experiences 
we pass through when we approach supersensible 
realms with the human intellect. Then it turns 
out that intellectual proofs may certainly be 
irrefutable, and that notwithstanding this, they 
need not be decisive with regard to reality. 
Instead of all sorts of theoretical explanations, let 
us now try to make this comprehensible by a 
comparison. That comparisons are not in them- 
selves proofs is readily admitted, but this does not 
prevent their often making intelligible what has 
to be expressed.

Human understanding, as it works in everyday 
life and in ordinary science, is actually so con- 
stituted that it cannot penetrate into super- 
physical worlds. This may be proved beyond the 
possibility of denial. Only this proof can have 
no more value as regards a certain kind of soul- 
life than the one attempting to show that man’s 
natural eye cannot with its visual faculty penetrate 
to the smallest cells of a living being, or to the 
constitution of far-off celestial bodies.

Just as the assertion is true and demonstrable

X PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

that the ordinary power of seeing does not pene- 
trate as far as the cells, so is the other assertion 
which maintains that ordinary knowledge cannot 
penetrate into supersensible worlds. And yet 
the proof that the ordinary power of vision has 
to stop short of the cells in no way excludes 
the investigation of cells. Why should the proof 
that the ordinary power of cognition has to stop 
short of supersensible worlds, decide anything 
against the possibility of investigating those 
worlds?One can be sensible of the feeling which this 
comparison may evoke in many people. One 
can even enter into the feelings of others who 
doubt if one who confronts the thought-labour 
mentioned above with such a comparison, has 
any idea whatever of the full seriousness of 
that labour. And yet the present writer is not 
only fully convinced of that seriousness, but is 
of opinion that that work of thought may be. 
munbered among the noblest achievements of 
humanity. To show that the human power of 
vision cannot reach the cells without the help 
of instruments, would surely be a useless under- 
taking; but in exact thinking, to become conscious 
of the nature of that thought is a necessary work 
of the mind. That one who devotes Himself to 
such work does not notice that reality may refute 
him, is only too natural. The preface to, this 
book can be no place for entering into many

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

XI

refutations of the former editions, put forth by 
people who are entirely devoid of appreciation 
of what it strives after, or who direct their un- 
founded attacks against the personality of the 
author; but it must none the less be emphasized 
that depreciation in this book of serious scientific 
thought can be imputed to the author only by 
one who wishes to shut himself off from the spirit 
of what is expressed in it.Man’s power of cognition may be augmented 
and made more powerful, just as the eye’s power 
of vision m'ly be augmented. Only the means 
for strengthening the capacity of cognition are 
entirely of a spiritual nature; they are inner 
processes, belonging wholly to the soul. They 
consist of what is described in this book as medita- 
tion §,nd concentration (contemplation). Ordinary 
soul-life is bound up with the bodily organs; the 
strengthened soul-life liberates itself from these. 
There are schools of thought at the present time to 
which this assertion must appear quite senseless, 
to which it must seem based only on self-delusion. 
Those who think in this way will find it easy, from 
their point of view, to prove that “all soul-life’’ 
is bound up with the nervous system. One who 
occupies the standpoint from which this book has 
been written can thoroughly understand such 
proofs. He understands people who say that only 
superficiality can assert that there may be some 
kind of soul-life independent of the body; and

xii PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

who are quite convinced that in such experiences 
of the soul there exists a connection with the life 
of the nervous system, which the “dilettantism of 
occult science” merely fails to detect.who are quite convinced that in such experiences 
of the soul there exists a connection with the life 
of the nervous system, which the “dilettantism of 
occult science” merely fails to detect.

Here certain quite comprehensible habits of 
thought are in such sharp contradiction to what 
has been described in this book, that there is as 
yet no prospect of coming to an understanding 
with many people. It is here that we come to 
the point where the wish must assert itself that it 
should no longer be a characteristic of mental 
culture in our time at once to decry as fanciful or 
visionary a method of research which abruptly 
deviates from its own. But on the other hand 
it is also a fact at the present time that a num- 
ber of people can appreciate the supersensible 
method of research, as it is represented in this 
book: people who understand that the meaning 
of life is not revealed in general phrases about 
the soul, self, and so on, but can only result 
from really entering into the facts of superphysi- 
cal research.

Not from lack of modesty, but with a sense of 
joyful satisfaction, does the author of this book 
keenly feel the necessity for this fourth edition 
after a comparatively short time. He is prevented 
from immodestly emphasizing this by the feeling 
that even this new edition falls far short of what 
it should really be as an outline of a super- 
sensible conception of the world. The whole

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xiiiPREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xiii

book has once more been revised for the new 
edition, much supplementary matter has been 
inserted at important points, and elucidations 
have been attempted. But in numerous passages 
the author has realized how poor the means of 
representation accessible to him prove to be in 
comparison with what superphysical research 
discovers. Thus it was scarcely possible to do 
more than point out the way in which to reach 
conceptions of the events described in this book 
as the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions. An 
important aspect of this subject has been briefly 
remodelled in this edition. But experiences in 
relation to such things diverge so widely from all 
experiences in the realm of sense, that their 
representation necessitates a continual striving 
after expressions which may be, at least in some 
measure, adequate. One who is willing to enter 
into the attempt at representation which has here 
been made, will perhaps notice that in the case 
of many things which cannot possibly be expressed 
by mere words, the endeavour has been made to 
convey them by the manner of the description. 
This manner is, for instance, different in the 
accoimt of the Saturn evolution from that used 
for the Sun evolution, and so on.

Much complementary and additional matter 
has been inserted in this edition in the part which 
deals with “Perception of the Higher Worlds.” 
The endeavour has been made to represent in a

xiv PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITIONxiv PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

graphic way the kind of inner soul-processes by 
which the power of cognition liberates itself from 
the limits which confine it in the world of sense and 
qualifies itself for experiencing the supersensible 
world. The attempt has been made to show that 
these experiences, though gained by entirely 
inner ways and methods, have yet a not merely 
subjective significance for the individual person 
who gains them. The description attempts to 
show that within the soul its separateness and 
personal peculiarities are stripped away, and that 
it attains to experiences which every human being 
has in the same way, who rightly works out his 
development from his subjective experiences. It 
is only when “knowledge of supersensible worlds” 
is thought of as bearing this character that it may 
be differentiated from old experiences of rnerely 
subjective mysticism. Of this mysticism it may 
be said that it is after all more or less a subjective 
concern of the mystic. The scientific spiritual 
training of the soul, however, as it is described 
here, strives after objective experiences, the truth 
of which, although recognized in an entirely 
inward way, may yet, for that very reason, be 
found to be universally valid. This again is a 
point on which it is very difficult to come to an 
understanding with many of the habits of thought 
of our time.

In conclusion, the author would like to observe 
that it would be well if even the sympathetic

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xvIn conclusion, the author would like to observe 
that it would be well if even the sympathetic

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xv

reader of the book wotdd take its statements 
exactly as they stand. At the present time there 
is a very prevalei\t tendency to give this or that 
spiritual m<Arement an historical name, and to 
many it is only such a name that seems to make 
it valuable. But, it may be asked, what would 
the statements in this book gain by being denom- 
inated “Rosicrucian,” or anything else of the 
kind? What is of importance is that in this book 
a glance into supersensible worlds is attempted 
with the means which in our present period of 
evolution are possible and suitable for the hu- 
man soul; and that from this point of view the 
problems of human destiny and hiunan existence 
are considered beyond the limits of birth and 
death. The question is not to find a name, but 
to find truth.

On the other hand, designations have also been 
used, with hostile intention, for the conception of 
the universe represented in this book. Leaving 
out of account that those which were intended to 
strike and discredit the author most heavily are 
absurd and objectively untrue, these designations 
are stamped as unworthy by the fact that they 
disparage a fully independent search for truth; 
because the aggressors do not judge it on its own 
merits, but try to impose on others, as a judgment 
of these investigations, erroneous ideas as to their 
dependence on this or that tradition, — ideas 
which they have invented, or adopted from others

xiv PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITIONxiv PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

graphic way the kind of inner soul-processes by 
which the power of cognition liberates itself from 
the limits which confine it in the .world of sense and 
qualifies itself for experiencing the supersensible 
world. The attempt has been made to show that 
these experiences, though gained by entirely 
inner ways and methods, have yet a not merely 
subjective significance for the individual person 
who gains them. The description attempts to 
show that within the soul its separateness and 
personal peculiarities are stripped away, and that 
it attains to experiences which every htunan being 
has in the same way, who rightly works out his 
development from his subjective experiences. It 
is only when “knowledge of supersensible worlds” 
is thought of as bearing this character that it may 
be differentiated from old experiences of merely 
subjective mysticism. Of this mysticism it may 
be said that it is after all more or less a subjective 
concern of the mystic. The scientific spirituaj 
training of the soul, however, as it is described 
here, strives after objective experiences, the truth 
of which, although recognized in an entirely 
inward way, may yet, for that very reason, be 
found to be universally valid. This again is a 
point on which it is very difficult to come to an 
understanding with many of the habits of thought 
of our time.

In conclusion, the author would like to observe 
that it wotdd be well if even the sympathetic

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xvIn conclusion, the author would like to observe 
that it wotdd be well if even the sympathetic

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xv

reader of the book would take its statements 
exactly as they stand. At the present time there 
is a very prevalei\t tendency to give this or that 
spiritual mcA^ement an historical name, and to 
many it is only such a name that seems to make 
it valuable. But, it may be asked, what would 
the statements in this book gain by being denom- 
inated “Rosicrucian,” or anything else of the 
kind? What is of importance is that in this book 
a glance into supersensible worlds is attempted 
with the means which in our present period of 
evolution are possible and suitable for the hu- 
man soul; and that from this point of view the 
problems of human destiny and human existence 
are considered beyond the limits of birth and 
death. The question is not to find a name, but 
to find truth.

On the other hand, designations have also been 
used, with hostile intention, for the conception of 
the universe represented in this book. Leaving 
out of account that those which were intended to 
strike and discredit the author most heavily are 
absurd and objectively untrue, these designations 
are stamped as unworthy by the fact that they 
disparage a fully independent search for truth; 
because the aggressors do not judge it on its own 
merits, but try to impose on others, as a judgment 
of these investigations, erroneous ideas as to their 
dependence on this or that tradition, — ideas 
which they have invented, or adopted from others

xvi PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

without reason. However necessary these words 
are in face of the many attacks on the author, it 
is yet repugnant to him in this place to enter 
further into the matter.

Rudolf Steiner

June, 1913.

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

CHAPTER I

The Character of Occult ScienceRudolf Steiner

June, 1913.

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

CHAPTER I

The Character of Occult Science

A t the present time the words “occult sci- 
ence’’ are apt to arouse the most divergent 
feelings. Upon some people they work 
like a magic charm, like the announcement of 
something to which they feel attracted by the 
innermost powers of their soul; to others there 
is in the words something repellent, calling forth 
contempt, derision, or a compassionate smile. By 
many, occult science is looked upon as a lofty goal 
of human effort, the crown of all other knowledge 
and cognition; others, who are devoting them- 
selves with the greatest earnestness and noble 
love of truth to that which appears to them true 
science, deem occult science mere idle dreaming 
and fantasy, in the same category with what is 
called superstition. To some, occult science is 
like a light without which life would be valueless; 
to others, it represents a spiritual danger, calcu- 
lated to lead astray immature minds and weak 
souls, while between these two extremes is to be 
found every possible intermediate shade of opinion.

Strange feelings are awakened in one who has 
attained a certain impartiality of judgment in

2

1

2

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEStrange feelings are awakened in one who has 
attained a certain impartiality of judgment in

2

1

2

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

regard to occult science, its adherents and its 
opponents, when he sees how people, undoubtedly 
possessed of a genuine feeling for freedom in many 
matters, become intolerant when they meet with 
this particular line of thought. And an unpre- 
judiced observer will scarcely fail in this case to 
admit that w'hat attracts many adherents of 
occult science — or occultism — is nothing but the 
fatal craving for what is unknown and mysterious, 
or even vague. And he will also be ready to own 
that there is much cogency in the reasons put 
forward against what is fantastic and visionary by 
serioiis opponents of the cause in question. In 
fact, one who studies occult science will do well 
not to lose sight of the fact that the impulse toward 
the mysterious leads many people on a vain chase 
after worthless and dangerous will-o’-thc-wisps.

Even though the occult scientist keeps a watch- 
ful eye on all errors and vagaries on the part of 
adherents of his views, and on all justifiably 
antagonism, there are yet reasons which hold 
him back from the immediate defence of his own 
efforts and aspirations. These reasons will become 
apparent to any one entering more deeply into 
occult science. It would therefore be super- 
fluous to discuss them here. If they were cited 
before the threshold of this science had been 
crossed, they would not suffice to convince one 
who, held back by irresistible repugnance, refuses 
to cross that threshold. But to one who effects

THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 3THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 3

an entry, the reasons will soon manifest them- 
selves from within, with unmistakable clearness. 
This much, however, implies that the reasons in 
question point to a certain attitude as the only 
right one for an occult scientist. He avoids, as 
much as he possibly can, any kind of outward 
defence or conflict, and lets the cause speak for 
itself. He simply puts forward occult science; 
and in what it has to say about various matters 
he shows how his knowledge is related to other 
departments of life and science, what antagonism 
it may encounter, and in what way reality wit- 
nesses to the truth of his cognitions. He knows 
that an attempted vindication would, not merely 
on account of current defective thinking but by 
virtue of a certain inner necessity, lead into the 
domain of artful persuasion; and he desires noth- 
ing else than to let occult science work its own 
way quite independently.

, The first point in occult science is by no means 
the advancing of assertions or opinions which 
are to be proved, but the communication, in a 
purely narrative form, of experiences which are 
to be met with in a world other than the one that 
is to be seen with physical eyes and touched with 
physical hands. And further, it is an important 
point that through this science the methods are 
described by which man may verify for himself 
the truth of such communications. For one who 
makes a serious study of genuine occult science

4

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

will soon find that thereby much becomes changed 
in the conceptions and ideas which are formed — 
and rightly formed — in other -spheres of life. A 
wholly new conception necessarily arises also 
about what has hitherto been called a “proof.” 
We come to see that in certain domains such a 
word loses its usual meaning, and that there are 
other grounds for insight and understanding than 
“proofs” of this kind.All occult science is born from two thoughts, 
which may take root in any human being. To 
the occult scientist these thoughts express facts 
which may be experienced if the right methods 
for the purpose are used. But to many people 
these same thoughts represent highly disputable 
assertions, which may arouse fierce contention, 
even if they are not regarded as something which 
may be “proved” impossible.

These two thoughts are, first, that behind the 
visible world there is another, the world invisible, 
w’hich is hidden from the senses and from thought 
that is fettered by those senses; and secondly, 
that it is possible for man to penetrate into that 
unseen world by developing certain faculties 
dormant within him.

Some will say that there is no such hidden 
world. The world perceived by man through his 
senses is the only one. Its enigmas can be 
solved out of itself. Even if man is still very far 
from being able to answer all the questions of

TI^E CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 5

existence, the time will certainly come when sense- 
experience and the science based upon it will be 
able to give, the answers to all such questions.

Others say that it cannot be asserted that there 
is no unseen world behind the visible one, but that 
human powers of perception are not able to pene- 
trate into that world. Those powers have bounds 
which they cannot pass. Faith, with its urgent 
cravings, may take refuge in such a world; but 
true science, based on ascertained facts, can have 
nothing to do with it.

A third section looks upon it as a kind of pre- 
sumption for man to attempt to penetrate, by 
his own cognitive efforts, into a domain with 
regard to which he should give up all claim to 
knowledge and be content with faith. The adher- 
ents of this view feel it to be wrong for weak 
human beings to wish to force their way into a 
world which can belong only to religious life.• It is also alleged that a common knowledge of 
the facts of the sense- world is possible for mankind, 
but that in regard to supersensil^le things it can 
be merely a question of the individual’s personal 
opinion, and that in these matters there can be 
no possibility of a certainty universally recognized. 
And many other assertions are made on the subject.

The occult scientist has convinced himself 
that a survey of the visible world propounds 
enigmas to man which can never be solved out 
of the facts of that world itself. Their solution

6

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

in this way will never be possible, however far 
knowledge of those facts may advance. For 
visible facts plainly point, throngh their own 
inner nature, to the existence of a hidden world. 
One who does not see this clo.ses his eyes to the 
problems which obviously spring up everywhere 
out of the facts of the sense-world. He refu.ses 
to see certain problems and enigmas, and there- 
fore thinks that all questions can be answered 
through facts pertaining to the senses. The 
questions which he is willing to ask are all capable 
of being answered by the facts which he is con- 
vinced will be discovered in the course of time. 
Every genuine occultist admits this. But why 
should one who asks no questions expect answers 
on certain subjects? The occult scientist says 
nothing else than that to him such questioning 
is natural, and must be regarded as a wholly 
justifiable expression of the human soul. Science 
is surely not to be confined within limits which 
prohibit impartial inquiry.d'he cipinion that there are bounds to human 
knowledge which it is impossible to pass, com- 
pelling man to stop short of the world invisible, 
is thus met by the occult scientist; he says that 
there can exist no manner of doubt that it is 
impossible to penetrate into the unseen world 
by means of the kind of cognition here meant. 
One who considers it the only kind ean- come to 
no other opinion than that man is not permitted

THE CHARACTER OP OCCULT SCIENCE 7

to penetrate into a possibly existing higher world. 
But the occult scientist goes on to say that it is 
possible to develap a different sort of cognition, 
and that this leads into the unseen world. If this 
kind of cognition is held to be impossible, we 
arrive at a point of view from which any mention 
of an invisible world appears as sheer nonsense. 
But to an unbiassed judgment there can be no 
basis for such an opinion as this, except that its 
adherent is a stranger to that othci- kind of cogni- 
tion. But how can a person form an opinion 
about a subject of which he declares himself 
ignorant? Occult science must in this case main- 
tain the principle that people should speak only 
of what they know, and should not make asser- 
tions about anything of which they are ignorant. 
It ca^ only recognize every man’s right to com- 
municate his own experiences, not every man’s 
right to declare the impossibility of what he does 
uot, or will not, know. The occult scientist dis- 
putes no one’s right to ignore the invisible world; 
but there can be no real reason why a person 
should declare himself an aixthority not only on 
what he may know but also on things considered 
unknowable.

To those who say that it is presumption to 
penetrate into unseen regions, the occult scientist 
would merely point out that this can be done, 
and that it is sinning against the faculties with 
which man has been endowed if he allows them

8

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

to waste instead of developing and using them.8

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

to waste instead of developing and using them.

But he who thinks that views about the unseen 
world are neeessarily wholly depen4ent on per- 
sonal opinion and feeling is denying the common 
base of all human beings. Even though it is 
true that every one must find light on these things 
within himself, it is also a fact that all those who 
go far enough arrive at the same, not at different, 
conclusions regarding them. Differences exist 
only so long as people will not approach the high- 
est truths by the well-tested path of occult science, 
but attempt ways of their own choosing. Genuine 
occult science will certainly fully admit that 
only one who has followed, or at any rate has 
begun to follow, the path of occult science is in 
a position to recognize it as the right one. But 
all those who follow that path will recognize its 
rightness, and have ever done so.

The path to occult knowledge will be found, 
at the fitting moment, by every human being 
who discerns in what is visible the presence of 
something unseen, or who even but dimly sur- 
mises or divines it; and who, from his conscious- 
ness that powers of cognition arc capable of 
development, is driven to the feeling that what is 
hidden may be unveiled to him. One who is 
drawn to occult science by such experiences of 
the soul will find opening up before him not only 
the prospect of finding the answers to certain 
questions which press upon him, but the further

XHE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 9XHE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 9

prospect of overcoming everything which hampers 
and enfeebles his life. And in a certain higher 
sense it implies aVeakening of life, in fact a death 
of the soul, when a person is compelled to turn 
away from, or to deny, the unseen. Indeed, 
under certain circumstances despair is the result 
of a man’s losing all hope of having the invisible 
revealed to him. This death and despair, in 
their manifold forms, are at the same time inner 
spiritual foes of occult science. They make their 
appearance when a oerson’s inner force is dwin- 
dling away. In that case, if he is to possess any 
vital force it must be supplied to him from without. 
He perceives the things, beings, and events which 
approach his organs of sense, and analyzes them 
with his intellect. They afford him pleasure 
and pain, and impel him to the actions of which 
he is capable. For a while he may go on in this 
way : but at length he must reach a point at which 
he inwardly dies. For that which may thus be 
extracted for man from the outer world, becomes 
exhausted. This is not a statement arising from 
the personal experience of one individual, but 
something resulting from an impartial survey of 
the whole of human life. That which secures 
life from exhaustion lies in the unseen world, 
deep at the roots of things. If a person loses 
the power of descending into those depths, so 
that • he cannot be perpetually drawing fresh 
vitality from them, in the end the outer world

lO

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,

of things also ceases to yield him anything of a 
vivifying nature.lO

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,

of things also ceases to yield him anything of a 
vivifying nature.

It is by no means the case that only the indi- 
vidual and his personal weal and woe are con- 
cerned. Through occult science man gains the 
conviction that from a higher standpoint the 
weal and woe of the individual arc intimately 
bound up with the weal or woe of the whole world. 
This is a means by which man comes to see 
that he is inflicting an injury on the whole world 
and every being within it if he does not develop 
his own powers in the right way. If a man makes 
his life desolate by losing touch with the unseen, 
he not only destroys in his inner self something, 
the decay of which may eventually drive him to 
despair, but through his weakness he constitutes 
a hindrance to the evolution of the whole world 
in which he lives.

Now man may delude himself. He may yield 
to the belief that there is nothing invisible, and 
that that which is manifest to his senses and intel- 
lect contains everything which can possibly exist. 
But such an illusion is only possible on the surface 
of consciousness and not in its depths. Feeling 
and desire do not yield to this delusive belief. 
They will be perpetually craving, in one way or 
another, for that which is invisible. And if this 
is withheld, they drive man into doubt, into 
uncertainty about life, or even into despair. 
Occult science, by making manifest what is unseen,

TJIE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE n

is calculated to overcome all hopelessness, uncer- 
tainty, and despair, — everything, in short, which 
weakens lif(j and 'makes it unfit for its necessary 
service in the universe.is calculated to overcome all hopelessness, uncer- 
tainty, and despair, — everything, in short, which 
weakens lif(j and 'makes it unfit for its necessary 
service in the universe.

The beneficent effect of occult science is that 
it not only satisfies man’s thirst for knowledge 
but gives strength and stability to life. The 
source whence the occult scientist draws his 
power for work and his confidence in life is inex- 
haustible. Any one who has once had recourse 
to that fount will always, on revisiting it, go 
forth with renewed vigour.

There arc people who will not hear anything 
about occult science, because they think they 
discern something unhealthful in what has just 
been said. The.se people are quite right as regards 
the surface and outer aspect of life. They do 
not de.sire that to be stunted which life in its so- 
called reality offers. They see weakness in man’s 
tnirning away Horn reality and seeking his welfare 
in an unseen world which to them is synonymous 
with what is chimerical and visionary. If as 
occult scientists we do not desire to fall into 
morbid dreaming and weakness, we must admit 
that such objections are partially justified. For 
they are founded upon sound judgment, which 
leads to a half truth instead of a whole truth 
merely because it does not penetrate to the roots 
of things, but remains on the surface. If occult 
science were calculated to weaken life and estrange

12

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE12

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

man from true reality, such objections would 
certainly be strong enough to cut the ground 
from under the feet of those' who . follow this 
spiritual line of life. But even in regard to such 
opinions as these, occult science would not be 
taking the right course in defending itself in the 
ordinary sense of the words. Even in this case 
it can only speak by means of what it gives to 
those who really penetrate into its meaning, 
that is, by the real force and vitality which it 
bestows. It does not weaken life, but strengthens 
it, because it equips man not only with the forces 
of the manifest world but with those of the invis- 
ible world of which the manifest is the effect. 
Thus it does not imply an impoverishment, but 
an enrichment, of life. The true occult scientist 
does not stand aloof from the world, but is a 
lover of reality, because he does not desire to 
enjoy the unseen in a remote dream-world, but 
finds his happiness in bringing the world ever 
fresh supplies of force from the invisible sources 
whence this very w'orld is derived, and from which 
it must be continually drawing fertilizing power.

Some people find many obstacles on the path 
of occult science, when they enter upon it. One 
of these is expressed in the fact that a person, 
attempting to take the first steps, is sometimes 
discouraged because at the outset he is introduced 
to the details of the supersensible world, in* order 
that he may, with entire patience and devotion.

THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 13THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 13

become acquainted with them. A series of com- 
munications is made to him about the invisible 
nature of naan, about certain definite occurrences 
in the kingdom of which death opens the portals, 
and about the evolution of man, the earth, and 
the entire solar system. What he expected was 
to enter the supersensible world easily, at a bound. 
Now he is heard to say: “Everything which I 
am told to study is food for my mind, but leaves 
my soul cold. I am seeking the deepening of my 
soul-life. I want to find myself within. I am 
seeking something that will lift my soul into 
the sphere of the divine, leading it to its true 
home; I do not want information about human 
nature and world-processes.” People who talk 
in this way have no idea that by such feelings they 
are barring the door against what they are really 
seeking. For it is just when, with a free and 
open mind, in self -surrender and patience, they 
assimilate what they call “merely” food for the 
intellect, it is then and then only that they will 
find that for which their souls are athirst. That 
road leads the soul to union with the divine, 
which brings the soul knowledge of the works 
of the divine. The uplifting of the heart is the 
result of learning to know about the creations of 
the spirit.

On this account occult science must begin 
by imparting the information which throws light 
on the realms of the spiritual world. So too in

14

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

this book we shall begin with what can be unveiled 
from unseen worlds through the methods of occult 
research. That which is mortal in man, and

f

that which is immortal, will be described in their 
connection with the world of which he is a member.f

that which is immortal, will be described in their 
connection with the world of which he is a member.

Then will follow a description of the methods 
by whicli man is able to develop those powers 
of cognition latent within him, which will lead 
him into that world. As much will be said about 
the methods as is at present possible in a work 
of this kind. It scorns natural to think that 
these methods should be dealt with first. P'or 
it seems as tliough the main point would be to 
acquaint man with what may bring him, by means 
of his own powers, to the desired view of the higher 
world. Many may say, “Of what use is it for 
me that others tell me what they know g.bout 
higher worlds? I wish to see them for myself.”

The fact of the matter is that for really fruitful 
experience of the mysteries of the unseen world,, 
previous knowledge of certain facts belonging to 
that world is absolutely necessary. Why this is 
so will sufficiently appear from what follows.

It is a mistake to think that the truths of occult 
science which are imparted by those qualified to 
do so, before they speak about the methods for 
penetrating into the spiritual world itself, can 
be understood and grasped only by means of the 
higher vision which results from developing, cer- 
tain powers latent in man. This is not the case.

THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 15THE CHARACTER OF OCCULT SCIENCE 15

For investigating and discovering the mysteries 
of a supersensible world, that higher sight is 
essential. No one is able to discover the facts 
of the unseen world withoixt the clairvoyance 
which is synonymous with that higher vision. 
But if when discovered they are related, every 
one who applies to them the full range of his 
ordinary intellect and unprejudiced powers of 
judgment will be able to understand them and 
to rise to a high degree of conviction concerning 
them. One who maintains that the mysteries 
are incomprehensible to him, does not do so 
because he is not yet clairvoyant, but because 
he has not yet succeeded in bringing into activity 
those powers of cognition which may be possessed 
by every one, even without clairvoyance.

A new method of putting forward these matters 
consists in so describing them, after they have 
been clairvoyantly investigated, that they are 
.quite accessible to the faculty of judgment. If 
only people do not shut themselves off by preju- 
dice, there is no obstacle to arriving at a convic- 
tion, even without higher vision. It is true that 
many will find, that the new method of present- 
ment, as given in this book, is far from corre- 
sponding to their customary ways of forming an 
opinion. But any objection due to this will soon 
disappear if one takes the trouble to follow out 
his customary methods to their final consequences.

When, by an extended application of ordinary

i6 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

thought, a certain number of the higher mysteries 
have been assimilated and found intelligible, by 
any one, then the right moment ,has come for the 
methods of oceult research to be applied to his 
individual personality: these will give him access 
to the unseen world.Nor will any genuine seientist be able to find 
contradiction, in spirit and true reality, between 
his science, whieh is built upon the faets of the 
sense-world, and the way in whieh oecult seicnee 
carries on its researches. I'he scientist uses cer- 
tain instruments and methods. He constructs 
his instruments by working upon what “nature” 
gives him . Occult science also uses an instrument, 
but in this case the instrument is man himself. 
And that instrument too must first be prepared 
for that higher research. The faculties and 
powers given to man by nature at the outset, 
without his cooperation, must be transformed 
into higher ones. In this way man is able to ^ 
make himself into an instrument for the inves- 
tigation of the unseen world.

CHAPTER II 
The Nature of Man

C ONSIDERING man in the light of occult 
science, we are at once reminded of its 
general characteristics. It rests upon the 
recognition of a hidden something behind that 
which is manifest to the outer senses and to the 
intellect brought to bear upon their perceptions. 
These senses and this intellect can apprehend only 
a part of all that which occult science unveils as 
the total human entity, and this part is what 
occult science calls the physical body. In order 
to throw light on its conception of this body, 
occult science ct first directs attention to a 
phenopienon which confronts all observers of life 
like a great riddle, — the phenomenon of death, — 
and in connection with it occult science points to 
so-called inanimate nature, the mineral kingdom. 
We are thus referred to facts which it devolves 
on occult science to explain, and to which an im- 
portant part of this work must be devoted. But 
to begin with, only a few points will be touched 
upon, by way of giving an idea of the bearings 
of the subject.

Within manifested nature the physical body, ac- 
cording to occult science, is that part of man which 
is of Ahe same nature as the mineral kingdom.

*7Within manifested nature the physical body, ac- 
cording to occult science, is that part of man which 
is of Ahe same nature as the mineral kingdom.

*7

i8 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

On the other hand, that which distinguishes man 
from minerals is considered as not being part 
of the physical body. From, the occult point 
of view, what is of supreme importance is the 
fact that death separates from the human being 
that which, during life, is of like nature with 
the mineral w'orld. Occult science points to the 
dead body as that part of man which is found 
existing in the same way in the mineral kingdom. 
It lays strong emphasis on the fact that in that 
principle of human nature which it looks upon as 
the physical body, and which death reduces to a 
corpse, the same materials and forces are at work 
as in the mineral realm; but no less emphasis is 
laid on the fact that at death disintegration of the 
physical body sets in. Occult science therefore 
says: “It is true that the same materials and 
forces are at work in the physical body as in the 
mineral, but during life their activity is placed at 
the disposal of something higher. They are le£,t 
to themselves only when death occurs. Then 
they act, as in conformity with their own nature 
they must, as decomposers of the physical body.”

Thus a sharp distinction must be drawn between 
the manifested and the hidden elements in man. 
For during life, that which is hidden from view 
has to wage perpetual war on the materials and 
forces of the mineral world. This indicates the 
point at which occult science steps in. It Ijas to 
characterize that which wages the war alluded

THE NATURE OF MAN

19THE NATURE OF MAN

19

to, — a principle which is hidden from sense-obser- 
vation. Clairvoyant sight alone can reveal its 
workings. How man arrives at becoming aware 
of this hidden element as plainly as his ordinary 
eyes see the phenomena of sense, will be described 
in a later part of this book. Results of clair- 
voyant observation will be given now for the 
reason already pointed out in the preceding pages, 
that is, that communications about the way in 
which the higher sight is obtained can only be of 
value to the studeid when he has first become 
acquainted, in the form of a narrative, with the 
resxilts of clairvoyant research. For in this sphere 
it is quite possible to understand things which one 
is not yet able to observe. Indeed, the right path 
to higher vision starts with understanding.

Noy^ although the hidden something which 
wages war on the disintegration of the physical 
body can be observed only by the higher sight, it 
is plainly visible in its effects to the human faculty 
of judgment which is limited to the manifested 
world; and these effects are expressed in the form 
or shape in which mineral materials and forces are 
combined during life. When death has intervened, 
the form disappears little by little, and the physi- 
cal body becomes part of the rest of the mineral 
world. But the clairvoyant is able to observe, 
as an independent principle of human natime, that 
which, while life lasts, prevents the physical 
materials and forces from pursuing their natural

20

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

course; which would lead to the dissolution of the 
physical body. He calls this independent principle 
the etheric or vital body. • ^20

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

course; which would lead to the dissolution of the 
physical body. He calls this independent principle 
the etheric or vital body. • ^

If misunderstandings are not to arise at the 
outset, two things must be borne in mind in con- 
nection with this account of a second principle of 
human nature. The word “etheric” is used here 
in a different sense from that of modern physics, 
which designates as “ether” the medium by which 
light is transmitted. In occult science the use of 
the word is limited to the sense given above. It 
denotes that which is accessible to higher sight, 
and can be knowii to physical observation only 
by its effects, that is, by its power of giving a 
definite form or shape to the mineral materials and 
forces present in the physical body. Again, the 
use of the word “body” must not be misunder- 
stood. It is necessary to use the words of every- 
day language in describing things on a higher 
plane of existence, and tliese terms, when applied 
to sense-observation, express only what is physical. 
The etheric body has, of course, nothing of a 
bodily nature in the physical sense, however 
ethereal we might imagine such a body to be.

Directly the occultist comes to the mention of 
this etheric or vital body, he reaches the point at 
which he is bound to encounter the opposition of 
many contemporary opinions. The development 
of the human mind has been such that the mention 
of such a principle of human nature is necessarily

THE NATURE OF MAN

21

looked upon as unscientific. The materialistic 
way of thinking has arrived at the conclusion that 
there is notjiing ifo be seen in a living body but a 
combination of physical substances and forces such 
as are also found in the so-called inanimate body 
of the mineral, the only difference being that 
they are more complicated in the living than in 
the lifeless body. Yet it is not very long since 
other views were held even by official science.It is evident to any one who studies the works 
of many earnest meo of science, produced during 
the first half of the nineteenth century, that at 
that time many a genuine investigator of nature 
was conscious of some factor acting within the 
living body other than in the lifeless mineral. It 
was termed “vital force.” It is true this vital 
force, is not represented as being what has been 
above characterized as the vital body, but under- 
lying the conception was a dim idea of the existence 
of such a body. The vital force was generally 
regarded as something which in a living body was 
united with physical matter and forces in the 
same way as the force of a magnet unites itself 
with iron. Then came the time when vital force 
was banished from the domain of science. Mere 
physical and chemical causes were accounted all- 
sufficient.

At the present moment, however, there is a 
reaction in this respect in some scientific quarters. 
It is sometimes conceded that the hypothesis of

22

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEAt the present moment, however, there is a 
reaction in this respect in some scientific quarters. 
It is sometimes conceded that the hypothesis of

22

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

something of the nature of a “vital force” is 
not pure nonsense. Yet even the scientist who 
concedes this much is not willing to make common 
cause with the occultist with regard to the vital 
body. As a ntle, it serves no useful purpose to 
enter upon a discussion of such views from the 
standpoint of occult science. It should be much 
more the concern of the occultist to recognize 
that the materialistic way of thinking is a necessary 
concomitant phenomenon of the great advance of 
natural science in our day. This advance is due 
to the vast improvements in the instruments used 
in sense-observation. And it is in the very nature 
of man to bring some of his faculties to a certain 
degree of perfection at the expense of others. 
Exact sense-observation, which has been evolved 
to such an important extent by natural science, 
was bound to leave in the background the cultiva- 
tion of those human faculties which lead into the 
hidden worlds. But tlie time has come when this 
cultivation is once more necessary; and recogni- 
tion of the invi.siblc will not be won by combating 
opinions which are the logical outcome of a denial 
of its existence, but rather by setting the invisible 
in the right light. Then it will be recognized by 
those for whom the “time has come.”

It was necessary to say this much, in order that 
it might not be assirmcd that occult science is 
ignorant of the standpoint of natural science when 
mention is made of an “etheric body,” which in

THE NATURE OF MAN

23

many circles must necessarily be considered as 
purely imaginary.THE NATURE OF MAN

23

many circles must necessarily be considered as 
purely imaginary.

The etheqc body is thus the second principle 
of human nature. For the clairvoyant it possesses 
a higher degree of reality than the physical body. 
A description of how it is seen by the clairvoyant 
can be given only in a later part of this book, when 
the sense in which such descriptions are to be 
taken will become manifest. For the present it 
will be enough to say that the etheric body inter- 
penetrates the physical body in all its parts, and 
is to be regarded as a kind of architect of the latter. 
All the physical organs are maintained in their 
form and shape by the currents and movements 
of the etheric body. The physical heart is based 
upon an etheric heart, the physical brain upon an 
etheric brain, and so on. The etheric body is or- 
ganized exactly like the physical, with this differ- 
ence, that in the etheric body the parts flow into 
one another in active movement, whereas in the 
physical body they are separated from each other.

Man has this etheric body in common with all 
plants, just as he has the physical body in com- 
mon with minerals. Everything living has its 
etheric body.

The study of occult science proceeds upwards 
from the etheric body to another principle of 
human nature. To aid in the formation of an 
idea ©f this principle, it draws attention to the 
phenomenon of sleep, just as in connection with

24

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE24

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the etheric body it drew attention to death. All 
human work, so far as the manifested world is 
concerned, is dependent on acti /ity d^uring waking 
life. But that activity is possible only so long as 
man is able to recuperate his exhausted forces by 
sleep. Action and thought disappear, pain and 
pleasure fade away during sleep, and on man’s 
reawaking, his conscious powers ascend from the 
unconsciousness of sleep as though from hidden 
mysterious sources of energy. It is the same 
consciousness which sinks down into dim depths 
on falling asleep and ascends from them again 
on reawaking.

That which brings life up out of the state of 
unconsciousness is, according to occult science, 
the third principle of human nature. It is called 
the astral body. Just as the physical body cannot 
keep its foiTn by means of the mineral substances 
and forces it contains, but mu.st, in order to keep 
them together, be interpenetrated by the etheric 
body, so it is impossible for the forces of the 
etheric body of them.selves to be irradiated with 
the light of consciousness. An etheric body left 
to its own resources would be in a permanent 
state of sleep.' An etheric body awake is irra- 
diated by an astral body. The effect of this 
astral body seems to sense-observation to dis- 
appear when man falls asleep; to clairvoyant

iWe may also say, it could only live the life of a ])lant in the 
physical body.

THE NATURE OF MAN

25

observation it is still present, with the difference 
that it appears separated from or drawn out of 
the etheric body. • Sense-observation has nothing 
to do with the astral body itself, but only with 
its effects in the manifested world, and these cease 
to be visible during sleep. In the same sense in 
which man possesses his physical body in common 
with minerals and his etheric body in common with 
plants, he resembles aninials as regards his astral 
body.Plants are in a pcmanent state of sleep. One 
who does not judge accurately in these matters may 
easily make' the mistake of attributing to plants 
the same kind of consciousness as that of animals 
and human beings in the waking state; but this 
assumption can only be due to an inaccurate 
conception of consciousness. In that case it is 
said that if an external stimulus is applied to a 
plant, it responds by certain movements, as would 
an animal. The sensitiveness of some plants is 
spoken of, — for example, of those which contract 
their leaves when certain external things act upon 
them. But the characteristic mark of conscious- 
ness is not that a being reacts in a certain way to 
an impression, but that it experiences something 
in its inner nature which adds a new element to 
mere reaction. Otherwise we should be able to 
speak of the “consciousness” of a piece of iron 
when, it expands under the influence of heat. 
Consciousness is present only when, through the

26

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

effect of heat, the being feels pain or pleasure 
inwardly.26

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

effect of heat, the being feels pain or pleasure 
inwardly.

The fourth principle of being which occult science 
attributes to man is one which he docs not share 
in common with the rest of the manifested world. 
It is that which differentiates him from his fellow- 
creatures, and makes him the crown of the creation 
which belongs to him. Occult science helps in 
forming a conception of this further principle of 
human nature by pointing out the existence of an 
essential difference betweeri the kinds of experience 
in waking life. On the one hand, man is con- 
stantly subjected to experiences which must of 
necessity come and go; on the other, he has 
experiences with which this is not the case. This 
fact comes out with special force if human expe- 
riences are compared with those of animals. An 
animal experiences the influences of the outer world 
with great regularity; under the influence of heat 
and cold it becomes conscious of pain or pleasure, 
and during certain regularly recurring bodily 
processes it feels hunger and thirst. The sum 
total of man’s life is not exhausted by such expe- 
riences; he is able to develop desires and wishes 
which go beyond these things. In the case of an 
animal it would always be possible, on going far 
enough into the matter, to ascertain the cause — 
either within or without its body — which impelled 
it to any given act or feeling. This is by no means 
the case with man. He may engender wishes and

THE NATURE OF MAN

27

desires for which no adequate cause exists either 
within or without his body. A particular source 
must be found foj* everything in this domain ; and 
according to occult science this source is the human 
“I” or “ego.” Therefore the ego is called the 
fourth principle of human nature.Were the astral body left to its own resources, 
feelings of pleasure and pain, and sensations of 
hunger and thirst, would alternate within it, but 
there would be lacking the consciousness of a 
lasting quality in all these feelings. It is not the 
lasting element as such which is here designated 
the ego, but that which is conscious of the lasting 
element. In this domain, conceptions must be 
very exactly expressed if misunderstandings are 
not to arise. The becoming aware of that which 
is permanent, in exchange for that which is 
changeable, constitutes the first dawning of the 
feeling of the ego. The sensation of hunger, for 
instance, cannot give a creature the feeling of 
having an ego. Hunger sets in when the recurring 
causes make themselves felt in the being con- 
cerned, which then devours its food just because 
these recurring conditions are present. For the 
ego-consciousness to arise, there must not only be 
these recurring conditions, urging the being to 
take food, but there must have been pleasure 
derived from previous satisfaction of hunger, and 
the consciousness of the pleasure must have 
remained; so that not only the present experience

28

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

(3f hunger but the past experience of pleasure urges 
the being to take nourishment.

Just as the physieal body fallis into, deeay if the 
ctherie body does not keep it together, and as 
the etheric Viody sinks into uneonseiousness if not 
irradiated Ijy tlie asli'al body, so would the astral 
body again and again allow' Uie past to be lost in 
oblivion iinle.ss the ego rescued the past by calling 
it up into the present. What death is to the 
physical body and sleep to the etheric, the power 
of forgetting is to the astral l,>ody. We may put 
this in another w’ay, and .say that life is the 
.special charaeteristie of the' etheric body, con- 
sciousness that of tlie astral body, and meniory 
that of the ego.It is still easier tf) make the mi.stake of attribut- 
ing memory' to an animal than that of attributing

* s such as those given in thi^ book regarding the faculty

of menit;ry muy cttv cn'''i1y l)e misunderstood. For one who observes 
extenud everts oi ly word.! i>nt at lirst sight notice the difference between 
vdiat hriijx'ns in th< animal, ''•r e\A-n in the ])lant, when somethiiy^ 
ajiyears in tlien re^ mbhng menioiy, and what is here characterized as 
actual rerM]l<', I m man. Of (oursr, when an animal has performed 
an a('Lion for a. third or fourth time it may ^lerform it in such a way 
that the out* r proec-s gives the imon-odon that memory and the 
traimng a-^.-^ociated with it are ])r«---ent. Nay, wo may even extend our 
coii('e[)ti( di of memory *>r of reeo]lreti(di as far as do some naturalists 
and ih('ir dis' irdcs, when they say that the chicken begins to pick up 
gra.in as so(,n a^ it efdncs out of the shell; that it even knows the proper 
nuvernents of h* ad and bf>f!y hir gaining its end. It could not have 
learned this in the eggshell; hence it must have done so through the 
thousands and thousands oi creatures from which it is descended (so 
says flering, for examyile). We may (Till the jihenomenon before us 
^onudhing resembling nu nioiy, but wr ',ha1l never aT*rive at a real eom- 
jirdicn^ion (jf human natnn' if wt; d() not take into account that very 
dislinc Pve (‘h inont whi^ h diows it^-clf in the human being as an inner 
jjh •( e-s, as at! actunl ];er(;c ption of (Tirlier experiences at a lat«r date, 
not merely the wc^rking of earlier conditions in latcm ones. In this 
book it is this perception of what is pas:t that is called memory, not alone

THE NATURE OF MAN

29THE NATURE OF MAN

29

consciousness to a plant. It is so natural to think 
of memory when a dog recognizes its master, whom 
perhaps it has not ^een for some time ; yet in reality 
the recognition is not due to memory at all, but 
to something quite different. The dog feels a 
certain attraction toward its master which pro- 
ceeds from the personality of the latter. This 
gives the dog a sense of pleasure whenever its 
master is present, and every time this happens 
it is a cause of the repetition of the pleasure. 
But memory only exists in a being when he not 
only feels his present experiences, but retains 
those of the past. A person might admit this, 
and yet fall into the error of thinking the dog has 
memory. For it might be said that the dog 
pines when its master leaves it, and therefore it 
retains a remembrance of him. This too is an 
inaccurate opinion. Living with its master has 
made his presence a condition of well-being to the 
dog, and it feels his absence much in the same way 
in which it feels hunger. One who does not make 
these distinctions will not arrive at a clear under- 
standing of the true conditions of life.

Memory and forgetfulness have for the ego much 
the same significance that waking and sleeping

the reappearance (even though transformeil; of what once existed, in a 
later form. Were we to use the word memory for the corresponding 
processes in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, we should require to 
use a differeiit word in speaking of man. in 1he description given here 
the important thing is not the i)artieular word used, but rather that in 
attempting to understand human beings this distinction should be 
recognized. The a])parently very intelligent actions of animals have 
just as little to do with what is here called memory.

3 °

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE3 °

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

have for the astral body. Just as sleep banishes 
into nothingness the cares and troubles of the day, 
so does forgetfulness draw a I’eil over the sad 
experiences of life and efface part of the past. 
And just as sleep is necessary for the recuperation 
of the exhausted vital forces, so must a man blot 
out from his memory certain portions of his past 
life if he is to face his new experiences freely and 
without prejudice. It is out of this very forget- 
fulness that strength arises for the perception of 
new facts. Let us take the case of learning to 
write. All the details which a child has to go 
through in this process are forgotten. What 
remains is the ability to write. How would a 
person ever be able to write if each time he took 
up his pen all his experiences in learning to write 
rose up before his mind?

' Now there are many different degrees of 
memory. Its simplest form is when a person 
perceives an object and, after turning away fropi 
it, retains its image in his mind. He formed the 
image while looking at the object. A process 
was then carried out betw'cen his astral body and 
his ego. The astral body lifted into consciousness 
the outward impression of the object, but know- 
ledge of the object would last only as long as the 
thing itself was present, unless the ego absorbed 
the knowledge into itself and made it its own.

It is at this point that occult science dra^vs the 
dividing line between what belongs to the body and

THE NATURE OF MAN 31It is at this point that occult science dra^vs the 
dividing line between what belongs to the body and

THE NATURE OF MAN 31

what belongs to the soul. It speaks of the astral 
body as long as it is a question of the gaining of 
knowledge from aa object which is present. But 
what gives laiowledge duration is known as soul. 
From this it can at once be seen how close is the 
connection in man between the astral body and 
that part of the soul which gives a lasting quality 
to knowledge. The two are, to a certain extent, 
united into one principle of human nature. Con- 
sequently, this unity is often denoted the astral 
body. When exact t^rms are desired, the astral 
body is called the soul-body, and the soul, in so 
far as it is united with the latter, is called the 
sentient soul.

The ego rises to a higher stage of its being when 
it centres its activity on what it has gained for 
itself out of its knowledge of objective things. It 
is by means of this activity that the ego detaches’ 
itself more and more from the objects of percep- 
tion, in order to work within that which is its own 
possession. The part of the soul on which this 
work devolves is called the rational or intellectual 
soul.* It is the peculiarity of the sentient anjJ 
intellectual souls that they work with that which 
they receive through sense-impressions of outward

*The term “verstaudesseele” is sometimes translated by “ rational 
soul.” From a certain point of view one could prefer the term “in- 
tellectual soul,” because it expresses better the activity of the soul 
than does “rational soul.” In the latter one thinks of the knowledge 
about a perception; in intellectuality, of the actual possibility of form- 
ing this knowledge through inward activity. In German the expression 
“emotional soul ” only coincides as it should with the second member of 
the soul when the inward activity is kept in view.

3 ^

rVN OUTLINE OF OCCULT vSCIENCE3 ^

rVN OUTLINE OF OCCULT vSCIENCE

objects of which they retain the memory. The 
soul is then wholly surrendered to something 
which is really outside it. Even what it has made 
its own through memory, it has actually received 
from without. But it is able to go beyond all 
this, and occult science can most easily give an 
idea of this by drawing attention to a simple 
fact, which, however, is of the greatest importance. 
It is that in the whole range of speech there is 
but one name which is distinguished by its very 
nature from all other names. This is the name 
“I.” Every other name can be applied by any 
one to the thing or Ixnng to which it belongs. The 
word “I” as the dc.signation of a being has a 
meaning only when given to tliat bt'ing by himself. 
Never can any outside voice call us by the name 
of “I.” We can apply it only to ourselves. “I 
‘am only an ‘I’ to myself; to every one else 1 am 
a ‘you,’ and every one else is a ‘you’ to me.” 
This fact is the outward expression of a deeply 
significant truth. The real essence of the ego is 
independent of everything out.sidc it, and it is on 
this account that its name cannot be applied to it 
by any one else. This is the reason why those 
religious confessions which have consciously main- 
tained their connection with occult science, speak 
of the word “I” as the ‘‘unutterable name of 
God.” For the fact above mentioned is exactly 
what is referred to when this expression is used. 
Nothing outward has access to that part of the

THE NATURE OF MAN

33

human soul of which we are now speaking. It 
is the “hidden sanctuary” of the soul. Only a 
being of like nature with the soul can win entrance 
there. “The divinity dwelling in man speaks 
when the soul recognizes itself as an ego.” Just 
as the sentient and intellectual souls dwell in the 
outer world, so a third soul -principle is immersed 
in the divine when the soul becomes conscious of 
its own nature.In this connection a misunderstanding may 
easily arise; it may seem as though occult science 
pronounced the ego to be one with God. But it by 
no means says that the ego is God, only that it is 
of the same nature and essence as God. Does 
any one declare the drop of water taken from the 
ocean to be the ocean, when he asserts that the 
drop and the ocean are the same in essenee or 
substance? If a comparison is needed, we may* 
say, “The ego is related to God as the drop of 
water is to the ocean.” Man is able to find a 
divine element within him, beeause his original 
essenee is derived directly from the divine. Thus 
man, through the third principle of his soul, 
attains to an inner knowledge of himself, just as 
through his astral body he gains knowledge of 
the outer world. For this reason occult science 
calls the third soul-principle the self-conscious 
soul, and it holds that the soul-part of man 
consists of three principles, the sentient, intellec- 
tual, and self-conscious souls, just as the bodily

34

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

part has three principles, the physical, etheric, 
and astral bodies.34

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

part has three principles, the physical, etheric, 
and astral bodies.

The real nature of the ego -•is first revealed in 
the self-conscious soul. Through feeling and 
reason the soul loses itself in other things; but 
as the self-conscious soul it lays hold of its own 
essence. Therefore this ego can only be perceived 
through the self-conscious soul by a certain inner 
activity. The images of external objects are 
formed as those objects come and go, and the 
images go on working in the intellect by virtue 
of their own force. But if the ego is to perceive 
itself, it cannot merely surrender itself; it must 
first, by inner activity, draw up its own being out 
of its depths, in order to become conscious of it. 
A new activity of the ego begins with this self- 
cognition, — with self -recollection. Owing to this 
activity, the perception of the ego in the self- 
conscious soul possesses an entirely different mean- 
ing for man from that conveyed by the observation 
of all that reaches him through the three bodily 
principles and the two other soul-principles. The 
power which reveals the ego in the self-conscious 
soul is in fact the same power which is manifested 
everywhere else in the world; only in the body 
and the lower soul-principles it does not come 
forth directly, but is manifested little by little in 
its effects. The lowest manifestation is through 
the physical body, thence a gradual aspent is 
made to that which fills the intellectual soul.

THE NATURE OF MAN

35THE NATURE OF MAN

35

Indeed, we may say that with each ascending 
step one of the veils falls away in which the hidden 
centre is wra|iped. * In that which fills the self- 
conscious soul, this hidden centre emerges unveiled 
into the temple of the soul. Yet it shows itself 
just here to be l)ut a drop from the ocean of the 
all-pervading Primordial Essence; and it is here 
that man first has to grasp it, — this Primordial 
Essence. He must recognize it ii\ himself before 
he is able to find it in its manifestations.

That which penetrates into the self-conscious 
soul like a drop from the ocean is called by occult 
science the .spirit. In this way is the self-conscious 
soul united with the spirit, which is the hidden 
principle in all manifested things. If man wishes 
to lay hold of the spirit in all. manifestation, 
he must •do it in the same way in which he lays 
hold of the ego in the self-conscious soul. He 
must extend to the visible world the activity which 
has led him to the perception of his ego. By this 
means he evolves to yet higher planes of his being. 
He adds something new to the principles of his 
body and soul. The first thing that happens is 
that he himself conquers what lies hidden in his 
lower soul-principles, and this is effected through 
the work which the ego carries on within the soul. 
How man is engaged in this work becomes evident 
if we compare with a high-minded idealist one 
who is still given up to low desii'es and so-called 
sensual pleasures. The latter becomes transmuted

36 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE36 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

into the former if he withdraws from certain lower 
tendencies and turns to higher ones. He thereby 
works from his ego upon his sou’ so as to en- 
noble and spiritualize it. The ego has become 
the master of that man’s soul-life. This may be 
carried so far that no desire or wish can take root 
in the soul unless the ego permits of its entrance. 
In this way the whole soul becomes a manifestation 
of the ego, which previously only the self-conscious 
soul had been. All civilized life and all spiritual 
effort reaUy consist in the one work which has for 
its object to make the ego the master. Every 
one now living is engaged in this work, whether 
he wishes it or not, and whether or no he is con- 
scious of the fact.

Again, by this w'ork human nature is drawn 
upward to higher stages of being. Man develops 
new principles of his nature. These lie hidden 
from him behind what is manifest. If man is 
able by working upon his soul to make his ego 
master of it, so that the latter brings into mani- 
festation what is hidden, the work may extend 
yet farther and may include the astral body. In 
that case the ego takes possession of the astral 
body by uniting itself with the hidden wisdom of 
this astral principle. In occult science the astral 
body which is thus conquered and transformed by 
the ego is called the Spirit-Self. (This is the same 
as what is known as “Manas” in theosophical 
literature, a term borrowed from the wisdom of

THE NATURE OF MAN

37

the East.) In the Spirit-Self a higher principle is 
added to human nature, one which is present as 
though in the germ, and which in the course of 
the work of the hiiman being on itself comes forth 
more and more.Man conquers his astral body by pushing 
through to the hidden forces lying behind it; a 
similar thing happens, at a later stage of develop- 
ment, to the etheric body: but the work on the 
latter is more arduous, for what is hidden in the 
etheric body is enveloped in two veils, but what is 
hidden in the astral body in only one.‘ Occult 
science gives an idea of the difference in the work 
on the two bodies by pointing out certain changes 
which may take place in man in the course of his 
development. Let us at first think of the way in 
which certain soul-qualities of man develop when 
the ego works upon the soul; how pleasures and 
desires, joys and son'ows, may change. We have 
only to look back to our childhood. What gave 
us pleasure then, what caused us pain? What 
have we learned in addition to what we knew as 
children? All this is but an expression of the

1 No hard and fast lino can be drawn between the changes which are 
accomplished in the astral body through the activity of the ego and 
those taking place in the etheric body. The one merges into the other. 
When a man learns something, and thereby gains a certain capacity 
for judgment, a change takes place in his astral body; but when this 
judgment changes his natural disposition, so that he habituates himself 
to feel differently, in consequence of his learning, from what he did 
before, this means a change in his etheric body. Everything that 
becomes so much a man’s own that he can always recall it, is based on 
the transformation of the etheric body. That which little by little 
becomes an abiding possession of the memory has its foundation in 
the transmission to the etheric body of the work of tin? astral body.

38 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE38 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

way in which the ego has gained the mastery over 
the astral body, for it is this principle which is 
the vehicle of pleasure and pi^in, joy and sorrow. 
Compared with these things, how' little in the 
course of time do certain other human qualities 
change, for example, the temperament, the deeper 
peculiarities of the character, and like qualities. 
A passionate child wall often retain certain tend- 
encies to sudden anger during its development in 
later life.

This is such a striking fact that there are 
thinkers who entirely deny the possibility of 
changing the fundamental character. They as- 
sume that it is something permanent throughout 
life, and that it is merely a question of its being 
manifested in one way or another. But sucli an 
opinion is due to defective observation. To one 
who is capable of seeing such things, it is' evident 
that even the character and temi^eramcnt of a 
person may be transformed under the influence of 
his ego. It is true that this change is slow in 
comparison with the change in the qualities before 
mentioned. We may compare the relation to 
each other of the rates of change in the two 
bodies to the movements of the hour-hand and 
minute-hand of a clock. Now'^ the forces which 
bring about a change of character or temperament 
belong to the hidden forces of the etheric body. 
They are of the same nature as the forces which 
govern the kingdom of life, — the same, therefore,

THE NATURE OF MAN

39

as the forces of growth, nutrition, and generation. 
Further explanations in this work will throw the 
right light oi^ thest; things.THE NATURE OF MAN

39

as the forces of growth, nutrition, and generation. 
Further explanations in this work will throw the 
right light oi^ thest; things.

Thus it is not when man simply gives himself 
up to pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, that 
the ego is working on the astral body, but when 
the peculiarities of these qualities of the soul are 
changed; and the work is extended in the same 
way to the etheric body, when the ego applies its 
energies to changing the character or tempera- 
ment. This change, too, is one in which every 
person living is engaged, whether consciously or 
not. The most powerful incitement to this kind 
of change in ordinary life is that given by religion. 
If the ego allows the impulses which flow from 
religion to work upon it again and again, they 
becomq a power within it which extends to the 
etheric body and changes it as lesser impulses in 
life effect the transformation of the astral body. 
These lesser impulses, which come to man through 
study, reflection, the ennobling of feeling, and so 
on, are subject to the manifold changes of existence; 
but the religious feelings impress a certain stamp 
of unifonnity upon all thinking, feeling, and 
willing. They diffuse an equal and single light 
over the whole life of the soul.

Man thinks and feels one thing to-day, another 
to-morrow, the causes of which are of many dif- 
ferent kinds; but one who, through his religious 
convictions consistently held, has a glimpse of

40 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

something which persists through all changes, 
will relate his thoughts and feelings of to-day, as 
well as his experiences of to-morrow, to that 
fundamental feeling he possesses. Thus religious 
belief has the power of permeating the whole of 
the soul-life. Its influences increase in strength 
as time goes on because they are constantly 
repeated. Hence they acquire the power of 
working upon the ethcric body.In a similar way does the influence of true art 
affect m.an. If, going beyond the outer form, 
colour, and tone of a work of art, he penetrates 
to its spiritual foundations with his imagination 
and feeling, then the impulses thus received by 
the ego actually reach the etheric body. When 
this thought is followed out to its logical conclu- 
sion, the immense significance of art in all human 
evolution may be estimated. Only a few instances 
are pointed out here of what induces the ego to 
work upon the etheric body. There are many 
similar influences in human life which are not so 
apparent at the first glance. But these instances 
are enough to show that there is yet another 
principle of man’s nature hidden within him, which 
the ego is making more and more manifest. 
Occult science denotes this second principle of 
the spirit the “Life-Spirit.” (It is the same which 
in current theosophical literature is called Bud- 
dhi, a term borrowed from Eastern wisdom.) The 
expression “Life-Spirit” is appropriate, becaitse

THE NATURE OF MAN

41

the same forces are at work within what it de- 
notes as in the vital body, with the difference 
that when they ace manifesting in the latter the 
ego is not active. When, however, these powers 
express themselves as the Life-Spirit, they are 
interpenetrated by the ego.Man’s intellectual development, the purification 
and ennobling of his feelings and of the manifesta- 
tions of his will, are the measure of the degree in 
which he has transformed the astral body into the 
Spirit-Self. His relig'ous experiences, as well as 
many others, are stamped upon the etheric body, 
making it into the Life-Spirit. In the ordinary 
course of life this happens more or less uncon- 
sciously; so-called initiation, on the contrary, 
consists in man’s being directed by occult science 
to the means through which he may quite con- 
sciously take in hand this work in the Spiiit-Self 
and Life-Spirit. These means will be dealt with in 
ly.tcr parts of this book. In the meantime it is 
important to .show that besides the soul and the 
body, the spu'it also is working within man. It 
will be seen later how this spirit belongs to the 
eternal part of man, as contrasted with the perish- 
able body.

But the work of the ego on the astral and 
etheric bodies does not exhaust its activity, which 
is also extended to the physical body. A slight 
effect, of the influence of the ego on the physical 
body may be seen when certain experiences cause

42

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

»42

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

»

a person to blush or turn pale. In this case the 
ego is actually the occasion of a process in the 
physical body. Now if through the activity of 
the ego in man, changes occur influencing the 
physical body, the ego is really united with the 
hidden forces of the physical body, that is, with 
the same forces which bring about its physical 
processes. Occult science says that during such 
activity the ego is working on the physical body. 
This expression mu.st not be misunderstood. It 
must on no account be supposed that this work is of 
a grossly material nature. What appears as gross 
material in the physical body is merely the 
manifested part of it; behind this are the hidden 
forces of its being, which are of a spiritual nature. 
When the ego piits forth its energies in the manner 
described, it unites itself, not with the outer 
material manifestation of the physical body, but 
with the invisible forces which bring that body 
into being and afterwards cause it to decay. This 
work of the ego on the physical body can only very 
partially become clear to man’s consciousness in 
ordinary life. It can become fully clear only 
when, under the influence of occult science, man 
consciously takes the work into his own hands. 
Then he becomes aware that there is a third spir- 
itual principle within him. It is that which occult 
science calls the “Spirit-Man,” as contrasted with 
physical man. (In theosophical literature this 
“Spirit-Man” is known as Atm^.)

THE NATURE OF MAN

4.5THE NATURE OF MAN

4.5

Again, with regard to the Spirit-Man, it is easy 
to make a mistake. In the physical body we see 
man’s lowestj)rinc»iple, and on this account find it 
hard to realize that the work on that body should 
be accomplished Vjy the highest principle of the 
human entity. But just because the spirit active 
within the physical body is hidden under three 
veils, the highest kind of human effort is needed in 
order to make the ego one with that which is 
the hidden spiritual energy of the body.

Occult science, therefore, represents man as a 
being com]ioscd of many principles. Those of 
a bodily nature are:

the physical body, 
the etheric or vital body, 
the astral body.

The sopl-principles arc: 
the sentient soul, 
the intellectital or rational soul,

. the self-conscious soul.

It is in the soul that the ego diffu.ses its light. 
Of a spiritual nature are: 
the Spirit-Self, 
the Life-Spirit, 
the Spirit- Man.

It follows from what was said above that the 
sentient soul and the astral body are closely united 
and in a certain sense arc one. Similarly, the 
self-conscious soul and the Spirit-Self form a 
whole, for in the self-conscious soul the spirit

44

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

shines forth, and thence irradiates with its light 
the other principles of human nature. Hence 
occult science also speaks of man’s organization 
as follows. The intellectual soul is' called simply 
the ego, because it partakes of the nature of the 
ego, and in a certain sense is the ego, not yet 
conscious of its spiritual nature. We thus have 
seven divisions of man:

(1) physical body;

(2) etheric or vital body;

(3) astral body;

(4) ego;

(5) Spirit-Self;

(6) Life-Spirit;

(7) Spirit-Man.(1) physical body;

(2) etheric or vital body;

(3) astral body;

(4) ego;

(5) Spirit-Self;

(6) Life-Spirit;

(7) Spirit-Man.

Even one accustomed to materialistic habits 
of thought would not find in this sevenfold organ- 
ization of man the “fanciful magic’’ often attrib- 
uted to it, if he would keep strictly to the meaning 
of the above explanations, and not at once intro- 
duce the idea of something magic into the matter. 
Occult science speaks of these seven principles of 
man in exactly the same way, only from the 
standpoint of a higher form of observation of the 
world, as allusion is commonly made to the seven 
coloms that make up white light, or to the seven 
notes of the scale (the octave being regarded as a 
repetition of the keynote). As light appears in 
seven colours, and sound in seven tones, sq is the 
unity of man’s nature manifested in the seven

THE NATURE OF MAN

45

principles described. No more superstition at- 
taches to the number seven in the case of occult 
science than ^when' associated with the spectrum 
or with the scale.THE NATURE OF MAN

45

principles described. No more superstition at- 
taches to the number seven in the case of occult 
science than ^when' associated with the spectrum 
or with the scale.

On an occasion when these facts were put for- 
ward verbally, it was objected that the statement 
about the number seven does not apply to colours, 
since there are others beyond the red and violet 
rays, invisible to the eye. But even in this 
respect the comparison with colours holds good, 
for, in fact, the human being expands beyond the 
physical body on the one side, and beyond the 
Spirit-Man on the other; only to the methods of 
spiritual observation of which occult science first 
relates, these continuations of man are “spiritu- 
ally” invisible, just as the colours beyond red 
and violet are physically invisible. It was neces- 
sary to say this much, because the opinion so 
easily arises that occult science does not seriously 
apply itself to scientific thinking, but treats 
matters as an amateur. But one who carefully 
considers the meaning of the statements made by 
occult science will find that in reality it is never at 
variance with genuine science; neither when it 
brings forward the facts of natural science as 
illustrations, nor when its statements are directly 
connected with natural research.

CHAPTER HI

<■

Sleep and DeathCHAPTER HI

<■

Sleep and Death

T he nature of waking consciousness cannot 
l‘e fathomed without observing that condi- 
tion whieli man experiences during sleep, 
and the problem (d life cannot be approached 
without studying death. Any one failing to per- 
ceive the importance of occult science may distrust 
the manner in which it .studies sleep and death. 
Occult science is. however, capable of appreciating 
the motives from which such distrust arises. 
For there is nothing incomprehensible in the 
assertion that man exists for active, purposeful 
life, that his acts de])end on his devotion thereto, 
and that absorption in such conditions as sleep 
and death can result only frcjm a taste for idle 
dreaming, and can lead to nothing else than 
vain imaginings.

The refusal to accept anything of so fantastic 
a nature may readily be regarded as the expres- 
sion of a sound mind, while indulgence in such 
“idle dreaming” is accounted morbid, and a pur- 
suit fit only for people in whom the joy and 
ardour of life are lacking, and who are incapable 
of “real work.” It would be wrong to set this 
assertion aside at once as an injustice, for it con- 
tains a certain grain of truth. It is one quarter

SLEEP AND DEATH

47

truth, and must be completed by the remaining 
three quarters belonging to it. Now if we dis- 
pute the one quariier which is right, with him who 
recognizes t^at one quarter quite distinctly but 
who does not dream of the other three quarters, 
we only rouse his suspicions. For it must indeed 
be unconditionally granted that the study of 
that which lies hidden in sleep and death is morbid 
if it leads to weakness or to estrangement from 
real life. No less must we admit that much of 
that which has always called itself occult science 
in the world, and which is even now practised 
under that name, bears the impression of what is 
unhealthy and hostile to life; but this certainly 
does not spring from genuine occultism.The real fact of the matter is this, that just as 
a man cannot always be awake, neither is he 
sufficiently equipped for the actual conditions of 
life in its entire range without that which occult 
science has to offer him. Life continues during 
sleep, and the forces which work and labour 
during the waking state draw their strength and 
refre i ment from that which sleep gives them. 
It is thus with the things under our observation 
in the manifested world. The boundaries of the 
world are wider than is the field of the latter 
observation; and what man recognizes in the 
visible must be supplemented and fertilized by 
what .he is able to know of the invisible world. 
A man who did not continually renew his exhausted

48 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

^ «

forces by sleep, would bring his life to destruction; 
and in the same way a view of the world which 
is not fertilized by a knowledge of^the unseen, 
must lead to a feeling of desolation.

It is similarly so with regard to death. Living 
creatures fall a prey to death in order that new life 
may arise. It is precisely occult science whicli 
throws light on Goethe’s beautiful phrase : ‘ ‘ Nature 
invented Death in order to have much Life.” 
Just as in the ordinary sense there could be no 
life without death, so can there be no real know- 
ledge of the visible world without insight into the 
invi.sible. All discernment of the visible must 
plui'ge again and again into the invisible in order 
to develop. Thus it is evident that occult science 
alone makes th.e life of revealed knowledge possi- 
ble. In its true form it never enfeebles life, but 
strengthens it and ever renews its freshness and 
health, when, left to its own resources, it has 
become weak and diseased.When a man sinks into sleep the connection 
between his principles changes, as described earlier 
in this work. The part of the sleeping man 
which lies upon his couch comprises the physical 
and etheric bodies, but not the astral body and 
not the ego. It is because the etheric body 
remains bound to the physical body in sleep that 
the life-activities continue. For the moment the 
physical body is left to itself, it must of necessity 
fall into decay. The things that are extinguished

SLEEP AND DEATH

49

in sleep are ideas, pain, pleasure, joy, grief, the 
ability to express conscious will, and similar 
faculties of ^existence. But the astral body is 
the vehicle of all these things. That the astral 
body, with its joy and sorrow, its realm of thought 
and will, is annihilated in sleep is an opinion 
that cannot be entertained by an unbiassed judg- 
ment; it exists still, but in another condition. 
In order that the human ego and the astral body 
may not only be endowed with pleasure and pain 
and all the other things we have nam*ed, but also 
have a conscioiis j)crception of them, it is neces- 
sary that the astral body should be united wnth 
the physical and ethcric bodies. This is the 
case during waking life, but not in sleep. The 
astral body has withdrawn itself from the other 
bodies., It has adopted another kind of existence 
than that which it possesses while united with 
the physical and ctheric l.xxlies. Now it is the 
task of occult science to study this other kind of 
existence in the astral body. During sleep, the 
astral body vanishes from observation in the outer 
world : and occult science must trace it in its hidden 
life until it again takes possession of its physical 
and etheric bodies on awaking.As in all cases when knowledge of the hidden 
things and events of life have to be dealt with, 
clairvoyant observation is necessary for the dis- 
covery* of the real facts of the sleep state in its 
true nature, but if that which may be discovered

■;o AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

by this means has once been made clear, it is 
comprehensible to really unprejudiced thought 
withorit further demonstration. For events in 
the unseen world show themselves by their effects 
in the world of majiifestation. If what is revealed 
by clairvoyant vision is an explanation of visible 
events, such a coiitirmation by life is the proof 
which may rightly be demanded. Even one who 
will not use the nieans to be given later for the 
attainment of clairvoyant \-ision may have the 
following exi^crience; he may, in the first place, 
take the statements of the clairvoyant for granted, 
and then apply them tf) the material events with- 
in his experience. He will then find that life 
thereby becomes clear and comprehensible; and 
the more exact and minute his observations of 
ordinary life, the more readily will he come to 
this conclusion.

Even though the astral body during sleep 
passes through no ex]:)eriences. though it is npt 
conscious of pleasure, pain, and the like, it does 
not remain inactive. Rather is it the case that 
active work is its function in the sleep state. For 
it is the astral body which strengthens and recu- 
perates man’s forces, exhausted during waking life. 
As long as the astral body is united with the 
physical and ctheric bodies it is related to the 
outer world through these two bodies. They 
convey to it perceptions and representations. 
Through the impressions which they receive from

SLEEP AND DEATH

51SLEEP AND DEATH

51

their surroundings, it experiences pleasure and 
pain. Now thc‘ physical body can be preserved 
in the form^and ''.hapc suitable to the individual 
only by means of the human etheric body. But 
this human form can be preserved only by an 
etheric body which on its part receives corre- 
sponding forces from the astral body. The etheric 
body is the builder, ilie architect, of the physical 
body. It can, howc\cr, build in the true sense 
only when it receive.-^ from the astral body the 
impulse as to the manix^r in which it must build. 
In this latter are contained the models, accord- 
ing to which the etlieric Ijody gives the physical 
body its f(;rm. During our waking hours these 
models for the physical Ixxly are not present in 
the astral body, or, at least, only to a certain 
extentj. For in waking life ihe soul replaces these 
models with its own images. When a person 
directs his senses upon his environment he thus 
creates in his ideas pictures which are copies of 
the world around him. These copies at first 
disturb the prototypes which give the etheric 
body the impulse to preserv(' the physical body. 
Such disturbance could not be present if a man, 
by virtue of his own activity, could convey 
to his astral body those picture's which would 
give the right impulse to the etheric body. Yet 
this very disturbance plays an important part in 
hvunan life, and is able to express itself because the 
models for the etheric bodv do not come into full

52

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE,52

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE,

play in the waking state. This fact is revealed by 
“fatigue.” Nosv, during sleep, no external impres- 
sions disturb the force of the astl'al bQdy. There- 
fore in this condition it can expel fatigue. The 
work of the astral body during sleep consists in 
removing fatigue, and it can accomplish this only 
on leaving the physical and ctheric bodies. Dur- 
ing waking life the astral body does its work 
within the physical body; during sleep it works 
on the latter from outside.

For instance, just as the physical body has 
need of the outer world, which is of like substance 
with itself, for its supply of food, something of the 
same kind takes place in the case of the astral 
body. Let us imagine a physical human body 
removed frcjin the surrounding world: it would 
die. That shows that physical life is an impossi- 
bility without the entire physical environment. 
In fact, the whole earth must be just as it is if 
physical human bodies are to exist upon it. For, 
in reality, the whole human body is only a part 
of the earth, — indeed, in a wider sense, part of 
the whole physical universe. In this respect it 
is related in the same .sense as, for example, the 
finger of a hand to the entire htunan body. Sepa- 
rate the finger from the hand and it cannot remain 
a finger: it withers away. Such would also be 
the fate of the human body were it removed from 
that body of which it is a member, — from the 
conditions of life with which the earth provides

SLEEP AND DEATH

S3

it. Let it be rjiised above the surface of the earth 
but a sufficient number of miles and it will perish 
as the finger peri:*hes when cut off from the hand. 
If this fact IS less apparent in the case of a man’s 
physical organism than in that of his finger and 
his body, it is mcrc'ly because the finger cannot 
walk about on the Ijody as man is able to do on 
the earth, and because- on that account the depend- 
ence of the former is more obvious.In the same way that the physical body is 
embedded in the physical world to which it 
belongs, so does the astral body form a part of 
its own world, only it is tom out of it in waking 
life. We can form a clear idea of what happens 
by having recourse to an analogy. Imagine a 
vessel filled with water. xNo one drop is a sep- 
arate thing in itself within that entire mass of 
water. But let us take a little spoi\ge and with 
it suck up a single drop from the whole mass 
of water. Something of this kind happens to 
the human astral body on awaking. During 
sleep it is in a world resembling its own nature. 
In a certain sense it forms part of it. On awak- 
ing, the physical and etheric bodies suck it up: 
they absorb it; they contain the organs through 
which it observes the outer world. In order 
to achieve this observation it has to leave its 
own world, though it is in that world alone that 
it can receive the models which it needs for the 
etheric body.

54

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE54

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Just as food is supplied to the physical body 
from its suiToundings, so arc the pictures of the 
world surrounding the astral body oresented to 
it during the state of sleep. There, indeed, it 
lives in the universe, beyond the phj'^sical and 
cthcric bodies: in that same universe out of 
which the whole man is born. 'Phe source of 
the images by means of which man receives his 
form is in this universe. Tie is linked in harmony 
with it; and when he awakes he rises above the 
surface of this all-pervading harmony to attain 
external perce{)tion. In sleep his astral body 
returns to the universal harmony. He brings so 
rmicli strength from it to his bodies (jn awaking 
that he can once more dispense for a time with 
sojourning in the realm of harmony. T'he astral 
body retuins during sleep to its home, and, on 
awaking, Pmings back into life freshly invigorated 
forces. 'That wliich the astral body thus gains, 
and brings with it on waking, finds its outer 
expression in the refreshment afforded by sound 
sleep.

PTu'ther exposition of occult .science will show 
that this home of the astral Tiody is more extensive 
than that which belongs to the physical body in 
the narrower sense of the physical environment. 
Thus, while man as a physical being is a member 
of this earth, his astral body belongs to worlds 
in which other heavenly bodies l»esides our. earth 
are included. During sleep, therefore, — this can

SLEEP AND DEATH

55

be made clear, as we have said, only by further 
explanations, — it enters a world to which other 
stars than tl^ ear i*h belong. In recognition of the 
fact that man lives during sleep in a world of stars, 
that is, in an astral world, oecult science ealls that 
principle of man which has its real home in that 
“astral” world and which, every time it returns 
to the sleep state, draws renewed foree from that 
world, the “astral bod''.”It should be superfinous to point oitt that a 
misunderstanding miglu easily arise with regard 
to these facts; in our lime, however, when eer- 
tain materialistic modes of I'epresentation exist, it 
becomes not altogether nnneeessary. In quar- 
ters where such representation prevails it may, 
of course, be said that such a thing as fatigue 
can be. scientifically investigated only in accord- 
ance with physical conditions. Even if the 
learned are not yet unanimous with regard to 
tiui physical cause of fatigue, one thing is quite 
firmly established; we must accept certain phys- 
ical processes which lie at the root of this phe- 
nomenon. It would be well, however, if it were 
recognized that occult science docs not in any way 
oppose this assertion. It admits c' very thing that 
is said in this connection, just as it is admitted 
that for the physical erection of a house one 
brick must be laid upon another, and that when 
the house is finished its form and construction 
can be explained by purely mechanical laws.

:;6 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

But the thought of the architect is ticccssary 
for the building of the house. This cannot be 
discovered merely by examination^ of physical 
laws.

Just as the thought of the creator of a house 
stands behind the physical laws which make it 
explicable, so too, behind what is affiiTncd, with 
perfect accuracy, b}'^ physical science docs there 
stand that of which occult science treats. This 
comparison is of course often put forward when 
the justification for a spiritual background to the 
world is in question; and it may be considered 
a trivial one. But what is important in .siich 
matters is not familiarity with certain concep- 
tions, but that the proper weight should be given 
them in establishing a fact. One may be pre- 
vented front doing this simply because contrary 
ideas have so much power over the judgment 
that this weight is not felt.Dreaming is an intermediate state bctw9cn 
sleeping and waking. What dream experiences 
offer to thoughtful observation is the many- 
coloured interweaving of a picture-world, wliich 
nevertheless conceals within itself some sort of 
law and order. At first this world seems to 
have an ebb and flow, often in confused suc- 
cession. Man in his dream-life is set free from 
the laws of waking consciousness which bind him 
to sense-perception and the laws of .reason. 
And yet dreams have some sort of mysterious

sr.EEP AND DEATH

57

law, attractive ai d fascinating to human specula- 
tion, and this is l!ie deeper reason why the beau- 
tiful play o^ imatdnation lying at the root of 
artistic feeling is always apt to be compared to 
dreaming. We nec <1 only recall a few character- 
istic dreams to find this corroborated. A man 
dreams, for example’, that he is driving off a dog 
that is attacking Imn. He wakes, and finds 
himself in the act of unconsciously pushing off 
part of the bedclothes which had been lying on 
an unaccustomed part ( i' his body and which had 
therefore become oppn ssive. What is it that 
dream -life makes in this instance out of an inci- 
dent perceptible to the senses? In the first 
place, it leaves in complete unconsciousness what 
the senses would perceive' in the waking state. 
But it. holds fast something essential — namely, 
the fact that the man wdshc-^ to repel something; 
and round about this it weaves a metaphorical 
occurrence.

The pictures, as such, are echoes of waking 
life. There is something arbitrary in the way 
in which they are drawn from it. Every one feels 
that with the same exterior cause the dream 
might conjure up various pictures before him. 
But they give symbolic expression to the feeling 
that the man has something to ward off. The 
dream creates symbols; it is a symbolist. Inner 
experiences can also be transformed into such 
dream-symbols. A man dreams that a fire is

58 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE58 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

crackling beside him; he sees flames in his dream. 
He wakes up feeling that he is too heavily covered 
and has become too warm. The feeling of too 
great warmth expresses itself symbolically in 
the pictitre. Quite dramatic experiences may be 
enacted in a dream. For example, some one 
dreams that he is standing on the edge of a 
precipice. He sees a child running toward it. 
The dream makes him experience all the tor- 
tures of the thought — if only the child will not 
be heedless and fall over into the abyss! He 
sees it fall, and hears the dull thud of the body 
below. He awakes, and perceives that an object 
which had been hanging on the wall of the room 
has become unfastened, and made a dull sound 
by its fall. This simple event is expressed in 
dream-life by one which unravels itself in exciting 
pictures. For the present it is not at all necessary 
to engage in reflection as to the reason why, in 
the last example, the moment of the falling of 
a heavy object expresses itself in a series of 
events which seem to spread themselves over a 
certain length of time; it is only necessary to 
keep in view that the dream transforms into a 
picture that which would present itself to the 
waking sense-perception.

We see that the moment the senses cease their 
activity, creative power asserts itself in man. 
It is the same creative power which is present in 
absolutely dreamless sleep, and then recuperates

SLEEP AND DEATH

59SLEEP AND DEATH

59

man’s exhausted forces. For this dreamless sleep 
to take place, the astral body must be withdrawn 
from the etheric* and physical bodies. During 
the dream -^ate it is so far separated from the 
physical body as to have no further connection 
with the organs of sense; but it still maintains a 
certain connection with the etheric body. The 
capacity for perceiving the experiences of the 
astral body by means of pictures is due to this 
connection which it maintains with the etheric 
body. The momerd this connection also ceases, 
the pictures sink into the obscurity of uncon- 
sciousness and dreamless sleep has set in.

The arbitrary and often nonsensical element 
in dream-pictures arises from the fact that the 
astral body cannot, on account of its separation 
from the sense-organs of the physical bod\^ 
relate its pietures to the correct objects and 
events of the outer environment. It is espe- 
cially illuminating, in this matter, to examine 
a dream in which the ego is, as it were, split up. 
Take, for example, the case of some one who 
dreams that he is a schoolboy and cannot anvswer 
the question put to him by his teacher, although 
immediately afterwards the teacher answers it 
himself. The dreamer, being unable to make 
use of his physical organs of perception, is not 
able to connect both occurrences with himself, 
as the. same individual. Therefore, if only to be 
able to recognize himself as a permanent ego.

6o AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

t

man must first be equipped with outer organs 
of perception. Only when he had acquired the 
faculty of sdf-consciousness without the aid of 
such organs would the permanent ego^also become 
perceptible to him outside his physical body. 
Clairvoyant consciousness has to acquire this 
faculty, and the method of so doing will be 
treated in detail later in this work.Even death takes place for no other cause 
than a change in the connection of the principles 
of man’s being. And what is visible to clair- 
vo3'’ant obser\'ation with regard to death may 
also be seen in its effects in the manifested 
world; in this case also, an unbiassed judgment 
will find the teachings of occult science corvfirmed 
by obsen'ing external life. The expression of the 
invisible in the visible is, however, less evident 
with regard to these facts, and there is greater 
difficulty in feiding the full importance of that

which in the events of outer life endorses the

•

statements of occult science in this domain. 
These statements may be pronounced to be merely 
fancy-pictures, even more readily than many 
other things that have been dealt with in this 
work, if we shut ourselves off from the knowledge 
that everywhere in the visible is contained an 
unmistakable foreshadowing of the invisible.

Whereas, on the approach of sleep, only the 
astral body is released from its connection! with 
the etheric and physical bodies, which still remain

SLEEP AND DEATH

6iWhereas, on the approach of sleep, only the 
astral body is released from its connection! with 
the etheric and physical bodies, which still remain

SLEEP AND DEATH

6i

united to each other, at death the separation of 
the physical from the etheric body takes place. 
The physical bodly is abandoned to its own forces, 
and must therefore become disintegrated as a 
corpse. At death the etheric body finds itself 
in a condition in which it has never been before 
between the time of its birth and death,— with 
the exception of certain abnormal conditions to 
be dealt with later. That is to say, it is now 
united to the astral body in the absence of the 
physical body; for the etheric and astral bodies 
do not separate immediately after death; they 
are held together for a time by the agency of a 
force, the presence of which can be easily under- 
stood, for were this force not present the etheric 
body could not detach itself from the physical 
body. It would remain bound to the latter, as 
is shown by sleep, when the astral body is not able 
to rend asunder these two principles of man’s 
being. This force comes into action at death. 
It releases the etheric from the physical body, 
so that the former remains united to the astral 
body. Clairvoyant observation shows that this 
connection varies with different people after 
death. The time of its duration is measured by 
days. For the present, this period of time is 
mentioned only for the sake of information.

Subsequently, the astral body is also released 
from* the etheric body and goes on its way alone. 
Dming the union of the two bodies the individual

2 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE,Subsequently, the astral body is also released 
from* the etheric body and goes on its way alone. 
Dming the union of the two bodies the individual

2 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE,

5 in a state which enables him to be aware of 
he experiences of his astral body. As long as 
he physical body is there, thb wgrk of rein- 
arcing the wasted organs has to be begiin from 
/ithout, directly the astral body is liberated 
•om it. When once the physical body is sep- 
rated, this work ceases. Nevertheless, the 
3rce which was expended in this fashion, when 
le man was asleep, continues after death and 
an now be applied to some other end. It is 
ow used for making the astral body’s own 
tperiences perceptible. During his connection 
ith his physical body the outer world enters 
le man’s consciousness in images; after the 
ody has been laid aside, that which is expe- 
enced by the astral body, when it is no longer 
)nnectcd by sense organs with this outer physical 
orld, becomes perceptil)le. At first it has no 
?w experiences. Its connection with the ctheric 
xly prevents it from experiencing anything new. 
What, however, it docs possess, is memory 
its past life. The ethcric body still being 
■esent causes that past life to appear as a vivid 
id comprehensive panorama. That is man’s 
st experience after death. He sees his life 
am birth to death spread out before him in a 
ries of pictures. While this life lasts, memory 
present only in the waking state, when man 
united with his physical Viody, and it is present 
ly to the extent allowed by that body, but

SLEEP AND DEATH

63SLEEP AND DEATH

63

nothing is lost to the soul that has made an 
impression on it during life. Were the physical 
body a perfect irfstrument for the purpose, it 
would be possible, at any moment during life, 
to conjure up the whole of the past before the 
eyes of the soul. At death there is no longer 
any obstacle to this. As long as the etheric 
body remains, there exists a certain degree of 
perfection of memory. But this disappears ac- 
cording to the degree in which the etheric 
body loses the form which it possessed while 
united with the physical body, and which re- 
sembles that body. This is the very reason why 
the astral body separates, after a time, from the 
etheric body. It can remain united with the lat- 
ter only so long as the form of the etheric body 
corresponds with that of the physical body.

During the period of life between birth and 
death, separation of the etheric body occurs 
on^y in exceptional cases, and for no longer 
than a brief space of time. If, for example, a 
man exposes one of his limbs to pressure, part of 
his etheric body ma^'’ become separated from the 
physical one. We say on such an occasion that 
the limb has “gone to sleep,’’ and the peculiar 
sensation we feel results from the separation of 
the etheric body. (Of course a materialistic 
manner of explanation may here again deny 
the invisible behind the visible and say all that 
arises merely from the physical disturbance

62

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE62

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

is in a state which enables him to be aware of 
the experiences of his astral body. As long as 
the physical body is there, tffe 'W'grk of rein- 
forcing the wasted organs has to be begun from 
without, directly the astral body is liberated 
from it. When once the physical body is sep- 
arated, this work ceases. Nevertheless, the 
force which was expended in this fashion, when 
the man was asleep, continues after death and 
can now be applied to some other end. It is 
now used for making the astral body’s own 
experiences perceptible. During his connection 
with his physical body the outer world enters 
the man’s consciousness in images; after the 
body has been laid aside, that which is expe- 
rienced by the astral body, when it is no longer 
connected by sense organs with this outer physical 
world, becomes perceptible. At first it has no 
new experiences. Its connection with the etheric 
body prevents it from experiencing anything new.

What, however, it does possess, is memory 
of its past life. The etheric body still being 
present causes that past life to appear as a vivid 
and comprehensive panorama. That is man’s 
first experience after death. He sees his life 
from birth to death spread out before him in a 
series of pictures. While this life lasts, memory 
is present only in the waking state, when man 
is united with his physical body, and it is present 
only to the extent allowed by that body, but

SLEEP AND DEATH

63SLEEP AND DEATH

63

nothing is lost to the soul that has made an 
impression on it during life. Were the physical 
body a perfect irjstrument for the purpose, it 
would be possible, at any moment during life, 
to conjure up the whole of the past before the 
eyes of the soul. At death there is no longer 
any obstacle to this. As long as the etheric 
body remains, there exists a certain degree of 
perfection of memory. But this disappears ac- 
cording to the degree in which the etheric 
body loses the form \/hich it possessed while 
united with the physical body, and which re- 
sembles that body. This is the very reason why 
the astral body separates, after a time, from the 
etheric body. It can remain united with the lat- 
ter only so long as the form of the etheric body 
corresponds with that of the physical body.

During the period of life between birth and 
death, separation of the etheric body occurs 
only in exceptional cases, and for no longer 
than a brief space of time. If, for example, a 
man exposes one of his limbs to pressure, part of 
his etheric body may become separated from the 
physical one. We say on such an occasion that 
the limb has “gone to sleep,” and the peculiar 
sensation we feel results from the separation of 
the etheric body. (Of course a materialistic 
manner of explanation may here again deny 
the invisible behind the visible and say all that 
arises merely from the physical disturbance

64 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCJ?64 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCJ?

caused by the pressure.) Clairvoyant vision can 
see in such a case how the corresponding part 
of the etheric body is extruded, from the physical 
limb. Now if a man experience's an unusual 
shock, or something similar, such a separation 
of the etheric body from a large part of the 
physical body may result, for a short time. 
That is the case when a man for some reason 
or other is suddenly brought face to face with 
death, — for example when drowning, or threat- 
ened by a fatal accident when mountaineering. 
What is related by people who have had such 
experiences comes, in fact, very near the truth, 
and can be ratified by clairvoyant observation. 
They declare that in such moments their whole 
lives pass before their minds as though in a huge 
memory-picture .

Out of the many examples which might here 
be adduced, allusion will be made to one only, 
because it originates from a man to whose mode 
of thought everything that is here said about 
such things must seem pure fancy. ‘ Moriz 
Benedict, the distinguished criminal anthropolo- 
gist and an eminent investigator in many othei

1 As a matter of fact, it Is always very profitable for any one who i; 
taking up the sturly of occult science to acquaint himself with the state 
meats of those who regard this science as merely fanciful. Such state 
ments cannot be so easily branded as due to partiality on the part o 
the observer. Let occultists learn as much as possible from those wh 
regard their efforts as nonsense. They need not be disturbed if in Ihi 
respect their love is not reciprocated. Occult observation assuredl 
docs not require such things for the verification of its results, nor ar 
these allusions intended as proofs but as illustrations.

SLEEP AND DEATH

65SLEEP AND DEATH

65

realms of natural science, relates in his Reminis- 
cences an experience of his own, — ^to the effect 
that he had once, when on the point of drowning 
in a bath, seen* his whole life pass before his mem- 
ory as though in a single picture. If other people 
describe differently the pictures seen by them 
under similar circumstances, and even in such a 
way that they seem to have little to do with the 
events of their past life, that does not contradict 
what has been said; for the pictures which arise 
in the quite abnormal condition of separation 
from the physical body are sometimes at first 
sight unintelligible in their relation to life. Cor- 
rect observation, however, would always recog- 
nize this relationship.

Neither is it an objection if, for example, some 
one who was once on the point of drowning did 
not experience what has been described; for it 
must be borne in mind that this can happen only 
when the etheric body is really separated from the 
physical body, — when, moreover, the former is 
still united with the astral body. If, through 
the fright, a loosening of the etheric and astral 
bodies also takes place, the experience is not 
forthcoming, because then complete unconscious- 
ness ensues, as in dreamless sleep.

Immediately after death the events of the past 
appear as though compressed by the memory 
into a picture. After its separation from the 
etheric body, the astral body pursues its fvurther

66

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE66

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

wanderings alone. It is not difficult to realize 
that everything continues to exist which by means 
of its activity the astral body has made its own 
during its sojourn in the physical body. The 
ego has to a certain extent elaborated the Spirit- 
Self, the Life-Spirit, and the Spirit-Man. So 
far as these are developed, they do not owe their 
existence to the organs present in the different 
bodies, but to the ego; and it is precisely the ego 
which needs no outer organs for perception; nor 
does it require any such organs in order to retain 
possession of what it has made one with itself. 
It might be objected: “Why then is there no 
perception during sleep of the developed Spirit- 
Self, Life-Spirit, and Spirit-Man ?’ ’ On this account 
— because the ego is chained between birth and 
death to the physical body. Even though, dur- 
ing sleep, it is out of the physical body with the 
astral one, it nevertheless remains closely con- 
nected with the phy.sical body; for the activity 
of the astral body is directed toward the physical 
body. On this account the ego is relegated to 
the outer u'orld of sense for its observations, 
and cannot receive spiritual revelations in their 
direct form. Not until death do these revela- 
tions come within reach of the ego, because by 
means of death the ego is freed from its connec- 
tion with the physical and etheric bodies. An- 
other world may flash upon the consciousness 
the moment it is withdrawn from the physical

SLEEP AND DEATH

67

world which during life monopolizes its activity.SLEEP AND DEATH

67

world which during life monopolizes its activity.

Now there are reasons why even at this juncture 
all connectiQp with the outer physical world of 
sense does not cease for man. That is to say, 
certain desires remain which sustain the connec- 
tion. There are desires which man creates just 
because he is conscious of his ego as the fourth 
principle of his being. These desires and wishes, 
springing from the existence of liis three lower 
bodies, can operate only in the external world, 
and cease to operate when these bodies are cast 
aside. Hunger is caused by the external body; 
as soon as that external body is no longer con- 
nected with the ego, hunger ceases. Now, had 
the ego no further desires than those springing 
from its own spiritual nature, it might at death 
draw full satisfaction from tlie spiritual world 
into which it is transplanted. But life has given 
it other desires as well. It has kindled in it a 
longing for pleasures only to be enjoyed by means 
of physical organs, although these pleasures them- 
selves to not originate in the nature of those 
organs. It is not only the three bodies which 
demand gratification from the physical world, 
but the ego itself finds pleasures in that world, 
for the enjoyment of which there exist no means 
whatever in the spiritual world.

During life the ego has two kinds of desires: 
those .that spring from the bodies and must 
therefore be gratified within the bodies, but which

68 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENC^During life the ego has two kinds of desires: 
those .that spring from the bodies and must 
therefore be gratified within the bodies, but which

68 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENC^

must also come to an end with their disintegration ; 
and those that arise from the spiritual nature of 
the ego. So long as the ego dives in the bodies, 
those cravings are satisfied by means of the bodily 
organs. For in the manifestations of the bodily 
organs the hidden spiritual element is at work, 
and the senses receive something spiritual as well, 
in everything of which they are cognizant. That 
spiritual element is also present after death, 
although in a different form. Everything spir- 
itual that the ego longs for while in the world of 
sense, it still possesses when the senses are no 
longer there.

Now if a third kind of wish were not added to 
these two, death would mean only a transition 
from desires which may be satisfied through the 
senses to such as are fulfilled by the revelation of 
the spiritual world. The third kind of desire 
is that which is created by the ego during life in 
the sense-world, because it finds pleasure in that 
world, even when no spiritual element is revealed 
in it. The humblest pleasures may be manifes- 
tations of the spirit. The satisfaction afforded 
a starving creature by taking food is a manifesta- 
tion of the spirit, for by taking the food some- 
thing is thereupon brought about without which, 
in a certain sense, the spiritual nature could not 
develop. But the ego may go beyond the pleas- 
lore, which in this case is the outcome of necessity. 
It may even long for the delicious food quite

SLEEP AND DEATH 69

apart from the service rendered to the spirit by 
taking nourishment.SLEEP AND DEATH 69

apart from the service rendered to the spirit by 
taking nourishment.

It is the s^e ■v^ith other things in the sense- 
world. Desires are created in this way which 
would never have appeared in the sense-world 
if the human ego had not been incorporated in 
it. Neither do such desires arise from the spir- 
itual nature of the ego. The ego must have 
pleasures of the senses as long as it lives in the 
body, even though it be for the very reason that 
its own nature is spiritual. For the spirit is 
manifested in material things, and the ego is 
enjoying nothing less than spirit when it sur- 
renders itself to that element in the sense-world 
which is irradiated by the light of the spirit. 
Moreover, it will continue to enjoy this light 
even when the senses are no longer the medium 
through which the spiritual rays pass. But 
there is no fulfilment possible in the spiritual 
wodd for desires in which the spirit is not living 
even in the world of the senses.

When death takes place, the possibility of 
gratifying desires of this description is cut off. 
Pleasure in good things to eat can be induced 
only by the presence of the physical organs re- 
quired for their consumption, — the palate, tongue, 
and so on; but when man has laid aside his 
physical body he no longer possesses these organs, 
and if the ego still craves for that kind of pleas- 
ure the craving must remain unsatisfied. So

70 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE70 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

long as the pleasure is subservient to the spir- 
itual need, it is caused only by the presence of 
the physical organs; but should it, happen that 
the ego has created the desire without serving the 
spirit in so doing, he retains it after death in 
the fonn of a craving which thirsts in vain for 
gratification. We can fonn an idea of what the 
iirdividual then experiences only by imagining 
some one suffering from burning thirst in a region 
where, far and wide, there is no water to be found. 
This is the predicament of the ego after death, 
so long as it retains ungratificd desires for the 
pleasures of the outer world, and has no o-^gans 
by means of which to satisfy them. Of course 
the burning thirst, serving as a comparison for 
the condition of the ego after death, must be 
thought of as enonnously increased, and it must 
be imagined as extending to all desires still exist- 
ing, for which all possibility of gratification is 
lacking.

The next condition of the ego consists in freeing 
itself from this bond of attraction to the outer 
world. With regard to this world, it has to 
attain purification and liberation. It must be 
cleansed of all wishes which it has created while 
in the body, and which have no native rights in 
the spiritual world. As an object is caught and 
burned up by fire, so the world of desire, described 
above, is broken up and destroyed after death. 
A vista is then opened into that world which

SLEEP AND DEATH

71SLEEP AND DEATH

71

occult science calls the “consuming fire” of the 
spirit. This fire seizes upon a desire which is of 
the senses, but in which these are not an expression 
of the spirit. !K.evelations of this kind which occult 
science is bound to make with regard to such events 
may appear hopeless and terrible. It may seem 
a fearful thing that a hope, for the realization of 
which sense-organs are required, should after 
death be transformed into despair, and that a 
wish that can be fulfilled only by the physical 
world should be changed into torturing depriva- 
tion. Yet we can hold such an opinion only 
so long as we fail to realize that the wishes and 
desires seized by the “consuming fire” after 
death do not, in a higher sense, represent forces 
beneficial to life but destructive of it.

By means of these forces the ego binds itself 
to the sense -world more closely than is neces- 
sary, in order to draw from it all the experience 
it Requires. For the sense-world is a mani- 
festation of the hidden and spiritual world which 
lies behind it; and the ego could never attain 
spiritual happiness throitgh the bodily senses, 
which are the only form in which the spiritual 
can be manifested, unless it utilized the senses 
to seek the spiritual element in sense-experi- 
ence. Nevertheless, the ego loses sight of the 
true spiritual reality in the physical world to 
such an .extent that it experiences sensual desires 
irrespective of the needs of the spirit. If sense-

72

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCf,

pleasure, as the expression of the spirit, serves to 
.raise and develop the ego, any pleasure which is 
not an expression of the spirit' warps and impov- 
erishes it. No matter if this kind ‘of desire finds 
the means of its gratification in the outer world, 
its warping effect on the ego is in no way dimin- 
ished; but it is not until after death that its 
disastrous effects become apparent.For this reason a man may, by gratifying such 
desires, create, during his life, new and similar 
desires, wholly unaware that he is enveloping 
himself in a “consuming fire.” What becomes 
visible to him after death is only what already 
surrounded him during his life, and by thus 
becoming visible it at once appears in its salutary 
and beneficent effect. A htunan being who loves 
another is certainly not attracted merely by that 
part of him which is perceptible to the physical 
senses — the only part which is cut off from 
observation after death — but after death, that 
part of the dear one for the perception of which 
physical organs were only the means, is the very 
part which then becomes visible. I'he one thing, 
in fact, which would prevent the man from 
beholding his friend clearly is the presence of 
desires which can be satisfied only by means of 
physical organs. Unless these desires are extin- 
guished, he can have no conscious perception of 
his friend after death. When looked at in this 
light, the terrible a'nd hopeless character which

SLEEP AND DEATH

73

after-death experiences, according to the descrip- 
tions given by occult science, might assume for 
man, becomes chhnged into one which is thor- 
oughly satisfying and consoling.

Now the first after-death experiences differ 
entirely in yet another respect from thOvSe of our 
present life. During the time of purification 
man lives, as it were, backwards. He lives over 
again the whole span of his life since his birth ; 
beginning with the events immediately preceding 
his death, and reversing the order of his experi- 
ences, he goes through them again until he reaches 
back to childhood. In this process he sees with 
spiritually enlightened eyes all those things which 
were not inspired by the spiritual nature of the 
ego, with the difference that he now experiences 
these things in a reversed position.For instance, a man who died in his sixtieth 
year, and who at the age of forty had, in an out- 
burst of anger, caused some one either physical 
or mental pain, will go through this experience 
again when, on the return journey of exivStence 
after death, he reaches that point in his fortieth 
year; but he does not now experience the satis- 
faction which his attack had iifforded him during 
life; instead, he experiences the pain which he 
inflicted upon the other man. It may at once 
be seen, however, that whatever pain he feels 
in the after-death experience is caused by a desire 
of the ego arising only from the outer physical

74

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENC&

world; that is to say, the ego does not, in fact, 
injure only another by the indulgence of such a 
desire, but he also injitres hhnsclf; though the 
injury to himself is not apparent during life.

After death, however, the whole of the harm- 
ful world of desires becomes visible to the ego, 
who then feels attracted toward every being or 
object which had kindled the desire, in order that 
this may be destroyed in the “consuming fire” 
by the same means that created it. When man, 
on his return journey, reaches the moment of his 
birth, then only have all such desires been purged 
in the purifying flames, and henceforward nothing 
remains to hinder him from devoting himself 
entirely to the spiritual world. He enters upon 
a new phase of existence. In the same way that 
he laid aside at death his physical and, soon after, 
his etheric body, so does that part of his astral 
body which responds only to the outer physical 
world now fall to pieces.Occult science, therefore, recognizes three 
corpses, — the physical, etheric, and astral. The 
period at which the last is cast off by man is 
marked by the time of purification, which amounts 
to about a third of the time which elapsed between 
birth and death. The reason why this is so can 
only be explained later, when the course of hu- 
man life is examined from the standpoint of 
occult science. To clairvoyant observation, astral 
corpses, which have been cast off by hiunan

SLEEP AND DEATH

75

beings passing from the state of purification into 
a higher existence, are constantly visible in the 
world surrounding man, in exactly the same way 
that physical corpses, in places inhabited by men, 
are apparent to physical observation. ‘

After purification an entirely new state of con- 
sciousness begins for the ego. Whereas, before 
death, external images had to be brought before 
it, for the light of consciousness to fall on them, 
a world now streams, as it were, from within, and 
penetrates to the consciousness. The ego is 
living in this world also between birth and death; 
only then this world is clothed in the manifesta- 
tions of the senses. It is only when the ego, freed 
from all the tics of sense, turns inward to behold 
its own “holy of holies” that his true innermost 
nature,. which had hitherto been obscured by the 
senses, is revealed to him. In the same way that 
the ego is recognized inwardly before death, so, 
after death and purification, is the spiritiuil life 
inwardly revealed to him in all its fulness. This 
revelation really takes place immediateh^ the 
etheric body is laid aside; but it is obscured by 
the dai'k cloud of desires Uirncd toward the outer 
world. It is as if a world of spiritual bliss were 
invaded by black demoniacal phantoms, caused 
by those desires which are being destroyed by 
the “consuming fire.” Indeed, those desires are^ In current theosophical literature, the condition of the ego from 
death to the end of purification is called “Kamaloca.”

76 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENC:E^

not mere phantoms, but real entities, which 
become apparent directly the ego is deprived of 
physical organs, and is thus aSle tq-discern those 
things which are of a spiritual nature. These 
entities have the appearance of distorted cari- 
catures of the objects with which the individual 
had formerly become acquainted through his 
senses.

Clairvoyant observation reports that this place 
of purging fire is peopled by beings whose appear- 
ance may well seem horrifying and painful to 
spiritual vision, whose pleasure seems to consist 
in destruction, and whose passions impel them 
to evil-doing of such a description that the evil 
of the physical world seems insignificant in com- 
parison. Whatever desires of the kind described 
above are brought into that world by man, such 
desires are looked upon by these beings as food, 
by means of which their powers are continually 
strengthened and invigorated.

The picture thus sketched of a world imper- 
ceptible to the senses may seem less incredible 
if we look with an unprejudiced eye on part of 
the animal world. What is a fierce, devouring 
wolf, from a spiritual point of view? What 
does it reveal to us through that which our senses 
perceive? Nothing else than a soul that lives 
in desire, and acts by desire. The external form 
of the wolf may be called an embodiment of 
those desires; and if man had no organs with

SLEEP AND DEATH

77SLEEP AND DEATH

77

which to perceive that form, if its desires appeared 
invisibly in their effects, — if, therefore, a force 
invisible to ^e eye were prowling about, and 
might be the cause of all that happened through 
the visible wolf, — he would still be forced to 
recognize the existence of a creature correspond- 
ing to it. Now the beings of the region of puri- 
fying fire are not visible to the physical eye, but 
to clairvoyant sight only; but their effects are 
clearly apparent. They bring about the destruc- 
tion of the ego when it gives them nourishment. 
These effects are clearly visible if what began 
as a pleasure leads to excess and debauchery.

For even what is perceptible to the senses would 
attract the ego only in so far as the pleasure had 
its root in the ego’s own nature. The animal is 
prompted by desire for that in the otiter world 
which its three bodies crave. Man has higher 
enjoyments, because to the three principles of 
hi» bodily nature is added the fourth, the ego. 
But if the ego seeks a gratification which tends 
not to the maintenance and development of its 
nature but to its destruction, then such a craving 
can be neither the effect of its three bodies, nor 
that of its own nature, but can only be caused 
by beings, in their true form concealed from the 
senses, but able to approach furtively that higher 
nature of the ego, and excite in it desires which, 
though* it is cut off from the senses, can still be 
satisfied only by means of sense-organs.

78

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^78

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^

For there are beings which feed on passions 
and desires of a worse kind than those of an 
animal nature, because they do’ not ,»xpend them- 
selves on objects of the senses but seize upon the 
spiritual element and drag it down to a sensual 
level. Therefore the forms of such beings are 
more hideous, more horrible, to spiritual sight 
than arc the forms of the fiercest animals, in which 
after all only passions rooted in the senses arc 
incarnated. And the destmetive forces of the.se 
beings immeasurably surpass any destructive rage 
existing in the animal world as perceived by the 
senses. Occult science mitst in this way enlarge 
man’s view so as to include a world of beings 
standing, in a certain respect, lower than the 
visibly destructive animal world.

When man, after death, has passed through the 
world of purification, he finds himself in a world 
the contents of which are spiritual, and which 
also creates in him longings which can be satisfied 
only by spiritual things. But even now man dis- 
tinguishes between that which properly belongs 
to his ego and that which forms the environment 
of that ego — one might say, its spiritual outer 
world. Only whatever he becomes sensible of 
in this environment, pours in upon him in the 
same way that the consciousness of his own ego 
poured in upon him during his sojourn in the body. 
Whereas man’s environment in the life between 
birth and death speaks to him through his bodily

SLEEP AND DEATH

79

organs, after all the bodies are laid aside the 
language of his new environment penetrates 
directly into*J;he innermost sanctuary of the ego. 
Man’s whole environment is now filled with beings 
of a like nature with his ego, for only an ego has 
access to an ego. Just as minerals, plants, and 
animals surround man in the sense-world, and 
compose it, so, after death, is he surrounded by a 
world composed of beings of a spiriUml nature.Yet he takes something with him into this 
world which is not part of his environment 
there; it is what the ego has experienced in the 
world of the senses. First of all, the sum of 
these experiences appeared, as a comprehensive 
memory-picture, immediately after death, while 
the etheric body was still united to the ego. 
The etheric body itself is then, indeed, laid aside, 
but something of the memory-picture remains 
with the ego as an everlasting possession. Just 
as 'if an extract or essence were made out of all 
the events and experiences which a man en- 
counters between birth and death, so might we 
describe that which is left behind. It is the 
spiritual product of life, its fruit. This product 
is spiritual in nature. It contains everything 
spiritual which is revealed through the senses, 
yet this spiritual treasure could not have been 
gathered save by life in the sense-world.

After death, the ego realizes that this spiritual 
fruit of the sense-world is its very own, its inner

So

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE*After death, the ego realizes that this spiritual 
fruit of the sense-world is its very own, its inner

So

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE*

world, with which it enters the world composed 
of beings revealing themselves as only his own 
ego can reveal itself in the inmo§t recesses of 
his being. As a plant seed, which is the essence 
of the whole plant, grows only when buried in 
another world, the earth, so now does that which 
the ego brings from the sense-world graduallj'^ 
unfold itself as a seed under the influence of 
the spiritual environment in which it has been 
planted. Occult science can, of course, only por- 
tray in pictures wluit happens in this “spirit- 
world”; nevertheless those pictures may be such 
as present themselves to the clairvoyant’s sight 
as absolute reality, when he is following up the 
invisible happenings, corresponding to those which 
are visible to the physical eye. Whatever 
of that world can be described may be made 
clear by comparisons with the external world; 
for although it is of a purely spiritual nature, 
it nevertheless resembles the physical world ’in 
certain respects. As, for instance, a colour ap- 
pears in the latter w'orld, when this or that 
object strikes the eye, so does a colour present 
itself to the ego in the spirit-world w^hen another 
being influences it. But in this case, the colour 
is produced in the same manner, as only the per- 
ception of the ego can be affected during life 
between birth and death. It is riot as if the 
light outside fell within upon the man, bnt as if 
another being directly affected the ego, causing

SLEEP AND DEATH

8i

the latter to picture this influence in a colour-form.SLEEP AND DEATH

8i

the latter to picture this influence in a colour-form.

Thus do all beings in the spiritual environment 
of the ego fi^d expression in a world of coloured 
rays. As their origin is of a different kind, it 
goes without saying that these colours of the 
spiritual world are also of a somewhat different 
character from physical colours. A similar thing 
is true of other impressions received by man from 
the world of sense. But it is the sounds of the 
spiritual world that most nearly resemble the 
impressions of the sense-world; and the more 
at home a man becomes in the spiritual world, 
the more does he realize it as a life of self-deter- 
mined motion, which may be compared with 
the sounds, and the harmony of sounds, of the 
physical world. Only he does not feel the tones 
as something approaching an organ from out- 
side, but as a force streaming forth into the 
outer world through his ego. He feels the sound 
just as in the sense-world he feels his own speech 
or song, only that in the spiritual world he knows 
these sounds streaming out from him are at the 
same time the manifestations of other beings, 
who are pouring themselves into the world 
through him.

A still higher manifestation takes place in 
the spirit-land when the sound becomes the 
“spiritual word.” Then there streams through 
the eg(3 not only the pulsing life of another spirit- 
ual being, but such a being itself communicates

82

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

its own inner nature to the ego; and then, when 
the spiritual word streams through the ego, two 
beings live in one another," without .that separat- 
ing element which every companionship in the 
sense- world nuist carry with it. And this is 
really the nature of the communion of the ego 
with other spiritual beings after death.There are three regions in the spiritual world, 
which may be compared to the three divisions 
of the physical sense-world. The first region 
is in a certain res])ect the “solid land’’ of the 
spiritual wwld, the second the “sphere of ocean 
and river,’’ and the third the “atmospheric 
region.’’ 'I'liat which assumes physical form on 
earth, so as to be perceived by physical organs, 
is, in accordance with its syiiritual nature, seen 
in the first regi'^ni of the spirit-world. ♦ There, 
for instance, may be seen the force that fashions 
the form of a crystal. Only what is then revealed 
is the opposite of that which appears in the sense- 
world. In that world the s]jace which is filled by 
a mass fjf rock appears to spiritual sight as a 
kind of hollow' space; but round about this hol- 
low is seen the force which fashions the form of 
the rock. The colour of the rock in the sense- 
w'orld appears in the spiritual world as its com- 
plementary colour; thus a red stone is green 
when seen from the spirit- world, a green stone 
is red, and so on. Other qualities also hppear 
in their opposites. Just as stone, masses of

SLEEP AND DEATH

83

earth, and like materials make up the solid land 
— the continental region of the world of sense — 
so do the ^trucfures described above compose 
the solid .land of the spiritual world.

All that is life in the sense-world belongs to 
the ocean-region of the spiriHial world. To the 
physical eye, life appears in its effects in plants, 
animals, and men. To spiritual vision, life is a 
flowing substance, like oceans and rivers, diffused 
through the spivit-vorld. A still better com- 
parison is that with the circulation of the blood 
in the body; for whereas seas and rivers are seen 
to be irregularly distributed in the physical 
world, a certain regularity in distribution of the 
flowing life reigns in the spirit-world, as in the 
circulation of the blood. This “flowing life” is 
simultaneously heard as spiritual sound.The third region of the spirit-world is its 
“atmosphere.” What is known in the physical 
world as “feeling” is also present there, perme- 
ating everything like the air on the earth. We 
must imagine a rushing sea of feeling. Pain 
and sorrow, joy and rapture, flow through this 
region, like wind and storms in the atmosphere 
of the physical world. Imagine a battle fought 
on earth. There confront one another not merely 
human forms as seen by the physical eye, 
but feelings opposed to feelings, passions to pas- 
sions; pain fills the battlefield just as much as 
do the forms of men. All that is seething there

84 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

of passion, pain, and the joy of victory is not 
only perceptible in its effects as revealed to the 
physical senses; it may be seen with,*the spiritual 
senses as an atmospheric process in the spirit- 
world. Such an event in the spiritual world 
is like a thunderstorm in the physical, and the 
perception of these events may be compared to 
the hearing of words in the physical world. For 
this reason it is said that as the air envelops and 
permeates earthly beings, so do “interweaving 
spiritual words” pervade the beings and events 
of the spirit-world.And yet further observations are possible of 
this spirit- world. What may be compared to 
light and heat in the physical world is there too. 
That which permeates everything in the spirit- 
world, as earthly things and beings are permeated 
by heat, is the world of thought itself. There, 
however, thoughts must be regarded as living 
and independent beings. What is understood 
by man in the manifested world as thought is 
but a shadow of what lives as a thought-being in 
the spirit-world. Imagine thought, as it now 
exists in man, raised out of him and as an active, 
energetic being, endowed with an inner life of 
its own, and you have a feeble illustration of that 
which fills the foxirth region of the spirit-world. 
In the physical world between birth and death 
what man understands as thought is but th^ mani- 
festation of the thought-world as it is able to

SLEEP AND DEATH

85

mould itself by means of the instruments afforded 
by the bodies. All such thoughts cherished by 
man as car^ wfth them an enrichment of the 
physical world have their origin in this region. 
By such thoughts are meant not only the ideas of 
great invetitors and men of genius; but those 
ideas found in every individual which he does not 
owe solely to the external world, but through 
which he, so to speak, transforms that world.

So far as feelings and passions are concerned, 
the cause of which lies in the outer world, these 
feelings are perceptible in the third region of 
the spirit-world; but everything which so lives 
in a man’s soul as to make him a creator, — 
influencing, transforming, and fertilizing his en- 
vironment, — in its original and intrinsic form is 
manifest in the fourth division of the spirit-world.That which exists in the fifth region may be 
compared to physical light. In its archetypal 
form it is wisdom in manifestation. Beings who 
diffuse wisdom throughout their surroundings, 
as the sun pours light on physical beings, belong 
to this realm. Whatever is illumfPiated by their 
wisdom stands forth in its true meaning and 
significance for the spiritual world, just as the 
colour of a physical object is seen when the 
light falls upon it. There are still higher regions 
of the spirit-world, which will be described later 
in this work.

Into this world the ego is plunged after death,

86 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^

together with the results it carries with it out of 
physical life. And these results are still united 
with that part of the astral body ^jvhich is not 
cast off at the end of the time of purification. In 
fact, only that part falls away which, in its desires 
and wishes, turned after death toward physical 
life. The plunging of the ego into the spiritual 
world, with what it has accjuircd in the physical 
world, may be compared to the planting of a 
grain of seed in the soil in which it can mature. 
As the grain of seed draws substances and forces 
from its surroundings in order that it may develop 
into a new plant, so the condition of the ego, 
when implanted in the spiritual world, is one of 
development and growth.There lies hidden in what is perceived by an 
organ, the force by which that same organ was 
formed. The eye perceives light; but without 
light there would be no eye. Creatures spending 
their lives in darkness do not develop organs^of 
sight. Thus the whole of man’s physical body is 
created out of the hidden forces of that of which 
he becomes cbnscious through his bodily organs. 
The physical body is built up by the forces of 
the physical world, the etheric body by those 
of the life-world, and the astral body is formed 
out of the astral world. Now when the ego is 
transferred to the spirit-world it is met by just 
those forces which remain hidden to physical 
perception.

SLEEP AND DEATH

87

What appear to man’s view in the first region 
of the spirit-world are the spiritual beings that 
are always surroifnding him, atid that have built 
up his physieal body. 'I'hus in the physical world 
man perceives nothing but the manifestations 
of those spiritUcil forces wh.ich have formed his 
own physical body. After death he is in the very 
midst of these moulding forces, which, previously 
hidden, now appear to him in their true fonns. 
In the same way, in the second regitm, he is in 
the midst of the forces l)y which his etheric body 
was organized, and in the third region there pour 
in upon him the potencies out of which his astral 
body was formed. The higher regitnis of the 
spirit -world also direct toward him those forces 
from which he was built up for the life between 
birth apd death.The.se denizens of the sj^iritital world are at 
present working in c(.>operation with that which 
man has brought v/ith him as the product of his 
last life, which nf)w becomes a germ ; and through 
this cooperation man is first of all built up anew 
as a spiritual being, d'he physiedl and etheric 
bodies are still present in sleep; the astral body 
and the ego are, it is true, outside them, but still 
connected with them. Whatever influences the 
astral body and the ego receive, in such a state, 
from the spiritual world, can serve only to recu- 
perate • the forces exhausted during the waking 
state.

88 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE/

But when the physical and etheric bodies have 
been laid aside, and also, after the time of purifi- 
cation, those parts of the astral body #till bound by

>%88 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE/

But when the physical and etheric bodies have 
been laid aside, and also, after the time of purifi- 
cation, those parts of the astral body #till bound by

>%

their desires to the physical world, then every- 
thing pouring in upon the ego from the spiritual 
world is not only a reforming but a reorganizing 
force. After a certain period, to be dealt with in 
later chapters, the ego gathers round it an astral 
body which will again be able to live in such an 
etheric and physical body as man possesses between 
birth and death. The man may once more pass 
through birth and renew his earthly existence, with 
which, however, will be incorporated the results 
of his former life. Until the rebuilding of his 
astral body, the man is a witness of his reconstruc- 
tion. As the powers of the spirit-world are not 
manifested to him through external orga,ns, but 
from within outward, like his own ego in self- 
consciousness, he is able to observe that manifesta- 
tion so long as his attention is not turned to. an 
outer world of perception. But from the moment 
that the astral body is reconstituted, his attention 
is turned outwards: the astral body once more 
craves an outer etheric and physical body. It 
is thus turned away from the inner revelations. 
For this reason there is now an intermediate 
state, during which man is immersed in uncon- 
sciousness. For consciousness can emerge again 
in the physical world only when the necessary 
organs for physical perception are formed.

SLEEP AND DEATH

89SLEEP AND DEATH

89

During this period, in which consciousness 
illiuninated by inner perception ceases, the new 
etheric body begins to link itself to the astral 
and man can once again enter a physical body. 
In the linking together of these two bodies only 
such an ego could consciously take part as had 
of itself created the Life-Spirit and Spirit-Man 
out of the creative forces hidden in the etheric 
and physical bodies. Until the individual has 
evolved as far as th*s, beings further advanced 
than himself in evolution must guide this linking 
together. The astral body is guided by such 
beings as these to parents by whose means it 
may be endowed with the appropriate etheric 
and physical bodies. Before the attachment of 
the etheric body takes place, something of very 
great importance happens to the man who is 
about to reenter physical existence.

In his former life he created disturbing forces, 
wljich were revealed to him on the journey 
retraced after death. Let us again take an exam- 
ple. He caused some one pain in an outburst 
of anger in the fortieth year of his former life. 
After death, the other’s pain came before him 
as a force which had interfered with the evolu- 
tion of his ego. It is similarly so with all such 
events of his former life. On his reentrance into 
physical life these hindrances to his evolution 
confront the ego anew. As, on the threshold of 
death, a sort of memoiy -picture rose up before

90

AN OUl'LINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE /90

AN OUl'LINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE /

the hmiian ego, so does there now arise a vision 
of the life approaching. Again he sees a picture, 
this time showing all the obstacles which he has 
to clear away, if he is to advance 'in evolution. 
And what he thus sees becomes the starting- 
point for forces which he nutst bring with him 
into his new life. 'I'he picture of the pain he has 
caused the other man becomes a force which 
impels the ego, on entering life again, to make 
amends for this pain. I'hus the previous life 
has a detei'mining effect on the new one. The 
deeds of the new life are in a certain way caused 
by those of the former life. This connection, 
following a law, Ix-tween an earlier and later 
existence is to be looked upon as the “Law of 
Destiny”; it has bccfmic usual to designate it 
“Karma,” a term borrowed from oriental wisdom.

The building up of a new set of bodies, however, 
is not the only task incumbent upon man between 
death and a new birth. While this building up 
is taking place, man lives outside the physical 
world. That world, however, continues to evolve 
during this time. The surface of the earth changes 
in comparatively short periods of time. What 
aspect did those regions which are now occupied by 
Germany bear a few thousand years ago? When 
man appears on earth in a new existence, the earth 
rarely looks the same as it did at the time of his 
last incarnation. During his absence from the 
earth all sorts of changes have occurred. Now

SLEEP AND DEATH

91SLEEP AND DEATH

91

hidden forces are also at work in this alteration 
of the face of the earth, acting from that very- 
world in whjch n^an finds himself after death; 
and he himself must cooperate with these forces 
in the transformation of the earth. He can do 
so only under the direction of Higher Beings 
until, by the creation of his Life-Spirit and Spirit- 
Man, he has acquired a clear perception of the 
connection between the spiritual and its expres- 
sion in the physical. But he takes part in the 
transformation of earthly conditions. It may be 
said that during the pei'iod between death and 
a new birth, man so transforms the earth that its 
conditions are in keeping with what he has evolved 
in himself. If we look at a given place on the 
earth at a definite moment, and see it again 
after a long lapse of time, under entirely changed 
conditions, the forces which have wrought the 
change have proceeded from those who are now 
dead. And it is this kind of connection which 
exists between them and the earth until the time 
of rebirth.

Clairvoyant observation sees in all physical 
existence the manifestation of a hidden spiritual 
element, ^'o physical observation it is the light 
of the sun, climatic changes, and so on, that 
effect the transformation of the earth, but to 
clairvoyance it is the force of the dead that acts 
in the ¥ay of light which falls on the plant from 
the sun. The clairvoyant sees how human souls

92

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

hover about plants, how they change the surface 
of the earth. Not only on himself, not only on 
the preparations for his own flew Qarthly exist- 
ence, is man’s attention bestowed after death, — 
no, he is called upon then to work upon the outer 
world, just as he is in life between the time of 
his birth and death.Not only does the life of man affect the condi- 
tions of the physical world from spirit-land; but, 
vice versa, activity during physical existence has 
its effects in the spiritual world. An example 
may explain what happens in this respect. A bond 
of love exists between mother and child. This 
love arises from a mutual attraction cavxsed by 
the forces of the sense- world. But in the course 
of time it changes. A spiritual tie gradually 
grows out of the sense-bond, and this spiritual 
tie is not created for the physical world only 
but for the spirit-world as well. The same 
applies to other ties. Whatever is created , in 
the physical world by spiritual entities continues 
to exist in the spiritual world. Friends who 
were closely united in life belong to each other 
in spirit-land also, and when their bodies are 
laid aside they are in much more intimate com- 
munion than during physical life. For as spirits 
they exist for each other in the same way as, 
in the above description, spiritual beings reveal 
themselves to others by inner manifestation; and 
a tie created between two persons brings them

SLEEP AND DEATH

93

together again in a new life. Thus in the truest 
sense of the word we may speak of finding one 
another agaip after death.

What has *once happened to a man between 
birth and death and from then till a new birth, 
repeats itself. Man returns to earth again and 
again when the fruit he has earned in a physical 
life has ripened in the spirit-world. It is not, 
however, a case of repetition without beginning or 
end; but man has or.ce passed out of different 
forms of existence into those which run their 
course in the manner just described, and he 
will again in the future pass into other forms. 
An outlook on these transition stages will be 
gained when the evolution of the universe in 
connection with man is subsequently dealt with 
from the standpoint of occult science.The occurrences between death and a new 
birth are of course still more concealed from 
ou^er sense-observation than is the spiritual 
foundation underlying manifested life between 
birth and death. This sense-observation can 
see only the effects of that portion of the hidden 
world where they impinge upon physical existence. 
With regard to this the question must arise 
whether man, on entering this life at birth, 
brings with him any residts from the events de- 
scribed by occult science as having taken place 
between his last death and his birth. If one 
finds the shell of a snail in which there is no

94

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

trace of the animal he will, in spite of that, recog- 
nize that this snailshell was formed by the activity 
of an animal, and he canndt befjeve that the 
shell constructed a foi-m for itself, by means of 
mere physical forces. In the same way one 
who stridies a man during life, and finds some- 
thing in him which cannot be due to this life, may 
reasonably admit that it arises from what occult 
science describes, if by so doing an explanatory 
light is thrown on what is otherwise inexplicable.

Here, too, the unseen causes might appear 
intelligible to rational sense-observation from 
their visible effects, and whoever observes life 
with absolute impartiality will find that, with 
every fresh observation, this appears more and 
more to be the truth. The important question, 
however, is how to find the right point of view 
from which to observe the workings in life. Where, 
for example, are the effects to be found of what 
occult science describes as incidents of the time of 
purification? How are the effects of the expe- 
rience which, according to occult investigations, 
man undergoes in purely spiritual regions, man- 
ifested after this time of purification?Problems enough press upon every serious 
and profound student of life in this domain. We 
see one man born in want and misery, endowed 
only with inferior abilities, so that on account 
of these facts, which are incident to his birth, 
he appears predestined to a miserable existence.

SLEEP AND DEATH

95

Another, from the first moment of his life, is 
tended and cherished by loving hands and hearts; 
brilliant talents ’are unfolded in him; his gifts 
point to a * successful and satisfactory career. 
Two opposite view's may be taken vdien met by 
such questions as these. The one wall adhere 
to what the senses perceive and what the un- 
derstanding, relying on these senses, is able 
to comprehend. This view wall admit no prob- 
lem in the fact that one man is born fortunate 
and the other unfortunate. Iwcn if the word 
“chance” is not used, there will be no question 
of thinking that such things are brought about 
through any law of cause and effect. Also with 
regard to talents and abilities, such a view' wall con- 
sider them as “inherited” from parents, grand- 
parents, and other ancestors. It w'ould refuse to 
seek the causes in spiritual events which the 
man himself met with before birth — apart from 
the line of heredity from his ancestors — and by 
means of which he formed his talents and abilities.

Another view would find no satisfaction in 
such an interpretation. It would assert that 
even in the manifested world nothing happens 
in a definite place or in definite surroundings 
without our having to presuppose causes for the 
event in question. Even though in many cases 
such causes have not yet been investigated, they 
are there. An Alpine llower does not grow in 
the lowlands. Its nature has something which

96 an; OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE96 an; OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

associates it with Alpine regions. Just so must 
there be something in a man which determines 
his birth in a certain environn:;ent. Causes 
belonging to the physical world alone are not 
sufficient to account for this. To a more pro- 
found thinker such an explanation would be 
much the same as if the fact of some one having 
given another a blow should be attributed not 
to the feelings of the former, but to the physical 
mechanism of his hand.

Just as unsatisfactory would any explanation 
of abilities and talents solely by “heredity” 
appear to such a view. It is true one may say: 
“See how certain talents are inherited in families.” 
During two and a half centuries musical talents 
were inherited by members of the Bach family. 
Eight mathematicians sprang from the Bernoulli 
family, to some of whom quite different occupa- 
tions were assigned in their childhood; but the 
inherited talents always drove them to the family 
vocation. It may be further pointed out how, 
by an exact investigation of the line of ancestry 
of a personality, it can t)e shown that in one 
way or another the gifts of this personality have 
shown themselves in the forefathers, and only 
represent the sum of inherited talents. Whoever 
holds the latter of the two views above indicated 
will be sure not to let such facts pass unnoticed, 
but to him they cannot mean the same jas they 
do to one who relies for his interpretation on

SLEEP AND DEATH

97SLEEP AND DEATH

97

the events of the world of sense alone. The 
former will point out that inherited talents can of 
themselves nw,morc combine into a complete per- 
‘ sonality than can the metal portions of a watch 
fit themselves together. And if it is objected that 
the cooperation of the parents may doubtless pro- 
duce the combination of talents, — that this takes, 
as it were, the place of the watchmaker, — he 
will reply: “Look impartially at what is new in 
every child-personality, that which is absolutely 
new; that cannot come from the parents, for 
the simple reason that it does not exist in them.”

Inaccurate thinking may create much confusion 
in this domain. Worst of all is it when those 
who hold the second view are set down by the 
supporters of the first as opponents of what is, 
after all,. borne ovit by “ascertained facts.” But 
it may well be that the latter have not the slight- 
est intention of denying the truth or value of 
those facts. For instance, they see that a def- 
inite mental aptitude or predisposition is “in- 
herited” in a family, and that certain gifts 
accumulated and combined in one descendant 
result in a remarkable personality. They are 
perfectly willing to acquiesce when it is said 
that the most celebrated name seldom stands at 
thfe top, but at the bottom, of a line of descent. 
But it should not be taken amiss if they are 
compelled to form very different opinions on the 
subject from those of people who are determined

98 AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

to accept nothing but material evidence. To 
the latter it may be said that it is true a man 
shows the characteristics of his ^ancestors, for 
the “spirit-soul” which enters upon physical 
existence at birth draws its bodily substance 
from that which heredity bestows on it. But 
this is only to say that a being already possesses 
in his own nature the characteristics of the 
mcditim into which he has descended.It is no doubt a singular — a trivial — com- 
parison, but the unprejudiced person will not 
deny its validity if it is said that the fact that 
a human being turns out to be imlnted with the 
qualities of his forefathers proves the origin of 
the personal qualities of the individual just as 
little as the fact that a man is wet because he 
has fallen into the water proves something regard- 
ing his inner nature. And it may further be 
said that if the most celebrated name stands 
at the bottom of a line of family descent, it 
shows that the bearer of that name needed that 
particular ancestry to build the body necessary 
for the expression of his whole personality. 
But it ifi no proof that his actual personal qual- 
ities were transmitted to him: such a statement 
is, on the contrary, opposed to sound logic. If 
personal gifts were inherited, they would be 
found at the beginning of a line of descent,' and

‘The assertion that a man's personal talents, if governed purely 
by the law of “heredity,” must show themselves at the beginning of 
a line of descent, not at its end, might of course easily be misunderstood.

vSLEEP AND DEATH

99

starting from that point be transmitted to the 
descendants. As, ^ however, they stand at the 
end, it is evMent that they are not transmitted.vSLEEP AND DEATH

99

starting from that point be transmitted to the 
descendants. As, ^ however, they stand at the 
end, it is evMent that they are not transmitted.

Now it is not to be denied that those who speak 
of a spiritual causality in life have contributed no 
less to bringing about confusion of thought. Far 
too much generalizing and vague discussion comes 
from this quarter, ^'o say that a man’s person- 
ality is a combination of inherited eharacteristics 
may certainly be compared with the assertion 
that the metal parts of a watch have fitted them- 
selves together. It must also be admitted that, 
with regard to many assertions about a spiritual 
world, it is as though some one said that the 
metai parts of a watch cannot put themselves 
together in such a way as to enable the hands to 
move forward; some intelligence must therefore 
be present to effect this forward movement. In 
face of such an assertion, he certainly builds on 
a far better foundation who says: “Oh! I care 
nothing for your ‘mystic’ beings who move the 
hands on. What I want to know is the mechanical 
construction by means of whieh the forward move- 
ment of the hands is achieved.’’ It is by no

It might be said, indeed, that tliey coultl not show themselves then, 
for they must first be developed. But this is no objection; for if we 
wish to prove that something has been inherited from an ancestor, 
we must show how that which was there before is repeated in a de- 
scendant. Now if it were demonstrated that something existed at 
the beginning of a genealogical line which reappeared in its further 
course, we r^ight speak of heredity. We cannot do so when something 
appears at the end of it which was not there before. The reversal of 
the above proposition is only to show that the belief in heredity is 
impossible.

lOO

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCElOO

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

means a question of merely knowing that behind 
a mechanism, for example a .watch, there is an 
intelligence (the watchmaker) : it cefn only be of 
importance to know the ideas in the watchmaker’s 
mind which preceded the construction of the 
watch. These thoughts may be rediscovered in 
the mechanism.

Mere dreaming and imagining about the super- 
sensual only rcsrtlt in confusion, for they are not 
calculated to satisfy opponents. 'The latter are 
right in saying that .such general allusions to super- 
physical beings are not at all conducive to an 
understanding of facts. Of course, such oppo- 
nents might also say the same of the exact state- 
ments of occult science. F3ut, in that case, ifmay 
be pointed out that the effects of hidden spirit- 
ual causes arc .seen in manifested life. Ixjt us as- 
sume for the moment that what occult science 
as.serts to be proved by observation is correct, — 
that man has gone through a time of purification 
after death, and during this period has experi- 
enced in his soul how a certain deed performed 
Vjy him in a former life w^as a hindrance to his 
progressive evolution. While he was undergoing 
this experience, the impulse arose in him to make 
amends for that deed. He brings this impulse 
with him into a new life, and its presence pro- 
duces a tendency in his nature which draws him 
into conditions rendering the amendment possi- 
ble. Taking into consideration a number of such

SLEEP AND DEATH

lOI

impulses, we have the cause for a man’s being 
born into an environment corresponding to his 
destiny. *SLEEP AND DEATH

lOI

impulses, we have the cause for a man’s being 
born into an environment corresponding to his 
destiny. *

We may deal in the same way with another 
assumption. Let us again accept as correct the 
assertion of occult .science that the fruits of a 
past life are incorporated in man’s spiritual 
germ, and that the spirit -land in which man 
finds himself, betweem death and a new life, is 
the region in which these fruits ripen, and are 
transformed into talents and capabilities which will 
appear in a new life and will form the personality 
so that it appears as the effect of what was gained 
in a former life. It will become evident to any 
one who accepts these hypotheses and, bearing 
them in mind, surveys life impartially, that 
while, by their means, all material facts may be 
appreciated in their full truth and significance, 
at the same time everything becomes intelli- 
gible which, if merely material facts were relied 
upon, must forever remain incomprehensible to 
one whose attention is fixed on the spiritual 
world. And, more important still, there will 
vanish that illogical reasoning of the kind indi- 
cated above, — that becau.se the most distinguished 
name in a line of descent stands at the end of 
it, its bearer must have inherited his gifts. Life 
becomes logically comi)i-ehcnsible through the 
supersensual facts ascertained by occult science.

But yet another weighty objection may be

102 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE' ,But yet another weighty objection may be

102 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE' ,

raised by the conscientious seeker after truth 
who desires to find his way to facts and has no 
experience of liis own in the supersensual world. 
It may be urged that it is inadmissible to accept 
the existence of facts, of any kind, simply because 
by means of them something may be explained 
which is othenvise unintelligible. Such an objec- 
tion is meaningless to one who knows the corre- 
sponding facts from supersensual experience, and 
in later chapters of this book will be indicated 
the path that may be followed in order to gain 
knowledge not only of the spiritual facts herein 
described, but also of the law of spiritual causa- 
tion as a personal experience. Any one, how- 
ever, who is not willing to enter upon this path 
may find the above objection important; and 
what can be said against it is also of valive to one 
who is resolved to follow the path indicated. For 
if it is received in the right spirit, it is the very 
best preliminary step that can be taken on this 
path. It is perfectly true that one ought not to 
accept a statement about which one is otherwise 
ignorant merely because, by means of it, some- 
thing otherwise inexplicable can be explained, but 
in the case of alleged spiritual facts the matter is 
different. If the statements are accepted, the 
intellectual consequence is not only that, by their 
means, life becomes intelligible, but that through 
admitting these hypotheses into the thought- world, 
experiences of quite a new kind are induced.

SLEEP AND DEATH

103SLEEP AND DEATH

103

Take the followinf( case. Something befalls a 
man which causes him extremely painful sensa- 
tions. He vc\^y m*eet the situation in one of two 
ways. He may submit to the occurrence as 
something affecting him painfully, and abandon 
himself to the painful sensation, even becoming 
absorbed in his grief; or he may meet it in another 
way. He may say: “It is really I myself who 
in a former life set the force in motion which has 
brought me into contact with this thing. I have 
I'cally brought it on myself.” He may then 
awaken in himself all the feelings which such a 
thought brings in its train. It goes without say- 
ing that the thought must be entertained with 
perfect seriousness, and with the utmost possible 
force, if it is to have such consequences in the 
life of sensation and feeling. One who succeeds 
in this will meet with an experience which may be 
best illustrated by a comparison. Let us suppose 
that two men have each a stick of sealing wax 
in his hand. One begins reflecting about its 
inner nature. These reflections may perhaps be 
very wise, but if the “inner nature” did not 
show itself in any way, some one might easily 
retort: “That is all imagination.” The other, 
however, rubs the sealing wax with a woollen 
rag, and then shows that it attracts small particles. 
I'here is an important difference between the 
thoughts which have passed through the first 
man’s head and prompted his reflections, and

104

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

those of the second. The thoughts of the first 
man had no actual result; those of the second 
have called ont a hidden force, ♦ consequently 
something real.104

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

those of the second. The thoughts of the first 
man had no actual result; those of the second 
have called ont a hidden force, ♦ consequently 
something real.

The same thing happens with regard to the 
thoughts of a man in whose mind the idea arises 
that in a former life he has set going within him- 
self the force which causes him to meet with a 
certain event. Idic mere conception of this 
stirs up strength within him which enables him 
to face the event iii quite a different manner from 
that in w'hich he would have met it without 
entertaining such an idea. It dawns upon him 
that an event which he would otherwise have 
looked upon as an accident was really a necessity, 
and the perception will flash upon him: “My 
thought was the right one, for it had the power of 
revealing a truth to me.’’ If such inner processes 
are repeated they will grow into a source of inward 
power and thus prove their truth fjy their fruit- 
fulness; and little by little, this truth is found to 
be powerfully effective. Such processes have a 
salutary effect on body, soul, and spirit, — nay, 
they help life forward in every way. The man 
becomes aware that in this manner he takes the 
right position with regard to life’s continuity; 
whereas, by taking into consideration only the 
one life between birth and death, he is the victim 
of a delusion.

Such an entirely inward proof of .spiritual

vSLEEP AND DEATH

losSuch an entirely inward proof of .spiritual

vSLEEP AND DEATH

los

causation can of course be acquired only hy each 
one for himself, in his own inner life. But it is in 
every one’s power* to have it. Those who have 
► not acquired it certainly cannot judge of its con- 
vincing force; but those who have acquired it 
can scarcely have any further doubt in the matter. 
And there is no reason for surprise that this should 
be so. It is only natural that what is so wholly 
bound up with the constitution of man’s inmost 
being and personality can be adequately proved 
only by inner experience. On the other hand, it 
cannot be alleged that because such a matter 
corresponds to inner experience it must therefore 
be settled by every one for himself, and that it 
is no subject for occult science. Certain it is 
that every one must undergo the experience 
for himself, just as each must see for himself the 
proof of a matliematical problem. But the path 
by which such an experience may be gained is 
open to all, just as the method of proving a mathe- 
matical problem is available for every one.

It is not to l)e denied that, apart, of course, from 
clairvoyant observation, the only proof which 
can hold its own against unprejudiced logic is the 
one just cited of the power of right thinking to 
engender force. All other considerations are no 
doubt very important, but in all of them there 
will be something on which an opponent might 
seize as a point of attack. Surely one who has 
acquired a fairly impartial way of looking at

io6 AX OUTLINE OF OCC'ULT SCIENCE ,io6 AX OUTLINE OF OCC'ULT SCIENCE ,

things will find something in the possibility and 
actual fact of man’s education, which has the 
power of logical proof that a spiritual being is 
struggling for existence within the sheath of the 
bod^n He will compare animals with man and 
say to himself that at the birth of the fonner 
there appear certain definite qualities and capaci- 
ties as something, decisive in itself, which plainly 
shows how it has been designed by heredity and 
will evolve in the outer world. We see how a 
young chicken carries out life’s functions in the 
appointed way from its birth; but by means of 
education something comes into touch with man’s 
inner life which is independcjit of any connection 
w-ith his heredity, and he may be in a position to 
assimilate the effects of such external influences. 
The educator know's that such influences are met 
by forces coming from the man’s inner nature. 
If this is not the case all instimction and training 
are meaningle.ss. The unprejudiced educator finds 
the boundary line between inherited talents and 
those inner forces of the man himself which shine 
through them cind originate in former lives, to be 
very sharply marked. It is true we cannot bring 
forward such weighty proofs for things of this 
kind as we can for certain ] hysical facts, by means 
of scales; but then these are just the intimate 
things of life, and one who has the power to appre- 
ciate such impalpable proofs will find them- convinc- 
ing — even more convincing than palpable reality.

SLEEP AND DEATH

107SLEEP AND DEATH

107

That animals may be trained, and thus, to a 
certain extent, acquire qualities and capacities 
by educationt. is no objection to him who is able 
to see reality, for apart from the fact that transi- 
tional stages are met with all over the world, the 
results of training an animal by no means fade 
away with its individual existence, as is the case 
with a man. What is more, the fact has been 
emphasized that faculties acquired by domestic 
animals through intercourse with man are trans- 
mitted, that is to say, continue in the species, not 
in the individual. Darwin describes how dogs 
fetch and carry without having been taught to do 
so, or without having seen it done. Who would 
make such an assertion with regard to human 
education?

Now there are thinkers whose observations have 
led them beyond the opinion that a man is built 
by purely inherited forces from withoiit. They 
rise* to the tliought that a spiritual being, an 
individuality, exists before life in the body, and 
fashions it; but many of them find it impossible 
to conceive that there are repeated earthly lives, 
and that the fruits of fonner lives are moulding 
forces during the intemiediate state between two 
lives. Let us take one instance from among the 
ranks of these thinkers. Immanuel Hermann 
Fichte, son of the great Fichte, in his Anthropology 
(p. 528) ’gives the observations which led him to 
the following conclusion:

io8 AX OUTLINE OF OC'CULT S('IENCFio8 AX OUTLINE OF OC'CULT S('IENCF

“Parents are not generators in the full sense of 
the word. They supply organh suLstanee, and 
not alone this, but also that intenncfliate element 
of the senses and mental nature which appears 
in temperament, coloitri .g of eharactcr, (Udinite 
tendencies, and so on, the ca>mmon source of which 
proves to be ‘imagination’ in the wider sense 
indicated by us. In ail these elements of per- 
sonality, the mingling and particular eomb)ination 
of the souls of the parents is unmistakable: it is 
therefore a perfectly well-grounded assertion that 
this combination is simply the result of procre- 
ation, even if we regard procreation, as w'e must 
do, as really a soul-process. But the real ulti- 
mate centre of the personalit}' is just what is 
lacking here; for a dee])er and mort' st'arching 
observation rev'cals the fact t: at evep those 
peculiarities of disposition are but a covering and 
an instrument for containing the individual’s 
really spiritual and ideal capabilities, cpialified to 
aid these in their development or to hinder them, 
but in no wise able to originate them.” It is 
further stated in the .same weu'k (p. 532) : “Every 
individual preexists as regards the fundamental 
form of his spirit, for no individual, from a spiritual 
point of view, resembles another, just as no species 
of animal resembles another species.”

These themghts reach only far enough to allow 
of a spiritual being within the physical body; 
but as the forces shaping such a being are not

SLEEP AND DEATH

109These themghts reach only far enough to allow 
of a spiritual being within the physical body; 
but as the forces shaping such a being are not

SLEEP AND DEATH

109

derived from causes existing in former lives, it 
would be necessary that, each time a fresh per- 
Sf.mality appears, *a spiritual being should come 
forth from a Divine First Cause. With this 
hypothesis there would be no possibility of 
e'])laining the relationship which certainly exists 
between the potentialities struggling out (rf man’s 
innermost being, and that which is forcing its 
way thitlier from his outer earthly environment 
in the course of his life. Man’s innermost being, 
issuing in the case of each single person from a 
Divine First Cause, would find what confronts 
him in earthly life quite strange and foreign. 
Only then could this not be the case — as, in fact, 
it is not - if there had already been a connection 
between the inner man and the outer world, only 
if the inner man were not now living in it for the 
first time.

The unprejudiced educator may undoubtedly 
objjerv^e: “I am Iwinging m3' pupil something 
out of the results of earthly life, which is certainly 
alien to his purel}' inherited qualities, but which 
yet gives him the impres.sion that the work, out 
of which the results arise, had been done by him 
in the past.” Only repeated lives on earth, in 
conjunction with the facts set forth by occult 
science as taking place in spiritual regions between 
two earthly lives, — only this view can afford a satis- 
factory-explanation of present human life looked 
at from every side. I say expressly “present”

110

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SC:iENCE110

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SC:iENCE

human life, for occult investigation shows that 
the cycle of earthly life certainly had a beginning, 
and that then man’s spiritfial being, which 
entered a bodily frame, existed under different 
conditions. In the following chapter we shall 
go back to this primeval condition of human 
existence. When it has been sliovvn, from the 
reports of occult science how luunan beings re- 
ceived their present fonn in connection with the 
evolution of the earth, it will also be possible to 
indicate more precisely how the spiritual germ of 
man’s being descends from supcrphysical worlds 
into a bodily form, and how the spiritual law of 
causation, or “human dc.stiny,” is developed.

C^IAPTER IV

The Evolution of the Would and Man

F rom the foregoing oVjservations it will be 
seen thai man’s being is built up of four 
principles: the physical body, the etheric 
body, the astral body, and the veliicle of the ego. 
d'he ego works within the three other principles, 
and transforms them. By means of this trans- 
formation thei'e are hjrmed, on a lower level, the 
sentient soul, tlu' rational or intellecriud soul, and 
the self-conscious soul; on a higher level, the 
Spirit-Self, the Life-Spirit, and the Spirit-Man. 
The relations existing between these Inunan prin- 
ciples and the whole universe are of the most 
varied c^iaracter; and the evolution of the prin- 
ciples is bound up with that of the universe. By 
studying the latter evolution an insight is obtained 
into the deeper mysteries of man’s being.It is clear that human life is connected in the 
most widely different directions with the environ- 
ment or dwelling place in which it is developed. 
Physical science, through the facts presented to 
it, has already been driven to the opinion that 
the earth itself, man's dwelling place in the widest 
sense of the word, has undergone evolution. 
Science points to fonner conditions of the earth’s 
history when man, in his t)resent form, did not

I 12

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

yet exist on our planet; it shows how man has 
slowly and gradually evolved to his present 
condition from priniitive states of civilization. 
Physical science, therefore, comes also to the. 
conclusion that there is a connection between 
man’s evolution and that of tlie heavenly Ixxly 
on which he lives — the earth.

Occult science traces this connection by means 
of that knowledge which obtains its data from 
observation ciuickened b}' spiritual organs of 
perception. It traces man backwards in his 
course of development, and the fact becomes 
evident to occult science that the real inner 
spiritual being of man has progressed through a 
series of lives on this earth. But occult research 
arrives in this way at an e])och far back in the 
remote past, when for the first time that inner 
being of man made its entry into “external life” 
as at present understood. It was in this first 
earthly incarnation that the ego began to function 
in the three bodies, — the astral body, etheric 
or vital body, and physical body; and it there- 
upon carried over the results of that activity into 
its next life.

If in our investigation we proceed backwards, 
in the manner indicated, as far as that epoch, 
we shall discover that the ego lights upon a 
condition of the earth in which the three bodies, 
physical, etheric, and astral, are already devel- 
opedfand bear a certain relation to each other.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 113EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 113

The ego is, for the first time, united with the 
being composed of these three bodies ; and hence- 
forward takes p?irt in the further evolution of 
the three bodies. Hitherto, up to the stage at 
which that ego came into touch with them, they 
had evolved witliout a human ego.

Occult science must now go back still farther 
in its researches if it is to answer the questions, 
“How did the three bodies reach that stage of 
evohition at which they were able to receive an 
ego within them?” and “How did that ego itself 
come into being and acquire the capacity for 
working within these bodies?"

It is possible to an.swcr these ciuestions only 
when the gradual development of the earth- 
planet it.self is studied from tlie occult point of 
view. By such investigation we arrive at a 
beginning of the earth-planet. That method of 
examination which is based only on the facts of 
the physical senses cannot arrive at conclusions 
concerning the beginning of the earth. A cer- 
tain point of view which avails itself of such 
conclusions arrivt's at the result that everything 
material on the earth was formed out of a prime- 
val evsscnce, or ^^apour. *Tt is not the purpose 
of this work to enter more fully into such con- 
ceptions of our planet’s origin; for in occult 
science the important matter is not merely to 
inquire, into the material processes of the earth’s 
evolution, but first and foremost to discover the

lu AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

<

spiritual causes lyin^ behind what is material.lu AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

<

spiritual causes lyin^ behind what is material.

If we see before us a man raising his hand, we 
may consider his action in two different ways: 
we may examine the mechanism of the arm and 
of the rest of tlu' organism, in order to describe 
the process as it takes place from the purely 
physical standpoint, or we may direct the spiritual 
vision to what takes place in the man’s sold and 
constitutes tlie inner motive of the raising of 
the hand. In this way the investigator, trained 
in occult research, sees spiriliud processes Ijchind 
all the events of llie physical sense-world In 
his eyes all transformations of tlie material part 
of the earth-planet are manifestations of .spiritual 
forces lying behind what is material.

But if occult obsen'ation of this kind goes 
farther and farther back in the life of the earth 
it comes to that point in evolution at which 
material tilings first came into being. The ma- 
terial element is evolved out of the spiritual. 
Up to this point the spiritual element was the 
only one existing. By occult investigation the 
spiritual element is perceived, and the observer 
can .see how it becomes partly condensed, as it 
were, into matter. \Vc have before us a process 
which is taking place- -on a higher level — much 
as though we were observing a lump of ice being 
formed by artificial means in a vessel of water. 
Just as we see the ice being condensed .out of 
what was previously only water, .so may we,

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 115EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 115

by means of occult observation, watch the 
condensation, so to speak, of material things, 
processes, and beifigs, out of what was previously 
entirely spiritual. In this way the physical 
earth-planet was evolved out of a cosmic essence; 
and everything that is combined materially with 
the earth-planet has been condensed out of 
what was previously united with it spiritually. 
We must not, however, think that everything 
spiritual was at any one time changed into mate- 
rial form; but, in the latter we have before 
us rherely the transmuted portions of what was 
originally spiritual. Thus, even during the period 
of matei'ial evolution, it is always Spirit that is 
really the leading and governing principle.

It is obvious that the mode of thought which 
restricts itself to the processes of physical sense — 
and to what reason is able to infer from them — 
cannot express an opinion about the spiritual 
elepient of which we arc speaking. Let us 
assume that a being might exist to whose senses 
ice would be perceptible, but not the finer con- 
dition of water, from which ice is detached by 
refrigeration. For such a being, water would 
be non-existent, and coulS become visible only 
when parts of it had been transformed into ice. 
In the same way, the .spiritual element behind 
earthly processes remains hidden from a man 
who will admit the existence only of what his 
physical senses can recognize. And if, from

ii6 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the physical facts he now perceives, he wishes 
to draw correct conclusions about earlier con- 
ditions of the earth-planet, he can^ get only so 
far as that poiiit in evolution at which what 
was previously spiritual was partially condensed 
into material siibstance. Such a method of 
observation no more discovers the s])iritual ele- 
ment previously existing, than it perceives the 
spiritual life which even now rules unseen behind 
that which is material.Not until we come lo the later chapters of 
this work can we deal with those methods by 
which man acciuires the faculty uf looking back, 
by means of occult percepli(.)n, iipon those earlier 
conditions of tlie earth which are rxnv under 
disctxssion. l^or the presen l we shall mcrc'ly 
intimate chat the facts concerning the primc'val 
past have not passed beyond the reach of occult 
research. If a feeing comes into corponxil exist- 
ence his material i)art ])crishes after ])hysi,cal 
death. But not thus do the spiritual force's, which 
called the bchily part into being from out of them- 
selves, “disappear.” d'hey leave behind them 
their traces, their exact cf)pies, in the spiritual 
foundations of the W(jrld. And any one who 
is able to raise his j)erceptivc' faculty through 
the visible to the invisible world, attains at 
length a level on which he may see before him 
what may be compared to a vast spiritual pano- 
rama, in which are recorded all the past events

.IvVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 117

of the woi'ld’s history. These imperishable traces 
of everything beyond the realm of matter are 
called in occiilt .scrence the “ Akashie Records.”.IvVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 117

of the woi'ld’s history. These imperishable traces 
of everything beyond the realm of matter are 
called in occiilt .scrence the “ Akashie Records.”

Here it must once more be repeated that 
investigations of the super.scnsiblc spheres can 
be carried (jn C)nly with the aid of spiritual per- 
eeption, and conscciuently can ViC instituted only 
in the .s]jhere now under consideration, by reading 
the Akashie Records above-mentioned. Nevt'r- 
theless, wliat was said earlier in this l)ook in 
a similar instance holds good here. Super- 
.sensible facts are only to be investigated by 
supers(“nsiblc perceptions; l>ut once investigated 
and communicated by occult science, they may 
be grasped by the ordinary powers of thought, 
if these arc- honestly exercised without bias. 
Tn the Jollowing ])ages the v^arious conditions of 
the earth’s evolution, as given by occult science, 
will be detailed, 'fhe transformations of our 
planet v.'ill 1 k' traced down to the conditions of 
life in which we n<.nv find it. Any one wdio 
surveys what eonu's Ijcfore him at the present 
time merely through the evidence of his senses, 
and then lends an ear to what occult science has 
to say on the subjei-t, namely, how' that which 
now lies before him has been evolved from a 
far distant past, will be able, if his thought is 
genuitiely unbiassed, to say to himself: “In the 
first place, what occult science reports is quite 
logical; in the second ]jlace, I can, if I assiune

irS AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,irS AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,

the reports of occult investigation to be correct, 
understand how things have become as they 
now appear.” By “logical” is not meant, of 
course, in this connection, that errors might 
not be made from a logical standpoint in some 
description given by occult research. We are 
here speaking of “logic” as it is understood in 
the ordinary life of the physieal world. Just 
as a logical demonstration is there accepted as 
would be one of physical research, even though 
a single investigator, in a certain domain of 
facts, may make illogical statements, so also 
is it in occult science. It may even happen 
that an investigator who possesses the power of 
vision in supersensible spheres may make mistakes 
in a reasoned presentment of them, and may 
be corrected by another who has no supersensible 
perception, but has, none the less, a capacity 
for sound thinking. In reality, nothing of any 
weight can be said against the logical deductions 
of occult science. And it ought to be unnecessary 
to insist that nothing can be adduced, on purely 
logical grounds, against the facts themselves. 
In the domain of the physical world it can never 
be proved by logie, but only by ocular demon- 
stration, whether or no there is such an animal 
as a whale; similarly, supersensible facts can be 
known only through occult perception.

But it cannot be sufficiently emphasized that 
an obligation is laid upon the explorer of

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN irgBut it cannot be sufficiently emphasized that 
an obligation is laid upon the explorer of

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN irg

supersensible regions, before he detenuines to ap- 
proach the invisible worlds in his own conscious- 
ness, to accjuire ‘first of all the aforernentioncd 
logical faculty, and this is none the less essential 
if he admits that the world manifest to his senses 
will become comprehensible if he accepts the com- 
munications of occult science as correct. All expe- 
riences in the supersensible woidd are nothing but 
an uncertain — nay, a dcingcrous — groping in the 
dark if we despise the method of preparation 
which has been described. Therefore in this 
book the facts concerning the supersensible proc- 
esses of the earth’s evolution will first be given, 
before the path leading to the attainment of 
supersensible knowledge is dealt with.

We have also, it is true, to take into account 
that the man who, by sheer thinking, comes to 
accept what supersensible research has to impart, 
is by no means in the same position as one who 
listens to the account of a physical occurrence 
which he is unable to see. For thinking is in 
itself a supersensible activity. When relating 
to the senses, it cannot of itself lead to .super- 
sensible happenings. But if thought is directed 
to supersensible matters through the accounts 
given of them by occult science, it grows by its 
own activity into the supersensible w'orld. What 
is more, one of the very best ways of acquiring 
individual perception in supersensible spheres is 
to grow into the higher worlds by meditation

I 20

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

upon what has been communicated by occult 
science. That is to say, such n mode of entry 
insures the greatest clearness of 'results. For this 
reason such thinking is regarded by a certain sec- 
tion of occult investigators as the most valuable 
first step to take in occult training.It will be readily understood that it is impossible 
to mention in this bucjk all the details of the 
earth’s evolution, as it has been spiritually 
perceived by occultists, in order to illustrate 
the way in which the supersensible world is 
reflected in the manifested one. Nor was this 
what was intended when it was said that the 
unseen may everywhere be demonstrated by its 
manifested effects. Rather was it meant that 
everything that man encounters may, step by 
step, become clear and comprehensible if he brings 
manifested events into the illumination of occult 
science. Only in a few characteristic instatices 
will reference be made in the following pages ,to 
confirmations of the invisible by the manifest, in 
order to show that this may be done everywhere

in the course of practical life, if desired.

* *

♦

Following the evolution of the earth backward 
by the method of (jccult research mentioned 
above, we arrive at a spiritual condition (Pralaya) 
of our planet. But if we go farther back along 
this path of research we. find that that spiritual 
substance had previously been in a kind of

.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 121

physical incarnation. Thus we come upon a bygone 
physical planetary condition, which was after- 
wards spirituftlizecf, and subsequently transformed 
^into our earth by repeated materialization. Our 
earth is therefore presented to us as the rein- 
carnation of a very ancient planet. But occult 
science can go back still farther; and then it 
finds the whole process twice repeated. Our 
earth lias, therefore, passed through three previous 
planetary states, between which lie intenuediate 
states of spirituality. 'Phe physical stibstance, 
of course, proves to be finer and finer the farther 
back we follow the incaniations.Now man, in the form in which he is at prc.sent 
evolving, makes his first a])pcarance during the 
fourth of the jjlanetary incarnations which have 
been described, on the earth i.iroper. And the 
essential characteristic of liis femn is that it is 
comxiosed of four principles, the physical, cthcric, 
and a.stral bodies and the ego. But that foim 
could not have appeared if it had not lieen pre- 
pared by the preceding events of evolution. The 
method of prc'paration was that, in the earlier 
planetary incarnation, beings were evolved who 
already had three of the present four ]:)rinciples 
of man: the phy.sical, etheric, and astral bodies. 
These beings who, in a certain sense, may be called 
man’s ancestors, had as yet no ego, but they 
developfed the three other principles and the 
connection between them to such a point that

122 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

they became sufficiently mature to rcceiv'e an ego. 
Consequently, man’s ancestor attained to a certain 
degree of mattirity of his tliree pritjelplcs during 
the earlier planetary incarnation.

This state passed into spirituality; and out of 
the spirituality was formed a new planetary 
condition, iii whicli man’s matured ancestors were 
contained, as it were, in embryo. Because the 
whole planet had passed through a process of 
spiritualization and had appeared in a new form, 
it offered those embryos, with their physical, ethe- 
ric, and astral l)odie.s, whicli were contained within 
it, not only the opportunity of again evolving up 
to the level on which they had previously stood, 
but the further possibility, after having arrived 
at that level, of reaching out licyond themselves 
through receiving the ego.The evolution of tlie earth falls, therefore, into 
two parts. During the first period the earth 
itself appears as a reincarnation of the previous 
planetary state. But that recurring state is a 
higher one than that of the previous incarnation, 
in consequence of the intervening period of spirit- 
ualization. And the earth contains within itself the 
germs of man’s ancestors belonging to the earlier 
planet. These were first developed up to the 
level they had previously reached. The attain- 
ment of this level marks the end of the first period. 
But now, owing to its own higher .stage of evolu- 
tion, the earth is able to carry the germs .still

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 123

higher, that is, to qualify them for receiving the 
ego. The second period of the earth’s evolution 
is that of the.development of the ego in the phys- 
ical, etheric, and astral bodies.

In the same way that man was thus carried a 
stage farther by the evolution of the earth, this 
had been the case during the earlier planetary 
incarnations. For man had in some measure 
existed as early as the first of these. Light is 
therefore thrown on the present constitution of 
man if his evolution is followed back to the far- 
remote past of the first of the planetary incarna- 
tions mentioned above.

In occult science the first of these is called 
‘ ‘ Saturn’ ’ ; the second is termed ‘ ‘ Sun ’ ’ ; the third , 
“Moon”; and the fourth is the earth. It must 
be distinctly understood that these occult terms 
arc not at first to be in any way associated with 
the names used to designate the members of the 
present solar system.* In occult science Saturn,^ In different chapters of this book it has been shown how the world 
of humanity, and man himself, pass, in their progressive evolution, 
through conditions which have been nameil vSaturn, Sun, Moon, earth, 
Jupiter, Venus, and Vulcan. The relationshiij has also been indicated 
in which human evolution stands with regard to the celestial bodies 
which exist besides the earth and which are called Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, and so on. These latter planets are also passing through their 
evolution in the natural way. At the ])rcsent period they have reached 
such a stage that their physical portions are seen as those bodies which 
physical astronomy calls Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and so on. Now when 
the Saturn of the present day is observed by occultism it is seen to be, 
in a certain sense, a reincarnation of the old Saturn. It has come into 
existence because of the presence of certain beings, who before the 
separation of the Sun from the earth were unable-, like the others, to 
leave with The Sun. The reason of this was that they had gained so 
many qualities which are suitable for a Saturn existence, that their 
place could not be w'herc the qualities of the Sun were specially

124

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Sun, and Moon are merely names for bygone 
foiTns of evolution through which the earth has 
passed. In the course of the* following account 
it will be shown what relation these worlds ot 
remote antiquity bear to the celestial bodies com- 
posing the present solar system.If the conditions of the four planetary incarna- 
tions named are now to be described, they can 
only be outlined briefly; for the events, the beings, 
and the destiny of those beings on Saturn, Sun, 
and Moon are in truth just as varied as they are 
on the earth itself. Therefore only a few charac- 
teristic details as to the prevailing conditions can 
be selected for description, for the purpose of 
illu.strating the manner in which the earth’s con- 
ditions have l^cen evolved out of its earlier forms. 
It must also he borne in mind, in this connection, 
that those conditions are seen to be more and 
more different from present-day conditions the 
farther back we go. And yet they are onlj^ to 
be described, as to their main characteristics, by

unfolik‘(1. I'ht* Jupilor f)t' the ])rcbcnt, howt ver, an.st.' in ( (diseqiuMico of 
the presence of beings possess'nl of qtialities which can only In; matured 
on the future Jupiter of the whole evolution. A dwc'lling plnce appeared 
for them on which they can alrea<ly begin in nnticipalion this later 
evolution.

In the bame way Mars i.s a platietary body on whudi (Kvt'll beings 
whose lunar evolution was .such that further jirogress on the earth 
could bring them nothing. Mars is a reincarnation of the old Moon 
at a higher stage. The present Mercury is the dwelling place of beings 
who are beyond the evolution of the eartli; but this is just because 
they have developed certain qualities iii a higher way than is possible 
on the earth itself. The present Venus is a prcijdietic anticipation of 
the future Venus condition of a similar kind. It is consequently jus- 
tifiable to give to the conditi(ai.s preceding and following the earth the 
names of their ('orresj)onding represen tative.s in I hi* univers(\

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 125EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 125

making use of ideas borroM'^ed from existing con- 
ditions of the eart|j. If, for instance, light, heat, 
or the like is •mentioned in connection with these 
Earlier conditions, it must not be overlooked that 
they are not exactly the same as what we now 
term light and heat. And yet such terminology 
is accurate, for to the clairvoyant observer of 
earlier stages of evolution something beeomes 
manifest out of which have come the light and 
heat of the present time. And one who follows 
the descriptions thus given by occult science will 
be well able to infer, from the connection in which 
these matters are placed, what ideas have to be 
adopted in order to get charactei'istic images and 
similes of events enacted in a primeval past.

Of course there will be considerable difficulty 
in treating of those planetary conditions which 
preceded the Moon incarnation. For during the 
latter, conditions prevailed which bore at any rate 
sonfe resemblance to earthly conditions. One at- 
tempting to describe these conditions finds that 
such re, semblances to the present time form a 
certain basis on which he may clearly represent 
the observations he has made through clairvoy- 
ance. It is another thing if the Saturn and 
Sun evolutions are to be described. In that case, 
what lies before clairvoyant observation is utterly 
different from the objects and beings now belong- 
ing to the sphere of human life. And this differ- 
ence makes it exceedingly difficult to bring the

120 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE .

corresponding facts of primeval times within the 
the scope of clairvoyant consciousness.120 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE .

corresponding facts of primeval times within the 
the scope of clairvoyant consciousness.

Yet as the present constitution of man cannot 
be understood without going back to the SaturrC 
state, the description must nevertheless be given. 
And surely no one will misunderstand such a 
description wlio keeps in view the existence of 
the difficult}', and the fact that owing to it much 
that is said must be in the natiirc of a suggestion 
or hint of the facts in question, rather than an

exact description of them.

* *

*

The physical body is the oldest of the present 
four principles of man’s being. It is also the 
one, which, in its way, has attained the greatest 
perfection. Occult research shows that this part 
of man already existed during the Saturn evolu- 
tion. It will be shown in the following account 
that the form taken by the physical body on Sat- 
urn was, of course, something quite different from 
the present physical l;ody of man. The earthly 
physical human body, from its nature, can only 
exist by being in connection with the etheric and 
astral bodies and the ego, in the manner described 
earlier in this book. Such a connection did not 
as yet exist on Saturn. The physical body was 
then passing through the first stage of its evo- 
lution, without having a human etheric body, 
astral body, or ego incorporated with it. *

During the Saturn evolution it was growing

^iVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN x2^During the Saturn evolution it was growing

^iVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN x2^

ripe for the reception of an etheric body. For 
that purpose Saturn had first to pass into a spirit- 
ual condition^ and then to be reincarnated as Sun. 
•Curing the Sun incarnation the physical body was 
developed again, as if from a germ left behind, to 
the point it had reached on Saturn; and then 
only could it be interpenetrated by an etheric 
body. By means of this incorporation of an 
etheric body, a change took place in the nature 
of the physical body; it was raised to a second 
stage of perfection. A similar thing took place 
during the Moon evolution. Man’s ancestor, 
at the point to which he had developed when 
passing from the Sun to the Moon, incorporated 
within himself the astral body. By this means 
the physical body was changed for the third 
time, and thus raised to its third stage of per- 
fection; at the same time the etheric body was 
likewise changed, and passed to its second stage 
of perfection. On the earth the ego was incor- 
porated with man’s ancestor, composed of the 
physical, etheric, and astral bodies. Thereby 
the physical body reached its fourth stage of per- 
fection, the etheric body its third, and the astral 
body its second stage; the ego is only now at the 
first stage of its existence.

If we give ourselves up to an unprejudiced 
examination of man’s nature, there will be no 
difficult)! in drawing an accurate pieture of these 
several .stages of perfection of his individual

128 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE128 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

principles. In this connection we have merely to 
compare the physical with the astral body. It 
is true, the astral body, as a psychic principle, 
stands on a hij^her level t)t evolution than the 
physical body. And in future ages, when the 
former has been perfected, it will be of very much 
more consequence to man’s comi)lete being than 
the present physical body. Yet, in its own way, 
the latter has reached a certain degree (h' perfec- 
tion. Consider the marvelhjus wisdom with which 
the structure of the heart is planned, the amazing 
structure of the brain,-- nay, even of ])art of a 
single bone, such as the upper end of a thigh 
bone. In the end of this bone we find a net- 
work or scaffolding, wonderfully constructed and 
adjusted out of delicate little bars. The whole 
is so arranged that with the leiist expenditure of 
material substance the most effective action on 
the joint-surfaces is obtained -the most judicious 
distribution of frictiim and thence a proper free- 
dom of movement. Similarly, wise contrivances 
are found in other parts of the physical body. 
And if we go on to oljserve the harmonious coop- 
eration of the })arts with the whole we shall find 
that it is certainly true that this principle of 
man’s being is, in its way, perfect. Moreover, 
it does not affect the question that in certain 
parts something apparently useless ai^pears, or 
that disturbances of structure or functibns may 
1 -oVp Vore It will even lie found that such

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 129

disturbances are the necessary shadows of the 
wisdom -filled light which is poured forth over the 
whole physicai organism.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 129

disturbances are the necessary shadows of the 
wisdom -filled light which is poured forth over the 
whole physicai organism.

And now compare with this the astral body 
as the medium, or vehicle, of pleasure and pain, 
desires and passions. What uncertainty rules in 
it with regard to pleasure and pain; how the 
desires and passions of which it is the scene run 
counter to the higher goal of man; how senseless 
they often are. The astral body is only now on 
its way to attain the harmony and inner self- 
control already possessed by the physical body. 
Similarly it might be shown that the etheric body 
is certainly more perfect in its own way than the 
astral but less perfect than the physical body. 
And it will equally result from a corresponding 
study of .the ego that this, the real kernel of man’s 
being, is now only at the beginning of its evolu- 
tion. For how much has hitherto been accom- 
plislied of its mission, which is so to transform 
the other principles of man’s being that they 
shall become a revelation of the ego’s own nature?

'The result of an outer examination of this kind 
is intensified for the t)ccult student by something 
else. It might be pointed out that the physical 
body is attacked by diseases. Now' occult science 
is in a position to show that a large proportion 
of all diseases owe their origin to the fact that 
the perverse actions and mistakes of the astral 
body are transmitted to the etheric body, and

130 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE130 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

indirectly by its means ^destroy the perfect har- 
mony of the physical body. The deeper con- 
nection, which can here be otily hinted at, and 
the true cause of many of the conditions o^ 
disease, elude that kind of scientific observation 
which confines itself solely to the facts obtained 
by means of the physical senses. The connection 
in most cases comes about in such a way that an 
injury to the astral body does not cause mani- 
festations of disease in the physical body in the 
same incarnation in which the injury takes place, 
but in a later one. Hence the laws now under 
consideration have meaning only for one who is 
able to admit that human earth-life is repeated 
again and again. But even if deeper knowledge 
of this kind is despised, ordinary observation of 
life makes it plain that human beings indulge in 
far too many pleasures and desires which under- 
mine the harmony of the physical body. And 
the seat of pleasure, desire, passion, is not in the 
physical but in the astral body. The latter is 
still so imperfect, in many respects, that it is 
able to destroy the harmony of the physical body.

It should also be mentioned here that such 
explanations as these are by no means intended 
as proofs of the assertions of occult science as 
to the evolution of the four principles of man’s 
being. The proofs are drawn from spiritual re- 
search, which shows that the physical body has 
behind it a transformation, enacted four times.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 13 1

into higher degrees of perfection, and that man’s 
other principles have been perfected to a lesser 
degree, as has been described. It is desired 
merely to indicate here that these communica- 
tions made by spiritual research relate to facts 
which are visible in their effects even to ordinary 
observation, in the degrees of perfection reached

by the physical body, etheric body, and so on.

* *

*by the physical body, etheric body, and so on.

* *

*

If we wish to draw an approximately true pic- 
ture of the conditions prevailing during the 
Saturn evolution we must take into account that 
while it lasted there were virtually, as yet, none 
of the things and creatures existing which now 
belong to the earth, and arc included in the min- 
eral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. The inhab- 
itants of these three kingdoms were formed during 
later p’eriods of evolution. Man alone, of the 
earthly beings now perceptible to physical sense, 
was then existing, and of him only his physical 
body, as described. But there are at present on 
the earth not only the denizens of the mineral, 
vegetable, animal, and human kingdoms, but 
other beings as well, not manifesting in a physical 
embodiment. Such entities were also present 
during the Saturn evolution, and their activity 
on the Saturn scene of action brought about the 
subsequent evolution of man.

If the organs of spiritual perception are at first 
directed, not to the beginning and end, but to the

I,, 2 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

IIf the organs of spiritual perception are at first 
directed, not to the beginning and end, but to the

I,, 2 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

I

middle period of evolution during the Saturn 
incarnation, there will be seen a cosmic being, 
which in the main consists only of heat. Nothing 
is to be found composed of gaseous, 4uid, or even 
solid constituents. All these states appear only 
in later incarnations. Let us assume that a 
human being, with the present organs of sense, 
were to approach the Saturn conditions as a spec- 
tator. None of the sense-impressions possible 
to him would confront him there except the 
feeling of warmth, or heat. Even supposing that 
such a being were to approach Saturn, he would 
only feel, on reaching the portion of space he was 
to occupy, that this had a different temperature 
from the rest of his special environment. But 
he would not find that portion of space by any 
means equally warm throughout, for warmer and 
colder parts would alternate in the most promis- 
cuous fashion. Radiating heat would be felt 
along certain lines. And the lines would not 
only extend straight on, but geometrical shapes 
would be formed by the variations in heat. Some- 
thing would be discerned like a cosmic being, 
organically constructed in itself, appearing in 
changing conditions, and consisting only of heat.

It is difficult for a man of the present day to 
form an idea of anything consisting only of heat, 
for he is not accustomed to think of heat as some- 
thing self -existent, but as a perceptible quality of 
warm or cold, gaseous, liquid, or solid bodies. To

.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 1.^3.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 1.^3

one who has adopted the physical conceptions of 
our time it will sepm particularly absurd to speak 
of heat in th« foregoing manner. He will, perhaps, 
•say: “There are solid, liquid, and gaseous bodies; 
but heat only denotes a condition assumed by 
one of these three forms of body. If the smallest 
particles of a gas are in motion, the movement 
will be felt as heat. Where there is no gas, there 
can be no movement, conseqticntly no heat.”

To an occult investigator the fact appears 
differently. To him heat is something of which 
he speaks in the same sense as he speaks of gases, 
of liquids, or of solid bodies. To him it is simply 
a still finer substance than gas. And a gas to 
him is nothing but condensed heat, in the same 
sense that a liquid is condensed vayiour, or a solid 
body condensed liquid. Thus the occultist speaks 
of heat bodies just as he does of bodies fonned of 
gas and vapour.

If we are to follow the spiritual investigator 
into this region, it is only necessary to admit 
that there is such a thing as psychic perception. 
In the world, as it presents itself to the physical 
senses, heat appears entirely as a condition of 
solid, liquid, or gaseous bodies; but that condi- 
tion is merely the outward appeai'ance of lieat, 
or the effect of it. Physicists speak only (A' this 
effect of heat, not of its inner natirrc. Let us try 
for once’to leave entirely out of consideration any 
effect of heat received through external bodies,

134 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,134 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ,

and to realize merely the inward experience which 
comes from saying the words “I feel warm,” 
“I feel cold.” That inward experience is the only 
thing capable of giving an idea of what Saturn 
was during its period of evolution described above. 
It would have been possible to pass right through 
the portion of space it occupied: no gas would 
have been there to exercise pressure, no solid 
or liquid body from which light-impressions could 
have come ; but at every point of space occupied, 
it would have been inwardly felt, without any 
external impression: ‘‘Here there is such and 
such a degree of heat.”

In a cosmic body of this constitution there 
are no conditions for the animal, vegetable, and 
mineral organisms of to-day.* The beings whose 
.sphere of action was this Sattxrn were at quite a 
different stage of evolution from that of the 
present inhabitants of the earth who are percep- 
tible to the senses. In the first instance, beings 
were there who had no physical body like that 
of contemporary man. We must also guard 
against thinking of man’s present physical embodi- 
ment, when mention is made of a ‘‘physical body” 
in this connection. Rather must we carefully 
distinguish between the physical and the mineral 
body. A physical body is one governed by

iTherefore it is perhaps scarcely necessary to remark that what has 
been described above could never actually happen. A contemporary 
man cannot, as he is, approach the ancient Saturn as a spectator. 
The account was given merely for the sake of illustratifjn.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 135

*EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 135

*

the physical laws which are now observable in 
the mineral kingdom. Now man’s present phys- 
ical body is not 'only ruled by those physical 
laws, but is still partly composed of mineral 
matter. There can be no question as yet on 
Saturn of a physical-mineral body of this kind. 
There is only a physical bodily fonn, governed 
by physical laws; but these laws are manifested 
only through the agency of heat.

Therefore the physical body is a fine, subtle, 
ethereal heat body; and the whole of Saturn 
consists of such heat bodies. They are the 
beginnings of the present physical-mineral human 
body. The latter has been formed out of the 
former, because there have become incorporated 
with the original body the more recently formed 
gaseous, liquid, and solid substances.

Among the beings of which we are now speak- 
ing, who, besides man, were inhabitants of Saturn, 
there were, for instance, some which did not 
need a physical body at all. The lowest principle 
of their nature was an etheric or vital body. On 
the other hand, they had one principle higher 
than the principles of human nature. Man’s 
highest principle is the Spirit-Man (Atma). These 
beings have one still higher. And between the 
etheric body and the Spirit-Man they have 
all the principles described in this book as also 
found in man: the astral body, ego, Spirit-Self, 
and Life-Spirit. Just as our earth is surrounded

136 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE136 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

by an atmosphere, so too was Saturn; only in 
this case the “atmosphere” was of a spiritual 
nature. It really consisted of the beings just 
. named and some others. Now there was constant 
reciprocal action between the heat bodies of 
Saturn and the beings we have described. The 
latter projected the principles of their being 
down into the physical heat bodies of Saturn. 
And whereas there was no life in those heat bodies 
themselves, the life of their neighbours was 
expressed in them. They might be compared to 
mirrors; only there were reflected in them, not 
the images of the living beings mentioned above, 
but their conditions of life. Therefore, although 
nothing living could have been discovered in 
Saturn itself, yet it had a vivifying effect on its 
environment in celestial space, because it threw 
back into space, like an echo, the reflection of the 
life w^hich had been sent to it. The whole of 
Saturn appeared as a mirror of celestial life. 
Very high beings whose life was reflected by 
Saturn are called in occult science ‘ ‘ Lords of 
Wisdom.”' Their activity on Saturn did not 
begin only during the middle period of its evolu- 
tion, which has been described. In a certain 
way it had even then already ceased. Before 
they could be in a position to rejoice in the reflec- 
tion of their own life from Saturn’s heat bodies 
they had to make those bodies capable of producing

1 Tn Christian spiritual science they hear the name of ‘‘Kyriotetes,” 
that is, “Dominions/'

EVOLUTION OF THE WORL13 AND MAN i.v;

such a reflection. Therefore their activity set in 
soon after the beginning of the Saturn evolution. 
When this hjyjpencd, the body of Saturn was still 
chaotic material, which could not have reflected 
anything.By looking at that chaotic material, we have 
transferred ourselves, by spiritual observation, 
to the beginnitig of the Saturn evolution. What 
is to be observed there does not as yet bear 
anything of the later character of heat. If we 
wish to describe it, we can only speak of a quality 
which may be compared with the human will. 
From first to last it is nothing but “Will.” There- 
fore it is an entirely spiritual condition that 
meets us here. If we a.sk whence came this will, 
we see it proceeding from the cfiiuence of exalted 
beings, who brought their evolution, l)y steps 
only to be dimly conceived, up to such a point 
that when the Saturn evolution began they 
were able to poixr forth will from their own 
nature. When this effluence had lasted a certain 
time, the activity of the Lords of Wisdom de- 
scribed above was united with will. Through 
this means the will wliich had liitherto had no 
attributes gradually received the quality of re- 
flecting life back into celestial space. In occult 
science the beings who found their happiness at 
the beginning of the Saturn evolution in pouring 
forth will, are called the “Lords of Will.”'

ilii Christian esoteric science they arc called “Thrones."

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

rilii Christian esoteric science they arc called “Thrones."

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

r

After a certain stage of the Saturn evolution 
had been reached, through the cooperation of 
will and life, there sets in the ’influence of other 
beings, who are also within Saturn’s environ-, 
ment. These are the “Lords of Motion.”* They 
have no physical or etheric body. Their lowest 
principle is the astral body. When the Saturn 
bodies have ficquired the capacity for reflecting 
life, that reflected life can be interpenetrated 
with the qualities which have their seat in the 
astral bodies of the Lords of Motion. In con- 
sequence of this, it appears as if expressions of 
feelings, emotions, and similar psychic forces had 
been hurled out of Saturn into celestial space. 
The whole of Saturn appears like one animated 
being, manifesting sympathies and antipathies. 
These psychic manifestations, however, are by 
no means its own, but merely the activity of 
the Lords of Motion thrown back again.

This also having lasted for a certain period, 
there begins the activity of yet other beings, 
that is, of the “Lords of Form.”^ Their lowest 
principle, too, is an astral body; but that body 
is at a different stage of evolution from that of 
the Lords of Motion; whereas these communi- 
cate only general manifestations of feeling to the 
reflected life, the astral body of the Lords of Form 
operates in such a way that the manifestations

iThe Christian “Dynamis,” or “Principal it ius.”

^The Christian “Exusiai," or “Powers."

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 139

of feeling are flung out into cosmic space as if 
they came from individual beings. It might 
be said that tl;e Lords of Motion make the whole 
o£ Saturn appear as an animated being. The 
.Lords of Form separate that life into individual 
living beings, so that Saturn now appears as a 
conglomerate of such psychic beings.Let us imagine, for the sake of illustration, a 
mulberry or blackberry, made up, as it is, of 
small individual berries. Thus, to clairvoyant 
vision, Saturn, in the period of evolution now 
being deseribed, is made up of individual Saturn 
beings, whieh of eourse have neither life nor soul 
of their own, but refleet the life and soul of 
its inhabitants. Into this condition of Saturn 
there now come beings whose astral body is also 
their lowest principle, but who have brought it 
to such a high stage of development that it 
operates in the same way as the present human 
ego. . Through these beings, the ego in the 
environment of Saturn looks down on that 
planet, and it imparts its nature to Saturn’s 
individual living beings. Thus something is sent 
out from Saturn into cosmic space, which has 
an effect similar to that of human personality 
in the present conditions of life. The beings 
causing that effect are designated “Sons of 
Personality.’ They confer on the Saturn 
bodies the appearance of personality. Personality

iThc Christian “Archai,” or “First beginnings."

MO

AN OL' rLINK OF OCCUI/F vSCIENCE

itself, however, is not present on vSaturn, but 
only, as it were, its reflected image, the shell 
or husk of personality. The reg,l personality 
of these spirits is in the environment of Saturp. 
As a result of these Sons of Personality letting 
their essence stream back from the Saturn bodies 
in the manner described, that fine substance is be- 
stowed on those bodies which has previously been 
descriljed as heat. Tn the wiiole of Saturn there 
is no subjectivity: but the Sons of Personality 
recognize the image of their own subjectivity, 
when it stream .s out t<.) them from Saturn as heat.When all this is taking place, the Sons of 
Personality are on the same level on which man 
now stands. They are then passing through 
their “human” period. In order to look at this 
fact with an unprejudiced eye, we must imagine 
it possible for a being to be human without being 
in the exact form in which man now exists. The 
Sons of Personality arc “human beings” on Sat- 
urn. As their lowest ])rinciple they have not 
the physical, but the astral body with the ego. 
Hc-nce they cannot express the experiencss of 
their astral body in a physical and etheric body 
as contemporary man is able to do; they not 
only have an ego, however, but are aware of the 
fact, because the heat of Saturn brings that ego 
streaming back into their consciousness. In 
fact, they are human beings under different cir- 
cumstances from those of earth.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i^rEVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i^r

In the sequel of the Saturn evohxtion, facts 
follow of a different kind from those already 
related. Whqreas everything hitherto was a 
reflection of outer life and feeling, there now 
begins a kind of inner life. In the Saturn world 
there begins a life of light, flickering here and 
there, and growing dim again. A quivering 
glimmer is seen in some places, something like 
flashes of lightning in others. The Saturn heat 
bodies begin to glimmer, to sparkle, and even 
to emit rays. Because this stage of evolution 
has been reached, there again arises the possi- 
bility for certain beings to develop their activity. 
They are those known to occult science as “Sons 
of Fire.”* These beings certainly have an astral 
body, but at this particular stage of their existence 
they ar^ unable to give suggestions to their 
own astral bodies; they would not be able to 
excite any feeling or emotion unless they could 
act upon the heat bodies which have attained 
the Saturn stage of evolution described. That 
action affords them the possibility of recogniz- 
ing their own existence from the effect which 
they produce. 1^hey cannot say to themselves, 
“I am here”; but rather, “My environment 
allows me to be here.” They have percep- 
tions, and what they perceive is the light-effects 
on Saturn which have been described. These are, 
in a certain manner, their ego. This gives them

1 The Christian “Archangeloi,” ur “Archangels/’

142 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ^

a peculiar kind of consciousness. It is designated 
“picture-consciousness.” It may be represented 
as having the nature of human dream-conscious- 
ness, except that the degree of activity it enjoys 
must be thought of as very much greater than 
it is in human dreams, and also that it is not 
a question of shadowy dream-pictures floating 
hither and thither, but of such as have a real 
connection with the play of light on Saturn.During this reciprocal action between the Sons 
of Fire and the Saturn heat bodies, the germs 
of the human organs of sense become incor- 
porated for the purpose of evolution. The organs, 
by means of which contemporary man becomes 
cognizant of the physical world, begin to shine 
in their first delicate ethereal outlines. Human 
phantoms, displaying as yet nothing but the 
original light-forms of the sense-organs, become 
discernible within Saturn, to the clairvoyant 
faculty of perception. These sense-organs are, 
therefore, the result of the activity of the Sons 
of Fire; but it is not only these spirits that have 
brought about their inception. Other beings 
come upon the scene of Saturn at the same time 
as these Sons of Fire, — beings so far advanced 
in their evolution that they are able to make use 
of the germs of the sense-organs for beholding 
the cosmic events taking place in the Saturn life. 
They are the “Lords of Love.”' If they were

I The Christian “Seraphim,” ■

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 143

not there, the Sons of Fire could not have the 
consciousness described a1)ove. They behold the 
events on §aturh with a consciousness which 
/nakes it possible for them to convey these events 
as pictures to the Stnis of Fire. 'They them- 
selves forego all the advantages which might 
accrue to them from contemplating the events 
on Saturn; they renounce all joys and pleasures; 
they give up all these in order that the Sons of 
Fire maj'' come into possession of them.

A new period of Saturn’s existence succeeds 
these occurrences. Something else is added to 
the play of light. If what hei'e presents itself 
to clairvoyant perception be reported, it may 
seem an absurdity to many. Within Saturn, 
intermingled sensations of taste seem to be surg- 
ing. Sweet, bitter, sour, are perceived within 
Saturn in all kinds of places; and outside, in 
space, all this is heard as sound, as a kind of 
music.In the course of these processes there are again 
certain beings who find it possible to develop 
activity on Saturn. These are the “Sons of 
Twilight, or Life.’’* They enter into reciprocal 
action with the forces of taste surging up and 
down within Saturn. By this means their etheric 
or vital body attains a state of such activity 
that if may be called a kind of metabolism. 
They bring life into the interior of Saturn. Hence

J The Christian “ Angelo i,” or “Angels.”

144

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

processes of nutriment and excretion take place 
in Saturn. This inner life makes it possible for 
yet other beings to come into thp planet, the' 
"Lords of Harmony. ’’i They bestow a dim kini^ 
of consciousness on the Sons of Life, which is even 
more vague and dim than the dream-consciousness 
of eontemporary man. It is of the kind that now 
comes to man in dreamless sleep, and is, indeed, 
of sueh a low order that it does not, so to speak, 
enter into man’s consciousness. Yet it is there. 
It differs from waking consciousness in degree 
and also in its nature. Plants, too, have this 
dreamless-sleep consciousness at the present time. 
Even though it does not bring about any per- 
ceptions of an external world, in the human sense 
of the words, yet it regulates the life processes 
and brings them into harmony with the proeesses 
of the outer world.

This adjustment cannot be perceived by the 
Sons of Life at the stage of Saturn’s evolution 
now being described; but the Lords of Harmony 
perceive it, and therefore it is they who really 
do the adjusting. All this life is enacted in the 
human phantoms already deseribed. To clair- 
voyant vision they consequently appear animated ; 
but yet their life is only a semblance of life. 
It is the life of the Sons of Life, who in some way 
make use of the human phantoms in order to 
manifest themselves in life.

iThe Christian “Cherubim.”

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 145iThe Christian “Cherubim.”

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 145

Let us now turn our attention to the human 
phantoms with their semblance of life. During the 
Saturn perio4 described, their form is constantly 
^hanging. Sometimes they bear one aspect, some- 
times another. In the further course of evolution, 
their forms become more definite, and occasionally 
permanent. This is due to their becoming inter- 
penetrated by the action of the Spirits described 
at the beginning of the Saturn evolution, — the 
Lords of Will (the Thrones). The consequence is 
that the human phantom itself is seen to have the 
simplest, dullest form of consciousness. This must 
be thought of as still duller than the conscious- 
ness of dreamless sleep. Under present conditions, 
minerals have that consciousness. It brings the 
inner being into harmony with the outer physical 
world. On Saturn it is the Lords of Will who 
regulate that haimony. And man by this means 
appears a copy of Saturn life itself. What 
Saturn life is upon a large scale, mati at this 
vStage is upon a small scale. And thus the first 
germ is prepared for that which is .still only a 
germ in contemporary man: for the “Spirit-Man” 
(Atma). This dull human will within Saturn is 
manifested to clairvoyant faculty by effects which 
may be compared with odours. Outside, in celestial 
space, there is present a manifestation like that 
of a personality, which however is not directed by 
an inner ego but regulated from outside, like a ma- 
chine. Those who regulate it are the Lords of Will.

ij

146 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEij

146 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

It will become evident, from a survey of the 
foregoing, that starting from the middle condition 
of the Saturn evolution at first portrayed, the 
steps of that evolution might be described by 
comparing their effects with sense-perceptions 
of the present time. It might be said that the 
Saturn evolution is manifested as heat; then a 
pla}'’ of light is added; then a play of taste and 
sound; at length, something appears which is 
manifested within the interior of Saturn as sen- 
sations of smelling; outside, as a human ego 
working like a machine.

What have the Saturn revelations to say about 
what preceded the heat condition? Now this is 
what cannot be compared with anything acces- 
sible to outer sense -perception. A state of things 
precedes the heat condition, which contemporary 
man experiences only in his inner being. When 
he gives himself up to ideas which he forms in 
his own soul, without having any inducement 
brought to bear on him by an external impression, 
then he has something within himself which can- 
not be perceived by any physical sense, but is 
'only accessible to the perception of the higher 
clairvoyant vision. Manifestations precede the 
heat condition of Saturn, which can be cognized 
only by a clairvoyant. Three sitch conditions 
may be mentioned: purely psychic warmth, not 
outwardly perceptible ; purely spiritual light, which 
is outwardly darkness; and lastly, something of a

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 147

Spiritual nature which is complete in itself, and 
needs no outer being in order to become self- 
conscious. J’ure, inward heat accompanies the 
appearance of the Lords of Motion; pure, spirit- 
ual light, that of the Lords of Wisdom; pure, 
inward being is linked with the first effluence of 
the Lords of Will.Thus, with the appearance of heat on Saturn, 
our evolution first comes forth out of the inner 
life of pure spirituality into outwardly manifested 
existence. It is, of course, particularly difficult 
for present-day consciousness to realize this, 
even though it should be added that what is 
know'n as “time” appears first during the heat 
condition of Saturn. That is to say, the previous 
conditions have nothing to do with time. They 
belong, to that sphere which may be called, 
in occult science, “duration.” Consequently, 
everything that is said in this book about the 
conditions existing in the “Sphere of Duration” 
must be understood in such a way that wheti 
expressions referring to time conditions are used, 
they are only to be accepted for the sake of 
comparison and explanation. That which, in a 
certain sense, precedes “time,” can be expressed 
in human language only by terms which imply 
the idea of time. Even if we are aware that the 
first, second, and third Saturn conditions were 
not enacted “one after the other,” in the present 
sense of the words, yet we cannot do otherwise

148 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

than describe them one after the other. Indeed, 
in spite of their duration or coexistence in time, 
they are so dependent on one another that this 
very dependence may be compared with a time, 
sequence.This indication of the first conditions of evolu- 
tion on Saturn also throws light on any further 
questions that may be asked as to the origin 
of those conditions. From the purely intellectual 
point of view, it is, of course, quite possible, when 
dealing with the source of anything, to inquire 
after “the source of the source.” But in the 
face of facts, this is not possible. A comparison 
will help us to realize it. If we find ruts on a 
road we may ask. “ 'Po what are they due?” And 
it may be replied, “To a carriage.” It may 
further be asked; “Whence did the c^-rriage 
come? Whither was it going?” An answer 
founded on fact is again possible. We may then 
proceed to ask, “Who occupied the carriage? 
What purpose had the person using it? What 
was he, or she, doing?” At last, however, we 
shall reach a point at which inquiry by means of 
facts finds its natural limit; and on inquiring 
further we get away from the original questions. 
We only continue the inquiry mechanically, as 
it were.

In such matters as the one brought forward as 
a comparison, it is easy to see where facts demand 
the end of the inquiry. It is not so evident when

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 149

we are face to face with great C(,)sniic questions. 
But as the re.sii]t of really exact observation it 
will nevertl^eless* be seen that all inquiry as to 
origins must come to an end at the Saturn condi- 
tions portrayed above. For we have reached a 
region in which beings and events are. no longer 
justified by that from which they proceed, but by 
themselves.As a result of the Saturn evohition it appears 
that the himian genu developed up to a certain 
point. It attained the low, dim state of con- 
sciousness described above. We must not imagine 
that its evolution does not begin until the last 
of the Saturn stages, d'he L(.)rds of Will carry on 
their work through all the conditions. Only 
the result is most striking to clairvoyant percep- 
tion in the last period. Then' is not anything 
like a fixed boundary between the activities of 
the several groups of beings. If it is said that 
the Lords of Will work first, then the Lords of 
Wisdom, and so on, it is not meant that they are 
working only at that time. They arc working 
all through the Saturn evolution; only their 
activity can best be observed during the periods 
specified. The several groups have, as it were, 
the leadership at those times.

Thus the whole Saturn evolution appears as a 
working out of what streamed forth from the 
Lords "of Will through the Lords of Wisdom, 
Motion, Form, and the rest. By this means,

150

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE150

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

those spiritual beings themselves pass through 
evolution. For instance, the Lords of Wisdom 
stand on a different level after tliey h^ve received 
their life reflected back from Saturn, from the one 
on which they previously stood. The result of 
that activity exalts the faculties of their own being. 
The consequence is that, on the completion of 
such activity, something similar to human sleep 
comes upon them. I'o their periods of activity 
in connection with Saturn there succeed other 
periods, during which they live, as it were, in 
other worlds. At these times their activity is 
withdrawn from Saturn. On this account clair- 
voyant perception sees an ascent and a descent 
in the Saturn evolution that has been described. 
The ascent lasts until the formation of the heat 
condition. Then, with the play of light, the ebb 
tide sets in. And when the human phantoms 
have assumed forai through the Lords of Will, 
the spiritual beings have also gradually with- 
drav/n themselves. The Saturn evolution, as 
such, dies away; as an evolution, it disappears. 
A kind of resting pause occurs.

The hvunan germ at the same time enters upon 
a state of dissolution; not, however, a state in 
which it passes away, but one like that of a plant 
seed, resting in the earth in order that it may 
ripen into a new plant. Thus the human germ, 
in the bosom of the cosmos, takes rest before its 
next awakening. And by the time the moment

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 15 1

•EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 15 1

•

of awakening has arrived, the spiritual beings 
described above have acquired, under other con- 
ditions, the faculties b}'’ means of v/hich they can 
further advance the human genn. The Lords of 
Wisdom have, in their etheric body, gained the 
faculty not only of enjoying the reflection of life 
as they did on Saturn, but of pouring life forth 
from themselves, and endowing other beings with 
it. The Lords of Motion arc now as far advanced 
as were the Lords of Wisdom on Saturn. Then 
the lowest principle of their being was the astral 
body; they now possess an etheric, or vital body; 
and in a corresponding degree the other spiritual 
beings have reached a further stage of evolution. 
All these spiritual beings are therefore able to 
act in a different way, on the further evolution 
of the human gemi, from that in w'hich they 
acted on Saturn.

But the human germ was tlissolved at the end 
of the Saturn evolution. In order that the more 
highly evolved spirit-beings might resume their 
work where they had left it off, the human germ 
must once more briefly recapitulate the stages 
through which it had passed on Saturn. This, 
in fact, is what appears to clairvoyant faculties 
of perception. The human germ comes forth 
out of its retirement and begins to develop by 
its own "ability, by means of the forces which 
had been implanted within it on Saturn. It 
comes forth out of the darkness as a “being of

152 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT vSCIENCE

4

Will,” and assumes the appearana' of life, of 
psychic cjualitics (Seclenhaftigkeit), and so on, 
up to that mechanical manifestation rif person- 
ality which it had at the end of the Saturn 
evolution.

* *

** *

*

The second of the great periods of evolution 
that have been mentioned, the “Sun period,’’ 
effects the raising of man’s being to a higher stage 
of consciousness than that which it had attained 
on Saturn. Compared with man’s present state 
of consciousness, the Sun condition might cer- 
tainly be termed “unconsciousness.’’ For it is 
approximately like that condition in which con- 
temporary man is during absolutely dreamless 
sleep. Or it might be compared to the low degree 
of consciousness in which our vegetable world 
now slumbers. For occult science there is no 
such thing as unconsciousness, but only different 
degrees of consciousness. Everything in the world 
is conscious.

In the course of the Sun evolution, human nature 
attains a higher degree of consciousness through 
the incorporation within it of the etheric, or vital 
body. Before this can take place the Saturn 
conditions must be recapitvdated in the manner 
described above. This recapitulation has quite 
•a definite meaning. That is to say, when the 
period of rest which was spoken of in the foregoing 
statement has come to an end, that which was

EVOLUTION OF THFN WORLD AND MAN 153EVOLUTION OF THFN WORLD AND MAN 153

formerly Saturn issues forth, out of “cosmic 
sleep,’’ as a new celestial body, the Sun. But the 
conditions of^evollition have meanwhile changed. 
The spirit-beings, whose activity on behalf of 
Saturn we have portrayed, have progressed onward 
into different conditions. Yet at first the human 
germ appears on the newly formed Sun in the form 
it possessed on Saturn. It has first of all so to 
transform the various stages of evolution it has 
adopted on Saturn that they may suit the new 
conditions on the Sun. Conseciirently. the sun 
epoch begins with a recapitulation of the occur- 
rences on Saturn, adjusted to the changed condi- 
tions of Sun life. Now when man’s being has 
advanced so far that the stage of evolution it 
reached on Saturn has been adapted to the Sun 
conditions, the T^ords of Wisdom already men- 
tioned r)egin to let the ethcric, or vital body, 
stream into the physical body. 'Fhe higher .stage 
which man reaches on the Sun may therefore be 
described in this way: the physical body, already 
fonned in the genn-state on Saturn, is raised to a 
second stage of perfection by becoming the vehicle 
of an etheric, or vital b(xiy. d'his last-named 
body attains its first degree of perfection on its 
own account during the Sun evolution. In order, 
however, that the second degree of perfection 
for the physical and the first for the etheric body 
may be -arrived at, the interposition of yet more 
spirit -beings is necessary during the further coiu'se

154 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

of the Sun life, in a similar manner to that which 
has been described as taking place during the 
Saturn stage.154 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

of the Sun life, in a similar manner to that which 
has been described as taking place during the 
Saturn stage.

When the Lords of Wisdom begin to pour in 
the etheric body, the Sun body, previously dark, 
begins to shine. At the same time the first 
appearances of inner activity arc seen in the 
human germ; life has begun. What had to be 
described as a semblance of life on Saturn now 
becomes acUial life. The infiux lasts for a cer- 
tain time, at the end of which an important 
change for the human germ sets in — that is to 
say, it is divided into two parts. Whereas up 
to this point the physical and etheric bodies 
formed an intimately connected whole, the physi- 
cal body now begins to detach itself as a separate 
part. Yet even that separated physical body is 
still pervaded by the etheric body. Therefore 
we have now to do with a human being composed 
of two principles. One portion is a physical body 
permeated by an etheric body; the other is the 
etheric body and nothing else. This separation 
comes to pa.ss, however, diiring a period of rest 
in the Sun life. During this pause the shining, 
which had begun to appear, dies away. The 
separation takes place during a “cosmic night” 
(Pralaya), as it were. Yet this interval of rest 
is much shorter than the one between the Saturn 
and Sun evolutions mentioned above. At the ex- 
piration of the resting period the Lords of Wisdom

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 155

work tor a while on the two-principled being of 
man, just as they had previously done on the 
one-principled, being. Then the Lords of Motion 
begin their activity. They stream through the 
hiunan etheric body with their own astral body. 
By this means man acquires the capacity for exe- 
cuting inner movements in the physical body. 
These movements mtiy be compared with those 
of sap in a plant of our own time.The Saturn body consisted entirely of heat 
substance. During the Sun evolution that heat 
substance is condensed into the state which may 
be compared with tliat of our present-day gas or 
steam. It is the condition which occult science 
is accustomed to call “air.” The first beginnings 
of such a state arc seen after th(j Lords of Motion 
have begun their activity. The folloAving spectacle 
is presented to clairvoyant consciousness: Within 
the heat sul^stancc there appears something 
like delicate organisms which are set in tegular 
motion by the forces of the etheric body. These 
orgaiiisms represent the human physical body 
at the stage of evolution imw propc'r to it. 
'rhey are permeated through and through with 
heat, and also wrapped, as it were, in a heat 
envelope. From a physical point of view, man’s 
nature may be said to be composed of heat struc- 
tures with air forms embedded in them — the 
latter irf regular motion. Hence, if we wish to 
retain the foregoing comparison with a plant of

156 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE ^

the present day, we must remember that it is not 
a solid plant organism which we have to consider, 
but an air or gas form, * the movements of which 
may be compared with the circulation of the sap 
in plants of to-day.The evolution thus indicated continues. After 
a certain time another interval of rest sets in; 
after this the Lords of Motion go on working until 
their activity is supplemented by that of the Lords 
of Form. The effect of the latter is that the gas 
structures which before were constantly changing, 
now assume lasting forms. 1'his, too, happens 
because the Lords of Form let their forces flow in 
and out of the hiunan etheric body. When the 
Lords of Motion alone were acting on the gaseous 
organisms, these were in perpetual motion, not 
keeping their form for an instant. Now, however, 
they temporarily assume distinguishable shapes. 
Again, after a certain period, there occurs a time 
of rest; once more, after this, the Lords of Form 
continue their activity. But then entirely new 
conditions set in within the Sun evolution.

For the point has now been reached when the 
Sun evolution has attained its zenith. This is 
the time at which the Lords of Personality, who 
attained their human stage on Saturn, ascend to 
a. higher degree of perfection. They advance 
beyond the human stage; they attain a form of

1 The gas appears to clairvoyant consciousness through the effect of 
light which emanates from it. We might therefore speak also of light 
forms, which are ap])aront to spiritual vision.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 157EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 157

consciousness which contemporary mati does not 
yet possess in his nonnal course of development 
on the earth. ,Hc will acquire it when the earth 
— dhe fourth of the planetary stages of evolu- 
tion — has reached its goal and has entered upon 
the next planetary period. Then man will not 
only perceive around him what his present physi- 
cal senses enable him to cognize, but he will be 
able to see in images the inner psychic condi- 
tions of the beings surrounding him. He will have 
a (clairvoyant) picture-consciousness, although 
retaining complete self-consciousness. There will 
be nothing dreamlike or vague in his clairvoyance, 
but he will sense what is psychic, in pictures cer- 
tainly, but in such a way that these images will 
be the expression of realities, as physical colours 
and sounds are now. Man, at present, can attain 
to this degree of clairvoyance only through 
occult training, which will be treated later in this 
book.

Now this clairvoyance is attained by the Sons 
of Personality, as the gift of their normal evolu- 
tion, midway in the Sun period; and it is just on 
this account that they become capable of acting 
on the newly formed etheric body of man during 
the Sun evolution, in a way similar to that in 
which they acted on the physical body on Saturn. 
Just as there the heat reflected their own per- 
sonality bajck to them, so do the gaseous organisms 
now reflect back to them, in gleams of light, the

I5S AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEI5S AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

images of their clairvoyant conscioxisness. They 
clairvoyantly behold what is taking place on the 
Sun. This vision is by no means^mere observa- 
tion; it is as if something of the force which 
mortals call love made itself felt in the images 
which stream forth from the Sun. And if a clair- 
voj’ant looks more closely, he will find the cause 
of this appearance. Exalted beings have blended 
their activity with the light that is being radiated 
from the Sun. They arc the Lords of Love 
(the Clu'istian Seraphim) already mentioned. 
Plencefortli they act, together with the Sons of 
Personality, on the human etheric, or vital body. 
By means of that activity the etheric body 
advances a step farther along its path of evolu- 
tion. It acquires the capacity not only of trans- 
forming the gaseous forms within it but of so 
elaborating them that the first indications of a 
propagation of living human beings appear. In 
some way something is segregated and driven 
out (as though exuded) from the gaseous organisms 
that have been formed, and is moulded into shapes 
resembling their mother-forms.

In order to describe the further course of the 
Sun evolution, reference must be made to a fact 
in the foimation of worlds which is of the greatest 
possible significance. It is this, — that by no 
means every being attains the goal of its evolu- 
tion in the course of one epoch; there are some 
that fall short of that goal. Thus, during the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 159

*EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 159

*

Saturn evolution, it was not all the Sons of Per- 
sonality that actually reached the human stage 
for which, as described above, they were destined ; 
tyid just as little did all the physical human bodies, 
developed on Saturn, attain the degree of maturity 
which qualifies them to become vehicles of a self- 
dependent etheric body on the Sun. The conse- 
quence is that beings and organisms are present 
on the Sun which are not in harmony with their 
environment. These must now make up, during 
the Sun evolution, for what they failed to attain 
on Saturn. The following may, therefore, be 
clairvoyantly observed during tlie Sim period. 
When the Lords of Wisdom begin their pouring 
in of the etheric body, the Sun body is to some 
extent darkened. Structures are mingled with 
it whiclp properly speaking, belong to Saturn. 
They are heat organisms v/hich arc not able to 
condense themselves into air in the proper manner. 
These are the human beings left behind in the 
Saturn stage. They are not able to become 
vehicles of a perfected etheric body in the nor- 
mal way.

Now the heat substance of Saturn, which has 
thus been left behind, splits into two parts on the 
Sun. One part is absorbed, as it were, by human 
bodies, and henceforward forms a kind of lower 
nature within man’s being. Thus something, 
which really corresponds to the Saturn stage, is 
incorporated in the bodily part of man on the Sun.

J^.o AX OUTLINE OF OC'CULT SCIENCE

Now just as the Saturn body of man made it 
possible for the Sons of Personality to raise them- 
selves to the human stage, the Saturn part of 
man performs the same office on the Sun for the 
Sons of Fire. They raise themselves to the 
human stage by letting their forces flow in and 
out of the Saturn part of man, as did the Sons of 
Personality on Saturn.This also happens in the middle period of the 
Sun evolution. The Satiini part of human nature 
is then so far matured that vrith its help the 
Sons of Fire ( Archangeloi ) are able to pass through 
their human stage. Another part of the Satur- 
nian heat substance becomes detached and attains 
an independent existence alongside of and among 
the human beings on the Sun. fl'his forms a 
second kingdom by the side of the human king- 
dom, a kingdom which develops on the Sun 
only a perfectly independent physical body, as 
a heat body. In consequence of this, the fully 
evolved Sons of Personality are not able to direct 
their activity toward any independent etheric 
body in the manner l)efore described. But there 
were also certain Sons of Personality left behind 
at the Saturn stage who fell short of humanity 
then. There exists a bond of attraction between 
them and the second Sun kingdom which has 
become independent. They must now’ act to- 
ward the backward kingdom on the Sun’as their 
advanced brethren did on Saturn in regard to

EVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN i6iEVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN i6i

human beings. The latter had only their physical 
body perfected* there. But there is no possi- 
bility on the §un for such a work on the part of 
tlje backward Sons of Personality. They there- 
fore separate themselves from the Sun body, and 
form a self-dependent celestial body outside it. 
This body, accordingly, withdraws from the Sun, 
and from it the backward Sons of Personality act 
on the beings of the second Sun kingdom which 
have been described. In this way two world- 
organisms have been formed out of the one which 
was previously Saturn. The Sun has now in 
its environment a second celestial body, one which 
exhibits a kind of re-birth of Saturn, a new Saturn. 
From this Saturn the character of personality is 
conferred on the second Sun kingdom. Therefore 
within this kingdom we have to do with beings 
which have no personality on the Sun itself. 
But yet they reflect back to the Sons of Person- 
ality on the new Saturn the special personality of 
those spirits. Clairvoyant consciousness is able 
to observe heat forces among the human beings 
on the Sun, which act upon the regular course of 
Sun evolution, and in which the sway of the spir- 
its described as belonging to the new Saturn is 
to be seen.

We have to notice the following facts about 
man’s bei'ng during the middle period of the Sun 
evolution’. It is divided into a physical body 
and an etheric body. Within these there plays

12

1 62 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE12

1 62 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the activity of the advanced Sons of Personality 
conjointly with that of the Lords" of Love. Now 
part of the backward Saturn nat\jre is mingled 
with the physical body. In this there plays the 
activity of the Sons of Fire. We have now to 
see in e^’el•ything which the Sons of Fire effect 
on the backward Saturn nature, the forerunners 
of the present human sense-organs. It has been 
shown how these Sons of Fire were already at 
work on the elaboration of the sense-germs in the 
heat substance on Saturn. The first outline of 
the present human glands is to be recognized in 
what is accomplished by the Sons of Personality 
conjointly with the Lords of Love (Seraphim).

But when this is done the work of the Sons of 
Personality dwelling on the new Saturn is not 
yet finished. They not only extend their activity 
to the second Sun kingdom mentioned above, 
but they establish a kind of connection between 
that kingdom and the human senses. The heat 
substances of this kingdom flow in and out of 
the germs of the human seiivse-organs. By this 
means the hiunan being on the Sun acquires a 
sort of perception of the lower kingdom situated 
outside him. That perception is naturally but a 
dim one, closely corresponding to the dull Saturn- 
consciousness previously treated of. And it con- 
sists essentially of various heat effects. '

Everything here described as taking ’place in 
the middle of the Sun evolution lasts for a definite

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 163Everything here described as taking ’place in 
the middle of the Sun evolution lasts for a definite

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 163

period. Then a time of rest again occurs. After 
that, things continue for a wliile in the same 
manner up to fw certain point of evolution, at which 
thp human etheric body is so far matured that a 
united action of the Sons of Life (Angeloi) and 
the Lords of Harmony (Cherubim) can set in. 
There now appear to clairvoyant consciousness, 
within man’s being, certain manifestations which 
may be compared with perceptions of taste, and 
which arc made known externally as sounds. A 
similar thing has already been stated about the 
Saturn evolution. But here on the Sun the proc- 
esses relating to human beings are more inward, 
and full of more self-dependent life.

The Sons of Life thereby acquire that dim pic- 
ture-consciousness which the Sons of Fire had 
already a.ttained on Saturn. In this the Lords 
of Harmony are their helpers. They really behold 
clairvoyantly what is now being enacted within 
the Sun evolution; only they give up all the 
results of that contemplation, and the enjoy- 
ment of those revelations of Wisdom that arise 
from it, and allow them to stream, like splendid 
visions of enchantment, into the dreamlike con- 
sciousness of the Sons of Life. The latter again 
work these pictures of their visions into the etheric 
body of man, so that it attains higher and higher 
stages of development.

Again a’n interval of rest sets in; again every- 
thing is raised from “cosmic sleep’’; and after

i 64 an outline of occult scienceAgain a’n interval of rest sets in; again every- 
thing is raised from “cosmic sleep’’; and after

i 64 an outline of occult science

man’s being has lasted a while longer, it is suffi- 
ciently advanced to direct its forces for itself. 
These forces are the same that ware poured into 
man’s being by the “Thrones” during the latter 
part of the Saturn period. Human nature now 
evolves by an inner life, which, in its manifesta- 
tion to clairvoyant consciousness, may be com- 
pared with an inward perception of smell. But 
outside, in the direction of celestial space, man’s 
being is manifested as a personality, though not 
one, it is true, directed by an inner ego. It 
appears more like a plant working as a personality. 
It has indeed been shown that at the end of the 
Saturn evolution personality is manifested like 
a machine. And just as then the first germ was 
developed of what becomes capable of evolving 
only in contemporary man, — the Spirit-Man 
(Atmd), — so at this point there is formed a similar 
first germ of the Life-Spirit (Buddhi).

After this has all continued for some time, 
an interval of rest again occurs. Following this 
interval, as in the previous instances, the activ- 
ity of the human being is resximed for a while. 
Then conditions set in, w'hich present them- 
selves as a fresh intervention of the Lords of 
Wisdom. By its means human nature becomes 
capable of feeling the first traces of sympathy 
and antipathy in regard to its environment. As 
yet there is no real sensation in all ‘this, but 
only a forerunner of sensation. For the inner

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 165EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 165

life-activity, which might be characterized in its 
manifestation as perception of smell, is revealed 
externally as if in a kind of primitive language. 
If, the human being is inwardly consciolls of a 
useful smell — or taste, or glitter, — it is manifested 
outwardly by a sound; and the same thing 
happens, in a corresponding way, with an in- 
wardly uncongenial perception. The real pitr- 
pose of the Sun evolution for humanity is attained 
by means of all the processes that have been 
described. Human nature has reached a higher 
stage of consciousness than that of the Saturn 
period. It is the consciousness of sleep.

After some time, the point of evolution is also 
reached at which the higher beings connected 
with the Sun stage must pass into other spheres 
in order to work out that with which they have 
endowed themselves by their work on the human 
being. A long period of rest sets in, one similar 
to that between the Saturn and Sun evolutions. 
Everything that has been })erfected on the Sun 
passes into a condition which may be compared 
with that of a plant when its powers of growth 
are resting in the seed. But just as those powers 
of growth appear again in a new plant, so does 
everything that was living on the Sun come 
forth again, after the period of rest, from the womb 
of the world, and begin a new planetary existence.

The meaning of such a term of rest, or “sleep 
of worlds” (Pralaya), will readily be understood

1 66 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEThe meaning of such a term of rest, or “sleep 
of worlds” (Pralaya), will readily be understood

1 66 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

if we will only direct our spiritual vision to one 
of the orders of beings already mentioned, for 
instance, to the Lords of Wisdoi©. They were 
not far enough evolved on Saturn to be able ,to 
pour forth from themselves an etheric body. 
They were not prepared for this until they had 
gone through their experiences on Saturn. During 
the rest (Pralaya) they are transforming into 
actual faculty what had been previously prepared 
in them. Thus on the Sun they are evolved 
far enough to pour life forth from themselves, 
and to endow the human being with an etheric 
body of its own.

* *

*

After the interval of rest, that which had 
previously been the Sun comes forth again out 
of the “sleep of worlds.” That is, it again becomes 
perceptible to the clairvoyant faculties which 
had been able to observe it before, but had lost 
sight of it during the resting period. There 
are now two points to be observed with regard 
to the newly appearing planetary organism, which 
may, in occult science, be denoted the “Moon” 
(and this must not be confused with that portion 
of it which is now the earth’s moon). In the 
first place, that which had detached itself during 
the Sun period as a “new Saturn” is once more 
within the new planetary body. This Saturn 
has therefore been again united with the Sun 
during the term of rest. Everything which was

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 167EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 167

in the original Saturn reappears at first as one 
world-organism. Secondl}'’, the human etheric 
bodies which, had been formed on the Sun have 
b.een absorbed, during the resting period, by 
that which constitutes the spiritual sheath of 
the planet. At this point of time, therefore, 
they do not make their appearance united with 
the corresponding physical human bodies, but 
these latter at first appear separately. It is 
true, they contain everything which had been 
gained for them on Saturn and the Sun, but they 
are without the etheric, or vital body. Indeed, 
they cannot incorporate that etheric body within 
themselves immediately, for it has also been 
passing, during the period of rest, through an 
evolution with which they are not yet harmonized.

What^ occurs at the beginning of the Moon 
evolution, in order to Vjring about this adjust- 
ment, is, first of all, another recapitulation of the 
Saturnian events. 'Phe physical part of man 
passes once more through the stages of the 
Saturn evolution, but under greatly altered cir- 
cumstances. On Saturn there were only the forces 
of a heat body at work within; now there 
are also those of the gas body that has been 
elaborated. These latter forces do not, however, 
appear quite at the beginning of the Moon evo- 
lution. ’Then everything appears as if man’s 
being Were composed only of heat substance, 
and as if the gas forces were lying dormant

i6S AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

within that substance. Then comes a time when 
the 'first indications of these forces make their 
appearance; and lastly, in the lat^pst period of 
the Saturn recapitulation, man’s being has tl|e 
same appearance as during his life-condition 
on the Sun. Yet, even now, all the life there 
proves to be but a semblance of life.Next occurs a period of rest similar to the 
short periods of rest of the Sun evolution. Then 
the pouring in of the etheric body, for which 
the pltysical body has now become ripe, begins 
anew. As in the case of the recapitulation of 
Saturn, this influx takes place in three periods, 
distinguishable one from the other. During the 
second of these, man’s being is so far adjusted to 
the new Moon conditions that the Lords of 
Motion are able to bring into play the faculty 
they have acquired. This faculty consists in 
their pouring the astral body out of their own 
being into man’s. They prepared themselves 
for this work during the Sun evolution, and 
during the time of rest between the Sun and 
Moon they transformed what had been prepared 
into the faculty alluded to. This influx lasts 
for a while, then one of the shorter intervals of 
rest sets in. After that the influx continues 
until the Lords of Form begin their activity. In 
consequence of the pouring of the astral body 
into man’s being by the Lords of Motion, the 
latter acquires its first psychic qualities. It

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 169EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 169

begins to develop sensations in connection with 
the processes which take place in it through 
the possession of an etheric body, and which 
during the Sun evolution were still plant-like in 
nature; through these processes man’s being now 
experiences pleasure and aversion. But it is 
nothing more than a constant inner ebb and 
flow of such pleasure and aversion, until the 
Lords of Form intervene. Then these changing 
feelings are so transformed that there appear 
in man’s nature what may be regarded as the 
first signs of wishes and desires. The being 
strives after a repetition of what has once caused 
pleasure, and tries to avoid what has been felt 
as antipathetic. As, however, the Lords of Form 
do not give up their own nature to the human 
being, but merely let their forces stream in and 
out, desire is wanting in depth of feeling and 
independence. It is directed by the Lords of 
Form, and makes its appearance in an instinctive 
character.

The human physical body on Saturn was a 
heat body; on the Sun a condensation into the 
gaseous state, or into “air,” has set in. Now 
as, during the Moon evolution, the astral element 
is poured in, and the physical part, at a definite 
moment, attains a further degree of condensation, 
it arrives at a state which may be compared 
with that of a liquid of our own day. In accord- 
ance with the usage of occult science this state

170 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

may be called “water.” But by this term is 
not meant the water wc now have, but every 
liquid form in existence. The plvysical human 
body now gradually assumes a form composed 
of three kinds of material structures. The 
densest is a ‘hvater body”; through this flow air 
currents; and through these two there further 
passes heat-activity.Now all the organisms do not attain full, 
adequate maturity during the Sun stage. There- 
fore there are organisms found on the Moon 
which are only at the Saturn stage, and others 
which have bul, reached the Sun stage. In this 
way two other kingdoms arise by the side of the 
nonnally evolved human kingdotn. One con- 
sists of beings which have stopped short at the 
Satitrn stage, and therefore have only a physical 
body, which even on the Aloon is not yet able 
to become the vehicle of an independent etheric 
body. I'his is the lowest of the Moon kingdoms. 
A second consists of beings which have been left 
behind at the Sun stage, and which are therefore 
not mature enough on the Moon to incorporate 
within themselves an independent astral body. 
These form a kingdom between the one just 
mentioned and the regularly progressing hiunan 
kingdom .

But there is still something else taking place: 
the substances with only heat forces and those 
with only air forces permeate also the human

P.VOLU'J'ION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 171

beings. Thus it happens that the latter have 
within them on the Moon a Saturnian and a solar

t

nature. In this way a kind of cleavage has taken 
place in human nature; and by means of this 
division, something very momentous is called 
forth within the Moon evolution after the activity 
of the Lords of Form has begun. • A cleavage in 
the celestial body of the Moon begins to be pre- 
pared for. One ])art of its substances and beings 
separates from the other; two heavenly bodies 
are fonned out of one. One of these becomes the 
abode of certain higher beings who were previ- 
ously more closely connected with the undivided 
celestial body; while the other is occupied by 
human beings, the two lower kingdoms described 
above, and certain higher beings who did not pass 
over to the first celestial body.The first heavenly body, with the higher beings, 
appears like a newly born but refined Sun; the 
other is really the new^ formation, the “old Moon.” 
The regenerated Sun, on going out, takes with it 
only “heat” and “air” of the substances which 
have been formed on the Moon; on what is left 
as the Moon there is the liquid condition as well 
as the other two substances. By this separation 
it comes about that the beings which have with- 
drawn with the newborn Sun are not, in the first 
instance,’ hampered in their further evolution by 
the denser Moon beings. Thus they are able to 
continue their own progress without hindrance.

172 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

But by this means they acquire so much more 
power that they are able now, from their Sun, to 
influence the Moon beings, These^also acquire 
thereby new possibilities of evolution. Mos.t 
important of all, the Lords of Form are still in 
union with them. These confirm the appetites 
and the desire-nature, and this also is gradually 
expressed in a further condensation of the physical 
human body. What was previously nothing but 
liquid in that body assumes a densely viscid form ; 
and the air and heat organisms are correspond- 
ingly condensed. Similar processes take place in 
the two lower kingdoms.The result of the separation of the Moon-body 
from the Sun-body is that the former bears the 
same relation to the latter as the Saturn-body 
once did to the whole cosmic evolution surround- 
ing it. The Satum-sphere was formed out of 
the body of the “Lords of Will” (the Thrones). 
From its substance there streamed back into 
cosmic space everything experienced in its pe- 
riphery by the above-mentioned spiritual beings. 
And this radiation by degrees awakened inde- 
pendent life, by means of the following processes. 
All evolution is indeed due to the fact that inde- 
pendent being is first separated from the life 
svuTotmding it; that next the environment is 
impressed, as by reflection, upon the being sep- 
arated off, and that then this detached being 
independently evolves further. Thus was the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 173

Moon-body detached from the Sun-body, at 
first reflecting the life of the latter. If nothing 
further had then happened, the following cosmic 
process would have taken place. There would 
have been a Sun-body in which spiritual beings 
adapted to that body would have lived through 
their experiences in the elements of heat and air.Set over against this Sun -body would have 
been a Moon-body, in which other beings of like 
nature with the Sun-beings would have under- 
gone their experiences in the conditions of heat, 
air, and water. The progress from the Sun- 
evolution to that of the Moon would have con- 
sisted in the Sun-beings having their own life, 
after the events on the Moon, reflected before 
them as in a mirror, and in their being able to 
enjoy it, which was impossible to them during 
the Sun incarnation. But evolution did not 
remain at this stage. Something happened of 
the deepest significance for all evolution to come. 
Certain beings who were adapted to the Moon- 
body, take possession of the element of will 
(the heritage of the Thrones) which was at their 
disposal, and by its means develop a life of their 
own, which takes shape independently of the 
Sun-life. Alongside of those Moon experiences 
which are entirely under the influence of the 
Sun, there arises independent Moon experiences, — 
as it were, states of rebellion or mutiny against 
the Sun-beings. And the various kingdoms which

174 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

had arisen on the Sun and Moon, first and fore- 
most the kingdom of man’s ancestors, are drawn 
into these conditions. In this way the Moon- 
body contains within it, spiritually and mate- 
rially, two kinds of life : one that is in inner union 
with the Sun-life, and another which has “fallen 
away” from it and goes its own way independ- 
ently. This divi,sion into a twofold life appears 
in all subsequent events of the Moon incarnation.What presents itself to clairvoyant conscious- 
ness in this period of evolution may be realized 
from the following pictures, d'he whole ba.sic 
composition of the Moon is formed of a half- 
living substance, which at one time is moving 
sluggishly, at another, quickly. It is not yet a 
mineral mass in the sen.se of being made up of 
the rocks and constituents of the earth on which 
contemporary man walks about. Wc might call 
it a kingdom of plant-minerals, only we have to 
imagine that the main body of the Moon consists 
of this plant-mineral substance, as the earth 
to-day consists of rocks, earth, and other sub- 
stances. Just as now we have toweritig masses 
of rock, so there were then harder portions 
embedded in the Moon’s bulk; these may be 
compared with hard wooden structures or forma- 
tions of horn; and as plants now arise out of 
mineral soil, so was the surface of the Moon 
covered and penetrated by the second kingdom, 
consisting of a kind of plant-animals. Their

JJ VOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN ns

substance was softer than the general mass of 
the Moon, and .more mobile. This kingdom 
extended over the other, like a viscous sea.

• Man himself at that time may be called animal- 
man. He had in his nature the component parts 
of the other two kingdoms; but his being was 
thoroughly interpenetrated by an etheric and an 
asti’al body, upon which there wcjrked the forces 
of higher beings issuing from the severed Sun. 
His form was thus brought to greater perfection. 
While the Lords of Form were giving him a frame 
which adapted him for Moon life, the Sun-Spirits 
were giving him a nature which lifted him beyond 
that life. He had the x>()wer of ennobling his 
own nature with the faculties given him by 
these Spirits, — in fact, of raising what was akin 
to the lower kingdoms to a higher level.As seen spiritually, the events now under 
consideration may be described in the following 
way. Man’s ancestor had been brought to greater 
perfection by beings who had fallen away from 
the Sun kingdom. This improvement extended 
e.specially to everything that could be experi- 
enced in the clement of water. Ov'^er that element 
the Sun-beings, who were rulers in the elements 
of heat and air, had less influence. The eon- 
sequenee of this was that in the organism 
of man’s ancestor two kinds of beings made 
themselves felt. One part of the organism was 
wholly interpenetrated by the influences of the

176 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Sun-beings. In the other part, the rebellious 
IVIoon-beings were operative. . Owing to this, 
the latter part was more independent than the 
former. In the former there could only arise 
states of consciousness in which the Sun-beings 
lived; in the latter there lived a kind of universal 
consciousness, as had been specially the case on 
Saturn, only now it was on a higher plane.Man’s ancestor consequently seemed to him- 
self an “image of the universe,’’ whereas his 
“Sun-part’’ felt itself only an “image of the 
Sun.’’ The two beings now came to a kind of 
conflict in man’s nature. A settlement of this 
conflict was brought about by the influence of 
the Sun-being, through which the material 
organism which made the independent universal 
consciousness possible, was rendered frail and 
perishable. From time to time this part of the 
organism had to be separated off. During and 
some time after the separation, man’s ancestor 
was a being wholly dependent on the Sun in- 
fluence. His consciousness became less independ- 
ent; he lived within it, entirely surrendered to 
Sun-life. Then the independent Moon portion 
was once more renewed. After some time this 
process was always repeated. Thus man's an- 
cestor lived on the Moon in alternating con- 
ditions of clearer and duller consciousness: and 
the alternation was accompanied by a change of 
his being in a material respect. From time to

SVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 177

time he laid aside his Moon-body and restxmed 
it later. Seen physically, great variety appears 
in the kingdoms of the Moon that have been 
rhentioned.

The mineral-plants, plant-animals, and animal- 
men are differentiated into groups. This will 
be understood when it is borne in mind that in 
consequence of organisms being left behind at 
each of the earlier tffages of evolution, forms 
possessing most varied qualities were incor- 
porated. There are organisms still showing the 
elementary Saturnian qualities, others of the 
middle period of that world, others of its end. 
A similar statement is true of all the stages of 
the Sun evolution.As organisms related to the evolving planet are 
left behind, this is also the case with certain beings 
connected with that evolution. Through the 
gradual progress of development up to the Moon 
period, many grades of such beings have already 
arisen. There are the Sons of Personality who 
never attained their human stage on the Sun; 
but there are also present some who have made 
up on the Moon for lost time and become human. 
A number of the Sons of Fire, who should have 
attained humanity on the Sun, have also been 
left behind. Now, just as during the Sun evolu- 
tion certain of the Sons of Personality withdrew 
from the Sun and caused the reappearance of 
Saturn as a separate body, so it also happens that

1 78 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

in the course of the Moon evolution the beings 
described above separate and form individual 
celestial bodies. So far we have mentioned only 
the separation into Sun and Moon; but other 
world-organisms detached themselves, for the 
reasons already given, from the Moon body which 
made its appearance after the great interval 
between the Sun and Moon.

After a certain time we have to consider a sys- 
tem of heavenly bodies of which the farthest 
progressed, as can easily be seen, must be called 
the new Sun. And just such a bond of attraction 
as was described above as existing between the 
backward Saturn kingdom and the Sons of Per- 
.sonality on the new Saturn, is formed between 
each of these bodies and the corresponding Moon- 
beings. It would take us much too far to follow 
up in detail all the celestial bodies that come 
into existence. It must suffice to have pointed 
out the reason why a succession of them arises 
by degrees from the undivided world-organism 
which appears as Saturn at the beginning of 
human evolution.After the intervention on the Moon of the 
Lords of Form, evolution proceeds for a while 
in the manner described. At the end of this time 
there is again a pause. While it lasts, the coarser 
portions of the three Moon kingdoms are in a sort 
of resting state, but the finer parts, in particular 
the human astral body, extricate themvsclves

F^VOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 179

from those coarser organisms. They reach a 
condition in which the higher forces of exalted 
Sun-beings aft-e able to act upon them very 
strongty. After the interval of rest they again 
interpenetrate those parts of man’s being which 
are composed of the coarser substances. Because 
they received such mighty forces during the pause 
— in a free state — they are able to make those 
coarser substances ripe for the influence to be 
exercised upon them after a certain time by the 
Sons of Personality and the Sons of Fire, who 
have progressed normally.

In the meantime these Sons of Personality 
have raised themselves to a level on which they 
have the “consciousness of inspiration.” Here 
they are not only able — ns was the case with 
clairvoyant picture-consciousness — to observe in 
images the inner state of other beings but to 
apprehend the inner nature itself of those beings, 
as though in a spiritual language of sound. But 
the Sons of Fire have risen to that height of 
consciousness possessed on the Sun by the Sons 
of Personality. Both kinds of Spirits can by 
this means interpose in the maturing life of human 
nature. The Sons of Personality act on the astral 
body, the Sons of Fire on the etheric body, of 
man’s being. The iistral body thereby acquires 
the character of personality. It now not only 
experiences pleasure and pain, but refers them to 
itself. It has tiot yet arrived at a complete

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i8iEVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i8i

The animal-plants appear only as condensed 
regular forms of this element, often differing 
little physica^y from their environment. The 
respiratory And nutritive processes are both aetive. 
It is like an absorption and emanation of heat. 
To clairvoyant observation it is as if, during 
those processes, organs opened and closed, through 
which a warming current passed in and out, and 
through which airy and watery substances were 
also carried in and out And since man’s nature 
at this stage of evolution already possesses an 
astral body, respiration and nutrition are accom- 
panied by feelings, so that a sort of pleasure 
ensues when materials which promote the upbuild- 
ing of man’s nature are taken in from without. 
Aversion is caused if injurious substances flow 
in, or even if they merely approach.

Just as during the Moon evolution the respir- 
atory and the nutritive processes were closely 
connected, as has been described, so was the 
imaginative process in close eonnection with re- 
production. No immediate effect was produced 
on any of the senses by the things and beings in 
the environment of Moon-humanity. The eon- 
ception was, on the contrary, of such a kind that 
the presence of things and beings called up pic- 
tures in the dull, dreamy consciousness. These 
pictures ’were much more closely connected with 
the real nature of the environment than the 
.present sense-perceptions, which show in colours.

i8o AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE .

ego-corisciousness, that says to itself, “I am 
here”; but it feels itself upheld and protected by 
other beings in its environment. When looking, 
as it were, up to these, it is able to say, “This, 
my environment, keeps me alive.”The Sons of Fire now work upon the etheric 
body. Under their influence the movement of 
forces in that body becomes more and more one 
of an inner vital energ5^ What then results finds 
physical expression in a circulation of fluids and 
in phenomena of growth. The gaseous substances 
have become condensed into liquid substances; 
we may speak of a kind of nutritive process, in 
the sense that what is reeeived from without 
becomes transformed and elaborated within. Per- 
haps if we think of something intermediate 
between mttrition and respiration in the present 
meaning of the terms, we may get an idea of what 
then happened in this direetion. The nutritive 
matter was drawn from the animal-plant king- 
dom by the human being. We must think of 
those animal-plants as floating or swimming — 
or even almost fixed — in an element surrounding 
them, as fish of the present time live in water, 
or land animals in air. Yet the element is neither 
water nor air in the present sense, but something 
midway between the two, a kind of thick vapour 
in which the most heterogeneous substances 
move hither and thither, as though dissolved, in 
currents flowing in all directions.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i8iEVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN i8i

The animal-plants appear only as condensed 
regular forms of this element, often differing 
little physically from their environment. The 
respiratory dnd nutritive processes are both active. 
It is like an absorption and emanation of heat. 
To clairvoyant observation it is as if, during 
those processes, organs opened and closed, through 
which a warming current passed in and out, and 
through which airy and watery substances were 
also carried in and out.. And since man's nature 
at this stage of evolution already possesses an 
astral body, respiration and nutrition are accom- 
panied by feelings, so that a sort of pleasure 
ensues when materials which promote the upbuild- 
ing of man’s nature are taken in from without. 
Aversion is caused if injurious substances flow 
in, or even if they merely approach.

Just as during the Moon evolution the respir- 
atory and the nutritive processes were closely 
connected, as has been described, so was the 
imaginative process in close connection with re- 
production. No immediate effect was produced 
on any of the senses by the things and beings in 
the environment of Moon-humanity. The con- 
ception was, on the contrary, of such a kind that 
the presence of things and beings called up pic- 
tures in the dull, dreamy consciousness. These 
pictures ■ were much more closely connected with 
the real nature of the environment than the 
.present sense-perceptions, which show in colours.

r 82 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

sounds, scents, and so on, only the outward side 
of beings.r 82 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

sounds, scents, and so on, only the outward side 
of beings.

In order to get a clearer idea yf the human 
consciousness on the Moon, let us imagine hiiman 
beings immersed in the vaporous environment 
described above. The most varied processes are 
enacted in this vapoxir-element. Materials unite, 
substances break asunder one from the other; 
some parts become condcn.scd, others attenuated. 
All this comes to pass in such a way that human 
beings do not sec or hear anything of it directly, 
but it calls up images in their consciou.sness. 
These may be compared with the images of our 
present dream-consciousness. It is somewhat the 
same as when an object falls to the ground, and a 
sleeping man does not discern what has really 
happened but perceives some image of it: for 
instance, he thinks that a shot has been fired. 
But the pictures in the Moon-consciousness are 
not arbitrary, as is the case with such dream- 
pictures; it is time they arc symbols, not repre- 
sentations, but they correspond with outer events. 
A definite outer event can call up only a quite 
definite image. The Moon-being is therefore in 
a position to regulate his conduct by means of 
these images, as contemporary man does by means 
of his perceptions. We must nevertheless be 
careful to notice that conduct regulated by per- 
ception is governed by choice, whereas action 
under the influence of the images we have

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 183

*

described seems to result from a dim instinct.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 183

*

described seems to result from a dim instinct.

It is by no means as if only outer physical proc- 
esses became, perceptible through this picture - 
consciousness, but through the images there are 
also represented the spiritual beings who rule 
behind the physical facts, and the activities of 
those beings. Thus the Lords of Personality 
become visible, so to s^jeak, in what concerns the 
animal-plant kingdom; the Sons of Fire appear 
behind and in the mineral-plant beings; and the 
Sons of Life apj^ear as beings whom man is able 
to imagine unconnected with anything physical, 
— whom he secs, as it were, as etheric -psychic 
organisms.

Thotigh these itnages of the Moon-consciousness 
were not representations, but only symbols of 
outer things, they nevertheless had a much more 
important effect on the inner nature of man than 
the images now catised by perception. They 
were able to set the whole inner being in motion 
and activity. The inner events were shaped 
in conformity with them. They were genuine 
formative forces. Man’s being became what 
those formative forces made it; it became, to a 
certain extent, a representation of the events of 
its consciousness.

The further evolution progresses in this manner, 
the more does it result in the coming to pass of a 
deeply incisive change in man’s being. The power 
issuing from the images in the consciousness

1 84 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE1 84 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

gradually becomes unable to extend over the 
whole hiunan bodily frame, which thereupon 
divides into two parts, or two naj;ures. Mem- 
bers are formed subject to the shaping influence 
of the picture-consciousness, and they become to 
a great extent a copy of that life of imagination 
in the way just described. But other organs 
escape such an influence. They are, as it were, 
too dense, too much determined by other laws, to 
regulate themselves by the images of conscious- 
ness. These withdraw from the human influence ; 
but they come under another, that of the exalted 
Sun-beings themselves. A period of rest, how- 
ever, is first seen to precede this stage of evolution. 
Dixring this pause the Sun-Spirits are gathering 
force to influence the Moon-beings under quite 
new circumstances.

After this term of rest, man’s being is dis- 
tinctly divided into two natures. One of these 
is withdrawn from the self-dependent action of 
the picture-consciousness; it assumes a more defi- 
nite form, and comes under the influence of forces 
which, though issuing from the Moon body, only 
come into existence there through the influence 
of the Sun-beings. This part of human nature 
shares more and more the life which is stimulated 
by the Sun: the other part rises like a kind of 
head out of the first one. It is flexible, can move 
itself, and takes shape in conformity with the 
life of dull human consciousness. Yet the two

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 185

parts are closely connected with each other; 
they send one another their juices, and members 
extend from qjie of them into the other.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 185

parts are closely connected with each other; 
they send one another their juices, and members 
extend from qjie of them into the other.

significant harmony is now attained by the 
working out, in the course of the time during which 
all this has happened, of such a connection between 
the Sitn and Moon as is in keeping with the 
tendency of this evolution. It has already been 
intimated in a former passage that the beings who 
are progressing detach their celestial bodies from 
the general cosmic mass by the stages of evolution 
through which they pass. They pour out, as it 
were, forces in conformity with which materials 
are organized. The Sun and Moon have thus 
parted from each other, as was necessary for the 
preparation of the right abodes for the beings 
appropriate to them. But this determination of 
material and its forces by the Spirit is carried 
very much farther. The beings themselves con- 
dition as well certain movements of the heavenly 
bodies, and definite revolutions of them around 
each other. In consequence, those bodies come 
to occupy variable positions with regard to each 
other. And if the position or situation of one 
body with regard to another is altered, the effects 
of their respective inhabitants on each other also 
change. It has thus happened with the Sun and 
Moon. By the motion of the Moon around the 
Sun, which has arisen, hiiman beings come, peri- 
odically, at one time more into the sphere of the

1 86 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE1 86 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Sun’s influence; at another time they may turn 
away from the Sun, and are then thrown more 
on their own resources. The mpvement is a 
consequence of the “fall” of certain Moop- 
beings, as described above; and of the settlement 
of the conflict which was thereby brought about. 
It is the physical expression of the new relation 
of spiritual forces created by this falling away. 
The consequence of the rotation of the one sphere 
round the other is that the beings inhabiting 
these heavenly bodies experience the alternating 
conditions of consciousness above described. We 
may put it thus, that the Moon alternatety turns 
its life toward the Sun and away from it. There 
is a Sun period and a planetary period, in the 
latter of which the Moon-beings evolve on a 
side of the Moon which is turned away from the 
Sun. Of course there is other movement going on 
in the Moon in addition to planetary movements. 
That is to say, clairvoyant consciousness, on 
looking back, can plainly see the Moon-beings 
wandering around their own planet, at quite 
regular periods of time. Thus at certain times 
they seek localities where they can give them- 
• selves up to the Sun influence ; at other peri- 
ods they wander to places where they are not 
subject to that influence, and where they can, as 
it were, reflect upon themselves.

In order to complete the picture that* is to be 
drawn of these events, we must further notice

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 187In order to complete the picture that* is to be 
drawn of these events, we must further notice

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 187

that the Sons of Life attain their human stage 
during this period. Man’s senses, the beginnings 
of which already existed on Saturn, cannot even 
y,et, on the Moon, be used for his own perception 
of external objects. But at the Moon stage those 
senses become the instruments of the Sons of 
Life, who make use of them in order to perceive 
through them. Those senses, belonging to the 
physical human body, thereby enter into recip- 
rocal relations with the Sons of Life, by whom 
they are not only used but improved.

Now there sets in a change of circtimstances, 
in consequence of the changing relations of the 
Sun to human nature. Things so shape them- 
selves that when man’s being is subject to the 
Sun influence it is more given up to the world in 
general ^ and its phenomena than to itself. At 
such times it feels the greatness and glory of the 
universe; it, so to speak, absorbs them. Then 
the exalted beings who dwell on the Sun are 
influencing the Moon, which again influences 
human beings. This influence, however, does 
not extend to the whole of man, but chiefly to 
those parts which have thrown off the influence 
of their own picture-consciousness. The physical 
and etheric bodies especially reach at this time a 
certain largeness and shape. On the other hand, 
the phenomena of consciousness retire into the 
backgrefund. But when human life is turned 
away from the Sun it_is occupied with its own

i88 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

nature; an inner activity begins, especially in 
the astral body. The outer form, on the con- 
trary, becomes more insignificant, a^d less perfect 
in form.i88 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

nature; an inner activity begins, especially in 
the astral body. The outer form, on the con- 
trary, becomes more insignificant, a^d less perfect 
in form.

Thus during the Moon evolution there are two 
states of consciousness to be clearly distinguished, 
and alternating with each other: duller during 
the Sun period and clearer during the time when 
life is left more to its own resources. The first 
state is certainly duller, but on the other hand 
it is more unselfish; man then lives a life more 
devoted to the outer world, to the universe. It 
is an alternation of states of consciousness, which 
on the one hand may be compared with the 
alternation of sleeping and waking in contem- 
porary man, as well as with his life between birth 
and death ; on the other hand, it may be compared 
with the more spiritual existence between death 
and a new birth. The awakening on the Moon, 
when the Sun period gradually ceases, might 
be described as intermediate between the awaken- 
ing of contemporary man each morning, and his 
being born. And in the same way the gradual 
dulling of consciousness at the approach of the 
Sun period resembles a middle condition between 
falling asleep and dying. For on the old Moon 
there was not yet such a consciousness of birth 
and death as man now possesses. Man gave 
himself up to the enjoyment of the universe in a 
kind of Sun life. During this period he was

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 189

carried beyond his own life; he lived more spirit- 
ually. We can attempt only an approximate 
description, one by way of comparison, of what 
rrjan experienced during such times. He felt as 
though the forces of the universe were streaming 
into him, and coursing through him. He was 
as though intoxicated with the harmonies of the 
cosmos, with which he coexisted.At such times his astral body was as if set free 
from the physical body; also part of the etheric 
body went with it out of the physical body. 
This organism, consisting of the a.stral and 
etheric bodies, was like a delicate, wonderful 
musical instrument, from the strings of which 
resounded the mysteries of the universe. And the 
members of that part of human nature on which 
conscioijsness had but a slight influence were 
shaped in accordance with the harmonies of 
the universe. For the Sun-beings worked in 
those harmonies. Thus was this part of man 
given its form by the spiritual sounds of the 
universe; and at the same time the alternation 
between the clearer state of consciousness during 
the Sun period, and the duller one, was not so 
abrupt as that between the waking state and 
that of absolutely dreamless sleep in contemporary 
man. It is true the picture-consciousness was not 
so clear’ as the present waking consciousness; but 
on the other hand, the other consciousness was not 
so dull as the dreamless sleep of the present day.

ipo AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

•

There was thus a kind of dim echo of the 
“music of the spheres” in the physical body of 
man, and in that part of his etherip body which 
was still united with the physical body. At tlje 
time when, so to speak, the Sun did not shine 
on humanity, the picture-conceptions replaced 
these harmonies in consciousness. There was 
then a revival of those members of the physical 
and etheric bodies which were in the immediate 
power of the consciousness. On the other hand, 
the other parts of hiunan nature, on which the 
transforming powers of the Sun were not working, 
went through a kind of hardening or drying 
process. When the Sun period again drew near, 
the old bodies decayed; they separated from 
man’s being, and as though from the grave of 
his old bodily fonn there went forth the hiunan 
being, newly formed inwardly, even if outwardly 
still insignificant looking.A renewal of the life-process had taken place. 
By the operation of the Sun-beings and their 
harmonies, the newborn body shaped itself again 
in its perfection, and the process described above 
was repeated. Man felt that renewal as if it 
were the putting on of new garments. The 
kernel of his being had not passed through an 
actual birth or death; it had only passed from 
a spiritual tone-consciousness, in which' it was 
given up to the outer world, to a pictiire-con- 
sciousness, in which it was more turned in on

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 191

itself, on its inner being. It had cast its skin. 
The old body had become useless; it was thrown 
off and renew,ed. At the same time we get a 
more exact indication of what has been charac- 
terized above as a kind of reproduction, and of 
which it was remarked that it is closely con- 
nected with perception. Man’s being has brought 
forth its like with respect to certain parts of 
the physical and etheric bodies. There does not, 
however, come into existence a being entirely 
different from its parent, but the kernel of the 
parent-being passes to the child. No new being 
arises, but the same one in a new form.

Thus the Moon human being experiences a 
change of consciousness. When the Sun period 
draws near, his pictured images become dimmer 
and dimmer, and blissful ecstasy takes pos- 
session of him; the harmonies of the universe 
resound in his inner being, which is at peace. 
Toward the end of this time the images in the 
astral body begin to be animated; it begins to 
be more conscious of, and to feel, itself. Man 
experiences something like an awakening from 
the bliss and tranquillity in which he was wrapped 
during the Sun period.

But at the same time another important 
experience begins. In the new illumination of 
the pictures of consciousness, man sees himself 
as though enveloped in a cloud, which has de- 
scended on him out of the universe as though

192 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE192 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

it were a being. And he feels as if that being 
belonged to him, as if it were complementary 
to his own nature; he feels as if it were what 
gives him. his existence, as if it were his ego. 
That being is one of the Sons of Life. Man 
feels toward him somewhat like this: “I have 
lived in this being, even when I was given up 
to the gloiy’’ of the universe in the Sun period, — 
only then he was not visible to me; now he is.” 
And it is from the strength of that Son of Life 
that the influence proceeds which man exercises 
on his own bodily form during the sunless period. 
Then when the Sun period again approaches, 
man feels as if he himself became one with the 
Son of Life. Even if man does not see him, he 
nevertheless feels closely united with him.

Now the connection w'ith the Sons of Life 
was such that not every individual human being 
had a Son of Life to himself, but an entire group 
of people felt such a being belonging to them. 
People on the Moon lived thus, divided into 
groups, and each group felt in a Son of Life the 
“group-ego” they had in common. The etheric 
bodies in each group took a special form, and 
in this way the difference between the groups 
made itself felt. But as the physical bodies 
shaped themselves in conformity with the etheric 
bodies, the differences of the latter Were also 
stamped upon the former; and the individual 
human groups appeared as so. many varieties

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 193EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 193

of people. If the Sons of Life looked down on 
the human groups belonging to them, they saw 
themselves to"* a certain extent reproduced in 
the individual human beings. And in this way 
they felt their own individuality. They were, 
so to speak, reflected in those people. And in 
this way they felt the possession of their own ego. 
They reflected themselves, as it were, in the human 
beings. This was indeed the mission of the hiunan 
senses at that time. It has already been shown 
that the senses did not as yet effect any per- 
ception of objects. But they reflected the nature 
of the Sons of Life. What those Sons of Life per- 
ceived through the reflection, gave them their 
"ego-consciousness.” What was aroused in the 
htunan astral body by the reflection were the dull, 
dim pictures of the Moon-consciousness. The 
effect of that action carried out conjointly with 
the Sons of Life brought about the conditions 
for the nervous system in the physical body. The 
nerves appear, one might say, as continuations 
of the senses, in conformity with the inner nature 
of the hirman body.

It is evident, from this description, in what 
manner the three kinds of Spirits, of Person- 
ality, of Fire, and those of Life, act upon Moon- 
hiimanity. If we watch the chief or middle 
period of the Moon evolution, we may say that 
the Sons of Personality are at that time implant- 
ing in the hviman astral body self-dependence

194 an outline of occult science

and the character of personality. Tt is owing 
to this fact that during those times when the 
sun is not shining on man his attention can be 
turned inwards, and he is able to work at the 
shaping of his own form.The Sons of Fire are occupied with the etheric 
body, as far as the latter becomes imprinted 
with the independent formation of man’s being. 
Through their means it comes to pass that htiman 
beings are again conscious of themselves, as 
such, every time the body is renewed. Thus a 
kind of memory is bestowed on the etheric body 
through the Sons of Fire.

The Sons of Life act on the physical body in 
such a way that it is able to become the expression 
of the astral body which has now become inde- 
pendent. They thus make it possible for the 
physical body to become a physiognomic copy 
of its astral body. On the other hand, higher 
spiritual beings, in particular the Lords of Form 
and of Motion, interpose in the physical and 
etheric bodies, as far as these are being developed, 
during the Sun periods, apart from the inde- 
pendent astral body. Their intervention comes 
from the Sun, in the manner described above.

Under the influence of such facts, man’s being 
grows toward maturity, so as gradually to develop 
in itself the germ of the Spirit-Self, just as during 
the second half of the Saturn evolution it devel- 
oped the germ of the Spirit-Man, and, on the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 195

Sun, that of the Life-Spirit. Thereby all the 
Moon conditions are changed. Human beings have 
not only become more and more noble and refined 
through successive transformations and renewals, 
but they have also gained in power. For this 
reason the picture-consciousness was more and 
more maintained during the Sun periods. It 
also gained influence in the formation of the 
physical and etheric bodies, which hitherto had 
been formed entirely by the action of the Sun- 
beings.What took place on the Moon by means of 
human beings and the Spirits connected with 
them became more and more like that which 
had formerly been effected by the Sun with its 
higher beings, ^'he consequence was that those 
Sun-beings were able to withdraw more and more, 
and to concentrate their forces to advantage on 
their own evolution. By this means the Moon 
became, after a time, mature enough to be again 
united with the Sun. To spiritual vision, these 
occun-ences take place as follows: The rebellious 
Moon-beings are gradually overcome by the Sun- 
Spirits, and compelled thenceforward to submit 
to them so far that their actions work in with 
those of the Sun-Spirits, to whom they are sub- 
ordinate. It is true that this happened only 
after the lapse of long ages, during which the 
Moon periods had become shorter and shorter, 
and the Sun periods longer and longer. Now

196 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^

there again comes an evolution during which 
the Sun and Moon form one world-organism. 
By this time the physical human body has become 
quite etheric. >

When it is said that the physical body has 
become etheric, it must not be imagined that 
under such circumstances there is no physical 
body existing. What was formed as a physical 
body during the Saturn, Sun, and Moon periods, 
stiU exists. In this matter it is important to 
recognize the physical element where it is exter- 
nally and physically manifested. It may also 
be present where it shows outwardly an etheric 
or even an astral form. We must distinguish 
between the outward appearance and the inner 
law. What is physical may become etheric and 
astral, and at the same time retain in itself the 
physical law. Things happen thus when the 
physical body of man has attained a certain 
degree of perfection on the Moon. It becomes 
etheric in form.But when clairvoyant observation, which can 
perceive such things, is directed toward an 
etheric body of this kind, that body is seen to 
be pervaded by physical, not etheric, laws. The 
physical element has in this case been taken into 
the etheric world, there to rest and to be nursed 
as though in a mother’s tender care. Later it 
again emerges in a physical form, but at a higher 
stage. If Moon-humanity had kept its physical

EyOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 197

body in thfe coarse physical form, the Moon 
would never have been able to unite itself with 
the Sun. By accepting the etheric form, the 
physical body becomes more closely related to 
the etheric body, and by this means can again 
be more closely interpenetrated with those parts 
of the etheric and astral bodies which had perforce 
to withdraw from it during the Sun periods of 
the Moon evolution. Man, who appeared as 
a being with two natures during the separation 
of Sun and Moon, again becomes an undivided 
being. The physical part becomes more psychic; 
on the other hand, what is psychic becomes 
more closely connected with what is physical.

Now the Sun-Spirits, into whose immediate 
sphere this uniform, undivided human being 
has come, are able to act upon it in quite a dif- 
ferent manner from their previous influence from 
without on the Moon. Man is now in a more 
psychic-spiritual environment. Owing to this, 
the Lords of Wisdom are able to effect something 
momentous. They imbue and inspire him with 
wisdom. He thereby becomes in a certain sense 
an independent soul. And to the influence of 
these beings is added that of the Lords of Motion. 
They act principally on the astral body, so that 
under their influence it produces psychic activity, 
and an etheric body filled with wisdom. The 
latter is the foundation of what has been de- 
scribed above as the rational or intellectual soul

198 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE198 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

in contemporary man, whereas the astral body 
inspired by the Lords of Motion is the germ of 
the sentient soul. And because all "this is effected 
in man’s being in his progressed condition ^of 
independence, these genns of the rational and 
sentient soul appear as the expression of the 
Spirit-Self. In this connection the mistake must 
not be made of thinking that at this period of 
evolution the Spirit-Self was something separate 
from the intellectual and sentient souls. The 
latter are only the expression of the Spirit-Self, 
which signifies their higher unity and harmony.

It is especially significant that the Lords of 
Wisdom intervene at this period in the manner 
described. For they do this not only with 
regard to humanity but also for the benefit of 
the other kingdoms which have been elaborated 
on the Moon. On the reunion of Sun and IMoon 
these lower kingdoms are drawn into the Sun 
sphere. Everything in them which was physical 
becomes etheric. There arc, therefore, mineral- 
plants and plant-animals now in the Sun, just 
as there is humanity there. But those other 
creatures are still endowed with their own laws 
of being. They therefore feel like strangers in 
their environment. They come upon the scene 
with a nature but little in harmony with their 
surroundings. But as they have become etheric, 
the influence of the Lords of Wisdom may also 
extend to them. Everything which has come

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 199

from the Moon into the Sun now becomes per- 
vaded with the forces of the Lords of Wisdom. 
Hence what is developed out of the Sun-Moon 
origanism during this period of evolution may 
be called in occult science the “Cosmos of 
Wisdom.”When, therefore, our earth system appears, 
after an interval of rest, as the suceessor of this 
Cosmos of Wisdom, all the beings newly alive 
on the earth, developing out of their Moon- 
germs, prove to be filled with wisdom. Then 
the reason comes to light why a mortal, when 
reflecting upon the things he sees around him, 
is able to discover wisdom in their very nature. 
The wisdom in each leaf of a plant, in every 
bone in animals and men, in the marvellous 
structure of the brain and heart, fills us with 
admiration. If man requires wisdom to under- 
stand things, and therefore gathers wisdom from 
them, this shows that there is wisdom in the 
things themselves. For however much pains 
man took to understand things by means of 
wise conceptions, he could not draw any wis- 
dom from them unless it had first been put into 
them. If any one tries by means of wisdom 
to understand things which he does not think 
have had any wisdom bestowed on them, he 
may as 'reasonably believe that he can empty 
water out of a glass into which it has not first 
been poured. As will be shown later in this

200 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

book, the earth is the “old Moon” risen again. 
And it appears as an organism full of wisdom, 
because it was pervaded by the Lords of Wisdom 
and their forces during the epoch that has been 
described.It will be easily understood that this descrip- 
tion of the Moon conditions could take account 
only of certain temporary'’ forms of evolution. 
It was necessary to pause at certain things in 
the progress of events, and single them out for 
delineation. It is true that this kind of de- 
scription gives only isolated pictures, and it 
may, for this reason, be regretted that in the 
foregoing account the evolutionary scheme was 
not brought down to a system of precise and 
definite conceptions. But in the face of such 
an objection it may be well to point out that 
the description was intentionally given in less 
clearly defined outlines. For it is not here of 
so much consequence to give speculative ideas 
and to construct theories, as to represent what 
really passes before the spiritual eyes of clair- 
voyant consciousness, when looking back upon 
these events. With regard to the Moon evolution 
this cannot be done in such clear and defined 
outlines as are visible to earthly perceptions. 
In the Moon period we are mainly concerned 
with variable, changing impressions, with shift- 
ing, moving pictures and their transitory stages. 
We have, moreover, to bear in mind that we

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 201

#«

are contemplating an evolution continuing through 
long, long periods of time, and that out of all 
it offers it is possible to seize upon only momen- 
tary pictures and fix them for delineation.#«

are contemplating an evolution continuing through 
long, long periods of time, and that out of all 
it offers it is possible to seize upon only momen- 
tary pictures and fix them for delineation.

The Moon period actually reached its highest 
point at the time when the astral body, implanted 
in man, has brought him so far along the evolu- 
tionary path that his physical body affords the 
Sons of Life the possibility of attaining their 
human stage. Man has then attained all that 
this epoch can give him for himself, that is to 
say, of benefit to his inner nature on the upward 
path. The following, or second, half of the 
Moon evolution may therefore be termed the 
“ebb tide,” or wane. But even dming this ebb 
we see a most important thing taking place in 
this epoch with regard to man’s environment, 
and even as regards himself. It is now that 
wisdom is implanted in the Sun-Moon body. 
It has been shown that during the ebb tide 
the germs of the intelleetual and sentient souls are 
implanted. But the development of these, also 
of the self-conscious soul, and with it the birth 
of the ego — the free self-consciousness — will not 
ensue until the earth period.

At the Moon stage the rational and sentient 
souls have as yet nothing of an appearance that 
would indicate their being used by human beings 
as a means of expression; rather do they appear 
to be instruments of those Sons of Life who

202

AN OUTLINE OF OCCUL'I' SCIENCE^202

AN OUTLINE OF OCCUL'I' SCIENCE^

belong to humanity. Were we (.o describe the 
feeling of the human dweller on the Moon in 
this respect, we should have to sa/ that he feels 
this: “The Son of Life lives in and through mu; 
he surveys through me the environment of the 
Moon; in me he ponders over the things and 
beings of that environment.” 'Phe Moon human 
being feels himself overshadowed by the Son 
of Life, and looks upon himself as the instrument 
of that higher being. During the time of the 
separation of Sitn and Moon he felt a greater 
measui'e of independence when the Sun was 
turned away from him; but at the same time 
he also felt as if the ego belonging to him, which 
had disappeared from the picture-consciousness 
during the Sun period, now became visible. 
It was, for Moon-himifinity, what may- be de- 
scribed as a change in the states of consciousness, 
so that the Moon-being had this feeling: “In 
the Sun period my ego wafts me away into higher 
regions, into the presence of exalted beings, and 
when the Suii disappears it descends with me 
into lower worlds.”

The actual Moon evolution was preceded by a 
preparatory stage. In a certain way the Saturn 
and Sun evolutions were recapitulated. Now, 
after the reunion of Sun and Moon, and also 
during what we have termed the ebb tide, two 
epochs may be distinguished one from the other. 
In the course of these, even physical condensation

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 203EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 203

occurs up to a certain point. Therefore spiritual- 
psychic conditions of the Sun-Moon organ- 
ism alternate, with those of a more physical 
njiture. In such physical epochs h\mian beings 
and those of the lower kingdoms appear as if 
they w’ere preparing in stiff, and not yet self- 
reliant, forms the type of what they were to 
become in a more independent fashion during 
the earth period. We may therefore speak of 
two preparatory epochs in the Moon evolution, 
and of two others dunng the ebb tide, or waning. 
In occult science such epochs may be termed 
cycles.* In that period which follows the two 
preparatory epochs, and precedes those of the 
wane, or ebb tide — that is to say, during the 
time of the separation of the Moon — three 
epochs can again be distingiiivshed. I'he middle 
period is the time when the Sons of Life reached 
the human level. It is preceded by a period in 
which all conditions lead up to that crowning 
event; and it is followed by one which may be 
called a time of adaptation and of perfecting 
the new creations.

In this way the middle period of the Moon 
evolution is again divided into three epochs, 
which, with the two preparatory periods and the 
two when the tide is ebbing, make up seven 
Moon Cycles, or rounds. It may therefore be

iln current theosophical literature they are called ‘'rounds.” Yet. 
if we bear in mind the more graphic tlescriptian already given, we 
.shall guard against a too formal representation of such matters.

204 an outline of occult science204 an outline of occult science

said that the whole Moon evolution passes 
through seven cycles, or rounds. Between them 
are intervals of rest, which have been repeatedly 
mentioned in the above description. Yet Aye 
approach the matter in its reality only by 
forbidding ourselves to think of any sudden 
transitions from periods of activity to those of 
rest. For instance, the Sun-beings little by 
little withdraw their activity from the Moon. A 
time begins for them which, viewed from without, 
appears to be their resting period, whereas in- 
tense, independent activity still continues on 
the Moon itself. Thus the active period of 
one kind of being repeatedly extends into the 
resting time of another. If we take account of 
such things we may speak of a rhythmic ascent 
and descent of forces in cycles. Indeed, similar 
divisions are to be recognized even within the 
seven Moon cycles mentioned. We may then 
call the whole Moon evolution one great cycle, 
or planetary chain (Planetenlauf) ; and the 
seven divisions or rounds within it, “small” 
cycles; and again, the separate parts of these, 
“smaller” cycles. This systematic arrangement 
into seven times seven divisions is also noticeable 
in the Sun evolution and indicated during the 
Saturn period. Yet we must bear in mind that 
the boundaries between the divisions are some- 
what obliterated even in the Sun, and still more 
so in Saturn. These boundaries become more

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 205

and more defined the nearer evolution advances 
to the earth period.

. * *

• *EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 205

and more defined the nearer evolution advances 
to the earth period.

. * *

• *

,At the close of the Moon evolution, which has 
been sketched in the foregoing pages, all the 
beings and forces connected with it enter upon 
a more spiritual form of existence. This is on 
quite a different level from that of the Moon 
period, and also from that of the earth evolution 
which follows. A b^ing possessed of faculties 
so highly developed as to enable him to perceive 
all the details of the Moon and earth evolutions 
need not necessarily be able to see what happens 
during the interval between the two periods. 
For one possessing such vision, beings and forces 
would, at the end of the Moon period, disappear, 
as it were, into nothingness; and after an interval 
they would issue forth again from the dusky 
twilight of the “womb of worlds.” Only a being 
endowed with considerably higher faculties would 
be capable of following up the spiritual events 
which take place during the interval.

When this interval is over, the beings who 
took part in the evolutionary processes on Saturn, 
Sun, and Moon reappear endowed with new 
faculties. The beings of a higher order than 
man have, by their former achievements, won 
the power of bringing forward man’s evolution 
to a point at which he would be able to unfold 
in himself, during the earth^period, a form of

200

AX OrTLlXH OF (HVL'LT SCIENCE

consciousness whicli stands a step higher than 
the picture-consciousness he had possessed during 
the Moon period. But man mutrf, first be pre- 
pared to receive this gift. ,consciousness whicli stands a step higher than 
the picture-consciousness he had possessed during 
the Moon period. But man mutrf, first be pre- 
pared to receive this gift. ,

During the Saturn. Sun, and Moon evolutions 
he incorporated within his being the physical, 
etheric. and astral bodies. But those principles 
were only gifted with such faculties and powers 
as qualified them to live with a picture-con- 
sciousness; the organs and fomts by means of 
which they could attain to a cognizance of a 
world of outer sense-objects, such as is requisite 
for the earth stage, were still wanting. Just 
as the new plant unfolds only what is concealed 
in the seed originating from the old plant, so 
do the three principles of man’s nature appear, 
at the beginning of the new stage of evolution, 
with such forms and organs as will enable them 
to develop only a picture-con.sciousncss. It is 
necessary first to prepare them for the unfolding 
of a higher state of con.sciousncss.

This takes place in three preliminary stages. 
Dmnng the first, the physical body is raised to 
a level at which it becomes able to undergo the 
necessary remodelling which is to serve as a 
basis for the objective consciousness. This is 
one of the preliminary stages of the actual earth 
evolution, and may be called a recapitulation 
of the Saturn period on a higher level. For 
during this period, as during the Saturn period,

* EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 207* EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 207

higher beings are working only on the physical 
body. When the latter has progressed far 
enough in its evolution, all beings must first 
pass into a higher form of existence before the 
etheric body also can go forward. The physical 
body must, as it were, be recast, in order i,o be 
able, when further developing, to receive the 
more highly constituted etheric body. After this 
interval devoted to a higher form of existence, there 
occurs a kind of recapitulation of the Sun evolu- 
tion on a higher level, for the purpose of shaping 
the etheric body. And after another interval, a 
similar thing happens for the astral body, by 
means of a recapitulation of the Moon evolution.

Let us now turn our attention to the evolu- 
tionary processes taking place after the close of 
the third recapitulation described. All beings 
and forces have passed again into a state of spirit- 
ualization. During that state they ascended into 
higher worlds. 'The lowest of the worlds, in 
which some indication of them may still be 
perceived during this term of spiritualization, is 
that in which contemporary man sojourns between 
death and a new birth. These are the regions 
of the spirit-world. Thence the beings and 
forces gradually descend again into lower worlds. 
Before the physical earth evolution begins they 
have so far descended that their lowest manifesta- 
tions are to be seen in the astral or psychic world.

Everything human existing at that period is

2o8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCEEverything human existing at that period is

2o8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

still in its astral form. In order to understand 
this condition of humanity, attention should 
be paid especially to the fact that though man 
has within him the physical, etheric, and astr.al 
bodies, yet the physical and etheric bodies are 
not "present in their own forms but in astral 
form. It is not physical form that makes the 
physical body physical, but the fact that it 
embodies physical laws, although possessing an 
astral form. It is a being in a psychic form with 
a physical law of existence. A similar thing is 
true of the etheric body.

To spiritual vision the earth at this stage of 
evolution appears at first as a heavenly body 
all soul and spirit, in which, therefore, even 
physical and living forces appear in a psychic 
form. In this world-organism everything which 
will subsequently be moulded into the creatures 
of the physical earth is contained in a germinal 
state. The globe is luminous; but its light is 
not yet such as could be seen by physical eyes, 
supposing even that they existed. The globe 
shines only in psychic light to the opened vision 
of the seer.

Something now takes place on this globe which 
may be called “condensation.” The result of 
this is that a fiery form appears after a time in 
the midst of the psychic globe, such as Saturn 
was in its densest state. This fiery form is 
interpenetrated by the action of the various

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 209EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 209

beings who are taking part in the evolution. 
The reciprocal action which is to be observed 
between those beings and the planetary body 
ijv like a springing up from and a diving into the 
earth’s fiery globe. Hence the earth’s globe 
is not by any means a homogeneous substance, 
but has somewhat the character of an ensouled 
and spiritualized organism. The beings destined 
to become human on the earth in man’s present 
form are as yet in a condition which renders 
them the least capable of sharing in this activity 
of plunging into the fiery globe. They remain 
almost entirely in the uncondensed environment. 
They are still living in the bosom of the higher 
spiritual beings. At this stage they come into 
contact with the fiery earth at only one point 
of their, psychic form, and this causes one part 
of their astral form to be densified. Thereby 
earth life is kindled in them. They therefore 
still belong to psychic-spiritual worlds with regard 
to the greater part of their nature, but by coming 
into contact with the earth’s fire, vital heat plays 
around them.

If we wish to draw a material, yet supersensible, 
picture of these human beings in the very begin- 
ning of the earth’s evolution, we must imagine 
a psychic ovoid, or egg, contained within the 
circumference of the earth, and enclosed on its 
lower surface as an acorn is by its cup. The 
substance of the cup, however, consists solely

15

210

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE15

210

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

of heat or fire. The process of being enveloped 
by heat not only causes the kindling of life in 
human nature, but a change appears simulta- 
neously in the astral body. In tfiis body there 
becomes incorporated the first rough outline 'of 
what aftenvards becomes the sentient soul. We 
may therefore say that man at this stage of his 
existence consists of the .sentient soul, the astral 
body, the etheric body, and the physical body, 
which latter is formed out of fire. In the astral 
body there surge up and down those spiritual 
beings who arc connected with human existence. 
Man feels himself bound to the earth-body by 
the sentient soul. He has therefore at this time 
a preponderating picture-consciousness, in which 
are manifested those spiritual beings in whose 
bosom he reposes; and the feeling of his own body 
seems to be merely a point within that con- 
sciousness. He looks down, so to speak, from the 
spiritual world upon an earthly possession, about 
which he feels: “That is yours.’’

Farther and farther does the condensation of 
the earth now proceed, and at the same time the 
differentiation of the various parts of man, as it 
has been described, becomes more and more 
defined. From a definite point of evolution 
onward, the earth is so far condensed that only 
part of it is fiery; another part has asstuned a 
substantial shape, which may be termed “gas” 
or “air.” A change also takes place now in man.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN

2II

He is not only brought into contact with the heat 
of the earth, but the air substance is incorporated 
into his fire-jDody. And as heat kindled life in 
him, the air playing around him creates an effect 
within him which may be called (spiritual) sound. 
His ethcric body begins to resound. Simul- 
taneously, a part of the astral body becomes 
separated from the remainder; this part is the 
beginning of the rational soul which appears 
later.In order to bring before our eyes what takes 
place in the human soul at this time, we must 
notice that the beings superior to man are surging 
up and down in the airy -fiery body of the earth. 
In the fire-heat it is at first the Sons of Personality 
who are of importance to man. And when man 
is stirred into life by the heat of the earth his 
sentient soul says to itself, “These are the Sons 
of Personality ’ ’ ; in the same way the beings called 
“Archangels” earlier in this book, in accordance 
with Christian esotericism, proclaim themselves in 
the air-body. It is their influences which man 
feels within himself as sound when the air plays 
around him. And the rational soul then says 
to itself, “ThevSe are the Archangels.” Thus what 
man at this stage perceives, through his connec- 
tion with the earth, is not as yet a collection of 
physical objects, but he lives in sensations of 
heat which rise up to him, and in sounds; in those 
heat currents and sound waves, however, he feels

an AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

the Sons of Personality and the Archangels. It 
is true that he cannot perceive those beings 
directly, but only, as it were, through a veil of 
heat and sounds. While these perceptions axe 
penetrating from the earth into his soul, there 
continue to ascend and descend within it the 
images of those higher beings in whose tender 
care he feels himself to be.Now evolution takes a further step, which is 
once more expressed in condensation. Watery 
substance is incorporated into the earth-body, so 
that the latter now consists of three parts, — igne- 
ous, aeriform, and aqueous. Before this happens, 
something of great importance takes place. An 
independent celestial body is split off from the 
fiery-aeriform earth; this new body becomes in 
its later development our present sun.\ Previ- 
ously, earth and sun had formed one body. After 
the sun has been split off, the earth still has at 
first everything within it which is in and on the 
present moon. The separation of the sim takes 
place because higher beings could not any longer 
use for their own evolution and for what they 
have to do for the earth, the material which has 
been condensed into water. They separate from 
the general mass of the earth the only substances 
useful to them, and fare forth to make a new 
abode for themselves in the Sun. Thence they

*In the next few pages, Sun and Moon are printed with capital 
letters when the old evolutions are referred to, but are left “sun** and 
“moon” when the earth period is indicated. — Translator,

EVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN 213

now work upon the earth from outside. Man, 
however, needs for his further evolution an envi- 
ronment in which matter becomes still more 
condensed.EVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN 213

now work upon the earth from outside. Man, 
however, needs for his further evolution an envi- 
ronment in which matter becomes still more 
condensed.

With the incorporation of watery substance 
into the earth-planet a change also takes place 
in man. Henceforth not only does fire stream 
into him and air play around him, but watery 
substance is incorporated into his physical body. 
At the same time his etheric part changes; that 
is, it is now felt by man as a fine light-body. 
Previously to this, man had felt currents of heat 
rising up to him from the earth, and air pene- 
trating to him through sounds; now the watery 
element also penetrates his fiery-aeriform body, 
and he sees the watery influx and efflux as a dawn 
and a (^ing away of light. But a change has 
also begun in his soul. To the beginnings of the 
sentient and intellectual soids is added that of 
the self-conscious soul. The "Angels” work in 
the element of water; they are also the real cre- 
ators of light. It seems to man as though they 
appeared to him in light.

The higher beings who were previously in the 
earth-planet itself, now influence it from the sun. 
On this account all effects produced on the 
earth are different. The human being chained 
to earth 'would no longer be able to feel the in- 
fluence of the Sun-beings within him, if his soul 
were unceasingly turned toward the earth, from

214 an outline of occult science214 an outline of occult science

which his physical body is taken. A change now 
appears in the conditions of human consciousness. 
At certain times the Sun-beings wrest the soul 
of man from his physical body, so that man .is 
now alternately purely psychic, in the bosom of 
the Sun-beings, and, when united with the body, 
in a condition in which he receives earth influences. 
When in the physical body, heat citi'rents stream 
up to him, air substances echo round him, water 
pours into and out of him. When man is out 
of his body the images of the higher beings in 
whose care he is, float through him.

The earth passes through two periods at this 
stage of its evolution. In one of these it can play 
around hxurnan souls with its substances, and 
invest them with bodies; in the other, tlic souls 
have withdrawn from it, and only the bodies are 
left : and the human beings are in a sleeping 
condition. It is speaking quite in conformity 
with the facts to say that in those times of a 
remote past the earth passed through a day and 
a night period. This is expressed in terms of 
physical space by saying that by means of the 
reciprocal action of the Sun-beings and the earth - 
beings, the earth is brought into a movement in 
relation with the sun; thus there is brought about 
the alternation of day and night periods de- 
scribed above. The day period is when the sur- 
face of the earth, on which man is evolving, is 
turned toward the sun; the night period, which

EAi^LUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 215EAi^LUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 215

is the time when man leads a purely psychic 
existence, is when the earth’s surface is turned 
away from thfi sun. Now it must not, of course, 
b(? imagined that in that far-off time the earth’s 
motion around the sun was like its present motion. 
The conditions were still utterly different. But 
even at this early point it is useful to gather how 
the motions of the celestial bodies are due to 
the mutual relations of the spiritual beings in- 
habiting them. Spiritual-psychic causes produce 
in the celestial bodies positions and motions 
which allow the manifestation of spiritual con- 
ditions on the physical plane.

If our gaze were tumed upon the earth during 
its night period, its body would appear like a 
corpse. For it consists to a great extent of the 
decaying bodies of those human beings whose 
souls are in another state of existence. The 
organized watery and aerifonn structures of 
which human bodies were fomied become dis- 
integrated, and dissolve into the rest of the 
earth’s substance. Only that part of man’s 
body which was fomicd from the very beginning 
of earthly evolution by the cooperation of fire 
and the human soul, and which subsequently 
became denser and denser, continues to exist as 
an insignificant looking embiyo. Now when the 
day peiT^od begins, the earth once more partici- 
pates directly in the sun influence, and human 
souls press forward into the sphere of physical

2i6 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

life. They come into contact with the embtyos, 
and cause them to spring up and assume an 
external form, which appears as a copy of man’s 
psychic being. It is something like a delicate 
fertilization which then takes place between the 
human soid and the bodily embryo.The souls thus embodied now begin once more 
to attract the aeriform and watery substances 
and incorporate them into their own bodies. 
Air is expelled and absorbed by the organized 
body; the first beginning of the later respiratory 
process. Water too is absorbed and expelled; 
the nutritive process in its original form has 
begvm. But these processes are not yet perceived 
as External ones. A kind of external perception 
takes place in the soul only during the kind of 
fertilization we have described. Here the soul 
vaguely feels its awakening to physical existence 
when it comes in contact with the embryo which 
is held toward it from the earth. It then feels 
something which may be thus put into words: 
“This is my form.’’ And such a feeling, which 
might even be called a dawning consciousness 
of self, abides with the soul all through its union 
with the physical body. But the soul still feels 
the process of absorbing air in quite a psychic 
and spiritual way, as an image, which appears 
in the form of tone-pictures surging up and down ; 
these give form to the embryo which is being 
incorporated with them. The soul everywhere

EiyOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN 217

feels itself in the midst of sound waves, and 
feels that it is fashioning the body in accord- 
ance with those tone forces. Thus are human 
forms developed at that stage of evolution. They 
cannot be observed in any external world by our 
present consciousness. They evolve like vege- 
table and flower forms of fine substance, but they 
are inwardly flexible and therefore appear like 
flowers waving in the wind.During his earth period, man experiences the 
blissful feeling of being fashioned into such forms. 
The absorption of the watery parts is felt in the 
soul as an accession of force, or inward strength- 
ening process. From without it appears as growth 
of the physical hiunan structure. As the direct 
influence of the sun decreases, the human soul 
loses the power of controlling these processes. 
By degrees they are cast aside. Only those parts 
are left which allow the embryo above described 
to mature. But man leaves his body, and returns 
to the spiritual form of existence. (As it is not all 
parts of the earth’s body that are employed in 
building up htunan bodies, we must not imagine 
that during the earth’s night period it is composed 
exclusively of disintegrating corpses and embryos 
waiting to be awakened. All these are imbedded 
in other structures, which are formed out of the 
earth’s substances. How matters stand with 
those structures will be explained later.)

But now the process of condensing the earth’s

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEBut now the process of condensing the earth’s

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

substance is continued. There is added to the 
watery element the solid or “earthly” substance 
(“earthly” in the sense of occult science). And 
when this happens man. too, during his earjth 
period, begins to incorporate the earthly element 
into his body. As soon as this incorporation 
begins, the forces which the soul brings with it 
out of the disembodied state no longer liave the 
same power as before. Previously, the soul had 
fashioned its body out of the igneous, aeriform, and 
watery elements, in accordance with the tones 
which resounded and the light-pictures which 
played around it. The soul cannot do this with 
regard to the solidified form. Other forces now 
interpose to shape it. What is left behind of man, 
when the soul withdraws from the body, is not only 
an embryo to be fanned into life by the returning 
soul, but a structure containing in itself reanimat- 
ing power. The soul, at its departure, not only 
leaves its image behind on earth but sends down 
some of its animating power into that image.

Now on its reappearance on earth the soul alone 
no longer suffices to awaken the image to life; 
reanimation must take place in the image itself. 
The spiritual beings influencing the earth from the 
sun now uphold the reanimating force that is in 
the human body, even though man himself is not 
upon the earth. Thus, on its reincarnation, the 
soul is not only sensible of the sounds aind light- 
pictures floating around, in which it feels the

E^^OLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 219E^^OLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 219

beings next above it, but, through receiving the 
earthly element, it comes under the influence of 
those still higher beings who have taken up their 
abode on the sun. Previously, man felt that he 
belonged to the spiritual-psychic beings with 
whom he was united when free from the body. 
His ego was still within them. Now that ego 
confronts him during physical incarnation, quite 
as much as everything else which is around him 
during that period. Independent copies of the 
psychic-spiritual being of man were henceforward 
on the earth. These structures were of finer 
material than the present human body. For there 
was only an admixture of earthly portions in their 
finest state, — much in the same way as when man 
of the present day absorbs the finely distributed 
substanoes of an object through his organ of smell. 
Human bodies were like shadows. But as they 
were distributed over the whole earth they came 
under earth influences, which varied in their nature 
on different parts of the earth’s surface. Whereas 
formerly the bodily copies corresponded to the 
hiunan souls animating them, and on that account 
were essentially alike over the whole earth, dif- 
ferences now appeared between human forms. In 
this manner the way was prepared for what 
appeared later as differences of race.

When, the human body became independent, 
the previous close union of mortals with the 
spiritual-psychic world was to a certain extent

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD A'ND MAN 221

•When, the human body became independent, 
the previous close union of mortals with the 
spiritual-psychic world was to a certain extent

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD A'ND MAN 221

•

formerly inhabiting the eart# there came forth, 
through the cooperation within each other of the 
two forces, the embryo and the animating force, 
th« new human form, their descendant. These 
descendants were now remoulded. In one group 
the animating power of the spiritual-psychic 
element was paramount; in another, the vitality 
of the embryo. This was caused by the weakening 
of the power of the solid element in consequence of 
the moon’s leaving the earth. The influence of 
the two forces one upon the other now took place 
in one body, and it became slighter than it had 
been, and the descendant also became more 
fragile and refined. He entered the earth in a 
subtle condition, and only gradually incorporated 
more solid parts within himself. In this way the 
possibility of union with the body was once more 
given to the human soul returning to earth. It is 
true the soul no longer animated the body from 
without, for that animation took place on the 
earth itself; but it became united with the body, 
and enabled it to grow. Of coturse a certain limit 
was set to that growth. Through the separation 
of the moon, the human body had for a time be- 
come supple; but the more it continued to grow on 
the earth, the more did the solidifying forces get the 
upper hand. At length the share borne by the soul 
in the organization of the body grew ever less and 
less. The body became disintegrated when the soul 
ascended to spiritual-psychic modes of existence.

220 AN Ol/TLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f220 AN Ol/TLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f

dissolved. Henceforward, when the soul left the 
body, the latter went on living something like a 
continuation of life. If evolution ‘had continued 
to advance in this manner, the earth must have 
hardened under the influence of its solid constit- 
uents. To the eyes of the seer who looks back on 
those conditions, htunan bodies, when abandoned 
by their souls, appear to become more and more 
solidified. And after a time the hiunan sovds 
returning to earth would have found no available 
material with which to combine. All the sub- 
stances available for man would have been used up 
in filling the earth with the indurated remains of 
incarnated beings.

Then an event took place which gave a new 
turn to the whole evolution. Everything in the 
sohd earthly substance which could contribute to 
permanent induration was eliminated. At this 
point our present moon left the earth. And what 
had previously directly conduced to a permanent 
moulding of forms, now operated from the moon 
indirectly and in a diminished degree. The 
higher beings, on whom that moulding of forms 
depended, had resolved to let their influences no 
longer come to the earth from its interior, but 
from without. By this means there was brought 
about in the bodily structiu-e of man a difference 
which must be called the beginning of the separa- 
tion into a male and a female sex.

And from the finely constituted human forms

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 221And from the finely constituted human forms

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 221

formerly inhabiting the eartl^ there came forth, 
through the cooperation within each other of the 
two forces, the embryo and the animating force, 
the new hiunan form, their descendant. These 
descendants were now remoulded. In one group 
the animating power of the spiritual-psychic 
element was paramount; in another, the vitality 
of the embryo. This was caused by the weakening 
of the power of the solid element in consequence of 
the moon’s leaving the earth. The influence of 
the two forces one upon the other now took place 
in one body, and it became slighter than it had 
been, and the descendant also became more 
fragile and refined. He entered the earth in a 
subtle condition, and only gradually incorporated 
more solid parts within himself. In this way the 
possibility of union with the body was once more 
given to the hximan soul returning to earth. It is 
true the sotd no longer animated the body from 
without, for that animation took place on the 
earth itself; but it became united with the body, 
and enabled it to grow. Of course a certain limit 
was set to that growth. Through the separation 
of the moon, the human body had for a time be- 
come supple ; but the more it continued to grow on 
the earth, the more did the solidifying forces get the 
upper hand. At length the share borne by the soul 
in the organization of the body grew ever less and 
less. The body became disintegrated when the soul 
ascended to spiritual-psychic modes of existence.

222 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f "222 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f "

The powers gradually acquired by man during 
the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions may be 
traced taking part by degrees in hwman progress 
during the shaping of the earth as we have bqpn 
describing it. The first part to be kindled by 
the earth’s fire is the astral body, still containing 
within it the etheric and physical bodies in a state 
of solution. Then the astral body is organized 
into a more subtle astral part, the sentient soul, 
and into a grosser etheric part, which henceforward 
is in contact with the earth-element; when this 
occurs, the etheric or vital body, already shadowed 
forth, makes its appearance. And while the 
rational and self-conscious soi:ls are being evolved 
in the astral man, there are incorporated into the 
etheric body those coarser parts which are sus- 
ceptible to sound and light.

At the moment when the etheric body is still 
further densified, and from being a light-body 
becomes a fire- or heat-body, the stage of evolution 
has been reached at which, as described above, 
parts of the solid earth-element are incorporated 
into man. Because the etheric body has come 
down so far as to be condensed into fire, it is now 
able, by means of the forces of the physical body 
previously implanted in it, to combine with those 
substances of the physical earth which have been 
attenuated as far as the fire-state. But by itself 
it would no longer be able to introduce air sub- 
stances also into the body which has meanwhile

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 223EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 223

become more solidified. Then* as indicated above, 
the higher beings dwelling on the sun interpose, 
and breathe air into the body. While man, by 
vistue of his past, is able of himself to become 
permeated with the earthly fire, higher beings 
direct the breath of air into his body. Before the 
etheric body was organized, it was able, as a 
receiver of sound, to direct the air current. It 
permeated the physical body with life. Now the 
physical body gets life from without. The result 
of this is that that life becomes independent of the 
psychic part of man. Man, on quitting the earth, 
leaves behind not only the embryo of his form, 
but a living image of himself. The Lords of Form 
now remain united with that image, and the life 
they have bestowed they transfer to man’s de- 
scendants, when his soul has left the body. Thus 
comes about what may be called heredity, and 
when the human soul once more appears on earth 
it feels it is in a body animated by the life of 
its ancestors. It feels itself specially attracted 
to just that kind of body. In this way there is 
formed something like a memory of an ancestor 
with whom the soul feels itself to be one. This 
memory passes through the line of descendants in 
the form of a consciousness possessed in common. 
The ego flows down thi'ough the generations.

At this stage of evolution man, during his life 
on earth," was conscious of himself as an indepen- 
dent being. He felt the inner fire of his etheric

224 an outline of occult scienceAt this stage of evolution man, during his life 
on earth," was conscious of himself as an indepen- 
dent being. He felt the inner fire of his etheric

224 an outline of occult science

body to be combine'd with the external fire of the 
earth. He could feel as his ego the heat that was 
streaming through him. In those ‘heat currents, 
interwoven with life, are to be found the first 
beginnings of the circulation of the blood. But 
in what flowed into him as air he did not quite 
feel his own being. Indeed, it was the forces of 
the higher beings we have described that were 
working in that air. But still there was left to 
him, within the air that flowed through him, that 
part of the forces which belonged to him by virtue 
of his previously formed etheric powers. In one 
part of those air cun'ents he was master. And 
to that extent, it was not only the higher beings 
who were shaping him, but he himself. He 
formed the air parts of his being in accordance 
with the images of his astral body. VHiile air 
was thus flowing into his body from without, 
a process which became the basis of respiration, 
part of the air was formed within him into an 
organism which became fixed in man, and was 
the basis of the later nervous system. Thus man 
at this period was connected with the external 
earth by heat and air.

On the other hand, he was not conscious of the 
introduction of the solid element into the earth. 
Although it contributed to his own embodiment, 
he could not directly perceive what was being 
supplied, but only through a dim consciousness 
in the image of the higher beings who were active

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 225EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 225

in the process. In the same kind of picture-form, 
as an expression of the beings above him, man had 
previously perceived the introduction of the fluid 
element into the earth. Through the densification 
of his earthly form the pictures have now under- 
gone a change in his consciousness. The solid 
element has been mixed with the fluid. This 
incoming of the solid element must also be seen 
to be the work of higher beings operating from 
without. It is not possible for the human soul 
to have any longer the power of directing the 
supply, for that supply has now to serve his body, 
which is being built up from without. He would 
spoil its fonn if he were to direct the influx himself.

What therefore he conveys to himself from 
without appears to him to be directed by authori- 
tative orders issuing from the higher beings who 
are at work on the shaping of his body. Man 
feels himself to be an ego; he has within him, as 
part of his astral body, his rational soul, through 
which he inwardly perceives, in the form of pic- 
tures, what is happening externally, and by means 
of which he permeates his delicate nervous sys- 
tem. He feels himself to be descended from 
ancestors, by virtue of the life flowing down 
through generations. He breathes that life, and 
feels it to be the effect of the higher beings who 
have been described, the Lords of Form. And 
he submits to them also as regards , what is con- 
veyed to him by their initiative from without for

10

226 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE10

226 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

his nourishment. What he finds most obscure is 
his origin as an individual. As to that, he only 
knows that he has been under thg influence of 
the Lords of Form expressing themselves in earth- 
forces. In his relations with the outer world, 
man was guided and ruled. This comes into 
expression by his being conscious of spiritual and 
psychic activities operating behind his physical 
world. It is true that he does not see the spiritual 
beings in their own form, but he is conscious in 
his soul of sounds and colours. He knows, how- 
ever, that it is the actions of spiritual beings that 
are realized through that world of images. What 
those beings communicate to him, comes to him 
in sounds; their manifestations appear to him in 
light-pictures.

The earth-man is most acutely conscious of 
himself by means of the images which come to 
him through the element of fire or heat. He can 
already distinguish between his own inner heat 
and the heat currents of the earth’s periphery. In 
these latter are manifested the Sons of Personality. 
But man has only a dim consciousness of what 
is behind the currents of external heat. It is 
in those very currents that he feels the influence 
of the Lords of Form. When powerful effects of 
heat are produced in man’s environment, the soul 
feels, “Spiritual beings are heating the earth’s 
periphery: a spark has been detached from them, 
which is permeating my inmost being with heat.’’

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 227EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 227

In the light-effects man does not as yet distin- 
guish between outer and inner quite in the same 
way. When, light-pictures emerge around him, 
they do not always produce the same feeling in 
the soul of the earth -man. There were times 
when he felt them as external images. This 
was during the period when he had just descended 
from the disembodied state into incarnation. It 
was the period of his growth on earth. As the 
time approached for the embryo to be formed 
into a new earth-being, those images faded, and 
man retained only something like inward memory- 
pictures of them. The actions of the Sons of 
Fire (Archangels) were contained in those light- 
pictures, which appeared to man to be the serv- 
ants of the fire-spirits who sent down a spark 
into his own inner being. When their outer mani- 
festations died away, man felt them inwardly 
in the form of images (memories). He felt him- 
self united with their forces. And indeed he was 
so. For by means of what he had received from 
them, he was able to work upon the atmosphere 
surrounding him. This, under his influence, began 
to emit light.

It was a time when nature forces and human 
forces were not as yet separated from each other 
as they subsequently became. What happened 
on earth still emanated to a great extent from 
human forces. At that time any one viewing 
nature processes on the earth from outside, would

228 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

t

ha^'e seen in them not only something th/it is 
independent of man, but would have seen human 
forces within those processes. Soimd-perceptions 
assiuned a very different form to the earth-man. 
From the beginning of earth-life they had been 
heard as outer sounds. Whereas, up to the 
middle of earthly existence, air-pictures were per- 
ceived from without, external sounds could be 
heard even after that middle period.Only toward the end of his life did the earth- 
man become insensible to them. And the mem- 
ory-pictures of those sounds remained. In them 
were contained the manifestations of the Sons of 
Life (Angels). When, toward the end of his life, 
man felt himself inwardly united with those 
forces, he was able, by imitating them, to produce 
mighty effects in the earth’s watery element. 
Under his influence the waters surged up and down 
within and upon the earth. Man had perceptions 
of taste only during the first quarter of his earth- 
life, and even then they seemed to the soul like 
a memory of the experience of his disembodied 
state. As long as they lasted, his body continued 
to grow more and more solid by assimilating exter- 
nal substances. In the .second quarter of earthly 
existence growth certainly continued, but the 
form was already fully developed. At this time 
man could perceive other living beings near 
him only through their heat, light, and sound ef- 
fects: for he was not as yet capable of imagining

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 239

the solid element. During the first quarter of 
his life he received the taste-impressions that 
have been described only through the watery 
element.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 239

the solid element. During the first quarter of 
his life he received the taste-impressions that 
have been described only through the watery 
element.

Man’s external bodily form was a copy of this 
inner psychic condition. Those parts were most 
fully developed which contained the first begin- 
nings of the later form of the head. The other 
organs appeared only as appendages. These were 
shadowy and indistinct. Yet earth -beings varied 
with regard to foim. There were some in whom 
the appendages were more or less developed, 
according to the earth-conditions under which 
they lived. This varied with people’s different 
dwelling places on the earth. Where they were 
more involved in the things of earth, the appen- 
dages became more prominent. Those human 
beings who at the beginning of physical develop- 
ment on earth were the ripest, owing to their 
previous evolution, having come into contact 
with the fire-element at the very beginning, 
before the earth had been condensed into air, 
were those now able to develop most completely 
the first beginnings of the head. These were the 
people possessing most inward haimony.

Others were ready for contact with the fire- 
element only when the earth had already evolved 
air within itself. These people were more depend- 
ent on outer conditions than those first mentioned. 
These latter distinctly felt the Lords of Form

230 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE230 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

through heat, and during their earth-life they felt 
as if they retained a memory of having belonged to 
those spirits and of having been one with them 
in the disembodied state. The second kind of 
people only had the memory of the disembodied 
state in a more limited degree; they were conscious 
of their fellowship with the spiritual world chiefly 
through the light-influences of the Sons of Fire 
(Archangels). A third variety of human beings 
was still more entangled in earthly existence. It 
was they who were not able to come into contact 
with the fire-element till the earth was separated 
from the sun, and had absorbed the watery element 
within itself. Their feeling of fellowship with the 
spiritual world was especially slight at the begin- 
ning of earth-life. Only when the influence of the 
Archangels, and more especially of the 'Angels, 
made itself felt in the inner image-forming life, 
did they feel this connection in any degree. On 
the other hand, at the beginning of the earth- 
period they were full of active inpulses toward 
performing deeds which can be accomplished under 
earthly conditions proper. In them the sup- 
plementary organs were particularly strongly 
developed.

When the Moon-forces, before the separation of 
the moon from the earth, were more and more 
tending to solidify the latter, it happened that 
among the descendants of the embryos left behind 
upon the earth by man there were some in whom

SOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 231SOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 231

human souls returning from the disembodied state 
could no longer be incarnated in consequence of 
the Moon-forfces. The form of these descendants 
was too much solidified and, in virtue of the Moon- 
forces, had become too unlike human form to be 
able to assume it. Consequently certain human 
souls no longer found it possible, under these 
circumstances, to return to earth. Only the ripest 
and strongest of these souls could feel competent 
so to transform the earth-body during growth that 
it could blossom into a human form. Only a 
proportion of the bodily descendants of man 
became the vehicles of earthly hmnan beings. 
Another section was only able, on account of 
solidified form, to receive souls on a lower level 
than those of men. But one section of human souls 
was prevented from taking part in the earth- 
evolution of that time. In this way they were 
driven to embark on another course.

There were souls who, as far back as the sepa- 
ration of the sun from the earth, found no place 
on the latter. For their further evolution they 
were removed to a planet which, under the guid- 
ance of cosmic beings, was being detached from 
the universal world-substance, — that substance of 
which the earth formed a part at the beginning of 
its physical evolution, and from which the sun 
had separated. This planet is the one known to 
outer science, in its physical expression, as “Jup- 
iter.” (Here we are speaking of celestial bodies,

232 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE232 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

planets, and their names exactly in the sense of a 
more ancient science, and as is in harmony with 
occult science. Just as the physical earth is only 
the physical expression of a great spiritual-psychic 
organism, so is every other celestial body. And 
as the seer does not denote only the physical planet 
by the word “earth,” nor only the physical fixed 
star by “sun,” so when speaking of “Jupiter,” 
“Mars,” and the other planets he signifies far- 
reaching spiritual connections. The form and 
mission of the heavenly bodies have, in the course 
of nature, been essentially changed since the times 
of which we are here speaking, — in a certain 
respect even their position in celestial space is 
changed too. It is possible only for one who 
follows with the seer’s vision the evolution of 
those celestial bodies back to remote ages of the 
past, to apprehend the connection of contempo- 
rary planets with their predecessors.) On Jupiter 
the souls that have been described continued their 
evolution.

And later, when the earth was tending more 
and more toward consolidation, another abode 
had to be prepared for souls for whom it was 
certainly possible to occupy the solidified bodies 
for a time, but who could not do so when the solid- 
ification had progressed too far. An appropriate 
place for their further evolution was found in Mars. 
Even as far back as the time when the soul was 
still united with the sun, and was incorporating

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 233

the sun’s air elements within itself, souls were 
proving unfit to participate in the earth’s evolu- 
tion. They were too powerfully affected by the 
eaj’thly bodily form. Accordingly, even at that 
time, they had to be withdrawn from the direct 
influence of the Sun-forces. These had to influence 
them from without. Saturn became the scene of 
their further evolution.Thus, in the course of the earth’s evolution, the 
number of human forms decreased, and forms 
appeared which had not embodied human souls. 
These were able to receive only astral bodies within 
them, as the human physical and etheric bodies 
on the old Moon had done. While the earth 
was becoming depopulated as far as human beings 
were concerned, these other beings were coloniz- 
ing it. At length all h\unan souls would have 
been compelled to leave the earth if another 
possibility had not been provided by the detach- 
ment of the moon. The human forms which cotild 
still be animated by htunan souls were enabled to 
withdraw the budding human life, during earthly 
existence, from the Moon-forces proceeding directly 
from the earth, and to let the life mature within 
themselves up to a point at which it could be 
delivered over to those forces. As long as the life 
was developing within man, it was under the in- 
fluence o’f the beings who, under the leadership 
of the m*ightiest of their number, had detached 
the moon from the earth in order to conduct

234 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the evolution of the latter over a critical point.234 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the evolution of the latter over a critical point.

When the earth had developed the air element 
within it there were present astsal beings, as 
described above, who had been parts of the oj[d 
Moon and had been left behind. These had fallen 
short, in their evolution, of the lowest human 
souls. They became the souls of those forms 
which, even before the separation of the sun, 
had to be abandoned by man. These beings were 
the ancestors of the animal kingdom. In the 
course of time they specially developed those 
organs which in man only existed as appendages. 
Their astral body had to work on the physical and 
etheric bodies in the same way as did the human 
astral body during the old Moon-period. Now 
the animals which had thus come into existence 
had soxds which could not dwell in single animals. 
The soul’s existence was also extended to the 
descendant of the ancestral form. Virtually, 
animals descended from one form have a soul in 
common. Only when the descendant diverges 
from the ancestral type through special influences, 
does a new animal soul become incarnated. In 
this sense, conformably with occult science, we 
may speak of a species or race-soul, or group-soul, 
in animals.

Something of a similar nature took place at the 
time of the separation of sun and earth. There 
came forth from the watery element forms no fur- 
ther evolved than was man before the old Moon-

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 235EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 235

evolution. They could receive an impression 
from anything of an astral nature only when 
the latter influenced them from without. This 
cquld not happen till after the departure of the 
sun from the earth. Whenever the sun-period of 
the earth set in, the astral element in the sun 
stimulated these forms in such a way that they 
formed their vital body out of the etheric part of 
the earth. When the sun turned away from the 
earth, that etheric body was again dissolved into 
the common earth-life. And as a result of the 
cooperation of the astral part of the sun with 
the etheric part of the earth, there emerged from 
the watery element those physical forms which 
became the ancestors of the present vegetable 
kingdom.

Man became an individualized psychic being on 
earth. His astral body, which had flowed into 
him on the Moon through the Lords of Motion, 
became organized on earth into the sentient, in- 
tellectual and self-conscious souls. And when the 
self-conscious soul had progressed so far that it 
was able to fonn for itself during earth-life a 
body adapted to that life, the Lords of Form 
endowed that body with a spark from their fire. 
The "ego” was kindled within it. Every time 
man now left the physical body he was in the 
spiritual ’world, in which he met the beings who, 
during the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions, 
had given him his physical, etheric, and astral

236 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE236 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

bodies, and developed him as far as the earth- 
stage. Since the spark of the ego had been 
kindled during earth-life, there had also come 
about a change in the disembodied life. Up fo 
this point of evolution, man had had no independ- 
ence within the spiritual world. Within that 
world he did not feel himself a separate being, 
but as though he were a member of the exalted 
organism which was composed of the beings supe- 
rior to him. The “ego experience” on earth now 
takes effect also in the spiritual world. Hence- 
forth man feels himself to be, to a certain degree, 
a unit in that world. But he feels also that he is 
unceasingly linked with it. In the disembodied 
state he again finds the Lords of Form, in a higher 
aspect, and this aspect he had perceived in their 
manifestation on earth by means of the spark of 
his ego.

At the separation of the moon from the earth 
the disembodied soul began to have experiences 
in the spiritual world which were connected with 
that separation. Indeed, it only became possible 
to continue developing on the earth such human 
forms as could receive psychic individuality, 
through the transfer of part of the shaping forces 
from the earth to the moon. By this means 
human individuality came into the sphere of the 
Moon-beings. And in the disembodied state the 
memory of earthly individuality could only operate 
because, even in that state, the soul remained

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 237

within the sphere of those mighty spirits who had 
brought about the separation of the moon. The 
process worked thus, — that immediately after 
leaving the earth-body the soul could only see 
the exalted Sun-beings as though in a lustre 
reflected from the Moon-beings. And it was 
only when sufficiently prepared by gazing at that 
reflected splendour that the soul attained to the 
vision of the exalted Sun-beings themselves.The mineral kingdom of the earth also arose 
out of what was ejected from hiunan evolution 
in general. Its structures are what was consoli- 
dated when the moon was detached from the 
earth. The only soul-element which felt attracted 
to those structures was that which had been left 
behind at the Saturn stage, and was therefore 
only adapted for developing physical forms. 
All the occurrences treated of here and in what 
follows were enacted in the course of exceedingly 
long periods. But the question of chronology 
cannot be entered into here.

The events described exhibit the evolution of 
the earth from without. Seen spiritually from 
within, the facts present themselves as follows. 
The spiritual beings who drew the moon out of 
the earth and incorporated their own existence 
with the moon, thus becoming beings of the earth- 
moon, brought about a certain formation of the 
human organism by means of the forces which 
they sent to the earth from the moon. Their

238 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f238 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f

influence affected the ego which man had acquired, 
and made itself felt in the interplay of that ego 
with the astral, ethcric, and physical bodies. 
Through their influence it became possible for 
man consciously to reflect within himself the con- 
summate wisdom of the formation of the world, 
to reproduce it mirrored in knowledge. It will 
be remembered that during the old Moon-period 
man, owing to the separation from the sun at 
that time, acquired a certain independence in 
his organism, a more unfettered stage of con- 
sciousness than that which he had been able to 
derive directly from the Sun-spirits. This ^ree, 
independent consciousness appeared again — a her- 
itage from the old Moon-evolution — during the 
earth-period in question. But it was just this 
consciousness which, through the influence of the 
beings of the earth-moon described, could again be 
brought into union and harmony with the tmi- 
verse, and be made a reflection of it. This would 
have happened if no other influence had asserted 
itself. Failing any other influence, man would 
have become a being with a consciousness of which 
the content would have been a reproduction of 
the world in pictures of perception; and this not 
through its own initiative, but as by natural 
necessity.

Things did not happen thus. At the time when 
the moon split off, there interposed in human 
evolution certain spiritual beings who had retained

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 239Things did not happen thus. At the time when 
the moon split off, there interposed in human 
evolution certain spiritual beings who had retained

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 239

so mucii of their Moon nature that they could not 
take part in the exodus of the sun from the earth, 
and were shu1> out from the influence of the spirits 
wjio from the earth-moon had exerted their activity 
upon the earth. These spirits with the old Moon 
nature were, so to say, banished to the earth, but 
with an irregular development. In their Moon 
nature was that which had rebelled against the 
Sun-spirits during the old Moon-evolution, and 
which had so far been a blessing to man that it 
had led him to a free, independent state of con- 
sciousness. The consequences of the peculiar 
development of these spirits during the earth- 
period entailed their becoming adversaries of the 
spirits who, acting from the moon, desired to make 
human consciousness an automatic reflector of 
the uniyerse. What had helped man to a higher 
state of development on the old Moon proved to 
be in opposition to the possibilities which had 
arisen through the evolution of the earth. The 
opposing forces had brought with them from 
their Moon nature the power of working upon the 
human astral body, that is to say, — in accordance 
with the above statements, — the power of making 
it independent. They exercised that power by 
giving the astral body a certain degree of inde- 
pendence — in this case for the earth-period — as 
compared with the automatic (involuntary) state 
of consciousness which had been brought about 
by the spirits of the earth-moon.

240

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE240

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

It is difficult to express in the language of to-day 
the effects on man in that far-off time of the 
spiritual beings referred to. They* must not be 
thought of as analogous to nature influences pf 
the present time, nor yet as similar to the influence 
of one human being on another, when the first 
awakens in the second inner powers of con- 
sciousness by words which help the second person 
to understand something, or stimulate him to 
virtue or vice. The effect referred to as operative 
in that primeval age was not a natural force but 
a spiritual influence, conveyed in a spiritual way, 
and which descended upon man as a spiritual 
influx from the higher spirits, conformably with 
man's state of consciousness at that time. If we 
think of the influence as a nature-force we alto- 
gether miss its essential reality. If we say that 
the spirits v/ith the old Moon nature tempted man 
in order to lead him astray for their own ends, we 
are using a symbolical expression, which is good 
as long as we remember it is but a symbol and are 
at the same time clear in our minds that a spiritual 
fact imderlies the symbol.

The influence brought to bear on man by 
the spirits who had remained behind during the 
Moon-evolution had a twofold result. Man’s con- 
sciousness was divested of the character of be- 
ing merely a mirror of the universe, because the 
possibility was aroused in the human astral body 
of regulating and controlling from this astral

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 241EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 241

body tVie images in the consciousness. Man 
became the ruler of his own knowledge. But 
on the other hand it was the astral body that was 
tl\e startingpoint of that rulership, and conse- 
quently the ego set over the astral body came to 
be continually dependent upon it. Hence man 
was from this time forth exposed to the lasting 
influences of a lower element in his natme. It was 
possible for him in his life to sink below the height 
on which he had been placed by the spirits of the 
earth-moon in the course of the world’s progress. 
And subsequently he was open to the lasting in- 
fluence on his nature of the irregularly evolved 
Moon-spirits. We may call these the Luciferian 
spirits, as distinguished from the other spirits who, 
from the earth-moon, made the consciousness into 
a mirror of the universe, without bestowing any 
free will. The Luciferian spirits endowed man 
with the possibility of developing free activity in 
his consciousness, and at the same time created 
the possibility of error and evil.

The result of these events was that man was 
brought into a different connection with the Sun- 
spirits from that which had been destined for him 
by the spirits of the earth-moon. These had 
wished so to develop the mirror of his consciousness 
that the influence of the Sun-spirits should have 
been th6 prevailing one within the whole inner 
life of ihan. These purposes were crossed, and 
there was created in human nature an opposition

242 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE242 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

between the influence of the Sun-spirits and that 
of the spirits irregularly evolved on the old Moon. 
Owing to this opposition there also arose in man 
the incapacity for recognizing the physical Siyi- 
influences as such; they were hidden by the 
earthly impressions of the outer world. Filled 
with these impressions, the astral part of man was 
drawn into the sphere of the ego. This ego, which 
otherwise would have felt only the spark of fire 
bestowed on it by the Lords of Form, and would 
have submitted to the bidding of those spirits in 
everything which had to do with external fire, 
henceforth worked upon external heat phenom- 
ena through the element with which it had 
itself been inoculated. A bond of attraction was 
thereby established between the ego and the 
earth-fire.

In this way man became more involved in 
earthly materiality than had been ordained for 
him. Whereas he previously had a physical body 
consisting mainly of fire, air, and water, with only 
a slight admixture of the earth substance, the 
body now became more solid and dense. And 
whereas man previously had been moving in a 
floating, hovering manner over the solid earth, 
as a finely organized being, he was now forced to 
descend “from the earth’s periphery’’ to parts of 
it which were already more or less consolidated.

That such physical effects of the 'spiritual 
influences above described could be produced

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 243

is accounted for by the fact that the influences 
were of the kind that has been depicted, neither 
nature forces »nor svich as act from the soul of 
one human being on another. The influence of 
the latter does not extend so far into matter as 
the spiritual forces which are here in question.Because man laid himself open to the influ- 
ences of the outer world, through following his own 
ideas which were liable to error; because he lived 
to gi'atify desires and, passions which he did not 
allow higher spiritual influences to regulate, the 
possibility of disease appeared. But a special 
effect of the Lucifer influence was that hence- 
forth man could not feel his individual earth-life 
to be a continuation of the disembodied state. 
Henceforth he was open to such earth-impres- 
sions as. arose through the astral element with 
which he had been inoculated, and these com- 
bined with the forces destructive of the physical 
body. Man felt this as the decay of his earth-life. 
And in this manner “death” came about, caused 
by human nature itself. This points to a sig- 
nificant myster}'- in man’s nature, the connection 
of the human astral body with disease and death.

Particular conditions now set in, affecting the 
human etheric body. It was put into a position 
between the physical and astral bodies, which, to 
a certain extent, caused its withdrawal from the 
faculties’ acquired by man through the Lucifer 
influence. Part of the etheric body was left so

244

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE244

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

much outside the physical body that it could be 
ruled only by higher beings, not by the human ego. 
The higher beings were those wh» had left the 
earth at the separation of the sun, in order 
occupy another dwelling place under the guidance 
of one of their exalted associates. If that part of 
the etheric body that has been described had re- 
mained linked with the astral body, man would 
have had at his disposal siipersensible forces 
formerly possessed by him. He would have 
directed the Lucifer influence on to those forces, 
and would by degrees have quite freed himself 
from the Sun-beings. His ego would have become 
entirely an earth-ego. It must in that case have 
come about that that earth-ego, after the death 
of the physical body (in some cases even during 
its decay), would have occupied another physical 
body, that of a descendant, without passing 
through the stage of union with higher spiritual 
bodies in a disembodied state. Man would thus 
have arrived at the consciousness of his own ego, 
but only of an earthly one. This was averted 
by the process which was effected through the 
earth-moon .spirits. The real individual ego was 
thereby so set free from the mere earth-ego that 
though man during earth-life only partially felt 
himself to be an ego, he at the same time felt his 
earth-ego to be a continuation of that of his 
ancestors through the generations. The soul was 
conscious of a kind of “group-ego” in earth-life.

EVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN 245EVOLUTION OP THE WORLD AND MAN 245

dating ^ack to remote ancestors; man felt him- 
self to be a member of this grou]). Only in the 
disembodied state could the individual ego be 
copscious of itself as a separate being. But this 
state of isolation was impaired because the ego 
was still burdened with a memory of the earth- 
consciousness (earth-ego). This memory troubled 
its vision of the spiritual world, which began to 
be covered with a veil between birth and death, 
in the same way in which physical eyes on earth 
may be veiled.

The many changes which took place in the 
spiritual world while human evolution was passing 
through the conditions just described, found 
physical expression in the gradual adjUvStment of 
the mutual relations existing between the sun, 
moon, and earth (and, moreover, between other 
celestial bodies).

The alternation of day and night stands out 
as one result of those relations. (The motions of 
Jhe celestial bodies are regulated by the beings who 
inhabit them. The earth’s motion, of which day 
and night are the result, was induced by the 
mutual relations of the various spirits superior 
to man. The moon’s motion had been brought 
about in the same way, in order that after the 
separation of the moon from the earth the Lords 
of P'orm 'might, by means of the revolution of the 
former atound the latter, work upon the htunan 
physical body in the right way, and with the right

240 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE240 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

rhythm.) The ego and the astral body of man 
now worked within the physical and etheric bodies 
by day ; at night that activity ceased ; for the ego 
and the astral body then left the physical apd 
etheric bodies, and came wholly within the sphere 
of the Sons of Life, or Angels, the Sons of Fire, or 
Archangels, the Sons of Personality, and the 
Lords of Form. Besides the Lords of Form, the 
Lords of Motion, of Wisdom, and the Thrones also 
included the physical and etheric bodies in their 
sphere of influence at this time. The injurious 
effects produced on man by tlie errors of his astral 
body during the day. could thus be counter- 
balanced.

Now that mankind was once more on the 
increase on earth, there was no longer any reason 
against the incarnation of human souls in their 
descendants. As the Moon-forces were then at 
work, there were formed under their influence 
human bodies thoroughly adapted for occupation 
by human souls. The souls previously removed 
to Mars, Jupiter, and the other planets were 
now guided to earth, and there was thus a soul 
ready for each human being born in the physical 
line of descent, fl'his went on through long periods 
until the immigration of souls to earth corre- 
sponded to the increase of human beings. The 
.souls now leaving their bodies at physical death 
retained the echo of their earthly individuality 
as a memory in the disembodied state. The

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 247EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 247

result ot that memory was that when a body 
.suitable for them was again bom on earth, those 
souls were on*e more incarnated in it. In the 
cojirse of time there were in the human race 
some whose souls came from without and were 
appearing on earth for the first time since its very 
earliest periods, and others with souls which had 
already been incarnated on the earth in its present 
form. In subsequent periods of earthly evolution 
the number of young souls appearing for the first 
time grows ever smaller and smaller, and the 
reincarnated souls become more and more ntuner- 
ous; yet for long ages the hiunan race was com- 
posed of the two varieties of people conditioned 
by these facts.

Henceforth man on earth felt himself united 
with his forefathers through the group-ego which 
he had in common with them. On the other hand, 
the experience of the individual ego was all the 
stronger in the disembodied state between death 
and a new birth. The souls which entered 
human bodies from celestial space were in a 
different position from those which had one or 
more earthly lives behind them. The former, as 
souls entering upon the physical earth-life, brought 
with them only the conditions to which the higher 
spiritual world and their experiences outside the 
sphere of earth subjected them. The others had, 
by their actions in former lives, added conditions 
of their own. The fate of the first was determined

248 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT .SCIENCE

only by facts lying beyond the new earth-condi- 
tions; that of the reincarnate souls is also deter- 
mined by what they have themsjelves done in 
former lives under earthly conditions. Individual 
hiunan Karma makes its first appearance simul- 
taneously with reincarnation.Because the htunan etheric body was withdrawn 
from the astral body in the manner above indi- 
cated, the generative faculty also was not included 
in the sphere of human consciousness, but was 
under the sway of the spiritual world. When 
the time had come for a soul to descend to earth, 
procreative impulses arose in a hiunan being. 
The entire process, up to a certain point, was 
veiled in mysterious obscurity as far as earthly 
consciousness was concerned. But the consje- 
quences of this partial separation of the etheric 
from the physical body were felt during earthly 
life also. The qualities of the etheric body were 
capable of being specially ennobled by spiritual 
influence. In psychic life this made itself felt 
by the memory’s being brought to a special 
degree of perfection. Independent logical thought 
was at this period only in its most rudimentary 
stage in man; on the other hand, the faculty of 
memory was almost unlimited. Externally it 
appeared as if man had direct knowledge of the 
working forces of every living being. He had at 
his disposal the vital and generative forces of 
animal and, more especially, of vegetable nature.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 249

t

He was able, for instance, to draw out of a plant 
the force which impels it to grow, and to use that 
force, just as w% use the forces of inanimate nature ; 
fo» example, that dormant in coal is extricated 
and used for propelling engines. ‘The inner psychic life of man was also trans- 
formed in many different ways by the Lucifer 
influence. Many kinds of feelings and emotions 
due to it might be instanced. Of these only one 
can be mentioned. P’^eviously to this influence 
the human soul, in what it shaped and perfonncd, 
had worked under the will and purposes of higher 
spiritual beings. The plan of everything that 
was to be carried out was determined on before- 
hand. And in proportion to the degree to which 
htiman consciousness was evolved, was it able to 
foresee how things must develop in the future in 
accordance with that preconceived plan. That 
consciousness of the future was lost when the 
veil of earthly perceptions was woven across the 
manifestations of higher spiritual beings and in 
these the real forces of the Sun-spirits were hid- 
den. Henceforth the future became uncertain, 
and in conseqiience of this the possibility of fear 
was implanted in the soul. Fear is a direct result 
of error.

It is however evident that through the Lucifer 
influence ’ man became independent of certain

^ Further particulars oii this subject will be found in my book, 
Atlantis and Lemuria^ which deals with man’s ancestors,

2 50 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

(‘

definite forces to which he had previously sub- 
mitted without the exercise of his will. Hence- 
forward he was able to form resolutions of his 
own. Freedom is the result of the Lucifer -in- 
fluence, and fear and similar feelings are only 
the phenomena attendant on the evolution of 
human freedom.Spiritually seen, fear makes its appearance in 
this way. Within the earth-forces under the in- 
fluence of which man had come by means of the 
Luciferian powers, other powers were operating, 
which had developed irregularly much earlier in 
the course of evolution than the Luciferian powers. 
With the earth-forces man admitted into his 
nature the influence of these other powers. They 
gave to feelings, which without them would have 
operated quite differently, the quality of fear. 
They may be called Ahrimanic beings. They are 
the same as those which Goethe calls Mephis- 
tophelian.

Although the Lucifer influence had at first 
made itself felt only in the mo.st advanced in- 
dividuals, it soon became extended to others. 
The descendants of the advanced individuals 
were interbred with the less progressive described 
above, and in this way the Lucifer force was con- 
veyed to the latter. But the etheric body of the 
souls returning from the plants could not be 
protected to the same extent as the one pos- 
sessed by the descendants of those who had

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 251

»EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 251

»

remained on earth. The protection of this body 
emanated from an exalted being who had the 
direction of the cosmos at the separation of the 
sun* from the earth. That being is the ruler of 
the sun kingdom. With him there removed to 
the dwelling place in the sun those lofty spirits 
whose cosmic development had sufficiently ma- 
tured them. But there were other beings who 
had not reached such a height at the separation 
of the sun ; these were obliged to seek other 
spheres. It was through their instrumentality 
that Jupiter and other planets became detached 
from that general cosmic substance which at the 
outset was in the earthly physical organism. 
Jupiter now became the abode of those beings 
who were not highly developed enough to live 
on the sun, and the most advanced of these be- 
came the leader on Jupiter. The leader of the 
Sun-evolution became the “higher ego” which 
worked in the etheric body of the descendants 
of those who had remained on earth.

In a similar way the leader on Jupiter became 
the “higher ego” passing as a common con- 
sciousness through the posterity which resulted 
from the crossing of the offspring of those who 
had remained on earth with those who had ap- 
peared on earth for the first time during the 
period of _ the air element, as described above, 
and had passed over to Jupiter. This mixed 
race may be called, in conformity with occult

252 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

f

science, “ Jupiter-humanity.” They were scions 
of the human race who had adopted human 
sotils far back in that ancient ‘time; but who, 
at the beginning of earthly evolution, were* not 
yet mature enough to take part in the first con- 
tact with fire. They were souls midway between 
the human and animal soul-kingdoms.Now there were other beings who, under the 
leadership of one of the highest, had detached 
iVIars from the general cosmic substance, that it 
might be their dwelling place. Under their influ- 
ence there arose a third kind of humanity, formed 
by interbreeding, the “ Mars-hiunanity . ' ’ (By 
means of this knowledge, light is thrown on the 
origin of the formation of the planets of our solar 
system; for all the members of that system orig- 
inated through the various stages of maturity 
reached by the beings inhabiting them. But it 
is of course not possible to enter into all the details 
of cosmic formation here.) Those people who 
felt in their etheric body the influence of the 
exalted Sun -being himself, may be called “Sun- 
humanity.” The being who lived in them as the 
higher ego — of course only in the race, not in the 
individual, — is the same to whom various names 
were given in later times, when man had gained 
conscious knowledge of him, and who appears 
to the human race to-day as the Christ.

“ Saturn -humanity ” is also to be distinguished 
at that time. The “higher ego” of this race

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 253“ Saturn -humanity ” is also to be distinguished 
at that time. The “higher ego” of this race

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 253

appeared *as a being who with his associates had 
been forced to leave the general cosmic substance 
before the sepjft-ation of the sun. Part of the 
physical, no less than of the etheric body of these 
people, was exempt from the Lucifer influence. 
But the etheric body was nevertheless not suffi- 
ciently protected in the lowlier races of mankind 
to be able to resist the influences of the Lucifer 
nature. These people could extend the free action 
of the spark of the egt- within them so far as to 
call forth potent and mischievous effects of fire 
around them. The result was a mighty terres- 
trial catastrophe. A large part of the then 
inhabited earth was wrecked by fiery storms, and 
with it the human beings that had fallen into 
error. Only a very small proportion, some of 
whom had remained untouched by error, were 
able to take refuge in a region whieh had so far 
been shielded from the fatal human influence.

The country occupying that part of the earth 
now covered by the Atlantic Ocean proved to be 
peculiarly well fitted for the abode of the new 
human race. Thither did those people repair who 
had remained most free from error. Only those 
cut off from the main body of humanity inhabited 
other regions. Occult science gives the name of 
“Atlantis” to that part of the earth which once 
existed between the present continents of Europe, 
Africa, and America. (This particular stage of 
human evolution has its special nomenclature

2 54 an outline of occult science2 54 an outline of occult science

in theosophical literature. The period 'preceding 
the Atlantean is called the Lemurian age, whereas 
that during which the Moon-for«es had not yet 
fully developed is called the Hyperborean age. 
This is preceded by yet another, which coincides 
with the earliest period of the evolution of the 
physical earth. Biblical tradition describes the 
period before the influence of Lucifer-beings came 
into play as the Paradise time, and the descent to 
earth, or entanglement of humanity in the sense- 
world, as the expulsion from Paradise.)

The Atlantean period of evolution was the real 
time of separation into Saturn, Sun, Jupiter, and 
Mars humanity. Up to that time only predis- 
positions in those directions had been developed. 
The division of the waking state from sleep had 
special consequences, which appeared particularly 
in the Atlantean race. During the night the 
human astral body and ego were in the sphere of 
the beings superior to man, as far up as the Sons of 
Personality. Alan could feel the influence of the 
Sons of Life and the Sons of Fire through that 
part of his etheric body which was not united 
with the physical body. For he was able to re- 
main united, during sleep, with that part of his 
etheric body which was not interpenetrated by 
the physical body. It is true his perception of 
the Sons of Personality was vague, owing to the 
Lucifer influence; but there became 'visible to 
man, in this condition, not only the Angels and

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 255EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 255

Archangels but also those beings who were not 
able to enter upon earthly existence because they 
had lagged behind on the Sun or Moon, and were 
therefore obliged to remain in the psycho-spiritual 
world. But man, by means of the Lucifer in- 
fluence, drew them into that part of his soul which 
was separated from his physical body. Hence he 
came into contact with beings who led him very 
far astray. They increased, in his soul, the 
propensity to error; especially the misuse of the 
powers of growth and reproduction, which since 
the separation of the physical and ctheric bodies 
were now under his control.

It was now made possible for certain individuals 
of the Atlantean period to become very little 
entangled in the sense-world. Through them, 
the Lucifer influence was turned from being a 
hindrance to human evolution into a means of 
further progress. It enabled them to develop 
knowledge of earthly matters sooner than would 
otherwise have been possible. They sought to 
expel error from their imaginative life, and to 
interpret from cosmic phenomena the original 
purposes of spiritual beings. They kept them- 
selves free from those impulses and desires of the 
astral body which were directed merely toward 
the sense- world. Hence they became more and 
more free from the errors of the astral body. 
This induced in them conditions through which 
they were able to confine their perceptions to

2 56 AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE2 56 AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

that part of the etheric body which was Separated 
from the astral body in the manner described 
above. Under these cotiditions the capacity of 
the physical body for perception was practicg.lly 
annihilated, and the physical body itself was as 
if dead. For through the etheric body, these 
people were wholly united with the kingdom of 
the Lords of Form, and were able to learn from 
them how they were being guided and directed 
by that exalted being who was the leader at the 
separation of sun and earth, - by the “Christ.” 
These people were Initiates. But since human 
individuality had been brought into the sphere of 
the Moon-beings, as described above, these Ini- 
tiates could not as a rule come into direct contact 
with the Christ; they could only be shown him 
reflected, as it were, by the Moon-beings.

In this case they did not see the Christ directly, 
but only his reflected glory. 'I'hcy became leaders 
of the rest of humanity, to whom they were able 
to impart the mysteries they had seen. They 
attracted disciples, to whom they communicated 
the methods for attaining the condition which 
leads to Initiation. Only those could attain 
knowledge of the Christ who were members of the 
Sim-humanity mentioned above. They cultivated 
their mystic learning, and the occupations which 
promoted it, at a particular spot which, in con- 
formity with occult science, may be 'called the 
Christ oracle, or Sun oracle, the term “oracle”

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 257

being us5d to denote a place where the purposes 
of spiritual beings are unveiled.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 257

being us5d to denote a place where the purposes 
of spiritual beings are unveiled.

Other oracle* were called into being by the 
mepibers of the Saturn, Mars, and Jupiter human- 
ity. The intuitive vision of their Initiates was 
confined to seeing those beings who were revealed 
to them in their etheric bodies as their respective 
“higher egos.” Thus there arose adherents of 
the Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars wisdom. Besides 
these methods of Initiation, there were others for 
people who had assimilated too much of the Lucifer 
spirit to allow as large a part of the etheric body 
to be separated from the physical body as was the 
case with the Sun-hiunanity. The astral body of 
these people kept back even more of the etheric 
within the physical body than did the Sim- 
humanity^ Nor could they be brought to the 
revelation of the Christ through the conditions 
mentioned above. Because their astral body was 
more influenced by the Lucifer principle, they were 
obliged to undergo a more difficult preparatioh, 
and then, in a less disembodied state than the 
others, they were able to receive the revelation, 
not indeed of the Christ himself, but of other 
exalted beings.

There were beings who, although they had left 
the earth at the separation of the sun, did not 
stand on Such a high level that they were able to 
continue taking part in the Sun evolution. They 
formed an abode for themselves away from the

18

2 58 2\N outline of occult science18

2 58 2\N outline of occult science

sun, after its separation from the earth n this was 
Venus. Their leader was the being who now 
became the “higher ego” of theses Initiates and 
their adherents. A similar thing happened with 
the leading spirit of Mercury for another variety 
of people. In this way there arose the Venus and 
Mercury oracles. One kind of human beings, 
who had most absorbed the Lucifer influence, 
could reach only one of the higher beings who, 
with his associates, had been expelled earliest of 
all from the Sun evolution. This being owns no 
particular planet in space, but still lives within 
the periphery of the earth, with which he was once 
more united after the return from the sun. The 
people to whom this being was revealed as their 
higher ego may be called the followers of the 
Vulcan oracle. Their attention was more directed 
to earthly phenomena than that of "the other 
Initiates. They laid the first foundations of 
what afterwards became the human arts and 
sciences. On the other hand, the Mercury Ini- 
tiates established the study of the more super- 
sensible things; and the Venus Initiates did this 
to a still greater extent.

The Vulcan, Mercury, and Venus Initiates 
dift'ered from those of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars 
in that the latter received their Mysteries more as 
a revelation from above, and in a more complete 
state; whereas the former gained their knowledge 
more in the form of their own thoughts, — in the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 259

form of* ideas. The Christ Initiates occupied a 
middle position. Together with the direct revela- 
tion, they rec«ived the capacity for clothing their 
Masteries in a human form of conception. The 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars Initiates were obliged 
to express themselves more in sense-images; the 
Christ, Venus, Mercury, and Vulcan Initiates 
were able to impart their knowledge more through 
ideas pure and simple.Whatever knowledge of this kind reached 
Atlantean humanity came indirectly through the 
Initiates. But the rest of mankind also received 
special faculties through the Lucifer principle; 
for, through the agency of lofty cosmic beings, 
what would have wrought ruin was turned to a 
good end. One of these faculties was that of 
speech. ^This was bestowed upon man through 
his being materialized into physical substance 
and through the separation of part of his etheric 
from his physical body. In the times after the 
moon had split off, man at first felt himself con- 
nected with his physical ancestors through the 
group-ego. But this common consciousness, link- 
ing posterity with its ancestors, was gradually 
lost in the course of generations. Later descend- 
ants had an inner memory of only their more 
recent ancestors, no longer of their earlier fore- 
fathers. Tt was only in the conditions akin to 
sleep, during which mankind came into contact 
with the spiritual world, that the remembrance

26 o

AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

of one ancestor or another again emerged^ Then 
people felt themselves one with that ancestor 
whom they believed to be reappe&ring in them. 
This was an erroneous idea of reincarnation, which 
arose especially in the later Atlantean period. The 
true doctrine of reincarnation could be learned 
only in the schools of the Initiates. They could 
see how the human soul passes through the disem- 
bodied state on its way from one incarnation to 
another, and they alone were able to impart the 
real truth of the matter to their disciples.In the remote past which is now under consid- 
eration, man’s physical form was very different 
from his present form. It was still, to a great 
extent, the expression of the qualities of his soul. 
Man was composed of a softer and more delicate 
substance than that which he has since acquired. 
That which is now solidified was then in the limbs 
soft, flexible, and plastic. The bodily structure 
of the more psychic and spiritual human beings 
was delicate, supple, and expressive. Those less 
evolved spiritually possessed coarser, heavier, 
less mobile bodily forms. A high degree of 
psychic maturity contracted the limbs, and the 
form was kept small; backwardness of the soul 
and entanglement in sensuality were outwardly 
expressed in gigantic size. While man was grow- 
ing to maturity his body was being formed, in ac- 
cordance with what was growing in his soul, in a 
way which wotdd appear incredible and fantastic

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 261

to contemporary ideas. Depraved passions, im- 
pulses, and instincts brought in their train a 
colossal incre^e of matter. Man’s present phys- 
ical form has come about through a contraction, 
thickening, and consolidation of the Atlantean 
himian form. And whereas man, before the 
Atlantean period, had been a faithful image of his 
soul’s being, the events of Atlantean evolution 
bore within them the causes conducing to the 
structure of post -Atlantean man, whose physical 
form is solid and comparatively independent of 
the qualities of the soul. (The forms of the animal 
kingdom became dense on earth long before man.) 
The laws now governing the shaping of forms in 
the kingdom of nature must certainly not be 
thought of as prevailing in the remote past.Toward the middle of the Atlantean evolution 
evil gradually made itself felt in hmnanity. The 
Mysteries of the Initiates had to be carefully kept 
secret from those who had not purified their astral 
bodies from error. Had these gained insight into 
that hidden knowledge, into the laws by means of 
which higher beings directed the forces of nature, 
they would have placed those forces at the dis- 
posal of their own perverted needs and passions. 
The danger was all the greater tiecause mankind 
was coming, as has been described, into the sphere 
of lower spiritual beings, who could not take part 
in the regular evolution of the earth and were 
therefore working against it. These persistently

262 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

influenced humanity in such a way as to instil 
into it interests which were actually directed 
against hiunan welfare. But manlcind still had 
at its disposal the forces of growth and reproduc- 
tion belonging to animal and human nature.

Not only ordinary people, but also some of 
the Initiates, were subject to temptation on the 
part of lower spiritual beings. They were induced 
to employ the supersensible forces mentioned 
above for a purpose which ran counter to human 
evolution. And for this purpose they sought out 
associates who were not initiated, and who made 
use of the secrets of the supersensible forces of 
nature for low ends. The result was a great cor- 
ruption of human nature. The evil spread further 
and further; and since the forces of growth and 
generation, if tom from their original sphere and 
used independently, have a mysterious connec- 
tion with certain forces working in air and water, 
there were thus unchained, through human action, 
mighty, destructive natural forces which led to 
the gradual min of the Atlantean territory by the 
agency of air and water catastrophes. Atlantean 
htunanity was obliged to wander forth — that 
portion of it, at least, which did not perish in the 
storms.In consequence of these storms the earth took 
on a new aspect. On one side, Europe, Asia, 
and Africa gradually assumed their present shape; 
on the other, America appeared. Great companies

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 263

of wanderers set out for these countries. Those 
who journeyed^ eastward from Atlantis are espe- 
cially important for us of to-day. Europe, Asia, 
and Africa were gradually colonized by the 
descendants of the Atlanteans. Various races 
fixed their abode in these continents. They were 
at different stages of development, and also at 
different levels of corruption. And with them 
came the Initiates, guardians of the oracle-Mys- 
teries. They establi.shed sanctuaries in various 
parts, in which the cults of Jupiter, Venus, etc., 
were carried on, sometimes in a good, sometimes 
in a bad spirit. The betrayal of the Vulcan 
Mysteries exercised a specially unfavourable influ- 
ence, for the attention of their adherents was more 
directed to earthly matters than was that of the 
others. By this betrayal, mankind was made 
dependent on spiritual beings who, as a result of 
their past evolution, rejected everything emanating 
from the spiritual world which had been evolved 
through the separation of the earth from the sun. 
In accordance with the tendency they had thus 
developed, they worked upon just that element in 
man which was formed through his having per- 
ceptions of the sense-world, behind which the 
spiritual world lies hidden. Thenceforward these 
beings acquired great influence over many of the 
human inhabitants of earth, and their influence 
first asserted itself by depriving mankind more 
and more of the feeling for spiritual things.

264 an outline of occult science264 an outline of occult science

Since the size, form, and flexibility of che phys- 
ical human body were still largely affected by the 
qualities of the soul, the consequence of the be- 
trayal of the Mysteries also appeared in changes 
of the himian race in these respects. Wlien 
human corruption expressed itvself in the fact 
that supersensible powers were made subservient 
to lower impulses, desires, and passions, mis- 
shapen human forms, grotesque in size and .shape, 
were the result. These were not able to survive 
the Atlantean period, and became extinct. Post- 
Atlantean humanity was fonned physically from 
those Atlantean <ancestors in whom such a solidi- 
fication of the bodily form had taken place that 
it no longer yielded to the powers of the soul, 
which thenceforth became abnormal.

There was a certain period in Atlantqan evolu- 
tion during which, by means of the laws prevailing 
on and around the earth, just those conditions 
obtained which tended to consolidate man’s 
bodily form. 'Phe human race-types which had 
been solidified before this period were certainly 
able to reproduce themselves for a long time, but 
the souls incarnating in them were gradually so 
cramped that the forms were bound to become 
extinct. It is true that many of these race-types 
survived to post-Atlantean times; those which 
had remained sufficiently plastic lasted even for 
a very long time. The human forms which had 
remained flexible after the period described became

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 265

bodies for such souls as had largely undergone 
the pernicious influence of the betrayal described 
above. Thes€ forms were destined to speedy 
extinction.EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 265

bodies for such souls as had largely undergone 
the pernicious influence of the betrayal described 
above. Thes€ forms were destined to speedy 
extinction.

In consequence of what had happened in this 
way, beings had made them.selves felt in the sphere 
of hiunan evolution, since the middle of the At- 
lantean period, whose influence tended to make 
mankind live in the physical world of sense in an 
unspiritual manner. This went so far that, 
instead of man’s seeing the real form of that world, 
phantoms, hallucinations, and illusions of every 
kind appeared to him. Mankind was exposed 
not merely to the Lucifer influence but to that of 
those other beings mentioned above, whose leader 
may be called Ahriman, according to the appella- 
tion given him later in the Persian civilization. 
(He is the same as Mephistopheles.) Through 
this influence man was subject, after death, to 
powers which made him appear even then as a 
being belonging only to earthly conditions of the 
senses. Open vision of the events of the spiritual 
world was more and more taken from him. He 
was forced to feel himself in Ahriman’s power, 
an(^ to a certain extent shut out from intercourse 
with the spiritual world.

There was one oracle-sanctuary of special 
importatlce, which in the universal decline had 
preserved the ancient cult in its purest form. It 
was one of the Christ oracles, and on that account

206 AX OUTLLNli OF OCCULT SCIENCE206 AX OUTLLNli OF OCCULT SCIENCE

it was able to preserve nut only the Chr^t Mys- 
tery itself but those of the other oracles. For in 
the manifestation of the loftiest', of the Sun- 
spirits, there were also revealed the leaders ^pf 
Saturn, Jupiter, and the other planets. In the 
Sun oracle there tvas known the secret of calling 
forth, in one or another huinait being, such human 
etheric bodies as had been owned by the best of 
the Jupiter, Mercury, tind other Initiates. By 
means of the methods used for this purpose, which 
cannot be further dealt witli Itcre, the impressions 
of the best ethcric bodies of the ancient Initiates 
were preserved, in order timt they might subse- 
quently be stamped upon suitable individuals. 
The like could be done with the astral bodies of 
the Venus, Mercury, and Vulcan Initiates.

At a certain point of time the leader of the Christ 
Initiates found himself isolated with a few asso- 
ciates, to whom he was able to impart, to a very 
limited extent only, the mysteries of the cosmos. 
For those associates were people who had received 
as a natiiral gift tin* least i,)ossiljle degree of 
separation between the physical and etheric 
bodies. They were alt(igether, at that time, the 
best possible people for })romoting the furftier 
progress of humanity. Their experiences in the 
realm of sleep had become rarer and rarer. The 
spiritual world w^as more and more closed to them. 
But they were also lacking in the comprehension 
of all that had been revealed to man in ancient

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 267EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 267

times whfcn he was not in his physical, but only in 
his etheric body. The people immediately sur- 
rounding the l<ftider of the Christ oracle were the 
farthest advanced with regard to the union of the 
physical body with that part of the etheric body 
which had previously been separated from it. 
This union came about in human nature by little 
and little, as a result of the transformation which 
had taken place with regard to Atlantean terri- 
tory and the earth generally.

The physical and etneric bodies of man were 
being more and more covered up. Hence the 
memory lost its former unlimited capacity, and 
the human life of thought began. 'I'hat part of 
the etheric which was united with the physical 
body transformed the physical brain into an 
actual instrument of thought, and man from this 
time first really felt his “ego” within his physical 
body. Self-consciousncss awoke. This was at 
first the case with only a limited number of the 
human race, eminently with the associates of the 
leader of the Christ oracle. The bulk of hitmanity, 
scattered over Europe, Asia, and Africa, retained 
in varying degrees the remains of the old condition 
of consciousness. Hence they had direct experi- 
ence of the supersensible world.

The associates of the Christ Initiate were people 
of highly developed intelligence but of less expe- 
rience in Supersensible spheres than any of their 
contemporaries. The Initiate journeyed with

268 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE268 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

them to a country in central Asia. Re wished 
them to be guarded as much as possible from 
contact with those of less developed consciousness. 
He educated these associates of his in the spirit 
of the Mysteries unfolded to him, and specially 
influenced their descendants in this way. Thus 
he gathered round him a band of people who had 
received into their hearts the impulses correspond- 
ing to the Mysteries of the Christ Initiation. Out 
of this company he chose the seven best, that 
they might be endowed with the etheric and 
astral bodies which bore the impress of the etheric 
bodies of the seven best Atlantean Initiates. 
Thus he educated a successor to each of the 
Christ, Saturn. Jupiter, Mars, Vulcan, Mercury, 
and Venus Initiates. These seven Initiates be- 
came the teachers and leaders of the people who, 
in the post-Atlantean period, had colonized the 
south of Asia, especially ancient India. Since 
these great teachers were really endowed with 
the etheric bodies of their spiritual ancestors, 
what was in their astral body, that is, the science 
and knowledge they had themselves worked out, 
was not enough for what was revealed to them 
through their etheric body. Therefore when 
these revelations were about to be uttered within 
them, they were obliged to impose silence on their 
own science and knowledge. Then the exalted 
beings who had also spoken to their spirituai 
ancestors spoke out of and through them. Except

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 269

during the times when these beings were speaking 
through them, they were simple people, endowed 
with the meastfre of intelligence and feeling which 
they had cultivated and worked out for themselves.There lived at this time in India a race of 
people who had retained a specially vivid remem- 
brance of the ancient soul-condition of the Atlan- 
teans, which allowed of experiences in the spiritual 
world. Moreover, the heart and soul of a great 
number of these people were powerfully attracted 
by such experiences. By a wise decree of fate, 
the majority of the race had come to southern 
Asia from among the best portions of the Atlantean 
population. Besides this majority, other Atlan- 
teans had migrated thither at different times. 
The Christ Initiate, referred to above, appointed 
his seven great disciples to be the teachers of this 
association of people, to whom they imparted 
their wisdom and precepts. Many of these an- 
cient Indians needed but little preparation for 
reviving within them the scarcely extinct faculties 
leading to observation of the supersensible world. 
For longing after that world was really a funda- 
mental quality of the Indian soul. It was felt that 
man’s original home was in that world. Out of it 
he is transplanted into this one, which offers only 
outer sense-observation and the intelligence con- 
nected with it.

The stfpersensible world was felt to be the 
real world, and the sense- world to be a deception

2 70 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCEThe stfpersensible world was felt to be the 
real world, and the sense- world to be a deception

2 70 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

of the hiiman power of observation, ah illusion 
(Maya). By every possible means did these 
people strive to open up a view of the real world. 
They could take no interest in the illusory sense- 
world, or at any rate only so far as it proved to 
be a veil for the supersensible. The power going 
out from the seven great teachers to such people 
as these, was a mighty one. What they were able 
to reveal entered deeply into the Indian soul ; and 
since the possession of the transmitted cthcric and 
astral bodies invested the teachers with lofty 
powers, they were also able to work magically on 
their disciples. They did not really teach: they 
worked as though by magical power from one 
personality to another. Thus there arose a civi- 
lization completely saturated with supersensible 
wi.sdom. The contents of the wisdom books of 
the Hindus, the Vedas, do not give the original 
form of the lofty wisdom imparted by the great 
teachers in the most ancient times, but only a 
feeble echo of it. Only the seer’s eye, looking 
back, is able to find an unwritten original wisdom 
behind the written words.

A specially prominent feature of this ancient 
wisdom is the harmonious accord of the various 
wisdom oracles of the Atlantean time. For each of 
the great teachers was able to imveil the wisdom 
of one of these oracles, and these different aspects 
of wisdom were in complete harmony, because 
the fundamental wisdom of the Christ Initiation

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 271EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 271

underlaj" them. It is true the teacher who was 
the successor of the Christ Initiate did not impart 
to his discipl<?s what the Christ Initiate himself 
was able to reveal. The latter had remained in 
the background during this period of evolution. 
At first he was unable to entrust his high office to 
any post-Atlantean. The difference between him 
and the Christ Initiate of the seven great Indian 
teachers was that the formc'r was able to work his 
vision of the Christ Mystery completely into the 
form of human ideas, whereas the Indian Christ 
Initiate could only offer a reflection of the Mystery 
in signs and symbols; for his humanl}?- cultivated 
power of conception did not .suffice for such a 
My.stery. However, from the imion of the seven 
teachers there resrilted a knowledge of the super- 
sensible world, presented in one great wisdom- 
panorama, of which only separate portions could 
be imparted in the ancient Atlantean oracles. 
The great leaders of tlie cosmic world were 
revealed, and there was just indicated the One 
great Sun-spirit, tlie Hidden One, ruling over 
those who were manifested through the seven 
teaehers.

What is here meant by “ancient Indians” is 
not the same as what is u,sually understood by 
that term. No outer documents exist of the 
period iff question. The people usually known as 
“Indians” belong to a .stage of historical evolution 
which was developed long after the time spoken of

2 72 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE '2 72 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE '

here. We have to distinguish a first post-Atlan- 
tean period of the earth, in which the Indian 
civilization now described was the. predominant 
one; then came a second post-Atlantean period 
in which the prevailing civilization was that 
which later in this work is called the “ancient 
Persian,’’ and still later there was developed the 
Egypto-Chaldean civilization, also to be de- 
scribed. During the evolution of these second and 
third post-Atlantean epochs, “ancient” India also 
went through a second and third epoch, and to 
this third epoch belongs what is usually related 
of ancient India. What is described here must 
therefore not be applied to the “ancient India” 
mentioned elsewhere.

Another feature of this ancient Indian civiliza- 
tion is that which afterward led to the division 
of the race into castes. The inhabitants of India 
were descendants of Atlanteans who belonged to 
the various types of Satum-humanity, Jupiter- 
humanity, etc. By means of supersensible teach- 
ings it was seen that it is not by chance that a 
soul is incarnated in a particular caste, but that 
the soul itself has determined its lot. Such an un- 
derstanding of supersensible teachings was made 
much easier, because it was possible to revive in 
many people the inner remembrance of their 
ancestors which has been described above: this, 
of course, might also easily lead to an eiToneous 
idea of reincarnation. Just as, in the Atlantean

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 273EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 273

age, it was only through the Initiates that the 
true idea of reincarnation could be realized, so in 
India, in the itiost ancient times, it was possible 
only through direct contact with the great teachers. 
It is true that the erroneous idea of reincarnation 
mentioned above found the widest acceptance 
imaginable among the bands of people who were 
dispersed over Europe, Asia, and Africa in con- 
sequence of the Atlantean catastrophe. And 
because the Initiates who had gone astray during 
the Atlantean evolution had imparted the mys- 
tery of reincarnation to immature souls, mankind 
began to confuse more and more the true and the 
erroneous ideas. Many of these people indeed 
retained a kind of dim clairvoyance, as a heritage 
from the Atlantean period. Just as the Atlanteans 
had entered the spiritual world during sleep, their 
descendants had experience of it in abnormal 
states, intermediate between sleeping and waking. 
Then there came uppermost in these people the 
images of the ancient times of their forefathers. 
They believed themselves to be reincarnations of 
people who had lived in those times. Teachings 
about reincarnation, which were at vai'iance with 
the true ideas of the Initiates, were widely spread 
over the earth.

As a result of the long-continued migrations 
which had set in from west to east since the 
beginning of the Atlantean catastrophe, there had 
settled in western Asia an association of people

19

2 74 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE19

2 74 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

whose posterity is known to history as the> Persian 
nation and the tribes related to it. Here we are 
going back to a much earlier period than the histo- 
rical times of these nations. We have first to deal 
with very early ancestors of the later Persians, 
among whom arose the second great civilization 
of post-Atlantcan evolution, that next after the 
Indian period. The peoples of this second era 
had a different mission from that of the Indians. 
Their affections and longings were not fixed on 
the supersensible world only: they were fitted for 
the physical world of sense, and their feelings were 
drawn toward the earth. They valued what man 
is able to acquire on it, and what he is able to 
win by means of its forces. Their achievements 
as a warlike people, and the methods which they 
discovered of acquiring the earth’s treasures, are 
connected with this peculiarity of their nature. 
There was no danger of their turning their backs 
upon the “illusion” of the physical senses in their 
yearning after the supersensible, but rather of 
their entirely severing the connection of their 
souls with the supersensible world, through their 
liking for the physical world.

The oracle-sanctuaries, which had been trans- 
ferred hither from the ancient Atlantean territory, 
also reflected, in their own way, the general 
character of the nation. In them forces were 
present which it had formerly been possible to 
acquire through cxi>eriences in the supcr.sensible

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 27sEVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 27s

world, *and which could still be controlled in 
certain lower forms; these forces were used in the 
sanctuaries t<9 direct the phenomena of nature in 
such a way as to make them subserve man’s 
personal interests. This ancient people still had 
a great mastery over those forces of nature which 
subsequently withdi'ew from the influence of the 
human will. The guardians of the oracles gov- 
erned certain inner forces connected with fire and 
other elements. They might be called magicians. 
What supersensible knowledge and force they had 
retained as a heritage from ancient times was 
certainly slight in comparison with man’s powers 
in the remote past. But it nevertheless took all 
kinds of forms, from noble arts, the only object of 
which was the welfare of htunanity, down to the 
most reprehensible transactions.

The Lucifer influence held sway over these 
people in a peculiar manner. It had brought 
them into connection with everything which 
diverts mankind from the purposes of those 
exalted beings who alone would have guided human 
evolution, had not the Luciferian influence inter- 
posed. Even those members of the race who 
were still gifted with some remains of the old 
clairvoyant condition, described above as a state 
intermediate between sleeping and waking, felt 
themselves powerfully attracted by the lower 
beings o*f the spiritual world. In order to counter- 
act these characteristic qualities it was necessary

2 76 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

that a spiritual impulse should be givemto the 
nation. A leader was sent to it, by the guardian 
of the Mysteries of the Sun oracle, fi*om the same 
source from which the spiritual life of ancient 
India proceeded.The leader of ancient Pei'sian civilization, who 
was sent by the guardian of the Sun oracle to the 
nation now under consideration, may be desig- 
nated by the same name as the historical Zara- 
thustra, or Zoroaster. Only the fact must be 
emphasized that the personality indicated belongs 
to a much earlier period than the historical pos- 
sessor of the name. In this connection it is not 
a question of outer historical research, but of 
spiritual knowledge. And any one who instinc- 
tively thinks of a later time in connection with the 
bearer of the name Zarathustra may reconcile 
this idea with occult science on learning that 
the historical character represents himself as a 
successor of the first great Zarathustra, whose 
name he took, and in the spirit of whose teaching 
he worked.

The impulse which Zarathustra had to give 
to his people consisted in his showing them that 
the physical world of sense is not merely the 
lifeless material, devoid of spirit, which it appears 
to a man who gives himself up exclusively to the 
influence of the Lucifer nature. To this nature 
man owes his personal independence and sense of 
freedom: but these .should work within him in

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 277

harmony with that spiritual nature which is their 
opposite. With the pre-historic Persians it was 
a question of*keeping alive the sense of this last- 
named spiritual-nature. Through their affection 
for the physical world of vsense they were threat- 
ened with complete absorption into the Luciferian 
beings. Now Zarathustra, through the guardian 
of the Sitn oracle, had received such an Initia- 
tion as enabled him to receive the revelations of 
the great Sun-spirits. In particular states of his 
consciousness, brought about by his training, he 
was able to see the leader of the Sitn-spirits, who, 
as described above, had taken under his protec- 
tion the human etheric body.Zarathustra knew that this spirit directs the 
counse of human evolution, but that he must 
first, at a certain time, descend to earth out of 
cosmic space. For this purpose it was necessary 
that he should be able to live in a human astral 
body, just as, since the incoming of the Lucifer 
nature, he had worked in the etheric body. It 
was therefore necessary that a man should appear 
who had transformed the astral body back again 
up to such a level as it would have reached with- 
out Lucifer at a certain period in the past (the 
middle of the Atlantean evolution). Had Lucifer 
not appeared, man would certainly have attained 
this level before, but without personal independ- 
ence or the possibility of freedom. Now, how- 
ever, in spite of those qualities he was again to

2 78 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

rise to this height. Zarathustra, when endowed 
with prophetic vision, could see that in time to 
come a personality would be possible, within 
human evolution, who would have a suitable 
astral body for the purpose. But he also knew 
that the great Sun-spirit would not appear on 
earth before that time, though he could be per- 
ceived by a seer in the spiritual part of the 
Sun. By directing his seer’s gaze to the Sun, 
Zarathustra was able to see this spirit, whom he 
proclaimed to his people. He announced that 
the Sun-spirit was at first to be found only in the 
spiritual world, but that later he would dc-^-cend 
to earth.This was the proclamation of the great Sun- 
spirit, or Spirit of Light (the aura of the Sun, 
Ahura-mazdao, Ormuzd). He was revealed to 
Zarathustra and his followers as the spirit who for 
the time being was turning the light of his counte- 
nance on man from the spiritual world, and who 
might be expected to appear within the human 
race in the future. It was Christ, before his 
appearance on earth, whom Zarathustra pro- 
claimed as the Spirit of Light. On the other 
hand he represented Ahriman (Angra mainju) 
as a power working injuriously on the life of the 
human soul, if it engrosses that soul completely. 
This power is none other than the one described 
above, which had acquired special dominion 
over the earth since the betrayal of the Vulcan

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 2 ^)

Mysteries. Togetlier with the message conceniing 
the Light God, Zarathustra proclaimed teachings 
about those sj!iritual beings who are manifested 
to the seer’s purified perception as associates of 
the Spirit of Light. These are in strong contrast 
to the tempters who appeared to the unpurified 
clairvoyance which was loft over from the At- 
lantcan period. It had to be made clear to the 
primitive Persians that in man’s .soul, so far as 
it is concentrated on work and struggle in the 
physical wcjrld of scn.se, a conflict is going on 
between the power of the Light God and his 
adversary. It had also to bt^ shown them how 
man must ricf so as not to bo engulfed through 
Ahriman, ]:)ut s<j as to turn his influence to good 
through tlie might of the Light God.The third era of post-Atlantean civilization 
began among the jicoplcs who finally came 
together in western Asia and northern Africa after 
the migrations. 'Phis civilization was developed 
among the Chaldeans, Babylonians, and Assyri- 
ans on the one hand, and among the Egyptians 
on the other. In these nations the taste for the 
physical world of sense was developed in a different 
form from that which it had taken among the 
Persians. The former had accpiired much more 
than other nations of the temper of mind ly- 
ing at the root of the faculty of thought which 
has arisen since Atlantean times, that is, the 
gift of reason. Indeed, it was the mission of

28 o ax outline of occult science

post-Atlantenii Imnianity k) dp\vlop witAiii] itself 
those faciilti<'s of the soul which it was f)ossiblo 
to acquire through tlie newly aWakened powers 
of thought and feeling. T'hese powers canpot 
be directly stimulated from the spiritual world, 
but result from man’s observing the sense-world, 
becoming familiar with it, and working upon it. 
The conquest of the physical world of sense by 
these human faculties must be regarded as the 
mission of post-Atlantean humanity. Step by 
step does that conquest proceed.In ancient India, man’s attention was already, 
by the constitution of his soul, directed to the 
sense- world: but he still looked upon it as illu- 
sion, and his spirit turned to the supersensible 
world. In the Persian nation, on the contrary, 
there sprang up the endeavour to conquer the 
physical world of sense, but the attempt was still 
largely made with those powers of the soul which 
had been left over as an inheritance from the time 
when man could still reach the spiritual world 
directly. Among the peoples of the third epoch 
of civilization, the soul had for the most part 
lost the supersen-sible faculties. It was obliged 
to seek manifestations of the spiritual in the 
surrounding world of sense, and to continue 
its development by discovering the means of 
civilization existing in that world. Men sought 
to investigate, through the physical world of 
sense, the laws of the spiritual world underl5dng

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 281

it, and in this way himian sciences arose. Human 
technical skilly artistic work, and the instruments 
and methods of these came about through the 
recognition and use of the forces of the spiritual 
world. To a man of the Chaldaic-Babylonian 
race the sense-world was no longer an illusion 
but a manifestation, in its different kingdoms, 
in mountains and seas, in air and water, of the 
spiritual activity of powers existing behind it, 
whose laws man was striving to learn.To the Egyptian, the earth was a field of work, 
given to him in a condition which he must, by his 
own powers of intelligence, so transform that it 
should bear the impress of htmran power. From 
Atlantis, oracle-sanctuaries, originating chiefly 
from the Mercury oracle, had been transplanted 
to Egypt. Yet there were others as well, — for 
example, Venus oracles. A new seed of civili- 
zation was sown in what it was possible, through 
the oracle-sanctuaries, to cultivate in the Egyptian 
nation. This germ proceeded from a great leader 
who had received his training within the Persian 
Zarathustra Mysteries. (He was the reincarnated 
personality of a disciple of the great Zarathustra 
himself.) He may be called “Hermes.” By 
accepting the Zarathustra Mysteries he was able 
to find the I'ight way in which to guide the Egyp- 
tian nation. This nation had so turned its atten- 
tion to the physical world of sense, during earthly 
life between birth and death, that it was able only

282 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

to a limited extent to behold directly the spirit- 
world behind phenomena, but )jpt recognized 
spiritual laws in the physical world. Thus it 
could not be taught about the spiritual world as 
one with which it could become familiar during 
earth-life. But, on the other hand, it could be 
shown how man will live, in the disembodied state 
after death, with the world of those spirits who, 
during earthly life, appear through their counter- 
parts in the kingdom of physical sense.Hermes taught that man qualifies himself for 
union with spiritual forces after death, in propor- 
tion as he uses his powers on earth for furthering 
the purposes of those spiritual forces. In partic- 
ular, those who had worked most zealously in this 
way between birth and death would be united with 
the lofty Sun-!3pirit, Osiris. On the Chaldaic- 
Babylonian side of this stream of civilization the 
direction of the human mind toward the physical 
world of sense was more conspicuous than on the 
Egyptian side. The laws of that world were 
investigated, and on the basis of images of sense 
they were observed in spiritual archetypes. Yet 
in many respects the nation remained wedded 
to physical things. Instead of the star-spirit 
the star was put first, and instead of other spirit- 
ual beings their earthly counterparts were made 
prominent. Only the leaders attained to really 
deep knowledge concerning the laws of the super- 
sensible world and its connection with the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 283

physical. * The contrast between the knowledge of 
the Initiates an^ the perverted belief of the people 
asserted itself more strongly in these nations than 
any where else.physical. * The contrast between the knowledge of 
the Initiates an^ the perverted belief of the people 
asserted itself more strongly in these nations than 
any where else.

Quite different circumstances arose in those 
parts of southern Europe and western Asia where 
the fourth epoch of post-Atlantean civilization 
was unfolded. In harmony with occult science, 
it may be called the Greco-Roman period. De- 
scendants of peoples inliabiting the most widely 
distant parts of the older world had met together 
in these countries. Here were oracle-sanctuaries 
which conformed to the various Atlantean oracles; 
here were people with the heritage of the ancient 
clairvoyance as a natural gift, and others who were 
able to acquire it, with comparative ease, by 
training. The traditions of the ancient Initiates 
were not only preserved in special places, but 
worthy successors to them arose, who attracted 
disciples capable of rising to lofty levels of spiritual 
vision. Moreover, these races had within them 
the impulse to create in the sense-world a domain 
in which the spirit should be expressed in physi- 
cal substance in consummate forms.

Greek art is, among other things, a result of 
this impulse. It is only necessary to gaze with 
the eye of the spirit upon a Greek temple, in 
order to see that in this marvel of art material 
substance is so worked upon by man that it ap- 
pears in every detail as the expression of spirit.

284 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE284 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

A Greek temple is a “House of the Spirit." In 
its forms may be perceived what otherwise is 
beheld only by the spiritual eye of the seer. A 
temple of Zeus (or Jupiter) is so constructed as 
to present to the eye of sense a fitting shrine for 
what the guardian of the Zeus, or Jupiter, In- 
itiation saw with spiritual vision. And it is the 
same with all Greek art. The wisdom teachings 
of the Initiates flowed in mysterious ways into 
poets, artists, and thinkers. The Mysteries of 
the Initiates are found again, in the form of 
conceptions and ideas, in the systems of thought 
by which the ancient Greek philosophers inter- 
preted the universe. The influences of the spir- 
itual life, the Mysteries of the Asiatic and 
African sanctuaries of Initiation, flowed into these 
nations and their leaders. The great Indian 
teachers, the associates of Zarathustra, and the 
followers of Hermes had attracted disciples. 
These, or their successors, thereupon founded 
sanctuaries for Initiation, in which the ancient 
wisdom was revived in a new form. These were 
the Mysteries of the ancient world. Here dis- 
ciples were prepared for being brought into the 
conditions of consciousness through which they 
might attain vision of the spiritual world.' From 
these sanctuaries of Initiation the Mysteries flowed 
forth to those who cultivated Spiritual Mysteries

^ More detailed information about these Mysteries of the ancient 
world is to be found in my bc>ok, Das Christentum als mystische Tatsache, 
More particulars will be given in the last chapter of the present work.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 285

in Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy. (Important 
centres of Initiation were fonned in the Greek 
world in the drphic and Eleusinian Mysteries. 
In Pythagoras’s school of wisdom the great wis- 
dom teachings and methods of remote antiquity 
were in force. Pythagoras, on his distant travels, 
had been initiated into the secrets of the mostvarious kinds of Mysteries.)

=n *

*

But hiunan life between birth and death in the 
post-Atlantean period had also an influence on 
the disembodied state after death. The more 
man’s interests were fixed on the physical world 
of sense, the greater was the possibility of Ahri- 
man’s getting a hold over the soul during earthly 
life and retaining his power over it after death. 
This danger was least among the peoples of 
ancient India, for during earthly life they had felt 
the physical world of sense to be an illusion, and 
hence had eluded the power of Ahriman after 
death. So much the greater was the danger for the 
primitive Persian peoples, who between birth and 
death had fixed their attention, with great interest, 
on the physical world of sense. They would have 
largely fallen a prey to Ahriman’s wiles had not 
Zarathustra pointed out, in an impressive way, 
through his teaching concerning the Light God, 
that behihd the physical world of sense there exists 
that of the Spirits of Light. In proportion as 
the people of this civilization had been able to

286 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

receive into their souls something out of fhe world 
of thought thus created, so far were they able 
to escape Ahriman’s clutches during earthly life, 
and thereby elude him in the life after death, by 
which they were to be prepared for a new earth- 
life. The power of Ahriman in earthly life tends 
to make the physical sense-existence appear to 
be the only one, and thus to bar the way to any 
vista of a spiritual world. His power in the spirit- 
ual world leads man to complete isolation, and 
to the concentration of all his interest upon him- 
self. Those who, at the time of death, are in 
Ahriman’s power, are bom again as egoists.It is now possible for occult science to describe 
life between death and a new birth as it really is, if 
the Ahriman influence has been, up to a certain 
point, overcome. It has been so described by the 
writer in other works and in the first chapters of 
this book, and it must be so described if it is to be 
made clear what can be experienced by man in 
this mode of existence, if he has attained to pure 
spiritual vision of what has really taken place. 
The degree in which the individual makes this 
experience is dependent on the extent to which he 
has overcome the Ahriman influence.

Man is approaching nearer and nearer to what 
it is possible for him to become in the spiritual 
world. How his progress may be interfered with 
by other influences must be clearly grasped in our 
present review of the course of human evolution.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 287

Hermgs saw to it that the people of the Egyptian 
nation should prepare, during earthly life, for 
communion wiih the Spirit of Light. But because 
at that time human interests between birth and 
death were already so constituted that it was only 
possible to see in a slight degree through the veil of 
physical sense, the spiritual vision of the soul after 
death was also troubled. Perception of the world 
of light remained dim.The obscuration of the spiritual world after 
death reached a climax in the souls who passed 
into the disembodied state out of a body belonging 
to the Greco-Roman civilization. During their 
earthly life they had brought to perfection the 
cultivation of the physical sense-existence, and 
had thus condemned themselves to a shadowy 
existence after death. Hence the Greek felt 
life after death to be a shadowy existence, and it 
is not mere rhetoric but the realization of truth 
when the hero of that time, who is given up to the 
life of sense, says, “Better a beggar on earth than 
a king in the realm of shades.’’ All this was still 
more marked in those Asiatic peoples who had 
fixed their attention with veneration and worship 
on material images instead of on their spiritual 
archetypes. A large proportion of mankind was 
in this condition at the time of the Greco-Roman 
era of civilization. It can be seen how man’s 
mission in post-Atlantean times, which consisted 
in the conquest of the physical world of sense.

288 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

must necessarily conduce to estrangement from 
the spiritual world. Thus does greatness in one 
respect necessarily involve deterioration in another.288 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

must necessarily conduce to estrangement from 
the spiritual world. Thus does greatness in one 
respect necessarily involve deterioration in another.

Man’s connection with the spiritual world w;as 
kept alive in the Mysteries. Through these the 
Initiates, in special states of the soul, were able to 
receive revelations from that world. They were 
more or less the successors of the guardians of the 
Atlantean oracles. To them was revealed what 
had been hidden through the interposition of 
Lucifer and Ahriman. Lucifer concealed from 
man what had flowed in from the spiritual world 
upon the human astral body, without its coopera- 
tion, up to the middle of the Atlantean period. 
Had the etheric body not been partially separated 
from the physical body, man would have been able 
to experience within himself this part of the 
spiritual world as an inner revelation to his soul. 
As a result of Lucifer’s interference, this could 
be done only in special states of the soul. At 
those times a spiritual world appeared to man in 
the guise of the astral. The corresponding spirit- 
ual beings manifested themselves in forms which 
embodied only the higher principles of hiunan 
nature, and in those principles the symbols of the 
particular spiritual forces were astrally visible. 
Superhuman forms were manifested in this way.

After the interposition of Ahriman, another kind 
of Initiation was added to this one. Ahriman 
concealed everjrthing in the spiritual world which

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 289After the interposition of Ahriman, another kind 
of Initiation was added to this one. Ahriman 
concealed everjrthing in the spiritual world which

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 289

wotild hftve appeared behind physical sense-per- 
ception, had he not intervened from the middle 
of the Atlantc'An period onward. The Initiates 
of the Mysteries owed the revelation of what he 
had kept hidden to the circiamstance that they 
were exercising within their souls all those faculties 
which man had gained since that time, and were 
exercising them to a degree beyond what is neces- 
sary for obtaining impressions of the life of physi- 
cal sense. Thus there were revealed to them the 
spiritual powers lying behind the forces of nature. 
They could speak of spiritual beings behind nature. 
Th3 creative powers working in nature-forces 
were unveiled to them. That part of Saturn, 
the Sun, and the old Moon which had gone on 
working, and had formed the physical, ctheric, 
and astral bodies of man, as well as the mineral, 
vegetable, and animal kingdoms, was what formed 
the content of one kind of Mysteries, that is, 
those which Ahriman kept coneealed. What had 
led to the sentient, rational, and self-conscious 
souls, and had been hidden from man by Lucifer, 
was revealed in the second kind of Mysteries.

But what the Mysteries could only prophesy 
was that in the fulness of time a man would appear 
possessing an astral body which, despite Lucifer, 
could become conscious of the light-world of the 
Sun-spirit through the etheric body, apart from 
any special condition of the soul. And the physi- 
cal body of that human being would necessarily

20

290 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE20

290 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

be such that ever3rthing would be mauifest to 
it in the spiritual world which it is possible for 
Ahriman, up to the time of ph3^ical death, to 
conceal. Physical death could bring no change 
into the life of such a being, that is to say, could 
have no power over his life. The ego so comes 
into manifestation in him that the entire spiritual 
nature is comprehended within the physical life. 
Such a being is the vehicle of the Spirit of Light, 
up to whom the Initiate ascends from two direc- 
tions, being led, in special conditions of the soul, 
either to the Spirit of the Superhuman or to that 
behind the forces of nature. When the Initiates 
of the Mysteries foretold the appearance, in the 
fulness of time, of such a human being, they were 
prophets of the Christ.

A personality arose, as the special prophet 
of this manifestation to come, within a nation 
which possessed through natural inheritance the 
qualities of the peoples of western Asia, and 
through education the learning of the Egyptians. 
This was the Hebrew nation, and the prophet was 
Moses. The influences of Initiation had entered 
so deeply into his soul that in certain states of 
consciousness there was revealed to him the 
spirit who had undertaken, in regular cotu'se of 
evolution, to shape human consciousness from 
the Moon. In thunder and lightning Moses 
realized not merely physical phenomena but 
manifestations of this spirit. At the same time

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 291

the other kind of Mysteries had influenced his 
soul, so that he was able to distinguish, in astral 
vision, how t?ie superhuman becomes human by 
rqieans of the ego. Thus, from two directions, he 
who was to come was revealed to Moses as the 
highest form of the ego.And in Christ the lofty Sun-spirit appeared 
in human form as the great ideal for human life 
on earth. At his coming, all mystery- wisdom 
had in some respects tP take a new form. Up to 
that time this wisdom had existed exclusively for 
the purpose of inducing man to put himself into 
a condition of soul in which he would be able 
to view the kingdom of the Sun-spirit outside 
earthly evolution. Henceforth it was the mission 
of Mystery teaching to make man capable of 
recognizing in the Christ, incarnate in human 
nature, the original principle of being. From this 
central point of all wisdom, man was enabled 
to understand the natural and spiritual worlds.'

At that point in his life at which the astral body 
of Christ Jesus contained everything which it is 
possible for the Lucifer influence to conceal, he 
came forward as the teacher of humanity. From 
that moment there was implanted in human 
earthly evolution the faculty for assimilating that 
wisdom by means of which the physical goal of 
the earth may gradually be reached. At the

^What there is to be said further on this subject will be given in a 
later chapter dealing with supersensible knowledge.

292 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^What there is to be said further on this subject will be given in a 
later chapter dealing with supersensible knowledge.

292 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

moment when the event of Golgotha was. accom- 
plished, human nature was endowed with another 
faculty, that by which Ahriman’s influence may 
be turned to good. Henceforth man was able to 
take with him through the gate of death that 
which saves him from isolation in the spiritual 
world. What happened in Palestine was the 
central point not only of hiunan physical evolution 
but also of the other worlds to which man belongs; 
and when the “Mystery of Golgotha” had been 
accomplished, when the “death of the cross” had 
been endured, Christ appeared in that world 
where souls sojourn after death, and set limits to 
the power of Ahriman. From that moment the 
region which the Greeks had called the “realm of 
shades” was illuminated by spiritual light, which 
showed its inhabitants that the darkness was no 
longer to continue. What had been gained for 
the physical world by the “ Mystery of Golgotha” 
cast light also into the spiritual world.

Up to this event, human post-Atlantean evolu- 
tion had been a time of ascent in the physical 
world of sense, but of descent as far as the spiritual 
world was concerned. Everything which flowed 
into the sense-world proceeded from what had 
been in the spiritual world from remote ages. 
Since the coming of Christ, those who attain to 
the Mystery of Christ are able to take with them 
into the spiritual what they have won in the 
physical world. And from the spiritual world

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 293

it then* flows back again into the earthly world 
of sense, sin^ reincarnated souls, on reentering 
life, bring with them what they have gained 
through the Christ impulse in the spiritual world 
between death and a new birth.What flowed into human evolution in conse- 
quence of the coming of Christ worked in it like 
a seed. Little by little does a seed mature. 
Only a very limited proportion of the profound 
depths of the new wisdom has up to the present 
time flowed into physical existence. This exist- 
ence is only now at the beginning of Christian 
evolution, which during the periods successively 
following on the coming of Christ, has only 
been able to disclose as much of its inner nature 
as individuals and nations were capable of receiv- 
ing, aivi as their power of thought was able to 
realize. The first form into which this essence 
of Christianity could be poured may be described 
as a comprehensive ideal of life. As such it was 
opposed to those forms of life which had been 
developed in post-Atlantean humanity. The con- 
ditions operating in human evolution since the 
re-poptdation of the earth in the Lemurian period 
have been described above. In accordance with 
these conditions, the souls of human beings are 
descended from various spirits who were incar- 
nated, from other worlds, in the bodily descendants 
of the ancient Lemurians. The various races of 
man are a consequence of this fact; and the most

294 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE294 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

diverse vital interests appeared in these reincar- 
nated souls, as a result of their Karma. As long 
as all this was being worked out, t^ere could be 
no ideal of ‘ ‘ universal hiunanity . ’ ’ Hxunan nature 
originated in unity, but earthly evolution up to the 
present time has led to division. In the person 
of Christ an ideal is given which opposes every 
idea of separation, for in the man who bears the 
name of Christ there lives the lofty Sun-spirit 
in whom every human ego finds its first cause. 
The Hebrew nation still felt itself to be a nation, 
and each individual Jew to be a member of that 
nation. WTien once the mere idea was appre- 
hended that in Christ Jesus there lives the ideal 
human being on whom the conditions of separa- 
tion have no effect, Christianity became the ideal 
of universal brotherhood. The feeling that the 
inmost ego of each human being has the same 
origin, overstepped the bounds of all separate 
interests and private relationships. (The mutual 
Father of the human race appears beyond all 
earthly progenitors. “I and the Father are 
one. ”)

In the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries after 
Christ, the era of civilization in which we are still 
living was being prepared. It was gradually 
to break up the fourth, or Greco-Roman civili- 
zation. It is the fifth post-Atlantean period. The 
races which, after many wanderings and the most 
varied fortunes, became the vehicles of this new

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 295EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 295

civilization were descendants of those Atlanteans 
who had remained less affected than others by 
what had meanwhile been going on during the 
four preceding periods of civilization. They had 
not penetrated into the countries in which those 
respective civilizations took root. On the con- 
trary, they had; in their way, handed on Atlantean 
forms of civilization. There were many among 
them who had retained in a high degree the 
inheritance of the ancient dim clairvoyance, the 
state described above as intermediate between 
sleeping and waking. Such people knew the 
spiritual world from their own experience, and 
could reveal to their fellow-men what takes place 
there. Thus there sprang up a great number of 
narratives of spiritual beings and events, and the 
national treasures of legends and sagas had their 
origin in spiritual experiences of this kind. For 
the dim clairvoyance lasted on, in many people, 
into times not far removed from the present. 
There were other people who, although they had 
lost clairvoyance, nevertheless developed the facul- 
ties they acquired for use in the physical world 
of sense, in accordance with feelings and emotions 
which corresponded to clairvoyant experiences. 
And even the Atlantean oracles had their succes- 
sors in the new civilization.

There’ were everywhere Mysteries, but in them 
the Mystery of Initiation was most cultivated, 
which leads to the unveiling of that part of the

296 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEThere’ were everywhere Mysteries, but in them 
the Mystery of Initiation was most cultivated, 
which leads to the unveiling of that part of the

296 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

spirit-world which Ahriman keeps hidden. The 
spiritual powers existing behind the forces of 
nature were here revealed. In t*lie mythologies 
of European nations are contained the remnapts 
of what the Initiates of these Mysteries were able 
to disclose to men. It is true that these mythol- 
ogies also contain the other kind of mystery, 
although in a more imperfect form than that in 
which the Southern and Eastern Mysteries pos- 
sessed it. Superhuman beings were also known 
in Europe, but they were seen to be in perpetual 
conflict with the associates of Lucifer. And the 
Light God too was proclaimed, but in such a 
form that it was do’al‘)tful whether he would over- 
come Lucifer. On the other hand, these Mysteries 
were illuminated by the appearanee of the future 
form of the Christ. Of him it was announeed 
that his kingdom would break up the kingdom of 
that other Light God.*

From such influences as these, there came about 
a cleavage in the soul of the people of the fifth 
epoeh of civilization which still continues, and is 
manifest in the most diverse phenomena. The 
soul had not retained from ancient times a suffi- 
ciently strong attraction toward spiritual things 
to enable it to hold fast the connection between 
the worlds of spirit and .sense. The attraction 
existed only as a training of feeling and 'emotion,

'Ail sagas conuerning the twilight of the gods, and similar tradi- 
tions, had thbir origin in this knowledge of the Mysteries in Europe.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 297'Ail sagas conuerning the twilight of the gods, and similar tradi- 
tions, had thbir origin in this knowledge of the Mysteries in Europe.

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 297

not as direct vision of the spiritual world. On 
the other hancj, man’s gaze was more and more 
directed toward the world of sense, and the 
conquest of that world ; and the intellectual 
powers which had been awakened in the last part 
of the Atlantean period, all those human powers 
of which the physical brain is the instrument, 
were concentrated upon the sense-world, and on 
gaining knowledge of and mastery over it. Two 
worlds, so to speak, were developed within man. 
One is directed toward the life of physical sense; 
the other is susceptible to the manifestations of the 
spirit in such a way as to permeate the spirit with 
feeling and emotion, though without intuitive 
vision. The tendency to this cleavage of soul was 
already existing when the teaching concerning the 
Christ was introduced into various European 
countries.

This message from the spiritual world was 
received into men’s hearts, and feeling and emotion 
became penneated with it ; but it was not possible 
to bridge the gulf between this state of soul and 
what human intelligence, concentrated on the 
sense- world, was investigating in the sphere of 
physical existence. What is now known as the 
contradiction between external science and spir- 
itual knowledge is merely a consequence of this 
fact. The Christian mysticism of Eckhart, Tauler, 
and others is a result of the permeation of feeling 
and emotion by Christianity. Science directed

298 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE298 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

exclusively on the world of sense, and the effects 
of science on life, are the restd^ of the other 
tendency of the soul, and all achievements in the 
sphere of outer material civilization are due to the 
divergence of the two tendencies. Since those 
human faculties of which the brain is the instru- 
ment were concentrated exclusively on physical 
life, they were able to reach that pitch of perfec- 
tion which makes contemporary science, technical 
arts, and other forms of mental life possible. 
Such a material civilization could originate only 
among the nations of Europe, for they are those 
descendants of Atlantean ancestors who only con- 
verted their bent toward the physical world of 
sense into faculty, when it had reached a certain 
degree of maturity. Previously they had allowed 
it to lie dormant, and had lived on what was left 
them of Atlantean clairvoyance and on the com- 
munications of their Initiates. While mental 
culture w’as outwardly quite given up to these 
influences, there slowly ripened the desire for the 
material conquest of the world.

Nevertheless, the dawn of the sixth post-Atlan- 
tean era of civilization is already at hand, for 
what is to arise at a certain time in human evolu- 
tion ripens slowly in the preceding age. What 
it is now possible to develop in its early beginnings 
is the discovery of the thread binding' together 
the two tendencies of human nature, th^t toward 
material civilization and that toward life in the

EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN 299

spiritual' world. For this it is necessary that, 
on the one ha^id, the results of spiritual vision 
should be understood; on the other, that the 
manifestations of the spirit should be recognized 
in the observations and experiences of the sense- 
world. The sixth period of civilization will bring 
the harmony between these two to full perfection.We have now reached a point in our studies at 
which they may pass from the consideration of 
the past to that of the future. But it is better 
that this outlook should be preceded by an 
account of the knowledge which has been attained 
concerning the higher world and Initiation. After- 
wards a survey of the future, as far as is possible 
within the limits of this work, will be briefly 
added.

In the explanation of the effect of the Christ- 
being on human evolution, only the more external 
aspect has been described. The inner side will be 
dealt with in the account of Initiation.

CHAPTER V

The Perception of Higher Worlds

(Concerning Initiation)

A t his present stage of development, man 
ordinarily lives between birth and death 
in three conditions of the soul : those • of 
waking, of sleeping, and again, between these two, 
in that of the dream state. It is my intention to 
allude briefly to this latter state in a subsequent 
portion of this book. For the present, however, 
we will content ourselves with taking a survey of 
life under its two chief alternating conditions, 
those of waking and of sleeping.

Cognizance of higher worlds is obtained by man 
when, in addition to sleeping and waking, he 
attains to yet a third soul-state. While awake 
the soul is given up, as it were, to the impressions 
of the senses, and to such concepts as are excited 
by sense-impressions. During sleep, however, not 
only is sense-impression latent, but the soul itself 
loses its consciousness, the events of the day being 
merged in an ocean of unconsciousness.

Let us now imagine that the soul might become 
conscious during sleep, even if sense-impressions 
were absent, as is the case under conditions of 
deep sleep. Even the memory of the day’s 
happenings would not be present. Yet, would

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 301THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 301

the sou? then find itself in a state of vacuity? 
Would it be incapable of having any experiences? 
This is a question that can only be answered if 
the conditions under discussion can actually be 
set up. If the soul is capable of experiencing 
an3d;hing, even when sense-experience and recollec- 
tion of such experiences are lacking, then would 
that soul, so far as the external world is concerned, 
be “asleep”; and yet the soul would not be asleep, 
but awake to an actual world.

This is a condition of consciousness which can 
be brought about by those who follow the direc- 
tions given them by occult science and who apply 
the same to their soul’s experience. And every- 
thing the soul may communicate about those 
worlds which transcend the senses, has been dis- 
covered under similar conditions of consciousness.

In the foregoing portions of this book certain 
communications have been made as to the higher 
worlds ; and in the following pages as much as may 
be said in such a book will be told as to the means 
by which the condition of consciousness requisite 
for such studies may be acquired.

Only in one way does this state of consciousness 
resemble that of sleep ; and this is in the fact that 
owing to it all outward activity of the senses 
ceases, and all thoughts, such as might be aroused 
by the action of the senses, likewise vanish. 
But whereas, in ordinary sleep, the soul is without 
the power requisite for conscious experience, it is

302 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

this very power that the aforesaid stat€ of con- 
sciousness is to place in its possession. And, by 
its aid, capacity is given to the soul that will 
enable it to be alive to such experiences as, under 
the ordinary conditions of life, can be brought 
about only by the action of the senses. The 
awakening of the soul to such a higher state of 
consciousness is called Initiation.The methods of initiation lead man away from 
the state of ordinary day-consciousness into a 
condition of the soul during which he makes use 
of spiritual organs of observation. The embryos 
of these organs are dormant in each soul, and for 
their development require cultivation. Now it 
may come to pass that a person at some definite 
point of his earthly career makes the discovery 
for himself of the development of these higher 
organs within his soul, and in such cases we have 
to do with a kind of self-awakening. Such a 
person will become conscious of a change affecting 
his entire being; his soul’s experiences will have 
been enriched beyond measure. He will then 
find that no experience gained in the exterior 
world has at any time possessed the power of so 
spiritualizing and satisfying his condition of 
being, of suffusing it with such a sense of inner 
warmth, as does this experience to which he has 
now obtained access, invisible though it be to the 
physical eye and eluding the physical touch. 
From this spiritual world, power, and a sense of

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 303

life’s seourity, will flow in upon him, strengthening 
his will. ^

There are instances of such self -initiation; but 
they should not give rise to the belief that the only 
right course is to wait for the coming of such self- 
initiation, and to abstain from doing aught in the 
way of regular training with a view to bringing 
about initiation. We need not here give further 
space to the subject of self-initiation, for the 
very reason that it takes place spontaneously, 
as it were, and without regard to rules of any 
kind whatsoever.What we have here to consider is how training 
may develop those rudimentary organs of the soul 
destined as instruments for the higher perception. 
Those who do not feel themselves specially impelled 
toward doing something for their own develop- 
ment may easily say that man stands under the 
guidance of spiritual powers, that such guidance 
should therefore not be interfered with, and that 
the moment deemed by those powers the right 
one for revealing to the soul another world should 
be awaited in patience. Indeed, persons who are 
of this opinion are inclined to deem it a kind of 
presumption, or unjustifiable curiosity, for any 
one to interfere with the wisdom of such spiritual 
guidance.

Such 'as are of this way of thinking will change 
their opinion only if some other mode of presenting 
the case makes a sufficiently strong impression on

304 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

them. If they were to say to themselves, V Yonder 
wise guidance has endowed me with certain fac- 
ulties, and has done so not that I sliould let them 
be idle but rather that I should use them. Indeq.d, 
the very wisdom of such guidance lies in the fact 
of its having placed in me the rudiments of those 
organs necessary for the higher state of con- 
sciousness. I can, therefore, rightly comprehend 
this guidance only when I regard it as my duty to 
do everything in my power that may serve to 
bring such rudimentary growths to their proper 
development.” Should such thoughts make a 
sufficiently strong impression on the mind, douots 
as to the rightfulness of such training for the 
attainment of the higher consciousness will dis- 
appear.There is, it is true, another scruple which may 
arise in the mind with regard to such schooling. 
A person might say to himself: “This develop- 
ment of the inner faculties of the soul means a dire 
invasion of man’s most hidden sanctuary. It 
involves a certain change of the entire human 
being: the means of such a change cannot be 
evolved by any ordinary procedure of thought, 
for the manner in which such higher worlds are 
attained can be known only to those to whom the 
path has become visible by reason of experience. 
If, therefore, I turn to such a one, I am allowing 
him to exercise his influence over the innermost 
sanctuary of my soul.” Any one given to this

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 305

attitude%of mind will hardly find it reassuring if 
the means for inducing such states of higher 
consciousness are imparted to him in book form. 
For it is not a question of receiving communica- 
tions either verbally or from some person who, 
having the knowledge, has set the same down in 
a book to which we have access. Now there are 
people possessing a knowledge of the rules for 
developing the spiritual organs of perception who 
are of opinion that these rules ought not to be 
entrusted to a book. These people for the most 
part look upon the communication of certain 
truths relating to the spiritual world as inad- 
missible. But this view must be characterized 
as in a certain sense out of date in view of the 
present stage of human evolution. It is true 
that the communication of the rules referred to 
can be made only up to a certain point. Yet 
what is imparted leads so far that one who applies 
it to his soul-life makes such progress in know- 
ledge that he is able to go on by himself. The way 
then leads onward in a manner of which a true 
idea can be gained only through what has been 
previously experienced. From all these facts 
scruples may arise about the path to spiritual 
knowledge.Such doubts as have here been brought for- 
ward vanish as soon as we clearly apprehend the 
nature of a process of development for which, in 
our present generation, the school of tra.ining here

3o6 an outline OF OCCULT SCIENCE

inculcated is more particularly adapted. This 
method is here to be spoken of, while other schools 
will also be briefly referred to.

The training now to be dealt with places in the 
hand of him who may possess the will to undertake 
his own higher development, such means as will 
enable him to set about that work of transforma- 
tion. Any questionable encroachment on the 
personality of the student would only then be 
possible, should the teacher proceed to carry out 
the change by methods which withdraw the 
consciousness of the pupil. But no true teacher 
of occult science in our day would make use of 
any such method, by which, indeed, the pupil 
would be reduced to a blind tool. The teacher 
gives his pupil instructions as to the rules of 
conduct he is to pursue, and he leaves it to the 
pupil to carry them out. At the same time, 
should the case seem to demand it, the teacher 
does not withhold the reasons justifying these 
rules of conduct.

The acceptance of the mles, and their applica- 
tion by a person seeking spiritual development, 
need not be a matter of blind belief. Such a 
belief ought to be quite out of the question in this 
sphere. One who studies the nature of the hiunan 
soul as far as it can be followed by ordinary self- 
observation, without occult training, may, after 
accepting the rules recommended by ' spiritual 
training, ask himself, "How do these rules act

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 307THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 307

in the Hfe of the soul?” This question may be 
satisfactorily answered, before any training, by a 
dispassionate use of common sense. Before these 
rules are adopted, true conceptions may be gained 
as to the way in which they operate. Of course 
the process can be experienced only dming training, 
but even then the experience will always be 
accompanied by an understanding of the expe- 
rience, if each step that is to be taken is tested 
by sound judgment. And for the present, true 
spiritual science will only suggest such rules for 
training as can be vindicated by sound judgment. 
Those who have the will to surrender to these 
conditions of confidence only, and who by no 
manner of predisposing prejudice are inclined to 
surrender in blind faith, will find all doubts pass 
from them, and objections brought against a 
regular course of training with the aim of attaining 
to higher states of consciousness will no longer 
disturb them.

Even such people as may have arrived at this 
state of inward maturity, — a maturity which 
sooner or later would lead to the self -awakening 
of these spiritual organs of perception, — even for 
such as these, training is by no means superfluous. 
On the contrary, training is specially adapted for 
them. For there are but few cases in which 
personal initiation has not to travel along tortuous 
and devious ways, and training spares them the 
traversing of such by-paths, leading them forwardIt may easily happen that such a soul possesses 
a certain dim intuition of its own ripeness, and by- 
reason of this very feeling may assume an attitude 
of disinclination toward training. A feeling of 
this kind may be the result of a certain degree of 
pride, which refuses to place confidence in a 
teacher. Then again, a special degree of soul- 
development may, in some persons, lie concealed 
up to a particular age, only then revealing itself, 
and in such cases training may be the very means 
needed to call forth its appearance. Should the 
person then hold aloof from such training, it may 
then be that the power will remain dormant 
during that term of life, and only reassert itself in

the course of future incarnations.

♦ *

*

The uplifting to a higher state of consciousness 
can only proceed from a condition of ordinary 
waking day-consciousness. It is in this conscious- 
ness that the soul lives prior to its uplifting, and 
training will endow it with the means which lead 
to a transcending of such consciousness. The 
training to be first noticed advises in the first 
instance such measures as may still be taken 
during ordinary waking consciousness. ' Indeed, 
those methods which are the most significant

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 309THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 309

consist Ml quiet acts performed by the soul. This 
requires that the soul should give itself up to 
particular conceptions, and these conceptions are 
such as are able by their very nature to exercise 
an awakening power over certain hidden faculties 
of the inner nature of man. They thereby differ 
from those conceptions of the waking daily life, 
the object of which, in the first instance, is of 
another kind, namely, tliat of presenting external 
objects. The more faithfully they present these 
things, the truer they are. It is, indeed, in 
accordance with their nature that they should 
be true in this sense, but this is not the mission 
of those conceptions which the soul is to con- 
sider, when its object is the pursuit of spiritual 
training; and they are therefore so formed as 
not to present anything external, having rather 
within themselves the power to act upon the soul. 
These presentments are emblematic, or symbolic.

Yet other conceptions may be used. For it 
does not depend at all on what the conceptions 
contain, but solely on the fact that the soul puts 
forth all its powers in order not to have anything 
in the consciousness except the conception in 
question. Whereas, in the ordinary life of the 
soul, its forces are divided among many things and 
the conceptions rapidly change, the important 
point in spiritual training is the concentration of 
the whole inner life on one conception. And 
this conception must be voluntarily brought to

310 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE310 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the centre of the consciousness. S3rnibolic con- 
ceptions are better than those which reflect outer 
objects or events, because the latter are in touch 
with the outer world, and the soul has to depend 
less on itself than in the case of symbolic con- 
ceptions, formed out of its own inner energy. 
The chief object at which to aim is the intensity 
of the force to be exercised by the sotil. It is not 
what is before the soul that is essential, but the 
greatness of the effort and the length of time dur- 
ing which it is concentrated on one conception. 
Strength ascends from unknown depths of the 
soul, from which it is drawn up by concentration 
on one conception. Occult science contains many 
such, all of which have been proved to possess the 
power alluded to above.

The important thing is to apply these conceptions 
in the right manner. This is accomplished by 
the practice of so-called withdrawing, or medita- 
tion. But a certain kind of this inner absorp- 
tion has first to be considered in connection 
with symbolical conceptions, and we are enabled 
more readily to grasp this mode of meditation 
when we begin by recalling to the soul the con- 
ception of some memory. Say, for instance, that 
we allow the eye to rest on a tree, and then turn 
away from the object so that it is no longer 
presented to our sight; we shall, nevertheless, 
be able to retain the image, of the tree in the soul. 
Now this image or conception of the tree which

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 311THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 311

we have, when it is no longer in sight, is a recol- 
lection of the tree. We will then take it that this 
recollection is retained in the soul, and allow 
the soul to repose, as it were, in this recollection, 
taking care to exclude all other conceptions from 
the memory. The soul then dwells in that 
memory-conception of the tree, and we then have 
to do with the withdrawal of the soul into a con- 
ception. Yet this conception is the impression 
of an actual thing conceived through the senses, 
and for this reason it cannot, in the sense above 
specified, be qualified to be an instrument for 
awakening the faculties of the soul. If, however, 
the same process is entered upon, selecting instead 
one of those conceptions which have already been 
tested by occult science, one then becomes able 
by degrees to attain this result.

One example only of meditation based upon a 
symbolical conception shall now be placed before 
the reader. Such a conception must first be built 
up in the soul, and this may be done in the fol- 
lowing manner. We may think of a plant, calling 
to mind how it is rooted in the ground, the way 
in which leaf after leaf shoots forth, until finally 
the blossom, too, unfolds. And then we may 
imagine a hiunan being placed beside this plant, 
and we call up in our soul the thought that this 
being has qualities and characteristics which, 
when compared with those of the plant, will be 
found to be more perfect. We dwell on the fact

312 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

that this being is able to move here and there, 
according to his will and his desires, while the 
plant remains stationary, rooted in the soil.312 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

that this being is able to move here and there, 
according to his will and his desires, while the 
plant remains stationary, rooted in the soil.

Then, however, it may be said: “Man certainly 
has attained to a higher stage of perfection than 
the plant, yet I can call to mind qualities in man 
which are not present in the plant, the absence of 
which, indeed, seems in a certain way to make 
the plant more perfect than man. Man is full of 
passions and desires, and these he follows in his 
actions. I can take count of errors committed 
by reason of his impulses and his passions, whereas 
in the plant I may note how the pure law of its 
growth is passed on from leaf to leaf, and how 
the passionless blossom opens its petals to the 
pure rays of the sun.” Then I can say: “Man 
is possessed of certain faculties which exceed those 
of the plant, but he has attained these at the 
cost of allowing his impulses, passions, and 
desires to commingle in his being with the purer 
forces I seem to recognize in the plant.” And 
then I call to mind the green sap flowing through 
the plant, and conceive it to be the expression 
of the pme and passionless law of growth. Next 
I call to mind the red blood as it courses through 
the veins of man, and recognizing this as expressive 
of man’s instincts, of his passions and desires, I 
construct from all these things an inte'nse and 
powerful thought within my soul. I then ponder 
on man’s capacity for development; I conceive

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 313

how his .very instincts, passions, and desires may 
be purged and cleansed by the higher faculties of 
his soul ; and I meditate on how the dross in such 
qualities is driven out, the qualities themselves 
being, as it were, reborn upon a higher plane, so 
that the blood may finally be called to mind as 
the expression of passion and desire, cleansed and 
purified.Now I gaze in spirit on the rose, saying to my- 
self: “In the red juice of the rose is the erstwhile 
green sap of the plant— now changed to crimson 
— and the red rose follows the same pure, passion- 
less laws of growth as docs the green leaf.” Thus 
the red of the rose may offer me a symbol of a kind 
of blood which is the expression of cleansed im- 
pulses and passions, purged of all lower elements, 
and resembling in their purity the forces working 
in the red rose. This thought I seek not only to 
bring home to my intelligence but to vivify in 
my feelings; and I may experience a sensation of 
bliss if I conceive the purity and passionless nature 
of the growing plant, while I can produce in myself 
the feeling that certain higher perfections must be 
purchased through the possession of passions and 
desires. Here, then, is a thought that can trans- 
form the soul’s blissful feeling just conceived 
into a more serious feeling, while in its wake a 
sensation’ of liberating happiness may stir within 
me, if I yield to this thought of the red blood that 
can thus become the vehicle of inward and pure

314 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

experiences, even as is the case with the.red juice 
of the rose. But all depends upon not entering 
upon this line of thought, requisite for the con- 
struction of such symbols, without feeling bejng 
present; and after the trend of these thoughts 
and feelings has been pursued, it is well to trans- 
form them into the following symbolical con- 
ception. Imagine before you a black cross, and 
let this stand as the S5mibol of the annihilated 
lower part of the passions and desires, and then, 
there where the beams of the cross traverse each 
other, imagine seven bright red roses ranged in a 
circle. Those roses are, then, the symbol of that 
blood which is the expression of cleansed and 
purified passions and desires. ‘This symbolical conception has now to be 
called up before the soul, as has been iUustrated 
before, by a memory-conception. A conception 
such as this, when it has become the object of 
concentration and meditation, has an awakening 
power, and every other idea must for the time be 
excluded from the mind. This one symbol must 
mentally float before the soul as distinctly as 
possible.

* It is a matter of no moment whatever whether the above thoughts 
are warranted or not by any of the views held by natural science. For 
the object is to develop such thoughts about the plant and man as may 
— irrespective of all theories — be gained by the means of simple and 
direct contemplation. Such thoughts are of importance side by side 
with no less significant theoretical presentments of things in the external 
world; and here the thoughts are not adduced in order to prove a fact 
scientifically, but so to construct a symbol that shall prove effective, 
irrespective of whatever objections may be raised by this or that 
person against its construction.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 315THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 315

It is not without significance that this symbol 
has been introduced as no mere awakening 
presentment, but has been built up from certain 
conceptions touching the nature of plant and man. 
For the effect of such a symbol depends upon the 
fact of its being put together in this definite 
manner, before employing it as an instrument 
for rneditation. Should it be called up without a 
previous process of construction such as has here 
been delineated, the picture must remain cold 
and will be far less effective than if it had by 
previous preparation gathered force wherewith 
to animate the soul. While meditating, however, 
all the preparatory thoughts should not be 
called into the soul, the image alone being allowed 
to float, as if it were alive, before the mind, and 
at the same time the feeling allowed to vibrate 
which has been called into being by the thoughts 
that led up to it. Thus the symbol becomes a 
sign, connected with an inner experience. And 
the dwelling of the soul in this experience is that 
which produces the desired effect. The longer 
the time during which it is possible to do this, 
without other conceptions arising to impose a 
disturbing element, the stronger will be the effect 
of the entire process.

Nevertheless, it is advisable for the student to 
bestow so!me extra time, over and above that 
devoted tO actual meditation, on repeating the 
building up of the picture by thoughts and

3i6 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

feelings, in the way described abovd, and the 
greater the patience brought to bear in performing 
these acts of repetition, the more important will 
prove the impression made on the soul by .that 
picture. 'A symbol such as has just been described 
represents no external object or entity evolved by 
nature, and for this very reason it possesses a 
quickening power for certain inner faculties. 
Some people might, it is true, object to this, 
saying, “The rosy cross as a whole is of course 
no product of nature; nevertheless, each separate 
part of it — as, for instance, the black colour and 
the roses — may be perceived by the senses.” 
But any one on whom the objection here raised 
tends to act as a disttubing influence should 
remember that it is not the presentatiqn of these 
sense-objects to which the quickening influence of 
the higher faculties of the soul is due, but purely 
the manner in which the conjunction of the 
separate parts has been effected; it is this that is 
productive of the desired result. This conjunction 
does not reproduce anything that is present in the 
world of the senses.

‘In my explanations of “How to attain Knowledge of the Higher 
Worlds," translated under the title of The Way of Initiation and begin- 
ning at Chapter II, several other examples of methods of meditation 
are given, and especially efTicacioiis will be found one which deals with 
the coming into being and fading away of a ])lant; also another may be 
particularly recommended, based on the dormant formative power 
dwelling in the seed of a plant, and others on the form and structure of 
crystals, and other substances, but from the abundarft materials for 
meditation presenting themselves I have in this instance selected one 
in order to show the nature of meditation.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 317THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 317

Such a ,symbol is intended as an example to 
show the process of efficacious meditation for the 
soul. Manifold pictures of this kind are pre- 
scriljed in occult training which arc constructed, 
or built up, according to varying methods. Cer- 
tain sentences, formulae, and also single words 
may also be given out to the student upon which 
he will have to meditate, and in every case the 
means used have the same object, namely, that 
of severing the soul from the perception of the 
senses and unfolding in it those slumbering activ- 
ities to which the impressions of the physical 
senses are without moment or importance — the 
unfolding of those slumbering faculties of the 
soul being alone the all-essential.

There are, further, meditations the subjects of 
which are the feelings, emotions, and so on. Such 
are found to be especially efficacious. Let us take 
the feeling of joy. In the normal course of life 
the soul is prone to experience pleasure when the 
engendering cause is something external. If a 
healthily constituted soul perceives some act 
performed by a person, indicative of the doer’s 
goodness of heart, then the soul will assuredly feel 
pleastire at the deed thus perfonned. But the 
soul is further able to reflect upon an act of this 
kind, and can say to itself that an act done from 
sheer kindness of heart is one in which the doer 
is following the interests of his fellow-creatures 
rather than his own, and such an act may be

3i8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE3i8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

called morally good. But the sotd, Fhile con- 
templating, may free itself during the conception 
of any particular case in the outer world which 
has given it joy or pleasure, and instead piay 
construct for itself the general idea of goodness of 
heart. It might think, for instance, of how kind- 
ness of heart might come into being through one 
soul drawing up within itself, as it were, all the 
interests pertaining to some others, making the 
interests of those other souls its own. The soul 
thus meditating is now in a position to rejoice at 
the moral idea of such goodness of heart.

Here, therefore, we have not the pleasure which 
may be brought about by this or that occurrence 
in the world of the senses, but pleasure in an idea 
as such. And if the student tries to cor.centrate 
for some space of time upon such joy as is here 
indicated, allowing it to become a living factor 
in his soul, this may be called meditating upon 
a feeling or sentiment. But the potent agent 
here, to which the awakening of the inner facul- 
ties of the soul is due, is not the idea, but rather 
the sustained sway within the .soul of an impres- 
sion which has not originated in any feeling due 
to external impressions.

Occult science being in a position to penetrate far 
deeper into the being of things than can be done 
by ordinary presentment, the teacher will be able 
to indicate to the pupil feelings and •sentiments 
which are much more powerful as awakening

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 319

agents for the unfolding of the soul’s faculties 
when used as subjects of meditation. Yet, neces- 
sary as this will be for the higher degrees of 
training, it should be remembered that energetic 
meditating upon subjects such as kindness of 
heart may carry the student very far on his way.The natures of people being so different, it is 
obvious that for particular individuals special 
methods of training become necessary. As to the 
duration of time to be devoted to meditation, we 
may remind the student that the greater the 
length of time during which he can meditate 
uninterruptedly, the stronger will be the effect 
called forth. But every excess in these matters 
may become injurious. In time, however, the 
student will probably become conscious of a 
certain inward “marking of time’’ — the result of 
this habitual meditation — which will thus auto- 
matically indicate the length of time to which 
he is to keep. Those who pursue their studies in 
occult science under the personal guidance of a 
teacher will receive from him precise instruction 
and advice in these particulars. Nevertheless, 
it must be emphatically understood that expe- 
rienced occultists alone are in a position to impart 
such advice.

Such exercises in inward concentration will gen- 
erally require practising for some considerable time 
before the student can become aware of any result. 
What is essential to occult science is patience

320 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

and perseverance. He who is unable to awaken 
these qualities and who cannot pursue his exercises 
with continued quietude, so as to render these 
qualities the fundamental tones, as it were, of his 
soul, can never expect to make great progress.

Prom what has been said above, the reader may 
now have gathered that meditation is a means of 
acquiring knowledge of the higher worlds, yet 
that not any subject-matter taken at random is 
productive of this result, but only such as expe- 
rience gained in occult science has found suitable, 
provided it is carried out in the manner just 
narrated.The path here indicated leads in the first place 
to what is called imaginative knowledge, and this 
is the first step toward the higher knowledge. 
Cognizance, dependent on sense-perceptions and 
on the working up of such perceptions by reason, 
which is sense -bound, is, to use tlie occult term, 
known as “objective cognition.’’ Beyond this 
step rise others, the imaginative stage being, as 
we have said, the first. Now the term “imagina- 
tion” might conduce to raise suspicion in the minds 
of some, to whom imagination stands for much the 
same as “invention,” — for conceptions, in short, 
which lack reality. In occult science, however, 
by “imaginative” must be tmderstood that kind 
of conception that is called into being by the soul 
in its state of higher consciousness; the things 
perceived in this state of consciousness are spiritual

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 321

facts, and spiritual beings, to which the senses 
have no access, and — since this condition of the 
soul is caused by meditating upon symbols, or 
“imaginations” — the sphere to which this con- 
dition of higher consciousness belongs may be 
termed the imaginative world, and the knowledge 
relating to it, imaginative knowledge. “Imag- 
inative” stands, therefore, in this sense for that 
which is “actual” in a higher sense than are the 
facts and beings common to physical sense- 
perception.A very ready objection to the itse of the symbolic 
pictures here characterized is that their formation 
encourages dreamy thoughts, which might arise 
from a capricious imagination, and might therefore 
have doubtful consequences. But any such doubts 
are unju-stified in the matter of the symbols given 
out by the true occult schools. For the symbols 
are chosen in such a way that they can be looked 
at quite apart from their connection with outer 
sense-reality, and their value is to be found only 
in the power with which they work upon the soul 
when it turns its attention wholly away from the 
outer world, when it suppresses all sense-impres- 
sions and shuts out every thought to which it 
might be stimulated from without. The process 
of meditation is best demonstrated by comparison 
with sleep'. In one aspect it is like the state of 
sleep; in a’nother, the exact opposite df it. It is 
a sleep .which represents a higher state of being 
« 22

322 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE322 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

awake than ordinary waking consciousness. The 
point is that by concentration on the given con- 
ception or image, the soul is obliged to call up 
much stronger forces out of its own depths thsLn it 
uses in ordinary life or knowledge. Its inner 
activity is thereby enhanced. It becomes de- 
tached from the body, as it does in sleep; but 
instead of passing, as in the latter case, into 
unconsciousness, it experiences a world it did not 
know before. Although as regards detachment 
from the body this condition may be compared 
with sleep, yet it is such that, compared with 
ordinary waking consciousness, it may be denoted 
a more intense waking state. By this means the 
soul learns to know itself in its true, inner, inde- 
pendent being. But in ordinary life, owing to the 
weaker development of its forces, it is only with the 
help of the body that the soul arrives at self- 
consciousness, and it therefore does not learn 
to know itself but only sees itself in the image, — 
a kind of reflected image, — traced of it by the 
body, or, as a matter of fact, by the processes of 
the body.

Symbols built up in the manner above described 
are not as yet indicative of anything actual 
in the spiritual world, but they serve to detach 
the htunan soul from sense-observations and from 
that instnunent, the brain, to which the reason is 
immediately fettered. This detachment is not 
effected until man is able to feel: “I am now

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 323THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 323

picturing lo myself something by means of powers 
to which neither my senses nor my brain serve as 
the instruments”; and the first thing man thus 
experiences is a sense of freedom from the shackles 
of the physical organs. He is then able to say to 
himself: “My consciousness does not vanish when 
I cease to take cognizance of sense-perceptions and 
of ordinary reasoned thought: I can lift myself 
out of those conditions and can then feel myself 
to be a separate entity alongside of that which I 
was before” — and this is the first of the purely spir- 
itual experiences : the observation of an ego, a being 
having a soul and spirit nature, which has arisen 
as a new self from out the one that is fettered to the 
physical senses and to physical understanding.

Had this detachment from the world of the 
senses and from the reason been effected without 
meditation, the person so doing would have lapsed 
into the nothingness of the unconscious state. 
This soul and spirit being was our possession prior 
to meditation also, yet it then lacked the organs 
for the observation of the spirit-world; and it 
might, indeed, have been compared to the physical 
body minus the eye to see — the ear to hear with. 
The strength thus expended in meditation has, 
in fact, been the creative means by which these 
soul and spirit organs have been formed out of a 
previously unorganized soul and spirit entity. 
But this which man thus creates for himself is 
also the first thing to be perceived by him, the

324 . AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE324 . AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

first experience being a kind of self-cognition. 
It is of the essence of spiritual training that the 
soul, through the self-education it gives itself at 
this point of its development, is fully conscious 
that it at first perceives itself in the world of images 
(imaginations), which appear as a result of the 
exercises described. It is true that these images 
make their appearance as a new world, but the 
soul must recognize that nevertheless they are at 
first nothing but the reflection of its own being, 
which has been strengthened by the exercises. 
And it must not only recognize this by correct 
reasoning, but must have arrived at such a 
cultivation of the will that it is able at any time 
to put away and obliterate the images from the 
consciousness.

The soul must be able to act in ■ complete 
independence in the presence of the images. This 
is part of true spiritual training at this stage. If 
it could not do this, it woiild be in the same 
position, in the sphere of spiritual experiences, as 
a soul in the physical world which, on looking at 
an object, has its attention so arrested by it that 
it cannot look away. An exception to this pos- 
sibility of obliteration is formed by a group of 
inner imaginative experiences which are not to be 
extinguished at this stage of spiritual training. 
They correspond to the inmost kernel of the soul’s 
being, and the occult student recognizes in those 
images that which forms the basis of his natiure

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 325THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 325

and passes through repeated earthly lives. At 
this point the knowledge of repeated earthly lives 
becomes a real experience. In relation to every- 
thiixg else the freedom that has been mentioned 
must prevail. And only after acquiring the 
faculty of obliterating experiences is the spiritual 
outer world really approached. What is oblit- 
erated returns in another form, and is experienced 
as a spiritually outer reality. We experience how, 
out of something indefinite, we spiritually grow 
into something definite. And this self-observation 
has then to proceed onward to a perception of a 
soul and spirit world without. This comes to 
pass when we can order our inner experience after 
the manner to be indicated in the following pages.

At the outset, the soul of the occult student is 
feeble in all that appertains to a perception of the 
world of sotil and spirit; and he will therefore need 
all the inner energy he can muster in order, while 
meditating, to keep a firm hold on the symbols 
or other pictures that he has so strenuously built 
up from the suggestions supplied to him by the 
outer world. Should he, however, desire to attain, 
further, to a genuine contemplation of the higher 
world, he will not alone have to maintain his hold 
on these; he must also, after having done this, be 
able to continue in a condition in which not only 
no influences of the outer world of sense can affect 
the soul, but in which also the imaginaiy present- 
ments above characterized shall have been effaced

326 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE326 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

from his consciousness. Then only will that enter 
the plane of his consciousness that has been 
previously formed by means of meditation. It 
becomes, therefore, a matter of importance that 
there should be an adequate amount of soul-power 
at the student’s disposal, so that that which has 
been formed may also be spiritually discerned, 
and may not escape the attention, for this must 
needs be the case where the inward energies are as 
yet but feebly developed.

That which is here evolved as an organism of 
the soul and spirit, and which should be an 
object of conscious apprehension, is ephemeral 
and tender, and the disturbing influences of the 
outer world of sense, however much we may try to 
exclude them, are nevertheless great. It is not 
merely a question of those disturbances to which 
we are able to pay heed, but far more of those 
which in ordinary life are ever eluding our notice. 
By reason, however, of man’s own nature, a cer- 
tain condition of transition has in this particular 
made possible that which the soul in its waking 
state was powerless to effect, owing to the dis- 
turbances of the physical world; this it is, in fact, 
capable of achieving during sleep. One who gives 
himself up to serious meditation will, if sufficiently 
attentive, become aware of a certain aspect 
wherein his sleep is affected. Such a person will 
feel that while sleeping he is yet not quite asleep, 
but that his soul has periods during which it is

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 327THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 327

active in, a certain way during sleep. Under 
such conditions natural processes have a deter- 
rent effect upon the influences of the external 
world, which the soul is not strong enough to 
ward off of itself. When, however, the habit of 
meditation is beginning to take effect, the soul 
releases itself during sleep from the conditions 
of unconsciousness, and realizes that it is in a 
world of soul and spirit. This can happen in two 
ways: the person may, 'while asleep, become 
aware that he is in another world, or he may, 
after awakening, remember that he has been in 
a different world. But to set up the former of 
these two feelings requires the greater degree of 
inner energy, for which reason the second is the 
more common among students in occult train- 
ing. But it may gradually come to pass that 
the student will become aware of having been 
the whole of the time of his sleep in this other 
world, only emerging therefrom when he wakes. 
And his memory of beings and facts connected 
with this other world will become ever more and 
more distinct, thus showing that in one form or 
another he has now entered upon the state known 
to occtilt science as the continuity of conscious- 
ness. (The continuation of consciousness during 
sleep.)

Still, for this to be so, it is not necessary that 
man’s consciousness should always continue during 
sleep. Much will already have been attained in

328 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEStill, for this to be so, it is not necessary that 
man’s consciousness should always continue during 
sleep. Much will already have been attained in

328 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the matter of the continuity of consciousness 
should the person, whose sleep is in general that 
of the ordinary individual, have certain periods 
during his sleeping hours when he is aware of being 
in a world of the soul and the spirit; or if, on 
awakening, he is able to remember such a con. 
dition of consciousness. It should be borne in 
mind that what is here described is to be under- 
stood as only a transition state. It is as well to 
pass through this state with the aid of training; 
yet it should not be imagined that any conclusive 
views in respect to the soul and spirit world are to 
be gathered during this transition state, for in this 
condition the soul is uncertain, and unable as yet 
to rely upon its own experiences. And yet it is 
through such experiences that the soul ever gathers 
strength, enabling it during waking hours to ward 
off the disturbing influences current in the internal 
as well as in the external physical world, and 
thus to attain to a state of observation as to the 
spirit and the soul into which no impression of the 
senses will intrude, — a condition in which brain- 
fettered reason is silent, and when even the 
presentments for meditation, which were but a 
preparatory means for spiritual vision, will have 
passed from the consciousness. Whatever is pub- 
lished, in one form or another, through occult 
science, should never be drawn from any otjier 
kind of soul and spirit observation but what is 
embarked upon in ftdl waking consciousness.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 329THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 329

There ^re two soul experiences which are of 
importance during the progress of occult training. 
The first is when the student says to himself: 
‘ ‘ While disregarding everything the external world 
may yield me in the way of impressions, I yet, 
when turning my gaze inward, do not see a being 
whose activity has been entirely extinguished. 
On the contrary, I behold one that is self-conscious 
in a world of which I know nothing, as long as I 
permit myself to be only impressed by sensations 
from the outside.” And at this moment the 
soul will have the sensation of having given birth 
to a new being, this new-born being having quite 
different qualities from those which were pre- 
viously in the soul.

The second experience consists in becoming 
aware of that former self, henceforth detached, 
as it were, and being at one’s side in the guise 
of a second entity. That within which we 
had up to this time been imprisoned, evolves 
now into something we are able to confront; 
we feel, in fact, at certain times exterior to 
that which we have been accustomed to regard 
as our own personality, as our own ego. It is 
as though one now lived in two egos, — one, that 
which we have hitherto known; the other, a 
newly born being, superior to the first, — and 
we become aware that the former ego acquires a 
certain independence in its relationship to the 
second, even as the physical body has a certain

330 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

measure of freedom in its relation to thalj, first ego.330 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

measure of freedom in its relation to thalj, first ego.

Now this is an event of great importance, for by 
it man comes to know what it is to live in that 
world which it has been his endeavour to reach 
by means of training. It is this second, this 
new-born, ego which can be led to cognizance of 
the spiritual world, and in it can be developed 
that which has as much significance for the 
spiritual world as our sense organs have for the 
physical world of the senses. Should this develop- 
ment have attained to the requisite degree, the 
student will not only be aware of himself as a 
new-born ego, but he will recognize the spiritual 
facts and entities around him, even as he perceives 
the physical world through the action of his 
physical senses; and this is a third important 
experience.

In order to pass rightly through this stage of 
spiritual training it must be taken into account 
that the strengthening of the powers of the sotd 
brings about a degree of self-love and egoism 
which is quite unknown in the ordinary life of 
the soul. It would be a mistake for any one to 
think that it is only a case of ordinary self-love at 
this point. Self-love becomes so strong at this 
stage of development that it acquires the strength 
of a natme-force within the soul, and a vigorous 
training of the will is necessary in order to conquer 
this powerful egoism. This training of the will 
must positively go hand in hand with the rest of

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 331

the spiritual training. A strong inclination exists 
to feel absolutely happy in a world which we 
have gradually created for ourselves. And we 
must be able to obliterate, in the manner above 
described, that to which we have previously 
devoted ourselves with all our powers. We must 
efface ourselves in the imaginative world we have 
reached. But this effacement is opposed by the 
strongest impulses of egoism.The belief may easily arise that the exercises in 
spiritual training are something outward, apart 
from the soul’s moral development. In this con- 
nection it must be said that the moral force 
necessary for the conquest of egoism, as described, 
cannot be gained unless the moral condition of the 
soul is brought to a corresponding stage. Progress 
in spiritual training is unthinkable unless moral 
progress comes to pass at the same time. The 
conquest of egoism is impossible without moral 
force. Any talk of spiritual training not being 
at the same time moral training is really out of 
the question.

Those only who have not experienced such 
manifestations might advance the following objec- 
tion, saying, “How can any one know that 
while thinking one is perceiving spiritual mani- 
festations, one is dealing with actualities and not 
with mere imaginings, visions, or hallucinations?” 
Now the matter lies thus: every person, who has 
been systematically trained and who has arrived

332 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

at the stage already characterized, will< be in a 
position to note the difference between his own 
presentment and a spiritual reality, just as well 
as a man endowed with sound sense knows the 
difference between the counterfeit of a bar of hot 
iron and the actual presence of such a bar when he 
touches it with his hand. The difference is de- 
termined by experience and by nothing else; and 
in the spiritual world, too, life is the touchstone. 
Just as we know that in the world of the senses 
the mere representation of a bar of hot iron will 
burn nobody’s fingers, so does the trained occultist 
know whether he is experiencing a spiritual fact 
or whether his awakened spiritual organs of per- 
ception are under the impress of actual facts or 
entities. The rules which have to be observed 
by the student in this connection , in order that he 
should not fall a victim to delusions, will be dealt 
with in the following pages.It is of the greatest importance that the student 
should have attained to a very definite condition 
of the soul by the time at which the consciousness 
of the new-born ego commences. For it is due to 
and by reason of this ego that man is the ruler 
of his own sensations, feelings, and conceptions; of 
his impulses, his desires, and his passions. Obser- 
vations and conceptions cannot be left in the 
soul to follow their own devices ; they mufet be reg- 
ulated according to the laws of thought. And it is 
the ego that, as it were, handles these thought-laws.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 333

and by pieans of them brings order into the life 
of conception and thought.THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 333

and by pieans of them brings order into the life 
of conception and thought.

It is similar with regard to desires and passions, 
inclinations and impulses. The fundamental eth- 
ical laws become the guides of these forces of the 
soul, and by reason of the moral judgment the 
ego becomes the soul’s guide within this domain. 
Now if a person detaches from his ordinary ego 
one that is higher, the former becomes to a 
certain extent indepei>dent, so much life-power 
being taken away from it as must serve for the use 
of that higher ego. But let us consider the case 
should that person as yet not have developed a 
certain ability and firmness in the exercise of the 
laws of thought and in the power of judgment, 
and should he, nevertheless, desire to bring about 
the birth of his higher ego on this insufficient basis. 
He would then be able to apportion to his ordinary 
ego only just so mueh thought capacity as might 
prior to this have been developed, and should the 
amount of such systematic thought be too small, 
then the now independent and ordinary ego will 
sink to a level of confused and fantastic thought 
and judgment, and moreover, since in such a 
case the new-born ego must inevitably also be 
weak, the disordered lower ego will gain the up- 
per hand, and the person will lose his balance 
in the matter of discernment, of power of judg- 
ment. Had he developed sufficient capability 
and firmness in thinking logically, he might calmly

334 an outline op occult science

have left his ordinary ego to go its o,wn way.334 an outline op occult science

have left his ordinary ego to go its o,wn way.

In the ethical sphere this is precisely the same. 
Should a person not have attained to firmness in 
the matter of his moral judgment, should he not 
have become sufficiently master over his inclina- 
tions, his impulses, and his passions, he will then 
render his ordinary ego independent — when he 
is still in a condition in which he will be over- 
whelmed by all these powers of the soul. It may 
then come to pass that that person will have 
become worse than he was before, owing to the 
birth of his higher ego. Had he waited to bring 
about this birth until he had sufficiently developed 
his ordinary self, attaining firmness in the matter 
of ethical judgment, stability of character, and 
thoroughness in the matter of his conscience, he 
would then have been in a position to have all 
these virtues left within that first ego when the 
birth of the second came about. Neglecting to 
do so, however, lays him open to the danger of 
losing his moral balance, which under the right 
course of training cannot happen.

Two things must here be borne in mind. First, 
that the facts above related should be laid to 
heart as seriously as possible; and secondly,' that, 
on the other hand, they should not in any way 
deter persons from entering upon such training.

Any one who has the firm intention of doing all 
in his power that may give confidence tO' the first 
ego in the execution of that which it has to fulfil.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 335

need never be dismayed when the second ego 
becomes detached as the result of such spiritual 
training. Yet he must remember that the power 
of self-delusion may be very great, and may thus 
lehd him into the erroneous belief that he has 
now reached the stage of “ripeness.”During the spiritual training here described the 
student develops his thought-life to such an 
extent that he is not exposed to dangers which 
are often thought to be connected with training. 
This cultivation of thought brings about all inner 
experiences which are necessary, but causes them 
to be so enacted that the soul lives through them 
without any injurious shocks. Without an ade- 
quate development of thought, these experiences 
may produce a feeling of great uncertainty in 
the soul. The method here emphasized calls 
forth experiences in such a way that they may 
produce all their effect and yet not cause serious 
shocks. By developing the life of thought the 
student becomes more of a spectator of the expe- 
riences of his inner life, whereas without such 
thought-development he is in the very midst of 
the experience and shaken by all the shocks 
incidental to it.

In systematic training certain qualities are 
mentioned which the student has to acquire by 
means of exercises in order to find the way to the 
higher worlds, and especial stress is laid on the 
following, — control of the soul over its thoughts.

336 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

its will, and its feelings. The manner an which 
this control is acquired through exercise has a 
dual aim. On the one hand, the soul is by this 
practice to acquire a firmness, reliance, and 
balance, such as will not forsake it even after the 
birth of the second ego; and on the other hand, this 
latter ego is to be provided with strength and 
inner fortitude for its journey.What is required is that man’s thinking power 
shall in all dornains conform to facts. In the 
physical world of the senses life is the great 
teacher of the htunan ego with regard to reality. 
Were the soul to allow its thoughts to roam 
aimlessly hither and thither, it would soon be 
corrected by life, unless it were willing to enter 
into combat with its mentor : the soul must 
conform its thoughts to the facts of life. Now, 
when man leads his thoughts away from the world 
of the physical senses, he misses the corrective 
influence of this latter. If his thought is not able 
to be its own mentor, it will be as unsteady as 
a will o’ the wisp. Consequently, the student’s 
thought must be exercised in such a way that 
its course and object are self-deterrnined. Inner 
firmness and capacity to concentrate strictly on 
one object: this is what such thinking must of 
itself engender. And for this reason the exercises 
for meditation should not be concerned with 
complicated objects, or with such as are foreign to 
daily life, but should, on the contrary, deal with

THE PERCEPTION OP HIGHER WORLDS 337

such as, are simple and familiar. Any one who 
can succeed in fixing his mind, over a period of 
several months and for a space of at least five 
minutes a day, on such ordinary objects as a pin 
or a lead pencil, excluding for the time being all 
other thoughts not concerned with the object 
under contemplation, will have accomplished much 
in the right direction. (A new article may be 
chosen each day, or the same one be adhered to for 
the space of several days.)Those, also, who feel themselves to be “thinkers” 
need not despise this method of preparing them- 
selves for occult training, because by the fixing 
of our attention for a time upon a really familiar 
object we may be sure that we shall be thinking 
in accordance with facts, and any one putting to 
himself the questions: “What are the constituent 
parts of a pencil?” “How are these materials 
prepared?” “How are they afterwards put to- 
gether?” “When were pencils invented?” and 
so on, will be adapting his conception more to 
realities than is he who meditates on the descent 
of man, or asks himself what life is.

Simple themes of meditation prepare us more 
for an accurate conception of the world of the 
Saturn,’ Sun, and Moon stages of development 
than do those based on learned and eomplicated 
ideas, for the primary thing is not merely to 
think, but to think accurately by means of an inner 
force. Once one has been trained to accuracy by

23

338 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

means of an obvious, actual physical process, the 
desire to think in conformity with facts will have 
become habitual, even when thought is not 
feeling itself under the control of the physical 
sense-world and its laws; and we then break free 
from the tendency to let our thoughts drift about 
aimlessly.And even as it governs in the world of thought, 
so the soul should hold sway in the realm of the 
will. In the physical sense-world it is life that 
here too maintains dominion. It urges upon 
man this or that as a necessity, and the will feels 
itself constrained to satisfy these same wants. But 
in following the higher training man must accustom 
himself to obey his ow'n commands strictly, and 
whosoever acquires this habit will feel less and 
less inclined to desire that which is of no moment. 
All discontent and instability in the life of the will 
come from the desire for things, of the actuality 
of which we form no distinct conception. Dis- 
content such as this may, when the higher ego is 
desirous of leaving the soul, throw that person’s 
whole inner life into di.sorder; and it is a good 
exercise to give oneself for the space of several 
months some command to be carried out at a 
specified time of day, such as, for instance: 
“To-day, at this or that particular hour, you will 
do this or that thing.” By such means we arrive 
in time at “ordering” the time at which tiie thing 
is to be done and the manner in which it is to be

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 339

performed, so as to admit of its being accomplished 
with the utmost exactitude. Thus we lift our- 
selves above the pernicious habit of saying, “I 
should like this,” and “ I want the other,” the while 
•\A^ exercise no thought toward its accomplishment.

In the second part of Faust, Goethe puts the 
following words into the mouth of a seeress: 
“Den lieb ich, der Unmogliches begehrt” (“Him 
I love, who craves the impossible”), and Goethe 
himself, in his Prose Proverbs, says: “In der Idee 
leben heisst, das Unmogliche behandeln, als wenn 
es moglich ware” (“To live in the idea means 
treating the impossible as though ’t were possible”).Yet such sentiments must not be put forward 
as objections against what has here been stated, 
for the demands made by Goethe and by his 
seeress (Man to) can be fulfilled only by those who 
have first educated themselves up to a desire for 
that which is possible, and have in so doing arrived 
at being able, by means of their strong “willing,” 
to treat the impossible in such a manner that 
through will it becomes transformed into the 
possible.

Concerning the world of feeling, a certain 
•resignation should pervade the soul of the occult 
student. And, for this to be so, it is necessary 
that the soul should have mastery over the 
expressions of joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain. 
But the -very fact of acquiring this characteristic 
may arouse prejudice: people might be afraid of

340 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

becoming dull and unsympathetic if they do not 
“rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with 
them that weep.” Yet this is not the case. 
What is pleasurable should rejoice the soul, apd 
sorrow should give it pain, but what the soul is to 
learn to achieve is conquest over the signs of joy 
and of sorrow. While thus endeavouring, the 
student will become aware that, so far from 
becoming “dull and unsympathetic,” he will be 
growing all the more receptive for all the joy and 
sorrow around him. But it is true that the 
student will here find that he needs to watch 
himself carefully for a considerable time to be 
able to acquire the faculty indicated. He must 
be careful to see that he partakes of pain and 
pleasure to the full, yet without so giving himself 
up to either as to give involuntary expression to it. 
Justifiable sorrow should not be repressed; but 
involuntary weeping should be held in check. 
Revulsion against a bad action is not condemned ; 
but the blind passion of anger is. Nor is pre- 
caution against dangers deemed unjustified, though 
fruitless “being afraid” is to be discountenanced, 
and so on.It is only by means of such exercises that the- 
occult student can gain the inner quietude req- 
uisite to his soul, in order that at the birth of the 
higher ego the soul may not find itself as a kind of 
double leading a second and unhealthy life along- 
side of the higher self. It is more especially in

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 341

these matters that we should not yield to any self- 
deception. Some people may be of the opinion 
that they already possess in everyday life a 
ceHain degree of equanimity, and that they 
therefore stand in no need of such exercises; yet 
it is precisely such who doubly need them. For it 
is quite possible to remain equable when surveying 
the things of this life, and then when ascending 
into the higher world to show evidences of a 
want of equanimity all the greater because it had 
only been held in check. For it should be emphat- 
ically understood that in the matter of occult 
training it is not so much a question of what we 
may previously have seemed to possess, but of 
persevering in careful and regular practice of what 
we need. Contradictory as this phrase- may ap- 
pear, it is nevertheless true that though life may 
have trained us to this or to that, the qualities to 
serve us in occult training are those that we have 
to acquire for ourselves. Should life have ren- 
dered us excitable, we must train ourselves into 
vanquishing this trait; yet if life has engendered 
in us equanimity, we should so rouse ourselves 
by our own efforts that the soul may be capable of 
responding to the impressions it receives. The 
man who cannot laugh at anything has just as 
little control over his laughter as one who is 
perpetually giving way to uncontrolled laughter.

Thou^t and feeling may be cxdtivated by yet 
another means, namely, by the* acquirement of the

342 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCEThou^t and feeling may be cxdtivated by yet 
another means, namely, by the* acquirement of the

342 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

characteristic known as positiveness. There is a 
beautiful legend told of Christ Jesus, in which it 
is related how He, with others, passed on the road 
the dead body of a dog. Our Lord's companions 
turned aside from the hideous sight, but Christ 
Jesus referred in admiration to tire creature’s 
beautiful teeth. And we can ourselves practise 
attaining the condition of mind in regard to the 
world which is thus indicated in the legend. 
Error, vice, and ugliness should not deter the soul 
from seeing truth, goodness, and beauty, where- 
soever they are to be found. Nor is this positive- 
ness to be mistaken for want of judgment, with a 
deliberate closing of the eyes to what is bad, false, 
and inferior. He who can admire the beautiful 
teeth of a decaying animal can also see that 
decaying corpse — yet the corpse does not hinder 
his observing the beauty of the teeth. Thus, 
though what is bad cannot be deemed good, nor 
error acclaimed as truth, we can yet train our- 
selves so that what is bad need not prevent us from 
recognizing what is good, nor need errors render us 
insensible to that which is true.

Thought, combined with will, attains to a cer- 
tain maturity if we strive never to allow what we 
have already experienced or learned to rob us of 
our tmbiassed receptiveness for new experiences. 
Such a thought as: “I have never heard that 
before; I don’t believe it!” should lose all its 
significance where the occult student is concerned;

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 343THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 343

indeed, he should endeavour, for a fixed period of 
time, to allow every thing and every creatme to 
convey something new to his mind. Every breath 
of air, every leaf on the tree, the prattling of a 
child, — each and all will teach us something, pro- 
vided we be willing to bring a different point of view 
to bear on it from the one we have held hitherto.

It may, of course, be possible to go too far in this 
particular, and we must be careful, at one time 
of life, not to lose sight of the experiences we have 
had at another time with regard to certain things. 
Indeed, what we experience in the present should 
be judged in accordance with the sum of our past 
experiences. These must be laid on the one 
scale, while on the other the occult student should 
place his inclination for ever gathering new know- 
ledge — above all, keeping his mind open to the 
fact that new experiences may contradict the old.

Thus we have here come to the enmneration 
of those five qualities of the soul which the occult 
student should, through definite training, endeav- 
our to make his own: controlling the trend of 
his thoughts; controlling the impulses of the will; 
equanimity in the matter of sorrow and joy; 
positiveness in his judgment of the world; and 
impartiality in his view of life. After giving 
consecutive periods of time to the acquiring of 
these qualities by means of continuous practice, 
the student must go still further, and. see that all 
these are blended into one harmonious whole

344 an outline of occult science

within his soul, to achieve which he will, have to 
practise the exercises in twos and twos together, 
or three and one, simultaneously, so as to bring 
about the harmony here desired. rwithin his soul, to achieve which he will, have to 
practise the exercises in twos and twos together, 
or three and one, simultaneously, so as to bring 
about the harmony here desired. r

The exercises indicated above are thus given otft 
by the occult teaching because not only do they — 
if faithfully carried out — produce as a direct 
result the effects desired, but because they are also 
calculated indirectly to bring about much that is 
helpful to the student in pursuing his way to the 
higher worlds. He who sufficiently practises these 
exercises will, while so doing, become aware of 
many a want and many a failing in his own soul- 
life, and he will at the same time find in them the 
very means necessary to give strength and security 
to the intellect, as also to the emotional tendencies 
and to the character. He will assuredly need 
many additional exercises, according to his capa- 
cities, his temperament, and his character; these, 
however, will present themselves if the above be 
abundantly carried out. Indeed, they will even- 
tually reveal themselves as containing more than 
at the first would appear, as, for instance, when a 
person endowed with but little self-confidence 
comes, in the course of time, to find that by 
persistent practice the needed confidence in him- 
self has come about, — and such may be the case 
with many another quality of the soul.*

• Special exercises going into greater detail on this subject may be found 
in my book entitled The Way of Initiation (Theosophical Publishing 
Society, i6i, New Bond St., London, W.), commencing with Chapter II.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 345THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 345

It is a matter of significance that the occult 
student is capable of raising these capabilities to 
a higher power; and he must succeed in so con- 
trolling his thoughts and feelings that the soxd 
ufUl have power to maintain complete inner 
quietude for certain periods of time — periods 
during which the student can keep at a distance 
from his mind and heart all those things that in 
any way concern the outer everyday life, its 
joys and its sorrows, its pleasures and its cares, 
even its tasks and its claims. At such a time 
nothing should be allowed entrance to the soul 
except what the soul itself admits. An objection 
may easily be made to this; the thought might 
arise that alienation from life must result if the 
student withdraws in heart and spirit from life 
and its duties for a certain part of the day. Yet, 
in reality, this is by no means the case. For 
those who, in the above manner, give them- 
selves up to periods of inner quietude and peace 
will find that out of these there grows such a 
fund of energy for fulfilling the outer duties of 
life that , they are not only not worse performed, 
but assuredly better.

It would be well for a man at such times to

t

detach himself entirely from thoughts of his own 
personal affairs, raising himself to what affects 
not only himself but mankind generally. If he 
is then able to fill his soul with messages from 
another and a spiritual world, and if they have the

346 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

power of enthralling his soul to as intense,^ degree 
as any personal concern or care, then indeed will 
his soul have gathered fruit of especial value.346 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

power of enthralling his soul to as intense,^ degree 
as any personal concern or care, then indeed will 
his soul have gathered fruit of especial value.

Those who thus exert themselves to regulate 
their soul-life will even arrive at the possibility 
of such self-observation as will permit of their 
reviewing their personal affairs with the same 
tranquillity as those of others; and seeing one's 
own experiences and one’s own joys and sorrows 
in the light in which those of another appear, is a 
good preparation for occult training. Thus in time 
we may bring this exercise to the requisite pitch 
that, after the day’s work is over, pictures of the 
day’s occurrences will pass before the mind’s eye, 
and we should then perceive ourselves within 
these experiences; in other words, the student 
shovild look at himself in his daily life as an 
outside observer.

A certain practice in self-observation having 
been gained by concentrating the attention upon 
short divisions of one’s everyday life, the student 
will become more and more expert in this kind of 
retrospect, continued practice enabling him to 
review these short periods completely and quickly. 
It will then become ever more and more the ideal 
of the occult student to assume such an attitude 
with regard to the events of life that confront him 
that he will be able to await their approach 
with absolute calm and inner confidence, no longer 
judging them by the state of his own soul but

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 347

according to their own inner meaning and inner 
worth. And it is by looking to this ideal that he 
will create a condition of soul that will enable him 
to meditate profoundly, as described above, upon 
sjrmbolical and other thoughts and feelings.The conditions here described must be fulfilled, 
because supbrsensible experience is built upon the 
foundation on which the student stands in his 
ordinary soul-life, before he enters the super- 
sensible world. In a twofold way, all supersensible 
experience is dependent on the soul’s point of 
departure before entering that world. One who 
is not intent, from the outset, on making sound 
powers of judgment the foundation of his spirit- 
ual training will develop supersensible capacities 
which perceive the spiritual world inaccurately and 
untruly. To a certain extent his spiritual organs 
of perception will develop wrongly. And just as 
a man with a defective or diseased eye cannot see 
rightly in the world of sense, so it is not possible to 
have true perceptions with spirit-organs which are 
not built up on the foundation of sound powers of 
judgment. One who starts from an immoral state 
of soul comes up into spiritual worlds with his 
spiritual vision confused and clouded. With re- 
gard to supersensible worlds he is like one in the 
sense-world who makes observations in a state 
of bewilderment. The latter, however, will not 
arrive at making any statements of consequence, 
whereas the spiritual observer, even in his

348 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

bewilderment, is more awake than a person in the 
ordinary state of consciousness^ and the results of 
his observations will therefore be errors in re- 
gard to the spiritual world.

* * c

*bewilderment, is more awake than a person in the 
ordinary state of consciousness^ and the results of 
his observations will therefore be errors in re- 
gard to the spiritual world.

* * c

*

The inner value of the grade of imaginative 
knowledge is secured by the withdrawal of the 
soul, or meditation, described above, aided by 
the student accustoming himself to what may be 
called “sense-free thinking.” Now when we for- 
mulate an idea based upon observations made in 
the physical world of the senses our thought 
cannot fail to be coloured by those senses. Yet 
it is not as though man could fomiulate nothing 
but such ideas: htunan thought need not become 
void and meaningless simply because it is not 
filled with observations derived through the 
channels of the senses. The most direct and 
safe way for the occult student to acquire this 
“sense-free" attitude with regard to his thoughts 
is by familiarizing himself with those facts con- 
cerning the higher worlds which occidt science 
is able to present, making these the subjects of 
his thoughts.

These facts cannot be observed by means of 
the physical senses; nevertheless, the student 
will find that he will be placed in a position to 
grasp them — if only he has enough patiefice and 
perseverance. No one can explore the higher 
worlds, nor make his own observations therein,

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 349THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 349

without* having been trained. But for all that, 
it is quite possible, without the higher training to 
understand everything which investigators may 
be in a position to communicate about those 
regions. Should any one ask, “How can I accept 
on trust whatever the occultist may say, being 
myself as yet unable to see an3rthing?” such an 
objection would be groundless, for it is perfectly 
possible to arrive through mere reflective thinking 
at the sure conviction that the matters thus com- 
municated are true. If a man is unable, after 
reflecting, to feel this sense of certainty, the want 
will arise not from lack of power to “believe” 
in something he cannot see, but simply because 
he has not as yet applied his powers of reflective 
thinking in a sufficiently unbiassed, comprehen- 
sive, and profound manner.

In order to be clear on this point, it must be 
borne in mind that hiunan thought, if it bestirs 
itself energetically, with inner force, can under- 
stand more than it usually imagines possible for 
itself. For in thought there is an inner essence 
which is in connection with the supersensible 
world. The soul is not usually conscious of this 
connection, because it is wont to train its faculty 
of thought only through the world of sense. On 
this account it thinks what is imparted to it 
from the supersensible world incomprehensible. 
What i*s thus commtmicated is, however, not 
only, intelligible to thought which has been

350 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

spiritually trained, but to any thinking “which is 
ftdly conscious of its power and is willing to make 
use of it.350 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

spiritually trained, but to any thinking “which is 
ftdly conscious of its power and is willing to make 
use of it.

By the persevering assimilation of what occult 
teachers are able to impart to us we can habituate 
ourselves to a line of thought that is not derived 
from sense-observation, and we then learn to 
recognize how, within the soul, thought allies 
itself to thought, and how one thought seeks out 
another, even when the connection of ideas is not 
occasioned by any power of sense-observation. 
The essential point is that by this method we 
become aware of the fact that the world of thought 
possesses an inner life, and that while we are 
engaged in thought we are, indeed, in the realms 
of a supersensible living power. Thus we may 
say to ourselves: “There is something within 
me that constitutes an organism of thought; 
nevertheless, I am one with this something.” 
Therefore, in the course of yielding to this sense- 
free way of thinking, we come to the knowledge 
that there is something real which flows in upon 
our inner life, just as the attributes of the objects 
of the senses, when we observe them, flow in 
upon us through the channels of our physical 
organs.

An observer in the world of the senses might 
remark: “Out yonder in space is a rose: it is 
not unfamiliar to me, for both scent and colour 
proclaim its presence.” And in like manner.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 351THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 351

when sefise-free thought is working within us, we 
need only be sufficiently unbiassed in order to be 
able to say: “Something real proclaims its 
ptesence to me, linking thought to thought 
and constituting a thought-organism” — only that 
there is this difference to be noted between the 
communication coming to the observer from the 
outer world of the senses, and that which actually 
reaches the sense-free thinker. The former feels 
that he is standing without — in front of the rose — 
whereas he who has given himself up to thinking 
which is untrammelled by the senses will feel 
within himself whatever thus proclaims its presence 
to him; he will feel himself one with it.

Those who, more or less unconsciously, can 
accept as real only such things as approach them 
from the outside, will, it is true, be little able to 
entertain this feeling, for what is in itself a reality 
can only be proclaimed to me through my being 
at one with it. In order to see aright here, it is 
necessary to have the following inner experience: 
we must learn to distinguish between the thought 
combinations we create of our own volition, and 
those experienced without any voluntary exercise 
of our will. In the latter case we may then say: 
“ I am entirely tranquil within myself; I am giving 
rise to no sequence of ideas; I yield to that which 
thinks within me.” And in such a case we are 
entirely 'justified in saying, “Within me something 
is itself a reality,” saying so, indeed, with as much

352 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

justification as we may say, “The rose makes an 
impression on me,” when we see a particular red 
and become aware of a particular scent.352 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

justification as we may say, “The rose makes an 
impression on me,” when we see a particular red 
and become aware of a particular scent.

Nor is there any contradiction in having derived 
the content of our ideas from the communications 
made by the occult seer. The ideas are, it is 
true, present; we find them there in readiness, 
if we but yield to them, yet they cannot be 
“thought” without in each case creating them 
anew within the soul. This is why the occult 
teacher seeks to awaken in his hearers and his 
readers such thoughts as they must first call forth 
from within themselves, whereas he who describes 
some object connected with sense realities is 
alluding to something that the listener or reader 
may observe within the world of the senses.

(The path which leads to sense-free thinking 
by means of the communications made by occvdt 
science is thoroughly safe. But there is also 
another method even safer and above all things 
more exact, yet for this very reason more difficult 
for the majority. This method is set forth in 
my two books. The Theory of Cognition, according 
to Goethe's Conception of the Universe and The 
Philosophy of Freedom. These works set forth 
what human thought may achieve for itself, if, 
instead of relying on the impressions derived from 
the external world of the senses, it yields to inward 
contemplation. At such a time the pure* thought 
works within that person, even as a being lives

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 353

within itsnlf. At the same time nothing in either 
of these writings is derived from commvmications 
due to occult science itself. And yet it is here 
shown that clear, self-concentrated thought can 
ob*tain explanations about the world, life, and man.These writings therefore occupy a very impor- 
tant intermediate position between the cognition 
of the world of the senses and that of the spiritual 
world. They proffer those things which thought 
can win when it raises itself above sense-obser- 
vation, while yet avoiding the gateway to oceult 
science. Any one allowing these books to work 
upon his soul in its entirety, already stands within 
the spiritual world, though the impression he will 
have will be that of being in the world of thought. 
And those who feel themselves in a position to 
seek the influences peculiar to this middle course, 
will be following a safe and plain road, for they 
may thus win for themselves feelings eonceming 
those higher worlds, sueh as will for all time

ensure for them the most abundant results.)

* *

*

The object of meditating upon the above 
described symbolical conceptions and feelings is, 
strictly speaking, the training of the higher organs 
of cognition within man’s astral body. They are 
in the first place created from the substance of the 
astral body, and these new organs of observation 
provide a' new world wherein man learns to know 
himself as a new ego.

24

354 an outline of occult science

These new organs of perception aJre readily 
distinguished from those of the physical world 
of the senses in that they are active organs. 
Whereas the eye and ear are passive, alloMdng 
light and sound to work upon them, it may be 
said of these perceptive organs of ^ the soul and 
spirit that, while cognizant, they are in a perpetual 
state of activity, and that they take hold, as it 
were, of their objects and their facts. This gives 
rise to the feeling that soul and spirit cognition 
is a union with — a “dwelling within” — the corre- 
sponding facts.These separately evolving soul and spirit organs 
may be compared to “lotus flowers” in accordance 
with the appearance which they present to the 
clairvoyant consciousness as they are formed 
from the substance of the astral body.' '

Very special kinds of meditation are used for 
affecting the astral body in order that this or the 
other organ of the soul and spirit may form this 
or that lotus flower, and all systematic medita- 
tion undertaken with a view to imaginative 
cognition has its influence upon one or other of 
these organs.’'

A systematic course of training so arranges and 
orders the separate exercises to be practised by

’ It must of course be clearly understood that such an appellation as 
“lotus flow’er” has no more bearing on the matter than would the 
expression “ wing,” supposing it were applied to the lobe of a lung. ^

^In my books, entitled The Way of Initiation and Initiation and its 
Results y some of these methods of meditation and exercises for acting 
upon these different organs arc set forth.

THE PERCEPTION OP HIGHER WORLDS 355THE PERCEPTION OP HIGHER WORLDS 355

the occult'" student that these organs may either 
simultaneously or consecutively attain their suit- 
able development, and on this process the student 
will have to bring much patience and perseverance 
to bear. Those, indeed, who are possessed of 
no more tha^j the average amount of patience 
with which man, under life’s present conditions, is 
endowed, need hardly expect this supply to suffice. 
For it takes long — often ^^ery long indeed — before 
these organs have reached a point at which the 
occult student is able to use them for observing 
things in the higher worlds. At this point comes 
what is known as “illumination,” in contradis- 
tinction to the preparation, or “purification,” 
which consists in the practices undertaken for the 
formation of these organs. (The term “purifi- 
cation” is used because the above exercises do 
in some particulars purify the inner life of the 
pupil from those things which belong to the world 
of sense-observation only.)

It may, however, also happen that prior to 
this actual illumination the student may get 
repeated “flashes of light” from the other world. 
Such “flashes” should, indeed, be accepted grate- 
fully, for these can already make him a witness 
to the spiritual realms. Yet he must not falter 
should this never be vouchsafed him during his 
entire period of preparation, and should its con- 
sequent duration seem all too long to him. In- 
deed, such as yield to impatience “because they

3s6 an outline OP OCCULT SCIENCE3s6 an outline OP OCCULT SCIENCE

can as yet see nothing,” have not yfct acquired 
the right attitude toward the higher worlds. 
Those alone will be in a position to grasp this who 
can view the exercises they undertake as being an 
object in themselves. For this practice is in tnith 
a working on something which is of the soul 
and spirit, namely, on a man’s own astral body; 
and even though not “seeing,” we can neverthe- 
less “feel” that we are at work on the spirit and 
the soul. It is only when we indulge in a precon- 
ceived notion as to what we “want to see” that 
we become unable to experience this feeling. In 
that case we may, indeed, consider as nothing 
what is, in reality, of immeasurable importance. 
Rather should we carefully note everything whicli 
we experience while practising, — experiences which 
are so fundamentally different from those of the 
external world. Wc shall then become aware 
that we cannot work upon our astral body as 
though it were some indifferent substance; that, 
on the contrary, an entirely different world here 
has its being, and one of which we know nothing 
through the outer world.

Higher entities work .upon the astral body in 
the same way in which the world of the physical 
senses works upon the physical body, and we 
“come upon” that higher life in our own astral 
body, provided only we do not shut ourselves 
out from it. If we are perpetually saying: “I 
am aware of nothing,” then it is generally the

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 357

case that we have made up our mind how these 
experiences ought to present themselves to our 
vision, and seeing nothing that accords with these 
preconceived ideas, we say: “I can see nothing.”case that we have made up our mind how these 
experiences ought to present themselves to our 
vision, and seeing nothing that accords with these 
preconceived ideas, we say: “I can see nothing.”

I^e, however, who is able to acquire the right 
attitude of mind with regard to practice during 
his training, will find that he gains something 
more from these exercises, something that he 
treasures for its own sake, — so much so that he 
will no longer be able to iisi^ense with so incal- 
culably important a vital function. But he will 
then know that through these very f)ractices he is 
standing in the world of soul and spirit, and he 
will await with patience and resignation those 
things which may further transpire. The feeling 
of which the student then becomes conscious may 
best be expressed in such words as these: “I 
will do all the exercises which are suitable for me ; 
for I know that during the time thus spent, all 
things that arc of importance to me will come to 
me; I do not ask for these things impatiently, 
yet I prepare myself to receive them.” And to 
this no objection can be raised such as, for instance, 
that the student is first left to feel about in the 
dark,— possibly for somb considerable length of 
time, — and that he will be able to know that he 
is on the right path only when the results evince 
themselves to him. For it is not the fact that 
these results are the first evidence of the correct 
method of his practice. Should the attitude

358 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

taken in respect to these exercises be the right one, 
he will feel a sense of satisfaction as the outcome 
of the exercises, and this will show him clearly 
that he is on the right road, even before any such 
results can be recorded.The right use of exercises in occult training 
allies itself with a satisfaction that is not mere 
satisfaction, but knowledge — knowledge, that is 
to say, which proclaims: “I am doing something 
which shows me that it is leading me along the 
right road.” Every occult student may have 
this knowledge at any moment if he but pay 
careful attention to all his experiences. Should 
he not bring this attention to bear, he will pass by 
such events, just as a man wrapped in thought 
may walk past the trees growing on either side of 
a road, without so much as observing them, 
though he might have seen them had he but 
looked at them.

It is by no means desirable that results, other

V

than those which are always due to such practice, 
should in any way be hastened. For this might 
easily be only an infinitesimal degree of what 
should really take place. Indeed, in the matter 
of occult development, partial results are more 
often than not the cause of considerable delay 
in complete development. To move about among 
such forms of the spiritual life as correspond to 
partial results, tends but to dull the perceptive 
faculties to the influences of the powers leading

THE PERCEPTION OP HIGHER WORLDS 359

to the higher stages of development; while the 
value derived from them — that of having seen 
into the spiritual world — is merely apparent, for 
this kind of “seeing” cannot yield the truth, but 
or^y groundless illusions.

**

The orgar^ of the soul and spirit, named 
“lotus flowers,” shape themselves in such a manner 
that to clairvoyant consciousness they appear in 
the vicinity of particular physical organs of the 
body of the person undergoing training. From 
among their number I will enumerate the follow- 
ing: in the space between the eyebrows is the 
so-called two-petalled lotus flower ; near the laiynx 
is located the sixteen-petalled one; about the 
neighbourhood of the heart we find the twelve- 
petalled lotus flower. The fourth is near the 
navel, and there are others appearing in close 
conjunction to other parts of the physieal body.'

The lotus flowers are formed out of the astral 
body, and by the time one or the other has devel- 
oped, we ourselves shall have come to know that 
we are in possession of it. We then feel that we 
can make use of it, and that by so doing we really 
enter a higher world. The impressions received 
of that world will still resemble in many respects 
those of the physical senses; and any one with 
imaginative cognizance will be able to allude to

*The appellation “two-petalled” or “sixteen-petalled,” and so on, 
is used because the organs in question may bc‘ likened to flowers having 
a corresponding number of petals.

36 o an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

the sensations emanating from this new and 
higher world in such terms as “feelings of warmth' 
or of cold” — “sounds, or word-impressions” —

“effects of light or of colour” — for it is as such

«

that he becomes aware of them. Yet he will l^e 
conscious of the fact that these impressions 
received in the imaginative world erpress some- 
thing differel^t from what they do in the actual 
world of the senses; and he recognizes that there 
are causes behind them which have nothing to do 
with physical matter, but are connected with 
things which are of the soul and spirit.Should he receive an impression of heat he will 
not, for instance, attribute this to a piece of hot 
iron, but will regard it as the emanation of some 
soul-process, such as he has hitherto experienced 
only within his soul’s inner life. He knows that 
behind the imaginative experiences things and 
processes have their being which are of the soul 
and spirit, even as at the back of physical percep- 
tions we have physical entities and material facts.

And yet this similarity apparent between the 
world of the imagination and tlie physical world 
is modified by one important difference. There is 
something present in the physical world which, 
when met with in the imaginative world, bears 
quite another appearance. In the former we are 
aware of a perpetual ebb and flow, an alternation 
between birth and death. But in the imaginative 
world there appears, in place of this phenomenon,

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 361

•a continual metamorphosis of the one into the 
other. In the physical world we see, for instance, 
how a plant fades away, but in the imaginative 
world there emerges, in proportion as the plant 
faftes, the shape of another form, not physically 
discernible, into which the withering plant changes. 
When once tlie plant has vanished, this form will 
have become fully developed in its place. Birth 
and death are conceptions which lose their value 
in the imaginative world, making way for a com- 
prehension of the transmutation of the one into 
the other.This being the case, those truths concerning 
which we have already made certain communi- 
cations in an earlier chapter of this book (see 
Chapter II, “The Nature of Man”) become 
accessible to the imaginative conception. Phys- 
ical sense-cognizance is, on the other hand, able 
to perceive only what takes place in the physical 
body, processes which are enacted within the 
“domain of birth and death.” The other prin- 
ciples of man’s nature, namely, the etheric or 
vital body, the sentient body, and the ego, are 
subject to the law of transmutation, and the per- 
ception of them is unlocked by the imaginative 
understanding. Any one who has attained thus 
far will observe that that which lives on under 
other conditions of being, appears to detach 
itself, as It were, from the physical body by the 
process of dying.

,^62 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

But development does not here come to a stand,-* 
still within the imaginative world. Any one who 
attempted to remain stationary in it would, it 
is true, be able to note the entities in process, of 
transmutation, but he would be unable to inter- 
pret the meaning of these processes of change. 
He would not be in a position to ^nd his way 
about in this newly attained world. For the 
imaginative world is a realm of unrest — there 
is naught in it but movement and change; no 
quiet spot is to be found there. A resting place 
is reached only by the person who, having trans- 
cended the stage of imaginative knowledge, has 
attained to that grade of development known to 
occult science as “understanding through inspi- 
ration.”It is not necessary for him who seeks knowledge 
of the superphysical world so to develop his 
capacities that the imaginative understanding 
should have been acquired in full measure, before 
moving on to the stage of “inspiration.” His 
exercises may, indeed, be so regulated that two 
processes may go on simultaneously, one leading to 
imagination and the other to inspiration. The 
student will then in due time enter a higher world, 
in which he not only perceives, but where he can 
also find his way about, as it were, and which 
he becomes able to interpret. Progress is, it is 
true, generally distinguished by the student hav- 
ing some phenomena of the imaginative world

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 363

liresented^to him, and then, after a little while, he 
will have the sensation that he is now beginning 
to know his whereabouts.

Yet the world of inspiration is something quite 
n(|w as compared with that of mere imagination. 
By means of the latter we learn to know the 
transformation of one event into another; while 
through the former (inspiration) we come to 
recognize the inner qualities of the changing 
entities. Imagination shows us the soul-expres- 
sion of such entities; inspiration penetrates in- 
ward, even to their spiritual core. Above all, we 
become aware of a multiplicity of spiritual entities 
and of their relations one to the other. In the 
physical sense-world we have also, of course, to 
deal with a multiplicity of divers entities, yet in 
the world of inspiration this multiplicity bears a 
different character. There the relation of each 
entity to the other is of a definite nature, not, as 
in the physical world of the senses, determined by 
exterior impressions upon the entity, but arising 
out of its inner nature.When we become aware of an entity in the 
world of inspiration, no external impression made 
upon anything is apparent, such as might be 
likened to the influence of one physical being upon 
another; a relation nevertheless exists which is 
purely the result of the inner constitution of the 
two entities. This relationship may be compared 
to that in which the separate sounds or letters of

364 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

a word stand one to the other in the. physical 
world. If the word “man” comes before us the 
impression made is due to a unison of the sounds 
“m-a-n”; no impact, nor any other influence, 
proceeds from the “m” to the “a,” but bpth 
sounds work together, doing so within “a whole,” 
owing to their inner constitution. F<5r this reason, 
observations made in the world of inspiration 
can only be compared to reading. The entities 
in this world make the impression on the beholder 
of written characters which he has to learn, and 
the connection between which is revealed to him 
as though in supersensible writing. This is why 
occult science calls the knowledge derived from 
inspiration the “reading of the secret writing.”

The way in which things are read by this secret 
writing, and how that which has been read can 
be communicated, shall now be made clear by a 
reference to previous chapters of this book. 
There man’s being was at first described as it is 
built up of different principles. It was then fur- 
ther shown how the world-being upon which man 
is developing passes through various eonditions, 
those of Saturn, Sun, Moon, and earth. The 
perception by means of which we are able on the 
one hand to discern the principles of the human 
entity, and, on the other hand, the successive states 
of the earth and its previous transformations, 
is revealed to the imaginative understanding. 
But it is now further requisite to comprehend

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 365THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 365

•the relations existing between the Saturn state 
and man’s physical body; between the Sun 
state and the etheric body, and so on. What 
must be explained is that even during the Saturn 
stjite the germ of man’s physical body came into 
existence, and that it has then further developed 
up to its present form during the Sun, Moon, and 
earth periods.

It had to be shown what changes took place in 
the human entity owing to the sun separating 
from the earth, and also that something similar 
again took place in connection with the moon. 
We had, moreover, to make plain what contrib- 
uted to the bringing about of such changes with 
regard to mankind as those which took place 
in the Atlantean era, how they were expressed 
in the subsequent Indian, ancient Persian, Egyp- 
tian, and other periods. The description of this 
sequence of events is not the result of the 
imaginative perception, but of inspirational 
knowledge derived from the reading of the secret 
writing. For such reading the imaginative per- 
ceptions are as the letters, or sounds, although such 
reading is not alone necessary for interpretations 
like the ^bove. It wotdd be impossible to com- 
prehend the whole life-process of man by means 
of the imaginative understanding. One might 
possibly ‘be in a position to note how, in the 
process of dying, the psychic and spiritual prin- 
ciples . dissociate themselves from what remains

366 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

in the physical world, but it wotild be impossiblp* 
to understand the connection between what 
happens to man after death and the preceding 
and following stages, were we unable to find our 
way through the facts obtained by imaginati^/e 
cognition. Without inspirational knowledge the 
entire imaginative world would femain mere 
writing, at which we might stare but which we 
should be unable to read.As the student proceeds from imagination to 
inspiration he will soon sec how wrong it would 
be to neglect this knowledge of the great world - 
conditions and limit himself merely to those 
facts which, to a certain degree, touch our closer 
personal interests. Indeed, such as are not ini- 
tiated into these matters may be inclined to say: 
“The only thing that seems of any importance to 
me is that I should ascertain the fate of the hmnan 
soul after death. If any one can give me infor- 
mation upon that subject, it will suffice; but of 
what use is it for occult science to involve me in 
such remote subjects as the Saturn and the 
Sun states, or the separation of the moon and 
the sun, and so on?"

Those, however, who have been properly in- 
structed in these things will recognize that a true 
understanding of what they desire to learn 
could not be obtained without prior knowledge 
as to these matters, which appear so unnecessary 
to them. A delineation of man’s states after

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 367

death remain utterly incomprehensible

and valueless to the man who is unable to con- 
nect it with ideas derived from those very far-off 
eypnts. Even the most elementary observations 
r^ade by a clairvoyant person necessitate his 
acquaintance with such things.When, foi» example, a plant passes from blossom 
into the state of fruition, the clairvoyant can note 
a change going forward in an astral entity which, 
while the plant is in bloom, has hovered above 
and around it in the semblance of a cloud. Had 
the fructification not taken place, this astral 
entity would have been changed into quite a 
different form from the one it now assumes in 
consequence of this fertilization. But now we 
may understand the entire process thus clair- 
voyantly observed if we have but learned to com- 
prehend ovu own nature from that great cosmic 
process, in which the earth and all its inhabitants 
were involved at the time of the separation from 
the sun. Prior to its fertilization the plant is in 
a similar condition to that of the whole earth 
before that separation from the sun took place, 
and after fertilization the blossom shows itself 
in such wise as recalls the state of the earth when 
the sun had passed out and when the moon 
powers were still bound up with it.

Those who have thoroughly assimilated the 
idea to, be gained by a comprehension of this 
separation from the sun, will now be able to

368 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

grasp adequately the significance of the process 
of plant fertilization, when it is said that “the 
plant previous to fructification is in a ‘sun state,’ 
and after this in the ‘moon state.’ ’’ Indeed, ^it 
may be said of even the smallest occurrence ip 
the world that it can be fully understood only 
when the reflection of the great cosiK.ic events is 
recognized in it. Unless this be the case, such 
an occurrence must remain as incomprehensible 
as to its real nature as would be Raphael’s Sistine 
Madonna, were it so covered up that but one 
little speck of blue was visible.Everything that happens to man is a reflection 
of all those great cosmic events that have to do 
with his existence. Those who wish to under- 
stand the observations made by clairvoyant 
consciousness of the phenomena taking place 
between birth and death, and again between 
death and a new birth, will be able to do so if 
they first acquire the faculty of interpreting 
imaginative observations by means of the con- 
ceptions they have gained by reflecting upon the 
great cosmic events. These surveys, indeed, fur- 
nish the key to a comprehension of human life. 
Therefore the studies of Saturn, Sun, and Moon 
are, from the standpoint of occult science, at the 
same time studies of man.

Through inspiration a knowledge is attained 
of the relationships between the beings of the 
higher world, and at a further stage of cognition

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 369

,it becoraes possible to obtain knowledge of the 
inner being of these entities. This grade, or step, 
of the understanding is known to occult science 
as that of intuitive knowledge. ‘

I Cognition of a sense-being implies standing 
outside it, and judging it according to the outward 
impression.* Intuitive cognition of a spiritual 
entity implies being at one with it ; uniting oneself 
with the inner being of that entity. Step by step, 
the occult student ascends toward such knowledge. 
Imagination has led him no longer to sense the 
impressions he receives as being the external 
qualities of entities, but rather as effluences of 
the soul and spirit. Inspiration leads him fur- 
ther, to the interior of these entities, and by it 
he learns what these beings are to each other; 
by means of intuition he penetrates within the 
entities themselves.Here we can again illustrate by means of fore- 
going chapters what is the meaning of intuition. 
In those earlier chapters it has not only been stated 
how the progress of the Saturn, Sun, and Moon 
evolutions proceeded; but also that beings took 
part in widely different ways in those develop- 
ments, and mention was made of the Thrones, or

* Intuition is in everyday life a much-abused word, which is made 
to stand for a vague and uncertain view of a matter; for some sort of 
“notion,” jvhich, while it may possibly “hit” the truth, can never- 
theless give no immediate proof of it. It is needless to say that this 
kind of intiiition is not meant here. Intuition, in this case, stands for 
knowledge of the highest and most luminous clearness, of the justi- 
fication of which the possessor is, in the fullest sense, con.scious.

25

370 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Lords of Will, the Lords of Wisdom, tlje Lords^ 
of Motion, and so on. In connection with the 
earth’s development, reference was made to 
the Lucifer spirits and spirits of Ahriman. The 
structure of the world was traced back to thosjf 
beings who took part in it. The knowledge 
attainable as to these beings is derived from 
intuitive cognition, and such knowledge becomes 
imperative, if we wish to understand the course 
of man’s life.That which is released from the human physical 
body at death passes on through divers states in 
the future. The more immediate conditions after 
death might, to some extent, be described by 
referring to imaginative knowledge, but that 
which takes place when man has proceeded farther 
into that time lying between death and a new 
birth would be entirely incomprehensible to the 
imagination, did not inspiration come to its aid. 
For inspiration alone can disclose what can be 
revealed about man’s life after its purification 
in the “land of spirits.’’ There, however, some- 
thing occurs for which inspiration in its turn 
proves inadequate, and as to which it has to some 
extent lost the clue. For there is a period in 
human development, between death and a new 
birth, in which the hiunan entity is accessible to 
intuition only.

Yet this part of the human entity' is ever 
within man, and would we understand it in its

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 371

true inwardness we must also seek it, by means 
o£ intuition, in the time between birth and death. 
Any one attempting to fathom man by means of 
imagination and inspiration alone would be miss- 
ing that which happens to the very innermost 
being, that which continues from incarnation to 
incamatioif. It is therefore by intuitive cog- 
nition alone that adequate research concerning 
reincarnation and Karma becomes possible, and 
all genuine knowledge as to these processes is 
derived from research undertaken by means of 
intuition. If a man would know his own inner 
self, he can do so only by intuition: by its aid he 
becomes aware of what it is that moves onward 
within him from incarnation to incarnation; and 
should it fall to any one’s lot to know something 
about his earlier incarnations, this can take place

only through intuitive knowledge.

* *

*only through intuitive knowledge.

* *

*

Knowledge through inspiration and intuition is 
attainable only by means of exercises of the soul 
and spirit, and they resemble those meditations 
practised for the attainment of the imagina- 
tive faculty which have already been described. 
While, laowevcr, in exercises for the development 
of the imagination, a connection is set up with 
impressions belonging to the world of the phys- 
ical senses, such links must gradually be set aside 
in the case of inspiration. In order to obtain a 
clear conception of what has to happen here, it

372

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE372

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

would be well to recall to mind the symbol of the , 
“rosy cross.” When we meditate on this we have 
before us a picture of which the component parts 
have been taken from the world of the senses: 
there is the black colour of the cross, and the rosesf 
and yet the combination of those various parts 
into the “rosy cross ” is not derived frofh the world 
of the senses. If the student now endeavours to 
banish from his consciousness both the black 
cross and the red roses, in their capacities of sense- 
realities, only retaining in his soul that spiritual 
energy which has been active in putting the above 
things together, he will be in possession of a means 
for such meditation as will gradually lead him 
on to inspiration. He should put the question 
to himself somewhat in the following manner: 
“What have I inwardly done in order to construct 
that symbol of the cross and the roses? Well, 
what I did, being an act of my own soul, I will 
retain my hold upon; but the picture itself I will 
allow to fade away out of my consciousness. I 
shall then be able to feel within me all that my 
soul did in order to produce the picture, though 
I no longer recall the picture itself. I will now 
live wholly within : I will live in my own activity 
that created the picture. I will not meditate upon 
a picture, but upon the powers of my own soul 
which are capable of creating pictures.”

Such are the meditations that must now be 
undertaken in respect to many symbols. This

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 373Such are the meditations that must now be 
undertaken in respect to many symbols. This

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 373

pleads to, cognition through inspiration. Here is 
another example, that of meditating upon the 
growth and subsequent withering of a plant. 
The picture of a gradually growing plant is allowed 
|;o appear before the soul, how it grows up from 
the seed and, unfolding leaf after leaf, reaches the 
flowering Stage and afterwards that of bearing 
fruit. Then let your meditation be of its decline, 
on to its complete withering away, its dissolution. 
By the help of meditations on such a symbol as 
this the student gradually attains to a feeling 
concerning growth and decay of which the plant 
is but a symbol. If the exercises be persevered 
in continuously, there can be evolved from this 
feeling the image of the transformation which 
underlies physical growth and decay.

But if one would attain the corresponding stage 
in inspiration, this exercise has to be practised 
differently. Here one’s own activity of soul 
must Vre called to mind, — that which had obtained 
from the image of the plant the conception of 
growth and decay. The plant must now be 
allowed to vanish altogether from the conscious- 
ness, and the attention be concentrated entirely 
upon the student’s own inner activity. It is 
only such exercises as these that help us to rise 
to inspiration. But in the beginning the student 
will not find it an easy matter to understand fully 
how to. set about such an exercise, owing to the 
fact, that people are accustomed to allow their

374 an outline of occult science

inner life to be determined by extenial„impres- 
sionv'^, hence a tendency to uncertainty -a general 
wavering — when it comes to unfolding a soul-life 
that has freed itself of all exterior impressions.Here the student must clearly understand tha| 
he should only undertake these exercises if along 
with them he cultivates everything that may lead 
to firmness and certainty in his judgment, his 
emotional life, and his character; these precau- 
tions are even more necessary than when seeking 
to acquire the faculty of imagination. Should 
he take them, he will be doubly successful, for, 
in the first place, he will not lose the balance of 
his personality through the exercises; and secondly, 
he will acquire the capacity of being really able 
to carry out what is demanded in these exercises. 
They will be deemed difficult only so long as the 
student is at fault in the matter of the particu- 
lar attitude of soffi, and the precise feelings and 
sentiments requisite to their complete perform- 
ance, while he who patiently and perseveringly 
cultivates within his soul such qualities as are 
favourable to the growth of supersensual know- 
ledge will not be long in acquiring both the under- 
standing and the faculty for these practices.

Any one who can acquire the habit of frequently 
entering into the quiet of his own soul, and who, 
instead of worrying about himself, utilizes such 
time for the transforming and ordering of those 
experiences he has had in life, will gain much.

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 375

For he jvill perceive that thoughts and feelings 
become the richer by bringing life’s experiences 
into connection with each other. He will become 
ayvare that .he gains stores of new knowledge not 
|nly through new impressions and new experi- 
ences, but also by letting the old be digested within 
him. •He who is able to set to work and to ponder the 
value of his experiences, — nay, even the opinions 
he may have formed, — doing so in such a manner 
as to exclude himself, together with his sym- 
pathies and antipathies, his personal interests, 
and his feelings, will indeed be doing much to 
prepare the ground for knowledge of the super- 
sensual kind, and he will in very truth be culti- 
vating what may be called a rich inner life. But 
what is of primary importance is the balance 
and the equilibrium of the qualities of the soul. 
People are only too apt, when indulging in certain 
activities of the soul, to become one-sided. Thus, 
when a person has come to know the advantages 
of contemplation, and of dwelling upon pictures 
derived from his own thought- world, he is apt to 
develop a tendency to withdraw himself from the 
impressions of the outer world. Yet such a step 
only lea^s to a parching and withering of the inner 
life; and he will go farthest who manages to retain 
an undiecked receptivity for all impressions of 
the outer world, while yet possessing the power to 
withdraw within his own inner self. It is by no

,,76 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

means necessary to think of the so-called ii^iportant 
events of life only: every one, in every sphere of 
life, be his four walls ever so humble, will be 
possessed of experience enough, provided on],y 
his mind be truly receptive. Experiences nee4 
not be sought — they abound on every hand.Here it is of particular importance "to consider 
how experience may be utilized by the htunan 
soul.. For instance, one may make the discovery 
that some one he or another greatly reveres has 
some quality that cannot but be regarded as a 
flaw in his character. Am experience of this kind 
may lead the person to whom it comes to thoughts 
which will tend in one of two different directions. 
He may simply feel that he can never again regard 
the person in question with the same degree of 
veneration; or again, on the other hand, he may 
say to himself: “How has it been possible for 
this revered person to become burdened with 
such a failing? How can I present the matter 
to my mind so as to sec in this failing not a mere 
fault, but rather a something that is the outcome 
of his life, possibly even caused by his grander 
qualities? ’’ Whoever can place the question thus 
before his own mind may, perhaps, arrive at the 
conclusion that his veneration for his friend need 
not suffer the least diminution, owing to the 
failing that has come to light.

Experiences of this nature will, each time they 
are met with, add something to 'our understanding

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 377Experiences of this nature will, each time they 
are met with, add something to 'our understanding

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 377

of life. Yet it would certainly be a bad thing for 
5,ny one fo allow himself, by reason of the value 
of fhis view of life, to excuse everything in those 
whom he happens to like, or to drop into the habit 
of ignoring "every blamable action, in order to 
s4ek in it some benefit to his own inner develop- 
ment. For this latter does not take place if the 
impetus, not only to blame faults but to under- 
stand them, comes from ourselves. Advantage 
of the kind instanced can only accrue when our 
attitude has been brought about by the case 
itself, and it is immaterial whether the person 
passing judgment thereon has anything to gain 
or to lose. It is incontestably triie that we cannot 
learn by condemning a fault, but only by under- 
standing it; but, at the same time, if, owing to 
understanding it, we exclude all disapproval of it, 
we cannot get very far, either.

Here, again, the matter does not depend so 
much upon one-sidedness, either in one direction 
or the other, but rather on the proportion and 
balance of all qualities in the soul; and this is 
very specially the case with one of these qualities 
whifh is preeminently important to man’s devel- 
opment: this is the feeling of devotion. Those 
who can cultivate this feeling, or on whom nature 
has herself bestowed so inestimable a gift, have a 
good foi^ndation for the powers of supersensible 
knowledge. Those who in childhood and youth 
have been able to look up to certain persons with

378 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE378 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

feelings of devoted admiration, beholding in them 
some high ideal, will already possess in the depths' 
of their souls the soil in which supersensible know- 
ledge may flourish abundantly. And those who, 
possessed of the maturer judgment of later liffe, 
can direct their gaze upon the starry heavenf; 
and surrender themselves unreservedly to revela- 
tions of the Higher Powers, are in a like manner 
ripening their senses for the acquisition of know- 
ledge with regard to the supersensible worlds. 
So is it also with those who can admire the powers 
ruling over human life itself. It is of no small 
significance for a man who has attained mattirity 
to be able to feel himself filled with reverence, 
even of the most exalted kind, for others in whom 
he either believes there are, or thinks he recog- 
nizes, superlative qualities. For it is only where 
veneration such as this is present that a vista of 
the higher worlds can be revealed. Those who 
possess no sense of reverence will never go very 
far in their attainment of cognition ; for from such 
as decline to appreciate anything in this world, 
the essence of all things will assuredly be withheld.

Nevertheless, any one permitting his feelings of 
reverence and devotion to slay his healthy self- 
consciousness and .self-confidence is guilty of sin- 
ning against the laws of balance and equilibrium. 
Thus the occult student must see that he labours 
perpetually to mature his own nature; then, 
indeed, he may rightly acquire confidence in his

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 379THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 379

own personality, and believe that its powers are 
increasing more and more. Any one arriving at 
thfe right conclusion in this respect may then say 
to himself : “There are within me hidden powers, 
and I am able to call them forth from within. If, 
iherefore, I see something which fills me with 
reverence t^pcause it is above me, I need no longer 
merely venerate it, but I may confidently as- 
sume that, if I but develop all that is in me, I 
may raise myself to the level of the object of 
my veneration.”

The more capable a man is of fixing his at- 
tention upon those events of life which do not 
primarily demand any measttre of personal criti- 
cism, the greater will be the possibility of provid- 
ing himself with a foundation for growth in higher 
worlds. The following example will make this 
evident. Let us assume that some one is placed 
in a position in which it rests with him either to 
do, or leave undone, a certain thing. His judg- 
ment bids him “Do this,” while yet there may 
at the same time be a certain indefinable some- 
thing in his feelings which deters him from the 
deed. It may so happen that the person in ques- 
tion will pay no heed to this inexplicable some- 
thing, carrying out the action in accordance with 
his judgment. But it may also be that the person 
so placed will hearken to this inner suasion and 
not perform the action. Now, pursuing the mat- 
ter further, he may find that mischief would have

38 o an outline OF OCCULT SCIENCE38 o an outline OF OCCULT SCIENCE

resulted from his following the dictates of his 
reason, and that a blessing awaited his omission 
of the act. Any experience of this nature may 
lead a man’s thoughts into quite a definite channelj 
when he will put the matter to himself thus: 
“There is something within me that is a surer" 
guide than is that measure of judgment of which 
I am at present possessed : I must therefore 
retain an open mind in respect to this inner some- 
thing, to the height of which my own capacity for 
judgment has not yet attained.”

The soul derives much benefit from the atten- 
tion being directed to occurrences in life such as 
these, for they demonstrate that man’s healthy 
premonitions bear something in them which is of 
greater moment than he, with his present degree 
of judgment, is able to perceive. Attention in 
this direction has the effect of enlarging the life 
of the soul. Yet here again certain peculiarities 
may arise which are of themselves dangerous. 
Any one who accustoms himself to a perpetual 
sifting of his judgment, owing to this or that 
“premonition,” might well become a .shuttle-cock 
tossing at the mercy of ever>' Icind of undefined 
impulse; indeed, it is not a far cry from such 
habitual indecision to a state of absolute' super- 
stition.

Every superstition is disa.strous to the student 
of occult science. The possibility of gaining 
admission by legitimate means to the realms of

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 381Every superstition is disa.strous to the student 
of occult science. The possibility of gaining 
admission by legitimate means to the realms of

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 381

spiritual life must depend upon a careful exclusion 
of all superstition, phantasy, and dreaming. He 
who is pleased at having had a certain experience 
which cannot be grasped by human reason will 
not approach the spiritual world in the right 
manner? No partiality for the “inexplicable” will 
ever make" an occult student. So much is certain, 
and people must entirely divest themselves of the 
idea that a mystic is .one who presupposes the 
inexplicable and the unfathomable whenever, and 
wherever, in this world he thinks fit. The right feel- 
ing that should inspire the student of occult science 
is the recognition everywhere of hidden forces and 
hidden beings, and also a feeling that the hitherto 
unfathomed forces are capable of being understood 
whenever the right powers become available.

There is a pecitliar disposition of mind which 
at every step of his development is of great 
importance to the occult student. This consists 
in not assuming, in his search after truth, an atti- 
tude such as renders him particularly anxious as to 
the way in which this or that question can be 
answered. He shoiild rather concentrate his ener- 
gies upon trying how he may best develop this or 
that faculty within him, and when, by means of 
such patient inward labour, various faculties 
have been attained, he will find that the answer 
to certain questions will be forthcoming.

This’ is the attitude of soul which the occxdt 
student should ever cultivate, for by its aid he is

38 t AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCEThis’ is the attitude of soul which the occxdt 
student should ever cultivate, for by its aid he is

38 t AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

led to work upon himself, to bring his nature to^ 
greater maturity, and to be able to resist the 
impulse to force an answer to certain questions. 
He will wait, until in the fulness of time the answers 
come to him. Yet here, once more, those whq 
tend to become one-sided can achieve little, and 
the occult student may rest assured that within 
a certain time he will be in a position to solve 
even the greatest problems in accordance with the 
measure of his powers: here also balance and 
equipoise of the soul play a significant part.

Many another quality of the soul might be dis- 
cussed, the fostering and development of which 
are desirable, should the student wish to pursue the 
exercises requisite to inspiration; but in everything 
it should be emphasized that harmony and balance 
are the main points ; both prepare the understand- 
ing and the capacity for the exercises here de- 
scribed — exercises for the attainment of inspiration.

• Exercises for the attainment of intuition require 
that the student should not only banish from his 
consciousness the pictures whereby he gained 
the powers of imagination, but also the life in 
that activity of his own soul into which he plunged 
for the attainment of inspiration. He is — and 
this should be taken literally — to retain in his 
soul nothing he has hitherto known, either by 
inner or outer experience. But if, after this 
throwing off of both inner and outer experiences, 
nothing should remain within his consciousness, —

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 383

that is to say, should his consciousness disappear 
altogether and should he drift into unconscious- 
ness, — ^he would then be able to recognize his 
unfitness to* undertake as yet the exercises leading 
1JP to intuition, and he should therefore continue 
those requisite for imagination and inspiration.A time is*bound to come when his consciousness 
will no longer be a void after rejecting those inner 
and outer experiences,— '-when, on the contrary, 
such rejection will still leave a certain residue to 
which the student can then devote himself in 
inner meditation, just as on previous occasions 
he has given himself up to what owes its existence 
to inner and outer impressions. This something 
is, however, of a very special nature, for in com- 
parison with all previous experiences it will be 
found to be something absolutely new. When it 
occurs, we recognize it as being something we have 
never known before. It is a perception, even as 
an actual sound is, that strikes upon the ear; yet 
it can enter our consciousness only by way of 
our intuition, just as the sound can come within 
the range of our consciousness only by way of 
the ear. And thus with intuition the last rem- 
nants of. the physical and sentient are stripped 
from man’s impressions, while the spiritual 
world begins to expand before the understanding 
in a form that has nothing in common with the 
characteristics of the world of the physical senses.

384 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE384 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Imaginative cognition is attained by tiie evolv-- 
ing of the lotus flowers from the astral body. 
Owing to the exercises undertaken for the attain- 
ment of inspiration and intuition, particular 
movements, formations and tendencies whi^h 
were previously absent, now appear in the human 
etheric or vital body. These are the organs by 
means of which man learns to read the secret 
writing, and takes up into the sphere of his facul- 
ties what lies beyond that writing. For such as 
are clairvoyant, the changes which occur in the 
etheric body of a person attaining to inspiration 
and intuition are displayed in the following man- 
ner. Near the physical heart is situated a new 
centre which develops into an etheric organ. 
From this organ, movements and currents flow 
toward the different parts of the human body, 
doing so in the most varied manner. The most 
important of these movements approach the 
lotus flowers, traversing these as well as their 
separate petals, and thence directing their course 
outward to where they radiate their light out 
into exterior space. The more developed a person 
is, the greater will be the circtunference around 
him wherein these rays will become discernible. 
This centre near the heart is not, however, the 
one which under correct training first tends to 
evolve. It has first to be prepared, and there is 
to be first formed a provisional centre in the head, 
which later moves downward to the region of the

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 385

larynx, whence it is finally transferred into the 
neighbourhood of the heart. Under an irregular 
course of devck)pnient it would be possible for 
the organ in (question to develop near the heart 
in the first place, in which case there would be a 
dllnger that the student thus trained, instead of 
arriving in • due course at adequate, tranquil 
clairvoyance by regular means, would turn into 
a visionary dreamer.Subsequent development enables the occxdt 
student to render these currents and organized 
parts of his etheric body independent of his physi- 
cal body; he then becomes capable of using them 
separately, and the lotus flowers then serve him 
as instruments for setting in motion his etheric 
body. Yet, before this can take place, certain 
currents and radiations must come into action 
around his entire etheric body, surrounding this, 
as it were, with a fine network, and thus encasing 
it as though it were a separate entity. When this 
has taken place, the movements and currents 
within the etheric body are able to put themselves 
in touch with the world of soul and spirit outside 
them, uniting themselves with that world in such 
a manner that affairs of the soul and spirit trans- 
piring externally combine and mingle with the 
inward world, with that of the etheric body. 
When this comes to pass, the moment has arrived 
when man can consciously observe the world of 
inspiration. This cognizance takes place in a 
26

386 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

manner somewhat different from cognizance of 
the physical -sense world. In this latter we be- 
come aware of the world by means of our senses, 
and gather from these perceptions our ideas, 
opinions, and conceptions. But in the case of 
knowledge through inspiration this is not so.

What is thus recognized is immediately present 
to the mind; there is no thinking after the per- 
ception has taken place. What in the case of 
physical-sense cognition is only gained through 
an idea and subsequently translated into terms, 
is, in the case of inspiration, simultaneous with 
perception. One would therefore be running the 
risk of becoming merged with the surrounding 
world of soul and spirit, and being unable to 
differentiate oneself from it, had not the fine net- 
work above alluded to been previously formed in 
the etheric body.When exercises for the attainment of intuition 
are practised, they not only affect the etheric 
body but extend their influence to the super- 
sensible forces of the physical body. But it must 
not of course be^imagined that effects are brought 
about in the physical body which are discernible 
*to ordinary sense-observation, for the effects are 
such as the clairvoyant alone is able to' estimate, 
and they have nothing to do with any external 
powers of perception. They come as the result 
of a ripened consciousness, when thi^ latter is 
able to have intuitional experiences, even though

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 387

it has divested itself of all previous inner and outer 
experiences. The experiences of intuition are, 
however, subtle and delicate, and are of so inti- 
mate a natuse that the physical human body at 
its present stage of development is coarse in com- 
parison with them, and therefore proves a deter- 
mined hindrance to the success of any exercises 
for attaining intuition. Nevertheless, should these 
be pursued with energy and perseverance, and 
with the requisite inward calm, they will ulti- 
mately overcome those powerful hindrances of 
the physical body. The occult student will be- 
come aware of this when he notices how, by 
degrees, particular actions of his physical body 
which hitherto had taken place without his own 
volition, now come under his control. He will 
also become aware that for a short time he will 
feel the need, for instance, of so regulating his 
breathing (or some similar act) as to bring it 
into a kind of harmonious accord with whatever 
is being enacted within his soul, be it exercises 
or other forms of inner concentration.The ideal development would-be for no exer- 
cises to be carried out by means of the physical 
body but rather that everything which has to 
take place within it should result only as a con- 
sequence of exercises for intuition. As, however, 
the physical body offers such powerful impedi- 
ments, the training may permit of some allevia- 
tions. .These consist in exercises which affect the

388 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

physical body; yet everything in this domajp. 
that has not been directly imparted by the teacher, 
or those having knowledge and experience of these 
things, is fraught with danger. Such exercises, 
for instance, include a certain regulated process 
of breathing to be carried out for a very short 
space of time. These regulations al to breathing 
correspond in quite a definite way to particular 
laws of the world of the soul and spirit. Breath- 
ing is a physical process, and when this act is so 
carried out as to be the expression of a law of 
the soul and spirit, physical existence receives the 
direct stamp, as it were, of spirituality, and the 
sense-material is transformed.

For this reason occtdt science is able to call the 
change due to such spiritual influence a direct 
transmutation of the physical, and this process 
represents what is called “working with the phi- 
losopher’s stone’’ by those who have knowledge 
of these matters. And here it is important that 
all the superstitions, the humbug, and the char- 
latanism that have during the course of time accu- 
mulated about this formula should be put aside; 
the meaning of the process will be all the more 
significant to one who understands it, for the very 
reason that, as an occult student, all superstition 
is far removed from him. When we have gained 
a clear idea about a matter of importance it is 
presumably permissible to call that idea by its 
right name, even though error and nonsense

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 389THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 389

shotdd have become associated with that name 
through misunderstandings and far worse things.

Every true intuition is a “working with the 
philosopher’s^ stone,” since every such act calls 
directly upon powers which are derived from the 
suj>ersensible world, and are brought to bear upon 
the world of sense.

* *

*

As the occult student climbs the path leading 
to cognition of the higher worlds, he becomes 
aware at a particular point that the cohesion of 
the powers of his own personality is assuming a 
different form from that which it possesses in 
the world of the physical .senses. In the latter, the 
ego brings about a unifoim cooperation of the 
powers of the soul — 'primarily of thought, feeling, 
and Avill. These three soul powers are actually, 
under normal conditions of human life, in per- 
petual relation one to the other. For instance, 
we see a particular object in the external world, 
and it pleases or is displeasing to the soul; that 
is to say, the presentment of the thing will be 
followed by a sense of either pleasure or aversion. 
Possibly we may desire the object, or may have 
the impulse to alter it in some way or other; that 
is to say, desire and will associate themselves with 
both presentment and feeling. Now this asso- 
ciation is. due to the fact that the ego coordinates 
presentment (thinking), feeling, and willing, and 
after this fashion introduces order among the

390 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE390 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

powers of personality. This healthy arrangement 
would be interrupted should the ego prove itselV 
powerless in this respect; if, for instance, ‘the 
desires went a different way from tlje feelings, or 
the presentment.s. No man would be in a healthy 
condition of mind who, while thinking this f)r 
that to be right, nevertheless wished* to do some- 
thing which he did not consider right. The same 
would hold good should a person desire not the 
thing that pleased him but that which displeased 
him. Now the person progressing toward higher 
cognition becomes aware that feeling, thinking, 
and willing do actually assume a certain inde- 
pendence: that, for example, a particular thought 
no longer urges him, as though of itself, to a cer- 
tain condition of feeling and willing. The matter 
resolves itself thus; We may perceive something 
correctly by means of thinking, yet in order to 
arrive at a feeling or resolution on the subject 
we may need a further independent impetus, 
coming from within. Thinking, feeling, and will- 
ing no longer remain three powers, radiating from 
the ego as their common centre, but become, as 
it were, independent entities, just as if they were 
three separate personalities. For this reason, 
therefore, a person’s own ego must be strength- 
ened, for not only must it introduce order among 
three powers, but the leadership and guidance of 
three entities have devolved upon it. -

And this is what is known to occult science as

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 391And this is what is known to occult science as

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 391

,^e cleavage of the personality. Here is once 
more clearly revealed how important it is to add 
to the exercises of the higher training others for 
giving certainty and firmness to the judgment, 
and to the life of feeling and will. For if certainty 
and firmness arc not brought into the higher world, 
it will at onfce be seen how weak the ego proves 
to be, and how it can be no fitting ruler over 
the powers of thought, feeling, and will. In the 
presence of this weakness, the soul would be 
dragged by three different personalities in as many 
directions, and its inner privacy would cease. 
But should the development of the occult student 
proceed on the right lines, this multiplication of 
himself, so to speak, will prove to be a real step 
forward, and he will nevertheless continue, as a 
new ego, to be the strong ruler over the inde- 
pendent entities which now make up his soul.

In the subseciuent course of development this 
division or cleavage is carried further; thought, 
now functioning itidependently, arouses the activ- 
ities of a fourth distinct entity of the soul and 
spirit; one that may be described as a direct 
influx into the individual of cuiTcnts which bear 
a resemblance to thoughts. The entire world 
theti appears as a thought-structure, confronting 
a man just as do the vegetable and animal worlds 
in the domain of the physical senses. In the 
same manner do feeling and will, which have be- 
come independent, stimulate two powers within

392 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the soiil to work in it as separate entities. An^ 
yet a seventh power and entity must be add/^d, 
which resembles the ego itself. Thus does man, on 
reaching a particular stage of development, find 
himself to be composed of seven entities, all of 
which he has to guide and control.The whole of this experience bebomes asso- 
ciated with a further one. Before entering the 
supersensible world, thinking, feeling, and willing 
were known to man merely as inner soul-expe- 
riences. But as soon as he stands within that 
supersensible world he becomes aware of things 
which express nothing of the nature of the physical 
world, but such as belong to the soul and spirit. 
Behind the characteristics of the new world of 
which he has become aware, he now perceives 
spiritual entities. These present themselves to 
him as an external world, as things in the do- 
main of the physical senses, as stones, plants, and 
animals have been wont to present themselves 
to his senses. Now the occult student is able to 
observe an important difference between the 
spiritual world unfolding itself before him and 
the world he has hitherto been accustomed to 
recognize by means of his physical senses. A 
plant of the sense-world remains what it is, what- 
ever man’s soul may think or feel about it. This 
is not the case at first with regard to images of 
the soul and spirit world, for these change accord- 
ing to man’s own thoughts and feelings. Man

the’ PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 39.^ 
stamps upon them an impression which is the

I ■*}

result of his own being.the’ PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 39.^ 
stamps upon them an impression which is the

I ■*}

result of his own being.

Let us imagine a particular picture presenting 
ijself to man in the imaginative world. As long 
as he maintains indifference toward it, it will 
tontinue to show a particular form. As soon, 
however, as he is moved by feelings of like or 
dislike with regard to it, its form will change. 
Pictures, therefore, at first present not only some- 
thiiig independent and exterior to man himself 
but they reflect also that which the man is. These 
pictures are permeated through and through with 
man’s own being. This falls like a veil over the 
other beings. In this case man, even if confronted 
by a real being, does not see this, but sees what he 
has himself created. Thus he may have something 
true before him, and yet see what is false. Indeed, 
this is not only the case in respect to what man has 
observed concerning his own entity, but every- 
thing which is in him impresses itself upon the 
spiritual world.

If, for example, a person has secret inclinations, 
which owing to education and character are pre- 
cluded from revealing themselves in life, those 
inclinations will, nevertheless, take effect in the 
soul and spirit world, which is thus coloured in a 
peculiar way, due to that person’s entity, quite 
irrespective of how much he may or may not know 
of his own being. And in order to be able to 
advance farther from this stage of development

394 an outline of occult SCIENCl'E394 an outline of occult SCIENCl'E

it becomes necessary that man should learn to 
distinguish between himself and the spiritual world 
outside him. It is necessary that he should learn 
to eliminate all the effects produced by his own 
nature upon the surrounding soul and spirit world. 
This can be done only by acquiring a knowledge 
of what we ourselves take with us into this new 
world. It is therefore primarily a question of 
self-knowledge, in order that we may become 
able to perceive cleaiiy the surrounding world 
of soul and spirit. Now it so happens that certain 
facts of human development must lead as a natural 
consequence to such self-knowledge, when the 
student enters higher worlds. In the ordinary 
world of the physical senses man is wont to develop 
his ego, his self-consciousness, and this ego then 
acts as a point of attraction for all that appertains 
to man. All personal propensities, sympathies, 
antipathies, passions, opinions, and so on, possessed 
by a person, group themselves as it were around 
his ego, and in a like manner does the ego become 
the point of attraction for what is called the 
person’s Karma. Were we to see this ego unveiled 
it would also be possible to note the destinies still 
awaiting it during this and future incarnations, 
according as it may have lived in one 'way or 
another during former incarnations, and have 
acquired this or that quality. Encumbered as it 
is by all this, the ego must be the first picture that 
presents itself to the human soul, when ascending

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 395THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 395

into the .world of soul and spirit. This, man’s 
dopble, is bound, in accordance with a law of the 
spiritual world, to be his first impression in that 
w®rld. It is easy, if we but consider the following 
statement, to explain to ourselves this fundamental 
law. In the life of the physical senses man is 
cognizant of himself only so far as he is inwardly 
conscious of himself in his thinking, feeling, and 
willing. This cognition is inward; it does not 
present itself to him externally, as do stones, 
plants, and animals; while again, even in the 
case of inner experiences, man learns to know 
himself only partially, for he has within him some- 
thing that prevents any deeper probing into self- 
cognition.

This something is an impulse at once to set 
about altering any quality which he may have 
discovered within himself, through self -cognition, 
and about which he indulges in no illusions. 
Should he not give way to this impulse, but 
simply turn his attention away from his own self 
— remaining as he is — he, as a matter of course, 
deprives himself of even the possibility of knowing 
himself in regard to that particular matter. Yet 
should he “explore” himself, facing this or that 
quality of his without self-deception, he will 
either be in a position to improve them in him- 
self, or 'in his present condition of life he will 
be unable to do so. In the latter case a feeling 
will steal over his soul which we must designate

396 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE396 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

as a feeling of shame. 'I'hus, in very tr^ith, doe§ 
man’s healthy nature act, and self-cognitjon 
engenders in it manifold kinds of shame. Even 
in ordinary life this feeling has a certain definite 
effect. A healthy-minded person who becomes 
imbued with this feeling in consequence of sonie 
quality within him will take care that'this quality 
does not express itself in outward acts and make 
itself felt by its effects. Thus the sense of shame 
is a force urging a man to conceal something 
within himself and not allow it to be outwardly 
apparent.

If we ponder this sufficiently, we shall find it 
possible to understand why occult science should 
ascribe much farther-reaching effects to another 
inward experience of the soul, very closely allied 
to this feeling of “being ashamed.’’ To occult 
science is revealed within the soul a kind of secret 
feeling of shame, of which man in his life of the 
physical senses is unaware. Yet this secret feel- 
ing acts much in the same way as the conscious 
feeling of shame of ordinary life to which we have 
alluded; it prevents man’s inmost entity from 
being able to confront him in a recognizable 
image, or double. Were this feeling not present, 
man would see himself as he is in very truth; not 
only would he inwardly experience his thoughts, 
ideas, feelings, and decisions, but he would per- 
ceive these as he now perceives stones, animals, 
and plants. This feeling, therefore, is that which

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 397

, pbscures„man from himself, and at the same time 
hi^es from him the entire spiritual world. For 
owing to this obscuration of man’s inner self, 
h« becomes* unable to perceive those things by 
means of which he is to develop organs for pene- 
trating into the soul and spirit world, and he 
becomes urfable to so transform his own being 
as to render it capable of obtaining these spiritual 
organs of perception.Should he, however, by pursuing the right course 
of training, work in such a manner as to become 
possessed of those organs of cognition, then the 
first impression to present itself to him will be 
one of himself as he is; he becomes aware of his 
own double. This self-recognition is inseparable 
from perception of the rest of the soul and spirit 
world. In the everyday life of the physical-sense 
world the feeling of shame here described acts in 
such a manner as to be perpetually closing the 
door, as it were, to man’s entrance into the world 
of soul and spirit. If man take but one step, in 
order to penetrate within that world, straightway 
does this directly present, yet not actually con- 
scious feeling of shame, conceal that portion of the 
spiritual^ world which was ready to be revealed. 
The exercises here described do, however, unlock 
this world: and it so happens that the above- 
mentiofted hidden feeling acts as a great bene- 
factor to man, for all we may have gained, apart 
from* occult training, in the matter of judgment.

398 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

feeling, and character, is insufficient tQ. support; 
us when confronted by our own entity in its ti;ue 
form; its apparition would rob us of all feeling of 
self, self-confidence, and self-consciousness. And 
that this may not happen, provision must be 
made for cultivating sound judgment, good feel- 
ing, and character, at the same time that exercises 
are given for the attainment of higher knowledge.A correct method of tuition teaches the student 
as much of occult science as will, in combination 
with the many means provided for self-cognition 
and self-observation, enable him to meet his 
double with assured strength. It will then appear 
to the student that he sees, in another form, a 
picture of the imaginative world with which 
he has already become acquainted in the physical 
world. Any one who has first learned in the 
physical world by means of his understanding 
to apprehend rightly the law of Karma, is not 
likely to be greatly perturbed when he sees his 
fate marked out on the image of his double. 
Any one who, by means of his own powers 
of judgment, has made himself acquainted 
with the evolution of the universe, and the de- 
velopment of the human race, and who is aware 
that at a particular epoch of this development 
the powers of Lucifer penetrated into the 
human sotil, will have little difficulty in' endur- 
ing the sight of the image of his own individ- 
uality, when he knows that it includes those

THE' PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 399

Luciferiah powers and all their accumulated effects.

^This will therefore suffice to show how neces- 
sary it is that no one should demand admission 
into the spiritual world beforfe having learned to 
understand certain truths concerning it; learning 
\;hem by means of his own judgment, as developed 
in this wofld of the physical senses. Everything 
that was imparted in this volume previous to the 
explanation concerning “cognition of the higher 
worlds,” should have been laid to heart by the 
student in the course of his regular development, 
by means of his ordinary judgment, before he has 
any desire to seek entrance himself into the super- 
sentient worlds.Where the training has been such as to pay 
little heed to firmness and surety of judgment, 
and of the life of feeling and character, it may 
happen that the student will approach the higher 
world before being possessed of the necessary 
inner capacities. The meeting with his double 
would in this case overwhelm him. But what 
might also happen is that the meeting might be 
altogether avoided, and the person in question 
thus introduced into the supersensible world 
would be totally unable to know that world in 
its true form, for it would be impossible for him 
to differentiate between the appearance which 
things 'present to him through his own entity, and 
that which they really are. For this differen- 
tiation becomes possible only when a person has

400 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

himself beheld the image of his own entity, and 
has thus separated from his surroundings everjr- 
thing proceeding from his own inner being.

In respect to the world of physical sense, man’w 
double acts thus: the already mentioned sense of 
shame causes it instantly to disappear when man 
nears the world of the soul and spirit', but in so 
doing it also causes the whole of that world to 
become invisible. The double stands before the 
entrance as a “guardian,” ready to deny admis- 
sion to all who are as yet unfit, and it is therefore 
designated in occult science as the “guardian of 
the threshold of the world of soul and spirit.” 
Indeed, we may call it the “lesser guardian,” for 
there is another, of whom we shall speak later.And besides this meeting with his double on 
entering the supersensible world as here set forth, 
man encounters the Guardian of the Threshold 
when he passes the portals of physical death, 
and it gradually reveals itself during that devel- 
opment of the soul and spirit which takes place 
between death and a new birth. Then, however, 
the encounter can in no wise crush us, for we then 
know of other worlds of which we are ignorant 
during the life between birth and death. A person 
entering the world of the soul and spirit without 
having encountered the Guardian of the Thresh- 
old would be liable to fall a prey to one delusion 
after another. For he woxUd never be able to 
distinguish between that which he himself brings

THE PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 401

-into that world and that which really belongs to 
it.. But correct training should lead the student 
into the domain of truth, not of error, and with 
such training the meeting must at some time or 
other inevitably take place, for it is the one essen- 
tial remedy, in the observation of the supersen- 
sible worlds, against the possibility of deception 
and phantasm.*It is one of the precautions most ineumbent 
on every occult student to conduct his work of 
training so as not to degenerate into a visionary, 
liable to either suggestion, or auto-suggestion; 
and wherever correct occult training is adhered 
to, the causes of such deceptions are destroyed 
at their source. It would of course be impossible 
here to speak exhaustively of the many details 
to be included in such precautions, and we can 
only indicate what these depend on in general. 
The illusions to be taken into account arise from 
two sources. In part they proceed from the fact 
that our own soul-entity is apt to colour reality. 
In the ordinary life of the physical-sense world, 
the danger arising from this source of deception 
is comparatively small, for here we have the exter- 
nal world always ready to assert its own forms 
distinctly enough, however the observer may 
choose to colour them in accordance with his own 
wishes and interests. As soon, however, as we 
enter the imaginative world, all the pictures are 
changed by such wishes and interests, and we

27

40J

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE27

40J

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

have then actually before us that which we our> 
selves have formed or, at any rate, helped to foijn. 
Now, as through this meeting with the Guar- 
dian of the Threshold the occult student becomes 
aware of everything within him, of what, therefore, 
he may be taking with him into the spiritual worl(3., 
this source of delusion is removed, ahd the prep- 
aration which will have been given the student 
prior to his entering that world is in itself calcu- 
lated to accustom him to exclude self — even in 
matters appertaining to the physical world — 
when making his observations, thus allowing 
things and occurrences to speak for themselves. 
Any one who has sufficiently practised these pre- 
paratory exercises may await this meeting with 
the Guardian of the Threshold in all tranquillity; 
by this meeting it will be conclusively proved 
whether he be really in a condition to exclude 
his own entity when confronted by the soul and 
spirit world.

And in addition to this there is another source 
of delusion. This becomes apparent when we 
place the wrong interpretation upon an impres- 
sion we receive. We may illustrate it by means 
of a very simple example taken from the world 
of the physical senses. It is the delusion we 
encounter when sitting in a railway carriage; we 
think the trees are moving in the reverse direction 
to the train, whereas we ourselves are moving with 
the train. Although there are many cases in

THE' PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 403

which ijuch illusions occurring in the physical 
wprld are more difficult to correct than the simple 
one we have adduced, yet it is easy to see that, 
ewen withim that world, mean% may be found for 
getting rid of those delusions if a person of sound 
judgment brings everything to bear upon the 
matter whibh may help to clear it up.But as soon as we penetrate into the world of 
the soul and spirit such elucidations become less 
easy. In the world of sense, facts are not altered 
by human delusions about them; it is therefore 
possible to correct a delusion by unprejudiced 
observation of facts. But in the supersensible 
world this is not immediately possible. If, desir- 
ing to study a supersensible matter, we approach 
it in the wrong spirit of judgment, we then carry 
that wrong judgment over into the thing itself, 
and it becomes interwoven with the fact, the two 
becoming not at once distinguishable; for the 
error is no longer in the person and the correct 
fact exterior to him, but the error will have become 
a component part of the exterior fact. It cannot 
therefore be cleared up simply by unprejudiced 
observation of the fact. This is enough to indicate 
an extremely fertile source of illusion and decep- 
tion for one who would venture to approach the 
supersensible world without adequate preparation.

And ■ as the occult student becomes able to 
exclude* delusions which might tinge the phenom- 
ena of the supersensible world with the colour of

404 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

his own entity, so too must he acquire the further , 
attribute of making the second source of such 
delusions ineffective. He can eliminate what 
arises within himself after the meeting with his 
own double, and he will be able to remove the 
second source of delusion when he has acquired 
the capacity for estimating by the nature of a 
fact seen in the supersensible world, whether it 
be real or illusion ary. Now if the delusions were 
of precisely the same appearance as the real- 
ities, differentiation would be impossible. But 
this is not the case. Illusions seen in the super- 
.sensible world have their own characteristics, 
which allow of their being distinguished from 
realities, and the important thing is for the occult 
student to know by what qualities he may be 
able to recognize the reality.Nothing seems more obvious than that those 
ignorant of occult training should here say: 
“How, then, is there any possibility of guarding 
against delusions, seeing that their causes are so 
numerous?” And he may further object thus: 
“Can an occult student ever be safe from the 
possibility that all his so-called higher experiences 
may not turn out to be based on no more than 
suggestion and auto-suggestion?” And yet any 
one advancing these objections ignores the fact 
that all true occult training proceeds in such a 
manner as to remove those sources of delusion 
one by one. In the first place, the true occult

THE' PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 405THE' PERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 405

student ^will during his preparation have become 
possessed of so much knowledge about those 
matters which may lead to delusion and self- 
delusion, t|;iat he will be in a position to avoid 
them. will in all such things have an une- 
qualled opportunity of rendering himself level- 
headed and capable of right judgment for the 
journey of life. Everything he learns teaches 
him not to rely on vague presentiments and pre- 
monitions. Training makes him as cautious as 
it is possible for him to be, and, in addition to 
this, all true training leads in the first place 
to conceptions as to the great cosmic events, — to 
matters, therefore, which necessitate the exertion 
of the judgment, a process by which this power is 
both refined and sharpened. But such as decline 
to occupy themselves with these remote subjects, 
and prefer keeping to revelations nearer at hand, 
might miss the strengthening of that sound power 
of judgment which gives certainty in distinguishing 
between illusion and reality. Yet even this is 
not the mofet important thing, for that consists 
in the exercises themselves, which are carried out 
during a systematic course of occult training. 
These are so arranged that the consciousness of 
the student is enabled during inward meditation 
to scan minutely all that passes within his soul. 
In order to bring about imagination, the first 
thing to be done is to form a symbol. In this 
ther§ are still elements taken from external

4o6 an outline of occult science4o6 an outline of occult science

observation; the person himself is not algne con- , 
cemed in their contents, he does not himself 
produce them. Lie may, therefore, fall into error 
as to the manner in" which they are produced, and 
he may assign their origin to wrong sources. But 
when the occult student proceeds onward to th^ 
exercises for inspiration, he dismisses' these con- 
tents from his consciousness and immerses himself 
only in the soul-activity which was occasioned by 
the symliol. Even here error is still possible: 
education and study have induced a particular 
kind of soul-activity in man. He is unable to 
know everything as to the origin of such activities. 
Now, however, the occult student sets to work to 
remove his own soul-activity from his conscious- 
ness; should then aught remain, nothing can 
adliere to it that cannot easily be scanned, nothing 
can intrude itself that is not easily investigated 
in respect to its entire contents.

In his intuition, therefore, the occult student 
possesses something which shows him how a pure 
reality within the soul and spirit world is consti- 
tuted, and should he apply this recognized test 
to all that meets his observation in the realm of 
spiritual realities he will be well able to distinguish 
appearance from reality ; while he may also feel sure 
that the application of this law provides just as 
effectually against delusions in the spiritual world 
as does the knowledge in the physical world that an 
imaginary piece of red-hot iron cannot bum him.

THE f>ERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 407THE f>ERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 407

It is obvious that this test applies only to our 
own expenences in the supersensible world, and 
no{ to communications made to us which wc have 
to, apprehend by means of ottr physical under- 
standing aM our healthy sense of truth. The 
oecult student should exert himself to draw a 
distinct line* of demarcation between the know- 
ledge he acquires by the one means, and by the 
otfcer. He should be ready on the one hand to 
accept communications iliade to him regarding 
the higher worlds, and should seek to understand 
them by using his powers of judgment. When, 
however, he is confronted by an “experience,” 
which he may so name because it is due to personal 
observation, he will first carefully test the same to 
ascertain whether it posses.scs exactly those char- 
acteristics whicli he has learned to recognize by

means of infallible intuition.

* *

The meeting with the Guardian of the Threshold 
being over, the occult .student will have to face 
other new e^tperiences, and the first thing that 
he will become aware of is the inner connec- 
tion which exists between this Guardian of the 
Threshold and that soul-power we have already 
characterized, when describing the cleavage of 
personality, as being the seventh power to resolve 
itself into an independent entity. This .seventh 
entity is, .indeed, in certain respects no other than 
the double, or Guardian of the Threshold itself.

4o8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

and it lays a particular task upon the student. For 
what he is in his ordinary self, which now jippears 
to him in an image, has to be led and guided* by 
the new'-born self,* so that there arises a kind of 
war against the double, which will be' found con- 
stantly striving to gain the upper hand. This 
endeavour to set up the right relationship, this 
care not to permit of its doing aught but what 
may result from the influence of the new-bQrn 
ego, is what endows man’s powers with firmness 
and vigour.This matter of self-cognition is, in certain 
respects, different in the higher worlds from what 
it is in the physical world of sense. For whereas 
in the latter self-cognition occurs as an inner 
experience only, the newly bom ego becomes 
immediately discernible as an externally spiritu- 
alized vision. We see our new-born ego before 
us, yet w'e cannot perceive it in its entirety, for, 
whatever the step to which we may have climbed 
on our journey to the supersensible worlds, there 
will ever be higher steps still, and' on these we 
shall perceive still clearer visions of our “higher 
self.’’ It can therefore but partially reveal itself 
to the student, at whatever stage he may be. 
The temptation here assailing man is tremendous; 
for having once caught a glimpse of this higher 
self, he becomes inclined to regard it from the 
standpoint he has acquired in the world of the 
physical senses. And yet even this temptation

THE ^t’ERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 409

is salutary; it is indeed necessary, if man’s devel- 
opment is to proceed in the right manner. For 
the student must here note what it is that appears 
ai his double, as the Guardiarf of the Threshold, 
and place it ever in front of the higher self, in 
cft’der that he may rightly observe the disparity 
between what he is and what he is to become. 
But while thus engaged in observation he will 
fiad that the Guardian of the Threshold will 
assume quite a different aspect, for it will now 
reveal itself as a picture of all the obstacles which 
oppose the development of the higher ego, and we 
then become aware of how great a load the 
ordinary ego has to drag about with it.Then, should the student’s preparations not 
have rendered him strong enough to be able to 
say: “I will not remain at this point, but will 
persistently work my way upwards toward the 
higher ego,” he will grow weak and will shrink 
back dismayed before what yet lies before him. 
Then, though he has plunged into the spiritual 
world, he v^ill give up trying to work his way 
farther, and will become a captive to that image 
which, as Guardian of the Threshold, now con- 
fronts the soul. And the remarkable thing here 
is that the person so situated will have no feeling 
of being a captive. He will on the contrary 
think he is going through quite a different experi- 
ence, for the image called forth by the Guardian 
of the d'hreshold may be such as to awaken in

410

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIEN

the soul of the observer the impression that in the 
pictures which appear at this stage of develop- 
ment he has before him all possible worlds in their 
entirety — the impression of having aft^ii^ed to 
the summit of all knowledge, and of there being, 
therefore, nothing left to strive after. There- 
fore, instead of feeling himself a captive, the 
student would believe himself rich beyond all 
measure, and in possession of all the secrets of tlve 
universe. Nor need this experience fill any one 
with surprise, though it be the reverse of the fact, 
for we must remember that by the time these 
experiences are felt we are standing within the 
soul and spirit world, and that the special pecu- 
liarity of tills world is that it reyjresents events in 
the reversed order to that in which they actually 
occur —a fact which has already been alluded to 
in ourhsurvey of life after death.The image seen by the occult student at this 
stage of development shows him a different aspect 
from that in which the Guardian of the Threshold 
first revealed itself. In the double firs'u mentioned 
were to Vie seen all those cpuilities which, as the 
result of the influence of Lucifer, are po.ssessed by 
man’s ordinary ego. Jlut in the course of human 
development another power has, in conseciuence 
of Lucifer’s influence, also invested the soul of 
man, this being the one known as the power of 
Ahriman, and it is this power that during his 
physical existence prevents man from becoming

THE^ PERCEPTION OP HIGHER WORLDS 41 1

aware of those entities of the soul and spirit world 
which lie behind the surface of the exterior world. 
All that man’s soul has become under the influ- 
eiice of thisj power may be discerned in the image 
revealing itself during the experienee just de- 
:!cribed. Those who have been suffieiently prepared 
for this eifperienee will, when thus eonfronted, 
be able to a.ssign it its true meaning, and 
then another fonn will soon become visible --one 
we may describe as the ‘ grcatc'r Guardian of the 
Threshold”; and this one will tell the student 
not to rest content with the grade to whicli he has 
attained, but to work on energetically. It will 
call forth in him the consciousness that tlie world 
he has conquered will only become a trutli, and 
not an illu.sion, if the work tints begun be contin- 
ued in a corresponding manner. Those, however, 
who, having been trained in accordance fvith a 
wrong .system of occult science, face this experience 
unprepared, will, on meeting with the greater 
Guardian of the Threshold, be filled with feelings 
of boundlesi fear and immeasurable horror.Ju.st as the meeting with the ‘‘lesser Guardian” 
gives the occult student the opportunity of judging 
whether or not he be proof against delusicjus, such 
as might arise through interweaving his own 
personality with the supersensible world, so too 
must he be able to prove from the experiences 
which finally lead to the ‘‘greater Guardian,” 
whether he is able to withstand those illusions

412 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENds

which are to be traced to the second source men- 
tioned farther back in this chapter. Should he 
be proof against the powerful illusion by which 
the world of images to which he has attained is 
falsely displayed to him as a rich possession, 
when actually he is but a captive, then he is 
guarded also against the danger ofi mistaking 
appearance for reality during the further course 
of his development. ^

Up to a certain point the Guardian of the 
Threshold will assume a different fonn in the case 
of each individual. The meeting with him corre- 
sponds exactly to the way in which the personal 
nature of supersensible observations is overcome. 
The possibility is then given of entering a realm 
of experience which is free from any tinge of 
personality and is open to every human being.

r * *

♦

When the occult student has passed through 
the above experiences he will be capable of dis- 
tinguishing in the spiritual world between what he 
himself is and what is exterior to him, and he will 
then recognize why an understanding of the cos- 
mic occurrences narrated in this book is necessary 
to man’s understanding of humanity itself and 
its life process. In fact, we can understand the 
physical body only when we recognize the manner 
in which it has been built up in the developments 
undergone in the Saturn, the Sun, the, Moon, 
and the earth periods, and we come to understand

THE' PERCEPTION OF IJIIGHER WORLDS 413THE' PERCEPTION OF IJIIGHER WORLDS 413

the etheric body when we follow its evolution 
through the development of the Sun, Moon, and 
earth stages. We further comprehend what is 
bound up jvith our earth-development at present 
if we can but grasp how all things proceed by the 
process of gradual evolution, so that occult train- 
ing places* us in a position to recognize the con- 
nection between everything that is within man and 
30 iTesponding facts and entities existing in the 
world exterior to him. For the position is this; 
that each principle of man stands in some connec- 
tion with the rest of the world. In this book it 
has, of course, been possible only to hint at these 
things very generally; it must however be borne 
in mind that the physical body had, at the time 
of the Saturn development, for instance, no more 
than its first rudimentary beginnings: its organs — 
such as the heart, lungs, and brain — det^eloped 
later during the Sun, Moon, and earth periods, 
for which reason heart, lungs, and brain are related 
to the evolutionary process of Sun, Moon, and 
earth. *

It is the same thing with regard to the members 
of the. etheric body, of the sentient body, and of 
the sentient soul. Man is the outcome of the 
entire world surrounding him, and every single 
thing about him corresponds to some process, to 
some entity, in the external world. At the right 
stage of his development the occtilt student 
comes to recognize the connection of his own

414

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE414

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

entity witli the cosmos, and this stage of the devel- ^ 
opment may in the occult sense be described as 
becoming aware of the relationship of the little 
world, the microccTsm, — that is, man, himself,--^- 
to the greater world, the macrocosm. *And when 
the occult student has pressed on thus far he ma>' 
become aware of a new experience; he begins to 
feel himself grown together, as it were, with the 
entire world-structure, although he remains fullrV 
conscious of his own independence. This is a 
merging within the universe, a becoming “at 
one’’ with it, yet nevertheless ivithout losing the 
personal identity. Occult science describes this 
stage as the “becoming one with the macrocosm,’’ 
and it is important that this condition must not 
be imagined as one in which the separate con- 
sciousness ceases, the himian entity flowing forth 
into the all, for sucli a thought would be but the 
expression of an opinion which is the result of an 
untutored reasoning.

Following this stage of development something 
takes place that in occult science is described as 
“beatitude.” It is neither possible nor necessary 
that this stage be more closely described, for 
no human words have the power to picture man’s 
experiences at that time, and it may rightly be 
said that any conception of this state could be 
acquired only by means of such thought-power as 
would no longer be dependent upon the instru- 
ment of the human brain. The separate stages

THE IPERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 415

of the higher knowledge may, following the proc 
’esses of hiitiation as (lescrihcd, be thus set fortli:

1 . The study of occult science, in the course

• of which we first of all make use of the 
reasoning powers we have acquired in the

• world of the physical senses.

2. Attairftnent of iniaginative cognition.

3. Reading the secret writing (which corre- 
* spends to inspiration).

4. Working with the philosopher’s stone (cor- 
responding to intuition).2. Attairftnent of iniaginative cognition.

3. Reading the secret writing (which corre- 
* spends to inspiration).

4. Working with the philosopher’s stone (cor- 
responding to intuition).

5. Cognition of the relationship between the 
microcosm and the macrocosm.

6. Being one with the macrocosm.

7. Beatitude.

It is not necessary to imagine these stages as 
following each other consecutively, for the t!Ourse 
of training may very possibly resolve itself in 
such a way that, according to the individuality 
of the student, one step may be but partially 
taken when ^e will be already practising exercises 
for the next. For instance, it may very well be 
that when he has won, in a reliable way, but a 
few imaginative pictures, he will be already doing 
exercises, which lead him on to draw inspiration, 
intuition, or cognition of the relationship between 
the microcosm and the macrocosm into the sphere 
of his own experiences.

4i6

AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIE>^E4i6

AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIE>^E

When the student has acquired some experience 
of intuition he comes to know not only the pic- 
tures of the spiritual world, nor is he only able^to 
read by their light the secret script, but he also 
acquires knowledge of those beings’ to whose 
cooperation is due the creation of the world, 1>o 
which man himself belongs; thus he learns to 
know himself in the true form which he possesses 
as a spiritual being in the soul and spirit wor^d. 
He has struggled throvigh to the knowledge of his 
higher ego, and in so doing will have noted how 
he has to continue the work in order that he may 
master his double, the Guardian of the Threshold. 
Yet further on he will have met the “greater 
Guardian,” who stands before him, perpetually 
summoning him to further labours. It is this 
greater Guardian of the Threshold who now 
becomes the example he must strive to resemble, 
and when the student has acquired this feeling 
he will have risen to that important stage of 
development in which he will be in a position to 
recognize who it is that is really standing before 
him as that “greater Guardian.” For hence- 
forth, in the student’s consciousness, the Guardian 
is gradually transformed into the figure of the 
Christ, whose Being and intervention in the 
evolution of the earth have been dealt with in a 
foregoing chapter.

Thus does it happen that the student, through 
his intuition, will have become initiated intp that

the perception op HKiHER WORLDS 417

sublime mystery which is linked with the name 
*of Christ — the Christ revealing himself to him as 
the “Great Example to be held up to humanity 
OT\,earth.” ^ •the perception op HKiHER WORLDS 417

sublime mystery which is linked with the name 
*of Christ — the Christ revealing himself to him as 
the “Great Example to be held up to humanity 
OT\,earth.” ^ •

When in this manner, and by means of intuition, 
the Christ becomes recognized in the world of the 
spirit, then too does it become possible for us to 
understand those events that took place his- 
toijcally upon earth during the fourth post- 
Atlantean period (the Greco-Roman time), and 
how it came to pass that at that epoch the great 
Sun-Spirit, the Christ-Being, intervened in the 
world’s development, and how He still continues 
to guide its evolution. These are matters the 
student will then know by personal experience. 
Therefore it is through intuition that the meaning 
and significance of the earth’s evolution are dis- 
closed to the occult student.

The path leading to knowledge of the super- 
sensible worlds, as above indicated, is one which 
all men may travel, whatever their position under 
the present oionditions of life. And in speaking 
of such a path it must be borne in mind that, while 
the goal ^of knowledge and truth is the same at 
all times of the earth’s development, yet the 
starting-pbint for man has varied considerably at 
different periods. For instance, the man of the 
present day who wishes to find his way into the 
supersensible worlds, cannot start from the same 
point ^s the Egyptian candidate for initiation of

4i8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE4i8 an outline of OCCULT SCIENCE

old. This is why it is impossible simply to apply, 
the exercises given to the student of ancient 
Egypt to the requirements of modern humanity. 
For since those times men’s souls, have pas,':ed 
through different incarnations, and ‘this passing 
onward from incarnation to incarnation has riot 
been without significance and importance. The 
capabilities and qualities of souls change from 
one incarnation to another. Those who Eave 
studied human history even superficially are in a 
position to judge how feelings and opinions have 
changed, since the twelfth and thirteenth centuries 
of the Christian era, from what they were in 
former ages. In fact, not only the feelings and 
opinions but even the capabilities of men differ 
from what they were formerly. The path here 
deseribed for the acquirement of the higher know- 
ledge is one which is suitable for souls incarnating 
in the immediate present. It fixes the starting- 
point of .spiritual development just where the man 
of the present day stands, in whatever conditions 
of life he may be placed. ^

Just as external life ehanges its forms, so does 
progressive evolution lead humanity on from one 
form to another, as epoch succeeds epoch, in regard 
to the paths to higher knowledge. For at all 
times it is necessary that perfect harmony should 
reign between external life and initiation. In 
the next chapter indications wiU be found of the 
change which has had to take place in the ancient

THE IPERCEPTION OF HIGHER WORLDS 419

form of initiation by which the Mysteries led 
into the higher worlds, in order that it might 
become modern initiation — the attainment of 
supersensible knowledge in it? present form.

CHAPTER VI 
0

i

The Present and Future Evolution of the 
World and of HumanityCHAPTER VI 
0

i

The Present and Future Evolution of the 
World and of Humanity

I T is impossible to know anything in the 
occult sense of the present and future ^of 
human or planetary evolution without under- 
standing that evolution in the past. For what 
presents itself to the occult student’s observation 
when he watches the hidden events of the past, 
contains at the same time everything that he can 
learn of the present and of the future. In this 
book we have spoken of the Saturn, Sun, Moon, 
and earth evolutions. We cannot follow the 
evolution of the earth, as the occultist understands 
it, unless we observe the events of preceding 
evolutionary periods. For what meets us to-day 
within the bounds of our earthly globe comprises 
in a certain sense the facts of the , evolution of 
the Moon, Sun, and Saturn. The beings and 
things that took part in the evolution of the Moon 
have gone on developing, and all that now belongs 
to the earth is the outcome of that development.

But not everything that has been’ evolved from 
the Moon to the earth is perceptible to sense- 
consciousness. A part of that which came over 
to us from the evolution of the Moon is revealed

420’

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 421420’

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 421

only at a certain stage of clairvoyant conscious- 
ness, at which the knowledge of super sensual 
worlds is reached. When this knowledge is gained, 
the fact thfit our earthly plahet is united to a 
supersensible world is recognized. The latter 
iiflcludes that part of lunar existence which is not 
sufficiently tiensified to be observed by the phys- 
ical senses. At first we see in it that part as it 
is •at present, — not as it was at the time of the 
evolution of the original Moon. But clairvoyant 
consciousness can get a picture of the conditions 
of that earlier period. For by concentration on 
the images which clairvoyant consciousness can 
obtain to-day, it is seen that this picture gradually 
divides into two. One presents the shape borne 
by the earth during the lunar evolution, the other 
shows itself in such a way that we recognize as 
its content a form as yet in the germinal *stage, 
which will become a reality — in the sense in 
which the earth is now a reality — only in the 
future.

On further observation it is seen that the 
results, in a certain sense, of what is taking place 
on the earth are continually streaming into that 
future form, so that in it we have before us that 
which our earth will ultimately become. The 
effects of earthly existence will unite with the 
events in the world described, and out of this will 
arise the new world-being, into which the earth 
will be transformed, as the Moon was transformed

432

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENfcE432

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENfcE

into the .earth. This future form is called in 
occult science the Jupiter conditioti. The clair- 
voyant observer of this Jupiter state secs the 
revelation of certain events which mus/ take plaae 
in the future. The reason for this is Jhat in the 
supersensible part of the earth which had it^ 
origin in the Moon, beings and things*are present 
which will assume definite form when certain 
events have actually happened in the physioal 
world. Thus there will be something in the 
Jupiter condition which was predetermined by the 
Moon evolution, and it will contain new factors, 
coming into the whole evolution only in conse- 
quence of terrestrial events. In this way clair- 
voyant consciousness is able to learn something 
of what will happen during the Jupiter state.

The beings and facts observed in this field of 
consciousness have not the nature of sense-images; 
they do not even appear as fine air-structures, 
from which effects might proceed which are 
reminiscent of sense-impressions. They give purely 
spiritual impressions of sound, light*, and heat. 
These are not expressed through any material 
embodiments. They can be apprehended only 
by clairvoyant consciousness. And yet it may 
be said that the.se beings have a “body.” This 
body, however, appears within their soul-part, 
which manifests as their being, for the time, 
like a mass of condensed memories, which they 
carry within their psychic being. It is possible

THE PAESENT and FUTURE EVOLUTION 423

to distinguish, within their being, between what 
they are now experiencing and what they have 
experienced and now remember. This last is 
cgntained ■^ithin them like n bodily element. 
They are cfbnscious of it in the same way as an 
earthly human being is conscious of his body.At a stage of clairvoyant development higher 
than that just described as necessary for a know- 
ledge of the Moon and Jupiter, the student is able 
to perceive supersensible beings and objects which 
are, in fact, more highly developed forms of those 
present during the Sun condition, but which have 
now reached stages of existence so lofty as to be 
quite imperceptible to a consciousness capable 
only of observing the Moon forms. During deep 
meditation the picture of this world also divides 
into two. The one leads to a knowledge of the 
Sun state of the past; the other exhibits a "future 
form of the earth — -that into which the latter 
shall be transformed when the fruits of all that 
takes place on it and on Jupiter have merged into 
the forms of that other world.

What can thus be observed of this future world 
may be characterized in occult phraseology as the 
Venus condition. In a similar manner, to a still 
more highly evolved clairvoyant consciousness, a 
future state of evolution is revealed, which we 
may call the Vulcan state. It stands in the same 
relationship to the Saturn state as the Venus 
edndition does to that of the Sun, or the Jupiter

424 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIEl^E

state to the evolution of the Moon. Therefore, 
when we contemplate the past, present, and 
future of the earth’s evolution, we may speak of 
the Saturn, Sun, 'Moon, earth, Jupiter, Venu^, 
and Vulcan evolutions.Just as these far-reaching conditions of the 
evolution of our earth lie disclosed to* clairvoyant 
vision, the same vision is also able to cover the 
nearer future. There is a picture of the future 
corresponding to every picture of the past. But 
in speaking of such things one point must be 
emphasized, the realization of which should be 
considered absolutely indispensable: in order to 
recognize facts of this kind, we must absolutely 
do away with the idea that mere philosophical 
reflection upon the subject can establish anything. 
These things cannot, and must not, ever be 
investigated by that kind of thinking. Any one 
would be labouring under a prodigious delusion 
who, after becoming acquainted with the teachings 
of occult science regarding the Moon state, was to 
think that he could discover the future conditions 
of Jupiter by comparing those of the Moon and 
earth. These conditions must be investigated 
only when the requisite clairvoyant consciousness 
has been attained; but once communicated to 
others after such investigation, they can be 
understood without any clairvoyant consciousness.

Now the occultist finds himself in quite, a differ- 
ent position, with regard to revelations conceniiilg

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 425Now the occultist finds himself in quite, a differ- 
ent position, with regard to revelations conceniiilg

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 425

the future, from that in which he stands with 
regard to those of the past. It is impossible at 
first for man to contemplate future events with 
tile equanimity which is possible for him with 
regard to the past. Future events excite human 
will and feeling; while the past affects us in quite 
a different* way. A student of life knows how 
true this is of everyday existence; but how enor- 
nipusly this truth is enhanced, and what an 
intimate bearing it has upon the hidden facts of 
life, can only be realized by one who has some 
knowledge of the superphysical world. That 
is the reason why those who do know such things 
are very definitely limited as to what they are 
allowed to give out. Certain things bearing on 
the future can, in fact, be imparted only to those 
who have themselves determined to follow the 
path leading to the supersensible worlds.* Such 
people have acquired by their mental attitude 
something which gives them the disinterestedness 
necessary for the reception of these teachings. 
For this re,ason certain secret facts, even of the 
past and present, can be spoken of only to such 
as are prepared for them. These are facts so 
closely connected with future evolution that their 
effect oil the hiunan soul is similar to that produced 
by communications regarding the future itself.

This, explains, also, why the information in 
this book regarding the present and the future is 
^ven in the merest outline as compared with the

426 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIEN(feEThis, explains, also, why the information in 
this book regarding the present and the future is 
^ven in the merest outline as compared with the

426 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIEN(feE

more detailed descriptions of the evolution of the _ 
world and of humanity in the past. What is 
said here is not intended to appeal to the love of 
sensation in the Smallest degree; nqt even to 
awaken it. We shall only state where the answer 
can be found by a certain definite attitude of 
mind to vital questions which natursflly present 
themselves.

Just as the great cosmic evolution can be por- 
trayed in a series of conditions following one 
another, from the Saturn to the Vulcan period, so 
also is this possible for shorter periods of time; 
for example, for those of the evolution of the earth. 
Since that mighty upheaval which terminated the 
ancient Atlantean life, successive periods of human 
evolution have followed one another which have 
been called in this work the ancient Indian, the 
ancient' Persian, the Egypto-Chaldean, and the 
Greco-Roman. The fifth period is that in which 
humanity finds itself to-day — it is the present 
time. This period gradually took its rise in the 
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries A.D., 
after a period of preparatipn commencing in the 
fourth and fifth centuries. The Greco-Roman 
period preceding it began about the eighth cen- 
tury B.c. When one third of this period had 
elapsed, the coming of the Christ took place.

During the transition from the Egypto-Chaldean 
to the Greco-Roman period, the attitude, of the 
human mind and, indeed, all human capacities'^

THE l>RESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 427During the transition from the Egypto-Chaldean 
to the Greco-Roman period, the attitude, of the 
human mind and, indeed, all human capacities'^

THE l>RESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 427

underwent a change. In the first of these two 
periods that which we now know as logical reflec- 
tion, as a reasonable conception of the world, was 
«till wanthig. The knowledge which a man now 
acquires through his intelligence he then gained 
In the manner suited to that time, — directly 
through a^ inner or, in a certain respect, clair- 
voyant knowledge. He saw the things around 
kim, and while perceiving them the conception — 
the vision of them which the soul needed — arose 
within the consciousness. Whenever knowledge 
is gained in this way, not only do pictures of the 
physical sense-world come to light, but from the 
depths of consciousness there arises a certain 
knowledge of facts and beings which are not of 
the physical world. This was a remnant of the 
ancient dim clairvoyance, once the common 
property of the whole of humanity.

During the Greco-Roman period an ever- 
increasing number of individuals appeared without 
these capacities. Intelligent reflection concerning 
things took their place. These individuals were 
more and more shut off from the immediate per- 
ception of the spiritual world, and were more and 
more restricted to forming a picture of it through 
their intelligence and feeling. This condition 
lasted more or less during the whole of the fourth 
division of the post-Atlantean period. Only those 
individuals who had preserved the old mental 
■^ate as an inheritance could still become directly

428

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENcfe428

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENcfe

conscious of the spiritual world. But the^e were 
stragglers from an earlier time. Their manner 
of gaining knowledge was no longer suitable for 
later conditions. For, as a consequence of the* 
laws of evolution, an old faculty of the soul loses 
something of its former significance when new* 
capacities appear. Human life then adapts itself 
to these new capacities, and can no longer properly 
use the old capacities. *

There were individuals, however, who began in 
full consciousness to add, to the powers of intelli- 
gence and of feeling already gained, the develop- 
ment of other and higher powers, which made it 
possible for them once more to penetrate into the 
spiritual world. To this end they were obliged 
to set to work in a different way from that in 
which the pupils of the old Initiates had been 
trained. The latter had not been obliged to take 
into account those faculties of the soul which were 
developed only in the fourth period. The method 
of occult training which has been described in 
this work as that of the present age, began in its 
first rudiments in the fourth period. But it was 
then only at its commencement; it could not 
attain real maturity till the fifth period (from the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries onward). " Those 
who sought to rise into supersensible worlds in 
this manner could learn something of the -higher 
regions of existence through the exercise of their 
own imagination, inspiration, and intuition. Those

THE ‘PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 429

who went no further than the development of 
the faculties of reason and feeling could learn 
only through tradition what had been known to 
•ancient clairvoyance. This ■^as handed on, either 
by word of mouth or in writing, from generation 
to generation.Neithef could those born later know anything 
of the real nature of the Christ-event save by such 
traditions, if they did not view it from the level 
of the superphysical worlds. Initiates there cer- 
tainly were who still possessed the natural facul- 
ties of perception on the higher planes, and who 
by the development of those faculties did ascend 
thither, in spite of their disregard of the new 
powers of intelligence and feeling. Through them 
a transition was effected from the old method 
of Initiation to the new. Such persons lived in 
later times as well. The essential characteristic 
of the foui'th period is that, by the exclusion of 
the soul from direct communion with the psycho- 
spiritual world, the human faculties of intelligence 
and feeling were thereby strengthened and invigor- 
ated. The souls whose powers of intelligence 
and feeling had at that time developed to a great 
extent as the result of incarnation, carried over 
with t*hem the fruits of this development into 
their incarnations during the fifth period. As 
a compensation for this exclusion from the higher 
worlds-, mighty traditions of the Ancient Wisdom 
then existed, especially those of the Christ-event,

430

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

which by the power of their content gaye men 
confident knowledge of the higher worlds.

But there were still certain individuals existing 
who had evolved the higher powers of knowledge' 
in addition to the faculties of reason and feeling. 
It devolved upon them to learn the facts of the' 
higher worlds, and especially of the Mystery of 
the Christ-event, by direct supersensible percep- 
tion. From these individuals there always flowed 
into the souls of other men as much as was intelli- 
gible and good for them.The first extension of Christianity was to take 
place just at a time when the capacities for super- 
physical knowledge were undeveloped in a great 
part of htunanity. It was on this account that 
the power of tradition was at that time so enor- 
mous. The strongest force was necessary to lead 
individuals who could not themselves behold the 
supersensible world to believe in it. How Chris- 
tianity worked during that period has been shown 
in previous pages. There were always those, 
however, who were able to rise into higher worlds 
through imagination, inspiration, and intuition. 
These men were the post-Christian successors of 
the old Initiates, the teachers and members of 
the Mysteries. Their task was to recognize 
again, through their own faculties, what man had 
been able to perceive through the ancient clair- 
voyance, and through the methods of ascent into 
higher worlds taught in the old Initiations; and

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 431

in addition to this, to acquire the knowledge of 
the real nature of Christ’s advent.THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 431

in addition to this, to acquire the knowledge of 
the real nature of Christ’s advent.

Thus there arose, among these “New Initiates, ’’ 
A knowledge embracing everything contained in 
the old form of Initiation; but the central point 
bf this teaching was the higher knowledge 
concerning the Mysteries of the coming of 
the Christ. Such teaching could only filter 
through into the general life of the world in scanty 
measure, for the faculties of intellect and feeling 
were to be strengthened in the human soul dur- 
ing the fourth period; therefore, while this lasted, 
the doctrine was in truth secret. Then began 
the dawn of the new period designated as the 
fifth. Its essential characteristic lay in the prog- 
ress made in the evolution of the intellectual 
faculties, which were then developed to a very 
high degree, and will unfold still further* in the 
future. This process has been slowly going on 
from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, becom- 
ing ever more rapid from the sixteenth century 
up to the present time.

Under these influences the evolution of the 
fifth period became an ever-increasing endeavour 
to foster the powers of intellect, while, on the 
contrary, the knowledge by faith of former times, 
and the traditional wisdom, gradually lost its 
hold over the hiunan soul. On the other hand, 
from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries onward 
^n ever increasing stream of knowledge’ flowed

432

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE432

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

into the human soul, which was of the nature of, 
modem clairvoyant consciousness. The “secret 
doctrine” flows, even though at first quite imper- 
ceptibly, into hurnan modes of interpretatiofi 
during this period. It is therefore a matter of 
course that up to the present, intellectual faculties 
should have maintained an attitude* of denial 
with regard to this knowledge. But that which 
must come to pass will do so in spite of all terfi- 
porary rejection. The “secret doctrine” which 
through this avenue comes to take possession of 
humanity, and will continue to do so increasingly, 
may be called from a symbol the “Wisdom of 
the Holy Grail.”

For he who learns to understand this symbol in 
its deeper meaning, as it is told in story and legend, 
will find that it illtuninates significantly the 
nature of what has been called above the know- 
ledge of the new Initiation, with the Christ Mys- 
tery as its central point. Modern Initiates may 
therefore be called “the Initiates of the Grail.” 
The path to the superphysical worlds which has 
been described in this work in its preliminary 
stages, leads to the Wisdom of the Grail., It is 
a peculiarity of this wisdom that its facts can be 
investigated only when the requisite powers, as 
described in this book, have been acquired. 
Once investigated, however, these facts Can be 
understood by means of those very soul-forces 
which are the result of the evolution of the “fifth

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 433THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 433

period.^ Indeed, it will become more and more 
evident that to an ever increasing extent those 
forces find satisfaction through this knowledge. 
*We are n®w living at a time* in which such facts 
must be absorbed by the universal consciotxsness 
*to a much fuller extent than was formerly the 
case. AnS. it is from this point of view that the 
teachings contained in this work are put forward. 
The impulse given by Christ’s advent will grow 
ever mightier in proportion as hmnan evolution 
assimilates the Wisdom of the Grail. The inner 
side of the development of Christianity will more 
and more be associated with the exoteric side. 
That which may be learned in connection with 
the Christ Mystery by imagination, inspiration, 
and intuition, concerning the higher worlds, will 
interpenetrate ever moi'e and more the human 
world of ideas, of feeling, and of will. The 
secret wisdom teaching of the Grail will become 
manifest, and as an inner force will more and more 
permeate the manifestations of human life.

Through the whole of the fifth period, know- 
ledge concerning the supersensible world will flow 
into human consciousness; and when the sixth 
begins, humanity will be able at a higher level 
to regain that which it possessed at an earlier 
epoch in a clairvoyance as yet dim and indis- 
tinct.* Yet the new acquisition will take a form 
^uite different from the old. In olden times 
the soul’s knowledge of higher worlds was not

20

434 an outline of OCCULT SCIENQE20

434 an outline of OCCULT SCIENQE

permeated by its own forces of intelligence and 
feeling. Its knowledge was instinctive. In the 
future it will not only have intuitions, but will 
understand them, arfd feel them to be the essence 
of its own nature. When the soul learns a fact 
concerning some other being or thing, its intelli- 
gence will find this fact verified through its own 
nature. Or when some fact regarding a moral 
law or human conduct makes itself felt, the soul 
will say to itself: “My feeling is only justified 
when I carry out that which is implied in this 
knowledge.’’ An attitude of mind such as this 
will have to be developed in a considerable num- 
ber of individuals in the sixth period.

In a certain manner, that which human evolu- 
tion accomplished during the third period — the 
Egypto-Chaldean — is repeated in the fifth. At 
that tifhe the soul could still perceive certain 
facts of the superphysical worlds, but this percep- 
tion was fast disappearing. For the intellectual 
powers were being made ready for their evolution, 
and they were destined in the first instance to 
shut man out of the higher worlds. In the fifth 
period the supersensible facts which in the^ third 
were perceived in hazy clairvoyance are again be- 
coming manifest ; but they are now interpenetrated 
by the intellectual and emotional life of the indi- 
vidual man. They are also imbued with* what 
may be imparted to the soul by a knowledge of 
the Christ Mystery; therefore they assume a

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 435THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 435

.form totally different from that which they had 
I^reviously. Whereas in ancient times impres- 
sions from the higher worlds were felt as forces 
driving m^ out of a spiritual* world, to which he 
did not properly belong, through the development 
ifi later times these impressions are felt as those 
of a world*into which man is growing, of which 
he more and more forms a part. Let no one sup- 
pftse that a repetition of the Egypto-Chaldean 
civilization can take place in such a way that the 
soul would merely regain that which then existed, 
and which has been handed on from that time. 
The Christ-impulse, rightly understood, impels 
the human soul which has experienced it to feel 
itself a member of a spiritual world, recognizing 
it as a world to which it belongs, outside which it 
formerly existed.

As during the fifth period the characteristics 
of the third are thus revived, in order to perfect 
within the human soul that which the fourth has 
newly contributed, so in a similar way will things 
happen in the case of the sixth in relation to the 
second, and in the case of the seventh with regard 
to the first, the ancient Indian civilization men- 
tioned above. All the marvellous wisdom of 
ancient * India which the great teachers of that 
day were able to proclaim, will reappear in the 
seventh period, as living truth in human souls.

^Now the changes in the earthly environment of 
man- take place in a manner which bears a certain

436 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE^Now the changes in the earthly environment of 
man- take place in a manner which bears a certain

436 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

relationship to his own evolution. When the^ 
seventh period has run its course, the earth will 
experience an upheaval which may be compared 
with the one which Separated Atlanteaa from po94- 
Atlantean times. And the transformed earth 
will again continue its evolution in seven divisions 
of time. The human souls which will* then incar- 
nate will experience at a more exalted level the 
kinship with the higher worlds which was possessed 
by the Atlanteans at a lower stage. But only 
those individuals will be able to cope with the new 
conditions of earth who have built into their souls 
the qualities made possible by the influences of 
the Greco- Roman age, and of the periods follow- 
ing it, — the fifth, sixth, and seventh of the post- 
Atlantean evolution.

The content of such souls will then be in right 
relatioti with that stage of evolution which the 
earth has then attained. All other souls must 
then remain behind, although up to that point 
they had been able to choose whether or not they 
would create for themselves the conditions neces- 
sary to advance with the others. Those souls 
alone will be ripe for the conditions arising after 
the next great catastrophe, who at the point of 
transition from the fifth to the sixth post-Atlan- 
tean period have attained the capacity for inter- 
penetrating supersensual knowledge with the forces 
of intelligence and of feeling. The fifth apd 
sixth are in a way the decisive periods. Tho^

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 437THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 437

^souls which have attained the goal of the sixth 
period will, it is true, continue to develop corre- 
spondingly in the seventh; but the others will, 
under the altered conditions of’their surroundings, 
find but little opportunity to proceed with their 
' rifeglected task. Only in a distant future will con- 
ditions agafti appear whieh will allow of this being 
done.

•Thus does evolution advance from period to 
period. Clairvoyance observes not only those 
ehanges in the future in which the earth alone 
takes part, but those also which take place in 
conjunction with the heavenly bodies round about 
it. A time will come in which the terrestrial and 
human evolution will be advanced so far that 
those forces and beings whieh were compelled to 
detaeh themselves from the earth during the Lemu- 
rian period, so as to afford the earth-beiiTgs the 
possibility of further progress, will be able onee 
more to unite with the earth. Then the moon 
will be united with the earth again. This will 
happen because a sufficiently large number of 
hiunan souls will then possess the inner powers 
which will enable them to render the Moon forces 
fruitfuf for further development. And it will 
oceur at a time when side by side with the high 
development which a sufficient niimber of human 
souls will have attained, another group will reveal 
itself which has chosen the path of evil. The 
•I^gard souls will have acetunulated so mueh

438 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE438 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

error, ugliness, and evil, in the form of Karma, 
that at first they will form a separate community, 
a perverse and erring section of humanity, keenly 
opposing what we ''understand as “good.” Ths 
“good” humanity will acquire little by little the 
power of using the Moon forces, and will thereby 
so transform the evil section also as to enable it 
to keep pace with the advance of evolution as a 
separate earth kingdom. Through these laboivrs 
of the good part of humanity, the earth, then 
reunited with the moon, will be able, after a 
certain period of development, to unite with the 
sun again and with the other planets also.

After an intermediate state, which resembles a 
sojourn in a higher world, the earth will be trans- 
formed into the Jupiter condition. That which 
we now call the mineral kingdom will not exist on 
Jupitei''; the forces of this mineral kingdom will be 
transformed into vegetable forces. But the veg- 
etable kingdom, which will have quite a new form 
as compared with its present one, will appear in the 
Jupiter state as the lowest of the kingdoms. Above 
it, at a higher level, is organized the animal king- 
dom, likewise transformed; next comes a human 
kingdom — the descendant of the evil community 
which had previously arisen on the earth. And then 
will appear the deseendants of the good humanity 
of earth, as a human kingdom on a higher level.

A great part of the work of this last. human 
kingdom consists in ennobling the souls which

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 439A great part of the work of this last. human 
kingdom consists in ennobling the souls which

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION 439

have sunk into the evil community, so that they 
may still gain admittance into the true human 
Kingdom. The Venus condition will be of such a 
mature thaj; the vegetable kingdom will have dis- 
appeared Mso; the lowest kingdom will be the 
animal kingdom once more transformed, and, 
ascending “from the latter, there will be three 
human kingdoms at different stages of perfection. 
The earth will remain united with the sun during 
the Venus period; while during that of Jupiter 
it will have happened that at a certain point the 
sun separates once again from Jupiter, the latter 
receiving its influence from outside. Then there 
is again a union between the sun and Jupiter, 
and the transformation gradually passes into the 
Venus state. During that state another planet 
detaehes itself from Venus, containing all kinds 
of beings which have opposed evolution, an 
“irredeemable moon,” as it were, following a 
path of evolution which is of a character impossible 
to describe, because it is too unlike anything 
man can e,]cperience on earth. But evolved hu- 
manity will pass on in a fully spiritualized state 
of existence to the Vulcan evolution, a description 
of whifch lies beyond the seope of this work.

We see that from the fruits of the Wisdom of 
the Grail springs the highest ideal of human evo- 
lution conceivable for man: spiritualization at- 
tained by him through his own efforts. For in the 
ignd this spiritualization appears as a product of the

440

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENQE440

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENQE

harmony which he wrought out in the fifth and sixth 
periods of the present evolution, between tKe facul- 
ties of reason and emotion which he had then at- 
tained, and the knowledge of superphysipal worlds.^ 
That which he thus builds up in his soul hiust itself 
at last become the objective world. The human* 
spirit rises to the mighty impacts of the universe 
aroimd him, and has at first a faint premonition of 
spiritual beings behind the impressions he has re- 
ceived. He recognizes these beings at a later period. 
The human heart feels the sublimity of this spiritual 
state; but man may also realize that his own inner 
experiences of intellect, feeling, and character are 
the germs of a spiritual world which is to come.

He who supposes that human liberty is not 
compatible with a foreknowledge and predestina- 
tion of future conditions, ought to consider that 
man’s freedom of action in the future depends 
just as little on the arrangement of predestined 
things as does his liberty of action v/ith regard to 
inhabiting a house a year hence, the plans for 
which he is now settling. He will be. as free as 
he can be, in accordance with his innermost being, 
within the house he has built; and he will be as 
free on Jupiter and on Venus as his inner life per- 
mits, subject to the conditions which will arise 
there. Freedom will not depend on what has been 
predetermined by antecedent conditions, but on 
that which the soul has made out of itself.

THE ^RESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION

441THE ^RESENT AND FUTURE EVOLUTION

441

In the earth condition is contained that which 
has developed within the preceding Saturn, Sun, 
and Moon states. The earth -man finds “wisdom” 
in the p^pcesses going on ‘around him. This 
wisdom is 'there, as the fruit of what has happened 
in the past. The earth is the descendant of the 
“old Mooh”; and the latter developed with all 
that belonged to it into the “Cosmos of Wis- 
dom.” The earth is now at the commencement 
of an evolution, which will introduce a new force 
into this wisdom. It will cause man to feel him- 
self an independent member of a spiritual world. 
This will come to pass because his ego will have 
been formed within him during the earth period 
by the Lords of Form, as was his physical body on 
Saturn by the Lords of Will, his vital body on the 
Sun by the Lords of Wisdom, and his astral body 
on the Moon by the Lords of Motion. *

By means of the cooperation of the Lords of 
Will, Wisdom, and Motion, that which manifests 
as wisdom is brought forth. Through the labours 
of these tljree classes of spirits, the beings and 
processes of earth can harmonize in wisdom with 
the other beings of the world. It is the Lords of 
Form who bestow on man his independent ego. 
In the ■ future this ego will harmonize with the 
beings of earth, of Jupiter, of Venus, and of 
Vulcan-, by means of the force added to the exist- 
ing wisdom during the earth period. It is the force 
of love. This force must ainse in the humanity

442

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENdS442

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENdS

of earth; and the Cosmos of Wisdom be devel- 
oped into a Cosmos of Love. Everything which 
the ego is able to unfold within itself must give 
birth to love. The all-embracing arghetype o£ 
love is set forth in the manifestation of that 
lofty spirit of the Sun indicated in the description 
of the Christ Mystery. By this mcanS the germ 
of love is planted in the innermost core of human 
nature; and from this starting-point it must flov/ 
through the whole of evolution. Just as the 
wisdom previously fonned manifests in the forces 
of the physical world of earth, in the “forces of 
nature” of to-day, so will love itself manifest in 
the future, in all phenomena, as the new “natural 
force.”

The secret of all further development in the 
future is that knowledge and everything achieved 
by mart from a right comprehension of the world 
process is a sowing of seed which must ripen into 
love. And the greater the amount of love-power, 
so much the greater will be the creative force 
available for the future. In that )vhich will 
grow from love will lie the mighty forces leading 
to that culminating point of spiritualization 
described above. The greater the amount of 
spiritual knowledge that flows into hum'an and 
terrestrial evolution, so much the more living 
and fruitful seed will be stored up for the iuture. 
Spiritual knowledge is transmuted through its 
own nature into love. The whole process whi<^’“

THE Present and future evolution 443THE Present and future evolution 443

has been described, ranging from the Greco- 
Roman to the end of the present period, exhibits 
fhe way in which this transformation is to take 
place, and,shows why so great a part of its devel- 
opment must lie in the future. That which has 
been preparing as wisdom on Saturn, Sun, and 
Moon is aCtive in the physical, etheric, and astral 
bodies of man ; it shows itself there as the Wisdom 
oi the World, btit within the ego it is intensified. 
The wisdom of the outer world becomes inner 
wisdom in man from the earth period onward, and 
when it is concentrated in him it becomes the 
germ of love. Wisdom is the necessary condition 
for love; love is the fruit of wisdom, reborn in 
the ego.

VII

Details from the Domain of Occult Science 
man’s etheric body ,

W HEN the higher principles of man are 
observed with clairvoyant vision, the mode 
of perception is never precisely the same 
as that which comes from the outer senses. If we 
touch an object, and experience a sensation of 
warmth, we must distinguish between that which 
comes from the object and which, as it were, 
streams out from it, and our own psychic experi- 
ence. The inner psychic experience of perceiving 
warmth is something different from the heat which 
streams from the object. Now let us imagine 
this psychic experience quite by itself without 
the outer object. Let us call up the experience of 
a sensation of heat in our soul, without the pres- 
ence of any external physical object to qause it. If 
such a sensation existed without cause, it would 
be merely fancy. The student of occult science 
experiences such inner perceptions without any 
physical cause. But at a certain stage of develop- 
ment they present themselves in such a manner 
that he knows (as it has been shown that by the 
very nature of the experience he can know), that 
the inner perception is not fancy, but is caused'

444

T|[E DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 445444

T|[E DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 445

by a psycho-spiritual being belonging to a super- 
sensible world; just as the ordinary sensation of 
heat, for example, is caused by an external phys- 
ical-sense object. •

It is the same with regard to the perception 
cf colour in the supersensible world. Here we 
must distinguish between the colour associated 
with the outer object, and the inner colour- 
^nsation in the soul. Let us call up the soul’s 
inner sensation when it perceives a red object in 
the physical, outer world of sense. Let us imagine 
that we retain a very vivid recollection of the 
impression, but that we are looking away from 
the object. What we still retain as a memory 
picture of the colour let us imagine as an inner 
experience. We shall then distinguish between 
that which is an inner experience of the colour, 
and the external colour itself. These inney experi- 
ences differ entirely in their content from impres- 
sions of the outer senses. Much more do they 
bear the impress of what is felt as joy and sor- 
row than that of normal physical sensations. Now 
let us imagine an inner experience of this kind 
arising in the soul without any suggestion arising 
from an outer sense object. A clairvoyant may 
have an experience of this kind, and may know 
too in that case that it is no fancy, but the expres- 
sion of a psycho-spiritual being. Now if this 
psycho:spiritual being excite the same impression 
' as does a red object of the physical-sense world.

446 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE446 AN OUTLINE OP OCCULT SCIENCE

then that being is red. There will, however, 
always be the external impression first, a’nd then 
the inner experience of colour, in the case of the 
physical-sense object; in that of the genuine claii;- 
voyance of a man of to-day it must be the con- 
trary, — first the inner experience, shadowy, like 
a mere recollection of colour, and then a picture, 
growing more and more vivid. The less heed we 
pay to the necessary sec^uence of these occurrence, 
the less are we able to distinguish between actual, 
spiritual perception and the delusions of fancy 
(illusion, hallucination, and so on).

The vividness of the picture in a psycho-spir- 
itual perception of this kind, whether it remain 
quite shadowy, like a dim imagination, or whether 
it appear in a distinct form, like an external 
object, depends altogether on the clairvoyant’s 
possibilities of development. Now, the general 
impression obtained by the clairvoyant of the 
etheric body may be thus described. When the 
clairvoyant has strengthened his will power to 
such a degree that, in spite of the fact that an indi- 
vidual stands before him in a physical body, he 
can abstract his attention from what the physical 
eye sees, — he is then able to see clairvoyantly 
into the space occupied by the man’s phys- 
ical body. Of course, a great increase of will 
power is necessary, in order to withdraw the 
attention not only from something in th,e mind, 
but from something standing before one, in su^^*

TpE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 447TpE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 447

a way that the physical impression is quite extin- 
guished. But the increase is possible, and is 
•brought about by the exercises for the attainment 
,of superspisible knowledge.* When these have 
been successful, the clairvoyant may gain first of 
iall the general impression of the etheric body. 
Within his soul there arises the same inner sensa- 
tion which he has, let us say, at the sight of a 
peach blossom; and then this becomes vivid, so 
that he is able to say th.at the etheric body has the 
colour of peach blossoms. He next perceives 
the separate organs and currents of the etheric 
body. A further description of the etheric body 
may be given by relating the psychic experiences 
corresponding to sensations of heat or of sound- 
impressions, for it is not merely a phenomenon of 
light. The astral body and other principles of 
hiunan nature may also be described in like man- 
ner. If this be taken into account it will be seen in 
what sense descriptions must be understood which 
are given from the standpoint of occult science.

* THE ASTRAL WORLD

As long as we observe the physical world only, 
the e^rth, as man’s dwelling place, appears like 
a separate planet. But when supersensible know- 
ledge rises to higher spheres, this separateness 
ceases. It may therefore be said that the imagi- 
nation, perceives the Moon condition,, as developed 
• up .to the present, at the same time that it perceives

448 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE448 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

the earth. Now the world which is entered in 
this fashion is such that not only the supersen- 
sible part of the eai'th belongs to it, but that othei 
planets are also to be found in it which are physi- 
cally apart from the earth. Therefore one who 
is familiar with higher worlds observes not only 
the supersensible regions of the earth but at the 
same time the supersensible part of other planets 
also. (Should any one be impelled to ask why 
clairvoyants do not report as to how things appear 
on Mars and the other planets, he should bear in 
mind that it is first of all a question of observing 
the supersensible conditions of other planetary 
bodies, whereas the questioner has in view the 
physical-sense conditions.) On this account it 
was possible to make in this work statements 
regarding certain relations between the earth’s 
evolutio*! and the contemporary evolution on 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and so on. Now when 
the human astral body has been drawn away by 
sleep, it belongs not only to the conditions of 
earth but to worlds in which yet other regions of 
the universe (stellar worlds) have their part. Nay, 
these worlds extend their influence to man’s astral 
body even when he is awake. For this reason 
the name “astral body’’ appears to be justified.

OF man’s life after death

Mention has been made, in the course , of this 
book, of the time during which the astral body

THE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 449

still remains joined to the etheric body of man

after de^th has supervened. During this time

there remains a recollection, gradually growing

fainter, of ^he whole of the life just ended. The

duration of 'this time varies in different individuals.

•It depends upon the strength with which the

astral body^ilings to the etheric body, on the power

which the former has over the latter. Occult

sc’ence makes it possible to obtain an idea of that

power by observing a person who, judging fromastral body^ilings to the etheric body, on the power

which the former has over the latter. Occult

sc’ence makes it possible to obtain an idea of that

power by observing a person who, judging from

his degree of fatigue, must of necessity fall asleep,

and yet, by sheer strength of mind, keeps awake.

It then appears that different people can keep

awake for periods varying in length. About as

long as a man in an extreme case can keep awake,

so long does memory of a past life, or in other

words the connection with the etheric body, last

after death. •

* *

*

When the etheric body is detached from the 
individual after death, something of it nevertheless 
remains for the purpose of the man’s whole subse- 
quent development — what may be described as an 
extract, or the essence of it. This extract con- 
tains the result of the past life, and is the vehicle 
of all that which, during the man’s spiritual 
development between death and a new birth,

unfolds Jike a germ for the life following.

* *

♦

Th.e duration of time between death and new

30

450 AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCTEriCEunfolds Jike a germ for the life following.

* *

♦

Th.e duration of time between death and new

30

450 AX OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCTEriCE

birth is determined by the fact that the ego as a 
rule does not return to the physical-se^se worlcf * 
until that world has been so transformed that the 
ego can experience something new. , During its 
soioum in spiritual regions its dwelling place on 
earth undergoes a change. But this change ‘is* 
connected with the great changes in ■ftie universe, 
with changes in the relationship between earth 
and sun, and so forth. These are changes in which 
certain cyclic repetitions take place, in connection 
with new conditions. They find an external 
expression in the fact, for example, that the point 
in the vault of heaven at which the sun rises at 
the beginning of spring makes a complete circuit 
in the course of about twenty-six thousand years. 
Hence this vernal point moves in the course of 
the period mentioned from one region of the 
heave^iis to another. In the course of the twelfth 
part of the time, that is to say, in about twenty- 
one hundred years, conditions on the earth have 
changed there so far that the human soul can 
experience something new since its last incarna- 
tion. As, however, the experiences of an indi- 
vidual vary according as incarnation is as a woman 
or as a man, there are, as a rule, two incaVnations 
within the time stated, one as a man and one as 
a woman. But these things are also dependent 
on the nature of the forces which man carries 
with him from his earthly existence, through 
death. Hence all statements of the kind here

THj: DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 451

made are only to be understood as generally valid, 
*but as f)resenting in particular cases the most 
ifianifold variations.

f«E COURSE OF HUMAN LIFETHj: DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 451

made are only to be understood as generally valid, 
*but as f)resenting in particular cases the most 
ifianifold variations.

f«E COURSE OF HUMAN LIFE

» .Man’s life, as expressed in the sequence of con- 
ditions between birth and death, can be fully 
understood only by taking into account both the 
pljysical body with its senses and the changes 
undergone by man’s supersensual principles. Oc- 
cult science views those changes in the following 
manner. Physical birth is seen to be the extri- 
cation of the human being from its maternal 
covering. Forces which before birth the embryo 
shared in common with its mother’s body, are 
present independently in the child after birth. 
But in later life superphysical events, similar to 
those of sense which are enacted at the physical 
birth, are visible to clairvoyant sight. That is 
to say, a child, as regards its etheric body, is en- 
veloped in an etheric covering until the approach 
of the change of teeth (in the sixth or seventh year) . 
The etheric covering falls away at that period, 
and here the “birth” of the etheric body occurs. 
But the child is still surrounded by, an astral 
covering, which falls off between its twelfth and 
sixteenth year (at the time of puberty). This 
is the “birth” of the astral body; and at a still 
later period the real ego is born.‘

' Tl;e suggestive points of view for the conduct of education resulting

452

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE' Tl;e suggestive points of view for the conduct of education resulting

452

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Now after the birth of the ego man lives in 
such a fashion that he adapts himself to che con-’ 
ditions of the world and of life, and occupies him- 
self within them according to the cap^ibilities of 
the principles working through his ego, — the sen- 
tient, the rational, and the self-conscious soul. 
Then comes a time in which the etheric body 
retraces the process of its development from the 
seventh year onward in reverse order. Wherefi,s 
before this the astral body had developed m such 
a way as first of all to unfold that which was pres- 
ent at birth as the embryo, and which then, after 
the birth of the ego, enriched itself by the experi- 
ences of the outer world, it begins at a certain 
moment to feed spiritually on its own etheric 
body. It lives on the etheric body; and during 
the further course of life the etheric body also 
begins to prey on the physical body.

The decay of the physical body in old age is a 
consequence of this. The course of human life 
therefore falls into three divisions: a time of 
unfoldment for the physical and etheric bodies, 
then one in which the astral body and the ego 
develop, and lastly that in which the etheric and 
physical bodies are changed back againv But 
the astral body plays a part in all the events that 
take place between birth and death. Since it is 
really born in a spiritual sense only between the

from a knowledge of these supersensible facts are presented in my lit- 
tle book. The Education of Children from the Standpoint of Theosophf^ in 
which will be found fuller details of what can here only be hinted at.

TlbE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE

453TlbE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE

453

twelfth and sixteenth years, and must during its 
^latest life-period draw upon the forces of ‘ the 
etheric and physical bodies, that which it is able 
•to perform by its own powers will develop more 
slowly than if it were not within a physical and 
an etheric body. After death, when the physical 
and ethenc bodies have fallen away, evolution, 
during the time of purification, proceeds in such 
sP manner that it occupies about one third of the 
duration of life between birth and death.

THE HIGHER REGIONS OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD

By imagination, inspiration, and intuition, 
supersensual knowledge gradually ascends into 
those regions of the spiritual world within which 
it can reach the beings who have to do with human 
and cosmic evolution. And by such a faculty 
it is also possible to trace intelligibly* human 
evolution between death and a new birth in such 
a way that it is comprehensible. Now there are 
still higher regions of existence, which can here 
be only l)riefly indicated. When supersensual 
knowledge has risen to intuition, it lives in a 
world of spiritual beings. These too are evolving. 
That Which concerns the humanity of the present 
day extends upward in a certain sense as far as 
the world of intuition. True, man receives im- 
pulses ‘from yet higher worlds in the course of 
hi^ evolution between death and re-birth. But 
he does not experience these impulses directly;

454

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENOE454

AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENOE

they are guided to him by beings belonging to the 
spiritual world. And when these come into view 
eveiything that happens to man stands revealed. 
But the special conditions of these beings, that 
which they themselves require in order to guide 
human evolution, can be seen only by means of 
a cognition that transcends intuition. ’’ We thus 
have a glimpse of worlds which we must imagine 
of such a nature that the most highly spiritual 
features of the earth are there among the lowest. 
Wise decisions are, for example, some of the high- 
est things within the sphere of earth ; the activities 
of the mineral kingdom are among the lowest. 
In those higher spheres wise resolutions correspond 
to about what the mineral activities are on earth. 
Above the domain of intuition lies the region in 
which the cosmic plan is woven out of spiritual 
causes. '■

THE PRINCIPLES OF MAN

When it is said that the ego works on the human 
principles, on the physical, the etheric, and the 
astral bodies, and transforms them in reverse order 
into Spirit-Self, Life-Spirit, and Spirit-Man, this 
statement relates to the work of the ego on the 
human being by means of the highest faculties; 
the development of these begins only under 
earthly conditions. But this transformation is 
preceded at a lower level by another change,- giving 
rise to the sentient, the intellectual or rational, aqd 
the self-conscious soul. For while, in the course

THE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 455THE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 455

of htirnan evolution, the sentient soul is being 
fonnedf, changes are taking place in the astral 
body; also the growth of the intellectual soul 
I expresses, itself in transformations in the etheric 
body; and that of the self-conscious soul in similar 
•transformations in the physical body. Fuller 
infprmatibn on this subject has been given in 
this book in the accounts of the evolution of the 
«arth. Thus in a certain sense we may say that 
the sentient soul ifcself is the result of a trans- 
formed astral body, the intellectual or rational 
soul of a transformed etheric body, and the self- 
conscious soul of a transformed physical body. 
But we may also say that these three divisions of 
the soul are parts of the astral body; for example, 
the self-conscious soul is only possible because it 
is an astral entity existing in a physical body 
suited to it. It lives an astral life withia a phys- 
ical body fashioned to be its dwelling place.

THE DREAM STATE

A description of the dream state has been given 
in another chapter of this work. On the one hand 
it is to be regarded as a relic of the old picture- 
consoiousness peculiar to man during the Moon 
evolution, and also during a great part of the 
evolution of the earth. Evolution goes forward 
in such a way that earlier conditions resolve 
themselves into later ones. And so, in the dream 
state, there now appears in man a relic of what

456 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE456 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

was once his normal condition. But at the same 
time this condition is from another aspect diSerent 
from the old picture-consciousness. For since 
its development the *ego also has taken part in 
those activities of the astral body which are car- 
ried on during sleep in the dream life. Thus* 
through the presence of the ego there "arises in 
dreams a transformed picture-consciousness. But 
since the ego does not consciously exercise its*-, 
authority over the astral body during dream life, 
nothing belonging to the sphere of that life can be 
regarded as really able to lead to a knowledge of 
higher worlds in an occult sense. Something 
similar holds good with regard to what is often 
called vision, premonition, or “second sight.” 
These arise through the silencing of the ego, and 
the consequent appearance of remnants of the 
old condhion of consciousness. In occult science 
these are of no value. What may be observed in 
them cannot in any real sense be regarded as its 
result.

THE ATTAINMENT OF SUPERPHYSICAL KN'OWLEDGE

The way to attain knowledge of the higher 
worlds, which has been more fully described in 
this book, may also be called the “path of 'direct 
knowledge.” In addition to this path there is 
another, which we may designate as the “path of 
feeling.” It would be quite a mistake, however,, 
to believe that the former had nothing to do with

tHE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 457tHE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 457

the development of feeling. Rather does it lead 
to the greatest possible deepening of the life of 
feeling. But the “path of feeling” addresses 
itself dirtctly and solely to fhe feelings, and seeks 
from this point to rise to knowledge. It rests on 
•the fact that when the soul entirely surrenders 
itself to a feeling for a certain length of time, the 
latter is transformed into knowledge, into intuitive 
•vision, by means of images. When, for example, 
the soul is filled for weeks or months, or even 
longer, with the feeling of humility, the content 
of the feeling becomes transformed into intuitive 
vision. Now a path leading to supersensible 
regions may be found by devoting oneself to such 
feelings one by one; but for the man of to-day, 
bound by the ordinary circiunstances of life, this is 
not easily carried out. Solitude, retirement from 
the life of the present day, is almost indispensable. 
For the impressions created by everyday life dis- 
turb the soul, especially at the beginning, in its 
work of development through absorption in cer- 
tain feelings. It is on the contrary possible to 
pursue the path of knowledge described in this 
book in every situation of present-day life.

OBSERVATION OF SPECIAL EVENTS AND BEINGS 
IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD

The question may be asked whether inner con- 
gentration and the other means described for the 
attainment of supersensual knowledge permit us

4s8 an outline of occult SCIENCfcThe question may be asked whether inner con- 
gentration and the other means described for the 
attainment of supersensual knowledge permit us

4s8 an outline of occult SCIENCfc

to observe only in a general way what happens 
between death and a new birth or other spiritual 
events; or whether they furnish the possibility 
of observing quite definite events and beings, as, 
for example, any given deceased person. To 
this we must answer that a man who gains the' 
capacity for seeing in the spiritual world by the 
methods explained, can also perceive particular 
events which occur there; he acquires the power 
to put himself into communication with individ- 
uals living in the spiritual world between death 
and a new birth. It must be observed, however, 
that in an occult sense this ought to take place 
only after the proper training required for super- 
sensible knowledge has been undergone. For 
not until then is it possible to distinguish between 
illusion and reality, as regards certain events and 
beings. '^A man who tries to observe particular 
cases without due instruction may fall a victim 
to innumerable deceptions. The training which 
leads to observation in higher worlds of what has 
been described, also leads to the ability to trace 
the post-mortem life of a special individual, after 
death has supervened, and no less does it lead to 
the observation and comprehension of all psycho- 
spiritual beings who, from the invisible tvorlds, 
work upon those which are manifest. Correct 
observation of individual cases is only possible, 
however, on the basis of a knowledge of the

TJPE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE 459

universal sublime facts of the spiritual world, — 
facts regarding the world and humanity which 
concern every human being. The desire for the 
I one without the other leads»astray.

AUTHOR’S REMARKS /AUTHOR’S REMARKS /

I N placing a book such as this in the hands;, 
of the public, the writer must calntly antic- 
ipate regarding his work every kind of criti- 
cism w'hich is likely to arise in the present day^ 
A reader, for instance, whose opinions are based 
upon the results of scientific research, after noting 
certain statements here made touching these 
things, may pronounce the following judgment; 
“It is astounding that such statements should be 
possible in our time. The most elementary con- 
ceptions of natural science are distorted in such 
a manner as to denote a positively inconceivable 
ignorance of even the rudiments of science. The 
author uses such terms, for instance, as ‘heat’ in a 
way that would lead one to infer that he had let 
the entire wave of modem thought on the sub- 
ject of physics sweep past him unperceived. Any 
one familiar with the mere elements of this science 
would show him that not even the merest dilet- 
tante could have made these statements, and ,they 
can only be dismissed as the outcome of rank 
ignorance.’’

This and many a similar verdict might b§ pro- 
nounced, and we can picture our reader, after the 
perusal of a page or two, laying the book aside,— ^

460

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

461This and many a similar verdict might b§ pro- 
nounced, and we can picture our reader, after the 
perusal of a page or two, laying the book aside,— ^

460

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

461

smiling or indignant, according to his tempera- 
ment,-^ and reflecting on the singular growths 
which a perverse tendency of thought may put forth 
in our tinje. So thinking, he will lay this volume 
aside, with his collection of similar freaks of the 
train. What, however, would the author say should 
such opinions come to his knowledge? Would not 
he, from his point of view, also set the critic down 
%s incapable of judgment or, at least, as one who 
has not chosen to briug his good will to bear in 
forming an intelligent opinion? To this the 
answer is mOvSt emphatically — No! In no sense 
whatever does the author feel this, for he can 
easily conceive of his critic as being not only a 
highly intelligent man, but also a trained scien- 
tist, and one whose opinions are the result of 
conscientious thought. For the author of this 
book is able to enter into the feelings of such a 
person and to understand the reasons which have 
led him to form these conclusions.

Now, before going any further, it is necessary, 
in order to comprehend what the author really 
means, to 'do here what segms to himself generally 
out of place, but for which there is urgent cause 
as regards this book, namely, to introduce certain 
personal data. Of course, nothing wiU be put 
forward in this connection but what concerns 
his determination to write this very book. What 
is said in it could not be justified if it bore merely 
a* personal character. A book of this kind is

462 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENQP

bound to proffer views to which any person may 
attain, and these views must be presented in such 
a way as to suggest no shade of the personal ele-' 
ment, as far, that is to say, as such thing is, 
possible. *It is therefore not in this sense that the personal,, 
note is sounded. It will be struck onl^^ where it 
may assist the writer to point out how, in spite 
of being able thoroughly to enter into the "rea- 
son” of such a dictum as the one quoted above, he 
cordd still write this book.

It is true there is one method which would 
have made the introduction of the personal ele- 
ment unnecessary — this would have been to 
specify in detail all those particulars which would 
show that the statements here made are in agree- 
ment with the progress of modem science. This 
course would, however, have necessitated the 
writing of many volumes, and as such a task is 
at present out of the question, the writer feels it 
necessary to state the personal reasons which he 
believes justify him in thinking such an agree- 
ment thoroughly possible and satisfactory. Were 
he not in a position to make the following expla- 
nations, he would most certainly never have gone 
so far as to publish such statements as those 
referring to heat processes.

Some thirty years ago the writer had the.oppor- 
txmity of taking a course of physics in its .various 
branches. At that time the central point of

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

463Some thirty years ago the writer had the.oppor- 
txmity of taking a course of physics in its .various 
branches. At that time the central point of

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

463

interest in the sphere of heat phenomena was 
the pr(5mulgation of the so-called "Mechanical 
Theory of Heat,” and it happened that this 
theory s® particularly engrossed the writer’s 
attention that the historical development of the 
Various interpretations associated with the names 
of Julius lElobert Mayer, Helmholtz, Joule, Clau- 
sius, and others, formed the subject of his con- 
tinuous study. During that period of concen- 
trated work he laid those foundations which have 
enabled him to follow all the actual advances 
since made with regard to the theory of physical 
heat, without experiencing any difficulty in pene- 
trating into that which science is achieving in 
this department. Had he been obliged to confess 
himself unable to do this, the writer would have 
had good reason for leaving unsaid and unwritten 
much that has been brought forward in this book.

He has made it a matter of conscience, when 
writing or speaking on occult science, to deal only 
with matters on which he could also report, in what 
seemed an adequate manner, the views held by 
modem science. In this he does not in any wise 
challenge the whole world to do Hkewise. Any 
one may feel a call to communicate or to publish 
whatsoever his judgment, his sense of tmth, and 
his feelings may prompt him to, even if he is igno- 
rant of the attitude taken by contemporary science 
i^ the. matter. The writer wishes to indicate 
merely that he holds to the pronouncements he

464 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE464 AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

has made. For instance, hie would never have 
written those few sentences on the humafn glan- 
dular system, nor those regarding man’s nervous* 
system, contained iif this voliune, were#he not in* 
a position to discuss both subjects in'* the terms 
used by the modem scientist, when speaking o^' 
the glandular and nervous systems *from the 
standpoint of science.

In spite of its being possible to think that ft 
person discussing heat in the way it has here been 
done, knows nothing of the elements of modern 
physics, the writer yet feels justified, because of 
his being thoroughly acquainted with present- 
day research, and because, were he not so, he 
would have left the subject alone. He knows 
that such utterances may be ascribed to want 
of modesty, but it is necessary to declare his 
true motives, lest they should be confounded 
with others of a very different nature, a result 
infinitely worse than a verdict of mere vanity.

A criticism from the philosophical point of view 
is also possible, and a philosopher might suspect 
that the author had been asleep wh’ile recent 
labours in the field of epistemology were in prog- 
ress. “Had he never heard of the existence of 
a man called Kant?’’ this philosopher might ask, 
“and did he not know that according to this man 
it was simply inadmissible, from a philosophic 
point of view, to put forward such statements?^’’ 
and so on, while in conclusion he might remark

AUTHOR’S REMARKS 465

that stuff of so uncritical, childish, and unpro- 
fessional a nature should not be tolerated among 
philosophers, and that any further investigation 
tv^ould be » waste of time. But here again, for 
reasons already advanced and at the risk of being 
Jgain misinterpreted, the writer would fain in- 
troduce certain personal experiences.His studies of Kant date from his sixteenth 
yiear, and he really believes he is now capable of 
criticizing quite objectively, from the Kantian 
point of view, everything that has been put 
forward in this book. On this account, too, he 
might have left this book unwritten were he not 
fully aware of what moves a philosopher to pass 
the verdict of “childishness” whenever the critical 
standard of the day is applied. Yet one may 
actually know that in the Kantian sense the 
limits of possible knowledge are here exceeded: 
one may know in what way Herbart (who never 
arrived at an “arrangement of ideas”) would dis- 
cover his “naive realism.” One may even know 
the degree to which the modem pragmatism of 
James anci Schiller and others would find the 
bounds of “tme presentments” transgressed — 
those ipresentments which we are able to make 
our own, to vindicate, enforce, and to verify.

We may know all these things and yet, for this 
very reason, feel justified in holding the views here 
presented. The writer has dealt with the ten- 
dencies of philosophic thought in his works :

31

46^ AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

Erkenntnistheorie der Goetheschen Weltanschauung; 
Wahrheit und Wissenschaft; Philosopffie der 
Freiheit; Goethes Weltanschauung, and Welt- und* 
Lebensanschauungen Hm neunzehnten Jahrhundert.%Erkenntnistheorie der Goetheschen Weltanschauung; 
Wahrheit und Wissenschaft; Philosopffie der 
Freiheit; Goethes Weltanschauung, and Welt- und* 
Lebensanschauungen Hm neunzehnten Jahrhundert.%

Many other criticisms might be "'suggested. 
Any one who had read some of the writer’s earlier 
works: Lebens- und Weltanschauungen *im neun- 
zehnten Jahrhundert, for instance, or a smaller 
work on Haeckel and his Opponents, might think 
it incredible that one and the same man could 
have written those books and also not only that 
entitled Theosophy but the one now under dis- 
cussion. “How,” he might ask, “can a man 
throw himself into the breach for Haeckel, and 
then, turning round, discredit every sound theory 
concerning monism that is the outcome of Haeckel’s 
researches?” He might understand the author of 
this book attacking Haeckel “with fire and sword” ; 
but it passes the limits of comprehension that, 
besides defending him, he should actually have 
dedicated “ Welt- und Lebensanschauungen im neun- 
zehnten Jahrhundert” to him. Haeckel, it might 
be thought,. would have emphatically d&lined the 
dedication had he known that the author was 
shortly to produce such stuff as An OutUne of 
Occult Science, with all its unwieldy dualism.

The writer of this book is of opinion that one 
may very well understand Haeckel without hold- 
ing the belief that he can be understood only 
when ever3rthing is thought to be nonsense which

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

AfilAUTHOR’S REMARKS

Afil

is not directly traceable to Haeckel’s own concep- 
tions afid assumptions. The writer is further of 
opinion that attacking Haeckel violently will 
►hardly conduce to the understanding of him; that 
this can only be done, in fact, after a careful in- 
restigation of all he has done for science. Least 
of all does he hold those opponents of Haeckel 
to be in the right, against whom he has in his 
book, Haeckel and his Opponents, sought to de- 
fend the great naturalist; for surely, the fact of 
his having far outstripped Haeckel’s hypotheses, 
by placing the spiritual conception of the world 
side by side with the merely natural one con- 
ceived by Haeckel, need be no reason for sup- 
posing him to be of one mind with the latter’s 
opponents. Any one taking the trouble to look 
at the matter in the right light must see that the 
writer’s recent books are in perfect acoord with 
those of an earlier date.

But the author can also imagine some one, 
judging from the more general point of view, 
condemning his book as the outpouring of an 
“imagination run wild,’’ or as “romantic work- 
ings of the brain.’’ Yet all that can be said 
in this respect is contained in the book itself, 
and it is explicitly shown that sane and earnest 
thought not only can but must be the touch- 
stone of all the facts presented. Only one who 
sijbmits what is here advanced to logical and 
adequate examination, such as is applied to the

46 ^ AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

facts of natural science, will be in a position to 
decide for himself how much reason has *to say- 
in the matter.46 ^ AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE

facts of natural science, will be in a position to 
decide for himself how much reason has *to say- 
in the matter.

After saying this nluch about those -who may at ' 
first be inclined to take exception to this work, 
we may perhaps be permitted to address a fe\^f* 
words to those on whose sympathetic att'ention we 
can rely. These will find all broad essentials con- 
tained in the first chapter, “ Conceniiiig the Natur®- 
of Occult Science.” A word, however, must here 
be added. Although this book deals with invevSti- 
gations carried beyond the confines of intelligence 
limited to the world of the senses, yet nothing has 
been put forward save what can be grasped by 
any person possessed of unprejudiced reasoning 
powers backed by a healthy sense of truth, and 
who is at the same time willing to turn these gifts 
to the bfst account; and the writer emphatically 
wishes it to be understood that he hopes to appeal 
to readers who will not be content with merely 
accepting on "blind faith” the matters presented, 
but who will take the trouble to test them by 
the light of their own understanding and by the 
experiences of their own lives. Above all, he desires 
cautious readers, who will allow themselves rto be 
convinced only by what can be logically justified. 
The writer is well aware that his work would be 
worth nothing were its value to rest oiT blind 
belief; it is valuable only in the degree to whi(;h 
it can be justified by unbiassed reason. It is

AUTHOR’S REMARKS

469AUTHOR’S REMARKS

469

the easiest thing for “blind faith’’ to confound 
folly and superstition with truth, and doubt- 
less many who have been content to accept 
the supersensual on mere faith will be inclined 
to think tiTat this book makes too great a demand 
on their powers of thought. It is not a question 
of merely making certain communications, but 
rather of presenting them in a manner consistent 
with a conscientious view of the corresponding 
plane of life; for this is the plane upon which the 
loftiest matters are often handled with unscrupu- 
lous charlatanism, and where knowledge and 
superstition come into such close contact as to be 
liable to be confused one with the other.

Any one acquainted with supersensual research 
will, on reading this book, be able to see that 
the writer has sought to define sharply the 
boundary line between what it is permitted to 
communicate now from the sphere of supersen- 
sual knowledge, and what is to be given out, at 
a later time, or at all events in a different form 
from the present.

* Rudolf Steiner

December, iqoq

THEOSOPHY

By

RUDOLF STEINER

An introduction to the supersensible 
knowledge of the world and the des- 
tination of man.

science presupposes an entirely 
new inner sense organ or instrument, 
by means of which there is revealed a 
new world which does not exist for the 
ordinary man, Johann Fichte,

This notable addition to the theosophical lit- 
erature of to-day now appears for the first time 
in^Elnglish, though it already has to its credit 
three editions in Oerman» and translations into 
Russian, Swedish • Outch, Czechish, and Italian, 
with a French translation in progress. Or. 
Steiner's books are the first theosophical works 
that foreign readers have shown a decided 
inclination to read in their own language.

, f

Cloth, 1 2 mo, $1,00 net,

RAND McNALLY & COMPANY

CHICAGO SAN FRANCISCO NEW YORK

THEOSOPHY and 
CHRISTIANITY

By MAX SEILING

%

With an Afterword by

DR. RUDOLF STEINER, f

Cloth, 1 2 mo, $1,00 net,

RAND McNALLY & COMPANY

CHICAGO SAN FRANCISCO NEW YORK

THEOSOPHY and 
CHRISTIANITY

By MAX SEILING

%

With an Afterword by

DR. RUDOLF STEINER

T his book of definite information concerning 
Theosophy demonstrates that there is possi> 
ble such development of the inner organs of per- 
ception that the soul and spirit worlds become 
as clear to the supersensory sight as the outer 
world to the physical senses. The relation of 
Theosophy and Christianity is brought to light, 
for the spiritual currents of all religions are 
shown to meet in Christianity, constituting it 
the universal religion of mankind. Theosophy, 
by searching into the hidden consciousness, ex- 
plains from its wider outlook the meaning and 
differences in religions, systems of philosophy, 
and the phenomena of existence.

Rand McNally & Company

Fifty Cents Net

SAN FRANCISCO

CHICAGO

NEW YORK