# The Vedas - Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda

[Source: full-text.md]
IJIMI  'i  lillilillillllllii

imiua'j

.lllliilllllii:

iiiiiiiiiitiip

lijiijijiiiiiliitiitiiiiitiiiiii.iiiiiiiii.

iUllllllllllllll

uinnifiiTfiiTni.

.c;^^^^

.^^

^i  X\\t  ^i}^oiagiciti

PRINCETON.  N.J.

■**

\

Purchased  by  the  Mary  Cheves  Dulles  Fund.

Di'vision

Section-

B.L\  \  \  5

t^"»-.

,^iS-^

Ml

RIG-VEDA    SANHI^^.,,,,^

DEC  14 1910

A    COLLECTION    OF    V^/j,  "^^*^'^-

ANCIENT    HINDU    HYMNS

CONSTITUTING

THE    SECOND    ASHTAKA,    OR    BOOK,

OF  THE

RIG-VEDA;

THE     OLDEST      AUTHORITT      FOB      THE      RELIGIOUS      A\D      SOCIAL

INSTITUTIONS  OF  THE   HINDUS.

TBANSLATED   FBOM   THE   OBIGINAL    SANSEBIT.

By  H.  H.  WILSON,  M.A.,  F.KS.,

ED   FBOM   THE   OBIGINAL    SANSEBIT.

By  H.  H.  WILSON,  M.A.,  F.KS.,

Memhfr  of  the  Ttoyal  Asiatic  Society,  of  the  Asiatic  Societies  of  Calcutta  and  Pari*,  anil  of  the

Ot-iental  Society  of  Germany;  Foreign  Member  qf  the  Nnfional  Jnntitute  nf  Fravce';

Member  of  the  Imperial  Academies  ofPefenburf/h  and  Vienna,  and  of  the  Ito/jal

Academies  ofMiinieh  and  Berlin ;  Ph.  D.  Brealaa;  M.  D.  Marburg,  Sfc,

and  Boden  Professor  of  Sannkrit  in  the  University  qf  Oj-ford.

IPuMfsJifll  «n>tr  tj)t  patronagt  c^  t?!C  tSTourt  of  ISucctors  o!  tijc  ISastEnDIa  OToinpanp.

LONDON:

AVm.   H.    ALLEN    and    CO.,

7,  LEADENHALL  STREET.

1854.

THE

SECOND     ASHTAKA,     OR     BOOK,

OP   THB

RIG -VEDA,

54.

THE

SECOND     ASHTAKA,     OR     BOOK,

OP   THB

RIG -VEDA,

INTEODUCTION.7,  LEADENHALL  STREET.

1854.

THE

SECOND     ASHTAKA,     OR     BOOK,

OP   THB

RIG -VEDA,

54.

THE

SECOND     ASHTAKA,     OR     BOOK,

OP   THB

RIG -VEDA,

INTEODUCTION.

The  publication  of  the  text  of  the  second  division 
of  the  Rig-Veda  by  Professor  MUller,  aifords  safe 
authority  for  the  continuance  of  the  translation, 
which  is  therefore  now  oiiered  to  the  public,  under 
the  same  liberal  patronage  of  the  Court  of  Directors 
of  the  East-India  Company  under  which  the  pre- 
ceding volume  appeared,  and  without  which  it  would 
probably  have  been  withheld  from  the  press :  little 
interest  in  the  work  having  been  manifested  in  this 
country,  however  indispensable  the  Vedas  may  be 
to  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  religious  opinions

the  Vedas  may  be 
to  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  religious  opinions 
of  the  ancient  world,  and  of  the  primaeval  institu- 
tions of  the  Hindus.

The  view  which  has  been  taken  in  the  introduc- 
tion to  the  former  volume,  of  the  religion  and 
mythology  of  the  people  of  India,  and  of  their 
social  condition,  fifteen  centuries  at  the  least  prior 
to  Christianity,  as  derivable  from  the  Veda,  is  con- 
firmed by  the  further  particulars  furnished  in  the 
present  volume.  The  worship  is  that  of  fire  and 
the  elements :  it  is  patriarchal  and  domestic,  but  is 
celebrated  through  the  agency  of  a  rather  imposing 
body  of  priests,  although  it  consists  of  little  more 
VOL.  II.  b

VI  INTRODUCTION.

although  it  consists  of  little  more 
VOL.  II.  b

VI  INTRODUCTION.VI  INTRODUCTION.

although  it  consists  of  little  more 
VOL.  II.  b

VI  INTRODUCTION.

than  the  presentation,  through  fire,  of  clarified 
butter  and  the  juice  of  the  Sojna  plant,  to  the  gods, 
•who  are  invoked  to  be  present,  whose  power  and 
benevolence  are  glorified,  whose  protection  against 
enemies  and  misfortunes  is  implored,  whose  dis- 
pleasure and  auger  are  deprecated,  and  who  are 
solicited  to  bestow  food,  cattle,  riches,  and  posterity 
upon  the  individuals  who  conduct  the  worship,  or 
on  whose  behalf  it  is  performed  :  occasional  intima- 
tions of  the  hope  of  happiness  hereafter  occur,  but 
they  are  not  frequent,  nor  urgent,  and  the  main 
objects  of  every  prayer  und  hymn  are  the  good

urgent,  and  the  main 
objects  of  every  prayer  und  hymn  are  the  good 
things  of  this  present  life.

The  chief  individual  objects  of  worship  are  the 
same  as  in  the  former  volume,  even  in  a  still 
more  engrossing  proportion :  of  the  hundred  and 
eighteen  hymns  of  the  Second  Ashtaka,  thirty  are 
dedicated  to  Aoni  in  his  own  form  or  subordinate 
manifestations,  whilst  to  Tndra  by  himself  or  with 
other  divinities,  and  especially  with  the  winds  or 
the  Maruts^  his  attendants,  there  are  appropriated 
thirty-nine :  of  the  remaining  hymns,  six  are  ad- 
dressed to  the  AswiNS,  five  to  Mitra  and  Varuna, 
five  to  Brihaspati  and  Braiimanaspati,  five  to  theMitra  and  Varuna, 
five  to  Brihaspati  and  Braiimanaspati,  five  to  the 
Viswadevas,  and  three  to  Vayu  ;  Vishnu  has  two, 
the  Dawn  two.  Heaven  and  Earth  three  :  tlie  rest 
are  distributed,  for  the  most  part  singly,  amongst  a 
variety  of  personations,  some  of  which  are  divine,  as 
RuDRA,  Varuna,  Savitri,  the  A'dityas,  and  Pushan, 
each  having  one  hymn :  some  of  the  objects  are 
human  beings,  as  the  Bdjd  Swanaya   who  is  the

INTRODUCTION.  \I1

hero  of  two  S(iktas,  Agastya  and  his  wife  who  are 
the  interlocutors  in  one,  and  the  Hibhus,  or  deified 
sons  of  SuDHANWAN,  to  whom  one  hymn  is  ad- 
dressed :  some  of  the  number  are  fanciful,  as  Pitu,

one  hymn  is  ad- 
dressed :  some  of  the  number  are  fanciful,  as  Pitu, 
Food ;  Water,  Grass,  and  the  Sun ;  the  supposed 
divinities  of  a  Siikta  each;  whilst  two  hymns,  as 
will  be  presently  more  particularly  noticed,  are 
dedicated  to  the  Horse,  who  is  the  victim  of  the 
Aswamcdha  sacrifice.

The  particulars  that  are  related  of  Agni  are  little 
else  than  repetitions  of  those  ascribed  to  him  in  the 
First  Ashi'aka,  told  with  rather  less  detail,  the  lan- 
guage of  general  panegyric  being  much  more  diffuse 
in  this  AsMaka  than  in  the  First,  whilst  the  legen- 
dary incidents  are  comparatively  scanty :  the  same 
may  be  said  of  the  Hymns  addressed  to  Indra;vely  scanty :  the  same 
may  be  said  of  the  Hymns  addressed  to  Indra; 
such  of  his  exploits  as  are  alluded  to  are  those 
which  have  been  previously  particularized,  but  fewer 
of  them  are  specified,  and  some  of  them  have  been 
ascribed  in  the  preceding  book  to  other  agents,  as, 
for  instance,  to  the  Akvlns  (p.  242).  There  are  a 
few  hymns  in  this  book  which  evidently  imply  a 
recent  grafting  of  the  worship  of  the  Maruts  upon 
that  of  Indra,  an  innovation  of  which  the  RisJd 
Agastya  appears  to  have  been  the  author,  and 
which  was  not  effected  without  opposition  on  the 
part  of  the  worshippers  of  Indra  alone  (pp.  145 — 
163) :  the  Maruts  are  here,  as  well  as  in  the  First

ne  (pp.  145 — 
163) :  the  Maruts  are  here,  as  well  as  in  the  First 
Book,  termed  the  sons  of  Rudra.

There  is  but  one  hymn  addressed  to  the  A'dityas 
collectively,  but  the  chief  divinities  of  the  class  are

b  2

VIU  INTRODUCTION.

the  subjects  severally  of  other  hymns,  or  of  scattered 
stanzas,  such  as  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  and 
VISH^IU ;  the  latter,  in  one  place,  appears  as  iden- 
tical with  Time  (p.  97),  in  which  capacity  his  three 
paces,  which  are  repeatedly  alluded  to,  may  be 
intended  to  allegorize  the  past,  present,  and  future. 
Varuna,  besides  being  characterized  by  the  same 
attributes  as  those  formerly  attached  to  him,  is 
represented  as  the  especial  resource  of  persons  in

ached  to  him,  is 
represented  as  the  especial  resource  of  persons  in 
debt,  or  of  those  who  have  been  reduced  from  afflu- 
ence to  poverty  (pp.  278 — 280).ached  to  him,  is 
represented  as  the  especial  resource  of  persons  in 
debt,  or  of  those  who  have  been  reduced  from  afflu- 
ence to  poverty  (pp.  278 — 280).

The  AsvviNS  are  described  in  the  same  strain  as 
in  the  First  Ashiaka,  and  various  of  their  exploits  are 
repeated,  but  with  less  copiousness  and  distinct- 
ness: although  it  is  rather  vaguely  intimated,  they 
are  regarded  mythologically  as  born  in  the  firma- 
ment and  the  sky  (p.  179) ;  and  in  one  place  they 
are  called  the  grandsons  of  heaven,  being  identified, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  as  on  a  former  occasion, 
with  the  sun  and  rnoon,  or  being,  in  fact,  mytholo- 
gical personations  of  the  former.

rnoon,  or  being,  in  fact,  mytholo- 
gical personations  of  the  former.

Savitrt,  the  Sun,  has  but  one  Hymn  addressed 
to  him,  and  this  offers  fewer  particulars  than  occur 
in  the  three  Sukfas,  of  which  he  is  the  deity,  in  the 
First  Book  :  the  principal  attribute  noticed  is  his 
defining  the  day  and  distinguishing  it  from  the 
night :  it  is  said,  also,  to  be  his  office  to  effect  the 
generation  of  mankind,  but  this  seems  to  be  little 
else  than  an  etymological  conceit,  the  noun  being 
derived  from  the  root  sH,  to  bring  forth:  he  is 
called  also  the  husband  or  protector  of  the  wives  of

INTRODUCTION.  IX

the  gods,  usually  considered  to  be  personations  of 
the  metres  of  the  Veda.

,  usually  considered  to  be  personations  of 
the  metres  of  the  Veda.INTRODUCTION.  IX

the  gods,  usually  considered  to  be  personations  of 
the  metres  of  the  Veda.

,  usually  considered  to  be  personations  of 
the  metres  of  the  Veda.

Brahmanaspati  is  in  this  Ashiaka  identified  with 
Brihaspati,  and  both  receive  more  honour  than  in 
the  former  Book,  in  which  Brihaspati  is  named  only 
incidentally  in  single  verses  of  hymns  to  Indra,  or 
the  Viswadevas,  and  one  hymn  only  is  dedicated  to 
Brahmanaspati  ;  the  former,  when  treated  of  sepa- 
rately, is  identical  with  Indra,  by  his  attributes  of 
sending  rain  (p.  199)  and  wielding  the  thunderbolt 
(p.  285) ;  but  he  is  hymned  indiscriminately  with 
Brahmanaspati,  who  is  styled  the  lord  of  the 
Ganas.  or  companies  of  divinities,  and  also,  which 
is  in  harmony  with  his  former  character,  chief  or

and  also,  which 
is  in  harmony  with  his  former  character,  chief  or 
most  excellent  lord  of  mantras,  or  prayers  of  the 
Vedas  (p.  2G2) ;  he  also,  in  some  of  his  attributes, 
as  those  of  dividing  the  clouds,  and  sending  rain, 
and  recovering  the  stolen  kine  (p.  268),  is  identical 
with  Indra,  although,  with  some  inconsistency,  he 
is  spoken  of  as  distinct  from,  although  associated  with 
him  (p.  270) ;  but  this  may  be  a  misconception  of 
the  Scholiast :  his  attribute  of  father,  or  cherisher, 
and  purohita,  or  family  priest  of  the  gods,  may  be 
merely  figurative  as  connected  with  his  presiding 
over  prayer.

RuDRA  is  described  as  in  the  first  book  by  rather

ding 
over  prayer.RuDRA  is  described  as  in  the  first  book  by  rather

ding 
over  prayer.

RuDRA  is  described  as  in  the  first  book  by  rather 
incompatible  qualities,  as  both  fierce  and  benignant, 
but  his  specific  province  is  here  also  the  tutelarship 
of  medicinal  plants,  and  administration  of  medicine, 
and  he  is  designated  as  a  physician  of  physiciaiis 
(p.  290).,     With  respect  also  to  his  presiding  over

INTRODUCTION.

medicinal  plants,  tbere  occurs  a  passage  worthy  of 
note,  as  among  the  herbs  are  those,  it  is  said,  which 
Manu  selected,  alluding,  most  probably,  to  the  seeds 
of  the  plants  which  Manu,  according  to  the  legend 
as  related  in  the  MaJidbhdrata,  took  with  him  into 
his  vessel  at  the  time  of  the  deluge.  There  are

ook  with  him  into 
his  vessel  at  the  time  of  the  deluge.  There  are 
more  particulars  of  the  person  of  Rudra  than  usual. 
He  is  sometimes  said  to  be  brown  or  tawny,  but  he 
is  also  said  to  be  white-complexioned  (p.  291) :  he 
is  soft-bellied  and  handsome-chinned  ;  he  is  armed 
with  a  bow  and  arrows,  and  brilliant  with  golden 
ornaments.  He  is  also  called  the  father  of  the 
Maruts.  There  is  little  however  in  all  this  except 
his  fierceness  to  identify  him  with  the  Rudra  of 
the  Purdrias.

Of  the  remaining  persons  of  the  Vaidik  pantheon, 
who  appear  in  this  portion,  the  notices  that  occur 
conform  generally  to  those  of  the  preceding  AsMaka, 
and  require  no  remark.rm  generally  to  those  of  the  preceding  AsMaka, 
and  require  no  remark.  There  are  several  hymns, 
however,  of  a  peculiar  character,  some  of  which 
deserve  notice.  The  two  hymns,  of  which  the  Rdjd 
SwANAYA,  the  son  of  Bhdvayavya,  is  the  patron  or 
deity,  record  the  munificence  of  a  Hindu  prince  to 
the  Rishi,  Dirghatamas,  and  furnish,  apparently, 
the  model  of  the  many  similar  acts  of  regal  libe- 
rality which  are  narrated  in  the  heroic  poems  and 
Purdnas,  as  well  as  of  the  family  alliances  of  royal 
and  saintly,  or  military  and  Brahmanical  races  by 
marriage,  the  daughters  of  lictjds  being  wedded  to 
holy  RisJiis.  It  also  affords  evidence  of  the  preva-

eing  wedded  to 
holy  RisJiis.  It  also  affords  evidence  of  the  preva- 
lence of  polygamy  at  this  early  date,  as  Dirgha-

INTRODUCTION.  XI

TAMAS  marries  the  ten  daughters  of  the  Raja.  It 
may  be  doubted,  however,  if  this  was  universally 
practised,  as  the  institutor  of  a  sacrifice  is  ordinarily 
associated  with  but  one  wife  at  its  celebration  ;  and 
at  the  Aswamedha,  although  four  denominations  of 
females  are  specified  as  the  women  of  the  Raja,  the 
first  wedded  is  alone  considered  to  be  the  MahisMy 
or  queen.  The  multiplicity  of  wives  may  have  been 
a  privilege  of  the  Rishis — if,  indeed,  these  two 
Hymns  be  not  compositions  of  a  later  day,  andf,  indeed,  these  two 
Hymns  be  not  compositions  of  a  later  day,  and 
foreign  to  the  earliest  purport  of  the  Vedas.  The 
same  may  be  suspected  of  the  SuMa  that  records 
the  dialogue  between  Agastya  and  Lopamudra 
(p.  174),  although  that  has  more  of  an  air  of  anti- 
quity, though  somewhat  out  of  place.  As  to  the 
two  last  verses  of  the  second  of  the  Swanaya 
Siiktas  (p.  18),  they  are  manifest  incongruities, 
although  they  also  may  be  old.  The  Hymn  to  Pitu 
(p.  192),  nutrition  or  food,  is  merely  fanciful.  The 
Hymn  to  Water,  Grass,  and  the  Sun  (p.  201),  as 
antidotes  to  the  venom  of  poisonous  creatures,  is 
somewhat  dark  and  mystical,  and  offers  various

oisonous  creatures,  is 
somewhat  dark  and  mystical,  and  offers  various 
terms  for  the  import  of  which  there  is  no  other 
authority  than  that  of  the  scholiast.  The  general 
intention  of  it  is,  however,  positively  specified  by 
competent  authority  with  which  the  text  offers 
nothing  incompatible,  and  it  expresses  notions  that 
are  familiar  still  in  popular  credence.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  two  hymns  to  the  Kapinjala,  or 
partridge,  as  a  bird  of  good  omen  (p.  31G).

A  Stlkta,  remarkable  for  its  unusual  extent  of

XU  INTRODUCTION.

fifty-two  stanzas,  and  for  the  indeterminate  appli- 
cation of  the  greater  part  of  them,  is  conceived  by 
Saya^^a  to  convey  the  principal  dogmas  of  theXU  INTRODUCTION.

fifty-two  stanzas,  and  for  the  indeterminate  appli- 
cation of  the  greater  part  of  them,  is  conceived  by 
Saya^^a  to  convey  the  principal  dogmas  of  the

them,  is  conceived  by 
Saya^^a  to  convey  the  principal  dogmas  of  the 
Vedimta  philosophy,  or  the  unity  and  universality 
of  spirit,  or  Brahma  :  according  to  the  Index,  these 
stanzas  are  addressed  to  the  Viswadevas ;  but  their 
general  bearing,  though  sometimes  darkly  denoted, 
is  the  glorification  of  the  Sun,  as  identical  with  the 
divisions  of  time,  or  with  time  itself,  and  with  the 
universe,  as  mentioned  in  the  note  (p.  126) :  all  the 
verses  of  this  Sitkia  occur  also  in  i\\Q  Atharva-Veda^ 
with  the  style  of  which  it  agrees  better  than  with 
that  of  the  Rich,  at  least  in  general.

The  most  peculiar  and  remarkable,  hoM'ever,  of 
the  hymns  contained  in  this  Asltfaka,  are  the  two

ble,  hoM'ever,  of 
the  hymns  contained  in  this  Asltfaka,  are  the  two 
of  which  the  Aswamedha,  or  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  is 
the  subject :  the  rite  as  described  in  the  Puranas 
has  been  introduced  to  English  poetry  in  the  Curse 
of  Kehama,  correctly  enough  according  to  the 
authorities  followed  by  Southey ;  but  the  main  object 
of  the  ceremony, — the  deposal  of  Indra  from  the 
throne  of  Sivarga,  and  the  elevation  of  the  sacrificer, 
after  a  hundred  celebrations,  to  that  rank,  are  fictions 
of  a  later  date,  uncountenanced  by  the  Feda  :  even 
the  doctrine  of  the  Brdhmanas,  that  the  Aswa- 
medha is  to  be  celebrated  by  a  monarch  desirous  of 
universal  dominion,  is  not  supported  by  thesea  monarch  desirous  of 
universal  dominion,  is  not  supported  by  these 
Hymns,  any  more  than  it  is  in  the  Ramayana^ 
where  it  is  nothing  more  than  the  means  of  obtain- 
ing a  son  by  the  childless  Dasaratha  :  as  enjoined 
by  the  Rig-  Veda^  the  object  of  the  rite  seems  to

INTRODUCTION.  XUl

be   no   more  than  as  usual  with    other   rites,  the 
acquiring   of  wealth   and   posterity ;   but  as  it  is 
detailed   in   the    Yajur-Vcda,   22,    26,   and   more 
particularly  in    the   Sfitras  of  Kdfyayana   {Aswa- 
medha  i — 210),  the  object  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  Rdmayana  or  posterity,  as  one  step  towards 
which  the   principal  queen,  Kausdyd,  in  the  poem,

s  one  step  towards 
which  the   principal  queen,  Kausdyd,  in  the  poem, 
is  directed  to  lie  all  night  in  closest  contact  with 
the  dead  steed  :  in  the  morning,  when  the  queen  is 
released  from  this  disgusting,  and  in  fact  impossible, 
contiguity,  a  dialogue,  as  given  in  the  Yajushy  and 
in  the  Aswamedha  section  of  the  S'atapatJia  Brdh- 
mana,  and  as  explained  in  the  Sutras,  takes  place 
between  the  queen  and  the  females  accompanying  or 
attendant  upon  her,  and  the  principal  priests,  which, 
though  brief,  is  in  the  highest  degree  both  silly  and 
obscene.     We   find  no  vestige,   liowever,   of  these 
revolting  impurities  in  the  Ricj-  Veda,  although  it  isr,   of  these 
revolting  impurities  in  the  Ricj-  Veda,  although  it  is 
authority  for  practices  sufficiently  coarse,  and  such  as 
respectable  Hindus  of  the  present  generation  will 
find  it  difficult  to  credit  as  forming  a  part  of  the 
uncreated  revelations  of  Brahma  :  other  particulai-s 
which  are  found  in  the  Sutras,  and  in  the  Rinnd- 
yana  and  Mahdhharata^  as  the  infinite  nmltiplication 
of  victims,  have  no  warrant  from  our  text.    That  the 
horse   is   to    be    actually  immolated  admits  of  no 
question  ;  that  the  body  was  cut  up  into  fragments  is 
also  clear  (pp.  IIG,  119) ;  that  these  fragments  were 
dressed,  partly  boiled,  and    partly  roasted,  is  also 
indisputable  (p.

dressed,  partly  boiled,  and    partly  roasted,  is  also 
indisputable  (p.  117);  and  although  the  expressions 
may  be   differently  understood,  yet  there  is  little

XIV  INTRODUCTION.

reason  to  doubt  that  part  of  the  flesh  was  eaten  by 
the  assistants  (p.  117),  part  presented  as  a  burnt- 
offerinjr  to  the  ffods :  the  second  of  the  two  Suktas 
relating  to  the  same  sacrifice,  deals  less  in  matters 
of  fact  than  the  first,  and  is  more  or  less  mystical, 
but  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  is  incompatible  with 
an  actual  immolation,  and  no  reasonable  doubt  can 
be  entertained  that  the  early  ritual  of  the  Hindus 
did  authorize  the  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  the  detailsl  of  the  Hindus 
did  authorize  the  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  the  details 
and  objects  of  which  were  very  soon  grossly  ampli- 
fied and  distorted  :  at  the  same  time  it  is  to  be 
remarked  that  these  two  hymns  are  the  only  ones 
in  the  Rich  that  relate  especially  to  the  subject; 
from  which  it  miglit  be  inferred  that  they  belong  to 
a  different  period,  and  that  the  rite  was  falling  or 
bad  fallen  into  disuse,  although  it  may  have  been 
revived  subsequently  in  the  time  of  the  Siitras  and 
of  the  heroic  poems,  in  which  the  Aswamedha  of 
the  MahdUiarata  takes  a  middle  place,  being  in 
various  essentials,  particularly  the  part  played  by 
Draupai  1,  the  same  ceremony  as  that  of  the  Rama-

part  played  by 
Draupai  1,  the  same  ceremony  as  that  of  the  Rama- 
yana,  whilst  in  others,  as  in  the  guardianship  of  the 
horse  by  Arjuna,  it  is  that  of  the  Padma  and  other 
Furanas  {Mahdbh.  Aswamedlia  Parva).  As  the 
solemnity  appears  in  the  Rich,  it  bears  a  less  poetical, 
a  more  barbaric  character,  and  it  may  have  been  a 
relic  of  an  aute-Vaidik  period,  imported  from  some 
foreign  region,  possibly  from  Scythia,  where  animal 
victims,  and  especially  horses,  were  commonly  sacri- 
ficed (Herod.  IV.  71) ;  the  latter  were  also  offered 
by  the  Massagetai  to  the  Sun  {Ibid.  I.  216) ;  and  in

INTRODUCTION.  XV

the  second  Aswamedhik  Hymn  of  the  Rich  there

d  in

INTRODUCTION.  XVINTRODUCTION.  XV

the  second  Aswamedhik  Hymn  of  the  Rich  there

d  in

INTRODUCTION.  XV

the  second  Aswamedhik  Hymn  of  the  Rich  there 
are  several  indications  that  the  victim  was  especially 
consecrated  to  the  solar  deity  :  however  this  may  be, 
the  rite,  as  it  appears  in  the  Rig- Veda,  can  scarcely 
be  considered  as  constituting  an  integral  element  of 
the  archaic  system  of  Hindu  worship,  although  its 
recognition  at  all  is  significant  of  extant  barbarism. 
That  this  was  not  the  condition  of  the  Hindus  at 
the  date  of  the  composition  of  the  greater  portion 
of  the  Vedas,  as  formerly  inferred,  is  corroborated 
by   the   various    scattered   and    incidental   notices 
which  are  dispersed  through  this  Asht'aka  also  :  the

dental   notices 
which  are  dispersed  through  this  Asht'aka  also  :  the 
question  of  the  institution  of  caste  is  still  left  un- 
decided, although  the  live  classes  of  beings  who  are 
frequently  mentioned,  is  invariably  explained  by  the 
commentators   to  denote  the  four  castes,  and  the 
barbarians  as  the  fifth.     We  have  also  something 
very  like   a   specification   of  Brahmans,    as   those 
acquainted   with   the    forms   of  speech    or  as   the 
(p.  142)  appropriate  repeaters  of  hymns.     The  ex- 
pressions, however,   do  not  indicate  any  exclusive 
privilege.     The  term  Kshatriya  does  not  occur  in 
this  book,  and  there  are  indications  of  Rdjds  hostilenot  occur  in 
this  book,  and  there  are  indications  of  Rdjds  hostile 
to  the  ritual  who  would  not,  therefore,  have  be- 
longed to  the  recognized  military  order.     No  such 
word  as  Sddra  is  used,  although,  as  in  the  first  book, 
the  Aryas  and  Dasyus  are  contrasted.     It  looks, 
also,  as  if  it  was  intended  to  designate  the  latter  as 
especially  black-complexioned  (pp.  35,  258).     They 
were  not,  however,  so  barbarous  but  that  they  were 
assembled  in  towns  or  cities,  of  which,  as  well  as  of

XVI  INTRODUCTION.

the  cities  of  the  Asuras,  Indra  is  repeatedly  repre- 
sented as  the  destroyer  (pp.  167,  258) :  if  that  was 
the  <'ase,  the  Aryan  were  still  more  likely  to  be

8) :  if  that  was 
the  <'ase,  the  Aryan  were  still  more  likely  to  be 
similarly  located,  of  which  we  have  also  mention 
(p.  61).  In  their  towns  or  cities  we  find  existing 
the  arts,  sciences,  institutes,  and  vices  of  civilized  life> 
golden  ornaments,  coats  of  mail,  weapons  of  offence^ 
the  use  of  the  precious  metals  (p.  17),  of  musical 
instruments,  the  fabrication  of  cars,  and  the  employ- 
ment of  the  needle  (p.  283) ;  and  although  we  have 
not  the  allusions  to  traders  by  sea  that  occur  in  the 
first  Ashiaka,  yet  the  unequivocal  notices  and  men- 
tion of  the  ocean,  are  so  frequent  and  precise  as  to 
prove  beyond  doubt  its  being  familiarly  known  andand  precise  as  to 
prove  beyond  doubt  its  being  familiarly  known  and 
occasionally  navigated :  we  have  also  the  know- 
ledge of  drugs  and  antidotes,  tlie  practice  of  medi- 
cine, and  computation  of  the  divisions  of  time  to  a 
minute  extent,  including  re]>eated  allusions  to  the 
seventh  season,  or  intercalary  month  (pp.  8,  131). 
We  have  mention,  not  only  o^  Rajas,  but  of  envoys 
and  heralds,  of  travellers,  and  of  Sarais,  or  places 
provided  for  their  refreshment:  it  is  true  that  in 
the  passage  in  which  they  are  named  (p.  151), 
the  refreshments  are  said  to  be  provided  for  the 
Maruts,  or  the  winds ;  but  in  this,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  cities  of  the  Asuras,  the  notion  must  have

as  in  the  case 
of  the  cities  of  the  Asuras,  the  notion  must  have 
been  derived  from  what  really  existed  :  PrapatJuis, 
or  cholfris,  were  not  likely  to  be  pure  mythological 
inventions  ;  those  for  the  Maruts  must  have  had  their 
prototypes  on  earth.  Then  with  regard  to  the  laws  of 
property,  it  appears,  although  not  very  perspicuously

INTRODUCTION.  XVll

described,  that  daugliters  liad  claims  to  a  share  of 
the  paternal  inheritance  (p.  12) :  that  women  took 
part  in  sacrifices,  we  have  already  seen,  and  it  seems 
that  they  appeared  abroad  in  public  (pp.  150 — 153) : 
of  some  of  the  vices  of  the  civilized  state,  we  have 
proofs  in  the  notice  of  common  women  (p.  153),  ofd  state,  we  have 
proofs  in  the  notice  of  common  women  (p.  153),  of 
secret  births,  and  by  inference  of  the  abandonment  of 
new-born  children  (p.  281) ;  thieves  are  frequently 
mentioned  :  debts  and  debtors  are  adverted  to  more 
than  once,  and  although  the  idea  is   complicated 
with    that    of    moral    obligations,    yet   debt   must 
orio'inate   in   fact  before   it  becomes  a  figure:  re- 
verses  of  fortune  and   being   reduced    to    poverty 
from  a  state  of  opulence,  form  the  burden  of  more 
than    one    Sukta    (pp.    278 — 281);  all    these   par- 
ticulars, although   they  are   only  briefly  and    inci- 
dentally thrown  out,  chiefly  by  way  of  conip? risen

iefly  and    inci- 
dentally thrown  out,  chiefly  by  way  of  conip? risen 
or    illustration,    render    it    indisputable    that    the 
Hindus  of  the  Vaidik  era  even  had  attained  to  an 
advanced  stage  of  civilization,  little  if  at  all  differing 
from  that  in  which  they  were  found  by  the  Greeks 
at  Alexander's  invasion,  although  no  doubt  they  had 
not  spread  so  far  to   the  east,    and    were  located 
chiefly  in  the  Punjab  and  along  the  Indus  :  the  same 
advanced  state  of  civilization  may  be  inferred  from 
the  degree  of  i)erfection  to  which  the  grammatical 
construction  of  the  language  had  been  brought,  and 
still  more  from   the  elaborate  system   of  metrical

been  brought,  and 
still  more  from   the  elaborate  system   of  metrical 
composition  of  which  so  many  examples  occur,  and 
of  which  the  Suktas  attributed  to  the  Rislii  Paruch- 
CHEPA  (pp.19 — 58)  afford  such  remarkable  instances.

Xvili  INTRODUCTION.Xvili  INTRODUCTION.

In  translating  the  text  of  the  second  AsMaka,  the 
same  principle  has  been  adhered  to  that  was  adopted 
for  the  translation  of  the  first,  and  as  close  a  con- 
formity to  the  text  as  possible  has  been  aimed  at, 
without  any  attempt  to  give  the  translation  a 
poetical  or  rhetorical  turn :  to  me  the  verses  of  the 
Veda,  except  in  their  rhythm,  and  in  a  few  rare 
passages,  appear  singularly  prosaic  for  so  early  an

in  a  few  rare 
passages,  appear  singularly  prosaic  for  so  early  an 
era  as  that  of  their  probable  composition,  and  at 
any  rate  their  chief  value  lies  not  in  their  fancy  but 
in  their  facts,  social  and  religious :  in  translating 
the  text,  the  gloss  of  Say  ana  A  chary  a  has  been 
invariably  consulted  and  almost  as  invariably  faith- 
fully followed,  as  furnishing  the  safest  guide  through 
the  intricacies  and  obscurities  of  the  text :  occasion- 
ally, but  upon  the  strongest  grounds  only,  has  the 
interpretation  of  this  very  able  scholiast  been  ques- 
tioned, and  where  his  assistance  even  has  failed  to 
remove  all  uncertainty,  the  passage  has  been  ordi-even  has  failed  to 
remove  all  uncertainty,  the  passage  has  been  ordi- 
narily cited  in  the  annotations,  to  enable  the  student 
to  form  an  independent  conclusion  :  although  I 
cannot  always  concur  in  M.  Langlois'  version  of  the 
text,  yet  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  refer  to  his 
translation,  and  I  have  also  adverted  to  Professor 
Benfey's  translation  of  those  passages  of  the  Rich, 
which  are  repeated  in  the  Sama-Veda,  as  well  as  to 
Mahidharas  commentary  on  similar  parallel  verses 
in  the  Vajasaneyi  Sanhitd  of  the  Yajush,  edited 
by  Professor  Weber ;  an  easy  reference  to  such  pas- 
sages being  now  placed  within  our  reach  by  the 
excellent  comparative  Index  of  the  Hymns  of  the

our  reach  by  the 
excellent  comparative  Index  of  the  Hymns  of  the

INTRODUCTION.  xix

four  Vedas,  compiled  by  Mr.  Whitney,  and  pub- 
lished in  the  second  volume  of  the  Indische  Studicn 
of  Dr.  Weber.  With  these  and  other  appliances, 
the  task  of  translation  has  been  in  some  deirree 
facilitated,  although  I  cannot  pretend  to  have  alw'ays 
contended  successfully  with  the  inherent  difficulties 
of  the  original ;  a  brief  notice  of  which  may  possibly 
contribute  to  a  candid  appreciation  of  the  arduous- 
ness  of  the  undertaking,  and  may  be  of  some  service 
to  students  of  the  text.

It  may  be  doubted  if  the  impediments  to  a  right 
understanding  of  the  text  of  the  Veda  have  beenIt  may  be  doubted  if  the  impediments  to  a  right 
understanding  of  the  text  of  the  Veda  have  been

ediments  to  a  right 
understanding  of  the  text  of  the  Veda  have  been 
accurately  conceived  of,  especially  when  they  are 
confined  to  peculiarities  ci  grammatical  construction, 
or  the  use  of  words  not  found  in  other  works,  or 
employed  in  an  unusual  acceptation.  The  far 
greater  portion  of  Vaidik  grammar  is  as  systematic 
as  that  of  the  laws  of  Mmiu,  and  the  exceptions, 
when  regular,  as  specified  in  the  sketch  of  the 
grammar  of  the  Vedas,  which  I  have  given  in  the 
second  edition  of  the  Sanscrit  grammar,  soon  be- 
come familiar ;  the  only  real  difficulty  on  this  head 
arises  from  the  disregard  of  all  grammar,  and  the 
arbitrary  substitution  of  one  case  or  number  of  a

grammar,  and  the 
arbitrary  substitution  of  one  case  or  number  of  a 
noun,  or  person  and  tense  of  a  verb  for  another,  as 
specified  by  Pdnini,  and  instances  of  which  are 
frequent,  as  occasionally  pointed  out  in  the  notes  of 
the  following  pages.  With  respect  to  unusual 
words,  there  are  no  doubt  a  great  number  employed 
in  the  Vpda,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  lexicographic 
significations  given  by  the  commentators  may  be

XX  INTRODUCTION.

sometimes  questionable,  sometimes  contradictory; 
but  from  what  other  authority  can  a  satisfactory 
interpretation  be  derived?     It  has  been  supposed 
that  a  careful  collation  of  all  the  passages  in  whichbeen  supposed 
that  a  careful  collation  of  all  the  passages  in  which 
such  words  occur  might  lead  to  a  consistent  and 
indisputable  interpretation,  but  this  assumes   that 
they  have  always  been  employed  with  precision  and 
uniformity  by  the  original  authors,  a  conclusion  that 
would  scarcely  be  tenable  even  if  the  author  were 
one  individual,  and  utterly  untenable,  when,  as  is 
the  case  with  the  SiiMas,  the  authors  are  indefinitely 
numerous :    it   is  very  injprobable,   therefore,  that 
even  such  collation  would  remove  all  perplexity  on 
this  account,  although  it  might  occasionally  do  so ; 
at  any  rate,  such  a  concordance  has  still  to  be  esta-

ally  do  so ; 
at  any  rate,  such  a  concordance  has  still  to  be  esta- 
blished, and  until  it  is  effected,  we  may  be  satisfied 
with  the  interpretations  given  us  by  the  most  distin- 
guished native  scholars,  availing  themselves  of  all  the 
Vaidik  learning  that  had  preceded  them,  or  that  was 
contemporary  with  them,  and  inheriting  no  incon- 
siderable assistance  from  traditional  explanation,  pre- 
served by  the  professional  teachers  of  the  Vedas.

Admitting,  however,  that  the  correct  under- 
standing of  single  terms  may  be  very  much  pro- 
moted by  the  comparison  of  all  the  passages  in 
which  they  are  met  with,  a  very  small  advance  miU 
have  been  effected  towards  surmounting  the  diflii-

small  advance  miU 
have  been  effected  towards  surmounting  the  diflii- 
culty  of  translation  even  as  respects  words  alone. 
The  Sanscrit  scholar,  with  or  without  such  help, 
meeting  with  the  words  in  their  proper  places,  and 
in  connection  with  others,  may  readily  comprehend

INTRODUCTION.  XXIINTRODUCTION.  XXI

their  purport,  but  he  will  not  therefore  be  able  to 
render  it  equally  comprehensible  to  others,  from  the 
want  of  equivalents  in  his  own  language,  or  from 
those  which  are  available  failing  to  convey  the  same 
ideas :  kavi,  vipra,  vidvat^  medhavin,  chikitivah,  and 
many  others,  mean  wise,  intelligent,  knowing;  but 
we  cannot  make  use  of  these  adjectives  in  the  way

ent,  knowing;  but 
we  cannot  make  use  of  these  adjectives  in  the  way 
in  which  the  original   terms  are   employed,  more 
frequently   without    substantives  than  with   them  ; 
becoming  appellative   titles,  or   names :  still  more 
difficult  is  it  to  devise  equivalents  for   compound 
terms,  and  especially  those  which  it  is  sometimes 
doubtful  how  to  deal  with,  and  whether  to  consider 
them  as  epithets  or  proper  names,  more  particularly 
when  they  may,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Scholiasts,  be 
variously  explained :  thus,  S'atakratu  is  an  appella- 
tive epithet  of  Indra,  implying  either,  one  to  whom 
many  sacrifices  are  offered ;  one  who  is  the  insti- 
gator of  many  sacred  rites ;  or  one  by  whom  many

who  is  the  insti- 
gator of  many  sacred  rites ;  or  one  by  whom  many 
great  actions  have  been  performed.     Again,  Jatave- 
das  is  sometimes  a  name,  sometimes  an  epithet  of 
Agni  ;  it  may  mean,  according  to  the  commentators, 
he  by  whom  knowledge  was  acquired  at  his  birth ; 
he  bv  whom  all  that  has  been  born  is  known ;  he 
who  is  known  to  be  one  with  all  beings;  or  he  from 
or   by    whom    all  wealth    is  generated  :  these    are 
awkward    terms   to    encounter,    not   because    they 
cannot  be  comprehended,  but  because,  unless  given 
untranslated    as    proper  names,  they  can  only  be 
parenthetically   rendered,  at   least  in   English  andhey  can  only  be 
parenthetically   rendered,  at   least  in   English  and 
in   French;  the   facility   of  forming  compounds  in 
VOL.  11.  c

XXll  INTRODUCTION.

German,  and  the  hardihood  of  German  translators, 
give  that  language  an  advantage  in  these  respects.

Still,  however,  these  are  but  slight  obstacles,  and 
will  be  overcome  in  proportion  to  the  skill  of  the 
translator,  and  his  command  of  his  own  language, 
as  well  as  of  that  from  which  he  translates:  it  may 
not  be  always  possible  to  devise  unexceptionable 
and  felicitous  equivalents  for  such  expressions,  but 
they  may  be  so  rendered  as  to  convey  with  some 
degree  of  accuracy  the  substance  of  the  text ;  the

convey  with  some 
degree  of  accuracy  the  substance  of  the  text ;  the 
more  unmanageable  difficulties  are  those  which  are 
utterly  insuperable  except  by  guess  :  they  are  not 
the  perplexities  of  commission,  but  of  omission :  not 
the  words  or  phrases  tliat  are  given,  but  those  that 
are  left  out :  the  constant  recurrence  of  the  abuse 
of  ellipsis  and  metonymy,  requiring  not  only  words, 
but  sometimes  sentences,  to  be  supplied  by  comment 
or  conjecture,  before  any  definite  meaning  can  be 
given  to  the  expressions  that  occur : — thus,  as  akeady 
observed,  the  substantive  is  very  often  omitted  and 
the  adjective  does  double  duty :  the  first  verse  often  omitted  and 
the  adjective  does  double  duty :  the  first  verse  of 
the  second  AsMaka  offers  an  example  :  it  begins — 
raghu-manyavah — "  Oh  ye  of  little  wrath ;"  "  Ye  who 
are  gentle,  mild-tempered  ;"  but  who  they  are  that 
are  so  saluted,  does  not  appear.  The  Scholiast  says, 
mild-tempered  priests,  and  it  would  not  be  easy  to 
suggest  a  preferable  application  of  the  epithet, 
although  if  not  traditional  it  is  only  conjectural. 
It  may  not  always  require  extraordinary  ingenuity 
to  hit  upon  what  is  intended  by  such  elliptical  ex- 
pressions from  correlative    terms  or  context ;  but

INTRODUCTION.  XXlll

such  a  mode  of  interpretation  by  European  scholars,

RODUCTION.  XXlll

such  a  mode  of  interpretation  by  European  scholars, 
whose  ordinary  train  of  thinking  runs  in  a  very 
diOerent  channel  from  that  of  Indian  scholarsliip, 
can  scarcely  claim  equal  authority  with  the  latter : 
it  may  be  happier  ;  it  may  be  more  rational: — still 
It  is  not  that  which  has  been  accepted  for  centuries 
by  critics  of  indisputable  learning  in  their  own 
department  of  knowledge.

As  many  instances  of  this  elliptical  conatruction 
have  been  given  in  the  notes  of  both  this  and  the 
former  volume,  a  few  additional  instances  will 
here  be  sufficient : — thus,  (p.  301,  v.  9)  we  have 
*'the  grandson  of  the  waters  has  ascended  above301,  v.  9)  we  have 
*'the  grandson  of  the  waters  has  ascended  above 
the  crooked  — — ;"  "  the  broad  and  golden — ■■ — 
spread  around."  What  would  the  European  scholar 
do  here  without  the  Scholiast  ?  He  might,  perhaps, 
suspect  that  the  term  crooked,  curved,  or  bent,  or, 
as  here  explained,  crooked-going,  tortuous,  might 
apply  to  the  clouds,  but  he  would  hesitate  as  to  what 
he  should  attach  the  other  epithets  to,  and  the 
original  author  alone  could  say  with  confidence  that 
he  meant  'rivers,''  which  thenceforward  became  the 
traditional  and  admitted  explanation,  and  is,  accor- 
dingly, so  supplied  by  the  Scholiast.

The  object  as  well  as  the  subject  is  very  frequently 
omitted.

liast.

The  object  as  well  as  the  subject  is  very  frequently 
omitted.     Thus  we  have  (p.  29,  v.  6),  "  thou  re-

movest  all of  men  ; "  according  to  the  Scholiast,

"the  sins  of  men:"  again  (p.   33,   v.   4),    "thou

cattest   to    pieces;"    where   something   like

*  enemies '  has  to  be  supplied  :  and   (in  p.  2,  v.  3) 
Indba   and    Parvata    are   solicited    "  to   whet  or

XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

sharpen   our   ; "    a    European    commentator

would  most  probably  fill  up  the  blank  with  ' spears 
or  swords  :'  we  are  indebted  to  the  native  Scholiast 
for  the  mooe  appropriate  accusative,  ' intellects*

An  equally  frequent  ellipse  is  that  of  the  verb,  as 
(p.  6,  V.

cts*

An  equally  frequent  ellipse  is  that  of  the  verb,  as 
(p.  6,  V.  14)  "may  our  offerings  be  acceptable  to  the

gods,  and  with  both," — that  is,  according  to

Sdi/ana,  "  maj/  tliey  he  pleased  or  profit'iated "  by  both 
"our  offerings  and  praises."  Again  (p.  20,  v.  2),  "with

prayers  by  the   priests  thee"  requiresSdi/ana,  "  maj/  tliey  he  pleased  or  profit'iated "  by  both 
"our  offerings  and  praises."  Again  (p.  20,  v.  2),  "with

prayers  by  the   priests  thee"  requires

something  like  * rec?'^^c? '  and  ^ adore''  to  make  any 
sense  at  all :    again   (p.  25,   v.   3),    "  Agni   having

his   abode   on    high    places to    pious   rites,"

obviously  requires  'comes;'  and  "those,  who,  de- 
siring his  friendship the  lord  of  a  city

with  good  government "  (p.  165,  v.  10),  is  made  in- 
telligible by  the  commentator's  adding,  ^conciliate*

10),  is  made  in- 
telligible by  the  commentator's  adding,  ^conciliate* 
the  lord  of  a  city  who  'administers*  good  govern- 
ment ;  instances  of  this  kind  are  innumerable.

Another  source  of  perplexity  which  is  not  un- 
common, and  which  is  also  a  sort  of  ellipse,  is  the 
abuse  of  metonymy:  thus,  we  have  (p.  303,  v.  1) 
"  This  libation  consists  of  the  cow,  and  has  been 
filtered  by  the  sheep."  A  European  translator 
might  suspect  that  for  cow,  we  should  read,  the 
products  of  the  cow — milk  and  butter,  but  he  ought 
to  be  thankful  to  the  commentator  for  explaining 
to  him  that  the  Soma  juice  was  cleansed  by  being 
jtassed  through  a  filter  made  of  the  wool  of  the  sheep,

d  by  being 
jtassed  through  a  filter  made  of  the  wool  of  the  sheep, 
the  animal  being  here  put  for  his  skin.

To  these  sources  of  difficulty  others  less  peculiar,

INTRODUCTION.  XXVTo  these  sources  of  difficulty  others  less  peculiar,

INTRODUCTION.  XXV

but  for  the  elucidation  of  which  an  authentic  glosa 
is  no  less  desirable,  are  to  be  added  ;  such  as  those 
of  involved  and  complex  construction,  such  as  is 
common  in  all  metrical  compositions  ;  and  the  use 
of  terms  of  a  figurative  and  allegorical  injport.  In 
this  class  of  words,  the  cow  makes  a  great  figure, 
and  we  have  typified  by  her  a  variety  of  persons  and 
things  bestowing  benefits,  in  like  manner  as  she 
yields  milk ;  as  the  earth,  the  institutor  of  a  sacrifice

r  as  she 
yields  milk ;  as  the  earth,  the  institutor  of  a  sacrifice 
\yith  his  wife,  and  especially  the  clouds,  that  shed 
rain :  withholding  which,  they  are  fabled,  as  the 
cows  of  the  saintly  Amjirasos,  to  have  been  stolen 
by  an  Asura  and  rescued  by  Indra.  These,  how- 
ever, are  nothing  more  than  usual  in  mythological 
writings,  and  are  by  no  means  so  embarrassing  as 
the  elliptical  omission  of  words  indispensable  to  a 
complete  sentence  and  perfect  signification,  origina- 
ting, no  doubt,  in  the  method  by  which  the  hymns 
of  the  Veda  were  first  communicated  to  the  disciples 
of  the  teacher,  and  were  afterwards  transmitted, 
— oral  communication ;  it  being  easy  for  the  authorards  transmitted, 
— oral  communication ;  it  being  easy  for  the  author 
himself  to  supply  the  deficient  words  or  sentences, 
and  convey  to  his  auditors  all  that  he  would  have 
them  understand.  How  far  his  lecture  and  ampli- 
fication may  have  been  preserved  uncorrupted 
through  successive  generations  until  they  reached 
Ydska,  and  eventually  Saymia,  may  be  reasonably 
liable  to  question,  but  that  the  explanations  of  these 
Scholiasts  were  not  arbitrary,  but  were  such  as  had 
been  established  by  the  practice  of  preceding  schools. 
and  were  generally   current  at  their  several  eras,

XXVi  INTRODUCTION.

can  admit  of  no  doubt.  Even  if  it  were  not  so,

XXVi  INTRODUCTION.

can  admit  of  no  doubt.  Even  if  it  were  not  so, 
their  undeniable  learning  and  their  sympathy  with 
tlie  views  and  feelings  of  their  countrymen,  amongst 
whom  were  the  original  authors  and  expounders  of 
the  Sftktas,  must  give  a  weight  to  their  authority 
which  no  European  scholar,  however  profound  his 
knowledge  of  Sanscrit  or  of  the  Vedas,  can,  in  my 
opinion,  be  entitled  to  claim.

As  a  concluding  specimen  of  some  of  the  dif- 
iiculties  of  our  task,  I  subjoin  the  version  of  a 
stanza  in  which  we  have  an  opportunity  of  comparing- 
the  interpretation  given  by  different  translators  of 
an  easy  passage, — it  forms  the  burden  of  several 
SuJctas  (p.  236,  v.an  easy  passage, — it  forms  the  burden  of  several 
SuJctas  (p.  236,  v.  11):  "  Grant,  Agni,  to  the  offerer 
of  the  oblation,  the  earth,  the  bestower  of  cattle, 
the  (means)  of  many  (pious)  rites,  such  that  it  may 
be  perpetual :  may  there  be  sons  and  grandsons 
born  in  our  race,  and  may  thy  good-will  ever  be 
upon  us."  M.  Langlois  renders  it— "0  Agni,  en 
echauge  de  nos  invocations,  fais  que  la  terre  soit  a 
jamais  liberale  pour  nous,  et  feconde  en  troupeaux : 
que  nous  ayons  une  belle  lignee,  d'enfans  et  de  petits 
enfans  :  0  Agni,  que  ta  bonte  soit  avec  nous  "  (vol.  i. 
p.  542).  Mr.  Stevenson's  translation  of  the  same 
stansa  repeated  in  the  Sama-Veda  (p.  16)  has—

anslation  of  the  same 
stansa  repeated  in  the  Sama-Veda  (p.  16)  has— 
"  0  Agni,  grant  to  us,  the  performers  of  sacrifice, 
those  supplies  by  which  many  sacred  rites  can 
be  performed,  and  cows  which  remain  always  pro- 
fitable. 0  Agni,  may  we  have  sons  and  grandsons, 
the  fathers  of  a  numerous  race,  and  may  thy  favour- 
able regards  be  ever  towards  uf*."     Professor  Benfey

INTRODUCTION.  XXVll

translates  the  same  stanza  thns :-—  "The  foocl,0  Agni;, 
the  much-effecting  gift  of  the  cow,  make  everlasting 
to  him  who  implores  you.  To  us  may  there  be  a 
son — may  there  be  a  wide-branching  name  to  us. 
May  this  be,  0  Agni,  the  fruit  of  thy  kindness  to 
us"  (p.  217,  3rd  decade,  4th  v.).

gni,  the  fruit  of  thy  kindness  to 
us"  (p.  217,  3rd  decade,  4th  v.).  The  original  is, 
"  Die  Speis',  o  Agni,  der  Kuh  viel-werk'ge  Spende 
mach  ewigdauernd  dera,  der  zu  dir  flehet :  uns  sei 
ein  Sohn,  ein  weitverzweigter  Name  uns :  diess  sei, 
o  Agni,  deiner  Gnade  Frucht  uns."The  original  text  is  lldm  Ague  purudansam 
sanim  goh  saswattamam  havamdndya  sadliw — Sydn-nah 
siinustanayo  vijdvd  Agne  sd  te  sumatir-ikutwasmS.

The  first  word,  lid,  is  tlie  subject  of  a  different 
explanation.      M.   Langlois  and  myself  render  it

*  earth,'  following  Sdi/ana,  who  explains  it  here 
bhumi.  Mr.  Stevenson  renders  it  'su])p]ies,'  and 
Professor  Benfey  '  food,'  a  meaning  which  the  word

'su])p]ies,'  and 
Professor  Benfey  '  food,'  a  meaning  which  the  word 
sometimes  bears :  a  more  doubtful  term  is  puru^ 
dansam,  explained,  many-acting,  hahu-carmdnam,  or 
puru,  much,  many,  and  dcmsas,  act,  usually  implying 
an  act  of  worship.  Mr.  Stevenson  understands  it  in 
this  sense,  *  by  which  many  sacred  rites  can  be  per- 
form^ed.'     M.  Langlois  translates  it  more  directly,

*  liberal,'  '  bountiful.'  Professor  Benfey  apparently 
detaches  it  from  Ud,  and  applies  it  to  sanim,  gift, 
distribution,  whilst  Sdyanu  considers  sanim  an 
epithet  also  of  lid,  praddtri,  the  liberal  donor,  i.  e., 
of  cattle,  as  he  also  has  it,  gavdfn  praddtrim  lldm.

donor,  i.  e., 
of  cattle,  as  he  also  has  it,  gavdfn  praddtrim  lldm. 
The  sense  of  the  French  version  is  to  the  same 
purport ;  whilst   Stevenson  puts  goh  into  the  ac-

XXVIU  INTRODUCTION.

ciisative,  '  grant  to  us  cows.'  Benfey  seems  to  put 
the  two  nouns  in  apposition  :  '  food,  the  gift  of  the 
cow  : '  the  meaning  of  the  next  word,  mswattamam, 
most  lastino-,  is  concurred  in  bv  all,  but  its  con- 
nection  varies;  I  have  taken  it  adverbially  after 
Sayafia,  chiraJccilam  yatlid  bhavati  tafha  sdd/ia,  'so 
grant  that  it  (the  gift  of  the  earth)  endure  for  a 
long  time.'  M,  Langlois'  a  jamais,  is  not  fur  from 
the  same,  although  he  puts  it  in  relation  to  the 
earth.not  fur  from 
the  same,  although  he  puts  it  in  relation  to  the 
earth.  Stevenson  treats  it  as  an  epithet  of  (jo/t^ 
*  cows  always  profitable/  which  it  can  scarcely  be, 
as  it  is  in  the  singular  accusative,  and  either  mascu- 
line or  neuter,  whilst  (/oh  is  the  feminine  genitive. 
It  seems  somewhat  doubtful  whether  Benfey's 
ewigdauernd  ?i\)\A]Q%  to  Speise  or  to  Spcnde :  it  might 
be  the  adjective  of  the  latter,  sanim;  but  the  Sanscrit 
could  not  agree  with  Ildm.  Ilavamdncnia  may 
signify,  '  to  the  offerer  of  the  oblation,'  or  '  to  the 
invoker  of  Agni ;'  scarcely,  '  en  echange  de  nos 
invocations,'  nor  '  him  who  prays  to  or  implores,' 
although  in  substance  not  very  different.

ho  prays  to  or  implores,' 
although  in  substance  not  very  different.

In  the  second  half  of  the  verse  the  term  tanaya 
may  admit  of  some  difference  of  meaning,  although 
when  associated  with  puira  or  simuh^  a  son,  it  is 
commonly  explained,  grandson :  SdyancHs  expla- 
nation is  somewhat  equivocal ;  he  has  santdnasya 
vistdrayitd.  '  an  extender  of  offspring,'  which  may 
be  an  epithet  of  sunuli ;  at  the  same  time  it  is  not 
an  incompatible  synonyme  of  grandson,  and  that  has 
been  adopted  in  three  of  the  translations ;  Benfey 
apparently  understands  it  somewhat  differently,  or

INTRODUCTION.  Xxi^

*  wide-branching,'  as  an  epithet  of  tlie  next  word,

RODUCTION.  Xxi^

*  wide-branching,'  as  an  epithet  of  tlie  next  word, 
vijdvci,  an  unusual  term,  but  scarcely  equivalent  to*  wide-branching,'  as  an  epithet  of  tlie  next  word,

RODUCTION.  Xxi^

*  wide-branching,'  as  an  epithet  of  tlie  next  word, 
vijdvci,  an  unusual  term,  but  scarcely  equivalent  to

*  name :'  the  commentator  expounds  it  here,  putra 
pautradi  riipena  sic  ay  am  jay  ate,  *  he  who  is  born 
himself,  in  the  form  of  sons  and  grandsons,'  that  is, 
a  continuer  of  the  race,  an  epithet  of  tanayah.  In 
a  repetition  of  the  same  stanza  at  the  end  of  the 
seventh  Siikta  of  the  next  book,  Sayana  alters  his 
exposition,  and  attaches  vijcivd  to  sumatih,  '  good- 
will, favour,'  considering  it  as  synonymous  with 
abandhyd,  not  barren — may  thy  good-will  ever  be 
productive  (of  benefits)  to  us;  but  the  construction

od-will  ever  be 
productive  (of  benefits)  to  us;  but  the  construction 
of  the  sentence  is  somewhat  opposed  to  this  inter- 
pretation. The  several  translators  agree  tolerably 
well  in  the  close ;  but  their  discrepancies  in  a 
passage  of  less  than  ordinary  perplexity  may  be 
considered  as  bearing  witness  to  the  utility  or  even 
to  the  necessity  of  a  competent  interpreter,  such  as 
we  have  in  Say  ana  Achchya,  although  he  may  not 
be  infallible :  at  any  rate  1  gratefully  acknowledge 
the  value  of  his  assistance,  and  without  it  I  should 
not  have  ventured  to  attempt  a  translation  of  the 
Rig-  Veda.

H.  H.  WILSON.

London,  \lth  October,  1854.

VOL.  II.

ERRATA.

H.  H.  WILSON.

London,  \lth  October,  1854.

VOL.  II.

ERRATA.

Page      3,  note  (c),  for  'Kakshivat,'

5,    „    (d),  „  'astvamedhu,'

7,    „     (c),  „  'comment,'

{b),  „  'Sindhan,'

{b),  ,,    Ariddyaso*

(a),  „   'ajasd,'

(c),  „  'takkaviye,'

(b),  „   'Pardnas/

(b),  ,,   'Jarundh,'

(d),  „  'samohasd,'

(d),  „   ' Ekasminanevd,'

read

17,

18.

21.

47,

63.{b),  ,,    Ariddyaso*

(a),  „   'ajasd,'

(c),  „  'takkaviye,'

(b),  „   'Pardnas/

(b),  ,,   'Jarundh,'

(d),  „  'samohasd,'

(d),  „   ' Ekasminanevd,'

read

17,

18.

21.

47,

63.

69. 
106, 
106. 
112,    „     (a),  .,   'vdydm;

137,  V.  30.       „   'obsequeal'  ,,

138,  delQ  reference  («),  and  for  (5)  read 
234,  note  {d),  for  'bhujaniyastwam,'  read

297,  „     (b).  „  'Soma,'

298,  „     {b),  ,.  'sicutmd,'  „

Kakshivat.' 
aswamedha.' 
'commentator.' 
Sindhau.' 
Aridhdyaso.' 
'ojasd.' 
takwaviye,' 
Purdnas.'

edha.' 
'commentator.' 
Sindhau.' 
Aridhdyaso.' 
'ojasd.' 
takwaviye,' 
Purdnas.' 
'Jaranah.' 
samokasd.' 
'  Ekasminneva.' 
'vdyum.' 
obsequial.' 
(a).

bhajaniyastwam.' 
'Homa.' 
swdtmdj

The  accents   are  occasionally  omitted  or  misplaced,  but  the 
Sanskrit  scholar  will  have  no  difiSculty  in  rectifying  them.

RIG- VEDA    SANHITA.

SECOND     A  S  H  T  A  K  A.

FIRST  ADHYAYA.

ANUYAKA  XYIII.  (continued).

SdKTA    II.    (CXXII.)

The  deities  are  the  Vi^wadevas  ;  the  Rishi  is  Kakshivat  ;  the

metre  is  Trishfubh.

1.  Present,  mild-tempered'*  (priests),  the  sacrificial 
viands  which  you  have  prepared,  to  the  reward- 
showering  RuDRA.  I  praise  him  who,  with  his  heroic

to  the  reward- 
showering  RuDRA.  I  praise  him  who,  with  his  heroic 
(followers),  as  (with  shafts)  from  a  quiver,  expelled 
(the  Asuras)  from  heaven:  and  (I  praise)  the 
Maruts,  (who  abide)  between  heaven  and  earth.''

2.  Animated  by  our  diversified  praise,  hasten, 
Morning  and  Niffht,  to  attend  to  our  first  invocation, 
as  a  wife  (to  the  first  call  of  her  husband) ;  and  may 
the  Dawn,  beautiful  with  the  lustre  of  the  (rising)

Man6al,\  I.

Varga  I.

Raghu-manyavah,  of  light  or  little  wrath;  hoia'ragJiu,  for 
laghu,  light,  and  manyu,  anger.Man6al,\  I.

Varga  I.

Raghu-manyavah,  of  light  or  little  wrath;  hoia'ragJiu,  for 
laghu,  light,  and  manyu,  anger.

The  constraction  of  the  second  half  of  the  stanza  is  exceed- 
ingly elliptical :  it  is  literally,  "  I  have  praised  of  the  expeller

ingly elliptical :  it  is  literally,  "  I  have  praised  of  the  expeller 
from  iieaven  with  arrows  as  if  from  a  quiver  the  Maruts  of  heaven 
and  earth."

VOL.  II.  B  *

RIG-VEDA   SANHI'.A.

Sun,  and  robing  like  the  Sun*  (her)  vast  expanse 
with  golden  rays,  (come  to  our  early  rite).

8.  May  the  circumambient  divinity,  the  wearer  of 
varioiis  forms,^  grant  us  delight ;  May  the  wind,  the 
shedder  of  rain,  grant  us  delight ;  do  you,  Indra 
and  Parvata,*'  sharpen  our  (intellects),  and  may  all 
the  gods  show  us  favour.

4.  Whenever  I,  the  son  of  UsiJ,  worship  with 
my  offerings  (of  food)  those  two  {Aswins)  who  eat 
and  drink  (of  oblations  and  libations)  at  (the  season)

swins)  who  eat 
and  drink  (of  oblations  and  libations)  at  (the  season) 
of  the  world-whitening  (dawn) ;  do  you.  Priests, 
glorify  the  grandson  of  the  waters^  (Agni),  and 
render   (the  divinities   of  the  day  and  night)"  the

Starih  na :  the  former,  which  properly  means  what  covers  or 
expands,  occurs  in  lexicons  as  a  synonyme  of  smoke,'  but  it  is 
said  by  the  Scholiast  here  to  mean,  the  Sun  invested  or  clothed 
with  light,  or  destructive  of  foes,- — Satrundm  hinsakas  tejasdchhanno 
vd  Aditya.

Agni,  here  called  Vasarhan,  as  assuming  various  vestures 
(vasa),  or  forms,  in  the  Gdrhapatya  and  other  fires ;  or,  as 
destroying  the  vesture  of  the  earth, — the  trees ;  or  as  causing  thedestroying  the  vesture  of  the  earth, — the  trees ;  or  as  causing  the 
revolutions  of  day  and  night :  the  sense  of  the  appellative  seems 
rather  doubtful.

Another  name  of  Indra,  as  regulating  the  Parvus,  the  joints 
or  periods  of  the  day  or  year.

The  trees  and  shrubs  spring  up  from  moisture  or  the  waters, 
and  fire  proceeds  from  timber ;  hence  Agni  may  be  called  the 
grandson  of  the  waters,  or  it  may  mean  son  of  the  waters,  as  in 
Manu,  IX.  32]  :  a  different  etymology  has  been  given  in  a 
former  place  (vol.  i.  p.  Z\,  note).

This  specification  is  supplied  by  the  Scholiast.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.

mothers  (as  it  were)  of  the  man  who  repeats  their 
praise.

5.

AYA.

mothers  (as  it  were)  of  the  man  who  repeats  their 
praise.

5.  I,  the  son  of  Usu,  address  to  you  (Aswins) 
audible  praises,  in  like  manner  as  Ghosha"  praised 
you  for  the  removal  of  her  white-tinted  (skin):  I 
glorify  (gods)  the  bountiful  Pushan  (associated) 
with  you,  and  I  proclaim  the  munificence  of  Agni.

6.  Mitra  and  Varuna,  hear  these  my  invocations,      Varga  ii. 
and  moreover  listen  to  those  (that  are)  everywhere 
(uttered)  in   the   chamber   of  sacrifice;   and   may 
SiNDHU,''  the  renowned  bestower  of  wealth,  hear

us,  (fertilizing  our)  broad  fields  with  water.

7.  I  praise  you,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  for  your 
gift  of  numerous  cattle  to  the  Pajra^  and  (from

d  Varuna,  for  your 
gift  of  numerous  cattle  to  the  Pajra^  and  (from 
those  praises)  may  abundant  food  (proceed).  May 
(the  gods),  bestowing  nourishment  on  me,  come 
quickly  unimpeded,  (each)  in  his  famous  and 
favourite  car.*

8.  I  laud  the  treasures  of  that  opulent  (assembly 
of  the  gods) ;"  may  we,  men  who  (are  blessed)  with 
excellent  descendants,  partake  of  them  together:8.  I  laud  the  treasures  of  that  opulent  (assembly 
of  the  gods) ;"  may  we,  men  who  (are  blessed)  with 
excellent  descendants,  partake  of  them  together:

See  vol.  i.  p.  315.

Said  to  mean  the  deity  presiding  over  water,  jiddblumdni 
devak.

'^  To  me  Kakshvat,  of  the  race  of  Pajra.  See  vol,  i.  pp.  1 40,  308. 
Srutarathe  priyaratJie  are  referred  by  Sui/aAa  to  mai/i,  under- 
stood,— *on  me  possessing  a  famous  car,  a  favourite  car;'  bat

under- 
stood,— *on  me  possessing  a  famous  car,  a  favourite  car;'  bat 
perhaps  such  an  ellipse  is  not  necessary.

^  Mahimaghasya  rddhas,  the  riches  of  that,  or  of  him,  who  or 
which  is  possessed  of  great  wealth :  the  Scholiast  explains  the

B   2

4  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA.

the  assembly^  conferring  upon  the  Pajras  abundant 
food,  has  been  my  benefactor,  and  has  made  me  the 
master  of  horses  and  chariots.

9.  The  man  who  does  you  wrong,  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  who  injures  you  in  any  way,''  who  does  not 
present  yon  with  oblations,  contracts  for  himself 
sickness  in  his  heart ;"  but  he  who,  performing  wor-^ 
ship,  (celebrates  it)  with  praises —

10.

but  he  who,  performing  wor-^ 
ship,  (celebrates  it)  with  praises —

10.  He,  borne  by  well-trained  horses,  endowed  with 
surpassing  strength,  renowned  above  men,  munifi- 
cent in  gifts,  moves  a  hero,  ever  undaunted  in  all 
combats,  (even)  against  mighty  men.

y«rga  III.         11.  Royal  bestowcrs  of  delight,  listen  to  the  invo- 
cation of  (your)  undying  worshipper,*^  and  then  come

epithet  to  imply  deva  sangha,  the  assembly  or  company  of  the 
gods.

The  text  has  jano  yah,  the  man  who — :  the  Scholiast 
explains  it  yascha  devasanghah,  '  the  assembly  of  the  gods 
which — .*

Akshnayd  dhruk  is  explained,  chakrena,  marge  na  druhyati,

which — .*Akshnayd  dhruk  is  explained,  chakrena,  marge  na  druhyati,

which — .*

Akshnayd  dhruk  is  explained,  chakrena,  marge  na  druhyati, 
offends  by  a  wheel,  or  a  way;  equivalent  to  anyathd prakdreiia,  in 
another  manner.

Yakshnam  hridaye  nidhatte,  he  places  or  deposits  consumption 
in  the  heart ;  but  yakshma  is  said  here  to  mean  vyddhi,  sickness 
in  general :  the  expression  is  understood  to  imply  something  like 
our  phrase  of  sick  at  heart,  meaning,  it  is  said,  the  sense  of 
mortification  experienced  by  those  who  neglect  the  gods  on 
observing  the  blessings  wliich  recompense  devotion.

Amrita.fya  nahusho  haram  silreh  is  explained,  dhvdnam  amara- 
nasya  stotrddiprerakasya  maimshyasya  mama,  the  invocation  of

nam  amara- 
nasya  stotrddiprerakasya  maimshyasya  mama,  the  invocation  of 
me,  a  mortal,  instigating  praises  and  the  hke,  not  dying.     It  would

SECOND   ASHTAKA— FIRST    ADIIYAYA.  '6

hither,  that  you  who  traverse  the  sky  may  be  pro- 
pitiated by  the  greatness  of  the  (sacrificial)  wealth 
presented  to  you  by  the  sacrificer,  who  acknow- 
ledges no  other  protector.

12.  The  gods  have  declared,  We  confer  present 
vigour  upon  the  worshipper  (who  invokes  us)  to 
jiartake  of  the  decupled*  (libation).  May  all  (the 
gods)  in  whom  splendours  and  riches  abound,  bestow 
(abundant)  food  at  (solemn)  sacrifices.^

13.  We  rejoice  that  for  the  satisfaction  of  the

olemn)  sacrifices.^

13.  We  rejoice  that  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
ten  (organs  of  sense),''the  (priests)  bearing  the  t\vice 
five*^  (ladles  of)  sacrificial  food,  proceed  (to  the  altar). 
What  can  Ishtaswa,  (what  can)  Isht'arasmiy  (what 
can)  those  who  are  now  lords  of  the  earth,  achieve 
(with  respect)  to  the  leaders  of  rnen,  the  conquerors 
of  their  foes?^make  better  sense  to  render  it.,  the  invocation  of  the  immortal 
(deity)  by  me,  a  mortal  worshipper,

Dasataya,  a  decade,  meanin^j^  according  to  Suyana,  food,  by 
which  the  vigour  of  the  ten  senses  is  augmented,  or  Soma  juice 
offered  in  ten  ladles.

A  different  interpretation  may  be  given  to  the  latter  half  of

les.

A  different  interpretation  may  be  given  to  the  latter  half  of 
the  stanza, — "  May  all  the  gods  partake  of  the  abundant  food  (or 
Soma)  at  those  sacnfices  in  which  the  priests  are  the  distributors 
of  the  riches  of  copious  libations."

Here  we  again  have  dasataya  :  dasatayasya  dhdse,  which  the 
Scholiast  explains  by  the  ten  indriyas,  or  organs  of  sense.

The  enumeration  here  may  refer  to  the  ten  ladles  by  which 
the  Soma  juice  is  thrown  on  the  fire ;  or  to  the  ten  articles 
offered  in  sacrifices,  as  honey,  batter,  curds,  milk,  water,  grain, 
&c.,  offered  to  fire  at  the  a'nvamedhu.

According  to  Sdyana,  what  can  "the  princes  who  are  named.

6  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

14.

na,  what  can  "the  princes  who  are  named.

6  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

14.  May  all  the  gods  favour  us  with  a  person* 
decorated  with  golden  earrings  and  jewel  necklace ; 
may  the  venerable  (company  of  the  deities)  be  pro- 
pitiated by  the  praises  issuing  (from  the  mouth  of 
the  worshipper) :  may  our  offerings  be  acceptable  to 
them,  and  (may  they  be  pleased)  with  both**  (our 
praises  and  offerings).

15.  The  four  (silly)*'  sons  of  Masarsara,  the  three 
of  the  victorious  monarch  xYyavasa,  (annoy)  me.* 
Let  your  spacious  and  bright-rayed  chariot,  Mitra 
and  Varuna,  blaze  (before  them)  like  the  sun, 
(filling  them  with  fear).

SiJkta  III.  (CXXIII.)

hem)  like  the  sun, 
(filling  them  with  fear).

SiJkta  III.  (CXXIII.)SiJkta  III.  (CXXIII.)

hem)  like  the  sun, 
(filling  them  with  fear).

SiJkta  III.  (CXXIII.)

The  deity  is  Usha.9,  or  the  Dawn;  the  Rishi  KxKSRiyAT ;  the

metre  Trishfiibh.

Varga  IV.  1.  Tlic  si)acious  chariot  of  the  gracefuP  (Dawn)

or  any  other  princes,  do  against  those  who  enjoy  the  protection 
of  Mitra  and  Varuna :  the  construction,  however,  is  obscure,  and 
the  names,  which  are  said  to  be  those  of  Rdjds,  are  new  and 
unusual.

Arnas,  synonyme  of  rupa,  form :  the  Scholiast  understands 
it  to  mean  '  a  son ;'  but  this  does  not  seem  indispensable.

Or  it  may  mean,  according  to  Sdyana,  '  may  they  reward  us 
in  both  worlds :'  the  text  has  only  uhhayeshu,  in  both.

reward  us 
in  both  worlds :'  the  text  has  only  uhhayeshu,  in  both.

S Uwah,  ior  Sisavah,  mioixis, ;  that  is,  infantile,  childish.

Of  the  two  princes  named,  no  particulars  are  given  in  the 
commentary,  nor  have  they  been  met  with  elsewhere :  the  whole 
hymn  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure.

Dakshindynh,  of  the  clever  one:  there  is  no  substantive; 
the  appellative  means,  according  to  Suyana,  she  who  is  skilled  in 
her  own  function, — swavydpdra  kusald.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  7

has  been  harnessed ;  the  immortal  gods  have 
ascended  it ;  the  noble  and  all-pervading  Ushas 
has  risen  up  from  the  darkness,  bringing  health'  to 
human  habitations.

2.

risen  up  from  the  darkness,  bringing  health'  to 
human  habitations.

2.  First  of  all  the  world  is  she  awake,  triumphing 
over  transitory''  (darkness) :  the  mighty,  the  giver 
(of  light)  from  on  high,  she  beholds  (all  things) : 
ever  youthful,  ever  reviving,  she  comes  first  to  the 
invocation.3.  Well-born  and  divine  Ushas,  who  art  the  pro- 
tectress of  mortals ;  whatever  share*'  (of  light)  thou 
apportionest  to-day  to  men,  may  the  radiant  Savitri 
be  disposed  (to  confirm)  the  gift,  and  declare  us  free 
from  sin;  so  that  (he)  the  sun  (may  come  to  our 
sacrificial  hall).*^

4.  Ahana,®  charged  with  downward-bending 
(light),  goes  daily  from  house  to  house ;  she

d  with  downward-bending 
(light),  goes  daily  from  house  to  house ;  she 
comes,   perpetually   diffusing  light,  and  desirous  of

Chikitsant{,  healing,  remedying  the  malady  of  darkness.

Jayanti  vujam :  Sdyana  explains  vdja  as  moving,  motive ; 
the  darkness  that  goes  away  with  the  dawn ;  or,  in  its  more  usua) 
meaning  of  *  food,'  it  may  mean  *  producing  food,'  as  the  reward 
of  the  morning  sacrifice.

Bhdgam,  a  share  :  the  comment  supplies  prakdsasya,  of  light; 
but  he  admits  that  it  may  mean  a  share  of  the  offerings  to  the 
gods ;  for,  as  the  sacrifice  is  offered  at  dawn,  the  dawn  may  be 
said  to  be  its  distributor.

The  text  has  only  Surydya,  for,  or  on  account  of,  or  for  the

or.

The  text  has  only  Surydya,  for,  or  on  account  of,  or  for  the 
sake  of,  the  sun  :  the  amplification  necessary  to  render  the  word 
intelligible,  is  the  work  of  the  Scholiast.

Ahand  is  enumerated  by  Ydska  among  the  Fvnonymes  of 
Ushas,  but  no  explanation  of  it  is  given.

8  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA.

bestowing  (benefits),  and  accepts  the  choicest  por- 
tions of  (the  sacrificial)  treasures.

5.  UsHAS,  endowed  with  truth,  who  art  the  sister 
of  Bhaga,  the  sister  of  Varuna,  be  thou  hymned 
first  (of  the  gods) :  then  let  the  worker  of  iniquity 
depart,  for  we  shall  overcome  him  with  our  chariot, 
through  thy  assistance. 
Varga  V,  6.  Let  words  of  truth  be  spoken  :  let  works  ofistance. 
Varga  V,  6.  Let  words  of  truth  be  spoken  :  let  works  of

wisdom  (be  performed) :  let  the  blazing  fires  rise  up, 
so  that  the  many  radiant  Ushas  may  make  manifest 
the  desirable  treasures  hidden  by  the  darkness.

7.  The  twofold  day''  proceeds  unseparated  ;  one 
(part  going)  forward,  one  backward  ;  one  of  these 
two  alternating  (periods)  effects  the  concealment 
(of  things) ;  the  Dawn  illumines  them  with  her 
radiant  chariot.

8.  The  same  to-day,  the  same  to-morrow,  the 
irreproachable  (Dawns)  precede  the  distant  course 
of  Varuna  by  thirty  yo/a^ffs,'' and  each  in  succession 
revolves  in  its  (appointed)  oflice.

Day  and  night.

h  in  succession 
revolves  in  its  (appointed)  oflice.

Day  and  night.

Varuna  is  here  identified  with  the  sun,  as  the  remover  of 
darkness,  who,  according  to  the  Schoh'ast,  revolves  daily  round 
Mount  Meru,  the  centre  of  the  earth,  performing  a  diurnal  circuit 
of  5,059  yojanas ;  the  dawn  being  always  30  yojanas  in 
advance  of  his  rising,  or  first  appearance  from  behind  the  moun- 
tain in  the  east.  Sdyaiia  adds,  that  the  period  called  dawn  is 
reckoned  from  the  disappearance  of  the  stars  to  the  appearance 
of  the  sun,  and  is  measured,  as  to  the  duration,  by  21  ghatikds  and 
26  pards.  Taking  the  ghatikd  at  its  lowest  valuation  of  half  a

and 
26  pards.  Taking  the  ghatikd  at  its  lowest  valuation  of  half  a 
muhuHln,  or  24  minutes,  and  a  pard  as  aVth  of  a  ghatikd,  we

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  0

9.  The  self-illumined  Dawn,  announcing  the  de- 
clination of  the  first  (portion)  of  the  day,  is  boru 
white-shining  out  of  the  gloom :  cleansing  (with  the 
radiance)  of  the  sun,  she  impairs  not  his  splendour, 
but  daily  adds  embelH^hment  (to  his  lustre).10.  Goddess,  manifest  in  person  like  a  maiden, 
thou  goest  to  the  resplendent  and  munificent  (sun) ; 
and,  like  a  youthful.bride  (before  her  husband),  thou 
uncoverest,  smiling,  thy  bosom  in  his  presence.

11.  Radiant  as  a  bride  decorated  by  her  mother,     Varga  vi.

ence.

11.  Radiant  as  a  bride  decorated  by  her  mother,     Varga  vi. 
thou  willingly  displayest  thy  person  to  the  ylew.

Do  thou,  auspicious  Ushas,  remove  the  investing 
(gloom),  for  other  daw.ns  than  thou  do  not  dis- 
perse it.

12.  Possessed  of  horses,  possessed  of  cows,  exist-

should  have  in  a  day  of  60  ghatikds  more  than  one-third  allotted 
to  the  dawn,  which  is  evidently  erroneous.  -Again,  if  the  sun 
travels  5,059  yojanus  in  24  hours,  he  travels  at  the  rate  of  about 
84  yojanas  in  one  gJiatikd ;  and  as  the  dawn  is  in  advance  only 
30  yojanas,  it  is  in  time  less  than  half  a  ghntikd  before  the  sun  ; 
a  more  correct  estimate  than  the  22  ghatikds  of  the  commentary.

; 
a  more  correct  estimate  than  the  22  ghatikds  of  the  commentary. 
There  is  some  inaccuracy,  therefore,  in  the  statement.  According 
to  the  Purdnas,  the  sun  travels,  in  a  day  of  30  muMrttas,  or 
60  ghatikds,  94,500,000  yojanas,  or  1,575,000  yojanas  in 
1  ghatikd.  The  same  authorities  assign  1  ghatikd  to  the  Sandhya, 
the  morning  twilight  or  dawn,  and  3  muhurttas,  or  2  hours 
24  minutes,  to  the  Prdtar,  or  early  moniing.  The  reckoning  of 
the  sun's  daily  journey,  cited  by  Sdyaiia,  perhaps  from  some  text 
of  the  Vedas,  is  much  nearer  the  truth  than  that  of  the  Purdnas, 
being  something  more  than  20,000  miles,  and  being  in  fact  the 
equatorial  circumference  of  the  earth.

000  miles,  and  being  in  fact  the 
equatorial  circumference  of  the  earth. — Bentley,  Hindu  Astro- 
nomy, p.  185.000  miles,  and  being  in  fact  the 
equatorial  circumference  of  the  earth. — Bentley,  Hindu  Astro- 
nomy, p.  185.

10  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

ing  through  all  time,  vying  with  tlie  rays  of  the 
suQ  (iu  dissipating  darkness),  auspicious  Dawns, 
sending  down  benefits  (on  mankind),  pass  away  and 
again  return.

13.  Co-operating  with  the  rays  of  the  true  (sun), 
confirm  in  us  every  propitious  act :  earnestly  invoked 
by  us  to-day,  disperse,  Ushas,  (the  darkness),  that 
wealth  may  devolve  upon  us,  (already)  affluent  (in 
sacrificial  treasures).

SUKTA  IV.  (CXXIV.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre  are  the  same.

Varga  VII.         1.  Whou  the  (sacred)  fire  is  kindled,  Ushas  sheds

Varga  VII.         1.  Whou  the  (sacred)  fire  is  kindled,  Ushas  sheds

abundant  light,  dispersing  (the  darkness)  like  the

rising  sun  :  may  the  divine  Savitri  bestow  upon  us

for  our  use,*  wealth  of  both  bipeds  and  quadrupeds.

2.  Unimpeding^  divine  rites,  although  wearing 
away  the  ages  of  mankind,  the  Dawn  shines  the 
similitude  of  the  (mornings)  that  have  passed,  or 
that  are  to  be  for  ever,  the  first  of  those  that  are  to 
come.

3.  She,  the  dauditer  of  heaven,  is  beheld  in  the 
east,  gracious  and  arrayed  in  light :  she  travels 
steadily  along  the  path  of  the  sun,  as  if  cognizant 
(of  his  pleasure),  and  damages  not  the  quarters  (of 
the  horizon).

"^  Ityai,  lit.

ure),  and  damages  not  the  quarters  (of 
the  horizon).

"^  Ityai,  lit.  *  for  going ;'  that  is,  according  to  the  commentary, 
*  for  carrying  on  our  own  affairs.'

Amimati  ahinJantt,  not  injuring,  not  opposing,  not  misuited 
to ;  heing,  in  fact,  the  fit  season  of  their  performance.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  11Amimati  ahinJantt,  not  injuring,  not  opposing,  not  misuited 
to ;  heing,  in  fact,  the  fit  season  of  their  performance.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  11

4.  She  is  beheld  nigh  at  hand,  (radiant)  as  the 
breast  of-  the  illuminator,''  (the  sun) ;  and,  like 
NoDHAs,^  has  made  manifest  many  pleasing  (ob- 
jects) :  like  a  matron"  she  awakens  (her)  sleeping 
(children),  and  of  all  (females  who  are)  stirring 
betimes,  she,  the  most  unvarying,  repeatedly 
appears.

5.  Born  in  the  eastern  quarter  of  the  spacious

repeatedly 
appears.

5.  Born  in  the  eastern  quarter  of  the  spacious 
firmament,  she  displays  a  banner  of  rays  of  light. 
Placed  ou  the  lap  of  both  parents  (heaven  and 
earth),,  filling  them  (with  radiance),  she  enjoys  vast 
and  wide-spread  renown.

6.  Verily  she,  the  wide-expanded  Ushas,  neglects    Varga  viii. 
not  (to  give)  the  joy  of  sight  to  those  of  her  own  or

of  a  different  nature:'^  visible  in  her  faultless  person,

Snndhjuvo  na  vakshas :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  Sundhyu 
is  a  name  of  the  sun,  and  the  expression  is  to  be  understood  as 
implying  the  collective  solar  rays.  Sundhyu  also  means  a  water- 
bird  of  a  Yvhite  colour,  to  whose  white  plumage  the  morning

water- 
bird  of  a  Yvhite  colour,  to  whose  white  plumage  the  morning 
light  may  be  compared,  Sundhyuvah  in  the  plur.  may  also  mean 
waters. — Nir.  4,  16.

In  the  same  manner  as  the  Rlshi  Nona  as  displays  his  wishes 
by  his  prayers  and  praises,  so  the  dawn  puts  forth  the  light  that 
is  accessible  to  all  the  world  :  we  have  no  further  notice  of  Nodhas 
than  that  he  was  a  Rishi.Admasad:  adma  means  either  food  or  a  dwelling ;  sai^  who 
goes  or  abides ;  the  mistress  of  the  house  literally,  or  one  ^Yho 
has  to  cook  the  food  of  her  family  ;  and  in  cither  case,  who  rises 
with  the  dawn  and  wakes  up  tlie  sleepers  of  the  household.

ho  rises 
with  the  dawn  and  wakes  up  tlie  sleepers  of  the  household.

Ajdmim  na  liarivrinahi  jumim :  jdinl  is  explained  by  the 
Scholiast,  sajdtiyu,   of  the  same  species,  that  is  to  say,  divine

12  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

and  brightly  shining,  she  passes  not  by  the  little  or 
the  great.*

7.  She  goes  to  the  west,  as  (a  woman  who  has) 
no  brother  (repairs)  to  her  male  (relatives) ;''  and 
like  one  ascending  the  hall  (of  justice)  for  the 
recovery  of  property,  (she  mounts  in  the  sky  to 
claim  her  lustre)  f  and  like  a  wife  desirous  to 
please  her  husband,  Ushas  puts  on  becoming  attire, 
and  smiling  as  it  were,  displays  her  charms.

8.  The  sister  {Night)  has  prepared  a  birth-place

splays  her  charms.

8.  The  sister  {Night)  has  prepared  a  birth-place 
for  her  elder  sister  {Day),  and  having  made  it  known 
to  her,   departs.     Ushas,  dispersing   the    darkness

beings,  the  gods ;  ajdmi  then  means,  not  of  the  same  species ; 
vijdtiyd,  that  is,  manlcind.

She  lights  up  all  things,  from  an  atom  to  a  mountain,  says 
the  Schohast.

Abhrdteva  puma  eti  pratichi,  as  a  damsel  who  has  no  brother, 
averted  from  her  own  abiding-place,  goes  to  or  relies  upon  her 
male  relatives,  punsah,  for  support ;  or  it  may  mean,  according 
to  Sdyana,  that  she  is  in  such  case  to  offer  the  funeral  cakes  to 
her  progenitors :  prattchi,  with  face  averted,  as  applicable  to

s  to 
her  progenitors :  prattchi,  with  face  averted,  as  applicable  to 
Ushas,  means  looking  or  going  to  the  west.s  to 
her  progenitors :  prattchi,  with  face  averted,  as  applicable  to 
Ushas,  means  looking  or  going  to  the  west.

Gartdrug  iva  sanaye  dhandndm,  like  one  who  ascends  {druh, 
to  mount)  a  house  {garta-griha)  for  the  gift  or  receipt  of  riches, 
the  explanation  and  the  application  to  the  dawn  are  given  by 
Sdyana,  conformably  to  the  Nirukta,  3,  5  :  the  commentary  on 
which,  however,  explains  Carta  to  be  a  stool  or  table  on  which 
dice  are  thrown,  and  alludes  not  very  intelligibly  to  a  practice  in 
the  South,  in  which  u  childless  widow  seeks  to  obtain  support  from 
her  husband's  relatives  by  repairing  to  a  garnbling-house :  the 
passage  is  cited  by  Professor  Miiller — Preface,  2nd  vol.

g-house :  the 
passage  is  cited  by  Professor  Miiller — Preface,  2nd  vol.  of  the 
J^ig-vcda,  p.  xvi.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  13

with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  illumines  the  world,  like 
congregated  lightnings.

9.  Of  all  these  sisters  who  have  gone  before,  a 
successor  daily  follows  the  one  that  has  preceded. 
So  may  new  dawns,  like  the  old,  bringing  fortunate 
days,  shine  upon  us  blessed  with  affluence.

10.  Awaken,  wealth-abounding  Us  has,  those  who 
delight  (in  holy  offerings) :  let  the  (niggard)  traders, 
reluctant  to  wake  (for  such  a  purpose),  sleep  on. 
Arise,  opulent  Ushas,  bearing  wealth  to  the  liberal 
(worshipper) :  speaker  of  truth,  who  art  the  waster

to  the  liberal 
(worshipper) :  speaker  of  truth,  who  art  the  waster 
away  (of  li\ing  creatures),  arise,  bearing  wealth  to 
him  who  praises  thee.

11.  This  youthful  (Ushas)  approaches  from  the     Varga  ix. 
east :    she   harnesses   her    team    of    purple    oxen. 
Assuredly  she  will  disperse  the  darkness,  a  manifest11.  This  youthful  (Ushas)  approaches  from  the     Varga  ix. 
east :    she   harnesses   her    team    of    purple    oxen. 
Assuredly  she  will  disperse  the  darkness,  a  manifest

sign  (of  day)  in  the  firmament :  the  (sacred)  fire  is 
kindled  in  every  dwelling.

12.  At  thy  dawning,  (Ushas),  the  various  birds 
rise  up  from  their  nests,  and  men  who  have  to  earn 
their  bread*  (quit  their  homes).  Thou  bringest, 
divine  (Ushas),  much  wealth  to  the  liberal  mortal 
who  is  present  in  the  chamber  (of  sacrifice).

13.  Praiseworthy  Ushasas,  be  glorified  by  this

chamber  (of  sacrifice).

13.  Praiseworthy  Ushasas,  be  glorified  by  this 
(my)  hymn ;  graciously  disposed  towards  us,  augment 
(our  prosperity) ;  and  may  we  obtain,  goddesses, 
through  your  fitvour,  wealth,  a  hundred  and  a  thou- 
sand fold.

*  Naraschapiiubhdjah-anndrthinah,  seeking  for  food.

14  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

S^KTA   V.    (CXXV.)

The  hymn  is  supposed  to  be  recited  by  KakshI vat,  in  acknow-

,  ledgment  of  the  liberality  of  Rdjd  Swanaya,    whose  gift  is

therefore  considered  as  the  divinity  of  the  hymn,  or  the  object

addressed ;  Kakshivat  is  of  course  the  Rishi ;  the  metre  of

the  4th  and  5th  stanzas  is  Jagati;  that  of  the  rest,  Trisht'ubh.

Varga  X.  1.

nd  5th  stanzas  is  Jagati;  that  of  the  rest,  Trisht'ubh.

Varga  X.  1.  Having  come  in  the  early  morning,  (Swanaya)

presents  precious  (wealth),  knowing  it  (to  be  worthy

of  acceptance) ;  and  having,  (therefore),  accepted  it,

(Kashivat)  brings  it  (to  his  father) :  wherewith  the

parent  of  excellent  sons,  maintaining  his  progeny,

passes  his  life  in  the  enjoyment  of  affluence.

2.  May  he  (the  Rdjd)  be  rich  in  kine,  in  gold,  in 
horses :   may  Indra  grant  abundant  food   to  himpasses  his  life  in  the  enjoyment  of  affluence.

2.  May  he  (the  Rdjd)  be  rich  in  kine,  in  gold,  in 
horses :   may  Indra  grant  abundant  food   to  him

The  legend  which  is  cited  by  Sdyana,  and  which  is  told  to 
the  like  purport  in  the  Niti-manjari,  relates  that  Kakshivat,  having 
finished  his  course  of  study,  and  taken  leave  of  his  preceptor,  was

finished  his  course  of  study,  and  taken  leave  of  his  preceptor,  was 
journeying  homewards,  when  night  came  on,  and  he  fell  asleep  by 
the  road -side :  early  in  the  raoniing,  Rdjd  Sivanaija,  the  son  of 
Bhdvayavya,  attended  by  his  retinue,  came  to  the  spot,  and 
disturbed  the  Brahman's  slumbers :  upon  his  starting  up,  the 
Rdjd  accosted  him  with  great  cordiality,  and  being  struck  by  his 
personal  appearance,  determined,  if  he  was  of  suitable  rank  and 
birth,  to  give  him  his  daughters  in  maniage.  After  ascertaining 
his  fitness,  he  took  Kakshwat  home  with  him,  and  (here  manied 
him  to  his  ten  daughters,  presenting  him  at  the  same  time  with  a

him  to  his  ten  daughters,  presenting  him  at  the  same  time  with  a 
hundred  nishkas  of  gold,  a  hundred  horses,  a  hundred  bulls,  one 
thousand  and  sixty  cows,  and  eleven  chariots,  one  for  each  of  his 
wives  and  one  for  himself,  each  drawn  by  four  horses.  With 
these  presents  Kakshivat  returned  home,  and  placed  them  at  the 
disposal  of  his  father,  Dirghatamas,  reciting  this  hymn  in  praise 
of  the  munificence  of  <Stfa«aya.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  15

who  delays  thee,  returning  home  in  the  early  morn- 
ing, by  costly  gifts,  as  (a  hunter  arrests  the)  wander- 
ing (animals)  by  his  snares.

3.  Desirous  (of  again  beholding  thee),*  I  have  this

by  his  snares.3.  Desirous  (of  again  beholding  thee),*  I  have  this

by  his  snares.

3.  Desirous  (of  again  beholding  thee),*  I  have  this 
day  obtained  thee,  who  hast  done  in  the  morning  a 
good  deed ;  the  performer  of  a  sacrifice^  with  a 
wealth-laden  car,  refresh  thyself  with  the  effused 
juice  of  the  exhilarating  {Soma)  creeper,  and 
augment  with  sincere  prayers  (the  prosperity)  of 
the  chief  of  a  flourishing  race.

4.  The  copiously-yielding  and  joy-conferring  kine, 
distil  (their  milk)  for  the  celebration  of  the  (Soma) 
sacrifice,  and  for  him  who  has  undertaken  its  cele- 
bration :  the  nutritious  streams  of  butter  converge 
from  every  quarter  towards  him,  who  both  pro- 
pitiates (his  progenitors),  and  benefits  (mankind)."

5.

m,  who  both  pro- 
pitiates (his  progenitors),  and  benefits  (mankind)."

5.  He  who  propitiates  (the  gods),  gives  to  the 
gods,  and  sits  at  ease  upon  the  summit  of  heaven  i 
to  him  the  flowing  waters  bear  their  essence;  to 
him  this  fertile  (earth)*  ever  yields  abundance.

This  and  the  following  verses  are  supposed  to  be  repeated  by 
Dirghatamas,  the  father  of  Knkshivat.

Ishteh  putram,  lit.  the  son  of  sacrifice;  but  the  Scholiast 
explains  putram,  upon  the  authority  of  Ydska,  to  signify  purU" 
trdtdram,  the  much-protecting,  or,  simply,  kartdram,  performer.

Prmayantam  papurln-cha  are  both  attributives  of  an  agent, 
and  therefore  the  agent  who  gives  pleasure,  or  who  gives  repletion

and  therefore  the  agent  who  gives  pleasure,  or  who  gives  repletion 
or  satisfaction :  the  Scholiast  applies  the  first  to  the  Pitris,  or 
progenitors,  pitrdn  prhayantam ;  the  second  to  all  Uving  beings, 
prdninah  sarvadd  prmayantam  purusham.

Jyam   dakshind,  the   Scholiast  interprets  by,   this   capable

16  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.Jyam   dakshind,  the   Scholiast  interprets  by,   this   capable

16  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

6.  These  wonderful  (rewards)*  verily  are  for  those 
who  give  (pious)  donations:^  for  the  donors  of 
(pious)  gifts  the  suns  shine  in  heaven :  the  givers 
of  (pious)  donations  attain  immortality :  the  givers 
of  (pious)  gifts  prolong  their  (worldly)  existence.

7.  May  those  who  propitiate  (the  gods),  never 
commit  degrading  sin :  may  those  who  praise  the

ate  (the  gods),  never 
commit  degrading  sin :  may  those  who  praise  the 
gods  and  observe  holy  vows,  never  experience 
decay :  may  some  (honourable)  individual  ever  be 
their  defence;*^  and  may  afflictions  fall  upon  him 
who  does  not  propitiate  (the  gods).

earth ;  the  bhiimi,  that  is  able,  daksM,  to  bear  crops  :  otherwise 
it  might  have  been  thought  to  refer  to  the  gift,  dakshind,  of" 
Swanaya,  as  in  the  next  verse.

'  Imdni  chitrd,  these  wonders,  or  these  variegated  things, 
which,  according  to  the  comment,  are  personsd  decorations, — 
garlands,  sandal,  jewels,  pearls,  and  the  like.

^  Daksh'mdvatdm-daJcshindddtrindm,  of  the  givers  of  DaksUnd,

he  like.

^  Daksh'mdvatdm-daJcshindddtrindm,  of  the  givers  of  DaksUnd, 
or  donations  to  Brahmins  at  the  end  of  a  sacrifice,  or  any  par- 
ticular solemnity.

"  Anyas  tesham  paridkir  astu  kaschit,  may  some  other  one  be 
their  surrounding  defence,  or,  as  the  Scholiast  says,  kavacha- 
sthdniya,  in  the  place  of  armour :  he  seems  rather  uncertain  as  to 
the  sense  of  anyah  kaschit,  some  other,  whether  it  mean  a  man, 
or  the  divinity  presiding  over  sin,  or  to  some  countervailing 
merit,  dharma-viseshdt :  it  probably  alludes  to  Swanaya  as  the 
type  of  a  patron  or  protector.

/  . .         . /

SECOND   ASHTAEA FIRST- ADHYAYA.  17

SiJkta  VI.  (CXXVI.)

.         . //  . .         . /

SECOND   ASHTAEA FIRST- ADHYAYA.  17

SiJkta  VI.  (CXXVI.)

.         . /

SECOND   ASHTAEA FIRST- ADHYAYA.  17

SiJkta  VI.  (CXXVI.)

Of  the  first  five  verses,  the  Rishi  is  Kakshivat,  and  as  they  are 
in  commendation  of  the  Rdjd  BnAVAYAvrA,  he  is  considered 
to  be  in  the  place  of  the  deity ;  the  sixth  stanza  is  ascribed  to 
the  RdJd,  and  the  seventh  to  his  wife  Loma^a,  the  daughter  of 
Brihaspati.  The  first  five  stanzas  are  in  the  Trish/ubh  metre; 
that  of  the  two  last  is  AnusMubh.

1.  I  repeat  with  a  (willing)  mind,  the  imreluctant     Vaiga  xi. 
praises  of  Bhavya,^  dwelling  on  the  banks  of  the 
Sindhu  :^  a  prince  of  unequalled  (might),  desirous  of 
renown,  who  has  enabled  me  to  celebi-ate  a  thousand 
sacrifices.

2.

f 
renown,  who  has  enabled  me  to  celebi-ate  a  thousand 
sacrifices.

2.  From  which  generous  prince,  soliciting  (my 
acceptance),  I,  Kakshivat,  unhesitatingly  accepted 
a  hundred  nishkas,'^  a  hundred  vigorous  steeds,  and 
a  hundred  bulls,  whereby  he  has  spread  his  imperish- 
able fame  through  heaven.

3.  Ten  chariots  drawn  by  bay  steeds,  and  carrying 
my  wives,  stood  near  me,  given  me  by  Swanaya  ; 
and  a  thousand  and  sixty  cows  followed :  these, 
after  a  short  interval  of  time,  did  Kashivat  deliver 
(to  his  father).

4.  Forty  bay  horses,  (harnessed)  to  the  chariots, 
lead  the  procession  in  front  of  a  thousand  (followers).

Bhdvya  is  here  identified  evidently  with  Swanaya,  his  son.

lowers).

Bhdvya  is  here  identified  evidently  with  Swanaya,  his  son.

Sindkan  adhi,  upon  the  Sindhu,  either  the  liver  Indus  or  the 
Bea-shore ;  most  probably  the  former.

A  nishka  is  a  weight  of  gold.  By  Maim  it  is  said  to  be 
equal  to  four  .SMuamas  (viii.  134).  In  the  ^mara  ^os^a  it  is  rated 
at  lOS  suvarnas.A  nishka  is  a  weight  of  gold.  By  Maim  it  is  said  to  be 
equal  to  four  .SMuamas  (viii.  134).  In  the  ^mara  ^os^a  it  is  rated 
at  lOS  suvarnas.

VOL.  II.  C

18  KIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

The  Pajras,  the  kinsmen  of  Kakshivat,  rub  down 
the  higli-spirited  steeds,  decorated  with  golden 
trappings.

5.  I  have  accepted  a  prior  grant,  (kinsmen),  for 
you :"  three  and  eight  harnessed  chariots  and  cattle 
of  incalculable  value  :^  may  the  kindred  Pnjras,  like 
well-disposed  relations,"  be  desirous  of  acquiring

indred  Pnjras,  like 
well-disposed  relations,"  be  desirous  of  acquiring 
renown  by  their  abundant  offerings.^

6.  ^She,  who,  when  her  desires  are  assented  to, 
clings  as  tenaciously  as  a  female  weasel,'  and  who 
is  ripe  for  enjoyment,  yields  me  infinite  delight.

7.  Approach  me,  (husband) ;  deem  me  not  imma- 
ture :  I  am  covered  with  down  like  a  ewe  of  the 
Gandharins.^

The  Scholiast  is  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  this  should  be, 
as  in  the  former  hyron  the  whole  of  the  gifts  were  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  his  father  by  Kakshivat ;  and  again,  the  ten  cars  con- 
veyed his  wives,  who  could  not  be  given  away;  he  suggests, 
therefore,  that  a  different  sense  of  eleven  is  intended.

suggests, 
therefore,  that  a  different  sense  of  eleven  is  intended.

Aridhuyaso  gtih  is  explained  arihhir-iswarair-dharanlyd,  to  be 
held  or  attained  by  rich  men  ;  i.  e.  bahvmulydh,  of  great  price.

Visyd  iva  vrdh  is  a  rather  doubtful  phrase  :  the  Scholiast 
explains  it  visdmvrutu  yat/id  parasparam  anurdgavantah,  hke  troops 
of  people  having  mutual  affection.

The  text  has,  having  carts  or  barrows,  anaswantah ;  the  term 
anas  implying  a  small  cart  or  truck,  in  which  the  Soma  plants  are 
brought  to  the  place  where  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  offered.This  is  supposed  to  be  said  by  Bhdvya  to  his  wife  Lomasd.

Kdsi'kd,  which  is  explained  sutavatsd  nakult,  the  female  neul

Lomasd.

Kdsi'kd,  which  is  explained  sutavatsd  nakult,  the  female  neul 
or  viverra,  having  brought  forth  young.

^  This  is  Lomasd's  reply ;  but  the  verse,,  as  well  as  the  pre- 
ceding, is  brought  in  very  abruptly,  and  has  no  connection  with

SECOND   ASHTAKA— FIRST    ADHYAYA.  19

ANUVAKA  XIX.

SlTrKTA   I.    (CXXVII.)

The  hymn  is  addressed  to  Agni  ;  the  Rishi  is  called  Paruch- 
CHHEPA,  the  son  of  Divodasa  ;  the  metre  is  Atyashii^

1.  I  venerate  Agni,  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),     Varga  xii. 
the  munificent,  the  giver  of  dwellings,  the  son  of 
strength  :  he  who  knows  all  that  exists,  like  a  sage 
who  is  endowed  with  knowledge '}'  who,  the  divine

ists,  like  a  sage 
who  is  endowed  with  knowledge '}'  who,  the  divine

what  precedes :  it  is  also  in  a  different  metre,  and  is  probably  a 
fragment  of  some  old  popular  song ;  another  meaning  is  also 
assigned  to  gandhdri'.

According  to  Mr.  Colebrooke  {Sanscrit  and  Prakrit  Prosody, 
Misc,  Essays,  ii.  162),  the  Atyashti  metre  is  a  stanza  of  foui* 
lines,  containing  68  syllables,  each  arranged  in  different  feet, 
constituting  varieties  of  the  class ;  and  the  Scholiast  quotes  the 
chhandas,  or  metrical  system  of  the  Vedas,  for  a  graduated  series 
of  metres,  beginning  with  Utkriti,  containing  104  syllables,  and 
descending  by  a  dhninution  of  four  through  eight  classes  to.s,  and 
descending  by  a  dhninution  of  four  through  eight  classes  to. 
AtyasMi,  the  ninth,  which  gives  it  the  same  number.  In  this 
hymn  and  the  twelve  following,  however,  the  stanza  is  arranged 
in  three  lines,  and  the  number  of  syllables  varies  from  57  to  70, 
being  in  most  of  the  lines  65,  &&,  67  :  the  distribution  of  the  feet 
does  not  seem  to  follow  any  definite  rule.

It  is  a  peculiarity  of  this  and  the  twelve  succeeding  Suktas, 
to  reiterate  a  leading  word  which  occurs  the  third  or  fourth  from 
the  end  of  the  first  line,  and  sometimes  also  of  the  third,  and  to 
repeat  it  as  the  last  word  of  the  line  ;  thus,  we  have  here  stinum

peat  it  as  the  last  word  of  the  line  ;  thus,  we  have  here  stinum 
sahaso  Jatavedasam,  vipram  na  jatavedasam  ;  this  is  little  else 
than  a  kind  of  verbal  alliterative  jingle,  but  the  Scholiast  thinks  it 
necessary  to  assign  to  the  repeated  word  a  distinct  signification, 
agi-eeably  indeed  to  the  rule  that  prevails  in  respect  to  the  various

c  2

20  RTG-VEDA   SANHITA.

regenerator  of  sacrifices,  through  his  lofty  and 
reverential  devotion,  covets  for  the  gods  the  blaze 
of  the  liquefied  butter  which  is  offered  in  oblation 
with  his  flames.

2,  We,  the  institutors  of  the  ceremony,  invoke 
thee,  Agni,  who  art  most  deserving  of  worship,  and

ceremony,  invoke 
thee,  Agni,  who  art  most  deserving  of  worship,  and 
art  the  eldest  of  the  Aiigirasas,  with  (acceptable) 
prayers;  and  with  prayers  (recited)  by  the  priests, 
(we  adore)  thee,  who,  like  the  traverser  of  the  sky, 
(the  sun),  art  the  invoker  (of  the  gods  on  behalf)  of 
men,  and  whom,  the  bright-haired  showerer  (of 
blessings),  many  people  approaching  propitiate  for 
the  attainment  of  felicity.3.  Verily,  that  Agni,  far  shining  with  brilliant 
vigour,  is  the  destroyer  of  foes,  like  a  hatchet  that 
cuts  down  trees :  whatever  is  most  solid  and  stable 
dissolves  like  water  at  his  contact:  unsparing,  he 
sports  (amidst  enemies),  nor  desists  (from  their

ontact:  unsparing,  he 
sports  (amidst  enemies),  nor  desists  (from  their 
destruction),  like  an  archer  who  retreats  not  (from 
battle).

species  of  alliteration,  termed  by  writers  on  Alankdra,  or  oma- 
inental  composition,  Yamaha;  illustrated  by  several  celebrated 
writings,  especially  by  the  Nalodaya,  attributed  to  Kdliddsa, 
translated  by  the  late  Rev.  Mr.  Yates,  who  has  also  published  a 
learned  dissertation  on  the  subject  in  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Re- 
searches, vol.  XIX. :  the  employment  of  this  artifice,  and  in  a  still 
greater  degree  the  complex  construction  of  the  stanza,  render  the 
whole  series  of  the  Pdruchchhejfo  hymns  exceedingly  obscure  and

the 
whole  series  of  the  Pdruchchhejfo  hymns  exceedingly  obscure  and 
unintelligible;  it  is  not  pretended  that  their  translation  is  free 
from  exception,  but  the  text  has  been  adhered  to  as  nearly  as 
possible  with  the  aid  of  the  Scholiast.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  21

4.  They  have  presented  substantial  donations  to 
him,  as  (they  give  riches)  to  a  sage,  and  by  re- 
splendent means  he  grants  us  (grace)  for  our  pre- 
servation :  (the  vorshipper)  presents  (gifts)  to  Agni 
for  preservation :  he  who  pervades  the  (many  offer- 
ings made  to  him)  consumes  them  (as  rapidly)  as 
(he  consumes)  forests:  he  matures  the  standing 
corn  by  his  potency ;  he  destroys  whatever  (things)

tures  the  standing 
corn  by  his  potency ;  he  destroys  whatever  (things) 
are  stationary  by  his  potency."tures  the  standing 
corn  by  his  potency ;  he  destroys  whatever  (things) 
are  stationary  by  his  potency."

6.  We  place  near  the  altar  the  (sacrificial)  food 
of  him  who  is  more  conspicuous  by  night  than  by 
day:  (we  of!er  it)  to  him  who  is  scarcely  alive  by 
dav:^  hence  his  (sacrificial)  food  finds  prompt  ac- 
ceptance,  like  a  dwelling  (given  by  a  father)  to  a 
son:  these  undecaying  fires,  (although)  discriminating 
between  the  devout  and  the  undevout,  grant  (both) 
protection,  and  accepting  (the  offerings  of  the  pious), 
they  are  exempt  from  decay.

6.  He  roars  aloud,  like  the  roaring  of  the  winds,  Varga  xiil. 
amidst  the  sanctified  and  selected  (rites. of  sacred)

ds,  Varga  xiil. 
amidst  the  sanctified  and  selected  (rites. of  sacred) 
solemnities  ;  he  who  is  to  be  worshipped,  who  is  to 
be  adored  (for  victory)  over  hosts  (of  enemies) ;  he, 
the  receiver  (of  oblations),  the  manifester  of  the 
sacrifice;  he,  who  is  deserving  of  veneration,  de-

^  Sthirdni  nirinati  ajasu ;  the  Scholiast  proposes  to  explaia 
Sthirdni  by  pupcini,  sins,  or,  amitrdni,  enemies ;  but  neither  seems 
to  be  indispensable.

^  Apruyushe  divdtardt,  to  liim  who  has  not  prominent  or 
vigorous  life  through  the  day,  being  dimmed  or  enfeebled  by  the 
superior  effulgence  of  the  sun.

22  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

vours  the  oblations :  hence,  all  men  for  their  good

VEDA    SANHITA.

vours  the  oblations :  hence,  all  men  for  their  good 
pursue  the  path  of  Agni,  who  gives  pleasure  (to 
his  worshippers),  being  pleased  (himself),  in  like 
manner  as  men  follo\y  a  path  (that  leads)  to  happi- 
ness.7.  The  descendants  of  Bhrigu,  celebrating  him 
(Agni)  in  both  his  forms,''  glorifying  him,  and  paying 
him  homage,  proclaim  his  praises ;  the  descendants 
of  Bhrigu,^  rubbing  (the  sticks  to  kindle  flame)  for 
the  oblation.  For  the  radiant  Agni,  who  is  the 
guardian  of  all  these  treasures,  has  power  (to  distri- 
bute them).  May  lie,  the  receiver  of  sacrifices, 
partake  of  the  agreeable  (offerings)  given  to  satiety ;

f  sacrifices, 
partake  of  the  agreeable  (offerings)  given  to  satiety ; 
may  he,  the  receiver  of  sacrifices,  partake  (of  the 
oblations).

8.  We  invoke  thee,  the  protector  of  all  people, 
tbe  same  alike  to  all,  the  preserver  of  the  house,  to 
enjoy  (the  oblation) ;  thee,  who  art  the  wafter  of 
our  infallible  prayer;  to  enjoy  (the  oblation):  we 
invoke  thee,  who  art  the  guest  of  men,  to  whom  all 
these  immortals  apply  for  their  sustenance,  as  (a 
sou)  to  a  father ;  thee,  to  whom  the  priests  oifer 
oblations  amongst  the  gods.

Dwitd  yad  im  hstdsah,  celebrating  him  as  twofold ;  that  is, 
according  to  Sdyana,  either  as  recognised  in  both  the  Sruti  and

is, 
according  to  Sdyana,  either  as  recognised  in  both  the  Sruti  and 
Smriii,  the  books  of  religion  and  law ;  or  as  the  giver  of  happi- 
ness in  both  this  world  and  the  next ;  or  as  manifold  in  the 
A  havamya  aad  other  fires,  two  being  put  for  many.

The  Scholiast  would  explain  Bhrigavah  in  this  second  place, 
the  roasters  {hhrashtdrah,  from  bhraj,  to  fiy)  or  consumers,  either 
of  the  oblation  or  of  iniquity.

SECOND    ASH-fAKA — FIRST    ADHYAYA.  23

9.  Thon,  Agni,  the  destroyer  (of  enemies)  by  thy 
strength,  the  possessor  of  great  splendour,  art  born 
for  the  sake  of  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  as  riches  (are 
generated)  for  the  sake  of  sacrificing  to  the  gods :as  riches  (are 
generated)  for  the  sake  of  sacrificing  to  the  gods : 
verily  thy  exhilaration  is  most  brilliant,  thy  worship 
is  most  productive  of  renown  ;  hence,  undecaying 
Agni,  (sacrificers)  wait  upon  thee,  like  envoys  (upon 
a  prince ;  upon  thee),  who  preservest  (thy  votaries) 
from  decay."

10.  May  your  praise,  (oh  priests),  become  grateful 
to  Agni,  who  is  deserving  of  laudation,  who  is  of 
strength  to  overcome  the  strong,  who  is  awakened 
at  the  dawn  ;  to  Agni,  as  if  to  a  giver  of  cattle. 
Inasmuch  as  the  presenter  of  the  oblation  repairs 
assiduously  to  every  altar,  the  invoking  priest,  well 
skilled  in  (pious)  praise,  glorifies  him  (Agni)  as  the

priest,  well 
skilled  in  (pious)  praise,  glorifies  him  (Agni)  as  the 
first  of  the  attaining  (divinities),  as  a  herald  (recites 
the  praises)  of  illustrious  (men).'*

11.  Agni,  do  thou  becoming  visible  close  to  us,  and 
partaking  with  benignant  intent  of  (the  sacrificial) 
food  along  with  the  gods,  bestow  upon  us  abundant 
riches,  with  benignant  intent.  Most  mighty  Agni, 
render  us  illustrious,  that  we  may  behold  and  enjoy 
(this   earth) ;    and  grant    greatness  with    excellent

Ajara,  undecaying  ;  but  here  explained,  not  causing  decay ; 
or  else  one  who  does  not  praise  others ;  one  to  whom  alone  praise 
is  due.

The  last  line  of  this  stanza  is  very  elliptical  and  inverted ;  it

The  last  line  of  this  stanza  is  very  elliptical  and  inverted ;  it 
is  literally,  "  in  front,  a  herald,  like  praiaers  of  the  comers 
{rishundm),  the  skilled  in  praise,  invoker  of  the  wealthy 
{rishundm) ."

24  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

progeny   to   tliose    who    praise   thee,    possessor   of

wealth,  destroyer  of  foes',  like  a  fierce   (g-iant)*  in

strength.

SUKTA  II.  (CXXVIII.)24  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

progeny   to   tliose    who    praise   thee,    possessor   of

wealth,  destroyer  of  foes',  like  a  fierce   (g-iant)*  in

strength.

SUKTA  II.  (CXXVIII.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre  are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding

Sukta.

Varga  XIV.  1.  This  Agni,  the  invoker  of  the  gods,  the 
assiduous  offerer  of  sacrifices,  is  generated  of  man, 
(for  the  fulfilment  of  the)  duty  of  those  who  desire 
(the  fruit  of)  pious  rites,  as  well  as  for  (the  dis-

hose  who  desire 
(the  fruit  of)  pious  rites,  as  well  as  for  (the  dis- 
charge of)  his  own  duty  :  he  is  the  bestower  of  all 
blessings  on  him  who  desires  his  friendship,  and  is 
wealth  to  (such  a  one)  seeking  for  food :  the  unob- 
structed offerer  of  oblations,  he  sits  down,  sur- 
rounded (by  ministering  priests),  on  the  most 
sacred  spot  of  eartli,  upon  the  footmark  of  7/^.^

Like  an  uffra,  an  og^re,  ugro  na  savasd;  Sdyana  explains  it 
merely  by  kaschit  kriira,  some  one  cruel  or  fierce.

Nishadad-ilaspade  parivita  ilaspade:  the  first  term  is  inter- 
preted by  Sdyana,  bhumydh  pade,  on  a  spot  or  site  of  ground,  on 
the  earth,  to  which  the  epithet  dharmani,  occurring  in  the  firston 
the  earth,  to  which  the  epithet  dharmani,  occurring  in  the  first 
stanza,  is  said  to  apply,  meaning  that  spot  which  contains  the 
essence  of  the  earth,  that  is  to  say,  the  altar ;  for  different  texts 
affirm  the  altar  to  be  not  only  the  essence  of  the  earth,  but  the 
whole  earth;  as,  vedim  dhuhparamantam  prith'wydk,  'they  call  the 
altar  the  utmost  end  of  the  earth;'  and  again,  etavati vai prithivir 
ydvativediriti,  so  much,  verily,  as  is  the  earth  so  much  is  the  altar.* 
In  the  repetition,  lid,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  refers  to  lid, 
the  daughter  of  Manu  (see  vol.  i.  p.  82),  and  pada  to  the  spot 
where  in  the  form  of  a  cow,  gorupd,  she  placed  her  feet,  pddanydsa

where  in  the  form  of  a  cow,  gorupd,  she  placed  her  feet,  pddanydsa 
pradese,  alluding  to  the  legendary  account  of  Mann's  daughter 
being  the  first  institutor  of  sacrificial  rites,  and  referring  to  some

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST    ADHYAYA.  25

2.  We  propitiate  that  instrument  of  sacrifice  by 
the  path  of  sacrifice,  by  reverential  salutation,  and 
by  oblations  of  clarified  butter ;  by  oblations  (offered) 
to  the  gods :  and  he  accepts  our  offerings,  and 
through  his  benignity  quits  not  (the  rite  until  its 
close),  the  divinity  whom  the  wind  brought  from 
afar  for  the  service  of  Manu  :  (may  he  come)  from 
afar  (to  our  sacrifice),^

3.  Agni,  who  is  ever  to  be  hymned,  the  giver

(to  our  sacrifice),^3.  Agni,  who  is  ever  to  be  hymned,  the  giver

(to  our  sacrifice),^

3.  Agni,  who  is  ever  to  be  hymned,  the  giver 
of  food,  the  showerer  (of  benefits),  comes  imme- 
diately (upon  our  invocation),  in  approach  to  (the 
altar  of)  earth,  loud-sounding,  vigorous,  and  loud- 
sounding  :  the  rapid  and  divine  (Agni,  incited  by 
praise),  manifests  himself  a  hundred-fold  by  his 
flames ;  Agni,  having  his  abode  in  high  places, 
1(comes  quickly)^  to  pious  rites.

4.  That  Agni,  who  is  (the  performer  of)  holy 
acts,  the  priest  of  the  family,  thinks  in  every  dwell- 
ing of  the  imperishable  sacrifice  ;  he  thinks  of  the 
sacrifice  (reminded)  by  (its)  celebration  :  for  through 
.such   pious  rite,  he,  the  bestower  of  (fit)  rewards,

for  through 
.such   pious  rite,  he,  the  bestower  of  (fit)  rewards,

mantra  or  praysv  addressed  to  her:  IM  vai  Manavi  yajndnuhd' 
sinydsid  itiHayd  pade  ghritavati.  swdJid.  Icld,  the  daughter  of  Manu, 
was  the  institutor  of  sacrifice,  glory  to  the  butter- charged  foot- 
mark of  /^a.

*  Bhdh  pardvata-abhdsit ,  shone  or  made  to  shine ;  according  to 
.Sdyana,  placed  suitably  upon  earth,  having  been  brought  from 
the  distant  sun ;  atiddram  gatavata  dditydd  ahhdsit  aucJiityena 
hhvmau  sthdpitavdn.

^  There  is  no  copulative  in  the  text :  the  verb  is  supplied  by 
the  commentator.

26  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

accepts  all  the  offered  oblations  for  (the  good  of)  the

DA   SANHITA.

accepts  all  the  offered  oblations  for  (the  good  of)  the 
worshipper ;  whence  he  has  become  as  a  guest,  fed 
abundantly  with  butter;  and  the  offerer  (of  the 
oblations)  has  become  the  realizer  of  the  rewards 
(of  the  worship).6.  Inasmuch  as  (all  men)  offer  in  holy  rite  (food) 
for  his  satisfaction  in  the  blazing  (flames)  of  Agni, 
like  (the  grains  that)  are  to  be  enjoyed  by  the 
winds,  and  like  the  viands  that  are  to  be  given  to 
him  who  solicits  them  ;  therefore  the  worshipper 
presents  gifts  to  him,  according  to  the  extent  of  his 
opulence;  and  he  preserves  us,  when  oppressed  (by 
sin),  from  wickedness ;  from  overpowering  malevo- 
lence and  sin.

Varga  XV.  g.

rom  wickedness ;  from  overpowering  malevo- 
lence and  sin.

Varga  XV.  g.  The  universal,  mighty  and  imperious"  (Agni) 
holds  riches  in  his  right  hand  ;  but,  like  the  sun,'' 
he  loosens  his  grasp  (in  favour  of  his  worshipper), 
although  he  relaxes  not  from  his  desire  of  the 
(sacrificial)  food.  Verily,  Agni,  thou  bearest  the 
oblation  to  every  one  of  the  gods  who  desires  it ; 
Agni  grants  blessings  to  every  pious  (worshipper), 
and  opens  for  him  the  gates  (of  heaven).

7.  Agni  is  a  most  amiable  friend  in  human  in-

"  Arati,  one  who  is  not  easily  pleased,  a  sovereign ;  aratiris- 
uiara-fframatndnah  vd  apr{t(h.

^  Tarinir  na>  as  explained  by  the  Scholiast  tdrakah  surya-wa,

{t(h.

^  Tarinir  na>  as  explained  by  the  Scholiast  tdrakah  surya-wa, 
like  him  who  conveys  across  (the  sea  of  life  or  the  world),  i.  e. 
the  sun  :  or  the  epithet  may  be  applied  to  Agni,  when  na  in  the 
negative  sense  is  attached  to  the  following  verb,  sisrathat, 
loosened,  let  go,  the  conveyer  (across  the  world)  has  not  let  go, 
has  not  cast  off  or  deserted  his  worshipper.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHyAyA.  27SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHyAyA.  27

firmity  through  the  means  of  sacrifices ;  the  beloved 
protector  of  all  in  sacrifices,  like  a  victorious  prince, 
he  alights  upon  the  oblations  of  men  when  placed 
upon  the  altar :  he  preserves  us  from  the  malignity 
of  Varuna  ;  from  the  malignity  of  the  mighty  deity

m  the  malignity 
of  Varuna  ;  from  the  malignity  of  the  mighty  deity 
(of  sin).''

8.  They,  (the  devout),  praise  Agni,  the  invoker 
(of  the  gods),  the  possessor  of  wealth,  the  beloved, 
the  thoughtful ;  they  have  recourse  to  him  as  to  a 
sovereign  ;  they  have  recourse  to  him  as  the  bearer 
of  oblations :  to  him,  who  is  the  life  (of  all  living 
beings),  who  knows  all  things,  the  oiferer  of  obla- 
tions, the  object  of  worship,  the  sage :  the  sacred 
(priests),  desirous  of  affluence,  murmur  (his  praises) 
to  obtain  his  protection ;  desirous  of  affluence,  they 
murmur  (his  praises)  in  their  hymns.

SUKTA  III.  (CXXIX.) 
The  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  unchaaiged. 
1.

(CXXIX.) 
The  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  unchaaiged. 
1.  Indra,  frequenter  of  sacrifices,  quickly  enable    Varga  xvi. 
him  to  attain  his  desires,  to  whom  thou  repairest  in 
thy  car  to  receive  the  oblation ;  and  for  whom,  as 
he  is  mature  (in  understanding)  and  devout,  thou 
who  art  without  fault,  entertainest  regard.     Accept 
his  offering,   for  thou  who   art    without   fault,  art

^  The  expressions  are  rather  ara])iguous,  irdsate  Vamtiasi/a 
dhurtter  maJio  devasya  dhurtieh,  and  the  commentator  seems  to 
prefer  rendering  them  *  preserves  us  from  the  malevolence  of  the 
obstructor  of  religious  rites'  {Varuna  being  explained  by  Vdraka,the 
obstructor  of  religious  rites'  {Varuna  being  explained  by  Vdraka, 
the  impeder) — from  the  malevolence  of  the  mighty  deity  presiding 
over  sin,  pdjia  devatd.

28  TLIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

prompt  to  favour  us  (among)  the  pious  (offerers  of 
oblations),  as  (thou  acceptest)  this  our  praise.

2.  Hear  our  invocation,  Inrlra :  thou  who  in 
various  battles  (associated)  with  the  Marufs,  art 
animated  through  their  encouragement;  (and  art 
able),  with  the  Maruts,^  to  destroy  (thy  foes) :  (for 
thou  art)  he,  who,  (aided)  by  heroes,  art  of  thyself 
the  giver  (of  victory) ;  or,  (when  praised)  by  the 
pious,  the  giver  of  food,  and  whom  the  lords  (of 
prayer)  celebrate,  as  swift-moving  and  eager  (for

whom  the  lords  (of 
prayer)  celebrate,  as  swift-moving  and  eager  (for 
sacrificial  food),  like  a  fleet  courser  (eager  for 
forage).

3.  Thou,  the  subduer  (of  adversaries),  piercest 
every  rain  (confining)  skin ;  thou  overtakest,  hero, 
every  flying  mortal  (cloud),  and  abandonest  (it) 
when  exhausted  (of  its  water) '}  for  such  glorious 
deed,  Indra,  I  offer  praise  to  thee ;  to  heaven ;  to 
the   self-glorifying    Rudra  ;*'  to   Mitra;  (to  each)

Nribkih  is  the  term  of  the  text  in  both  this  and  the  preceding 
phrase,  and  is  rendered  by  the  Scholiast  MariUs,  or  it  may  mean, 
he  adds,  by  men,  i.  e.  by  the  worshippers.

As  in  the  other  stanzas  of  this  hymn,  the  language  of  this  is

s.As  in  the  other  stanzas  of  this  hymn,  the  language  of  this  is

s.

As  in  the  other  stanzas  of  this  hymn,  the  language  of  this  is 
obscure ;  we  have  ydvir  aruram  martyam,  parivrinahshi  martyam, 
'  thou  mixest  with  the  departing  mortal,  thou  abandonest  the 
mortal ;'  the  Scholiast  explains  the  first  martyam  by  '  cloud,'  the 
skin  that  contains  the  rain,  vrishanam,  twacham,  trying  to  escape, 
like  an  enemy,  from  the  hero  S  ura ;  the  second  martyam  he  also 
renders  cloud,  but  it  is  after  it  has  parted  with  its  water,  like  an 
enemy  who  has  been  killed,  and  whom  the  victor  abandons.

Rudrdya  swayasase  to  Rudra,  i.  e.  Agni,  possessed  of  his  own 
fame,  swakiyayaso-yuktdya  agnaye.

SECOND   ASH^AKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  29

ame,  swakiyayaso-yuktdya  agnaye.

SECOND   ASH^AKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  29

the  benefactor    (of   mankind)    for    such    glorious 
(deed).

4.  We  desire,  (priests),  Indra  to  be  present  at 
your  sacrifice,  (he  who  is)  our  friend,  the  frequenter 
of  all  (ceremonies),  the  endurer  (of  enemies),  the 
ally  (of  his  worshippers),  the  patient  expecter  of 
(sacrificial)  viands,  associated  (with  the  Maruts)', 
do  thou,  Indra,  guard  our  holy  rite  for  our  preser- 
vation, for  in  whatsoever  contests  (thou  raayest 
engage),  no  enemy,  whom  thou  opposest,  prevails 
against  thee ;  thou  prevailest  over  every  enemy 
whom  (thou  opposest).

5.  Humble  the  adversary  of  every  one  (thy  wor-

om  (thou  opposest).5.  Humble  the  adversary  of  every  one  (thy  wor-

om  (thou  opposest).

5.  Humble  the  adversary  of  every  one  (thy  wor- 
shipper), fierce  (Indra),  by  thy  aids,  like  radiant 
paths,  (to  glory);  by  thy  powerful  aids,  guide  us, 
hero,  as  thou  hast  guided  our  forefathers,  for  thou 
art  honoured  (by  all).  Thou,  (Indra),  who  art  the 
sustainer  (of  the  world),  removest  all  (the  (sins)  of 
man :  present  at  our  sacrifice,  thou  art  the  bearer 
(of  good  things).

6.  May  I  be  competent  to  utter  (praise)  for  the   Varga  xvil. 
{Soma)  libation,  sustaining  existence,   which,   like

the  (deity)  to  be  invoked,  (Indra),  goes  abounding 
with  food  to  (each)  venerable  (rite) ;  the  destroyer 
of  Rdkshasas  at  (each)  venerable  (rite).  May  that

e) ;  the  destroyer 
of  Rdkshasas  at  (each)  venerable  (rite).  May  that 
(libation)  of  itself  repress  with  chastisement  the 
malevolence  of  him  who  reviles  us  :  let  the  thief 
fall  downwards  (and  perish),  like  a  little  (water) 
running  down  (a  declivity).

7.  We  praise  thee,  Indra,  with  praises,  making 
known  (thy  glory) :  we  solicit,  giver  of  rjches,  the

30  RIQ-VEDA   SANIIITA.

wealth  that  bestows  vigour,  that  is  agreeable,  dura- 
ble, and  the  support  of  progeny.  May  we  (ever) 
be  possessed  of  (abundant)  food,  through  the  praises 
of  thee,  whom  it  is  difficult  adequately  to  honour: 
may  we  attain  the  adorable  (Indra)  by  true  and 
earnest  invocations  ;  by  invocations,  (offering  sacri-

)  by  true  and 
earnest  invocations  ;  by  invocations,  (offering  sacri- 
ficial) food.)  by  true  and 
earnest  invocations  ;  by  invocations,  (offering  sacri- 
ficial) food.

8.  Indra  is  powerful  in  the  discomfiture  of  the 
malevolent  by  his  self-glorifying  aids,  (granted)  unto 
you  and  unto  us :  (he  is)  the  tearer  of  the  malevo- 
lent (to  pieces) :  the  impetuous  host  that  was  sent 
against  us  by  devouring  (foes)  to  destroy  us,  has 
been  itself  destroyed :  it  will  not  reach  us ;  it  will 
not  do  us  harm.

9.  Do  thou,  Indra,  come  to  us  with  abundant 
riches  by  a  path  free  from  evil ;  (by  a  path)  unob- 
structed by  Rdkshasas :  be  with  us  when  afar ;  be 
with  us  when  nigh  ;  favour  us,  whether  afar  or 
nigh,  with  the  objects  of  our  desires ;  ever  favour

whether  afar  or 
nigh,  with  the  objects  of  our  desires ;  ever  favour 
us  with  the  objects  of  our  dt^sires.

10.  Do  thou,  Indra,  (sustain  us)  with  wealth 
that  transports  (man  beyond  calamity) ;  for,  (en- 
hanced) greatness  accrues  to  thee,  however  mighty, 
(from  our  thanks)  for  (thy)  protection,  as  it  does  to 
Mitra   for  his  powerful    protection,"  most   potent

Twd  maJi'and  Siikshud  avase  make  mitram  na  avase,  lit.  great- 
ness is  present  to  thee  for  protection  as  to  miti-a  for  great  protec- 
tion ;  or  mitra  may  be  rendered  friend/  as  praises  animate  a 
friend  with  great  attachment,  tarn  sakhuyam  yathd  mahatyai  pn'taye 
iambhajante.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  31:

mahatyai  pn'taye 
iambhajante.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  31:

and  immortal  (Indra),  our  defender  and  preserver, 
(ascend)  some  chariot,  (and  come  hither) :  devourer 
(of  foes),  repel  any  one  assailing  us ;  any  one  assail- 
ing us,  devourer^  (of  foes).11.  Deservedly-lauded  Indra,  preserve  us  from 
suffering ;  for  thou  art  always  verily  the  chastiser  of 
the  malevolent :  thou,  being  divine,  (art  the  chas- 
tiser) of  the  malevolent :  (thou  art)  the  slayer  of  the 
wicked  liaks/ias,  the  preserver  of  a  pious  (worship-i 
per),  such  as  I  am :  for,  asylum  (of  all  men),''  the 
progenitor  has  begotten  thee  (for  this  purpose) ;  haa 
begotten  thee,  asylum  (of  all  men),  the  destroyer  of

s  purpose) ;  haa 
begotten  thee,  asylum  (of  all  men),  the  destroyer  of 
the  Rakshasas.

SUKTA    IV.    (CXXX.)

The  deity,  Riski,  and  metre,  are  continued ;  in  the  last  stanza  the 
metre  is  changed  to  TrisMubh. 
1.  Come  to  us,  Indra,   from  afar :  not  as  this  Varga  xviii, 
(fire)  which  is  before  us,  (but)  like  the  pious  insti- 
tutor  of  sacrifices,  or  like  the  royal  lord  of  the  con- 
stellations (when  going)  to   his  setting.*"     Bearing

In  both  places  the  term  is  Adrivas,  voc.  of  Adrivat,  which 
usually  means  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt  {adri) ;  but  Sdyana  here 
derives  it  fromarf,  to  eat,  and  explains  it  satrdndm  atiiayena 
bhakshaka,  the  eater  m  excess  of  enemies ;  this  is  upon  the

iiayena 
bhakshaka,  the  eater  m  excess  of  enemies ;  this  is  upon  the 
authority  of  Ydska. — Nir.  iv.  4.

Twd  janita  jtjanad-vaso :  Vasu  may  be  used  as  a  name  of 
Indra;  but  as  an  attributive  it  implies  one  who  is  the  abode  of 
all,  sarvesham  nivdsabhutah,  according  to  the  Scholiast.  By 
Janitd,  genitor,  Sdyana  understands  the  first  maker  of  the 
universe.,  the  supreme  being,  saruasya  A  dikarttd  Parameswarah.

The  passage  is   obscure ;  there  is  no  verbal  copulative ;  it

32  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.The  passage  is   obscure ;  there  is  no  verbal  copulative ;  it

32  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

oblations,  we,  along  with  (the  priests),  invoke  thee 
to  accept  the  effused  (juices),  as  sons  (invite)  a 
father  to  partake  of  food :  (we  invoke)  thee,  who

sons  (invite)  a 
father  to  partake  of  food :  (we  invoke)  thee,  who 
art  most  entitled  to  reverence,  to  (accept  of)  the 
sacrificial  viands.

2.  Drink,  Indra,  the  Soma  juice,  that  has  been 
expressed  by  the  stones,  and  sprinkled  with  the 
sacred  grass,  as  a  thirsty  ox  or  a  thirsty  man 
hastens  to  a  well/  (Drink)  for  thy  exhilaration, 
for  thy  invigoration,  for  thy  exceedingly  great 
augmentation :  let  thy  horses  bring  thee  hither,  as 
his  steeds  convey  the  sun;  as  they  carry  him 
(through  heaven)  day  by  day.

3.  He  (Indra)  found  the  {Soma)  treasure  (that 
had  been  brought)  from  heaven,  and  hidden  like 
the  nestlings  of  a  bird  in  a  rock  ;  amidst  (a  pile  of)

idden  like 
the  nestlings  of  a  bird  in  a  rock  ;  amidst  (a  pile  of)

runs,  vidutMnka  satpatir  astam  rdjeva  satpatih :  the  first  part  is 
explained  by  Sdyaria  the  cherisher  {pati  quasi  pdlaka)  of  the  good 
(satdm),  or  of  those  who  are  present,  the  priests,  or  of  the  extant 
{satdm)  rewards  of  holy  rites :  that  is,  either  as  the  Yajamdna,  or 
ia  the  last  place,  Agni,  comes  to  or  exhibits  the  knowledge  of 
what  is  to  be  performed,  vidathdni  anushtheyajndndni ;  or  is  present 
in  the  apartments  of  sacrifice,  vidathdni  yajna-grihdni.  In  the 
reiteration  of  the  phrase,  satpati  is  rendered  the  lord  of  the  con- 
stellations, the  moon,  nahsliatrdndm  patis-chandramdh ;  who  corneacon- 
stellations, the  moon,  nahsliatrdndm  patis-chandramdh ;  who  cornea 
to  his  own  abode  at  the  time  of  setting,  sa  yathd  swa  dhamas- 
thdnam  dgachchhati ;  and  in  like  manner  Indra  is  invited  to  come 
to  the  sacrifice.

Avatam  na  vnnsagas-tatrishuno  na  vansagah  :  in  the  repetition, 
vansaga  is  explained  vanan{yagamana,  s(ghra  gdmi,  purushah,  a 
mangeing  swiftly;  but  it  is  probably  a  mere  reiteration,  like  a 
thirsty  c_  to  a  well — like  an  ox.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  33

vast  rocks  inclosed  (by  bushes)  :*  desiring  to  partake 
(of  the  beverage),  the  thunderer  (found  it),  as  the 
chief  of  the  A ngirasas  (discovered),  the  hiding-place

nd  it),  as  the 
chief  of  the  A ngirasas  (discovered),  the  hiding-place 
of  the  cows :  he  opened  the  doors  of  (the  waters, 
the  sources  of)  food,  when  shut  up  (in  the  clouds ; 
the  sources  of)  food,  that  were  spread  (over  the 
earth).''

4.  Grasping  his  sharp  thunderbolt  with  both 
hands,  Indra  whetted  it  to  hurl  it  (on  his  foes), 
like  the  water  (of  an  imprecation)  :'^  he  whetted  it 
for  the  destruction  of  Ahi.  Indra,  who  art  fully 
endowed  with  strength,  with  energy,  with  might, 
thou  cuttest  (our  enemies)  to  pieces,  as  a  wood- 
cutter the  trees  of  a  forest;  thou  cuttest  them  to 
pieces  as  if  with  a  hatchet.

5.  Thou  hast  without  effort*  created  the  rivers

if  with  a  hatchet.

5.  Thou  hast  without  effort*  created  the  rivers 
(that  are)  to  flow  to  the  sea,  like  chariots  (bearing 
thee  to  sacrifices),  as  those  (construct)  chariots  who

The  Soma  plant,  it  is  usually  affirmed,  is  brought  from 
mountainous  tracts :  according  to  the  Taittinyas  it  was  brought 
from  heaven  by  Gdyatri, — Divi  Soma  dstt  tarn  Gdyatri  dharat,  *  the 
Soma  was  in  heaven  ;   Gdyatri  brought  it  away.*Ishah  parwritdh  is  the  reiterated  phrase,  alluding  in  the  first 
place,  according  to  Sdyana,  to  the  rains  shut  up  in  the  clouds,  and 
in  the  second  to  the  seeds  shut  up  in  the  earth,  germinating  on 
the  fall  of  the  rain,  and  affording,  in  either  case,    food,'  ishah.

e  fall  of  the  rain,  and  affording,  in  either  case,    food,'  ishah.

That  is,  like  water  which  is  poured  out  for  the  destruction  of 
enemies,  rendered  fatal  by  the  formulse  of  imprecation,  udakam 
yathd  satriindm  nirasandya  abhhnantranddisanskdrena  tikshniknyate.

Vrithd,   which   usually   means   fruitlessly,  in  vain,   is  here 
explained  by  aprayatnena,  without  effort. 
VOL.  II.  D

34  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

are  desirous  of  (going  to)  battle:  (the  streams) 
flowing  hither  have  gathered  together  their  water 
for  a  common  purpose,  like  the  cows  that  yielded 
all  things  to  Manu  ;  that  yield  all  things  to  man. 
Varga  XIX.  6.  Men  who  are  desirous  of  wealth  have  recited

to  man. 
Varga  XIX.  6.  Men  who  are  desirous  of  wealth  have  recited 
this  thy  praise,  as  a  resolute  and  provident  man 
(prepares)  a  chariot  (for  a  journey) :  they  have  pro- 
pitiated thee  for  their  good:  glorifying  thee,  sage 
Indra,  as  impetuous  in  conflicts,  they  have  praised 
thee  (as  men  praise)  a  conqueror.  We  praise  thee 
for  (the  acquirement  of)  strength,  wealth,  and  every 
kind  of  aflHuence ;  as  (they  commend)  a  courser  (for 
his  good  qualities)  in  battle.

7.  For  PuRU,  the  giver  of  oflerings,  for  the 
mighty  Divodasa,  thou,  Indra,  the  dancer"  (with 
delight  in  battle),  hast  destroyed  ninety  cities; 
dancer  (in  battle),  thou  hast  destroyed  them  withoyed  ninety  cities; 
dancer  (in  battle),  thou  hast  destroyed  them  with 
(thy  thunderbolt),  for  (the  sake  of)  the  giver  of 
offerings.  For  (the  sake  of)  Atithtgwa,  the  fierce 
(Indra)  hurled  Sambara  from   off  the  mountain,^

Nfito,  voG.  of  Nritu,  a  dancer ;  raiie  narttanaSila,  dancing  in

war.

b

We  have  had  Indra  s  exploits  in  defence  of  these  princes 
before;  see  vol.  i.  pp.  137,  147,  292 :  it  may  be  added  that  the 
Sambara  of  the  Purdias  is  an  Asura  who  was  engaged  in 
hostilities  with  KrisMa,  and  finally  destroyed,  together  with  his 
six  hundred  sons,  by  Fradyumna,  the  grandson  of  KrisMa.  (See 
Harivansa,  Langlois,  vol,  iii.  p.  169.)  The  text  of  the  Mahd^

(See 
Harivansa,  Langlois,  vol,  iii.  p.  169.)  The  text  of  the  Mahd^ 
hhurata,  however,  agrees  with  the  Veda  in  representing  him  as  the 
adversary  of  Indra. — Droiia-vijaya,  v.  39.  Selections  Mvhdbh. 
p.  39.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  35

bestowing  (upon  the  prince)  immense  treasure, 
(acquired)  by  (his)  prowess ;  all  kinds  of  wealth 
(acquired)  by  (his)  prowess.

8.  Indra,  the  manifold  protector  (of  his  votaries) 
in  battles,  defends  his  Aryn  worshipper  in  all  con- 
flicts ;  in  conflicts  that  confer  heaven  i'^  he  punished 
for  (the  benefit  of)  man  the  neglecters  of  religious 
rites  :  he  tore  off  the  black  skin  (of  the  aggressor)  '^

religious 
rites  :  he  tore  off  the  black  skin  (of  the  aggressor)  '^ 
as  if  burning  (with  flame),  he  consumes  the  malig- 
nant ;  he  utterly  consumes  him  who  delights  in 
cruelty.

9.  Endowed  with  augmented  vigour,  he  hurled 
(against  the  foes)  the  wheel  (of  the  chariot)  of  the 
sun  \^  and,  ruddy  of  hue,  deprived  them  of  exist- 
ence ;   he,    the  sovereign    lord,    deprived    them    ofSo  Pardsara;  two  descriptions  of  men  attain  the  sphere  of 
the  sun,  the  vagrant  practiser  of  the  Yoga,  and  the  hero  who  falls 
in  battle.'

According  to  the  legend,  an  Asura,  named  Krishna  the  black, 
advanced  with  ten  thousand  followers  to  the  banks  of  the  Ansumati

k, 
advanced  with  ten  thousand  followers  to  the  banks  of  the  Ansumati 
river,  where  he  committed  fearful  devastation,  until  Indra,  with 
the  Maruts,  was  sent  against  him  by  Brihaspati,  when  he  was 
defeated  by  Indra,  and  stripped  of  his  skin.

Suraschakram  pravrihad,  he  threw  the  sun's  wheel ;  for 
Suryasya  rathasya  ckakram,  the  wheel  of  the  chariot  of  the  sun, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  who  cites  a  legend  that  the  Asuras 
obtained  a  boon  frotn  Brahma,  that  they  should  not  be  destroyed 
by  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  and  having  in  consequence  defied 
him,  he  cast  at  theTici  the  wheel  of  the  sun's  car,  which  was 
equally  fatal :  this  has  more  the  character  of  a  Paurdnik  than  a

s 
equally  fatal :  this  has  more  the  character  of  a  Paurdnik  than  a 
Vaidik  legend :  another  explanation  is  also  proposed  :  the  Sun 
(or  Indra  in  that  capacity)  having  risen,  urges  on  his  car,   and

D    2

36  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

existence.'  As  thou,  sage  Indra,  comest  from  afar 
to  the  succour  of  Usanas,  so  do  thou  come  quickly, 
bearing  all  good  things  (to  us),  as  thou  bearest  to 
(other)  men  ;  come  quickly  (to  us)  every  day.

10.  Showerer  of  benefits,  destroyer  of  cities, 
propitiated  by  our  new  songs,  reward  us  with 
gratifying  blessings:  glorified,  Indra,  by  the  de- 
scendants of  Divodasa,^  increase  (in  power),  like 
the  sun  in  (revolving)  days.

SuktaV.  (CXXXI.)

ase  (in  power),  like 
the  sun  in  (revolving)  days.

SuktaV.  (CXXXI.)SuktaV.  (CXXXI.)

ase  (in  power),  like 
the  sun  in  (revolving)  days.

SuktaV.  (CXXXI.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre  are  unchanged ;  the  hymn  is  divided 
into  three  Trichas,  or  triplets,  according  to  the  different  occa- 
sions on  which  the  several  portions  are  recited,  and  the  priests 
to   whom   the   portions   are   respectively  assigned ;   the  first 
Tricha  being  repeated  by  the  Maitrdvaruia ;  the  second,  com- 
mencing with  the  third  stanza,  by  the  Bramdchchkansi ;  and  the 
third,  beginning  with  the  fifth  verse,  by  the  Achchhdvdka. 
Varga  XX.         1.  To  Indra  hcaveu,  that  excludes  the  wicked, 
verily  has  bowed :  to  Indra  the  wide-spread  earth 
(has  offered  homage)  with  acceptable  (praises) ;  with

ide-spread  earth 
(has  offered  homage)  with  acceptable  (praises) ;  with 
acceptable  praises  (the  worshipper  has  propitiated 
Indra)   for   the  sake   of  food :  all  the  gods  well 
pleased  have   given  precedence  to  Indra  :  let  all

Aruna  (his  charioteer)  silences  the  clamom-  (of  his  enemies)  ;  the 
lord  (of  day)  dissipates  the  gloom.

Vdcham  mushdyati,  lit.  '  steals  or  takes  away  speech  ;'  the 
latter,  it  is  said,  put  by  meton)rmy  for  breath,  i.  e.  life  ;  or  it 
may  mean  silences  clamour,  or  suppresses  his  ovm  exclamations  : 
the  Scholiast  is  evidently  puzzled  by  the  phrase.

Divoddsebhih,  by  us,  the  Pdruchchbepas,  or  me,  Parvch- 
chhepa,  the  plur.  being  used  honorifically.

chbepas,  or  me,  Parvch- 
chhepa,  the  plur.  being  used  honorifically.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  37

the  sacrifices  of  men   (be  appropriated)  to  Indra  ; 
let  all  the  offerings  of  men  be  (presented  to  him).SECOND   ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  37

the  sacrifices  of  men   (be  appropriated)  to  Indra  ; 
let  all  the  offerings  of  men  be  (presented  to  him).

2.  Hoping  to  partake  of  thy  bounties,  (thy  wor- 
shippers) hasten  severally  in  every  rite  to  (adore) 
thee,  vrho  ask  one  and  all ;  each  severally  seeking 
heaven.  We  meditate  on  thee,  the  sustainer  of  our 
strength,  like  a  boat  that  bears  (passengers)  across 
(a  stream):  mortals,  indeed,  knowing  Indra,  pro- 
pitiate him  with  sacrifices;  mortals  (propitiate  him) 
with  hymns.

3.  The   (married)    couples,*   anxious    to    satisfy

) 
with  hymns.

3.  The   (married)    couples,*   anxious    to    satisfy

Mithundh,  *  the  paii's ;'  according  to  the  Scholiast,  couples, 
consisting  of  husband  and  wife ;  the  right  of  the  wife,  which  is 
here  intimated,  to  take  an  active  part  in  religious  ceremonies  is 
contrary  to  the  precepts  of  the  law,  which  prohibit  her  sharing 
in  the  celebration  of  any  solemnity  except  that  of  marriage,  and 
rfie  is  on  no  occasion  to  repeat  mantras,  sacred  or  Vaidik  texts. 
The  Mimdnsd,  however,  is  cited  by  the  commentator  to  show  that 
she  may  be  associated  with  her  husband  in  oblations  to  fire,  as 
by  the  text,  Jdydpati  agnim  adMydtdm,  let  wife  and  husbandfire,  as 
by  the  text,  Jdydpati  agnim  adMydtdm,  let  wife  and  husband 
place  the  fire  ;'  and  she  may  be  instructed  in  the  mantras  for  the 
special  occasion,  although  not  authorized  to  engage  in.  a  course  of 
study  of  the  Vedas ;  adhyayandbhdve  apt  vedam  patnyai  praddya 
vdchayet,  since  there  is  no  regular  reading  (of  the  Veda),  he 
(the  husband),  having  imparted  the  Veda  to  his  wife,  may  cause 
her  to  recite  it;'  and  she  joins  in  the  mantra  or  prayer,  suprajdsas 
twd  vayam,  &c.,  we,  having  good  progeny,  praise  thee  :  the  pro- 
hibition, then,  according  to  Sdyana,  does  not  preclude  a  wife  from 
taking  part  in  sacred  rites  with  her  husband,  or  from  joining  in

m 
taking  part  in  sacred  rites  with  her  husband,  or  from  joining  in 
prayers  which  he  has  taught  her,  but  is  intended  to  exclude  her 
from  a  coarse  of  indopendeul  study  of  the  Vedas  and  the  celebra- 
tion of  sacrifices  by  herself  alone.

38  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

thee,  and  presenting  (oblations)  together,  celebrate 
(thy  worship),  for  the  sa'ke  of  (obtaining)  herds  of 
cattle;  presenting  (thee),  Indra  (oblations):  thou 
well  knowest  that  these  two  persons  are  desirous  of 
cattle,  are  desirous  of  heaven,  and  (thou  abidest), 
displaying  thy  thunderbolt,  the  showerer  (of 
benefits),  thy  constant  companion,  ever,  Indra, 
associated  (with  thee).

4.  The  aucients  have  known  of  that  thy  prowess,

iated  (with  thee).

4.  The  aucients  have  known  of  that  thy  prowess, 
by  which,  Indra,  thou  destroyest  the  perennial 
cities^  (of  the  Asuras) :  thou  hast  destroyed  them, 
humiliating  (their  defenders).  Thou  hast  chastised. 
Lord  of  Strength,  the  mortal  who  offers  not  sacri- 
fice :  thou  hast  rescued  this  spacious  earth  and  these 
waters ;  exulting,  (thou  hast  recovered)  these  waters.5.  Thenceforth  have  thy  worshippers  scattered 
(libations)  for  the  augmentation  of  thy  vigour,  that 
in  thy  exhilaration,  showerer  (of  benefits),  thou 
mayst  defend  those  who  are  solicitous  (of  thy 
favour) ;  that  thou  mayst  defend  those  who  are 
desirous  of  (thy)  friendship  :  for  them  thou  bast

nd  those  who  are 
desirous  of  (thy)  friendship  :  for  them  thou  bast 
uttered  a  shout''  to  encourage  them  in  combats  ; 
from  thee  they  obtain  many  and  many  an  enjoy- 
ment ;  anxious  for  food,  they  obtain  it  (from  thee).

"  Purah  sdradih,  defended,  according  to  Sdyafia,  for  a  year 
by  walls,  ditches,  aud  the  like,  samvatsara  paryantam  prakdra- 
parikhddibhir  dridliikritdh.

Chakartha  kdram.  The  commentator  explains  kdra  by  sahda, 
sound ;  sinhandda  lakshanam,  meaning  war-cry ;  or  the  words 
might  be  rendered,  '  thou  hast  done  a  deed,'  i.  e.  performed  a

service

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  39

6.  Will  (Indra)  be  present  at  this  our  morning

FIRST   ADHYAYA.  39

6.  Will  (Indra)  be  present  at  this  our  morning 
rite :  be  apprized,  (Indra),  of  the  oblation  offered 
with  (due)  observances;  offered  with  (due)  obser- 
vances for  the  sake  of  (obtaining)  heaven :  and 
since,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  showerer  (of 
benefits),  thou  knowest  how  to  destroy  the  malevo- 
lent, do  thou,  therefore,  listen  to  the  acceptable 
(praise)  of  me,  intelligent,  though  a  novice ;  (hear 
it  fram  me)  a  novice.^

7.  Indra,  endowed  Mith  many  (excellences),  do 
thou,  who  art  exalted  (by  our  praises),  and  art  well 
disposed  towards  us,  (slay)  the  man  who  is  unfriendly 
to  us  ;  (slay)  such  a  man,  hero,  with  thy  thunderbolt :unfriendly 
to  us  ;  (slay)  such  a  man,  hero,  with  thy  thunderbolt : 
kill  him  who  sins  against  us ;  ever  most  prompt  to 
hear,  hear  (us) :  let  every  ill  intent  (towards  us, 
such  as  alarms)  a  wearied  (traveller)  on  the  road,'' 
be  counteracted ;  let  every  ill  intent  be  counteracted.

SiJktaVI.  (CXXXII.)

The  deity,  Riski,  and  metre,  are  the  same ;  but  in  the  last  stanza 
Indra  is  associated  Math  Parvata.

1.  (Possessed   of)  former  opulence,  Maghavan,    Varga  xxi. 
(through  thy  bounty) ;  protected,  Indra,  by  thee, 
may  we  overcome  those  who  are  arrayed  in  (hostile) 
hosts :  may  wo  anticipate    (our)    assailants.     (The 
sacrifice)  of  to-day  being  nigh,  speak  encouragingly

ssailants.     (The 
sacrifice)  of  to-day  being  nigh,  speak  encouragingly

Me  naviyasa,  of  me  most  new.

Rishtam  na  ydman,  Hke  one  wearied  on  the  road  ;  towards 
whom  evil  designs  may  be  entertained  by  robbers,  du7'maUs- 
chaurddivishayd.

40  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

to  the  presenter  of  the  libation :  May  we  bring- 
together  at  this  rite  (suitable  offerings  and  praises) 
to  thee,  the  victor  in  war ;  worshipping  thee,  the 
victor  in  war."

2.  In  the  combat  which  secures  heaven,  Indra, 
(treading)  in  the  appropriate  and  straight  path  of 
the  active  (combatant),  as  well  as  in  his  own 
appropriate  and  straight  (path),^  destroys  (the 
adversary)  of  him  who  wakes  at  dawn  and  cele-

path),^  destroys  (the 
adversary)  of  him  who  wakes  at  dawn  and  cele- 
brates (pious  rites) :  he  is  therefore  to  be  adored 
with  the  head  (bowed  down),  as  reverence  is  paid 
by  prostration  to  a  holy  sage.  May  thy  treasures, 
(Indra),  be  accumulated  upon  us ;  may  the  trea- 
sures of  thee  who  art  auspicious  be  auspicious  (to 
us).3.  Indra,  in  whatsoever  rite  (the  priests)  from  of 
old  have  placed  the  brilliant  (sacrificial)  food  for 
thee  upon  the  altar,  in  that  place  of  sacrifice  thou 
abidest  '^  do  thou  declare  that  (rite),  that  men  may

Bhare  kritam  is  explained  in  both  places  sangrdme  jayasya 
karttdram.

Swasminnanjad,  are  the  words  reiterated;  epithets  in  both

karttdram.

Swasminnanjad,  are  the  words  reiterated;  epithets  in  both 
places  of  vakman  for  vakmani,  marge,  in  the  road  or  path ;  the 
first  is  as  usual,  own,  peculiar;  the  latter  is  explained  honest, 
straight,  free  from  fraud,  kapatddirahite ;  or  open,  unconcealed, 
aprachchanne.

Ritasya  vdrasi  kshayam — yajnasya  nivdsasthdnam  samhhaktosi, 
thou  art  possessed  of  the  place  of  the  abode  of  the  sacrifice, 
termed  Rita,  or  the  true,  as  giving  unfailing  reward ;  or  Rita 
may  mean  water,  when  the  expression,  thou  abidest  in  the 
dwelling  of  the   water,    is   equivalent   to   the   sender   of  rain.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  41

thence  behold  the  intermediate  (firmament  bright)

A FIRST   ADHYAYA.  41

thence  behold  the  intermediate  (firmament  bright) 
with  the  rays  (of  the  sun) :  for  this,  Indra,  the 
searcher  (of  rain,  is)  the  searcher  after  cattle,  for 
(the  benefit  of)  his  kindred  (worshippers),  and 
knows  in  due  course  (the  season  of  the  rain).*

4.  Thy  exploits,  Indra,  are  worthy  to  be  glorified ; 
now,  verily,  as  well  as  in  former  times,  when  thou 
didst  open  the  cloud  for  the  Angnasas,  restoring  to 
them  their  cattle** — conquer  for  us,  fight  for  us,  as 
thou  didst  for  them  :  humble  in  behalf  of  those  who 
present  libations,  him  who  offers  no  worship;  hini 
who  rages  against  us,  and  offers  no  worship.

fers  no  worship;  hini 
who  rages  against  us,  and  offers  no  worship.fers  no  worship;  hini 
who  rages  against  us,  and  offers  no  worship.

vrishiiprado  asi;  or  another  interpretation  is  proposed,  Rita  mean- 
ing the  sun,  and  the  verb  having  a  causal  power ;  thou  causest 
(the  sacrificer)  to  go  to  the  region  of  the  sun.

This  part  of  the  stanza  requires  even  more  than  the  usually 
necessary  amplification  to  be  rendered  at  all  intelligible.  It  is 
sa  gha  vide  anwindro  gaveshano  handhuksMdbhyo  gaveshanah,  lite- 
rally, he  verily  knows  in  order,  Indra,  the  searcher,  for  those  who 
have  the  quality  of  kindred,  the  searcher ;  gaveshana  is  explained, 
in  the  first  place,  by  the  Scholiast,  udakasydnvhhana  silah,  pos-

d, 
in  the  first  place,  by  the  Scholiast,  udakasydnvhhana  silah,  pos- 
sessed of  or  practising  the  seeking  after  water,  the  sender  of  rain ; 
in  the  second,  it  is  rendered  gavdm  eshanakartta,  the  maker  of 
search  after  the  cows,  alluding  to  the  old  legend ;  or  it  may  mean, 
it  is  said,  the  seeker  for  the  rewaid  of  the  worshipper,  yajamdna 
phalasya  murgayatd:  the  object  of  vide  or  anuvide,  he  knows  in  order, 
is  filled  up  by  udakaprdptiprakdsam,  he  understands  the  mani- 
festation of  the  attainment  or  arrival,  in  due  season,  of  the  rains.

Vrajam  is  the  word  of  repetition,  implying,  in  the  first 
instance,  according  to  Sdyaiia,  a  cloud ;  in  the  second,  the  cattle

instance,  according  to  Sdyaiia,  a  cloud ;  in  the  second,  the  cattle 
of  the  Angirasas,  stolen  by  Pai'd;  the  word  properly  meaning  a 
cow- pen  or  pasture.

42  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.42  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  Inasmuch  as  the  hero,  (Indra),  rightly  judges 
men  by  their  deeds,  therefore  do  the  (pious),  sacri- 
ficing (to  him)  for  sustenance,  become  enabled,  by 
the  wealth  that  has  been  attained,  to  overcome 
(their  foes) :  desirous  of  food,**  they  diligently  wor- 
ship (him) :  the  (sacrificial)  food  offered  to  him  is 
the  source  of  progeny  (to  the  worshipper),  and 
(men)  worship  him,  that  by  their  own  strength  they 
may  overcome  (their  foes) :  pious  sacrificers  enjoy

own  strength  they 
may  overcome  (their  foes) :  pious  sacrificers  enjoy 
residence  in  the  heaven  of  Indra  ;^  pious  sacrificers 
are,  as  it  were,  in  the  presence  of  the  gods.

6.  Indra  and  Parvata,"  who  are  foremost  in 
battles,  slay  every  one  who  is  arrayed  against  us ; 
slay  every  such  (adversary)  with  the  thunderbolt — 
(the  shaft  that)  bent  upon  his  destruction  pursues 
him,  however  far,  or  to  whatever  hiding-place  he 
may  have*  fled.  Thou,  hero,  (tearest)  our  enemies 
entirely  to  pieces  ;  the  tearer  (of  foes,  the  thunder- 
bolt), rends  them  entirely  asunder.

Sravasyavak,  plur.  oi  sravimju,  derived  from  a  nominal  verb, 
sravasya,  from  iravas,  food  or  fame,  implying  a  wish  or  desire

verb, 
sravasya,  from  iravas,  food  or  fame,  implying  a  wish  or  desire 
for  either  :  the  SchoHast  proposes  to  render  it,  the  first  time,  by 
they,  desirous  of  food, — '  and  the  second,  by  '  desirous  of 
offering  food — '  oblations  to  Tndra ;  but  the  variation  does  not 
seem  to  be  necessaiy.

The  text  has  only  Indre,  in  Indra;  that  is  to  say,  in  the 
abode  or  vicinity  of  i«(/ra,  agreeably  to  the  wdl-known  metonymy, 
gangdydm  ghoshah,  a  village  in  or  on  the  Ganges,  i.  e.  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges.Panmta  is  said  to  mean  a  cloud ;  or  the  deity  presiding  over 
clouds,  another  form  of  Indra.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  43

SUKTA  VII.   (CXXXIII.)

Indra.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADHYAYA.  43

SUKTA  VII.   (CXXXIII.)

Indra  is  the  deity,  and  the  Rishi  is  still  Parucuchhepa,  but  the 
metre  is  diversified :  that  of  the  first  stanza  is  TrisMubh ;  of 
the  next  three  stanzas,  Anushtubh;  of  the  fifth,  Gdyatn;  the 
sixth  and  seventh  return  to  the  long  and  complex  measures  of 
Dhriti  and  Atyashti.

1.  By  sacrifice  I  purify  both  the  heaven  and  the   Varga  xmi. 
earth :  I  burn  the  wide  (realms  of  earth)  that  are 
without  Indra,  and  are  (the  haunts)  of  the  wicked : 
wherever  the  enemies  have  congregated  they  have

been  slain :  and,  utterly  destroyed,  they  sleep  in  a 
deep  pit.*

2.  Devourer  (of  foes),  having  trampled  on  the

leep  in  a 
deep  pit.*

2.  Devourer  (of  foes),  having  trampled  on  the 
heads  of  the  malignant  (hosts),^  crush  them  with 
thy  wide-spreading  foot ;  thy  vast  wide-spreading 
foot.

Vailasthdnam  aseran,  '  they  have  slept,'  or  irregularly  they 
sleep,'  in  a  place  which  is  of  the  nature  of  a  vila,  a  hole,  a  cavern, 
a  pit :  the  Scholiast  considers  the  expression  in  this  and  in  the 
third  stanza  to  be  equivalent  to  smasdna,  a  place  wherg  dead 
bodies  are  burned,  or,  as  it  would  here  seem  to  imply,  a  place 
where  they  were  buried ;  as  if  it  was  tlie  practice  to  bury  the 
dead  when  this  hymn  was  composed.  Sdyatia  also  suggests,  as

ury  the 
dead  when  this  hymn  was  composed.  Sdyatia  also  suggests,  as 
an  alternative,  the  translation  of  vailasthdnam  by  ndgaloka,  the 
Serpent-world  ;  Pdidla,  the  regions  below  the  earth ;  but  this  is 
rather  Pmirdnik,  perhaps,  than  Vaidik.In  this  and  the  next  verse  tliP  term  is  ydtumatindm ;  which 
may  be  rendered,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  hlnsdvatindm  sendndm, 
of  injury-inflicting  armies,  or  dyudha  vaHndm,  of  those  possessing 
weapons ;  or  ydtu  may  mean  Rakshasas ;  of  hosts  composed  of 
Rakshasas.

44  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

3.  Annihilate,  Maghavan,  the  might  of  malig- 
nant (hosts),  hurl  them  into  the  vile  pit ;  the  vast 
and  vile  pit.

4.  That  thou  hast  destroyed,  by  thy  assaults,

vast 
and  vile  pit.

4.  That  thou  hast  destroyed,  by  thy  assaults, 
thrice  fifty  of  such  (hosts),  is  a  deed  that  well 
becomes  thee,  although  thought  by  thee  of  little 
moment.

5.  Destroy,  Indra,  the  tawny-coloured,  fearfully- 
roaring,  Pisdchi  ;*  annihilate  all  the  Rakshasds.

6.  Hurl  headlong,  Indra,  the  vast  (cloud) :  hear 
our  supplications :  verily  the  heaven  is  in  sorrow 
like  the  earth,  through  fear,  wielder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt, (of  famine),^  as  (formerly  through  fear  of) 
Twashiri:"  most  powerful  with  mighty  energies, 
thou  assailest,  Indra,  (the  clouds)  with  terrible 
blows ;  and,  doing  no  injury  to  man,  (thou  march- 
est)  invincible,  hero,  by  (thine)  enemies;  attended,

man,  (thou  march- 
est)  invincible,  hero,  by  (thine)  enemies;  attended, 
hero,  by  three  or  by  seven  followers.*

A  kind  of  Piidcha ;  or,  according  to  some,  '  decay.'

From  the  absence  of  rain.

Ghrindn-na  bhishd :  ghrina  is  said  to  be  a  name  of  Twashiri, 
or  of  blazing  fire  personified  :  according  to  the  legend,  the  world 
being  enveloped  by  thick  darkness,  the  gods  prayed  to  Agni,  on 
which  he  burst  forth  suddenly  from  heaven  and  earth,  in  the 
shape  of  Twasht'ri,  to  the  dismay  of  both  regions,  as  by  the  text, 
sa  chobhe  Twashfur  bibhyatuh.Trisaptaih  surasatwabkih ;  the  Scholiast  explains  it  tribhih 
saptabhir  vd  anucharaih,  but  gives  no  further  interpretation  :

tribhih 
saptabhir  vd  anucharaih,  but  gives  no  further  interpretation  : 
Indra  s  followers,  the  Maruts,  are  forty-nine,  so  that  they  cannot 
be  intended ;  and  Satwabhih  must  mean  something  else  :  perhaps 
an  allusion  is  intended  to  the  seven  platters  offered  to  the  Maruts 
repeated  at  the  three  daily  rites ;  or,  attended  by  the  beings,  i.  e.

SECOND   ASHT AKA — FIRST   ADHYAYA.  45

7.  Offering  libations,  (the  worshipper)  obtains  a 
(safe)  asylum:  offering  libations,  he  destroys  his 
prostrate  foes;  (he  destroys)  the  enemies  of  the 
gods:  abounding  with  food,  and  unsubdued  (by 
adversaries),  he  hopes  to  attain,  when  offering  liba- 
tions, infinite  (riches),  for  Indra  grants  to  him  who

offering  liba- 
tions, infinite  (riches),  for  Indra  grants  to  him  who 
offers  libations  whatever  there  is  (that  he  desires) ; 
he  grants  (him)  accumulated  wealth.

anuvAka  XX.

Si5kta  I.  (CXXXIV.)

The   deity    is  Vayu  ;    the  Rishi  Paruchchhepa  ;   the  metre 
Atyaskfi,  except  in  the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  AsMi.

1.  Let  thy  swift  coursers,  Vayu,  bring  thee  Varga  xxiii. 
quickly  hither,  that  thou  majst  be  the  first  to 
drink ;  the  first  (of  the  gods)  to  drink*  of  the  Soma 
libation.  May  our  upraised,  discriminating,  and 
sincere  (praise)  be  acceptable  to  thy  mind:  come 
with  thy  steed-yoked  car^  for  (the  libation)  to  be 
presented  to  thee ;  come,  Vayu,  for  granting"  (the

e  libation)  to  be 
presented  to  thee ;  come,  Vayu,  for  granting"  (the 
objects  of  our  worship).

the  Maruts,  to  whom  the  thrice  seven  offerings  are  presented. 
See  vol.  i.  191,  note.the  Maruts,  to  whom  the  thrice  seven  offerings  are  presented. 
See  vol.  i.  191,  note.

In  both  places  the  phrase  is  purvapftaye,'  for  the  first  drink- 
ing ;  Sdyana  supplies,  in  the  second,  itaradevebhyah  purd,  before 
other  gods.

Niyutwatd  rathena,  with  the  car  having  the  Niyuts;  the 
horses  of  Vdyu  so  denominated.

Ddvane  is  the  expression  in  both  places,  fi'om  ddv,  a  vaidik 
verb,  to  give ;  the  Scholiast  explains  it  as  in  the  text ;  in  the 
first  instance  in  a  passive  sense,  or  'come  for  that  which  is  to  be

46  RIG-VEDA    gANHITA.

2.  May  the  exhilarating  drops  (of  the  libation)

RIG-VEDA    gANHITA.

2.  May  the  exhilarating  drops  (of  the  libation) 
exhilarate  thee,  Vayu,  being  fitly  prepared,  doing 
their  oflSce,  administered  opportunely,  rendered 
efficacious  by  (our)  praises,  and  flowing  (in  due 
season):  for  which  purpose,  thy  docile  and  active 
steeds,  the  Niyuts,*-  attending  (thy  presence,  bring 
thee)  to  the  sacrificial  hall  to  accept  the  offering ; 
to  the  sacrifice  in  which  the  pious  (priests)  repre- 
sent their  desires.

3.  VAyu  yokes  to  his  car  his  two  red  horses  ; 
Vayu  (yokes)  his  purple''  steeds:  Vayu  (yokes) 
his  two  unwearied  (coursers)  to  his  car  to  bear 
their  burthen ;  for  most  able  are  they  to  bear  the 
burthen.  Arouse,  Vayu,  the  intelligent  (sacri-

are  they  to  bear  the 
burthen.  Arouse,  Vayu,  the  intelligent  (sacri- 
ficer),  as  a  gallant  (awakens)  his  sleeping  mis- 
tress :  summon  heaven  and  earth ;  light  up  the 
dawn ;  light  up  the  dawn,  (to  receive)  thy  sacrificial 
food.

4.  For  thee,  the  brilliant  dawns,  (rising)  from 
afar,  spread  abroad  their  auspicious  raiment  in 
inviting  rays ;''  in  varieg-ated  and  glorious  rays :  for4.  For  thee,  the  brilliant  dawns,  (rising)  from 
afar,  spread  abroad  their  auspicious  raiment  in 
inviting  rays ;''  in  varieg-ated  and  glorious  rays :  for

^ven  by  us,'  ddlavydya ;  in  the  second,  in  an  active  sense,  or  for 
giving  to  us  that  which  we  solicit.'

The  epithets  of  the  Soma  and  the  Niyufs  are  somewhat  vague 
and  incomprehensible.

ITie  first  term  is  rohitd,  the  second  Arund;  the  latter  usually 
denotes  purple.

term  is  rohitd,  the  second  Arund;  the  latter  usually 
denotes  purple.

Dansu  rasmishu :  the  meaning  of  the  first  seems  rather 
doubtful ;  dansu,  the  commentator  says,  mav  be  used  for 
danseshu,  karmavatsu,  doing  their  work,  or  dansa  may  mean  a 
house,  in  rays  investing  or  covering  the  world  like  a  house ;  or

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  47

thee,  the  cow  that  yields  ambrosia*  milks  all  kinds 
of  treasure :  thou  begettest  the  Maruts,  of  the 
firmament,  for  (the  purpose  of)  showering  rain ; 
(for  the  purpose  of  replenishing)  the  rivers.

5.  For  thee,  the  bright,  pure,  quick-flowing 
{Soma  juices),  potent  for  exhilaration,  are  eager  for 
the  (lire  of)  oblation;  are  eager  for  the  cloud

tion,  are  eager  for 
the  (lire  of)  oblation;  are  eager  for  the  cloud 
(showering)  waters.**  The  timid  and  anxious  (wor- 
shipper) praises  thee,  who  art  auspicious,  for  (driving 
away)  thieves;''  for  thou  defendest  (us)  from  all 
beings,  (as  the  reward)  of  our  righteousness  :  thou 
protectest  us  from  the  fear  of  evil  spirits,  (as  the 
reward)  of  our  righteousness.

6.  Thou,  Vayu,  who  art  preceded  by  none,  art 
entitled  to  drink  first  of  these  our  libations :  thou 
art  entitled  to  drink  of  the  effused  (juices),  moi*e- 
over,  (of  all)  oblations  and  sin-olie rings  of  men:   forit  may  mean  the  chamber  of  sacrifice,  m  which  the  fires  are

for

it  may  mean  the  chamber  of  sacrifice,  m  which  the  fires  are 
lighted  at  da-wn,  and  the  rays  or  flames  of  the  fire  may  be  said  to 
offer  a  raiment  to  Vdpi ;  bhadrd  vastra,  auspicious  garments : 
the  metaphor  is  not  very  obvious.

Savardughd:  savar  is  here  explained  by  Amrita.

The  oblations  that  are  offered  to  fire  are  the  remote  cause  of 
the  rain  ;  the  text  has  ishananta  bhurvanyapdm  iskantah  bhurvani : 
in  the  first  place,  bhurvan  is  explained  by  ydga,  a  sacrifice ;  in  the 
second,  a  cloud ;  the  passage  is  rather  obscure.

C      ---

Twdm  bhagam  takkaviye:  the  second  is  considered  to  imply 
bhajamyam,  for  which  a  precise  equivalent  is  not  easily  found ;

imply 
bhajamyam,  for  which  a  precise  equivalent  is  not  easily  found ; 
that  which  is  to  be  enjoyed ;  that  which  is  agreeable  or  accept- 
able ;  the  last  is  explained  taskardnam,  yajna  vighdtindm  anyatra 
gamandya,  for  causing  to  go  elsewhere  thieves,  i.  e.  the  ob- 
structers  of  sacrifices.

48  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

thee,  their  cattle  yield  milk  ;  (for  thee)  they  yield 
butter.*

Si5kta  II .  (CXXXV.)

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  three  first  stanzas  are  addressed  to 
Vayc;  the  next  five  to  Indra  also;  and  the  last  to  Vayu 
alone ;  the  metre  is  the  same,  except  in  the  seventh  and  eighth 
stanzas,  in  which  it  is  Ashfi.

Varga  XXIV.  1.  Approach  our  strewn  grass,  Vayu,  with  (thy)

s  Ashfi.Varga  XXIV.  1.  Approach  our  strewn  grass,  Vayu,  with  (thy)

s  Ashfi.

Varga  XXIV.  1.  Approach  our  strewn  grass,  Vayu,  with  (thy) 
thousand  steeds,  to  partake  of  the  (offered)  food, 
(prepared)  for  the  lord  of  the  steeds  ;  (approach) 
with  hundreds  (to  the  sacrifice  prepared)  for  the 
lord  of  the  steeds :  the  gods  hold  back  for  thee  as 
the  deity  (entitled)  first  to  drink  (the  libation) : 
sweet  eifused  juices  are  ready  for  thy  exhilaration  ; 
are  ready  for  their  function.

2.  For  thee  this   Soma  juice,   purified    by   the 
stones  (that  bruise  the   plant),''  and  clothed  with

A  Siram,  in  the  first  place,  is  explained  hy  ksMram ;  in  the 
second,  by  ghrita ;  being  in  either  dsrayana  dravyam,  an  article

the 
second,  by  ghrita ;  being  in  either  dsrayana  dravyam,  an  article 
which  is  the  material  of  oblations  and  the  like.

Pariputo  adribhih,  which  the  Scholiast  explains  by  abhishava- 
iodhanair  apagatarijishatwena  sodhitah,  'purified  by  the  impurity 
which  has  been  removed  by  the  purifying  means  of  the  effusion ;' 
the  sense  of  Rijisha  is  doubtful ;  in  Mah'dhara's  commentary  on 
a  text  of  the  Yajur,  iii.  25,  it  is  explained  gatasdrah  Soma; 
Soma  that  has  lost  its  strength ;  and  Sdyana  similarly  explains 
it  in  a  subsequent  passage — Asht.  iii.  Adhy.  ii.  S.  vii.  v.  10; 
but  that  could  scarcely  be  restored  by  mechanical  means :  again,

10; 
but  that  could  scarcely  be  restored  by  mechanical  means :  again, 
it  is  explained  dasdpavitrasodhanena  grahanena  vd  sodhita,  purified 
by  straining  through  kiisa  grass,  or  by  taking  hold  of;  but  the 
last  must  have  some  technical  application.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST    ADHYAYA.  49SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIRST    ADHYAYA.  49

enviable  (s])lenflour),*  flows  to  its  (appropriate) 
receptacle  ;''  clothed  with  brilliant  (splendour),  this 
Soma  is  offered  as  thy  portion  amongst  men  and 
amongst  gods ;  (having  received  it),  harness  thy 
horses,  and  depart  well  affected  towaids  us ; 
gratified,  and  well  disposed  towards  us,  depart.

3.  Come  with  hundreds  and  thousands  of  thy 
steeds  to  our  sacrifice  to  partake  of  (the  sacrificial)

ands  of  thy 
steeds  to  our  sacrifice  to  partake  of  (the  sacrificial) 
food ;  (come),  Vayu,  to  partake  of  the  oblations : 
this  is  thy  reasonable  portion,  and  it  is  radiant 
along  with  the  sun  f  the  juices  borne  by  the  priests 
are  prepared  ;  the  pure  juices,  Vayu,  are  prepared.

4.  Let  the  chariot  draAvn  hy  t\\e  Niyuts  Qonxey 
you  both,  (Indra  and  VAyu,  to  the  sacrifice),  for 
our  preservation,  and  to  partake  of  the  consecrated 
viands ;  to  partake,  Vayu,  of  the  oblations  :  drink 
of  the  sweet  beverage  ;  for  the  first  draught  is  your 
(joint)  due.^     Vayu  (and   Indra),  come  with  joy-

Sparhd  vasdnah,  explained  sprihoniydni  tejdnsi  pidhdiiah,

e  with  joy-

Sparhd  vasdnah,  explained  sprihoniydni  tejdnsi  pidhdiiah, 
putting  on  desirable  or  enviable  splendours.

Pari  kosam  arshati-kosa  sthdniyam  graham  prdpnoti,  it  goes  to 
the  ladle,  as  it  were,  in  place  of  a  receptacle.

Sarasmih  surye  sachd  may  also  be  understood,  according  to 
Sdyana,  to  imply  that  the  offering  is  simultaneous  with  sunrise : 
the  first  part  of  the  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajur,  xxvii.  28  ;  the 
latter  is  different,  or  "  Vayu,  delight  in  this  sacrifice,  and  do 
you,  (priests),  preserve  us  ever  by  auspicious  rites."

Sdyaiia   seems  rather  perplexed  how  to  adjust  precedenceSdyaiia   seems  rather  perplexed  how  to  adjust  precedence

between  Vdyu  and  Indra ;  but,  upon  the  authority  of  other  texts,

between  Vdyu  and  Indra ;  but,  upon  the  authority  of  other  texts,

assigns  it  to  Vdy^i,  which  concurs  with  the  order  of  the  text  in

this  place;  in  which,  as  well  as  in   some  others,  we  have  the

VOL.  II.  E

50  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

bestowing  wealth;  Indra  (and  Vayu),  come  with 
wealth.

5.  The  pious  acts  (addressed)  to  you  have  given 
augmented  (efficacy)  to  our  sacrifices  :  for  you,  (the 
priests)-  strain  this  quick-dropping  juice,  as  (the 
grooms  rub  down)'*  a  fleet,  quick-running  courser  '^ 
drink  of  their  (libations),  and  come  hither,  well 
disposed  towards  us,  for  our  protection:  do  you 
both  drink  of  the  juices  that  have  been  expressed

protection:  do  you 
both  drink  of  the  juices  that  have  been  expressed 
by  the  stones,  for  you  are  both  givers  of  food. 
Varga  XXV.  6.  Those  Soma  juices,  poured  out  in  our  rites, 
and  borne  by  the  priests,  are  prepared  for  you  both : 
the  pure  juices,  Vayu  (and  Indra),  are  prepared : 
these  pervading  (juices)  have  passed  through  the 
oblique  filter*^  for  you  both ;  the  Soma  juices  in- 
tended for  you  both,  pass  through  the  woolly  fleece ; 
the  inexhaustible  iSowfl!  juices.^

nominative  in  the  singular,  with  the  verb  in  the  dual,  thus : 
Vdyavdgatam;  Indrascha-dgatam;  implying,  therefore,  that  one 
of  the  two  is  understood ;  or,  in  the  first  instance,  it  should  be

of  the  two  is  understood ;  or,  in  the  first  instance,  it  should  be 
Vayu  and  Indra;  in  the  second,  Indra  and  Vayu.

The  text  has  no  verb  here ;  but  the  comparison  intends  the 
preceding  verb,  marmrijanta,  have  strained  or  cleaned,  or  rubbed.The  text  has  no  verb  here ;  but  the  comparison  intends  the 
preceding  verb,  marmrijanta,  have  strained  or  cleaned,  or  rubbed.

Vdjinam,  dsumatyam  na  vdjinam,  lit.  going  quick,  like  a  quick 
horse  going  quick.

Abhyasrikshata  tirah  pavitram:  the  latter  term  is  usually 
applied  to  a  bundle  of  kusa  grass,  which  is  supposed  to  pxifify  the 
Soma  or  the  butter  poured  upon  it ;  it  is  here  explained  the 
receiver  of  the  Soma  juice  placed  slopingly  or  obliquely,  or  a 
filter  or  strainer  made  of  wool.

Atiromdnyavyayd  Somaso  atyavyayd:  in  the  first  place,  the

of  wool.

Atiromdnyavyayd  Somaso  atyavyayd:  in  the  first  place,  the

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST    ADIIYAYA.  51

7.  Pass,  (Vayu),  bj  the  many  sleeping  (wor- 
shippers), and  go  (with  Indra)  to  the  house  where 
the  stone  resounds :  Indra  (and  Vayu),  go  to  that 
dwelling ;  (go  where)  the  (word  of)  truth  is  mani- 
fest ;  (go  where)  the  butter  flows ;  go  both  with 
well-fed  horses  to  the  sacrifice ;  Indra  (and  Vayu), 
repair  to  the  sacrifice.

8.  Then,  accept  the  libations  of  the  sweet  juice 
at  the  sacrifice  in  which  the  triumphant  priests  stand 
round  the  rock-born  (plant)  :*  may  they  ever  be 
victorious  for  us :  (for  you)  together  the  cows  distil

they  ever  be 
victorious  for  us :  (for  you)  together  the  cows  distil 
(their  milk) ;  the  (offering  of)  barley  is  dressed ; 
and  never  for  thee,  (Vayu),  will  the  cows  grow 
meagre;  never  will  the  kine  be  carried  off  (by 
thieves).^

9.  These  thy  horses,  excellent  Vayu,  strong  of 
limb,  youthful  and  full  of  vigour,  bear  thee  through 
the  space  between  heaven  and  earth  :  growing  (are 
they)  in  bulk,  and  strong  as  oxen  :  they  are  not  lostSoma  juices  having  gone  through  (ati)  the  undipped  {avyaydni 
for  achchinndni)  hairs ;  or  avyayd  may  be  intended  for  avimaydni, 
made  from  the  sheep,  sheep's  wool ;  fall  into  the  vessel  that

maydni, 
made  from  the  sheep,  sheep's  wool ;  fall  into  the  vessel  that 
receives  them ;  in  the  second  place,  avyaya  is  said  to  bear  its 
ordinary  meaning,  unexpended,  unexhausted.

Aswattham  vpatishtanti :  ASwattha  is,  in  common  use,  the 
Religious  figtree ;  but  Sdyana  explains  it  here  as  the  Soma 
found  spread  through  mountains  and  the  like,  parvatddi  vydpti- 
pradese  sthitam.

Na  upndasyanti  dhenavah-ndpa  dasyanti  dhenavah :  upadas  is 
explained  to  mean  infirm,  or  wasted  by  sickness ;  apadas,  to  be 
carried  off  by  thieves.

E   2

52  RlG-VEDA    SANHITA.

in  the  firmament,  but  hold  on  their  speed,  unre- 
tarded  by  reviling;*  difficult  are  they  to  be  arrested

speed,  unre- 
tarded  by  reviling;*  difficult  are  they  to  be  arrested 
as  the  beams  of  the  sun;  difficult  are  they  to  be 
arrested  by  force.''

SUKTA  III.  (CXXXVI.)

The  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  deities  are  Mitra  and  Varuna  ;  the 
metre  is  AtyashU,  except  in  the  last  verse,  in  which  it  is 
Trisht'ubh.

Varga  xx\i.  1.  Offer  most  excellent  and  ample  adoration,  and 
reverential  oblation,  to  those  two  deities  who  have 
existed  from  of  old ;  who  confer  happiness  (on  their 
worshippers),  and  delight  in  most  sweet  (libations) ; 
for  they  are  both  imperial  (sovereigns,"  in  whose 
honour)  oblations  of  butter  are  poured  out,  and 
who  are  glorified  at  every  sacrifice,  whence  their

e  poured  out,  and 
who  are  glorified  at  every  sacrifice,  whence  their 
might  is  not  in  any  way  to  be  opposed ;  their 
divinitv  is  not  to  be  resisted.e  poured  out,  and 
who  are  glorified  at  every  sacrifice,  whence  their 
might  is  not  in  any  way  to  be  opposed ;  their 
divinitv  is  not  to  be  resisted.

2.  T!ie  most  excellent  Dawn  has  been  seen 
proceeding  to  the  comprehensive  (rite):  the  path 
of  the  revolving  (sun)  has  been  lighted  up  by  (his) 
rays:  the  eyes  of  men  (have  been  opened)  by  the

Agiraukamh,  lit.  having  no  dwelling  by  speech ;  according 
to  the  Scholiast,  they  are  not  brought  to  a  stop  by  abusive 
speech  or  the  like,  bhartsanddind  sthitim  alahhamdndh.

Hastayor  dur-niyantavah,  difficult  to  be  checked  by  both 
hands,  or  by  physical  force :  they  are  not  to  be  deterred  by

both 
hands,  or  by  physical  force :  they  are  not  to  be  deterred  by 
words,  such  as  woh  woh ;  or  by  pulling  up  the  reins,  from 
coming  to  the  sacrifice.

Td  samrdjd :  or  samrdjd,  may  be  rendered  greatly  or  thoroughly 
shining,  samyak-rdjamdnau.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIRST   ADHYAYA.  53

rays  of  Bhaga  :  the  brilliant  mansion  of  Mitra,  of 
Aryaman,  of  Varuna,  (has  been  lighted  up  by  his 
rays),*  and  therefore  do  you  two  accept  the  com- 
mendable and  copious  oblation;  the  praiseworthy 
and  copious  oblation.

3.  (Your  worshipper)  has  prepared  ground  (for 
the  altar),  free  from  defect,  radiant  (with  sacrificial 
lire),  and  conferring  heaven :  come  to  it  together

(with  sacrificial 
lire),  and  conferring  heaven :  come  to  it  together 
every  day,  yon  who  are  vigilant ;  every  day  (at 
sacrifices)  receive  invigorated  energy  (by  coming 
hither),  sons  of  Aditi,  lords  of  munificence :  of 
those  two,  Mitra  is  the  animator^  of  mankind,  and 
so  is  Varuna;  Aryaman  (likewise)  is  the  animator 
of  mankind.4.  May  this  Soma  libation  be  gratifying  to  Mitra 
and  Varuna,  to  be  enjoyed  by  them  as  they  drink 
of  it,  inclining  downwards;  a  divine  (beverage),  fit 
to  be  enjoyed  by  the  gods :  may  all  the  gods,  well 
pleased,  to-day  accept  it;  therefore,  royal  (deities), 
do  as  we  request :  you,  who  are  ever  truthful,  do  as 
we  request.

, 
do  as  we  request :  you,  who  are  ever  truthful,  do  as 
we  request.

Nothing  more  is  meant  by  all  this,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
than  that  the  firmament  is  lighted  by  the  sun ;  the  several  names 
being  designations  or  forms  of  the  sun,  specified  severally  by  way 
of  multiplying  his  praises.

Ydtayaj-janah,  by  whom  men  are  being  impelled  to  exertion, 
or  incited  to  the  discharge  of  their  respective  functions :  as 
appHed  to  Aryaman,  in  the  repetition,  the  Scholiast  says  it  may 
imply  one  by  whom  the  irreligious,  or  those  not  performing 
religious  worship,  mw  be  cast  into  the  infernal  regions,  ydtija- 
mdnah-nipdtyamdnah-narake.

54  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.

regions,  ydtija- 
mdnah-nipdtyamdnah-narake.

54  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  Whatever  individual  offers  adoration  to  Mitra 
and  Varuna,  do  you  preserve  him  entirely  un- 
harmed from  sin;  (preserve)  from  sin  the  mortal 
who  presents  you  (with  oblations) :  may  A  r  yam  an 
protect  him  who  is  sincere  in  his  devotion,  who 
offers  worship  addressed  to  both  (Mitra  and 
Varuna)  with  prayers ;  who  offers  worship  with 
praises.

6.  I  proclaim  veneration  to  the  mighty  Sun,  to 
heaven  and  earth,  to  Mitra,  to  the  benevolent 
Varuna,  to  the  conferrer  of  happiness,  theshowerer 
of  benefits.*  Praise  Indra,  Agni,  the  brilliant 
Aryaman,  and  Bhaga,  so  that,  enjoying  long  life,Agni,  the  brilliant 
Aryaman,  and  Bhaga,  so  that,  enjoying  long  life, 
we  may  be  blessed  with  progeny ;  we  may  be  happy 
through  the  protecting  virtues  of  the  Soma.

7.  Worshipping  Indra,  and  favoured  by  the 
Maruts,  may  we  rely  upon  the  protection  of  the 
gods ;  and  may  we,  affluent  (through  their  bounty), 
enjoy  the  felicity  which  Agni,  Mitra,  and  Varuna 
are  bestowing  (upon  us).

Varuiiuya  milkushe  sumrilikdya  milhiisJie :  the  Scholiast  sepa- 
rates the  first  attributive  from  Varuna,  and  considers  it  to  be  an 
epithet  of  Riidra,  the  showerer  of  desired  benefits,  ahhhnataphala- 
sektre ;  the  two  next  words  he  appKes  equally  to  Mitra,  Varwia,

hala- 
sektre ;  the  two  next  words  he  appKes  equally  to  Mitra,  Varwia, 
and  Rudra;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  necessary  to  associate 
Rudra  with  the  other  tw'O,  especially  as  it  is  not  so  directed  in 
the  Anukramam.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  55

SECOND  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  XX.  {co7itinued).

SUKTA  IV.  (CXXXVII.)

The  deities  are  Mitra  and  Varuna  ;  the  Rishi  Paruchchhbpa;

the  metre  Atisdkkara.

1.  Come,  (MiTRA  and  Varuna,  to  our  sacrifice) ;      Varga  i. 
where   we   express  (the  Soma  juice)  with  stones:

these  juices  mixed  with  milk  are  exhilarating ; 
these  (juices)  are  exhilarating:*  come  to  us,  royal 
divinities,  dwellers  in  heaven,  and  our  protectors;

ome  to  us,  royal 
divinities,  dwellers  in  heaven,  and  our  protectors; 
these  juices  are  mixed  with  milk  for  you,  Mitra 
and  Varuna  ;  they  are  pure,  mixed  with  milk.ome  to  us,  royal 
divinities,  dwellers  in  heaven,  and  our  protectors; 
these  juices  are  mixed  with  milk  for  you,  Mitra 
and  Varuna  ;  they  are  pure,  mixed  with  milk.

2.  Come,  for  these  dripping  Soma  juices  are 
mixed  with  curds;  they  are  expressed  and  mixed 
with  curds ;  whether  they  be  prepared  for  you  at 
the  awaking  of  the  dawn,  or  (be  associated)  with 
the  rays  of  the  sun :  the  juice  is  effused  for  Mitra 
and  for  Varuna,  for  their  drinking  the  grateful 
(libation) ;  for  their  drinking  at  the  sacrifice.

3.  They  milk  for  you  two  with  stones,  that 
succulent  creeper,  like  a  productive  milch  cow ; 
they  milk  the  Soma  plant  with  stones :  come  to  us

tive  milch  cow ; 
they  milk  the  Soma  plant  with  stones :  come  to  us 
as  our  protectors ;  be  present  with  us  to  drink  the 
Soma  juice :  this  Soma  juice  has  been  effused,  Mitra 
and  Varuna,  for  you  both ;  effused  for  your  drinking.

Matsardh :  in  the  repetition  Say  ana  suggests  also  the  usual 
sense  of  'envious ;'  the  Soma  juices  offered  on  this  occasion  being 
envious  or  emulous  of  those  presented  at  other  ceremonies.

5G  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

SUKTA  V.  (CXXXVIII.) 
The  deity  is  Pushan  ;  the  Bishi  and  metre  are  the  same. 
Varga  II.  1.  Tlie  greatiiess  of  the  strength  of  the  many-

worshipped  Pushan  is  universally  lauded ;  no  one 
detracts  (from  his  praise) ;  his  praise  displeases  no

auded ;  no  one 
detracts  (from  his  praise) ;  his  praise  displeases  no 
one.  Desirous  of  happiness,  I  adore  him,  whose 
protection  is  ever  nigh  ;  who  is  tlie  source  of  felicity ; 
who,  when  devoutly  worshipjied,  blends  with  the 
thoughts  of  all  (his  worshippers) :  who,  (though)  a 
deity,  is  united  with  the  sacrifice.''2.  I  exalt  thee,  Pushan,  with  praises,  that  thou 
may  est  hasten  (to  .the  sacrifice),  like  a  rapid  (courser) 
to  the  battle  :  that  thou  mayest  bear  us  across  the 
combat,  like  a  camel  :^'  therefore  do  I,  a  mortal, 
invoke  thee,  the  divine  bestower  of  happiness,  for 
thy  friendship ;  and  do  thou  render  our  invocations

Mana  dyuyave  makho.

y  friendship ;  and  do  thou  render  our  invocations

Mana  dyuyave  makho.  deva  dyvyuve  makhah  are  the  words  of 
the  text,  intending,  no  doubt,  although  obscurely,  to  identify 
Pushan,  spiritually  or  mystically,  with  the  performer  and  the 
performance  of  the  worship  :  the  Scholiast  gives  a  rather  different 
interpretation  :  in  the  first  instance,  makha  is  rendered  yajna-vdn, 
having  or  receiving  sacrifice,  who  thereupon  confers  the  boon  the 
sacrificer  solicits,  thus  'mixing  with '  or  assenting  to  his  thoughts 
or  mind  {mana  dyvyvve  samantdd  mUrayati-sighra  vara  praddndt)  : 
in  the  reiteration  makha  is  considered  to  be  put  for  makham,

dt)  : 
in  the  reiteration  makha  is  considered  to  be  put  for  makham, 
objective  case,  the  sacrifice,  with  which  Pushan  mixes,  or  is 
present  at,  untilcompleted,  sampurttiparyantam  misrayati.  Another 
rendering  is  also  proposed,  but  it  is  not  more  satisfactory.

Ushtio  na,  like  a  camel ;  as  a  camel  bears  a  burthen,  is  the 
explanation  of  the  commentary.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  67

productive*  (of  benefit) ;  render  them  productive  (of 
success)  in  battles.

3.  Through  thy  friendship,  Pushan,  they  who  are 
dih'gent  in  thy  praise  and  assiduous  in  thy  w.orship 
enjoy  (abundance),  through  thy  protection ;  by 
(assiduous)  worship  they  enjoy  (abundance) ;  ash  thy  protection ;  by 
(assiduous)  worship  they  enjoy  (abundance) ;  as 
consequent  upon  thy  recent  favour,  we  solicit  in- 
finite riches.  Free  from  anger,  and  entitled  to 
ample  praise,  be  ever  accessible  to  us ;  be  our 
leader  in  every  encounter.

4.  Free  from  anger,  and  liberal  of  gifts,  be  nigh 
to  us,  Ajaswa,''  for  the  acceptance  of  this  our 
(offering) ;  be  nigh  to  those,  Ajaswa,  who  solicit 
food :  we  have  recourse  to  thee,  destroyer  of 
enemies,  with  pious  hymns.  I  never  cease, 
PusiiAN,  accepter  of  ofTeiings,  to  think  of  thee ; 
I  never  disregard  thy  friendship.

Dyunminaskridhi,  make  them  possessed  of  wealth ;  dynmnn

friendship.

Dyunminaskridhi,  make  them  possessed  of  wealth ;  dynmnn 
having  that  meaning  :  the  commentator  renders  it  in  the  first  in- 
stance brilUant,  dyotanavatah ;  or  having  fame  or  food,  yasovatah  or 
annavatah;  in  the  reiteration  he  proposes  the  latter  as  the  result 
of  coiKiuests.

He  who  is  drawn  by  goats,  or  has  goats  for  horses,  accord- 
ing to  Ydska.

68  RIG-VEDA  .  SANIIITA.

SiJkta  VI.  (CXXXIX.)

The  Rishi  is  the  same;  the  deities  are  various,  under  the 
collective  designation  of  ViIwadevas.  The  first  verse  is  ad- 
dressed to  Agni,  Indra,  and  Vayu  ;  the  second  to  Mitr4  and 
VaruAa  ;  the  three  next  to  the  A.4wins  ;  in  the  sixth,  Indra4  and 
VaruAa  ;  the  three  next  to  the  A.4wins  ;  in  the  sixth,  Indra 
is  again  addressed,  Agni  in  the  seventh,  and  the  Maruts  in 
the  eighth;  Indra  and  Agni  are  associated  in  the  ninth; 
Brihaspati  is  hymned  in  the  tenth,  and  all  together  in  the 
eleventh.  The  metre  also  varies ;  that  of  the  fifth  verse  is 
Brihati,  and  of  the  eleventh  TrisMubh ;  in  the  rest  it  is 
Atyasht'i;  after  which  we  take  leave  for  the  present  of  this 
long,  complicated,  and  embarrassing  construction.

Varga  III,  1.  May  our  prayers  be  heard.^     I  place   before

(me)  Agni  with  reverence ;  we  have  recourse  to 
his  celestial  might ;  we  have  recourse  to  Indra  and

ave  recourse  to 
his  celestial  might ;  we  have  recourse  to  Indra  and 
to  Vayu  :  which  doing,  a  new  (hymn)  has  been  ad- 
dressed (by  us)  to  the  radiant  navel  (of  the  earth)  ;^

Astu  Sraushat,  which  the  Scholiast  explains  asydh  stuter 
sravanam.  hhavatu,  may  there  be  a  hearing  of  this  hymn ;  or 
srotd  hhavatu,  may  Agni  or  other  deity  be  a  hearer.  In  ordinary 
use  Sraushat  is  an  exclamation  uttered  when  the  butter  is  poured 
upon  the  fire,  on  the  altar,  as  an  ofiering  to  the  gods,  and  it  is 
not  impossible  that  it  may  have  some  such  signification  here.

We  have  had  occasion  to  notice  the  expression  before,  as 
intending  the  altar ;  or  it  may  mean,  according  to  Sdyana,  theWe  have  had  occasion  to  notice  the  expression  before,  as 
intending  the  altar ;  or  it  may  mean,  according  to  Sdyana,  the

as 
intending  the  altar ;  or  it  may  mean,  according  to  Sdyana,  the 
sacrifice,  agreeably  to  the  text,  yajnam  dhur  bhuvanasya  ndbhim, 
they  have  called  the  sacrifice  the  navel  of  the  world ;  the  text 
adds  vivasivati,  explained  by  the  commentator  diptamati,  shining ; 
the  stanza  occurs' in  ihe  Sdma,  i.  461,  where  Professor  Benfey 
considers  that  Vivaswat,  the  Sun-god,  is  intended  as  identified 
with  Vdyu  and  Indra.

SECOND    ASIITAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  59

and  thereupon  may  our  pious  rites  attain  the  gods ; 
may  our  pious  rites  attain  the  presence  of  the 
gods.

2.  MiTRA  and  Varuna,  bestow  (upon  us)  abun- 
dantly that  unenduring  water  which  you  obtain

,  bestow  (upon  us)  abun- 
dantly that  unenduring  water  which  you  obtain 
from  the  sun,  through  your  own  energy;  through 
the  inherent  energy  of  the  vigorous :  may  we  thus 
behold  your  golden  (forms)  in  our  halls  of  sacrifice, 
(brought  thither)  by  our  sacred  rites,  and  by  our 
thoughts  and  senses  (intent  upon  you) ;  by  our 
senses  (intent  upon  offering)  the  Soma  libation.

3.  AswiNS,  men  who  desire  to  glorify  you  with 
(their)  hymns,  cause,  as  it  were,  their  praises  to 
be  heard,  propitiating  you  with  oblations  ;  for,  from 
you,  who  are  possessed  of  all  opulence,  (they  obtain) 
every  kind  of  wealth  and  abundant  food.  Dasras, 
the  fellies  (of  the  wheels)  of  your  honey-laden  car

t  food.  Dasras, 
the  fellies  (of  the  wheels)  of  your  honey-laden  car 
drop  honey,  (carried)  in  your  golden  (car).*t  food.  Dasras, 
the  fellies  (of  the  wheels)  of  your  honey-laden  car 
drop  honey,  (carried)  in  your  golden  (car).*

4.  Dasras,  your  purpose  is  known :  you  would 
repair  to  heaven :  your  charioteers  harness  (your 
steeds)  for  your  heavenward  journey;  the  horses 
that  injure  not  (the  car)  on  your  journey  to  heaven.

Hiranyaye  rathe  Dasrd  hiranyaye :  the  epithet  usually  means 
'  golden  :'  but  Say  ana  interprets  it,  in  the  first  place,  by  madhu- 
purna,  and  consistently  with  that  interpretation  explains  prushd- 
yante  pavayah,  the  circumferences  of  the  wheels  distil  (Jcsharantf 
sravanti),  or  scatter  honey,  as  they  revolve  :  in  the  reiteration  he

ravanti),  or  scatter  honey,  as  they  revolve  :  in  the  reiteration  he 
proposes  to  render  it  by  '  pleasing,  heart-delighting,*  hridaya- 
ramana;  and  to  supply  a  supposed  ellipse,  by  havir-vahatam, 
'convey  the  oblation  in  your  delightful  chariot,'  but  this  does  not 
seem  to  be  necessary.

60  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

We  have  placed  you,  Dasras,  in  your  golden  three- 
shafted  chariot,  going  by  an  (easy)  road  to  heaven, 
hurailiators  (of  enemies),  and  principal  regulators 
of  the  rain.*

5.  Enriched  by  holy  rites,  grant  us,  by  day  and 
night,  (all  good  things),  on  account  of  our  pious 
acts:  never  may   your   donations,    never  may  our 
(donations),  be  withheld. 
Varga  IV.  6.

our   donations,    never  may  our 
(donations),  be  withheld. 
Varga  IV.  6.  Indra,  showerer  (of  blessings),  these  effusedour   donations,    never  may  our 
(donations),  be  withheld. 
Varga  IV.  6.  Indra,  showerer  (of  blessings),  these  effused

juices,  (expressed)  by  stones,  and  which  have  sprung 
(from  mountain  plants),  are  for  thy  drinking;  these 
libations  have  burst  forth  for  thee  :  may  they  satisfy 
thee  as  an  offering  presented  (in  the  hope  of  re- 
ceiving) great  and  wonderful  riches.  Accepter  of 
laudations,  come  to  us,  glorified  by  our  hymns; 
come  to  us  well  pleased.

7.  Agni,  listen  attentively  when  thou  art  praised 
bv  us,  and  repeat  (those  praises)  to  the  gods  who 
are  entitled  to  worship;  to  the  royal  (deities) 
entitled  to  worship  :  on  which  account  the  gods

the  royal  (deities) 
entitled  to  worship  :  on  which  account  the  gods 
gave  to  the  Anfjirams  the  milcli  cow  which 
Aryaman  milked  for  (thee),^'  the  maker  (of  all), 
together  with  the  gods;  that  cow  (the   nature  of

*  Anj'asd  susatd  rajas :  the  latter  Sdyana  interprets  by  udakam, 
water ;  vrishti-lakshanam,  metonymy  for  rain.

The  Scholiast  quotes  a  legend,  stating  that  the  Angirasas, 
having  propitiated  the  gods,  solicited  the  gift  of  a  cow ;  the  gods 
gave  them  the  cow  of  plenty,  but  they  were  unable  to  milk  her, 
and  applied  to  Aryaman,  who  drew  from  the  cow  milk  convertible 
to  butter  for  oblations  to  fire.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  61

tter  for  oblations  to  fire.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  61

Avhicli  thou  hast  said),  he,  along  with  me,  compre- 
hends.*SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  61

tter  for  oblations  to  fire.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  61

Avhicli  thou  hast  said),  he,  along  with  me,  compre- 
hends.*

8.  Never,  Maruts,  may  your  glorious  energies 
be  exerted  against  us ;  may  our  (riches)  never 
diminish  :  never  may  our  towns  decay :  and  may 
whatever  is  wonderful,  admirable,  immortal,  or 
(M'hatever  is  recognized  to  be  living),  from  its 
sound,*"  that  has  been  vours  from  agfe  to  a^e, 
(devolve)  upon  us ;  whatever  is  most  difficult  (of 
attainment)  bestow  upon  us;  whatever  is  most 
difficult  (to  be  attained).

9.  The  ancient  Dadhyanch,  Angiras,  Priya- 
MEDHA,  Kanwa,  Atri,  Manu,*'  havc  known  my 
birth  :^  they  who  were  of  old  and  Manu  have

Manu,*'  havc  known  my 
birth  :^  they  who  were  of  old  and  Manu  have 
known  (my  progenitors) ;"  for  of  them  is  long  life

Esha  tdm  veda  me  sachd,  he  knows  her  along  with  me ; 
explained  by  the  Scholiast  Aryamdhum  api  jdndmi,  either  I, 
Aryamd,  or  I  and  Aryamd  know  her :  in  what  way  or  to  what 
eflfect  is  not  specified :  the  addition  to  the  text  is  conjectural.

The  text  has  only  ghoshdt,  pat  for  ghoshdh,  plur.  sounds, 
noises  ;  according  to  the  comment  and  by  metonymy,  those  who 
utter  them,  either  cattle  or  people.

These  ancient  Rishis  have  all  been  named  before.  See  index 
to  the  first  Asht'nka.

The  birth  of  me,  Paruchchhepas,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  ;  he  is

a.

The  birth  of  me,  Paruchchhepas,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  ;  he  is 
subsequent  to  them,  or  of  more  recent  date.a.

The  birth  of  me,  Paruchchhepas,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  ;  he  is 
subsequent  to  them,  or  of  more  recent  date.

Te  me  purve  manor  viduh  •  the  Scholiast  supplies  pitrddin, 
fathers,  &c. ;  he  also  proposes  Manavah  in  the  plur.  for  Manu, 
but  that  is  scarcely  necessary,  unless  purve  be  considered  as  the 
adjective  of  Manavah,  implying  former  Manus,  and  involving  a 
recognition  of  the  system  of  Manwantaras,  the  vaid'ik  origin  of 
which  is  yet  to  be  determined  :  Sdiya/ia,  however,  disconnects  the

62  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

amongst  the  gods,  and  in  them  is  our  existence :' 
for  the  sake  of  their  high  station,  I  adore  (the  gods) 
with  praise ;  I  worship  Indra  and  Agni  with  praise.

10.

(the  gods) 
with  praise ;  I  worship  Indra  and  Agni  with  praise.

10.  Let  the  invoker  (of  the  gods)  offer  sacrifice, 
and  may  they,  desirous  of  the  offering,  (partake  of) 
the  acceptable  (libation) :  Brihaspati  himself,  de- 
siring (the  libation),  celebrates  worship  with  liba- 
tions ;  with  copious  and  excellent  libations.  We 
catch  from  a  distant  quarter  the  sound  of  the  stones, 
whereby  the  performer  of  pious  acts  has  of  himself 
secured  the  waters  (of  the  clouds) '}  the  performer 
of  pious  acts''  (has  secured)  many  habitations.

11.  Gods   who  are  eleven  in  heaven;  who  are

terms,  and  applies  piirve  to  those  previously  named,  DadJiyanch 
and  the  rest ;  manavds-cha  and  the  Manus.

previously  named,  DadJiyanch 
and  the  rest ;  manavds-cha  and  the  Manus.previously  named,  DadJiyanch 
and  the  rest ;  manavds-cha  and  the  Manus.

^  Asmdkam  teshu  ndbhayah,  in  them  are  our  'navels,'  a  rather 
unintelligible  phrase ;  Sdyana  would  explain  it  by  vital  airs,  in 
connection  with  life,  jivena  saJia  sambandhavantah  prdndk  ;  or  by 
sacrifices  in  relation  to  their  rewards,  phalena  sambaddhdh  ydgdh. 
There 'are  various  readings  of  the  commentary  on  this  verse,  of 
which  none  are  quite  satisfactory :  they  are  specified  by  Prof. 
Miiller,  vol.  ii.  p.  xx.,  and  he  proposes  a  version  somewhat 
differing  from  that  above  given :  it  is  not  easy  to  say  which  is 
most  correct.

Tmand  adhdrayad  avarindandni,  explained  vrishti  lakskandnyu-

correct.

Tmand  adhdrayad  avarindandni,  explained  vrishti  lakskandnyu- 
ddkdni  dtmand  dhdrayati,  he  sustains  by  himself  the  waters,  that 
is,  the  rains ;  or  it  may  be  rendered,  he  produces  such  waters  by 
his  sacrifices,  tddrisdnyudakdni  ydgena  iitpddayati,  rain  being  the 
result  of  worship.

Sukratuh,  which  is  repeated,  may  indicate  either  the  Yajamdna 
or  Brihaspati,  as  the  adJnvnryu,  or  ministering  priest.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  63

eleven  on  earth  ;  and  who  are  eleven  dwelling  with 
glory  in  mid-air  f  may  ye  be  pleased  with  this  our 
sacrifice.

ANUVAkA  XXI.

SUKTA    I.    (CXL.)

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  j^ishi  is  DfRGHAXAiiAs,  the  son  of

(CXL.)

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  j^ishi  is  DfRGHAXAiiAs,  the  son  of 
Uchatthya ;  the  metre  is  Jagati,  except  in  the  two  last  stanzas, 
in  which  it  is  TrisMuhh.

1.  Prepare  a  (fit)  place,  as  it  were  an  offering,      Varga  v. 
for  the  radiant  Agni,  who  is  seated  on  the  altar,

and  fond  of  his  station:  strew  the  sacred,  light- 
bearing,  bright  and  gloom-dispelling  (spot),  with 
agreeable  {kusa  grass),  as  with  a  garment.and  fond  of  his  station:  strew  the  sacred,  light- 
bearing,  bright  and  gloom-dispelling  (spot),  with 
agreeable  {kusa  grass),  as  with  a  garment.

2.  (Agni),  the  two-fold  generated,*^  devours  the 
triple  (sacrificial)  food,'^  and  when  the  year  expires 
renovates  what  has  been  eaten  :^  the  showerer  (of 
benefits)  is  invigorated  (in   one    form),    by  eating

See  vol.  i.  p.  97,  and  note,  p.  121.

(in   one    form),    by  eating

See  vol.  i.  p.  97,  and  note,  p.  121.  The  verse  is  repeated 
in  the  Yajush,  vii.  19.  No  explanation  is  given  of  the  powers  of 
these  three  classes,  nor  are  their  names  specified :  they  seem 
to  be  something  different  from  the  thirty-three  deities  of  the 
Purdnas.

The  reading  of  the  Pardrias  is  invariably  Uttathya,  but  this 
is  the  reading  of  the  several  MSS.  of  the  text  and  of  the 
Anuhramanikd.

Either  as  produced  by  attrition  from  the  two  sticks,  or  in 
the  first  instance  by  attrition,  and  in  the  second  from  consecration 
for  sacrificial  use.

Trivrid-annam.  1.  Clarified  butter;  2.  Puroddsa,  butter,

crificial  use.

Trivrid-annam.  1.  Clarified  butter;  2.  Puroddsa,  butter, 
with  other  articles  or  cakes  fried  in  butter;  and  3.  Soma  juice.

That  is,  the  same  articles  are  offered  annuallv.

64  RTG-VKDA    SANHITA.

with  the  tongue  of  another;  in  a  different  form  the 
restrainer  (of  all)  consumes  the  forest  trees."

3.  Both  his  associated  mothers,  blackened  (l)y 
combustion),  are  in  movement,  and  give  birth  to  an 
infant,  whose  tongue  (of  flame  glows)  in  the  east : 
(who)  dissii)ates  darkness ;  (who)  rapidly  issues 
forth ;  (who)  is  readily  developed ;  (who)  is  (ever) 
to  be  cherished,  and  is  the  augmenter  (of  the 
prosperity)  of  his  parent,  (the  institutor  of  the 
rite).

4.4.

(of  the 
prosperity)  of  his  parent,  (the  institutor  of  the 
rite).

4.  The  (flames  of  Agni),''  light-moving,  dark- 
tracked,  quick  (consuming),  capricious,  restless, 
lambent,  fanned  by  the  Mind,  wide-spreading,  and 
ensuring  liberation  (to  the  devout),  are  kindled  for 
(the  benefit  of)  the  pious  reverencer  of  (lioly) 
priests.

Some  of  this  is  obscure  ;  anyasya-usd  jihvayd  jenyo  vrishd- 
nyanyena-mrishta,  lit.  the  victorious  showerer  by  the  mouth- 
tongue  of  another ;  by  another  consumes.  Sdyana  explains  usd 
by  asyena,  with  the  mouth  ;  anyasya,  of  the  oblation  ;  or  with  the 
mouth  in  one  form  (or  sacrificial  fire)  he  receives  the  oblation

the 
mouth  in  one  form  (or  sacrificial  fire)  he  receives  the  oblation 
through  the  tongue  of  another ;  that  i.«,  the  ladle  of  the  minister- 
ing priests ;  in  another  form,  that  is,  the  fire  that  burns  forests, 
ddvdgni,  he  consumes  the  trees.

This  is  inserted  by  the  Scholiast,  for  the  stanza  is  made  up 
of  epithets  only ;  they  are  not  easily  provided  with  equivalents, 
as  raghu-druvah,  going  lightly ;  krishnasAdsah,  black-pathed ; 
juvah,  quick ;  asamand,  not  same  minded, — some  going  east, 
some  west ;  or  it  may  mean  of  dift'crent  colours ;  ajirdsah, 
moving;  raghiishpadah,  light-gliding;  ?'(.'/ff/tt7«7i,  wind-impelled ; 
dsavah,  pervading;  nmmvlishvah,  giving  liberation.

7i,  wind-impelled ; 
dsavah,  pervading;  nmmvlishvah,  giving  liberation.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  65

5.  Thereupon  those  (flames  of  Agni)  extend 
together  in  all  directions,  dispersing  gloom,  and 
spreading  great  light  along  the  path  of  darkness; 
when  (Agni)  illumines  repeatedly  the  whole  earth, 
and  proceeds  panting,  thundering,  and  roaring  aloud.6.  He    stoops    down    among    the    bushes   as   if    Varga  vi. 
embellishing   them    (with    his    lustre),    and   rushes, 
roaring    like    a    bull   amongst    (a  herd   of)   cows:*

thence  increasing  in  intensity,  he  enhances  (the 
fierceness)  of  his  form,  and  is  difficult  to  be  arrested 
as  a  formidable  (animal),  when  he  brandishes  his

ult  to  be  arrested 
as  a  formidable  (animal),  when  he  brandishes  his 
horns.

7.  Now  hidden,  now  displayed,  he  seizes  (on  the 
fuel),  as  if  understanding  (the  purpose  of  the  wor- 
shipper), and  even  reposes  amidst  the  conscious 
(flames) :  again  they  break  forth,  and  repair  to  the 
divine  (fire  of  sacrifice),  blending  with  which  they 
give  a  different  (luminous)  form  to  their  parents, 
(heaven  and  earth).

8.  The  curving  tresses''  (of  the  flames)  embrace 
him,  (Agni),  and  when  expiring  spring  aloft  again 
to  (greet)  their  coming  (lord) ;  rescuing  them  from

Vrisheva  patnir  ahhyeti :  Sdyana  renders  ■patnih,  by  pdlayitrih, 
those  who  cherish  him,  Agni,  that  is,  bushes,  timber ;  but  this

ih, 
those  who  cherish  him,  Agni,  that  is,  bushes,  timber ;  but  this 
would  not  be  a  comparison,  as  is  impHed  by  iva  ;  patnt  is  ordinarily 
a  wife,  and  may  here  be  applicable  to  a  cow ;  the  translation, 
however,  is  in  some  respects  conjectural.

Agruva  kesinih :  agruvah  usually  means  '  fingers ;'  here  it  is 
an  attributive,  implying,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  either  those 
that  are  in  front,  agi-atah  sthitdh,  or  crooked  or  curved  like 
fingers,

VOL.  11.  F

66  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

decrepitude,  he   comes  sounding  aloud,  generating 
(in  them)  intenser  animation  and  unimpaired  vitality.

9.  Licking  up  the  (verdant)  vesture  of  the  mother 
(of  all  things,  earth),  the  rapid  (Agni)  proceeds9.  Licking  up  the  (verdant)  vesture  of  the  mother 
(of  all  things,  earth),  the  rapid  (Agni)  proceeds

ure  of  the  mother 
(of  all  things,  earth),  the  rapid  (Agni)  proceeds 
with  resounding  existences  :^  granting  sustenance  to 
(every)  footed''  (creature) ;  ever  consuming  (fuel), 
so  that  a  blackened  track  follows  (his  path).

10.  Shine,  Agni,  in  our  opulent  (abodes),  vivify- 
ing, showering  (blessings),  bounteous,  casting  off 
infantine  (glimmerings);  blaze  (fiercely),  repelling 
repeatedly,  like  a  coat  of  mail,  (our  enemies)  in 
combats.

Varga  VII.  11.  May  this  oblation,  Agni,  carefully  placed 
upon  the  rugged  but  agreeable  (pile  of  fuel),  be 
most  acceptable  to  thee,  so  that  the  pure  radiance 
of  thy  person  may  shine  brightly,  and  thou  mayst 
grant  us  wealth.

12.

thy  person  may  shine  brightly,  and  thou  mayst 
grant  us  wealth.

12.  Bestow,  Agni,  npon  our  excellent  patron"  a 
boat  ever  fitted  with  oars  and  feet,^  (one  that  may

*  Tuvigrebhih  satwabhih  viyati,  he  goes  variously  with  living 
beings,  sounding  loudly,  or  going  quickly ;  accompanied  by  the 
cries  or  the  flight  of  animals  when  he  sets  fire  to  a  forest.

**  Padvate,  to  that  which  has  feet;  either  bipeds  or  quadrupeds.

'  Eathdya  no  grihdya,  lit.  '  to  our  carriage-house ;'  according 
to  the  Scholiast  the  first  word  is  an  adjective  for  ranhandya, 
agreeable ;  griha,  a  house,  applies  to  the  Yajamdna,  as  the  asylum 
of  the  needy,  or  of  the  priests.

es  to  the  Yajamdna,  as  the  asylum 
of  the  needy,  or  of  the  priests.

Ndvam  nitydritrdm  padvattm :  the  boat  is  explained  by  Yajna 
the  sacrifice,  the  oars  are  the  priests,  the  materials  are  the  fuel 
and  apparatus,  and  the  feet  are  the  divinities,  the  prayers,  and

offerings.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  67offerings.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  67

render)  our  posterity  prosperous,  and  may  bear 
mankind  across  (the  ocean  of  life)  to  felicity.

13.  Agni,  be  propitiated  by  this  our  earnest 
praise,  and  may  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sponta- 
neously-flowing (streams),  provide  for  us  the  produce 
of  the  herd,  and  of  the  field  ;  and  may  the  purple 
coursers  (of  the  dawn)  bestow  upon  us  abundant

and  may  the  purple 
coursers  (of  the  dawn)  bestow  upon  us  abundant 
food  through  a  length  of  days.

St5kta  II.  (CXLI.) 
The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  continued.

1.  Verily,    that    visible   radiance   of  the   divine    Vai-a  viii. 
(Agni)  has  been  so  apprehended  (by  all,  that  it  may

be)  for  (the  support  of)  the  body,  for  which  end  it 
has  been  generated  by  (bodily)  strength :  and  that 
my  mind  may  apprehend  and  apply  (that  radiance), 
they  address  the  sacred  prayers  associated  with 
oblations  (to  Agni).

2.  First,  he  reposes  (on  the  earth)  as  the  digestive 
(faculty),**  the  embodied,^  the  accepter  of  food,  the 
eternal :  secondly,  (he  dwells)  among  the  seven

accepter  of  food,  the 
eternal :  secondly,  (he  dwells)  among  the  seven 
auspicious  mothers  (of  fertility) ;"  thirdly,  the  asso- 
ciated (regions)  generate  him,  delighting  in  the  ten

Prikshah,  explained  by  Sdyana,  anna  sddhaka,  the  perfecter 
or  digester  of  food.

Vapuh,  explained  vapushmat,  having  body  ;  but  the  Scholiast 
interprets  it  sarirdbhivriddhi  hetuh,  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  the 
body.

"^  Saptasivdshu  mdtrishu,  the  rains  fertilizing  the  seven  lokas,

or  worlds.

VOL.  ir.  F   2  *

68  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(quarters)  of  space,  for  the   sake  of  milking  this 
showerer  (of  rain).*

3.  As  powerful  priests  extract  by  the  force  (of

howerer  (of  rain).*68  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(quarters)  of  space,  for  the   sake  of  milking  this 
showerer  (of  rain).*

3.  As  powerful  priests  extract  by  the  force  (of

howerer  (of  rain).*

3.  As  powerful  priests  extract  by  the  force  (of 
prayer),^  this  Agni  from  his  primitive  seat,  (for  the 
evolvement)  of  his  mighty  form ;  as  the  wind  arouses 
him  lurking  in  the  hiding-place  (of  the  altar),  for 
the  sake  of  offering  oblations  now  as  of  old :

4.  As  from  the  excellence  of  the  nutritious 
(offering),  he,  (Agni),  is  brought  forth,  and  the 
consumable  branches  rise  amidst  (the  flames)  f  and

Asya  vrishabhasya  dokase  is  the  vague  phrase  of  the  text : 
according  to  Sdyaiia,  allusion  is  intended  to  the  rays  of  the  sun : 
in  the  preceding  sentence,  Jgni  is  said  to  be  represented  as  the 
terrestrial,  maturative,  or  digestive  fire,  and  as  the  electrical  or

terrestrial,  maturative,  or  digestive  fire,  and  as  the  electrical  or 
ethereal  element,  or  lightning  in  the  antariksha,  or  firmament; 
here  he  is  identified  with  solar  fire,  or  the  sun  in  heaven,  or  as 
the  solar  rays,  which  in  the  hot  season  milk,  as  it  were,  the  earth 
by  the  evaporation  of  its  moisture,  which  is  thus  conveyed  to  the 
solar  region,  whence  it  is  transferred  to  the  clouds,  and  in  due 
season  descends  again  in  rain.

Or  by  bodily  strength,  applied  to  attrition  as  producing  fire.

Pra  yat  piiuh  paramdn-niyate  paryd  prikshudho  virudho  dansu 
rohati  is  a  very  unintelligible  line ;  pituh  paramdt,  from  thePra  yat  piiuh  paramdn-niyate  paryd  prikshudho  virudho  dansu 
rohati  is  a  very  unintelligible  line ;  pituh  paramdt,  from  the

dansu 
rohati  is  a  very  unintelligible  line ;  pituh  paramdt,  from  the 
excellence  of  the  sacrificial  or  other  nutriment  or  food,  is  com- 
prehensible ;  but  it  is  also  proposed  to  explain  pituh  as  the 
genitive  of  p'dri,  a  father  or  progenitor,  that  is,  figuratively,  the 
gdrhapatya  Agni,  from  which  fire  is  taken,  niyate,  to  the  dhavanuja : 
prikshudha  may  mean,  it  is  said,  that  which  is  to  be  consumed 
amongst  the  offerings,  or  what  expects  or  desires  to  be  consumed  ; 
virudh  is  imexplained ;  in  its  ordinary  acceptation  of  shrub  or 
creeper,  it  may  be  put  for  fuel ;  dansu  is  put  for  danteshu,  teeth ; 
which,  as  applicable  to  Agni,  will  be  flames ;  drohati,  the  Scholiast

which,  as  applicable  to  Agni,  will  be  flames ;  drohati,  the  Scholiast 
aflSrms,  is  used  for  drohanti,  the  sing,  for  the  plur.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  69

as  both  (the  iustitutor  of  the  rite  and  the  priest) 
combine  for  his  generation,  therefore  has  he  been 
generated,  pure,  youthful,  and  radiant.

5.  Therefore  has  the  brilliant  Agni  entered  the 
maternal  (quarters  of  space),  amidst  which,  pure 
and  unharmed,  he  had  evolved  into  magnitude,  so 
that  he  mounted  (the  bushes)  placed  before  him,  as 
he  had  (consumed  others)  prior  to  them,  and  runs 
rapidly  among  the  more  recent  and  inferior  branches.

6.  Pious  worshippers  then  adore  the  invoker  (of     Varga  ix.

nches.

6.  Pious  worshippers  then  adore  the  invoker  (of     Varga  ix. 
the  gods),  for  (the  propitiation  of)  the  dwellers  in 
heaven,    as  (such  men)  adore  a  powerful  prince,*nches.

6.  Pious  worshippers  then  adore  the  invoker  (of     Varga  ix. 
the  gods),  for  (the  propitiation  of)  the  dwellers  in 
heaven,    as  (such  men)  adore  a  powerful  prince,*

since  the  many-lauded,  and  all-upholding  (Agni) 
knows  how  by  (holy)  act  and  (bodily)  strength  to 
bring  together  the  gods  and  their  mortal  worshipper 
for  the  sake  of  obtaining  (mutual)  sustenance.

7.  Since  the  adorable  (Agni),  impelled  by  the 
wind,  spreads  in  various  directions,  like  an  insincere 
and  unrestrained  chatterer,  (who  utters  indiscrimi- 
nate) praises,^  therefore  the  world  is  assiduous  in 
the  worship  of  him,  the  consumer  of  all,  whose  way 
is  dark,  who  is  pure  of  birth,  and  follows  various 
paths.

8.

e  way 
is  dark,  who  is  pure  of  birth,  and  follows  various 
paths.

8.  Like  a  chariot  drawn  by  ropes,  Agni,  set  in 
movement    Vj   ^'^^    own    revolving    members    (his

Bhagam,  which  the  SchoUast  explains  Bhaga,  a  great  prince ; 
the  more  usual  sense  were  A'dlh/a,  or  the  sun.

Hvdro  na  vakvd  jarand  andkritah :  kvdrah  is  explained  by 
kviila,  crooked ;  vakvd  by  bahu-vaktd,  a  much-speaker ;  andkritah 
is  unrestrained,  anivdritah;  the  verb  is  understood;  jarundh 
implies  stidik,  praises.

70  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

flames),"  proceeds  to  the  heavens;  the  paths  he 
traverses  are  blackened  by  smoke,  as  he  consumes 
(the  fuel),  and  (beasts  and)  birds'*  fly  from  his

,  as  he  consumes 
(the  fuel),  and  (beasts  and)  birds'*  fly  from  his 
radiance  as  (enemies  fly  from  the  prowess)  of  a  hero.,  as  he  consumes 
(the  fuel),  and  (beasts  and)  birds'*  fly  from  his 
radiance  as  (enemies  fly  from  the  prowess)  of  a  hero.

9.  By  thee,  Agni;  Vaeuna,  observant  of  his 
duties,  and  Mitra  and  Aryaman,  bountiful  divini- 
ties, are  animated,  so  that  thou  hast  been  born 
comprehending  them  all  universally  in  all  (their) 
functions,  and  encompassing  (them  all)  as  the  cir- 
cumference (encompasses)  the  spokes  (of  a  wheel).

10.  Most  youthful  Agni,  for  the  good  of  him  who 
praises  thee  and  offers  thee  libations,  thou  makest 
the  precious  (offering)  acceptable  to  the  gods :  new- 
born of  strength,  we  glorify  thee  who  art  to  be 
lauded :  to  whom  rich  offerings  (are  to  be  pre-

hee  who  art  to  be 
lauded :  to  whom  rich  offerings  (are  to  be  pre- 
sented) :  (we  glorify  thee)  in  (our)  hymn  as  (men 
eulogize)  a  powerful  prince.*'

11.  In  like  manner  as  thou  conferrest  upon  us 
riches,  (so  thou  bestowest  upon  us)  a  well-disposed, 
docile,  and  energetic  (son) ;  the  receptacle  (of  learn- 
ing and  other  merits),*  one  who  is  the  performer  of

Angebhir  arushebhih-gamanasUair-avay avoir  jwdldhhih,  by  limbs, 
that  is,  flames,  having  motion.

Vaijah  -  gamanavantah  -  pakshimrigddayah,  creatures  having 
motion, — birds,  beasts,  and  the  like.

Bhagam-iva,  as  before ;  see  n.  of,  p.  G9.

Rdyim  na  stvdrtham  hhagam  daksham  na  dharnasim :  the  com-

,  p.  G9.

Rdyim  na  stvdrtham  hhagam  daksham  na  dharnasim :  the  com- 
mentary supplies  putram,  a  son,  but  the  passage  is  obscure : 
daksham  na  might  mean  like  Daksha,  and  bhaga  might  be  a 
substantive ;  but  the  former  is  explained  utsdhavantam,  having- 
energy,   and  the  latter  sarvair  bhajanvjam,  to  be   enjoyed,  or

SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND   ADHYAYA.  71SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND   ADHYAYA.  71

holy  rites,  Agni,  who  regulates  as  it  were  his  own 
rays,  (and  the  condition  of)  both  (his)  births,  (or 
heaven  and  earth),  he  regulates  at  (our)  sacrifice  the 
adoration  of  the  gods.

12.  May  he  who  is  one  with  light,  who  has  fleet 
horses,  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  full  of  joy,  and

who  has  fleet 
horses,  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  full  of  joy,  and 
borne  in  a  golden  chariot,  listen  to  us :  may  that 
irresistible,  yet  placable  Agni,  conduct  us,  by  the 
most  efficacious  (means),  to  that  desirable  and  acces- 
sible (heaven).

13.  Agni,  possessing  eminent  (fitness)  for  supreme 
sovereignty,  has  been  glorified  by  us  with  holy  rites, 
and  with  hymns :  Let  all  who  are  present,  as  well  as 
we  ourselves,  enriched  (by  his  favour),  shout  aloud 
(the  praise  of  Agni),  as  (loudly  as)  the  sun  (causes) 
the  rain-cloud  (to  thunder).

Si5kt4  III.  (CXLII.)

The  Rishi  is  Dirghatamas  ;  the  hymn  is  addressed  to  the  Apris 
or  Agni  in  their  personifications,  being  the  same  as  those

the  Apris 
or  Agni  in  their  personifications,  being  the  same  as  those 
specified  in  the  13th  Siikta ;  many  of  the  expressions  arc 
identical,  and  the  differences  arise  chiefly  from  the  difference  of 
metre,  which  in  the  earlier  hymn  is  Ga'i/ntn,  and  in  the  present 
AnKsJtt'ub/i.

1.  Agni,  who  art  Samiddha,  bring  the  gods  to-      Varga  x. 
day  (to  the  worshipper),  whose  ladle  is   uplifted : 
extend  (the  ment  of)  former  sacrifice  to  the  giver

approved    of  by  all ;    dharnasim  is    explained  vidyddcr   dhurana 
kusalam,  skilful  in  containing  knowledge,  &c. 
See  vol.  i.  p.  31.

72  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(of  the  offering),  by   whom   the  Soma   libation   is 
poured  forth.

2.72  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(of  the  offering),  by   whom   the  Soma   libation   is 
poured  forth.

2.

(of  the  offering),  by   whom   the  Soma   libation   is 
poured  forth.

2.  Tanunapat,  be  present  at  this  well-flavoured 
and  butter-fed  sacrifice,  (the  offering)  of  a  pious 
offerer  (of  oblations) ;  glorifying  thee.

3.  The  pure,  purifying,  wonderful  Narasansa," 
an  adorable  god  among  gods,  (having  come)  from 
heaven,  thrice  mixes  the  sacrifice  with  the  sweet 
(juice  of  the  Soma)}

4.  Agni,  who  art  I'lita,  bring  hither  Indra,  the 
wonderful,  the  beloved :  this  my  praise  is  recited, 
bright-tongued,  before  thee.

5.  The  priests,  bearing  ladles,  are  strewing  the 
sacred  grass  in  this  holy  sacrifice,  to  prepare  a  god- 
frequented  and  well-spread  abode  for  Indra.

6.

ce,  to  prepare  a  god- 
frequented  and  well-spread  abode  for  Indra.

6.  Let  the  bright,  separable  doors,"  the  aug- 
menters  of  sacrifice,  the  purifiers  of  rites,  the  desired 
of  many,  be  set  open  for  the  gods  to  enter.

Nardsansa,  according  to  the  Kdtthakas,  is  especially  the 
deity  presiding  over  sacrifice, — Yajndhhimdni  devah.

He  comes  thrice,  or  he  thrice  bestows  rewards,  is  all  the 
explanation  given  in  the  commentary :  probably  allusion  is  in- 
tended to  the  three  daily  sacrifices.

According  to  the  Scholiast,  the  verse  is  addressed  to  the 
divinities  presiding  over  the  doors  of  the  chamber  of  sacrifice : 
the  phraseology  is  much  the  same  as  in  the  former  hymn,  vol.  i. 
p.the  phraseology  is  much  the  same  as  in  the  former  hymn,  vol.  i. 
p.  32,  with  some  additional  epithets;  asakhata,  there  explained 
unentered,  is  here  interpreted  not  adhering  together,  mutually 
separable ;  asajyamdna-paraspara  viprakrishtd,  as  if  intending 
folding- doors,  but  perhaps  nothing  more  is  meant  than  wide ' 
or  '  open.'

SECOND    ASHT AKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  73

7.  Beautiful  night  and  morning,  ever  hymned,     Varga  xi. 
ever  associated,  progeny  (of  time),  parents  of  sacri- 
fice, sit  down  of  your  own  good  will  on  the  sacred

grass.

8.  May  the  two  pleasing-tongued  receivers  of 
praise,  the  divine  and  sage  invokers  (of  the  gods),

ued  receivers  of 
praise,  the  divine  and  sage  invokers  (of  the  gods), 
officiate  to-day  at  this  our  sacrifice,  which  confers 
(rewards)  and  attains  heaven.*

.9.  May  the  pure  Hotra,''  placed  among  the  gods, 
and  Bharati,  among  the  Maruts,  and  may  the 
adorable  Ila,  Saraswati,  and  Mahi,''  sit  down  upon 
the  sacred  grass.

10.  May  Tavashtri,  favourably  disposed  towards 
us,  send  to  us,  for  our  nourishment  and  prosperity, 
the  quick  (falling),  wonderful,  abundant  (water),^  in

*  See  note  on  the  corresponding  stanza.  Hymn  xiii.  v.  8.  The 
Scholiast  here  adds  nothing  to  his  former  imperfect  explanation  : 
the  epithet  mandra-jilwd  he  applies  to  Agni,  the  two  flames  that

: 
the  epithet  mandra-jilwd  he  applies  to  Agni,  the  two  flames  that 
give  delight  to  the  gods.: 
the  epithet  mandra-jilwd  he  applies  to  Agni,  the  two  flames  that 
give  delight  to  the  gods.

Hotrd  is  explained  homa-niskpddikd,  the  presenter  of  the, 
oblation  ;  deveshu  arpitd,  delivered  amongst  the  gods ;  or  the 
praisers  or  priests :  the  latter  being  expressed  by  Marutsu,  with 
which,  however,  Bhdrati  seems  more  naturally  connected, — 
mai-utsu-bhdrati;  the  term  is  explained  by  vdch,  situated  in 
heaven,  dyusthdnd,  and  connected  with  Bharata,  an  A'ditya,  or 
name  of  the  sun.

"^  These  the  Scholiast  considers  as  sound,  vdch,  or  the  god- 
desses presiding  over  it  in  the  three  regions,  severally  of  earth, 
firmament,  and  heaven.

it  in  the  three  regions,  severally  of  earth, 
firmament,  and  heaven.

*^  The  text  has  epithets  only ;  tunyam  adbhutam  puru  vdram 
puru  tmand;  the  Scholiast  supplies  udakam,  water.

74  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

the  centre*  (of  the  cloud,  effecting)  of  itself  much 
(good).

11.  Vanaspati,'^  here  present  of  your  own  accord, 
convey  our  offerings  to  the  gods;  the  divine  and 
intelligent  Agni  accepts  (the  oblations)  for  the 
deities.

12.  (Priests),  present  the  oblation  with  Stvdhd 
to  Indra,  in  the  form  of  the  Gdj/atra,"  along  with 
PusHAN  and  the  Maruts;'^  also  to  the  assembled 
gods,  and  to  Vayu.

13.  ''Approach,  Indra,  to  partake  of  the  oblations

ds,  and  to  Vayu.

13.  ''Approach,  Indra,  to  partake  of  the  oblations 
consecrated  with  Sivdlid ;  approach  and  hear  the 
invocation,  as  they  invoke  thee  to  the  sacrifice.

Ndbhd-ndbliau  meghasya  avasthltam  iidaham,  that  is,  rain ; 
Twash&i  is  here  said  to  be  the  personified  electric  fire,  or 
lightning,  in  which  capacity  he  is  the  sender  of  rain,  vrishfyddeh 
karitd.

Tlie  fire,  or  Agni  of  the  sacrificial  post,  or  yxlpa,  from  its 
being  of  timber,Tlie  fire,  or  Agni  of  the  sacrificial  post,  or  yxlpa,  from  its 
being  of  timber,

Gdyatra-vepase :  gdyatra  is  said  to  be  put  for  the  Tiara-sdma : 
vepas  is  the  same  as  rdpa  ;  gdyatram-rupam  yasya  ;  is  Gdyah'avepas, 
a  name  or  form  of  Indra.

It  is  literally  having  or  possessed  of  Pushan  or  the  Mariits, —

a.

It  is  literally  having  or  possessed  of  Pushan  or  the  Mariits, — 
Pdshanvate-marutwate :  viswadevdya  in  the  sing,  is  explained  by 
the  commentator  viswadeva  sanghdyd,  the  assemblage  of  all  the 
gods ;  but  it  may  be  intended,  like  the  other  epithets,  to  identify 
Indra  with  all  the  deities  :  the  personification  of  ^igni,  however, 
is  Swdlid,  as  one  of  the  A'pris.

Tliis  stanza  is  one  in  addition  to  the  former  hymn,  and 
seems  superfluous.

SECOND    ASIITAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  75

SiJkta  IV.  (CXLIII.)

The   deity   is  Agni  ;    the  RisJti  Dirghatamas  ;   the   metre   is

Jagati,  except  in  the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  TrisMuhh.

1.

is

Jagati,  except  in  the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  TrisMuhh.

1.  I  offer  devoutly  to  Agni,  the  son  of  strength,     varga  xii. 
an  invigorating  and  most  new  sacrifice,  with  words

of  adoration ;  (that  Agni),  the  grandson  of  the 
waters,^  who,  (present)  in  due  season,  the  friend 
and  ministering  priest  (of  the  sacrificer),  sits  upon 
the  altar^  with  (many)  good  tilings.

2.  As  soon  as  born,  was  that  (Agni)  manifested 
to  Matariswan'^  in  the  highest  atmosphere,  and  his 
radiance,  kindled  by  vigorous  effort,  spread  through 
heaven  and  earth.

3.  His  radiance  is  undecaying :  the  rays  of  him 
who  is  of  pleasing  aspect,  are  everywhere  visible3.  His  radiance  is  undecaying :  the  rays  of  him 
who  is  of  pleasing  aspect,  are  everywhere  visible

:  the  rays  of  him 
who  is  of  pleasing  aspect,  are  everywhere  visible 
and  bright :  the  intensely  shining,  all-pervading, 
unceasing,  undecaying  (rays)  of  Agni,  desist  nof^ 
(from  their  functions).

Apdm-napdt  is  here  explained  as  in  the  text ;  vegetable  sub- 
stances, it  is  said,  are  the  progeny  of  rain,  and  fire  is  the  progeny 
of  vegetable  substances,  timber,  or  fuel.

Prithivyum,  literally  on  the  earth,  on  the  mound  of  earth 
constituting  the  altar.

To  the  wind,  to  be  fanned  mto  flame ;  according  to  another 
text,  twam  Agne  prat/mmo  rndtarisvane  dvirhhava,  be  first  manifest, 
Agni,  to  the  wind ;  or  mdtarisvan  may  imply  the  Yajamdna,  or 
sacrificer.

to  the  wind ;  or  mdtarisvan  may  imply  the  Yajamdna,  or 
sacrificer.

Na  rejante,  do  not  tremble  ;  they  do  not  move,  or  are  moved 
in  burning,  maturing,  and  the  like ;  ddhapdkddhJiu  na  chalanti  na 
cMlyante  vd.  anyaih,  or  na  may  imply  comparison,  when  bhdtwak- 
shasor-na  sindhavah  will  mean,  like  the  rays  of  the  sun.

76  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

4.  Bring  to  his  own  abode  with  hymns  that 
Agni,  the  possessor  of  all  riches,  whom  the  de- 
scendants of  Bhrigu  placed  by  the  strength  of  all 
beings  upon  the  navel  of  the  earth :  for,  like 
Varuna,  he  reigns  sole  (monarch)  over  (all)  trea- 
sure.

5.  Agni,  who,  like  the  roaring  of  the  winds,  like

all)  trea- 
sure.

5.  Agni,  who,  like  the  roaring  of  the  winds,  like 
a  victorious  host,  like  the  thunderbolt  in  heaven,  is 
not  to  be  arrested,  devours  and  destroys  (our  foes) 
with  sharpened  teeth,  and,  as  a  warrior  (annihilates 
his  enemies),  he,  (Agni),  lays  waste  the  woods.6.  May  Agni  be  ever  desirous  of  our  praise  ; 
may  the  giver  of  wealth  satisfy  our  utmost  expecta- 
tion with  riches  ;  may  the  inspirer  (of  our  devotion) 
hasten  our  rites  to  fruition.  I  glorify  him,  the 
radiant-limbed  (Agni),  with  this  laudation.

7.  The  kindler  (of  the  sacrificial  fire)  propitiates 
Agni,  of  glistening  form ;  the  upholder  of  your 
ceremony,  like  a  friend ;  well  kindled  and  well

he  upholder  of  your 
ceremony,  like  a  friend ;  well  kindled  and  well 
supplied  (with  fuel)  f  blazing  brightly  at  holy  rites, 
he  illumines  our  pure  and  pious  observances.

8.  Agni,  never  heedless  (of  us),  guard  us  with 
never  heedless,  auspicious,  and  joy-bestowing  cares  : 
do  thou,  who  art  desired  (by  all),  protect  us,  and 
those  born  of  us,  with  unobstructed,  unovercome, 
and  never-slumbering  (vigilance).

Akrah,  which  is  derived  from  kram,  to  go,  and  is  explained 
by  dkrdnta  or  anuh-anta,  surpassed,  or  exceeded  by;  jwdld 
samidddihhih,  flame,  fuel,  and  the  like :  the  exact  sense  is  not 
very  obvious.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — ^SECOND    ADHYAYA.  77

SdKTAV.  (CXLIV.)

ry  obvious.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — ^SECOND    ADHYAYA.  77

SdKTAV.  (CXLIV.) 
The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  continued.

1.  The   ministering  priest,   (qualified)  by  expe-    Varga  xiii 
rience,  and  possessing  exalted   and  graceful  devo- 
tion, proceeds  (to  celebrate)  his,  (Agni's),  worship,

having  circumambulated   (the  altar),  he  takes  up 
the  ladles  which  are  first  to  present  the  oblations.**

2.  The  drops  of  rain,  enveloped  (by  the  solar 
rays),  are  renewed  in  the  dwelling  of  the  divine 
(sun),  their  birth-place:  when  he,  (Agni),  abides 
cherished  on  the  lap  of  the  waters,  then  (the  world) 
drinks  the  nectareous  (rain),  with  which  he,  (as  the 
lightning),  associates.

8.8.

nectareous  (rain),  with  which  he,  (as  the 
lightning),  associates.

8.  The  two^  (priests,  the  Hotri  and  Adhivm-yu), 
of  equal  honour,  and  alike  assiduous,  labouring 
mutually  for  a  common  object,  combine  the  form  of 
Agni  (with  their  respective  functions) ;  whereupon 
he  to  whom  the  oblation  is  to  be  offered,  collects 
the  drops  (of  clarified  butter),  as  Bhaga  (accepts 
the  worship  of  all),  or  as  a  charioteer  (gathers  the 
reins  of  the  horses)  that  draw  (the  car).''

4.  He,  whom   the  two,   a  pair  of  equal  power,

Yd  asya  dhdma  pralhamam  ha  ninsate,  literally,  which  first 
kiss  his  dwelling,  agneh  sihdnam  chmnbanti.

^  Or  the  two,  in  both  this  and  the  next  verse,  may  refer  to  the

^  Or  the  two,  in  both  this  and  the  next  verse,  may  refer  to  the 
husband  and  wife  associated  in  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice..

'  The  comparisons  seem  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  various 
meanings  of  rasWw,  rays  of  light  or  reins,  and  here,  also,  streams, 
of  butter,  spreading  like  rays  ;  according  to  the  Scholiast.

78  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

dwelling  in  the  same  place,  and  engaged  in  the 
same  ceremony,  worship  night  and  day :  he,  whetlier 
old  or  young,  has  been  engendered  for  tlie  sake  of 
mortal  couples,  accepting  many  (oblations),  and 
exempt  from  decay.

5.  The  ten  fingers  intertvyined  propitiate  that 
divine  (Agni),  whom  we  mortals  invoke  for  protec-

yined  propitiate  that 
divine  (Agni),  whom  we  mortals  invoke  for  protec- 
tion :  he  darts  (his  rays)  like  swift  (arrows)  from  a 
bow,  and  accepts  the  new  praises  (uttered)  by  those 
who  crowd  round  (the  altar).6.  Thou,  Agni,  reiguest  over  (the  dwellers  in) 
heaven,  and  over  those  of  earth,  according  to  thine 
own  (will),  as  a  herdsman  over  his  (herd),  and  those 
two,  (heaven  and  earth),  bright,  vast,  adorable,  be- 
neficent, and  sounding  (agreeably),  partake  of  the 
oblation.

7.  Agni,  who  conferrest  happiness,  who  acceptest 
oblations,  who  was  born  for  sacrifice,  and  art  the 
performer  of  good  works,  be  pleased  (with  this  rite), 
attend  to  this  prayer :  for  thou  art  in  presence  of  all

his  rite), 
attend  to  this  prayer :  for  thou  art  in  presence  of  all 
(the  world),  art  visible  (to  all),  art  pleasant  in  their 
sight,  and  art  their  refuge,  like  a  (bountiful)  distri- 
butor of  food.

SuktaVI.  (CXLV.)

The  deity,  Rlshi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XIV.         1.  Ask  (of  Agni  what  you  desire),  for  he  goes

(everywhere),   he  knows  (all  things) :  possessed  of

intelligence,  he  proceeds'*  (to  ascertain  what  is  to  be

The  text   has  only   lyate  and  nviyate,    he   goes,    and   goes 
quickly,  or  is  gone  to  or  worshipped,'  sevyate ;  the  verb,  having

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHYAYA.  79

done),  and  is  had  recourse  to  (by  liis  worship-

ECOND   ADHYAYA.  79

done),  and  is  had  recourse  to  (by  liis  worship- 
pers) ;  for  in  him  is  the  power  of  restraining  (un- 
reasonable desires),  in  him  (is  the  power  of  grant- 
ing) enjoyment;*  he  is  the  giver  of  food  and  of 
strength  ;  the  protector  of  the  mighty,

2.  They  ask  of  Agni,  but  no  one  asks  improperly; 
for  a  sensible  man  (replies  to  solicitation)  as  he  has 
determined  in  his  own  mind  ;  Agni  tolerates  not  a 
speech  that  anticipates  (his  reply),  nor  endures  a 
rejoinder  :^  he  who  is  devoid  of  arrogance  is  favoured 
by  his  protection.3.  To  him  the  (sacrificial)  ladles  are  directed  ; 
to  him  (our)  praises  are  addressed :  he  alone  hears

are  directed  ; 
to  him  (our)  praises  are  addressed :  he  alone  hears 
all  my  prayers ;  he  is  the  instigator  of  many,  the 
transporter  (across  the  world),  the  instrument  of 
sacrifice,  the  unintermitting  preserver  (of  mankind), 
and  (gentle  as)  an  infant :  provided  with  the  pre- 
parations (of  sacrifice),  he  accepts  the  oblation.

4.  When  (the  priest)  proceeds  to  effect  his  de- 
velopment, he  is  (at  once)  manifested  ;  and  as  soon

a  passive  signification  ;  the  amplification  in  both  cases  is  the 
Scholiast's.

Tasmin-t-santi  prasishak  idsminnisMayah :  prasisha  is  ex- 
plained by  prasdsandni  or  niyamandsdmarthydm,  powers  of  re- 
straining ;  that  is,  having  restrained  what  is  not  to  be  accom-

re- 
straining ;  that  is,  having  restrained  what  is  not  to  be  accom- 
plished, he  is  able  to  accomplish  what  may  be  effected ;  isht'i  is 
usually  sacrifice  ;  it  is  here  put  for  bhogdii,  enjoyments ;  or  it  may 
mean  those  acts  of  worship  which  confer  rewards.

Na  mrisJiyate  prathamam  ndparam  vachas :  literally,  he  does 
not  bear  a  first  or  a  subsequent  speech  :  the  explanation  is  from 
the  comment.

80  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

as  engendered  is  associated  with  his  objects  :*  he 
provides  for  the  gratification  (of  his  worshipper), 
placidly  engaged  in  the  agreeable  (rite),  when  the 
(oblations)  that  desire  (his  acceptance)  reach  him 
present  (at  the  sacrifice).

5.

that  desire  (his  acceptance)  reach  him 
present  (at  the  sacrifice).5.

that  desire  (his  acceptance)  reach  him 
present  (at  the  sacrifice).

5.  He,  the  searcher,  the  accessible,  the  dweller 
in  woods,  has  been  placed  (amidst  the  fuel),  as  in 
the  similitude  of  (an  enveloping)  skin  :  the  wise 
Agni,  the  appreciater  of  sacrifice,  the  veracious, 
has  declared  to  mortals  (the  knowledge  of)  their 
religious  duties.

SiJkta  VII.  (CXLVI.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XV.  ].  Glorifj  the  three-headed,  seven-rayed  Agni;^ 
who  is  subject  to  no  diminution,  seated  on  the  lap 
of  his  parents,  (heaven  and  earth)  ;  and  gratifying 
all  (desires) ;  as  the  universal  radiance  of  the  divine 
(Agni),  whether  moving  or  stationary,  (spreads 
around).

of  the  divine 
(Agni),  whether  moving  or  stationary,  (spreads 
around).

Tatsdra  yvjyebkih  :  the  verb  is  tsara,  to  go ;  yiijya  is  that 
which  may  be  joined  with :  the  expression  is  vague,  and  the 
Scholiast  offers  different  explanations :  as  being  joined  with 
abilities,  that  may  be  associated  with  their  objects,  or  with 
energies  (tejobhih)  fit  to  be  connected  with  their  consequences, 
or  with  his  horses  joined  to  his  car.

The  three  heads  may  be  the  three  daily  sacrifices,  or  the 
three  household  fires,  or  the  three  regions,  heaven,  earth,  and 
mid-air.  The  seven  rays  are  the  seven  flames  of  fire ;  or  rahni, 
ordinarily  a  ray,  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  rein  or  rule,  when  it

inarily  a  ray,  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  rein  or  rule,  when  it 
may  allude  to  the  seven  metres  of  the  Vedas.

SECOND   ASH-fAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  81inarily  a  ray,  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  rein  or  rule,  when  it 
may  allude  to  the  seven  metres  of  the  Vedas.

SECOND   ASH-fAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  81

2.  The  great  showerer  (of  benefits)  has  pervaded 
these  two  (worlds) ;  undecaying  and  adorable,  he  is 
(ever)  present,  bestowing  protection :  he  places  his 
foot  on  the  summit  of  the  earth,  and  his  radiant 
(flames)  lick  the  udder  (of  the  firmament).

3.  (There  are)  two  well-disposed  milch  cows* 
together  approaching  their  common  progeny,  and 
fully  nourishing  (him) ;  pointing  out  the  paths  that 
are  free  from  all  that  is  to  be  avoided,  and  pos- 
sessing more  than  the  great  intelligence  (necessary 
for  his  development).^

4.

more  than  the  great  intelligence  (necessary 
for  his  development).^

4.  Experienced  sages  bring  the  invincible  (Agni) 
to  his  station  (on  the  altar) ;  cherishing  him  in 
manifold  (ways)  in  their  hearts:  desirous  of  pro- 
pitiating him,  they  worship  the  (boon-)  shedding 
(Agni);  and  to  those  men  he  is  manifest  as  the 
Sun.

5.  He  is  willing  to  be  seen  in  the  (ten)  regions 
(of  space) ;  the  victorious,  the  adorable,  the  source 
of  life  to  great  and  small :  inasmuch  as  in  many 
places  the  opulent  (possessor  of  sacrificial  food), 
who  is  visible  to  all,  is  the  parent  of  that  (pious) 
progeny.*^

Either  the  institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  ministrant  priest,  or

*^Either  the  institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  ministrant  priest,  or

*^

Either  the  institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  ministrant  priest,  or 
the  sacrificer  and  his  wife  :  the  vatsa  calf,  or  offspring,  is  Agni. 
Viswdn  ketdn  adhi  maho   dadhdne :  keta  is  always  rendered 
knowledge;'    so    Sdyaiia    explains    the    phrase    here    sarvdni 
prajndni  pravarrdhana   vishaydni,   having    for   their    object    the 
augmentation  of  all  sorts  of  wisdom  of  the  highest  description. 
That  is,  the  priests  alluded  to  in  the  preceding  stanza  may 
VOL.  II.  G

82  illlG-\EDA    SANHITA.

Si5ktaVIII.  (CXLVII.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XVI.  1-  How  liavc  tlij  shilling  and  evaporating  (rays), 
Agni,  supi)orted  life  (and  supplied)  food  ;  so  that,

orating  (rays), 
Agni,  supi)orted  life  (and  supplied)  food  ;  so  that, 
enjoying  both,  the  devout  (worshippers),  possessing 
sons  and  grandsons,  may  repeat  the  hymns  of  the 
sacrifice.

2.  Youthful  (Agni),  to  whom  oblations  are  due, 
appreciate  this  my  reverential  and  earnest  praise: 
one  man  reviles  (thee),  another  propitiates  (thee); 
I,  thy  worshipper,  glorify  thy  person."*

3.  Thy  fostering  (rays),  Agni,  beholding  the  blind 
son  of  Mamata,''  relieved  him  of  the  affliction:  he 
who  knows  all  things  protects  the  pious,  and  (their) 
malevolent  enemies  are  unable  to  do  them  harm.

4.  When  a  wicked  (man),  with  twofold  (malig- 
nity of  thought  and  speech),  obstructing  our  offer-

h  twofold  (malig- 
nity of  thought  and  speech),  obstructing  our  offer- 
ings, and  refraining  from  gifts  (himself),  reviles  us.

be  considered  as  the  offspring  of  Agni,  as  they  derive  their  cha- 
racter from  the  performance  of  his  worship.be  considered  as  the  offspring  of  Agni,  as  they  derive  their  cha- 
racter from  the  performance  of  his  worship.

The  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xii.  42,  and  is  explained  by 
the  Scholiast  ranch  to  the  game  purport.

The  Scholiast  repeats  the  Paurdnik  legend  of  the  birth  of 
Dirghatumas  from  Mamntd,  the  ■uife  of  Utatthya,  but  there  is 
nothing  in  the  text  to  warrant  the  application  :  tlie  persons  are 
obviously  allegorical ;  Diryhatamm,  long-darkness,  being  the 
blindness  or  ignorance  which  is  the  natural  oftspring  of  Mamatd, 
mine-ness,  or  selfishness.

hich  is  the  natural  oftspring  of  Mamatd, 
mine-ness,  or  selfishness.

SECOND   ASH'fAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  83

may  his  prayer  be  heavy  en  him,  and  involve  his 
person  (in  the  consequences  of)  his  evil  words.*

5.  When,  Son  of  Strength,  a  man  skilful  (in 
deception)  assails  another  man  with  s.  doubly 
(malignant  prayer),  do  thou,  AaNi,  duly  propi- 
tiated, protect  him  who  worships  thee  (from  its 
eftects) ;  consign  us  not  to  misfortune.

Si5kta  IX.  (CXLVIII.) 
The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

1.  The  wind,  penetrating  (amidst  the  fuel),  haa  Var^a  xvil. 
excited  (Agni),  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  the  multi- 
form, the  minister  of  all  the  deities,  whom  they

gods),  the  multi- 
form, the  minister  of  all  the  deities,  whom  they 
have  established  amongst  mortal  worshippers  for 
the  accomplishment  of  sacritice,^  like  the  wonderful 
and  variously  radiant  sun.

•2.  Let  not  (my  enemies)  prevail  against  me, 
when  presenting  acceptable  (oblations),  for  (Agni) 
is  desirous  of  my  so  offered  adoration,  and  all  they 
(the  gods)  are  gratified  by  the  (pious)  acts  of  ttie, 
the  reciter  of  their  praise,  and  the  celebrator  (of  the 
sacrifice).

3.  Him,  whom  the  worshippers  lay  hold  of  in  his3.  Him,  whom  the  worshippers  lay  hold  of  in  his

^  There  is  some  indistinctness  of  construction  in  this  stanza, 
and  it  is  not  very  clear  whether  the  epithets  aghdyu,  &c.,  should

a, 
and  it  is  not  very  clear  whether  the  epithets  aghdyu,  &c.,  should 
be  referred  to  mantra,  or  to  asmai,  to  him,  the  individual  who 
utters  it.  Sdyaria  leans  to  the  latter,  but  the  former  seems  most 
natural :  in  either  case  we  have  here  an  allusion  to  the  use  of 
maledictory  prayers  or  imprecations.

Vapushe  is  explained  yajna  siddkaye,  for  the  fulfilment  of  the

sacrifice,  or  of  its  object.

G    2

84  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

perpetual  abode,  they  detain  by  their  praises,  and 
the  holders  convey  him*  diligently  to  the  sacrifice, 
as  rapid  coursers,  harnessed  to  a  car,  (bear  the  rider 
to  his  destination).

4.  The  destroyer,  (Agni),  consumes  numerous

der 
to  his  destination).

4.  The  destroyer,  (Agni),  consumes  numerous 
(trees)  by  his  flames,  and  shines  with  manifold 
radiance  in  the  forest :  the  favouring  wind  blows 
(the  flames)  onwards  day  by  day,  like  the  swift 
arrows  of  an  archer.

5.  The  blind  (of  intellect),  or  those  who- see  not 
(physically),  detract  not  from  his  glory,  whom  no 
enemies,  no  malevolent  adversaries,  harm,  even 
whilst  yet  in  (his)  embryo  (condition) ;  for  his 
constant  encouragers  defend  him,

SiJkta  X.  (CXLIX.)

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same  ;  the  metre  is  Vairdja.

Varga  XVIII.  1.  Agni,  the  lord  of  great  wealth,  the  granter  (of 
desires),  comes  (to  the  place  of  sacrifice) ;  he,  the

e  granter  (of 
desires),  comes  (to  the  place  of  sacrifice) ;  he,  the 
lord  of  lords,  comes  to  the  place  of  affluence,  (the 
altar) ;  the  stones  prepare  (the  libation  for  him)  as 
he  approaches.2.  He,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  generator  of  men 
as  well  as  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  whom  creation 
has  imbibed  life,  abides  with  his  glories:  he  it  is 
who,  entering  into  the  womb  (of  being),  procreates 
(all  living  creatures).^

Prajiayanta  alludes  to  an  especial  part  of  the  usual  ceremony ; 
the  solemn  conveyance  of  fire  from  the  Gdrhapatya,  or  household, 
to  the  Ahavan{ya,  or  sacrificial  fire.

This  is  also  another  version   of  a   familiar  notion.     Agni

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHyAyA.

on   of  a   familiar  notion.     Agni

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND   ADHyAyA.  85

3.  He  who  is  wise,  and  goes  (wheresoever  he 
will),  like  the  rapid  ethereal  (wind),  has  lighted  up 
the  delightful  spot,  (the  altar),  and,  identical  with 
many  forms,  is  radiant  as  the  sun.

4.  He,  the  twofold-born,''  illuminating  the  three 
bright  (regions),^  and  shining  over  all  the  lustrous 
spheres,  the  adorable  invoker  of  the  gods,  is  present 
at  the  place  where  the  waters  are  collected.''

5.  He  is  the  offerer  of  oblations,  who  is  of  two- 
fold birth ;  and,  through  desire  for  (sacrificial)  food, 
has  in  his  keeping  all  good  things:  the  man  who

sacrificial)  food, 
has  in  his  keeping  all  good  things:  the  man  who

presents  to  the  Sun  the  oblations  offered  with  fire,  and  thence, 
becoming  identified  with  the  solar  rays,  engenders  rain,  on  which 
the  food  and  consequent  existence  of  all  living  beings  depends ; 
of  whom,  therefore,  Agni  may  be  said  to  be  the  begetter.

Dwi-janmd,  as  born  either  from  the  two  pieces  of  stick,  or, 
in  the  first  instance,  from  attrition ;  and  in  the  second,  from 
oblation :  or  it  may  be,  born  of  earth  and  heaven,  commonly 
termed  the  parents  of  Agni.^  Trih  rochandni,  either  heaven,  earth,  and  mid-air,  or  the  three 
fires.

"^  Apdm  sadastM,  according  to  Sdyana,  is  the  place  of  sacrifice

s.

"^  Apdm  sadastM,  according  to  Sdyana,  is  the  place  of  sacrifice 
where  water  is  collected  for  the  different  purificatory  sprinklings 
required  :  or  it  might  be  thought  to  refer  to  the  antariksha,  or 
firmament,  in  which  Agni  exists  as  lightning :  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding verse  occur  in  the  Sdma  Veda,  Benfey's  edition,  p.  152, 
1.  4.  Professor  Benfey's  version  differs,  in  some  respects,  from 
that  of  the  text.  "  He,  who  illumes  the  place,  the  cheerful,  (who 
is)  the  wise,  the  swift,  like  a  horse,  springing  in  the  air  like  a 
bright  sun  full  of  life;" — "The  twofold-bom  abides,  illuming 
with  his  radiance  the  three  bright  regions,  all  the  world,  the

ming 
with  his  radiance  the  three  bright  regions,  all  the  world,  the 
most  sacred  priest  in  the  realm  of  the  waters."

8G  RIG-VEDA    Sy^sHlTA.

presents  offerings  to  him  is(  the  parent  of  excellent 
oftsprino-.

SiJkta  XI.  (CL.)

The  deity  and  Eiski  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Ushnik.

Yarga  XIX.  1.  Presenting  many  offerings,  I  address  thee, 
Agni,  ever  coming  into  thy  presence  (like  a  servant)* 
in  the  dwelling  of  a  mighty  master.^

2.  (I  ask  thee  also  to  withhold  thy  favour)  from 
(those)  two  godless  (persons),  from  the  rich  man, 
who,  acknowledging  thee  not  as  his  lord,  is  chary 
of  gifts  at  sacred  rites,  and  from  him  who  rarely 
praises  (the  gods).

3.

fts  at  sacred  rites,  and  from  him  who  rarely 
praises  (the  gods).

3.  Sage  Agni,  the  mortal  (who  propitiates  thee) 
becomes  a  moon  in  heaven,*^  the  most  eminent  of

■■■-■■  '      -.     .1..      ■>—■-—      .  ■  ...-^1—    ,—  ».  I.....  ,.i       -■         ,■■■-■■  '      -.     .1..      ■>—■-—      .  ■  ...-^1—    ,—  ».  I.....  ,.i       -■         ,

Arir-agne  tava  swidd:  ari,  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  '  enemy,' 
•would  be  rather  unmeaning  in  this  place ;  although  Ydska 
countenances  the  intei"pretation,  rendering  it  by  Amitra,  un- 
friend.— Nir.  V.  7.  But  Sdyana  explains  it  Artd,  a  servanti  in 
the  character  of  bringing  oblations  and  the  like  before  Agni, — 
Yato  aham  Ague  tava  swit  tavaiva  d  abhimukhyena  arir-itrtd 
havirddi  prdpanena  sevako^aham,  '  Since  I,  Ag^i,  going  verily  into

d 
havirddi  prdpanena  sevako^aham,  '  Since  I,  Ag^i,  going  verily  into 
thy  presence  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  oblations,  I  am  a 
servant.'  The  verse  occurs  in  the  Sdma,  p.  11,  1.  6.  Benfey 
renders  ari  by  BestUrmer,  an  assailant.

Todasya,  a  governor,  a  master ;  sxkshakasya  summinah  ,•  literally, 
a  tormentor ;  whence  Benfey  renders  it  Zwingherr,  a  tyrant.

Sa  chandro  martyah :  the  commentator  explains  it,  he  becomes 
like  the  moon,  the  rejoicer  of  all,  dhlddakah  sarveshdm;  or  be- 
comes even  the  moon,  chandra  eva  bhavati,  according  to  the 
Chhandogas ;  chandratwaprdptm  chhandoga  dmananti;  tlie  Chhan- 
dogas  are  authority  for  the  obtainmg  of  the  condition  of  the  moon :

f

are  authority  for  the  obtainmg  of  the  condition  of  the  moon :

f

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECX)ND    ADHYAYA.  87

the  great  (deities):  may  we,  therefom,  ever  be  in 
an  especial  manner  thy  worshippers,

SiJkta  XII.  (CLL)

The  deities  are  Mitra  and  Varuna  ;.  the  i^isU  is  the  same;  the

metre  JagatL

1.  Heaven  and  earth  have  been  terrified  by  the     Varga  xx. 
strength  and  the  noise  (of  him),  whom  pious  wor- 
shippers, desirous   of  acquiring  cattle,  have  gene- 
rated by  their  (sacred)  acts>  amidst  the  waters  (ofthe  firmament),  at  the  saeriiice,  as  a  friend"  for  the 
preservation  of  living  beiiigSj  the  benefactor  (of 
man),  and  entitled  to  adoration,

2.

iving  beiiigSj  the  benefactor  (of 
man),  and  entitled  to  adoration,

2.  Since  they,  (the  priests),  like  friedds,  have 
prepared  for  you  both,  (Mitra  and  Varuna,  a 
libation)  of  the  abundantly-flowing  and  sponta- 
neous Soma  juices,^  tlierefore  do  you  consent  to 
come  to  the   rite    of  the    worshi{»per,    and    listen,

pitrUokdd-dkdaam  dkasdch-chandramasam  esha  Soma  rdjd,  from  the 
region  of  the  Pitris  to  the  A'kdsa  ,•  from  A'kdsa  to  the  moon,  this 
ia  Soma,  the  king.  The  Mumlaka  Upaiiishad  is  also  quoted  for 
the  attainment  of  heaven  ;  dyuloka  pruptih,  the  figurative  expres- 
sion of  the  text  having  been  converted  into  the  assertion  of  a

res- 
sion of  the  text  having  been  converted  into  the  assertion  of  a 
fact,  by  the  Upanishads ;  instancing  the  advance  from  simple 
metaphor  to  complex  mythological  notions.

Mitram  na,  although  implying  a  comparison  of  Jani  to  a 
friend,  conveys  also,  with  reference  to  the  hymn's  being  partly 
addressed  to  Mitra,  the  notion  of  his  identification  with  Agni, 
especially  as  the  Agni  of  the  firmament,  or  lightning.

Purumilhasya  sominah  may  be  also  rendered,  of  the  Soma- 
ofFering  Parumxlhd ;  the  name  of  a  prince.

88  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

showerers   (of  blessings),   to   the  (prayers  of  the) 
householder.

3.  For  the  sake  (of  obtaining)  great  vigour,

of  the) 
householder.88  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

showerers   (of  blessings),   to   the  (prayers  of  the) 
householder.

3.  For  the  sake  (of  obtaining)  great  vigour,

of  the) 
householder.

3.  For  the  sake  (of  obtaining)  great  vigour, 
showerers  (of  benefits),  men  glorify  your  birth  from 
heaven  and  earth,*  which  is  to  be  extolled,  inas- 
much as  you  bestow  (his  desires)  upon  the  wor- 
shipper (as  the  reward)  of  his  sacrifice,  and  accept 
the  rite  (that  is  solemnized)  with  praise  and  oblation.

4.  Powerful  divinities,  most  acceptable  to  you 
both  is  that  spot,  (where  you  are  worshipped) : 
accepters  of  sacrifice,  proclaim  the  great  ceremony 
(as  duly  performed) ;  for  you  two  connect  the 
efficacious  and  comprehensive  rite  with  the  vast 
heaven,  like  a  cow  with  a  burthen.''

5.  You  bring  the  cattle  upon  the  earth  to  their

with  a  burthen.''

5.  You  bring  the  cattle  upon  the  earth  to  their 
favourite  (pasture,  whence),  protected  from  harm  by 
your  power,  the  milch  kine,  yielders  of  milk,  return 
to  their  stalls :  they  cry  aloud  to  the  sun  (in  heaven) 
above.

Vdm  Jamna  rodasyoh  is  explained  yuvayoh  sambandhi  janma, 
jananam-utpattim,  dydvapritkivyoh  sakdsdt,  the  birth  connected 
with  you  two  from  heaven  and  earth.

Divo  brihato  daksham  dbhuvam  gdm  na  dhuri  vpayunjdthe  apas, 
you  two  join  the  work  (opus),  able  (to  support  the  burthen)  of 
heaven,  and  applying  to  all  creatures,  as  a  cow  to  a  load :  the 
sense  is  not  very  obvious,  although  it  is  clear  that  the  adequacyhe 
sense  is  not  very  obvious,  although  it  is  clear  that  the  adequacy 
of  worship  or  sacrifice  to  effect  its  objects,  or  realize  its  rewards, 
is  intended,  as  the  cow  is  able  to  bear  a  burthen  suited  to  her 
bodily  strength  :  dhuri-sdnrabalasya  nirvdhe  tad-arthdm  gdm  na- 
dhemim  iva ;  or  it  may  allude  to  her  ability  to  give  milk  and  the 
rest,  kshirddikam  iva.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  89

6.  You    bring   (the   cattle)   to    their  acceptable    Varga  xxi. 
(pasture)   upon    earth,   whence    the    milk-yielding

cows,  protected  by  your  power,  return  unharmed 
to  their  stalls:  they  cry  to  the  sun  (in  heaven) 
above,  both  at  evening  and  at  dawn,  as  one  (cries

sun  (in  heaven) 
above,  both  at  evening  and  at  dawn,  as  one  (cries 
aloud)  who  detects  a  thief.

7.  The  tresses  of  Agni  minister,  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  to  your  sacrifice,  when  you  honour  (with 
your  presence)  the  sacrificial  chamber:  send  down 
of  your  own  accord  (the  rain),  and  prosper  our 
offerings,  for  you  have  command  over  the  praises 
of  the  pious  men.

8.  Come  to  the  devout  (worshipper),  who,  glorify- 
ing you,  and  providing  (all  that  is)  acceptable,  pre- 
sents you  with  oblations;  (to  him),  the  sage,  the 
invoker,  who  offwrs  you  worship :  accept  his  sacri- 
fice; favourably  disposed  towards  us,  (accept)  our 
praises.

9.  Accepters  of  sacrifices,  you  are  the  first  whom

pt)  our 
praises.

9.  Accepters  of  sacrifices,  you  are  the  first  whom 
(worshippers)  propitiate  with  offerings,  the  produce 
of  the  cow ;  like  (the  application)  of  the  mind  (in 
the  first  instance)  to  the  results  (of  the  senses) : 
hymns  (prompted)  by  thoughts  wholly  intent  upon 
you,  celebrate  (your  praise) :  do  you,  with  humble 
minds,  bestow  upon  us  wealth.10.  You  distribute  food,  accompanied  by  riches; 
you  bestow  upon  us,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  wealth, 
ample,  and  defended  by  your  wise  provisions:  the 
days    with    the    nights'"   have    not    attained    your

Dydvo  ahabhir  na :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  these  words

90  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

a :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  these  words

90  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

divinity;    neither   have    the   rivers,    nor  iiave    the 
Asuras,  and  they  have  not  obtained  (your)  wealth.*

SUKTA  XIII.  (CLII.) 
Divinities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  tlie  sanje. 
Varga  XXII.        J.  Robust''  MiTRA  and  Varuna,  you  wear  vest- 
ments (of  light);  your  natures  are  to  be  regarded 
as  witliout  defect ;  you  annihilate  all  untruths ;  you 
associate  (us)  with  sacrifice.

2.  He  amongst  those  (who  are  your  followers),*^ 
who  observes  truth,  who  is  considerate,  who  is  com- 
niended  by  the  wise,  who  is  able  to  (inflict)  harm,

are  employed  in  an  unusual  acceptation;  dydvah  meaning  days, 
and  ahan,  night.

ed  in  an  unusual  acceptation;  dydvah  meaning  days, 
and  ahan,  night.

Ndnasur-magham ;  dnas^ih-prdpnuvanti  applies  to  all  tlie  snb- 
staotives,  each  of  which  also  is  provided  with  a  negative  sepa- 
rately ;  na  vam  dydvo,  &c. :  the  connection  of  the  negative  with 
the  verb  in  the  last  place  requires,  therefore,  a  new  nominative, 
they,  or  something  like  it,  being  understood  :  the  purport  of  the 
whole  is,  according  to  the  comment,  that  there  is  no  one  in  the 
three  worlds  more  powerful  than  Mitra  and  Varuna;  Lokatraye 
yuvayoh  pardbhavitard  na  he  apt  santi.

Pt'vasd  may  mean  pinau,  fat,  stout,  when  it  will  be  the  epithet

.Pt'vasd  may  mean  pinau,  fat,  stout,  when  it  will  be  the  epithet

.

Pt'vasd  may  mean  pinau,  fat,  stout,  when  it  will  be  the  epithet 
of  Mitravanind ;  or  achhinndni,  nntom  ;  vasirdni,  garvneiits:  or  it 
may  be  in  the  third  case,  sing.,  with  great  or  intense  radiance, 
tejasd,  understood.

Etachchana  twa  eshdm  is  resolved  by  the  Scholiast  into 
etayor  madhye  twaschana  ekah,  one  of  you  two,  the  plural  being 
used  honorifically ;  implying,  if  one  of  you,  Mitra  or  Varuna,  can 
do  such  things  (etad),  how  much  more  irresistible  must  you  be 
together :  or  eshdm  may  mean  iad-anuchard,  their  followers  or 
worshippers.

SECOND  ASHTAKA— SECOND  ADHYAYA.     91

carefully  weighs  (the  means  whereby),  fierce  and 
well-armed,  he  slays  (a  foe)  less  efficiently  accoutred,*

fierce  and 
well-armed,  he  slays  (a  foe)  less  efficiently  accoutred,* 
and  (by  which)  the  revilers  of  the  gods,  however 
mighty,  may  perish.

3.  Who  knows,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  that  it  is 
your  doing,  that  the  footless  dawn  is  the  precursor 
of  footed  beings;^  and  that  your  infant  (progeny, 
the  sun),  sustains  the  burthen  of  this  (world) :  he 
diffuses  (the)  truth  (of  light),  and  disperses  the 
falsehood  (of  darkness).

4.  We  behold  the  lover  of  the  maiden  (dawns),'' 
ever  in  movement,  never  resting  for  an  instant, 
wearing  inseparable  and  diffusive  (radiance),  the 
beloved  abode  of  Mitra  and  Varuna.

6.  Without  steeds,  without  stay,  (he  is  neverthe-

Mitra  and  Varuna.

6.  Without  steeds,  without  stay,  (he  is  neverthe- 
less) borne  swift-moving  and  loud-sounding;  he 
travels,  ascending  higher  and  higher,  connecting 
the  inconceivable  mystery*  (of  sacred  rites)  with  the"  Trirasrim-hanfi  chaturairih,  literally,  he  who  has  a  quadrangu- 
lar weapon  kills  him  who  has  a  triangular  one ;  meaning  merely 
that  he  who  has  most  arms,  adhikdyudhavdn,  is  more  than  a  match 
for  one  who  has  fewer  or  inferior.

^  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  respectively  the  divinities  presiding 
over  day  and  night,  consequently  the  hreak  of  day,  and  the 
course  of  the  sun,  may  he  considered  as  their  work :  the  dawn  is

e 
course  of  the  sun,  may  he  considered  as  their  work :  the  dawn  is 
termed  apdd,  or  footless,  or  not  moving  by  its  own  feet  or  steps, 
but  as  depending  upon  the  motion  of  the  sun.

'^  The  Sun.

*  Achittam  brahma  yuvdnak:  achittam  is  explained  chittd- 
vishayam,  not  an  object  of  the  mind  or  thought;  brahma  is 
interpreted  parivriBham  uktarupam  karma,  the  act  of  which  the 
nature  is  declared  very  great :  the  expressions  are  obscure.

92  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

radiance  (abiding)  in  Mitra  and  Varuna,   (which 
men),  eulogising,  gloriFy.

6.  May  the  milch  kine,  propitious  to  the  devout 
son  of  Mamata,  be  possessed  of  well-filled  udders  :* 
knowing  the  rites  (necessary  to  be  performed),  let

-filled  udders  :* 
knowing  the  rites  (necessary  to  be  performed),  let 
him  beg^  (the  residue)  of  the  offerings  for  his  eating, 
and  worshipping  (you  both)  complete  the  perfect 
(ceremony).

7.  Divine  Mitra  and  Varuna,  may  I  render 
the  oblation  acceptable  to  you  with  reverence  and 
prayer ;  may  the  sacred  rite  enable  us  (to  overcome) 
in  battles,  and  may  the  heavenly  rain"  be  to  us  the 
means  of  satisfying  our  wants.

StjKTA  XIV.  (CLIII.) 
Divinities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  the  same.StjKTA  XIV.  (CLIII.) 
Divinities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  the  same.

Varga  XXI 11.  1.  Mighty  MiTRA  and  Varuna,  dispensers  of 
butter,  we  worship  you,  rejoicing,  with  oblations; 
with  reverential  homage,  and  with  (offerings  of) 
water;  so  that  our  ministrant  priests  may  propi-

with  (offerings  of) 
water;  so  that  our  ministrant  priests  may  propi- 
tiate you  by  (our)  devotions.

2.  The  purpose  of  worshipping  yon,  jNIitra  and 
Varuna,  is  not  the  performance,  but  (even  by  so

*  For  the  purpose  of  supplying  appropriate  offerings  to  Mitra 
and  Varuna,  which  are  said  by  another  text  to  be  the  products  of 
milk  :  Mitravarui'idhhydm  payasycll  sruteh.

^  Pitwo  hhiksheta,  let  him  beg  of  or  for  food ;  that  is,  for  what 
is  not  consumed  in  oblations.

*^  I^et  the  rain  be  supdrd,  cairying  us  well  across,  or  to  the 
completion  of  our  duties,  by  causing  the  growth  of  grain  which 
is  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  93

to  be  offered  in  sacrifice.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  93

much)  I  may  attain  to  your  glory,  and  there  is 
acquittance  (of  my  duty)  ;*  for  when  the  priest 
offers  you  oblations  in  sacrifices,  then  the  pious  man, 
showerers  (of  benefits),  being  desirous  of  worshipping 
you,  (obtains)  felicity.

3.  Let  the  productive  milch  cow,  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  furnish  abundant  nutriment  to  the  pious 
man  who  presents  you  with  oblations,  as  when 
Ratahavya,''  glorifying  you,  propitiates  you  in  the 
solemnity,  like  the  ministrant  priest  of  a  man  (who 
institutes  the  rite).

4.  May  the  divine  cows,  and  the  waters,  supply 
you  with  (sacrificial)  food,  for  the  prosperity  of  the4.  May  the  divine  cows,  and  the  waters,  supply 
you  with  (sacrificial)  food,  for  the  prosperity  of  the

aters,  supply 
you  with  (sacrificial)  food,  for  the  prosperity  of  the 
people  whom  you  favour ;  or  may  (  Agni),  the  former 
protector  of  this  (our  patron),  be  the  donor  (of  the 
oblation):  eat  (of  the  butter  and  curds),  drink  of 
the  milk  of  the  kine.''

SUKTA  XV.  (CLIV.) 
The  Rishi  and  metre  ai-e  the  same ;  but  the  deity  is  Vishnu. 
1.  Earnestly  I   glorify  the  exploits  of  Vishnu,  Varga  xxiv. 
who  made   the    three  worlds  f  who  sustained  the

Prastutth  vdm  dhdma  na  prayuktir-aydmi  stwriktih,  lit.  the 
previous  purpose  of  praising  you  is  not  the  fulfilment,  but  I  come 
to  your  abode  well  detached ;  suvriktih-sobhana  dvarjako  yushmat

come 
to  your  abode  well  detached ;  suvriktih-sobhana  dvarjako  yushmat 
parigrahdt,  the  meaning  of  which  is  not  very  obvious. 
The  name  of  a  Rdjd,  according  to  the  Scholiast. 
'^  Vi'tam  pdtam  payasa  iisriydydh,  eat,  drink,  of  the  milk  of  the 
cow;  the  eating  implies  the  coagulation  of  the  milk>  or  curds, 
butter,  or  the  like.

*  Pdrthivdni  vimame  rajdnsi,  lit.  he  made  the  earthy  regions :

9^4  RIO -VEDA    SANHITA.

lofty  aggregate  site  (of  the  spheres)  f  thrice  travers- 
ing^  (the  whole) ;  who  is  praised  by  the  exalted.

2.  Vishnu  is  therefore  glorified,  that  by  his 
prowess  he  is  like  a  fearful,  ravenous,  and  mountain- 
haunting  wild  beast,"  and  because  that  in  his  three

s,  and  mountain- 
haunting  wild  beast,"  and  because  that  in  his  three 
paces  all  worlds  abide.s,  and  mountain- 
haunting  wild  beast,"  and  because  that  in  his  three 
paces  all  worlds  abide.

but,  according  to  Sdyam,  prithivt  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  the 
three  worlds, — utra  trayo  lokd  apt  prithivi  sabdavdchyd ;  as  in  the 
text,  in  which  Indra  and  Agni  are  said  to  abide  in  the  lower, 
middle,  and  upper  prithivi,  or  world, — yad-Indrdgni  avamasydm 
prithivydm  madhymasydm  paramasydm  uta  stha ;  the  stanza  occurs 
in  the  Yajush,  v.  18,  where  Mahidhara  explains  prithivi  in  a 
similar  manner;  he  also  suggests  that  pdrthivdrd  rajdnsi  may 
mean  atoms  of  earth, — pdrthiva  paramdmin ;  Sdyana  also  proposes 
to  extend  the  meaning  still  farther,  and  include  the  seven  lower

es 
to  extend  the  meaning  still  farther,  and  include  the  seven  lower 
lokas,-  or  to  limit  it  to  the  three  regions  addressed  in  prayer, 
Bhuh  Bhvvar  Swar ;  but  these  alternatives  are  superfluous.

*  XJttaram  sadhastham  a.<kabhdyat :  Sadhastha,  according  to 
Sdyana,  is  the  firmament,  as  the  asylum  of  the  three  regions, — 
lokatraydsrayabhdtam  antariksham:  or  it  may  be,  the  seven 
regions  above  the  earth;  or  the  highest  region  of  all,  whence 
there  is  no  return ;  or  the  abode  of  the  righteous,  the  Satya-loka. 
Mahidhara  makes  it  heaven,  the  region  where  the  gods  dwell 
together.  Askabhdyat  Sdyana  considers  equivalent  to  nirmitavdn,

dwell 
together.  Askabhdyat  Sdyana  considers  equivalent  to  nirmitavdn, 
created ;  Mahidhara  explains  it,  propped  it  up  so  that  it  should 
not  fall.  Some  of  these  notions  of  the  commentator  are  rather 
paurdnik  than  vaidik.Vichakramdnas  tredhd:  traversing  in  various  ways  his  own 
created  worlds  is  Sdyaria's  explanation  ;  Mahidhara  says,  going  in 
the  three  regions,  as  Agni,  Vdyu,  and  Aditya,  or  fire  in  the  earth, 
air  in  the  firmament,  and  the  Sun  in  heaven.

Mriga,  or,  as  Sdyana  renders  it,  Sinhu,  a  lion,  as  applicable 
to  Vishnu :  it  is  said  to  mean  one  who  seeks  for  his  enemies  to

SECOND    ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  95

3.  May  acceptable  vigour  attend  Vishnu,  who

HTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  95

3.  May  acceptable  vigour  attend  Vishnu,  who 
abides  in  prayer,"  the  hymned  of  many,  the  showerer 
(of  benefits),  who  alone  made,  by  three  steps,  this 
spacious  and  durable  aggregate  (of  the  three  worlds).

4.  Whose  three  imperishable  paces,  filled  with 
ambrosia,  delight  (mankind)  with  sacred  food ;  who 
verily  alone  upholds  the  three  elements,^  and  earth 
and  heaven.

5.  May  I  attain  his  favourite  path,''  in  which 
god-seeking  men  delight;  (the  path)  of  that  wide- 
stepping  Vishnu,  in  whose  exalted  station  there  is  a 
(perpetual)  flow  of  felicity;  for  to  such  a  degree  is 
he  the  friend  (of  the  pious).

6.  We  pray  (to  Vishnu)  that  you  may  both*^  go

d  (of  the  pious).

6.  We  pray  (to  Vishnu)  that  you  may  both*^  go

inflict  punishment  on  thera,  and  is  therefore  fearful  and  fierce : 
giri-sthah  may  imply,  either  he  who  dwells  on  high,  or  who  abides 
in  prayer,  and  the  like, — inuntrddirvpdydm  vdchi  varttanuinah.

Giri-kshit,  who  dwells  in  speech,  as  before  explained,  or  who 
abides  in  high  places.Giri-kshit,  who  dwells  in  speech,  as  before  explained,  or  who 
abides  in  high  places.

Tridhdtu,  the  aggregate  of  the  three  elements,  earth,  water, 
light:  prithimjaptejorupadhdivtrayavisishtliam;  or  it  may  imply 
the  three  periods  of  time,  or  the  thre§  qualities ;  the  first  seems 
preferable,  although  the  enumeration  differs  from  that  of  the 
philosophical  schools.

The  firmament, — patho  antan'hsham. — Ydska  Ni,  vi.  7.

hical  schools.

The  firmament, — patho  antan'hsham. — Ydska  Ni,  vi.  7.

The  sacrificer  and  his  wife.  This  stanza  occurs  in  the 
Yajush,  VI.  3,  with  some  difterence  of  reading  and  of  sense: 
instead  of  id  vdm  vdstunyuhnasi  gamadhyai,  it  begins  yd  te 
dhdmdnyvsinasi  gamadhyai:  those  places  to  which  we  desire 
vour  going ;  the  hymn  being  addressed,  it  is  said,  to  the  Yvpa, 
or  post  of  sacrifice,  at  the  time  of  trimming  it  into  shape  ;  the 
rest  of  the  verse  is  the  same,  except  at  the  end,  where  we  have

96  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA.

to  those  regions  where  the  many-pointed  and  wide- 
spreading  rays  (of  light  expand) ;  for  here  the 
supreme  station  of  the  many-hymned,  the  showerer

and) ;  for  here  the 
supreme  station  of  the  many-hymned,  the  showerer 
(of  benefits),  shines  (with)  great  (splendour).

SUKTA  XVI.  (CLV.)

The  deities  are  Vishnu  and  Indra,  the  first  triplet  being 
addressed  to  the  latter ;  the  Rishi  is  the  same ;  the  metre  is 
Jagati.

Varga  XXV.  1.  Offer  your  nutritious  viands  to  the  great  hero, 
(Indra),  who  is  pleased  by  praise,  ^nd  to  Vishnu, 
the  two  invincible  deities  who  ride  upon  the  radiant 
summit  of  the  clouds,  as  upon  a  well-trained  steed.2.  Indra  and  Vishnu,  the  devout  worshipper 
glorifies  the  radiant  approach  of  you  two,  who  are 
the  grantors  of  desires,  and  who  bestow  upon  the 
mortal  who  worships  you  an  immediately-receivable

who  bestow  upon  the 
mortal  who  worships  you  an  immediately-receivable 
(reward),  through  the  distribution  of  that  fire  which 
is  the  scatterer  (of  desired  blessings).*

3.  These  (oblations)  augment  his,  (Indra^s), 
mighty  manhood,  by  M'hich  he  fits  the  parents  (of 
all  creatures,  heaven  and  earth),  for  generation  and 
enjoyment;  whereby,  in  the  upper  region  of  the 
sky,  the  son  has  an  inferior  and  superior  appella- 
tion, and  a  third  (name)  of  father.^

avabhdri  for  avabhdti ;  r,  it  is  said,  being  sometimes  substituted 
for  t  in  the  Veda.

Krisdnor  astuk,  of  fire,  which  is  the  scatterer  (of  good 
things) :  or,  in  a  different  sense,  the  disperser  of  enemies, — 
nirasitd  satriindm.

n  a  different  sense,  the  disperser  of  enemies, — 
nirasitd  satriindm.

Dadhdti  putro  avaram  param  pitur  ndma  trMyam :  the  phrase

SECOND   ASHTAKA SECOND    ADHYAYA.  97

4.  Therefore,  verily,  we  celebrate  the  Tnanhood  of 
that  lord  (of  all),  the  preserver,  the  innocuous,  the 
vigorous,  who  traversed  the  three  regions  with  three 
wide  steps,  in  different  directions,  for  the  many- 
praised  (preservation  of)  existence.

5.  Man,glorifying(ViSHNu),  tracks  twosteps  of  that 
heaven-beholding  (deity),  but  he  apprehends  not  the 
third  ;*  nor  can  the  soaring-winged  birds  (pursue  it)."*

6.  He  causes,  by  his  gyrations,  ninety  and  four 
periodical  revolutions,*"  like  a  circular  wheel,  vast  of6.  He  causes,  by  his  gyrations,  ninety  and  four 
periodical  revolutions,*"  like  a  circular  wheel,  vast  of

ty  and  four 
periodical  revolutions,*"  like  a  circular  wheel,  vast  of 
body,  and  evolving  in  many  forms,  through  the 
praises  (addressed  to  him) ;  ever  young,  though  not 
infantine,^  he  comes  at  our  invocations.

is  very  obscure ;  Sdyana  explains  it,  the  son  of  the  father  has  an 
inferior  name,  or  that  of  grandson  ;  a  superior,  or  that  of  son  ;  and 
a  third,  which,  with  respect  to  them,  is  that  of  father :  the  mean- 
ing is,  that  oblations,  ascending  to  the  solar  region,  nourish  Indra 
and  Vishnu,  as  two  of  the  Adityas,  or  forms  of  the  Sun ;  who 
thereupon  sends  down  rain,  whereby  the  earth  is  rendered 
fruitful,  and  the  generations  of  man  are  sustained ;  whence

rendered 
fruitful,  and  the  generations  of  man  are  sustained ;  whence 
fathers,  sons,  and  grandsons,  are  successively  engendered.

*  His  path  on  earth  and  in  the  firmament  is  within  mortal 
observation  ;  not  so  that  in  heaven.

Vayaschatia  patayanta  patatrinah :  Sdyana  distinguishes  these, 
making  the  two  first,  the  everywhere-going  Maruts;  PatatriAa 
may  mean  GaruSa,  and  other  birds,  or  the  winds.

*^  Vishnu  is  here  identified  with  Time,  comprising  ninety-four 
periods :  the  year,  two  solstices,  five  seasons,  twelve  months, 
twenty-four  half-months,  thirty  days,  eight  watches,  and  twelve 
zodiacal  signs.

^  Yuvd  akumdrah,  young,  not  a  boy.  Sdyana  renders  the 
latter  analpah,  not  little.

VOL.

young,  not  a  boy.  Sdyana  renders  the 
latter  analpah,  not  little.

VOL.  II.  H

98  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.VOL.

young,  not  a  boy.  Sdyana  renders  the 
latter  analpah,  not  little.

VOL.  II.  H

98  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

SUKTA  XVII.  (CLVI.) 
The  deity  is  VishAu  ;  the  ^ishi  and  metre  are  as  before. 
Varga  XXVI.  1.  Be  (to  us),  ViSHNU,  like  a  friend,  the  giver  of 
happiness,  the  accepter  of  oblations,  abounding  with 
food,  the  granter  of  protection,  and  every  way 
accessible;  on  which  account  thy  praise  is  to  be 
repeatedly  recited  by  the  wise,  and  thy  worbhip  to 
be  celebrated  by  the  offerer  of  oblations.

2.  He  who  presents  (offerings)  to  Vishnu,  the 
ancient,  the  creator,  the  recent,  the  self-born ;  he 
who  celebrates  the  great  birth  of  that  mighty  one ;

self-born ;  he 
who  celebrates  the  great  birth  of  that  mighty  one ; 
he  verily  possessed  of  abundance,  attains  (the 
station)  that  is  to  be  sought  (by  all).''

3.  Hyniners,  propitiate  of  your  own  accord''  that 
ancient  Vishnu,  since  you  know  him  as  the  germ 
of  sacrifice  f  cognizant  of  his  greatness,  celebrate 
his  name :  may  we,  Vishnu,  enjoy  thy  favour.

Sravobhir  yujyam  chidabhyasat,  by  food,  or  by  fame,  he 
attains  whatsoever  is  to  be  joined  with.  Sdyana  does  not  make 
the  meaning  much  clearer,  although  he  supplies  what  he  thinks 
necessary  for  completing  the  ellipse ;  amtair-yuktak  san  sarvair 
gantavyam  tat  padam  gachchhati.

the  ellipse ;  amtair-yuktak  san  sarvair 
gantavyam  tat  padam  gachchhati.

Janushd  piparttanu ,  literally,  please  or  propitiate  (him)  by 
your  birth,  is  explained  swata  eva,  of  yourself,  or  spontaneously, 
not,  as  Sdyana  adds,  from  any  interested  motive;  na  kenachid- 
varaldbhddind.fiitasya  garbham.,  born  as  one  with  sacrifice  ;  agreeably  to  the 
text,  yajno  vai  Vishnuh,  sacrifice,  verily  (is)  Vishnu ;  or  if  rita 
keep  the  sense  of  water,  then  the  phrase  applies  to  Vishnu  as  the 
cause  or  creator  of  water,  according  to  the  Smriti,  Apa  eva 
sasarja  ddau,  in  the  beginning  he  created  water.

SECOND    A9HTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.  99

4.  The  royal  Varuna  associates  (himself)  with

— SECOND    ADHYAYA.  99

4.  The  royal  Varuna  associates  (himself)  with 
the  sacrifice  of  the  pious  worshipper,  assisted  by  the 
company  of  the  priests:*  the  AswiNS  (unite  witn 
it) :  Vishnu,  with  his  friend  (Indra),  possesses 
supreme  heaven-conferring  power,"^  and  sits  npoii 
the  clouds.''

5.  The  divine  Vishnu,  the  best  of  the  doers  of 
good  deeds,  who  came  to  the  pious  institutor  of  the 
rite,*^  to  assist  (at  its  celebration),  knowing  (the 
desires  of  the  worshipper),  and  present  at  the  three 
connected  periods  (of  worship),*  shows  favour  to  the 
Arya,  and  admits  the  author  of  the  ceremony  to  a 
share  of  the  sacrifice/

Kratum  sachanta  mdrutasya  vedhasah,  explained  as  in  the

sacrifice/

Kratum  sachanta  mdrutasya  vedhasah,  explained  as  in  the 
text ;  but  mdruta  may  also  mean  the  trciop  of  the  Maruts,  and 
Vedhas  the  creator,  or  Vishnu;  the  sacrifice  offered  to  VisMu, 
attended  by  the  Maruts ;  or  mdruta  may  be  a  synonyme  of  Indra. 
Dddhdra  daksham  uttamam  aharvidam,  he  has  the  best  power 
cognizant  of  day :  Sdyana  explains  the  last,  generative  of  Swarga, 
Swargotpddakam .

Or  sends  down  rain.Or  sends  down  rain.

^  Sachathdya  Indrdya :  the  first  is  explained,  for  giving  assis- 
tance at  the  ceremony  ;  the  second,  to  the  Yajamdna,  or  sacn'ficer : 
upon  the  strength  of  one  of  Ydska's  various  etymologies  of  Indra, 
irdm  drdvayati,  who  pours  out  the  sacrificial  food  or  oblation. —

dra, 
irdm  drdvayati,  who  pours  out  the  sacrificial  food  or  oblation. — 
Ni.  X.  8.

*  Trisadhastham  may  allude  to  the  three  daily  celebrations  of 
worship,  or  to  the  three  worlds.

^  Ritasya  bhdge  may  also  mean  the  share  that  follows  the  rite ; 
the  blessings  granted  as  a  reward.

H    2

100  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA..

,  ANUVAKA  XXII.

S(5kta  I.  (CLVII.)

The  deities  are  the  AIwins;  the  fiishi  is  DfROHATAMAS;  the 
metre  of  the  first  four  stanzas,  Jagati;  of  the  two  last,  Trish- 
hbh.

Varga  XXVII.  1.  Agni  IS  awakened  upon  earth  :  the  Sun  rises  : 
the  spreading  dawn,  exhilarating  (all)  by  her  radi- 
ance, has  dispersed  (the  darkness) ;  harness,  (there-

l)  by  her  radi- 
ance, has  dispersed  (the  darkness) ;  harness,  (there- 
fore), AswiNS,  your  chariot,  to  come  (to  the  sacri- 
fice), that  the  divine  Savitri  may  animate  all  beings 
to  (the  performance  of)  their  several  (duties).

2.  When,  Aswins,  you  harness  your  bounty- 
shedding-  chariot,  refresh  our  strength  with  trickling 
honey  :^  bestow  (abundant)  food  upon  our  people '} 
may  we  acquire  riches  in  the  strife  of  heroes.

3.  May  the  three-wheeled  car  of  the  Aswins, 
drawn  by  swift  horses,  laden  with  honey,  three- 
canopied,  filled  with  treasure,  and  every  way  auspi-

Madhund  ghriteiia  is  variously  explained :  madhu  may  be  an 
adjective  for  madhura,  sweet,  with  sweet  water ;  or  it  may  be  aMadhund  ghriteiia  is  variously  explained :  madhu  may  be  an 
adjective  for  madhura,  sweet,  with  sweet  water ;  or  it  may  be  a

an 
adjective  for  madhura,  sweet,  with  sweet  water ;  or  it  may  be  a 
substantive  for  Amrita,  ambrosia,  with  trickling  nectar ;  or  it  may 
have  the  usual  meaning  of  honey,  especially  with  reference  to  the 
next  verse,  where  the  chariot  of  the  ASwins  is  termed  Madhuvd- 
hana,  honey-bearing.

Asmdkam  brahma  pritandsu :  PHtand  is  a  synonym  e  of 
Manushya,  in  the  Nighantu  of  Ydska;  that  is,  according  to 
Say  ana,  children  and  dependants.  Brahma  is,  amongst  other 
senses,  a  synonyme  of  anna,  food,  which  is  the  interpretation 
here  preferred  by  the  commentator.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SECOND    ADHYAYA.         101

cious,  come  to  our  presence,  and  bring  prosperity  to 
our  people  and  our  cattle.*

4.

our  presence,  and  bring  prosperity  to 
our  people  and  our  cattle.*

4.  Bring  us,  Aswins,  vigour:  animate  us  with 
your  honied  speech  '}  prolong  our  existence ;  wipe 
away  our  sins ;  destroy  our  foes ;  be  ever  our 
associates.

6.  You,  AswiNS,  sustain  the  germ  in  all  moving 
creatures:  you  are  in  the  interior  of  all  beings: 
do  you,  showerers  of  benefits,  supply  (for  our  own 
use)  fire  and  water  and  the  trees  of  the  forest.

6.  You  two  are  physicians,  (conversant)  with  (all) 
medicaments:  you  ride  in  a  chariot  (drawn  by) 
well-trained  steeds:  therefore,  mighty  (divinities), 
resolutely  uphold  (the  worshipper),  who,  with  a 
mind  (devoted  to  you),  offers  you  oblations.

shipper),  who,  with  a 
mind  (devoted  to  you),  offers  you  oblations.

Dwtpade-chatushpade,  literally,  to  our  bipeds  and  quadru- 
peds :  this  and  the  two  preceding  stanzas  occur  in  the  second 
part  of  the -Sama,  V.  1108-1110.Dwtpade-chatushpade,  literally,  to  our  bipeds  and  quadru- 
peds :  this  and  the  two  preceding  stanzas  occur  in  the  second 
part  of  the -Sama,  V.  1108-1110.

Madhumatyd  nah  kasayd  mimikshatam,  literally,  mix  us  with 
your  honied  whip :  but  Sdyana  renders  kasd  by  vdch,  speech ; 
and  mimikshatam  by  prinayatam:  it  seems  a  set  phrase  when 
applied  to  the  Aswins,  as  we  have  it  in  a  former  hymn,  with  a 
somewhat  different  application.     See  vol.  i.  p.  50,  and  note.

102  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

THIRD  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  XXII.  (continued). 
SUKTA  II.  (CLVIII.)

The   deities   are  the  A^wins  ;    the  Rishi  DfRGHATAMAS ;  the

VIII.)

The   deities   are  the  A^wins  ;    the  Rishi  DfRGHATAMAS ;  the 
metre  TrisMubh,  except  in  the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  Jagati.

Varga  I.  1.  Dasras,  showerers   (of  benefits),  granters  of

dwellings,**  dispellers  of  sin,^'  cognizant  of  many 
(things),  increasing  (through  praise),  and  fulfillers 
(of  desires),  inasmuch  as  Auchatthya  offers  you 
(sacrificial)  wealth,  and  you  protect  (your  worship- 
pers) with  unobjectionable  aids,  bestow  upon  us 
(our  prayers).

2.  Granters  of  dwellings,  who  may  make  you 
offerings  so  propitiatory  of  that  your  good  will, 
that  (invoked)  by  our  adoration,  to  the  site  of  the 
altar,*"   you   may   entertain    (favourable    intentions

site  of  the 
altar,*"   you   may   entertain    (favourable    intentions

VasuS'Vdsayitdrau  prtydndm,  causers  of  the  habitations  of 
mankind ;  or  it  may  mean  possessors  of  vasu,  wealth.VasuS'Vdsayitdrau  prtydndm,  causers  of  the  habitations  of 
mankind ;  or  it  may  mean  possessors  of  vasu,  wealth.

The  term  in  the  text  is  simply  Rtidrof,  from  rut,  which  may 
mean  pain,  or  its  cause,  sin ;  and  dm,  what  drives  away ;  or  if 
derived  from  rut,  to  sound,  it  may  import  those  who  shout  in 
battle ;  but  in  this,  as  in  the  case  of  Vasus,  it  may  be  intended  to 
apply  them  to  the  Aiwins,  as  identical  with  the  classes  of  demi- 
gods so  denominated.

Fade  goh,  lit.  to  the  place  of  the  earth,  which,  as  has  been 
already  noticed,  often  designates  the  Vedi,  or  altar,  as  it  is  here 
explained  to  signify.

esignates  the  Vedi,  or  altar,  as  it  is  here 
explained  to  signify.

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  103

towards  us),  and  grant  us  kine  rich  in  milk,* 
coming  with  minds  made  up  to  grant  the  desires 
(of  the  worshipper).

3.  In  like  manner.  Aswins,  as  vour  stronD-drawn 
(car),  able  to  cross  (the  sea),  was  placed,  liarnessed, 
in  the  middle  of  the  water,  for  (the  rescue  of)  the 
son  of  TuGRA,''  so  may  I  attain  to  your  preserving- 
protection  (with  the  same  alacrity)  as  a  victorious 
hero  (returns  home)  v/ith  bounding  steeds.

4.  May  the  praise  addressed  to  you,  Aswins, 
preserve  the  son  of  Uchatthya  :  let  not  these 
revolving  (days  and  nights)  exhaust  me :  let  not

a  :  let  not  these 
revolving  (days  and  nights)  exhaust  me :  let  not 
the  ten  times  kindled  fire  consume  me :  let  it  not 
be,  that  one  who  is  your  (dependant),  bound  (with 
bonds),  should  of  himself  bite  the  earth.''

5.  Let  not  the  maternal  waters  swallow  me, 
since  the  slaves  hurled  down  this  decrepit  (old 
man)"*,  in  like  manner  as  Traitana  wounded  his 
head,  so  has  the  slave  wounded  his  own,  and  has 
struck  his  breast  and  shoulders.'^Revatth  purandhih,  lit.  wealth-possessing,  sustainers  of  the 
body,  which  the  Scholiast  explains  to  mean,  cows  abounding  in 
milk.

See  vol.  i.  p.  306 ;  the  text  here  has  Arnaso  madhye,  in  the 
midst  of  the  wat^r.

Tmani  khddate  kshdm,  lit.

Arnaso  madhye,  in  the 
midst  of  the  wat^r.

Tmani  khddate  kshdm,  lit.  by  himself  he  eats  the  earth : 
according  to  Sdyana,  being  unable,  from  age  and  infirmity,  to 
walk,  he  crawls  or  rolls  on  the  ground.

This  is  the  verse  quoted  in  the  Niti-manjan.  See  vol.  i. 
p.  143,  note:  and  is  similarly  explained,  except  that  SdyaAa 
understands  vitakskat  in  the  sense  of  the  imperative,  takshatu, —

104  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

6.  DiRGHATAMAS,  the  son  of  Mamata,  has  grown 
old  after  the  tenth  yuga  (has  passed)  i**  he  is  the 
Brahma  of  those  who  seel<  to  obtain  the  object  of 
their  (pious)  works:   he  is  their  charioteer.^

SlJKTA  III.  (CLIX.)

their  (pious)  works:   he  is  their  charioteer.^

SlJKTA  III.  (CLIX.)

The  deities  are  Heavbn  and  Earth  ;  the  Rishi  is  the  same  ;  the

metre  is  Jagatt.

Varga  II.  1.  I  glorify  with  sacred  rites  the  mighty  Heaven

and  Earth,  the  augraenters  of  sacrifice,  who  (are  to 
be  contemplated)  with  devotion  at  holy  ceremonies ; 
those   two,  who,    cherishing   their    worshippers   as

tasmdt  sa  ddsah  swayam  swakiyam  eva  siras  takshatu,  therefore 
may  that  slave  of  his  own  accord  wound  his  own  head :  I  cannot 
acquiesce  in  the  opinions  of  those  scholars  who  imagine  a  con- 
nection between  Traitana  and  Feridun:  even  admitting  a  forced 
similarity  of  name,  there  is  nothing  analogous  in  the  legendsforced 
similarity  of  name,  there  is  nothing  analogous  in  the  legends 
relating  to  either.  The  silent  repetition  of  the  verse  is  said  to  be 
a  sure  protection  against  a  murderer,  a  wolf,  or  a  tiger ;  and  a 
traveller  who  repeats  it  for  three  nights,  each  time  until  sunrise, 
becomes  invisible  to  robbers,  and  is  able  to  screen  others  from 
their  attack.

The  SchoHast  understands  Yuga  in  its  ordinary  acceptation ; 
but  the  Yuga  of  five  years  is  perhaps  intended,  a  lustrum,  which 
would  be  nothing  marvellous.

Apdm  artham  yattndm  brahmd  bhavati  sdrathih :  he  is  the 
Brahmd,  like  Brahmd,  the  great,  the  chief;  parivndha,  the 
progenitor,  or  creator  of  people.  Apdm  is  explained  apkdrydAdm,

a,  the 
progenitor,  or  creator  of  people.  Apdm  is  explained  apkdrydAdm, 
of  those  by  whom  offei'ings  of  water,  obsequal  libations  to  the 
Manes  are  to  be  made ;  or  it  may  be  put  for  Apasdm,  of  works, 
religious  rites  in  general.  Sdrathi,  lit.  a  charioteer,  is  explained 
a  conveyer,  t.  e.  to  heaven,  a  deity.

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  105

children/  are  venerated  by  the  devout,  and  there- 
fore with  favour  bestow  (upon  us)  desirable  blessings.

2.  Verily  I  propitiate,  by  my  invocations,  the 
mind  of  the  benevolent  father,  and  the  great  and 
spontaneous  (affection)  of  the  mother  (of  all 
beings)  :^  The  parents,  with  kindness,  have  secured,

mother  (of  all 
beings)  :^  The  parents,  with  kindness,  have  secured, 
by  their  excellent  protections,  the  vast  and  manifold 
immortality  of  their  progeny.mother  (of  all 
beings)  :^  The  parents,  with  kindness,  have  secured, 
by  their  excellent  protections,  the  vast  and  manifold 
immortality  of  their  progeny.

3.  These,  your  children,  the  performers  of  good 
works,  and  of  goodly  appearance,  recognize  you  as 
their  great  parents,  through  experience  of  former 
(kindness) :  preserve  uninterrupted  stability  in  the 
functions  of  your  progeny,  whether  stationary  or 
moving,  (depending  for  existence)  on  none  other 
than  you.''

4.  Those  provident  and  intelligent  sisters,  (the 
rays  of  light),  conceived  of  the  same  womb,  (ever) 
united  (with  each  other),  and  dwelling  in  the  same 
abode,  mete  out  (all  things) :  knowing  (their  func-

ling  in  the  same 
abode,  mete  out  (all  things) :  knowing  (their  func- 
tions), and  bright-shining,  they  spread  in  eyer  new 
(directions)  throughout  the  radiant  firmament.*^

Devebhir  ye  devaputre  sudansfasd  might  be  rendered,  who, 
having'  the  gods  for  children,  are  reverenced  by  the  gods ;  but 
Sdyana  explains  deva  in  both  terms  by  yajamdna.

Heaven,  Dyuloka,  is  said  here  to  be  the  father,  and  Earth, 
Prithnn,  the  mother,  agreeably  to  the  text, — Dyaur  voh  pita, 
prithivi  mdtd.  Mdtd  is  explained  by  Ydska  to  denote  the 
Antariksha,  the  firmament. — Nir.  ii.  8.

Advmydvinak,  having  no  second  parent  or  protector,  no  other 
to  depend  upon  for  subsistence.

econd  parent  or  protector,  no  other 
to  depend  upon  for  subsistence.

The  construction  of  this  stanza  is  very  irregular :  the  epithets

106  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  We  solicit  to-day  of  the  divine  sun,  his  favour 
being  propitiated,  that  wealth  which  is  desirable. 
Benignant  Heaven  and  Earth,  bestow  upon  us 
riches,  (consisting  of)  habitations  and  hundreds  (of 
cattle  and  the  like).SUKTA  IV.   (CLX.) 
The  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same. 
Varga  III.  1.  Those  two,  the  divine  Heaven  and  Earth,  are

the  diffusers  of  happiness  on  all,  encouragers  of 
truth,  able  to  sustain  the  water  (of  the  rains), 
auspicious  of  birth,  and  energetic  (in  action) :  in

(of  the  rains), 
auspicious  of  birth,  and  energetic  (in  action) :  in 
the  interval  between  whom  proceeds  the  pure  and 
divine  Sun  for  (the  discharge  of  his)  duties.

2.  Wide-spreading,  vast,  unconnected,  the  father 
and  mother  (of  "all  beings),  they  two  preserve  the 
worlds.     Resolute,  as  if  (for  the  good)  of  embodied

should  agree  with  te,  they  two  ;  but  some  are  in  the  plural,  not 
the  dual,  as  te  mdyinah  suprachetasah,  kavayah,  suditayah,  along 
with  others  in  the  dual,  sayoni,  samokasd:  the  Scholiast  seems 
to  understand  the  plurals  to  imply  another  substantive  understood, 
or  rcdmayah,  ray«  of  light,  as  he  explams  suprachetasah  by

nderstood, 
or  rcdmayah,  ray«  of  light,  as  he  explams  suprachetasah  by 
prakarshena  chetitum  saktd  rasmayah,  rays  able  distinctly  to 
apprehend;  and  again,  suditayah,  udyotanah,  rasmayah,  rising 
rays ;  but  he  does  not  show  how  they  can  be  connected  with  the 
duals,  which  he  refers  consistently  enough  to  '  heaven  and  earth ;' 
as  in  his  interpretation  of  samohasd,  both  dwelling  together  in  the 
same  space, — dyuprithivyor-ekasminanevdvakdsarupe  dkdse-avas- 
thdndt.  In  this  and  the  next  stanza  there  seems  to  have  arisen 
some  confusion  of  ideas,  some  relating  to  the  Sun  and  others  to 
the  acknowledged  objects  of  the  hymn.  Heaven  and  Earth.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  107

f  the  hymn.  Heaven  and  Earth.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  107SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  107

f  the  hymn.  Heaven  and  Earth.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  107

(beings),  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  the  father  has 
invested  every  thing  with  (visible)  forms.

3.  The  pure  and  the  resolute  son  of  (these) 
parents,  the  bearer  (of  rewards),''  sanctifies  the 
worlds  by  his  intelligence  ;  as  well  as  the  milch  cow 
(the  earth),  and  the  vigorous  bull  (the  heaven),  and 
daily  milks  the  pellucid  milk  (of  the  sky).

4.  He  it  is,  amongst  gods  (the  most  divine), 
amongst  (pious)  works  the  most  pious,  who  gave 
birth  to  the  all-delighting  heaven  and  earth :  who 
measured  them  both,  and,  for  the  sake  of  holy  rites, 
propped  them  up  with  undecaying  pillars.

6.

the  sake  of  holy  rites, 
propped  them  up  with  undecaying  pillars.

6.  Glorified  by  us,  grant  to  us.  Heaven  and  Earth, 
abundant  food  and  great  sti'ength ;  whereby  we  may 
daily  multiply  mankind :  bestow  upon  us  commend- 
able vigour.

Si5ktaV.  (CLXI.)

The  RiBHus  are  the  deities ;  DfRGHATAMAS  is  still  the  Riski; 
the  metre  is  Jagati,  except  in  the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is 
Trishfubh.

1.  Is  this  our  senior  or  our  junior  who  has  come     Varga  iv. 
(to  us);  has  he  come  upon  a  message  (from  the 
gods) ;  what  is  it  we  should  say  ?     Agni,  brother, 
we  revile  not  the  ladle  which  is  of  exalted  race ;

*  Sa  vahni  puirah  pitroh ;  the  terra  Vahni  might  suggest  that

ce ;

*  Sa  vahni  puirah  pitroh ;  the  terra  Vahni  might  suggest  that 
Fire,  or  Agni,  was  here  alluded  to ;  but  the  affiliation  intended  ia 
this  and  the  preceding  vei'se  is  that  of  Aditya,  the  Sun,  and 
Vahni  is  an  epithet  only  :  the  bearer  of  the  rewards  of  pious  rites, 
phalasya  boiUid.

108  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.108  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

verilj  we  assert  the  dignity  of  the  wooden  (imple- 
ment).*

2.  Make  fourfold  the  single  ladle;  so  the  gods 
command  you ;  and  for  that  purpose  am  I  come, 
sons  of  Sudhanwan :  if  you  accomplish  this,  you  will 
be  entitled  to  sacrifices  along  with  the  gods.

3.  Then  said  they,  in  answer  to  Agni,  the  mes- 
senger (of  the  gods),  Whate-ver  is  to  be  done,  w^hether

i,  the  mes- 
senger (of  the  gods),  Whate-ver  is  to  be  done,  w^hether 
a  horse  is  to  be  made,  or  a  car  is  to  be  made,  or  a 
cow  is  to  be  made,  or  the  two  (old  parents)  are  to 
be  made  young,^ — having  done  all  these  (acts), 
Brother  Agni,  we  are  then  ready  to  do  (what  you 
desire)  to  be  done.

4.  So  doing,  Ribhus,  you  inquired.  Where,  indeed, 
is  he  who  came  to  us  as  a  messenger?  when 
TwASHTRi  observed  the  one  ladle  become  four, 
he  was  immediately  lost  amongst  the  women."

According  to  the  legend  cited  by  the  commentator,  the  three 
Ribhus  being  engaged  in  a  sacrifice,  and  about  to  drink  the  Soma 
juice,  the  gods  sent  Agni  to  see  what  they  were  doing :  observing

juice,  the  gods  sent  Agni  to  see  what  they  were  doing :  observing 
that  they  exactly  resembled  each  other,  Agni  assumed  the  like 
form,  and  it  is  to  this  that  the  stanza  refers  in  calling  him 
brother,  and  questioning  his  comparative  age ;  one  purpose  of 
Agni's  visit  is  stated  in  the  next  verse  to  be  the  order  to  convert 
the  one  spoon  or  ladle,  Chamasa,  used  for  drinking  the  Soma  juice, 
or  for  libations,  into  four.     See  vol.  i.  p.  45,  and  notes.

These  marvels  have  been  related  in  the  preceding  hymns  of 
the  Ribhus.     See  Suktas  xx.  ox.  cxi.These  marvels  have  been  related  in  the  preceding  hymns  of 
the  Ribhus.     See  Suktas  xx.  ox.  cxi.

Gndsu  antar  nydnaje :  Sdyaiia  explains  the  verb  merely  by 
nyakto  abhut ;  the  combination  of  ni  and  anj  is  not  common,  and

by 
nyakto  abhut ;  the  combination  of  ni  and  anj  is  not  common,  and 
has  not  been  given  by  Weatergaard ;  but  it  is  possibly  the  converse

SECOND    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  109

6.  When  Twashtri  said,  Let  us  slay  those  who 
have  profaned  the  ladle,  (designed)  for  the  drinking 
of  the  gods ;  then  they  made  use  of  other  names 
for  one  another,  as  the  libation  was  poured  out;* 
and  the  maiden  (mother)  propitiated  them  by 
different  appellations.''

6.  Indra  has  caparisoned  his  horses :  the  Aswins      Varga  v. 
have  harnessed  their  car :  Brihaspati  has  accepted

the  oraniform  (cow) :  therefore,  Ribhu,  Vibhwa, 
and  Vaja,  go  to  the  gods,  doers  of  good  deeds,  enjoy 
your  sacrificial  portion.

,  go  to  the  gods,  doers  of  good  deeds,  enjoy 
your  sacrificial  portion.  '

7.  Sons  of  Sudhanwan,  from  a  hideless  (cow) 
you  have  formed  a  living  one :  by  your  marvellous 
acts  you  have  made  your  aged  parents  young:  from 
one  horse  you  have  fabricated  another :  harness 
now  your  chariot,  and  repair  unto  the  gods.

8.  They,  (the  gods),  have  said,  Sons  of  Sudhan-

of  vyanj,  to  be  manifest ;  to  be  concealed,  indistinct,  or  invisible. 
Gnd  is  a  synonyme  of  ^tn,  but  in  what  sense  it  is  here  used  is 
not  very  evident ;  Sdyaria  explains  the  phrase  stnyam  dtmdnam 
amanyata,  he,  Twasht'ri,  fancied  himself  a  woman,  that  is,  he  felt 
humbled,  as  feeble  as  a  female.

himself  a  woman,  that  is,  he  felt 
humbled,  as  feeble  as  a  female.himself  a  woman,  that  is,  he  felt 
humbled,  as  feeble  as  a  female.

^  According  to  the  Scholiast,  this  legend  accounts  for  the 
origin  of  the  names  of  the  chief  officiating  priests :  in  order 
to  evade  the  indignation  of  Ttoashfri,  the  Ribhvs  assumed  the 
titles  Adhwaryu,  Hotri,  and  TJdgdtn,  by  which  an  individual 
engaged  in  priestly  functions  at  a  sacrifice  is  to  be  always 
addressed,  and  never  by  his  own  name.

Anyair  endn  kanyd  ndmabhik  sparat :  the  force  of  the  term 
kanyd,  a  maiden,  is  not  explained  ;  Sdyana  expounds  it,  a  mother 
self-engendering,  swolpadayadn  mdtd.

110  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

WAN,  drink  of  this  water,  (the  Soma  juice);  or

RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

WAN,  drink  of  this  water,  (the  Soma  juice);  or 
drink  that  which  has  been  filtered  through  the 
Munja  grass ;  or  if  yon  be  pleased  with  neither  of 
these,  be  exhilarated  (by  that  which  is  drunk)  at 
the  third  (daily)  sacrifice.*

9.  Waters  are  the  most  excellent,  said  one  (of 
them) :  Agni  is  the  most  excellent,  said  another : 
the  third  declared  to  many  the  Earth''  (to  be  the 
most  excellent),  and  thus  speaking  true  things  the 
Ribhus  divided  the  ladle.

10.  One  pours  the  red  water,  (the  blood),  upon 
the  ground ;  one  cuts  the  flesh,  di  vided  into  frag- 
ments by  the  chopper;  and  a  third  separates  the 
excrement  from  the  other  parts  f  in  what  manner

third  separates  the 
excrement  from  the  other  parts  f  in  what  manner 
may  the  parents  (of  the  sacrifice)^  render  assistance 
to  their  sons?

Varga  VI.  11.  Ribhus,    leaders    (of   the    rains),^   you    haveVarga  VI.  11.  Ribhus,    leaders    (of   the    rains),^   you    have

The  two  first  alternatives  intimate  that  the  Ribkus  may 
be  participant  of  the  libations  offered  at  dawn  or  at  noon ;  the 
third  applies  to  the  evening  sacrifice ;  the  right  of  the  Ribhus 
to  share  in  which  is  elsewhere  acknowledged.  See  vol.  i. 
p.  48,  note.

Vardhayantim  is  said  by  the  Sclioliast  to  meaxi  either  a  line 
of  clouds  or  the  earth.

The  Ribhus  are  here  identified  with  the  priests  employed  in 
the  sacrifice  of  a  victim.

identified  with  the  priests  employed  in 
the  sacrifice  of  a  victim.

The  parents,  pitard,  are  here  said  to  mean  the  institator  of 
the  ceremony  and  his  wife.

Throughout  the  remaining  stanzas  the  Ribhus  ai'e  identified 
with  tlie  rays  of  the  sun,  as  the  instruments  of  the  rain  an^  the

SECOND    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHtAYA.  Ill

caused  tbe  grass  to  grow  upon  the  high  places ; 
you  have  caused  the  waters  to  flow  over  the  low 
places ;  for  (the  promotion  of)  good  works :  as  you 
have  reposed  for  a  while  in  the  dwelling  of  the 
unapprehensible  (sun),*  so  desist  not  to-day  from 
(the  discharge  of)  this  (your  function).^

12.  As  you  glide  along  enveloping  the  regions

this  (your  function).^

12.  As  you  glide  along  enveloping  the  regions 
(in  clouds) ;  where,  then,  are  the  parents  (of  the 
world)?''  curse  him  who  arrests  your  arm:  reply 
sternly  to  him  who  speaks  disrespectfully  (to 
you).*

13.  Ribhus,  reposing  in  the  solar  orb,  you  inquire, 
Who  awakens  us,  unapprehensible  (Sun),  to  this 
office    (of  sending   rain).     The    Sun    replies,   The

causes  of  fertility  ;  Sdyana  quotes  Ydska  as  his  authority, — Aditya^ 
rasmayo  api  Ribhava  uchyante. — Nir.  xi.  16.causes  of  fertility  ;  Sdyana  quotes  Ydska  as  his  authority, — Aditya^ 
rasmayo  api  Ribhava  uchyante. — Nir.  xi.  16.

Agohyasya  grihe :  agohya  is  also,  upon  the  authority  of  the 
Nirukta,  a  name  of  the  sun  ;  who  is  not  to  be  hidden,  aguhaniya  ; 
or,  according  to  Sdyana,  agrahaniya,  not  to  be  apprehended  ;

aniya  ; 
or,  according  to  Sdyana,  agrahaniya,  not  to  be  apprehended  ; 
literally  or  metaphorically,

Idam  ndnugachhatha :  Sdyana  explains  the  compound  verb, 
anusritya  na  gachhatha,  having  come  forth,  go  not  away  without 
doing  this,  idam,  your  office  of  sending  down  rain  for  as  long  a 
period  as  you  repose  in  the  solar  orb;  Ydska  s  explanation, 
following  Angirasa,  appears  to  be  a  truism, — as  long  as  you  are 
there,  you  are  not  here,  Ydvat  tatra  bhavatha  na  tdvadiha  bhavatha.

*^  The  sun  and  the  moon,  the  protectors  of  the  world,  which, 
during  the  rains,  are  hidden  by  the  clouds.

^  Yah  prdbravd  pro  tasmd  abravitana:  pra  prefixed  to  bru

e  clouds.

^  Yah  prdbravd  pro  tasmd  abravitana:  pra  prefixed  to  bru 
may  mean,  either  to  speak  harshly  or  kindly,  to  censure  or  to 
praise.

112  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

awakener  is  the  wind  ;*  and  the  year  (being  ended),'' 
you  again  to-day  light  up  this  (world).

14.  Sons  of  Strength,  the  Maruts,  desirous  of 
your  coming,  advance  from  the  sky:  Agni  comes 
(to  meet  you)  from  the  earth :  the  wind  traverses 
the  firmament;  and  Varnna  comes  with  undulating 
waters.

SiJktaVI.  (CLXII.)

The  subject  of  this  and  the  succeeding  hymn  being  the  Aiwa- 
medha,  or  sacrifice  of  the  Horse,  the  victim,  or  horse,  is 
considered  to  be  the  deity  ;  the  Rishi  is  DfROHATAMAS  ;  thee,  is 
considered  to  be  the  deity  ;  the  Rishi  is  DfROHATAMAS  ;  the 
metre  is  Trisht'ubh,  except  in  the  third  and  sixth  stanzas,  in

which  it  is  Jagati.

Varga  VII.  1.  Let  neither  Mitra  nor  Varuna,  Aryaman, 
Ayu,"^  Indra,  Ribhukshin,''  nor  the  Maruts,  censure 
us ;  when  we  proclaim  in  the  sacrifice  the  virtues 
of  the  swift  horse  sprung  from  the  gods.^

Swdnam  hodhayitdram  niight  be  rendered,  the  awakener  is 
the  dog ;  but  the  comnientator  explains  swdnam  by  antariksha 
swapantam  vdydm,  the  reposer  in  the  firmament,  the  wind,

Samvatsare  idarn  adyd  vyakhjata,  you  have  made  this  world 
to-day  luminous,  after  the  yeai-  has  expired ;  that  is,  the  rainy

d 
to-day  luminous,  after  the  yeai-  has  expired ;  that  is,  the  rainy 
season  being  passed,  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  are  again 
visible.

The  whole  of  this  hymn  is  given  in  the  Yajush,  xxv.  24,  25.

According  to  both  the  commentators,  Sdyana  and  MaMdhara, 
this  is  a  synonyme  of  Vdyu.

Usually  a  synonyrae  of  Indra,  but  the  commentators  intimate 
its  meaning  here,  Prajdpaii,  he  in  whom,  the  Ribhvs,  or  the  Devas, 
abide  (kshiyanti) .

Devajdtasya  may  also  imply,  according  to  Sdyana,  born  as

c 
d

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD   ADHYAYA.  113

2.  When  they,  (the  priests),  bring  the  prepared 
offering*  to  the  presence  (of  the  horse),  who  has 
been  bathed  and  decorated  with  rich  (trappings),

the  horse),  who  has 
been  bathed  and  decorated  with  rich  (trappings), 
the  various-coloured  goat  going  before  him,  bleat- 
ing, becomes  an  acceptable  offering  to  Indra  and

PUSHAN.''

3.  This  goat,  the  portion  of  Pushan,"  fit  for  all 
the  gods,  is  brought  first  with  the  fleet  courser,  soPUSHAN.''

3.  This  goat,  the  portion  of  Pushan,"  fit  for  all 
the  gods,  is  brought  first  with  the  fleet  courser,  so

the  type  of  various  divinities,  who,  according  to  some  texts,  are 
identified  with  diiFerent  parts,  as  Ushas,  the  Dawn,  his  head,  &c., 
as  cited  hy  Mr.  Colebrooke  from  the  Tattiriya  Yajush,  As. 
Res.  VIII.  423  ;  or  allusion  is  intended  to  a  legend  of  his  origin 
from  the  sun,  either  direct,  or  through  the  agency  of  the  Vasus, 
as  in  the  second  stanza  of  the  next  Sufda,  siirdd-aswam  Vasavo

sus, 
as  in  the  second  stanza  of  the  next  Sufda,  siirdd-aswam  Vasavo 
niratashta.

Rdtim-gribhitdm,  lit.  the  seized  wealth ;  the  offering  to  be 
made  for  the  horse :  Mahidhara,  after  Kdtydyana,  says,  the 
remains  of  the  burnt-offering  made  the  night  before  are  to  be 
given  to  the  horse.

Sdyaia  considers  Pushan  in  this  and  the  next  passage,  where 
he  is  named,  synonymous  with  Agni;  and  this  is  consistent  with 
the  direction  that  enjoins  the  goat  being  tied  to  the  front  of  the 
horse  at  the  sacrificial  post ;  such  a  goat,  black-necked,  krishna- 
grlva,  being  always  regarded  as  an  Agneya  pasu,  or  victim  sacred 
to  Agni,  and  to  be  offered  to  him. — Kdtydyana  Sutra,  98,  &c.  A

ed 
to  Agni,  and  to  be  offered  to  him. — Kdtydyana  Sutra,  98,  &c.  A 
black  goat  is  also  dedicated  to  Pushan,  along  with  Soma — 
Yajush,  XXIX.  58 ;  but  he  is  to  be  attached  to  the  ndbhi,  or 
middle  of  the  horse — Yajush,  xxiv.  1 ;  and  according  to  Mahi- 
dhara, both  goats  are  to  partake  of  the  food  given  to  the  horse. 
In  the  Rich,  however,  only  one  goat,  and  that  dedicated  to 
Pushan,  is  spoken  of:  the  more  complicated  sacrifices  of  the 
Yajush  and  the  Sutras  may  be  of  later  date.He  is  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice  to  Pushan  or  Agni. 
VOL.  II.  1

X14  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

that  TwASHTRf  may  prepare  him  along  with  the 
horse,  as  an  acceptable  preliminary  offering  for  the

along  with  the 
horse,  as  an  acceptable  preliminary  offering  for  the 
(sacrificial)  food.^

4.  When  the  priests  at  the  season  (of  the  cere- 
mony) lead  forth  the  horse,  the  offering  devoted 
to  the  gods,  thrice  round  (the  sacrificial  fire) ;  then 
the  goat,*"  the  portion  of  Pushan,  goes  first,  an- 
nouncing the  sacrifice  to  the  gods.

5.  The  invoker  of  the  gods,  the  minister  of  the 
rite,  the  offerer  of  the  oblation,  the  kindler  of  the 
fire,  the  bruiser  of  the  Soma  plant,  the  director  of 
the  ceremony,  the  sage  (superintendent  of  the 
whole)  f  do  you  replenish  the  rivers^  by  this  well- 
ordered,  well-conducted,  sacrifice.

*  Twasht'ri  is  here  called  by  Sdyana,  sarvasyotpddaka,  the

acrifice.

*  Twasht'ri  is  here  called  by  Sdyana,  sarvasyotpddaka,  the 
producer  of  all  forms ;  according  to  the  text,  TwashM  rupdni 
vikaroti;  or  it  may  here  be  a  name  of  Agni;  Mahidhara  says, 
of  Prajdpati.

Puroddsam,  is  usually  an  offering  of  cakes  and  butter ;  but  it  is 
here  explained,  piirastdd-ddtavyam,  that  which  is  to  be  first  offered.

The  goat  is  to  be  first  immolated.

These  designations  are  apphed  to  eight  of  the  sixteen  priests 
employed  at  solemn  rites ;  the  two  first,  the  Hotri  and  Adhwaryu, 
are  familiar  to  us ;  the  Avayaj  may  be  the  Pratiprasthdtri,  who 
brings  and  places  the  offering :  Agnimindha  is  the  Agnidh,  thewho 
brings  and  places  the  offering :  Agnimindha  is  the  Agnidh,  the 
kindler  of  the  fire :  the  next  is  termed  Grdvagrdbha,  the  praiser 
of  the  stones  that  bruise  the  Soma  plant,  or  he  who  applies  the 
stones  to  that  purpose  :  the  next  is  termed  6'  anstri,  the  same  as 
the  PraSdstri;  and  the  last,  the  Suvipra,  is  considered  to  be  the 
Brahmd:  these  nouns  have  no  direct  government,  ae  the  verb 
passes  all  at  once  to  the  second  person  plural, — dprinadhwam. 
Vakshand  dpriiiadkwam,  nadih  purayata ;  fill  the  rivers ;  the

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  115

6.  Whether  they   be  those  who  cut  the  (sacri-    Varga  vni. 
ficial)  post/  or  those  who  bear  the  post,  or  tljose

i-    Varga  vni. 
ficial)  post/  or  those  who  bear  the  post,  or  tljose

who  fasten  the  rings  on  the  top  of  the  post,  to  which 
the  horse  (is  bound) ;  or  those  who  prepare  the 
vessels  in  which  the  food  of  tlie  horse  is  dressed ; 
let  the  exertions  of  them  all  fulfill  our  expectations.

7.  May  my  desire  be  of  itself  accomplished,  such 
as  it  has  been  entertained,  that  the  smooth- backed 
steed  should  come  to  (gratify)  the  expectations  of 
the  gods:  we  have  made  him  well-secured  for  the 
nutriment  of  the  gods ;  let  the  wise  saints  now 
rejoice.

8.  May  the  halter  and  the  heel-ropes  of  the  fleet 
courser,^  and  the  head-ropes,   the  girths,  and  any

s  of  the  fleet 
courser,^  and  the  head-ropes,   the  girths,  and  any

consequence  of  sacrifice  being  rain  and  fertility  ;  or  it  may  mean, 
offer  rivers  of  butter,  milk,  curds,  and  the  like.

aconsequence  of  sacrifice  being  rain  and  fertility  ;  or  it  may  mean, 
offer  rivers  of  butter,  milk,  curds,  and  the  like.

a

Twenty-one  posts,  of  different  kind^  of  wood,  each  twenty- 
one  cubits  long,  are  to  be  set  up,  to  which  the  different  animals  are 
to  be  fastened,  amounting  to  three  hundred  and  forty-nine,  besides 
two  hundred  and  sixty  wild  animals,  making  altogether  six  hundred 
and  nine,  according  to  Kdtydyana  :  a  similar  enumeration  occurs  in 
the  Rdmdyana,  b.  i.  ch.  xii.  xiii. :  but  the  text  is  no  warrant  for 
such  a  multiplication,  and  it  would  seem  as  if  a  single  post  was  in-

h  a  multiplication,  and  it  would  seem  as  if  a  single  post  was  in- 
tended :  when  the  word  occurs  uncompounded  it  is  in  the  sing^ular ; 
chashdlam.  ye  aswayupdya  takshati :  chashdla  is  given  in  the  Amara 
Kosha,  and  is  explained  by  most  of  the  commentators  a  wooden 
ring,  or  bracelet,  on  the  top  of  the  sacrificial  post :  some  notice 
also  authority  for  its  being  an  iron  ring  at  the  foot  of  the  post.

Ddma  is  explained,  a  rope  fastened  round  the  horse's  neck ; 
sanddna,  one  that  fastens  his  feet ;  the  manner  in  which  horses  are 
commonly  picketed  in  India.

I  2

116  EIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Other  (part  of  the  harness)  ;*  and  the  grass  that  has

SANHITA.

Other  (part  of  the  harness)  ;*  and  the  grass  that  has 
been  put  into  his  mouth  ;  may  all  these  be  with 
thee,  (horse),  amongst  the  gods.

9.  Whatever  the  flies  may  eat  of  the  raw  flesh  of 
the  horse;  whatever  (grease)  is  smeared  upon  the 
brush  or  upon  the  axe  ;^  (what  is  smeared)  upon 
the  hands  or  the  nails  of  the  immolator,  may  all 
this  be  with  thee,  (horse),  among  the  gods.10,  Whatever  undigested  grass  fall  from  his 
belly ;  whatever  particle''  of  raw  flesh  may  remain ;

*  Sirshaiiyd  rasand  rajjuh :  Say  ana  confines  his  explanation  to 
the  first,  the  rope  that  is  fastened  to  the  head,  the  reins :  Mahi-

o 
the  first,  the  rope  that  is  fastened  to  the  head,  the  reins :  Mahi- 
dhara  explains  rasand  by  kafisthd,  and  rajju,  any  dpi  yd  rajjuh, 
whatever  other  rope.

^  Swarau  swadhitau  riptam,  for  iiptam,  smeared  :  the  flesh  that 
is  smeared,  according  to  Mahidhara ;  but  Sdyana  rather  intimates, 
in  regard  to  the  first  term,  unguent  with  which  the  animal  is 
anointed :  Swaru  is  the  implement  used  in  anointing ;  swarund 
pasum  anakti:  from  its  connection  with  what  follows,  however, 
grease  or  fat  were  more  likely  to  be  intended  :  Swudhiti  usually 
means  axe;  it  is  here  elliptically  explained,  chhedana  kale,  or 
avaddnakdle,  at  the  time  of  cutting  up  or  dissecting;  but  it  is

or 
avaddnakdle,  at  the  time  of  cutting  up  or  dissecting;  but  it  is 
elsewhere  interpreted  correctly,  avaddna-sddhana,  the  instrument 
of  dissecting ;  or  pasuchhedana  sddhana  asih,  a  sword  or  knife,  the 
instrument  of  cutting  up  the  victim.  In  the  Niti  Manjari^  text 
is  quoted,  in  which  the  sacrificers  are  termed  Vaishnavas, 
Dhanydste  Vaishnava  devdn  yajante  pasordmisham  samiturnakha 
hastastham  devesMam  makshikdsitam,  Happy  are  the  Vaishnavas, 
who  worship  the  gods  with  the  consecrated  flesh  of  an  animal, 
adhering  to  the  nails  and  hands  of  the  immolator,  and  eaten  by 
flies.

'^  Gandhah,  but  here  explained  by  lesah,  a  little  part.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  117

d  by  lesah,  a  little  part.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  117'^  Gandhah,  but  here  explained  by  lesah,  a  little  part.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  117

d  by  lesah,  a  little  part.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  117

let  the  immolators  make  the  whole  free  from  defect, 
and  so  cook  the  pure  (offering)  that  it  may  be  per- 
fectly dressed.*

11.  Whatever  (portion)  of  thy  slaughtered  (body)     Varga  ix. 
fall  from  thy  carcase  when  it  is  being  roasted  by

the  fire,  (escaping)  from  the  spit  ;^  let  it  not  be  left 
on  the  ground,  nor  on  the  (sacred)  grass,  but  let  it 
(all)  be  given  to  the  longing  gods.

12.  Let  their  exertions  be  for  our  good  who 
watch  the  cooking  of  the  horse ;  who  say.  It  is 
fragrant ;  therefore  give  us  some  ;*"  who  solicit  the 
flesh  of  the  horse  as  alms.

ore  give  us  some  ;*"  who  solicit  the 
flesh  of  the  horse  as  alms.

Medham  sritapdkam  pachantu,  let  them  cook  the  pure  flesh 
with  perfect  cooking ;  such  as  may  make  it  fit  for  the  gods,  and 
not' done  too  much  or  too  little,  as  may  be  fit  for  pitris  and  men, 
is  the  explanation  of  both  annotators.

Gdtrdd  agnind  pachyamdnah  -  abhi  sulam ;  in  the  preceding 
verse,  sritapdkayn  implies  boiling,  and  the  specification  of  ukhd, 
a  pot  or  caldron,  in  the  1 3th  verse,  is  to  the  same  purport : 
which  is  rather  at  variance  with  the  use  of  the  sula,  or  spit :  as 
the  expressions,  however,  are  unequivocal,  we  must  conclude  that 
part  was  boiled  and  part  roasted :  Sdyana  suggests,  that  the

e  that 
part  was  boiled  and  part  roasted :  Sdyana  suggests,  that  the 
portion  that  falls  may  be  the  rasa,  the  dripping,  which  is  to  be 
received  upon  darbha  grass,  afterwards  probably  to  be  thrown 
on  the  fire.Ya  im  dhuh  surihhir-nirhareti  is  explained  by  Sdyana,  ye 
chainam  sobhanagandho,  atah  kinchid-asmauhyam  deJti :  who  say  of 
it.  It  is  fragrant,  therefore,  give  us  some ;  or  it  may  mean,  give  it 
to  the  gods ;  nir^ara,  take  ofF,  or  give,  having  no  government. 
Mahidhara  accordingly  understands  it  to  mean,  the  smell  shows 
it  is  dressed  sufficiently,  remove  it  from  the  fire  ;  or,  he  says,  the 
gods,  perceiving  this,  and  impatient  of  the  delay,  may  exclaim.

he 
gods,  perceiving  this,  and  impatient  of  the  delay,  may  exclaim.

118  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.      •

13.  The  stick  that  is  dipped  into  the  caldron  in 
which  the  flesh  is  boiled  f  the  vessels  that  distribute 
the  broth  ;^  the  covers  of  the  dishes,''  the  skewers,* 
the  knives,^  all  do  honour  (to  the  horse).

14.  May  the  place  of  going  forth,  of  tarrying,  of 
rolling  on  the  ground ;  the  foot-fastening  of  the 
horse,  (the  water)  that  he  hjis  drunk,  the  gi*ass  that 
he  has  eaten ; — may  ail  these  be  thine  among  the 
gods.

15.  Let  not   smoke-smelling  Agni   cause   thee,

Give  us  :  the  following  phrase,  however,  ye  chdrvato  mdnsabhikshdm

Give  us  :  the  following  phrase,  however,  ye  chdrvato  mdnsabhikshdm 
vpdsate,  they  who  ask  the  flesh  of  the  horse  as  alms,  leaves  no 
doubt  that  mortals  are  intended,  who  feed  upon  horse-flesh  when 
ofitred  in  sacrifice.

Nikshanam  mdnspachanyd  ukhdydh :  the  first  is  explained, 
pdka  parikshdsd  dhanam  kdsht'ham,  a  piece  of  wood,  an  implement 
for  trying  if  the  cooking  is  eflected.

Pdtrdni  yusMa  dsechandni;  the  vessels  that  are  sprinklers  of 
the  boiled  juice,  or  broth,  rasasya  kwathitasya.Pdtrdni  yusMa  dsechandni;  the  vessels  that  are  sprinklers  of 
the  boiled  juice,  or  broth,  rasasya  kwathitasya.

Ushmanyd  pidkdnd,  covers  confining  the  heat ;  Maki'dhara. 
Sdyana  separates  them,  making  the  first,  vessels  for  confining  the 
heat,  ushmanivdrandrhdni  pdtrdni ;  and  the  second,  the  covers  of

ng  the 
heat,  ushmanivdrandrhdni  pdtrdni ;  and  the  second,  the  covers  of 
the  dishes,  dpidhdnd  charuudm.

Ankd,  slips  of  cane ;  vetasakikhd,  for  marking  the  members 
of  the  horse  as  they  are  to  be  dissected  :  according  to  Kdtydyana, 
Sutra  155,  this  is  to  be  done  by  the  queens,  or  wives  of  the 
sacrificer,  and  their  attendants,  with  one  hundred  and  one  needles 
or  skewers,  which  may  be  of  gold,  silver,  or  iron,  or  other  metal, 
80  embellish ed ;  this  is  an  evident  refinement  on  the  simple 
material  originally  used.

Sundh-avaddnasddhund,  implements  of  dissection,  the  Swadhiti, 
and  others.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  119

(horse),  to  utter  sound  ;''  let  not  the  glowing  caldron,

YAYA.  119

(horse),  to  utter  sound  ;''  let  not  the  glowing  caldron, 
odoriferous  (with  its  contents),^  be  overturned  :  the 
gods  accept  a  horse  that  has  been  selected  (for  sacri- 
fice) ;  that  has  been  led  (round  the  fire) ;  that  has 
been  devoutly  offered,  and  has  been  consecrated  by 
(the  exclamation),  VashaL

16.  The  cloth    which  they  spread   as   a  cover-      Varga  x. 
ing   for   the   horse ;''   the    golden    (trappings   with

which  they  decorate  him),  the  head-ropes,  the 
foot-ropes, — all  these  they  offer  as  acceptable  to 
the  gods.

17.  Whoever  has  goaded  thee  in  thy  paces,  either 
with  heel  or  with  whip,  whilst  snorting  in  thy 
strength, — all  these  (vexations)  I  pour  out  with17.  Whoever  has  goaded  thee  in  thy  paces,  either 
with  heel  or  with  whip,  whilst  snorting  in  thy 
strength, — all  these  (vexations)  I  pour  out  with

st  snorting  in  thy 
strength, — all  these  (vexations)  I  pour  out  with 
holy  prayer,  as  oblations  with  the  ladle.

18.  The  axe  penetrates  the  thirty-four  ribs  of  the 
swift  horse  :^  the  beloved  of  the  gods,  (the  immo- 
lators),  cut  up  (the  horse)  with  skill,  so  that  the

This  may  be  addressed  to  the  horse  before  he  is  killed ;  as 
an  expiatory  ceremony  is  necessary  if  he  neigh  on  approaching 
the  fire :  it  may,  however,  be  considered  as  addressed  to  his 
limbs  in  process  of  cooking,  to  desire  them  not  to  boil  too  loud, 
that  is,  too  fast,  lest  the  fire  split  the  caldron.

Jaghrih-tdpenajighrati,  smelling  with  heat,  is  Sdyana's  expla-

aldron.

Jaghrih-tdpenajighrati,  smelling  with  heat,  is  Sdyana's  expla- 
nation ;  but  it  is  not  quite  clear  what  is  intended.

'^  At  the  time  of  putting  him  to  death,  according  to  SdyaAa : 
the  adhivdsa  of  the  Sutras,  Kdt.  145,  is  apparently  a  curtain  or 
screen,  behind  which  the  principal  queen  lies  through  the  night 
by  the  side  of  the  horse.

According  to  the  commentators,  the  other  animals  have  only 
twenty -six  ribs.

120  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

lirnbs  may  be  unperforated,"  and  recapitulating  joint 
by  joint.

19.  There  is  one  immolator  of  the  radiant  horse, 
which  is  Time  '}  there  are  two  that  hold  him  fast :' 
such  of  thy  limbs  as  I  cut  up  in  due  season,  I  offer

him  fast :' 
such  of  thy  limbs  as  I  cut  up  in  due  season,  I  offer 
them,  made  into  balls  (of  meat),  upon  the  fire.him  fast :' 
such  of  thy  limbs  as  I  cut  up  in  due  season,  I  offer 
them,  made  into  balls  (of  meat),  upon  the  fire.

20.  Let  not  thy  precious  body  grieve  thee,  who 
art  going  verily  (to  the  gods) :  Jet  not  the  axe 
linger  in  thy  body :  let  not  the  greedy  and  unskilful 
(immolator),  missing  the  members,  mangle  thy  limbs 
needlessly  with  his  knife.

21.  Verily  at  this  moment  thou  dost  not  die; 
nor  art  thou  harmed ;  for  thou  goest  by  auspicious 
paths  to  the  gods.  The  horses  of  Indra,  the  steeds 
of  the  Mar  ids  shall  be  yoked  (to  their  cars),  and  a 
courser  shall  be  placed  in  the  shaft  of  the  ass  of  the 
AswiNS  (to  bear  thee  to  heaven).*

22.

the  shaft  of  the  ass  of  the 
AswiNS  (to  bear  thee  to  heaven).*

22.  May  this  horse  bring  to  us  all-sustaining 
wealth,  with  abundance  of  cows,  of  excellent 
horses,  and  of  male    offspring:   may  the  spirited*"

Achchhidra  gdtrd:  the  visasanakartirah,  or  dissectors,  are  to 
name  the  parts,  as,  heart,  tongue,  breast,  as  they  divide  them  ; 
and  are  so  to  separate  them  that  they  may  not  have  holes  or 
perforations,  they  may  not  be  cut  or  mangled.

Rituh,  properly  season ;  by  metonymy,  time ;  or,  according 
to  MaMdhara,  Prajdpati,  as  one  with  time.

Day  and  Night,  or  Heaven  and  Earth.

The  first  half  of  this  stanza  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxiii.  '26 ; 
and  the  whole  as  in  xxv.  44.

a  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxiii.  '26 ; 
and  the  whole  as  in  xxv.  44.

Aditi  is  explained  by  the  commentators,  not  poor  or  mean, 
adina,  as  an  epithet  of  aiwa.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADIIYAYA.         121

steed  bring  us  exemption  from  wickedness :  may 
this  liorse,  offered  in  oblation,  procure  for  us  bodily 
vigour.*

Si5kta  VII.  (CLXIII.)steed  bring  us  exemption  from  wickedness :  may 
this  liorse,  offered  in  oblation,  procure  for  us  bodily 
vigour.*

Si5kta  VII.  (CLXIII.)

The  subject  of  this  hymn  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  last,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  horse :  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same.

1.  Thy  great  birth,  0  Horse,  is  to  be  glorified;      Varga  xi. 
whether  first  springing  from  the  firmament"^  or  from

the  water,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  neighed  (auspici-

mament"^  or  from

the  water,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  neighed  (auspici- 
ously), for  thou  hast  the  wings  of  the  falcon  and  the 
limbs  of  the  deer.

2.  Trita''  harnessed  the  horse   which  was  given

Although  some  of  the  expressions  are  obscure,  a^J  perhaps 
contradictory,  yet  it  is  undeniable  that  the  hymn  describes  the 
actual  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  the  subsequent  dissection  of  his  limbs, 
partly  boiling  and  partly  roasting  of  his  flesh,  the  presentation  of 
part,  with  fire,  to  the  gods,  and  the  eating  of  a  part  by  the  persons 
present :  there  is  no  obvious  indication,  however,  of  the  same  cere- 
monial that  is  described  in  the  text  of  fie  Yajush,  or  the  Sutras

monial that  is  described  in  the  text  of  fie  Yajush,  or  the  Sutras 
of  Kdtydyana,  or  even  in  the  Rdmdyai'ia,  and  which  evidently 
belongs  to  a  later  and  more  corrupt  state  of  manners  :  even  as  it 
occurs  in  the  text,  it  seems  worthier  of  barbarous  Scythians  than 
civilized  Hindus,  and  may  possibly  have  originated  with  the 
former.

This  hymn  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxix.  12,  24.

^  Samudrdd-uta  va  purishdt ;  the  commentator  explains  these 
by  antariksha,  the  firmament,  and  udaka,  water :  purisha,  Mahidhara 
states,  may  also  mean  pasu :  according  to  Sdyana,  samudra  here 
may  also  mean  the  sun,  as  in  the  next  stanza.''  According  to  both  commentators,  this  is  a  synonyme  of  VdyUy

anza.

''  According  to  both  commentators,  this  is  a  synonyme  of  VdyUy 
as  pervading  the  three  regions :  Yama  is  considered  by  Sdyana  as 
in  this  place  a  name  of  Agni.

122  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

by  Yama  :  Indra  first  mounted  him,  and  Gand- 
HARBA*  seized  his  reins.  Vasm,  you  fabricated 
the  horse  from  the  sun."*

3.  Thou,  horse,  art  Yama:  thou  art  A'ditya: 
thou  art  Trita  by  a  mysterious  act :"  thou  art 
associated  with  Soma.  The  sages  have  said  there 
are  three  bindings'^  of  thee  in  heaven.

4.  They  have  said  that  three  are  thy  bindings  in 
heaven ;  three  upon  earth  ;*  and  three  in  the  firma- 
ment. Thou  declarest  to  me,  Horse,  who  art  (one

three  in  the  firma- 
ment. Thou  declarest  to  me,  Horse,  who  art  (one 
with)  Varuna,  that  which  they  have  called  thy 
most  excellent  birth.

5.  I  have   beheld,    Horse,    these    thy   purifying

Soma,  according  to  Say  aria  ;  Vimavasu  to  Mahidkara.

The  Vasus  may  be  the  divinities  previously  specified,  or 
demi-gods  so  named,  the  personified  solar  rays :  Mahidhara 
understands  Siira  to  be  equivalent  to  A'dityamandala,  the  solar 
sphere.

Guhijenavratena-gopaniyena,  dtirdina  riipena  vd  karmand  sar- 
vatra  vydptirupena,  by  a  secret  of  the  nature  of  a  cloudy  day,  or 
an  act  of  a  universally  penetrating  character :  the  explanations  are 
not  very  obvious.

rsally  penetrating  character :  the  explanations  are 
not  very  obvious.

Bandhandni  trmi ;  Suyana  explains  it  utpatti  harandni,  media 
of  origin,  that  is,  the  Vasus,  Aditija,  and  heaven  :  Mahidhara 
considers  it  as  applicable  to  the  horse  in  the  form  of  the  sun,  and 
that  as  identical  with  the  three  Vedas,  or  in  allusion  to  the  three 
regions  through  which  he  diffuses  warmth.Triiiyapsv,  more  properly,  three  in  the  waters ;  but  here 
intending  the  habitable  earth  in  which  the  three  bindings  of  the 
horse,  or  rather  of  the  sun,  of  which  he  is  the  type,  are,  according 
to  Sdyana,  food,  site,  seed  ;  according  to  Mahidhara,  tillage,  rain,

to  Sdyana,  food,  site,  seed  ;  according  to  Mahidhara,  tillage,  rain, 
seed :  in  the  firmament,  they  are  cloud,  lightning,  thunder.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  123

(regions);  these  impressions  of  the  feet  of  thee» 
who  sharest  in  the  sacrifice ;  and  here  thy  auspicious 
reins,  wliich  are  the  protectors  of  the  rite  that 
preserve  it.*

6.  I  recognize  in  my  mind  thy  form    afar   off,     Varga  xii. 
going  from  (the  earth)  below,  by  way  of  heaven,  to

the  sun.  I  behold  thy  head  soaring  aloft,  and 
mounting  quickly  by  unobstructed  paths,  unsullied 
by  dust.

7.  I  behold  thy  most  excellent  form  coming 
eagerly  to  (receive)  thy  food  in  thy  (holy)  place  of

t  form  coming 
eagerly  to  (receive)  thy  food  in  thy  (holy)  place  of 
earth :  when  thy  attendant  brings  thee  nigh  to  the 
enjoyment  (of  the  ])rov8nder),  therefore  greedy,  thou 
devourest  the  foddei'.^

8.  The  car  follo\\s  thee,  0  Horse  :  men  attend 
thee  ;  cattle  follow  thee  ;  the  loveliness  of  maidens 
(waits)  upon  thee  f  troops  of  demigods  following 
thee  have  sought  thy  friendship ;  the  gods  them- 
selves have  been  admirers  of  thy  vigour,

9.  His  mane  is  of  gold  f  his  feet  are  of  iron ;

Sdyana  proposes  another  explanation,  understanding  by 
avamdrjandni,  the  water  with  which  the  horse  is  sprinkled : 
Mahidhara,  the  cane,  mat,  and  other  things  used  in  cleaning  him  ;Mahidhara,  the  cane,  mat,  and  other  things  used  in  cleaning  him  ; 
saphdndm  nidhdna,  the  place  of  sacrifice, 'or  the  field  in  which  he 
is  pastured ;  and  by  the  raiand  ritasya  gopd,  either  the  guards 
attending  on  the  horse,  or  the  priests.

As  identical  with  the  Sun,  these  expressions  apply  to  his 
acceptance  of  the  oblations  ofiered  in  the  ceremony.

Bhagah  kdninam  is  explained  by  both  commentators,  kanydndm 
sauhhdgyatn,  or  saundaryam.

Hiranyasfringa,  lit.  golden-horned ;  but  fig.  maned.

124  R[G-VEDA    SANHITA.

and  fleet  as  thought,  Indra  is  his  inferior  (in 
speed).  The  gods  have  come  to  partake  of  his 
(being  offered  as)  oblation :  the  first  who  mounted 
the  horse  was  Indra.

ng  offered  as)  oblation :  the  first  who  mounted 
the  horse  was  Indra.

10.  The  full-haunched,  slender-waisted,  high- 
spirited,  and  celestiai  coursers  (of  the  sun),  gallop 
along  like  swans  in  rows,  when  the  horses*  spread 
along  the  heavenly  path. 
Varga  XIII.  11.  Thy  body,  horse,  is  made  for  motion:  thy 
mind  is  rapid  (in  intention)  as  the  wind  ;  the  hairs 
(of  thy  mane)  are  tossed  w  manifold  directions  ;  and 
spread  beautiful  in  the  forests.**

12.  The  swift  horse  approaches  the  place  of 
immolation,  meditating  with  mind  intent  upon  the 
gods:  the  goat  bound  to  him  is  led  before  him  ;° 
after  him  follow  the  priests  and  the  singers.

led  before  him  ;° 
after  him  follow  the  priests  and  the  singers.led  before  him  ;° 
after  him  follow  the  priests  and  the  singers.

Irmdntdsah  silikamadhyamdsah  are  differently  explained,  and 
may  also  be  rendered,  thin-ended,  or  thin-haunched,  and  plump- 
waisted :  according  to  Suyaria,  allusion  is  made  here  to  a  troop 
or  herd  of  horses :  Mahidhara  refers  them  to  the  horses  of  the 
sun's  car ;  Ydska's  explanation  apparently  identifies  the  horses 
with  the  Adityas,  but  it  is  rather  obscure. — Nir.  iv.  13.

The  horse  is  here  identified  with  Agni,  whose  flames  consume 
the  forests.

Ajah,  puro  niyate  ndbhirasydnu  paschdt  kavayo  yanti  rebhdh : 
Sdyana  connects  ndbhi  with  aja,  as  implying  nahanam,  a  binding,

bhdh : 
Sdyana  connects  ndbhi  with  aja,  as  implying  nahanam,  a  binding, 
being,  as  it  were,  or  in  place  of  a  binding,  as  not  detached  from 
him :  he  also  connects  anu  and  paschdt,  as  meaning,  following 
after :  Mahidhara  s  explanation  would  be  more  satisfactor}%  if  we 
could  be  sure  that  the  Yajush  and  Rich  agree  in  the  details :  he 
makes  it,  the  goat  that  is  fastened  to  the  horse's  head  is  led  first ; 
next,  the  goat  fastened  to  his  waist  or  navel,  ndbhirasydnu ;  after-

SECOND   ASIITAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  125

13.  The  horse  proceeds  to  that  assembly  which  is 
most  excellent:  to  the  presence  of  his  father  and 
his  mother,  (heaven  and  earth).  Go,  (Horse),  to-

of  his  father  and 
his  mother,  (heaven  and  earth).  Go,  (Horse),  to- 
day rejoicing  to  the  gods,  that  (the  sacrifice)  may 
yield  blessings  to  the  donor.''

SiJktaVIIL  (CLXIV.)of  his  father  and 
his  mother,  (heaven  and  earth).  Go,  (Horse),  to- 
day rejoicing  to  the  gods,  that  (the  sacrifice)  may 
yield  blessings  to  the  donor.''

SiJktaVIIL  (CLXIV.)

This  Sukta  is  of  the  unprecedented  extent  of  fifty-two  stanzas :  of 
these,  the  first  forty-one  are  addressed  to  the  Vihoadevas,  or  the 
usual  divinities  classed  together  under  that  appellation  :  the  first 
half  of  stanza  forty-two  refers  to  Vdch,  speech  ;  the  second  half 
to  the  waters ;  the  forty-sixth  and  forty-seventh  to  Surya  ;  the 
forty-eighth  to  Kula,  or  Time ;  the  forty-ninth  to  SARASWAxf ; 
the  fiftieth  to  the  Sddhyas;  the  fifty-first  to  Surta,  Parjanva,

xf ; 
the  fiftieth  to  the  Sddhyas;  the  fifty-first  to  Surta,  Parjanva, 
orAcNi ;  the  fifty-second  to  Surya,  or  Saraswat  ;  the  Rishi 
is  DiRGHATAMAS :  the  metre  is,  in  the  forty-second  stanza, 
Prastdra-pankti ;  in  the  rest,  TrisMulh  and  Jagati.

1.  I  have  beheld  the  Lord  of  Men  with  seven    Varga  xiv.

wards,  paschdt,  go  the  priests,  kavayaJi,  and  the  singers,  rebJidh, 
or  praisers,  stotdrah.

Although  more  mystical  than  the  preceding  hymn,  especially 
in  regard  to  the  intimations  of  the  identity  of  the  horse  with  the 
sun,  there  is  i^pthing  in  it  incompatible  with  the  more  explicit 
description  in  the  former  Sukta  of  the  actual  sacrifice  of  a  horse.

escription  in  the  former  Sukta  of  the  actual  sacrifice  of  a  horse.escription  in  the  former  Sukta  of  the  actual  sacrifice  of  a  horse.

According  to  Sdi/ana,  however,  the  general  purport  of  this 
Siikta  is  the  inculcation  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Veddnta,  or  the 
spiritual  unity  of  Brahma  and  the  universe :  some  passages  occur 
that  bear  him  out  in  this  view,  but  the  text,  upon  the  whole, 
although  often  -mystical  and  obscure,  evidently  proposes  the 
glorification  of  Aditya,  or  the  sun,  especially  as  identifiable  with 
all  creation :  according  to  Saunaka,  the  application  of  the  Sukta 
is  of  a  much  less  exalted  description  :  he  says.  If  a  Brahman  have 
committed  theft,  he  may  expiate  the  offence  by  fasting  three

126  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

may  expiate  the  offence  by  fasting  three

126  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

SODS  ;*  of  which  delightful  and  benevolent  (deity), 
who  is  the  object  of  our  invocation,  there  is  an  all- 
pervading  middle  brother,  and  a  third  brother,^  well 
fed  with  (oblations  of)  ghee.

2.  They  yoke  the  seven  (horses)  to  the  one- 
wheeled  car ;"  one  horse,  named  seven,  bears  it 
along:*  the  three-axled  wheel^  is  iindecaying,  never

nights,  and  repeating  inaudibly  this  Sdkta:  agreeably  to  the 
Aitareya  Brdhmana,  v.  12 ;  as  cited  by  Say  aria,  the  hyam  should 
consist  of  but  forty-one  stanzas.  Mr.  Whitney's  very  useful  com- 
parative index  shows  that  all  the  stanzas  of  the  hymn  occur  in  the

parative index  shows  that  all  the  stanzas  of  the  hymn  occur  in  the 
Afhai'va  Veda,  with  the  general  style  of  which,  as  far  as  we  yet 
know  of  that  Veda,  it  best  agrees. — Indisclie  Stadien,  vol.  ii.  part  iii.

The  seven  solar  rays ;  or  it  may  be  rendered,  seventh  son, 
A'ditya  being  the  seventh  son  of  Aditi.The  seven  solar  rays ;  or  it  may  be  rendered,  seventh  son, 
A'ditya  being  the  seventh  son  of  Aditi.

Vdyu  and  Agni,  the  younger  brothers  of  A'ditya :  Sdyana, 
substituting  Parameswara  for  A'ditya,  considers  the  three  sons  to 
be  his  attributes  of  creating,  preserving,  and  destroying :  the 
phrase,  I  have  beheld,  is  the  consciousness  of  the  identity  of 
individual  with  supreme  spirit.

Either  the  orb  of  the  sun,  or  time,  or  a  year :  the  seven

spirit.

Either  the  orb  of  the  sun,  or  time,  or  a  year :  the  seven 
horses  may  be  the  seven  solar  rays,  or  the  six  seasons,  with  their 
aggregation  and  year ;  or  the  six  double  months,  and  the  inter- 
calary month  ;  or  the  seven  days  of  the  week  :  the  wheels  of  the 
car,  as  typical  of  time,  past,  present,  and  future,  should  be  three, 
but  they  are  identical  in  nature,  and  are  therefore  said  to  be  but 
one.

Eko  aswo  saptandmd  may  mean  the  Sun,  or  Aditya,  either  as 
the  absorber  of  the  seven  flavours,  or  as  praised  by  the  seven 
Rishis :  or  it  may  be  a  sort  of  pun,  sapta  meaning  a  horse  as  well 
as  seven.

The  day  with  its  three  Sandhyas ;  the  year  with  three  seasons,

ven.

The  day  with  its  three  Sandhyas ;  the  year  with  three  seasons, 
hot,  wet,  and  cold ;  or  time,  past,  present,  and  future.

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  127

loosened,  and  in  it  all  these  regions  of  the  universe 
abide.*

3.  The  seven''  who  preside  over  this  seven-wheeled 
chariot  (are)  the  seven  horses  who  draw  it  f  seven 
sisters  ride  in  it  together,*  and  in  it  are  deposited 
the  seven  forms  of  utterance.^4.  Who  has  seen  the  primeval  (being)  at 
the  time  of  his  being  born :  what  is  that  endowed 
with  substance  which  the  unsubstantial  sustains:' 
from  earth  are  the  breath  and  blood,  but  where 
is  the  soul  :^  who  may  repair  to  the  sage  to  ask 
this?

t  where 
is  the  soul  :^  who  may  repair  to  the  sage  to  ask 
this?

All  things  are  dependent  upon  time ;  which  of  itself  is 
imperishable,  as  the  Smriti;  anddinidhanah  kdlah,  time  is  without 
beginning  or  end.

Either  the  solar  rays,  or  if  the  year  be  typified,  the  seven 
portions  of  it ;  as  the  ayana  or  solstice,  season,  month,  fortnight, 
day,  night,  hour.

Sdyana  considers  the  seven  wheels,  as  well  as  the  seven 
horses,  to  be  the  solar  rays.

The  commentator  repeats  the  interpretation,  either  the  rays 
of  the  sun,  or  the  six  seasons  and  the  aggregate  year,  or  the  six 
double  and  cne  intercalary  month.

The  seven  notes  of  music  as  employed  in  chanting  the

calary  month.

The  seven  notes  of  music  as  employed  in  chanting  the 
praises  of  the  Sun ;  or  if  gavdm  be  used  in  the  sense  of  water, 
the  seven  forms  may  be  the  seven  divine  rivers.

Asthanwantam  yad  anasthd  vibhartti;  lit.  that  which  having 
bone,  the  boneless  sustains;  the  latter,  according  to  Sdyana, 
is  the  Prakriti  of  the  Sdnkkyas,  or  the  Mdyd  of  the  VeddrUis, 
formless  matter,  or  spiritual  illusion,  from  which  the  material 
and  visible  world  proceeds.

BMmyd   asur-asrig-dtmd    kwa   swit :    Bkumi,    according   to

128  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  Immature*  (in  understanding),  undiscerning  in 
mind,  I  inquire  of  those  things  which  are  hidden128  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  Immature*  (in  understanding),  undiscerning  in 
mind,  I  inquire  of  those  things  which  are  hidden

),  undiscerning  in 
mind,  I  inquire  of  those  things  which  are  hidden 
(even)  from  the  gods :  (what  are)  the  seven  threads" 
which  the  sages  have  spread  to  envelop  the  sun,"  in 
whom  all  abide? 
Varg«  XV.  6.  Ignorant,  I  inquire  of  the  sages  who  know 
(the  truth) ;  not  as  one  knowing  (do  I  inquire), 
for  the  sake  of  (gaining)  knowledge :  what  is  that 
One  alone,  who  has  upheld  these  six  spheres  in  the 
form  of  the  unborn?**

Sdyana^  implies  the  sthdla  iarira,  gross  body ;  asuh,  breath ;  the 
sukshma  sarira,  or  subtile  body ;  and  asi'lj,  blood,  the  aggregate 
elements  of  which  the  body  is  formed  :  dtmd,  or  chetana,  the 
thinking  principle,  although  connected  with  gross  and  subtile

na,  the 
thinking  principle,  although  connected  with  gross  and  subtile 
form,  is  nowhere  perceptible  as  a  separate  object,  and  not  to  be 
apprehended,  either  by  pupil  or  teacher.

Pdkah,  properly  ripening,  being  or  making  mature  ;  but  it  is 
here  and  elsewhere  explained  hy  paktavyah,  what  is  to  be  matured ; 
apakwamafiraham,  I,  of  inmiature  mind.

SajJta  tantun,  may  be  the  seven  forms  of  the  Soma  sacrifice, 
or  the  seven  metres  of  the  Vedas,  by  which  the  gods,  or  the  Sun, 
are  induced  to  be  present.

Vatse  bashkaye  adhi:  the  first  is  explained  by  the  Scholiast, 
sarvasya  nivdsa  hhute :  bashkaye  is  rendered  Aditye ;  but,  as  Sdyana

sarvasya  nivdsa  hhute :  bashkaye  is  rendered  Aditye ;  but,  as  Sdyana 
adds,  the  usual  meaning  of  baskkuya  is  a  yearling  calf :  but  as  we 
have  ratsa  also,  which  likewise  means  a  calf,  bashkaya  must  have 
some  other  sense  ; — such  as  time,  or  rather,  the  sun.Yas-tcs^'nmbha  shaS-imd  rajdnsi  ajasya  rupe  kim  api  swid- 
ekam :  the  one  may  be,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  the  orb  of  the 
ungenerated  sun,  on  which  the  six  seasons  depend ;  or  the 
satyaloka,  wLence  there  is  no  return,  and  which  may  be  con- 
sidered as  the  stay  of  the  other  six   worlds   or   regions;   or.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  129

7.  Let  him  who  knows  this  (truth)  quickly

AKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  129

7.  Let  him  who  knows  this  (truth)  quickly 
declare  it;  the  mysterious  condition  of  the  beau- 
tiful ever-moving  (sun) :  the  rays  shed  (their)  milk 
from  his  (exalted)  head,  investing  his  form  with 
radiance :  they  have  drunk  up  the  water  by  the 
paths  (by  which  they  were  poured  forth).*

8.  The  mother  (earth),  worships  the  father, 
(sun),  with  holy  rites,  for  the  sake  of  water;  but 
he  has  anticipated  (her  wants)  in  his  mind :  where- 
upon, desirous  of  progeny,  she  is  penetrated  by  the 
dews  of  impregnation,  and,  (all)  expectant  of  abun- 
dance, exchange  words  (of  congratulation).''

9.  The  mother,  (sky),  was  associated  in  (sustain-

congratulation).''

9.  The  mother,  (sky),  was  associated  in  (sustain- 
ing) the  burthen  of  the  frJfiUer  of  desires,  (the 
earth)  :  the  embryo  (water)  rested  within  the 
(womb  of  the)  clouds :  thereupon  the  calf  bellowed,' 
and  beheld  the  omniform  cow  in  the  three  combi- 
nations.'*

10.  The  one  sole  (sun),  having  three  mothers  and 
three  fathers,^  stood  on  high  :  none  ever  over-weary

agreeably  to  his  Voddnta  views,  *  the  one  '  is  the  sole  form  of  the 
unborn  creator,  which  is  the  same  with  the  universe.

The  solar  rays ;  although  especial  agents  in  sending  down 
rain,  are  equally  active  in  its  re-absorption.

.  This  is  merely  a  metaphorical  description  of  the  agency  of

ption.The  solar  rays ;  although  especial  agents  in  sending  down 
rain,  are  equally  active  in  its  re-absorption.

.  This  is  merely  a  metaphorical  description  of  the  agency  of

ption.

.  This  is  merely  a  metaphorical  description  of  the  agency  of 
the  sun  in  sending  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  its  consequent  fertility. 
The  cloud  thundered.

Viswarupyam  gam  trishu  yojaneshu  is  explained,  the  earth 
diversified  by  various  crops,  in  consequence  of  the  co-operation  of 
the  cloud,  the  wind,  and  the  rays  of  the  sim.

'^  Tlie  three  worlds,  earth,  sky,  heaven,  and  the  three  deities 
presiding  over  them,  Agiii,  Vdyu,  Surya.

VOL.  II.  K  *

130  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

him :  The  (gods)  on  the  summit  of  tlie  sky  take 
counsel  respecting  him  in  language  all-comprehend- 
ing, (but)  not  extending  to  all.^ 
Varga  XVI.  11.  The  twclvc-spoked  wheeP  of  the  true  (sun)

to  all.^ 
Varga  XVI.  11.  The  twclvc-spoked  wheeP  of  the  true  (sun) 
revolves  round  the  heavens,  and  never  (tends)  to 
decay :  seven  hundred  and  tvi'enty  children  in  pairs," 
Agni,  abide  in  it.

12.  They  have  termed  the  five-footed,  twelve- 
formed  parent,  PurIshin,'^  when  in  the  further 
hemisphere  of  the  sky :  and  others  have  termed  him 
Arpita,®  when  in  the  hither  (portion  of  the  sky)  ;^

Viswavidam  vdcham  aviswaminvdm,  speech  or  discourse,  know- 
ing all,  or  which  may  be  "known  by  all ;  or  that  which  does  not 
extend  to  all,  a-sarva-vydpimm :  speech  here,  according  to  Suyam, 
means  thunder, — vdcham  garjitalakshandm.

According  to  Sdyana,  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac ;  but  the

handm.According  to  Sdyana,  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac ;  but  the

handm.

According  to  Sdyana,  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac ;  but  the 
expression  may  mean  the  twelve  months.  At  the  same  time, 
M.  MoUien  has  shown,  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  the 
Zodiacal  divisions  were  unknown  to  the  Hindus  at  the  probable 
date  of  the  Vedaa. — Memoir es  de  V Academic  des  Inscriptions, 
premiere  s&ie,  vol.  3.

*^  Nights  and  days  ;  three  hundred  and  sixty  of  each.

Deriving  it  from  purisha,  water,  Purishin  is  a  name  of  the 
sun,  as  the  source  of  rain :  the  first  five  feet  are  the  five  seasons, 
the  dewy  and  cold  seasons  forming  one ;  the  twelve  forms  are  the 
twelve  months,  or  twelve  A'dityas.

Sdyana  considers  this  as  synonymous  with  adhinam  or

twelve  A'dityas.

Sdyana  considers  this  as  synonymous  with  adhinam  or 
pardyattam,  dependent  upon,  and  applicable  to  the  sun,  as 
dependent  upon,  or  influeuced  by,  the  course  of  the  year,  or 
recurrence  of  the  solstices ;  moving  quick  or  slow,  according  to 
his  southern  or  northern  dechnation.

IJpare  is  the  term  of  the  text,  which  the  Scholiast  explains.

SECOND   ASH-fAKA THIRD   ADHYAYA.  131

shining   in   his  seven-wheeled    (car),  each  (wheel) 
having  six  spokes.

13.  All  beings  abide  in  this  five-spoked''  revolving 
wheel ;  the  heavily-loaded  axle  is  never  heated  ;  its 
eternal  compact  nave  is  never  worn  away.

14.  The  even-fellied,  undecaying  wheel,  repeat-

is  never  worn  away.

14.  The  even-fellied,  undecaying  wheel,  repeat- 
edly revolves:  ten,^  united  on  the  upper  surface," 
bear  (the  world) :  the  orb*^  of  the  sun  proceeds,  in- 
vested with  water,  and  in  it  are  all  beings  deposited.15.  Of  those  that  are  born  together,  sages  have 
called  the  seventh  the  single-born ;  for  six  are 
twins,  and  are  moveable,  and  born  of  the  gods ;"

where  living  creatures  are  delighted, — uparamanta  asmin  prdninah ; 
or  it  may  mean  a  year,  m  samvatsarah  ;  but  it  may  have  a  relation, 
perhaps,  to  the  expression  in  the  first  line  of  the  verse,  divah  pare 
arddhe,  in  the  further  part  of  the  sky,  upara  may  imply  the

h  pare 
arddhe,  in  the  further  part  of  the  sky,  upara  may  imply  the 
nearer  or  hither  part,  referring  to  the  two  ayams,  or  solstices  : 
the  seven  wheels  are  the  seven  rays,  or  the  seven  days  of  the 
week,  the  six  spokes  the  six  seasons.

*  The  five  seasons  ;  or  the  text  may  refer  to  the  cycle  of  five 
years.

^  The  ten  organs  of  sense,  or  the  five  Lokapdlas,  guardians 
of  the  world,  and  five  classes  of  human  beings,  according  ta 
Sdyana :  perhaps  the  ten  regions  of  space  would  be  more  appro- 
priate.

"^  Uttdndydm,  or  the  upper  part ;  urddhwatandydm,  or  the  pole, 
Mdydm ;  or  the  earth  spread  above,  vpari  vistrita  bhutnydm :  it  is 
not  clear  what  is  intended.

above,  vpari  vistrita  bhutnydm :  it  is 
not  clear  what  is  intended.

*  Suryasya  chakshush,  lit.  the  eye  of  the  sun,  either  the  display 
of  the  nature  or  radiance  of  the  sun,  or  his  orb,  being,  as  it  were, 
the  eye  of  all ;  sarvasya  chakshuk  sthdniyam  vd  maMalam.

*  These  are  six  seasons,  made  up  of  two  months  each;  the

K   2

132  RIG- VEDA    SANftlTA.*  These  are  six  seasons,  made  up  of  two  months  each;  the

K   2

132  RIG- VEDA    SANftlTA.

their  desirable  (properties),  placed  severally  in  their 
proper  abode,  are  various  (also)  in  form,  and  revolve 
for  (the  benefit  of)  that  which  is  stationary.^ 
Varga  XVII.  16.  Tliev  have  called  these,  my  virtuous  females, 
males '}  he  who  has  eyes  beholds ;  the  blind  man 
seeth  not :  he  who  is  a  sage  son  understands  this,

;  the  blind  man 
seeth  not :  he  who  is  a  sage  son  understands  this, 
and  he  who  discriminates  is  the  father  of  the  father.'' 
17.  The  cow,  holding   her  calf  underneath  Math

seventh  is  the  intercalary  month,  which  has  no  fellow,  and  has  no 
Aditya  to  preside  over  it,  wherefore  it  is  not  considered  to  be  of 
divine  origin  like  the  rest :  the  six  seasons  are  also  termed  Rishis, 
rishhayah,  which  Sdyana  explains  by  gantdrah,  goers ;  in  what 
sense  does  not  appear :  it  may,  perhaps,  refer  to  the  presence  of 
a  Rishi  in  the  sun's  car  in  each  of  the  twelve  months,  if  that  be 
not  rather  a  Paurdiiik  than  a  Vaidik  notion. — Vishnu  Purdna, 
p.  233.

t  rather  a  Paurdiiik  than  a  Vaidik  notion. — Vishnu  Purdna, 
p.  233.

That  is,  the  several  seasons  are  diversified  by  the  varieties  of 
temperature,  produce,  and  the  like,  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.

This  is  a  piece  of  grammatical  mysticism ;  rasmi,  a  ray  of 
the  sun,  here  personified  as  a  female,  is  properly  a  noun  masculine.

According  to  the  Scholiast,  the  Sun  is  to  be  considered  as 
the  father  of  the  rays  of  light,  which  again,  in  their  collective 
capacity,  being  the  cause  of  rain,  are  the  fosterers,  or  parent  of 
the  earth  :  the  sun  is  therefore  father  of  the  father,  and  he  who 
knows  this  is  identical  with  the  sun  :  another  explanation  is  thatknows  this  is  identical  with  the  sun  :  another  explanation  is  that 
which  Manu  intimates ;  an  intelligent  son  may  be  termed  the 
parent  of  an  ignorant  father :  the  philosophical  view  of  the  mean* 
ing  is,  that  there  is  no  distinction  of  gender  in  soul ;  it  is  neither 
male,  nor  female,  nor  neuter,  and  therefore  may  be  said  to  be 
either  or  all,  according  to  the  forms  with  which  it  is  associated ; 
as  in  the  text,  twam  stn,  twam  pumdn  asi,  twam  kvmdra,  uta  vd 
kumdrt,  thou  art  woman,  thou  art  man,  thou  art  vouth,  thou  art

SECOND    ASHTAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  133

her  fore-feet,  and  then  above  with  her  hind-feet,  has 
risen  up :  whither  is  she  gone ;  to  whom  has  she

her  hind-feet,  has 
risen  up :  whither  is  she  gone ;  to  whom  has  she 
turned  back  when  half-wav ;  where  does  she  bear 
vounff  :  it  is  not  amidst  the  licrd.''

18.  He  who  knows  the  protector  of  this  (world) 
as  the  inferior  associated  with  the  superior,  and  the 
superior  associated  with  the  inferior,  he  is,  as  it 
were,  a  sage ;  but  who  in  this  world  can  expound 
(it);  whence  is  the  divine  mind  in  its  supremacy 
engendered. "^

19.  Those  which  (the  sages)  have  termed  de- 
scending, they  have  also  termed  ascending ;  and 
those  they  have  termed  ascending,  they  have  also 
called  descending:"  and  those  (orbits)  which  tbou. 
Soma  and  Indra,''  hast  made,  bear  along  the  worlds

its)  which  tbou. 
Soma  and  Indra,''  hast  made,  bear  along  the  worlds 
like  (oxen)  yoked  to  a  wain.

20.  Two  birds  associated  together,*^  and  mutual

maiden  ;  being,  in  fact,  neither,  as  the  Smriti  has  it, — naiva  sin, 
na  pumdn  esl/a,  naiva  chdyam  rwpunsakam.20.  Two  birds  associated  together,*^  and  mutual

maiden  ;  being,  in  fact,  neither,  as  the  Smriti  has  it, — naiva  sin, 
na  pumdn  esl/a,  naiva  chdyam  rwpunsakam.

This  is  rather  obscure :  according  to  the  Schoh'ast,  the  cow- 
is  the  burnt- offering,  and  the  calf  is  Agni,  and  the  positions  of  the 
two  indicate  the  station  of  the  offerer  with  respect  to  the  sun : 
or  the  cow  may  typify  the  solar  rays  collectively,  and  the  calf  the 
worshipper.

Agni  is  the  inferior,  Aditya  the  superior  ;  but  they  are  both 
identical,  fire  and  the  sun  being  the  same.

;  but  they  are  both 
identical,  fire  and  the  sun  being  the  same.

The  rays  of  light,  or  the  planets  changing  their  relative 
position  as  they  revolve.

The  moon  and  the  sun ;  Indra  being  one  of  the  twelve 
Adityas,  or  identical  here  with  tbe  sun.

There  is  some  probability  in  Sdyana's  explanation,  that  the

134  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.-

friends,  take  refuge  in  the  same  tree :  one  of  tbem 
eats  the  sweet  fig ;"  the  other,  abstaining  from  food, 
merely  looks  on. 
Varga  XVIII.  21.  Where  the  smooth-gliding  (rays),^'  cognizant 
(of  their  duty),  distil  the  perpetual  portion  of  ambro- 
sial (water) ;  there  has  the  lord  and  steadfast  pro- 
tector of  all  beings  consigned  me,  (though)  imma-

d  and  steadfast  pro- 
tector of  all  beings  consigned  me,  (though)  imma- 
ture (in  wisdom).''

22.  In  the  tree*^  into  which  the  smooth-gliding 
(rays),  feeders  on  the  sweet  (produce),  enter,  and 
again  bring  forth  (light)  over  all ;  they  have  called 
the  fruit  sweet,  but  he  partakes  not  of  it  who  knows 
not  the  protector  (of  the  universe).*23.  They  who  know  the  station  of  Agni  upon  the 
earth  ;  the  station  of  Vayu  that  was  fabricated  from 
the  firmament ;  and  that  station  of  the  Sun  which 
is  placed  in  heaven,  obtain  immortality.^

vital  and  supreme  spirit,  jivdtmd  and  paramdtmd,  are  here  alluded 
to  under  the  figure  of  the  two  birds.

paramdtmd,  are  here  alluded 
to  under  the  figure  of  the  two  birds.

Pippalam  swddu  atti ;  the  philosophical  interpretation  is,  that 
the  vital  spirit  enjoys  the  rewards  of  acts.  Ydska's  explanation  is 
something  different,  although  he  agrees  in  considering  two  species 
of  soul  to  be  intended  as  abiding  in  one  body. — Nir.  xiv.  30.

Suparnd  is  here  explained,  supatandh  sohhanagamand  raS' 
may  ah;  the  goers  easily  or  beautifully,  the  rays  of  the  sun.

Aditya  has  admitted,  or  admits  me,  the  reciter  of  the  hymn, 
to  the  sphere  of  the  sun.

The  orb  or  region  of  the  sun.

Tarn  na  unnasad  yah  pitaram  na  veda :  here  pitaram  is

of  the  sun.

Tarn  na  unnasad  yah  pitaram  na  veda :  here  pitaram  is 
explained,  in  its  general  sense  of  pdlaka,  cherisher,  protector ; 
the  sun,  or,  according  to  the  Vaiddntik  gloss,  the  supreme  spirit.

Yadgdyatre  adhi  gdyatram  traishfubhdd-vd  traisMubham,  &c. ;

SECOND    ASH-fAKA — THIRD    ADIIYAYA.  185

24.  He  constructs  the  prayer  with  the  Gdyatri 
metre;"  with  tlie  prayer  (he  constructs)  ihQ  Stimay 
and  with  the  TrisMubh  metre  the  couplet  (or  tri- 
plet) '}  with  the  couplet  (or  triplet)  he  constructs  the 
hymn  with  (verses  of)  two  or  four  distichs  f  and 
with  the  syllable  they,  construct  the  seven  metres.''

the  purport  of  this  phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres,

'the  purport  of  this  phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres,

'

the  purport  of  this  phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres, 
Gdyatri,  TrisMubh,  and  Jagati,  is  not  very  clear  2  it  may  be  merely 
an  obscure  and  mystical  reference  to  the  text  of  the  Veda,  a 
knowledge  of  which  is  essential  to  final  fehcity;  but  Sdyana 
explains  the  words  as  in  the  translation  ;  gdyatra  he  derives  from 
gdyatri,  the  earth ;  and  in  the  second  place  he  calls  it  the  pada, 
or  station  of  Agni :  traishtubka  he  identifies  with  the  firmament, 
and  the  place  of  Vdyu ;  and  Jagat  as  the  sun  in  Jagati,  the  solar 
region ;  another  interpretation  is  derived  from  the  ritual  use  of 
the  three  several  metres,  and  their  combinations,  at  the  three 
daily  sacrifices.

veral  metres,  and  their  combinations,  at  the  three 
daily  sacrifices.

Gdyatrena  prathnimite  arkam,  he,  severally,  measures  the 
mantra  with  the  Gdyatri  metre ;  or  a  part  being  put  foir  the 
whole,  with  any  Vaidik  metre.

TrisMuhhena  vdkam;  vdka  is  explained  to  signify  either 
dicricha  or  tricha  riipam,  the  form  or  phrase  of  two  or  three 
stanzas ;  or  it  may  imply  a  Sukta.

Vdkena-vdkam :  w^hen  the  first  vdka  has  the  sense  of  Sukta, 
then  its  repetition  may  imply  the  Varga  or  Anuvdka;  but  if  it 
signify  a  couplet  or  triplet,  it  seems  more  applicable  to  the  Sukta 
or  hymn.

Aksharena  sapta  vdnih,  the  seven  generic  metres  of  the  Veda

hymn.Aksharena  sapta  vdnih,  the  seven  generic  metres  of  the  Veda

hymn.

Aksharena  sapta  vdnih,  the  seven  generic  metres  of  the  Veda 
with  the  syllable  ;  the  syllable  being  the  chief  element  of  the 
metre ;  thus,  the  Gdyatri  consists  of  eight  syllables ;  TrisMubh, 
of  eleven  ;  Jagati,  of  twelve :  it  is  not  said  who  thus  composed 
or  classified  the  metrical  system  of  the  Vedas,  but  it  appears,  from 
the  commentary  on  the  following  stanza,  that  Brahma  is  intended

136  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

25.  With  the  stanzas  in  the  Jagati  metre  he 
fixed  the  rain  in  heaven,"  and  surveyed  the  Sun 
in  the  Ratliantara}  They  have  declared  tliree 
divisions  of  the    Gdyairi   metre,*'  whence   it   sur-

Varga  XIX.    passcs  (all  the  rest)  in  force  and  majesty.

26.

t   sur-

Varga  XIX.    passcs  (all  the  rest)  in  force  and  majesty.

26.  I  invoke  the  milch  cow  that  is  easily  milked, 
that  the  handy  milker  may  milk  her  :*  may  Savitri 
accept  this  our  excellent  libation,  that  his  heat 
may  (thereby)  increase:  it  is  for  this,  verily,  that 
I  earnestly  invoke  him.

27.  She  comes  lowing,  abounding  in  rich  (pro- 
ducts), desiring  her  calf  in  her  mind  :  may  this  cow 
grant  her  milk  to  the  Aswins  :  may  she  thrive  for 
our  great  advantage.

28.  The  cow  bellows  for  her  calf,  (who  stands)

when  the  verb  is  in  the  singular:  perhaps  the  ^ishis,  or  the 
priests,  are  alluded  to  when  it  is  in  the  plural.

^ishis,  or  the 
priests,  are  alluded  to  when  it  is  in  the  plural.^ishis,  or  the 
priests,  are  alluded  to  when  it  is  in  the  plural.

Sindhum  divi  astabhdyat ;  Brahmd,  says  the  Scholiast,  at  the 
time  of  creation,  fixed  the  shedder  pf  water,  udakasya  syandakam, 
in  the  sky  ;  or  it  might  be  intended  for  Aditya,  as  by  the  text, — 
Jdgato  vd  esha  ya  esha  tapati ;  he  may  be  termed  Jdgata  who  gives 
heat  (to  the  world).

This  is  commonly  known  as  a  portion  of  the  Sdma :  the  mean- 
ing of  the  phrase  is  not  very  obvious.  Sdyana  says  Prajdpati  beheld 
the  sun  in  the  stanza  which  sustains  it ;  tadddhdrabhutdyam  richi.

Gdyatrasya  samidhas  tisra  dhuh :  Sdyana  considers  samidh  as 
merely  signifying  pdda,  division  of  a  stanza ;  of  which  the  Gdyatrt

merely  signifying  pdda,  division  of  a  stanza ;  of  which  the  Gdyatrt 
verse  has  three.

The  cow  is  the  cloud,  the  milk  the  rain,  and  Vdyu,  or  wind, 
the  milker ;  the  metaphor  is  continued  in  the  three  following 
verges,  where  the  calf  is  the  world,  or  mankind  anxious  for  the 
rain,  as  the  cause  of  abundance.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD   ADHYAYA.  137

with  winking  eyes,  and  lows  as  (she)  proceeds  to 
lick  his  forehead  :  she  utters  a  cry,  as,  anxious,  she 
sees  the  moisture  in  the  corners  of  his  mouth,  and 
nourishes  him  with  her  milk.

29.  He,  too,  bellows,  and  the  cow  utters  inarticu- 
late sounds,  as,  encompassed  by  him,  she  repairs  to

w  utters  inarticu- 
late sounds,  as,  encompassed  by  him,  she  repairs  to 
her  stall ;  (influenced)  by  her  instincts,  she  acts  like 
a  human  being,  and,  radiant,  manifests  her  nature.30.  Life  endowed  with  breath,  eager  (in  discharge 
of  its  functions),  reposes,*  steady,  in  the  midst  of  its 
(proper)  abodes  :  the  life  of  the  mortal  body,  cognate 
with  the  mortal  frame,  endures  immortal,  (sustained) 
by  (obsequeal)  offerings.^

31.  I  have  beheld  the  unwearied  protector  of  the     Varga  xx. 
universe,  the  sun,  travelling  upwards  and  downwards

by  various  paths :  invested  with  aggregative  and 
diffusive  radiance,  he  revolves  in  the  midst  of  the 
regions."

32.

nd 
diffusive  radiance,  he  revolves  in  the  midst  of  the 
regions."

32.  He  who  has  made  (this  state  of  things)  does 
not  comprehend  it:''  he  who  has  beheld  it,  has  it 
also  verily  hidden  (from  him) :  he,  whilst  yet  en-

Anat  sayejivam  ejnt,  life  breathing'  comes  to  repose,  reposes 
or  abides.

Swadhdhhih-putrdkritaOi,  by  offerings  made  by  the  sons.

Tliis  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajvsh,  xxxvii.  17;  MaMdhara 
explains  it  in  the  like  manner.

Man,  according  to  Sdyana's  philosophical  interpretation ;  but 
that  of  the  Nairuktas,  which  he  cites,  is  probably  more  consistent 
with  the  intention  of  the  on'ginal,  which  considers  wind  as  the 
cause  of  rain,  to  be  alluded  to  allegorically.

siders  wind  as  the 
cause  of  rain,  to  be  alluded  to  allegorically.

138  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

veloped  in  his  mother's  womb,  is  subject  to  many 
births,  and  has  entered  upon  evil.

33.  The  heaven  is  my  parent  and  progenitor:* 
the  navel  (of  the  earth)  is  my  kinsman  •}  the  spacious 
earth  is  my  mother.  The  womb  (of  all  being)  lies 
between  the  two  uplifted  ladles,''  and  in  it  the  parent 
has  deposited  the  germ  (of  the  fruitfulness)  of  the 
daughter.''34.  I  ask  thee,  (Institutor  of  the  rite),  what  is 
the  uttermost  end  of  the  earth :  I  ask  thee,  where 
is  the  navel  of  the  world.  I  ask  thee,  what  is  the 
fecundating  power  of  the  rain-shedding  steed  :  I  ask

,  what  is  the 
fecundating  power  of  the  rain-shedding  steed  :  I  ask 
thee,  what  is  the  supreme  heaven  of  (holy)  speech.^

35.  This  altar  is  the  uttermost  end  of  the  earth  f

Ndbhir  atra  handhu ;  Sdi/ana  refers  ndbhih  to  the  preceding 
terms,  mepitdjanitu,  meaning  the  moisture  of  the  earth,  by  which 
corn  is  abundant,  and  which,  as  derived  from  the  rain  of  heaven, 
makes  the  latter  the  parent  and  progenitor  of  man :  bandhuh  he 
renders  bandhikd,  binding  or  supporting,  and  makes  it  an  epithet 
oiprithivi,  the  earth:  it  may  be  doubted  if  this  is  the  meaning, 
and  the  term  ndbhi  possibly  irapHes  the  antariksha,  or  firmament,

g, 
and  the  term  ndbhi  possibly  irapHes  the  antariksha,  or  firmament, 
completing,  with  heaven  and  earth,  the  three  regions  concerned 
in  providing  sustenance  for  man.

Uttdnayo^-chamvor-yomr  antar :  the  uplifted  ladles  are  heaven 
and  earth,  and  the  womb  of  all  beings  between  them  is  the  firma- 
ment, the  region  of  the  rain.

The  father,  the  heaven,  may  be  regarded  as  identical  with 
either  Aditya  or  Indra ;  the  daughter  is  the  earth,  whose  fertility 
depends  upon  the  rain  deposited  as  a  germ  in  the  firmament.

The  answers  in  the  following  stanza  explain  what  is  here 
intended.  /

As  in  the  text,  etdvati  vai  pritJiim  ydvati  vedih,  such  or  so

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  139

iim  ydvati  vedih,  such  or  so

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  139As  in  the  text,  etdvati  vai  pritJiim  ydvati  vedih,  such  or  so

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  139

iim  ydvati  vedih,  such  or  so

SECOND    ASHTAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  139

this  sacrifice  is  the  navel  of  the  world  :^  this  Soma 
juice  is  the  fecundating  power  of  the  rain-shedding 
steed  :  this  Bralimd  is  the  supreme  heaven  of  (holy) 
speech. *"

36.  The  seven"  (sustaining),  the  embryo  (rain)  for     Varga  xxi. 
half  a  year,  the  fecundating  (element)  of  the  world,

abide,  by  appointment,  in  the  various  functions  of 
Vishnu.^  By  their  intelligence  they  pervade  in 
thought  all  around  (them),  for  they  are  intelligent 
and  diffusive.

37.  I  distinguish  not  if  I  am  this  all  ;^  for  I  go 
perplexed,  and  bound  in  mind ;  when  the  first-born 
(perceptions)  of  the  truth  reach  me,   then  imme-

hen  the  first-born 
(perceptions)  of  the  truth  reach  me,   then  imme-

much,  verily,  as  the  earth,  so  rauch  is  the  altar  :  it  is  the  essence 
of  the  whole  earth.

Ndbhi  merely  means  sanndhana,  the  binding  together 
of  man  with  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  the  crops  that  spring 
from  the  rain  which  falls  as  the  consequence  of  sacrifice  or  of 
oblations.

The  texts  of  the  Vedas,  of  >Yhich  Brahmd,  or  perhaps  the 
priest  so  termed,  is  the  author  or  expounder.

The  solar  rays,  saptdrddhagarhMh ;  either  retaining  the  rains 
for  half  a  year ;  that  is,  during  the  dry  months,  or  abiding  in  a 
part  or  half  of  space,  -or  in  the  mid-heaven  or  firmament.

in  a 
part  or  half  of  space,  -or  in  the  mid-heaven  or  firmament.

Vishnu  is  said  to  be  here  the  pervading  sun ;  vydpakasya 
Adityasya,  in  whose  various  duties  of  cherishing  the  world,  the 
solar  rays  are,  by  direction,  pradiia,  especially  employed.Na  vijdndmi  yadiva  idam  as7ni;  or  it  may  be  read,  yadi  vd 
idam,  that  I  am  like  that  which  this  is ;  or  if  I  am  this ;  in  either 
case,  the  expression  warrants  the  Vaiddntik  character  which 
Sdyana  ascribes  to  it,  implying  the  identity  of  individual  and 
universal  spirit.

140  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

diately  shall  I  obtain  "a  portion  (of  the  meaning)  of 
that  (sacred)  word.

38.  The  immortal,  cognate  with  the  mortal,

g)  of 
that  (sacred)  word.

38.  The  immortal,  cognate  with  the  mortal, 
affected  by  (desire  of)  enjoyment,^  goes  to  the 
lower  or  the  upper  (sphere) :  but  (men  beholding 
them)  associated,  going  everywhere  (in  this  world 
together) ;  going  everywhere  (in  other  worlds  toge- 
ther) ;  have  comprehended  the  one,  but  have  not 
comprehended  the  other.''

39.  All  the  gods  have  taken  their  seats  upon 
this  supreme  heaven,  the  imperishable  (text)  of  the 
Veda:"    what   will    he,    who    knows    not    this,    do

with  the  Vedaf  but  they  who  do  know  it,  they  are 
perfect.

40.  Cow,  mayst  thou  be  rich  in  milk  through 
abundant  fodder;  that  we  also  may  be  rich  (in

rich  in  milk  through 
abundant  fodder;  that  we  also  may  be  rich  (in 
abundance) ;  eat  grass  at  all  seasons,  and,  roaming 
(at  will),  drink  pure  water.

Varga  XXII.        41.  The  sound  (of  the  clouds)  has  been  uttered, 
fabricating  the  waters,  and  being  one-footed,  two-

Swadhayd  gribhitah,  lit.  seized  by  food ;  put  for  any  sensual 
gratification.

Tliey  have  not  distinguished  between  body  and  soul ;  or, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  they  have  not  made  any  distinction 
between  the  three  kinds  of  bodies  with  which  soul  is  invested,  the 
gross  body,  the  subtile  body,  and  the  union  of  the  two.

Richo  akshare  parame  vyomani:  by  Rich,  according  to  the

f  the  two.Richo  akshare  parame  vyomani:  by  Rich,  according  to  the

f  the  two.

Richo  akshare  parame  vyomani:  by  Rich,  according  to  the 
Scholiast,  is  to  be  here  understood  all  the  Vedas ;  different  mean- 
ings are,  however,  ascribed  to  both  it  and  akshara  by  other 
commentators, — See  Nbmlda,  xiii.  10.

SECOND    ASIITAKA THIRD    ADHYAYA.  141

footed,    four-footed,    eight-footed,    nine-footed,    or 
infinite  in  the  hio:hest  heaven."*

42.  From  her''  the  clouds  shed  abundant  rain, 
and  thence  (the  people  of)  the  four  quarters  live: 
thence  the  moisture  spreads  (to  the  grain),  and  the 
universe  exists.

43.  I  beheld  near  (me)  the  smoke  of  burning 
cow-dung;  and  by  that  all-pervading  mean  (effect), 
discovered  the  cause  (fire) :  the  priests  have  dressed

mean  (effect), 
discovered  the  cause  (fire) :  the  priests  have  dressed 
the  Soma  ox,"  for  such  are  their  first  duties.

44.  The  three,  with  beautiful  tresses,  look  down 
in  their  several  seasons  upon  the  earth ;  one  of  them, 
when  the  year  is  ended,  shears  (the  ground)  ;  one.

The  sound,  gaun,  is-  explained,  in  one  sense,  that  of  the 
clouds  or  sky,  as  differently  originated  ;  in  one  station,  ekapadi, 
from  the  clouds ;  in  two,  dwipadi,  from  the  clouds  and  sky ;  in 
four,  the  four  quarters  of  space ;  in  eight,  the  four  points  and 
four  intermediate  points  of  the  horizon ;  or  from  them  and  the 
zenith,  navapadi,  nine-stationed :  another  explanation  makesm  and  the 
zenith,  navapadi,  nine-stationed :  another  explanation  makes 
gaun  articulate  speech,  single  as  the  crude  form  only,  double  as 
declension  and  conjugation,  fourfold  as  nouns,  verbs,  preposi- 
tions, and  particles ;  eightfold  as  the  eight  cases,  including  the 
vocative ;  and  ninefold  as  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  inde- 
clinable :  or  again,  it  may  be  articulate  sound,  diversified  accord- 
ing to  the  nine  parts  of  the  body  whence  it  may  be  supposed  to 
proceed,  navel,  chest,  throat,  &c. ;  the  highest  heaven  is  said  to 
be  the  hridaya,  dkdsa,  or  ethereal  element  of  the  heart,  as  the 
basis  of  speech,  mulddhdre.

The  sound  of  the  clouds  or  sky,  the  thunder.

f  speech,  mulddhdre.

The  sound  of  the  clouds  or  sky,  the  thunder.

Ukshdiiam  prisnim  apachanta :  the  Schohast  explains  priini 
by  Soma,  and  ukshdnam,  the  shedder  or  bestower  of  the  reward 
of  the  sacrifice.

142  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

by  his  acts,  overlooks  the  universe;  the  course  of 
one  is  visible,  though  not  his  form.''

45.  Four  are  the  definite  grades  of  speech  i*"  those 
Brahmans  who  are  wise  know  them  f  three,  depo- 
sited in  secret,  indicate  no  meaning:  men  speak 
the  fourth  grade  of  speech.'^

The  three  are,  Agni,  who  burns  up  the  earth ;  the  Sun,  who 
revives  it  by  his  light,  and  the  rain  which  he  sends ;  and  Vdyu, 
the  wind,  who  contributes  to  the  fall  of  rain.

sends ;  and  Vdyu, 
the  wind,  who  contributes  to  the  fall  of  rain.sends ;  and  Vdyu, 
the  wind,  who  contributes  to  the  fall  of  rain.

Chaticdri  vdkparimitd  paddni :  the  explanations  of  this  piece 
of  mysticism  somewhat  vary  :  the  four  jmdas  may  be  om,  and  the 
three  sacred  words,  bhur,  bhuvar,  swcw ;  or  the  four  parts  of 
speech,  nouns,  verbs,  pi'epositions,  and  particles ;  or  the  language 
of  the  mantras,  the  halpa,  the  Brdhmana,  and  lauhika,  or  current 
speech ;  or  the  languages  of  serpents,  birds,  insects,  and  man  ; 
or  they  may  be  pard,  audible  ;  pasyanti',  visible,  audible  only  to 
sages  and  saints ;  rnadhyumd,  intelligible  or  expressive,  proceeding 
from  the  heart ;  and  vaiswari,  articulate,  as  residing  in  the  mouth

g 
from  the  heart ;  and  vaiswari,  articulate,  as  residing  in  the  mouth 
and  enunciated  by  the  palate,  lips,  tongue,  &c.  :  or  again,  they 
may  be  the  languages  of  the  three  upper  worlds  and  of  the  world 
of  man.

Brdhmana  ye  manishhiah :  Brahmans  here,  according  to 
Sdyana,  are  those  acquainted  with  Sabdabrahma :  Brahma  as 
the  word,  or,  in  fact.  Yogis,  mysticists.

Of  the  four  grades,  padas,  three  may  be  considered 
mystical ;  but  we  have  another  set  from  the  Brdhmanas,  quoted 
by  Sdyana,  from  Ydska — Nir.  xiii.  9  :  Speech,  vdk,  it  is  said  was 
created  fourfold ;  three  kinds  of  which  are  in  the  three  regions, 
the  fourth  amongst  the  Pasus :  the  form  on  earth,  associated  with

, 
the  fourth  amongst  the  Pasus :  the  form  on  earth,  associated  with 
Agni,  is  in  the  Rathantara  ,•  the  form  in  the  firmament,  associated 
with  Vdyu,  is  in  the  Vdmadevya  mantras ;  that  which  is  in  heaven, 
with  Aditya,  is  Brihati,  or  in  the  thunder  {stanayitnaxi)  :  whatever 
else  was  more  than  this  was  placed  amongst  the  Pasus,  literally.

SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD   ADHYAYA.  143SECOND   ASHTAKA THIRD   ADHYAYA.  143

46.  They  have  styled  (him,  the  Sun),''  Indra, 
MiTRA,  Varuna,  Agni,  and  he  is  the  celestial, 
well-winged  Garutmat,  for  learned  priests  call  one 
by  many  names  as  they  speak  of  Agni,  Yama, 
Matariswan.

47.  The  smooth-gliding  wafters  (of  the  rain,  the   Varga  xxiii.

wan.

47.  The  smooth-gliding  wafters  (of  the  rain,  the   Varga  xxiii. 
solar  rays),  clothing  the  waters  with  a  dark  cloud,

ascend  to  heaven  :  they  come  down  again  from  the 
dwelling  of  the  rain,  and  immediately  the  earth  is 
moistened  with  water.

48.  The  fellies  are  twelve ;  the  wheel  is  one ; 
three  are  the  axles ;  but  who  knows  it  ?  within  it 
are  collected  360  (spokes),  which  are,  as  it  were, 
moveable  and  immoveable.'*

49.  Saraswati,  that  retiring  breast,"  which  is  the

animals ;  but  here  apparently  implying  the  Brdhmanas, — atha 
pdsushu  tato  yd  vdg-atiricliyatc  tdm  Brdhvaneshu  adadhuh :  although 
the  inference  that  follows  rather  implies  the  Brdhmans,  as  it  is  said ;

inference  that  follows  rather  implies  the  Brdhmans,  as  it  is  said ; 
therefore,  the  Brdhmans  speak  both  languages,  both  that  of  the 
gods  and  that  of  man  ;  tasmdd  Brdhmana  ubhayim  vdcham  vadanti 
yd  cha  devdndm  yd  cha  manushydmim :  the  key  to  this  is  to  be 
found,  probably,  in  the  Upanishads.

The  Sun  is  Sdyanu's  interpretation  :  Ydska  says  Agni :  but 
they  are  the  same,  and  are  the  same  as  all  the  other  forms, 
according  to  the  texts,  Ekaiva  vd  mahdn  dtmd  devatd  suryah,  the 
divine  sun  is  the  one  great  spirit ;  and  Agni  sarvd  devatdh,  Agni 
is  all  the  divinities.

The  wheel  is  the  year  of  twelve  months  ;  the  three  axles  are

ies.The  wheel  is  the  year  of  twelve  months  ;  the  three  axles  are

ies.

The  wheel  is  the  year  of  twelve  months  ;  the  three  axles  are 
the  three  double  seasons,  or  hot,  wet,  and  cold ;  and  the  three 
hundred  and  sixty  spokes  are  the  days  of  the  luni-solar  year,  as 
we  have  had  before,

Stanah  sasayah,  saydna,  sleeping,  according  to  Sdyana ;  dche

144  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

source  of  delight,  with  which  thou  bestowest  all 
good  things,  which  is  the  container  of  wealth,  the 
distributor  of  riches,  the  giver  of  good  (fortune) ; 
that  (bosom)  do  thou  lay  open  at  this  season  for  our 
nourishment.

50.  The  gods  sacrifice  with  sacrifice,  for  such  are 
their  first  duties :  those  mighty  ones  assemble  in 
heaven,  where  the  divinities  who  are  to  be  propi-

ones  assemble  in 
heaven,  where  the  divinities  who  are  to  be  propi- 
tiated (by  sacred  rites)  abide.*

51.  The  uniform  water  passes  upwards  and  down- 
wards in  the  course  of  days :  clouds  give  joy  to  the 
earth  ;  fires  rejoice  the  heaven.

52.  I  invoke  for  our  protection  the  celestial,, 
well-winged,  swift-moving,  majestic  (Sun) ;  who  is 
the  germ  of  the  waters ;  the  displayer  of  herbs ; 
the  cherisher  of  lakes ;  replenishing  the  ponds  with 
rain.^

varttamdna,  abiding  in  the  body  :  Mahidhara,  Yaj.,  xxxviii.  5 ; 
explains  it  as  if  asleep,  not  subject  to  the  enjoyment  of  others, 
supta  iva  dste-anyair-amipahhvhtutwdt.

Yatra  purie  sadhydh  santi  devdh;  Sadhydh  is  explained  by

ahhvhtutwdt.Yatra  purie  sadhydh  santi  devdh;  Sadhydh  is  explained  by

ahhvhtutwdt.

Yatra  purie  sadhydh  santi  devdh;  Sadhydh  is  explained  by 
karma  devah,  divinities  presiding  over  or  givhig  effect  to  religious 
acts,  yajnddisddhanuvanluh ;  or  the  term  may  mean  those  who 
have  obtained  the  portion,  or  condition  of  gods,  by  the  former 
worship  of  Agni ;  or  the  Sadhyas  may  be  the  same  as  the  Adltyas, 
or  the  Angirasas,  or  they  may  be  the  deities  presiding  over  the 
metres,  chhando-abhimdninah :  it  would  seem  that  in  Sdy ana's 
day  the  purport  of  the  designation,  Sadhya,  had  become  uncer- 
tain ;  they  are  named  amongst  the  minor  divinities  in  the  Amara 
kosha,  and  from  Bharatamulla  we  learn  that  they  were  twelve  in

mara 
kosha,  and  from  Bharatamulla  we  learn  that  they  were  twelve  in 
number,  but  no  other  peculiarity  is  specified.

Abhputo   vriaht'ibhis-tarpayantam,    satisfying    with    rain    the

SECOND   ASIITAKA — THIRD    ADHYAYA.  145

ANUVAkA  XXIII.

SUKTA    I.    (CLXV.)

The  hymn  is  supposed  to  repeat  a  conversation  between  Indra, 
Agastya,  and  the  Maruts,  and  the  interlocutors  are  the  Rishis 
of  the  Siikta ;  that  is,  the  Maruts  are  the  Rishis  of  the  third, 
fifth,  and  seventh  verses  ;  Agastya  of  the  three  last,  and 
Indra  of  the  rest.  Indra  as  Marutwat,  or  attended  by  the 
Manits,  is  the  deity ;  the  metre  is  Trishhbh.^

1 .  (  Indra  speaks),— With  what  auspicious  fortune    Vargu  xxiv.

h.^

1 .  (  Indra  speaks),— With  what  auspicious  fortune    Vargu  xxiv. 
have  the  Maruts,  who  are  of  one  age,  one  residence,

one  dignity,  watered  (the  earth)  together :  with  what 
intention :  whence  have  they  come :  Showerers  of 
rain,  they  venerate,  through  desire  of  wealth,  the 
energy  (that  is  generated  in  the  world  by  rain).2.  Of  whose  oblations  do  the  youthful  {Maruts) 
approve :  who  attracts  them  to  his  (own)  sacrifice 
(from  the  rites  of  others) :  with  what  powerful 
praise  may  we  propitiate  (them),  wandering  like 
kites  in  the  mid-air  ?

3.  (The  Maruts), — Indra,  lord  of  the  good, 
whither  dost  thou,  who  art  entitled  to  honour, 
proceed  alone :  what  means  this  (absence  of  atten-

titled  to  honour, 
proceed  alone :  what  means  this  (absence  of  atten- 
dance) :  when  followed  (by  us),  thou  requirest  (what

reservoirs,  salilddhdrdn ;  the  word  ahMpata  is  unusual,  and  may 
be  differently  explained  :  as,  favourably,  willingly,  dnukulyena.

This  hyran  appears  to  vindicate  the  separate,  or  at   least 
preferential  worship  oi  Indra,  without  comprehending,  at  the  same 
time,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  adoration  of  the  Maruts. 
VOL.  II.  L

146  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

is  right)  f  Lord  of   fleet  horses,    say   to  us,    with 
pleasant  words,  that  which  thou  (hast  to  say)  to  us.**

4.  (Indra), — Sacred  rites  are  mine :  (holy) 
praises  give  me  pleasure :  libations  are  for  me :

are  mine :  (holy) 
praises  give  me  pleasure :  libations  are  for  me : 
my  vigorous  thunderbolt,  hurled  (against  my  foes), 
goes  (to  its  mark) :  me,  do  (pious  worshippers) 
propitiate :  hymns  are  addressed  to  me :  these 
horses  bear  us  to  the  presence  (of  those  worship- 
pers, and  worship).'^

5.  (The  Martits), — Therefore  we  also,  decorating 
our  persons,  are  ready,  with  our  docile  and  nigh- 
standing  steeds,  (to  attend  thee),  with  all  our  splen- 
dour, to  those  rites :  verily,  Indra,  thou  appropriatest 
our  (sacrificial)  food.''

Varga  XXV.  6.  (Indra), — Where,  il/an<^^,  has  that  (sacrificial) 
food  been  assigned  to  you,  which,  for  the  destructionVarga  XXV.  6.  (Indra), — Where,  il/an<^^,  has  that  (sacrificial) 
food  been  assigned  to  you,  which,  for  the  destruction

t  (sacrificial) 
food  been  assigned  to  you,  which,  for  the  destruction 
of  Am,  was  appropriated  to  me  alone :  for  I  indeed 
am  fierce,  and  strong,  and  mighty,  and  have  bowed 
down  all  mine  enemies  with  death-dealing  shafts.

7.  (Maruts), — Showerer  (of  benefits),  thou  hast 
done  much ;  but  it  has  been  with  our  united  equal

Samprickchkase :  saniiehmani  prickchhase  is  Sfhjana's  explana- 
tion :  Mahtdhara  renders  it,  thou  askest  of  the  people,  with 
kindly  words,  Which  is  the  way :   Yajiish,  xxxiii.  27.

Mahidhara's  rendering  is,  tell  us  the  reason  of  your  going 
alone ;  for  we  are  yours.

Yajush,  XXXIII.  78,  the  interpretation  is  much  the  same.

re  yours.

Yajush,  XXXIII.  78,  the  interpretation  is  much  the  same.

Swadhdm  anu  hi  no  babhutha,  thou  hast  beea  upon  or  after 
our  food ;  or,  as  Sdt/atia  proposes,  either  strength,  balam ;  or 
water,  udakam ;  that  is,  thou  seekest  after  the  oblations  generated 
either  by  our  strength,  or  the  water  we  have  created;

SECOND    ASHTAKA — -THIRD    ADHYAYA.  147

energies;  for  we,  too,  most  powerful  Indra,  have 
done  many  things,  and  by  our  deeds  (we  are,  as)  we 
desire  to  be,  Mariits.

8.  (Indra), — By  my  own  prowess,  Maruts^  T, 
mighty  in  my  wrath,  slew  Vitra  :  armed  with  my 
thunderbolt,  I  created  all  these  pellucid  gently- 
flowing  waters  for  (the  good  of)  man.

9.

all  these  pellucid  gently- 
flowing  waters  for  (the  good  of)  man.

9.  (Marids), — Verily,  Maghavat,  nothing  (done) 
by  thee  is  unaYailing  f  there  is  no  divinity  as  wise 
as  thou ;  no  one  being  born,  or  that  has  been  born, 
ever  surpasses  the  glorious  deeds  which  thou,  mighty 
(Indra),  hast  achieved.10.  (Indra), — May  the  prowess  of  me  alone  be 
irresistible:  may  I  quickly  accomplish  whatever  I 
contemplate  in  my  mind :  for  verily,  Maruts,  I  am 
fierce  and  sagacious,  and  to  whatever  (objects)  I 
direct  (my  thoughts),  of  them  I  am  the  lord,  and 
rule  (over  them).

11.  Maruts,  on  this  occasion  praise  delights  me;  Vaiga  xxvi. 
that  praise  which  is  to  be  heard  (by  all),  which  men

Vaiga  xxvi. 
that  praise  which  is  to  be  heard  (by  all),  which  men

have  offered  me.  To  Indra,  the  showerer  (of  bene- 
fits), the  object  of  pious  sacrifice  :  to  me,  (endowed) 
with  many  forms,  (do  you)  my  friends  (offer  sacri- 
fices) for  (the  nourishment  of  my)  person.

12.  Marids,  verily,  glorifying  me,  and  enjoying

"  Anuttmnd  te  Maghavan  nakir  m :  according  to  Sdyana,  it  is 
equivalent  to,  whatever  is  said  by  thee,  Indra,  is  true ;  a  is  an 
exclamation,  implying  absent  or  remembrance  ;  amttam  is,  that 
which  is  not  sent  or  driven  away ;  or,  according  to  Mahidhara,  na 
kena  ndsitam,  not  destroyed  or  frusUated  by  any  one.— Yajush,

XXXIII.  79.

L  2

148  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

ated  by  any  one.— Yajush,

XXXIII.  79.

L  2

148  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

"boundless  fame  and  food  (tlirongh  my  favour),  do 
you,  of  golden  colour,  and  invested  with  glory,  cover 
me  in  requital,  verily,  (with  renown).

13.  (Agastya), — What  mortal,  Maruts,  worships 
you  in  this  world  :  hasten,  friends,  to  the  presence 
of  your  friends:  wonderful  (divinities),  be  to  them 
the  means  of  acquiring  riches,  and  be  not  uncogni- 
sant  of  mv  merits/14.  Since  the  experienced  intellect  of  a  venera- 
ble (sage),  competent  to  bestow  praise  upon  (you), 
who  deserve  praise,  has  been  exerted  for  us;  do 
you,  Maruts,  come  to  the  presence  of  the  devout 
(worshipper),  who,  glorifying  (you),  worships  you

sence  of  the  devout 
(worshipper),  who,  glorifying  (you),  worships  you 
with  these  holy  rites.

15.  Tliis  praise,  Maruts,  is  for  you:  this  hymn  is 
for  you,  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable 
of  conferring  delight''  (by  his  laudations).  May  the 
praise  reach  you,  for  (the  good  of  your)  persons,  so 
that  we  may  (thence)  obtain  food,  strength,  and 
long  life."

Eshdm  bhiita  navedd  me  ritdndm,  be  cognizant  of  these  my 
truths,  is  Sdyaiias  interpretation,  madiydndm  avitathdndm  jndtdro 
hhavata.

Mdnddrijasya  kdroh  :  Sdyaila  explains  the  epithet,  stntivisesJiair 
mandayituh  ;  or  stutibhir  madasya  prerayituh,  causer  of  pleasure  by 
praises :  Muhidhara,  on  the  same  verse,  Yaj.  xxxiv.

er  of  pleasure  by 
praises :  Muhidhara,  on  the  same  verse,  Yaj.  xxxiv.  48,  has  a 
varietv  of  meanings  ;  as,  nidni  ddrayati,  one  who  has  command  of 
himself,  who  is  vitardga,  devoid  of  passion  ;  or  one  who  grants  all 
desires,  deriving  mdnddrya  from  manddra,  the  tree  of  heaven,  &c.

Isham  vrijanam  jiraddnum :  in  this  place,  Sdya/ia  renders  the 
last  term,  jayasda  ddnam,  donation  connected  with  victory  ;  but

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FOURTH    ADHYAYA.         149

FOURTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  XXIII.  {continued). 
SUKTA  II.  (CLXVI.)

The  deities  are  the  Maruts;  the  Rishi  is  Agastta;  the  metre,

Trishhbh,

1.  We  proclaim  eagerly,  Maruts,  your  ancient 
greatness,  for  (the  sake  of  inducing)  your  promptThe  deities  are  the  Maruts;  the  Rishi  is  Agastta;  the  metre,

Trishhbh,

1.  We  proclaim  eagerly,  Maruts,  your  ancient 
greatness,  for  (the  sake  of  inducing)  your  prompt

ruts,  your  ancient 
greatness,  for  (the  sake  of  inducing)  your  prompt 
appearance,  as  the  indication  of  (the  approach  of) 
the  showerer  (of  benefits).  Loud-roaring  and  mighty 
Maruts,  you  exert  your  vigorous  energies  for  the 
advance  (to  the  sacrifice),  as  if  it  was  to  battle.

2.  Ever  accepting  the  sweet  (libation),  as  (they 
would)  a  son,  they  sport  playfully  at  sacrifices,  de- 
molishing (all  intruders):  the  Riidras  come  to  the 
offerer  of  prayers  and  oblations,  for  his  protection, 
and,  powerful  as  they  are,  do  him  no  harm.

3.  To  him,  the  presenter  (of  oflferings),  the  pro- 
tecting and  immortal  Maruts,  (gratified)  by  the 
oblation,  have  given  abundance  of  riches:  they,  the

ratified)  by  the 
oblation,  have  given  abundance  of  riches:  they,  the 
bestowers  of  happiness,  becoming,  as  it  were,  the 
friends  (of  the  worshipper),  sprinkle  the  regions 
plentifully  with  water.

4.  Those,  your  coursers,  which  traverse  the  regions

in  the  repetition  of  the  stanza,  at  the  end  of  the  next  Sukta,  he 
explains  it,  chirahdla  jwanam,  long  life :  Mahidhara  makes  it  an 
epithet  of  food,  and  strength-conferring  life,  deriving  it  from  ji 
ior  Jtva,  and  raddnu;  Unddiaff. — Pan.  vi,  1,  GQ.

160  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

in  their  speed,  proceed,  self-guided :  all  worlds,  all 
dwellings,  are  alarmed,  for  marvellous  is  your  coming : 
(such  fear  as  is  felt)  when  spears  are  thrust  forth  (in

r  coming : 
(such  fear  as  is  felt)  when  spears  are  thrust  forth  (in 
battle).r  coming : 
(such  fear  as  is  felt)  when  spears  are  thrust  forth  (in 
battle).

5.  When  your  brilliant  coursers  make  the  moun- 
tains echo ;  and,  friendly  to  man,  traverse  the 
summit  of  the  firmament ;  then  all  the  forest  lords 
are  alarmed  at  your  approach,  and  the  bushes  wave 
to  and  fro,  as  a  woman  in  a  chariot. 
Varga  II.  6.  Fierce  Maruts,  free  from  malevolence  in  your 
kindly  thoughts,  fulfil  towards  us  your  good  pur- 
poses ;  when  your  missile  lightning  rends  (the  cloud), 
as  a  well-hurled  weapon  wounds  the  deer.*

7.  Givers  without  stint,  possessors  of  inexhausti- 
ble riches,  devoid  of  malevolence,  ever  glorified  at 
sacrifices,  they  worship  the  adorable  (Indra),  for

ever  glorified  at 
sacrifices,  they  worship  the  adorable  (Indra),  for 
(the  sake  of)  drinking  the  (Soma)  wine;  for  they 
know  the  first  manly  exploits  of  the  hero.

8.  Maruts,  gratify,  with  infinite  ^nd  complete 
enjoyments,  him,  whom  you  protect  from  degrading 
sin  :  that  man  whom,  fierce  and  mighty,  and  glorified 
(as  you  are),  you  defend  from  calumny,  by  (providing 
for)  the  nourishmciit  of  his  descendants.''

Paswah  sudhiteva  harhand:  Sdyana  connects  Pasu/i  with 
krivirdati,  the  missile  of  the  winds  ;  because,  he  says,  when  the 
wind  blows,  animals  are  withered  or  chilled ;  but  it  seems  more 
naturally  related  to  what  follows,  as  a  well-placed  weapon  strikes 
animals.

ly  related  to  what  follows,  as  a  well-placed  weapon  strikes 
animals.

Tanayasya  pushfisu;  tunaya,  a  son,  is  here  put  for  descen- 
dants, putrddayah.

SECOND   ASilTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.         151Tanayasya  pushfisu;  tunaya,  a  son,  is  here  put  for  descen- 
dants, putrddayah.

SECOND   ASilTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.         151

9.  Maruts,  all  good  things  are  in  your  cars :  on 
your  shoulders  abides  emulous  strength :  at  your 
resting-places  on  the  road  refreshments  (are  ready)  :* 
the  axle  of  your  (chariot)  wheels  holds  them  firmly 
together.

10.  MarutSf  in  your  arms,  propitious  to  man,  are 
many  good  things :  on  your  breasts  are  golden  (orna- 
ments), brilliant  and  conspicuous :  white  garlands 
(hang)  on  your  shoulders :  sharp  are  (the  edges  of) 
your  weapons:  the  Maruts  have  various  decorations,

re  (the  edges  of) 
your  weapons:  the  Maruts  have  various  decorations, 
as  birds  have  (many-coloured)  wings.

11.  MaridSy  mighty  with  mighty  power,  all-per-  Varga  iii, 
vading,  manifest  afar  off,  as  the  gods  (are  made 
manifest)  by  the  constellations ;  exhilarating,  soft- 
tongued,  speaking  gently  with  your  mouths,  asso- 
ciated with  Indra,  glorified  by  praise ;  (come  to  our 
sacrifice).

12.  Such,  well-born  Marids,  is  your  greatness, 
that  your  munificence  is  as  long  (continued)  as  the 
function  of  Acixi  ;^  and  Indra  does  not  exceed,  by 
his  own  liberality,  (the  value  of)  that  which  you

Prapatheshu  khddayah :  the  expression  is  worthy  of  note,  as

ich  you

Prapatheshu  khddayah :  the  expression  is  worthy  of  note,  as 
indicating  the  existence  of  accommodations  for  the  use  of  travel- 
lers :  the  Prapatha  is  the  ckoltri  of  the  south  of  India,  the  sardi 
of  the  Mohammedans,  a  place  by  the  road-side  where  the 
traveller  may  find  shelter  and  provisions.Aditer-iva  vratam,  the  act  or  obligation  of  Ad'ui,  either  the 
mother  of  the  gods,  or  the  earth ;  in  what  respects  the  compari- 
son exists  is  not  specified,  except  that  the  duration  of  both  is  the 
same,  Aditi  being  identifiable  with  the  universe,  as  by  v.  10  of 
Hymn  lxxxv.  vol.  i.  p.  230.

152  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

have  bestowed  upon  the  devout  man  (who  worships 
you).

13.

SANHITA.

have  bestowed  upon  the  devout  man  (who  worships 
you).

13.  Your  alliance  with  us,  Maruts,  is  of  a  long 
duration :  on  which  account,  immortals,  accept  our 
ample  praise ;  and,  having  accepted  our  laudation, 
be  gratified,  leaders  (of  sacrifice),  by  our  holy  acts, 
through  this  (your)  favourable  disposition  towards 
mankind.

14.  Quick-moving  Maruts,  we  augment  the  long 
(offered  ceremony)  upon  your  mighty  (approach), 
whereby  men  triumph  in  war. — May  we  obtain,  by 
these  our  sacrifices,  your  wished-for  (presence).

15.  This  praise,  Maruts,  is  for  you :  this  hymn  is 
for  you  ;  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable 
of  conferring  delight  (by  his  laudations) :  may  the

le  author,  capable 
of  conferring  delight  (by  his  laudations) :  may  the 
praise  reach  you  (for  the  good  of  your)  persons,  so 
that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

StJKTA  III.  (CLXVII.)

The  first  stanza  is  addressed  to  Indra.  ;  the  rest  to  the  Maruts; 
the  Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the  metre,  Trishhbh.

varga  IV.  1.  May  thy  thousand  benefits,   Indra,  come  to

us :  may  a  thousand  kinds  of  abundant  food  come 
to  us,  lord  of  horses :  may  a  thousand  (sorts  of) 
wealth  come  to  exhilarate  us  :  may  thousands  of 
horses  be  ours.

2.  May  the  Maruts  come  to  our  presence  with 
benefactions :  may  they  who  are  possessed  of  know-2.  May  the  Maruts  come  to  our  presence  with 
benefactions :  may  they  who  are  possessed  of  know-

our  presence  with 
benefactions :  may  they  who  are  possessed  of  know- 
ledge (come)  with  most  excellent  and  brilliant  (trea-

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.         153

sures),  since  their  glorious  horses,  the  Niyutas,  gather 
wealth  even  on  the  farther  shore  of  the  sea.*

3.  In  whom  the  water-shedding,  golden-coloured 
lightning,  is  fitly  deposited  like  a  chaplet  (of  clouds) 
moving  in  the  firmament  like  the  (splendidly-attired) 
wife  of  a  man  (of  rank)^^  and  distinguished  in  assem- 
blies like  a  sacrificial  hymn."

4.  The  radiant,  ever-moving  Maruts^  have  mingled 
with  (their)  associate,  (lightning),  like  (youths)  with 
common  women  •/  the  formidable  divinities  do  not

like  (youths)  with 
common  women  •/  the  formidable  divinities  do  not 
overwhelm  heaven  and  earth  (with  rain),  but  promote 
their  prosperity  through  (friendly)  regard.

5.  Rodasi,  the  associate  of  the  scatterers  (of  the

a

oi

Samudrasya  chid  dhanayanta para,  bearing  or  collecting  wealth, 
even  on  the  farther  shore  of  the  sea ;  parasmin  tire,  on  the  other 
bank :  however,  this  may  be,  more  correctly,  only  metaphorical, 
meaning,  the  winds  bring  wealth,  that  is,  rain,  from  the  sku-ts  of 
the  horizon,  or  firmament.

Guhd  charanti  manusho  na  yoshd,  going  in  the  darkness  of  the 
sky,  as  if  it  was  in  privity  or  in  secret,  like  the  wife  of  a  man,  who,

if  it  was  in  privity  or  in  secret,  like  the  wife  of  a  man,  who, 
although,  according  to  the  commentator,  is  brilliantly  attired, 
remains  in  the  privacy  of  the  female  apartments ;  suvesMntah' 
pura  eva  madhye  charati.Sahhdvatt  vidatheva  sam  vdk :  the  Scholiast  refers  the  first  to 
the  lightning,  which,  at  times,  shows  itself  as  if  in  an  assembly, 
sdbhd;  it  may  also,  perhaps,  refer  to  Yoshd,  a  woman  who  is 
not  always  restricted  to  the  private  chambers,  but  appears  occa- 
sionally in  public,  as  she  certainly  was  accustomed  to  do  in  the 
days  of  the  Fec/a,  at  least  at  religious  ceremonials,  like  the  hymu 
or  prayer,  which,  on  such  occasions,  is  recited  aloud.

like  the  hymu 
or  prayer,  which,  on  such  occasions,  is  recited  aloud.

Sddhdranyeva,  a  public,  or  common  woman ;  the  allusion  is 
not  without  interest,  as  indicative  of  manners.

154  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA.

clouds),  with  dishevelled  tresses,  and  mind  devoted 
to  her  lords,  wooes  them  to  associate  (with  her) :" 
Radiant  in  form,  she  has  ascended  the  car  of  the 
restless  {Mar ids)  as  Suryd}  (ascended  the  car  of  the 
Aswins),  and  comes  hither  (with  the  celerity)  of  the 
sun. 
Varga  V.  6.  The  jouthful  (Maruts)  have  placed  the  young

(lightning)  in  (their)  brilliant  (car),  commingling 
(with  them),  and  vigorous  (in  yielding  rain)  on 
sacrifices  (being  solemnized);  when,  Maruts,  your

n  yielding  rain)  on 
sacrifices  (being  solemnized);  when,  Maruts,  your 
worshipper,  presenting  oblations,  pouring  out  the 
Soma  juice,  and  offering  adoration,  chants  the  sacred 
song.

7.  I  celebrate  that  greatness  of  the  Maruts,  which 
is  true,  and  worthy  of  celebration,  inasmuch  as  their 
high-minded,  haughty,  and  ever-enduring  (bride), 
supports  a  flourishing  progeny.''

8.  MiTRA,  and  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  defend 
(this)  sacrifice  from  (all  that  is)  reprehensible,  and 
destroy  (all  that  are)  unworthy.     They  cause  the  yet8.  MiTRA,  and  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  defend 
(this)  sacrifice  from  (all  that  is)  reprehensible,  and 
destroy  (all  that  are)  unworthy.     They  cause  the  yet

*  Rodasi  usually  means,  as  in  the  preceding  stanza,  heaven  and 
earth  ;  here  it  is  said  to  signify  the  lightning,  or  the  bride  of  the 
Maruts,  marutpatni  vidyud-vd.

fy  the  lightning,  or  the  bride  of  the 
Maruts,  marutpatni  vidyud-vd.

^  Siiryeva,  like  Suryd;  the  Scholiast  understands  by  this 
appellation,  either  the  wife  or  the  daughter  of  Siirya ;  the  latter  is 
the  more  nsual  form  of  the  legend. — Vol.  i.  p.  311,  and  note.

'^  There  is  no  substantive  in  the  hemistich ;  but  the  epithets, 
vrishamand,  ahamyuh,  sthird,  being  feminine,  imply  a  substantive  in 
the  same  gender,  which  the  Scholiast  renders  by  Rodasi,  the  wife 
of  the  Maruts,  who,  by  contributing  to  the  fall  of  rain,  assists  in 
the  sustenance  of  mankind.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.         155

unfalleu  and  showering  (rains)  to  descend,  when,

ADHYAYA.         155

unfalleu  and  showering  (rains)  to  descend,  when, 
Maruts,  the  water-yielding  (season)  gives  increase 
to  this  (world).''

9.  None  of  us,  Maruts,  have  attained,  either 
nearly  or  remotely,  the  limit  of  your  strength : 
those  (Maruts),  increasing  in  energy  and  vigour, 
overwhelm  their  enemies  like  an  ocean.

10.  Let  us,  who  are  beloved  of  Indra,  glorify 
him  to-day;  let  us  glorify  him  to-morrow,  at  the 
sacred  rite ;  let  us  glorify  him  for  our  great  (good), 
in  future  days  as  of  old,  so  that  Ribhukshin  may 
ever  be  favourable  to  us  amongst  men.

11.  This  praise,  Maruts,  is  for  you;  this  hymn  is 
for  you,  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable11.  This  praise,  Maruts,  is  for  you;  this  hymn  is 
for  you,  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable

ou;  this  hymn  is 
for  you,  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable 
of  conferring  delight  (by  his  laudations) :  may  the 
praise  reach  you  for  (the  good  of  your)  persons,  so 
that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

SUKTA  IV.  (CLXVIII.)

The  deities  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  first  seven  verses  are  in 
the  Jagati,  the  last  three  in  the  Trishtubh  metre,

1.  Maruts,    at   every   sacrifice   your  alacrity   is     Varga  vi. 
uniform  :  you,  verily,  discharge  your  every  function 
for  the  benefit  of  the  gods  :  therefore,  do  I  invite 
you  to  come  hither,  by  sacred  hymns,  for  (the  sake

Vavridha  im  maruto  ddtivdrah:  the  latter  may  refer  to  the

the  sake

Vavridha  im  maruto  ddtivdrah:  the  latter  may  refer  to  the 
YajaTndna,vih.en  the  phrase  will  be,  when,  Maruts,  the  worshipper, 
or  he  by  whom  the  offering  is  presented,  promotes  this  your 
increase.

156  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

of)  your  powerful  protection  of  heaven  and  earth, 
and  your  beneficent  praise.

2.  They  who  are  as  if  embodied,  self-born,  self- 
invigorated,  and  (ever)  tremulous  (in  movement), 
are  generated  (to  confer)  abundant  food  and  heaven  : 
they  are  numerous  .as  the  undulations  of  the  waters ; 
they  are  to  be  praised  when  present,  shedding  water, 
like  cows  (yielding  milk).

3.  They,  who  are  like  the  Soma  plants,  with  well-

(yielding  milk).

3.  They,  who  are  like  the  Soma  plants,  with  well- 
nourished  branches,^  and  then  poured  out  (in  liba- 
tions), are  imbibed;  they  abide,  like  devoted  ad- 
herents, in  the  hearts  (of  men) ;  upon  their  shoulders 
hangs  (a  lance),^  like  a  youthful  female,  and  in  their 
hands  a  guard  and  sword  are  wielded.4.  Mutually  supported,  they  descend  readily  from 
the  sky:  immortal  Maruts,  animate  us  by  your 
own  words  (to  praise  you) :  exempt  from  toil,  pre- 
sent at  many  (sacrifices),  brilliant-eyed,  the  Maruts 
have  shaken  the  firmest  mountains.

5.  Maruts,  lightning-armed,  who,  (standing) 
amongst  you,  sets  you  of  yourselves  in  motion,  as

,  who,  (standing) 
amongst  you,  sets  you  of  yourselves  in  motion,  as 
the  jaws  are  (set  in  motion)  by  tlie  tongue  :  as  falling 
rains   (are  essential)   for  the  obtaining  of  food,  so

^  Ti'iptdnsavah-triptdvayavah,  having  satisfied  or  well-nourished 
limbs ;  which,  as  applicable  to  the  Soma  creeper,  may  be  ren- 
dered branches ;  the  analogy  of  the  comparison  here  between  the 
Soma  and  the  Maruts  is  not  very  obvious.

^  What  is  suspended  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Mamts,  the  text 
does  not  specify :  Sdyana  suggests,  either  a  lance,  sakti,  or  the 
beauty  of  the  arms,  bhvja  lakshmi.

SECOND    ASHfAKA — FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        157

(those,  desirous  of  sustenance),  excite  you  in  various

YA.        157

(those,  desirous  of  sustenance),  excite  you  in  various 
ways,  like  a  horse  in  (his)  daily  (training)."

6.  Where,  Maruts,  is  the  limit  of  the  vast  region    Vaiga  vii. 
(whence  you  come)  '^  where  is  the  beginning  of  that

to  which  you  proceed  :  when  you  scatter  the  dense 
vapour  like  light  grass,  and  hurl  down  the  brilliant 
rain-cloud  by  the  thunderbolt.

7.  Like  your  possession  of  treasure,  Maruts,  is 
your  liberality :  ministerial  (of  Indra's  bounty), 
heaven-bestowing,  brilliant,  fruitful,  favourable  to 
the  husbandman,  pro})itious ;  it  is  like  the  donation  of 
a  wealthy  (donor),  prompt  (of  distribution),  and  like 
the  all-subduing  force  of  the  Asuras."

8.8.

(of  distribution),  and  like 
the  all-subduing  force  of  the  Asuras."

8.  The  rivers  are  arrested  by  the  thunderbolts 
when  they  utter  the  voice  of  the  clouds ;  but  the 
lightnings  smile  in  the  firmament  when  the  Maruts 
sprinkle  water  on  the  earth.

9.  Prisni  bore  the  brilliant  troop  of  the  quick- 
moving  Maruts  for  the  great  combat  (with  the 
clouds),  whereupon  (mankind)  immediately  beheld 
the  desiderated  food.

10.  This  praise,  Maruts,  is  for  you  :  this  hymn 
is  for  you,  (the  work)  of  a  venerable  author,  capable

This  stanza  is  exceedingly  elliptical  and  obscure :  Sdyanas 
completion  of  the  text  is  entirely  conjectural.

Kajaso  mahaspuram  may  mean  the  limit  of  the  rains  ;  rajas

ectural.

Kajaso  mahaspuram  may  mean  the  limit  of  the  rains  ;  rajas 
being  a  synonyme  of  either  loka  or  udaha.

Asuryeva  janjati,  asiirasya  sarvdhhibhavanti  saktiJi :  according 
to  the  Scholiast,  the  similitude  consists  in  this,  that,  as  the 
Asuras  take  from  one  to  give  to  another,  so  the  winds  plunder 
the  clouds  to  enrich  the  earth.

158  RIG-VEDA    SANPIITA.

of  conferring  delight  (by  his  laudations) :  may  the 
praise  reach  you  for  (the  good  of  your)  persons,  so 
that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

SiJktaV.  (CLXIX.) 
The  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  Rishi,  Agastta  ;  the  metre,  TrisMuhh.

Varga  VIII,  1.  Tbou,  Indra,  art  mighty  from  the  might  of

TrisMuhh.

Varga  VIII,  1.  Tbou,  Indra,  art  mighty  from  the  might  of 
those  of  whom  thou  art  the  protector  against  aban- 
donment :  therefore,  creator  of  the  Maruts,  favour- 
ably-minded towards  us,  grant  us  those  blessings 
which  are  most  dear  to  thee.2.  Rulers  over  all  men,  and  impelling  t'o wards 
man  the  water-shedding  clouds,  they  are  united, 
Indra,  (with  thee) :  the  host  of  Maruts  is  delighted 
by  (thy)  acquisition  of  heaven-bestowing  Avealth.

3.  Thy  weapon,  Indra,  is  at  hand  for  our  (good) ; 
the  Maruts  send  down  the  long-accumulated  rain ; 
Agni  is  blazing  for  the  ceremony ;  the  oblations 
encompass  him  as  the  waters  (surround)  an  island.

4.

;  the  oblations 
encompass  him  as  the  waters  (surround)  an  island.

4.  Do  thou,  Indra,  quickly  grant  us  that  wealth 
(which  thou  possessest,  for  we  gratify)  the  donor 
with  a  most  worthy  j^resent :  we,  thy  praisers,  ofter 
to  thee,  the  ready-giver  of  boons,  the  laudations  that 
would  propitiate  thee ;  (and  the  priests)  nourish  thee 
with  sacrificial  food,  as  they  cherish  the  bosom  (of 
a  female  for  the  sake  of  replenishing  it)  with  sweet 
(milk).

5.  Thy  riches,  Indra,  are  most  delighting ;''  the

Twe  rdija  Indra  tosatamdh :  or  7-dya  may  mean  kinsmen  or 
friends ;  that  is,  the  Maruts.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        159

exciters  of  any  one  desirous  to  sacrifice :  may  those

YA.        159

exciters  of  any  one  desirous  to  sacrifice :  may  those 
Maruts  be  propitious  to  us ;  the  divine  beings  who 
were  anxious  to  go  first  to  the  ceremony.

6.  Go,  Indra,  to  the  mighty  rain-shedding  leaders      Varga  ix. 
(of  the  clouds),  and  exert  thyself  in  (thine)  aerial 
dwelling;  for  their  broad-footed  steeds  stand  (firm),

like  the  manly  energies  of  an  enemy  in  the  field  of 
battle/like  the  manly  energies  of  an  enemy  in  the  field  of 
battle/

7.  The  noise  of  the  formidable,  dark-coloured, 
swift-moving,  and  advancing  Maruts,  is  everywhere 
echoed  ;  (the  noise)  of  them  who  strike  down  their 
mortal  (foes)  gathering  in  a  host  against  them,  by 
their  self-defending  blows,  as  (they  strike  down)  a 
contemptible  enemy .^

8.

self-defending  blows,  as  (they  strike  down)  a 
contemptible  enemy .^

8.  Associated  with  the  Maruts,  do  thou,  Indra, 
for  thine  own  iionour  and  the  good  of  all,  pierce  the 
exhilarating  receptacles  of  the  waters,  for  thou, 
Indra,  art  glorified  by  the  lauded  divinities:  may 
we  obtain  for  thee  food,  strength,  and  long  life.

Ti'rthe  ndryah  paunsyilni  tasthuh :  arya  is  said  to  be  for  areh, 
satroh,  of  an  enemy  :  tirthe,  yuddhamdrge,  the  way  of  battle  :  or, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  it  may  be  rendered,  the  broad-based, 
dark-coloured  clouds  stand  like  the  manly  armies  of  a  prince, 
swutnimh  on  the  royal  road,  rujd-vithyum.

So  Sdyam  interprets  rimmhmm ;  other\Tnse,  it  might  be

rujd-vithyum.

So  Sdyam  interprets  rimmhmm ;  other\Tnse,  it  might  be 
thought  to  imply  a  debtor,  as  if  the  cloud  was  debtor  to  the 
winds  for  its  contents.

160  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Si5ktaVI.  (CLXX.)

The  deity  and  Rishi  as  before,  but  the  hymn  is  in  the  form  of 
a  dialogue  between  them ;    the  two  first  verses  are  in  the 
Brihati,  the  three  last  in  the  Anushfubh  metre. 
Varga  X.  1.  (Indra  spcaks), — It  is  not  certain  what  to-day

or  what  to-morrow  will  yield  to  iis '}  who  compre- 
hends this  mystery :  verily,  the  mind  of  any  other 
(being)  is  of  an  unsteady  (nature),  and  even  that 
which  has  been  profoundly  studied,  is  (in  time) 
forgotten/'

2.2.

en  that 
which  has  been  profoundly  studied,  is  (in  time) 
forgotten/'

2.  (Agastya), — Why,  Indra,  dost  thou  purpose 
to  slay  us:  the  Maruts  are  thy  brethren:'^  share

^  The  Scholiast  cites  the  Nirukta,  i.  6,  for  the  occasion  of  the 
dialogue :  Agastya,  having  intended  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  Indra, 
proposed  to  make  offerings  also  to  the  Maruts,  of  which  Indra 
complains;  the  object  being  evidently,  what  has  been  elsewhere 
indicated,  the  association  of  the  Maruts  with  Indra  in  the  worship 
addressed  to  the  latter,  apparently  an  innovation,  and  objected  to 
by  some  of  the  worshippers  of  Indra.

Na  nitnam  asfi  no  swah,  lit.  it  is  not  certain,  nor  is  it  to-

.

Na  nitnam  asfi  no  swah,  lit.  it  is  not  certain,  nor  is  it  to- 
morrow; but  Sdj/ana  and  Ydska  consider  the  first  negative  to 
imply  to-day ;  it  is  not  certain,  Indra  says,  whether  I  shall  receive 
any  offering  either  to-day  or  to-morrow  :■  hope  or  expectation  of 
the  future  should  not  be  entertained.

^  The  latter  portion  of  this  stanza  is  not  very  clear :  anyasya 
chittam  abhi  sancharenyam,  utddhitam  vi  nasyati ;  literally,  the  mind 
of  another  is  very  wandering ;  although  read,  (it)  perishes.  Roth 
translates  it ;  on  the  fickleness  of  the  other  (?  what  other) — rests 
the  (well-grounded)  expectation. — Nir.  Erllluterungen,  p.  7.

) — rests 
the  (well-grounded)  expectation. — Nir.  Erllluterungen,  p.  7.

''  Being  equally  with  Indra,  the  sons  of  Aditi,  according  to  the 
Purdms ;  but  here,  probably,  nothing  more  is  meant  than  affinity 
of  function.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        161

witli  them  (the  offering)  in  peace ;  destroy  us  not  in 
enmity.SECOND   ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        161

witli  them  (the  offering)  in  peace ;  destroy  us  not  in 
enmity.

8.  (Indra), — Wherefore,  brother*  Agastya,  dost 
thou,  who  art  my  friend,  treat  me  with  disregard : 
verily,  we  know  what  is  in  thy  mind  :  thou  dost  not 
intend  to  give  us  anything.

4.  (Agastya), — Let  the  priests  decorate  the  altar ; 
let  them  kindle  the  fire  to  the  east;  and  then  let 
us  both  consummate  the  sacrifice,  the  inspirer  of 
immortal  (wisdom),^

5.

both  consummate  the  sacrifice,  the  inspirer  of 
immortal  (wisdom),^

5.  (Agastya), — Thou,  Vasupatt,  art  the  lord  of 
riches ;  thou,  Mitrapati,  art  the  firm  stay  (of  us), 
thy  friends :  Declare,  Indra,  along  with  the  Maruts, 
(thy  approval  of  our  acts),  and  partake  of  the  obla- 
tion offered  in  due  season.

Si5kta  VII.  (CLXXI.)

The  deities  are  the  Maruts;  the  Rishi  is  Agastya;  the  metre,

Trishhbh.

1.  I  approach  you,  Maruts,  with  this  reverential     Varga  xi. 
homage,  and  with  a  hymn  implore  your  favour  against 
eager  (foes) :  with  minds  pacified  by  our  praises, 
suppress  your  anger,  and  let  loose  your  horses."

This  is  also  a  figurative  relationship,  founded  on  the  inter-

rses."

This  is  also  a  figurative  relationship,  founded  on  the  inter- 
change of  benefits,  the  presentation  of  oblations  by  one,  the 
reward  given  by  the  other.

Some  refer  this  stanza  to  Indra,  but  it  seems  more  suited  to 
Agastya  ;  in  which  case  the  two  are  either  the  sacrificer  and  his 
wife,  or  the  institutor  of  the  ceremony'  and  the  ofliciating  priest.

Take  the  horses  out  of  your  car,  that  you  may  not  come  back  to 
the  sacrifice  in  anger :  this  hymn  again  indicates  a  sort  of  trimming 
between  the  worship  of  Indra  and  of  the  Maruts. 
VOL.  II.  M

162  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.162  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

2.  This  pi-aise,  accompanied  by  offerings,  Maruts,

IG-VEDA    SANHITA.

2.  This  pi-aise,  accompanied  by  offerings,  Maruts, 
is  for  you,  offered  from  the  heart :  accept  it,  divini- 
ties, with  favour,  and  come  with  willing  minds  (to 
receive)  these  (laudations),  for  you  are  the  augmenters 
of  sacrificial  food.

3.  May  the  Maruts,  now  hymned,  bestow  happi- 
ness upon  us :  may  Maghavan,  now  glorified,  be 
propitious  to  us  :  Maruts,  may  all  the  ensuing  days 
that  may  be  expected  by  us  prove  gratifying,  and 
full  of  enjoyment.

4.  Maruts,  through  fear  of  that  violent  Indra,  I 
fly,  trembling,  (from  his  presence) :  the  oblations 
that  had  been  prepared  for  you  have  been  put 
away :  nevertheless,  have  patience  with  us.

5.

for  you  have  been  put 
away :  nevertheless,  have  patience  with  us.

5.  The  rays  of  the  ever-recurring  mornings, 
favoured,  Indra,  by  thy  vigour,  confer  consciousness 
as  they  shine  :  showerer  of  benefits,  ancient  (of  days), 
bestower  of  strength,  fierce,  (and  attended)  by  the 
fierce  Maruts,  grant  us  (abundant)  food.

6.  Do  thou,  Indra,  cherish  the  vigorous  leaders 
(of  the  rains),  be  free  from  displeasure  against  the 
Maruts  :  overcoming  (our)  enemies  along  with  the 
intelligent  (Maruts),  support  us  (so  that)  we  may 
obtain  food,  strength,  and  long  life.

SdKTAVIII.  (CLXXn.)

The  deities  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  meti'e  is  Gdyatri.

Varga  XII.  1.

ities  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  meti'e  is  Gdyatri.

Varga  XII.  1.  Maruts,  of  inseparable  splendour,  may  your 
coming  be  marvellous,  liberal  benefactors,  for  our 
protection.

2.  Maruts,  liberal  benefactors,  may  your  bright

SECOND    ASH-fAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        1632.  Maruts,  liberal  benefactors,  may  your  bright

SECOND    ASH-fAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        163

destructive  (shaft)  be  far  from  us:  may  the  stone 
which  you  hurl  be  far  from  us.

3.  Maruts,  liberal  benefactors,  protect  my  people, 
(although  I  be)  as  insignificant  as  grass :  lift  us  up, 
that  we  may  live.

SUKTA  IX.  (CLXXIII.) 
The  deity  is  Indra;  the  Rtshi,  Agastya;  the  metre,  Trishfubh.

1.  The  priests  chant  the  heaven-ascending  Sdma,"    Varga  xiii. 
as  thou  knowest  (it),  for  such  (praise)  do  we  venerate

Varga  xiii. 
as  thou  knowest  (it),  for  such  (praise)  do  we  venerate

as  the  cause  of  increase  and  conferrer  of  heaven, 
whence  the  kine,  unimpeded,''  do  honour  to  the 
divine  (Indra),  who  is  seated  on  the  sacred  grass.

2.  The  showerer  (of  the  oblation,  the  offerer  of 
the  sacrifice,  assisted)  by  (the  priests),  presenting 
the  oblations  which  have  been  provided  by  himself, 
adores  (Indra),  in  order  that  he  may  hasten  (to  the 
rite),  as  a  (thirsty)  deer  to  the  water.  The  mortal 
invoker  (of  the  gods),*^  0  mighty  Indra,  whilst 
glorifying  them  who  are  desirous  of  praise,  presents 
a  twofold  offering  (to  thee).*

3.  The  invoker  (of  the  gods,  Agni),  pervades  the

ering  (to  thee).*

3.  The  invoker  (of  the  gods,  Agni),  pervades  the 
measured  stations  (of  the  altars),  and  accepts  that 
(oblation),  which  is  the  germ  of  the  year  and  of  the

The  Sdma,  the  hymn  that  the  Udgdtri  chants.

Gdvo  dhenavah :  the  latter  is  interpreted  adahdhd,  \mimpeded, 
unharmed ;  the  cows  may  be  the  rains.

The  priest;  or  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice.

Either  of  praise  and  oblation,  or  in  the  capacity  of  the  inati* 
tutor  of  the  ceremony  and  his  wife.

M   2

10*4  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.Either  of  praise  and  oblation,  or  in  the  capacity  of  the  inati* 
tutor  of  the  ceremony  and  his  wife.

M   2

10*4  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

earth ;  as  a  horse  neighs  when  bringing  (t]ie  offering 
to  Indra),  as  a  bull  bellows  like  a  messenger  pro- 
claiming (his  message)  between  heaven  and  earth.*

4.

a  messenger  pro- 
claiming (his  message)  between  heaven  and  earth.*

4.  We  offer  to  him,  (Indra),  the  most  pious 
(oblations) :  the  worshippers  of  the  gods  present 
to  him  substantial  (adorations)  :^  may  he,  of  con- 
spicuous lustre,  standing  in  his  car,  and  light-moving 
like  the  Asvvins,  be  gratified  (by  our  worship),

5.  Glorify  that  Indra  who  is  mighty,  who  is  a 
hero,  possessing  abundant  wealth,  standing  in  his 
car,  a  valiant  combatant  against  adversaries,  the 
wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  the  disperser  of  all- 
enveloj)ing  gloom.

Vargn  xiT.  6.  Heaven  and  earth  are  insufficient  for  the  girth 
of  that  Indra,  who,  with  his  greatness,  rules  over

nt  for  the  girth 
of  that  Indra,  who,  with  his  greatness,  rules  over 
the  leaders  (of  sacrifice) :  as  the  atmosphere  encom- 
passes the  earth,  so  he  encompasses  (the  three 
worlds),  and,  being  the  master  of  the  rain,  he 
upholds  the  sky  as  well  as  the  firmament  and  the 
earth."

7.  Those  people,  who,  jointly  worshipping  Indra, 
diligently  endeavour,  0  hero,  to  propitiate  thee,  the

The  application  of  the  similes  is  not  very  obvious ;  but  they 
may  be  intended  to  illustrate  the  roaring  of  the  sacrificial  fire.

Chyautndni  is,  properly,  causing  to  fall  down;  but  Sdyana 
explains  it  by  dridhchii,  firm,  hard.

Opasam  iva  vibharti :  opasam  may  mean,  near  to,  and  be

firm,  hard.Chyautndni  is,  properly,  causing  to  fall  down;  but  Sdyana 
explains  it  by  dridhchii,  firm,  hard.

Opasam  iva  vibharti :  opasam  may  mean,  near  to,  and  be

firm,  hard.

Opasam  iva  vibharti :  opasam  may  mean,  near  to,  and  be 
inferentially  applied  to  the  earth  and  sky,  as  contiguous  to  heaven : 
but,  according  to  Sat/ana,  it  also  means  'a  horn,'  in  which  case 
the  ellipse  may  be  supplied,  he  upholds  the  sky  as  easily  as  a  bull 
bears  his  horns.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        165

invigorator  in  combats,  the  guide  in  the  right  way : 
provide,  for  his  gratification,  with  sacrificial  viands.

8.  The  libations  (offered)  to  thee  are,  verily,  the 
cause  of  happiness,  since  the  divine  waters  (effused) 
in  the  firmament  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  afford 
thee  satisfaction.  All  praise,  Indra,  is  acceptable

of  mankind  afford 
thee  satisfaction.  All  praise,  Indra,  is  acceptable 
to  thee,  and  thou  rewardest  with  understanding 
those  who  praise  thee.

9.  May  we  be,  as  it  were,  thy  valued  friends, 
O  Lord,  and  obtain  our  desires,  like  those  (who  gain 
their  objects)  by  the  praise  of  princes.  May  Indra, 
propitiated  by  our  eulogiums,  be  brought  to  the 
sacrifice  by  our  hymns.

10.  Emulous  in  commendation,  like  (those  con- 
tending for  the  favour)  of  men,  may  Indra,  the 
wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  be  equally  (a  friend)  to 
us :  like  those  who,  desirous  of  his  friendship,  (con- 
ciliate) the  lord  of  a  city**  (ruling)  with  good  govern- 
ment, so  do  our  intermediate  (representatives)  pro-

with  good  govern- 
ment, so  do  our  intermediate  (representatives)  pro- 
pitiate (Indra)  with  sacrifices.with  good  govern- 
ment, so  do  our  intermediate  (representatives)  pro- 
pitiate (Indra)  with  sacrifices.

11.  One  man  propitiates  Indra,  augmenting  (his     Varga  xv. 
vigour)  by  sacrifice ;  another,  who  is  insincere,  wor- 
ships (him),  with  mind  averted,  (to worldly  thoughts) :

(to  the  first  he  is)  like  a  lake  to  a  thirsty  (pilgrim) 
near  a  sacred  spot ;  (to  the  other)  like  a  long  road, 
which  retards  the  end  (of  the  journey).''

Mitrdyuvo  na  purpatim,  purah  swdminam,  the  master  or 
governor  of  a  city.

The  application  of  these  comparisons  is  not  very  distinct,  and 
it  might  be  thought  that  they  refer  to  the  individuals  mentioned.

166  RIG-YEDA    SANHITA.

12.

they  refer  to  the  individuals  mentioned.

166  RIG-YEDA    SANHITA.

12.  Indra,  associated  with  the  Maruts  in  battles 
(with  the  clouds),  abandon  us  not  ;*  for  a  share  of 
the  offering  is  set  apart,  mighty  one,  for  thee,  for 
whom,  the  shedder  of  rain  and  accepter  of  oblations, 
the  worship  is  offered  with  oblations,  whilst  the  hymn 
glorifies  the  Maruts.

13.  This  hymn,  Indra,  is  addressed  to  thee.  Lord 
of  steeds,  learn  by  it  the  way  to  our  sacrifice,  and 
come  hither  for  our  good,  that  we  may  thence  obtain 
food,  strength,  and  long  life.''

SuKTA  X.  (CLXXIV.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XVI.  1.  Thou,  Indea,  art  king :  they  who  are  gods

the  same.SuKTA  X.  (CLXXIV.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XVI.  1.  Thou,  Indea,  art  king :  they  who  are  gods

the  same.

Varga  XVI.  1.  Thou,  Indea,  art  king :  they  who  are  gods 
(are  subject)  to  thee :  therefore,  scatterer  (of  foes), 
do  thou  protect  and  cherish  us  men :  thou  art  the 
protector  of  the  good,  the  possessor  of  wealth,  the 
extricator  of  us  (from  sin) :  thou  art  true,  the  in-j 
vester  (of  all  with  thy  lustre),  the  giver  ol  strength, 
2.  Thou  hast  humbled  the  people,  suing  for 
pardon,"  when  thou  hadst  destroyed  their  seven 
iieM'  cities  :  thou,  the  irreproachable,  hast  dispersed

in  the  first  half  of  the  stanza ;  but  they  are  rather  more  intelligi- 
ble as  applied  to  Indra.

This  stanza  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  in.  46 ;  the  explanation  is

ndra.

This  stanza  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  in.  46 ;  the  explanation  is 
much  the  same,  except  that  Mahidhara  supplies  the  ellipse  by 
ndsaya  instead  of  tyukshlh,  do  not  destroy  us.

This  hymn  is  in  genercd  eUiptical  and  obscure.

Dano  visa  Indra  mridhravdchas  is  translated  by  Ydska,  make 
liberal  men  !5oft-?pol?en,  ddnamanaso  w.anushydn-indra  mriduvdchak 
kuru.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.         167

the  flowing  waters  :  thou  hast  destroyed  Vbitra  for 
the  sake  of  the  youthful  Purukutsa.*

3.  Go  to  the  cities  inhabited  by  the  Rakshasas^ 
and  thence  to  heaven  (attended),  receiver  of  many 
sacrifices,  by  those  who  (attend  thee).  Defend,  like

eceiver  of  many 
sacrifices,  by  those  who  (attend  thee).  Defend,  like 
a  lion,*"  the  untamed,  quick-moving  Agni,  that  he 
may  abide  in  his  dwelling,  fulfilling  his  functions.eceiver  of  many 
sacrifices,  by  those  who  (attend  thee).  Defend,  like 
a  lion,*"  the  untamed,  quick-moving  Agni,  that  he 
may  abide  in  his  dwelling,  fulfilling  his  functions.

4.  Let  (thy  foes,  Indra,)  humbled  by  the  might 
of  thy  thunderbolt,  rest  in  their  own  station,*  for 
thy  glory:  when  thou  movest,  (armed)  with  thy 
weapon,  thou  sendest  down  the  waters :  arresting 
thy  horses,  increase,  by  thy  power,  (the  abundance 
of)  food.

5.  Bear,  Indra,  with  thy  obedient  horses,  as 
swift  as  the  wind,  (the  sage)  Kutsa,  to  that  cer-e- 
mony  (to  which)  thou  desirest  (to  convey  him) :  let 
the  sun  bring  near  the  wheel  of  his  chariot,  and  let 
the  thunder-armed  advance  against  his  opponents.

6.

chariot,  and  let 
the  thunder-armed  advance  against  his  opponents.

6.  Indra,    lord    of   steeds,   invigorated    by   our    Varga  xvn.

The  verse  admits,  according  to  the  commentator,  of  a  different 
explanation,  more  consistent  with  current  acceptation,  rurM;  viz.j 
thou  hast  made  the  subject  (rain),  sohciting  forbearance,  descend 
(in  showers)  :  when  thou  hadst  rent  asunder  the  ghding,  world- 
filling  (clouds),  then,  irreproachable  one,  thou  didst  make  the 
waters  flow  in  channels,  and  didst  open  the  chief  cloud  for  young 
Puruhitsa.

Vritah  mrapatnth,  Say  ana  explains,  rakshobhih  pdlayitd  vritah' 
purih.

As  a  lion  protects  the  forest,  in  which  his  lair  is,  from  the

rih.

As  a  lion  protects  the  forest,  in  which  his  lair  is,  from  the 
depredations  of  other  animals.

In  the  firmament,  the  enemies  are  the  clouds.

168  KIG-VEDA   SANHITA.rih.

As  a  lion  protects  the  forest,  in  which  his  lair  is,  from  the 
depredations  of  other  animals.

In  the  firmament,  the  enemies  are  the  clouds.

168  KIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

animating  praise,  thon  hast  slain  those  wlio  make 
thee  no  offerings,  and  disturb  thy  worshippers ;  but 
they  who  look  upon  thee  as  (their)  protector,  and 
are  associated  for  (the  presentation  of  sacrificial) 
food,  obtain  from  thee  posterity.

7.  The  sage  praises  thee,  Indra,  for  the  grant  of 
desirable  (food),  since  thou  hast  made  the  earth  the 
bed  of  the  Asura:  Maghavan  has  made  the  three 
(regions)-  marvellous  by  his  gifts,  and  has  destroyed 
for  (the  prince)  Duryoni  (the  Asura,)  Kuyamcha^ 
in  combat.

8.

stroyed 
for  (the  prince)  Duryoni  (the  Asura,)  Kuyamcha^ 
in  combat.

8.  The  sages  have  celebrated  thy  everlasting  (as 
well  as  thy)  recent  (exploits,  in  achieving  which) 
tbou  hast  endured  many  injuries  in  putting  an  end 
to  war :  verilv,  thou  hast  demolished  the  hostile  and 
undivine  cities ;  thou  hast  bowed  down  the  thunder- 
bolt of  the  undivine  Asura.

9.  Thou,  Indra,  art  the  territier  (of  thy  foes) ; 
thou  hast  made  the  trembling  waters  overspread 
(the  earth)  like  flowing  rivers  i*'  but,  hero,  when  thou 
iillest  the  ocean,  thou  hast  protected  in  their  well- 
being  Turvasa  and  Yadu.*

*  The  text  has  only  tisrah.  to  which  the  Scholiast  adds  bMmCh,

*

*  The  text  has  only  tisrah.  to  which  the  Scholiast  adds  bMmCh, 
either  earth  in  three  respects,  as  identical  with  the  three  rituals  of 
the  Darsa,  or  lunar  periods ;  the  Pasu,  or  victim ;  and  Soma,  or 
lihation ;  or  as  implying  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven.

^  We  have  a  Kuyava  in  the  first  hook,  vol.  i.  p.  268,  but  not 
in  connection  with  DuryoAi.^  We  have  a  Kuyava  in  the  first  hook,  vol.  i.  p.  268,  but  not 
in  connection  with  DuryoAi.

'  Sirdh  na  sravantOi :  the  commentator  says  S{rd  may  be  the 
name  of  a  certain  river ;  one  put  for  many.

^  Pdrayd  Turvahm  yadum  swasti :  Sdyana  explains  pdraya  by

SECOND   ASHTAKA FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        169

10,  Be  thou,  Indra,  at  all  times  our  especial 
defender ;  the  preserver  of  our  people,  the  bestower

es  our  especial 
defender ;  the  preserver  of  our  people,  the  bestower 
of  strength  upon  all  these  our  emulous  (followers) ; 
that  we  may  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long  life.

SdKTA  XI.  (CLXXV.) 
The  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  Rishi,  Agastya ;  the  metre  of  the  first 
verse  is  a  kind  of  Brihatt;  of  the  last,  TrisMubh ;  of  the  rest, 
Anushtuhh.

1.  Lord  of  steeds,  thou  art  exhilarated  when  the  Varga  xviil. 
sacred  {Soina  juice)  has  been  imbibed  by  thee  as  by

its  (appropriate)  vessel ;  for  to  thee,  showerer  (of 
benefits),  it  is  exhilarating,  inebriating,  invigorating, 
the  yielder  of  delight,  (satisfying  as)  food,  and  the 
giver  of  a  thousand  (pleasures).

2.

t,  (satisfying  as)  food,  and  the 
giver  of  a  thousand  (pleasures).

2.  May  our  Soma  libation  reach  you,  (for  it  is) 
exhilarating,  invigorating,  inebriating,  most  precious : 
it  is  companionable,  Indra,  enjoyable,  the  over- 
thrower  of  hosts,  immortal.

3.  Thou  art  a  hero,  a  benefactor,  accelerate  the 
vehicle  of  man  (that  bears  him  to  heaven) ;  consume, 
mighty  one,  the  irreligious  Dasyu^  as  a  (wooden) 
vessel  is  burnt  by  fire.

4.  Sage  Indra,  who  art  the  lord,  thou  hast 
carried  off  by  thy  strength  one  wheel  of  (the 
chariot  of)  the  sun.  Take  up  thy  bolt  for  the 
death  of  S'ushna,  and  proceed  with  thy  horses, 
swift  as  the  wind,  to  Kutsa.^'ushna,  and  proceed  with  thy  horses, 
swift  as  the  wind,  to  Kutsa.^

apdlaydh,  thou  hast  protected ;  and  swasti  by  avindsam,  without 
loss  or  detriment;  or  pdraya  might  mean,  bear  across,  convey 
over  in  safety.

Or  kutsa  may  mean  the  thunderbolt ;  but  the  defence  of  the

170  RIG-VEDA    SANIHTA.

5.  Thy  inebriety  is  most  intense ;  nevertheless, 
thy  acts  (for  our  good)  are  most  beneficent.  Thou 
desirest,  bountiful  giver  of  horses,  that  (both  thy 
inebriety  and  thy  beneficence  should  be  the  meajis 
of)  destroying  enemies  and  distributing  riches,^

6.  Inasmuch,  Indra,  as  thou  hast  been  the  (giver 
of)  happiness  to  thine  ancient  encomiasts,  like  water

een  the  (giver 
of)  happiness  to  thine  ancient  encomiasts,  like  water 
to  one  who  is  thirsty,  therefore  I  constantly  repeat 
this  thy  praise,  that  I  may  thence  obtain  food, 
strength,  and  long  life.

StJkta  XII.  (CLXXVI.)

The  deity  and  lilshi  are  the.  same  ;  the  metre  is  AnusMuhh,  except 
in  the  last  verse,  in  ^N'hich  it  is  TrisMubh.

Varga  XIX.  1.  Soma^  exhilarate  Indra  (at  tlie  sacrifice  we 
offer),  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  wealth :  pervade 
him,  showerer  (of  benefits),  for  when  imbibed  thou 
art  the  annihilator  (of  enemies),  and  sufTerest  not  a 
foe  to  be  nigh.

2.  Pervade  with  our  praise  him  who  is  the  sole 
sustainer  of  men,  to  whom  the  oblation  is  presented,

o  is  the  sole 
sustainer  of  men,  to  whom  the  oblation  is  presented, 
and  who,  the  showerer  (of  benefits),  causes  (every 
desire)  to  bud  like  barley.

3.  In  whose  hands  are  all  the  treasures  (that  are 
desired    by)   the   five    classes  of  beings '}   destroy,

Edjarshi  against  Siish/ia,  or  of  mankind  against  drought,  has  been 
before  aUuded  to.— See  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  137,  171.Edjarshi  against  Siish/ia,  or  of  mankind  against  drought,  has  been 
before  aUuded  to.— See  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  137,  171.

The  epithets,  being  in  the  dual  number,  refer,  according  to 
the  co.mmentator,  to  the  maJa,  intoxication ;  and  kralii,  the  acts 
of  Indra.

See  vol.  i.  p.  20,  note.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.         171

Indra,  him  wlio  oppresses  us  ;  slay  hiui,  (as  if  thou 
wast  thyself)  the  heavenly  thiiiulerbolt.

4.

slay  hiui,  (as  if  thou 
wast  thyself)  the  heavenly  thiiiulerbolt.

4.  Slay  every  one  who  offers  not  libations,  how- 
ever diflicult  to  be  destroyed :  slay  every  one  who 
is  no  delight  to  thee  :  bestow  upon  us  his  wealth, 
for  the  pious  (worshipper)  deserves  it.

5.  Soma,  thou  protectest  him  in  whose  prayers, 
doubly  devout,  there  is  the  combination  (of  praise 
and  oblation):  protect,  especially,  Indra  in  war; 
protect  the  vigorous  Indra  in  battles.

6.  Inasmuch,  Indra,  as  thou  hast  been  the  giver 
of  happiness  .to  thine  ancient  encomiasts,  like  water 
to  one  who  is  thirsty,  therefore  I  constantly  repeat 
this  thy  praise,  that  I  may  thence  obtain  food, 
strength,  and  long  life.

thy  praise,  that  I  may  thence  obtain  food, 
strength,  and  long  life.

Si^KTA  XIII.  (CLXXVII.)

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same  ;  the  metre  is  Amtshfubh,  except 
in  the  last  verse,  in  which  it  is  Trishfibh.

1.  May  Indra,  who  is  the  cherisher  of  men,  the     Varga  xx. 
benefactor  of  mankind,  the  lord  of  men,  the  adored

of  many,  (come  to  us).  Indra,  who  art  praised  (by 
us),  and  art  desirous  of  the  oblation,  harness  thy 
vigorous  steeds,  and  come  down  to  me  for  (my) 
preservation.

2.  Mount,  Indra,  thy  steeds,  who  arc  young  and 
vigorous,*  tractable  to  prayer,  and  harnessed  to  a2.  Mount,  Indra,  thy  steeds,  who  arc  young  and 
vigorous,*  tractable  to  prayer,  and  harnessed  to  a

""  We  have  in  this  hymn,  as  we  have  had  in  others,  a  prodigral

""  We  have  in  this  hymn,  as  we  have  had  in  others,  a  prodigral 
repetition  of  the  words  varsM  and  varshanam :  showering,  shed- 
ding, effusing  ;  the  horses  are  vrhhaiid;  the  car  is  varskaAa ;  Indra

172  •  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

bounty-sbedding  car :  come  down  with  them  to  us. 
We  invoke  thee,  Indra,  the  libation  being  poured 
out.

3.  Ascend  thy  bounty-shedding  car,  for  for  thee  the 
So?na,  the  showerer  of  benefits,  is  effused,  the  sweet 
libations  are  prepared.  Bounty-shedding  Indra, 
having  harnessed  them,  come  with  thy  vigorous 
steeds  for  (the  good  of)  mankind  ;  come  with  thy 
rapid  (car)  to  my  presence.

4.  This  is  the  sacrifice  offered  to  the  gods :  this

to  my  presence.

4.  This  is  the  sacrifice  offered  to  the  gods :  this 
is  the  offering  of  the  victim  :**  these  are  the  prayers : 
this,  Indra,  is  the  Soma  juice :  the  sacred  grass  is 
ready  strewn :  conie,  therefore,  Indra,  quickly,  sit 
down,  drink  (the  libation) :  here  let  loose  thy  steeds.

5.  Glorified  by  us,  Indra,  come  to  (our)  presence 
to  accept  the  prayers  of  the  venerable  offerer  (of  the 
oblation);  so  that  we  may  ever  enjoy  prosperity 
through  thy  protection,  and  thence  obtain  food, 
strength,  and  long  life.

Su'kta  XIV.  (CLXXVIII.)

The  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

Varga  XXI.         1.  Inasmuch,  Indra,  as  the  praise  by  which  thou

.

Varga  XXI.         1.  Inasmuch,  Indra,  as  the  praise  by  which  thou

art  (induced  to  bestow)  protection  on  thine  adorers

is  heard  (by  all),  therefore  disappoint  not  the  desireVarga  XXI.         1.  Inasmuch,  Indra,  as  the  praise  by  which  thou

art  (induced  to  bestow)  protection  on  thine  adorers

is  heard  (by  all),  therefore  disappoint  not  the  desire

is  vrishabha ;  the  Soma  is  vrishan ;  and  so  on,  showing  poverty 
both  of  ideas  and  expressions.

Ayam  miyedha :  the  latter  is  explained  as  an  epithet  of  Yajna, 
derived  from  medha,  which,  according  to  a  text  cited  by  the  com- 
mentator, is  the  same  as  pasu,  a  victim.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        173

(that  would  raise  us)  to  greatness :  may  I  obtain, 
througli  thy  (favour),  all  things  that  are  obtainable 
by  man.

2.  Let  not  the  royal  Indra  frustrate  those  our

obtainable 
by  man.

2.  Let  not  the  royal  Indra  frustrate  those  our 
actions,  which  the  sisters,  (Day  and  Night),*  are 
directing  to  their  object.  May  these  invigorating 
offerings  propitiate  him,  so  that  he  may  bestow 
upon  us  friendly  (regard),  and  (abundant)  food.

3.  Indra,  the  hero,  the  victor  in  battles,  along 
with  the  leaders  (of  his  hosts,  the  Maruts),  will 
hear  the  invocation  of  his  supplicating  worshipper, 
and  when  disposed  to  accept  his  praises,  will,  of  his 
own  accord,  drive  his  chariot  close  to  the  donor  (of 
the  oblation).

4.  .Verily,  Indra,  through  desire  of  (sacrificial) 
food,  is  the  devourer  (of  that  which  is  presented)  by

(sacrificial) 
food,  is  the  devourer  (of  that  which  is  presented)  by 
(his)  worshippers,  and  overcomes  (the  adversaries) 
of  his  friend  :  in  the  many-voiced  assembly  (of  men), 
Indra,  the  faithful  (performer  of  his  promise),  com- 
mending (the  piety)  of  his  worshipper,  approves  of 
the  (offered)  food.5.  By  thee,  opulent  Indra,  may  we  overcome  our 
mighty  and  formidable  enemies :  thou  art  our  pro- 
tector :  mayst  thou  be  propitious  to  our  prosperity, 
that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

Swasdrd,  lit.  sisters,  may  mean  as  explained  in  the  text ;  or 
it  may  imply  the  associated  institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  officiating

t  may  imply  the  associated  institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  officiating 
priest ;  or  it  may  mean  the  fingers  which  are  employed  in  ritual 
manipulations.

174  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

SdKTA   XV.   (CLXXIX.)

There  is  no  deity,  properly  speaking,  to  this  Sukta;  but  Rati,  the 
goddess  of  pleasure,  is  suggested  by  the  Scholiast  as  taking  the 
place  of  one ;  the  Rishis  are  the  supposed  interlocutors,  Agastya, 
his  wife,  Lopamudrd,  and  certain  disciples  of  the  sage  who  have 
overheard  the  conversation ;  the  metre  is  TrisMubh.

Varga  XXII.  1.  (Lopamudra), — Many  years  have  I  been  serving 
thee  diligently,  both  day  and  'night,  and  through 
mornings,  bringing  on  old  age :  decay  now  impairs

night,  and  through 
mornings,  bringing  on  old  age :  decay  now  impairs 
the  beauty  of  my  limbs :  what,  therefore,  is  now  (to 
be  done) :  let  husbands  approacli  their  wives.

2.  The  ancient  sages,  disseminators  of  truth,  who, 
verily,  conversed  of  truths  with  the  gods,  begot 
(progeny),  nor  thereby  violated  (their  vow  of  con- 
tinence), therefore  should  wives  be  approached  by 
their  husbands.

3.  (Agastya), — Penance  has  nat  been  practised  in 
Afain :  since  the  gods  protect  us,  we  may  iiidulge  all 
our  desires:  in  this  world  we  may  triumph  in  many 
conflicts,  if  we  exert  ourselves  mutually  together.

4.  Desire,  either  from  this  cause  or  from  that,"

mutually  together.4.  Desire,  either  from  this  cause  or  from  that,"

mutually  together.

4.  Desire,  either  from  this  cause  or  from  that," 
has  come  upon  me  whilst  engaged  in  prayer  and 
suppressing  (passion) :  let  Lopamudra  approach  her 
husband :  the  unsteady  female  beguiles  the  firm  and 
resolute  man.

Ito-amutaJi  kutaschii,  from  some  cause,  from  this,  or  from 
that ;  from  your  society  or  from  the  influence  of  the  season,  as 
spring  and  the  like  ;  or  from  the  suggestions  of  this  world  or  of 
the  next ;  are  the  explanations  of  the  Scholiast.

SECOND    ASHTAKA J-OURTH    ADHYAYA.        175

5.  {Pupil), — I  beseech  the  Soma  juice,  which  has 
been  drunk  in  my  heart,''  that  it  may  fully  expiate 
the  sin  we  have  committed  '}  man  is  subject  to  many

fully  expiate 
the  sin  we  have  committed  '}  man  is  subject  to  many 
desires.

6.  Agastya,  a  venerable  sage,  working  with 
(fit)  implements,*^  desiring  progeny,  offspring,  and 
strength,^  practised  both  classes  (of  obligations),^ 
and  received  true  benedictions  from  the  gods.

Antito  hritsu  pitam,  di'unk  mentally,  not  actually,  is  probably 
intended,

Tbe  sin  of  listening  to  the  conversation  of  their  Guru  with 
his  wife ;  according  to  Saunaka,  the  repetition  of  this '  and  the 
following  verse  expiates  sin  in  general,  and  secures  the  accomplish- 
ment of  all  desires.

*"  Khammdnah  khanitraih,  Ut.  digging  with  digging  tools  ;  that

ires.

*"  Khammdnah  khanitraih,  Ut.  digging  with  digging  tools  ;  that 
is,  eflfecting  his  objects  by  appropriate  means,  eaniing  his  reward 
by  sacrifice  and  hymns.ires.

*"  Khammdnah  khanitraih,  Ut.  digging  with  digging  tools  ;  that 
is,  eflfecting  his  objects  by  appropriate  means,  eaniing  his  reward 
by  sacrifice  and  hymns.

^  Prajdm  apatyam  balam  icJichhamdnah :  prajd  is  distinguiaued 
by  the  SchoUast  as  implying  repeated  successions,  descendants, 
and  apatya  as  signifying  more  immediate  descent,  sons,  grand- 
sons ;  or  prajd  may  mean  descendants.

"  Kama  and  Tapas,  desire  and  devotion ;  the  duties  of  domestic 
as  well  as  ascetic  life.

176  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA,

ANUVAKA  XXIY:

Si5kta  I.  (CLXXX.)

The  deities  are  the  A^wins  ;  the  Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the  metre,

TrisMubh.

Varga  XXIII.        1.  AswiNS,   youF   hoi'ses   are   traversers   of    the

ga  XXIII.        1.  AswiNS,   youF   hoi'ses   are   traversers   of    the

(three)  regions,  when  your  chariot  proceeds  to 
(its  desired)  quarters  :  the  golden  fellies  of  your 
wheels  grant  (whatever  is  wished  for) :  drinking 
the  Soma  juice,  you  participate  in  the  morning 
(rite).

2.  Direct  downwards  (the  course)  of  your  (car) 
swift  moving,  variously  going,  friendly  to  man,  and 
to  be  especially  venerated,  when,  all  adorable,  your 
sister  (dawn)  prepares  (for  your  approach),  and  (the 
institutor  of  the  ceremony)  worships  you,  drinkers 
of  the  Soma  juice,  for  the  sake  (of  obtaining) 
strength  and  food.

3.  You  have  restored  milk  to  the  cow :  you  have

trength  and  food.

3.  You  have  restored  milk  to  the  cow :  you  have 
(brought)  down  the  prior  mature  (secretion)  into 
the  unripe  (or  barren  udder)  of  the  cow :  the 
devout  offerer  of  the  oblation  worships  you,  whose 
forms  are  truth,  (as  vigilant  in  the  midst  of  the 
ceremony),  as  a  thief  (in  the  midst)  of  a  thicket.4.  You  rendered  the  heat  as  soothing  as  sweet 
butter  to  Atri  ;"  wishing  (for  relief),  aud  invested 
it  with  coolness,  like  water :  therefore,  for  you, 
AswiNS,    leaders    (of    rites,)    the    fire-ofteriug    (is

See  vol.  i,  p.  290.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FOURTH    ADHYAYA.        177

made) ;"'  to  you  the  Soma  juices  run  like   chariot 
wiieeis  (down  a  declivity).

5.

you  the  Soma  juices  run  like   chariot 
wiieeis  (down  a  declivity).

5.  Dasras,  may  I  bring  you,  by  the  vehicle  of 
my  prayers,  (hither),  to  bestov^'  (upon  me  your  aid), 
like  the  infirui  son  of  Tugra  '?  heaven  and  earth 
combine  (to  worship  you)  through  your  greatness : 
may  this,  your  aged  (worshipper),  adorable  (AswiNs), 
enjoy  long  life,  (exempt)  from  sin.

6.  Bountiful  givers,  when  you  yoke  your  horses    Varga  xxiv. 
you  replenish  the  earth  with  viands :  may  this  your 
worshipper  be  (swift)  as  the  wind  to  propitiate  and

please  you,  that,  through  your  great  (favour),  he  may, 
like  a  pious  man,  obtain  food.

7.  Your  sincere  adorers,  we  verily  praise  you  in 
various  ways.

food.

7.  Your  sincere  adorers,  we  verily  praise  you  in 
various  ways.  The  pitcher  has  been  placed  (ready 
for,  the    Soma    juice)."      Irreproachable    Aswins,

Tad  vdm  paswa  ishti:  Pasu  is  interpreted  by  the  commentator 
*  fire,'  agreeably  to  the  text,  Agnih  pasur-dsit,  Agni  was  the 
victim ;  and  the  phrase  implies  that  the  oblations  are  presented 
through  fire  to  the  Aswins.

See  vol.  i.  p.  316.

Vi  pa/iir-hifdvdn :  Sdi/ana  proposes  first,  to  explain  pani  by 
drona-kalaia,  the  jar  or  vessel  into  which  the  Soma  juice,  after 
expression,  is  strained  tlirough  a  niter ;  but  he  then  suggests  that 
pani  may  have  its  more  usual  sense  of  a  merchant  or  trader,  andt 
pani  may  have  its  more  usual  sense  of  a  merchant  or  trader,  and 
hiidvdn,  instead  of '  being  placed,'  may  mean  opulent ;  in  which 
case  vi  will  have  the  force  of  viyvjyatdm,  let  him  be  separated ; 
iraplving,  let»the  niggardly  rich  man  who  does  not  oifer  worship 
be  cast  ofF :  the  Niti  manjan  appears  to  have  had  a  different,  but 
scarcely  coi-rect  reading,  ahavik-puni,  a  niggard  offering,  no 
oblation .

VOL.  II.  N

178  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

showerei-s  (of  benefits),  drink  freely  of  the  juice  in 
the  presence  of  the  gods.

8.  AswiNS,  Agastya,  eminent  amongst  the  leaders 
of  men,  arouses  you  daily  with  numerous  (invoca- 
tions), like  an  instrument  of  sound,''  for  the  sake  of

rous  (invoca- 
tions), like  an  instrument  of  sound,''  for  the  sake  of 
obtaining  a  manifold  (flow)  of  a  torrent  (of  rain).

9.  When,  by  the  virtue  of  your  chariot,  you  come 
(to  the  sacrifice),  and  when,  like  the  ministering 
priest,  (after  discharging  his  function),  you  depart, 
gliding  away,  you  give  to  the  devout  (worshippers  a 
reward),  though  it  be  store  of  good  horses :  may  we 
be  enriched,  Nasatyas,  (by  your  favour).

10.  We  invoke  to-day,  Aswms,  with  hymns,  for 
the  sake  of  good  things,  your  praise-worthy  chariot 
of  undamaged  wheels,  and  traversing  the  sky,  that 
we  may  obtain  (from  it)  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

SdKTA  II.  (CLXXXI.)

obtain  (from  it)  food,  strength,  and  long 
life.

SdKTA  II.  (CLXXXI.) 
Tlie  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  coutinued. 
Varga  XXV.  1.  When,  beloved  (AswiNs),  do  you  bear  aloft  (the 
materials)  of  food  and  riches,  that,  desirous  of  the 
sacrifice,  you  may  send  down  the  rain :  this  sacrifice 
offers  you  adoration,  givers  of  riches,  protectors  of 
men.2.  AswiNS,  may  your  horses,  pure,  rain-drinking, 
swift  as  the  wind,  heaven-born,  quick-moving,  fleet 
as  thought,  vigorous,  well-backed,  and  self-irradia- 
ting, bring  you  hither.

Kdrddhuniva,  from  kdrd,  sound,  iabda ;  and  dhuni,  generating, 
utpddayitd,  such  as  the  conch  shell  and  the  like,  iankhddi  sa  iva.

tpddayitd,  such  as  the  conch  shell  and  the  like,  iankhddi  sa  iva.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FOURTH    ADIIYAYA.        179

3.  AswiNS,  excellent  and  steady,  may  your  chariot, 
vast  as  the  earth,  broad-fronted,  rapid  as  the  rain, 
(fleet)  as  thought,  emulative^  and  adorable,  come 
hither  for  (our)  good.

4.  Born  here  (in  the  middle  region)  and  here  (in 
the  upper  region),^  you  are  glorified  together,  as 
faultless  in  your  forms  and  (perfect  in)  your  own 
many  excellences)  f  one  (of  you),  the  victorious 
son  (of  the  firmament),  th»^  devout  (promoter)  of 
sacred  sacrifice,  the  other,  the  auspicious  son  of 
heaven,^  (each)  upholds  (the  vi'orld).

5.  AswiNS,  may  the  golden-coloured  (car  of  one

holds  (the  vi'orld).

5.  AswiNS,  may  the  golden-coloured  (car  of  one 
of  you),  traversing  at  will  the  quarters  of  space,* 
come  to  our  dwellings;  may  mankind  encourage 
the  horses  of  the  other  by  food,  by  friction,  and  by 
shouts.

*  Ahampurvah,  I  first,  is  usually  applied  to  a  warrior,  one  who 
would  be  first  in  battle  :  Sdyana  would  explain  it  here  intelligent, 
manaswin ;  or  very  generous,  atyuddrah.

Iheha  Jdtd,  literally,  bom  here  and  here,  iha  and  iha :  the 
Scholiast  supplies  the  amplification,  identifying  the  Aswins  with 
the  Sun  and  Moon.

"  Arepasd  tanwd  ndmabhih  swaih ;  or  arepasd  may  mean,  free 
from  sin,  according  to  the  commentator,  apdpau,  alluding  to  the"  Arepasd  tanwd  ndmabhih  swaih ;  or  arepasd  may  mean,  free 
from  sin,  according  to  the  commentator,  apdpau,  alluding  to  the

free 
from  sin,  according  to  the  commentator,  apdpau,  alluding  to  the 
legend  of  the  decapitation  oi  Dadhyanck,  vol.  i.,  p.  216,  by  wImcIi 
act,  with  reference  to  its  result,  no  sin  was  incurred.

*  As  the  same  with  the  moon  and  sun,  one  Asw'm  may  be 
termed  the  son  of  the  middle  region  or  firmament ;  the  other,  the 
son  of  the  upper  region,  heaven  or  sty,

*  Nicheruh  kakuho  vasdm  anu :  kakuha  may  be  an  epithet  of 
ratha,  signifying  best,  Sresht'ha ;  but  it  seems  unnecessary  to  depart 
from  its  more  usual  meaning  of  points  of  the  horizon.

N   2

180  RIG-VEDA    SaNHITA.

Varga  XXVI.  6.  (One  of  joii),  the  disperser  (of  the  clouds),"

ITA.

Varga  XXVI.  6.  (One  of  joii),  the  disperser  (of  the  clouds)," 
like  Indba,  tbe  annibilator  (of  his  foes),  desirous  of 
the  oblation,  proceeds,  (bestowing)  abundant  food. 
(Devout  worshippers)  cherish  with  (sacrificial) 
viands,  (the  faculties)  of  the  other,  for  the  sake  of 
favours,  which  flow  upon  us  like  swelling  rivers?

7.  AswiNS,  creators,  the  perpetual  threefold  hymn, 
addressed  to  you,  has  been  uttered,  (to  secure)  your 
steady  (favour)  :  thus  glorified,  protect  him  who 
solicits  (your  bounty),  and,  whether  moving  or 
resting,  hear  his  invocation.

8.  May  the  praise  of  your  resplendent  forms, 
(uttered)  in  the  liall  of  sacrifice,  thrice  strewn  with

ndent  forms, 
(uttered)  in  the  liall  of  sacrifice,  thrice  strewn  with 
sacred  grass,  bring  prosperity  to  the  conductors  (of 
the  sacrifice).  ShoM'erers  (of  benefits),  may  the 
raining  cloud,  proceeding  to  man,  nourish  him  like 
a  sprinkling  of  v/ater.9.  The  wise  offerer  of  oblations,  like  Pusban, 
praises  you,  Aswins,  as  (he  would  praise)  Agni  and 
UsHAS,*"  (at   the  season)   at  which    I    invoke  you,

Saradwdn,  which  is  variously  interpreted :  it  may  be  synony- 
mous with  saranavdn,  blighting,  withering  as  leaves;  or  many- 
yeared,  old,  eternal,  bahu-samvatsarah  ;  or  autumnal,  with  reference 
to  one  of  the  Aswins  as  the  moon,  iarat-kdla  vdn.

with  reference 
to  one  of  the  Aswins  as  the  moon,  iarat-kdla  vdn.

This  Jind  the  preceding  stanza  are  not  very  explicit  in  the 
comparison  which  is  intimated  between  the  functions  of  the  two 
Ahvins,  for  the  use  of  anyasya,  of  the  other,  in  the  second  half 
of  the  verse,  is  all  that  intimates  that  ekasya,  of  the  one,  is 
understood  in  the  first  half.

Alluding  to  the  time  at  which  it  is  especially  proper  to 
worship  the  Aiwins,  the  morning  sacrifice.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        181

praising  with  devotion,  that  we  may  thence  obtain 
food,  strength,  and  long  life,

StjKTA  III.  (CLXXXfl.)

The  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.

StjKTA  III.  (CLXXXfl.)

The  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  The  iiiforniatiou,  sage  (jtricsts),  hits  been  re-  Varga  xxvil. 
ceived  :  be  ready  with  your  praises,  for  the  (benefit-) 
showering  ear  (of  the  Aswins  has  arrived):  pro- 
pitiate (the  divinities),  for  they  shov/  favour  to  the 
doer  of  good  works  :  they  are  entitled  to  praise,  rich 
in  benevolence  to  mankind,*  the  grandsons  of  heaven, 
and  observers  of  holy  rites.

2-  Dasras,  in  trutli  most  imperial,''  adorable, 
Hwifter  than  the  winds,  and  eminent  in  good 
\yorks,  riders  in  a  car,  and  most  distinguished 
charioteers,  bring  hither  yomr  car,  full  heaped  up 
with  ambrosia,  and  with  it  come,  Aswins,  to  thecar,  full  heaped  up 
with  ambrosia,  and  with  it  come,  Aswins,  to  the 
donor  (of  the  offering).

3.  What  make  you  here,  Aswins;  why  do  you 
tarry,  (where)  any  man  who  makes  no  oblation 
is  respected  :  humble  him  ;  take  away  the  life  of 
the  niggard  ;  grant  light  to  the  pious  man  striving 
to  speak  your  praise.

4.  Annihilate,  Aswins,  the  dogs  who  bark  at  us :

Vispaldvasu,  having  wealth,  vasu,  which  is  cherishing  pala 
for  pdla  ;  mankind,  vis ;  or  the  compound  may  refer  to  the  legend 
of  the  iron  or  golden  leg  given  to  Vispald. — See  vol.  i.  p.  311.

Indratamd,  superlatively,  Indra :  so  presently,  Maruttamd, 
superlatively,  Maruts ;  the  latter  may  also  mean,  according  to

ruttamd, 
superlatively,  Maruts ;  the  latter  may  also  mean,  according  to 
Sdyana,  of  moderated  passions,  mild,  gentle,  tnitardginau ;  or  not 
noisv,  mitardviHau.

182  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

slay  them  warring  (against  us) :  you  know  their 
(means  of  harm) :  render  every  word  of  him  who 
praises  you  affluent  in  precious  (rewards) :  accept, 
Nasatyas,  both  of  you,  my  praise.

5.  You  constructed  a  pleasant,  substantial,  winged 
bark,^  borne  on  the  ocean  waters  for  the  son  of 
TuGRA,^  by  wliich,  w^th  mind  devoted  to  the  gods, 
you  bore  him  up,  and,  quickly  descending  (from  the 
sky),  you  made  a  path  for  him  across  the  great 
waters, 
xxvfii.  6.  Four  ships*'  launched  into  the  midst  of  the

at 
waters, 
xxvfii.  6.  Four  ships*'  launched  into  the  midst  of  the

Plttva,  a  raft,  a  float. 
''  See  vol.  i.  p.  306.at 
waters, 
xxvfii.  6.  Four  ships*'  launched  into  the  midst  of  the

Plttva,  a  raft,  a  float. 
''  See  vol.  i.  p.  306.

Chatasro  ndvah,  four  boats  or  ships :  in  this  and  all  the  other 
expressions  in  this  hymn,  referring  to  the  legend,  it  is  impossible 
to  dispute  the  applicability  of  the  text  to  the  story :  the  authen- 
ticity of  the  narrative,  depending  solely  upon  tradition,  may  be 
questionable  enough,  but  its  purport  is  fully  borne  out  by  the 
expressions  of  the  text,  in  this  and  half  a  dozen  other  places,  in 
which  the  incidents  are  alluded  to.  Professor  Roth  has  not 
merely  questioned  the  accuracy  of  the  translation,  but  has  con-

not 
merely  questioned  the  accuracy  of  the  translation,  but  has  con- 
fidently asserted  that  there  is  no  mention  of  the  '  sea '  in  the 
text ;  grounding  his  assertion,  apparently,  upon  '  samudra*  mean- 
ing the  antariksha,  or  mid-heaven,  as  well  as  the  ocean ;  how 
Bhujyu  should  have  fallen  into  jeopardy  in  the  sky,  how  he  should 
have  got  there  at  all,  might  have  induced  a  cautious  critic  to 
hesitate  before  he  would  restrict  the  meaning  of  samudra  to 
antariksha;  but  in  this  place,  and  in  several  others,  there  is  no 
room  for  an  equivocal  meaning  :  sindhu,  kshodas,  arnas,  are  none 
of  them  included  amongst  the  synonymes  of  antariksha :  in  one

e  none 
of  them  included  amongst  the  synonymes  of  antariksha :  in  one 
place,  indeed,  the  text  seems  to  have  made  a  provision  against  a 
misapprehension,  by  placing  the  scene  of  the  adventure,  arnasi

SECOND   ASHTAKA — FOURTH   ADHYAYA.        183

receptacle  (of  the  waters),  sent  by  the  As  wins, 
brought  safe  to  shore  the  son  of  Tugra,  who  had 
been  cast  headlong  into  the  waters  (by  his  foes), 
and  plunged  in  inextricable  darkness.7.  What  was  the  tree  that  was  stationed  in  the 
midst  of  the  ocean,  to  which  the  supplicating  son  of 
Tugra  clung :  as  leaves  (are  caught  hold  of)  for 
the  support  of  a  falling  animal  :*  you,  Aswins,  bore 
him  up  to  safety,  to  your  great  renown.

8.

al  :*  you,  Aswins,  bore 
him  up  to  safety,  to  your  great  renown.

8.  May  the  praise  which  your  devout  adorers 
have  uttered  be  acceptable  to  you,  NAsatyas  ; 
leaders  (in  pious  rites) :  be  propitiated  to-day  by 
the  libations  of  our  assembly,  that  we  may  obtain 
food,  strength,  and  long  life.

SiJkta  IV.  (CLXXXIII.)

The  deities,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  Showerers  of  benefits,  harness  the  car  which    Varga  xxix. 
has  three  benches,  three  wheels,^  and  is  as  quick

samudre,  in  the  water — samudra;  however,  if  any  further  proof 
were  necessary,  the  specification  of  ndvah,  in  this  verse,  is  decisive 
of  the  sense  in  which  the  whole  is  to  be  understood.

is  decisive 
of  the  sense  in  which  the  whole  is  to  be  understood.

Partid  mrigasya  pataror-ivdrahhe :  the  passage  is  not  very 
clear,  and  Sdj/ana's  explanation  does  not  remove  the  difficulty ; 
he  explains  mriga  by  mdrjayitri  sodhayitri,  a  sweeper,  a  cleaner ; 
and  renders  the  whole,  like  leaves  for  the  support  or  prop  in  the 
occurrence  of  injury,  and  the  like,  of  a  sweeper  when  falling, 
patanasUasya  mdrjayituh  sodhayitur-Jdnsdder-drabJie  dlambandya 
pamdmva,  as  they  are  sufficient  for  support,  tdni  yaihdlamhannya 
prabhavanti-tad-vat .

See  vol.  i.  p.  94.

184  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

as  thonglit ;  with  which,  embeilisbed  with  three 
metals,*  you  come  to  the  dwelling  of  the  pious

mbeilisbed  with  three 
metals,*  you  come  to  the  dwelling  of  the  pious 
(worshipper),  and  in  which  yon  travel  like  a  bird 
with  Mnng^?.mbeilisbed  with  three 
metals,*  you  come  to  the  dwelling  of  the  pious 
(worshipper),  and  in  which  yon  travel  like  a  bird 
with  Mnng^?.

2.  Yonr  easy-rolling  car  alights  upon  the  earth, 
where,  favourable  to  the  sacred  rite,  you  stop  for 
the  sake  of  the  (sacrificial)  food  :  may  this  bynm, 
promotive  of  your  personal  (welfare),  be  associated 
with  your  forms,  and  do  you  unite  with  the  dawn, 
the  daughter  of  heaven.

3.  Ascend  your  rolling  car,  which  approaches 
the  sacred  rite  of  the  offerer  of  the  oblation  ;  the 
ear  in  which,  Nasatyas,  leaders,  you  purpose  to 
come  to  the  sacrifice,  and  to  proceed  to  the  dwelling 
(of  the  worshipper),  for  (bestowing  upon  him)  off-

to  the  dwelling 
(of  the  worshipper),  for  (bestowing  upon  him)  off- 
spring, and  for  his  own  (good),

4.  Let  not  the  wolf,  let  not  the  she-wolf,  harm 
me,  safe  (in  your  protection) ;  abandon  me  not,  nor 
deliver  me  (to  another).  This  your  share  (of  the 
offering)  is  prepared  ;  this  prayer,  Dasras,  (is  ad- 
dressed) to  you  ;  these  treasures  of  Sojna  juice  are 
for  vou.

5.  GoTAMA,  PuRUMiLHA,  Atri,**  (each),  offering 
oblations,  invokes  you  for  his  protection :  like  unto 
a  wayfarer,  who  (makes  for  his  intended  direction) 
by  a  straight  (path),  do  yon,  Dasras,  come  (direct) 
to  my  invocation.'^

Gold,  silver,  and  copper,  according  to  SdyaAa. 
**  See  vol.  i.  pp.  308,  314.

ilver,  and  copper,  according  to  SdyaAa. 
**  See  vol.  i.  pp.  308,  314. 
Sdyuna  rather  considers  the  simile  as  applicable  to  the  person

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  186ilver,  and  copper,  according  to  SdyaAa. 
**  See  vol.  i.  pp.  308,  314. 
Sdyuna  rather  considers  the  simile  as  applicable  to  the  person

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  186

6.  (Through  your  aid),  Aswtns,  we  cross  over 
this  (limit  of)  darkness:  to  you  this  (our)  hymn 
has  been  addressed :  come  hither  by  the  patha 
traversed  by  the  gods,  that  we  may  obtain  food, 
and  strength,  and  long  life.

FIFTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  XXIV.  (confinued.)

SiiKTA  V.  (CLXXXIV.)

The  deities,  ftkhi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  We  invoke  you  two,  (Aswins),  to-day ;  the  same      Varga  i. 
two  on  any  other  day :  when  the  morning  dawns. 
Nasatyas,  grandsons  of  heaven,  wherever  you  may

the  morning  dawns. 
Nasatyas,  grandsons  of  heaven,  wherever  you  may

be,  the  pious  reciter  (of  the  hymn)  invokes  you  with 
praises  on  behalf  of  the  liberal  donor  (of  the 
ofi'ering).

2.  Showerers  (of  benefits),  rejoicing  in  (our) 
libations,  make  us  happy,  and  destroy  the  niggard 
(withholder)  of  offerings :  hear,  leaders,  with  your 
CRTS,  my  praises  addressed  to  you  with  pure  words, 
for  you  are  seekers  (after  praise),  you  are  retentive 
(of  laudation).

3.  Divine    Aswins,"*   in    whom    is    no    untruth,

invoking  the  Akvins,  as  the  directest  path  to  the  realization  of  his 
wishes.

The  text  has  simply  Pu.ihan,  'which  is,  properly,  an  appella-

wishes.

The  text  has  simply  Pu.ihan,  'which  is,  properly,  an  appella- 
tion of  a  form  of  the  sun :  it  is  here  said,  by  the  Scholiast,  to

186  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(darting)  like  arrows  to  acquire  glory,  and  to  carry 
off  SuRYA,*  to  you  are  addressed  the  prayers  that 
are  recited  at  holy  rites,  for  (the  completion  of) 
the  uninterrupted,  sin  -  removing  (sacrifice),^  as 
ancient  ages  (offered  them).4.  Receivers  of  the  oblation,  may  your  liberality 
be  displayed  towards  us :  be  pleased  with  the  hymn 
of  the  venerable  author,  so  that  men  may  honour 
the  institutor  of  the  ceremony,  as  (they  honour) 
you,  liberal  donors,  for  the  sake  of  renown.

5.

y,  as  (they  honour) 
you,  liberal  donors,  for  the  sake  of  renown.

5.  AswiNS,  possessors  of  wealth,  this  sin-re- 
moving hymn  has  been  addressed  to  you,  together 
with  respectful  (oblations) :  Nasatyas,  be  favour- 
able to  Agastya  ;  come  to  his  dwelling  for  (confer- 
ring on  him)  progeny,  and  for  his  own  (good).

6.  (Through  your  aid),  Aswins,  we  cross  over  the 
limit  of  darkness :  to  you  this  (our  hymn)  has  been 
addressed :  come  hither  by  the  path  traversed  by 
the  gods,  that  we  may  obtain  food,  strength,  and 
long  life.

indicate  both  the  Aswins,  the  one  as  the  sun  and  the  other,  under- 
stood, as  the  moon.

See  vol.  i.  p.  311.  The  conamentator  adds  to  the  legend,

he  moon.

See  vol.  i.  p.  311.  The  conamentator  adds  to  the  legend, 
that,  besides  Siiryd,  a  prize  was  offered  of  a  hymn  of  a  thousand 
stanzas,  which  the  Aswins  also  won ;  but,  at  the  request  of  Agni 
and  other  competitors,  they  gave  up  to  them  portions  of  the 
hymn.

Varunasya  hhureh  is  interpreted  by  the  Scholiast,  avichchhin- 
nasya  varunastja-phalapratibandhaka  pdpanivdrakasya  ydgasya,  of 
the  uninterrupted  sacrifice  which  is  obstructive  of  the  sin  that 
intercepts  the  reward  :  the  expression  is  unusual.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  187

Si5kta  VI.  (CLXXXV.)

The  deities  are  Heaven  and  Earth ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  in

the  last.

1.

ies  are  Heaven  and  Earth ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  in

the  last.Si5kta  VI.  (CLXXXV.)

The  deities  are  Heaven  and  Earth ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  in

the  last.

1.

ies  are  Heaven  and  Earth ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  in

the  last.

1.  Whicli  of  these  two,  (Heaven  and  Earth),  is-     ^"""S"  "' 
prior,  which  posterior ;  how  were  they  engendered  ; 
(declare),  sages,  Avho  knows  this  ?  verily,  you  uphold

the  universe  of  itself,  and  the  days  (and  nights)* 
revolve  as  if  they  had  wheels.

2.  Footless  and  motionless,  they  sustain  numerous 
moving  and  footed  races,  as  a  son  is  even  (nursed) 
on  the  lap  of  his  parents :  defend  us,  Heaven  and 
Earth,  from  great  (danger).^

3.  I  solicit  of  Aditi*^  wealth,  without  pain  or 
decay,  like  heaven  (in  its  fullness  of  enjoyment), 
exempt  from  injury,  and  abounding  in  food :  grant,

ss  of  enjoyment), 
exempt  from  injury,  and  abounding  in  food :  grant, 
Heaven  and  Earth,  such  wealth  to  him  who  praises 
you:  defend  us,  Heaven  and  Earth,  from  great 
(danger).

4.  May  we  ever  be  (devoted  to)  that  Heaven  and 
Earth,  who  are  not  subject  to  annoyance,  who  satisfy 
(all  beings)  with  food,  who  have  the  gods  (and  men)

Ahani  chakriyeva,  two  days  as  if  wheeled;  that  is,  the 
succession  of  day  and  night,  each  of  which  may  be  considered  in 
turn  as  preceding  or  following  the  other,  like  the  rotations  of  a 
■wheel.     See  also  Ydska,  iii.  22.

Rakshatam  no  abhwdt :  abhwa  means  merely  great — the  subf 
stantive  has  to  be  supplied :  according  to  Sdt/atia,  it  is,  from  sin

tantive  has  to  be  supplied :  according  to  Sdt/atia,  it  is,  from  sin 
as  the  cause  of  great  danger, — mahaio  hJiayaheloh  pdpdt.

C  •        •  •

Adtti  IS  here  said  to  mean  the  firmament.

188  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA.C  •        •  •

Adtti  IS  here  said  to  mean  the  firmament.

188  RIG- VEDA    SANHITA.

for  song,  and  who  are  both  endowed  witli  the  double 
(condition)  of  the  divine  days  (and  nights)  :*  defend 
us,  Heaven  and  Earth,  from  great  (danger).

5.  Going  always  together,  equally  young,  and  of 
the  like  termination,  sisters,  and  kindred,  and 
scenting  the  navel  of  the  world,  placed  on  their 
lap  as  its  parents:''  defend  us.  Heaven  and  Earth, 
from  great  danger. 
Varga  III.  Q.  I  invoke  to  the  sacrifice,  for  the  preservation

nger. 
Varga  III.  Q.  I  invoke  to  the  sacrifice,  for  the  preservation 
of  gods  (and  men),  the  two  vast,  all-supporting,  and 
mighty  parents  (of  the  rain  and  corn) ;  who,  beauti- 
ful in  form,  sustain  ambrosial  (showers) ;  defend  us. 
Heaven  and  Earth,  from  great  danger.

7.  I  glorify  with  reverence,  at  this  sacrifice,  (the 
two),  who  are  vast,  expansive,  multiform,  infinite, 
auspicious ;  who  support  (all  beings)  by  their 
bounty:  defend  us,  Heaven  and  Earth,  from  great 
danger.

8.  May  this  sacrifice  be  the  means  of  expiating 
those  offences  which  w^e  may  have  committed 
against  the  gods,  against   a   friend    at   any   time.

Ubfie  devdndm  ubhayebhir-ahndm:  ahan,  according  to  the

any   time.

Ubfie  devdndm  ubhayebhir-ahndm:  ahan,  according  to  the 
Scholiast,  implies  night  as  well  as  day.

AbhijighranH  bhuvanasya  ndbhim  pitror-upasthe :  the  meaning 
is  not  very  obvious ;  ndbhi,  according  to  Sdyana,  "here  means 
water,'  udakam,  as  the  binding  of  all  beings, — bhutajdtasya 
bandhakam ;  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  child  of  heaven 
and  earth,  as  they  both  contribute  to  its  production. — 'vbhayor 
udakapradaiitvam  prasiddham :  or  the  two  here  mentioned  may 
imply  water  and  the  oblation,  which  are  also  connected.SECOND    ASFlfAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  189

against    a    son-in-law  :*   defend    us,    Heaven    and 
Earth,  from  great  danger.

9.

son-in-law  :*   defend    us,    Heaven    and 
Earth,  from  great  danger.

9.  May  both  these,  accepting  praise,  and  friendly 
to  raan,  be  favourable  to  me :  may  they  both  be 
associated  as  guardians  for  my  protection:  deities, 
we  your  adorers,  propitiating  you  with  (sacrificial) 
food,  desire  ample  (wealth),  for  the  sake  of  making 
liberal  donations.

10.  Endowed  with  understanding,  I  repeat  to 
Heaven  and  Earth  this  initial  praise,  to  be  heard 
around :  may  paternal  (heaven)  and  maternal  (earth) 
preserve  us  from  reprehensible  iniquitj;  and  ever 
nigh  defend  us  with  their  protection.

11.  May  this  (hymn).  Heaven  and  Earth,  be 
successful ;  (the  hymn)  which,  Father  and  Mother,  I

en  and  Earth,  be 
successful ;  (the  hymn)  which,  Father  and  Mother,  I 
repeat  to  you  both  on  this  occasion  ;  be  ever  with 
your  protection  in  the  proximity  of  those  who  praise 
you ;''  that  we  may  obtain  food,  strength,  and  long 
life,

SdKTA  VII.  (CLXXXVI.)

The  deities  are  the  Vi^wapevas  ;  the   Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the

metre,  TrisMubh.

1.  May  the  divine  Savitri,  the  benefactor  of  all     Varga  iv. 
men,  come  benignantly  to  our  solemnity,  together 
with  the  divinities  of  earth,  and  do  you,  who  are

Jdspatim  vd:  J  ah,  it  is  said,  means  '  daughters ;'  patim  is,  as 
usual,  lord  or  husband.

Devdndm  avame :  the  first  is  interpreted  stotrindm,  *of 
praisers.'

190  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

st  is  interpreted  stotrindm,  *of 
praisers.'

190  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(always)  young,  Avillingly  present  at  our  sacrifice, 
exhilarate  us,  as  (you  exhilarate)  the  whole  world.''st  is  interpreted  stotrindm,  *of 
praisers.'

190  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(always)  young,  Avillingly  present  at  our  sacrifice, 
exhilarate  us,  as  (you  exhilarate)  the  whole  world.''

2.  May  all  the  triumphant  gods,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Varuna,  equally  well  pleased,  come  (to  our  rite) : 
may  they  all  be  propitious  to  us :  may  they  not 
leave  us  in  want  of  food,  after  overcoming  (our 
foes).

3.  I  praise  with  hymns,  (0  gods),  your  best 
beloved  guest,  Agni,  who  is  prompt  (to  partake  of 
the  oblation),  and  who  is  well  pleased  along  (with 
you) ;  so  that  (thereby)  Varuna,  the  possessor  of 
renown,  the  subduer  of  foes,  the  animator  (of  men), 
may  fill  us  with  food.

4.

subduer  of  foes,  the  animator  (of  men), 
may  fill  us  with  food.

4.  I  approach  you,  (deities),  vnth.  reverence,  night 
and  day,  in  the  hope  of  overcoming  (sin),  as  (will- 
ingly) as  a  gentle  cow  (comes  to  be  milked),  mixing 
(for  you)  on  the  appropriate  day  the  (sacrificial) 
food,  (consisting)  of  multiform  (preparations)  of 
milk  (generated)  from  the  same  udder.*"

This  verse  occurs  in  the  icj isk,  33,  34.  Mahidhara  rather 
differs  from  Sdyana  in  his  explan  .tion,  Viswdnara  he  considers 
an  epithet  of  Savitri, — viswa  nara  hitakdn,  the  doer  of  good  to  all 
men  illd  he  renders  by  food, — yathd  sarve  irdm  bhakshayanti  tathd

all 
men  illd  he  renders  by  food, — yathd  sarve  irdm  bhakshayanti  tathd 
etu  ;  whilst  Sdyana  has  for  ildbhih  saha,  bhumisthdndbhih-devatdbhih, 
with  the  divinities,  whose  place  is  earth ;  in  the  second  part  of 
the  verse,  he  explains Ja^ac?  hy  jangama,  moveable;  that  is,  cattle 
and  offspring.Vishurdpe  payasi  sasminn-udhan,  '  in  multiform  milk  in  a 
common  udder ;'  or  it  may  be  explained,  the  manifold  water  or 
solution  of  the  Soma  juice  prepared  for  the  sacrifice  ;  which  may 
be  compared,  on  account  of  its  yielding  rewards,  to  an  udder 
yielding  milk,  whence  butter  and  the  like.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  191

5.  May  Ahirbudhnya^  grant  us  happiness  :  may

A FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  191

5.  May  Ahirbudhnya^  grant  us  happiness  :  may 
SiNDHU^  come,  nourishing  us  as  a  (cow  her)  calf, 
whereby  we  may  propitiate  the  grandson  of  the 
waters,  (Agni),  whom  the  clouds,  swift  as  thought, 
convey.

6.  Or  may   Twashtri    come    to    this  sacrifice,      Varga  v. 
equally  well  pleased  with  those  who  praise  (him)  at

the  excellent  (rite)  at  which  he  is  present :  may  the 
most  potent  Indra,  the  protector  of  man,  the  de- 
stroyer of  Vritra,  come  to  tlie  (solemnity)  of  our 
leaders.

7.  For  our  minds,  yoked  together  like  horses, 
tend  to  the  ever  youthful  Indra,  as  cows  to  their 
calves :  and  the  praises  of  men,  (addressed)  to  him,

cows  to  their 
calves :  and  the  praises  of  men,  (addressed)  to  him, 
are  generating  most  fragrant  (fruit),"  as  wives  bear 
(children  to  their  husbands).

8.  Or  may  the  Maruts,  being  of  one  mind,  come 
from  heaven  and  earth  (to  the  sacrifice) ;  they  who 
are  a  mighty  host,  who  have  parti-coloured  steeds, 
who   are   like   protecting   chariots,^  and   who   are

Or  Ahir,  who  is  also  Budhnya:  Ahi  and  Budhna  are  both 
said  to  be  synonytnes  of  antariksha,  and  the  compound  implies  a 
divinity  presiding  over  the  firmament :  they  occur  as  one  name  in 
the  Nirukta,  v.  4 ;  it  is  no  doubt  the  same  with  the  Ahirvradhna 
of  the  PurdAas,  who  is  by  them  enumerated  as  one  of  the  Rudras.na 
of  the  PurdAas,  who  is  by  them  enumerated  as  one  of  the  Rudras. 
— Vishnu  P.  121.  In  the  Kosha  of  Hemachandra,  Ahirbradhna  is 
a  name  of  Siva.

According  to  the  Scholit»t,  the  name  of  a  river.

Surabhishtamdm,  explained  by  the  commentary,  atisayena 
surabhim,  exceedingly  fragrant ;  a  rather  singular  epithet.

Avanayo  na  rathdh-rakshakdh-rathuh ;  or  avanaya  may  mean, 
bending,  or  inclining  downwards.

192  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

devourers  of  foes:   may  they  come    like    friendly 
deities.

9.  For,! verily,  their  greatness  is  well  known,  (as) 
tbey  diligently  discharge  their  functions  ;  by  which 
their  sport  pours  rain  upon  every  arid  soil,  as  light 
spreads  (universally)  on  a  fine  day.

10.

every  arid  soil,  as  light 
spreads  (universally)  on  a  fine  day.

10.  Propitiate  the  Aswins  and  Pushan,  for  my 
protection  ;  (propitiate)  those  (deities),  who  are  of 
independent  powers,*  as  Vishnu,  devoid  of  hatred, 
Vayu,  and  Ribhukshin,^  and  may  I  influence  the 
gods  to  be  present  for  my  felicity.

11.  Objects  of  admiration,  may  that  wealth- 
abounding  effulgence  which  manifests  itself  amongst 
the  gods,  give  animation  to  our  existence,  and  (per- 
manence to)  our  dwellings ;  that  we  may  (thence) 
obtain  food,  strength,  and  long  life,

SiJkta  VIIL  (CLXXXVII.)

The  deity  is  termed  Pitu,  the  divinity  presiding  over  food ;  the 
Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the  metre  of  the  second,  fourth,  eighth,

od ;  the 
Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the  metre  of  the  second,  fourth,  eighth, 
ninth,  and  tenth  verses,  is  Gdyatri;  of  the  other  six,  UsMlh.

Varga  VI.         1.  I  glorify  PiTU,   the  great,  the  upholder,  the

Swatavaso  hi  santi  is  explained,  ye  swuyatia  baldh  santi,  those 
who  are  self- dependant,  pow^erful.

A  name  of  Indra,Swatavaso  hi  santi  is  explained,  ye  swuyatia  baldh  santi,  those 
who  are  self- dependant,  pow^erful.

A  name  of  Indra,

Anna  devatd,  or  simply  anna,  the  divinity  presiding  over  food, 
or  merely  food ;  pitu  implying  pdiakam,  that  which  nourishes : 
according  to  Saunaka,  the  hymn  should  be  recited  by  a  person 
about  to  eat,  when  his  food  will  never  disagree  with  him ;  its 
repetition   also,   accompanied   with  oblations  and  worship,  will

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  198

oblations  and  worship,  will

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  198

strong,  by  whose  invigorating  power  Trita*  slew  the 
mutilated  Vritra.

2.  Savoury  Pitu  ;  sweet  Pitu  ;  we  worship  thee : 
become  our  protector.

3.  Come  to  us,  Pitu,  auspicious  with  auspicious 
aids ;  a  source  of  deh'ght ;  not  unpalatable  ;  a  friend 
well  respected,  and  having  none  (but  agreeable  pro- 
perties).''

4.  Thy  flavours,  Pitu,  are  diffused  through  the 
regions,  as  the  winds  are  spread  through  the  sky.

5.  Those  (men),  Pitu,  (are  the  enjoyei-s  of  thy 
bounty),  who  are  thy  distributors,  most  sweet  Pitu, 
(to  others) :  they  who  are  the  relishers  of  thy 
flavours,  are  as  if  they  had  stiff"  necks.*"

6.

the  relishers  of  thy 
flavours,  are  as  if  they  had  stiff"  necks.*"

6.  Tlie  thoughts  of  the  mighty  gods  are  fixed,     varga  vii.

secure  liina  against  want  of  food,   and  if  he  should  have  taken 
poison,  its  silent  repetition  will  act  as  an  antidote.

Trita  is  here  evidently  a  name  of  Indra;  the  Scholiast 
explains  it,  he  whose  fame  is  spread  through  the  three  worlds ; 
or,  as  Mahidhara  interprets  it,  Tristhana-Indrah,  the  three- 
stationed  Indra. — Yajur-Veda,  xxxiv.  7.The  text  has  advmydh,  not  being  twofold  ;  that  is,  according 
to  the  commentator,  being  of  the  property  described  alone ;  not 
comprising  any  incompatible  property;  or  it  may  be  an  epithet  of

ot 
comprising  any  incompatible  property;  or  it  may  be  an  epithet  of 
sdkhd,  a  friend,  one  who  does  not  differ  in  mind  or  act.

Ttwigrwdh  iva  irate ;  tuvi  is,  ordinarily,  a  synonyme  of  bahu, 
much,  many ;  Sdyana  explains  it  by  pravriddha,  enlarged  ;  because, 
he  says,  when  people  eat,  they  are  dritlkdnga,  erect,  firm  ;  and 
when  they  are  without  food,  the  neck  is  bent,  or  bends  down ;  or 
it  may  mean,  that  they  are  great  eaters,  as  if  they  had  many 
throats.

VOL.  11.  O

194  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

PiTiT,   upon   thee :    by    thy   kind   and   intelligent

assistance,  (Indra)  slew  Ahi/

7.  When,  PiTU,  this  (product)  of  the  water- 
wealthy  clouds,  (the  rain),  arrives;  then  do  thou,

t)  of  the  water- 
wealthy  clouds,  (the  rain),  arrives;  then  do  thou, 
sweet  PiTU,  be  at  hand  with  sufficiency  for  our 
eating.

8.  And  since  we  enjoy  the  abundance  of  the 
waters  and  the  plants  ;  therefore,  Body,  do  thou 
grow  fat.^'

9.  And  since  we  enjoy.  Soma,''  thy  mixture  with 
boiled  milk  or  boiled  barley  f  therefore,  Body,  do 
thou  grow  fat.

10.  Vegetable  cake  of  fried  meal,*  do  thou  be 
substantial,  wholesome,  and  invigorating ;  and,  Body, 
do  thou  grow  fat.

11.  We  extract  from  thee,  PnxV  by  our  praises, 
(the  sacrificial  food),  as  cows  yield  butter  for  obla- 
tion; from  thee,  who  art  exhilarating  to  the  gods ; 
exhilarating  also  to  us.

thee,  who  art  exhilarating  to  the  gods ; 
exhilarating  also  to  us.

Indra  is  supplied  by  the  comment :  there  is  no  nominative  in 
the  text  to  aliim-avadhit.thee,  who  art  exhilarating  to  the  gods ; 
exhilarating  also  to  us.

Indra  is  supplied  by  the  comment :  there  is  no  nominative  in 
the  text  to  aliim-avadhit.

Vdtdpe  piva  id  bhavd;  vdtdpi  is  explained  sarira,  that  which 
is  sustained  by  vital  air, — vdta.

The  object  addressed  is  now  not  food  in  general,  but  a 
modified  form  of  the  Soma  juice.

Gavdsiro-yavdsirah  are  said  to  mean  preparations  of  milk  and 
barley,  boiled :  go-vikdraksMrddydirapariadravyam  and  yavavi- 
kdrdhapana  dravyam.

Karamhha  oshadhe :  the  first  is  explained,  a  lump  or  cake  of 
parched  meal,  Saktu  pinda,  identified  with  an  herb  or  vegetable, —

taddtmaka  oskadhih.

f 
Pitu  is  here  again  identified  with  Soma.

, —

taddtmaka  oskadhih.

f 
Pitu  is  here  again  identified  with  Soma.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  195

SuKTA  IX.  (CLXXXVIII.)

This  hymn  is  addressed  to  the  various  forms  of  Agni,  which  have 
already   occurred   more  than   once   as   AfHs;     the  Rishi  is    ' 
Agastya  ;  the  metre,  Gdyatri.

1.  Thou    sbinest    to-day,    divine    conqueror    of   Varga  viii. 
thousands,   kindled^  by   the  priests  :  do  thou,  who

art  the  sapient  messenger  (of  the  gods),  convey  (to 
them)  our  oblation.

2.  Tiie  adorable  l^amcnapdt  proceeds  to  the  rite, 
and  combines  with  the  oblation,  bearing  (for  the 
sacrificer)  infinite  ("abundance  of)  food.

3.  Agni,  who  art  to  be  glorified,"  bring  hither,

Vol.  i.

f)  food.

3.  Agni,  who  art  to  be  glorified,"  bring  hither,3.  Agni,  who  art  to  be  glorified,"  bring  hither,

Vol.  i.

f)  food.

3.  Agni,  who  art  to  be  glorified,"  bring  hither,

Vol.  i.  p.  31;  and  this  vol.  p.  71  :  as  before  noticed,  i. 
p.  122',  note,  the  A'pris  are  also  termed  Praydjas :  Sdyana  also 
quotes  Ydska  for  the  synonyme  Kim-devatd,  a  term  of  disparage- 
ment,  implying  their  insignificance,  as  much  as  to  say  contemp- 
tuously. What  sort  of  divinities  are  these  :  the  term  Praydja,  that 
which  is  an  especial  object  of  worship,  may  be  variously  applied, 
as  in  the  Brdhmanas,  to  divinities  presiding  over  the  seasons,  ovei- 
the  metres  of  the  Veda,  over  animals,  over  life,  over  the  spirit, 
which  are  forms  of  Agni, — Praydja  ritudevatdschliandodevatdk

e  spirit, 
which  are  forms  of  Agni, — Praydja  ritudevatdschliandodevatdk 
pdsudevatdk  prdmdevatd  dtmadevatd  ityddind  bahun  pakshdn 
upanyasya  brdhmandni  cha  pradarsya  dgneyd  eveti  siddhdntitam.

This  hymn  occasionally  differs  from  others  of  the  same  tenor 
In  employing  as  epithets  the  terms  they  use  as  denominatives ; 
thus,  here,  samiddha  is  a  participle,  an  epithet  of  deva:  in 
Hymn  xiii.,  Susamiddha,  which  means  well-kindled,  is  con- 
sidered to  be  a  name  of  Agni.

*^  Idya  is  here  used  in  place  of  I lita,  employed  elsewhere  as  a:i 
appellative :  Nardsansa,  who,  in  the  two  preceding  hymns,  pre- 
cedes Iliia,  is  here  omitted.

o  2

196  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA.

,  pre- 
cedes Iliia,  is  here  omitted.

o  2

196  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA.

being  invoked  by  us,  the  adorable  gods,  for  tliou 
art  the  donor  of  thousands.

4.  By  the  power  (of  their   prayers)    they    have 
•  strewn    the   sacred    grass,"    the   seat   of  numerous 
heroes,  pointing  to  the  east;  on    which,  A'dityas, 
you  are  manifest.6.  They  have  sprinkled  water  on  the  doors^  (of 
the  hall  of  sacrifice),  which  are  variously  and  per- 
fectly radiant,  manifold,  excellent,  many,  and  nume- 
rous.

varga  IX.         6.  Let  the  brilliant  and  beautiful  Day  and  Night, 
who  shine   with  surpassing  lustre,    sit   down   here 
.   (upon  the  sacred  grass).

7.  Let  these  two  chief,  well-spoken,  divine  sages,

e  sacred  grass).

7.  Let  these  two  chief,  well-spoken,  divine  sages, 
the  invokers  (of  the  gods),  perform  this  our  sacrifice.

8.  Bharati,  Ila,  Saraswati,'  1  invoke  you  all, 
that  you  may  direct  us  to  prosperity.

9.  TwASHTRi,  who  is  the  master  (in  fashioning)

See  note  on  Varga  v.  vol.  i.  p.  32.

The  epithets  here  given  to  the  doors  are  unusual, — virdt samrdi 
vibhwih  prahhwih  bahvis  cha  bhuyasis  cha  yah ;  they  are  explained 
by  the  commentator  as  in  the  text,  but  he  adds  that  the  two  last 
may  be  understood  as  epithets  of  number,  and  the  rest  as  names ; 
the  apartment  having  four  different  doors,  each  designated  by  its

; 
the  apartment  having  four  different  doors,  each  designated  by  its 
proper  appellation :  in  the  original,  the  two  first,  virdt,  samrdf, 
are  in  the  nom.  sing. ;  the  others,  more  correctly,  in  the  accus. 
plural.

"^  Sdyana  makes  BhdraK  the  goddess  presiding  over  the  heaven, 
lid  over  the  earth,  and  Sarasxvati  over  the  firmament ;  but  they 
are  all  three  considered  to  be  special  manifestations  of  the  majesty 
of  the  sun ;  Etas  tisra  Adityaprabhdvavisesharupd  itydhuh.

SECOND   ASHTAKA— PiFTH    ADHYAYA.  197

the  forms  (of  beings),''  has  made  all  animals  distinct : 
grant  us,  (Twashtri),  their  increase.

10.  Vanaspati,  deliver  of  thyself  the  victim  to

ri),  their  increase.the  forms  (of  beings),''  has  made  all  animals  distinct : 
grant  us,  (Twashtri),  their  increase.

10.  Vanaspati,  deliver  of  thyself  the  victim  to

ri),  their  increase.

10.  Vanaspati,  deliver  of  thyself  the  victim  to 
the  gods,  so  that  Agni  may  taste  the  oblation.

11.  Agni,  the  preceder  of  the  gods,  is  character- 
ized by  the  Gdyatri  measure :  he  blazes  when  the 
oblations  are  offered.

Si5kta  X.  (CLXXXIX.)

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  RisU,  Agastya  ;  the  metre,  Trishhbh.

1 .  Agni,  knowing  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  lead      Varga  x. 
us  by  good  ways  to  wealth :  remove  far  from  us  the

sin  that  would  force  us  astray,  that  we  may  oifer  to 
thee  most  ample  adoration.^

2.  Adorable  Agni,  convey  us  by  the  sacred  acts 
(of  worship),  beyond  all  evil  ways:  may  our  city  be 
spacious;  our  land  be  extensive;  be  the  bestower

:  may  our  city  be 
spacious;  our  land  be  extensive;  be  the  bestower 
of  happiness  upon  our  offspring,  upon  our  sons.

3.  Agni,  do  thou  remove  from  us  disease,  and

Twashfd  rupdni  hi  prahhuh ;  karttum,  to  make,  being  under- 
stood :  Ttvashfri  is  described  by  the  commentator  as  the  divinity 
presiding  over  the  implements  of  sacrifice,  but  the  office  is  also 
ascribed  to  him  of  fashioning'  beings  in  the  womb  as  soon  as 
begotten,  founded  upon  a  text  of  the  Veda,  cited  as,  retasah 
siktasya  Twashfd  rupdni  vikaroti;  or,  as  explained  by  the 
Scholiast,  yonau  srishtdni  rupdni  karttum  prahhuh.

This  verse  is  an  essential  one  in  the  formulae  accompanying

rahhuh.This  verse  is  an  essential  one  in  the  formulae  accompanying

rahhuh.

This  verse  is  an  essential  one  in  the  formulae  accompanying 
oblations  vdth  fire :  it  occurs  three  times  in  the  Yajush,  v.  36 ; 
VII.  43;  and  xl.  16;  the  explanation  of  Mahidhara  is  the  same 
as  that  of  Sdyana  in  the  two  first :  in  the  third  it  is  somewhat 
varied.

198  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

those  men  who,  unprotected  by  Agni,  are  adverse 
to  us ;  and,  adorable  divinity,  (visit)  the  earth,  with 
all  the  immortals,  for  our  welfare.

4.  Cherish  us,  Agni,  with  incessant  bounties  ; 
shine  always  in  thy  favourite  abode :  let  no  danger, 
youngest  (of  the  gods),  assail  thy  worshipper  to- 
day; nor,  mighty  one,  let  it  assail  him  at  any  other 
season.

5.

to- 
day; nor,  mighty  one,  let  it  assail  him  at  any  other 
season.

5.  Abandon  us  not,  Agni,  to  a  wicked,  voracious, 
malevolent  foe ;  (abandon  us)  not  to  one  who  has 
fangs,  and  who  bites;*  nor  to  one  without  teeth;* 
nor  to  the  mahgnant;**  nor  give  us  up,  powerful 
Agni,  to  disgrace.

Varga  XI.  6.  Agni,  bom  for  sacrifice,  (a  man)  praising  thee,

who  art  excellent,  for  (the  sake  of  cherishing)  his 
body,  becomes  such  as  thou  art ;  exempts  himself 
from  all  who  are  inclined  to  harm  or  revile  him ; 
for  thou,  Agni,  art  the  especial  adversary  of  those 
who  do  wrong.

7.  Adorable  Agni,  thou  art  sagacious,  and  in  a 
short  time  discriminatest  between  both  those  men

sagacious,  and  in  a 
short  time  discriminatest  between  both  those  men 
(who  do  and  do  not  worship  thee) :  approach  the 
worshipper  at  the  proper  time,  and  be  compliant 
(with  his  wishes) ;  like  an  institutor  of  the  rite,  (who 
is  directed)  by  the  desires  (of  the  priests).

8.  We  address  our  pious  prayers  to  thee,  x\gni.8.  We  address  our  pious  prayers  to  thee,  x\gni.

Snakes  and  venomous  reptiles.

And    who,    therefore,    does    mischief   with    other    natural 
wsapons,  as  horns  and  claws.

^ishafe,  to  one  who  injures ;  as,  thieves  and  Rakshasas.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  199

the  son  of  prayer,  the  subduer  of  foes ;  may  we 
procure,  by  these  sacred  supplications,  infinite 
wealth,  that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength,

lications,  infinite 
wealth,  that  we  may  thence  obtain  food,  strength, 
and  long  life.

Si5kta  XL  (CXC.)

The  deity  is  BniHAsrATi ;     the  Rishi  Agasvta  ;   the  raetre,

Trisht'ubh.

1.  (Priests),  augment  by   your  hymns    B^ihas-    Varga  xii. 
PATi,  who  deserts  not  (his  worshipper) ;  the  showerer

(of  benefits),  the  pleasant-tongued,  the  adorable ;  of 
whom  resplendent,  gods  and  men,  (the  ministers)  of 
the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice,  emulous  in  sacred 
songs,  proclaim  (the  praise).

2.  The  hymns  of  the  (rainy)  season''  are  addressed 
to  him,  who  is  verily  the  creator  (of  the  rain),  and 
has  granted  it  (to  iho  pr.iyors)  of  the  devout;  for 
that  BRiHAsrATi  is  the  manifester  (of  all),  the

of  the  devout;  for 
that  BRiHAsrATi  is  the  manifester  (of  all),  the 
expansive  wind  that  (dispensing)  blessings  has  been 
produced  for  (the  diffusion  of)  water.

3.  He  is  ready''  (to  accept)  the  offered  praise,  the 
presentation  of  the  homage,  the  hymn,  as  the  sun 
(is  ready  to  put  forth)  his  rays  :  by  the  acts  of  him 
whom  the  Rakshasas  (oppose  not),  the  daily  (re-

Brihaspati  is  here  defined  as  mantrasya  pdlauitdram,  the 
protector  or  cherisher  of  the  prayer.

J^itwiyd  is  explained  varsharttusambundhinyo  vdchah,  prayers 
connected  with  the  season  of  the  rain.J^itwiyd  is  explained  varsharttusambundhinyo  vdchah,  prayers 
connected  with  the  season  of  the  rain.

Or  the  pronoun  may  apply  to  the  Yajamdna,  who  exerts 
himself  to  offer  the  praise,  the  oblation,  &c.

Yajamdna,  who  exerts 
himself  to  offer  the  praise,  the  oblation,  &c.

200  RiG-VEDA    SANillTA.

volving  sun)  exists,  and  he  is  strong  as  a  fearful 
beast  of  prey.

4.  The  glory  of  this  Brihaspati  spreads  through 
heaven  and  earth  like  the  sun :  receiving  worship, 
and  givhig  intelligence,  he  bestows  (the  rewards  of 
sacrifice) ;  like  the  weapons  of  the  hunters,*  so  these 
(weapons)  of  Brihaspati  fall  daily  u})on  the  workers 
of  guile.

5.  Divine  Brihaspati,  thou  dost  not  bestow 
desired  (wealth)  upon  those  stupid  (men),  who, 
sinful  and  mean,  subsist,  considering  thee,  who  art 
auspicious,  as  an  old  ox  :^'  but  thou  favourest  him 
who  offers  (thee)  libations.*

Varga  xiil.  6.

but  thou  favourest  him 
who  offers  (thee)  libations.*

Varga  xiil.  6.  Be  a  (pleasant)  v/ay  to  him  who  goes  well  and 
makes  good  offerings,  like  the  affectionate  friend  of 
(a  ruler  who)  restrains  the  bad ;  and  may  those 
sinless  men  who  instruct  us,  although  yet  enveloped 
(by  ignorance),  stand  extricated  from  their  covering.*

^  Mrigdndm  na  hetayah  is  explained  by  the  commentary, 
hanttim  anvishyatdm  dyudhdniva,  like  the  weapons  of  those  seek- 
ing to  kill.

Twd  usrikam  manyamdndh :  usriyd  is  explained,  a  cow  giving 
little  milk ;  or  an  old  one,  Jirnam  anaSwdham  vd.

^  Chayase  it  piydrum,  thoa  goest  to  bestow  favour  on  him  who

m  vd.

^  Chayase  it  piydrum,  thoa  goest  to  bestow  favour  on  him  who 
sacnfices  with  the  Soma  juice  ;  but,  according  to  the  Nmikta,  the 
words  may  have  a  different  sense,  implying,  thou  destroy  est  the 
malevolent. — iv.  25.Ahhi  ye  chakshate  noh,  those  who  speak  to  us  :  the  commen- 
tator says,  who,  bodhayanti,  waken  or  instruct  us ;  but  it  is  not 
clear  how  those  who  are  apwrita,  ajndnendvrita,  enveloped  by 
ignorance,  should  be  competent  to  teach  :  another  explanation  is.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.         201

7.  To  whom  praises  (necessarily)  proceed,  as  men 
(assemble  round  a  master) ;  as  rivers,  rolling  between 
their  banks,  flow  to  the  ocean :  that  wise  Brihas-

rolling  between 
their  banks,  flow  to  the  ocean :  that  wise  Brihas- 
PATI,  greedy  (after  rain),  and  statioriciry  in  the 
midst,  contemplates  both**  (the  ferry  and  the  water).

8.  So,  Brihaspati,  the  mighty,  the  beneficent, 
the  powerful,  the  showerer  (of  benefits),  the  divine, 
has  been  glorified :  praised  by  us,  may  he  make  us 
possessed  of  progeny  and  cattle,  that  thence  we  may 
obtain  food,  strength,  and  long  life.

Sv5kta  XII.  (CXCI.)

The  divinities  are  considered  to  be  Water,  Grass,  and  the 
Sun;  the  Rishi  is  Agastya  ;  the  metre  of  the  10th,  11th, 
and  12th  verses,  is  Makdpanhti ;  of  the  13th,  Mahdhrihati;  of 
the  rest,  AnusMubk.

1.

s,  is  Makdpanhti ;  of  the  13th,  Mahdhrihati;  of 
the  rest,  AnusMubk.

1.  Some  creature  of  little  venom  ;  some  creature     VargaXiv.

let  those  vfho  revile  us,  and  are  heing  protected,  be  deprived  of 
that  protection.1.  Some  creature  of  little  venom  ;  some  creature     VargaXiv.

let  those  vfho  revile  us,  and  are  heing  protected,  be  deprived  of 
that  protection.

Ulhayam  chashfe  antar  Brihaspatistara  dpascha  gridhrah: 
the  pEissage  is  very  obscure :  gridhrah  is  explained,  vrishtim 
dkdnkshamdna,  desirous  of  rain ;  taras,  taraiiam  Jaldbhivriddhim, 
crossing,  or  a  ferry,  or  increase  of  water :  dpah  has  its  usual 
sense ;  uhhayam  antar  madhye  s'hitwd,  having  stood  in  the  middle ; 
but  it  is  not  said  of  what :  chashtc-pasyate,  he  sees ;  or  karoti,  he 
does:  idenrliying  Brihaspati  with  Indra,  ubhayam,  both,  may

aroti,  he 
does:  idenrliying  Brihaspati  with  Indra,  ubhayam,  both,  may 
denote  heaven  and  earth,  between  which,  in  the  Antariksha,  or 
firmament,  the  region  of  the  rain,  is  his  proper -station.

This  is  a  rather  singular  hymn :  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
it  is  a  mystical  antidote  against  poison,  ha^'ing  been  recited  by 
Agastya  under  an  apprehension  of  having  been  poisoned  :  so 
Saunaka  says;  Let  any  one  who  is  afflicted  by  poison  diligently

202  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

of  great  venom  ;  or  some  venomous  aquatic  re})tile  ;* 
creatures  of  two  kinds,^  both  destructive  (of  life),  or 
(poisonous)  unseen  creatures,*'  have  anointed*^  nie 
with  their  poison.

2.

isonous)  unseen  creatures,*'  have  anointed*^  nie 
with  their  poison.

2.  (The  antidote),  coming  (to  the  bitten  peraon), 
destroys  the  unseen  (venomous  creatures) ;  departing, 
(it  destroys  them) ;  deprived  (of  substance),"  it 
destroys  them  (by  its  odour) ;  being  ground,  it 
pulverises  them.

3.  (Blades  of)  sara  grass,  (of)  kusara,  (of)  darbha^ 
(of)  sairya,  (of)  munja,  (of)  virana/  all  (the  haunt)3.  (Blades  of)  sara  grass,  (of)  kusara,  (of)  darbha^ 
(of)  sairya,  (of)  munja,  (of)  virana/  all  (the  haunt)

repeat  the  hymn  Kankato  na,  when  it  will  have  uo  elTect  upon 
him,  though  inflicted  by  a  serpent,  or  an  envenomed  spear :  he 
will  overcome  all  venom  in  reptiles,  spiders,  insects,  scorpions, 
roots,  and  artificial  poisons,  by  silently  repeating  it.

scorpions, 
roots,  and  artificial  poisons,  by  silently  repeating  it.

"  Kankata,  na-kankata,  satinakankata,  are  thus  explained  by 
Sdyana,  alpavishah  kaschit,  something  of  little  venom  ;  tadviparito 
analpavisho  mahoragddi,  the  opposite  of  that,  of  not  little  venom, 
like  great  snakes  and  the  like  :  satina  is  a  synonyme  of  water  in 
the  Nirukta.

^  Of  Uttle  or  of  much  venom  ;  or  creatures  of  land  or  water.

*  AdrishU,  of  invisible  forms ;  the  appellation,  according  to  the 
Scholiast,  of  certain  poisonous  insects ;  in  the  comment  on  the 
eighth  verse  he  explains  it,  either  a  class  of  poisons,  or  of 
poisonous  ci'Qiit\xrt^,—vishaviseshdh  vishadJiaraviseshd  vd.

oisons,  or  of 
poisonous  ci'Qiit\xrt^,—vishaviseshdh  vishadJiaraviseshd  vd. 
AUpsata,  have  smeared,  have  spread  over  all  the  limbs. 
Avaghnaii,  avahanyamdnaushadhih ;  a  drug  or  antidote  being 
destroyed;  losing  its  substance,  and  reduced  to  its  odour:  or  it 
may  mean  merely,  that  a  certain  drug,  understood,  is  destructive 
of  poisonous  creatures.

These  are  severally,  the  Saccharum  sara,  an  inferior  sort  of 
it,  Poa  cynosuroides,    Saccharum   spovtaneum,   Saccharum  munja,

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  203

of  unseen  (venomous  creatures),  have  together 
anointed  me  (with  their  venom).

4.  The  cows  had  lain  down  in  their  stalls ;  tlie 
wild  beasts  had  retreated  (to  their  lairs) ;  the  senses4.  The  cows  had  lain  down  in  their  stalls ;  tlie 
wild  beasts  had  retreated  (to  their  lairs) ;  the  senses

talls ;  tlie 
wild  beasts  had  retreated  (to  their  lairs) ;  the  senses 
of  men  v/ere  at  rest;  when  the  unseen  (venomous 
creatures)  anointed  me  (with  their  venom).*

6.  Or  they  may  be  discovered  (in  the  dark),''  as 
thieves  in  the  (dusk  of)  evening ;  for  although  they 
be  unseen,  yet  all  are  seen  by  them ;''  therefore, 
men,  be  vigilant.

6.  Heaven,    (serpents),    is   your   father ;    Earth,     Varga  xv. 
your  mother;    Soma/ your   brother;''   Aditi,  your

sister:  unseen,  all-seeing,  abide  (in  your  own  holes); 
enjoy  (your  own)  good  pleasure.

7.  Those  (who  move  with  their)  shoulders,  those 
(who  move  with  their)  bodies,^  those  who  sting  with

houlders,  those 
(who  move  with  their)  bodies,^  those  who  sting  with

Andropogon  mnricatum,  long  reed-like  grasses,  amidst  which 
reptiles  may  lurk  unseen.

These  reptiles  being  most  frequent  at  night  or  in  the  dark  ; 
the  verse  occurs  in  the  Atharvana,  vi.  lii.  2,  with  a  various 
reading  in  the  first  part  of  the  second  line;  nyurmayo  nadtnam, 
the  waves  of  the  rivers  were  hushed.

As  snakes  by  their  breathing,  according  to  Sdyana.

So  the  Scholiast  understands  viswadrisMa,  makiug  it  a 
Bahuvrihi  compound,  as  indicated  by  the  accentuation.

Soma  here  will  be  the  moon ;  or,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
rieaven,  the  residence  of  Soma, — Somadharo  dyidokah.

the  Scholiast, 
rieaven,  the  residence  of  Soma, — Somadharo  dyidokah.the  Scholiast, 
rieaven,  the  residence  of  Soma, — Somadharo  dyidokah.

Ye  ansyd  ye  angydh;  the  expressions  are  rather  vague, 
implying  what  relates  to  the  shoulders,  or  the  body  generally : 
thus,  ansyd  may  mean,  being  suited  to  the  shoulders,  moving  with 
or  by  them,  born  or  produced  in  or  on  them,  biting  with  them, — 
ansdrhdh,  ansagdh,  ansebhavdh,  ansaydbJiydm  khddanfah :  so  ar,gya

204  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

sharp  fangs,"  those  who  are  virulently  venomous ; 
■what  do  you  here,  ye  unseen,  depart  together  far 
from  us.

8.  The  all-seeing  Sim  rises  in  the  east,  the 
destroyer  of  the  unseen,''  driving  away  all  the  unseen 
(venomous  creatures),  and  all  evil  spirits.

9.

ing  away  all  the  unseen 
(venomous  creatures),  and  all  evil  spirits.

9.  The  Sun  has  risen  on  high,  destroying  all  the 
many  (poisons) ;  A'ditya,  the  all-seeing,  the  de- 
stroyer of  the  unseen,  (rises)  for  (the  good  of)  living 
beings."

10.  I  deposit  the  poison  in  the  solar  orb,  like  a 
leather  bottle  in  the  house  of  a  vender  of  spirits: 
verily,  that  adorable  (Sun)  never  dies  ;  nor,  (through 
his  favour),  shall  we  die  (of  the  venom) ;  for,  though 
afar  off,  yet  drawn  by  his  coursers,  he  will  overtake

may  mean,  moving  with  the  body,  or  poisoning  with  the  body,  as 
certain  soiders,  whose  contact  is  poisonous,  and  the  hke  :  the

as 
certain  soiders,  whose  contact  is  poisonous,  and  the  hke  :  the 
anse  bhavdh,  produced  in  the  shoulders,  might  furnish  those  who 
seek  for  analogies  between  Iranian  and  Indian  legends  with  a 
parallel  in  the  story  of  Zohdk.

^  Such'kdh,  having  sharp  needle-like  stings,  like  a  scorpion.^  Such'kdh,  having  sharp  needle-like  stings,  like  a  scorpion.

^  Adrinht'ahd  may  also  mean,  the  dissipator  of  darkness  ;  but 
adrisht'a  presently  occurs  again  in  the  sense  of  invisible  venomous 
creatures,  who,  as  well  as  the  Yutudhdnaa ,  or  Kakshasas,  disappear 
at  sunrise.  We  have  this  stanza,  with  some  variety,  in  the 
Atharvana,  v.  xxiii.  6 :  the  second  half  of  the  stanza  is, 
drishtdnscha  ghnan  na  drishtdnscha  ;  sarvdnscha  pramrinan  krimin,

a  is, 
drishtdnscha  ghnan  na  drishtdnscha  ;  sarvdnscha  pramrinan  krimin, 
destroving  the  seen  and  unseen ;  killing  all  the  reptiles.

*^  This  also  occurs  in  the  Atharvana,  vi.  lii.  1  :  the  second 
part  is  the  same ;  the  first  reads,  Utsuryo  divam  eti  puro  rakshdnsi 
nirjuva?i,  the  sun  rises  in  the  sky  in  the  east,  scattering  the 
Rakshasas.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  205

(the   poison)  :   the  science  of  antidotes   converted 
thee,  (Poison),  to  ambrosia.''

11.  That  little  insignificant  birdMias  swallowed     Varga  xvi. 
thy  venom  ;  she  does  not  die ;  nor  shall  we  die ;  for, 
although  afar  oif,  yet  drawn  by  his  coursers,   (the

we  die ;  for, 
although  afar  oif,  yet  drawn  by  his  coursers,   (the

Sun)   will   overtake    (the    poison)  ;  the    science    of 
antidotes  has  converted  thee,  (Poison),  to  ambrosia.

12.  May  the  thrice-seven  sparks  (of  Agni)''  con- 
sume the  influence  of  the  venom  ;  they  verily  do 
not  perish  ;  nor  shall  we  die ;  for,  although  afar  off, 
the  Sun,  drawn  by  his  coursers,  will  overtake  the

The  notion  that  pervades  this  stanza,  and  forms  the  hurden 
of  the  three  following,  is  derived,  according  to  Sdyaiia,  from  the 
Visha-vidyd,  the  science  of  poisons,  or  of  antidotes,  whence  it 
is  also  termed  Madhu-vidyd,  science  of  amhrosia  :  one  formula  ofit 
is  also  termed  Madhu-vidyd,  science  of  amhrosia  :  one  formula  of 
which,  as  cited  by  him,  is  "  having  taken  the  poison  in  the  solar 
orb  with  the  fourth  finger ;  having  made  it  ambrosia ;  and  caused 
them  to  blend  together,  may  it  become  poisonless  :"  by  the  Siirya 
mundala,  or  orb  of  the  sun,  is  probably  to  be  understood  a  mystical 
diagram,  or  figure  wholly  or  partly  typical  of  the  solar  orb  :  the 
sim  being  considered  as  especially  instrumental  in  counteracting 
the  operation  of  poison  :  the  science  of  antidotes  is  also  named  in 
the  text  madhuld,  as  synonymous  with  Madhuvidyd.  It  was 
originally  taught  by  Indra  to  DadhyancJi,  who  communicated  it

It  was 
originally  taught  by  Indra  to  DadhyancJi,  who  communicated  it 
to  the  Aswins,  and  thereby  lost  his  head. — See  vol.  i.  p.  310,  notCc

^  The  bird,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  is  the  female  kapinjala, 
or  francoline  partridge,  which,  he  says,  is  well  known  as  a 
remover  of  poison, — visha-TiartrL

*^  Tlie  seven  tongues,  or  flames  of  fire,  may  be  multiplied  as 
red,  white,  and  black;  or  vishpu/ingaka  may  be  a  s}Tionyme  of 
chafikd,  a  female  span-ow ;  of  whom  there  are  twenty-one 
varieties,  eaters  of  poison  with  impunity.

206  RIG-VEDA    SANHTTA.

poison  ;  the  science  of  antidotes  has  converted  thee, 
(Poison),  to  ambrosia.

13.  I  recite  the  names  of  ninety  and  nine  (rivers),

,  to  ambrosia.

13.  I  recite  the  names  of  ninety  and  nine  (rivers), 
the  destroyers  of  poison :  although  afar  off,  (the  Sun), 
drawn  by  his  coursers,  will'  overtake  the  poison :  the 
science  of  antidotes  has  converted  thee,  (Poison),  to 
ambrosia.

14.  May  the  th rice-seven  peahens,*  the  seven- 
sister  rivers,  carry  off,  (0  Body),  thy  poison,  as 
maidens,  with  pitchers,  carry  away  water.14.  May  the  th rice-seven  peahens,*  the  seven- 
sister  rivers,  carry  off,  (0  Body),  thy  poison,  as 
maidens,  with  pitchers,  carry  away  water.

15.  May  the  insignificant  mungoose^  (carry  off) 
thy  venom,  (Poison) :  if  not,  I  will  crush  the  vile 
(creature)  with  a  stone  :  so  may  the  poison  depart 
(from  my  body),  and  go  to  distant  regions.

16.  Hastening  forth  at  the  command  (of  Agastya), 
thus  spake  the  mungoose :  The  venom  of  the  scorpion

d  (of  Agastya), 
thus  spake  the  mungoose :  The  venom  of  the  scorpion 
is  innocuous  ;  scorpion,  thy  venom  is  innocuous.''

^  Tri-sapta  mayuryah :  the  enmity  between  peafowl  and  snakes 
is  proverbial,  but  that  there  are  twenty-one  varieties  of  the 
mayih-i,  or  peahen,  wants  authority :  the  seven  rivers,  the 
Scholiast  says,  are  those  of  heaven,  or  the  branches  of  the  divine 
Gangd,  but  we  have  had  them  before ;  all  ranning  streams  are 
possibly  regarded  as  antidotes,

^  KushumbhaJco-nahilah,  the  neul,  or  viverra  Mungoose,  whose 
hostility  to  the  snake  is  also  proverbial.

''  M.  Langlois  has  preferred  a  totally  different  interpretation  of

''  M.  Langlois  has  preferred  a  totally  different  interpretation  of 
this  Sdkta,  understanding  it  to  allude  to  the  state  of  the  sky 
before  the  commencement  of  a  sacrifice  :  he  therefore  interprets 
visha  by  darkness, — les  tenUres,  or  les  vapevrs  de  la  mil,  which 
are  dispersed  by  the  morning  light,  or  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  :  on 
what  authority  this  view  of  the  intention  of  the  hymn  is  founded

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  207

l^

MANJ)ALA  II.

The  first  MaiiSala  is  termed  that  of  the  Satarchins,  of  a 
hundred  put  for  an  indefinite  number  of  authors  of  Richas,  or 
stanzas ;  the  second  is  usually  term&d  the  Gdrtsamada  MariSlala,as,  or 
stanzas ;  the  second  is  usually  term&d  the  Gdrtsamada  MariSlala, 
the  hymns,  with  a  few  exceptions,  being  attributed  to  the  Rishi 
Gritsamada,  a  remarkable  personage  in  Hindu  legend.  It  is 
related  of  him  that  he  was  first  a  member  of  the  family  of 
Angiras,  being  the  son  of  Sunahotra:  he  was  carried  off  by  the 
Asuras,  whilst  performing  a  sacrifice,  but  was  rescued  by  Indra, 
by  whose  authority  he  was  thenceforth  designated  as  Gritsamada, 
the  son  of  Sunaka,  or  Saunaka,  of  the  race  of  Bhrigu.  Thus,  the 
Amikramanika  says  of  him  :  He,  who  was  an  Angirasa,  the  son  of 
Sunahotra,  became  Saunaka,  of  the  race  of  Bhrigu:  he,  Gritsa-

on  of 
Sunahotra,  became  Saunaka,  of  the  race  of  Bhrigu:  he,  Gritsa- 
mada, is  the  the  seer  of  the  second  ManSala:  and  again,  in  the 
enumeration  of  the  Rishis,  it  is  said  of  him,  The  Ris?ii  of  the 
hymn,  Twam  Agne  is  Gritsamada,  the  son  of  Sunaka,  who  went 
to  the  race  of  Bhrigu,  being  naturally  the  son  of  Sunahotra,  of 
the  Angirasa  family.  The  Index  should  be  correct,  if  it  be  the 
work  oi Kdtydyana,  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  pupil  of  Saunaka; 
but  we  have  other  very  different  accounts  of  Gritsamada,  or 
Ghritsamada,  as  the  name  is  also  written.  In  the  AnuMsana 
Parva  of  the  Mahdbhdrata  he  is  culled  the  son  of  Vitihavya,  a

sana 
Parva  of  the  Mahdbhdrata  he  is  culled  the  son  of  Vitihavya,  a 
king  of  the  Haihayas,  who,  fleeing  from  the  vengeance  of 
Pratarddana,  king  of  Kusf,  took  refuge  with  the  Rishi  Bhrigu:  on 
Pratarddana's  demanding  his  delivery,  Bhrigu  denied  that  anyhas  not  been  stated  ;  nothing  of  the  kind  is  intimated  by  Sdyana, 
whose  interpretation  is  confirmed  by  the  legendary  application  of 
the  hvmn  as  related  by  Saunaka  and  by  the  corresponding  texts  of 
the  Atharvana ;  there  are,  no  doubt,  many  expressions  of  doubtful 
import,  and  some  which  are  used  in  other  places,  as  in  the  Yajush, 
in  a  different  acceptation  ;  but  the  interpretation  given  by  Sdyana

in  a  different  acceptation  ;  but  the  interpretation  given  by  Sdyana 
appears  to  be  most  consistent  with  the  general  purport  of  the  text.

^8  RIG-VEDA    SANHItA.

Kslmtriya  was  present  in  his  hermitage ;  in  consequence  of  which 
denial,  Vttihavya  at  once  became  a  Brahman :  his  son  was 
Gritsatnada,  who,  the  MahdbMrata  adds,  w^as  a  famous  Rishi,  and 
the  author  of  the  principal  hymns  in  the  Rig-Veda. — Maha, 
vol.  lY.  p.  70.  Again,  the  Purdnas  make  him  the  son  of  Suhotra, 
9Xi^  father  either  of  Saunaka,  or  of  Sunaka,  the  father  oi  Saunaka  ; 
and  ascribe  to  him  the  institution  of  the  four  castes.  A  curious 
story  is  also  related  of  Gritsamada,  to  which  the  Mahdbhdrata

curious 
story  is  also  related  of  Gritsamada,  to  which  the  Mahdbhdrata 
alludes,  of  his  hanng  aosumed  the  semblance  of  Indra,  and  so 
enabled  that  deity  to  escape  from  the  Asiiras,  who  were  lying  in 
wait  to  destroy  him ;  a  legend  to  which  we  shall  again  have 
occasion  to  refer.  Saunaka,  whether  the  same  as  Gritsamada,  or 
a  different  person,  is  named  as  the  chief  of  the  Rishls  assembled 
at  Naimishdranya  to  celebrate  the  twelve  years'  sacrifice,  to  whom 
the  Mahdbhdrata,  and  several  of  the  Purdnas,  are  said  to.  have 
been  repeated,  by  Lomaharshana,  the  Suta :  he  is  also  said  to 
have  been  the  teacher  of  a  Sdkhd,  or  branch  of  the  Atharvanad  to 
have  been  the  teacher  of  a  Sdkhd,  or  branch  of  the  Atharvana 
Veda :  he  is  often  quoted,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Sdyaiia.

FIFTH  ADHYAYA  (contifiued).

ANUVAKA  I.

SUKTA    I.    (I.)

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  Rishi,  Gritsamada  ;  the  metre,  Jagati.

Vargo  XVII.  i.  Sovereign  of  men,  Agni,  thou  art  born  for  the 
days  (of  sacrifice),  jmre  and  all-irradiating,  from  the 
waters,  from  the  stones,  from  trees,  and  from  plants."

This  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xi.  27.  Mah'dhara's 
explanation  is  much  the  same  as  that  of  Sdyana :  both  notice 
varieties  of  interpretation.  Suhikshani,  for  instance,  may  also 
signify  drying  up,  causing  the  evaporation  of  the  earth's  moisture  ;

gnify  drying  up,  causing  the  evaporation  of  the  earth's  moisture  ;

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  209

2.  Thine,  Agni,  is  the  office  of  the  Hotri,  of  the 
PotrU  of  the  Ritivij,  of  the  NesMri ;  thou  art  tlie 
Agnidhra  of  the  devout;  thine  is  the  function  of 
the  PrukUtri ;  thou  art  the  Adhwaryu  and  the 
Brahmnnf  and  the  householder  in  our  dwelling.

or  it  may  mean,  destroying,  consuming :  Agni  is  produced  from 
the  waters,  either  as  the  lightning  that  accompanies  rain  or  sub- 
marine fire ;  froto  stones  by  striking  them  together ;  so  from  trees 
or  wood  by  attrition ;  from  plants,  such  as  bambus,  by  mutual 
friction,  causing  the  conflagration  of  a  forest.

bambus,  by  mutual 
friction,  causing  the  conflagration  of  a  forest.bambus,  by  mutual 
friction,  causing  the  conflagration  of  a  forest.

These  are  eight  of  the  sixteen  priests  employed  at  very 
solemn  ceremonies :  the  commentary  ascribes  the  duty  of  the 
Praidstri  to  the  Maitrdvarvria,  and  identifies  the  Brahmd  with  the 
Brdhmandchchansi ;  but  in  the  ordinary  enumeration  they  are 
distinct :  the  sixteen  are  thus  enumerated  by  Kulluka  Bhaffa,  the 
commentator  on  Manu,  viii.  210 ;  in  the  order  and  propoition  in 
which  they  are  entitled  to  share  in  a  Daksh'uid  of  a  hundred  cows, 
being  arranged  in  four  classes,  of  which  the  first  four  are  severally 
the  heads,  and  the  others  subordinate  to  them,  in  the  same  course 
of  succession  : — 1 .

he  others  subordinate  to  them,  in  the  same  course 
of  succession  : — 1 .  Hotri,  Adhwaryu,  Udgdtri,  and  Brahman,  are 
to  have  twelve  each,  or  forty-eight  in  all.  2.  Maitrdvai-uha. 
Pratistotri,  Brdhmandchchhans{,  and  Prastotri,  six  each,  or  twenty- 
four.  3.  Achchdvdka,  Neshfri,  Agnidhra,  and  Pratiharttri,  four 
each,  or  sixteen ;  and  4.  Grdvddut,  Netri,  Potri,  and  Suhrah- 
manya,  three  each,  or  in  all  twelve ;  making  up  the  total  of  one 
hundred.  Rdmandtha,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Amara  Kosha, 
VII.  17,  also  gives  the  names  of  the  sixteen  priests,  with  a  few 
variations  from  Kulluka.  Grdvdstut  is  his  reading,  instead  of 
Grdvddut,  and  it  is  the  more  usual  one ;  and  in  place  of  the

of 
Grdvddut,  and  it  is  the  more  usual  one ;  and  in  place  of  the 
Prastotri,  Netri,  and  Potri,  he  gives,  Prasthdtri,  Praidstri,  and 
Bdldchchhddaka :  we  have  the  Potri  repeatedly  named  in  the  text 
of  the  Rich,  as  well  as  the  Prasdstri.  In  the  Aitareya  Brdhmana, 
b,  VII.  1,  the  sixteen  priests  to  whom  portions  of  the  offering 
VOL.  II.  P

210  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.210  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

3.  Thou,  Agni,  art  Indra,  the  showerer  (of 
bounties)  on  the  good ;  thou  art  the  adorable 
Vishnu,  the  hymned  of  many  :  thou,  Brahmanas- 
PATI,  art  BraJnnd,  the  possessor  of  riches  ;  tliou,  the 
author  of  various  (conditions),  art  associated  with 
wisdom.

4.  Thou,  Agni,  art  tlie  royal  Varuna,  observant

sociated  with 
wisdom.

4.  Thou,  Agni,  art  tlie  royal  Varuna,  observant 
of  holy  voM's  :  thou  art  the  adorable  Mitra,  the 
destroyer  (of  foes) :  thou  B.vtAri/aman,  the  protector 
of  the  virtuous,  whose  (liberality)  is  enjoyed  by  all :"

are  assigned  are  also  enumerated,  with  some  modifications, 
having,  instead  of  the  Pratistotrl,  Grdvddut,  Netri,  and  Subrah- 
manya,  of  the  first  Hst,  the  Pratiprasthdtri,  Upagdtri,  Atreya,  and 
Sadasya.  The  sanae  authority,  however,  adds  as  priests  not 
included  in  the  sixteen,  the  Grdvdstut,  Unnetri,  Subrahmaiiya,  and 
the  Samitri,  or  imniolator,  when  a  Brahman.  In  Mddhava's 
commentary  on  the  Nydya  mdld  vistara  of  Jaimini,  for  an  extract

a's 
commentary  on  the  Nydya  mdld  vistara  of  Jaimini,  for  an  extract 
from  which  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Goldstiicker,  he  enumerates  the 
sixteen  priests  as  classed  in  four  orders,  following  the  authority  of 
Kumdril  Bhat'i'a,  much  to  the  same  effect  as  Kulluka ;  they  are  : — 
1.  The  Adhwaryu,  Pratiprasthdtri,  Neshfri,  and  Unnetri;  2.  the 
Brahma,  Brdhmaiidchchhansi,  Agmdh,  and  Potri;  3.  the  Udgdtri, 
Prastotri,  Pratiharttri,  and  Subrahmaiiya;  and  4.  the  Hotri, 
Maitrdvaruria,  Achchhdvdka,  and  Grdvdstut.  The  four  first  are 
especially  charged  with  the  ceremonial  of  the  Yajur-Veda ;  the 
next  four  superintend  the  whole  according  to  the  ritual  of  thethe 
next  four  superintend  the  whole  according  to  the  ritual  of  the 
three  Vedas ;  the  third  class  chant  the  hymns,  especially  of  the 
Sdma  Veda,  and  the  fourth  repeat  the  hymns  of  the  Rich;  the 
head  of  each  class  receives  the  entire  Dakshind,  or  gratuity ;  the 
second,  one-half;  the  third,  one-third ;  and  the  fourth,  a  quarter : 
the  several  functions  are  not  very  explicitly  described.

Liberality    is    said    to   be   the   characteristic,    properly,   of 
Aryaman,  ddtritwam  chdryamno  lingam.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  211

thou  art  a  portion  (of  the  sun):"  be  the  distributor 
(of  good  things),  divine  (Agni),  at  our  sacrifice.

5.  Thou,  Agni,  art  Twashtri,  (the  giver)  of

gni),  at  our  sacrifice.

5.  Thou,  Agni,  art  Twashtri,  (the  giver)  of 
great  wealth  to  (thy)  worshipper :  these  praises  are 
thine :  do  thou,  of  benevolent  power,  (admit)  our 
affinity:  thou,  who  art  prompt  to  encourage  (us), 
givest  us  good  (store  of)  horses  :  thou,  who  aboundest 
with  opulence,  art  the  strength  of  men.

6.  Thou,  Agni,  art  Rudra,  the  expeller  (of  foes)   Varga  xviii. 
from  the  expanse  of  heaven :''  thou  art  the  strength

of  the  Maruts :  thou  art  supreme  over  (sacrificial) 
food  :  thou,  who  art  pleasantly  domiciled  (in  the 
hall  of  sacrifice),  goest  with  ruddy  horses,  (fleet  as) 
the  wind :  as  Pushan,  thou  clierishest,  of  thine  own 
will,  those  who  offer  worship.

7.

an,  thou  clierishest,  of  thine  own 
will,  those  who  offer  worship.

7.  Thou,  Agni,  art  Dravinodas,  to  him  who 
honours  thee :  thou  art  the  divine  Savitri,  the  pos- 
sessor of  precious  things  :  protector  of  men,  thou 
art  Bhaga,  and  rulest  over  wealth  :  thou  art  the 
cherisher  of  him  who  worships  thee  in  his  dwelling.S.  The  people  adore  thee,  Agni,  the  protector  of 
the  people  in  their  dwellings  :  they  propitiate  thee  as 
a  benevolent  sovereign :  leader  of  a  radiant  host,  thou 
art  lord  over  all  offerings ;  thou  art  the  distributor  of 
tens,  and  hundreds,  and  thousands  (of  good  things).

Twam  ansah  may  also  mean  the  forms  of  the  sun,  or  the 
A'dityn,  named  ansa.

may  also  mean  the  forms  of  the  sun,  or  the 
A'dityn,  named  ansa.

Twam  Rudro  asuro  maho  divah :  asura  is  explained  sairundm 
nirasltd,  the  expeller  of  enemies,  divas,  from  heaven ;  or  it  may 
mean,  the  giver  of  strength,  asur,  balam ;  tasya  ddtd ;  A'ditya 
rupa :  a  form  of  Aditya,  or  an  Ad'itya.

p  2

212  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

9.  (Devout)  men  (worship)  tliee,  Agni,  as  a 
father,  with  sacred  rites :  they  (cherish)  thee,  who 
art  the  illuminator  of  the  body,  with  acts  (of  kind- 
ness), as  a  brother :  thou  art  as  a  son  to  him  who 
propitiates  thee ;  and  thou  protectest  us,  a  faithful 
and  firm  friend.

10.  Thou,  Agni,  art  (ever)  resplendent,""  and  art 
to  be  glorified  when  present .

Agni,  art  (ever)  resplendent,""  and  art 
to  be  glorified  when  present .  thou  art  lord  over  all 
renowned  food  and  riches:  thou  shinest  brightly, 
and  thou  consumest  (the  oblation)  for  him  who 
offers  it :  thou  art  the  especial  accomplisher  of  the 
sacrifice,  and  bestower  (of  its  rewards).

Varga  XIX.  H.  Thou,  diviue  Agni,  art  Aditi  to  the  donor  of 
the  oblation:  thou  art  Hotra  and  BhArati,  and 
thrivest  by  praise :  thou  art  Ila  of  a  hundred 
winters^  to  him  who  makes  thee  gifts :  thou,  lord  of 
wealth,  art  the  destroyer  of  Vritra,''  SaraswatI.

12.  When,  well-cherished  Agni,  thou  art  (the 
giver  of)  excellent  food :  in  thy  desirable  and12.  When,  well-cherished  Agni,  thou  art  (the 
giver  of)  excellent  food :  in  thy  desirable  and

Agni,  thou  art  (the 
giver  of)  excellent  food :  in  thy  desirable  and 
delightful  hues,  beauties  (abound) :  thou  (art)  food :

Tvmm  agne  ribhuh,  twam  vdjasya  isishe :  we  might  have  con- 
jeccured  that  some  allusion  to  the  Ribhus  was  here  intended ; 
but  Sdyaita  renders  ribhu,  bhdsamdnah,  shining ;  and  vdjasya, 
by  annasya,  of  food.

Twam  lid  satahimdsi,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  means  the 
earth  of  unlimited  duration, — aparimitakdld  bhiimih.

Vritrahd,  Sdyana  inteiprets,  the  destroyer  of  sin,  &c. ;  but 
these  goddesses  are  identified  in  the  hymns  to  the  Apns,  with 
Agni,  and  an  allusion  to  Indra  would  only  be  consistent  with  the

ith 
Agni,  and  an  allusion  to  Indra  would  only  be  consistent  with  the 
prevailing  idea  throughout  the  hymn,  of  the  universal  identity  of 
Agni  with  all  other  divinities.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  213

(thou  art)  the  transporter  (beyond  sin) ;  thou  art 
mighty ;  thou  art  wealth ;  thou  art  manifold,  and 
everywhere  diffused.

13.  The  A'dityas  have  made  thee,  Agni,  their 
mouth ;  the  pure  (deities)  have  made  thee,  Kavi, 
their  tongue :  the  (gods),  the  givers  of  wealth, 
depend  upon  thee  at  sacrifices ;  they  eat  the  offered 
oblation  through  thee :

14.  All  the  benignant  immortal  gods  eat  the 
offered  oblation  through  thee,  as  their  mouth:

immortal  gods  eat  the 
offered  oblation  through  thee,  as  their  mouth: 
mortals  taste  the  flavour  (of  all  viands)  through 
thee :  thou  art  born  pure,  the  embryo  of  plants."immortal  gods  eat  the 
offered  oblation  through  thee,  as  their  mouth: 
mortals  taste  the  flavour  (of  all  viands)  through 
thee :  thou  art  born  pure,  the  embryo  of  plants."

15.  Thou  art  associated,  Agni,  by  thy  vigour, 
with  those  (gods):  divine,  well-born  Agni,  thou 
exceedest  (them  in  strength) ;  for  the  (sacrificial) 
food  that  is  here  prepared  is,  by  thy  power,  subse- 
quently diffused  through  both  regions,  heaven  and 
earth.

16.  The  pious  are  they  who  present,  as  a  gift,  to 
the  reciters  of  thy  praises,  an  excellent  cow  and  an 
excellent  horse :  do  thou,  Agni,  lead  both  us  and 
them  to  the  best  of  abodes,  (or  heaven),  that  we 
and  our  worthy  descendants  may  repeat  the  solemn

r  heaven),  that  we 
and  our  worthy  descendants  may  repeat  the  solemn 
prayer  to  thee  at  the  sacrifice.

Corn  and  other  grains  ripen  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  or  fire ; 
the  text  has  suchi,  pure ;  but  Sdyanas  copy  must  have  had  in  its 
place  va^u,  which  he  explains  as  usual,  being  the  abode  of  all ; 
sarvesham  nwdsabhdtah  san.

214  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

SdKTA  II.

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  the  same  as  before.

Varga  XX.  1.  Exalt  with  sacrifice,  Agni,  who  knows  all  that 
has  been  born :  worship  him  with  oblations,  and 
w^ith  ample  praise ;  him  who  is  well  kindled,  well 
fed,  much  lauded,  resplendent,  the  conveyer  of 
oblations,  the  giver  of  strength  (to  the  body).

2.

the  conveyer  of 
oblations,  the  giver  of  strength  (to  the  body).

2.  The  mornings  and  evenings,  Agni,  are  de- 
sirous (of  worshipping)  thee,  as  cows  in  their  stalls 
long  for  their  calves :  adored  of  many,  thou,  self- 
controlled,  art  verily  spread  through  the  sky :  thou 
(art  present  at  all)  the  sacred  rites  of  men,  and 
shinest  brightly  by  night.3.  The  L^ods  have  stationed  at  the  root  of  the 
world, ""  that  Agni  who  is  of  goodly  appearance ;  the 
pervader  of  heaven  and  earth ;  who  is  to  be  known 
as  a  car  (to  convey  men  to  their  wishes) ;  who 
shines  with  pure  radiance,  and  who  is  to  be  honoured 
as  a  friend  amongst  mankind.

4.

radiance,  and  who  is  to  be  honoured 
as  a  friend  amongst  mankind.

4.  They  have  placed  him  in  his  solitary  dwelling, 
who  is  shedding  moisture  upon  the  earth  ;  resplen- 
dent as  gold,''  traversing  the  firmament,  animate 
with  flames ;  and  pervading  the  two  parents  (of  all 
things,  heaven  and  earth),  like  refreshing  water.

Budhne  rajasah-lokasya  mule :  that  is,  according  to  the  com- 
mentary, the  altar.

Chandram  iva  surucham  might  seem  to  be  preferably  rendered, 
bright-shining,  like  the  moon ;  but  Sdyaiia  affirms  that  chandra 
here  means  gold;  of  which,  when  neuter,  it  is  a  synonynie,  in  the 
Veda,

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  215

5.  May  lie,  the  presenter  of  oblations  (to  the

FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  215

5.  May  lie,  the  presenter  of  oblations  (to  the 
gods),  be  around  all  sacrifices:  men  propitiate  him 
with  oblations  and  with  praises,  when  blazing  with 
radiant  tresses^  amongst  the  growing  plants,  and 
enlivening  heaven  and  earth  (with  his  sparks),  like 
the  sky  with  stars.

6.  Thou,  Agni,  art  he  who,  for  our   good,   art    Varga  xxi. 
possessed  of  riches:  kindled    by  us,   blaze  as   the

liberal  donor  of  wealth  to  us :  render  heaven  and 
earth  propitious  to  us,  so  that,  divine  Agni,  (the 
gods)  may  partake  of  the  oblations  of  the  institutor 
of  the  rite.

7.  Bestow  upon  us,  Agni,  infinite  possessions: 
grant  us  thousands  (of  cattle  and  dependants) :  open7.  Bestow  upon  us,  Agni,  infinite  possessions: 
grant  us  thousands  (of  cattle  and  dependants) :  open

nite  possessions: 
grant  us  thousands  (of  cattle  and  dependants) :  open 
to  us,  for  thy  reputation,  the  doors  of  abundance  : 
make  heaven  and  earth,  propitiated  by  sacred  prayer, 
favourable  to  us,  and  may  the  mornings  light  thee  up 
like  the  sun.

8.  Kindled  at  the  beautiful  dawn,  (Agni)  shines 
with  brilliant  lustre,  like  the  sun  ;  adored  by  the 
hymns  of  the  worshipper,  Agni,  the  king  of  men,""

^  Hirisipro  vridhasdmsu  jarhhurat :  sipra  has  been  before  met 
with,  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  chin,  or  jaw  ;  or  has  been  explained, 
the  nose ;  and  one  sense  of  the  compound  that  here  occurs  is, 
haranasilahanuh,  having  a  jaw  accustomed  to  seize  or  consume ;

s  is, 
haranasilahanuh,  having  a  jaw  accustomed  to  seize  or  consume ; 
but,  upon  the  authority  of  another  text,  siprd  sirshasu  vitafd  hiran- 
yayiky  golden  locks  spread  on  the  head,  Sdijaiia  explains  it  here  by 
usMisha,  a  curl,  or  turban  ;  vridhasdndsu  he  explains  by  pravardha 
mdnaswoshadhishu,  amongst  growing  plants.

^  Rdjd  viidm,  king,  or  master  of  the  Visas,  or  people.

216  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(comes  as)  an  agreeable  guest  to  the  institutor  of  the 
sacrifice.

9.  Amongst  men  our  praise,  Agni,  celebrates 
thee,  who  art  first  amongst  the  greatly-splendid 
immortals ;  (may  it  be  to  us)  as  a  milch  cow  spon- 
taneously yielding  at  sacrifices  to  the  Worshipper,

a  milch  cow  spon- 
taneously yielding  at  sacrifices  to  the  Worshipper, 
infinite  and  multiform  (blessings  according  to  his) 
desire.a  milch  cow  spon- 
taneously yielding  at  sacrifices  to  the  Worshipper, 
infinite  and  multiform  (blessings  according  to  his) 
desire.

10.  May  we  manifest  vigour  among  other  men, 
Agni,  through  the  steed  and  the  food  (which  thou 
hast  given) ;  and  may  our  unsurpassed  wealth  shine 
like  the  sun  over  (that  of)  the  five  classes  of  beings.^

11.  Vigorous  Agni,  hear  (our  prayers) :  for  thou 
art  he  who  is  to  be  lauded ;  to  whom  the  well-born 
priests  address  (their  hymns) ;  and  whom,  entitled 
to  worship,  and  radiant  in  thine  own  abode,  the 
offerers  of  the  oblation  approach,  for  the  sake  of 
never-failing  posterity.

12.  Agni,  knowing  all  that  is  born,  may  we,  both

ailing  posterity.

12.  Agni,  knowing  all  that  is  born,  may  we,  both 
adorers  and  priests,  be  thine  for  the  sake  of  felicity ; 
and  do  thou  bestow  upon  us  wealth  of  dwellings,  of 
cattle,  of  much  gold,  of  many  dependants,  and  vir- 
tuous offspring.

13.  The  pious  are  they  who  present,  as  a  gift,  to 
the  reciters  of  thy  praises,  an  excellent  cow  and  an 
elegant  horse  :  do  thou,  Agni,  lead  us  and  them  to 
the  best  of  abodes,  (or  heaven),  that  we  and  our 
worthy  descendants  may  repeat  the  solemn  prayer 
to  thee  at  the  sacrifice.

Pancha-krisMishu,  janeshu,  men ;  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
the  four  castes  and  the  Nishddas.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  217

SUKTA    III.

the  Nishddas.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  217

SUKTA    III.

The  divinities  are  the  A  pris  ;    the  metre  is  Triskfubh,  except  in 
the  seventh  stanza,  in  -vshich  it  is  Jagati.

1.  Agni,  the  well-kindled,  ])laced  upon  (the  altar   Varga  xxii. 
of)  the  earth,  stands  iu  the  presence  of  all  beings ;1.  Agni,  the  well-kindled,  ])laced  upon  (the  altar   Varga  xxii. 
of)  the  earth,  stands  iu  the  presence  of  all  beings ;

the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  the  purifier,  the  ancient, 
the  intelligent,  the  divine :  Let  the  venerable  Agni 
minister  to  the  gods.

2.  May  the  bright  Narasansa,''  illuming  the 
receptacles  (of  the  ojBTering),  making  manifest  by  his 
greatness  the  three  radiant  (regions),  and  diffusing 
the  oblation  at  the  season  of  sacrifice  with  butter- 
dispensing  pur]>ose,  satisfy  the  gods.

3.

n  of  sacrifice  with  butter- 
dispensing  pur]>ose,  satisfy  the  gods.

3.  Agni,  who  art  the  venerable  I'lita,  do  thou, 
with  mind  favourably  disposed  towards  us,  offer  to- 
day sacrifice  to  the  gods,  before  the  human  (minis- 
trant  priest) :  as  such,  bring  hither  the  company  of 
tije  Maruts,  the  undecaying  Indra,  to  whom,  seated 
on  the  sacred  grass,  do  you  priests  offer  worship.

4.  Divine  grass,"  let  the  Vasus,  the  Viswadevas^ 
the  adorable  A'dityas^  sit  upon  this  flourishing, 
invigorating,  well-grown,   sacred  grass,  strewn    for

See  Hymns  xiii,  vol.  i.  p.  31  ;  and  cxlii.  clxxxvui. 
pp.  71,  195,  in  this  volume.

In  the  preceding  Siiktas,  Tanunaput  is  the  second  personifica-

lume.

In  the  preceding  Siiktas,  Tanunaput  is  the  second  personifica- 
tion of  Agni  addressed  :  he  is  here  omitted.

The  Barhish,  or  a  personification  of  Agni,  here  as  in  the 
preceding.

218  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

the  sake  of  wealth  upon  this  altar,  and  sprinkled 
with  butter.The  Barhish,  or  a  personification  of  Agni,  here  as  in  the 
preceding.

218  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

the  sake  of  wealth  upon  this  altar,  and  sprinkled 
with  butter.

5.  Let  the  divine  doors,  spacious  and  easily 
accessible,  and  to  be  saluted  with  prostrations,  be 
set  open ;  let  them  be  celebrated  as  expansive, 
uninjurable,  and  conferring  sanctity  upon  the  illus- 
trious class  (of  worshippers),  possessed  of  virtuous 
progeny. 
Varga  XXIII.  6.  In  regard  of  our  good  deeds.  Day  and  Night, 
perpetually  reverenced,  are  interweaving  in  concert,

.  Day  and  Night, 
perpetually  reverenced,  are  interweaving  in  concert, 
like  two  famous  female  weavers,*  the  extended 
thread,  (to  complete)  the  web  of  the  sacrifice, 
liberal  yielders  (of  rewards),  containers  of  water.

7.  Let  the  two  divine  invokers  of  the  gods,''  the 
first  (to  be  reverenced),  most  wise,  sincerely  worship- 
.piug  with  sacred  texts,  most  excellent  in  form, 
offering  homage  to  the  gods  in  due  season,  present 
oblations  in  the  three  high  places  upon  the  navel  of 
the  earth.''

8.  May  the  three  goddesses,  Saraswati,  perfect- 
ing our  understanding,  the  divine  Ila,  and  all-im- 
pressive Bharati,  having  come  to  our  dwelling,

ivine  Ila,  and  all-im- 
pressive Bharati,  having  come  to  our  dwelling, 
protect  this  faultless  rite,  (oftered)  for  our  welfare.

Vayyeva  ranvite  are  explained  by  the  Scholiast,  vayyd  iva 
vdnakuiale  iva  sabdlte,  stute.

The  personified  fires  of  earth  and  the  firmament,  under  the 
character  of  two  ministering  priests,  according  to  the  Scholiast.

That  is,  as  usual,  the  altar :  the  three  high  places,  sdmtshu 
trishu,  are  the  three  sacred  fires ;  Gdrhapatya,  A'havaniya,  and 
Dakshina.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  219That  is,  as  usual,  the  altar :  the  three  high  places,  sdmtshu 
trishu,  are  the  three  sacred  fires ;  Gdrhapatya,  A'havaniya,  and 
Dakshina.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  219

9.  May  a  tawny-hued,  well-grown  (son),  the 
bestower  of  food,  active,  manly,  a  worshipper  of 
the  gods,  be  born :  may  Twashtri  prolong  for  us  a

a  worshipper  of 
the  gods,  be  born :  may  Twashtri  prolong  for  us  a 
continuous  (line  of)  progeny,  and  may  the  food  of 
the  gods  come  also  to  us.

10.  May  Agni,  who  is  Vanaspati,  approving  (of 
our  rite),  approach  ;  and  by  his  especial  acts  fully 
dress  the  victim  :"  may  the  divine  immolator^'  convey 
the  burnt-offering  to  the  gods,  knowing  it  to  have 
been  thrice  consecrated.*^

11.  I  sprinkle  the  butter,  for  butter  is  his  birth- 
place; he  is  nourished  by  butter;  butter  is  his 
radiance:  Agni,  showerer  (of  benefits),  bring  the 
gods  to  the  offered  oblation ;  exhilarate  them ; 
convey  to  them  the  offering  that  has  been  reverently 
sanctified.'^

convey  to  them  the  offering  that  has  been  reverently 
sanctified.'^

Agnir-havih  siidaydti  pra  dhibhih  is  explained  by  the  Scholiast, 
Agni,  who  is  the  supporter,  or  the  instrument  of  cooking  or 
maturing  fitly,  cooks  the  oblation  of  the  nature  of  the  victim  with 
various  acts,  which  are  the  means  of  cooking;  he  dresses  the 
oblation,  not  under-dressing  nor  over-dressing  it :  Agnih  pukd- 
dhdro  havih  pasurupam  karmaviseshaih  pdkasddhanaih  prakarshena 
siidaydti  kshdrayati-apdkddkikapdkddirdhityena  havih  pachati.

^  Daivyah  samitd:  the  latter  usually  denotes  the  person  who 
kills  the  victim :  Agni  is  elsewhere  called,  perhaps  only  typically, 
the  immolator  of  the  gods, — devdndm  samitd.

,  perhaps  only  typically, 
the  immolator  of  the  gods, — devdndm  samitd.,  perhaps  only  typically, 
the  immolator  of  the  gods, — devdndm  samitd.

'^  Tridhd  samnktam,  thrice  anointed  or  sprinkled;  the  three 
rites  or  ceremonies  are  termed  upastarni'ia,  avaddna,  abhighdrana.

''  Yajur-Vedn,  xvii.  88.  Mahidhara  renders  dhdma  by  dwell- 
ing, or  radiance  ;  and  proposes,  as  an  alternative,  to  apply  the 
last  member  of  the  stanza  to  the  Adhvarvu :  or,  Priest,  bring

220  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

St5kta  IV.

Agni  is  the  deity;  Somabuti,  of  the  race  of  Bhrigu,  the  Rishi;

the  metre  is  TrisMubh.

Varga  XXIV.  1.  I  iDvoke,  Oil  jour  behalf,  the  resplendent,  the 
sinless  Agni,  the  guest  of  mortals,  the  accepter  of 
(sacrificial)  food,  who,  knowing  all  that  has  been

the  accepter  of 
(sacrificial)  food,  who,  knowing  all  that  has  been 
born,  is  like  a  friend,  the  supporter  (of  all  beings), 
from  men  to  gods.

2.  The  Bhrigus,  worshipping  Agni,  have  twice 
made  him  manifest :  (once)  in  the  abode  of  the 
waters,  and  (once)  amongst  the  sons  of  men  f  may 
that  Agni,  the  sovereign  of  the  gods,  mounted  on  a 
rapid  courser,  ever  overcome  all  (our  foes).

3.  The  gods,  intending  to  dwell  (in  heaven),  left, 
as  a  dear  friend  amongst  the  human  races,  that 
Agni,  who,  present  in  the  chamber  of  sacrifice,  is 
bounteous  to  the  donor  of  offerings,  and  shines  on 
the  nights  when  he  is  wished  for.''

4.  The  cherishing  of  Agni  is  as  agreeable  as  (the

is  wished  for.''

4.  The  cherishing  of  Agni  is  as  agreeable  as  (the 
cherishing)  of  one's  self;  (pleasant)  is  his  appear- 
ance, when  spreading  abroad,   and  consuming  (the

hither  Agni  to  the  oblation ;  exhilarate  him ;  (and  say  to  him), 
Showerer  (of  blessings),  convey  the  consecrated  oblation  (to  the 
gods).

As  lightning  in  the  firmament,  and  as  culinary  fire  on  earth.As  lightning  in  the  firmament,  and  as  culinary  fire  on  earth.

Didayad-usat{r-urriyd :  usaiih,  the  commentator  explains, 
kdmayamdndh,  being  to  be  desired ;  and  urmyd,  rdtrih,  nights ; 
which  he  renders,  all  nights,  or  the  whole  night, — sarvdsu 
riUrishu  dipyate ;  or  sarvaratrirddipayati,  he  shines  on  all  nights, 
or  he  lights  up  all  the  nights.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  221

he  lights  up  all  the  nights.

SECOND   ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  221

fuel) :  he  brandishes  his  flame  amongst  the  bushes, 
as  a  chariot-horse  lashes  with  his  tail.

5.  Whose  greatness  my  colleagues  loudly  extol : 
who  has  manifested  his  real  form  to  the  priests : 
who  is  recognised  at  oblations  by  his  variegated 
radiance,  and  who,  though  frequently  growing  old, 
again  and  again  becomes  young.

6.  Who  shines  amidst  the  forests,  as  if  satisfying    Varga  xxv 
himself  (with  food) :  who  (rushes  along),  like  water

down  a  declivity,  and  thunders  like  a  chariot  (of 
war) :  dark-pathed,  consuming,  yet  delightful,  he  is 
regarded  like  the  sky  smiling  with  constellations.

7.

delightful,  he  is 
regarded  like  the  sky  smiling  with  constellations.

7.  He  who  is  in  many  places ;  who  spreads  over 
the  whole  eartli,  like  an  animal  without  a  herdsman, 
that  goes  according  to  its  own  will ;  Agni,  the 
bright-shining,  consuming  the  dry  bushes,  by  whom 
the  pain  of  blackness  (is  inflicted  on  the  trees), 
entirely  drinks  up  (their  moisture).

8.  Verily  thy  praise  has  been  recited  (by  us)  at 
the  third  (daily)  sacrifice,  as  it  was  in  the  repetition 
of  thy  first  propitiation :  give  us,  Agni,  am})le  and 
notorious  food,  posterity,  riches,  such  as  may  be  the 
support  of  numerous  dependants .

9.  By  thee,  (Agni),  may  the  Gritsamadas,  re-

numerous  dependants .9.  By  thee,  (Agni),  may  the  Gritsamadas,  re-

numerous  dependants .

9.  By  thee,  (Agni),  may  the  Gritsamadas,  re- 
peating thy  praise,  become  masters  of  the  precious 
secret  (treasures) ;  so  that  they  may  be  possessed  of 
excellent  dependants,  and  be  able  to  resist  (their) 
enemies ;  and  do  thou  give  to  (thy)  pious  worship- 
pers, and  to  him  who  glorifies  (thee),  such  (abun- 
dant) food.

222  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

StjKTA    V.

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Amisht'ubh.

Varga  XXVI.  1.  All  invoker  (of  the  gods),''  our  instructor  and 
protector,  has  been  born  for  the  preservation  of  our 
patrons  i*"  may  we,  possessed  of  (sacrificial)  food,  be 
able  to  acquire  worshipful,  conquerable,  and  manage- 
able riches.

2.

be 
able  to  acquire  worshipful,  conquerable,  and  manage- 
able riches.

2.  In  whom,  as  conductor  of  the  sacrifice,'  the 
seven  rays  are  manifested,  and  who,  as  a  human 
Potri,  officiates  in  the  eighth  place  to  perfect  every 
divine  (rite).

3.  Whatever  (offerings  the  priest)  presents,  what- 
ever prayers  he  recites,  he,  (Agni),  knows  them  all : 
he  comprehends  all  priestly  acts,  as  the  circumference 
(includes  the  spokes)  of  a  wheel.

4.  The  pure  regulator  (of  the  sacrifice)*  is  born

^  Hotri :  in  this,  and  the  following  stanzas,  Agni  is  addressed, 
as  identified  with,  or  personified  by,  several  of  the  individual  priests 
employed  at  sacrifices,

onified  by,  several  of  the  individual  priests 
employed  at  sacrifices,

^  Pitribhyah  utaye,  for  protection  to  the  Pi'tris :  the  Schohast 
interprets  pitri  here  by  pdlaka,  or  Yajamdna,  the  patron,  or 
institutor  of  the  sacrifice.^  Pitribhyah  utaye,  for  protection  to  the  Pi'tris :  the  Schohast 
interprets  pitri  here  by  pdlaka,  or  Yajamdna,  the  patron,  or 
institutor  of  the  sacrifice.

^  Netri,  and  presently  afterwards  Potri,  two  of  the  sixteen 
priests:  the  seven  rays  are  here  explained  to  mean,  the  seven 
priests,  engaged  in  their  respective  functions,

'^  The  Praidstri,  whose  duty  it  is,  by  appropriate  acts,  to 
obviate  all  obstructions  to  a  sacrifice.

SECOND    ASHTAKA FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  223

verily  together  with  the  lioly  act :  the  wise  (wor- 
shipper) performs  all  his,  (Agni's),  prescribed  rites

the  wise  (wor- 
shipper) performs  all  his,  (Agni's),  prescribed  rites 
ill  succession,  as  the  branches  spring  (from  a  common 
stem).

5.  The  sister  fingers,  which  are  the  milch  kine  of 
the  NesJih'i,  are  those  which  accomi)lish  his,  (Agni's), 
"worship ;  and  in  various  ways  are  combined  for  this 
purpose  through  the  three  (sacred  fires).

6.  When  the  sister  (vessel),  bearing  the  clarified 
butter,  is  placed  near  the  maternal  (altar),  the 
Adliwaryu  rejoices  at  their  approach,  like  barley 
(at  the  fall  of)  rain.

7.  May  he,  the  ministering  priest/  discharge  the 
office  of  priest  at  his  own  ceremony ;  and  may  we 
worthily  repeat  (his)  praise,  and  offer  (him)  sacrifice.

8.

and  may  we 
worthily  repeat  (his)  praise,  and  offer  (him)  sacrifice.

8.  And  do  thou,  Agni,  (grant),  that  this  wise 
(worshipper)  may  worthily  offer  (worship)  to  all  the 
adorable  (divinities),  and  that  the  sacrifice  which  we 
offer  may  also  be  perfected  in  thee.

SUKTA    VI.

The  deity  and  EisU  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Gay  air  i.

1.  Agni,  accept  this  ray  fuel,  this  my  oblation;  Vargaxxvii. 
listen,  well  pleased,  to  my  praises.SUKTA    VI.

The  deity  and  EisU  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Gay  air  i.

1.  Agni,  accept  this  ray  fuel,  this  my  oblation;  Vargaxxvii. 
listen,  well  pleased,  to  my  praises.

2.  May  we  propitiate  thee,  Agni,  by  this  (obla- 
tion) :  grandson  of  strength,  (who  art)  gratified  by

*  The  Ritwij,  or  a  priest  in  general,  in  which  capacity  Agni  is 
invited  to  officiate  for  himself.

224  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Agni  is 
invited  to  officiate  for  himself.

224  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

prompt  sacrifice,*  (may  we  please  thee),  well-born, 
by  this  hymn.

3.  Granter  of  riches,  may  we,  thy  worshippers, 
propitiate  thee,  who  art  desirous  of  (sacrificial) 
wealth,  and  deserving  of  laudation,  by  our  praises.

4.  Lord  of  wealth,  giver  of  wealth,  possessor  of 
riches,  who  art  wise,  understand  (our  prayers),  and 
scatter  our  enemies.''

6.  (For  thou  art)  he  (who  gives)  us  rain  from 
heaven ;  he  (who  gives)  us  undecaying  strength,  he 
(who  gives)  us  infinite  (abundance  of)  food.

6.  Youngest  (of  the  gods),  their  messenger,  their 
invoker,  most  deserving  of  worship,  come,  upon  our

r  messenger,  their 
invoker,  most  deserving  of  worship,  come,  upon  our 
praise,  to  him  who  offers  (thee)  adoration,  and  is 
desirous  of  (thy)  protection."

7.  Sage  Agni,  thou  penetratest  the  innermost 
(man),  knowing  the  birth  of  both  (the  worshipper 
and  the  worshipped) ;  like  a  messenger  favourable 
to  men,  especially  to  his  friends.

8.  Do  thou,  Agni,  who  art  all-wise,  fulfil  (our 
desires) :  do  thou,  who  art  intelligent,  worship  (the 
gods)  in  order;  and  sit  down  on  this  sacred  grass.

Aswamishte-vydpakayajna,  whose  rites  are  expanding  ;  or  dsu, 
quick,  tadichchhati,  he  wishes  that ;  he  wishes  for  quick  or  prompt 
worship.  •Aswamishte-vydpakayajna,  whose  rites  are  expanding  ;  or  dsu, 
quick,  tadichchhati,  he  wishes  that ;  he  wishes  for  quick  or  prompt 
worship.  •

YajuV'Veda,  xii.  43 ;  the  explanation  is  the  same,  only  the

hip.  •

YajuV'Veda,  xii.  43 ;  the  explanation  is  the  same,  only  the 
ellipse  following  understand,  is  filled  up  by  abhimatam,  wish, 
desire.

c       '

Ildndya-pujayitre,  to  the  worshipper ;  avasyave-swarakshana- 
michchhate,  to  him  who  wishes  his  own  preservation.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — FIFTH    ADHYAYA.  225

Si5kta  VII.

Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

Vara;a

1.  Youngest  (of  the  gods),  Agni,  descendant  of      xxviii. 
Bharata,^  granter  of  dwellings,  bring  (to  us)  ex- 
cellent, splendid,  and  enviable  riches.

2.  Let  no  enemy  prevail  against  us,  whether  of 
god  or  man  ;  protect  us  from  both  such  foes.

3.  Let  us,  through  thy  favour,  overwhelm  all  our 
foes,  like  torrents  of  water.

4.

rough  thy  favour,  overwhelm  all  our 
foes,  like  torrents  of  water.

4.  Purifier,  Agni,  holy,  adorable,  thou  shinest 
exceedingly  when  (thou  art)  worehipped  with 
(oblations  of)  butter.

5.  Agni,  descendant  of  Bharata,  thou  art  en- 
tirely ours,  when  sacrificed  to  with  pregnant  kine, 
with  barren  cows,  or  bulls.''

6.  Feeder  upon  fuel,''  to  whom  butter  is  offered, 
(thou  art). the  ancient,  the  invoker  of  tbe  gods,  the 
excellent,  the  son  of  strength,  the  wonderful.

Bharata,  according  to  Sdyana,  means  sprung  from  the  priests, 
— bharatd-ritwija,  produced  by  their  rubbing  the  sticks  together.

Vasdbhir'Ukshabhih-ashfdpadtbhirdhutah,  offered  or  sacrificed

together.Vasdbhir'Ukshabhih-ashfdpadtbhirdhutah,  offered  or  sacrificed

together.

Vasdbhir'Ukshabhih-ashfdpadtbhirdhutah,  offered  or  sacrificed 
to  with  barren  cows,  vasd;  with  bulls,  uksha;  and  with  eight- 
footed  animals ;  that  is,  according  to  Sdyana,  a  cow  with  calf; 
but  it  is  remarkable  that  these  animals  should  be  spoken  of  as 
burnt-offerings.

Drvannah:  from  dru,  a  tree,  or  timber;  and  anna,  food.

VOL.  II.  Q

226  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Si5kta  VIII.

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same,  as  is  the  metre,  except  in  the 
last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  Anusht'uhh.

Varga  XXIX.  1.  Praise  quickly  the  yoked  chariot  of  the  glorious 
and  munificent  Agni,  like  one  who  is  desirous  of 
food.

2.  Who,  sagacious,  invincible,  and  of  graceful

is  desirous  of 
food.

2.  Who,  sagacious,  invincible,  and  of  graceful 
gait,  destroys,  when  propitiated,  his  foe,  for  him 
who  presents  (offerings).

3.  Who,  invested  with  radiance,  is  glorified,  morn- 
ing and  evening,  in  (our)  dwellings :  whose  worship 
is  never  neglected.

4.  Who,  many-tinted,  shines  with  radiance,  like 
the  sun  with  (his)  lustre,  spreading  (light)  over  (all) 
by  his  imperishable  (flames).

5.  Our  praises  have  increased  the  self-irradiating 
devouring  Agni  :  he  is  possessed  of  all  glory.

6.  May  we,  uninjured,  be  secure  in  the  protection 
of  Agni,  Indra,  Soma,  and  the  gods,  and,  confident 
in  battle,  overcome  (our  enemies).

SIXTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUYAKA  I.  {continued).

tle,  overcome  (our  enemies).

SIXTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUYAKA  I.  {continued).

SUKTA    IX.

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Trishtubh.

Varga  I.  1.  May  Agni,  the  invoker   (of  the   gods),   the

intelligent,  the  resplendent,   the  radiant,  the  very

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  227Varga  I.  1.  May  Agni,  the  invoker   (of  the   gods),   the

intelligent,  the  resplendent,   the  radiant,  the  very

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  227

powerful ;  he  who  knows  (how  to  maintain)  his  rites 
undisturbed ;  who  is  steady  in  (his  own)  phice,  and 
is  the  cherisher  of  thousands,  sit  in  the  station  of 
the  invoking  priest,'*

2.  Showerer  (of  benefits),  Agni,  be  thou  our 
messenger  (to  the  gods) ;  our  preserver  from  evil ; 
the  conveyer  to  us  of  wealth ;  the  protector  of  our 
sons  and  grandsons,  and  of  our  persons ;  understand

protector  of  our 
sons  and  grandsons,  and  of  our  persons ;  understand 
(our  prayer),  ever  heedful  and  resplendent.

3.  We  adore  thee,  Agni,  in  thy  loftiest  birth- 
(place),  and  with  hyrans  in  thine  inferior  station  -}  I 
worship  that  seat  whence  thou  hast  issued :  the 
priests  have  offered  thee,  when  kindled,  oblations.

4.  Agni,  who  art  the  chief  of  sacrificers,  worship 
(the  gods)  with  the  oblation,  and  earnestly  commend 
to  them  the  (sacrificial)  food  that  is  to  be  given 
(them) ;  for  thou,  indeed,  art  the  sovereign  lord  of 
riches  ;  thou  art  the  appreciator  of  our  pious  prayer.

5.  Beautiful  Agni,  the  two  dwelling-places  (heaven 
and  earth)  of  thee,  who  art  born  day  by  day,  never

-places  (heaven 
and  earth)  of  thee,  who  art  born  day  by  day,  never 
perish:  confer  upon  him  who  praises  thee  (abundant) 
food,  and  make  him  the  master  of  riches,  (support- 
ing) virtuous  offspring.

^  Hotrishadane,  in  a  place  convenient  for  pouring  the  butter 
on  the  fire,  or  near  to  the  Uttara-vedi,  the  north  altar;  or 
considering  the  fire  itself  to  be  introduced,  upon  the  altar; 
Mahidhara  explains  it  in  the  same  manner, — Yajv.r-Veda, 
VI.  36.^  That  is,  Agni  is  worshipped  in  heaven  as  the  Sun ;  in  the 
firmament  as  lightning  ;  and  as  the  sacrificial  fire  kindled  on  the 
altar:  the  same  occurs  in  the  Ynjush,  xvii.  75.

Q  2

228  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

6.

e  occurs  in  the  Ynjush,  xvii.  75.

Q  2

228  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

6.  Do  thou,  with  this  (thy)  host  (of  attendants), 
be  of  good  promise  to  u?: :  do  thou,  the  especial 
worshipper  of  the  gods,  their  unassaihible  protector, 
as  well  as  our  preserver,  light  u})  (all)  with  shining 
and  affluent  M^ell-being.

SUKTA    X.

Deity,  Risfii,  and  metre,  as  before.

Varga  II.  1.  The  adorable  Agni,  the  first  (of  the  gods),  and

their  nourisher  when  kindled  by  man  upon  the 
altar;  he  who  is  clothed  in  radiance,  is  immortal, 
discriminating,  food -bestowing,  powerful ;  he  is  to 
be  worshipped.

2.  May  Agni,  who  is  immortal,  of  manifold 
wisdom,  and  wonderful  splendour,  hear  my  invoca-

mmortal,  of  manifold 
wisdom,  and  wonderful  splendour,  hear  my  invoca- 
tion, (preferred)  with  all  laudations  :  tawny,  or  red, 
or  purple  horses  draw  his  car ;  he  has  been  borne  in 
various  directions.

3.  They  have  generated  (Agni)  when  soundly 
sleeping  on  his  upturned  (couch) :"  that  Agni  who 
is  an  embryo  in  many  (vegetable)  forms,  and  who, 
(rendered  manifest)  by  the  oblation,  abides  conscious 
in  the  night,  unenveloped  by  darkness.

4.  I  offer  oblations  with  butter  to  Agni,''  who 
spreads  through  all  regions,  vast,  expanding,  with

Uttundyum  sushdtam,  on  the  lower  of  the  two  sticks  which 
are  rubbed  together,

Jigharmy-agnim  havishd  ghritena:  the  Yajush,  xi.  23,  reads

together,Uttundyum  sushdtam,  on  the  lower  of  the  two  sticks  which 
are  rubbed  together,

Jigharmy-agnim  havishd  ghritena:  the  Yajush,  xi.  23,  reads

together,

Jigharmy-agnim  havishd  ghritena:  the  Yajush,  xi.  23,  reads 
it,  d  twd  jigharmi  manasd  ghritena,  I  sprinkle  thee  with  butter, 
with  a  believing  mind ;  sraddhayuktena  chittena.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  220

all-eomprehending-  form,*  nourished  (with  sacrificial) 
food,  povverfii],  conspicuous.

5.  I  offer  oblations  to  Agni,  who  is  present  at  all 
(sacrifices)  ;^  may  he  accept  (them),  offered  with  an 
unhesitating  mind,  (to  him)  who  is  the  refuge  of 
man,  endowed  with  any  form  that  may  be  desired, 
blaziiig  with  a  radiance  (that  it  is)  not  (possible)  to 
endure.

6.  Overpowering  (thy  foes)  with  lustre,  mayest 
thou  recognize  thy  portion :  may  we,  having  tliee

with  lustre,  mayest 
thou  recognize  thy  portion :  may  we,  having  tliee 
for  our  messenger,  recite  (praise)  like  Manu  : 
desiring  wealth,  I  offer  oblation  with  the  sacrificial 
ladle  and  with  praises,  to  that  entire  Agni,  who 
rewards  (the  worshipper)  with  the  sweet  (fruit)  of 
the  sacrifice.

Prithum  tiraschd  vayasd  vrihanfam :  Mahidhara  connects  the 
two  first,  and  renders  them,  vast  with  crooked-going  or  undulating 
radiance :  the  two  last  he  interprets,  augmenting  with  smoke : 
other  interpretations  are  given,  hut  they  are  not  more  intelligible 
than  that  of  the  text.

This  verse  is  also  in  the  Yajnsh,  xi.  24 ;  and  from  Kdtyd-

text.This  verse  is  also  in  the  Yajnsh,  xi.  24 ;  and  from  Kdtyd-

text.

This  verse  is  also  in  the  Yajnsh,  xi.  24 ;  and  from  Kdtyd- 
yana,  a  direction  is  given  for  its  use  and  that  of  the  preceding : 
they  are  to  be  repeated  together,  but  the  first  half  of  stanza 
four  is  to  be  repeated  with  the  second  half  of  stanza  five,  and  the 
first  half  of  stanza  five  with  the  second  half  of  stanza  four :  as 
the  sense  of  the  line  stops  with  the  half-stanza,  there  is  no 
obscurity  of  meaning  from  the  process,  but  it  shows  that  more 
attention  is  paid  to  the  manner  than  the  matter  of  the  recitation.

230  R[G-VEDA    SANHITA.

SuKTA  XI.

ITie  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  RisM  as  before ;  the  metre  is  a  species

ITie  deity  is  Indra  ;  the  RisM  as  before ;  the  metre  is  a  species 
of  TrisJdubh,  entitled  Virdt'-sthund,  except  in  the  last  verse,  in 
which  it  is  in  the  usual  form.

Varga  III.  1.  IxDRA,    hear   (my)    invocation;    disregard    it

not :  may  we  be  (thought  Avorthy)  of  the  gift  of  thy 
treasures  :  these  oblations,  designed  to  obtain  wealth, 
flowing  (abundantly)  like  rivers,  bring  to  thee  aug- 
mented vigour.

2.  Indra,  hero,  thou  hast  set  free  the  copious 
(waters)  which  -^cyq  formerly  arrested  by  Am,  and 
which  thou  liast  distributed  :  invigorated  by  hymns, 
thou  hast  cast  down  lieadlong  the  slave,  conceiting 
himself  immortal.

3.  Indra,  hero,  these  brilliant  (laudations),  in

ng 
himself  immortal.

3.  Indra,  hero,  these  brilliant  (laudations),  in 
(the  form  of)  hymns,  in  which  thou  delightest,  and 
in  (that  of)  the  praises  uttered  by  the  worshippers'* 
by  which  thou  art  gratified,  are  addressed  to  thee, 
to  bring  thee  (to  our  sacrifice).4.  We  are  invigorating  thy  brilliant  strength  (by 
our  praises),  and  placing  the  thunderbolt  in  thy 
iiands :  do  thou,  Indra,  radiant,  increasing  in 
strength,  and  (encouraged)  by  the  sun,  overpower, 
for  our  (good),  the  servile  people.''

Rudriyeshu  stomeshu:  Rudriya  raay  be  rendered,  the  means 
of  giving  pleasure, — siikhasddhanahhlteshu ;  or  Riidrdh  may  mean 
stofdrah,  praisers,  worshippers  ;  either  is  an  unusual  signification.

stofdrah,  praisers,  worshippers  ;  either  is  an  unusual  signification.

Ddsir  visah  suryena  sahydh:  the  two  first  the  Scholiast 
renders  by,  vpakshapayatnh,  or  dsiirih  pi-ajdh,  people  interrupting

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  231

6.  Indra,  hero,  thou  hadst  slain  by  tliy  prowess 
the  glorified  AM,  hidden  privily  in  a  cave,  lurking- 
in  concealment,  covered  by  the  waters  in  which  he 
was  abiding,  and  arresting  the  rains  in  the  sky.

6.  We  glorify,  Indra,  thy  mighty  (deeds)  of  old  :     Vaiga  iv. 
we  glorify  thy   (more)  recent  exploits :  we  praise

the  thunderbolt  shining  in  thine  arms,  and  we 
celebrate  the  horses,  the  signs  of  (Indra  as)  the 
sun.''

7.

and  we 
celebrate  the  horses,  the  signs  of  (Indra  as)  the 
sun.''

7.  Thy  swift  horses,  Indra,  have  uttered  a  loud 
sound,  announcing  rain:  the  level  earth  anxiously 
expects  its  fall,  as  the  gathering  cloud  has  passed.

8.  The  cloud,  not  heedless  (of  its  office),  is  sus- 
pended (in  the  sky) ;  resonant  with  maternal 
(waters),  it  has  spread  about :  (the  winds),  aug- 
menting the  sound  in  the  distant  horizon,  have 
promulgated  the  voice  uttered  by  Indra.

9.  The  mighty  Indra  has  shattered  the  guileful 
ViiiTRA,  reposing  in  the  cloud  :  heaven  and  earth 
shook,  alarmed  at  the  thundering  bolt  of  the 
showerer.

10.  The  thunderbolt  of  the  showerer  roared10.  The  thunderbolt  of  the  showerer  roared

ng  bolt  of  the 
showerer.

10.  The  thunderbolt  of  the  showerer  roared 
aloud,  when  (Indra),  the  friend  of  man,  sought  to 
slay  the  enemy  of  mankind.''     Drinking  the  Soma

religious  rites,  or  of  the  race  of  Asuras :  suryeAa  lie  renders  by 
prerakeiia,  urger,  instigator,  as  if  it  were  an  adjective.

Hart  siiryasya  ketu,  the  two  horses  the  signs  of  the  sun ;  but 
the  SchoHast  proposes  to  explain  siirya  by  instigator  or  heroic, — 
sushfu  p-erukasya  ;  or  su-v{ryasya,  as  indicating  Indra ;  or  it  may 
mean,  of  Indra,  identical  with  Surya,  Surydtmanah  Indrasya.

Amdnusham  yan  mdnuslio  nijurvii,  when  the  man,  or  as  Sdya/ia

232  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

slio  nijurvii,  when  the  man,  or  as  Sdya/ia

232  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

juice,    he,    (Indra),    baffled    the    devices    of  the 
guileful  Ddnava. 
VargaV.  11.  Drink  hero,  Indra,  drink  the  Soma:  may

the  exhilarating  juices  delight  thee :  may  they, 
distending  thy  flanks,  augment  (thy  prowess),  and 
in  this  manner  may  the  replenishing  effused  libation 
satisfy  Indra.

12.  May  we,  thy  pious   (worshippers),  abide  in 
thee:    approaching   thee   with   devotion,    may  we 
enjoy  (the  reward  of)  our  adoration;   desirous  of 
protection,  we  meditate  thy  glorification  :  may  we- 
ever  be  (thought  worthy)  of  the  gift  of  thy  treasures.

13.  May  we,  (through)  thy  (favour),  Indra,  be

ft  of  thy  treasures.

13.  May  we,  (through)  thy  (favour),  Indra,  be 
such  as  those  are,  who,  desirous  of  thy  protection, 
augment  (by  their  praises)  thy  vigour:  divine 
(Indra),  thou  grantest  the  wealth  which  we  desire, 
(the  source  of)  great  power  and  of  (numerous) 
progeny.14.  Thou  grantest  a  habitation ;  thou  grantest  us 
friends;  thou  grantest  us,  Indra,  the  strength  of 
the  Maruts:  the  winds,*  who,  propitious  and 
exulting,  drink  copiously  of  the  first  offering  (of  the 
So?na  juice).

expljuns  it,  the  benefactor  of  man,  manushydndm  hitakdn,  destroyed 
the  no-man  ;  that  is,  the  manushydndm-ahitam,  not  friendly  to  man  ; 
which  is,  probably,  a  correcter  reading  than  the  manushydndm'

man  ; 
which  is,  probably,  a  correcter  reading  than  the  manushydndm' 
rahitam,  of  the  printed  text.

Vdyavah,  the  Scholiast  adds,  may  be  put  honorifically  for 
Vayu,  in  the  singular,  of  whom  it  is  said,  that  he  is  the  first 
drinker  of  the  Soma ;  Vdyur-hi  somasya  agrapdtd.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  233

15.  Let  those*  in  whom  thou  art  delighted  repair 
(to  the  libation),  and  do  thou,  Indra,  confiding, 
drink  the  satiating  Soma:  liberator  (from  evil), 
associated  with  the  mighty  and  adorable  (Maruts), 
augment  our  prosperity,  and  (that  of)  heaven.^

16.  Liberator  (from  evil),  they  who  worship  thee,     Varga  vi. 
the  giver  of  happiness,  with   holy  hymns,   quickly

thee,     Varga  vi. 
the  giver  of  happiness,  with   holy  hymns,   quickly 
become  great :  they  who  strew  the  sacred  grass  (in 
honour  of  thee)  are  protected  by  thee,  and,  together

with  their  families,  obtain  (abundant)  food.

17.  Indra,  hero,  exulting  in  the  solemn  Tri- 
JiadruJca'^  rites,  quaff  the  Soma  juice,  and  re- 
peatedly shaking  it  from  thy  beard,  repair,  well 
pleased  with  thy  steeds,  to  the  drinking  of  the 
effused  libation.

18.  Indra,  hero,  keep  up  the  strength  wherewith 
thou   hast   crushed  Vrita,   the  spider-like  son   of18.  Indra,  hero,  keep  up  the  strength  wherewith 
thou   hast   crushed  Vrita,   the  spider-like  son   of

Yeshu  may  apply  either  to  the  Maruts  or  to  the  Soma; — 
mav  those  Maruts  or  those  Soma  juices,  in  which  thou  delightest.

— 
mav  those  Maruts  or  those  Soma  juices,  in  which  thou  delightest.

Asmdntsu  pritswd  tarutra  avarddhayo  dydm  hrihadbhir  arkaih : 
the  sense  is  not  very  obvious :  Sdyana  explains  pritsu  as  the 
quahfication  of  avarddhaya,  increase,  that  is,  v^rith  children,  cattle, 
and  the  like ;  in  consequence  of  which  prosperous  condition, 
men  can  offer  sacrifices,  whence  heaven  thrives :  arkaih  is  for 
archaniyaih,  to  be  adored,  the  Maruts,  understood.

See  vol.  i.  p.  85.  The  Trikadruhas  are  said,  by  the  commen- 
tator, to  denote  three  days,  or  celebrations  of  the  ceremonial, 
termed  ahJdplava ;  dbhiplavikeshu  ahah-su,  called  severally,  Jyotish,

, 
termed  ahJdplava ;  dbhiplavikeshu  ahah-su,  called  severally,  Jyotish, 
Gai/h,  A'yns :  the  text  designates  them  as  ugrefihu,  fierce,  angry ; 
but  the  Scholiast  here  explains  ugra  to  mean,  having  many 
praises  and  prayers, — hahu  stotrasdstravat.

234  J3LIQ-VEDA    SANHITA.

Danu,^  and   let  open  the  light  to  the  A'rya:  the 
Dastfu  has  been  set  aside  on  thy  left  hand.

19.  Let  us  honour  those  men,  who,  through  thy 
protection,  surpass  all  their  rivals,  as  the  Dasyus 
(are  surpassed)  by  the  Arya:  this  (hast  thou 
wrought)  for  us:  thou  hast  slain  Viswarupa,  the 
son  of  TwASHTRi,  through  friendship  for  Trita.*

20.  Invigorated  (by  the  libation)  of  the  exulting

dship  for  Trita.*20.  Invigorated  (by  the  libation)  of  the  exulting

dship  for  Trita.*

20.  Invigorated  (by  the  libation)  of  the  exulting 
Trita,  offering  thee  the  Soma,  thou  hast  annihilated 
Arbuda:  Indra,  aided  by  the  Angirasas,  has  whirled 
round  his  bolt,  as  the  sun  turns  round  his  wheel,'' 
and  slain  Bala.

21.  That  opulent  donation,  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee  the  boon  (which  he  desires) :  grant  it  to  us,  thy 
praisers  ;  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of  adora- 
tion," disregard  (our  prayer):  so  that,  blessed  with 
worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.

**  Danum  aurnavdbham :  Sdyafia  considers  the  latter  to  be  the

ice.

**  Danum  aurnavdbham :  Sdyafia  considers  the  latter  to  be  the 
same  as  aurnandbham ;  or  that  it  may  be  composed  of  auriia,  a 
spider,  and  dbhd,  resembhng.

^  Trita,  in  this  and  the  next  stanza,  is  said  to  be  a  Maharshi.

*^  Suryo  na  chakram;  or  m  may. be  used  in  a  negative  sense, 
and  the  phrase  imply,  when  the  sun  did  not  turn  his  wheel,  or 
stood  still  through  fear  of  the  Asvra  :  or  again,  it  may  mean,  that 
Indra  whirled  the  wheel  like  the  sun,  having  taken  one  of  the 
wheels  of  the  sun's  chariot  as  a  weapon  against  Bala.

'^  Mdti  dhag  hJiago  no:  Sdyana  renders,  Bhvjaniyastwam 
asmdkam.  kdjndn  md  ddkshih,  thou,  who  art  adorable,  consume  not

twam 
asmdkam.  kdjndn  md  ddkshih,  thou,  who  art  adorable,  consume  not 
our  desires  ;  YdsJca  separates  the  two  last  words,  as,  bliago  no  astu, 
mav  fortune  be  to  us. — Nir.  i.  7.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  235

ANUVAKA  11.

SUKTA    I.    (XII.)

Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  235

ANUVAKA  11.

SUKTA    I.    (XII.)

Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  He,  who  as  soon  as  born,  is  the  first  (of  the     Varga  vii. 
deities) ;  who  has  done  honour  to  the  gods  by  his 
exploits ;"  he,  at  whose  might  heaven  and  earth  are 
alarmed,  and  (who  is  known)  by  the  greatness  of  his 
strength,  he,  men,^  is  Indra.

Who  has  preserved  or  protected  them  :  or  has  surpassed 
them;  pratyarakshad  ahjakrdmad-iti  vd. — Ydska,  x.  10:  the

s  surpassed 
them;  pratyarakshad  ahjakrdmad-iti  vd. — Ydska,  x.  10:  the 
whole  of  this  hymn  occurs,  with  one  additional  stanza,  in  the 
Atharva-Veda ,  xx.  34  ;  to  which,  by  the  more  naodem  character 
of  its  style,  it  more  i.roporly  belongs  :  its  construction  is  in  striking 
contrast  for  intelligibility  with  the  more  ordinary  elliptical  and 
obscure  construction  of  the  SiUctas  by  which  it  is  preceded  and 
followed.

Sa  jandsa  Indra ;  jandso  jand,  he  asiirdh,  the  Scholiast  thus 
explaining yfl«fl  :  but  this  has  reference,  it  is  supposed,  to  a  curious 
legend,  which  is  somevvhat  variously  related,  although  to  the  same 
general  purport:  according  to  one  version,  Gritsamada,  bv  hise  same 
general  purport:  according  to  one  version,  Gritsamada,  bv  his 
devotions,  acquired  a  form  as  vast  as  that  of  Indra,  visible  at  once 
in  heaven,  in  the  firmament,  and  on  earth ;  the  two  Asuras, 
Dhuni  and  Chumuri,  taking  him,  therefore,  for  Indra,  were  pro- 
ceeding to  attack  him,  when  he  arrested  their  advance  by 
repeating  this  hymn,  intimating  that  he  was  not  Indra:  another 
version  states,  that  when  Indra  and  the  gods  were  present  at  a 
sacrifice  celebrated  by  Vainya,  C'rifsnmada  was  one  of  the  officiating 
priests ;  the  Asuras  came  to  the  spot  to  hill  ladra,  w]}o,  ass'iming 
the  likeness  of  Grltsamadn,  went  away  without  question :  when

s'iming 
the  likeness  of  Grltsamadn,  went  away  without  question :  when 
the  assembly  broke  up,  and  Griisamada  v»'ent  out,  the  Asuras, 
who  had  been  lying  wait,  considered  him  to  be  Indra,  and  were

236  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA,

2.  He,  who  fixed  firm  the  moving  earth ;  who 
tranquillized  the  incensed  mountains ;''  who  spread 
the  spacious  firmament;  who  consolidated  the 
heaven  ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.

3.  He,  who  having  destroyed  Ani,  set  free  the 
seven  rivers ;  who  recovered  the  cows  detained  by 
Bala  ;  who  generated  fire  in  the  clouds ;  who  is 
invincible  in  battle  ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.

4.  He,  by  whom  all  these  perishable  (regions) 
have  been  made;  who  consigned  the  base  servile

perishable  (regions) 
have  been  made;  who  consigned  the  base  servile 
tribe  to  the  cavern ;  who  seizes  triumphant  the 
cherished  (treasures)  of  the  enemy,  as  a  hunter 
(strikes)  his  prey ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.5.  He,  whom,  terrible,  they  ask  for,  (saying), 
Where  is  he?  or,  verily,  they  say  of  him,  he  is  not 
(in  any  one  place) ;  but  who,  inflicting  (chastise- 
ment), destroys  the  cherished  (treasures)  of  the 
enemy ;  in  him  have  faith ;  for  he,  men,  is  Indra.

about  to  fall  upon  him,  when  he  diverted  them  from  their  purpose 
by  reciting  this  hymn,  showing  that  Indra  was  a  different  person  : 
a  third  storv  is,  that  Indra  came  alone  to  the  sacrifice  of  Gritsa-

a  third  storv  is,  that  Indra  came  alone  to  the  sacrifice  of  Gritsa- 
mada,  and  being,  as  before,  waylaid  by  the  Asuras,  assumed  the 
person  of  the  RisM,  and  coming  forth,  returned  to  Swarga ;  after 
waiting  some  time,  the  Asuras  entered  the  chamber  of  sacrifice, 
and  laid  hold  of  Grifsamada,  conceiving  that  Indra  had  assumed 
his  person,  until  they  were  persuaded  of  their  mistake  by  the 
repetition  of  this  Sukta:  the  legend,  as  before  stated,  is  briefly 
alluded  to  in  the  Mahdbhurata.

"  Yah  parvatdn prakupitan  aramiuit ;  the  Scholiast  says  he  quieted 
the  mountains,  going  hither  and  thither,  as  long  as  they  had 
wings  :  Indra  cut  them  off.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHyAya.

y  had 
wings  :  Indra  cut  them  off.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHyAya.         237

6.  He,  wlio  is  the  encourag-er  of  the  rich,  and  of    Varga  viii. 
the  poor,  and  of  the  priest,  who  recites  his  praise,

and  is  a  suppliant ;  who,  of  goodly  features,  is  the 
protector  of  him,  who,  with  ready  stones,  expresses 
the  So)na  juice;  he,  men,  is  Indra,

7.  He,  under  whose  control  are  horses  and  cattle, 
and  villages,  and  all  chariots  ;  he  who  gave  birth  to 
the  sun  and  to  the  dawn  :  and  who  is  the  leader  of 
the  waters ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.8.  Whom  (two  hosts),  calling  and  mutually  en- 
countering, call  upon  f  whom  both  adversaries,  high

and  mutually  en- 
countering, call  upon  f  whom  both  adversaries,  high 
and  low,  (appeal  to) ;  whom  two  (charioteers),  stand- 
ing in  the  same  car,^  severally  invoke ;  he,  men,  is 
Indra.

9.  Without  whom  men  do  not  conquer;  whom, 
when  engaged  in  conflict,  they  invoke  for  succour ; 
he,  who  is  the  prototype  of  the  universe  and  the 
caster  down  of  tbe  unyielding  ;  he.  men,  is  Indra.

10.  He,  who  with  the  thunderbolt  has  destroyed 
many  committing  great  sin,  and  offering  (him) 
no  homage ;  who  grants  not  success  to  the  con- 
fident ;  who  is  the  slayer  of  the  Dasiju ;  he,  men, 
is  Indra.

11.  He,  who  discovered  S'ambara  dwelling  in  the      Varga  ix.

Indra.

11.  He,  who  discovered  S'ambara  dwelling  in  the      Varga  ix. 
mountains  for  forty  years  ;  who  slew  Am,  growing

Yam  krandasi  sanyati  vihvayele ;  whom,  crying  alou'^,  en- 
countering (two),  invoke ;  there  is  no  substantive :  Sdyana  pro- 
poses, rodasi,  heaven  and  eiirth  ;  or  dice  sene,  two  armies.

Here  again  a  substantive  is  wanting  :  the  Scholiast  suppHes 
ratkinau,  two  charioteers,  or  Agni  and  Indra.

238  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

in  strength,  and  the  sleeping  son  of  Danu  f  lie, 
men,  is  Indra.

12.  He,  the  seven-rayed,^  the  showerer,  the 
powerful,  who  let  loose  the  seven  rivers  to  flow ; 
who,  armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  crushed  Rauhina

en  rivers  to  flow ; 
who,  armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  crushed  Rauhina 
when  scaling  heaven  ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.en  rivers  to  flow ; 
who,  armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  crushed  Rauhina 
when  scaling  heaven  ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.

13.  He,  to  whom  heaven  and  earth  bow  down ; 
he,  at  whose  might  the  mountains  are  appalled  ;  he, 
who  is  the  drinker  of  the  So7na  juice,  the  firm  (of 
frame),  the  adamant-armed,  the  wielder  of  the 
thunderbolt ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.

14.  He,  who  protects  (the  worshipper)  offering 
the  libation,  or  preparing  (the  mixed  curds  and 
butter),  repeating  his  praise  and  soliciting  his 
assistance ;  he,  of  whom  the  sacred  prayer,  the 
(offered)  Soma  juice,  the  (presented  sacrificial)  food, 
augment  (the  vigour) ;  he,  men,  is  Indra.

16.  Indra,  who  art  difficult  of  approach ;  thou,

e,  men,  is  Indra.

16.  Indra,  who  art  difficult  of  approach ;  thou, 
verily,  art  a  true  (benefactor),  who  bestowest 
(abundant)  food  upon  him  who  offers  the  libation, 
who  prepares  (the  mixed  curds  and  butter) :  may 
we,  enjoying  thy  favour,  blessed  with  progeny,  daily 
repeat  (thy  praises)  at  the  sacrifice.

Sdyana  considers,  aid,  the  slayer,  ahantdram,  and  ddnum,  the 
son  of  Danu,  to  be  epithets  of  Sambara.

The  seven  rays,  rasmayah,  are  here  said  to  imply  the  seven 
forms  of  Parjanya,  or  Indra,  as  the  rain-cloud  ;  or  seven  kinds  of 
rain-clouds,  severally  named  in  the  Taittiriydranyaha.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  239

St5kta  II.  (XIII.)

riydranyaha.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  239

St5kta  II.  (XIII.) 
The  deity,  J^isM,  and  metre,  are  the  same.

1.  The  season  (of  the  rains)  is  the  parent  (of  the      Varga  x. 
So7na  plant),  which,  as  soon  as  born  of  her,  enters1.  The  season  (of  the  rains)  is  the  parent  (of  the      Varga  x. 
So7na  plant),  which,  as  soon  as  born  of  her,  enters

into  the  waters  in  which  it  grows ;  thence  it  is  fit 
for  expression,  as  concentrating  (the  essence  of  the) 
water ;  and  the  juice  of  the  Sojna  is  especially  to  be 
praised  (as  the  libation  proper  for  Indra).

2.  The  aggregated  (streams)  come,  bearing  every- 
where the  water,  and  conveying  it  as  sustenance  for 
the  asylum  of  all  rivers,  (the  ocean) :  the  same  path 
is  (assigned)  to  all  the  descending  (currents)  to

) :  the  same  path 
is  (assigned)  to  all  the  descending  (currents)  to 
follow ;  and  as  he,  who  has  (assigned)  them  (their 
course),  thou,  (Indra),  art  especially  to  be  praised.

3.  One  (priest)  announces  (the  offering)  that  he, 
(the  institutor  of  the  rite)  presents ;  another  per- 
forms the  act  that  apportions  the  limbs  (of  the 
victim);  a  third  corrects  all  the  deficiencies  of  either,* 
and  as  he,  who  has  enjoyed  these  (functions),  thou, 
(Indra),  art  especially  to  be  praised.

4.  Distributing  nourishment  to  their  progeny, 
they,  (the  householders),  abide  (in  their  dwellings), 
as  if  offering  ample  and  sustaining  wealth  to  a  guest : 
constructing  (useful  works,  a  man)  eats  with  his

ealth  to  a  guest : 
constructing  (useful  works,  a  man)  eats  with  his 
teeth  the  food  (given  him)  by  (his)  protector,''  and

According  to  Sdyana,  the  Hotri,  Adhwaryu,  and  Brahman^ 
are  the  three  priests  indicated.

Asinwan  dansMraih  pitur  atti  bhojanam ;  asintcan  is  explained 
bv  the  commentator,  setubandMdikam  karma  kurvan,  doing  acts,

240  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

as  he,  wlio  has  enjoined  tbese  (things  to  be  done), 
thou,  (Tndra),  art  especially  to  be  praised.240  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

as  he,  wlio  has  enjoined  tbese  (things  to  be  done), 
thou,  (Tndra),  art  especially  to  be  praised.

5.  Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  rendered  earth  visible 
to  heaven,  and  hast  set  open  the  path  of  the  rivers 
by  slaying  A  hi  ;  therefore  the  gods  have  rendered 
thee  divine  by  praises,  as  (men)  invigorate  a  horse  by

ave  rendered 
thee  divine  by  praises,  as  (men)  invigorate  a  horse  by 
water ;  (and)  thou  art,  (Indra),  to  be  praised. 
Varga  XI.  6.  (Thou  art  he)  who  bestowest  both  food  and

increase,  and  niilkest  the  dry  nutritious  (grain)  from 
out  the  humid  stalk  :  he,  who  gives  wealth  to  the 
worshipper,  and  art  sole  sovereign  of  the  universe  : 
thou  art  he,  (Indra),  who  is  to  be  praised.

7.  Thou,  who  hast  caused,  by  culture,  the  flower- 
ing and  fruitful  (plants)  to  spread  over  the  field; 
who  hast  generated  the  various  luminaries  of  heaven ; 
and  who,  of  vast  bulk,  comprehendest  vast  (bodies) ; 
thou  art  he  who  is  to  be  praised.

8.  Thou,  who  art  (famed  for)  many  exploits,  put

is  to  be  praised.

8.  Thou,  who  art  (famed  for)  many  exploits,  put 
on  to-day  an  unclouded  countenance,  (as  prepared) 
to  slav  Sahavasu,  the  son  of  Nrbiara,^  with  the 
sharpened  (edge  of  the  thunderbolt),  in  defence  of 
the  (sacrificial)  food,  and  for  the  destruction  of  the 
Dasyus :  thou  art  he  who  is  to  be  praised.

such  as  building  bridges,  and  the  like  :  pituJt  is  explained,  as 
usual,  pdlaka ;  but  Sdyana  suggests  that  it  may  imply  the  foster- 
ing heaven,  from  which  comes  the  rain  that  causes  the  growth  of 
grain,  for  the  sustenance  of  man.

"^  Two  Asuras,  of  whom  nothing  more  is  particularized  than 
the  etymology  of  their  appellations,  which  is  perhaps  not  very"^  Two  Asuras,  of  whom  nothing  more  is  particularized  than 
the  etymology  of  their  appellations,  which  is  perhaps  not  very

than 
the  etymology  of  their  appellations,  which  is  perhaps  not  very 
authentic  :  nri,  man,  and  mam,  who  hills ;  and  saha,  with,  vasu, 
wealth.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  241

9.  Thou,  for  whose  sole  pleasure  a  thousand 
(steeds  are  ready) ;  by  whom  all  are  to  be  fed  ;  and 
who  protectest  the  institutor  (of  the  sacrifice) ;  who, 
for  the  sake  of  Dabhiti,"^  hast  cast  the  Dasyus  into 
unfettered  (captivity),  and  who  art  to  be  approached 
(by  all),  thou  art  he  who  is  to  be  praised.

10.  Thou  art  he,  from  whose  manhood  all  the 
rivers  (have  proceeded) ;  to  whom  (the  pious)  have 
given  (offerings) ;  to  whom,  doer  of  mighty  deeds,

(the  pious)  have 
given  (offerings) ;  to  whom,  doer  of  mighty  deeds, 
they  have  presented  wealth  ;  thou  art  he,  who  hast 
regulated  the  six  expansive''  (objects),  and  art  the 
protector  of  the  five  (races),  that  look  up  to  thee  : 
thou  art  he  who  is  to  be  praised.

11.  Thy  heroism,  hero,  is  to  be  glorified,  by  which,     Varga  xii. 
with   a   single   effort,   thou  hast  acquired  wealth ; 
(wherewith)  the  (sacrificial)  food  of  (every)  solemn

and  constant  (ceremony  is  provided)  :'=  for  all  (the 
acts)  thou  hast  performed,  thou,  Indra,  art  he  who 
is  to  be  praised.

Dabhiti  has  been  named  before,  i.  295,  but  with  no  further

praised.

Dabhiti  has  been  named  before,  i.  295,  but  with  no  further 
description  than  his  being  a  Rishi :  he  is  elsewhere  called  a  Rdjd : 
see  note  {a),  p.  246 :  several  of  the  exploits  here  ascribed  to 
Indra  are,  in  the  hymn  referred  to,  attributed  to  the  Aswins.Shad-vishfirah ;  they  are  said  to  be,  heaven,  earth,  day, 
night,  water,  and  plants.

JdtusMhirasya  pra  vayah  sahaswato :  Jdfushfhira  may  be  a 
proper  name  ;  when  the  sense  will  be,  thou  hast  given  {pra  being 
put  for  prdddh)  food  to  the  vigorous  JdtusMhira;  but  the 
phrase  may  also  signify,  according  to  Sdyana,  Indra's  being  the 
occasional  {j^^u)  agent  in  sacrificial  offerings  (vayas)  in  relation

e 
occasional  {j^^u)  agent  in  sacrificial  offerings  (vayas)  in  relation 
to  constant  and  essential  ceremonies, — sthirasya  baluvato  yajnddeh 
karmana  sambandhih  vayas.

VOL.  II.  R

242  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

12.  Thou  hast  provided  a  passage  for  the  easy 
crossing  of  the  flowing  waters*  for  Turviti  and  for 
Vayya  :  rendering  (thyself)  renowned,  thou  hast 
uplifted  the  blind  and  lame  Paravrij^  from  the 
lowliness  (of  affliction) :  thou  art  he  who  is  to  be 
praised.

13.  Possessor  of  riches,  exert  thy  ability  to  bestow 
wealth  upon  us  ;  for  thine  is  great  affluence  :  mayest 
thou,  Indra,  be  disposed  to  grant  us  exceeding 
abundance  day  by  day,  so  that,  blessed  with  worthy

ant  us  exceeding 
abundance  day  by  day,  so  that,  blessed  with  worthy 
descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  (our)  sacrifice.

StJkta  III.  (XIV.) 
The  deity,  fiishi,  and  metre,  as  before. 
Varga  XIII.        1.  PHests,  bring  the  So}?ia  libation  for  Indra  ;StJkta  III.  (XIV.) 
The  deity,  fiishi,  and  metre,  as  before. 
Varga  XIII.        1.  PHests,  bring  the  So}?ia  libation  for  Indra  ;

Aramaya  sarapasastardya  srutim :  it  would  seem  as  if  Sayaia 
understood  apas  here  by  karma,  opvs  ;  saranam  apah  karma  ydsdm  ; 
they  of  whom  the  act  is  going  or  proceeding :  but  this  is  only 
his  etymology  of  apas,  waters,  for  he  presently  places  his  meaning 
beyond  doubt  by  saying,  that  the  persons  named  beheld  a  large 
river,  which  they  were  unable  to  cross,  when  they  prayed  to 
Indra,  and  were  conveyed  across  by  him.

o  cross,  when  they  prayed  to 
Indra,  and  were  conveyed  across  by  him.  2\rv{ti  and  Vayya 
have  both  occurred  more  than  once. — See  Index,  vol.  i.

Pardvrijam  prdndham  sronam,  which  is  the  expression  of 
S.  cxii.  V.  8  ;  see  vol.  i.  p.  290  ;  the  latter  adds  chakshase 
etave,  to  see  and  to  walk  ;  and  the  Scholiast  inserted,  as  under- 
stood, the  name  of  Rijrdswa,  as  the  individual  who  was  made  to 
see ;  whence  it  followed  that  Srona  was  the  name  of  him  who  was 
made  to  walk  :  from  this  passage,  however,  it  is  clear  that  there 
was  an  ellipse,  and  that  both  prdndha  and  hoiia,  or  blind  and 
lame,  were  epithets  of  PardvriJ :  the  miracle  in  the  earher  hymn

nd 
lame,  were  epithets  of  PardvriJ :  the  miracle  in  the  earher  hymn 
is  ascribed  to  the  Aswins.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  243

sprinkle  with  ladles  the  exhilarating  beverage :  he, 
the  hero,  is  ever  desirous  of  the  draught :  offer  the 
libation  to  the  showerer  (of  benefits),  for,  verily,  he 
desires  it.

2.  Priests,  offer  the  libation  to  him  who  slew  the 
rain-arresting  Vritra,  as  (he  strikes  down)  a  tree 
with  (his)  thunderbolt ;  to  him  who  desires  it :  and 
Indra  is  worthy  of  (the  beverage).?}.  Priests,  offer  this  libation,  which,  like  the  wind 
in  the  firmament,  (is  the  cause  of  rain) ;  to  him  who 
slew  Dribhika,*  destroyed  Bala,  and  liberated  the

rain) ;  to  him  who 
slew  Dribhika,*  destroyed  Bala,  and  liberated  the 
cows  :  heap  Indra  with  Soma  juice,  as  an  old  man 
(is  covered)  with  garments.

4.  Priests,  propitiate,  by  the  offering  of  the  Soma, 
that  Indra,  who  slew  Urana,''  displaying  nine  and 
ninety  arras  ;  and  hurled  Arbuda  down  headlong.

5.  Priests,  offer  the  Soma  libation  to  that  Indra, 
who  slew  Swasna,  the  unabsorbable  S'ushna,  and 
the  mutilated  (Vritra)  ;  who  destroyed  Pipru, 
Namuchi,  and  Rudhikra.''

6.  Priests,   present   the  Soma   libation   to   him,

An  Asura ;  Bala  we  have  had  before.

Urana  is  a  new  name ;  Arbuda  occurs  vol.  i.  p.  173.

S  ushna  has  often  been  named,  and  Piprti  occurs  more  than

p.  173.

S  ushna  has  often  been  named,  and  Piprti  occurs  more  than 
once :  see  Index,  vol.  i.  Sumsna-su-asndle  is  he  who  devours ; 
but  the  Schohast  refers  su  to  the  verb  jaghdna,  well-slew,  and 
makes  the  name,  Asm,  apparently  without  necessity ;  this  and 
Rudhikrd,  are  new  names  of  Asvras :  Namuchi  has  been  named 
before,  vol.  i.  14  :  his  destruction  by  the  foam  of  the  sea,  which 
is  a  PaurdAik  legend,  is  cited  by  Sdyana  from  the  Taitliriyci : — 
apdm  phenena  Namucheh  sir  ah  Indra  udavartayat.

R    2

244  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

who,  with  the  adamantine  (thunderbolt),  demolished 
the  hundred  ancient  cities  of  S'ambara,  and  cast 
down  the  hundred  thousand  (descendants)  of 
Varchin.''who,  with  the  adamantine  (thunderbolt),  demolished 
the  hundred  ancient  cities  of  S'ambara,  and  cast 
down  the  hundred  thousand  (descendants)  of 
Varchin.''

mbara,  and  cast 
down  the  hundred  thousand  (descendants)  of 
Varchin.'' 
vargaxiv.  7-  Priests,  present  the  Soma  libation  to  him, 
who,  slaying  hundreds  and  thousands  (of  Asuras\ 
cast  theni  down  upon  the  lap  of  the  earth :  who 
destroyed  the  assailants  of  Kutsa,  A'yu,  and 
Atithigwa.^

8.  Priests,  leaders  (of  the  ceremony),  may  you, 
quickly  bringing  the  offering  to  Indra,  receive  that 
(recompense)  which  you  may  desire:  solemnizing 
the  sacrifice,  offer  the  Soma  libation,  purified  by 
expressing,  to  the  renowned  Indra.

9.  Priests,  offer  to  him  the  prompt  (libation); 
lift  it  up,  purified  with  water,  in  the  ladle:  well 
pleased,  he  desires  it  from  your  hands ;  present  the

he  ladle:  well 
pleased,  he  desires  it  from  your  hands ;  present  the 
exhilarating  Soma^mQe  to  Indra.

10.  Priests,  fill  the  bountiful  Indra  with  liba- 
tions, as  the  udder  of  a  cow  is  filled  with  milk  ;  so 
shall  the  adorable  (Indra)  fully  comprehend  (the 
liberality)  of  him  who  desires  to  present  the  gift, 
and  shall  say  (to  him),  I  acknowledge  the  secret 
(virtue)  of  this  my  (draught).

11.  Priests,  fill  with  libations,  as  a  granary  (is 
filled)  with  barley,  Indra,  who  is  lord  of  the  riches

For  Samhara,  see  vol.  i.  Index ;  also  vol.  ii.  p.  34,  note. 
Varchin  is  said  to  have  ))een  an  Asura,  who  reviled  Indra,  and

te. 
Varchin  is  said  to  have  ))een  an  Asura,  who  reviled  Indra,  and 
was  consequently  destroyed,  with  all  his  children  and  dependants.

See  vol,  i.  Index.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  245

of  heaven,  of  mid-heaven,  of  earth ;  and  may  such 
(pious)  act  be  for  your  (good).See  vol,  i.  Index.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  245

of  heaven,  of  mid-heaven,  of  earth ;  and  may  such 
(pious)  act  be  for  your  (good).

12.  Possessor  of  riches,  exert  ihy  ability  to 
bestow  wealth  upon  us ;  for  thine  is  great  afflu- 
ence: mayst  thou,  Indra,  be  disposed  to  grant  us 
exceeding  abundance  day  by  day,  so  that,  blessed 
with  w'orthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at 
our  sacrifice.

SiJkta  IV.  (XV.) 
Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  Verily,    I  proclaim   the  great  and  authentic     Varga  xv.

fore.

1.  Verily,    I  proclaim   the  great  and  authentic     Varga  xv. 
deeds  of  the  mighty  and  true  (Indra)  ;  of  him  who

drank  the  eifused  juices  at  the  Trikadruka  rites,* 
and  in  his  exhilaration  slew  Ahi.

2.  Who  fixed  the  heaven  in  unsupported  (space), 
and  filled  the  spacious  firmament,  and  heaven,  and 
earth,  (with  light) :  he  it  is  who  has  upheld  and  has 
made  the  earth  renowned :  in  the  exhilaration  of 
the  Soma,  Indra  has  done  these  (deeds).

3.  (He  it  is)  who  has  measured  the  eastern 
(quarters)  with  measures  like  a  chamber ;  who  has 
dug  with  the  thunderbolt  the  beds  of  the  rivers, 
and  has  easily  sent  them  forth  by  long-continued

eds  of  the  rivers, 
and  has  easily  sent  them  forth  by  long-continued 
paths :  in  the  exhilaration  of  the  Soma,  Indra  has 
done  these  (deeds).

4.  Encountering  the  {Asuras),  carrying  off  Dab- 
HiTl,  he  burnt  all  their  weapons  in  a  kindled  fire, 
and  enriched   (the  prince)   with  their  cattle,  their

See  Hymn  xi.  Varga  xvii.  note.

246  RIG-VEDA:  SANHItA.

horses,  and  their  chariots:''  in  the  exhilaration  of 
the  Soma,  Indra  has  done  these  (deeds).See  Hymn  xi.  Varga  xvii.  note.

246  RIG-VEDA:  SANHItA.

horses,  and  their  chariots:''  in  the  exhilaration  of 
the  Soma,  Indra  has  done  these  (deeds).

5.  He  tranquilHzed  this  great  river,  (so  that  it)'' 
might  be  crossed ;  he  conveyed  across  it  in  safety 
(the  sages)  who  had  been  unable  to  pass  over  it, 
and  who,  having  crossed,  proceeded  to  realize  the

to  pass  over  it, 
and  who,  having  crossed,  proceeded  to  realize  the 
wealth  they  sought :  in  the  exhilaration  of  the 
Soma,  Indra  has  done  these  (deeds). 
Varga  XVI.  6.  By  his  great  power  he  turned  the  Sindhu 
towards  the  north  i*^  with  his  thunderbolt  he  ground 
to  pieces  the  waggon  of  the  dawn,  scattering  the 
tardy  enemy  with  his  swift  forces  :  in  the  exhilara- 
tion of  the  Soma,  Indra  has  done  these  (deeds).

7.  Conscious  of  the  disappearance  of  the  damsels,'^ 
the  {Rishi)  Parivrij,  becoming  manifest,  stood  up ; 
the   lame   man   overtook    (them),   the   blind   man

According  to  the  legend,  the  Asuras  had  besieged  and  taken

ind   man

According  to  the  legend,  the  Asuras  had  besieged  and  taken 
the  city  of  a  royal  sage,  named  Dabktti,  but  on  their  retreat  were 
intercepted  and  defeated  by  Indra,  who  recovered  the  booty,  and 
restored  it  to  the  prince.

Sa  in  maMm  dhunim  eto  aramndt :  dhuni,  according  to  Sdyana, 
is  a  synonyme  of  the  ParushM,  or  IrdvaK  River:  see  vol.  i, 
p.  88,  note,  from  its  shaking  or  dissipating  the  sins  of  the 
worshippers, — stotnndm  pdpdni  dhvnoti  parusMi  nadi.

Sodancham  sindhum  arindt ;  sindhum  prdncham  saiitam  udati' 
mukham  akarot ;  he  made  the  Sindhu,  being  to  the  east,  facing 
towards  the  north  :  there  is  no  further  explanation  of  the  senseg 
towards  the  north  :  there  is  no  further  explanation  of  the  sense 
of  the  passage,  and  it  does  not  appear  whether,  by  the  Sindhu,  we 
are  in  this  place  to  understand  the  Indus.

Certain  girls,  it  is  said,  made  sport  of  the  blind  and  lame 
Rishi,  who  thereupon  prayed  to  Indra,  and  recovered  his  sight 
and  the  use  of  his  legs  :  see  p.  242.

SECOND   ASIITAKA SIXTH    ADIIYAYA.  247

beheld   (them) :  in  the  exhilaration  of  the   Soma, 
Indra  has  done  these  (deeds).

8.  Praised  by  the  Angirasas,  he  destroyed 
Bala  :  he  forced  open  the  firm  shut  ((U)ors)  of  the 
mountain ;  he  broke  down  their  artificial  defences : 
in  the  exhilaration  of  the  Soma,  Indra  has  done 
these  (deeds).

9.

: 
in  the  exhilaration  of  the  Soma,  Indra  has  done 
these  (deeds).

9.  Thou  hast  sLain  the  Dasyus,  Chumuri  and 
Dhuni,  having  cast  them  into  (profound)  sleep : 
thou  hast  protected  Dabhiti,  whilst  his  chamberlain' 
gained  in  that  (contest)  the  gold  (of  the  A  suras) : 
in  the  exhilaration  of  the  Soma,  Indra  has  done 
these  (deeds).

10.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee  the  boon  (that  he  desires) :  grant  it  to  (us)  thy 
adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of  adora- 
tion, disregard  our  prayers;  so  that,  blessed  with 
worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.^

SijKTA  V.   (XVI.)

endants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.^

SijKTA  V.   (XVI.)

Deity,  Riski,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  I  bear  the  libation  for  you  to  the  best  of  the   Varga  xvii,

holy  (gods,  to  be  poured)  on  the  kindled  fire,  (and

I  offer  to  him)  fitting  praise) :  we  invoke  for  (our)

protection  the  ever-youthful  Indra,  the  undecaying,holy  (gods,  to  be  poured)  on  the  kindled  fire,  (and

I  offer  to  him)  fitting  praise) :  we  invoke  for  (our)

protection  the  ever-youthful  Indra,  the  undecaying,

Rambhi  chid  atra  vivide,  hiranyam :  Rambht  is  explained, 
vetradhdri,  staflf-bearer ;  or  dadvarika,  porter,  or  door-keeper.

This  verse  has  occurred  as  the  last  of  several  preceding 
Suktas,  pp.  234,  242,  and  is  repeated  in  several  that  follow  as  a 
sort  ft  burden.

248  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

the  causer  of  decay,  sprinkled  (with  the  Soma  liba- 
tion).

2.

HITA.

the  causer  of  decay,  sprinkled  (with  the  Soma  liba- 
tion).

2.  For  without  that  mighty  Indra,  this  (world) 
were  nothing :  in  him  all  powers  whatever  are 
aggregated :  he  receives  the  Soma  juice  into  his 
stomach,  and  in  his  body  (exhibits)  strength  and 
energy :  he  bears  the  thunderbolt  in  his  hand,  and 
wisdom  in  his  head.

3.  Thy  might,  Indra,  is  not  to  be  overcome  by 
(that  of)  heaven  and  earth  ;  nor  is  thy  chariot  (to  be 
stopped)  by  oceans  or  by  mountains:  no  one  can 
escape  from  thy  thunderbolt,  when  thou  traversest 
many  leagues  with  rapid  (horses).

4.  All  men  offer  worship  to  that  adorable,  power- 
ful, and  munificent  (Indra),  who  is  associated  (with

adorable,  power- 
ful, and  munificent  (Indra),  who  is  associated  (with 
praise) :  therefore,  (do  thou),  who  art  liberal  and 
most  wise,  worship  hiiii  with  oblations ;  and  drink, 
Indra,  the  Soma,  together  with  the  Sun,  the 
showerer  (of  benefits)/5.  The  juice  of  the  gratifying  and  exhilarating 
{Soma),  the  exciter  (of)  those  who  drink  it,  flows  to 
the  showerer  (of  benefits),  the  dispenser  of  food,  for 
his  beverage :  the  two  priests,  the  sprinklers  of  the 
oblation ;  and  the  stones  (that  express  the  juice), 
offer  to  the  best  (of  the  deities),  the  Soma,  the 
shedder  (of  blessings).^

Vrishabhena  bhdnund :  the  Scholiast  renders  bhdnu  by  Agni,

fire, 
b

Vrishabhena  bhdnund :  the  Scholiast  renders  bhdnu  by  Agni,

fire, 
b

The  main  object  of  this  and  the  succeeding  stanza  appears  to 
be  the  exemplification  of  the  various  modifications  of  meaning,  of 
which  the  words  vrishan  and  vrishabha  are  susceptible  ;  the  Soma

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH    ADHYAYA.  249

6.  Thy   thunderbolt,   Indra,   is   the   rainer   (of  Vargaxviii. 
bounties) ;  thy  chariot,  the  showerer  (of  blessings) ;

thy  two  horses,  the  shedders  (of  desires) ;  thy 
weapons,  the  diffusers  (of  wishes) ;  thou  reignest, 
showerer  (of  benefits),  over  the  inebriating  beverage, 
the  sprinkler  (of  delight) :  satiate  thyself,  Indra, 
with  the  good-diffusing  Soma.

7.

of  delight) :  satiate  thyself,  Indra, 
with  the  good-diffusing  Soma.

7.  Victorious  in  battle,  (through)  thy  (favour)  I 
approach  thee,  who  art  gratified  by  praise,  in  sacred 
rites  with  prayer,  as  a  boat  (to  bear  me  over  mis- 
fortune) :  may  Indra  listen  attentively  to  these  our 
words :  we  pour  out  libations  to  Indra,  (who  is  a 
receptacle)  of  treasure,  as  a  well  (is  of  water).

8.  Conduct  us  beforehand  away  from  evil,  as  a 
cow  grazing  in  a  meadow  leads  her  calf  (out  of 
peril) :  may  we,  S'atakratu,  envelop  thee,  if  but 
once,  with  acceptable  praises,  as  youthful  husbands 
(are  embraced)  by  their  wives.

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra,9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra,

ed)  by  their  wives.

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises

juice,  which  is  vrishan,  flows,  (to)  vrishahha,  Indra,  who  is  also 
vrishahhdnna :  the  two  priests,  the  AdhwaTyu  and  Pratisthdtri,  it  is 
said,  are  both  vrishahhas ';  so  are  the  stones  used  to  bruise  the  Soma 
plant ;  and  the  Soma  juice  is  vrishana ;  so  the  thunderbolt  is 
vrishd;  the  car  is  vrishd;  the  horses,  vrishanau;  the  weapons, 
vrishahhdni ;  the  Soma  is  vrishan;  and  Indra  and  the  Soma  are 
both  designated  vrishahha:  these  different  forms,  vrishan, 
vrishana,  vrishahha,  are  from  the  radical  vrish,  to  rain ;  and

shan, 
vrishana,  vrishahha,  are  from  the  radical  vrish,  to  rain ;  and 
imply  raining,  shedding,  showering,  sprinkling,  literally ;  or 
bestowing  freely  or  liberally,  when  used,  as  they  most  commonly 
are,  in  a  figurative  sense.

250  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

thee,  the  boon  (that  he  desires) :  grant  (it)  to  (us) 
thy  adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of 
adoration,  disregard  our  prayers :  so  that,  blessed 
with  worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at 
this  sacrifice.

SiJkta  VI.  (XVII.)

The  deity  and  RisM  as  before ;  the  metre  of  the  two  last  stanzas 
is  Trishfuhh ;  of  the  rest,  Jagati.

Varga  XIX.  1.  Address,  worshippers,  after  the  manner  of

st,  Jagati.

Varga  XIX.  1.  Address,  worshippers,  after  the  manner  of 
Angiras,  a  new  (hymn)  to  that  Indra,  whose 
withering  (energies)  were  developed  of  old ;  who, 
in  the  exhilaration  of  the  Soma,  forced  open  the 
obstructed  and  solid  clouds.'*2.  May  that  (Indra)  be  (exalted),  who,  manifest- 
ing his  energy,  exerted  his  might  for  the  first  drink- 
ing of  the  Soma :  a  hero,  who  in  combats  protected 
his  own  person,  and  by  his  greatness  sustained  the 
heaven  upon  his  head,

3.  Verily,  Indra,  thou  hast  displayed  thy  first 
great  prowess,  when,  (propitiated)  by  the  prayer 
(of  the  worshipper),  thou  hast  put  forth  thy  wither- 
ing (vigour)  in  his  presence:  and  when  the  con-

t  forth  thy  wither- 
ing (vigour)  in  his  presence:  and  when  the  con- 
gregated enemies  (of  the  gods),  hurled  down  by 
thee  in  thy  chariot,  draAvn  by  thy  horses,  fled, 
scattered.

4.  He  indeed,  the  ancient  Indra.  mailing  hiniself 
by   his   might  sovereign  over  all    worlds,    became

Yad-golrd,  for  gotrani,  clouds ;  from  go,  water,  and  Ird,  to 
preserva  or  contain  :  or  gotrd  may  mean,  herds  of  cattle,  tlie 
cows  of  the  Angitasas  recovered  by  Indra.

SECOND   ASH-fAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.         251

supreme  over  (all) ;  and  thenceforth  sustaining 
heaven  and  earth,  he  overspread  them  with  efful- 
gence, and,  scattering  the  malignant  glooms,  he 
pervaded  (all  things).

5.

ce, and,  scattering  the  malignant  glooms,  he 
pervaded  (all  things).

5.  By  his  strength  he  fixed  the  wandering 
mountains ;  he  directed  the  downward  course  of 
the  waters ;  he  upheld  the  earth,  the  nurse  (of  all 
creatures) ;  and  by  his  craft  he  stayed  the  heaven 
from  falling.

6.  Sufficient  was  he  for  (the  protection  of)  this     Varga  xx. 
(world),  which  he,  its  defender,  fabricated  with  his

two  arms  for  the  sake  of  all  mankind,  over  whom 
he  was  supreme  by  his  wisdom ;  whereby,  (also), 
he,  the  loud-shouting,  having  struck  Kmvi"  with  the 
thunderbolt,  consigned  him  to  (eternal)  slumber  on 
the  earth.7.  As  a  virtuous  (maiden),  growing  old  in  the

umber  on 
the  earth.

7.  As  a  virtuous  (maiden),  growing  old  in  the 
same  dwelling  with  her  parents,  (claims  from  them 
her  support),'"  so  come  I  to  thee  for  wealth :  make 
it  conspicuous,  measure  it,  bring  it  (hither),  grant  (a 
sufficient)  portion  for  my  bodily  sustenance,  (such 
as  that)  wherewith  thou  honourest  (thy  worshippers).

8.  We  invoke  thee,  Indra,  the  bestower  of 
enjoyment :  thou  grantest  food,  Indra,  (in  requital

An  Asura.

Amdjdr-iva  pitroh  sachd  sati  samdnat :  amdjuh  is  explained 
by  Say  ana,  living  at  home  during  life  ;  sati  he  renders,  daughter, 
duhitd :  the  point  of  comparison,  her  claiming  her  portion,  is  sup-

duhitd :  the  point  of  comparison,  her  claiming  her  portion,  is  sup- 
plied by  the  commentator;  but  the  possibility  of  a  daughter's 
being  so  situated  intimates  a  probability  that  infant  marriages 
were  not  at  this  time  considered  imperative.

252  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

of  pious)  works ;  protect  us,  Indra,  with  manifold 
protections ;  Indra,  sliowerer  (of  benefits),  render 
us  affluent.

9.  Tiiat  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  tliee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee,  the  boon  that  he  desires:  grant  (it)  to  (us)  thy 
adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of  adora- 
tion, disregard  our  prayers :  so  that,  blessed  with 
worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this

o  that,  blessed  with 
worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.

SiJkta  VII.  (XVIII.)

The  deity  and  Itishi  as  before ;  the  metre,  TrisMubh.o  that,  blessed  with 
worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.

SiJkta  VII.  (XVIII.)

The  deity  and  Itishi  as  before ;  the  metre,  TrisMubh.

Varga  XXI.  1.  A  laudable  and  pure  sacrifice^  has  been  insti- 
tuted at  dawn ;  having  four  pairs  (of  stones  for 
bruising  the  Soma) ;  three  tones  (of  prayer) ;  seven 
metree,  and  ten  vessels ;  beneficial  to  man,  con- 
ferring heaven,  and  sanctifiable  with  solemn  rites 
and  praises.

2.  That  (sacrifice)  is  sufficient  for  him,  (Indra), 
whether  (offered)  for  the  first,  the  second,  or  the

Prdtd  ratho  navo  yoji-ratho-ranhandd  yajnah :  the  word  ratha, 
as  derived  from  ranha,  to  go,  is  said  to  mean  here,  worship,

atha, 
as  derived  from  ranha,  to  go,  is  said  to  mean  here,  worship, 
sacrifice :  it  may  have,  however,  its  more  usual  meaning  of  a 
chariot,  in  which  case  the  other  words  and  phrases  are  to  be 
adapted  to  the  signification  :  the  chariot  has  been  harnessed, 
ayoji,'  provided  with  four  yokes,  chatur-yuga;  three  whips, 
trikasa;  seven  reins,  suptaraimi;  and  ten  sides  or  faces,  dasa 
aritra;  such  a  chariot  is  to  be  understood,  figuratively,  as  a 
conveyance  to  Swarga,  in  which  sense  it  is  also  applicable  to 
yajna,  sacrifice.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  253

third  time  :*  it  is  the  bearer  (of  good)  to  man :  other 
(priests)  engender  the  embryo  of  a  different  (rite),

to  man :  other 
(priests)  engender  the  embryo  of  a  different  (rite), 
but  this  victorious  (sacrifice),  the  showerer  (of 
benefits)  combines  with  other  (ceremonies).^

3.  I  harness  quickly  and  easily  the  horses  to  the 
car  of  Indra  for  its  journey,  by  new  and  well- 
recited  prayer :  many  wise  (worshippers)  are  pre- 
sent here ;  let  not  other  institutors  of  sacred  rites 
tempt  thee  (away).4.  Come,  Indra,  when  invoked,  with  two  horses, 
or  with  four,  or  with  six,  or  with  eight,  or  with  ten," 
to  drink  the  Soma  juice:  object  of  worship,  the 
juice  is  poured  out ;  do  no  wrong  (to  the  libation).

5.  Come  to  our  presence,  Indra,  having  har-

rong  (to  the  libation).

5.  Come  to  our  presence,  Indra,  having  har- 
nessed thy  car  with  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  horses ; 
or  with  fifty  well-trained  steeds ;  or  with  sixty  or 
with  seventy,  Indra,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

6.  Come,  Indra,  to  our  presence,  conveyed  by   Varga  xxii. 
eighty,  ninety,  or  a  hundred  horses :  this  Soma  has

been  poured  into  the  goblet,  Indra,  for  thy  exhila- 
ration.

7.  Come    hither,    Indra,    (having    heard)    my

Alluding  to  the  three  daily  sacrifices.

The  terms,  anyasydh,  anye,  and  anyehhih,  of  another,  others, 
with  others,  have  no  substantives  expressed ;  the  nouns  of  the 
text  are  supplied  from  the  Scholiast,  except  in  the  last,  which  he

text  are  supplied  from  the  Scholiast,  except  in  the  last,  which  he 
renders  by  Indra,  and  other  deities, — Indrddibhih  devoir  sangach- 
chate.

Although  the  horses  of  Indra  are  properly  but  two,  yet,  from 
their  supernatural  faculties,  they  may  multiply  themselves  with- 
out limit,  so  says  the  Scholiast.

254  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

prayer :  yoke  thy  two  universal  steeds  to  the  pole 
of  thy  chariot :  thou  hast  been  the  object  of  invoca- 
tion in  many  ways  by  many  (worshippers),  but  now, 
hero,  be  exhilarated  in  this  (our)  sacrifice.

8.  Never  may  my  friendship  with  Indra  be 
disunited :  may  his  liberality  (ever)  yield  us  (our 
desires) :  may  we  be  within  the  excellent  defence8.  Never  may  my  friendship  with  Indra  be 
disunited :  may  his  liberality  (ever)  yield  us  (our 
desires) :  may  we  be  within  the  excellent  defence

ver)  yield  us  (our 
desires) :  may  we  be  within  the  excellent  defence 
of  (his  protecting)  arms :  may  we  be  victorious  in 
every  battle.*

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee,  the  boon  that  he  desires  :  grant  (it)  to  (us) 
thy  adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of 
adoration,  disregard  our  prayers :  so  that,  blessed 
with  worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  in 
this  sacrifice.

Si5kta  VIII.  (XIX.) 
The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  the  same.

VargaxxiiT.  1.  It  has  beou  partaken^  (by  Indra)  for  his 
exhilaration,  of  this  agreeable  (sacrificial)  food,  the 
libation   of  his  devout  (worshipper) ;  thriving   by

icial)  food,  the 
libation   of  his  devout  (worshipper) ;  thriving   by

Pnii/e  prdye  jigivdnsak  synma:  prdye  is  explained,  in  one 
sense,  yuddh/,  in  war  or  battle ;  it  is  also  said  to  mean,  entering ; 
may  we  be  victorious  in  consequence  of  Indra's  repeatedly 
entering  or  frequenting  the  chamber  of  sacrifice.

Apuyi  asya  andhasah  is  here  used  impersonally,  being  the 
third  pers.  sing,  of  the  third  preterite,  passive  voice ;  the  com- 
mentator affirms  that  it  may  be  used  for  the  imperative,  and  be 
equivalent  to  Indra  somam  pivatu,  may  Indra  di-jnk  the  Soma ; 
but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  necessary.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  255

s  not  seem  to  be  necessary.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  255

which  ancient  (beverage),  he  has  bestowed  a  (fitting) 
dwelling,  where  the  adoring  conductors  (of  the 
ceremony)  abide.SECOND    ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  255

which  ancient  (beverage),  he  has  bestowed  a  (fitting) 
dwelling,  where  the  adoring  conductors  (of  the 
ceremony)  abide.

2.  Exhilarated  by  the  Soma  juice,  Indra,  armed 
with  the  thunderbolt,  severed  the  rain-confining 
cloud ;  whereupon  the  currents  of  the  rivers  pro- 
ceeded (towards  the  ocean),  like  birds  to  their  own 
nests.

3.  The  adorable  Indra,  the  slayer  of  Ahi,  sent 
the  current  of  the  waters  towards  the  ocean :  he 
generated  the  sun :  he  discovered   the   cattle :  he . 
effected  the  manifestation  of  the  days  by  light.*

4.  To  the  presenter  (of  the  libation)  Indra  gives

days  by  light.*

4.  To  the  presenter  (of  the  libation)  Indra  gives 
many  unparalleled  gifts  :  he  slays  Vritra  :  he  who 
was  the  arbiter  amongst  his  worshippers  when  con- 
tending for  the  possession  of  the  Sun.^

5.  The  divine  Indra,  when  lauded  (by  Etasa), 
humbled  the  Sun  (in  behalf)  of  the  mortal  who 
offered   to   him    the  libation:    for   the   munificent

Aktund  ahndm  vayundni  sddhat  is  explained  by  the  comment, 
tejasd  prakdsdn  divasdndm  asddhayat ;  the  sense  given  in  the 
translation,

Atasdyyo  bhut  paspndhdnehhhyah  suryusya  sdtau :  the  first  is 
explained,  prdptihetuhhutah  san,  being  the  cause  of  obtaining,  to 
those  who  were  contending ;  saying.  Let  me  be  the  first  to  have

to 
those  who  were  contending ;  saying.  Let  me  be  the  first  to  have 
the  sun, — aham  eva  praihamam  suryam  prdpnuydm ;  or  ^dti  may 
mean  war ;  to  those  contending  in  battle  with  the  sun  ■.  no  legend 
is  given  in  explanation  of  either  sense,  but  one  is  ii  imated  in 
the  succeeding  verse,  which  has  been  before  alluded  to,  of  a 
dispute  between  Siiryu  and  Etcda,  in  which  Indra  supported  the 
latter. — Vol.  i.  p.  16G.  note.256  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Etasa  presented  him  with  mysterious  and  inestima- 
ble riches  ;  as  (a  father  gives)  his  portion  (to  a  son). 
Varga  XXIV.  6.  The  radiant  Indra  subjected  to  Kutsa,  his 
charioteer,  (the  Asuras,)  Sushna,  Asusha,  and

subjected  to  Kutsa,  his 
charioteer,  (the  Asuras,)  Sushna,  Asusha,  and 
Kuyava  ;  and,  for  the  sake  of  Divodasa,  de- 
molished the  ninety  and  nine  cities  of  S'ambara.*

7.  Through  desire  of  food,  Indra,  we,  contri- 
buting to  thy  vigour,  spontaneously  address  to  thee 
(our)  praise :  secure  of  thee,  may  we  rely  upon  thy 
friendship  :^  hurl  thy  thunderbolt  against  the  godless

PlYU."'

8.  Thus,  hero,  have  the  Gritsamadas  fabricated 
praises  to  thee,  as  they  who  are  desirous  of  travelling 
(construct)  roads  i*^  may  those  who  worship  thee, 
adorable  Indra,  obtain  food,  strength,  habitations, 
and  felicity.

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra,

ations, 
and  felicity.

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee,  the  boon  (that  lie  desires) :  grant  it  to  us  thy 
adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of  adora- 
tion, disregard  our  prayers  :  so  that,  blessed  with

All  these  have  repeatedly  occurred  before, — see  Index, 
vol.  i. ;  except  Asusha,  he  who  is  not  to  be  dried  up  ;  it  may  be 
an  epithet  of  SusMa,  but  is  explained  by  the  Scholiast,  an  Asura.

Asydma  tat  sdptam :  sdptu,  derived  from  sapta,  seven,  is 
considered  a  synonyme  of  sdpta  padinam,  or  sakhyam,  triendship.

Either  an  Asura  in  general,  or  the  name  of  a  particular  Asura.

.

Either  an  Asura  in  general,  or  the  name  of  a  particular  Asura.

Avasyavo  na  vayundni  are  explained,  gamanam  ichchhantah 
pumdnso  mdrgdn  yathd  kurvante,  as  men,  wishing  to  go,  make 
roads.Avasyavo  na  vayundni  are  explained,  gamanam  ichchhantah 
pumdnso  mdrgdn  yathd  kurvante,  as  men,  wishing  to  go,  make 
roads.

SECOND   ASHTAKA—SIXTII    ADIIYAYA.  257

worthy  descendants,   we  may  glorify  thee  in  this 
sacrifice.

SUKTA    IX.    (XX.)

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

1.  We  bring  to  thee,  Indra,  (sacrificial)  food,  as    Varga  xxv. 
one  desiring  food    brings  liis  waggon :''   regard  us 
benevolently,  when  glorifying  thee,  rendering  (thee) 
illustrions  by  (our)  praise,  and  soliciting  such  guides

as  thou  art  to  felicity.

2.  (Defend  us),  Ini>ra,  with  thy  protections,  for

art  to  felicity.

2.  (Defend  us),  Ini>ra,  with  thy  protections,  for 
thou  art  the  defender  against  enemies  of  those  men 
who  rely  upon  thee  :  thou  art  the  lord  of  the  offerer 
(of  the  libation),  the  repeller  (of  foes),  and  with 
these  acts  (protectest)  him  who  worships  thee.

3.  May  that  young,  adorable  Indra,  ever  be  the 
friend,  the  benefactor,  and  protector  of  us,  his 
worshippers:  who,  witli  his  protection,  may  conduct 
(to  the  object  of  his  worship)  him  who  repeats  (to 
him)  prayer  and  praise,  who  prepares  the  oblation, 
and  recites  (his)  commendations.

4.  I  laud  that  Indra,  I  glorify  him,  in  whom  of 
old  (his  worshippers)  prospered,  and  overcame  (their

him,  in  whom  of 
old  (his  worshippers)  prospered,  and  overcame  (their 
enemies) :  may  he,  when  solicited,  gratify  the  desire 
of  wealth  of  his  present  pious  adorer.

5.  Propitiated  by  the  hjonns  of  the  Angirasas, 
Indra  granted  their  prayer,  and  directed  them  on

*  Vdjayur-na-ratham ;  yathd  annam  ichchhan  pwndn  sakafam  sam- 
pddayati,  as  a  man,  wishing  food,  provides  his  cart  or  barrow  to 
take  it  away.

VOL.  II.  S

258  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.VOL.  II.  S

258  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

the  way  (to  recover  their  cattle) :  carrying  off  the 
dawns  by  the  (light  of  the)  sun,  he,  animated  by 
praise,  demolished  the  ancient  cities  of  Asna. 
Varga  XXVI.  6.  May  the  renowned  and  graceful  Indra,  who  is

of  Asna. 
Varga  XXVI.  6.  May  the  renowned  and  graceful  Indra,  who  is 
verily  divine,  be  present  over  men:  may  he,  the 
vigorous  conqueror  of  foes,  cast  down  the  precious 
head  of  the  malignant  Dasa.**

7.  Indra,  the  slayer  of  Vritra,  the  destroyer  of 
cities,  has  scattered  the  black-sprung  servile  (hosts)  :^ 
He  engendered  the  earth  and  the  waters  for  Manu  : 
may  he  fulfil  the  entire  prayer  of  the  sacrificer.

8..  Vigour  has  been  perpetually  imparted  to 
Indra  by  his  worshippers  (witli  oblations),  for  the 
sake  of  obtaining  rain  ;  for  which  purpose  they  have 
placed  the  thunderbolt  in  his  hands,  wherewith, 
having  slain  the  Das7/tcs,  he  has  destroyed  their  iron 
cities.

9.

h, 
having  slain  the  Das7/tcs,  he  has  destroyed  their  iron 
cities.

9.  That  opulent  donation  which  proceeds,  Indra, 
from  thee,  assuredly  bestows  upon  him  who  praises 
thee,  the  boon  (which  he  desires) ;  grant  (it)  to  (us) 
thy  adorers :  do  not  thou,  who  art  the  object  of 
adoration,  disregard  our  prayers:  so  that,  blessed 
with  worthy  descendants,  we  may  glorify  thee  at 
this  sacrifice.

Ddsa,  a  slave,  is  here  said  to  be  the  name  of  an  Asura.

KrisMayo7iir  ddsir  airayad-vi,  he  scattered  the  low-caste 
sacrifice-disturbing'  Asura  armies,  is  one  explanation,  in  which 
krishmyoni  is  rendered  by  nikrisht'ajdti,  and  ddsi  by  upakshapayitn,krishmyoni  is  rendered  by  nikrisht'ajdti,  and  ddsi  by  upakshapayitn, 
or  Asuri,  send,  army,  being  understood ;  the  Scholiast  intimates, 
as  another  sense,  the  pregnant  wife  of  the  Asura  named  Krishia.

SECOND    ASriTAKA— SIXTH    ADHYAYA.         250

■        SUKTA   X.    (XXI.)

The  deity  and  Rishi  are  the  same  ;  the  metre  is  Jagati,  except  ia 
the  last  stanza,  in  which  it  is  TrisMubh.

1.  Bring  the  desired  ♦S'owza  to  the  adorable  Indra,  Vargaxxvii. 
the  lord  of  all,  the  lord  of  wealth,  the  lord  of  heaven,

the  perpetual  lord,  tlie  lord  of  man,  tlie  lord  of 
earth,  the  lord  of  horses,  the  lord  of  cattle,  the  lord 
of  water.*

2.  Offer  adoration  to  Indra,  the  overcomer,  the

the  lord 
of  water.*

2.  Offer  adoration  to  Indra,  the  overcomer,  the 
destroyer,  the  munificent,  the  invincible,  tlie  all- 
eiduring,   the   creator,    the   all-adorable ;  the    sus-

ainer,  the  unassailable,  tlie  ever-victorious.

3.  I  proclaim  the  mighty  exploits  of  that  Indra, 
v.lio  is  ever  victorious ;  the  benefactor  of  man,  the 
overthrower  of  (the  strong)  man,  the  caster  down  (of 
foes),  the  warrior ;  who  is  gratified  by  our  libations, 
the  granter  of  desires,  the  subduer  of  enemies,  the 
refuge  of  the  people,

4.  Unequalled  in  liberality,  the  showerer  (of 
benefits),  tbe  slayer  of  the  malevolent,  profound, 
mighty,  (endowed  with)  impenetrable  sagacity,  the

malevolent,  profound, 
mighty,  (endowed  with)  impenetrable  sagacity,  the 
dispenser  of  prosperity,  the  enfeebler  (of  foes),  firm 
(of  frame),  vast  (in  bulk),  the  performer  of  pious 
acts,  Indra  has  given  birth  to    the  light   of  the

morning.^morning.^

**  These  are  all  compounds  with  JzV;  literally,  conqueror,  as, 
viswajit4,  dhanajite,  swarjite,  &c. ;  but  the  sense,  as  Sdijana  suggests, 
is  best  expressed  by  Adhipati,  lord  of  or  over.

^  Ushasak  swar  janat :  or  swar  may  mean,  the  Sun  ;  Lidra,  or 
the  sky,  makes  manifest  the  morning  sun.

s  2

2C0  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  The  wise  Usijas,  celebrating  Lis  praises,  have 
obtained  by  their  sacrifice,  from  the  sender  of  water,

praises,  have 
obtained  by  their  sacrifice,  from  the  sender  of  water, 
(knowledge)  of  the  path  (of  their  cattle) :  seeking  the 
aid  of  Indra,  and  celebrating  his  praises,  they  have 
acquired,  whilst  uttering  hymns  and  ofToring  adora- 
tion, (valuable)  treasures.

6.  Indra,  bestow  upon  us  most  excellent  trea- 
sures ;  (give  us)  the  reputation  of  ability  (to  cefe- 
brate  sacred  rites) ;  giant  us  prosperity,  increase  of 
wealth,  security  of  person,  sweetness  of  speech,  and 
auspiciousness  of  days.

Sl^kta  XI.  (XXII.)

The  deity  and  JRishi  as  before ;  the  metre  of  the  first  stanza  is 
Ashii ;  of  the  rest,  AtisakkarC.

XXVIII.  1.  The  adorable  and  powerful  (Indra),  partaking

AtisakkarC.

XXVIII.  1.  The  adorable  and  powerful  (Indra),  partaking

of  the  Sojna^  mixed  with  barley,  eftused  at  the  Tri' 
kadrnka  rites,  has  drunk  with  Vishnu  as  much  as 
he  wished :  the  draught  has  excited  that  great  and 
mighty  Indra  to  perform  great  deeds  :  May  that 
divine  {Soma)  pervade  the  divine  (Indra),  the  true 
Soma  (pervade)  the  true  Indra.''All  the  verses  of  this  hymn  occur  in  the  Sdma-  Veda,  though 
scattered;  this  corresponds  with  i.  457,  and  ii.  836,  of  Mr. 
Whitney's  Index.  Professor  Benfey  translates  the  first  epithet  of 
Indra,  Mahisha,  which  Sat/ana  interprets  by  Malum,  great,  or 
piljya,  worshipful,  by  its  more  ordinary  sense  of  Buflfalo :  the

,  or 
piljya,  worshipful,  by  its  more  ordinary  sense  of  Buflfalo :  the 
burthen  of  each  verse,  sa-enam  saschad  devo  devam  satyam  Indram 
satya  Induh,  he  renders  by,  der  hat  der  Gott  den  Gott  geehrt,  der 
wahre  Indu  den  wahren  Indra ;  Sdyana  refers  sa  to  Indu,  or  the 
Soma,  of  which  devu,  as  well  as  satya,  is  an  epithet,  and  puts  the

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  261

2.  Thereupon,  resplendent,  be  bas  overcome 
Krivi*  in  conflict  by  bis  prowess :  be  has  filled 
heaven  and  earth  (with  his  lustre),  and  has  been 
invigorated  by  the  efficacy  of  the  draught:  one 
jiortion  he  has  taken  to  himself;''  the  other  he  has 
distributed  (to  the  gods) :  May  that  divine  [Soma)

the  other  he  has 
distributed  (to  the  gods) :  May  that  divine  [Soma) 
pervade  the  divine  (Indra),  the  true  Soma,  the 
true  (Indra).''

3.  Cognate  witli  (pious)  works  and  with  power, 
thou  desirest  to  support  (the  universe) :  mighty  witb 
heroic  (energies),  thou  art  tbe  subduer  of  the  male- 
Yolent :  (thou  art)  the  distinguisber  (between  the 
doer  of  good  and  ill) ;  the  giver  of  the  substantial 
wealth  he  desires  to  him  who  praises  thee :  May  the 
divine  {Soma)  pervade  tbe  divine  (Indra),  the  true 
Soma,  the  true  (Indra).^

4.  Indra,   the  delighter   (of  all),^  the  first  act

verb  saichat,  which  he  renders  by  vydpti  karma,  pervading,  in

act4.  Indra,   the  delighter   (of  all),^  the  first  act

verb  saichat,  which  he  renders  by  vydpti  karma,  pervading,  in

act

verb  saichat,  which  he  renders  by  vydpti  karma,  pervading,  in 
the  imperative,  vyiipnotu ;  the  text  follows  his  interpretation.

Krivim  ndmdsuram,  an  Asvra  so  named.

Adhattdnijam  jafhare,  prem  arkhjata:  literally,  he  has  taken 
the  other  in  the  belly,  he  has  left  over  that ;  that  ia,  according  to 
the  Scholiast,  basing  his  interpretation  upon  the  Taittiriya,  Indra, 
having  divided  the  Soma  into  two  portions,  took  one  to  himself, 
and  gave  the  other  to  the  gods ;  as  it  is  said  by  another  text,  a 
half  to  Indra,  a  half  to  the  other  gods,  etena  arddham  Indrdya, 
arddham  anyeikyo  devebhyak.

Sdma-Veda,  ii.  838. 
^  Sdma-Veda,  ii.  837.

Nrito,  lit.

eikyo  devebhyak.

Sdma-Veda,  ii.  838. 
^  Sdma-Veda,  ii.  837.

Nrito,  lit.  dancer  ;  the  epithet  occurs  elsewhere,  as  one  who 
dances  or  exults  in  battle  ;  here  the  Scholiast  explains  it  by 
narttayitri,  one  who  causes  to  dance  or  to  rejoice.

262  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

performed  by  tliee  in  ancient  time  was  for  the  good 
of  man,  and  deserving  of  renown  in  heaven,  when, 
arresting  by  force  the  breath  of  the  (enemy)'*  of  the 
gods,  thou  didst  send  down  the  rain :  May  Indra 
prevail  by  his  prowess  over  all  that  is  godless ;  may 
S'atakratu  obtain  vigour ;  may  he  obtain  (sacrificial) 
food.

ANUVAKA  III.

SiJkta   I.    (XXIII.)

This  hymn  is  addressed  to  Bbahmanaspati,  or  to  Brihaspati

(XXIII.)

This  hymn  is  addressed  to  Bbahmanaspati,  or  to  Brihaspati 
when  the  latter  is  named  ;  the  Eishi  is  Gritsamada ;  the  metre 
of  the  first  fifteen  stanzas  and  tlie  nineteenth  is  Trisht'ubh ;  of 
the  other  three,  Jagatt.Varga  XXIX.  1.  We  iiivoke  thee,  Brahmanaspati,^  chief  leader 
of  the  (heavenly)  bands ;  a  sage  of  sages ;  abounding 
beyond  measure  in  (every  kind  of)  food :  best  lord

The  text  has  only  devasya,  of  the  divine,  or  the  deity ;  which 
the  Scholiast  explains,  asiirasya :  asum  rinan  he  renders  prdnam 
hinsan,  injm-ing  or  taking  away  the  breath  or  life,  in  consequence 
of  which  Indra  sends  down  the  water  or  rain,  prarindh  apah ;  the

nce 
of  which  Indra  sends  down  the  water  or  rain,  prarindh  apah ;  the 
stanza  occurs  in  the  Sdma-Veda,  i.  466,  where  this  passage  and 
the  concluding  one  are  somewhat  differently  translated.

Brahmanaspati  is  explained  by  Sdyana,  hrahmano  annasya 
parivridhasya  karmano  vd  pdlayatri,  the  protector  or  cherisher  of 
food,  or  of  any  great  or  solemn  acts  of  devotion :  he  has  other 
attributes  in  the  text,  as,  gandndm  gampatih,  chief  of  the  gai'ias, 
which  generally  denotes  the  classes  of  the  inferior  divinities,  as 
the  commentator  here  understands  it;  and  again,  Jyesht'harujam 
brahmandm,  the  best  lord  of  mantras,  or  prayers, — prasasyam 
swuminam  mantrdndm.

•o"

t  lord  of  mantras,  or  prayers, — prasasyam 
swuminam  mantrdndm.

•o"

SECOND    ASIITAKA SIXTH    APIIYAYA.  2G3

of  prayer :  liearing  our  invocations,  come  with  thy 
protections,  and  sit  down  in  tlie  chamber  of  sacrifice.

2.  Brihaspati,**  destroyer  of  the  A.suras,  tlirouo'h 
thee  the  intelligent  gods  have  obtained  the  sacri^ 
ficial  portion  :  in  like  manner  as  the  adorable  sun 
generates  the  (solar)  rays  by  liis  radiance,  so  art 
thou  the  generator  of  all  prayers.3.  Having  repelled  revilers,  and  (dispersed)  the 
darkness,  thou  standest,  Brihaspati,  on  the  radiant 
chariot  of  sacrifice,  (which  is)  formidable  (to  foes), 
the  humiliator  of  enemies,  the  destroyer  of  evil

rmidable  (to  foes), 
the  humiliator  of  enemies,  the  destroyer  of  evil 
spirits,  the  cleaver  of  the  clouds,  the  attainer  of 
heaven.

4.  Thou  leadest  men,  Brihaspati,  by  virtuous 
instructions ;  thou  preservest  them  (from  calamity) : 
sin  will  never  overtake  him  who  presents  (offerings) 
to  thee:  thou  art  the  afflicter  of  him  who  hates 
(holy)  prayers  ;^  thou  art  the  punisher  of  wrath : 
such  is  thy  great  mightiness.

There  is  no  marked  distinction  between  Brihaspati  and 
Brahmaiiaspati  in  any  of  the  following  stanzas :  the  former  is, 
perhaps,  something  of  a  more  martial  character,  and  his  protection 
is  sought  for  against  enemies  and  evil  spirits  in  a  more  especial

is  sought  for  against  enemies  and  evil  spirits  in  a  more  especial 
manner,  but  there  is  nothing  very  precise  in  the  passages  addressed 
to  him  to  assign  to  him  any  particular  office  or  character  :  Mahi- 
dhara  explains  the  term,  cherisher  or  protector  of  the  Vedas, — 
brihatdm  veddndm  pdlakah ;  but  in  the  next  Sukta,  Sdyana 
interprets  brihat  by  mantra, — brihato  mantrasya,  swdmin.

Brahmadwishah,  which  may  mean,  according  to  the  commen- 
tator, those  who  hate  either  the  Brdhmans,  or  the  mantras,  or 
prayers.

264  RIG-VEDA   SANIIITA.

6.  The  man  whom  thou,  Beahmanaspati,  a  kind 
l^rotector,  defendest,  neither  sorrow  nor  sin,  nor 
adversaries,  nor  dissemblers  ever  harm,  for  thou

sorrow  nor  sin,  nor 
adversaries,  nor  dissemblers  ever  harm,  for  thou 
drivest  away  from  him  all  injurious  (things).sorrow  nor  sin,  nor 
adversaries,  nor  dissemblers  ever  harm,  for  thou 
drivest  away  from  him  all  injurious  (things).

Varga  XXX.  6.  Thou,  Brihaspati,  art  our  protector,  and  the 
guide  of  (our)  path ;  (thou  art)  the  discerner  (of  all 
things):  we  worship  with  praises  for  thy  adoration: 
may  his  own  precipitate  malice  involve  him  (in 
destruction)  who  practises  deceit  against  us.

7.  Turn  aside  from,  (the  true)  path,  Brihaspati, 
the  arrogant  and  savage  man  who  advances  to  injure 
us,  although  unoffending,  and  keep  us  in  the  right 
way  for  (the  completion  of)  this  offering  to  the 
gods.

8.  Brihaspati,  defender  (from  calamity),  we 
invoke  thee,  the  protector  of  our  persons,  the

er  (from  calamity),  we 
invoke  thee,  the  protector  of  our  persons,  the 
speaker  of  encouraging  words,  and  well  disposed 
towards  us :  do  thou  destroy  the  revilers  of  the 
gods  :  let  not  the  malevolent  attain  supreme  felicity.

9.  Through  thee,  Beahmanaspati,  (our)  bene- 
factor, may  we  obtain  desirable  wealth  from  men  : 
destroy  those  (our)  unrighteous  enemies,  whether 
nigh  or  far  off,  who  prevail  against  us.

10.  Through  thee,  Brihaspati,  (who  art)  the 
fulfiller  of  our  desires ;  pure,  and  associated  (with 
us),  we  possess  excellent  food  :  let  not  the  wicked 
man  w^ho  wishes  to  deceive  us  be  our  master ; 
but  let  us,  excelling  in  (pious)  praises,  attain 
prosperity.

Varga  XXXI.        11.

excelling  in  (pious)  praises,  attain 
prosperity.

Varga  XXXI.        11.  Thou,  Brahmanaspati,  who  hast  no  requiter 
(of  thy  bounty),  who  art  the  showerer  (of  benefits),

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SIXTH   ADHYAYA.  265

the  repairer  to  combat,  the  consuiner  of  foes,  the 
victor  in  battles,  thou  art  true,  the  discharsrer  of 
debts,  the  hurniliator  of  the  fierce  and  of  the 
exulting.the  repairer  to  combat,  the  consuiner  of  foes,  the 
victor  in  battles,  thou  art  true,  the  discharsrer  of 
debts,  the  hurniliator  of  the  fierce  and  of  the 
exulting.

12.  Let  not,  Brihaspatj,  the  murderous  (weapon) 
of  that  man  reach  us,  who,  with  unrighteous  mind, 
seeks  to  harm  us  ;  who,  fierce  and  arrogant,  designs 
to  kill  (thy)  worshippers :  may  M-e  baflUe  the  wrath 
of  the  strong  evil-doer.

13.  Brihaspati  is  to  be  invoked  in  battles ;  he  is

trong  evil-doer.

13.  Brihaspati  is  to  be  invoked  in  battles ;  he  is 
to  be  approached  with  reverence  :  he  who  moves 
amidst  combats,  the  distributor  of^-repeated  wealth ; 
the  lord  Brihaspati  has  verily  overturned  all  the 
assailing  malignant  (hosts),  like  chariots  (overturned 
in  battle).

14.  Consume  with  thy  brightest  (weapon)  the 
Makshasas,  who  have  held  thy  witnessed  prowess 
in  disdain :  manifest,  Brihaspati,  thy  glorified 
(vigour),  such  as  it  was  (of  old),  and  destroy  those 
who  s])eak  against  thee.

15.  Brihaspati,  born  of  truth,  grant  us  that 
wonderful  treasure,  wherewith  the  pious  man  may 
worship  exceedingly ;  that  (wealth)  which  shines

h  the  pious  man  may 
worship  exceedingly ;  that  (wealth)  which  shines 
amongst  men  ;  which  is  endowed  with  lustre,  (is) 
the  means  of  (performing  holy)  rites,  and  invigorates 
(its  possessor)  with  strength.''

ft

There  are  different  interpretations  of  this  stanza,  and  Sdyana 
would  prefer  the  sense  which  is  given  to  the  phrase,  dravinam 
chitrum,  lit.  various,  or  wonderful  wealth,  in  the  Brdhmana,  which 
considers  it  to  mean  hrdhmu-varchas,  or  tejds,  the  Brahmanlcal 
virtue  or  energy  :  the  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxvi.  3,  where

2GG  RIG-VEDA    SANIITTA.2GG  RIG-VEDA    SANIITTA.

Varga XXXII.  16.  Deliver  us  not  to  the  tljieves,  the  enemies 
delighting-  in  violence,  who  seize  ever  upon  the  food

,  the  enemies 
delighting-  in  violence,  who  seize  ever  upon  the  food 
(of  others) ;  those  who  cherish  in  their  hearts  the 
abandonment  (of  the  gods) ;  (they),  Briiiaspati,  who 
do  not  know  the  extent  of  (thy)  power*  (against 
evil  spirits).*

17.  Twashtri  engendered  thee  (chief)  amongst 
all  beings,  (whence)  thou  art  the  reciter  of  many 
a  holy  hymn:^  Brahmanaspati  acknowledges  a 
debt  to  the  performer  of  a  sacred  rite  f  he  is  the 
acqnitter  (of  the  debt),*^  and  the  destroyer  of  the 
oppressor.

18.  When  Brihaspati,   descendant  of  Angiras,

the  commentator  explains  dravimm  ia  its  literal  acceptation  of 
dhanam,  wealth.

"^  Na  parah  sdtnno  viduh  is  a  rather  doubtful  phrase;  Sdyana

alth.

"^  Na  parah  sdtnno  viduh  is  a  rather  doubtful  phrase;  Sdyana 
explains  it,  ye  j)umdnsah  sdmnah  sumamaijdt  twattak  parah  parastdd 
anyadatTirishiam  sdma  yad  rakshoghnam  na  jdnanti,  those  men  who 
do  not  know  anything  greater  than  the  faculty  of  destroying 
Rakshasas,  derived  from  thee  made  up  of  that  faculty:  his 
explanation  is  not  very  intelligible :  Sdma  vai  rakshohd,  Sdma  is 
the  killer  of  Rakshasas.

^  Sdmnah  sdmnah  kavih  is,  according  to  Sdyana,  the  reciter  or 
author  of  every  Sama,  sarvasya  sdmnah  uchchdrayitd  karttdsi ;  or 
he  refers  kavi  to  Twash&i,  and  then  explains  it,  the  sage  who 
created  Brahnariaspnti  by  the  eflScacy  of  the  Sdma, — sdmnah 
sdreiia  twdm  ajijanat.

iaspnti  by  the  eflScacy  of  the  Sdma, — sdmnah 
sdreiia  twdm  ajijanat.

'  Riuachit-stotrikdmam  riuam  iva  chinoti,  he  takes  the  intention 
of  the  praiser  as  if  it  was  a  debt,  or  obligation.'  Riuachit-stotrikdmam  riuam  iva  chinoti,  he  takes  the  intention 
of  the  praiser  as  if  it  was  a  debt,  or  obligation.

Rinayd  is  of  doubtful  meaning  ;  Sdyana  explains  it,  the 
discharger  or  remover  of  the  debt  which  is  of  the  nature  of  sin, 
pdparnpasya  rii'tasya  prithak-karttd.

SECOND  ASHTAKA SEVENTH  ADHYAYA   267

for  thy  glory,  Parvata  had  concealed  the  herd  of 
kine,  thou  didst  set  them  free,  and  with  thine 
associate,  Indra,  didst  send  down  the  ocean  of 
water  which  had  been  enveloped  by  darkness.

19.  Brahmanaspati,  who  art  the  regulator  of 
this  (world),  understand  (the  purport)  of  (our)  hymn,

e  regulator  of 
this  (world),  understand  (the  purport)  of  (our)  hymn, 
and  grant  us  posterity ;  for  all  is  prosperous  that  the 
gods  protect :  (and  therefore)  may  we,  blessed  with 
excellent  descendants,  glorify  thee  at  this  sacrifice.*

SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.

A'^VV AK A  111.  (coyitinued). 
SUKTA  II.   (XXIV.)

Brahmanaspati  and  Brihaspati  are  ag.ain  the  deities;  the 
former  associated  with  Indra  in  the  twelfth  stanza;  the  Ris/ii 
as  before ;  the  metre  of  the  twelfth  and  sixteenth  stanzas  is 
Trishfubh ;  of  the  rest,  Jagati.

1.  Inasmuch,   Brihaspati,   as  tliou   rulest  (over      Varga  j. 
all),  accept  this  our  propitiation  :  we  worship  thee 
with   this  new  and  solemn  hymn  :  since  this,  thy

we  worship  thee 
with   this  new  and  solemn  hymn  :  since  this,  thy

This  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxxiv.  58 ;  Mahidhara 
explains  it  in  the  same  manner,  except  in  regard  to  the  word 
vadema,  at  the  end,  rendered  in  the  text,  may  we  declare  or 
glorify  thee :  he  would  explain  it  literally,  let  us  speak ;  that  is, 
let  us  say ;  let  what  we  ask  be  given  to  us  ;  let  it  be  enjoyed  by 
us  ; — diyatdm  bhujyatdm  uchchdrayema.268  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

friend,    our   benefactor,    celebrates   thee,    do    thou 
fulfil  our  desires.

2.  (Thou  art)  that  Brahmanaspati  who,  by  his 
might,  has  humbled  those  who  deserved  humilia- 
tion ;  who  iu  his  wrath  rent  the  clouds  asunder ;

deserved  humilia- 
tion ;  who  iu  his  wrath  rent  the  clouds  asunder ; 
who  sent  down  the  undescending  (waters) ;  and 
made  way  into  the  mountain  (cave),  opulent  (in 
cattle).

3.  That  was  the  exploit,  (performed)  for  the 
most  divine  of  the  gods,  by  which  the  firm  (shut 
gates)  were  throwp  open,  the  strong  (barriers)  were 
relaxed,  (by  him)  who  set  the  cows  at  liberty:  who, 
by  the  (force  of  the)  sacred  prayer,  destroyed  Bala  : 
who  dispersed  the  darkness  and  displayed  the  light.

4.  That  stone-like,  solid,  down-hanging,  water- 
laden  (cloud),  which  Brahmanaspati  has  with  his 
strength  divided,  the  universal  solar  rays  have 
drunk  up ;  but  they  have  again  shed  together  the

al  solar  rays  have 
drunk  up ;  but  they  have  again  shed  together  the 
showering  and  water-spreading  (rain).

5.  For  you,  (worshippers),  the  constant  and 
manifold  (bounties  of  Brahmanaspati),  through 
months  and  through  years,  set  open  the  gates  of 
the  future  rains,**  and  he  has  appointed  those  results 
of  prayer,  which  the  two  regions  mutually  and 
without  effort  provide.**

Bhuvand  bhavitwd  are  rendered  by  the  commentary,  udahdndm 
bMvydndm.

Vayund  chakdra ;  jnandni-mantravishaydni,  he  made  the  know- 
ledge, the  object  of  prayer  ;  whicli  the  ayatamdnau-aprayatnau,  or 
the  two,  said  by  the  Scholiast  to  mean  heaven  and  earth,  which

or 
the  two,  said  by  the  Scholiast  to  mean  heaven  and  earth,  which 
are  without  effort,  pass  to  one  another,  anyadanyad  charatah :  the

SECOND   ASHTAKA— -SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        269SECOND   ASHTAKA— -SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        269

6.  Those   sages,''  who,  searching  on  every  side,      Varga  ii. 
discovered  the  precious  treasure  (of  cattle)  hidden

in  the  cave  of  the  Panis,  having  seen  through  the 
false  (illusions  of  the  Asiira),  and  again  coining 
(thither),  forced  an  entrance.

7.  Those  sages,  eminent  for  truth,  having  seen 
through  the  false  (illusions  of  the  Asura),  again 
pursued  the  main  road  thither,  and  with  their  hands 
cast  against  the  rock  the  destructive  fire,  M'hich,  till 
then,  was  not  there.^

8.

the  rock  the  destructive  fire,  M'hich,  till 
then,  was  not  there.^

8.  Whatever  Braiimanaspati  aims  at  with  the 
truth-strung  quick-darting  bow,  that  (mark)  he 
surely  attains:  holy  are  its  arrows  with  which  he

phraseology  is  rather  obscure,  but  the  meaning  is,  that,  by  virtue 
of  prayer  and  sacrifice,  rain  is  engendered  in  the  sky,  which 
coming  down  upon  the  earth,  causes  fertility,  whence  food  for 
men  or  for  sacrifice  is  provided ;  which,  being  offered,  is  again 
productive  of  rain,  and  thus,  as  the  result  of  prayer,  a  mutual  and 
spontaneous  interchange  of  benefits  between  heaven  and  earth  is 
perpetuated.

The  Angirasas,  according  to  the  Scholiast :  see  vol.  i.  1 6,

tuated.

The  Angirasas,  according  to  the  Scholiast :  see  vol.  i.  1 6, 
note  ;  the  whole  of  this  is,  no  doubt,  allegorical ;  the  cows  hidden 
in  the  caves  are  the  rains  accumulated  in  the  clouds,  which  are 
set  free  by  the  oblations  with  fire,  of  which  the  Angirasas  were, 
no  doubt,  the  authors ;  at  least  to  some  extent.The  expression  is  rather  obscure,  nakih  sho  asti,  that  is  not ; 
that  is,  according  to  Sdyaiia,  so  agnih  purvam  tatra  nakir  asti,  na 
vidyate,  that  fire  formerly  is  not  there,  is  not  known  ;  but  they,  of 
their  own  power.  Laving  produced  the  fire  that  was  not  known,  or 
was  not  extant,  threw  it  there ;  avidyamdnam  agnim  swasdmarthydd

or 
was  not  extant,  threw  it  there ;  avidyamdnam  agnim  swasdmarthydd 
utpddya  tatra  prachikshipuh :  a  probable  allusion  to  the  dissemina- 
tion of  fire-worship  by  the  Angirasas:  see  vol.  i.  pp.  3,  212.

270  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

shoots,  (iiiLended)  for  the  eyes  of  men,  and  having 
their  abode  in  the  ear."

9.  He,  Brahmanaspati,  is  the  aggregator  and 
subjugator  (of  objects) ;  the  family  priest  (of  the 
gods) ;  and  the  renowned  in  battle ;  the  beholder 
(of  all),  who  bestows  food  and  desired  treasures, 
whence  the  radiant  sun  shines  without  exertion.

10.  Expansive,  vast,  and  excellent  riches,  are  the 
attainable  (bounties)  of  Brihaspati,  the  sender  of

ent  riches,  are  the 
attainable  (bounties)  of  Brihaspati,  the  sender  of 
the  rain ;  these  are  the  gifts  of  the  adorable  giver 
of  food,  whereby  both  (descriptions  of  worshippers) 
entering  here  enjoy  (abundance).''

Varga  III.  H.  He,  who  Is  all-pervadiug  and  delighting,  is

willing  to  sustain  by  his  strength  the  noble  wor- 
shipper), as  well  as  one  who  is  in  low  distress: 
greatly  is  that  Brahmanaspati  renowned  amongst 
the  gods,  and  therefore  is  he  verily  supreme  above 
all  (beings).

12.  All  truth,  lords  of  wealth,  (Indra  and 
Brahmanaspati),  is  (inherent)  in  you  both  :  the 
waters  injure  not  your  rites  i''  come  to  our  presence

both  :  the 
waters  injure  not  your  rites  i''  come  to  our  presenceboth  :  the 
waters  injure  not  your  rites  i''  come  to  our  presence

^  Nrichakshasah  karnayonayah ;  the  arrows  are  oblations  and 
mantras :  the  first  obvious  to  the  sight,  the  second  addressed  to 
the  ears  of  men.

^  Yenajand  ubhaye  bhunjate  visah:  the  two  sorts  of  persons  are 
either  the  Yajamdna,  or  host,  and  the  officiating  priests ;  or  they 
may  be  gods  and  men;  vUo  nivishtuh  santo  bkmjate-bhogdn 
labhanti,  being  entered  or  seated,  they  enjoy  ;  they  obtain  enjoy- 
ments.

Apas  cha  na  praminnnti  vratam  vdm  :  the  Schohast  says  that 
dpah  is  here  used,  by  metonymy,  for  all  beings, — sarvdni  bhutdni.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        271

s, — sarvdni  bhutdni.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        271

(to  receive)  our  oblations,  like  a  pair  of  steeds  (to 
receive)  their  provender.

13.  The  very  swift  horses  (of  Brahmanaspati) 
listen  to  (our  invocation) :  the  priest  of  the  assem- 
bly offers  with  praise  the  (sacrificial)  wealth :  may 
Brahmanaspati,  the  hater  of  the  oppressor,  accept 
(the  payment  of)  the  debt,  agreeably  to  his  pleasure  : 
may  he  be  the  accepter  of  the  (sacrificial)  food  ])re- 
sented  at  this  ceremony.

14.  The  purpose  of  Brahmanaspati,  engaging  in 
a  great  work,  has  been  successful,  according  to  his 
wish ;  for  he  it  was  who  recovered  (the  stolen)

,  according  to  his 
wish ;  for  he  it  was  who  recovered  (the  stolen) 
cattle  for  (the  dwellers  in)  heaven  ;  and  distributed 
them  ;  so  that  of  their  own  power  they  took  different 
directions,  like  (the  branches  of)  a  mighty  river.15.  May  we,  Brahmanaspati,  be  daily  in  the 
possession  of  well-regulated  and  food-supplying 
wealth :  do  thou  add  for  us  posterity  to  posterity, 
since  thou,  who  art  the  ruler  (of  all),  acceptest  my 
invocation  with  (offered  sacrificial)  food.

16.  Brahmanaspati,  who  art  the  regulator  of 
this  (world),  understand  (the  purport  of)  our  hymn, 
and  grant  us  posterity ;  for  all  is  prosperous  that 
the  gods  protect :  (and  therefore)  may  we,  blessed

s  prosperous  that 
the  gods  protect :  (and  therefore)  may  we,  blessed 
with  excellent  descendants,  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.

SiJkta  III.  (XXV.) 
The  deity  and  RisJii  are  the  same ;  the  metre  is  Jagati. 
1.  Kindling  the  fire,  may  (the  worshipper)  over-     Varga  iv. 
come  the  malevolent  (disturbers  of  the  rite) ;  may

272  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

he,  repeating  prayers,  and  laden  with  oblations, 
prosper :  he  whom  Brahman  a  spati  makes  his 
associate,  lives  to  behold  the  son  of  his  son.

2.  (Surrounded)  by  his  descendants,  may  he  sur- 
pass the  malevolent  descendants  (of  his  adversaries), 
for  he  is  famed  for  great  wealth  of  cattle,  and 
understands  (all  things)  of  himself:  his  sons  and

th  of  cattle,  and 
understands  (all  things)  of  himself:  his  sons  and 
grandsons  prosper  whom  Brahmanaspati  makes  his 
associate.

3.  As  a  river  (washes  away)  its  banks,  so  the 
devout  worshipper,  (of  Brahmanaspati),  overpowers 
his  enemies  by  his  strength,  as  a  bull  (overcomes) 
an  ox  :  like  the  spreading  llame  of  fire,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  stop  him,  whom  Brahmanaspati  makes  his 
associate.4.  For  him,  the  unobstructed  rains  of  heaven 
descend :  first  iimong  the  devout,  he  acquires 
(wealthi)  in  cattle:  of  irresistible  vigour,  he  destroys 
his  enemies  by  his  strength,  whom  Brahmanaspati 
makes  his  associate.

5.  Veril}',  for  him  all  rivers  flow:  him  do  un-

es  his  associate.

5.  Veril}',  for  him  all  rivers  flow:  him  do  un- 
interrupted and  numerous  pleasures  await  :  blessed 
with  the  felicity  of  the  gods,  he  ever  prospers,  whom 
Brahmanaspati  makes  his  associate.

SijKTK  IV.  (XXVI.)

Deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

Varga  V.  1.  May  the  sincere  praiser  (of  Brahmanaspati)

verily  overcome  (his)  enemies ;  may  the  worshipper 
of  the  gods  overcome  him  assuredly  who  does  not 
reverence  them  :   may    the    propitiator   of  (Brah-

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       273

MANASPATi)  overcome  him  who  is  difficult  to  be 
overcome  in  battles :  may  he  who  offers  sacrifice 
appropriate  the  food  of  him  who  does  not  sacrifice.

2.

ers  sacrifice 
appropriate  the  food  of  him  who  does  not  sacrifice.

2.  Offer  worship,  0  man,  (to  Brahmanaspati)  : 
proceed  resolutely  against  those  who  are  meditating 
(hostility) :  keep  your  mind  firm  in  contending 
against  foes  :  offer  oblations  whereby  you  may  be 
prosperous  :  we  also  solicit  the  protection  of  Brah- 
manaspati.

3.  He  who  with  a  believing  mind  worships  Brah- 
manaspati, the  father  of  the  gods,"  with  oblations, 
he  verily  receives  food,  together  with  his  sons,  his 
kindred,  his  descendants,  his  people,  and  (obtains) 
riches  together  with  (all)  men.

4.  Brahmanaspati  leads  by  a  straight  path  (to 
his  reward),  the  worshipper  who  propitiates  him4.  Brahmanaspati  leads  by  a  straight  path  (to 
his  reward),  the  worshipper  who  propitiates  him

a  straight  path  (to 
his  reward),  the  worshipper  who  propitiates  him 
with  oblations  of  butter :  he  guards  him  against  sin  ; 
he  protects  him  from  foes  and  from  distress ;  and 
wonderful  (in  might),  confers  upon  him  many 
(favours).

Si5kta  V.  (XXVII.)

The  deities  are  the  A'dityas  ;  the  Rishi  is  either  Gritsamada,  or 
his  son,  Kunna ;  the  metre  is  Trishtubh.

1.  I    present    continually,    with    the    ladle    (of     Varga  vi. 
speech),  these  oblation-dropping  hymns  to  the  royal

"  Devdndm  pitaram :  the  Scholiast  renders  the  latter,  puJayi- 
tdrum,  the  protector  or  cherisher. 
VOL.  II.  T

274  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

A'dityas  :  May  Mttra,  Aryaman,  Bhaga,  the  multi-

RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

A'dityas  :  May  Mttra,  Aryaman,  Bhaga,  the  multi- 
present  Varuna,  the  powerful  Ansa,  hear  us.""

2.  May  those  of  equal  exploits,  ^Iitra,  Aryaman, 
Varuna,  be  pleased  to-day  by  this  my  praise ;  they 
who  are  A'dityas,  luminous,  purified  by  showers,^' 
who  abandon  none  (that  worship  them),  who  are 
irreproachable,  unassailable.

3.  Those  A'dityas,  mighty,  profound,  unsub- 
dued, subduing,  many-eyed,'  behold  the  innermost'' 
(thoughts  of  men),  whether  wicked  or  virtuous, 
whether  far  from  or  nigh  to  those  royal  (deities).

4.  The  divine  A'dityas  are  the  upholders  (of  all 
things),  moveable  or  immoveable  ;  the  protectors  of

upholders  (of  all 
things),  moveable  or  immoveable  ;  the  protectors  of 
the  universe  ;  the  provident  in  acts ;  the  collectorsupholders  (of  all 
things),  moveable  or  immoveable  ;  the  protectors  of 
the  universe  ;  the  provident  in  acts ;  the  collectors

"  The  A'dityas,  or  sons  of  Aditi,  here  enumerated,  are  only 
five  ;  the  Scholiast  quotes  the  Taitliri'ya  for  eight,  adding  Dkdtri, 
Indra,  and  ViwaSwat  to  those  in  the  text,  and  adding  Aniu  for 
Atisa.  The  Paurduik  enumeration  is  universally  twelve,  VisMu, 
Pushan,  Twasht'ri,  and  Savitri,  being  added  to  the  eight  of  the 
Taittiriya.

Dhdrdputd,  cleansed  by  water,  clean,  nlrmald,  according  to 
the  commentary ;  but  no  doubt  the  term  refers  to  the  connection 
of  the  A'ditijas  with  the  fall  of  rain.

'^  Bhdryakshdh,  having  many  eyes,  is  the  literal  rendering  of

rain.

'^  Bhdryakshdh,  having  many  eyes,  is  the  literal  rendering  of 
the  epithet ;  it  is  no  doubt  figuratively  used,  implying  the  univer- 
sal penetration  of  the  rays  of  light,  or,  as  the  commentator  says, 
very  brilliant, — hahutejasah .

Antali-'pasyante,  they  look  within,  is  the  phrase  of  the  text, 
but  the  Scholiast  explains  it,  prdnindm,  or  manushydndm  hritsu, 
into  the  hearts  of  living  beings,  or  men  ;  the  following  expressions 
confirm  his  interpretation.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       275

of  rain  ;*  the  possessors  of  veracity ;  the  acquitters 
of  our  debts.''

5.  May  I  be  conscious,  A'dityas,  of  this  your 
protection,  the  cause  of  happiness  (and  security)  in

,  of  this  your 
protection,  the  cause  of  happiness  (and  security)  in 
danger;  Aryaman,  Mitra,  and  Varuna,  may  I, 
through  your  guidance,  escape  the  sins  which  are 
like  pitfalls"  (in  my  path).

6.  Aryaman,  Mitra,  and  Varuna,  easy  is  tlie    Varga  vii. 
path    (you   show   us),   and  free   from  thorns,   and 
pleasant ;    therefore,  A'dityas,    (lead   us)    by   (it) :6.  Aryaman,  Mitra,  and  Varuna,  easy  is  tlie    Varga  vii. 
path    (you   show   us),   and  free   from  thorns,   and 
pleasant ;    therefore,  A'dityas,    (lead   us)    by   (it) :

speak   to    us  favourably,   and   grant  us   happiness 
difficult  to  be  disturbed.

7.  May  Aditi,  the  mother  of  royal  sons,  place  us 
beyond  the  malice  (of  our  enemies) :  may  Aryaman 
lead  us  by  easy  paths,  and  may  we,  blessed  with 
many  descendants,  and  safe  from  harm,  attain  the 
great  happiness  of  Mitra  and  Varuna.

8.

safe  from  harm,  attain  the 
great  happiness  of  Mitra  and  Varuna.

8.  They   uphold    the    three   worlds,^  the   three

Asuryam  rakshamdndh:  asura,  the  Scholiast  here  explains, 
a  cloud;  from  asu,  water,  as  the  same  with  life,  and  ra,  what 
yields  ;  thence,  asuryam  is  the  water  of  the  cloud,  or  rain,  which 
the  A'dityas  keep  collected  until  the  season  of  its  fuU  tat  tat  kdle 
vrisht'i/ufpddcindya  rakshanti.

The  debts,  in  the  estimation  of  the  commentator,  are  literally 
so ;  those  which  are  to  be  paid  by  the  worshippers  to  other 
persons;  riiidni  stotribhiramjehhyah  jjradeydni ;  see  again, 
verse  nine  of  the  next  Sdkta.

Sioabheva,  swabhrdmva,  gartavanti  sthaldnwa,  like  places  of

next  Sdkta.

Sioabheva,  swabhrdmva,  gartavanti  sthaldnwa,  like  places  of 
land  having  holes  or  pits.

Tisro  bhumir  dhdrayan:  bhdmi  is  here  said  to  mean  toka, 
world  or  sphere,  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven ;  which  the 
A'dityas  support  by  supplying  them  with  rain,

T  2

276  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

heavens  ;*  and  in  their  sacrifices  three  ceremonies 
(are  comprised) :''  by  truth,  A'dityas,  has  your  great 
might  (been  produced),  such  as  is  most  excellent; 
Aryaiman,  Mitra,  and  Varuna.9.  The  A'dityas,  decorated  with  golden  orna- 
ments, brilliant,  purified  by  showers,  who  never 
slumber,  nor  close  their  eyelids,  who  arc  unassail- 
able, and  praised  by  many,  uphold  the  three  bright

who  arc  unassail- 
able, and  praised  by  many,  uphold  the  three  bright 
heavenly  regions  for  the  sake  of  the  upright  man.

10.  Varuna,  destroyer  of  foes,  thou  art  the 
sovereign  over  all,  whether  they  be  gods  or  mortals  : 
grant  to  us  to  behold  a  hundred  years,  and  that  we 
may  enjoy  lives  such  as  were  enjoyed  by  ancient 
(sages).''

Varga  VIII.  11.  Neither  is  the  right  hand  known  to  us, 
A'dityas,  nor  is  the  left ;  neither  is  that  which  is 
in  front,  nor  tiiat  which  is  behind,  (discerned  by 
me) :  Givers  of  dwellings,  may  I,  who  am  immature

Tnh  dyiin,  the  three  luminous  objects,  (liptdn,  which, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  may  be  the  three  lokas  above  the

which, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  may  be  the  three  lokas  above  the 
sky,  Mahar,  Jana,  Sattja,  or  the  three  luminous  deities,  Agni, 
Vdyu,  and  Siirya.

The  expression  is  rather  obscure, — truii  vratd  vidathe  antar 
eshdm,  lit.  the  three  ceremonies  in  the  sacrifice,  in  the  midst  of 
them :  the  commentator  explains  it  as  in  the  text,  the  three  daily 
ceremonials  being  essentially  one  worship  of  the  A'dityas ;  or  he 
suggests  it  might  be  rendered,  in  the  midst  of  those  worlds,  there 
are  three  acts  intended  especially  as  the  acts  of  the  A'dityas,  the 
absorption,  retention,  and  re-distribution  of  dew  or  rain.

The  text  has  only  purvd,  prior,  former  ;  the  commentator

or  rain.

The  text  has  only  purvd,  prior,  former  ;  the  commentator 
explains  it  by  purvair-devaih,  by  former  gods  or  divine  sages.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.       277or  rain.

The  text  has  only  purvd,  prior,  former  ;  the  commentator 
explains  it  by  purvair-devaih,  by  former  gods  or  divine  sages.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.       277

(in  knowledge),  and  timid  (in  spirit),  obtain,  when 
guided  by  yon,  the  light  that  is  free  from  fear.*

12.  He  who  presents  offerings  to  the  royal  and 
true  (A'dityas);  he  whom  their  constant  favours 
exalt;  he  proceeds,  wealthy,  renowned,  munificent, 
^nd  honoured,  to  sacrifices,  in  his  chariot.

13.  Pure,  unmolested,  possessing  (abundant)  food 
•and  virtuous  descendants,  he  dwells  amidst  fertilizing 
waters  ■}  no  one,  w^iether  nigh  or  afar,  harms  him 
who  is  (safe)  in  the  good  guidance  of  the  A'dityas.

14.

,  harms  him 
who  is  (safe)  in  the  good  guidance  of  the  A'dityas.

14.  Aditi,  Mitra,  Varuna,  have  pity  upon  us, 
even  although  we  may  have  committed  some 
offence  against  you :  may  I  obtain,  Indra,  that 
^reat  light  which  is  free  from  peril;  let  not  the 
protracted  glooms  (of  night)  envelop  us.

15.  Both  (heaven  and  earth)  combined,  cherish 
him  (whom  the  A'dityas  protect) ;  verily  prosper- 
ous, he  thrives,  with  the  rain  of  heaven  ;  victorious 
in  battles,  (he  defends)  both  his  own  dwelling  (and 
assails)  that  of  his  foe ;"  to  him  both  portions  (of 
creation)  are  propitious.'*

16.  Adorable  A'dityas,  may  I  pass  (safe)  in  your

Either  the  light  of  day,  or  the  light  of  knowledge.

afe)  in  your

Either  the  light  of  day,  or  the  light  of  knowledge.

Jpak  sityavasa  upaksheti;  he  dwells  near  to  waters  that  are 
productive  of  corn  ;  that  is,  he  obtains  rain  when  needed.

Ubhd  kshayd  vdjayan  ydti,  he  goes,  conquering,  to  both 
habitations,  is  the  literal  rendering,  which  is  amplified  by  the 
comment  as  in  the  text.Ubhd  kshayd  vdjayan  ydti,  he  goes,  conquering,  to  both 
habitations,  is  the  literal  rendering,  which  is  amplified  by  the 
comment  as  in  the  text.

Ubhdv-arddhau,  the  two  parts,  of  the  world,  according  to 
-the  commentator,  either  moveable  and  immoveable  things,  or 
mortal  and  immortal  beings.

278  RIG»VEDA    SANIIITA.

car  from  the  illusions  which  (you  devise)  for  the 
malignant,  the  snares  which  are  spread  for  your 
foes,  (in  like  manner)  as  a  horseman  (passes  over  a

pread  for  your 
foes,  (in  like  manner)  as  a  horseman  (passes  over  a 
road) ;  and  thus  may  we  abide  secure  in  infinite 
felicity.

17.  May  I  never  (have  to)  represent,  Varuna, 
the  destitution  of  a  (once)  opulent,  dear,  and  muni- 
ficent kinsman:*  may  I  never,  royal  Varuna,  be 
devoid  of  well-regulated  riches:  (and)  may  we, 
blessed  with  excellent  descendants,  worthily  glorify 
thee  at  this  sacrifice.''

StjKTX  VI.  (XXVIII.)

The  deity  is  VaruAa  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same  as  before.

Varga  IX.  1.  (The  worshipper  repeats)  this  praise  of  the 
sage,  the  self-radiant  A'ditya  ;  may  he  preside  over 
all  beings  by  his  power:  I  beg  for  fame  of  the

y  he  preside  over 
all  beings  by  his  power:  I  beg  for  fame  of  the 
sovereign  Varuna,  a  deity  who,  when  much  pleased, 
(is  propitious)  to  his  adorer.

2.  May  we,  Varuna,  deeply  meditating  on  thee, 
earnestly  praising  thee,  and  (engaged)  in  thy  worship, 
be  prosperous ;  glorifying  thee  daily,  like  the  fires2.  May  we,  Varuna,  deeply  meditating  on  thee, 
earnestly  praising  thee,  and  (engaged)  in  thy  worship, 
be  prosperous ;  glorifying  thee  daily,  like  the  fires

Mdham  dvidam  Siinam  djyeh :  the  last  word  is  of  not  unfrequent 
occurrence  for  j'ndti,  a  relative ;  kinam,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
is  synonymous  with  klnyam,  emptiness ;  ddridryam,  poverty  :  the 
sentiment  is  thus  illustrated  by  the  Scholiast:  may  I  not  be 
under  the  necessity  of  begging  of  different  princes,  saying,  my 
sons,  or  other  relatives,  are  hungry :  asmadiyah  putrddayah

aying,  my 
sons,  or  other  relatives,  are  hungry :  asmadiyah  putrddayah 
Icshudhitd  iti  prabhu  prabhu  samipe  abhidhdya  ydchamdno  md 
hhuvam.

The  burden  of  the  last  stanza  of  Hymn  xv.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       279

(that  are  kindled  in  thy  honour)  at  the  coming  of 
the  luminous  dawns.

3.  Varuna,  chief  guide  (of  men),  may  we  abide 
in  the  felicity  of  thee,  who  art  endowed  with  great 
prowess,  and  art  glorified  by  many  :  divine  sons  of 
Aditi,  unharmed  (by  foes),  liave  compassion  upon 
us  through  your  benevolence.

4.  The  A'ditya,  the  upholder,  has  created  all 
this  water  :*  the  rivers  flow  by  the  power  of  Varuna  : 
they  never  weary,  they  never  stop ;  they  have  de-

ower  of  Varuna  : 
they  never  weary,  they  never  stop ;  they  have  de- 
scended with  swiftness,  like  birds  upon  the  circum- 
ambient (earth).''

6.  Cast  off  from  me  sin,  Varuna,  as  if  it  were  a 
rope:  may  we  obtain  from  thee  a  channel  (filled) 
with  water :  cut  not  the  thread  of  me  (engaged  in) 
weaving  pious  works ;  blight  not  the  elements  of 
holy  rites  before  the  season  (of  their  maturity).6.  Keep  off  all  danger  from  me,  Varuna  :  supreme      Varga  x. 
monarch,   endowed  with  truth,   bestow  thy  favour 
upon  me :  cast  off  (from  me)  sin,  like  a  tether  from 
a  calf:  no  one  rules  for  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
apart  from  thee.

calf:  no  one  rules  for  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
apart  from  thee.

Pra  Sim  asrijad  ritam;  the  expression  is  indeterminate,  in 
consequence  of  the  various  senses  of  ritam,  wliich  may  mean 
truth,  or  sacrifice,  as  well  as  water  :  the  following  phrase,  sindhavo 
varunasya  yanti,  rivers  go  of  Varuna,  or  by  his  will  or  power, 
confirms  the  sense  of  water  in  the  preceding.

Paptu  raghiyd  parijman :  the  last  means  merely  that  which 
goes  about  or  round,  and  might  be  rendered,  revolving :  the 
Scholiast  considers  it  to  be  an  epithet  of  bhiam,  understood, 
parijmani  bhumydm.

280  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

7.  Harm  us  not,  VarUxNA,  with  those  destructive

RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

7.  Harm  us  not,  VarUxNA,  with  those  destructive 
(weapons),  which,  repeller  (of  foes),  demolish  him 
who  does  evil  at  thy  sacrifice :  let  us  not  depart 
(before  our  time)  from  the  regions  of  light :  scatter 
the  malevolent,  that  we  may  live.

8.  As  we  have  offered  adoration  to  thee,  Varuna, 
of  old,  in  like  manner  as  we  offer  it  now,  so  may 
■we  offer  it  in  future  (to  thee),  who  art  everywhere 
present:  for  in  thee,  who  art  difficult  of  attain- 
ment, as  in  an  (immoveable)  mountain,  all  holy  acts 
are  assembled,  and  are  not  to  be  dissevered.

9.  Discharge,  Varuna,  the  debts  (contracted)  by 
my  progenitors,  and  those  now  (contracted)  by  me ;9.  Discharge,  Varuna,  the  debts  (contracted)  by 
my  progenitors,  and  those  now  (contracted)  by  me ;

bts  (contracted)  by 
my  progenitors,  and  those  now  (contracted)  by  me ; 
and  may  I  not,  royal  Varuna,  be  dependent  (on 
the  debts  contracted)  by  another :''  many  are  the 
mornings  that  have,  as  it  were,  indeed  not  dawned ;'' 
make  us,  Varuna,  alive  in  them.

10.  Protect  us,  Varuna,  against  every  peril  which

Mdham  rdjann-anyakritena  hhojam,  may  I  not  enjoy  by  what 
is  made  by  another;  which  the  Scholiast  explains,  may  I  not 
obtain  enjoyment  by  the  wealth  that  is  acquired  by  another :  but 
the  preceding  phrase,  mat-kritani,  made  by  me,  refers  to  rind,  for 
rindni,  debts ;  and  so,  probably,  it  does  here.

AvyusMd  in-nu  bhuyasirushdsah-d  nojivdn  tdsu  sudhi,  unrisen,

es  here.

AvyusMd  in-nu  bhuyasirushdsah-d  nojivdn  tdsu  sudhi,  unrisen, 
verily  indeed,  many  morning-dawns,  make  us  alive  in  them  : 
accoi'ding  to  Sdt/atia,  this  means,  tliat  persons  involved  in  debt 
are  so  overcome  with  anxiety  that  they  are  not  conscious  of  the 
dawn  of  day,  to  them  the  morning  has  not  dawned,  they  are 
dead  to  the  light  of  day :  the  passage  is  deserving  of  notice, 
indicating  an  advanced,  as  well  as  a  corrupt  state  of  society — the 
occurrence  of  debt  and  severity  of  its  pressure.

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       281

a  kinsman  or  a  friend  threatens  me  with  alarmed  in 
sleep ;  or  from  a  thief  or  a  wolf  that  attempts  to 
destroy  us.*

11.

leep ;  or  from  a  thief  or  a  wolf  that  attempts  to 
destroy  us.*11.

leep ;  or  from  a  thief  or  a  wolf  that  attempts  to 
destroy  us.*

11.  May  I  never  (have  to)  represent,  Varuna, 
the  destitution  of  a  (once)  opulent,  dear,  and  muni- 
ficent kinsman  :  may  I  never,  royal  (Varuna),  be 
devoid  of  Avell-regulated  riches :  and  may  we, 
blessed  with  excellent  descendants,  worthily  glorify 
thee  at  this  sacrifice.

St^KTA  VII.  (XXIX.) 
The  deities  are  the  Viswadevas  ;  the  Riski  and  metre  as  before.

1.  A'dityas,  Upholders  of  pious  works,  and  who     Varga  xi. 
are  to  be  sought  by  all,  remove  sin  far  from  me,  like

a  woman  delivered  in  secret:^  knowing,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  (universal)  gods,  the  good  that  follows

knowing,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  (universal)  gods,  the  good  that  follows 
from  your  hearing  our  prayers,  I  invoke  you  for  (our) 
protection.

2.  You,  gods,  are  intelligence,   you  are  vigour:

The  construction  is  rather  inconsistent  with  maTiyam,  to  me, 
in  the  sing.,  in  the  first  line,  and  asmdn,  us,  in  the  plur,,  in  the 
second  :  according  to  an  authority  cited  by  Sdyana,  this  hymn 
removes  sin  and  danger,  debt  and  poverty,  and  counteracts  bad 
dreams —

Idam.  ekddasarcham  tu  vdrunam  hhayapdpanut, 
Rinaddridryaduhswaimanasanam  iti  susruma.

Rahasdriva,  hke  a  loose  woman  who  has  a  child  privately, 
and  who  abandons  it  in  some  distant  place,  is  the  explanation  of

ly, 
and  who  abandons  it  in  some  distant  place,  is  the  explanation  of 
the  commentator ;  and  is  necessary  to  support  the  comparison  to 
the  distant  removal  of  sin  prayed  for :  it  is  a  not  insignificant 
indication  of  manners.

282  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

do  you  drive  away  the  malevolent  subduers  (of 
enemies),  overcome  them  entirely,  and  grant  us 
felicity  both  now  and  in  future.282  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

do  you  drive  away  the  malevolent  subduers  (of 
enemies),  overcome  them  entirely,  and  grant  us 
felicity  both  now  and  in  future.

3.  What  may  we  do  for  you,  gods,  either  now, 
or  in  future  :*  what  may  we  do,  Vasus,  by  perpetual 
and  practicable  (acts  of  devotion) :  Do  you,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  Aditi,  Indra,  and  the  Maruts,  maintain 
our  well-being.

4.  0  gods,  you,  verily,  are  our  kinsmen :  being

in 
our  well-being.

4.  0  gods,  you,  verily,  are  our  kinsmen :  being 
so,  grant  felicity  to  me  your  suppliant ;  let  not  your 
chariot  be  tardy  in  coming  to  the  sacrifice;  let  us 
never  weary  of  relatives  such  as  you  are.

5.  Alone  among  you,  I  have  committed  many 
offences,  (the  which  correct)  as  a  father  corrects  a 
naughty  (son) :  far  from  me,  gods,  be  bonds ;  far 
from  me  be  sins ;  seize  not  upon  me  (your)  son  as 
(a  fowler)  catches  a  bird.

6.  Adorable  (deities),  be  present  to-day,  that, 
apprehensive  of  danger,  I  may  feel  sure  of  your 
hearty  (support)  :  protect  us,  gods,  from  the  rapacity 
of  the  wolf:  protect  us,  adorable  (deities),  from  him

the  rapacity 
of  the  wolf:  protect  us,  adorable  (deities),  from  him 
who  would  work  us  misfortune.''

7.  May  I  never  (have  to)  represent,  Varuna,  the

That  is  to  say,  we  are  unable  to  render  you  any  adequate 
service.

'  The  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxxin.  51.  The  explanation 
of  the  expression,  nijuro  vrikasya,  somewhat  varies,  the  fii-st  being 
considered  as  the  adjective,  agreeing  with  vrikasya,  protect  us 
from  the  mischievous  wolf;  and  again,  hartdt  avapado,  is  explained

by  Mahidhara,  protect  us  from  a  well  into  which  we  might  fall,'

kupdt  avapdt  yatra  sa-tasmdt  pdlayata.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        283by  Mahidhara,  protect  us  from  a  well  into  which  we  might  fall,'

kupdt  avapdt  yatra  sa-tasmdt  pdlayata.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADIIYAYA.        283

destitution  of  a  (once)  opulent,  dear,  and  munificent

IYAYA.        283

destitution  of  a  (once)  opulent,  dear,  and  munificent 
kinsman :  may  I  never,  royal  (Varuna),  be  devoid 
of  well-regulated  riches,  and  may  we,  blessed  with 
excellent  descendants,  worthily  glorify  thee  at  this 
sacrifice.

SiJkta  VIII.  (XXX.)

The  deities  are  various  :  Indra  and  Soma  are  those  of  the  sixth 
stanza;  SARAswAxf  of  the  eighth;  Brihaspati  of  the  ninth; 
the  Maruts  of  the  last;  Indra  of  the  rest;  the  RisJii  is 
Griisamada ;  the  metre  is  Trishhbh,  except  in  the  last  verse, 
in  which  it  is  Jagati.

1.  The  waters  cease  not  (to  flow  in  libations)  to    Varga  xii. 
the  divine  Indra,  the  sender  of  rain,  the  animator

to    Varga  xii. 
the  divine  Indra,  the  sender  of  rain,  the  animator

(of  all),''  the  slayer  of  Am ;  day  by  day  proceeds 
the  current  of  the  waters :  at  what  period  of  time 
was  their  first  creation.^

2.  His  mother,  (Aditi),  declared  to  him  the  man 
who  had  offered  (sacrificial)  food  to  Vritra  :  obedient 
to  his  pleasure,  the  rivers,  tracing  out  their  paths, 
flow  day  by  day  to  their  object,  (the  ocean).

3.  Inasmuch  as  he  had  soared  aloft  above  the 
firmament,  Indra  hurled  against  Vritra  his  de- 
structive (thunderbolt):  enveloped  in  a  cloud,  he 
rushed  upon  Indra,  but  the  wielder  of  the  sharp- 
edged  weapon  triumphed  over  his  foe.

ut  the  wielder  of  the  sharp- 
edged  weapon  triumphed  over  his  foe.

*  The  text  has  saviire,  which  might  mean,  to  the  sun,  as  one 
with  Indra:  the  Schohast  renders  it,  however,  by  sarvasya 
prerakdya,  to  the  instigator,  impeller,  or  animator  of  all.^  The  drift  of  the  question,  according  to  the  commentator,  is 
the  non-creation  or  eternity  of  the  waters, — nityd  eva  hi  id 
ityartha.

"284  RIG-VEDA    SANHITa.

4.  Pierce,  Brihaspati,''  with  a  radiant  shaft,  as 
with  a  thunderbolt,  the  sons  of  the  Asura  guarding 
his  gates:  in  like  manner  as  thou  didst  formerly 
slay  Vritra  by  thy  prowess,  so  do  thou  now  destroy 
our  enemy.

5.  Do  thou,  who  art  on  high,  cast  down  from

w  destroy 
our  enemy.

5.  Do  thou,  who  art  on  high,  cast  down  from 
heaven  the  adamantine  (tlianderbolt),  wherewith, 
when  exhilarated,  thou  didst  slay  thy  foe ;  and 
make  us  affluent  in  the  possession  of  many  sons, 
and  grandsons,  and  cattle.

Varga  XIII.  6.  Indra  and  Soma,  eradicate  the  worker  (of 
evil),  whom  you  hate;  be  the  encouragers  of  the 
liberal  institutor  of  the  rite :  protect  us  in  this 
place  of  peril,  and  make  the  world  (free  from  fear).*

7.  Let  not  Indra  vex  me,  or  weary  me,  or  make 
me  slothful :  never  may  we  say  (to  another),  do 
not  offer  the  Soma  libation :  (for  it  is  Indra)  who 
will  fulfil  (my  wishes),  who  will  give  (me  riches),

is  Indra)  who 
will  fulfil  (my  wishes),  who  will  give  (me  riches), 
who  will  hear  (my  prayers),  who  will  reward  me, 
presenting  libations,  with  cattle.

8.  Saraswati,  do  thou  protect  us :  associated 
with  the  Maruts,  and  firm  (of  pnrpose),  overcome 
our  foes,  whilst  Indra  slays  the  chief  of  the 
Sanctikas,"  defying  him  and  confiding  in  his 
strength.

Brihaspati  is  here  obviously  identified  with  Indra. 
^  Krimtam-u-lokam,  is,  literally,   make    the   world;  but   the 
verb  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  creating,  and  requires  the  specifi- 
cation of  what  is  done,  which  the  comment  supplies  by  bhayara- 
hitam,  freed  from  fear.Vrishabham  hnSikdnum :  the   Samlikas  are  said  to  be   the

from  fear.

Vrishabham  hnSikdnum :  the   Samlikas  are  said  to  be   the

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       285

9.  Detecting  him  who  is  lying  in  ambush  (against 
us),  who  is  purposing  our  death,  pierce  him,  Briiias- 
PATI,  with  thy  sliarp  (thunderbolt),  and  overthrow 
(our)  enemies  with  (thy)  weapons:  hurl,  monarch, 
thy  destroying  (shaft)  against  the  oppressor.

10.  Achieve,  hero,  along  with  our  valiant  heroes, 
the  exploits  that  are  to  be  achieved  by  thee :  long 
have  (our  enemies)  been  inflated  (with  pride);  slay 
them,  and  bring  to  us  their  treasures.

11.  Desirous  of  felicity,  Maruts,  I  glorify  with 
praise  and  homage  your  divine,  manifest,  and  con-

s,  I  glorify  with 
praise  and  homage  your  divine,  manifest,  and  con- 
gregated strength  ;  that  we  may  thereby  daily  enjoy 
distinguished  affluence,  accompanied  by  valiant  de- 
pendants and  posterity.

SUKTA  IX.  (XXXI.)

The  deities  and  Eishi  are  the  same ;  the  metre  of  the  last  stanza 
is  Trislit'uhh ;  of  the  rest,  Jagati.

1»  MiTRA    and    Varuna,    associated    with    the    Varga  xiv. 
A'diU/as,  the  Rudras,  and   the   Vasiis^  protect  our 
(sacrificial)  chariot,"  when  (it  goes)  about  (from  one 
place  to  another) ;  like  birds  that  fly  down,  seeking 
for  food,  rejoicing,  and  resting  in  the  woods,

2.  Propitiated  divinities,  protect  our  chariot,  gone

in  the  woods,

2.  Propitiated  divinities,  protect  our  chariot,  gone 
forth  in  quest  of  food  among  the  people,  when  the

descendants   of  SanHa,  who,  with  Amarka,  is  the  PuroUta,  or 
priest  of  the  Asuras.descendants   of  SanHa,  who,  with  Amarka,  is  the  PuroUta,  or 
priest  of  the  Asuras.

^  Asmdkam  avatam  ratham :  the  latter  is  here  intended  for  the 
cart,  or  waggon  employed,  as  appears  from  the  next  stanza,  to 
bring  food,  probably  intending  the  Soma  plant,  for  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  libation.

286  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

quick  (horses),  raising  the  dust  with  their  paces, 
trample  with  their  feet  upon  the  high  places  of  the 
earth.*

3.  Or,  may  that  all-beholding  Indra,  the  accom- 
plisher  of  great  deeds,  by  the  collective  vigour  of

Indra,  the  accom- 
plisher  of  great  deeds,  by  the  collective  vigour  of 
the  Maruts,  (coming)  from  heaven,  protect  our 
chariot  with  unassailable  protection,  (for  the  sake 
of  securing  to  us)  ample  wealth  and  abundant  food.

4.  Or,  mav  the  divine  Twashtri,  the  defender  of 
the  world,  together  with  the  wives  (of  the  gods),"* 
well  pleased,  urge  on  the  chariot ;  or  may  Ila,  the 
resplendent  Bhaga,  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  sagacious 
Push  an,  and  the  Aswins,  the  two  husbands  (of 
Surya),  urge  on  tlie  chariot.

5.  Or,  may  the  two  divine  auspicious  and 
mutually-contemplating  Day  and  Night,  the  anima- 
tors of  moving  (creatures,  urge  it  on) :  and,  Earth

ight,  the  anima- 
tors of  moving  (creatures,  urge  it  on) :  and,  Earth 
and  Heaven,  whilst  I  praise  you  both  with  a  new 
hymn,  I  offer  you  food  of  the  standing  (corn), 
although  provided  with  the  three  (sorts  of  sacri- 
ficial) viands."

Priihivydk  sdnau  janghananta  pdnlbhih,  going  heavily  on  the 
precipice  of  the  earth  with  their  feet ;  Uterally,  with  their  hands.Priihivydk  sdnau  janghananta  pdnlbhih,  going  heavily  on  the 
precipice  of  the  earth  with  their  feet ;  Uterally,  with  their  hands.

The  text  has  only  gndbhih,  with  the  wives ;  but,  as  accom- 
panying Tivasht'ri,  they  must  be  the  devapatnih,  the  wives  of  the 
gods,  the  personified  metres  of  the  Veda,  according  to  the 
Taittariya  ;  chhanddnsi  vat  gndh.

Sthdiuscha  vayas  trivayd  itpastire :  the  passage  is  rather

vat  gndh.

Sthdiuscha  vayas  trivayd  itpastire :  the  passage  is  rather 
obscure :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  it  means,  I,  who  am  able  to 
offer  you  three  sorts  of  sacrificial  food,  vegetable  substances, 
animal   victims,    or    the    Soma    juice, — oshadhipasusomdtmdkdni

SECOND   ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.       287

6.  We  desire,  gods,  to  repeat  the  praise  of  you, 
who  are  propitiated  by  praise  :  may  Ahirbudhnya, 
Aja-ekapad,  Trita,  Ribhukshin,  Savitri,''  bestow 
upon  us  food,  and  may  the  swift-moving  grandson 
of  the  waters,  (Aqni,  be  gratified  by)  our  praises 
and  our  worship.

7.  Adorable  (gods),  I  desire  that  these  (my) 
earnest  praises  (should  please)  you:  men  wishing

ire  that  these  (my) 
earnest  praises  (should  please)  you:  men  wishing 
for  food,  desirous  of  vigour,  have  constructed 
(hymns)  for  your  celebration ;  may  you  hasten  like 
a  (swift)  chariot-horse  to  our  (pious)  rite.

SUKTA  X.  (XXXII.)

The  deities  of  the  first  stanza  are  Heaven  and  Earth  ;  of  the 
two  next,  Indra  or  TwashI-ri;  Raka,  the  full  moon,  of  the 
two  followang  ;  and  Sinivali,  the  new  moon,  of  the  next  two ; 
and  of  the  last  verse,  the  six  female  personifications  there 
specified ;  the  Rishi  is  as  before ;  the  metre  of  the  first  five 
stanzas  is  Jagati;  of  the  three  last,  Anushhbh.

1.  Heaven  and  Earth,  be  the  protectors  of  me     Varga  xv.1.  Heaven  and  Earth,  be  the  protectors  of  me     Varga  xv.

shhbh.

1.  Heaven  and  Earth,  be  the  protectors  of  me     Varga  xv.

anndni;  spread,  vpastrinmni ;  the  food,  or  cates  and  butter, 
chdrupuroddsddi  lakshandiii,  of  that  which  is  stationary,  that  is, 
vrihyddeh,  or  rice  and  other  grains.

The  two  first  of  these  names  occur  in  the  Purdiias,  as  those 
of  two  of  the  Rvdras :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  the  first  is  the 
same  as  ahi,  alone;  budhnya  implying  merely  his  origin  in  the 
firmament, — budhnam  antariksham  tatra  hhavo  ahi-ndmd  deva: 
the  second  is  a  name  of  the  sun,  the  unborn,  who  goes  with  one 
foot:  trita  he  would  treat  as  an  epithet,  tritasti'rnatama,  most 
expanded,  an  epithet  of  Indra :  Ribhukshin  is  an  ordinary  appel-

ost 
expanded,  an  epithet  of  Indra :  Ribhukshin  is  an  ordinary  appel- 
lative of  the  same  deity  :  Savitri  he  explains,  the  generator  of  all, 
sarvasya  prasavitd.

288  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA..

your  worshipper,  anxious  to  propitiate  you  by 
worship  and  adoration,  for  of  you  two  is  abundant 
food  :  desiring  riches,  I  glorify  you  both,  and  cele- 
brate you  with  great  (laudation).

2.  Let  not  the  secret  guile  of  man,  (Tndra), 
harm  us  by  day  (or  night)  ;  leave  us  not  subject  to 
the  malevolent,  disunite  us  not  from  thy  friendship ; 
regard  us  with  the  favourable  thoughts  that  (spring) 
from  it :   we  ask  this  (boon)  of  thee.

3.  Bring  to  us,  with  benignant  mind,  the  well-

is  (boon)  of  thee.

3.  Bring  to  us,  with  benignant  mind,  the  well- 
nourished  and  compactly-limbed  milch  cow,  yielding 
milk,  and  conferring  happiness  :  daily  I  glorify  thee, 
who  art  adored  by  many,  quick  in  (thy)  steps,  and 
rapid  in  (thy)  words.^4.  I  invoke,  with  suitable  praise,  Raka,  who  is 
worthily  invoked:  may  she,  who  is  auspicious  of 
good  fortune,  hear  us,  and  spontaneously  understand 
(our  purpose) :  may  she  sew  her  work  with  an 
infallible  needle :''  may  she  grant  us  excellent  and 
opulent  descendants.

5.  Raka,  with  those  thy  kind  and  gracious  inten- 
tions, wherewith  thou  grantest  riches  to  the  donor 
(of  oblations),   approach  us  to-day;  thou   who  art

s  to  the  donor 
(of  oblations),   approach  us  to-day;  thou   who  art

*  Padydbhir-dsum  vachasd  chb.  vdjinam,  explained  as  in  the  text, 
but,  according  to  the  SchoHast,  it  is  doubtful  wliether  this  and 
the  preceding  stanza  apply  to  Indra  or  to  Tivnsht'ri.

**  Sivyatu  apah  suchydchchhidyamdnayd,  may  she  sew  the  work 
with  a  needle  that  is  not  capable  of  being  cut  or  broken  ;  with 
one,  of  which  the  stitches  will  endure,  in  like  manner  as  clothes 
and  the  like  wrought  with  a  needle  last  a  long  time,  according  to 
the  commentator.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.       289

auspicious  of  good  fortune,  favourably  inclined,  and 
bestowing  a  thousand  blessings.

6.

d  fortune,  favourably  inclined,  and 
bestowing  a  thousand  blessings.

6.  Wide-liipped  Sinivali,*  who  art  the  sister  of 
the  gods,  accept  tlie  offered  oblation,  and  grant  us, 
goddess,  progeny.

7.  Offer  the  oblation  to  that  Sinivali,  the  pro- 
tectress of  mankind,  who  has  beautiful  arms,  beau- 
tiful fingers,  who  is  the  parent  of  many  children, 
and  who  has  numerous  children.

8.  I  invoke  her  who  is  Gangu,''  who  is  SinIvali, 
who  is  Raka,  who  is  Saraswati;  (I  invoke) 
IndranI  for  protection,  Varunani  for  welfare.

ANUVAKA  IV.

SiJkta    I.    (XXXIII.)

The  deity  is  Rudra  ;  the  Rishi  as  before  ;  the  metre,  Trishfubh.ANUVAKA  IV.

SiJkta    I.    (XXXIII.)

The  deity  is  Rudra  ;  the  Rishi  as  before  ;  the  metre,  Trishfubh.

1.  Father  of  the  Maruts,"  may  thy  felicity  extend     Varga  xvi.

h.

1.  Father  of  the  Maruts,"  may  thy  felicity  extend     Varga  xvi. 
to  us :  exclude  us  not  from  the  sight  of  the  sun :

"  Shnvdli  is  the  moon  on  the  first  day  on  which  it  is  visible  : 
she  is  said  to  be,  devdndm  swasd,  either  the  sister  of  the  gods,  or 
one  who  is  independent  of  them ;  the  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajusht 
XXXIV.  10;  for  the  epithet,  PrithusMuke,  which  Say  ana  explains 
by  prithn  Jaghane,  Mahidhara  proposes,  either,  prithu  kesabhdre, 
abundant- luiired,  or  much-praised,  or  desired  of  many ;  stukd^ 
meaning  a  head  of  hair,  praise,  or  desire.

^  Said  to  be  a  synonyrae  of  Kuhu,  the  day  of  conjunction,

desire.

^  Said  to  be  a  synonyrae  of  Kuhu,  the  day  of  conjunction, 
when  the  moon  rises  invisible  :  it  would  seem  as  if  these  phases 
of  the  moon  were  identifiable  with  Indrdni  or  Varundm,  or  with 
both.

See  vol.  i.  p.  302,  note. 
VOL.  II.  U

290  RIG-VEDA    SANITITA.

(grant  that)  our  valiant  (descendants)  may  over- 
come (these)  foes,  and  that  we  may  be  multiplied, 
RuDBA,  by  (our)  progeny.

2.  Nourished  by  the  sanatory  vegetables  which 
are  bestowed  by  thee,  may  I  live  a  hundred 
winters :  extirpate  mine  enemies,  my  exceeding 
«in,  and  my  manifold  infirmities.

3.  Thou,  RuDRA,  art  the  chiefest  of  being-s  in 
glory:  thou,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  art  the

fest  of  being-s  in 
glory:  thou,  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  art  the 
mightiest  of  the  mighty :  do  thou  waft  us  in  safety 
over  (the  ocean)  of  sin  :  repel  all  the  assaults  of 
iniquity.4.  Let  us  not  provoke  thee,  Rudra,  to  wrath  b' 
our  (imperfect)  adorations  ;  nor,  showerer  (of  bene- 
fits), by  our  unworthy  praise,  nor  by  our  invocation 
(of  other  deities)  :  invigorate  our  sons  by  thy  medi- 
cinal plants,  for  I  hear  that  thou  art  a  chief  physiciai 
amongst  physicians.*

5.  May  I  pacify  by  my  praises  that  Rudra,  who 
is  worshipped  with  invocations  and  oblations  ;  and 
never  may  he  who  is  soft-bellied,  of  a  tawny  hue, 
and  handsome  chin  -^  who  is  reverently  invoked ;

,  of  a  tawny  hue, 
and  handsome  chin  -^  who  is  reverently  invoked ; 
subject  us  to  that  malevolent  disposition  (that  pur- 
poses our  destruction)."

"  Bhishaktamam  two.  bhishajdm  srinomi :  we  have  here  an 
unequivocal  assertion  of  the  iEsculapian  attributes  of  Rudra.

^  Ridudara  babhruvarna  susipra :  Ydska  interprets  the  first, 
tnridu  udara,  having  a  soft  belly. — Nir.  vi.  4.

"^  Md  no  asyai  nradhan  mandyai :  the  Scholiast  explains  mand 
by  kanmiti  manyamdnd  buddhih,  the  mind  meditating,  I  kill.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.      291

6.  May  the  sbowerer  of  benefits,  the  lord  of  the   Varga  xvii. 
Maruts,  gratify  me  bis  suppliant  with  invigorating

the   Varga  xvii. 
Maruts,  gratify  me  bis  suppliant  with  invigorating

food :  may  I,  free  from  sin,  so  propitiate  Rudra, 
that  I  may  attain  to  bis  felicity,  as  a  man,  distressed 
by  beat,  (finds  relief)  in  the  shade.

7.  Where,  Rudra,  is  thy  joy-dispensing  hand, 
which  is  the  healer  and  delighter  (of  all) :  sbowerer 
(of  benefits),  who  art  the  dispeller  of  the  sins  of  the 
gods,^  quickly  have  compassiop-  upon  me.8.  I  address  infinite  and  earnest  praise  to  the 
sbowerer  (of  benefits),  tbe  cherisher  (of  all),  the 
white-complexioned  i*"  adore  the  consumer  (of  sin), 
with  prostrations :  we  glorify  tbe  illustrious  name 
of  Rudra.

9.  (Firm)  with  strong  limbs,  assuming  many  forms,

us  name 
of  Rudra.

9.  (Firm)  with  strong  limbs,  assuming  many  forms, 
fierce,  and  tawny-coloured,  he  shines  with  brilliant 
golden  ornaments :  vigour*^  is  inseparable  from 
Rudra,  the  supreme  ruler  and  lord  of  this  world.

10.  Worthy^  (of  reverence),  thou  bearest  arrows

*  Apahhartd  rapaso  daivyasya,  is,  according  to  the  commen- 
tator, devah'itasya  pdpasya  apaharttd,  the  taker  away  of  sin 
committed  by  a  divinity  :  however,  the  proper  sense  of  daivya 
here  may  be  questionable,  and  it  may  imply  sin  against  the  gods.

^  Switiche-swnityam  anchate,  he  who  goes  to  or  obtains  white- 
ness ;  the  white  complexion  of  ^iva,  the  later  representative  of

te- 
ness ;  the  white  complexion  of  ^iva,  the  later  representative  of 
Rudra,  has,  therefore,  its  origin  in  the  Rich.

''  Asuryam,  according  to  the  comment,  means  bah,  strength ; 
or  it  might  be  thought  to  connect  Rudra  with  the  Asuras.

^  Arhan  is  for  arha  or  yogya,  fit  for,  or  worthy  of ;  the  term

is  somewhat  remarkable,  as  especially  applicable,  although  not

exclusively  so,  to  a  Buddha.

u  2

292  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

and  a  bow ;  worthy  (of  praise),  thou  wearest  an 
adorable  and  omniform  necklace  f  worthy  (of  adora- 
tion), thou  preservest  all  this  vast  universe:  there 
is  no  one  more  powerful  than  thou. 
Vargaxviii.  H.  Glorify  the  renowned  Rudra,  riding  in  histhan  thou. 
Vargaxviii.  H.  Glorify  the  renowned  Rudra,  riding  in  his 
car,  ever  youthful,  destructive,  fierce  like  a  formida- 
ble wild  beast :  Rudra,  propitiated  by  praise,  grant 
happiness  to  him  who  praises  (thee),  and  let  thy 
hosts  destroy  him  who  is  our  adversary.

12.  I  bow,  Rudra,  to  thee,  approaching  (our 
rite),  as  a  boy  to  his  father  when  pronouncing  a 
blessing  upon  him  :  I  glorify  thee,  the  giver  of  much 
(wealth),  the  protector  of  the  virtuous  ;  do  thou, 
thus  glorified,  bestow  healing  herbs  upon  me.

13.  Maruts,  I  solicit  of  you  those  medicaments 
which  are  pure  ;  those,  showerers  (of  benefits),  which 
give  great  pleasure  ;  those  which  confer  felicity ;

benefits),  which 
give  great  pleasure  ;  those  which  confer  felicity ; 
those  which  (our)  sire,  Manu,  selected  '^  and  those 
(medicaments)  of  Rudra  which  are  the  alleviation 
(of  disease),  and  defence  (against  danger).

14.  May  the  javelin  of  Rudra  avoid  us :  may  the 
great  displeasure  of  the  radiant  deity  pass  away 
(from  us) :  showererof  benefits,  turn  away  thy  strong

The  text  has  nishka,  which  Sdyana  here  interprets,  hdra.

Ydni  Manur  avrimtd  pita  nah :  this  alludes,  no  doubt,  to  the 
vegetable  seeds  which  Manu,  according  to  the  Mahdbhdrata,  was 
directed  to  take  with  him  into  the  vessel  in  which  he  was  pre- 
served at  the  time  of  the  deluge  :  the  allusion  is  the  more  worthy

served at  the  time  of  the  deluge  :  the  allusion  is  the  more  worthy 
of  notice,  that  this  particular  incident  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
narrative  that  is  given  of  the  event  in  the  Satapatha  Brdhmana: 
see  Weber,  Indische  Studien.

SECOND   ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       293

(bow)  from  the  wealthy  (offerers  of  oblations),  and 
bestow  happiness  upon  (our)  sons  and  grandsons.*SECOND   ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       293

(bow)  from  the  wealthy  (offerers  of  oblations),  and 
bestow  happiness  upon  (our)  sons  and  grandsons.*

15.  Cherisher  of  the  world,  showerer  (of  benefits), 
omniscient  and  divine  (Rudra),  hearer  of  our  invo- 
cation, so  consider  us  on  this  occasion,  that  thou 
mayest  not  be  irate,  nor  slay  us ;  but  that,  blessed 
with  excellent  descendants,  we  may  worthily  glorify 
thee  at  this  sacrifice.

Si5kta  II.  (XXXIV.)

we  may  worthily  glorify 
thee  at  this  sacrifice.

Si5kta  II.  (XXXIV.)

The  deities  are  the  Maruts  ;  the  Rishi  as  before ;  the  metre  is 
Jagati,  except  in  the  last  verse,  in  which  it  is  Trishtuhh.

1.  The   Maruts,  sliedders  of  showers,   endowed    Varga  xix. 
with   resistless  might,  like  formidable   lions,   reve- 
rencing (the  world)  by  their  energies,   resplendent

as  fires,  laden  with  water,''  and  blowing  about 
the  wandering  cloud,  give  vent  to  its  (collected) 
rain.

2.  Since,  golden-breasted  Maruts,  the  vigorous 
(Rudra)  begot  you  of  the  pure  womb  of  Prisni,"

*  The  stanza  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xvi.  50 ;  the  end  of  the

ni,"

*  The  stanza  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xvi.  50 ;  the  end  of  the 
first  half  of  the  verse  reads,  durmatir-aghuyoh,  the  displeasure  of 
the  sinful  or  the  malevolent,  instead  of  durmatir -mahi  gat,  may 
the  great  displeasure  pass  away.

^  Rijishinah,  from  rijisha,  water ;  or  it  may  mean.  Soma  that 
has  lost  its  strength. — rijisha,  apagata  sdrah  somah.^  Rijishinah,  from  rijisha,  water ;  or  it  may  mean.  Soma  that 
has  lost  its  strength. — rijisha,  apagata  sdrah  somah.

'  Prisnydh  sukra  lidhani,  lit.  in  the  pure  udder  of  Prisni,  that 
is,  on  the  elevated  places  of  the  earth,  in  the  mountains  :  or, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  allusion  is  intended  to  the  legend  of 
the  earth's  assuming  the  form  of  a  brindled  cow,  and  Rudra's 
begetting  the  Maruts  of  her  in  the  shape  of  a  biill ;  but  this  is

begetting  the  Maruts  of  her  in  the  shape  of  a  biill ;  but  this  is 
more  of  a  Paurdnik  than  a  Vaidik  legend.

294  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

therefore  they,  the  devourers  (of  their  euemies),  are 
conspicuous  (by  their  ornaments),  as  the  heavens 
are  by  the  constellations  ;  and,  senders  of  rain,  they 
are  brilliant  as  the  cloud-born  (lightning).

3.  They  sprinkle  the  wide-extended  (lands)  with 
water,  as  (men  sprinkle)  horses  (when  heated)  in 
battles;  and  they  rush  along  with  swift  (horses) 
on  the  >kiiis  of  the  sounding  (cloud)  :*  Maruts, 
golden-helmed,^  and  of  one  mind,  agitating  (the 
trees),  come  with  your  spotted  deer  to  (receive  the 
sacrificial)  food.

4.

),  come  with  your  spotted  deer  to  (receive  the 
sacrificial)  food.

4.  The  prompt-giving  Maruts  ever  confer  upon 
the  (offerer  of  sacrificial,  food,  as  upon  a  friend,  all 
these  (world-supporting)  waters :  they  who  have 
spotted  deer  for  steeds,  who  are  possessed  of  inex- 
haustible riches,  and  who,  seated  in  their  chariots, 
(proceed)  amongst  the  moving  (clouds),  like  horses 
going  straight '^  (to  the  goal).

5.  Maruts,  who  are  of  one  mind,  and  are  armed 
with  shining  lances,  come  with  the  bright,  full- 
uddered  kine,  by  unobstructed   paths,    to   partake5.  Maruts,  who  are  of  one  mind,  and  are  armed 
with  shining  lances,  come  with  the  bright,  full- 
uddered  kine,  by  unobstructed   paths,    to   partake

Nudasya  karnais-turayanta  dsubhih,  lit.  they  hasten  with  quick 
ears  of  the  sound :  the  Scholiast  furnishes,  n/iick  horses,  and

uick 
ears  of  the  sound :  the  Scholiast  furnishes,  n/iick  horses,  and 
explains  the  ears  to  signify^  the  middle  parts  of  that  which  emits 
sound,  i.  e.,  the  cloud.

Hiranyasiprdh :  sipra,  in  other  places,  the  nose,  or  the  lower 
jaw,  is  here  explained,  siras-trdm,  a  head-guard,  a  helmet.

'^  Rijipyuso  na  is  explained,  by  the  Scholiast,  by  riju  akuiilam 
prdimuvantak  gachchhanto  aswd  iva,  like  horses  going  by,  or 
arriving  at,  that  which  is  straight,  not  crooked.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH    ADII\AYA.       295

of  the  exhilaration  of  the  {Soma)  juice,  as  swans 
(fly)  to  their  nests.

6.  Maruts,  who  are  of  one  mind,  come  to  the     Varga  xx.

nests.

6.  Maruts,  who  are  of  one  mind,  come  to  the     Varga  xx. 
food  that  is  offered  at  (our)  sacrifices,  as  (you  come)

to  the  praises  of  men  :  nourish  the  milch  cow,  (the 
cloud),  so  that  it  may  be  like  a  mare  with  a  full 
udder,  and  render  the  pious  rite  productive  of 
abundant  food  to  the  worshipper.

7.  Bestow  upon  us,  Maruts,  that  (son)  who  shall 
enjoy  abundance,  and  who  shall  be  repeating  your 
appropriate  praises  day  by  day  to  (induce)  your 
coming :  give  food  to  those  who  praise  you ;  to 
him  who  glorifies  you  in  battles :  (grant  him) 
liberality,  intelligence,  and  unimpaired  unsurpassa- 
ble vigour.

8.  When  the  golden-breasted  munificent  Maruts

d  unsurpassa- 
ble vigour.8.  When  the  golden-breasted  munificent  Maruts

d  unsurpassa- 
ble vigour.

8.  When  the  golden-breasted  munificent  Maruts 
yoke  their  horses  to  their  chariots  on  an  auspicious 
(occasion),  they  shed  in  their  peculiar  (directions) 
abundant  food  upon  him  who  offers  them  oblations, 
as  a  milch  cow  (gives  milk)  to  her  calf.

9.  Maruts,  grantors  of  dwellings,  protect  us  from 
the  malignity  of  the  man  who  cherishes  wolf-like 
enmity  against  us :  encompass  him  with  your  burn- 
ing diseases;  ward  off  the  murderous  (weapon)  of 
the  devourer.

10.  Maruts,  your  marvellous  energy  is  well 
known,  whereby,  seizing  the  udder  of  heaven,  you 
milked  it  (of  the  rain,*  destroyed)   the  reviler  of

of  heaven,  you 
milked  it  (of  the  rain,*  destroyed)   the  reviler  of

Prisnyd  yad  lidhar  apt  dpayo  duhuh  :  Prisni  is  here  identified 
with  the  firrnaracnt,  and  the  udder  is  the  cloud  :  in  the  text  the

296  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

your  worshipper,  and  (came),  irresistible  sons  of 
RuDRA,  to  Trita*  for  the  destruction  of  his 
enemies. 
Varga  XXI.  11.  We  invoke  you,  mighty  Maruts,  who  frequent 
such  sacrifices^'  (as  this,  to  be  present)  at  the  offer- 
ing of  the  diffusive  and  desirable  (libation) :  lifting 
up  our  ladles,  and  reciting  their  praise,  we  solicit 
the  golden-hued  and  lofty  Maruts  for  excellent 
wealth.

12.  May  they,  who,  the  first  celeb rators   of  the

excellent 
wealth.

12.  May  they,  who,  the  first  celeb rators   of  the 
ten-months'  rite,   accomplished   this    sacrifice,"   re-

person  is  abruptly  changed :  your  energy  is  known,  by  which 
they  milked,  &c.

Trita  is  said  to  be  a  ^iski.person  is  abruptly  changed :  your  energy  is  known,  by  which 
they  milked,  &c.

Trita  is  said  to  be  a  ^iski.

Evayuvnah  is  said  to  be  derived  from  era,  that  which  is  to 
be  gone  to,  ganiavyam,  that  is,  worship,  or  a  sacrifice,  stotram, 
yajnam  vd,  and  ydvan,  who  goes  to ;  it  is  a  purely  Vaidik  word.

Te  dasagwdh  prathamd  yajnam  uhtre :  in  the  first  volume 
(p.  167),  we  have  had  dasagwdh  explained,  those  who  originally, 
at  least,  were  priests  of  the  nice  or  school  of  Angiras,  conducting 
ceremonies  that  lasted  nine  or  ten  days  :  here  we  have  the  office

ceremonies  that  lasted  nine  or  ten  days  :  here  we  have  the  office 
assigned  to  the  Maruts,  as  the  first  celebrators  of  the  rite,  and 
who  are  therefore  identified  by  the  Scholiast  with  the  Angirasas, 
— Angirasas -tad  rupd  bhutwd-marutah,  who  were  the  first,  or 
prior  to  the  Adityas:  according  to  the  legend,  which  is  here 
more  fully  detailed  in  the  commentary,  there  was  a  competition 
for  precedence  in  going-  to  Sivarga,  between  the  Adityas  and  the 
Angirasas,  and  the  latter  acquired  it,  by  first  instituting  sacrifices 
with  fire ;  according  to  the  text,  Aditydschaiua  iha-dsann-angi- 
rasascha  te  agre  agnind  agnim  ayajanta ;  the  Adifyds  were  also

-angi- 
rasascha  te  agre  agnind  agnim  ayajanta ;  the  Adifyds  were  also 
here,  and  the  Angirasas;  they  (the  latter)  first  worshipped  Agni 
with  fire :  this  is  in  harmony  with  the  inference  drawn  from  othCT

SECOND    ASHTAKA — SEVENTH   ADHYAYA.       297

animate  us  at  the  rising  dawn  ;  for  as  the  dawn 
with  purple  rays  drives  away  the  night,  so  (do  they 
scatter  the  darkness)  with  great,  and  pure,  and 
mist-dispelling  radiance.13.  They,  the  Rudras,  (equipped)  with  melodious 
(lutes),*  and  decorated  with  purple  ornaments,  exult 
in  the  dwellings  of  the  waters ;  and  scattering  the 
clouds  with  rapid  vigour,  they  are  endowed  with 
delightful  and  beautiful  forms.

14.

pid  vigour,  they  are  endowed  with 
delightful  and  beautiful  forms.

14.  Imploring  them  for  ample  wealth,  and  (having 
recourse  to  him)  for  protection,  we  glorify  them 
with  this  praise;  like  the  five  chief  priests  whom 
Trita  detained  for  the  (performance  of)  the  sacri- 
fice, and  to  protect  it  with  their  weapons.''

15.  Maruts,  may  that  protection  wherewith  you 
convey  the  worshipper  beyond  sin,  wherewith  you 
rescue  the  reciter  of  your  praise  from  the  scoffer,  be 
present  with  us :  may  your  benign  disposition  tend 
towards  us,  like  a  lowing  (cow  towards  her  calf).

passages,  that  Angiras  and  his  disciples  were  the  persons  who

alf).

passages,  that  Angiras  and  his  disciples  were  the  persons  who 
first  established  the  various  forms  of  worship  with  fire  :  see  vol.  i. 
p.  3,  note.

Te  kshombhih:  Sdyana  explains  kshonibhih  by,  sabtfa  kdri- 
hkir-v{ndkhyair-v{ndviseshaih,  with  sounding  instruments,  called 
v{nis,  a  sort  of  viiids:  the  vmd  is  a  stringed  instrument,  well 
known.

Trito  na  ydn  pancha  hotrm  abhisht'aye  dvavarttad  avardn  chak^ 
riyd  avase :  the  passage  is  obscure,  especially  as  the  legend  which 
is  alluded  to  is  not  narrated  by  the  Scholiast :  in  fact,  he  is  disposed 
to  consider  it  as  alluding  to  the  practice  of  mysticism,  or  yogc. :

to  consider  it  as  alluding  to  the  practice  of  mysticism,  or  yogc. : 
llie  five  hotris,  or  offerers  of  the  Soma,  being  the  five  vital  airs.

298  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

StfKTA    III.    (XXXV.)298  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

StfKTA    III.    (XXXV.)

The   deity  is  ApamnapXt  ;  the  Rishi  as  before ;   the  metre  is

Trishfubh.

Varga  XXII.  1.  Desiring  food,  I  put  forth  this  laudatory 
hymn  :  may  the  sounding  and  swift-moving  grand- 
son of  the  waters*  bestow  abundant  food  upon  me 
his  worshipper  :  may  he  make  us  of  goodly  appear- 
ance, for  verily  he  is  propitiated  by  praise.

2.  Let  us  address  to  him  the  prayer  that  is  con- 
ceived in  our  hearts,  and  may  he  fully  understand 
(its  purport) ;  for  he,  the  lord,  the  grandson  of  the

understand 
(its  purport) ;  for  he,  the  lord,  the  grandson  of  the

whom  Trita,  as  a  Yogi,  suppressed,  and  compelled  to  concentrate 
themselves  in  the  Chakra,  or  umbilical  region,  for  the  attainment 
of  superhuman  faculties  :  this  would  leave  the  term  avardn  un- 
explained, although  the  commentator  proposes  to  render  it, 
hotnanishpddakdn  muhhjdn,  the  chief  offerers  of  the  Soma:  his 
explanation  runs  thus  :  pancha-hotn'n  adhydtmaprdndpdnddi  pancha 
vrittydtmand  varttamdndn,  ata  eva  homanishpddakdn  miikhydn, 
abkisht'aye  abhilashitasiddhydrtham  chakriyd  ndbhichakrena  avatum 
sanganium  dvavarttat :  swasmdn  nir  jigamishun  prdndn  swulmd- 
bhimukham  dvartayat,  he  compelled  the  vital  airs,  desirous  of

swulmd- 
bhimukham  dvartayat,  he  compelled  the  vital  airs,  desirous  of 
issuing  from  himself,  to  turn  back  into  the  presence  of  himself, 
and  to  concentrate  with  the  umbilical  chakra,  for  the  entire  com- 
pletion of  the  rite  ;  (those  airs  being)  the  chief  offerers  of  the  obla- 
tion abiding  in  the  spirit,  asprdiia,  apdna,  and  the  rest,  constituting 
the  five  ministering  priests  :  a  less  mystical  interpretation  turns 
upon  the  sense  of  chakriyd,  with  a  spear  or  lance,  rishfydkkyena 
dyudhena.^  Apdm-napdt,  the  son  of  the  trees  or  fuel,  which  are  the 
progeny  of  the  rains :  a  different  etymology  makes  the  term  an 
epithet  of  the  sun  :  vol.  i.  51,  note.

tymology  makes  the  term  an 
epithet  of  the  sun  :  vol.  i.  51,  note.

SECOND    ASHTAKA SEVENTH    ADHYAYA.       299

waters,  has  generated  all  beings  by  the  greatness  of 
his  might.

3.  Some  waters  collect  together  (from  the  rain) ; 
others,  (already  collected  on  earth),  unite  with  them  ; 
as  rivers,  they  flow  together  to  propitiate  the  ocean- 
fire  :*  the  pure  waters  are  gathered  round  the  pure 
and  brilliant  grandsons  of  the  waters.^

4.  The  young  and  modest  (waters)  wait  upon  the 
youth,  assiduous  in  bathing  him,  and  he,  although 
unfed  with  fuel,  yet  cleansed  with  clarified  butter, 
shines  with  bright  rays  amidst  the  waters,*'  that 
abundance  (may  be)  to  us.

5.

bright  rays  amidst  the  waters,*'  that 
abundance  (may  be)  to  us.

5.  Three  divine  females'^  present  food  to  that 
uninjurable   divinity;  as  if  formed   in   the  waters

a       '

Urvam  nadyah  prinanti :  urva  is  explained  by  Say  ana  in  its 
usual  acceptation  of  submarine  fire, — samudramadhye  varttamdnam 
vddavdnalam.

The  Scholiast  suggests  also  a  different  explanation  of  the 
stanza,  as  referring  to  two  sorts  of  water ;  one  termed  ekadhandh, 
the  other  vasativaryah,  apparently  the  juice  of  the  Soma,  as 
distinguished  by  their  employment  in  the  Agnishomiya  sacrifice, 
after  collecting  the  fat  of  the  victim,  and  which  are  to  be  mixed, 
after  collecting  the  fat  of  the  victim,  and  which  are  to  be  mixed 
for  the  completion  of  the  ceremony :  the  mantra  used  on  the 
occasion  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  vi.  23,  where  Mahidhara  explains 
the  meaning  of  Vaaativari;  vasatwan  sanjndndm  somdrtlidndm  apdm 
grahanam  kdryam,  the  taking  of  the  waters  named  Vasativari, 
which  mean,  the  Soma  is  to  be  observed :  more  particular  detail 
is  to  be  found  in  the  Sutras  of  Kutydyana,  viii.  9  ;  vii.  10

Alluding  either  to  the  submarine  fire  or  to  the  lightning 
amidst  the  rain-clouds.

They  are,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  IM,  Saraswaii,  and 
Bhdrati,  personifications  of  sacred  prayer  or  praise.

300  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

ersonifications  of  sacred  prayer  or  praise.

300  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

they  spread  abroad,  and  he  drinks  the  ambrosia  of 
the  first-created  (element).* 
Var  ga  XXIII.  6.  In  him  is  the  birth  of  the  horse  '^  of  him  is 
(the  origin  of)  the  world  f  do  thou,  grandson  of  the 
(waters),  protect  the  pious  worshippers  from  the 
malevolence  of  the  oppressor:  those  who  give  no 
offerings,  those  who  practise  untruths,  attain  not 
the  inconceivable  deity,  whether  abiding  in  the 
immature  or  the  perfect  waters.

7.  He,  the  grandson  of  the  waters,  who  abides  in 
his  own  dwelling ;  of  whom  is  the  readily-milked 
cow ;  who  augments  the  nectar  (of  the  skies),  and

the  readily-milked 
cow ;  who  augments  the  nectar  (of  the  skies),  and 
(thence)  eats  the  sacrificial  food ;  he,  gathering 
strength  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  shines  for  the 
sake  of  conferring  wealth  upon  his  worshipper.Kritd  iva  upa  hi  prasarsre  apsu,  they  have  proceeded  or 
issued,  as  if  made,  in  the  waters,  is  the  explanation  of  the  com- 
mentator ;  but  this  is  all.  Sa  piyusham  dhayati  purvasundm,  he 
drinks  the  nectar,  that  is,  the  Soma,  of  those  first  bom ;  the 
essence  of  the  waters  which  were  the  first  created  things  by 
Brahma ;  pui'vam  Brahmanah  sakdsad  utpannundm  apdm  sdrabhutam.

Aswasya  utra  janimd,  here,  or  in  him  is  the  birth  of  the  horse  ;

Aswasya  utra  janimd,  here,  or  in  him  is  the  birth  of  the  horse  ; 
alluding,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  to  the  production  of  Uchchais- 
sravas,  the  horse  of  Indra,  amongst  the  precious  things  obtained 
by  the  churning  of  the  ocean :  but  this  is  Paurdnik ;  apparently 
not  Vaidik;  and  the  birth  of  the  horse  from  water,  whether 
of  the  ocean  or  not,  is  a  legend,  the  origin  of  which  is  yet 
doubtful.

Asya  cha  swah ;  the  last  is  explained,  su,  well,  varamya,  to 
be  chosen  :  implying,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  the  whole  world  : 
that  is,  the  deity  residing  amidst  the  waters,  or  the  rains,  may  be 
considered  as  the  origin  of  all  earthly  things.

SECOND  ASHTAKA SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.

as  the  origin  of  all  earthly  things.

SECOND  ASHTAKA SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.   301

8.  All  Other  beings  are,  as  it  were,  brandies  of 
him,  who,  truthful,  eternal,  and  vast,  shines  amidst 
the  waters  with  pure  and  divine  (radiance) ;  and 
the  shrubs,  with  their  products,  are  born  (of  him).

9.  The  grandson  of  the  waters  has  ascended  the 
firmament  above  (the  region)  of  the  tortuously- 
moving  (clouds),  arrayed  in  lightning :  the  broad 
and  golden-coloured  (rivers)  spread  around,  bearing 
(to  all  quarters)  his  exceeding  glory.10.  The  grandson  of  the  waters  is  of  golden 
form,  of  golden  aspect,  of  golden  hue,  and  (shines) 
seated  upon  a  seat  of  gold :  the  givers  of  gold  (at

e,  and  (shines) 
seated  upon  a  seat  of  gold :  the  givers  of  gold  (at 
solemn  rites)  present  to  him  (sacrificial)  food.

11.  Beautiful  is  his  form  (of  aggregated  lustre,  Varga  xxiv. 
beautiful)    is   the    name   of  the   grandson   of   the

waters;  (both)  flourish,  though  hidden*  (by  the 
clouds) ;  the  youthful  waters  collectively  kindle  the 
golden-coloured  divinity  in  the  firmament,  for  water 
is  his  food.

12.  To  him  our  friend,  the  first  of  many^  (deities), 
we  offer  worship  with  sacrifices,  oblations,  and  pro- 
stration :  I  decorate  the  high  place  (of  his  presence) :

Aptchyam  varddhate-meghdntarhitam  sad-vardhcUe ;  increases 
though  concealed  by  the  clouds ;  is  the  interpretation  of  the

reases 
though  concealed  by  the  clouds ;  is  the  interpretation  of  the 
comment.

Bahundm  avamdya,  the  best  of  many,  that  is,  of  the  gods,  as 
in  the  Aitareya  Brdhmaiia,  agnir-vai  devdndm  avamah,  that  is, 
according  to  the  Scholiast,  devdndm  madhye  prathainah,  the  first 
amongst  the  gods ;  qualifying  the  expression  as  refezTing  to  the 
•sacrifice  in  which  oblations  are  to  be  presented  to  Agni,  or  fire,  in 
the  first  instance.

302  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

I  nourish  him  with  fuel :  I  sustain  him  with  (sacri- 
ficial) viands :  I  glorify  him  with  hymns.

13.  Vigorous,  he  has  generated  himself  as  an 
embryo  in  those  (waters) :  he  is  their  infant ;  he

d  himself  as  an 
embryo  in  those  (waters) :  he  is  their  infant ;  he 
sucks  them ;  they  bedew  him  (with  moisture) ;  the 
grandson  of  the  waters  of  untarnished  splendour 
has  descended  to  this  (earth)  in  the  form  of  a 
different  (fire).'14.  The  abundant  waters,  bearing  sustenance  to 
their  grandson,  flow  round  him  with  spontaneous 
movements ;  when  abiding  in  his  supreme  sphere, 
and  shining  daily  with  imperishable  (rays).

15.  I  have  come,  Agni,  to  thee,  (the  giver)  of 
good  dwellings,  for  the  sake  of  offspring:  I  have 
come  with  a  propitiatory  hymn  for  the  sake  of  the 
opulent  (offerers  of  oblations) :  may  all  the  good 
which  the  gods  defend  (be  ours) ;  that,  blessed  with

all  the  good 
which  the  gods  defend  (be  ours) ;  that,  blessed  with 
excellent  descendants,  we  may  worthily  glorify  thee 
at  this  sacrifice.

Anyasya  iva  iha  tanvd  vivesha,  has  entered  here,  veiily,  with 
the  body  of  another ;  the  substantive,  fire,  is  understood ;  that  is, 
fire  originally  ethereal,  has  come  upon  earth  as  culinary  and 
gacrificial  fire.

SECOND  ASHTAKA SEVENTH  ADHYAYA.   303

SUKTA.  IV.   (XXXVI.)

The  Rishi  and  the  metre  are  the  same  as  ui  the  preceding  ;  the 
deities  are  various:  the  first  stanza  is  addressed  to  Indra,  the 
second  to  the  Maruts.  the  third  to  Twashtri,  the  fourth  to 
Agni,  the  fifth  to  Indua,  and  the  sixth  to  Mitra  and  Varuna  ;

h  to 
Agni,  the  fifth  to  Indua,  and  the  sixth  to  Mitra  and  Varuna  ; 
according  to  the  Schohast,  each  is  associated  with  a  deified 
month,  after  the  nomenclature  of  the  old  kalendar,  or  Indra 
with  Madku.  the  Maruts  with  Mddhava,  Twashtri  with 
Sukra,  Agni  with  s'uchi,  Indra  with  Nabha,  and  Mitra  and 
Varuna  with  NabMsya.

1.  (The  libation)  that  is  being  presented,  Indra,    Varga  xxv. 
to  thee,  comjDrises  the  (products  of  the)  cow,  and1.  (The  libation)  that  is  being  presented,  Indra,    Varga  xxv. 
to  thee,  comjDrises  the  (products  of  the)  cow,  and

the  (consecrated)  water ;  and  the  leaders  (of  the 
rite)  have  expressed  it  with  stones,  and  strained  it 
through  ^^oollen  (filters)  :^  Do  thou,  Indra,  who  art 
the  first  (of  the  gods),  and  rulest  (over  the  world),

dra,  who  art 
the  first  (of  the  gods),  and  rulest  (over  the  world), 
drink  the  Soma  offered  by  the  Hotri^  and  sanctified 
by  the  exclamations  Swdhd  and  Vashdi.

2.  Maruts,  together  worshipped  with  sacrifices, 
standing  in  the  car  drawn  by  spotted  raares,  radiant 
■with  lances,  and  delidited  by  ornaments,  sons  of

"  Tlie  text  has  only  avibhih,  with  sheep  ;  the  Schohast  amplifies 
the  phrase,  aver  bdlamayalr  dasdpavitraik,  with  purifying  filters 
made  of  the  hair  of  the  sheep.

^  Piba  hotrdd  a  somam :  in  this  and  the  following  verses,  hotra 
and  the  analogous  terms,  potra,  Agnidhra,  &c.,  are  explained,  the 
Ydga,  or  sacrifice  of  the  Hotri,  and  the  rest,  those  portions  of  the

ga,  or  sacrifice  of  the  Hotri,  and  the  rest,  those  portions  of  the 
ceremony  which  are  assigned  to  the  different  officiating  priests,  or 
the  oblations  which  each  is  in  turn  to  present.

804  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

Bharata,^  leaders  in  the  firmament,  seated  on  the 
saci-ed  grass,  drink  the  Soma  presented  by  th.e  Potri.

3.  Do  ye,  who  are  devoutly  invoked,  come  to  us 
together,  and,  seated  on  the  sacrificial  grass,  enjoy 
your  rest ;  and  then,  Twashtri,  wlio  headest  a 
brilliant  cohort,  (come)  with  the  gods  and  tlieir 
wives,  and  rejoice,  being  pleased  with  the  (sacrificial) 
food.^

4.  Sage  Agni,  bring  hither  the  gods,  and  sacrifice 
to  them :  invoker  of  the  gods,  propitious  to  us,  sit4.  Sage  Agni,  bring  hither  the  gods,  and  sacrifice 
to  them :  invoker  of  the  gods,  propitious  to  us,  sit

and  sacrifice 
to  them :  invoker  of  the  gods,  propitious  to  us,  sit 
down  in  the  three  altars :"  accept  the  libation  of 
Soma  that  is  offered  to  thee,  from  the  A'gnidhra, 
and  be  satisfied  with  thy  portion-

5.  This  (libation),  Indra,  is  the  augmenter  of  thy 
bodily  (vigour),  favourable  of  old  to  the  resistless 
strength  of  (thy)  arms :  it  is  effused,  Maghavan,  for 
thee  ;  it  is  brought  to  thee  from  the  Brdlimana;  do 
thou  drink  and  be  satisfied.

6.  MiTRA  and  Varuna,  both  be  gratified  with 
the  sacrifice;  hear  my  invocation  as  the  seated 
Hotri  repeats  in  succession  the  ancient  praises: 
the  (sacrificial)  food,  encompassed  (by  the  priests),

ancient  praises: 
the  (sacrificial)  food,  encompassed  (by  the  priests), 
attends  the  royal  pair  ;  drink,  both  of  you,  the  sweet 
Soma  libation,  offered  by  the  Prasakiri.

*  Bharatasya  sunavah :  the  first  is  said  to  be  a  name  of  Rudra, 
as  the  cherisher  or  sovereign,  hharttrt,  of  the  world.

The  verse  occurs  in  the  Yajush,  xxvi.  24 ;  and,  according  to 
Mahidhara,  is  in  the  first  instance,  addressed  to  the  Devapatnyah, 
the  wives  of  the  gods,  and  then  to  TtvashM  along  with  them  : 
his  interpretation  is,  in  other  respects,  much  the  same  as  Sdyurlas,

Those  of  the  Gdrhapatya,  Ahavaniya,  and  Ddkshina  fires.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.         305

EIGHTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  IV.

OND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.         305

EIGHTH  ADHYAYA.

ANUVAKA  IV.  {continued). 
SlJKTA  V.   (XXXVII.)

Tlie  deity  of  the  first  four  stanzas  is  Dkavinodas  ;  of  the  fifth, 
the  AswiNS ;  and  of  the  sixth,  Agni  ;  the  metre  and  RisM 
are  the  same  as  hefore.Tlie  deity  of  the  first  four  stanzas  is  Dkavinodas  ;  of  the  fifth, 
the  AswiNS ;  and  of  the  sixth,  Agni  ;  the  metre  and  RisM 
are  the  same  as  hefore.

1.  Be   gratified,   Dravjnodas,"  by  the  sacrificial       ^^s^  ^^ 
food  presented  as  tlie  offering  of  the  Hotri ;  He 
desires,  priests,  a  full  libation;  present  it  to  him,

and,  influenced  (by  it,  he  M'ill  be  your)  benefactor : 
drink,  Dravinodas,  along  with  tiie  Ritus^  the 
Soma,  the  oft'ering  of  the  Hotri,

2.  He,  whom  I  formerly  invoked,  and  whom  I 
now  invoke,  is  verily  worthy  of  invocation,  for  he  is

and  whom  I 
now  invoke,  is  verily  worthy  of  invocation,  for  he  is 
renowned  as  a  benefactor:  the  So/ua  libation  has 
been  brought  by  the  priests;  drink,  Dravinodas, 
along  with  the  Mtus,  the  So??ia,  the  oHering  of  the

Potri.

3.  May  these  thy  bearers,  by  whom  thou  art 
borne  along,  be  satisfied;  lord  of  the  forest,  be  firm, 
doing   no    injury,   steadfast  of  resolve;  come,   and

See  vol.  i.  p.  37,  note. 
^  Somam  Dravinodah  piba  rituhhih :  this  is  the  burthen  of  the 
two  next  stanzas  also,  and  of  the  last  of  the  hymn  :  the  Scholiast 
would  understand  the  Riius,  properly  the  seasons,  to  be  the 
deities  presiding  over  the  months,  continuing  the  series  from  the

the 
deities  presiding  over  the  months,  continuing  the  series  from  the 
precechng  Siikta,  and  adding  to  the  number  severally,  the  months 
named  Isha,  Urjja,  Sahas,  and  Tapasija. 
VOL.  II.  X

306  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

being  gracious,  drink,  Dravinodas,  along  with  the 
Ritus,  the  Soma,  the  offering  of  the  Ncshiri.306  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

being  gracious,  drink,  Dravinodas,  along  with  the 
Ritus,  the  Soma,  the  offering  of  the  Ncshiri.

4.  Whether  he  have  drunk  the  Soma  from  the 
offering  of  the  Hotri ;  M'hether  he  have  been  exhi- 
larated  by  tlie  offering  of  the  Potri;  whether  he 
have  been  pleased  with  the  (sacrificial)  food  pre- 
sented as  the  act  of  the  Neshiri;  still  let  Dravi- 
AoDAS  quaff  the  unstrained  ambrosial  cup,  the  fourth 
offered  by  the  priest.*

5.  Yoke  to-day,  Aswins,  your  rolling  car,  con-

ered  by  the  priest.*

5.  Yoke  to-day,  Aswins,  your  rolling  car,  con- 
veying (you),  the  leaders  (of  the  rite) ;  and  setting 
you  down  before  us  :  mix  the  oblations  with  the 
sweet  juice :  come,  you  are  affluent  with  (abundant) 
food,  and  drink  the  Soma.

6.  Be  pleased,  Agni,  with  the  fuel;  be  pleased 
with  the  oblation ;  be  pleased  with  the  sacred  prayer 
that  is  good  for  man ;  be  pleased  with  holy  praise, 
asylum  of  all :  Agni,  willing  (to  accept  oblations), 
render  all  the  great  gods  desirous  (of  the  same), 
and  with  them  all,  and  with  the  Ritu  drink  the 
oblation.

SiJkta  VI.  (XXXVIII.)

The  deity  is  Savitri  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same.

Varga  II.

The  deity  is  Savitri  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same.

Varga  II.  1-  ^^  truth,  the  divine  Savitri,  the  bearer  (of

the   world),  has  perpetually  been  present  for  the

'^  Pdtram  Dravinoddh  pibatii  dravinodasah,  lit.  let  Dravinodas 
drink  tlie  cup  of  Dravinodas ;  but  in  the  second  place  the  word  is 
explained  ritwij,  a  priest.

SECOND   ASHTAKA EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.         307

generation  (of  mankind),  for  such  is  liis  office:* 
verily  he  grants  wealth  to  the  pious  (worshippers) ;'' 
may  he,  therefore,  bestow  upon  the  offerer  of  the 
oblation  (sufficient)  for  his  well-being.2.  The  divine,  vast-handed  (Savit^i),  having 
risen,  Stretches  forth  his  arms  for  the  delight  of

(Savit^i),  having 
risen,  Stretches  forth  his  arms  for  the  delight  of 
all :  the  purifying  waters  (flow)  for  (the  fulfilment 
of)  his  rites,  and  this  circumambient  air  sports  (in 
the  firmament).

3.  The  moving  (Sun)  is  liberated  by  his  rapid 
rays:  verily  he  has  stopped  the  traveller  from  his 
journey:"^  he  restrains  the  desires  of  warriors  for 
combat,  for  night  follows  (the  cessation  of)  the 
function  of  Savitri.

4.  She,  (Night),  enwraps  the  extended  (world) 
like  (a  woman)  weaving  (a  garment) :  the  prudent 
man  lays  aside  the  work  he  is  able  (to  execute)  in 
the  midst  (of  his  labour) :  but  all  spring  up  (from 
repose)  when  the  divine,  unwearied  Sun,  who  has

all  spring  up  (from 
repose)  when  the  divine,  unwearied  Sun,  who  has 
divided  the  seasons,  again  appears.

5.  The  engendered  domestic  radiance  of  Agni 
spreads  through  various  dwellings,  and  presides  over 
all  (sorts  of  sacrificial)  food :  the  mother,  (Dawn), 
has  assigned  to  her  son,  (Agni),  the  best  portion  (at

This  seems  to  be  suggested  by  the  etymology  of  Savitri,  as 
derived  from  the  root  Sii,  to  bring  forth,  prasavdya  lokdndm ;  for 
such  is  his  work, — tadapd,  tat  prasava  kamid.

Devehhyah,  to  the  gods ;  but  the  Scholiast  interprets  it  here, 
siotnbhyah,  to  the  praisers.

Or  literally,  the  goer,  from  going.

X  2

COS  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

Or  literally,  the  goer,  from  going.

X  2

COS  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

sacrifices),  which  is  the  manifestation  of  him  imparted 
by  Savitri.* 
Var?a  III  Q,  The  warrior,  eager  for  victory,  who  has  goneX  2

COS  RIG-VEDA    SANIIITA.

sacrifices),  which  is  the  manifestation  of  him  imparted 
by  Savitri.* 
Var?a  III  Q,  The  warrior,  eager  for  victory,  who  has  gone

forth  (to  battle),  turns  back ;  (for)  home  is  the 
desire  of  all  moving  beings  :  abandoning  his  half- 
wrought  toil,  the  labourer  returns  (home)  when  the 
function  of  the  divine  Savitri  (is  suspended).

7.  The  animals  search  in  dry  places  for  the  watery 
element  which  has  been  collected  in  the  firmament 
by  thee:  the  woods  are  assigned  (by  tliee)  to  the 
birds  :  no  one  obstructs  these  functions  of  the  divine 
Savitri.

8.  The  ever-going  Varuna  grants  a  cool,  accessi-

he  divine 
Savitri.

8.  The  ever-going  Varuna  grants  a  cool,  accessi- 
ble, and  agreeable  place  (of  rest),  to  all  moving 
(creatures),  on  the  closing  of  the  eyes  (of  Savitri);'' 
and  every  bird  and  every  beast  repairs  to  its  lair 
when  Savitri  has  dispersed  (all)  beings  in  various 
directions.

9.  I  invite  to  this  place,  with  reverential  saluta- 
tions, for  my  good,  that  divine  Savitri,  whose 
functions  neither  Indra,  nor  Varuna,  nor  Mitra, 
nor  Aryaman,  nor  Rudra,  nor  the  enemies  (of  the 
gods),  imjiede.

10.  May  he,  who  is  adored  by  men,  the  protector 
of  the  wives  (of  the  gods),*"  preserve  us ;  when  wor-

The  Agnihotra  rite  is  to  be  performed  at  dawn,  which  may  be

wor-

The  Agnihotra  rite  is  to  be  performed  at  dawn,  which  may  be 
therefore  considered  as  enjoined  or  instigated  by  the  rising  sun.

Varuna  especially  presiding  over  the  night.

Gndspati,  devapatnhdm  patih ;  or  gndh  may  mean  the  metres 
of  the  Vedas.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        309Varuna  especially  presiding  over  the  night.

Gndspati,  devapatnhdm  patih ;  or  gndh  may  mean  the  metres 
of  the  Vedas.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        309

shipping  him,  who  is  auspicious,  the  object  of  medi- 
tation, and  the  all-wise :  may  we  be  the  beloved  of 
the  divine  Savitrt,  that  we  may  (thence  be  success- 
ful) in  the  accumulation  of  wealth  and  the  acquisi- 
tion of  cattle.

11.  May  that  desirable  wealth  which  is  granted 
to  us,  Savitri,  by  thee,  proceed  from  the  sky,  from 
the  waters,  from  the  earth  ;  and  may  the  happiness

m  the  sky,  from 
the  waters,  from  the  earth  ;  and  may  the  happiness 
(which  belongs)  to  the  race  of  those  who  eulogise 
thee,  devolve  upon  me,  repeating  diligently  thy 
praises.

SiJkta  VII.  (XXXIX.) 
The  deities  are  the  Aswins  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  before. 
.1.  Descend,  Aswins,  like  falling  stones,  for  the      Varga  iv 
purpose    (of  destroying   our    foes) ;   hasten    to   the 
presence    of    the    wealth-possessing    (worshippers), 
like  vultures  to  a  tree  :  like  two  Brahmans"  repeat- 
ing hymns,  (be  present)  at  the  sacrifice,  and  come 
like  (royal)   messengers  in  the  land,  welcomed  by 
many  people.

2.  Moving  at  dawn  like  two  heroes  in  a  car ;  like

y 
many  people.

2.  Moving  at  dawn  like  two  heroes  in  a  car ;  like 
a  pair  of  goats  ;^  like  two  women  lovely  in  form ;  or 
like  husband   and   wife ;  come    together,    knowing

Brahmuiid-wa  for  Brahmanau ;  this  looks  very  like  a  specific 
deriomination,  and  recognises  the  existence  of  the  Brahman  not 
merely  as  the  title  of  an  individual  superintending  priest,  but  as 
implying  a  religious,  or  priestly  order  or  caste.

In  this  and  many  of  the  succeeding  comparisons,  the  only 
point  of  similitude  is  that  of  the  dual  number.In  this  and  many  of  the  succeeding  comparisons,  the  only 
point  of  similitude  is  that  of  the  dual  number.

310  RTG-VEDA    SANHITA.

(how  sacred)  rites  (are  to  be  celebrated)  amongst 
men,  (to  bestow)  happiness  (on  the  worshipper).

3.

celebrated)  amongst 
men,  (to  bestow)  happiness  (on  the  worshipper).

3.  Come  to  us,  the  first  (before  other  gods),  like 
a  pair  of  horns,  or  like  two  hoofs,  travelling  with 
rapid  (steps) ;  like  a  pair  of  ChaTcravdkas,  awaiting 
day;  overthrowers  of  foes,  like  warriors  in  cars, 
able  (to  perform  all  things),  come  to  our  presence.

4.  Bear  us  across  (the  sea  of  life),  like  two 
vessels,  or  (over  difficult  places),  like  the  poles  of  a 
car,  the  axles,  the  spokes,  the  fellies  (of  two  wheels) ; 
Be  like  two  dogs,  warding  off  injury  to  our  persons, 
and,  like  two  coats  of  mail,  defend  us  from  decay.

6.  Irresistible  as  two  winds,  rapid  as  two  rivers ;

us  from  decay.

6.  Irresistible  as  two  winds,  rapid  as  two  rivers ; 
and  quick  of  sight,  come  like  two  eyes  before  us ; 
like  two  hands ;  like  two  feet ;  subservient  to  the 
well-being  of  our  bodies,  conduct  us  to  (the  acquire- 
ment) of  excellent  (wealth). 
Varga  V.  6.  Like  two  lips  uttering  sweet  words ;  like  two

breasts  yielding  nourishment  for  our  existence ;  be 
to  us  like  two  noses,  preserving  our  persons,  and  like 
two  ears  for  the  hearing  of  agreeable  (sounds).

7.  Like  two  hands,  Aswins,  be  ever  investing  us 
with  vigour;  like  heaven  and  earth,  bestow  upon  us 
rain ;  give  sharpness  to  the  praises  that  are  addressed 
to  you,  as  they  whet  an  axe  upon  a  grindstone.'

8.

t  are  addressed 
to  you,  as  they  whet  an  axe  upon  a  grindstone.'8.

t  are  addressed 
to  you,  as  they  whet  an  axe  upon  a  grindstone.'

8.  The  Gritsamadas  have  composed  this  prayer, 
these  praises,  AswiNS,  for  your  exaltation :  be  pro- 
pitiated by  them,  leaders  of  ceremonies,  and  come

Kshnotreiia     iva    sioadhitim;    asim    tejanasdnavat    tikkshm- 
hirutam ;  sharpen  like  a  sword  or  knife  upon  a  whetstone.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        311

hither;  that,  blessed  with  excellent  descendants, 
we  may  worthily  glorify  you  at  this  sacrifice,

SiJkta  VIII.  (XL.) 
The  deities  aie  Soma  and  PiJshan  ;  the  Eishi  and  metre  as  before,

1.  Soma*  and  Pushan,  you  two  are  the  generators     Varga  vi. 
of  riches,  the  generators  of  heaven,  the  generators  of

Varga  vi. 
of  riches,  the  generators  of  heaven,  the  generators  of

earth;  as  soon  as  born  you  are  the  guardians  of  the 
whole  world :  the  gods  have  made  you  the  source  of 
immortality.''

2.  (The  gods)  propitiate  these  two  divinities  at 
the  moment  of  their  birth,  for  they  drive  away  the 
disagreeable  glooms :  with  these  two,  Soma  and 
Pushan,  Indra  generates  the  mature  (milk)  in  the 
immature  heifers.''

3.  Soma  and  Pushan,  showerers  (of  benefits), 
direct  towards  us  the  seven-wheeled  car,'^  the 
measure  of  the  spheres,  undistinguishable  from  the 
universe,  every  where  existing,  (guided)  by  five 
reins,"  and  to  be  harnessed  by  the  mind.

existing,  (guided)  by  five 
reins,"  and  to  be  harnessed  by  the  mind.

By  Soma,  it  would  appear  that  we  are  to  understand  hoth 
the  moon  and  the  Soma  plant,  as  is  more  particularly  intimated 
is  the  fourth  stanza.

Akrinavan  amritasya  ndbhim:  hetum,  the  cause  or  source, 
amaranasya,  of  not  dying.

That  is,  the  rain  in  the  newly-risen  clouds.Akrinavan  amritasya  ndbhim:  hetum,  the  cause  or  source, 
amaranasya,  of  not  dying.

That  is,  the  rain  in  the  newly-risen  clouds.

Sdyana  explains  saptachakram,  the  year,  consisting  of  seven 
seasons,  reckoning  the  intercalary  month  as  an  additional  ritu,  or 
season.

Here  again,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  we  have  a  reference 
to  the  solar  year,  reduced,  by  the  amalgamation  of  the  cold  and

312  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

4.  One  of  them,  (Pushan),  has  made  his  dwelling

RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

4.  One  of  them,  (Pushan),  has  made  his  dwelling 
above  in  the  heaven ;  the  other,  (Soma),  upon  earth, 
and  in  the  firmament:"  may  they  both  grant 
us  much-desired  and  much-commended  abundant 
wealth  of  cattle,  the  source  to  us  (of  enjoyments).

5.  One  of  you,  (Soma),  has  generated  all  beings  ;^ 
the  other  proceeds  looking  upon  the  universe : 
Soma  and  Pushan,  protect  my  (pious)  rite :  through 
you,  may  we  overcome  all  the  hosts  of  our  enemies.

6.  May  Pushan,  who  is  the  benefactor  of  all,  be 
propitious  to  (this  pious)  rite  ;  may  Soma,  the  lord 
of  wealth,  grant  us  affluence  :  may  Aditi,  who  is 
without  an  adversary,  protect  us,  so  that,  blessed

may  Aditi,  who  is 
without  an  adversary,  protect  us,  so  that,  blessed 
with  excellent  descendants,  we  may  worthily  glorify 
(you)  at  this  sacrifice.

dewy  seasons  into  one,  to  five  seasons ;  as  by  another  text, 
dwddasa  vai  mdsdh  panchartavo  hemantasiiirayoh  samdsena,  the 
twelve  months  are  verily  five  seasons  by  the  combination  of  the 
cold  and  dewy  seasons.

In  the  first,  Soma,  as  a  vegetable,  abides  on  earth;  in  the 
second,  or  the  firmament,  he  is  represented  by  the  moon.In  the  first,  Soma,  as  a  vegetable,  abides  on  earth;  in  the 
second,  or  the  firmament,  he  is  represented  by  the  moon.

In  what  way  is  not  explained,  and  another  text,  quoted  from 
the  ninth  MaMala, — Soma  janitd  matindm.  Soma,  the  generator  of 
the  wise  or  pious,  does  not  supply  the  information  :  possibly

or  of 
the  wise  or  pious,  does  not  supply  the  information  :  possibly 
allusion  is  intended  to  the  effects  of  the  libations  offered  in 
sacrifice  as  productive  of  rain,  and  thence  of  nourishment,  upon 
which  existence  depends.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        313

StfKTA    IX.    (XLI.)

The  deities  are  various :  Vayu  is  addressed  in  the  two  first 
stanzas  ;  Indra  and  Vayc  in  the  third  ;  Mitra  and  Varuna, 
the  AswiNs,  Indra,  the  Viswadevas,  Saraswati,  and 
Heaven  and  Earth,  are  in  succession  the  divinities  of  six 
triplets ;  the  metre  is  Gayatri,  except  in  the  fifth  Tricha,  in 
which  the  two  first  stanzas  are  in  the  Anvshfubh  metre,  and  the

in 
which  the  two  first  stanzas  are  in  the  Anvshfubh  metre,  and  the 
third  in  the  Brihat{;  the  Rishi  is,  as  before,  Gritsamada.

1.  Vayu,  whose  are  a  thousand  chariots,  and  the     Varga  vii. 
Nii/ut  steeds,*  come  to  drink  the  ^Soma  juice.''

2.  Vayu,  of  the  Niyut  steeds,  approach  :  this 
bright  (juice)  has  been  accepted  by  thee,  for  thou 
goest  to  the  dwelling  of  the  offerer  of  the  libation."

3.  Leaders  (of  rites),  Indra  and  Vayu,  lords  of 
the  Niynt  steeds,  come  and  drink  to-day  the  mixture 
of  milk  and  of  the  pure  /S'o?/«a  juice.

4.  This  libation  is  offered  to  you,  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  cherishers  of  truth ;  hear,  verily,  this  my 
present  invocation.'^

5.

cherishers  of  truth ;  hear,  verily,  this  my 
present  invocation.'^5.

cherishers  of  truth ;  hear,  verily,  this  my 
present  invocation.'^

5.  Sovereigns,  exercising  no  oppression,  sit  down

The  Niyuts  are  the  horses  of  the  car  of  Vayu.

This  verse  occurs  in  th§  Yajush,  xxvii.  32.

This  also  is  given  in  the  Yajush,  xxvii,  29  :  Sukra,  which 
Sdyaua  interprets  dipyanidna,  bright,  resplendent,  as  an  appellative 
of  the  Soma  juice,  Mahidhara  renders  by  graha,  a  vessel,  a  ladle ; 
that  is,  a  ladle  or  cup  of  Soma  juice.

This  stanza  occurs  in  the  Sdma-Veda,  ii.  2G0 ;  and  in  the 
}  ajush ;  but  in  a  very  different  place  from  the  two  preceding,  or 
VII.  9.

314  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

jn  this  substantial  and  elegant  hall,  (built)  with  a 
thousand  columns/

jn  this  substantial  and  elegant  hall,  (built)  with  a 
thousand  columns/ 
Varga  vin.        6.  May  these  two  universal  monarchs,  fed  with 
clarified  butter,  sons  of  Aditi,  lords  of  liberality, 
show  favour  to  their  sincere  (worshipper).

7.  As  WINS,  in  whom  there  is  no  untruth  ;  Rudras, 
go  by  the  (direct)  road  to  (the  sacrifice  at  which  the 
libation)  is  to  be  drunk  by  the  leaders  (of  sacred 
rites,  for  which  (the  offerer  may  receive  the  reward 
of)  cows  and  horses.^

8.  Showerers  of  wealth,  (bring  to  us)  such  (riches) 
that  the  malevolent  man,  our  foe,  whether  he  be  far 
off  or  nigh,*^  may  not  take  (it)  away.

9.  Resolute  Aswins,  bring  to  us  riches  of  various

take  (it)  away.

9.  Resolute  Aswins,  bring  to  us  riches  of  various 
sorts,'*  and  wealth  begetting  wealth.

10.  May  Indra  dissipate  all  great  and  overpower-

This  and  the  next  verse  occur  in  the  Sdma-Veda,  ii.  261,  262.

The  Yajush  repeats  this  and  the  two  following  verses,  xx. 
80—83.This  and  the  next  verse  occur  in  the  Sdma-Veda,  ii.  261,  262.

The  Yajush  repeats  this  and  the  two  following  verses,  xx. 
80—83.

Na  yat  para  ndntara:  para  is  rendered  by  Sdyana,  durastha, 
being  at  a  distance  ;  and  antara  by  samipavarttC,  one  being  near ; 
Mah'dhara  understands  them  to  signify  relationship,  pa^'a  meaning 
asambaddha,  unconnected,  and  antara,  sambaddha,  connected  or 
related :  he  explains  also  the  verb  ddadharsJiat  differently,  and 
makes  Jndra  the  object : — '  The  Indra  whom  may  such  a  man

tly,  and 
makes  Jndra  the  object : — '  The  Indra  whom  may  such  a  man 
not  overcome, — yam-Indram  na  pardbhilydt ;"  but  this  seems 
rather  inapplicable.

Ptsanga  sandrisam  is  explained  by  Sdyana,  ndndrupam,  of 
many  sorts  ;  Mahi'dhara,  more  literally,  gives  pisanga  its  ordinary 
sense  of  tawny  or  yellow,  and  explains  the  compound,  that  which 
is  of  a  yellow  colour,  or  gold.

SECOND   AStlTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        315

iug  danger,  for  he  is  resolute,  and  the  beholder  of 
all.^

11.  If  Indra  provide  for  our  happiness,  evil  will      Varga  ix. 
not  come  behind  us,  good  will  be  before  us.

12.  Let  Indra,  the  beholder  of  all,  the  conqueror 
of  foes,  send  us  security  from  all  quarters.

13.

all,  the  conqueror 
of  foes,  send  us  security  from  all  quarters.

13.  Universal  gods,  come  hither;  hear  this  my 
invocation ;  sit  down  upon  this  sacred  grass.^

14.  This  sharp,  savoury,  exhilarating  (beverage), 
is  (prepared)  for  you  by  the  Sunahotras  ;'^  drink  of 
it  at  your  pleasure.

15.  Maruts,  of  whom  Indra  is  the  chief; 
divinities,  of  whom  Pushan  is  the  benefactor;  do 
you  all  hear  my  invocation.

16.  Saraswati,  best  of  mothers,  best  of  rivers,      Varga  x. 
best  of  goddesses,*  we  are,  as  it  were,  of  no  repute ;16.  Saraswati,  best  of  mothers,  best  of  rivers,      Varga  x. 
best  of  goddesses,*  we  are,  as  it  were,  of  no  repute ;

grant  us,  motber,  distinction.

17.  In  thee,  Saraswati,  who  art  divine,  all 
existences  are  collected :  rejoice,  goddess,  amongst

o  art  divine,  all 
existences  are  collected :  rejoice,  goddess,  amongst 
the  Sunahotras^  grant  us,  goddess,  progeny.

18.  Saraswati,  abounding  in  food,  abounding  in 
water,  be  propitiated  by  these  oblations,  which  the 
Gritsamadas  offer  as  acceptable  to  thee,  and  precious 
to  the  gods.

19.  May   the   two,    (Heaven   and    Earth),   who

"  Sdma-Veda,  i,  200.

Yajur-Veda,  vii.  34.

In  this  and  in  verse  17  the  author  resumes  his  original 
character  of  a  member  of  the  family  of  the  Sunahotras :  see  p.  207.

Ambitame,  naditame,  devitame;  the  superlatives  of  ambikd,  a 
mother ;  nadi,  a  river ;  and  devi,  a  goddess.

316  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

confer  good  fortune  upon  the  sacrifice,  proceed  (to

-VEDA    SANHITA.

confer  good  fortune  upon  the  sacrifice,  proceed  (to 
the  altar) ;"  for,  verily,  we  implore  yon  both  (to 
come),  as  well  as  Agni,  the  bearer  of  oblations.

20.  Heaven  and  Earth,  bear  to  the  gods  to-day 
our  heaven-aspiring  sacrifice,  tlie  means  of  obtaining 
Swarga.

21.  May  the  adorable  gods,  devoid  of  malice, 
sit  down  to-day  nigh  to  you  both  to  drink  the  Soma 
juice.

SUKTA    X.    (XLII.)

The  deity  is  a  bird,  or  Indra  in  the  form  of  one ;  the  Rishi  is 
Gritsamada ;  the  metre,  Trishi'uhh;  according  to  the  Grihya 
Sutras,  the  hymn  is  to  be  silently  repeated  on  hearing  the 
disagreeable  cry  of  a  bird ;  one  ominous  of  misfortune  is 
probably  intended.

Varga  XI.  1.

bird ;  one  ominous  of  misfortune  is 
probably  intended.

Varga  XI.  1.  Crying  repeatedly,  and  foretelling  what  willVarga  XI.  1.

bird ;  one  ominous  of  misfortune  is 
probably  intended.

Varga  XI.  1.  Crying  repeatedly,  and  foretelling  what  will

come  to  pass,  (the  Kapinjalaf  gives  (due)  direction

^  According  to  the  Scholiast,  the  objects  addressed  are  the 
two  sakat'as,  carts  or  barrows,  which  are  employed  to  bring  the 
fuel,  or  the  Soma  plants,  and  are  placed  in  front  of  the  hall  of 
sacrifice,  north  and  south  of  an  altar  erected  outside,  and  which 
are  considered  here  as  types  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  who,  properly

r

speaking,  are  the  deities  of  the  Tricha :  the  Sakahs  are  requested, 
according  to  Sdyana,  to  proceed  to  the  west  part  of  the  northern

ed, 
according  to  Sdyana,  to  proceed  to  the  west  part  of  the  northern 
vedi,  or  altar, — uttaravedeh  paschimahhagam  pragachchhatdm : 
according  to  Kutyctyana,  they  are  also  termed  Havirdhdnas, 
oblation-containers,  and  part  of  the  ceremony  consists  in  dragging 
them  into  different  positions  at  different  periods,  accompanied  by 
appropriate  texts,  which  are  given  in  the  Yajur-Veda,  v.  14 — 21. 
The  name  does  not  occur  in  the  text,  but  the  Anukramanikd

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.         317

to  its  voice,  as  a  helmsman  (guides)  a  boat :  be 
ominous,  bird,  of  good  fortune,  and  may  no  calamity 
whatever  befall  thee  from  any  quarter.

2.  May  no  kite,  no  eagle,  kill  thee :  may  no

e  from  any  quarter.

2.  May  no  kite,  no  eagle,  kill  thee :  may  no 
archer,  armed  with  arrows,  reach  thee :  crying 
repeatedly,  in  the  region  of  the  Pitris,^  be  ominous 
of  good  fortune :  proclaimer  of  good  luck,  speak  to 
us  on  this  occasion.8.  Bird,  who  art  ominous  of  good  fortune,  the 
proclaimer  of  good  luck,  cry  from  the  south  of  our 
dwellings  :  may  no  thief,  no  evil-doer,  prevail  against 
us;  that,  blessed  with  excellent  descendants,  we 
may  worthily  praise  thee  at  this  sacrifice.

SUKTA  XL  (XLIII.)

The  deity  and  Rishi  as  before :  like  the  preceding,  the  hymn 
is  also  a  Tricha,  or  Triad:  the  metre  of  the  first  and  third

hymn 
is  also  a  Tricha,  or  Triad:  the  metre  of  the  first  and  third 
stanzas  is  Jagati;  of  the  third,  Atisdkkar{,  or  Asht'i.

1.  Let  the  birds  in  quest  of  their  food,  according     Varga  xii. 
to   the  season,   proclaim  their   circumambulations,

-like  the  celebrators  (of  sacred  rites) :  he  utters 
both  notes,  as  the  chaunter  of  the  Sdma  recites  the 
Gayatri  and  Trishiubh,  and  delights  (the  hearers).

2.  Thou  singest,  Bird,  like  the  Udgdtri  chanting 
the  Soma :  thou  nmrmurest  like  the  Bra/wiaputra)'

has  kapinjalarvpindro  devatd:  the  kapinjala,  in  ordinary  language, 
is  the  Francoline  partridge.

The  south ;  for,  as  observed  in  the  comment  on  the  next

partridge.

The  south ;  for,  as  observed  in  the  comment  on  the  next 
verse,  the  cry  of  birds  on  the  south  is  of  good  omen.

The  same  as  the  Brdhmandchchansi,  one  of  the  sixteen  priests.

818  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

at  sacrifices :  like  a  horse  (neighing)  when  approach- 
ing a  mare,  do  thoii  proclaim  (aloud)  to  us  good 
fortune  from  every  quarter ;  proclaim  aloud  pro- 
sperity to  us  from  every  direction.

3.  When  uttering  thy  cry,  0  Bird,  proclaim  good 
fortune  :  when  sitting  silently,  cherish  kind  thoughts 
towards  us :  when  thou  criest  as  thou  art  flying,  let 
the  sound  be  like  that  of  a  lute  ;*  so  that,  blessed 
with  excellent  descendants,  we  may  worthily  praiseso  that,  blessed 
with  excellent  descendants,  we  may  worthily  praise 
thee  at  this  sacrifice.

MANi)ALA  III.

EIGHTH  ADHYAYA  (continued).

anuvAka  I.

SdKTA  I.  (I.)

The  hymns  of  the  Third  MaMala  are  attributed  to  Vi;§wamitra, 
or  individuals  of  his  family  ;  he  is  the  Rishi  of  the  first  Sukta, 
the  deity  of  which  is  Agni  ;  the  metre,  Trishhhh.

Varga  XIII.        1.  Render  me  vigorous,    Agni,  since  thou  hast 
made  me  the  bearer  of  the  Soma  to  ofier  it  in  the

who  sastram  sansati,  recites  the  mantra  that  is  not  to  be  sung  or 
chaunted.

Karkarir-yathd :  the  karkari  is  said  to  be  a  musical  instru- 
ment,— vddya  viseshah.

:  the  karkari  is  said  to  be  a  musical  instru- 
ment,— vddya  viseshah.

ViswAMiTRA  is  a  remarkable  person  in  the  traditions  of  the 
Hindu  religion :  according  to  the  historical  and  Paurdnik  autho- 
rities, he  was  originally  a  member  of  the  Kshatriya,  or  royal  and

SECOND   ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        319

sacrifice:  honouring  the  gods  who  are  present,  I 
take  hold  of  the  stone  (to  express  the  juice) ;  I 
propitiate  them ;  do  thou,  Agni,  protect  my  person.

2.  We  have  performed,  Agni,  a  successful  sacri- 
fice :  may  my  praise  magnify  (thee)  as  worshipping 
thee  with  fuel  and  with  reverence :  (the  gods)  from 
heaven  desire  the  adoration  of  the  pious,  who  are

(the  gods)  from 
heaven  desire  the  adoration  of  the  pious,  who  are 
anxious  to  praise  the  adorable  and  mighty  (Agni).

3.  The  gods  discovered  the  graceful  Agni  (con- 
cealed) amidst  the  waters  of  the  flowing  (rivers),  for 
the  purpose  of  (sacred)  acts :  Agni,  who  is  intelli- 
gent, of  purified  vigour,  and  friendly ;  who  from  his 
birth  bestowed  happiness  on  earth  and  heaven.military  caste,  and  himself  for  some  time  a  monarch :  he  was 
descended  from  Knsa,  of  the  lunar  race,  and  was  the  ancestor  of 
many  royal  and  saintly  personages,  who,  with  himself,  were  called 
after  their  common  Mucestor,  Kusikas,  or  Kausikas  :  by  the  force

lled 
after  their  common  Mucestor,  Kusikas,  or  Kausikas  :  by  the  force 
of  his  austerities,  he  coinpelled  Brahma  to  admit  him  into  the 
Brahmanical  order,  into  which  he  sought  admission,  in  order  to 
be  placed  upon  a  level  with  VaiisMha,  with  whom  he  had 
quarrelled  :  his  descent,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  dispute 
with  VaiisMha,  are  told,  with  some  variation,  in  the  Rdmdyana, 
ch.  LI. — Lxv.  (Schlegel's  edition),  in  the  Mahdbhdrata,  Vdyu, 
Vishnu,  and  Bhdgavat,  and  other  Purdnas :  the  details  of  the 
Rdrndyana  are  the  most  ample :  the  texts  of  the  Rig-  Veda  inti- 
mate a  general  conformity  with  those  of  the  Purdnas  as  to  the

inti- 
mate a  general  conformity  with  those  of  the  Purdnas  as  to  the 
family  designation  of  Vikcdmltva,  and  to  occasional  disagreements 
with  VasisMha,  originating,  apparently,  in  their  respective  patron- 
age of  hostile  princes :  according,  however,  to  the  heroic  poems, 
the  Purdnas,  and  variou?  poems  and  plays,  these  two  saints  were 
on  very  amicable  terms  in  their  relations  to  the  royal  family  of 
Ayodhyd,  or  to  kin^  Dnkiratha,  and  his  son  Rdma.

320  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

4.  The  seven  great  rivers'"  augmented  in  might 
the  auspicious,  pure,  and  radiant  Agni  as  soon  as  he 
was  born,  in  like  manner  as  mares  (tend)  the  new- 
born foal :  the  gods  cherished  the  body  (of  Agni) 
at  his  birth.

w- 
born foal :  the  gods  cherished  the  body  (of  Agni) 
at  his  birth.w- 
born foal :  the  gods  cherished  the  body  (of  Agni) 
at  his  birth.

5.  Spreading  through  the  firmament  with  shining 
limbs,  sanctifying  the  rite  with  intelligent  and  puri- 
fying (energies),  and  clothed  with  radiance,  he 
bestows  upon  the  worshipper  abundant  food  and 
great  and  undiminished  prosperity.

Varga  XIV.  6.  Agni  every  where  repairs  to  the  undevouring, 
undevoured  (waters)  ;^  the  vast  (offspring)  of  the 
firmament,  not  clothed,''  yet  not  naked,  seven 
eternal,  ever  youthful  rivers,  sprung  from  the  same 
source,  received  Agni  as  their  common  embryo.

7.  Afforreofated  in  the  womb  of  the  waters,*  (his 
rays)  spread  abroad  ;  and  omniform,  are  here  effective

waters,*  (his 
rays)  spread  abroad  ;  and  omniform,  are  here  effective 
for  the  diffusion  of  the  sweet  (juice),  like  milch  kine 
full  uddered :  the  mighty  (Heaven  and  Earth)  are 
the  fitting  parents  of  the  graceful  Agni.

*  See  vol.  i.  p.  88,  and  note:  the  seven  great  rivers  of  India, 
or  branches  of  the  Ganges,  seem  to  have  been  known  to  the 
Romans  in  the  time  of  Augustus.

Ceu  septem  surgens  sedatis  amnibus  altus 
Per  taciturn  Ganges. — ^En.  ix.  30, 
^  Anadaiiradahdhd,  not  extinguishing  Agni,  nor  yet  evaporated 
by  him.

'  Avasdnd  anagnd,  not  wearing  garments,  but  invested  by  the

water  as  by  a  robe.

'^  Ttie  antariksha,  mid-heaven,  or  the  firmament,  the  region  of 
vapour.

tie  antariksha,  mid-heaven,  or  the  firmament,  the  region  of 
vapour.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        321

8.  Son  of  strength,  sustained  by  all,  thou  shinest, 
possessing  bright  and  rapid  rays :  when  the  vigorous 
Agni  is  magnified  by  praise,  then  the  showers  of 
sweet  rain  descend.9.  At  his  birth  he  knew  the  udder  of  his  parent," 
and  let  forth  its  torrents,  and  its  speech  (of  thunder) : 
there  was  no  one  to  detect  him,  lurking  in  the  deep, 
with  his  auspicious  associates,  (the  winds),  and  the 
many  (waters)  of  the  firmament.

10.  He  cherishes  the  embryo  of  the  parent 
(firmament),  and  of  the  generator  (of  the  world): 
he  alcne  consumes  many  flourishing  (plants) :  the

or  (of  the  world): 
he  alcne  consumes  many  flourishing  (plants) :  the 
associated  brides  (of  the  Sun,  Heaven  and  Earth), 
who  are  kind  to  man,  are  both  of  kin  to  that  pure 
showerer  (of  blessings) :  do  thou,  Agni,  ever  pre- 
serve them.

11.  The  great  Agni  increases  on  the  broad  un-     Varga  xv. 
bounded  (firmament),  for  the  waters  supply  abundant 
nutriment ;  and  placid,  he  sleeps  in  the  birth-place

of  the  waters  for  the  service  of  the  sister  streams.

12.  The  invincible  Agni,  the  cherisher  of  the 
valiant  in  battle,  the  seen  of  all,  shining  by  his  own 
lustre,  the  generator  (of  the  world),  the  embryo  of 
the  waters,  the  chief  of  leaders,  the  mighty,  is  he

the  embryo  of 
the  waters,  the  chief  of  leaders,  the  mighty,  is  he 
who  has  begotten  the  waters  for  (the  benefit  of)  the 
offerer  of  the  libation.

13.  The  auspicious  timber  has  generated  the 
graceful  and  multiform  embryo  of  the  waters  and

Pitttrudhar  viveda :  the  parent  here  is  the  firmament,  and  the 
adder  the  clouds,  or  the  accumulated  stores  of  rain. 
VOL.  II.  Y

322  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

the  plants :  tlie  gods  approached  him  with  reve- 
rence, and  worshipped  the  adorable  and  mighty 
(Agni)  as  soon  as  born.

14.  Mighty  suns,  lili:e  brilliant  lightnings,  asso- 
ciate with  the  self-sliining  Agni,  great  in  his  own 
abode,  as  if  in  a  (deep)  cavern,  as  they  milk  forth14.  Mighty  suns,  lili:e  brilliant  lightnings,  asso- 
ciate with  the  self-sliining  Agni,  great  in  his  own 
abode,  as  if  in  a  (deep)  cavern,  as  they  milk  forth

at  in  his  own 
abode,  as  if  in  a  (deep)  cavern,  as  they  milk  forth 
ambrosia  into  the  boundless  and  vast  ocean.

16.  I,  the  institutor  of  the  rite,  worship  thee 
with  oblations :  desirous  of  thy  favour,  I  implore 
thy  friendship :  grant,  along  with  the  gods,  protec- 
tion to  him  who  praises  thee ;  preserve  us  with  thy 
well-regulated  rays.

Varga  XVI.  16.  Approachiug  thee,  benevolent  Agni,  and 
performing  all  holy  acts  that  are  the  cause  of 
opulence,  offering  oblations  with  earnestness  and 
in  abundance,  may  we  overcome  the  hostile  hosts 
that  are  without  gods.''

17.  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  commendable  announcer 
of  the  gods,  cognizant  of  all  sacred  rites ;  placid,

dable  announcer 
of  the  gods,  cognizant  of  all  sacred  rites ;  placid, 
thou  abidest  amongst  mortals,  and,  like  a  charioteer, 
thou  foUowest  the  gods,  accomplishing  (their  wishes).

18.  The  immortal  being  has  sat  down  in  the 
dwelling  of  mortals,  accomplishing  (their)  sacri- 
fices: Agni,  who  is  cognizant  of  all  sacred  rites, 
shines  with  expanded  bulk  "when  fed  with  clarified 
butter.

19.  Come   to  us   with  friendly,  auspicious,   and

Ahhiskydrna  prilandyur  adevdn,  or  it  may  mean,  may  we  over- 
come the  hosts  of  those  who  ate  not  gods,  i.  e.,  the  Rakshasas,  or 
evil  spirits,  obstructing  sacrifices.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        323

obstructing  sacrifices.

SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        323

mighty  aids,  thou  who  art  great  and  all-pervading : 
bestow  upon  us  annple  riches,  safe  from  injury,  well- 
spoken  of,  desirable,  and  renowned.mighty  aids,  thou  who  art  great  and  all-pervading : 
bestow  upon  us  annple  riches,  safe  from  injury,  well- 
spoken  of,  desirable,  and  renowned.

20.  I  address  to  thee,  Agni,  who  art  of  old,  these 
eternal  as  well  as  recent  adorations :  these  solemn 
sacrifices  are  offered  to  the  showerer  of  benefits, 
who  in  every  birth  is  established  (amongst  men), 
cognizant  of  all  that  exists.

21.  The  undecaying  Jdtavedas,  who  in  every 
birth  is  established  (amongst  men),  is  kindled  by 
the  Viswdmitras :  may  we,  (enjoying)  his  favour, 
ever  be  (held)  in  the  auspicious  good  will  of  that 
adorable  (deity).

22.

be  (held)  in  the  auspicious  good  will  of  that 
adorable  (deity).

22.  Powerful  Agni,  (fulfiller)  of  good  works, 
convey,  rejoicing,  this  our  sacrifice;  towards  the 
gods :  Invoker  of  the  gods,  bestow  upon  us  abundant 
food  ;  grant  us,  Agni,  great  wealth.

23.  Grant,  Agni,  to  the  offerer  of  the  oblation, 
the  earth,  the  bestower  of  cattle,  the  means  of  many 
(pious  rites),  such  that  it  may  be  perpetual :  may 
there  be  to  us  sons  and  grandsons  born  in  our  race, 
and  may  thy  good-will  ever  be  upon  us.*

S(5kta  IL

The  deity  is  Agni  as  Vaiswanara.;  the  Rishi  is  Viswdmitra;

the  metre,  Jagati.

1.  We  offer  to  Agni,  who  is  Vaiswanara,  the    Vargaxvii.

,  Jagati.

1.  We  offer  to  Agni,  who  is  Vaiswanara,  the    Vargaxvii.

This  verse,  which  forms  the  burden  of  several  subsequent 
hymns,  occurs  in  the  Sdma-Veda,  i.  76;  it  is  translated,  with 
some  difference,  by  Benfey  and  Stevenson,  as  has  been  observed 
in  the  Preface.

VOL.  II.  Y   2  *

324  RIG-YEDA    SANIHTA.VOL.  II.  Y   2  *

324  RIG-YEDA    SANIHTA.

auginenter  of  water,  praise  (as  bland)  as  pure  clarified 
butter ;  and  the  })riests  and  the  worshipper  incite  hy 
their  (pious)  rites  the  invoker  of  the  gods  to  his 
two-fold  function,'' as  a  wheelwright  fabricates  a  car.

2.  By  his  birth  he  lighted  up  both  heaven  and 
earth  ;  he  was  the  praise-worthy  son  of  liis  parents ; 
the  uiidecaving  Agni,  the  bearer  of  oblations,  the

of  liis  parents ; 
the  uiidecaving  Agni,  the  bearer  of  oblations,  the 
giver  of  food,  the  guest  of  men,  the  affiuent  in 
radiance.

3.  The  gods,  (endowed)  with  Intelligence,  gave 
birth  to  Agni  in  the  multiform  rite  by  the  exertion 
of  preserving  strength :  desirous  of  food,  1  eulogise 
the  great  Agni,  bright  with  solar  effulgence,  and 
(vigorous)  as  a  horse.

4.  Desiring  excellent  food,  inflicting  no  disgrace, 
we  solicit  the  boon  of  the  a«lorable  (Vaiswanara) 
fiom  Agni,  the  benefactor  of  the  Biirigus,  the 
object  of  our  desires,  who  is  acquainted  with  past 
acts,  and  shines  with  celestial  splendour.

5.  Men  with  strewn  holy  grass,  and  uplifted

th  celestial  splendour.

5.  Men  with  strewn  holy  grass,  and  uplifted 
ladles,  place  before  thera  this  solemnity  for  the 
?ake  of  obtaining  happiness,  Agni,  the  bestower 
of  food,  the  resplendent,  the  benefactor  of  all  the 
gods,  the  remover  of  sorrow,^  the  perfecier  of  the 
(holy)  acts  of  the  sacrificer.

**  To  the  lighting  of  the  Gdrhaputya  and  A'havarJi/a,  the 
domestic  and  sacrificial  fires.

^  Tlie  text  has  merely  Rudra,  -which  the  Scholiast  translates 
duhkkandm  drdvakam,  the  driver  av/ay  of  griefs  or  pains :  other- 
wise, we  mi^ht  take  it  as  a  synonymc  of  Agni,

SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        325SECOND    ASHTAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        325

6.  Agni,  of  purifying  lustre,  invoker  of  the  gods,  Vargaxviii.

325

6.  Agni,  of  purifying  lustre,  invoker  of  the  gods,  Vargaxviii. 
men  desirous  of  worshipjjing  (thee),  having  strewn

the  sacred  grass,  repair  to  thy  appropriate  abode  at 
sacrifices:  bestow  upon  them  wealth.

7.  He  has  filled  both  lieaven  and  earth  and  the 
spacious  firmament,  he  whom  the  performers  of 
(sacred)  rites  have  laid  hold  of  as  soon  as  born: 
he,  the  sage,  the  giver  of  food,  is  brought  like  a 
horse  to  the  sacrificer,  for  (the  sake  of)  obtaining 
food.*

8.  Reverence  the  bearer  of  oblations  (to  the 
gods),  him  whose  sacrifice  is  acceptable  ;  worship 
him  by  whom  all  tliat  exists  is  known,  who  is 
friendly  to  our  dwellings  ;  for  Agni  is  the  conductor

known,  who  is 
friendly  to  our  dwellings  ;  for  Agni  is  the  conductor 
of  the  great  sacrifice,  the  beholder  of  all,  who  has 
been  placed  in  front  of  the  gods.

9.  The  immortals,  desirous  (of  his  presence), 
sanctified  the  three  radiances''  of  the  sfreat  cir- 
cumambient  Agni  ;  one  of  them  they  have  placed 
in  the  world  of  mortals  as  the  nourisher  (of  all) ; 
the  other  two  have  gone  to  the  neighbouring  s])here.

10.  Human  beings,  wishing  for  wealth,  give 
brightness,  (by  their  praises),  to  the  lord  of  men,

Yajur-Veda,  xxxiii.  75.

Tisrah  samidhah,  literally,  the  three  fuels,  but  here  said  to 
intend  the  three  forms  or  conditions  of  fire ;  as,  earthly  fire,  thatYajur-Veda,  xxxiii.  75.

Tisrah  samidhah,  literally,  the  three  fuels,  but  here  said  to 
intend  the  three  forms  or  conditions  of  fire ;  as,  earthly  fire,  that

tend  the  three  forms  or  conditions  of  fire ;  as,  earthly  fire,  that 
of  the  firmament  or  lightning,  and  that  of  heaven,  the  sun ;  or 
three  Vaidik  forms,  two  termed  Aghdra,  and  one  Anuydja:  the 
celebration  of  the  latter  is  rewarded  by  enjoyment  in  this  world, 
that  of  the  two  former  by  enjoyment  in  the  firmament  and 
heaven.

326  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

the  wise  (Agni),  as  they  add  lustre,  (by  polishing), 
to  an  axe :  spreading  everywhere,  he  goes  alike 
tb  rough  high  and  low  places,  and  has  taken  an 
embryo  (condition)  in  these  regions.^ 
Varga  XIX.  11.  The  showeror  (of  benefits),  generated  in 
(many)  receptacles,  flourishes,  roaring  in  various

fits),  generated  in 
(many)  receptacles,  flourishes,  roaring  in  various 
(places)''  like  a  lion ;  Vaiswanara,  the  resplendent, 
the  immortal,  giving  precious  treasures  to  the  donor 
(of  the  oblation).

12.  Glorified  by  his  adorers,  Vaiswanara  of  old 
ascended  to  the  heaven  that  is  above  the  firmament, 
bestowing  wealth  upon  his  (present)  worshipper,  as 
he  did  in  former  times;  he  travels,  ever  vigilant, 
the  common  path  (of  the  gods).''

13.  We  implore  for  present  riches,  the  many- 
moving,  tawny-rayed,  resplendent  Agni,  whom 
mighty,  venerable,  wise,  adorable,  and  dwelling  in 
the  sky,  the  wind  (brought  down)  and  deposited 
(upon  the  earth).

14.  We  implore  with  prayer  the  mighty  Agni,

ited 
(upon  the  earth).14.  We  implore  with  prayer  the  mighty  Agni,

ited 
(upon  the  earth).

14.  We  implore  with  prayer  the  mighty  Agni, 
the  giver  of  food,  the  unrefusing,  (seated  on)  the 
the  front  of  heaven  ;  the  radiant  in  the  sacrifice, 
him  who  is  to  be  sought  (for  by  all),  the  beholder 
of  all,  the  emblem  of  heaven,  the  dweller  in  light, 
who  is  to  be  awakened  at  dawn.

15.  We  solicit  wealth  of  the  adorable  (Agni),  the 
invoker  of  the  gods,   the  pure,  the  single-minded.

The  two  pieces  of  wood,  the   attrition  of  which  produces

flame.

t)  e  .

As  in  forests  on  fire.  That  is,  as  the  sun.

SECOND   ASHTAKA EIGHTH   ADHYAYA.        327

the  munificent,  the  commendable,  the  beholder  of 
all,  who  is  many-coloured  like  a  chariot,  elegant  in

he  beholder  of 
all,  who  is  many-coloured  like  a  chariot,  elegant  in 
form,  and  always  friendly  to  mankind.

SiJkta  hi.

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  are  unchanged.

1.  Intelligent  (worshippers),  offer  to  the  powerful     Varga  xx. 
Vaiswanara  precious  things  at  holy  rites,  that  they

may  go  (the  way  of  the  good),  for  the  immortal 
Agni  worships  the  gods ;  therefore,  let  no  one 
violate  eternal  duties.

2.  The  graceful  messenger  (of  the  gods)  goes 
between  heaven  and  earth :  sitting  (on  the  altar), 
and  placed  before  men,  he  ornaments  the  spacious 
chambers  (of  sacrifice)  with  his  rays,  animated  by 
the  gods,  and  aflduent  in  wisdom.

3.  The  wise  worship,  with  (pious)  rites,  Agni,

aflduent  in  wisdom.

3.  The  wise  worship,  with  (pious)  rites,  Agni, 
the  sign  of  sacrifices,"*  the  accomplishment  of  the 
solemnity,  in  whom  the  reciters  of  (his)  praises  have 
accumulated  (their)  acts  (of  devotion),  and  from 
whom  the  worshipper  hopes  for  happiness.4.  The  parent  of  sacrifices,  the  invigorator  of  the 
wise,  the  end  (of  the  rite),  the  instruction  of  the 
priests,  Agni,  who  has  pervaded  heaven  and  earth 
in  many  forms,  the  friend  of  man,  wise,  (and  en- 
dowed) with  splendours,  is  glorified  (by  the  wor- 
shipper).

Ketum  yajndndm:  ketu  is,  properly,  a  banner;  but  it  is 
repeatedly  used  in  the  Veda  in  the  sense  oi  prajndpaka,  a  sign,

is 
repeatedly  used  in  the  Veda  in  the  sense  oi  prajndpaka,  a  sign, 
a  signal,  that  which  makes  any  thing  known.

328  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

5.  The  gods  have  placed  in  this  world  the 
delightful  Agni  in  a  delightful  chariot,  the  tawny- 
hued  Vaiswanara,  the  sitter  in  the  waters,  the 
omniscient,  the  all-pervading,  the  endowed  with 
energies,  the  cherisher,  the  illustrious. 
Varga  XXI.  Q,  Perfecting  in  performance  the  multiform  sacri- 
fice of  the  worshipper,  along  with  the  gods  to  whom 
solemnities  have  been  addressed,  and  together  with 
the  priests,  Agni,  the  charioteer,  the  swift-moving, 
the  humble-minded,  the  destroyer  of  foes,  passes 
along  between  (heaven  and  earth).

7.

d,  the  destroyer  of  foes,  passes 
along  between  (heaven  and  earth).

7.  Agni,  praise  (the  gods  that  we  may  enjoy) 
good  offspring  and  long  life :  propitiate  them  by 
libations ;  bestow  upon  us  plentiful  crops :  ever 
vigilant,  grant  food  to  the  respectable  (institutor 
of  this  ceremony),  for  thou  art  the  desired  of  the 
gods,  the  object  of  the  pious  acts  of  the  devout.

8.  The  leaders  (of  holy  rites)  praise  with  prostra- 
tion, for  (the  sake  of)  increase,  the  mighty  lord  of 
people,  the  guest  (of  men),  the  regulator  eternally 
of  acts,  the  desired  of  tlie  priests,  the  exposition 
of  sacrifices,  Jatavedas,  endowed  with  (divine) 
energies.9.  The  resplendent  and  adorable  Agni,  riding  in

(divine) 
energies.

9.  The  resplendent  and  adorable  Agni,  riding  in 
an  auspicious  chariot,  has  comprehended  the  whole 
earth  by  his  vigour :  let  us  glorify  with  fit  praises 
the  acts  of  that  cherisher  of  multitudes  in  his  own 
abode.

10.  Vaiswanara,  I  celebrate  thy  energies, 
whereby,  O  sage,  thou  hast  become  omniscient: 
as   soon  as    born,    Agni,    thou   hast   occupied    the

SECOND    ASIITAKA — EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        329

realms  (of  space),  and  heaven  and  earth,  and  hast 
comprehended  all  these  with  thyself.

11.  From  acts  that  are  acceptable  to  Vais\va\ara 
comes  great  (wealth) ;  for  he,  the  sage  (Agni)  alone, 
bestows  (the  reward)  of  zeal  in  (the  performance  of)

ge  (Agni)  alone, 
bestows  (the  reward)  of  zeal  in  (the  performance  of) 
his  worship:  adoring  both  his  prolific  friends,  heaven 
and  earth,*  Agni  was  born.

SUKTA    IV.

The  deities  are  the  Apris;    the  Rishi  and  metre  as  before.

1.  Repeatedly  kindled,  (Agni),"  wake  up  favour-    Varga  xxii. 
ably    disposed;    (endowed)    with   reiterated    lustre, 
entertain  the  kind  purpose  of  (granting  us)  wealth  :

bring,  divine  Agni,  the  gods  to  the  sacrifice  :  do 
thou,  the  friend  (of  the  gods),  niiuister,  well-affected, 
to  (thy)  friends.

2.  Tanunapat,  whom  the  deities,  Mitra,  Varuna, 
and  Agni,  worship  daily  thrice  a  day,  render  this  our 
sacred  rain-engendering  sacrifice  productive  of  water.

3.

der  this  our 
sacred  rain-engendering  sacrifice  productive  of  water.

3.  May  the  all-approved  praise  reach  the  invoker 
of  the  gods :  may  Tla'^  first  proceed  to  worship  and 
to  praise  with  prostrations  the  showerer  (of  benefits) 
in  his  presence :  may  tlie  adorable  (Agni),  instigated 
(by  us),  worship  the  gods.4.  An  upward  path  has  been  prepared  for  you

See  I,  158,  verse  4.

See  p.  195.

Samit-samit,  takes  the  place  of  the  Samiddha,  or  Susamiddha, 
as  an  appellative  of  Agni  in  preceding  Su/das.

The  Ilita  of  preceding  hymns,  but  the  construction  of  the 
stanza  is  difficult,  and  the  sense  obscure.

330  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

both*  in  the  sacrifice :  the  blazing  oblations  soar

-VEDA    SANHITA.

both*  in  the  sacrifice :  the  blazing  oblations  soar 
aloft :  the  invoker  of  the  gods  has  sat  down  in  the 
centre  of  the  radiant  (hall) :  let  us  strew  the  sacred 
grass  for  the  seats  of  the  gods.

5.  The  gods  who  gratify  the  universe  with  rain 
are  present  at  the  seven  offerings  (of  the  ministei*- 
ing  priests),  when  solicited  with  (sincerity  of)  mind  : 
may  the  many  deities  who  are  engendered  in  sensible 
shapes  at  sacrifices  come  to  this  our  rite.'' 
Varga  XXIII.  6.  May  the  adored  Day  and  Night,  combined  or 
separate,  be  manifest  in  bodily  form,  so  that  Mitra, 
Varuna,  Indra,  or  (the  latter),  attended  by  the 
Maruts,  may  rejoice  us  by  their  glories.

7.

latter),  attended  by  the 
Maruts,  may  rejoice  us  by  their  glories.

7.  I  propitiate  the  two  chief  divine  invokers  of 
the  gods :  the  seven  offerers  of  (sacrificial)  food, 
expectant  of  water,  gratify  (Agni)  with  oblations: 
the  illustrious  observers  of  sacred  rites  have  saluted 
him  in  every  ceremony  as  (identifiable),  verily,  with 
water.''

8.  May  Bharati,  associated  with  the  Bharatis  ; 
Ila  with  the  gods  and  men ;  and  Agni  ;  and  Saras-

Agni  and  the  Barkis,  or  sacred  grass,  to  which,  as  in  the 
parallel  passages,  the  stanza  is  addressed.

In  preceding  Suktas,  the  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice  are  the 
personifications  specified ;  here  are  to  be  understood  divinitiesIn  preceding  Suktas,  the  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice  are  the 
personifications  specified ;  here  are  to  be  understood  divinities

the 
personifications  specified ;  here  are  to  be  understood  divinities 
presiding  over  the  doors.

Ritum  it  ta  dhuh  is  explained  by  the  Scholiast,  Agnim  eva  rita- 
bhutam  dhuh,  they  have  called  Agni,  verily,  rita :  rita  is  usually 
rendered  water,  but  it  may  mean  truth ;  the  commentator  leaves 
it  unexplained,  having,  in  the  preceding  phrase,  ritam  sansanta, 
rendered  it  by  udakam,  desirous  or  expectant  of  water.

SECOND    ASHTAKA— EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        331

WATi  with  the  Saraswatas  f  may  the  three  goddesses 
sit  down  upon  the  sacred  grass  (strewn)  before  them.

9.  Divine  Twashtri,  being  well  pleased,  give 
issue  to  our  procreative  vigour,  whence  (a  son),

well  pleased,  give 
issue  to  our  procreative  vigour,  whence  (a  son), 
manly,  devout,  vigorous,  wielder  of  the  {Soma- 
bruising)  stone,  arid  reverencing  the  gods,  may  be 
born.

10.  Vanaspati,  bring  the  gods  nigh :  may  Agni, 
the  immolator,  prepare  the  victim  '?  let  him  who  is 
truth  officiate  as  the  ministering  priest,  for,  verily, 
he  knows  the  birth  of  the  gods.

11.  Agni,  kindled  into  flame,  come  to  our  pre- 
sence in  the  same  chariot  with  Indra  and  with  the 
swift-moving  gods  :  may  Aditi,  the  mother  of  excel- 
lent sons,  sit  down  on  the  sacred  grass,  and  may  the 
immortal  gods  be  satisfied  with  the  reverentially- 
offered  oblation."

immortal  gods  be  satisfied  with  the  reverentially- 
offered  oblation."immortal  gods  be  satisfied  with  the  reverentially- 
offered  oblation."

The  Scholiast  interprets  bhdratibhih,  with  the  connections  of 
Bharata,  or  the  Sun,  bharatasya  suryasya  sambaadhinibhih,  perhaps 
intending  the  solar  rays :  Bhdrati  he  explains  by  Vdch,  speech ; 
lid  he  explains  by  Bhumi,  the  earth ;  and  SaraswaU  by  Mddhya- 
mikd  vdk ;  the  Saraswatas  are  the  Madhyamasthdnas,  the  middle 
regions,  or  the  firmament :  Agni,  whose  name  is  rather  uncon- 
nectedly  inserted,  is  thus  identified  through  their  several  personi- 
ficatiovs  as  goddesses,  with  heaven,  mid-heaven,  and  earth,  or 
with  speech  or  sound  in  the  three  regions ;  see  p.  73,  note  (c).

r 
with  speech  or  sound  in  the  three  regions ;  see  p.  73,  note  (c).

Agnir  havih  samitd  sudaydti  is  the  same  phrase  as  occurred  in 
Sukta  III.  of  the  Second  MaMala,  v.  10  :  see  p.  219.

Swdhd  devd  amritd  mddayantdm  :  Swdhd  is  explained  Swdhd- 
kdrena  yuktdh,  joined  with  or  addressed  by  the  exclamation, 
Swdhd.  This  Sukta  is  more  complicated  and  obscure  than  any 
of  the  preceding  addressed  to  the  Apris,  except  Sukta  in.  of  the

332  RIG-VEDA    SANHITA.

SUKTA    V.

The  deity  is  Agni  ;  the  Rishi  and  metre  as  before.

Varga  XXIV.  1.  The  sagacious  Agni,  cognizant  of  the  dawn,  is 
awakened  to  (follovv)  the  })atb-s  of  the  sages :  the

the  dawn,  is 
awakened  to  (follovv)  the  })atb-s  of  the  sages :  the 
luminous  Vahni,  kindled  by  the  devout,  has  thrown 
open  the  gates  of  darkness.

2.  The  adorable  Agni  is  niagiiificd  by  the  hymns, 
the  prayers,  the  praises,  of  (his)  worshippers :  emu- 
lating the  many  glories  of  the  sun,  the  messenger 
(of  the  gods)  shines  forth  at  the  glimmering  of  the 
dawn.3.  Agni,  the  embryo  of  the  waters,  the  friend  (of 
the  pious),  accomplishing  (all  desires)  with  truth, 
has  been  placed  (by  the  gods)  amongst  men,  the 
descendants  of  Manu  :  desirable  and  adorable,  he 
has  taken  his  station  on  high,"^  where  the  wise  Agni 
is  to  receive  the  oblations  of  tlie  devout.

4.

^  where  the  wise  Agni 
is  to  receive  the  oblations  of  tlie  devout.

4.  Agni,  when  kindled,  is  Mitra  ;  and,  as  Mitra, 
is  the  invoker  (of  the  gods) :  Varuna  is  Jatavedas  ; 
Mitra  is  the  ministering  priest :  Damunas  is  the 
agitator  (Vayu)  :  Mitra  (is  the  associate)  of  rivers 
and  mountains.''

5.  The  graceful  (Agni)  protects  the  primary 
station  of  the  moving  earth :  mighty,   he  protects

Second  ManSlala,  to  which  it  bears  the  nearest  analogy  :  they  are 
both  perhaps  of  somewhat  later  date  than  the  others.

Scinwasthdt ;  sdnu,  uchchhritam;  that  is,  uttaravedydkhyam ; 
the  place  called  the  north  altar.

The  purport  of  the  stanza  is  the  identity  of  Agni  with  Mitra,

ar.

The  purport  of  the  stanza  is  the  identity  of  Agni  with  Mitra, 
the  sun,  and  of  both  with  Varuna  and  Vdyu.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADHYAYA.        333

the  path  of  the  sun  :  he  protects  the  seven-lieaded 
(troop  of  the  Maruts)  in  the  centre  (between  heaven 
and  earth) :  he  protects  tlie  exhilarating  (oblations) 
of  the  gods.

6.  The  mighty,  divine  Agni,  knowing  all  (things)    Varga  xxv. 
that  are  to  be  known,  made  the  commendable  and 
beautiful  water,  the  glossy  skin,"  the  station  of  the 
diffused  slumbering  (Agni),  and,  ever  vigilant,  pre- 
serves it.

7.  Agni  has  taken  his  station  in  an  asylum,  bril- 
liant, much-lauded,  and  as  desirous  (of  receiving7.  Agni  has  taken  his  station  in  an  asylum,  bril- 
liant, much-lauded,  and  as  desirous  (of  receiving

in  an  asylum,  bril- 
liant, much-lauded,  and  as  desirous  (of  receiving 
him)  as  he  is  (to  repair  to  it) :  radiant,  pure,  vast, 
and  purifying,  he  repeatedly  renovates  his  parents, 
(Heaven  and  Earth).

8.  As  soon  as  generated  he  is  borne  aloft  by  the 
plants,  which  grow  flourishing  by  moisture,  as  tlie 
beautifying  waters  descend :  may  he,  in  the  bosom 
of  his  parents,  protect  us.

9.  Praised  and  (nourished)  by  fuel,  the  mighty 
Agni,  stationed  on  the  (altar  the)  navel  of  the  earth, 
in  the  form  of  the  firmament,  has  shone  (brightly) : 
may  the  friendly  and  adorable  Aqni  who  respires  in 
the  mid-heaven,''  the  messenger  (of  the  gods),  bring 
them  to  the  sacrifice.

heaven,''  the  messenger  (of  the  gods),  bring 
them  to  the  sacrifice.

Covering  as  it  were  by  extinguishing  the  flame  of  fire.

Mdtariswan,  the  Schohast  explains  mdiari,  antarikshe;  swasiti, 
suryarupena  ckeshfate,  who  breathes  iu  rcid-heaven,  or  acts  in  the 
form  of  the  sun ;  or  mdtari  may  imply  dranydm,  in  a  forest,  he 
who  abides  in  the  woods  :  the  explanations  are  those  of  Ydska — 
Nir.  VII.  26  ;  the  more  usual  sense  of  Mdtariswan  is  the  wind,  as 
in  the  next  stanza.

334  RIG-VEDA   SANHITA.

10.  The  mighty  Agni,  being  the  best  of  tlie 
heavenly  luminaries,  sustained  the  heaven  with 
radiance,  when  the  wind  kindled  the  bearer  of

ained  the  heaven  with 
radiance,  when  the  wind  kindled  the  bearer  of 
oblations,  (till  then  concealed)  in  a  cave  from  the 
Bhrigiis.^ained  the  heaven  with 
radiance,  when  the  wind  kindled  the  bearer  of 
oblations,  (till  then  concealed)  in  a  cave  from  the 
Bhrigiis.^

11.  Grant,  Agni,  to  the  offerer  of  the  oblation 
the  earth,  the  bestower  of  cattle,  the  means  of 
many  (pious  rites),  such  that  it  may  be  perpetual : 
may  there  be  to  us  sons  and  grandsons  born  in  our 
race,  and  may  thy  good  will  ever  be  upon  us.''

SiJkta  VI.

The  deity,  Rishi,  and  metre,  as  before.

Varga  XXVI,  1.  Dovout  ministrauts,  who  are  to  be  inspired  by 
prayer,  bring  forth  (the  ladle)  destined  for  the  wor- 
ship of  the  gods,  which  is  to  be  conveyed  to  the 
south  (of  the  fire-altar),  and  which,  charged  with

conveyed  to  the 
south  (of  the  fire-altar),  and  which,  charged  with 
(sacrificial)  food,  pointed  to  the  east,  containing  the 
oblation,  and,  filled  with  liquefied  butter,  proceeds 
to  Agni.

2.  Agni,  as  soon  as  born,  occupy  both  heaven 
and  earth  ;  for  thou,  to  whom  sacrifice  is  to  be 
offered,  exceedest  in  magnitude  the  firmament  and 
the  earth:  may  thy  seven-tongued  fires  be  glorified.

3.  The  firmament  and  the  earth  and  the  adorable 
(gods)  propitiate  thee  their  invoker,  for  the  (com- 
pletion of  the)  sacrifice,  whenever  the  descendants

Yadi  Bhrigubhyah  guhd  santam :  the  commentator  interprets 
Bhrigubhyah  by  ddityasyn  rasmlbhyah,  from  the  rays  of  the  sun. 
The  burden  of  Sukta  xliv.

tyasyn  rasmlbhyah,  from  the  rays  of  the  sun. 
The  burden  of  Sukta  xliv.  :  see  p.  32S.

SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADITYAYA.         835

of  Manu,"*  pious,  and  bearing  oblations,  glorify  thy 
radiant  flame.SECOND    ASHTAKA EIGHTH    ADITYAYA.         835

of  Manu,"*  pious,  and  bearing  oblations,  glorify  thy 
radiant  flame.

4.  The  great  and  adorable  Agni  is  firm  seated  on 
his  spacious  throne  between  heaven  and  earth  ;  and 
the  powerful  fellow-brides^  (of  the  sun),  the  im- 
perishable, uninjurable  (heaven  and  earth)  are  the 
two  milk-yielding  cows  of  the  wide-extending 
(Agni).

5.  Great,  Agni,  are  the  deeds  of  thee  the  mighty 
one:  thou  hast  spread  abroad  by  thy  power  the 
heaven  and  earth ;  thou  hast  been  the  messenger 
(of  the  gods) ;  as  soon  as  begotten  thou  hast  become 
the  leader  of  men.

6.

gods) ;  as  soon  as  begotten  thou  hast  become 
the  leader  of  men.

6.  Harness   with   traces,   to   thy  car,    thy  long-  Vargaxxvii. 
maned,  ruddy  (steeds,   to  come)  to  the  sacrifice :

bring  hither,  divine  Jatavedas,  all  the  gods,  and 
make  them  propitious  to  the  oblation.

7.  When,  Agni,  thou  abidest  in  the  woods,  con- 
suming the  waters  at  thy  pleasure,  then  thy  rays 
illuminate  the  heavens,  and  thou  shiuest  like  many 
former  radiant  dawns  :  the  gods  themselves  commend 
(the  brilliancy)  of  their  praise-meriting  invoker.

8.  The  deities  who  sport  in  the  spacious  (firma- 
ment) ;  those  who  are  in  the  luminous  sphere  of 
heaven  ;  the  adorable  U'mas,"  who  come  when  wor-

luminous  sphere  of 
heaven  ;  the  adorable  U'mas,"  who  come  when  wor-

Visah  mdnushih-manoh  sambandkinyah  prajdh:  people  con- 
nected vsrith  Manu,  is  the  explanation  of  the  Scholiast.

Sapatni,  the  two  brides  of  one ;  that  is,  according  to  the 
commentator,  of  the  smi.

Umdh :  umasanjnakdh  pitarnh  santi,  the  Umas  are  the 
pitris,  called  Uma:  the  term  is  micoramon.

836  RIG-VEDA   SANHIT.v.

thily  invoked  ;  the  horses,  Agni,  that  are  fit  for  thy 
car.836  RIG-VEDA   SANHIT.v.

thily  invoked  ;  the  horses,  Agni,  that  are  fit  for  thy 
car.

9.  With  all  these  in  one  chariot,  Agni,  or  in 
many  (chariots),  come  to  our  presence,  for  thy 
horses  are  able :  bring  the  three  and  thirty  divini- 
ties with  their  wives,  for  the  sake  of  (the  sacrificial)

rty  divini- 
ties with  their  wives,  for  the  sake  of  (the  sacrificial) 
food,  and  exhilarate  them  (all  with  the  Soma 
libation).

10.  He  is  the  invoker  (of  the  gods),  whom  the 
spacious  heaven  and  earth  glorify,  for  the  sake  ol 
increase,  at  repeated  sacrifices :  charged  with  water, 
they  await  like  holy  rites,  propitious  to  the  real 
presence  of  him  who  is  born  of  truth.

11.  Grant,  Agni,  to  the  offerer  of  the  oblation, 
the  earth,  the  bestower  of  cattle,  the  means  of 
many  (pious  rites) ;  such  that  it  may  be  perpetual : 
may  there  be  to  us  sons  and  grandsons  born  in  our 
race,  and  may  thy  good-will  ever  be  upon  us.

^  Patnkatas-trinsatam  trhscha  devdn:  the  first  is,  literally,

n  us.

^  Patnkatas-trinsatam  trhscha  devdn:  the  first  is,  literally, 
having  wives,  but  is  sometimes  considered  as  a  proper  name: 
for  the  thirty-three  divinities,  see  vol.  i.  p.  97,  note.

''  Prdchi  adhwareva  tasthatuh  sumeke  ritdvari  rita-jdtasya  sotye: 
the  passage  is  obscure,  and  the  commentator  has  not  done  much 
to  render  it  more  explicit.

END  OF  THE  SECOND  ASHTAKA.

INDEX    OP   THE    SUKTAS.

ASHTAKA  II.

MAN  DAL  A  I.  {continued).

Adhyaya  I.

Anuvaka    XVIII.    {continued).

Page.  Siikta.

1.      11.  (CXXII.)

6.     III.  (CXXIII.)

10.      IV.  (CXXIV.)

14.       V.  (CXXV.)

17.     VI.  (CXXVI.)

Daily.

Vl^WADEVAS,

USHAS,

The  same,

SwANAYA,

Bhavayavya,

Risfii. 
Kakshivat.

WADEVAS,

USHAS,

The  same,

SwANAYA,

Bhavayavya,14.       V.  (CXXV.)

17.     VI.  (CXXVI.)

Daily.

Vl^WADEVAS,

USHAS,

The  same,

SwANAYA,

Bhavayavya,

Risfii. 
Kakshivat.

WADEVAS,

USHAS,

The  same,

SwANAYA,

Bhavayavya,

Risfii. 
Kakshivat. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

Anuvaka  XIX.

19.

I.

(CXXVII.)

Agni,

24.

II.

(CXXVIII.)

The  same.

27.

III.

(CXXIX.)

Indra,

31.

IV.

(CXXX.)

The  same,

36.

V.

(CXXXI.)

The  same.

39.

VI.

(CXXXII.)

The  same.

43.

VII.

(CXXXIII.)

The  same,

Anuvaka  XX.

45.

I.

(CXXXIV.)

Vayu,

48.

II.

(CXXXV.)

VXyu  and  Indra,

52.

III.

(CXXXVI.)

MiTKA  and  Varuna,

VOL.  II

•

Z

Paruchchhkpa. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

338

INDEX    OF    THE    SUKTAS.

ADHYAYA  II.

Page.  Sukta.  Deity.

55.  IV.

NDEX    OF    THE    SUKTAS.

ADHYAYA  II.

Page.  Sukta.  Deity.

55.  IV.  (CXXXVJI.)  MiTRA  and  VaruAa.

56.  V.  (CXXXVIIi:)  PusHAN,

58.  VI.    (CXXXIX.)  ViSWADBVAS,

Paruchchhefa. 
The  same. 
The  same.

Anuvaka  XXI.

63.

I-  (

CXL.)

Agm,

DiRGHATAMAS

67.

II.   (

CXLI.)

The  samp.

The  same.

71.

III.  (

CXLII.)

A'PRIS,

Tlie  same.

75.

IV.  (

CXLIII.)

Agni,

The  same.

77.

V.  (

CXLIV.)

The  same.

The  same.

78.

VI.  (

CXLV.)

The  same.

The  same.

SO.

VII.  (

CXLVI.)

The  same,

The  same.

82.

VIII.  (

;cxLvii.)

The  same,

The  same.

83.

IX.

[CXLVIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

84.

X.

:CXLIX.)

The  same.

The  same.

86.

XT.

:cL.)

.  The  same.

The  same.

87.

he  same.

The  same.

86.

XT.

:cL.)

.  The  same.

The  same.

87.

XII.  (

CLI.)

MiTRA  and  Varuna,

Tlie  same.

90.

XIII.

[CLII.)

The  same.

The  same.

92.

XIV.

^CLIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

93.

XV.  (

:cLiv.)

VishAu,

The  same.

96.

XVI.

:cLv.)

Vishnu  and  Indra,

The  same.

98.  XVII.

(CLVI.)

Vishnu,

The  same.

Anuvaka  XXIT.

100.

I.  (CLVII.)

AiSwins,

The  same.

ADHYAYA  III.

102.VishAu,

The  same.

96.

XVI.

:cLv.)

Vishnu  and  Indra,

The  same.

98.  XVII.

(CLVI.)

Vishnu,

The  same.

Anuvaka  XXIT.

100.

I.  (CLVII.)

AiSwins,

The  same.

ADHYAYA  III.

102.

II.  (CLVIII.)

The  same.

The  same

104.

III.  (CLIX.)

Heaven  and  Earth,

The  same

INDEX   OF   THE   SUKTAS.

339

Page.

Sukta.

Deity.

Rishi.

106.

IV.

(CLX.)

Heaven  and  Earth,

DfRGHATAMAS

107.

V.

(CLXI.)

The  RiBHus,

The  same.

112.

VI.

(CLXII.)

The  Horse,

.

(CLXI.)

The  RiBHus,

The  same.

112.

VI.

(CLXII.)

The  Horse,

The  same.

121.

VII.

(CLXIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

125.

VIII.

(CLXIV.)

Vl^WADEVAS,

The  same.

Anuvaka  XXIII.

145.        I.  (CLXV.)

Indka,

Agastta.

ADHYAYA  IV.

149.

II.  (

CLX  VI.)

Maruts,

The  same.

152.

III.  (

CLXVII.)

Indra  and  Maruts,

The  same.

155.

IV.  (

:CLXVIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

158.

V.  (

;cLXix.)

Indra,

The  same.

160.

VI.  (

CLXX.)

The  same.

The  same.

161.

VII.  (

:CLXXI.)

Mardts,

The  same.

162.

VIII.

(CLXXII.)

The  same.

The  same.

163.

IX.  (

:CLXXIII.)

Indra,

The  same.

166.

X.  (

:CLXXIV.)

The  same,

The  same.

167.

XI.

[CLXXV.)

The  same.

(

:CLXXIV.)

The  same,

The  same.

167.

XI.

[CLXXV.)

The  same.

The  same.

170.

XII.

(CLXXVI.)

The  same.

The  same.

171.

xni.  (

;cLXXvii.)

The  same.

Tlie  same.

172.

XIV.

^CLXXVIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

174.

XV.  (

;CLXXix.)

Rati,

The  same.

Anuvaka  XXIV

176.        I.  (CLXXX.)

178.  II.  (CLXXXI.)

181.  III.  (CLXXXII.)

183.  IV.  (CLXXXIII.)

A^WINS,

The  same. 
The  same, 
The  same,

z  2

The  same. 
Tlie  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

340

INDEX    OF   THE   SUKTAS.

Page.

185.  V.

187.  VI.

189.  VII. 
192.  VIII.

195.  IX.

197.  X.

199.  XI.

201.  XII.

Sxikta.

(CLXXXIV.)

(CLXXXV.)

(CLXXXVI.)

(CLXXXVII.)

(CLXXXVIII.)

(CLXXXIX.)

(CXC.)

ADHYAYA  V.

Deity.

VI.)

(CLXXXVII.)

(CLXXXVIII.)

(CLXXXIX.)

(CXC.)

ADHYAYA  V.199.  XI.

201.  XII.

Sxikta.

(CLXXXIV.)

(CLXXXV.)

(CLXXXVI.)

(CLXXXVII.)

(CLXXXVIII.)

(CLXXXIX.)

(CXC.)

ADHYAYA  V.

Deity.

VI.)

(CLXXXVII.)

(CLXXXVIII.)

(CLXXXIX.)

(CXC.)

ADHYAYA  V.

Deity. 
AswiNS,

Heaven  and  Earth,

ViSWADEVAS, 
PiTU,

Apris,

Agni,

Brihaspati,

(CXCI.)

Water,  Grass,  the  Sun,

Rishi.

Agastta. 
The  same.

The  same.

«

The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

MANDALA  II.

Anuvaka  I.

203.

I.

(I-)

Agni,

Gritsamadj^

214.

II.

(II.)

The  same.

The  same.

217.

III.

(III.)

Apris,

The  same.

220.

IV.

(IV.)

Agni,

SOMAHUTI.

222.

V.

(V.)

The  same.

The  same.

223.

VI.

(VI.)

The  same.

The  same.

225.

VII.

(VII.)

The  same.

The  same.

226.

VIII.

(VIII.)

The  same,

The  same.

ADHYAYA  VI.

226.

IX.

(IX.)

The  same,

The  same.

228.

X.

(X.)

DHYAYA  VI.

226.

IX.

(IX.)

The  same,

The  same.

228.

X.

(X.)

The  same.

The  same.

230.

XI.

(XL)

Indra, 
Anlvaka  II.

The  same.

235.

I.

(xri.)

The  same.

The  same.

239.

II.

(XIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

242.

III.

(XIV.)

The  same.

The  same.

INDEX    OF   THE   SUKTAS.

341

Page.

Suktd.

Deity.

Rishi.

245.      IV.

(XV.)

Indra,

SoMAHdxi.

247.       V.

(XVI.)

The  same.

The  same.

250.      VI.

(XVII.)

The  same,

The  same.

252.    VII.

(XVIII.)

The  same.

The  same.

254.  VIII.

(XIX.)

The  same.

The  same.

257.     IX.

(XX.)

The  same.

Tlie  same.

259,        X.

(XXI.)

The  same.

The  same.

260.     XI.

(XXII.)

The  same.

The  same.

Anuvaka  III.

he  same.

260.     XI.

(XXII.)

The  same.

The  same.

Anuvaka  III.

262.        I.  (XXIII.)

Brahmanaspati  and 
Brihaspati,

Gritsamada.

ADMYAYA  VII.

267.

II.

(XXIV.)

The  same.

The  same.

271.

Til.

(XXV.)

The  same.

The  same.

272.

•IV.

(XXVI.)

The  same.

The  same.

273.

V.

(XXVII.)

A  dityas.

KdRMA.

278.

VI.

(XXVIII.)

Vardna,

The  same.

281.

VII.

(XXIX.)

Viswadevas,Til.

(XXV.)

The  same.

The  same.

272.

•IV.

(XXVI.)

The  same.

The  same.

273.

V.

(XXVII.)

A  dityas.

KdRMA.

278.

VI.

(XXVIII.)

Vardna,

The  same.

281.

VII.

(XXIX.)

Viswadevas,

The  same.

283.

VIII.

(XXX.)

Indra  and  others.

Gritsamadj

285.

IX.

(XXXI.)

The  same.

The  same.

287.

X.

(XXXII.)

Heaven  and  Earth, 
Indra  and  others,

Anuvaka  IV.

The  same.

289.

I.

(XXXIII.)

Rudra,

The  same.

293.

II.

(XXXIV.)

Ma  RUTS,

The  same.

298.

in.

(XXXV.)

same.

293.

II.

(XXXIV.)

Ma  RUTS,

The  same.

298.

in.

(XXXV.)

Apamnap.it,

The  same.

303.

IV.

(XXXVI.)

Indra  and  others.

The  same.

?A2

INDEX    OF    THE    SUKTAS.

ADHYAYA   Vlil.

Pa(/e.  Sukta.  Deiiy.

305.  V.  (XXXVII.)  DraviAodas,  Aswins,  Agni,

306.  VI.  (XXXVIII.)  Savitri,

309.    VII.  (XXXIX.) 
311.  VIII.  (XL.) 
313.     IX.,(XLI.)

316.  X.  (XLII.)

317.  XI.  (XLIII.)

AIWINS,

Soma  and  Pushan,

Vayu  and  others,

The  Kapinjala,  or  Indra,

The  same,

Rishi.

Gritsamada. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same. 
The  same.

MANDALA  III. 
Anuvaka  I.

318.

I.

(!•)

Agni,

ViSWAMlTRA

323.

II.

(11.)

Vaisv.'anara,

The  same.

327.

III.

(III.)

The  same,

II.

(11.)

Vaisv.'anara,

The  same.

327.

III.

(III.)

The  same,

The  same.

329.

IV.

(IV.)

The  Apris,

The  same.

332.

V.

(V.)

Agni,

The  same.

334.

VI.

(VI.)

The  same.

The  same.

INDEX    OF    NAMES.

Achchdvdka,  209

Adhcaryu,  209

yfrfjVt,  187,  203,  212.  331

Adityas,  196,  273,  274, 
281.  296

Agastya,  145,  149,  152, 
155,  158,  160,  161, 
162.  163,  166,  169, 
170,  171,  172,  174, 
176,  178,  181,  183, 
185.  187,  189,  192, 
195,  197,  199.  201

Agni,  19,  24,  63,  67,  75, 
77.  78,  80,  82.  83,  84, 
86,  197.  208,  214, 
220,  222.  223.  225, 
226,  228.  305,  318, 
323,  327,  332.  334

Agnidhra,  209

A  hand,  7

Ahi,  33,  236,  283

Ahirbudhnya,  191-,  287

Aja-ekapdd,  287Agnidhra,  209

A  hand,  7

Ahi,  33,  236,  283

Ahirbudhnya,  191-,  287

Aja-ekapdd,  287

hand,  7

Ahi,  33,  236,  283

Ahirbudhnya,  191-,  287

Aja-ekapdd,  287

Ajdswa,  57

Angiras,  61,  296 
Angirasas,    20,    33.    41.

207,  257,  296 
Ama,  274 
Ansu,  274 
Ansumati,  35 
Apdmnopdt,  298 
A'pris,  71,  195,  329 
Arbuda,  234,  243 
Arpita,  130 
Aryo,  35,  234 
Aryaman,  53, 70, 1 90, 274 
Asuras,  1,  38 
Asusha,  256 
Aswamedha,  112,  121 
Aswins,2,  100,  102,  176.

178,    181,    183,    185,

192,    286,    305,    309,

314 
Atlthigwa,  34,  244 
A  trey  a,  210 
Atri,  61,  176,  184 
Atyasht'i,  19 
AyavasOf  6

Ayu,  112,  121,  244

Bala,  234,  236,  240,  247 
Bdldchhddaka.  209 
Bhaga,  8,  53,  211,  274 
Bharata,  303 
Bhdratt,    73.    196,    218,

299,  330 
Bhdrafis.  330 
Bhdvayavya,  17 
Bhdvya,  17 
Bhrigu,  22.

,    218,

299,  330 
Bhdrafis.  330 
Bhdvayavya,  17 
Bhdvya,  17 
Bhrigu,  22.  207,  220 
Brahma,  139,  210 
B)-ahman,  209 
Brdhmann,  142 
Brdhmandchchhans{,  209 
Brahynaiiaspati,  210,  262,

267,  271 
Brahmaputra,  317 
Brihaspati,  17,  62,  199,

262.  267.  283

Chumuri,  247

344

INDEX    OF    NAMES.

Dabhtti.  241,  24a.  247

Dadhyanck,  61

Damunas,  332

Dasras,  59

Dasyu,  169.  234.  240

Dawn,  1

Dhuni,  247

DCrghatamas,  63,  67.  75.

77.  78.  SO.  82,  84,  87.

90,92,93,96,98.100.

102,104,106.107,112 
Divoddsa,  34,  256 
DraviAodas,  211,  305 
Dribhika,  243 
Ihiryoni,  168

J5;ar//t,104,106,187.287 
Ekadhandh,  299 
Etasa,  255

Gandhdrins,  18 
C7fln^M,  289 
Garutmat,  143 
Ghatikd,  8 
Ghoshd,  3 
Gotama,  184 
Gross,  201

ln^M,  289 
Garutmat,  143 
Ghatikd,  8 
Ghoshd,  3 
Gotama,  184 
Gross,  201 
Grdvddut,  209 
Gruvdstut,  209 
Gritsamada,    207,     208, 
214.  235,  .«;c.

Heaven,  104,   106,   187, 
287

i/o^ra,  73,  212

^o/ra.  303

^o/ri,  209,  303,  305

//a,  24.  73,  196

//a,  329

//j7a,  72.  217.  212,  218Heaven,  104,   106,   187, 
287

i/o^ra,  73,  212

^o/ra.  303

^o/ri,  209,  303,  305

//a,  24.  73,  196

//a,  329

//j7a,  72.  217.  212,  218

7w(?ra,  2.  27.  31.  36,  39. 
43,  do.  145.  158,  160, 
163,  166,  169,  170, 
171,  172,  191,  230, 
235,  239.  242,  245, 
247,  250,  252,  254. 
257,  259.  260,  284, 
287.  303,  314

Indrdni,  289

IsMarasmi,  5

Ishfdsiva,  5

Jdtavedas,  19,  232,  323,

328,  332,  335 
Jatasht'hira,  241

Kukshivat,  3,  6,  14

Kanwa,  61

Kapinjala,  316,  317

Kavi.  212

Krishfh,  35

Krivi,  251

Kurmma,  273

iTw^sa,    167,    169,    244,

256

shfh,  35

Krivi,  251

Kurmma,  273

iTw^sa,    167,    169,    244,

256 
Kiiyava,  256 
Kuyavdcha,  16S

Lomasd,  1 7 
Lnpannidrd,  1 74

Maghavdn,  39

ilfflAi',  73

Maitrdvaruna,  209

Mamatd,  82

McwM,  24,  61,  293,  332

M«rM/5,  1,  28.  145,  149.

152,    155,    161,    162,

191,  293.  315 
Marutwat,  145 
Masarsdra,  6 
Mdtariswan,  75,  143 
iV/e/-w,  8

Mitra,  3,  6,  28,  52,  55, 
70,  87,  90.  92.  190, 
274,  304,  313,  332

Morning,  1

Mvhurtta,  8

Namuchi,  243 
Narasansa,  72,  217 
Ndsatyas,  178 
Neshtri,  209,  306 
A>/ri,  209 
M^^i-,  1 
Niskka,  17.  292 
A7y?(?5,  46.  153 
Nodhas,  11 
Nrimara,  240

Pc/Va,  3,  18 
jPfl«j5,  269 
Parrt,  8

Paravrij,  242,  246 
Parjanya,  125

INDEX    OF    NAMES.

845

t,  8

Paravrij,  242,  246 
Parjanya,  125

INDEX    OF    NAMES.

845

Parvata,  2,  39,  267

Paruchchhepa,\9.  24,  27. 
31.  36.  39,  43,  45,  48,

52,  55.  5G,  58

Pipru,  243

Pisdchi,  44

PiVw,  192

Po/n,  209,  305

Prasdstri,  209

Prasthdtri,  209

Prastotri,  209

Pratarddana,  207

Pratiharttri,  209

Pratistoiri,  209

Przes^s.  209

Prism',  157,  293

Prhjamedha,  61

Purishin,  130

P«rM,  24

Purukutsa,  167

Piirumtlha,  184

Pj/s^cw,  3,  56,  113,  311

i?aAa,  267 
Rdkshasas,  30 
Jidtahavija,  93 
Raihantara,  135 
i2a/2,  174 
Rauhina,  238 
Ribhukshin,     112,     192,P«rM,  24

Purukutsa,  167

Piirumtlha,  184

Pj/s^cw,  3,  56,  113,  311

i?aAa,  267 
Rdkshasas,  30 
Jidtahavija,  93 
Raihantara,  135 
i2a/2,  174 
Rauhina,  238 
Ribhukshin,     112,     192,

267 
ii;iMM>%  107 
iRi7ti'i>',  209 
iJit-ers,  320

Rodas{,  153 
Rudhikrd,  243 
PMdra,  1,  28,  211.289 
Ri/rfra^.  297

Sadasya,  210 
Sddhyas,  125

243 
PMdra,  1,  28,  211.289 
Ri/rfra^.  297

Sadasya,  210 
Sddhyas,  125 
Sahavasu,  240 
Sambara,   34.  237,  243,

256 
Samiddha,  70 
Sandikas,  284 
Sdraswat,  125 
Sdraswatas,  331 
Sarastvati  73,  125,  143,

196,  283,  315,  330 
Satakratu,  249 
Saunaka,  207 
SariVn.  10.  189,  306 
Serpents,  201 
Smrf/iM,  17,  246 
S?7«'t;a/t',  287 
Som«,  32,47,48,50,55,

203,  231.  283,  311 
Somdhuti,  220.  222,  223, 
225,226,228,230,235 
Siibrahnanya,  209 
Suchi,  74 
Sudhumcan,  108 
Sm«,  201 
Suiiahotra,  207 
Sundaka,  207 
Sundhyu,  1 1 
Swryo,  125

Suryd,  154

SiwAnff,  169,  243,  256 
Swanaya,  14,  17 
Sicasna,  243

Tandnapdt,  70,  195,  329 
Tz'me,  125 
Traitana,  103 
Trikadruka,  233.  245 
TnVfl,  121,193,234.287,

296 
r«^ra.  103.  177,  182

Trikadruka,  233.  245 
TnVfl,  121,193,234.287,

296 
r«^ra.  103.  177,  182 
Turvasu,  160 
rwrrrK/,  242

Twaskt'pi.  73,  108,  191. 
196,  211.  219,  266. 
286,  304,  331

Uchatthya,  63 
L^ff^r?:.  209 
Umas,  335 
Unnetri,  210 
Upagdtri,  210 
Urana,  243 
L/'srtas,  e.  10 
Ky.  2

F«c^,  125 
Fa/^nJ.  332

Vaiswdnara,  323,  327 
r«>,  109

Vana.pati,  73,  196,  218. 
331

S4G

INDEX    OF   NAMES.

Varchin.  244

Vayya,  242

Vitihavya.  207

Varvna.  3,  6,  8,

27

.52,

Veda,  140

Vritra,  167,  193,  243

55.    70,   87.

90

92.

Vibhwa,  109

190,   274.    2: 
308,  313

•8,

285,

Viswadevas,   1,  58,  125, 
189,  281

Watei',  201

Varvndni,  289

Vihcdmitra,    318,    323,

Vasarhan,  2

327,  329,  332,  334

r«£fu,  168

cdmitra,    318,    323,

Vasarhan,  2

327,  329,  332,  334

r«£fu,  168

Vasativan,  299Varvndni,  289

Vihcdmitra,    318,    323,

Vasarhan,  2

327,  329,  332,  334

r«£fu,  168

cdmitra,    318,    323,

Vasarhan,  2

327,  329,  332,  334

r«£fu,  168

Vasativan,  299

Viswanipa,  234

ra?na,  122

F(WMS,  122

FM«tt,  93,  96.  98,  139,

Yojana,  8

Fayw,  45.  48,  192,

313

192

Fm^o,  1-04

DATE  DUE

.,.^'^"''"

^innn-

m

GAYLORD

PRINTED  IN  US    A.

I  <sir«  ""ii

-.-  .J

<<

Mi-  ■'

''  ■■     -  .  ■,

'*''.•'    ,:■  -•  ■>  --..-."

*     '             '

*■                 '

p>  ',  t'^IJIl^

rti*  •'  •

*lS?i^Afl!ll

■^

.-;4-

rV.'-"'-

BL1H5.A3W74V.2

Rig-veda  Sanhita  :  a  collection  of

Princeton  Theological  Semmary-Speer  Library

1    1012  00163  0989

[Source: test.txt]
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45908 ***

PEGGY RAYMOND'S WAY

_Or_

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45908 ***

PEGGY RAYMOND'S WAY

_Or_

BLOSSOM TIME AT FRIENDLY TERRACE

_The Friendly Terrace Series_

BY

HARRIET LUMMIS SMITH

[Illustration]

_The Girls of Friendly Terrace_    $1.65
    _Peggy Raymond's Vacation_          1.65
    _Peggy Raymond's School Days_       1.65
    _The Friendly Terrace Quartette_    1.65
    _Peggy Raymond's Way_               1.75

[Illustration]

THE PAGE COMPANY
    53 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass.

[Illustration: PEGGY RAYMOND]

_The Friendly Terrace Series_

PEGGY RAYMOND'S WAY

Or, Blossom Time at Friendly Terrace

BY
    HARRIET LUMMIS SMITH
    Author of "The Girls of Friendly Terrace,"
    "Peggy Raymond's Vacation," "Peggy
    Raymond's School Days," "The

errace,"
    "Peggy Raymond's Vacation," "Peggy
    Raymond's School Days," "The
    Friendly Terrace Quartette,"
    etc.

ILLUSTRATED BY
    FRANK T. MERRILL

[Illustration]

BOSTON [Illustration] THE PAGE
    COMPANY [Illustration] MDCCCCXXII

_Copyright, 1922_,
    BY THE PAGE COMPANY

_All rights reserved_

Made in U. S. A.

First Impression, August, 1922

PRINTED BY C. H. SIMONDS COMPANY
    BOSTON, MASS., U. S. A.

CONTENTS_Copyright, 1922_,
    BY THE PAGE COMPANY

_All rights reserved_

Made in U. S. A.

First Impression, August, 1922

PRINTED BY C. H. SIMONDS COMPANY
    BOSTON, MASS., U. S. A.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                        PAGE
        I WHAT'S IN A NAME?                           1
       II A TELEPHONE PARTY                          22
      III A TRIUMPH OF ART                           39
       IV AN AFTERNOON CALL                          59

39
       IV AN AFTERNOON CALL                          59
        V THE RUMMAGE SALE                           69
       VI PRISCILLA HAS A SECRET                     85
      VII THE FRIENDLY TERRACE ORPHANAGE             98
     VIII THE LONGEST WEEK ON RECORD                113
       IX THE MOST WONDERFUL THING IN THE WORLD     129
        X MISTRESS AND MAID                         143
       XI QUITE INFORMAL                            156
      XII GOOD-BY                                   169
     XIII PEGGY GIVES A DINNER PARTY                186
      XIV AT THE FOOT-BALL GAME                     201
       XV THE CURE                                  215
      XVI DELIVERANCE                               230

HE CURE                                  215
      XVI DELIVERANCE                               230
     XVII PEGGY COMES TO A DECISION                 241
    XVIII A PARTIAL ECLIPSE                         252
      XIX THE END OF SCHOOL LIFE                    268
       XX A SURPRISE                                284
      XXI A MISSING BRIDE                           296
     XXII A JULY WEDDING                            313

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE
  PEGGY RAYMOND                                          _Frontispiece_
  "'COME RIGHT IN,' SAID AMY WITH A MISLEADING AIR OF CORDIALITY"    9
  "'A HUNDRED DOLLARS AIN'T ANY TOO MUCH TO PAY FOR HAVING YOURORDIALITY"    9
  "'A HUNDRED DOLLARS AIN'T ANY TOO MUCH TO PAY FOR HAVING YOUR
        LIFE SAVED'"                                               127
  "SHE RAISED HER EYES AND MET HIS"                                184
  "PEGGY LOOKED AT HIM WITHOUT REPLYING"                           247

Peggy Raymond's Way

CHAPTER I

WHAT'S IN A NAME?

IT was the first day of the spring vacation, and Amy Lassell had
spent it sewing. To be frank, it had not measured up to her idea
of a holiday. Self-indulgence was Amy's besetting weakness. Her
dearest friend, Peggy Raymond, was never happy unless she was busy at
something, but Amy loved the luxury of idleness.

Yet although indolence appealed so strongly to Amy's temperament, to

idleness.

Yet although indolence appealed so strongly to Amy's temperament, to
do her justice she was generally able to turn a deaf ear to its call.
The first summer after America's entry into the war she had enlisted in
the Land Army along with Peggy and Priscilla, and then in the fall had
taken up her work at the local Red Cross headquarters, serving in an
unpaid position as conscientiously as if she had received a salary and
was depending on it for her bread and butter.

After a strenuous year with the Red Cross, Amy had entered college with
Ruth Wylie. Neither girl had expected to enter till after the close of
the war, and Amy was continually harping upon the respect which the
young and unsophisticated Freshmen were bound to feel for classmates of
such advanced years.sophisticated Freshmen were bound to feel for classmates of
such advanced years. But Nelson Hallowell's discharge from the service
had altered the aspect of affairs. Ruth had pledged herself to keep
Nelson's position for him till he should return, and Amy had promised
to wait for Ruth. The wound which had kept Nelson in the hospital less
than a month had nevertheless incapacitated him from military service.
Heavy-hearted, he had returned to his job at the book store, while Ruth
and Amy had immediately made their plans for entering college just two
years behind Peggy and Priscilla.

After her months of hard study, the first day of the spring vacation
found Amy at the sewing machine, which in itself was sufficient proof
that, whatever her natural bias in the direction of indolence, her

icient proof
that, whatever her natural bias in the direction of indolence, her
will was more than a match for that tendency. As a matter of fact she
was the only one of the Friendly Terrace quartette to spend the day
in unremitting industry. Peggy and Ruth had gone off with Graham for
the day. Priscilla was entertaining an out-of-town guest. But Amy,
resolution manifest in every line of her plump little figure, was
sewing for dear life.

Though the armistice had been signed months before, there still
remained foes to fight, as the girls had promptly discovered. The
reaction from economy and hard work had come in the shape of an orgy
of extravagance and frivolity. The high war prices were continually
going higher, as dealers realized that people would get what they

e continually
going higher, as dealers realized that people would get what they
wanted regardless of price. The four Friendly Terrace girls, after
an afternoon of shopping which had ended in the purchase of a box of
hair-pins and two spools of thread, had returned home to hold a council
of war."The only way to bring prices down is to stop buying things," declared
Peggy, with all the authority of a college Junior. "I don't know as
I have anything to make over, but if I have, nothing new for me this
spring."

Amy sighed. "I'd just been luxuriating in the thought of a lot of new
dresses," she said mournfully. "Don't you know how after you've been
dieting, all at once you're hungry for creamed chicken and pineapple
fritters, and chocolate with whipped cream, and strawberry sundaes, all

neapple
fritters, and chocolate with whipped cream, and strawberry sundaes, all
rolled into one. And that's just the way I feel about clothes. But I
suppose it will end in my making over my blue taffeta."

"I've two or three summer dresses that will do very well if I make the
skirts scanty," said Ruth. "They're too full for this season."

They talked on seriously, planning their little economies as if they
expected unaided to bring down the high cost of living. They were
not the sort of girls who follow the crowd unthinkingly, nor had any
of them contracted the fatal habit of asking, "What can one do?" The
program they outlined would have resulted in a general lowering of
prices in a month's time if every one had agreed to it. And it did not

ering of
prices in a month's time if every one had agreed to it. And it did not
occur to them that public indifference excused them from doing their
little part toward combating a serious evil.

That was how it happened that Amy Lassell had spent the spring day
sewing. The blue taffeta had been ripped and pressed in anticipation
of the vacation leisure, and as soon as the breakfast dishes were out
of the way Amy had commandeered the dining-room table as a cutting
table. With the help of a paper pattern she had remodeled the taffeta
according to the latest dictates of fashion. Caution suggested that
it would be advisable to wait for assistance in the fitting, but
having basted the breadths together and surveyed her reflection in theing, but
having basted the breadths together and surveyed her reflection in the
mirror, Amy had been so favorably impressed that she had gone to work
energetically stitching up seams.

Like many people whose natural tendency is in the direction of
indolence, Amy was capable of relentless industry, almost as though she
were afraid that if once she halted she might not get her courage to
the point of starting again. She swallowed a hasty luncheon and rushed
back to her sewing. Her eyes grew tired, her back ached. She became
nervous and hot and impatient, so that breaking a thread or dropping a
thimble seemed almost a calamity. And yet she did not stop.

It was after five when she laid her work reluctantly aside. Amy's
responsibilities for the day were not limited to the blue taffeta. As

de. Amy's
responsibilities for the day were not limited to the blue taffeta. As
in many another household, the domestic service problem had become
acute in the Lassell establishment during the last few years. Incapable
servants demanding preposterous wages, had been replaced by others
equally incompetent, and there had been interims when it had been
difficult to secure so much as a laundress. Amy and her mother had
learned a good many short cuts to achievement, and had accepted the
frequent necessity of doing their own work with a philosophy of which
they would have been incapable in pre-war times. On this first day of
vacation Amy was without a servant, and without a mother, as well;
for Mrs. Lassell had left home that morning not to return till nearly
bed-time.

or Mrs. Lassell had left home that morning not to return till nearly
bed-time.or Mrs. Lassell had left home that morning not to return till nearly
bed-time.

At five o'clock the realization that she must prepare her father's
supper forced itself on Amy's attention. It was not a formidable
responsibility, for at breakfast that morning Mr. Lassell had informed
her that he was to take a customer out to lunch and would be satisfied
with very little for the evening meal. Amy meant to take him at his
word. There was cold meat, quite enough for two, she thought; and
some potatoes to fry, and her father did not care much for dessert.
Accordingly, Amy had waited till five o'clock before she laid down her
sewing, and then she realized for the first time how very tired she
was. A glimpse of herself in the mirror emphasized her certainty that
it was high time to stop.

of herself in the mirror emphasized her certainty that
it was high time to stop. Amy's fair hair was disheveled, her plump
cheeks brilliantly pink. There were dark lines under her eyes, eloquent
of weariness. Amy regarded herself with extreme disfavor.

"Looks as if I'd taken up rouge in my old age. And I positively must
do my hair over. I can't ask even poor patient daddy to look at such
a frowsy head all through supper. O, well, he won't mind, if I am a
little late."

Encouraging herself with this reflection, Amy bathed her burning
cheeks, combed her hair hastily, and slipped into a little gingham
gown which, if somewhat faded and passée, had at least the merit of
being fresh and clean. It buttoned in the back, and by virtue of much

merit of
being fresh and clean. It buttoned in the back, and by virtue of much
twisting and stretching Amy finally succeeded in securing the middle
button which for a time had defied her efforts. And just as she did so,
the door-bell rang.

[Illustration: "'COME RIGHT IN,' SAID AMY WITH A MISLEADING AIR OF
CORDIALITY"][Illustration: "'COME RIGHT IN,' SAID AMY WITH A MISLEADING AIR OF
CORDIALITY"]

Amy went placidly downstairs. She had no apprehensions about the
door-bell. She took it for granted that it was somebody to collect for
the newspaper, or an old-clothes man, or else a friend so intimate
that she could ask her into the kitchen while she made her supper
preparations. As she reached the door she realized her mistake. Of
the two young people waiting admission she had met the sister several
times. The brother she knew merely by sight, for the family had moved

er several
times. The brother she knew merely by sight, for the family had moved
into the neighborhood only recently.

For a moment Amy's mood was one of unqualified dismay. She wanted to
turn and run. With lightning-like rapidity she compared her faded
gingham with the stylish frock setting off the girlish, graceful figure
of Hildegarde Carey. And Hildegarde's brother, Robert, if looking a
trifle bored, was immaculately attired. Amy recollected that in her
absorption with the blue taffeta she had neglected to dust the living
room that morning.

Amy opened the door with a smile that poorly concealed her anguish of
spirit. Her flickering hope that Hildegarde had made a mistake in the
number was dissipated by the composure of Hildegarde's greeting. The

ake in the
number was dissipated by the composure of Hildegarde's greeting. The
two young people entered, as Amy realized, without waiting to be asked,
and in the hall Hildegarde performed the ceremony of introduction.

"Come right in," said Amy with a misleading air of cordiality. She
wondered if she had better apologize for the undusted living room, but
decided against it. Perhaps they would overlook it, though Robert Carey
impressed her as one who would notice the least little thing out of
the way. Amy decided that the young fellow's handsome face was almost
spoiled by its discontented expression.Another shock came when she said to Hildegarde, "Let me take your
coat." She expected Hildegarde to reply that the coat was light and

e take your
coat." She expected Hildegarde to reply that the coat was light and
that she did not mind it for the few minutes she had to stay; but on
the contrary she not only removed her coat, but slipped off her gloves,
unpinned her hat, and added it to the collection Amy carried into the
hall with a growing sense of stupefaction. "Any one would think," she
told herself, "that she was an old friend come to spend the day."

Perhaps Amy's perplexity partly explained the fact that the next half
hour dragged. Amy was not her usual entertaining self. She thought
of the dust showing gray against the shining mahogany of the piano.
She thought of her faded gingham. She heard herself talking stupidly,
unnaturally, and chiefly about the weather. Robert Carey looked more
bored than ever.

ally, and chiefly about the weather. Robert Carey looked more
bored than ever.

At half past six her father came in. He glanced at the group in the
living room as he entered, and Amy hastily summoned him. Her guests
must realize that when the man of the house came home it was time to
leave. Amy introduced her father, pulled out an arm chair invitingly,
and Mr. Lassell seated himself. It was from him that his daughter had
inherited her sense of humor, and on this occasion he made himself
much more entertaining than Amy had done. The conversation became
almost animated.

The clock in the hall struck seven, tolling out the notes sonorously.
Every one seemed to be listening to it, and Amy flushed. It was almost
as if the clock had said, "Time to go home! Time to go home!" And then

s almost
as if the clock had said, "Time to go home! Time to go home!" And then
to her horror her father turned toward her inquiringly. "Hadn't you
better put on the supper, my dear?" he asked. "Your friends will be
getting hungry."For an agonized half minute Amy vainly tried to think of something she
could say to soften the blow. She was magnanimous enough to acquit
her father of all blame. Seeing them sitting there at that hour,
especially as Hildegarde had taken off her hat, he had innocently
assumed that they had been invited to dinner. And of course his blunder
was equivalent to saying that they had stayed longer than was proper or
desirable.

Then Amy's head whirled again. Her guests did not spring to their feet
as she had expected them to do, protesting that they had not dreamed

their feet
as she had expected them to do, protesting that they had not dreamed
it was so late. Instead they sat quite still, only murmuring a polite
disclaimer of being hungry. With the force of a blow the realization
came over Amy that they had accepted her father's tacit invitation.
They were going to stay to supper.

Amy rose, murmuring something unintelligible, and got out of the
room quickly. O, if Peggy were only home, Peggy who had such a
faculty for evolving something savory and appetizing from the least
promising materials. Amy's cooking until recently had been confined
to chafing-dish delicacies and candy. It was too late, she realized,
to add to her scanty stores. She must feed four people with what had
seemed barely enough for two, and must do it quickly.

our people with what had
seemed barely enough for two, and must do it quickly.our people with what had
seemed barely enough for two, and must do it quickly.

Mechanically she lighted the oven of the gas stove. She remembered
there was a can of tomato soup in the house, and the cold meat, sliced
very thin, might possibly pass muster. She herself would refuse meat.
Luckily there was a generous plateful of potatoes. Creamed and with a
little cheese grated over them, they would be appetizing--and filling.
She could make baking powder biscuit,--Amy excelled in baking powder
biscuit--and there was honey to eat with them. For dessert she would
fall back on preserved peaches and some left-over fruit cake. It was a
queer, hit-or-miss meal, not a company repast in any sense of the word,
but the best she could do under the circumstances.

t in any sense of the word,
but the best she could do under the circumstances.

It was while the biscuits were browning in the oven, and Amy was
hastily setting the table for four, that her native common-sense
re-asserted itself. "After all," her thoughts ran, "if people take pot
luck, they can't expect to find things just as they would be if they
were especially invited. They've seemed real friendly and if they like
me well enough to stay to a pick-up supper, the first time they've ever
set foot in my home, I ought to meet them half way. I can't give them
much to eat, but I don't need to be quite as stupid as I've been for
the last hour."

And so it came about that when the guests were summoned to the dining
room, they encountered a very different hostess from the one who hadAnd so it came about that when the guests were summoned to the dining
room, they encountered a very different hostess from the one who had

the dining
room, they encountered a very different hostess from the one who had
entertained them previously, a hostess who twinkled and sparkled and
kept them laughing. It seemed to Amy that, when she had removed the
soup plates and brought in the sliced meat and creamed potatoes, she
had seen an expression of astonishment flicker across Hildegarde's
face, but she resolutely put the thought aside and continued to make
herself agreeable. The baking-powder biscuits had risen nobly to the
occasion. Amy thought them the best she had ever made. And she saw with
relief that the bored expression had disappeared from Robert Carey's
face, and that he really seemed to be enjoying himself.

Then suddenly into the midst of all this gaiety, Hildegarde dropped a
bomb in the shape of a question.

midst of all this gaiety, Hildegarde dropped a
bomb in the shape of a question. "What happened to detain Isabel?"

"Isabel?"

"Yes, Isabel Vincent, you know."

"I'm afraid," Amy hesitated, "that I don't know any one of that name."

Apparently the meal had come to a full stop. "Why," Hildegarde cried,
"the Isabel Vincent who attended the Pelham school when I was there."

She was so insistent that Amy unconsciously became apologetic. "I'm
sorry but I can't say I remember such a girl. Did she ever say she had
met me?"

"Why," Hildegarde almost screamed, "didn't you ask us here to-night to
meet her?"

"To meet Isabel Vincent! Why, I never heard of her."

"There's some mistake," exclaimed Robert. He had just helped himself to
a fifth baking-powder biscuit, but he laid it down unbuttered.

helped himself to
a fifth baking-powder biscuit, but he laid it down unbuttered. "You've
made some mistake," he informed his sister.

Hildegarde ignored him and addressed herself to Amy. "Didn't you
telephone me this morning?"

"I--why, to tell the truth, no I didn't."Hildegarde ignored him and addressed herself to Amy. "Didn't you
telephone me this morning?"

"I--why, to tell the truth, no I didn't."

"Then it was a disgusting practical joke. Some one called me up about
eleven o'clock and said she was Amy Lassell, and that Isabel Vincent
was to stop here twenty-four hours on her way to New York from her home
in Chicago. And then she invited Bob and me to dinner to meet Isabel.
There wasn't anything in her manner to give me an idea it was a hoax."

But Amy had found the clew. "O, did Isabel come from Chicago?" she
cried. "Then I know. It was Avery Zall who telephoned you."

"But I don't know her."

. "Then I know. It was Avery Zall who telephoned you."

"But I don't know her."

"She went away to boarding school--yes, it was the Pelham school, I'm
sure. And I know she has a friend from Chicago visiting her. Probably
the Vincent girl spoke of knowing you, and Avery called you up. O,
dear!" groaned Amy with a sudden change of countenance.

"What's the matter?" demanded Bob Carey, still ignoring his biscuit.

"I've cheated you out of a regular feast. The Zalls have a wonderful
cook. You'd have had broiled chicken and fresh mushrooms and I don't
know what beside, and I've given you cold meat and--"

"You've given us the best biscuits I ever ate," said Bob, and buttered
his fifth, but his sister had turned pale.

"I don't believe any one ever did such a dreadful thing before. Here we

pale.

"I don't believe any one ever did such a dreadful thing before. Here we
descended on you without warning and simply forced you to invite us to
stay--"

"Happy escape, I think," said Bob. "If there's anything I hate, it's
these social stunts Hildegarde's crazy about."

"The only dreadful part," said Amy, reassuring the distressed
Hildegarde, "is that you've exchanged a perfectly gorgeous dinner for a
pick-up supper."

"But what must Miss--Miss Zall think of me?""The only dreadful part," said Amy, reassuring the distressed
Hildegarde, "is that you've exchanged a perfectly gorgeous dinner for a
pick-up supper."

"But what must Miss--Miss Zall think of me?"

"She must know there's some mistake. Probably they're not waiting
dinner any longer, for it's after eight o'clock."

"O," groaned Hildegarde, "I never was so mortified. What am I going to
do?"

"It seems to me you'd better finish your supper, such as it is,"
suggested Amy.

"It seems to me you'd better finish your supper, such as it is,"
suggested Amy. "And then you can call up Avery Zall and explain your
mistake. She'll see that the names sound alike over the phone. And
after that there'll be plenty of time to see your friends."

"Seems to me," suggested Bob, "that as long as we've started the
evening here, we might as well put it through."

His eyes met Amy's with a twinkle that was like a spark to tinder. Amy
struggled for a moment, then gave way to peals of laughter.

"O," she gasped, when at length she could find her voice, "What must
you have thought of me, inviting you to dinner and then coming down in
this old, faded gingham."

"And what must you have thought of _me_," Hildegarde cried, "coming at
such an hour and calmly taking off my hat."

_me_," Hildegarde cried, "coming at
such an hour and calmly taking off my hat."

"The dust was thick over everything," giggled Amy. "I've been sewing
every minute all day long, and I warned father to expect a light meal."

"I should have known I had made a mistake," Hildegarde lamented, "when
you never said a word about Isabel. I don't know how I could have been
so ridiculously stupid."

But for all her dismay, she laughed. Indeed if laughter aids digestion,
there was little danger that Amy's biscuits would disagree with any
one, even Robert, who had dispatched such an extravagant number.While Amy cleared the table and brought in the dessert, Hildegarde went
to the phone and explained matters to a young woman whose preliminary
stiffness melted as Hildegarde reviewed the situation.

ng woman whose preliminary
stiffness melted as Hildegarde reviewed the situation. And then
Hildegarde hurried back to inform her brother that they must go over
as soon as he had finished. "She was as sweet as she could be, but she
said they had waited dinner an hour."

"So it's up to you to 'gobble and git,'" quoted Amy, dishing out the
preserves with a lavish hand.

"I'm not going to be hurried over that fruit cake," declared Bob. "It
carries me back to the merry Christmas time."

"It ought to, for it's a Christmas cake, but it's been kept in a tin
box with an apple and I hope it isn't dry. It was all I had in the cake
line." Amy paused to laugh again. "I really must stop," she exclaimed,
wiping her moist eyes. "They say that laughing at meal-time makes one

xclaimed,
wiping her moist eyes. "They say that laughing at meal-time makes one
fat, and I don't dare risk another pound."

"Can't have too much of a good thing," declared Bob Carey with a
significant glance at the flushed face. Strictly speaking, Amy was
perhaps the least pretty of the four Friendly Terrace girls; but good
humor has a charm, and a face radiant with fun can hold its own
against discontented beauty any day. There was such frank admiration in
the look the young man bent upon her, that Amy's cheeks grew hot with
an unwonted self-consciousness.

The brother and sister left with evident reluctance. "Now we've had
dinner with you," said Hildegarde, "you must dine with us very soon."

"Oh, this doesn't deserve to be counted," Amy laughed. "I'll ask you

ry soon."

"Oh, this doesn't deserve to be counted," Amy laughed. "I'll ask you
again some day and show you what I can do if I really try."ry soon."

"Oh, this doesn't deserve to be counted," Amy laughed. "I'll ask you
again some day and show you what I can do if I really try."

"No, don't," pleaded Bob. "Have us again when you're going to have
biscuit. It's so much jollier to be informal than to work the society
racket." And then Hildegarde carried him off, protesting that, if they
didn't hurry, Avery Zall would not believe a word of her excuse.

Amy found her father clearing the table. She put on her long apron and
joined him, chattering excitedly as she worked.

"No full garbage can to-night, Daddy. Every dish is scraped clean. I
suppose I ought to feel crushed over setting such a meal before people
I hardly knew, but somehow I don't."

Her father smiling, responsive to her high spirits, shook his head.

I don't."

Her father smiling, responsive to her high spirits, shook his head.

"It isn't much to set good food before folks, Amy. Any waiter in a
restaurant can do that. Give people the best of yourself and you don't
need to worry about your bill of fare."

CHAPTER II

A TELEPHONE PARTY

HOWEVER much the rest of the year may drag, the spring vacation always
ignores the speed limit. What with dress-making and shopping, and going
over one's bureau drawers and closets in anticipation of the spring
cleaning, and trying to do the things one has been postponing till this
week of leisure, and taking advantage of all the pleasures that start
up like mushrooms, twenty-four hours in a day are all too few. When
Priscilla dropped in on Peggy to suggest going out into the country

o few. When
Priscilla dropped in on Peggy to suggest going out into the country
for wild flowers, the Monday afternoon that closed the holiday season,
Peggy hesitated.

"I'd love it. I don't feel that spring is really here until I have
picked a few violets and spring beauties. But I was thinking of going
to see Mary Donaldson."

"Why, is anything the matter?" Priscilla asked."Why, is anything the matter?" Priscilla asked.

Peggy stared, "Matter! You know that since that attack of inflammatory
rheumatism she hasn't walked--"

"But I meant anything new."

"O, there's nothing _new_, not as far as I know. I haven't been in to
see Mary since--O, dear, I'm afraid it's been an age."

"I only meant," explained Priscilla reasonably, "that if Mary's no
worse off than she has been for the last year and a half, there's no

Mary's no
worse off than she has been for the last year and a half, there's no
especial point in taking to-day to go to see her. You could go any
afternoon."

"I could," owned Peggy with a significant inflection.

"And it's such a perfect day to go after wild flowers."

Peggy looked from the window. The blue sky seemed to smile an
invitation. Priscilla's argument all at once appeared unanswerable.

"Yes, isn't it lovely!" Peggy drew a long breath. "Too lovely to stay
indoors. I'll go to see Mary some stormy afternoon when she needs
cheering up."

And now that her decision was made, the thought of Mary Donaldson
passed completely from Peggy's mind. She had never been particularly
intimate with this class-mate, and had it not been for Mary's illness

rticularly
intimate with this class-mate, and had it not been for Mary's illness
it is unlikely that the two girls would have seen much of each other
after high school days. But the winter of Peggy's Freshman year, an
attack of rheumatism had left Mary seriously crippled. Though now
she was able to be dressed and to hobble from her bed to a chair by
the window, getting downstairs was too difficult a process to be
considered, except on very especial occasions. With all the yearnings
for life and joy that characterize the normal girl, Mary was condemned
to vibrate between her bed and chair.

It was not strange that with all her sympathy Peggy had found it
difficult to see much of her invalid friend. The demands made by theIt was not strange that with all her sympathy Peggy had found it
difficult to see much of her invalid friend. The demands made by the

d found it
difficult to see much of her invalid friend. The demands made by the
war upon the scanty leisure of a college student left her little time
she could call her own. She had worked making surgical dressings under
the Red Cross, and had given much time to collecting and mending worn
garments for the destitute children of Belgium and France. She had
subscribed for a bond in each of the Government loans, and to pay
for these with her own earnings had required hard work and careful
financing. On the whole, though Peggy was sorry not to have seen more
of Mary Donaldson, her conscience acquitted her of neglect.

The season was advanced and the girls had no difficulty in filling
their baskets with the early arrivals among the wild flowers, and

ty in filling
their baskets with the early arrivals among the wild flowers, and
as their baskets filled, they feasted their eyes on the myriad
indeterminate shades of a spring landscape, and drank in the
exhilarating odors of damp earth, warmed by the April sun. When Peggy's
wrist-watch warned them it was time to start for home, they went
reluctantly, with an unreasonable feeling that in returning to town
they were leaving the spring behind them.

At their transfer point a sign in a drug store window caught Amy's eye.
"Ice cream soda with fresh fruit," she read impressively. "I wondered
what it was I wanted. I've lost a pound and a half since vacation
began, so I dare to risk one."

"I haven't been buying sodas, because I needed the money for something
else," said Peggy.

t been buying sodas, because I needed the money for something
else," said Peggy. "But this is the last day of vacation and I believe
I'll celebrate."t been buying sodas, because I needed the money for something
else," said Peggy. "But this is the last day of vacation and I believe
I'll celebrate."

They filed in and gave their orders. Peggy had just taken the first sip
of a ravishing concoction, whose formula would have given a dyspeptic
heart-failure, when at the opposite counter she spied a stout,
middle-aged woman who was regarding her with savage intentness. Her
features were familiar, in spite of a look of hostility Peggy was not
accustomed to see on the faces that looked in her direction.

For some minutes Peggy was frankly puzzled. Not till she was finishing
her soda did she remember where she had seen that heavy, lowering face
before. But with the recollection, she slipped from her stool and

lowering face
before. But with the recollection, she slipped from her stool and
crossed to the opposite side of the room.

"I've been trying to think where I've seen you before, but now I
remember. You're the Miss Potts who takes care of Mary Donaldson,
aren't you?"

Rather ungraciously Miss Potts admitted her identity. She was not
a trained nurse, for in Mary's case skilled hands were no longer
necessary. Miss Potts was big and strong and kind of heart, though
at the moment her expression was far from suggesting the latter
characteristic. A little puzzled by the woman's manner, Peggy
continued, "I've been wanting to see Mary for ever so long. How is she?"

"Well, she ain't doing very well, and no wonder. Old folks get kind of

s she?"

"Well, she ain't doing very well, and no wonder. Old folks get kind of
used to the way things are in this world, and it doesn't surprise 'em
none to be forgotten. But it's sort of hard on the young."

Peggy flushed hotly. She realized that Miss Potts' disagreeable manner
was a deliberate expression of resentment. "I'm sorry that I haven't
been able to see more of Mary this last year," she said with gentle
dignity, "but I've been very busy, and it's such a long way over here.""I s'pose it's a long way to your telephone, too."

"Telephone!" Peggy repeated. She looked at Miss Potts so blankly that
Mary's caretaker had no alternative but to explain.

"Her pa had it put in for a surprise. It's right beside her bed, and

explain.

"Her pa had it put in for a surprise. It's right beside her bed, and
the little thing it stands on moves 'round, so she can talk without
any trouble. He thought it would be a comfort to her, for she could
chat with all her friends, and sort of keep up with things."

"Why, yes," said Peggy, feeling uncomfortable. "I should think she'd
get lots of fun out of it." She was remembering that Mary had called
her up--it was weeks or months, or was it fully a year before--to
tell her about the new telephone. There had been an eagerness in
Mary's voice that she remembered vividly. Peggy had agreed that it was
"splendid," without realizing just what this link with the outside
world would mean to a girl shut out from so much.

Miss Potts indulged in an unmusical laugh.

mean to a girl shut out from so much.

Miss Potts indulged in an unmusical laugh. "Oh, yes," she said. "She
gets lots of fun. Every now and then she gets a call. There's so many
new girls on the telephone exchanges nowadays, that they're bound to
give her number every little while. And then she tells 'em it's the
wrong number and rings off."

Peggy's face was a study. "Do you mean that she--that no one--"

The aggressiveness suddenly disappeared from Miss Potts' manner. Her
eyes filled with tears.

"It's the heart-breakingest thing I ever want to see," she cried. "She
was so hopeful at first. As soon as that telephone was put in, she
called up everybody she knew, to tell 'em about it. And then she'd lie
there smiling, watching that phone, as if it was something out of a

n she'd lie
there smiling, watching that phone, as if it was something out of a
fairy book and was going to bring her all kinds of happiness."n she'd lie
there smiling, watching that phone, as if it was something out of a
fairy book and was going to bring her all kinds of happiness."

Peggy's imagination was a vivid one. As Miss Potts spoke, she could
almost see Mary's smiling, expectant face. A pang of sympathy stabbed
her tender heart.

"The very first time that telephone rang it was somebody that wanted
the butcher; and the second time, a girl, who was coming over to spend
the afternoon with her, rang up to say her aunt was in town and she
was going to the matinée instead. I don't think Mary ever felt the
same about her phone after that start-out. When it rang, she looked
kind of scared, as if she was afraid she was going to hear something
disappointing."

"But surely," Peggy exclaimed, "she must have lots of calls from her

ointing."

"But surely," Peggy exclaimed, "she must have lots of calls from her
friends. I--why, I know I haven't called very often, but that was
because I was always hoping to get time to go over to see her." There
was such genuine distress in her voice that Miss Potts was visibly
melted.

"It's a busy world," she said, "for young folks and old folks, too, and
I guess on the whole it's lucky it is so easy for us to forget. But all
the same," she ended, with a shake of her head, "it's pretty hard on
the ones who get forgotten."

The clerk brought out the prescription for which Miss Potts had been
waiting, and Peggy rejoined her friends. For a moment she considered
sending her flowers to Mary, but a fear that to Miss Potts this might

onsidered
sending her flowers to Mary, but a fear that to Miss Potts this might
seem an effort to evade a more exacting expression of sympathy led
her to relinquish her purpose. Her crest-fallen manner revealed that
something was wrong, and as they left the drug store her friends
resentfully demanded an explanation.

"Peggy, what was that woman saying to you?" Priscilla was bristling
like a mother hen who sees one of her brood attacked."Peggy, what was that woman saying to you?" Priscilla was bristling
like a mother hen who sees one of her brood attacked.

In a few words Peggy explained. Her three listeners exchanged
conscience-stricken glances.

"It seems rather mean that you should be the one to be scolded," said
Amy, "when you have gone to see Mary oftener than all the three of us
together."

"That isn't saying much," Peggy stated gloomily. "I haven't been near
her for months."

n't saying much," Peggy stated gloomily. "I haven't been near
her for months."

"But you haven't had time," cried Ruth, slipping her hand through her
friend's arm.

"No, I think I really haven't," Peggy said frankly. "But I certainly
have had time to go to the telephone." Then suddenly her face
brightened. "I know what we'll do, girls; we'll give her a telephone
party."

"A telephone party," Amy repeated. "What do you mean by that?" The
car for which they were waiting came along before Peggy could answer,
and she finished her explanation hanging to a strap, while her three
companions, similarly supported and swaying violently with each jerk of
the car, listened absorbedly.

"College opens to-morrow, and the first day is never so very busy, so
we'll call Mary up every hour.

rrow, and the first day is never so very busy, so
we'll call Mary up every hour. My hour will be between nine and ten.
Priscilla, you take the hour between ten and eleven; and Amy, you can
have the next one. I think we'd better omit the hour between twelve and
one, for she'll probably be eating luncheon then. Ruth, you may call
between one and two."

"But you said every hour, Peggy. Don't you think it would be rather
over-doing it to call twice in one day?"

"I'm going to get hold of some of the other girls who were in Mary's
class in high school, Elinor Hewitt, and Anna Joyce, and Blanche
Eastabrook--"

"She's in New York.""I'm going to get hold of some of the other girls who were in Mary's
class in high school, Elinor Hewitt, and Anna Joyce, and Blanche
Eastabrook--"

"She's in New York."

"Well, Marian O'Neil isn't. And I'll see Aimee Dubois at college and
tell her about it. Mary's telephone is going to work overtime to make

llege and
tell her about it. Mary's telephone is going to work overtime to make
up for its long idleness."

"What I don't understand," said Priscilla, "is if Mary was so lonely,
why didn't she call us up?"

"I can understand that easy enough," replied Peggy. "She called us up
to tell us she had a phone, and after that, it was our move."

"And I suppose," suggested Amy, "that there isn't a great deal to talk
about, when you don't get out of an upstairs room from one month to
another."

"I suppose not," Priscilla acknowledged. Everything considered, it
was a rather crest-fallen quartette of girls who returned from their
afternoon's outing.

It was just half past nine next day when Mary Donaldson's telephone
rang. "I'm not too early, am I?" said a cheery voice.

ry Donaldson's telephone
rang. "I'm not too early, am I?" said a cheery voice.

Mary, who had taken up the receiver with the air of uncertainty to
which Miss Potts had referred, uttered a joyful exclamation. "Why, it's
Peggy Raymond!"

"Yes, it's Peggy. I wanted to tell you about something perfectly
killing that happened to Amy the other day." Peggy had made up her mind
to ignore the months of silence. Explanations would not help matters,
for nothing could explain away the fact that in the whirl and rush of
their over-full lives they had, for the time being, quite forgotten
Mary.

The story of Amy's impromptu dinner party proved as entertaining as
Peggy had anticipated. Mary Donaldson laughed as she had not laughed
for months. And in the next room Miss Potts, listening, made strangeot laughed
for months. And in the next room Miss Potts, listening, made strange
grimaces that seemed only distantly related to smiles. When the story
was finished, Mary had some questions to ask. "Who are the Careys?
There used to be a Carey girl in school--"

"I'm pretty sure they aren't related to her. They come from some place
in New York and they've lived in our neighborhood less than a year. And
do you know, Mary, we think Amy must have made quite an impression on
the brother--Bob. He's called on her twice since, and he's asked her to
go to the Glee Club concert."

"He has!" Romance dies hard in the heart of a girl. Poor Mary, shut
away from contact with young life, was thrilled by the suggestion of an
incipient love-story. "Is he nice looking?" she asked eagerly.

uggestion of an
incipient love-story. "Is he nice looking?" she asked eagerly.

"Well, I've not met him yet, but I've noticed him passing several
times, and I thought he was quite handsome. And Hildegarde is an
awfully stylish girl, though I'd hardly call her pretty."

In ten minutes Peggy announced that she must go to a history lecture
and rang off. She was smiling as she went to class, and wishing she
could be an unseen listener to the conversations scheduled to take
place in Mary's room every hour in the day.

As Peggy had promised, the bell of Mary's telephone worked over-time.
The Friendly Terrace girls were supplemented by former school-mates
in sufficient numbers to keep up the excitement till half past eight
that evening. Most of the girls, whose memories Peggy had undertaken

past eight
that evening. Most of the girls, whose memories Peggy had undertaken
to jolt, were conscience-stricken when they realized how they had
neglected Mary. And they readily fell in with Peggy's suggestion."Even if we can't get over there very often," urged Peggy, "we can
use the telephone. Five minutes talk every few days will make Mary
feel that she's in touch with us still. It doesn't seem to me I could
bear feeling forgotten." Peggy did not realize that, even with Mary's
disability, she would have made herself the center of some circle; and
in her failure to understand that Mary's rather colorless personality
was in part responsible for what had happened, Peggy was the more
severe upon herself for what now seemed to her inexplicable and
inexcusable neglect.

upon herself for what now seemed to her inexplicable and
inexcusable neglect.

Thanks to the sudden activity of Peggy's conscience, Mary Donaldson
heard more outside news in one day than she had heard in the three
months previous. And as the trouble with most young people is want of
thought, rather than want of heart, few of the girls were satisfied
with chatting five or ten minutes over the telephone. They promised
to come to see her soon. They offered to lend her books or mail her
magazines. One girl suggested that she would bring over some of her
victrola records for Mary to hear, and another informed her that as
soon as the lilies of the valley were out she should have a cluster.
All at once Mary Donaldson's friends were remembering her in earnest.

cluster.
All at once Mary Donaldson's friends were remembering her in earnest.

When Marian O'Neil rang off at twenty minutes of nine, Mary hesitated
a moment and then called Peggy Raymond. And Peggy who was giving her
studies that half-hearted attention customary on the first day after
vacation, whether the student is in the primary grade or a college
Junior, came running downstairs when Dick shouted her name.

"Hello--Hello--Why, Mary!" The pleasure in her tone was unmistakable,
and the shut-in, two miles away, thrilled responsively.

"Peggy, I just wanted to tell you before I went to sleep that I've had
such a lovely day.""Peggy, I just wanted to tell you before I went to sleep that I've had
such a lovely day."

"Have you, dear? I'm glad. What happened?"

The question took the guileless Mary aback. "I thought perhaps you
knew something about it.

on took the guileless Mary aback. "I thought perhaps you
knew something about it. My telephone has been ringing all day. It was
queer if it was only a coincidence, for some girls called me up that I
haven't heard from for years."

"Must have been what they call a brain wave," suggested Peggy,
audaciously.

"Well, anyway, it was nice. I've heard so many things and talked with
so many people that I feel as if I'd been to a party."

"If that's all, Mary, I'll prophesy there'll be just as nice days
coming as this."

"Oh, do you think so, Peggy! Well, it's my bed time now, so I won't
talk any longer. Good-night."

"Good-night!" And as Peggy hung up the receiver, she reflected that she
had never done justice to the possibilities of the telephone.

CHAPTER III

A TRIUMPH OF ART

tice to the possibilities of the telephone.

CHAPTER III

A TRIUMPH OF ART

IT was one of those warm, summer-like days of early June, when lessons
and college classes are forgotten in the enjoyment of thoughts of the
summer vacation to come. Such a few days left, and the four girls would
be free for all the reading and the tennis and the sewing and the
tramping which the press of examination preparation had forced aside.
And they would all be together again this summer, which gave promise of
many Quartette larks. The day was so perfect that all four had, as if
of one mind, discarded their lessons for the remainder of the day, and
had drifted over to Amy's.

"Do you know what I've been thinking about all week?" demanded Amy of
the trio occupying her front porch.

en thinking about all week?" demanded Amy of
the trio occupying her front porch. She did not wait for any of them to
hazard a guess, but gave the answer herself, "Strawberries."en thinking about all week?" demanded Amy of
the trio occupying her front porch. She did not wait for any of them to
hazard a guess, but gave the answer herself, "Strawberries."

A soft little murmur went the rounds. "We had strawberries for dinner
last night," said Peggy, "the best I've tasted this year."

"And we had strawberry short-cake." Priscilla smacked her lips
reminiscently.

"And I had some strawberry ice cream at Birds'," put in Ruth. "It was
so warm along about nine o'clock, you know, and Nelson and I went down.
My, but it was good!"

Amy listened unmoved. "What I've been thinking about," she explained,
"is strawberries in the patch, sticking their heads out from under the
leaves, as if they were begging to be picked, warm from the sun, and

under the
leaves, as if they were begging to be picked, warm from the sun, and
sweet, and just spilling over with juice."

The girls sat attentive. Something in Amy's manner indicated that there
was a background of reality for this flight of fancy.

"I've got a sort of relation living about ten miles out of town," Amy
continued. "Aunt Phoebe Cummings, only that isn't her name. Five years
ago she married a man named Frost."

"How interesting to get a new uncle at your age," interjected Ruth.

"I don't regard him as much of an addition to the family,"
retorted Amy drily. "When I talk about him, I call him, 'Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back.' But to his face, he's Mr. Frost. You see,
Aunt Phoebe isn't exactly an aunt. I believe she's a second cousin of

. You see,
Aunt Phoebe isn't exactly an aunt. I believe she's a second cousin of
my grandfather's first wife, but she's nicer than lots of real aunts."

"I do think you have the nicest relations, Amy Lassell," interposed
Peggy. "Now Aunt Abigail, at Doolittle cottage, was a perfect dear."

Priscilla showed signs of impatience. "What has all this to do with
strawberries?"Priscilla showed signs of impatience. "What has all this to do with
strawberries?"

"Well, I'm coming to that. My Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back owns a
little farm, and they've got strawberries to burn. And almost every
year Aunt Phoebe says she wishes I'd come out when the strawberries are
ripe and bring some of my friends."

"Amy Lassell!" exclaimed Priscilla reproachfully. "Do you mean that
Mrs. Philander has been begging you to do this for the last five years,

an that
Mrs. Philander has been begging you to do this for the last five years,
and that this is the first we've heard of it?"

"Well, as a rule she mentions it along about August, or October, and
I forget it by June. But she came in town to shop the other day and
took dinner with us, and when she left, she broached the subject again.
She said the strawberries would be at their best by the middle of next
week and she'd love to meet you all. What do you think of a trip to the
country along about Wednesday?"

There were certain subjects regarding which, in spite of their devoted
friendship, the Friendly Terrace quartette could develop considerable
diversity of opinion. But on this occasion, their unanimity would have
gratified the hospitable instincts of Amy's Aunt Phoebe. Strawberries

ould have
gratified the hospitable instincts of Amy's Aunt Phoebe. Strawberries
boxed and displayed in show windows, or even transformed into such
delicacies as short cake and ice cream, seemed prosaic all at once.
What they wanted was to be turned loose in a strawberry patch, to stain
their fingers plucking the strawberries from the vines. Before leaving
the porch the girls watched Amy pen a note to her relative, accepting
her oft-repeated invitation in behalf of herself and friends, and
suggesting the following Wednesday as a desirable time for their visit.A rather cloudy Tuesday awakened anxious apprehensions in the minds of
the four girls, apprehensions dissipated, however, by the cloudless
dawn of Wednesday. The height of the strawberry season is the most

he cloudless
dawn of Wednesday. The height of the strawberry season is the most
charming time of the year. The four ate an early luncheon at Peggy's
home, and then took the trolley for the outskirts of the city. Once
outside the city, the trolley car bowled along at an exhilarating pace,
and in spite of the prospects ahead, the girls were almost sorry when
the ten-miles were up, and the breezy ride was ended.

Aunt Phoebe was a little old lady whose black skirt was quaintly full
and showed signs of wear, partially concealed by a white ruffled apron
of unusual size. She greeted them as affectionately as if they had
all been nieces by adoption, and conducted them indoors to take off
their hats. The living room through which they passed was large and

to take off
their hats. The living room through which they passed was large and
pleasantly and immaculately neat, the unpainted floor having been
scrubbed to a milky whiteness.

The tapping of the girls' heels on the boards emphasized their
bareness. "Got your rugs up for the summer, I see," remarked Amy
casually. The comment was natural enough under the circumstances, but
unluckily it opened the door of the closet which contained the Frosts'
family skeleton. Aunt Phoebe reddened as if Amy's innocent remark had
been a slap in the face. "My sitting room carpet's worn out," she said.
"It was worn out when I came here. I patched it and I pieced it and I
made it last a good three years after anybody else would have put it in
the rags, and now he says there's no sense buying a new one."

"Mr.

ve put it in
the rags, and now he says there's no sense buying a new one."

"Mr. Frost, you mean?""Mr.

ve put it in
the rags, and now he says there's no sense buying a new one."

"Mr. Frost, you mean?"

"Yes. He's got awful queer notions, Philander has. He talks about bare
floors being healthy. Good gracious! It gives me a chill to think of
this room in November without a carpet on the floor. I've done without
lots of things in my life, but I never was too poor to have my floors
carpeted."

Amy was sorry she had broached the subject, for now that Aunt Phoebe
was started, she seemed to find it difficult to stop talking about her
grievance. Like many people who do not ask a great deal of life, she
was the more insistent regarding the few things she counted essential.
The bare floor, echoing noisily under the tread of her guests, stirred

sential.
The bare floor, echoing noisily under the tread of her guests, stirred
her indignation and almost spoiled her childlike satisfaction in
entertaining Amy and her friends.

But worse was coming. It appeared that Aunt Phoebe had a heaped glass
dish of berries to be served in the conventional fashion with sugar
and cream, but she suggested that first the girls might enjoy helping
themselves from the patch. As this was really what they had come for,
they acquiesced heartily, and Aunt Phoebe led the way. Her kindly old
face lost its pensiveness as she watched the laughing girls picking the
berries from the vines, their lips and fingers reddening as the feast
proceeded. Then without any warning, a deep voice spoke out of the
shrubbery, and only too much to the point.

arning, a deep voice spoke out of the
shrubbery, and only too much to the point. "The commission men," said
the voice, "are paying twelve cents a box for them strawberries."arning, a deep voice spoke out of the
shrubbery, and only too much to the point. "The commission men," said
the voice, "are paying twelve cents a box for them strawberries."

Four berry-pickers straightened themselves and looked at one another
aghast. Aunt Phoebe rushed furiously to their defense. "Philander
Frost, this is my niece, Amy Lassell, and she's brought out some young
friends to eat strawberries, because I asked her to." Her faded blue
eyes emitted electric sparks as she defied him.

"Pleased to meet you, I'm sure," said Mr. Frost, still with an air of
profound melancholy. "I don't grudge a few strawberries any more than
the next man, but with them bringing twelve cents a box--"

"Philander!" The little wrinkled wife was fairly beside herself
with mortification.

ilander!" The little wrinkled wife was fairly beside herself
with mortification. Her withered skin, suffused by a burning blush,
rivalled the vivid coloring of youth. "Philander, I don't care if the
strawberries are a dollar a quart--"

"Oh, well," said Mr. Frost patiently. "I just thought I'd mention it."
He turned away while four girls stood motionless in the strawberry
patch, as if there had been a Medusa-like quality in his gaze, turning
them all to stone.

"Go right on, dearies," commanded Aunt Phoebe, raising her voice
defiantly, so that it should reach the ears of her departing lord and
master. "Eat all you want to." But though as a matter of principle,
the girls attempted to obey, the sweetness had gone from the luscious
fruit.

le,
the girls attempted to obey, the sweetness had gone from the luscious
fruit. They ate half-heartedly, ashamed to meet one another's eyes,
calculating, in spite of themselves, how much Mr. Frost was out of
pocket because of their visit.Aunt Phoebe was plainly disappointed when they declared that they had
had enough. She tried to encourage them to think better of it, and
when they still insisted, led the way to the house. "I don't think
much of strawberries without trimmings, myself," she declared over her
shoulder. "When you taste them with sugar and cream, I guess you'll
find your appetites coming back."

The porch at the side of the house was shaded and inviting. Aunt Phoebe
insisted on their seating themselves, while she waited on them. Against

Phoebe
insisted on their seating themselves, while she waited on them. Against
the snowy covering of the small, round table, the big dish of choice
berries made a fine showing. Then Aunt Phoebe brought out a pitcher of
rich yellow cream, and the spirits of the crest-fallen group began to
revive. The appearance of a heaping plate-full of cookies was hailed
with appreciative smiles.

"Plenty more cookies in the jar," said Aunt Phoebe, helping them with
lavish hand. "And plenty more berries. Eat all you can."

They had almost reached the point of forgetting Mr. Frost and his
discomforting comments, when he again made his appearance. Peggy lost
the thread of the story she was telling and stopped short, but as no
one was listening, that made no difference.

Mr.

ing and stopped short, but as no
one was listening, that made no difference.

Mr. Frost seated himself and sighed heavily. "Some folks is afraid to
eat too many strawberries," he said. "They're likely to cause a rash."

The girls, not knowing what to say, went on eating mechanically. Aunt
Phoebe, however, straightened herself over her saucer. "I don't mind a
rash," she announced, "not in such a good cause."

"It ain't that I care for the expense," Mr. Frost said feelingly,
"though of course, with the cost of living so high, sensible folks
ought to do without everything that ain't necessary. Now Phoebe's got
an idea that she wants a new carpet for the sitting room--""I've got an idea that I'm going to have one, too," said Aunt Phoebe,
breathing hard.

ot an idea that I'm going to have one, too," said Aunt Phoebe,
breathing hard.

"I tell her that bare floors is all the rage," said Mr. Frost, looking
from one to another of the girls, as if he hoped to find an ally in
one of them. "Carpets are hiding-places for all sorts of germs. The
swellest folks there is have bare floors nowadays, I tell her."

"I guess their bare floors don't look much like mine," exploded Aunt
Phoebe, "just common pine boards, not even painted."

"I wouldn't mind letting you paint 'em," said Mr. Frost. "Of course
paint is very expensive these days, but if it would make you feel any
better--"

"What I want," Aunt Phoebe was beginning wrathfully, when Amy
interrupted. She addressed herself to Mr. Frost, and her manner was
propitiatory.

nterrupted. She addressed herself to Mr. Frost, and her manner was
propitiatory. "A painted floor isn't so bad," she said. "Lots of folks
have painted floors."

"A body's feet would freeze in winter," exclaimed Aunt Phoebe, plainly
bewildered at Amy's taking sides against her.

"You want to wear good thick shoes and stockings," replied Mr. Frost,
eyeing Amy approvingly. His manner indicated that as far as she was
concerned, he did not grudge the strawberries.

"I was going to say," continued Amy, returning his friendly gaze with
interest, "that I wouldn't mind coming out and painting the floors for
you some day."

The other Friendly Terrace girls looked at one another in surprise.
They could not understand Amy. Apparently she was trying to curry
favor with Mr.The other Friendly Terrace girls looked at one another in surprise.
They could not understand Amy. Apparently she was trying to curry
favor with Mr.

They could not understand Amy. Apparently she was trying to curry
favor with Mr. Frost by taking sides with him against Aunt Phoebe,
yet none of them considered this the real explanation. Whatever
her intention, it was plain that Amy had made a conquest of Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back. For the rest of their stay, he addressed
most his remarks to her, and though his conversation dealt largely
with the high cost of living and the necessity for thrift, their
inexplicable friend seemed highly edified.

When they took their departure, Mr. Frost again brought up the subject
of the floor. "If you should happen to feel like painting it some
day--"

"Oh, I'm coming," said Amy smiling up at him. "I'll get the other girls
to help me, and we'll make short work of it."

t him. "I'll get the other girls
to help me, and we'll make short work of it."

"I think I've got pretty near enough paint left from painting the
barn--"

Aunt Phoebe's accession of color suggested an attack of apoplexy, for
the barn was the color of a ripe pumpkin. Amy hastily interposed, "Oh,
I'll bring the paint."

"Will you now? Well, I call that the right spirit. I like to see young
folks appreciative," declared Mr. Frost. "Strawberries are bringing a
good price this year, but I'm sure you're welcome to every one you et."

On the way to the car Amy walked beside Aunt Phoebe, holding fast
to her arm and chattering like a magpie. And as she kissed the old
lady good-by, she pulled her close and whispered in her ear. It
was impossible to know what she said, but Aunt Phoebe's lugubrious

her ear. It
was impossible to know what she said, but Aunt Phoebe's lugubrious
countenance showed an immediate improvement. She stared at Amy with an
expression of incredulity which presently became a bewildered smile.The uncertainty of the other Friendly Terrace girls, as to whether or
not Amy had intended her promise to be taken literally, was dissipated
about a week later when she called on them to accompany her and assist
in the painting of Aunt Phoebe's sitting-room floor. Thoughtlessly Amy
had selected a date when Peggy had an imperative engagement. Peggy
urged her to choose another day, but Amy found insuperable objections
to a change.

"But I don't like this," said Peggy. "I ate as many strawberries
as anybody, and if you're painting the floor to pay your uncle

many strawberries
as anybody, and if you're painting the floor to pay your uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back, I want to do my share." And to this,
Amy replied imperturbably that she need not worry, for Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back would be paid in full, without her assistance.

"It really is a pity Peggy couldn't come." The trio was fairly on its
way. "She knows more about such work than any of us."

"I'm afraid Peggy wouldn't be much of a help to-day," replied Amy.

"Peggy not a help? Why not?" Priscilla's manner indicated that if any
criticism of Peggy were implied, she would not stand for it.

"Peggy's conscience is such a Johnny-on-the-spot," Amy explained. "It
never seems to take a vacation the way ours do, and I'm afraid it would
be dreadfully in the way to-day."

ion the way ours do, and I'm afraid it would
be dreadfully in the way to-day."

"Why, what do you mean?" demanded Priscilla and Ruth together.

Amy opened the little grip she carried, produced a small-sized can of
paint and handed it to Priscilla. A similar one was bestowed on the
perplexed Ruth, and then Amy leaned back and looked from one to the
other triumphantly.

"What do you want me to do with it?" frowned Priscilla. Then with a
violent start, "Why, Amy Lassell!"

"Well?"

"This paint is moss green."

"And this," cried Ruth excitedly, "is yellow.""What do you want me to do with it?" frowned Priscilla. Then with a
violent start, "Why, Amy Lassell!"

"Well?"

"This paint is moss green."

"And this," cried Ruth excitedly, "is yellow."

"And in here," explained Amy, patting her bag tenderly, "are all the
colors of the rainbow in half pint cans. Did you ever see an exhibition
of cubist pictures?"

"Yes, once," replied Priscilla mechanically, while Ruth too amazed for

tures?"

"Yes, once," replied Priscilla mechanically, while Ruth too amazed for
words, stared dumbly at her friend.

"Well, that is the way Aunt Phoebe's floor is going to look when we are
through with it."

"Why, Amy," gasped Ruth, suddenly finding her voice. "You can't do
anything like that. He wouldn't let you."

"He won't be there. I've arranged for Aunt Phoebe to take him off for
the day. The key to the house has been left hanging on the back porch."

"Does she know?"

"She doesn't, for I thought it was best for her to be able to say she
didn't know a thing about it. But she suspects that something's in the
wind."

Priscilla hesitated. "I suppose your idea is--"

"My idea is to make such a looking floor that he will be only too glad
to buy a carpet to cover it."

ch a looking floor that he will be only too glad
to buy a carpet to cover it."

The three girls looked at one another, and then Ruth gave a little
nervous giggle. After a minute Priscilla joined in. And then all three
leaned back in the seats in a paroxysm of silent laughter, while their
fellow passengers regarded them enviously.

"Well, I don't know but you're right about Peggy," admitted Priscilla,
at length, wiping her eyes. "I'm pretty sure she would not have
approved."

"I think it serves him just right," declared Ruth. "I detest stingy
people."

"It does serve him right," said Amy. "He has plenty of money, but he
hates to part with any of it. Poor Aunt Phoebe has a little money of
her own, and before she married him she got no end of fun out of doing
things for other people.fore she married him she got no end of fun out of doing
things for other people. And now the dear old soul can't even treat her
friends to strawberries without being humiliated. Anyway," concluded
Amy with decision, "I'm bound she shall have a carpet for her living
room next winter."

They found the farm house on the hill silent and deserted, the back
door locked, and the key hanging in such plain view that it seemed an
invitation to enter. Indoors they found the living room made ready
against their coming. All the furniture had been moved into adjoining
rooms and the floor had been given an extra and quite unnecessary
scrubbing.

The girls hastily arrayed themselves for the work. Priscilla and Amy
had brought along the outfits they had worn as farmerettes, while

cilla and Amy
had brought along the outfits they had worn as farmerettes, while
Ruth donned a worn-out bathing suit. Then Amy pried off the covers
of her array of cans, and presented each of her friends with a small
paintbrush. The fun began.

Amy's suggestion that a striking design should be painted in the middle
of the room, and at each of the four corners, was enthusiastically
accepted, and Priscilla at once undertook the execution of a Chinese
dragon in the corner of the room which was most in evidence to one
standing in the doorway. Amy taking possession of the can of yellow
paint, set herself to reproduce a sunrise in the center of the room,
the yellow rays radiating from the central golden orb in the most
realistic manner. Ruth, her imagination stimulated by the discovery of

the most
realistic manner. Ruth, her imagination stimulated by the discovery of
a can of black paint, promptly set about balancing Priscilla's dragon
by a black cat in the opposite corner, its back arched like a bow, and
its tail standing upright like an ebony plume.They splashed about, admiring one another's work enthusiastically and
complacently accepting compliments for their own. And when the various
masterpieces had been executed to the satisfaction of the artists,
they fell to work filling in the remaining spaces with gaily colored
rhomboids, red, yellow, green, black, and purple. Nothing more gorgeous
than Aunt Phoebe's painted floor could possibly be imagined. Even the
highly colored chromos on the wall paled before it. In some respects

. Even the
highly colored chromos on the wall paled before it. In some respects
it suggested an old-fashioned crazy-quilt, though when the dragon and
the black cat were taken into account, it was more like a bad case of
nightmare. After the girls had finished, they withdrew to the next
room and, gazing upon it, tried to imagine the sensations of Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back when its kaleidoscopic magnificence should
break upon his astonished gaze.

Suddenly they were panic-stricken for fear the occupants of the farm
house should return before they had taken their departure. They dressed
in such haste that they failed to get the full benefit of the bottle of
turpentine Amy had brought along for cleansing purposes, and they went

ottle of
turpentine Amy had brought along for cleansing purposes, and they went
back to town with green and purple smudges on their fingers. As soon
as they had reached home, they descended on Peggy to tell her of the
manner in which they had fulfilled Amy's promise, and Peggy listened
with amazement tinged with admiration.

"I'm rather glad you didn't tell me, for I'm afraid I should have
thrown cold water, and I can't help thinking it's exactly what Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back deserves. And if it really drives him into
buying a new carpet, I shall feel satisfied that you've done the right
thing."

The four girls had agreed to play tennis Saturday of that week, but
early Saturday morning Amy called Peggy up to ask to be excused.The four girls had agreed to play tennis Saturday of that week, but
early Saturday morning Amy called Peggy up to ask to be excused.

that week, but
early Saturday morning Amy called Peggy up to ask to be excused.
"Aunt Phoebe is coming in town for some shopping," she explained, and
interrupted herself by an ecstatic giggle. "And she wants me to go with
her. She wants me to help her select a carpet for the sitting room."

CHAPTER IV

AN AFTERNOON CALL

PRISCILLA sat at her little dressing table, studying her reflection in
the mirror with an absorbed intentness which would have impressed nine
observers out of ten as a naïve exhibition of vanity. This verdict,
however, would have been most unfair. Though many people considered
Priscilla a really handsome girl, she had always been inclined to be
unduly modest regarding her personal appearance. Her present scrutiny

ned to be
unduly modest regarding her personal appearance. Her present scrutiny
was solely for the purpose of discovering the blemish which she was
sure must be apparent to all beholders.

For a girl of her age, Priscilla had thought very little about the
opposite sex. Her devotion to Peggy had been a sufficient outlet for
her sentiment, while her contempt for those girls who could think and
talk of nothing but the "boys" had, perhaps, led her to go needlessly
far in the opposite direction. The youths who had fluttered mothlike
about the tall, graceful girl had met such a baffling indifference that
they had transferred their attentions to some more responsive luminary,
while Priscilla went on her way unruffled.

But this year things were different. The four Friendly Terrace chums

nruffled.But this year things were different. The four Friendly Terrace chums

nruffled.

But this year things were different. The four Friendly Terrace chums
were no longer sufficient to themselves. Peggy was engaged. Since
Nelson Hallowell's return from the service, he had been a very frequent
caller at Ruth's home. And on one or two occasions when Priscilla had
run over to Amy's in the evening, she had found one of the porch chairs
occupied by Robert Carey. Priscilla began to have a feeling of being
left out, new in her experience and most unpleasant. She wondered what
there was about her to differentiate her from other girls. She studied
her reflection, dreading yet half expecting to see some flaw which
would inevitably repel the beholder.

On this particular afternoon as Priscilla faced herself in the glass

beholder.

On this particular afternoon as Priscilla faced herself in the glass
and tried to discover the defects that kept admirers at a distance,
affairs had reached a crisis. The University Field Day had long been a
thrilling occasion to many of the young people of the city, not merely
because of their interest in the various events, but because it was
customary for each of the young fellows who attended to ask some girl
to accompany him. Priscilla had taken it for granted that Peggy would
go with Graham, and was not surprised to learn that Nelson had been
promised the pleasure of Ruth's company on the important occasion. But
when she had suggested to Amy that they should go together, and Amy
after a moment's hesitation had replied, "Why, the fact is, Priscilla,

and Amy
after a moment's hesitation had replied, "Why, the fact is, Priscilla,
Bob Carey has asked me to go with him," Priscilla was conscious of a
distinct shock. Her subsequent dejection had nothing to do with the
prospect of missing Field Day. But when she asked herself if she were
really the least attractive girl in the world, she could see no escape
from an affirmative answer.It was while she sat there, heavy-hearted and vaguely resentful, that
the maid brought up a card, one of those small, inobtrusive slips of
cardboard which proclaim the modesty of the socially inclined male.
Priscilla took it, impressed in spite of herself. Though she was old
enough to have become accustomed to such little conventions, the life

he was old
enough to have become accustomed to such little conventions, the life
of a college girl is so necessarily informal that few people who came
to see Priscilla announced their presence in this fashion. And this was
the first time a young man had sent up his card to Priscilla.

"Mr. Horace Endicott Hitchcock," read Priscilla, and if the truth be
told, she was conscious of an undefined disappointment. She had known
Horace Hitchcock for a dozen years, ever since a smug little boy in
a velvet suit, he had attended the children's parties which were her
earliest social dissipations. As he was about three years older than
Priscilla she had admired him extremely in those days when the velvet
suit was much in evidence. But her attitude had altered long before she

velvet
suit was much in evidence. But her attitude had altered long before she
had considered herself too old to play dolls.

Horace's boyhood had been a trying period. He had never had a boy
friend, the lads of his own age agreeing with contemptuous unanimity
that he was a "sissy." Perhaps for the same reason, the girls had found
him as little appealing. But as he neared his majority, Horace had
blossomed into a belated popularity. He was somewhat effeminate as far
as his appearance went. He talked very rapidly, and used more gestures
than is customary with young Americans. Horace dressed in excellent
taste, and was somewhat of an authority on shirts and ties and matters
equally important. Although he was supposed to be an insuranceties and matters
equally important. Although he was supposed to be an insurance
solicitor, he was never too occupied to attend any social affair at
any hour of the day, and this gave him an advantage over the young men
who were on duty till five o'clock or later. Priscilla had seen very
little of him since she had entered college, and now as she looked at
his card she only wondered if he had come to ask her to play for some
entertainment.

Priscilla gave a last dissatisfied glance at her reflection in the
glass, captured a stray lock with a hairpin, and went downstairs.
Sensible girl as she was, she found herself impressed by Horace's
greeting. He bowed very low over her hand, like the hero of a picture
play, and drew up a chair for her with great elegance of manner. To a

a picture
play, and drew up a chair for her with great elegance of manner. To a
girl suffering from lack of proper self-esteem, his air of deference
was peculiarly soothing. Yet even then, it never occurred to Priscilla
that this was a social call. She listened to Horace's voluble talk,
made such replies as seemed necessary, noted approvingly the perfect
fit of his light suit, and the fact that his tie matched his silk
socks, and waited patiently for him to come to the point.

Something like twenty minutes had passed when Priscilla reached a
realizing sense of the situation. All at once, while Horace was
describing minutely the country house where he had spent the previous
week-end, Priscilla gave a little start and colored high. It had just

e previous
week-end, Priscilla gave a little start and colored high. It had just
dawned upon her that Horace had not come upon any utilitarian errand,
that he was there for the sole purpose of seeing her. It took her a
little time to adjust herself to the novel idea, and if Horace had
asked her a point-blank question during the interval, she would not
have known whether to answer yes or no, for she had not the least idea
what he was talking about.Then Priscilla waked up. She exerted herself to be charming. She
talked almost as fluently as Horace himself. She laughed delightedly
at his little jests; though, if the truth be told, Horace's humor
was decidedly anemic. She listened raptly to his stories of his
achievements, and was ready with the expected admiring smile when the

es of his
achievements, and was ready with the expected admiring smile when the
time arrived. A curious sense of unreality possessed her. She felt as
if she were taking part in an exciting game.

"Miss Priscilla," said Horace suddenly, "are you at all interested in
Field Day?"

"It's not so bad when one knows the men," Priscilla replied, and the
answer showed the effect of Horace's influence in a little over half
an hour. For Priscilla adored Field Day. When she watched the various
events her heart pounded as if she herself were taking part in the
hundred yard dash. At the close of an exciting race, she had often
found herself on her feet, shrieking spasmodically, and waving her
handkerchief, and feeling the smart of tears in her strained eyes. But

ving her
handkerchief, and feeling the smart of tears in her strained eyes. But
instinctively Priscilla knew that Horace would not consider Field Day a
legitimate cause for excitement, and so she answered as she did.

"Sometimes I find it a deuce of a bore," Horace said. "The crowd and
the noise, don't you know. But if you are willing to accompany me next
Friday, Miss Priscilla, I'm sure this Field Day will prove a delightful
exception."

"Oh, thank you," Priscilla said carelessly. "I should enjoy going very
much." Her nonchalant acceptance of the invitation gave no idea of her
tumultuous excitement. She was no longer the odd one of the quartette
of chums. She was no longer left out. Her misgivings regarding herself
were instantaneously set at rest, for she knew that, had she been asng herself
were instantaneously set at rest, for she knew that, had she been as
unattractive as she had feared, Horace Hitchcock would never have
invited her to accompany him on such an occasion. Her pulses throbbed,
and there was a humming in her ears as she chattered on without any
clear idea of what she was saying.

Priscilla's feeling of elation had nothing to do with Horace's
personality. Had he been any other young man, equally well dressed and
well mannered, she would have felt exactly the same. Yet under the
circumstances she experienced a not unreasonable sense of gratitude.
She shut her eyes to the little affectations of manner which
ordinarily she would have found amusing. She refused to acknowledge
to herself that Horace was bragging. She had never liked him, and

o acknowledge
to herself that Horace was bragging. She had never liked him, and
the Horace who had invited her to the Field Day exercises was in all
essentials the Horace of the velvet suit; yet now, if she had heard him
criticized, she would have rushed impetuously to his defense. In short,
Priscilla was started on a course which many an older and wiser woman
has followed to disaster.

Priscilla was in no hurry to mention the fact that she expected to be a
spectator of the Field Day events. The very intensity of her previous
qualms made her the more inclined to treat the present situation
nonchalantly. On Thursday evening, however, she remarked casually to
Peggy that she hoped their seats would not be too far separated. Peggy
looked up in pleased surprise.

eir seats would not be too far separated. Peggy
looked up in pleased surprise.

"Are you going, Priscilla? I'm awful glad. Who's taking you?"

"Horace Hitchcock."

"Horace Hitchcock!" Peggy repeated the name in such accents of
astonishment that Priscilla flushed. "Why not?" she asked rather
coldly.

"I didn't know you saw anything of him."

"I've known him as long as I've known you--almost as long as I've known
anybody.""I didn't know you saw anything of him."

"I've known him as long as I've known you--almost as long as I've known
anybody."

"Why, of course, Priscilla. I remember when we used to see him at
parties in a Fauntleroy suit. But I've lost track of him for an age
and I thought you had, too, that's all." There was an underlying
astonishment in Peggy's apology. She could not understand Priscilla's
seeming readiness to take offense. And when Priscilla began to talk of

scilla's
seeming readiness to take offense. And when Priscilla began to talk of
something quite different, Peggy realized with fresh amazement that
the peculiarities of Horace Hitchcock were, for the present, a tabooed
topic between them.

CHAPTER V

THE RUMMAGE SALE

SUMMER vacation! Although the Field Day exercises, and the few
Commencement festivities to which undergraduates are invited, were only
four days past, classes and lessons seemed to the Quartet never to have
existed; or if so, only in a dream. And it would be the same way when
college began again in the fall. Summer, of a few days before, would be
a dim memory of the past.

Though they had not heard from their examinations, they all felt
reasonably confident of having passed successfully. At any rate, they

all felt
reasonably confident of having passed successfully. At any rate, they
had put the thought of them resolutely out of mind, following Peggy's,
"one thing at a time, and when it's done, it doesn't do any good
worrying about it." Those four days had been devoted to concentrated
doing nothing.

"'DULCE FAR NIENTE' is such a pretty phrase it makes a virtue of
loafing," said Priscilla.

And to this, for the time being, the other three agreed."'DULCE FAR NIENTE' is such a pretty phrase it makes a virtue of
loafing," said Priscilla.

And to this, for the time being, the other three agreed.

It was indirectly through Horace Hitchcock that the Friendly Terrace
girls became interested in the Rummage Sale. For at the Field Day
exercises Horace and Priscilla had happened to occupy seats in the
Grand Stand next to Mrs. Sidney Vanderpool, and Horace, who seemed a
prime favorite with that influential lady, had introduced Priscilla.
Mrs.

eemed a
prime favorite with that influential lady, had introduced Priscilla.
Mrs. Vanderpool was in charge of a rummage sale to be held for the
benefit of a local charity, and recognizing Priscilla's efficiency at a
glance, she had promptly enlisted her under her banner. Since whatever
concerned one of the Friendly Terrace quartette concerned all, Mrs.
Vanderpool in securing Priscilla's coöperation had gained four new
assistants.

It was Peggy, strange to say, whose enthusiasm it was hardest to
kindle. "Somehow I never thought much of rummage sales," she owned.
"Perhaps it is because _rummage_ always reminds me of _rubbish_."

"But that's not fair, Peggy," Priscilla remonstrated. "Every family
has a lot of things packed away that would be a blessing to people a
little poorer."

lot of things packed away that would be a blessing to people a
little poorer."

Peggy reflected. "I can't think of anything we could spare that would
be much of a blessing to any one."

"You haven't looked your things over with that thought in mind. Take
Mrs. Vanderpool, for instance. Why, she'd discard a piece of furniture
we would be proud to put in the parlor. A chair or sofa we'd think
too shabby to have around would seem magnificent to your friends, the
Bonds."

"I suppose there's something in that," owned Peggy."I suppose there's something in that," owned Peggy.

"Of course there is. Thanks to the rummage sales, people get rid of a
lot of stuff that's no further good to them; and other people get a
great many things that they can use, and pay almost nothing for them."

"If they pay so little, why does Mrs.

an use, and pay almost nothing for them."

"If they pay so little, why does Mrs. Vanderpool expect to make such a
lot of money!" demanded Peggy.

"Look at the five-and-ten cent stores. Little profits count up, if you
make sales enough. And in a rummage sale the expenses are so small
that almost everything is profit."

Peggy began to think that her prejudice had been unreasonable, and she
hunted the house over to find something worth contributing. But her
search was far from satisfactory to herself. Mrs. Raymond was not one
of the house-keepers who make a practice of hoarding useless articles.
If a piece of furniture broke down, she had it mended if it were worth
repairing; if not, she either gave it to some poor family who could

were worth
repairing; if not, she either gave it to some poor family who could
make use of it, or else had it carted away by the rubbish collector.
When Peggy's exhaustive search ended, she had succeeded in collecting
for the sale only a few pieces of crockery and a carpet-sweeper which
had outlived its halcyon days, though still capable of picking threads
off the carpet.

The sale was to be held in a large vacant store in the down-town
district, and was to last three days. All contributors had been asked
to send their offerings several days in advance, and the Friendly
Terrace girls, with a score of others, were on hand to assist in
classifying the articles as they arrived, and were arranging them
so as to make the best possible showing. As Peggy worked with thearranging them
so as to make the best possible showing. As Peggy worked with the
others, she was conscious of a return of her former misgivings.
Undoubtedly among the contributions arriving by the wagon load there
were many articles which would be useful to some one, but Peggy
wondered who would be able to make use of the cracked pitchers and
leaky kitchen utensils which were coming in such quantities. She looked
disapprovingly at the loads of worn-out finery, displayed on the
clothing table. In her opinion people who would buy second-hand evening
dresses ought not to afford any. Of the flimsy evening frocks, most of
them cut excessively low, some were spotted and soiled, while others
were torn and generally bedraggled. Peggy made up her mind that under

le others
were torn and generally bedraggled. Peggy made up her mind that under
no circumstances would she be a saleswoman at that table.

The array of bric-a-brac aroused similar qualms. Looking the collection
over, Peggy wondered at the things people had once regarded as
ornamental. And even though they now realized their error, and were
glad to rid themselves of these offenses against good taste, it seemed
to Peggy rather hard that they should encourage the unenlightened to
purchase such monstrosities under the mistaken notion that they were
beautifying their homes. She was glad to turn to the book table where,
if nowhere else, really worth-while bargains were offered. There were
piles of the best magazines, many of them with the leaves uncut.

ed. There were
piles of the best magazines, many of them with the leaves uncut.
There were odd volumes of classic writers, the most of which seemed
in excellent condition. Peggy set herself to make the book table as
inviting as possible, in hopes that the sales would be gratifying.But while her original misgivings had returned in full force, Peggy
said nothing about them. As far as she could see, they were unshared
by any person present. The three girls who were her most intimate
friends were working away enthusiastically, their bright faces
unclouded by a doubt. Peggy had been a little startled by the discovery
that Amy had deliberately left her out of the plot for painting Aunt
Phoebe's sitting-room floor. It led her to wonder if perhaps she was
over-particular.

s sitting-room floor. It led her to wonder if perhaps she was
over-particular.

"No one else seems to see anything out of the way," Peggy reflected.
"It seems as if it must be all right, if I'm the only one who thinks
it isn't. Oh, dear, I hope I'm not getting so critical and fussy
that I imagine that things are wrong when they're not." Again her
thoughts turned to Aunt Phoebe's painted floor. If Amy had asked her
coöperation, she would have refused, and would have done her best
to dissuade Amy from her reckless scheme. But the results had been
all that could be desired. Aunt Phoebe had her new carpet, and was
radiantly happy, while Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back had undoubtedly
been taught a lesson he sorely needed. Strange to say, he did not seem

oubtedly
been taught a lesson he sorely needed. Strange to say, he did not seem
to hold any grudge against Amy for taking sides against him. Amy, who
had been out to admire the new carpet, reported that he had received
her without any display of animosity, and unprotestingly had allowed
Aunt Phoebe to serve her with ice cream. "It must be that I'm getting
too particular," thought Peggy. "This time I won't say a word."She broke her resolution, however, when the committee, who had been
delegated to mark the prices of each article, set to work. Peggy had
comforted herself by recalling Priscilla's assurance that everything
would be sold at prices almost too small to mention. Instead, it seemed
to the astonished Peggy that a good price was set on articles which

, it seemed
to the astonished Peggy that a good price was set on articles which
from her standpoint were quite valueless. "O, don't you think that
is too much?" She could not help exclaiming as one of the committee
attached a price card to a three legged chair, which kept an upright
position only by balancing itself against a rickety table.

The lady smiled upon her. "We'll have the prices rather high the first
day," she replied. "Of course we want to make all we can. Then we'll
reduce them for the second day, and on the third we'll take anything we
can get."

Peggy did not return the smile. She was perplexed and troubled. She was
beginning to realize that though these women were working for charity,
they knew very little about the practical problems of the poor. She

or charity,
they knew very little about the practical problems of the poor. She
looked at the three-legged chair and wondered what she would do if she
saw some reckless mother of a family preparing to squander real money
on anything so worthless.

Although Peggy had expressed a wish to be stationed at the book table,
Mrs. Vanderpool had insisted on placing her among the household
furnishings. "You've got such a winning way, my dear," she said, "and
you would be wasted on the books. Nobody buys books at a rummage sale
except the people who would buy them anyway. I'm expecting great things
from that persuasive tongue of yours." Peggy blushed guiltily, even
while she smiled. She was glad Mrs. Vanderpool had such a complimentaryy, even
while she smiled. She was glad Mrs. Vanderpool had such a complimentary
idea of her persuasive powers and hoped she would not disappoint her.

From the hour of its opening, the rummage sale was crowded. Peggy's
heart went out to the women who came pouring in as soon as the doors
were opened to the public. Many of them had a distinctly foreign look.
They came hatless, holding their money tightly, and looking about them
with sharp, dark eyes in search of the bargains they coveted. In the
evening the shop girls and factory workers were out in full force,
and Peggy noticed uneasily how inevitably they gravitated toward the
cast-off finery which had aroused her disapproval. She turned her back
that she might not be a witness to the thriving business she suspected

her back
that she might not be a witness to the thriving business she suspected
that department of doing.

But resolving to allow events to take their course without a protest,
Peggy had failed to reckon with her inborn inability to shirk
responsibility. The formula which acts as a sedative to so many
consciences, "It's none of my business," had never proved effective in
her case. And though she stuck to her resolution on the first day, the
developments of the second proved too much for her. It was late on that
afternoon when she noticed a flutter at one of the adjacent counters,
and discovered to her astonishment, that the occasion of the excitement
was an acquaintance of her own, no other than the husband of Elvira
Bond.

ment
was an acquaintance of her own, no other than the husband of Elvira
Bond.ment
was an acquaintance of her own, no other than the husband of Elvira
Bond.

Peggy had always felt a certain responsibility for Elvira, due to the
fact that she had known the good-natured, slatternly girl ever since
she could remember. Mrs. Bond had done the Raymonds' washing, off and
on for many years, less because of her excellence as a laundress, than
because she needed the work. Then Elvira had grown up, and taken her
mother's place at the wash-tubs. The year of America's entry into the
war she had unexpectedly married a young man considerably above her in
the social scale, who had immediately been called to the colors.

Elvira's romance had been her awakening. To Peggy's attentive ear
she had confided her dawning aspirations. "Joe likes things neat

attentive ear
she had confided her dawning aspirations. "Joe likes things neat
and clean," she explained, a little wistfulness in her voice. "Not
cluttered up the way Ma keeps 'em. And I'd hate to make him ashamed of
me."

"Of course you would," Peggy had cried. "And there's not a bit of need,
Elvira. Why, of course you can keep your house as nice as anybody's.
All you've got to do is to make up your mind that you will."

In the absence of the young husband Peggy had a watchful eye on
Elvira. She had done her best to keep alive the girl's newly awakened
ambitions, in spite of the discouraging home atmosphere. And after
Joe's return she had frequently gone to see Elvira in the little home
the young couple had purchased, and were paying for on the installment
plan.

home
the young couple had purchased, and were paying for on the installment
plan. In view of the girl's bringing up, it is hardly surprising that
she had her relapses; but on the whole, Peggy was proud of her. Elvira
worked hard, was developing a commendable thrift, and was extremely
proud of her little home and of her baby.It was at one of the bric-a-brac tables that Peggy discovered Elvira's
husband, and he seemed, as far as she could judge from his manner and
the manner of the women who were calling his attention to one thing
after another, on the point of investing largely in the heterogeneous
collection. But he happened to look over his shoulder in Peggy's
direction, recognized her instantly, and came toward her, his face
irradiated by a broad smile.

ized her instantly, and came toward her, his face
irradiated by a broad smile.

"Afternoon, Miss Peggy," he exclaimed. "I'm looking around. I'm
thinking of buying a few little things to take home to the wife." He
slapped his pocket. "It's pay-day, Miss Peggy, and the best ain't none
too good for Elvira and the kid, I'll swear it ain't."

Peggy looked at him silently. It was the era of prohibition, yet
an unmistakable odor radiated from Joe's person and confirmed the
suspicion aroused by his unnatural manner. Peggy's heart sank.

All unconscious of her dismay, Joe was examining her stock. "What's
that, Miss Peggy?" He indicated by a gesture the object which had
aroused his interest.

"That is a churn, Joe."

"Fine! Fine! I've been wanting a churn ever since I got married. What's

Joe."

"Fine! Fine! I've been wanting a churn ever since I got married. What's
the damage?"

"But you can't want a churn, Joe; you don't keep a cow."

"No telling, Miss Peggy, I might buy a cow 'most any day." But his
vacillating attention went to a battered table and he gave it a
seemingly close examination. "I'll take it, Miss Peggy," he declared
with a wave of his hand, "Just the thing for our front room."

"Why, Joe, Elvira has a table for the front room already."

"Can't have too much of a good thing, you know," grinned Joe. "Say I
like the looks of that." Peggy's eyes followed his extended finger
and she frowned. "Why, Joe, that's a coffee urn, and it wouldn't be
suitable for a small family. Besides, it leaks.""I'm bound to take home something, Miss Peggy," snickered Joe.

sides, it leaks."

"I'm bound to take home something, Miss Peggy," snickered Joe. "Nothing
small about me. My pockets are pretty well lined, and you'll find me a
good customer."

"Joe," said Peggy desperately, "Listen to me. You don't want any of
this stuff in your pretty little home. It's not good enough."

"I guess I know what I want."

"No, Joe. You must excuse me, but to-day you don't know what you want.
If you were quite yourself you'd never think of taking Elvira home a
rickety table or a churn."

"You mean to tell me that I'm drunk." Joe's manner had lost its
suavity. His eyes flashed as he regarded her.

"No, Joe, you're not drunk, but you've been drinking and you're not
yourself. And I know by to-morrow you'll feel awfully sorry if you have

're not
yourself. And I know by to-morrow you'll feel awfully sorry if you have
carried a lot of rubbish into your dear little home."

For a moment Joe wavered between amiability and anger. His masculine
pride was touched by the implication that he did not know his own mind,
and alcohol had quickened his propensity to take offense. But on the
other hand, there was something disarming in the way Peggy spoke of
his wife and his home, and her smile was appealing. Mrs. Vanderpool had
counted on her winning way and it was as effective as she had hoped,
though Peggy did not apply it exactly as she had expected of her.

After a moment's hesitation, Joe capitulated. "I guess you're right,
Miss Peggy. When a fellow's had a few drinks, most anything looks like
a bargain.

iss Peggy. When a fellow's had a few drinks, most anything looks like
a bargain. Guess this is a lot of junk."

"There's nothing here that you and Elvira want, I'm sure of that, Joe."

"Good-by, Miss Peggy."

"Good-by, Joe. Tell Elvira I'll be over to see her very soon.""There's nothing here that you and Elvira want, I'm sure of that, Joe."

"Good-by, Miss Peggy."

"Good-by, Joe. Tell Elvira I'll be over to see her very soon."

Peggy drew a breath of relief when she saw Joe leave the building.
But her congratulatory mood was not to last. For not long after Joe's
departure, she became aware of Mrs. Vanderpool at her elbow.

"Well, you had a profitable customer at last," smiled the lady. "Wanted
to buy you out, didn't he?"

The possibility of evasion did not occur to Peggy. She lifted her frank
eyes. "He talked about buying a lot of useless things," she answered,
"but of course I wouldn't let him. You see, he'd been drinking and he

answered,
"but of course I wouldn't let him. You see, he'd been drinking and he
didn't really know what he wanted. And besides, I know his wife."

The blank expression with which Mrs. Vanderpool regarded her made
plain the impossibility of their ever coming to an understanding.
Peggy started to go on, and then lapsed into silence, realizing the
uselessness of further explanations. Mrs. Vanderpool having relieved
her mind by a long stare, turned majestically away, and Peggy heard her
a little later, talking animatedly of some one who, it appeared, was
totally lacking in the business instinct. Peggy thought she could come
very near guessing the identity of the person referred to. But as she
went on pointing out to possible purchasers the flaws in her wares, she

as she
went on pointing out to possible purchasers the flaws in her wares, she
made up her mind that the chance of being over-particular in matters of
right and wrong was very trifling compared with the danger of not being
particular enough.

CHAPTER VI

PRISCILLA HAS A SECRET

PEGGY was worried about Priscilla. For the first time in their years
of intimacy she could not understand her friend; and worst of all, it
seemed out of the question to discuss the situation and come to an
understanding."Do you think she can like him?" Peggy asked the other Friendly Terrace
girls despairingly. "Because he's always seemed to me almost a joke. I
don't know how I could bear to have Priscilla fall in love with a man I
wanted to laugh at."

w I could bear to have Priscilla fall in love with a man I
wanted to laugh at."

Though both girls would have been glad to reassure her, an ominous
silence followed her outbreak. "There's no accounting for tastes," said
Ruth at length, a suggestion of superiority in her tone.

"Priscilla ought to have a good talking to," exclaimed Amy. "She's got
plenty of sense, and to think of her letting Horace Hitchcock hang
around! I'd like to tell her--"

"You mustn't, Amy," Peggy interrupted. "It would never do to let her
know how you feel about it. That's one of the things that make me so
anxious--she's so awfully touchy on the subject of Horace. She won't
have him criticized."

Peggy had valiantly done her best to cultivate a liking for Horace
Hitchcock.

"

Peggy had valiantly done her best to cultivate a liking for Horace
Hitchcock. Since the fatal Field Day when he had acted as Priscilla's
escort, his attentions had been unremitting. He had called several
times a week. He had brought Priscilla flowers and boxes of candy, to
say nothing of books of poems, from which he had read aloud to her by
the hour. Peggy, assuming that since Priscilla was seeing so much of
Horace, he must be quite a different person from what she supposed, had
invited him to her home along with the others of her little circle,
only to find it would not do. Horace and the others would not mix any
more than oil and water.

"For Heaven's sake, don't ask that Hitchcock here again," Graham
implored Peggy, after an evening that had been a failure, socially
considered."For Heaven's sake, don't ask that Hitchcock here again," Graham
implored Peggy, after an evening that had been a failure, socially
considered.

m
implored Peggy, after an evening that had been a failure, socially
considered. "He puts on airs as if he were the Prince of Wales--no,
that's not fair to the prince. But Hitchcock is a snob and a sissy and
he makes me tired."

"But if Priscilla likes him, Graham--"

"She can't," Graham had argued, not unreasonably. "She must see through
him just as the rest of us do; and even while she's so pleasant to him,
she must be laughing in her sleeve."

But reasonable as Graham's stand had seemed, Priscilla was in no
mood to laugh at Horace Hitchcock. Indeed, she was deliberately
shutting her eyes to his weaknesses, and holding before herself such
an idealized likeness of the real Horace that no one but herself
would have recognized it. Horace's attentions flattered her vanity.

but herself
would have recognized it. Horace's attentions flattered her vanity.
Every call helped to reassure her anxiety in the matter of her own
attractiveness. Moreover, Priscilla was a little dazzled by Horace's
seeming familiarity with the people whose names were chronicled in the
society columns of the daily paper. She had seen for herself that Mrs.
Sidney Vanderpool regarded him with favor, and Horace had been at
some pains to let her know that other ladies, some of them young and
beautiful, held him in equally high esteem. That he should leave girls,
who could not go to New York for a week without the fact brought to the
public attention in the daily papers, in order that he might spend his
evenings with her, gave Priscilla an intoxicating sense of power.

ht spend his
evenings with her, gave Priscilla an intoxicating sense of power.ht spend his
evenings with her, gave Priscilla an intoxicating sense of power.

But foolish as this all was, worse was to come, and all because Amy
disregarded Peggy's prudent counsel. Peggy had discovered an undue
sensitiveness in Priscilla, where Horace was concerned, and had been
sensible enough to perceive that any criticism of her ardent admirer,
instead of prejudicing Priscilla against him, was likely to have the
opposite effect. It hardly need be said that Amy did not flout Peggy's
advice, but in the course of a conversation with Priscilla she lost her
temper and subsequently her head.

It began with a most amiable intention on Amy's part. "Is Horace coming
up to-night?" she asked Priscilla, as the two strolled along the
Terrace in the hazy hush of a summer afternoon.

as the two strolled along the
Terrace in the hazy hush of a summer afternoon.

"I--I shouldn't be surprised to see him," owned Priscilla, with a
becoming blush.

"Bob telephoned me this morning that he'd be up. If Horace comes, bring
him over and I'll try to get Peggy and Ruth--"

"Shall you ask Nelson Hallowell?" Priscilla inquired, a reservation in
her tone which Amy did not understand.

"I'll tell Ruth to bring him if he comes, and he's pretty sure to be on
hand," laughed Amy. "He's making up for the chances he missed when he
was in the service."

"Then I'm afraid we can't come," said Priscilla. "Horace thinks Bob
Carey is fine, and he rather likes Graham, but he draws the line at
Nelson."

Amy stopped short, her plump face crimson. "Please tell me what you

at
Nelson."

Amy stopped short, her plump face crimson. "Please tell me what you
mean by his drawing the line?"

"Well, Amy, I've no doubt that Nelson is a very fine fellow, as far as
morals go, but his social position, you know--"

"What about it?" As the two girls were standing side by side, it was
quite unnecessary for Amy to speak so loudly. Her defiant tone seemed
to challenge the entire block."What about it?" As the two girls were standing side by side, it was
quite unnecessary for Amy to speak so loudly. Her defiant tone seemed
to challenge the entire block.

"Hush, Amy. I'm not deaf. Of course Nelson comes from quite an ordinary
family, and he's only a clerk, and Horace really doesn't care to meet
him socially."

Amy burst into an angry laugh. "Horace Hitchcock said that. What a
joke!"

"I don't quite understand you, Amy." Priscilla spoke with extreme
frigidity.

"Why, there's enough in Nelson Hallowell's little finger to make
several Horaces.

Why, there's enough in Nelson Hallowell's little finger to make
several Horaces. To think of that dandified little manikin's turning up
his nose at a fellow like Nelson."

"Amy Lassell, how dare you?"

"Oh, fudge, Priscilla, you know perfectly well what Horace Hitchcock
is, and you needn't pretend to admire him, for I know better."

"I won't listen to you any longer," cried Priscilla furiously,
"slandering my friends." She turned abruptly and crossed the street.
The two girls continued on their homeward way with the width of the
Terrace between them, each looking steadily ahead, ignoring the other's
presence.

Before Amy reached home she was sorry. She saw she had been wrong
as well as right. Her whole-hearted championship of Nelson had not
necessitated sneering at Horace.

er whole-hearted championship of Nelson had not
necessitated sneering at Horace. Amy realized that Priscilla had good
reason to be angry, and resolved on a whole-hearted apology next day.

It was a pity she had not followed up her feeling of penitence by
immediate action, for when Horace came that evening he found Priscilla
in an unwonted mood. She had dramatized the whole affair to herself.
Everyone was unjust to Horace. Even Peggy allowed her childish
prejudices to influence her unwarrantedly. But she herself was Horace's
friend and she would be loyal to that friendship, cost what it might.A few minutes after his arrival Horace suggested a walk in the
neighboring park, which had been so little "improved" that walking
through it was almost like strolling along country lanes.

improved" that walking
through it was almost like strolling along country lanes. Though the
night was warm, most of the populace preferred the movies, and Horace
and Priscilla had the park practically to themselves. The night wind
sighed languorously through the trees. The air was full of ineffable
fragrances.

"Oh, Priscilla," exclaimed Horace suddenly, and caught her hand. It
seemed to Priscilla that her heart stood still. There was a note in
Horace's voice she had never heard before. She was sure that something
wonderful was happening. And the irritating part was that she could not
do justice to it, for she kept thinking of something else. She should,
she was sure, be entirely absorbed in what Horace was going to say; and

should,
she was sure, be entirely absorbed in what Horace was going to say; and
right at that moment, she wondered if Ruth and Nelson were sitting on
Amy's porch.

"Oh, Priscilla," Horace was murmuring, "Do you not feel as I do, that
we have met and loved before? You were mine, Priscilla, when the
pyramids were building. You were mine in Babylon. Tell me that you have
not forgotten. Tell me that you love me."

It was only about half an hour from that impassioned speech before
they were walking home decorously along the lighted streets, but
Priscilla had a feeling as if she had been away for months and months.
An unbelievable thing had happened. She was engaged. It was understood
that the engagement was not to be mentioned at present, not even to
Priscilla's father and mother.t was not to be mentioned at present, not even to
Priscilla's father and mother. Horace had said something to the effect
that to let outsiders into their secret would bruise the petals of
the flower of love, and she had agreed to the postponement of that
catastrophe, without asking herself why the flower of love should be so
fragile. But the fact remained that she was the second of the quartette
to become engaged, and she took a rather foolish satisfaction in the
realization. She made up her mind that her former qualms as to her
own unattractiveness were without foundation, for otherwise a social
favorite like Horace would never have asked her to marry him.

Priscilla's father and mother were on the porch when the young people

rry him.

Priscilla's father and mother were on the porch when the young people
reached home, and, as it was much too warm to stay indoors, the evening
which had contained so thrilling an episode ended rather tamely. Mr.
Combs and Horace exchanged ideas on local politics, and Mrs. Combs and
Horace expressed themselves on the subject of the weather. Priscilla
had nothing to say on either interesting topic. She was trying to
realize that some day, instead of saying "Mr. Combs" and "Mrs. Combs,"
Horace would be addressing her parents as "father" and "mother." This
seemed so extraordinary that she was almost inclined to believe that
she had dreamed the whole thing, though the significantly tender
pressure of Horace's fingers, as he said good-night, assured her to the
contrary.

ssure of Horace's fingers, as he said good-night, assured her to the
contrary.ssure of Horace's fingers, as he said good-night, assured her to the
contrary.

Priscilla slept very poorly that night. Her dreams were troubled. And
each time she woke, which was on the average of once an hour, she
had a dreadful sense of impending disaster. On each occasion it took
her several minutes to convince herself that nothing was wrong, that
instead she was a very fortunate and happy girl, singled out of the
world of girls by a most unusual young man. And thus reassured, she
would drop off to sleep, to start again with troubled dreams, and to go
again through the whole program.

Owing to her restless night, Priscilla overslept and had to dress in
a hurry to avoid being late to breakfast. By expedition she reached
the dining room just after her mother had seated herself.

expedition she reached
the dining room just after her mother had seated herself. Her father
followed a half minute later, and leaning over her mother's chair
kissed her cheek. "Know what day it is?"

"Of course, silly," laughed Mrs. Combs. "But I'm astonished to hear
that you do."

Smiling broadly, Mr. Combs went around the table and took his seat. "We
should have planned a celebration," he remarked.

"What, and advertise our advanced age!" exclaimed his wife in mock
consternation.

"That's so," owned Mr. Combs with a chuckle. "I remember when a silver
wedding seemed to me significant of extreme age. What do you think,
daughter, of having parents old enough to have been married twenty-five
years?"

Then Priscilla knew what was the matter with her. She thought of

-five
years?"Then Priscilla knew what was the matter with her. She thought of

-five
years?"

Then Priscilla knew what was the matter with her. She thought of
sitting opposite Horace Hitchcock twice a day, year in and year out,
for a quarter of a century, and her heart turned sick within her.
All at once she knew how his affections of manner would grate on one
who watched them for twenty-five years. He had a way of raising his
eye-brows and pursing his mouth which, she was convinced, would drive
her frantic in course of time. And then her relentless common-sense,
awake at last, went on to assure her that the Horace Hitchcock who had
made love to her in the park the previous evening was in all essentials
the smug, vain little boy nobody liked. She watched her father and
mother exchanging smiles and knew that such good comradeship between

father and
mother exchanging smiles and knew that such good comradeship between
Horace and herself was unthinkable. She doubted if there would be a
smile left in her after twenty-five years of his society.

"You look tired this morning, Priscilla," said Mr. Combs. "And I can't
say I wonder. That admirer of yours makes me rather--"

"He's a very pleasant boy, I'm sure," interrupted Mrs. Combs hastily,
"though I wish his manners were just a little simpler. But he always
looks so neat that it's refreshing to the eye. And by the way, dear,
I think you had better see your tailor and get samples for your fall
suit. You've got to the point where you must have something."

Priscilla did not notice her mother's dextrous changing of the subject.

hing."Priscilla did not notice her mother's dextrous changing of the subject.

hing."

Priscilla did not notice her mother's dextrous changing of the subject.
She was too absorbed in looking ahead twenty-five weary years. Of
course, in view of her discovery, the only sensible thing to do was
to get in touch with Horace, and tell him that the lady with whom he
had been on such friendly terms in Babylon was an entirely different
person. But that sane and simple way of escape never occurred to
Priscilla. She had given her word. She must stand by it, no matter what
it cost.

Amy came over about eleven o'clock, looking very penitent. "Priscilla,"
she said, "I don't blame you a bit for getting angry yesterday. I'm
ashamed of what I said. Of course," added Amy, her natural candor
getting the better of her, "Horace Hitchcock doesn't appeal to me, but

l candor
getting the better of her, "Horace Hitchcock doesn't appeal to me, but
that doesn't excuse me for calling him a manikin, and you have a right
to choose your friends to please yourself."

Priscilla's acceptance of this apology took Amy by surprise. She
dropped her head on her visitor's shoulder--as Priscilla was tall and
Amy was short, this was a feat requiring considerable dexterity--and
burst into tears.

CHAPTER VII

THE FRIENDLY TERRACE ORPHANAGE

PRISCILLA'S engagement, instead of interrupting her intimacy with her
chums on Friendly Terrace, seemed to intensify it. Up to the night
that she had walked with Horace in the park, and he had claimed her on
the score of an affection dating back to Babylon, Priscilla had ratherd her on
the score of an affection dating back to Babylon, Priscilla had rather
enjoyed informing Peggy and others that she would be unable to join in
their plans for the evening, as she was expecting a caller. But now all
this was changed. Instead, when Horace called up to suggest coming out,
he was very likely to hear that his sweetheart of Babylonian days had
an imperative engagement with Peggy, or Ruth, or Amy, or more probably
with all three.

It was after an evening spent at a moving picture house that Peggy made
a suggestion destined to have more momentous results than she dreamed.
They had gone early to avoid the crowd which a popular film is likely
to draw even in the warmest weather, and at nine o'clock they were
occupying chairs on Peggy's porch, and discussing the heat.

ne o'clock they were
occupying chairs on Peggy's porch, and discussing the heat. "How about
ice cream?" inquired Amy, fanning herself with a magazine some one had
left in the hammock.

Before any one could answer, Peggy had interposed with her astonishing
suggestion. "Girls, I move we adopt a French orphan."

Amy forgot her interest in ice cream. "A French orphan," she gasped,
"What for?"

"Well, there are plenty of reasons from the orphan's standpoint,
and several from ours, it seems to me. Do you know we're getting
extravagant."

"Oh, Peggy," Ruth reproached her. "Why, as far as clothes go, I never
got along with so few in my life."

"I didn't say we were extravagant in clothes. But do you know, we're
getting to spend lots of money for little, no-account things. How many

w, we're
getting to spend lots of money for little, no-account things. How many
nights this week have we been to a movie?"

The question was a rhetorical one, as Peggy knew the answer as well as
any one. But nevertheless Amy replied, "We've been three times, but one
night the boys took us."The question was a rhetorical one, as Peggy knew the answer as well as
any one. But nevertheless Amy replied, "We've been three times, but one
night the boys took us."

"It costs just as much, no matter who pays. There are four of us; and
at twenty-five cents apiece, that makes a dollar an evening. Three
dollars a week for movies, just for us four."

"Goodness," exclaimed Amy in as astonished a tone as if this very
simple arithmetical calculation had been beyond her. "That does seem a
lot."

"And that's not all," continued Peggy. "We've had ice cream, or ice
cream soda, or something of the sort, at least three times this week,

m, or ice
cream soda, or something of the sort, at least three times this week,
and these days you can't go near a soda fountain for less than fifteen
cents, and you're more likely to pay twenty or twenty-five. If we call
our bill two dollars, that's putting it pretty low. Five dollars,
altogether."

"That _is_ too much, Peggy," Priscilla agreed. "Unless you stop to
count up, you wouldn't believe how much you can spend and all the time
think you've been economical. But why the French orphan?"

"Well, it's awfully hard work saving by main strength, and it's easy
enough if you have something to save for. If I happen to feel hungry
for ice cream--"

Amy groaned. "Don't!" she said in a hollow voice. "If we're not going
to have any, for pity's sake don't talk about it."

voice. "If we're not going
to have any, for pity's sake don't talk about it."

Peggy heartlessly ignored her friend's protest. "If I'm hungry for ice
cream, it doesn't do me much good to tell myself that I had a dish
night before last. I'll just think, 'Oh, well, what's twenty-five
cents!' But if I'm saving up for something, it's a different matter. We
found that out when we were paying for our Liberty Bonds."

"Won't it cost a great deal to adopt an orphan?" asked Ruth doubtfully."Won't it cost a great deal to adopt an orphan?" asked Ruth doubtfully.

"Why, we won't have to pay all its expenses. But there are lots of
French children left without fathers and mothers, who have some
relative who can give them a home if they have a little extra to help
them out. I think forty dollars will do it."

"Forty dollars a year?" Amy exclaimed in amazement.

forty dollars will do it."

"Forty dollars a year?" Amy exclaimed in amazement.

"I'm pretty sure that's it. Mrs. Alexander was talking to me about it
just the other day, and I'm certain she said forty dollars."

"Then let's adopt an orphan right away," cried Amy. "And we'll have
money enough left for sodas."

"Why, of course I didn't mean we should give up all our good times,"
Peggy exclaimed. "Only it seemed to me we were getting a little too
extravagant. Then if you all agree, I think I'll go and telephone Mrs.
Alexander that we'll take an orphan. She's worried because people
aren't as interested as they ought to be."

It was while Peggy was at the telephone that a small girl appeared,
carrying a large bundle. "I've brought home Mrs. Raymond's dress," she

ppeared,
carrying a large bundle. "I've brought home Mrs. Raymond's dress," she
said shyly, looking from one to another of the occupants of the porch.

"Mrs. Raymond isn't home, but Miss Peggy is. She's telephoning now, but
she'll be out in a minute," said Priscilla.

"You'd better sit down and rest while you wait for her," suggested Ruth
kindly, pushing forward a porch rocking-chair. The small girl accepted
the invitation and looked smaller than ever in the capacious depths of
the big chair.

Peggy came out beaming. "Mrs. Alexander is perfectly delighted, girls.
She says--Why, hello, Myrtle!"

"Hello, Miss Peggy," returned the girl with the bundle. "I brought home
your mother's dress. Aunt Georgie couldn't get it finished any earlier."

"Mother gave you up for to-night, Myrtle.

ouldn't get it finished any earlier.""Mother gave you up for to-night, Myrtle.

ouldn't get it finished any earlier."

"Mother gave you up for to-night, Myrtle. She left at eight o'clock,
but I think I know where she put the money."

Peggy's conjecture proved correct. She brought out the amount of the
dressmaker's bill, and having counted it before Myrtle's eyes, she
folded the bills carefully and stuffed them into Myrtle's diminutive
pocket book. "Shall you be glad when school opens, Myrtle?" she asked
pleasantly.

"I'm not going to school any more, Miss Peggy."

"What! You're going to leave school?"

"Aunt Georgie can't afford to keep me any longer. Everything is so
high," sighed the child, with a worldly-wise air that would have seemed
funny had it not been so apparent that she knew what she was talking
about.

ed
funny had it not been so apparent that she knew what she was talking
about.

"But you can't be nearly fourteen, Myrtle," protested Peggy. "And you
were doing so well in school."

"I'm twelve in September, but Aunt Georgie can get permit for me to
work, if she can't afford to keep me in school."

"Would you rather work than go to school?" asked Amy, rather tactlessly.

The eyes of the little girl filled. She sniffed bravely as she fumbled
for her handkerchief.

"I like school better," she explained, a catch in her voice. "But I
don't like to be a burden."

There was a brief silence on the porch as the little figure went down
the walk, and then Priscilla murmured pityingly, "Poor child!"

"It's a shame," exclaimed Peggy warmly. "She's a bright little thing.

child!"

"It's a shame," exclaimed Peggy warmly. "She's a bright little thing.
She's not twelve till September, and she's ready for the high school
already. If she could go to school four years more she'd probably be
able to earn a good living, but she'll never do very well if she stops
school now, for she's not strong enough for heavy work.""It almost seems a pity," Ruth suggested, "that we've just adopted a
French orphan. It seems there are orphans right at home who need help
just as much."

Peggy sighed. "I'm not sorry about the French orphan. I suppose we
can't imagine the need over there. But I do wish we could do something
for Myrtle."

"Peggy Raymond," warned Amy. "Don't let your philanthropy run away with
you, and get the idea that we're an orphan asylum. One orphan is all we

way with
you, and get the idea that we're an orphan asylum. One orphan is all we
can manage."

"Yes, of course," Peggy agreed hastily. "Only I was wondering--poor
little Myrtle!"

"Can't her aunt afford to give her an education?" Priscilla asked, "Or
is she stingy?"

"Oh, I suppose it's pretty hard for Miss Burns to get along with
everything so expensive. She's not a high-priced dress-maker, and
besides she's mortally slow; one of the puttering sort, you know. At
the same time," added Peggy, "I mean to see her and have a talk with
her about Myrtle."

Peggy was as good as her word. As postponement was never one of her
weaknesses, she saw Miss Burns the following day, and the faded little
spinster shed tears as she discussed Myrtle's future.

ay, and the faded little
spinster shed tears as she discussed Myrtle's future.

"Of course I know she ought to go on through high school," she sobbed.
"She's been at the head of her class right up through the grades, and
if she could finish high school, she wouldn't need to ask any odds of
anybody. But I've laid awake night after night thinking, and I can't
see my way to do it."

"If you had a little help, Miss Burns, I suppose you could manage,
couldn't you? What is the very least you could get along on and let
Myrtle stay in school?"

"Why she can't earn a great deal of course," said Miss Burns, wiping
her eyes. "She's not old enough for a sales-woman, and she's not
strong enough for any hard work, and she don't know anything about
stenography."rong enough for any hard work, and she don't know anything about
stenography."

"And what is the very least you think you could take in place of having
Myrtle go to work?"

Miss Burns was one of the people who have a constitutional aversion
to answering a direct question, but Peggy's persistence left her no
loop-hole of escape. Cornered at last, she expressed the opinion that
she could do with a hundred dollars. For some reason not quite clear in
her own mind, Peggy had hoped it might be less, and her face showed her
disappointment. "You think that is the very least you could get along
on, Miss Burns."

"I'm afraid it is, Miss Peggy. Maybe I should have said a hundred and
fifty. Look at the price of coal."

"Oh, I know," Peggy agreed. "Well, perhaps something will come up so

of coal."

"Oh, I know," Peggy agreed. "Well, perhaps something will come up so
Myrtle won't have to leave school. I'm sure I hope so."

Peggy repeated the substance of her conversation with Miss Burns to her
three chums that afternoon as they were on the way out to Amy's Aunt
Phoebe's. For in their efforts to circumvent the high cost of living,
the Friendly Terrace girls had begun making weekly or even semi-weekly
visits to the country. The season had been a favorable one for all
garden produce, but Mr. Frost was finding it difficult to get anything
like the help he needed. The girls went out into the garden, picked and
pulled what they wanted, paid a price which, compared with the charges
in the retail markets, seemed extremely reasonable, and came home

h the charges
in the retail markets, seemed extremely reasonable, and came home
with loaded market baskets and a tinge of sunburn in their cheeks. The
weekly saving paid their car-fare many times over, and the fact that
they all were together lent a festive air to the enterprise.Peggy's three friends listened silently to their story of her visit to
Miss Burns. Peggy's generosity was always leading her to attempt things
far too big for her. The girls had stood by her loyally in the matter
of the French orphan, but there they drew the line. A second orphan was
too much.

"I'm sorry," Amy said, with an air of dismissing the subject. "But I
don't see that we can do anything for her."

"You don't think, do you," Peggy hesitated, "that we could give a
little entertainment--"

think, do you," Peggy hesitated, "that we could give a
little entertainment--"

"Oh, Peggy, people are bored to death with benefits and drives, and
to try to raise money for a little girl nobody knows about would be
hopeless, especially when she's no worse off than thousands of others."

"I suppose that's so," Peggy replied, and reluctantly dropped the
subject. Under her submission was a persistent hope that something
might happen to aid her in the matter she had so much at heart. But
the last thing she or any one else would have thought was that such
assistance would come from Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back.

Mr. Frost had been having an unusually hard time with help and was in
an exceptionally bad humor. He was one of the men who, when out of

p and was in
an exceptionally bad humor. He was one of the men who, when out of
sorts, invariable relieve their minds by criticism of the opposite sex.
He had heard the girls chattering as they picked the lima beans, and
doubtless that furnished the text for his ill-natured sermon.

"Women's tongues do beat all," he declared, as the girls came to the
house to pay their reckoning. "It's small wonder they don't count much
when it comes to work. They get themselves all wore out talking."

"I think we do some other things beside talking," declared Peggy,
dimpling in a disarming fashion.

"And I can't see that we say any sillier things than men do," added Amy."I think we do some other things beside talking," declared Peggy,
dimpling in a disarming fashion.

"And I can't see that we say any sillier things than men do," added Amy.

"O, men can talk or be quiet, just as they please, but a woman's got
to talk or die.

men can talk or be quiet, just as they please, but a woman's got
to talk or die. You couldn't pay her enough to get her to hold her
tongue."

"You could pay me enough," said Peggy with spirit.

"Me, too," Amy cried.

Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back sneered contemptuously. "Why, I'd give
you four a hundred dollars to hold your tongues for a week."

"Girls," cried Peggy turning to her friends, "I move we take him up on
that."

Had Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back been less disagreeable, less
contemptuous, the girls might have hesitated, for a week of silence is
an ordeal to the least voluble. But Mr. Frost's sneers, combined with
Peggy's enthusiasm, swept them off their feet.

"Yes, we'll take you up," Amy cried, and Priscilla and Ruth nodded
approval.

"Yes, we'll take you up," Amy cried, and Priscilla and Ruth nodded
approval.

Uncle Philander was a little taken aback, and showed it. "You
understand when I said hold your tongues, I meant it. If there's an
_aye_, _yes_, or _no_ out of any of the four of you, it's all off."

"Of course," agreed the four girls in chorus.

Mr. Frost was plainly growing nervous. "Of course I haven't any way to
keep tab on you."

"Philander," cried his wife, bristling with indignation, "If you think
Amy or any of her friends would lie for the sake of money--"

"No, I didn't mean that," he half apologized. "I put all four of you on
your honor. Not a word out of you, not so much as an _ouch_."

"But we can write notes and explain to our families, of course," cried
Peggy.

"Of course," cried Amy, as Mr.

explain to our families, of course," cried
Peggy.

"Of course," cried Amy, as Mr. Frost hesitated. "And talk on our
fingers. All you said was _tongues_.""Of course," cried Amy, as Mr.

explain to our families, of course," cried
Peggy.

"Of course," cried Amy, as Mr. Frost hesitated. "And talk on our
fingers. All you said was _tongues_."

"You can write all the notes you want to," conceded Uncle Philander
generously. Now that he had time to think of it, he was convinced that
the conditions he had imposed could not possibly be complied with. Who
had ever heard of four lively girls maintaining an unbroken silence for
a week? His hundred dollars was safe.

After some discussion it was decided that the week should begin the
following morning, to give the girls ample chance to explain their
singular undertaking to their friends. And then the four started off
with their heavy baskets, chattering excitedly, as if in the hopes

r started off
with their heavy baskets, chattering excitedly, as if in the hopes
of saying in the few hours remaining before bed time, all they would
ordinarily have said in the next seven days.

CHAPTER VIII

THE LONGEST WEEK ON RECORD

IT was a Thursday when the four Friendly Terrace girls entered on their
remarkable contract with Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back, and Friday
began the longest week recorded in the experiences of any of the four.
According to the calendar, it contained only the usual seven days.
According to the clock, each of these days consisted of the customary
twenty-four hours. But the four chums knew better. It was at least a
month long. They had spent Thursday evening explaining the situation
to their friends and relatives and saying good-by as if for a week'ssituation
to their friends and relatives and saying good-by as if for a week's
absence. It was not to be expected that their news would meet the same
reception in all quarters. Fathers and mothers, while not exactly
approving, were on the whole rather amused, and inclined to take
the attitude that girls will be girls. Among their friends outside,
their announcement was received with a surprise that was sometimes
suggestive of enjoyment, and again of indignation.

Peggy found Graham particularly obdurate. "Not to speak to me for a
week? Well, I like that!"

"I can write you letters, dear."

"Letters!" Graham's repetition of the word was anything but flattering
to Peggy's epistolary efforts. "Of course," he went on in a milder
tone, "I love your letters when I'm away from you.

ourse," he went on in a milder
tone, "I love your letters when I'm away from you. But to read letters
instead of talking to you is like--like eating dried apple pie in
October."

"It's only a week," said Peggy, but she sighed. And her sigh would have
been much more vehement had she dreamed how long that week would prove.

Priscilla writing a little note to Horace Hitchcock did not sigh over
the prospect that she could exchange no words with him for seven days.
Indeed she was conscious of a profound relief. Recently Horace had
taken up the philosophical style in conversation, and Priscilla, as she
listened, frequently found herself unable to understand a word he was
saying. At first she assumed that this was due to her not having givend he was
saying. At first she assumed that this was due to her not having given
him sufficiently close attention, and she had chided herself for her
wandering thoughts. But things were no better when she listened her
hardest. Priscilla knew that she was not a fool. She had finished her
junior year in college, and her class standing in all philosophical
subjects had been excellent. If she could not understand what Horace
was talking about, she felt reasonably sure that the explanation
was not in her own intellectual lack but because Horace was talking
nonsense. The polysyllables he used so glibly and the epigrammatic
phrases which to the unthinking might have seemed indicative of
erudition and originality, when Priscilla came to analyze them seemed

cative of
erudition and originality, when Priscilla came to analyze them seemed
to have no more relation to one another than glittering beads strung
on a wire. Priscilla was driven to the conclusion that Horace had
been reading literature considerably over his head, and that he was
reproducing for her benefit a sort of _pot-pourri_ of recollections,
blended without much regard to their original connection.

But this was not the only reason why Priscilla had a sense of relief
in writing to ask Horace not to call for a week. As the days went
on, the thought of her silver wedding had been increasingly painful.
Horace's affectations, to which for a time she had deliberately closed
her eyes, were continually more glaringly in evidence. Once, whenrately closed
her eyes, were continually more glaringly in evidence. Once, when
they were alone, Priscilla had tremulously hinted that perhaps they
had been mistaken in supposing themselves fitted for each other, and
Horace's reception of the suggestion had terrified her unutterably.
He had addressed himself to the stars and asked if it were true that
there was neither faith nor constancy in womankind. Then he had looked
at Priscilla, with an expression of agony, and said, "I thought it
was you who was to heal my tortured heart, and now you have failed
me." But when he began to put his hand to his forehead and mutter that
life was only a series of disappointments and that the sooner it was
over the better, Priscilla, white to the lips, had assured him that he
had misunderstood her.

er, Priscilla, white to the lips, had assured him that he
had misunderstood her. Her efforts to restore his serenity were not
altogether successful and she did not feel at ease about him until,
a day or two later, she saw his name among the guests at a dinner
dance, at Mrs. Sidney Vanderpool's country house. But the interview had
confirmed her certainty that there was no escaping the snare into which
she had walked with eyes wide open. And for that reason a week free
from Horace's society was more than welcome.

The silent week starting Friday morning had seemed rather a joke to
begin with. At four breakfast tables, four girls who contributed not
a syllable to the conversation, contributed largely, nevertheless, to
the family gaiety. But by noon the humorous phase of the situation hadless, to
the family gaiety. But by noon the humorous phase of the situation had
passed, at least for the four chiefly concerned. All of them went about
with an expression of Spartan-like resolve, blended with not a little
anxiety. For when people have been chattering animatedly every day for
fifteen or twenty years, it is very easy for an exclamation to escape
their lips in spite of resolutions to the contrary.

Peggy probably had the hardest time of any one. For her brother, Dick,
although fond of calling attention to a fuzzy excrescence which he
denominated his mustache, was as fond of mischief as he had ever been.
And while undoubtedly he would have been sorry to have Peggy break her
vow of silence, and lose the hundred dollars which meant another year

break her
vow of silence, and lose the hundred dollars which meant another year
in school for little Myrtle Burns, he nevertheless subjected his sister
to any number of nerve-racking tests. A crash as of a falling body in
an upstairs room, a cry of anguish from the cellar, a loud knocking on
the ceiling of her room apparently by ghostly fingers, were among the
devices Dick used for the testing of his sister. On each occasion Peggy
started convulsively, but somehow or other choked back the cry that
rose to her lips, "Oh, what is it? What is the matter?"

Though Dick was the only one of the Raymond family who made
deliberate attempts to betray his sister into unguarded speech, Mrs.
Raymond, innocent as were her intentions, was almost as much of a
stumbling-block.

ymond, innocent as were her intentions, was almost as much of a
stumbling-block. "Now what do you think, Peggy," she would begin,
"had we better try Turners again or--" And then catching sight of
the Joan-of-Arc expression on Peggy's face, she would break off her
question in the middle, and cry, "Oh, dear, I entirely forgot! I shall
certainly be glad when this ridiculous week is over."There was one advantage in a week of silence. The girls were allowed
to write letters, and they took full advantage of that permission.
They wrote to aunts and uncles and cousins and all sorts of neglected
relatives. They wrote to old friends, who had moved to other cities.
They wrote to the girls they had come to know in their work as
farmerettes. They wrote--all four of them--to Lucy Haines, a country

ir work as
farmerettes. They wrote--all four of them--to Lucy Haines, a country
girl they had helped one summer vacation, now a successful teacher. If
all weeks had been like this one, the postman who collected the mail
from the Friendly Terrace letter-box would have needed an assistant.
Peggy also wrote to Graham every day, and she tried to make her letters
as sprightly and entertaining as possible, so that he should not miss
their daily talks so much. But under the circumstances there was not
a great deal to tell, and if it had not been for Dick's machinations,
which Peggy repeated in much detail, she feared that her missives would
have proved dull reading.

Every afternoon the four girls met at the home of one or the other
of the quartette, bringing sewing or fancy work.

at the home of one or the other
of the quartette, bringing sewing or fancy work. They usually sat
indoors, for if a neighbor conversationally inclined had happened to
come along while they were occupying the porch the situation might
have been embarrassing. Amy made a valiant effort to revive a finger
alphabet they had used in school to carry on extended conversations
across a school room. But though it had not taken long for the girls to
refresh their memories of the letters, they found it much harder work
to converse after the fashion of the deaf and dumb than it had seemed
when they were younger, and for the most part conversation languished.
They sat and sewed, each vaguely cheered by the proximity of her fellow
sufferers, though all the time conscious that this was an abnormallyher fellow
sufferers, though all the time conscious that this was an abnormally
long week.

But long as the days were, each came to an end in time. Amy had fallen
in the way of apprising Aunt Phoebe by post-card that another day had
been passed in silence. "Tell Mr. Frost he might as well make out his
check now," she wrote at the conclusion of the third day. "We haven't
spoken yet, and now we've learned the secret, there isn't the least
danger that any one will speak before the week is up."

As the days went by, the vigilance of the girls increased instead of
relaxing. Each realized that a single inadvertent exclamation from the
lips of one would render vain the effort and sacrifice of all. This
realization got rather on their nerves, and Ruth particularly, showed
it.

This
realization got rather on their nerves, and Ruth particularly, showed
it.

"It's the most absurd thing I ever heard of," declared Mr. Wylie at
breakfast one morning, as Ruth came downstairs heavy-eyed. "You girls
call yourselves college women, don't you? This affair is worthy of a
bunch of high-school Freshmen."

"I think Ruth wants me to remind you," said Mrs. Wylie, as her daughter
looked at her appealingly, "that they mean to use the hundred dollars
in sending a little girl to school."

"But no man in his senses is going to pay good money for anything like
this. Who is he, anyway?"

"A sort of Uncle of Amy's, didn't you say, Ruth?"

As Amy's relationship to Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back was too
complicated to explain without the assistance of language, Ruth

is-Back was too
complicated to explain without the assistance of language, Ruth
contented herself with nodding.

"Probably he was only joking. A hundred dollars is a hundred dollars,
especially these days. You oughtn't to have taken him seriously, Ruth."

"I think Peggy is really responsible," remarked Mrs. Wylie, with a
rather mischievous smile, for Mr. Wylie's admiration for his son's
fiancée was as outspoken as Graham's own."I think Peggy is really responsible," remarked Mrs. Wylie, with a
rather mischievous smile, for Mr. Wylie's admiration for his son's
fiancée was as outspoken as Graham's own.

"Is that so, Ruth?"

Ruth nodded.

"Then all I can say," declared Mr. Wylie, pushing back his chair from
the table, "is that in this matter my future daughter-in-law showed
less than her usual good horse-sense."

"I'm beginning to understand something that always puzzled me,"
Peggy wrote Graham, that same evening. "You know in mathematics they

zzled me,"
Peggy wrote Graham, that same evening. "You know in mathematics they
talk about an _asymptote_, something that something else is always
approaching, but never reaches. That always seemed so foolish to
me, to approach a thing continually and never get there. But now I
understand. Thursday is an asymptote."

But though Thursday loitered on the way, it arrived at last, and four
girls woke to the realization that it was supremely important--the day
that either made void or confirmed the success of the previous six.
They spent the morning characteristically. Ruth, who had felt under
the weather for a day or two, decided to stay in bed, this being a
safe refuge. Priscilla took a basket of mending and retired to her
room. Peggy spent her time at her writing desk and tried to collect

ired to her
room. Peggy spent her time at her writing desk and tried to collect
some fugitive ideas into a theme for her college English work in the
fall. Amy devoted herself to making a cake with a very thick chocolate
frosting.It happened that this morning Amy had received a postcard from Aunt
Phoebe, the first reply to her daily bulletins. "Glad to hear you are
getting on so well," wrote the old lady. "P---- quite nervous." After
the cake was finished and the frosting hardening, Amy resolved to take
Aunt Phoebe's card over to Peggy. While they could not talk it over,
they could exchange smiles, and probably a few ideas as well, through
the medium of a lead pencil. The luckless Amy picked up the post card
and started off in high spirits.

cil. The luckless Amy picked up the post card
and started off in high spirits.

It happened that one of the houses on the Terrace had been built with
a slate roof, which at the present time was undergoing repairs. Amy,
swinging lightly along the familiar way, gained rapidly on an old man
ahead who walked very deliberately, apparently examining the numbers of
the houses. Amy noticed that, although the sky was clear, he carried a
massive cotton umbrella.

The old gentleman was just opposite the house which was being repaired,
when one of the workmen pulled out a broken slate and without even
looking behind him, flung it to the street below. Amy saw the workman
before the slate left his hand, and some intuition warned her of
danger. "Look out!" she cried shrilly, "Look out!"

ome intuition warned her of
danger. "Look out!" she cried shrilly, "Look out!"

The old man ahead dodged back. He was none too quick, for the piece
of slate, flying through the air with the sharp edge down, dropped
where he had stood an instant before. The old man took off his
hat and ran his fingers through his hair. Amy saw it was Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back.The discovery, interesting in itself, meant nothing to Amy at the
moment. She uttered a heart-broken wail. She had spoken before the week
was up. By her impulsive exclamation she had forfeited the hundred
dollars. Though she knew acknowledgment must be made to her partners
in the undertaking, since as she had broken the spell the others were
automatically released from the obligation of silence, to face any of

hers were
automatically released from the obligation of silence, to face any of
them at that moment seemed impossible. Without a word to Mr. Frost, Amy
wheeled about and started for home, the tears running down her cheeks.

Breathing hard, Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back trotted after her. What
he meant to say does not matter, since the discovery that Amy was in
tears resulted in the inquiry, "What are you crying for, hey?"

"I lost it," Amy sobbed. "I spoke."

Her companion seemed to be deliberating. "I s'pose you mean the hundred
dollars."

"Of course I mean the hundred dollars. But I don't see how I could have
helped it. I couldn't walk on deliberately and see a sharp piece of
slate drop on a man's head."

[Illustration: "'A HUNDRED DOLLARS AIN'T ANY TOO MUCH TO PAY FOR HAVING

head."

[Illustration: "'A HUNDRED DOLLARS AIN'T ANY TOO MUCH TO PAY FOR HAVING
YOUR LIFE SAVED'"]

"I came in to-day thinking I'd have a talk with that friend of yours,"
said Mr. Frost, "seeing she seemed to be the head one in this thing.
I was going to tell her that now I'd thought it over, my conscience
wasn't quite easy about this agreement of ourn. I'm afraid it is too
much like placing a bet."

Amy's jaw dropped as she looked at him. Her tears dried instantly, the
moisture evaporated by the fires of her wrath. But either because her
usually ready tongue was out of practise after six days of idleness,
or because the realization of the perfidy of the old man produced a
momentary paralysis of her vocal chords, not a word escaped her parted
lips."Yes, it didn't look right to me," Mr.

rds, not a word escaped her parted
lips.

"Yes, it didn't look right to me," Mr. Frost continued. "It was the
same as betting that you four girls couldn't keep from talking for a
week. My conscience wouldn't let me be a party to anything of that
sort. But--"

The pause after the "but" was prolonged. Amy searched her vocabulary
for words that would do justice to the occasion, but Uncle
Philander-Behind-His-Back was continuing before she knew what she
wanted to say.

"Having your life saved is a different thing. That slate had an edge on
it like a meat ax, and coming through the air the way it was, it would
have cleft my head open like it had been an egg shell. My widow could
have got damages all right, but that wouldn't have helped me out."

They had reached Amy's door by now.

ght, but that wouldn't have helped me out."

They had reached Amy's door by now. "Got pen and ink handy?" asked Mr.
Frost, with a marked change of manner.

"Yes," said Amy tonelessly, and opened the door for him. She led the
way to the writing desk, and pointed out the articles he required.
Mr. Philander Frost, seating himself, wrote out a check for a hundred
dollars, payable to Amy Lassell or order.

"There," he said as he reached for the blotter. "Can't nobody no matter
how sensitive their consciences are, find any fault with that. A
hundred dollars ain't any too much to pay for having your life saved."

And then the ink had a narrow escape from being overturned, for Amy
flung her arms around the old gentleman's neck and hugged him. "Uncle
Philander!" she screamed, "You're a prince."

man's neck and hugged him. "Uncle
Philander!" she screamed, "You're a prince."

And that is how little Myrtle Burns was assured of her year in high
school, and Uncle Philander-Behind-His-Back was adopted, unreservedly,
by four unusually attractive nieces.

CHAPTER IX

THE MOST WONDERFUL THING IN THE WORLDCHAPTER IX

THE MOST WONDERFUL THING IN THE WORLD

NELSON HALLOWELL had something on his mind. Ruth had discovered it
early in the evening. They had all gone over to Peggy's, and there
had been the usual amount of talk and laughter, but Nelson had hardly
spoken. Every time she looked in his direction, Ruth found his eyes
upon her, and something in his manner said as plainly as words could
have told it, that he was only waiting to get her alone to impart some
confidence of more than ordinary importance. Ruth was not in the least

art some
confidence of more than ordinary importance. Ruth was not in the least
inclined to be self-conscious, but for some reason his unwavering
regard made her nervous. She was glad when the clock struck ten and she
could take her leave.

Though Graham had lingered for a little talk with Peggy, and Nelson
and Ruth had the sidewalk to themselves, the young man seemed in no
hurry to relieve his mind. Instead he walked at Ruth's side apparently
absorbed in thought. Ruth, waiting, half amused and half vexed by his
air of preoccupation, pinched her lips tightly shut as she resolved not
to be the first to break the silence.

At the door of her home Nelson suddenly roused himself. "May I come in
for a little while, Ruth?"

"Of course, Nelson. It's Friday. No classes to-morrow."

little while, Ruth?"

"Of course, Nelson. It's Friday. No classes to-morrow."

"There's something I want to talk to you about," he said, and followed
her indoors with an air of summoning his resolution. As Ruth turned on
the lights in the living room, he drew a letter from his pocket and
handed it to her. "I'd like to have you read that."

Ruth seated herself by the drop light, and drew out the enclosure. It
was folded so that her eye fell at once on the signature. "Why," she
exclaimed, "that's the nice soldier you got acquainted with in the
hospital."

"Yes. The fellow from Oklahoma, you know.""Yes. The fellow from Oklahoma, you know."

Ruth unfolded the letter and began to read. Immediately her expression
underwent a noticeable change. One would have said that the letter

er expression
underwent a noticeable change. One would have said that the letter
annoyed her, though when at length she lifted her eyes and met Nelson's
expectant look, she was laughing. "Did you ever hear of anything so
absurd!" she exclaimed.

Nelson cleared his throat. "If you look at it in one way, it's quite an
unusual chance. You see he's willing to take me without any capital--"

"I don't know what he ever saw in you to make him think you'd make
a ranchman," Ruth exclaimed. "I can't imagine you as a cowboy. I
suppose," she added excusingly, "that he's always been used to an
out-door life and it seems rather dreadful to him for any one to be
shut up in a book-store."

"It is rather dreadful."

Ruth gave a little start. For a moment she was under an impression

dreadful."

Ruth gave a little start. For a moment she was under an impression
that she had not heard Nelson aright, or else that he was joking.
And yet his voice had no suggestion of humor. It was hoarse and
curiously intense, and as she looked at him, she saw that his face was
unnaturally flushed.

"Why, Nelson," she cried, "What are you talking about? You can't mean
that you don't like your work."

Nelson looked at her appealingly. Without realizing it, Ruth had spoken
in a rather peremptory fashion, and at once his sensitive face showed
his fear of having offended her.

"I used to think I liked it, Ruth."

"Used to! Why, Nelson--"

"But now it's like being in a strait jacket. I don't see how any fellow
who was in the service can ever get back to standing behind a counter

any fellow
who was in the service can ever get back to standing behind a counter
and be satisfied."any fellow
who was in the service can ever get back to standing behind a counter
and be satisfied."

Again Ruth noticed the curious intensity of his manner. She looked at
the letter lying upon the table with a feeling of irritation she did
not stop to analyze.

"Nelson, you don't mean you want to take that offer? You wouldn't
really like to go to Oklahoma, would you? Why it's the jumping-off
place."

He sat looking at the floor. "I wanted to know what you thought," he
murmured.

"I'd hate to say all I thought. Why, Nelson, I don't believe it's ever
occurred to you what it would mean to your mother." Ruth herself had
not thought of Mrs. Hallowell until that instant, and she made up for
her tardiness by speaking very earnestly. "It would simply kill her to

e up for
her tardiness by speaking very earnestly. "It would simply kill her to
have you off at the ends of the earth."

"Mother's pretty game, you know." Nelson smiled as if recalling
something that had pleased him particularly. "She says she wouldn't
mind a bit living in Oklahoma."

Ruth swallowed hard. Something in his reminiscent smile added to her
vexation.

"I should think you would know better than to take her seriously. She'd
die of homesickness. But of course, if you've really set your heart on
going thousands of miles away from all your friends, I wouldn't want to
put anything in your way."

"Ruth, you know I don't mean that." He looked rather bewildered at her
injustice. "I haven't answered the letter. I just wanted to know what
you thought about it."

haven't answered the letter. I just wanted to know what
you thought about it."

"Well, I think the whole thing is absurd. I suppose you are a little
restless after your army life, but you'll get over that."

"I suppose I will," Nelson acknowledged. He was so humble about it
that Ruth promptly forgave him for having given favorable consideration
to the offer of his friend in Oklahoma, and was her usual pleasant self
during the remainder of his stay.As far as Nelson was concerned, the matter was dropped, but unluckily
for Ruth's peace of mind Peggy was yet to be heard from. The next day
was Saturday and Peggy dropped in soon after breakfast.

"Ruth, what was the matter with Nelson last evening? I never knew
anybody to be so quiet. I was afraid that perhaps something was said

never knew
anybody to be so quiet. I was afraid that perhaps something was said
that hurt his feelings. He's such a sensitive fellow."

"No indeed, Peggy. It wasn't anything particular." Ruth hesitated,
uncertain whether to let it go at that, or to explain the situation
in full. Her life-long habit of confiding in Peggy proved more than
a match for her undefined hesitation, and she went on to tell of the
letter from Oklahoma with its preposterous offer. She finished with a
little contemptuous laugh, but Peggy's face was grave.

"Did he want to go, Ruth?"

"Why, he--well, it seems, Peggy, that since he got out of the service
he's been sort of restless. He got so used to outdoor life that he
doesn't enjoy indoor work. But I tell him he'll get over that."

r life that he
doesn't enjoy indoor work. But I tell him he'll get over that."

"I suppose," said the downright Peggy, looking straight at her friend,
"that you feel that you wouldn't want to live in Oklahoma."

Ruth jumped. Then as the blood rushed tingling to the roots of her
hair, she turned on Peggy a look of intense indignation.

"Peggy Raymond, what on earth are you talking about?"

Peggy sat without replying and Ruth continued vehemently, "Of course
I like Nelson Hallowell; like him very much. I consider him one of my
very best friends. But that's all. The very idea of your talking as
if--"

"I suppose," said Peggy, as Ruth came to a halt, "you'd miss him if he
went out West."

Ruth brightened. "Yes, that's just it. I'd miss him terribly. I really

West.""I suppose," said Peggy, as Ruth came to a halt, "you'd miss him if he
went out West."

Ruth brightened. "Yes, that's just it. I'd miss him terribly. I really

West."

Ruth brightened. "Yes, that's just it. I'd miss him terribly. I really
think he's one of the nicest boys I ever knew, and for all he's so
quiet, we have dandy times together. But as for anything else--"

"Don't you think," suggested Peggy, as Ruth halted again, "that it
seems a little bit unfair to interfere with Nelson's future, just
because you like to have him dropping in every day or two and because
it's convenient to have an escort whenever you want to go somewhere?"

Ruth found herself incapable of replying. She sat staring at Peggy with
a resentment that she could not have concealed if she had tried. And
Peggy, quite unmoved by her friend's indignation, continued judicially,
"If you were going to marry Nelson, you would have a perfect right to

udicially,
"If you were going to marry Nelson, you would have a perfect right to
help decide where he should be located. But it's considerable of a
responsibility to persuade him to turn down an offer like that, just
because you're afraid you're going to miss him if he goes away."

Ruth found her voice. "Nelson Hallowell can do exactly as he pleases.
He asked my advice and I gave it, but he doesn't have to take it unless
he wants to."

"That's not fair, Ruth. However you feel about it, you know perfectly
well that Nelson wants to please you more than anything in the world.
And besides, when a friend asks you your advice, you're supposed to
think of what is best for him and not of what you want yourself."

"Really, Peggy," said Ruth rather witheringly, "as long as Nelson is

ourself."

"Really, Peggy," said Ruth rather witheringly, "as long as Nelson is
satisfied with my advice, I can't see that any one else need take it to
heart."ourself."

"Really, Peggy," said Ruth rather witheringly, "as long as Nelson is
satisfied with my advice, I can't see that any one else need take it to
heart."

Peggy colored. It was a fact that, relying on long intimacy and
close friendship, she had said more to Ruth than she would have been
justified in saying to another girl. "Excuse me, Ruth," she answered
quickly. "I'm afraid I was rather interfering."

The effect of this apology was peculiar. Ruth burst into tears. "Oh,
don't, Peggy," she sobbed. "Don't act as if it wasn't any business of
yours what I did."

"I'm afraid," owned Peggy, "that I'm too much inclined to think
everything you do is my business."

"No, you're not. We're just the same as sisters. And it would kill me
if you washed your hands of me."

ust the same as sisters. And it would kill me
if you washed your hands of me."

Peggy burst into a reassuring laugh. "Small danger of that, dearie.
I'm likely to remain Meddlesome Peggy to the end of the chapter, as far
as you're concerned. And I don't know what you're crying for, Ruth."

Ruth was not quite sure herself, but she continued to sob. "Do you
think I ought to encourage Nelson to go, Peggy?"

"I don't say that. But it seems to me you ought not to discourage him,
unless you have a good reason. And though I don't know much about such
things, it sounded to be like a wonderful offer. What does Nelson
think?"

"I--I guess he thought so, too, but I didn't give him a chance to
say much." Ruth dropped her head upon Peggy's shoulder and sobbed.
"Oklahoma is such a dreadful way off."

head upon Peggy's shoulder and sobbed.
"Oklahoma is such a dreadful way off."

"I know it is," Peggy patted her shoulder tenderly. "I'd nearly cry my
eyes out if anybody I loved went there to live."

"Nelson is so good, Peggy. He wanted to go, but he gave it up just as
soon as he saw I didn't like the idea. And I know he hates that old
book store.""Nelson is so good, Peggy. He wanted to go, but he gave it up just as
soon as he saw I didn't like the idea. And I know he hates that old
book store."

Peggy continued to smile rather wistfully and to pat the heaving
shoulders while Ruth prattled on. "I'm awfully selfish, I know. It's
just as you said. I never gave a thought to what was best for him."

"I never said that, Ruth, I'm sure."

"Well, it's so, anyway. I wonder if he's answered that letter yet. I'm
going to call up and see."

Ruth had no need to look in the telephone book to find the number of
Flynn's book store.

d no need to look in the telephone book to find the number of
Flynn's book store. As the hour was early, Nelson himself answered the
call. His politely interrogative tone changed markedly as in response
to his, "Hello," Ruth said, "It's I, Nelson."

"Ruth! Why, good morning!"

"Have you answered that letter from Oklahoma?"

"No, I haven't, Ruth. But never mind that letter. We won't talk about
it any more."

"I just wanted to ask you not to answer it till we'd talked it over
again, Nelson."

He hesitated a moment. "I don't see the use of that. I wanted to see
how you really felt about it, and now I've found out."

"Well, don't answer it right away. That's all. Are you coming up
to-night, Nelson?"

"Sure."

Ruth smiled faintly at the emphatic syllable. "Good-by," she said, then

Sure."

Ruth smiled faintly at the emphatic syllable. "Good-by," she said, then
sighed as she hung up the receiver. "Well, it's all right," she told
the waiting Peggy. "I haven't done any mischief that I can't undo."

But when Nelson came that evening he proved unexpectedly obdurate. He
showed an extreme reluctance to re-open the subject of the Oklahoma
proposition, and roused Ruth's indignation by hinting that the matter
did not concern Peggy Raymond, and he could not see any reason for her
"butting in." And when sternly called to order for this bit of heresy,
he still showed himself unwilling to talk of Oklahoma."What's the use?" he burst out suddenly. "I know how you feel about
it. I--I--It's awfully hard explaining, Ruth, when I haven't any right

el about
it. I--I--It's awfully hard explaining, Ruth, when I haven't any right
to--to say how I feel--but the long and short of it is I wouldn't go to
any place where you wouldn't live."

He stopped, his face scarlet as he realized all his statement implied.
Nelson was keenly conscious of his own disadvantages. Graham would
soon be in a position to support a family, but the salary Mr. Flynn
paid his competent clerk made a wife seem an impossible luxury. Nelson
regarded Ruth as the bright particular star of the Friendly Terrace
quartette. He considered her prettier than Peggy, wittier than Amy, and
more talented than Priscilla. For him to aspire to be the first in her
heart was the height of presumption, in Nelson's opinion, and yet he

rst in her
heart was the height of presumption, in Nelson's opinion, and yet he
had just said to her in effect that he would not go to any place where
she would not go with him. Despairingly he realized how poorly his
presumptuous speech had expressed his attitude of worshipful humility.

Then he became aware that Ruth was looking at him from the other side
of the table, and that her manner lacked the indignation appropriate
to the occasion. She held her head very high, and her eyes were like
stars. Nelson suddenly experienced a difficulty in breathing. His heart
was beating more rapidly than it had ever beaten under fire. He heard
himself asking a question, the audacity of which astounded him.

"You wouldn't think of it, would you, Ruth, going out to that rough

unded him.

"You wouldn't think of it, would you, Ruth, going out to that rough
cattle country, a girl like you?""You wouldn't think of it, would you, Ruth, going out to that rough

unded him.

"You wouldn't think of it, would you, Ruth, going out to that rough
cattle country, a girl like you?"

He did not realize the desperation in his voice as he put the
question, but its appeal went straight to Ruth's heart. She answered
unhesitatingly. "The place wouldn't matter, Nelson. Everything would
depend on the one--the one I went with."

It was not an opportune time for Graham to walk into the room. And it
argued him obtuse, that instead of realizing he was in the way, he
seated himself in the easy chair, and proceeded to discuss a variety of
subjects. Once or twice Nelson's answers suggested that his mind was
wandering, and small wonder. For when the most wonderful thing in the
world has just happened, it is hard on any young fellow to be held up

ng in the
world has just happened, it is hard on any young fellow to be held up
and forced to give his views on universal training.

CHAPTER X

MISTRESS AND MAID

A CAREWORN, anxious expression had come to be so much at home on
Priscilla's countenance, that it did not surprise Peggy to look from
her window one Saturday morning and see Priscilla approaching, her face
so lined by worry as to suggest that the heaviest responsibilities
rested on her shoulders. As she was quite unconscious of Peggy's
observation, she did not make her usual effort to smile and appear
natural.

"I wish I knew what ailed that girl," thought Peggy, studying
Priscilla's changed countenance with a heart-sick concern. "She looks
years older than she did six months ago, and I can't make out whether

She looks
years older than she did six months ago, and I can't make out whether
she's sick or just unhappy. And the worst of it is that one can't get a
thing out of her."She looks
years older than she did six months ago, and I can't make out whether
she's sick or just unhappy. And the worst of it is that one can't get a
thing out of her."

But in this particular instance Peggy was to have no reason to complain
of Priscilla's reticence. As Priscilla raised her heavy eyes and
saw her friend's face at the window, her own face brightened and she
quickened her steps. Peggy hurried to the door, and flung it open with
an unreasonable hope that this interview would end the mystery which
had baffled her for so long. But the perplexity Priscilla had come to
confide was too recent to explain her worried air through the months
past. She was hardly in the house before she burst out, "Peggy, I'm in
an awful pickle."

"What's the matter? Can I help!"

burst out, "Peggy, I'm in
an awful pickle."

"What's the matter? Can I help!"

"I wondered if you would lend me Sally."

"Sally?" repeated Peggy in accents of astonishment. For the
maid-of-all-work in the Raymond household was a possession of which
few people were envious. Whether Sally was really weak minded was a
question on which a difference of opinion was possible, but there was
no possible doubt of her talent for doing the wrong thing at the right
time or else, vice versa, the right thing at the wrong time. Her one
redeeming feature was her amiability, but as this frequently took a
conversational turn, it was not without its drawbacks. That any of
her friends could want to borrow Sally, or that any household but

s. That any of
her friends could want to borrow Sally, or that any household but
their own would put up with the blundering, good-natured apology for a
domestic servant, had never entered Peggy's head.

"Sally," she repeated, still in a tone of mystification. "Of course you
can have her if you want her, but whatever it is, she'll do it wrong."

"I suppose she could open the door for a caller, couldn't she?""I suppose she could open the door for a caller, couldn't she?"

"Why, she can open a door, as a rule, but just now she's got a
tooth-ache, and her head is tied up in a red flannel, so unless the
callers are people of strong nerves, they may be startled."

"O dear!" Priscilla's acceptance of this bit of information was so
suggestive of tragedy that Peggy was more puzzled than ever. "Who is
the caller?" she demanded.

ragedy that Peggy was more puzzled than ever. "Who is
the caller?" she demanded. "And why in the world do you want Sally?"

"Well, it's quite a story, Peggy. You know Mother's away this week and
Martha's having her vacation, and Father and I are taking our meals at
the Lindsays. And last evening Horace Hitchcock called, and it seems
that an aunt of his is in town."

"Oh!" said Peggy. She always made desperate efforts to act just as
usual when Horace's name was mentioned, but under such circumstances
she invariably felt as if a thick curtain had dropped between her
friend and herself. "Horace Hitchcock's aunt," she repeated, trying
valiantly to speak naturally. "Is she his mother's sister or his
father's?"

"Neither one. She's his father's aunt, and of course she is quite old

ther's?"

"Neither one. She's his father's aunt, and of course she is quite old
and very rich, and it seems she's coming out to call on me."

"To call on you," Peggy exclaimed. "How interesting!"

But that adjective registered an exception to Peggy's usual frankness.
Had she spoken her real feelings she would have said, "How dreadful!"
For a call from the young man's great-aunt seemed to imply that the
young man's intentions were serious, and recognized by the family.
Horace and Priscilla! Peggy stifled a groan.

"And you see the fix I'm in," Priscilla was explaining disconsolately.
"Of course she's used to butlers and everything, and here I've got to
go to open the door myself."

Peggy listened wonderingly. For even if Horace Hitchcock had been an

myself."Peggy listened wonderingly. For even if Horace Hitchcock had been an

myself."

Peggy listened wonderingly. For even if Horace Hitchcock had been an
entirely different young man, the necessity for opening the door to
his great-aunt would not have impressed her as a tragedy. Priscilla's
intuition told her what was passing through the other girl's mind, and
she spoke a little fretfully.

"Of course it's silly to mind, Peggy, but I _do_ mind, just the same.
Mrs. Duncan has a houseful of servants, and she thinks of women who
answer their own door-bell as we think of women who take in washing."
Priscilla's feeling of resentment at Peggy was enhanced by her own
wonder at herself. The glamor which had surrounded Horace in the first
renewal of their childish acquaintance had quite disappeared, and yet

the first
renewal of their childish acquaintance had quite disappeared, and yet
she could not bear the thought that Horace's great-aunt might look down
upon her.

"Sally wouldn't be the least bit of good," Peggy declared, "even if it
wasn't for the red flannel. Just when I want Sally to be on her good
behavior, she does some perfectly unheard-of thing. When do you expect
Mrs. Duncan?"

"Oh, sometime this forenoon. Horace thought about eleven. And that's
another thing that puzzles me," exclaimed Priscilla unhappily. "Ought I
to dress up, do you think, as long as I'm expecting a call?"

"I'd wear my blue serge, if I were you. Blue serge is always safe and,
besides, you look awfully well in that dress. And you need not worry
about the maid. I'm it."

"Why, Peggy, what do you mean?"

nd you need not worry
about the maid. I'm it."

"Why, Peggy, what do you mean?"

"Don't insult me by asking for Sally, and then pretending that I won't
do. I've got a black dress and a cute little ruffled apron, and I'm
just aching to try my hand at one of those fetching caps the maids wear
in the movies."

"But, Peggy, suppose Horace should come with his aunt!"

"You don't expect him, do you?""But, Peggy, suppose Horace should come with his aunt!"

"You don't expect him, do you?"

"No. I'm sure he didn't plan to come last evening. But he might change
his mind."

"We'll keep on the look-out. If we see a lady arriving with a young man
in tow, I'll roll my cap and apron into a bundle and put them under my
arm. Then I'll be your friend, Peggy Raymond, making a morning call.
But if the lady is alone, I'm Margaret, the maid."

ond, making a morning call.
But if the lady is alone, I'm Margaret, the maid."

Priscilla was hardly arrayed in her blue serge when Peggy arrived, and
the two girls inspected each other admiringly. The Plainness of the
blue serge set off the long lines of Priscilla's slender, graceful
figure, while the little frilled, nonsensical cap gave a charm to
Peggy's mischievous face. "You look like a queen," Peggy declared.

"And you're darling in that cap. I'm afraid she'll suspect something
the minute she sees you."

Mistress and maid were sitting comfortably side by side in the
dining-room when the door-bell rang. Peggy started to her feet, but
Priscilla clutched her arm. "Don't go far, will you, Peggy."

"I don't want to appear to be eavesdropping, ma'am."

o far, will you, Peggy."

"I don't want to appear to be eavesdropping, ma'am."

"Nonsense: you can pretend to be dusting something out here. I don't
want you to go away." Priscilla was experiencing a panic at the thought
of being left to the tender mercies of Horace Hitchcock's great-aunt.
She needed the close proximity of Peggy to give her confidence.

Horace had not accompanied Mrs. Duncan. She stood upon the steps, a
little withered woman, rather elaborately dressed, and she inspected
Peggy through her lorgnette. "Is Miss Combs in?" she inquired, after
finishing her leisurely scrutiny.

"I think so, Madame. Please walk in." Peggy ushered the caller into
the front room and brought a tray for her card. Her cheeks had flushed
under Mrs. Duncan's inspection."I think so, Madame. Please walk in." Peggy ushered the caller into
the front room and brought a tray for her card. Her cheeks had flushed
under Mrs. Duncan's inspection.

ught a tray for her card. Her cheeks had flushed
under Mrs. Duncan's inspection. The small, beady eyes in the wrinkled
face had a curiously piercing quality, and she wondered uneasily
whether this remarkable old woman could possibly have recognized that
she was only masquerading.

She carried the card upstairs to Priscilla who had retreated to her
room, the prey of nerves, and brought back word that Miss Combs would
be down in a few minutes. Then she retired to the adjoining room and
began on her dusting. She was not sorry Priscilla had insisted that she
be near, for she was extremely curious to hear what the visitor was
going to say.

Priscilla followed Peggy in something like half a minute, and greeted
her caller sweetly, though with some constraint. Mrs. Duncan looked

and greeted
her caller sweetly, though with some constraint. Mrs. Duncan looked
her over approvingly. "You're not as pretty as I expected," was her
disconcerting beginning.

In the next room Peggy gasped. Priscilla drew herself up and blushed
crimson.

"What I meant to say," explained the terrible old woman, "is that
you're not as pretty as I expected, but much handsomer. I took it for
granted Horace would admire some namby-pamby with a doll's face. I
suppose you know you're a very striking type, don't you?"

"I can't say I've thought much about it," prevaricated Priscilla.

"And you're going to college," continued Mrs. Duncan. "What's your idea
in that? I suppose you know that if you marry Horace, you ought not to
know too much."

"Really, Mrs. Duncan--"

if you marry Horace, you ought not to
know too much."

"Really, Mrs. Duncan--"

But Priscilla's caller was off at a tangent. "You've got a nice-looking
maid? Have you any brothers?"

"No," replied Priscilla mechanically. "I'm an only child.""Really, Mrs. Duncan--"

But Priscilla's caller was off at a tangent. "You've got a nice-looking
maid? Have you any brothers?"

"No," replied Priscilla mechanically. "I'm an only child."

"When you're married, Miss Combs, take an old woman's advice and never
have an attractive maid about the house. My married life of twenty
years was reasonably successful," explained Mrs. Duncan complacently,
"and I lay it all to my habit of selecting maids who were either
cross-eyed or else pock-marked."

Priscilla felt that she hated her, but as she struggled to conceal her
inhospitable emotion, her visitor inquired blandly, "What do you and
Horace talk about?"

"About--Oh, about all sorts of things." Priscilla wondered if ever in

about?"

"About--Oh, about all sorts of things." Priscilla wondered if ever in
her life she had appeared as inane and stupid as on this momentous
occasion.

"I can't understand him, you know," explained Mrs. Duncan, rubbing her
nose. "Sometimes I think it's because I'm a fool, and sometimes I think
it's because he's a fool. I dare say you've felt the same uncertainty.
But we'd better talk of something else, so you won't look to conscious
when he arrives."

"Arrives?" repeated Priscilla blankly.

"Yes, he's to lunch with me down town. He suggested that I would enjoy
taking him to--what's the name of the place? Oh, well, he'll know.
Perhaps you'll join us."

Priscilla declined fervently. Without saying it in so many words, she

join us."

Priscilla declined fervently. Without saying it in so many words, she
gave the impression that she had a most imperative engagement for
the afternoon. As she voiced her stammering refusal, she felt like
a criminal on the verge of exposure. For when the bell rang Peggy
would answer it, and Horace would at once recognize that Priscilla's
attractive maid was no other than Priscilla's bosom friend.But Peggy, dusting industriously in the adjoining room, had overheard
the news that had carried consternation to Priscilla's soul, and acted
upon the hint with characteristic promptness. A moment later she
appeared in the doorway, waiting unobtrusively till Priscilla looked in
her direction. And then she said respectfully, "Miss Priscilla."

Priscilla struggled to play her part.

she said respectfully, "Miss Priscilla."

Priscilla struggled to play her part. "Yes--Margaret?"

"I haven't done the marketing yet. If you can spare me for a little
while, I'll attend to it."

"Certainly, Margaret," replied Priscilla with boundless relief.

As Peggy disappeared, Mrs. Duncan leaned forward and tapped Priscilla's
knee. "I tell you she's too good to be true," she insisted. "She's too
pretty, too well-mannered. There's something wrong somewhere. Don't
trust her." And Priscilla had to conquer the impression that it was
her friend Peggy who was being slandered, before she could assume the
nonchalant manner suited to the statement that they had always found
Margaret a most trustworthy girl.

Horace arrived some fifteen minutes after Peggy's departure, and his

rthy girl.

Horace arrived some fifteen minutes after Peggy's departure, and his
apologies to his great-aunt were more profuse than his slight tardiness
called for. Indeed, as Priscilla watched his manner toward the
domineering old lady, she was unpleasantly reminded that Mrs. Duncan
was a rich widow, and that Horace might cherish the hope of inheriting
at least a portion of her wealth. Priscilla had all the contempt of
a normal American girl for a fortune-hunter, and her lover had never
appeared to less advantage in her eyes than in his obvious efforts to
please his eccentric relative. In her revolt from Horace's methods she
went a little too far in the other direction, and her manner as she
parted from her guest was frigid rather than friendly. Mrs. Duncan'sner as she
parted from her guest was frigid rather than friendly. Mrs. Duncan's
call was the first indication that Horace's people were aware of his
intentions, and Priscilla had a not unreasonable feeling of resentment
at being inspected to see if she would do. Although the door had been
opened for Mrs. Duncan by a correctly appointed maid, Priscilla was
miserably conscious that the call had not been a success, and that her
unfavorable impression of Horace's great-aunt was probably returned by
that terrible old person with something to spare.

CHAPTER XI

QUITE INFORMAL

AMY'S memorable dinner party, which had resulted in making Bob
Carey such a frequent caller, was responsible for another agreeable
friendship. Bob's sister Hildegarde, if she did not fully share

other agreeable
friendship. Bob's sister Hildegarde, if she did not fully share
her brother's sentiments where Amy was concerned, acknowledged,
nevertheless, to a thorough liking for the girl who had played the part
of hostess under such trying circumstances. She saw considerable of Amy
and, through her, had made the acquaintance of Amy's especial chums on
Friendly Terrace. The girls all liked Hildegarde, and Hildegarde liked
them, though she was continually accusing them of being old-fashioned
in their ideas. Hildegarde had rather more spending money than was good
for her, and her social ambitions were the bane of Bob's existence. Bob
hated formality. He never put on his dress suit except under protest,
and his popularity among his sister's friends, with the resulting

nder protest,
and his popularity among his sister's friends, with the resulting
invitations to all sorts of affairs, awakened his profound resentment.
The simple good times of Amy's set where every one came at eight
o'clock and went home at ten, exactly suited him.There was perhaps a spice of malice back of an invitation Amy received
one morning. The previous evening Bob had accompanied his sister to
the home of one of her friends. He had gone reluctantly, only yielding
when Hildegarde had agreed to start for home promptly at ten. There had
been other callers, however, and bridge had been suggested, so that it
was quarter of one when the brother and sister reached home. Bob was
frankly sulky. "I hate to go down to the office in the morning feeling

Bob was
frankly sulky. "I hate to go down to the office in the morning feeling
like a fool because I haven't had sleep enough," he declared.

"Bob Carey, any one would suppose you were an old grandfather to hear
you talk. I don't know another fellow your age who thinks he has to go
to bed with the chickens."

"And knowing the hours some of your friends keep," returned
Bob irritatingly, "I'm not surprised at their seeming lack of
intelligence. They're practically walking in their sleep."

"Please leave my friends alone. You wouldn't be particularly pleased if
I began sneering at Amy."

"Sneering at Amy!" Bob's tone was scornful as he repeated his sister's
words. "If you did, it would be only to get even with me."

"I don't suppose she's absolute perfection."

"I don't know."

t even with me."

"I don't suppose she's absolute perfection."

"I don't know."

"Oh, Bob, don't be so absurd." But though Hildegarde ended with a
laugh, she was still resentful. She knew that Bob had planned to call
on Amy that evening and shrewdly judged that, since she had thwarted
his intention, he would go the following night. Accordingly she
called Amy on the phone bright and early, and invited her to attend a
down-town picture show; not an ordinary movie, but a special attraction
with the seats selling at regular theater prices. Amy exclaimed
delightedly, and then caught herself up."I forgot that Peggy and Priscilla were coming over to-night. But I'm
sure they'll let me off. I'll call them up and then call you. I'm

ight. But I'm
sure they'll let me off. I'll call them up and then call you. I'm
crazy to see that picture, but I didn't expect to for a year or two
till it got down to the twenty-five cent houses."

"We'll ask Peggy and Priscilla to go, too," said Hildegarde.

"Gorgeous," replied Amy, "and it's so near the end of vacation we can
make it a final spree"; and Hildegarde, smiling a little, proceeded to
call the two Sweet P's as she mentally designated them. Both girls were
unqualifiedly delighted to accept, for one of the advantages of not
possessing too much money is that the zest for simple pleasures remains
keen. Hildegarde had friends who were blasé over a trip to Europe, and
she always felt a little wonder, not without a tinge of patronage it

urope, and
she always felt a little wonder, not without a tinge of patronage it
must be admitted, over the thoroughness with which Amy and her friends
could enjoy things.

When Hildegarde announced casually at the dinner table that she would
have to be excused before the desert, as she and Amy were to see the
"Star of Destiny" that evening, her brother shot her a comprehending
glance. "I'd have bought a ticket for you, Bob," Hildegarde explained
teasingly, "Only I felt sure you meant to go to bed at nine, and make
up the sleep you lost last evening."

"You're always thoughtful, Hildegarde," said Bob with an irony so
apparent that his mother stared. And Hildegarde hurrying through
her dinner, felt cheerful certainty that as far as her brother was
concerned, she had evened the score.

certainty that as far as her brother was
concerned, she had evened the score.certainty that as far as her brother was
concerned, she had evened the score.

The "Star of Destiny" proved quite as thrilling as any of the audience
could have wished, and the accompanying comedy a trifle less inane than
the average picture comedy. At ten o'clock the girls left the theater,
while the crowd that had been standing in line scrambled to take the
seats they had vacated. As they reached the sidewalk, Hildegarde
slipped her hand through the arm of Priscilla, who happened to be
nearest, "I'm on the point of starvation," she declared gaily. "I had
to hurry through my dinner so, I feel as though I hadn't had a thing.
Now we'll go over to the Green Parrot and get something to eat."

The guests hesitated. "Is--do you think it is all right for girls to go

o eat."

The guests hesitated. "Is--do you think it is all right for girls to go
there alone in the evening?" asked Peggy doubtfully.

"Why of course. The name's rather lurid, but it's a perfectly nice
place. Let's take this cross-street and then we'll save half a block."

On the way to the popular restaurant, Hildegarde did most of the
talking. None of her guests felt exactly comfortable over accepting the
invitation; and yet to decline it, when Hildegarde declared herself
half starved, seemed decidedly ungracious. None of the Friendly
Terrace girls had been brought up to think a chaperone a necessary
accompaniment to all youthful pleasures, but venturing into a down-town
restaurant at ten o'clock in the evening, without either chaperone

a down-town
restaurant at ten o'clock in the evening, without either chaperone
or escort, was rather too up-to-date to please any of them. Peggy
pictured Graham's face when she told him of the climax of the evening's
pleasures, and smiled rather ruefully.Once inside, it must be admitted, the spirits of all three revived. The
big room was so lighted that it was more dazzling than the noon day. A
space had been cleared for dancing, and several couples were revolving
in time to a catchy popular air. The majority of the tables were
occupied, but the head-waiter, who evidently recognized Hildegarde,
led the way to a small round table at the side, and seated them with a
flourish. No one had seemed to notice them, and Peggy hoped that their

em with a
flourish. No one had seemed to notice them, and Peggy hoped that their
inconspicuous location would prevent any unwelcome attention.

"After all," she thought sensibly, "it's a perfectly respectable
place, and perhaps it's not considered queer for girls to come alone."
Unconsciously her fear of arousing unfavorable comment rendered her
unusually subdued, and the other girls took their cue from her,
speaking in their lowest voices, smiling discreetly, and otherwise
conducting themselves with as much decorum as if there had been a
chaperone apiece.

After some discussion they decided on welsh rarebit, and Hildegarde
also ordered coffee and rolls. The rarebit came in due time, an
island of toast in a seething lava-lake of rarebit. The girls sniffed

time, an
island of toast in a seething lava-lake of rarebit. The girls sniffed
appreciatively and exchanged smiles. "To think I didn't know I was
hungry," Amy exclaimed.

"I wish I could make my rarebits smooth like this," sighed Peggy. "It
looks so wonderful that I hate to eat it.""I wish I could make my rarebits smooth like this," sighed Peggy. "It
looks so wonderful that I hate to eat it."

Their faces cheerful, but their manners still decorously subdued, the
four girls attacked the dainty which has so undesirable a reputation in
the matter of dreams. Though Hildegarde was the only one of the four
who had not done justice to her dinner, all were young enough to feel
hungry at the sight of the tempting dish. The islands of toast vanished
as if submerged by a tidal wave. The miniature lava lakes gradually
disappeared, and the big plate of rolls was so diminished by successive

radually
disappeared, and the big plate of rolls was so diminished by successive
onslaughts that the few remaining had a lonely look.

Priscilla was buttering the end of her roll when, in involuntary
emphasis of something she was saying, she pressed it more energetically
than she realized. As if determined to escape the fate of its comrades,
the fragment flew from her fingers. It cleared the space between that
table and the next as if it had been winged, and then made sure of
escape by dropping in the coffee cup of a young man in eye glasses, who
was composedly eating fried oysters.

The young man looked up, startled as a splash of coffee on his cheek
challenged his attention. He looked about in all directions and at
length his inquiring gaze came to the table where sat the agonizedtions and at
length his inquiring gaze came to the table where sat the agonized
Priscilla. Here, alas! it halted. For as she had seen the bewildering
gyrations of the fragment of Priscilla's roll, Amy had burst into
an astonished giggle and had continued to giggle without cessation.
Hildegarde, too, had lost interest in the remnant of her meal, and sat
leaning her head on her hand, speechless with laughter. As for Peggy
and Priscilla, they were looking at each other in silent stupefaction,
their flaming cheeks seemingly proclaiming their guilt. It was no
wonder the young man in eye-glasses looked no farther. He had found the
ones responsible.

For an agonizing moment Priscilla sat uncertain what to do. Then
summoning her common sense to her aid, she turned to the sole occupant

do. Then
summoning her common sense to her aid, she turned to the sole occupant
of the next table. "I am very sorry," she said with that dignity that
was Priscilla's own. "A piece of roll slipped from my fingers when I
was buttering it, and flew across to your table. It--it is in your
coffee cup."

The young man looked into his cup and perceived the floating fragment.
When again he lifted his eyes to Priscilla's he was smiling. "I thought
some acquaintance had thrown something at me to attract my attention,"
he explained.

"No," said Priscilla. "It was an unfortunate accident. I beg your
pardon." And then she turned to her own coffee, and seemingly gave it
her attention, though so intense was her excitement that she might as

y gave it
her attention, though so intense was her excitement that she might as
well have been drinking warm water as the coffee for which the Green
Parrot was famous.y gave it
her attention, though so intense was her excitement that she might as
well have been drinking warm water as the coffee for which the Green
Parrot was famous.

Peggy was proud of the dignity with which Priscilla had met a difficult
situation, but poor Priscilla was not to find it easy to preserve that
dignity. Amy was still giggling, her face wearing an expression of
suffering, due to the exhausting effect of continuous laughter. Across
the table Hildegarde pressed her handkerchief to her eyes and moaned
softly. And all at once it seemed to Priscilla that she must shriek
with laughter or die.

A moment later Peggy uttered an ejaculation of consternation, for the
tears were running down Priscilla's cheeks. She sat perfectly erect,

n, for the
tears were running down Priscilla's cheeks. She sat perfectly erect,
her eyes upon the table, and her only sign of emotion those tell-tale
tears. Peggy was really alarmed.

"Priscilla, you mustn't take it so to heart. It wasn't anything. Don't
cry."

"But I must do something," responded Priscilla in a strangled voice.
"Oh, can't we get away?"

Her laughing companions sobered at the discovery that Priscilla was in
tears. Hildegarde called the waiter and demanded her check. But before
they could get away, the young man in eye-glasses had risen and crossed
to their table.

"I hope you're not worrying about that roll," he said, looking down
dismayed at Priscilla's tear-wet cheeks. "It's not worth thinking of
twice, you know."

at Priscilla's tear-wet cheeks. "It's not worth thinking of
twice, you know."

Seeing that Priscilla was incapable of replying, Peggy came to her
friend's assistance. "Of course it was only an accident," she said,
"But it made her a little nervous."Seeing that Priscilla was incapable of replying, Peggy came to her
friend's assistance. "Of course it was only an accident," she said,
"But it made her a little nervous."

"So I see. I'm terribly sorry. If I could be of any service--" The
young man's face was troubled, his manner earnest. Peggy appreciated
the sincerity of his feeling, even while she longed to take him by the
ear and lead him to the door. For heads were turning in their direction
from all over the room. They were the observed of all observers.

"Oh, thank you," said Peggy hastily, "she will feel all right as soon
as she gets outside. This room is so warm," she added rather inanely.

ht as soon
as she gets outside. This room is so warm," she added rather inanely.
To her enormous relief the waiter appeared with Hildegarde's change.
Hildegarde tipped him extravagantly, rammed her remaining bills into
her purse, and all four girls started for the door. The young man with
the eye-glasses remained standing, staring after them, and Peggy's
cheeks crimsoned as she realized the attention they were attracting.

She was quite sure she had a case of hysterics on her hands when, once
outside, Priscilla began to laugh. It started in a little smothered
giggle which soon had developed into peals of laughter. Peggy was
terrified. "Priscilla," she cried, "for Heaven's sake--"

But Amy who had begun laughing sympathetically, as soon as Priscilla

s sake--"

But Amy who had begun laughing sympathetically, as soon as Priscilla
started off, checked herself to remonstrate.

"Let her alone, Peggy. All that ails her is she wanted to laugh and
couldn't, and I don't know anything that hurts worse. Isn't that it,
Priscilla?"

Priscilla could not answer in words, but she nodded vehemently and
laughed and wiped her wet eyes and laughed on till she sobbed. And then
all at once she stopped short, drew a long breath, and exclaimed, "I
feel better."They made their way to the street cars, discussing the late
unpleasantness with much animation and making use of many lurid
adjectives. It was Hildegarde who exclaimed, "Don't you wish you knew
who he was?" She referred, of course, to the young man in eye-glasses.

Priscilla stiffened.

She referred, of course, to the young man in eye-glasses.

Priscilla stiffened. "Mercy, no! I hope he was a stranger in town,
stopping over a train, and that I'll never lay eyes on him again."

But that wish, though it came from the depths of Priscilla's heart, was
not destined to come true.

CHAPTER XII

GOOD-BY

COLLEGE had opened; but they had slipped into it so quietly that there
hardly seemed to be a break. For Peggy and Priscilla, perhaps, there
was a bit of a pang at the realization that this was the last year of
what would probably be one of the sweetest periods in their lives to
look back on; and they privately vowed to make it rich in experience
and the beauty of living. Ruth and Amy, like Southey's brother who said

perience
and the beauty of living. Ruth and Amy, like Southey's brother who said
that "no young man believes that he will ever die," felt that college
life would never, could never, end. So a week after the beginning of
classes found the four girls trying conscientiously to live in the
present, and stifling vague, tantalizing memories of the past three
months.

A number of letters passed between Nelson Hallowell and his friend in
Oklahoma before the great step was decided on. And it must be confessed
that in the meantime Ruth's college work suffered. Nelson came almost
every evening to pour into her attentive ears the story of his hopes
and ambitions, and Ruth listened with the happy confidence that her
approval meant more to him than to any one in the world.

y confidence that her
approval meant more to him than to any one in the world.y confidence that her
approval meant more to him than to any one in the world.

Ruth and Nelson were living in an enchanted world, where perfect
understanding took the place of speech. Nelson did not feel himself at
liberty to say to her the thing that was constantly in his thoughts.
The salary Mr. Flynn had paid him had not enabled him to save any
money, and his venture in Oklahoma, promising as he believed it, was,
after all, only a venture, with a possibility of failure. Nelson knew
that he himself was bound fast and irrevocably, but he wanted to leave
Ruth free as air. Yet he talked to her with the assurance that she knew
all he was in honor bound not to say, and her look, as she listened,
confirmed that certainty.

Those weeks during which the matter was being settled were a happy

certainty.

Those weeks during which the matter was being settled were a happy
time for both of them. Youth has a way of making the most of a present
joy, regardless of what the future has in store, and while this seems
very short-sighted to some older people, who can always look ahead
far enough to be miserable, the young will probably continue to
enjoy to-day's sunshine--regardless of the weather prognosticator,
who assures them of a storm in the middle of the week with a drop
in temperature. Nelson and Ruth saw as much of each other as they
could, and looked no further than a happiness born of a confidence and
understanding.

But the thing was settled at last, and the generous offer of Nelson's
soldier friend definitely accepted. Nelson gave Mr. Flynn notice, and

f Nelson's
soldier friend definitely accepted. Nelson gave Mr. Flynn notice, and
that irritable gentleman promptly lost his temper, and accused his
reliable clerk of folly and ingratitude. Later he realized his mistake,
and offered to raise his salary. But Nelson was as little moved by Mr.
Flynn's smiles as he had been by his frowns, and Mr. Flynn promptly
relapsed into his former irascibility."The war spoiled a lot of you young fellows. You're sick of hard work.
Loafing is the only thing that appeals to you."

"I never heard," laughed Nelson, "that life on a cattle ranch was
considered a soft snap."

"Well, if it isn't, you'll soon give it up," said Mr. Flynn
disagreeably. "An easy berth is what you're looking for, and it's my
opinion that you'll look some time before you find it."

oking for, and it's my
opinion that you'll look some time before you find it."

The next two weeks fairly flew. Nelson was getting his necessary
outfit, and every afternoon, on the way home, he stopped to exhibit to
Ruth his latest purchases. And now the time had come when it was hard
for Ruth to smile and show the proper interest. Sometimes when she
remembered that the decision had been left to her, and that she had
brought this on herself, her heart almost failed her. It would have
been so much easier to have gone on in the old way. The thought of the
thousands of miles that would soon stretch between Nelson and herself
gave her a weak feeling in the knees. They had a great deal to say in
those days about letters but each realized, only two well, that the

l to say in
those days about letters but each realized, only two well, that the
best letter ever penned is a poor substitute for the exchange of speech
and of smiles.

The day of Nelson's departure Ruth went through the customary routine
with a curious sense of unreality. She had suggested Nelson's coming
to dinner, but he had declined, and she would never know what that
refusal cost him.

"I'd love to, Ruth. You don't know how I'd love to. But I think I
should take my last meal with mother."

"Yes, Nelson, I think so, too."

"She says she won't go down to the station to see me off," Nelson went
on. "She's been keen about my going from the start, but now that it's
come to the point, it's harder than she thought."

Ruth reflected that she could sympathize with Mrs. Hallowell perfectly.

ght."Ruth reflected that she could sympathize with Mrs. Hallowell perfectly.

ght."

Ruth reflected that she could sympathize with Mrs. Hallowell perfectly.

"The train goes at ten," Nelson continued with a sprightly air that
would not have deceived the most gullible, "so I'll have plenty of time
to bore you stiff before you see the last of me."

Ruth forced the smile his jest demanded. "You know we're all going to
the station with you," she said. "Even Bob Carey's coming."

"I hope that Hitchcock won't show up," exclaimed Nelson apprehensively.

Ruth laughed. "No, I don't think Horace expects to honor us. Isn't it
the queerest thing," she added, "what Priscilla can see in him?"

"I should say so. Priscilla's one of the finest girls you'd meet in
a day's journey, and Hitchcock is a nut. I shouldn't think she could
stand it to have him around.

and Hitchcock is a nut. I shouldn't think she could
stand it to have him around. Though I suppose," concluded Nelson with
customary modesty, "that Priscilla thinks just the same about you and
me."

"Priscilla! She wouldn't dare." Ruth's indignation was so intense that
Nelson shouted with laughter, but it warmed his heart, nevertheless.

In that last quick-moving Saturday, Ruth saw Nelson for a few moments
in the morning, and again about three in the afternoon. His stay was
short and rather unsatisfactory for he had some last errands to attend
to, and his mind was so full of them that his thoughts wandered from
what he was saying, and he left his sentences unfinished in the most
irritating fashion.

After he had answered a question of Ruth's in a way which showed he had

shion.

After he had answered a question of Ruth's in a way which showed he had
hardly heard what she had said, he looked up quickly at her half-vexed
exclamation, laughed, and jumped to his feet.shion.

After he had answered a question of Ruth's in a way which showed he had
hardly heard what she had said, he looked up quickly at her half-vexed
exclamation, laughed, and jumped to his feet.

"It's no use, Ruth," he said. "I'm one of the fellows who's good
for only one thing at a time. I'll attend to these thousand-and-one
things that have been left over, and I'll see you about eight o 'clock
to-night. That will give us time for a nice little visit."

Up till that time the hours had fairly flown. Now they dragged. Ruth
watched the clock and waited for the tiresome, leisurely hour hand to
point to eight. The clan was to gather at a little after nine, and she
was thankful when Graham departed for Peggy's shortly after finishing
dinner. Peggy would keep him till the last minute.

ggy's shortly after finishing
dinner. Peggy would keep him till the last minute. Peggy would
understand. Ruth had taken great pains in dusting the living-room that
morning, and she looked around it thinking that it made a picture of
cosy comfort Nelson might be glad to carry with him.

It was eight o'clock at last. Ruth straightened a book on the table,
brushed a speck of dust from her gown, and sat down facing the door.
There were quick steps on the side walk, and she never doubted that
they would come on up the walk, and then up the steps, and she meant to
have the door open before he had time to ring. But the footsteps went
on and the minute hand of the clock was also moving.

At quarter past eight Ruth was nervous. She got up and down, adjusted

moving.At quarter past eight Ruth was nervous. She got up and down, adjusted

moving.

At quarter past eight Ruth was nervous. She got up and down, adjusted
the window shades, changed the arrangement of the chairs, fussed with
the flowers on the mantel, looked at herself in the mirror, and did
something to her hair. At half past eight she sat very still, frowning
slightly and biting her lip. At quarter of nine her cheeks had reddened
and she tapped the carpet with the toe of her shoe. And at nine o'clock
her heart gave a jump and she forgot how near she had come to being
angry. For the footsteps for which she had waited were coming up the
walk.

"Hello!" It was Priscilla's voice. "Don't tell me I'm the first one."

"The others will be here in a minute," Ruth replied in an even voice.
"Come right in and take off your coat, Priscilla, for this room's

an even voice.
"Come right in and take off your coat, Priscilla, for this room's
awfully warm."

Priscilla complied with her friend's suggestion, and glanced at her
admiringly. She thought she had never seen Ruth look so pretty. "You've
got a lovely color to-night," she exclaimed.

"It's just because it's so hot here. I always get flushed when I'm
warm."

Priscilla was looking around the room as if in search of something.
"Why, where's Nelson?"

"He'll be here right away. You know there are always so many things
to be attended to in the last few minutes." But though Ruth gave this
explanation with a matter-of-fact cheerfulness that deceived even
Priscilla who knew her so well, she was seething inwardly. So this was
all he cared. He had sacrificed their quiet hour together. Now there

o this was
all he cared. He had sacrificed their quiet hour together. Now there
would be a crush and a crowd and everybody talking at once, and no
chance to say any of the things she had saved up for their last evening.Not that she cared. Ruth flung up her head and laughed gaily at
something Priscilla was telling. Her hands were cold and her mouth
felt very dry, and her heart was pounding furiously. Nelson could come
when he was ready, and so that he didn't miss the train, it made no
difference to her.

Amy and Bob were next to arrive. Then came Peggy and Graham. "Nelson's
late, isn't he?" said Peggy with an uneasy glance at the clock. "He
hasn't any time to spare."

"I'll put on my things so we'll all be ready to start when he gets
here," Ruth returned casually.

hings so we'll all be ready to start when he gets
here," Ruth returned casually. She had put on a little blue frock, of
which Nelson was especially fond, for the last evening, and she was
glad to conceal it by a long coat. Her hand trembled as she pinned her
hat in place. She hoped Nelson Hallowell wasn't conceited enough to
suppose she cared whether he came at one hour or another.

It was twenty minutes past nine when Nelson arrived, and he looked
rather white and shaken. As he had left for camp two years before, his
mother had stood smiling in the doorway to watch him go. When it was
whispered that they were going across, and he had told her she was not
likely to see him again till the war was over, she had kissed him with
lips that did not tremble.

again till the war was over, she had kissed him with
lips that did not tremble. But then she had been lifted above herself
by the exalted spirits of the times. Now she had no sense of patriotic
service to sustain her. She realized that she was no longer a young
woman, that life was uncertain, and that her boy was going very far
away. Over their last meal together she had broken down, and wept as
Nelson had never seen his mother weep in all his life.It is not to Nelson's discredit that he had forgotten Ruth. Or if that
is saying too much, his thought of her was vague and shadowy. Nelson's
father had died when he was a little boy, and through the years that
he was growing to manhood, his mother and he had been everything to
each other. The sight of her grief was torturing.

r and he had been everything to
each other. The sight of her grief was torturing. He had put his arms
about her, and comforted her as best he could. He had offered to give
up the whole thing, and had started to go out to telegraph his friend
in Oklahoma that he was not coming. That, more than anything else,
had helped her to regain her self-control. As mothers have been doing
from time immemorial she wiped her wet eyes and tried to smile, that
he might go on his great adventure without a shadow on his heart.
Throughout that distressing, solemn, sacred time, it had never
occurred to Nelson to look at the clock. The thought of Ruth had hardly
crossed his mind. Even on his way to her homo, he was still thinking of
the mother he had left.

Even on his way to her homo, he was still thinking of
the mother he had left.

It was Graham who, hearing Nelson's step outside, rushed to admit him.
Nelson entered, blinking a little in the bright light of the room,
and speaking first to one and then another. Ruth in the corner by the
fireplace was talking to Bob Carey, and was so interested that she only
glanced in Nelson's direction, to toss him a smiling nod, and then
resume her conversation with Bob. Nelson gave a little start as if
some one had pinched him in the middle of a dream and he had suddenly
awakened.

"Well, old man," remarked Graham cheerfully, "you haven't left yourself
much leeway. It's just about time to start."

"I--yes, I suppose it is." Nelson looked in Ruth's direction and then
looked quickly away."I--yes, I suppose it is." Nelson looked in Ruth's direction and then
looked quickly away.

I suppose it is." Nelson looked in Ruth's direction and then
looked quickly away. As for Ruth, she was so absorbed by what Bob Carey
was saying, that her brother had to repeat his remark for her benefit.
"Come, Ruth. Better get a move on. We haven't any time to waste."

"Oh, is it really time to start?" Ruth asked carelessly. "I hadn't
noticed." And with that fib on her conscience, she rose and joined the
others.

Fond as Peggy was of Ruth, that evening she could have shaken her in
her exasperation. For on the walk to the street-car, Ruth clung to her
arm and chattered unceasingly. As Graham stuck doggedly to Peggy's
other side and Bob was with Amy, Nelson and Priscilla found themselves
walking together. But since Nelson was too dazed for speech, and

und themselves
walking together. But since Nelson was too dazed for speech, and
Priscilla was wondering what Horace would say to this juxtaposition,
they walked in an almost unbroken silence.

It was no better on the street car. Peggy maneuvered shamelessly to
put Nelson and Ruth into the one vacant seat, but Ruth slipped past
and took her seat beside a fat woman, who left so little space that
Ruth was in imminent danger of falling into the aisle, whenever the
car turned the corner. In Peggy's opinion such a catastrophe would
have been no more than she deserved. Peggy had to take the place she
had designed for Ruth, and did her best to be agreeable, but Nelson's
wandering replies showed the futility of her efforts.

A slight delay on the way brought them to the station less than ten

r efforts.A slight delay on the way brought them to the station less than ten

r efforts.

A slight delay on the way brought them to the station less than ten
minutes before train time. Nelson's tickets were bought, of course,
and his reservations made. They stood in a group in the station
waiting-room and said the aimless things people generally say five
minutes before train-time. All but Ruth, that is. When Nelson looked at
her he found her attention absorbed by an Italian family, whose bundles
and babies occupied the nearest row of seats.

It was Graham who again took on himself the ungracious duty of calling
Nelson's attention to the flight of time. "I guess you'd better go
aboard, Nelson. You don't want to stand right here in the station, and
miss the train."

Nelson started violently. "Oh, no," he replied, "certainly not." He

he train."

Nelson started violently. "Oh, no," he replied, "certainly not." He
turned to Bob Carey and shook hands with him, murmuring a mechanical
good-by. Amy stood at Bob's side and Nelson held out his hand to her.

Amy had shared Peggy's feeling of vexation with Ruth, and like Peggy
had resented her sense of impotence. Neither one of them would have
hesitated to take Ruth roundly to task for her conduct, but it was
impossible to scold her in Nelson's presence, and after he had started
on his long journey westward it would be too late. But as Amy looked
into the young fellow's down-cast face, a brilliant inspiration came to
her aid. She grasped his hand, pulled herself up on tiptoes, and kissed
the astonished youth squarely on the lips. "Good-by, Nelson, and good
luck."

d
the astonished youth squarely on the lips. "Good-by, Nelson, and good
luck."d
the astonished youth squarely on the lips. "Good-by, Nelson, and good
luck."

Peggy, the next in line, saw her friend's ruse, and seconded her
admirably. It was impossible to tell whether Nelson blushed at the
second kiss, for the flaming color due to Amy's salute still dyed him
crimson. Priscilla pushed aside the obtrusive thought of Horace, and
backed up the others. And then Nelson came to Ruth.

For a moment Ruth had been in a quandary. After their warm friendship,
to part with Nelson with a formal handshake when the other girls had
kissed him, would be to proclaim publicly that she was angry, and
Ruth did not wish to seem angry, but only indifferent. And yet if she
kissed Nelson good-by, she had a suspicion that the barrier her pride

et if she
kissed Nelson good-by, she had a suspicion that the barrier her pride
had built between them would melt like mist in the sun. She raised her
eyes and met his, those honest eyes in which she read bewilderment and
grief and appeal and something greater than all. And then, all at once,
her resentment seemed incomprehensibly petty. Whatever the reason that
Nelson had come late, it was not because he did not care. And so their
first kiss was exchanged in the garish light of a railway waiting-room,
with the calls of the trainmen blending with the unmelodious crying of
babies, with travelers coming and going, and a little circle of friends
standing by and taking everything in. But there are some experiences it
is impossible to spoil.

[Illustration: "SHE RAISED HER EYES AND MET HIS"]

it
is impossible to spoil.

[Illustration: "SHE RAISED HER EYES AND MET HIS"]

"All aboard," cried Graham, and carried Nelson away. Ruth slipped her
arms through Peggy's, and turned toward the door, swallowing hard at
something that refused to be swallowed.

"If ever a girl deserved a scolding!" said Peggy in the tenderest
tones imaginable. "But I'm not going to do it now, because at the last
minute you redeemed yourself--thanks to Amy.""If ever a girl deserved a scolding!" said Peggy in the tenderest
tones imaginable. "But I'm not going to do it now, because at the last
minute you redeemed yourself--thanks to Amy."

CHAPTER XIII

PEGGY GIVES A DINNER PARTY

RUTH moped after Nelson's departure. Just how much her depression was
due to missing him, and how much was the result of self-reproach, she
could not have told. Each time she realized his absence she remembered
with a pang the hurt wonder of his face that night in the station. It

remembered
with a pang the hurt wonder of his face that night in the station. It
did not help matters that Nelson seemed to consider himself entirely to
blame for what had happened, and had written her from the train a most
humble apology for failing to be at her home at eight o'clock as he had
promised. In fact, his assumption that she could not possibly be in the
wrong only made Ruth the more conscious of her pettiness.

It was largely on Ruth's account that Peggy resolved on her dinner
party. For after scolding Ruth soundly, and giving her to understand
that she was very much ashamed of her, Peggy had set herself resolutely
to cheer her despondent friend. On the Friday following Nelson's
departure something went wrong with the heating plant at college, and

Nelson's
departure something went wrong with the heating plant at college, and
the classes were dismissed at ten o'clock. At once Peggy determined to
celebrate.

"Father and mother have gone away for the week end, and Dick's going
home with his chum after school, and I shan't see him till bed-time.
Come to dinner all of you. We'll have an old-fashioned good time."

The recipients of this invitation accepted promptly. They were in the
rather hilarious mood which for some reason characterizes the most
ambitious student when school is dismissed for the day, college seniors
as well as kindergarten tots. "Only you must let us come over and help
you," stipulated Ruth."Yes, come on, and then if anything doesn't turn out well, I can
blame some of you.

es, come on, and then if anything doesn't turn out well, I can
blame some of you. I wonder--do you know, I've half a mind to invite
Hildegarde Carey."

The others approved, especially Priscilla who had a great admiration
for Bob's attractive sister.

"She took us out that evening, you know," Peggy continued. "She's
always been awfully sweet to me and I've never done anything for her.
The only thing--well, I feel a little bit afraid of her."

"I'll testify that she can eat a very simple meal and seem to enjoy
it." And Amy chuckled as she always did when she recalled the first
time Hildegarde had sat at her table.

Peggy laughed understandingly. "I think I'll ask her. I've always
thought it was a sort of snobbishness to be ashamed to give your best
to people who have more than you do.

nobbishness to be ashamed to give your best
to people who have more than you do. Though I'm not sure that a party
of girls will appeal to her."

Apparently she had misjudged Hildegarde. For the latter's tone, when
she responded to Peggy's invitation given over the phone a few minutes
later, was unmistakably enthusiastic.

"A dinner party and just girls! How cute! I'd adore to come, Peggy,
but would it put you out if I brought my friend Virginia Dunbar? She's
a New York girl who's making me a little visit and she's perfectly
fascinating."

"Why, bring her of course. I shall love to meet her." Peggy's
hospitality rendered her response sufficiently fervent, but as she hung
up the receiver, her face wore a thoughtful expression. The little

as she hung
up the receiver, her face wore a thoughtful expression. The little
dinner party, which had seemed pure fun when her three chums were her
prospective guests, had become a responsibility, as soon as Hildegarde
was added to the number. And with a New York girl coming, it seemed
distinctly formidable.It had not previously occurred to Peggy that the house was not in
suitable order for the reception of guests, but now as she looked about
the dining-room its shortcomings were painfully evident. She donned a
long apron and a sweeping cap, and set resolutely to work. When the
dining room was swept and garnished, the living room across the hall
suffered comparison, and Peggy gave that equally careful attention.
And as by this time she was on her mettle, she went to work cleaning

attention.
And as by this time she was on her mettle, she went to work cleaning
the silver. The twelve o'clock whistles surprised her in this exacting
task, and she swallowed a peanut-butter sandwich by way of luncheon,
promising herself to make up for this abstemiousness at dinner, Peggy
was not one of the temperamental cooks who cannot enjoy their own
cooking.

At half past one she hurried forth with her market basket to make the
necessary purchases. She left by the back door and took the key with
her. A little after two she was back again, the loaded basket on her
arm. Peggy set her burden down, rubbed her aching muscles, and felt in
her coat pocket for the key. Then she felt in the other pocket. Then
she continued to search one pocket and then the other, with increasing

ket. Then
she continued to search one pocket and then the other, with increasing
evidences of consternation. But it was of no use. The key was gone.

"I must have had it in my hand and laid it down on the counter
somewhere," thought Peggy. "Was ever anything so exasperating." She
left the basket outside the locked door, and hurriedly retraced her
steps. The butcher, whom she had visited first, shook his head in
answer to her question. No, he had not seen a stray door-key. It was
the same at the grocer's, the same at the bakery where she had bought
Parker-house rolls. Peggy walked home over the route she had traversed,
her eyes glued to the side-walk, but she did not find the key.Ruth was waiting for her by the front steps. "I thought I'd come over
and help you.

h was waiting for her by the front steps. "I thought I'd come over
and help you. I hope you haven't finished everything."

"I haven't even started," replied Peggy in a hollow voice, and
explained the situation. Ruth was a girl of resources and at once she
had a bright idea.

"Peggy, our front door key looks a good bit like yours. Perhaps it will
open the door. I'll run over and get it."

"Then, fly," pleaded Peggy, "It's simply awful to be locked out of your
house when you have a million things to do."

Ruth sped on her errand at a pace which satisfied even the impatient
Peggy, and returned with a key which really did look like the latch key
with whose appearance Peggy was most familiar. Hopefully she inserted
it in the appropriate key-hole. Patiently she turned it this way and
that.

erted
it in the appropriate key-hole. Patiently she turned it this way and
that. The latch key was like a great many people, encouraging one's
expectations by almost doing what it was asked to do, but never quite
succeeding. In the end Peggy mournfully relinquished all hope of
entering the house by its aid.

"I can't waste any more time on that key. It won't work, and I've got
to get in."

"How about the windows," suggested Ruth.

"The windows on the first floor are all locked, for I made sure of that
before I started out."

"If we could borrow a ladder--"

"I don't know anybody who owns a ladder. No, there's just one chance as
far as I can see. I've always wondered if I could get in through the
coal shute and now I'm going to see."

"But, Peggy, it's so dirty."

hrough the
coal shute and now I'm going to see."

"But, Peggy, it's so dirty."

"I know, but it's got to be done."

"You might get stuck," exclaimed Ruth, turning pale. "Wait a little,
Peggy. Perhaps something will happen.""But, Peggy, it's so dirty."

"I know, but it's got to be done."

"You might get stuck," exclaimed Ruth, turning pale. "Wait a little,
Peggy. Perhaps something will happen."

"Unless an air ship comes along and takes me to a second story window,
I can't think of anything that could happen that would be of any help
to me."

The narrow, inclined passage through which the coal was chuted from
the side walk to the cellar bin, looked small enough and black enough
to justify Ruth's forebodings. But Peggy's impatience had reached the
point where anything seemed better than inaction. She lowered herself
into the chute, and when she released her hold of the edge, her descent
was so rapid that Ruth shrieked. But after a moment of suspense she

her descent
was so rapid that Ruth shrieked. But after a moment of suspense she
heard an encouraging rattle of coal, and then steps slowly ascending
the cellar steps. A little later the front door was shaken violently
without opening, however, and Peggy's face presently appeared at one
of the living-room windows. Regardless of the fact that her friend was
attempting to tell her something, Ruth screamed with laughter, for
Peggy's face was so begrimed as to suggest that her habitual occupation
was that of a chimney-sweep. Ruth's laughter was short-lived, however,
for raising her voice, Peggy made herself heard, and with an accent of
authority by no means characteristic.

"Stop laughing, Ruth, and help me. In fooling with your key I've done

eristic.

"Stop laughing, Ruth, and help me. In fooling with your key I've done
something to that wretched lock, and now I can't open the door even
from the inside."

"The front door?"

"I can't open either door," cried Peggy. "I can't open _any_ door. The
only way to get into the house is by the window, and Hildegarde Carey
is coming to dinner and a girl from New York.""I can't open either door," cried Peggy. "I can't open _any_ door. The
only way to get into the house is by the window, and Hildegarde Carey
is coming to dinner and a girl from New York."

"What do you want me to do, Peggy?" Ruth was so carried away by her
friend's excitement that for the moment she was unable to see anything
humorous in the situation.

"Bring me my market basket, first. It's on the back steps. And then
find a locksmith and bring him here. Don't be satisfied with having him
say he'll come. Bring him with you."

Ruth hurried to the back of the house, secured the heavy basket, and

ith you."

Ruth hurried to the back of the house, secured the heavy basket, and
returned with it to the living room window. And then she astonished
Peggy by setting the basket down and beginning to laugh hysterically.

"What on earth--"

"Oh, Peggy, please excuse me. I really didn't mean to laugh, but
honestly you're the funniest sight I've ever seen. You're striped just
like a zebra."

Curiosity led Peggy to consult the mirror over the mantel. But instead
of laughing as Ruth had done, she uttered a tragic groan.

"It's going to take a terrible time to clean that off, if it ever does
come off. Oh, Ruth, hurry! When I think of all that will have to be
done before six o'clock, my head just whirls."

Ruth took a hasty departure and Peggy, having carried the basket to

t whirls."

Ruth took a hasty departure and Peggy, having carried the basket to
the kitchen, rushed upstairs to remove all traces of her recent novel
entry. As this necessitated an entire change of clothing and the use
of a prodigious amount of soap and hot water, her toilet consumed more
time than she could well spare. But at length, clean and extremely
pink, and attired in a little frock not too good for getting dinner
and yet good enough to pass muster at the table, she rushed downstairs
and attacked her vegetables. And still no sign of Ruth, bringing the
locksmith.About five o'clock Priscilla arrived ready to lend a hand. Peggy
answered her ring at the window, instead of at the door, and after a
brief conversation, the tall Priscilla made an unconventional entry.

nd after a
brief conversation, the tall Priscilla made an unconventional entry.
Amy arriving twenty minutes later was admitted by the same entrance.
The girls made themselves useful and speculated on what was detaining
Ruth.

"I don't mind letting you girls in through the window," groaned Peggy.
"But it's different with Hildegarde. And that New York girl. Oh,
heavens!"

At five o'clock they were all too nervous to know what they were doing.
Peggy set skillets on the stove with nothing in them, and snatched them
off again, just in time to avert disaster. She salted vegetables and
then forgot and salted them all over again. Priscilla was trying to set
the table, and making a poor job of it, as is generally the case when
one is doing one thing and thinking of another.

t, as is generally the case when
one is doing one thing and thinking of another. Amy, after going to the
front window on the average of once in every two minutes to see if Ruth
were coming, felt that she could bear inaction no longer.

"Peggy, where's the latch key to your front door?"

"Hanging on a hook over by the umbrellas. But you can't do anything
with it. I've tried."

"What a key has done a key can undo," replied Amy, sententiously; and
possessing herself of the magic piece of steel, she climbed out of the
window and set to work. For fifteen or twenty minutes she continued
to fumble at the lock without results, and she was on the point of
deciding that she might be putting in the time to better advantage,
when something clicked encouragingly. Amy turned the knob, and squealed

antage,
when something clicked encouragingly. Amy turned the knob, and squealed
with delight; for the door opened.antage,
when something clicked encouragingly. Amy turned the knob, and squealed
with delight; for the door opened.

Before she could proclaim her success, Priscilla had made a discovery.
Lying across a chair in the kitchen was a garment of some indeterminate
shade between blue and black. "What's this?" asked Priscilla, pausing
to examine it.

"It's my old blue coat. But since I came down the coal chute, I don't
know as I can ever wear it again. It isn't worth sending to the
cleaner's, and I'm afraid it's beyond my skill."

"I'll hang it in the laundry," said Priscilla, and lifted the smutty
garment daintily by the tips of her fingers. The coat swung against the
round of the chair with a distinct clink, and Peggy looked up quickly.
"What was that?"

"A button, wasn't it?"

t clink, and Peggy looked up quickly.
"What was that?"

"A button, wasn't it?"

"The buttons are cloth. And that was such a queer sound--like metal."

Priscilla had a brilliant idea. Disregarding the fact that the coal
dust with which the garment was covered came off on her hands, she
began eagerly feeling along the lower edge. And just as Amy heard the
click that meant victory, Priscilla uttered an ecstatic cry.

"The key, Peggy! I've found your key!"

"What? Where? Oh, Priscilla, not really?"

"There must have been a hole in your pocket," declared Priscilla. "The
key slipped down between the outside and the lining. You can feel for
yourself. There's a key all right, and it's not likely it's a different
one."

"Take a knife and rip up the lining at the bottom," ordered Peggy
recklessly.

"

"Take a knife and rip up the lining at the bottom," ordered Peggy
recklessly. "Yes, of course it's the key. I wonder if I'd rather have
that New York girl come in by the back door or the front window."

That query had hardly left her lips, when Amy rushed in. "I've done it,
Peggy, I've done it."

"You don't mean you've got the door open?"That query had hardly left her lips, when Amy rushed in. "I've done it,
Peggy, I've done it."

"You don't mean you've got the door open?"

"Yes, I have. I was just ready to give up and then I tried again and
something clicked and the deed was done."

"And Priscilla's found the back-door key. Now Ruth will come with the
locksmith."

They heard footsteps even as she spoke, and then Ruth's voice
explaining to the locksmith that the only way to get into the house was
by the window. Peggy went to meet them, assuming a very dignified air
that she might not look sheepish.

to meet them, assuming a very dignified air
that she might not look sheepish.

"We succeeded in opening the doors that were troubling us, but there's
a key broken off in a lock upstairs. Since you're here, you might as
well attend to that. Will you take him upstairs Ruth? It's the door of
the den." And then Peggy beat a retreat to the kitchen, leaving Ruth to
propitiate the locksmith, who had left his shop reluctantly, yielding
to her impassioned representations of the urgency of the case.

Dinner was more than half an hour late, and failed to justify Peggy's
reputation as a cook, for some dishes were over-salted and others
entirely lacking that essential ingredient, while the pudding was so
overdone that it was necessary to remove the top layer, and conceal

dding was so
overdone that it was necessary to remove the top layer, and conceal
deficiencies by a quite superfluous meringue. But since Peggy had
planned her dinner party with the purpose of distracting Ruth's
thoughts, she had every reason to consider it an unqualified success.

CHAPTER XIV

AT THE FOOT-BALL GAMECHAPTER XIV

AT THE FOOT-BALL GAME

THE foot-ball season was on. It had opened auspiciously when the
university had crushingly defeated the visitors, and the attendance
upon the second game showed that the public anticipated a similar
victory. Priscilla, sitting demurely beside Horace Hitchcock, was
a-tingle with excitement. Not for the world would she have allowed
Horace to guess how momentous the occasion seemed.

The tiers of seats gave a dazzling effect of color. Pennants and flags

seemed.

The tiers of seats gave a dazzling effect of color. Pennants and flags
and the bright-colored hats of the girls made Priscilla think of
terraces covered with flowers. Every one was talking, almost drowning
out the noisy efforts of the 'varsity band. It seemed to Priscilla an
unfitting time to quote Schopenhauer, but the Schopenhauer pose was
Horace's latest, and it recognized neither time nor seasons.

Priscilla leaned impulsively across Horace to wave to Amy, whose
good-humored face had suddenly differentiated itself from the mass of
surrounding faces. Horace interrupted in the midst of a peculiarly
pessimistic utterance, looked frankly vexed, and Priscilla apologized.
"Excuse me, I just happened to see Amy."

"It is not a surprise to me, Priscilla, to find you uninterested.

to see Amy."

"It is not a surprise to me, Priscilla, to find you uninterested. It is
the fate of some souls to be solitary. Once I had hoped--but it doesn't
matter."

Priscilla's mood was a little perverse. "Perhaps the reason you're
solitary is that you choose such unpleasant paths. If you'd only walk
where it was nice and sunny, you'd have plenty of company."Priscilla's mood was a little perverse. "Perhaps the reason you're
solitary is that you choose such unpleasant paths. If you'd only walk
where it was nice and sunny, you'd have plenty of company."

"Plenty of company! Heavens!" Horace shuddered. "That suggests the
crowd. It is bad enough for the body to be jostled, but at least the
spirit can command unhampered space. I had dreamed once that you might
follow me to the heights where the atmosphere is too rare for the
multitude, but--Why do we cling to life, when each hour that passes
shatters another illusion?"

Why do we cling to life, when each hour that passes
shatters another illusion?"

"I'm sorry I'm such a disappointment, Horace," Priscilla bit her lip.
She was young and eager. She wanted passionately to be happy. She
longed to respond to the charm of the hour, to enjoy it ardently, and
instead she was obliged to listen to quotations from Schopenhauer, and
think of Horace's lost illusions. The thought crossed her mind that
since she could not make Horace happy even for an afternoon, and since
he was certainly not making her so, it promised ill for the future. If
only Horace could be brought to see that they had made a mistake. A
little flutter of hope stirred in Priscilla's heart.

Horace was speaking in a tone of extreme bitterness. "Blessed is the

's heart.

Horace was speaking in a tone of extreme bitterness. "Blessed is the
man who expects nothing from life, for he shall not be disappointed."

"Horace," began Priscilla firmly. "Don't you think that we--I mean
wouldn't it be better--"

A number of people were coming into the vacant places on her left.
A young man seated himself beside Priscilla, and involuntarily she
turned. Then she gave an impulsive start and her ready color flamed
up. The young man, who wore glasses, also started and after an almost
imperceptible hesitation lifted his hat. Simultaneously Priscilla bowed
in the most unresponsive fashion possible, and looked away.Horace stared suspiciously at her flushed cheeks. Horace had never
heard the story of the supper at the Green Parrot, and the fragment of

ad never
heard the story of the supper at the Green Parrot, and the fragment of
roll that had sought to drown itself in the stranger's coffee-cup. If
Priscilla had ever taken him into her confidence, he might have guessed
the explanation of her present embarrassment. As it was, he leaned
close and said in her ear, "Who is that fellow?"

"Sh! I'll tell you afterward."

Poor Priscilla! The game to which she had looked forward had become an
impossible nightmare. Horace's philosophical pursuits had not freed him
from that ready jealousy which is the characteristic of small natures.
He sat glowering across Priscilla's shoulder at the young man seated on
her left. As it was impossible to misunderstand Horace's expression,
the young man, after his first recognition of Priscilla's presence,

expression,
the young man, after his first recognition of Priscilla's presence,
obligingly ignored her.

The finishing of the first half was an enormous relief to Priscilla.
The majority of the seats in the grand-stand were immediately vacated.
The flower bed had become kaleidoscopic, with the bits of color
continually rearranging themselves, as laughing girls and glowing
youths moved about, excitedly discussing the points of the game they
had witnessed. But though Priscilla was so ardent a fan, she knew
little of the game and cared less.

The young man at her left had been one of the first to rise. As he
moved away, Priscilla turned to Horace, and without giving herself time
to be frightened by his forbidding expression, she told him the story

self time
to be frightened by his forbidding expression, she told him the story
of her first and only visit to the Green Parrot.

After she had finished, Horace seemed to be waiting for more. "Do you
mean that is all?" he demanded at length.

"All? Of course it's all."

"Then why did you blush that way?"After she had finished, Horace seemed to be waiting for more. "Do you
mean that is all?" he demanded at length.

"All? Of course it's all."

"Then why did you blush that way?"

The red went out of Priscilla's cheeks. Even the color due to the
frostiness of the outdoor air was replaced by an angry pallor. "Do you
mean," she said in a level voice, "that you don't believe me?"

"A fellow crowds in and sits down beside you, a fellow I've never seen.
You recognize each other and then you turn crimson. You refuse to give
me any explanation till enough time has elapsed for fabricating a
story, plausible from your point of view--"

"Horace!"

apsed for fabricating a
story, plausible from your point of view--"

"Horace!"

"And you then tell me a yarn that is no explanation whatever. What if a
piece of roll did fly out of your hand and fall into somebody's coffee
cup! What is there in that to turn you all colors of the rainbow?
You're stringing me, that's all." The Horace who quoted Schopenhauer,
and talked like the hero of a society novel, had magically disappeared,
and in his place was a slangy young man, very much like other young men
in a bad temper.

"Horace," said Priscilla, her lips trembling, "I've been afraid for
a long time that we'd made a mistake. I can't seem to please you, no
matter how hard I try, and probably it won't surprise you to know that
I've been perfectly miserable for the last six months.

surprise you to know that
I've been perfectly miserable for the last six months. And it seems to
me the best thing we can do--"

The people were beginning to come back to their seats. A couple just
in front of Horace and Priscilla turned to scream something to a row
of young people back of them. Priscilla tightened her grip on her self
control and looked straight ahead. It was not the time nor place for
breaking an engagement. She must wait till she could get away from this
noisy, laughing crowd. Oh, if only the dreadful afternoon were over.The university triumphed again, as its friends had anticipated. There
was the usual tumultuous cheering, the usual frantic demonstrations.
Priscilla gave Horace the benefit of a frigid profile. Her sense
of indignity kept her sternly silent.

the benefit of a frigid profile. Her sense
of indignity kept her sternly silent. He had accused her of lying,
and that meant all was over between them. Underneath her hurt and
humiliation was a sense of relief she refused to acknowledge even to
herself. Fortunately the young man in eye-glasses did not return to
take the vacant place at Priscilla's left, and the situation was not
further complicated by his embarrassing presence.

She stood up as the crowd rose, thankful for the prospect of escape.
Horace put his hand lightly on her arm. "Wouldn't you like something
hot to drink?" he asked. "Chocolate or coffee?" His tone was caressing.

"I don't want anything except to get home."

"Then we'll go home, little girl. I only thought you might be chilled
sitting here in the cold so long."

e girl. I only thought you might be chilled
sitting here in the cold so long."

He spoke with placid tenderness, as if their quarrel belonged to the
Babylonian era of their acquaintance. Priscilla cast a frightened
glance at him. She felt like a fly, partially disentangling itself from
the spider's web, only to find itself again mysteriously ensnared.
"Don't, Horace," she exclaimed impulsively.

"Don't what, Priscilla?"

"Don't talk as if nothing had happened. If you believe that I'm a
liar--"

"My dear girl, don't be absurd. We'd better not talk till you're
calmer."

"I'm as calm as I'm likely to be when I'm talking of this, Horace. If
you think it a little thing to doubt my word, I don't agree with you."

He took her arm and bent down till his face was very close to hers.

with you."

He took her arm and bent down till his face was very close to hers.
"Can't you make allowances, Priscilla, for a man crazed with love and
jealousy?"with you."

He took her arm and bent down till his face was very close to hers.
"Can't you make allowances, Priscilla, for a man crazed with love and
jealousy?"

"You haven't any right--" Her voice broke in a sob. She fought
desperately against the tears that placed her, she vaguely realized,
at such a serious disadvantage, but they were too much for her. They
splashed down on her white cheeks, and the couples crowding past
glanced at her curiously.

"Forgive me, Priscilla. I accept your explanation. I ask your
forgiveness. I am at your feet."

She was lost and she knew it, but she struggled nevertheless. "We've
made a mistake. We're not happy, either of us. It's better to stop now
than later."

"Priscilla--are you in love with him?"

Horace's tone had changed magically.

."

"Priscilla--are you in love with him?"

Horace's tone had changed magically. It was no longer tenderly
matter-of-fact, but tragic, desperate. She stared at him aghast. "In
love--why, what, do you mean?"

"With that man who sat beside you to-day, the man who did not dare come
back and face me."

"Horace,--why, Horace, you must be crazy. I told you I had never seen
him but once before, and I told you what happened then."

Her disclaimer did not afford him any especial relief. He was muttering
to himself. She caught the words, "As well now as later," and fear
gripped her heart. He did not directly address her till they had left
the field behind, and were no longer surrounded by the laughing,
buoyant throng.

"I have foreseen this, Priscilla. I have known that happiness was not
for me.

.

"I have foreseen this, Priscilla. I have known that happiness was not
for me. But I have tried to shut my eyes to the truth, to hope for the
impossible. Now you have thrown me away like a ripped glove--""Horace, I didn't." Even at this tragic moment the thought crossed
Priscilla's mind that instead of throwing away a ripped glove as
worthless, she would sit down conscientiously to mend it. She brushed
aside the reflection as unworthy the occasion and hurried on, "It isn't
that. But if we can't be happy now, if we're always irritating and
hurting each other--"

"You don't need to say more, Priscilla. You are weary of me. I had
dreamed I had found a soul capable of constancy--but no matter. This
is good-by, Priscilla. I cannot live without you. When you take away

tter. This
is good-by, Priscilla. I cannot live without you. When you take away
your love from me, you take away all that makes life endurable. All I
ask now is forgetfulness, and only death can promise me that--Good-by,
Priscilla."

Poor Priscilla! She should have known better. Long before she had
discovered Horace's weakness for posing. It was no secret to her that
he experienced the keenest satisfaction in contemplating the ravages
wrought in his nature by successive disillusionments. Yet though she
understood, at this crisis her good sense failed her. In spite of
herself, she interpreted Horace's speech by her own sincerity, and a
chill terror took possession of her. He would kill himself and she
would be to blame. Although the law would not recognize her crime, at

f and she
would be to blame. Although the law would not recognize her crime, at
the bar of her own conscience she would be adjudged guilty of murder.

"Horace," she wailed, "you did not understand me. I want to make
you happy, that's all. If you think we haven't made a mistake, I'm
satisfied.""Horace," she wailed, "you did not understand me. I want to make
you happy, that's all. If you think we haven't made a mistake, I'm
satisfied."

It took a long time to reassure Horace. It was so hard to explain
matters satisfactorily that it almost seemed as if he were stupid or
else wilfully perverse. Much of the time he stared blankly ahead, so
lost in gloomy reflections that she had to speak his name twice, before
she could attract his attention. His lips moved, too, but without a
sound, as if he were saying things too dreadful to be heard. Altogether
Priscilla suffered intolerably before she could bring the unhappy young

ogether
Priscilla suffered intolerably before she could bring the unhappy young
man to reconsider his desperate purpose.

At last she was partially successful. He became calm enough to listen
to her repeated assurances that all she thought of was his happiness
and, though his mood was still sober when they parted, he had given a
half-hearted and reluctant promise that he would surrender, for the
present at least, all thought of doing away with the life he valued so
lightly.

Priscilla was not sure how she got through the rest of the day. Her
mother noticed her abstraction and speculated hopefully as to whether
she had quarreled with Horace. While Priscilla's parents had never been
let into the secret of the engagement, they could not be unaware of
the significance of Horace's attentions.

ngagement, they could not be unaware of
the significance of Horace's attentions. Like most American fathers
and mothers, they believed a girl should be allowed to choose her own
friends, unless there was some decided reason to oppose her choice.
Although neither of them liked Horace, the reasons for their prejudice
were too vague and too personal to constitute a ground for opposing
the intimacy. Moreover, both of Priscilla's parents were of the
opinion that if she saw enough of the young man she would tire of the
mannerisms they found so objectionable.It was not till Priscilla was safe in bed that she dared relieve her
over-burdened heart by tears. And as she lay sobbing with the coverlet
over her head, she solemnly relinquished all hope of happiness in this
world.

over her head, she solemnly relinquished all hope of happiness in this
world.

"It was my vanity that got me into this," lamented Priscilla. "I didn't
like to feel I was less attractive than the other girls and so I fairly
snatched at Horace. Now I've got to stand by my promise if it kills me,
but Oh, how am I going to bear it!"

So Priscilla cried herself to sleep. And there was an added poignancy
in her grief as she remembered that the Combs family was notably
long-lived, boasting some distant ancestors who had rounded out a full
century of existence.

CHAPTER XV

THE CURE

THEY were out for a walk one Saturday evening, Peggy and Amy, with
Graham and Bob in attendance, when in front of a little movie theater,
Peggy stopped short. A young couple stood at the ticket booth, the girl

theater,
Peggy stopped short. A young couple stood at the ticket booth, the girl
giggling vacuously as the very slender youth fumbled in his pockets for
the price of admission. Peggy's abrupt halt was not due to the charm of
the flaring poster, representing a fat woman with a broom in pursuit of
a thin man attired in a bath-robe. Her attention was absorbed by the
young couple, who were planning to enjoy the show. For while she had
never seen the girl before, the slender youth was her younger brother,
Dick.

As the two disappeared behind the swinging doors, Peggy turned to her
companions. "Think you could stand it?" She indicated the poster by
a gesture, and Bob Carey, who did not have the pleasure of Dick's
acquaintance, looked surprised, while Graham's face wore an expression
of doubt.

quaintance, looked surprised, while Graham's face wore an expression
of doubt.

"I've seen just as bad, Peggy, and still survive," Graham said. "But I
hardly think--"quaintance, looked surprised, while Graham's face wore an expression
of doubt.

"I've seen just as bad, Peggy, and still survive," Graham said. "But I
hardly think--"

"Of course we can stand it, if you'd like to go in, Peggy," interrupted
Amy. And Bob, though evidently puzzled by Peggy's taste moved quickly
forward to purchase the tickets, thus getting ahead of Graham who was
still inclined to remonstrate. Graham understood that Peggy was not
especially pleased to discover Dick in company with a girl she knew
nothing about, especially since her manner had made anything but a
favorable impression in the few seconds she had been under observation.
But Dick, while considerably short of his majority, was old enough to
resent interference in his affairs, and Graham could not see that Peggy

ough to
resent interference in his affairs, and Graham could not see that Peggy
would gain anything by trying to play detective.

The film which constituted the evening's entertainment was
exceptionally poor. The comedy was of the atrocious, slap-stick sort
that moves the judicious almost to tears while the feature play, a
melodrama only saved from being a tragedy by an inconsistently happy
ending, was frequently so overdone as to be extremely funny. Peggy paid
comparatively little attention to the drama as it unrolled before her
eyes. First of all she set herself to locate Dick and his companion,
and then to evolve a plan of action suited to the requirements of the
case.

Graham spoke confidentially in her ear. "Don't worry, Peggy. Every boy
has his silly times.

e confidentially in her ear. "Don't worry, Peggy. Every boy
has his silly times. I did myself." Graham's manner suggested that he
was speaking from the vantage-point of discreet middle age.e confidentially in her ear. "Don't worry, Peggy. Every boy
has his silly times. I did myself." Graham's manner suggested that he
was speaking from the vantage-point of discreet middle age.

"Yes, I know." Peggy did not mean her answer just as it sounded. She
was simply thinking of something else. Graham stared at the inane
chase, unfolding on the screen, where a procession of people ran into
everything imaginable from a peanut vendor's cart to an express train,
and presently tried again. "You want to be careful, Peggy. He's just at
the age to resent your trying to manage him."

"Yes, I know," whispered Peggy again. She was fully as alive as Graham
to the necessity of tact. But she was aware, too, that all boys do not
pass through the silly stage as unscathed as Graham had done. All the

ys do not
pass through the silly stage as unscathed as Graham had done. All the
loyal sister in her was alert.

They sat through the depressing comedy and the amusing tragedy, and
then suddenly Peggy rose. She had seen Dick on ahead getting to his
feet. In the darkness of the picture house there was no danger he would
recognize her. Indeed it was unlikely that he would have seen her even
if the lights had been turned on, so engrossed was he by the plump
little person whose head barely reached his shoulder.

Peggy and her party were outside first. All unaware of the ambush,
Dick came blundering on. He was talking fast and the girl was giggling
approval. Peggy saw that she was all she had feared. Her round cheeks
were rouged so as to give an excellent imitation of a pair of Baldwin
apples.ks
were rouged so as to give an excellent imitation of a pair of Baldwin
apples. Between the crimson circles her nose gleamed ludicrously
white, suggesting a very recent use of her powder puff. Her bobbed
hair, together with her diminutive frame, gave her a childish air,
contradicted by the shrewdness of her eyes. Peggy guessed that Dick's
friend was considerably his senior, probably not far from her own age.

Dick was laughing rather boisterously at one of his own witticisms,
when Peggy touched his arm. "Hello, Dick!" Her tone was nonchalant,
but Dick started, straightened himself and flushed angrily. All his
masculine pride was up in arms at the thought of coercion. But Peggy's
matter-of-fact air partly allayed his suspicions.

"We sat about six rows back of you," she explained.

tly allayed his suspicions.

"We sat about six rows back of you," she explained. "Dick, you haven't
met Mr. Carey, have you? My brother, Richard, Bob."

The two shook hands and Dick realized that reciprocity was in order.
Under the most favorable circumstances, performing the ceremony of
introduction was to Dick an agonizing ordeal, and the present situation
increased his inevitable embarrassment a hundred fold. He was the color
of a ripe tomato as he blurted out, "Miss Coffin, let me introduce you
to my sister--Miss Raymond--and Miss--Miss----" He had forgotten Amy's
name after having known it all his life, and Peggy came to the rescue,
and introduced the others.

Whatever Dick's feeling in regard to the meeting, it was clear that
Miss Coffin was not displeased.

ling in regard to the meeting, it was clear that
Miss Coffin was not displeased. She fixed a hypnotic gaze on Bob Carey
as she exclaimed, "Fierce name, isn't it! But take it from me, I'm no
dead one, Coffin or no coffin."

Peggy's smile gave no hint of her inward anguish. "We're just going
home to have some oysters. Won't you and Dick come along, Miss Coffin?"Peggy's smile gave no hint of her inward anguish. "We're just going
home to have some oysters. Won't you and Dick come along, Miss Coffin?"

Graham had difficulty in choking down an impatient exclamation. What
was Peggy thinking of? It was bad enough for Dick to be associating
with a girl of this sort, but for Peggy to encourage him in his folly
by welcoming the girl to her home, the first time she had ever seen
her, impressively illustrated the feminine incapacity to act reasonably
in a crisis. While it was impossible to put his disapproval into words,

sonably
in a crisis. While it was impossible to put his disapproval into words,
Graham's manner left little unexpressed.

Dick looked as if he agreed with Graham, but Peggy had not addressed
herself to him. And as for Miss Coffin, Peggy's invitation was
responsible for a marked increase in her sprightliness. "Eats!" she
cried dramatically, "Oh, boy! Lead me to it!"

They went down the street in the direction of Friendly Terrace, Miss
Coffin chattering animatedly at Dick's elbow, and speaking loudly
enough to be heard easily by the others. Indeed, there was ground for
supposing that she was willing to allow her vivacious conversation to
make an impression on more important listeners than Dick. Her youthful
escort, stalking awkwardly at her side, was almost as silent as Graham

youthful
escort, stalking awkwardly at her side, was almost as silent as Graham
who walked on ahead with Peggy. But the silence of her brother and her
lover, even though it implied criticism and displeasure, seemingly
failed to shadow Peggy's spirits. She turned her head every now and
then to address a remark to Dick's companion, and Miss Coffin showed
her appreciation of the friendly attitude by the request that she "cut
out the formal stuff." "You kids are the kind that can call me Mazie,"
she chirruped, apparently under the impression that she was addressing
some one at a considerable distance.It was perhaps as well for the success of Peggy's plan that neither
her father nor her mother were at home. She ushered her guests into

hat neither
her father nor her mother were at home. She ushered her guests into
the living room and insisted on their laying aside their wraps. Mazie
Coffin having removed her hat, went straight as a homing pigeon to the
mirror over the mantel, and made an unabashed and quite unnecessary use
of her powder puff.

"You're coming out to help me, aren't you, Amy?" Peggy inquired
casually. "I thought I'd fix little pigs-in-blankets, you know. They're
awfully good, but rather fussy."

"Why, of course I'll help," responded Amy, wondering if Mazie,
also, would be called on to render assistance. But apparently
Peggy's acquaintance with Mazie had not progressed to that point of
informality. "We'll try not to be any longer than we can help," she

at point of
informality. "We'll try not to be any longer than we can help," she
smiled, "and we'll leave you to amuse one another till we're ready."

Out in the kitchen as they wrapped fat oysters in blankets of bacon,
pinning the latter in place with wooden tooth-picks, the two girls
exchanged significant glances. "What's the idea?" Amy asked, with the
frankness of long friendship.

"Well, I'm not sure that it will do any good. But I've got an
idea--Don't you know that the impression a thing makes on you depends a
lot on the background?"

"Hm! I don't quite understand what you mean."

"Well, if you see a girl on the stage with a skirt nine inches long, it
doesn't make the same impression on you that it would if you saw her in
your own home."

"No, it doesn't."

sion on you that it would if you saw her in
your own home."

"No, it doesn't."

"Dick's been used to nice people all his life," Peggy went on, plainly
trying to encourage herself as well as to explain matters to Amy. "A
girl like this might attract his attention if he saw her behind the
counter of a cigar store--""Does she work in a cigar store?"

"I haven't the least idea. I only meant she wouldn't seem particularly
out of place in a tobacco shop. But here in our home--Oh, it seems as
though Dick must see how cheap and tawdry she is."

Amy skewered a particularly juicy oyster with a vicious thrust of the
tooth pick. "Hope so, anyway," she said, and felt an exasperated
desire to box Dick's ears.

But when Peggy had left the field to Mazie Coffin, she had builded

ick's ears.

But when Peggy had left the field to Mazie Coffin, she had builded
better than she knew, Mazie had accepted the responsibility of
entertaining the masculine portion of the company with extreme
complacency. Never for a moment had she doubted her ability to make a
favorable impression. As she gave her smiling attention to the trio,
her late escort occupied a very small fraction of her thoughts. Dick
was only a boy, a boy to whom shaving was still a novel art, and whose
voice cracked ludicrously in moments of excitement. But Graham and Bob
were young men, and good looking young men at that. Mazie hoped that
the girls would not hurry with the oysters.

As this young woman's methods were not characterized by subtlety, it

oysters.

As this young woman's methods were not characterized by subtlety, it
was not long before Dick realized that he was being disregarded. Mazie
had eyes only for his seniors. She had begun by saying, as the door
closed behind Peggy and Amy, "Gee, but they're trusting! How do they
know that I won't vamp you two guys!" And when Dick, resenting his
new rôle of unnoticed on-looker, had attempted to bear his part in
the conversation, Mazie had silenced him with a jocose, "What are you
butting in for, kid? Children must be seen and not heard, you know."

Dick Raymond was by no means a bad boy, and he was just as far from
being a stupid boy. Mazie's conversational advances, as she had weighed
out peanut brittle and caramels in quarter pound lots, had flattered
his vanity.out peanut brittle and caramels in quarter pound lots, had flattered
his vanity. Dick was not accustomed to being regarded as a young man,
and Mazie's manner of considering him worth-while game had naturally
convinced him that she was a girl of exceptional insight. But now as
she made eyes at Graham and smiled at Bob, the conviction seized Dick
that her previous attentions had been due to the fact that he was the
only one of his kind within reach. As was natural, the discovery made
him critical. He noticed the harshness of Mazie's voice, the vacuity
of her giggle. Her repetition of cheap slang began to jar on him, even
though he was himself a similar offender. He looked distrustfully at
the crimson cheeks, with the powdered nose gleaming whitely between.

ustfully at
the crimson cheeks, with the powdered nose gleaming whitely between.
"I'll be 'jiggered if it doesn't look exactly like a marshmallow," he
told himself.

The possibility that Dick's mood was critical did not trouble Mazie.
She had looked Peggy and Amy over with the complacent certainty of
her superior charms. Dick's sister wasn't a bad looker, Mazie owned
condescendingly, but she was slow, dead slow, and nowadays the fellows
liked plenty of pep. Mazie prided herself, not without reason, on
having an abundance of that essential quality. She was sorry when the
fragrance of frying bacon and coffee greeted her nostrils. Though
Graham was stiffly polite and Bob Carey plainly amused, she would have
been glad of a little more time.

and Bob Carey plainly amused, she would have
been glad of a little more time.and Bob Carey plainly amused, she would have
been glad of a little more time.

The impromptu supper in the dining-room completed Dick's
disillusionment. Determined not to yield any advantage she had gained
Mazie continued to take the lead in the conversation. She gestured
freely and frequently with the hand which held her fork, even with an
oyster impaled on the tines. She drank her coffee noisily. Once, Dick
was sure, he saw Bob choke down a laugh, though he made a pretence of
coughing behind his napkin. And it was not, Dick was certain, because
he found her amusing, but because he thought her ridiculous. Dick
glared furiously at the averted shoulder of his erst-while charmer.
Mazie had elected to treat him like a little boy, but if she had

-while charmer.
Mazie had elected to treat him like a little boy, but if she had
listened to him, thought Dick, he could have kept her from making a
fool of herself.

Mazie seemed willing to linger, even after Amy and Bob had taken their
departure. "Guess we might as well be starting," suggested Dick, his
thoughts upon the probable return of his father and mother, rather than
on his responsibility as host.

"Getting sleepy aren't you, little boy?" mocked Mazie. "Don't let me
keep you from your downy. I can get home somehow," and she glanced
significantly at Graham, whose good looks, for all his air of reserve,
had made a strong impression on her susceptible temperament.

When at length she left under the escort of a frankly sulky Dick,

temperament.

When at length she left under the escort of a frankly sulky Dick,
she turned back to remind Graham that he could always find her in
Streeter's Sweet Shop between the hours of nine and five. And then she
took Dick's arm, and went out the door, smiling back coquettishly over
her shoulder.Graham hardly waited for them to be out of hearing before he exploded.
The evening had been a great disappointment, and while Graham would
have resented any outside suggestion that Peggy came short of absolute
perfection, there were times when he felt himself quite capable of
pointing out her errors in judgment. Peggy's painstaking explanation
failed to enlighten him, and while Peggy thought Graham the most
wonderful of men, in this instance she found him disappointingly slow

the most
wonderful of men, in this instance she found him disappointingly slow
of comprehension. They did not quarrel, but they kept on arguing the
question long after it was clear that neither would be able to take the
other's point of view. They were still arguing when Dick returned.

Dick was in that state of irritation when scolding somebody seems an
indispensable luxury. "See here, Peggy, just because you see me with a
girl, you don't have to start right in and invite her to the house."

"Why, Dick, I thought--"

"Sometimes a fellow asks a girl out just so he can size her up. And if
he finds that she's a blamed idiot, he don't want her mixed up with his
family. You mean all right, Peggy, but you don't understand life the
way Graham and I do.

You mean all right, Peggy, but you don't understand life the
way Graham and I do. I don't want you to have anything more to do with
Mazie Coffin, Peggy. She's not the sort of girl for you to associate
with. You can ask Graham about it if you don't believe me."

And as Dick stalked off to bed, ill tempered and aggrieved and
abnormally dignified, even Graham was obliged to admit that it looked
like a cure.

CHAPTER XVI

DELIVERANCEAnd as Dick stalked off to bed, ill tempered and aggrieved and
abnormally dignified, even Graham was obliged to admit that it looked
like a cure.

CHAPTER XVI

DELIVERANCE

PRISCILLA had seen Horace only once since the football game, and then
for a short and unsatisfactory interview. Immediately after, Horace had
left town for one of those trips which so cleverly combined business
and pleasure, a combination of which Horace seemed to have the secret.
A long letter which might have been an excerpt from the Journal of

the secret.
A long letter which might have been an excerpt from the Journal of
Another Disappointed Man gave her no address to which to write him, and
the best she could do was to promise herself to be very, very kind to
Horace on his return. She owed him that for the wrong she had done him.

The days went by without any further word from Horace, and Friday
rounded out a full week since she had last seen him. Priscilla and
Peggy walked home from class together with that sense of leisure Friday
afternoon brings to each student, no matter how much must be done
before Monday morning. They paused at Peggy's door and Peggy urged
hospitably, "Come on in."

"I think I'd better go home and see if mother's there, and if she wants
anything. We haven't seen our maid for three days."

r's there, and if she wants
anything. We haven't seen our maid for three days."

"Well, we've _seen_ Sally, if that's any comfort," laughed Peggy. "But
she's been about as much good as if she'd been at the North Pole. A
woman she knows was knocked down by an automobile and taken to the
hospital, and all Sally has been good for since is to dramatize the
affair. First she's the automobile speeding recklessly on, and then
she's the poor victim. You never saw anything so realistic as the way
she drops on the kitchen floor."

Priscilla laughed, but disapprovingly. "I don't see how you folks put
up with her, Peggy. She'd drive me crazy."Priscilla laughed, but disapprovingly. "I don't see how you folks put
up with her, Peggy. She'd drive me crazy."

"Well, there's no denying she's a trial at times, but Sally has her
good points. She's devoted to us all, for one thing, and that isn't

lly has her
good points. She's devoted to us all, for one thing, and that isn't
very common these days. And besides," added Peggy simply, "if we didn't
keep her I don't know how the poor thing would get along."

The two girls had been together all day but they lingered, loath to
separate. "Listen, Peggy," Priscilla exclaimed. "Come home with me.
Like enough mother will have an errand for me to do and then we can go
together. Don't you love outdoors when it's still and cold like this?"

"Yes, love it. I'll go and see if we need anything in the way of
groceries, and I'll join you in about a minute."

Peggy hurried up the walk and Priscilla went on her way. The evening
paper lay folded on the porch of her home and she picked it up and

The evening
paper lay folded on the porch of her home and she picked it up and
tucked it under her arm before she slipped her key into the latch. She
found the kitchen empty and ran upstairs, calling her mother. But only
the echoes answered, and Priscilla realized that except for herself the
house was empty.

Priscilla seated herself to wait for Peggy, picking up the paper she
had thrown on the library table. Her eye ran mechanically over the
columns. She turned the sheets, her thoughts still busy with the day's
happenings, and with vague plans for the morrow. Then unexpectedly a
familiar face flashed out at her from the page, set above head-lines
that seemed fairly to shriek their news.

YOUNG HITCHCOCK SURPRISES FRIENDS
    SOCIETY MAN MARRIES IN NEW YORK

ews.

YOUNG HITCHCOCK SURPRISES FRIENDS
    SOCIETY MAN MARRIES IN NEW YORKYOUNG HITCHCOCK SURPRISES FRIENDS
    SOCIETY MAN MARRIES IN NEW YORK

ews.

YOUNG HITCHCOCK SURPRISES FRIENDS
    SOCIETY MAN MARRIES IN NEW YORK

Priscilla, sitting motionless, read the news over several times. Then
her eyes began moving down the column. Even when she saw Horace's name
written out in full, her sense of unreality persisted. The reporter
had treated the matter humorously, following the precedent which makes
love and marriage the most popular theme for jests. That the lady in
question had become Mrs. Hitchcock just three days after meeting her
future husband furnished a partial excuse for the levity.

"Mr. Hitchcock denies that there is anything hasty in his romantic
marriage," wrote the reporter. "When asked if he considered a three
days' acquaintance a sufficient prelude to matrimony, he smilingly

ered a three
days' acquaintance a sufficient prelude to matrimony, he smilingly
replied that he preferred three thousand years. In explanation of his
enigmatic remark, Mr. Hitchcock gave his views on reincarnation, while
in the background Mrs. Hitchcock blushed assent. Both are convinced
that, to quote Mr. Hitchcock, 'they were soul mates when the pyramids
were in building, lovers in Babylon--'"

Priscilla suddenly crumpled the paper in her hand. The familiar phrases
were like a dash of cold water, rousing her from her daze. "I'm free,"
she cried, "I'm free! I'm free!" and broke into violent weeping.

Peggy rang several times without attracting attention. When at length
she put her finger to the button and held it there, Priscilla woke

en at length
she put her finger to the button and held it there, Priscilla woke
to the realization that there was some one at the door. She crept
downstairs, unconsciously holding fast to the paper that had announced
her release, and admitted a justly incensed Peggy."I'm afraid you need some of those artificial ear-drums,
Priscilla--Why, what's happened?" Peggy's attempted irony changed to
affectionate concern, as she saw Priscilla with her tear-streaked
cheeks and eyes inflamed and swollen. She threw her arms around her
friend, her imagination running the gamut of possible calamities. "Oh,
what is the matter?" she pleaded.

It seemed to Priscilla that a verbal explanation was beyond her.
Dumbly she held out the crumpled sheet. Peggy caught sight of Horace's

ond her.
Dumbly she held out the crumpled sheet. Peggy caught sight of Horace's
smug smile, snatched the paper from Priscilla's hand, and read the
incredible story at a glance. The blood rushed to her brain, dying even
her ears crimson. Rage shook her. For the instant, the gentle Peggy was
a silent fury.

Priscilla roused herself to the need of explanation. "Peggy!"

Peggy whirled upon her. "My dear, it is the most abominable thing I
ever heard of, but you couldn't have cared for him, Priscilla. Oh, tell
me you didn't."

"We--well, we were engaged."

"Engaged," choked Peggy. She took a backward step, looked at
Priscilla's disfigured face, and dug her nails deep into her palms.
"Oh, I wish I were a man," she breathed in a voice hardly recognizable.

Priscilla uttered a choked laugh.

she breathed in a voice hardly recognizable.

Priscilla uttered a choked laugh. Combined with the fact that the tears
were still running down her face, this did not tend to allay Peggy's
apprehensions. But as the laugh seemed to unlock Priscilla's tongue,
her distressed friend was not long kept in suspense.

"I suppose I looked as if I were heart-broken," exclaimed Priscilla,
laughing and crying. "Yes, we were really engaged, Peggy, but you can't
imagine what a nightmare it has been."

"A nightmare," gasped Peggy. "Your engagement a nightmare!" She put her
hands to her head as if the unexpected information acquired in the last
few minutes had crowded it to the bursting point."A nightmare," gasped Peggy. "Your engagement a nightmare!" She put her
hands to her head as if the unexpected information acquired in the last
few minutes had crowded it to the bursting point.

"Wait, Peggy! I've had a dreadful time, but it's been my own fault. I

ng point.

"Wait, Peggy! I've had a dreadful time, but it's been my own fault. I
blame myself for everything that has happened. If it hadn't been for my
silly vanity--"

"Vanity--" interrupted Peggy, and sniffed her scorn.

"Oh, you can sneer, Peggy Raymond, but I've been a silly little fool.
In the first place, I made myself miserable because nobody wanted me."

"Priscilla," Peggy interrupted again, "I believe you ought to go to
bed. You're talking as if you were delirious."

"I know perfectly well what I'm saying, Peggy. You were engaged to
Graham, and Nelson was in love with Ruth and Bob Carey was getting very
attentive to Amy, and I was the only one left out and I resented it."

"Do you mean," cried Peggy incredulously, "that you don't know that

ented it."

"Do you mean," cried Peggy incredulously, "that you don't know that
you're so handsome that people are always turning to look after you
when you pass?"

Priscilla laughed. "I won't choke you off, Peggy. After that news--"
she nodded significantly toward the paper. "I fancy I can stand a
little flattery and not be injured. But anyway I was sour and sore when
Horace began to call. I knew exactly what Horace was, Peggy, but I shut
my eyes to it. I wouldn't criticize him even in my thoughts. I wouldn't
let you laugh at him--"

"Don't I know it!" Peggy drew a long breath. "That was one of the
things that made me anxious."

"Well, when he told me--that he cared for me, I just snatched at
him, Peggy. I was perfectly delighted that somebody thought I was
attractive."Well, when he told me--that he cared for me, I just snatched at
him, Peggy. I was perfectly delighted that somebody thought I was
attractive.

at
him, Peggy. I was perfectly delighted that somebody thought I was
attractive. And I was such a silly little fool that I actually gloated
over being the second girl out of us four to get engaged. Peggy, I'm
terribly ashamed to tell you all this, but now's the time to finish up
the subject and be done with it."

"Priscilla darling, I can understand everything except your feeling
that way about yourself."

"Of course I wasn't happy," Priscilla went on. "I don't know whether
Horace was or not. He always talked in a dreadfully pessimistic
fashion, but I rather think--"

"Just a pose," interpolated Peggy witheringly. "Even when he was a
little boy, Horace was always playing a part."

"Once or twice I tried to tell him I thought we had made a mistake.

g a part."

"Once or twice I tried to tell him I thought we had made a mistake.
When I thought of going on and on through the years it didn't seem as
if I could bear it. And then he talked so dreadfully, Peggy, and I was
afraid he'd kill himself."

"No such luck," snorted Priscilla's audience. It was hard to believe
that it was really Peggy making such a speech and looking so fierce
and angry. Priscilla interrupted her story by a little hysterical laugh.

"The last time was only two weeks ago at the foot-ball game. He was so
disagreeable that I tried again to get out of it, and then he took it
so to heart that I gave up all hope of ever being free. When I read
that account today, and it came over me all at once that I needn't ever

I read
that account today, and it came over me all at once that I needn't ever
see Horace Hitchcock again, it seemed as if I'd die of joy. I believe I
should have, too, if I hadn't begun to cry."

Peggy was still scornful. "The idea of your sacrificing yourself for
such a fellow as Horace."Peggy was still scornful. "The idea of your sacrificing yourself for
such a fellow as Horace."

"Only because I was to blame, Peggy. As long as my silly vanity had got
me into such a scrape, I thought nothing was too bad for me."

"Didn't it ever occur to you that two wrongs didn't make a right? If
you were wrong in getting engaged to Horace when you didn't love him,
marrying him without love would be a million times wickeder."

Priscilla took the reproof meekly. "Perhaps so. Anyway, I have learned
my lesson. The wrong man is so much worse than no man at all that now

ve learned
my lesson. The wrong man is so much worse than no man at all that now
I'm perfectly resigned to being an old maid."

Peggy sniffed derisively. "You talk about your silly vanity. You
certainly were silly enough, but when it comes to vanity, why,
Priscilla Combs, you're the most painfully modest girl I know. The
timid violet is a monster of arrogance compared to you. I adore Ruth
and Amy, as everybody knows, but when it comes to looks, they're simply
not in it alongside you. You're handsome, Priscilla, just as Horace's
dreadful old aunt said, and you're talented and you're charming, and
lots of men would fall in love with you in a minute if they thought
they had the ghost of a chance."

Priscilla clapped her hands over her ears and blushed till Peggy's

a chance."

Priscilla clapped her hands over her ears and blushed till Peggy's
eloquence lost itself in laughter. "I'm not going to be punished by
having to marry Horace," she said, when at length she judged it safe
to lower her defenses. "But I shan't get off scott-free. Just think,
Peggy, how many people in this city will be sorry for me, because I've
been jilted by Horace Hitchcock."

CHAPTER XVII

PEGGY COMES TO A DECISION

IT was mid-afternoon on a crisp February day when Graham called Peggy
on the phone. In his preliminary "Hello" she detected an unwonted note
of excitement.

"Hello, Graham. Yes, it's Peggy."IT was mid-afternoon on a crisp February day when Graham called Peggy
on the phone. In his preliminary "Hello" she detected an unwonted note
of excitement.

"Hello, Graham. Yes, it's Peggy."

"I want you to take dinner with me to-night."

"Take dinner? Why, I can't possibly, Graham. I've got quite a lot of
cramming to do for the mid-year examinations.

ly, Graham. I've got quite a lot of
cramming to do for the mid-year examinations. And I haven't even looked
at my lessons for to-morrow."

"Hang your lessons."

Peggy pricked up her ears. "What did you say?" she queried
incredulously.

"I said, 'Hang your lessons,' and I'll add, 'Hang your examinations.'
I've got to see you and have a long talk."

One of the advantages of habitual faithfulness to duty is that the rare
relapse into irresponsibility comes as a delightful holiday. Peggy's
face suddenly crinkled into a charming smile. It was a pity Graham
could not see it.

"Oh, well," she said demurely, "if it's terribly important--"

"It is."

"Then I suppose I must let you have your way."

"I'll call for you at half past six and we'll dine at the McLaughlin."

way."

"I'll call for you at half past six and we'll dine at the McLaughlin."

"The McLaughlin! You haven't happened to come into a fortune since last
evening, have you!"

"Not exactly. It's a celebration."

"What for?"

"That's telling. See you at six-thirty, Peggy darling. Good-by." And
Graham rang off in a hurry, as if he feared her powers of persuasion,
and suspected that if he gave her half a chance she would have the
whole story out of him over the wire.

Peggy went back to her books with a smile which proved her thinking
of something very different from history or economics. She was well
aware that she would go to the class next day without her usual
careful preparation, but having made up her mind to accede to Graham'sher usual
careful preparation, but having made up her mind to accede to Graham's
request, she had no intention of spoiling her pleasure by thinking of
slighted tasks. And though she made a valiant effort at concentration
in the short time left her for study, her attempt was not particularly
successful. The dinner was a celebration, Graham had said. She racked
her brain to recall some anniversary that had momentarily escaped her
recollection, but without results.

Peggy was dressed by six o'clock, having spent an unprecedentedly long
time over her toilet. The McLaughlin, though not the largest hotel in
the city, was one of the most exclusive, and the costumes seen in the
dining-room were frequently of an elegance compared with which Peggy's
little evening frock was almost dowdy.

f an elegance compared with which Peggy's
little evening frock was almost dowdy. But neither at the McLaughlin
nor elsewhere was one likely to see a face more charming than that
which looked back at Peggy from her mirror, so that her haunting fear
that Graham might be ashamed of her was entirely unfounded.

Mrs. Raymond left the dining table to see the young couple off. "Have
a good time, dears," she said, and was pleased but not surprised when
Graham followed Peggy's example, and stooping kissed her. She stood at
the window looking after them as they went down the street. What a dear
boy Graham was! In the far-off, nebulous future when Peggy began to
think of being married, she could trust her to Graham without a fear.
And then they would live near, where she could see Peggy every day.

out a fear.
And then they would live near, where she could see Peggy every day.
Mrs. Raymond told herself she would not have anything different.

"Mother," called Mr. Raymond's voice from the dining-room, "your
dinner's getting cold."

Meanwhile Peggy, tilting her head on one side like an inquisitive
canary, was asking Graham, "What is it we are going to celebrate?"Meanwhile Peggy, tilting her head on one side like an inquisitive
canary, was asking Graham, "What is it we are going to celebrate?"

"Washington's birthday and the Fourth of July, Christmas and New
Year's."

"Now, Graham, really I want to know."

"I'll tell you when the time comes. It's not the sort of thing to be
sprung on the street."

"Oh, how interesting!" But though Peggy stopped asking questions, her
curiosity grew prodigiously. Silent as Graham was as to the occasion
of this unwonted festivity, she realized that there was about him

the occasion
of this unwonted festivity, she realized that there was about him
an atmosphere of suppressed excitement. Sometimes, when his eyes
were on her, he seemed to be looking through her at something big in
the distance. Peggy was at the age when thrills and mysteries are
always welcome. She climbed aboard the street-car all a-tingle with
pleasurable excitement.

The dining-room at the McLaughlin impressed Peggy with its grandeur.
The hour was still early for fashionable diners, and less than half of
the tables were occupied. But the rows of waiters in black clothes and
gleaming shirt fronts, and the scrape of violins in the background,
gave Peggy an uneasy sense of being out of place. But Graham, convinced
that he was escorting the queen rose of the rose-bud garden of girls,

convinced
that he was escorting the queen rose of the rose-bud garden of girls,
walked to his place as sure of himself as a young prince. And what he
saw in Peggy's eyes was not of a sort to lessen his self-confidence.Peggy soon perceived that her customary little hints regarding economy
were to have no weight on this particular occasion. Graham began
with oysters and then appealed to Peggy as to her choice in soups.
And perceiving that he was determined to be extravagant, for all she
could say or do, Peggy gave herself up to enjoying the fruits of his
extravagance. This was clearly Graham's night. Peggy decided not to ask
again about his secret till he told her of his own accord.

[Illustration: "PEGGY LOOKED AT HIM WITHOUT REPLYING"]

her of his own accord.

[Illustration: "PEGGY LOOKED AT HIM WITHOUT REPLYING"]

As a matter of fact, Graham seemed in no hurry to take her into his
confidence. The meal went on through its leisurely courses, the tables
about them gradually filling, till the attentive waiter set their
dessert before them--French pastries with small cups of deliciously
fragrant coffee. Peggy tasted and sipped and smiled, and looked across
the table with such an air of radiant happiness that if Graham had kept
the smallest fragment of a heart in his possession, he would have been
forced to surrender it on the spot.

He laid down his fork and leaned toward her. "Peggy, I've got my
promotion."

"Oh, Graham!"

"They want me to go to South America for two years," Graham

on."

"Oh, Graham!"

"They want me to go to South America for two years," Graham
continued, speaking with curious breathlessness. "They're not asking
me to stay permanently, you understand. But they want a man here who's
thoroughly familiar with conditions down there."

Peggy looked at him without replying, all the radiant happiness drained
from her face. South America! Her sensations were almost the same as
when he went to France, except that now she had no patriotic ardor
to sustain her. He was to be away two years, and yet his mood was
exultant, and he seemed to expect her congratulations.Peggy rallied her courage and lifted her eyes with a wan little smile.
"When--when do they want you to go?" Her fork clattered against her
plate, and she laid it down.

hey want you to go?" Her fork clattered against her
plate, and she laid it down. She conceived on the instant an intense
loathing for French pastry.

"In July."

"Oh!" Peggy winked hard. It would be a shame to spoil that beautiful
dinner by crying. And besides, it was a long time before Graham would
have to go, from February to July. Then a dreadful thought wrung her
heart. If six months was a long time, what of two years?

Graham's face seemed to waver as he leaned toward her across the little
round table. His voice sounded far-off and unfamiliar. "What do you
say, Peggy? Shall we go?"

"I--I--what are you talking about Graham?"

"You're always saying how you'd love to travel. Don't you see this is
your chance."

"Do you--do you mean--"

"Yes, of course I do.

't you see this is
your chance."

"Do you--do you mean--"

"Yes, of course I do. Won't you marry me, Peggy, and go along? I can't
leave you for two years. I can't. When I came back from the other side
I promised myself I'd never be separated from you again by anything
less than a world war. If I went by myself, Peggy, it would be going
into exile for two years. But with you along, it would be a two-years'
honeymoon. Think what it would be to see those new countries together."

"I suppose it would be a good thing for our Spanish," said Peggy, and
the inane remark set them both to laughing, which undoubtedly was
a good thing. When the paroxysm was over, Peggy wiped her eyes and
struggled to be reasonable. "But, Graham, I don't graduate till the
twelfth of June."

ed to be reasonable. "But, Graham, I don't graduate till the
twelfth of June."

"And I don't sail till the sixth of July. Loads of time."

"But I always meant to earn my living for a few years after I
graduated, before--""And I don't sail till the sixth of July. Loads of time."

"But I always meant to earn my living for a few years after I
graduated, before--"

"I wouldn't have stood for that, Peggy, not if I was making enough to
take care of you, and I shall be."

Peggy was breathing fast. It was hard to realize that she and Graham
were sitting there in the McLaughlin dining-room, discussing the
question of whether or not they should be married in July. For except
on one memorable occasion, when Graham had been on the point of going
across and Peggy had been ready to marry him at a moment's notice, she
had felt about her marriage much as her mother did, as if it belonged
to the misty, distant, indeterminate future.

s her mother did, as if it belonged
to the misty, distant, indeterminate future. And now the six months
she had assured herself was a long time had dwindled down almost to
nothing. July! It was incredibly, overwhelmingly near.

"We'll have to see what father and mother think." She tried to make her
voice matter-of-fact, but it had an unnatural tension. Graham on the
other side of the little table, nodded agreement.

"Of course we'll see what they think. But we know they can say only
one thing. It's such a reasonable solution that only one opinion is
possible. Don't you like your dessert, Peggy? Won't you have some
ice-cream?"

Peggy protested she liked her desert, and finished it without tasting a
morsel. Then they went home and proceeded to bomb the peaceful RaymondPeggy protested she liked her desert, and finished it without tasting a
morsel. Then they went home and proceeded to bomb the peaceful Raymond

asting a
morsel. Then they went home and proceeded to bomb the peaceful Raymond
household with Graham's astounding proposition. And while Mrs. Raymond
began by pronouncing it out of the question, before the evening ended
she was driven to admit the reasonableness of Graham's plan. It was
true that Peggy's marriage would follow rather closely on the heels
of her graduation, but thanks to common-sense hours of sleep, and an
abundance of outdoor exercise, she had come through her four years'
college course in radiant health. A separation of two years just now
would be hard for both, and especially for Graham. Indeed Graham
frankly declared that he would not go without Peggy, and yet to refuse
such a chance was to prejudice his future success.

ut Peggy, and yet to refuse
such a chance was to prejudice his future success.

When Peggy went to bed that night she knew the whole thing was settled.
To be sure, both her father and mother had warned her against a hasty
decision, insisting that she take plenty of time to think the matter
over. But Peggy knew what the final verdict would be, and she was sure
Graham also knew it, by the triumph in his eyes as he kissed her good
night.

Changes! She lay in her little white bed and thought of the new life
opening before her, strange countries, unfamiliar tongues, alien
customs, even the dear, friendly constellations replaced by unknown
stars. And the queerest part of all was that she herself would no
longer be Peggy Raymond, but a strange young woman, Margaret Wylie by
name.

d no
longer be Peggy Raymond, but a strange young woman, Margaret Wylie by
name. Peggy gave a little incredulous laugh. It was astonishing how the
world had turned upside down since morning.

CHAPTER XVIII

A PARTIAL ECLIPSECHAPTER XVIII

A PARTIAL ECLIPSE

THE wedding day was set for the second of July, and after that decision
had been reached, Peggy professed a complete loss of interest in the
subject. When Graham consulted her on details more or less important,
she gave him a reluctant attention.

"I tell you, Graham, I don't want to think about it. I never did enjoy
mixed flavors. I shall have years and years of being Mrs. Graham Wylie,
fifty or sixty probably, and there's only a few months left of my
college life."

"If you feel so keenly on the subject," teased Graham, "we'd better

ege life."

"If you feel so keenly on the subject," teased Graham, "we'd better
postpone our wedding, and let you take a post-graduate course of ten
years or so."

"That won't be necessary. I know I shall love my wedding clothes, and
my wedding day, and being married to you, and everything. But if I let
myself think of that, I'll spoil this, don't you see? It would be like
eating ice-cream with soup."

"I suppose I shall be allowed to call occasionally."

"Don't be silly! Of course I should be wretched if I didn't see you
every day. But unless you have to settle something very important about
South America, don't ask my opinion. Up to the twelfth of June, I'm a
college senior, first, last and all the time."

Peggy was as good as her word. As far as her conversation revealed, she

time."

Peggy was as good as her word. As far as her conversation revealed, she
never looked beyond Commencement Day. And if it was inevitable that her
thoughts should be more unruly than her tongue, her mental excursions
into the future were surprisingly few. Peggy had never been a girl to
discount to-day in favor of to-morrow, and this life-long habit aided
her in her determination to extract the full flavor from the present.While Peggy had thoroughly enjoyed her college life, college
associations had naturally never meant to her what they mean to a
girl who leaves home to complete her education. Although she was
popular in her class, her closest friends were the girls who had been
her intimates long before her high-school days, even, and she enjoyed

had been
her intimates long before her high-school days, even, and she enjoyed
her home so thoroughly that it never occurred to her to regret having
missed the associations of dormitory life. But now she gave herself
so unreservedly to her college interests that no on-looker would have
dreamed that any event of special importance had been scheduled for
early July.

As a matter of fact, Peggy could hardly have done justice to her varied
duties in connection with Commencement, had she brought to them a
divided attention. Her knack at rhyming had resulted in her election as
class poet, and the same gift, doubtless, had caused her to be chosen
one of the editorial staff of the Annual, gotten out each spring by the
senior class. Moreover she had a part, though a small one, in the class

g by the
senior class. Moreover she had a part, though a small one, in the class
play that was to be given out-of-doors and promised to be one of the
most interesting features of commencement week. Since even for seniors
there were lessons to be learned, and examinations to be passed, it
is no wonder that Peggy found herself quite occupied without giving
thought to the great changes on ahead.

While she struggled with her poem, which she was determined as all
class laureates, to make a masterpiece, and scribbled off jokes for the
Annual and practised for the play, and studied in her odd minutes, the
days had a most disconcerting fashion of shooting by without regard to
speed regulations. Every Saturday night awoke in Peggy's mind the same
incredulity.ed regulations. Every Saturday night awoke in Peggy's mind the same
incredulity. Another week was gone--only it couldn't be, for it was no
time at all since last Sunday morning. She had an unreasonable impulse
to clutch at the flying hours and hold them fast.

But the last spring of her college life was not to be altogether a
season of flowers. One afternoon at the close of recitations, Peggy
hunted up Ruth who had agreed to go with her for a call on Mary
Donaldson.

"Ruth, I'm sorry, but Priscilla and I are going to be busy until after
dinner time, probably. It's the Annual again."

"That old Annual takes so much time," scolded Ruth, objecting on
principle to anything that separated her from Peggy for these few
precious weeks. Poor Ruth was trying to imitate Peggy's example and not

ese few
precious weeks. Poor Ruth was trying to imitate Peggy's example and not
look ahead, but there were times when the coming desolation settled
over her spirits like a chilling fog. With Peggy and Graham in South
America, and Nelson in Oklahoma, Ruth felt that existence would be flat
and flavorless.

"Yes, I know it takes time." Peggy resolutely ignored the undertone of
tragedy in Ruth's voice. "But somebody has to do it, and anyway, it's
fun."

It was due to her lingering to cheer the despondent Ruth that Peggy was
the last of the Annual staff to reach the class room, which for that
particular evening had been promoted to the dignity of an editorial
sanctum. Peggy made her entry on a somewhat hilarious scene. Everybody
was laughing, or so Peggy thought.

ntry on a somewhat hilarious scene. Everybody
was laughing, or so Peggy thought. Had she been more observant she
would have noticed that Priscilla's face wore no smile, but a look of
anxiety, bordering on distress."What's the joke?" inquired Peggy, as she took her seat. Though
the gathering was made up of college seniors and was therefore a
dignified, deliberative assembly, its proceedings were sometimes as
informal as if they had been merely a group of high-school girls.

By way of answer, a sheet of card-board that evidently had made the
rounds was put in her hand. Peggy looked at it curiously. At the top,
under the heading, "The Misfit," was a clever caricature representing a
small man attired in garments much too large for him. His broad-brimmed

nting a
small man attired in garments much too large for him. His broad-brimmed
hat came down over his ears, his overcoat trailed on the ground, while
the umbrella he carried was more than double his height. But the artist
had avoided giving the impression that he was a masquerading child by
bringing into prominence a somewhat scraggly mustache.

Peggy smiled appreciatively at the undoubted humor of the drawing and
gave her attention to the verses below. But though they showed quite
as much ability as the illustration, the effect of reading them was
to erase the smile from her lips, leaving her gravely attentive. The
laughter had quieted. She was aware that the girls were all watching
her, and though she did not raise her eyes, she knew instinctively

all watching
her, and though she did not raise her eyes, she knew instinctively
that Priscilla's face wore a look of apprehension.all watching
her, and though she did not raise her eyes, she knew instinctively
that Priscilla's face wore a look of apprehension.

The previous spring, one of the most popular men in the English
department had resigned to devote himself to literary work, and his
place had been nominally filled by a young man with good credentials
but no experience. He had proved a great disappointment, for whatever
his attainments, he lacked the ability to impart; while in contrast to
the enthusiasm which Professor Baer's lectures had aroused, his classes
seemed veritable refrigerating plants. Peggy knew that the seniors who
had taken his courses were complaining bitterly that they had been
"stung," and had congratulated herself that her own work in English had

ad been
"stung," and had congratulated herself that her own work in English had
been continued with another member of the faculty.

In the verses before her, all the resentment of the students toward an
incompetent teacher, following an able and popular one, was expressed
with diabolical cleverness. The fact that the present incumbent was
named Fox, and that he followed Professor Baer, had already been the
theme of innumerable jokes, and the author of the verses had used it
as the motive of her lines, so that there was no chance that even the
outsider would remain ignorant of the instructor satirized.

Peggy read the verses over more than once in order to gain time.
She was sorely tempted to say nothing. Peggy was under no illusions
regarding the path of the reformer.Peggy read the verses over more than once in order to gain time.
She was sorely tempted to say nothing. Peggy was under no illusions
regarding the path of the reformer.

to say nothing. Peggy was under no illusions
regarding the path of the reformer. It was vastly easier, vastly
pleasanter, to let things go. It was not that she had any cowardly
shrinking from hard knocks, but now, almost at the close of her
college life, she was not in the mood to antagonize any one. She
loved everything about the college, its gray stone buildings draped
in ivy, its campus dotted with stately trees, the class-rooms and
the laboratories, the dignified president, the professors and the
girls--oh, most of all, the girls. She loved to believe in their
affection, their admiration. Never in her life had popularity meant as
much to her as now. And yet in spite of her distaste, she knew she had
no choice. She must disagree, antagonize, anger.

er distaste, she knew she had
no choice. She must disagree, antagonize, anger.

When she lifted her eyes, the room was very quiet, almost as if every
one knew what she was going to say. "Awfully clever, aren't they?"
Peggy spoke very deliberately. "What are they for?"

A dark-eyed girl across the room took it on herself to answer, and as
soon as her lips parted, Peggy knew her for the author.

"I'd intended it for the _Atlantic Monthly_," she smiled with frank
sarcasm. "But I think perhaps it's better suited to the Annual. What do
you say?"

"I'm afraid I don't think it's at all suited to the Annual."

There was a little chorus of protests. "You never were in his classes,
Peggy," cried some one from the rear seat. "If you'd endured what we

s classes,
Peggy," cried some one from the rear seat. "If you'd endured what we
have at the hands of that man, you'd love every line."s classes,
Peggy," cried some one from the rear seat. "If you'd endured what we
have at the hands of that man, you'd love every line."

A burst of approving laughter showed how completely the sympathies of
this group of girls were with the speaker. Half-whispered comments
were being exchanged. "The stupidest lectures!" "The greatest waste of
time!" Peggy was perfectly able to understand this point of view. She
struggled to make the girls see hers.

"Of course that's not right. If I had been in his class I'd have
been perfectly ready to go to President Eaton, and tell him how
unsatisfactory everything was. But to take this way of doing it--" she
looked down at the mocking lines and said with a visible effort, "Don't
you think it seems a little bit cowardly--and cruel, too?"

ible effort, "Don't
you think it seems a little bit cowardly--and cruel, too?"

Priscilla came to her friend's assistance. "If the faculty knew about
those verses, I'm sure we'd never be allowed to put them in the Annual."

"How's the faculty to know?" demanded the criticized author, Ida Craig,
with much asperity.

"Don't you think," suggested Peggy with all the diplomacy she could
muster, "that since they leave it all to us, we're put on our honor to
see that nothing gets in that they could object to?"

Ida smiled disagreeably. "After all," she said, "you're not the
editor-in-chief, you know."

The rudeness gave Peggy the courage that she needed. "No, of course.
I haven't any more voice than any of the rest of you. But if the poem
goes in, I shall ask you to accept my resignation."

st of you. But if the poem
goes in, I shall ask you to accept my resignation."

"In other words," exclaimed Ida, "If you can't have your own way,
you'll take your dolls and go home."st of you. But if the poem
goes in, I shall ask you to accept my resignation."

"In other words," exclaimed Ida, "If you can't have your own way,
you'll take your dolls and go home."

"No indeed," Peggy was trying to speak calmly, but her voice shook,
"But if my name appears among the editors of the Annual, it'll be taken
for granted that I approve of all that is in it. I'm not willing to
stand for anything like this."

"Nor I," said Priscilla. "I agree with Peggy."

Ida Craig leaned toward the girl nearest her. "Miss Combs is nothing if
not original," she said in an echoing stage-whisper audible to every
one in the room. But the editor-in-chief, dismayed at the prospect of
losing two of her most reliable aides, hastily interposed.

"Now we mustn't get personal, girls," she said.

able aides, hastily interposed.

"Now we mustn't get personal, girls," she said. "You know how the
newspapers are always trying to make out that the members of women's
organizations do nothing but quarrel. I think college graduates
ought to disprove that sort of thing." She looked at Peggy rather
appealingly. "I suppose you're willing to abide by the will of the
majority," she said.

"If the majority vote to include 'The Misfit,'" returned Peggy, "Of
course that settles it." And then as the face of the editor-in-chief
brightened, she added, "But I shall have to resign, because the vote of
the majority can't decide a question of right and wrong for me."

"Oh," said the editor-in-chief rather blankly, and then she quickly
rallied. "We'll decide that question when we come to it," she said.

she quickly
rallied. "We'll decide that question when we come to it," she said.
"Will the meeting please come to order."

The mooted question was not put to vote till the end of the hour.
"All in favor of including 'The Misfit' in the Annual," said the
editor-in-chief, after the motion had been duly made, "please signify
it by saying 'aye.'""Aye," chimed two defiant voices, that of the author and her dearest
friend in the class.

"Those opposed, 'No.'"

There was a murmur of 'noes,' indicating that Peggy had won her fight,
but she had none of the elation of the victor. She realized that
several had not voted, and that those who had espoused her side had
acted from motives of policy rather than conviction. Ida Craig was

her side had
acted from motives of policy rather than conviction. Ida Craig was
plainly offended, and as for the rest, Peggy suspected that they failed
to make the fine distinction between standing up for one's principles
and being determined to have one's way.

Those closing weeks of college life were not all she had hoped. Peggy
fancied a reserve in the friendliness of her friends. She became
unnaturally sensitive, imagining slights where none existed. She was
troubled by the thought that Priscilla shared in her partial eclipse of
popularity, and inclined to regard her uncompromising conscience as a
decided inconvenience, if nothing worse.

But Peggy's stand was to have a tragic justification. Three weeks
before Commencement the Annual came from the binders, looking very

Three weeks
before Commencement the Annual came from the binders, looking very
attractive in its cover of blue and white, the college colors. The
editorial force had been called together to make the necessary
arrangements for placing it on sale. Peggy and Priscilla had an early
class Wednesday morning, and as they entered the hall on their way
to the cloak-room, they encountered Phyllis Riordan, the Annual's
editor-in-chief. Phyllis' greeting was more than cordial, but Peggy
hardly noticed that, in her concern for the girl herself.

"Why, Phyllis," she cried. "What's the matter? You're as white as a
sheet."

Phyllis looked from one to the other. "You haven't heard about Mrs.
Fox?"

"What about her?" The question came simultaneously from two pairs of
lips.

"She died last night."Phyllis looked from one to the other. "You haven't heard about Mrs.
Fox?"

"What about her?" The question came simultaneously from two pairs of
lips.

"She died last night."

he question came simultaneously from two pairs of
lips.

"She died last night."

Peggy and Priscilla uttered a shocked exclamation. They were both but
slightly acquainted with the girlish wife of the unpopular professor of
English, but intimacy was not needed to point the tragedy of the news.
Her voice curiously tense, Phyllis continued.

"It seemed she had serious heart trouble, and the doctor thought she
ought to live in a milder climate. Professor Fox has resigned, and they
were to locate in southern California. And Oh, Peggy Raymond--"

She turned suddenly toward Peggy, and caught both of her hands. "Since
I heard the news last evening, I haven't been able to think of anything
else. Peggy, do you realize what it would have meant if we had let

of anything
else. Peggy, do you realize what it would have meant if we had let
that poem of Ida's go in? We'd have had to destroy the whole edition of
the Annual. We couldn't have done anything else."

Peggy changed color slightly, but did not speak.

"You've saved our lives," declared Phyllis, her eyes bright with tears.
"If it hadn't been for you, we'd have been in the worst box of any
class since the college was founded. And when I think how brave you
were, standing out against us all--"

"Why, Phyllis," Peggy interposed, "I wasn't brave at all. This--this
dreadful thing that has happened doesn't make me a bit more right than
I was in the beginning. And I knew it, too, and yet I wasn't satisfied.
I've been ready to wish I hadn't done it a hundred times. And when you

atisfied.
I've been ready to wish I hadn't done it a hundred times. And when you
call me brave, you make me desperately ashamed, for nobody knows as
well as I do what a coward I've been."atisfied.
I've been ready to wish I hadn't done it a hundred times. And when you
call me brave, you make me desperately ashamed, for nobody knows as
well as I do what a coward I've been."

"If you're cowardly, Peggy," cried Priscilla, up in arms at once, "I'm
sorry for the rest of us."

"Heavens, I should say so," agreed Phyllis. And then as the signal
bell sounded, the girls rushed for the cloak room. Blended with Peggy's
sorrow and her sense of humility, was a gratifying certainty that the
last three weeks of her college life would be all she had dreamed.

CHAPTER XIX

THE END OF SCHOOL LIFE

THE senior banquet was the most intimate and, in the opinion of many,
the most delightful festivity of Commencement. No guests were invited.

of many,
the most delightful festivity of Commencement. No guests were invited.
The only member of the faculty present was the honorary member of
the class, a charming woman, who taught Greek and talked slang--as
an antidote, she was wont to say. And because it was so strictly a
class affair, a great deal of fun was in order which would have been
impossible before ever so limited an audience.

"What I like about it is that it's frankly selfish," Peggy told
Priscilla. And then noticing Priscilla's expression of incredulity, "I
don't mean selfish in the mean sense, just the nice, comfortable, homey
sort. All the rest of Commencement we're thinking about other people,
the Board of Trustees, and the fathers and mothers, and the audience
and the public.

Board of Trustees, and the fathers and mothers, and the audience
and the public. It's a comfort that there's one thing where we don't
have to think of any one but ourselves, and we can be as silly as we
please."The first class to graduate had established a precedent which every
succeeding class had strictly followed, that all engagements were
to be announced at the class banquet, Commencement week. If for any
reason it was preferred that such announcements should be regarded
as confidential, it was understood that the members of the class
would be put to torture rather than reveal a word. So strictly had a
few such items of news been guarded--in some instances for several
years--that the ability of a woman to keep a secret had apparently been

several
years--that the ability of a woman to keep a secret had apparently been
satisfactorily demonstrated by the graduates of Peggy's alma mater. As
a rule, however, the graduate who announced her engagement at the class
banquet was willing that all the world should know the joyful news.

The banquet was held in the college gymnasium, the long tables being
arranged in a hollow square. After the feasting was over, the waiters
were dismissed and the doors closed to ensure perfect secrecy,--after
which every girl engaged in the class was expected to take her stand
in the central enclosure, carrying with her a photograph of her fiancé,
the back of the said photograph being duly inscribed with her name and
his. And as if this were not enough, each was required to state in a

r name and
his. And as if this were not enough, each was required to state in a
few well-chosen words the qualities which differentiated her particular
young man from all the rest of mankind. At the conclusion of this
unique ceremony, the photographs were passed about and duly inspected,
and then a vote was taken to determine the handsomest. The gentleman so
honored was presented with a stick-pin, which his betrothed took charge
of until such time as she chose to deliver it.As the girls dispatched their deviled crabs and chicken salad and ice
cream, and other incongruous and indigestible dainties, the thoughts
of many turned expectantly toward the ceremony immediately following
the banquet. It was true that some of the engagements were no secret.

following
the banquet. It was true that some of the engagements were no secret.
Graham Wylie, for instance, had been Peggy Raymond's devoted cavalier
ever since she graduated from high school. And there were girls in the
dormitories who heard so frequently and at such length from certain
men friends that they were assumed to be engaged whether they admitted
it or not. But on the other hand there were always surprises enough to
render the occasion exciting.

The ice cream was dispatched at last, along with the cakes and candies.
The little coffee cups were emptied. The waiters cleared the tables and
withdrew, closing the door according to instructions. And then from
here and there in the long rows of diners, one laughing girl after

nd then from
here and there in the long rows of diners, one laughing girl after
another rose, and made her way into the vacant space enclosed by the
tables.

Priscilla's eye followed Peggy on her way, blushing, laughing, and
looking to Priscilla's fond eyes the embodiment of girlish loveliness.
And then some one called her name. "Why, Priscilla Combs!"

Priscilla turned. A classmate that she knew only slightly was leaning
across the table. "Why aren't you going with the others?" she cried.

"I?" Priscilla colored to the roots of her hair. "I'm not eligible."

"Oh, come!" retorted the other archly. "This isn't any time for
prevarication, you know. You're expected to tell the truth."

Some one caught the speaker by the arm, and as she turned, hissed a
terse statement in her ear.Some one caught the speaker by the arm, and as she turned, hissed a
terse statement in her ear.

the speaker by the arm, and as she turned, hissed a
terse statement in her ear. Only too well did Priscilla know the import
of that whisper. Inaudible as it was, its news might as well have been
shouted. The girl who had innocently assumed Priscilla's engagement
was now hearing that Horace Hitchcock, after paying Priscilla every
attention, had met some one he liked better in New York, and had
married her after three days' acquaintance.

Priscilla held her head high. She saw her _vis-à-vis_ change color and
lift startled eyes. When she found Priscilla regarding her, the girl
lost her head. "Oh, excuse me," she gasped.

"Why certainly," laughed Priscilla. "I'm like the man who was asked to
change a twenty-dollar bill. I appreciate the compliment." But for all

asked to
change a twenty-dollar bill. I appreciate the compliment." But for all
her cheerful air, the thing rankled. Would they never be done pitying
her because she had been jilted by Horace Hitchcock. It was impossible
to explain, but it really seemed to Priscilla that some of them might
suspect what a relief the termination of that unacknowledged engagement
had been.

There were now a dozen girls in the enclosure. The appearance of
some was greeted with loud cries, intended to convey reproach, or
incredulity. Excited comments ran around the tables. "Look, there's
Cynthia, after insisting that there wasn't a thing between them." "Why,
there's Anne Gordon." "Now who in the world--" And while the eager
inspection went on, the twelve girls in the middle stood rather close

the eager
inspection went on, the twelve girls in the middle stood rather close
together as if each found it a help in that trying moment to feel she
was not alone.the eager
inspection went on, the twelve girls in the middle stood rather close
together as if each found it a help in that trying moment to feel she
was not alone.

The talk and laughter quieted when the president rapped for order.
Eloise Hayden was the first to be called on to introduce her fiancé
to her attentive classmates. Eloise was one of the girls who affect
the modern pose of matter-of-factness. She was so afraid of undue
sentimentality that she went too far in the other direction, like one
who is so determined to be straight as to bend backward. As Eloise's
name was spoken, she stepped out from the group, and held up to view
the photograph she carried.

"Friends and classmates, I am introducing John Mackenzie Rowe. As you

carried.

"Friends and classmates, I am introducing John Mackenzie Rowe. As you
see, he is no beauty, and he'll never wear the stick pin unless it's
given for a consolation prize. But on the other hand, he isn't bad
looking enough so he needs to wear a mask when he goes on the street."

The momentary silence as Eloise stopped for breath was filled by a
chorus of groans, Eloise's classmates disapproving her extreme lack of
sentiment. Quite unabashed by this demonstration, Eloise continued.

"John and I live in the country, as some of you know. The only thing
between his father's place and my father's place is a privet hedge, not
high enough to be a barrier. We've lived on the two sides of that hedge
since he was thirteen and I eleven. I suppose if any other boy had

of that hedge
since he was thirteen and I eleven. I suppose if any other boy had
lived there, I should now be engaged to him. And if any other girl had
lived where I do, he would have been engaged to her."

The signs of displeasure redoubled. Mingled with the groans were
hisses, and Eloise, who liked nothing better than to stir her friends
to protest against her nonchalant attitude, continued blithely:The signs of displeasure redoubled. Mingled with the groans were
hisses, and Eloise, who liked nothing better than to stir her friends
to protest against her nonchalant attitude, continued blithely:

"Our engagement is in every way a sensible one. Neither of us thinks
the other perfect, so we won't have the usual disillusionment and
disappointment after we are married. I'm sorry I shan't be able to
introduce John to you to-morrow, but he wrote me that if he came he
would have to put off a business trip, and I wrote him, 'Business
first.'"

he
would have to put off a business trip, and I wrote him, 'Business
first.'"

The demonstrations of disapproval were now so marked that Eloise
considered this a good place to stop. She laid down the photograph for
the girls' inspection and stepped back, seemingly very well satisfied
with her performance.

Judith West, a plump pink and white girl, looking, thanks to her bobbed
hair and round face, not a day over fifteen, was next to be called on.
Judith blushed rosily as she held up the photograph of a handsome young
man in a lieutenant's uniform.

"This is Philip Carpenter," she announced in a faint, frightened voice.
"And all I can say is that he's as good as he looks."

"He looks good enough to eat," encouraged an admiring voice from a
side-table.

"He is," declared Judith.

eat," encouraged an admiring voice from a
side-table.

"He is," declared Judith. "At least--well, you know what I mean. He's
just as nice as he can be, and after I'd seen him once, nobody else in
the world had the least chance."

As this impressed the class as the proper attitude for an engaged girl,
the applause was hearty, and the blushing Judith interpreted it as
a _finish_ to her remarks, and retreated in charming confusion. But
the applause dropped into instantaneous silence as Anne Gordon arose.
Anne's appearance in the enclosure had surprised every one."I haven't much of a photograph to show you," said Anne holding up a
kodak picture in which three diminutive figures appeared seated under
an apple tree. "The one in the middle is Elmer Wharton. He looks very

ated under
an apple tree. "The one in the middle is Elmer Wharton. He looks very
tiny, but believe me, he's longer than our engagement."

Anne stopped to laugh, and the class laughed with her.

"I had a letter from Elmer yesterday," Anne continued, "a very
particular letter. I can't say it was a great surprise to me, though
you all seem so astonished. And in this letter Elmer told me a number
of things he meant to say to me as soon as I got home. But I thought of
to-night, and I couldn't see why I shouldn't be engaged the day before
Commencement as well as the day after. So I telegraphed him, _yes_."

Amid the shrieks of laughter due to this frank acknowledgment, Peggy
was called, and she held up her photograph with an engaging pride.

ment, Peggy
was called, and she held up her photograph with an engaging pride.

"I fancy there aren't many of you who need to be introduced to Graham
Wylie, for he's been very much in evidence ever since I entered
college. I don't know any way of doing justice to the subject, but when
I feel strongly about anything, I'm very likely to drop into poetry,
like Mr. Wegg."

Peggy, who had been brought up on Dickens as if she had been a girl of
the fifties, had forgotten how few of her contemporaries had ever heard
of Mr. Wegg. Warned of her slip by the blank faces that looked back at
her, she began to recite the lines she had written in sheer desperation
the previous evening, after she was supposed to be in bed.

"It isn't because he's six feet two

, after she was supposed to be in bed.

"It isn't because he's six feet two
      With shoulders to match his height,
    That I'm happy and proud to be facing you
      On this very eventful night., after she was supposed to be in bed.

"It isn't because he's six feet two
      With shoulders to match his height,
    That I'm happy and proud to be facing you
      On this very eventful night.

"It isn't because his face is fine,
      Clear-cut, like a cameo,
    That I value the right to call him mine
      More than any one here can know.

"It isn't because he's so very wise;
      We both could improve right there.
    His faults are plain to the kindest eyes,
      And I know that I have my share.

"He's not perfection--to hint at this
      Would waken his scornful mirth.
    And yet he has made me--just as he is--
      The happiest girl on earth.

"I know he is built of the sterling stuff
      Of which manly men are made.

"I know he is built of the sterling stuff
      Of which manly men are made.
    And that glad certainty is enough
      To render me unafraid.

"As we scatter to go our devious ways
      Like sparks from the anvil hurled,
    I want you to think of me all your days,
      As the proudest girl in the world."

The applause that greeted Peggy's effort was not due chiefly to the
quality of her verses, nor even to the charm of her undisguised
happiness. The Editorial Staff of the Annual had leaked out. It had
been whispered about that if it had not been for Peggy's protests, the
Annual would have contained a satirical attack on a stricken man, which
would have rendered its circulation impossible. The clapping died down,

man, which
would have rendered its circulation impossible. The clapping died down,
and then broke out again, as if to emphasize the fact that it was a
personal tribute.man, which
would have rendered its circulation impossible. The clapping died down,
and then broke out again, as if to emphasize the fact that it was a
personal tribute.

And so one after another, the girls in the enclosure introduced the
possessors of the names they themselves would some day bear, and having
finished, went laughing back to their seats. The photographs were
passed about for examination and the ballots distributed. The voting
was a somewhat protracted process due, doubtless, to the fact that so
much was at stake. But in course of time the ballots were collected and
the judges retired to count them, the girls filling in the interval
with college songs.

The announcement of the result of the balloting came as a great
surprise to Peggy.

e announcement of the result of the balloting came as a great
surprise to Peggy. For the recipient of the stick pin was not Graham
but Philip Carpenter. Judith, blushing very prettily, made the speech
of acceptance in behalf of her fiancé, and took the pin.

"I wish to say to you all," said the class president, "that twenty-five
dollars is deposited with the treasurer for the purchase of a
wedding-present for the first of our number to marry. I can only say
it can't be spent too soon to suit me. It's time," she added severely,
"that somebody was disproving the slander that college women care only
for civic reform and settlement work and teaching school, and that home
and husbands don't matter to them at all."

Priscilla glanced discreetly in Peggy's direction, but Peggy was

them at all."

Priscilla glanced discreetly in Peggy's direction, but Peggy was
looking at the table. Indeed her expression remained thoughtful till
the first toast was given, and she stood with the others to drink to
her alma mater in a draught of fruit punch.It was not till they were on their way home that Priscilla discovered
the reason for Peggy's temporary abstraction. For while they were
talking of something entirely different, Peggy suddenly exclaimed, "Do
you suppose it was the uniform that dazzled them?"

"I don't quite understand you, Peggy."

"Why, that vote, you know. Of course Judith's lieutenant is a very good
looking fellow, but the idea of comparing him to Graham."

Priscilla looked at her friend askance and said nothing.

ring him to Graham."

Priscilla looked at her friend askance and said nothing.

"I have a photograph of Graham in uniform," Peggy continued, "and now I
wish I'd brought that. But I hadn't any idea it would count so much."

"Peggy," began Priscilla faintly. "Will you promise not to be angry if
I tell you something?"

"Of course. Why should I be angry?"

"Well, then, I voted for Philip Carpenter."

Peggy looked at her in seemingly speechless amazement. "But why?" she
asked at last.

"Because--well, there could be only one reason for that, Peggy, because
I thought him the handsomest man in the collection. His nose is
wonderful."

"And so is Graham's. I never saw a more perfect nose."

"Philip's eyes are so big and beautiful."

"A little _too_ big, it seems to me.

"Philip's eyes are so big and beautiful."

"A little _too_ big, it seems to me. It gives him a rather girly look.
Now Graham's eyes are just large enough."

Priscilla burst into an irrepressible shriek of laughter. "I wonder
if it ever occurred to you, Peggy, that you might be a little bit
prejudiced."

It was plain that such an idea had never occurred to Peggy. She looked
blank for a moment and then joined in Priscilla's helpless laughter.
"I suppose," she owned when again she could find her voice, "that it's
just as well that tastes differ."They parted at Priscilla's door, kissing each other good-night, a
somewhat unusual ceremony, far they were not girls who made a parade of
affection. Peggy, who had started toward her own home, suddenly turned

parade of
affection. Peggy, who had started toward her own home, suddenly turned
back as if she had forgotten something. Priscilla hurried down the
steps to meet her.

"Priscilla, do you realize that to-morrow is Commencement Day? What a
little time it seems since we entered as Freshman. Don't you remember
how scared we were, and how in awe of the Seniors? And now, Priscilla
our school life is over."

And much to Priscilla's astonishment, and even more to her own, Peggy
burst into tears.

CHAPTER XX

A SURPRISE

RATHER to the surprise of those who knew her best, Peggy had decided on
a church wedding. But when she came to give her reasons, the decision
seemed characteristic, after all.

"I think this is the dearest house in the world. When Graham and I come

r all.

"I think this is the dearest house in the world. When Graham and I come
back from South America, I hope we can find one just like it--and on
Friendly Terrace, too. But it's not what you'd call spacious. A dozen
extra people crowd it, and it makes you uncomfortable to have a wedding
and leave out so many."

"Our wedding seems likely to be a unique affair," grinned Graham. "From
the looks of Peggy's list, the guests will make up in variety what they
lack in exclusiveness. What do you think of her asking the Bonds?"

"Now, Graham, that's not fair. I haven't any idea of asking the Bond
family. I only said that Elvira had improved so much that I felt like
encouraging her by sending her an invitation."

"And the Dunns. She's got them down." For all matrimonial

her an invitation."

"And the Dunns. She's got them down." For all matrimonial
responsibilities loomed so close, Graham's boyish fondness for teasing
remained one of his most prominent characteristics."And the Dunns. She's got them down." For all matrimonial
responsibilities loomed so close, Graham's boyish fondness for teasing
remained one of his most prominent characteristics.

"Why, Graham Wylie! Not the Dunns at all. Just Jimmy! And he's doing so
well and looks as nice as any boy."

"And she says she's going to have her Sunday school class, one and all."

"Well, I should think so. I've taught those girls ever since they came
out of the infant room, and they're darlings. And it would break their
hearts if I were married and they weren't there to see."

Now that her college life was over, Peggy had thrown herself joyously
into her planning for the next thing. Ruth, as Graham's sister, was to
be the maid of honor, Priscilla and Amy bridesmaids. They decided on

ter, was to
be the maid of honor, Priscilla and Amy bridesmaids. They decided on
their gowns after hours and hours of delicious deliberation. For a
July wedding, organdie was the thing--the sheerest pale pink organdie,
with pink roses to match on their wide hats. "You'll be dreams," Peggy
declared ecstatically. "Everybody'll say so."

"Nonsense!" scoffed Amy, "As if people at a wedding ever looked at
anybody but the bride!"

"I had a letter from Alice, yesterday," exclaimed Peggy, changing the
subject. "She thinks little Irma had better be the flower-girl instead
of Dorothy. She says Dorothy has been shooting up so fast lately,
that now she's lanky and self-conscious, and that Irma is plump and
adorable. I only hope dear little Dorothy won't feel left out. That
would spoil everything."

ly hope dear little Dorothy won't feel left out. That
would spoil everything."ly hope dear little Dorothy won't feel left out. That
would spoil everything."

Robert Carey was to be Graham's best man, a decision which pleased
Peggy immensely. Most of the ushers were young men the girls knew
more or less, though Graham had included in the number a comparative
new-comer at the office, Kennedy by name, with whom he was on
especially friendly terms. "You ought to bring him out some evening,"
suggested Peggy, "and not wait till just before the wedding to
introduce him."

"No, that's right. I'll ask him to-morrow to set a time."

When Graham appeared shortly after dinner the following evening, Peggy
and Priscilla were addressing invitations. Graham seated himself lazily
in the arm chair and congratulated them on their industry. "Have you
addressed all that pile to-day?"

ngratulated them on their industry. "Have you
addressed all that pile to-day?"

"Yes, sir. We've been working ever since I got back from the
dressmaker's, about four o'clock. Priscilla stayed to dinner so as not
to lose any time."

There was a brief silence. Two pairs of pens scratched busily while
Graham entertained himself by watching the anxious pucker of Peggy's
mouth as she wrote each new address. "By the way," he remarked, "He's
coming out to-night."

"Who is?"

"Kennedy."

The scratching of the pens came to an abrupt stop. "Priscilla," Peggy
cried in tones of horror, "Graham has asked that Mr. Kennedy to call
and he's coming this evening."

"You told me to ask him," Graham defended himself.

"Of course, I want him to come. But I don't want him to descend on me

himself.

"Of course, I want him to come. But I don't want him to descend on me
without warning, and get the impression that you are going to marry a
frump."

"Why, I was just thinking how nice you looked--both of you," Graham
declared, kindly including Priscilla, who scorned to acknowledge the
compliment. She rose, returned her pen to the writing desk, and said
briefly, "I'm off.""Put on your glad rags and come back, Priscilla," begged Peggy, who
also was making preparations for a retreat.

"Oh, I think not. Mr. Kennedy isn't coming to see me."

"It'll be ever so much nicer if he meets some of you before the last
minute. Ruth says she's got to put in this evening letter writing, and
Amy and Bob are going somewhere."

"Oh, very well. I'll be back after a little." Priscilla spoke

oing somewhere."

"Oh, very well. I'll be back after a little." Priscilla spoke
nonchalantly, but as a matter of fact, she was glad of Peggy's
insistence. Now that the time was growing so short, she grudged every
hour she was away from her friend. As she left by the door, Peggy ran
up the stairs, leaving Graham to the companionship of his own agreeable
anticipations.

Peggy was back in about twenty minutes, looking, in Graham's
estimation, very much the same, except that her dress was a lighter
blue than the other, and her hair, having been freshly combed, did not
show as much of the curl. He expressed his opinion and Peggy smiled
tolerantly.

"I wore that old thing because a drop of ink more or less wouldn't
matter. It's as old as the hills, and I made it when I didn't know as

wouldn't
matter. It's as old as the hills, and I made it when I didn't know as
much about dress-making as I do now. Of course I like to have you think
I look nice, no matter what I wear, but now you're going to be married,
you'd better learn more discrimination in regard to clothes. It would
be dreadful to have a new dress and you not able to see that it was any
prettier than the old one."

"Very well. Suppose you start on my education right away. Tell me the
fine points about the rig you've got on." But before Peggy could
begin, the bell rang, and Graham's education was left incomplete for
the time being.

Mr. Kennedy was a slender, pleasant-mannered young man, who looked
considerably older than Graham, partly perhaps, because he wore
eye-glasses.Mr. Kennedy was a slender, pleasant-mannered young man, who looked
considerably older than Graham, partly perhaps, because he wore
eye-glasses.

oked
considerably older than Graham, partly perhaps, because he wore
eye-glasses. As Peggy greeted him, she was conscious of something
hauntingly familiar in his face. "I haven't met you before, have I?"
she asked.

"It hardly seems that I could have met you and not remember it," said
young Kennedy gallantly. "I'm very sure I've seen you before, however."

"And I believe I've seen you, but I don't know where."

"Hitchcock would say," remarked Graham, "that probably you had been
well acquainted in Nineveh or Babylon or some other ancient burg."

Mr. Kennedy smiled, and took the chair Graham had pulled forward for
him. "Who's Hitchcock?" he asked.

"Oh, a nut that Peggy used to have here till I told her she'd have to
choose between us."

"Graham, what a misleading thing to say."

r she'd have to
choose between us."

"Graham, what a misleading thing to say."

"Well, it might give the wrong impression, I confess. Peggy didn't care
much about him herself, but one of her friends had a case on him."

"Sh!" warned Peggy, in an agony as she heard Priscilla's footsteps
outside. She filled the somewhat awkward pause by springing to her
feet, crying as she ran to the door, "You needn't ring; I hear you."

The results of the half hour Priscilla had given to vanity were
more evident, Graham thought, than in Peggy's case. Peggy could be
disheveled and still irresistible. Priscilla's rather stately beauty
was more exacting in its demands. In her dress of pale green voile,
which set off her clear pallor and the beauty of her smooth, dark hair,

voile,
which set off her clear pallor and the beauty of her smooth, dark hair,
she looked the incarnate spirit of spring. Even Graham stared.

Peggy, her arm slipped caressingly through Priscilla's, led her
forward. "Priscilla, this is Graham's friend, Mr. Kennedy. Miss Combs--"Peggy, her arm slipped caressingly through Priscilla's, led her
forward. "Priscilla, this is Graham's friend, Mr. Kennedy. Miss Combs--"

Peggy stopped short. Priscilla had jumped. Mr. Kennedy's conventional
smile had changed to startled recognition. "Why, you know each other,"
Peggy cried.

"Only--why, surely, Peggy, you remember."

Peggy's vague, irritating certainty of something familiar in Mr.
Kennedy's face was suddenly transformed to recollection. "Oh, of
course. The Green Parrot."

"Oh, of course! The Green Parrot!" mocked Graham, who had risen on
Priscilla's entrance, and now stood looking from one to another of the
trio.

n on
Priscilla's entrance, and now stood looking from one to another of the
trio. "Makes it perfectly clear."

They took their seats, and Peggy explained, helped out by suggestions
from the others. As they recalled the absurd experience, the three
narrators went off into fits of laughter, but the audience maintained a
dignified calm.

"Take my word for it, John, it's an inscrutable sex. Now, I would have
sworn that this young woman hadn't a thought I didn't share, and look
what she's been keeping from me, lo! these many months. When we're
alone I shall expect you to give me a full account of what really
happened."

For some reason the discovery that Graham's friend, Kennedy, was the
young man whose coffee cup had been invaded by Priscilla's roll seemed

was the
young man whose coffee cup had been invaded by Priscilla's roll seemed
to put him at once on the footing of an old acquaintance. They had a
very jolly evening, and it was not till after ten that Priscilla said,
"Graham, I think you'd better take me home, now. I've got a busy day
before me."

"You have indeed, poor dear," Peggy cried. "I expect you to finish
addressing those invitations and do any number of errands. These are
trying times for my friends, Mr. Kennedy. They have hardly a minute in
the twenty-four hours that they can call their own."The young man smiled at her in the abstracted fashion of one whose
thoughts are on something else. "Won't you let me be your escort?" he
asked Priscilla. "It would give me the greatest pleasure."

be your escort?" he
asked Priscilla. "It would give me the greatest pleasure."

"Thanks, but it's only a step, and my going early won't break up
Graham's evening, for he'll come directly back." She softened her
refusal by giving him her hand and saying pleasantly, "I'm glad to have
met you properly at last, with a real introduction, you know."

"I shall look forward to the next time," said young Kennedy, with
rather more ardor than conventional courtesy required. "This is our
third meeting, I believe."

"Third?" exclaimed Peggy, pricking up her ears. "Why, when was the
second?"

"At one of the football games last fall," explained Priscilla. "I was
there with Horace Hitchcock, and Mr. Kennedy sat next me." And then
recalling the suspicious glances Horace had shot in the direction of

." And then
recalling the suspicious glances Horace had shot in the direction of
the guiltless Mr. Kennedy, Priscilla began to blush. The worst of
blushing is that it is much easier to start it than to call a halt.
There were innumerable things connected with the thought of Horace that
made Priscilla uncomfortable, and now she found herself blushing for
them all. The tide of color flooded her smooth forehead and dyed her
throat. Peggy's observant eyes detected an unmistakable shadow on Mr.
Kennedy's erst-while radiant face.

Later, when Graham and herself were alone, she scolded him a little.
"You oughtn't to have said that a friend of mine had a case on
Hitchcock. Now Mr. Kennedy knows you meant Priscilla."

"Well, is that such a tragedy?"

. Now Mr. Kennedy knows you meant Priscilla."

"Well, is that such a tragedy?"

"Couldn't you mention to him some day that Horace did admire Priscilla,
but that now he's safely married to another. You could bring it in in a
casual way, you know.""Well, is that such a tragedy?"

"Couldn't you mention to him some day that Horace did admire Priscilla,
but that now he's safely married to another. You could bring it in in a
casual way, you know."

Graham looked at her hard. "My dear Peggy," he said, "Just because
you yourself have been fortunate--unusually fortunate I might say--in
your love affairs, don't let that lead you into trying your hand at
matchmaking. Fooling with high explosives is child's play compared to
that, believe me."

But instead of seeming impressed by the warning, Peggy only answered
dreamily, "When he doesn't see Horace at the wedding, he'll probably
begin to suspect that it's ancient history. If only Priscilla could
learn to speak of him without blushing."

t history. If only Priscilla could
learn to speak of him without blushing."

CHAPTER XXI

A MISSING BRIDE

IT was two days before Peggy's wedding, and in the front room
downstairs Peggy was looking around complacently on her wedding
presents. They were very much like the wedding presents of other
prospective brides. A few were admirably suited to the needs of a young
couple of moderate means, about to start house-keeping. Others would
have been useful in the establishments of wealthy people who expected
to do a great deal of entertaining. And there were still others whose
use was problematical, anywhere and under any circumstances.

Peggy's mood, however, was far from critical. Each gift as it came
had given her the keenest pleasure, and if it were impossible to find

s it came
had given her the keenest pleasure, and if it were impossible to find
anything admirable in the article itself, she could always say, "How
awfully kind of them to send it. Everybody's being perfectly dear to
me." She approached every newly arrived package with the same feeling
with which she had once taken up a bulging Christmas stocking.The clock in the dining room, a pert little timepiece with a peremptory
voice, struck three. It was characteristic of this particular
clock always to strike the hour as if it were reminding somebody
of something. On this occasion it reminded Peggy that she had an
engagement with the dressmaker at half past three, and that she was to
call for Ruth, who had promised to accompany her. As it was impossible

e was to
call for Ruth, who had promised to accompany her. As it was impossible
to take along a crowd of girls to the dressmaker's rather cramped
quarters, Peggy avoided hard feeling by inviting a different girl each
day.

Peggy had hardly reached the top of the stairs when the bell rang,
and Sally came rushing from the kitchen to answer it. The prospect of
a wedding in the family had so excited Sally that she was even less
responsible for her conduct than usual. Almost the only thing she could
be trusted to do was to answer the door-bell, but as the bell rang very
often, she succeeded in making herself rather useful. On this occasion
a swarthy woman stood outside, and in a quick, parrot-like fashion
said something Sally did not understand.

"You want to see Miss Peggy?" Sally demanded.

mething Sally did not understand.

"You want to see Miss Peggy?" Sally demanded. Such wits as she
possessed were not on duty, for ordinarily she would have recognized
the stranger's errand, and sent her about her business. As the woman
nodded, Sally at once admitted her, showing her into the room where the
wedding presents stood about in picturesque confusion.

"Miss Peggy," shrieked Sally, forgetting for the moment the lesson
impressed on her on innumerable occasions that she was not to save her
steps by calling up the stairs, "Somebody to see you."

It was a minute or two before Peggy came down, and Sally had retreated
to the kitchen in the meantime. Peggy who had naturally expected to see
an acquaintance, was rather startled to be confronted by a dark-skinnedto see
an acquaintance, was rather startled to be confronted by a dark-skinned
woman with jet black eyes and an oily voice.

"Buy lace, lady? Very cheap: three inch wide up to nine inch. Very
cheap!"

Peggy replied politely that she did not care for any lace, reflecting
as she spoke that had the woman presented herself a few months
earlier, she might have thought it worth while to examine her stock.
Having had some experience in the persistence of her kind, she was
surprised when the dark woman took her refusal as final, and meekly let
herself out. Peggy stepped into the kitchen to warn Sally against her
late indiscretion, and came back through the hall, reflecting that she
must hurry, since the dressmaker did not like to be kept waiting. As

ng that she
must hurry, since the dressmaker did not like to be kept waiting. As
she passed the open door of the room the vender of lace had so lately
quitted, she stopped and stood transfixed.

One of her wedding presents was missing. She knew exactly the place
where it had stood on the center table, flanked on one side by a pair
of book-ends, and on the other by a cloisonné vase. The gap left by
its removal was as obvious to Peggy's startled eyes as the breach in a
smile, due to a missing tooth. Instantly she understood that there was
no mystery about its disappearance. She had seen it not ten minutes
before, and the only person who had entered the room since then was the
woman with lace to sell.

The discovery went to Peggy's head. The stealing of any of her other

to sell.

The discovery went to Peggy's head. The stealing of any of her other
possessions would not have affected her in just the same way. But these
were her wedding presents, invested with a certain sanctity because
of the goodwill they represented, and the occasion which led to their
bestowal. It never once occurred to Peggy that she could submit to such
an outrage.She ran out of the house, looking up and down the street, and
immediately caught sight of the woman she wanted. Apparently she had
suspended business for the day, for she was walking, rapidly and making
no attempt to dispose of her wares in any of the houses she passed.
Peggy promptly started in pursuit. Her idea was to follow the woman,
keeping her in sight until she could encounter a policeman. Peggy

low the woman,
keeping her in sight until she could encounter a policeman. Peggy
had no desire to deprive any human creature, however erring, of her
liberty. She hoped the officer of the law would force the surrender of
her ill-gotten gains without formally arresting her. But whatever the
consequences, she meant to recover her property.

According to the calendar it was the last day of June, but the
thermometer proclaimed it mid-July. The heated air quivered. The
streets seemed as silent as the thoroughfares of a deserted village.
A block from Peggy's home, the woman took the right-hand turning and
went down Rossiter Street. Peggy followed, walking rapidly in her
determination to gain on the quick-walking figure on ahead.

Three blocks on Rossiter Street, and then the woman turned north,

re on ahead.

Three blocks on Rossiter Street, and then the woman turned north,
giving Peggy a clew to her plan. Friendly Terrace lay near the
outskirts of the city. A walk of a mile from Peggy's home brought one
into a section sparsely settled. It looked as though Peggy's quarry
were making for the open country.Oh, for a policeman! Peggy rather unjustly resented the scarcity of
officers of the law, forgetting how seldom their services were required
in the law-abiding part of town. She discovered, too, that the woman
pursued was uncannily aware of her pursuer. Though apparently she
never looked back, she accommodated her pace to Peggy's, accelerating
her speed, as Peggy quickened hers, so that the distance between them
remained about the same in spite of Peggy's efforts to lessen it.

between them
remained about the same in spite of Peggy's efforts to lessen it.

Owing to the lack of policemen, had any reliable looking man passed
her in a car, Peggy believed herself capable of stopping him and
commandeering his services. But apparently the heat had driven every
one indoors. Two or three delivery wagons passed with small boys
handling the reins. One machine glided by, but the driver was a woman.
After an hour's chase the two participants in the singular game of
"Follow my Leader," came out upon the turnpike, stretching away to
the north, white and dusty and hot in the brilliant sun. Here the
houses were scattered and stood back from the road. The likelihood of
encountering a policeman had become extremely faint. But Peggy set her
teeth and pressed forward.

ceman had become extremely faint. But Peggy set her
teeth and pressed forward.

Graham got off half an hour early this particular afternoon, and
reached Peggy's a little before five. Irma, dimpled and sweet, a
replica of Dorothy a few years earlier, rushed to meet him squealing
with delight, while Dorothy smiled a welcome, her lips pinched tightly
together. One of Dorothy's upper front teeth was missing and Dorothy
was painfully conscious of the lack every minute that she was awake.

Graham kissed his prospective nieces, greeted the older members of the
family cordially, if less effusively, and put the inevitable question,
"Where's Peggy?"Graham kissed his prospective nieces, greeted the older members of the
family cordially, if less effusively, and put the inevitable question,
"Where's Peggy?"

"Oh, at the dressmaker's of course," sighed Mrs. Raymond. "I hope she
won't keep the poor child very long. It's so dreadfully warm."

nd. "I hope she
won't keep the poor child very long. It's so dreadfully warm."

The telephone tinkled, and Dick went to answer it. He scowled as he
listened. "Who did you say it was? Oh, wait a minute!" He turned to his
mother. "I thought you said Peggy had gone to the dressmaker's."

"She has. She had a fitting at half past three."

"Well, this is the dressmaker, and she says Peggy hasn't come."

"Let me speak to her." Mrs. Raymond crossed to the phone, with an air
of expecting to clear up the puzzle immediately. And hardly had she
made herself known, when the door opened and Ruth appeared. "What's
become of Peggy? She was to call for me a little after three, and I've
had my hat on waiting for her nearly two hours."

What had become of Peggy? She had not kept her engagement with the

two hours."

What had become of Peggy? She had not kept her engagement with the
dressmaker, and Ruth knew nothing of her whereabouts. Mrs. Raymond
called up Priscilla and Amy, each of whom disavowed having seen Peggy
since noon. And then as there seemed nothing better to do, she went on
calling neighbors and friends and trades-people, growing more and more
puzzled, moment by moment. For no one had seen Peggy.

It finally occurred to Peggy's sister, Alice, to make inquiries in the
kitchen. Sally informed her that Miss Peggy had come into the kitchen
with her hat on, and had said something about the dressmaker. The new
girl, who had been engaged to help out for the few weeks before the
wedding, confirmed Sally's story, adding that it was a little after
three when Peggy left the house.ally's story, adding that it was a little after
three when Peggy left the house. Obviously Peggy had started out with
the intention of keeping her appointment, and obviously she had not
done so.

Dinner was ready at six o'clock, but no one was ready for dinner.
Peggy's failure to appear at meal-time added to the general
consternation. Peggy was by nature prompt and methodical, and she had
acted the rôle of cook too often not to realize how the best efforts of
that important functionary are frustrated by late arrivals. At quarter
past six Mr. Raymond went to the telephone and called up the hospitals
one after another. But the hot sleepy day had not been productive of
automobile accidents, and the only cases of sun-strokes reported were
elderly people, four men and one old woman.

cases of sun-strokes reported were
elderly people, four men and one old woman.

Graham was very pale. A dreadful suspicion was taking shape in his
mind. Could it be that, as the second of July drew near, Peggy had
found herself unable to face the situation? Perhaps he had asked too
much of her when he had urged her accompanying him to South America.
He thought of the innumerable ties that bound her to her native land,
and yet he had assumed that she would be ready to leave everything and
every one she loved, and go with him to a land of strangers. Graham
was no more troubled by excessive humility than other popular young
men, but in the present emergency he seemed to himself to have put a
most preposterous estimate on the value of his own society. He had a

have put a
most preposterous estimate on the value of his own society. He had a
horrible conviction that, through his demanding too much, Peggy was
lost to him forever.have put a
most preposterous estimate on the value of his own society. He had a
horrible conviction that, through his demanding too much, Peggy was
lost to him forever.

It hardly need be said that no one in the anxious company shared this
particular apprehension. At seven o'clock Peggy's father made up his
mind that it would be necessary to appeal to the police. But before he
could bring himself to act on this conviction, the gate clicked and
Irma, standing at the window, her nose flattened against the screen,
exploded in a series of joyful shrieks.

"Aunt Peggy! Aunt Peggy! Oh, it's Aunt Peggy!"

And Peggy it was, though it took a second glance to be sure. The
perspiration trickling over her dusty face had produced a curious
piebald effect, and she walked with a noticeable limp.

ce had produced a curious
piebald effect, and she walked with a noticeable limp. They rushed to
the door, greeting her with mingled cries of joy and reproach. All but
Graham. He sat down in the darkest corner of the living room and put
his hands over his face. The intensity of his relief was almost too
much for him.

Peggy limped in, looking decidedly ashamed of herself.

"Have you waited dinner for me? I'm awfully sorry."

"Waited dinner," repeated Mrs. Raymond, and burst into tears. Peggy's
sister Alice caught her by the shoulders and gave her a sharp little
shake.

"Peggy Raymond, where have you been and what have you been doing? Don't
you understand that we've been frightened to death about you?"

Peggy dropped into the nearest chair and began on her story. She told

ut you?"

Peggy dropped into the nearest chair and began on her story. She told
of the woman Sally had admitted to the house, the missing wedding
present, and the purpose with which she had started in pursuit. They
all listened breathlessly, Graham left his corner and stood back of the
others, unwilling to miss a word.It was not till Peggy's recital brought her to the turnpike that she
lost a little of her fluency. At this point she hesitated and seemed
to appreciate the difficulty of making matters clear to her audience.
"Of course I should have given up then. But somehow I couldn't. I kept
hoping that somebody would appear, and it seemed such a shame when I'd
followed that thief so far, to give up and go back. I'd made up my mind

hen I'd
followed that thief so far, to give up and go back. I'd made up my mind
that as soon as an automobile came along, I'd ask for a lift. I felt if
I could only catch up with her I could frighten her into giving me what
belonged to me. But nobody passed me, and then when she got to the old
toll-gate--"

Mr. Raymond interrupted, "You don't mean you followed her to the toll
gate?"

"Yes, father. Or at least I was almost there. You know there's a
cross-road just beyond the gate, and a Ford car came up that cross-road
and turned north on the pike. And the woman stopped it--"

"Confederates, I'll bet," cried Dick.

"No, it looked as if she were just asking some stranger for a ride. And
as far as they knew she was only a tired woman carrying a bag and they
took her in.

far as they knew she was only a tired woman carrying a bag and they
took her in. And then I saw it wasn't any use to go further."

"You surprise me." Mr. Raymond's voice was satirical. "I can't
understand why you didn't run after the machine."

Peggy accepted the sarcastic rejoinder meekly. "Then I turned around
and came home. But you see I had put on my new brown shoes because
Mrs. Morley wanted to fit my brown dress with the shoes I was going to
wear with it, and all at once they began to hurt me terribly. Instead
of hurrying I had to slow up, and sometimes I had to stop and wait. I
never had anything hurt so."

"If you'd walked three blocks east," exclaimed Graham, speaking for the
first time, "you could have got a car."

"I knew it, but I'd come off without my pocket book."If you'd walked three blocks east," exclaimed Graham, speaking for the
first time, "you could have got a car."

"I knew it, but I'd come off without my pocket book.

you could have got a car."

"I knew it, but I'd come off without my pocket book. I didn't have a
penny with me. That was the reason I didn't telephone."

Peggy looked about her with a crestfallen air. While she was far from
realizing the extent of the alarm her family had felt, and would not
have believed Graham had he told her of the apprehensions that had
tortured him through the terrible time of waiting, she understood that
they had all been worried and that she had inconvenienced every one by
making dinner late. "Don't wait for me any longer," she pleaded. "Have
the dinner put on, mother, and I'll be down as soon as I've washed up a
little."

Mrs. Raymond put her arm about her. "Yes, come upstairs, darling. You
must have something on those blisters right away. Alice, tell Sally to

ing. You
must have something on those blisters right away. Alice, tell Sally to
put on plates for Ruth and Graham."

It was while they were eating lamb chops, which after an hour and a
half in the warming oven might as well have been anything else, that
some one thought to put the question Peggy had been dreading. "Do you
know what present she stole?"

Peggy took a hasty sip of her iced tea and looked appealingly at her
questioner. But her reluctant manner only aroused the curiosity of
every one.

"I'll bet it was the silver teapot," exclaimed Dick.

"It doesn't matter what's missing, as long as Peggy herself is here
safe and sound," declared Mrs. Raymond fervently.

"But what _did_ she take?" insisted Alice, eyeing her sister with
suspicion.

"But what _did_ she take?" insisted Alice, eyeing her sister with
suspicion."But what _did_ she take?" insisted Alice, eyeing her sister with
suspicion.

"But what _did_ she take?" insisted Alice, eyeing her sister with
suspicion.

Again Peggy forfeited herself with iced tea, and her cheeks, flushed
by heat and weariness, took on a deeper hue. "It--it really wasn't
so valuable,--" stammered Peggy. "You know Elvira Bond gave me half
a dozen teaspoons that she got by saving soap wrappers or something.
They came in a neat little case, and I suppose the woman snatched the
nearest thing without looking. I didn't chase her because the spoons
were worth so much because--well, it was the principle of the thing."

There was a long moment of silence, and then a roar of laughter. They
laughed long and helplessly and wiped their eyes and started all over
again. As a rule Peggy could appreciate a joke, even if it was against

d all over
again. As a rule Peggy could appreciate a joke, even if it was against
herself, but on this occasion a rather wry smile was the best she could
do. She was beginning to realize that she had been very silly.

"Well, Graham," remarked Mr. Raymond when he could make himself heard,
"In my opinion you're assuming quite a responsibility in planning to
take this young woman to South America."

Graham's eyes met Peggy's and something in his look arrested her
attention, a peculiar radiance as if he had just heard a wonderful
piece of news. But all he said was, "I'm ready to take the risk, sir."

CHAPTER XXII

A JULY WEDDING

PEGGY'S brother Dick had parodied an old rhyme to fit the occasion and
sang it with gusto, in season and out of season. It was Dick's voice,

asion and
sang it with gusto, in season and out of season. It was Dick's voice,
caroling in a high falsetto, and breaking ludicrously on an average of
once a line, that woke Peggy on the most eventful morning of her life."A wedding day in May
    Is worth a load of hay.
    A wedding set for June
    Is worth a silver spoon.
    A wedding in July
    Isn't worth a fly."

Peggy winked hard and sat up in bed, turning instantly toward the east
windows. "Oh," she cried joyously, "what a glorious day!" And so indeed
it was. Apparently the weather man had carefully selected whatever was
best in all the year, and combined his selections into one perfect day
in honor of Peggy's wedding. There had been a little rain the night
before, and the air was as sweet as if perfumed by June's roses.

rain the night
before, and the air was as sweet as if perfumed by June's roses. There
was a freshness that suggested early spring, and something in the
breeze as exhilarating as October. Peggy reflected complacently that
this was just her luck.

She wondered, as she dressed, what she was to do with herself between
the hours of eight and six. Her trunk was packed for going away, and
the other trunks were ready except for a few articles to be added at
the last minute. She had acknowledged every gift she had received. The
dressmaker was through with her, and the wedding dress was hanging
in Peggy's closet, with a sheet draped over it that no speck of dust
should mar its immaculate whiteness. Peggy decided that her wedding day
was to be characterized by elegant leisure.

Peggy decided that her wedding day
was to be characterized by elegant leisure.Peggy decided that her wedding day
was to be characterized by elegant leisure.

Of course this expectation was not realized. To begin with, there were
more presents. They came by parcels post and by express. Deliverymen
handed them over as nonchalantly as if they had been ordinary
purchases. Others came by special messengers, who grinned knowingly
when Peggy signed for them. Breakfast was hardly over when it was
necessary to send for Graham, that he might assist in opening the
packages. But Graham was not as satisfactory in opening packages as a
number of other people, Priscilla and Amy, for instance. If Peggy cried
"Isn't that beautiful?" he always looked straight at her as he said
"yes," and then it was necessary to remind him that he was supposed to

s he said
"yes," and then it was necessary to remind him that he was supposed to
be admiring a piece of silverware or glass. Peggy always said, "How
beautiful!" when a package was opened. And then if the article were
something she really wanted, she would add, "Isn't it lucky, Graham,
that some one thought of that? I don't see how we could have kept house
without it." And if it were something quite unsuitable she would cry,
"How kind everybody is. I never saw anything like it."

The present from Peggy's college class came the morning of the wedding
day, when it was practically certain that no one was to be married
in advance of Peggy. It was a very attractive silver vase, with the
class motto engraved about its base. Peggy's delight was marred by one
characteristic reflection.

ved about its base. Peggy's delight was marred by one
characteristic reflection. "I have so many things. It's almost a pity
this didn't go to some girl whose friends weren't so generous."

"Any one could have had it," Graham reminded her, "who was ready
to take the risk. This is in recognition of your courage, like the
Victoria Cross.""Any one could have had it," Graham reminded her, "who was ready
to take the risk. This is in recognition of your courage, like the
Victoria Cross."

Of course the wedding presents were not going to South America, but
were to be stored against the young people's return. "Don't you hate
to go away and leave all these lovely things, Graham?" Peggy asked,
stroking the gleaming sides of a copper bowl as if it had been a
kitten. And then with her usual happy faculty for seeing the bright
side, she added, "But think of coming home and finding them waiting for

bright
side, she added, "But think of coming home and finding them waiting for
us! Why, it'll be like getting married all over again."

Wedding presents, however, were not to occupy Peggy's thoughts to the
exclusion of other matters. All sorts of affectionate messages kept
coming, special deliveries, telegrams, telephone calls. A girl like
Peggy, who for twenty-one years and over has been helping to make the
world a happier place, is likely to be surprised when she comes to
count up her friends. Elaine Marshall, who had moved from the city and
now lived with her married sister, came down for the day. "I couldn't
stand it, not to be at your wedding, Peggy," she declared. And Lucy
Haines walked in about noon, looking so radiant that Peggy at once
suspected an especial reason.

n about noon, looking so radiant that Peggy at once
suspected an especial reason. There was a little pearl ring on the
third finger of Lucy's left hand that Peggy had never seen before. Lucy
blushed when she saw Peggy's contemplative gaze focused on it."Yes, Peggy, it's--it's Jerry," owned Lucy, looking so proud and happy
that she did not seem even distantly related to the disheartened girl
who had once thought it was no use trying. "He's grown into such a
splendid fellow. Everybody says I'm so lucky. And, Peggy, if it hadn't
been for the summer you spent at Doolittle Cottage, it's not likely
that either of us would ever have amounted to anything."

Mary Donaldson called up to say that she was coming to the wedding.
Her father and cousin had promised to carry her downstairs, and they

e wedding.
Her father and cousin had promised to carry her downstairs, and they
were going early so she could be in her place before any one else
arrived. "I don't believe you're a bit more excited than I am, Peggy,"
Mary laughed. And another surprise was when Uncle Philander and his
wife drove into town, with a bushel or two of flowers piled about them
in the buggy.

"They're not such awful stylish flowers," beamed Aunt Phoebe. "Of
course there's a few roses, but most of our bushes bloomed themselves
'most to death in June and haven't done much since. The rest are just
everyday posies, so to speak, but they'll make little bright spots
around the house, and anyway, you can't have too many flowers at a
wedding."

At four o'clock the bridesmaids went home to dress. The mother of the

edding."

At four o'clock the bridesmaids went home to dress. The mother of the
flower girl pounced on her and carried her upstairs.

"Peggy, dear," said Mrs. Raymond warningly.

"Just a minute mother. I want to tell Graham something." Peggy led her
lover into a corner and whispered in his ear, "Don't you want to come
back and get a glimpse of me after I'm dressed."

"Well rather.""Well rather."

"Because you know, if you don't like me," dimpled Peggy, "it's not too
late to change your mind." She was inclined to be reproachful when
Graham caught her in his arms and kissed her before everybody, but
Graham insisted it was her own fault, and on reflection Peggy decided
he was right.

At six o'clock the little church was well filled. In spite of Graham's

right.

At six o'clock the little church was well filled. In spite of Graham's
teasing, Peggy's humble friends could hardly be distinguished from
their so-called betters. Hildegarde Carey, slender and elegant, sat in
the pew behind Elvira Bond, and noticed nothing peculiar except that
Elvira blew her nose oftener and with more emphasis than is customary
on such occasions. It was either that or weep, and Elvira chose the
least of the two evils. As for Jimmy Dunn, with his purple necktie and
a large scarfpin that resembled a diamond, he was fairly resplendent.

The march pealed out and the people rose. Up the aisle came the
bridesmaids walking very slowly. The little flower girl, all smiles,
seemed as unconscious as if weddings were an old story in her
experience.

smiles,
seemed as unconscious as if weddings were an old story in her
experience. And then came Peggy on her father's arm, and Elvira Bond
was not the only one whose eyes brimmed over as she passed.

A great deal can happen in five minutes. The organ pealed out again,
and now Peggy was Mrs. Graham Wylie. She put her hand on her husband's
arm and smiled up into his face, Peggy's own sunny smile. She had
promised for better or for worse, but in her heart of hearts she was
confident that the future held only good for the two of them. And as
Graham was equally positive on that score, they went down the aisle
with illumined faces.

Only a few besides the two families came to the house from the church.
These, with the out-of-town guests like Elaine and Lucy, and theOnly a few besides the two families came to the house from the church.
These, with the out-of-town guests like Elaine and Lucy, and the

om the church.
These, with the out-of-town guests like Elaine and Lucy, and the
wedding party, filled the cosy little house to overflowing. Mary
Donaldson sat in a corner, radiant; and since she could not cross the
room to kiss the bride, the bride crossed to kiss her.

It was after the chicken salad had been disposed of, and they were
passing the ice cream, that Peggy's attention focussed itself on her
new friend, Mr. Kennedy. He stood by himself for the moment and his
face was rather grave for a young man, a guest at a wedding. But as he
caught her eye, he smiled resolutely and came over to her.

"I'm sorry you're going away, Mrs. Wylie, just as I met you. It doesn't
seem fair."

"I'm sorry, too," said Peggy. "If we'd only known that night at

't
seem fair."

"I'm sorry, too," said Peggy. "If we'd only known that night at
the Green Parrot that you were a friend of Graham's it would have
simplified matters so much."

Mr. Kennedy's face again lost its smile. He turned and looked the
company over. "Your friend Hitchcock isn't here to-night, is he?"

Peggy was delighted. She had been wishing for a chance to bring Horace
into the conversation, and here Mr. Kennedy had done it himself. When
again the young man looked at her, he was almost startled by the
radiant mischief of her face.

"Horace Hitchcock here? Oh, dear, no! I can't think of anybody I'd be
less likely to ask to my wedding."

"That's one point, evidently, on which you and Miss Combs are not in
agreement."

Peggy pondered. "Priscilla might ask him to her wedding.

are not in
agreement."

Peggy pondered. "Priscilla might ask him to her wedding. I don't know.
But it's certain he didn't ask _her_ to _his_."

Young Mr. Kennedy's start was unmistakable. "You don't mean he's
married?"Peggy pondered. "Priscilla might ask him to her wedding. I don't know.
But it's certain he didn't ask _her_ to _his_."

Young Mr. Kennedy's start was unmistakable. "You don't mean he's
married?"

"Yes indeed. There was quite an account of it in the papers. But if you
didn't know his name, you wouldn't remember."

"No, I wouldn't remember," agreed Mr. Kennedy. All at once he was
beaming. "I shall be glad when the next two years are up, Mrs. Wylie,"
he cried boyishly. "I have a hunch that you and I are going to be great
friends."

A moment later he joined Priscilla, and from that time on followed her
about like her shadow, and the observant Peggy smiled approval. She was
not in the least discomfited by Graham's reference to high explosives.

She was
not in the least discomfited by Graham's reference to high explosives.
The most dangerous things in the world, in her estimation, were
misunderstandings.

At ten o'clock the bride went upstairs to change to her little
going-away suit with the Eton Jacket, that made her look hardly older
than the Peggy Raymond who entered college. And then the good-bys
began. "We'll be back in a few days," said Peggy as she kissed each
one, but even that assurance failed to give comfort. For though Peggy
and Graham were coming back for twenty-four hours, they were to sail on
the sixth. Peggy's friends returned her smiles bravely, but there was
hardly one who did not struggle to keep back the tears.

They crowded out on the porch to see her go. Some one hurled an old

the tears.

They crowded out on the porch to see her go. Some one hurled an old
shoe as the taxi-cab glided away. Peggy leaned from the window to wave
her hand, and then the darkness swallowed her up.

Amy, Ruth, and Priscilla stood side by side. The tears were running
down Ruth's cheeks, and Priscilla's eyes were wet. Amy had forced
herself to smile during Peggy's protracted leave-taking and the smile
persisted, though it had become a grimace."Is this place called Friendly Terrace?" Amy demanded tragically, "Or
is it the--the Dismal Swamp."

"Or the desert of Sahara," suggested Priscilla, a quaver in her voice
showing that the suggestion was not altogether a joke.

"Girls!" for a moment Ruth struggled with a sob, but she conquered it

r a joke.

"Girls!" for a moment Ruth struggled with a sob, but she conquered it
and went on resolutely, "I don't know who named Friendly Terrace, but
I do know it was Peggy who made the name fit. And we've got to keep it
up. We can't let it become like other little streets where nobody cares
for his neighbor. We've got to show what Peggy meant to us by--by--"

"By keeping the home fires burning," interpolated Amy, and Ruth nodded
as if the familiar phrase said all she had wished to say.

As the others crowded indoors, declaring after immemorial fashion that
there had never been a prettier wedding nor a lovelier bride, Peggy's
three friends stood side by side; Ruth's hand was fast in Amy's, and
Amy's arm was about Priscilla's waist. And while none of them spoke,

Amy's, and
Amy's arm was about Priscilla's waist. And while none of them spoke,
each of them in her heart was silently pledging herself to keep
Friendly Terrace what Peggy had made it.

THE END

MARK GRAY'S HERITAGE

A Romance

_By Eliot Harlow Robinson_

_Author of "Smiles: A Rose of the Cumberlands," "Smiling Pass," "The
Maid of Mirabelle," etc._

_Cloth, 12mo, illustrated, $1.90_

"_What is bred in the bone will never come out of the flesh._"

MR. ROBINSON'S distinguished success came with the acclaim accredited
to his novel, SMILES, "_The Best-Loved Book of the Year_," and its
sequel, SMILING PASS. With delicate humor and a sincere faith in the
beautiful side of human nature, Mr. Robinson has created for himself
a host of enthusiastic admirers.an nature, Mr. Robinson has created for himself
a host of enthusiastic admirers. In his new book he chooses a theme,
suggested perhaps by the old proverb quoted above ("Pilpay's Fables").
His setting is a Quaker village, his theme the conflict between grave
Quaker ideals and the strength and hot blood of impulsive Mark Gray.

Here is a book that is worthy of the reception accorded SMILES by
all readers who appreciate a story of deep significance, simply yet
powerfully built upon fundamental passions, wrought with a philosophy
that always sees the best in troubled times.

The enthusiastic editor who passed on MARK GRAY'S HERITAGE calls
it--hardly too emphatically--"A mighty good story with plenty of
entertainment for those who like action (there is more of that in it

plenty of
entertainment for those who like action (there is more of that in it
than in any other of Mr. Robinson's novels). The reading public will
unquestionably call it another 'courage book'--which they called the
SMILES books, you know. The language is both strong and smooth. The
story has a punch!"

POLLY THE PAGAN

Her Lost Love Letters

_By Isabel Anderson_

_With an appreciative Foreword by Basil King_

_Cloth decorative, 12mo, illustrated, $1.90_

ISABEL ANDERSON, who heretofore has confined her literary talents to
writing of presidents and diplomats and fascinating foreign lands,
contributes to our list her first novel, POLLY THE PAGAN, a story of
European life and "high society." The story is unfolded in the livelya story of
European life and "high society." The story is unfolded in the lively
letters of a gay and vivacious American girl traveling in Europe,
and tells of the men whom she meets in Paris, in London or Rome, her
flirtations (and they are many and varied!) and exciting experiences.
Among the letters written to her are slangy ones from an American
college boy and some in broken English from a fascinated Russian Prince
(or was he disillusioned, when after dining at a smart Parisian café
with the adorable Polly he was trapped by secret police?); but the
chief interest, so far as Polly's _affaires d'amour_ are concerned,
centers around the letters from a young American, in the diplomatic
service in Rome, who is in a position to give intimate descriptions of

plomatic
service in Rome, who is in a position to give intimate descriptions of
smart life and Italian society.

*       *       *       *       *

The character drawing is clever, and the suspense as to whom the
fascinating Polly will marry, if indeed the mysterious young lady will
marry anybody, is admirably sustained.

UNCLE MARY

A Novel for Young or Old

_By Isla May Mullins_

_Author of "The Blossom Shop" books, "Tweedie," etc._

_Cloth decorative, 12mo, illustrated, $1.75_

SINCE the great success of POLLYANNA there have been many efforts to
  achieve the "_GLAD_ BOOK" style of fiction, but none so successful
          Trade      Mark
  as Mrs. Mullins' UNCLE MARY.

Here is a story, charming in its New England village setting, endearing

MARY.

Here is a story, charming in its New England village setting, endearing
in its characters, engrossing in its plot, and diverting in its
style. The PAGE imprint has been given to many books about beautiful
characters in fiction,--Pollyanna, Anne Shirley, Rose Webb of "SMILES,"
and Lloyd Sherman of the "LITTLE COLONEL" books. To this galaxy we now
add "Uncle" Mary's protégé, Libbie Lee.Mrs. Mullins is an author gifted with the ability to appeal to the
young in heart of whatever age. Her characters are visually portrayed.
Her situations have the interest of naturalness and suspense. The
reader of UNCLE MARY will become in spirit an inhabitant of Sunfield;
will understand the enjoyment of the sudden acquisition of wealth, a

f Sunfield;
will understand the enjoyment of the sudden acquisition of wealth, a
limousine, and--an adopted child (!), by the sisters, "Uncle" Mary and
"Aunt" Alice; will watch with interest the thawing and rejuvenation of
"Uncle" Mary, the cure of Alice, and the solving of the mystery of the
wealth of sweet little Libbie Lee.

THE RED CAVALIER

Or, The Twin Turrets Mystery

_By Gladys Edson Locke_

_Cloth decorative, 12mo, illustrated, $1.90_

HERE is a mystery story that is different! The subtlety and strangeness
of India--poison and daggers, the impassive faces and fierce hearts
of Prince Bardai and his priestly adviser; a typical English week-end
house party in the mystery-haunted castle, Twin Turrets, in Yorkshire;
a vivid and contrasting background.

aunted castle, Twin Turrets, in Yorkshire;
a vivid and contrasting background.

And the plot! Who is the mysterious Red Cavalier? Is he the ghost of
the ancestral portrait, that hangs in Sir Robert Grainger's strange
library? Is he flesh and blood, and responsible for the marauding
thefts in the neighborhood? Is he responsible for Prince Kassim's
murder? Or is it only coincidence that one of the guests at the masked
ball happened to wear the costume of the Red Cavalier?

Miss Locke has been able to weave a weird and absorbing tale of modern
detective romance, the strangeness of India in modern England.

There is Lady Berenice Coningsby, a bit _déclassé_; Ethelyn Roydon,
more so; Princess Lona Bardai, "Little Lotus-Blossom," sweet and
pathetic; Mrs.There is Lady Berenice Coningsby, a bit _déclassé_; Ethelyn Roydon,
more so; Princess Lona Bardai, "Little Lotus-Blossom," sweet and
pathetic; Mrs.

more so; Princess Lona Bardai, "Little Lotus-Blossom," sweet and
pathetic; Mrs. Dalrymple, the woman of mystery; Miss Vandelia Egerton,
the spinster owner of Twin Turrets. There is dashing Max Egerton and
the impeccable Lord Borrowdean; Captain Grenville Coningsby; Prince
Kassim Bardai, with the impenetrable eyes, and Chand Talsdad, his
venerable adviser. Which of them is the Red Cavalier?

*       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired while varied hyphenation has been
retained.

Page 11, "asumed" changed to "assumed" (assumed that they had)

Page 75, the ligature was removed from "Phoebe" to conform to the
numerous uses without it (turned to Aunt Phoebe's)

Page 115, "epigramatic" changed to "epigrammatic" (epigrammatic phrases

oebe's)

Page 115, "epigramatic" changed to "epigrammatic" (epigrammatic phrases
which)

Page 172, "your're" changed to "you're" (what you're looking for)

Page 180, "Rob" changed to "Bob" (absorbed by what Bob)

Page 184, "publicity" changed to "publicly" (publicly that she was)

Page 184, "incomprehensiblely" changed to "incomprehensibly"
(incomprehensibly petty)

Page 186, repeated word "the" removed from text. Original read (how
much . was the the result of)

Page 199, "upstair" changed to "upstairs" (upstairs Ruth? It's)

Page 205, "fiinished" changed to "finished" (After she had finished)

Page 207, "tumultous" changed to "tumultuous" (tumultuous cheering, the)

Page 210, "forseen" changed to "foreseen" (have foreseen this)

Page 238, repeated word "to" removed from text.

"foreseen" (have foreseen this)

Page 238, repeated word "to" removed from text. Original read (four to
to get engaged)

Page 261, "rudness" changed to "rudeness" (The rudeness gave Peggy)

Page 262, "af" changed to "of" (losing two of her)Page 261, "rudness" changed to "rudeness" (The rudeness gave Peggy)

Page 262, "af" changed to "of" (losing two of her)

Page 271, "spare" changed to "space" (vacant space enclosed by)

Page 272, "attenion" changed to "attention" (Priscilla every attention)

Page 279, "emphazie" changed to "emphasize" (to emphasize the fact)

Page 301, "There" changed to "Three" (Three blocks on Rossiter)

End of Project Gutenberg's Peggy Raymond's Way, by Harriet Lummis Smith

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45908 ***

[Source: test2.txt]
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45839 ***

Transcriber’s Note

PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45839 ***

Transcriber’s Note
                          ##################

This e-text is based on a reproduction of the original 1897 edition.
All modern material has been removed.

Italic text in the original version has been placed between underscores
(_text_); passages in small caps have been symbolised by forward
slashes (/small caps/). Subscript numerals have been placed between
curly braces ({2}).

Inconsistencies in hyphenation and spelling (to-morrow/tomorrow;
aerial/aërial, etc.), as well as incorrectly used phrases in Van
Helsing’s speech have been retained. A number of obvious errors in
punctuation and inconsistencies in single/double quotation have been
tacitly removed.

tion and inconsistencies in single/double quotation have been
tacitly removed.

The following typographical errors, have been corrected:tion and inconsistencies in single/double quotation have been
tacitly removed.

The following typographical errors, have been corrected:

# p. vi/vii: header word “Page” has been moved from page vii to
                 page vi.
    # p. vii: “Chapter VXVII” → “Chapter XVIII”; “Chapter XXI” →
              “Chapter XXVII”; “320” → “324”
    # p. 16: “a long” → “along”
    # p. 30: “Wœ” → “Woe”
    # p. 44: “wondow” → “window”
    # p. 43: “that” → “than”
    # p. 58: “number One” → “number one”
    # p. 63: “Hopwood” → “Holmwood”
    # p. 82: “role of paper” → “roll of paper”
    # p. 98: “dreadul” → “dreadful”
    # p. 99: “pounts” → “pounds”
    # p. 112: “Holmmood” → “Holmwood”
    # p. 133: “pharmacopœœia” → “pharmacopœia”
    # p. 147: “do do” → “to do”
    # p.

. 133: “pharmacopœœia” → “pharmacopœia”
    # p. 147: “do do” → “to do”
    # p. 157: “confortable” → “comfortable”; “everthing” → “everything”
    # p. 186: “greatful” → “grateful”
    # p. 212: “Arther” → “Arthur”
    # p. 241: “next the Professor” → “next to the Professor”
    # p. 257: “gloated with fresh blood” → “bloated with fresh blood”
    # p. 286: “Rat, rats, rats!” → “Rats, rats, rats!”
    # p. 339: “preceeded” → “preceded”
    # p. 358: “the bit box” → “the big box”
    # p. 380: “they mean fight” → “they mean to fight”
    # p. 384: “respulsive” → “repulsive”

BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

“Under the Sunset.”
                          “The Snake’s Pass.”
                         “The Watter’s Mou’.”

“The Snake’s Pass.”
                         “The Watter’s Mou’.”
                       “The Shoulder of Shasta.”

DRACULA

BY

BRAM STOKER

Constable · London

First published by Archibald Constable and Company, 1897

TO

MY DEAR FRIEND

HOMMY-BEG

CONTENTS.

Page

/Chapter I./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                          1

/Chapter II./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         15

/Chapter III./Page

/Chapter I./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                          1

/Chapter II./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         15

/Chapter III./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         15

/Chapter III./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         28

/Chapter IV./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                         41

/Chapter V./

Letters--Lucy and Mina                                            55

/Chapter VI./

Mina Murray’s Journal                                             64

/Chapter VII./

Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August                           77

/Chapter VIII./

Mina Murray’s Journal                                             91

/Chapter IX./

Mina Murray’s Journal                                            106

/Chapter X./

urray’s Journal                                            106

/Chapter X./

Mina Murray’s Journal                                            120

/Chapter XI./

Lucy Westenra’s Diary                                            135

/Chapter XII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               148

/Chapter XIII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               166

/Chapter XIV./

Mina Harker’s Journal                                            182

/Chapter XV./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               198

/Chapter XVI./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               212

/Chapter XVII./

Dr.

212

/Chapter XVII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               223

/Chapter XVIII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               237

/Chapter XIX./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        254

/Chapter XX./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        267

/Chapter XXI./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               282/Chapter XX./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        267

/Chapter XXI./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               282

/Chapter XXII./

Jonathan Harker’s Journal                                        297

/Chapter XXIII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               310

/Chapter XXIV./

Dr.

/Chapter XXIII./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               310

/Chapter XXIV./

Dr. Seward’s Phonograph Diary, spoken by Van Helsing             324

/Chapter XXV./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               339

/Chapter XXVI./

Dr. Seward’s Diary                                               354

/Chapter XXVII./

Mina Harker’s Journal                                            372

How these papers have been placed in sequence will be made manifest
in the reading of them. All needless matters have been eliminated, so
that a history almost at variance with the possibilities of later-day
belief may stand forth as simple fact. There is throughout no statement

of later-day
belief may stand forth as simple fact. There is throughout no statement
of past things wherein memory may err, for all the records chosen are
exactly contemporary, given from the standpoints and within the range
of knowledge of those who made them.

DRACULA.

CHAPTER I.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

(_Kept in shorthand._)

_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8.35 p.m. on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6.46, but train was
an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse
which I got of it from the train and the little I could walk through
the streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had
arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. Thes we had
arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The
impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the
East; the most Western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner,
or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which
was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the
waiter, and he said it was called “paprika hendl,” and that, as it
was a national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the
Carpathians. I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed,

long the
Carpathians. I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed,
I don’t know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the
British Museum, and made search among the books and maps of the library
regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of
the country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with
a noble of that country. I find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the

pe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post
town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall
enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk
over my travels with Mina.In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct
nationalities: Saxons in the south, and mixed with them the Wallachs,
who are the descendants of the Dacians; Magyars in the west; and
Szekelys in the east and north. I am going among the latter, who claim
to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the
Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the

r when the
Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the
Huns settled in it. I read that every known superstition in the world
is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the
centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very
interesting. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howling all night under my
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have
been the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe,
and was still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the
continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping
soundly then.

ntinuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping
soundly then. I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge
of maize flour which they said was “mamaliga,” and egg-plant stuffed
with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call “impletata.”
(_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for
the train started a little before eight, or rather it ought to have
done so, for after rushing to the station at 7.30 I had to sit in the
carriage for more than an hour before we began to move. It seems to me
that the further East you go the more unpunctual are the trains. What
ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on theAll day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the

s full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side
of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those
I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round
hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The
women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very
clumsy about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or

re very
clumsy about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or
other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course
petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks,
who are more barbarian than the rest, with their big cowboy hats, great
baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy
leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails.
They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had
long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque,
but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at
once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am

set down at
once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am
told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.set down at
once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am
told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.

It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is
a very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for
the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a
series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five
separate occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it
underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties
of war proper being assisted by famine and disease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I

isease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I
wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently
expected, for when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly
woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double
apron, front and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for
modesty. When I came close she bowed, and said: “The Herr Englishman?”
“Yes,” I said, “Jonathan Harker.” She smiled, and gave some message
to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the
door. He went, but immediately returned with a letter:--

“/My Friend/,--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
you. Sleep well to-night.

--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start
for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass my
carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust that your
journey from London has been a happy one, and that you will enjoy your
stay in my beautiful land.

“Your friend,
        “/Dracula./”“Your friend,
        “/Dracula./”

_4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did.

nderstood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort
of way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and
that was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and
could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed
themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused
to speak further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no
time to ask any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any
means comforting.

Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in
a very hysterical way:

“Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?” She was in such an excited

al way:

“Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?” She was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew,
and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at
all. I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I
told her that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important
business, she asked again:

“Do you know what day it is?” I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

“Oh, yes! I know that, I know that! but do you know what day it is?” On
my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

“It is the eve of St. George’s Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have“It is the eve of St. George’s Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have

ht, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are going
to?” She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous, but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business
to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me.
I did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been

it to me.
I did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet
it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in
such a state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she
put the rosary round my neck, and said, “For your mother’s sake,” and
went out of the room. I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I
am waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix
is still round my neck. Whether it is the old lady’s fear, or the many
ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not
know, but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this
book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here
comes the coach!

ld ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here
comes the coach!ld ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here
comes the coach!

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun
is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with
trees or hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and
little are mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till
I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many odd things
to put down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well
before I left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on
what they call “robber steak”--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned
with red pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the
simple style of the London cat’s-meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch,

re, in the
simple style of the London cat’s-meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch,
which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I
saw him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of
me, for every now and then they looked at me, and some of the people
who were sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a
name meaning “word-bearer”--came and listened, and then they looked
at me, most of them pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often
repeated, queer words, for there were many nationalities in the
crowd; so I quietly got my polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked
them out.

crowd; so I quietly got my polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked
them out. I must say they were not cheering to me, for amongst them
were “Ordog”--Satan, “pokol”--hell, “stregoica”--witch, “vrolok” and
“vlkoslak”--both of which mean the same thing, one being Slovak and
the other Servian for something that is either were-wolf or vampire.
(_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these superstitions.)When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this
time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross
and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye.

at I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for
me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but
every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic
that I could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse
which I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures,
all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with
its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green
tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide
linen drawers covered the whole front of the box-seat--“gotza” they
call them--cracked his big whip over his four small horses, which ran
abreast, and we set off on our journey.

over his four small horses, which ran
abreast, and we set off on our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of
the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or
rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might
not have been able to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green
sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep
hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable
end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit
blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the
green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out
amongst these green hills of what they call here the “Mittel Land” rann and out
amongst these green hills of what they call here the “Mittel Land” ran
the road, losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut
out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down
the hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand
then what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing
no time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in
summer-time excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after
the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the general run
of roads in the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are
not to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair

hey are
not to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair
them, lest the Turk should think that they were preparing to bring
in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at
loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpathians themselves. Right
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling upon them
and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep
blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in

ance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in
the mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and
again the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched
my arm as we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty,
snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our
serpentine way, to be right before us:--“Look! Isten szek!”--“God’s seat!”--and he crossed himself reverently.
As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower
behind us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This
was emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and

ill held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and
there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I
noticed that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many
crosses, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here
and there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did
not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender
of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There
were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees and
here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white
stems shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now
and again we passed a leiterwagon--the ordinary peasant’s cart, with

eaves. Now
and again we passed a leiterwagon--the ordinary peasant’s cart, with
its long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of
the road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, the Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get very cold,
and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the
Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background
of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pinebackground
of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine
woods that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great
masses of greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced
a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts
and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling
sunset threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst
the Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys. Sometimes
the hills were so steep that, despite our driver’s haste, the horses
could only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do
at home, but the driver would not hear of it. “No, no,” he said; “you
must not walk here; the dogs are too fierce!” and then he added, with

said; “you
must not walk here; the dogs are too fierce!” and then he added, with
what he evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to
catch the approving smile of the rest--“and you may have enough of such
matters before you go to sleep.” The only stop he would make was a
moment’s pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on
to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills.t of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared
to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering the Borgo Pass. One by
one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed upon
me with earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of
an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a
kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning
movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of

r-meaning
movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of
the cross and the guard against the evil eye. Then, as we flew along,
the driver leaned forward, and on each side the passengers, craning
over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the darkness. It was
evident that something very exciting was either happening or expected,
but though I asked each passenger, no one would give me the slightest
explanation. This state of excitement kept on for some little time;
and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on the eastern
side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the air the
heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though the mountain
range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into
the thunderous one.had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into
the thunderous one. I was now myself looking out for the conveyance
which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light
was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could now see the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
my own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had best do, when
the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which
I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I

hing which
I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was, “An hour less than the time.” Then, turning to me, he
said in German worse than my own:--

“There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected, after all. He
will now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day;
better the next day.” Whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh
and snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up.
Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal
crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind
us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see from the
flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were
coal-black and splendid animals.

as the rays fell on them, that the horses were
coal-black and splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a
long brown beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face
from us. I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes,
which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to the
driver:--

“You are early to-night, my friend.” The man stammered in reply:--

“The English Herr was in a hurry,” to which the stranger replied:--“You are early to-night, my friend.” The man stammered in reply:--

“The English Herr was in a hurry,” to which the stranger replied:--

“That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You
cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are
swift.” As he spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking
mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory.

rd-looking
mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory.
One of my companions whispered to another the line from Burger’s
“Lenore:”--

“Denn die Todten reiten schnell.”--
    (“For the dead travel fast.”)

The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. “Give me the Herr’s
luggage,” said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of
the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me
with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must
have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses

rength must
have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses
turned, and we swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I
saw the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps,
and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing
themselves. Then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses,
and off they swept on their way to Bukovina.

As they sank into the darkness I felt a strange chill, and a lonely
feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a
rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:--

“The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take
all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz [the plum brandy of the“The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take
all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz [the plum brandy of the

me take
all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz [the plum brandy of the
country] underneath the seat, if you should require it.” I did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was there, all the same. I felt a
little strange, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any
alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that unknown
night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight along, then we
made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It seemed
to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground again;
and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was so.
I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any

ll meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention
to delay. By and by, however, as I was curious to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my
recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind
which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, whichthe wind
which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which
seemed to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination
could grasp it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl
the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them
soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though
after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance,
from the mountains on each side of us began a louder and sharper
howling--that of wolves--which affected both the horses and myself in
the same way--for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst
they reared again and plunged madly, so that the driver had to use
all his great strength to keep them from bolting. In a few minutes,

r had to use
all his great strength to keep them from bolting. In a few minutes,
however, my own ears got accustomed to the sound, and the horses so far
became quiet that the driver was able to descend and to stand before
them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their
ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers doing, and with extraordinary
effect, for under his caresses they became quite manageable again,
though they still trembled. The driver again took his seat, and shaking
his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the
far side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which
ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over
the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again greatSoon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over
the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great

ched right over
the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great
frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in
shelter, we could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled
through the rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as
we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine powdery snow
began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were covered with a
white blanket. The keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs,
though this grew fainter as we went on our way. The baying of the
wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they were closing round on
us from every side. I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my
fear; but the driver was not in the least disturbed. He kept turning

shared my
fear; but the driver was not in the least disturbed. He kept turning
his head to left and right, but I could not see anything through the
darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not know
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but
while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word
took his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen
asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now, looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road that even in the darknessul nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road that even in the darkness
around us I could watch the driver’s motions. He went rapidly to where
the blue flame rose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there appeared a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me,
but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived
me straining through the darkness. Then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

ing of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he
had yet done, and during his absence the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any
cause for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but
just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind
the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times
more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they
howled. For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only

en when they
howled. For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only
when a man feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can
understand their true import.en when they
howled. For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only
when a man feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can
understand their true import.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side, and they
had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through
the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap.

care the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept
his long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the
wolves fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed
across the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and
the wolves had disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that
a dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move.
The time seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost
complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept onalmost
complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. Suddenly I became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.

CHAPTER II.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal/--_continued._

_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully
awake I must have noticed the approach to such a remarkable place. In
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several
dark ways led from it under great round arches it perhaps seemed
bigger than it really is.

led from it under great round arches it perhaps seemed
bigger than it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by
daylight.

When the calèche stopped the driver jumped down, and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old
and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook

by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook
the reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared
down one of the dark openings.by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook
the reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared
down one of the dark openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The
time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this
a customary incident in the life of a solicitor’s clerk sent out to
explain the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor’s
clerk! Mina would not like that.

of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor’s
clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor,--for just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am now a
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see
if I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with
the dawn struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again
felt in the morning after a day of overwork. But my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake
and among the Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of the morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching

morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming
light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back.Within, stood a tall old man, clean-shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long, quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of
the open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with

e draught of
the open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with
a courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange
intonation:--

“Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!” He made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

“Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of
the happiness you bring!” The strength of the handshake was so much

omething of
the happiness you bring!” The strength of the handshake was so much
akin to that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not
seen, that for a moment I doubted if it were not the same person to
whom I was speaking; so, to make sure, I said interrogatively:--

“Count Dracula?” He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

“I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest.” As he was
speaking he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I
protested but he insisted:--

“Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself.” He insisted on carrying“Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself.” He insisted on carrying

are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself.” He insisted on carrying
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. At the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs flamed and flared.

The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room
lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort.
Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter.
It was a welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and

to enter.
It was a welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and
warmed with another log fire, which sent a hollow roar up the wide
chimney. The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying,
before he closed the door:--

“You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared.”

The light and warmth and the Count’s courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal
state, I discovered that I was half-famished with hunger; so making a
hasty toilet, I went into the other room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the

er room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--er room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

“I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust,
excuse me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do
not sup.”

I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to
me. He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he
handed it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill
of pleasure:--

“I much regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a
constant sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for
some time to come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient

on my part for
some time to come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient
substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young
man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful
disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in
my service. He shall be ready to attend on you when you will during his
stay, and shall take your instructions in all matters.”

The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses,
was my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me
many questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

y questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished my supper, and by my host’s desire had
drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he
offered me, at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I
had now an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead,
and hair growing scantily round the temples, but profusely elsewhere.
His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with
bushy hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so
far as I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather

mouth, so
far as I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over
the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in
a man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing
them now close to me, I could not but notice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs
in the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to
a sharp point.

the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to
a sharp point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me,
I could not repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was
rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what
I would, I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew
back; and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet
done his protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of
the fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards
the window I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed
a strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard, as if
from down below in the valley, the howling of many wolves. The Count’s
eyes gleamed, and he said:--he valley, the howling of many wolves. The Count’s
eyes gleamed, and he said:--

“Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!”
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he
added:--

“Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of
the hunter.” Then he rose and said:--

“But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!” and, with a courteous bow, he opened for
me himself the door to the octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom....

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things
which I dare not confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

_7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. When I had dressed myself I went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by
the pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on
which was written:--

“I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D.” So I set to
and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so
that I might let the servants know I had finished; but I could not find
one. There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering
the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me.the house, considering
the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table
service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of
immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and
the hangings of my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics,
and must have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are
centuries old, though in excellent order. I saw something like them
in Hampton Court, but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten.
But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a
toilet glass on my table, and I had to get the little shaving glass
from my bag before I could either shave or brush my hair. I have not
yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except

I have not
yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except
for the howling of wolves. When I had finished my meal--I do not know
whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and
six o’clock when I had it--I looked about for something to read, for
I did not like to go about the castle until I had asked the Count’s
permission. There was absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper,
or even writing materials; so I opened another door in the room and
found a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it
locked.

In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazineszines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. The books
were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life
and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the
London Directory, the “Red” and “Blue” books, Whitaker’s Almanack, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the
Law List.

Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count
entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night’s rest. Then he went on:--

“I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will interest you.

you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will interest you. These friends”--and he laid his hand on some of the
books--“have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great England; and
to know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets
of your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak.”

“But, Count,” I said, “you know and speak English thoroughly!” He bowed
gravely.

But, Count,” I said, “you know and speak English thoroughly!” He bowed
gravely.

“I thank you, my friend, for your all too flattering estimate, but yet
I fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I
know the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them.”

“Indeed,” I said, “you speak excellently.”“Indeed,” I said, “you speak excellently.”

“Not so,” he answered. “Well I know that, did I move and speak in your
London, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is
not enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common people
know me, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no
one; men know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content
if I am like the rest, so that no man stops if he sees me, or pause in

content
if I am like the rest, so that no man stops if he sees me, or pause in
his speaking if he hear my words, to say, ‘Ha, ha! a stranger!’ I have
been so long master that I would be master still--or at least that none
other should be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my
friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in
London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me a while, so that by our
talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would that you tell
me when I make error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry
that I had to be away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one
who has so many important affairs in hand.”

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose.

could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: “Yes, certainly,” and
added:--

“You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand.” I said I was sure
of this, and then he went on:--

“We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something
of what strange things here may be.”This led to much conversation. And as it was evident that he wanted to

ay be.”

This led to much conversation. And as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking’s sake, I asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked
most frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I
asked him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for
instance, why the coachman went to the places where we had seen the
blue flames. Was it indeed true that they showed where gold was hidden?
He then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a certain
night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits are

on a certain
night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits are
supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. “That treasure has been hidden,” he
went on, “in the region through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for centuries by
the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of
soil in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,
patriots or invaders. In old days there were stirring times, when the
Austrian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep

oo--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil.”“But how,” said I, “can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?”
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

“Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames
only appear on one night. And on that night no man of this land will,
if he can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he
did he would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell

ven if he
did he would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell
me of who marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in
daylight even for his own work. You would not, I dare be sworn, be able
to find these places again?”

“There you are right,” I said. “I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them.” Then we drifted into other matters.

“Come,” he said at last, “tell me of London and of the house which you
have procured for me.” With an apology for my remissness, I went into
my own room to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as
I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark.

e had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also
lit in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the sofa,
reading, of all things in the world, an English Bradshaw’s Guide. When
I came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him
I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested
in everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very
much more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:--“Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me,

I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me,
I fall into my country’s habit of putting your patronymic first--my
friend Jonathan Harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He
will be in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law
with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!”

We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which
I inscribe here:--

“At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed

here:--

“At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed
to be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that
the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient
structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large
number of years. The closed gates were of heavy old oak and iron, all
eaten with rust.

“The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old _Quatre
Face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points
of the compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded
by the solid stone wall above mentioned. There are many trees on it,
which make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clearlooking pond
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear
and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of
all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of
stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily
barred with iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old
chapel or church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the
door leading to it from the house, but I have taken with my Kodak views
of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a very
straggling way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers,
which must be very great. There are but few houses close at hand, one
being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a

at hand, one
being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a
private lunatic asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds.”

When I had finished, he said:--

“I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and
to live in a new house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable
in a day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I
rejoice that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles
love not to think that our bones may be amongst the common dead. I seek
not gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine
and sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer
young; and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead,
is not attuned to mirth.

my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead,
is not attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken;
the shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when I may.”

Somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else it was
that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine.Somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else it was
that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found opened naturally
at England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I
found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I

g at it I
found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I
noticed that one was near London on the east side, manifestly where his
new estate was situated; the other two were Exeter, and Whitby on the
Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned. “Aha!”
he said; “still at your books? Good! But you must not work always.
Come; I am informed that your supper is ready.” He took my arm, and
we went into the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready
on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on
his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and
chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the last evening,
and the Count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions on everyt evening,
and the Count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions on every
conceivable subject, hour after hour. I felt that it was getting very
late indeed, but I did not say anything, for I felt under obligation to
meet my host’s wishes in every way. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep
yesterday had fortified me; but I could not help experiencing that
chill which comes over one at the coming of dawn, which is like, in its
way, the turn of the tide. They say that people who are near death die
generally at the change to the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any
one who has, when tired, and tied as it were to his post, experienced
this change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once we heard
the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the

we heard
the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the
clear morning air; Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

“Why, there is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by
us,” and, with a courtly bow, he left me.

I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little
to notice; my window opened into the courtyard; all I could see was
the warm grey quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting
too diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first,_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting
too diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first,

getting
too diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first,
for there is something so strange about this place and all in it that
I cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-existence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak
with, and he!--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the
place. Let me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to
bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am
lost. Let me say at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up.

ew hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window,
and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the Count’s voice saying to me, “Good morning.” I started,
for it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the
glass covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself
slightly, but did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the
Count’s salutation, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been
mistaken. This time there could be no error, for the man was close to
me, and I could see him over my shoulder. But there was no reflection
of him in the mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed; but there
was no sign of a man in it, except myself.om behind me was displayed; but there
was no sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and,
coming on the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase
that vague feeling of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is
near; but at that instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the
blood was trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I
did so half round to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw
my face, his eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly
made a grab at my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string
of beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for
the fury passed so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever
there.

the fury passed so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever
there.

“Take care,” he said, “take care how you cut yourself. It is more
dangerous than you think in this country.” Then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on: “And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief. It is a foul bauble of man’s vanity. Away with it!” and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones
of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case
or the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal.

When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could

f metal.When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could

f metal.

When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could
not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange
that as yet I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very
peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle.
I went out on the stairs and found a room looking towards the south.
The view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every
opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the very edge of a terrible
precipice. A stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet
without touching anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of
green tree-tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm.
Here and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges
through the forests.

e are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges
through the forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen the view
I explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!

CHAPTER III.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal/ (_continued_).

When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over
me. I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out
of every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other things. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved muchafter a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
anything in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done.
I am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain: that it is no use making my ideas known
to the Count. He knows well that I am imprisoned; and as he has done
it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only
deceive me if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see,
my only plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and
my eyes open. I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my

self, and
my eyes open. I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my
own fears, or else I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so,
I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly come
to this conclusion when I heard the great door below shut, and knew
that the Count had returned. He did not come at once into the library,
so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making the bed.
This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along thought--that
there were no servants in the house. When later I saw him through the
chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the dining-room,
I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these menial offices,
surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them. This gave meoffices,
surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them. This gave me
a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it must have been
the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that brought me here.
This is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it mean that he could
control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand in silence.
How was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the coach had some
terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of the
garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good
woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a comfort and a
strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing which I have
been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous should in a time

h I have
been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous should in a time
of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there is something in
the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium, a tangible
help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some time, if it
may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up my mind about
it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as
it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I
turn the conversation that way. I must be very careful, however, not to
awake his suspicion.

_Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few
questions on Transylvanian history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especiallyo the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially
of battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said “we,”
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could
put down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. He
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I

s hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

“We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from
Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their
Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe,
ay, and of Asia and Africa, too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found
the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of thoseg flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia, had mated with the devils in
the desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great
as Attila, whose blood is in these veins?” He held up his arms. “Is
it a wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that
when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured
his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that
when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he
found us here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was
completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the
Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us

ward, the
Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us
for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land;
ay, and more than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as
the Turks say, ‘water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.’ Who more gladly
than we throughout the Four Nations received the ‘bloody sword,’ or at
its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was
redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of Cassova, when the
flags of the Wallach and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent;
who was it but one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube
and beat the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe
was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold hisindeed! Woe
was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his
people to the Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it
not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in
a later age again and again brought his forces over the great river
into Turkey-land; who, when he was beaten back, came again, and again,
and again, though he had to come alone from the bloody field where
his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could
ultimately triumph? They said that he thought only of himself. Bah!
what good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without
a brain and heart to conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of
Mohacs, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were

battle of
Mohacs, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were
amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook that we were not
free. Ah, young sir, the Szekelys--and the Dracula as their heart’s
blood, their brains, and their swords--can boast a record that mushroom
growths like the Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach. The
warlike days are over. Blood is too precious a thing in these days of
dishonourable peace; and the glories of the great races are as a tale
that is told.”

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._ this
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the “Arabian Nights,” for
everything has to break off at cock-crow--or like the ghost of Hamlet’s
father.)

verything has to break off at cock-crow--or like the ghost of Hamlet’s
father.)verything has to break off at cock-crow--or like the ghost of Hamlet’s
father.)

_12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified
by books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must
not confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own
observation or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the
matters I had been examined in at Lincoln’s Inn. There was a certain
method in the Count’s inquires, so I shall try to put them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors, or more.
I told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not
be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as
only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to
militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and
went on to ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one
man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in
case local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by
any chance mislead him, so he said:--

“I shall illustrate.

that I might not by
any chance mislead him, so he said:--“I shall illustrate.

that I might not by
any chance mislead him, so he said:--

“I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from
under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far
from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London.
Good! Now here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange
that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead
of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest
might be served save my wish only; and as one of London resident might,
perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve I went thus
afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest.
Now, suppose I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to

interest.
Now, suppose I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to
Newcastle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it
could with more ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?” I
answered that certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors
had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be
done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the client,
simply placing himself in the hands of one man, could have his wishes
carried out by him without further trouble.

“But,” said he, “I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?”

“Of course,” I replied; “and such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person.”

ess, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person.”ess, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person.”

“Good!” he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,
and he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made
a wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of
or foresee. For a man who was never in the country, and who did not
evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen
were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which
he had spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books

of which
he had spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

“Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any other?” It was with some bitterness in my heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity
of sending letters to anybody.

“Then write now, my young friend,” he said, laying a heavy hand on my
shoulder; “write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now.”

“Do you wish me to stay so long?” I asked, for my heart grew cold at
the thought.

“I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that some one should come on his

n your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that some one should come on his
behalf, it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. I
have not stinted. Is it not so?”n your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that some one should come on his
behalf, it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. I
have not stinted. Is it not so?”

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins’s interest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count
Dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it
I could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them,
but in his own smooth, resistless way:--

“I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of
things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please

scourse of
things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please
your friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to
getting home to them. Is it not so?” As he spoke he handed me three
sheets of notepaper and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest
foreign post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet
smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red under-lip, I
understood as well as if he had spoken that I should be careful what I
wrote, for he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only
formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also
to Mina, for to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle
the Count, if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I satuld puzzle
the Count, if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat
quiet, reading a book whilst the Count wrote several notes, referring
as he wrote them to some books on his table. Then he took up my two
and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials, after
which, the instant the door had closed behind him, I leaned over and
looked at the letters, which were face down on the table. I felt no
compunction in doing so, for under the circumstances I felt that I
should protect myself in every way I could.

One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The
Crescent, Whitby; another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to
Coutts & Co., London, and the fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth.

o., London, and the fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in
my seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been
and to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter
in his hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and
stamped them carefully, and then, turning to me, said:--

“I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private
this evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish.” At the
door he turned, and after a moment’s pause said:--

“Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with
all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any“Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with
all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any

you with
all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. It is old, and has
many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely.
Be warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do,
then haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will
then be safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then”----He
finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands
as if he were washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to
whether any dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible
net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing round me.

_Later._--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question.

--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed--I imagine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing
any sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look
out towards the south. There was some sense of freedom in the vast
expanse, inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow
darkness of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was
indeed in prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though
it were of the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence
tell on me. It is destroying my nerve.eginning to feel this nocturnal existence
tell on me. It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and
am full of all sorts of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is
ground for any terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over
the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was
almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became
melted, and the shadows in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness.
The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in
every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window my eye was caught by
something moving a storey below me, and somewhat to my left, where I
imagined, from the lie of the rooms, that the windows of the Count’s
own room would look out.

m the lie of the rooms, that the windows of the Count’s
own room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep,
stone-mullioned, and though weather-worn, was still complete; but it
was evidently many a day since the case had been there. I drew back
behind the stonework, and looked carefully out.

What I saw was the Count’s head coming out from the window. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his
back and arms. In any case, I could not mistake the hands which I had
had so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed
to repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge fromngs changed
to repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from
the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful
abyss, _face down_, with his cloak spreading out around him like
great wings. At first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was
some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept
looking, and it could be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp
the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of
years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards
with considerable speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the
semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering

t in the
semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; I am
encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of....

_15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count go out in his lizard
fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down,
and a good deal to the left. He vanished into some hole or window. When
his head had disappeared I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity
to explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the
room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all lockedback to the
room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked
as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went
down the stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I
found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great
chains; but the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must
be in the Count’s room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so
that I may get it and escape. I went on to make a thorough examination
of the various stairs and passages, and to try the doors that opened
from them. One or two small rooms near the hall were open, but there
was nothing to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and
moth-eaten. At last, however, I found one door at the top of a stairway

age and
moth-eaten. At last, however, I found one door at the top of a stairway
which, though it seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure.
I tried it harder, and found that it was not really locked, but that
the resistance came from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat,
and the heavy door rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which
I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts
forced it back so that I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle
further to the right than the rooms I knew and a story lower down. From
the windows I could see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south
of the castle, the windows of the end room looking out both west and
south. On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great
precipice.south. On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great
precipice. The castle was built on the corner of a great rock, so that
on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed
here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently
light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be guarded,
were secured. To the west was a great valley, and then, rising far
away, great jagged mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer
rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks
and crevices and crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion
of the castle occupied in bygone days, for the furniture had more air
of comfort than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the

more air
of comfort than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the
yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. My
lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I
was glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the
place which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was
better than living alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the
presence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much

ittle oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It
is nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, unless my
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have powers of their own
which mere “modernity” cannot kill._Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I
am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for: that I may
not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely
it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this

n surely
it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone
I can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. I begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant
when he made Hamlet say:--

“My tablets! quick, my tablets!
    ’Tis meet that I put it down,” etc.,

for now, feeling as though my own brain was unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

The Count’s mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold
upon me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book
and pen in my pocket, I felt sleepy. The Count’s warning came into my
mind, but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of sleep was
upon me, and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The
soft moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of
freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where of old ladies had sat andt to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where of old ladies had sat and
sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that, as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring
for the dust, composed myself for sleep.

I suppose I must have fallen asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all
that followed was startlingly real--so real that now, sitting here in
the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the least believe
that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,

since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,
my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of
dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. They came close to me and looked at me for some
time and then whispered together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes, that seemed to
be almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great, wavy masses of golden hair and
eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and toden hair and
eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to
know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not recollect
at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth, that
shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was
something about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same
time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that
they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this
down, lest some day it should meet Mina’s eyes and cause her pain;
but it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all three
laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound
never could have come through the softness of human lips. It was like

the sound
never could have come through the softness of human lips. It was like
the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on
by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the
other two urged her on. One said:--

“Go on! You are first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to
begin.” The other added:--

“He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all.” I lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly
under the lashes. The fair girl went on her knees and bent over me,
fairly gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both
thrilling and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually
licked her lips like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the
moisture shining on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped
the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went
below the range of my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my
throat. Then she paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her
tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath
on my neck.

ongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath
on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one’s flesh
does when the hand that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I
could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the supersensitive
skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching
and pausing there. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and
waited--waited with beating heart.

But at that instant another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily
I saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant’s power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, then and with
giant’s power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. But the Count! Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even
in the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red
light in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind
them. His face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like
drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like
a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he
hurled the woman from him, and then motioned to the others, as though
he were beating them back; it was the same imperious gesture that I
had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost a

e that I
had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost a
whisper, seemed to cut through the air and then ring round the room, as
he said:--

“How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him
when I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man belongs to me!
Beware how you meddle with him, or you’ll have to deal with me.” The
fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

“You yourself never loved; you never love!” On this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

nt turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

“Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it
not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him, you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work
to be done.”“Are we to have nothing to-night?” said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward and opened it. If
my ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful

ghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

Then the horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.

CHAPTER IV.

JONATHAN HARKER’S JOURNAL--_continued._

I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the Count must
have carried me here. I tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid
by in a manner which was not my habit.h as that my clothes were folded and laid
by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and
I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to
bed, and many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may
have been evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause
or another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof.
Of one thing I am glad: if it was that the Count carried me here and
undressed me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are
intact. I am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he
would not have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look
round this room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now

s I look
round this room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now
a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful
women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
I _must_ know the truth. When I got to the doorway at the top of the
stairs, I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the
bolt of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the
inside. I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me
in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me
in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work

t asked me
in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work
here was nearly done and that I should start for home within a few
days, another that I was starting on the next morning from the time
of the letter, and the third that I had left the castle and arrived
at Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present
state of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count
whilst I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to
excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know
too much, and that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my
only chance is to prolong my opportunities. Something may occur which
will give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that

ccur which
will give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that
gathering wrath which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from
him. He explained to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that my
writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured
me with so much impressiveness that he would countermand the later
letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case
chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would
have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in
with his views, and asked him what dates I should put on the letters.
He calculated a minute, and then said:--

“The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29.”

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

June 19, and the third June
29.”

I know now the span of my life. God help me!“The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29.”

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

June 19, and the third June
29.”

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

_28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able
to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are
encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of
them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. There are thousands
of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and
call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany
tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted. I have already spoken to them through my window to begin an
acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, I could not understand any more than I could
their spoken language....

I have written the letters. Mina’s is in shorthand, and I simply
ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my
situation, but without the horrors which I may only surmise. It would
shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her.
Should the letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my
secret or the extent of my knowledge....

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window

wledge....I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window

wledge....

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted.
The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then
put them in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study and
began to read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here....

The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two letters:--

“The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!”--he must have looked at
it--“one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other”--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and

er”--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--“the
other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It
is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us.” And he calmly held
letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed.
Then he went on:--

“The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that
unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?” He
held out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute

ilence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute
later I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, his
coming wakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been
sleeping, he said:“So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest.
I may not have the pleasure to talk to-night, since there are many
labours to me; but you will sleep, I pray.” I passed to my room and
went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has
its own calms.

_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket,

de myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket,
so that I might write in case I should get an opportunity; but again a
surprise, again a shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact, all
that might be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and
pondered a while, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made
search of my portmanteau and in the wardrobe where I had placed my
clothes.

The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed

villainy....

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses’ feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard.
With joy I hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-waggons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great, nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through
the main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a
shock: my door was fastened on the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me

n the outside.Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me

n the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the “hetman” of the Szgany came
out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which
they laughed. Henceforth, no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away.
The leiter-waggons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. When
they were all unloaded and backed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse’s head. Shortly afterwards I

ting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse’s head. Shortly afterwards I
heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.

_24 June, before morning._--Last night the Count left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dared, I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window which opened south. I
thought I would watch for the Count, for there is something going on.
The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle, and are doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away, muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be to the end of
some ruthless villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count’s window. I drew back and watchedI had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count’s window. I drew back and watched

when I saw
something coming out of the Count’s window. I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me
to find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he
will allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local
people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut
up here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law

I am shut
up here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law
which is even a criminal’s right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count’s return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at the window. Then I began to notice that there were some
quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered
in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense
of soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more
fully the aerial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder itSomething made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it

ogs somewhere
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it
seemed to ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new
shapes to the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself
struggling to awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul
was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to
answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced
the dust, and the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into
the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they gathered till they seemed
to take dim phantom shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in full
possession of my senses, and ran screaming from the place. The phantom
shapes, which were becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams,

phantom
shapes, which were becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams,
were those of the three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and
felt somewhat safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and
where the lamp was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the
Count’s room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and
then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With
a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of
a woman. I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between
the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding herbetween
the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. When she saw my face at the window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

“Monster, give me my child!”

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the
same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair
and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of
extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I
could not see her, I could hear the beating of her naked hands against
the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of
the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper.

the tower, I heard the voice of
the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to
be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. Before many
minutes had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when
liberated, through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

What shall I do? What can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful
thrall of night and gloom and fear?

_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When

the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When
the sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great
gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to
me as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me
as if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I
must take action of some sort while the courage of the day is upon me.
Last night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that
fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from
the earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen
the Count in the daylight.

in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen
the Count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake,
that he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his
room! But there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way
for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not another body go? I have seen him myself crawl from his
window; why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall
risk it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man’s death is not a
calf’s, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and

help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

_Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and, God helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order.
I went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south
side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs
round the building on this side. The stones were big and roughly cut,
and the mortar had by process of time been washed away between them.
I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked
down once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth
would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I

e awful depth
would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I
knew pretty well the direction and distance of the Count’s window, and
made for it as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities
available. I did not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and
the time seemed ridiculously short till I found myself standing on
the windowsill and trying to raise up the sash. I was filled with
agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through
the window. Then I looked round for the Count, but, with surprise and
gladness, made a discovery. The room was empty! It was barely furnished
with odd things, which seemed to have never been used; the furniture
was something the same style as that in the south rooms, and was
covered with dust.something the same style as that in the south rooms, and was
covered with dust. I looked for the key, but it was not in the lock,
and I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great
heap of gold in one corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and
Austrian, and Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a
film of dust, as though it had lain long in the ground. None of it that
I noticed was less than three hundred years old. There were also chains
and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain.

f my search, I must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only
lit by loopholes in the heavy masonry. At the bottom there was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage the
smell grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door
which stood ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had
evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two
places were steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently beennd in two
places were steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been
dug over, and the earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those
which had been brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I
made search for any further outlet, but there was none. Then I went
over every inch of the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down
even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so
was dread to my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw nothing
except fragments of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third,
however, I made a discovery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on
a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep,

all, on
a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep,
I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without
the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through
all their pallor, and the lips were as red as ever. But there was no
sign of movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. I bent
over him, and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not
have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in
a few hours. By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes
here and there. I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I
went to search I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were,
such a look of hate, though unconscious of me or my presence, that

h they were,
such a look of hate, though unconscious of me or my presence, that
I fled from the place, and leaving the Count’s room by the window,
crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my own chamber, I threw
myself panting upon the bed and tried to think...._29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave
the castle by the same window, and in my clothes. As he went down the
wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that
I might destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man’s
hand would have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return,
for I feared to see those weird sisters. I came back to the library,
and read there till I fell asleep.

weird sisters. I came back to the library,
and read there till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

“To-morrow, my friend, we must part. You return to your beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come
the Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come
some Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and
shall bear you to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina
to Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Dracula.” I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.

f you at Castle
Dracula.” I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so I asked him point-blank:--

“Why may I not go to-night?”

“Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission.”

“But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once.” He
smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew there was
some trick behind his smoothness. He said:--

“And your baggage?”

“I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time.”

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub
my eyes, it seemed so real:--“And your baggage?”

“I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time.”

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub
my eyes, it seemed so real:--

“You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit

real:--

“You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit
is that which rules our _boyars_: ‘Welcome the coming, speed the
parting guest.’ Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall
you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going,
and that you so suddenly desire it. Come!” With a stately gravity, he,
with the lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly
he stopped.

“Hark!”

Close at hand came the howling of many wolves. It was almost as if the
sound sprang up at the raising of his hand, just as the music of a
great orchestra seems to leap under the baton of the conductor. After a
pause of a moment, he proceeded in his stately way, to the door, drew

r. After a
pause of a moment, he proceeded in his stately way, to the door, drew
back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw
it open.

To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew
louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their
blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. I
knew that to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless. With
such allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. But still the
door continued slowly to open, and only the Count’s body stood in the
gap. Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and the meansd in the
gap. Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and the means
of my doom; I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation.
There was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the
Count, and as a last chance I cried out:--

“Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!” and covered my face with
my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of
his powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts
clanged and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their
places.

In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his
hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile
that Judas in hell might be proud of.

of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile
that Judas in hell might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whispering at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears
deceived me, I heard the voice of the Count:--

“Back, back, to your own place! Your time is not yet come. Wait. Have
patience. To-morrow night, to-morrow night, is yours!” There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw
without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. Is it then so near
the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

ear
the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

_30 June, morning._--These may be the last words I ever write in this
diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I woke threw myself
on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me
ready.At last I felt that subtle change in the air and knew that the morning
had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down the hall. I had seen
that the door was unlocked and now escape was before me. With hands
that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled and pulled
at the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its

and pulled
at the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left
the Count.

Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I
determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count’s
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east window and scrambled
down the wall, as before, into the Count’s room. It was empty, but
that was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap
of gold remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the
winding stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I knew now
well enough where to find the monster I sought.

to the old chapel. I knew now
well enough where to find the monster I sought.to the old chapel. I knew now
well enough where to find the monster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the
lid was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in
their places to be hammered home. I knew I must search the body for
the key, so I raised the lid and laid it back against the wall; and
then I saw something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay
the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half-renewed, for the
white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks
were fuller, and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth
was redder than ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which
trickled from the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck.

od, which
trickled from the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck.
Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the
lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole
awful creature were simply gorged with blood; he lay like a filthy
leech, exhausted with his repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to
touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had
to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body a
banquet in a similar way to those horrid three. I felt all over the
body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked
at the Count. There was a mocking smile on the bloated face which
seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I was helping to transferface which
seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I was helping to transfer
to London, where, perhaps for centuries to come, he might, amongst its
teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever
widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very
thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world
of such a monster. There was no lethal weapon at hand, but I seized a
shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the cases, and lifting
it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the hateful face. But as I
did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full upon me, with all their
blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyse me, and the
shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a

me, and the
shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a
deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my hand across the
box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge
of the lid, which fell over again, and hid the horrid thing from my
sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face, blood-stained
and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its own in the
nethermost hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As
I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices
coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and
the cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Countwheels and
the cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count
had spoken were coming. With a last look round and at the box which
contained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count’s
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
With strained ears I listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of
the key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door.
There must have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key
for one of the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet
tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo.
I turned to run down again towards the vault, where I might find the
new entrance; but at that moment there seemed to come a violent puff of

find the
new entrance; but at that moment there seemed to come a violent puff of
wind, and the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set
the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found
that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of
doom was closing round me more closely.

As I write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes,
with their freight of earth. There is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again
along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key

them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key withdrawn; then another door opens and
shuts; I hear the creaking of lock and bolt.

Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the
distance.

I am alone in the castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina is a
woman, and there is naught in common. They are devils of the Pit!I am alone in the castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina is a
woman, and there is naught in common. They are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle
wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold
with me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dreadful
place.

And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away

ful
place.

And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

At least God’s mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!

CHAPTER V.

_Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._

“_9 May._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have been simply overwhelmed
with work. The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes
trying. I am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can
walk together freely and build our castles in the air. I have been
working very hard lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan’s

I have been
working very hard lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan’s
studies, and I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When
we are married I shall be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can
stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to say in this
way and write it out for him on the typewriter, at which I am also
practising very hard. He and I sometimes write letters in shorthand,
and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I
am with you I shall keep a diary in the same way. I don’t mean one of
those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries,
but a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I
do not suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but itclined. I
do not suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it
is not intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there
is in it anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book.
I shall try to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and
writing descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told
that, with a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that
one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I shall tell you
all my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines
from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in
about a week. I am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to
see strange countries, I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall
ever see them together.

countries, I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall
ever see them together. There is the ten o’clock bell ringing. Goodbye.

“Your loving
        “/Mina./

“Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything
for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???”

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray._

“_17, Chatham Street,

“Wednesday._

“My dearest Mina,--

“I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent.
I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only
your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really
nothing to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a
good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park.and we go a
good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park.
As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who was
with me at the last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales.
That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma
get on very well together; they have so many things to talk about in
common. We met some time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if
you were not already engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_,
being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and really
clever. Just fancy! He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense
lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to
me, and he called here to see us, and often comes now. I think he is

uced him to
me, and he called here to see us, and often comes now. I think he is
one of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He
seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he
must have over his patients. He has a curious habit of looking one
straight in the face, as if trying to read one’s thoughts. He tries
this on very much with me, but I flatter myself he has got a tough
nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do you ever try to read your
own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not a bad study, and gives
you more trouble than you can well fancy if you have never tried it.
He says that I afford him a curious psychological study, and I humbly
think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress tohumbly
think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to
be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a bore. That is slang
again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day. There, it is all
out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were
_children_; we have slept together and eaten together; and laughed
and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like to
speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn’t you guess? I love him. I am blushing
as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so
in words. But, oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There,
that does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.

the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the letter, and I don’t want to stop, for I _do so_
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in
your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness.

“/Lucy./

“P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Good-night again.

“L.”

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray._

“24 _May._

“My dearest Mina,--

“Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter! It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

“My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.

ympathy.“My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.

ympathy.

“My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.
Here am I, who will be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! /Three/ proposals in one day! Isn’t it awful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don’t know what to do with myself. And three proposals!
But, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell any of the girls, or they would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain. You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged
and are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can

e engaged
and are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must
keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan.
You will tell him, because I would, if I were in your place, certainly
tell Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don’t you
think so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their
wives, to be quite as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are
not always quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number
one came just before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the
lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was
very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidentlyead. He was
very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently
been schooling himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered
them; but he almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men
don’t generally do when they are cool, and then when he wanted to
appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way that made me
nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told
me how dear I was to him, though he had known me so little, and what
his life would be with me to help and cheer him. He was going to tell
me how unhappy he would be if I did not care for him, but when he saw
me cry he said that he was a brute and would not add to my present
trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I could love him in time; and

y present
trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I could love him in time; and
when I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation
he asked me if I cared already for any one else. He put it very nicely,
saying that he did not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to
know, because if a woman’s heart was free a man might have hope. And
then, Mina, I felt it a sort of duty to tell him that there was some
one. I only told him that much, and then he stood up, and he looked
very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in his and said he
hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever wanted a friend I must count
him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can’t help crying; and you must
excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very

nd you must
excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very
nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn’t at all a happy thing when
you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know loves you honestly, going
away and looking all broken-hearted, and to know that, no matter what
he may say at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life. My
dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so miserable, though I am so
happy.“_Evening._

“Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number
two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas,
and he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that
he has been to so many places and has had such adventures.

lmost impossible that
he has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise
with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards
that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know
now what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love
me. No, I don’t, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and
Arthur never told any, and yet----My dear, I am somewhat previous.
Mr. Quincey P. Morris found me alone. It seems that a man always does
find a girl alone. No, he doesn’t, for Arthur tried twice to _make_
a chance, and I helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it
now. I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn’t always speak

to say it
now. I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn’t always speak
slang--that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them,
for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found
out that it amused me to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I
was present, and there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny
things. I am afraid, my dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits
exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is a way slang has.
I do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang; I do not know if
Arthur likes it, as I have never heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr.
Morris sat down beside me and looked as happy and jolly as he could,
but I could see all the same that he was very nervous. He took my handhe could,
but I could see all the same that he was very nervous. He took my hand
in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

“‘Miss Lucy, I know I ain’t good enough to regulate the fixin’s of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won’t
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road
together driving in double harness?’

“Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn’t seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward, so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that
I wasn’t broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken
in a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing

d spoken
in a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing
so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him.
He really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn’t help
feeling a bit serious, too--I know, Mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though I couldn’t help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of

in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

“‘Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is,
I’ll never trouble you a hair’s breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.’

“My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy
of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think

earted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think
this is a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt
very badly. Why can’t they let a girl marry three men, or as many as
want her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not
say it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look
into Mr. Morris’s brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

“‘Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that
he even loves me.’ I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite
a light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took
mine--I think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

“‘That’s my brave girl. It’s better worth being late for a chance of

ty way:--“‘That’s my brave girl. It’s better worth being late for a chance of

ty way:--

“‘That’s my brave girl. It’s better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. Don’t
cry, my dear. If it’s for me, I’m a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that other fellow doesn’t know his happiness, well,
he’d better look for it soon, or he’ll have to deal with me. Little
girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that’s rarer
than a lover; it’s more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I’m going to have
a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won’t you give me
one kiss? It’ll be something to keep off the darkness now and then.
You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must
be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love

ow--he must
be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love
him--hasn’t spoken yet.’ That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave
and sweet of him, and noble, too, to a rival--wasn’t it?--and he so
sad; so I leant over and kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in
his, and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing
very much--he said:--

“‘Little girl, I hold your hand, and you’ve kissed me, and if these
things don’t make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for your
sweet honesty to me, and good-bye.’ He wrung my hand, and taking up
his hat, went straight out of the room without looking back, without a
tear or a quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must
a man like that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who

why must
a man like that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who
would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were
free--only I don’t want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I
feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it;
and I don’t wish to tell of the number three till it can all be happy.“Ever your loving

“/Lucy./

“P.S.--Oh, about number three--I needn’t tell you of number three,
need I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from
his coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don’t know what I have done
to deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not

I have done
to deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not
ungrateful for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a lover,
such a husband, and such a friend.

“Good-bye.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

(Kept in phonograph.)

_25 April._--Ebb tide in appetite to-day. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be
worth the doing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing
was work, I went down amongst the patients. I picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. He is so quaint in his ideas, and
so unlike the normal lunatic, that I have determined to understand him
as well as I can.

ke the normal lunatic, that I have determined to understand him
as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get nearer than ever before to the
heart of his mystery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to
making myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner
of doing it there was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seemed to
wish to keep him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid
with the patients as I would the mouth of hell. (_Mem._, under what
circumstances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?) _Omnia Romae
vernalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be anything
behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M.

t afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--R. M.

t afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical
strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom ending in some fixed
idea which I cannot make out. I presume that the sanguine temperament
itself and the disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished
finish; a possibly dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish.
In selfish men caution is as secure an armour for their foes as for
themselves. What I think of on this point is, when self is the fixed
point the centripetal force is balanced with the centrifugal: when
duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed point, the latter force is paramount,
and only accident or a series of accidents can balance it.

_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon.

ent or a series of accidents can balance it.

_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

“_25 May._

“My dear Art,--

“We’ve told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another’s wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. Won’t you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the
Korea, Jack Seward. He’s coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to

ingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. Come!“Yours, as ever and always,
        “/Quincey P. Morris./”

_Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._

“_26 May._

“Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

“/Art./”

CHAPTER VI.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and

Journal./

_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Crescent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the
Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near
the harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through
which the view seems, somehow, farther away than it really is. The
valley is beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on
the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are
near enough to see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from
us--are all red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow,
like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin

anyhow,
like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin
of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene
of part of “Marmion,” where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a
most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic
bits; there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the
windows. Between it and the town there is another church, the parish
one, round which is a big graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is,
to my mind, the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the
town, and has a full view of the harbour and all up the bay to where
the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea. It descends
so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen away,. It descends
so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen away,
and some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the
stonework of the graves stretches out over the sandy pathway far below.
There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and
people go and sit there all day long looking at the beautiful view and
enjoying the breeze. I shall come and sit here very often myself and
work. Indeed, I am writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening
to the talk of three old men who are sitting beside me. They seem to
do nothing all day but sit up here and talk.

The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it,
in the middle of which is a lighthouse.

with a curve outwards at the end of it,
in the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along
outside of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked
inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers
there is a narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.

It is nice at high tide; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind.

h a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he
is coming this way....He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the Greenland fishing
fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady
at the abbey he said very brusquely:--

“I wouldn’t fash masel’ about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don’t say they never was, but I do say that they wasn’t in
my time.

out.
Mind, I don’t say they never was, but I do say that they wasn’t in
my time. They be all very well for comers and trippers an’ the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York
and Leeds that be always eatin’ cured herrin’s an’ drinkin’ tea an’
lookin’ out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel’ who’d
be bothered tellin’ lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk.” I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something
about whale-fishing in the old days. He was just settling himself to
begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and
said:--

“I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My granddaughter doesn’t like

said:--

“I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My granddaughter doesn’t like
to be kept waitin’ when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of ’em; an’, miss, I lack
belly-timber sairly by the clock.”He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could,
down the steps. The steps are a great feature of the place. They lead
from the town up to the church; there are hundreds of them--I do not
know how many--and they wind up in a delicate curve; the slope is so
gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they
must originally have had something to do with the Abbey. I shall go
home too. Lucy went out visiting with her mother, and as they were only
duty calls, I did not go. They will be home by this.

er, and as they were only
duty calls, I did not go. They will be home by this.

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come
and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and I should
think must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not
admit anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can’t out-argue them
he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his
views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has
got a beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old
men did not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat
down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love

hen we sat
down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love
with her on the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict
her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of the
legends, and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. I must try to
remember it and put it down:--“It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that’s what it be, an’
nowt else. These bans an’ wafts an’ boh-ghosts an’ bar-guests and
bogles an’ all anent them is only fit to set bairns an’ dizzy women
a-belderin’. They be nowt but air-blebs! They, an’ all grims an’ signs
an’ warnin’s, be all invented by parsons an’ illsome beuk-bodies an’
railway touters to skeer an’ scunner hafflin’s, an’ to get folks to
do somethin’ that they don’t other incline to.

er hafflin’s, an’ to get folks to
do somethin’ that they don’t other incline to. It makes me ireful to
think o’ them. Why, it’s them that, not content with printin’ lies on
paper an’ preachin’ them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin’ them
on the tombsteans. Look here all round you in what airt ye will; all
them steans, holdin’ up their heads as well as they can out of their
pride, is acant--simply tumblin’ down with the weight o’ the lies wrote
on them, ‘Here lies the body’ or ‘Sacred to the memory’ wrote on all
of them, an’ yet in nigh half of them there bean’t no bodies at all;
an’ the memories of them bean’t cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin’ but lies of one kind or another! My

much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin’ but lies of one kind or another! My
gog, but it’ll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment, when they
come tumblin’ up here in their death-sarks, all jouped together an’
tryin’ to drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was;
some of them trimmlin’ and ditherin’, with their hands that dozzened
an’ slippy from lyin’ in the sea that they can’t even keep their grup
o’ them.”

I could see from the old fellow’s self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was
“showing off,” so I put in a word to keep him going:--

“Oh, Mr. Swales, you can’t be serious. Surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?”

“Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin’ where they make

rong?”“Oh, Mr. Swales, you can’t be serious. Surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?”

“Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin’ where they make

rong?”

“Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin’ where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl
be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only
lies. Now look you here; you come here a stranger, an’ you see this
kirk-garth.” I nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did
not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with
the church. He went on: “And you consate that all these steans be aboon
folk that be happed here, snod an’ snog?” I assented again. “Then that
be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds
that be toom as old Dun’s ’bacca-box on Friday night.” He nudged one of
his companions, and they all laughed. “And my gog! how could they be

ged one of
his companions, and they all laughed. “And my gog! how could they be
otherwise? Look at that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank; read it!”
I went over and read:--

“Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast
of Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30.” When I came back Mr. Swales went
on:--

“Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the
coast of Andres! an’ you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name
ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above”--he pointed
northwards--“or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lostl-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost
in the _Lively_ off Greenland in ’20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in
the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in ’50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they’d be jommlin’ an’
jostlin’ one another that way that it ’ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we’d be at one another from daylight to dark, an’
tryin’ to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis.” This
was evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and

lis.” This
was evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and
his cronies joined in with gusto.

“But,” I said, “surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?”

“Well, what else be they tombsteans for? Answer me that, miss!”

“To please their relatives, I suppose.”

“To please their relatives, you suppose!” This he said with intense
scorn. “How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?” He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on

lies?” He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. “Read the
lines on that thruffstean,” he said. The letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--“Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb is erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. ‘He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.’
Really, Mr. Swales, I don’t see anything very funny in that!” She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

“Ye don’t see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that’s because ye don’t gawm

severely.

“Ye don’t see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that’s because ye don’t gawm
the sorrowin’ mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk’d--a regular lamiter he was--an’ he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn’t get an insurance she put
on his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket
that they had for scarin’ the crows with. ’Twarn’t for crows then, for
it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That’s the way he fell off
the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I’ve often
heard him say masel’ that he hoped he’d go to hell, for his mother was
so pious that she’d be sure to go to heaven, an’ he didn’t want to
addle where she was. Now isn’t that stean at any rate”--he hammered it

t want to
addle where she was. Now isn’t that stean at any rate”--he hammered it
with his stick as he spoke--“a pack of lies? and won’t it make Gabriel
keckle when Geordie comes pantin’ up the grees with the tombstean
balanced on his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!”

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

“Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide.”“Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide.”

“That won’t harm ye, my pretty; an’ it may make poor Geordie gladsome
to have so trim a lass sittin’ on his lap. That won’t hurt ye. Why,
I’ve sat here off an’ on for nigh twenty years past, an’ it hasn’t
done me no harm. Don’t ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that

’ it hasn’t
done me no harm. Don’t ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that
doesn’ lie there either! It’ll be time for ye to be getting scart when
ye see the tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a
stubble-field. There’s the clock, an’ I must gang. My service to ye,
ladies!” And off he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and
their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven’t heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

*       *       *       *       *

_The same day._--I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine.

ere cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine. I see the lights scattered all over the
town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the Abbey. The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey’s hoofs up the paved road below.
The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and farther
along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he
were here.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

n is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he
were here.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get
to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed:
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what is the
object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his
own, but what it is I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a
love of animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that
I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a
quantity that I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness.

break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: “May I have
three days? I shall clear them away.” Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding them with his flies, and the
number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has
used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room.

_1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at
all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the samethem, at
all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same
time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for
when a horrid blowfly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the
room, he caught it, held it exultingly for a few moments between his
finger and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in
his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that
it was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life,
and gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I
must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep
problem in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is
always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses

ch he is
always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses
of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the
totals added in batches again, as though he was “focusing” some account,
as the auditors put it.

_8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary
idea in my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then,
oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your
conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that
I might notice if there were any change. Things remained as they were
except that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He
has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His
means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.

med it. His
means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the
flies by tempting them with his food.med it. His
means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the
flies by tempting them with his food.

_19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

“A kitten, a nice little, sleek, playful kitten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!” I was not unprepared for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and

for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

“Oh, yes I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they?” I shook
my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of
danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him

ich meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.ich meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.

_10 p.m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his

his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

_11 a.m._--The attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. “My belief is,
doctor,” he said, “that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!”

_11 p.m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night; enough to make

them raw!”_11 p.m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night; enough to make

them raw!”

_11 p.m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night; enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The
thought that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and
the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall
have to invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoophagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at

periment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the brain? Had
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch
compared with which Burdon-Sanderson’s physiology or Ferrier’s brain
knowledge would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient cause! I
must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might
turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain,
congenitally?

How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one.

their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great
Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must only wait on
hopeless and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there, a
good, unselfish cause to make me work, that would be indeed happiness.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

use to make me work, that would be indeed happiness.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here;
it is like whispering to one’s self and listening at the same time.
And there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter
from him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the
enclosed had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle
Dracula, and says that he is just starting for home. That is not like
Jonathan; I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too,s not like
Jonathan; I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too,
Lucy, although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of
walking in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we
have decided that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs.
Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of
houses and along the edges of cliffs, and then get suddenly awakened
and fall over with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place.
Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that
her husband, Lucy’s father, had the same habit; that he would get up in
the night and dress himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy
is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her

opped. Lucy
is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her
dresses and how her house is to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for
I do the same, only Jonathan and I will start in life in a very simple
way, and shall have to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is
the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here
very shortly--as soon as he can leave town, for his father is not very
well, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She
wants to take him up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him
the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it is the waiting which disturbs her;
she will be all right when he arrives.

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about

he arrives._27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about

he arrives.

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about
him, though why I should I do not know; but I _do_ wish that he would
write, if it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and
each night I am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the
weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and
the perpetually being awakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am
getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy’s health keeps up.
Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his father, who has
been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him,
but it does not touch her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks
are a lovely rose pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I

r cheeks
are a lovely rose pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I
pray it will all last.

_3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even
to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill.
He surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it
is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much
in her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful._6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
letter. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable
than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The

ng over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The
sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey
mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and
there is a “brool” over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded
in the mist, and seem “men like trees walking.” The fishing-boats are
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

“I want to say something to you, miss.” I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--“I want to say something to you, miss.” I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

“I’m afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked
things I’ve been sayin’ about the dead, and such-like, for weeks past;
but I didn’t mean them, and I want ye to remember that when I’ve gone.
We aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal,
don’t altogether like to think of it, and we don’t want to feel scart of

-hooal,
don’t altogether like to think of it, and we don’t want to feel scart of
it; an’ that’s why I’ve took to makin’ light of it, so that I’d cheer up
my own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain’t afraid of dyin’,
not a bit; only I don’t want to die if I can help it. My time must be
nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any
man to expect; and I’m so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin’
his scythe. Ye see, I can’t get out o’ the habit of caffin’ about it
all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the
Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don’t ye dooal an’
greet, my deary!”--for he saw that I was crying--“if he should come this
very night I’d not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all,come this
very night I’d not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all,
only a waitin’ for somethin’ else than what we’re doin’; and death be
all that we can rightly depend on. But I’m content, for it’s comin’ to
me, my deary, and comin’ quick. It may be comin’ while we be lookin’
and wonderin’. Maybe it’s in that wind out over the sea that’s bringin’
with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!”
he cried suddenly. “There’s something in that wind and in the hoast
beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It’s
in the air; I feel it comin’. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call
comes!” He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes’ silence, he got

His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes’ silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time
kept looking at a strange ship.

“I can’t make her out,” he said; “she’s a Russian, by the look of her;
but she’s knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn’t know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can’t decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn’t mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We’ll hear more of her before

the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We’ll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow.”

CHAPTER VII.

/Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August./

(_Pasted in Mina Murray’s Journal._)

From a Correspondent.

_Whitby._CHAPTER VII.

/Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August./

(_Pasted in Mina Murray’s Journal._)

From a Correspondent.

_Whitby._

One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
August. Saturday evening was as fine as ever was known, and the great
body of holiday-makers set out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,
Robin Hood’s Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips
in the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_
made excursions along the coast, and there was an unusual amount of

carborough_
made excursions along the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
“tripping” both to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till
the afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the East Cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show
of “mares’-tails” high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then
blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked “No. 2: light breeze.” The coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century
has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an
emphatic manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset wasin an
emphatic manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset was
so very beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds,
that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the
old churchyard to enjoy the beauty. Before the sun dipped below the
black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its
downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here
and there masses not large, but seemingly of absolute blackness, in
all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The
experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the “Prelude to the Great Storm” will grace the R.A. and
R.I. walls in May next.

the “Prelude to the Great Storm” will grace the R.A. and
R.I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then
and there that his “cobble” or his “mule,” as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,
which usually “hug” the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The

a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating
swell of the sea,

“As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.”“As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.”

Shortly before ten o’clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep
inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and
the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord
in the great harmony of nature’s silence. A little after midnight came

a discord
in the great harmony of nature’s silence. A little after midnight came
a strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to
carry a strange, faint hollow booming.

Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to realise,
the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. The waves rose in
growing fury, each over-topping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume
swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of
either pier of Whitby Harbour.

rns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of
either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew
with such force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept
their feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It was
found necessary to clear the entire piers from the mass of onlookers,
or else the fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold.
To add to the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog
came drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly
fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort
of imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and
many a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by.my hands of death, and
many a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times
the mist cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the
glare of the lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such
sudden peals of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling
under the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the scenes thus
revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of absorbing interest--the
sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty
masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl
away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail,
running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again the white
wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East Cliff the

the white
wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East Cliff the
new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been tried.
The officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in the
pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea. Once
or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with
gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance of
the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the piers.
As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of joy
from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed to
cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the
searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sailsre long the
searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails
set, apparently the same vessel which had been noticed earlier in the
evening. The wind had by this time backed to the east, and there was a
shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they realised the terrible
danger in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great
flat reef on which so many good ships have from time to time suffered,
and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would be quite
impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. It was
now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in
their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the
schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the

and the
schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the
words of one old salt, “she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only in
hell.” Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than any hitherto--a
mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things like a grey
pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar
of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the
mighty bellows came through the damp oblivion even louder than before.
The rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour mouth across
the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless.
The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the
sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between thenant of the
sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the
piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept
the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained
the safety of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder
ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with
drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the
ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on
all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had found the
harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead man! However, all took
place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner
paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that

he schooner
paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that
accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms
into the south-east corner of the pier jutting under the East Cliff,
known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up
on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of
the “top-hamper” came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very
instant the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from
below, as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from
the bow on to the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the
churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some

ere the
churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some
of the flat tombstones--“thruff-steans” or “through-stones,” as they
call them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the
sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which
seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight.It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier,
as all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed
or were out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty on the
eastern side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier,
was the first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after
scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then

light, after
scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then
turned the light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran
aft, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it and
recoiled at once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to
pique the general curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run.
It is a good way round from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate
Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well
ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found already assembled
on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to
come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boat-man, I was, as your
correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and was one of a small group

as your
correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and was one of a small group
who saw that dead seaman whilst actually lashed to the wheel.

It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which
it was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast
by the binding cords. The poor fellow may have been seated at one
time, but the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through
the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords
with which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note wase cords
with which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was
made of the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of
33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after
making examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two
days. In his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a
little roll of paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The
coastguard said the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the
knots with his teeth. The fact that a coastguard was the first on board
may save some complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for the
coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is the right of the first
civilian entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are

first
civilian entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are
wagging, and one young law student is loudly asserting that the rights
of the owner are already completely sacrificed, his property being held
in contravention of the statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as
emblemship, if not proof, of delegated possession, is held in a _dead
hand_. It is needless to say that the dead steersman has been reverently
removed from the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till
death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the young Casabianca--and
placed in the mortuary to await inquest.

Already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating; the
crowds are scattering homewards, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds.

cattering homewards, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further
details of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in the storm.

_Whitby.__Whitby._

_9 August._--The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. It
turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called
the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with
only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled
with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S.
F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and
formally took possession of the goods consigned to him. The Russian

aboard and
formally took possession of the goods consigned to him. The Russian
consul, too, acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of
the ship, and paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here
to-day except the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of
Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been
made with existing regulations. As the matter is to be a “nine days’
wonder,” they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of
after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog
which landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members
of the S.P.C.A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend
the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to beto befriend
the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be
found; it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be
that it was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is
still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff, belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in the roadway opposite its master’s yard. It had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly slit open as if with a savage claw.

_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been

e claw.

_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been
permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. The greater interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced
at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive
for concealment, I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send
you a rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that this

d with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that this
had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my statement
must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from the dictation of a
clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being
short.

/Log of the “Demeter.”/

_Varna to Whitby._/Log of the “Demeter.”/

_Varna to Whitby._

_Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands, ... two mates,
cook, and myself (captain).

On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs
officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p.m.

On 12 July through Dardanelles.

s. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p.m.

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.

On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky,
was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells

trofsky,
was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells
last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
downcast than ever. All said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than that there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting
very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead.On 17 July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to my cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering behind
the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall, thin man,
who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way, and go
along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when

and go
along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when
he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed. He was
in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid the panic may spread.
To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to
stern.

Later in the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they
evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we should search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep
them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while
the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns;
we left no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes,

lanterns;
we left no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes,
there were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but
said nothing.

_22 July._--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weather. Passed Gibraltar and out through Straits. All well._24 July._--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round

off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
violent. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will
do some violence.

_28 July._--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out.
Hardly know how to set a watch since no one fit to go on. Second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours’ sleep.
Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is
steadier.

_29 July._--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,

d no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,
but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

_30 July._--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both men on watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

_1 August._--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom.er,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than either of them. His stronger
nature seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond
fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They
are Russian, he Roumanian.

_2 August, midnight._--Woke up from few minutes’ sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck,
and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and

d, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deserted us.

_3 August._--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, but
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for
the mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: “_It_ is here; I know
it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out.ike a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind
It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the
air.” And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on: “But It is here, and I’ll find it. It is in the
hold, perhaps, in one of those boxes. I’ll unscrew them one by one and
see. You work the helm.” And, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad, stark,
raving mad, and it’s no use my trying to stop him. He can’t hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as “clay,” and to pull them about is as

hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as “clay,” and to pull them about is as
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can’t steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. “Save me! save me!” he cried, and thenolling and
his face convulsed with fear. “Save me! save me!” he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and
in a steady voice he said: “You had better come too, captain, before it
is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret now. The sea will save me
from Him, and it is all that is left!” Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into the sea. I suppose I know the secret too, now. It
was this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. God help me! How am I to account for all these
horrors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there

ever be?

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there
is sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dared not go
below, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dimness of the night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but the mate was
right to jump overboard. It is better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall
tie my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along
with them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come
good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I
am growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the

tain. I
am growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God
and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no evidence to adduce;
and whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now
none to say. The folk hold almost universally here that the captain
is simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it
is arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the

lready it
is arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the
Esk for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the
Abbey steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The
owners of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I
believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more “mystery of the sea.”

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could
not sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder.

was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to
be like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got
up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time,
and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed.
It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her
will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her
life.

Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. There were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,ple about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth
of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!

_10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst

to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the
way. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat, so that we
stood on it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed
much upset. She was restless and uneasy all the time, and I cannot
but think that her dreaming at night is telling on her. She is quite
odd in one thing: she will not admit to me that there is any cause
for restlessness; or if there be, she does not understand it herself.
There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead
this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, asound dead
this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as
the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for
there was a look of fear and horror on his face that the men said made
them shudder. Poor dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his
dying eyes! Lucy is so sweet and sensitive that she feels influences
more acutely than other people do. Just now she was quite upset by a
little thing which I did not much heed, though I am myself very fond of
animals. One of the men who come up here often to look for the boats
was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him. They are both
quiet persons, and I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark.
During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the

g bark.
During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the
seat with us, but kept a few yards off, barking and howling. Its master
spoke to it gently, and then harshly, and then angrily; but it would
neither come nor cease to make a noise. It was in a sort of fury, with
its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat’s tail when
puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped
down and kicked the dog, and then took it by the scruff of the neck and
half dragged and half threw it on the tombstone on which the seat is
fixed. The moment it touched the stone the poor thing became quiet and
fell all into a tremble. It did not try to get away, but crouched down,
quivering and cowering, and was in such a pitiable state of terror thatd down,
quivering and cowering, and was in such a pitiable state of terror that
I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity,
too, but she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at it in an
agonised sort of way. I greatly fear that she is of too supersensitive
a nature to go through the world without trouble. She will be dreaming
of this to-night, I am sure. The whole agglomeration of things--the ship
steered into port by a dead man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a
crucifix and beads; the touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now
in terror--will all afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so
I shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood’s Bay and
back.

so
I shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood’s Bay and
back. She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.

CHAPTER VIII.

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_Same day, 11 o’clock p.m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that
I have made my diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a
lovely walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think,
to some dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the
lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we forgot
everything, except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the
slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a capital “severe tea” at
Robin Hood’s Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-windowtea” at
Robin Hood’s Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window
right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should
have shocked the “New Woman” with our appetites. Men are more tolerant,
bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to
rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy
was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we
could. The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him
to stay for supper. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with the dusty
miller; I know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I
think that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding
up a new class of curates, who don’t take supper, no matter how they may

reeding
up a new class of curates, who don’t take supper, no matter how they may
be pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep
and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the “New Women” writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or
accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won’t condescend in future to
accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There’s some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the

y to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him._11 August, 3 a.m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my diary....
Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of
fear upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was
dark, so I could not see Lucy’s bed; I stole across and felt for her.
The bed was empty. I lit a match, and found that she was not in the
room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to

t in the
room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to
wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on
some clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was leaving the room
it struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. “Thank God,” I said
to myself, “she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress.” I ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked
in all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling my heart. Finally I came to the hall-door and found it open.
It was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. Thend it open.
It was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The
people of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I
feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no time to
think of what might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all
details. I took a big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was striking
one as I was in the Crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran
along the North Terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure
which I expected. At the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked
across the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don’t know
which--of seeing Lucy in our favourite seat. There was a bright full
moon, with heavy black, driving clouds, which threw the whole scene

bright full
moon, with heavy black, driving clouds, which threw the whole scene
into a fleeting diorama of light and shade as they sailed across. For a
moment or two I could see nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured
St. Mary’s Church and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could
see the ruins of the Abbey coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow
band of light as sharp as a sword-cut moved along, the church and the
churchyard became gradually visible. Whatever my expectation was, it was
not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of
the moon struck a half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the
cloud was too quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light
almost immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stoodon light
almost immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood
behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it
was, whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch
another glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by
the fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East
Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced
that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy’s condition. The
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the Abbey. I must
have gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted
with lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I

ere weighted
with lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I
got almost to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for
I was now close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of
shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over
the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, “Lucy! Lucy!”
and something raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white
face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat.

t I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.t I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly, as usual with her, but
in long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled
the collar of her nightdress close round her throat. Whilst she did so
there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to

night air,
unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet, and then began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradually
she became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and for many other
reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprisedorcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she
was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body
must have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at
waking unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there
was a puddle of water remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with

ere there
was a puddle of water remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as
there are here, steep little closes, or “wynds,” as they call them in
Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes I thought
I should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed oureputation
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walking adventure.
I hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother’s health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

y is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her, and seemed
not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it

t, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.t, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was clear, and the
sun bright and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the
cliff path and joining her at the gate. I felt a little sad myself,
for I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening
we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr
and Mackenzie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than
she has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the

tful than
she has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the
door and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect any
trouble to-night.

_12 August._--My expectations were wrong, for twice during the night
I was awakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her
sleep, to be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went
back to bed under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard
the birds chirping outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was
glad to see, was even better than on the previous morning. All her old
gaiety of manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in
beside me, and told me all about Arthur; I told her how anxious I was
about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded

ous I was
about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can’t alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.ous I was
about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can’t alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
before. Again I woke in the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great,
silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great, whirling circles. Once
or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing
me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the Abbey.

frightened at seeing
me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the Abbey. When I
came back from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping
peacefully. She did not stir again all night.

_14 August._--On the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems
to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for
dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; the red light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old Abbey, and seemed to bathe

d light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old Abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--d light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old Abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--

“His red eyes again! They are just the same.” It was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look
on her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our seat, whereon
was a dark figure seated alone. I was a little startled myself, for it
seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like burning

lf, for it
seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like burning
flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. The red sunlight was
shining on the windows of St. Mary’s Church behind our seat, and as
the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the refraction and
reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. I called Lucy’s
attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start,
but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she was thinking
of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I said
nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early
to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself; I
walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet sadness,self; I
walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet sadness,
for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright
moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the Crescent
was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance up at
our window, and saw Lucy’s head leaning out. I thought that perhaps she
was looking out for me, so I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She
did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then, the moonlight
crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell on the window.
There distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against the side of the
window-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and by her, seated
on the window-sill, was something that looked like a good-sized bird.

r, seated
on the window-sill, was something that looked like a good-sized bird.
I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs, but as I came
into the room she was moving back to her bed, fast asleep, and breathing
heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat, as though to protect it
from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that
the door is locked and the window securely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont,
and there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like.
I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it
is.

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast._15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.

d, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur’s father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later
on in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as
her very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to
protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy’s sleep-walking.

ise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy’s sleep-walking.

_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to
write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother’s hours are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy’s
fading away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when Ithe open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if anything, larger, than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with
red centres. Unless they heal within a day or two, I shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.

_Letter, Samuel F.

day or two, I shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.

_Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Paterson & Co., London._

“_17 August._

“Dear Sirs,--

“Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern
Railway. Same are to be delivered to Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station King’s Cross. The house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.

“You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the
house and marked ‘A’ on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. Thel easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The
goods leave by the train at 9.30 to-night, and will be due at King’s
Cross at 4.30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready
at King’s Cross at the time named and forthwith conveying the goods to
destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the

ring from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the
house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by
means of his duplicate key.

“Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.

“We are, dear Sirs,
    “Faithfully yours,
    “/Samuel F. Billington & Son./”

_Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington &
Son, Whitby_

“_21 August._

“Dear Sirs,--

“We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17_s._
9_d._, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods
are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in
parcel in main hall, as directed.

“We are, dear Sirs,

ns, and keys left in
parcel in main hall, as directed.

“We are, dear Sirs,
    “Yours respectfully,
    “_Pro_ /Carter, Paterson & Co./”

/Mina Murray’s Journal./“We are, dear Sirs,

ns, and keys left in
parcel in main hall, as directed.

“We are, dear Sirs,
    “Yours respectfully,
    “_Pro_ /Carter, Paterson & Co./”

/Mina Murray’s Journal./

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep.

g, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

“My poor little feet didn’t make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was because I didn’t want to wake up
Geordie.” As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, I don’t wonder that he does. Then she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

“I didn’t quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be

lf:--“I didn’t quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be

lf:--

“I didn’t quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don’t know why, for I was afraid of something--I
don’t know what. I remember, though I suppose I was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by,
and I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
I went up the steps. Then I have a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away

I have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seemed to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do
it before I felt you.”

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I
listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very

really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write.
I am not afraid to think it or to say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins
sent me on the letter, and wrote himself oh, so kindly. I am to leave
in the morning and to go over to Jonathan, and to help nurse him if
necessary, and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad
thing if we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good
Sister’s letter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies.
It is of Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart.
My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready.

art, for he is _in_ my heart.
My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one
change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I
send for it, for it may be that.... I must write no more; I must keep it
to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched
must comfort me till we meet.

_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wilhelmina Murray._

“_12 August._

“Dear Madam,--

“I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,x weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all his work is completed. He will require some few
weeks’ rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall
not be wanting for help.

“Believe me,
    “Yours, with sympathy and all blessings,
    “/Sister Agatha./

“P.S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife.

ing
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite
him of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an illness
as his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburgh, and the guard
was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that

station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the farthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the farthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

“Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for
safety’s sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many happy years for you both.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o’clock he began to get excited and to sniff about as a dog does
when setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my
interest in him, encouraged him to talk.

was struck by his manner, and knowing my
interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to
the attendant, and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he
was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

“I don’t want to talk to you: you don’t count now; the Master is at
hand.”

The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which
has seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man
with homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The
combination is a dreadful one. At nine o’clock I visited him myself. His
attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing.lf-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an Omnipotent being. How these madmen give themselves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it

into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought
I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which never failed to excite his
attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

“Bother them all! I don’t care a pin about them.”

“What?” I said. “You don’t mean to tell me that you don’t care about
spiders?” (Spiders at present are his hobby, and the note-book is
filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered
enigmatically:--

illing up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered
enigmatically:--

“The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes
that are filled.”

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don’t sleep at once, chloral,
the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O·H_{2}O! I must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought
of Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it.

t shall be sleepless....

Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had lain
tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield
had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.d at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting
out of the building by the door. He is a bulky man, and couldn’t get
through the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet
foremost, and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt.
The attendant told me the patient had gone to the left and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

I ran back at once, and told the watchman to get three or four men

rted house.

I ran back at once, and told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our
friend might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the
wall, dropped down on the other side. I could see Renfield’s figure
just disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him.
On the far side of the house I found him pressed close against the old
iron-bound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic when the fit of escaping is
upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not take

ing is
upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not take
note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the
more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I
heard him say:--“I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?”

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.

make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong, and he was more like a wild beast than a man.
I never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn’t get free from the strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he’s chained to the wall in the padded
room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

“I shall be patient, Master.

t now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

“I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!”

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.

CHAPTER IX.

_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

_“Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

“My dearest Lucy,--CHAPTER IX.

_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

_“Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the train on here. I
feel I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I knew I
was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some nursing,
I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one, oh,

me nursing,
I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one, oh,
so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out of
his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face
has vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not remember
anything that has happened to him for a long time past. At least, he
wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some terrible
shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try to
recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were thess herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved
about, added: ‘I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.’ I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of

s lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of
_my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He is waking! ... When he woke he asked me for
his coat, as he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister
Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that amongst them was his
note-book, and was going to ask him to let me look at it--for I knew
then that I might find some clue to his trouble--but I suppose he must
have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, saying
he wanted to be quite alone for a moment. Then he called me back, and

w, saying
he wanted to be quite alone for a moment. Then he called me back, and
when I came he had his hand over the note-book, and he said to me very
solemnly:--w, saying
he wanted to be quite alone for a moment. Then he called me back, and
when I came he had his hand over the note-book, and he said to me very
solemnly:--

“‘Wilhelmina’--I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--‘you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be
no secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want
to know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.’ For,
my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are

age.’ For,
my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. ‘Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is
the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.’ He fell
back, exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

“She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission
church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

“Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy.

..“Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy.

..

“Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his ‘I will’ firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even these
words seemed to choke me. The dear Sisters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the
chaplain and the Sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy,
it is the first time I have written the words ‘my husband’--left me
alone with my husband, I took the book from under his pillow, and
wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue

w, and
wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue
ribbon which was wound round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with
sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it
and showed it to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and
then it would be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that
we trusted each other; that I would never open it unless it were for his
own dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took my hand
in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife’s_ hand,
and said that it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that
he would go through all the past again to win it, if need be. The poor
dear meant to have said a part of the past; but he cannot think of time

he poor
dear meant to have said a part of the past; but he cannot think of time
yet, and I shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month,
but the year.he poor
dear meant to have said a part of the past; but he cannot think of time
yet, and I shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month,
but the year.

“Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I had nothing to give him
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

“Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because
it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear
to me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came

very dear
to me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came
from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. I want you to see
now, and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me;
so that in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am. My
dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day
of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
always as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is waking--I must attend to my husband!

“Your ever-loving
    “/Mina Harker./”

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

Your ever-loving
    “/Mina Harker./”

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

“_Whitby, 30 August._

“My dearest Mina,--_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

Your ever-loving
    “/Mina Harker./”

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

“_Whitby, 30 August._

“My dearest Mina,--

“Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. I wish you could be coming home soon enough
to stay with us here. This strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it
has quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here. We have
such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and I love him more than ever.

es, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells me_ that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn’t love me
more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from your loving

“/Lucy./

“P.S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear.

“P.P.S.--We are to be married on 28 September.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary_

_20 August._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then
one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: “Now I can wait; now I can wait.” The attendant came to tellmuring to
himself: “Now I can wait; now I can wait.” The attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had
gone from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I
might almost say, “cringing”--softness. I was satisfied with his
present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants
hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a
strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust,
for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking
furtively at them:--

“They think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!”

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated

e fools!”

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same
I do not follow his thought. Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: “I don’t take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait.”

After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and then he began to get uneasy, and at length

as quiet
until just before dawn, and then he began to get uneasy, and at length
violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so
that he swooned into a sort of coma.as quiet
until just before dawn, and then he began to get uneasy, and at length
violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so
that he swooned into a sort of coma.

... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day, then
quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the
cause. It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came
and went. Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad
ones. He escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with
it. We shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case
they are required....

_23 August._--“The unexpected always happens.” How well Disraeli knew
life! Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our

raeli knew
life! Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements went for naught. At any rate, we have proved one
thing: that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bond for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. The poor soul’s
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!
The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped.

_Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. Then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.t past him
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again we went into the ground of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then he suddenly grew
calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught
the patient’s eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had

this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

“You needn’t tie me; I shall go quietly!” Without trouble we came back
to the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....

_Lucy Westenra’s Diary._

_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things
down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and horrid to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so

id to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn’t the spirit to be cheerful. I wonder if I
could sleep in mother’s room to-night. I shall make an excuse and try._25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my
proposal. She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when
the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been
falling asleep. There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the
window, but I did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I
must then have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember
them.

e I
must then have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember
them. This morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my
throat pains me. It must be something wrong with my lungs, for I don’t
seem ever to get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes,
or else I know he will be miserable to see me so.

_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._

“_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._

“My dear Jack,--

“I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. I have
asked her if there is any cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for
to disturb the poor lady’s mind about her daughter in her present state
of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that heresent state
of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her
doom is spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it
yet. I am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl’s mind.
I am almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a
pang. I told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred
at first--I know why, old fellow--she finally consented. It will be a
painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at
Hillingham tomorrow, two o’clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together. I

f being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together. I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

“/Arthur./”

_Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._

“_1 September._

“Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully
by to-night’s post to Ring. Wire me if necessary.”

_Letter from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._

“_2 September._

“My dear old fellow,--

“With regard to Miss Westenra’s health, I hasten to let you know at
once that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any
malady that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means satisfied
with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I
saw her last.her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I
saw her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have
done and propose doing.

“I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was trying all she
knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have
no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there
is. We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful,

ion there
is. We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful,
we got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

“‘I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.’ I reminded her
that a doctor’s confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her.

doctor’s confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. ‘Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not care for
myself, but all for him!’ So I am quite free.“I could easily see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not
see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to
test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff
a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It
was a slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I
secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health.

ormal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite
satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be something
mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her,
but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child
she used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came
back, and that once she walked out in the night and went to the East
Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the
habit has not returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thinglate the
habit has not returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing
I know of; I have written to my old friend and master, Professor Van
Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any
one in the world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that
all things were to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you
are and your relations to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fellow, is only
in obedience to your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do
anything I can for her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me
for a personal reason. So, no matter on what ground he comes, we must
accept his wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because
he knows what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a

is because
he knows what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a
philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists
of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with
an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and
the kindest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for
the noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy.
I tell you these facts that you may know why I have such confidence
in him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not

iss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

“Yours always,

“/John Seward./”

_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M.D., D.Ph., D.Litt., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

“_2 September._

“My good Friend,--“Yours always,

“/John Seward./”

_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M.D., D.Ph., D.Litt., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

“_2 September._

“My good Friend,--

“When I have received your letter I am already coming to you. By good
fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who
have trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who
have trusted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he
holds dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound
so swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my

our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on tomorrow, for it is likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John.

“/Van Helsing./”

_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

“_3 September._

“My dear Art,--

“Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and

ar Art,--“/Van Helsing./”

_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

“_3 September._

“My dear Art,--

“Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and

ar Art,--

“Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy’s discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very careful examination
of the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he said: ‘You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.’ I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his

we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any further clue. You must
not be angry with him, Art, because his very reticence means that all
his brains are working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when
the time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account
of our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for
_The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the
smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. In any case I am to have a letter.

“Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better.“Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better.

was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to the Professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat
of all things except ourselves and diseases, and with such an infinite
geniality that I could see poor Lucy’s pretence of animation merge into
reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

“‘My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are much

said:--

“‘My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are much
beloved. That is much, my dear, even were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To them I say: “Pouf!”’ And he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: ‘But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How
can he’--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that
with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--‘know anything
of a young ladies? He has his madmans to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. Buto do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But
the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not
tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known
so many sorrows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send
him away to smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and I have
little talk all to ourselves.’ I took the hint, and strolled about,
and presently the Professor came to the window and called me in. He
looked grave, but said: ‘I have made careful examination, but there is
no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood
lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way
anæmic. I have asked her to send me her maid, that I may asked just

e in no way
anæmic. I have asked her to send me her maid, that I may asked just
one or two questions, that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know
well what she will say. And yet there is cause; there is always cause
for everything. I must go back home and think. You must send to me
the telegram every day; and if there be cause I shall come again. The
disease--for not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the sweet
young dear, she interest me too. She charm me, and for her, if not for
you or disease, I come.’

“As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my

h. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_4 September._--Zoophagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst, and that was yesterday at an unusual time.
Just before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The attendant
knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came
at a run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became

e men came
at a run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became
so violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now.
The attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were
really appalling; I found my hands full when I got in, attending to some
of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was
some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum,
and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show

ullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show
something directly. I cannot quite understand it.

_Later._--Another change in my patient. At five o’clock I looked in
on him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to
be. He was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his
capture by making nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges
of padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be let back
to his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
humour him; so he is back in his room, with the window open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the windowsill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies.f his tea spread out on the windowsill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies. He is not now eating them, but putting them in a box,
as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find a
spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any clue
of his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not rise.
For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of far-away
voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

“All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do
it for myself!” Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
“Doctor, won’t you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me.”

“And the flies?” I said.

little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me.”

“And the flies?” I said.

“Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like
it.” And there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, I suppose, any in the world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

_Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at
our own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I heard him yelling.
As his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it better than
in the morning. It was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadowsul smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight

ts not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the
window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. All this surprised me,
so I asked him: “Are you not going to keep flies any more?”

“No,” said he; “I am sick of all that rubbish!” He certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. Can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
We shall see.

hich affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
We shall see.

_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_4 September._--Patient still better to-day.”

_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits, colour coming back.”

_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_“_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits, colour coming back.”

_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam_

“_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you.”

CHAPTER X.

_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

“_6 September._

“My dear Art,--

“My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a
bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it: Mrs.

ne back a
bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it: Mrs.
Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted
me professionally about her. I took advantage of the opportunity,
and told her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist,
was coming to stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge
conjointly with myself; so now we can come and go without alarming
her unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in
Lucy’s weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but please God, we shall
come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste,

hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste,

“Yours ever,
    “/John Seward./”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liverpool Street was:--

“Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?”

“No,” I said. “I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram.
I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be.”“Right, my friend,” he said, “quite right! Better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal
with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch

ou deal
with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God’s madmen,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here.” He
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself
the same way. “I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall
unfold to you.”

“Why not now?” I asked. “It may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision.” He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

“My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has

at me, and said:--

“My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: ‘Look! he’s good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.’” I did not see the application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: “The good husbandman tell
you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is forfind the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn,
and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there’s some promise; and I wait till the ear begins to swell.” He broke
off, for he evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on, and very
gravely:--

“You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master,
and I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that
knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practice, let me tell you that this

weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practice, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
interest to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from failure, not from success!”

When I described Lucy’s symptoms--the same as before, but definitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, “the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade,” as he once called, in one of his lectures,raphernalia
of our beneficial trade,” as he once called, in one of his lectures,
the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown
in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from
some cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change
in her daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her.
It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body
an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil
that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered

from evil
that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper roots for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that
I saw again the hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy’s room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale;
the red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bonesily pale;
the red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones
of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing’s face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. “My God!” he said; “this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart’s
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is

heart’s
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?”

“I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me.”

“Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared.”

I went downstairs with him and as we were going there was a knock at the
hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door,
and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in an
eager whisper:--

“Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming.” When first the Professor’s eye had lit upon him he had

to you,
sir, for coming.” When first the Professor’s eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at any interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--“Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She
is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that.” For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. “You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help.”

“What can I do?” asked Arthur hoarsely. “Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for

do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her.” The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

“My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!”

“What shall I do?” There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostrils
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. “Come!”
he said. “You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John.” Arthur looked bewildered, and the
Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

“Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform

st have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me”--here Arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--“but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!” Arthur turned to him
and said:--

“If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----”

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

“Good boy!” said Van Helsing. “In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. YouHe stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

“Good boy!” said Van Helsing. “In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You

l be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!”

We all went up to Lucy’s room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

“Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child.

y:--

“Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. Yes.” She had made
the effort with success.

It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was
satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Then he added: “You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over the table. Friend John, help to me!” So neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing, turning to me, said:--

“He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not

o me, said:--

“He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it.”Van Helsing, turning to me, said:--

“He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not

o me, said:--

“He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it.”

Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed
the operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to
come back to poor Lucy’s cheeks, and through Arthur’s growing pallor the
joy of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy’s system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the Professor’s face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat.

eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: “Do not stir an instant.
It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her.” When all was over I
could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

“The brave lover I think deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently.” And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient’s head. As he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seemed always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat.ver had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing’s
ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: “Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell

and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. Good-bye.”

When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; I could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Professor in a
whisper:--

“What do you make of that mark on her throat?”

“What do you make of it?”

“I have not seen it yet,” I answered, and then and there proceeded to
loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no signere were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no sign
of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

“Well?” said Van Helsing.

“Well?” said I, “I can make nothing of it.” The Professor stood up.
“I must go back to Amsterdam to-night,” he said. “There are books and
things there which I want. You must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her.”

ust remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her.”

“Shall I have a nurse?” I asked.

“We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all
the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
possible. And then we may begin.”

“May begin?” I said. “What on earth do you mean?”

“We shall see!” he answered as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door, and said, with warning finger
held up:--

“Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself

inued.__Dr. Seward’s Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself

inued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were
good, and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences
of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs.
Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with
her she almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter’s
renewed strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the
night I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me

a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was apparent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once:--

“You do not want to go to sleep?”

“No; I am afraid.”

“Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for.”

“Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!”

“A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?”

“I don’t know; oh, I don’t know. And that is what is so terrible. All

ou mean?”

“I don’t know; oh, I don’t know. And that is what is so terrible. All
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought.”

“But my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and I
can promise that nothing will happen.”“But my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and I
can promise that nothing will happen.”

“Ah, I can trust you!” I seized the opportunity, and said: “I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once.”

“You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me! Then I will
sleep!” And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum.

slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my
zoophagous patient. The report was good: he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as

whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and would join me early in the morning.

_9 September._--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and
my brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--“No sitting up to-night for you. You are worn-out. I am quite well
again; indeed, I am; and if there is to be any sitting up, it is I who
will sit up with you.” I would not argue the point, but went and had
my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence,

t and had
my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence,
I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs and showed me a room next
her own, where a cosy fire was burning. “Now,” she said, “you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the
sofa, for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything
I shall call out, and you can come to me at once.” I could not but
acquiesce, for I was “dog-tired,” and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.

_Lucy Westenra’s Diary_

I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.

_Lucy Westenra’s Diary_

_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a
long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me. Andrest of
last night! How I slept with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me. And
to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and within
call. Thank everybody for being so good to me! Thank God! Good-night,
Arthur.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_10 September._--I was conscious of the Professor’s hand on my head, and
started awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

“And how is our patient?”

“Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me,” I answered.

“Come, let us see,” he said. And together we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I

o the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I
heard the Professor’s low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, “Gott in Himmel!” needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.

There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit

to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. “Quick!” he said. “Bring
the brandy.” I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
He wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--“It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have
to call on you yourself this time, friend John.” As he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion;
I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,

re was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment’s delay, we began the operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one’s blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing
held up a warning finger. “Do not stir,” he said, “but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia.” He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid

sonal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
cheeks and lips. No man knows till he experiences it, what it is to feel
his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. “That will do,” he said. “Already?”
I remonstrated. “You took a great deal more from Art.” To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

“He is her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for others; and the present will suffice.”

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied
digital pressure to my own incision. I lay down, whilst I waited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-byited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine
for myself. As I was leaving the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

“Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!”

When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

“You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me.”

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I

ey were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement
at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering
over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and
how she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere
to show for it. I think I must have continued my wonder in my dreams,
for sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day; and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much as the day before. When Van Helsing

well and
strong, though not nearly so much as the day before. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

“We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. You are looking pale
yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you

oking pale
yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!” As she spoke Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
“Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-probable.

ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. Good-night.”

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing’s wish that either he or I should
sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the “foreign
gentleman.” I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps it was on Lucy’s account that their
devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen similar
instances of woman’s kindness. I got back here in time for a late
dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting for
sleep. It is coming.my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting for
sleep. It is coming.

_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the Professor. He opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

“These are for you, Miss Lucy,” he said.

“For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!”

“Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines.” Here
Lucy made a wry face. “Nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort.

he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters
of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought
for in the Floridas, and find him all too late.”

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and
smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter and
half-disgust:--

“Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only common garlic.”

u are only putting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only common garlic.”

To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

“No trifling with me! I never jest! There is grim purpose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own.” Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: “Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. I only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flower. See, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;

ake so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;
and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem,
where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here.”

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The Professor’s
actions were certainly odd, and not to be found in any pharmacopœia
that I ever heard of. First, he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get

all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and
round the fireplace in the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently I said:--“Well, Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit.”

“Perhaps I am!” he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck.

en she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. The last words he said to her were:--

“Take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door.”

“I promise,” said Lucy, “and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?”

As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

“To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my ‘spell’ which I have work. Ho! ho!”

ur pretty miss, so much
more strong for my ‘spell’ which I have work. Ho! ho!”

He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
I felt it all the more, like unshed tears.

CHAPTER XI.

/Lucy Westenra’s Diary./CHAPTER XI.

/Lucy Westenra’s Diary./

_12 September._--How good they all are to me! I quite love that dear
Dr. Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone tonight, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window.

can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in the play, with “virgin crants and maiden
strewments.” I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night
everybody.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as
usual, up to time.

September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as
usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The
Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at
eight o’clock. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature’s
annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

“You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep.

-“You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep.

-

“You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should disturb her.” The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

“Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working,” to
which she answered:--

“You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy’s state this
morning is due in part to me.”

“How do you mean, ma’am?” asked the Professor.

“Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did
not wake her. But the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually

those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away
and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure.”

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As
she had spoken, I watched the Professor’s face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and

ss into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.ss into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. “God! God!
God!” he said. “What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such a way? This

from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such a way? This
poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!” Suddenly he
jumped to his feet. “Come,” he said, “come, we must see and act. Devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same.” He went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to Lucy’s room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards the
bed. This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the
same awful, waxen pallor as before.

start as he looked on the poor face with the
same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.start as he looked on the poor face with the
same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

“As I expected,” he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his
which meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and
then began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet
another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised
the necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. “No!” he said. “To-day you must operate. I shall provide.
You are weakened already.” As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I

lour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy’s room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright, and
seemingly not much the worse from her terrible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.

long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.

_Lucy Westenra’s Diary._long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.

_Lucy Westenra’s Diary._

_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong
again that I hardly know myself. It is as if I had passed through
some long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful
sunshine and feel the fresh air of the morning around me. I have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant; and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back
to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,
however, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my

eaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother’s sake, and dear Arthur’s, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found

e, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something flapped almost angrily against
the window-panes.

“_The Pall Mall Gazette_,” _18 September._

THE ESCAPED WOLF.

/Perilous Adventure of our Interviewer./

_Interview with the Keeper in the Zoological Gardens._“_The Pall Mall Gazette_,” _18 September._

THE ESCAPED WOLF.

/Perilous Adventure of our Interviewer./

_Interview with the Keeper in the Zoological Gardens._

After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
the words _Pall Mall Gazette_ as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the Zoological Gardens in which the wolf
department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the cottages
in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting
down to his tea when I found him.

ehind the elephant-house, and was just sitting
down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable
folk, elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoyed of
their hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty
comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called “business”
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

“Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You’ll excoose me
refoosin’ to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the
wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
I begins to arsk them questions.”

“How do you mean, ask them questions?” I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

n, ask them questions?” I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.“How do you mean, ask them questions?” I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

n, ask them questions?” I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

“’Ittin’ of them over the ’ead with a pole is one way; scratchin’
of their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a
show-orf to their gals. I don’t so much mind the fust--the ’ittin’
with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they’ve
’ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin’. Mind you,” he added philosophically, “there’s a deal of
the same nature in us as in them there animiles. Here’s you a-comin’ and
arskin’ of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin’ arf-quid I’d ’a’ seen you blowed fust ’fore I’d
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I’d like you to

’fore I’d
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I’d like you to
arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence,
did I tell yer to go to ’ell?”

“You did.”

“An’ when you said you’d report me for usin’ of obscene language, that
was ’itten’ me over the ’ead; but the ’arf-quid made that all right. I
weren’t a-goin’ to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my ’owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor’ love yer ’art, now
that the old ’ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an’ rinsed
me out with her bloomin’ old teapot, and I’ve lit up, you may scratch
my ears for all you’re worth, and won’t get even a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions. I know what yer a-comin’ at, that ’ere
escaped wolf.”

“Exactly.

your questions. I know what yer a-comin’ at, that ’ere
escaped wolf.”

“Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how
it happened; and when I know the facts I’ll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will
end.”“All right, guv’nor. This ’ere is about the ’ole story. That ’ere wolf
what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach’s, which we bought off him four year ago. He was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I’m more
surprised at ’im for wantin’ to get out nor any other animile in the
place. But, there, you can’t trust wolves no more nor women.”

“Don’t you mind him, sir!” broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. “’E’s

men.”

“Don’t you mind him, sir!” broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. “’E’s
got mindin’ the animiles so long that blest if he ain’t like a old wolf
’isself! But there ain’t no ’arm in ’im.”

“Well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin’ yesterday when I first
hear any disturbance. I was makin’ up a litter in the monkey-house for
a young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin’ and ’owlin’ I
kem away straight. There was Bersicker a-tearin’ like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn’t much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a ’ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin’ through it. He
had a ’ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,

it. He
had a ’ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was ’im as they was hirritated at. He ’ad white
kid gloves on ’is ’ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:
‘Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.’

“‘Maybe it’s you,’ says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
’isself. He didn’t get angry, as I ’oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. ‘Oh no, they
wouldn’t like me,’ ’e says.

“‘Ow yes, they would,’ says I, a-imitatin’ of him. ‘They always like
a bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you ’as a
bagful.’

“Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin’ they

agful.’“Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin’ they

agful.’

“Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin’ they
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn’t put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf’s ears too!

“‘Tyke care,’ says I. ‘Bersicker is quick.’

“‘Never mind,’ he says. ‘I’m used to ’em!’

“‘Are you in the business yourself?’ I says, tyking off my ’at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

“‘No,’ says he, ‘not exactly in the business, but I ’ave made pets of
several.’ And with that he lifts his ’at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Bersicker kep’ a-lookin’ arter ’im till ’e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner, and wouldn’t come hout the ’ole
hevening.

nd then went and lay down in a corner, and wouldn’t come hout the ’ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-’owling. There warn’t nothing for them to ’owl at.
There warn’t no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin’ a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the ’owling
stopped. Just before twelve o’clock I just took a look round afore
turnin’ in, an’, bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker’s
cage I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And
that’s all I know for certing.”

“Did any one else see anything?”

“One of our gard’ners was a-comin’ ’ome about that time from a ’armony,

hing?”“Did any one else see anything?”

“One of our gard’ners was a-comin’ ’ome about that time from a ’armony,

hing?”

“One of our gard’ners was a-comin’ ’ome about that time from a ’armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin’ out through the gardin ’edges. At
least, so he says; but I don’t give much for it myself, for if he did
’e never said a word about it to his missis when ’e got ’ome, and it
was only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been
up all night a-huntin’ of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered
seein’ anything. My own belief was that the ’armony ’ad got into his
’ead.”

“Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the
wolf?”

“Well, sir,” he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, “I think I
can; but I don’t know as ’ow you’d be satisfied with the theory.”

“Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from

the theory.”

“Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can’t hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?”

“Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that ’ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out.”

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke
I could see that it had done service before, and that the whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn’t cope in badinage
with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

“Now, Mr. Bilder, we’ll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you’ve told me
what you think will happen.”

“Right y’are, sir,” he said briskly.

ou’ve told me
what you think will happen.”

“Right y’are, sir,” he said briskly. “Ye’ll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin’ of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on.”

“Well, I never!” said the old lady.“Well, I never!” said the old lady.

“My opinion is this: that ’ere wolf is a-’idin’ of, somewheres. The
gard’ner wot didn’t remember said he was a-gallopin’ northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don’t believe him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don’t gallop no more than dogs does, they not bein’ built that
way. Wolves is fine things in a story-book, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivvin’ somethin’ that’s more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,

n they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor’ bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in ’im. This
one ain’t been used to fightin’ or even to providin’ for hisself, and
more like he’s somewhere round the Park a-’idin’ an’ a-shiverin’ of,
and, if he thinks at all, wonderin’ where he is to get his breakfast
from; or maybe he’s got down some area and is in a coal-cellar. My eye,
won’t some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining
at her out of the dark! If he can’t get food he’s bound to look for it,
and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher’s shop in time. If he
doesn’t, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin’ orf with a soldier, leavin’

e. If he
doesn’t, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin’ orf with a soldier, leavin’
of the hinfant in the perambulator--well then I shouldn’t be surprised
if the census is one babby the less. That’s all.”

I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against the window, and Mr. Bilder’s face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

“God bless me!” he said. “If there ain’t old Bersicker come back by
’isself!”“God bless me!” he said. “If there ain’t old Bersicker come back by
’isself!”

He went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder

hat idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder
nor his wife thought any more of the wolf than I should of a dog. The
animal itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood’s quondam friend, whilst seeking her
confidence in masquerade.

The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. The
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed London and set all the
children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort
of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

“There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;

said:--

“There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn’t I say it all along? Here’s his head all cut and full of broken
glass. ’E’s been a-gettin’ over some bloomin’ wall or other. It’s a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This ’ere’s what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker.”

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the
fatted calf, and went off to report.

I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given
to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up

rd’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up

rd’s Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up
my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to
Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open,
and in rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. I was
thunder-struck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the Superintendent’s study is almost unknown. Without an instant’s
pause he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knife in his hand, and, as
I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was too
quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get my balance
he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he
could strike again, however, I got in my right, and he was sprawling

Before he
could strike again, however, I got in my right, and he was sprawling
on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little
pool trickled on to the carpet. I saw that my friend was not intent on
further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary
eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the attendants rushed in,
and we turned our attention to him, his employment positively sickened
me. He was lying on his belly on the floor licking up, like a dog, the
blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured,
and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply
repeating over and over again: “The blood is the life! the blood is the
life!”

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present: I have lost too much

the
life!”I cannot afford to lose blood just at present: I have lost too much

the
life!”

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present: I have lost too much
of late for my physical good, and the then prolonged strain of Lucy’s
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. I am over-excited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.

_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

“_17 September._--Do not fail to be at Hillingham to-night. If not
watching all the time, frequently visit to see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_18 September._--Just off for train to London. The arrival of Van
Helsing’s telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I
know by bitter experience what may happen in a night. Of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with
me, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy’s phonograph.

_Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that
no one may by chance get into any trouble through me. This is an exact
record of what took place tonight.

into any trouble through me. This is an exact
record of what took place tonight. I feel I am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the
doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after the
sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now
I know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in
the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep

e to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep
would try to come when I did not want it; so, as I feared to be alone,
I opened my door and called out: “Is there anybody there?” There was no
answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again. Then
outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl like a dog’s, but more
fierce and deeper. I went to the window and looked out, but could see
nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its wings
against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determined not to
go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by
my moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She said to me
even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

n, and sat by me. She said to me
even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

“I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right.”n, and sat by me. She said to me
even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

“I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right.”

I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she
did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay
awhile and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms,
and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She
was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: “What is that?” I
tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I
could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while
there was the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after

er a while
there was the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after
there was a crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled
on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in,
and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great
gaunt grey wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a
sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her.
Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van
Helsing insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me.
For a second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a
strange and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over, as if
struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzyer, as if
struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy
for a moment or two. The room and all round seemed to spin round. I
kept my eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and
a whole myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the
broken window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust
that travellers describe when there is a simoom in the desert. I tried
to stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother’s poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I remembered no more for a while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the

recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the
nightingale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. I called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me in the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up.dear mother and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear
mother’s breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn’t like to remove them, and, besides, I would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that
the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went
to the dining-room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily.

w what had happened. They all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,
and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother’s doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? What am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for
the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead!
I dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken window.

The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God

draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not
survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!

CHAPTER XII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./CHAPTER XII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_18 September._--I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked
gently and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to disturb Lucy
or her mother, and hoped to bring only a servant to the door. After a
while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer.

After a
while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer.
I cursed the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such
an hour--for it was now ten o’clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, and still without response. Hitherto I had blamed
only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds, of delay might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and I went round the house to try if I could to find by chance an entry
anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened

anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened
and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard
the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse’s feet. They stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

“Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you
not get my telegram?”

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his
telegram early in the morning and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

“Then I fear we are too late. God’s will be done!” With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: “Come.“Then I fear we are too late. God’s will be done!” With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: “Come.

late. God’s will be done!” With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: “Come. If there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now.”

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen
window. The Professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window.
I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them.
Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes
and opened the window. I helped the Professor in and followed him.
There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants’ rooms, which were
close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the
dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four

in the
dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and I looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: “We can attend to them later.”
Then we ascended to Lucy’s room. For an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her
mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through thea white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother’s bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching
poor Lucy’s breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

“It is not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring the brandy!”

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste

randy!”

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and
I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make
sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

“I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those
maids. Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard.
Make them get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly
as cold as that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do
anything more.”

d as that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do
anything more.”d as that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do
anything more.”

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
women. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I was stern with
them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice
Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half-clad
as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We

tchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath, and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock on the hall-door. One
of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come
with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.

I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly
earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not

with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

“If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon.” He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning
to be of some effect. Lucy’s heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing’s
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

“The first gain is ours! Check to the King!”

sheet to dry her he said to me:--

“The first gain is ours! Check to the King!”

We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

“We must consult as to what is to be done,” he said as we descended the
stairs. In the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in,
he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened,

sed in,
he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened,
but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette
of death which the British woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing’s sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

“What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl’s life
won’t be worth an hour’s purchase. You are exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit.ted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. What are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?”

“What’s the matter with me, anyhow?”

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quincey Morris. Van
Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and
a glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: “Quincey Morris!” and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

“What brought you here?” I cried as our hands met.

“I guess Art is the cause.”

He handed me a telegram:--

“Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--/Holmwood./”

still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--/Holmwood./”

“I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do.”

Van Helsing strode forward and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

“A brave man’s blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. You’re a man, and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against
us for all he’s worth, but God sends us men when we want them.”

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not the heart
to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock, and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions.ns, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. The Professor watched
whilst I went downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet
or two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was

ith a sheet
or two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the paper, saying only: “It dropped from Lucy’s breast when
we carried her to the bath.”

When I had read it, I stood looking at the Professor, and after a pause
asked him: “In God’s name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?” I was so bewildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

“Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what

all know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is that you came to me to say?” This brought me back to fact, and I was
all myself again.all know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is that you came to me to say?” This brought me back to fact, and I was
all myself again.

“I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let
us fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker.”

“Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be

rtaker.”

“Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the
more for it! Now go.”

In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

“When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?” I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about

all to
ourselves?” I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at
her side. From his putting his finger to his lips, I gathered that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful,
or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he
said to me:--

ther less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he
said to me:--

“Jack Seward, I don’t want to shove myself in anywhere where I’ve no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that’s all past and gone, I
can’t help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is it that’s
wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. But this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?”

s
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?”

“That’s so,” I said, and he went on:--

“I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?”

“That’s so.”“That’s so,” I said, and he went on:--

“I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?”

“That’s so.”

“And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at
his own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so
quick since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of go
to grass all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires
had got at her in the night, and, what with his gorge and the vein left
open, there wasn’t enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to
put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first; is not that so?” As he

l me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first; is not that so?” As he
spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of
suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the
terrible mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His
very heart was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there
was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused
before answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
Professor wished kept secret, but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answered
in the same phrase: “That’s so.”

“And how long has this been going on?”

“About ten days.”

hrase: “That’s so.”

“And how long has this been going on?”

“About ten days.”

“Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn’t hold it.” Then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: “What took it
out?”I shook my head. “That,” I said, “is the crux. Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits’ end. I can’t even hazard a guess.
There has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill.” Quincey held
out his hand. “Count me in,” he said. “You and the Dutchman will tell me

y held
out his hand. “Count me in,” he said. “You and the Dutchman will tell me
what to do, and I’ll do it.”

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy’s first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it
had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit
on Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked round the
room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put
her poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother’s death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but

tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. The Professor
and I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor
Lucy’s strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more

, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at the station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o’clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave
more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, Arthur was simply
choked with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that hads simply
choked with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had
passed, the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for
it, had grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was
possible were shortened. Arthur’s presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

It is now nearly one o’clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with
her. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering
this on Lucy’s phonograph. Until six o’clock they are to try to rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too

o rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all.

_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

_“17 September._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You
will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at Exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his own house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. After
dinner Mr. Hawkins said:--

“‘My dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both.

ant to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.’ I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one.“So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both
my bedroom and drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow
stone of the cathedral; and I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans.

ing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things
and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now
that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the
clients.

“How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for
a day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on
my shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He is beginning
to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by
the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a
sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his
usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent

to his
usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent
as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust.
And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be
married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are
you to wear, and is it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all
about it, dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which
interests you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send
his ‘respectful duty,’ but I do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm of Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his ‘love’ instead. Goodbye, my dearestnd tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his ‘love’ instead. Goodbye, my dearest
Lucy, and all blessings on you.

“Yours,
    “/Mina Harker./”

_Report from Patrick Hennessey, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.K.Q.CP.I., etc., etc.,
to John Seward, M.D._

“_20 September._

“My dear Sir,--

“In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions
of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield,
there is more to say. He has had another outbreak which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier’s cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped

house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped
at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner,
and saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the window of
Renfield’s room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to ‘shut up for
a foul-mouthed beggar,’ whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up hiso notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of place he had got to by saying: ‘Lor’ bless yer,
sir, I wouldn’t mind what was said to me in a bloomin’ madhouse. I pity
ye and the guv’nor for havin’ to live in the house with a wild beast
like that.’ Then he asked the way civilly enough, and I told him where
the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats and
curses and revilings from our man. I went down to see if I could make
out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a well-behaved
man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had ever occurred.
I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his
manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked

in his
manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked
me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe that he was
completely oblivious of the affair. It was, I am sorry to say, however,
only another instance of his cunning, for within half an hour I heard of
him again. This time he had broken out through the window of his room,
and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow
me, and ran after him, for I feared he was intent on some mischief. My
fear was justified when I saw the same cart which had passed before
coming down the road, having on it some great wooden boxes. The men were
wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the face, as if with violent
exercise. Before I could get up to him the patient rushed at them, andviolent
exercise. Before I could get up to him the patient rushed at them, and
pulling one of them off the cart, began to knock his head against the
ground. If I had not seized him just at the moment I believe he would
have killed the man there and then. The other fellow jumped down and
struck him over the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was
a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but seized him also,
and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and fro as if we were
kittens. You know I am no light weight, and the others were both burly
men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we began to master
him, and the attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat on him, he
began to shout: ‘I’ll frustrate them! They shan’t rob me! they shan’t

on him, he
began to shout: ‘I’ll frustrate them! They shan’t rob me! they shan’t
murder me by inches! I’ll fight for my Lord and Master!’ and all sorts
of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable difficulty
that they got him back to the house and put him in the padded room. One
of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set it all
right; and he is going on well.

“The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying andat if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary
state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their
labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same,
and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and
swore that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure
of meeting so ‘bloomin’ good a bloke’ as your correspondent. I took
their names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as

nt. I took
their names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding’s Rents, King George’s Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Parley’s Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master’s Yard, Soho.

“I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

“Believe me, dear Sir,
    “Yours faithfully,
    “/Patrick Hennessey./”

_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

“_18 September._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love(Unopened by her.)

“_18 September._

“My dearest Lucy,--

“Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love

suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love
him that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew
either father or mother, so that the dear old man’s death is a real blow
to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels
sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all
his life, and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left
him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond
the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says
the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous.
He begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in
_him_ helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the

_ belief in
_him_ helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the
grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too
hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature
which enabled him by our dear, good friend’s aid, to rise from clerk to
master in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of
its strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles
in the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some
one, for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to
Jonathan tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread
coming up to London, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father.Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,

“Your loving
    “/Mina Harker./”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_20 September._--Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, and I would not care if I heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy’s mother
and Arthur’s father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

ate--Lucy’s mother
and Arthur’s father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. “Come, my child,” he said;
“come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy willare two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort for each other, even though we do not speak, and even if
we sleep.” Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on
Lucy’s face, which lay on her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. She
lay quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as
it should be. I could see that the Professor had carried out in this
room, as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of
the window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy’s neck, over the silk
handkerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her

sly, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moonlight,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every
now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back to my
seat I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic

k to my
seat I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.k to my
seat I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to be
with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had
hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that the moment
she became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. It was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no possibility of making any

when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking, and repeated both actions many times.

At six o’clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy’s face
I could hear the hissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: “Draw up the blind; I want light!” Then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching Lucy’s, examined her carefully. He
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat.
As he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, “Mein
Gott!” as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked too,

ion, “Mein
Gott!” as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked too,
and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.

The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

“She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him.”

I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that

the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that
Lucy was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with
his hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his hands buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. “Come,” I
said, “my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude; it will be best
and easiest for _her_.”

When we came into Lucy’s room I could see that Van Helsing had, with his
usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything
look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy’s hair, so that
it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples.

en brushed Lucy’s hair, so that
it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came into the
room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:--

“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am glad you have come!” He was stooping to kiss
her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. “No,” he whispered, “not yet!
Hold her hand; it will comfort her more.”“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am glad you have come!” He was stooping to kiss
her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. “No,” he whispered, “not yet!
Hold her hand; it will comfort her more.”

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. Then
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child’s.

And then insensibly there came the strange change which I had noticed in
the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale

ced in
the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft voluptuous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

“Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!” Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

“Not for your life!” he said; “not for your living soul and hers!” And

e room.

“Not for your life!” he said; “not for your living soul and hers!” And
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and he stood silent, waiting.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm
as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm
as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing’s great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. “My true friend,” she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, “My true friend, and his! Oh,

id, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, “My true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!”

“I swear it!” said he solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. Then he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: “Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once.”

Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

Lucy’s eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took
Arthur’s arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy’s breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

“It is all over,” said Van Helsing. “She is dead!”

I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where
he sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that

, where
he sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy,
and his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

“We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died.”

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

“Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!”“We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died.”

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

“Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!”

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

er at last. It is the end!”

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

“Not so! alas! not so. It is only the beginning!”

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

“We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see.”

CHAPTER XIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and
her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

“She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir.

had come out
from the death-chamber:--

“She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It’s quite a privilege to
attend on her. It’s not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!”

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible
from the disordered state of things in the household. There were no
relatives at hand; and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend
at his father’s funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should
have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it
upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over
Lucy’s papers himself. I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and

being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

“I know; I know. You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. But
this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such
as this.”

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in Lucy’s breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

“When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy’s old room all night, and I myself
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into

d I myself
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers.”

I went on with my part of the work, and in another half-hour had found
the name and address of Mrs. Westenra’s solicitor and had written to
him. All the poor lady’s papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

“Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to
you.”

“Have you got what you looked for?” I asked, to which he replied:--

“I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun.

ll that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, I shall use some.”

When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--

“And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. Alas!”

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the

ite flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over
and turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us,
the tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All
Lucy’s loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had
passed, instead of leaving traces of “decay’s effacing fingers,” had but
restored the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes
that I was looking at a corpse.

The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: “Remain till I
return,” and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic

n till I
return,” and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic
from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little golden crucifix, and
placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

“To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives.”

“Must we make an autopsy?” I asked.“To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives.”

“Must we make an autopsy?” I asked.

“Yes, and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart.

w, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen
with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that
make the rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend John,
that you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his father’s funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation; and then replace
all, so that none know, save we alone.”

“But why do it at all? The girl is dead.

ll, so that none know, save we alone.”

“But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body
without need? And if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and
nothing to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it is monstrous.”

For answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

“Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yetleasant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I believe in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!

“Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so

or many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is
not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart, and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!” He paused
a moment, and went on solemnly: “Friend John, there are strange and
terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?”

I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood withoutI took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without

t away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where Lucy
lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van
Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came over to my bedside and
said:--

“You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it.”

“Why not?” I asked.

You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it.”

“Why not?” I asked. For his solemnity of the night before had greatly
impressed me.

“Because,” he said sternly, “it is too late--or too early. See!” Here he
held up the little golden crucifix. “This was stolen in the night.”

“How stolen,” I asked in wonder, “since you have it now?”

“Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the
woman who robbed the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did, and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait.”

He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.

pple with.He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.

pple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.
Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy’s father which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

“Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and

on:--

“Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. Indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry
out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept.
We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred
we should have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our
judgment. Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other
form of disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of
her wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would haveg out of
her wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have
come into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived
her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have
been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case, Lord
Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the
world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon
their just rights for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger.
I assure you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly
rejoiced.”

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy was an object-lesson

which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy was an object-lesson
in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort
to us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was expected at five o’clock,
so a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods,
and there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits
at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,ur spirits
at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity, and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him.

ed to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as
I felt he would like to be quite alone with her; but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

“You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don’t know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can’t think yet....”

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

nd threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

“Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do? The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for.”“Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do? The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for.”

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man’s
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said
softly to him:--

“Come and look at her.”

Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he

ing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

“Jack, is she really dead?”

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer
than I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the

vingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in
his and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.I left him in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker’s
men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When
he came out of the room again I told him of Arthur’s question, and he
replied:--

“I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!”

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time, but

ng to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time, but
when we had lit our cigars he said:--

“Lord----;” but Arthur interrupted him:--

“No, no, not that, for God’s sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so
recent.”

The Professor answered very sweetly:--

“I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
‘Mr.,’ and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
Arthur.”

Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man’s warmly.

“Call me what you will,” he said. “I hope I may always have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
your goodness to my poor dear.” He paused a moment, and went on: “I know

ou for
your goodness to my poor dear.” He paused a moment, and went on: “I know
that she understood your goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember”--the
Professor nodded--“you must forgive me.”

He answered with a grave kindness:--He answered with a grave kindness:--

“I know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And there may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from

tand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others, and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to protect.”

“And, indeed, indeed, sir,” said Arthur warmly, “I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack’s friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like.”

The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

“May I ask you something now?”

“Certainly.”

“You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?”

“No, poor dear; I never thought of it.”

“And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will.
I want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy’s papers and
letters.

ll.
I want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy’s papers and
letters. Believe me, it is no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It’s a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy’s sake?”

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you

g this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes.”

The old Professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

“And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!”

I slept on a sofa in Arthur’s room that night. Van Helsing did not go
to bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,

n with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between them, in Whitby and all the world before me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and
Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask
me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

The service was very simple and very solemn.

again with an exercise anyhow....The service was very simple and very solemn.

again with an exercise anyhow....

The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter,
his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the
President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, taking a ’bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the Row for a while,
so we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days

n Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you can’t go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without
the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and
he was my husband, and we didn’t know anybody who saw us--and we didn’t
care if they did--so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cartwheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Giuliano’s
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: “My God!” I am always anxious about Jonathan, for
I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

ain; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.ain; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty
girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal’s.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he would notice. I
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was so disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking

. I asked
Jonathan why he was so disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking
that I knew as much about it as he did: “Do you see who it is?”

“No, dear,” I said; “I don’t know him; who is it?” His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:--

“It is the man himself!”

The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him, he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom.

iage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--iage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

“I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this
be so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew!” He was
distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes’ staring at nothing, Jonathan’s eyes closed, and
he went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought

osed, and
he went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought
it was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

“Why, Mina, have I been asleep? Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we’ll have a cup of tea somewhere.” He had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all
that this episode had reminded him of. I don’t like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I
must open that parcel and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,

when I
must open that parcel and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, forgive me if I do wrong but it is for your own dear sake.

_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he
may be:--“You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day.”

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to
have lost such sweetness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_22 September._--It is all over.

l to bear our
troubles.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_22 September._--It is all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow is Quincey! I believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy’s death as
any of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral Viking. If
America can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the
world indeed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to
his journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which
can only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he
says he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor

he can; he
says he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor
old fellow! I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down
even his iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could
see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over,
we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his
part in the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy’s
veins; I could see Van Helsing’s face grow white and purple by turns.
Arthur was saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really
married, and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said
a word of the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and
Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on
here.nd
Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on
here. The moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular
fit of hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and
insisted that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under
very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried and I had to draw
down the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he
cried till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a
woman does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the
circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.

e grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mysterious. He said:--

“Ah, you don’t comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just
the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door
and say, ‘May I come in?’ is not the true laughter. No! he is a king,
and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time
of suitability. He say: ‘I am here.’ Behold, in example, I grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, thoughieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
sufferers want that she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her
coffin and say, ‘Thud! thud!’ to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet

you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet
even at such moment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my
ear, ‘Here I am! Here I am!’ till the blood come dance back and bring
some of the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend
John, it is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and
woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance
to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard,
and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that
he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John,
that he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes
drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come;

ike ropes
drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come;
and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the
strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be.”I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as
I did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As
he answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

“Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded
with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered
if she were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that

wondered
if she were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that
lonely churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the
mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going
‘Toll! toll! toll!’ so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all us with the bowed head. And all
for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?”

“Well, for the life of me, Professor,” I said, “I can’t see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. But even if the burial service was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking.”

“Just so.

t about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking.”

“Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?”

“Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him.”

“Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church’s law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist.”

“I don’t see where the joke comes in there either!” I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

“Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others

said:--“Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others

said:--

“Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me the most of all.”

I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

“Because I know!”

And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming

tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
London; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin
another. If I do, or if I ever open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

“/Finis./”

_The “Westminster Gazette,” 25 September._

/A Hampstead Mystery./

The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what/A Hampstead Mystery./

The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what

sed with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to the writers of headlines as “The Kensington Horror,” or
“The Stabbing Woman,” or “The Woman in Black.” During the past two
or three days several cases have occurred of young children straying
from home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath.
In all these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a “bloofer lady.” It has always been late
in the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the
children have not been found until early in the following morning. It
is generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child

morning. It
is generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child
missed gave as his reason for being away that a “bloofer lady” had
asked him to come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and
used it as occasion served. This is the more natural as the favourite
game of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles.
A correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending
to be the “bloofer lady” is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing
the reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that the “bloofer lady” should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely

e the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely
says that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as
some of these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
themselves--to be.There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some
of the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might
be made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. The police of the division have been
instructed to keep a sharp lookout for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog

specially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.

_“The Westminster Gazette,” 25 September._

_Extra Special._

THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

/Another Child Injured./

_The “Bloofer Lady.”_

We have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at
the Shooter’s Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common
story to tell of being lured away by the “bloofer lady.”

CHAPTER XIV.

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

lured away by the “bloofer lady.”

CHAPTER XIV.

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_23 September._--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the
responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. My household work is done, so I shall take his foreign journal,
and lock myself up in my room and read it...._24 September._--I hadn’t the heart to write last night; that terrible

d it....

_24 September._--I hadn’t the heart to write last night; that terrible
record of Jonathan’s upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
terrible things; or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that
man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow!
I suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on
our wedding-day he said: “Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go
back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane.” There seems

n me to go
back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane.” There seems
to be through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count
was coming to London.... “If it should be, and he came to London, with
its teeming millions.” ... There may be a solemn duty; and if it come
we must not shrink from it.... I shall be prepared. I shall get my
typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready
for other eyes if required. And if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am
ready, poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never
let him be troubled or worried with it all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.

d I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.

_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

“_24 September._
    (_Confidence._)

“Dear Madam,--d I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.

_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

“_24 September._
    (_Confidence._)

“Dear Madam,--

“I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
send to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra’s death. By the kindness of
Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I
am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I
find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and
how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me.
It is for others’ good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift
much and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know.
May it be that I see you? You can trust me.

may be more great than you can know.
May it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am a friend of Dr. John
Seward and of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must keep
it private for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you
at once if you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I
implore your pardon, madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy, and
know how good you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if
it may be, enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon, and
forgive me.

“/Van Helsing./”

_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

“_25 September._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

“/Wilhelmina Harker./”

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

see you any time you call.

“/Wilhelmina Harker./”

/Mina Harker’s Journal./“/Wilhelmina Harker./”

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

see you any time you call.

“/Wilhelmina Harker./”

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect
it will throw some light upon Jonathan’s sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason for his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the
real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of
course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear, and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten

and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of
her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew all about it;
and now he wants me to tell him about it, so that he may understand. I
hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra; I should
never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even a negative one,
brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing will not
blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I
cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, andI suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and

ther rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been parted since our marriage. I do
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o’clock and the doctor will be here soon
now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan’s journal unless he asks me. I am
so glad I have typewritten out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how
it all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it
be all possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan’s

eam. Can it
be all possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan’s
journal first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor,
poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God all
this may not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it
may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and
awful in its consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears
and brain did not deceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that
it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no
matter which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be
a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur’s friend and Dr.ing must be
a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur’s friend and Dr.
Seward’s, and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he is good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes tomorrow I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and then, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan’s
friend on “The Exeter News” told him that memory was everything in
such work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare
interview; I shall try to record it _verbatim_.

It was half-past two o’clock when the knock came. I took my courage
_à deux mains_ and waited.

st two o’clock when the knock came. I took my courage
_à deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
announced “Dr. Van Helsing.”

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium height,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy eyebrows come down and
the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first

me down and
the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first
almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide
apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble
over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes
are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man’s
moods. He said to me:--

“Mrs. Harker, is it not?” I bowed assent.“Mrs. Harker, is it not?” I bowed assent.

“That was Miss Mina Murray?” Again I assented.

“It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come.”

“Sir,” I said, “you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra.” And I held out my hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

per of Lucy Westenra.” And I held out my hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

“Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----” He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

“I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Madam Mina; it was begun after you left, and was made in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much

ed her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you remember.”

“I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it.”

“Ah, then you have a good memory for facts, for details? It is not
always so with young ladies.”

“No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you
if you like.”

“Oh, Madam Mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour.” I
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--I suppose it
is some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

“May I read it?”

“If you wish,” I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
the instant his face fell.“May I read it?”

“If you wish,” I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
the instant his face fell.

nswered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
the instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

“Oh, you so clever woman!” he said. “I long knew that Mr. Jonathan was
a man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for
me? Alas! I know not the shorthand.” By this time my little joke was
over, and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from my
work-basket and handed it to him.

“Forgive me,” I said: “I could not help it; but I had been thinking
that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might
not have to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you.”

your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you.”

He took it, and his eyes glistened. “You are so good,” he said. “And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read.”

“By all means,” I said, “read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat.” He bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers,
whilst I went to see after lunch, chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back I found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

“Oh, Madam Mina,” he said, “how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me.“Oh, Madam Mina,” he said, “how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me.

can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light; and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Madam”--he said this very solemnly--“if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
your husband will be blessed in you.”

“But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me.”

d in you.”

“But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me.”

“Not know you--I, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and
women; I, who have made my speciality the brain and all that belongs
to him and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that
you have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in
every line. I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels’ eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your

le too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your
husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone,
and is he strong and hearty?” I saw here an opening to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--“He has almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr.
Hawkins’s death.” He interrupted:--

“Oh yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters.” I went
on:--

“I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock.”

“A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
shock was it?”

“He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever.” And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush.

to his brain fever.” And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I
was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

“My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here
by my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen suchto here
by my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. Believe me, then, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what
I am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my
study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.

ife a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
Husband Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like
not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must
eat and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think over what you have told me, and when I have thought I will
ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of husband
Jonathan’s trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now;
afterwards you shall tell me all.”

After lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

“And now tell me all about him.” When it came to speaking to this great,

me:--

“And now tell me all about him.” When it came to speaking to this great,
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to
go on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and I
trusted him, so I said:--“Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things.” He reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

“Oh, my dear, if you only knew how strange is the matter regarding which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little

which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one’s belief, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane.”

“Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off
my mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is
long, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and
Jonathan’s. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and
judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think.”

hen when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think.”

“I promise,” he said as I gave him the papers; “I shall in the morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may.”

“Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3.34 train, which
will leave you at Paddington before eight.” He was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains offhand, but he does not know that I have made
up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don’t know what.

_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don’t know what.

_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

“_25 September, 6 o’clock._

“Dear Madam Mina,--

Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

“_25 September, 6 o’clock._

“Dear Madam Mina,--

“I have read your husband’s so wonderful diary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my
life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and you there is
no dread. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of
men, that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to
that room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more

e you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

“Yours the most faithful,
    “/Abraham Van Helsing./”

_Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

“_25 September_, 6.30 _p.m._

“My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

“A thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are
in the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be
really in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing,
had a wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6.25 to-night
from Launceston and will be here at 10.18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you therefore, instead of lunching with us, please comeno fear
to-night. Will you therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast, at eight o’clock, if this be not too early for you? You
can get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10.30 train, which will
bring you to Paddington by 2.35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it
that, if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

“Believe me,
    “Your faithful and grateful friend,
    “/Mina Harker./”

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing’s visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she had been
about me.

g
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she had been
about me. She showed me in the doctor’s letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where

over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where
he was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

“But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock.” It
was so funny to hear my wife called “Madam Mina” by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

“I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already.”“I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already.”

“And how?”

“By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the
evidence of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life.

so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
myself. Doctor, you don’t know what it is to doubt everything, even
yourself. No, you don’t; you couldn’t with eyebrows like yours.” He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

“So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife.” I
would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded
and stood silent.

“She is one of God’s women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men
and other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth.

at there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the
knowing of others; but I have seen your true self since last night. You
will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives.”

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

“And now,” he said, “may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on Ie here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do.”

“Look here, sir,” I said, “does what you have to do concern the Count?”

“It does,” he said solemnly.

“Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10.30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundle of papers.
You can take them with you and read them in the train.”

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting he said:

“Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina
too.”

“We shall both come when you will,” I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers of the previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for

e previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for
the train to start, he was turning them over. His eye suddenly seemed
to catch something in one of them, “The Westminster Gazette”--I knew
it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself: “Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!” I do not
think he remembered me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: “Love to Madam Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said “Finis,” and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said “Finis,” and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather

a week
since I said “Finis,” and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he
had just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any
trouble to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from
it I gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is
with him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well
of good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was settling down to my

; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows too,
but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He went to
Exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. To-day he came back, and
almost bounded into my room at about half-past five o’clock, and thrust
last night’s “Westminster Gazette” into my hand.

“What do you think of that?” he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but

is
arms.“What do you think of that?” he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but

is
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but
he took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being
decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached
a passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. “Well?” he said.

“It is like poor Lucy’s.”

“And what do make of it?”

“Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured them.” I did not quite understand his answer:--

“That is true indirectly, but not directly.”

“How do you mean, Professor?” I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one’s spirits--but

freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one’s spirits--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

“Tell me!” I said. “I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture.”

“Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as
to what poor Lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?”

“Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood.”

“And how the blood lost or waste?” I shook my head. He stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

“You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced.“You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced.

friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to
you. Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men’s
eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other
men have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to
explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend

eliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do
not believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No?
Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in
hypnotism----”

“Yes,” I said. “Charcot has proved that pretty well.” He smiled as
he went on: “Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course
then you understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great
Charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how youconclusion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought-reading. Let me tell you,
my friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science
which would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered
electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned as
wizards. There are always mysteries in life. Why was it that Methuselah
lived nine hundred years, and ‘Old Parr’ one hundred and sixty-nine,
and yet that poor Lucy, with four men’s blood in her poor veins, could
not live even one day? For, had she lived one more day, we could have
save her. Do you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know the
altogether of comparative anatomy, and can say wherefore the qualities

know the
altogether of comparative anatomy, and can say wherefore the qualities
of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me why,
when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for
centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, that those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are

ecause that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?”

“Good God, Professor!” I said, starting up. “Do you mean to tell me
that Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in
London in the nineteenth century?” He waved his hand for silence, and
went on:--“Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the

men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and
the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then
men come and take away the unbroken seal, and that there lie the Indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?” Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature’s eccentricities and possible impossibilities that
my imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching

ies that
my imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching
me some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam;
but he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object
of thought in mind all the time. But now I was without his help, yet I
wanted to follow him, so I said:--

“Professor, let me be your pet student again. Tell me the thesis, so
that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. I feel like a novice blundering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where I am going.”

“That is good image,” he said. “Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is“That is good image,” he said. “Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is

m going.”

“That is good image,” he said. “Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is
this: I want you to believe.”

“To believe what?”

“To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once
of an American who so defined faith: ‘that which enables us to believe
things which we know to be untrue.’ For one, I follow that man. He meant
that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of truth check
the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway truck. We get
the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value him; but all the
same we must not let him think himself all the truth in the universe.”

“Then you want me not to let some previous conviction injure the
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
your lesson aright?”

of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
your lesson aright?”

“Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. You think then that those so small holes in the children’s
throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?”

“I suppose so.” He stood up and said solemnly:--

“Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse,
far, far worse.”

“In God’s name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?” I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

“They were made by Miss Lucy!”

CHAPTER XV.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

y were made by Miss Lucy!”

CHAPTER XV.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?” He raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. “Would I were!” he
said. “Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all
my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!”

“Forgive me,” said I.

when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!”

“Forgive me,” said I. He went on:--

“My friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in the breaking to
you, for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do
not expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the ‘no’ of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dare you come with me?”

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

“And prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

nd prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--“And prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

nd prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

“The logic is simple, no madman’s logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty fog. If it be not true, then proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come,
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hospital. Dr. Vincent of the North Hospital, where the papers say
the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were in
class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will
not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to
learn. And then----”

ends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to
learn. And then----”

“And then?” He took a key from his pocket and held it up. “And then we
spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This
is the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give
to Arthur.” My heart sank within me, for I felt that there were some
fearful ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up
what heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon
was passing....

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food,
and altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from
its throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy’s throat. They were smaller,ing the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy’s throat. They were smaller,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what
he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of
some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to
think that it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of London. “Out of so many harmless ones,” he said, “there may
be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
the Zoological Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days
ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction.

y ten days
ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction.
For a week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood
on the Heath and in every alley in the place until this ‘bloofer lady’
scare came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them.
Even this poor little mite, when he woke up today, asked the nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the ‘bloofer lady.’”

“I hope,” said Van Helsing, “that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?”

y be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?”

“Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed.”

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

“There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way.”

We dined at “Jack Straw’s Castle” along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o’clock we
started from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for

ndividual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for
he went on unhesitatingly; but as for me, I was in quite a mix-up
as to locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people,
till at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol
of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached
the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little
difficulty--for it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange
to us--we found the Westenra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened
the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously,
motioned me to precede him. There was a delicious irony in the offer,
in the courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. Mye offer,
in the courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring
one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a match-box and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the daytime, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished

scoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of Lucy’s coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

“What are you going to do?” I asked.

“To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced.” Straightway he began

asked.“What are you going to do?” I asked.

“To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced.” Straightway he began

asked.

“To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced.” Straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: “You shall see,” and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point
of the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to

pse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side
of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking
the edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty.

It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. “Are you satisfied now, friend
John?” he asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as

asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
I answered him:

“I am satisfied that Lucy’s body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing.”

“And what is that, friend John?”

“That it is not there.”“I am satisfied that Lucy’s body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing.”

“And what is that, friend John?”

“That it is not there.”

“That is good logic,” he said, “so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--account for it not being there?”

“Perhaps a body-snatcher,” I suggested. “Some of the undertaker’s people
may have stolen it.” I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. “Ah
well!” he said, “we must have more proof. Come with me.”

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag.

aced
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. We opened the door, and went out. Behind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, saying: “Will you keep it? You had
better be assured.” I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I motioned him to keep it. “A key is nothing,” I said;
“there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind.” He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he could watch
at the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my
sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant

ight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust; so altogether I had
a dreary, miserable time.Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
Professor’s side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then
I too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs,
and I stumbled over graves.

t I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs,
and I stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far
off an early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked the pathway to the church, a white, dim
figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the
rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

“Are you satisfied now?”

“No,” I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

“Do you not see the child?”

“Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?” I
asked.

?”

“Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?” I
asked.

“We shall see,” said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child’s throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

“Was I right?” I asked triumphantly.

“We were just in time,” said the Professor thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during the night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman’s heavy tramp,
and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw
it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of
astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near the “Spaniards,” and drove to town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours’
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall

hours’
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall
go with him on another expedition.

_27 September._--It was two o’clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we
saw the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe
till morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that we should
not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense
of the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed
out of place; and I realised distinctly the perils of the law which
we were incurring in our unhallowed work.distinctly the perils of the law which
we were incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all
so useless. Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a
woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of
folly to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and
again courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome
as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy’s coffin, and I followed.

sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy’s coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I
could not believe that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

“Is this a juggle?” I said to him.

“Are you convinced now?” said the Professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

“See,” he went on, “see, they are even sharper than before. With this

e teeth.

“See,” he went on, “see, they are even sharper than before. With this
and this”--and he touched one of the canine teeth and that below
it--“the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend
John?” Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which I was even at the moment ashamed, I said:--

“She may have been placed here since last night.”“She may have been placed here since last night.”

“Indeed? That is so, and by whom?”

“I do not know. Some one has done it.”

“And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so.” I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph.

t
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. He was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--

“Here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded: here is
some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when
the Un-Dead sleep at home”--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of

y when
the Un-Dead sleep at home”--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was “home”--“their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that-was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep.” This turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing’s
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

“Ah, you believe now?”

I answered: “Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?”

o hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?”I answered: “Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?”

o hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?”

“I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body.” It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling
was not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

“I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If

said:--

“I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If
I did simply follow my inclining I would do now, at this moment, what
is to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that
are thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have
to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the
wounds on Lucy’s throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child’s
at the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week after she die--if you know of this and know ofd more
beautiful in a whole week after she die--if you know of this and know of
the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect
Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when
I took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always.
Yet he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will

ppy always.
Yet he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and, again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he
must pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and
see that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this

ylum, and
see that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this
churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to the
Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of America that gave his blood. Later
we shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
there dine, for I must be back here before the sun set.”So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.

_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel, directed
to John Seward, M.D._

(Not delivered.)

“_27 September._

“Friend John,--

“I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard.

ite this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall
not leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more
eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out;
they may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the Un-Dead is
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,
and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy, or from her, I have no fear: but that other to whom is there that

or Miss
Lucy, or from her, I have no fear: but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy’s life, and
we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf
and I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he
shall find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. But it may be
that he will not attempt the place. There is no reason why he should;
his hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where thee should;
his hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
Un-Dead woman sleep, and one old man watch.

“Therefore I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
though it, so that the world may rest from him.

“If it be so, farewell.

“/Van Helsing./”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night’s sleep will do for
one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing’s monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged.

at he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. Is it possible that
the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some
light on the mystery.

_29 September, morning_.... Last night, at a little before ten o’clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing’s room; he told us all what he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all

what he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, “for,” he said, “there is a grave duty to be
done there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?” This query was
directly addressed to Lord Godalming.“I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. Quincey and I talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself
that I’m about up a tree as to any meaning about anything.”

“Me, too,” said Quincey Morris laconically.

“Oh,” said the Professor, “then you are nearer the beginning, both of

nically.

“Oh,” said the Professor, “then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin.”

It was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

“I want your permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for
a time--I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything.”

“That’s frank anyhow,” broke in Quincey.

ll not blame yourselves for anything.”

“That’s frank anyhow,” broke in Quincey. “I’ll answer for the Professor.
I don’t quite see his drift, but I swear he’s honest; and that’s good
enough for me.”

“I thank you, sir,” said Van Helsing proudly. “I have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me.” He held out a hand, which Quincey took.

Then Arthur spoke out:--Then Arthur spoke out:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, I don’t quite like to ‘buy a pig in a poke,’ as they
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise.
If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though, for the life of me, I

her of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though, for the life of me, I
cannot understand what you are driving at.”

“I accept your limitation,” said Van Helsing, “and all I ask of you
is that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will
first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations.”

“Agreed!” said Arthur; “that is only fair. And now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?”

“I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
Kingstead.”

Arthur’s face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

“Where poor Lucy is buried?” The Professor bowed. Arthur went on: “And
when there?”

“To enter the tomb!” Arthur stood up.

owed. Arthur went on: “And
when there?”

“To enter the tomb!” Arthur stood up.

“Professor, are you in earnest; or is it some monstrous joke? Pardon
me, I see that you are in earnest.” He sat down again, but I could see
that he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was
silence until he asked again:--

“And when in the tomb?”

“To open the coffin.”

“This is too much!” he said, angrily rising again. “I am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----” He fairly choked with indignation. The
Professor looked pityingly at him.

“If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend,” he said, “God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and“If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend,” he said, “God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and

nows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!”

Arthur looked up with set, white face and said:--

“Take care, sir, take care!”

“Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?” said Van Helsing.
“And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go
on?”

“That’s fair enough,” broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

“Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----”

Arthur jumped to his feet.

“Good God!” he cried. “What do you mean? Has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?” He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

she been buried alive?” He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

“I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no
further than to say that she might be Un-Dead.”

“Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?”

“There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?”

“Heavens and earth, no!” cried Arthur in a storm of passion. “Not for
the wide world will I consent to any mutilation of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want toshould
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things,
or am I mad that listen to them? Don’t dare to think more of such a
desecration; I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do
it!”

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

“My Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a
duty to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask
you now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if
when later I make the same request you do not be more eager for its

ten; and if
when later I make the same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow of your Lordship’s wishes, I shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will.” His voice broke a little, and he went on with an accent full
of pity:--

“But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you
will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to
save you from sorrow. Just think.so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to
save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so much
of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from my own land to
do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and then
to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I am
ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you gave:
the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her lover,
but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her my nights and
days--before death, after death; and if my death can do her good even
now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely.” He said
this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected by it.

He said
this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected by it.
He took the old man’s hand and said in a broken voice:--

“Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I
will go with you and wait.”

CHAPTER XVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

It was just a quarter before twelve o’clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark, with occasional
gleams of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded
across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing
slightly in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb
I looked well at Arthur, for I feared that the proximity to a place
laden with so sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself
well.lace
laden with so sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself
well. I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding tended in some
way a counteractent to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door, and
seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the
difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of us followed, and he
closed the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin.
Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

“You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?”

“It was.” The Professor turned to the rest, saying:--

“You hear; and yet there is one who does not believe with me.” He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur

h me.” He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. He evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

The coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by
Quincey Morris:--

“Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn’t
ask such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn’t so dishonour you as to imply a

wouldn’t
ask such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn’t so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this your doing?”wouldn’t
ask such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn’t so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this your doing?”

“I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and
saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
daytime, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?”

“Yes.”

“That night we were just in time. One more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move.

aves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable
that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown I took away
my garlic and other things. And so it is we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So”--here he shut the dark slide of his lantern--“now to the outside.”
He opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

ed the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.ed the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror
of that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the
brief gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man’s life; how sweet it
was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay;
how humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and
to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city.
Each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and
was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning
of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again

meaning
of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again
to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing’s conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has
to stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug
of tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin

it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. He answered:--

“I am closing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter.”“I am closing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter.”

“And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?” asked Quincey.
“Great Scott! Is this a game?”

“It is.”

“What is that which you are using?” This time the question was by
Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

“The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence.” It was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually

was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor’s, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it
was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself
been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet
I, who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress,
or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did
tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so

m; never did
tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from
the Professor a keen “S-s-s-s!” He pointed; and far down the avenue
of yews we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held
something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a
ray of moonlight fell between the masses of driving clouds and showed in
startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of
the grave. We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we
saw to be a fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry,hat we
saw to be a fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry,
such as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and
dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor’s warning hand, seen
by us as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked
the white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to
see clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as
ice, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features
of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of

esture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of
the tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on Lucy’s face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous light that even
Van Helsing’s iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy’s eyes in format gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy’s eyes in form
and colour; but Lucy’s eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung
to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when

. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile, he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

“Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!”

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix.

hen Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.hen Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped as if
arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now
no quiver from Van Helsing’s iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again
by mortal eyes. The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to
throw out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the
folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa’s snakes, and the lovely,

hough the
folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa’s snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur:--

“Answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?”

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

“Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no horror
like this ever any more!” and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear“Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no horror
like this ever any more!” and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear

uincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear
the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming
close to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the
sacred emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at the moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said:--

“Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The

ere is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock
the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home.” Coming close to Arthur,
he said:--

“My friend Arthur, you have had sore trial; but after, when you will
look back, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the
bitter waters, my child. By this time tomorrow, you will, please God,
have passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me.”

aters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me.”aters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me.”

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o’clock we three--Arthur,
Quincey Morris, and myself--called for the Professor. It was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. We got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task, and the sexton, under the belief

hen the
gravediggers had completed their task, and the sexton, under the belief
that everyone had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we entered, closing
it behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and
also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their
own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient
to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy’s coffin we all

ht sufficient
to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy’s coffin we all
looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there
in all its death-beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, nothing
but loathing for the foul Thing which had taken Lucy’s shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur’s face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--“Is this really Lucy’s body, or only a demon in her shape?”

“It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you shall see her
as she was, and is.”

She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there; the pointed
teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder
to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like
a devilish mockery of Lucy’s sweet purity.

unspiritual appearance, seeming like
a devilish mockery of Lucy’s sweet purity. Van Helsing, in his
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame;
then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round
wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about three
feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and was
sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To

mer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To
me, a doctor’s preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

“Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all thatter age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the Un-Dead become themselves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had
met that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last
night when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had
died, have become _nosferatu_, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and
would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with
horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun.
Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse;
but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood, and

he worse;
but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood, and
by her power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood
with that so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the
tiny wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays
unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in the assimilation of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
To this I am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better

s her free.
To this I am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better
right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: ‘It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose’? Tell me if there be
such a one amongst us.”We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

“My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me

ow:--

“My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!” Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

“Brave lad! A moment’s courage, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time.”

“Go on,” said Arthur hoarsely. “Tell me what I am to do.”

“Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right.

eft hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. Then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in God’s name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love, and that the Un-Dead pass away.”

Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quincey and I followed as well as we
could. Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.

The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twistedThe Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted

screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us courage, so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth ceased to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The
terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur’s hand.

ly it lay still. The
terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur’s hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. Great drops of sweat sprang out on his forehead, and
his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

e over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.e over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

There in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
there was there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur’s shoulder, and said to
him:--

.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur’s shoulder, and said to
him:--

“And now, Arthur, my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?”

The reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man’s hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

“Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace.” He put his hands on the Professor’s shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

“And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil’s Un-Dead.

ot any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil’s Un-Dead. She is God’s true dead, whose soul is with Him!”ot any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil’s Un-Dead. She is God’s true dead, whose soul is with Him!”

Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the
tomb; the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and
gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked the
door he gave the key to Arthur.

Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. There was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--

“Now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?”

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the
Professor as we moved off:--

“Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John.“Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John.

you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And then begins our great quest. But first
I shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to
dread. Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is
a terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare, we
must not draw back.”

CHAPTER XVII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary/--_continued._

When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

“Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--/Mina
Harker./”

The Professor was delighted. “Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina,” he said,
“pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your
house, friend John. You must meet her at the station. Telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared.”

When the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker’s diary at Whitby. “Take these,” he
said, “and study them well. When I have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keepmaster of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need all
your faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day.
What is here told,” he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet
of papers as he spoke, “may be the beginning of the end to you and me
and many another; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk
the earth. Read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can
add in any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important.
You have kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes!
Then we shall go through all these together when that we meet.” He then
made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool
Street.

en
made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool
Street. I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen
minutes before the train came in.

The crowd melted away after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: “Dr. Seward, is it not?”

“And you are Mrs. Harker!” I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

“I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----” She stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for
it was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a

ease, for
it was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I
had sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a slight
shudder when we entered.In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a slight
shudder when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. So here I am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of looking
at the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open
before me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them.

her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be careful not to frighten her. Here
she is!

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_29 September._--After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr. Seward’s
study. At the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking
with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, “Come in,” I entered.

To my intense surprise, there was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much
interested.

“I hope I did not keep you waiting,” I said; “but I stayed at the door

erested.

“I hope I did not keep you waiting,” I said; “but I stayed at the door
as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you.”

“Oh,” he replied, with a smile, “I was only entering my diary.”

“Your diary?” I asked him in surprise.

“Yes,” he answered. “I keep it in this.” As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

“Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?”

“Certainly,” he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.“Certainly,” he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

“The fact is,” he began awkwardly, “I only keep my diary in it; and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that

and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----” He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

“You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I can know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very,
very dear to me.”

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

“Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!”

“Why not?” I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
At length he stammered out:--

“You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary.” Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he

part of the
diary.” Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he
said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the
naïveté of a child: “That’s quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!”
I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. “I gave myself away that
time!” he said. “But do you know that, although I have kept the diary
for months past, it never once struck me how I was going to find any
particular part of it in case I wanted to look it up?” By this time my
mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have
something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being,
and I said boldly:--

“Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on my
typewriter.” He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

for you on my
typewriter.” He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

“No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn’t let you know that terrible
story!”for you on my
typewriter.” He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

“No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn’t let you know that terrible
story!”

Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on the great batch of typewriting
on the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his
thinking, followed their direction. As they saw the parcel he realised
my meaning.

“You do not know me,” I said. “When you have read those papers--my
own diary and my husband’s also, which I have typed--you will know me
better. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not

wn heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
expect you to trust me so far.”

He is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

“You are quite right. I did not trust you because I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
the only atonement in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the

horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the
meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things.” He carried the phonograph himself up
to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already....

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce
dinner, so I said: “She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour;”
and I went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker’s diary,
when she came in.

went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker’s diary,
when she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes
were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to my heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

“I greatly fear I have distressed you.”

“Oh no, not distressed me,” she replied, “but I have been more touched
than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to almighty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful.

ty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out the
words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
I did.”

“No one need ever know, shall ever know,” I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

“Ah, but they must!”

“Must! But why?” I asked.

“Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy’s
death and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all the
knowledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the cylinders
which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know; but I
can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark mystery.; but I
can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark mystery.
You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain point,
and I see already, though your diary only took me to 7 September, how
poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought out.
Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark.” She looked at me so appealingly, and at
the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. “You shall,” I said, “do as you

bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. “You shall,” I said, “do as you
like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There are terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on the road to
poor Lucy’s death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and I will answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were
present.”

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He

Journal.//Mina Harker’s Journal./

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He

Journal./

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy’s death, and--and all that followed,
was done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not of
a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a

mped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if
I had not known Jonathan’s experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn’t know what to believe, and so got out of
my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--

“Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes.“Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes.

t me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything,
and I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell
them when they come.” He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace,
and I began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder.
I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had
done with all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward
went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had

Dr. Seward
went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had
finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel
too lonely whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; the world
seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I
left him I remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the Professor’s
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station
at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed
the files of “The Westminster Gazette” and “The Pall Mall Gazette,” and
took them to my room. I remember how much “The Dailygraph” and “The
Whitby Gazette,” of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand
the terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall look

erstand
the terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o’clock. He had got his
wife’s wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. If his journal be true--and
judging by one’s own wonderful experiences it must be--he is also a
man of great nerve. That going down to the vault a second time was
a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

f manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has
got the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the
carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his
wife’s typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here
he is....

Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be the
Count’s hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the
conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to thefrom the
conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the
purchase of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had only had
them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies!
Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that
by dinner-time they will be able to show a whole connected narrative. He
thinks that in the meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has
been a sort of index to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see
this yet, but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good
thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have
found the dates otherwise....

I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands folded,
smiling benignly.

d Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands folded,
smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw.
I sat down and talked with him on a lot of subjects, all of which he
treated naturally. He then, of his own accord, spoke of going home, a
subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here.
In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I
believe that, had I not had the chat with Harker and read the letters
and the dates of his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for
him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious.
All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that hisity of the
Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that his
instinct is satisfied as to the vampire’s ultimate triumph? Stay; he
is himself zoophagous, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door
of the deserted house he always spoke of “master.” This all seems
confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came away; my friend
is just a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too
deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came
away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the attendant
a hint to look closely after him, and to have a strait-waistcoat ready
in case of need.

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington’s

ournal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington’s
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power,
I thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as I wanted. It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the Count’s to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father’s house, where they had decided that I must
stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all
knew that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington
had ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of
boxes.gton
had ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of
boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which
I had seen on the Count’s table before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle
which might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being
carried out. To use an Americanism, he had “taken no chances,” and the
absolute accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled was simply
the logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it:
“Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes.”
Also the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both
of these I got copies.

py of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both
of these I got copies. This was all the information Mr. Billington
could give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the
Customs officers, and the harbour-master. They had all something to say
of the strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in
local tradition; but no one could add to the simple description: “Fifty
cases of common earth.” I then saw the station-master, who kindly put
me in communication with the men who had actually received the boxes.
Their tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except
that the boxes were “main and mortal heavy,” and that shifting them
was dry work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there

shifting them
was dry work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there
wasn’t any gentleman “such-like as yourself, squire,” to show some sort
of appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form; another put in a
rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which
had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took
care before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach._30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a line
to his old companion the station-master at King’s Cross, so that when
I arrived there in the morning I was able to ask him about the arrival
of the boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper
officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice.

per
officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was
compelled to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

From thence I went on to Carter Paterson’s central office, where I
met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King’s Cross
office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the
delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found the tally agreeing

with the
delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found the tally agreeing
exactly; the carriers’ men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity,
through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying at a
later period this beneficent evil, one of the men remarked:--

“That ’ere ’ouse, guv’nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but
it ain’t been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick
in the place that you might have slep’ on it without ’urtin’ of yer
bones; an’ the place was that neglected that yer might ’ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it.n’ the place was that neglected that yer might ’ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn’t never git out quick enough. Lor’, I
wouldn’t take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark.”

Having been in the house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived
at Whitby from Varna in the _Demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel of Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from Dr. Seward’s diary I fear.

I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them.

see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them. By following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave
a face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear,trong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear,
good Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night.
I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity
any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is
not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward’s account of poor Lucy’s
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one’s heart.

_Later._--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we
expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan
with him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for

en Jonathan
with him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for
it brought back all poor dear Lucy’s hopes of only a few months ago.
Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr.
Van Helsing, too, had been quite “blowing my trumpet,” as Mr. Morris
expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over,
and came to the conclusion that the best thing I could do would be to
post them in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward’s diary
that they had been at Lucy’s death--her real death--and that I need not

s diary
that they had been at Lucy’s death--her real death--and that I need not
fear to betray any secret before the time. So I told them, as well as I
could, that I had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--“Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?”

I nodded, and he went on:--

“I don’t quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that
all I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. I
have had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man

lp you. I
have had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man
humble to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor
Lucy----” Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands.
I could hear the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive
delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked
quietly out of the room. I suppose there is something in woman’s nature
that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings
on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his
manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down
on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and
took his hand. I hope he didn’t think it forward of me, and that if he

him and
took his hand. I hope he didn’t think it forward of me, and that if he
ever thinks of it afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I
wrong him; I _know_ he never will--he is too true a gentleman. I said to
him, for I could see that his heart was breaking:--

“I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won’t you let me be of some little service--for
Lucy’s sake?”

In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found aIn an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a

. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder, and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook
with emotion.

We women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt this big,
sorrowing man’s head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child.

day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that
for days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had
been unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to the terrible circumstances with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. “I know now how I suffered,” he said,
as he dried his eyes, “but I do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall

other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy’s sake?”“For dear Lucy’s sake,” I said as we clasped hands. “Ay, and for your
own sake,” he added, “for if a man’s esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring
to you a time when you need a man’s help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know.” He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that

hat you
will let me know.” He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--

“I promise.”

As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps. “How is Art?” he said. Then noticing
my red eyes, he went on: “Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him.”

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. I saw the
manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

“I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me

him:--

“I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak.” He saw that I was in earnest, and
stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

“Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!” Then he went into the study to his friend.

“Little girl!”--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!

CHAPTER XVIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./“Little girl!”--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!

CHAPTER XVIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

oh, but he
proved himself a friend!

CHAPTER XVIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_30 September._--I got home at five o’clock, and found that Godalming
and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to
the carriers’ men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker
gave us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time
since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
finished, Mrs. Harker said:--

“Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your diary

atient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!” She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: “Why?”

“She is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it,” I
answered. “Oh, very well,” he said: “let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up the place.” His method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgustingd, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: “Let the lady come in,” and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where
I could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

“Good evening, Mr. Renfield,” said she.

ling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

“Good evening, Mr. Renfield,” said she. “You see, I know you, for Dr.
Seward has told me of you.” He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

“You’re not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can’t be,
you know, for she’s dead.” Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

“Oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker.”

“Then what are you doing here?”

“My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward.”

“Then don’t stay.”

“But why not?” I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs.

hy not?” I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

“How did you know I wanted to marry any one?” His reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

“What an asinine question!”“What an asinine question!”

“I don’t see that at all, Mr. Renfield,” said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

“You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is loved
and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of interest in
our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his household and

rest in
our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his household and
his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of them hardly
in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since I
myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but notice
that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates lean towards the
errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_.” I positively opened my
eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet lunatic--the most
pronounced of his type that I had ever met with--talking elemental
philosophy, and with the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if it
was Mrs. Harker’s presence which had touched some chord in his memory.
If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due to her unconscious

memory.
If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due to her unconscious
influence, she must have some rare gift or power.

We continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished,
for he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

“Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my
being put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, notive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to
take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion
I tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers
by the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of
his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, ‘For the
blood is the life.’ Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn’t that true,
doctor?” I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what I
ought to think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat

ew what I
ought to think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat
up his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch,
I saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told
Mrs. Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying
pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: “Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself,” to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

“Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!”

When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the boys behind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

“Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And
Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!”

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker’s suggestion; at
which the Professor interrupted me:--

“Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man’s brain--a brain that a
man should have were he much gifted--and woman’s heart. The good God

ain that a
man should have were he much gifted--and woman’s heart. The good God
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things
to think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, thenr things
to think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then
she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work,
and we go alone.” I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what
we had found in his absence: that the house which Dracula had bought was
the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. “Oh that we had known it before!” he said, “for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, ‘the milk
that is spilt cries not out afterwards,’ as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end.” Then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

“I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment.”

“Not up to this moment, Professor,” she said impulsively, “but up to
this morning.”

“But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it.”

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pocket, she
said:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in? It
is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal.

verything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. Must it go in?” The Professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

“It need not go in if you do not wish it; but pray that it may. It can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love.” She took it back with
another blush and a bright smile.And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o’clock. The rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.

, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward’s study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o’clock, we unconsciously formed a sort
of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of the
table, to which Dr. Seward motioned him as he came into the room. He
made me sit next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary;
Jonathan sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward,
and Mr. Morris--Lord Godalming being next to the Professor, and Dr.
Seward in the centre. The Professor said:--

“I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers.” We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

he facts
that are in these papers.” We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

“Then it were, I think good that I tell you something of the kind
of enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for
me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

“There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that
they exist. Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience,
the teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that
through long years I have trained myself to keep an open mind, I could
not have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. ‘See!I could
not have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. ‘See!
see! I prove; I prove.’ Alas! Had I known at the first what now I
know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared
to many of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must so work,
that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_
do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and
being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which
is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is
of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he
have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply,
the divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to

ogy imply,
the divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to
are for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil
in callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations,
appear at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to
him; he can, within his range, direct the elements: the storm, the fog,
the thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the
owl, and the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and
become small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are
we to begin our strife to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and
having found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a
terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make; it is a
terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make
the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win;
and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail
here, is not mere life or death. It is that we become as him; that we
henceforward become foul things of the night like him--without heart or
conscience, preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best.
To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to
us again? We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of
God’s sunshine; an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But we are
face to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say,
no; but then I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his

I say,
no; but then I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music, and his love, lie far behind. You others are
young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?”

Whilst he was speaking Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man’s hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman’s love to hear its music.

When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

“I answer for Mina and myself,” he said.

“Count me in, Professor,” said Mr.

s.

“I answer for Mina and myself,” he said.

“Count me in, Professor,” said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

“I am with you,” said Lord Godalming, “for Lucy’s sake, if for no other
reason.”“I answer for Mina and myself,” he said.

“Count me in, Professor,” said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

“I am with you,” said Lord Godalming, “for Lucy’s sake, if for no other
reason.”

Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up, and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,

us work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

“Well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have resources of science; we are free
to act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours
equally. In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and
we are free to use them. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

“Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the

st us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.st us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.

“All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do
not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and
death--nay of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied;
in the first place because we have to be--no other means is at our
control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and
superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest
for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us
would have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief

entific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the
vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany
all over, in France, in India, even in the Chersonese; and in China,
so far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him
at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the
devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then,
we have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of
the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience.the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of
the time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of
the living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan
observe. He has the strength of many in his hand--witness again
Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too.

he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the window at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at
the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship’s captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance
he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. He
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hair-breadth space at
the tomb door.Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hair-breadth space at
the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from anything
or into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up
with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power
this, in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear
me through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is
even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his
cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to
obey some of nature’s laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere
at the first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to
come; though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as

id him to
come; though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as
does that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain
times can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the place whither
he is bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise
or sunset. These things are we told, and in this record of ours we
have proof by inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his
limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the
place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at
Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has nohe flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

“Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine

r eyes.

“Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what
he has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won
his name against the Turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the
most cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the ‘land beyond
the forest.’ That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him
to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were,with him
to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were,
says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions
who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One.
They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains
over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his
due. In the records are such words as ‘stregoica’--witch, ‘ordog,’ and
‘pokol’--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is
spoken of as ‘wampyr,’ which we all understand too well. There have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in

l. For it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest.”

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. There was a little
pause, and then the Professor went on:--

“And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan
that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of these
boxes have been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be
to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall

hould be
to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the
latter, we must trace----”hould be
to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the
latter, we must trace----”

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with
a bullet, which, ricocheting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the
window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris’s voice
without:--

“Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it.” A minute later he came in and said:--

“It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs.

and said:--

“It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs.
Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly.
But the fact is that while the Professor was talking there came a big
bat and sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that I cannot stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art.”

“Did you hit it?” asked Dr. Van Helsing.

“I don’t know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood.” Without
saying any more he took his seat, and the Professor began to resume his
statement:--

“We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must

statement:--

“We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.“And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night,
you no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are
men, and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are.”

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to

s we
are.”

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to
me good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their
safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

Mr. Morris resumed the discussion:--

“As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
another victim.”

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave

hat if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax,
with means to get into the house.

Manlike, they have told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary_

_1 October, 4 a.m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an urgent
message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see him at
once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me. I told
the messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in the morning; I
was busy just at the moment. The attendant added:--

“He seems very importunate, sir.“He seems very importunate, sir.

usy just at the moment. The attendant added:--

“He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I
don’t know but what, if you don’t see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits.” I knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: “All right; I’ll go now;” and I asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my “patient.”

“Take me with you, friend John,” said the Professor. “His case in your
diary interested me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on
_our_ case. I should much like to see him, and especially when his mind
is disturbed.”

“May I come also?” asked Lord Godalming.

“Me too?” said Quincey Morris. I nodded, and we all went down the
passage together.

oo?” said Quincey Morris. I nodded, and we all went down the
passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was
an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had
ever met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons
would prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the room,
but none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I
would at once release him from the asylum and send him home. This he
backed up with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced
his own existing sanity. “I appeal to your friends,” he said; “they
will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you; “they
will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you
have not introduced me.” I was so much astonished, that the oddness
of introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment;
and, besides, there was a certain dignity in the man’s manner, so much
of the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction: “Lord
Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr.
Renfield.” He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

“Lord Godalming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the
Windham; I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. He was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in
his youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr.

ve heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be proud of your great
state. Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics may hold
allegiance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of Treaty may yet prove
a vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him
to one of a class.ional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him
to one of a class. You gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or
by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of their liberties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances.” He made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man’s character and history,

under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man’s character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impulse
to tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about
the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction
of meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

“But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire

quickly:--“But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire

quickly:--

“But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire
to go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may.
Time presses, and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it
is of the essence of the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to
put before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment.” He looked at me keenly, and
seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

“Is it possible that I have erred in my supposition?”

“You have,” I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally.
There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

s I felt, brutally.
There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

“Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask
for this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to
implore in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of
others. I am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons; but
you may, I assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound
and unselfish, and springing from the highest sense of duty. Could you
look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments
which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and
truest of your friends.” Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a
growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual. I had a
growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual
method was but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so
determined to let him go on a little longer, knowing from experience
that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the end. Van
Helsing was gazing at him with a look of the utmost intensity, his bushy
eyebrows almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He
said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the time, but
only when I thought of it afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an
equal:--

“Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.

-a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.
Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility,
the privilege you seek.” He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. The Professor went on:--

“Come sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in
the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish.” He still shook
his head as he said:--

“Dr.

shall aid you to achieve your wish.” He still shook
his head as he said:--“Dr.

shall aid you to achieve your wish.” He still shook
his head as he said:--

“Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not
my own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me.” I thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went
towards the door, simply saying:--

“Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night.”

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient.
He moved towards me so quickly that for the moment I feared that he
was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his

owever, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request
of which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when
he wanted a cat; and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,

the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth
a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks and his
whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--“Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me
out of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you
will; send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in
a strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let
me go out of this. You don’t know what you do by keeping me here. I am

but let
me go out of this. You don’t know what you do by keeping me here. I am
speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don’t know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me
out of this and save my soul from guilt! Can’t you hear me, man? Can’t
you understand? Will you never learn? Don’t you know that I am sane and
earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!”

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

“Come,” I said sternly, “no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly.”

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments.
Then without a word he rose, and moving over, sat down on the side of
the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasions, just as I had
expected.

When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

“You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to convince you tonight.”

CHAPTER XIX.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_1 October, 5 a.m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy

ournal./CHAPTER XIX.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_1 October, 5 a.m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy

ournal./

_1 October, 5 a.m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

re silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

“Say, Jack, if that man wasn’t attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic I ever saw. I’m not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance.” Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

“Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I’m glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say.
All is best as they are.” Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

“I don’t know but that I agree with you.

r them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--“I don’t know but that I agree with you.

r them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

“I don’t know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an
ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can’t forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear
my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count ‘lord and
master,’ and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn’t above trying to use a respectable lunatic.
He certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best.

c.
He certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man.” The Professor stepped over, and laying a hand on
his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

“Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good God?” Lord Godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but he now returned. He held up a little silver
whistle as he remarked:--

“That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I’ve got an antidote on
call.” Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone

g care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took
out a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four
little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:--“My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual. Remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his is not
amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but yet they cannot hurt
him as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from
his touch.

im as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from
his touch. Keep this near your heart”--as he spoke he lifted a little
silver crucifix and held it out to me, I being nearest to him--“put
these flowers round your neck”--here he handed to me a wreath of
withered garlic blossoms--“for other enemies more mundane, this revolver
and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which
you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last,
this, which we must not desecrate needless.” This was a portion of
sacred wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the
others was similarly equipped. “Now,” he said, “friend John, where are
the skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break

where are
the skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break
house by the window, as before at Miss Lucy’s.”

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as
a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit;
after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
Dr. Seward’s diary of the opening of Miss Westenra’s tomb; I fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.“_In manus tuas, Domine!_” he said, crossing himself as he passed over

n door.

“_In manus tuas, Domine!_” he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we might possibly attract attention from the road. The
Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry to make our exit. Then we all lit
our lamps and proceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania.

ome to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was caked. The
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spiders’ webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They

in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They
had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, like that exposed when the Professor lifted the
keys. He turned to me and said:----“You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you
know at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?” I had
an idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been
able to get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong
turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with
iron bands. “This is the spot,” said the Professor, as he turned his
lamp on a small map of the house, copied from the file of my original
correspondence regarding the purchase.

ouse, copied from the file of my original
correspondence regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found
the key on the bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some
unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air
seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an
odour as we encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at
close quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting
stage of his existence in his rooms or, when he was bloated with fresh
blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was
small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul.
There was an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the
fouler air.

e was an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the
fouler air. But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was
not alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with
the pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption
had become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every
breath exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and
intensified its loathsomeness.Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and the high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our

shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we
began:----

“The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
examine every hole and corner and cranny, and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of the rest.” A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mistaking them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted
door into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still.

o the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count’s evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only for a moment, for
as Lord Godalming said, “I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shadows,” and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction,
and stepped into the passage. There was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining.A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining.

tes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew
back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was
seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr.

tle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward’s house by the yelping of dogs, and after about
a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved I
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had
elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting

at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were
multiplying in thousands, and moved out.at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were
multiplying in thousands, and moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in in the same manner, had but small
prey ere the whole mass had vanished.

With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in

darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening
of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding
ourselves in the open, I know not; but most certainly the shadow of
dread seemed to slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming
lost something of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a
whit in our resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked
it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We
found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and
all untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.

ns, and
all untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

“So far,” he said, “our night has been eminently successful. No harm
has come to us such as I feared might be, and yet we have ascertained
how many boxes are missing. More than all do I rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been

at this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina
or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count’s command are yet themselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother’s cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We have other matters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used

atters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity
to cry ‘check’ in some way in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night’s work. It may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink.”The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from Renfield’s room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,

ng sound
from Renfield’s room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing
so softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler
than usual. I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it
is settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and
yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be

once she
suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be
a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that
all is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world.
I daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and tomorrow I shall keep
dark over to-night’s doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.

_1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two orh I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for
a few seconds she did not recognise me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in
the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it
be that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to
trace them all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and
the sooner the matter is attended to the better. I shall look up Thomas
Snelling today.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor
walking into my room.

--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor
walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and
it is quite evident that last night’s work has helped to take some of
the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the
night he suddenly said:----

“Your patient interests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound.” I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against

essary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against
getting any false impression from my patient. “But,” he answered, “I
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?”“Excuse me,” I said, “but the answer is here.” I laid my hand on the
typewritten matter. “When our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered the room.” Van Helsing smiled in turn. “Good!” he said.
“Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it

e said.
“Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?” I went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. “Do I interrupt?” he asked politely as he
stood at the door.

“Not at all,” I answered. “Come in. My work is finished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.”

“It is needless; I have seen him!”

“Well?”

“I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.

“Well?”

“I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.
When I entered the room he was sitting on a stool in the centre,
with his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a
measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. ‘Don’t
you know me?’ I asked. His answer was not reassuring: ‘I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutchmen!’ Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at
all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from thise room at
all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this
so clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a
few happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
worried, with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help,
it is better so.”

“I agree with you with all my heart,” I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. “Mrs. Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her.”

ained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her.”

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey
and Art are both out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. I
shall finish my round of work, and we shall meet to-night.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_1 October._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am
today; after Jonathan’s full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all.
This morning I slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count’s house. And yet he musta word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count’s house. And yet he must
have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn further into this awful work, and
I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband’s great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men....

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has
doubted of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my

n if he has
doubted of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible
excitement.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told
me to. I didn’t feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety.
I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came
to see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn’t gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now.plored. If I hadn’t gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn’t taken to visiting the churchyard
till I came, and if she hadn’t come there in the daytime with me she
wouldn’t have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn’t gone there
at night and asleep, that monster couldn’t have destroyed her as he
did. Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There now, crying again! I wonder
what has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he
knew that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on
my own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

ee it. I suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

I can’t quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember
hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like
praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield’s room, which
is somewhere under this. And then there was silence over everything,
silence so profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of
the window. All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the
moonlight seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a thing
seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so
that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible
slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentienceeptible
slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience
and a vitality of its own. I think that the digression of my thoughts
must have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay awhile, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it lying thick against the
wall, as though it were stealing up to the windows. The poor man was
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into

hat the
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not remember anything until the
morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and
a little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and
my hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed ateet, and
my hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at
the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to
dawn upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim around
me. The gas-light which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that I
had shut the window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what

I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker, and I could see now how it came in,
for I could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the
top of which I could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye.
Things began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words “a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night.” Was it indeed some suchwords “a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night.” Was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascination for me; till, as I
looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes; such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary’s
Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling
mist in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all
became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made

for all
became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made
was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. I
must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one’s reason if
there was too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to
prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear
to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into
their fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If
I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral;
that cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night’s sleep.
Last night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

_2 October, 10 p.m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must

ept at all._2 October, 10 p.m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must

ept at all.

_2 October, 10 p.m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must
have slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but
the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and
spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he
was very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade God
bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him.
This is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. Jonathan would be
miserable if he knew I had been crying. He and the others were out until
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how

o brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
together, as they said, but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see from Jonathan’s
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear

I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.

CHAPTER XX.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./CHAPTER XX.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal
Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything.
The very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to
him had proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected
debauch. I learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor
soul, that he was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates
was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr.

two mates
was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr.
Joseph Smollet at home and in his shirt-sleeves, taking a late tea out
of a saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good,
reliable type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered
all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog’s-eared
notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes.
There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from Carfax and
left at 197 Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which
he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant tor six which
he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were
chosen at the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now
fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the
very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back
to Smollet and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had been
taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

he could tell us if any other boxes had been
taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

“Well, guv’nor, you’ve treated me wery ’an’some”--I had given him half
a sovereign--“an’ I’ll tell yer all I know. I heeard a man by the name
of Bloxam say four nights ago in the ’Are an’ ’Ounds, in Pincher’s
Alley, as ’ow he an’ his mate ’ad ’ad a rare dusty job in a old ’ouse at
Purfleet. There ain’t a-many such jobs as this ’ere, an’ I’m thinkin’
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut.” I asked if he could tell
me where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the address it
would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

“Look, ’ere, guv’nor, there ain’t no sense in me a-keepin’ you ’ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn’t; but anyhow he ain’t like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I’ll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye’d better be up arter ’im soon in the mornin’, or maybe ye won’t ketch
’im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore.”

This was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny
to buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. When
she came back I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet

ge. When
she came back I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet
had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my
way to home. We’re on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want
sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look
as though she had been crying. Poor dear, I’ve no doubt it frets her to
be kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances.

st rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the
Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision._2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By the first
post I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter’s pencil in a sprawling hand:--

“Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for
the depite.”

I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for

e her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where
I was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I
should have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some
difficulty, Potter’s Court. Mr. Smollet’s spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter’s Court instead of Potter’s Court. However, when I had found
the court I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran’s lodging-house.
When I asked the man who came to the door for the “depite,” he shook his
head, and said: “I dunno ’im. There ain’t no such person ’ere; I never

hook his
head, and said: “I dunno ’im. There ain’t no such person ’ere; I never
’eard of ’im in all my bloomin’ days. Don’t believe there ain’t nobody
of that kind livin’ ’ere or anywheres.” I took out Smollet’s letter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. “What are you?” I asked.“I’m the depity,” he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put
the deputy’s knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam,
who had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at
Corcoran’s, had left for his work at Poplar at five o’clock that
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but

ck that
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a “new-fangled ware’us;”
and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve
o’clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner.
One of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel
Street a new “cold storage” building; and as this suited the condition
of a “new-fangled ware’us,” I at once drove to it. An interview with a
surly gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day’s wages to his foreman for

r on my
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day’s wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--“main
heavy ones”--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I
asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

“Well, guv’nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from
a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a“Well, guv’nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from
a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a

oors from
a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old ’ouse, too, though nothin’ to the dustiness of the ’ouse we
tooked the bloomin’ boxes from.”

“How did you get into the house if they were both empty?”

“There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin’ in the ’ouse at
Purfleet. He ’elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse
me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an’ him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn’t throw
a shadder.”

How this phrase thrilled through me!

“Why, ’e took up ’is end o’ the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin’ an’ a-blowin’ afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an’ I’m no
chicken, neither.”

“How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?” I asked.

o
chicken, neither.”

“How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?” I asked.

“He was there too. He must ’a’ started off and got there afore me, for
when I rung of the bell he kem an’ opened the door ’isself an’ ’elped me
to carry the boxes into the ’all.”

“The whole nine?” I asked.

“Yus; there was five in the first load an’ four in the second. It
was main dry work, an’ I don’t so well remember ’ow I got ’ome.” I
interrupted him:--

“Were the boxes left in the hall?”

“Yus; it was a big ’all, an’ there was nothin’ else in it.” I made one
more attempt to further matters:--

“You didn’t have any key?”

“Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door ’isself
an’ shut it again when I druv off. I don’t remember the last time--but
that was the beer.”

again when I druv off. I don’t remember the last time--but
that was the beer.”

“And you can’t remember the number of the house?”again when I druv off. I don’t remember the last time--but
that was the beer.”

“And you can’t remember the number of the house?”

“No, sir. But ye needn’t have no difficulty about that. It’s a ’igh ’un
with a stone front with a bow on it, and ’igh steps up to the door. I
know them steps, ’avin’ ’ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin’s, an’
they seem’ they got so much, they wanted more; but ’e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw ’im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin’.” I thought that with this description I could
find the house, so having paid my friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience: the Count

I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience: the Count
could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was
precious; for, now he had achieved a certain amount of distribution,
he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task unobserved. At
Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab, and walked westward; beyond
the Junior Constitutional I came across the house described, and was
satisfied that this was the next of the lairs arranged by Dracula. The
house looked as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were
encrusted with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was
black with time, and from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away.
It was evident that up to lately there had been a large notice-boardcaled away.
It was evident that up to lately there had been a large notice-board
in front of the balcony; it had, however, been roughly torn away, the
uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of
the balcony I saw there were some loose boards, whose raw edges looked
white. I would have given a good deal to have been able to see the
notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the
ownership of the house. I remembered my experience of the investigation
and purchase of Carfax, and I could not but feel that if I could find
the former owner there might be some means of gaining access to the
house.

There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side,
and nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if

ccadilly side,
and nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if
anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active,
the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two
of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me
anything about the empty house. One of them said he had heard it had
lately been taken, but he couldn’t say from whom. He told me, however,
that up to very lately there had been a notice-board of “For sale” up,
and that perhaps Mitchell, Sons & Candy, the house agents, could tell
me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm
on the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant
know or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away.

t
know or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so
I did not lose any time. Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons &
Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in
Sackville Street.The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that
the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
“mansion”--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

“It is sold, sir.”

“Pardon me,” I said, with equal politeness, “but I have a special reason

sir.”

“Pardon me,” I said, with equal politeness, “but I have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it.”

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. “It is sold,
sir,” was again his laconic reply.

“Surely,” I said, “you do not mind letting me know so much.”

“But I do mind,” he answered. “The affairs of their clients are
absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons & Candy.” This was
manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

“Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their
confidence. I am myself a professional man.” Here I handed him my card.
“In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of

my card.
“In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of
Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was,
he understood, lately for sale.” These words put a different complexion
on affairs. He said:--

“I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially
would I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter
of renting some chambers for him when he was the Honourable Arthur
Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship’s address I will consult
the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night’s post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship.”r
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship.”

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward’s, and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company
and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but
she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful; it wrung my heart
to think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking
on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our
confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task.

l my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or
else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we made
our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

I could not tell the others of the day’s discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to
me as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of
and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no

talked of
and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

When I came down again I found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:--“This has been a great day’s work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death.” We all sat silent awhile, and all at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

“Say! how are we going to get into that house?”

l at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

“Say! how are we going to get into that house?”

“We got into the other,” answered Lord Godalming quickly.

“But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing
to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I
don’t see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find
us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in
the morning.” Lord Godalming’s brows contracted, and he stood up and
walked about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one
to another of us:--

“Quincey’s head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we

rious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we
can find the Count’s key basket.”

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell’s,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning.ep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so
rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after
his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding
destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not
really care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds
and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I

he clouds
and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I
thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked
him:--

“What about the flies these times?” He smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio--as
he answered me:--

“The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature: its wings are typical
of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!”

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said
quickly:--

“Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?” His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

haking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

“Oh no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want.” Here he brightened
up: “I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right;
I have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoophagy!”

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

“Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?” He smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

“Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If
I may state my intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!” This was a poser to me.

ewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!” This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall
Enoch’s appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt
that by doing so I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--

“And why Enoch?”

“Because he walked with God.” I could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

“So you don’t care about life and you don’t want souls. Why not?” I put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

“I don’t want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don’t. I couldn’t use them

plied:--

“I don’t want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don’t. I couldn’t use them
if I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn’t eat
them or----” He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over
his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. “And, Doctor,
as to life, what is it after all? When you’ve got all you require, and
you know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good
friends--like you Doctor Seward;” this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning, “I know that I shall never lack the means of
life!”I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it

such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come
without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him
that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are
Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over
the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he

en him with
me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

“What about souls?” It was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with
the lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. “What about them
yourself?” I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for

round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

“I don’t want any souls!” he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to “be
cruel only to be kind.” So I said:--

“You like life, and you want life?”

“Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn’t worry about that!”

“But,” I asked, “how are we to get the life without getting the soul
also?” This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:--

“A nice time you’ll have some time when you’re flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You’ve got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!” Something seemed to affect

ves, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!” Something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,

ould and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

“Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again!” He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

“Not much! flies are poor things, after all!” After a pause he added,
“But I don’t want their souls buzzing round me, all the same.”

“Or spiders,” I went on.“Not much! flies are poor things, after all!” After a pause he added,
“But I don’t want their souls buzzing round me, all the same.”

“Or spiders,” I went on.

“Blow spiders! What’s the use of spiders? There isn’t anything in them
to eat or”--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

“So, so!” I thought to myself, “this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word ‘drink’; what does it mean?” Renfield seemed himself

ddenly
stopped at the word ‘drink’; what does it mean?” Renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

“I don’t take any stock at all in such matters. ‘Rats and mice and such
small deer’ as Shakespeare has it; ‘chicken-feed of the larder’ they
might be called. I’m past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before
me.”

“I see,” I said. “You want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?”

“What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!” He was getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. “I wonder,” I said

getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. “I wonder,” I said
reflectively, “what an elephant’s soul is like!”

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

“I don’t want an elephant’s soul, or any soul at all!” he said. For a
few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. “To
hell with you and your souls!” he shouted. “Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven’t I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls?” He looked so hostile that I thought he
was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

“Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so
worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I
want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am
sure you will understand!” He had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

“Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me

weetness:--

“Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me
that I am very very grateful to you!” I thought it well to leave him in
this mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder
over in this man’s state. Several points seem to make what the American
interviewer calls “a story,” if one could only get them in proper order.
Here they are:--

Will not mention “drinking.”

Fears the thought of being burdened with the “soul” of anything.

Has no dread of wanting “life” in the future.Will not mention “drinking.”

Fears the thought of being burdened with the “soul” of anything.

Has no dread of wanting “life” in the future.

Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul.

will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!

And the assurance--?

Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my
suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He

im talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.

_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming_

“_1 October._

“My Lord,

“We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with
regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your
behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreignexecutors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes ‘over the counter,’ if your Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

“We are, my Lord,
    “Your Lordship’s humble servants,
    “/Mitchell, Sons & Candy./”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield’s room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire in
the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and

ire in
the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and
discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result, and
we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

Before going to bed I went round to the patient’s room and looked in
through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his chest
rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked
him if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was
something about his manner so suspicious that I asked point-blank if he
had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having “dozed” for a
while.

he
had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having “dozed” for a
while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched.he
had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having “dozed” for a
while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched.

To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey are
looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
British Museum, looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The
old physicians took account of things which their followers do not
accept, and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which
may be useful later.

he Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which
may be useful later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track,
and our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder
if Renfield’s quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so
followed the doings of the Count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- that
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

iet for a spell.... Is he?---- that
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....

CHAPTER XXI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./CHAPTER XXI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield’s room I found him lying on the floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;

ve him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the
body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could
see that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against
the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

“I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg
and the whole side of his face are paralysed.” How such a thing could
have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

“I can’t understand the two things. He could mark his face like that

e said:--

“I can’t understand the two things. He could mark his face like that
by beating his own head on the ground. I saw a young woman do it once
at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I
suppose he might have broke his back by falling out of bed, if he got
in an awkward kink. But for the life of me I can’t imagine how the two
things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn’t beat his head; and
if his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be
marks of it.” I said to him:--

“Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an instant’s delay.” The man ran off, and within a very few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing-gown and slippers appeared. Whenery few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing-gown and slippers appeared. When
he saw Renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment and then
turned to me. I think he recognized my thought in my eyes, for he said
very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

“Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much
attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you.”

The patient was now breathing stertorously, and it was easy to see
that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

nd made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

“Send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation.” So I said:--

“I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate.
Let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere.”

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.
The wounds of the face were superficial; the real injury was a depressed
fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The
Professor thought a moment and said:--

“We must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of“We must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of

s, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late.” As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, Arthur and
Quincey in pyjamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

“I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey, or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of
us these times. I’ve been thinking that to-morrow night will not see
things as they have been. We’ll have to look back--and forward a little
more than we have done.

have been. We’ll have to look back--and forward a little
more than we have done. May we come in?” I nodded, and held the door
open till they had entered; then I closed it again. When Quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

“My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!” I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time at all events. He went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

“We shall wait,” said Van Helsing, “just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing.”

y remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing.”y remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing.”

The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had
a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing’s face I gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. I
dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to
think; but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read
of men who have heard the death-watch. The poor man’s breathing came
in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his
eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath,
and he would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was
to sick-beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could

as I was
to sick-beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could
almost hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through
my temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became
agonising. I looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

At last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at the Professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

“There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have

e
spoke:--

“There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear.”e
spoke:--

“There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear.”

Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless
stare. This was continued for a few moments; then it softened into
a glad surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. He moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

“I’ll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move.

oat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What’s wrong with my face? It feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully.” He tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again, so I gently put it back. Then Van
Helsing said in a quiet, grave tone:--

“Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield.” As he heard the voice his face
brightened through its mutilation, and he said:--

“That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some
water, my lips are dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed”--he
stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to Quincey--“The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!” He flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the parched

a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I
shall never forget, and said:--“I must not deceive myself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality.”
Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

“If I were not sure already, I should know from them.” For an instant
his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he
were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,

though he
were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

“Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before my
poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you
left me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn’t speak then,
for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, except in that
way, as I am now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after
you left me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My
brain seemed to become cool again, and I realized where I was. I heard

o me. My
brain seemed to become cool again, and I realized where I was. I heard
the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!” As he spoke
Van Helsing’s eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine
and gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded
slightly, and said: “Go on,” in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:--

“He came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man’s when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when He turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn’t ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them.” He
was interrupted by a word from the Professor:--

“How?”

“By making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs.” Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

“The _Acberontia atropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the
‘Death’s-head moth!’” The patient went on without stopping.

“Then he began to whisper: ‘Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too.

ands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!’ I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could
do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to the window. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire;
and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that
there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His,
only smaller. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought
He seemed to be saying: ‘All these lives will I give you, ay, and manythought
He seemed to be saying: ‘All these lives will I give you, ay, and many
more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and
worship me!’ And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to
close over my eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found myself
opening the sash and saying to Him: ‘Come in, Lord and Master!’ The rats
were all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it
was only open an inch wide--just as the Moon herself has often come in
through the tiniest crack, and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour.”

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval, for his story was further advanced.

s memory had gone on working in
the interval, for his story was further advanced. I was about to call
him back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: “Let him go on.
Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at
all if once he lost the thread of his thought.” He proceeded:--

“All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn’t even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn’t hold him.

was no one. He didn’t even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn’t hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.
Harker had come into the room.”

The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his
face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without
noticing:--“When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn’t the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered.” Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

“I didn’t know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn’t look the
same. I don’t care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood

look the
same. I don’t care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn’t think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been taking the life out of her.” I could feel that
the rest quivered, as I did; but we remained otherwise still. “So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn’t
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned

didn’t
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned
into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door.” His voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

“We know the worst now,” he said. “He is here, and we know his purpose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare.” There was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that wed them in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the Count’s house. The Professor had his ready and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

“They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that the dear Madam Mina should suffer.” He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

Outside the Harkers’ door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

“Should we disturb her?”

“We must,” said Van Helsing grimly. “If the door be locked, I shall
break it in.”

“May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady’s

t in.”

“May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady’s
room!” Van Helsing said solemnly:--

“You are always right; but this is life and death. All chambers are
alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to me
to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if the door does not
open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends.
Now!”

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw
appalled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the
room was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed, and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
Kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw it we all recognised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker’s hands, keeping them away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared

the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man’s bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten’s nose into a saucer of milk
to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard described seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth,
champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turnedich threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred
Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under Quincey’s match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with

I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. For a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood. Her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
Count’s terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently

on of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--“Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vampire can produce.
We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she
recovers herself; I must wake him!” He dipped the end of a towel in
cold water and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all
the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that
was heart-breaking to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. There was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great yew
tree.

y
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great yew
tree. It puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at the instant
I heard Harker’s quick exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness,
and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well be, was a look
of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and then full
consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he started up.
His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to him with her
arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly, however, she
drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands
before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

“In God’s name what does this mean?” Harker cried out. “Dr. Seward, Dr.

shook.“In God’s name what does this mean?” Harker cried out. “Dr. Seward, Dr.

shook.

“In God’s name what does this mean?” Harker cried out. “Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,
what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to
this!” and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. “Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!” With a quick
movement he jumped from the bed, and began to pull on his clothes--all
the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. “What has
happened? Tell me all about it!” he cried without pausing. “Dr. Van
Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot
have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!” His wife,
through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him;

wife,
through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him;
instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried
out:--

“No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must
stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!” Her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bedside, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

“Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you
no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be“Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you
no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be

ose to you
no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be
calm and take counsel together.” She shuddered and was silent, holding
down her head on her husband’s breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. The instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

“Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear.” To this he spoke out resolutely:--

“Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my

ld not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!” He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After
a while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said
to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to the utmost:--

“And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been.” I told him exactly what had happened,“And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been.” I told him exactly what had happened,

e broad
fact; tell me all that has been.” I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the Count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see that whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the
door. They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at
me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage
of their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy

ake advantage
of their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy
husband and wife from each other and from themselves; so on my nodding
acquiescence to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which
Lord Godalming answered:--

“I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in the study, but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had,
however----” He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

“Go on friend Arthur. We want no more concealments. Our hope now is in
knowing all. Tell freely!” So Art went on:--

“He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been“He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been

n for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes;
the cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the
wax had helped the flames.” Here I interrupted. “Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!” His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: “I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Renfield’s room; but there was no trace there except----!” Again
he paused. “Go on,” said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head, and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: “except that the poor fellow
is dead.” Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us as she said solemnly:--

r raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us as she said solemnly:--

“God’s will be done!” I could not but feel that Art was keeping back
something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.
Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:--

“And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?”

“A little,” he answered. “It may be much eventually, but at present I
can’t say. I thought it well to know if possible where the Count would
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield’s window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some
shape go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!”

sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!”

He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker’s head:--“And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may so be; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn.”

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves

learn.”

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing, who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

“I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but
for a long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and
myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble.”of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble.”
Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: “Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I
need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medicine do its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remembered no
more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that
I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will

mist that
I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will
find it in my diary which I shall show you later. I felt the same vague
terror which had come to me before, and the same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught and not I. I
tried, but could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I looked
around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed,
as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist had
turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall,
thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the descriptions of the
others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light fells of the
others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell
in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth
showing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the sunset
on the windows of St. Mary’s Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the red scar
on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant my heart
stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was paralysed.
In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he
spoke to Jonathan:--

“‘Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.’ I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder

o do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so: ‘First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
appeased my thirst!’ I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity
me! He placed his reeking lips upon my throat!” Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were the injured one, and went on:--

“I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long

ent on:--

“I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful sneering mouth away. I
saw it drip with the fresh blood!” The remembrance seemed for a while
to overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband’s sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--“Then he spoke to me mockingly: ‘And so you, like the others, would
play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me
and frustrate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part
already, and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path.
They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst

ss my path.
They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst
they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and
intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they
were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one,
are now to me flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my
bountiful wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and
my helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be punished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says “Come!” to you, you shall cross land or sea
to do my bidding; and to that end this!’ With that he pulled open his

nd or sea
to do my bidding; and to that end this!’ With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the--Oh,
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my
days? God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!” Then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,

tion.As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,

tion.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

Of this I am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.

CHAPTER XXII.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It

rnal./

_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o’clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us

at our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh, my God! what end?... To work! To work!at our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh, my God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then Renfield
had called out loudly several times, “God! God! God!” After that there

Renfield
had called out loudly several times, “God! God! God!” After that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard “voices” or “a voice,” and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that the word “God” was spoken by the patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it.
As it was, he thought that on the attendant’s evidence he could give a

ieve it.
As it was, he thought that on the attendant’s evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to the same result.When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. “There must be no more concealment,” she said. “Alas! we have
had too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that

e have
had too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that
can give me more pain than I have already endured--than I suffer now!
Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!”
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

“But, dear Madam Mina are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?” Her face grew set in
its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

“Ah no! for my mind is made up!”

“To what?” he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

nswer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

“Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!”

“You would not kill yourself?” he asked hoarsely.

“I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such
a pain, and so desperate an effort!” She looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:--“My child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For myself
I could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for
you, even at this moment, if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But, my
child----” for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his

! But, my
child----” for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

“There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must
not die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own.
Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must
not die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would
make you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive
to live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight
Death himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day,
or the night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul I charge you
that you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be

harge you
that you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be
past.” The poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shivered, as I
have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We
were all silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm, and
turning to him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out
her hand:--

“I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this horror
may have passed away from me.” She was so good and brave that we all
felt that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her,
and we began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was
to have all the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries andt she was
to have all the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and
phonographs we might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she
had done before. She was pleased with the prospect of anything to
do--if “pleased” could be used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

“It is perhaps well” he said, “that at our meeting after our visit
to Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that
lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose,
and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such
an effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions.

ch
an effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. Nay more, in all probability he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilize his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge
as to their disposition, that, when we have examined the house in
Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations
of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a door-way, he
must open the door like a mortal.s or crannies. If he go through a door-way, he
must open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilize them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure.” Here I started up for I
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina’s life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was possible. But Van Helsing held up his
hand warningly. “Nay, friend Jonathan,” he said, “in this, the quickest
way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all act, and
act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in all

ll act, and
act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in all
probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly. The
Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt, ‘stop the earths’ and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?”

ses of hunt, ‘stop the earths’ and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?”

“Then let us come at once,” I cried, “we are wasting the precious,
precious time!” The Professor did not move, but simply said:--

“And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?”

“Any way!” I cried. “We shall break in if need be.”

“And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?”“And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?”

“Any way!” I cried. “We shall break in if need be.”

“And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?”

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

“Don’t wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am
in.”

“Ah, my child, that I do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement? Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it

rld be at
movement? Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?” I nodded.

“Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and
could not still get it; and think there was to you no conscience of the
housebreaker, what would you do?”

“I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me.”

“And your police, they would interfere, would they not?”

“Oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed.”

“Then,” he looked at me keenly as he spoke, “all that is in doubt is
the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as
to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one.policemen as
to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one.
Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in
reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no,
my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty houses
in this your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as
such things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly
done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so
fine house in your London, and when he went for months of summer to
Zwitzerland and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at
back and got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and
walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police.

front and
walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police.
Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big
notice; and when the day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all the
goods of that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he
sell him that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take
all away within a certain time. And your police and other authority help
him all they can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in
Zwitzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This
was all done _en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We
shall not go so early that the policeman who have then little to think
of, shall deem it strange; but we shall go after ten o’clock when there

o think
of, shall deem it strange; but we shall go after ten o’clock when there
are many about, and when such things would be done were we indeed owners
of the house.”

I could not but see how right he was, and the terrible despair of Mina’s
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--I could not but see how right he was, and the terrible despair of Mina’s
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--

“When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End.”

Lord Godalming stood up. “I can be of some use here,” he said. “I shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most
convenient.”

“Look here, old fellow,” said Morris, “it is a capital idea to have all

ient.”

“Look here, old fellow,” said Morris, “it is a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don’t you think that one
of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byeway at
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to.”

“Friend Quincey is right!” said the Professor. “His head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may.”

Mina took a growing interest in everything, and I was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the

ed to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the
terrible experience of the night. She was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of
the disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was
finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the
Count’s lair close at hand.

before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the
Count’s lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

As to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that,
after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly;
that the two doctors and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed
them. It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the
Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we
might be able to cope with him then and there. At any rate we might be
able to follow him in force.

pe with him then and there. At any rate we might be
able to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, in
so far as my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay
and protect Mina. I thought that my mind was made up on the subject;
but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be
some law matter in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count’s
papers might be some clue which I could understand out of my experience
in Transylvania; and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster
was required to cope with the Count’s extraordinary power. I had to
give in, for Mina’s resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last
hope for _her_ that we should all work together. “As for me,” she said,
“I have no fear._her_ that we should all work together. “As for me,” she said,
“I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever
may happen must have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my
husband! God can, if He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any
one present.” So I started up crying out: “Then in God’s name let us
come at once, for we are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly
earlier than we think.”

“Not so!” said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

“But why?” I asked.

“Do you forget,” he said, with actually a smile, “that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?”

Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but

rget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall
her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part
in the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he
had said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort
her. “Oh Madam Mina,” he said, “dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I,
of all who so reverence you, should have said anything so forgetful.
These stupid old lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve
so; but you will forget it, will you not?” He bent low beside her as he
spoke; she took his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said
hoarsely:--

oke; she took his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said
hoarsely:--

“No, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember; and with it
I have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
together. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong.”Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

“Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy’s
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?” We all assured
him. “Then it is well.

against ghostly as well as carnal attack?” We all assured
him. “Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if--we shall
return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of the things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me
guard yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in
the name of the Father, the Son, and----”

There was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. As he
placed the Wafer on Mina’s forehead, it had seared it--had burned into
the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor

burned into
the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling’s brain told her the significance of the fact as quickly as her
nerves received the pain of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that her
overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words
to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased to
ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her knees
on the floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over
her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

“Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day.” They
all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helplesst Day.” They
all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired and was stating things outside himself:--

“It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God Himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam
Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God’s knowledge of what has been, shall pass away

en that
red scar, the sign of God’s knowledge of what has been, shall pass away
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God see right to lift the burden
that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did in
obedience to His will. It may be that we are chosen instruments of His
good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through
stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears,
and all that makes the difference between God and man.”

There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation.
Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man’s hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all

of the old
man’s hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which
neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be
a vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and
terrible land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire
meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred

s one vampire
meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred
earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly
ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as we already knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, nor any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

“And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise

ore them:--

“And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise
this earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God.” As he spoke he took from his bag a screw-driver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on the Professor. Taking from his box a piece of the
Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of the Host.

When we closed the door behind us, the Professor said solemnly:--

“So much is already done. If it may be that with all the others we can
be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine on Madam
Mina’s forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!”

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the
window of my room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nodded to tell
that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply

to tell
that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply
to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in
farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station and just
caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the platform.

I have written this in the train.

_Piccadilly, 12.30 o’clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street
Lord Godalming said to me:

“Quincey and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us
in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn’t seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are
a solicitor, and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you
should have known better.” I demurred as to my not sharing any dangeru that you
should have known better.” I demurred as to my not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: “Besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had
better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in the Green Park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door open and the
smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the look out
for you, and will let you in.”

“The advice is good!” said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming
and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park.

ner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the coming of the others.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris
paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the twos. Morris
paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two
ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered
along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he proceeded to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling

them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. All at once the
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing’s went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we saw the
workman come out and take in his bag. Then he held the door partly open,
steading it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he
finally handed to Lord Godalming, who took out his purse and gave him
something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his coat and
departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole transaction.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door.

en the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.en the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.

“The place smells so vilely,” said the latter as we came in. It did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using
the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping
together in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy
to deal with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be
in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall,
we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the nine which
we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should

nine which
we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should
have found the missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window
which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face
of a stable, pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There
were no windows in it, so we were not afraid of being overlooked. We did
not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those others in the chapel. It was evident to us that the Count
was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for any of
his effects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms from basement to attic,

fects.After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms from basement to attic,

fects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms from basement to attic,
we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to the Count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room
table. There were title-deeds of the Piccadilly house in a great
bundle; deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
notepaper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. There were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses.

ap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming
and Quincey Morris, taking accurate notes of the various addresses of
the houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us
are, with what patience we can, awaiting their return--or the coming of
the Count.

CHAPTER XXIII.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_3 October._--The time seemed terribly long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. I could see his beneficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.ficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong youthful face,
full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard
old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and
grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact he
is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go
well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a
kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I thought
my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows this
well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has

ws this
well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has
been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. As well
as I can remember, here it is:--

“I have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands,
all the papers relating to this monster; and the more I have studied,
the greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through
there are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his
knowledge of it. As I learned from the researches of my friend Arminius
of Buda-Pesth, he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman,
and alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the
science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse.brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even
to attend the Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his
time that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of
man’s stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life.”

Harker groaned and said: “And this is all arrayed against my darling!

ot Life.”

Harker groaned and said: “And this is all arrayed against my darling!
But how is he experimenting? The knowledge may help us to defeat him!”

“He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto.”

“I fail to understand,” said Harker wearily. “Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain.” The Professor laid
his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

“Ah, my child, I will be plain.

is hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--“Ah, my child, I will be plain.

is hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

“Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally? How he has been
making use of the zoophagous patient to effect his entry into friend
John’s home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto
by an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we
not see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by others?
He knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he
might not himself move the box. So he begin to help; and then, when he

ether he
might not himself move the box. So he begin to help; and then, when he
found that this be all right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground.
So that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change
his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding
place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him just
too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilize as for him;
and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even

e sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even
more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour, and already, if all
be well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are
five of us when those absent ones return.”Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door,
the double postman’s knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to
the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us
to keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
despatch. The Professor closed the door again and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read it aloud:--

“Look out for D.

after looking at the
direction, opened it and read it aloud:--

“Look out for D. He has just now, 12.45, come from Carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the south. He seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: Mina.”

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker’s voice:--

“Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!” Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

“God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings.”

“I care for nothing now,” he answered hotly, “except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!”

“Oh, hush, hush, my child!” said Van Helsing, “God does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not
keep faith.

souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not
keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us; we
are all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time
is coming for action; to-day this Vampire is limit to the powers of
man, and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arrive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey arrive first.”About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker’s telegram, there
came a quiet resolute knock at the hall door.

eived Mrs. Harker’s telegram, there
came a quiet resolute knock at the hall door. It was just an ordinary
knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the Professor’s heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the moral in the right. Van
Helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:--

“It is all right.

hind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:--

“It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each, and we
destroyed them all!”

“Destroyed?” asked the Professor.

“For him!” We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey said:--

“There’s nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn’t turn up
by five o’clock, we must start off; for it won’t do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sunset.”

“He will be here before long now,” said Van Helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. “_Nota bene_, in Madam’s telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o’clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet onlybefore one
o’clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. You must have been at Bermondsey only a
short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went
to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!” He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall-door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a

he hall-door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. With a swift glance round the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just behind the door so that when it was opened the Professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready
to move in front of the window.

d Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready
to move in front of the window. We waited in a suspence that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way
past us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was
something so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it
seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act
was Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. As the Count saw us,
a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth

nt saw us,
a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth
long and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare
of lion-like disdain. His expression again changed, as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he
had ready his great Kukri knife, and made a fierce and sudden cut at
him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the
Count’s leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had
shorn through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of hisade had
shorn through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his
coat, making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of
gold fell out. The expression of the Count’s face was so hellish, that
for a moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible
knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with
a protective impulse, holding the crucifix and wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without surprise that I
saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
the Count’s face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast

ame over
the Count’s face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under Harker’s arm ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, and
threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling
glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the
shivering glass I could hear the “ting” of the gold, as some of the
sovereigns fell on the flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

gged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--gged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

“You think to baffle me, you----with your pale faces all in a row,
like sheep in a butcher’s. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You
think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My
revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my
side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them
you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to
be my jackals when I want to feed. Bah!” With a contemptuous sneer, he
passed quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us
to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following

rst of us
to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved towards the hall.

“We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You
follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For
me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return.” As he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had

ith
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the Count. He had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
Professor when he said:--

“Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor, dear Madam Mina. All we can
do just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. But we
need not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to

r. But we
need not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to
find it; when that is done all may yet be well.” I could see that he
spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was
quite broken down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not
suppress--he was thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker
awaiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death; for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:--

“I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!” as she spoke

fully:--

“I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!” as she spoke
she took her husband’s grey head in her hands and kissed it--“Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect
us if He so will it in His good intent.” The poor fellow only groaned.
There was no place for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and I think it cheered
us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to
hungry people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or
the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all
less miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope.
True to our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed;out hope.
True to our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed;
and although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to
the part where Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung
to her husband’s arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right
up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband’s hand
she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh that I could give any idea of
the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant

ny idea of
the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant
beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead
of which she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

“Jonathan,” she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips, it
was so full of love and tenderness, “Jonathan dear, and you all, my
true, true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all
this dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroyrough all
this dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy
even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live
hereafter; but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought
all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his
joy when he too is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may
have spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him too, though it
may not hold your hands from his destruction.”

As she spoke I could see her husband’s face darken and draw together,
as though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively the clasp on his wife’s hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she

ll his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost
tearing his hand from hers as he spoke:--

“May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!”

“Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don’t say such things,
Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just
think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I too may need such pity; and that somef it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I too may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,
my husband! my husband, indeed I would have spared you such a thought
had there been another way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heartbroken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. Oh God, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come.”

We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. She wept too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress.

ide her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with God.

Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband’s sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady.

iding the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us
will be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done, I, too, shall go
to bed.

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal.__Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_3-4 October close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change
must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our
next step was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew
was that one earth-box remained, and that the Count alone knew where
it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and

knew where
it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and
in the meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of
it even now. This I know: that if ever there was a woman who was all
perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand
times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own
hate of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the
world to be the poorer by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to
me. We are all drifting reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor.
Thank God! Mina is sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what
her dreams might be like, with such terrible memories to ground them
in. She has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset.

o ground them
in. She has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset.
Then, for a while, there came over her face a repose which was like
spring after the blasts of March. I thought at the time that it was the
softness of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it had
a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy myself, though I am weary--weary to
death. However, I must try to sleep; for there is to-morrow to think
of, and there is no rest for me until...._Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awakened by Mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

he had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

“Hush! there is someone in the corridor!” I got up softly, and crossing
the room, gently opened the door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

“Hush! go back to bed; it is all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don’t mean to take any chances!”

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed, and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

“Oh, thank God for good brave men!” With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

back again to
sleep. I write this as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

_4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:--

“Go call the Professor. I want to see him at once.”

“Why?” I asked.

“I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is getting close.”
I went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

“Is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

d, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

“Is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

“No,” I replied; “but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once.”“Is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

d, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

“Is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

“No,” I replied; “but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once.”

“I will go,” he said, and hurried into the Professor’s room.

Two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward
at the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a
positive smile--ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as
he said:--

“Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!” Then
turning to her, he said cheerfully: “And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for nothings.”

“I want you to hypnotise me!” she said.

hour you do not want me for nothings.”

“I want you to hypnotise me!” she said. “Do it before the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is
short!” Without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving
of her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Professor made a
few more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration., and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. There was a faraway look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to
impose silence, the Professor motioned me to bring the others in. They
came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the foot of
the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see them. The stillness was
broken by Van Helsing’s voice speaking in a low level tone which would
not break the current of her thoughts:--

“Where are you!” The answer came in a neutral way:--

“I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own.”

For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor

own.”

For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor
stood staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe.
The room was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina’s face,
Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the
day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed
to diffuse itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke
again:--

“Where are you now?” The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
was as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

“I do not know. It is all strange to me!”

“What do you see?”

“I can see nothing; it is all dark.”

all strange to me!”

“What do you see?”

“I can see nothing; it is all dark.”

“What do you hear?” I could detect the strain in the Professor’s patient
voice.

“The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear them on the outside.”

“Then you are on a ship?” We all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came
quick:--

“Oh, yes!”

“What else do you hear?”“Then you are on a ship?” We all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came
quick:--

“Oh, yes!”

“What else do you hear?”

“The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. There is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the ratchet.”

“What are you doing?”

“I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!” The voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

ded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina’s shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a
few moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to
see us all around her. “Have I been talking in my sleep?” was all she
said. She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling; though
she was eager to know what she had told. The Professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

“Then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!” Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door, but the Professor’s calm
voice called them back:

“Stay, my friends.

r the door, but the Professor’s calm
voice called them back:“Stay, my friends.

r the door, but the Professor’s calm
voice called them back:

“Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. There are many ships weighing anchor at the moment in
your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you seek? God
be thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead
us we know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of
men, since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas! but
that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the
Count’s mind when he seize that money, though Jonathan’s so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear

so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily,
and we must follow with wile. I too am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us.

ll or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortable since he be not in the same land with
us.” Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

“But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?” He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--“But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?” He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

“Ask me nothing as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all
questions.” He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sorrowfully:--

“Because, my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell?” She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

“Why?”

ollow him to the jaws of Hell?” She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

“Why?”

“Because,” he answered solemnly, “he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat.”

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.

CHAPTER XXIV.

/Dr. Seward’s Phonograph Diary, Spoken by Van Helsing./

This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.
This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them.tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earthwork I might say did I wish _double entente_. He
is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and so

nte_. He
is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and so
he decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he came, and
he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we
have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will comfort
you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope when you
think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue,
he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in one day,
when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is finite,
though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do. But we
are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong together.
Take heart afresh dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun,

gether.
Take heart afresh dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun,
and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch
over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return.

/Van Helsing./

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._/Van Helsing./

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing’s message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the
certainty that the Count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that this horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air, in the bright
sunlight--

a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air, in the bright
sunlight--

Alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling’s white forehead. Whilst that lasts,
there can be no disbelief. And afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the diaries again and again. Somehow, although the reality
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and

ach other
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and
the others after their investigations.

The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o’clock.

_Mina Harker’s Journal_

_5 October, 5 p.m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van
Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--

“As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne

Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion
of my Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd’s, where are note of all ships that
sail, however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound
ship go out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail
from Doolittle’s Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up
the Danube. ‘Soh!’ said I, ‘this is the ship whereon is the Count.’ So
off we go to Doolittle’s Wharf, and there we find a man in an office

Count.’ So
off we go to Doolittle’s Wharf, and there we find a man in an office
of wood so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we
inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he
red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when
Quincey give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it
up, and put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing,
he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and
ask many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when
they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom and
of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

hat they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.hat they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

“They make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five
o’clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high
nose and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be
all in black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or
the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what
ship sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office
and then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore
end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The captain
come, when told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at
the first he agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him

much at
the first he agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him
where horse and cart can be hired. He go there, and soon he come again,
himself driving cart on which is a great box; this he himself lift
down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give
much talk to captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but
the captain like it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him
that if he like he can come and see where it shall be. But he say ‘no;’
that he come not yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain
tell him that he had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will
leave the place--of blood--before the turn of the tide--with blood. Then
the thin man smile, and say that of course he must go when he thinkblood. Then
the thin man smile, and say that of course he must go when he think
fit; but he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear
again, polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say
that he will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues,
tell him that he doesn’t want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and
also with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after
asking where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase
ships forms, he departed.

“No one knew where he went ‘or bloomin’ well cared,’ as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon

aid, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as
was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it
grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around
her. The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began
to fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly
mood, when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank
again and asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain
replied that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went downloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away,
and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language
that was of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain’s
swears exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were in movement up
and down the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any of
fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However the ship went
out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the river
mouth.

went
out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the river
mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

“And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. There
are days for us in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed inhown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at Varna, we say ‘no;’ for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way.”

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if it were certain
that the Count had remained on board the ship. He replied: “We have
the best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance
this morning.” I asked him again if it were really necessary that they
should pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I

y that they
should pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I
know that he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing
passion, at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry
and more forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at
least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master
amongst men:--

“Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, oryou, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. Were another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of
nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. The very place where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world.

r
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations
of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid whichrow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from, and
are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have infect
you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for good
of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do no
more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and so
in time, death, which is of man’s common lot and with God’s sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn together
that it must not. Thus are we ministers of God’s own wish: that the
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one

nsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to redeem
more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause.” He paused and I said:--

“But will not the Count take his rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven
from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from
which he has been hunted?”

“Aha!” he said, “your simile of the tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Your man-eater, as they of India call the tiger who has
once taste blood of the human, care no more for other prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself hee is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go
over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child-brain that was
to him he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city.
What does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promise
for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task.
He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers.
He study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a

ent of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a
new land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse
that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it
help him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he
was at the first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone!
from a ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the
greater world of thought is open to him? He that can smile at death, as
we know him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off
whole peoples. Oh! if such an one was to come from God, and not the
Devil, what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours.
But we are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence,of ours.
But we are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence,
and our efforts all in secret; for this enlightened age, when men
believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his
greatest strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and
his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even
our own souls for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind,
and for the honour and glory of God.”

After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow at breakfast we are to meet
again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall

to meet
again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall
decide on some definite course of action.

*       *       *       *       *

I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. Perhaps....

My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I was still
unclean.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature.

ce
again.It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature.

ce
again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature.
Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even
by death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment.
More than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder
whether the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only
when I caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker’s forehead that
I was brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely resolving
the matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all
our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of
her trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are

something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are
to meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker’s tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The
Count had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called “therk. The
Count had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called “the
Vampire’s baptism of blood.” Well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker’s silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think
further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall
try to open the subject with him.

_Later._--When the Professor came in, we talked over the state of
things.

him.

_Later._--When the Professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted
to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After
beating about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

“Friend John, there is something that you and I must talk of alone,
just at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the others
into our confidence;” then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

“Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina, is changing.” A cold shiver
ran through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing
continued:--

“With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than“With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than

warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the silence now
often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he

t, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?” I nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

“Then what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a painful
task! Oh! so painful that it heartbreak me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us.” He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort

the poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for
at any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the
effect was as I expected.It is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

_Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief
was experienced by both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at

r movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at
each other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my
own part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it
was much pain as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances
we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence of our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van
Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:--

“The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will
take her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks
to reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three
days.

eeks
to reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three
days. Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship’s voyage, owing
to such weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear;
and if we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur
to us, then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be
quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any
rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical.” Here Quincey Morris
added:--“I understand that the Count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he will get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to

t may be
that he will get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn’t we have given then for a repeater
apiece!”

“Good!” said Van Helsing. “Winchesters it shall be. Quincey’s head
is level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, though my
metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man.
In the meantime we can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna is not
familiar to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait
here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all
be well, we four can set out on our journey.”

can get ready, and then, if all
be well, we four can set out on our journey.”

“We four?” said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

“Of course!” answered the Professor quickly. “You must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!” Harker was silent for a while and then said
in a hollow voice:--

“Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with
Mina.” I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lip and
turned away.

/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of/Jonathan Harker’s Journal./

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of

morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina’s determination
not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could
not argue the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever
from a solution now. The way the others received it, too, puzzled me;
the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams
with happiness. Thank God there are such moments still for her.

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina’s happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the

eep, and
came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking
lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

“Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour.
A promise made to me, but made holily in God’s hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once.”

“Mina,” I said, “a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I may have
no right to make it.”

“But, dear one,” she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, “it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr.

like pole stars, “it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise.”“I promise!” I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
She said:--

“Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed
for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!” and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

“I promise!” and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

nd as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I myself felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dreamless sleep.

_6 October, morning._--Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr.

Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the Professor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the others might come too.

“No,” she said quite simply, “it will not be necessary. You can tell
them just as well. I must go with you on your journey.”

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment’s pause he
asked:--

“But why?”Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment’s pause he
asked:--

“But why?”

“You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer
too.”

“You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer
too.”

“But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been.” He paused
embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

“I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even Jonathan.” God saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour.

if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. She went on:--

“You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I myself do not know.” Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

“Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve.” When he had
spoken, Mina’s long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled upad fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. Van Helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.
He told them what Mina had said, and went on:--

“In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a new
factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to
tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are warned
in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be ready to
act the instant when that ship arrives.”

“What shall we do exactly?” asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor
paused before replying:--

xactly?” asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor
paused before replying:--

“We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was
man’s faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well.”

“I shall not wait for any opportunity,” said Morris. “When I see the box
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!” I

thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!” I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!” I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.

“Good boy,” said Dr. Van Helsing. “Brave boy. Quincey is all man, God
bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. There are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways;
and when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack.
Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which

t be lack.
Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which
touch on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none
of us can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own
affairs are regulate; and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go make
arrangement for the travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey.”

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she
survive is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us will have remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina’s uneasiness calls my
attention to it.It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina’s uneasiness calls my
attention to it.

t is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina’s uneasiness calls my
attention to it. I am sure that there is something on her mind which
the time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming
harrowing times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some
new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God’s will be means to
a good end. I write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

She is calling to me.

CHAPTER XXV.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.

rd kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before the time of sunset. We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and
lasts till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow
with the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute
freedom quickly follows; when however the freedom ceases the change-back
or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence.

ge-back
or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence.ge-back
or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence.

To-night, when we met she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle. I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband’s hand
in hers she began:--

“We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to the end.” This was to
her husband, whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. “In

s was to
her husband, whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. “In
the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be
in store for any of us. You are going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!” She looked
appealingly at us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

e looked
appealingly at us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

“What is that way?” asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. “What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?”e looked
appealingly at us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

“What is that way?” asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. “What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?”

“That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor Lucy’s. Were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way, I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, is God’s will. Therefore, I on my part, give up here the certainty

to be
done, is God’s will. Therefore, I on my part, give up here the certainty
of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the blackest
things that the world or the nether world holds!” We were all silent,
for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. The faces of the
others were set, and Harker’s grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better
than any of us what was coming. She continued:--

“This is what I can give into the hotch-pot.” I could not but note
the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. “What will each of you give? Your lives, I know,” she went
on quickly; “that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God’s, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?” She looked

’s, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?” She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband’s face. Quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. “Then I shall
tell you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in
this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even
you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me.”“What is that time?” The voice was Quincey’s but it was low and
strained.

“When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a moment’s delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!”

h me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!”

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

“I’m only a rough fellow, who hasn’t, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred
and dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the
duty that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has
come!”

“My true friend!” was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

“I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!” said Van Helsing.

“And I!” said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to

Helsing.

“And I!” said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. I followed, myself. Then her husband turned to her,
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

“And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?”

“You too, my dearest,” she said, with infinite yearning of pity in
her voice and eyes. “You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest
and all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life
and all time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men
have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling
into the hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the more
because those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men’sthe more
because those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men’s
duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And
oh, my dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it
be at the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy’s case to him who loved”--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--“to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband’s life that it was his loving hand
which set me free from the awful thrall upon me.”

“Again I swear!” came the Professor’s resonant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

“And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall_ be--leagued
with your enemy against you.”

“One more request;” she became very solemn as she said this, “it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will.” We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

“I want you to read the Burial Service.” She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her

by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: “You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will, I hope, read it,
for then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!”

“But oh, my dear one,” he pleaded, “death is afar off from you.”“But oh, my dear one,” he pleaded, “death is afar off from you.”

“Nay,” she said, holding up a warning hand. “I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!”

“Oh, my wife, must I read it?” he said, before he began.

“It would comfort me, my husband!” was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

band!” was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

“How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness? Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of
her husband’s voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service for the Burial
of the Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!”....

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may

!”....

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker’s coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o’clock. Lord Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any telegram
had arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--the
Odessus. The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eagertel--the
Odessus. The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. Until the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour
is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she
slept nearly all the time. Before sunrise and sunset, however, she is
very wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He

power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
always asks her what she can see and hear. She answers to the first:--

“Nothing; all is dark.” And to the second:--

“I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is
high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam.”
It is evident that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening
on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _Czarina Catherine_ had not been reported to Lloyd’s from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should

yd’s from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.We had dinner and went to bed early. To-morrow we are to see the
Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on board between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man’s form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box.

ithout
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he will get from us will not count for much.
We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the
seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I
think!

_16 October._--Mina’s report still the same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and

rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass the Dardanelles we are sure to have some report.

*       *       *       *       **       *       *       *       *

_17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his
own risk. The owner gave him a paper telling the captain to give him
every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also
a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent,

and also
a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent,
who was much impressed with Godalming’s kindly manner to him, and we
are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be
done. We have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open.
If the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at
once and drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I
shall prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we
shall have ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count’s
body, it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps

oused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us
and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully
if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out
our intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant
the _Czarina Catherine_ is seen, we are to be informed by a special
messenger.

_24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only the same story: “Not yet reported.” Mina’s morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_Telegram, October 24th.__Telegram, October 24th._

_Rufus Smith, Lloyd’s, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H.B.M.
Vice-Consul, Varna_

Smith, Lloyd’s, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H.B.M.
Vice-Consul, Varna_

“_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_24 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen
is irksome to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
excitement to-day when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd’s. I know
now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not
to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it;

would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it;
but in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied. We
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It
would break poor Harker’s heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that
we had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells
me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition,
for he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no
active danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would
be necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would havet would
be necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have
to be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
“Euthanasia” is an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to
whoever invented it.

It is only about 24 hours’ sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the
rate the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before then, we are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one
o’clock, so as to be ready.

_25 October, Noon._--No news yet of the ship’s arrival. Mrs. Harker’s
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment.

ing was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are as cold as ice,
and an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. It will be a bad look out for the
Count if the edge of that “Kúkri” ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silent to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She had
been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casuallyad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

_Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she has
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

_26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still journeying _somewhere_
is apparent, for Mrs. Harker’s hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same. It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: “lapping
waves and rushing water,” though she added that “the waves were very

: “lapping
waves and rushing water,” though she added that “the waves were very
faint.” The telegrams from London have been the same: “no further
report.” Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:--“I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina’s. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance.” I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must try to-night,
at sunset, to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

_28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming, care
of H.B.M. Vice-Consul, Varna_

“_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o’clock to-day.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

rine_ reported entering Galatz at one o’clock to-day.”

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_28 October._--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz
I do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should
know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels,we should
know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels,
even if it be a will-o’-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience, and
we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his hands over his head
for a moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said
not a word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set.
Lord Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself
half stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant “action.” Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark

r hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark
bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his action
belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of the
great Kukri knife and rested there. “When does the next train start for
Galatz?” said Van Helsing to us generally.

“At 6.30 to-morrow morning!” We all stared, for the answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

“How on earth do you know?” said Art.

“You forget--or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter
I always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
the time-tables now.

found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
the time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say.”

“Wonderful woman!” murmured the Professor.“Wonderful woman!” murmured the Professor.

“Can’t we get a special?” asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: “I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do

d get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. Quincey Morris, you see the Vice-Consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since I am here
with Madam to make report.”

“And I,” said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, “shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do.

try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!”
The three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the
time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
Harker’s journal at the castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

“We mean the same! speak out!”“We mean the same! speak out!”

“There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us.”

“Quite so.

ome change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us.”

“Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?”

“No!” said I, “unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone.”

“You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you something. And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration come to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with

He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.
He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that he in his tomb for centuries, that
grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore
small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance! She know
it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we wantShe know
it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want
all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great brain
which is trained like man’s brain, but is of sweet woman and have a
special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never
feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!”

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly

ped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. Then, holding the pages between his finger
and thumb, he said:--

“Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from, and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that he be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings.

hole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the “Ugly Duck” of my friend
Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I
read here what Jonathan have written:--“That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over the Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph.”

“What does this tell us? Not much! no! The Count’s child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my

ought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my
man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another
word from some one who speak without thought because she too know not
what it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are elements which
rest, yet when in nature’s course they move on their way and they
touch--then pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven’s wide,
that blind and kill and destroy some; but that show up all earth
below for leagues and leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain.
To begin, have you ever study the philosophy of crime? ‘Yes’ and
‘No.’ You, John, yes; for it is a study of insanity. You, no, Madam
Mina; for crime touch you not--not but once. Still, your mind works

, no, Madam
Mina; for crime touch you not--not but once. Still, your mind works
true, and argues not _a particulari ad universale_. There is this
peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant, in all countries and
at all times, that even police, who know not much from philosophy,
come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to be empiric. The
criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems
predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has
not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but
he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much.
Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he too have
child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done. The littleoo have
child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done. The little
bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but
empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to him the ground
to start from to do more. ‘_Dos pou sto_,’ said Archimedes. ‘Give me
a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!’ To do once, is the fulcrum
whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to
do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he have
done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened, and that to
you the lightning flash show all the leagues,” for Mrs. Harker began to
clap her hands, and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

“Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with

t on:--

“Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes.” He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

“The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso
would so classify him, and _qua_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed
mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past
is a clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a
‘tight place,’ he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort.

o invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. He came again, better equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube
from Turkey land.”“Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!” said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later
he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

“Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope.” Turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

“But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know.

go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
Speak, without fear!”

“I will try to; but you will forgive me if I seem egotistical.”

“Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think.”

“Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. So, his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat of
the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I
felt it, Oh! I felt it. Thank God for His great mercy! My soul is freer

ight. I
felt it, Oh! I felt it. Thank God for His great mercy! My soul is freer
than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me is a
fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for his
ends.” The Professor stood up:--

“He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from
us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is
in God’s Providence, the very thing that the evil doer most reckoned
on for his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter
is taken in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that hee hunter
is taken in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he
think he is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us
with so many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him
to sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your
mind, there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail!
That terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to
him in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when
the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by
his; and this power to good of you and others, you have won from your
suffering at his hands. This is now all more precious that he know it
not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge

know it
not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge
of our where. We, however, are not all selfish, and we believe that God
is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We
shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril ourselves
that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great hour; and it
have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe and write
him all down, so that when the others return from their work you can
give it to them; then they shall know as we do.”

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us.

CHAPTER XXVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

all since she brought the MS. to us.

CHAPTER XXVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./CHAPTER XXVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

all since she brought the MS. to us.

CHAPTER XXVI.

/Dr. Seward’s Diary./

_29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more strenuous effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

m pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

“I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only
a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear
men’s voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of it seems far away.
There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air
blowing upon me.”

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting
a weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst

anding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
Harker’s hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his kúkri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--“Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!” We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

“You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land; he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be

ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did at
Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he be
carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men may
discover what the box contains. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on shore
to-night, or before dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him. We
may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come on
him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his true
self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered.”

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

n patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise
was so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his
whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

“All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood.” She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.“All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood.” She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot

n the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw
more light on what is happening.

_Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a time
when there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. I am in fear that her power of reading the Count’s
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts.

s been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the Count’s power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

“Something is going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves.” She stopped, and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in answer to the Professor’s imperative questioning. When she woke frome, even
in answer to the Professor’s imperative questioning. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

_30 October, 7 a.m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may not have time to
write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

essor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

“All is dark. I hear the water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound, a
queer one like--” she stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

“Go on; Go on! Speak, I command you!” said Van Helsing in an agonized
voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen
sun was reddening even Mrs. Harker’s pale face. She opened her eyes,
and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
concern:--

“Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can’t? I don’t remember
anything.” Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

“What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was
lying here, half asleep, and I heard you say ‘go on! speak, I command
you!’ It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad
child!”“Oh, Madam Mina,” he said sadly, “it is proof, if proof be needed,
of how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I
am proud to obey!”

The whistles are sounding; we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since

had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language. The forces were distributed
much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice-Consul as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _Czarina Catherine_.

_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the
Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o’clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I

r’s Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o’clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I
called on Messrs Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm
of Hapgood. They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming’s telegraphed request, asking them to show us any civility
in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us
at once on board the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at anchor out in
the river harbour. There we saw the captain, Donelson by name, who told
us of his voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so
favourable a run.“Man!” he said, “but it made us afeared, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi’ some rare piece o’ ill luck, so as to keep up the
average. It’s no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi’ a wind

ep up the
average. It’s no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi’ a wind
ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin’ on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An’ a’ the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi’ us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi’oot bein’ able to signal; an’ till we
came to the Dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o’ aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if
the Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to
do it whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no

s like to
do it whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no
to our miscredit wi’ the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an’ the Old
Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin’ him.” This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

“Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!” The skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

“When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o’ them,
the Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer-lookin’ old man just before we had started
frae London.put on board by a queer-lookin’ old man just before we had started
frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the
supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us,
I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn’t say it
was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn’t let up
for five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to
get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a’reet. An’ if he didn’t,
well, we’d keep a sharp look out anyhow. Sure enuch, we had a fair way
and deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin’ sun

d a fair way
and deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin’ sun
came through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite
Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take
out the box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi’ them aboot it
wi’ a handspike; an’ when the last o’ them rose off the deck, wi’ his
head in his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye,
the property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in
the river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I’d let it
lie till we discharged in the port an’ get rid o’t athegither. We didn’t
do much clearin’ that day, an’ had to remain the nicht at anchor; but indidn’t
do much clearin’ that day, an’ had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in
the mornin’, braw an’ airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came aboord
wi’ an order, written to him from England, to receive a box marked for
one Count Dracula. Sure enuch the matter was one ready to his hand. He
had his papers a’ reet, an’ glad I was to be rid o’ the dam’ thing, for
I was beginnin’ masel’ to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any
luggage aboord the ship, I’m thinkin’ it was nane ither than that same!”

“What was the name of the man who took it?” asked Dr. Van Helsing, with
restrained eagerness.

“I’ll be tellin’ ye quick!” he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed “Immanuel Hildesheim.” Burgen-strasse
16 was the address.

duced a receipt signed “Immanuel Hildesheim.” Burgen-strasse
16 was the address. We found out that this was all the captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were pointed
with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little bargaining
he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but important.
He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to
receive, if possible before sunrise, so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to
give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with Slovaks who
traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by an

vaks who
traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by an
English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube
International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. That was all
he knew.We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated
by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten
and eleven o’clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking, one came running and breathlessly gasped

dstill again.

Whilst we were talking, one came running and breathlessly gasped
out that the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the
churchyard of St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if
by some wild animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the
horror, the women crying out, “This is the work of a Slovak!” We hurried
away lest we should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so
detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. We were all
convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence.

her, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was
released from my promise to her.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn-out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the moment. I feel so grateful to the man who invented the
“Traveller’s” typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me.
I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to write with a
pen....It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now.

dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. He lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit;
his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I
can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts.
Oh! if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can....

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that
I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow the Professor’s example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

I do believe that under God’s Providence I have made a discovery. I

fore me....

I do believe that under God’s Providence I have made a discovery. I
shall get the maps and look over them....

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready,
so I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.

_Mina Harker’s Memorandum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula’s problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for, had
he power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or
wolf, or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusion may help us.
By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving a
city.(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusion may help us.
By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving a
city.

(_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) There are, or there might be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his greatest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track.

ts chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track. True, he might escape at night; but where would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here is the safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do

erate.

We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could._Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent
invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
The proof of this is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel

was to escape.
The proof of this is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is
also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. This we must only guess at;
but there must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson’s
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the Count’s game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the
Count’s arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here

cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along. The customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.Now we come to what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my husband’s diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing
with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man’s
remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general
feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation.

My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his

tion.

My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his
Castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the Castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks
who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped for London.
Thus the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map, and find that the river most suitable for the

agent.

I have examined the map, and find that the river most suitable for the
Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in
the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling
level with my ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is working against stream. There
would be no such sound if floating down stream.Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza,
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as

istritza,
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as
close to Dracula’s Castle as can be got by water.

_Mina Harker’s Journal--continued._

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The
others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

“Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have seen where
we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream, where he perish.

to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream, where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now,
men, to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each
and all shall do.”

“I shall get a steam launch and follow him,” said Lord Godalming.

“And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land,” said Mr.
Morris.

“Good!” said the Professor, “both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms.” All the men smiled, for amongst them
they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

“I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd,
and there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other“I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd,
and there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other

in a crowd,
and there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other
precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points.” Dr.
Seward said:--

“I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don’t suppose these fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time;
we shall not rest until the Count’s head and body have been separated,
and we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate.” He looked at Jonathan as
he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me.

not re-incarnate.” He looked at Jonathan as
he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was
silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

“Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at
the last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which
has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina;
she will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick toadam Mina;
she will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to
run as once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be,
or to fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can
fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men.
Now let me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming,
and friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river,
and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might
be landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the enemy’s
country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to

the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went--from Bistritz over
the Borgo--and find our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina’s
hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all dark and
unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we near that fateful
place. There is much to be done, and other places to be made sanctify,
so that that nest of vipers be obliterated.” Here Jonathan interrupted
him hotly:--

“Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil’s illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or

ess, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!” He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--ess, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!” He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

“Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and ever speck
of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo? Have you
felt the Vampire’s lips upon your throat?” Here he turned to me, and as
his eyes lit on my forehead, he threw up his arms with a cry: “Oh, my
God, what have we done to have this terror upon us?” and he sank down on
the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor’s voice, as he spoke in
clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all:--

“Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful

s all:--

“Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful
place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that
place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with our own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are in
terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century; and then
in time our dear one”--he took my hand--“would come to him to keep
him company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You
have told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as
they clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder;

augh as
they clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder;
and well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving,
if need be, my life? If it were that anyone went into that place to
stay, it is I who would have to go, to keep them company.”“Do as you will;” said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, “We
are in the hands of God!”

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men
worked. How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so
true, and so brave! And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of
money! What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it

wer of
money! What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it
do when basely used! I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming is rich, and
that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment’s notice. Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris have half a dozen beautiful horses, well appointed. We
have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had.
Professor Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11.40 train to-night

an be had.
Professor Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11.40 train to-night
for Veresti, where we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass.
We are bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage
and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can
trust in this matter. The Professor knows something of a great many
languages, so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for
me a large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed
like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar
on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling
me that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go asis getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

_Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. There must be no tears now--unless it may be that
God will let them fall in gladness.

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch; Lord Godalming is firing up. He is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina’s guess was correct, and that if
any waterway was chosen for the Count’s escape back to his Castle, the

d that if
any waterway was chosen for the Count’s escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one. We
took it that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be
the place chosen for crossing the country between the river and the
Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart
to make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells
me to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to
be on watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger
hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My
only comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faithace.... My
only comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith
it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the
trouble. Mr. Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before
we started; they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get
on higher lands, where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid
the following of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men
to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excite
curiosity. When they dismiss the men, which will be shortly, they will
themselves look after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join
forces; if so they can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a
movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

e saddles has a
movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the
furnace door....

_31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek.

em had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.em had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are
wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have overhauled every boat,
big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government
boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing
matters, so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have overhauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every

which we
have overhauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in
the night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to
tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists
that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness
to poor dear Mina and me.

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight.

oodness
to poor dear Mina and me._2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight.

oodness
to poor dear Mina and me.

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept so peacefully
and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish of me to have
slept so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am
a new man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can
do all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back
to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have
got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to
get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard,
they would be about now at the Borgo Pass.

they had started and travelled hard,
they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I
am afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but
we cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder
how Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless
streams running down from the mountains into this river, but as none of
them are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road.

what to do next.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road.

what to do next.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza. I wish it wasn’t so cold. There are signs of snow coming;
and if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge
and go on, Russian fashion.

_4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapid. The Slovak boats get

ned by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapid. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope, and steering with knowledge. Some went
up only a few hours before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they
got up the Rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry tell us that after she got upon the smooth water again, she
kept stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must
push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all

me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all
I could say was: “Dark and quiet.” He is off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting;
if only it were under different conditions, how delightful it would be
to see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned.

ntry and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of
our being cold.

*       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We
are truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray
Him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will, and I pray
Him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will
watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may
know that I loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my
latest and truest thought will be always for him.

CHAPTER XXVII.

/Mina Harker’s Journal./

_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed.
The horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they
go willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them
well to make the exchange of horses.

t he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them
well to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or
tea; and off we go. It is a lovely country; full of beauties of all
imaginable kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and
seem full of nice qualities. They are very, very superstitious. In the
first house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar
on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me,
to keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to the trouble of putting
an extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can’t abide garlic.
Ever since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and
so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as wer veil, and
so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we
have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I
daresay that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the
way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest,
though he made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotized
me, and he says that I answered as usual “darkness, lapping water
and creaking wood;” so our enemy is still on the river. I am afraid
to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for
myself. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be
got ready. Dr. Van Helsing is sleeping. Poor dear, he looks very tired
and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror’s; even

y tired
and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror’s; even
in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started
I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days
before us, and he must not break down when most of all his strength
will be needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.

_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving
all night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange
heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean
that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered
“darkness, creaking wood and roaring water,” so the river is changing
as they ascend.

ness, creaking wood and roaring water,” so the river is changing
as they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God’s hands.ness, creaking wood and roaring water,” so the river is changing
as they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God’s hands.

_2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves.
Dr. Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass.
The houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last
horses we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to
change.

last
horses we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to
change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we
have a rude four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and
they give us no trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and
so even I can drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not
want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest
in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place
where my poor darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided
aright, and that He will deign to watch over my husband and those dear
to us both, and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not
worthy in His sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until

I am not
worthy in His sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until
He may deign to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who
have not incurred His wrath.

_Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing.__Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing._

_4 November._--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D.,
of Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It
is morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she
was not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She, who

day that she
was not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She, who
is usual so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even
have lost her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she
who write so faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all
is not well. However, to-night she is more _vif_. Her long sleep all
day have refresh and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright
as ever. At sunset I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect;
the power has grown less and less with each day, and to-night it fail
me altogether. Well, God’s will be done--whatever it may be, and
whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography,

y lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography,
I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.y lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography,
I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I
saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual,
but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As
before, came the answer: “darkness and the swirling of water.” Then
she woke, bright and radiant, and we go on our way and soon reach the
Pass. At this time and place she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

ome new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

“This is the way.”

“How know you it?” I ask.

“Of course I know it,” she answer, and with a pause, add: “Have not my
Jonathan travel it and wrote of his travel?”

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be only
one such by-road. It is used but little, and very different from the
coach road from Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him.we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself
to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I
may not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I
harm her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all--in--all to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something; I find myself bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever.
I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off

just as ever.
I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off
sunset time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow
flood, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so
steep. For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky,
as though it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when
we first enter the Count’s house.never saw her since that night at Carfax when
we first enter the Count’s house. I am amaze, and not at ease then;
but she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget
all fear. I light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us,
and she prepare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in
shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper
ready. I go to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat
already--that she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not,
and I have grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent
of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie
beside the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently

ur and lie
beside the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently
I forget all of watching; and when I sudden remember that I watch,
I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright
eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before
morning. When I wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut
her eyes obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up;
and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not
wake. I have to lift her up and place her sleeping in the carriage when
I have harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep,
and sleep; and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder than
before. And I like it not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am

e redder than
before. And I like it not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am
afraid of all things--even to think; but I must go on my way. The stake
we play for is life and death, or more than these, and we must not
flinch._5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though
you and I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first
think that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so
long strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seemed to have
held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and

eemed to have
held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and
though I did have hunger and appeased it, I could not waken her--even
for food. I began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon
her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. “Well,” said I to
myself, “if it be that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I
do not sleep at night.” As we travel on the rough road, for a road of
an ancient and imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept.
Again I waked with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam
Mina still sleeping, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed;
the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top
of a steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such as castle ase near the top
of a steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such as castle as
Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now,
for good or ill, the end was near. I woke Madam Mina, and again tried
to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the
great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected
the gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great twilight--I
took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a
fire; and near it I made Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than
ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would
not eat, simply saying that she had not hunger. I did not press her,
knowing her unavailingness. But I myself eat, for I must needs now be
strong for all.

ng her unavailingness. But I myself eat, for I must needs now be
strong for all. Then, with the fear on me of what might be, I drew a
ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina sat; and over the
ring I passed some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all was
well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she
grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was not more pale; and no
word she said. But when I drew near, she clung to me, and I could know
that the poor soul shook her from head to feet with a tremor that was
pain to feel. I said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet:--

“Will you not come over to the fire?” for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she

a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

“Why not go on?” I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--“Why not go on?” I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

“I cannot!” and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till
I came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them,
they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet
for a time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it

were quiet
for a time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it
arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time
my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to
die, and I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow
came in flying sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there
was a light of some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as
though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women
with trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence, only that the
horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to
fear--horrible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings wereety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings were
of the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through,
and all the terrible anxiety. It was as though my memories of all
Jonathan’s horrid experience were befooling me; for the snow flakes and
the mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though
a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And then
the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in
pain. Even the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could
break away. I feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures
drew near and circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and
smiled at me; when I would have stepped to the fire to replenish it,

calm, and
smiled at me; when I would have stepped to the fire to replenish it,
she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one
hears in a dream, so low it was:--

“No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!” I turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

“But you? It is for you that I fear!” whereat she laughed--a laugh low
and unreal, and said:--

“Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them
than I am,” and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise, till--if God have notr without
the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise, till--if God have not
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before
me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room,
when they would have kissed his throat. I knew the swaying round forms,
the bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--

“Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!” In fear I turned to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the

to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them.
I seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of
the Wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. They drew back before me,
and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them
not; for I knew that we were safe within our protections. They could
not approach me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained
within the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could
enter. The horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the
snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was

ound; the
snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was
for the poor beasts no more of terror.ound; the
snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was
for the poor beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn began to fall through the
snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror;
but when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me
again. At the first coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the
whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which
I could not wake her. I tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she
made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I

but she
made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I
have made my fire and have seen the horses; they are all dead. To-day I
have much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high; for
there may be places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow
and mist obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will to my terrible
work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....

_Jonathan Harker’s Journal._

_4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we

ink of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we
follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean to fight. Oh, if
only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no
more, Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.

_Dr. Seward’s Diary.__Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_5 November._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us
dashing away from the river with their leiter-waggon. They surrounded
it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling
lightly and there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be our
own excited feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear
the howling of wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains,

off I hear
the howling of wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains,
and there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are
nearly ready, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God
alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....

_Dr. Van Helsing’s Memorandum._

_5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that
mercy at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. When I
left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the
castle. The blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriage from Veresti
was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered I might not get out.tent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered I might not get out. Jonathan’s bitter experience served
me here. By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for
I knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if
there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either
there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in terrible
plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not dare to
take into this place, but left safe from the Vampire in that Holy
circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work
lay here, and that as to the wolves we must submit, if it were God’s
Will. At any rate it was only death and freedom beyond.

submit, if it were God’s
Will. At any rate it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose
for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy; the maw
of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the Vampire! So I
make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in
her Vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder
as though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time,
when such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as
mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he
delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascinationve. So he
delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination
of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on, and on,
till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful
eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth
present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in
the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the
Un-Dead!...

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour
such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van
Helsing, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved

d--I, Van
Helsing, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved
to a yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to
clog my very soul. It may have been that the need of natural sleep,
and the strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me.
Certain it was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of
one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came through the
snow-stilled air a long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke
me like the sound of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam
Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared
not pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more Ione. I dared
not pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I
should begin to be enthral; but I go on searching until, presently, I
find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other
fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out
of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly
beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in
me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made
my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of
my dear Madam Mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell
could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work.
By this time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I

wild work.
By this time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I
could tell; and as there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms
around us in the night, I took it that there were no more of active
Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the
rest; huge it was, and nobly proportioned. On it was but one word

DRACULA.

This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many
more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I
knew. Before I began to restore these women to their dead selves
through my awful work, I laid in Dracula’s tomb some of the Wafer, and
so banished him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one,
it had been easy, comparative.

rible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one,
it had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after
I had been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with the
sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who
had survived through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the
passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their
foul lives?...Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen
the repose in the first face, and the gladness that stole over it just

not seen
the repose in the first face, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have
endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror
and left my work undone. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity
them now and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of
death, for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my
knife severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt
away and crumble into its native dust, as though the death that should
have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once

hat should
have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once
and loud “I am here!”

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can
the Count enter there Un-Dead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from
her sleep, and seeing me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

“Come!” she said, “come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet
my husband, who is, I know, coming towards us.” She was looking thin
and pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I
was glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of
the fresh horror of that ruddy Vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to

ire sleep.And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to

ire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to
meet our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_
are coming to meet us.

_Mina Harker’s Journal._

_6 November._--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I
took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We
did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to
take heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of
being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some
of our provisions too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so
far as we could see through the snow-fall, there was not even the sign
of a habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the
heavy walking and sat down to rest.

had gone about a mile, I was tired with the
heavy walking and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where
the clear line of Dracula’s castle cut the sky; for we were so deep
under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the
Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We
could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about

all, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. The rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a
rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took
me by the hand and drew me in: “See!” he said, “here you will be in
shelter; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one.” He
brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some
provisions and forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to

ut some
provisions and forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to
do so was repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please
him, I could not bring myself to the attempt. He looked very sad, but
did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood
on the top of the rock, and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he
called out:--

“Look! Madam Mina, look! look!” I sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries, and I could see a long way round. From the height where
we were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond

ight where
we were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond
the white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black
ribbon in kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us
and not far off--in fact so near that I wondered we had not noticed
before--came a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of
them was a cart, a long leiter-waggon, which swept from side to side,
like a dog’s tail wagging, with each stern inequality of the road.
Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see from the men’s
clothes that they were peasants or gipsies of some kind.On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for
I felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and

it, for
I felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude
all pursuit. In fear I turned to the Professor; to my consternation,
however, he was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

“At least you shall be safe here from _him_!” He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
“See,” he said, “they come quickly; they are flogging the horses,
and galloping as hard as they can.” He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

and galloping as hard as they can.” He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

“They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God’s will be
done!” Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole
landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:--

“Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the
south. It must be Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look, before the
snow blots it all out!” I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr.
Seward and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of them was
Jonathan. At the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off;
looking around I saw on the north side of the coming party two other
men, riding at break-neck speed.on the north side of the coming party two other
men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan,
and the other I took, of course, to be Lord Godalming. They, too,
were pursuing the party with the cart. When I told the Professor he
shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a
snowfall made sight impossible, he laid his Winchester rifle ready for
use against the boulder at the opening of our shelter. “They are all
converging,” he said. “When the time comes we shall have the gipsies
on all sides.” I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we
were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the
snowstorm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the
snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond, the sun

ge to see the
snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond, the sun
shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain
tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could see here and there dots
moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves
were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us
in circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm’s length before
us; but at others as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew

We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set.We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set.

It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than an hour
that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to
converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter
sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven
the snow-clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow
fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the
pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem
to realize, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they seemed,
however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and

ey seemed,
however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and
lower on the mountain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouched down
behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was
determined that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of
our presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: “Halt!” One was my Jonathan’s,
raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris’s strong resolute
tone of quiet command. The gipsies may not have known the language,
but there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other.g
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other. The leader of the gipsies, a splendid looking fellow, who sat
his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave
to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses, which
sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and
in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same moment Dr.
Van Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded, the men tightened their reins and
drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man
of the gipsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and
held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

stol, and
held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out
in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the
hill-tops--and then to the castle, said something which I did not
understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves
from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have felt
terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of
battle must have been upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no
fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing a quick
movement of our parties, the leader of the gipsies gave a command;
his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined

e a command;
his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined
endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness
to carry out the order.e a command;
his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined
endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness
to carry out the order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it
was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the
levelled weapons or the flashing knives of the gipsies in front, or the
howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their attention.
Jonathan’s impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his purpose,
seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they cowered
aside and let him pass.

verawe those in front of him; instinctively they cowered
aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the cart,
and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box,
and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris
had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of Szgany.
All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had, with the
tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had seen
the knives of the gipsies flash as he won a way through them, and they
cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first I
thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside
Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that withang beside
Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that with
his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was
spurting through his fingers. He did not delay notwithstanding this,
for as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prise off the lid with his great kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gipsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters,
and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and
made no further resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain

iven in and
made no further resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain
tops, and the shadows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I
saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the
rude falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale,
just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible
vindictive look which I knew too well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan’s great
knife. I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the
same moment Mr. Morris’ bowie knife plunged in the heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the

the heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every
stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of
the setting sun.The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every
stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of
the setting sun.

The gipsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away
as if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter-waggon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. The

umped upon the
leiter-waggon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. The
wolves, which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake,
leaving us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding
his hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his
fingers. I flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back;
so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man
laid back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble
effort, my hand in that of his own which was unstained. He must have
seen the anguish of my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and
said:--

“I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!” he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, “It

” he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, “It
was worth this to die! Look! look!”

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. With one
impulse the men sank on their knees, and a deep and earnest “Amen”
broke from all as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger as the
dying man spoke:--

“Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!”

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.

NOTE.And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.

NOTE.

Seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It

iness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It
is an added joy to Mina and to me that our boy’s birthday is the same
day as that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend’s spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

tted out. The
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we got to talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily
married. I took the papers from the safe where they have been ever
since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all
the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly
one authentic document; nothing but a mass of type-writing, except
the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing’s
memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept
these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he
said, with our boy on his knee:--

a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he
said, with our boy on his knee:--a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he
said, with our boy on his knee:--

“We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. Already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake.”

/Jonathan Harker./

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dracula, by Bram Stoker

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 45839 ***