# Confessions of Aleister Crowley

*Aleister Crowley (1979)*

Statsbibliote na

Mn ill AUN

| An Autohagiography edited.by JOHN SYMONDS 
le, f:

and KENNETH GRANT

eA 4 / 
ah A PENGUIN

i = 
d 7 a ~~ s f

IE i - ò 
ee i ARKANA 
f 7 
A 
J / 
Po

Aleister Crowley's autobiographical confessions are a 
_- fascinating record of his lifetime's journey into strange regions 
z of consciousness. A ‘saint’ of the ‘Gnostic’ church, Crowley 
subtitled his six-volume work ‘an autohagiography. He describes 
his initiation into magic, his world-wide travels and mistresses, 
his experiments with sex and drugs, and the philosophy of his 
famous Book of the Law which contains the gospel that Crowley 
proclaimed for all mankind: the Law of Thelema, 
or Do What Thou Wilt.

Generations before his time, Crowley invoked sex, drugs and 
Eastern philosophy in his perpetual and often bizarre search for 
self-realization. The Confessions, skilfully edited and annotated 
by John Symonds and Kenneth Grant, serves as the perfect 
introduction to Crowleys extraordinary life and thought.

Cover photograph courtesy of Mary Evans Picture Library

s PENGUIN ISBN 0-14-019189-5 
. Biography/Autobiography HME LUE) PEELE ie. 
Pie aes oo ae 3281719261 Arhus Kommunes Bibl.

ARKANA 
THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Alcister Crowley, who called himsclf the Beast 666, was onc of the most 
extraordinary personalities of modern times — novelist, poct, magician, ac- 
complished mountaineer, chess master and founder of an abbey of Do What 
Thou Wilt. To his followers he was the creator of a new religion called 
Crowleyanity. He was born in 1875, the son of a brewer and evangelizing 
Plymouth Brother. By the time of his death in 1947 his career and writings 
on occultism, psychology and sex had become legendary. His best-known 
works arc his Confessions and his great book on magic, Magick.John Symonds met Aleister Crowley in 1945 and helped him with his 
literary work during the last two ycars of his life. He is Crowley's literary 
executor and the author of his biography, The King of the Shadow Realm.

Kenneth Grant studied the occult under Aleister Crowley. His books in-

clude The Magical Revival, Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God, Cults of the

Shadow, Nightside of Eden and Outside the Circles of Time. He has edited and

annotated, with John Symonds, Crowley's major writings, including 
Magick (1973, Arkana 1988).

= yy; 
C A x “ 
4 P = 
C ie ~ yen 
Ls) t > LD 
YS = : 
LASA 
E ~ À 
al

y A 
2 
l or

a: ad AD] bJ nN s 
<=. z “ago OF D AN Z 
MW, vs YR ps ee TOS ee. 
Gora raw S20 anh one

THE CONFESSIONS OF

ALEISTER 
CROWLEY

AN AUTOHAGIOGRAPHY

edited by 
JOHN SYMONDS

an 
KENNETH GRANT

ARKANA 
PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, London W8 STZ. England 
Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia 
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario. Canada M4V 3B2 
Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Private Bag 102902, NSMC, Auckland, New Zealand

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England

This corrected edition first published by Routledge & Kegan Paul 1979 
Published by Arkana Books 1989 
12

Copyright © John Symonds and Kenneth Grant, 1969. 1979 
All rights reserved

Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives plc

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject 
to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 
re-sold, hired out. or otherwise circulated without the publisher's 
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in 
which it is published and without a similar condition including this 
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser

CONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTIONCONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

PART ONE: Towards the Golden Dawn

PART TWO: The Mystical Adventure

PART THREE: The Advent of the Aeon of Horus 
PART FOUR: Magical Workings

PART FIVE: The Magus

PART SIX: At the Abbey of Thelema

EDITORS’ NOTES

INDEX

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Crowley and Alostrael (Leah Hirsig) at the Abbey of 
Thelema, 1921 between pages 736-737

. Betty May 
. Raoul Loveday (Frater Aud), 1923 
. Sketch by Crowley of Norman Mudd (Frater Omnia Pro

Veritate)

. Frank Bennett (Frater Progradior)

Maria de Miramar and Crowley

. Sketch by Crowley of a devouring demon between pages 768-769 
. Crowley as a human being, 1934

. Crowley as Fo-hi, the Chinese god of joy and laughter

. Crowley’s hands locked in yogic mudra

. Sketch by Crowley

. In Jermyn Street, Piccadilly, c. 1943

. At ‘Netherwood’, Hastings

. The Beast 666: self-portrait

PREFACE

Since the publication of this book ten years ago it has become evident that 
Aleister Crowley was more than just another cult hero of our time.

Crowley’s life was more fantastic even than that of Gurdjicff, the only com- 
parable personality among his contemporaries, whose unconventionalities 
were mostly passed over in silence. Crowley’s eccentricities, however, have 
been so much emphasized that the unique value of his work in every 
conceivable arca of experimental occultism has been obscured until recently. 
It is only during the last decade that Crowley’s ideas have taken wing in 
harmony with a vast new body of litcrature which fuses science, fantasy and 
metaphysics in a manner that may ultimately reify the wildest nightmares 
of an H. P. Lovecraft.Timothy Leary, for cxample, identifies himself so entircly with the 
current initiated by Crowley, and the ‘coincidences-sychronicities between 
my life and his’, that he considers one of his aims to be the completion of 
the work of preparing the world for cosmic consciousness, which Crowley 
had begun. As with Carlos Castaneda - another writer deeply concerned 
with these matters -Leary’s breakthrough came through drugs, though 
these were later discarded by Castaneda as inessential to the opening of the 
higher centres. Crowley was, however, the first systematically to co-relate 
such states of consciousness with various kinds of spiritual experience, as well 
as to facilitate contact with extra-dimensional entities.

A reviewer of the Confessions had pointed out in Life that ‘Crowley was 
as superior to today’s mindless cultists as Rabelais’s “Do What You Will” 
is to their “Do Your Own Thing”.’ Crowlcy’s Magick* is considered by 
the cognoscenti to be the most comprchensive book on the subject ever 
written, and the Confessions brings to life the man who wrote it.

Many of the personalities - famous, infamous, or little known - whose 
mectings with Crowley arc here described, have now been re-assessed, from 
Marie Desti’s ‘brat’, who transmogrificd into the film director Preston 
Sturges, to Somerset Maugham, who, after publication of his novel, The 
Magician, was rumourcd to have sold his soul to the devil in the form of 
Alcister Crowley in return for world-wide fame. Crowlcy’s first biographer, 
Major-General Fuller, forsook the ‘Crowned and Conquering Child’ of the

* The complete cdition, comprising Book 4, Part One, Book 4, Part Two, and Magick in Theory

= ue edited, annotated and introduced by Symonds and Grant, Routledge & Kegan 
aul, 1973.

10 PREFACE* The complete cdition, comprising Book 4, Part One, Book 4, Part Two, and Magick in Theory

= ue edited, annotated and introduced by Symonds and Grant, Routledge & Kegan 
aul, 1973.

10 PREFACE

Book of the Law for Hitler, and quotes Hitler as saying to him on one 
occasion: ‘I hope you are pleased with your children?’, a reference to a vast 
parade of German tanks, the brainchild of Fuller’s later theories.

Florence Farr, confidente of Shaw and Ycats, ended her days in Ceylon 
under the spiritual guidance of Allan Bennett's mentor, Sri Ramanathan; 
and Gerald Kelly, ‘painter, according to the telephone directory’, was duly 
knighted for his many portraits of royalty. As for Crowlcy’s pioneering 
attempts on the Himalayan peak K2, its ‘storm fiend’ still claims victims.

The seeds of the most interesting speculations regarding the future will be 
found in what Allan Watts - one of a hundred reviewers of the Confessions - 
has called ‘this huge volume which from beginning to end is almost entirely 
fascinating, witty, arrogant, immodest, and yet curiously wise’.

London KENNETH GRANT 
1978

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The editors wish to thank Mr George H. Brook for generously 
putting his collection of Crowleyana at their disposal; they are 
also grateful to Mrs Norah Fitzgerald and Mr Gerald Yorke for 
the loan of typescripts; and they arc indcbted to Mrs Stcffi Grant 
for her help in preparing the index.

I4 INTRODUCTION

pertinent to tell us something of his grandparents, whom he studiously 
ignored. It so happened that his father, Edward Crowley, whom he called 
an engineer, was a brewer, and the family fortunc came from ‘Crowley 
ales’, a fact which creeps into his autobiography in an oblique way.By the time Aleister was born, his father was well advanced in middle age, 
and spent his time travelling about the countryside, preaching Plymouthism 
to anyone who would listen to him. The Plymouth Brethren sect was 
founded about 1830 by John Nelson Darby, an Irish clergyman who was a 
barrister before he went into the Church. The Brethren believed that they 
were the only true Christians; they considered the idea of ordained ministers 
contrary to the teaching of Scripture; the Bible was literally true; Christ's 
Second Coming was imminent; the Elect would inherit the Kingdom of God.

Out of this background emerged Aleister Crowley, the Beast 666.

At first, he was a devout little Plymouth Brother, taking turns with his 
parents and the servants in reading passages from the Bible. Plymouthism was 
the only true faith. He could not, he said, even conceive of the existence of 
people who were so foolish or so wicked as to doubt it. In his childish ardour he 
thought of himself as a Christian knight, doing deeds of holiness and valour.

As he grew older his ideas took a strange turn. He had always preferred the 
sounds of the Hebrew names to the actual biblical narratives; now any 
description of torture or blood aroused his feelings tremendously. He liked 
to imagine himself in agony and, in particular, degraded by, and suffcring 
at the hands of, a woman whom he described as ‘wicked, independent, 
courageous, ambitious, and so on’. He fell in love with the False Prophet, 
the Beast whose number is 666, and the Scarlet Woman. And suddenly, after 
the death of his father —he was then eleven years old—he discovered that his 
sympathies were entirely on the side of the enemies of heaven. He had gone 
over to Satan, and did not know why. He was still searching for the reason 
when he came to write his autobiography at the age of forty-seven.Crowley was a contemporary of Freud; he grew out of the matrix of 
Victorianism with its rosy view of the world, and its medieval ideal of beauty 
and of God. He was one of many who helped to tear down the false, hypo- 
critical, self-righteous attitudes of the time. His account of his early life in a 
Plymouth Brethren household is no less remarkable than Edmund Gosse’s.* 
What, however, is peculiar in Crowley's casc is not that he chose ‘evil’ but 
that, in his revolt against his parents and God, he set himself up in God's

lace. 
: ‘Why do you call yourself the Beast?’ I asked him on the occasion of our 
first meeting.

‘My mother called me the Beast,’ he replied to my surprise.

He went to Malvern and Tonbridge public schools; his health broke down

* Father and Son (Heinemann, 1907).

INTRODUCTION IS

at Tonbridge, due partly to having ‘caught the clap from a prostitute in 
Glasgow’ (as he wrote in the margin of his own copy of The World's 
Tragedy, privately published, 1910, his first attempt at autobiography).

He published his first book of verse while an undergraduate at Trinity 
College: Aceldama, A Place to Bury Strangers in. A Philosophical Poem. By a 
Gentleman of the University of Cambridge, 1898. It carried this odd preface 
which foreshadowed his future interests and the ambiguous direction he was 
going in:It was a windy night, that memorable seventh night of December, 
when this philosophy was born in me. How the grave old professor 
wondered at my ravings! I had called at his house, for he was a valued 
friend of mine, and] felt strange thoughts and emotions shake within me. 
Ah! how I raved! I called to him to trample me, he would not. We 
passed together into the stormy night. I was on horscback, how I 
galloped round him in my phrenzy, till he became the prey of real 
physical fear! How I shrickcd out I know not what strange words! And 
the poor good old man tried all he could to calm: me; he thought I was 
mad! Thc fool! I was in the dcath struggle with self: God and Satan 
fought for my soul those three long hours. God conquered —now I have 
only one doubt left— which of the twain was God?

Mountaineering was another of his passions. He climbed in the Lake 
District, on Beachy Head and in Switzerland; and he was a master of that 
esoteric game called chess— who can ever get to the bottom of chess? — had 
played in two matches against Oxford and won his chess half-Blue.He had taken to wearing pure silk shirts and great floppy bow-knottcd ties; 
on his fingers were rings of semi-precious stones. An atmosphere of luxury, 
studiousness and harsh effort pervaded his rooms at Cambridge. Books 
covered the walls to the ceiling and filled four revolving walnut bookcases. 
They were largely on science and philosophy, with a modest collection of 
Greek and Latin classics, and a sprinkling of French and Russian novels. On 
one shelf shone the black and gold of The Arabian Nights of Richard Burton; 
below was the flat canvas and squarc label of the Kelmscott Chaucer. Valuable 
first editions of the British poets stood beside extravagantly bound volumes 
issued by Isidor Liseux. Over the door hung an ice-axe with wom-down 
spike and ragged shaft, and in the corner was a canvas bag containing a 
salmon rod. Leaded Staunton chessmen were in their mahogany box upon a 
card-table scattered with poker chips.

The “Gentleman of the University of Cambridge’ was prolific: he had 
quickly followed Aceldama with The Tale of Archais, then Jephthah, A 
Tragedy; the pseudonym was borrowed from Shelley, whose The Necessity of 
Atheism, 1811, was by a Gentleman of the University of Oxford, During

16 INTRODUCTION

1898 he was also responsible for a more pretentious production, White 
Stains, which Mr Peter Fryer considers the most disgusting piece of erotica 
in the English language; it bears on the title-page the name of Crowley’s 
pious uncle, George Archibald Bishop, ‘A Neuropath of the Second Empire’, 
and is now a rare book. Crowley prefaced the work with a statement which 
expressed his contempt: “The Editor hopes that Mental Pathologists, for 
whose eyes alone this treatise is destined, will spare no precautions to prevent 
it falling into other hands.’ He had inherited a fortune —the size of which he 
exaggerated —and could afford these extravagant jests.He thought of entering the Forcign Office, but decided against it: he 
wanted to be someone really great, whose name would be remembered as 
long as life lasted on this planet; he was unlikely to achieve this in the 
Diplomatic Service by devotion to duty.

The problem of what he should do with his life was solved by reading The 
Book of Black Magic and of Pacts. In the preface to this work, the author, 
Arthur Edward Waite, referred to certain occult sanctuaries run by a body of 
Initiates who dispense Truth and Wisdom to the worthy postulant. Crowley 
wrote to Waite, asking for more information. Waite replied, telling him to 
read Eckartshausen’s The Cloud upon the Sanctuary. Eckartshausen con- 
firmed what Waite had hinted at: behind the exterior church is an interior 
church, the most hidden of all communities, a Secret Sanctuary which 
preserves all the mysteries of God and nature. It was formed immediately 
after the fall of man. It is the hidden assembly of the Elect.

In Zermatt during 1898, Crowley met a certain Julian L. Baker, and 
growing friendly with Mr Baker he told him about his search for the 
Brotherhood of Initiates who jealously guard the perfect knowledge of God, 
nature and humanity. Mr Baker offered to help, and when they returned to 
England he introduced Crowley to George Cecil Jones who was a member 
of a magical organization called the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. 
Jones could perhaps help Crowley to find the Secret Sanctuary. Jones intro- 
duced him to MacGregor Mathers, the head of the Golden Dawn and at the 
turn of the century the most talented magician in the West. He was the 
Master Crowley was looking for.Crowley began his career of magic as a Neophyte in the Golden Dawn, 
which was the First or Outer Order of the Great White Brotherhood;* he 
quickly rose to the highest grade (that of Philosophus) in the Outer Order. 
He discovered that he had a remarkable aptitude for magic; this he later 
ascribed to his previous incarnations. He caught glimpses of these incarna- 
tions during his deep yoga meditations on ‘Ocesopus Island’ in America 
during 1918. Not only had he been Eliphas Lévi—there was just enough

* Whether this Brotherhood was Eckartshausen's hidden assembly of sages, no one, as far as I 
know, has said, but the implication is that they were the same.

INTRODUCTION 17

time for Lévi's liberated spirit to have descended into the womb of Mrs 
Crowley — but also the great magician Cagliostro in the incarnation before 
that; and John Dce’s skryer, Edward Kelly, before Cagliostro, and the 
vicious, pleasure-loving Pope Alexander VI before him. (This last-mentioned 
incarnation would explain Crowlcy’s insatiable curiosity about every aspect 
of sex.)

He Icft Cambridge without sitting for a degrec, set himself up in a flat in 
Chancery Lane, and called himself Count Vladimir Svareff. In separate 
rooms in his Chancery Lane flat he made two temples — one white, one black. 
They represented the twin pillars of the Light and the Dark, Jachin and Boaz. 
The white temple was lined with six large looking-glasses to throw back the 
forces of the invocations (so that nothing of the force was lost); the black 
temple was empty except for a human skeleton and a large cupboard, in 
which stood an altar supported by the figure of an cbony Negro standing on 
his hands. And both rooms had thcir magic circle, triangle, and pentagrams 
inscribed on the floor.

In addition to being the Hcad of the Golden Dawn, Mathers was the Head 
of the Second Order in the Great White Brotherhood, a Rosicrucian order 
called the Order of the Rcd Rose and the Golden Cross.In addition to being the Hcad of the Golden Dawn, Mathers was the Head 
of the Second Order in the Great White Brotherhood, a Rosicrucian order 
called the Order of the Rcd Rose and the Golden Cross.

It was not long before Crowley was hammering on the door of the 
Second Order.

There was yet another order within the Great White Brotherhood, the 
top order; it bore the name of the Silver Star or A.*. A.. (Argenteum Astrum). 
This contained three exalted grades— Master of the Temple, Magus, and 
Ipsissimus—to none of which Mathers had attained. And for the very good 
reason that they were on the other side of the Abyss; only the most stalwart 
and enlightened of Aspirants can cross the Abyss.

But by whose authority did this mystical organization, this Great White 
Brotherhood, exist? It obviously could not exist solely by the authority of its 
members; it would then have been no different from an ordinary Masonic 
Fraternity. The answer to this important question is that the authority of the 
First and Second Orders, i.e. the Golden Dawn, and the Red Rose and 
Golden Cross, resided in the Secret Chiefs, the upper and inner circle of the 
Great White Brotherhood.

Madame Blavatsky had come up against the same problem. She was 
merely an intellectual and a medium; by herself she could do little. The 
siddhis, or feats, she performed, to the amazement of Anglo-Indian society 
of the 1880s, were made possible by the magical current which sustained her 
and which was derived from her Secret Chiefs, Koot Hoomi and Morya, 
who lived in the fastness of Tibet. She first met a Secret Chief or, to use her 
term, a Hidden Master, beside the Serpentine in Hyde Park one moonlit 
night during 1851, the year of the Great Exhibition.

18 INTRODUCTION18 INTRODUCTION

In 1886 a Secret Chief of the grade of Master of the Temple (living in 
Germany under the guise of Fraulein Anna Sprengel) gave Mathers and his 
colleagues a charter to establish the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. 
And after the Golden Dawn had been split from top to bottom and Mathers’ 
authority was being disputed, his leadership of the First and Second Orders 
was confirmed by three Secret Chiefs whom he met in the Bois de Boulogne 
—or so he said. Crowley disbelieved him, swore that Deo Duce Comite 
Ferro (‘With God as my Leader and the Sword as my Companion’), to 
mention one of Mathers’ magical names, had only banged into three evil 
spirits. But saying this did not help Crowley.

The only actual magic which Mathers performed, apart from employing 
elementals in attacks on Crowley, was to still a storm; it is not surprising 
therefore that Crowley, who was far more ambitious, should have quarrelled 
with him, and struck out on his own; taking with him, of course, all the 
weapons in Mathers’ armoury he could lay his hands on. Crowley also 
quarrelled with the rank and file of the Order, and with W. B. Yeats, whom 
he accused of being jealous of his superior talent as a poet, and was virtually 
expelled from the Order.

The most important of these weapons was the Rosicrucian system of the 
Great White Brotherhood, and the magic of Abra~Melin which Mathers had 
brought to light and published. The first was the party apparatus, the second 
the philosophy and driving force. Crowley therefore took from Mathers 
everything, except a following, necessary for a successful career as a magician.If you wish to perform the operation of conjuring up your Holy Guardian 
Angel, says the Egyptian Mage, Abra-Melin, you must first of all construct 
an oratory in a secluded place. Where should Crowley construct his oratory? 
His flat in Chancery Lane was far too noisy. In search of a suitable spot, he 
wandered about the Lake District and into Scotland, and in August 1899 he 
found Boleskine House near the village of Foyers. Loch Ness lay before it 
and a hill behind it; it was remote; the view was magnificent; it was ideal 
for the practice of Abra-Melin magic.

The full title of the manuscript which Mathers had found in the Biblio- 
thèque de |’Arsenal in Paris, translated (from the French) and published, is 
The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin the Mage, as delivered by Abraham 
the Jew unto his son Lamech, A.D. 1458. There is no general ritual in this work 
as in other grimoires; there is only a list of several hundred spirits (angels and 
demons) to be evoked, and talismans to be used for such magical purpose as 
raising or quelling storms, finding hidden treasure, inflaming lust between 
persons of the magician’s choosing. The spirit in question, after it has been 
ceremonially evoked, vitalizes the talisman which has been duly con- 
secrated. The whole system is only possible after the aspirant has established 
communion with his Holy Guardian Angel, i.e. his True Self. It is the Holy

INTRODUCTION 19

Guardian Angel who imparts the method to be employed for this or that 
purpose. The book of the sacred magic of Abra-Melin (or Abramelin, or 
Abrahamelin, or Abramelim) is therefore scaled with seven seals. Everything 
depends upon the H. G. A., and his intercession is impossible without six 
months’ intense ceremonial purification. In other words, Abra-Melin magic 
is a kind of yoga, producing psychic transformation. Crowley described it as 
the one startling exception to all the puerile nonsense written on the subject.Crowley made his oratory in a room facing north and began the operation 
at once. After some months of concentrated effort, he partially succeeded. 
He says that a host of demons were attracted, some of which materialized; 
they causcd a great deal of disturbance and damage among tradespeople and 
others in the neighbourhood. But he did not obtain complete success in the 
operation — that is, knowledge of and conversation with his Holy Guardian 
Angel or True Self—till a few years later.

He married, produced a child and more volumes of poetry and erotica. 
He hurried off to Mexico and, with his fricnd Oscar Eckenstein, climbed 
Ixtaccihuatl and Popocatapetl. A year later, in 1902, he joined Eckenstein’s 
expedition to Chogo Ri: at that time all the great peaks in the Himalayas were 
unconquered and had hardly been attempted. Eckenstein, who was of 
German-Jewish extraction, devised a new type of crampons, or climbing 
irons, which enabled mountaineers to dispense with the laborious work of 
cutting steps in the ice. He was seventeen years older than Crowley. In a 
letter written in 1924 to Harry Doughty, Crowley summcd up Eckenstein 
as a climber: ‘Eckenstein, provided he could get three fingers on something 
that could be described by a man far advanced in hashish as a ledge, would be 
smoking his pipe on that ledge a few seconds later, and none of us could tell 
how he had done it.’ Crowley had great affection for Oscar Eckenstein.Eckenstein, as far as I know, did not record his opinion of Crowley as a 
climber, but we have the view of Dr Tom George Longstaff, President of the 
Alpine Club from 1947 to 1949. Crowley was ‘a fine climber, if an uncon- 
ventional one. I have seen him go up the dangerous and difficult right (true) 
side of the great ice fall of the Mer de Glace below the Géant alone, just for a 
promenade. Probably the first and perhaps the only time this mad, dangerous 
and difficult route had been taken.’* Crowley’s own brief account of this 
ui in which Dr Longstaff is mentioncd, is in Chapter 25 of the present 
work,

In 1904, the Abra-Melin Operation flowered and Crowley's Holy 
Guardian Angel, Aiwass, appeared — not, however, to enter into conversation 
with him, but to dictate The Book of the Law. He treated this profoundly 
significant event in a very quiet way, as if he did not quite believe it; he 
merely announced to a few friends and acquaintances, like Arnold Bennctt,

* This My Voyage (Murray, 1950).

20 INTRODUCTION

that the old world of Christianity had collapsed, and that a ‘New Aeon’ for 
mankind had begun.

Crowley has written a great deal about The Book of the Law in these 
Confessions. This was unavoidable, for the Book is the heart of his creed and 
the turning point of his career. Without the Law of Thelema (which is 
embodied in the Book), he would just have been a minor magician like 
Eliphas Lévi or MacGregor Mathers, one of the many who studied the 
mysteries and practised the magic of Abra~Melin or the Enochian system of 
John Dee or some other magical system. The Book was the force which 
enabled him to cross the Abyss, and to go on to become a Magus, and 
proclaim his word,* as Allah and Buddha proclaimed theirs.If we are to believe him, he crossed the Abyss in 1909 and appeared on the 
other side with the grade of Mastcr of the Temple, that is to say, he had 
united his consciousness with the universal consciousness, shifted the centre of 
gravity from himself to God. Thus he had found the Secret Sanctuary of the 
Saints or the abode of the Secret Chiefs, and become one of them; he had 
succeeded in his quest. His poetry and exploits on mountains are insignificant 
beside this. He could dash off a successful kind of music-hall song, like ‘La 
Gitana’, and evocative verses for magic rituals like his ‘Hymn to Pan’, which 
he thought ‘the most powerful enchantment ever written’ — it certainly has a 
spell-binding quality about it; but he lacked the equipment for the higher 
flights of poetry. And he failed to climb Kangchenjunga, was driven back by 
the demon who protects the Five Sacred Peaks (the local name for Kang- 
chenjunga) and who claimed as victims Alexis Pache, a thirty-one-ycar-old 
lieutenant in the Swiss Cavalry, and four coolies.The personality of Aleister Crowley was a riddle to Charles Richard 
Cammell, one of Crowley's biographers. ‘Explain me the riddle of this 
man!’+ To Arthur Gauntlett, who analysed Crowley’s character from his 
horoscope, he is ‘one of the most enigmatic personalities of our time’.{ The 
sphinx with the face of Aleister Crowley propounds this riddle: ‘Why did 
I drive away my friends and followers? Why did I behave so vilely?’ The 
answer is to be found in some of the versicles in The Book of the Law. ‘Bind 
nothing! Let there be no difference made among you between any one thing 
& any other thing ... The word of Sin is Restriction ... There is no law 
beyond Do what thou wilt.’ The many rolcs which Crowley chose for him- 
self show that he had taken this precept literally. He did not make any 
difference or distinction between one thing and another; he was not restric- 
ted; that is to say he was not contained within any particular borders. On the

* Crowley's word was thelema, the Greck for will, best understood in the phrase Do What Thou 
Wilt, or in the words of The Book of the Law, There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.

t Aleister Crowley. The Man: the Mage: the Poet (The Richards Press, 1951).

$ ‘Aleister Crowley (A Study of an Enigma)’, in Astralogy. The Astrologers’ Quarterly, June 1965.

INTRODUCTION 2I

contrary, he was driven into anything that touched his fancy. Thus, he was an 
English gentleman —he was always reminding us of that—a Scottish peer, a 
Russian nobleman, a Persian prince, Alastor, the Spirit of Solitude, Parama- 
hansa (the divine Swan), the Wanderer of the Waste, God, and, above all, 
the Beast 666 who proclaimed for all mankind his word of Do What Thou 
Wilt. He had a guise for every mood. On no account live within your own skin.Above the grade of Magus is the top grade of all, that of Ipsissimus, who 
is free from all limitations whatsoever, including good and evil, someone 
hardly to be described. Crowley, for whom nothing was too difficult, was 
not going to be restrained from assuming this grade too. In the opinion of 
certain occultists, that is where he made a false step. The suggestion is, of 
course, that he illegally assumed this most exalted grade and that it choked 
him.

The Ape of Thoth* found him unbearable after he had become the 
Ipsissimus, and shortly afterwards wrote about him in her magical diary 
that it was ‘damn hard’ to think of ‘the rottenest kind of creature’ as a Word 
(i.e. thelema).The momentous Ipsissimus event took place in the spring of 1921 when 
Crowley was forty-five. He was at his abbey at Cefalu, Sicily, across the 
door of which were painted the words DO WHAT THOU WILT. He had run 
out of money, was laden with the responsibility of two mistresses and several 
children. For a while he did not know which way to turn in spite of being 
a Master of every kind of Magick. But the gods had not deserted him. In a 
flash of intuition, which came upon him with shattering force, he penctrated 
the ultimate mystery. This is the meaning of Crowley's ‘godhead’, but 
strictly speaking he had reached the stage earlier in his career. As Ipsissimus 
he was beyond the gods, beyond all mental concepts. That is why, I suppose, 
he had to steel himself for the deed, to acknowledge that he, even he, known 
among men as Aleister Crowley, was by insight and initiation the Ipsissimus. 
It is not surprising that he wrote in his diary (The Magical Record of the Beast 
666), ‘I am mortally afraid to do so. I fear I might be called upon to do some 
insane act to prove my power to act without attachment.’ Nevertheless, he 
entered the temple, followed by the Ape of Thoth. Of the actual ceremony 
he says nothing, and at the conclusion, only ‘As a God goes, I go.’ And he 
left the temple as naked as he had entered it, no longer a saint—Saint 
Aleister Crowley of the Gnostic church—but a god. His Confessions, which 
he began to write and dictate shortly afterwards, should not therefore have 
been called an autohagiography but an autotheography.

He did not reveal this Ipsissimus attainment to anyone. We know of it 
from his Magical Record. In Magick, privately published, 1929, page 301, there

* Leah Hirsig, Crowley's scribe, who during the Cefalu period held the office of the Scarlet 
oman.

22 INTRODUCTION* Leah Hirsig, Crowley's scribe, who during the Cefalu period held the office of the Scarlet 
oman.

22 INTRODUCTION

is only this hint of it: ‘I, The Beast 666, lift up my voice and swear that I 
myself have been brought hither by mine Angel ... Also He made me a 
Magus ... Yea, he wrought also in me a Work of Wonder beyond this, 
but in this matter I am sworn to hold my peace.’

Under the complicated overlay, one can discern a relatively simple pattern. 
Other pcople have no ego, and are just weak, but Crowley made a religion 
out of his weakness, out of being ego-less. I know that ego-lessness is a 
condition which Indian philosophy regards as the supreme state, and towards 
which the Sadhaka strives, but in Crowley’s case it is the point from which 
he begins, not the goal of his endeavours.* Besides, he was not an Oriental; 
he had all the restlessness of the European. Indeed, he rushed in where angels, 
Ict alone Sadhakas, fear to tread. He did not, he tells us in Section 58 of the 
present work, deliberatcly cross the Abyss; he was hurled across it. He lacked 
an inhibitory counterforce; he was always hurling himself into magical and 
other adventures.But whatever view one takes of The Book of the Law, it was not written 
by Crowley with tongue in cheek. Until the day he died, he believed it was 
a piece of inspired writing; he was merely the vehicle of its transmission. 
The year was 1904; the place, Cairo. He was on holiday with his wife, Rose. 
It was she who told him that Horus wanted to speak to him. He was sur- 
prised, for she knew nothing of Egyptian mythology. ‘Who is Horus?’ he 
asked. She pointed out the hawk-headed god in the museum. “They are 
waiting for you,’ she said. She then told him how to get in touch with 
Horus, what ritual to use. He raised an eyebrow; he had been performing 
magic rituals continually for the previous six years. But he did as she said, 
went barefoot and clad in his magical robe into the room which he had 
consecrated as a temple and performed the invocatory ceremony. In a 
trance-like condition he heard a voice—not the voice of Horus but of one 
who introduced himself as Aiwass, the Messenger. Crowley had his Swan 
fountain pen with him; he began to write.

The cosmology of The Book of the Law is explained by Crowley thus: 
there have been, as far as we know, two aeons in the history of the world. 
The first, that of Isis, is the aeon of the woman; hence matriarchy, the wor- 
ship of the Great Mother and so on. About 500 B.c. this acon was succeeded 
by the aeon of Osiris, that is, the aeon of the man, the father, hence the 
paternal religions of suffering and death—Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity 
and Mohammedanism. This aeon came to an end in 1904 when Aleister 
Crowley reccived The Book of the Law, and the new aeon, that of Horus, 
the child, was born. In this aeon the emphasis is on the true self or will, not 
on anything external such as gods and priests. The enol of Egyptian names 
for the aeons is purely arbitrary.

* In the language of psychology, he lacked integration; he was in the grip of unconscious forces.

INTRODUCTION 23* In the language of psychology, he lacked integration; he was in the grip of unconscious forces.

INTRODUCTION 23

The Book of the Law is a collection of sentiments of a rebellious kind, on 
the whole remarkably similar to the sentiments Crowley himself expressed.

He wrote a vast comment on the Book; it is unpublished. The brief com- 
ment which he did publish contains this curious statement: ‘The study of 
this Book is forbidden ... Those who discuss the contents of this Book are 
to be shunned by all as centres of pestilence.’ Norman Mudd, Professor of 
Applied Mathematics of Grey University College, Bloemfontein, ‘guide, 
philosopher, and friend’ of the Beast, was foolish enough to ignore this 
warning and was overtaken by disaster. (See note on page 925, and Section 
"i a man who was having visions on frequent occasions, he was remark- 
ably unintrospective. He drew no deductions from the series of Enochian 
visions he experienced in the North African desert with his chela, the poet 
Victor Neuburg.* These so-called visions present situations of hopelessness 
and despair, and others of an inflated, or compensatory, kind. The gates of 
heaven and hell are thrown wide open, wonders and horrors are revealed, 
withdrawn, and the skryer is back where he startcd. The style is that of the 
Old Testament, but the numinous quality of visions seems to me to be 
absent. From the point of view of ordinary consciousness, the wheel did not 
go round; there was no metabolism. Crowley had no personal problems 
to solve and no mundane ambitions. Instead the scene is enlivened by the 
appearance of the demon Choronzon, the epitome of all disharmony and 
confusion, whom Crowley had conjured up in the form of a naked savage; 
he rushed upon Neuburg and smote him (see Section 66).Crowley began to write his Confessions in a mood of optimism, but he 
concluded them with uncertainty and sadness. The Italian government had 
reacted to the attacks on his character in the Sunday Express by ordering him 
to leave Italy, and he dictated the last section in exile from his abbey. Another 
blow quickly followed: Collins, who had brought out his novel, The Diary 
of a Drug Fiend, decided to publish nothing more by Aleister Crowley, 
although they had given him an advance of £125 on the autohagiography. 
He was forty-eight years of age, and the outlook was bleak. It did not remain 
so for long. A new Scarlet Woman (Dorothy Olsen) appeared, and he 
discarded the exhausted Ape of Thoth; he also found a new set of followers 
in Germany, and during 1925 he went to Thuringia to preach the Law of 
Thelema.

In 1929, a small firm of publishers called the Mandrake Press published 
the first two volumes of the autohagiography in a projected series of six 
volumes. It bore the title:

* The Vision and the Voice, Thelema Publishing Company, Barstow, California, circa 1949. This 
work was originally published in Crowley's periodical, The Equinax, vol. I, no. V, t911.

24 INTRODUCTION

THE SPIRIT OF SOLITUDE 
An Autohagiography 
Subsequently re-Antichristened 
THE CONFESSIONS OF 
ALEISTER CROWLEY

The Mandrakc Press also brought out a small volume of three of Crowlcy’s 
stories, The Stratagem, and his magical novel, Moonchild.

The third volume of the autohagiography reached the stage of galleys but 
was never published. Crowlcy quarrelled with the directors of the Mandrake 
Press. The firm was then taken over by Crowley's friends and followers, and 
promptly went out of business.

This is the text of all six volumes, after some redundancies have been 
removed: Crowley dictated the work to the Ape of Thoth while under the 
influence of heroin, which made him at times a little verbose.At the beginning of 1945, the Prophet of the New Aeon went to live in a 
boarding-house in Hastings. ‘Netherwood’ was a large Victorian mansion 
standing in wooded grounds in that part of the outskirts of the town called 
The Ridge. He had published privately several more works since the failure 
of the Mandrake Press, notably The Equinox of the Gods, 1937, in which The 
Book of the Law is presented as the new religion for mankind; three patriotic 
war-time broadsheets with his photograph in Arab headdress; and The Book 
of Thoth, 1944, a reorientation of the tarot in the light of his philosophy.

The rest of his autohagiography was still unpublished; he had lost the 
galleys of the third volume and the typescripts of the remaining three volumes 
were scattered among his papers. On my suggestion, he collected them 
together and gave them to a typist. One copy (bound in four parts) he sent 
to me. In his reply to my letter of thanks, he wrote, “You were a little light- 
hearted in asking me to make sure of these volumes of the Hag not being lost 
to the world. It cost me as near forty pounds as makes no difference.’

His odd dress and sweet smell, his magic ring with the hieroglyphic 
inscription, Ankh-f-n-Khonsu, ‘his life is in Khonsu’ (the moon god of 
Thebes), his magic wand, resting in the corner of the rather seedy room in 
which he ended his days, all added to his haunted presence. He had spent his 
whole life in struggling through the Abyss or, if you will, in exploring the 
Unconscious with the aid of every known stimulant and magic ritual; and 
in his old age he had come to look like what he claimed to be—a Secret 
Chief. On the wall, I remember, was a painting, badly drawn but effective, 
of himself as The Beast 666, an idealized self-portrait. (He had covered the 
walls of his bedroom — La Chambre des Cauchemars —at his abbey with magical 
paintings which the vulgar thought obscenc.)I think he was telling the simple truth when he wrote that he immediately

INTRODUCTION 25

stopped a quarrel among Arabs in a coffee house in Algeria by striding into 
the scrimmage, rapidly drawing sigils in the air with his magic ring —a star 
sapphire stone, held in position by a band of two intcrlaced gold serpents — 
while intoning in Arabic a chapter of the Koran. With his shaven head and 
hypnotic eyes, he made a strong, and in some cases a lasting, impression on 
many people.

He was erudite in all subjects relating to magic—or magick as he preferred 
to spell it. He used the J Ching for probing the future long before that work 
became popular in intellectual circles in the West. His greatest merit, perhaps, 
was to make the bridge between Tantrism and the Western esoteric tradition, 
and thus bring together Western and Eastern magical techniques. He lived 
through the night, not the day.

Hampstead Jonn Symonps 
August 1968

To Three Friends

J. W. N. SULLIVAN 
who suggested this booklet

AUGUSTUS JOHN 
who first gave practical assistance

P. R. STEPHENSEN 
who saw the point

And To Three Immortal Memories

RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON 
the perfect pioneer of spiritual and physical adventure 
OSCAR ECKENSTEIN 
who trained me to follow the trail

ALLAN BENNETT 
who did what he could

PART ONE

TOWARDS THE GOLDEN 
DAWN

The Eye of Horus in the Pyramid of Fire, radiating the solar blaze. 
One of the Golden Dawn emblems used by Crowley.

PRELUDE

‘Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.”! Not only to this auto- 
hagiography —as he amusedly insists on calling it—of Alcister Crowley, but 
to every form of biography, biology, even chemistry, these words are the 
key.‘Every man and every woman is a star."? What can we know about a 
star? By the telescope, a faint phantasm of its optical value. By the spectro- 
scope, a hint of its composition. By the telescope, and our mathematics, its 
course. In this last case we may legitimately argue from the known to the 
unknown: by our measure of the brief visible curve, we can calculate whence 
it has come and whither it will go. Experience justifies our assumptions.

Considerations of this sort are essential to any serious attempt at biography. 
An infant is not—as our grandmothers thought — an arbitrary jest flung into 
the world by a cynical deity, to be saved or damned as predestination or 
freewill required. We know now that ‘that, that is, is’, as the old hermit of 
Prague that never saw pen and ink very wittily said to a niece of King 
Gorboduc.

Nothing can ever be created or destroyed; and therefore the ‘life’ of any 
individual must be comparable to that brief visible curve, and the object of 
writing it to divine by the proper measurements the remainder of its 
career.

The writer of any biography must ask, in the deepest sense, who is he? 
This question ‘who art thou?’ is the first which is put to any candidate for 
initiation. Also, it is the last. What so-and-so is, did and suffered: these are 
merely clues to that great problem. So then the earliest memories of any 
autohagiographer will be immensely valuable; their very incoherence will 
be an infallible guide. For, as Freud has shown, we remember (in the main) 
what we wish to remember, and forget what is painful. ‘here is thus great 
danger of deception as to the ‘facts’ of the case; but our memories indicate 
with uncanny accuracy what is our true will. And, as above made manifest, 
it is this true will which shows the nature of our proper motion.In writing the life of the average man, there is this fundamental difficulty, 
that the performance is futile and meaningless, even from the standpoint of 
the matter-of-fact philosopher; there is, that is to say, no artistic unity. In 
the case of Alcister Crowley no such Boyg appeared on the hillside; for he 
himself regards his career as a definitely dramatic composition. It comes to a 
climax on April 8th, 9th and roth, 1904 z.v.2 The slightest incident in the

31

32 PRELUDE

history of the whole universe appears to him as a preparation for that event; 
and his subsequent life is merely the aftermath of that crisis.31

32 PRELUDE

history of the whole universe appears to him as a preparation for that event; 
and his subsequent life is merely the aftermath of that crisis.

On the other hand, however, there is the circumstance that his time has 
been spent in three very distinct manners: the Secret Way of the Initiate, the 
Path of Poetry and Philosophy, and the Open Sea of Romance and Adven- 
ture. It is indeed not unusual to find the first two, or the last two, elements in 
the molecule of a man: Byron exemplifies this, and Poe that. But it is rare 
indeed for so strenuous and out-of-doors a life to be associated with such 
profound devotion to the arts of the quietist; and in this particular instance 
all three careers are so full that posterity might well be excused for surmising 
that not one but several individuals were combined in a legend, or even for 
taking the next step and saying: This Aleister Crowley was not a man, or 
even a number of men; he is obviously a solar myth. Nor could he himself 
deny such an impeachment too brutally; for already, before he has attained 
the prime of life, his name is associated with fables not less fantastic than 
those which have thrown doubt upon the historicity of the Buddha. It 
should be the true will of this book to make plain the truth about the man. 
Yet here again there is a lion in the way. The truth must be falsehood unless 
it be the whole truth; and the whole truth is partly inaccessible, partly 
unintelligible, partly incredible and partly unpublishable—that is, in any 
country where truth in itself is recognized as a dangerous explosive.A further difficulty is introduced by the nature of the mind, and especially 
of the memory, of the man himself. We shall come to incidents which show 
that he is doubtful about clearly remembered circumstances, whether they 
belong to ‘real life’ or to dreams, and even that he has utterly forgotten 
things which no normal man could forget. He has, moreover, so completely 
overcome the illusion of time (in the sense used by the philosophers, from 
Lao Tzu and Plotinus to Kant and Whitehead) that he often finds it impos- 
sible to disentangle events as a sequence. He has so thoroughly referred 
phenomena to a single standard that they have lost their individual signifi- 
cance, just as when one has understood the word ‘cat’, the letters c a t have 
lost their own value and become mere arbitrary elements of an idea. Further: 
on reviewing one’s life in perspective the astronomical sequence ceases to be 
significant. Events rearrange themselves in an order outside time and space, 
just as in a picture there is no way of distinguishing at what point on the 
canvas the artist began to paint. Alas! it is impossible to make this a satisfac- 
tory book; hurrah! that furnishes the necessary stimulus; it becomes worth

while to do it, and by Styx! it shall be done.

It would be absurd to apologize for the form of this book. Excuses are 
always nauseating. I do not believe for a moment that it would have turned 
out any better if it had been written in the most favourable circumstances.

PRELUDE 33

I mention merely as a matter of general interest the actual difficulties attending 
the composition.PRELUDE 33

I mention merely as a matter of general interest the actual difficulties attending 
the composition.

From the start my position was precarious. I was practically penniless, I 
had been betrayed in the most shameless and senseless way by practically 
everyone with whom I was in business relations, I had no means of access to 
any of the normal conveniences which are considered essential to people 
engaged in such tasks. On the top of this there sprang up a sudden whirlwind 
of wanton treachery and brainless persecution,‘ so imbecile yet so violent as 
to throw even quite sensible people off their base. I ignored this and carricd 
on, but almost immediately both I and onc of my principal assistants were 
stricken down with lingering illness. I carried on. My assistant® dicd. I 
carried on. His death was the signal for a fresh outburst of venomous falsc- 
hoods. I carried on. The agitation resulted in my being exiled from Italy; 
though no accusation of any kind was, or could be, alleged against me. That 
meant that I was torn away from even the most clementary conveniences 
for writing this book. I carried on. At the moment of writing this paragraph 
everything in connection with the book is entircly in the air. I am carrying 
on.But apart from any of this, I have felt throughout an essential difficulty 
with regard to the form of the book. The subject is too big to be susccptible 
of organic structure unless I make a deliberate effort of will and a strict 
arbitrary selection. It would, as a matter of fact, be easy for mc to choose 
any one of fifty mcanings for my lifc, and illustrate it by carefully chosen 
facts. Any such method would be open to the criticism which is always 
ready to devastate any form of idcalism. I myself fecl that it would be unfair 
and, what is morc, untrue. The alternative has been to makc the incidents as 
full as possible, to state them as they occurred, entirely regardless of any 
possible bearing upon any possible spiritual significance. This mcthod 
involves a certain faith in life itself, that it will declare its own meaning and 
apportion the relative importance of every sct of incidents automatically. In 
other words, it is to assert the theory that destiny is a supreme artist, which 
is notoriously not the case on any accepted definition of art. And yet—a 
mountain! What a mass of heterogeneous accidents determine its shape! 
Yet, in the case of a fine mountain, who denics the beauty and even the 
significance of its form?

In the later ycars of my life, as I have attained to some understanding of 
the unity behind the diverse phenomena of experience, and as the natural 
restriction of elasticity which comes with age has gained ground, it has 
become progressively easier to group events about a central purpose. But 
this only means that the principle of selection has been changed. In my carly 
years the actual seasons, climates and occupations determined the scctions of 
my life. My spiritual activities fit into those frames, whereas, more recently,

34 PRELUDE34 PRELUDE

the converse is the case. My physical environment fits into my spiritual 
preoccupation. This change would be sufficient by itself to ensure the 
theoretical impossibility of editing a life like mine on any consistent principle.

I find myself obliged, for these and many other reasons, to abandon 
altogether any idea of conceiving an artistic structure for the work or formu- 
lating an artistic purpose. All that I can do is to describe everything that I 
remember, as best I can, as if it were, in itself, the centre of interest. I must 
trust nature so to order matters that, in the multiplicity of the material, the 
proper proportion will somehow appear automatically, just as in the opera- 
tions of pure chance or inexorable law a unity ennobled by strength and 
beautified by harmony arises inscrutably out of the chaotic concatenation of 
circumstances.

At least one claim may be made; nothing has been invented, nothing 
suppressed, nothing altered and nothing ‘yellowed up’. I believe that truth 
is not only stranger than fiction, but more intercsting. And I have no motive 
for deception, because I don’t give a damn for the whole human race—

‘you re nothing but a pack of cards.’

l

Edward Crowley,* the wealthy scion of a race of Quakers, was the father of 
a son born at 30 Clarendon Square, Leamington, Warwickshire,t on the 
12th day of October, 1875 E.v. betwecn eleven and twelve at night. Leo 
was just rising at thc time, as ncarly as can be ascertained. The branch of 
the family of Crowley to which this man belonged has been settled in 
England since Tudor times: in the days of Bad Queen Bess there was a 
Bishop Crowley, who wrote epigrams in the style of Martial. One of them — 
the only one I know —runs thus:

The bawds of the stews be all turnéd out: 
But I think they inhabit all England throughout.

(I cannot find the modern book which quotes this as a footnote and have 
not been able to trace the original volume.)(I cannot find the modern book which quotes this as a footnote and have 
not been able to trace the original volume.)

The Crowleys are, however, of Ccltic origin; the name O'Crowley is 
common in south-west Ireland, and the Breton family of de Quérouaille— 
which gave England a Duchess of Portsmouth —or de Kerval is of the same 
stock. Legend will have it that the then head of the family came to England 
with the Earl of Richmond and helped to make him king on Bosworth 
Field.

Edward Crowley was educated as an engineer, but never practiscd his 
profession.) He was devoted to religion and became a follower of John 
Nelson Darby, the founder of the ‘Plymouth Brethren’. The fact reveals a 
stern logician; for the sect is characterized by refusal to compromise; it 
insists on the literal interpretation of the Bible as the exact words of the 
Holy Ghost. ||

He marricd (in 1874, one may assume) Emily Bertha Bishop, of a Devon 
and Somerset family. Her father had dicd and her brother Tom Bond 
Bishop had come to London to work in the Civil Service. The important 
points about the woman are that her schoolmates called her ‘the little

* ‘the younger’ (1834-87).

t It has been remarked a strange coincidence that one small county should have given England

her two greatest poets — for one must not forget Shakespeare (1550-1616).!

sp aaa this is nature’s compensation for the horror which blasted mankind on that date in 
2.

§ His son elicited this fact by questioning; curious, considering the dates.

I| On the strength of a text in the book itself: che logic is thus of a peculiar order.

35

36 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN§ His son elicited this fact by questioning; curious, considering the dates.

I| On the strength of a text in the book itself: che logic is thus of a peculiar order.

35

36 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Chinese girl’, that shc painted in water-colour with admirable taste destroyed 
by academic training, and that her powerful natural instincts were suppressed 
by religion to the point that she became, after her husband’s death, a brainless 
bigot of the most narrow, logical and inhuman type. Yet there was always 
a struggle; she was really distressed, almost daily, at finding herself obliged 
by her religion to perform acts of the most senseless atrocity.

Her firstborn son, the aforesaid, was remarkable from the moment of his 
arrival. He bore on his body the three most important distinguishing marks 
of a Buddha. He was tongue-tied, and on the second day of his incarnation 
a surgcon cut the fraenum linguae. He had also the characteristic membrane, 
which necessitated an operation for phimosis some three lustres later.? Lastly, 
he had upon the centre of his heart four hairs curling from left to right in 
the exact form of a Swastika.*

He was baptised by the names of Edward Alexander, the latter being the 
surname of an old friend of his father’s, deeply beloved by him for the 
holiness of his life—by Plymouth Brethren standards, one may suppose. It 
seems probable that the boy was decply impressed by being told, at what 
age (before six) does not appear, that Alexander means ‘helper of men’. He 
is still giving himself passionately to the task, despite the intellectual cynicism 
inseparable from intclligence after one has reached forty.But the extraordinary fact connected with this baptismal ceremony is 
this. As the Plymouth Brethren practise infant baptism by immersion, it 
must have taken place in the first three months of his life. Yet he has a 
perfectly clear visual recollection of the scene. It took place in a bathroom 
on the first floor of the house in which he was born. He remembers the shape 
of the room, the disposal of its appointments, the little group of ‘brethren’ 
surrounding him, and the surprise of finding himself, dressed in a long white 
garment, being suddenly dipped and lifted from the water. He has also a 
clear auditory remembrance of words spoken solemnly over him; though 
they meant nothing, he was impressed by the peculiar tone. It is not impos- 
sible that this gave him an all but unconquerable dislike for the cold plunge, 
and at the same time a vivid passion for ceremonial speech. These two 
qualities have played highly important parts in his development.

This baptism, by the way, though it never worried him, proved a peril 
to the soul of another. When his wife’s conduct compelled him to insist upon 
her divorcing him—a formality as meaningless as their marriage—and she 
became insane shortly afterwards, an eminent masochist named Colonel 
Gormley, R.A.M.C. (dead previously, then and since) lay in wait for her at 
the asylum gatcs to marry her. The trouble was that he included among his 
intellectual lacunae a devotion to the Romish superstition. He feared damna-

* There is also a notable tuft of hair upon the forehead, similar to the mound of flesh there 
situated in the Buddhist legends. And numerous minor marks.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 37

tion if he married a divorceuse dipsomaniac with non-parva-partial dementia. 
The poor mollusc asked Crowley for details of his baptism. He wrote back 
that he had been baptised ‘in the name of the Holy Trinity’.It now appeared that, had these actual words becn used, he was a pagan, 
his marriage void, Lola Zaza a bastard and his wife a light o’ love!

Crowley tried to help the wretched worm; but, alas, he remembered too 
well the formula: ‘I baptise thee Edward Alexander in the name of the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.’ So the gallant colonel had to fork out 
for a dispensation from Rome. Crowley himself squandered a lot of cash in 
one way or another. But he never fell so far as to waste a farthing on the 
three-card trick, or the three-God trick.

He has also the clearest visualization of some of the people who surrounded 
him in the first six years of his life, which were spent in Leamington and the 
neighbourhood, which he has never revisited. In particular, there was an 
orange-coloured old lady named Miss Carey who used to bring him oranges. 
His first memory of speech is his remark, “Ca’ey, onange’ ;* this, however, is 
remembered because he was told of it later. But he is in full conscious 
memory of the dining-room of the house, its furniture and pictures, with 
their arrangement. He also remembers various country walks, one especially 
through green fields, in which a perambulator figures. The main street of 
Leamington, and the Leam with its weir—hc has loved weirs ever since — 
Guy’s Cliffe at Warwick, and the Castle with its terrace and the white 
peacocks: all these are as clear as if he had secn them last week. He recalls no 
other room in the house except his own bedroom, and that only because he 
‘came to himself’ one night to find a fire lighted, a steam kettle going, a 
strange woman present, an atmosphere of anxicty and a feeling of fever; for 
he had an attack of bronchitis.He remembers his first governess, Miss Arkcll, a grey-haired lady with 
traces of beard upon her large flat face and a black dress of what he calls 
bombasine, though to this hour he does not know what bombasine may be, 
and thinks that the dress was of alpaca or even, it may be, of smooth hard silk.

And he remembers the first indication that his mind was of a logical and 
scientific order.

Ladies will now kindly skip a page, while I lay the facts before a select 
audience of lawyers, doctors and ministers of religion.

The Misses Cowper consisted of Sister Susan and Sister Emma; the one 
large, rosy and dry, like an overgrown radish; the other small, pink and 
moist, rather like Tenniel’s Mock Turtle. Both were Plymouth Sister old 
maids. They were very repulsive to the boy, who has never since liked 
calf’s head, though partial to similar dishes, or been able to hear the names 
Susan or Emma without disgust.

* He has never been able to pronounce ‘R’ properly —like a Chinese!

38 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

One day he said something to his mother which elicited from her the 
curious anatomical assertion: ‘Ladies have no legs.’ Shortly afterwards, when 
the Misses Cowper were at dinner with the family, he disappeared from his 
chair. There must have been some slight commotion on deck, leading to the 
question of his whereabouts. But at that moment a still small voice came 
from beneath thc table: ‘Mamma! Mamma! Sister Susan and Sister Emma 
are not ladies!’

This deduction was perfectly genuine: but in the following incident the 
cynical may perhaps trace the root of a certain sardonic humour. The child 
was wont to indicate his views, when silence seemed discretion, by facial 
gestures. Several people were rash enough to tell him not to make grimaces, 
as he ‘might be struck like that’. He would reply, with an air of enlightcn- 
ment after long meditation: ‘So that accounts for it.’All children born into a family whose social and economic conditions are 
settled are bound to take them for granted as universal. It is only when they 
meet with incompatible facts that they begin to wonder whether thcy are 
suited to their original environment. In this particular case the most trifling 
incidents of life were necessarily interpreted as part of a prearranged plan, like 
the beginning of Candide.

The underlying theory of life which was assumed in the household 
showed itsclf constantly in practice. It is strange that less than fifty years 
later, this theory should seem such fantastic folly as to require a detailed 
account.

The universe was created by God 4004 B.c. The Bible, authorized version, 
was literally true, having been dictated by the Holy Ghost himself to scribes 
incapable of even clerical errors. King James’s translators enjoyed an equal 
immunity. It was considered unusual—and therefore in doubtful taste—to 
appcal to the orginal texts. All other versions were regarded as inferior; the 
Revised Version in particular savoured of heresy. John Nelson Darby, the 
founder of the Plymouth Brethren, being a very famous biblical scholar, had 
becn invited to sit on the committce and had refused on the ground that some 
of the other scholars werc atheists.

The Second Coming of the Lord Jesus was confidently expected to occur 
at any moment.* So imminent was it that preparations for a distant future — 
such as signing a lease or insuring one’s life— might be held to imply lack of 
confidence in the promise, ‘Behold I come quickly.’

A pathetically tragic incident—some years later —illustrates the reality of 
this absurdity. To modern educated pcople it must sccm unthinkable thatA pathetically tragic incident—some years later —illustrates the reality of 
this absurdity. To modern educated pcople it must sccm unthinkable that

* Much was made of the two appearances of ‘Jesus’ after the Ascension. In the first, to Stephen, 
he was standing, in the second, to Paul, seated, at the righe hand of God. Ergo, on the first 
occasion he was still ready to return at once; on the second, he had made up his mind to let things 
take their course to the bitter end, as per the Apocalypse. No one saw anything funny, or blas- 
phemous, or even futile, in this doctrine!

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 39

so fantastic a superstition could be such a hellish obsession in such recent 
times and such familiar places.

One fine summer morning, at Redhill, the boy — now eight or nine— got 
tired of playing by himself in the garden. He came back to the house. It was 
strangely still and he got frightened. By some odd chance everybody was 
either out or upstairs. But he jumped to the conclusion that ‘the Lord had 
come’, and that he had been ‘left behind’. It was an understood thing that 
there was no hope for pcople in this position. Apart from the Second Advent, 
it was always possible to be saved up to the very moment of dcath; but 
once the saints had been called up, the day of grace was finally over. Various 
alarums and excursions would take place as per the Apocalypse, and then 
would come the millennium, when Satan would be chained for a thousand 
years and Christ reign for that period over the Jews regathered in Jerusalem. 
The position of these Jews is not quite clear. They were not saved in the same 
sense as Christians had been, yct they were not damned. The millennium 
seems to have becn thought of as a fulfilment of God’s promise to Abraham; 
but apparently it had nothing to do with ‘eternal life’. However, even this 
modificd beatitude was not open to Gentiles who had rejected Christ.The child was consequently very much relicved by the reappearance of 
some of the inmates of the house whom he could not imagine as having been 
lost eternally.

The lot of the saved, even on earth, was painted in the brightest colours. 
It was held that ‘all things work together for good to them that love God and 
are called according to His purpose’. Earthly life was regarded as an ordeal; 
this was a wicked world and the best thing that could happen to anyonc was 
‘to go to be with Christ, which is far better’. On the other hand, the unsaved 
went to the lake of fire and brimstone which burneth for ever and ever. 
Edward Crowley used to give away tracts to strangers, besides distributing 
them by thousands through the post; he was also constantly preaching to vast 
crowds, all over the country. It was, indeed, the only logical occupation for 
a humane man who believed that even the noblest and best of mankind were 
doomed to eternal punishment. One card—a great favourite, as being 
peculiarly dcadly— was headed ‘Poor Anne’s Last Words’; the gist of her 
remarks appears to have been ‘lost, lost, lost!’ She had been a servant in the 
house of Edward Crowley the elder, and her dying delirium had made a 
deep impression upon the son of the house.

By the way, Edward Crowley possessed the power, as per Higgins, the 
professor in Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion, of telling instantly from a man’s 
speech what part of the country he lived in. It was his hobby to make walking 
tours through every part of England, evangelizing in every town and 
village as he passed. He would engage likcly strangers in conversation, 
diagnose and prescribe for their spiritual diseases, inscribe them in his

40 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

address books, and correspond and send religious literature for years. At that 
time religion was the popular fad in England and few resentcd his ministra- 
tions. His widow continucd the sending of tracts, ctc. for years after his death.As a preacher Edward Crowley was magnificently eloquent, spcaking as 
he did from thc heart. But, being a gentleman, he could not be a real revival- 
ist, which means manipulating the hystcria of mob psychology.

2

If troubles arose in the outer world, they were regarded as the beginning of 
the fulfilment of the prophecics in Danicl, Matthew and Revelation. But it 
was understood implicitly that England was specially favoured by God on 
account of the breach with Rome. The child, who, at this period, was 
called by the dreadful name Alick, supposed it to be a law of nature that 
Queen Victoria would never die and that consols would never go below 
par.

Crowley remembers, as if he had seen it yesterday, the dining-room and 
the ceremony of family prayers after breakfast. He remembers the order in 
which the family and the servants sat. A chapter of the Bible was read, each 
person present taking a verse in turn, At four years old he could read perfectly 
well. The strange thing about this is not so much his precocity as the fact that 
he was much less interested in the Biblical narratives than in the long Hebrew 
names. One of his father’s favourite sermons was based on the fifth chapter 
of Genesis; long as the patriarchs lived, they all died in the end. From this 
he would argue that his hearers would die too; they had therefore better 
lose no time in making sure of hcaven. But the interest of Alick was in the 
sound of thc names themselvcs—Enoch, Arphaxad, Mahalccl. He often 
wondcrs whether this curious trait was symptomatic of his subsequent 
attainments in poetry, or whether it indicates the attraction which the 
Hebrew Cabbala was to have for him later on.With regard to the question of salvation, by the way, the theory of the 
exclusive Plymouth Brethren was peculiar, and somewhat trying to a 
logical mind. They held predestination as rigidly as Calvin, yet this nowise 
interfered with complete freewill. The crux was faith in Christ, apparently 
more or less intellectual, but, since ‘the devils also belicve and tremble’, it had 
to be supplemented by a voluntary acceptance of Christ as one’s personal 
saviour. This being so, the question arose whether Roman Catholics, Angli- 
cans or even Nonconformists could possibly be saved. The gencral fceling 
secms to have been that it was impossible for anyone who was oncc actually 
saved to be lost, whatever he did.* But it was, of course, beyond human 
power to determine whether any given individual had or had not found 
salvation. This, however, was clear: that any teaching or acceptance of false 
* ‘OF those that thou gavest me have I lost not one, except the son of perdition.’ In view of 
predestination, ‘those’ means all the elect and not merely the Eleven, as the unenlightened might

suppose.

4I

42 TOWARDS THB GOLDEN DAWN

doctrine must be met by excommunication. The leaders of the Brethren were 
necessarily profound theologians. There being no authority of any kind, 
any brother soever might enunciate any doctrine soever at any time, and 
this anarchy had already resulted, before the opening of our story, in the 
division of the Brethren into two great sects: the Open and the Exclusive.Philip Gosse, the father of Edmund Gosse, was a leader among the Open 
Brethren, who differed from the Exclusive Brethren, at first, only by 
tolerating, at the Lord’s table, the presence of ‘professed Christians’ not 
definitely affiliated to themselves. Edmund Gosse has described his father’s 
attitude in Father and Son. Much of what he wrote taxes the credulity of the 
reader. Such narrowness and bigotry as that of Philip Gosse seemed beyond 
belief. Yet Edward Crowlcy regarded Philip Gosse as likely to be damned 
for latitudinarianism! No one who loved the Lord Jesus in his heart could 
be so careless of his Saviour’s honour as to ‘break bread’* with a man who 
might be holding unscriptural opinions.

Readcrs of Father and Son will remember the incident of the Christmas 
turkey, secretly bought by Mr Gosse’s servants and thrown into the dustbin 
by him in the spirit of Moses destroying the golden calf. For the Brethren 
rightly held Christmas to be a pagan festival. They sent no Christmas cards 
and destroyed any that might be sent to them by thoughtless or blaspheming 
‘goats’. Not to disappoint Alick, who liked turkey, the family had that bird 
for lunch on the 24th and 26th of December. The idca was to ‘avoid even the 
appearance of evil’; there was nothing actually wrong in eating turkey on 
Christmas Day; for pagan idols are merely wood and stone—the work of 
men’s hands. But one must not let others suppose that one is complying with 
heathen customs.Another early reminiscence. On February 29th, 1880, Alick was taken to 
see the dead body of his sister, Grace Mary Elizabeth, t who had only lived 
five hours. The incident madc a curious impression on him. He did not see 
why he should be disturbed so usclessly. He couldn't do any good; the child 
was dead; it was none of his business. This attitude continued through his 
life. He has never attended any funeral} but that of his father, which he did 
not mind doing, as he felt himself to be the real centre of interest. But when. 
others have died, though in two cascs at least his heart was torn as if by a wild 
beast, and his life actually blighted for months and years by the catastrophe, 
he has always turned away from the necrological facts and the customary 
orgies. It may be that he has a deep-seated innate conviction that the con- 
nection of a person with his body is purely symbolic. But there is also the 
feeling that the fact of death destroys all possible interest; the disaster is

* i.e. sit at the communion table. 
+ What a name! 
+ With one notable exception, at which he officiated.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 43

irreparable, it should be forgotten as soon as possible. He would not even 
join the search party after the Kangchenjunga accident. What object was there 
in digging frozen corpses from under an avalanche? Dead bodies themselves 
do not repel him; he is as interested in dissecting rooms as in anything else. 
When he met the dead body of Consul Litton, he turned back, knowing the 
man was dead. But when the corpse was brought to Tengyueh, he assisted 
unflinchingly at the inquiry, because in this instance there was an object in 
ascertaining the cause of death.®One other group of incidents of early childhood. The family went to the 
west of England for the summer. Alick remembers Monmouth, or rather 
Monmouth Castle. It is curious that, in the act of remembering this for the 
purpose of this book, he was obsessed by the idca that there could not be such 
a place as Monmouth; the name seemcd fantastic. It was confused in his mind 
with ‘Monster’ and ‘Mammoth’, and it was some hours beforc he could 
convince himself of its reality. He remembers staying in a farm some distance 
from the road and has a very vague impression of becoming acquainted with 
such animals as ducks and pigs. Much morc clearly arises the vision of him- 
self on a pony with people walking each side. He remembers falling off, 
starting to yell and being carried up to the house by the frightened governess 
(or whoever it was) in charge of him. This event had a tragic result. He 
ought to have been put back on the pony and made to conquer his fears. As 
it was, he has never been able to feel at home on horscback, though he has 
ridden thousands of miles, many of them over really dangcrous country.

On the other hand — subconscious memory of previous incarnations, or the 
Eastern soul of him, or the fact that he took to it after he had learned the 
foolishness of fear? — he was from the first perfectly at home on a camcl. And 
this despite the fact that these animals act like highly placed officials and even 
—if scabby — like consuls, and look (when old) like English ladies engaged in 
good works. (There is much of the vulture in the type of head.)One incident connected with this journey is of extraordinary interest as 
throwing a light on future events. Walking with his father in a ficld, whose 
general aspect he remembers perfectly well to this day, his attention was 
called to a clump of nettles and he was warned that they would sting if he 
touched them. He docs not remember what he answered, but whatever it was 
it elicited from his father the question, ‘Will you take my word for it or 
would you rather learn by experience? He replied, ‘I would rather learn by 
experience,’ and plunged head foremost into the clump.

This summer was marked by two narrow escapes. He remembers being 
seated beside the driver of some carriage with what seemed to him an 
extraordinarily tall box, though this impression may mean merely that he was

_a very small boy. It was going down hill on a road that curved across a steep 
slope of very green grass. He remembers the grinding of the brakes. Suddenly

44 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

his father jumped out of the carriage and cried to the driver that a wheel was 
coming off. The only trace which this left in later life is that he has always 
disliked riding in unusual vehicles unless himself in control. He became a 
reckless cyclist and motorist, but he was nervous for a long while with 
automobiles unless at the wheel.The last event of this period occurred at a railway station. He remembers 
its general appearance and that of the little family group. A porter, staggering 
under a heavy trunk, slid it suddenly off his back. It missed crushing the boy 
by a hair’s breadth. He does not remember whether he was snatched away, or 
anything else, except his father’s exclamation, “His guardian angcl was 
watching over him.’ It seems possible that this early impression determined 
his course in later life when he came to take up Magick’; for the one document 
which gripped him was The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin the Mage, 
in which the essential work is “To obtain the Knowledge and Conversation 
of the Holy Guardian Angel’.

It is very important to mention that the mind of the child was almost 
abnormally normal. He showed no tendency to see visions, as even common- 
place children often do. The Bible was his only book at this period; but 
neither the narrative nor the poetry made any deep impression on him. He 
was fascinated by the mysteriously prophetic passages, especially those in 
Revelation. The Christianity in his home was entirely pleasant to him, and 
yet his sympathies were with the opponents of heaven. He suspects obscurcly 
that this was partly an instinctive love of terrors. The Elders and the harps 
seemcd tame. He preferred the Dragon, the False Prophet, the Beast and the 
Scarlet Woman, as being more exciting. He revellcd in the descriptions of 
torment. One may suspect, moreover, a strain of congenital masochism. He 
liked to imagine himsclf in agony; in particular, he liked to identify himself 
with the Beast whose number is the numbcr of a man, six hundred and threc 
scorc six. One can only conjecture that it was the mystery of the number 
which determined this childish choice.Many of the memorics even of very early childhood seem to be those of a 
quitc adult individual. It is as if the mind and body of the boy were a mere 
medium being prepared for the expression of a complete soul already in 
cxistence. (The word medium is herc uscd in almost exactly the samc sense 
as in spiritualism.) This feeling is very strong; and implics an unshakable 
conviction that the facts are as suggested above. The explanation can hardly 
fail to imply the existence of an immanent spirit (the true self) which uses 
incarnations, and possibly many othcr means, from time to time in order to 
observe the universe at a particular point of focus, much as a tclescope 
resolves a nebula.

The congenital masochism of which we have spoken demands further 
investigation. All his life hc has been almost unduly sensitive to pain, physical,

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 45The congenital masochism of which we have spoken demands further 
investigation. All his life hc has been almost unduly sensitive to pain, physical,

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 45

mental and moral. There is no perversion in him which makcs it enjoyable, 
yet the phantasy of desiring to be hurt has persisted in his waking imagination, 
though it never manifests itself in his dreams. It is probable that these 
peculiaritics are connected with ccrtain curious anatomical facts. While his 
masculinity is above the normal, both physiologically and as witnessed by his 
powerful growth of beard, he has certain well-marked feminine characteris- 
tics. Not only are his limbs as slight and graccful as a girl’s, but his breasts are 
developed to a quite abnormal degree. There is thus a sort of hermaphroditism 
in his physical structure; and this is naturally expressed in his mind. But 
whereas, in most similar cases, the feminine qualities appear at the expense 
of manhood, in him they are added to a perfectly normal masculine type. 
The principal cffcct has been to enable him to understand the psychology of 
women, to look at any theory with comprchensive and impartial eyes, and to 
endow him with maternal instincts on spiritual planes. He has thus been able 
to beat the women he has met at their own game and emerge from thc battle 
of sex triumphant and scatheless. He has been able to philosophize about 
nature from the standpoint of a complete human being; certain phenomena 
will always be unintelligible to men as such, others, to women as such. Hc, by 
being both at once, has been able to formulate a view of existence which 
combines the positive and thc negative, the active and the passive, in a single 
identical equation. Finally, intensely as the savage male passion to create has 
inflamed him, it has been modified by the gentleness and conservatism of 
womanhood. Again and again, in the course of this history, we shall find his 
actions determined by this dual structure. Similar types have no doubt 
existed previously, but none such has been studied. Only in the light of 
Weininger and Freud* is it possible to select and interpret the phenomena. 
The present investigation should be of extraordinary ethical value, for it must 
be a rare circumstance that a subject with such abnormal qualities so clearly 
marked should have trained himself to intimate self-analysis and kept an 
almost daily record of his life and work extending over nearly a quarter of a 
century. }i oie is, for those not initiated into the Magical Tradition and the Holy Cabbala — the Children’s 
rae from which Freud and Weininger ate of a few crumbs that fell. 
T It should be added that the apparently masochistic stigmata disappeared entircly at puberty;

- their relics are observable onl i . ; 
; y when he is depressed physically. That is, they are wholly symptom 
of physiological malaise. sid y y y symptoms

3

When Alick was about six years old his father moved from Leamington to 
Redhill, Surrey. There was some reason connccted with a gravel soil and 
country life. The house was called The Grange. It stood in a large long 
garden ending in woods which overhung the road between Redhill and 
Merstham; about a mile, perhaps a little morc, from Redhill. Alick lived hcre 
till 1886 and his memory of this period is of perpetual happiness. He 
remembers with the utmost clearncss innumcrable incidents and it becomes 
hard to select those which posscss significance. He was taught by tutors; but 
they have faded, though their lessons have not. He was very thoroughly 
grounded in geography, history, Latin and arithmetic. His cousin, Gregor 
Grant, six years older than himself, was a constant visitor; a somewhat 
strange indulgence, as Gregor was brought up in Presbyterianism. The lad 
was very proud of his pedigree. Edward Crowlcy used to ridicule this, 
saying, ‘My family sprang from a gardener who was turned out of the garden 
for stealing his master’s fruit.’ Edward Crowley would not allow himself to be 
addressed as ‘Esquire’ or even ‘Mr’. It seems a piecc of atavism, for a Crowley 
had petitioned Charles I to take away the family coat of arms; his successor, 
however, had asked Charles II to restore them, which was donc. This is 
evidencc of thc satanic pride of the race. Edward Crowley despised worldly 
dignities because he was a citizen of heaven. He would not accept favour or 
honour from any onc less than Jesus Christ.Alick remembers a lady calling at the house for a subscription in aid of 
Our Soldiers in Egypt. Edward Crowley browbeat and bullied her into tears 
with a philippic on ‘bibles and brandy’. He was, however, bitterly opposed 
to the Bluc Ribbon Army. Hc said that abstainers were likely to rely on good 
works to get to heaven and thus fail to realize their nced of Jesus. He preached 
one Sunday in the town hall, saying, ‘I would rather preach to a thousand 
drunkards than a thousand T-totallers.’ They retorted by accusing him of 
being connected with “Crowley's Ales’. He replied that he had been an 
abstainer for nineteen ycars, during which he had shares in a brewery. He 
had now ccased to abstain for some time, but all his money was invested in a 
waterworks.*

Besides Gregor Grant, Alick’s only playmates were the sons of local 
Brethren. Aristocratic feeling was extremely strong. The usual boyish play-

* At Amsterdam. It was a failure at first, the natives objecting to a liquid which lacked taste, 
smell and colour.

46

THE CONFBSSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 47

acting, in which various personalities of the moment, such as Sir Garnet 
Wolseley and Arabi Pasha, were represented, was complicated in practice by 
a united attack on what were called cads. Alick especially remembers lying 
in wait at the end of the wood for children on thcir way to the National 
School. They had to cross a barrage of arrows and peas and ultimately got so 
scared that they found a roundabout way.Facing the drive, across the road, was a sand-pit. Alick remembers jumping 
from the top with an alpenstock and charging a navvy at work in the pit, 
knocking him down, and bolting home. But he was not always so courageous. 
He once transfixed, with the same alpenstock, the bandbox of an errand-boy. 
The boy, however, was an Italian; and pursucd the aggressor to The Grange, 
when of course the cldcrs intervened. But he remembers being very 
frightened and tearful because of some connection in his mind between 
Italians and stabbing. Here again is a curious point of psychology. He has no 
fear of being struck or cut; but the idea of being picrced disturbs his nerve. He 
has to pull himself together very vigorously even in the mattcr of a hypo- 
dermic syringe.There has always been something suggesting the oricntal—Chinese or 
ancient Egyptian—in Alick’s personal appearance. As his mother at school 
had been called ‘the little Chinese girl’, so his daughter, Lola Zaza, has the 
Mongolian physiognomy even more pronounced. His thought follows this 
indication. Hc has never been able to sympathize with any European religion 
or philosophy; and of Jewish or Mohammedan thought he has assimilated 
only the mysticism of the Cabbalists and the Sufis. Even Hindu psychology, 
thoroughly as he studied it, never satisfied him wholly. As will be seen, 
Buddhism itself failed to win his devotion. But he found himself instantly at 
home with the Yi King! and the writings of Lao Tzu. Strangely enough, 
Egyptian symbolism and magical practice made an cqual appcal; incompatible 
as these two systems appear on the surface, the one being atheistic, anarchistic 
and quictistic, the other thcistic, hierarchical and active. Even at this period 
the East called to him. There is one very significant episode. In some history 
of the Indian Mutiny was the portrait of Nana Sahib, a proud, fierce, cruel, 
sensual profile. It was his idcal of beauty. He hated to believe that Nana 
Sahib had been caught and killed. He wanted to find Nana Sahib, to become 
his ally, share in torturing prisoncrs, and yet to suffer at his hands. When 
Gregor Grant was pretending to be Hyder Ali, and himself Tipu Sahib, he 
once asked his cousin, ‘Be cruel to me.’

The influence of Cousin Gregor at this time was paramount. When 
Gregor was Rob Roy, Alick was Greumoch, the outlaw’s henchman in 
James Grant’s novel. The MacGregors appealed to Alick as being the most 
royal, wronged, romantic, brave and solitary of the clans. There can be no 
doubt that this phantasy played a great part in determining his passionate

48 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN48 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

admiration of the chief of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, a 
Hampshire man named Mathers who inexplicably claimed to be MacGregor 
of Glenstrae.

The boy’s attitude to his parents is one of the most remarkable facts of his 
early life. His father was his hero and his friend, though, for some reason or 
other, there was no real conscious intimacy or understanding. He always 
disliked and despised his mother. There was a physical repulsion, and an 
intellectual and social scorn. Hce treated her almost as a servant. It is perhaps 
on this account that he remembers practically nothing of her during this 
period. She always antagonized him. He remembers one Sunday when she 
found him reading Martin Rattler and scolded him. Edward Crowley took 
his part. If the book was good enough to read on any day, why not on Sun- 
day? To Edward Crowley, every day was the Lord’s Day; sabbatarianism 
was Judaism.

When Alick was eight or thereabouts he was taken by his father to his first 
school. This was a private school at St Leonards, kept by an old man named 
Habcrshon and his two sons, very strict Evangelicals. Edward Crowlcy 
wanted to warn his son against the commonest incident of English school life. 
He took a very wise way. He read to the boy very impressively the story of 
Noah's intoxication and its results, concluding: ‘Never let any one touch you 
there.’ In this way, the injunction was given without arousing morbid 
curiosity.Alick remembers little of his life at this school beyond a vivid visual 
recollection of the playground with its ‘giant’s stride’. He does not remember 
any of the boys, though the three masters stand out plainly enough. One very 
extraordinary event remains. In an examination paper, instead of answering 
some question or other, he pretended to misunderstand it and wrote an 
answer worthy of James Joyce. Instead of selling a limited cdition at an 
extravagant price, he was soundly birched. Entirely unrepentant, he began to 
will Old Habershon’s death. Strangely enough, this occurred within a few 
weeks; and he unhcesitatingly took the credit to himself.

The boy’s intellect was amazingly precocious. It must have been very 
shortly after the move to Redhill that a tailor named Hemming came from 
London to make new clothes for his father. Being a ‘brother’, he was a guest 
in the house. He offered to teach Alick chess and succeeded only too well, 
for he lost every game after the first. The boy recalls the method perfectly. 
It was to catch a developed bishop by attacking it with pawns. (Hc actually 
invented the Tarrasch Trap in the Ruy Lopez before he ever read a book on 
chess.) This wrung from his bewildered teacher the exclamation, ‘Very 
judicious with his pawns is your son, Mrs Crowlcy!’

As a matter of fact, there must have been morc than this in it. Alick had 
assuredly a special aptitude for the game; for he never met his master till one

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLEY 49

fatal day in 1895, when W. V. Naish, the President of the C.U.Ch. C.,? took 
the ‘fresher’ who had beaten him to Peterhouse, the abode of Mr H. E. 
Atkins, since seven times amateur champion of England and still a formidable 
figure in the Masters’ Tournament.It may here be noted that the injudicious youth tried to trap Atkins with a 
new move invented by himself. It consists of playing K R B Sq, instead of 
Castles, in the Muzio Gambit, the idea being to allow White to play P Q 4 
in reply to Q B 3.

In 1885 Alick was removed from St Leonards to a school kept by a 
Plymouth Brother, an ex-clergyman named H. d’Arcy Champney, M.A. It 
is a little difficult to explain the boy’s psychology at this period. It was 
probably determined by his admiration for his father, the big, strong, hearty 
leader of men, who swayed thousands by his eloquence. He sincerely wished 
to follow in those mighty footsteps and so strove to imitate the great man as 
best he might. Accordingly, he aimed at being the most devoted follower of 
Jesus in the school. He was not hypocritical in any sense.

All this strikes onc as absolutely natural; what is extraordinary is the 
sequel.

A letter dating from his early school life at Cambridge:

Dear Papa & Mama,

For my holiday work prize I have got a splendid knife, 2 blades, a 
saw, a screwdriver, a thing to pull out thorns, another to get stones out 
of horse’s shoes, another I don’t know what for, a leather piercer, a 
gimlet & a corkscrew and namie plate. It is nicol plated in some parts, 
but the handle is ivory. The asphalt* gave way near the middle. We were 
nearly blown hup by the hoiler+ a little while ago, no jokes. We had a 
$ holiday given us on Friday. Please send me a little money for fireworks. 
Send up my bankbook by the 1st please. I am awfully well, thank you! 
I have joined a sort of band of chaps, who are with God’s blessing, going 
to try & help others & speak to them about their souls. I will write soon 
again. Write quick please

Good bye 
Yr loving son 
ALECGood bye 
Yr loving son 
ALEC

He was thoroughly happy at this school; the boys liked and admired him; 
he made remarkable progress in his studies and was very proud of his first 
prize, White’s Selborne, for coming out top in ‘Religious Knowledge, 
Classics and French’. |

But to this day he has never read the book! For certain lines of study he had

* i.e. of the ‘playground’. 
t Query? ‘Oiler’, of course, but what was that doing?

$0 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

a profound, instinctive and ineradicable aversion. Natural history, in any 
form, is one of these. It is hard to suggest a reason. Did he dislike to analyse 
beauty? Did he feel that certain subjects were unimportant, led to nothing 
that he wanted to explore? However this may be, he used to make up his 
mind with absolute finality as to whether he would or would not take some 
particular course. If he would, he panted after it like the hart after the water 
brooks; if not, nothing would persuade him to waste an hour on it.

It was while he was at this school that he began to write poetry. He had 
read none, except ‘Casabianca’, ‘Excelsior’, the doggerel of Sir Walter Scott 
and such trash. But he had a genuine love for the simple Hymns for the little 
Flock compiled by the ‘Brethren’. His first taste of real poetry was Lycidas, 
set for the Cambridge Local Examination, if his memory serves him aright. 
He fell in love with it at once and had it by heart in a few days. But his own 
earliest effort is more on the lines of the hymnal. Only a few lines remain.

Terror, and darkness, and horrid despair! 
Agony painted upon the once fair

Brow of the man who refused to give up

The love of the wine-filled, the o’erflowing cup. 
“Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging.’

No wine in death is his torment assuaging.

Of this Redhill pcriod there remain also memories of two summers, one in 
France and Switzerland, the other in the Highlands.No wine in death is his torment assuaging.

Of this Redhill pcriod there remain also memories of two summers, one in 
France and Switzerland, the other in the Highlands.

The former has left numerous traces, chiefly of a visual character: the 
Grand Hotel in Paris, Lucerne and the Lion, William Tell, the Bears at 
Bere, the Rigi, the Staubbach, Trummelbach and Giessbach, Basle and the 
Rhine, the Dance of Death. Two points only concern us: he objected violently 
to being taken out in the cold morning to see the sunrise from a platform on 
the Rigi-Kulm and to illumination of a waterfall by coloured lights. He felt 
acutely that nature should be allowed to go her own way and he his! There 
was plenty of beauty in the world; why make oneself uncomfortable in order 
to sce an extra? Also, you can’t improve a waterfall by stagecraft!

There is the skeleton of quite a philosophy of life in this.

As to the Scottish Highlands, the boy’s mind had been so poisoned by 
romance that he saw nothing that he can remember. The scenery was 
merely a setting for silly daydreams of Roderick Dhu!

Three other episodes of the Redhill period are pertinent; not that they are in 
themselves very significant, save that two of them exhibit Alick in the charac- 
ter of a normally mischievous boy with some skill in playing upon other 
people’s psychology. But they illustrate the singular environment.

A frequent guest at The Grange was an old gentleman named Sherrall, 
whose vice was castor oil. Edward Crowley was in the habit of holding

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY SIA frequent guest at The Grange was an old gentleman named Sherrall, 
whose vice was castor oil. Edward Crowley was in the habit of holding

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY SI

‘tea meetings’; a score or so of people would be invited to what is vulgarly 
known as a blow-out, and when the physical animal was satisfied, there would 
be a debauch of spiritual edification. On the mahogany table in the dining- 
room, extended to its fullest length, would stand two silver urns of tea. Into 
one of these young Alick emptied Mr Sherrall’s castor oil. So far, so good. 
The point is this, that the people served from that urn were too polite or 
overawed either to call the attention of their hostess or to abstain from the 
accursed beverage. The only precaution necessary was to prevent that lady 
herself from seeing one of the doctored cups.

A rather similar jest was played at a prayer meeting at the house of a 
Brother named Nunncrley. Refreshment was offered before the meeting; 
and a Sister, named Mrs Musty, had becn marked down on account of her 
notorious greed. Alick and some fellow conspirators kept on plying her with 
food after every onc elsc had finished, with the object of delaying the prayer 
meeting. The woman herself was too stupid to see what was happening and 
the Brethren could not be rude enough even to hint their feelings.This hesitation to act with authority, which was part of the general 
theoretical P.B. objection to priestcraft, on one occasion reached an astound- 
ing point in the following circumstances. A Mr Clapham, the odour of whose 
beard proclaimed him truthfully a fishmonger, had a wife and a daughter who 
was engaged to a Mr Munday. These three had gone on an excursion to 
Boulogne; and, by accident or design, the engaged couple missed the boat for 
Folkestone. It was again a question of avoiding even the appearance of evil 
and Mrs Clapham was expelled from fellowship. It is to be presumed that her 
husband believed her innocent of all complicity, as a priori appears the most 
natural hypothesis. In any case, next Sunday morning she took her place with 
her husband at the Lord’s Table. It is almost inconceivable that any gathering 
of human beings, united to celebrate the supreme sacrament of their creed, 
should have been destitute of any means of safeguarding common decency. 
But the fear of the priest was paramount; and the entire meeting waited and 
fidgeted for over an hour in embarrassed silence. Ultimately, a baker named 
Banfield got up trembling and inquired timorously: ‘May I ask Mr Clapham 
if it is Mrs Clapham’s intention to break bread this morning?’ Mrs Clapham 
then bounced out of the room and slammed the door, after which the 
meeting proceeded as usual.

Bourbonism still survives among some people in England. I remember 
explaining some action of mine to Gerald Kelly? as taken on my lawyer’s 
advice. He answered contemptuously, ‘Lawyers are servants!’ The social 
position of the Lord Chancellor and other legal officers of the Crown meant 
no more to him than the preponderance of lawyers in the councils of the 
nation. He stuck to the futile stupidity that any man who used his brains to 
earn a living was an inferior. This is an extreme case of an exceptionally

52 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN52 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

stupid standpoint, but the psychological root of the attitude permeates English 
conceptions. The definition of self-respect contains a clause to include pitiless 
contempt for some other class. In my childhood, Mrs Clapham—one of 
whose adventures has been already recorded—once came to the grain in 
conjugal infelicity. ‘How could I ever love that man?’ she exclaimed; ‘why, 
he takes his salt with his knife!’ There is nothing to warn a fishmonger’s 
wife that such sublime devotion to etiquette is in any way ridiculous. 
English society is impregnated from top to bottom with this spirit. The 
supreme satisfaction is to be able to despise one’s neighbour and this fact 
goes far to account for rcligious intolcrance. It is evidently consoling to 
reflect that the people next door arc headcd for hell.Practically all boys arc born with the aristocratic spirit.* In most cases they 
are broken down, partly by bullying, partly by experience. In the case of 
Alick, he was the only son of a father who was naturally a leader of men. In 
him, therefore, this spirit grew unchecked. Hc knew no superior but his 
father; and though that father ostentatiously avoided assuming authority 
over the other Brethren, it was, of course, none the less therc. The boy seems 
to have despised from the first the absence of hierarchy among the Brethren, 
though at the same time they formed the most exclusive body on carth, 
being the only people that were going to heaven. There is thus an extreme 
psychological contradiction inherent in the situation. It is improbable that 
Alick was aware at the time of the real feelings which must have been 
implanted in him by this environment; but the main result was undoubtedly 
to stimulate his pride and ambition in a most unwholesome (?) degree. His 
social and financial position, the obvious envy of his associates, his undoubted 
personal prowcss, physical and intellectual, all combined to make it impos- 
sible for him to be satisfied to take any place in the world but the top. The 
Plymouth Brethren refused to take any part in politics. Among them, the 
peer and the pcasant mct theoretically as cquals, so that the social system of 
England was simply ignored. The boy could not aspire to become prime 
minister or even king; he was already apart from and beyond all that. It 
will be scen that as soon as he arrived at an age where ambitions are compelled 
to assume concrete form, his position became cxtremely difficult. The earth 
was not big enough to hold him.In looking back over his life up to May 1886, he can find little consecution 
and practically no coherence in his recollections. But from that month 
onwards there is a change. It is as if the event which occurred at that time 
created a new faculty in his mind. A new factor had arisen and its name was 
death. He was called home from school in the middle of the term to attend 
a special prayer meeting at Redhill. His father had been taken ill. The local

* It is purely a question of virility: compare the noble races, Arabs, Pathans, Ghurkas, Japanese, 
etc. with the ‘moral’ races. Of course, absence of caste determines loss of virility and vice versa.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY $3

doctor had sent him to see Sir James Paget, who had advised an immediate 
operation for cancer of the tongue. Brethren from far and near had been 
summoned to help to discover the Lord’s will in the matter. The upshot was 
that the operation was declined; it was decided to treat the disease by Count 
Mattei’s electro-homeopathy, a now discarded system of unusually out- 
rageous quackery. No doctor addicted to this form of swindling being 
locally available, The Grange was given up and a house called Glenburnie 
taken at Southampton.On March sth, 1887, Edward Crowley died. The course of the disease 
had been practically painless. Only one point is of interest to our present 
purposc. On the night of March sth, the boy—away at school — dreamed 
that his father was dead. There was no reason for this in the ordinary way, 
as the reports had been highly optimistic. The boy remembers that the quality 
of the dream was entircly different from anything that he had known. The 
news of the death did not arrive in Cambridge till the following morning. 
The interest of this fact depends on a subsequent parallel. During the years 
that followed, the boy—and the man—dreamed repeatedly that his mother 
was dead; but on the day of her death he —then three thousand miles away — 
had the same dream, save that it differed from the others by possessing this 
peculiar indescribable but unmistakable quality that he remembered in 
connection with the death of his father.

From the moment of the funeral the boy’s life entered on an entirely new 
phase. The change was radical. Within three weeks of his return to school 
he got into trouble for the first time. He does not remember for what 
offence,* but only that his punishment was diminished on account of his 
bereavement. This was the first symptom of a complete reversal of his 
attitude to life in every respect. It seems obvious that his father’s death must 
have been causally connected with it. But even so, the events remain in- 
explicable. The conditions of his school lifc, for instance, can hardly have 
altered, yet his reaction to them makes it almost incredible that it was the 
same boy.Previous to the death of Edward Crowley, the recollections of his son, 
however vivid or detailed, appear to him strangely impersonal. In throwing 
back his mind to that period, he feels, although attention constantly clicits 
new facts, that he is investigating the behaviour of somebody else. It is only 
from this point that he begins to think of himself in the first person. From 
this point, however, he does so; and is able to continue this autohagiography 
in a morc conventional style by speaking of himself as I.

* On revision, he thinks it was ‘talking on the march’, a whispered word to thc other half of his 
scale of the ‘crocodile’.

4

I had naturally no idea at the time that the death. of my father would make 
any practical difference to my environment. In most similar cases it probably 
would not have donc so. Most widows naturally remain in the groove.

As things were, I found mysclf in a totally new environment. My father’s 
rcligious opinions had tended to alienate him from his family; and the 
friends whom he had made in his own circle had no interest in visiting my 
mother. I was thrown into the atmosphere of her family. She moved to 
London in order to be near her brother, whom till then I had hardly met.Tom Bond Bishop was a prominent figure in religious and philanthropic 
circles in London. He held a more or less important position in the Custom 
House, but had no ambitions connected with the Civil Service. He devoted 
the whole of his spare time and cnergy to the propagation of the extra- 
ordinarily narrow, ignorant and bigoted Evangclicalism in which he believed. 
He had founded the Children’s Scripture Union and the Children’s Special 
Service Mission. The former dictatcs to children what passages of the Bible 
they shall read daily: the latter drags them from their play at the seaside 
and hands them over to the ravings of pious undergraduates or hired 
gospel-gcysers. Within his limits, he was a man of acute intelligence and 
great executive and organizing ability. A Manning plus bigoted sincerity; 
a Cotton Mather minus imagination; one might even say a Paul deprived 
of logical ability, and this defect supplied by invulnerable cocksureness. 
He was inaccessible to doubt; he knew that he was right on cvery point.

I once put it to him: suppose a climber roped to another who has fallen. 
He cannot save him and must fall also unless he cut the rope. What should 
he do? My uncle replied, “God would never allow a man to be placed in 
such a position’!!!! This unreason made him mentally and morally lower 
than the cattle of the fields. He obeyed blind savage impulses and took them 
for the sanctions of the Almighty.“To the lachrymal glands of a crocodile hc added the bowels of compassion 
of a cast-iron rhinoccros; with the meanness and cruelty of a eunuch he 
combined the calculating avarice of a Scotch Jew, without the whisky of 
the one or the sympathetic imagination of the other. Perfidious and hypo- 
critical as the Jesuit of Protestant fable, he was unctuous as Uriah Heep, 
and for the rest possessed the viccs of Joseph Surface and Tartuffe; yet, 
being without the human weaknesses which make them possible, he was 
a more virtuous, and thercfore a more odious, villain.

54

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 55

‘In feature resembling a shaven ape, in figure a dislocated dachshund, his 
personal appearance was at the first glance unattractive. But the clothes 
madc by a City tailor lent such general harmony to the whole as to reconcile 
the observer to the phenomenon observed.

‘Of unrivalled cunning, his address was plausible; he concealed his genius 
under a mask of matchless mediocrity and his intellectual force under the 
cloak of piety. In religion he was an Evangelical, that type of Nonconformist 
who remains in the Church in the hope of capturing its organization and its 
revenues.

‘An associate of such creatures of an inscrutable Providence as Coote 
and Torrey, he surpassed the one in sanctimoniousness, the other in bigotry, 
though he always thought blackmail too risky and slander a tactical error. *No more cruel fanatic, no meaner villain, ever walked this earth. My 
father, wrong-hcaded as he was, had humanity and a certain degree of com- 
mon-sensc; he had a logical mind and never confused spiritual with material 
issues. He could never have believed, like my uncle, that the cut and colour 
of ‘Sunday clothes’ could be a matter of importance to the Deity. Having 
decided that faith and not works was essential to salvation, he could not 
attach any vital importance to works. With him, the reason for refraining 
from sin was simply that it showed ingratitude to the Saviour. In the casc 
of the sinner, it was almost a hopeful sign that he should sin thoroughly. 
He was more likely to reach that conviction of sin which would show him 
his need of salvation. The material punishment of sin (again) was likely to 
bring him to his knees. Good works in the sinner were worthless. ‘All our 
righteousness is as filthy rags.’ It was the devil’s favourite trick to induce 
people to rely on their good character. The parable of the pharisee and the 
publican taught this clearly enough.

I do not know whether my Uncle Tom could have found any arguments 
against this theory, but in practice he had a horror of what he called sin 
which was exaggerated almost to the point of insanity. His talents, I may 
almost say his genius,t gave him tremendous influence. In his own house 
he was a ruthless, petty tyrant; and it was into this den of bitter slavery 
that I was suddenly hurled from my position of fresh air, freedom and 
heirship.

He lived in London, in what was then called Thistle Grove. The name 
has since been changed to Drayton Gardens, despite a petition enthusiasti- 
cally supported by Bishop; the objection was that a public house in the 
neighbourhood was called the Drayton Arms. This is typical of my uncle’s 
attitude to life. His sense of humour. When I called him ‘Uncle’, he wouldlal | quote from an obituary of him published during his life.? 
` + He devised a most ingenious method of teaching history by charts, each nation being represented 
by a river of greater or less breadth as it rose or fell, annexations by tributaries, etc., etc.

56 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

snigger, ‘Oh my prophetic soul, my uncle!’ But the time came when I 
knew most of Hamlet by heart, and when he next shot off his ‘joke’, | 
continued the quotation, replying sternly, ‘Ay, that inccstuous, that adul- 
terate beast!’—I am, in a way, glad to think that at the end of his long 
and obscene lifc I was reconciled with him. The very last Ictter he cver 
reccived from me admitted (if a little grudgingly) that his mind was so 
distorted that he had really no idea how vile a thing he was. I think this must 
have stirred his sense of shame. At lcast, I never received any answer.

I suppose that the household at Thistle Grove was as representative of 
one part of England as could possibly have been imagined. It was nondescript. 
It was ncither upper nor lowcr middle-class. It had not sufficient indivi- 
duality even to belong to a category. My grandmother was a particularly 
charming old lady. She was inexpressibly dignified in her black silks and 
her lace cap. She had been imported from the country by the cxigencies 
of her son’s position in the Civil Service. She was extremely lovable; | 
never remember hearing a cross word fall from her. She was addicted to 
the infamous vicc of bezique. It was, of coursc, impossible to have “The 
Devil’s Picture Books’ in a house frequented by the leading lights of Evan- 
gelicalism. But my Aunt Ada had painted a pack of cards in which the 
suits were roses, violets, etc. It was the same game; but the camouflage 
satisfied my uncle’s conscience. No pharisee ever scourcd the outside of 
the cup and platter more assiduously than hc.My grandmother was the second wife of her husband; of the first mar- 
riage there werc two surviving children; Anne, a stout and sensual old maid, 
who always filled me with intense physical repulsion; she was shiny and 
greasy with a blob nose and thick wet lips. Every night she tuckcd a bottle 
of stout under her arm and took it to bed with her—adding this invariable 
‘joke’—“My baby!’ Even today, when people happen to drink stout at a 
table where I am sitting, I manage instinctively not to see it.

Her brother John had lived for many years in Australia in enjoyment 
of wealth and civic distinction. His wealth failed when his health broke: 
and he returned to England to live with the family. He was a typical hardy 
out-door man with all the colonial freedom of thought, speech and manner. 
He found himself in the power of his half-brother’s acrid code. He had to 
smoke his pipe by stealth and he was bullied about his soul until his mind 
gave way. At family prayers he was perpetually being prayed at; his per- 
sonality being carefully described lcst the Lord should mistake his identity. 
The description would have suited the average murdcrer as observed by a 
singularly uncharitable pacifist.

I am particularly proud of myself for the way I behaved to him. It was 
impossible to help liking the simple-minded genial soul of the man. I

remember one day at Streatham, after he and my grandmother had come

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY $7remember one day at Streatham, after he and my grandmother had come

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY $7

to live with us, that I tried to cheer him up. Shaking all over, he explained 
to me almost in tcars that he was afraid he was ‘not all right with Christ’. 
I look back almost with incredulity upon myself. It was not I that spoke; 
I answered him with brusque authority, though I was a peculiarly shy boy 
not yet sixteen. I told him plainly that the whole thing was nonsense, that 
Christ was a fable, that there was no such thing as sin, and that he ought 
to thank his stars that he had lived his whole life away from the hypocritical 
crew of trembling slaves who believed in such nonsense. Already my 
unconscious self was singing in my ears that terrific climax of Browning's 
‘Renan-chorus ’:?

Oh, dread succession to a dizzy post,

‘Sad sway of sceptre whose merc touch appals, 
Ghastly dethronement, cursed by those thc most 
On whosc repugnant brow the crown next falls!

However, he became mcelancholy-mad; and died in that condition. I 
remember writing to my mother and my uncle that they were guilty of 
‘murder most foul as in the best it is; but this most foul, strange and 
unnatural’.

I lay weight upon this episode because my attitudc, as I remember it, 
seems incompatible with my gencral spiritual life of the period, as will 
appear later.

I was genuinely fond of my Aunt Ada. She was womanly in the old- 
fashioncd sense of the word; a purcly passive type. Naturally talented though 
she was, shc was both ignorant and bigoted. In her situation, she could 
not have been anything clse. But her opinions did not interfere with her 
charity. A woman of infinite kindness. Her health was naturally delicate; 
an attack of rheumatic fever had damaged her heart and she dicd before 
her time. The meanness and selfishness of my Uncle Tom were principally 
responsible. He would not engage a secretary; he forced her to slave for 
the Scripture Union and it killed her.One anecdote throws a curious light upon my character in these carly 
days and also reveals her as possessed of a certain sense of humour. Some 
years beforc, on the platform at Redhill with my fathcr, I had seen on the 
bookstall Across Patagonia by Lady Florence Dixie. The long name fascinated 
me; I begged him to buy it for mc and he did. The name stuck and I decided 
tobe King of Patagonia. Psycho-analysts will learn with pleasure that the 
name of my capital was Margaragstagregorstoryaka. ‘Margar’ was derived 
from Margaret, quecn of Henry VI, who was my favourite character in 
history. This is highly significant, as indicating the type of woman that I 
have always admired. I want her to be wicked, independent, courageous, 
ambitious, and so on. I cannot placce the ‘ragstag’, but it is probably euphonic.

$8 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

‘Gregor’ is, of course, my cousin; ‘story’ is what was then my favourite 
form of amusement. I cannot place the ‘yaka’, but that again is probably 
euphonic.

I cannot imagine why, at this very early age, I cultivated a profound 
aversion to, and contempt for, Queen Victoria. Merely, perhaps, the clean 
and decent instinct of a child! I announced my intention of leading the 
forces of Patagonia against her. One day my Aunt Ada took me to tea at 
Gunters’; and an important-looking official document was handed to me. 
It was Queen Victoria’s reply. She was going to blow my capital to pieces 
and trcat mce personally in a very unpleasant manner. This document was 
sealed with a label marked with an anchor to suggcst naval frightfulness, 
taken for this purpose from the end of a reel of cotton. But I took the 
document quite seriously and was horribly frightened.The dinginess of my uncle’s household, the atmosphere of severe dis- 
approval of the universe in general, and the utter absence of the spirit 
of life, combined to make me dctest my mother’s family. There was, 
incidentally, a grave complication, for my father’s death had increased 
the religious bigotry of my mother very greatly; and although she was 
so fond of her family, she was bound to regard them as very doubtful 
candidates for heaven. This attitude was naturally inexplicable to a child 
of such tender years; and the effect on me was to develop an almost petulant 
impatience with the whole question of religion. My Aunt Ada was my 
mother’s favourite sister; yet at her funeral she refused to enter the church 
during the service and waited outside in the rain, only rejoining the pro- 
cession when the corpse repassed those accurséd portals on its way to the 
cemetery. She stood by the grave while the parson read the service. It was 
apparently the architectural diabolism to which she most objected.

There was also an objection to the liturgy, on numerous grounds. It 
seems incredible, but is true, that the Plymouth Brethren regarded the 
Lord’s Prayer as a ‘vain repetition, as do the heathen’. It was forbidden to 
use it!! Jesus had indeed given this prayer as an example of how to pray; 
but everyone was expected to make up his own supplications ex tempore.

The situation resulted in a very amusing way. Having got to the point 
of saying, ‘Evil, be thou my good,’ I racked my brains to discover some 
really abominable crimes to do. In a moment of desperate daring I sneaked 
one Sunday morning into the church frequented by my Uncle Tom on 
Streatham Common, prepared, so to speak, to wallow in it. It was one 
of the most bitter disappointments of my life! I could not detect anything 
which satisfied my ideas of damnation. ©For a year or two after my father’s death my mother did not seem to 
settle down; and during the holidays we either stayed with Bishop or 
wandered in hotels and hydros. I think she was afraid of bringing me up

THE CONFBSSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 59

in London; but when my uncle moved to Streatham she compromised 
by taking a house in Polwarth Road. I hated it, because there were bigger 
houses in the neighbourhood.

I am not quite sure whether I am the most outrageous snob that ever 
lived, or whether I am not a snob at all. The truth of the matter is, I think, 
that I will not acquiesce in anything but the very best of its kind. I don’t 
in the least mind going without a thing altogether, but if I have it at all 
it has got to be At. England is a very bad place for me. I cannot endure 
people who are either superior or inferior to others, but only those who, 
whatever their station in life, are consciously unique and supreme. In the 
East, especially among Mohammedans, one can make friends with the 
very coolies; they respect themselves and others. They are gentlemen. 
But in England the spirit of independence is rare. Men of high rank and 
position ncarly always betray consciousness of inferiority to, and dependence 
upon, others. Snobbishness, in this sensc, is so widely spread that I rarely 
feel at home, unlcss with a supreme genius like Augustus John.Aubrey Tanqueray is typical. He must not forfeit the esteem of his 
‘little parish’, and avoids mortification by shifting from one parish to 
another. When Paula asks him, ‘Do you trouble yourself about what 
servants think?’ he answers, “Of course.’3 If one had to worry about one’s 
actions in respect of othcr people’s ideas, onc might as well be buried alive 
in an antheap or married to an ambitious violinist. Whether that man is 
the prime minister, modifying his opinions to catch votes, or a bourgeois 
in terror lest some harmless act should be misunderstood and outrage some 
petty convention, that man is an inferior man and I do not want to have 
anything to do with him any more than I want to eat canned salmon. 
Of course the world forces us all to compromise with our environment 
to some extent, and we only waste our strength if we fight pitched battles 
for points which are not worth a skirmish. It is only a faddist who refuses 
to conform with conventions of dress and the like. But our sincerity should 
be Roman about things that really matter to us. And I am still in doubt, 
as I write these words, as to how far it is right to employ strategy and 
diplomacy in order to gain onc’s point. The great men of the world have 
stood up and taken thcir medicine. Bradlaugh and Burton did not lose 
in the end by being downright. I never approved the super-subtlety of 
Huxley’s campaign against Gladstone; and as for Swinburne, he died out- 
right when he became respectable. Adaptation to one’s environment makes 
for a sort of survival; but after all, the supreme victory is only won by those 
who prove themselves of so much harder stuff than the rest that no power 
on earth is able to destroy them. The people who have really made history 
are the martyrs.

I suppose that therc comes to all of us only too often the feeling which

60 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWNI suppose that therc comes to all of us only too often the feeling which

60 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Freud calls the Œdipus complex. We want to reposc, to be at peace with 
our fellows whom we love, who misunderstand us and for whose love 
we are hungry. We want to make terms, we want to surrender. But I have 
always found that, though I could acquiesce in some such line of conduct, 
though I could make all preparations for accommodation, yet when it 
came to the point, I was utterly unable to do the base, irrevocable act. I 
cannot even do evil that good may come. I abhor Jesuitry. I would rather 
lose than win by stratagem. The utmost that I have been able to manage 
is to consent to put forward my principles in a form which will not openly 
outrage ordinary susceptibilities. But I feel so profoundly the urgency of 
doing my will that it is practically impossible for me to write on Shakespeare 
and the Musical Glasses without introducing the spiritual and moral principles 
which are the only things in myself that I can identify with myself.This characteristic is evidently inhcrited from my father. His integrity 
was absolute. He lived entirely by his theological convictions. Christ might 
return at any moment. ‘Even as the lightning lighteneth out of the East 
and lighteneth even unto the West, so is the coming of the Son of Man.’ 
He would have to give an account of ‘every idle word’. It was a horrifying 
thought to him that he might be caught by the Second Advent at a moment 
when he was not actively and intensely engaged on the work which God 
had sent him into the world to do. This sense of the importance of the 
lightest act, of the value of every moment, has been a tragically intense 
factor in my life. I have always grudged the time necessary for eating, 
sleeping and dressing. I have invented costumes with the sole object of 
minimizing the waste of time* and the distraction of attention involved. 
I never wear underclothing. The ‘magnetism’ of men and women has for 
its physical basis sweat: in health this is sparse and very fragrant. Any defect 
should be instantly remedied: there is no surer danger sign than foul or 
unduly profuse perspiration.

This quality determined much of my life at school. I instinctively under- 
stood that I did not want academic knowledge as such; but since I was 
under duress, the best plan for avoiding interruption was to acquit mysclf 
well in class and in examination. I had no ambitions; but I invariably set 
myself to acquire the necessary knowledge with the minimum of exertion. 
My natural abilities, especially my memory, made this easy. I soon dis- 
covered that to distinguish myself in school was in the nature of a conjurer’s 
trick. It is hard to analyse my method or to be sure of the analysis; but I 
think the essence of the plan was to make certain of the minimum required 
and to add a superstructure of one or two abstruse points which I would* In Mexico City in 1900 Eckenstein counselled me to turn back the heels of my stockings to 
facilitate putting them on. I objected to the waste of time involved. This developed into a long 
argument on the point: he won, but I couldn't believe it and am yet unconverted.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLEY ÓI

manage to bring to the notice of the master or the examiner so as to give 
him the idea that I had prepared myself with unusual thoroughness.

It occurs to me that this confession sounds rather strange, after my 
previous remarks about integrity. My justification is that I considered 
schoolmasters as importunate and possibly dangerous beggars. I was not 
in a position to fight; and I could not afford a good sixpence, so I put 
them off with a bad one. It was their own fault for plaguing me.

55

I found nothing in the school curriculum which interested me. I had no 
inkling of it at the time, but I was already in the thrall of the search for 
reality. Mathematics captured my imagination. I was brilliant at arithmetic 
until the subject degenerated into ‘practice’, which was a matter for grocers. 
I might have liked geometry; but the arid method of presentation in Euclid 
put me off. I was asked to memorize what I did not understand; and, my 
memory being so good, it refused to be insulted in that manner. Similarly, 
I could never memorize the ordinary ‘repetitions’ of Greek and Latin 
poetry. I took to trigonometry with ardour; but became disgusted as soon 
as I found my calculations were to be applied to such vulgarities as archi- 
tecture. The only pure science for me was algebra and I progressed in that 
with amazing rapidity. On one occasion, at Malvern, the mathematical 
master wished to devote the whole hour to the three elder boys, who werc 
going up for some scholarship, and set us juniors to work out quadratic 
equations. There were sixty-three in the chapter set. At the end of forty 
minutes I stood up and said, ‘Please, sir, what shall I do now?’ He would 
not believe that I had worked them correctly, but I had. I seem to have an 
instinct for appreciating the relations of pure numbers and could find factors 
by intuition.My intellectual activity has always been intense. It was for this very reason 
that I could not bear to waste a moment on subjects which scemed to me 
alien to my interest, though I had no idea what that interest was. As soon 
as I heard of chemistry, I realized that it dealt with reality as I understood 
the word. So I soon had ‘Little Roscoe’! practically by heart, though it 
was not a school subject. I furnished a laboratory in the house at Streatham, 
and spent all my time and money in making experiments. It may be interest- 
ing to mention how my mind worked. I had heard of the petard as a military 
engine; and I was hoist with it. Roscoe told me that chloride of nitrogen 
was the most powerful and sensitive explosive known. My idca was to 
dissolve it in some volatile fluid; one could then lIcave a bucket of it at 
the enemy's gate. The fluid would evaporate and the chloride explode at 
the first vibration. After several minor misadventures, I collected it over 
benzine—about a quart—and the whole thing exploded and nearly burnt 
the house down.

I had also a plan for manufacturing diamonds. By various analogies I 
came to the conclusion that a true solution of carbon might be made in

62

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 63

iron and I proposed to crystallize it out in the regular way. The apparatus 
required was, however, hardly within the compass of a boy of fourteen 
and my diamonds are still theoretical.iron and I proposed to crystallize it out in the regular way. The apparatus 
required was, however, hardly within the compass of a boy of fourteen 
and my diamonds are still theoretical.

Talking of theory, I came to the conclusion, which at that time was a 
damnable heresy and a dangerous delusion, that all the elements were 
modifications of one substance. My main argument was that the atomic 
weights of cobalt and nickel were practically identical and the characteristic 
colours of thcir salts suggested to me that they were geometrical isomers 
like dextrose and laevulose. This is all obvious enough today, but I still 
think that it was not bad for a boy in his ‘teens in the early ‘nineties, whose 
only source of information was ‘Little Roscoe’.

An amusing situation arose out of this early devotion to the art of Flamel. 
In my last term at Malvern a panic-stricken board of governors determined 
to create a sciencc side and started a chemistry class. With laudable economy 
they put it in charge of one Mr Faber, a broken-down classical master, 
possibly in the belief that as he had a German name he knew as much as 
Ostwald. The result was that I had constantly to correct him in class; and 
he could do nothing, because the authorities, when consulted, proved to 
be on my side.

I had thus no difficulty at school as far as lessons were concerned, but 
in my three years at Champney’s I had no lack of trouble; the nature of 
this can only be understood if I adduce a few facts to indicate the atmos- 
phere. I used to tell people about my school life and met with such consistent 
incredulity that I made a little collection of incidents in the preface to my 
The World's Tragedy. I quote the passage as it stands.

A Boyhood in Hell

The Revd H. d'Arcy Champney, m.a. of Corpus Christi College, 
Cambridge, had come out of sect.

He had voted at the parliamentary elections by crossing out the 
names of the candidates and writing, ‘I vote for King Jesus.’He had voted at the parliamentary elections by crossing out the 
names of the candidates and writing, ‘I vote for King Jesus.’

He had started a school for the sons of Brethren at 51 Bateman Street, 
Cambridge. May God bite into the bones of men the pain of that hell 
on earth (I have prayed often) that by them it may be sowed with 
salt, accursed for ever! May the maiden that passes it be barren and the 
pregnant woman that beholdeth it abort! May the birds of the air 
refuse to fly over it! May it stand as a curse, as a fear, as an hate, among 
men! May the wicked dwell therein! May the light of the sun be 
withheld therefrom and the light of the moon not lighten it! May it 
become the home of the shells of the dead and may the demons of

the pit inhabit it! May it be accursed, accursed — accursed for ever and 
ever!

64 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

And still, standing as I stand in the prime of early manhood, free 
from all the fetters of the body and the mind, do I curse the memory 
thereof unto the agcs.

It was a good enough school from the point of view of examiners, 
I dare say. Morally and physically, it was an engine of destruction and 
corruption. I am just going to put down a few facts haphazard as they 
come to my memory; you may form your own judgment.

1. We were allowed to play crickct, but not to score runs, lest it 
should excite the vice of ‘emulation’.

2. Champney told me, a child of not yet twelve ycars old, that he 
had never consummated his marriage. (Only the very acute verbal 
memory which I possess enabled me years after to recall and interpret 
his meaning. He uscd a coarser phrase.)

3. We were told that ‘the Lord had a special care of the school and 
brought to light that which was donc in darkness,’ etc., etc. ad nauseam. 
‘The instrument was on this occasion so-and-so, who had nobly come 
forward,’ etc., etc. In other words, hypocrisy and sneaking were the 
only virtues.Naturally, one of several boys who might be involved in the samc 
offence would take fright and save his skin by sneaking. The informer 
was always believed implicitly, as against probability, or even possibility, 
with complete disregard of the testimony of other and independent 
witnesses.

For instance, a boy named Glascott, with insane taint, told Mr 
Champney that he had visited me (twelve years old) at my mother’s 
house during the holidays—true so far, hc had—and found me lying 
drunk at the bottom of the stairs. My mothcr was never asked about 
this; nor was I told of it. I was put into ‘Coventry’, i.e. no mastcr nor 
boy might speak to me, or I to them. I was fed on bread and water; 
during play hours I worked in the schoolroom; during work hours 
I walked solitary round and round the playground. I was expected 
to ‘confess’ the crime of which I was not only innocent, but un- 
accused.

This punishment, which I believe criminal authorities would con- 
sider sevcre on a poisoncr, went on for a term and a half. I was, at 
last, threatencd with expulsion for my refusal to ‘confess’, and so 
dreadful a picture of the horrors of expulsion did they paint mc— 
the guilty wretch, shunned by his fcllows, slinks on through life to 
a dishonoured grave, etc.—that I actually chose to endure my tortures 
and to thank my oppressor.

Physically, I broke down. The strain and the misery affected my 
kidneys; and I had to leave school altogether for two ycars. I should

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEBISTBR CROWLEY 65

add in fairness that there were other accusations against me, though, 
as you shall hear, almost equally silly.THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEBISTBR CROWLEY 65

add in fairness that there were other accusations against me, though, 
as you shall hear, almost equally silly.

I learnt at last, through the intervention of my uncle, in a lucid inter- 
val, what I was supposed to have done. I was said to have tried ‘to 
corrupt Chamberlain’—not our great patriotic statesman, shifty Joe— 
but a boy. (I was twelve years old and quite ignorant of all sexual 
matters till long after.) Also I had ‘held a mock prayer meeting’. 
This I remembered. I had strolled up to a group of boys in the play- 
ground, who were indeed holding one. As they saw me one said, 
‘Brother Crowley will now lcad us in prayer.’ Brother Crowley was 
too wary and walked away. But instead of doing what a wise boy 
would have done: gone straight to the head and accused them of 
forty-six distinct unmentionable crimes, I lect things slide. So, fearing 
that I might go, they hurricd off themselves and told him how that 
wicked Crowley had tried to lead them away from Jesus.

Worse, I had called Page I a phariscc. That was true; I had said it. 
Dreadful of me! And Page I, who ‘walked very close to Jesus’, of 
course went and told.

Yes, they all walked very close to Jesus—as close as Judas did.

4. A boy namcd Barton was sentenced to one hundred and twenty 
strokes of the cane on his bare shoulders, for some petty theft of which 
he was presumably innocent.

Superb was the process of trial. It began by an extra long prayer 
time and Joshua’s account of the sin of Achan, impressively read. 
Next, an hour or two about the Lord’s care of the school, the way 
He brought sin to light. Next, when well worked up and all our 
nerves on the jump, who stole what? Silence. Next, the Lord’s care 
in providing a witness—like the witnesses against Naboth! Then 
the witness and his story, as smooth as a policeman’s. Next, sentence. 
Last, execution, with intervals of praycr!Champney’s physique being impaired, one may suppose by his exces- 
sive devotion to Jesus, hc arranged to give sixty strokes one day and 
sixty the next.

My memory fails—perhaps Barton will onc day oblige with his 
reminiscences —but I fancy the first day came so near to killing him 
that he escaped the second.

I remember one licking I got—on the legs, because flogging the 
buttocks excites the victim’s sensuality!—fiftcen minutes prayer, 
fifteen strokes of the cane, fifteen minutes more prayer, fifteen morc 
strokes—and more prayer to top it!

5. On Sunday the day was devoted to ‘religion’. Morning prayers 
and sermon (about forty-five minutes). Morning ‘meeting’ (one and

66 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

a half to two hours). Open-air preaching on Parker’s Piece* (say 
one hour). Bible reading and learning by heart. Reading of the few 
books ‘sanctioned for Sunday’ (say two hours). Prayer meeting (called 
voluntary, but to stay away meant that some sneak in the school would 
accuse you of something next day) (say one hour). Evening prayer 
and sermon (say thirty minutes). Preaching of the gospel in the meeting- 
room (one and a half hours). Ditto on Parkcr’s Piece (say one hour). 
Prayer before retiring (say half an hour).

6. The ‘Badgers’ meeting’. Every Monday night the school was 
ranged round the back of the big schoolroom, and the scourings of 
Barnswell (Cambridge’s slum) let in, fed, preached to and dismissed.

Result, cpidemics of ringworm, measles and mumps.

Oh no! not a result; the Lord’s hand was heavy upon us because 
of some undiscovered sin.

I might go on for a long while, but I will not. I hope there are 
some people in the world happy enough to think that I am lying, 
or at least exaggcrating. But I pledge my word to the literal truth of 
all I have said, and there are plenty of witnesscs alive to confirm me, 
or to refute me. I have given throughout the actual names, addresses 
and other details.It is impossible to suppose that the character of the school had com- 
pletely changed between my father’s death and my return from the funeral. 
Yet before that I was completely happy and in sympathy with my sur- 
roundings. Not three wecks latcr, Ishmael was my middle name. I cannot 
account for it at all satisfactorily. I had been perfectly genuine in my ambi- 
tion to lead a life of holiness; the idea of intimate communion with ‘Jesus’ 
was constantly present to my mind. I do not remember any steps in the 
volte-facc. I asked one of the masters onc day how it was that Jesus was 
three days and three nights in the grave, although crucified on Friday and 
risen again on Sunday morning. He could not explain and said that it had 
never been explained. So I formulated the ambition ta become a shining 
light in Christianity by doing this thing that had never yet becn done. 
This idea, by the way, is very characteristic. I am totally unable to take 
any interest in doing anything which has been done before. But tcll me 
of an alleged impossibility; and health, wealth, life itself are nothing. I am 
out to do it. The apparent discrepancy in the gospel narrative aroused 
no doubt in my mind as to the literal truth of either of the texts. Indced, 
my falling away from grace was not occasioned by any intellectual qualms; 
* Evangelizing was almost all plain terrorism. Besides the torments of hell, there were ‘judg- 
ments’. For instance, the Blasphemous Butcher who, begged to get ‘washed in the Blood of the

Lamb’, replied ‘Right you are, I’ve got a lamb of my own.’ And that very same night his reason 
tottered on its throne, etc.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 67

I accepted the theology of the Plymouth Brethren. In fact, I could hardly 
conceive of the existence of people who might doubt it. I simply went over 
to Satan’s side; and to this hour I cannot tell why.But I found myself as passionately eager to serve my new master as I 
had been to serve the old. I was anxious to distinguish myself by commit- 
ting sin. Here again my attitude was extraordinarily subtle. It never occurred 
to me to steal or in any other way to infringe the decalogue. Such conduct 
would have been petty and contemptible. I wanted a supreme spiritual sin; 
and I had not the smallest idea how to set about it. There was a good deal 
of morbid curiosity among the saints about ‘the sin against the Holy Ghost’ 
which ‘could never be forgiven’. Nobody knew what it was. It was even 
considercd rather blasphemous to offer any very positive conjecture on the 
point. The idea seems to havc been that it was something like an ill-natured 
practical joke on the part of Jesus. This mysterious offence which could never 
be forgiven might be inadvertently committed by the greatest saint alive, 
with the result that he would be bowled out at the very gate of glory. 
Here was another impossibility to catch my youthful fancy; I must find out 
what that sin was and do it very thoroughly.

For (evidently) my position was exceedingly precarious. I was opposed to 
an omnipotent God; and for all I knew to the contrary, He might have 
predestincd me to be saved. No matter how much I disbelieved in Jesus, no 
matter how many crimes I piled up, He might get me in spite of myself. The 
only possibility of outwitting Him was to bring Him up against His own 
pledge that this particular sin should never be forgiven, with a certificate 
from the recording angel that I had duly done it.It seems incredible that such insanc conclusions should form the basis of 
practical action in any human being above the level of a bushman. But they 
follow logically enough from the blasphemous and superstitious premisses of 
Christian theology. Besides this, I had never a moment's inclination to take 
the material world scriously. In the Apologia pro Vita Sua, Cardinal Newman 
tells us, I suspect truthfully, that as a child he wished that The Arabian 
Nights were true. As we all know, he gratified his ambitions by accepting for 
reality the Freudian phantasm of hashed-up paganism with Semitic sauce 
which led him to the hat. But I went further. My senses and my rational 
judgment created a subconscious feeling of uneasiness that supernaturalism 
might not be true. This insulted my inmost consciousness of myself. But the 
reply was not to accept the false for the true, but to determine to make it true. 
I resolved passionately to reach the spiritual causes of phenomena, and to 
dominate the material world which I detested by their means. I was not con- 
tent to believe in a personal devil and serve him, in the ordinary sense of thc 
word. I wanted to get hold of him personally and become his chief of staff.

In my search for a suitable sin which might earn me the diabolical V.C., I

68 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWNIn my search for a suitable sin which might earn me the diabolical V.C., I

68 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

obviously enough came in touch with the usual thing. Champney was 
always sniffing around it, but—to me—he was completely unintelligible. I 
frequented the boys whose reputation for wickedness was best established, 
and was further directed in my inquiry by an intuitive sense of magnetism 
or appreciation of physiognomy. But the reign of terror was so firmly 
established in the school that nobody dared tell me outright the nature of 
this sin, even when the knowledge of it was admitted. Mystcrious hints were 
given; and at last a boy named Gibson told me what action to make, but he 
did not tell me to what object to apply the process. It seems extraordinary 
that nature should have afforded me no indication. I nowise connected the 
organ of reproduction with any voluntary act. I made conjectures dictated by 
purcly intellectual considerations, and carried out experiments based on their 
results; but they were absolutely ill-directed. I never guessed what organ was 
in question. The discovery was delayed for years.

My revolt must have manifested itself by actions which were technically 
not blameworthy. I cannot accuse myself of any overt crime. The battle 
between myself and the school was conducted on the magical plane, so to 
speak. It was as if I had made wax figures of the most inoffensive sort, that 
yet were recognized by the spiritual instinct of Champney as idols or in- 
struments of witchcraft. I was punished with absolute injustice and stupidity, 
yet at the same time the mystical apprehension of Champney made no 
mistake.

6

I must mention the intervention of my Uncle Jonathan in the matter of the 
Badgers’ meeting, and that of my Uncle Tom in the final eruption.6

I must mention the intervention of my Uncle Jonathan in the matter of the 
Badgers’ meeting, and that of my Uncle Tom in the final eruption.

Jonathan Crowley, my father’s elder brother, was the beau ideal of the 
noble patrician. He looked like a Roman emperor as we romantically 
imagine him to have been, not as we see him in most sculpture. The tremen- 
dous brow, the cagle eyes, the great hooked arrogant nose, the firm mouth 
and the indomitable jaw combined to make him onc of the most strikingly 
handsome men that I have ever seen.

He lived in a stately splendour which had no hint of ostentation. I never 
knew his first wife, by whom he had two children, Claude and Agnes. Claude 
was strikingly ugly, so much so as to be attractive, and he had a touch of 
deformity without being actually a hunchback. The same traits appeared in 
his mental and moral character. I always thought of him admiringly as 
Richard III; but he was merely weak and feeble-minded. Agnes inherited her 
father’s aristocratic haughtiness and a share of his good looks. She was too 
proud to marry and the repression preyed on her mind until she developed 
an idée fixe. For the last thirty ycars of her life she was constantly announcing 
her engagement and drawing up marriage contracts, which never came to 
anything. She was also possessed by the demon of litigation, and imagined 
herself wronged by various members of the family.

My uncle married the governess of the children. This was a lady of a 
distinguished Saxon family, who could trace her pedigrce to the time of 
Edward the Confessor. Tall, thin, distinguished and highly educated, she 
made an admirable chatelaine. Her personality appealed strongly to me, and 
she took that place in my affections which I could not give to my mother. 
She became a prominent member of the Primrose League, and it was 
through her influence with Lord Salisbury and Lord Ritchie that I obtained 
my nomination for the Diplomatic Service.My uncle and aunt visited me at Cambridge. I told them about the 
Badgers’ meeting, not in a spirit of complaint, but rather as Sir Richard 
Burton might have described his adventures among savages. Uncle Jonathan 
did not see the matter in that light at all. He made inquiries which confirmed 
my story; and told Champney point blank that this sort of thing had got to 
stop. Champncy attempted to bluster, but on being threatened with the 
sanitary authorities, knuckled undcr. The matter, however, did not stop 
there. My uncle saw clearly that I was being brutally ill-treated; and he made

69

70 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

an application to the courts which resulted in my beiag called to see Mr 
Justice Stirling in chambers. I have always been intensely loyal even to my 
enemics, and (for all I knew) the judge might send my mother and her 
brother to prison. So I lied like a little man and pretended that I was perfectly 
happy at the school. I do not think that he was entircly fooled by my 
protestations; and although I was not made a ward in Chancery, a promise 
was exacted that I should go to a public school and university as soon as I 
had passed the ‘Cambridge Local’.Meanwhile, nature took my part. At the end of the first term of my 
punishment I was so obviously ill during the holidays that questions were 
asked, and I complained to my mother of the ill-treatment. Instead of in- 
vestigating the circumstances, they sent for Champney without saying 
anything to me. I was taken over to my Uncle Tom’s house one evening and 
found myself penned in a corner of the room by the fulminating headmaster. 
The surprise terrified me and I did not darc to deny anything. But there was 
still no accusation madc against me. Champney did not even tell my mother 
and Uncle Tom what I was supposed to have donc. I was sent back to the 
school to serve the remainder of my sentence. At the end of that term, 
however, for some reason whose nature I cannot gucss, Uncle Tom decided 
to come up to Cambridge and make further inquiries. Warncd of the visit, 
Champney put on extra pressurc. I must confess or be expelled. I did my 
utmost to invent satisfactory abominations; but as of course these were not 
connected in any way with the real accusations, I merely made matters 
worse. On Uncle Tom’s arrival I once more resorted to telling the simple 
truth, that I had no idea what I had done. This time my uncle lapsed from 
righteousness to the extent of insisting on knowing what the accusations 
were. Champney told him. My uncle had sensc enough to see that they 
were all absurd, put down Champney for a lunatic, and took me away 
from the school. As a matter of fact, within a very short time the insanity 
of the headmaster became patent and the school was broken up in 
consequence.As regards myself, the mischicf had been done. I, who had been a happy, 
healthy, good-natured, popular boy, had learned to endure complete 
solitude for months at a time. I spoke to no boy and the masters always 
addresscd me, when necessity compelled them, with sanctimonious horror. 
The bread and water diet, and the punishment of perpetual walking round 
the playground during school hours, had broken down my constitution. I 
was taken to a doctor, who found that I was suffering severely from albuminu- 
ria, and predicted that I should never live to come of age. I was put on special 
diet and prescribed a course of country life with a tutor. During the next year 
or two I was constantly travelling round Wales and Scotland, climbing 
mountains and fishing for trout. I also had one delightful summer at St

THE CONPESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLEY 7I

Andrews where Andrew Kirkaldy taught me to play golf. My health 
rapidly improved. I was allowed to work a very limited number of hours, but 
I progressed rapidly, having the undivided attention of my tutors.

These persons, however, were not too satisfactory; they were all my 
Uncle Tom’s nominees; that is, they were of the sawny, anaemic, priggish 
type, who at the best could boast of minor Cambridge® colleges. Of course, I 
considered it my duty to outwit them in every possible way and hunt up 
some kind of sin.This uncle, by the way, some years later, contributed what he esteemed a 
brilliantly witty article to the Boys’ Magazine, the organ of an Evangelical 
attempt to destroy the manhood of our public schools. It was called The 
Two Wicked Kings. These were described as tyrants who ruined the lives of 
boys and enslaved them. Their names were Smo-King and Drin-King. Uncle 
Tom called my attention to his masterpiece and I said, with shocked surprise, 
‘But, my dear Uncle, you have forgotten to mention a third, the most 
dangerous and deadly of all!’ He couldn’t think who that was. I told him. 
Now, I ask you, is it not deplorable that so important and accurate an addi- 
tion to his thesis should not have been accepted with pious glee?

Things went from bad to worse as I grew in moral power. Part of the time 
I was well enough to go to a day school in Streatham, where I learnt at long 
last the terrible secret which I had racked my brains to discover for nearly 
three years. Here was certainly a sin worth sinning and I applied myself with 
characteristic vigour to its practice.

As my father had becn accustomed to drink wine, I could not see how 
drinking could be a sin. There was, therefore, no object in doing it. I never 
touched wince until I got to Trinity and I have never felt the smallest tempta- 
tion to excess. My father had, however, not been a smoker, saying that if 
God had intended men to smoke He would have supplied a chimney at the 
top of the head.f I had no hesitation, therefore, in making a great point of 
smoking. I had no thought of connecting the service of the ‘third King’ with 
the reproduction of the species, and therefore no reason to suppose that my 
father had ever so far forgotten himself. I spent my whole time trying to 
enrol myself under the royal banner; but this could only be done by co- 
Operation and it was some time before I found the means.To return to my tutors. Relations were invariably strained. On one 
occasion the Rev. Fothergill had taken me for the summer to a fishing centre 
near Lairg called Forsinard. We went fishing one day to a loch over the 
moors and in the course of some argument I threw his rod far into the water.

* Oxford was anathema maranatha to my Uncle Tom. Keble! Manning!! Newman!!! procurers 
to the lords of hell far subtler and more fearful than Darwin, Huxley and Tyndall.

t One might surely argue that His most generous device was the adaptation of tobacco to the 
nerves of taste and smell.

72 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

He attacked me with fury, but I got a good hold and threw him after it. I 
then went off in the boat, but he caught mc as I was pushing off, overturned 
the boat on top of me and tried to drown mc. That night the gods still 
further favoured me, for a village girl named Belle McKay found herself with 
nothing better to do than to roam with me amid the heather. We returned 
together quite openly and Fothergill threw up the sponge. He took me back 
to London the next morning. Breaking the journcy at Carlisle, I repeated my 
victory with a buxom chambermaid.But murder is not the only amusement open to pious tutors. The brother 
of the Dean of Westminster (he subsequently became a missionary and died 
at Lokoja) had been taught that if he couldn't be good he should be careful. 
While he was actually in charge of me his conduct was irreproachable, but 
after giving me up he invited me over to his mother’s house at Maze Hill to 
spend the night, and did his best to live up to the reputation of his cloth. I did 
not allow him to succeed, not because I could sce no sin in it, but because I 
thought it was a trap to betray me to my family. Just before he left for 
Africa he invited me again, prayed with mc, confessed to his offence, 
excusing himself on the ground that his elder brother Jack, also a missionary, 
had led him astray, and asked my pardon. Once again I adopted the attitude 
of the man of the world, “Tut, tut, my dear fellow, don’t mention it,’ which 
annoyed him very much, because he wanted to be taken scriously as the 
chief of sinners.

Onc of the principal points about the sin stupidity is that it flatters the 
sinner. All insanity depends upon the exacerbation of the ego. The melan- 
cholic hugs the dclusion that he has committcd the unpardonable sin. Sins 
grow by repression and by brooding upon their enormity. Few people 
would go to excess if they were not unwholesomely over-excited about their 
trivial apishness.Most people, especially Freud, misunderstand the Freudian position. “The 
libido of the unconscious’ is really ‘the true will of the inmost self’. The sexual 
characteristics of the individual are, itistruc, symbolic indications of its nature, 
and when those are ‘abnormal’, we may suspect that the self is divided against 
itself in some way. Expericnce teaches the adepts who initiate mankind that 
when any complex (duality) in the self is resolved (unity) the initiate 
becomes whole. The morbid sexual symptoms (which are merely the com- 
plaints of the sick animal) disappear, while the moral and mental conscious- 
ness is rclicved from its civil war of doubt and self-obsession. The complete 
man, harmonized, flows freely towards his natural goal.

It will be seen that I had developed cnormously in these years. Unfortuna- 
tely, my misery was so great during this long battle with my tyrants that, 
while the incidents themselves stand out luminously in focus, I find it very 
hard to remember the order in which thcy occurred. There are, moreover,

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 73

curious contradictions in myself against which I seem always to be stumbling. 
For example, as late as 1894, I think it must be, I find myself writing hymns of 
quite acceptable piety. One was published in The Christian; it began:

I am a blind man on a helmless ship

Without a compass on a stormy sea. 
I cannot sink, for God will hold me up, etc.I am a blind man on a helmless ship

Without a compass on a stormy sea. 
I cannot sink, for God will hold me up, etc.

Again, I wrote a poem on the death of my Aunt Ada, which I thought good 
enough to include in my Songs of the Spirit, and is entirely irreproachable on 
the score of piety. It seems as if I possessed a theology of my own which was, 
to all intents and purposes, Christianity. My satanism did not interfere with 
it at all; I was trying to take the view that the Christianity of hypocrisy and 
cruelty was not true Christianity. I did not hate God or Christ, but merely 
the God and Christ of the people whom I hated. It was only when the 
development of my logical faculties supplied the demonstration that the 
Scriptures support the theology and practice of professing Christians that 
I was compelled to set myself in opposition to the Bible itself. It does not 
matter that the literature is sometimes magnificent and that in isolated passages 
the philosophy and ethics are admirable. The sum of the matter is that 
Judaism is a savage, and Christianity a fiendish, superstition.It is very strange that I should have had no inkling of my tendency to 
Mysticism and Magick by means of any definite experience. It is true that, 
from the beginning, I held the transcendental view of the universe, but there 
was nothing to back it up in the way of experience. Most children have a 
touch of poetry and believe in what I hate to call psychic phenomena, at least 
to the extent of fancying they see fairies or being scared of “bugges by 
night’. But I, although consciously engaged in the battle with ‘principalities 
and powers’, never had the slightest hallucination of sense or any tendency to 
imagine things ghostly. I might have had an ambition to see the devil and 
talk things over with him, but I should have expected such communication 
to be either perfectly material or perfectly intellectual. I had no idea of 
nuances. When I eventually learnt how to use my astral eyes and ears, there 
was no confusion; the other world had certain correspondences with our 
own, but it was perfectly distinct. I seem to have made a very determined 
effort to prevent the obliteration of my spiritual consciousness of the world 
beyond the veil by the ink of terrestrial experience. Then again, there are 
sudden outbreaks of a fully formed personality, in which I spoke with the 
assurance and authority of a man of fifty on subjects on which I had really no 
opinion at all in the ordinary sense of the word.

There is one amazing incident; at the age of fourteen as near as I can re- 
member. I must premise that I have always been exceptionally tender- 
hearted, except to tyrants, for whom I think no tortures bad enough. In

74 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

particular, I am uniformly kind to animals; no question of cruelty or sadism 
arises in the incident which I am about to narrate.74 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

particular, I am uniformly kind to animals; no question of cruelty or sadism 
arises in the incident which I am about to narrate.

I had been told “A cat has nine lives.’ I deduced that it must be practically 
impossible to kill a cat. As usual, I became full of ambition to perform the 
feat. (Observe that I took my information unquestioningly au pied de la 
lettre.) Perhaps through some analogy with the story of Hercules and the 
hydra, I got it into my head that the nine lives of the cat must be taken more 
or less simultaneously. I therefore caught a cat, and having administered a 
large dose of arsenic I chloroformed it, hanged it above the gas jet, stabbed it, 
cut its throat, smashed its skull and, when it had been pretty thoroughly 
burnt, drowned it and threw it out of the window that the fall might 
remove the ninth life. In fact, the operation was successful; I had killed the 
cat. I remember that all the time I was genuinely sorry for the animal; I 
simply forced myself to carry out the experiment in the interest of pure 
science.The combination of innocence, ignorance, knowledge, ingenuity and high 
moral principle scems extraordinary. It is evident that the insanely immoral 
superstition in which I had been brought up is responsible for so atrocious an 
absurdity. Again and again we shall see how the imposition of the anti- 
natural theory and principles of Christianity upon a peculiarly sane, matter- 
of-fact, reality-facing genius created a conflict whose solution was expressed 
on the material plane by some extravagant action. My mind is severely logical; 
or, rather, it was so until mystic experience enabled it to shake off its fetters. 
Logic is responsible for most of the absurd and abominable deeds which have 
disgraced history. Given Christian premisses, the Inquisition was acting in 
accordance with the highest humanitarian principles in destroying a man’s 
body to save his soul. The followers of Descartes were right to torture 
animals, believing them to be automata. Genuine determinists would be 
justified in committing any crime, since the fact of its occurrence would 
prove that it was unavoidable. Huxley, in Evolution and Ethics, makes out a 
very poor case against infanticide and race suicide. We are constantly using 
our judgment to preserve one section of humanity as against another; we are 
in fact constantly compelled to do so. As for the future of humanity, the 
certainty of final extermination when the planet becomes uninhabitable 
makes al] human endeavour a colossal fatuity.

It is one of the principal theses of this book to show the above statement to 
be absurd, by offering a theory of reality compatible with sanity.

However, that comes later.

JIt is one of the principal theses of this book to show the above statement to 
be absurd, by offering a theory of reality compatible with sanity.

However, that comes later.

J

‘The best laid plans of mice and men gang aft agley.’ Even so cunning a 
combination of rat and ape as my Uncle Tom made occasional mistakes, and 
one of these was very fortunate for me. He engaged a tutor named Archibald 
Douglas, an Oxford man who had purged that offence by having travelled 
for the Bible Society across Persia. If my uncle had ever heard of George 
Borrow, he might have saved himself much trouble; and I might have been 
driven insane. It was in the spring of ’91. I had recovered from a bad attack 
of whooping-cough. The idea was that we should bicycle down to Torquay, 
but on reaching Guildford I was too ill to ride further and we went down by 
train. Though Douglas called himself a Christian, he proved to be both a man 
and a gentleman. I presume that poverty had compelled the camouflage. 
From the moment that we were alone together he produced a complete 
revolution in my outlook upon life, by showing me for the first time a sane, 
clean, jolly world worth living in. Smoking and drinking were natural. He 
warned me of the dangers of excess from the athletic standpoint. He intro- 
duced me to racing, billiards, betting, cards and women. He told me how 
these things might be enjoyed without damaging oneself or wronging 
others. He put me up to all the tricks. He showed me the meaning of honour. 
I immediately accepted his standpoint and began to behave like a normal, 
healthy human being. The nightmare world of Christianity vanished at the 
dawn. I fell in with a girl of the theatre in the first ten days at Torquay, and 
at that touch of human love the detestable mysteries of sex were transformed 
into joy and beauty. The obsession of sin fell from my shoulders into the sea 
of oblivion. I had been almost overwhelmed by the appalling responsibility 
of ensuring my own damnation and helping others to escape from Jesus. I 
found that the world was, after all, full of delightful damned souls; of people 
who accepted nature as she is, accepted their own place in nature and enjoyed 
it, fought mean and despicable things fairly and firmly whenever they met 
them. It was a period of boundless happiness for me. I had always yearned 
for the beauty of nature; my only friends, except animals and occasional 
strangers, from whom I was carefully protected, had been the skies, the 
strcams, the mountains and the seas. For the first time in my life I was brought 
into contact with my fellow men and women. For the first time honest friend- 
ship, wholesome love, frank, gay and courageous, became possible and actual. 
I had loved nature as a refuge from mankind. I now perceived the beauty of 
the world in conjunction with the beauty of my species. For the first time75

76 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

the sea sparkled, the breezes whispered other songs than those in praise of 
solitude, the flowers lent their fragrance and their folly to light, laughing 
girlhood; the moon, instcad of Artemis, was Aphrodite.

I said, ‘she is warmer than Dian... 
Come up through the lair of the Lion 
With love in her luminous eyes.’

It is possible that my own indiscretion may have produced the catastrophe. 
I may have let my mother know that I was happy by the tone of my letters. 
In any casc, hcr suspicions were aroused. Uncle Tom appcared upon the 
scene, got Douglas out of the way by somc lic, rifled his belongings, stole his 
private letters and dismissed him. But it was too late; my eyes were opened 
and I had become as a god, knowing good and cvil. I was in a position to 
take the initiative. Till then, I could only aim at escaping from the hideous 
hell of homc. Now I had an objective; now I could attack.

I must explain something of the horror of life in my mother’s house. To 
begin with, I was entirely debarred from the society of boys and girls of my 
own age, unless they were the children of Brethren. The sect was already 
moribund and in addition had split over the Raven heresy. The situation is 
illustrated by the story which I will quote from the preface to my The 
World's Tragedy.

An irrcligious man may have moral checks; a Plymouth Brother has 
none. He is always rcady to excuse the vilest crimes by quoting the 
appropriate text and invoking the namc of Christ to cover every mean- 
ness which may delight his vain and vicious nature.

For the Plymouth Brethren were in themselves an exceptionally 
detestable crew. The aristocrats who began the movement were, of 
course, just aristocrats, and their curious system Icft them so. But they ran 
a form of ‘Early Christian’ spiritual socialism by having no appointed 
priest or minister, and they were foolish enough to favour their followers 
financially.Thus Mr Giblets — let us call him — the third-best butcher in the village 
found (on the onc hand) that while at church he was nobody at all, and 
in chapcl but an elder, in the little meeting in the squire’s morning-room 
he was no less than the minister of God and the mouthpiece of the Holy 
Ghost; just as on the other hand it was only natural that the orders from 
the Hall should comc his way and leave the first-best butcher lamenting 
and the second-best bewildered. So that in my time the sect (though it 
is only fair to point out that they refused to be described as a sect, since 
what they had donc was not to form a new sect, but to ‘come out of 
sect’—this they maintained in spite of the fact that they were far more

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 77

exclusive than any other religious body in Europe) was composed of a 
few of the old guard, my father the last of them all, and the meanest 
crew of canaille that ever wriggled.

With my father’s death the small schisms which had hitherto lopped 
off a few members every year or two were altogether surpassed by the 
great Raven heresy, which split the body into two nearly equal halves 
and extinguished the last sparks of its importance.

I am going beyond my subject, but I cannot refrain from telling 
the awful story of the mecting at Oban.

The meeting at Oban consisted of a Mr Cameron and his wife and the 
bedridden mother of one of the two, I forget which. Now as it is 
written, ‘Wheresoever two or three are gathercd together in my name, 
there am I in the midst of them’, it was all very well: but two forms a 
quorum. Jesus will not comc for less. This has never been disputed by any 
doctor of the Brethren. Wigram is clear on the point; if Darby had ever 
been clear on any point, it would have been on that. Kelly never denied 
it; even Stuart was sound in this matter, and Stoncy himself (though 
reluctantly) gave his adhesion. To hold a mccting you must have two 
persons present...Well, I need hardly say that Mr and Mrs Cameron took opposite 
sides of the controversy. When the glad wircs flashed the message that 
Mr Raven in the meeting at Ealing had deliberatcly said with slow and 
weighty emphasis, ‘He that hath the Son hath eternal life’, Mrs 
Cameron almost wept for joy. When (the message continued) Major 
McArthy had risen to his feet and retorted, “He that hath the Son of God 
hath everlasting lifc’, Mr Cameron exccuted a Highland though 
funercal fling.*

When Mr Raven, stung to the quick, had shaken his fist at the major 
and yelled, ‘Brother, you're a sinful old man!’ Mrs Cameron ‘had 
always known there was something’, and invented a ruined governess. 
But—oh the laughter of her husband when the telegraph brought the 
major’s retort, ‘Brother, have you no sin?’ —spoken with an accent of 
mildness which belied the purple of his face.

In short, the mceting at Oban had split. Mr Cameron had withdrawn 
from the Lord’s supper ! ! ! It was therefore absolutely necessary for 
both of them to assure themselves that the bedridden mother was of 
their way of thinking, or neither could hold the morning mecting; 
though I suppose either could preach the gospel —morosa voluptas!

Unhappily, that excellent lady was a hard case. She was quite deaf and

* The alleged antithesis between these two texts (I cannot perceive it) was actually the basis of 
the schism. My mother thought that one of them (I forget which) ‘dishonoured the Lord’s 
person’ |]

78 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

very nearly blind; while mentally she had never been remarkable for 
anything beyond a not unamiable imbecility. However, there was but 
one thing to be done, to argue her into conviction.

They agreed to take eight-hour shifts; and for all I know, they are 
arguing still, and neither of the meetings at Oban can meet!They agreed to take eight-hour shifts; and for all I know, they are 
arguing still, and neither of the meetings at Oban can meet!

As it happened, my mother took the minority view. This means that she 
cut herself off from every single intimate friend. On the strength of a text in 
one of the epistles, shc refused to shake hands with anyone who was teaching 
false doctrine. The very few remaining were new friends. My associates could 
therefore be counted on the fingers of one hand and our only bond of sym- 
pathy was a detestation of our tyrants.

My intellectual avidity was enormous, yct I was absolutcly cut off from 
literature. One or two books of Scott and Dickens were permitted. Ballantyne 
was approved, G. A. Henty winked at rather than openly tolerated. David 
Copperfield was barred because of Little Em’ly, for she was a naughty girl; 
besides, Emily was my mother’s name, and to read the book might diminish 
my respect for her. One of my tutors brought down The Bab Ballads, one of 
which begins:

Emily Jane was a nursery maid.

My mother threw the book out of the house and very nearly threw him after 
it. Another tutor read “The Ancient Mariner’ aloud after dinner one night 
and my mother, after delivering a stormy tirade, snatched me from the 
contamination of his presence. The reason was that when the Ancient 
Mariner saw the water snakes playing around the ship, he ‘blessed them un- 
aware’. An outragcously blasphemous act, for snakes arc cursed in Genesis!Here, by the way, is a curious point. These bigots are so inconsistent that I 
have never been able to follow the working of their minds. There is a great 
deal of doctrine in “The Ancient Mariner’ which outrages every tenct of the 
Plymouth Brethren, but my mother does not appear to have taken offence 
at that. My only suggestion is that she detested snakes for Freudian reasons; 
she had probably met them in dreams and had therefore good reasons (from 
her point of view) for identifying them with the devil in his most objection- 
able form. My mother was naturally a rather sensual type of woman and 
there is no doubt that sexual repression had driven her as nearly as possible to 
the borders of insanity.

My cousin Agnes had a house in Dorset Square. My mother took me to 
tea there one afternoon. A copy of Dr Pascal was in the room. The word 
‘Zola’ caught my mother’s eye and she made a verbal assault of hysterical 
fury upon her hostess. Both women shouted and screamed at each other 
simultaneously, amid floods of tears. Needless to say, my mother had never 
read a line of Zola—the name was simply a red rag to a cow.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLBY 79THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLBY 79

This inconsistency, by the way, seems universal. I have known a printer 
object to set up ‘We gave them hell and Tommy’, while passing unquestioned 
all sorts of things to which exception could quite reasonably be taken by 
narrow-minded imbeciles. The censor habitually passes what I, who am no 
puritan, consider nauseating filth, while refusing to license Oedipus Rex, 
which we are compelled to assimilate at school. The prosecutions against 
publishers are equally incomprehensible. The country is flooded with the 
nasty pornography of women writcrs, while there is an outcry against 
epoch-making masterpieces of philosophy like Jurgen. The salacious musical 
comedy goes its libidinous way rejoicing, while Ibsen and Bernard Shaw are 
on the black list. The fact is, of course, that the puritan has been turned by 
sexual repression into a sexual pervert and degenerate, so that he is insane on 
the subject.

Of course, I could not be prevented entirely from reading. I was kept 
very short of pocket money, so that I could not even buy books to any 
extent. But I used to get them now and again, smuggle them into the house 
inside my clothes, and lock myself into the water-closet to read them. One 
such book, I remember, was The Mystery of a Hansom Cab. My mother 
considered the hansom cab as an engine specially devised by the devil and any 
reference to one was considered obscene.

Having given an idea of the atmosphere of home, it should be intelligible 
that I was prepared to go out of my way to perform any act which might 
serve as a magical affirmation of my revolt. I was, in fact, restrained from 
developing my mind in any wholesome manner. I had no opportunity to 
think of anything but fighting fire with fire.A new parlour maid took it into her head to better herself by getting a 
stranglehold on the young master. I arranged to meet her on her evening out 
at a safe distance from Streatham and we drove in a cab over to Herne Hill, 
indulging in a mild flirtation on the way. On Sunday morning, however, I 
brought things to a point. I made an excuse for staying away from the 
morning meeting, got the girl into my mother’s bedroom and made my 
magical affirmation. I had no idea that there was any counterplot, but the 
girl proceeded to ‘blow the gaff’. She was, of course, instantly flung into the 
street, but she continued her operations for bettering herself. Uncle Tom 
intervened, for of course my mother could not discuss such a subject with me 
at all. I denied the whole affair point blank. My uncle tried to find the cab- 
man, but failed. They scented trouble for somebody and knew no more than 
so many Chinamen. Hc begged me, however, to try to furnish some positive 
proof of my innocence; and this is where my subtlety came in. I pretended 
to be in great trepidation. Yes, I could prove it, and yet, how could I? My 
uncle scented a mystery and adjourned the examination.

I immediately went out and appealed to the tobacconist on the bridge

80 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

above Streatham station to say, if asked, that he remembered my having been 
in his shop on the Thursday night previous, which was that of the cab drive. 
He was a good sportsman and naturally anxious to oblige. I went back to my 
uncle and proposed a deal. I would tell him where I had been, but he must not 
punish me, for I had been led astray by bad companions. He was only too 
glad; and I owned up, tremulous and tearful, that I had been in the tobac- 
conist’s. He would have doubted a merely innocent alibi. The girl was, of 
course, discredited, and nothing more was heard of the matter. And I had 
had her on my mother’s very bed!That is the state of affairs which is caused by puritanistn. First we have a 
charming girl driven to attempt blackmail, next a boy forced to the most 
unmanly duplicity in order to exercise his natural rights with impunity, 
and incidentally to wrong a woman for whom he had nothing but the 
friendliest feelings. As long as sexual relations are complicated by religious, 
social and financial considcrations, so long will they cause all kinds of 
cowardly, dishonourable and disgusting behaviour. When war conditions 
imposed artificial restraint on the sister appetite of hunger, decent citizens 
began to develop all kinds of loathsome trickery. Men and women will 
never behave worthily as long as current morality interferes with the 
legitimate satisfaction of physiological necds. Nature always avenges herself 
on those who insult her. The individual is not to blame for the crime and 
insanity which are the explosions consequent on the clogging of the safety 
valve. The fault lies with the engineer. At the present moment, society is 
blowing up in larger or smaller spots all over the world, because it has failed 
to develop a system by which all its members can be adequately nourished 
without conflict and the waste products climinated without discomfort.

On the whole, I was so well guarded that incidents like the above were rare 
accidents. I had been taught by bitter experience that almost anybody might 
be a spy, so that the slightest indiscretion in talking to an apparently harmless 
stranger might result in some disaster. The foundations were laid of an 
exaggerated shyncss which has never left me. I was practically debarred from 
human intercourse, even that of the great men of the past. My only consola- 
tion was writing poetry.It is difficult to explain by what means I came to the conclusion that 
poctry was of paramount importance. There was a sort of family tradition 
which honoured the poet; but it was as irrational as the rest of their beliefs. I 
can only imagine it as derived from their having been told at school that the 
English poets were the glory of humanity, for they certainly knew no poetry 
beyond ‘Casabianca’ and ‘We are Seven’. I discovered Shakespeare for my- 
self. It happened that in the farmhouse at Forsinard were three old folio 
volumes. My mother had an edition of Shakespeare; but I had never read it, 
because it was permitted. At the farmhouse, however, there was nothing else

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY gI

to read. I became fascinated and spent night after night poring over the pages. 
(I have always been singularly thorough in anything I take up. My father had 
a favourite sermon on the word ‘but’; and I went through the whole Bible, 
page by page, enclosing this word, wherever it occurred, with an oblong ofApart from the few regular pieces for recitation, there was Paradise Lost. 
This bored me for the most part as much as it does now, but allowed me to 
gloat over the figures of Satan and sin. After all, Milton was a great poet; and 
the subconscious artistic self of him was therefore bitterly antagonistic to 
Christianity. Not only is Satan the hero, but the triumphant hero. God’s 
threats have not ‘come off’. It is the forces of evil, so called, that manifest in 
strength and beauty of form. The glories of the saints are tinsel. It is impossible 
to draw goodness with character. On the Christian theory, goodness is, in 
fact, nothing but absence of character, for it implies complete submission to 
God. Satan’s original fault is not pride; that is secondary. It springs from the 
consciousness of separateness. Now of course this is, mystically speaking, 
sinful, because the mystic holds that all manifestation is imperfection. 
Christian theology has not had sufficient logic to see, like its elder sister, 
Hindu theology, that any attributes soever must distinguish their possessor 
from some other possible being. But their instinct has been to go as far in that 
direction as possible and consequently the divine characters in Milton are 
comparatively colourless. Such was the transmutation in the nature of God 
effected by building a super-structure of Greek philosophy upon the founda- 
tion of the savage phantasm of Jehovah. My own attitude in the matter is to 
be seen in my aesthetic tendencies. I could never tolerate smooth, insipid 
beauty. The ugliness of decrepitude revolted me; but that of strength 
absorbed my whole soul. I despised the tame scenery of the Swiss lakes; 
the ruggedness of barren pinnacles of rock and the gloomy isolation of such 
lakes as Llyn Idwal appealed to my imagination. Wastwater disappointed 
me. It did not come up to the level of its poetic reputation. It was only 
when I got among the crags themselves that I was happy. I demanded to 
be at grips with death in one way or another. The bourgeois ambition to 
get through life without unpleasantness seemed to me the lowest vileness 
and entirely in keeping with the moral attitude of the heavenly people in 
Paradise Lost.I was allowed to read Tennyson and Longfellow, but it is impossible to 
class them as poets. The emasculation of all the characters disgusted me 
beyond measure. Their very sins are suburban.

S

So when it came to my writing poetry myself, my work fcll naturally into 
three divisions. Firstly, short lyrics modelled on the hymns to which I was 
accustomed; secondly, parodies, principally of Scottish and English songs; 
and thirdly, epics based on Sir Walter Scott. I must have written over a 
hundred thousand lines. They have all been destroyed; and I am rather sorry 
for it. While they possessed no mcrit, their contents would afford a valuable 
key to my thoughts at the time. The few fragments which escaped destruc- 
tion were reprinted in my Oracles. I remember something of thcir general 
moral tendency, which was to celebrate the triumph of the revolt of youth 
and passion against age and propriety. I tried to get effect by using cxtremes 
of expression. I remember two lincs from an epic, ‘Lady Ethelreda’:

Baron Ethcelred waxed wroth, 
Frothcd he with a frothy froth.

But as I grew a little older 1 became able to manage my material with more 
discretion. My mother designed me, of course, to follow in my father’s 
footsteps as an evangelist, but as I had to take a profession she decided she 
would like me to be a doctor, on the ground that ‘doctors have so many 
opportunities’. (Scil. for bringing souls to Jesus. She did not see anything 
funny in this remark!) So I began to learn a little about medicine and pro- 
duced the following cftusion:

A PEEP BEHIND THE SCENES

In the hospital bed she lay 
Rotting away!

Cursing by night and cursing by day, 
Rotting away!

The lupus is over her face and head,

Filthy and foul and horrid and dread,

And her shrieks they would almost wake the dead; 
Rotting away!

In her horrible grave she lay, 
Rotting away!

Rotting by night, and rotting by day, 
Rotting away!

In the place of her face is a gory hole,

82In her horrible grave she lay, 
Rotting away!

Rotting by night, and rotting by day, 
Rotting away!

In the place of her face is a gory hole,

82

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 83

And the worms are gnawing the tissues foul, 
And the devil is gloating over her soul, 
Rotting away!

Note that the title of this poem is ironical. It is taken from a goody-goody 
book, popular at that time, which describes the life of travelling barn- 
stormers and how the only hope for them was to be converted. But the 
irony gocs somewhat deeper. It was a genuine criticism of the shallow 
philosophy of optimism which went with the polite Christianity of the time. 
I was analysing life in the spirit of Schopenhauer. I couldn’t sce any sense 
in pretending that life was not full of horrors. Death and trousers are facts 
in nature; and merely to avoid reference to them or to invent euphemisms 
for them does not alter their character. I was reduced to gloating on murder 
and putrefaction, simply because these things gave the most forcible denial 
to the assumptions current at home. Paganism is wholcsome because it 
faccs the facts of life; but I was not allowed to take a normal view of nature. 
In my situation, I could not dismiss the falsitics of Christianity with a smile; 
I was compelled to fight fire with fire and to oppose their poisoned poultices 
with poisoned daggers.Such was the influence of home life. But it was partially interfered with 
by the more decent current of school life. I have mentioned my school in 
Streatham. It was there that occurred the last important incident of this 
period. Being the star chemist of the school, I determined to distinguish 
myself on the fifth of November, 1891. I procured a ten-pound jar from 
the grocer’s, put two pounds of gunpowder at the bottom and filled it up 
with various layers of different coloured ‘fires’. These were all—except for 
the small ingredicnts of varied metallic salts—of the same composition: 
sugar and chlorate of potash. In order to make sure of success, I turned the 
whole household on to mixing these ingredients, with the result that they 
were mingled so intimatcly as to produce what was to all intents and pur- 
poses chlorate powder! I pressed this down very powerfully, buried the 
jar in the playground, stuck a rocket into the top and lighted it at the critical 
moment. The rocket had been fixed too firmly to rise and the protecting 
wad of paper burnt through before I could step back. I neither saw nor 
heard anything. I felt as if a brush of some warm tarry and gritty substance 
had been passed across my face; and found myself standing on the brink of 
a hole in the ground of no mean size. I wondered how on earth it could 
have happened that my experiment had failed. I remember apologizing for 
the failure and saying that I must go up to the house to wash my face. I 
discovered that I was being supported on the journey by my private tutor 
and my mother. Then I found myself in the headmaster’s sanctum, receiving 
first aid. I remember nothing more for some time except the annoyance

84 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN84 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

of being awakened to have my dressings changed. I slept for ninety-six 
hours with these scmi-conscious intervals. My tutor had the sense to wire 
to Guy’s Hospital for Dr Golding Bird, whose intervention probably saved 
me from crysipelas and the loss of my sight. In the course of convalescence, 
over four thousand pieces of gravel and the like were removed from my 
face; and it was on Christmas Day that I was first allowed to use my eyes 
for a few minutes. The explosion had been devastating. The windows werc 
smashed for a long way round; and thc bottles in the chemist’s shop on 
the railway bridge—a quarter of a mile and more away — rattled, though 
the passage of trains had no such effect. Strangely cnough, I was the only 
person injured. Throughout I enjoyed the cpisodc; I was the hero, I had 
made my mark!

The following year I was ready to go to a public school. My Uncle 
Jonathan wanted me to go to Winchester, as per the family tradition, but 
my health demanded a more bracing climate and it was decided that I 
should go to Malvern. The school at that timc was rising to the height of 
its glory in athletics. We possessed a brilliant bat in Percy Latham; H. R. 
and W. L. Foster were sure to distinguish themselves in onc way or another, 
and the youngsters of that famous game-playing family were coming on, 
ready to take thcir places when the time came. There was also C. J. Burnup 
as a promising colt.In other matters, however, the school had a long way to go. Bullying 
went on unchecked, the prefects being foremost offenders. As a shy, solitary 
boy in ill-health, incapable of football, I naturally got more than my share, 
and this led ultimately to one of the few actions in my life with which I 
have ever felt inclined to reproach mysclf. The tone of the school was 
brutal and imbecile. The authorities had done much to stamp out the prac- 
tice of ‘greasing’, which consists in spitting as smegmatically as possible 
either in people’s faces or on their backs. It still flourished at our house, 
Huntingdon’s, No. 4, and constituted our only claim to distinction. I do 
not think we had a single member in either of the elevens. The prefects 
were hulking louts, shirking both work and play, and concentrating on 
obscenity and petty tyranny. It annoyed them particularly that my conduct 
was irreproachable. They could not cance me without the housemaster’s 
permission. I did not realize how closely I was being watched, but ultimately 
I committed some trifling breach of discipline during ‘prep’. After the hour 
was over the prefect in charge gleefully hastened to the housemaster. He 
found mc there already. I got my licking; but there was a fine series of 
expulsions to balance it. Of course my action was technically indefensible; 
but after all, I had held my tongue uncomplainingly for months and it 
was only when they appealed to the housemaster to fight their battles that 
I appealed to him to fight mine.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 85

I may as well emphasize at this moment that I remained amazingly 
innocent. My study companion was actually the favourite ‘tart’ of the house; 
so much so, that he thereby added considerably to his income. But though I 
was aware of these facts, I had no conception whatever of what they implied.An anecdote illustrates this fact. It was the custom of our form master 
to remit twenty per cent of any number of lines that might be given one 
to write if they were delivered before the time appointed. It happened that 
I was set a number of lines by some other master and I handed in eighty 
per cent with the written remark, “Twenty per cent deducted as usual for 
premature delivery.’ He thought that I was ‘getting at him’, but on investi- 
gation I was acquitted; in fact, I had no idea of any ambiguity.

My life at Malvern made little impression on me. For the most part I 
was lost in my own thought and touched school life as little as I could. 
I made no real friends. I had no sympathy with the general brutality and 
refused to pander to it by making myself the favourite. The following 
story helps to illustrate my attitude.

Some of the prefects were twitting me with cowardice and proposed 
that I should prove my virtue by fighting Smith tertius, a boy much smaller 
than myself. I refused, observing that if I did not fight him I must pass for 
a coward, and if I did I should be accused of bullying, and probably be 
reported for fighting as well.

None of my ambitions were conncctcd with the school. I preferred to 
daydream of my plans for mountaineering in the holidays and to busy my- 
self with writing poetry. Memory has preserved fragments of two efforts.

The first:

‘Put not thy trust in princes.’ ’Tis a speech 
Might thee, O Gordon-Cumming, something teach.

It seems absurd that a boy of my age should take an interest in such matters 
and become so positive a partisan. But I had an ingrained hatred for the 
Hanoverian usurper and took for granted what I still believe to have been 
the fact, that the man who cheated was not Gordon-Cumming.

Of the second poem I retain:

Poor lady! whom a wicked jury's hate

In face of facts as iron as the grave

To which they would have doomed thee — bitter fate! 
Thee guiltless to the cruel hangman gave.Poor lady! whom a wicked jury's hate

In face of facts as iron as the grave

To which they would have doomed thee — bitter fate! 
Thee guiltless to the cruel hangman gave.

Shame on the judge who sees but half the facts! 
Shame on the nurse who private letters opes! 
But never shalt thou be forgot by us,

The pity of thy life’s so blasted hopes.

86 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Lady, hope on! All England takes thy part 
But a few bigots. Lady, then, take heart.

My sympathy with Mrs Maybrick nowise argues my belief in her innocence. 
She was admittedly an adulteress. I asked no further questions. The mere 
fact thrilled me to the marrow. Adultery being the summit of wickedness, 
its commission excuscd everything.

I made no intimate friendships. I did my work sufficiently well to avoid 
serious punishment, but without ambition. I took no interest in the Shake- 
speare prize, for which everybody had to enter, and had not read a line of 
the two plays prescribed, Romeo and Juliet and Richard II. But for some reason 
or other I got scared three days before the examination, got excused from 
games and worked so hard that I came out sixth in the school. I was able 
to quote several long passages accuratcly from memory. With me, it was 
always a question of the interest which I took in things. I had the makings 
of a sound classical scholar, but I could not bring myself to memorize 
Greck and Latin poetry. Stranger still, I could not master the rules of prosody. 
My most hostile critics admit that my technique and my sense of rhythm 
are unsurpassed; but the rulcs of scansion mcant nothing to me, because no 
one explained thcir connection with the way a poem should be read.I should have liked school life well cnough if it had not been for the 
bullying and the complete lack of intellectual companionship. I had no 
interest in games; my athletic ambitions were confined to climbing moun- 
tains. But at least there was no Christianity! and what morality there was 
was rather manly than otherwise. However, I was now old enough to match 
myself against my private tutors and found greater freedom with them 
than at school. I decided to leave and drew such a picture of the abomina- 
tions which went on, though I knew nothing about them or even what thcy 
were, that my mother refuscd to let me go back. I told her, she once reminded 
me, that ‘if Mr Huntingdon [the housemaster] knew what was going on 
in the house, it would break his heart’. Pure bluff! but the following term 
I was entered at Tonbridgc.

By this timc I had acquired a considerable facility in making the best of 
my advantages. I had in some ways much more experience of life than 
most boys of my age. My holidays, what with fishing, mountain climbing 
and running after girls, were full of adventures of one kind and another, 
in which I was always being thrown on my own resources. By the time I 
reached Tonbridge I had devcloped a kind of natural aristocracy. People 
were already beginning to be afraid of me and there was no question any 
longer of bullying. My health must have been very much better. 
Albuminuria breeds melancholy and destroys physical courage. I had also, 
no doubt, been subject to constant irritation duc to my phimosis and the

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 87

operation had relieved me. I was, thercfore, more or less ready to fight 
anybody that annoyed me. And people took good care not to do so.THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 87

operation had relieved me. I was, thercfore, more or less ready to fight 
anybody that annoyed me. And people took good care not to do so.

The atmosphere at Tonbridge was, moreover, much more civilized than 
at Malvern. Today it impresses me as having been on the namby-pamby 
side. There was at that time no trace of the marriage system since introduced 
and now said to be flourishing. ‘Mrs So-and-so’ was almost a term of deri- 
sion, while now it is exacted by its owner to show that he is not ‘one of 
those’. My best friend was a brother of C. F. G. Masterman. He was neither 
a sneak nor a hypocrite; but it gives an idea of the atmosphere.The glimpse of normal human life afforded by Archibald Douglas had 
rendered me completely sane as far as my conscious life was concerned. 
The problem of life was not how to satanize, as Huysmans would have 
called it; it was simply to escape from the oppressors and to enjoy the world 
without any interference of spiritual life of any sort. My happiest moments 
were when I was alone on the mountains; but there is no evidence that this 
pleasure in any way derived from mysticism. The beauty of form and 
colour, the physical exhilaration of exercise, and the mental stimulation of 
finding one’s way in difficult country, formed the sole elements of my 
rapture. So far as I indulged in daydreams, they were exclusively of a normal 
sexual type. There was no need to create phantasms of a perverse or un- 
realizable satisfaction. It is important to emphasize this point, because I have 
always appeared to my contemporaries as a very extraordinary individual 
obsessed by fantastic passions. But such were not in any way natural to me. 
The moment the pressure was relieved every touch of the abnormal was 
shed off instantly. The impulse to write poetry disappeared almost completely 
at such periods. I had not even any of the ordinary ambitions of young 
men. I was content to enjoy sport without wishing to attain eminence in 
it. It came natural to me to find ways up mountains which looked to me 
interesting and difficult. But it never occurred to me to match myself 
against other people. It was from purely aesthetic considerations that I 
climbed the gullies of Tryfan and Twll Du. This last climb landed me, as 
luck would have it, in a controversy which was destined to determine my 
career in a very remarkable manner.

99

It had never occurred to me that rock climbing, as such, might be a recog- 
nized sport. However, my mother and I were at the Sligachan Inn in Skye 
during the summer of 1892. I talked about my hill rambles with Sir Joseph 
Lister, who happened to be staying there, and asked him about the Coolins. 
He was kind enough to suggest to some real climbers who were staying 
at the hotel to include mc in their party the next day, and they were kind 
enough to take me up Sgurr-nan-Gillean by the Pinnacle Ridge. I found 
myself up against it; and realized at once that there was something more to 
be done than scrambling.I think it was the following summer that I was staying at a farm in 
Langdale and heard from the natives of the celebrated twenty-four hours’ 
walk. The idea is to climb the four highest fells, Scafell Pikes, Helvellyn, 
Skiddaw and Saddleback, in a day. I conceived a minor ridge walk and 
set out one moming at dawn from Langdale, climbed the Langdale Pikes, 
and followed the crest of the fells to Scafell Pikes. Then I crossed to Scafell 
by the Broad Stand; and, seeing the Deep Ghyll pinnacle, climbed that on 
my way to the summit of Scafell. It was a terrifically hot day over Lingmell 
and down into the valley to climb the screes of Great Gable. My attention 
was attracted by the Great Napes Needle and I climbed that. Thence I took 
the easiest way — the Needle ridge, or a gully, I forget which — to the summit 
of the mountain. I had become almost insane from heat, thirst and exhaus- 
tion; I could no longer walk, but crawled on hands and knees down to Sty 
Head Tarn, whose watcrs revived me to some extent. I struggled on home- 
wards and reached the top of Rossett Ghyll Pass shortly after nightfall. 
There was a bright moon, but I had a terrible time picking my way down 
the path. I must have been a little light-headed from exhaustion and therc 
was a Dantesque quality in the long climb among the blinding white patches 
of light and the jetty shadows. At the bottom of the pass I met a small 
rescue party who had just started out to look for mc, and reached home 
about eleven o'clock. It was, in its way, a remarkable performance for a boy.Another incident is less heroic but more amusing. My tutor had invited 
his sister to stay a few days at the farm at Langdale. One day I took her up 
the Langdale Pikes and found a quite decent bit of scrambling. Having no 
rope, I could only help her from below. She became scared and broke into 
a passionate monologue punctuated by screams. It consisted of variations 
on a triple theme. ‘I’m going to fall—Our Father which art in heaven—

88

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALBISTER CROWLEY 89

Don’t look at my legs.’ Ah me!— ‘I learnt about women from ’er.’ It was 
a startlingly complete revelation of the psychology of the well-brought-up 
young lady. Craven fear, prurient shame and narcotic piety: of such is the 
kingdom of Tennyson!

The glimpse that I had had of Wastdale attracted me and I went over 
there. One very wet morning I started to climb Scafell, chiefly with the 
idea of tackling some of the gullies which I had noticed in the Great Cliff. 
I had reached the Grass Traverse when I heard voices in the mist above 
me, and a few minutes later a powerful man with red whiskers and a rope 
about his shoulders came towards me from the cliff. It was J. W. Robinson, 
a local farmer, who had laid the foundation of Cumberland climbing. He 
offcred to show me some of the easier climbs. He had started that morning 
with a man named Owen Glynne Joncs. Jones had insisted on trying to 
climb Steep Gill, which is for the most part a shallow gully of smooth 
slabs set at a dangerous angle. There is no reliable hold for hand or foot 
on the main pitch, which is some eighty feet high. As torrents of icy water 
were pouring over the crags, it was shcer foolhardiness to attempt it. 
Robinson had refused to do so, whereupon Jones had quarrelled with him 
and they had parted.I had every reason, later on, to agree with Robinson. I was only once on 
a rope with Jones. It was on Great Gable; the rocks were plastered with 
ice and a bitter wind was blowing. In such conditions one cannot rely on 
one’s fingers. Our party proposed to descend the Oblique Chimney on the 
Ennerdale face. Robinson led the way down. The second man was a Pole 
named Lewkowitch, who was generally known as ‘Oils, fats and waxes , 
because of his expert knowledge of them and the personal illustration of 
their propertics which he afforded. He had no experience of climbing and 
weighed about sixteen stone. It was up to me, as third man on the rope, 
to let him slowly down. I had, of course, to descend little by little, the rope 
being too short to allow me to lower him from the top. I soon found myself 
in the most difficult part of the chimney, very ill placed to manipulate a 
dangling ox. I looked up to Jones, the |:st man, to hold my rope so that I 
could give full attention to Lewkowitch, and saw to my horror that he was 
maintaining his equilibrium by a sort of savage war dance! He was hampered 
by a photographic apparatus which was strapped to his back. Robinson had 
urged him to lower it separately. As nor Einstein nor the Blessed Virgin 
Mary was there to suspend the law of gravitation, I have no idea how we 
got to the bottom undamaged; but when we did I promptly took off the 
rope and walked home, utterly disgusted with the vanity which had en- 
dangered the party. Of course, there could only be one end to that sort of 
thing, and Jones ended by killing himself and three guides on the Zinal 
side of the Dent Blanche a few ycars later.

gO TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWNgO TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

The imbecility of the accident is shown by the fact that the fifth member 
of the party, who was quite a beginner, found himself—after the smash— 
alone on the precipice. The guides had begged Jones not to attempt the 
pitch from which hc fell, but he had persisted. The fifth man had hitched 
the rope over a rock and it had broken between him and the third guide. 
But this man, instead of going down to the valley, actually climbed the 
mountain, spent a night on the ridge and went down the next day to 
Zermatt.

The dangers of mountaineering are ridiculously cxaggerated. I have 
never known of any accident which was not due to ignorance or folly. 
Eckenstein, the greatest climber of his age, told me the same thing.

Jones obtained the reputation of being the most brilliant rock climber of 
his time by persistent self-advertisement. He was never a first-rate climber, 
because he was never a safe climber. If a handhold was out of his reach 
he would jump at it, and he had mct with several serious accidents before 
the final smash. But his reputation is founded principally on climbs which 
he did not make at all, in the proper scnse of the word. He used to go 
out with a couple of photographers and have himself lowered up and down 
a climb repeatedly until he had learnt its peculiaritics, and then make the 
‘first ascent’ before a crowd of admircrs. Now the essential difficulty of 
negotiating a pitch of any length is that one has to waste any amount of 
time and strength while one is finding out where the holds are. There is 
no credit at all in repeating a climb.

Another trick of Jones’s was to get his friends to make dates with other 
people to try various unclimbed places, and then to postpone the expedi- 
tion on various prcetexts until Jones had managed to negotiate it by the 
method above described.This conduct seemed to me absolutely unsportsmanlike. To prostitute 
the mountains to personal vanity is in fact something rather worse. And I 
had a taste of the malice of people’s envy in my first week. A personal issue 
arose from the very start. Robinson happened to ask me if I had climbed 
in Wales. I told him yes, and mentioned one particular place, the Devil’s 
Kitchen or Twll Du, which I had climbed by taking off my boots. I had no 
idea that the place was famous, but it was. It was reputed unclimbable. 
Almighty Jones himself had failed. I found myself, to my astonishment, 
the storm centre. Jones, behind my back, accused me flatly of lying. Quite 
unconsciously, however, I put mysclf in the right. I have always failed to 
see that it is necessary to make a fuss about one’s climbs. There is a good 
reason for describing a first climb. To do so is to guide others to enjoyment. 
One may also for the same rcason describe interesting variations of a climb, 
or its accomplishment by a solitary man. Now as it happened, Jones had 
been blowing his trumpet about the first ascent of Kern Knotts Chimney;

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY QI

the top pitch, however, he had failed to do unaided. He had been hoisted 
on the shoulders of the second man. I went to have a look at it and found 
that by wedging a stone into a convenient crack, and thus starting a foot 
higher up, I could get to the top, and did so. I recorded this in the Climbers’ 
Book; and the following day a man named H. V. Reade, possibly in a scep- 
tical mood, followed in my footsteps. He found my wedged stone, contemp- 
tuously threw it away, climbed the pitch without it, and recorded the feat. 
That was a double blow to Mr Jones. It was no longer a convincing argu- 
ment that if he couldn’t do a thing it couldn't be done.But this was not all. Scafell is separated from Scafell Pikes by a pass 
called Mickledoor; and on the Scafell side it is precipitous. The ridge of 
the pass is well-marked; by going down a little on one side one can climb 
the cliffs by the Broad Stand or Mickledoor Chimney, on the other side 
by the North Climb; and so on. But it had been the ambition of every climber 
to start from the exact top of the ridge. This was called the direct climb of 
Micklcdoor; and nobody had done it. That scemed to be a shame, so I did 
it. This time the fat was in the fire. My good faith was openly challenged 
in the smoking-room. I shrugged my shoulders, but offered to repeat the 
climb the following day before witnesses—which I accordingly did. I 
suppose I am a very innocent ass, but I could not understand why anyone 
calling himself human should start a series of malicious intrigues on such a 
cause of quarrel. I must admit that my methods were sometimes calculated 
to annoy; but I had no patience with the idiotic vanity of mediocrities. I 
took the Climbers’ Record to be a serious compilation and never wrote in 
it without the fullest sense of responsibility. So when I found a solemn Te 
Deum being chanted on account of the fifth ascent of the Pillar Rock by 
a ‘lady’, I took my dog to the top and recorded, ‘First ascent by a St Bernard 
bitch.’ When Jones, after the usual practice, had climbed Kern Knotts 
Crack, and three public school masters, who ought to have known better, 
said they had seen him do it, and it was a marvellous exhibition of skill 
and so on, I completed their remarks by a colophon: [Advt.] So much fuss 
was made about Kern Knotts Crack that Eckenstein took a young girl 
named Miss Nicholls and asked her to lead up it, which she did.Wastdale at that time was a rendezvous for many amusing characters as 
well as for some of the most brilliant men in England. Professor Milnes 
Marshall spent most of his holidays there. His death is one of the most curious 
accidents in the history of climbing. He had gone up to Deep Ghyll with 
some friends one bright winter day when the mountains were covered with 
snow. But, not feeling particularly well, he remained at the foot of Deep 
Ghyll while his friends climbed it, proposing to take photographs of them. 
He set up his camera on a snow slope no steeper than Ludgate Hill, a place 
entirely free from danger. But he fell and rolled gently down the slope,

92 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

making no effort to save himself, finally pitching over a small cliff, at the 
foot of which he was pickcd up dead. It was not a climbing accident at 
all, any more than the death of Norman Neruda, who died of heart failure 
when he happened to be in a rock chimney in the Dolomites.After a short time at Tonbridge my health again broke down. It was 
evident that boarding-school life was unsuited to me. It was arranged for 
me to live at Eastbourne with a tutor named Lambert, a Plymouth Brother. 
It is curious (by the way) to reflect that Henri Bernstein, the celebrated 
French dramatist, being also a ‘hope’ of the Brethren, was one of Lambert's 
pupils. I saw hardly anything of him. All I remember is that one day, for 
no reason that I can remember, we set to in the street and fought it out. 
At that time I knew no boxing. My one idea was to get his head ‘in chan- 
cery’ under my left arm and bash his face in with my right, which I suc- 
ceeded in doing, making no attempt to defend myself against his blows 
which he gave like a windmill on my skull. I remember acutely my surprise 
that they did not hurt me at all. During the day I worked at Eastbourne 
College in the chemical laboratory under Professor Hughes, and was 
privileged to assist that great man in several researches which go to prove 
that no two substances can combine in the absence of a third. It seems 
strange that I should have secn the bearings of this upon philosophy.One very significant incident is stamped upon my memory. I was spend- 
ing an evening with the professor and in the course of some discussion I 
said, “The Bible says so.’ These words dripped with the utmost irony from 
my lips. I meant to imply the bitterest contempt. I was not understood. 
He took me scriously and broke out into a passionate denunciation of the 
book. His manner was so ferocious that I was positively startled; and the 
interesting thing about the incident is this. I had been so long so alert lest 
I should be accused of disbelicf, that it almost took my breath away to hear 
a man in authority speak so openly.* I have explained how I had vainly 
sought supreme wickedness in the Church of England. I had even gone to 
so-called ‘high’ churches and on one occasion dared to enter the portals of 
the papists. But I had found nothing wicked even there. They all seemed 
to me to be tarred with the same brush; they were cold, heartless, dull, 
stupid, vapid and fatuous. The emotionalism of some and the sacramentalism 
of others seemed to me perfectly insincere. The fact is that (as my brother- 
in-law, Gerald Kelly, once told me, with astounding insight) I was the 
most religious man that he had ever met. It is the inmost truth. The instinct 
was masked for a long time, firstly by the abominations of the Plymouth 
Brethren and the Evangelicals; secondly, by the normal world. It only 
broke out at a subsequent period in any recognizable form. But when it

* I remember my first stolen visit to the Theatre — Little Christopher Columbus. Weren't all these 
people afraid of being found out?

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 93

did so, it became the axis of my being. As a matter of fact, even in these 
early days, my rcal need was spiritual satisfaction; and I was a satanist or 
a worldling (as the case may be) in the spirit of St Francis of Assisi.My poetry during this period was either amorous or satirical. A few of 
my efforts are preserved in Oracles. I quote the first and last verses from a 
lyric about a girl I mct on the sea front.

ELVIRA

Was thy fault to be too tender? 
Was thinc error to be weak?

Was my kiss the first offender 
Pressed upon thy blushing cheek?

Heaven at your accurst creation 
Shall become a hell of fire:

Death for kisses, and damnation 
For your love, shall God require!

What is worthy of note is what I may call the laus veneris point of view; 
which symbolizes my revolt and required many years to wear out. It seems 
as if I clung to the idca of the wickedness of love and the belief that it 
entailed divine retribution, partly perhaps because of my tendency to 
masochism, but consciously, at least, as adding actual value to sin. Pleasure 
as such has never attracted me. It must be spiccd by moral satisfaction. I 
was reluctant to abandon my intellectual belief in Christianity; if the whole 
thing was nonscnse, where was the fun of fighting it?

All this early poetry, moreover, tended to become worse instead of 
better as my mind developed. I explain this by reference to the analogy 
of such games as billiards. As soon as one begins to take lessons one spoils 
one’s natural game and one does not recover until the artificially acquired 
technique has been driven down into the subconscious by continual practice.

Apart from a very few very carly poems like “The Balloon’, all my 
writing is wooden, imitative and conscious, until I reached Cambridge, 
with hardly an exception.Apart from a very few very carly poems like “The Balloon’, all my 
writing is wooden, imitative and conscious, until I reached Cambridge, 
with hardly an exception.

At Eastbourne, I had still no interest in games. I was still prevented from 
anything like intimate association with my fellow creatures. I was still 
ignorant of the existence of English literature and I became a first-rate French 
scholar without reading any French literature. In my play time I was either 
hunting flappers on the front, playing chess or climbing Beachy Head. My 
chess was almost entirely book leaming and I was very much surprised to 
find myself the best player in the town. For although the local champion 
insisted on giving me pawn and move, I beat him so easily every time I met 
him that the odds might have been reversed without making much difference

94 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

to the result. I edited a chess column in the Eastbourne Gazette and made 
myself a host of enemies by criticizing the team. I wanted to arouse enthu- 
siasm, to insist on study and practice and to make Eastbourne the strongest 
town in England. The result fell short of breaking up the club, but not very 
far.I used my position as editor to criticize the formation of the team and 
anything clse that secmcd to ine wrong. I was absolutely unable to conceive 
that anyone should be anything but grateful for constructive criticism. I 
had moreover in my mind a firm conception of an editor as Jupiter tonans. 
I remember onc occasion on which I made myself particularly nasty. In a 
club tournament I had won all my games except two against a man named 
Martin, who had failed to play any of his games. At the same time he would 
not withdraw from the tournament. I tricd to deal with the situation in 
my weckly articles. I requested Mr Martin to begin to play his games; I 
implored him to begin to play his games; I pointed out to him the propriety 
of beginning to play his games, I showed him that the best traditions of 
England (which had made her what she was) spoke with no uncertain 
voice to the effect that hc should begin to play his games. All this settled 
down to a weckly chorus à la Cato, “Delenda est Carthago’. Whatever the 
subject of my discourse, it invariably ended, ‘Mr Martin has not yet begun 
to play his games.’

By this persistent nagging I got him to make an appointment with me 
and the game had to be adjourned in a position which was clearly won for 
me. He determined to avoid dcfeat by the simple process of refusing to 
make any further moves. I could have done a great deal with a brazier and 
a gimlet, but short of that there was no moving him; and his abstention 
prevented me from being proclaimed the winner. I published an analysis 
of the position, demonstrating that he was bound to lose and suggesting 
that he should either play it out or resign. But of course the result of my 
manoeuvres had simply been to drive him into blind fury and the situation 
was never settled. It simply lapsed by my departure for Switzerland.

1010

My grand passion was Beachy Head. The fantastic beauty of the cliffs can 
never be understood by anyone who has not grappled with them. Mountain 
scenery of any kind, but especially rock scenery, depends largely on fore- 
ground. This is especially the case when one has acquired an intimate know- 
ledge of the meaning, from the climber’s point of view, of what the cyes 
tell one. The ordinary man looking at a mountain is like an illiterate person 
confronted with a Greek manuscript. The only chalk in England which is 
worth reading, so to speak, is that on Beachy Head. This is due to the fact 
that it is relatively so much higher than other similar cliffs. Most chalk 
cliffs are either unbroken precipices, unclimbable in our present stage of 
the game, or broken-down rubble; but Beachy Head offers rock problems 
as varied, interesting and picturesque as any cliffs in the world. I began to 
explore the face. Popular ignorance had surrounded it with innumerable 
absurd rumours. The gencral opinion was that no one had ever climbed it. 
There was, however, a legend that it had once been done. I settled the 
point by walking up, smoking a pipe, with my dog (I had no woman avail- 
able) in nine and a half minutes from the beach to the coastguard station.

My cousin, Gregor Grant, was with me on my earlier climbs. These 
were the most obvious, but also the most important. Etheldreda’s Pinnacle 
—which I named after my dog, or a schoolgirl with whom I had stolen 
interviews, I forget which—was the first great triumph. The second was 
the Devil’s Chimney, and the third the Cuillin Crack. I have always refused 
till now to claim this climb, as I finished it with the moral support of a loose 
rope from above. It would be formidable enough were it of the best rock 
in the world: therc is one section which actually overhangs. I believe that 
these latter climbs have never been repcated.Chalk is probably the most dangerous and difficult of all kinds of rock. 
Its condition varies at every step. Often one has to clear away an immense 
amount of debris in order to get any hold at all. Yet indiscretion in this 
Operation might pull down a few hundred tons on one’s head. One can 
hardly ever be sure that any given hold is secure. It is, therefore, a matter 
of the most exquisite judgment to put on it no more weight than is necessary. 
A jerk or a spring would almost infallibly lead to disaster. One does not 
climb the cliffs. One hardly even crawls. Trickles or oozes would perhaps 
be the ideal verbs.

The unique character of the climbing led to an amusing incident. The

95

96 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

greatest rock climber in England, A. F. Mummery, published a short 
account of his work on the cliffs at Dover, where he lived. He stated that 
at more than twenty to thirty feet above sea-level no climbing was possible, 
and that practically all his climbs were traverses; that is, horizontal and not 
vertical. I wrote to him saying that my experience was precisely the opposite. 
All my climbing had been donc at greater altitudes, and that (with hardly 
an exception) my climbs were vertical. He wrote back rather superciliously 
to the effect that there were certainly grassy gullies which corresponded to 
my description, but they were not what he called climbing. I replied, 
thanking him and begging him to accept a few photographs of the grassy 
gullies under description. These showed the most formidable-looking pin- 
nacles in the British Islands, and vertical cracks as precipitous as anything 
in Cumberland. He wrote back immediately a warm letter of congratula- 
tion. It was evident that we had becn using the word ‘chalk’ to cover two 
widely different spccics of material.I published some of my records in the local newspapers with the idea of 
inspiring the natives with praiseworthy enthusiasm. Once again I had mis- 
judged humanity. All I got was a leading article beginning with the words, 
‘Insensate folly takes various forms.’ Another shock was to come. Cousin 
Gregor suddenly declared that he was engaged to be married and that he 
didn't think he had the right to climb any more on Beachy Head. My 
boyhood’s idol was shattered at a blow. I reccived my first lesson in what 
the religions of the world have discovered long since, that no man who 
allows a woman to take any placc in his life is capable of doing good work. 
(Similarly, men may be as foolish over dogs as old maids over cats.) A 
man who is strong enough to usc women as slaves and playthings is all 
right. Even so, there is always a danger, though it is difficult to avoid it. 
In fact, I don’t think it should be avoided. I think a man should train him- 
self to master what are commonly called vices, from maidens to morphia. 
It is undeniable that there are very few such men. Again and again I have 
had the most promising pupils give up the great work of their lives for 
the sake of some wretched woman who could have been duplicated in a 
Ten Cent Store. It doesn’t matter what the work is; if it is worth while 
doing, it demands one’s whole attention, and a woman is only tolcrable 
in one’s life if she is trained to help the man in his work without the slightest 
reference to any other interests socver. The necessary self-abnegation and 
concentration on his part must be matched by similar qualitics on hers. I 
say matched—I might say better, surpassed—for such devotion must be 
blind. A man can become his work, so that he satisfies himself by satisfying 
it; but a woinan is fundamentally incapable of understanding the nature of 
work in itself. She must consent to co-opcrate with him in the dark. Her 
self-surrender is, therefore, really self-surrender, whereas with him it isTHE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 97

rather self-realization. It is true that if a woman persists long enough in the 
habit, she will ultimately find herself therein. For woman is a creature of 
habit, that is, of solidified impulses. She has no individuality. Attached to 
a strong man who is no longer himself but his work, she may become a 
more or less reliable mood. Otherwise her moods change with her phan- 
tasms. But the most dominant mood of woman will always be motherhood. 
Nature itself, therefore, insures that a man who relies on a woman to help 
him is bucking the tiger. At any moment, without warning, her interest 
in him may be swept off its feet and become secondary. Worse—she will 
expect her man to abandon the whole interest of his life in order to look 
after her new toy. A bitch does not lose all her interest in her master just 
because she has puppies.

I found a new climbing companion on Beachy Head in a man named 
J. S. New. We worked out the possible climbs systematically and made a 
large-scale map of the cliff. I ultimately contributed an illustrated article on 
the subject to the Scottish Mountaineering Journal. But with the exception of 
Mr H. S. Bullock, and onc or two others who repeated a few of our climbs 
and made one or two new ones, little work has been done on the Head. 
Climbers gencrally seem to have come to the conclusion that it was altogether 
too dangerous. It must be admitted that, at any rate, it is very unpleasant. 
In wet weather the chalk forms a paste which clogs the boots and makes 
foothold impossible. In dry weather the dust takes possession of the eyes 
and throat. But for all that, many of my happiest days have been spent on 
the face.I must record a very strange phenomenon in connection with my adven- 
tures on Beachy Head. One summer day I went up with my mother and 
took her down to the grassy slopes (the Grass Traverse) which used to extend 
eastward from Etheldreda’s Pinnacle. I say ‘used to extend’, for since that 
time there has been an extensive landslide. It was rather a scramble for an 
old lady to reach them from the top of the cliff, but it could be done by 
descending a narrow gully called Etheldreda’s Walk. I put her in a comfor- 
table position where she could make a water-colour sketch, and went off 
to do some climbing on the Devil’s Chimney, which is some distance west 
of the pinnacle. The general contour of the cliff is here convex, so that I 
was entirely out of her sight, besides being a quarter of a mile away. Such 
breeze as there was was blowing from the south-west, that is, from me to 
her. I was trying to make a new climb on the west of the Devil’s Chimney 
and had got some distance down, when I distinctly heard her crying for 
help. At this time I had no acquaintance with psychic phenomena, yet I 
recognized the call as of this type; that is, I had a direct intuition that it was 
so. It was not merely that it scemed improbable that it could be normal 
audition. I did not know at the time for certain that this was impossible,

98 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN98 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

though it was afterwards proved to be so by experiment. I had no reason for 
supposing the danger to be urgent; but I rushed madly to the top of the cliff; 
along it and down to the Grass Traverse. I reached her in time to save her 
life, though there were not many seconds to spare. She had shifted her 
position to get a better view and had wandered off the traverse on to steep, 
dusty, crumbling slopes. She had begun to slip, got frightencd and done the 
worst thing possible; that is, had sat down. She had been slipping by inches 
and was on the brink of a cliff when I reached her. She had actually cried for 
help at the time when I heard her, as nearly as I could judge; but, as explained 
above, it was physically impossible for me to have donc so. I regard this 
incident as very extraordinary indecd. I have never taken much stock in the 
regular stories of pcople appearing at a distance at the moment of death and 
so on; nor does the fact of something so similar having actually happened 
to me make mc inclincd to believe such stories. I cannot offer any explana- 
tion, apart from the conventional magical theory that a supreme explosion 
of will is sometimes able to set forces in motion which cannot be invoked in 
ordinary circumstances.

To return to my subject. Despite the regrettable incident of impulsive 
humanitarianism above recorded, my associations with Beachy Head possess 
a charm which I have never known in any other district of England. My 
climbs there fulfilled all my ideals of romance, and in addition I had the 
particularly delightful feeling of complete originality. In other districts I 
could be no more than primus inter pares. On Beachy Head I was the only 
one—I had invented an entirely new branch of the sport.For a number of weeks I slept ina Mummery tent on one of the traverses. 
It was my first experience of camp life, which is, one thing with another, the 
best life I know. The mere feeling of being in the fresh air under the stars 
when one goes to slcep, and of waking at dawn because it is dawn, raises 
one’s animal life ipso facto to the level of poetry.

There have always been in me two quite incompatible personalities with 
regard to my judgment of men and in practical matters. One of them 
possesses great instinctive shrewdness partaking of cynicism; the other an 
innocence amounting almost to imbecility. Der reine Thor! In certain 
respects, this latter quality is calculated. Thus, I have always refused to believe 
that I am being cheated, cven when I know the facts perfectly well. I have 
deliberately made up my mind that it is not worth while to allow my purity 
to be contaminated by descending to the level of the people who are swind- 
ling me. In some matters again, I am genuinely unable to criticize; and so I 
take people at their face value, occasionally with disastrous results.

For instance, one of the most original characters that I have ever met was 
the Rev. T. C. V. Bastow, of Little Peatling Rectory, Lutterworth. It was the 
proud boast of this gentleman, who used to spend his vacations at Wastdale

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 99

Head, that he possessed a rudimentary tail; and though I was never favoured 
personally with a view of this distinction, he was credited with readiness to 
demonstrate the Darwinian theory to any earncst young anatomist who 
might be in the offing. He wandered about the crags with a three-pronged 
claw attached to twenty or thirty feet of rope, his theory being to throw it up 
the rocks till it caught somewhere, and then swarm up the rope. He gave 
himself the air of being a rock climber of the first rank and I never thought of 
doubting it.Now I had made the first solitary descent of the Ennerdale face of the 
Pillar Rock, a feat at that time considered theoretically impossible. He asked 
mc casually whether it was the sort of place that he could take his daughter. I 
did a sort of rule of three sum in my head. If poor little I, the beginner, 
could do it, a fortiori so could the great man, even with the handicap of the 
girl novice. As a matter of fact, he could not climb at all, and the delightful 
pair found themselves crag-fast.

Some ycars later I made a blunder of the same kind which resulted in a 
frightful tragedy. I was in Arolla in 1897* with Morris Travers and his 
younger brother. In Coolidge’s Guide therc is a record of the ascent of the 
Petite Dent de Veisivi by the gap facing Arolla. The local guides, however, 
unanimously denicd that this route had ever been done. The rocks below the 
gap, they said, were overhanging and werc impossible. We decided to test 
these statements, ascended the mountain by the ordinary way and came 
down by the route in question. The rocks do overhang, but the holds are so 
good that the climb is quite easy. We discussed the climb with a son of the 
celebrated Dr John Hopkinson, Edward, who was there with a large family. 
We said, quite truthfully, that there was no difficulty or danger for a 
responsible party; but he and three of his children attempted to repeat our 
climb and all were killed. A peculiarly English incident adds a touch of 
grotesque grimness to the story. The widow begged Travers, who was a 
member of the rescue party (I had left the valley), to allow her to take a last 
look at her husband. She had been brought up to fancy pictures of people 
lying in state — ‘calm and grand in Death’, and that sort of thing. As a matter 
of fact, all the remains had been brought down in one sack; no one could tell 
what was whose.This diffculty in understanding that professed climbers could be incurably 
incompetent culminated in the one great mistake of my mountaineering 
carecr. Despite the actual evidence of 1902 that Dr Jacot Guillarmod was 
utterly ignorant and untrustworthy, vain and obstinate, I consented to take 
him to Kangchenjunga, with the disastrous result to be recorded later.

There remains one remarkable incident of my climbing in Cumberland. I 
had been trying some new routes on the Pillar Rock one day, when I was

* See Collected Works, vol. I, p. 127.3

100 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

caught by a terrific thunderstorm. Luckily for me, as it turned out, I was 
soaked to the skin in ten minutes. Any further serious climbing being 
impossible, I started back to Wastdale. In doing this onc crosses the ridge of 
Pillar Mountain, along which runs a wire sheep fence. I crossed this; and, the 
storm increasing in violence, my attention was attracted by the little flames 
of lightning that played upon thc iron uprights. I forgot about my axe. The 
next thing I knew was that I had been knocked down. I can hardly say that 
I felt any definite electrical shock: but I knew what must have happened. I 
was seized by a curious mixturc of exhilaration and terror; and dashed down 
the face of the mountain at its steepest point, lcaping from rock to rock like a 
goat. I easily beat the record from thc summit to the hotel! Despite the intense 
concentration® necessary to jump down the dangerous crags, my conscious 
attention was absorbed by the magnificent spectacle of the cliffs of Scafell, 
framed in lurid purple storm clouds and literally ablaze with lightning; 
continuous and vivid to a degree that I have never since seen exccpt on one 
occasion near Madrid, when the entire sky was a kaleidoscopic network of 
flame for nearly two hours.

* But see The Book of Lies, cap. 32, ‘The Mountaineer’.

l1* But see The Book of Lies, cap. 32, ‘The Mountaineer’.

l1

In 1894 I had my first serious taste of the Alps. I went with my tutor to the 
Suldenthal in the Austrian Tyrol. I had discovered the Badminton Volume of 
Mountaineering.! I looked on it very much as I had been taught to look on 
the Bible. It says much for my innocence previously described, that despite the 
data already in my possession, I failed entirely to realize that the one book was 
as full of grotesque blunders and inaccuracies as the other. I arrived in Sulden 
with a deep reverence for the Alpine guide, and hastened to engage Joseph 
Pingerra, who was supposed to be the best in the valley. I was very shocked 
to find that it was customary in the Tyrol to go two on a rope instead of 
three, though in point of fact this was the only thing they knew about 
climbing. But I was amazed beyond measure to find that I was a much better 
rock climber than my guide. He did not know what rock climbing was, 
judged by Cumberland standards! I had no experience of snow and ice; so 
here, of course, I was the reverent disciple. Imagine my astonishment, then, 
when after two or three days Pingerra slipped and fcll on a perfectly easy 
snow slope. He was entirely unable to do anything to save himself and I had 
to pull him up on the rope. I retained my faith in Badminton by saying to 
myself that the guides in the outlying groups must be very poor examples. I 
engaged two other guides and started for the Kénigspitze, spending the night 
in a hut. In the morning the guides were drunk and unwilling to start, making 
absurd excuses about the weather. I had not sufficient self-confidence to 
tackle the Kénigspitze by myself; but I dismissed them, made a solitary 
ascent of the Eisscespitze, and thought the matter over. I was utterly 
disgusted and decided to Icarn ice and snowcraft by myself, as I had with 
rocks.A few days later 1 went out alone and made the first ascent of the Ortler by 
the Hintere Grat. The mountain had previously been climbed on this side; 
but the ridge had not been followed with the conscientiousness which was 
the rule in England. It took me six and a half hours to reach the summit.

My arrival created a profound sensation. Sitting on the top were an Ameri- 
can and a guide, who had come up by the easy way from the Paycrhiitte. The 
guide regarded my appearance as strictly supernatural; but the American 
feared not God, neither regarded man. He had been trying to persuade the 
guide to go down to Sulden by the Hintere Grat and the guide had cold feet.

My arrival changed the situation. Once assured that I was flesh and blood, 
the guide plucked up a little courage, which the American further stimulated

TO!

102 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

by a promise of additional dollars. As I had come up alone, the three of us 
could evidently go down together. I agreed to accept the responsible position 
of last man and we roped up accordingly. But we were no sooner started than 
the guide again lost whatever nerve he ever possessed. His employer had 
never been on a mountain before, but he had common sense and pluck; he 
behaved admirably in every respect; we half nursed and half chivvied that 
guide down that ridge. It was, of course, out of the question to follow the 
ridge, as I had just done, so that two or three thousand feet of the descent 
were accomplished by glissading down snow slopes. If I had been alone I 
could have got down by that route in under three hours. As it was, we took 
ninc and a half. But the next day the guide had no lack of nerve; he wanted 
me to pay him for his services! Nothing doing.I madc a number of other ascents in the district, for the most part alone, 
but once or twice with some chance-met English. My chief aim was to master 
the technique of snow and icc; and by dint of using my senses and my sense 
I found out most of the tricks of the trade in the course of the scason. I am 
particularly proud of having invented a pattern of Steigeisen, identical with 
that used by Oscar Eckenstein as far as the idea was concerned. The difference 
was that he, being an enginccr, had had them forged in accordance with 
mechanical principles, whereas I had entrusted the exccution of mine to a 
rotten firm with a grcat reputation in Alpine Club circles, whose ignorance of 
the elements of material and workmanship must have caused many ‘regret- 
table incidents’.In 1895 I felt myself fit to tackle the higher peaks of the Alps and went to 
the Little Scheideck. My first exploit was a solitary ascent of the Eiger. I 
started late and on the final ridge caught up with a ‘strong’ party of English 
with guides, the principal Herr being a charming clergyman from Japan, the 
Rev. Walter Weston. The guides were more or less drunk and frightened. 
They were trying to make some excuse for turning back; but shame stimu- 
lated their courage when I came up and we procceded to the summit. We 
all went down together; the guides professed themselves delighted with the 
surc-footed agility of my performance and said that I was ‘wie ein Führer’. A 
year before the compliment would have persuaded me that I had died and 
gone to heaven, but time had changed all that. I still clung pathetically to 
Badminton; I had merely reached the stage of praying pathetically to meet 
the good guides described in the book. I was still obsessed by the idea that it 
was suicidal to cross snow-covered glaciers without a rope. So I took a porter: 
he was quite willing to obey my orders implicitly, since I was regarded as a 
Wunderkind. We went up the Jungfrau by the Schneehorn-Silbcrhorn route, 
I leading up and descending last. But it was the same old story. The man 
couldn’t stand on a snow slope. I was constantly having to misuse valuable 
time in saving his worthless life.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 103THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 103

I began to reason the whole business out from the start. Mountaineering, I 
saw, was primarily a scientific problem. How, then, could the superstitious 
and ignorant peasants of the Alps master it or even attack it? There could be 
only one answer; they made no attempt to do so. Their craft was traditional; 
one man learnt from another by rule of thumb. Confront any guide with any 
mountain that he did not know by habit, and he was at sea. How was it, 
then, that the mountains had ever been climbed at all? And the answer to that 
was that the general standard of climbing was, given good weather condi- 
tions, altogether beneath contempt from the standpoint of the pionecrs in 
England and Wales. The ordinary way up any Swiss mountain is little 
more than a scramble. Eckenstein used to say that he would take a cow up the 
Matterhorn provided that he were allowed to tie its legs. And once, when an 
ex-president of the Alpine Club began to reply to this remark by mentioning 
that he had been up the Matterhorn, some tactless person interrupted, ‘Did 
they tie your legs?

Mummery, Collie and Hastings from England, with Eckenstein and one 
or two minor lights on the one hand, and Purtscheller, Blodig and others 
from Germany on the other, were setting up an entirely new standard of 
Alpine climbing. They were men of education and intelligence; they had 
studied the physical theory of mountain conditions; they had practised the 
various types of technique required to mcet these conditions in detail. They 
were doing climbs which had never been dreamt of by any Alpine guide. 
The first-rate amateur was to the professional as a rifleman to a man with a 
flint axe.In ’95 I was not yet aware of what was going on. I discovered independently 
the facts of the case. I found that I could go pretty well anywhere without the 
least danger or difficulty, whereas all the people I met were constantly on the 
brink of disaster. I began to think that solitary climbing was the safest form 
of the game. The one problem was the snow-covered glacier. I began to 
study that question by itself. I soon noticed that when I looked down on such 
a glacier from a ridge, I could see the covered crevasses quite plainly. They 
appeared as lines of shade. Descending to the glacier, I found that I was still 
able to detect the slight differences in illumination. So much for the theory. 
But the question still remained, ‘I see it, but can I cross it safely? My ex- 
perience with chalk helped to give me confidence. I was accustomed to 
estimate the breaking-strain of rotten material. Now, given a night's hard 
frost, it stands to reason that a bridge which has not fallen through by its 
own weight during the previous day would support my extra weight in the 
early morning. I began to test my theory, being, of course, careful to arrange 
my routes so as to avoid having to cross snow-covered glaciers after sunrise. 
I noticed, however, that a great deal of care was necessary to avoid accidents; 
and this made for slowness. There were also many other occasions on which

104 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

a second man would be a safeguard, and some when he might be of active 
assistance.104 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

a second man would be a safeguard, and some when he might be of active 
assistance.

The question of a third man is quite different. He diminishes the mobility 
of the party; the middle man is deprived almost completely of any freedom 
of action. Whenever the ground is so difficult that only one man can move 
at a time, a party of three takes not half as long again but twice as long as a 
party of two, since the operation of pulling in a section of rope is duplicated. 
The speed of a party means a great deal to its safety. As regards nightfall, 
weather conditions, and avalanches or falling stones, two is evidently much 
safer than three. Another point is that it is at least twice as hard to find two 
competent companions as it is to find one.

The combination of Mummery, Collie and Hastings could hardly happen 
again in a century. Mummery had a genius for rock climbing and an uncanny 
instinct for mountain problems in general. Collie was brilliant all round and 
had an absolute scientific knowledge of materials and a feeling for topo- 
graphy. Hastings was a tower of physical strength and endurance, an ideal 
second man cither as a hoist or an anchor. All three were accomplished 
technicians and had experience of every kind of ground and conditions.

In the absence of so miraculous a combination, the best thing to be hoped 
for was one other man who would possess all the qualities which one lacked 
oneself; and it was my supreme good fortune in 1898 to find what I sought in 
Oscar Eckenstein.

In the meantime I went on climbing in the Bernese Oberland during the 
summer of 1895. Certainly the Lord must have been leading me, for I hardly 
evcr went out on a mountain without striking some cpisode which directed 
my thoughts into the right channel.To return to psychology. It is hard to summarize the general effects of my 
queer education. But it was terribly uneven. In some respects I was a long 
way ahead of most boys of my age; in others I was little better than an 
imbecile. I was practically prevented from acquiring the habit of normal 
relations with other people. My associates were, for the most part, much 
older than myself.

But the one really disastrous feature was the attitude which I was compelled 
to assume about money. I was taught to expect every possible luxury. 
Nothing was too good for me; and I had no idea of what anything cost. It 
was all paid for behind my back. I was never taught that effort on my part 
might be required to obtain anything that I wanted; but on the other hand I 
was kept criminally short of pockct money lest I should spend it in some 
disgraceful way, such as buying books or tobacco, or spending it on even 
worse abominations such as theatres and women. (I was encouraged to keep a 
dog!) I had therefore no sense of responsibility in the matter of money. It

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 105THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 105

never occurred to me that it was possible to make it, and I was thus trained 
to be dependent to the point of mendicancy. The effect was, of course, 
disastrous. When I got to Cambridge I still had everything paid for me and in 
addition I found myself with unlimited credit which I could keep secret. 
When I came into my fortune a year later, I was utterly unprepared to use it 
with the most ordinary prudence, and all the inherent viccs of my training 
had a perfectly free field for their devclopment. Before, if I wanted to give a 
dinner party every day of the weck, I could do it, but if I wanted a little cash 
my only alternative to the card table was the pawnshop, till I came of age. 
After that, it was simply a question of writing a cheque, which gave me no 
idea of the nature of the transaction involved. I doubt whether any one in 
history was ever furnished with such a completely rotten preparation for the 
management of practical affairs.My residence at Eastbourne broke up very suddenly. During the whole 
of my adolescence I had taken the romantic point of view of love; and I 
found that the universal practice was for elder pcople to interfcre in the 
affairs of their juniors. Two people could not decide to marry without 
rousing a hurricane. There was never any exception. Engagements were 
always being made and broken on unintelligible religious grounds. The family 
of the Lamberts was no exception to this. The eldest daughter was an acid old 
maid in the late twenties; the youngest was a hysterical monster of sup- 
pression. The middle girl was beautiful, voluptuous and normal. She was not 
sufficiently intelligent to revolt openly against her family; but her human 
instincts told her that something was wrong and that she had better get out 
of it. She was in love with a quite suitable young man and engaged to him on 
probation. The question was whether he would or wouldn’t join the Ply- 
mouth Brethren. Naturally, the more he saw of them the less he liked them 
and he ultimately made up his mind to stand by the church of his fathers. On 
announcing this desolating decision he was overwhelmed with abuse and 
thrown out of the house. His fiancée was forbidden to communicate with 
him in any way, and to all intents and purposes imprisoned. I offered to 
arrange for correspondence with a view to an early elopement. But I couldn't 
stand the continuous abuse and ill-treatment which was the portion of the 
unfortunate girl. The family literally foamed at the mouth on every oppor- 
tunity. Meals were a poisoned whirlwind. She was constantly reduced to 
tears and perhaps the happiest time she had was when she was actually being 
beaten. I ought to have conducted my intrigues with greater patience, no 
doubt, but it got on my nerves too much. One morning at breakfast I said 
about a millionth part of what I thought and the family started screaming. It 
was as if they had been attacked by collective mania. Everything was 
thrown at me; they went for me with claws and fists. They were too blind 
with rage to know what they were doing. I simply knocked their heads106 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

together and walked out of the house. When I though: the atmosphere had 
had time to dissipate I returned with the intention of carrying out a rescue for 
the distressed damsel. They were too much scared to oppose me and I 
begged her to come away at once and go to her ex-fiancé’s family. But she 
could not summon up courage to do it. The opportunity went by; and later 
in the afternoon my Uncle Tom, summoned by telegram, came to fetch me 
away from the accursed spot.

The incident had a wholesome effect upon my own family. They had 
failed to break my spirit and begun to realize that I had reached the stage when 
I could make as much trouble for them as they could for me. The best thing 
they could do was to let me go my own way. I had won the fight; and the 
evidence of my triumph was my season in the Bernese Oberland on my own 
responsibility. I was recalled by a telegram. They had decided to let me go to 
Trinity; and the entrance examination was only a week away. I went up to 
Cambridge and passed it without difficulty, though I had had no opportunity 
of preparing the set classics. But I followed Browning’s advice to ‘greet the 
Unseen with a cheer’: my real knowledge of Greek and Latin enabled me to 
give renderings, far above the average, of unfamiliar passages. I could never 
adapt myself to the sheep-system of mnemonic ‘learning’. In October I 
entered the university, taking rooms at 16 St John’s Street. From that 
moment begins an entirely new chapter in my life.

1212

When I went up to Cambridge in the October term of 1895, I had the sensa- 
tion of drawing a long deep breath as one does after swimming under water 
or (an even better analogy) as one docs aftcr bracing oneself against the pain 
inflicted by a dentist. I could not imagine anything better in life. I found 
myself suddenly in an entirely new world. I was part of the glorics of the 
past; and I made a firm resolution to be one of the glories of the future. I 
should like the haunted room over the Great Gate of Trinity to be turned 
into a vault like that of Christian Rosencreutz to receive my sarcophagus. 
I must admit that I don’t know of much else in England of the works 
of man which I would not make haste to destroy if the opportunity occurred. 
But Trinity, except New Court and Whewell’s Court, is enough for any 
poet to live and die for.

I remember being amazed in latcr years when my patriotism was doubted. 
I wasn’t going to have ‘Eintritt Verboten’ put up over the Great Gate with a 
Prussian sentry to enforce it. I am perfectly aware that I am irrational. The 
traditions of England are intertwincd inextricably with a million abuses and 
deformitics which I am only too eager to destroy. But all Englishmen keep 
their brains in watertight compartments. It would be a comic degradation 
to make Trinity the headquarters of the Rationalist Press Association. But at 
the time I had not seen the logical incompatibility of my various positions. 
Shakcspeare’s patriotism in John of Gaunt’s dying speech and Henry V 
appeals directly to my poetic sense.

I am quite prepared to die for England in that brutal, unthinking way. 
‘Rule, Britannia’ gets me going as if I were the most ordinary music-hall 
audience. This sentiment is not interfered with by my detestation of the 
moral and religious humbug which onc is expected to produce at moments 
of national crisis. My patriotism is of the blatant, unintelligent variety,

popularized by Kipling. I like the old rime:popularized by Kipling. I like the old rime:

Two skinny Frenchmen, onc Portugee, 
One jolly Englishman lick ’em all three.

But I can find no moral excuse for my attitude. I am an animal with a family 
and a country. To hell with everybody! This animal is prepared to use its 
brains and its force as stupidly and unscrupulously as the Duke of Wellington. 
It is not convinced by its own philosophical opinions, which condemn 
patriotism as parochialism, regard war as immoral savagery and cconomic

107

108 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

insanity, and consider public opinion and its leaders as the bleating of sheep, 
huddling into their fold at the barking of mongrel dogs.

The atmosphere of Cambridge formed an admirable background for my 
state of mind. I saw myself as a romantic character in history. The Church of 
England, as represented by my Uncle Tom, had seemed a narrow tyranny, 
as detestable as that of the Plymouth Brethren; less logical and more hypo- 
critical. My Uncle Jonathan was a sound churchman; but he kept his religion 
to himself and went his own triumphant way in the world, keeping 
ecclesiastical discipline at arm’s length as far as he himself was concerned. He 
was prima facie one of the saved, whenever he troubled to think about it, no 
doubt; but in practice the Church of England was simply a machine for 
keeping the lower classes in their proper place. At Trinity it was the same 
thing. Christianity was the official religion with which it was convenient to 
comply, just as it is convenient to go to a good tailor. It was, in short, a 
political paganism.I don’t suppose that I appreciated this fact at the time, in that way. My 
attitude was determincd by the unquestionable beauty of ecclesiastical 
architecture and the comparative dignity of the ritual. But when I discovered 
that chapel was compulsory I immediately struck back. The junior dean 
hallcd me for not attending chapel, which I was certainly not going to do, 
because it involved early rising. I excused myself on the ground that I had 
been brought up among the Plymouth Brethren. The dean asked me to come 
and see him occasionally and discuss the matter, and I had the astonishing 
impudence to write to him that ‘the seed planted by my father, watered by 
my mother’s tears, would prove too hardy a growth to be uprooted even by 
his eloquence and learning’. It sounds like the most despicable hypocrisy, but 
it was pretty good cheek, and I had madc up my mind that I would not be 
interfered with. I regarded any attempt to control my actions as an impertin- 
ent intrusion and I was not going to waste timc in taking any but thc easiest 
way out.I entered for the Moral Science Tripos with the idea that it would help me 
to learn somcthing about the nature of things. I don’t know why it should 
have interested me. It must have been my subconscious will speaking. In any 
case, I was profoundly disgusted to find that political economy was one of the 
subjects. I attended the first lecture; the professor told us that the subject was 
a very difficult one because there were no reliable data. It is easy to imagine 
the effect of such a statement on a boy who had been trained in the exactitude 
of mathematics and chemistry. I closed my notebook and never attended 
another lecture. My tutor naturally called me to account, but by great good 
fortune he was a man of extraordinary ability — Dr A. W. Verrall. He accep- 
ted my plea that my business in life was to study English literature. He was, 
indeed, most sympathetic. He knew only too well that the university curricu-

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 109

lum afforded no opportunities. He knew, too, that my school knowledge was 
amply sufficient to take mc through the university examinations without 
my doing any work for them. In fact, during my three years I only did one 
day’s work for the university, and that consisted in employing a boy to read 
through a translation of a Greek play while I followed it in the text. I got 
either a first or second class in every subject.One of the dons at Pembroke, a clergyman named Heriz Smith, ran a sort 
of secret cult which was disrespectfully called by outsiders the Belly-banders. 
There were said to be seven degrecs of initiation, in the highest of which the 
candidate was flagellated. I took the first degree out of curiosity. It made so 
little impression on me that I have altogether forgotten what took place. I 
remember that I was alonc in the man’s room with him. He blindfolded me. 
I waited for something to happen; it did not. I was, of course, utterly unable 
to divine what purpose might lic behind the scheme. It was, of course, 
looked upon as cant by the man’s own colleagues, who probably presumed 
certain undesirable featurcs.

I am rather sorry now that I did not continue. There may have been 
nothing in it beyond sensuous mysticism, but for all I know Heriz Smith may 
have developed a method of psycho-analysis of quite possibly great value. I 
am inclined to think that the most scientific and reliable way of exploring 
people’s unconscious minds would be to watch their reaction to a well- 
thought-out series of unfamiliar circumstances. One could compare their 
respective qualities, such as will-power, patience, dignity, courage, imper- 
turbability, and so on. Such data should be of great use in answering the 
question, ‘Wherewithal shall a young man mend his ways?’I was very put out by finding, as a first ycar man, that Hall was at half-past 
eight. I objected to my evenings being cut into by dining so latc and soon 
acquired the habit of having all mcals sent in from the kitchen. I was thus 
almost totally dissociated from the corporate life of the college. The only 
institution which interested me was the debating society, the Magpie and 
Stump. But I could not take even this seriously. It seemed to me absurd 
for these young asses to emit their callow opinions on important subjects. I 
was only intercsted in ‘rag’ debates. I remember on one occasion that the 
suggestion had been madc by a committee inspired by one of the tutors, the 
eminent mathematician, W. W. Rouse Ball, to establish a junior common- 
room. My contribution to the discussion was to say that ‘this proposal seems 
to me to be all Ball’s.’ (An even happier moment was in a debate on a 
proposal to institute a passion play in England, when Lord Kilmarnock said 
te would certainly be a popular attraction to hear Arthur Roberts say 
‘I thirst.’)

My three years were determincd by the influence of a fourth year man 
named Adamson, whom I think I met at the chess club. He started to talk to

IIO TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWNMy three years were determincd by the influence of a fourth year man 
named Adamson, whom I think I met at the chess club. He started to talk to

IIO TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

me about English literature. For the first time I heazd the name Shelley. 
Wie gesagt, so gethan. Nothing else seemed to me worth while but a thorough 
reading of the great minds of the past. I bought all the classical authors. 
Whenever I found a reference of one to another I hastened to order his 
works. I spent the whole of my time in reading. It was very rare that I got to 
bed before daylight. But I had a horror of being thought a ‘smug’; and what I 
was doing was a secret from my nearest friends. Whenever they were about 
I was playing chess and cards. In the daytime I went canoeing or cycling. I 
had no occupations which brought me into close touch with any great body 
of undergraduates. I even gave up the habit of going round to see people, 
though I was always at home to anyone who chose to call. I was not interested 
in the average man; I cultivated the freak. It was not that I liked abnormal 
people, it was simply the scientific attitude that it is from the abnormal that 
we learn.

Most people of this disposition are readily carried away into anti-social 
channels. But with me this was not the case. I dropped my subscription to the 
boat club because I was getting nothing out of it; but I was always wildly 
enthusiastic about the success of the boat. I have always had a passionate 
yearning for mankind, wholesale and retail, but I cannot endure to have them 
anywhere around. It is a very peculiar psychology; yet it is frequently found 
among poets. We are lonely and suffer intensely on that account. We are 
prepared to love any and every specimen of humanity in himself, for him- 
self, and by himself; but even a dinner party gets on our nerves.It is perhaps part of the psychology of sensitiveness. We cannot bear 
having our corners knocked off, and at the same time we are so well aware of 
the intense suffering of isolation that we long to lose ourselves in a crowd at a 
football match. I can be perfectly happy as an unknown individual in a revel, 
from a political meeting to a masked ball; but inevitably one’s unique 
qualities draw attention to one; the cruel consciousness of self is reawakened, 
one becomes utterly miserable and flees to the ends of the earth to be rid of 
one’s admirers. A certain coarseness is inseparable from popularity and one is 
therefore constantly driven away from the very thing one needs most. It is a 
quasi-electrical phenomenon. One can only find satisfaction in intimate 
union with one’s opposite.

This fact explains very largely the peculiar nature of the love affair of great 
men. They cannot tolerate their like. Their superiority is recognized as the 
cause of their pain, and they assuage their pain by cultivating people to whom 
that superiority means nothing. They deliberately seek the most degraded 
and disgusting specimens of women that exist. Otherwise, they brutalize 
themselves by addiction to drink and drugs. The motive is always the same; 
to lose consciousness of their Promethean pangs.

I must here point out that the social system of England makes it impossible

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II!I must here point out that the social system of England makes it impossible

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II!

for a young man of spirit and intelligence to satisfy his nature with regard to 
sex in any reasonable way. The young girl of position similar to his own is 
being fattened for the market. Even when his own situation makes it possible 
for him to obtain her he has to pay an appalling price; and it becomes more 
difficult than ever for him to enjoy female companionship. Monogyny is 
nonsense for any one with a grain of imagination. The more sides he has to 
his nature, the more women he necds to satisfy it. The same is, of course, true, 
mutatis mutandis, of women. A woman risks her social existence by a single 
cxpcriment. A young man is compelled by the monogamic system to develop 
his character by means of corrupt society vampires or women of the lower 
classcs, and though he may learn a great deal from these sources, it cannot 
but be unfortunate that he has no opportunity to learn from women of his 
own birth, breeding, education and rank in society.Now, monogamy has very little to do with monogyny; and should have 
less. Monogamy is only a mistake because it leaves the excess women un- 
satisfied and unprovided for. But apart from this, it provides for posterity, 
and it is generally recognized that this is the crux of all practical arguments on 
the subject. But the defect of monogamy, as generally understood, is that it is 
connected with the sexual appetite. The Practical Wisdom of the Astrologers 
has made this clear. The Fifth House (love, children) has nothing to do with 
the Seventh (marriage, lawsuits, public enemies). Marriage would lead to 
very little trouble if men would get rid of the idea that it is anything morc 
than a financial and social partnership. People should marry for convenience 
and agree to go their separate ways without jealousy. It should be a point of 
honour for the woman to avoid complicating the situation with children by 
other men, unless her husband be willing, which he would be if he really 
loved her. It is monstrous for a man to pretend to be devoted to securing his 
wife’s happiness and yet to wish to deprive her of a woman’s supreme joy: 
that of bearing a child to the man whom she desires sexually, and is therefore 
indicated by nature as the proper father, though he may be utterly unsuitable 
as a husband. In most cases this would be so, for it must obviously be rare 
that a man with a genius for paternity should also possess a talent for domesti- 
city. We have heard a great deal in recent ycars of the freedom of women. 
They have gained what they thought they wanted and it has availed them 
nothing. They must adopt the slogan, “There shall be no property in human 
flesh.’ They must train men to master their sexual selfishness, while of course 
allowing them the same freedom as they themselves will enjoy. The true 
offences against marriage arise when sexual freedom results in causing injury 
to the health or estate of the partner. But the sentimental wrong of so-called 
infidelity is a symptom of the childishness of the race.Among artists, the system here advocated has always becn more or less 
in full swing. Such societies exist in circumstances highly inimical to a

II2 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

satisfactory life. Financial considerations alone make this obvious; yet it is 
notorious that such people are almost uniformly happy. There is no revolt 
against the facts of life, because there is no constraint. The individual is 
respected as such and is allowed to act as he or she likes without penalty 
or even reproach. Only when selfish or commercial considerations arise do 
we find catastrophe.

It is commonly supposed that women themselves are the chief obstacle 
to such an arrangement. But this is only because they have been drilled 
into thinking that the happiness and well-being of the children depend upon 
their supporting the existing system. When you tackle a woman on the 
subject she pretends to be very shocked; and hysterically denics the most 
obvious facts. But she wilts under cross-examination and agrees with the 
above conclusions in a very short timc. For women have no morality in 
the sense of the word which is ordinarily understood in Anglo-Saxondom. 
Women never let ideals interfere with thcir practical good sense. They are 
also influenced by selfishness; it is natural to them to put the interests of 
their children before their own. Men, on the other hand, are hard to con- 
vince. When forced to analyse the situation, they arrive not at a reason but 
at a prejudice, and this is purely the brainless bestial lust for exclusive 
possession.Anthropology proves these theorems thoroughly. The first step in civili- 
zation is to restrain women from infidelity. The institutions of the pardah, 
sati and the marriage laws all show that men think that women must be 
kept under lock and key, whereas women have always realized that it is 
impossible and undesirable to prevent men from taking their happiness 
where they find it. The emancipation of women, therefore, depends entirely 
upon leaving them free to act as men do. Their good sense will prevent 
them from inflicting the real wrongs; and besides, their complete indepen- 
dence and happiness will encourage them in nobility and gencrosity.

We already see, in America, the results of the emancipation of women 
from the economic fetter. There is an immense class of bachelor girls (and 
of married women whose husbands are strictly business machines) who 
pick up men with the same nonchalance as the young ‘blood’ picked up 
women in my time at Cambridge.

I found myself, from the very beginning of my university carcer, urged 
by circumstances of every sort to indulge my passion in every way but the 
right one. My ill-health had prevented me from taking part in the ordinary 
amusements of the public school boy. My skill in avoiding corporal punish- 
ment and my lack of opportunity for inflicting it had saved me from 
developing the sadistic or masochistic sides to my character. But at Cam- 
bridge I discovered that I was of an intensely passionate nature, physio- 
logically speaking. My poctic instincts, further, transformed the most sordid

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II}THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II}

liaisons into romance, so that the impossibility of contracting a suitable and 
serious relation did not worry me. I found, moreover, that any sort of 
satisfaction acted as a powerful spiritual stimulus. Every adventure was the 
direct cause of my writing poetry. In the periods of suppression my brain 
had been completely clogged; I was as incapable of thought of any kind 
as if I had had the toothache.

I have a genuine grudge against the system on this account. Whole months 
of my life, which might have been profitably spent in all sorts of work, 
were taken up by the morbid broodings of the unsatisfied appetite. Repres- 
sion is as mentally unwholesome as constipation, and I am furious, to this 
hour, that some of the best years of my life, which should have been spent 
in acquiring knowledge, were sterilized by the suffocating stupor of pre- 
occupation with sex. It was not that my mind was working on the subject; 
it was simply unable to work. It was a blind, horrible ache for relief. The 
necessities of men in this respect vary enormously. I was, no doubt, an 
exceptional case. But I certainly found even forty-eight hours of abstinence 
sufficient to dull the fine edge of my mind. Woe unto them by whom 
offences come! The stupidity of having had to waste uncounted priceless 
hours in chasing what ought to have been brought to the back door every 
evening with the milk!

Cambridge is, of course, an ideal place for a boy in my situation. Prostitu- 
tion is to all intents and purposes non-existent, but nearly all the younger 
women of the district are eager to co-operate in the proper spirit—that of 
romance and passion.There is thus little trace of public school faute de mieux paederasty: it 
survives only in very small ‘aesthetic’ coteries, composed mostly of congeni- 
tal perverts, and in thcological circles, where fear of scandal and of disease 
inhibits natural gratification. Oxford, of course, is different, chiefly, I believe, 
owing to the great Balliol tradition of statesmanship. The idea secms to be 
that intrigues with women are more dangerous than useful to a rising 
politician: while on the other side of the fence the state of the law supplies 
one with a pull on one’s intimates on the Bench or in the Privy Council 
which is only the stronger because it is not, and never can be, used.

13

Till the Great Gate of Trinity opened mc the way to freedom I had always 
been obsessed more or less cither by physical weakness or the incubus of 
adolescence. I had never known what it was to be able to work frecly and 
gladly. Now, however, I was able to give myself with absolute concentra- 
tion to literature and I read everything important in the language with the 
utmost thoroughness. For example, I read the whole of the writings of 
people like Carlyle, Swift, Coleridge, Fielding, Gibbon, and so on. In this 
way I obtained a much more comprehensive idea of these men than if | 
had, as people usually do, picked out the masterpieccs.I was very anxious that my style should not be influenced by my con- 
temporaries, and also not to waste myself on anybody who had not stood 
the test of time. I made it a rule to rcad no one who had not been dead for 
fifty years, unless brought under my notice in some special way. For example, 
I could not avoid Swinburne, as onc of my friends was crazy about him, 
and I could not doubt, after the first acquaintance, that he was a classic. 
Similarly, I allowed myself to read Sir Richard Burton, because The Arabian 
Nights was an cstablishcd masterpiece and his was the best translation. I also 
read a good deal of French literature and all the best Greek and Latin authors. 
But my peculiar temperament madc me balk at one or two fences. I had 
certain innate ideas about literature; I say innate because I cannot imagine 
on what grounds I formed them. Thus I could not tolerate the idea of a 
novel exceeding a certain length, with the result that I have never read a 
page of Samuel Richardson. It is easier to understand the objection which 
I had to what I thought gossip. I have never read Boswell and have never 
been able to bring myself to face the average memoir. With regard to 
history* again, I demanded that the subject should be important. I did not 
see why I should bother my head about the Crimean War. I studied philo- 
sophy and kindred subjects with the greatest enthusiasm; but resented the 
form in which it was set forth by such people as Plato. It seemed to me that 
the argument of any of Plato’s dialogues might have been presented much 
more clearly and cogently in about a tenth of the space. I made a very 
thorough study of logic as being my critical apparatus.

It is hard to say what motive impelled mc to work so desperately hard 
as I did. Much of the work was anything but pleasant; and at the time, noIt is hard to say what motive impelled mc to work so desperately hard 
as I did. Much of the work was anything but pleasant; and at the time, no

* There is no such thing as history. The facts, even werc thcy available, are too numerous to 
grasp. A selection must be made; and this can only be one-sided, because the selector is enclosed 
in the same network of time and space as his subject.

114

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IIS

less than now, it appeared quite uscless. But I had a strong sense of duty 
about it. I think the idea was mostly to make sure that I knew everything 
that there was to be known, and incidentally to avoid the possibility of 
plagiarism. There was a certain tinge of vanity in the matter as well. I 
thought it shameful to leave anything unread. I was influenced by Ruskin’s 
imbccile remark that any book worth reading was worth buying, and in 
consequence acquired books literally by the ton.

My plan of going from each author to those whom he quoted had a 
great advantage. It established a rational consecution in my research; and 
as soon as I reached a certain point the curves became re-entrant, so that 
my knowledge acquired a comprehensiveness which could never have been 
so satisfactorily attained by any arbitrary curriculum. I began to understand 
the real relation of onc subject to another. I think I must have unconsciously 
askcd myself which subject treated of reality in the most intimate and 
ultimate sense. I was, of course, far from the conception that all truth is 
equally important, or that no truth can by itself cover the whole ground of 
existence. My tendency was to discard certain types of research as im- 
material. I gradually got the idea that the thing I was looking for was 
abstruse; and one of the results of this was to induce me to read the literature 
of alchemy. It is perhaps natural for a young man to confuse obscurity with 
profundity.With regard to the choice of a profession, I decided on the Diplomatic 
Service. It seemed to me to afford the greatest opportunities for worldly 
enjoyment, while at the same time demanding the highest qualities of mind. 
The subtlety of intrigue has always fascinated me. It is very curious that 
this should have been the case, in view of my master passion for truth and 
my relentless determination to tell it without regard for consequences. The 
obstacle to my success in the preliminary canter was that I had no aptitude 
whatever for learning languages. I could master the grammar of a language 
in a few hours; but I was impatient of acquiring the vocabulary. Genders 
and inflections irritated my sense of simplicity. It is also difficult for me to 
acquire a language by ear, partly because my hearing is not particularly 
acute, and partly because I resent any conversation whatever which does 
not deal with matters of prime importance. The early stages of learning a 
language are, therefore, agonizing.

I had been advised with regard to the fourth language required for the 
examination not to take Italian, because so many people spoke it so perfectly, 
or Spanish, because it was considered the easiest way into the service, but 
Russian, on account of its extreme difficulty, and because the knowledge of 
it made one eligible for appointment to the most interesting and brilliant 
court in Europe. This led to my going to St Petersburg, a journey which 
worked wonders in enlarging my outlook on the world.

116 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN116 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

The passion for travel was already very strong in mc. Home was my idea 
of hell; and London itself had a sordid aspect which never appealed to me. 
The idea of wickedness in London is connected with that of shamc, and 
besides this there are certainly excellent reasons for a poct to feel unhappy 
there. To begin with, I can’t stand the climate. I have known rare days in 
May and June when youth pays a fleeting visit to town, when the sunlight 
excites and the breeze braces one. It is this idea of the Young Dionysus with 
which I am in love. I always feel myself as about eightccn or twenty; I 
always look at the world through those eyes. It is my constant sorrow that 
things do not always accommodate themselves to that point of view; and 
it is my cternal mission to redeem the universe to that state of intoxicated 
innocence and spiritual sensuality.

I bring ye wine from above

From the vats of the storied sun. 
For every one of ye love,

And life for every one.?

The air of London is damp and depressing. It suggests the consciousness of 
sin. Whether one has a suite in the Savoy or an attic in Hoxton, the same 
spiritual atmosphere weighs upon the soul.

To a poct, moreover, the artistic side of London is the abomination of 
desolation. The plays are commercialized either for sentimentality or porno- 
graphy. There is something uncomfortable in going to see a play by Shake- 
speare or Ibsen. Actors and spectators alike seem to be engaged in a dreary 
ritual. Grand opera is even worse. Covent Garden patronizes Wagner; he 
is an excuse for the display of diamonds. I shall never forget my first ex- 
perience of Continental opera: Lohengrin at Stockholm. The atmosphere 
was absolutely natural; people had gone there because they really liked the 
music. I was transported into my own idcal world of love and melody. 
The caresses of my companion were the overflowing of ecstatic passion. 
Sin had been abolished, I was back in Eden.In London one cannot even go to the National Gallery or the British 
Museum with a pure heart as one goes to the Louvre or the Prado. One 
cannot get away from the sense that one is performing an act of piety.

Concerts are even morc dreadful than the opera. The surroundings are 
invariably bleak; one feels that the artist is doing it on purpose. Singing 
and playing demand background. Singing is the natural expression of human 
emotion, the joy of youth and life as connected with the landscapes of 
Corot and Gauguin, or with the interiors of Teniers. Elaborate instrumental 
music asks for appropriate architecture, not necessarily that of the cathedral. 
Music should have its own temples. London concert halls are blasphemous 
and obscenc.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II7THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY II7

Before the cinema—the panorama. The camera obscura and the magic 
lantern were the popular scientific wonders of the period. Some nameless 
pompier had sluiced I do not know how many acres of canvas with a repre- 
sentation of Niagara. They built a pavilion to house it. One was supposed 
to be standing on Goat Island—in fact, one was rather the goat—and one 
walked round a vast gallery and inspected each segment of the waterfall in 
turn. In due course everyone had seen it and the question was what to do 
with the building. They turned it into a palais de glace with real ice. I, always 
keen on skating, bought a tickct for the season. The convention was for the 
ordinary skater to swing round and round the outside, whilc the experts 
performcd their evolutions in the centre. At that time I was bent on learning 
the outside forward loop, which involves raising the unemployed lcg very 
high until you discover the knack. Absorbed in this labour I failed to observe 
the Duke of Orlcans, a glaring girl on either arm. He swerved, swanking, 
out of the ruck and collided with me. We both sat down very hard, but I 
on the point of his skate to the detriment of my much prized perineum. 
Being then a perfect young fool, as I am now a perfect old onc, I supposed 
it incumbent on my race and caste to pretend not to be hurt, so I forced 
myself to go on skating despite agony so great that I could hardly bite back 
the tears, until I thought I had done enough for honour and felt free to slip 
away. I was engaged that night to a committee mccting of the Climbing 
Club at the rooms of H. V. Reade in Jermyn Street. I managed somehow 
to sit through the mccting, the matter being made worse by my insane 
bashfulness which prevented me asking my host to let me usc his bedroom. 
We proceeded to a restaurant to dinncr, but there I broke down and excused 
myself.The rest of the evening’s cntertainment remains a mystery. I have a 
vague memory of being stretched on the seat of a railway carriage and I 
learned later that I had reachcd home, some six miles from London, soaked 
to the skin. I suppose I must have wandered about in the rain for an in- 
definite period, in pain too great to know what I was doing exccpt to try 
to be brave. The blow had sct up cystitis which kept me in bed for the next 
three weeks. The inflammation gradually disappeared after spreading to the 
prostate gland and the urethra. Nor was that the end of the trouble. The 
urethritis caused a discharge which proved very refractory to treatment 
and ultimately determined a triple stricture for which I am being treated 
at the moment of dictating this paragraph more than a quarter of a century 
after the accident. The moral is, of course, to avoid the Bourbons, though, 
as the duke is reported to be dying at the prescnt moment, it is quite pos- 
sible that his physician is shaking his head wisely and saying, ‘Ah, Your 
Highness, this is what comes from getting mixed up with people like 
Aleister Crowley! ...’

118 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN118 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

The very streets testify against the city. On the one hand we have pale 
stunted hurrying pygmies jostling each other in the bitter search for bread; 
an ant heap is a miracle of beauty and dignity in comparison. On the other, 
when it comes to excitement or amusement, we see perspiring brutes 
belching the fumes of beer; coarse, ugly parodies of apes. Nature affords 
no parallel to their degradation. There is no open air life, physical or mental, 
and there is the ever-abiding sense of sin and shame to obsess these slaves. 
Nowhere, except in English cities, do these conditions exist. Slum life there 
is elsewhere, and misery cnough; pitiful struggle, monstrous greed and 
triumphant brutality. But only in England are the people poisoned through 
and through; elsewhcre there is a sense of independence even in the most 
servile. The Russian mujik is in his way an aristocrat.And the cause of all these phenomena is one and the same. It is the Anglo- 
Saxon conception of Christianity which pollutcs the race. Only the well- 
fed pagan, whethcr he be a bishop or a bookmaker, is exempt, because he 
either docs not take religion seriously or takes it individually without 
rcference to his neighbour. The most bigoted members of the Greek and 
Roman communions on the Continent, though they may feel their religion 
passionately and make it the mainspring of thcir lives, are not bound 
together by that insect-like collective consciousness which stamps the 
Anglo-Saxon. The English pagan is in nine cases out of ten a Norman or 
a Celt. He has the aristocratic consciousness, whatever he may tell you about 
his religious opinions. Now it is all very well to be one of the master class 
and smile contemptuously while bowing the knce in the temple of Rimmon, 
but a poet cannot be content with the situation. Hencc the most intcnsely 
aristocratic types, like Shelley and Byron, instead of acquiescing in the social 
system which made them superiors, felt with acute agony the degradation 
of the slaves among whom they moved, and became revolutionaries and 
exiles because they could not endure to live in such a degraded community.Certain classes in England possess manliness and sclf-respect. As a rule 
they are connected with sport and agriculture, or are skilled workmen. 
The essence of aristocracy is to take a pride in being what you arc, whatever 
that may be. There is no room for this in industrialism and the result is 
that one can watch a London thoroughfare for hours without even sccing 
an individual whose nonentity is not repulsive. Everyone who possesses 
natural advantages has got out of the ruck and takes very good care to 
avoid further contamination. Such people lead lives of artificial seclusion. 
It is part of their Freudian protcction to become unconscious of the mob. 
But it is the business of the poet to see, hear and know everything. Hc dare 
not let himself forget. England is the most fertile mother of poets, but she 
kills the weak and drives the strong to happicr lands. James Thomson, John 
Davidson, Richard Middleton, Erncst Dowson and I don’t know how many

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IIQ

more even in our own generation found England unendurable for this one 
reason. The English poet must either make a successful exile or die of a 
broken heart.more even in our own generation found England unendurable for this one 
reason. The English poet must either make a successful exile or die of a 
broken heart.

At Cambridge I was surrounded by a more or less happy, healthy, pros- 
perous set of parasites. The paganism of the university had to a great extent 
redeemed them from the sense of sin. But during vacation I either hid myself 
in the mountains among the sturdy peasants or went abroad. North-western 
Europe appealed to me. There was a certain element of romance in the long 
nights, the cold clear air, the ice. I loved :o wander solitary in Holland, 
Denmark, Norway and Sweden. There was a mystery in the streets and a 
spontaneous gaiety in the places of amusement, which satisficd my soul. 
Life seemed both morc remote and more intense. As a stranger, I never 
came into contact with the malaise, the soul-searching, the psychological 
dissatisfaction which Ibsen and Strindberg describe. But though my view 
was thus entirely superficial, it was none the less in a certain sense profound 
and accurate. One can gct a very good idea of a country by travelling 
through it in the train. The outward and visible signs do, after all, reveal, 
especially to the poet, its inward and spiritual graces. The pcople who lcad 
one astray are the analysts who fail to come out the other side. Mr Jorrocks 
and Mr Pickwick give a bettcr idea of England than Charles Reade or Sir 
Walter Besant. Dumas pére tells us more about France than Zola. A great 
deal of the interior workings of a national mind ought to be taken for 
granted. One can distinguish profitably between two pretty girls at the end 
of an opera glass. It is absolutely misleading to disembowel them, as the 
average so-called psychological writer tries to do. There are all sorts of 
obscure processes always at work in nature and they are morc or less the 
same for all of us. To insist upon them is one of the worst kinds of false 
thinking. Zola’s peasants in La Terre are untrue, except as among them- 
selves. The ultimate issue is that these people breed cattle, grow corn and 
wine, and fight like demons for thcir country. Henri Barbusse’s Le Feu was 
a disgrace to literature. Mass psychology is the only important thing about 
the masses. The great artists, such as Emily Bronté—or was it her brother? 
— make no such blunder. They deal with individuals; but they never lose 
sight of the fact that the individual is only such to a limited extent. He is only 
one figure in a picturc; and when he stands out unnecessarily, there is some- 
thing wrong with the picture. Captain Marryat’s stories contain master- 
pieces of individual portraiture, but he never loses sight of the background. 
I am convinced that the English people were very much happier under the 
old semi-feudal system. ‘Hard cases make bad law.’ We have abolished all 
kinds of injustice on our attention being called to them; but the result has 
been that we have created an artificial doctrinaire society in which nobody 
is really happy or prosperous. All classes are complaining. We arc in the120 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

condition of a man whose nerves all talk at once instead of doing their 
work quietly. The most appalling of political mistakes is to develop con- 
sciousness in sections of the social organism which are not its brains. The 
crash has come in Russia; and we shall not have long to wait.

But in those days of adolescence I had no inducement to do any political 
thinking. The atmosphere was one of prosperity and stability. It was taken 
for granted that England was the greatest country in the world and that 
nothing could go wrong. One heard about Ireland as a perennial nuisance; 
and Mr Gladstone was regarded as a traitor, neither more nor less. One of 
my tutors had becn a Caius don named d’Arcy, whose father was the 
rector of Nymphsfield in Gloucestershire. I had spent some time there— 
to make my first appearance in the hunting field. “Chapel folk’ were looked 
upon as criminals of no class. 1 remember the old rector chuckling over a 
riddle. ‘Why is Gladstone’s hair like a tuft of grass?’ “Because it grows on 
the top of an old sod.’ That was the quality of political thought which was 
considered on the same level of certainty as two and two make four. I 
recall two lines of a poem that I wrote to Lord Rosebery:

And now, my lord, in medias res, 
Get rid of all your red Rad fleas.

I had been invited to meet Gladstone in north Wales, refused to go and wrote 
him a poem. 
LINES ON BEING INVITED TO MEET THE PREMIER IN 
WALES, SEPTEMBER 1892

I will not shake thy hand, old man, 
I will not shake thy hand;

You bear a traitor’s brand, old man, 
You bear a liar’s brand.

Thy talents are profound and wide, 
Apparent power to win;

It is not everyone has lied 
A nation into sin.You bear a traitor’s brand, old man, 
You bear a liar’s brand.

Thy talents are profound and wide, 
Apparent power to win;

It is not everyone has lied 
A nation into sin.

And look not thou so black, my friend, 
Nor seam that hoary brow; 
Thy deeds are seamier, my friend, 
Thy record blacker now. 
Your age and sex forbid, old man, 
I need not tell you how, 
Or else I'd knock you down,* old man, 
Like that extremist cow. 
* Mr Gladstone was attacked by a cow in Hawarden Park in 1891.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLEY I2I

You've gained your every seat, my friend, 
By perjuring your soul; 
You've climbed to Downing Strect, my friend, 
A very greasy poll. 
You bear a traitor’s brand, old man, 
You bear a hiar’s brand; 
I will not shake thy hand, old man, 
I will not shake thy hand. 
And I didn’t.

My life at Cambridge did nothing to make me think more deeply. With 
regard to forcign politics, the position was parallel. It was pure Kipling; 
but (in another watertight compartment) I was passionatcly enamoured of 
the views of Shelley, though I did not correlate them with any practical 
programme.

There was yct another compartment. Scott, Burns and my cousin Gregor 
had made me a romantic Jacobite. I regarded the Houses of Hanover and 
Coburg as German usurpers; and I wished to place ‘Mary III and IV’ on 
the throne. I was a bigoted legitimist. I actually joined a conspiracy on 
behalf of Don Carlos, obtained a commission to work a machine gun, took 
pains to make myself a first-class rifle shot and studied drill, tactics and 
strategy. However, when the time came for the invasion of Spain, Don 
Carlos got cold feet. The conspiracy was disclosed; and Lord Ashburnham’s 
yacht, which was running the arms, fell into the hands of the Spanish navy.This part of my mind did succeed in getting disturbed by the other 
parts. My rcactionary conservatism came into conflict with my anti- 
Catholicism. A reconciliation was effected by means of what they called 
the Celtic Church. Here was a romantic and mystical idea which suited my 
political and religious notions down to the ground. It lived and moved in 
an atmosphcre of fairies, seal-women and magical operations. Sacramental- 
ism was kept in the foreground and sin was regarded without abhorrence. 
Chivalry and mystery were its pillars. It was free from priestcraft and 
tyranny, for the simple reason that it did not really exist!

My innate transcendentalism leapt out towards it. The Morte d'Arthur, 
Lohengrin and Parsifal werc my world. I not only wanted to go out on the 
quest of the Holy Grail, I intended to do it. I got the idea of chastity as a 
positive virtuc. It was delightful to be pure. Previously, chastity had been 
my chief abomination; the sign-manual of cowardice, hcartlessness and 
slavery. In the Celtic Church there was no fear of God, but a communion 
with Him as nobly familiar as the relations of Roland and Charlemagne. I 
still took everything very literally. Browning’s quotation:

Childe Roland to the dark tower came

122 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

was as real to me as the Battle of Waterloo. In a sense, perhaps, even 
more so. I think it was only due to my subconscious common sense 
that I did not go and see Browning and ask him where to find the dark

tower!

| 14

I obtained the honour of knighthood*® from one of Don Carlos’s lieutenants. 
It is part of the legitimist theory that the sovereign had abrogated to himself 
the monopoly of conferring spurs, whilc on the othcr hand a woman could 
not confer knighthood. All Victorian creations are invalid.The effect of adopting the official Anglo-German theory is even more 
patent today than in the ‘nineties. Then it was city knights; the next step 
was the matinée idol; now the pawnbrokcr, the movie star and the low 
comedian have made the title a badge of nastiness. There is only one honour 
connected with true knighthood, that of being a man of honour, of having 
taken the vows—to uphold the right, to serve mankind, to protect the 
distressed, and generally to exercise the manly virtues. When renegade 
Jews and clowns walk in to dinner before gentlemen, the latter may prefer 
to go without.

I took my admission to the Order with absolute seriousness, keeping vigil 
over my arms in a wood. The theory of the Celtic Church was that Roman- 
ism was a late heresy, or at least schism. The finest cathedral in the world 
was too small for the Church, as Brand found. The mountains and forests 
were consecrated spots. The nearest thing to a material house would be a 
hermitage such as one was likcly to encountcr while travelling on the 
Quest.

But all these ideals, scriously as I entertained them, were in the nature 
of reverie. In practical life I was still passionately engaged in cleansing my- 
self from the mire of Christianity by deliberate acts of sin and worldliness. 
I was so happy to be free from the past tyranny that I found continual joy 
in affirming my emancipation.

There were thus several divers strands in the loom of my soul which 
had not yet been woven into a harmonious pattern. I dealt with life empiri- 
cally, taking things as they came, without basing them on any fundamental 
principle.Two main cvents were destined to put mc on the road towards myself. 
The first took place in Stockholm about midnight of December 31st, 1896. 
I was awakened to the knowledge that I posscssed a magical means of 
becoming conscious of and satisfying a part of my nature which had up to 
that moment conccalcd itself from me. It was an experience of horror and 
pain, combined with a ccrtain ghostly terror, yet at the same time it was

* There is a great deal more to this story; but I may not tell it— yet.

123

124 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

the key to the purest and holiest spiritual ecstasy that exists. At the time, I 
was not aware of the supreme importance of the matter. It seemed to me 
little more than a devclopment of certain magical processes with which I 
was already familiar. It was an isolated experience, not repeated until 
exactly twelve months later, to the minute. But this second occasion 
quickened my spirit, always with the result of ‘loosening the girders of the 
soul’, so that my animal nature stood rebuked and kept silence in the pre- 
sence of the immanent divinity of the Holy Ghost; omnipotent, omniscient 
and omnipresent, yet blossoming in my soul as if the entire forces of the 
universe from all eternity were concentrated and made manifest in a single 
rose.The second event took place in October 1897. The occasion was an attack 
of illness. It was nothing very serious and I had long been accustomed to 
expect to die before I came of age. But for some reason or other I found 
myself forced to meditate upon the fact of mortality. It was impressed upon 
me that I hadn’t a moment to lose. There was no fcar of death or of a pos- 
sible ‘hereafter’; but I was appalled by the idea of the futility of all human 
endeavour. Suppose, I said to myself, that I make a grcat success in diplo- 
macy and become ambassador to Paris. There was no good in that—I could 
not so much as remember the name of the ambassador a hundred ycars 
ago. Again, I wantcd to be a great poet. Well, here I was in one of the two 
places in England that made a speciality of pocts, yet only an insignificant 
fraction of the three thousand men in residence knew anything about so 
great a man as Aeschylus. I was not sufficiently enlightened to understand 
that the fame of the man had little or nothing to do with his real success, 
that the proof of his prowess lay in the invisible influence which he had 
had upon generations of men. My imagination went a step further. Suppose 
I did more than Cacsar or Napoleon in one line, or than Homer and Shake- 
speare in the other—my work would be automatically cancelled when the 
globe became uninhabitable for man.I did not go into a definite trance in this meditation; but a spiritual con- 
sciousness was born in me corresponding to that which characterizes the 
Vision of the Universal Sorrow, as I learnt to call it later on. In Buddhist 
phraseology, I perccived the First Noble Truth—Sabbé Pi Dukkham— 
everything is sorrow. But this perception was confincd to the plancs familiar 
to the normal human consciousness. The fatuity of any work based upon 
physical continuity was cvident. But I had at this time no reason for sup- 
posing that the same criticism applied to any transcendental universe. I 
formulated my will somewhat as follows: ‘I must find a matcrial in which 
to work which is immune from the forces of change.’ I suppose that I still 
accepted Christian metaphysics in some sense or another. I had been satis- 
fied to escape from religion to the world. I now found that there was no

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 125

satisfaction here. I was not content to be annihilated. Spiritual facts were the 
only things worth while. Brain and body were valueless except as the 
instruments of the soul.

The ordinary materialist usually fails to recognize that only spiritual 
affairs count for anything, even in the grossest concerns of life. The facts 
of a murder are nothing in themselves; they are only adduced in order to 
prove felonious intent. Material welfare is only important as assisting men 
towards a consciousness of satisfaction.From the nature of things, therefore, lifc is a sacrament; in other words, 
all our acts are magical acts. Our spiritual consciousness acts through the 
will and its instruments upon material objects, in order to produce changes 
which will result in the establishment of the new conditions of consciousness 
which we wish. That is the definition of Magick. The obvious example 
of such an operation in its most symbolic and ceremonial form is the Mass. 
The will of the priest transmutes a wafer in such wise that it becomes 
charged with the divine substance in so active a form that its physical 
injection gives spiritual nourishment to the communicant. But all our 
actions fit this equation. A tailor with the toothache takes a portion of the 
wealth derived from the business to which he has consecrated himself, a 
symbol of his accumulated and stored energy, in order to have the tooth 
removed and so to recover the consciousness of physical well-being.

Put in this way, the magical theory of existence is self-evident. I did not 
apprehend it clearly at this time; but I unconsciously acted upon it as soon 
as I had discovered the worthlessness of the world. But I was so far from 
perceiving that every act is magical, whether one likes it or not, that I 
supposed the escape from matter to involve a definite invasion of the 
spiritual world. Indeed, I was so far from understanding that matter was 
in its nature secondary and symbolic, that my principal preoccupation was 
to obtain first-hand sensory evidence of spiritual beings. In other words, I 
wanted to evoke the denizens of other planes to visible and audible 
appearance.This resolution was the first manifestation of my true will. I had thrown 
myself with the utmost enthusiasm into various occupations from time to 
time, but they had never occupied my entire attention. I had never given 
mysclf wholly to chess, mountaincering or even to poetry. Now, for the 
first time, I felt myself prepared to expend my resources of every kind to 
attain my purpose.

To me the spiritual world consisted roughly of the Trinity and thcir 
angels on the one side; the devil and his on the other. It is absolutely sophisti- 
cal to pretend that Christianity is not Manichaean in essence. The Vedanta 
theory of Advaitism in the Upanishads makes evil—and indeed all mani- 
fested cxistence — Maya, purc illusion. But even at this, there is no satisfactory

126 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

explanation of the appearance of the illusion. In Christianity evil is just as 
real as good; and so long as two opposites exist they must either be equal 
or there must be a third component to balance them. Now this is in itself 
sophistical, for the third component only exists as a make-weight; and it is 
pure fiction to discriminate between two things whose only function is to 
counterbalance a third thing. In respect of the universe of discourse involved, 
a proposition cannot have. two contradictories. If the opposite of good 
exists at all, as it must, if ‘good’ is to have any meaning, it must be exactly 
equal in quantity and quality to that good. On the Christian hypothesis, 
the reality of evil makes the devil equal to God. This is the heresy of Manes, 
no doubt. But those who condemn Manes must, despite themselves, impli- 
citly affirm his theorem.I seem to have understood this instinctively; and since I must take sides 
with one party or the other it was not difficult to make up my mind. The 
forces of good were those which had constantly oppressed me. I saw them 
daily destroying the happiness of my fellow-men. Since, therefore, it was 
my busincss to explore the spiritual world, my first step must be to get 
into personal communication with the devil. I had heard a good deal about 
this operation in a vague way; but what I wanted was a manual of technical 
instruction. I devoted myself to black magic; and the booksellers - Deighton 
Bell, God bless ’em!—immediately obliged with The Book of Black Magic 
and of Pacts,+ which, judging by the title, was exactly what I needed.

It was with intense disappointment and distrust that I read this compila- 
tion. The author was a pompous, ignorant and affected dipsomaniac from 
America, and he treated his subject with the vulgarity of Jerome K. Jerome, 
and the beery, leering frivolity of a red-nosed music-hall comedian making 
jokes about mothers-in-law and lodgers.It was, however, clear, even from the garbled texts of the Grimoires 
which he quoted, that the diabolists had no conception of the Satan hymned 
by Milton and Huysmans. They were not protagonists in the spiritual 
warfare against restriction, against the oppressors of the human soul, the 
blasphemers who denied the supremacy of the will of man. They merely 
aimed at achieving contemptible or malicious results, such as preventing a 
huntsman from killing game, finding buried treasure, bewitching the 
neighbours’ cows, or ‘acquiring the affection of a judge’. For all their 
pretended devotion to Lucifer or Belial, they were sincere Christians in 
spirit, and inferior Christians at that, for their methods were puerile. The 
prayer book, with its petitions for rain and success in battle, was almost 
preferable. The one point of superiority was nevertheless cardinal; their 
method was in intention scientific. That is, they proposed a definite technique 
by which a man could compel the powers of nature to do his bidding, no

less than the engineer, the chemist and the electrician. There was none of

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY I27

the wheedling, bribery and servility which is of the essence of that kind of 
prayer which secks material gratifications. Sir J. G. Frazer has pointed out 
this distinction in The Golden Bough. Magic he defines as science which 
does not work. It would be fairer to state this proposition in slightly different 
terms: magic 1s science in posse.The compiler of The Book of Black Magic and of Pacts is not only the most 
ponderously platitudinous and priggishly prosaic of pretentiously pompous 
pork butchers of the language, but the most voluminously voluble. I cannot 
dig over the dreary deserts of his drivel in search of the passage which made 
me write to him. But it was an oracular obscurity which hinted that he knew 
of a Hidden Church withdrawn from the world in whose sanctuarics were 
preserved the true mysterics of initiation. This was one better than the Celtic 
Church; I immediatcly asked him for an introduction. He replied kindly and 
intclligibly, suggesting that I should rcad The Cloud upon the Sanctuary by 
Councillor von Eckartshausen. With this book I retired to Wastdalc Head 
for the Easter vacation of 1898. This period proved to be the critical moment 
of my early life: in two most important respects it determined the dircction 
of my efforts. The two were intimately linked in certain ways and in order 
to make clear my position I must retrace my steps for a little and bring myself 
up to date in the matter of climbing, as also of literature.The summers of 1896 and 1897 were spent in the Alps. They were the 
logical development of my previous experience. I had made up my mind 
to look for a climbing companion of a permanent character. I had met 
Professor Norman Collie in Westmorland. His teaching and advice were 
invaluable. I arranged to spend part of the summer with Morris Travers, 
Collie’s demonstrator at University College, London, and a very admirable 
‘second man’ he was. A man who writes treatises on ‘Gas Manipulation’ 
and who knows how to rebuff the advances of his girl students is an ideal 
companion on a mountain. Unfortunately, he obtained an appointment in 
a far country and had to give up climbing in consequence. But we made 
our mark in the Alps, beginning with the first guideless traversc of the 
Mönch, the Vuibez Séracs, and the first traverse of the Aiguilles Rouges, 
climbing all the pinnacles.

Travers joined me for a short time in August. We began by making the 
first guideless traverse of the Mönch. We started for the Guggi hut within 
two or three hours of his arrival, he having come straight through from 
London without breaking the journey. We started the next morning very 
early and made great spced up the lower slopes in our enthusiasm. Travers 
became extremcly mountain sick. It was obvious that the barometric pres- 
sure had nothing to do with it; he was simply upset from the fatigue of 
the journey, the change to coarse food and the sudden call upon his full 
physical strength when out of training. Numerous other similar observa-

128 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

tions prevented me from ever being so foolish as to attribute this sickness 
to the altitude. I have produced all the symptoms on Beachy Head in men 
who had been perfectly comfortable on the high Alps; and I experienced 
no discomfort whatever above 23,000 feet.Travers and I wandered about the Obcrland for a week without going 
below the snow-line. His mountain sickness soon disappeared, but he 
became badly sunburnt. In those days we chcrished the superstition that 
lanolin was a preventative; but the application seemed to feed the sores 
instead of healing them. A few days after leaving me he arrived at the 
Gornergrat, whither he had dispatched his baggage, in fluttering rags and 
with a face which was little bettcr than one single suppurating sore. A lady 
sitting outside the hotel exclaimed indignantly that such disgusting objects 
should not be allowed to frequent public places. It was his mother!Talking of sunburn, there was once—improbable as it may appear—a 
Dr Bowles, of Folkestone, interested in the subject. He arranged with 
Morris Travers to carry out a research on the actinic value of the solar rays 
on glaciers. Travers and I and his brother went to live in a hut on a glacier 
somewhere above Bel Alp, where Travers was to carry out some cxperi- 
ments. One day there arrived Bowles and a number of voluntary victims, 
each member of the party having his face painted with greasc paint of 
divers colours, the right half vermilion and the left sky-blue, or the left 
bright green and the right orange, and so on. I record, with regret, that I, 
who had refused to abdicate the dignity of humanity to this extent, was the 
only person in the party who was not badly burnt. The sun showed no 
respect to persons in the matter of their camouflage. My freedom was due 
to the fact that I had spent most of my lifc in the open air and gradually 
acquired immunity. It sometimes strikes me that the whole of science is a 
piece of impudence: that nature can afford to ignore our impertinent 
interference. If our monkey mischief should ever reach the point of blowing 
up the earth by decomposing an atom, and even annihilate the sun himself, I 
cannot really suppose that the universe would turn a hair. If we are ever to 
do anything, it can only be by the manipulation of those spiritual forces 
which lie behind the consciousness of which the universe of matter is but 
a symbolic phantasm.The second of these exploits—the Vuibez Séracs—constituted one of the 
most interesting ice climbs that I had ever done. They had not been climbed 
for a generation, when the glacier was in a very different condition, and were 
reputed impossible. Jean Maitre, who was supposed to be the best guide in 
the valley, with other strong guides and some distinguished members of the 
Alpine Club, decided to attempt it. They returned with a wonderful story 
of desperate adventure. They had been stopped, they said, by the final

obstacle, an overhanging ice wall guarded by a wide crevasse. This interested

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 129 
Jobstacle, an overhanging ice wall guarded by a wide crevasse. This interested

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 129 
J

us. We set out the following morning, reaching the obstacle without any 
difficulty, which gavc us a poor idea of the capacity of the mighty men of 
valour. But we could not be surprised at their failure to negotiate the obstacle. 
We found ourselves standing on a knifc-edge separated from the over- 
hanging wall by a crevasse so broad that we could only just reach it with our 
axes. Travers held me on the rope while | leant across and cut a ledge in the 
wall which could be used for his hands. Having anchored him to his brother 
lower down, I lowered him cautiously so that he was able to lcan across with 
his hands on the ledge, thus forming a bridge. I then climbed, in my cram- 
pons, on to his shoulders and stood there for forty minutes while I cut hand 
and foot holds in the overhanging ice. Trusting mysclf to thesc, Travers was 
hastily pulled back to the vertical by his brother. In this position he was able 
to support my weight on his uplifted axe-head sufficiently to allow mc to use 
one hand. In this way I cut fresh hand holds in the overhanging wall and 
ultimately pulled mysclf over the cdge. There was still some step-cutting to be 
done before I got to a sufficiently good placc to pull up the others. I have 
never seen the performance of Travers cqualled on any occasion. Hastings 
himself could hardly have been more strong, steady and cnduring, to say 
nothing of the qualities requircd to allow a man to stand on his head and 
shoulders with sharp spikes!We now found that so far from this obstacle being the last, it was the first! 
I take a good deal of credit to myself for finding the way to the top through 
the tangled pinnacles of ice. I began to be not a little alarmed; the séracs 
stretched line after line above us. There was no way of getting out of them 
and at any moment the sun might strike the glacier and overthrow their 
pride and our temerity. We climbed with desperate haste and managed to 
reach the snow-covered glacicr above them just in time. As it happened, a 
party had gone out from the hotel after breakfast with the idea of watching 
us from the opposite slopes and they told us next evening that our tracks

had been oblitcrated in a dozen places by falling ice.

15had been oblitcrated in a dozen places by falling ice.

15

I must not omit to mention the first descent of the west face of the Trifthorn. 
It was early in the season of ‘96. Going up to Zermatt in the train I met an 
English climber whom I will call Arthur Ellis. He was anxious to do guide- 
less work and we agrecd to try a few mountains together. We made some 
minor expeditions and he proved highly competent. One day we climbed the 
Trifthorn by the ordinary route, with the idea of attempting the traverse. 
As I was to go down last, he was carrying the rucksack with our provisions. 
We made several attempts to find a way down the Zinal face; but always 
the slopes steepened until it became evident that they pitched over, and we 
had to retrace our steps. Ellis, however, was very annoyed at my caution and 
wanted to glissadc, which was a proposal about as reasonable as jumping off 
the Eiffel Tower. Presently he made an excuse for taking off the rope and 
retired behind a rock while I sat down and lit my pipe. | was aroused by a 
hail. Ellis was three or four hundred feet down the slope! He urged me once 
more to glissade. He said he had invented a new method of exercising this 
art, which was to hold the axe by the shaft and usc the pick as a brake. It was 
downright insanity; and took me absolutely by surprise, as previously he had 
been a sound and careful climber. I could do nothing to restrain him: I tried 
to humour him and suggested that he should ‘come up to where I was and 
start fair’. But he wasn’t taking any and let himself go. A few scconds later he 
was performing cartwheels and then disappeared over the edge. The angle 
was such that I could not sce where he had fallen. I hastily climbed a con- 
venient rock pinnacle. Then I saw him. He was lying, spreadeagled, in the 
Bergschrund, with his blood staining the snow; which, by the way, ought not 
to have been there, and would not have been but for the continuous bad 
weather.The task before me was hardly prepossessing. It was up to me to find my 
way alone down a face which had never previously becn climbed. However, 
I discovered a route which took me to the glacier in about five hours. At 
one point I was obliged to lower mysclf down by the rope; and, as I could not 
unhitch it, I was thrown more than ever on my own rcsources after that. On 
several occasions I was obliged to make some very risky jumps, so that I 
might have been cut off if I had found a passage beyond my powers.

I must admit fccling considerable disgust at seeing Ellis making his way 
over the glacicr as if nothing had happened. He had fallen some eight 
hundred feet, the last three hundred sheer drop. I was utterly exhausted and

130

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALBISTER CROWLEY I3I

badly in need of food. It was all I could do to catch up to him. The only 
damage he had suffered was a trifling cut on one leg! Nightfall was at hand; 
and though the hut was not very far off in actual distance, we had a terrible 
time getting there, having to wade through soft snow up to our waists. The 
hut was bewirtschaftet; but the guardian had not come up in consequence of 
the weather, so we had to force our way in and break into the provision 
room in order to get fuel and the like.

Our adventures were not yet over. My clothes were (naturally) dripping. 
I threw my coat on the table, above which hung my Alpine lamp. This type 
of lamp has a hole in the bottom through which a candle is thrust. It is held 
in place by a spring. I threw myself on the straw, being too tired to complete 
the operation of going to bed without a few moments’ rest. I felt sleep over- 
coming me, knew it was my duty to put out the candle, but began to argue 
that even if it did drop out the fall would extinguish it, or if not, the wet coat 
would do so. It was a perfectly good argument; but the one chance in a 
million came off—it didn’t go out till my coat was bumt to cinders.Luckily, the next morning the guardian of the hut came up. I borrowed 
his coat and went down to Evolena, where my baggage had been sent. Ellis 
was not fit to be moved and I arranged to come up two days later and 
fetch him. At Evolena I got a change of clothes and sent up the guide's coat 
by a porter.

Now, in the hotel was a girls’ school, being conducted to admire the 
wonders and beauties of nature. The following day they came down in the 
afternoon from the glacier, very excited at having found the tracks of a 
chamois on the mule path. I knew, of course, that this was hallucination and 
thought no more of it. Just before dinner I was outside the hotel taking the 
air, when I saw in the distance a solitary figure slowly approaching. Its action 
was very peculiar, I thought.

The wild man wends his weary way 
To a strange and loncly pump.

Yet it seemed somehow familiar. It drew nigh; yes, it was Acthur Ellis. I 
expressed surprise; but he said that he had felt so much better he thought he 
might as well come down, but it had been a long and terrible day. He had 
started at dawn. This was absurd, as it was only a couple of hours’ easy 
walking from the hut. Ah yes, he said, but he had come down over the 
snout of the glacier and he had had to cut steps all the way—no more 
glissading for him! This story was again rather incredible. But his axe had 
been tremendously knocked about. The truth slowly dawned on my 
benighted brain: he had solemnly cut his way down the mule path—he was 
the chamois whose tracks the girls had seen!

Well, it was not time for me to join my friends at Arolla; but I

132 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

wasn't going to climb any more with Ellis, so 1 made my excuses and 
departcd.Well, it was not time for me to join my friends at Arolla; but I

132 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

wasn't going to climb any more with Ellis, so 1 made my excuses and 
departcd.

The fag-end of the story is as peculiar as the rest. We arranged to dine 
together in London and when I got back I wrote to him. He replied at once, 
asking me to dine with him at his club. I duly turned up; but he was not 
there and I have never heard a word of him sincc!

Another very amusing incident occurred at Arolla. A little way above the 
old hotel is a large boulder, which had never been climbed from the hotel 
side. I spent some time before I found out how to do it. One had to traverse 
the face to the right, with a minimum of hand hold and foot hold, until one 
came to a place where the slope eased off. But this point was defended by a 
bulge in the rock which threw once out. It was just possible for a very slim 
man with a prehensile abdomen. But it was a matter of a quarter of an ounce 
one way or the other whether the friction grips were sufficient or not. It was 
one of the most difficult pieces of rock climbing I had ever tackled.

I decided to have some fun with it and taught a girl how to do it. I then 
offered a hundred francs to any guide who could get up. We got together a 
little party one afternoon and | proceeded to show off. Several other people 
tried, but without success. I began to mock them and said, ‘But this is 
absurd— you fellows can’t climb at all — it’s quite casy — why, I'd back a girl 
to do it— won't you have a try, Miss So-and-so?” My pupil played up beauti- 
fully and pretended to need a lot of persuasion. Ultimately, she offered to 
try if she were held on a rope from above. I said, ‘Nonsense, you can do it 
perfectly well by yoursclf!’ The company protested that she would kill her- 
self; and she pretended to be put on her mettle, refused all help and 
swarmed up in great style.This made everybody very much ashamed. Even the guides were stung 
into trying it. But nobody elsc got up. So I started to coach them on the rope. 
Several succeeded with the moral support and without being hauled. A 
fair number, however, came off and looked rather ridiculous, dangling. 
People began to urge the chaplain to try his hand. He didn’t like it at all; but 
he came to me and said he would go if I would be very careful to manage the 
rope so that he did not look ridiculous, because of the respect due to his 
cloth. I promised him that I would attend to the matter with the utmost 
conscicntiousness. I admitted that I had purposely made fun of some of the 
others, but that in his case I would tic the rope properly; not under his arms 
but just above the hips.

Having thus arranged for the respect duc to his cloth, I went to the top of 
the rock and sat sufficiently far back to be unable to see what was happening 
on the face. When he came off, as the rope was fastened so low, he turned 
upside down. I pretended to misunderstand and jerked him up and down for 
several minutes before finally hauling him up, purple in the face and covered

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 133

with scratches. I had not failed in the respect due to his cloth. But quite a 
number of people were sufficiently lacking in taste to laugh at him.THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 133

with scratches. I had not failed in the respect due to his cloth. But quite a 
number of people were sufficiently lacking in taste to laugh at him.

One day I took my cousin Gregor, who by this time was married and had 
discovered that his life was not worth keeping. We made the second ascent of 
the north-north-cast ridge of Mont Collon. It is a long and severe climb. The 
conditions were very bad and Gregor was quite unequal to this class of 
climbing, so that I had to pull him up most of the way. We were very late 
on the mountain in consequence. I had no idea of the best way down, but 
decided to try the short and precipitous route which leads to the level glacier 
above the Vuibcz Séracs. The descent of a difficult mountain is always 
awkward when the second man is not up to the mark. He cannot go down 
last because of the danger; and in going down first he is pretty surc to take 
the wrong road, wherever he cannot be guided by voice. However, we got 
down the stecp part, safely enough, just before dark.

We took off the rope to descend some slopes covered with loose rock. As 
I sat down to coil the rope I realized that I was completely exhaustcd, 
though mentally rather than physically. My brain played mc a curious trick. 
Gregor had reached a patch of broken rocks at the bottom of the slope and I 
followed him slowly. Suddenly I saw a troll, one of those funny little dwarfs 
with pointed caps and formidable beards that onc sces pictured in German 
fairy stories and on beer mugs (Heinzelmannchen appears to be the official 
name). This creature was hopping about the rocks in a very jovial way. He 
appeared quitc real in cvery respect. For instance, he was not transparent. But 
it never occurred to me to belicve in him. I put him down to cerebral 
fatigue. The apparition only lasted for a few minutes. He was gone before I 
rejoined my cousin.It would, of coursc, have been madness to attempt to cross the glacier that 
night, the snow being very deep and soft, so we managed as best.we could to 
keep warm. I did not sleep very much—it was my first night out. In the 
morning we ran across the frozen snow to thc little pass which leads down to 
the vallcy. We had hardly crossed it when we met a rescue party sent up by 
the dear old hotel keeper, Anzevui, who had a curious personal affection for 
me as the bad boy of the valley who was always making things interesting. 
Our descent had been watched through glasses; and they had come to the 
conclusion that we must have met with an accident, becausc our route down 
the mountain was an original variation on the regular way and supposed to 
be impossible. We had, in fact, met with onc cxcecdingly bad pitch where I 
was glad of the hitched rope.

On another occasion I was benighted; it was with Morris Travers and his 
younger brother on the Aiguilles Rouges, owing to our extreme conscien- 
tiousness in climbing every pinnacle accuratcly and the breakdown of the 
younger Travers from fatigue. It was one more example of the disadvantage

134 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

of a third man. A party of two would have finished tke climb at least three 
hours earlier. A bitterly cold wind was blowing from the north-west, so that 
we could not pass the night on the ridge or on that side of it. We had to find 
shelter on the castcrn face. It was too dark to get down the cliffs, even if 
young Travers had been equal to the effort, and they were very steep. There 
was not even a reasonable ledge.However, we found a chimney where the boy could rest in moderate 
comfort and there was a sort of shelf which accommodated his brother. As 
for me, the best repose I could find was to wedge myself across the chimney 
with one foot, my back against a steep patch of snow; the warmth of my 
body melted this and the water trickled down. As my knickerbockers had 
been torn to pieces on the rock, there was a certain degrce of discomfort 
connected with my night’s rest and the strain on my leg somehow damaged 
the knee joint, which uscd continually to give trouble for ycars afterwards. 
But I was so ured that I went to sleep with my pipe in my mouth. It is 
extraordinary that I did not fall—the pipe did.

1616

Such were some of the adventures of 1896 and 1897. My experiences all 
contributed to build up an original theory of mountaineering. It was not till 
1898 that I discovered the identity of my own ideas with those of the great 
climbers. But I discovered the extremely unpleasant fact that the English 
Alpine Club were bitterly opposed to mountaineering —its members were 
incompetent, insancly jealous of thcir vested interests and unthinkably 
unsportsmanlike. Professor Norman Collic had proposed mce for the club and 
Sir Martin Conway had becn kind enough to second me; but the record of 
climbs which I put in to qualify for admission was much too good. It was 
subversive of all authority. The average Alpine clubman qualifies by paying 
guides to haul him up a few hackneyed peaks. He is not expected to do any 
new climbs whatever; and it is an outrage to the spirit of the club to do 
anything original. Mummery had been blackballed because he was the most 
famous climber in England; and, though occasionally climbing with guides 
before he found Collie and Hastings, had been in fact the leader of the party. 
The club was, of course, afraid to give its real reasons for objecting to him. 
It circulated the lie that he was a bootmaker! Later on, it became a public 
scandal that he was not a member of the club and he was weak enough to 
allow himself to be elected. In my case, Collie and Conway warned me that 
my election would be opposed and I withdrew my name. On this, the son 
of a church furnisher named Tattersall, who had insinuated himself into 
Trinity, circulated the rumour that I had been expelled from a London club. 
He hated me because I, as president of the Cambridge University Chess Club, 
did not see my way to allow him to become secretary. He was an excellent 
player, but unsuitable for conducting official correspondence with other 
clubs. I went to his rooms with a heavy malacca and demanded that he should 
retract his falsehood or fight. He rcfused to do either, so I thrashed him 
soundly then and there. He complained to my tutor, who halled me, made 
a few remarks on the desuetude of the duel, changed the conversation to 
Ibsen and asked me to dinner.Mountaineering differs from othcr sports in one important respect. A man 
cannot obtain a reputation at cricket or football by hiring professionals to 
play for him. His achievements are checked by his averages. But hardly any 
one in England at that time knew anything about mountaineering. Various 
old fogies, who could not have climbed the simplest rocks in Cumberland, 
or led across an easy Alpine pass, had been personally conducted by peasants

135

136 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

up a few mountains and written themselves up into fame. The appearance 
of the guideless climber was thcrefore a direct challenge. They tricd every 
dirty trick to prevent the facts from Icaking out. They refused to record the 
exploits of guideless men in the Alpine Journal. Thcy discountenanccd 
cven their own membcrs, they tried to ignore English rock climbing 
altogether and would have nothing to do with the Continental Alpine 
Clubs.

The result of this policy was to hinder the devclopment of the sport in 
England. The younger men were ostracized. It was parallel to the attempts 
of the Church to pretend that there was no such thing as science. The result 
was not dissimilar. In 1901 all the world’s records, except once, were held 
by myself and Eckenstein. The exception was that of the greatest height 
attained by man. This was claimed by Matthias Zurbriggen, who was not a 
guide in the ordinary sense of the word, but a convict who had learnt all his 
climbing from Eckenstein at the request of the nc’er-do-weel’s family, who 
didn’t know what to do with him and probably hoped that he would kill 
himself on the mountains.The Alpine Club cven tried to fake records. Onc party made a great fuss 
over an ascent of the Dent Blanche. It was proved later that they had not been 
on the mountain at all and that onc at least of the party—Smith quidam — 
knew it. Again, when I arrived at the head of the Baltoro glacier, I questioned 
some of my coolies who had been with the Conway cxpcdition of 1892 
about the alleged ascent of Pioneer Pcak. The men unanimously declared 
that the party had only gone to the foot of the icefall and had turned back 
from this point. Far be it from me to place any reliance on the statements of 
ignorant Baltis, though I never found them at fault on any other point! But 
it is certainly singular that they should have agreed to give an account of the 
expedition so different from that recorded by the party themselves. Zurbrig- 
gen, who was the guide in the case, was cross-cxamined by Legros, the son of 
the painter, and a friend of Eckenstein’s. He told a very singular story about 
Pionecr Peak, but as hc was under the influence of alcohol I suppose his 
statements are as unreliable as thosc of my coolies.

The coincidence of evidence from two doubtful sources docs not neces- 
sarily strengthen cither, does it?

So bitter has been the hatred of the Alpine Club for the people who have 
exposed its principal members as impostors that it has actually induced the 
bulk of the press to ignore expeditions of such first-rate importance as those 
of 1902 and 1905 to the Himalayas. Subsequent exploration has been 
hampered in consequence; and the manslaughter of seven porters on Everest 
in 1922 was dircctly duc to ignorance of the lesson taught by the Kangchen- 
junga disaster, as will be made clear in the proper place.

However, my principles have triumphcd all along the line. There were no

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 137

Swiss guides on Everest in 1922 and the record for altitude is held by ama- 
teurs travelling two on a rope.THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 137

Swiss guides on Everest in 1922 and the record for altitude is held by ama- 
teurs travelling two on a rope.

Let me emphasize the fact that I am absolutely satisfied with this result. l 
am congenitally incapable of personal ambition and envy. My interest is in 
the sport itsclf. I care nothing for glory. In 1899, for example, I worked out 
a route up the Aiguille du Géant from the Montanvers. This mountain had 
never been climbed fairly. The ordinary way up is a matter of engineering 
by means of pitons and wire ropcs. I did not keep my knowledge to myself 
in order to have the glory of making thc first ascent. I indicated the way up to 
other climbers and was absolutely overjoyed whcn two Austrian amateurs 
madc the climb. In the same way, I am perfectly satisficd at having broken 
down the dishonest and imbecile traditions of Badminton and only regret 
that I was not in command of the 1922 Everest expedition, because that 
expedition failed and cost heavily in human life. I am convinced that if I had 
been there the summit would have been reached and that no one would have 
been killed. In the expedition to K 2, neither man nor beast was injured, and 
in that to Kangchenjunga, the catastrophe was the direct result of mutinous 
disobedience to my orders. I do not lay claim to personal credit for this 
record, save in so far as I was on thc way to an apprehension of the proper 
principles of mountain craft when I met Eckenstcin, to whose instructions I 
am profoundly indcbted.I have never been in danger on a mountain, except through the rashness of 
others. Here is a typical case. I was crossing the Bréche de la Meije with a 
porter. About half way down the rocky slopes (we had taken off the rope) 
I stopped for a few minutes for personal reasons, never imagining that the 
boy would get himself into trouble. When I got up he had disappeared. I 
shouted and he replied. I then saw that he had done an incredibly rash action. 
By going on, entirely out of the way, hc had crossed a narrow gully which 
was being constantly swept by ice from a hanging glacier. I could not leave 
him alonc on the mountain and I could not ask him to risk his life by returning. 
There was nothing for it but to repeat his indiscretion. The only way across 
the gully was a steep slab, polished by ice and constantly bombarded. I had to 
rush it, at the gravest risk of slipping on the onc hand and being smashed on 
the other.

It is a remarkable fact that only very exceptional men retain their normal 
reasoning powers in presence of mountains. Both Eckenstein and I have had 
constant evidence of this. It is not merely the panic of the peasant, who loses 
his head and calls on the saints whenever he finds himself a few yards off the 
beaten track or is overtaken by bad weather. Scientifically trained minds 
frequently lose all sense of judgment and logic.

There is an account, hardly a century old, of a party of quite distinguished 
men who ascended Saddleback. They speak of precipitous cliffs and yawning

138 TOWARDS THB GOLDEN DAWN

gulfs, though as a matter of fact there is not a rock on the mountain which a 
child of three years old could call scrambling. They were, in fact, on ponies! 
Shellcy’s descriptions of Mont Blanc arc comically exaggerated; his powers 
of observation must have been completely in abeyance.The expression ‘absolutely perpendicular’ ultimately became a byword. It 
was used so frequently by ostensibly reliable men to describe quite gentle 
slopes. We used to ask engineers and other people accustomed to practical 
trigonometry to estimate the angle of the Mattcrhorn from Zermatt 
and from the Schwartzsee. They would give us anything from thirty 
degrees to fifty degrces in the first case and from forty-five degrees to 
eighty degrces in the second. The actual figures are ten degrees and fifteen 
degrees.

In 1902 Pfannl proposed to rush Chogo Ri from Askole. He thought he 
could get there and back in three days! In reality, it is fourteen days to the 
foot of the mountain, though unladen men might possibly do it in five. 
Mountain panic was without doubt partly accountable for the mental and 
moral breakdown in Guillarmod and Righi, which led them to mutiny on 
Kangchenjunga. A high degree of spiritual development, a romantic 
temperament and a profound knowledge based on experience of mountain 
conditions are the best safeguards against the insane impulses and hysterical 
errors which overwhelm the average man.

During my thrce years at Cambridge my literary faculties made sudden 
strides. The transition was brief. It is marked by my The Tule of Archais. But in 
Aceldama, my first published pocm of any importance, I attained, at a 
bound, the summit of my Parnassus. In a scnsc, I have never written anything 
better. It is absolutely characteristic. Its technical excellence is remarkable 
and it is the pure expression of my unconscious self. I had no corresponding 
mental concepts at the time. It enounccs a philosophy which subsequent 
developments have not appreciably modified. I remember my own attitude 
to it. It seemed to me a wilfully extravagant eccentricity. I had no idea that it 
was the pure water of the Dircean spring.A certain amount of conscious aspiration is, however, evident in Songs of 
the Spirit. This book is a collection of lyrics which reveal an ill-defined 
longing for spiritual attainment. The background is vividly coloured by 
observation and experience. The atmosphere of the old strects of Amsterdam, 
of the colleges of Cambridge and of the mountains, lakes, forests and rivers, 
among which I wandered solitary, is evident in every stanza. The influence of 
my rcading is almost negligible. The ‘wish-phantasm’ of the book is princi- 
pally that of a wise and holy man living in a lonely tower, master of the 
secrets of nature. I had little conscious aspiration to that ideal. In practice, 
I was living for pleasure.

Another book of the transition period was Green Alps. This was never

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALBISTER CROWLEY 139

published. I had paid Leonard Smithers to have it printed and he told me that 
the printers’ works had been destroyed by fire, which may or may not have 
been the case. It is characteristic that I accepted the situation with a shrug of 
the shoulders. I had a complete sct of proofs, but I had become rather 
ashamed of the book. I merely selected the pocms which I thought really 
worth while for inclusion in subsequent volumes. The collection was 
marked by a tendency to earthly passion; and its title shows that I already 
regarded human love as an idea to be transcended. Green Alps are pleasant 
pasturcs, but I was bound for thc peaks.

My essential spirituality is made manifest by yet another publication, 
which stands as a testimony of my praeterhuman innocence. The book is 
called White Stains and is commonly quoted by my admirers as evidence of 
my addiction to every kind of unmentionable vice. Asses! It is, indccd, 
technically, an obscene book, and yet the fact that I wrote it proves the purity 
of my heart and mind in the most extraordinary fashion.The facts are as follows: In the course of my reading I had come across 
von Krafft-Ebing’s Psychopathia Sexualis. The professor tries to prove that 
sexual aberrations are the result of disease. I did not agree. I thought that I 
was able to understand the psychology involved; I thought that the acts were 
merely magical affirmations of perfectly intelligible points of view. I said to 
mysclf that I must confute the professor. I could only do this by employing 
the one form at my disposal: the artistic form. I therefore invented a poet who 
went wrong, who began with normal and innocent enthusiasms, and 
gradually developed various vices. He ends by being stricken with disease and 
madness, culminating in murder. In his poems he describes his downfall, 
always explaining the psychology of each act.

The conclusions of the book might therefore be approved in any Sunday 
School, and its metaphysics is orthodox from the point of view of the 
theologian. I wrote the book in absolute seriousness and in all innocence. It 
never occurred to me that a demonstration of the terrible results of mis- 
guided passion might be mistaken for pornography. Indeed, now that I do 
understand that vile minds think it a vile book, I recognize with grim 
satisfaction that Psychopathia Sexualis itself has attained its enormous popu- 
larity because people love to gloat over such things. Its scientific form has 
not protected it from abusc, any more than the artistic form of my own reply 
to it. But von Krafft-Ebing has not been blackguarded as I have. The average 
man cannot believe that an artist may be as serious and high-minded an 
observer of life as the professed man of science.

I was to find very shortly that the most innocent personal relations could 
be taken by filthy minds as the basis for their malicious imagination. The 
story of how this came about dominates my third year at the university, as 
will appear. It seems as if my destiny were preparing me for my appointed140 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

work by clearing inessential factors out of the way. My one serious worldly 
ambition had been to become the champion of the world at chess. I had 
snatched a gamc from Blackburne in simultancous play some ycars before. I 
was bcing beaten in the Sicilian defence. The only chance was the sacrifice of 
a rook. I remember the grand old master coming round to my board and 
cocking his alcoholized eye cunningly at me. ‘Hullo,’ said he, ‘Morphy come 
to town again!’ I am not coxcomb enough to think that he could not have 
won the game, even aftcr my brilliancy. I believe that his colossal gencrosity 
let me win to encourage a promising youngstcr.

I had frequently beaten Bird at Simpson’s and when I got to Cambridge I 
made a savagely intense study of the game. In my second year I was president 
of the university and had beaten such first-rate amatcurs as Gunston and Cole. 
Outside the mastcr class, Atkins was my only acknowledged superior. I madc 
mincemeat of the man who was champion of Scotland a few years later, 
even after I had given up the game. I spent over two hours a day in study and 
more than that in practice. I was assured on all hands that another ycar would 
scc me a master myself.I had been to St Petersburg to learn Russian for the Diplomatic Service in 
the long vacation of 1897, and on my way back broke the journey in Berlin 
to attend the Chess Congress. But I had hardly entered the room where 
the masters werc playing when I was scized with what may justly be des- 
cribed as a mystical experience. I seemed to be looking on at the tournament 
from outside myself. I saw the masters — one, shabby, snuffy and blear-eyed; 
another, in badly fitting would-be respectable shoddy; a third, a mere parody 
of humanity, and so on for the rest. These were the people to whose ranks I 
was sccking admission. “There, but for the grace of God, gocs Aleister 
Crowley,’ I exclaimed to mysclf with disgust, and there and then I registered 
a vow never to play another serious game of chess. I perceived with praeter- 
natural lucidity that I had not alighted on this planet with the object of 
playing chess.

Alcister Crowley, by the way! I have not yet explained how I came to 
have changed my name. For many ycars I had loathed being called Alick, 
partly because of the unplcasant sound and sight of the word, partly because 
it was the name by which my mother called me. Edward did not seem 
to suit me and the diminutives Ted or Ned were even less appropriate. 
Alexander was too long and Sandy suggested tow hair and freckles. | 
had read in some book or other that the most favourable name for becoming 
famous was one consisting of a dacty] followed by a spondec, as at the end 
of a hexameter: like ‘Jeremy Taylor’. Alcister Crowley fulfilled these con- 
ditions and Aleister is the Gaelic form of Alexander. To adopt it would 
satisfy my romantic ideals. The atrocious spelling A-L-E-I-S-T-E-R was 
suggested as the correct form by Cousin Gregor, who ought to have known

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY I4ITHE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY I4I

better. In any case, A-L-A-I-S-D-A-I-R makes a very bad dactyl. For these 
reasons I saddled mysclf with my present nom-de-gucrre—I can’t say that J 
feel sure that I facilitated the process of becoming famous. I should doubtless 
have done so, whatever namc I had chosen.

17

J began my last year at Cambridge with my moral decks cleared for action. I 
didn’t know where I was going, but I was on the way. I was thus quite ready 
for the perception of the First Noble Truth, but also for an entircly new 
current to influence my life. Towards the end of the October term I met a 
man named Herbert Charles Jerome Pollitt. He was an M.A., ten years older 
than mysclf, and had mercly come up to Cambridge to dance for the 
F.D.C. (Footlights Dramatic Club). I saw him only once or twice that term, 
but corresponded with him from abroad during the Christmas vacation. The 
result was the establishment of the first intimate friendship of my life.

Pollitt was rather plain than otherwise. His face was made tragic by the 
terrible hunger of the eyes and the bittcr sadness of the mouth. He possessed 
one physical beauty —his hair. This was very plentiful and he worc it rather 
long. It was what is called a shock. But its colour was pale gold, like spring 
sunshine, and its texture of the finest gossamer. The relation between us was 
that ideal intimacy which the Grceks considered the greatest glory of man- 
hood and the most precious prize of life. It says much for the moral state of 
England that such ideas are connected in the minds of practically every onc 
with physical passion.My sexual life was very intense. My relations with women were entirely 
satisfactory. They gave me the maximum of bodily enjoyment and at the 
same time symbolized my theological notions of sin. Love was a challenge 
to Christianity. It was a degradation and a damnation. Swinbume had 
taught me the doctrine of justification by sin. Every woman that I met 
enabled me to affirm magically that I had deficd the tyranny of the Plymouth 
Brethren and the Evangelicals. At the same time women were the source 
of romantic inspiration; and their caresses emancipated me from the thral- 
dom of the body. When I left them I found myself walking upon air, 
with my soul free to wing its way through endless empyreans and to 
express its godhead in untrammelled thought of transcendent sublimity, 
expressed in language which combincd the purest aspirations with the most 
majestic melodies. Poems like “The Philosopher’s Progress’ illustrate my 
unconscious, and poems like ‘De Profundis’ my conscious reaction. But, 
morally and mentally, women werc for me beneath contempt. They had no 
true moral ideals. They were bound up with their necessary preoccupation, 
with the function of reproduction. Their apparent aspirations were camou- 
flage. Intellectually, of course, they did not exist. Even the few whose minds

142

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLBY 143

were not completcly blank had them furnished with Wardour Street 
Chippendale. Their attainments were those of the ape and the parrot. These 
facts did not deter me. On the contrary, it was highly convenient that one’s 
sexual relations should be with an animal with no consciousness beyond sex.As to my men friends, I had never met anyone of sufficiently exalted 
ideals and refinement to awaken serious sympathy. Pollitt was a new species. 
My feeling for him was an intensely purc flame of admiration mingled with 
infinite pity for his spiritual disenchantment. It was infinite because it could 
not even imagine a goal and dwelt wholly amid eternal things.

To him I was a mind—no more. He never manifested the slightest interest 
in any of my occupations. He had no sympathy with any of my ambitions, 
not even my poetry, cxcept in a very peculiar way, which I have never 
thoroughly understood. He showed an instinctive distrust of my religious 
aspirations, because he realized that sooner or later they would take me out of 
his reach. He had himself no hope or fear of anything beyond the material 
world. But he never tired of the originality of my point of view; of watching 
the way in which my brain dealt with every subject that came under 
discussion.

It was the purcst and noblest relation which I had ever had with anybody. I 
had not imagined the possibility of so divine a development. It was, in a 
sense, passionatc, because it partook of the white heat of creative energy and 
because its intensity absorbed all other emotions. But for this very reason it 
was impossible to conceive of it as liable to contamination by any grosser 
qualities. Indeed, the universe of sense was entirely subordinated to its 
sanctity. It was based upon impressions as an incandescent light upon its 
filament. But the world was transfigured and consumed by the ineffable 
intensity of the spiritual consciousness. It was so free from any impure 
ingredient that my friendship with Pollitt in no way interfered with the 
current of my life. I went on reading, writing, climbing, skating, cycling and 
intriguing, as if I had never met him.Yet his influence initiated me in certain important respects. He was a 
close friend of Beardsley’s and introduced me to the French and English 
renaissance. In his heart was a hunger for beauty which I can only call 
hideous and cruel, because it was so hopeless. He totally lacked illumination 
in the mystical sense of the word. His outlook on life was desperate, very 
much like that of Des Esseintes. He suffered like Tintagiles. He could not 
accept any of the usual palliatives and narcotics; he had no creative genius, 
no ideals; he could not deceive himself about love, art or religion. He merely 
yearned and moaned. In certain respects he annoyed me, because I was 
determined to make my dreams come truc; and he represented eternal 
dissatisfaction. In his heart was ‘the worm that dicth not and the fire that 
is not quenched’.

144 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

The school of art and literature to which he introduced me was thus 
one which I instinctively despised, even while I adored it. The intense 
rcfinement of its thought and the blazing brilliance of its technique helped 
me to kcy myself up to a pitch of artistry entirely beyond my original 
scope; but I never allowed myself to fall under its dominion. I was deter- 
mined to triumph, to find my way out on the other side. Baudelaire and 
Swinburne, at their best, succeed in celebrating the victory of the human 
soul over its adversaries, just as truly as Milton and Shellcy. I never had a 
moment's doubt that I belonged to this school. To me it is a question of 
virility. Even James Thomson, cnding with ‘confirmation of the old des- 
pair’, somehow defeats that despair by the cssential force of his genius. 
Keats, on the contrary, no matter how hard he endcavours to cnd on a note 
of optimism, always leaves an impression of failure.I well know how strangely perverse this criticism must sound, but I fecl 
its truth in the marrow of my bones. In my own writings the tempestuous 
energy of my soul invariably sweeps away the wreckage of my mind. No 
matter to what depth I plunge, I always end with my wings beating steadily 
upwards towards the sun. The actual writing which releases my unconscious 
produces the effect. I inevitably end by transcending the problem of the 
poem, either lyrically or satirically. Turn to any page at random and the 
truth of this will become apparent.

In his ame at Cambridge Pollitt had becn very prominent as a female 
impersonator and dancer. He called himself Diane de Rougy — aprés Liane de 
Pougy. The grossness of people who do not understand art naturally mis- 
interpreted this acsthetic gesture and connected it with a tendency to 
androgynity. I never saw the slightest symptoms of anything of the kind 
in him; though the subject sometimes camc under discussion. But at that 
time it was considcred criminal to admire Lady Windermere’s Fan. I have 
always taken the attitude of Bishop Blougram and pay no attention to

the infamy scrawled broad 
About mc on the church wall opposite.

I have made a point of understanding the psychology of the subject: Nihil 
humani a me alienum puto.

But the conscience of the world is so guilty that it always assumcs that 
people who investigate heresies must be heretics; just as if a doctor who 
studies leprosy must be a leper. Indeed, it is only recently that science has 
been allowed to study anything without reproach. Matter being evil, the 
less that we know about it the better—such was the Christian philosophy 
in the ages which it darkened. Morris Travers told me that his father, an 
eminent physician, had been ostracized, and had lost much of his practice, 
for joining the Anthropological Society. Later still, Havelock Ellis and

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 14§THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 14§

Edward Carpenter have been treated with the foulest injustice by ignorant 
and prejudiced people. My mother always believed that the Great Eastern, 
the first steamship of any size to speak of, met with repeated disasters because 
God was jealous, as He had been of the Tower of Babel. In 1917 my cousin, 
Lawrence Bishop, told me that he thought that ‘the Lord prepared a great 
iceberg’ for the Titanic in annoyance at the claim of the shipbuilders that 
she was unsinkable. William Whiteley had several fires, which my mother 
took as the repartee of the Almighty to the merchant’s assumption of the 
title ‘Universal Provider’, which could be properly attributed only to 
God.It is the modern fashion to try to dismiss these barbarous absurdities as 
cxcrescences on Christianity, but they are of the essence of the religion. 
The whole theory of the atonement implies that man can set up his own 
will in opposition to God’s, and thereby excites Him to anger which can 
only be pacified by the sacrifice of His Son. It is, after all, quite as reasonable 
to think of God as being irritated by a shipbuilding programme as by 
idolatry. The tendency has, in fact, been to forget about the atonement 
altogether and to represent Jesus as a ‘Master’ whose tcachings are humani- 
tarian and enlightcned. Yet the only evidence of what he actually said is 
that of the gospels and these not only insist upon the incredible and immoral 
sides of Christianity, but contain actual Logia which exhibit Jesus in the 
character of a superstitious fanatic who taught the doctrine of etcrnal punish- 
ment and many others unacceptable to modern enlightenment. General 
Booth and Billy Sunday preach perfectly scriptural abominations. Again, 
much of the teaching of Jesus which is not savage superstition is diametrically 
opposed to the ideas of those modern moralists who reject his supernaturalism 
and salvationalism. The injunction “Take no thought for the morrow’ is 
incompatible with ‘Preparedness’, insurance and any other practice involving 
foresight. The command to break off all family and social relationships is 
similarly unethical. The truth, of course, is that these instructions were 
given to a select body of men, not to the world at large. Renunciation of 
the world is the first step toward spiritual illumination, and in the East, from 
the beginning of recorded time to the present day, the yogi, the fakir, the 
bhikkhu and the monk take this course, expecting that the picty of their 
neighbours will supply them with a means of livelihood.It is not only illogical to pick out of the gospels the texts which happen 
to suit one’s own prejudices and then claim Christ as the supreme teacher, 
but his claims to pre-eminence are barred by the fact that all the passages 
which are not fiendish superstition find parallels in the writings of earlier 
masters. The works of Lao Tzu, the Buddhist canon, the Upanishads, the 
Bhagavad-Gita, the Talmud and the philosophy of many of-the early 
Greeks, to say nothing of the sacred books of Egypt, contain the whole of

146 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

the metaphysics, theology and ethics to which modern enlightenment can 
assent. It is monstrous and mischievous for liberal thinkers to call themselves 
Christians; thcir nominal adhesion dclays the disruption of the infamous 
system which they condonc. To declare oneself a follower of Jesus is not 
only to insult history and reason, but to apologize for the murderers of 
Arius, Molinos and Cranmer, the persecutors of science, the upholders of 
slavery and the suppressors of all free thought and speech.At this time I had not carried these arguments to their logical conclusion. 
The Cloud upon the Sanctuary told me of a secret community of saints in 
possession of every spiritual grace, of the keys to the treasures of nature, 
and of moral emancipation such that there was no intolerance or unkindness. 
The members of this Church lived thcir secret life of sanctity in the world, 
radiating light and love upon all that came within their scope, yet they 
were free from spiritual pride. They enjoyed intimate communion with 
the immanent divine soul of naturc. Inheritors of innocence and illumination, 
they werc not self-seekers; and their one passion was to bring mankind into 
the sphere of thcir own sublimity, dealing with cach individual as his cir- 
cumstanccs required. To them the members of the Trinity were nearer and 
more real than anything else in the universe. But they were pure ideas of 
incorruptible integrity. The incarnation was a mystical or magical operation 
which took place in every man. Each was himself the Son of God who had 
assumed a body of flesh and blood in order to perform the work of redemp- 
tion. The in-dwelling of the Holy Ghost was a sanctification resulting from 
the completion of the great work when the self had been crucified to itself 
and raised again in incorruptible immortality.I did not yct see that this conception reposed on metaphysical bases as 
untenable as those of orthodoxy. There was no attempt to explain the origin 
of evil and similar difficulties. But these things were mysteries which would 
be revealed to the saint as he advanced in the way of grace. Anyhow, I 
was certainly not the person to cavil. The sublimity of the idca enthralled 
mc; it satisfied my craving for romance and poetry. I determined with my 
whole heart to make myself worthy to attract the notice of this mysterious 
brotherhood. I yearned passionately for illumination. I could imagine 
nothing more exquisite than to center into communion with these holy 
men and to acquire the powcr of communicating with the angelic and divine 
intelligence of the universe. I longed for perfect purity of life, for mastery 
of the secret forces of nature, and for a carcer of devoted labour on behalf 
of ‘the Creation which groaneth and travaileth’.

My poetry at this time is charged to the highest point with these aspira- 
tions. I may mention the dedication to Songs of the Spirit, ‘The Quest’, 
‘The Alchemist’, ‘The Philosopher’s Progress’, ‘A Spring Snowstorm in 
Wastdalc’, ‘Succubus’, ‘Nightfall’, “The Storm’, ‘Wheat and Wine’, ‘Ves-

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 147

pers’, ‘Astrology’ and ‘Daedalus’. In ‘The Farewcll of Paracelsus to Aprile’, 
‘The Initiation’, ‘Isaiah’ and ‘Power’, I have expressed my ideas about the 
ordeals which might be expected on the Path. All these poems were pub- 
lished in 1898. In later volumes, Mysteries Lyrical and Dramatic, The Fatal 
Force, The Temple of the Holy Ghost and Tannhäuser, these ideas are carried 
further in the light of my practical experience of the Path.It may seem strange that, despite the yearning after sanctification, which 
is the keynote of these works, I never lost sight of what seems on the surface 
the incompatible idea of justification by sin. ‘Jezebel’ and the other pocms 
in that volume prove this point. It is as if my unconscious were aware that 
every act is a sacrament and that the most repulsive rituals might be in 
some ways the most effective. The only adequate way of overcoming evil 
was to utilize it fully as a means of grace. Religion was for me a passionate 
reality of the most positive kind. Virtuc is etymologically manhood. Virility, 
creative conception and enthusiastic execution were the means of attainment. 
There could be no merit in abstention from vice. Vice indeed is vitium, a 
flaw or defect.

This attitude is not antinomianism, as the word is usually understood. 
When St Paul said, ‘All things arc lawful for me, but all things are not 
expedient’, he only went half way. One ought to leave no form of energy 
to rust. Every particle of one’s personality is a necessary factor in the cqua- 
tion and every impulse must be turned to account in the Great Work. I 
perceived, moreover, that all conventional rules of conduct were valid only 
in relation to environment. To take a fundamental issue: self-preservation. 
On the theory of reincarnation or that of immortality, there should be no 
more objection to dying than there is to going to sleep. In any case, I realized 
that my physical life was utterly valueless; and I did not set it at a pin’s

ee.ee.

I have never been afraid of carrying into effect my conclusions; and I 
knew, what is morc, that to fail to do so would be merely to create a con- 
flict in mysclf. I had a thorough instinctive understanding of the theory of 
psychoanalysis. To this fact I attribute my extraordinary success in all my 
spiritual undertakings. From the very beginning I made a point of carrying 
out the instructions of one of the old Grimoires ‘to buy a black egg without 
haggling’. I always understood that spiritual and material wealth were 
incommensurable. If I wanted a book on Magick and it was offered me for 
ten times the proper price, I would buy it on the spot, even though I knew 
that I had only to go round the corner to find an honest tradesman.

I did this sort of thing on purpose to affirm magically that nothing mattered 
except the work of the moment. It was ‘Take no thought for the morrow’ 
carricd out in its most literal sense. I made a point of putting God on His 
honour, so to speak, to supply anything I might need by demonstrating to

148 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

him that I would not keep back the Icast imaginable fraction of my resources. 
I acquired this custom later on, when I had definitely discovered the direc- 
tion of my destiny; but the moral basis of my attitude was already prcsent. 
The first important indication of its incidence is given by the outcome of 
my friendship with Pollitt.

He was in residence during the Easter term of 1898 and we saw each other 
almost every day. In the vacation he accompanied me to Wastdale Head 
and used to walk with me over the fells, though I could never persuade 
him to do any rock climbing.I was absorbed in The Cloud upon the Sanctuary, reading it again and 
again without being put off by the pharisaical, priggish and pithecanthro- 
poid notes of its translator, Madame de Steiger. I appealed with the whole 
force of my will to the adepts of the Hidden Church to prepare me as a 
postulant for thcir august company. As will be scen later, acts of will, per- 
formed by the proper person, never fall to the ground, impossible as it is 
(at present) to understand by what means the energy is transmitted.

Although Pollitt had done so much for my education by introducing me 
to the actual atmosphere of current aesthetic ideas, to the work of Whistler, 
Rops and Beardslcy in art, and that of the so-called decadents in literature, 
as well as to many remote and exquisite masters of the past whom I had 
ignored or misunderstood, my admiration and gratitude did not prevent 
me from becoming conscious of the deep-seated aversion of our souls. He 
had made no mistake in divining that my spiritual aspirations were hostile 
to his acquiescence in despair of the universe. So I felt in my subconscious 
sclf that I must choose between my devotion to him and to the Secret 
Assembly of the Saints. Though he was actual and adequate, I preferred to 
risk all on the hazard. Human friendship, ideal as it was in this case, was under 
the curse of the universal sorrow. I determined deliberately to give it up, 
notwithstanding that it was unique and adorable in its way; that there was 
no reasonable hopc of replacing it. This was my act of faith, unalloyed with 
the dross of hope, and stamped with the imperial countenance of love, to 
determine that I would not continue our relations.The poignancy of this resolution was jagged and envenomed; for he was 
the only person with whom I had ever enjoyed truly spiritual intercourse 
and my heart was loncly, hungry and embittered as only a poet’s heart can 
understand. This determination developed gradually during that last May 
term. He fought most desperately against my increasing preoccupation with 
the aspiration in which he recognized the exccutioner of our friendship.

Shortly after I went down, we had a last interview. I had gone down to 
the Bear at Maidenhead, on the quiet, to write ‘Jezebel’. I only told one person 
—in strict confidence — where I was going; but Pollitt found out that person 
and forced him to tell my secret. He walked into the room shortly after

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 149

dinner, to my surprise and rage—for when I am writing a pocm I would 
show Azracl himself the door!

I told him frankly and firmly that I had given my life to religion and that 
he did not fit into the scheme. I see now how imbecile I was, how hidcously 
wrong and weak it is to reject any part of one’s personality. Yet these mis- 
takes are not mistakcs at the time: one has to pass through such periods; one 
must be ruthless in analysis and complete it, before one can proceed to 
synthesis. He understood that I was not to be turncd from my purpose and 
we parted, never to mect again. I repented of my decision, my eyes having 
been enlightened, only a little later, but the reconciliation was not written! 
My letter miscarried; and in thc autumn, when he passed mc in Bond Street, 
I happened not to sce him; he thought I meant to cut him and our destinies 
drew apart.It has been my lifclong regret, for a nobler and purer comradeship never 
existed on this earth, and his influence might have done much to temper 
my subsequent trials. Nevertheless, the fragrance of that fricndship still 
lingers in the sanctuary of my soul. That cucharist of the spirit reminds mc 
constantly that the one ingredicnt necessary to my acsthetic development 
was supplied by the gods at the one period in my life when it could profitably

be introduced into my equipment.

1s

During the May term of 1898 I met another man who, in his own way, 
was interested in many of the same things as I was myself. His name was 
Gerald Festus Kelly. He is described in the telephone book as an artist; and 
the statement might have passed unchallenged indefinitely had not the 
Royal Academy recently elected him as an associate. He is hardly to be 
blamed for this disgrace. He struggled manfully. Even at the last moment, 
when he felt the thunderclouds about to break over his head, he made a 
last desperate coup to persuade the world that he was an artist by marrying 
a model. But the device deccived nobody. The evidence of his pictures was 
too glaring. The effort, moreover, completely exhausted his power of 
resistance; and he reccived the blow with Christian resignation. It saddens 
me morc than I can say to think of that young life which opened with such 
brilliant promise, gradually sinking into the slough of respectability. Of 
coursc it is not as if he had been able to paint; but to me the calamity is 
almost as distressing as if that possibility had ever existed. For he completely 
hypnotized mc into thinking that he had something in him. I took his 
determination to become an artist as evidence of some trace of capacity and 
I still hope that his years of unremitting devotion to a hopcless ambition 
will earn him the right to rcincarnate with some sort of soul.We met in a somewhat romantic way. My Aceldama had just been issucd 
and was being sold privately in the university at half-a-crown. (There were 
only cighty-eight copies, with tcn on large paper and two on vellum.) 
One of the mottoes in Aceldama is a quotation from Swinburne’s “The 
Leper’. I had not acknowledged the authorship of Aceldama; it was by ‘A 
Gentleman of the University of Cambridge’ in imitation of one of Shelley's 
earlicr books.

Now, there was a bookseller in the town with whom I had few dealings, 
for he was the most nauscatingly hypocritical specimen of the pushing 
tradesman that I ever set eyes on. He was entirely irreligious and did a con- 
siderable business in the kind of book which is loathsomely described as 
‘curious’. But he was out to get the clerical and academic custom and to 
this end adopted a dress and manner which would have been affected in 
the sweetest of young curatcs. Somchow or other, a copy of Aceldama got 
into his hands; he showcd it to Kelly, who was so excited by the quotation 
from Swinburne that he found out who I was, and a meeting was arranged. 
His knowledge of both art and literature was encyclopaedic, and we became

150

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY I§gl

very intimate, projecting collaboration in an Arthurian play and a new 
magazine to take the place of The Yellow Book and The Savoy, which had 
died with Beardsley. Nothing much came of this at the time, but the meet- 
ing had in it the germs of important developments. The critical event of 
the year was my meeting with Oscar Eckenstein at Wastdale Head.Eckenstein was a man twenty years older than myself. His business in 
life was mathematics and science, and his one pleasure mountaineering. He 
was probably the best all-round man in England, but his achievements were 
little known because of his almost fanatical objection to publicity. He hated 
self-advertising quacks like the principal members of thc Alpine Club with 
an intensity which, legitimate as it was, was almost overdone. His detestation 
of every kind of humbug and false pretence was an overmastcring passion. 
I have never met any man who upheld thc highest moral ideals with such 
unflinching candour.

We did a few climbs together that Easter and made a sort of provisional 
agreement to undertake an expedition to the Himalayas when occasion 
offered. He had been a member of the Conway expedition of 1892, but 
had quitted the party at Askole, principally on account of his disgust with 
its mismanagement. The separation was engineered, moreover, from the 
other side. For what reason has never becn clearly explained. It would 
evidently be improper to suggest that they had made up their minds to 
record at least a partial success and did not want an independent witness to 
their proceedings on the glacier.

One incident of that expedition is well worth mentioning. A survey 
was being made with instruments which lacked various essential parts, and 
on Eckenstein pointing out the uselessness of making observations of this 
kind, the reply was, ‘Yes, I know, but it’s good enough for the Royal 
Geographical Society.’ Anything of this sort roused Eckenstein to a pitch 
of indescribably violent rage. I could not have had a better teacher in matters 
of conscience. He taught me thoroughness and accuracy in every department 
of the game.To illustrate one point. I had considered myself a very good glissader, 
and as compared with the other people whom I met on the mountain side, 
even such experts as Norman Collie, I had little to learn. But Eckenstein 
showed me that I was not even a beginner. He made me start down assorted 
slopes from all sorts of positions, and to pick myself up into any other 
desired position; to stop, to increase my pace or to jump, at the word of 
command. Why ‘starting from all sorts of positions’? The idea was that one 
might conceivably fall on to a snow slope or have to jump to it from a 
great height, and it was therefore necessary to know how to deal with such 
situations.*

* See The Diary of a Drug Fiend, pp. 159-60.

152 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

The combination was ideal. Eckenstcin had all the civilized qualities and 
I all the savage ones. He was a finished athlete; his right arm, in particular, 
was so strong that he had only to get a couple of fingers on to a sloping 
ledge of an overhanging rock above his head and he could draw himself 
slowly up by that alone until his right shoulder was well above those fingers. 
There is a climb on the east face of the Y-shaped boulder (so called because 
of a forked crack on the west face) near Wastdale Head Hotel which he 
was the only man to do, though many quite first-rate climbers tried it. 
Great as his strength was, he considered it as nothing, quoting a Bavarian 
schoolmaster of his acquaintance, who could tear a silver florin in half with 
his fingers.

He was rather short and sturdily built. He did not know the meaning 
of the word ‘fatigue’. He could endure the utmost hardship without turning 
a hair. He was absolutcly reliable, either as lcader or second man, and this 
quality was based upon profound and accurate calculations. He knew his 
limitations to a hair’s breadth. I never saw him attempt anything beyond 
his powers; and I never knew him in want of anything from lack of 
foresight.He had a remarkable sense of direction, though infcrior to my own. But 
his was based upon rational considerations, that is to say, he could deduce 
where north was from calculations connected with geology, wind and the 
law of probabilities; whereas my own finer sense was purcly psychical and 
depended upon the subconscious registration in my brain as to the angles 
through which my body had turned during the day.

One point, however, is not covered by this explanation, nor can I find 
anything satisfactory or even plausible. For instance, one day (not having 
scen moonrise that month or in the district) we attempted to climb the 
Volcan di Colima; we had sent back our mozos with the camp to Zapotlan, 
intending to cross the mountain to the ranch of a gentleman to whom we 
had introductions. We had watched the volcano for a week and more, in 
the hope of discovering some periodicity in its eruptions, which we failed 
to do. We accordingly took our chance and went across the slopes until the 
rocks began to burn our fect through our boots. We recognized that it was 
hopeless to proceed.

We decided to make for the farm and soon reached a belt of virgin jungle 
where the chapparal and fallen timber made it almost impenctrable. The 
trees were so thick that we could rarely see the sky. The only indication for 
progress was to keep on down hill. The slopes were amazingly complicated, 
so that at any moment we might have been facing east, south or west. The 
dust of the rotten timber almost choked and blinded us. We suffered tor- 
tures from thirst, our water supply being extremely limited. Night fell; it 
was impossible to see our hands in front of us. We accordingly lit a fire to

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 1$3THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 1$3

keep off the jackals and other possibilities, which we heard howling round 
us. We naturally began to discuss the question of direction; and I said, “The 
moon will rise over therc’, and laid down my axe as a pointer. Eckenstein 
independently laid down his, after a rather prolonged mental calculation. 
When the moon rose we found that my axe was within five degrees and 
his within ten degrces of the correct direction. This was only one of many 
such tests; and I do not sce in the least how I knew, especially as astronomy 
is one of the many subjects of which my knowledge is practically nil. In 
spite of innumerable nights spent under the stars, I can recognize few 
constellations except the Great Bear and Orion.

Besides my sense of direction on the large scale, I have a quite uncanny 
faculty for picking out a complicated route through rocks and ice falls. This 
is not simply a question of good judgment; for in any given route, scen 
from a distance, there may always be a passage, perhaps not twenty feet in 
height, which would render the whole plan abortive. This is especially the 
case with ice falls, where much of the route is necessarily hidden from view. 
Obviously, one cannot see what is on the other side of a sérac whose top 
one has theoretically reached. Yet I have never been wrong; I have never 
been forced to turn back from a climb once begun.I have also an astonishing memory for the minutest details of any ground 
over which I have passed. Professor Norman Collie had this quality very 
highly developed, but he paid me the compliment of saying that I was much 
better than he was himself. This, too, was in my very carly days when he 
was teaching me many quite rudimentary points in the technique of rock 
climbing. Again, we have a question of subconscious physical memory. I 
am often quite unable to describe even the major landmarks of a climb 
which I have just done, but I recognize every pebble as I come to it if asked 
to retrace my steps. Efforts on my part to bring up a mountain into clear 
consciousness frequently create such a muddle in my mind that I almost 
wonder at mysclf. I make such grotesque mistakes that I am not far from 
doubting whether I have been on the mountain at all: yct my limbs possess 
a consciousness of their own which is infallible. I am reminded of the 
Shetland ponies (sce Wilkie Collins’s The Two Destinies) which can find 
their way through the most bewildering bogs and mist. This faculty is not 
only retrospective —I can find my way infallibly over unknown country in 
any weather. The only thing that stops me is the interference of my conscious 
mind.

I have several other savage faculties; in particular, I can smell snow and 
water, though for ordinary things my olfactory sense is far below the 
average. I cannot distinguish perfectly familiar perfumes in many cases; 
that is, I cannot connect them with thcir namos.

Eckenstein and I were both exceedingly expert at describing what lay

194 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWNEckenstein and I were both exceedingly expert at describing what lay

194 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

behind any mountain at which we might be looking. In his case, the know- 
ledge was deduced scientifically; in mine, it was what one must call sheer 
clairvoyance. The nearest I could get to understanding his methods was 
judging by the glow above the ridge of a mountain whether the other side 
was snow-covered, and estimating its steepness and the angle of its rocks 
by analogy with the corresponding faces of the mountains behind us, or 
similar formations elsewherc. It should hardly be necessary to point out the 
extraordinary practical value of these qualitics in deciding one’s route in 
unknown country.

In the actual technique of climbing, Eckenstein and I were sull morc 
complementary. It is impossible to imagine two mcthods more opposed. 
His climbing was invariably clean, orderly and intelligible; mine can hardly 
be described as human. I think my early untutored efforts, emphasized by 
my experience on chalk, did much to form my style. His movements were 
a series, mine were continuous; he used definite muscles, I used my whole 
body. Owing doubtless to my early ill-health, I never developed physical 
strength; but I was very light, and possessed clasticity and balance to an 
extraordinary degrcc.I remember going out on Scafell with a man named Corry. He was the 
ideal athlete and had gone through a course of Sandow; but had little 
experience of climbing at that time. I took him up the North Climb of 
Mickledoor. There is one place where, while hunting for holds, one supports 
oneself by an arm stretched at full length into a crack. The arm is supported 
by the rock and the hand grasps a hold as satisfactory as a sword hilt. The 
inconceivable happened; Corry fell off and had to be replevined by the 
rope. I was amazed, but said nothing. We continued the climb and, reaching 
the top of the Broad Stand, took off the rope. By way of exercise, I suggested 
climbing a short, precipitous pitch above a sloping slab. There was no 
possible danger, it was within the powers of a child of six; but Corry came 
off again. I was standing on the slab and caught him by the collar as he 
passed on his way to destruction.

After that, we put on the rope again and returned by descending, I think, 
Mickledoor Chimney. On the way down to Wastdale, he was strangely 
silent and embarrassed, but finally he made up his mind to ask me about it.

‘Do you mind if I fecl your arm?” he said. ‘It must be a marvel.’

I complicd and he nearly fainted with surprise. My muscles were in 
quantity and quality like those of an carly Victorian young lady. He showed 
me his own arm. There could not have been a finer piece of anatomy for 
manly strength. He could not understand how, with everything in his 
favour, he had been unable to maintain his grip on the best holds in 
Westmorland.

A curious parallel to this incident happened in 1902 on the expedition

THE CONFESSIONS OP ALEISTER CROWLEY ISSA curious parallel to this incident happened in 1902 on the expedition

THE CONFESSIONS OP ALEISTER CROWLEY ISS

to Chogo Ri. We had an arrangement by which a pair of ski could be 
converted into a sledge for convenience in hauling baggage over snow- 
covered glaciers. When the doctor and I proposed to move from Camp 10 
to Camp 11 we set up this sledge and packed seven loads on it. We found 
it quite easy to pull. This was clearly an cconomy of five porters and we 
started two men up the slope. To our astonishment they were unable to 
budge it. They called for assistance; until the whole seven were on the 
ropes. Even so, they had great difficulty in pulling the sledge and before 
they had gone a hundred yards managed to upset it into a crevasse. They 
settled the matter by taking two loads (between 100 and 120 pounds) each 
and went off quite merrily. It is useless to have strength unless you know 
how to apply it.

Eckenstcin recognized from the first the valuc of my natural instincts for 
mountaineering, and also that I was one of the silliest young asses alive. 
Apart from the few priceless lessons that I had had from Norman Collie, I 
was still an amatcur of the most callow type. I had no idea of system. I had 
achieved a good deal, it is true, by a mixture of genius and common sense; 
but I had no regular training and was totally ignorant of the serious business 
of camp life and other branches of exploration.

We arranged to spend the summer in a tent on the Schénbihl glacier 
under the Dent Blanche, primarily with the idea of fitting me for the 
Himalayan expedition, and secondarily with that of climbing the east face 
of the Dent Blanche by a new route which he had previously attempted 
with Zurbriggen. They had been stopped by a formation which is excecd- 
ingly curious and rare in the Alps—slopes of very soft snow set at an un- 
climbable angle. He thought that my capacity for swimming up places of 
this sort might enable us to bag the mountain.I hope that Eckenstcin has left adequate material for a biography and 
made arrangements for its publication. I had always meant to handle the 
matter mysclf. But the unhappy termination of his life in phthisis and 
marriage, when he had hoped to spend its autumn and winter in Kashmir 
meditating upon the mysteries which appealed to his sublime spirit, made 
all such plans nugatory.

I feel it one of my highest duties to record in thcse memoirs as much as 
possible relative to this man, who, with Allan Bennett, stands apart from 
and above all others with whom I have been rcally intimate. The greatness 
of his spirit. was not inferior to that of such giants as Rodin; he was an artist 
no less than if he had actually produced any monument to his mind. Only 
his constant manhandling by spasmodic asthma prevented him from match- 
ing his genius by masterpicccs. As it is, there is an immense amount in his life 
mysterious and extraordinary beyond anything I have ever known. For 
instance, during a number of years he was the object of repcated murderous

156 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

attacks which he could only explain on the hypothesis that he was being 
mistaken for somebody clse.156 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

attacks which he could only explain on the hypothesis that he was being 
mistaken for somebody clse.

I must record one adventure, striking not only in itself, but because it is 
of a type which seems almost as universal as the ‘flying dream’. It possesses 
the quality of the phantasmal. It strikes me as an adventure which in some 
form or other happens to a very large number of men; which occurs 
constantly in dreams and romances of the Stevensonian order. For instance, 
I cannot help belicving that somcthing of the kind has happened to me, 
though I cannot say when, or remember the incidents. I have written the 
essence of it in “The Dream Circean’; and some phantasm of similar texture 
appears to me in slecp so frequently that I wonder whether its number is 
Icss than one weekly, on the average. Sometimes it perpetuates itself night 
after night, recognizable as itself despite immense varicty of setting, and 
haunting my waking hours with something approaching conviction that it 
represents some actuality.This story is. briefly as follows. Onc night after being attacked in the 
streets of Soho, or the district between that section of Oxford Street and 
the Euston Road, he determined, in casc of a rencwed assault, to walk home 
by a roundabout and unfamiliar route. Somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of the Caledonian Road he thought that he was being followed—it was 
now late at night and somewhat foggy. To make surc, he turned into a 
narrow passage on to which opencd the gardens of a row of houses, in one, 
and only onc, of which lights were visible. The garden door of this house 
was open and he dodged in to sce whether the men he suspected were 
following. Two figures appearing at the cnd of the passage, he quietly 
closed the door behind him with thc intention of entering the house, explain- 
ing his position and asking to be allowed to lcave by the front door. The 
door was opencd by a young and beautiful woman in fashionable evening 
dress. She appeared of good social position and, on his explaining himself, 
asked him to stay to supper. He accepted. No servants appeared, but on 
reaching the dining-room — which was charmingly furnished and decorated 
with extremely good pictures, Monct, Sisley and the like, with sketches or 
ctchings by Whistler, all small but admirable examples of those masters — 
he found a cold supper for two people was laid out. Eckenstein remained 
for several hours, in fact until daylight, when he left with the understanding 
that he would return that evening. He made no note of the address, the 
strect being familiar to him and his memory for numbers entirely reliable. 
I think that he was somchow prevented from returning the same evening; 
I am not quite sure on this point. But if so, hc was there twenty-four hours 
later. He was surprised to find the house in darkness and astounded when 
on further inspection he saw a notice ‘To Let’. He knocked and rang in 
vain, Assuming that he must have mistaken the numbcr, unthinkable as theTHE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 1$7

supposition was, he explored the adjacent houscs, but found nothing. 
Annoyed and intrigued, he called on the agent the next morning and visited 
the house. He recognized it as that of his hostess. Even the lesser discolora- 
tions of the wallpaper where the bookcase and pictures had been testified 
to the identity of the room. The agent assured him that the house had not 
been occupied for three months. Eckenstcin pointed to various tokens of 
recent occupancy. The agent refuscd to admit the conclusion. They explored 
the back part of the premises and found the French windows through which 
Eckenstcin had cntered, and the garden gatc, precisely as he had left them. 
On inquiry it appeared that the house was vacant owing to the proprietor 
(a bachelor of some sixty years old, who had lived there a long while with 
a man and wife to kccp house for him) having been ordered to the south of 
France for the winter. He had led a very retired life, seeing no company; the 
housc had been furnished in early Victorian style. Only the one room whcre 
Eckenstein had had supper was unfurnished. The agent explained this by 
saying that the old man had taken the effects of his study with him to France, 
for the sake of thcir familiarity.

The mystery intrigued Eckenstcin immensely and he returned several 
times to the house. A month or so latcr he found the two servants had 
returned. The master was cxpected back in the spring. They denied all 
knowledge of any such lady as described; and therc the mystery rests, save 
that some considerable time later Eckenstein received a letter, unsigned, in 
evidently disguised handwniting. It contained a few brief phrases to the cffect 
that the writer was sorry, but it could not be helped; that there was no hope 
for the future, but that memory would never fade. He connected this 
mysterious communication with his hostess, simply because he could not 
imagine any other possibility.I can offer no explanation whatever, but I believe evcry word of the story, 
and what is most strange is that 1 possess an impenetrable conviction that 
something almost exactly the samc must have happencd to me. I am re- 
minded of the one fascinating episode which redccms the oncc-famous but 
excessivcly stupid and sentimental novel Called Back from uttcrly abject 
dullness. There is also an admirable scence in one of Stcvenson’s best stories, 
John Nicholson’. A similar theme occurs in Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, ‘The 
Sire de Malétroit’s Door’, and ‘A Lodging for the Night’. There are 
similar ideas in oriental and classical literature. The fascination of the central 
idea thus seems a positive obsession to certain minds.

Is it somehow symbolic of a widespread wish or fear? Is it, as in the casc of 
the Oedipus complex, the vestige of a racial memory — ‘In the beginning was 
the decd’? (This phrase magnificent concludes Freud’s Totem and Taboo.) 
Or can it be the actual memory of an event in some previous incarnation or 
in some other illusion than what we call rcal life?

158 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN158 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

In the course of writing this story down, the impression of personal 
reminiscence has become steadily stronger. I now recall clearly enough that I 
have actually expericnced not one but many such adventurcs, that is, as far 
as the spiritual essence is concerned. I have repeatedly, sometimes by accident 
but more often on purpose, gone into the wrong room or the wrong house, 
with the deliberate intention of finding romance. More often than not, I 
have succeeded. As to the sequel, I have often enough failed to return; and 
here again sometimes the force of circumstances has been responsible, some- 
times disinclination; but, most frequently of all, through the operation of 
that imp of the perverse whom I blame elsewhere in this book for occasional 
defeats at chess. I have wished to go, I have made every preparation for 
going, I have perhaps reached the door, and then found myself powerless 
to enter. Stranger still, I have actually returned; and then, despite the 
strongest conscious efforts to ‘recapture the first fine careless rapture’ of the 
previous visit, behaved in such a way as to make it impossible.

I have never been baffled by any such inexplicable incident as the abandon- 
ment of the room, though I have sometimes failed to find the expected girl.

Talking the whole matter over with my guide, philosopher and friend, 
Frater O.P.V.,! he finds the whole story extraordinarily gripping. He finds 
the situation nodal for the spirit of romance. An extraordinary number of 
vital threads or ‘nerves’ of romance.He attaches great significance to the failure of Eckenstcin to keep the 
appointment. It seems to him as if the whole business were a sort of magical 
ordcal, that Eckenstein should have been awakc to the miraculous character 
of the adventurc and kept his appointment though hell itself yawned between 
him and the house. The main test is his realization that the incident is high 
Magick, that if he fail to grasp its importance, to understand that unless he 
return that night the way will shut for ever. He suggests that by failing to 
appreciate the opportunity at its full value he had somehow missed the 
supreme chance of his lifc, as if the ‘wrong house’ were the gateway to 
another world, an inn, so to speak, on the outskirts of the City of God. In 
recent years I have been constantly alert and on the look-out for something 
of the kind. Whenever my plans are disarranged by a number of apparently 
trivial and accidental circumstances, I look eagerly for the possibility that the 
situation to which they lead may prove the opening scenc in some gigantic 
drama. Numerous episodcs in these memoirs illustrate this thesis. One might 
even say that the wholc book is a demonstration of how the accumulation 
and consequence of large numbers of apparently disconnected facts have 
culminated in bringing ‘the time and the place, and the loved onc all together’.

Eckenstcin’s parents had escaped from Germany in ’48, or thereabouts, as 
political exiles, or so I imaginc; I do not remember any details. But he was 
educated at Bonn and knew Bloody Bill intimately. This luckless despot

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 1§9THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 1§9

was at that time a young man of extraordinary promise, taking himself with 
the utmost seriousness as realizing the gigantic responsibilities of his in- 
heritance. He was intensely eager to fit himself to do his best for Germany. 
He was openminded and encouraged Eckenstein’s endeavours to introduce 
eight-oared rowing into the university, and used his influence to obtain 
permission for officers to lay by their swords when playing tennis.

One incident amuses me greatly. Students were exempt from the general 
law and could not be punished for any act which was not mentioned by 
name in the statutes. The brighter spirits would then accordingly search the 
statutes for gaps. It was, for instance, strengstens verboten to tie night-watchmen 
to lightning conductors during thunderstorms. Eckenstein and his friends 
waited accordingly for the absence of thunderstorms and then proceeded to 
tie up the watchmen.He was as thoroughly anglicized as possible. The chief mark of the old 
Adam was a tendency to professional dogmatism. When he felt he was 
right, he was almost offensively right; and on any point which seemed to him 
settled, the coefficient of his mental clasticity was zero. He could not imagine 
the interference of broad principles with the detailed results of research. The 
phrase ‘general principles’ cnraged him. He insisted on cach case being 
analysed by itself as it arose. This is all right, but it is possible to overdo it. 
There are many circumstances which elude analysis, yet arc perfectly clear if 
examined in the light of the fundamental structure of the human organism. 
For all that, he was exactly the man that I needed to correct my tendency 
to take things for granted, to be content with approximations, to jump at 
conclusions, and generally to think casually and loosely. Besides this, my 
experience of his moral and intellectual habits was of the greatest service to 
me, or rather to England, when it was up to mc to outwit Hugo Münster- 
berg.

Eckenstein’s moral code was higher and nobler than that of any other man 
I have met. On numerous points I cannot agrce; for some of his ideas are 
based on the sin complex. I cannot imagine where he got it from, he with his 
rationalistic mind from which he excluded all the assumptions of established 
religion. But he certainly had the idea that virtue was incompatible with 
enjoyment. He refused to admit that writing poetry was work, though he 
admired and loved it intensely. I think his argument must have been that if a 
man enjoys what he is doing, he should not expect extra remuneration.Eckenstein shared the idiosyncrasies of certain very great men in history. 
He could not endure kittens. He did not mind grown-up cats. The feeling was 
quite irrational and conferred mysterious powers! for he could detect the 
presence of a kitten by means of some sense peculiar to himself. We used to 
tease him about it in the manner of the young, who never understand that 
anything may be scrious to anothcr person which is not so to them. One

160 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Easter the hotel was overcrowded; and five of us, including Eckenstein and 
myself, werc sleeping in the barn. One of Eckenstein’s greatest friends was 
Mrs Bryant, whose beautiful death betwccn Chamonix and the Montanvers 
in 1922 was the crown of a noble life. She had brought her niccc, Miss 
Nichols, who to intrepidity on rocks added playfulness in less austere 
surroundings. I formally accuse her of putting a kitten under Eckenstein’s 
pillow in the barn while we were in the smoking-room after dinncr. If 
it had been a cobra Eckenstcin could not have been more upsct!

He had also an idiosyncrasy about artificial scent. One day my wife and a 
friend came home from shopping. They had called at the chemist’s who had 
spraycd them with ‘Shem-cl-nessim’. We saw them coming and went to the 
door to reccive them. Eckcnstein madc one rush — like a bull — for the window 
of the sitting-room, flung it open and spent the next quarter of an hour 
leaning out and gasping for breath.

Eckenstcin was a great connoisscur of puzzles. It is extremely useful, by the 
way, to be able to occupy the mind in such ways when one has not the con- 
venicnces or inclination for one’s regular work, and there is much time to 
kill in an hotel or a tent in bad weather. Personally, I have found chess, 
solitaire and triple-dummy bridge or skat as good as anything.Eckenstein was a recognized authority on what is known as Kirkwood’s 
schoolgirl problem, but we used to work at all sorts of things, from problems 
connected with Mersennc’s numbcrs and Fermat’s binary theorem to the 
purely frivolous attempt to represent any given numbcr by the usc of the 
number four, four times—ncither morc nor less, relating them by any of 
the accepted symbols of mathematical operations. Thus:

18 = 4 (4.4) + -4 
38= 14+ -4+4 
106 = la + 4.5 
128 = 44+ 41/4

This has been donc up to about 170, with the exception of the number 113, 
and thence to 300 or thcreabouts with only a few gaps. I solved 113 with the 
assistance of Frater ‘4? and the use of a subfactorial, but Eckenstein would not 
admit the use of this symbol as fair.

He was also interested in puzzles involving material apparatus, onc of which 
scems worth mention. He was in Mysore and a travelling conjurer sold him 
a whole bundle of more or less ingenious tricks. Onc of these consisted 
simply of two pieces of wood; one a board with a holc in it, the other 
shaped somewhat like a dumb-bell, the ends being much too big to go 
through the hole. Eckenstein said that he was almost ready to swear that 
he saw the man take them up separately and rapidly put them together,

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLBY 16!

in which condition he had them and was never able to take them apart. 
He explored the surface minutely for signs of complexity of structure 
but without success. I never saw the toy, he having sent it to Mr W. W. 
Rouse Ball, a great authority on such matters, but also baffled in this case.We were naturally always interested in any problems concerned with the 
working out of a difficult route, and here his probity on one occasion made 
him the victim of an unscrupulous child of Shaitan. The villain appeared in 
the guise of an old and valucd friend, saying ‘Is it possible to reach Q from 
P (mentioning two places in London) without passing a public house?’ 
Eckenstein accordingly took his walks in that direction and after endless 
trouble discovered a roundabout way which fulfilled the condition. Com- 
municating the joyful news, his friend replied, ‘Good for you! Here's some- 
thing clsc. Can you get to the Horseshoe, Tottenham Court Road, from 
here without passing a public house?’ I do not know how many pairs of 
alpine boots Eckenstcin wore out on the problem, before asking his friend, 
‘Can it be done?’ A telegram assured him that it could. More boots went the 
way of all lcather and then he gave up. ‘It’s perfectly easy,’ said the false 
friend, ‘don’t pass them — go in!’

(The psychologist will observe that this atrocious piece of misplaced 
humour was made possible by the earlicr problem having been genuine, 
difficult and interesting, thus guarantceing the spoof.)

Onc of his favourite amusements was to calculate the possibility of some 
published description of a phenomenon. For instance, in the novel She there 
is a ‘rocking stone’ about which there arc sufficient data in the book to enable 
an expert to say whether it was possible in nature. He decided that it was, but 
only on the assumption that it was a cone balanced on its apex.I suppose that every form of navigation possesses its peculiar dangers. I 
remember Eckenstein telling me of an adventure he once had with Legros. 
One might be tempted to think that very little harm could come to a barge in 
a dock on the Thames, bar being cut down by a torpedo ram. But the facts 
arc otherwise. It was the first time that cithcr of them had been in charge of 
this species of craft, which they had to manoeuvre in order to inspect a 
wharf which required some slight repair. The gallant little wave-waltzer 
displaced a hundred and twenty tons and was called the Betsy Anne.

They boarded the barge without difficulty, but to get her going was 
another mattcr. The fellow-countrymen of Cook, Drake and Nelson were 
not behindhand with wise advice couched in language of frankness and 
fancy. They lcarncd that the way to make a barge go was to walk up and 
down the broad flat gunwale with a pole. She was certainly very hard to 
start; but it got easier as she gathered way. They entered into the spirit of the 
sport and began to run up and down with their poles, exciting each other to 
emulation with cheerful laughter. Pride filled their souls as they observed

162 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN162 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

that their rapid mastery of the awkward craft was appreciated on shore, as 
the lusty cheering testified. It encouraged them to mightier efforts and before 
long they must have been making well over two miles an hour. Then 
Eckenstein’s quick ear asked him whether the shouting on shore was so 
wholly the expression of unstinted admiration as he had supposed. He paid 
greater attention and thought he detected yells of coarse ridicule mingled with 
violent objurgation. He thought he heard a word at the conclusion of a 
string of extremely emphatic cpithets which might casily have been mistaken 
for ‘Fool!’ At this point Legros stopped poling, said shortly and unmistakably 
‘Hell!’ and pointed to the wharf, which, as previously stated, stood in necd of 
some trifling repairs. It was now not more than fifty yards away and seemed 
to them to be charging them with the determination of an angry elephant. 
They realized the danger and shouted for advice. The answer was, in essence, 
‘Dive!’ It was, of course, hopeless to attempt to check or even to deflect the 
Betsy Anne. They dived, and a moment later heard the rending crash of the 
collision, and were nearly brained by baulks of falling timber. ‘Well,’ said 
Eckenstein, as they drove home to change their muddy garments, ‘we've 
done a good morning’s work, anyhow. That wharf is no longer in need of 
trifling repairs.’ Both it and the Betsy Anne kept the neighbourhood in match- 
wood for the next two years. Oh! for a modern Cowper to immortalize the 
maritime John Gilpin!

1919

We had one or two other people with us, in particular a man namcd Paley 
Gardner, who had been with Eckenstein at Wastdale at Easter. He was a man 
of giant strength, but could not be taught to climb the simplest rocks. He 
always tricd to pull the mountain down to him instead of pulling himself up 
to it! He was one of the best fellows that ever walked and had led an extra- 
ordinary life of which he was too silent and too shy to speak. But he loosened 
up to some cxtent in camp; and two of his adventures are so remarkable that 
I feel they ought to be rescued from oblivion.

He was a rich man, but on one occasion found himself stranded in Sydney 
and too lazy to wire for money. At this juncture he met a man who offered 
to take him trading in the islands. They got a schooner, a crew and some 
stores; set off; sold their stuff; and started home. Then smallpox broke out 
on board and every man died but Paley, who sailed the schooner, single- 
handed, seven days back to Sydney.

On another occasion he found himself at Lima during the battle; if you 
can call it a battle when everyone thought it the best bet to shoot anyone he 
saw as a matter of general principle. Paley, being a man of peace, took up a 
position on a remote wall with the idea of shooting anyone that approached 
in case of his proving unfricndly. However, the first person that arrived was 
obviously an Englishman. They recognized each other and proceeded to 
concert measures for escape.The newcomer, a doctor with long experience of South America, sug- 
gested that if thcy could only cross a broad belt of country inhabited by 
particularly malignant Indian tribes, and the Andes, they could reach the 
head waters of the Amazon and canoe down to Iquitos, where they would be 
in clover, as the doctor was a close friend of Dom Somebody, a powerful 
minister or other high official. They started off on this insane programme and 
carried it out (after innumerable adventures) with success. Arriving at 
Iquitos, ragged and penniless, but confident that the minister’s friendship 
would put them on a good wicket at once, they sought the local authorities — 
and learnt that their friend had been hanged a few days before, and that any- 
one who knew him might expect a similar solution to his troubles!

The two Englishmen were thrown into prison, but broke out and bolted 
down river. The hue and cry was raised; but, just as their pursuers were 
closing in on them, they managed to steal a fishing smack, with which they 
put out into the open Atlantic. Luckily, a few days later, when they were on

163

164 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

the brink of starvation, they fell in with an English steamer bound 
for Liverpool. The captain picked them up and took them home in 
triumph.

The weather made it impossible to do any serious climbing; but I learnt a 
great deal about the work of a camp at high altitudes, from the management 
of transport to cooking; in fact, my chief claim to fame is, perhaps, my 
‘glacier curry’. It was very amusing to see these strong men, inurcd to every 
danger and hardship, dash out of the tent after one mouthful and wallow in 
the snow, snapping at it like mad dogs. They admitted, however, that it was 
very good as curry and I should endeavour to introduce it into London 
restaurants if there were only a glacicr. Perhaps, some day, after a heavy 
snowfall —I had been led, in the course of my reading, to The Kabbalah Unveiled, by 
S. L. Mathers. I didn’t understand a word of it, but it fascinated me all the 
more for that reason, and it was my constant study on the glacicr. My health 
was not good during this summer and I had gone down to Zermatt for a rest. 
One night in the beer hall I started to lay down the law on alchemy, which I 
nowise understood. But it was a pretty safe subject on which to spread 
myself and I trust that I impressed the group of men with my vast lcarning. 
However, my destiny was in ambush. One of the party, named Julian L. 
Baker, was an analytical chemist. He took me aside when the group broke 
up and walked back to the hotel with me. He was himsclf a real practical 
alchemist —I don’t know whether he had been fooled by my magpie display 
of erudition. He may simply have deduced that a boy, however vain and 
foolish, who had taken so much pains to read up the subject, might have a 
really honest interest after all; and he took me seriously. He had accomplished 
some remarkable work in alchemy. For onc thing, he had prepared ‘fixed 
mercury’; that is to say, the pure metal in some form that was solid at 
ordinary temperaturcs.

As for me, I made no mistake. I felt that the moment of opportunity was 
come. I had sent out the S.O.S. call for a Master during that Easter at 
Wastdale Head; and here was a man who was either onc himself or could 
put me in touch with onc. It struck me as more than a coincidence that | 
should have been led to mcct him partly through my ill-health and partly 
through my fatuous vanity. That night I resolved to renew my acquaintance 
with Baker in the morning and tackle him scriously about the intricate 
question which lay close about my heart.The morrow dawned. At breakfast I inquired for Baker. He had lcft the 
hotel; no one knew wherc he had gone. I telegraphed all over the valley. He 
was located at the Gorner Grat. I sped up the mountain to find him. Again he 
had gone. I rushed back. In vain I hunted him through the hotels and at the 
railway station. At last I got a report that an Englishman corresponding to

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 165

his description had started to walk down the valley to Brigue. I hurled 
myself headlong in pursuit. This time I was rewarded. I caught up with him 
some ten miles below Zermatt. I told him of my search for the Secret 
Sanctuary of the Saints and convinced him of my desperate earnestness. He 
hinted that he knew of an Assembly which might be that for which I was 
looking. He spoke of a Sacrament where the Elements were four instead of 
two. This meant nothing to mc; but I felt that I was on the right track. I got 
him to promise to mect me in London. He added, ‘I will introduce you to a 
man who is much more of a Magician than I am.’

To sum the matter in brief, he kept his word. The Secret Assembly 
materialized as the “Hermetic Order of the G.. D.:.,)” and the Magician as 
one George Cecil Jones.To sum the matter in brief, he kept his word. The Secret Assembly 
materialized as the “Hermetic Order of the G.. D.:.,)” and the Magician as 
one George Cecil Jones.

During the whole summer, the weather got steadily worse and my health 
took the same course. I found myself obliged to leave the camp and go to 
London to sce doctors. I took rooms in an hotel in London, attended to the 
necessary medical treatment and spent my time writing poetry. The play 
Jephthah was my principal work at this period. It shows a certain advance in 
bigness of conception; and has this notable merit, that I began to realize the 
possibility of objective treatment of a theme. Previous to this, my lyrics had 
been more or less successful expressions of the ego; and I had made few 
attempts to draw characters who were not more than Freudian wish 
phantasms—I mean by this that they werc either projections of myself as I 
fancied myself or aspired to be; otherwise, images of women that I desired to 
love. When I say ‘to love’, I doubt whether the verb meant anything more 
than ‘to find myself through’. But in Jephthah, weak as the play is, I was really 
taking an interest in other people. The characters are not wholly corrupted 
by self-portraiture, I stuck to the Hebrew legend accurately enough, merely 
introducing a certain amount of Cabbalistic knowledge.The passionate dedication to Swinburne is significant of my literary 
hero-worship. With this play were published (in 1899) a number of lyrics 
entitled “Mystcrics, Lyrical and Dramatic’. The shallow critic hastily assumed 
that the influence of Swinburne was paramount in my style, but on re- 
reading the volume I do not think that the accusation is particularly justifiable. 
There are plenty of other authors who might more reasonably be served with 
an affiliation summons. Indeed, criticism in England amounts to this: that if 
a new writer manifests any sense of rhythm, he is classed as an imitator of 
Swinburne; if any capacity for thought, of Browning.

I remember one curious incident in connection with this volume. I had a 
set of paged proofs in my pocket one evening, when I went to call on W. B. 
Yeats. I had never thought much of his work; it seemed to me to lack 
virility. I have given an extended criticism of it in The Equinox (vol. I, 
no. I, page 307). However, at that time I should have been glad to have a

166 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

kindly word from an elder man. I showed him the proofs accordingly and 
he glanced through them. He forced himself to utter a few polite con- 
ventionalitics, but I could sec what the truth of the matter was.

I had by this time become fairly expert in clairvoyance, clairaudience and 
clairsentience. But it would have bccn a very dull person indced who failed 
to recognize the black, bilious rage that shook him to the soul. I instance this 
as a proof that Ycats was a genuine poet at heart, for a merc charlatan would 
have known that he had no cause to fcar an authentic poet. What hurt him 
was the knowledge of his own incomparable inferiority.I saw little of him and George Moore. I have always becn nauscatcd by 
pretentiousness; and the Celtic revival, so-called, had all the mincing, postur- 
ing qualities of the literary Plymouth Brother. They pretendcd to think it an 
unpardonable crime not to spcak Irish, though thcy could not speak it 
themselves; and they worked in thcir mcalymouthed way towards the gal- 
vanization of the political, ethnological and literary corpse of the Irish nation. 
Ireland has been badly treatcd, we all know; but her only salvation lay in 
forgetting her nonsense. What is the usc of sctting up a scarecrow pro- 
vincialism, in re-cstablishing a barbarous and fantastic language which is as 
dead as Gothic and cannot boast sufficient literature to hold the attention of 
any but a few cloistered scholars — at the price of cutting Ireland off from the 
main stream of civilization? We sec already that the country has slunk into 
the slough of anarchy. When the Kilkenny cats have finished shooting each 
other from behind hedges, the depopulated island will necessarily fall into the 
hands of practical colonists, who will be content to dwell peaceably together 
and communicate with the world in a living language.

Like Byron, Shelley, Swinburnc and Tennyson, I left the university with- 
out taking a degree. It has been better so; I have accepted no honour from 
her; she has had much from me.

I wanted the spirit of the university and I passed my cxaminations in 
order to be able to imbibe it without interference from the authorities, but 
I saw no sense in paying fifteen guineas for the privilege of wearing a long 
black gown more cumbersome than the short blue one, and paying thirteen 
and fourpence instead of six and eightpencc if I were caught smoking in it. 
I had no intention of becoming a parson or a schoolmaster; to write B.A. 
after my name would have been a decided waste of ink.I felt chat my carcer was already marked out for me. Sir Richard Burton 
was my hero and Eckenstein his modern representative, as far as my extcrnal 
life was concerned. A baccalaureate would not assist me noticeably in the 
Himalayas or the Sahara. As for my literary career, academic distinction 
would be a positive disgrace. And with regard to my spiritual life, which 
I already felt to be the deepest thing in me, the approbation of the faculty 
was beneath troubling to despise. I have always objected to incurring positive

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 167

disgrace. I see no sense in violating conventions, still less in breaking laws. 
To do so only gives one unnecessary trouble.

On the other hand, it is impossible to make positive progress by means 
of institutions which lead to one becoming a lord chancellor, an archbishop, 
an admiral, or some other flower of futility. I had got from Cambridge 
what I wanted: the intellectual and moral freedom, the spirit of initiative 
and self-reliance; but perhaps, above all, the indefinable tone of the univer- 
sity. The difference between Cambridge and Oxford is that the former 
makes you the equal of anybody alive; the latter leaves you in the invidious 
position of being his superior.

NOTE ON THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN 
OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGENOTE ON THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN 
OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE

One of the most significant points in English character is thrown into 
rclief by the contemplation of Oxford and Cambridge. I should be very 
puzzled to have to say what that point is, but the data arc unmistakable. 
The superficial likeness between the universities is very clear, yet their 
fundamental spiritual difference can only be described as ‘a great gulf fixed’. 
Contrast this with America, where even long experience does not enable 
one to distinguish at a glance between men from the four principal univer- 
sities, or even to detect, in most cascs, the influence of any university training 
soever, as we understand the idea. But to mistake an Oxford for a Cambridge 
man is impossible and the converse exceedingly rare.

I hope it is not altogether the blindness of filial affection that inclines me 
to suggest that the essential difference depends upon the greater freedom of 
the more famous university. Oxford makes a very definite effort to turn 
out a definite type of man and even his ingrained sense that he is not as 
other men operates finally as a limitation. At Cambridge the ambitions and 
aspirations of any given undergraduate are much less clearly cut and are of 
wider scope than those of his equivalent on the Isis. It seems to me no mere 
accident that Cambridge was able to tolerate Milton, Byron, Tennyson and 
myself without turning a hair, while Oxford inevitably execrated Shelley 
and Swinburne. Per contra, she suited Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde perfectly. 
Had they been at Cambridge, the nonsense would have been knocked out 
of them. They would have had to succeed or fail entirely on their own 
virtues; whereas, as things were, the Oxford atmosphere and the Oxford 
manner shielded them from the rude blasts of all-round criticism.These ideas receive some support from the consideration of the relations 
normally obtaining between undergraduates and dons. On the Granta we 
are no doubt in statu pupillari; the Oxonian is in statu quo pupillari. He is 
taught, trained and, if necessary, trounced, to respect the principle of 
authority. It is really fair to say that no Cambridge man would ever dream

168 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

of adducing authority in the course of an argument. He might indccd 
bring forward a grcat name on his side, but never without being ready to 
support it with the heavy artillery of patent proof. No fame is fixed with 
us as it is with them. The spirit of criticism never sleeps.

We see accordingly much stricter discipline with them than with us. We 
tend to trust the good sense and good will of the fluffiest fresher. Our dons 
never get nervous lest a rag should go too far, and we never betrayed their 
trust, at least not till quite recently. Since my time the tone of both univer- 
sities has been lowered. Before 1900 a rag capable of scaring the women 
students would have been unthinkable.

Tyranny always trembles, and 1 remember only too well the wave of 
sympathy which swept through Cambridge at the news that the Oxford 
authoritics, panic-stricken at some projected demonstration, had actually 
imported mounted police from London. Our own dons would have cut 
their throats rather than do anything so disgraceful; but if they had, we should 
have pounded those police into pulp.This particular contrast is manifest to both universities. Whenever the 
subject comcs up, anecdote answers anecdote to the point. The psychology 
extends to the individual. Our conception of the idcal proctor is very 
different to thcirs. In my sccond ycar one proctor effected some capture by 
watching his victim from the darkness of a doorway. The story went round 
and within a week dishonour met its due. The dirty dog was ducked in the 
Cam. Nor were the avengers sent down. On the contrary, the proctor was 
obliged to burn his bands. Such conduct was practically unprecedented.

The typical tale is this. The grounds of Downing College are surrounded 
by a long low wall. One dark windy night a passing proctor saw his cap, 
caught by a gust, soar gracefully over the rampart. His bulldogs climbed 
the wall and retrieved it. But the cap was not their only prize. They dragged 
with them a most discomfited undergraduate, and a companion who was 
open to criticism from the point of view of the university regulations. But 
the proctor simply thanked the man for bringing back his cap and apologized 
for disturbing him. He rcfuscd to take advantage of an accident.

One very instructive incident concerns that brilliant Shakespeare scholar 
and lecturer Louis Umfraville Wilkinson. One summer night he came into 
college at Oxford a little lively with liquor. His wit had made the evening 
memorable and he went on to his rooms without curbing his conversation, 
which happened to decal with the defects of the dean in various directions. 
Fortune favoured him—I balance the books in perspective!—the dean’s 
window was open and the reprobate heard to his horror that one at least 
cf his flock failed to cstimate his eminence at the same exalted rate as he 
did himself. He actually brought a formal charge of blasphemy against 
Wilkinson, pressed it to the utmost and succeeded in getting him sent down.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 169THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 169

Wilkinson shrugged his shoulders, came over to us and entered his name 
at John’s. Now comes an infamy almost incredible. The dean pursued his 
revenge. He wrote a long, bitter, violent letter to Wilkinson's tutor, giving 
an account of the affair at Oxford, and urging —in such language that it 
was more like a command than a threat—that Wilkinson be forthwith 
kicked out of Cambridge. The tutor sent for the offender and the following 
dialogue ensued:

‘I believe you know Mr So-and-So, Mr Wilkinson.’

‘I have that honour, sir.’

‘Dean of Blank, Oxford, I understand.’

‘That is so, sir.’

‘I have a letter from him, which I proposc to read to you.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

The tutor read through the letter, madc no comment, asked no questions. 
He tore it slowly in picccs and threw them into thc fire.

‘May I hope that you will be with us at breakfast tomorrow?’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘Good morning, Mr Wilkinson.’

‘Good morning, sir.’

I confess that it seems to me that the method of Oxford in such matters 
crrs in two different directions. On the onc hand, the undergraduate is 
treated as an irresponsible infant, to be dragooned into decency; and on 
the other, punished with a sternness which postulates that he is as accountable 
for his actions as a fully adult man, with comprchensive knowledge of the 
ways of the world. The result is to hinder his development, by withholding 
experience from him, and at the same time to punish his inexpericnce by 
making a mere mistake ruinous. The system tends to atrophy his ethical 
development by insisting on a narrow and inelastic code, while encouraging 
moral cowardice and unfitting him to face the facts which so presumptuously 
force themselves into notice as soon as the college conventions are done with.Cambridge realizes that (within very wide limits) the more experience a 
man has, the better is he equipped to makc his way in the world. We think 
it wiser to lct men find out for themselves what dangers lie ahead, and pay 
the penalty for imprudence while recovery is comparatively easy. Better 
learn how to fall before the bones become brittle.

Another advantage of our idea of the relationship between long gowns 
and short is that, even if at the cost of some superficial respect, it is possible 
to establish more intimate communion in a spirit of comradeship between 
the old and the young. The intellectual gain is obvious; but perhaps even 
morc valuable is the moral profit. To draw a hard and fast line between 
puvil and teacher limits both. Misunderstanding leads to mistrust, mistrust 
to enmity. It is better to realize the identity of interests.

170 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN170 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

I became aware of my feeling on this point quite suddenly. The impression 
is the more intense. One night there had been a regular rag. I forget what 
about, but we built a big bonfire in the middle of the market place and 
otherwise spread ourselves. Things began with no definite pulse of passion 
discernible, but as the evening advanced, we found oursclves somehow 
or other at odds with the townees. I think we must have resented their 
attempt to participate in the gencral gaiety. Sporadic free fights sprang up 
here and there, but nothing really serious. On the whole we gave and took 
in good temper. Just before twelve o'clock I turned to go home. Just beyond 
the tobacconist’s— Bacon, celcbrated by Calverley in his overrated ode— 
swirled a swarm of townees shouting and swearing in a way that struck me 
as ugly. It was no affair of mine and I did not want to be late. But even as 
I changed my course to avoid the mob I saw that their game was to reinforce 
half a dozen roughs who were surrounding a doorway and hustling one of 
the proctors. My immediate impulse was to gloat upon the evil that had 
befallen my natural enemy, for until that moment my absurd shyness had 
prevented me from realizing my relations with the authoritics. I had timidly 
accepted the conventional chaff, but now almost before that first thought 
was formulated my inmost instincts sprang into consciousness. I shouted to 
the few scattered gownsmen that were still in the square and hurled myself 
headlong to the rescue of my detested tyrant. He was pretty well under the 
weather, warding off feebly the brutal blows that the cowardly cads rained 
on his face. His cap was gone and his gown was in shreds. His bulldogs had 
been handled still more roughly. I suppose the townees saw them as traitors 
to the cause, hirelings of the aristocracy. They had been knocked clean 
down and were being battered by the boots of the mob. We must have been 
about a dozen, not more, and we had to fight off forty. It was the first time 
that I had ever had to face the animal anger, unreasoned and uncontrolled, 
of a mass of men whosc individual intelligences, such as they werc, had been 
for the moment completely swamped by the savage instinct to stamp on 
anything that seemed to them sensitive.Fate familiarized me with this psychology in another form. It breaks out 
every time any man speaks or acts so as to awaken the frantic fear which is 
inherent in all but the rarest individuals, that anything new is a monstrous 
menace. For the first time I observed the extraordinary fact that in such 
situations one’s time sense runs at two very different rates. The part of one’s 
mind that is concerned with one’s actions races riotously with their rhythm. 
Another part stands aloof, observing, analysing, imperturbable; a train of 
thought which might, in normal circumstances, occupy an hour reduced 
to a few minutes, and seeming slow at that.

The roughs were, to all intents and purposes, insane. They neither knew 
nor cared whether they ended by murder. And yet I have no idea why we

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IJI

mastercd them easily cnough. Wc had neither arms nor discipline. We were 
younger, certainly weaker, man for man, and we lacked the force which 
fury lends to its victims. I found myself puzzling it out and the only con- 
clusion was that, whatever science may say, there is such a thing as moral 
superiority, a spiritual strength independent of material or calculable 
conditions.

The fight went on for twenty minutes or so and ended queerly enough. 
The mob thinned out, melted away at its outskirts, and the front rank men 
became aware of the fact simultancously without any more rcason than had 
marked their entire proceedings. They took to their heels and ran like 
rabbits.It was half-past twelve before I got home. I took a tub and found I was 
black and blue. Of course my breach of the rule about midnight was duly 
reported. I was halled and explained why I had been late. The proctor 
whom we had conveyed to Christ’s had not taken our names and I have no 
reason to think that he knew me. But my tutor asked no questions. He took 
my story for true; in fact, he treated me simply as another gentleman. That 
could not have happened at Oxford.

20

Nothing gives such a mean idea of the intelligence of mankind than that it 
should ever have accepted for a moment the imbecile illusion of ‘free will’; 
for there can be very few men indeed, in any gencration, who have at any 
time in their lives sufficient apparent liberty of action to induce them to 
dally with it. Of these few, I was onc. When I left Cambridge, I had acquired 
no particular ties. I was alrcady the Spirit of Solitude in embryo. Practically, 
too, my father having been the younger son of a younger son, I had not 
even a territorial bond. On the other hand, I had a large fortune entirely at 
my own disposal; there was no external constraint upon me to do one thing 
rather than another. And yet, of course, my career was absolutely deter- 
mined. The events of my life up to that point, if they had been intclligently 
interpreted, would have afforded ample indications of the future. I was 
white-hot on thrce points; climbing, poetry and Magick.On my return from Switzerland in 1898, I had nowhere in particular to 
go. There was no reason why I should settle down in any special placc. I 
simply took a room in the Cecil, at that remote period a first-class hostelry, 
and busied myself with writing on the onc hand and following up the 
magical clues on the other. Jephthah, and most of the other poems which 
appear in that volume, were written about this period. It is a kind of back- 
water in my life. I seem to have been marking timc. For this reason, no 
doubt, I was the morc ready to be swept away by the first definite current. 
It was not long before it caught me.

I had a number of conversations with Julian Baker, who kept his promise 
to introduce mc to ‘a man who was a much grcater Magician than he was 
himself’. This was a Welshman, named George Cecil Jones. He possessed a 
fiery but unstable tempcr, was the son of a suicide, and bore a striking 
resemblance to many conventional representations of Jesus Christ. His spirit 
was both ardent and subtle. He was very widely read in Magick; and, being 
by profession an analytical chemist, was able to investigate the subject in a 
scientific spirit. As soon as I found that he really understood the matter I 
went down to Basingstoke, where he lived, and more or less sat in his 
pocket. It was not long before I found out exactly where my destiny lay. 
The majority of old magical rituals are either purposely unintelligible or 
actually puerile nonsense.* Those which are straightforward and workable

* Some are doubtless survivals of various forms of nature religion; but the majority are adapta- 
tions of Catholic or Jewish traditions to the ambitions, cupidities, envics, jealousies and animal 
instincts of the most ignorant and primitive type of peasant.

172

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 173172

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 173

arc, as a rule, better adapted to the ambitions of love-sick agricultural 
labourers than those of educated people with a serious purpose. But there 
is one startling exception to this rulc. It is The Book of the Sacred Magic of 
Abra-Melin the Mage.

This book is written in an exalted style. It is perfectly coherent; it does not 
demand fantastic minutiae of ritual or even the calculations customary. 
There is nothing to insult the intelligence. On the contrary, the operation 
proposed is of sublime simplicity. The method is in entire accordance with 
this. There arc, it is true, certain prescriptions to be observed, but these 
really amount to little more than injunctions to obscrve decency in the 
performance of so august an opcration. One must have a house where 
proper precautions against disturbance can be taken; this bcing arranged, 
there is really nothing to do but to aspire with incrcasing fervour and con- 
centration, for six months, towards the obtaining of the Knowledge and 
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. Once He has appeared, it is 
then necessary, first, to call forth the Four Great Princes of the Evil of the 
World; next, their eight sub-princes; and, lastly, the three hundred and 
sixteen servitors of these. A number of talismans, previously preparcd, are 
thus charged with the power of these spirits. By applying the proper talis- 
mans, you can gct practically anything you want.It cannot be denicd that the majesty and philosophical irreproachability 
of the book are sensibly diminished by the addition of these things to the 
invocation of the Holy Guardian Angel. 1 should have preferred it without 
them. There is, however, a reason. Anyonc who reaches a new world must 
conform with all the conditions of it. It is true, of course, that the hierarchy 
of evil appcars somewhat repugnant to science. It is in fact very hard to 
explain what we mcan by saying that we invoke Paimon; but, to go a 
little deeper, the same remark applics to Mr Smith next door. We do not 
know who Mr Smith is, or what is his place in nature, or how to account 
for him. We cannot even be sure that he exists. Yet, in practice, we call 
Smith by that name and he comes. By the proper means, we can induce 
him to do for us those things which are consonant with his nature and 
powcrs. The whole question is, thercfore, one of practice; and by this 
standard we find that there is no particular reason for quarrelling with the 
conventional nomenclature.

At this time I had not worked out any such apology for the theorics of 
transcendentalism. I took everything as it camc and submitted it to the test 
of expericnce. As it happened, I had no rcason at any time to doubt the 
reality of the magical universe. I began my practical work with astral visions 
and found to my surprise that after half a dozen experiments I was better 
than my teacher.

In these days I took my Magick very much au pied de la lettre. 1 knew, of

174 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

course, that Magick had fallen into desuetude chiefly because people would 
follow the prescribed course of action and get no result.174 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

course, that Magick had fallen into desuetude chiefly because people would 
follow the prescribed course of action and get no result.

An exquisitely amusing incident bearing on this point is as follows: 
Gerald Kelly, Ivor Back and one or two other ardent spirits, inspired by 
my success, decided to do Magick themselves. They hired and furnished a 
room at Cambridge for the purpose and proceeded to evoke various spirits. 
Nothing happened. At last one of the greatly daring extended his little finger 
outside the circle. He was not ‘slain or paralysed as if blasted by thc lightning 
flash’ and thence concluded that Magick was all rubbish. I offer this example 
of logic to the Museum of Human Imbecility, in the principal city of the 
Astral Plane.

I understood perfectly well that Back and Kelly, having no capacity for 
Magick, were bound to fail either to evoke a spirit or to get themselves 
blasted. If one does not understand anything about electricity, one cannot 
construct a dynamo; and having so failed, one cannot get oneself electrocuted.

But I suppose that their failure and my success was mostly a matter of 
personal genius, just as Burns with hardly any literary apparatus could write 
poetry, and Tennyson, with any amount, could not.

My success itself helped to blind me to the nature of the conditions of 
achievement. It never occurred to me that the problem of Magick contained 
metaphysical elements.My success itself helped to blind me to the nature of the conditions of 
achievement. It never occurred to me that the problem of Magick contained 
metaphysical elements.

Consider my performance one evening at Eastbourne. Having waited 
for the lowest possible tide so as to be as remote as might be from the 
bandstand, I made a circle and built an altar of stones by the edge of the sca. 
I burned my incense, performed my evolutions and made heaven hideous 
with my enchantments. All this in order to invoke the Undines. I hoped, 
and more or less expected, to have one come out of the foam and attach 
herself to my person. I had as yet no notion that this programme might be 
accomplished far more easily.

There are thus two main types of mistake; one in spirit and one in tech- 
nique. Most aspirants to Magick commit both. I soon learned that the 
physical conditions of a magical phenomenon were like those of any other; 
but even when this misunderstanding is removed, success depends upon 
one’s ability to awaken the creative genius which is the inalienable heirloom 
of every son of man, but which few indeed are able to assimilate to their 
conscious existence, or even, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, to detect.

The only Undine that appeared was a policeman, who approached near 
enough to observe a fantastically garbed figure, dancing and howling in 
the moonlight ‘on the silvery, silvery, silvery sands’; howling, whistling, 
bellowing and braying forth the barbarous names of evocation which have 
in the sacred rites a power ineffable, around a furiously flaming bonfire 
whose sparks were whirled by the wind all over the beach.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 175THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 175

The basis of the delusion is that there is a real apodeictic corrclation 
between the various clements of the operation, such as the formal manifesta- 
tion of the spirit, his name and sigil, the form of the temple, weapons, 
gestures and incantations. These facts prevent one from suspccting the real 
subtlety involved in the hypothesis. This is so profound that it seems almost 
true to say that even the crudest Magick eludes consciousness altogether, so 
that when one is able to do it, one does it without conscious comprehension, 
very much as onc makes a good stroke at cricket or billiards. One cannot 
give an intellectual explanation of the rough working involved, as one can 
explain the steps in the solution of a quadratic equation. In other words 
Magick in this sense is rather an art than a science.

Jones realized at once that I had a tremendous natural capacity for Magick, 
and my every action proved that I intended to devote myself to it “without 
keeping back the least imaginable thing’. He suggested that I should join 
the Body of which he was an adept; known, to a few of the more en- 
lightened seekers, as the Hermetic Order of the G.*. D.-.. A short 
account of this Order is necessary. Most of the facts concerning it are given 
here and there in The Equinox; but the story is so lengthy and complex that 
it would require a volume to itself. Briefly, however, the facts arc as follows:Some timc in the ’seventics or ’eightics, a cipher manuscript was found on 
a bookstall by a Dr Woodman, a collcague in magical study of Dr W. 
Wynn Westcott. It was beyond their powers to decipher it, though Mrs 
Emery (Miss Florence Farr) told me that a child could have done so. They 
called in a man named Samuel Liddell Mathers, a scholar and Magician of 
considerable eminence. The manuscript yielded to his scrutiny. It contained, 
among minor matters, the rubric of certain rituals of initiation and the true 
attribution of the Tarot Trumps. This attribution had been sought vainly 
for centuries. It cleared up a host of Cabbalistic difficulties, in the same 
way as Einstein’s admirers claim that his equations have done in mathematics 
and physics. The manuscript gave the name and address of an adept Sapicns 
Dominabitur Astris, a Fraulein Sprengel, living in Germany, with an 
invitation to write to her if further knowledge was required. Dr Westcott 
wrote; and S.D.A. gave him and his two colleagues a charter authorizing 
them to establish an Order in England. This was donc. Soon after, S.D.A. 
died. In reply to a letter addressed to her, came an intimation from one of 
her colleagues that they had never approved her policy in permitting open- 
temple work in England, but had refrained from active opposition from 
personal respect for her. The writer ended by saying that England must 
expect no more assistance from Germany; enough knowledge had been 
granted to enable any English adept to form a Magical Link with the 
Secret Chiefs. Such competence would evidently establish a right to renewed 
relations.

176 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN176 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Dr Woodman had died and Mathers forced Dr Westcott to retire from 
active lcadership of the Order. Mathers, however, was not trusted. He, 
therefore, announced to the most advanced adepts that he had himself made 
the Magical Link with the Secret Chiefs; and, at an interview with three of 
them in the Bois de Boulogne, had been confirmed in the supreme and sole 
authority as the Visible Head of the Order. The adepts entrusted with this 
information were required to sign a pledge of personal obedience to Mathers 
as a condition of advancement in the Order. Nevertheless, dissatisfaction 
continued. The advancement did not arrive. They suspected that Mathers 
had no more knowledge to give; and he retorted that, however that might 
be, he wasn’t going to waste it on such hopeless duffcrs. Both positions 
have much to recommend them to discriminating sympathy.These petty squabbles apart, a big thing had happened. Mathers had 
discovered the manuscript of Abra-Melin in the library of the Arscnal in 
Paris and begun to translate it. He found himself harassed and opposed on 
all sides. In those days there was practically no public way of getting about 
Paris at all. Mathers lived at Auteuil, a long way from the Arsenal, and met 
with so many bicycle accidents that he was driven to go on foot. (There is 
always occult opposition to the publication of important documents. It 
took me over thrce years to get my The Goctia through the press, and over 
two ycars in the casc of 777. This is onc of the facts whosc cumulative effect 
makcs it impossible to doubt the existence of spiritual forces.) Other mis- 
fortunes of every kind overwhelmed Mathers. He was an expert Magician 
and had become accustomed to use the Greater Key of Solomon with 
excellent effect. He did not realize that Abra-Melin was an altogether bigger 
proposition. It was like a man, accustomcd to handle gunpowder, suddenly 
supplicd with dynamite without being aware of the difference. He worricd 
through and got Abra-Melin published; but he perished in the process. He 
became the prey of the malignant forces of the book, lost his integrity and 
was cast out of the Order of which he had been the visible head.

This debacle had not yet taken place at the time of my first initiation, 
November 18th, 1898.

I took the Order with absolute scriousness. I was not cven put off by the 
fact of its ceremonics taking place at Mark Mason’s Hall. I remember 
asking Baker whether people often died during the ceremony. I had no idca 
that it was a flat formality and that the members were for the most part 
muddled middle-class mediocritics. I saw myself entering the Hidden Church 
of the Holy Grail. This state of my soul served me well. My initiation was 
in fact a sacrament.The rituals have been printed in The Equinox, vol. I, nos. 1 and m1. There 
is no question that those of neophyte and adept are the genuine rituals of 
initiation, for they contain the true formulac. The proof is that they can be

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 177

made to work by those who understand and know how to apply them. 
Shallow critics argue that because the average untrained man cannot evoke 
a spirit, the ritual which purports to cnable him to do so must be at fault. 
He does not reflect that an electroscope would be useless in the hands of a 
savage. Indubitably, Magick is one of the subtlest and most difficult of the 
sciences and arts. There is more opportunity for errors of comprchension, 
judgment and practice than in any other branch of physics. It is above all 
needful for the student to be armed with scientific knowledge, sympathctic 
apprehension and common sense. My training in mathematics and chemistry 
supplied me with the first of these qualitics; my poetic affinities and wide 
reading with the second; whilc, for the third, I suppose I have to thank my 
practical ancestors.Being thus able to appreciate the inmost intention of my initiation, I was 
able to stand the shock of the events immediately subsequent. I was intro- 
duced to an abject assemblage of noncntitics; the members of the Order 
were as vulgar and commonplace as any other set of average people. Jones 
and Baker themselves were the only members with any scmblance of 
scientific education, until, a few months later, I met Allan Bennett, a mind 
purc, piercing and profound beyond any other in my experience. There 
was one literary light, W. B. Yeats, a lank dishevelled demonologist who 
might have taken more pains with his personal appearance without incurring 
the reproach of dandyism; and one charming and intelligent woman, Mrs 
Emery, for whom I always felt an affectionate respect tempered by a feeling 
of compassion that her abilities were so inferior to her aspirations. The rest 
of the Order possessed no individuality; they were utterly undistinguished 
cither for energy or capacity. There is not one of them today who has made 
any mark in the world.

At my initiation, I could have believed that these adepts deliberately 
masked their majesty; but there was no mistaking the character of the 
‘knowledge lecture’ in which I had to be examincd to entitle me to pass to 
the next grade. I had been most solemnly sworn to inviolable secrecy. The 
slightest breach of my oath meant that I should incur ‘a deadly and hostile 
current of will, set in motion by the Greatly Honoured Chiefs of the Second 
Order, by the which I should fall slain or paralysed, as if blasted by the 
lightning flash’. And now I was entrusted with some of these devastating 
though priceless secrets. They consisted of the Hebrew alphabet, the names 
of the planets with their attribution to the days of the weck, and the ten 
Sephiroth of the Cabbala. I had known it all for months; and, obviously, 
any schoolboy in the lower fourth could memorize the whole lecture in 
twenty-four hours.I sce today that my intellectual snobbery was shallow and stupid. It is 
vitally necessary to drill the aspirant in the groundwork. He must be

178 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

absolutely familiar with the terminology and thcory of Magick from a 
strictly intellectual standpoint. I still think, however, that this course of 
study should precede initiation and that it should not be mixed up with it. 
Consider the analogy of poetry. One could, to a certain extent, teach a man 
to write poetry, by offering to his soul a set of spiritual and cmotional 
expericnces, but his technique must be based on the study of grammar 
and so on, which have no essential relation with art.

Talking over these matters with Jones and Baker, I found them quite in 
sympathy with my point of view; but they insisted, rightly enough, that I 
was not in a position to judge the circumstances. I must first reach the 
Second Order.

Accordingly, I took the grade of Zelator in December, of Theoricus in 
January and of Practicus in February. One could not proceed to Philosophus 
for three months, so I did not take that grade till May. The Philosophus 
cannot proceed to the Second Order in less than seven months; also, he 
must be specially invited.

In the spring of 1899, at some ceremony or other, I was aware of the 
presence of a tremendous spiritual and magical force. It seemed to me to 
procecd from a man sitting in the east, a man I had not scen before, but whom 
I knew must be Very Honourcd Frater Iehi Aour, called among men Allan 
Bennett. The fame of this man as a Magician was already immense. He was 
esteemed second only to Mathers himself; and was, perhaps, even more 
feared.After the ccremony we went into the outer room to unrobe. I was 
secretly anxious to be introduced to this formidable Chief. To my amazc- 
ment he came straight to me, looked into my cyes, and said in penetrating 
and, as it seemed, almost menacing tones: ‘Little Brother, you have been 
meddling with the Goctia!’ (Goetia means ‘howling’; but is the technical 
word employcd to cover all the operations of that Magick which deals with 
gross, malignant or unenlightencd forces.) I told him, rather timidly, that 
I had not been doing anything of the sort. ‘In that case,’ he returned, ‘the 
Goetia has been meddling with you.’ The conversation went no further. I 
returned homc in a somewhat chastened spirit; and, having found out where 
Ichi Aour lived, I determined to call on him the following day.

I should have explained that, on deciding to join the Order, I had taken 
a flat at 67 and 69 Chancery Lane.* I had already determincd to perform 
the Operation of Abra-Melin, but Jones had advised me to go through my 
* My innocence after three years at Cambridge may be gauged by my conduct in the matter of 
choosing a residence. I understood it as a fixed principle of prudence, ‘When in a difficulty consult 
your lawyer.’ Knowing nothing whatever about renang apartments, I was in a difficulty. I 
therefore consulted my lawyer and took the first place he suggested. He, of course, never gave a

thought to my convenience or the appropriateness of the district. He saw and took the chance of 
obliging a business acquaintance.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 179thought to my convenience or the appropriateness of the district. He saw and took the chance of 
obliging a business acquaintance.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 179

initiation first. However, I began to busy myself with the preparations. 
Abra-Melin warns us that our families will object strenuously to our under- 
taking the Operation. I resolved, therefore, to cut myself off absolutely from 
mine. So, as | had to live in London, I took the flat under the name of Count 
Vladimir Svareff. As Joncs remarked later, a wiscr man would have called 
himself Smith. But I was still obsessed with romanticism, while my summer 
in St Petersburg had made me in love with Russia. There was another 
motive behind this—a legitimate one. I wanted to increase my knowledge 
of mankind. I knew how people treated a young man from Cambridge. | 
had thoroughly appreciated the servility of tradesmen, though I was too 
generous and too ignorant to realize the extent of thcir dishonesty and 
rapacity. Now I wanted to see how people would behave to a Russian 
nobleman. I must say here that I have repeatedly used this method of dis- 
guise —it has been amazingly useful in multiplying my points of view about 
humanity. Even the most broad-minded pcople are necessarily narrow in 
this one respect. They may know how all sorts of people treat them, but 
they cannot know, except at second hand, how those same people treat 
others.To return to Allan Bennett. I found him staying with V. H. Frater Aequo 
Animo® in a tiny tenement in Southwark or Lambeth—1 forget which. It 
was a mean, grim horror. Æ.A., whose name was Charles Rosher, was a 
widely travelled Jack-of-all-trades. He had invented a patent water-closet 
and been court painter to the Sultan of Morocco. He wrote some of the 
worst poetry I have ever read. He was a jolly-all-round sportsman with an 
excellent heart and the cheery courage which comes from knocking about 
the world, and being knocked about by it. If his talents had been less varicd, 
he might have made a success of almost anything.

* I ultimately conjectured: Equi Animo: ‘with the soul of a horse’.

21

Allan Bennett was four years older than myself. His father, an enginccr, 
had died when he was a boy; his mother had brought him up as a strict 
Catholic. He suffered acutely from spasmodic asthma. His cycle of life was 
to take opium for about a month, when the effect wore off, so that he had 
to inject morphine. After a month of this he had to switch to cocaine, which 
he took till he began to ‘sce things’ and was then reduced to chloroform. I 
have secn him in bed for a week, only recovering consciousness sufficiently 
to reach for the bottle and sponge. Asthma being a sthenic disease, he was 
then too weak to have it any morc, so he would gradually convalesce until, 
after a few wecks of freedom, the spasms would begin once more and he 
would be forced to renew the cycle of drugs.No doubt, this constant suffering affected his attitude to life. He revolted 
against being an animal; he regarded the pleasures of living (and, above all, 
those of physical love) as diabolical illusions devised by the cnemy of man- 
kind in order to trick souls into accepting the curse of existence. I cannot 
forbear quoting one most remarkable incident. When he was about sixteen, 
the conversation in the laboratory where he was working turned upon 
childbirth. What he heard disgusted him. He became furiously angry and 
said that children were brought to earth by angels. The other students 
laughed at him and tricd in vain to convince him. He maintained their theory 
to be a bestial blasphemy. The next day one of the boys turned up with an 
illustrated manual of obstetrics. He could no longer doubt the facts. But his 
reaction was this: ‘Did the Omnipotent God whom he had been taught to 
worship devise so revolting and degrading a method of perpetuating the 
species? Then this God must be a devil, delighting in loathsomeness.’ To 
him the existence of God was disproved from that moment.

He had, however, already some expericnce of an unseen world. As a 
little boy, having overheard some gossip among superstitious servants, he 
had gonc into the back garden and invoked the devil by reciting the Lord's 
Prayer backwards. Somcthing happened which frightened him.

Having now rejected Catholicism, he took up Magick and at once 
attained extraordinary success. He used to carry a ‘lustre’ —a long glass 
prism with a neck and a pointed knob such as adorned old-fashioned 
chandeliers. He uscd this as a wand. One day, a party of theosophists were 
chatting sceptically about the power of the ‘blasting rod’. Allan promptly 
produced his and blasted one of them. It took fourteen hours to restore the 
incredulous individual to the use of his mind and his muscles.

180

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IBI180

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IBI

Allan Bennett was tall, but his sickness had already produced a stoop. 
His head, crowned with a shock of wild black hair, was intensely noble; 
the brows, both wide and lofty, overhung indomitable piercing eyes. The 
face would have been handsomc had it not been for the haggardness and 
pallour due to his almost continuous suffering.

Despite his ill-health, he was a tremendous worker. His knowledge of 
science, especially electricity, was vast, accurate and profound. In addition, 
he had studicd the Hindu and Buddhist scripturcs, not only as a scholar, 
but with the insight that comes from inborn sympathetic understanding.

I did not fully realize the colossal stature of that sacred spirit; but I was 
instantly aware that this man could tcach me morc in a month than anyone 
elsc in five ycars. He was living in great discomfort and penury. I offered 
him the hospitality of my flat. I have always felt that since the occult sciences 
nourish so many charlatans, it should be one’s prime point of honour not 
to make money in any way connccted with them. The amateur status above 
all! Hospitality is, however, always allowable. But I was carcful never to 
go beyond the strict letter of the word.

Iehi Aour camc to stay with me and under his tuition I madc rapid progress. 
He showed me whcere to get knowledge, how to criticize it and how to 
apply it. We also worked together at ceremonial Magick; evoking spirits, 
consecrating talismans, and so on.I must relate one episode, as throwing light upon my magical accomplish- 
ments and my cthical standards. Jones and I had come to the conclusion 
that Allan would die unless he went to live in a warmer climate. However, 
he was penniless and we would not finance him for the reasons given above. 
Instead, Jones and I evoked to visible appearance the Spirit Buer, of The 
Goetia, whose function is to heal the sick. We were partially successful; a 
helmeted head and the left leg being distinctly solid, though the rest of the 
figure was cloudy and vaguc. But the operation was in fact a success in the 
following manner. It is instructive to narrate this as showing the indirect 
and natural means by which the will attains its object.

I am constrained to a sceming digression. Many authors insist on the 
importance of absolute chastity in the aspirant. For some months I had been 
disregarding this injunction with a seductive siren whose husband was a 
colonel in India. Little by little I overcame my passion for her and we parted. 
She wrote to me frequently and tricd to shake my resolution, but I stood 
firm. Shortly after the evocation of Buer, she wrote, begging mce to call at 
her hotel. I cannot remember how it camc into my mind to do what I did, 
but I went to sec her. She begged me to come back to her and offered to 
do anything I wanted. I said to her, ‘You’re making a mess of your life by 
your sclfishness. I will give you a chance to do an absolutely unfettered act. 
Give me a hundred pounds, I won't tell you whom it’s for, except that it’s

182 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

not for myself. | have private reasons for not using my own money in this 
matter. If you give me this, it must be without hoping or expecting anything 
in return.’ She gave me the moncy-—it paid Allan’s passage to Ceylon and 
saved to humanity onc of the most valuable lives of our generation.So much for Bucr. As for the lady, she came to see me some timc later 
and I saw that I was mysclf acting selfishly in setting my spiritual welfare 
above her happiness. She had made a gencrous gesture; I could do no less. 
She agreed not to stand in the way of my performing the Operation of 
Abra-Melin, but begged me to give her a living memory of our love. I 
agreed and the sequel will be told in its place.

During this timc, magical phenomena were of constant occurrence. I had 
two temples in my flat; onc white, the walls being lined with six huge 
mirrors, each six feet by eight; the other black,* a mere cupboard, in which 
stood an altar supported by the figure of a Negro standing on his hands. 
The presiding genius of this place was a human skeleton, which I fed from 
time to time with blood, small birds and the like. The idea was to give it 
life, but I never got furthcr than causing the boncs to become covered with 
a viscous slime. In The Equinox, vol. I, no. 1, is a story, ‘At the Fork of the 
Roads’, which is in every detail a truc account of one episode of this period. 
Will Butc is W. B. Yeats, + Hypatia Gay is Althoea Gyles, the publisher is 
Leonard Smithers.

The demons connected with Abra-Melin do not wait to be evoked; they 
come unsought. One night Jones and I went out to dinner. I noticed on 
Icaving the white temple that the latch of its Yale lock had not caught. 
Accordingly, I pulled the door to and tested it. As we went out, we noticed 
semi-solid shadows on the stairs; the whole atmosphcre was vibrating with 
the forces which we had bcen using. (We were trying to condense them 
into sensible images.) When we came back, nothing had been disturbed in 
the flat; but the temple door was wide open, the furniture disarranged and 
some of the symbols flung about in the room. We restored order and then 
observed that scmi-materialized beings were marching around the main 
room in almost unending procession.When I finally left the flat for Scotland, it was found that the mirrors 
were too big to take out exccpt by way of the black temple. This had, of 
course, been completely dismantled before the workmen arrived. But the 
atmosphere remained and two of them were put out of action for scveral 
hours. It was almost a weekly ecxpcricnce, by the way, to hear of casual 
callers fainting or being scized with dizziness, cramp or apoplexy on the 
staircase. It was a long time before those rooms werc re-let. People felt

* Ichi Aour never had anything to do with this; and I but little: the object of establishing it was 
probably to satisfy my instinct about equilibrium. 
t The identification is conjectural, depending solcly on the admissions of Miss Gyles.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 183

instinctively the presence of something uncanny. Similarly, later on, when 
I gave up my rooms in Victoria Strect, a pushing charlatan thought to 
better himself by taking them. With this object he went to see them. A 
few seconds later he was leaping headlong down the five flights of stairs, 
screaming in terror. He had just sufficient genuine sensitiveness to feel the 
forces, without possessing the knowledge, courage and will required to turn 
them to account, or even to endure their impact.

22

Apart from my daily work, my chief prcoccupation was to prepare for the 
Operation of the Sacred Magick.22

Apart from my daily work, my chief prcoccupation was to prepare for the 
Operation of the Sacred Magick.

The first essential is a house in a more or less secluded situation. There 
should be a door opening to the north from the room of which you make 
your oratory. Outside this door, you construct a terrace covered with fine 
river sand. This ends in a ‘lodge’ where the spirits may congregate. It would 
appear the simplest thing in the world for a man with forty thousand pounds, 
who is ready to spend every penny of it on the achievement of his purpose, 
to find a suitable house in a very few weeks. But a magical house is as hard 
to find as a magical book to publish. I scoured the country in vain. Not till 
the end of August 1899 did I find an estate which suited me. This was the 
manor of Boleskine and Abertarff, on the south-cast side of Loch Ness, 
half way between Inverfarigaig and Foyers. By paying twice as much as 
it was worth, I got it, gave up my flat and settled down at once to get 
everything in order for the great Operation, which one is told to begin at 
Easter.

The housc is a long low building. 1 set apart the south-western half for my 
work. The largest room has a bow window and here I made my door 
and constructed the terrace and lodge. Inside the room I set up my oratory 
proper. This was a wooden structure, lined in part with the big mirrors 
which I brought from London.On first arriving at Boleskine, I innocently frightened some excellent 
people by my habit of taking long walks over the moors. One morning | 
found a large stone jar at my front door. It was not an infernal machine; it 
was illicit whisky —a mute, yet eloquent appeal, not to give away illicit stills 
that I might happen to stumble across in my rambles. I needed no bribe. I 
am a free trader in evcry sense of the word. I have no sympathy with any 
regulations which interfere with the natural activitics of human beings. I 
believe that they aggravate whatever trouble they are intended to prevent; 
and they create the greatest plaguc of humanity, officialdom, and encourage 
underhand conduct on both sides, furtivencss and espionage. Any law which 
tends to destroy manly qualities is a bad law, however necessary it may 
seem on the surface. The tendency of most modern legislation is to bind 
Gulliver with packthread. I have never broken the law myself, because the 
things I happen to want arc so utterly different from thosc desired by men 
in general, that no occasion has ever risen.

184

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 185

But I observe with regrct that humanity is being compelled to turn its 
attention from its proper business by having to comply with innumerable 
petty formalitics.

Salmon fishing on Loch Ness should be remembered by people who are 
praying for ‘those in peril on the deep’. It is a dull year when nobody is 
drowncd. The loch is large enough to get up a regular sea; and the hills 
are so arranged that the wind can come down in all sorts of unsuspected 
ways. The most violent storms often arise without five minutes’ warning. 
In addition, there is one section of the loch (north-east of Boleskinc, on the 
same side) wherc the shore for some two miles is a rocky precipice just too 
high above the water to be climbable, even if onc could gct a footing.It is uscless fishing in settled finc weathcr; one wants it overcast, neither 
too hot nor too cold, ncithcr windy nor quite calm — unsettled weather, in 
a word. One morning I got into a salmon which subscquently turned the 
scale at forty-four pounds. He was terrifically game and really much too 
heavy for my tackle. Again and again he ran out the line and we only held 
him by rowing for all we were worth in his direction. It was nearly two hours 
before we got him into the boat.

The excitement over, I observed that a sleet was driving heavily and that 
the loch was white with foam. Also that we werc off a lee shore, and that 
shore about the middle of the precipice. We could do nothing but pull for 
life in the teeth of the gale, which increased in violence every moment. We 
were both already tired out. Despite every cffort, we were forced, foot by 
foot, towards the rocks. By great luck, there is one gap in thosc infernal 
little cliffs. But the boat was not under control. However, we had to risk 
it and managed to get ashore without being smashed, to beach the boat and 
walk home. That was the worst of it.

But I was often caught on the wrong side of the loch. So near and yet so 
far! There was the house a mile away and there was I with thirty miles to 
make to get there. I have never heard of the steamers being wrecked, but 
that is perhaps because thcy are wrecks already.

I took Lady Etheldreda to Scotland with me. I have had many dogs in 
my time; but she was sui generis. I had trained her to follow me on the 
mountains and she was not only an admirable rock climber but an uncannily 
prophetic tracker. For instance, I would leave her at the foot of a precipice 
beyond her powers and, aftcr a climb, descend another precipice to another 
valley, often in mists so thick that I could not sce ten yards in any direction. 
But I would invariably find her at the foot of the rocks after making a 
detour of perhaps ten miles across unknown country.These qualities had their defects. She became an amateur of sheep. It was 
straightforward sport. She never mangled a sheep, she killed it neatly with 
a single bite and went off to the next. She had no illusions about the ethics

186 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

of her proceedings and she brought superlative cunning into service. She 
never touched a sheep within ten miles of Boleskine; she never visited the 
same district twice running; she was even at pains to prepare an alibi. Of 
course, she was always careful to remove every trace of blood. That was 
clementary. But she would sham sickness the morning after the kill and 
she would bring various objects into her kennel, as if to say, “Well, if you 
want to know how I have been passing the timc, there you arc!’ She also 
realized that her extraordinary specd and endurance would help her to clear 
herself. On one occasion she killed not less than forty miles there and back 
from Boleskine. No one cxcept her master, whom she trusted not to give 
her away, could suspect that she had covered so much ground—to say 
nothing of the shikar itself—in the course of the night. She was unsuspected 
for months—even weeks of watching failed to identify her and if she had 
not been such a magnificent animal she might have escaped altogether. But 
her size and beauty werc unmistakable. The evidence began to be too strong 
to pooh-pooh and I had to send her back to London.

Boleskine is in the winter an excellent centre of ski-läufing. There is little 
snow in the valley itself, but on the moors behind Strath Errick are tracts of 
clevated country, extending for many miles. The slopes are for the most part 
gentle and I have found the snow in first-rate condition as late as the end of 
March.On off days at Wastdale Head, it was onc of our amusements to throw the 
boomcrang. Eckenstein had long been interested in it and constructed 
numerous new patterns, cach with its own peculiar flight. As luck would 
have it, Walker of Trinity came to the dale. He had earned a fellowship by 
an essay on the mathematics of the boomerang. The theoretical man and the 
practical put thcir heads together; and we constructed some extraordinary 
weapons. One of them could be thrown half mile, even by me, who cannot 
throw a cricket ball fifty yards. Another, instead of returning to the thrower, 
went straight from the hand and undulated up and down like a switchback, 
seven or cight times, before coming to the ground. A third shot out straight, 
skimming the ground for a hundred yards or so, stopped as suddenly as if it 
had hit a wall, rose, spinning in the air to the height of some fifty fcet, 
whence it settled down in a slowly widening spiral. Obviously, these 
researches bore on the problem of flying. Eckenstein and I, in fact, proposed 
to work at it. The idea was that we should cut an alley through the woods on 
that part of my property which bordered Loch Ness. We were to construct a 
chute and start down it on a bicycle fitted with movable wings. There was to 
be a steam launch on the loch to pick us up at the end of the flight. We were, 
in fact, proposing to do what has now, in 1922, proved so successful. But the 
scheme never went further than the construction of the boathouse for the 
launch. My wanderings are to blame.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 187THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 187

The harmless necessary cat sheds those cpithcts in the Highlands. The most 
domesticated tabby becomes intoxicated by the air of freedom (so one 
hypothesis suggests) and begins to run wild. It takes to the woods and lives 
on rabbits and birds. Its conscience tells it that it is violating the game laws; 
man becomes its enemy. It accordingly flccs at onc’s approach, though 
somctimes it becomcs mad with fear and will attack a stranger, unprovokcd, 
and fight to the death.

Much to my disgust, commercialism thrust its ugly head into my neigh- 
bourhood. The British Aluminium Company proposcd to exploit the water 
power of the vallcy above Foyers. The Falls of Foycrs are onc of the few 
natural glories of the British Isles; why not use them to turn an honest 
penny?

I sate upon the mossy promontory

Where the cascade cleft not his mother rock,

But swept in whirlwind lightning foam and glory, 
Vast circling with unwcarying luminous shock

To lure and lock

Marvellous eddics in its wild carcss;

And there the solemn cchoes caught the stress,

The strain of that impassive tidc,

Shook it and flung it high and wide,

Till all the air took fire from that melodious roar; 
All the mute mountains heard,

Bowed, laughed aloud, concurred,

And passed the word along, the signal of wide war. 
All carth took up the sound,

And, being in one tune securely bound,

Even a star became the soul of silence most profound.

Thus there, the centre of that death that darkened, 
I sat and listened, if God’s voice should break 
And pierce the hollow of my ear that hearkencd, 
Lest God should speak and find me not awake— 
For his own sakc. 
No voice, no song might pierce or penetrate 
That enviable universal state. 
. The sun and moon beheld, stood still. 
Only the spirit’s axis, will, 
Considered its own soul and sought a deadlier deep, 
And in its monotone mood 
Of supreme solitude 
Was neither glad nor sad because it did not sleep;188 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

But with calm eyes abode 
Paticnt, its leisure the galactic load, 
Abodc alone, nor even rejoiced to know that it was God.

Moncy-grubbing does its best to blaspheme and destroy nature. It is useless 
to oppose the baseness of humanity; if one touches pitch one runs the risk of 
being defiled. I am perfectly content to know that the vileness of civilization 
is rapidly destroying itself; that it stinks in my nostrils tells me that it is 
rotting and my consolation is in the words of Lord Dunsany. In the mcan- 
timc, the water was to be wasted in producing wealth—the most dangerous 
of narcotic drugs. It creates a morbid craving — which it never satisfies after 
the first flush of intoxication.

Now the furnaccs of the British Aluminium Company cost a great deal to 
light. It was, therefore, impossible to extinguish them every Saturday 
evening. The people of the neighbourhood learnt this fact with unfeigned 
horror. Such wickedness was inconceivable! But besides that, it was sheer 
madness. Did not these people in Glasgow understand that God did not 
permit such things to happen with impunity? So on the first Saturday night 
the people betook themselves to points of vantage on the surrounding hills 
in order to sce the works destroyed by the divine wrath. No explanation has 
ever been offered why it did not come off!

The lady previously mentioned was now madc happy as a result of the 
fortnight we had spent together in Paris. I therefore thought it my duty to 
take care of her until the following spring. The fulfilment of her hopes would 
end my responsibility before the beginning of my Operation.I had asked Jones to come and stay with me during the six months, in view 
of the dangers and interference already expericnccd at the mere threat to 
perform it. It was obviously the part of prudence to have, if possible, an 
initiate on the spot. It is also very awkward for a man absorbed in intense 
magical effort to have to communicate with the external world about the 
business of everyday life. Joncs did not sce his way to come, so I asked 
Rosher, who consented. But before he had been there a month he found the 
strain intolerable. | camc down to breakfast one morning; no Rosher. I 
asked the butler why he was absent. The man replied, in surprise at my 
ignorance, that Mr Rosher had taken the carly morning boat to Invemess. 
There was no word of explanation; I never saw him or heard of him for 
many years; and, when we met, though absolutely friendly and even inti- 
mate, we never referred to the matter.

One day I came back from shooting rabbits on the hill and found a 
Catholic priest in my study. He had come to tell me that my lodgekceper, a 
total abstainer for twenty years, had been raving drunk for three days and 
had tried to kill his wife and children.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 189

I got an old Cambridge acquaintance to take Roshcr’s place; but he too 
began to show symptoms of panic fear. Meanwhile, other storms were 
brewing. The members of thc London temple, jealous of my rapid progress 
in the Order, had refused to initiate me to the Second Order in London, 
though the Chief himself had invited me. He, therefore, asked me to come to 
Paris, where he would himself confer the Grade. I went; and, on my return, 
ten days later, found that my protégéc had also taken fright, fled to London 
and hidden herself.Besides these comparatively explicable effects on human minds, there were 
numberless physical phenomena for which it is hard to account. While I was 
preparing the talismans, squares of vellum inscribed in Indian ink, a task 
which I undcrtook in the sunniest room in the house, I had to use artificial 
light even on the brightest days. It was a darkness which might almost be 
felt. The lodge and terrace, moreover, soon became peopled with shadowy 
shapes, sufficiently substantial, as a rulc, to be almost opaque. | say shapes; 
and yet the truth is that they were not shapes properly spcaking. The 
phenomenon is hard to describe. It was as if the faculty of vision suffered 
some interference; as if the objects of vision were not properly objects at 
all. It was as if they belonged to an order of matter which affected the sight 
without informing it.

By the exercise of dour determination, I succeeded in getting everything 
ready in good time to begin the work proper at Faster. It is unfortunate that 
in these days I had no idea of the value of a Magical Record from the 
historical standpoint. I find few dates, nor have I troubled to set down even 
such startling occurrences as arc related above. 1 was dead set on attainment. 
Anything which appeared to me out of the dircct road to the goal was mercly 
a nuisance, a hindrance and a distraction. Apart from my memory, therefore, 
the chief sources of information about my life at this period are poems, 
rituals and records of visions.I was very busily at work with the musc. My Appeal to the American 
Republic was begotten of a pleasant journcy with two Americans from 
Geneva to Paris. The poem is still popular, though from time to time onc 
has to change ‘The lying Russian clokc his traitor head’ to ‘Prussian’, and so 
on. Carmen Saeculare was actually the result of a morc or less prophetic 
vision. Some of its forecasts have turned out wonderfully well, though the 
century is yet young; others await fulfilment—but I do not propose to 
linger on mercly to obtain so morbid a satisfaction!

The Fatal Force, written in the spring of 1899, possesses one feature of 
remarkable interest. The idea of the play is that a high priestess, resenting the 
necessity of male co-operation in maternity, should marry her own son and, 
subsequently, the son of that union, so as to produce an individual who would 
be seven-cighths herself; the advantage being that he would thus inhcrit as

190 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

much of her power and wisdom as possible. I supposed this idea to be 
original; but I discovered later that Eliphas Lévi mentions this formula as 
having been used by the ancient Magicians of Persia with this very intention. 
That was one of the facts which led me to the discovery that in my last 
incarnation I was Eliphas Lévi.

The Mother’s Tragedy seems to have been influenced by Ibsen, with a touch 
of Bulwer Lytton.The Mother’s Tragedy seems to have been influenced by Ibsen, with a touch 
of Bulwer Lytton.

In The Temple of the Holy Ghost, however, the reader may trace the 
progress of my soul’s development. A few of the poems in this book arc 
comparatively normal. Onc can see the extent of my debt to various pre- 
decessors, especially Baudelaire. But while there is a certain delight in 
dalliance with demoniac Delilahs, there is a steady advance towards the 
utmost spiritual purity. In “The Athanor’, the invocation of the Holy 
Guardian Angel reveals my truc aspirations; while in “The Mountain Christ’, 
‘The Rosicrucian’ and others, it is evident that my ambition was not to become 
superior to the rest of mankind exccpt in order that I might redeem them.

I quote:

The Oath of the Beginning.

I, Perdurabo, Frater Ordinis Rosae Rubcæ et Aureae Crucis, a Lord 
of the Paths in the Portal of the Vault of the Adepts, a 5°=6° of the 
Order of the Golden Dawn; and an humble servant of the Christ of God; 
do this day spiritually bind myself anew:

By the Sword of Vengeance: 
By the Powers of the Elements: 
By the Cross of Suffering:

That I will devote myself to the Great Work: the obtaining of 
Communion with my own Higher and Divine Genius (called the 
Guardian Angel) by means of the prescribed course; and that I will 
use my Power so obtained unto the Redemption of the Universe.

So help me the Lord of the Universe and mine own Higher Soul!

This idea is further expanded in the obligation which I took in respect of 
the Operation. The influence of my initiation into the Second Order is 
manifest. While I remained in the Outer Order, I had not definitely realized 
the fact that I was bound up with the welfare of humanity and could only 
satisfy my aspiration by becoming a perfect instrument for the regeneration 
of the world. I quote once more:

The Obligation of the Operation.The Obligation of the Operation.

I, Perdurabo, in the Presence of the Lord of the Universe, and of all 
Powers Divine and Angelic, do spiritually bind myself, even as I am 
now physically bound unto the Cross of Suffering.

(1) To unite my consciousness with the divine, as I may be permitted

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY IQI

and aided by the Gods Who live for ever, The Acons of Infinite years; 
that, being lostin the Limitless Light, it may find Itself: to the Regenera- 
tion of the Race, either of man or as the Will of God shall be. And I 
submit myself utterly to the Will Divine.

(2) To follow out with courage, modesty, loving-kindness and 
perseverance the course prescribed by Abra-Melin the Magc; as far as 
in me lies, unto the attainment of this cnd.

(3) To despise utterly the things and the opinions of this world lest 
they hinder me in doing this.

(4) To use my powers only to the Spiritual well-being of all with 
whom I may be brought in contact.

(s) To give no place to Evil: and to make cternal war against the 
Forces of Evil: until even thcy be redeemed unto the Light.

(6) To harmonize my own spirit so that Equilibrium may lead me to 
the East; and that my Human Consciousness shall allow no usurpation 
of its rule by the Automatic.

(7) To conqucr the temptations.

(8) To banish thc illusions.

(9) To put my whole trust in the Only and Omnipotent Lord God: 
as it is written, “Blessed are thcy that put thcir trust in Him.’

(10) To uplift the Cross of Sacrifice and Suffering; and to cause my 
Light so to shine before men that they may glorify my Father which is in 
Heaven.(10) To uplift the Cross of Sacrifice and Suffering; and to cause my 
Light so to shine before men that they may glorify my Father which is in 
Heaven.

Furthermore, I most solemnly promise and swear: to acquire this 
Holy Science in the manner prescribed in the Book of Abra-Melin, 
without omitting the Icast imaginable thing of its contents; not to gloss 
or comment in any way on that which may be or may not be, not to use 
this Sacred Science to offend the Great God, nor to work ill unto my 
neighbour: to communicate it to no living person, unless by long 
practice and conversation I shall know him thoroughly, well examining 
whether such an one really intendcth to work for the Good or for the 
Evil. I will punctually observe, in granting it, the same fashion which 
was used by Abra-Mclin to Abraham. Otherwise, let him who recciveth 
it draw no fruit therefrom. I will keep myself as from a Scorpion from 
selling this Science. Let this Science remain in me and in my generation 
as long as it shall please the Most High.

As all these points I generally and severally swear to observe under the 
awful penalty of the displeasure of God, and of Him to whose Know- 
ledge and Conversation I do most ardently aspire.

So help me the Lord of the Universe, and my own Higher Soul!*

* Some of the above phrases are prescribed by Abra-Melin itself; others are adapted from my 
$°=68 documents.

J92 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

During this period I continued the practice of visions of and voyages upon 
divers spiritual planes. It seems worth while to record a few of these. They

afford a clear indication of my progress at this time.afford a clear indication of my progress at this time.

In bed, I invoked the Fire angels and spirits on the tablet, with names, 
etc., and the 6th Key.) I then (as Harpocrates) entered my crystal. An 
angel, meeting mc, told me, among other things, that they (of the 
tablets) were at war with the angels of the 30 Aethyrs, to prevent the 
squaring of the circle. 1 went with him unto the abodes of Fire, but must 
have fallen asleep, or nearly so. Anyhow, I regained consciousness in a 
very singular state, half consciousness being thcre, and half here. I 
recovercd and banished the Spirits, but was burning all over, and tossed 
restlessl y about — very sleepy, but consumed of Fire! Only repeated carcful 
assumption of Harpocratcs’ god-form cnabled mc to regain my normal 
state. I had a long dream of a woman eloping, whom I helped, and after, 
of a man stealing my Rose Cross jewel from a dressing-table in an hotel. 
I caught him and found him a man weak beyond the natural (I could 
bend or flatten him at will),* and then the dream scemed to losc 
coherence ... I carricd him about and found a hairbrush to beat him, 
ctc. ctc. Query: Was I totally obsessed?

Invoking the angels of Earth, I obtained wonderful effect. The angel, 
my guide, treated me with great contempt and was very rude and truth- 
ful. He showed me divers things. In the centre of the earth is formulated 
the Rose and Cross. Now the Rose is the Absolute Sclf-Sacrifice, the 
merging of all in the O (Negative), the Universal Principle of genera- 
tion through change (not mercly the feminine), and the Universal 
Light ‘Khabs’. The Cross is the Extension or Pekht principle. Now | 
should have learned morc; but my attcntion wandered. This closes the 
four elemental visions: prosecuted, alas! with what weakness, fatuity 
and folly!

I ... in the afternoon shut myself up and went on a journey ...I ... in the afternoon shut myself up and went on a journey ...

I went witha very personal guide: and beheld (after some lesser things) 
our Master as he sat by the Well with the Woman of Samaria. Now the 
five husbands were five great religions which had defiled the purity of 
the Virgin of the World: and ‘he whom thou now hast’ was materialism 
(or modem thought).

Other scenes also I saw in His Life: and bchold I also was crucified! 
Now did I go backwards in time even unto Berashith, the Beginning, 
and was permitted to sce marvellous things.

First the Abyss of the Water: on which I, even I, brooded amid other

* This incident was once quoted by one of my critics as illustrative of the absurdity of Magick — 
as if Magick were responsible for the irrationality of dreams! 
t This horrible phrase was not my own: I must not be judged by it.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALBISTER CROWLEY 193

dusky flames as Shin upon Maim, held by my Genius. And I beheld the 
victory of Râ upon Apophis? and the First of the Golden Dawns! Yea: 
and monsters, faces half-formed, arose: but they subsisted not.

And the firmament was.

Again the Chaos and the Death!And the firmament was.

Again the Chaos and the Death!

Then Ath Hashamain ve ath h-aretz. There is a whirling, intertwining 
infinitude of nebulae, many concentric systems, each system non-con- 
centric to any other, yet all concentric to the whole. As I went back- 
wards in time they grew faster and faster, and less and less material. 
(P.S.— This is a scientific hypothesis, directly contrary to that of Anna 
Kingsford.) And at last are whirling wheels of light; yct through them 
waved a thrill of an intenser invisible light in a direction perpendicular 
to the tangents. I asked to go yet farther back; and behold! I am floating 
on my back — cast down: in a wind of Light flashing down upon me from 
the immeasurable Above. (This Light is of a bluish silver tinge.) And I 
saw that Face, lost above me in the height inscrutable; a face of absolute 
beauty. And I saw as it were as a Lamb slain in the Glamour of Those 
Eycs. Thus was I made pure; for there, what impurity could live? I was 
told that not many had been so far back: none farther: those who could 
go farther would not, since that would have reabsorbed them into the 
Beginning, and that must not be to him who hath sworn to uplift the 
Standard of Sacrifice and Sorrow, which is strength. (I forgot the 
Angels in the Planetary Whirl. They regarded me with curiosity: and 
were totally unable to comprehend my explanation that I was a Man, 
returning in time to behold the Beginning of Things.)

So I returned; having difficulty to find the carth. But I called on 
S.R.M.D. and V.N.R.,2 who were glad to see me; and returned into 
the body: to waste the night in gibing at a foolish medico.So I returned; having difficulty to find the carth. But I called on 
S.R.M.D. and V.N.R.,2 who were glad to see me; and returned into 
the body: to waste the night in gibing at a foolish medico.

My actions continually testify that I naturally possessed what is after all 
the most essential asset for a Magician, in singular perfection. It came 
natural to me to despise and reject utterly, without a second’s hesitation or 
regret, anything soever that stood in the way of my purpose. Equally, I 
could hold that purpose itself as nothing in comparison with the greater 
purpose of the Order to which I was pledged.

Early in 1900 I applied to the Second Order in London for the documents 
to which my initiation in Paris entitled me. They were refused in terms 
which made it clear that the London body was in open revolt against the 
Chicf, though afraid to declare its intentions. I went to London and discussed 
the matter with Jones, Baker and Mrs Emery. Jones saw clearly enough that 
if Mathers were not the head of the Order and the trusted representative of 
the Secret Chiefs, there was no Order at all. Baker’s position was that

194 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Mathers was bchaving badly; he was sick of the whole business. Mrs Emery, 
the nominal representative of the Chicf, was trying to find a diplomatic 
solution. Her attitude was most serious and earnest and she was greatly 
distressed by her dilemma. She had thought it best to resign quietly, but 
reccived a reply of the most staggering character. The letter is dated Febru- 
ary 16th, 1900, and I quote the last two paragraphs in full.Now, with regard to the Second Order, it would be with the very 
greatest regret both from my personal regard for you, as well as from the 
Occult standpoint, that I should receive your Resignation as my Repre- 
sentative in the Second Order in London; but I cannot let you form a 
combination to make a schism thercin with the idea of working secretly 
or avowedly under Sapere Audc4 under the mistaken impression that he 
received an Epitome of the School of the Second Order work from 
G. H. Soror, Sapicns Dominabitur Astris.® For this forces me to tell you 
plainly (and, understand me well, I can prove to the hilt every word 
which I here say and more, and werc I confronted with S.A., I should 
say the same) though for the sake of the Order, and for the circum- 
stance that it would mean so deadly a blow to S.A.’s reputation, I 
entreat you to keep this secret from the Order, for the present, at least, 
though you are at perfect liberty to show him this if you think fit, after 
mature consideration.

He has NEVER been at any time either in personal or written com- 
munication with the Secret Chiefs of the Order, he having either him- 
self forged or procured to be forged the professed correspondence between 
him and them, and my tongue having been tied all these years by a 
Previous Oath of Secrecy to him, demanded by him, from me, before 
showing me what he had either donc or caused to be done or both. 
You must comprchend from what little I say here the extreme gravity 
of such a matter, and again I ask you, both for his sake, and that of the 
Order, not to force me to go further into the subject.

This letter struck at the very heart of the moral basis of her conduct. It put 
her in the position of having initiated people, for years, on false pretences. 
She could not drop out and say no more about it. The matter had to be 
thrashed out.My own attitude was unhampered by any ethical considerations. I had 
seen a good deal of Mathers personally. He was unqucstionably a Magician 
of extraordinary attainment. He was a scholar and a gentleman. He had that 
habit of authority which inspires confidence because it never doubts itself. A 
man who makes such claims as he did cannot be judged by conventional 
codes and canons. Ordinary morality is only for ordinary pcople. For 
example, assume a Prime Minister who has private information that some-

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY 195

body has discovered, and is cultivating, a new germ by means of which he 
intends to destroy the nation. To pass a ‘Short Act’ would be to give the 
alarm and precipitate the disaster. It would be his duty to override the law 
and put his foot upon the mischief. Then again, the whole of Mathers’s 
conduct might have been in the nature of a test. It might have been his way 
of asking the adepts whether they had the power of concentrating on the 
spiritual situation, of giving up for ever all their prejudices.

Anyhow, as far as I was concerned, Mathers was my only link with the 
Secret Chiefs to whom I was pledged. I wrote to him offering to place 
myself and my fortune unreservedly at his disposal; if that meant giving up 
the Abra-Mclin Opcration for the present, all right.

The result of this offer was recorded as follows:

D.D.C.F.* accepts my services, therefore do I rejoice that my 
sacrifice is accepted. Therefore do I again postpone the Operation of 
Abra-Mclin the Mage, having by God’s Grace formulated even in this a 
new link with the Higher and gaincd a new weapon against the Great 
Princes of the Evil of the World. Amen.

I went to Paris, discussed the situation with Mathers and formulated the 
following proposal for dealing with the refractory ‘temple’.I went to Paris, discussed the situation with Mathers and formulated the 
following proposal for dealing with the refractory ‘temple’.

I. The Second Order to be summoned at various times during two or 
three days. They to find, on being admitted one by one, a masked man 
in authority and a scribe. These questions, etc. pass, after pledge of 
secrecy Concerning interview.

A. Are you convinced of the truth of the doctrines and knowledge 
received in the grade of 5°=6°? Yes or No? 
If yes (1) Then their origin can spring from a pure source 
only? 
If no (2) I degrade you to be a Lord of the Paths in the Portal 
in the Vault of the Adepts. 
B. If he reply ‘yes’, the masked man continucs: Arc you satisfied 
with the logic of this statement? Do you solemnly promise to cease 
these unseemly disputes as to the headship of this Order? I for my 
part can assure you from my own knowledge that D.D.C.F. is 
really a 7°=4". 
If yes (3) Then you will sign this paper; it contains a solemn 
reaffirmation of your obligation as a 5°=6' slightly expanded, 
and a pledge to support heartily the new regulations. 
If no (4) I expel you from this Order.

II. The practice of masks is to be introduced. Each member will know 
only the member who introduced him.

196 TOWARDS THE GOLDEN DAWN

Severe tests of the candidate's moral excellence, courage, carnestness, 
humility, refusal to do wrong, to be inserted in the Portal or 5°=6" 
ritual.

II]. Outer Order to be summoned. Similar regulations to be announ- 
ced to them. New pledges required that they will not communicate 
the identity of anybody they happen to have known to any new 
member.

IV. Vault to be reconsecrated.

This was accepted, and I crossed to London to carry it out. I find an entry 
in my little book of Magical Rituals which reveals my state of mind.

April 12th, 1900.IV. Vault to be reconsecrated.

This was accepted, and I crossed to London to carry it out. I find an entry 
in my little book of Magical Rituals which reveals my state of mind.

April 12th, 1900.

I, Perdurabo, as the Temporary Envoy Plenipotentiary of Deo Duce 
Comite Ferro & thus the Third from the Secret Chiefs of the Order of 
the Rose of Ruby and the Cross of Gold, do deliberately invoke all laws, 
all powers Divine, demanding that I, even I, be chosen to do such a 
work as he has done, at all costs to myself. And I record this holy 
aspiration in the Presence of the Divine Light, that it may stand as my 
witness.

In Saecula Saeculorum. Amen!

A further complication had suddenly arisen. In Mathers’s fatal letter to 
Mrs Emery, he wrote that Sapiens Dominabitur Astris was not dead after all; 
but in Paris, working with him at that very moment. But when I arrived in 
Paris, Mathers had becn rudely undeceived. The woman who claimed to be 
Sapiens had bolted, with such property of his as she could lay hands on. That 
such a man could have been so imposed upon seems incredible. But he told 
me that she certainly possessed knowledge which only Sapiens had, and also 
that she had told him every detail of a very private conversation which 
he had once had with Mme Blavatsky at Denmark Hill. In the upshot, she 
proved to be one Mme Horos.’ In the following year she was sentenced to 
seven years’ penal servitude for outrages on young girls. She had in some 
way used the rituals of the Order which she had stolen from Mathers to 
entice them to their doom.My arrival in London as the envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary of 
Mathers put the cat among the chickens. My identity was very soon 
discovered and a typhoon began to rage in the teacup. The rebels resorted to 
all sorts of lawless and violent acts, and spread the most stupidly scandalous 
stories, not only about me, but about the few others who remained loyal to 
Mathers. They did not even scruple to slander a young girl of perfect 
purity, by imputing to her an improper intimacy with me. It was especially 
dastardly, as she was engaged to be marricd. To this day I cannot understand

THE CONFESSIONS OF ALEISTBR CROWLEY 197

how people like W. B. Yeats should not have repressed such methods in the 
sternest way and insisted that the fight be fought with fair weapons. They 
had scized the furniture of the temple and the vault. I applicd to a police 
magistrate for it to be handed over. On the hearing of the summons we were 
amazed to find Mr Gill, q.c., onc of the most famous men at the bar, briefed 
to appear in a police court to squabble over a few pounds’ worth of para- 
phernalia! The money was furnished by Miss Horniman, daughter of the 
Mazawattee tea man, and later of Manchester Theatre fame. She had been 
expelled by Mathers some time previously.I knew. enough of campaigning to decline joining battle against such heavy 
artillery as Mr Gill. Luckily, the value of the property had been sworn at a 
sum beyond the limit with which a police magistrate can deal. The summons 
was therefore withdrawn and Mr Gill kept his eloquence and his fee to him- 
self. There was in reality nothing worth fighting for. The rebel camp broke 
up in anarchy. They issued various hysterical manifestos, distinguished by 
confusion of thought, inaccuracy of statement, personal malice, empty 
bombast and ignorance of English. One crror is worth rescuing from 
oblivion. “Nothing in the above resolutions shall effect our connection with 
the Rosicrucian Order.’ The poor darlings meant affect.

They went on squabbling amongst themselves for a few months and then 
had the sense to give up playing at Magick. Their only survivor is Arthur 
Edward Waite, who still pretends to carry on the business, though he has 
substituted a pompous, turgid rigmarole of bombastic platitudes for the 
neophyte ritual, so that the last spark of intercst is extinct for ever. Mathers, 
of course, carried on; but he had fallen. The Secret Chiefs cast him off; he 
fell into deplorable abjection; even his scholarship deserted him. He published 
nothing new and lived in sodden intoxication till death put an end to his 
long misery. He was a great man in his way. May hc have expiated his errors 
and resumed his labours, with the advantage of experience!

Summer was now at hand and the wanderlust reasserted itsclf in me. There 
was no point in my going back to Boleskine till the following Easter. As it 
happened, Mathers — to whom I returned to report progress — had two 
guests, members of the Order. They had just come back from Mexico. The 
fancy took me to go there. I wanted in particular to climb the great volcanoes. 
So, late in June 1900, I sailed for New York.

PART TWO

THE MYSTICAL ADVENTUREPART TWO

THE MYSTICAL ADVENTURE

The Scal of the Great White Brotherhood, showing the sevenfold 
star of Babalon.

22

I think it was on the sixth of July that I reached New York. In those days one 
was not bored by people

*[... 2107396 more characters truncated ...]*