Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2007  with  funding  from

Microsoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/cultsofcampania01peteuoft


@)


w.n44'*tm^/i


THE  CVLTS
OF  CAMPANIA


BY


ROY  MERLE    PETERSON


PAPERS  AND  A\ONOGRAPHS
OF  THE  AMERICAN  ACADEAVY  IN  ROME


VOLVME    I


S.  ii.  as.


AMERICAN   ACADEMY   IN    ROA\E

I9!9


Printed  in  Italy


C3P(/


PRINTED    FOR    THE    AMERICAN    ACADEMY    IN    ROME

by

ACCOM.  Editori  Alfieri  <S  Lacroix  -  Roma
Di  LUIGI  ALFIERI  &  C.o


PREFACE.


The  present  volume  is  the  first  of  a  new  series  entitled
^Papers  and  Monographs  of  the  American  Academy  in  Rome^,
The  material  was  prepared  fcp  Mr,  Peterson  in  1919,  but  owing
to  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  printing  in  the  period  following
the  war,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  publish  it  until  now,
Mr.  Peterson  has  been  much  occupied  since  his  return  to
America  and  has  not  been  able  to  revise  his  text  in  the  light
of  the  most  recent  literature  so  it  has  been  thought  best  to  date
thfi  Volume  as  of  1919,

The  second  volume  of  the  series  will  be  b^  Miss  L.  R.
Tay^lor,  on  the  Cults  of  Etruria,  She  has  already  prepared
her  manuscript,  and  the  book  should  be  read^  for  distribution
earl^  in  the  ^ear  1923,


-  Ill


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.


'  Pago

Preface    ..       ..        Ill

Table  of  Contents V

List  of  Abbreviations        VII

List  of  Chapters  :

"^I,  The  Development  of  Religion  in  Campania 1

II,  Cumae,  Baiae,  Misenum      ..  45

^  III,  Puteoli       «        ..        ..  99

IV,  Neapolis 165

V,  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum 222

VI,  Nuceria,  Stabiae,  Surrentum,  Capreae          291

VII,  Capua        317

VIII,  Nola  and  the  Minor  Campanian  Towns        377

Addenda          396

Index 401


-  V  -


LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS.

To  avoid  unnecessary  repetition,  the  volumes  to  which  most
frequent  reference  is  made  will  be  cited  merely  by  the  name
of  the  author,  as  follows :


Beloch,  -  Campanien,  2nd  ed.  Breslau  1890.

Buck,  -  A  Grammar  of  Oscan  and  Umbrian,  Boston,  1904.

Conway,  -  The  Italic  Dialects,  Vol.  I,  Cambridge  1897.

D.-S.,  -  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  Dictionnaire  des  antiq.  Gr.  et  Rom.

D.,  -  Dessau,  Inscriptiones  Latinae  selectae,  Berlin  1892-1914.

DiELS,  -  Sibyllinische  Blatter,  Berlin  1890.

Dubois,   -  Pouzzoles  antique  (Bib.  des  ecoles  franccises  d'Athenes  e  de

Pome  XCVIII)  Paris  1907.
Farnell,  -  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States  I-V,  Oxford  1896-1909.
Fowler,  -  The  Religious  Experience  of  the  Roman  People,  London  1911.
Garucci,  -  Le  monete  dell'  Italia  antica,  Rome  1885.
Gruppe,  -  Griechische  Mythologie  (Handbuch  der  klassischen  Altertumswis-

senschaft  V,  21  Munich  1906.
Helbio,  -  Wandgemdlde  der  vom  Vesuv  verschiitteten  Stddte  Campaniens,

Leipsig  1868.
Mau,  -  Pompei  in  Leben  und  Kunst,  2nd  ed.  Leipsig  1908.
Mau-Kelsey,  -  Pompeii,  Its  Life  and  Art,  Trans,  by  F.  W.Kelsey,  2nd  ed.

New  York  1902.
Meyer,  -  Geschichte  des  Altcrtums  II,  Stuttgart  1893.
NissEN,  -  Italische  Landeskunde  II,  Berlin  1902.
P.-W.  -  Paulys-Wissowa,  -  Real-Encycl.  d.  klass.  Altertumswissenschaff,

Stuttgart  1894--.
Preller-Jordan,  -  Romische  Mythologie,  3rd  ed.,  Berlin  1881-1883.
Preller-Robert,  -  Griechische  Mythologie,  4tli  ed.,  Berlin  1894.
Roscher,  -  Lexikon  d.  gr.  und  rem.  Mythologie,  Leipsig  1884--.
Sambon  (A),  -  Les  monnaies  antiques  de  I'  Italic,  I,  Paris  1903.
Vaglieri,  -  Sylloge  epigraphica  orbis  Romani,  Vol.  II,  pars  I,  Rome  1904.
Von  Planta,  -  Grammatik  der  Oskisch-umbrischen  Dialekte  II,  Strassburg

1897.
WissowA,  -  Religion  u,  Kultus  d.  Romer,  2nd  ed.,  Munich  1912.


-  VII  -


CHAPTER  I.
THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGION  IN  CAMPANIA,


Our  knowledge  of  the  religious  conditions  of  the  Romam
world  has  made  great  progress  within  the  last  few  decades.
But  treatises  dealing  with  this  topic  are  genereJly  written  from
the  standpoint  of  the  City  itself;  the  cults  in  other  places  axe
treated  cursorily  or  relegated  to  allusions  in  the  notes.  In  some
cases  the  provinces  have  not  been  neglected,  but  little  has
been  done  systematically  to  bring  together  and  examine  the
scattered  information  which  we  possess  about  the  cults  of  the
Italian  cities  outside  of  Rome  (I).  As  a  result  such  information
is  difficult  to  find  and  not  seldom  inaccurate  because  of  the
lack  of  systematic  study  and  comparison.

Yet  the  life  said  activity  of  these  cities  were  of  the  high-
est importance  for  the  welfare  of  the  Empire.  Men  bom
and  reared  here  rather  than  at  Rome  were  the  leaders  in  pol-
itics and  literature.  Of  special  importance  through  many  cen-
turies of  history  was  the  old  and  populous  district  of  Campania.
As  a  geographical  term,  this  wais  used  by  the  ancients  with
considerable  eleisticity  for  the  territory  along  the  western  coast
of  Italy  between  the  Mediterraneem.  Sea  and  the  Samnite
mountains.  The  western  offshoot  of  this  range,  extending
through  the  peninsula  of  Sorrento,  bounded  it  on  the  south.
Certain  authors  as  Strabo,  Pliny  and  Mela,  who  evidently
derive    their    information    from    a  common  source,   agree  in

(1)  The  cults  of  Sicily  have  been  more  often  treated.  See  Ciaceri,  Culti
e  miii  nella  storia  dell' antica  Sicilia;  Troj>ea,  Carte  teotopiche  della  Sicilia
antica  in  Riv.  di  Storia  antica  VI  (1902)  467  f . ;  Pareti,  Per  una  storia  dei  culti
della  Sicilia   antica  in  Studi  siciliani   ed   italioti   227    f.

-    1    -


naming  SInuessa  as  the  last  city  in  Latium,  and  thus  do  not
admit  the  use  of  the  term  Campania  for  the  district  north  of
the  River  Liris,  which  later  was  all  included  in  the  same  re-
gion (I).  As  used  in  this  treatise  its  meaning  will  be  still  more
restricted  and  it  will  be  confined  to  the  district  the  northern
boundary  of  which  is  the  river  called  by  the  ancients  Vol-
turnus.  As  thus  defined,  Ceimpania  may  easily  be  divided  into
two  parts,  which  differ  in  their  physical  characteristics  and  to
some  extent  in  their  resf>ective  fortunes.  There  is  first  the
narrow  strip  of  volcanic  coast  Isuid  depending  largely  upon
commerce  for  its  prosperity;  sepeu-ated  from  this  section  by
Vesuvius,  Gaurus  and  other  mountain  formations  is  the  in-
terior plain  with  interests  primarily  agricultural.

In  comparison  with  the  long  period  covered  by  Campa-
nian  history  and  the  dense  population  of  the  country  little
material  has  survived  to  throw  light  upon  their  beliefs  and
observances.  The  writers  who  have  made  so  meuiy  allusions
to  the  shrines  and  deities  of  the  capital  city,  are  remeu-kably
silent  about  those  of  all  the  dependent  Italian  cities,  even
when  these  were  so  important  as  Capua  Euid  Puteoli.  Archaeo-
logical evidence  for  the  different  localities  is  very  uneven.  On
the  one  hand  something  has  been  discovered  of  most  of  the
temples  of  the  relatively  unimportant  town  of  Pompeii,  while
the  larger  cities  mentioned  above  are  represented  only  by
scattered  inscriptions  and  the  most  fragmentgu^  remains.  It  is
then  the  task  of  the  imagination  to  seize  upon  the  cold  and
lifeless  remains  of  Pompeisui  temples,  people  them  once  more
with  divinity,  priest,  and  worshipper,  and  fill  them  with  the
incense  of  sacrifice  and  the  sound  of  prayer,  so  that  they  may
reappeeir  somewhat  as  in  the  days  of  the  distant  past,  when
amid  the  surging  life  of  the  city  round  about  them  they  formed
the  basis  upon  which  the  welfare  of  the  state  and  the  faith
of  the  individual  was  founded.  If  this  can  be  accomplished,
we  shall   have  before   us    a   comprehensive   picture   revealing

(1)  Mela  II,  71;  Strab.  V.  2,  1;  Plin.  nat.  III.  59;  Hiilsen,  Campania  P.  -
W.  Ill,  1434;  Jung,  Grundriss  der  Geographic  von  Halien  25  f . ;  Beloch,  54tti
dei  Lincei  series  III,  X  (1882-3)  430  and  Campanien  1  f. ;  Ruggiero,  Campania
II,  42;  Lanzoni.  Le  origini  del  cristianesimo  e  deW episcopato  nella  Campania
Tomana  in  Riv.  atorico-crit.  delle  acienze  teol.  VI   (1910)  25.


many  secrets  of  ancient  life.  For  it  must  be  remembered
that  in  the  past  there  was  little  definite  sepsu-ation  either  in
theory  or  in  practice  between  political  and  religious  institu-
tions; both  were  interwoven  at  the  beginning  and  only  by
degrees  did  they  separate  (I).

Details  of  the  picture  are  furnished  by  the  epigraphical
evidence,  unsatisfactory  as  this  is  for  most  of  the  region  un-
der discussion  by  reason  of  the  lack  of  systematic  £ind  scientific
excavations.  It  affords  many  a  glimpse  into  the  intimate
thoughts  and  life  of  people  in  all  the  various  social  conditions.
Here  we  find  the  testimonies  of  esteem  paid  to  the  worthy
municipal  priest  for  his  faithfulness  as  an  official,  and  notice
the  pardonable  pride  of  the  aristocratic  priestess  who  during
her  own  lifetime  raised  a  monument  to  record  her  honors.
We  witness  the  piety  of  humble  dedicators  who  thank  the
gods  for  escape  from  a  raging  sea  or  for  the  restoration  of
freedom.  We  behold  the  crowds  that  throng  the  mysteries  and
depgirt  with  confidence  in  the  hof)e  of  an  assured  immortality.
In  short  we  have  before  us  a  pgunorama  exhibiting  the  emotions
and  the  Eispirations  of  humanity  (2).

PRIMITIVE  CAMPANIAN  RELIGION.

The  early  civilization  of  this  region  was  marked  by  the
presence  of  divergent  and,  to  a  large  extent,  conflicting  ele-
ments. To  a  primitive  race  of  Oscan  stock,  which  dwelt  in
these  parts,  were  added  contingents  of  Greek  colonists  who
established  themselves  along  the  coeist,  and  an  influx  of  E-
truscEoi  invaders  who  secured  the  domination  of  the  interior.
In  the  second  heJf  of  the  fifth  century  B.  C.,  the  Samnites,.
descending  from  the  mountains,  becaune  supreme  at  all  points^
and  so  continued  till  the  aggressions  of  Rome  overthrew  their
power.  All  these  peoples  naturally  had  their  own  religious
beliefs  and  interests,  which  reacted  upon  and  sensibly  mod-
ified one  another.  But  as  a  result  of  the  paucity  of  notices
which  have  reached  us,   little  specific  information  is  at  hand

(1)   Cp,    Trede,    Das   Heidentum   in    der    romischen    Kirche    1,    50.
(2)  See  e.   g.   pp.   93.   106.  231.  356.

-  3  -


about  the  contribution  of  each  element  to  the  resulting  civili-
zation, the  character  of  which  itself  is  known  only  in  a  general
way.  So  iai  as  the  various  cults  are  concerned,  it  is  often  diffi-
cult to  determine  the  origin  of  the  deities  worshipped,  and
generally  impossible  to  obtain  an  exact  idea  of  the  date  of
their  introduction.  Even  at  Rome  the  beginnings  of  most  of
the  forms  of  religion  are  shrouded  in  obscurity  and  their  sub-
sequent development  is  disputed;  here,  where  the  evidence  is
much  less  abundeint,  the  problem  is  still  hsirder  and  does  not
always  admit  a  solution.

The  divinities  recognized  by  the  primitive  inhabitaoits
were  conceived  in  the  vague  euid  general  sort  of  way  asso-
ciated with  the  animistic  stage  of  religion.  Though  the  forces
and  objects  for  which  they  stood  can  generally  be  inferred,
these  shadowy  beings  were  sepsurated  from  one  another  by
no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  either  in  nsune  or  in  function.
Thus  one  idea  was  frequently  represented  by  several  gods
with  different  names,  who  when  finally  analyzed  become  in
reeJity  a  single  divinity.  Yet  as  happened  in  the  case  of  both
the  Samnites  and  the  Latins,  certain  of  these  deities,  develop-
ing a  more  concrete  form,  became  actual  personalities  with
constant  characteristics,  while  their  erstwhile  companions  and
competitors  faded  away  into  total  obscurity  (I).  They  are  prob-
ably the  ones  that  appear  in  the  few  Oscan  inscriptions  which
have  come  down  to  us.  In  other  words  the  known  deities  of
the  pre-Roman  era  were  probably  worshipped  by  the  old  Os-
caoi  population,  and  were  not  introduced  by  the  Samnite  in-
vaders. The  latter  in  general  seem  to  have  been  devoted  to
divinities  simil2ir  to  those  of  their  predecessors  in  this  region,
and  their  invasion  could  not  have  produced  much  difference
from  a  religious  point  of  view.  Traces  of  the  old  Oscan  deities
£u:e  widely  scattered  throughout  this  territory,  appearing  along
the  coast  as  well  eis  in  the  interior.

Gabrici,  studying  the  evidence  of  south  Italisoi  coins,
believes  that  they  indicate  the  veneration  of  certain  primitive
divinities  genereJly  throughout  this  region,   one  a  male   deity

(1)  Conway,  Ancient  Italy  in  Hastings,  Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and
Ethics  VII,  458;  Fowler,  Religious  Experience  of  the  Roman  People  116;
Carter,  Religion    of   Numa    5 ;    Nissen,    Pompeianische   Studien    328.

-  4  -


I


of  solar  Eoid  terrestrial  character,  the  other  a  goddess  with
lunar  suid  chthonic  attributes.  The  first  one  he  considers  to
have  been  very  influential  in  Campania  £uid  to  have  been  ex-
pressed there  especially  by  the  well  known  bull  with  human
face  which  is  frequently  seen  upon  Campanian  coins.  Since
the  early  coins  of  Asiatic  cities  show  similar  types,  he  infers
that  the  conceptions  of  divinities  current  in  southern  Italy  were
largely  due  to  Oriental  influence  introduced  by  emigrants  from
that  region.  This  view,  however,  can  be  regarded  at  present
only  as  a  suggestive  hypothesis  (1).

More  teingible  evidence  exists  for  the  worship  of  several
deities  that  had  exact  pzurallels  at  Rome.  In  this  category  of
old  Italian  gods  Diovis,  who  corresponds  to  the  Latin  Jupiter,
had  a  prominent  place,  and  is  represented  on  the  earliest  coin-
age of  Campania  and  neighboring  districts.  To  be  more  ex-
act, several  forms  of  this  god  originally  independent  one  of
the  other  were  honored  in  this  locality;  among  them  Weis
conspicuous  a  divinity  represented  in  Latin  by  the  term  lu-
piter  Liber,  who  is  mentioned  in  both  Oscan  and  Latin  in-
scriptions. Another  Jupiter  called  Flazzus  is  not  well  under-
stood because  of  the  meager  evidence  for  his  existence,  but
he  has  been  usually  associated  with  the  Roman  Fulgurator  (2).
According  to  Servius  the  Oscan  Jupiter  was  especially  a  god
of  light  whose  most  general  epithet  was  Lucetius;  but  no
mention  of  this  name  has  been  preserved  in  the  cities  of  Caun-
pania,  nor  has  any  trace  appeared  of  the  epithets  Versor  and
Vicilinus  found  in  other  localities  which  were  peopled  by  a
kindred  race  (3).

It  has  generally  been  assumed  that  a  goddess  correspond-
ing to  Juno  was  honored  by  the  old  Italians  and  worshipped
in  Campania  and  the  other  Oscan  territories  £is  well  as  among


(1)  Gabrici,  Sul  valore  dei  tipi  monetali  nei  prohlemi  storici,  etnogra-
fici  e  religiosi  in  Atti  del  Congresso  internazionale  di  scienze  storiche  1903,
VI,    72-73    and   Miscellanea   Salinas    126    f.

(2)  See  p.    396  of   the   Addenda.

(3)  Serv.  Aen.  IX,  567.  Versor  occurs  in  a  Sabellian  inscription  from
Bruttium   written    in    Greek,    Vicilinus   is    cited    from    Compsa    (Samnium).    Cp.

Perdrizet,  Jupiter  D.S.  Ill,   709;   Aus^,   jupliVer,  Rcscher    II,   640.


the  Umbrians  (1).  This  view,  however,  has  been  attacked  by
Otto,  who  while  recognizing  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  cult,
insists  that  this  was  not  true  for  the  eeurlier  period,  but  wais
due  to  Roman  influence  (2).  In  fact,  although  a  few  cults  of
Juno  in  Campania  are  attested  by  evidence  coming  from  the
Republican  period,  it  is  not  impossible  to  consider  them  aa
established  after  the  power  of  Rome  became  strong  in  southern
Italy.  To  this  clciss  belong  those  of  Nuceria,  Mt.  Gaurus  and
Celenna.  Yet  the  evidence  for  denying  the  worship  of  Juno  to
the  e£irly  period  of  Campania  is  wholly  negative,  eind  the  prob-
ability of  ancient  cults  in  some  places  is  strong,  though  it
is  clear  that  the  worship  of  the  goddess  did  not  attain  here
the  prominence  which  it  reached  in  central  Italy  (3).

The  pure  Italic  origin  of  Diana  is  undisputed.  She  wets
a  patron  of  fertility  in  the  vegetable  and  suiimal  worlds,  and
was  honored  especially  by  women  as  a  goddess  who  presides
over  child  birth  (4).  Her  shrine  at  Mt.  Tifata  near  Capua  and
Casilinum  was  one  of  the  oldest  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
though  the  extemit  inscriptions  referring  to  it  go  back  no  far-
ther than  the  first  century  B.  C.  In  importance  it  vied  with  the
s2Uictuaa-ies  at  Aricia  and  Rome.  In  the  interior  cities  such  as
Capua  the  eeu-ly  Italic  form  of  Diana  as  well  as  of  Jupiter  and
Juno  continued  to  be  very  prominent  during  the  era  of  the
Roman  Republic.  It  is  true  that  they  were  modified  to  some
extent  by  Greek  influences  coming  from  the  coast,  but  it  is
not  correct  with  Albert  to  speak  of  them  as  Greek  gods  (5).
The  Latin  Venus,  who  seems  to  have  been  a  divinity  orig-
inally connected  with  fields  and  gaidens,  was  paralleled  in
Oscan  Campania  by  a  goddess  called  Herentas.  South  Italy
in  general  was  well  supplied  with  Venus  cults  (6).  In  one  form

(1)  Roscher,  Juno  II.   576;   Hild,  Juno  D.-S.    III.   684;  Aust,   Religion   der
Romer  125.

(2)  W.  F.  Otto.  Juno  in  Philologus  LXIV  (1905)  173.

(3)  Wissowa,  187.   See  pp.  293,  337.

(4)  Birt,  Diana,  Roscher  I.  1002;  Wissowa.  Diana  P.-W.  V,  328;  Paris
Diana  D.-S.  II.   154.

(5)  Albert.    Le   Culte   de    Castor   et  Pollux    en    Italic   46.

(6)  Old  Venus  cults  in  Latium  are  cited  from  Ardea.  Lavinium,  Alba,
and  Gabii.  Cp.  Secban.  Venus  D.-S.  V,  733,  735 ;  Preller-Jordan.  I,  435 ;  Wis-
sowa.  290,    291.

-6  -


or  goiother  cults  that  seem  to  be  old  aie  known  to  have  existed
not  only  at  Capua  in  the  interior  but  also  at  Pompeii  and  Her-
culaneum  on  the  coast.  Preller  believed  that  Venus  Felix  was
a  deity  worshipped  especially  in  Campania  and  as  such  formed
the  model  of  the  celebrated  Pompeian  goddess,  but  this  opin-
ion has  been  refuted  by  Wissowa  (1).  The  early  cults,  how-
ever, were  afterwards  modified  by  the  introduction  of  the
Sicilian  Aphrodite  from  Mt.  Eryx,  as  happened  also  at  Rome.

The  cult  of  Fortuna,  which  was  widespread  at  an  early
date  eunong  various  Italian  peoples,  was  important  at  Oscan
Capua.  She  was  probably  worshipped  in  this  region  as  else-
where £is  a  kind  of  protective  influence,  and  not  unlikely  was
regarded  as  a  goddess  interested  in  motherhood  (2).  In  the
Greek  settlements  along  the  shore,  however,  this  form  of  re-
ligion was  introduced  at  a  late  date  2is  a  result  of  Roman  in-
fluence.

The  Osc£Ui  equivalent  for  Ceres  occurs  in  inscriptions,
where  the  word  not  only  stands  for  a  specific  deity  but  also
is  used  £is  an  epithet  for  a  number  of  poorly  defined  divinities.
The  specific  goddess  Ceres  v/as  later  identified  with  the  Greek
Demeter  and  reverenced  as  a  goddess  of  agriculture.  As  a
mother  goddess  she  resembled  Fortuna;  as  Ceres  Ultrix  she
was  invoked  in  imprecation  tablets  to  promote  vengeance.  A
deity  corresponding  to  the  Latin  Libera  was  probably  in  exis-
tence, who  under  Greek  influence  was  associated  with  Ceres.
Her  Oscan  name  is  unknown  (3).  The  supposition  of  Preller,
approved  by  Nissen,  that  this  goddess  was  identical  with  the
Venus  found  at  Pompeii  and  Capua  hsis  nothing  to  recommend


(1)  Preller-Jcrdan.    I,   448;    Nissan.  Pomp.   Studien   343;  Wissowa.    De    Ve-
neris  simulacris   Romania    in    Gesammelte    Abhandlungen    23.

(2)  Besides  the  well  known  shrines  at  Antium  and  Praeneste,  temples
were  located  on  the  frontier  between  Cales  and  Teanum,  at  Fanum  Fortunae  in
Umbria,  2ind  probably  at  Beneventum.  Cp.  Peter,  Fortuna,  Roscher  1,  1548;
Otto,  Fortuna  P.-W.  VII,  13;  Wissowa,  258;  Dieterich.  Mutter  Erde  79;
Carter,  The  Cognomina  of  the  Goddess  «  Fortuna  »  in  Trans,  and  Proc.  of  the
Am.  Phil.  Assoc.  XXXI  (1900)  60.

(3)  Mommsen,  Vnteritalische  Dialekfe  273 ;  Buck,  Grammar  of  Oscan  and
Vmbrian  258;  F.  Lenormant,  Ceres  D.-S.  I,  1078;  Wissowa,  Ceres,  P.-W.  III.
1974.

-  7  -


it  (1).  Likewise  the  Greek  name  Hebon,  applied  especially
to  the  Dionysus  of  Neapolis,  seems  to  represent  some  native
Campanian  designation  for  the  god  Liber  (2).  Then  too  va-
rious places  had  local  divinities  not  recognized  outside  of  a
small  radius;  such  were  to  be  found  in  places  of  a  peculiar
character  such  as  Lake  Avemus,  the  Phlegraean  Fields  and
Mt.  Vesuvius,  where  perhaps  Cacus  was  honored,  or  a  god
corresponding  to  the  Romeui  Vediovis  who  was  held  in  awe
£Uid  reverence  in  localities  subject  to  volcanic  activity  (3).
While  the  cult  of  the  Genius  may  be  an  old  Italian  observance,
no  evidence  for  it  can  be  found  before  the  era  of  Roman  in-
fluence (4).

ETRUSCAN  INFLUENCES.

The  esurly  religious  state  of  the  country  wets  affected  by
the  arrival  of  Greek  settlers  and  Etruscan  invaders.  As  prov-
ed by  the  evidence  of  graves  which  have  been  excavated,
the  influence  of  the  Etruscans  was  second  in  point  of  time,
but  it  may  be  treated  first  because  it  must  be  passed  over
briefly  on  account  of  our  present  ignorance  of  the  subject  (5).
It  was  clearly  less  thaui  that  which  emanated  from  the  Greek
colonies  on  the  coast,  as  the  ideas  current  there  had  already
had  an  opportunity  of  being  disseminated  through  the  interior
in  the  period  that  antedated  the  arrival  of  the  Etruscans.  A-
gain,  the  prominence  of  the  latter  wcis  of  no  long  duration,
amounting^  according  to  the  Roman  historians,  to  only  half  a
century  (6).  On  the  other  hand  the  influence  of  the  Etrusceuis
must  not  be  unduly  minimized.  In  material  things  it  weis  very
important,  a  fact  demonstrated  noticeably  in  the  C2ise  of  pot-
tery,  and  to  a  less  extent,   because  of  the  lack  of  surviving

(1)  Preller-Jordan,    II,  50;    Nissen,    Pomp.    Studien    328.

(2)  Mommsen,    Unteritalische    Dialekte    133.

(3)  Winter,  The  Myth  of  Hercules  at  Rome  'n  Univ.  of  Mich.  Studies
IV,  268;  Frothingham.  Vediovis  the  Volcanic  God  in  Am.  Jour.  Phil  XXXVIIl
(1917)  388.

(4)  Meyer.    II.   528.

(5)  Sogliano.    Cuma   Italica    in    Miscellanea  Salinas    61.

(6)  Patroni,  Buccheri  Campani  in  Studi  e  mat.   I.   (1899-01)  290  f.

-  »  -


material,  in  Eu-chitecture  (I).  Furthermore,  it  is  known  that
this  people  profoundly  affected  the  religion  of  the  Roman
people  and  it  is  reeisonable  to  suppose  that  they  left  an  im-
press similcir  in  kind,  if  not  in  degree,  upon  the  religious  no-
tions prevalent  in  Campcmia.  Some  of  the  features  which  ap-
parently entered  this  region  after  it  had  been  exposed  to
Romeui  influence  were  probably  obtained  directly  from  the
Etruscans  at  a  much  earlier  period.  Thus  the  cult  of  the  Leires,
provided  that  it  was  an  offshoot  of  the  Etruscan  religion,  may
well  have  been  derived  from  them  by  the  Campanisms  (2).
Likewise  the  myth  of  Telephus  at  Capua  probably  came  from
the  Etruscans  rather  than  through  the  agency  of  the  Greeks
at  Cumae  (3).  The  principle  of  grouping  three  divinities  to-
gether so  as  to  form  a  triad  has  been  Eissociated  with  Etruria,
but  triads  that  probably  existed  in  southern  Italy  before
the  Roman  period  can  be  explained  as  of  Greek  origin  (4).
On  this  point  as  on  others  no  definite  information  is  attainable.
Etruscan  documents  from  Campania  which  have  a  bear-
ing on  the  religious  conditions  of  the  times  are  confined  to
a  single  example,  discovered  in  the  necropolis  of  the  ancient
Capua.  Although  the  sense  of  the  whole  is  far  from  clear,
there  seems  to  be  a  mention  of  certain  offerings  probably
made  to  the  gods  of  the  nether  world  (5).  Torp  considers  that

(1)  Pais,  Ancient  Legends  of  Roman  History  250  and  Storia  di  Roma
I.   part  2,   360.

(2)  The  derivation  of  the  cult  of  the  Lares  from  Etruria  is  supported
among  others  by  Lattes  and  most  of  the  specialists  in  Etruscology,  See  Lattes,
Rend,  del  r.  1st.  Lombardo  series  2.  XXV  (1892)  517  ;  De  Marchi,  //  culto  privato
di  Roma  antica  I,  31  (with  bibliography).  This  view  is  opposed  by  Jordan,
Preller-Jordan,    I,  82    and   Wissowa,   Lares,    Roscher    II,    1869.

(3)  See    p.   358.

(4)  Usener.  Dreiheit  in  Rh.  Mus.  LVIII   (1903)  I  f.  Cp.  Herbig,  Etruscan
Religion   in  Hastings  Encyclopaedia  V,    534;   Carter,   Religious  Life   of   Ancient
Rome  26;   Thulin.   Rh.   Mus.   LX  (1905)  256  f.

(5)  Biicheler,  Die  campanisch-etruski^che  Uriiunde  in  Rh.  Mus,  LV,
(1900)  2;  Lattes,  Primi  appunti  sulla  grande  iscrizione  etrusca  trovata  a  S.  Maria
di  Capua  in  Rend,  del  r.  1st.  Lombardo  series  2  XXXIII  (1900)  541,  and  Nuooi

appunti  intorno  alia  grande  iscrizione  etrusca  di  S.  Maria  di  Capua  in  Rend,  del
T.  1st.  Lombardo  series  2  XL  (1907)  737  f. ;  Torp.    Bemerkungen  zu  der  estruskia-
chen  Inschrift  von  S.  Maria  di  Capua  in  Skrifter  udgivne  af  Videnskabs-Selskabet
i  Chrisiiania   1905  N°.  5  and  Etruskische  Beitrage,   Zweite  Reihe  in  S^i/fer  ud-
givne  af   Videnslzabs-Selsl^abet  i  Chr  sHania   1906,   N.  8,   pp.   9,   18  f.


an  enumeration  of  divinities  appeeo-s  comprising  Suri,  Letham,
Uni,  Larzui  ( ?),  Thaur,  Turms,  eincl  Calu.  Lattes  adds  that  the
inscription  commemorates  the  performajnce  of  funeral  rites
at  the  tomb  by  an  unknown  priest  (I).  It  seems  to  be  of  late
date,  not  earlier  than  the  fourth  century,  -  a  circumstance
which  points  to  the  presence  of  a  number  of  Etruscans  in  Cam-
psinia  long  after  the  Samnite  conquest.  It  has  been  suggested
by  Pais  that  they  lived  here  for  religious  reasons  and  belong-
ed to  certain  families  who  had  the  hereditary  duty  of  serving
particular  divinities  (2).  This  accords  with  the  belief  that
gods  belonging  esp>ecially  to  one  race  could  not  have  ministers
from  another.

THE  INTRODUCTION  OF  GREEK  CULTS  ALONG
THE  COAST.

As  already  stated  the  inhabitants  of  Campania  had  come
in  contact  with  Greek  religious  notions  at  ein  esurly  period
through  the  establishment  of  colonies  along  the  cosist.  The
oldest  Greek  divinities  were  gods  prominent  in  eastern  Boeotia
Eoid  Euboea,  who  were  introduced  into  the  first  settlement  at
Cumae.  Here  belong  the  gods  of  the  phratries  introduced  at
Cumae  smd  then  caurried  to  Neapolis,  who  include  local  deities
from  both  sides  of  the  Euripus  (3).  The  place  of  first  rank
wais  occupied  by  Apollo,  who  seems  to  have  been  associated
with  mem,y  phases  of  life  and  to  have  served  as  prophet,  healer
and  patron  of  colonies.  At  ChaJcis  in  fact  colonies  were  re-
garded as  tithes  paid  to  Apollo  (4).  The  samie  source  was  re-
sponsible for  the  introduction  of  Demeter  Thesmophoros,  who
was  worshipped  at  Elretria  and  who  in  Campania  hats  left
traces  of  her  presence  (5).   At  the  saune  time  doubtless  camie

(1)  Torp.  op.  cit.  4;  Lattes.  Atti  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  108.  The  latter  reads
iSe  conclud'ng  words  as  an  equivalent  to  Veltur  deus  scripait,  a  formula  adop-
ted by  the  officiating  priest,  Lattes,  Rend,  del  r.  1st.  Lombardo  XXXIII  (1900)
560.  561.

(2)  Pais,   Ancient  Legends   251.

(3)  Busolt.    I.  393.

(4)  Strab.  VI.  1,6;  Gruppe.  58;  Roscher.  Apollo  I,  441  ;  Wernicke.  'Apol-
x>n  P.-W.   II,    18,   73.

(5)  Beloch.    156;    Gruppe,    65    f . ;    Plutarch.    Quaest.    Graec.    31.

-  10  -


Demeter's  daughter  Cora  with  whom  she  wets  associated  in
the  mysteries.  The  cult  of  the  Dioscuri,  which  was  very  im-
portant at  Neapolis,  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  oldest  cults
recognized  at  Cumae.  It  is  generally  2issumed  that  it  spread
through  Italy  steirting  from  Locri  and  Tarentum;  in  this  event
it  must  have  reached  the  Campanian  cocist  at  an  eaily  date  (1).
But  it  may  well  have  come  with  the  Euboeem  colonists.  Though
its  presence  is  not  well  attested  in  Euboea  and  Boeotia  as  early
as  the  colonization  period,  it  nevertheless  belonged  to  one  of
the  old,  widely  diffused  cults  traces  of  which  have  been  found
in  many  localities  (2).  Statius,  therefore,  may  be  following
an  authentic  tradition,  when  he  groups  the  Dioscuri  with  A-
pollo  and  Demeter  and  calls  them  dii  patrii  of  his  native
town  (3).  With  the  two  mystery  goddesses  mentioned  above
was  associated  Dionysus,  who  at  least  at  Neapolis  bore  the
epithet  Hebon.  Although  there  is  no  definite  trace  of  the  way
he  reached  Campania,  it  hsis  been  inferred  that  he  was  brought
from  Boeotia  (4).  Am,ong  other  deities  whose  worship  was
probably  tranjsplanted  to  ItaJy  with  the  Chalcidian  colony
may  be  mentioned  Zeus,  Hera,  Hermes,  Artemis,  and  Aphro-
dite, who  were  revered  generally  among  the  Greeks  in  esu-ly
times  and  were  prominent  in  Euboea  and  its  dependancy,  east-
em  Boeotia  (5).  With  Artemis  came  perhajjs  the  legend  of
Orestes,  which  has  left  no  traces  at  Cumae  but  which  flour-
ished at  Aricia.  It  may  have  come  to  the  latter  from  the  former,

(1)  Gruppe,  373;  Albert.  Le  cixlte  de  Cast<fT  et  Pollux  8  f . ;  Sambon,  Les
monnaiea  antiques  de  I'ltalie  I,    192.

(2)  Bethe,  Dioskuren  P.-W.  V.  1101;  Furtwangler.  Dioskuren,  Roscher
I.   1164;  Foucart.  Bull  corr.  hell  IX  (1885)  403.

(3)  See  pp.    66,    187.

(4)  Gruppe.  367.

(5)  Eitrem,  Hera,  P.-W.  VIII.  371  and  Hermes,  P.-W.  VIII.  739-40;  Ro-
scher. Hera  I.  2080-1  and  Hermes,  I,  2350;  Farnell,  Cults  of  the  Greek  States  1.
179.   247.  253.    II.   425;   Wernicke.  Artemis   P.-W.    II,    1403,    1406;    Gruppe,    367;

cp.  210.  306.  The  importance  of  the  cults  of  eastern  Boeotia  compared  with  those
of  Euboea  itself  is  discussed;  by  Gruppe.  365.  The  covers  of  funeral  urns  found  in
Campania  often  show  the  standing  figure  of  a  man  bearing  a  sheep.  Von  Duhn
identified  him  as  Hermes  Kriophoros  known  at  Temagra  and  explained  his
presence  as  due  to  the  influence  of  that  city  exercised  through  ChaJcis.  But  this
theory  has  been  more  recently  denied.  Von  Duhn.  i4nn.  Inst.  LI  (1879)  143  f . ;
Milchhofer.  Die  Anjdnge  der  Kunsl   in   Griechenland  212   f . ;   Busolt.    I,   393  .

-  n  -


as  there  were  rather  intimate  relations  between  them,  and
both  formed  an  alhance  against  the  Etruscans,  the  traditional
date  of  which  is  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  B.  C.  (I).

The  same  people  brought  with  them  a  knowledge  of  the
Homeric  traditions.  Early  navigators,  who  had  made  their
way  to  the  western  seas,  had  been  impressed  with  the  won-
ders of  nature  manifested  along  the  Campanian  coast,  and
imagined  it  to  be  the  abode  of  various  demons.  The  most  distinct-
ive points  of  this  region  were  now  definitely  identified  with
the  adventures  of  Odysseus,  and  myths  deeding  with  this  sub-
ject were  localized  at  different  places  along  the  shore  (2).
At  the  same  time  was  introduced  the  legend  of  the  combat
between  gods  and  giants;  localized  first  at  Phlegra  in  the
western  peninsula  of  the  Chalcidice,  it  becsune  associated  later
with  the  so-called  Phlegraean  Fields  in  Campania.  As  the
rich  lands  around  Nola  and  Capua  seemed  worthy  enough  to
be  desired  by  the  gods,  this  name  was  sometimes  applied  to
them;  the  scene  of  the  actual  conflict  however  was  generally
assumed  to  be  the  volcanic  district  about  Cumae  and  Pu-
teoli  (3).  It  is  also  probable  that  the  legend  of  Aeneas  was
known  at  an  early  date  in  the  vicinity  of  Chalcis  and  that  it
W£is  borne  thence  to  the  coast  of  Italy  (4).  The  priority  of  the
myth  in  Campania  however  before  it  was  known  at  Rome  is
not  entirely  certain,  as  it  may  have  been  introduced  in  both
localities  from  Sicily,   where  especially  at  Mt.   Eryx  the  cult


(1)  Dion.  Hal.  V,  36;  Liv.  II,  14;  Busolt.  II,  275.  Pais,  however,  holds
that  the  Orestes  cult  was  derived  from  lower  Italy  (Rhegium)  and  Sicily  (Messana)
where  it  was  connected  with  that  of  Artemis  Phacelitis.  Pais,  Gli  elementi  san-

nitici  e  campani  nella  pih  antica  civilta  romana  in  Atti  Nap.  XXI   (1900-1)   133
=   Ricerche  stor.   e  geog.  427.  Cp.   Gruppe,  367.

(2)  Ed.  Meyer,  II,  483;  Gruppe,  369;  Weicker,  Der  Seelenvogel  62;  De
Petra,  Parthenope  Sicula  in  Miscellanea  Salinas  81  ;  Patroni,  Intorno  al  mito
delle  Sirene  in  Riv.  di  fil.  e  d'istr.  class.  XIX  (1891).

(3)  Diod.  V,  71;  Strab.  V,  4,  6  (245);  Eustath.  on  Dionys.  Perieg.  357;
Tzetzes  on  Lycophron  688;  Ilberg,  Giganten  Roscher  I,  1648.  The  myth  of  the
Giants  around  Cumae  was  explained  rationally  by  Strabo,  V,  4,  3.  Preller-Robert,
75;  Pais,   Stor.  crit.   237,   249.

(4)   Gruppe,    369;    Oberhummer,     Chalkis    P.-W.     Ill,    2081;    Pais.    Stor.
crit.  I.  238-239.

-  12.


of  Aphrodite  weis  very  strong  (1).  In  any  ceise  the  myth  of
Aeneas  was  Eissociated  with  the  worship  of  that  goddess  rather
thein  with  the  cult  of  Apollo  as  was  maintained  by  O.  Miil-
ler  (2).  It  is  then  uncertain  whether  the  legend  of  Aeneas
was  introduced  here  in  a  form  different  from  that  which  it
assumed  at  Rome  or  whether  in  CeimpEmia  it  developed  cer-
tain peculiarities,  which  were  probably  reproduced  in  the
work  of  the  Campeuiian  poet  Naevius.  Besides  influencing
geographical  nomenclature,  as  in  the  C2ise  of  Misenum  and
the  promontory  of  Palinurus  farther  south,  it  becsone  aisso-
ciated  with  Capua,  whose  founder  Capys  W2is  asserted  to  be
the  cousin  of  Aeneas   (3).

According  to  Miiller's  theory  the  cult  of  Apollo  and  the
traditions  centering  about  Aene2is  cEune  to  Cumae  with  the
colonists  from  Aeolic  Kyme  (4).  The  same  origin  has  been
ascribed  to  the  Sibylline  prophecies  found  at  Cumae  (5).  But
in  addition  to  any  other  objections  that  might  be  brought  a-
gainst  these  views,  there  is  the  possibility  that  the  Kyme  cited
£is  participating  in  the  eeurliest  colonization  of  Italy  was  not
the  well  known  city  of  Aeolia  but  an  obscure  town  on  the


(1)  Preller-Jordan.  II,  314;  Pais.  Stor.  crit.  I.  253  .  Cp.  Busolt,  I,  395;
Worner,  Die  Sage  ton  den  Wanderungen  des  Aeneas  22;  Cauer,  Dj  f abulia
GrcBcis   ad  Romam   conditam   pertenentibus    10-11.

(2)  O.  Miiller,  Explicantur  causae  jabulae  de  Aeneae  in  Italiam  adventu
in  Class.  Jour.  XXVI  (1822)  308  f . ;  Hild,  La  legende  d'Enie  avant  Virgile  34;
Aineias  P.-W.   I,    1019;  Worner,  Aineias  Roscher  I,    188.

(3)  Pais.  Stor.  crit.  I.  233  f..  250;  Pfister.  Die  Reliquienkult  im  Altertum
I.  157-8  {Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiien  V)\  Gruppe,  690  ;
Worner,  Die  Sage  von  den  Wanderungen  des  Aeneas  19,  21  =  Abhandl.  zu  den
Programm  des  kgl.  Gymnasiums  in  Leipsig  1881-2;  Cauer,  Die  rom.  Aeneassage

von  Naevius  bis  Vergilius  in  Jahrb.  fur  class.  Phil.  Supplementband  XV  (1887)
101  ;  Nettleship.  The  Story  of  Aeneas  Wanderings  in  Jour.  Phil.  IX  (1880)  42,
45.  The  myth  related  by  Dionysius  that  Romus,  a  son  of  Aeneas,  founded  both
Capua  and  Rome  is  a  late  invention  depending  upon  the  alliance  between  the
two  cities  after  338  (or  334)  B.  C.  Dion.  Hal.  I,  73  ;  Niese,  Die  Sagen  von  der
Grundung  Roms  in  Hist.  Zeits.  XXIII  (1888)  490;  Geffcken,  Timaios  Geogra-
phic  des    Westens  44.

(4)  MuUer,  loc.  cit.;  Schwegler,  Rom.  Gesch.  I.  316;  Worner,  Die  Sage
von   den    Vl^anderungen  des  Aeneas  22.

(5)  Schwegler,  Rom.  Gesch.  I,  802;  Gruppe.  342;  Bouche-Leclercq,  Hist,
de  la  divin.  dana  Vant.  II,   156.  184.

-  13  -


island  of  Euboea  (I).  Samos  is  also  cited  as  the  source  of  the
Sibyl  (2).  In  fact  it  is  impossible  to  determine  exactly  how
her  cult  reached  Cumae,  and  it  may  have  come  with  more
than  one  band  of  colonists.  In  any  case  it  goes  back  ultimately
to   Marpessus    (3).

The  same  uncertainty  is  attached  to  the  cult  and  myth  of
the  Sirens,  which  becsune  associated  with  the  vicinity  of  Nea-
polis  and  Surrentum.  According  to  Gruppe  and  Weicker  they
were  brought  by  the  settlers  from  Chalcis  and  formed  a  part
of  their  stock  of  Euboean  and  Boeotian  traditions  (4).  P.  Fried-
lander,  calling  attention  to  the  priority  of  the  myth  of  the
Sirens  in  Setmian  tradition  before  it  appeared  in  the  Odyssey,
believes  that  their  presence  in  Caumpania  was  due  to  Samian
colonists,  who  aie  credited  in  history  with  the  foundation  of
a  settlement  at  Puteoli  (5).  No  evidence  has  been  preserved
for  the  arrival  of  Samians  at  Neapolis,  but  Friedlander  re-
gards the  statement  of  a  scholiast  as  pointing  in  that  direc-
tion "(6).  A  better  indication  for  believing  that  the  cult  of  the
Sirens  was  due  to  a  non-Chalcidian  element  is  the  attitude
shown  towaurd  them  by  the  people  of  Cumae;  not  only  did
the  latter  not  carry  on  the  worship  of  these  creatures,  but  they
are  actually  reported  to  have  been  hostile  to  Parthenope,  the
special  patroness   of  the   Neapolitans.

The  most  important  element  after  that  of  the  ChaJcidians
W21S  the  one  derived  from  Rhodes,  which  established  a  colony
Parthenope  on  or  near  the  site  of  the  later  Neapolis.  The  Rho-
dians  were  familiar  with  the  gods  generally  recognized  by
the  Greeks  aoid  in  addition  probably  introduced  into  Campania
the  worship  of  Heracles.  The  origin  of  this  cult  is  disputed.
The  opinion  once  held  that  he  was  especially  a  Doricui  god


(1)  Beloch.   147;  Busolt.  391  f.

(2)  Schwegler,    Rom.    Gesch.    I,    802.

(3)  Buchholz.  Sibylla,  Roscher  IV,  795.   799 ;  Schultess,  Die  Sihyllinischen
Biicher  in  Rom  8  f.

(4)  Gruppe,    344   and   Jahresb.    iiher   die  Fortschr.    der   class.    AltertumsiO.
CXXXVII   356;    Weicker.    Seirenen,    Roscher    IV,    607    and    Der   Seelenvogel   60.

(5)  P.  Friedlander.  Herckles  85  f.

(6)  Scholiast   on    Dionys.    Perig.    358    (Miiller,    Geog.    Gr.    min.    II,    445):
Friedlander.  HerakJes  90.

-  14  -


coming  from  the  Peloponnesus  to  Cumae,  as  stated  for  exam-
ple by  Reitzenstein,  is  not  tenable  (I).  Many  scholars  have
considered  him  as  a  primitive  Boeotian  deity  or  at  least  one
who  was  prominent  there  at  an  early  date.  In  this  event  his
cult  would  have  spread  first  to  Euboea  and  from  there  would
have  reached  Italy  at  Cumae  (2).  But  Friedlander  has  shown
that  the  primitive  Heracles  cult  was  at  Rhodes,  and  was  in-
troduced into  Boeotia  from  the  Rhodian  epics  as  late  as  700
B.  C.  In  Czunpania  therefore  it  must  have  been  due  to  the
Rhodians  either  by  direct  colonization  or  indirectly  from  their
settlement  at  Croton  (3).  The  recognition  of  the  god  soon
spread  along  the  coeist,  as  he  appears  associated  with  the
myths  of  the  Giants  suid  the  cattle  of  Geryon  which  were  lo-
calized in  the  neighborhood  of  Cumae.  He  wcis  further  wor-
shipped at  the  numerous  warm  springs  eo-ound  Puteoli  as  at
Himera   (4).

Other  elements  joined  the  esu-liest  colonists  from  time
to  time  bringing  with  them  certain  religious  ideas  from  their
old  homes.  Thus  refugees  from  Psophis  in  Arcadia  perhaps
reached  Cumae  bringing  their  traditions  about  the  Erymaoi-
thean  boar  with  the  result  that  in  time  Apollo's  temple  was
supposed  to  preserve  its  very  remains  in  the  form  of  a  sacred
relic,  and  the  bosur's  tusks  were  portrayed  on  Cumaesm
coins  (5).  On  the  basis  of  a  notice  in  Pausanias  it  has  also
been  thought  that  a  band  from  Tritaea  in  Achaia  settled  here
and  introduced  the  god  Ares  with  the  legend  of  Romulus  (6).


(1)  Reitzenstein,   Incd.   poet.   Gr.   frag.    II.

(2)  Von    Wilamowitz,    Der    Herahles    Sage    in   Eurip.    HerakJ-    I.     1,     12;
Meyer,   II  255,  485-6;   Beloch   I,    163  and  Die  dorische   Wanderung  in  Rh.  Mus.

XLV   (1890)    579;    Correra,    Riv.    Hal    di  numis.    XVI    (1903)    191;    Winter,    The
Myth   of  Hercules  at  Rome   266.

(3)  Friedlander,  Herakles  54  f. ;  Gruppe,  374 ;  Pohlmann,  Grundriss  der
gr.   Gesch.  49.

(4)  Serv.  'Aen.  VII.  662;  Friedlander,  HerakJes  22,  142;  Gruppe  454
and  Berl.  Phil  Wochens.  XXXI  (1911)  1002;  R.  Peter,  Hercules,  Roscher  I,
3009;    Preller-Jordan,    II.    280.

(5)  Gruppe,  371;  Garrucci.  Le  moneis  delVIt.  ant.  Pl.  83,  No.  29;  A.
Sambon.  Les  monn.  ant.  de  i'lt.    151.  No.  246:   Pais.  Sior.   crit.   I.  228.

(6)  Reitzenstein,  Ined  poet  Gr.  frag.  11,  24;  Gruppe,  141;  Paus,  VII,
22.  9.

-  15  -


But  the  worship  of  Ares  -  if  it  really  Wcis  carried  on  at  Cumae  -
might  well  have  come  from  Euboea.  Reitzenstein  saw  another
evidence  for  the  presence  of  an  Achaean  element  in  the  use  of
the  word  ^Ayjxi^zi  as  opposed  to  the  expression  iv  Tratfjiotoi  v6{j.otc
found  in  an  oracle  of  Phlegon  of  Tralles.  He  maintained  that
the  rites  of  the  new  comers  were  thus  distinguished  from  those
of  thei  original  Euboean  settlers,  but  the  reference  is  not
surely  to  Cumae  (1).  Pais,  while  admitting  the  presence  of
these  Achaean  euid  Arcadian  elements  in  the  religion  of  Cu-
mae, believes  that  they  came  from  Syracuse  sifter  the  battle
of  Cumae  in  474  B.  C.  (2).

The  cult  of  Athena  was  introduced  generally  in  lower
Italy  as  a  result  of  Achaesin  and  Aetolian  influence,  but  in
Campania  seems  to  have  been  brought  directly  from  Athens
by  a  number  of  colonists  from  that  city  who  took  up  their
abode  at  Neapolis  in  the  fifth  century  (3).  Before  this  time
there  were  few  relations  between  Athens  and  Csunpania,  and
wares  from  the  former  were  imported  into  the  latter  through
the  mediation  of  the  merchants  of  Syracuse  (4).  Now  Athe-
nian influence  made  itself  felt  more  strongly,  and  a  new  type
of  money  was  issued  which  bears  the  likeness  of  the  great
deity  of  that  city.  Pottery  found  at  Cumae  shows  so  great  a
resemblance  to  the  Athenian  product,  that  it  has  been  sup-
posed to  be  the  work  of  artisans  from  Athens  who  were  re-
siding in  Campania  (5).  The  new  movement  must  have  had
much  importance  in  a  religious  way,  but  little  evidence  for  it
has  been  preserved.  The  influence  of  Athens  was  not  always
exercised  directly  but  also   through  the  agency  of  Thurii   (6).


(1)  Reitzenstein,   op.  cit.    10;  Diels,   Sibyllinische  Blditer   54   f . ;   Schultess,
Die  Sibyllinische  Biicher  in  Rom  24.  For  the  oracle  see  Diels  op.  cit.   Ill   f.

(2)  Pais,   Sioria   della   Sicilia   e   della   Magna   Graecia    I,    163.

(3)  Dummler,   Athena  P.  W.   II,    1984;   Ruckert,  Dienst  der  Athena  84  f.
(not  accessible  to  me);   Beloch,  30;  Pais,   Ricerche  sior.   e  geogr.  441.

(4)  Helbig,    Sopra    le    relazioni    commerciali    degli    Ateniesi    colV Italia    in
Rend,    dei  Lincei  V   (1889)   79.

(5)  Vanacore,   /   vasi  con   heroon  dell'ltalia  tneridionale  in  Atti  Nap.  XXIV
(1906)   189.

(6)   A.   Sambon,  La   cronologia  delle   monete   di   Neapolis   in   Riv.    ital.    di
num.  XV   (1902)   119  f.

-  16-


In  fact  the  veirious  cities  of  Magna  Graecia  and  Sicily
exercised  an  important  influence  on  the  development  of  reli-
gion in  Campsmia.  Between  the  ports  of  the  latter  and  those
of  Sicily  an  extensive  commerce  wets  carried  on  through  the
sixth  and  the  first  part  of  the  fifth  centuries  B.  C.  (I).  In  the
latter  part  of  the  fifth  century  Cumae  was  an  ally  of  Syracuse,
and  King  Hiero  obtained  possession  of  the  island  of  Pithe-
cussae  (Ischia).  Syracuscin  influence  was  at  its  height,  and  at
this  time  may  have  originated  the  legends  of  the  Cretans  and
the  Thespiads,  who  are  supposed  to  have  come  respectively
from  Sardinia  and  Sicily  (2).  Through  the  same  instrumen-
tality was  made  known  the  cult  of  the  Sicilian  Athena,  which
flourished  along  side  of  that  derived  from  Athens  (3).  From
the  western  end  of  the  island  came  the  worship  of  the  ship-
protecting  Aphrodite  of  Mt.  Eryx,  who  was  identified  with
the  pre-existing  Oscan  deity  Herentas  (4).

Among  the  cities  of  lower  Italy,  which  promoted  the
spread  of  various  forms  of  religion  to  the  north  may  be  men-
tioned Tarentum,  which  was  zealous  in  the  worship  of  Hera-
cles, and  Locri  which  magnified  the  Dioscuri,  although  these
cults  had  already  been  introduced  along  the  coast  of  Ceunpania
by  eeurly  settlers  (5).  Gruppe  has  plausibly  explained  the
presence  of  the  Geryon  myth  here  as  due  to  the  Rhodians  at
Croton.  Although  admitting  the  colonization  of  Parthenope
by  men  of  the  same  nationality  he  believes  that  this  legend
of  Heracles'  exploits  was  ceuried  to  that  city  first  from  Croton,
and  later  formed  a  part  of  the  heritage  of  the  inhabitants  of
Cumae,  which  they  received  at  the  capture  of  Parthenope  (6).
An  acquainteunce  with  Achelous  as  father  of  the  Sirens  was
naturally  madfe  when  the  legends  of  those  goddesses  came  to
Campania,  but  his   presence   upon   coins   more  likely   resulted


(1)  Helbig,  Rend,  dei  Lincei  V   (1899).

(2)  Pais.  Storia  della  Sic.   I,    163  .

(3)  See  p.    197.

(4)  Meyer,   11.  531.

(5)  Gruppe,  372-373;  Wissowa.  269.

(6)  Gruppe,  Berl.  Phil.  Wochens.  XXXI  (1911)  1002.  Cp.  VoUgraff.  Rhodos
Oder  Argoa?  in  Neue  Jahrbiicher  XXV   (1910)   317.

-    17   -


from  the  influence  of  Metapontum  (1).  So  the  appearance  of
the  Argive  Juno  upon  the  money  of  the  eeirly  Campeinian  city
of  Hyria  was  due  according  to  Pais  to  the  influence  of  Posi-
donia  (2).  The  cult  of  Leucothea  has  been  derived  from  E-
lea  (Velia)  (3).

THE  SPREAD  OF  GREEK  CULTS  INTO  THE
INTERIOR.

The  gods  introduced  by  the  Greek  settlers  along  the  coeust
did  not  remain  confined  to  that  zu-ea  but  became  known  zJso
in  the  interior.  In  this  movement  the  influence  of  Cumae  was
the  most  important  on  account  of  its  commercial  relations
and  colonies  (4).  Its  settlements  at  Neapolis  and  Puteoli  flour-
ished and  the  former  beceune  in  later  years  the  greatest  center
of  Hellenic  civilization  in  Italy.  Other  places  farther  south
such  as  Potnpeii  and  Suitentum  appear  to  have  received
Greek  settlers  and  were  noticeably  affected  by  Greek  influence,
since  both  at  an  early  date  possessed  Greek  temples.  Cumae
furthermore  strengthened  Hellenic  influence  throughout  Czun-
pania  by  its  allisince  with  the  powerful  city  of  Syracuse,  by
whose  assistance  it  wcis  enabled  to  wit-hstand  and  defeat  the
Etruscans  (5).  The  religion  of  the  Greeks  was  one  of  the
factors  which  availed  most  to  save  them  from  being  submerged
by  the  surrounding  tribes,  and  in  order  to  strengthen  their
position  they  may  designedly  have  endeavored  to  extend  the
circle  wherein  the  gods  of  Greece  were  recognized   (6).   This


(1)  Gruppe,  343.

(2)  Pais,  Gli  elemenii  italioti,  sanniiici  e  campani  nella  piu  antica  civilt^
romana  in  Atti  Nap.  XXI  (1900-01)  part.  1.  132.  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  462;  Head.

Hist.   num.  32.

(3)  Correra,  Siudi  e  mater,  di  arch,  e  di  numis.   I   (1899)  74;  Gruppe,   376.

(4)  Meyer.   II.  531.

(5)  Freeman.  Hist,  of  Sic.   II,  252.

(6)  Nissen,  Italische  Landesl^unde  II,  723;  Reitzenstein  Ined.  poet.  Gr.
frag.,  10.  For  the  relations  that  existed  in  general  between  the  Greek  colonists
and  the  natives  with  whom  they  came  in  contact  see  Gwynn.  The  Character  of
Gr.  Colonization  in  four.  Hell.  Stud.  XXXVIII  (1918)   109  f.

-  18  -


result  wcis  achieved  by  meeuis  of  festivals.  Thus  at  Hamae
near  Cumae  a  solemn  festival  was  celebrated  from  e£u-ly  times
in  the  interest  of  the  Campanians,  an  occeision  on  which  the
inhabitants  of  the  interior  were  brought  into  touch  with  Hel-
lenic beliefs.

As  the  Oscan  cities  became  familiar  with  the  Greek  dei-
ties, they  either  adopted  them  as  new  gods  or  merged  them
with  others  of  similar  nature  already  existent.  Thus  Oscan
inscriptions  from  Pompeii  and  Herculemeum,  which  exhibit
the  forms  Apellu,  Hercolus,  Herentas,  and  Fluusa,  attest  the
worship  of  Apollo,  Hercules,  Venus,  and  Flora  (1).  Artemis
is  an  exsonple  of  the  divinities  who  were  merged  with  old
Italic  gods;  Heracles  and  the  Dioscuri  on  the  contrary  were
probably  never  eissimilated  to  preexisting  Oscan  divinities,  but
none  the  less  soon  had  temples  with  thriving  cults  in  the  in-
terior. Ceistor  and  Pollux  became  the  patrons  of  the  Caunpanian
aristocracy,  and  Heracles  or  Hercules  was  revered  everywhere
and  roads  were  commonly  called  by  his  name  (2).  The  myth
of  Cacus,  associated  in  legend  with  the  latter  deity  perhaps
had  its  counterpart  in  this  region;  Aeneais  weis  made  known
in   the  interior   (3).

Demeter,  Cora  and  Dionysus,  identified  with  native  dei-
ties, attained  a  position  of  preeminence.  Though  the  date  of
their  introduction  into  the  interior  is  uncertain,  they  were  cer-
tainly well  known  there  in  the  sixth  century.  They  were  con-
nected with  agriculture  and  naturally  became  widely  popular
over  the  rich  Campanian  plain.  As  a  result  of  its  bounteous
crops  of  grain  eind  the  abundant  yield  of  the  vine,  both  De-
meter  and  Dionysus  seemed  to  vie  with  each  other  in  show-
ering their  blessings  upon  it,  and  so  the  legend  eirose  that
it  had  been  the  object  of  contention  between  the  two  for  its
possession    (4).    Another   myth   represents    the   Ager   Falernas


(1)  Conway,    Italian   Religion   in   Hastings,  Encyclopaedia   VH,   458.

(2)  Liv.  VIII,  11.  16;  Preller-Jordan,  11.  301;  Pseudo- Aristotle.  De  mirab.
ausc.  97.  The  latter  writer  speaks  particularly  of  southern  Italy,  but  makes  his
remarks  of  general  application  for  the  peninsula.  Pais.  Stor.  Rom.  I,  2.  442-3 :
Cesano,  Hercules,  Ruggiero  III,  710;  Boehm.  Hercules  P.-W.  VIII.  608.

(3)  Pais.  Stor.  crit.  I.  238-239.

(4)  Plin.   nat.  III.  60;  Preller.Joxdan.   II.  47.

-   19  -


just  north  of  the  Volturnus  as  the  land  upon  which  Liber  first
conferred  the  gift  of  wine  (I).

The   worship   of   Dionysus   was   carried    on   especially   in
the  mysteries,  about  which  little  is  known  save  their  orgiaistic
nature  zund  their  tendency  to  be  marked  by  excesses  (2).   For
the  cities  of  Campania  itself  no  information  has  reached  us
about  their  cheuracter.  In  the  luxurious  cities  of  Magna  Graecia
their  environment  wets  especially  favorable  for  licentiousness.
In  the  former  district  too  much  emotion  in  religion  was  perhaps
repugnant  to  the  disposition  of  the  better  clciss  of  Greeks,  at
legist  in  the  esurlier  period  (3).  In  these  ceremonies  Ceres  seems
to  have  had  little  part  according  to  the  evidence  of  vase  paint-
ings; yet  she  probably  had  a  larger  share  in  the  mysteries  of
this  co2Lst,  whence  the  Romans  derived  their  worship  of  Ceres,
Liber  and  Libera,   than  on  the  other  side  of   the  peninsula,
where  Dionysus  wcis  supreme   (4).   Occasionally  Ceres  is  rep-
resented  along  with   Dionysus,  as   on   a  two   handled   hydria
from  the  vicinity  of  the  ancient  Capua  where  Cora  appears
with  them  in  a  scene  portraying  the  bliss  of  Elysium  (5).  The
companion  of  Dionysus  is  more  often  a  goddess  who  is  de-
\/  picted  in  the  form  of  Ariadne.  To  explain  this  figure  F.  Le-
normant  supposed  a  union  of  the  attributes  of  both  Demeter
and  Cora  in  the  person  of  a  single  goddess,   who  in  actual
cult  and  ritual  was  regarded  gis  the  deity  to  whom  reference
has  already  been  made  as  Libera,  but  who  in  populeu-  belief
was  fused  with  Ariadne  (6).  This  combination  would  be  fos-
tered  by   the   circumstance   that  the    latter   was   considered    a
goddess  of  wine,   Eind  the  conception  of  Ariadne  as  a  com-
panion of  Bacchus  was  so  powerful  that  the  Roman  Libera
was   taken  for  Ariadne   by   Ovid   (7).    Dionysus   himself   was

(1)  Sil.  VII.  162  f.

(2)  Comparetti,  Iscrizione  arcaica  cumana   in  Ausonia   I   (1906)    17   f.

(3)  Spinelli,    La    decadenza     religiosa    e    la     repressione     dei   Baccanali    a
Roma,  34.

(4)  Spinelli,  op.  cit.  29.

(5)  Frohner,    La  collection    Tyszkiewiez  PI.    c.    10.

(6)  F.    Lenormant,    Bacchus    D.-S.    I,    637    and    La    Grande-Grece    I,    407 ;
Preller-Robert,  683;   Thramer,   Dionysus   in  der   Kunst   Roscher    I,    1148.

(7)  Ov.  fast.   Ill,   512.  Metam.  Vlll.    170;   Prop.    II,  3.    18;   III.    17.   8:   Hot.
Carm.  II.    19.    16;  Stoll.  Ariadne,  Roscher  I.   544;   Wagner,   Ariadne  P.-W.   II,

-  20  -


4


regarded  as  the  Liberator  ('EXsoGspsocJEind  viewed  as  a  god  of
the  dead.  A  parallelism  was  seen  between  the  action  of  wine
and  death  both  of  which  release  the  soul  from  the  restraints
of  the  flesh;  the  feeling  further  prevailed  that  the  god  could
save  his  devotees  from  the  perils  and  miseries  of  the  lower
world  (I).  His  popularity  is  proved  by  the  frequency  with
which  he  appears  in  vase  paintings  from  the  factories  of  Cam-
pania and  the  adjoining  districts.  He  is  a  common  subject  not
only  upon  the  vases  coming  from  Posidonia  but  also  upon
those  from  Saticula  (S.  Agatha  de'  Goti),  where  a  notable
factory  was  located  in  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  (2).  Al-
though the  Vcises  are  based  on  Attic  models,  they  would  have
been  lacking  in  point,  if  they  did  not  allude  to  popular  legends
and  religious  rites.  In  this  ceise  the  comprehensive  character
of  the  cult,  the  many  phases  of  life  with  which  the  god  was
aissociated,  and  his  significance  in  the  mysteries  2is  a  chthonic
deity  are  all  circumstcuices  that  made  the  subject  appropriate.
Likewise  the  myths  connected  with  Dionysus,  especially  those
in  which  Ariadne  appears,  were  adopted  more  often  than  any
other    theme    for    Ccimpanian    wall-paintings    (3).

The  mystical  element  pervading  the  cult  of  Dionysus  was
paralleled  in  the  Orphic  mysteries,  which  had  attained  a  full
development  in  lower  Italy  in  the  sixth  century.  These  doc-
trines unquestionably  influenced  Campania  to  a  considerable
extent,  though  no  certain  evidence  for  their  presence  in  any
particular  city  remains  (4).  We  may  be  sure  that  the  wan-
dering Orphic  teachers  censured  by  Plato  did  not  neglect  this

(1)  Gruppe.    1430  f.

(2)  Walters,  Hist.  'Anc.  Pot.  II,  484;  Patroni,  La  ceramica  ant.  nelVlt.
merid.  in  Aiti  Nap.  XIX  (1897-8)  96;  Patroni's  conclusions  have  been  chaJlenged
in  genereil  by  Macchioro,  Intomo  al  contenuto  oltremondano  della  ceramografia
iialiota  in  NeapoUs  I  (1913)  30  f.

(3)  Stoll,  Roscher  I.  545;  Ovei beck-Mau.  Pompeji  588-589;  Mau.  t^om-
peji  in  Leben  und  Kunst  495  ;  Helbig,  Wandgemdlde  der  vom  Vesav  verschiit-
teien  Siadte  Campaniens   93,  No.  368    f.

(4)  Gruppe,    Orpheus   Roscher    III,    1101;   Vanacore,  /  vasi   con   heroon   in
Atti  Nap.    XXIV    (1906)    180;   J.    Harrison,    Prolegomena   to   the   Study   of   Greek
Religion  598;   Comparetti ;   Petelia   Gold   Tablet  in   Jour.   Hell.   Stud.    III.    11 1    h

and  Ausonia   I   (1906)    18-20;   Kern,    Orphischer    Totenkult   in   Aua   der  'Anomia
arch.  Beitrdge  C.  Robert  dargebracht  86  f.   Cp.   p.   70.

-  21    -


rich  and  prosperous  territory,  but  went  about  here  as  else-
where expounding  to  interested  throngs  their  hopes  for  a  fu-
ture life  (1).  Related  to  the  Orphic  doctrines  and  liable  to  be
confused  with  them  were  the  teachings  of  Pythagoras  ema-
nating from  Croton,  the  amount  of  whose  influence  in  Ceun-
peoiia  we  aie  not  in  a  position  to  estimate.  The  one  fact  that
is  gleaned  from  the  various  mysteries  -  Bacchic,  Orphic,  and
Pythagorean  -  is  that  the  life  beyond  the  grave  occupied  a
large  place  in  the  thought  of  southern  Italy;  the  end  was  the
same  whether  there  prevedled  a  belief  in  the  transmigration
of  souls  or  in  the  existence  of  a  blessed  Elysium  (2).  The  evi-
dence appears  in  vase  paintings  (3).

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  CAMPANIA  UPON  THE
RELIGION  OF  ROME.

As  the  commercial  and'  political  relations  of  Campania
with  the  Greeks  of  Sicily  and  lower  Italy  were  responsible  for
the  introduction  within  its  borders  of  new  forms  of  religion,
so  in  the  S2uiie  way  Campania  helped  to  modify  the  religious
conceptions  of  the  peoples  situated  feirther  north.  In  fact  from
an  early  date  the  coast  cities  of  Campania  carried  on  a  flour-
ishing trade  with  the  Etrusceins  eind  the  Latins  with  the  result
that  Greek  gods  were  made  known  within  their  borders  (4).
Among  the  deities  first  introduced  was  Heracles,  whose  cult
was  disseminated  largely  through  the  instrumentality  of  Cu-
mae  (5).  Etrusceui  works  of  art,  representing  the  god  or  de-
picting his  myths,  show  his  presence  in  that  country  as  early
as  the  sixth  century  B.  C,  and  it  has  been  susj>ected  that  his
popularity  there  had  an  important  effect  in  metking  him  known

(1)  Plat.   Rep.    II.   364B.   Cp.   Lobeck.   Aglaophamus  643   f . ;   Spinelli,   La
decadenza  relig.  e  la  repres.   dei  Baccanali  a  Roma  29.

(2)  Dieterich,    Eine  Mithrasliturgie    198.

(3)  Vanacare,   Atti  Nap.    XXIV    (1906)    180.

(4)  For  the  commercieil  importance  of  Cumae  see  Gabrici,  Cuma  in  Mon.
ant  XXII  (1913)  577  f.

(5)   Cesano,    Hercules,    Ruggiero    III,    684    with    comprehensive   references
to  earlier  I'terature;  Pais,  Stor.  crit.  I,  part.   I,  361.

-  22  -


to  the  Romans  (I).  The  cult  at  Rome  seems  to  have  been  due
mainly  to  Campguiian  influence,  although  Pais  in  his  later
work  admits  the  possibility  of  influences  from  Sicily  and  Mag-
na Graecia  (2).  The  god  indeed  may  have  come  directly
from  Cumae  to  Rome,  since  importsint  relations  existed  be-
tween the  two  cities  in  early  times,  and  certain  circumstances
have  been  found  to  support  this  contention  (3).  But  it  is  more
probable,  as  Wissowa  has  indicated,  that  he  was  worshipped
first  at  Tibur  and  that  from  this  loccJity  he  was  taken  to  Rome ;
as  a  result  he  was  not  considered  a  foreign  deity  by  the  Ro-
mans in  spite  of  his  Greek  ritusJ  (4).

Yet  Campanian  influences  doubtless  operated  directly,  at
least  at  a  later  epoch.  In  the  time  of  Appius  Claudius  Caecus,
as  a  result  of  the  construction  of  the  Via  Appia  and  the  inti-
mate relations  of  Rome  with  the  Campanians  and  Samnites,
Hercules  c£ime  more  prominently  before  the  Romeuis,  and  his
cult  was  made  a  public  one  (5).  This  event  marks  a  new
epoch  in  the  religious  relations  between  Campania  and  Rome,
for  earlier  intercourse  was  mainly  by  sea,  but  in  the  later  pe-
riod Capua  rather  than  Cumae  affected  the  Romans  (6).
Pais  has  expressed  the  opinion  that  Camnpanian  influence  com-
ing overland  is  indicated  by  the  location  of  the  principal
seat  of  the  Hercules  cult  at  Rome,  but  this  was  not  situated,
as  he  states,  where  the  great  highway  leading  to  Ccunpania
issued   from   the  city   (7).   Rather   its   position   near   the   Tiber

(1)  Diirrbach,   Hercules  D.-S.    III.    124-25;   Winter.   The  Myth  of  Here,   at
Rome  269.

(2)  Pais,    Stor.   crit.    I,    part.    I.    229.

(3)  Cesano,    Ruggiero    III,    684 ;    Reitzenstein,   Ined.  poem.    Gr.    frag.    24  ;
Preller-Jordan    H,    280.

(4)  Wissowa.  272;  Carter,  Relig.   of  Numa  32;  Fowler.   230.

(5)  Liv.  IX.  29.  9;  Val,  Max.  I.  1.  17;  Macr.  III.  6.  12;  Interpolator  to
Serv.  Aen.  VIII.  269;  Fest,  237;  Aur.  Vict.  De  uiris  illus.  34;  Origo  gentis
Romanae  8;  Pais.  Stor.  Rom.  I.  part  2.  439.  560  and  Atti  Nap.  XXI  (1900-1)
I.   134.

(6)  See,  however,  p.  28.

(7)  The  statements  of  Pais  about  the  cult  of  Hercules  are  confused  and
contradictory.  He  says  in  one  place  (Atti  Nap.  XXI  (1900-1)  134)  that  the  memor-
ials of  the  god  fittingly  stood  near  the  Porfa  Trigemina,  where  the  way  to  Capua
began,  and  in  another  place  (Stor.  crit.  I,  part  1,  229)  declares  that  the  princi-
pal seat   of   his   cult   -was   not.  by    accident  near    the    Porta    Capena,    where    the

Campanian  way  began.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  god  was  not  associated  with  the

last  named    gate,    nor    did    the   one    named    first   belong    to    a    road    leading    to

Campania.

-  23  -


and  the  landing  place  signified  that  it  had  arrived  in  the  first
instance  by  water  (I).  It  was  established  before  the  overl2uid
traffic  between  Rome  and  the  South  began,  as  is  recognized
by  Pais  in  another  place  (2).

The  story  of  Cacus,  who  was  associated  with  the  exploits
of  Hercules  at  Rome,  was  probably  based  upon  a  Campanism
myth  dealing  with  the  punishment  of  a  cattle  theft,  inflicted
by  the  great  hero.  An  evidence  for  this  assumption  is  the
statement  of  the  annzJist  Gellius  that  Cacus  came  to  Rome
from  Campania   (3).

Still  more  evident  is  the  Campanian  origin  for  the  worship
of  Apollo  at  Rome;  in  this  case  the  god  did  not  arrive  in  the
guise  of  an  Italian  divinity  but  was  introduced  directly  from
Cumae  as  a  god  of  healing  probably  as  a  result  of  the  in-
fluence of  the  so-called  Sybilline  oracles,  which  tradition  as-
cribes to  that  city  (4).  These  according  to  legend  reached
Rome  at  the  end  of  the  period  of  the  Kings  or  at  the  beginning
of  the  Republic  (5).  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  oracles  may
not  have  come  from  Cumae  at  all,  but  rather  were  pious
frauds  to  which  a  Cumaean  origin  v/as  assigned.  In  specific
cases   there   had   doubtless   been   a   consultation   of   the   Sibyl

(1)     Fowler,  230.

(2)  Pais,  Stor.  crit.  I,  part  I,  230.  His  statement  elsewhere  Atti  Nap.
XXI  (1900-1)  135  =  Ricerche  stor.  e  geogr.  428  that  the  cult  of  Hercules  arrived
at  Rome  after  that  of  Ceres,  when  Greek  civilisation  was  openly  welcomed,  must
be   regarded    as  erroneous.

(3)  Cell.  hist.  17  =  Peter,  Hist.  Rom.  frag.  7*  p.  93.  The  bronze  urn
found  at  S.  Maria  di  Capua  perhaps  contains  an  expression  of  the  Cacus  m5rth

but  this  interpretation   is   disputed.   Peter,   Hercules   Roscher    I,   2275 ;   Wissowa
Cacus  P.-W.   III.    1169;   Preller-Jordan :   I,    18;   Winter,    The  Myth  of  Here,    at
Rome  267  (with  references  to  earlier  literature).  The  view  that  the  Cacus  myth
was  an  old  Italian  one  is  less  probable.  Peter  2278.  For  the  myth  in  general  see
Gruppe,  Berl.  Hhil.  Wocher^s,  XXXI  (1911)  999  f. ;  Miinzer,  Cacas  der  Kinderdieb.

(4)  Wernicke,  Apollo  P.-W.  II,  78;  Ruggiero,  Apollo  I,  518;  Preller-
Jordan.  I.  18.  146  f . ;  Wissowa.  293;  Fowler.  268;  Carter.  Relig.  of  Numa,  66;
Roscher,  Apollo  I.  446;  Pais,  Stor.  Rom.  I,  part  1,  349  and  Stor.  crit.  I.  part  2.

528:  Haight,  An  inspired  message  in  the  Augustan  Poets  in  Am.  Jour.  Phil.
XXXIX  (1918)  341  f.

(5)  Hoffniann.  Die  tarquinischen  Sibylline-BUcher  in  Rh.  Mus.  L.  (1895)
108;  Worner,  Die  Sage   von   den   Wanderungen   des  Aeneas  22;   Schultess.   Die

Sihyllinischen  Biicher  in  Rom  ID.

«

-  24  -


there,  and  to  meet  future  needs  a  collection  of  remedies  for
averting  evil  omens  was  prepared.  Such  an  origin  would
account  for  the  presence  of  the  oracles  within  the  pomer-
ium  (1).  Otherwise  one  must  assume  either  that  the  oracles
and  the  god  were  not  closely  associated,  cis  is  generally  sup-
posed by  those  who  follow  the  common  tradition,  or  else  that
neither  oracles  nor  cult  entered  Rome  before  the  founding  of
the  Apollo  temple  in  the  fourth  century  B.  C.  (2).  While  such
a  late  date  is  improbable,  it  is  equally  incorrect  to  suppose
that  the  worship  of  Apollo  weis  maintained  at  Rome  before
the  presence  of  the  Sibylline  oracles  (3);  rather  it  arrived
soon  £ifter  they  came  into  existence  and  was  largely  due  to
them.  A  circumstance  indicating  the  belief  of  the  Romans
themselves  that  their  god  came  from  Cumae  was  the  perform"
ance  of  expiatory  rites  in  the  Apollo  temple  of  that  city  on
the  occEision  of  prodigies,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that
their  attitude  here  was  correct.  To  include  Cumae,  therefore,
as  one  of  the  localities  to  which  the  cult  spread  from  Rome,
as  is  done  by  Pascal,  is  an  unfortunate  reversal  of  the  rela-
tions actually  existing  between  the   two  cities   (4).

As  a  result  of  Sibylline  influence,  the  cult  of  Demeter,
Cora  and  Dionysus  is  said  to  have  reached  Rome  in  the  year
493  B.  C.  This  form  of  worship  in  which  Ceres,  representing
Demeter,  had  the  leading  place  was  adopted  as  an  official  cult
by  the  state,  but  although  the  divinities  were  designated  by
Latin  names  formerly  borne  by  old  Italian  deities,  they  were
considered  as  foreign  gods  and  their  rites  were  Greek  (5).
But  the  mysteries  celebrated  in  their  honor  by  the  Greeks  gold
all  features   of   the  worship   tending  toward   orgiastic  excesses

(1)  Diels,  Sibyllinische  Blatter  80;  Fowler.  259;  De  Sanctis,  Stor.  II.
526-7;  Pais,  Stor.  crit.  I.  249  .

(2)  Hoffmann.  Rh.  Mus.  L   (1895)  96;  Pais,  Stor.   crit.   I.   528.   II.   537.

(3)  De  Sanctis,   loc.   cit.

(4)  Pascal,  //  piu  antico  tempio  d' A  polio  a  Roma  in  Bull.  arch.  com.
1893,  48.  The  author  may  not  have  intended  to  make  this  statement  but  such
seems  to  be  the  purport  of  his  words.

(5)  Dion.  Hal.  VI,  17;  VI. -94,  3.  Cp.  Liv.  Ill,  55,7;  Tac.  Ann.  11.  49;
Spinelli,  La  decadenza  reVgiosa  e  la  repressione  dei  Baccanali  a  Roma,  25 ;
Toutain,  Liber  Pater  in  Etudes  de  mythologie  et  d'histoire  222.  Hoffmann,  Rh.
Mus.   L  (1895)    100  denies  that  the  divinities  treated  here  were   Greek.

-  25  -


were  doubtless  debarred  at  this  time  (1).  Their  origin  must
be  sought  in  coiuiection  with  the  importation  of  grain  from
Sicily  and  Campania  to  relieve  a  condition  of  famine.  Since
both  places  had  strong  Ceres  cults,  it  is  probable  that  both
were  effective  in  the  propagation  of  the  worship  of  the  god-
dess at  Rome,  but  which  one  took  the  leading  pait  in  this
movement  is  a  question  in  dispute.  Pais,  following  Preller,
has  attempted  to  prove  that  the  worship  of  Ceres  along  with
the  legend  of  Menenius  Agrippa  and  the  traditions  of  the
revolt  of  the  plebs  is  due  to  Sicilian  influences  centering  at
Syracuse  (2).  It  is  indeed  certain  that  the  Sicilian  Enna  was
held  to  be  the  oldest  seat  of  Demeter  worship,  and  for  that
resison  the  Romeins  in  133  B.  C.  sent  a  delegation  thither  to
perform  state  sacrifices  (3).  We  may  account  for  this  fact  by
supposing  that  during  the  lapse  of  time  the  Romgins  had  for-
gotten the  chief  source  from  which  their  cult  was  derived.  In
any  event  the  mention  of  Enna  does  not  exclude  a  Campainian
source  for  the  Romzin  goddess;  for  if  the  cult  came  from  the
island,  it  must  have  come  from  Syracuse  or  some  seaport  and
not  from  the  interior  (4).  On  the  other  hand  the  proximity
of  Campginia  to  Rome,  the  connection  of  the  Sibylline  oracles
with  Cumae,  the  known  derivation  of  other  cults  from  this
region,  all  tend  to  show  a  probability  that  the  district  around
Cumae  was  the  source.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact
that  priestesses  at  Rome  were  selected  from  the  neighboring
Velia  and  Neapolis,  after  Cumae  had  declined  in  population
and  power  (5).  The  statement  of  Birt  that  the  Ceres  cult  in
Ccimpania  was  due  to  the  extension  of  Roman  influence  is
altogether   unfounded,    since  it     conceives     the     relations     be-

(1)  Spinelli,    loc.    cit.

(2)  Preller -Jordan,  II,  40;  Fowler,  256;  Pestalozza  e  Chiesa,  Ceres,  Rug-
giero,  II,  206;  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  245  f.,  Ricerche  sior.  e  geog.  320,  and  Stor.
crit.    II,    146.

(3)  Cic.   Verr.  LV,   108;  Val.   I.    1,    1.

(4)  The  Romans  were  not  agreed  as  to  the  origin  of  their  cult,  as
appears  from  the  attempt  of  Dlonysius  t©  trace  it  to  Arcadia.  Dion.  Hal.,  I,  33.

Cp.   Famell,   Cults   of  the   Greek  States   III,    101.

(5)   Famell,     III,     101  ;    Wissowa,    Ceres    P.-W.     Ill,     1974    and    Rel    und

Kult.  297;  F.  Lenormant,  Ceres  D.-S.  I.  1078;  Carter,  Religion  of  Numa  72
f . ;  Aust,  Religion  der  Romer  150;  De  Sanctis,  Stor.  Rom.  11,527;  Dubois  Pouz-
zoles  antique   134   and  Milanges  XXII    (1902)  27.

-  26  -


tween  Rome  and  Ceunpania  as  the  reverse  of  the  actual  ones  (1).
The  date  of  the  introduction  of  the  triad  is  unknown,  unless
the  legendary  one  be  accepted  (2).

Similar  was  the  origin  of  the  Roman  cult  of  Mercury,
which  came  to  Rome  according  to  tradition  two  yeeu-s  esurlier
than  that  of  Ceres.  Although  no  details  are  at  hsuid,  the  Rom-
ans probably  felt  the  need  of  another  god  to  serve  as  patron
of  their  developing  commerce;  Hermes  Empolaios  therefore
was  imported  from  the  Greek  cities  in  the  South  to  fill  this
need.  It  is  probable  but  not  certain  that  the  introduction  was
due  to  Sibylline  influence  and  that  the  god  was  brought  from
the  vicinity  of  Cumae  (3).

From  the  same  co£ist  the  worship  of  Castor  and  Pollux
as  sea  divinities  spread  northward  toward  Latium;  according
to  Albert  it  was  hospitably  received  at  all  the  port  towns  and
at  Caere  in  particular,  but  it  has  left  cleau:  traces  of  its  pres-
ence only  at  Ostia  (4).  These  gods  as  patrons  of  the  knights
had  already  found  favor  at  Rome,  €m.d  were  associated  in
legend  with  the  battle  of  Lake  Regillus.  This  aspect  of  the
cult  originated  in  southern  Italy  especially  at  Locri  eoid  Ta-
rentum;  thence  it  pcissed  through  Tusculum  to  Rome.  Prob-
ably it  spread  overland  toward  the  north  with  Capua,  Cora
and  other  points  as  intermediate  stages  before  it  zurrived  at
Tusculum  (5).  More  evident  is  the  part  played  by  Campania
in  introducing  these  gods  at  Ostia  as  marinp  deities.  Miss
Taylor  limits  the  evidence  for  their  presence  in  Italian  ports

(1)    Birt,    Ceres,   Roscher    863.    His    view    here    depends    on    the  theory    of

the  introduction  of  the  cult  at  Rome  on,  the  analogy  of  the   triad  of  Demeter,

Dionysus  aud  Cora  at  Lampsacus,   Cp.    Roscher   862 ;   Marquardt-Wissowa  Rom.

StaaisverWaltung  III,  362;  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  250  and  Ricerche  sior.  e  geog.  326.

(2)  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  256  and  Ricerche  stor.   e  geog.   329.

(3)  Carter,  Rel  of  Numa  77  ;  Preller-Jordan,  I.  230  ;  Scherer,  Hermes  in
der  Kunst,  Roscher,  I.  2425.  Cp.  Wissowa,  51.  304 ;  Pais.  Stor.  Cnt.  II,  536;  howl-
er, 260.

(4)  Albert,  Le  culte  de  Castor  et  Pollux  en  Italie  58;  Taylor.  The  cults
of  Ostia  24  f.

(5)    Preller-Jordan,     II,    300    f . ;    Wissowa,     268;     Carter,     Rel.     of    Numa
37  f. ;   Furtwangler,    Dioskuren,    Roscher    I,    1168;    Bethe.    Dioskuren    P.-W.    V.
1104;  Albert,   op.   cit.  8  f.  and  Dioscuri  D.-S.   II.  260;  Helbig.  Die  Castores  als
Schutzgotter  des  rom.  Equitatus  in  Hermes  XL  (1905)   104  f.

27   -


to  statues  at  Puteoli  and  Ancona  and  a  temple  at  Ostia  (I).
But  they  had  a  temple  certainly  at  Neapolis  and  almost  cer-
tainly at  Cumae;  they  were  worshipped  in  fact  at  Cumae  and
its  two  colonies  in  Ceimpania  and  were  doubtless  introduced
from  there  to  Ostia.

Another  divinity  at  Rome  for  whom  a  Campauiian  origin
has  been  suggested  is  Victoria.  Graillot  thinks  that  her  in-
troduction was  caused  by  Greek  influence  from  this  quarter
at  the  opening  of  the  third  century  B.   C.   (2).

In  the  cEise  of  other  deities  for  whom  a  Campanian  origin
has  been  found  the  probabilities  are  strongly  against  such  an
assumption.  Thus  Poseidon,  who  was  thought  by  Preller  to
have  come  to  Rome  from  Cumae,  C2une  rather  from  Taren-
tum  (3);  and  Vesta,  whose  origin  Kretschmer  derived  from
the  cult  of  Hestia,  supposedly  flourishing  among  the  Greek
colonies  in  Italy,  was  a  goddess  of  Latin  origin  (4).  In  fact
the  Samnite  conquest  in  the  fifth  century  caused  a  diminu-
tion in  the  activity  of  the  Greek  cities  of  the  Campanian
coast  (5).  The  influence  of  this  district  however,  soon  made
itself  felt  in  another  way.  As  the  territory  of  Rome  increzised
by  conquest  toward  the  south  and  Capua  came  under  Romsun
protection  in  the  fourth  century  B.  C.  a  new  streeun  of  in-
fluences propagating  the  civilization  of  Campania  made  its
way  northward.  Capua  now  took  the  lead  in  affecting  the  civ-
ilization of  Rome,  a  position  formerly  held  by  Cumae  (6).
This  influence  is  seen  especially  in  the  early  Romeui  money
minted  in  bronze  about  340  B.  C.  Here  the  six  gods  chosen
to  serve  as  effigies  were  either  Greek  gods  whose  cult  had
been  introduced  from  the  South  or  were  Greek  divinities  who
were  now  identified  with   Roman   ones   (7).


(1)  Taylor.  The  Cults  of  Ostia  25-26.

(2)  Graillot,    Victoria   D.-S.  V.    837.

(3)  Preller-Jordan,  I.   18.  Cp.  Wissowa,  226 ;  Carter,  Rel.  oj  Numa,  79.

(4)  Kretschmer,    Einleitung   in  die   Geschichte   der   griech.    Sprache    162;
Dc  Sanctis,  Stor.  Rom.   11.   524.  Cp.   Wisi.owa,    157;  HiLi,    Vesta  D.-S.  V.    746;

Gruppe.  1.  84;  Jordan.  Der  Tempel  der  Vesta  und  das  Hans  der  V estallinen  75.

(5)  Pais.   Storia  crit.    1.   253.

(6)  Willers.  Gesch.   d.   rom.  Kupjerprdgung  34 ;   Nissen.   Orientation  333.

(7)  Willers.   op.   cit.  28;  cp.  33;  Wissowa,   56.

28  -


CAMPANIA  DURING  THE  LATER  REPUBLIC.

The  Second  Punic  Weu:  by  the  definite  establishment  of
Roman  supremacy  marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  Campanian
and  south  IteJian  religion.  Even  before  that  event  Roman
influence  through  the  establishment  of  alliances  and  protect-
orates had  been  making  itself  strongly  felt.  Just  as  in  the
sixth  and  fifth  centuries  the  forms  of  religion  flourishing  in
the  South  had  materially  modified  the  established  worships
of  Rome,  so  now  on  the  other  hand  the  favored  cults  of  that
city  tended  to  make  their  way  in  Campania,  fostered  by  the
pro-Roman  party  which  existed  in  the  different  communi-
ties (1).  At  the  close  of  the  great  struggle  Roman  religious
ideeis  were  definitely  planted  in  all  parts  by  the  foundation
of  Roman  colonies,  eind  although  in  a  few  places  like  Nea-
polis  Greek  civilization  lingered,  and  at  Capua  the  hatred  of
the  original  inhabitants  and  the  pride  of  the  Roman  colonists
there  settled  tended  to  maintsdn  a  certain  independence  of
Rome,  for  the  most  part  the  Ceunpanian  towns  became  minia-
ture copies  of  the  capital  city  (2).  Yet  the  survival  of  old
native  cults  was  encouraged  and  to  such  forms  of  religion,
officially  recognized  by  the  Roman  state,  W2is  given  the  special
appellation  of  municipalia  sacra  (3).

Still  the  influence  uf  Ceimpania  and  lower  Italy  in  gen-
eral had  not  ceased  to  affect  the  Roman  state.  Back  in  the
daik  days  which  followed  Hannibal's  invasion,  Rome  seems
once  more  to  have  had  recourse  to  the  Campanian  territory
for  the  acquisition  of  a  new  cult.  This  was  the  worship  of  Bona
Mens,  attested  for  several  localities  by  sporadic  inscriptions
and  particularly  prominent  near  the  southern  boundciry  of  Cam-
pania at  Posidonia  (Patstum)  (4).  Graillot  thinks  that  Rome's
action  here  w£is  due  to  a  desire  to  please  and  conciliate  her
southern  allies,  whose  loyalty  could  no  longer  be  considered

(1)   The    sympathizers  with    Rome    at    the    time    of    the    Hannibalic    Weir
seem  to  have  been  the  commons  rather  than  the  aristocracy,   Reid,  Problems  of
the  Second  Punic  War  in  Jonr.  Rom.  Stud.  V.   (1915)   112.
(2)  See  p.   330.   364.

(3)  Festus,    157;    Wissowa,    44.

(4)  Wissowa,  314;  Preller-Jordan,  II,  265;  R.  Peter.  Mens,  Roscher
II.  2799.

-  29-


as  assured  (1).  Preller  believed  that  the  cult  of  Volturnus
at  Rome  w£is  a  form  of  worship  honoring  the  Campanieui
river  of  that  name,  and  that  it  had  been  carried  to  Rome
after  the  subjugation  of  Capua  at  the  close  of  the  Hannibalic
War  (2).  But  this  opinion  is  untenable,  as  the  cult  of  Rome
was  under  the  charge  of  a  flamen,  and  therefore  very  old.
The  latter  was  rather  a  cult  of  the  Tiber  itself  designated  un-
der a  generic  name  (3).

At  the  close  of  the  war  Campanisui  influence  began  to
oi>erate  in  the  case  of  the  orgieistic  and  mystical  cults,  which
in  contrsist  to  those  introduced  in  the  past  did  not  enter  Rome
to  become  immediately  a  part  of  the  state  religion,  but  were
introduced  primeudly  without  the  sanction  of  the  governing
powers.  To  this  class  belong  especially  the  Bacchic  mysteries,
which  caused  so  much  alarm  to  the  Roman  state  in  the  first
part  of  the  second  century  B.  C.  From  Campania  ceune  the
priestess  Aniiia  Paculla,  who  by  the  innovation  of  receiving
men  into  the  Bacchic  gissociations  at  Rome,  and  holding  fre-
quent night  meetings  was  largely  responsible  for  the  ensuing
scandals,  which  disturbed  Roman  society  from  its  founda-
tions (4).  From  this  rotate  of  affairs  we  may  infer  that  in
Campania  too  the  worship  of  Bacchus  had  degenerated  and
was  marked  by  unseemly  conduct  on  the  pEirt  of  his  devotees.
As  a  result  of  the  agitation  in  Rome,  measures  were  taken
in  the  yesu*  166  B.  C.  to  stamp  out  the  mysteries  throughout
Italy.  But  they  were  hard  to  eradicate  in  the  South;  two  no-
tices preserved  from  Calabria  and  Apulia  and  dated  respec-
tively in  184  and  182  B.  C.  demonstrate  that  the  repressive
measures  were    still    meeting    opposition    (5).     Conditions    in


(1)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cyhele  56.

(2)  Preller-Jordan,    II.    142-43.   Cp.   Varro.   VI.    21.   VII   45;   Fest.    279.

(3)  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  I.  p.  327;  Wissotoa,  224-225;  Fowler.   The  Roman
Festivals   214;    Preller-Jordan.    II.    143;   Waser.    Flussgotter   P.-W.    VI,    2779-80.

(4)  Lisr.  XXXIX.   3-19;  Val.   Max.  VI,     3,   7;     Cic.  leg.     II.   37;  F.   Lenor-
maiit.  La  Grande-Grece  l,  420  and  Bacchanalia  D.-S.  I,  590 ;  Preller-Jordan,   II,
363;  Wissowa,  Bacchanal  P.-W.   II.  2721;  Fowler,   346;  Spinelli,  La   decadenza
religiosa  e  la  repres.   dei  Baccanali  a  Roma,  35   f.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  /,   196  =  X.   104;  Liv.  XXXIX.  41,  6;  XL,  19.  9,  Spinelli,  La
dec.  rel.   e  la  repres.  dei  Baccanali,    121.

-30-


Campzoiia  were  doubtless  similar.  The  abuses  were  done  away
with,  and  the  cult  as  a  whole  greatly  declined,  but  references
to  a  much  later  era,  which  attest  the  presence  of  associations
called  thiasi  for  the  worship  of  sonie  form  of  Bacchus,  show
that  the  cult  marked  by  mystic  devotion  to  the  wine  god  did
not  altogether  cease.

The  attempts  to  uproot  his  worship  were  aided  by  the
circumstance  that  the  Oriental  cults,  which  had  already  ob-
tained a  foothold  in  Campania  and  elsewhere,  offered  a  sub-
stitute in  a  different  guise  for  the  cult  which  had  been  pre-
scribed. They  found  a  ready  admission  here  because  Puteoli
the  greatest  Italian  sea-port  was  situated  in  this  region.  Its
development  began  immediately  sifter  the  Second  Punic  War,
and  through  it  for  several  generations  passed  the  commerce
of  Rome  with  the  Orient  (1).  Another  means  of  communi-
cation with  the  East  was  the  extension  of  the  Via  Appia,
which  in  the  second  century  B.  C.  was  carried  from  Campania
as  far  £is  Tarentum  and  Brundisium.  In  addition  to  the  in-
fluence of  traders  and  travelers  the  new  religions  were  pro-
moted by  the  presence  of  vast  numbers  of  slaves  and  by
returning  emigrants.  The  Italians  in  truth  who  went  to  the
East  were  mostly  from  Campania  and  Sicily.  The  same
causes  which  in  our  own  time  have  impelled  the  inhabitaints
of  these  parts  to  seek  their  fortunes  in  the  New  World  oper-
ated in  the  third  century  B.  C.  and  later,  with  the  result  that
numerous  Campanians  took  up  their  abode  at  Delos  and
elsewhere  for  the  sake  of  gain  (2).

The  new  religion  in  all  cases  took  the  form  of  a  personal
appeal  to  the  individual;  it  offered  with  greater  or  less  em-
pheisis  the  hope  of  a  blessed  existence  beyond  the  grave,  but
made  no  pretense  to  promote  the  material  welfare  of  the
community  sis  a  whole.  Here  belongs  the  worship  of  Isis  and
Serapis  introduced  through  the  port  of  Puteoli  as  esurly  as  the
beginning  of   the  second   century  B.    C. ;    at  the  end   of   that

(1)  Lafaye.  Histoire  da  culte  des  divinites  d'Alexandrie  41,  43;  Grail-
lot.  Le  culte  de  Cyb^le,  430-1.

(2)  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  65;  Homolle.  Les  Romains  a  Delos  in
Bull  corr.  hell  VIII  (1884)  81  ;  Hatzfeld,  Les  ItaUens  resident  a  Delos  in  Bull
eorr.  hell  XXXVI  (1912)  130.

-31  -


century  it  had  spread  to  Pompeii  said  other  points,  where  it
Wcis  not  only  tolerated  but  also  publicly  recognized.  It  then
continued  on  its  way  till  it  reached  Rome  (I).  The  worship
of  Magna  Mater  had  probably  been  introduced  into  Cam-
pania still  eau-lier.  During  the  Hannibalic  Weir  it  miade  little
progress,  but  after  the  close  of  that  struggle  it  took  on  new
vigor  (2).  The  goddess  readily  associated  herself  with  the
mineral  springs  2ind  mountains  of  the  country  and  perhaps
also  with  its  caves.  From  this  time  on  the  region  offered  a
fertile  field  for  all  the  mystery  religions  of  the  Orient,  which
in  some  instances  were  admitted  as  legal  forms  of  public
w^orship  (3).

Aside  from  the  development  of  the  Oriental  cults,  the
Romguiization  of  the  existing  forms  of  religion  through  the
establishment  of  colonies  formed  the  most  chsu-acteristic  fea-
ture of  this  period.  These  were  regulzu-ly  accompanied  by  the
institution  of  official  priesthoods  modelled  upon  those  pre-
vailing at  Rome.  This  fact  is  attested  by  the  law  applicable
to  a  colonization  in  Spain,  a  copy  of  which  has  been  pre-
served, and  in  the  case  of  Campania  by  a  reference  to  the
religious  officials  at  Capua  (4).  Among  these  public  priests
appear  most  often  in  inscriptions  the  names  of  pontiffs  and
augurs,  whose  number  in  the  cities  of  Campania  is  generally
uncertain.  They  attended  to  the  formal  religious  exercises  of
their  respective  communities,  and  in  particular  cases  they
doubtless  had  special  duties  to  perform,  as  was  true  in  other
colonies,  where  by  chance  a  record  hsis  been  preserved.  Their
functions  in  general  coincided  with  those  of  their  prototypes
in  Rome;  the  auspices  were  entrustd  to  the  augurs,   and  the


(1)  Preller-Jordan.  II  378;  Carter.  Rel  of  Numa  136;  Wissowa.  351;
Lafaye,  Hist,  du  culte  des  divin.  d'Alexandrie  40  and  L' introduction  du  culte
de  Serapis  a  Rome  in  Rev.  de  I'hist.  des  rel.  XI  (1885)  328;  Lovatelli.  //  culio
di  hide  in  Roma  in  Nuova  antologia  ser.  3  XXVIII  (1890)  37;  Ciaceri,  La  festa
di  S.  Agata  e  Vantico  culto  di  Iside  in  Arch.  stor.  per  la  Sicilia  orient.  II  (1905)
273.  Cumont.  liev    arch.  ser.  5.  V  (1917)  87  f.

(2)  Lafaye,   op.   cit.   40,  41  ;   Graillot,   Le  culte  de  Cybe/e  34.

(3)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cybele,  430;  Carter,   Rel.  of  Numa   137.

(4)  Lex  Coloniae  JuUae  Genitiuae,  Ep.  Eph.   111,91    f . ;  Dessau,  6087;  Cic.
leg.    agr.    II,  96.

-  32  -


commentarii  and  fasti  to  the  pontiffs  (I).  The  latter  also
performed  the  public  sacrifices  on  the  appointed  days  for
certain  cults  introdticed  under  Roman  influence,  which  were
without  a  regulzu:  priest.  The  pontiffs,  in  short,  along  with
the  augurs  were  the  exponents  of  the  formal  religion  of  the
Roman  state  (2).  Like  the  public  priests  of  individual  deities
they  seem  to  have  been  selected  in  the  same  mzuiner  as  offi-
cials with  purely  secular  duties.  At  first,  as  in  other  psurts  of
the  Roman  world,  they  were  chosen  at  general  elections,  but
later  were  appointed  by  the  decurions  who  formed  the  mu-
nicipal council  (3).

Flamens,  who  were  not  yet  so  numerous  as  at  a  later  time
when  the  worship  of  the  Emperors  had  developed,  seem  to
have  had  a  higher  rank  than  either  of  the  other  two  clas-
ses (4).  According  to  Herbst  the  municipal  haruspices  were
beneath  all  the  others  in  dignity  and  importeuice ;  yet  while
this  was  doubtless  their  nominal  rank,  instances  are  not  lack-
ing in  Ccunpzuiia  cis  in  other  parts  of  Italy,  where  the  men
who  filled  this  position  were  of  considerable  local  promi-
nence (5).

In  other  ways  too  the  colonies  strove  to  msJce  themselves
as  much  like  Rome  as  possible.  Particularly  by  the  institution
of  the  Capitoline  triad  and  the  construction  of  Capitolia  they
endeavored  to  show  their  vital  connection  with    the    mother


(1)  For  the  special  assignments  which  might  be  given  to  such  officials
see  the  two  inscriptions  of  Lambaesis  C.  /.  L.  HI,  2660,  2661.  Cp.  Herbst,  De
sacerdotiia  Romanorum   municipalihus   20.

(2)  Marquardt,  Rom.  StaatsvertV.  I,  172;  Marquaidt-Wissowa,  Rom.
Staatsverw.    Ill,    214;   Wissow^i,    516;   Spinazzola,    Gli   augures    108.

(3)  Campania  furnishes  instances  of  priests  selected  by  the  decuriono  at
Neapolis  and  Cumae  and  jof  augurs  at  Puteoli.  No  examples  can  be  cited
for  the  earlier  method,  which  occurs  in  the  lex  Coloniae  Juliae  Geniiiuae
belonging  to  the  first  century  B.  C.  But  this  decree  probably  embodies  forms
and  usages  generally  prevalent  and  authorized  also  for  Italy.  Marquardt,  op.  cit.
I,  68,  151  ;  Reid,  Municipalities  of  the  Roman  Empire  132;  Correra,  'Arch.  stor.
Sic.  XVIIl  (1893)  613;  DePetra.  Atti  Nap.  XII  (1884-6)64;  Spinazzola,  Gli  au-
gures and  Degli  auguri  nei  municipii  in  Atti  Nap,   XVI   (1891-3)   part  2,   29   f.

(4)  Spinazzola,   Gli  augures   125.

(5)  Herbst,  De  sacerd.  Rom.  munic.  21  ;  Thulin,  Haruspices  P.-W.  VII,
2439  with  instances  of  prominent  officials  of  this  grade.

-33  -


city,  and  thus  gave  expression  to  the  religion  of  patriotism  (I).
The  worship  of  Vesta  zmd  the  Lsures  Compitales  and  the  ob-
servances of  household  religion  in  the  Roman  fashion  found
their  appropriate  place.  To  the  guicient  festivals  commemora-
ting the  foundation  of  the  various  shrines  were  added  the
principal  celebrations  of  Rome.  Statius  has  left  an  account
of  Diana's  midsummer  festival  celebrated  by  the  household
of  Pollius  Felix  at  Surrentum,  the  wall  paintings  of  Pompeii
preserve  allusions  to  the  festival  of  Minerva  (Quinquatrus)
celebrated  by  the  fullers  and  that  of  Vesta  celebrated  by  the
baJcers,  and  finally  a  wall  inscription  at  Pompeii  records  the
Saturnalia  (2).  As  time  went  on  there  was  a  tendency  to
replace  the  originally  modest  dwellings  of  the  gods  with  more
elaborate  structures,  as  is  amply  demonstrated  by  the  history
of  the  Pompeian  temples.

THE  PROGRESS  OF  RELIGION  IN  CAMPANIA
UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

Campaaiia  was  marked  by  a  very  early  development  of
the  Imperial  cult.  As  eaily  as  44  B.  C.  an  order  had  been  is-
sued from  Rome  directing  that  at  all  public  games  held  in
ItgJy  one  day  should  be  consecrated  to  Diuus  lulius,  euid  two
years  later  all  Itsdian  municipalities  were  required  by  a  lex
Rufrena  to  set  up  an  image  of  that  deity  (3).  But  Csunpania
went  beyond  all  requirements  in  the  worship  of  the  Emperors.
Here  Augustus  was  worshipped  openly  during  his  lifetime  in
a  way  quite  opposed  to  the  conditions  prevalent  in  Rome  but
like  those  that  were  found  in  the  Eastern  provinces.  Nor  were


(1)  Castan  erroneously  maintained  that  the  building  of  Capitols  was
one  of  the  latest  forms  of  showing  loyalty  to  the  Roman  government  and  that  it
was  encouraged  by  Augustus.  In  reality  Capitols  begam  to  be  erected  during
the  last  century  of  the  Republic,  Castzm,  Les  Capitoles  provinciaux  68 ;  cp.  64
and  Dion.   Hal.    IV,   61,   4.   For  the   relation  of  Augustus  to  the   Jupiter  cult  in

general  see  Aust,  luppiter  Roschcx  II,  747,  f.

(2)  3tat.,  silo.  III.  I.  68;  C.  /.  L.  IV  2005a.  See  pp.  234.  255.

(3)  Dio   Cass.    XLIV     6,    2;     C.    /.    L.    VI   872,     IX    5136;     Heinen,     Zur
Begriindung  des   rom.   Kaiaerkultes   in  Klio  XI    (1911)    133,    136.

34  -


his  instructions  obeyed  that  his  worship  should  be  combined
with  that  of  the  goddess  Roma  (I).

Its  precocious  development  was  due  primzurily  to  the  ch€u:-
acter  of  the  inhabitzmts,  a  large  number  of  whom  were  of
Greek  or  Oriental  descent  (2).  The  influence  of  the  Emper-
ors was  also  unusually  ereat  here,  as  the  Imperial  possessions
on  the  Cgunpanian  coast  were  extensive  even  from  the  time
of  Augustus  (3).  Hirschfeld  believed  that  the  towns  which
honored  the  living  Emperor  were  colonies  of  his  creation  or
had  been  the  recipients  of  his  bounty  like  Puteoli,  which
was  grateful  for  his  aid  in  developing  its  commerce.  Gardt-
hausen,  however,  citing  the  case  of  Terracina,  where  these
reeisons  would  not  apply  but  where  the  living  monarch  was
none  the  less  worshipped,  considers  justly  that  the  opinion
of  Hirschfeld  here  is  untenable.  It  should  be  remarked,  how-
ever, that  the  instance  at  Terracina  is  not  parallel  with  the
exemnples  of  the  divine  honor  rendered  to  Augustus  in  Cam-
pania, aa  in  the  former  case  his  cult  was  combined  with  that
of  Roma  (4).  In  all  probability  the  early  worship  in  Cam-
pania as  stated  above,  was  due  chiefly  to  the  character  of  the
inhabitants.

The  cult  was  carried  on  by  a  multiplicity  of  organizations
principally  composed  of  freedmen  and  slaves.  Its  flourishing
condition  both  in  temples  and  in  connection  with  the  Lzu-es
Comfpitales  is  abundantly  attested  by  epigraphical  remains
from  Pompeii  and  other  places.  The  important  organization
which  embraced  the  most  wealthy  and  influentisJ  members
of  the  class  of  freedmen  was  found  in  all  the  Csunpanian
towns,  where  it  bore  the  name  of  Augustales  without  the  ad-
dition of  seuiri  (5).

(1)  Beurlier,    Le   culte   imperial    169;    Geiger    De   sacerdotibus   Augustorum
municipalibus  9.

(2)  Dubois,   Pouzzoles   antique    145;  Hirschfeld,    Zur   Geschichte   des    rom.
Kaiserkultes  in  Sitzungsber.   des  preuss.  Akademie  der  Wiss,   XXXV  (1888)   part

2  837   f.    =   Kleine  Schriften   477    f.

(3)  Hirschfeld.    Kleine  Schriften   533.

(4)  Hirschfeld.  Kleine  Schriften  477;  C.  /.  L.  X.  6305;  Gardthausen,
Augustus   und  seine   Zeit   II,    517,    note   66.

(5)  Beurlier.  Le  culte  imperiale  17,  194;  von  Premeistein,  Augustales,
Ruggiero  I,  829;  Neumann,  Augustales  P.-W.  II  2356;  L.  Taylor.  Augustales,  Se-
viri  Augustales,   Seviri  in   Trans,    and.   Proc.    of  the   Amer.    Phil.    Assoc.   XLV

(1914)  234.

-35  -


The  excavations  at  Pompeii  give  invaluable  assistance  to
our  efforts  to  obtain  £Ui  idea  of  religious  conditions  prevalent
in  CeunpEinia  at  the  opening  of  the  Christian  era,  when  the
pagan  world  was  at  the  height  of  its  power.  Stimulated  by
the  injection  of  a  new  element  in  the  form  of  the  worship  of
the  deified  Emperors  and  by  the  care  shown  for  religion  by
Augustus,  the  polytheistic  system  showed  an  abundance  of
life  (I).  Besides  the  formal  religion  of  the  state,  the  cults
which  appealed  to  the  individual  were  now  present  to  round
out  the  religious  life  of  the  community,  but  had  not  begun  to
manifest  appreciably  their  disintegrating  effects  (2).  The
remains  of  Pompeii  bear  witness  to  a  thriving  religious  life
in  the  first  century  A.  D.,  marked  by  a  sufficiency  of  public
temples  and  by  countless  wayside  and  domestic  shrines.  Per-
sons interested  in  the  adornment  of  the  city,  and  desiring  at
the  same  time  to  honor  the  gods,  set  up  statues  of  veurious
deities  at  their  own  expense  in  public  places,  -  a  fact  often
mentioned  in  inscriptions.  Petronius,  speaking  of  some  Cam.-
panian  city  the  identity  of  which  is  disputed,  says  that  the
community  in  question  weis  so  crowded  with  gods  that  they
were  easier  to  find  than  men  (3).

Festivals  occupied  an  important  place  in  the  life  of  the
times,  and  though  valued  largely  as  a  means  of  relaxation  or
excitement,  were  often  at  least  nominally  of  a  religious  na-
ture. Those  in  which  the  latter  characteristic  predominated
comprised  the  old  celebrations  marking  the  anniversary  of
ten^ple  foundations.  According  to  Nissen  such  festivals  at
Pompeii   occurred   chiefly   in   the   summer   from  May   to   Au-

(1)  Macchioro,  //  sincretismo  religioso  e  Vepigrafia  in  Rev.  arch.  IX
(1907)  279  f.

(2)  The  most  thoughtful  men  at  Rome,  however,  perceived  the  danger
of  these  religions,  and  from  time  to  time  tried  to  do  away  with  them  at  least
in  Rome  itself.  Cp.  Macchioro  op.  cit.    142.

(3)  Petron.  17:  Nostra  regio  tam  praesentibus  plena  est  numinibus  ut
facilius  possis  deum  c.uam  hominem  inuenire.  Cp.  Capasso-De  Petra  Napoli
greco-romana  5.  The  place  referred  to  by  Petronius  is  probably  Neapolis.  Cp.
CoUignon,  Etude  sur  Petron  4;  Cocchia,  Napoli  e  il  Satyricon  di  Petronio  Arbiiro
in  Arch.  stor.  Nap.  XVIII  (1893)  278  f . ;  Ussani,  Studi  Italiani  di  jilologia  classica

XIII  (1905)  17.  But  Cumae,  Puteoli,  and  Misenum  have  also  had  their  champions.
See     list  in   Schanz.    Gesch.   der  rom.  Lit.   II,   part  2,    126.

36-


gust  (I).  Besides  the  series  of  games  like  the  Italica  at  Nea-
poHs,  which  were  pecuHar  to  a  single  locality,  we  may  infer
that  the  principal  festivals  recognized  in  the  capital  had  their
counterpEirts  in  the  Campanian  towns.  This  condition  of  af-
fairs is  abundantly  illustrated  by  the  record  of  festivals  cele-
brated at  Cumae  in  honor  of  Augustus,  which  were  similar  to
those  at  Rome  but  not  identical  with  them  (2).  Religion  also
had  an  intimate  relation  to  the  deiily  life  of  the  people,  as  is
proved  by  a  multitude  of  alteo's  and  shrines  and  by  the  cir-
cumstance that  mural  decorations,  statueiry,  and  even  heistily
scrawled  graffiti  represent  or  allude  to  veurious  deities.  These,
it  is  true,  ordinarily  stand  for  no  peirticular  attitude  of  devotion
and  in  the  work  of  sculptor  suid  painter  a  decorative  rather
than  a  religious  purpose  w£is  dominant,  yet  they  show  how
completely  such  religious  notions  as  were  in  vogue  were  asso-
ciated with  the  life  amd  thought  of  the  people  in  genereJ,  and
at  all  events  the  deity  who  became  popular  in  ait  was  first  a
force  in  religion.  The  divinity's  seculso-ization  appe£u*8  in  the
case  of  Attis  who  came  into  prominence  in  Italy  late  enough
for  us  to  follow  his  development.  The  figure  of  the  Mourning
Attis,  which  at  first  had  a  deep  religious  significance  became
in  Campania  by  the  time  of  the  Flavieui  Emperors  merely  a
popular  type  to  reproduce  in  art  (3).

With  the  lapse  of  time  the  cults  derived  from  the  East
encroached  more  eind  more  upon  the  domain  of  the  older
deities.  To  the  causes  for  their  growth  existent  in  eeu-lier  times
was  addfed  the  circumstance  that  Agrippa  had  made  Misenum
a  great  naval  station  to  which  many  Orientals  were  attached.
Records  transmitted  from  Puteoli  show  that  nearly  every  O-
riental  cult  reaching  the  West  was  represented  in  that  sectfon.
Here  in  134  A.  D.  the  first  recorded  taurobolium  was  perform-
ed as  a  part  of  the  ritual  of  Venus  Caelestis.  Long  before
this  Christianity  had  been  introduced  and  as  elsewhere  made
its  first  converts  among  the  Jews.  The  latter  were  present  in
considerable  numbers  in  this  region,  eis  is  proved  by  notices
which  have  reached  us  from  Puteoli,   Neapolis,  Capua,  Pom-

(1)    Nissen,    Orientation    286-7.

(2)  See  p.  79.

(3)  Graillot,   Le  culte   de   Cyhele,   438.

-  37  -


peii  and  other  towns  (1).  According  to  Tertullian  there
jvere  no  Christisins  in  Campania  in  79  A.  D.  upon  whom  the
blame  for  the  disaster  of  that  year  could  be  lead;  but  while
the  Christian  communities  were  then  insignificant  and  obscure,
it  is  impossible  to  doubt  their  presence  (2).

The  newer  forms  of  religion,  increasing  steadily  in  the
second  century  A.  D.  at  the  expense  of  the  old,  took  great
strides  forward  in  the  third  (3).  This,  however,  is  £Ui  infer-
ence drawn  from  the  history  of  these  cults  in  general  rather
tham  a  fact  bzised  upon  evidence  belonging  to  this  region,
which  is  comparatively  meager  for  the  third  century.  Nor  are
we  in  a  position  to  follow  the  qualitative  changes  which  took
place  in  the  various  cults  after  the  days  of  the  Roman  Repub-
lic. It  hsis  been  maintained  that  such  modifications  did  not
taJce  place  and  the  worship  of  Mithras  heis  been  cited  as  an
exEunple  of  the  stability  found  in  the  pagan  cults  (4).  Now
it  is  indeed  true  that  religion  of  every  form  is  naturally  conser-
vative said  opposed  to  innovations,  -  a  condition  that  appears
at  its  maucimum  in  the  religious  practices  controlled  directly
by  the  state  and  at  its  minimum  in  the  cults  of  personal  devo-
tion. But  in  spite  of  this  innate  conservatism  the  history  of  re-
ligion demonstrates  that  there  is  inevitably  some  change  either
in  its  forms  and  doctrines  or  at  legist  in  the  significance  attach-
ed to  its  acts.  So  the  cult  of  Mithras  doubtless  had  some
local  peculizu-ities  and  underwent  minor  modifications  in  the
course  of  time.  If  the  taurobolium  w£is  never  a  feature  of  this
cult,  it  becsmtie  at  a  relatively  late  date  by  official  ssmction
an  mtegral  part  of  the  ceremonies  of  Magna  Mater,  though  o-

(1)  Juster,   Les  Juifs  dans  i' empire   romain    I,    182;    Harnack,   Die   Mission
nnd   Ausbreitung    des   Christentums    II,    216;    Renan,    Antichrist    (translation    of
Allen)  37 ;  ScKiirer,  Gesch.   d.  Juden,   III,  67,   gives  a  list  of   the  chief  Jewish
communties   in   Italy.    The    esurliest   reference   to   their  presence   is   a   notice   of
the  year  4   B.   C.    from   Puteodi.

(2)  Tert.   apol.   40.   Cp.  Harnack,  op.   cit.   II,  74.

(3)  For  a  list  of  the  places  in  southern  Italy  where  the  chief  Oriental
cults  are  attested  see  Drexler,  Meter,  Roscher  II,  2919  f.  and  I  sis,  Roscher
11,    398.

(4)  Macchioro.  Rev.  arch.   IX  (1907).    156;  Wissowa.  372-373.

38


riginally  it  was  entirely  separated  from  them  (I).  There  was
probably  a  tendency  towstrd  syncretism  with  a  modification
of  the  idesis  for  which  the  old  gods  stood,  but  this  feature  did
not  become  very  prominent  in  Caunpania  (2).  The  worship
of  the  Emperors,  which  had  degenerated  everywhere  by  the
third  century  has  left  no  traces  of  its  continued  existence  in
Campania  (3).  The  attempted  revival  of  the  old  state  religion
on  the  part  of  the  Emperor  Decius  through  a  persecution  of
the  Christians  met  with  little  permanent  success  (4).

The  adherents  of  the  latter  religion  had  already  in  the
second  century  a  community  at  Neapolis  in  addition  to  the
one  established  at  Puteoli  (5).  At  first  they  remained  al-
most unnoticed  but  their  ever  increasing  numbers  soon  com-
pelled attention  zmd  finally  alarm  on  the  part  of  the  author-
ities. While  their  membership  was  Isirgely  composed  of
humble  folk,  converts  of  high  rank  especially  women  were
not  unknown  from  esirly  times.  They  were  confined  to  the
towns  and  made  no  progress  in  the  open  country  (6).  De-
tails of  the  esurly  churches,  however,  are  entirely  lacking  in
the  Campanian  cities.   In  spite  of  the  persecutions  which  at-

(1)  Cumont,    Textes    et    monuments    figures    relatif    aux   mysteres    de   Mi-
thra  I,  293.   Cp.  I,    152  For  the  orig'n  and  development  of  the  taurobolium  and

its  extension  to  other  cults)  see  Cumont,  I,  334;  Rev.  arch.  XII  (1888)  132  f. ;  Reo.
d'hist  et  de  Utt.  relig.  VI  (1901)  102,  and.  Rev.  de  phil.  XVII  (1893)  195  f.;
Esperandieu,  Taurobolium  D.-S.  V,  46;  Zippel,  Das  Taurobolium  in  Festschrift
fur  Friedlander  498  f . ;  Wissowa,  324 ;  Loisy.  Rev.  d'hist.  et  de  Utt.  relig.  IV
(1913)  311;  Hepding,  Attis  199  {Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorar-
beiten  I.).

(2)  Macchioro,    Rev.   arch.    IX    (1907)    141    f.    Cp.    Reville.    La    religion    a
Rcme  sous  les  Severes  109.

(3)  Beurlier,    Le    culte    imperiale   44.

(4)  Seeck,  Gesch.  d.  Vntergangs  d.  ant.   Welt  III,  298 ;  von  Domaszewski
Magna  Mater  in  Latin  Inscriptions  *n  Jour.  Rom.  Stud.  I,   (1911)   153.

(5)  Harnack.  Die  Mission  u.  Ausbreitung  d.  Chrisientums  II,  76;  Laoizoni
Riv.   atorico-crit.    delle   scienze   teol.  VI    (1910)   293.

(6)  I  Corinthians,  I,  26;  Origen,  contra  Celsum  I  27.  Ill  18,  44;  VIII  75;
Min.  Fel.  Octav.  V,  8-12;  Lucian,  Peregrinus  12-13;  Weitsacker,  Das  apostolische
Zeitalter  407  f. ;  Harnack,  op.  cit.  II  25  f.  ;  Knopf,  Ueber  die  soziale  Zusam-
mensetzung  der  dltesten  heidenchristlichen  Gemeinden  in  Zeits.  fiir  Theol.   und

Kirche  X  (1900)  325  f.  and  Nachapostolisches  Zeitalter  64  f.  The  same  may  be
said  of  the  earlier  followers  of  Mithras,  Cumont,  Mithras  Roscher  II,  3036;  Bigg,
The  Origins  of  Christianity  20;  Gratz-Braun,  Gesch.  der  Juden  III,  419.

-39  -


tempted  to  stop  the  increase  of  Christiemity  as  soon  as  its
identity  and  principles  became  fully  known,  it  had  succeeded
in  planting  and  maintaining  other  churches  especially  in  south-
em  Italy,  as  is  indicated  by  the  circumstance  that  a  \aige
pait  of  the  sixty  bishops  who  participated  in  the  Council
called  by  Pope  Cornelius  in  25 1 ,  seem  to  have  come  from  this
section  (1).

At  the  begiiming  of  the  fourth  century  there  were  Christ-
ian communities  also  at  Capua,  Misenum,  Nola,  and  Nu-
ceria;  a  resident  bishop  presided  over  the  churches  of  Nea-
polis  and  Nola  and  probably  likewise  over  those  of  Capua
and  Puteoli.  According  to  the  Liber  Pontificalis  Constantine
erected  basilicas  at  Capua  and  Neapolis,  the  only  cities  outside
of  Rome  for  which  this  honor  is  recorded  (2).  There  were
in  all  probability  more  Christians  here  than  in  the  central  and
northern  pzurts  of  the  peninsula.  In  fact  the  coast  district  cen-
tering at  Puteoli  and  Neapolis  was  one  of  the  three  great  strong-
holds of  this  religion  in  Italy  (3).  As  a  result  of  the  perse-
cutions, especially  that  under  Diocletian,  a  considerable
number  of  meirtyrs  were  recorded  in  the  various  churches.
Many  Jews  were  likewise  present  in  the  Cgunpeuiigui  cities
especially  Neapolis;  their  history,  however,  is  very  obscure
till  the  very  close  of  the  ancient  world  (4).

(1)  Eusebius,  Historia  ecclesiastica  VI,  43;  Harnack,  Die  Mission  u.  Aus-
hreitung  d.  Christentums  II,  212,  215;  Duchesne,  Origines  du  culte  chritien  29.
The  total  number  of  bishops  in  Italy  in  the  third  century  is  estimated  at  100.
The  period  260-300  was  everyhere  one  of  great  advancement  for  the  Church.
Harnack  op.  cit.   II,  216.

(2)  Liber  Pontificalis  XXXI,  XXXII  (Duchesne's  edition  I,  186;  Lan-
zoni,  Riv.   stonco-crit.  delle  scienze  teol.  VI    (1910)  294.

(3)  The  other    centers   were    Rome   zmd  Ariminum.    Harnack,    op.    cit.    II
220.

(4)  A  law  of  Honorius  belonging  to  the  year  398  mentions  the  Jews  in
Apulia  and  Calabria.  Cod.  Theod.  XII,  I,  158;  Tamassia,  Ebrei  neU'Italia  me-
ridionale   in   Atti   del   r.   1st.    Veneto   LXIII    (1903-4)   796    f . ;  Ferorelli,    Gli   Ebrei

nelV Italia  meridionale  in  Arch.  star.  Nap.  XXXII  (1907)  255.  A  letter  of  Pope
Gelasius  I  to  a  bishop  Quinigesius,  whose  see  was  located  in  some  Campanian
town  which  can  not  now  be  determined,  speaks  of  a  certain  Telesinus  as  a
man  of  prominence  who  was  a  believer  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Jews  (before
499).  Mansi,  Amplissima  coUectio  conciliorum  VIII  131  ;  Ascoli.  Istruzione  di  cm-
tichi  sepolcri  giudaici  del  Napolitano  35 ;  Tamassa,  loc.  cit. ;  Gratz-Eppenstein
Gesch.  dsr  Juden  V.  40.

-  40  -


Although  the  triumph  of  Christianity  wsis  assured  ais  soon
as  it  was  officially  recognized  by  the  government  and  had
obtained  the  s2m.ction  of  the  reigning  emperor  Constantine,
it  still  had  several  important  battles  to  fight  before  Paganism
w£is  overthrown.  Ancient  heathen  practices  continued  to  have
a  place  for  msuiy  years  eifter  the  system  as  a  whole  had  been
repudiated  as  the  state  religion  of  the  Roman  Empire.  The
Emperors,  it  is  true,  passed  frequent  ordinzinces  restricting
the  activity  of  those  who  clung  to  the  old  order  of  things,  yet
in  their  attitude  to  the  pagan  religion  these  rulers  were  often
inconsistent.  Thus  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  provincial
priests  were  still  regularly  appointed  to  supervise  the  religious
interests  of  the  different  districts,  and  in  carrying  out  their
work  acted  as  the  Emperor*s  representative  to  put  the  staimp
of  official  approved  upon  religious  exercises  belonging  to  Pa-
ganism (I).

An  important  original  document,  exemplifying  the  acti-
vity of  this  kind  of  official,  aifords  an  insight  into  the  state  of
religion  prevailing  in  Czunpania  during  the  reign  of  Valenti-
nian  II  and  Theodosius  (2).  It  is  dated  Nov.  22,  387  and
consists  of  a  list  of  festivals  authorized  by  Imi>erial  consent  for
the  Campanian  region;  it  wets  promulgated  at  Capua,  the  chief
Campanian  city  at  that  time,  which  served  as  the  residence
of  the  provincial  priest  Rdmanus  lunior  (3).  Though  there
was  a  strong  Christian  community  in  this  locality,  it  is  likely
that  this  priesthood  wais  favored  or  at  least  tolerated  on  ac-
count of  the  pait    played     by     its     incumbent    in    providing

(1)  The  privileges  of  this  ofl&cer  were  taken  away  by  a  decree  of  general
application  issued  in  396.  Cod.  Theod.  XVI,  10,  14.  The  priesthood  is  treated  by
Marquardt,  Ep.  Eph.   I,  213  and  Rom.  StaatsverW.   I  ,  504  f.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3792  =  D.  4918  =  V.  1022.  Commentaries  by  Avellino,
Opuscoli  diversi  III,  215-304;  Mommsen,  Berichte  der  sacks.  Ges.  der  Wiss.
1850  64  f.    =    Gesammelte  Schriften  VIII,   14-24.

(3)  Mommsen  op.  cit.  16  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  day  was  the
anniversary  of  Valentinian's  ascent  to  the  throne.  For  the  extent  of  Campania  at
this  time  see  Ruggiero,   II  42  and.   p.   I  of  this  work.  Avellino  thought  that  the

festivals  were  of  only  local  significance;  Mommsen  on  the  contrary  believed
that  they  were  intended  for  the  entire  province.  Probably  they  were  designed
for  the  region  tributary  to  Capua.  The  danger  of  having  too  many  holidays  was

averted  by  legal  enactments.   Cp.  Cod.  lusi.   Ill,    12,   3;   III,    12,  6;  Cod.  Theod.

II,  8.

-41  -


games  (I).  A  second  person  Felix,  who  attended  to  the  prep-
aration of  the  inscription,  was  considered  by  Mommsen  to
be  a  subordiate  official  directly  dependent  on  the  Emperor  (2).

The  holy  days  here  enumerated  aie  meurked  by  obser-
vances of  a  general  human  interest  and  are  not  concerned
with  the  worship  of  any  peu-ticular  god.  The  first  festival  on
Jan.  3  is  devoted  to  the  making  of  gmnual  prayers  for  the
welfare  of  the  Emperor  and  also  by  implication  for  that  of  the
state,  -  a  time  hallowed  custom  observed  at  Rome  and  through-
out the  extent  of  the  Empire  (3).  The  act  was  not  one
which  Wcis  repugnant  to  the  ideas  of  the  Christieois;  in  fact
it  was  adopted  by  the  Church  gmd  is  mentioned  as  late  as  the
seventh  century  (4).  The  second  festival  called  Genialia
under  date  of  Feb.  1 1  seems  to  stand  for  ludi  genialici,  a  term
that  reappears  in  the  fasti  Philocali  (5).  Its  real  significeuice
is  unknown..  According  to  Mommsen 's  original  interpretation
it  was  a  celebration  in  honor  of  birth;  according  to  his  later
view  which  is  followed  by  Otto  and  is  more  plausible,  these
gamnes  were  connected  with  the  establishment  of  a  cult  of  the
Genius  of  the  Romsm  people  at  the  rostra  in  Rome  (6).

While  the  first  festival  and  probably  also  the  second  were
patriotic  in  character,  the  third,  coming  on  the  first  of  May,
was  in  the  interest  of  agriculture  and  consisted  of  a  lustration
of  the  growing  crops.  It  weis  held  at  the  town  of  Casilinum
by  the  Volturnus  River,  where  the  modern  Capua  stands,  2Uid
may  have  been  originally  a  festival  in  honor  of  the  divinity
of  the  local  streeim  (7).  The  thirteenth  day  of  the  same
month  is  marked  for  the  celebration  of  the  rosalia,  which  at
Rome  took  place  as  a  public  festival  ten  days  later  but  which

(1)  Avellino,  Opusc.  diversi  III,  280;  Marquardt,  Rom.  Staatsverw.   I,  505.

(2)  Mommsen,   Gesam.  Schr,  VIII,    17.

(3)  Marquardt.    III.    266;    Preller-Jordan,    I,    133,    182;    Wissowa.    382.

(4)  Mommsen,  Gesam.   Schr.   VIII    18;   Memsi,   AmpUssima  coUectio   con-
ciliorum  XI.  972,   section  62  of  the  Canons  of  Trullo  (691    A.  D.).

(5)  C.  I.  L.  I,  p.  258.

(6)  Mommsen.  Gesam.  Schr.  VIII,  18  and  C.  /.  L.  I,  309;  Avellino.
Opusc.  diversi,  242;  W.  F.  Otto,  Genius  P.  -  W.  VII,  1166;  Jordan,  Topog.  d.
Stadt  Rom  I,  part  2.  377.  Cp.  Chronographua  anni  354  in  Mommsen,  Chronica
minora   I,    148.

(7)  For  an   account   of    the    ceremonies   of  lustration    see    Marquardt-Wi»-
sowa,   Rom.  Staatar.   Ill  ,  201  ;  Wissowa.   390.

.  42  -


wEis  also  celebrated  privately  at  other  times  (I).  The  main
feature  of  the  day  was  the  decoration  of  the  graves  with
flowers,  an  act  which  appealed  to  the  Christiam  population
as  well  as  the  Pagans,  with  the  result  that  the  festival  was
taken  over  into  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  (2).  The
amphitheater  mentioned  in  this  record  is  doubtless  that  of
Capua,  where  certain  public  exercises  would  be  held  prior  to
the  decoration  of  the  graves.

The  next  festivals  are  dated  July  25  and  July  27  respec-
tively. The  first,  described  £is  a  lustration  at  the  river  reached
by  the  Via  Dianae,  seems  to  be  smother  celebration  belonging
to  rural  life  and  marking  the  close  of  the  harvest  period  (3).
It  was  held  at  the  bridge  over  the  Volturnus  River  east  of  Ca-
silinurn,  a  spot  at  no  great  distance  from  the  famous  temple
of  Diana  on  the  slope  of  Mt.  Tifata  (4).  Two  days  later  the
place  and  character  of  the  festival  changed.  It  was  now  held
in  the  vicinity  of  LaJce  Avemus  near  Baiae  and  Cumae  and
assumed  the  chsu-acter  of  a  commemorative  service  for  the
dead,  a  midsummer  All  Souls*  day,  which  wgis  paralleled  by
the  Romam  feralia  celebrated  in  the  opposite  part  of  the  year.
The  place  of  the  service  was  fitting,  as  it  had  been  associated
from  time  immemorial  with  the  dead  and  with  the  chthonic
deities.  The  last  festival  under  date  of  Oct.  15  was  assigned  to
the  vicinity  of  the  neighboring  Lake  Acherusia  (Lago  del
Fusziro),  and  was  concerned  with  the  vintage.  The  legal  term
for  the  feriae  uindemiales  extended  from  Aug.  23  to  Oct.  15;
compso-ing  this  with  the  feriae  messiuae  already  mentioned,
we  may  infer  that  the  duration  of  the  season  for  Ceonpemia
was  one  month  before  Oct.  15,  and  that  here  too  the  last  day
formed  the  principal  pait  of  the  festivities  (5).

(1)  Cp.  Fasti  Philocali,  C.  I.  L.  \.  p.  264;  cp.  p.  318.

(2)  Avellino,  Opusc.  diversi  III,  254  f. ;  Marquardt-Wissowa,  Rom.
Staatsr.  Ill,  311  ;  Stei:ding.  Manes,  RoscSer  II,  2322.

(3)  Mommsen,  Gesam.  Schr.,  VIII,  19.  The  interpretatio  to  the  Consti-
tutiones  of  Theodosius  II,  8  states  that  the  harvest  festivl  with  its  cessation  of
legal  business  should  be  considered  from  June  24  to  Aug.  1.  The  time  to  be
regarded  as  a  legal  holiday  seems  to  have  been  fixed  in  accordance  with  local
conditions  in  the  various  provinces,  so  that  in  Campania  the  period  ended  July  25.

(4)  Preller-Jordan,    II.    142  note  3.

(5)  Interpretatio  to  the  Constitutiones  of  Theodosius   loc.    cit.

-43  .


The  various  celebrations  therefore  which  were  ordered
by  the  Roincins  pertained  to  religion  only  in  its  broadest  sense.
Free  from  any  tendency  toward  secteu-ianism,  they  exhibit  the
trsuts  of  an  age  of  toleration,  eoid  seem  designed  to  afford  all
classes  of  citizens,  Christian  as  well  as  Pagsm,  the  opportunity
to  meet  on  neutral  ground,  where  the  prejudices  of  neither
pzu-ty  would  be  disturbed.  It  thus  affords  an  insight  into  con-
ditions which  prevailed  at  a  critical  period  of  European  his-
tory, -  the  transition  from  the  old  regime  to  the  new.  It  is
the  last  word  from  Campania  before  the  change  v/as  effected.


-  44  -


CHAPTER  II
CUMAE,  BAIAE,  MISENUM,

Cumae  has  secured  a  lasting  renown  as  the  first  Greek
colony  in  the  western  Mediterranean.  Founded  upon  the  pre-
cipitous rocks  which  approach  the  sea  to  the  north  of  Cape
Misenum,  it  w£is  protected  for  the  most  part  by  insurmountable
walls.  Toweu-d  the  east,  however,  the  land  slopes  away  more
gradually  to  form  a  valley  and  thus  afforded  no  natural  pro-
tection. At  first  the  settlement  weis  doubtless  confined  to  the
Acropolis,  £is  W21S  the  c£ise  in  the  early  Middle  Ages,  after
the  town  had  been  violently  ravaged.  The  volcsuiic  soil  of  the
surrounding  country  interspersed  with  numerous  lakes  received
the  name  of  the  Phlegraean  Fields.

Though  once  a  community  of  importeince,  its  territory
was  always  comparatively  small.  The  Campsuiian  plain,  which
extended  to  a  point  only  a  few  miles  distant  from  its  walls  on
the  north  and  east,  was  origineJly  owned  by  Capua;  when  this
in  large  measure  w£is  taken  away  from  its  former  proprietors
by  the  Romans,  the  latter  utilized  it  for  establishing  colonies,
and  henceforth  Liternum  became  the  neighbor  of  Cumae  on
the  north.  Immediately  to  the  east  began  the  territory  of  Pu-
teoli.  Under  Augustus  Cape  Misenum  left  the  jurisdiction  of
Cumae  and  beceime  the  seat  of  an  independent  municipality.
In  the  Ager  Cumeinus  remained  the  lakes  Avernus,  Lucrinus
and  Acherusia  £is  well  as  the  subordinate  communities  Bauli
and  Baiae,  which  seem  to  have  had  no  separate  legal  exist-
ence, though  the  latter  during  the  Empire  had  far  surpassed
Cumae  itself  in  importance.

Archaeological  evidence  points  to  a  considerable  maii-
time  activity  in  the  seventh  EUid  sixth  centuries  B.  C.  At  this

-  45


time  Cumae  exercised  its  great  mission  as  a  civilizing  force,
and  the  cRau'acters  of  its  script,  coming  to  the  knowledge  of
the  Italian  peoples,  formed  the  basis  for  all  their  alphabets.
Later,  commerce  dwindled  and  agriculture  becamne  the  leading
source  of  wealth.  Under  foreign  domination  the  town  declined
rapidly  in  all  respects,  until  it  prodticed  little  that  was  worthy
of  note  except  a  certain  kind  of  pottery.  Under  the  Empire  it
was  celebrated  for  its  tranquillity,  and  regarded  merely  as  the
((  gate  to  Beiiae  »  (I).

As  the  Greeks  au-rived  at  such  an  esu-ly  time  -  probably  in
the  eighth  century  B.  C.  -  there  wets  much  uncertainty  about
the  circumstemces  connected  with  their  settlement.  The  col-
ony was  certainly  largeK  Chalcidian,  but  it  is  probable  that
other  Greek  cities  particularly  Cyme  (in  Aetolia  7)  had  a  share
in  the  colonization.  At  any  rate  the  settlement  prospered
greatly  and  before  long  sent  out  colonies  of  its  own  to  Zancle
in  Sicily  and  to  the  Italian  coeist  immediately  to  the  south,
where  Naples  and  Pozzuoli  now  stand.  Its  power  continued
for  another  century  under  the  able  leadership  of  Aristodemus,
who  was  successful  in  defending  his  city  against  the  combined
attack  of  the  Etruscans  Irom  Capua  and  of  pther  tribes  belong-
ing to  the  neighborhood.  (524  B.  C.)  Later  in  conjunction  with
the  fleet  of  Syracuse,  Cumae  overthrew  the  naval  supremacy
of  the  Etruscans  (474  B.  C),  but  within  another  half  century
W21S  itself  stormed  by  the  Samnites  (428  or  421).  Many  of  the
inhabitants  fled  to  Neapolis,  and  though  the  Greek  customs
and  institutions  continued  to  survive,  the  Oscan  speech  grad-
ually came  into  regular  use  (2).

When  Campania  came  under  the  sway  of  the  Romans,
Cumae  was  forced  to  accept  the  same  masters,  and  at  that
time  received  the  right  of  limited  citizenship  {ciuitas  sine  suj-
fragio  334  B.  C).  After  its  loss  of  independence  its  history  offers
little  of  interest.  It  formed  a  part  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
prcEJectus  Capuam  Cwnas,  and  in  the  tumultuous  times  of  the

(1)  For  accounts  of  Cumae  see  Beloch,  Campanien  im  Alterihum  157;
Niasen,  It,  Landeskunde  II,  717  f . ;  De  Petra,  /  Porii  antichi  deli'Italia  merid.  in

Monografia  storica   dei  porti  delV aniichita   nella   penisola   Haliana   317.

(2)  Strab.    V.    4,    4.    According  to   Gabrici    the    Samnite    influence    became
preponderant  in  art.  Cuma  in  Boll  d'arte  IV  (1910)  112.

-46-


CeirtKaginian  wsu-s  it  remained  faithful  to  Rome.  In  the  yesu-
180  B.  C.  it  adopted  Latin  as  the  official  language,  received
the  full  suffrage  at  about  the  82uiie  time,  and  continued  as  a
Roman  municipality  till  Augustus  located  there  a  military  co-
lony. We  hear  little  of  it  henceforth  except  in  connection
with  Baiae.  Its  Acropolis,  however,  remained  a  stronghold
well  into  the  Middle  Ages,  as  it  is  known  to  have  resisted  suc-
cessfully the  2U-my  of  Narses  in  his  war  against  the  Goths.  In
fact  it  fell  only  at  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,
when  it  was  stormed  by  the  Neapolitans  (1205)  (I).

The  importance  of  Cumae  in  the  field  of  ancient  religion
is  greater  than  the  size  or  intrinsic  worth  of  the  place  at  any
time  would  suggest.  On  the  one  hand  it  was  the  seat  of  reli-
gious traditions  embodied  in  literature,  whict  gained  a  wide
currency  and  a  commanding  influence.  On  the  other  hand  it
exercised  a  great  positive  influence  upon  the  religion  of  its
neighbors  in  the  early  centuries;  from  this  source,  as  has  aJ-
ready  been  explained,  went  forth  the  Greek  conceptions  of  the
gods  which  modified  so  profoundly  the  primitive  notions  of
the  Italian  peoples  (2).

PHRATRY  GODS

For  the  constitution  of  the  state  in  its  religious  sispects
there  is  no  direct  evidence.  Something,  however,  may  be  in-
ferred from  our  knowledge  of  eeu-ly  conditions  in  Cumae  *8
flourishing  colony  Neapolis.  From  this  source  we  leatrn  of  the
existence  of  phratries  having  their  own  gods  suid  religious
observances  (3).  An  inscription  from  Neapolis  alludes  to  a  ded-
ication made  to  the  gods  of  the  phratry  of  the  Kymaioi ;  the  term
may  refer  to  the  refugees  that  fled  to  Neapolis  at  the  time  of
the  Samnite  conquest,  bat  as  Beloch  observes,  it  may  also  des-
ignate  a    phratry   already    existent    at    Cumae,    composed    of

(1)  For  the  history  of  Cumae  consult  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  350;  Beloch
145-152;  Gabrici.  Cuma  in  Mon.  ant.  XXII  (1913)  439-448;  Byvanck.  De  Magnae
Graeciae  historic  antiquissima  81  ;   Gardthausen,  Das  Alter  italischer  Schrift  und

die  Griindung  tion    Cumae    in    Neue   Jahrb.    fur    daa    class.    Altertum  XXXVII
(1916)  369  f.

(2)  See  p.   18.

(3)  Cp.  Beloch.  42.

-47  -


settlers  frcm  that  Cyme  —  either  in  Aetolia  or  Eutoea  —  which
sent  colonists  to  its  Italian  namesake  (1).  Hence  there  is  the
same  possibility  here  as  at  Neapolis  that  Hephaestus,  Diony-
sus, and  Heracles  were  considered  aa  the  special  divinities  of
this  phratry  (2).  Likewise  the  other  phratries  cited  at  Neapolis
probably  existed  for  the  most  part  in  the  parent  city  with  the
same  organization  and  gods.  They  will  be  considered  more
fully  in  the  treatment  of  Neapolis.

ZEUS

Among  the  old  Greek  divinities  who  came  to  Italy  with
the  first  settlers  from  Chalcis  w£is  Zeus,  who  was  recognized  in
that  city  under  the  designation  of  Olympius  suid  Milichius  (3).
But,  while  Zeus  appears  there  as  the  guardian  of  oaths,  evi-
dence is  lacking  for  magnifying  his  influence  and  calling  him,
as  does  Beloch,  the  protecting  divinity  of  that  state,  with  the
eissumption  that  his  worship  w£is  consequently  of  much  impor-
tance in  the  colony  (4).  \'et  he  doubtless  occupied  here  a  com-
modious temple  where  his  worship  continued  through  the  various
stages  of  the  city's  history  both  as  Zeus  and  later  £is  Jupiter,
when  Roman  influence  predominated.  An  evidence  of  the  high
position  attained  by  the  cult  appears  in  the  fact  that  the  temple
contained  gold  in  the  third  century  B.  C.  and  that  an  omen
reported  here  was  considered  important  enough  to  affect  the
fortunes  of  the  Roman  people.  In  narrating  the  events  of  208
B.  C.  before  the  consuls  proceeded  to  their  provinces,  Livy
inserts  a  list  of  ominous  occurences  pertaining  to  Campguiia,
among  which  was  the  notice  that  mice  had  gnawed  gold  in  the
Jupiter  temple,  attacking  perhaps  the  very  image  of  the
deity  (5).  The  site  of  the  earliest  shrine  wets  probably  on  the

(I)  Beloch  41.  /.  G.  XIV.  721  =  C.  /.  G.  5788.  Cp.  also  the  phratry  of
the  Euboioi,  N.  S.   1900,  269.

(2)  Engelmann,  'Arch.  Zeit  XXXI  (1874)133;  Farnell,  Cults  of  the  Greek
States  V,  395 ;  von  Wilamowitz,  Nachr.  von  der  ^/.  Gesells.  der  Wiss.  zu  Got-
tingen   1895.  228  note  24.

(3)  /.    G.    I.  27 A;   C.   /.    G.   2150.

(4)  Beloch.   156,   161.

(5)  Liv.  XXVII,  23,  2;  Et  ex  Campania  nuntiata  erant  Cumis  -  adeo
minimis  etiam.  rebus  prauaj  religfio  inserit  deos  -  mures  in  aede  louis  aurum  ro-
sisse.   Cp.   Plut.  Sulla  VII.

-48  -


Acropolis  in  the  midst  of  the  first  settlement.  Beloch  located
it  on  the  western  spur  of  the  heights,  perhaps  the  most  sightly-
situation  in  the  city,  where  the  ruins  of  a  temple  have  left  their
traces.  Although  they  have  now  almost  disappeared,  steps  and
fragments  of  columns  still  stood  in  their  original  position  at
the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  De  lorio  remarks  that
they  V2uiished  during  his  life  time  (I).  Beloch's  identification
is  based  upon  the  fact  that  so  prominent  a  position  and  so  large
a  structure  as  the  foundation  walls  indicate  must  have  belong-
ed to  a  very  important  deity  (2).  But  it  is  just  as  likely  that
some  other  deity  important  in  the  earlier  period  of  the  city
occupied  this  site,  especially  since  Servius  seems  to  exclude
Jupiter  from  the  Acropolis,  and  it  has  been  proposed  to  asso-
ciate this  spot  with  the  seuictuary  of  the  Dioscuri.

The  name  of  Jupiter  has  also  been  connected  with  a  ruin
of  Roman  times,  known  as  the  Tempio  del  Giganti,  which
stood  on  the  plain  outside  the  walls.  Only  a  few  stones  of  this
structure  still  remain,  but  a  drawing  made  in  the  eighteenth
century  (1740)  shows  the  rear  v/all  to  have  then  been  stcoid-
ing  (3).  In  a  large  niche  of  this  building  stood  apparently  a
colossal  statue  of  Jupiter,  which  wgis  discovered  in  the  eigh-
teenth century  and  is  now  in  the  National  Museum  at  Naples.
It  is  a  Roman  work  aissigned  to  the  first  century  of  the  Empire;
resembling  the  Zeus  of  Otricoli  2Uid  the  Pompeian  Jupiter,  it
is  of  inferior  execution.  Gabrici  maintains  that  it  is  a  represen-
tation of  Jupiter  Victor  rather  than  of  Jupiter  Stator  (4).

Other  references  to  the  divinity  designated  as  Zeus  or
Jupiter  consist  of  the  allusion  to  a  sacrifice  ordered  to  Jupiter


(1)  De  lorio,  Guida  di  Pozzuoli  115.  This  writer  fancied  that  these  re-
mains belonged  to  the  Greek  temple  of  Apollo.  His  plan  of  the  city  is  repro-
duced by  Beloch.  PI.  IV  and  by  Gabrici.  Cuma  in  Mon.  Ant.  XXII,  PI.   II.

(2)  Beloch.    161.

(3)  Reproduced  in  Boll   d'aHe  IV  (1910)    110;  Mon.   ant.  XXII,  PI.    11.  De
lorio  seems  to  ha/e  thought  this  a  temple  of  Mercury  in  the  Forum  of  the  city.
<juida    118;    cp.    Paoli,    ''Antiquitatum    reliquiae    fol.    29,    PI.    XLVII.   This    spot
ap(>esars  in  reality  to  have  been  occupied  by  a  tempJe  of  Ceres.

(4)  Gabrici,  Boll  d'aHe  IV  (1910)  116  and  Mon.  ant.  XXII,  18.  The  sculp-
ture is  portrayed  in  these  works  p.  112  and  p.  19  respectively  and  also  in  Real
Museo  di  Napoli  III  frontispiece.  Cp.  Riisch,  Guida  illustrata  del  Museo  nazio^
nale  di  Napoli  287  No.    1258;  Gerhard-Panofka,   Neapela  antike  Bildwerke  318.

-49  -


Sempiternus  in  honor  of  Augustus,  which  will  be  treated  under
the  worship  of  the  Emperors,  and  a  doubtful  inscription  on  a
painted  vase  found  at  Cumae.  The  reading  of  the  latter,  how-
ever, is  rather  e^  SwxTJp  than  Zso  SoDifjp,  though  in  any
case  there  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  custom  of  offering  a
special  libation  to  this  god  (1).

APOLLO

Much  more  information  hais  reached  us  respecting  the
cult  of  Apollo,  who  according  to  tradition  conducted  the  Greek
colonists  to  their  new  home  in  the  West.  Statius  in  his  Silvae,
although  speaking  of  Neapolis,  refers  to  this  god  as  one  of  the
old  deities  of  the  Chalcidians  under  whose  leadership  their
fleet  found  its  way  to  Italy,  and  in  another  passage  of  the  same
series  of  poems  alludes  to  the  dove  that  flew  ahead  of  them  ais
the  god's  representative  (2).  This  notion  is  in  keeping  espe-
cially with  the  custom  of  the  Chalcidians  to  send  out  colonies
which  were  regzirded  as  tithes  due  to  Apollo,  and  we  may  con-
clude that  he  was  venerated  at  Cumae  as  a  patron  of  coloni-
zation (3).

His  temple,  already  one  of  the  foremost  shrines  of  Italy,
attained  a  remcirkable  celebrity  because  of  the  detailed  account
of  it  inserted  by  Vergil  in  his  Aeneid.  According  to  the  tradi-
tion adopted  by  the  poet  it  had  been  founded  by  the  inventor
Daedalus,  who  as  in  Sicily  figures  here  as  an  architect.  Alight-
ing in  the  Acropolis  after  a  flight  through  the  air  directly  from
Crete,  or  arriving  after  a  stay  in  Sardinia,  as  reported  by  Sal-
lust,   he  built  this  sanctuary  to  commemorate  his  escape  and

(1)  Avellino.  Bull  Nap.   n.   s.  VII   (1858)  21.

(2)  Stat.  silv.  IV,  8.  47-49:

Tu,    ductor    populi   longe   migrantis,    Ai>ollo

cuius  adhuc  uolucrem   laeua  ceruice   sedentem

respiciens  blande  felix  Eumelus  adorat.
With   the   appearance   of   the    dove   here   may   be    compared   the   raven    at
Cyrene  and  the  dolphin  at  Crisa.  Roscher.  ApoUo  I,  441.  Stat  silv.  Ill,  5,  79-80:

Cui  mite  solum  trans  aequora  uectae

ipse   Dionaea  monstrauit    Apollo   columba.
Cp.  Anon.  Laus  Pisonis  91    =    Bahrens,  Poetae  Latini  I,   228.

(3)  Roscher  loc.  cit.

-50  -


piously  dedicated  his  wings  to  the  god  (1).  Upon  the  pamels
of  the  door  he  depicted  events  connected  with  the  Cretan  royal
family  eind  thus  indirectly  with  himself.  Upon  the  first  was
shown  the  death  of  Androgeus,  son  of  Minos,  and  with  it  the
King's  revenge,  —  the  selection  of  Athenieui  victims  for  the
Minotaur;  upon  the  other  was  portrayed  the  unnatural  peission
of  Pasiphae,  the  Labyrinth  and  the  Minotaur  (2).  This  de-
scription can  not  have  been  wholly  a  creation  of  the  poet's
imagination,  but  was  rather  an  allusion  to  an  actual  door  of
fine  workmanship  portraying  this  myth,  a  feature  of  the  temple
which  had  given  rise  to  the  legend  that  it  wets  a  foundation  of
DaedeJus.  The  same  tradition  of  the  temple  as  an  ancient  me-
moricJ  erected  by  this  hero  appears  in  Silius.  In  this  psissage
Virrius,  leader  of  the  Capuan  allies  of  HannibsJ,  points  to
the  shrine  ((  gleaming  on  the  rock  of  the  citadel  )),  and  declso-es
that  it  was  made  by  greater  hands  tham  those  of  the  present
age  (3).  In  the  connection  of  Daedalus  with  the  temple  Gruppe
sees  one  of  the  rare  cases  of  Cretan  influence  in  ItcJy  smd
thinks  of  an  eeirly  settlement.  But  Pais  believes  that  the  connec-
tion of  the  Daedalus  legend  with  Cumae  is  late  amd  due  to
Sicilian  influence  that  reached  Cumae  only  in  the  time  of  Hiero
after  the  defeat  of  the  Etruscans  by  the  aid  of  that  prince  (4).
Like  other  ancient  shrines  this  one  had  a  venerable  cult
statue  of  wood,  which  wsis  doubtless  carefully  preserved
through  all  improvements  2ind  restorations  of  the  building  that
housed  it.  Impressive  in  size,  it  measured  no  less  than  fifteen

(1)  Serv.  Aen.  VI,  14:  Daedalus  uero  primo  Sardiniam,  ut  dicit  Sallustius,
post  delatus  est  Cumas,  et  templo  Ap>ollini  condito  sacratisque  ei  alis  in  foribus

haec  uniuersa   depinxit.

(2)  Verg.  Aen.  VI.  20-33.

(3)  Sil.  XII.  85-103:

Atque  hie  perlustrans  aditus.   fulgentia  cernit

arcis   templo  iugo.   quorum  tum  Virrius   altae

inmit's   ductor   Capuae   pri    ordia   pandit:

a  non   est   hoc  ».    inquit,    «  nostri.   quod   suspicis  aeui,

maiores   fecere   manus

Hoc  pro  nubiuago  gratus  pia  templa  meatu
inmitis   ductor  Capuae  primordia  i>andit:
instituit    Phoebi    atque   audacis   exuit    alas ».
The  reference  is  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Cumae,  not  to  that  at  Capua
as  asserted  by  C.  Robert.  Daidalos  P.  -  W.   IV,  2005,

(4)  Gruppe  360 ;  Pais,  Stor.  della  Sic.   e  della  Magna  Grecia   I,   163.

-  31   -


Roman  feet;  hence  the  expression  altus  Apollo  employed  by
Vergil  was  regsu-ded  by  the  ancients  as  a  possible  reference  to
this  image  (1).  Among  the  holy  relics  which  the  shrine  pur-
ported to  possess  were  the  wings  of  Daedalus,  which  we  may
infer  were  not  on  exhibition,  and  the  tusks  of  the  Erymanthian
boar;  the  claims  made  for  the  latter  by  the  natives  were  re-
jected by  Pausanias  who  denied  their  authenticity  (2).  An
allusion  to  this  relic  has  been  seen  by  certain  numismatists  on
old  coins  of  Cumae,  which  show  the  skin  from  a  lion's  head
between  the  heads  of  two  wild  boars  (3).  The  appearamce  here
of  this  legend  has  been  eiscribed  by  Pais  to  Doric  influence
from  Syracuse  in  the  fifth  century,  but  it  is  more  probably  due
to  an  actueJ  immigration  of  Arcadians  from  Psophis  (4).

The  temple  is  mentioned  occasionally  in  Roman  history
because  of  the  appearance  of  prodigies.  These  all  occurred  in
connection  with  Apollo's  statue,  which  on  these  occasions  was
found  covered  with  moisture,  either  perspiration  or  teeurs.  The
first  recorded  instance  of  the  miracle  belongs  to  the  beginning
of  the  second  century  B.  C.  during  the  war  with  Antiochus  the
Great;  the  second  has  reference  to  the  period  of  the  third  Ma-
cedonian conflict,  waged  against  Perseus;  the  third  example,
referred  by  Augustine  to  the  time  of  the  war  against  the  Achae-
ans  and  King  Aristonicus,  claimant  of  the  kingdom  of  Per-
ggunon,  is  evidently  inaccurately  related,  as  more  than  a  decade


(1)  Coelius  it.   54  in   Peter,   Hist.   Rom.   frag.   p.    107.    Servius,  Aen.   VI.
9:  «Altus»  autem....  uel  a<J  simulacri  magnitudinem  retulit,  quod  esse  constat  al-

tissimum.    Coelius    enim    de   Cumano   Apolline    ait    ibi    fano    signum    Apollinis
ligneum,  ahum  non  minus  pedes  XV.   Cp.  Busolt,   393  note  3.

(2)  Paus,  VIII,  24,  5:Ku|j.aro(,  5^  ot  sv  'Otcixoi^  auog  oSovxa^  dvaxsi|i^vous
Tcapoc  ocpiotv  iv  'A7i6XXa)vos  tepqi  Xoytp  |ji^v  Xiyouoiv  wg  ol  obo^xs.^  uoj  slsv  xoO
'EpufiavOiou,  T(p  Xoyq)  8e  auxwv  ou8'  lu'  oXCyov  fiexsoxtv  xou  bIxozoq.

Pfister,  Der  Reliquienkult  im  Altertum  I,  325.
(3)  The  coin  is  shown  by  A.  Sambon,  150  No.  244-249  and  by  Gaurrucci,
Le  tnonete  delVIt.  ant.  PI.  83,  N^.  23.  The  theories  concerning  this  money  are  dis-
cussed by  A.  Sambon,  141-142,  L.  Sambon,  Recherches  sur  les  tnonnaies
Ae  la  presqu'iale  italique  137.  A  religious  significance  here  is  denied  by  Macdon-
ald.  Coin  Types  79.  Cp.  Dressel,  Beschreibung  der  antiken  MUnzen  III,  p.  93.
(4)  Gruppe.  371  ;  Pais.  Stor.  della  Sic.  I.   163  and  Ancient  Italy  269.

-  52  -


i


elapsed  between  these  conflicts  (1).  It  is  worth  noting  that
Augustine  cites  both  the  earlier  occurrences  of  the  miracle  in
his  interesting  account  of  the  superstition  that  gathered  around
the  omens  from  Cumae.  Because  the  image  had  ((  wept  »  con-
tinuously for  four  days,  certain  soothsayers,  who  had  probably
been  consulted  by  the  Romeoi  government,  decided  that  it
ought  to  be  cast  into  the  sea,  but  the  leading  men  of  the  city,
loath  to  pait  with  such  a  willing  worker  of  miracles,  counselled
against  the  project  on  the  ground  that  it  had  behaved  similsu-ly
in  previous  crises,  which  •  one  the  less  had  turned  out  in  the
end  most  fortunately  for  the  Roman  people.  In  fact  they  made
the  plausible  supposition  that  since  the  cult  had  been  brought
from  Greece,  the  god  naturally  felt  compEission  whenever  that
section  of  the  world  was  doomed  to  disaster,  and  added  that
the  Roman  Senate,  convinced  of  the  truth  of  this  theory,  sent
presents  both  times  to  the  shrine.  Among  the  prodigies  listed
in  the  consulship  of  L.  Marcius  Philippus  and  Sex.  lulius
Caesar  (91  B.  C.)  appeeu-s  that  of  the  sweating  image,  and  fi-
nally there  is  an  allusion  by  Cicero  to  the  same  phenomenon
withou:  any  circumstances  for  fixing  the  date  (2).

The  references  in  literature  axe  unanimous  in  indicating
an  elevated  site  for  the  temple,  and  in  some  cases  connect  it
with  the  Acropolis.  Servius  noted  as  singulgu:  the  location  of  a
temple  of  Apollo  in  that  situation  on  the  ground  that  the  cita-


(1)  FIoT.  I,  23;  3:  Ad  hoc  caelestes  minae  territabant,  cum  umore  continuo
Apcllo  sudaret.   Liv.  XLIII,    13,  5:   Cumis  in   arce  Apollo  triduum   ac  tres  nor.tis

lacximauit.  Aug.  civ.  Ill,  1 1  :  Neque  enim  aliunde  Apollo  ille  Cumemus,  cum
aduersus  Achaeos  regemque  Aristonicum  bellaretur,  quadriduo  fleulsse  nun-
tiatus  est ;  quo  prodigio  haruspices  territi  cum  id  simulacrum  in  mare  putauissent
esse  proiciendum,   Cumani   senes  intercesserunt  atque   rettulerunt  tale   prodigium

et  Antiochi  et  Persis  bello  in  eodem  apparuisse  figmento  et  quia  Romanis  feli-
citer  prouenisset,  ex  senatus  consulto  eidem  Apollini  suo  dona  esse  missa  testati
sunt.  Tunc  uelut  peritiores  acciti  haruspices  responderunt  simulacri  Apollinis
fletum  ideo  prosperum  esse  Romemis,  quoniam  Cumana  colonia  Graeca  esset,
suisque  terris,   unde  accitus  esset,    'd  est  ipsi   Graeciae,   luctum  et  cladem  Apol-

linem  significasse  ploraoitem.  Deinde  mox  regem  Aristonicum  uictum  et  captum
ease  nuntiatum  est,  quem  uinci  utique  Apollo  nolebat  et  dolebat  et  hoc  sui
lapidis  etiam  lacrimls  indicabat.

(2)  Obseq.    54    (114).    Cumis    in    arce  Apollinis   simulacrum   sudauit.   Cic.
div.  I,  43:  Quid?  cum  Cumis  ApK>llo  sudauit.

-  53  -


del  wets  ordinarily  consecrated  to  Jupiter  (1).  But  when  an
interest  developed  in  the  remains  of  classical  antiquity  sifter
the  Renaiss2uice,  common  opinion  located  this  sanctuary  on  the
shore  of  Lake  Avernus,  where  extensive  ruins  existed,  identi-
fied later  as  a  bathing  establishment  (2).  Another  view,  expres-
sed in  the  eighteenth  century  work  of  Paoli,  placed  it  on  the
heights  of  Monte  Grillo  east  of  the  city,  identifying  it  with  the
ruins  called  Arco  Felice  (3).  Actually  the  temple  stood  upon
the  ezistern  portion  of  the  Acropolis,  where  remains  of  substruc-
tures and  steps  with  fragments  of  columns,  capitals  £uid  slabs
still  appcEir  on  the  site;  they  indicate  the  previous  existence  of
an  edifice  of  generous  proportions  £uid  sumptuous  character,
thus  agreeing  fully  with  the  literary  allusions  of  the  authors
already  cited  (4).  The  temple  contained  an  unusueJly  leu-ge
cult  statue,  it  weis  an  impressive  sight  to  the  besieging  army  of
Hannibal,  and  it  is  called  by  Vergil  aurea  and  immanis  (5).
This  spot  was  definitely  identified  £is  the  site  of  Apollo's  wor-
ship by  an  altar  found  among  the  ruins,  which  contains  a  ded-
ication to  the  Cumean  Apollo  by  Q.  Tineius  Rufus  (6).  A
fragmenteiry  inscription  on  the  base  of  a  statue,  the  work  of
Isidorus  of  Peiros,  was  believed  by  Garrucci  to  belong  to  a
similar  dedication;  but  the  small  Eimount  of  the  origineJ  that
has  been  preserved  does  not  permit  the  matter  to  be  definitely
determined  (7).

The  cult  name  of  the  god  seems  to  have  been  simply
Apollo  Cumauius.  The  Scholiasta  uetus  and  Tzetzes,  comment-
ing on  Lycophron's  phrase    ZtoTTjpLoo  zXitdc    applied  to  the  town

(1)  Serv.  Aen.  VI,  9:  Cum  ubiique  arx  Icrtii    detur,    apud    Cunxas    in    eixce
Apollinis  templum  est.

(2)  De    lorio,    Guida   99:    Paoli,    Antiquitatum   reliquiae   PI.    XLIII.

(3)  Paoli,  op.  cit.  fol.  29.  Heyne  comments  on  this  and  other  theories  about
the  temple's  location  in  his  edition  of  Vergil  II,  excursus  III,  789.

(4)  De  lorio  even  thought  that  there  were  two  temples  of  Apollo,  one
for  a  Greek  and  another   for   a  Roman   cult  of  the   god.   The   first  he   located

on  the  w^estern  part  of  the  Acropolis  in  connection  w^ith  ruins  alluded  to  in
the  preceding  section  (p.  49) ;  the  second  he  identified  with  the  actual  site,
Guida     115.  Cp.  Loffredo,   Le  antichita  di  Pozzuolo  35.

(5)  Verg.   Aen  VI,    13;    19.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3683,  Apollini  Cumano  Q.  Tineius  Rufus.

(7)  /.  G.  XIV.  861  =  C.  /.  G.  5858  and  add.  p.  1259.  ['At-.oaXcov.  KuixaCq)
A^X|Jios  Eloj naxCou,  TaiScopo^  Noufx  [...ndpto?  eTioest.  Garrucci  Bull.  Inst.   1861,  ll.j

-  54  -


of  Cumae,  thought  that  the  local  divinity  W2is  designated  with
the  epithet  Zosterius,  and  Bouche-Leclercq,  following  them,
recognizes  this  word  as  a  real  attribute  of  Apollo  at  Cumae  (I).
But  this  title,  used  in  Attica  and  perhaps  elsewhere  in  confor-
mity with  the  version  of  the  god*s  birth  at  Cape  Zoster,  is  not
one  which  hcis  any  significance  at  Cumae;  it  is  not,  therefore,
likely  that  the  expression  of  the  erudite  Alexemdrian  was  in-
tended so  much  to  be  an  accurate  designation  of  the  pzurticulaur
form  of  Apolline  religion  current  here  as  a  leeirned  litersury
allusion  adopted  in  keeping  with  author's  notorious  striving
for  novelty  of  expression.

In  addition  to  his  function,  already  noted,  as  a  patron  of
colonization  Apollo  wets  doubtless  worshipped  as  Paean,  the
healer  and  reconciler  of  physical  and  spiritUeJ  ills.  This  is  ren-
dered plausible  by  the  fact  that  at  Rome,  where  the  influence
of  Cumae  was  predominant  in  introducing  the  cult,  this  aspect
of  his  chciracter  was  strongly  marked  (2).  Furthermore  on  the
neighboring  island  of  Pithecussae  (Ischia)  he  was  particularly
revered  as  a  great  physician  (3).  But  his  role  as  a  mantic  divi-
nity gained  for  him  his  greatest  celebrity;  as  the  god  of  pro-
phecy he  inspired  his  priestess  the  Sibyl,  whose  utterances
attained  a  more  than  local  renown  and  thereby  promoted  the
populeirity  of  his  worship.

Vergil,  relating  a  tradition  that  has  been  traced  back  to
Timaeus,  represents  Aeneas  as  receiving  prophetic  guidance
from  the  Sibyl  of  Cumae,  who  at  that  early  period  is  supposed
to  be  associated  with  the  cult  of  Apollo  (4).  This  conception
is  historically  correct  only  in  the  sense  that  there  was  localized
in  this  region  at  a  remote  time  a  mantic  shrine  tended  by  a
prophetess  who  delivered  the  oracles.  Its  antiquity  v/as  reflected
in  the  popular  belief  which  represented  the  Cumean  Sibyl  as
extremely  old.  Although  too  much  attention  can  not  be  given

(1)  Schol.  uetus  ad  Licoph.  1278.  ZcoaxVjptov  Iuwvuijlov  'Au6?.Xa)vos,  cpYjatv
ouv  SxievxauGa  St^ysv  1^  SCPuXXa.Tzetzes,  ibid.;  Bouche-Leclercq,  Hist  de  la  div.
II,   185,  Hild.  Sibyllae,  D.-S.   IV,  1292.

(2)  Preller-Jordan,   I.    147;  302;  Wissowa,  294;  Aust,  Relig.   d.  Romer  50.

(3)  See  p.  220.

(4)  Verg.  Aen.  VI,  12:  Delius  inspirat  uates;  VI,  347;  Neque  te  Phoebi
cortina  fefellit.  The  meeting  of  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  was  often  related.  Cp.
Worner,   Aineias   Roscher   I,    174.

-  55  -


to  this  point  because  in  general  the  Sibyls  were  credited  with
length  of  years,  yet  this  peculigirity  belonged  in  a  high  degree
to  the  one  whose  seat  was  in  this  town  (I).  On  the  other  hand
the  prophetess  did  not  at  first  receive  her  inspiration  from
Apollo,  but  was  connected  with  the  worship  of  a  chthonic  deity
long  before  the  arrival  of  the  great  deity  of  the  Greeks  (2).  As
at  Delphi  the  worship  of  Apollo  was  superimposed  upon  that
of  an  older  deity,  whose  influence  gradually  faded  away,  so
here,  although  it  did  not  precisely  usurp  the  euicient  seat  of
prophecy,  it  succeeded  in  ousting  the  other  cult  and  appro-
priated the  priestess  along  with  the  mantic  functions  of  the  older
deity  (3).

The  Greek  cult  of  the  Sibyl  as  distinguished  from  the  old
native  oracle  was  introduced,  as  indicated  in  the  preceding
chapter,  by  the  early  colonists,  perhaps  especially  by  those  from
Cyme,  and  was  thus  ultimately  derived  from  Erythrae  and  the
Troad  (4).  Allusions  to  her  activity  in  her  new  home  are  to  be
explained  zis  references  to  the  assembling  of  oracles,  which
were  afterwards  handed  out  to  inquirers  as  her  responses.  The
presence  of  these  prophecies  here  as  elsewhere  was  considered
as  the  result  of  a  wandering  of  the  Sibyl,  EOid  her  association
with  Apollo   formed   a   fruitful   subject   for   myth   making  (5).

(1)  BucKholz.  Sibylla  RoscKer  IV,  796;  Bouche-Leclercq  Hist,  de  la  divin.
186,  who  gives  ancient  references  for  the  antiquity  of  the  Sibyl ;  Ronde,  Psyche
II  ,    67    ;   The   general   belief   ascribed   to   the    Sibyl    a    life   of   a  thousand  yeeirs

and  the  expression  Cumaeae  saecula  vatis  attained  the  force  of  a  proverb.
Phlegon,   Macrohii  4:   Ps.   Arist.   de  mirab.   auscult.   95;   Ov.    met.   XIV,    134  f.

(2)  The  older  Roman  poets  and  annalists  who  mentioned  a  Cimmerian
Sibyl  did  not  attempt  to  distinguish  this  from  the  Cumean.  Cp.  Lact.  inst.  I,  6,
9  (dependent  on  Varro);  Aur.  Vict.  orig.    10;  Bou -he-Leclercq ,  Hist,  de  la  divin.

II,  188.  Hild.  Sibyllae  D.-S.  IV,  1292.  Varro  because  of  the  chronological  diffi-
culty in    making   Aeneas   associate   with    the    Sibyl,    who   was    reported    to   have

bargained  with  King  Tarquin,  suppioaed  theit  there  were  two  Sibyls,  -  a  view
which  must  be  adjudged  correct  so  far  as  -t  stands  for  two  periods  of  prophecy.
Serv.  Aen.  VI.  36,  72.

(3)  Gabrici,  Cuma  in  Boll,  d'arte  IV  (1910)  114;  Buchholz,  Roscher  IV,
799;  Worner,  Die  Sage  von  der  Wanderung  des  Aeneas  21.

(4)  Haight,  'Am.  Jour.  Phil.  XXXIX  (1918)  342  f . ;  Schultess.  Die  SibyU
linischen  Bticher  in  Rom.  8  f. ;  Blass,  Die  sibyllinischen-orakel  in  Kautzsch,
Die  Apok,ryphen   und  Pseudepigraphen  des  alien   Testaments  II,    178.

(5)  Buchholz,  Roscher  IV,  794.  Serv.  Aen.  VI,  321  :  Sibyllam  Apollo  pio
amore  dilexit  et  ei  obtulit  ix>scendi  quod  uellet  aurbitrium.  Ilia  hausit  harenam
manibus  et  tam  longam  uitam  proposuit.  Cui  Apollo  respondit  id  posse  fieri,  si
Erythraeam,  in  qua  habitabat,  insulam  relinqueret  et  earn  numquam  uidcret.
Profecta  igitur  Cumas  tenuit  ct  illic  defecta  corporis  uiribus  uitam  in  sola  uoco

-  56  -


On  the  one  hand  this  cult  tended  to  remain  substantiaJly  the
same  as  that  at  Erythrae.  The  seeress  here  bore  the  S2ime  name
as  the  Oriental  Sibyls,  Herophile,  and  Timaeus  recognized
their  identity  (1).  But  on  the  other  hand  there  was  a  noticeable
movement  toward  making  her  independent  of  outside  influen-
ces, and  a  strong  local  tradition  had  its  exponents  in  men  like
the  historian  Hyperochus.  These  gave  her  a  distinct  name  and
sought  to  attach  her  strongly  to  their  own  locality  (2).  This
Sibyl,  however,  did  not  attain  a  commanding  reputation  for
some  time,  and  is  not  mentioned  in  extemt  literature  before
Timaeus  (3).

She  gave  her  prophecies  in  a  cavern,  which  has  been  iden-
tified with  a  grotto  in  the  south  eeistern  side  of  the  Acropolis
and  hence  adjacent  to  the  temple  on  the  rock  above.  This
grotto  now  exibits  the  form  of  a  tunnel  ascending  by  a  series
of  steps  for  a  considerable  distance,  and  is  connected  with  a
number  of  passages  that  honeycomb  the  cliff.  This  is  doubtless
the  original  of  the  huge  cavern  hollowed  out  of  the  Euboean
rock  with  its  hundred  mouths,  which  Vergil  had  in  mind  in  the
composition  of  the  Aeneid,  and  to  which  Statius  alludes  as  ihe

retinuit.  Quod  cum  ciues  eius  cognouissent,  siue  inuidia,  siue  misericordia  com-
moti,  ei  epistulam  miserunt  creta  antiquo  more  signatum  ;  qua  uisa,  quia  erat  de
eius  insula,  in  mortem  soluta  est.  Unde  non  nuUi  hanc  esse  dicunt,  quae  Ro-
mana  ffcta  conscxipsit,  quod  incenso  ApoJlinis  tempio  inde  Romam  adlati  sunt
libri,  vnde  haec  fuerat.

(1)  Ps.  Arist.  de  mir.  ausc.  95:'Ev  x^  KuiJiij  xfj  Ttepl  XYjv  'IxaXJav  Seixvuxai
UQ,  d)g  loiy.e,  QixXci,[xoq  xaxayeio^  StpuXXyjg  x^g  XP'>^'^M'°^°Y°^/  ^^  uoXoxpovtcDxaxr^v
yevofxsvYjv  ixapGivov  StaiisrvaC  cpaotv,  ouoav  }iev  'EpuGpaiav,  bizo  xivcov  8^  X7]V  'IxaXCav
xaxotxouvxcovKuiaaiav,  uuoSe  xtvwv  MsXayxpaipav  xaXou|iEVYjv.Cp.  Mart.  Cap.  11,
159.

(2)  Paus.  X,  12,  8.  The  name  Herophile  belonged  earlier  still  to  the
Sibyl  of  Marpessus.  Buchholz,  Roscher  IV,  796.  The  name  Amathea  was  derived
also  from  this  source.  Gruppe,  342.  Other  names  borne  by  thei  Cumean  Sibyl  were
Demophile,  Deiphobe,  and  Taraxandra.  Verg.  Aen.  VI  36;  Lact.  Inst.  I,  6;
Scholiast  on  Plat.  Phaedrus  244B  ;  Ps,   Arist.  de  mir.  ausc.  95.  Cp.  Haight,  Am.

Jour  Phil.   XXXIX   (1918)  343;    Bouche-Leclercq,   Hist,    de  la  divin.    II.    184-186;

Buchholz,  RoscherJV.  800;  Hoffmann,  Rh.  Mus.  L  (1895)  90;  Maass.  de  Sibyl-
larum  indicibus  33.  Maass  discusses  the  combination  of  seeresses  which  went
to  make  up  the  Vergilian  Deiphobe.  Commentatio  mythograja  in  Index  scho-
larum  Gryphiswald  1886-7  part  3.  (Known  to  me  only  through  the  summary
contained  in  Bursian's  Jahresbericht  LXVI   (1891)  247).

(3)  Preller-Robert.  282;  Hild  Sibyllae  D.-S.   IV.    1292.

.  -  57  -


opaca  Sihyllae  antra  (I).  Within  the  cavern  was  the  [iavisiov,
where  the  seeress  was  constrsuned  to  submit  to  the  powerful
will  of  Apollo,  and  so  became  inspired  with  a  prophetic
frenzy  (2).

Her  responses  were  not  so  much  predictions  referring  to
the  future  as  directions  for  meeting  present  emergencies  (3).
According  to  tradition  they  were  given  in  olden  times  in  the
form  of  lots  written  upon  palm  leaves;  such  was  the  testimony
of  Varro,  whom  Vergil  probably  followed  in  his  account  of  the
oracle.  Whether  this  account  is  pure  fiction  or  whether  at  some
time  this  expedient  was  devised  in  order  to  make  the  oracles
seem  old  and  venerable  is  uncertain,  but  the  latter  alternative
is  probable.  Diels  suspects  that  Vergil  actueJly  saw  such  oracles
as  the  beisis  for  his  account  (4).  When  not  mere  stereotyped
marks,  they  were  written  regularly  in  poetical  form  and  in  the
Greek  tongue;  the  circumstance  that  the  meter  was  often  im-
perfect W21S  explained  by  the  supposition  that  the  attending
priests  who  copied  the  oracles  were  not  always  persons  of
much  education  (5).  In  historical  times  no  set  of  oracles  pur-

(1)    Verg.   Aen.  VI.   42^4:

Excisum  Euboicae  latus  ingens  rupis  in  antrum,
quo  lati   ducunt  aditus  centum,   ostia  centum,
unde  ruunt  totidem  uoces,   responsa  Sibyl  lae.
Stat.   silv.  V,  3,    172:

Sic  ad  Auernales  scopulos  et  opaca   Sibyllae
antra   rogaturae   ueniebant  undique    gentes.
Cp.   Ov.   met.   XIV.    104;   Stat.   silv.    III.   5.   IV,   97;   IV.   3.   24;   Sol.  2.  17;
Schultess,  Die  sih.  BUcher  in  Rom  7;  Cocchia.   La  geografia  nelle  metamorfoai
d'Ovidio  e  VAverno  vergiliana  in  Aiti  Nap.  XVIII  (1896-7)  part.   1  ;  No.  7.  35,   =
Saggi  philologici.  III.   16;  Hild.  D.-S.  IV.   1293.

(2)  For  references  to  the  inspiration  of  the  Sibyl  in  general  see  Rohde,
Psyche  II  .  68  .

(3)  Plin.  not.  XI,  105;  Hoffmann.  Die  tarquinischen  Sibyllen-Biicher
in  Rh.  Mus.  L  (1895)  92.

(4)  Serv.  Aen.  Ill,  444.  Cp.  also  ihid.  VI,  74,  Diels,  Sibyllinische
Blatter   56;    Buchholz,    Roscher    IV,    800.

(5)  Pseudo-Justin  (Apollinaris)  Cohort,  ad  Graecos  XXXVII :  l^aaxov  xat
xoDzo  oxt  ol  e>tXa|j,pdvovx£gTougxP'>^oM'0'^€  xvjvtxauxaexxdsTiaiSsuaswsovxsgTtoXXaxoO
T-^g  xc5v  {isxpwv  dxpipstas  StTQjiapxov,  xal  xaOxyjv  IXeyov  alxiav  elvai  xf^g  svtwv
in&v  dfisxpiag,  x^g  jxiv  xP^JcfiKpSou  5t,d  x6  TisuaSoBat,  xtj^  xaxo^"^?  xal  eixt,7tvoiag  (lYj
|jL£|iV7j|j,£VYjs  xd)v  §ppYj|ji£VU)v,  xwv  51  uTToypacpsoov  bl  duaiSsuoiav  x-^g  xwv  [xizptDV  6t.y.pi-
PsCas  sxTiSTixooxdxtov.  Hoffmann.  Rh.  Mus.  (1895)  109;  Buchholz.  Roscher  IV  804.

-58-


porting  to  come  from  the  local  Sibyl  was  in  circulatioli.  This
seemed  to  observers  a  strange  state  of  affairs,  for  eis  Varro
affirms,  collections  of  all  the  other  Sibyls  of  renown  were  ac-
cessible (1).

When  the  oracle  became  silent  is  unknown  (2).  Its  fame
continued  in  later  times,  and  the  Sibyl's  abode  was  pointed
out  to  visitors  as  the  chief  object  of  interest  in  the  declining
town.  In  the  temple  of  Apollo  a  vessel  of  bronze  was  exibited,
or  according  to  another  account  a  stone  urn,  in  which  the  re-
mains of  the  Sibyl  were  supposed  to  be  preserved  (3).  Likewise
a  perverted  version  of  the  affair,  due  to  a  belief  in  her  extreme
age,  got  into  circulation  in  some  queirters,  and  it  was  fancied
that  she  herself  was  confined  in  a  jai.  Thus  one  of  the  cheirac-
ters  of  Petronius  declared  that  he  had  himself  seen  her  in  this
condition  longing  to  die  (4).

In  the  fourth  century  A.  D.,  when  the  so-called  Sibylline
oracles  had  been  accepted  by  the  church,  and  were  therefore
of  interest  to  all  classes,  a  Christian  writer,  who  has  been  iden-
tified as  Apollinarius  of  Laodicea,  composed  a  description  of
the  seat  of  the  oracle,  based  ostensibly  on  actual  observation.
Though  it  had  long  ceased  its  activity,  local  guides  described
with  pride  its  ancient  glories  £is  they  had  received  the  account


(1)  Lact.  inst.  I,  6,  13:  Harum  omnium  Sibylleurum  carmina  et  feruntur  et
habentur  praeterquam  Cymaeae.  Paus.  X,  12,  8:  xtjv  5^  iui  xauxig  XP''T'P'°'^S
xoLxa.  xaOxa  siTiouaav  sx  Kuiiyjg  t-^s  ev  'OTzixotg  elvat,  xaXetaGat,  bk  auxYjv  Ayj|id)
ouviypacj^ev  'XTzipoxoq,  avYjp  Ku\xot.lo<;.  xP'>Qondv  bi  oi  KujiaCot  x'^?  ynv(Xi.'i(.6(^  xa6x7jc
ic,  ouSsva  slxov  smSsC^aaGai,  Xt0ou  5^  u5piav  ev  'AuoXXcovog  Ispw  Ssixvuouatv
ou    [xsydXYjV,  zfiQ   So^uXXtjs    svxaGGa  xeCaOai  cpcxjasvot,  Xix  daxtx.    Schwegler,  Rom.

Gesch,    I,    802.

(2)  It  seems  to  have  ceased  operations  before  the  time  of  Pausanias
in   the  second   century   A.   D.   Paus.    loc.    cit. ;  Buchholz,    Roscher    IV,    800.

(3)  Pseudo-Justin,   loc.  cit.

(4)  Petron.  48:  Nam  Sibyllam  quidem  ego  ipse  oculis  meis  uidi  in
ampulla  pendens,  et  cum  illi  pueri  dicerent,  ^'.j3'jXXa, xt  GsXei^, respondebat  ilia:
duoGavsrv    GsXa).      Cp.  Ampel,  Liber  memorialis  VIII,   16;  Fraser,  Paus,  V.  292;

Bouche-Leclercq ,  Hist,  de  la  Dio.  184  ;  Blass,  Die  sibyl,  orakel  in  Kautzsch,
Die  Apok  ti.  Pseudepigr,  d.  alt.  Test.  II,  178.  Another  tradition  represented
the  Sibyl's  grave  as  in  Sicily.  Sol.  2,  17;  5,  7.  Cp.  Sciava,  La  morte  deUa
Sibilla  in   Atene  e  Roma  XX   (1917)   38   f.

.  59  -


from  their  fathers  (1).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  grotto  of  the
Sibyl  was  no  longer  pointed  out  as  her  abode,  but  instead  she
was  assigned  to  a  paotXixT]  {lefionrj,  probably  the  temple  of
Apollo  himself  or  some  adjunct  to  it  (2).  This  illustrates  a
tendency  of  the  prophetess  to  become  more  and  more  closely
associated  with  Apollo.  The  original  exponent  of  prophecy  in
this  locality  had  been  free  from  his  influence.  But  with  the
advent  of  the  Apollo  cult  the  Sibyl  moved  to  the  cave  at  the
foot  of  the  rock  upon  which  his  temple  stood;  later,  when  the
oracle  weis  closed  and  what  purported  to  be  her  remains  v^aa
preserved  in  that  sanctuary,  it  csone  about  in  the  course  of  time
that  the  same  place  wsis  considered  to  be  the  seat  of  her  oracle.
Details  of  the  building  and  furniture  such  as  the  bath  eind
official  chair  were  exibited  to  Apollinarius  as  serving  the  needs
of  the  prophetess  (3).

The  last  description  of  the  cave  wais  made  by  Agathigis,
the  Byzantine  historian,  in  the  sixth  century,  while  he  was
describing  the  campaign  of  Ncirses  against  the  Goths  in  south
Italy.  Cumae  by  means  of  its  citadel  held  out  agadnst  the  ar-
mies of  Justiniem,  and  in  the  yesu-  552  Narses  tried  to  effect  an
entrance  by  digging  from  the  Sibyl's  grotto  to  the  rock  above,
an  undertaking  which  failed  to  effect  its  purpose  (4).

It  is  not  impossible  that  the  female  head  which  appears
regulzirly  upon  the  money  of  Cumae  was  intended  to  represent
the  Sibyl.  It  was  not  the  Siren  Parthenope,  who  had  no  cult
here    but  it  may  have  been  a  likeness  of  a  Tyche  divinity  (5).


(1)  Maass,  De  Sihyllarum  indicihus  11,  saw  in  this  account  a  contradic-
tion of  the  statements  of  Varro  and  Pausanias  about  the  lack  of  oracles  in
circulation  from  the  Cumean  Sibyl.  But  as  pointed  out  by  Diels,  Sibyl.  Bldt.
57,  the  informants  of  Pseudo-Justin  were  only  rei>eating  tradition  delivered
by  their  ancestors  rather  than  making  reference  to  their  own  times.  A
commentary  on  the  passage  of  Pseudo-Justin  is  given  by  A.  Chiapi>elli,
L'antro  della  Sibilla  a  Cuma  in  Atti  della  r.  accad.  di  scienze  morali  e  polit.
di  Napoli.  XXXI  (1900)  557.  Cp.  Hild.  D.  S.  IV.   1293.

(2)  Pseudo- Justin,   loc.   cit.  Cp.   Buchholz,   Roscher   IV.  801.

(3)  Pseudo-Justin,   loc.  cit.

(4)  Agathias,  Historiae  I,  10;  Cocchia.  Atti  Nap.  XVIII  (1896)  part
1,  No.  7,  37.

(5)  Heaxl,  Hist.  num.  37  ;  Pode,  Cat.  Gr.  Coins  in  Brit.  Mus.  87:  Babelon,
Treats  des  monnaies  grecques  et  romaines,  part.  2,   I,    1438.   See  p.    73.

-60.


h


In  connection  with  the  worship  of  Apollo  must  be  men-
tioned the  association  of  Apollinares  about  whom  little  is
known.  Occuring  at  several  other  Italian  towns,  they  £u:e  men-
tioned most  frequently  in  inscriptions  from  Mutina,  where  ap-
parently they  took  the  place  of  the  seuiri  Augustales.  Whether
they  were  connected  at  C'limae  with  the  worship  of  the  Emper-
ors remains  undetermined,  a^  the  only  evidence  for  their
presence  is  a  brief  dedication  by  C.  Pomponius  Zoticus,  which
was  inscribed  upon  a  vase  (1).

Gruppe  suggests  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  a  cult
of  the  Muses,  which,  if  it  really  -was  present,  wets  probably
closely  Eissociated  with  the  worship  of  Apollo;  the  evidence  at
heuid,  however,  does  not  permit  the  fact  to  be  definitely  estab-
lished (2).  Just  as  the  Thespiadai,  the  sons  of  Hercules  and  of
the  daughters  of  ThespiuB,  were  reported  to  have  established
at  Croton  the  cult  of  the  Muses,  so  the  circumstance  that  they
are  said  to  have  come  also  to  Cumae  lends  weight  to  the  suppo-
sition that  they  introduced  the  same  cult  here  (3).  Furthermore,
since  the  Cumeans  were  apparently  hostile  to  the  worship  of
the  Sirens  and  changed  to  Neapolis  the  name  of  the  town  Par-
thenope,  which  they  had  conquered,  it  is  natural  to  infer  that
they  were  devoted  to  the  rivals  of  these  creatures  (4).

ARTEMIS

A  cult  of  Artemis  is  rendered  practically  certain  by  the
fact  that  she  was  a  leading  divinity  of  Euboea  smd  of  the  cities
Chalcis  and  Eretria  whose  ideas  in  religion  affected  so  \aige\y
the   early   colony   at   Cumae.    Likewise    in   the   latter's   colony

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3684  =  V,  2143:  C.  Pomponius  Zoticus  collegio  Apolli-
nario  d.   d.   A  list  of  the  appearances  of  this   collegium   is   found   in  Ruggiero

I,  514,  Cp.   Aust.  'Apollinares  P.   -  W.   I,  2842;  Walzing,   iltude  historique  sur
les   corporations  professionelles   chez   les   Romains    I,    38.

(2)  Gruppe.  Berl  Phil.  Wochens.  XXI  (1911)  1000-1001.

(3)  Diod.  V,  15.  For  the  cult  at  Croton  see  lamblichus,  de  uita  Pytha-
gorica  45,  50,  264.  According  to  Geffcken,  Timaios'  Geographic  des  West-
ens   81,   the   assignment  of  a  cult  of  the   Muses   to  Croton   may   be  erroneous.

(4)  For   the   rivalry   between   Muses   and   Sirens   see   Bie,    Musen,   Roscher

II,  3242;    De   Petra,  Le  5irene   del   mar   iirreno    in    Atti  Nap.    XXV    (1908)    12.
There  is   no   reason   for   th'nking   w'th    Eckhel,    Doctrina    numorum    veterunx    I,

111,  that  the  head  of  the  nymph  on    codns    of   Cumae     represents     Parthenope.

-  61   -


Neapolis  Artemis  wais  used  £i8  a  device  upon  a  series  of  bronze
coins  (I).  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  these  do  not
belong  to  the  earliest  period  of  the  city  and  do  not  necess2u:ily
show  Cumean  influence.  At  this  point  the  references  to  Trivia
in  the  Aeneid  come  to  mind  and  suggest  themselves  as  clear
evidence  for  the  presence  of  an  Artemis  cult.  So  Roscher,  re-
plying to  the  declaration  of  Boll  that  there  is  a  total  lack  of
evidence  for  this  goddess,  cited  these  passages  (2).  The  Sibyl
is  called  by  the  poet  the  priestess  of  Apollo  and  Trivia,  a  term
which  forms  one  of  the  well  known  names  for  Diana  and  it  is
not  improbable  that  this  goddess  received  honors  in  the  temple
of  her  brother  as  at  Pompeii  (3).  Hence  the  poet  without  too
great  a  stress  on  literal  accuracy  might  well  speak  of  the  Sibyl
as  devoted  to  the  service  of  both  divinities.  But  it  is  more  likely
that  the  goddess  mentioned  here  should  be  identified  with  the
primitive  deity  of  Lake  Avernus  alluded  to  above,  whom  the
Sibyl  served  in  ancient  times.  As  a  goddess  of  the  dead  she  was
identified  by  the  Greeks  with  Persephone  and  had  likewise  a
great  similarity  to  Trivia-Hecate-Diana  for  whom  she  could  be
substituted  without  undue  effort  (4).  The  substitution  was  the
more  natural  in  this  case,  because  in  myth  amd  elsewhere  in
worship,  Artemis  W2is  Eissociated  with  her  brother.  Vergil  was
also  influenced  by  the  worship  of  the  two  deities  at  Rome  and
his  desire  appropriately  to  allude  to  the  construction  of  their
temple  by  Augustus  a  little  farther  along  in  the  poem,  where
Servius  accuses  him  of  confounding  history  (5).  That  we  axe
not  dealing  with  a  regular  Artemis  cult  so  much  as  with  that
of  the  primitive  chthonic  goddess  appears  in  the  words  of  Ae-
neas directed  to  the  Sibyl  (6),  that  Hecate  had  placed  her  with

(1)  Von  Duhn,  Der  Dioskureniempel  in  Neapel  14,  See  p.  202.

(2)  F.    Boll.      Marica    in      'Archiv     fur     Religionswiss.    XIII      (1910)      572;
Roscher,    Der  Artemiskult   von    Cumae    in   Philologus   XXV    (1912)   308.

(3)  Aen.  VI  35:  Phoebi  Triuiaeque  sacerdos.  See  p.  229.

(4)  For    Vergil's    relation    to    the    blending    of    Hecate    and    Artemis    see
Steuding,   Hekate   Roscher    I,    1896;    cp.    1895.

(5)  Verg.  Aen.  VI  69:

Turn    Phoebo    et    Triuiae    solido    de    marmore    templum
institiiam  festosque  dies  de  nomine  Phoebi.
Cp.    the  comment  of   Servius   on   these   lines.

(6)  Verg.  ^en.  VI  118.

-62-


(


good  reason  in  charge  of  the  groves  of  Avemus.  Here  Hecate
is  a  convenient  term  to  adopt  for  this  ancient  deity,  who  is
invoked  at  the  beginning  of  the  descent  (I).  She  is  not  essen-
tiaJly  different  from  the  Proserpina  mentioned  a  few  Hnes  later,
though  the  poet  with  his  characteristic  fullness  of  detail  and
tendency  toward  repetition  has  sissigned  to  each  a  separate
sacrifice.  In  regard  to  the  mention  of  the  grove  of  Trivia  at  the
beginning  of  the  book,  he  seems  to  have  joined  arbitrarily  the
temple  on  the  Acropolis  and  the  grove  at  Avernus,  transferring
the  chthonic  deity  for  the  moment  to  the  woods  which  perhaps
surrounded  Apollo's  temple  (2).

The  poetical  and  obviously  inexact  account  of  Aeneas 's  ad-
ventures does  not  prove  the  existence  of  a  cult  of  Artemis  here ;
at  the  same  time  the  poet  would  have  hesitated  to  assume  such
a  form  of  religion,  if  it  were  aJtogether  unknown.  Its  presence
is  indeed  directly  affirmed  in  a  marginal  note  discovered  by
Boll  in  meinuscripts  of  Augustine's  De  Ciuitate  Dei  (3).  The
substance  of  the  comment  is  the  arrival  at  Minturnae  of  a  cult
statue  of  Diana  stolen  from  Cumae,  which  the  people  retained
and  called  Msu-ica  (4).  This  somewhat  fsmciful  legend  doubt-
less indicates  that  the  goddess  Marica  was  an  imported  deity
related  to  Diana,  and  thus  demonstrates  that  at  Cumae  there
really  existed  a  cult  statue  and  temple  of  the  latter,  in  short  a
complete  apparatus  for  her  worship.  It  only  remains  to  consider
whether  the  scholion  is  worthy  of  credence,  zmd  on  this  point
the  answer  has  been  affirmative,  as  there  is  no  reason  fcr
doubting  it  comes  from  an  ancient  source  (5).

(1)  Verg.  'Aen.  VI,  247:  Voce  uocans  Hecaten  caeloque  Ereboque
polentem.  Serv.  Aen.  IV,  511:  Quidam  Hekaten  dictam  esse  tradunt  quod
eadem  et    Diana   sit   et    Proserpina.     Heckenbach,     He\ate    P.-W.     VII,     2773.

(2)  The  topographical  indications  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  book
are  confused  and  the  movements  of  Aenezis  impossible  in  the  strict  order
of  the  text.  Cp.  Cocchia,  L'Avemo  virgiliano  in  Atii  Nap.  XVIII  (1896-7)
par^  1,  No.  7,  35  f. ;  Saggi  Filologici  III,  251   f.

(3)  Maxiccim  deam  Dianam  dicit.  Minturnenses  enim  Cumanis  subrep-
tum  sigillum  Dianae  sibique  datum,  quoniam  mari  uenerat,  Maricam  uoca-
uerxmt  Dianam,  sicut  etiam  eadem  uocitatur  Fasdlina  eo  quod  intra  ligni
fascem  sit  occultata,  Boll.  Marica  in  Archiv.  fur  Religionsw.  XIII  (1910)
567-577.

(4)  This  account  should  be  comj>ared  with  that  of  Orestes  and  the
Diana  image  at  Lake  Nemi.  Cp.   R.   Peter,   Marica  Roscher   II,   2373.

(5)  Traube  thought  that  it  was  derived  from  Festus ;  Wissowa,  from
Ift  Vergilian  commentary.  Boll,  Archiv.  j.  Religionsw.  XIII  (1910)  p.  576.

-63  -


DEMETER

Another  ancient  cult  of  great  importance  was  that  of  De-
meter,  one  of  the  so  called  dii  patrii,  who  came  to  Italy  with
the  Chalcidians.  One  of  the  traditions  of  the  settlement  affirm-
ed that  the  colonists  had  been  miraculously  guided  at  night
by  the  sound  of  clashing  bronze  such  as  was  hezurd  in  the  ritual
of  this  goddess  (1).  She  was  accordingly  worshipped  in  this
district  by  the  celebration  of  mysteries,  but  as  a  mystery  deity
w£is  less  importsint  than  Dionysus.  Probably  the  two  cults  flour-
ished side  by  side  on  intimate  terms  with  each  other  and  were
maintained  in  large  part  by  the  same  body  of  interested  wor-
shippers (2).  From  its  seat  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Cumean  rock
the  worship  was  pleuited  at  Neapolis,  and  extended  into  the
interior  of  the  peninsula  as  well  as  north  and  south  along  the
coast.  The  cult  seems  to  have  had  a  close  relation  with  that  of
Apollo,  for  the  specific  name  of  his  seeress  W2is  Demophile  and
the  history  of  both  the  oracles  and  the  Demeter  worship,  when
transplanted  to  Rome,  shows  an  intimate  association  between
them  (3) .  Cora-Proserpina,  who  must  have  had  a  place  in  the
mysteries,  was  located  more  peirticularly  around  Lake  Avemus.

The  goddess  presumably  bore  here  as  at  Neapolis  the  title
of  Thesmophoros.  Her  priesthood,  carried  on  by  women,  -was
considered  at  least  in  the  early  times  as  the  highest  honor  that
could  be  attained.  This  estimation  is  proved  both  by  the  respect
in  which  the  office  was  held  elsewhere  in  Campania  and  by  a
story  related  by  Plutarch.  Xenocrite,  a  concubine  of  the  tyreoit
Aristodemus,  was  Icirgely  instrumental  in  arousing  the  members
of  the  aristocracy  to  effect  his  overthrow.  As  a  result,  sifter  the
city  came  into  their  power,  they  offered  her  presents  and  honors

(1)  Veil.  I,  4,  I  :  Huius  classtis  cursum  esse  directum  alii  columbae
antecedentis  uolatu  ferunt,  alii  nocturno  aeris  sono  qualis  Cerealibus  sacris
<;ieri  solet.

Stat.  silv.  IV.  8.  50.

Tuque,  Actaea  Ceres,  cursu  cui  semper  anhelo
uotiuam   taciti   quassamus   lampada    mystae.
(2)  F.    Lenormant,    Ceres    D.    S.    I,    1032;    Comi>aretti,    Iscrizione    arcaica
<:umana  in  Ausonia  I   (1906)   18.

(3)  Diels.  Sibyllinische  Blatter  53;  Soli,  Demo  Roscher  I,  986;  Jessen.
Demo  P.-W.  IV,  2862;  Maas«,  Mythische  Karznamen  in  Hermes  XXIII  (1888)
614;   Suidas,   Ayjjjki).

64  -


of  many  kinds,  but  she  rejected  all  except  the  privilege  of  serv-
ing Demeter  2is  priestess  (1).

The  site  of  the  temple  was  probably  discovered  during  the
course  of  excavation  begun  in  1852  among  the  remains  of  the
so  -  called  Tempio  dei  Giganti,  where  a  temple  of  Jupiter  has
sometimes  been  located  (2).  It  thus  stood  in  the  vsJley  east  of
the  Acropolis  and  outside  the  walls,  corresponding  to  the  prin-
ciple enunciated  by  Vit-uvius  for  the  location  of  shrines  of  this
cult  (3).  Among  the  remains  appeared  bits  of  marble,  which
contained  fragments  of  inscriptions  mentioning  the  Luccei,  a
family  named  elsewhere  on  account  of  a  restoration  of  Deme-
ter*s  temple.  The  most  complete  reference  to  their  work  states
that  Cn.  Lucceius  pater  and  Cn.  Lucceius  filius,  while  filling  the
office  of  praetor,  restored  the  worship  of  Demeter  auid  that  the
two  meu-ried  daughters  of  the  elder  Lucceius,  Polla  and  Ter-
tulla,  replaced  the  building  along  with  its  portico  and  other
appurtenances.  In  other  words  the  magistrates  used  their  offi-
cial position  formeJly  to  renew  the  cult  aiter  the  women  had
supplied  the  material  assistsuice  (4).  A  fragment,  which  seems
to  allude  to  the  construction  of  a  fountain  under  the  same  cir-
cumstances, probably  has  reference  to  this  shrine,  and  four
others  make  mention  of  benefactions  on  the  pait  of  Polla  and
Tertulla  (5).  Although  the  first  of  these  inscriptions  is  reported
to  have  been  found  at  Puteoli  eoid  the  origin  of  the  second  has

(1)  Plut.  Mulierum  virtutes  262  D:  Ti|ic5v  8i  xai  8cops(3v  jisYocXwv  x^
Esvoxpixij  7ipoT8ivo}i4v(i)v  Sotottoa  uotaag  Iv  TSxT^oaxo,  0otc|>at  xd  offifia  xoQ  *Apioxo-
tiinoi).  xat  xoux'  oov  l8oaav  aOx^  xal  AT^fiYjxpo^  t^pstav  aOxYjv  sEXovxo,  oOx  ^xxov
oc(5|i£voi  T-^  9sq)  xsxap(.a|idvY)v  7)  up^TCOuaav  ^xsiviu  xiiiyjv  lasoGai.

(2)  Comparetti.    Ausonia    I    (1906)    18;    Beloch,     165-166;    Gabrici,    Cuma
in  Mon.   ant.   XXII   (1913)    17.

(3)  The  excavations  are  discussed  in  Bull.  Nap.  n,  s.  I  (1853)  105  etc.
Cp.   Vitruv.   I.   7.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3685  =  D.  4040  =  V..  1034:  Cn.  Cn.  Luccei...  pate]r  et  filium
pr(aetore8)  sacra  Deme[tro8  res]tituerunt.  Lucceia  Cn.  f.  Polla  Qui....  [et
Luc]ceia  Cn.  i.  Tertulla  P'a  Galli  aedem  Demetros  et  quae  circa  [earn  aedem
sujnt  et  porticus  p.   s.   restituerunt.

Gervasio,  Intomo  alia  iscrizione  puteolana  de  Luccei  in  Memorie  della
r.  Accad.  ercol.  VII  (1851)  233-265.  Incorrectly  attributed  to  Puteoli  by  Pe-
stalozza  e   Chiesa,   Ruggiero   II,    209.    Cp.    Dubois,   Pouzzoles   antique    134  .

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3686,  Cp.  Gervasio.  op.  cit.  237;  C.  /.  L.  X,  3687,
3688,  3689,  3690.

-65


not  been  traced,  yet  all  appear  to  belong  to  Cumae,  where
individuals  by  the  name  of  Cn.  Lucceius  are  known  from  other
sources  to  have  held  the  office  of  praetor,  a  magistracy  well
attested  in  this  town  (1).  One  of  this  name  is  mentioned  in  an
inscription,  which  probably  belongs  to  the  yeai  7  A.  D. ;  this
establishes  the  approximate  time  of  the  restoration  of  Demeter's
sanctuary  (2).

CASTOR  AND  POLLUX

To  the  same  series  of  ancient  cults  represented  by  Apollo
and  Demeter  belongs  that  of  the  Dioscuri,  who  were  doubtless
honored  here  to  the  same  degree  as  in  the  colony  of  Neapo-
lis  (3).  Though  no  direct  information  has  reached  us  of  their
functions,  yet  it  is  probable  that  they  were  regarded  p2U-ticularly
as  the  patrons  of  those  citizens  who  formed  the  cavalry  con-
tingent and  as  the  protectors  of  sailors.  At  least  the  first  phase
of  their  activity  seems  to  have  been  genergJ  in  southern  Italy
from  where  it  finally  reached  Rome,  and  the  mzu-itime  cult  of
these  deities  as  practiced  at  Rome  and  Ostia  was  probably  de-
rived from  Cumae  (4).  The  ruins  of  a  temple  on  the  western
part  of  the  Acropolis,  which  have  been  mentioned  in  connec-
tion with  Zeus,  possibly  belonged  to  the  shrine  of  Ceistor  and
Pollux;  otherwise  the  location  of  their  temple  is  wholly  un-
known (5).

HERA

Hera's  worship  is  attested  by  an  oracle  preserved  in  the
writings  of  Phlegon  of  Tralles,  which  Diels  prounced  a  genu-

(1)  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X,  3697  and  Mommsen's  annotations  here  and  to
No.  1795;  C.  /.  L.  X.  3698  (quoted  on  p.  88);  D.  4040  and  notes;  Miner-
vini.  Bull  Nap.  n.  s.   1  (1853)   106.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3697.

(3)  Stat.   si/d.   IV,  8,  52:

Et  uos,  Tyndaridae  quo*  non  horrenda  Lycurgi
Taygeta  umbrosaeque  magis  colueie  Theiapnae.

(4)  Albert,  Le  Culte  de  Castor  et  Pollux  en  Italic  57;  Vaglieri,  Casiorea,
Ruggiero  II,  132;  Furtwangler,  Dioskuren,  Roscher  I,  1163;  Bethe,  Dioskuren
P.-W.   V.    1091,    1096.

(5)  Beloch    161.

.  66  -


ine  survival  from  the  treasured  Sybilline  collection  of  the  Rom-
ans (I).  This  alludes  to  the  arrival  of  Greek  colonists  on  the
Italian  peninsula  at  Cumae  from  their  earlier  settlement  upon
the  adjacent  islands,  and  contains  the  injunction  that  the  colo-
nists shall  provide  an  image  and  a  temple  for  the  worship  of
Hera,  ((  the  august  Queen  »  (2).  Although  the  oracle  belongs
to  the  yeeir  125  B.  C.  and  has  especial  reference  to  Rome,  the
mention  of  the  Cumean  ritual  served  to  confer  upon  it  a  mark
of  authenticity.  The  cult  at  Cumae  was  manifestly  very  old,
amd  was  am  offshoot  of  the  strong  one  flourishing  in  Boeotia  and
Euboea;  there  is  a  possibility  for  its  arrival  also  from  some
locality,  such  as  Cyme,  which  gave  the  Sibyl  to  Italy  (3).  It
W21S  likewise  important  at  Rome  in  the  form  of  a  devotion  to
Juno  Regina,  where  it  was  introduced  or  at  least  strengthened
by  the  influence  of  the  Sibylline  books  coming  from  Cu-
mae (4).  Juno  Regina  at  Rome  was  closely  allied  with  Apollo,
as  is  proved  by  the  expiatory  procession  of  the  year  207  B.  C.
recorded  by  Livy,  and  it  is  probable  that  here  too  she  was  on
friendly  terms  with  him  and  perhaps  shared  somewhat  in  his
m2uitic  qualities  (5).

A  reference  to  this  aspect  of  the  goddess  has  been  seen  in
an  ancient  inscription  upon  a  bronze  disk,  the  reading  and  inter-
pretation of  which  have  caused  much  difficulty.  This  inscription,
which  is  admitted  by  neairly  all  scholars  to  be  genuine,  shows
archaic  letter  forms  and  style  of  writing  and  is  sissigned  to  the
sixth  century  B.  C.  Although  its  provenience  can  not  be  exactly
determined,  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  found  during  clemdes-
tine  excavations  in  the  Cumeem  necropolis.  The  published
readings    differ   widely   from    one    smother    in  the   significance


(1)  Diels  I  {.;  Blass,  Die  sibyUinischenorakel  in  Kautzsch,  Die  Apo-
kryphen    und    Pseudepigraphen    des    alien    Testament.    II,     178.

(2)  Phlegon,  Mirabilia  X  =  Westermann,  Paradoxographi  Graeci  135,
I.   18  =   Diels  114.  Cp.  ibid.  98.

(3)  Diels  52  note  1.

(4)  Reitzenstein,  Ined.  poet.  Gr.  jrag.  in  Index  lectionum  Rostock.
second  series  1891-2,  11,  24;  Gruppe  367  .  Maiur',  Un  disco  oracolare  cumanq
in  Ausonia  VI   (1911)  9.

(5)  Liv.  XXVII,  37.  9.

-67  -


which  they  attach  to  the  disk  (I).  According  to  the  most  plau-
sible interpretation  we  have  here  a  religious  document  deeding
with  divination,  the  sense  of  which  is,  ((  Hera  does  not  permit
the  giving  of  ciacles  in  the  morning  (?)  ))  (2)  This  then  would
be  the  response  given  at  an  oraculsu:  shrine  to  some  inquirer  to
whom  those  in  charge  for  some  reeison  did  not  wish  to  return  a
definite  answer.  If  the  interpretation  given  by  Maiuri  is  based
upon  the  correct  reading  of  the  text,  this  is  the  oldest  document
relating  to  Greek  divination,  £uid  an  early  testimony  of  prophet-
ic activity  at  Cumae  (3).  Nothing  else  is  known  about  Hera  as
a  mantic  divinity  here,  but  this  aispect  of  her  chsiracter  is  not
wholly  unknown  in  other  places,  and  in  such  a  locality  as  this,
which  wcis  essentially  an  oracular  center,  it  would  not  be  strange
if  another  deity  should  assume  the  functions  of  prophecy  in
connection  either  with  the  Apollo  cult  or  with  that  of  the  oracle
of  the  dead  at  Avernus  (4).  Maiuri  suspects  a  worship  of  Hera
at  the  latter  spot,  but  the  supposition  lacks  evidence  to  support
it  (5).  The  connection  of  Hera  with  divination  in  general  is
shown  by  the  name  Herophile  applied  to  the  Sibyl  of  Erythrae
and  sometimes  to  the  seeress  of  Cumae  (6).  In  conclusion  we
can  say  that  if  there  is  as  yet  no  certain  evidence  that  Hera
was  regarded  here  as  a  goddess  of  prophecy,  yet  such  a  suppo-
sition is  quite  free  from  improbability.

The  eurea  of  a  temple  excavated  by  Prince  Emilio  de  Sayn-
Wittgenstein  about  1859  has  been  conjectured  to  be  the  site
of  Hera's  shrine.  A  deposit  of  broken  pottery  neai  the  remains
of  a  Greek  wall  appears  to  have  been  a  favissa.  Among  the

(1)  Scxgliano.  Di  una  iscrizione  greca  arcaica  in  un  disco  eneo  in  Atti
Nap.  n.  8.  I  (1910)  103;  Oliverio  (who  contests  its  authenticity)  Un'epigrafe
arcaica?  'n  Atene  e  Roma  XIII  (1910)  148;  Haussoullier,  Disques  funerairea
grecs  in  Rev.  de  phil.  XXXIV  (1910)  134;  Comparetti,  Iscrizione  greca  ar-
caica di  un  dischetto  di  hronzo  in  Symbolae  litterariae  in  honorem  lulii  De
Petra   1;  Maiuri,   Arcana   cumana  in   Ausonia  VI   (1911)    1.

(2)  Halbherr  reads  (Maiuri,   loc.  cit.)  "HpY]  oux  &^  Yjpt  navxsueoGau

(3)  Maiuri,  Ausonia  VI   (1911)   11.

(4)  A  mantic  shrine  of  Hera  Akraia  was  located  near  Q>rinth.  Strab.
380;  Xen.  Hell.  IV.  5.  5;  Liv.  XXXII.  23;  Bouch^-Leclercq.  Hist,  de  la  divin.
II.  395;  E.  Curtius.  Peloponnesus  II.  553;  Eitrem.  Hera,  P.-W.  VIII.  372.

(5)  Maiuri.  Ausonia  VI  (1911)  10.

(6)  DieU  52;   Sittig.   Herophile,    P.-W,   VIII.    1103.

-68  -


fragments  of  pottery  found  here  was  one  assigned  by  Minervini
to  a  sacred  vase,  which  appeeurs  to  have  contained  the  mention
of  Hera's  name  (I).

HERACLES

Myths  of  Heracles,  which  probably  reached  Cumae  from
Croton  through  the  medium  of  the  Rhodian  settlers  at  Neapolis,
were  localized  in  the  district  of  the  warm  springs  adjacent  to
the  city  (2).  The  Phlegraean  Fields,  of  evident  volcanic  origin,
formed  the  scene  of  his  combat  with  the  Gieuits.  The  name
Boaulia,  current  in  connection  with  the  neighboring  village  of
Bauli,  was  associated  by  the  etymologists  with  the  sojourn  of
the  great  hero  in  these  parts  auid  the  tarrying  of  his  cattle.  Near
here  too  he  received  credit  for  the  construction  of  a  dean  in  the
form  of  the  neu'row  strip  of  land  separating  Lake  Lucrinus  and
Lake  Avernus  from  the  sea  (3).

No  actual  traces  of  worship  remain,  but  since  his  cult  at
Rome  was  promoted  by  the  Sibylline  oracles,  we  are  justified
in  concluding  that  it  was  of  some  importance  also  in  the  place
whence  these  were  derived.  Jordan  maintains  that  he  was  re-
vered particularly  under  the  aspect  of  aXs^ixazo?,  —  a  god
who  protects  his  devotees  and  wards  off  evil  (4).  Unquestion-,
ably  this  was  a  center  of  Heracles  influence  (5)  De  lorio
asserts  that  most  of  the  writers  preceding  him  claimed  that  a
Hercules   temple  had  stood  at   Bacoli,    and   Meizzella   affirmed

(1)  XTiQ  ''Hpyjfs  tspd^  £|i{.  Minervini,  Notizia  di  alcuni  monumenti  ca-
mani  in  Bull  Nap.  n.  s.  VIII  (1860)  25;  Gabrici.  Cuma  in  Mon.  ant.  XXII.
43  .  No  account  giving  the  location  of  these  ruins  seems  to  have  been
preserved.

(2)  Gruppe,  Berl  Phil.  Wochens.  XXXI  (1911)  1005  and  Gr.  Myth.
367.  See  pp.  15,  100.

(3)  Dion.  Hal.  I,  44;  EHod.  IV,  21.  5:6  8'  ouv  'HpaxXTjg  d7i6  to5  Ttpipewg
dva^eugag,  xaxi^vxYjoev  elg  to  Ku|iaiov  nebiow.  IV,  22,  1:6  6'  'HpaxX^g  sx  xoD
$XsYpa{ou  Tiebioo  xaxsXOoov  ini  xyjv  GdXaxxav  xaxeoxeuaoev  Ipya  uspt  xyjv  'Aopvov

6vO|ia^O|Jl£VY)V    X([1,V7)V.

Cp.  Sil.  XII.  156;  Diod.  V,  71.  4-5;  Serv.  Aen.  VII.  662:  Posted  iuxta
Baias  caulam  bubus  fecit  et  earn  saepsit ;  qui  ^ocus  Boaulia  dictus  est.  nam
hodie  Bauli  uocatur.  Symm.  epist.  I,  1;  Prop.  III.  18,  4;  Geffcken.  Timaioa'
Geographic   des   Westens.

(4)  Preller-Jordan   II.  280.

(5)  Cesano,    Hercules,    Ruggiero    III,    684;  Preller-Jordan,    I,    18.

-  69  .


that  he  had  seen  remains  indicating  a  Doric  building.  The
latter,  however,  neglected  to  describe  clearly  its  situation,  and
his  notice  is  probably  worthless  (I).

DIONYSUS

The  famous  mysteries  celebrated  in  honor  of  Dionysus  are
referred  to  in  an  archaic  Greek  epitaph  found  neai  Cumae  and
assigned  to  the  fifth  century  B.  C.  It  proves  the  existence  of  a
special  cemetery,  where  only  initiates  could  be  interred,  and
is  by  far  the  earliest  testimony  for  such  a  burying  ground  pos-
sessed by  any  corporation  or  religious  society  (2).  Comparetti
calls  attention  to  the  probability  that  burial  here  W2is  not  a  nec-
essao-y  requiremient  of  the  worshippers  of  Dionysus,  but  was
rather  designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  humbler  folk,  who
were  not  provided  with  family  tombs  and  hence  were  exposed
to  the  deuiger  of  having  their  bodies  mingled  with  the  pro-
fane (3).  The  word  expressing  the  notion  of  initiation
t6v  pspa/)^sD{jL£Vov  recalls  the  expression  ta  pax^^soixata  used  by
Clement  of  Alexsmdria  for  the  ceremony  as  well  as  the  employ-
ment of  paTcxsoTwp  for  the  god  (4).  It  seems  to  have  all  the
force  of  p£pa7rTca{isvov  in  Christian  thought.  This  idea  of  sepa-
ration for  the  elect  and  its  consequent  indication  of  a  strong
feeling  for  ceremonial  purity  points  decisively  toward  the  pre-
sence of  Orphic  influence  among  the  devotees  of  Cumae,  —
a  force  which  was  undoubtedly  prevalent  in  the  fifth  century
B.  C.  (5).  The  worshippers  of  the  god  were  probably  united
thus  early  in  a  thiasus  for  purposes  of  worship  and  mutusJ  as-
sistance.

In  contraist  to  other  localities  in  Campeinia  Cumae  made  a
very  sparing  use  upon  pottery  of  features  connected  with  the

(1)  De  lorio,  Guida  di  PozzuoU,  144:  Mazzella,  Antichith  di  Poz-
zuolo,    140.

(2)  First  published  by  Sogliano  in  N.  5.  1905,  377;  later  with  improved
reading  amd  interpretation  (ou  6£|jli,i;  evxouGa  xetoBai  e{  ^r\  xov  pspaxxsupisvov)
by  Comparetti,  Auaonia  I  (1906)   13  f . ;  Haussoullier,  Ret),   de  phil  XXX  (1906)

141  ;    Gabiyici.    Mon.    ant.    XXI,    574.    Cp.    Rev.    de    Vhist    des    religions    LIII
(1906)  424.

(3)  Comparetti.  Ausonia   I    (1906)    17.

(4)  Clem.  Al.  Cohortatio  ad  gentes  XII  =  Migne,  Patrol  gr.  VIII  241,
9;   C.  /.  G.   38;   Anthologia  Palatina   IX,    524,   3.

(5)  Comparetti,  Auaonia  I  (1906)  19.  Cp.  the  Orphic  tablets  of  Sybaxi*
and  Petelia  belonging  to  a  later  epoch.

-  70  -


i


myths  or  cult  of  Dionysus,  but  instead  preferred  subjects
connected  directly  with  the  tomb.  Thus  Cumae  is  the  only  city
where  heroa  form  the  subject  of  vase  paintings.  The  examiples
of  the  Dionysiac  myths  which  3ie  occasionally  found  at  a  com-
paratively late  period  are  due  to  the  influence  of  Paestum  (1).
The  cult  is  mentioned  in  one  inscription  which  refers  to
a  priest  of  Liber  (2).  A  second  inscription,  once  cited  to
prove  the  presence  of  this  god  has  been  adjudged  spurious  by
Mommsen  and  Kaibel  (3j.  The  possible  worship  of  Dionysus
by  one  of  the  phratries  has  already  been  noted.

DEITIES  OF  MINOR  IMPORTANCE  IN  THIS  LOCALITY.

Under  this  heading  aie  collected  severed  divinities,  who
in  some  cases  may  have  had  considerable  importance  in  the
community  but  who  have  left  us  few  traces  of  their  influence.
To  this  cleiss  belongs  Athena,  whose  presence  is  attested  only
by  her  appearemce  upon  coins  of  the  fifth  century  B.  C,  upon
the  reverse  of  which  is  found  the  likeness  ot  a  crab  and  a
mussel  (4).  When  the  legend  appears  in  connection  with
Athena,  it  should  be  considered  rather  as  the  mere  nsune  of
the  town  them  as  a  reference  to  her  as  its  tutelciry  divinity  (5).

No  traces  of  Aphrodite  worship  have  survived  from  Cu-
mae itself.  Reitzenstein,  however,  calls  attention  to  the  possi-
bility of  a  cult  of  this  goddess  under  the  form  Apostrophia
or  one  who  averts  destructive  peission.  He  thinks  that  the  well
known  Boeotian  cult  centering  at  Thebes  was  introduced  into
Italy  at  this  point,  whence  the  goddess  passed  to  Rome  through
Sibylline   influence   under  the   title  of   Venus   Verticordia   (6).

(1)  Patroni,  La  ceramica  antica  nelV Italia  meridionale  in  Atti  Nap.
XIX  (1897-8)  85.

(2)  C.  /.   L.  X,  3705 Verrius  M.    f ontanus  Liberi  sacerdos.

(3)  The  genuine  inscription  with  this  reading  belongs  to  Rome,  /.  G.
XIV   975.

(4)  Examples  of  this  money  in  A.  Sambon  pp.  165-170;  Garrucci
PI.  LXXXIII;  Head  36.  Cp.  Dressel.  Beschr.  d.  ant.  Miinzen  p.  93;  Poole.  Cat.
Gr.   Coins,   Italy,   86.

(5)  Weber,  On  Some  Unpublished  or  Rare  Greek  Coins  in  Nam.
Chron.  XVI  (1896)  2.

(6)  Reitzenstein,  Ined.  poet.  Gr.  frag.  11,  24,  Cp.  Farnell  II,  665;
Preller-Jordan  II.  446,  Diimmler.  'Aphrodite,  P.-W.  I,  2731;  Gruppe.  207.
367  Note   1.

-71   -


The  same  scholar  believed  in  the  presence  of  a  cult  of
Ares  derived  from  Tritaea  in  Achaia,  a  town  which  sent  set-
tlers to  Cumae  (1).  There  is  nothing  improbable  in  the
assumption  that  these  people  introduced  this  god,  yet  there
is  no  proof  of  it.  The  connection  of  Mars  with  the  Romulus
legend  is  not  necesseu*ily  due,  as  Reitzenstein  suggested,  to
Cumeeui  influences  centering  around  this  cult.  It  is  true  that
the  legend  at  Tritaea,  which  represents  Melanippus  as  the
son  of  Ares  and  a  priestess  of  Athena  offers  a  close  psurallel
to  that  concerned  with  the  birth  of  Romulus  according  to  the
most  common  version  (2).  But  this  form  of  the  myth  is  prob-
ably due  to  literary  invention,  and  the  inventor  had  many
examples  to  choose  from  where  heroes  sprang  from  the  union
of  a  god  and  a  maiden.  Mais  naturally  became  the  father  in
this  case  because  of  his  prominence  at  Rome  (3).  There  is
thus  no  evidence  for  locating  at  Cumae  a  cult  of  Ares.

It  hsis  been  assumed  with  considerable  probability,  as
stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  the  Romans  derived  their
Mercury  cult  from  this  place.  Unfortunately  no  remains  have
been  found  which  give  any  proof  of  its  existence  (4).  An
inscription  preserved  near  Baiae  at  the  piscina  mirahHis  con-
tains a  Latin  dedication  to  Mercury;  though  included  by
Mommsen  among  the  inscriptions  of  Puteoli,  it  may  equally
well  be  assigned  to  Cumae  (5).

The  worship  of  the  Nymphs  is  attested  by  one  inscription,
a  dedication  inscribed  upon  a  bronze  patera,  which  records  a
vow  made  by  one  Zoilus,  a  son  of  Agathon  (6).  The  head
of  the  nymph  on  coins,  as  stated  above,  has  been  sometimes
identified  either  as   the   Sibyl   or   as  Parthenope.    The  former

(1)  Reitzenstein  10;  Gnipe  506;  Paus.  VII,  22,  8.

(2)  Stoll.  Ares,  Roscher  I.  485  and  Melanippos   1),  Roscher  II,  2577.

(3)  Pais,  Star.  crit.  I,  289  gives  a  list  of  such  cases.  Cp.  Trieber,  Die
\Romu/ussage  in  Rh.  Mus.  XLIII  (1888)  570;  Rosenberg,  Rea  Silvia,  P.  W.
second  series  I,  342  and  Romulus  ihid.  1085,  who  thinks  of  the  myth  of
Tyro,    daughter  of    Salmoneus.

(4)  Preller -Jordan  I,  18.  Early  antiquarians  sometimes  indentificd  a
ruin  near  Lake  Avernus  as  a  temple  of  Mercury.  Loffredo,  Le  antichita  di
Pozzuolo  29.  See  p.  27.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1590.

(6)  /.  G.  XVI,  860:  ZcbiXog  'AydQmo^  Nujicpatg  sux^v.

-  72  -


supposition  is  possible  but  the  latter  has  nothing  in  its  favor.
Eckhel  cited  the  passage  of  Lycophron  about  the  reception  of
the  Siren  by  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  River  Clanius
as  Eoi  evidence  that  she  was  held  in  regard  at  Cumae  (1).
But  this  pcissage  is  a  reference  rather  to  Neapolis.  The  poet
is  seeking  to  express  his  idea  by  circumlocution  instead  of  by
direct  statement  of  fact,  and  can  not  be  depended  upon  for
accuracy.  Likewise  the  assertion  that  the  Cumeans  took  up
the  worship  of  Parthenope,  is  applicable  only  to  those  who
went  to  Neapolis  and  were  engaged  in  the  restoration  of  that
town,  taking  part  thereby  in  a  form  of  worship  which  had
hitherto  been  foreign  to  them  (2).  More  likely  the  nymph
in  question  represents  a  personification  of  the  city  viewed  as
a  Tyche  divinity  or  similar  tutelary  goddess  such  as  probably
appcEirs  on  the  money  of  Terina  (3).  The  legend  Cyme  upon
some  of  the  figures  gives  a  name  to  this  vaguely  conceived
personality,  who  would  play  somewhat  the  same  role  of  pro-
tecting  influence    which    Parthenope    meuiifested    at    Neapolis.

A  cult  of  Hephaestus  is  Eissigned  to  this  place  by  Rapp
on  extremely  meager  evidence,  which  is  confined  to  the  re-
presentation of  the  god  with  other  deities  upon  a  piece  of
sculpture  offered  to  the  protecting  divinities  of  a  Neapolitan
phratry  (4).  Since  it  is  not  very  probable  that  he  weis  recog-
nized there  as  a  phratry  god,  we  can  by  no  means  draw  the
inference  that  he  was  worshipped  in  the  mother  city.

Among  the  heroes  who  received  recognition  wats  Daeda-
lus, whose  relics  as  stated  above,  were  preserved  in  the  temple
of  Apollo.  The  legend  points  to  Cretan  influence,  which  is
uncommon  in  Italy  (5).  Other  cults  such  as  that  of  Orestes  at
Aricia  neai  Lake  Nemi  eind  that  of  Evander  at  Rome  have
sometimes  been  traced  back  to  Cumae,  but  without  real  evi-
dence (6).


(1)  These    coins    are    shown    in    A.    Sambon    152    Nos.    252    i.    Cp.    142;
Eckhel.    Doctrina   numorum   veterum    I,    111,    113;    Garucci   80;   Lye    Alex.    717.

(2)  Serv.    georg.    IV,    563,    =    Lutat.    Daphnis,    book    IV    in    Peter,    Hist.
Rom.  frag.  p.    126.

(3)  Poole,    Cat.    Brit.    Mus.    Italy   87;    Dressel,    Beschr.    d.    ant.    MUnzen
III,   89;   K.   Regling.    Terina  62;   Babelon,   monn.   grec.   et  rom.   part  2,   I,   1437.

(4)  Rapp,  Hephaisics,  Roscher  I,  2074.

(5)  Gruppe  360;  Pais.  Stor.  d.  Sic.  I,   163.  See  p.  50.

(6)  Reitzenstein.  Ined.  poet.  Gr.  frag.    10;  Preller-Jordan   I,    18;   II  341.

.  73  -


The  mussel  which  forms  a  distinctive  emblem  on  Cumean
coins  has  been  explained  by  Gabrici  as  due  to  the  influence
of  ancient  religious  idesis.  He  regcirds  it  as  connected  with
some  marine  deity  who  Wcis  venerated  especially  by  the  sea-
iaiing  people  of  this  coEist  (I).  It  is  more  naturally  explain-
ed, however,  as  an  allusion  to  an  abundant  local  product  and
is  probably  not  affected  by  religion  (2).

CULT  OF  LAKE  AVERNUS.

In  the  account  of  the  Sibyl  who  served  as  the  spokesmsui
of  Apollo  it  was  suggested  that  this  type  of  prophetess  was
not  a  novelty  introduced  by  the  Greeks,  but  rather  w£is  adapted
to  their  cult  from  the  seeress  associated  with  LsJce  Avernus.
It  now  becomes  necessary  to  examine  more  in  detail  the  reli-
gious ideas  which  gathered  around  this  spot.  The  lake,  no-
torious for  the  traditions  of  ill  omen  attached  to  it,  lies  less
thaui  a  mile  eeist  of  the  ancient  city  beyond  Monte  Grillo.  It
was  once  thought  to  be  an  entrance  to  the  infernal  regions,
and  as  such  impressed  mightily  the  imaginations  of  men,  who
ascribed  baneful  influences  of  veirious  kinds  to  its  waters  (3).
Vergil  calls  it  the  ianua  Ditis.  In  those  days  a  dense  forest
surrounded  it  and  impsurted  thereby  an  atmosphere  of  gloom
to  a  spot  which  now  seems  entirely  commonplace.  Here  Ae-
neas is  reported  to  have  sought  and  by  divine  intervention  to
have  found  his  golden  branch  (4).  Upon  the  shore  of  the
lake  welled  up  a  sacred  spring,   the  water  of  which  because

(1)  Gabrici,  Sul  valore  dei  iipi  monetali  net  problemi  storici,  etno-
grafici  e  religiosi  in  Atti  del  Congr.  intern,  di  scienze  storiche  1903,  VI,  62
and  Riv.  it.  di  num.  XIX  (1906)  319.

(2)  G.  F.  Hill.  Handbool^  of  Greek,  and  Roman  Coins  173;  G.  Mac-
donald.    Coin    Types   95;   O.    Keller,    Die   aniike    Tierwelt  II,    551.

(3)  Its  supposed  deleterious  effect  upon  birds  is  often  eisserted  by  the
ancients:  Verg.  Aen.  VI,  201;  Sil.  XII,  123;  Strab.  V,  4,  5 ;  Pin.  nat  XXXI.
21;  Val.  Fl.  IV.  493;  Claud,  rapt.  Pros.  II.  347;  Serv.  Aen.  Ill,  442;  Tzetzes
on  Lye.  704.  Its  bottomless  depth  is  mentioned  by  Lye.  704;  Diod.  IV,  22;
Pseudo-Arist.  de  mirab.  auacalt.  102;  Lucan,  II,  665;  Vib.  Seq.  Lacna  in
Riese,  Geog.  Lat.  min.  p.  153.  Cp.  Petr.  120.  The  downward  descent  is  al-
luded to  by  Verg.  .4en.  VI,  126;  Serv.  Aen.  III.  386.  VI.  237;  Ribbeck,  Trag.
Rom.  frag.    inc.  fab.   inc.   frag.   38.

(4)  Aen.  VI.  126,  185  f.  Cp.  V.  731;  VII.  91.

74  -


of  a  supposed  connection  with  the  River  Styx  was  left  untouch-
ed (I).  The  most  goicient  tradition  located  in  the  vicinity
an  oracle  of  the  dead,  a  genuine  vexooiiavTsiov,  where  responses
were  obtained  by  the  evocation  of  spirits,  a  process  described
by  Cicero.  Servius  in  his  description  of  it  adds  that  it  operated
only  after  a  death  (2).  Strabo,  who  gives  an  extended  ac-
count of  the  place,  calls  it  a  Plutonium,  while  in  the  geograph-
ical comjxjsition  circulated  under  the  name  of  Scymnus  of
Chios,  it  is  designated  as  a  Cerberium  (3).  The  latter  name
gave  rise  to  a  theory  that  this  was  the  place  where  according
to  legend  the  dog  of  Hades  was  dragged  by  Hercules  to  the
upper  world.  Ideas  of  this  kind  centering  around  the  spot  are
perhaps  responsible  for  the  appeaurance  of  a  likeness  of  the
three  headed  dog  on  a  series  of  silver  didrachmas  of  the  fifth
century  B.  C.  (4).

This  oracle  was  identified  by  the  ancients  as  the  one  at
which  Odysseus  consulted  the  shade  of  the  Theban  seer  Tir-
esias  in  order  to  obtain  helpful  information  for  his  journey.
This  was  the  view  of  Ephorus  who  located  the  Homeric  Cim-
merians in  these  peu-ts,  and  the  same  opinion  heis  also  been
advanced  in  modern  times  (5).  In  the  olden  days  according
to  that  historian  the   oracle   was   built  far   below   the   surface

(1)  Strab.  V,  4,  5  (244):laxt  dk  nriyri  xtg  auxoGt  uoxijiou  udoLXOQ  ini  z%
QaXdxxTj,  xouxoi)  5'  dnsixovzo  uctvxss  x6  zy}q  Sxuyoij  u5(op  vofifaavxs^.   Quaranta,

Alcuni   luoghi  di  Strahone  in   Mem.    della   r.   ace.    ercol.   IV,    part.   2,   90.

(2)  Cic.   Tusc.   I,  37 inde  ea,  quae  meus  amicus  Appius  vexuofiavxeCa

faciebat,   inde  in  uicinia  nostra  Auerni  lacus,

Unde    animae    excitantur    obscura    umbra  opertae    ex   ostio

Altae   Acheruntis,    salso   sangu-ne,

Imagines  mortuorum.   Diod.  IV,  21,   I.  Serv.  Aen.  VI,   107.

(3)  Strab.  V,  4,  5:  xat  xoDxo  x6  xdipiov  uXouxcbviov  xi  UTieXdfiPavov.  Scymnus
239  =  Muller,  Geog.  Grace,  min.  I,  p.  205:

ou  Ksppeptov  XI  Sstxvuxat
G7rox66viov  ixavxstov.  eXOstv  cpaat  8^
SsOpo  uapdc  KCpxT^g  iTtavdyovx*  'OSuaosa.

(4)  See  Miiller's  notes  to  the  above  passage.  A.  Sambon  164  No.  290;
Gabrici  Relazioni  artistiche  e  religiose  etc.  in  Riv.  ital.  di  num.  XIX  (1906)
321.

(5)  Hom.  Od.  XI.  14-17;  Sil.  XII.  130;  Hyg.  fab.  125;  Maximus  Ty-
riu8,  diss.  XIV.  2  (Hobein's  edition  VIII,  2);  Plin.  nat.  Ill,  61  ;  Strab.  V.  4.  5,
Berard,  Les  Phiniciens  et  VOdyssSe  II,  311,  318.  Refuted  by  Bury.  The  Ho-
meric and  the  Historic  Kimmerians  in  Klio  VI  (1906)  79.

-  75  -


of  the  earth  and  was  tended  by  a  mysterious  race  of  men  who
lived  habitually  underground  with  no  glimpse  of  the  sunlight.
He  adds  that  they  made  a  goodly  profit  from  their  oracle,  but
at  last  were  exterminated  by  a  king  whom  their  advice  had
misled.  Afterweurds  oracular  revelations  were  still  vouchsafed
but  no  longer  in  the  original  place  (1).  This  account  of  the
oracle's  prosperity  and  its  final  overthrow,  ip  its  original  form
represents  no  doubt  a  distorted  version  of  the  fact  that  the
oracle  of  the  dead,  once  so  important,  cesised  to  function
after  the  arrival  of  Apollo.  It  is  quite  improbable  as  stated
by  Svoronos  that  sacrifices  were  still  made  here  to  obtain  re-
sponses in  the  time  of  Strabo  (2).  The  oracle  continued  only
in  the  sense  that  there  was  still  a  seeress  called  the  Sibyl  to
communicate  oracular  messages,  but  this  activity  was  now
carried  on  under  the  inspiration  of  Apollo;  the  method  of
revelation  was  altered,  and  the  seat  of  prophecy  was  now  in
the  cave  of  the  Acropohs.  The  old  oracle  was  probably  sit-
uated at  the  south  side  oi  the  lake,  where  a  tunnel  still  enters
the  earth;  here  Aeneas  offered  his  sacrifices  to  obtain  admis-
sion to  the  lower  world  (3).

As  the  oracle  at  Avernus  depended  on  the  spirits  of  the
dead,  the  lake  £ind  the  surrounding  territory  were  naturally
considered  to  lie  in  the  domain  of  the  nether  pKDwers,  -  a  sen-
timent that  lingered  there  long  after  the  disappearance  of  the
oracle.  According  to  Silius  the  spot  was  religione  sacer  at  the
epoch  of  the  Punic  Wars,  and  hither  Hannibal  in  214  B.  C.
during  his  military  operations  in  Campania  led  his  troops  un-
der the  pretext  of  sacrificing  to  the  divinities  of  the  lake  (4).

(1)  Strab.  V.  4.  5.

(2)  Svoronos,  Explication  de  la  base  de  Sorrente  in  Jour,  internal,
d'arch.  num.  XVI   (1914)    190.

(3)  Cocchia,  L'Avemo  virgiliano  in  Atti  Nap.  XVIII  (1896)  part  1,
No.  7,  39  f . ;  Scherillo,  Dell' aria  di  Baia  a  tempo  dei  Romani  55-59  located  the
entrcince  of  the  lower  world  used  by  Vergil  on  the  western  side  of  the  lake
on   the   site   of  the  grotto  di   Pietro   la   Pace.

(4)  Liv.  XXIV,  12,  4:  Inde  Numidis  Hispanisque  ad  praesidium  simul
castrorum  simul  Capuae  relictis  cum  cetero  exercitu  ad  lacum  Auerni  per
specaemi  sacrificandi,  re  ipsa,  ut  temptaret  Puteolos  quodque  ibi  praesidi  erat,
descendit.  SI.  XII,   12,  2:

Tum    tristi    nemore    atque    umbris    migrantibus    horrens
et    formidatus   uolucri    letale    uomebat
suffuso   uirus   caelo   Stygiaque   per   urbes
relig-one    sacer    sacrum    retinebat    honorem.

-  76  -


This  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of  the  original  notion  accord-
ing to  which  the  divinities  localized  here  were  vaguely  con-
ceived and  not  reduced  to  definite  numbers  nor  supplied  with
definite  names.  The  Greeks  finding  this  condition  existent  gen-
erally assigned  the  place  to  Persephone  (1).  Yet  such  a
goddess  obviously  did  not  become  a  concrete  personality  and
other  identifications  were  suggested  from  time  to  time  for  the
reigning  power,  although  a  feminine  deity  wets  regularly
thought  of,  She  is  called  sometimes  Persephone  or  Cora,  at
other  times  Hecate  or  Juno  Avema  (2).  Vergil,  who  seems  to
have  confused  the  oracle  in  the  cave  of  the  Acropolis  with  the
one  at  Avernus,  apparently  has  reference  to  the  forests  about
the  lake  when  he  spyeaks  of  the  groves  of  Trivia  (3).  Ruins  on
the  eastern  side  of  the  lake  were  commonly  spoken  of  as  the
remains  of  a  temple  of  Apollo.  The  antiquary  Paoli,  discern-
ing the  error  of  this  assignment,  decided  that  they  were  the
remains  of  a  shrine  of  Di£ina-Hecate,  which  Vergil  had  in
mind,  but  they  have  since  been  indentified  as  a  bath.  (4).

The  vagueness  of  the  conception  attached  to  the  divinity
of  the  lake  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  still  other  names  appear.
When  M.  Agrippa  was  endeavoring  to  create  a  harbor  at
Cumae,  he  materially  changed  the  original  character  of  the
lake  and  its  adjoining  shores  by  cutting  down  the  forests,  en-
larging the  channel  that  connected  this  body  of  water  with
Lake  Lucrinus,  and  making  other  improvements.  While  such
an  enterprise  was  no  longer  prevented  by  religious  scruples,
there  must  have  been  a  conservative  element  opposed  to  such
a  project  and  disposed  to  see  wonders  and  signs.  Accordingly
during  the  time  that  the  workmen  were  engaged  in  their  task,
the  image  of  a  deity  above  the  lake  was  reported  to  be  covered

(1)  Diod.  IV,  22,  1  ;  Lycoph.  698;  Lenarmant.  Ceres.  D.-S.  I.   1032

(2)  Ov.  met.  XIV,   114;  Sil.  XIII,  601.

(3)  Verg.  Aen.  VI,  13.  The  poet  connects  the  Sibyl  both  with
Cumae  and  with  Avernus.  Cocchia,  Atti  Nap.  XVIII  (1896)  part.  I,  No.  7,  36
thinks  of  a  subterranean  connect' on  between  them  so  that  both  were  the
Sibyl's  domain.  Hiilsen.  Avernus  lacus,  P.-W.  II,  2286  and  R.  Peter,  Avernus,
Roscher   I,    740   assert  that   the   Cumean   Sibyl   had  her   seat   at   Avernus.

(4)  Paoli,  Aniiquitatum  reliquiae,  Foi.  28.  Another  ruin  on  the  border
of  the  lake  has  received  without  apparent  reason  the  name  Tempio  di  Mer-
curio.  Beloch,   171  ;  Mazzella,  Antichita  di  Pozzuolo,  99.

-  77  -


with  moisture.  Dio  was  inclined  to  identify  this  goddess  with
Calypso,  although  he  admitted  that  the  matter  was  uncer-
tain (I).  But  Calypso  W£is  a  nymph  who  does  not  seem  to
have  had  a  cult  in  any  other  place,  and  the  image  mentioned
by  Dio  Csissius  was  more  likely  that  of  some  heroine,  as  be-
fitted the  chthonic  character  of  the  place  (2).  Another  account
of  the  sEune  event  mentions  a  sweating  image  but  assigns  it,
as  usually  interpreted,  to  an  eponymous  god  Avernus.  This
version  is  unique  in  that  it  deals  with  a  male  rather  than  a
female  divinity,  and  under  the  name  of  Avernus  signifies  a
localized  Pluto  or  Dis  Pater  (3).  But  probably  the  word  A-
uerni  in  this  neu-ration  is  in  the  locative  Ccise  and  so  does  not
refer  directly  to  the  image;  hence  there  is  really  no  variation
in  the  accounts  and  the  statue  remains  nameless  (4).  At  all
events  notice  was  taken  of  the  omen  by  the  Roman  pontifices,
who  ordered  adequate  reparation  to  be  made  to  the  offended
chthonic  power.

Although  the  fear  of  the  gods'  vengeance  did  not  prevent
the  desecration  of  the  sacred  place,  this  did  not  cease  to  main-
tain a  special  character  of  sanctity  down  to  the  very  end  of
Paganism.  In  the  Campanian  calendar  of  389  A.  D.  discussed
in  chapter  I  there  appears  a  midsummer  festival  celebrated
at  this  place  probably  for  the  commemoration  of  the  dead.
Its  selection  for  the  ceremonies  is  a  token  of  the  tenacity  with
which  the  notions  pertaining  originsJly  to  the  lake  still  clung
to  it  after  the  lapse  of  centuries,  and  shows  how  difficult  it  is
foi"  a  place  once  accounted  sacred  to  lose  that  characteristic.

(1)  Dio  Cass.  XLVIII.  50.  4.

(2)  Immisch,  Kalypso,  Roscher,  II,  942.

(3)  Serv.  georg.  11,  162  (based  on  Agripi>a*s  autobiography).  Deinde
terra  effosa  inter  ipsum  Lucrinum  et  Auernum,  contigit  ut  duo  lacus  misce-
rentur,  et  tanta  tempestas  orta  est,  ut  prodigii  loco  habita  sit  ac  nuntiatum
sit  simulacrum  Averni  sudasse:  propter  quod  pontifices  ibi  piacularia  sacra
fecerunt.  Cp.  Peter.  Roscher  1.  740;  Wissowa,  Avemua  deua,  P.  -  W.      II.  2285.

(4)  Cp.  however  the  appearance  of  the  term  Genio  Auemi  in  an  in-
scription of  Britain  C.  /.  L.  Vll.  165.  The  vicinity  of  Lake  Avernus  seems
to  have  been  regarded  w'th  awe  even  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Here  Christ  was
said  to  have  come  from  Hades  with  ransomed  souls  and  then  to  have  stop-
ped up  the  entrance  by  placing  a  mountain  where  later  arose  Monte  Nuovo.
Preller.  Ueber  den  Monte  Nuovo  in  Ber.  der  kgl.  siichs.  Gesell.  der  Wias.
II   (1850)    146;   Mazzella.   Antichit^   di   Pozzuolo  83.

-  78  -


The  same  locality  was  the  scene  of  the  festival  marking  the
termination  of  the  vintage,  which  took  place  at  Lake  Acherusia
every  year  on  the  Ides  of  October  ( I ) .

ROMAN  CULTS  AND  EMPEROR  WORSHIP.

The  Latinization  of  the  city  of  Cumae  made  considerable
progress  from  the  time  that  it  came  under  Roman  control  and
as  early  as  180  B.  C.  Latin  had  become  the  official  language.
In  this  process  the  ancient  religion  must  have  been  vitally
affected,  but  no  record  of  this  has  been  left.  During  the  Impe-
rial period,  after  the  Roman  colony  had  been  established,
there  W2is  naturally  a  closer  relation  between  the  religion  of
this  community  and  that  of  Rome.  For  the  pontiffs,  augurs,
and  other  municipal  priests  who  must  have  held  office  here
there  is  a  lack  of  evidence.  On  the  contrary,  considerable
traces  remain  of  that  formal  religion  of  the  Roman  state  \yhich
consisted  in  the  adoration  of  the  Emperor.  At  the  same  time,
often  in  connection  with  this  cult,  there  prevailed  the  worship
of  various  abstractions  such  as  Spes  and  Victoria,  which  were
probably  all  introduced  through  Roman  influence.  Then  too
old  Roman  deities  like  Vesta,  early  traces  of  whom  are  lacking,
were  now  honored  just  as  in  Rome.

This  condition  of  affairs  is  well  illustrated  by  the  remains
of  a  list  of  festivals  connected  with  the  worship  of  Augustus.
These  fragments,  containing  in  a  mutilated  form  references
to  most  of  the  days  originally  msirked  for  observance,  have
been  discovered  at  various  times  (2).  The  list  was  doubtless
affixed  to  the  temple  of  the  Emperor  and  was  composed,  as
appears  from  internal  evidence,  between  the  years  4  and  14
A.  D.  No  more  definite  data  Eire  at  hand  for  fixing  the  foun-


(1)  See  p.  43.

(2)  The  last  discovery  was  made  in  1882.  N,  S.  1882.  239.  Revised
text  with  Mommsen's  supplements  in  C,  I.  L.  I  ,  p.  229 ;  C.  /.  L.  X,  8375 ;
D.  108;  text  with  commentary  by  Mommsen,  Ges.  Schr.  IV,  258-270;  De
Petra,  Nuovo  frammento  del  feriale  cumano  in  Atti  Nap.  XI  (1882-83)  part  I,
33  f.  with  a  list  of  the  celebrations  43.  Cp.  Heinen,  Zur  Begriindung  des
rom.  KaiserkuUes  in  Klio  XI  (1911)  171.  Similar  is  a  fragment  from  Ameria
in  Umbria  C.  /.  L.  XI,   4346;   Bormann.   Mitt,   aus   Oestereich  XIX   (1896)  115.

-  79  -


dation  of  the  shrine  (I).  It  is  an  interesting  record  of  the
tendency  to  accord  divine  honors  to  Augustus  during  his  life
time,  a  feature  of  religious  development  that  was  prominent
in  Campzinia  and  due  in  pait  to  the  presence  of  the  Greek  el-
ement in  the  population.  If  Cumae  was  a  colony  of  the  Em-
peror, this  circumstance  would  tend  to  foster  his  cult.  Here
he  seems  not  to  have  tried  to  repress  the  movement  toward  his
deification  in  the  same  way  that  he  did  at  Rome  itself.  It  is
certain  that  the  Emperor  was  alive  when  these  festivals  were
announced;  otherwise  the  term  diuus  would  have  been  ap-
plied to  him,  when  sacrifices  to  his  divinity  were  ordered,  and
the  date  of  his  deification  (Oct.  1 7)  would  scarcely  have  psissed
unnoticed  (2).

So  far  as  it  has  been  preserved  the  list  shows  seventeen
days  during  the  year  which  were  sacred  to  Augustus.  The
ones  selected  are  fewer  in  numiber  and  somewhat  different
from  those  celebrated  at  Rome,  -  a  circumstance  which  indica-
tes that  the  municipalities  were  free  to  decide  the  details  of  the
worship,  subject  to  Imperial  approval.  Most  of  the  festivals
refer  to  important  events  in  the  career  of  Augustus  himself
and  embrace  in  the  order  of  their  occurrence  the  following
celebrations :  his  birthday  (Sept.  23),  the  assumption  of  the
toga  uirilis  (Oct.  18),  the  occasion  of  receiving  praetorian  pow-
er (Jan.  7),  the  first  consulship  (Aug.  19),  the  submission  of
Lepidus  (Sept.  3),  his  designation  as  Augustus  (Jan.  16),  the
consecration  of  the  temple  of  Mars  (May  12),  the  dedication  of
the  altar  of  Fortuna  Redux  after  his  return  from  the  East  in
19  B.  C.  (Dec.  13),  his  election  as  Pontifex  maximus  (Mairch
6)  and  the  dedication  of  the  altar  of  Pax  Augusta  in  9  B.  C.
IJan.  30)  (3).  Besides  these  events  two  others  are  probably
indicated  and  are  so  printed  in  Mommsen's  version,  -  the
first  victory  of  Augustus  (April  15)  and  his  salutation  zis  Im-
perator  by  the  troops   (April    16),   both  events  of  the  year  43

(1)  The)     indicatdons    fixing   the  date   are    discussed    by   Mommssn,      loc.
cit.  267.  Cp.  Dessau,  108  and  Heinen.  Klio  XI  (191 1)  171.  The  latter'  {p.  175)).
gives.  ^  list  of  temples,  eJtars,  and     priests     of    the     living     Augustus    in     Italy.

(2)  See  p.  34.

(3)  The  festival  of  Fortuna  Redux  was  called  Auguatalia  and  widely,
celebrated.  Mommsen,  Res  gestae  Divi  Augusti  II,  11  (p.  46);  De  Ruggiero,
Augustalia,    Ruggiero   I,    877.

-80  -


B.  C.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  initial  day  of  this  calendar
marking  the  new  year  is  Aug.  19,  the  day  when  Augustus  en-
tered upon  his  consulship,  which  others,  although  not  he
himself,  considered  the  beginning  of  his  principate  (I).

The  only  occasion  requiring  the  sacrifice  of  a  victim  wais
the  festival  of  his  birthday,  when  he  himself  as  divinity  re-
ceived the  honor  of  an  immolatio;  all  others  are  designated
simply  as  suppUcationes  to  be  observed  with  prayers  and  li-
bations. On  each  day  one  or  more  gods  were  chosen  to  receive
these  honors,  among  whom  the  Emperor  sometimes  appeared.
On  one  occasion  the  libation  is  made  to  the  imperium  of  Cae-
sai  Augustus,  the  only  instance  cited  for  such  a  form  of  honor,
and  on  another  occasion  he  received  tribute  through  the  use
of  the  abstract  divinity  Victoria  Augusta.  Similar  abstractions
are  seen  in  the  forms  Fortuna  Redux,  Felicitas,  Spes  et  lu-
ventas.  In  connection  with  Vesta  are  mentioned  the  dii  pub*-
l(ic()  P(enates)  p(opuli)  R(oman{)  Q(uiritium).  A  suppli-
catio  to  this  goddess  held  on  the  anniversary  of  the  day  that
Augustus  was  made  pontijex  maximus  was  peculieurly  fitting
because  her  cult  in  particuleir  w£is  under  the  supervision  of
that  officer  (2).  Among  the  greater  gods  appear  Jupiter  with
the  epithet  sempiternus,  and  Meurs,  the  latter  in  the  combi-
nation Moles  Martis  (3).  Though  Moles  is  a  term  whose  sig-
nificance in  religion  is  little  understood,  it  seems  to  refer  to
a  vague  divinity  associated  with  Mars  as  companion  and  assist-
ant (4).

Besides  these  festivals  celebrating  the  chief  events  in  the
life  of  Augustus,  three  notices  gJlude  to  members  of  the  Im-
perial  family   whom   the   Emperor   considered    in   the   line  of

(1)  Tac.  ann,  I,  9:  Multus  hinc  ipso  de  Augusto  sermo,  plerisque
uana  mirantibus  quod  idem  dies  accepti  quondam  imperii  princeps  et  uitae
supremus.  Momm^en,  Rom.  Staatsr.  II  ,  747  .

(2)  Cp.  Heinen.  KKo  XI  (1911)  161  and  Wissowa  76  for  the  action  of
Augustus  as  pontijex  maximus  relative  to  the  Vestals.

(3)  For  the  epithet  sempiternus  see  von  Premersteln,  Eine  Voiivinschrift
aus    augustischer   Zeit   in   Mitt,   aus   Oesterreich   XV    (1892)   81.

(4)  Gell.  XIII.  23;  Mommsen.  Gesam.  Schr  IV.  265.  Peter,  Moles
Martis,  Roscher,  II,  3104;  von  Domaszewki,  Die  Eigenschaftsgotter  der  altromis-
chen  Relig.  in  Abhandl.  zur  rom.  Relig.  106.  Mommsen's  equivalent  fox  moles
is  Strehungen,  which  »s  approved  by  von  Domaszewski ;  the  latter  parallels  the
expression  with  such  terms  as  uirtus  legionis,  exemplified  in  the  religion  of
the  Roman   army.

-81


succession  to  the  throne,  -  Tiberius,  his  step-son  and  heir  by
adoption  since  4  A.  D.  (Nov.  16)  and  the  latter's  son  Drusus
(Oct.  7)  and  nephew  Germanicus  (May  24).  In  each  C2ise  a
birthday  was  celebrated  with  honors  rendered  to  Vesta.  Fi-
nsJly,  under  date  of  July  12  the  calendar  probably  contained
a  notice  of  the  celebration  marking  the  anniversary  of  the
birth  of  Diuus  lulius.  The  divinities  marked  here  for  the  sup-
plicatio  were  Jupiter,  Mars  Ultor,  and  Venus  Genetrix.

Here  £is  elsewhere  the  cult  of  Augustus  was  ceu-ried  on
by  the  Augustales,  sui  association  of  uncertain  number  com-
posed of  the  most  distinguished  freedmen  of  the  community.
Three  members  aie  known  by  name,  C.  Auianius  Epagathus,
Q.  Valerius  Salutaris,  and  M.  Antonius  lulianus  (1).  An-
other individual  L.  Caecilius  Dioscorus  is  described  as  per
manent  curator;  he  was  a  member  of  a  little  known  associa-
tion of  boatmen  and  is  assigned  to  the  third  century  A.  D.  (2).
This  inscription  shows  that  the  Augustales  here  as  at  Puteoli
were  presided  over  by  curatores ;  it  is  the  only  instance  in  Cam-
pania of  the  term  permanent  curator  which  can  be  attributed
to  a  definite  loccJity,  as  the  examples  commonly  cited  from
Puteoli  do  not  surely  belong  t  >  that  city  (3).  It  is  also  to  be
noted  that  three  of  the  four  men  who  held  the  office  of  Augu-
stalis  were  members  of  the  same  organization  in  other  towns,
two  at  Puteoli  and  one  at  Misenum.  Finally  the  Emperor  wais
recognized  in  the  cult  of  the  Lares  (4).

Little  is  known  of  the  worship  of  other  Emperors.  Besides
the  temple  erected  to  Augustus  there  Weis  one  at  least  for
Diuus  Vespasianus;  here  in  the  year  289  A.  D.  the  decurions

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3701  :  Dis  man.  C.  Auianal  Epagathi  August.  Cumis.
C.I.  L,X,  690,  Vaglieri  1970:  D.  m.  Q.  Valeiio  Salutari  Aug.  PuteolisI  ef
Cumis...  heredes  C.  /.  L.  X,  3676,  D.  6059,  Vaglieri  1730;  D.  m.  M.  Antoni
luliani   Augustali{s)   immun(is)  Misen.   item   August.    Cum(is)   etc.

(2)N.  S.   1897,   12,  D.  6339:  L.  CaecdUo     EHoscoro,     curatori     Augu;stalium
Cumanor.  p>erpetuo  itemque    Augustali    dupl.    Puteo'anor.  et    curatori  perpet(uo)
emVaenilariorum  111  (  =  tiierum?)  Piscinensium  uixit  etc.  Cp.  Sogliano,  Atti  Nap.
XVIII  (1896-7)  1    ;  Vaglieri,  Atene  e  Roma  I  (1898)  197  ;  Slein,  Jahresber,  iiber  die
Fortschr.  der  class.  Alter.  CXLIV  (1909)  247.

(3)  Cp.  de  Ruggiero',  Curator,  Ruggiexo,  II,    1342,  who  does  not  include
this  example  in   h"s  list   of   curatores  of   the   Augustales.
(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3691  :  Lares  Augus(ti)  Agrippa.

-82  -


held  a  meeting  in  the  interests  of  the  cult  of  Magna  Mater,
whose  temple  was  situated  at  Bsdae  (I).

ORIENTAL  CULTS.

As  the  temple  of  Magna  Mater  for  this  community  was
situated  at  Baiae,  it  will  be  discussed  a  little  later.  For  the
worship  of  the  gods  of  Egypt  there  is  little  evidence.  A  neck-
lace found  here  contains  little  figures  of  a  clothed  Isis  and  a
nude  Harpocrates  imposing  silence  according  to  a  familiar
type.  Similar  figures  of  this  god  were  probably  designed  to  a-
dorn  the  eeirs,  and  here  as  in  the  necklace  served  as  phylac-
teries (2).  It  has  been  claimed,  however,  that  this  necklace
is  an  importation  of  Roman  workmanship  (3).

Traces  of  Egyptian  influence  have  been  seen  in  a  defixio
scrawled  upon  a  leaden  tablet,  which  weis  discovered  in  a
grave  (4).  It  belongs  to  a  class  of  magic  inscriptions  of  which
several  examples  have  been  found  in  Campania,  and  is  in
harmony  with  a  pronounced  tendency  of  the  Greeks  to  make
use  of  this  method  of  attempting  to  punish  an  enemy  (5).
In  this  case  the  inscription  is  of  a  late  date,  the  second  or  third
century  A.  D.,  and  shows  the  influence  of  the  Oriental
gods  (6).  It  belongs  to  the  division  of  amatory  imprecations
£uid  is  directed  against  a  certain  VgJeria  Quadratilla  by  her
husband.  A  large  pairt  of  the  tablet  is  illegible  or  doubtful,
and  the  divinities  who  are  invoked  can  not  always  be  deter-
mined. Kaibel  believed  that  there  was  a  reference  to  Hermes

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3698.  See  below  p.  87.

(2)  Semmoda,  Mon.  ined.  deW antichita  e  deUe  belle  arti  19  f.  A  pic-
ture of  the  necklace  is  given  on  PI.  111.  For  the  efficacy  of  Harpocrates  in
amulets  see  Plin.  nat.  XXXlll  3  (12);  Ed.  Meyer.  Horos  Roscher  I,  2747;  Jahn.
Ueber  den  Aberglauben  des  bosen  Blicks  in  Ber.  d.  Sachs.  Ges.  der  Wissens
VII   (1855)   47;  Marquardt-Wissowa,   Rom.    Staatsveru).    Ill,    107.

(3)  Abeken,    Mittelitalien    343    (4).

(4)  /.  G.  XIV  872,  Audollent.  Defixionum  taheVae  No.  198,  where  ref-
erences to  earlier  publications  may  be  found.  Cp.  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  VI
(1847-48)  66  f.  For  soime  reason  Stein,  Hermes,  P.-W.  VIII,  755  assigns  this
inscription   to  Capua.

(5)  Cesano,  De^xio,  Ruggiero  II,  1563;  Wiinsch,  Defixionum  tabellae,
praef.   II  in  /.  G.  Ill  Appendx.

(6)  Cp.  Deissmemn,  Bibelstudien  6.

-  83  -


and  Anubis,  but  this  is  denied  by  Audollent  (I).  Cesano,
however,  sees  Egyptiein  influence  in  the  apF>eal  to  the  ruler  of
the  universe  and  the  lower  world  (1.  10)  and  thinks  that  the
great  god  Osiris  is  meant  (2).  Other  imprecations  in  fact  in-
voke this  divinity  by  nsune  with  similar  lemgn^age,  and  there
is  evidently  a  reference  (1.  28)  to  the  Egyptian  evil  spirit  Ty-
phon-Set.   (3).

The  tendency  of  the  times  to  bring  together  deities  of
vEU'ious  nationalities,  however  fair  they  were  removed  from  one
another  in  origin  or  function,  is  demonstrated  here  by  the  em-
ployment of  lao,  representing  the  great  deity  of  the  Jews,
along  with  pagan  divinities.  The  invocation  of  lao  is  by  no
means  a  novelty,  as  he  appears  in  a  defixio  from  Puteoli  suid
in  other  examples  (4).  Other  evidence  for  the  presence  of
the  Jews  in  this  city  is  lacking  as  well  as  that  for  an  early
Christian  community;  yet  the  latter  almost  surely  existed  be-
fore the  third  or  fourth  centuries  (5).

BAIAE  AND  BAULI.

Along  the  sea-coast  about  two  Roman  miles  south  of
Cumae  extended  the  community  of  Baiae,  composed  in  large
pau-t  of  the  villas  of  wealthy  Romans.  This  locality  had  some
importance  in  early  times  during  the  days  of  Cumae *s  com-
mercial activity  because  of  its  harbor  facilities;  then  after  a
period  of  stagnation  it  begeui  to  be  popular  in  the  last  cen-
tury of  the  Republic  as  a  fashionable  pleasure  and  health
resort,  but  did  not  become  widely  known  until  the  Imperial
epoch.  Among  its  attractions  were  its  mineral  springs,  its
scenery   and   its  mild  climate;   during  the  summer,    however,

(1)  Kaibel.  /,  G.  XIV.  872;  Audollent,  Defixionum  tabellae  No.  198.
The  importance  of  Hermes  in  defixions  's  explained  by  Wiinsch,  Defixionum
tabellae  praef.   VI   in  /.  G,    III,   Appendix.

(2)  Ceaano.  Ruggiero  II,  1578-1579.

(3)  Cp.  Roder.  Set,  P.-W.  IV.  774.

(4)  See     citations     by     Ganschinietz,     lao  P.-W.    IX,      709.     Cp.     Cesano
Ruggierol  II,  1578-1579.  See  p.   161.

(5)  Harnack,  Die  Mission  und  die  Aushreitung  des  Chriatentums  U,
219;  Lanzoni,  Le  origini  del  Cristianesimo  nella  Campyania  romana  in  Riv.
alorico-crit.    delle  scienze   teol.   VI    (1910)    119.

-84  -


the  air  was  thought  to  be  msdarious,  and  the  most  fashionable
season  was  the  spring.  Many  members  of  the  Roman  nobility
as  well  as  the  Emperors  had  palatial  residences  round  about,
and  the  dissolute  and  licentious  of  both  sexes  flocked  hither
in  search  of  gain  and  pleasure.  But  in  spite  of  its  celebrity  and
increasing  population,  which,  however,  was  largely  transient,
Baiae  did  not  have  a  municipal  organization  of  its  own;  in-
stead it  remained  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  municipgj  of-
ficers of  Cumae.  Adjoining  Baiae  probably  on  the  north  wets
another  community  called  Bauli  similarly  composed  but  of
less  importance.  It  too  was  subject  to  Cumae  (I).

Somewhere  along  the  shore  which  lines  the  harbor  of
Baiae,  probably  on  the  projecting  tongue  of  land  called  Punta
deWEpitafio,  stood  the  temple  of  Venus  Lucrina.  It  thus  formed
a  pait  of  Bauli  (2).  She  may  have  derived  this  epithet  be-
cause her  shrine  wcis  in  close  proximity  to  the  lake  of  that
name,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  she  was  considered  as  a  deity
closely  associated  with  it,  euid  thus  succeeded  some  primitive
goddess  such  as  that  one  who  had  a  shrine  at  Avernus.  The
sanctuary  of  the  Lucrine  Venus  is  mentioned  by  Statius  among
the  objects  which  strike  the  attention  of  em  observer  at  Sur-
rentum,  along  with  Mt.  Gaurus,  Misenum,  and  other  features
of  the  landscape  of  this  coaist  (3).  Martial  too  refers  to  the
same    goddess,     calling    Baiae     ((  the     golden     shore     of     the


(1)  Beloch  176,  180.  Hulsen's  statement  of  the  location  of  Bauli  be-
tween Misenum  and  Baiae  on  the  Punta  dell'Epitafio  is  singularly  inexact,
since  the  cape  alluded  to  is  not  between  these  places  but  north  of  Baiae.
Hii'sen,  Bacoli,  P.-W.      III.     154.     The  theory       that  Bauli    lay  to  the  south  of

Baiae  on  the  site  of  the  modern  village  of  Bacoli  is  stated  by  Nissen,  Itali'
8che  Landesktinde  II,  733.  Cp.  Mommsen  C,  /.  L.  X,  p.  213.  [See  however
Claaa.  Quarterly   (1910)  96   f.   -  Ed.]

(2)  Beloch,    178.

(3)  Stat.   silv.  Ill,    1,    147   f.:

Spectat   et    Icario  nemorosus   palmite   Gaurus
siluaque    quae    fixam    pelago  Nesiaa    coronat,
et   placidus  Limon,   omenque  Euploea   carinis,
et  Lucrina  Venus,   Phrygioque  e  uertice  Graias
addisces,   Misene,    tubas,    ridetque   benigna
Parthenope    gentile    sacrum   nudosque    uirorum
certatus  et   parua  suae   simulacra   coronae.

-85  -


blessed  Veniis  »  (I);  An  inscription  in  her  honor,  written
pau-tly  in  meter  and  reported  to  have  been  discovered  at  Cu-
mae,  may  have  been  designed  for  this  shrine.  The  dedication
was  made  by  Ti.  Claudius  Marcion  to  Venus  with  the  epithets
of  proha  and  sanctissima,  and  is  followed  by  verses  in  her
praise  (2).  Another  inscription  which  neimes  this  goddess
is  without  religious  significance  (3).  The  nature  of  the  cult
exercised  here  is  unknown;  in  the  later  period  it  may  have
been  modified  by  influences  from  the  East,  but  there  is  no
reason  to  believe  with  Graillot  that  the  divinity  was  preemi-
nently Oriental  (4).  On  account  of  her  prominence  a  ruin  in
modem  Baiae  has  received  incorrectly  the  designation  Tempio
di  Venere  (5).

Evidence  for  the  worship  of  Neptune  is  limited  to  a  single
citation  from  Petronius,  who  says  that  an  image  of  the  god
stood  in  the  Tetrastylon  at  Baiae  (6).  About  this  building
nothing  further  is  known.  The  traditions  which  connect  Her-
cules with  this  coast  have  already  been  discussed  in  the  treat-
ment of  Cumae  (7).  Propertius  perhaps  contains  a  vague
allusion  to  the  traditions  that  Dionysus  made  a  victorious  ex-
pedition toward  the  West  as  well  2is  to  the  East.  Nowhere  else
is  there  any  statement  that  he  visited  Baiae,  but  the  poet  may
have  had  in  mind  some  local  legend  (8).  According  to  the
common  designation  there  are  in  this  vicinity  remains  of  tem-
ples  devoted   respectively    to  Mercury    and    Diana,    but   these


(1)  Mart.    XI,   80;  Litus  beatae  Veneris  aureum   Baias.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3692  =  D.  3170  =  Vaglieri  1205:  Veneri  probae  sancliw-
(imae)  sacrum.  Ti.  Claudius  Marcion.  Followed  by  five  hexameters  =Bucheler
Carm.  epigraf.   No.   225.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  2483.

(4)  Graillot.  Le  culte  de  CyUle  435.

(5)  Loffredo  Le  antiq.  di  Pozzuolo  46;  Paoli  Antiq.  reliquiae  Fol.  31,
PI.    LI.

(6)  Petron.   104:  Simulacrum  Neptuni,  quod  Bais  in  Tetrastylo  notaueram.

(7)  See  p.  69.

(8)  Prop.    III.    18.    1:

Clausus    ab    umbroso    qua  ludit    pontus    Auerno,

fumida  Baiarum    stagna   tepentis   aquae

hie   ubi,    mortal es   dexter  cum   quaereret   urbes
cymbala  Thebzmo  concrepuere  deo.

86


J


ruins   are  now   believed   to   have   belonged   to   bathing  estab-
lishments (I).

MAGNA  MATER.

Our  accounts  of  the  society  which  flourished  at  Baiae  un-
der the  Empire  would  lead  us  to  believe  that  it  offered  a
fruitful  field  for  the  growth  of  the  mystery  religions  of  the
Orient.  The  people  of  the  community  were  largely  of  the
wealthy,  leisure  class,  who  in  many  cases  had  both  tasted  and
tired  of  the  world's  pleasures.  They  would  welcome,  therefore,  a
religion  that  appealed  ro  the  individual;  convinced  of  the  need
of  a  personal  salvation  to  free  them  from  the  load  of  guilt
accumulated  in  the  past  and  to  offer  encouragement  for  the
future,  they  would  naturally  turn  to  those  forms  of  worship
which  professed  to  supply  this  need.  For  such  cults  no  certain
evidence  remains  save  in  the  case  of  the  Great  Mother,  who
under  the  name  of  Mater  Baiana  is  known  to  have  had  a
temple  here  in  the  third  century  A.  D.  Her  cult  was  fostered
not  only  by  the  presence  of  the  element  described  above  but
also  by  reason  of  the  proximity  of  the  naval  station  at  Mi-
senum,  where  hosts  of  Asiatics  had  their  quarters  with  the
fleet.  Graillot  adduces  this  circumstance  as  a  reason  for  the
development  of  the  cult  at  Puteoli,  but  more  probably  the
Icirger  pait  of  the  patronage  of  this  transient  element  went
to  upbuild  that  at  Baiae,  which  had  its  seat  in  a  temple  that
was  nesirer  and  at  the  same  time  was  by  no  means  insignifi-
cant (2).

The  same  writer,  calling  attention  to  the  topical  designa-
tion of  the  goddess,  compares  her  to  Venus  Lucrina,  and
suggests  that  as  the  latter  presided  over  the  waters  of  the  Lu-
crine  Lake,  so  the  former  protected  the  celebrated  hot  springs
of  the  region  (3).  Indeed  the  circumstance  that  the  Nymphs
were    usually    associated    with    them    would   not    exclude    her,

(1)  Beloch  187;  De  lorio,  Guida  di  Pozzuoli  (2)  130;  Dubois,  408;  Paoli
'Aniiq.  reliquiae,  Fol.   31.   PI.    LII.   LIV.

(2)  Graillot.   Le  cult  de  Cybe/e  432.

(3)  Graillot  op.  cit.  435  and  Mater  Deum  Salutaris  in  Melanges  Cagnai
213    f.

-  87  -


and  she  would  tend  gradually  to  supplant  them.  To  judge  from
the  place  where  the  chief  epigraphical  evidence  for  the  cult
"was  found,  her  temple  was  situated  on  the  height  of  the  Cas-
tello  or  close  by  at  its  foot.  It  was  thus  in  the  immediate  vi-
cinity of  the  heurbor  and  at  no  great  distance  from  the  baths.
As  her  worship  increased  in  populzirity,  she  no  doubt  usurped
the  functions  and  attributes  of  early  divinities,  and  may  have
been  brought  into  close  relation  with  the  Plutonium  at  Lake
Avemus  in  her  capacity  of  goddess  of  the  underworld  (I).
Some  interesting  details  of  the  administration  of  the  wor-
ship have  been  preserved  (2).  On  the  first  day  of  June  289
A.  D.  the  decurions  of  Cumae,  who  in  this  as  in  other  matters
exercised  jurisdiction  over  Baiae,  met  in  the  temple  of  Diuus
Vesp£isianus  to  select  a  priest  for  the  Magna  Mater  Baiana  in
the  place  of  the  former  incumbent  Claudius  Restitutus,  who
had  died.  When  the  praetors  brought  the  matter  to  the  atten-
tion of  the  council,  a  vote  was  taken  and  Licinius  Secundus
was  unanimously  elected  to  fill  the  vacancy  (3).  It  wzis  nec-
essary, however,  before  the  newly  elected  priest  could  take
office  that  the  choice  made  by  the  local  decurions  should  be
formally  ratified  by  the  quindecimuiri  sacris  faciundis,  the
Roman  bocird  of  commissioners  having  the  care  of  religious
matters.  For  this  reason  the  priest  is  often  called  sacerdos  quiri'
dedmuiralts  (4).   In  this  instance  after  a  delay  of  two  and  a


(1)  Graillot,  op.  cit.  438.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3698  =  D.  4175  =  Vaglien  2135:  M.  Magxio  Basso  L.  Ragonio
Quintiano  cos.  K.  lunis,  Cumis  in  templo  Diui  Vespaisiani  in  ordine  decurio-
rum  quern  M.   Mallonius  Undanus  et  Q.   Claudius  Acilicinus   praet.  coegerant,

referentibus    pr.    de    sacerdote     faciendo    Matris    Deae    Bainae    in     locum

Restituti,   sacerdotis  defuncti,   placuit   uniuersis  Licinium   Secundum   sacerdotem
fieri.

XVuiri  sac.  fac.  pr.  et  magistratibus  Cuman.  sal.  Cum  ex  epistula  uestra
cognouerimus,  creasse  uos  sacerdotem  Matris  Deum  Licinium  Secundum  in
locum  Claudi  Restituti  defunc,  cui  secundum  uoluntatem  uestra(m)  permisi-
mus  ei  occabo  et  corona  dumtaxat  intra  fines  coloniae  uestrae  uti.  Optamus
uos  bene   ualere   etc.   Cp.    Bouche-Leclercq,   Hist,    de   la   divin.   IV   310.

(3)  Cp.  t^e  selection  of  an  augur  at  Putecli  p.    117.

(4)  See  the  list  of  municipal  priests  in  Graillot,  Le  cuUe  de  Cybele  239.
The  first  dated  instance  of  the  term  belongs  to  Lugdunum  in  Gaul,  160  A.  D.
(C.   /.  L.   XIII,    1751);      the   first  occurrence  in   Italy  belongs  to  Forum   Popilii

-  88  -


half  months  they  sent  their  confirmation  of  the  appointment,
gramting  to  the  priest  the  right  to  weau:  the  insignia  of  his  of-
fice, -  the  occabus  and  the  wreath,  but  limited  the  use  of  these
distinctions  to  the  territory  of  his  own  parish  (1).  This  sys-
tem of  procedure  shows  that  the  various  local  cults  of  Magna
Mater  throughout  Italy  and  doubtless  in  Roman  colonies  ev-
erywhere were  controlled  by  a  systematic  scheme  of  regulation
on  the  part  of  the  central  government.  The  Romans  indeed
had  looked  with  suspicion  on  the  excesses  of  this  worship
from  the  outset  of  their  acquaintance  with  it,  and  felt  that  it
might  easily  become  a  menace  (2).  Yet  before  the  third
century  this  religion  had  obtained  a  fairly  high  standing  in  the
state  (3).

There  is  no  mention  in  this  town  of  the  taurobolium  or  of
the  official  called  archigallus,  who  flourished  in  the  later  Em-
pire at  the  same  period  that  this  rite  was  practiced.  But  an-
other inscription  found  at  Cumae  contains  a  complete  list  of  the
dendrophori,  an  association  connected  with  the  same  cult,
whose  duty  it  was  to  beau:  the  sacred  pine  of  Attis  in  the  pro-
cession of  the  March  festival  (4).  Abundance  of  material
was  at  hand  in  this  region  for  the  activity  of  the  woodmen
who  made  up  this  collegium;  stretching  along  the  sandy  shore
to  the  north  of  Cumae  were  miles  of  dark,  gloomy  pine  forest,
which  under  the  name  of  silua  gallinaria  had  acquired  an
unenviable   notoriety   as    the   resort   of   brigands    (5).    The   list

(near  Carinola)  in  the  Ager  Falernus,  186  A.  D.  (C.  /.  L.  X,  4726).  A  li»t  of
quindecimviral  investitures  is  given  by  Grail^ot,  Le  culie  de  Cyhele,  228.

(1)  For  the  tokens  of  office  see  Graillot,  op.  cit.  247;  Dessau  in  Momm-
*en,  Ges.  Schr.  VIII,   17.

(2)  Graillot.  op.  cit.  229.

(3)  For  the  imi>etus  to  her  worship  at  the  end  of  the  second  century
A.  D.  see  von  Domaszewski,  Magna  Mater  in  Latin  Inscriptions  in  Jour.  Rotn.
Stud.  I  (1911)  53.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3699  =  D.  4147  =  Vaglieri  2141  :  Ex  8.  c.  dendrophori  creati
qui  sunt  sub  cura  XVuir(orum)  s(acris)  f(aciundis)  cc.  uu.  ( =  clarissimorum  ui-
rorum)  L.  Ampius  Stephemus  sac.  M(atris)  d(eum),  q(in)q(uennaUs)  den(ropho-
ris)  dedicationi  huius  panem,  uinum  et  sportulas  dedit  etc.  The  sacred  and
secular  duties  of  the  organization  are  discussed  by  Maue,  Die  Vereine  der
fabri,  centonarii  und  dendrophori  im  rom  Reich  19  f.  Cp.  von  Domaszewski,
Jour.  Rom.  Stud.  (1911)  53;  De  Marchi,  //  culto  privato  di  Roma  antica,  II,  101  f.

(5)  Strab.  V,  4.  5;  Graillot.  Le  culte  de  Cyb^le  437-8;  Juv.   Ill  305.

89  .


irom  Cumae  belongs  to  the  year  251  A.  D.  and  exhibits  87
members,  who  just  as  the  priest  of  Magna  Mater  were  under
the  charge  of  the  Roman  quindecimuiri.  From  the  beginning
of  the  Empire  the  collegia  had  been  considered  a  dangerous
institution,  and  during  the  reign  of  Augustus  a  lex  lulia  de
collegiis,  effective  throughout  all  Italy,  prohibited  the  existence
of  all  the  associations  that  could  not  prove  their  usefulness
to  the  community  (I).  To  the  class  that  w£is  adjudged  service-
able belong  the  dendrophort ,  who  at  this  time  had  selected
as  their  patron  L.  Ampius  Stephanus,  an  incumbent  of  the
priesthood  of  the  goddess.  In  accordance  with  the  conventions
of  the  time  he  distributed  cimong  the  members  of  the  society
bread,  wine,  and  other  gifts,  -  an  event  which  the  inscription
was  designed  to  commemorate.  This  is  an  instance  of  the
cordial  relations  existing  between  the  priesthood  and  the  col-
legium; as  the  priest  here  became  patron,  so  often  the  den-
drophori  furnished  the  cult  with  its  ministers.  An  examination
of  the  list  shows  a  large  number  of  persons  with  names  indic-
ative of  a  foreign  origin,  and  the  organization  weis  composed
wholly  or  chiefly  of  freedmen.  By  this  time,  however,  it  had
obtained  a  very  respectable  position  in  all  the  communities
where  it  existed  and  could  command  the  services  of  a  man  of
some  prominence  as  its  patron  (2).  This  fact  indicates  that
the  priest  Stephanus,  selected  here  to  play  that  role,  was  likely
a  man  of  wealth  and  influence,  but  rather  a  rich  freedman
than  one  who  enjoyed  the  highest  social  position.

The  comparatively  large  number  of  dendrophori,  -  87  -  hsis
sometimes  caused  surprise,  and  the  view  w£is  advanced  by
Beloch  that  the  temple  of  the  Mater  Baiana  served  the  people
of  Puteoli  as  well  as  those  of  Cumae  eind  Baiae  itself.  Besides


(1)  Suet  Aug.  32:  Collegia  praeter  antiqua  et  legitima  dissoluit.  C.  /.  L.
VI,  2193  =  4416.  A  list  of  collegia  in  Italy  which  were  permitted  to  hold  meet-
ings is  given  by  WeJzing,  Les  corporations  professionnelles  chez  les  Romaina
I  125.

(2)  For  different  opinions  on  the  development  of  the  dendrophori  into
a  religious  collegium  see  Aur'gemma,  Dendrophori,  Ruggiero  II,  1673  f . ;  De
Marchi,  //  culto  privato  di  Roma  antica  II  103;  Graillot,  op.  cit.  115,  266;  von
Domaszewski,  op  .cit.  53.  For  their  standing  see  Graillot,  op.  cit.  273 ;  Aari-
gemma,  Ruggero  II,    1689.

-  90  -


alleging  the  small  population  of  Cumae  under  the  late  Empire,
he  cites  as  a  confirmation  of  this  opinion  the  circumstance  that
in  a  list  of  dendrophori  Eissigned  to  the  shrine  in  question  five
members  of  the  gens  Granicus  and  three  members  of  the
Polii  appear,  -  names  which  occur  not  infrequently  in  the
inscriptions  of  Puteoli  (I).  The  chief  reason  which  meJces
this  hypothesis  untenable  is  the  fact  that  Puteoli  by  reason  of
its  large  foreign  population  was  the  place  which  above  all
others  could  support  an  independent  shrine.  Although  the
list  of  dendrophori  seems  large,  this  feeling  is  mostly  caused
by  the  incompleteness  of  the  lists  that  have  reached  us  from
other  cities,  so  that  £is  a  result  they  give  no  clue  to  the  total
numbers  (2).  The  right  to  nominate  as  members  those  out-
side of  their  own  occupation  v/as  a  prerogative  everywhere
enjoyed  by  this  association,  but  it  was  naturally  used  in  some
communities  more  than  in  others.  Furthermore,  the  number
of  woodmen  and  dealers  in  that  commodity  at  Cumae  would
tend  to  be  unusualljr  Isurge  because  of  the  presence  of  the  silua
galUnaria,  affording  ample  scope  for  the  exercise  of  their  call-
ing  (3).

The  expression  ex  senatus  consulto  dendrophori  creati
raises  the  question  of  how  these  men  were  chosen.  Generally
such  societies  were  self  creative,  and  vacancies  were  supplied
and  accessions  made  by  the  members  themselves;  in  the  case
of  this  particular  organization  no  evidence  is  at  hand  for  any
locality.  According  to  Walzing*s  opinion  the  senate  named
here  stands  for  the  decurions  or  local  governing  body,  who
not  infrequently  are  so  designated  elsewhere  (4).  Hence
with  this  method  of  selection  the  dendrophori  would  have  a
thoroughly  official   character.   A  reason     for     such     procedure


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3700;  Beloch  112.  This  view  is  stated  by  Aurigemma,
Ruggiero  II,  1689,  who  considers  that  menbers  from  Cumae  smd  Puetoli  form-
ed one  body  of  dendrophori,  but  his  reasoning  here  seems  less  cogent  than
usual.   Cp.   Dubois,   Melanges  XX   11(1902)  35   f.

(2)  Lists   are   cited   by  Aurigemma,  Ruggeiero   II,    1687.

(3)  Graillot  fails  to  mention  this  among  the  localities  where  the  activity
of   the   association   was   stimulated  by  the    presence   of    forests.

(4)  Walzing,  Les  corporations  prof,  chez  les  Rom.  I  247;  II  356;  Maue,
Die    Vereine   der  fabr.    etc.    34,

-  91   -


might  lie  in  the  fact  that  in  any  one  city  the  number  of  persons
eligible  for  this  body  would  be  too  great  for  all  to  be  included »
so  that  a  selection  on  the  part  of  some  legally  constituted  au-
thority would  be  advisable.

Another  view  -  and  one  that  seems  to  accord  better  with
the  known  circumstances  -  is  stated  by  Aurigemma  in  his  com-
prehensive treatment  of  this  collegium  (I).  He  explains  that
the  senate  in  question  is  that  of  Rome,  by  whose  decree  the
dendrophori  chosen  in  the  ordinary  way,  are  given  the  author-
ity to  exist  as  a  collegium  under  the  oversight  of  the  Roman
quindecemvirgJ  board  (2).  This  mode  of  selection  is  more
probable  because  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  common  principle
of  cooptatio.  In  regard  to  the  number  of  the  dendrophori  two
facts  tend  to  establish  the  existence  of  this  method  of  choice.
In  the  first  place  the  numbers  in  the  society  prove  rather  the
election  of  outsiders  in  addition  to  the  wood  dealers  than  a
restriction  of  the  collegium  to  a  part  of  the  eligibles  (3).  In
the  second  place;  if  the  matter  depended  on  the  decurions,  we
should  expect  a  comparatively  small  number  of  members  or  at
least  a  round  number;  on  the  contrary  a  list  of  87  members
shows  all  the  marks  of  chance  (4).  At  the  same  time  the
dendrophori  were  not  merely  a  professional  guild  but  also  a
religious  society  having  an  official  relation  to  the  state.  As
such  they  would  be  properly  subject  to  the  local  authorities,
while  the  quindecimuiri  formed  the  bbard  of  ultimate  ap-
peal (5).  In  the  fragmentary  list  already  mentioned  there  is
a  probability  that  a  statement  occurred  saying  that  the  organ-
ization held  its  meetings  in  accordance  with  a  decree  of  the
Senate,  which  again  should  be  interpreted  as  that  of  Rome  (6).

(1)  Aurigemma,  Ruggiero   II,    1688   f.

(2)  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  VI,  2193.

(3)  Cp.  Graillot,  op.  cit.  266  (4),  who  considers  that  menbership  was
compulsory  on  the  F>eu:t  of  those  eligible  from  their  occupation,  and  Maue,
op.  cit.  35  who  states  that  the  collegium  consisted  of  a  fixed,  obligatory
membership  after   the  second   century   A.    D.

(4)  It  is  probable  that  complete  lists  for  towns  like  Tomi  and  Ostia
would  show  the  same  peculiarity.

(5)  See  p.  139.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3700.  C.  /.  G.  5856,  referring  to  Magna  Mater,  has  been
rejected  as  a  forgery  by  recent  editors.

-  92  -


MISENUM.

Beyond  Baiae  in  the  extreme  southern  part  of  the  territory
of  Cumae  there  grew  up  on  Cape  Misenum  a  village  of  the
same  neime.  Unlike  Baiae,  however,  it  did  not  continue  as  a
dependent  community  through  its  entire  history,  for  about  31
B.  C,  cifter  Agrippa  had  utilized  the  magnificent  harbor  ais
the  headquarters  of  one  of  the  Roman  fleets,  Misenum  became
quickly  prominent  and  was  made  an  independent  municipal-
ity. Although  it  w£is  technicaJly  a  Romem  colony  with  the
regular  officials  belonging  to  such  a  town,  it  was  in  reality
little  more  thzui  a  naval  station,  -  a  fact  attested  by  the  kind
of  epigraphical  evidence  that  its  site  hats  yielded.  When  the
Roman  naval  power  diminished  in  the  fourth  century,  the  place
declined,  but  it  continued  to  exist  for  a  long  period  until  fin-
ally destroyed  by  the  Seiracens  (before  900)  (1).

PRE-ROMAN  DEITIES.

The  evidence  for  religious  matters  at  Misenum  belongs
necessarily  to  the  period  of  the  Empire  and  is  not  extensive.
Jupiter  is  found  once  with  the  epithet  Striganus  in  a  dedication
coming  from  a  trier archa  L.  Varenius  Rufus  (2).  As  no  other
exEimples  occur  where  the  god  was  so  honored,  the  epithet  is
not  well  understood.  From  the  character  of  the  dedicator  and
the  use  of  the  word  striganus  elsewhere  in  the  sense  of  an  office
in  the  navy,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  some  eispect
of  the  god  which  W2is  recognized  by  seamen  (3).  None  of
the  other  major  divinities  have  left  traces  of  their  presence,
unless  perhaps  a  fragmentao-y  inscription  refers  to  Mercury  (4).

Deus  Magnus  et  Fatum  Bonum  appear  as  divinities  upon
an  altar  which  commemorates  a  vow  made  by  Valerius  Va-
lens  to  be  paid  when  he  attained  the  position  of  prefect  of  the

(1)  Beloch  190  f. ;  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  317;  De  Petra,  /  poHi  anti-
chi  dell' Italia  meridionale  321    f.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3337  =  Vaglieri  1122:  loui  Strigano  L.  Varenius  Rufus
tr(ierarcha).

(3)  Cp.   C.   /.   L.   X,  3495;  Forcellini,  Lexicon  V.  656.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3338.

-  93  -


fleet  stationed  here  (I).  The  inscription,  partly  in  Greek  and
partly  in  Latin,  falls  between  the  yeeu-s  238-244  A.  D.  The  pe-
culiar kind  of  deity  reverenced  by  this  officer  indicates  not  a
belief  in  the  old  gods  of  the  state  nor  in  the  imported  Oriental
cults,  but  rather  a  trust  in  a  philosophical  system  where  a  pan-
theistic deity  includes  in  his  person  the  functions  of  all  minor
deities.  It  is  the  religion  peculiar  to  the  man  of  high  station,
which  has  not  been  appreciably  affected  by  the  mystery  cults
at  the  period  when  their  influence  was  at  its  height.

ROMAN  DEITIES.

The  official  religion  of  the  colony  is  represented  by  two
inscriptions  both  having  to  do  with  the  same  man  D.  lunius
Certus  who  is  called  sacerdos  et  haruspex  publicus  (2).  He
had  been  selected  for  the  latter  office  from  among  the  priests
of  the  community  and  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  some  prom-
inence (3).  This  is  the  only  mention  of  a  haruspex  who
can  be  definitely  associated  with  any  of  the  Campanian  towns,
although  the  office  doubtless  existed  at  this  time  in  all  of
them.  In  some  localities  at  least  they  formed  a  collegium,  and
unlike  the  public  priests  received  a  seJary  for  their  servi-
ces (4).

The  worship  of  Augustus  Eoid  the  Julian  gens  was  in  the
hands  of  Augustales,   three  of  whom  are  known   (5).   Two  of

(1)  C.  I.  L.  X.  3336  =  /.  G.  XIV  873  =  D.  3756  =  Vaglieri  1047:  Deo  magno
et  Fato  Bono  Val.  Valens  u{ir)  p(erfectissimu^)  pnaefect.  classis  Mis.  p(iae)  u(m-
dicis)  Gordianae  uotum  soluit.  Bsqi  ixeytoxq)  xal  ^aX'^  Mofpcy,  OuocXyjC;  |  apx>jv
Xaxwv  STcapxov  Msigyjvwv  gxoXou  j  laxYjoa  [3(0|Jidv  e>cxsXc5v  eOx'^v  £|irjV.  For  another
position  held  by  Valens  see  D.   2159.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3680  =  D.  4957a=Vaglieri  2222:  D.  m.  D.  lunio  D.  f.  Clau.
Certo  sacerdoti  et  aruspici  pubUco  ex  genere  sacerdotum  creato  fratri  pientis-
simo.  C.  /.  L.  X,  3681  =D  4957:  D.  m.  D.  lunio  D.  f.  Quad.  (  =  Claud.)  Certo
sacerdoti    et    aruspici    publico   nepotes    pientissimi.

(3)  Thulin,   Haruspices,   P.-W.  VII,   2439.

(4)  Thulin  loc.  cit. ;  Marquardt-Wissowa,  Rom.  StaatsverW.  Ill,  415;
Wissowa,  548;  Bouche-Leclercq,  Hist,  de  la  divin.  IV,  376  (list  of  haruspi-
ces  in   Italy  eind  the  provinces);  C.  /.  L.   IX,    1540  (from  Beneventum).

(5)  A.  J.  A.  1898,  394.  No.  53;  C.  /.  L.  X,  3675  =  Vaglieri.  1729:  D.  m.
M.  Antonius  lanuarius  honoratus  Augusteilis  Misenis  (sic)  uixit  etc. ;  C.  /.  L.
X,  3676  =  Vaglieri  1730:  D.  m.  M.  Antoni  luliani,  Augustali(s)  immun(is)  Mi-
sen(i),    item    August.    Cum(is)    adlect(o)    trib(ui)    Palat.    uixit    etc.

-  94  -


them  Flauius  Zoticus  and  M.  Antoniiis  Ianu8U*ius  are  desig-
nated simply  as  Augustales,  the  third  M.  Antonius  lulianus
was  a  more  distinguished  personage,  who  had  received  his
office  as  an  immunis  without  being  called  upon  to  make  the
customary  outlay  for  amusements  or  other  purposes.  He  filled
the  same  position  at  Cumae.  According  to  von  Premerstein
the  word  honoratus  in  the  epitaph  of  leinuarius  has  reference
to  a  special  grade  in  the  association  which  this  man  had  reach-
ed (I).  But  as  there  are  no  other  examples  of  this  rank,
it  seems  more  natural  to  consider  the  word  simply  as  a  term
of  eulogy  alluding  to  the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  while
filling  the  post  of  Augustalis.  It  should  be  noted  further  that
immunis  is  not  a  common  term,  but  the  idea  that  it  conveys  is
expressed  often  enough  in  other  ways.

JUPITER  DOLICHENUS.

The  officers,  soldiers,  sailors  and  su^tisans  of  the  fleet  sta-
tioned at  Misenum  were  in  many  cases  Orientals  by  birth  and
naturally  interested  in  the  cults  which  originated  in  the  East.
Such  continued  to  be  the  composition  of  the  soldiers  of  the
fleet  when  they  had  been  organized  in  the  first  legio  adiu-
trix  (2).  Their  presence  in  most  cases  caused  the  dedication
of  sporadic  inscriptions  rather  than  the  maintenance  of  special
shrines,  peirticularly  when  there  were  already  in  existence  at
Puteoli  and  Baiae  sanctuaries  of  the  divinities  favored  by  these
people.  In  a  few  cases,  however,  where  the  divinity  was  no*:
much  worshipped  outside  of  the  army,  reguleu:  cults  with  shrine
and  priests  may  have  been  instituted  at  Misenum.  This  is
what  seems  to  have  happened  in  the  caise  of  Jupiter  Doli-
chenus,  who  is  mentioned  in  a  few  extant  inscriptions  of
doubtful  origin.  Although  this  cult  has  been  generally  sissign-
ed  to    Puteoli,    its    seat    was    more    probably    at    Misenum    in


(1)  Von  Premer&teln,  Augustales,  Ruggiero  1,  850.

(2)  Aschbach,  Die  rom.  Legionen  prima  und  secunda  adiutrix  in  Silz-
ungsher.  der  kais.  Akad.  (Wien)  XX  (1856)  301,  314;  Marquardt,  Rom.  Staais-
veru).  II  (2).  511;  Cagnat.Legio,  D.-S.  Ill,  1057.  1075;  Vaglieri.  Adiutrix,
Ruggiero  I,  86  f.  A  list  of  nationalities  revealed  by  inscriptions  from  Misenum
is  found   in  Marquardt,    op.    cit.    11(2)   510   (2).

-  95  -


close  proximity  to  the  great  naval  establishment  (1).  For
this  cult  was  not  spread  especially  by  merchants,  as  msuntzuH'
ed  by  Hettner,  nor  by  civilians  of  any  class,  but  by  the  differ-
ent branches  of  the  military.  Dolichenus  alone  of  all  the
Oriental  deities  was  primarily  a  soldiers*  god  and  his  presence
is  not  attested  in  localities  where  soldiers  were  not  station-
ed  (2).

He  was  originally  the  tutelary  god  of  Doliche  in  Comma-
gene  and  w£is  usually  conceived  in  the  form  of  a  vigorous  man
standing  on  the  back  of  a  bull.  Amalgamated  with  Jupiter
like  other  deities  of  the  Eeist,  he  became  very  popular  with
the  soldiers  about  Hadrisui^s  time,  and  W2is  favored  especially
under  Commodus  and  the  Severi.  Besides  his  popularity  with
the  soldiers  he  enjoyed  the  worship  of  the  lower  classes,  and
slaves  played  no  insignificant  part  in  introducing  and  main-
taining his  cult  (3).

An  inscription  which  exists  only  in  a  msmuscript  copy
preserves  the  name  of  a  priest  Antipater  guid  of  four  devotees
who  made  offerings  of  silver  to  the  god  as  /.  O.  M.  Dol,  (4).
After  the  name  of  each  of  the  donators  appears  the  word
filia,  which  in  its  present  form  is  wholly  unintelligible.  Kan
ingeniously  conjectured  that  the  reading  of  the  stone  was
Cilix  and  that  this  was  mistaken  by  an  eighteenth  century
copyist  for  filia.  Though  this  conjecture  is  not  entirely  con-


(1)  Assigned)  to  Puteoli  by  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  195;  Hiilsen,  Rom.
Mitt.  XVIII   (1903)   74;   and   doubtfully   by   Dubois.    154  f.

(2)  Hettner,  De  love  Dolicheno  6,  15;  Kem,  De  lovis  Dolicheni  culto
11;  C.  H.  Moore,  The  Distribution  of  Oriental  Cults  in  the  Gauls  and  the
Germanies  in  Trans,  and  Proc.  of  the  Am.  Phil  Assoc.  XXXVIII  (1907)  145.
Cp.  SeidI,  Ueber  den  Dolichenus-Cult  in  Sitzungsber.  der  Kais.  Akfld.  (Wien)
XII  (1854)  24;  von  Domaszewsk',  Die  Religion  des  rom.  Heerea  59;  Cumont,
Textes  et  monuments  I,  263.

(3)  Ed.  Meyer.  Dolichenus,  Roscher,  I,  1191  f . ;  Cumont.  Dolichenus,
P.-W.  V,  1216  f. ;  Reinach,  Dolichenus  Deus  Jupiter,  D.-S.  II,  329  f. ;  C.  S.
Sanders,  lupiter  Dolichenus  in  Jour,  of  the  Am.  Oriental  Society  XXIII  (1902)
89;   Kan,   op.    cii.    11.    17.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1577.  Vaglieri  1117:  lulius  sub  sacerdote  Antipatro  I.  O.
M.  Dol.,  lulius  Antiochus  filia  p(ondo)  I  arg(enti)  d.  d.  Antonius  Domitianus
filia  p(ondo)  I  arg(enti)  d.  d.  lulius  lanuarius  filia  p(ondo)  IS  arg(enti)  d.  d.
Antinius  Valens  filia   p(ondo)  I   arg(enti)   d.    d.

-  96  .


vincing  it  has  the  great  merit  of  fitting  the  circumstances  of
the  case,  for  there  were  a  large  number  of  Cilicisins  with  the
fleet,  who  might  have  made  the  offerings  (I).  Another  in-
scription, pcirtially  preserved,  alludes  to  a  dedication  made
by  order  of  a  god  who  is  designated  by  the  letters  I.  O.
M.  D.  (2)  This  might  be  understood  as  a  reference  to  Jupiter
Damascenus,  who  is  known  to  have  had  adherents  in  this
region.  But  the  greater  prominence  of  Dolichenus  and  the
circumstance  that  the  fragment  was  found  at  Misenum  render
it  almost  certain  that  the  dedication  was  intended  for  him.  In
fact  a  reference  to  the  other  god  would  not  have  been  made
in  this  abbreviated  way,  or  it  would  have  been  misunder-
stood (3).  A  priest  is  mentioned  but  the  inscription  has  been
too  much  mutilated  to  give  the  exact  sense  of  the  whole.

Finally  a  stone  containing  the  Latin  alphabet  flanked  by
two  towering  serpents  belongs  evidently  to  this  cult  (4).  The
inscription,  whose  sacred  cheiracter  is  thus  symbolically  in-
dicated, belongs  to  the  large  class  of  magic  formulas  in  which
a  whole  or  part  of  the  alphabet  is  employed  (5).  The  use  of
such  inscriptions  seems  to  have  been  a  noticeable  feature  of
the  Dolichenus  cult,  and  to  have  depended  on  the  idea  that
from  such  a  series  of  letters  the  god  could  understand  all  the
petitions  that  the  worshipper  might  thereby  frame  (6).  Ac-
cording to  one  theory  the  presence  of  the  alphabet  is  accounted
for  by  the  identification  of  Dolichenus  with  the  Babylonian
Nebo,  who  presided  over  the  art  of  writing;  according  to  an-
other theory  it  was  due  originally  to  indolence  on  the  part
of  the  Asiatic  devotees  of  the  god,  but  it  was  more  probably
an  instance  of  the  belief  that  the  alphabet  had  magical  pow-
ers,  -  a  sentiment  which  was  a  survival  from  primitive  times


(1)  Kan,  op.  cit.  84-85.  The  inscription  was  copied  by  Matteo  Egizio
(Aegyptius)  or  by  Christophorus  Saxius.  The  epitaph  of  lulius  Antiochus,
faber  dupliciarius,  a  Cilician,  appears  in  C.  /.  L.  X,  3424.  A  list  of  the  men
of  this  nationaUty  at  Misenum   is   given   by   Kan,    loc.   cit.

(2)  C.  /.   L.   X.    1575.

(3)  Hettner,    De   love   Dolicheno  23.

(4)  Hulsen,  Rom.  Mitt.  XVllI  (1903)  73.

(5)  Dieterich,   ABC-Denkmdler    in    Rh.    Mus.   LVI    (1901)    77    f.

(6)  Hulsen,  Klio  II  (1902)  235.

-  97  -


when  the  art  of  writing  was  regarded  as  a  msirvelous  thing  (I).
Similgu*  inscriptions  belonging  to  the  cult  of  Dolichenus  have
been  found  at  Rome  and  in  the  provinces,  notably  in  Panno-
nia  (2).  The  inscription  from  Misenum  has  been  assigned  by
Hiilsen  on  account  of  the  later  forms  to  the  period  of  Trajan
and  Hadrian  (3).

HAMAE.

Between  Capua  and  Cumae  and  only  three  Roman  miles
distant  from  the  latter  town  was  a  village,  where  the  inhabit-
ants of  Campamia  were  accustomed  to  gather  annually,  for
an  important  religious  festivaJ  which  lasted  for  three  days  (4),
It  was  in  fact  the  sanctuary  of  the  Ceunpanian  league  in  which
Capua  had  the  leading  place  (5).  One  of  these  celebrations
in  215  B.  C.  hecame  of  historical  importance  because  of  a
Roman  victory  which  resulted  on  account  of  it.  The  Capusms
had  invited  the  senators  of  Cumae  to  meet  them  here,  osten-
sibly to  arrange  an  alliance,  but  in  reality  according  to  Livy
to  entrap  them.  As  the  Roman  authorities  had  been  informed
by  the  Cumaeans  of  the  plot,  they  were  enabled  to  surprise
the  Ceimpanian  army  before  it  had  time  to  carry  out  the  plans
of  the  Capuan  leaders  and  so  the  Romans  won  an  easy  vic-
tory (6) .  Nissen  connects  with  the  place  the  celebration  mark-
ed in  the  late  Campanian  calendar  as  profectio  ad  iter  A-
uerni  (7).  It  seems  more  probable,  however,  that  this  festival
was  concerned  with  the  observances  due  to  the  dead,  and
hence  was  held  at  Lake  Avernus  itself.  There  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  festival  that  Livy  mentions  was  kept  up  indef-
initely and  thus  survived  till  the  end  of  the  pagan  world.

(1)  Hiilsen,  loc.  cii.;  Kan,  De  lovis  Dolicheni  culto  52;  Tragan,  quoted  by
Kan,  loc.  cH.;  cp.  A.  Jeremias,  Nebo,  Roscher  III,  55;  Mommsen,  Rom.  Gesch
(5)  V.   462;   Dieterich  Rh.    Mas.  LVI    (1901),    103.

(2)  HuUen.  KUo  1!  (1902)  235  :  Dell.  Au  grahangen  in  Camuntum  in
Arch. -epigraph.    Mitt,    aus    Oester.    XVI    (1893)   156    f.

(3)  Hiilsen,    Rom.    Mitt.    XVII   (1903)    73.

(4)  Its   exact   location   is   unknown.

(5)  Liv.  XXIII,  35,3:  Campanis  onmibus  statum  sacrificium  axl  Hamas
erat.

(6)  Liv.   XXIII.  35.

(7)  Nissen,  Italiache  Landeskunde  II,    715.

-  98


CHAPTER  III,
PUTEOLI,

Puteoli,  once  the  leading  commercial  city  of  Italy,  enjoyed
a  favorable  location  on  the  Campanian  coast  amid  the  Phle-
graean  Fields.  Lying  between  the  territories  of  Cumae  and
Neapolis  and  bounded  on  the  north  by  that  of  Capua,  it  was
originally  limited  in  its  jurisdiction  to  an  extremely  small  dis-
trict; for  the  domain  of  Capua,  which  included  the  Ager
Campanus  and  the  mountain  separating  this  from  the  sea,
thus  reached  to  its  very  doors.  But  during  the  reign  of  Vespa-
sian a  considerable  tract  of  the  Caunpanian  plain  extending
about  as  far  as  the  modern  town  of  Aversa  or  perhaps  even
to  the  River  Clanius  seems  to  have  been  allotted  to  Puteoli,
because  it  had  favored  the  emperor's  candidacy  for  the  throne,
while  Capua  had  espoused  the  cause  of  his  rival  Vitellius.  The
early  settlement  was  constructed  upon  the  elevation  which  is
occupied  by  the  present  town  of  Pozzuoli,  but  gifter  the  Han-
nibalic  War  the  city  began  to  increstse  gradually  in  size  guid
to  cover  the  low  district  surrounding  the  harbor.

The  oldest  part  of  the  city  was  systematically  arranged
gifter  the  Greek  fashion  as  in  Neapolis  with  parallel  rows  of
streets,  which  were  laid  out  according  to  the  points  of  the
compass  and  intersected  one  another  at  right  suigles.  The
heurbor  district  on  the  contrary  showed  no  regular  plan.  When
the  city  later  received  a  Roman  colony,  the  district  extending
inland  toward  the  Solfatara  was  laid  out  for  their  use  accord-
ing to  the  Roman  style  systematically  with  cardo  and  dc-
cumani,  -  a  fact  attested  by  the  parallelism  of  the  principal
modern  roadways  that  follow  the  ancient  lines.  Two  important
highways  entered  Puteoli  from  the  interior,  the  Via  Campana

-  99  -


from  Capua  and  the  north,  the  Via  Antiniana  from  Neapolis,
Other  roads  extended  along  the  shore.

The  importance  of  the  place  was  due  chiefly  to  its  harbor,
whose  waters  were  protected  by  the  construction  of  an  enor-
mous mole;  although  this  was  once  destroyed,  it  was  rebuilt
with  the  aid  of  the  Emperor  Antoninus  Pius.  During  the  Igist
century  and  a  half  of  the  Republic  and  the  first  years  of  the
Empire  vessels  from  all  parts  of  the  world  could  be  seen  in  the
harbor;  the  Oriental  trade  especially  that  with  Egypt  and
Phoenicia  thrived.  The  arrival  of  the  Alexandrian  fleet  was
the  event  most  anticipated  by  the  whole  population.  The  com-
mercial importance  of  Puteoli  grew  with  the  development  of
Roman  influence  in  the  Orient  and  the  spread  of  luxury  at
Rome,  when  that  city  first  became  a  world  power;  it  declined
when  a  port  was  constructed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber  by
Claudius.

To  carry  on  the  various  branches  of  commercial  activity
m£Uiy  merchants  from  the  East  took  up  their  abode  here  bring-
ing with  them  their  customs  and  religious  notions.  There  was
also  always  present  a  large  floating  population  of  sailors  and
longshoremen  from  the  three  continents  of  the  ancient  world.
In  contrast,  therefore,  to  the  other  cities  on  the  Campanian
coast,  Puteoli  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  was  a  busy
cosmopolitan  trade  center  rather  than  a  quiet  provincial  town.
Furthermore,  while  its  activity  wcis  primarily  commercicJ,  it
was  to  a  large  extent  engaged  in  manufactures.  These  com-
prised articles  of  iron  brought  from  Elba  and  Sardinia,  white-
lead,  pottery,  mosaics,  and  dye-stuffs,  all  of  which  helped
to  swell  the  bulk  of  commerce.  Another  article  was  the  cele-
brated puluis  puteolanus  or  pozzolana  for  the  preparation  of
cement.  But,  although  the  great  meiss  of  the  population  had
assembled  here  for  business  reasons,  there  were  not  wanting
men  of  wealth  and  leisure  who  built  villas  upon  the  surround-
ing hills  because  of  the  scenic  charm  of  the  place  and  its  a-
bundance  of  mineral  springs.  Among  this  class  were  Sulla
and  Cicero  (1).

(1)  Further  particulars  are  given  by  Beloch  114  f .  ;  Dubois  64  f .  ;  Nissen,
It.  Landesk-  11,  740  f . ;  Sogliano,  Pozzuoli  e  Pompei  in  Atens  e  Roma  XVII
(1914)   368;   De   Petra.    /   porti  antichi    ddV Italia    meridionale   317    f.

-  100  -


Puteoli,  first  known  as  Dicaearchia,  was  the  seat  of  a
Greek  colony.  Although  there  is  some  uncertainty  about  the
origin  of  these  ecu-lier  settlers,  it  is  genergJly  admitted  that
they  were  Samians,  who  were  seeking  new  homes,  perhaps
in  consequence  of  the  tyranny  of  Polycrates.  They  seem,  how-
ever, to  have  been  few  in  numbers  and  to  have  been  in  a
state  of  dependence  upon  Cumae.  In  fact  the  place  is  spoken
of  merely  as  a  port  of  that  city,  and  doubtless  derived  from
that  source  the  greater  part  of  its  population.  During  the  pe-
riods of  Greek  £Uid  Oscan  supremacy  in  Campania  Puteoli
had  no  particular  history  and  its  original  Greek  element  soon
disappeared.

Coming  into  the  hcuids  of  the  Romans,  it  served  as  a
strong  fortress  and  base  of  operations  against  HannibeJ.  It  had
been  put  with  Cumae  under  the  chsu-ge  of  the  Campanian  mag-
istrate, the  praetor  Capuam  Cumas  in  318  B.  C.  and  contin-
ued in  this  state  until  194  B.  C.  when  it  received  a  Roman
colony  of  300.  From  this  time  it  increased  rapidly  in  popu-
lation and  commercial  importance  at  the  expense  of  Neapolis,
the  port  through  which  the  Oriental  trade  with  Italy  had  for-
merly passed.  Popular  disturbances  are  reported  at  the  time
of  Sulla  and  Nero.  Because  of  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  said
to  have  changed  the  government  from  a  municipality  into  a
colony  (63  A.  D.),  though  Roman  colonists  were  found  here
long  before  his  day,  scholars  have  been  constrained  to  admit
the  unsatisfactory  theory  of  a  double  state  existing  for  many
years,  made  up  on  the  one  hand  of  Roman  citizens  and  on  the
other  of  non-Romans  governed  as  a  municipality  (1).  At  any
rate  Nero  called  the  city  by  the  imposing  title  of  Colonia  Clau-
dia Neronensis  Puteolana  an  appellation  which  was  changed
to  Colonia  Flauia  Augusta  Puteolana  under  Vespasian,  who
W21S  much  liked  in  the  town.  As  already  stated,  the  im-
portance of  the  city  declined  after  the  first  Christian  century,
but  it  still  figured  largely  in  the  distribution  of  public  grain
under  Constantine  and  his  successors.  Since  it  was  not  protec-
ted as  a  whole  by  walls,  it  suffered  much  when  the  barbarians
had  made  their  way  into  Italy;  most  of  the  inhabitants  went

(1)   Cp.    Kornemann,    Colonia,    P.-W.    IV.    538.

.101  -


to  Naples  and  only  the  heights  occupied  by  the  first  settlement
continued  to  be  populated  (I).

In  contrast  to  the  extremely  limited  number  of  inscriptions
available  for  the  study  of  religion  in  many  localities  of  Cam-
pania, Puteoli  appears  at  first  sight  to  present  a  real  wealth
of  epigraphical  material.  But  msuiy  inscriptions  that  have  been
classified  as  belonging  to  this  city  have  no  real  claim  for  such
an  assignment.  The  cities  in  the  vicinity  were  so  numerous,
and  were  situated  in  such  close  proximity  one  to  the  other,  that
it  is  often  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  determine  the  source
of  a  given  inscription.  The  principle  followed  by  Mommsen  in
editing  this  portion  of  the  Corpus  of  Latin  inscriptions,  to  at-
tribute to  Puteoli  as  the  largest  city  all  those  inscriptions  which
can  not  be  definitely  associated  with  Cumae,  Misenum  or
Neapolis,  makes  the  epigraphical  evidence  confusing  and  of-
ten of  little  value.  Hence  it  is  necessEU'y  to  use  great  caution
in  dealing  with  this  material  in  order  not  to  draw  unwarranted
conclusions  from  it  (2).

Unlike  Cumae  Puteoli  does  not  exhibit  any  evidence  for
the  religion  of  the  eeu-ly  Greek  settlers;  likewise  Oscan  in-
scriptions are  wanting,  and  there  is  little  material  on  which
to  base  a  study  of  the  earlier  period.  References  to  religious
matters  pertain  generally  to  the  Roman  period,  emd  we  can  use
the  Roman  names  in  speaking  of  the  various  deities,  zJthough
the  principal  ones  must  have  been  worshipp>ed  here  long  be-
fore the  Roman  domination.  Cults  that  are  not  of  Roman  ori-
gin £u-e  included  in  the  following  list.

PRE-ROMAN   DEITIES,   JUPITER.

Jupiter  was  worshipped  under  several  guises  as  a  result
of  the  identification  of  the  great  Greek  and  Italian  divinity  with
Oriental  gods,  but  these  combinations  will  be  reserved  for  later

(1)  For  the  history  of  Puteoli  see  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  pp.  182-184;
Dubois,    1   f.  ;  Nissen,  It.  Landcsk-  II,  737 ;  Beloch  89-93  and  Erganzungen  433.

(2)  Cp.  Dressel,  Nutnismatische  Beitrdge  in  Hisi.  und.  Phil.  Aufsdtze  E.
Curtius  gewidmet  255  (4).  I  have  relegated  to  the  ApF>endix  as  wholly  uncer-
tain several  inscriptions  classed  by  Mommsen  with  the  Puleolanae  smd  used
by  Dubois   for  establishing  various  cults  in   this  city.

-  102  -


treatment.  Likewise  the  cult  of  the  Capitoline  deity  will  be
discussed  in  the  next  section,  and  the  old  cult  of  Jupiter  Flaz-
zus,  assigned  to  Puteoli  by  Dubois,  has  been  left  for  the  Ap-
pendix (I).

APOLLO.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  exact  origin  of  the  first
settlement  around  Puteoli,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  settlers
were  worshippers  of  Apollo.  The  god  may  well  have  been
introduced  with  the  colonists  who  arrived  from  Samos;  it  has
even  been  suggested  that  this  colony  was  the  source  of  the
Sibylline  oracles  in  south  Italy,  which  are  supposed  to  have
passed  through  it  on  their  way  from  Elrythrae  to  Cumae  (2).
In  addition,  the  strong  influence  which  Cumae  wielded  in  this
district  and  the  probability  that  citizens  of  that  town  had  a
part  in  the  early  development  of  Puteoli  make  the  location  of
a  temple  here  at  this  period  amount  to  a  certainty.

Statius  goes  fgtrther  and  says  that  the  colonization  wsts
made  under  the  auspices  of  Apollo  (3).  But  since  the  reference
to  Puteoli  in  the  first  part  of  this  passage  has  been  called  in
question,  as  by  Dubois,  it  becomes  necesseury  to  re-examine
the  words  of  Statius.  In  relating  that  various  cities  of  Ceunpa-
nia  were  spared  by  the  volcano  Vesuvius  the  poet  cites  sever-
al examples,  which  he  designates  by  circumlocutions.  In  ac-
cordance with  the  view  of  Dubois,  who  arbitrarily  inserts  a
mcirk  of  punctuation  between  tecta  and  Dicarchei,  there  is  first
a  reference  .to  Apollo's  temple  at  Cumae  as  far  cis  the  word

(1)  Corcia,  Storia  delle  due  Sicilie  II,  179,  erroneously  claims  temples
for  Jupiter  under  the  three  fold  asi>ect  of  Optimus  Maximus,  Custos  and
Victor.

(2)  Graillot.  Le  culte  de  Cyhkle  44.

(3)  Stat.  silv.   III.  V,  74  f. :

Hinc  auspice    condita    Phoebo
tecta  Dicarchei   portusque  et  litora  mundi
hospita :    at    hinc   magnae    tractus    imitantia    Romae
quae  Capys   aduectis  impleuit    moenia    Teucris.
Nostra    quoque    et    propriis  tenuis    nee    rara    colonis
Parthenope,    cui    mite    solum  trans    aequora    uectae
ipse  Dionaea   monstravit    ApoUo   columba.

-  103  -


tecta,  then  a  reference  to  the  harbor  and  hospitable  shore  of
Puteoli,  and  finally  allusions  to  Capua  and  Neapolis  (1).  But
this  reading  puts  a  forced  interpretation  upon  the  statements
of  Statius,  who  cleeu-ly  divides  his  account  into  three  parts
marked  off  definitely  by  the  particles  hinc,  at  hinc,  and  quo-
que.  Moreover,  each  circumlocution  describing  the  three  chief
Campanian  towns,  -  Puteoli,  Capua  and  Neapolis,  -  is  approx-
imately of  the  same  length,  -  long  enough  in  fact  to  msike
the  reference  perfectly  intelligible  to  the  reader.  Hence  we  zxe
justified  in  understanding  the  words  of  Statius  as  an  evidence
for  the  existence  of  an  early  cult  of  Apollo  at  Puteoli.

Naturally  his  temple  was  located  on  the  Acropolis,  the
site  of  the  first  Greek  settlement.  The  building  appears  on  a
plate  inserted  at  the  beginning  of  Bellori*s  Fragmenta  vestigii
Veteris  Romae  (2).  This  design  is  labelled  ex  antiqua  pictura  ;
though  the  original  soon  disappeared,  it  W2is  first  seen  and  de-
scribed by  Ottavio  Falconieri  (3).  The  scene  here  represented
has  been  sometimes  considered  to  be  a  view  of  the  Tiber  be-
neath the  Aventine  hill  at  Rome,  and  this  opinion  has  been
more  recently  revived  by  Hiilsen;  most  modern  scholars,  how-
ever, following  the  lead  of  Canina  have  seen  here  the  cosist
of  Puteoli  (4).  In  fact  the  design  appears  to  be  a  reproduction
more  or  less  exact  of  the  mole  and  the  principal  buildings  a-
long  the  shore  of  this  city,  and  is  probably  derived  from  a
good  source.  It  is  thus  to  be  considered  in  the  same  cleiss
with  the  vases  which  exhibit  painted  designs  of  the  Csunpanian
coast  at  Baiae  and  Puteoli.  In  Bellori's  plate  a  small  building
marked    T.    APOLLINIS     is    seen  in  the  extreme  right-hand

(1)  Dubois.    133.

(2)  Bellori,    Fragmenta    vestigii   veteris   Romae    (1673)    1.

(3)  Described  in  a  letter  to  N.  Heinsius  with  date  of  Aug.  19,  1668;  by
Burmann,  Sylloge  epistolarum  a  viris  illustribus  scriptarum.  V,  p.  527;  £ind
Hiilsen  p.  214  of  the  article  cited  below.  The  original  painting,  found  in  1668
at  Rome,  is  assigned  to  the  third  century  A.  D.  Hiilsen,  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)
219;   Dubois.    204.

(4)  Hiilsen,  Di  una  pittura  antica  ritrovata  suW Esquilino  nel  1668  in
Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  213  f .  ;  Canina,  Architettura  antica,  sezione  romana  186
and  table  161  ;  De  Rossi,  Topografia  delle  spiagge  di  Baja  in  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.
I  (1853)  133  f.  ;  VI  (1854)  153  f.  and  Le  prime  raccolie  d'antiche  iscrizioni
58;   Jordan,    Arch.   Zeit.  XXVI    (1868)   93;    Beloch    126;    Dubois.  201    f.

-  104  .


side  near  the  sea.  Beloch,  therefore,  followed  by  Dubois,  puts
the  temple  on  the  western  side  of  the  church  called  Purifica-
zione  a  mare,  but  somewhat  higher  up  (I).

Two  dedications,  reported  to  have  been  found  at  Pu-
teoli,  belong  to  this  cult;  they  exhibit  nothing  of  importance
and  contain  merely  the  names  of  the  dedicators  (2).  A  citizen
of  this  place  L.  Aurelius  Pylades,  the  actor  of  pantomimes,
who  flourished  under  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Commodus,  was
a  prominent  member  of  one  of  the  actors'  associations,  the
parasiti  ApolUnis.  On  a  pedestal  from  Puteoli  he  is  called  their
patron  and  priest  (3).  But  this  society  probably  modelled  af-
ter the  associations  of  Greek  artists  who  stood  under  the  pro-
tection of  Dionysus,  had  its  seat  in  Rome,  where  its  members
were  concerned  especially  with  the  dramatic  performances  of
the  ludi  Apollinares  (4);  hence  it  is  not  to  be  considered  with
Walzing  as  a  local  society  of  Puteoli  or  as  having  a  branch
here  (5).  The  priesthood  held  by  Pylades  belonged  to  Rome,
while  the  dignities  granted  him  at  Puteoli  are  expressly  asso-
ciated  with  his   town   later   in   the  inscription.

CERES.

The  cult  of  Demeter  along  with  Cora  may  without  hesi-
tation be  ascribed  to  the  city  from  its  foundation  both  because
of  its  early  dependence  upon  Cumae  and  by  reason  of  the
wide  prevalence  of  Demeter  worship  and  the  mysteries  gener-

(1)  Beloch  131  ;  Dubois,  Cultes  et  dieux  a  Pouzzoles  in  Melanges  d'arch.
et  d'hist.   XXII   (1902)  25.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1544:  Apollini  sacrum.  Q.  Trebellius  Restitutus  fecit.
C.  /.  L,  X,  1545:  Sacrum  Apollini.  C.  Ratinius  Firmus.  Mommsen  suspected
without  sufficient  reason  that  both  inscrpt'ons  came  from  Cumae.  Cp.  Du-
bois, Melanges  XXII    (1902)   24.

(3)N.  S.  1888,  237  =  £.  £.  VIII.  369:.D.  5186  =  Vaglie;i.  1895.  For  the  text
of  the  inscription   see   p.    117.

(4)  A.  Muller,  Die  Parasiti  ApolUnis  in  Philologus  LXIII  (1904)  360.  Cp.
Mommsen,  Tre  iscrizioni  puteolane  in  Rom.  Mitt.  Ill  (1888)  79;  Dubois,  Pouz-
zoles antique  62;  Vaglieri,  ApolUnis  parasitus,  Ruggiero  I,  519,  Walzing,
Etude  historique  sur  les  corporations  projessionelles  IV,  112  gives  a  list  of
parasiti.

(5)  Walzing,    op.   cit.    IV,    181.

-   105  -


ally  in  south  Italy.  Her  worship  wets  doubtless  accompanied
by  mysteries  in  this  city  as  at  Cumae  and  Neapolis  (1).  Un-
der the  namje  of  Ceres  the  goddess  continued  to  be  populair
after  the  period  of  Roman  influence  began.  She  was  certainly
not  introduced  at  this  time,  as  Dubois  rightly  maintains,  yet
Beloch,  who  is  credited  by  Dubois  with  the  opposite  opinion,
also  admitted  her  presence  as  Demeter  in  the  Greek  pe-
riod (2).  This  worship  was  officially  recognized  by  the  com-
munity and  was  in  the  hands  of  public  priestesses  (sacerdotes
publiccB)  as  elsewhere  in  Campania.  Two  inscriptions  perhaps
of  the  first  century  A.  D.  allude  to  the  office  of  priestess;  the
neime  of  one  of  them  Sabina  appears  in  an  epitaph;  that  of
the  other  can  no  longer  be  determined  (3).  The  position  was
looked  upon  as  one  of  great  honor,  and  Sabina,  who  attended
to  the  preparation  of  her  monument  during  her  own  life  time,
speaks  proudly  of  her  distinction.  A  third  inscription  contains
the  name  of  a  priestess  Stlaccia;  she  is  styled  sacerdos  Cere^
rum  and  lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  (4) .  By
this  time,  however,  the  character  of  the  cult  had  been  thor-
oughly modified  as  a  result  of  contact  with  the  beliefs  and
practices  of  the  Orient.  It  was  now  closely  allied  with  the
worship  of  Dionysus,  and  will  be  mentioned  again  with  that
cult  when  the  Oriental  religions  are  treated.

A  draped  statue  found  in  this  neighborhood  belongs  to
the  Ceres  type  and  was  probably  designed  to  bear  a  torch.
This,  however  seems  to  be  a  portrait  statue,  or  at  any  rate  was
made  for  decorative  rather  than  for  religious  purposes  (5).
The  site  of  the  temple  is  unknown;  several  theories,  which
all  lack  a  solid  foundation,  are  discussed  by  Corcia  (6).


(1)  Dubois,   Milanges  XXII   (1902)  27   (4).

(2)  Dubois.   Pouzzoles  antique   134  and  Melanges  XXII  (1902)  27;    Beloch
104.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1812=VagIieri  1907:   Sabina  sacerdos  Cereris  public,   mon-
umentum  sibi  uiuae  fecit.    C.   /.   L.   X,    1829.   Cp.    p.    231.

(4)  C.   /.   L.   X.    1585  =  D.   3366=Vaglieri    1138.

(5)  Reinach,  Repertoire  de  la  statuaire  grecque  et  romaine  II,  656,   No.   9;
Dubois.PouzzoZes   antique  416,    No.    9.

(6)  Corcia,   Di   una   voiiva  statuetta   egizia    in  Atti  Nap.    II    (1866)    64    f.

-  106  -


NEPTUNE.

A  great  sea-port,  the  prosperity  of  which  depended  upon
its  commerce  could  scarcely  fail  to  recognize  the  principal  di-
vinities that  controlled  the  sea.   Thus  Neptune,   conceived  ac-
cording to  the  attributes  of  the  Greek  Poseidon,  had  a  place
in  the  community.  His  name  was  applied  to  a  portico,  which
Cicero  used  to  illustrate  a  problem  in  his  Academics,  saying,
a  We  see  Puteoli  but  do  not  see  our  friend  Auianus,   who  is
perhaps   strolling  about   in   Neptune's   portico   (1)  ».    De    lorio
understood  this  as  an  allusion  to  a  portico  directly  connected
with  a  temple  of. the  god,  which  he  located  on  the  site  of  the
so  -  called  Tempio  delle  Ninfe  west  of  the  city,  on  the  ground
that  to  this  point  (here  was  an  unimpeded  view  from  Bacoli  in
accordance  with  Cicero's  statement  (2).  But  in  reality  it  seems
to  have  stood  farther  east.  It  is  meurked  on  Bellori's  plan  with
the  words  portex  Neptuni,   and  was  part  of  an  extensive  sys-
tem  of   colonnades   extending  along   the   harbor,    the   remains
of  which  are  now  for  the  most  p£irt  under  water.   It  was  per-
haps   divided    into    sections    named    after    leading    divinities;
that  of  Neptune  is  located  by  Beloch,   following  the  plan,   at
the  eastern  extremity  somewhere  between  the  great  mole  and
the    church   Purificazione    a    mare    (3).    It    is    probable    that   a
temple  stood  in  the  vicinity  and  gave  its  name  to  this  section,
but  no   precise   information   is  at   hand.    The   ruin   improperly
called  Tempio  di  Nettuno  belongs  to  a  bath.  This  god  is  also
mentioned  in  literary  notices  belonging  to  Puteoli.   When  Ca-
ligula wcis  ready  to  start  upon  his  pcirade  across  his  specially
devised  sea-bridge,  he  offered  a  sacrifice  to  Neptune  and  other
gods  as  well  as  to  Phthonios  at  the  moment  before  he  set  out
for  Bauli  to  begin  his  triumphal  march.   Perhaps  the  sacrifice
to   Neptune   was   offered    in   his   temple    (4).    De    lorio   implies
that  Augustus  sacrificed  here  before  going  against  Sex.   Pom-

(1)  Cic.  ac.  II,  80:  O  praeclarum  prospectum !  Puteolos  uidemus,  at
familiarem  nostrum  C.  Auianum  fortasse  in  p>orticu  Neptuni  ambuiantem  non
uidemus.

(2)  De  lorio,  Guida  di  Pozzuoli  (2)  43.  LofFredo,  Le  antichita  di  Poz-
zuolo    7.

(3)  Beloch    134:  Dubois.    133  and  Milanges  XXII   (1902)  25.

(4)  Dio   Cassius  LIX,    17.    4.

-  107  -


pey,  but  Appian  says  that  the  libations  were  poured  into  the
water  (1).

While  these  evidences  point  to  a  worship  of  the  god  con-
ceived of  in  the  Greek  fashion  as  the  sea-god  Poseidon,  it  is
probable  that  in  earlier  times  he  was  worshipped  as  Neptune,
a  god  of  springs,  along  with  the  Nymphs  (2).  There  would
therefore  be  two  main  sources  for  his  cult,  which  doubtless
flourished  accordingly  in  this  locality.  A  freedman  of  the  city
L.  Junius  Puteolanus  was  devoted  to  this  god  and  made  him
a  dedication  in  southern  Spain  (3).

HERCULES.

The  legends  of  Hercules,  which  were  associated  with  so
many  points  along  this  coEist,  may  have  arrived  first  in  the
Rhodian  settlement  at  Neapolis,  borne  by  men  of  the  same
nationality  from,  the  vicinity  of  Croton.  The  myth  of  the
cattle  theft  becEime  most  easily  localized  around  this  city,
because  of  the  presence  of  the  numerous  warm  springs  which
had  already  figured  in  the  older  Argive  version  of  this
theme  (4) .  Hercules  appears  but  once  in  the  epigraphical  ma-
terial coming  from  this  city.  A  brief  dedication  belonging  to
the  Republican  period,  which  was  unearthed  near  the  Sol-
fatara,  records  the  manumission  of  a  libertinus  C.  Marcius
Alexander.  He  had  made  a  vow  to  the  god,  while  still  a  slave,
and  paid  this  with  gratitude  after  he  received  his  freedom  (5).
Cosenza  has  affirmed  the  existence  of  a  Hercules  temple,  here
as  in  other  places,  without  evidence  (6).


(1)  De  lorio,  Guida  43;  Corcia,  Atti  Nap.  II.  172;  Appian.  b.  civ.  V,
98:  6  §s  Karaap  sx  Atxaiapxsiag  Guwv  ajia  xal  otisvScdv  dnd  xfic,  vauapx^Soj
VECDg  is  TO  TisXccyoQ  avs|jiOLg  zubioiQ  xal  'AoiipaXsiq)  JloastSwvt  xal  dxu|i(i)V'.  BaXaaa-i;;.

(2)  von  Domaszewski,  Neptunus  auj  lateinischen  Inschrijten  in  'Ah'
handl.  zur   rom.   Rel.    19.

(3)  C.   /.    L.    II.    1944    from   Fuengirola    (Suel)  =  D.    6914.

(4)  Gruppe,  Berl.  Phil  Wochenshr.  XXXI  (1911)  1003.  See  p.    15.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1569  =  D.  3427  =  VagIieri  1086:  Herculei  sacrum.  C.  Marci
C.   1.   Alex,  fecit;   seruos  uouit,   liber  soluit.   Herculei  sacrum.   C.   Marci.    C.  1.

Alex.    dat.

(6)  Cosenza.   Siabia,    120    (2).    See    p.    232.

-  108  -


VENUS.

A  dedication  to  Venus  included  in  the  collection  of  Fusco
as  belonging  to  Puteoli  survives  in  a  badly  mutilated  condi-
tion. A  second  fragment,  which  mentions  this  goddess  along
with  other  divinities,  is  included  by  Dubois  in  his  evidence
for  this  cult,  but  its  origin  is  wholly  unknown  (I).  A  roof-
tile,  however,  which  was  discovered  here,  contained  the  words
Venerus  Heruc,  a  strange  mark  for  such  an  object,  as  these
were  generally  signed  with  the  maker's  name  (2).  On  account
of  the  orthography  and  the  form  Venerus,  the  tile  must  be
assigned  to  the  period  of  the  Roman  republic,  probably  to  the
era  immediately  following  the  Hannibalic  War.  It  evidently
contains  an  allusion  to  the  celebrated  Venus  of  Mt.  Eryx  in
Sicily.  The  cult  may  have  reached  Puteoli  directly  from  Sicily
through  the  ordinary  channels  of  trade,  as  suggested  by  Du-
bois, but  it  may  well  have  been  introduced,  and  was  at  least
fostered  by  Roman  influence  (3).  We  know  that  the  first
Roman  temple  in  honor  of  this  Venus  w2is  vowed  in  217  B.  C.
and  dedicated  within  two  years,  and  that  the  goddess  became
extremely  popular  in  Rome  (4),  Hence  there  is  every  indi-
cation that  the  cult  was  promoted  chiefly  by  the  Romein  colo-
nists who  came  to  Puteoli  during  the  first  great  wave  of  that
deity's  popularity.  For  a  Venus  Cuppedinaria,  who  was  the
patron  deity  of  a  supposed  Forum  with  a  similar  epithet,  there
is  no  evidence  whatever  (5).  Statues  of  Venus  found  in  this
locality   have   an    artistic   rather    than   a   religious    interest    (6).

AESCULAPIUS  AND  HYGIA.

A  shrine  in  honor  of  Aesculapius  and  his  companion  deity
Hygia  (Salus  or  Valetudo)  undoubtedly  stood  at  Puteoli.  It
was  one  of  the  Greek  cults  of  the  early  period  rather  than  a

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1595:  A.  Comananus  Ou(ii)  f.  Veneri  d.  d.  C.  /.  L.  X.
1605.  Cp.    Dubois    142.

(2)  C.   /.   L.    X,   8042    (I).    It   no  longer   exists.

(3)  Dubois,   loc.  cit.;   De  Sanctis,  Storia   dei  Romani   I,   200   (3).

(4)  Preller-Jordan    I,    151;    Wissowa   290   and    Ges.    Abhandl    9.

(5)  Garucci,  Bull  Nap.  V  (1846)  114;  Dubois.  Melanges  XXII  (1902)
33   (5).

(6)  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  Cat.  p.  417,  No.    13;   14.

-  109  -


late  importation  under  Roman  influence  as  stated  by  Miss
Walton  (1).  Here  were  many  mineral  springs,  recommended
as  specifics  for  numerous  maladies  to  which  the  sick  and  in-
firm resorted  from  all  directions.  Such  persons  were  naturally
interested  in  the  god  of  healing;  to  him  they  offered  up  their
prayers,  and  if  healed  by  any  agency  were  wont  to  acknowl-
edge the  beneficent  intervention  of  the  god.  Unfortunately
the  inscriptions  that  prove  a  cult  of  Aesculapius  and  Hygia
in  the  region  around  the  Bay  of  Naples  are  not  always  of  cer-
tain origin.  The  only  one  in  fact  which  can  be  attributed  to
this  city  with  any  degree  of  assurance  is  a  short  dedication  in
Greek,  discovered  according  to  report  near  the  church  of
S.  Fremcesco  (2) .  It  is  due  to  one  Protogenes  and  is  addressed
to  both  deities.  Two  other  inscriptions  may  be  briefly  mentioned
here,  although  it  is  not  certain  that  they  were  connected  with
this  city.  Both  exhibit  the  serpent  as  a  symbol  of  the  god,
in  one  case  it  api>ears  as  a  sculptured  relief  accompanying  the
inscription,  in  the  other  the  inscription  is  itself  written  upon
a  bronze  serpent.  In  both  is  seen  the  name  of  a  physician  Cal-
listus,  who  in  the  first  example  is  associated  with  a  Greek
woman.  In  one  case  the  Greek  name  of  the  goddess  is  em-
ployed; in  the  second  it  has  been  translated  by  Salus  (3).
The  collegium  salutare,  which  is  found  in  one  inscription,  is
not  a  sacred  organization  connected  with  the  worship  of  Hygia-
Salus  but  a  burial  society  (4).  The  god  Aesculapius  is  rep-
resented by  a  colossal  statue  une^thed  in  the  excavations  near
the  amphitheater  (5).

(1)  A.   Walton.   The   Cult  of  Asklepios   in  Cornell  Studies   III    (1894)    119.

(2)  /.  G.  XIV.  832=C.  /.  G.  5854;  'AaxXYjTiicp  xaL  Tyiq:  eOxapiaT(3(v)
IIpwTOYSvyjg.Tramex,  Asklepios,  P.-W.  II,   1676  rightly  recognizes  only  the  above

Greek  inscription  as  exemplifying  the  cult  here.  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  138
assigns  without  reason  to  Puteoli  also  the  two  Latin  inscriptions  mentioned
below.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1546  =  Vaglieri  1023:  Aelia  Nice  et  Callistus  medicus
Asclepio  et  Hygeiae  donu  posuerunt.  C.  /.  L.  X,  1547;  Asclepio  et  Saluti  sa-
crum ex  uoto  Callistus  d.  Cp,  Liv.  perioch.  XI;  Hiibner  Antil^e  Bildwer\e  in
Madrid  208,  No.  466;  Vaglieri,  Aesculapius,  Ruggiero  I,  316;  Axtell,  The
Deification    of    Abstract  Ideas    in    Roman    Literature    and    Inscriptions    15.

(4)  C.  /.  L.   X.    1588  =  D.   7388= Vaglieri  2331.

(5)  Dubois,    Pouzzoles   antique    catalogue    417.    No.    11.

-  110  -


NYMPHS.

Other  divinities  worshipped  at  the  abundant  mineral
springs  were  the  Nymphs.  Pliny,  speaking  on  the  subject  of
springs,  says  that  the  deities  of  these  with  their  various  names
increase  the  total  number  of  gods,  and  gives  Puteoli  as  an
example  of  this  tendency;  he  fails,  however,  to  cite  any  of  the
names.  Dubois  thinks  that  one  of  them  was  consecrated  to
Silvanus  and  another  to  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  but  this  as-
sumption rests  upon  no  real  evidence  (1).  The  Nymphs  are
mentioned  in  one  inscription  whose  origin  is  undisputed,  -
a  dedication  ctssociated  with  the  gift  of  a  woman  Ducenia
Tyche,  another  zissigned  by  Mommsen  to  Ischia  and  by  Beloch
to  this  city  speaks  of  the  same  divinities  under  the  form  Lym-
phae  (2).  The  provenience  of  the  latter  is  unknown,  but  the
second  attribution  seems  preferable  because  of  the  fact  that
the  dedicator  A.  Auianius  Gilo  is  mentioned  in  another  in-
scription that  came  from  Puteoli  (3).

The  Nymphs  were  doubtless  worshipped  at  several  spots
which  were  considered  sacred  to  them  because  of  the  presence
of  springs.  One  of  them  has  been  recorded,  -  a  cave  along  the
sea-shore  which  Beloch  would  locate  near  the  western  end  of
town  beyond  the  Balnevm  Faustinae  (4).  This  cave  is  men-
tioned in  the  nsurration  of  a  miraculous  incident  in  the  life  of
Apollonius  of  Tyana.  V/hile  the  noted  philosopher  and  ma-
gician was  imprisoned  by  Domitism,  his  friends  and  disciples
Darius  and  Demetrius  were  discussing  his  fate  as  they  walked
along  the  beach  at  Puteoli.  Entering  finally  into  a  shrine  of
the  Nymphs,  they  continued  in  conversation  and  after  a  time
marvelled  to  find  their  beloved  teacher  who  had  some  diffi-
culty to  persuade  them  that  he  was   still   alive   (5).    De   lorio

(1)  Plin.  not.  XXXI,  4:  Augent  numerum  deorum  nominibus  uariis  ur-
bisque  condunt.  sicut  Puteolos  in  Campania.  Dubois  138,  402  (2).  Cp.  Amm.
XXVIII.   4.    19.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1592:  Nymphis  Ducenia  A.  f.  Tyche  d.  d. ;  C.  /.  L.  X.
6791 :   A.   Auianius  Cilo  Lymphis  u.   8.   1.   m.

(3)  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.  2133.

(4)  Beloch    137.

(5)  Philostratus,  Vita  Apoll.  Tyan.  VIII,  11  :  d7r£tu6vTec  O'jv  3x5t0Y]vxo  ig  t6
vOji^atov  sv  4)  6  nidoi,  Xeuxou  5'  ooxog  soxi  XtGou  guvsxwv  uTjyifjv  uSaxo?  oCG*
&iX6ppc£XXouoav  xoO  oxo|iiou  out',  si  ttg  duavcXoirj,  OuodtSoGoav  etc.

-  Ill  -


believed  that  they  had  a  regular  temple  in  the  vicinity  of  Ci-
cero's villa  provided  with  an  abundance  of  water.  He  de-
voted considerable  space  in  attempting  to  Identify  it  with
scanty  ruins  west  of  Puteoli  beyond  the  supposed  location  of
Neptune's  temple;  but  evidence  for  such  a  building  is  want-
ing  (I).

BONA  DEA.

The  name  Bona  Dea  is  now  supposed  to  have  been  ap-
plied originally  to  the  Roman  Flora  and  later  to  have  been
transferred  to  the  Greek  cult  of  Damia,  which  came  to  Rome
from  Tarentum  and  supplanted  for  the  most  part  the  earlier
worship  (2) .  This  cult,  which  was  most  prominent  in  Latium,
existed  to  some  extent  in  Puteoli  where  it  is  attested  by  one
and  possibly  by  two  inscriptions.  The  one,  whose  origin  is
undisputed,  is  unfortunately  badly  mutilated  (3).  The  second
inscription,  which  is  carved  upon  a  pedestal,  may  be  men-
tioned here,  although  it  is  not  certain  to  what  city  it  belonged.
It  records  the  gift  to  the  goddess  of  an  image  donated  by  a
contractor  C.  Auillius  December  and  his  common  law  wife
Vellia  Cinnamis.  A  freedman  of  the  Emperor,  Claudius  Phi-
ladespotus  is  named  as  priest.  But  he  did  not  serve  Bona  Dea
herself,  £is  she  was  always  attended  by  women;  instead  he
seems  to  have  been  connected  with  the  temple  of  another  god,
where  the  image  in  question  was  set  up.  The  inscription  beeirs
the  date  of  62  B.  C,  and  conforms  to  the  principle  that  in
this  cult  a  woman  makes  the  offering,  or  is  at  least  associated
with  it  except  in  the  case  of  men  of  low  social  standing  (4).

The    question   arises   whether   this   cult   was    in   existence


(1)  De  lorio,  Guida  (2)  48;  Paoli,   Antiquitatum  reliquiae  Fol,   26,  PI.  XL.

(2)  Wissowa  216  and  Bona  Dea,  P.-W.  III.  686  f.  Cp.  Famell  III.  101  :
de   Guidobaldi,    Damia  o   bona   dea   2   f.,    87.

(3)  C.   /.   L.   X.    1548:    Bonae   D{ )sacru(m.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1549  =  Vaglieri  1030:  C.  Auillius  December  redemptor  mar-
morarius  Bonae  Dae  cum  Vella  Cinnamide  cont(ubernali)  u.  s.  1.  m.,  Clau-
d'o  Aug.  1.  Philadespoto  sacerdote,  posita,  dedicata  VI  Kal.  Nouembris,  Q.
lunio  MmuIIo  cos.  Dubois  143  (6)  reads  coni{uge?).  Vaglieri,  Bona  Dea,  Rug-
giero  I,    1014.

-  112  -


here  before  the  arrival  of  the  Roman  colony  (I).  For  the  most
psu't,  as  already  suggested,  the  cult  wets  confined  to  central
Italy  particulafly  to  Latium  and  to  a  number  of  localities  far-
ther north  such  as  Aquileia,  so  that  it  seems  not  to  have  been
generally  introduced  by  the  Roman  settlers,  or  at  least  not  to
have  made  much  headway  in  the  South.  Its  appearance  at
Puteoli  is  probably  due  in  the  first  place  to  the  influence  of
Tarentum  through  the  channels  of  trade.  When  the  Romans
arrived,  they  recognized  in  the  goddess  of  Puteoli  the  same
Bona  Dea  with  whom  they  were  already  familiar  at  Rome
and  whose  cult  was  administered  with  Greek  observances.

MINOR  DEITIES.

Hephaestus-Vulcan  would  naturally  receive  appropriate
recognition  in  a  place  where  signs  of  volcanic  activity  existed
on  every  hand,  and  was  probably  associated  with  several
places  along  this  shore.  Here  he  v/as  connected  more  partic-
ularly with  the  volcanic  crater  known  as  the  Solfateu-a,  which
Strabo  names  the  ((  Forum  of  Hephaestus  »  and  loannes  Ly-
dus  calls  his  ((  plain  ».  Alluding  to  the  same  deity,  Silius
speaks  of  the  rumbling  of  Mulciber  in  this  region  (2).  But
there  is  no  evidence  for  a  regularly  organized  worship  with
a  temple,  nor  for  a  festival,  such  as  wets  celebrated  at  A-
thens  (3).  Famell  wrongly  attributes  to  Cumae  the  notice  of
Strabo  just  cited  as  evidence  for  a  cult  there  (4).

There  are  slight  indications  for  a  cult  of  Ceistor  and  Pol-
lux. According  to  the  sketch  preserved  upon  the  so  called
vase  of  Odemira  in  the  Museum  of  Lisbon,  there  were  two
statues    close    to    the    heurbor   representing   youths    grsisping   a


(1)  Cp.   Dubois    143  and  Milangea  XXII   (1902)  34.

(2)  Strab.   V,   4,   6:  uTcspxsixat  be  xy^g  TioAscog  eObug  ii  xou  'H^adaxou  dyopoc.

loannes  Lydus.    De   menaibus    IV,    115.

Sil.   XII,    140:    son'tu   lugubre  minaci

Mulciber    immugit    lacerataque   uiscera    terrae

memdit    et    exesos    labefactat   murmure    montis.
Cp.    Preller-Robert    181;    Rapp,    Hephaiatos,   Roscher    I,    2073;    Wssowa,    Mul-
ciber,  Roscher    II,   3224:    Picard.    Vulcanua,   D.-S.    V,    991.

(3)  Farnell    V.    377   f . ;    Preller-Robert    180.

(4)  Farnell   V.   395   (20c).

.  113  -


spear,  which  have  been  identified  as  images  of  the  great  Twin
Brethren  (1).  The  Dioscuri  similarly  portrayed  have  been
found  upon  coins,  and  according  to  reliefs  upon  the  column
of  Trajan  seem  also  to  have  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  har-
bor of  Ancona  (2).  But  the  presence  of  such  figures  is  an  ev-
idence for  a  custom  of  adorning  ancient  harbors  in  a  particulsu*
way  rather  than  a  proof  for  the  existence  of  a  real  cult.  The
representation  of  the  statues  at  Puteoli  is  accompanied  by
stars,  which  Dubois  considers  as  another  reference  to  the
Dioscuri.  He  also  advcinces  the  theory  that  this  vase  was  a
talisman  borne  by  seamen  or  merchants  to  insure  immunity
from  disaster  and  a  safe  and  prosperous  voyage  (3).

Mercury  is  named  in  one  inscription  due  to  the  society  of
retiarii,  but  the  meeuiing  is  not  altogether  clear  14) .  Generally
the  term  retiarii  refers  to  one  of  the  importaint  cleisses  of  gladia-
tors, who  made  a  \aige  use  of  nets  in  their  combats  in  the  arena.
But  as  Mercury  is  not  usually  thought  of  as  a  patron  of  gladia-
tors but  rather  as  a  promoter  of  business  and  commercial  pros-
p>erity,  Dubois  explains  the  word  as  a  reference  to  a  body  of
men  engaged  in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  nets  (5).  There
is  no  improbability,  however,  in  understanding  the  dedication
as  due  to  gladiators,  who  had  some  reason  for  honoring  this
god,  especially  since  they  were  probably  joined  with  einother
society  whose  name  has  been  lost  (6).  The  inscription  is  a  Ccire-

(1)  Cp  the  money  of  Nuceria  discussed  below  p.  293.  Albert,  Le  culte
de  Castor  et  Pollux  catalogue  143  Nos.  115,  121,  122;  Dubois.  198.  One  of
the  figures  holds  possibly  a  trident  or  a  scepter  instead  of  a  spear.  Cp.  Du-
bois   198    (2).

(2)  Strong,  Roman  Sculpture  187  and  PI.  LVI ;  Cichorius,  Die  Reliefs
der  Trajansdule  III,  22;  Cp.  Taylor,  The  Cults  of  Ostia  26.  But  Reinach  "n-
terprsts  the  two  figures  as  Hercules  and  PaJaemon-Portunus,  Rev.  arch.  V.
(1905)  402,  where  a  summary  of  the  opinions  of  Benndorf,  Studniczka  and
Frohner  app>ears.

(3)  Dubois,    Pouzzoles    antique    199    (4).

(4)  C.   /.    L.    X,    1589  =  1.    1234  =  Vaglieri    1155:    Merc(urio)   retiari[ ]dan-

(dum)  mag(istri)  curarunt.  Six  names  follow.  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X.  p.  1163,
index,    under    the    heading    maglstri    says,     magistri    quinque    reiiariorum,     but

there  is  evidence  for  six  names.  The  supplement  Tnerc(atores)  instead  of  Merc-
(curio)  was  advocated  by  Garrucci,  Bull.  Nap.  V  (1847)  114.  Cp.  Walzing,
Etude  hist,   sur  les  corp.   prof.    IV,    117.

(5)  Dubois,  Melanges  XXII  (1902)  33   (5).   Cp.    Forcellini.  Lexicon  V.   218.

(6)  Walzing,   op.  cit.   I.   89.

-  114  -


less  piece  of  work,  coarse  and  uncouth  befitting  men  of  the
eirena.  A  second  inscription,  assigned  by  Mommsen  to  Puteoli,
has  been  treated  in  the  preceding  chapter  (I).

A  cult  of  Diana  Lochia  has  been  attributed  by  Dubois  to
PuteoH  (2).  But,  although  the  inscription  recording  this  goddess
has  been  included  by  Mommsen  among  those  belonging  to
Puteoli,  there  is  no  proof  that  this  was  its  place  cf  origin,  and
it  might  equally  well  be  aissigned  with  Capasso  to  Neapolis.  A
considerable  ruin  still  standing  on  the  east  side  of  the  Via  del-
VAnfiteatro  has  received  the  name  Tempio  di  Diana  because
of  the  belief  that  a  statue  of  her  was  found  here  (3).  But  consid-
erable doubt  exists  about  the  identity  of  this  work,  which  may
have  been  intended  for  Magna  Mater.  Furthermore,  other
remains  discovered  in  the  semie  place  point  to  the  use  of  the
structure  for  other  purposes  (4).  There  is  really  no  clue  to
its  identity.

As  in  other  Campanian  cities  it  is  evident  that  Dionysus-
Bacchus  must  have  been  honored  and  his  mysteries  celebrated.
But  the  only  references  to  the  god  are  not  concerned  with  a
Greek  cult  but  with  one  which  had  lost  its  Hellenic  cheu^acter
under  the  influence  of  the  Orientalism  in  its  environment.  They
will,  therefore,  receive  attention  in  smother  place  (5).  Statues
and  busts  of  Bacchus  excavated  in  this  locality  are  without
religious  significance  (6).  The  same  remark  will  apply  to
statues  of  other  gods  such  as  Silvan  us.

Juno  Gaura,  the  divinity  of  Mt.  Gaurus  behind  the  city,
must  be  considered  as  a  goddess  of  Puteoli  only  during  the
later  era,  after  this  territory  became  a  part  of  the  city*s  domain.
As  the  place  where  she  weis  worshipped  was  earlier  subject  to
Capua,    she   will   be   treated    in   the   chapter    devoted    to  that


(1)  See  p.  72.

(2)  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  142.   See  p.  397.

(3)  Beloch    140;    Dubois    359;    Paoli.   Antiquitatum    reliquiae    Fol.    21,    PI.
XXIX.   XXVII;   De   lorio.   Guida   di  Pozzuoli   (2)  64.

(4)  De  lorio,  Guida  48;  Loffredo,  Le  antichiia  di  Pozzuolo  8;  Paoli,  Antiq.
re/.   Fol.   21.

(5)  See  p.    143.

(6)  Dubois,    Pouzzoles    antique    catalogue    416    Nos.    6-8;    17;    18.

-  ?I5  -


city  (I).  An  inscription  in  honor  of  all  the  gods  and  goddesses
was  set  up  by  T.  Aurelius  Protogenes.  Here  the  polytheistic
tendency  is  strongly  manifested,  although  the  dedicator  takes
the  easiest  means  of  showing  his  devotion  to  the  multiplicity
of  divinities  whom  he  recognizes.  There  is  no  trace  of  a  syn-
cretistic  tendency  (2).

ROMAN  CULTS  -  OFFICIAL  PRIESTS

The  evidence  is  comparatively  good  here  for  the  presence
of  the  official  municipal  priests  of  the  Romsui  colony.  A  certain
individual  whose  cognomen  wsts  Marcellus,  mentioned  in  an
inscription  of  doubtful  origin  may  have  held  the  pontificate.
This  possibility  is  admissible,  because  he  belonged  to  the  tribe
Falernia  and  served  as  a  flamen  of  the  Diuus  Augustus,  who
had  a  strong  cult,  but  such  evidence  by  no  means  establishes
his  connection  with  this  city  (3).  There  is  likewise  a  proba-
bility that  the  pontifex  lulius  Flauianus  belonged  here.  He  is
recorded  as  assigning  a  plot  of  ground  to  a  woman  for  whom
he  acted  as  patron,  in  order  that  she  might  erect  there  a  tomb
for  her  son  (4).  Although  the  alt€ir  containing  the  notice  came
to  light  at  Puteoli,it  was  attributed  to  Misenum  by  Mommsen,
because  at  the  former  place  public  grants  of  this  nature  were
made  by  the  duumuiri,  while  at  Misenum  there  is  a  possibility
that  they  were  made  by  the  pontiff  on  the  analogy  of  the  pon-
tifex Vulcani  et  aedium  sacrarum  at  Ostia.  But  it  seems  more


(1)  Corcia  maintained  that  a  temple  of  Juno  Pronuba  was  located  here,
but  the  inscr'ption  mentioning  this  goddess  is  not  considered  to  be  authentic.
C.  /.  L.  X.  192*.

(2)  Macchioro,  II  sincretismo  religioso  e  I'epigrafia  in  Rev.  Arch,  series
IV,  IX  (1907)  141  f.  C.  /.  L.  X,  1552;  Diis  immortalibus  deabusque  omnibus
sacrum.  T.   Aurel(ius)  Protogenes.

(3)   C.  /.  L.   X,    1806  =  VagIieri    1900:    onio  Sex.    f.   Fal.   Musculo,  ponti-

fici,  flam(ini)  Diui  Aug.  praef.  fabr.  quaest.  Iluir(o)  bis,  tert.  quinq.  1.  d.  d.  d.
etc.  The  index  of  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  11 50  under  Puteoli  is  mislead-ng  as  it  assigns
this  official  definitely  to  Puteoli.  For  a  discussion  of  the  tribes  in  which  the
citizens  of  this  community  were  enrolled  see  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  58  f.
(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3458  =  D.  2856  =  Vaglieri  1762  :  D.  m.  s.  T.  A.  Lon-
giniano  optioni  ex  III  Venere  cl.  pr.  Mis.  lulia  Rufina  mater;  locua  datus  est
a  pontif(ice)  lulio  Flauiano  patrono.

.  116-


probable  that  this  pontifex  who  was  the  woman's  patron,  made
the  assignment  of  a  piece  of  ground  owned  by  himself  in  his
private  capacity.  Consequently  his  liberality  is  recorded  in  full
by  her  at  the  close  of  her  son's  epitaph.

The  number  of  augurs  here  is  unknown  but  was  perhaps
three  or  six.  A  fragmentary  inscription  commemorates  the
selection  of  a  iuuenis  Marius  Sedatus  as  augur  by  the  decu-
rions  (1).  It  has  been  assigned  to  the  second  century  A.  D.
and  is  valuable  for  proving  that  the  election  of  the  official
priests  had  changed  in  the  provincial  towns  as  in  Rome.  They
were  no  longer  selected  at  comitia,  but  were  appointed  by  the
local  senate  (2).  De  Petra  plausibly  considers  that  this  is  not
an  ordinary  case  of  filling  a  vacancy,  since  there  is  no  mention
of  the  former  incumbent,  but  is  a  selection  extra  numerum  as
a  mark  of  appreciation.  At  the  same  time  the  new  appointee
seems  to  have  exercised  the  full  authority  of  his  position  (3).
But  in  this  case  the  inscription  would  not  be  good  evidence  for
the  mode  of  filling  the  position  when  vacancies  occurred  in  the
reguleir  way.  Another  occupant  of  the  office  was  the  distin-
guished eques  M.  Gauius  Fabius  lustus,  who  flourished  in  the
latter  half  of  the  second  century  A.  D.  (4).  To  the  same  century
belongs  the  famous  actor  L.  Aurelius  Pylades,  already  mention-
ed in  connection  with  the  cult  of  Apollo,  who  is  named  in.
an  inscription  that  falls  between  the  years  185-192.  This  is  the
only  known  example  where  the  office  of  augur  was  committed
to  a  freedman,  and  is  a  signal  proof  of  this  msin's  great  pop-
ularity (5).


(1)  N.  S.  1885.  431  =£.  E.  VIII.  372  =  Vaglieri  1888:  De  Petra.  Frammento
di   decreto  puteolano   in    Atti   Nap.  XII    (1885)    63    f.

(2)  Cp.   the   lex  Coloniae  luliae  Genitiuae ;  Spinazzola,      Gli      augures    120.

(3)  De  Petra.   op.   cit.   66.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1785  =  D.  6333=Vaglieri  1685.  For  the  date  cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.
1784.

(5)  N.  5.  1888.  237  =  £.  £.  VIII,  369  =  D.  5186=Vaglieri  1895:  L.  Aurelio
Aug.  lib.  Pyladi,  pantomino  temporis  sui  primo,  hieronicae  coronato  IIII,  pa-
trono  parasitorum  Apollinis.  sacerdoti  synhodi.  honorato  Puteolis  d.  d.  orna-
mentis  decurionalibus  et  duumuiralib(us).  auguri,  ob  amorem  erga  patriam
et  eximiam  liberalitatem  in  edendo  munere  gladiatorum  uenatione  peissiua
ex  indulgentia  sacratissimi  princip.  Commodi  Pii  Felicis  Aug.  centuria  Cor-
nelia. Cp.  Mommsen.  Rom.  Mitt.  Ill,    (1888)  82;   Wissowa,  Augures,   P.-W.    II.

-  117  -


JUPITER  OPTIMUS  MAXIMUS

The  formed  cult  of  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus  flourished
at  Puteoli  after  the  establishment  of  the  Roman  colony.  Here
as  elsewere  it  was  an  evidence  of  the  attachment  of  the  colo-
nists to  the  Roman  state,  and  before  the  rise  of  the  cult  of  the
Emperors  was  the  chief  factor  in  the  expression  of  loyalty
toward  the  government.  It  was  essentially  a  form  of  the  religion
of  patriotism,  and  was  a  community  cult  rather  tham  one  that
appealed  to  the  individual,  although  dedications  made  by
single  private  individuals  have  been  found  in  this  very  place.
Thus  a  marble  fragment  discovered  in  1 893  south  of  the  eunphi-
theater  contains  part  of  a  dedication  due  to  a  freedman  Gra-
tus  (I).  Some  work  of  building  or  restoring  was  performed
for  the  god  probably  at  this  time  by  N.  Cluuius,  a  man  of  pro-
minence in  the  province,  who  filled  municipal  offices  at  Capua,
Nola,  and  Caudiumi  (2).  A  third  inscription,  belonging  to
the  year  56  A.  D.,  records  the  performance  of  games  by  the
Augustales  in  honor  of  Nero  and  his  mother,  where  the  deities
recognized  are  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus  and  the  Genius  of  the
colony  (3).

GENIUS

The  notion  of  a  personal  Genius,  which  showed  itself  so
prominently  among  the  Romans,  appears  but  once  in  the  extant
epigraphical   material;    this    is    a   brief   dedication    announcing

2344;  Muller.  Philologus  LXIII  (1904)  351;  Spina^zola,  Gli  augures  136.
Another  augur,  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  uncertain  origin,  possibly  serv-
ed in  this  town.  C.  /.  L.  X,    1685.

(1)  'A.  J.  A.  2nd  ser.  11  (1898)  374:  ]  1.  Gratus  I.  O.  M.  sacrum.  Inac-
curately  reproduced   by    Dubois    144    (2).

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1573  (cp.  p.  971)  =  D.  6345  :N.]  Cluuius  M'.  f.  Illluir  Caudi
Iluir  Nolae,  Illluir  quinquennal.  Capuae  de  suo  faciund(um)  coerauit,  idem-
que  restituit;  loui  O.  M.  sacr.   Cp.   Dubois   51.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1574  =  D.  226  =  Vaglieri  1114:  Q.  Volusio  Saturn.  P.  Cor-
nelio  Scip.  cos.  AugxistaJe®  qui  (Neroni)  Claudio  Caesari  et  (Agrippinae)  Au-
gustae  I.  O.  M.  et  Genio  Coloniae  ludos  fecer(unt)  etc.  The  words  Nero  and
Agrippina  have  been  erased.  The  origin  of  this  inscription  is  doubtful.  Us
assignment  to  Puteoli  in  consequence  of  the  mention  of  the  Genius  is  prob-
able but  not  certain.  Cp.  Dubois,  op.  cit.  40   (1).

-118-


the  payment  of  a  vow  by  M.  Annius  Macer  (1).  This  idea  de-
veloped easily  into  the  conception  that  each  city  and  individual
community  had  its  particular  Genius.  The  worship  of  this
gueurdisui  spirit  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Puteoli  became
an  easy  method  of  showing  their  unity  of  sentiment  and  pa-
triotic interest  in  their  town.  While  this  cult  is  found  sporadi-
caJly  elsewhere  in  Campania,  it  became  here  a  form  of  religion
of  much  greater  importance  (2).  As  a  vigorous  cult,  it  kept  its
individuality  distinct  from  that  of  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus,
when  both  were  used  together  in  inscriptions,  but  tended  to
merge  and  coalesce  with  the  worship  of  the  Emperor  £ind  of
the  Sun.  The  regular  designation  of  this  deity  is  Genius  Coloniae
Puteolanorum,  The  Genius  honored  seems  to  be  that  of  the
old  colony,  since  one  inscription  bears  the  date  of  56  A.  D.,
seven  yesirs  before  Nero  sent  out  his  colony  (3).

Besides  the  combination  with  Jupiter  treated  above,  a  brief
fragment,  there  are  extant  several  more  important  inscrip-
tions (4);  so  far  as  these  are  dated  they  belong  to  the  second
century  A.  D.  A  pedestal  exhibits  a  dedication  to  the  Genius
in  the  interest  of  the  Emperors  Antoninus  Pius  and  Marcus
Aurelius.  It  bears  the  name  of  an  Imperial  slave  who  had
charge  of  the  largesses  of  grain  which  were  given  to  the  people
of  Puteoli  and  Ostia  (5).  Likewise  to  enhance  the  well  being
of  the  ruling  family  a  seuir  Augustalis  Q.  Aurelius  Hermadion,
who  was  evidently  of  foreign  birth,  made  a  joint  offering  to  the
Genius  of  Puteoli,  specified  as  «  a  great  god  »  and  to  that  of
his  native  land   (6).   The  association  of  the   Genius   with   the

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1559:  Genio  uotum  soluii  an!m(o)  lib(enf)  M.  Annius  Macer.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1574  Cp.  Dubois.  Milanges  XXII  (1902)  37  and  Pouzzoles
antique  39-40.

(3)  A  list  of  inscriptions  referring  to  the  Genii  of  various  loceJities  both
in   and   outside   of   Campainia   is   found   in    Cesano,    Genius,    Ruggiero    III,    469.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1565:  Gen.  Col.  Put.  P.  Acilius  Hermeros.  C.  /.  L.  X.
1565.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1562  =  D.  344:  Pro  salute  imp.  Caesaris  Titi  Aelii  Hadriani
Antonini  Aug.  Pii  p,  p.  et  M.  Alii  (sic)  Aureli  Caesaris  n(ostri)  Genio  colo-
niae Puteolanorum,  Chrysanthus,  Aug.  disp(ensator)  a  fruminto  (sic)  Puteolis
et  Ostis,   I.   d.   decurionum   permissu.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1567  =  Vaglieri  1073:  Pro  salute  et  uictoria  Augustorum  dec
magno  Genio  coloniae  Puteolanorum  et  patriae  suae  Q.  Aurelius  Hermadion,
seuir  Augustalis  et  curator  eorum  extruxit  et  donum  dat.  For  the  interpreta-
tion  see   Mommsen's   note.

-  119  .


Imperial  household  is  stated  still  more  explicitly  in  an  inscription
prepared  for  one  of  the  Imperial  Ubertini;  although  he  made
the  dedication  nominally  to  the  Genius,  he  described  himself
as  devoted  to  the  divinity  of  his  patron  (I).  Especially  conspic-
uous is  the  zeal  manifested  by  members  of  the  gens  Nemonia.
Two  of  the  Nemonii,  M.  Tugurinus  and  M.  Sabinus  Felix
joined  in  ordering  an  inscription,  which  formerly  existed  upon
a  sculptured  pedestal.  In  a  second  inscription,  which  is  dated
168  A.  D.  four  members  of  the  same  family  participated,  includ-
ing M.  Nemonius  Eutychianus,  who  will  appear  again  as
priest  of  an  Oriental  cult ;  in  fact  they  seem  as  a  family  to  have
had  a  somewhat  eclectic  interest  in  religion.  Both  of  their
inscriptions  address  the  Genius  as  Sanctis simus  deus  (2).
Finally  the  cult  of  the  Genius  is  brought  into  relation  with  that
of  Fortuna  as  often  elsewhere  in  a  dedication  made  by  a  certain
Ptolemzds,  who  under  her  mother's  direction  offered  to  him  an
image  of  that  goddess   (3).

An  inscription  attesting  the  diffusion  of  the  cult  by  means
of  the  extensive  commercial  relations  of  Puteoli  was  discov-
ered at  Rusicade  (Philippeville)  a  seaport  of  the  ancient  province
of  Numidia.  This  whole  region  wels  colonized  by  Caimpanians
and  the  town  Veneria  Rusicade  took  its  name  from  Pompeii  (4).
Naturally  these  people  did  not  forget  the  peculiar  divinities  of
their  native  land,  so  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  here  a  dedication
in  which  the  cult  of  the  Genius  appears.  In  accordance  with  the
tendency  of  the  times  it  was  affected  by  the  cult  of  the  Emper-
ors (5).  As  an  evidence  of  the  high  esteem  in  which  this  cult

(1)  £.  £.  VIII,  358  =  Vaglieri  1074:  M(agno)  G{enio)  col(oniae)  Puteolan-
(orum)   M.    Aurelius  Hilario  Aug.    lib,    numini   huius   deuotus    d.   d.    d.

(2)  C.  /,  L.  X,  l564  =  Vaglieri  1072:  Sanctissimo  deo  Genio  coloniae  Puteo-
lanorum  M.  Nemoni  M.  fill  Tugurinus  et  Sabinus  Felix  dono  dant.  C.  /.  L.
X,  I563  =  D.  6320  =  Vaglieri  1071  :  Samctissimo  deo  Genio  coloniae  Puteolanorum
Nemonia  Calliste  Nemoni  ii-utychet's  cum  duobus  M.  M.  Nemonis  M.  filiis
Eutychiano  et  Gemelliano  fratribus  suis  et  Nemonia  lanuaria  filia  sua  dono
dant  etc.

(3)  C.  /.  L,  X,  1 568  =  Vagi ieri  1069:  Genio  coloniae  Puteolan(orum)  sacr.
Fortunam  Ptolemais  issa,  curante  GeJeria  Cyprogen'a  matre.  Otto,  Fortuna^
P.-W.  VII,  32-33.

(4)  Pais,   Ancient  Italy   202   (3)  and  Ricerche  storiche   e  geog.    254  (4).

(5)  C.  /.  L.  VIII,  7959:  Gen(io)  col(oniae)  Put{eolanoTum)  Aug{usto)  sacr.
The  third  word  is  completed  to  read  Put(eolanae)  by  Wilmanns  C.  /.  L.,  Vlli
p.   684,   but  the  regular   designation   is  as  above.

-  120  -


was  held,  Otto  conjectures  that  the  mutilated  fragment  cited
above  v/as  dated  by  meeuis  of  a  computation  of  time  reckoned
from  the  dedication  of  the  Genius  of  this  city  (1).  The  Genius
amalgamated  with  Sol  will  be  treated  later  (2).

Another  inscription  mentions  a  Genius  Alotisinus,  a  term
of  unceitain  significeince.  According  to  a  conjecture  of  Steuding
this  term  is  to  be  aissociated  with  the  term  'AXwxia,  applied  to
an  athletic  festival  at  Tegea  in  Arcadia  in  honor  of  a  solar
divinity  (3).  Although  the  god  honored  here  is  dubious,  the  piety
of  the  dedicator  is  very  evident.  He  describes  himself  as  the
servant  of  the  gods,  and  he  acted,  as  he  thought,  by  a  divine
commeuid  which  he  received  through  the  medium  of  a  dream.

Finally  Dubois  has  cited  a  work  of  art  as  a  possible  rep-
resentation of  a  Genius.  This  is  a  colossal  herm  found  near
Pozzuoli  and  now  preserved  in  the  Vatican  Museum  (4).  Besides
a  number  of  characteristics  plainly  indicating  a  sea  god,  the
head  bears  a  wreath  of  grapes  and  vine  leaves,  which  point
to  the  connection  of  this  deity  with  a  coast  where  vineyards
were  abundant.  The  latter  detail  meJces  the  identification  of  the
figure  as  an  ordinary  sea  god  difficult,  and  recent  critics  of  art
have  supposed  that  it  is  a  personification  of  the  Gulf  of  Poz-
zuoli (5).  Dubois  states  that  it  represents  a  sort  of  Genius  of
the  port,  but  Weizsacker,  rejecting  all  local  identifications,  sees
only  an  image  of  Ocesuius  (6) .  From  the  point  of  view  of  reli-
gion the  solution  of  the  problem  is  not  important,  as  the
connection  of  the  figure  with  this  subject  is  very  slight.


(1)  Otto,  Gcni-as,  P.-W.  VII.   1168.

(2)  See  p.    157.

(3)  Steuding,  Alotianus  Roscher  I,  256,  Cp.  Ruggiero  I,  424  and  the
etymology  given  by  Paus.  VIII,  47.  4,  C.  /.  L.  X,  1560  =  Vaglieri  1064:  Ex
imp>erio    Geni   Alotiani    Euaristus    seruitor   deorum    ex    uiso    lib(ens)    an(imo).

(4)  Kept  in  the  rotunda  of  the  Museum.  Reproduced  in  Baumeister,
Denkmaler  II,  p.  913;  Brunn,  Gr.  Gotter-ideale  PI.  VI ;  Weizsacker.  Okeanos,
Roscher  III,  818;  Collignon,  Hist,  de  la  sculpt,  grec.  II.  589  No.  306;  Lowy,
Gr.   Plastik  PI.    158;   Brunn-Bruckmann.    No.    136.

(5)  Helbig.  Fxihrer  I,  p.  197;  Friederichs-Wolters,  Die  GipshbgUsse
antiker  Bildwerke,    p.    613.

(6)   Weizsacker.   Roscher   111,  819.

-  121   -


FORTUNA

The  inscriptions  usually  cited  for  the  presence  of  this  cult
are  not  conclusive  because  of  the  uncertainty  regarding  their
provenience,  and  the  evidence  for  a  shrine  on  the  heights  of
Pausilypum  will  be  treated  under  Neapolis  (1).  There  is,
however,  little  doubt  that  the  goddess  had  her  worshippers  here
after  the  city  came  under  Roman  influence,  and  two  statues
representing  her  came  from  this  region.  One,  which  afterwards
disappeared,  was  uneajrthed  in  the  fifteenth  century;  the  other
C2uiie  to  light  within  recent  times.  Both  seem  to  have  reproduced
the  same  type,  which  exhibits  the  right  hand  of  the  image
resting  upon  a  steering-oar,  the  left  holding  a  horn  of  plen-
ty (2).  A  figure  upon  the  Lisbon  vase,  standing  in  front  of  a
temple  and  holding  a  patera  and  a  cornucopia,  wcis  regarded  by
Jordeui  as  a  representation  of  Fortuna,  but  this  identification  is
probably  incorrect  (3).

HONOR

A  temple  of  Honor  is  known  from  the  fact  that  it  is  men-
tioned in  the  /ex  parieti  faciendo,  where  a  comparision  is  made
between  it  and  ainother  structure  (portula)  which  is  to  be  erected,
but  no  dedications  addressed  to  the  divinity  have  been  pre-
served (4).  The  ceremonies  in  this  branch  of  religion  were
carried  out  according  to  the  Greek  ritusJ,  as  is  proved  by  the
circumstance  that  the  Roman  cult  was  of  that  cheiracter  (5).
The  name  Tempio  di  Onore  has  been  given  in  modern  times
to  the  remains  of  a  little  temple  located  between  the  Anfiteatro
and  the  baths  that  bear  the  name  Tempio  di  Nettuno,  but  such
a  designation  is  quite  uncertain.  The  character  of  the  material

(1)  See  p.  207.

(2)  Loffredo.  Le  antichith  di  Pozzuolo  S;  N.  S.    1898.   291   Fig.  3;   Dubois
415.

(3)  Jordan,  Die  Kixsie  von  Puteoli  atif  einem.  rom.  Glasgefass  in  Arch.
Zeit.  XXVI   (1868)  95.  Cp.  Dubois  195;  Beloch  140.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1781  Col.  II  line  11=C.  /.  L.  I.  577  =  Vaglieri  1883....  eis-
dem  fores  clatratas  II  cum  postibus  aesculnieis  facito,  statuito,  ocludito,  pi-
catoque,   ita   utei   ad   aedem  Honorus   facta  sunt etc.

(5)  Wissowa    151;    L.    Deubner,    Personifikaiionen,    Roscher    III,    2081.

-  122  -


used  in  the  construction,  brick  work  alone,  shows  that  the
building  was  put  up  too  late  to  be  the  temple  of  Honor,  which
was  in  existence  as  early  as  105  B.  C,  unless  the  present  remains
come  from  a  restoration  (I).  This  is  the  only  example  of  a
temple  of  this  god  outside  of  Rome  which  has  left  any  record
of  its  existence  (2).

MINOR  ROMAN  DEITIES

The  abstract  deity  Concordia  is  represented  by  one  in-
scription, prepared  for  two  Augustales  of  the  gens  Auia.  This
cult,  which  is  not  cited  elsewhere  along  the  Bay  of  Naples,  was
doubtless  brought  into  close  relation  with  the  worship  of  the
Emperor.  At  the  seime  time  the  existence  of  £ai  individuaJ  shrine
is  not  improbable  (3).  The  Penates,  meaning  doubtless  the
gods  of  some  household  shrine,  are  mentioned  on  a  meirble
slab  discovered  near  the   Via  Campania  (4).

THE  IMPERIAL  CULT

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the  cities  of  Csunpania
were  among  the  first  in  the  western  part  of  the  Empire  to  accord
divine  honors  to  Augustus,  and  this  was  in  pait  expleuned  by
the  presence  of  a  large  non-Roman  element  in  the  popula-
tion (5).  Conditions  for  the  rise  of  this  worship  were  partic-
ularly favorable  at  Puteoli,  where  the  leurge  number  of  foreign-
ers, especially  Asiatics,  readily  embraced  the  theory  that  the
great  ruler  is  divine,  because  such  a  conception  W2is  quite  in
accord  with  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  their  native  land.  The
presence  of  the  Asiatics  is  proved  in  particular  by  the  well
known  pedestal  of  Puteoli,  containing  allusions  in  sculpture  to


(1)  Beloch  139;  Dubois  347.  A  plan  of  the  ruins  is  found  in  De  lorio
Guida   (2)  atlante   Vf>.

(2)  Wissowa,    Honos,    Roscher   I,    2708.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  155I=Vaglieri  1040:  Concordiae  sacrum.  P.  P.  Aui  Gal-
linat.  et  Celer  Augustales.  The  nearest  instances  of  the  cult  are  in  Latium
Adiectum  at  Cora,  Casinum,  and  Fabrateria  Noua.  C.  /.  L.  X,  6508,  5159,  5574.

{A)  A.  J.  A.   1898,  375.

(5)  Dubois,  Milanges  XXII  (1902)  39.   See  p.  35.

-  123


the  chief  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  which  was  set  up  and  provided
with  a  statue  of  Tiberius  by  the  Augustales,  because  that  Em-
peror had  generously  aided  these  cities  after  the  earthquake  of
17  A.  D.  (I).  Here  the  divinities  of  the  various  localities  are
recognized  by  the  presence  of  mural  crowns  (2).  The  number
of  freedmen  seems  to  have  been  especially  large,  and  many  of
them  had  become  wealthy  from  business  ventures;  thus  there
was  a  favorable  soil  for  the  growth  of  the  Augustales.  The
Alexandrians  engaged  in  commerce  from  this  port  were  very
devoted  to  the  Emperor  and  have  left  an  enthusiastic  expression
of  their  feelings  toward  him  whom  they  considered  their  espe-
cial  benefactor  (3).  He  did  not  succeed,  therefore,  in  restrzdn-
ing  the  desire  of  all  these  people  to  treat  him  as  a  god  during
his  lifetime  on  the  seime  basis  as  Diuus  lulius,  and  it  is  not
improbable  that  this  was  the  first  city  in  the  West  to  supply
him  with  a  temple  and  complete  machinery  for  a  cult  (4).
As  generally  in  southern  Italy  the  cult  was  in  charge  of
the  sacred  collegium  of  the  Augustales  (5).  The  term  seuir
Augustalis  is  very  rare,  but  occurs  once  or  possibly  twice  in
inscriptions  which  may  be  definitely  attributed  to  Puteoli  (6).
We  have  no  information  to  explain  the  relation  which  existed
here  between  the  seuiri  and  the  Augustales.  When  the  organi-
zation acted  as  a  whole,  its  official  name  was  merely  Augustales,
as  appears  on  the  large  pedestal  designed  to  hold  the  statue  of
Tiberius  (7).  It  is  not  certain  that  the  term  corporati  was  in  use
here,   as  the  notice  containing  it  may  have  come  from   Mise-


(1)   Dubois,    Pouzzoles    antique    104;    Spineizzola,   La    base   figurata    di    Ti-
herio  in  AtU  Nap.   XXII    (1902)    119   f.    Pis.    1-3.
(2)  Wissowa.   Ges.   Abhandl   21    (2).

(3)  Suet.    Aug.    98;    Gardthausen,    Augustus    und   seine   Zeit    I,    1266.

(4)  Spinazzola.    Atti   Nap.    XXII    (1902)    133-134.

(5)  Von  Premerstein,  Augustales,  Ruggiero  I,  859  gives  a  list  of  the  in-
scriptions alluding  to  the  Augustales  but  it  contains  some  doubtful  examples.
Cp.  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  146  f.  and  Melanges  XXII  (1902)  38;  Neumann.
Augustales,  P.-W  .II,  2356;  Mo^'rlot,  Essai  sur  I'histoire  de  I'Augustalite,  65;
von   Premerstein,    Rutrffiero   I.    829.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1567;  1838.  A  fragment.  See  p.   119.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1624  =  Vaglieri  1264:  Ti,  Caesari  Diui  Augusti  f.,  Diui
luli  n.  Augusto  pontif.  maximo,  cos.  Ill,  imp.  VIII  trib.  p>otestat.  XXXII,
Augustales.    Res   publica   restituit.    (30   m.    D.).

-    124  -


num  (I).  When  the  members  are  mentioned  separately,  they
style  themselves  Qccasionally  Augustales  with  the  addition  of
the  name  of  the  city,  but  more  often  the  qualifying  word  is
omitted,  if  they  do  not  hold  the  same  position  in  another
town  (2) .  A  considerable  number  of  inscriptions  allude  to  a
double  membership.  Thus  Sex.  Publicius  Bathyllus  filled  the
same  office  at  Venafrum;  M.  Antonius  Trophimus  at  Neapolis,
and  Q.  Valerius  SsJuteu-is  and  L.  Caecilius  Dioscorus  at  Cumae
as  well  as  at  Puteoli  (3).

The  flourishing  condition  of  the  collegium  and  the  large
number  of  its  members  are  proved  by  the  circumstance  that  it
was  divided  into  centuries,  a  condition  of  affairs  for  which  no
exact  pzirallels  can  be  found  (4).  Two  centuries  are  known,
the  Petronia  and  the  Cornelia,  the  names  of  which  according
to  Walzing  were  derived  from  centurions  of  those  bodies  (5).
De  Ruggiero  appears  to  suppose  that  there  were  a  larger  number
of  centuries  than  the  two  whose  names  are  extant;  but  as  five
notices  of  these  divisions  of  the  Augustales  have  reached  us,
all  of  which  mention  only  one  or  the  other  of  the  two  nemies,
it  is  evident  that  the  number  of  divisions  was  limited  to
two  (6).  They  were  in  existence  from  a  very  early  date,  ais  the
centuria  Petronia  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  that  has  been
assigned  to  the  life  time  of  Augustus  and  they  were  present  as
late  £is  the  reign  of  Commodus  (7).

The  collegium  was  composed  wholly  or  chiefly  of  libertini,

(1)  C.  /.  L.   X.    1880,    1881.  Cp.    1870.

(2)  With  the  qualification  C.  /.  L.  X,  1807,  1873  and  perhaps  the  frag-
ment 1892;  without  the  qualifying  word  X.  1877,  1879.  1551,  N.  S.  1902,  381
and  perhaps  the   fragment   X,    1876.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X  1889,  1872.  690;  N.  S.  1897.  12.  Cp.  von  Premerstein,  Rug-
g'ero  I,  841.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1873  =  D.  6331  :  A.  Arrius  Chrysanthus  marmorarius  Augu-
stal.  Puteolis  duppliciar.  7Petron.  uiuus  sibi ;  C.  /.  L.  X.  8178:  Aug(usto)  sacr.
centuria   Petronia;  X,    1874:   C.   Caesonio  Endiacono   patri   cultor.    7  Cornel,    ob

merita  eius ;   X.    1888:   L.   Plutius  Eutychio iuncta   scholis   7   Petr[on.  £.   £.

VIII,  369.  See  p.   117  (5).

(5)  Walzing,  Eiude  hist,  sur  lea  corp.  prof.  I,  360  (5);  Dubois.  146;  von
Premerstein,   Ruggiero.    1.   834.

(6)  Centurio   Ruggiero,    II,    189.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  8 1 78  =  Vaglieri  1247.  Cp.  Mommsen's  note  and  von  Pre-
merstein,   Ruggiero   I,   834.

-  125  .


who  had  acquired  considerable  weeJth  and  had  attained  some
standing  in  their  community,  but  only  occasioneJly  do  they
state  publicly  their  social  status  (I).  As  members  of  an  asso-
ciation which  had  a  distinct  public  character  they  were  chosen
by  the  decurions  (2).  Their  occupations  are  in  some  cases
known.  Thus  M.  Antonius  Trophimus  was  a  dealer  in  clothing,
A.  Arrius  Chrysanthus  worked  in  marble,  Cn.  Haius  Dorypho-
rus,  who  perhaps  belonged  elsewhere,  was  a  manufacturer  of
dye-stuffs,  while  Sex.  Publicius  Bathyllus  held  the  position  of
magistrate's  assistant  (accensus)  (3).  Occsisionally  we  find  in
this  city  Augustales,  who  although  freedman,  appeu-ently
reached  the  higher  civic  offices,  a  combination  which  is  difficult
to  explain.  Thus  Q.  Aemilius  Helpidephorus  is  recorded  as
being  a  decurion,  although  he  did  not  surely  live  in  this  town,
and  Q.  Laecanius  Philumenus  filled  the  office  of  quaestor  (4) .
It  is  possible  that  the  latter  was  only  quaestor  of  the  Augustales,
but  it  is  doiibtful  whether  this  office  existed  here;  likewise  in
the  case  of  the  former  the  term  decurion  may  be  only  the  equiv-
alent of  the  customary  phrase  ornamentis  decurionalihus  hono-
ratus,  or  £is  Mommsen  suggested  the  holder  of  the  two  offices
may  have  been  an  ingenuus,  for  in  northern  Italy  men  of  this
class  sometimes  served  as  both  Seuiri  Augustales  and  decurions.
But  since  he  served  as  a  dendrophorus  the  status  of  Ubertinus
is  more  probable.  In  fact  the  leading  municipal  offices  in  cer-
tain colonies  outside  of  Italy  were  filled  by  libertini  and  here

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1878.

(2)  Von  Premerstein,  Ruggiero  I,  835 ;  But  cp.  Mourlot,  op.  cH.  89  and
the   fragment  C.  /.   L.   X,   1890  which   indicates  adlectio.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1872:  M.  Antonius  Trophimus  August.  Puteol.  et  Neapoli
negotiator  sagarius  sibi  et  luliae  Irene  coniugi  e  c.  ;  C.  /.  L.  X,  1873:  X,
1889:  Sex.   Publicius  Bathyllus  accensus  consuli     Augustalis     Puteolis     et     Ve-

nafri   sibi  et   Vrnineiae uxori   etc.;   X,   540:    Cn.    Haio   Doryphoro  purpursurio

August,  duplicario  uixit  etc.  The  leist  inscription  was  found  in  the  district
of  Salernum,  yet  on  account  of  the  appearance  of  the  term  duplicarius  it  may
have  belonged  here.  Perhaps  th'j  man  was  at  one  time  a  resident  of  Puteoli,
and  later  moved  away.  For  the  occupations  of  the  Augustales  in  other  towns
see  von   Premerstein,  Ruggiero   I,   841.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1790  =  0.6332:  D.  m.  Q.  Aemilio  Helpidephoro  decur(ioni)
et  dendrophoro  duplic(ario)  qui  uixit  etc.  The  term  duplicarius  makes  the
assignment  to  Puteoli  probable.  N.  S.  1902,  381  :  Diis  manibus  C.  Laecani
Philumeni    Augus.    quaest.    etc.

-  126  .


too  they  may  have  been  opened  exceptionally  to  one  of  the
claiss  of  f reedmen ;  although  parallels  from  this  part  of  the  coun-
try are  lacking  (I).

The  officers  of  the  organization  were  called  curatores.
There  is  no  evidence  for  the  existence  here  of  the  office  of  quin-
quennalis,  as  the  inscription  sometimes  cited  to  prove  its  pres-
ence is  really  of  unknown  origin  (2).  A  superior  position  was
occupied  by  the  dupUcarii,  who  in  the  event  of  the  distribution
of  a  largess  received  a  double  portion.  From  the  many  referen-
ces to  the  distinction  the  number  in  the  cleiss  must  have
been  large  (3).  It  was  not  common  elsewhere  and  is  cited  only
from  Tibur  (4).

The  aumount  of  the  honorarium  which  the  AugustaJes  were
obliged  to  pay  as  a  condition  of  receiving  their  appointment
is  not  stated  definitely;  the  inscription  containing  a  definite
sum,  which  is  cleissed  ctmong  the  Puteolana,  Cctn  not  be  attribu-
ted definitely  to  this  city  (5).  The  money  was  expended  in
different  ways  according  to  the  decision  of  the  decurions ;  some-
times several  Augustales  combined  in  performing  their  public
service,  as  happ>ened  in  56  A.  D.  when  they  exhibited
"games  (6).  Though  the  cult  of  Augustus  in  particular  and  also
the  gens  lulia  were  the  chief  object  to  which  the  organization
gave  its  attention,  they  sometimes  honored  other  divinities  by
gEimes,  £is  in  the  example  just  cited,  where  along  with  Jupiter
Optimus    Maximus    and    the   Genius    Coloniae,    Nero   said    his

(1)  Beurlier,  Le  culte  imperial  207,  215;  Paribeni.  N.  S.  1902,  382:  von
Prem^rstein,  Ruggiero  I,  841,  850;  Aedilis,  Ruggiero  I,  255;  Mancini,  Decu-
riones  Ruggiero  II  1525;  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  183  and  Rom.  Staatsrecht  III,
454(2);  L.  Taylor,  Augustales,  Seviri  'Augustales,  Seviri  in  Trans,  and  Proc.
of  the  Am.  Phil.  As.  XLV  (1914)  234-235.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1883.  Included  with  the  Puteolana  by  Mommsen.  It  is
utilized  by  Dubois  to  establish  the  office  at  PuteoU,  but  in  a  note  is  marked
as  doubtful.   Dubois  146  (9).

(3)  N.  S.  1897,  12;  C.  /.  L.  X,  1873.  1875,  1886  preserve  the  names  of
duplicarii;  in  C.  /.  L.  X,  1871  the  name  has  been  lost.  Uncertain  are  Nos.
1790  and  1882,  which  might  be  from  Cumae,  provided  the  dignity  really  exist-
ed there.

(4)  Von  Premerstein,  Ruggiero  I,  850;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  183;
Beurlier  Le  culte  imperial  222;   Mourlot,   Etudes  sur  les  corps,   prof.   I,    112.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1885.  Cp.  Mourlot,  op.  cit.  95.

(6)  C.  I.L.X,  1574.  Seep.  118.

.  127


mother  received  recognition  (I).  At  other  times  the  Augustales
carried  on  building  operations  for  the  improvement  of  the  town,
constructing  both  sacred  and  seculeu-  edifices  and  monuments.
A  badly  damaged  fragment  seems  to  indicate  the  erection  of  a
basilica,  another  reports  work  carried  on  in  connection  with
some  plot  of  ground,  a  third  inscription  refers  to  a  building
the  nature  of  which  is  unknown,  finally  there  is  the  record  of
the  statue  set  up  in  honor  of  Tiberius,  which  was  mentioned
above  (2).

A  comparatively  small  number  of  inscriptions  offer  any
«ure  indication  of  date.  Besides  one  which  belongs  to  the  life-
time of  Augustus  and  the  above  mentioned  record  in  honor  of
Tiberius,  one  belongs  to  the  reign  of  the  latter  monarch  (30  A.
D.),  another  to  that  of  Nero  (56  A.  D.)  and  a  third  to  the  period
of  Commodus  (176-192),  the  latest  evidence  that  has  yet
appeared.

Augustus  wais  worshipped  in  a  temple  erected  almost  cer-
tainly during  his  lifetime  by  a  certain  Calpurnius  Capitolinus,
whose  praenomen  has  been  lost  (3).  He  is  generally  identified
with  the  prosperous  merchant  L.  Calpurnius  Capitolinus,  whom
members  of  his  profession  from  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor
name  in  an  honorary  inscription.  If  this  supposition  is  correct,
it  offers  a  good  indication  of  the  interest  taken  in  the  new  Im-
perial cult  by  men  of  foreign  birth.  The  immediate  cause  for
the  construction  of  this  shrine  was  perhaps  certain  meaisures
emanating  from  the  Emperor,  which  built  up  the  commerce  of
Puteoli  (4) .  The  architect  wais  L.  Cocceius  Auctus,  who  is
probably  the  same  individual  cited  as  the  builder  of  the  psissage
between  Lake  Avernus  and  Cumae  (5).

These  inscriptions  were  discovered  on  the  site  of  the  an-

(1)  Von   Premerstein,    Ruggiero   I,   839.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1838.  1890,  1576,  1624.  Cp.  1839;  Mourlot  op.  cit.  96  f.
See  p.  124.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1613:  Calpurnius  L.  f.  templum  August©  cum  ornamentis
d.  8.  f.  Cp.  X,   1797;  Dubois,   145.

(4)  Hirschfeld,  Zur  Gesch.  des  rom.  KaiserJ^ultus  in  Kleine  Schrijten
477(5);    Gardthausen,    Augustus   und   seine    Zeit    I,    883.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1614  =  D.  7731a:  L.  Cocceius  L.  C.  Postumi  1.  Auctus  ar-
chitectus.  For  the  supplements  to  be  made  with  the  letters  L  and  C  compare
Dessau's  note.   Cp.   Strab.   V,  4.    5   and  C.   /.   L.   X.   3707.

-  128


cient  temple,  which  is  now  occupied  by  the  cathedral  of  S.
Procolo,  and  the  second  is  still  attached  to  its  walls  above  the
entrance.  It  stood,  therefore,  on  the  citadel  in  the  oldest  part
of  the  city.  According  to  Nissen  its  transverse  sixis  agrees  with
the  rising  sun  on  Sept.  23,  the  Elmperor's  birthday.  He  associ-
ates this  orientation  with  the  steps  taken  in  the  province  of  Asia
in  9  B.  C.  to  make  the  year  begin  on  this  date,  —  an  innovation
which  would  have  been  well  known  to  the  founder  through  his
Oriental  connections  (I).  When  it  was  transformed  into  a
church  is  quite  uncertain,  as  the  latter  is  not  mentioned  before
the  eleventh  century.  The  principal  remains  of  the  temple  still
visible  are  portions  of  a  wall  on  the  east  side  composed  of
travertine  blocks  and  the  upper  sections  of  six  Corinthian  col-
umns with  a  fragment  of  the  architrave  built  into  the  wall.  The
bell-tower  too  is  composed  largely  of  ancient  marble  from
the  temple  (2).  A  flamen  of  Augustus,  mentioned  in  an
inscription  of  uncertain  provenience,  is  usually  assigned  to
this  cult  (3).  The  cult  of  the  Emperor  combined  with  that
of  the  Lares  appeau^  in  one  short  inscription  (4).  Two  others
dealing  with  the  same  subject,  one  of  which  Wissowa  clas-
sifies here,  have  been  relegated  to  the  appendix  as  of  unknown
origin  (5).

Tiberius  was  publicly  honored  by  the  erection  of  statues,
as  hats  already  been  explained,  but  no  evidence  exists  for
supposing  that  he  had  a  cult.  As  to  the  Emperors  that  followed,
we  have  already  noted  an  instance  of  honors  rendered  to
Nero.  But  this  Emperor  did  not  dare  to  assume  so  large  a
measure  of  divinity  as  he  craved  on  account  of  an  omen,  and
furthermore  we  can  expect  little  evidence  in  his  case  because
of  the  general  destruction  of  his  monuments.  Caligula  and
Domitian,   both  of  whom  were  deified  during  life,   were  ex-

(1)  Nissen.  Orientation  292,  345;  Dittenberger,  Orientia  Graeci  inscrip-
tiones  selectae  458   beginning.

(2)  De  lorio,  Guida  (2)  27;  Mazzella,  Sito  ed  antichita  di  Pozzuolo  18.
Cp.  the  testimony  of  the  Renaissance  scholeirs  quoted  by  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.
X.    1613;    Beloch    131;    Dubois   346.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1806;  Dubois  145.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.    1581:  Laribus  Aug.   sacr.  Wissowa,  Roscher  II.    I88I.

(5)  See  p.  400.

-  129  -


posed  to  the  same  fortune  after  death  (I).  Dubois  on  the
evidence  of  an  inscription  of  doubtful  origin  assigns  to  Puteoli
a  cult  of  Claudius  during  that  ruler's  lifetime  (2).  But,  al-
though there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  existence  of  such  a
cult  here,  it  can  not  be  regarded  as  proved.  Nor  does  the  sup-
plement ministrae  suit  well  the  Imperial  cult,  and  according
to  Hirschfeld  there  is  a  lack  of  evidence  in  the  West  for  priests
of  a  living  Emperor  designated  by  name  (3).  It  is  still  more
likely  that  this  city  was  the  seat  of  an  importeint  cult  of  Ves-
pasian. He  was  much  liked,  and  on  various  occasions  showed
his  friendly  feelings  toward  the  inhabitants.  He  was  commem-
orated, moreover,  in  the  official  name  of  the  last  colony  plant-
ed here  (4).

Hadrian,  who  died  in  this  locality,  was  honored  eis  Diuus
in  a  temple  due  to  his  adopted  son  and  successor  Antoninus
and  had  his  own  fleimens.  His  memory  was  further  commemo-
rated by  the  institution  of  sacred  games  called  Eusebeia,  which
were  held  at  intervals  of  four  years  as  a  quinquennale  certo'
men  (5).  It  has  been  surmised  that  this  was  the  same  series
of  contests  which  is  called  sacrum  certamen  iselasticum  in  an
inscription  found  at  Amalfi,  as  it  too  was  established  by  An-
toninus and  held  at  Puteoli  (6).  On  the  other  hand  the  ex-
pression a7wv£<;  11  lo  tin  an  inscription  handed  down  as  originat-
ing at     Neapolis     is   undoubtedly     corrupt     (7).     The     g£unes

(1)  Tac.  an  XV,  74;  Suet.  CaL  22,  Claud.  11:  Aur.  Vict.  Caes.  39,  4;
H'rschfeld,   Kleine  Schrifien  483,    Compare   conditions   at   Pompeii   where    Nero

had  a  priest.  See  p.  27 1 .

(2)  Dubois.    146;   Melanges   XXII    (1902)  40.

(3)  Hirschfeld.   Kleine  Schriften   483    (4).

(4)  But  the  inscriptions  of  restorations  of  buildings  cited  by  Spinazzola
as  derived  from  this  place  come  from  other  towns.  See  p.    139.

(5)  Vita  Hadriani  27.  Nee  appellatus  esset  deus,  nisi  Antoninus  rogasset.
Templum  denique  ei  pro  sepulchro  apud  Puteolos  constituit  et  quinquennale
certamen  et  flamines  et  sodales  et  multa  alia  quae  ad  honorem  quasi  numinis
pertinerent.  Artemidorus,  Oneirocr.  I,  26.  Mazzella.  Sito  ed  antichita  di  Poz  -
zuo/o    71.

(6)  C.   /.   L.   X,   515  =  D.   340  =  Vaglieri    1315:    Imp.    Caesari constitutor!

sacri    certaminis   iselastici.    socii    lictores    popular es    denuntiatores    Puteolani.    In
Greek    dywv   slasXaaxixoc;.

(7)  /.  G.  XIV.  749  =  C.  /.  G.  5810.  Cp.  Kaibel's  note;  Conze.  Hadnaneia.
D.-S.  Ill,  2;   Beurlier.Le  culie  imperial   163.  Beurlier  not  only  makes  the  dywvsc;

nCo'.    equal  to  the  Eusebeia  but  also  considers  that  both  were  in  honor  of  Anto-
ninus. Cp.    Dubois,   96.

-  130  -


in  honor  of  the  deified  Hadrian  are  known  through  many  in-
scriptions recording  the  victories  of  winning  athletes,  which
have  been  discovered  at  Naples  and  in  various  other  locali-
ties (1).  Among  the  numerous  games  celebrated  throughout
the  Roman  world  during  the  era  of  the  Empire,  they  seem  to
have  tedcen  a  high  rank.  No  further  details  relative  to  them
have  been  preserved  except  the  name  of  the  victor  in  the  first
contest  for  flute  players,  P.  Aelius  Antigenes,  who  later  be-
came a  demarch  at  Neapolis  (2).  An  important  inscription
dealing  with  the  Tyrian  merchants  established  at  Puteoli  re-
cords expenditures  made  by  them  for  a  certain  contest.  Some
of  the  commentators  have  regarded  this  as  a  reference  to  the
Eusebeia  (3).  But  the  latter  seems  to  have  been  caJled  def-
initely by  its  precise  name  in  ail  cases,  and  the  geunes  sup-
ported by  the  Tyrian  merchants  were  probably  another  series
of  minor  importance  at  which  the  sacrifice  of  oxen  formed
an  original  and   characteristic  feature   (4).

Antoninus  Pius  himself  had  a  temple  here,  evidently  a
commodious  structure,  where  meetings  were  sometimes  held.
It  is  mentioned  only  once,  in  an  inscription  dated  187  A.
D.  (5).  Beloch  conjectured  that  the  front  of  the  temple  upon
the  Lisbon  vase  was  a  representation  of  this  shrine  and  that
the  standing  figure  seen  there  was  that  of  Diuus  Antoni-
nus (6).

ORIENTAL  CULTS.

No  city  of  Italy  offered  more  fruitful  soil  for  the  propa-
gation of  the  Oriental  cults,  and  in  no  other  place  of  similar


(1)  /.  G.  XIV,  737.  739.  1 102'.;  /.  G.  III.  129;  /.  G.  VII.  49;  C.  /.  G.
1720.  A  list  of  games  held  elsewhere  is  found  in  Conze,  D.-S.  Ill,  2  and
Stengel     'A8ptotveia.    P.-W.   VII.  2165.

(2)  /.  G.  XIV.  737;  Beloch   118.

(3)  Mommsen.  Berichte  der  sacks  Gesellschaft  der  Wiss.  II  (1850)  61  (l)=
Gea.  Schr.  VIII.  12  (6);  Walzing.EfuJe  sur  les  corp.  prof.  Ill,  443;  Kaibel,
/.  G.  XIV.  p.  221.

(4)  Dittenberger.  Orientis  Graeci  inscripiiones  selectae  II,  p.  289;  Ignarra,.
De   palaestra   Neapolitana  229 ;    Dubois   95.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.   1784  =  D.  6334.

(6)  Beloch   140.  See  pp.  122.   135.

-  131  -


size  were  these  religions  so  completely  represented  (1).  A-
mong  the  various  means  by  which  they  secured  a  foothold
here,  commerce  took  a  leading  place.  Some  of  them,  it  is  true,
were  greatly  fostered  by  the  presence  of  many  Asiatic  sailors
at  the  neighboring  harbor  of  Misenum,  but  in  most  cases  the
initial  impulse  for  their  establishment  and  their  main  support
came  from  the  many  persons  of  Oriental  birth  who  were  as-
sociated with  the  city  for  commercial  reasons.  A  good  indi-
cation of  the  character  of  the  population  with  which  the  city
teemed  is  derived  from  the  phrase  Delus  minor,  which  Luci-
lius  applied  to  the  city  (2).  That  island  itself  was  thoroughly
cosmopolitan  and  was  filled  especially  with  devotees  of  the
various  Syrian  divinities;  after  its  fall  Puteoli  was  supreme  in
this  field.  Its  only  rival  was  Ostia,  which,  however,  was  much
later  in  its  development.

The  floating  population  of  mariners  and  traders  with
whom  the  city  was  constantly  filled  was  largely  composed  of
men  from  the  East,  and  Orientals  destined  for  the  various  parts
of  central  and  northern  Italy  and  Rome  itself  long  used  this
city  as  their  port  of  entry.  More  important  was  the  continuous
residence  for  long  periods  of  Orientals  who  had  charge  of  the
wafehouses,  and  were  connected  in  various  capacities  with
the  intense  commercial  life  that  centered  here.  Such  men  not
only  set  up  sporadic  dedications  at  the  instigation  of  some  o-
men  or  dream  but  also  built  shrines,  instgJled  priests,  and  form-
ed societies  devoted  to  their  own  favorite  cults.  The  so-
cieties were  both  religious  and  commercial  in  their  character,
like  those  that  had  existed  earlier  at  Delos  and  the  Piraeus
and  those  of  the  Middle  Ages  which  the  Europeans  formed
in  Alexandria  (3). Often  they  were  the  owners  of  valuable
property.  These  religions  had  been  making  themselves  felt
as  eeirly  as  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  B.  C.  and
rapidly  increased  in  influence.  In  fact  they  made  a  strong  ap-
peal likewise  to  those  of  Italian  birth,  who  being  often  in  a

(1)  Beloch    114   f.;  Dubois  83   f . ;   Wissowa  88.

(2)  Lucil.   Ill   (edition  of  Marx   I   p.    10).

(3)  Yver,  Le  commerce  et  les  marchands  dans  I'ltalie  meridonale,  193-
195;  Heyd,  Geschichte  des  Levanthandels  im  Mittelalter  II  427  f . ;  Movers,
Daa    phonizische    Alterthum    III,     115.

-  132  -


condition  of  misery  and  suffering,  felt  that  the  new  cults  of-
fered them  a  consolation  and  a  hope  never  dreamed  of  amid
the  exercises  of  the  formal  religion  of  the  state.  Among  the
great  number  of  foreign  forms  of  worship  that  had  branches
here  those  of  Semitic  origin  were  most  numerous,  as  their  in-
fluence was  brought  to  bear  not  only  from  Asia  but  also  from
Africa.

EGYPTIAN  DEITIES.

Perhaps  the  earliest  of  the  foreign  religions  to  secure  a
foothold  at  Puteoli  was  that  of  Egypt.  This  becemie  known  in
vEU-ious  ways.  In  the  first  place  there  was  much  direct  inter-
course between  the  city  and  Egypt,  accompeuiied  by  the  so-
journ of  citizens  of  each  locality  in  the  territory  of  the  other.
Alexandria  in  fact  more  than  any  other  city  carried  on  trade
relations  with  Puteoli  (I).  Egyptian  influence  also  made
itself  felt  at  second  hand  through  the  medium  of  Delos  aind
Sicily,  where  the  worship  of  the  divinities  of  that  land  was  prac-
ticed at  an  early  date.  The  latter  was  important  as  an  inter-
mediate station  between  Alexandria  and  Italy,  and  the  former
as  explained  in  the  first  chapter  contained  many  sojourners
from  Campania  (2).  The  lex  parieti  fac'endo  already  cited
elsewhere  mentions  a  temple  of  Serapis  as  standing  in  the  year
105  B.  C.  (3).  The  probabilities  are  that  it  was  not  entirely
new  at  that  date;  indeed  the  temple  of  the  Egyptian  gods  at
Pompeii  seems  to  go  back  to  the  second  century  B.  C,  and
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  one  here  is  still  older  than  it,  be-
cause the  opportunities  for  the  introduction  and  development
of  the  cult  were  much  more  favorable  than  at  any  other  point.
At   all   events   it   must   have   been   in   existence   at   this   place


(1)  Lumbroso,  Recherches  sur  V economic  politique  de  I'Egypte  sous
les  Lagides  156-157;  Lafaye,  Hist,  du  culte  des  divinites  d'Alexandrie  hors
de   I'Egypte  43.

(2)  Holm,  Geschichte  Siciliens  im  'Altertum;  Homolle,  Les  Romains  a
Dilos  in  Bull  corr.  hell  VIII  (1884)  152  and  Fouilles  de  Delos  in  Bull  corr.
hell  VI  (1882)  321.  323,  339.  341;  Ciaceri.  Culti  e  miti  nella  storia  delVaniica
^iclia  259  f.;  Cic.    Verr.  II,   160;  Lafaye.  op.  cit.  37;  Dubois   148.  Se©     p.     31.

(3)  See  p.   122.

-  133  -


from  the  time  that  the  city  began  to  assume  importance  as  a
port  of  entry.  Epigraphical  evidence  for  its  presence  during
the  Empire  is  meager.  An  inscription,  whose  source  is  not
altogether  clear,  records  that  the  colonnade  of  the  temple  of
Serapis  was  restored  and  its  entrance  beautified  in  the  reign
of  Antoninus  Pius.  The  work  was  done  at  the  cost  of  a  cer-
tain Sex.  Pompeius  Primitius  and  his  son  in  consequence  of
a  vow  made  for  the  safety  of  the  Emperor  (1).  Another  vow
made  to  Serapis  at  an  uncertain  date  by  Herermius  Claudius
Priscus,  an  officer  of  the  second  legion,  was  paid  by  the  ded-
ication of  an  offering  (2).  In  the  first  instance  the  god  is
designated  as  magnus  deus  in  accordance  with  a  common
form  of  address  especially  for  divinities  of  foreign  origin;  in
the  second  he  is  qualified  as  dominus,  a  term  seldom  applied
to  the  gods  and  not  cited  elsewhere  for  Serapis.  According
to  Lugli  its  use  in  this  way  is  only  found  in  inscriptions  of  a
late  period  (3).  Mention  of  the  temple  ceases  after  the  sec-
ond century  A.  D.,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  proof  for  the
assertion  that  it  y/as  in  existence  in  the  fourth  (4).  Although
there  is  no  doubt  that  Isis  was  much  honored,  no  epigraphical
or  literary  evidence  on  this  point  has  come  down  to  us.  An
inscription  dealing  with  this  cult,  which  Beloch  is  inclined  to
attribute  to  Puteoli,  belongs  more  properly  to  Neapolis,  as
the  naime  of  the  dedicator  occurs  elsewhere  in  inscriptions  of
that  city  (5).  An  epitaph  of  M.  Antonius  Isidorus,  a  p>ciu-
sarius  dupUciarius ,  is  cited  by  Dubois  as  one  of  the  evidences


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1594.  Voto  suscepto  pro  salute  Imp.  Caes.  M,  Aurelii  An-
tonini  Pii  felicis  Sex.  Pompeius  Primitius  cum  M.  Virofurcio  fil.  columnas  cum
epistyl'o  deo  magno  Serapi  idemque  introitum  exornauerunt.  The  name  Viro-
furcio is  marked  in  the  index  of  C.  /.  L.  X  as  dubious  or  corrupt.  The  in-
scription, depending  solely  on  manuscript  copies,  is  sometimes  assigned  to
Brixia.   Its  attribution  to  Puteoli  is  defended   by  Henzen,   Hermes   III    (1869)    173.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1593;  ,,,,,, Herennius  M.  f.  Claudius  Priscus  primipilaria
leg.  II  tr.  fortis,  patronus  munic.  uoto  suscepto  domino  Sarapidi  d.  d.  The
origin   of   this  inscription   is  not    free   from   doubt.

(3)  Lugli,  Dominus,  Ruggiero  11,  1955  f . ;  Vaglieri,  Deus,  Ruggiero  II.
1721.

(4)  Dubois  149.

(5)  Beloch  53;  Dubois  152  and  MSlanges  XXll  (1902)  53  (1);  /.  G.  XIV.
719,  Cp.  /.  G.  795.  See  p.  215.

-  134


for  this  form  of  religion.  It  appears  that  such  priests  haul  a
part  in  the  musical  services  of  Isis,  but  Ferrero  and  Dessau,
referring  to  Seneca,  more  plausibly  explain  the  reference  as
an  allusion  to  an  official  who  regulated  the  movements  of  the
rowers  on  shipboard  (1).

Various  works  of  art  attest  the  prominence  of  Serapis  and
his  companion  deities.  A  statue  found  in  the  Mgw^ellum  exhib-
its a  common  conception  of  the  god.  He  is  seated  upon  a
throne  and  wears  a  long  chiton.  Ufx>n  his  head  appeau-s  a  caJ-
athus;  the  left  hand  is  upraised  to  hold  a  scepter,  the  right
rests  upon  the  hound  of  Hades  (2).  A  small  bust  of  the  god
shows  again  the  head  adorned  in  a  similar  way  (3).  The
standing  figure  portrayed  at  the  temple  entrguice  upon  the
Lisbon  vase  has  been  identified  by  Studniczka  with  great
probability  as  a  likeness  of  Serapis  in  the  capacity  of  sun  god.
The  attributes  upon  which  the  identification  is  based  consist
of  a  calathus  on  the  god's  head  with  a  crown  of  rays  around
it,  a  horn  of  plenty  in  one  hand  and  a  vessel  for  libations  in
the  other.  An  altar  and  another  object  perhaps  a  steering-oar
complete  the  details  portrayed.  Studniczka  conjectured  fur-
ther that  this  type  of  the  deity  represents  the  principal  image
in  the  shrine  at  the  time  that  the  vase  was  made  (4).  Another
work  of  art  alludes  to  Anubis,  and  the  fragment  of  a  statuette
of  a  pastophorus  is  described  as  having  been  found  in  the
ruins  of  a  small  shrine  destined  for  the  service  of  the  Egyptian
gods  (5).

(1)  Sen.  epis.  56,  5;  Ferrero.  Bull  ipigr.  de  la  Gaule  V  (1885)  277;  E.  E.
VIII.  383  =  D.  2867;  Dubois   152.  Cp.   Forcellini.  Lexicon  IV.  540.

(2)  Gerhard  und  Panofka.  Neapels  antike  Bildwerke  23,  No.  68;  Finati,
//  real  Museo  Borbonico  I  (2)  p.  52  No.  68 ;  Rusch,  Guida  del  Museo  di  No-
poli  188;  No.  705;  Lafaye.  Hist,  du  culte  des  divin.  d'Alexandrie  273,  No.  33;
Dubois  415.  No.  1  ;  Reinach,  Repertoire  I,  440,  No.  2;  Clarac,  Musee  de  sculp-
ture PI.  751.  No.   1851.

(3)  Dubois  414  cat.  No.  3;  Matz  und  von  DuKn.  Antike  Bildwerke  in
Rom  I.   10.  No.  39.

(4)  In  Wiegand's  article  Die  puteolanische  Bauinschrift  in  Jahrb.  jiir  Phil,
und  Pad.  Supplementband  XX  (1893)  696  f . ;  Dubois  Milanges  XXII  (1902)
49  f.  and  Pouzzoles  antique  195.  Wiegand  and  Dubois  give  references  to  sim-
ilar  representations   of  Serapis  on   coins.

(5)  Ehibois.  Pouzzoles  antique,  cat.  415.  No.  3.  and  Melanges  XXII  (1902)
54  (3);  De  lorio.  Guida  (2)  86.

.  135


An  interesting  lamp  having  the  shape  of  a  small  boat
contains  figures  of  Serapis,  Isis,  and  Phtha-Hephaestus.  The
head  of  Serapis  is  covered  with  rays  and  the  name  Helioser-
apis  is  applied  to  him,  thus  indicating  a  tendency  to  identify
Serapis  with  the  Sun;  the  latter,  however,  is  also  depicted
separately  as  a  radiant  head  (I).  In  the  company  of  the  E-
gyptian  deities  is  portrayed  one  of  the  Dioscuri  with  his  steed,
and  above  occurs  the  word  Euploia  in  reference  to  the  efficacy
of  the  horsemen  in  calming  the  waves  (2) .  Isis  and  Serapis,
therefore,  seem  to  be  associated  with  the  Dioscuri  as  patrons
of  navigation  and  lords  of  the  deep  sea,  a  conclusion  sup-
I>orted  by  the  form  of  the  lamip,  the  circumstance  that  it  was
found  in  the  harbor,  and  the  fact  that  Isis  wsis  one  of  the  im-
portemt  sailors*  divinities.  Apuleius  heis  left  an  account  of  a
spring  festival  connected  with  the  opening  of  navigation,  the
chief  feature  of  which  was  a  procession  in  honor  of  Isis,  where
lights  were  borne  by  the  participants.  A  gold  lamp  in  the
shape  of  a  boat  was  carried  by  the  chief  priest,  while  the  dev-
otees of  the  goddess  were  supplied  with  others  of  ordinary
material  but  of  the  same  form  (3).  Hence  it  has  been  con-
jectured with  considerable  probability  that  the  lamp  of  Pu-
teoli  was  designed  for  this  purpose  (4).

The  ruins  now  considered  to  belong  to  a  macellum  were
for  a  long  time  regarded  as  the  temple  of  Serapis  because  the
statue  of  the  god  described,  above  was  found  here  (5).  From
the  vague  indications  preserved  in  the  lex  parieti  jaciendo  it
appears  that  the  temple  wsis  located  in  a  street  adjacent  to  an
open  space  (area)  there  mentioned,   which  was  itself  not  far

(t)  Lafaye.  op.  cit.  304,  No.  132  repeated  by  Dubois  437,  No.  96;  Albert.
Etude  sur  le  culie  de  Castor  et  Pollux  168,  No.  236;  /.  G.  XIV  2405  (48).  Cp.
Drexler,  Helioserapis  RoscKer  I  2026.  Portrayed  by  Champfleury,  Gaz.  des
beaux  arts  XVI  (1864)  54;  Walters,  History  of  Ancient  Pottery  II,  403  PI.  63  (1).
For  the  identification  of  Serapis  and  Sol  see  Macr.  sat.  I,  20,  13-18.  Cp.  Grup-
pe,  Jahresber,  uber  die  Fortschr.  der  class.  Altherhumsw.  CXXXVII  (1908)  507.

(2)  Albert,  op.  cit.  63.

(3)  Apul.  met.  XI,  9-10.

(4)  Dubois    151.

(5)  This  erroneous  view  seems  not  to  have  been  abandoned  by  Albert,
op.  cit.  62  nor  by  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  der  rom.  Kirche  I,  109.  The  lat-
ter thinks  that  the  sanctuary  here  served  as  a  dream  oracle.

-  136  -


from  the  sea  and  apparently  separated  from  it  by  few,  if  any,
buildings  (1).  The  seinctuciry  wets,  therefore,  situated  in  the
harbor  district  and  was  convenient  for  the  use  of  the  Alexan-
drian tradespeople,  who  would  have  a  pgu-amount  interest  in
it.  The  stone  containing  this  enactment  was  discovered  in
the  sixteenth  century  near  the  church  of  S.  Stefanino  di  Pon-
tone,  whose  location  has  been  forgotten.  This  is  thought  by
Wiegand  to  have  been  situated  near  the  mole  and  to  have  de-
rived from  it  the  appellation  Pontone  from  the  fact  that  the
mole  was  called  populcirly  Ponte  di  Caligola  (2).  The  law
W£is  doubtless  posted  up  in  connection  with  the  building  op-
erations which  it  describes;  hence,  if  the  area  lay  in  this
district  around  the  harbor,  it  would  give  an  approximate  lo-
cation for  the  temple  and  identify  it  definitely  with  the  vici-
nity of  the  port.  Another  meager  indication  for  its  situation  is
afforded  by  the  Lisbon  vcise,  which  shows  it  between  the  am-
phitheater and  the  mole  and  nesu-  the  theatre.  Probably  it
was  not  fcir  removed  from  the  building  erroneously  identified
with  it  as  Tempio  di  Serapide.  Wiegand  located  it  more  pre-
cisely a  little  to  the  south  of  this  building  neai  the  landing
from  the  mole.  This  location  is  in  heu-mony  with  the  dictum
of  Vitruvius  that  the  shrine  of  this  god  ought  to  be  situated
in  the  emporium  (3).

The  area  or  court  already  mentioned  was  fitted  up  for
religious  uses.  Originally  it  wsis  connected  with  a  dwelling-
house  and  entirely  closed  to  the  street.  But  as  a  result  of  the
building  operations  here  described  its  relation  to  the  adjoining
proF>erties  was  completely  reversed.  Provided  with  an  entreuice
to  the  street  and  walled  up  on  the  other  sides,  it  became  a  pub-
lic court  used  as  a  sacred  enclosure  to  contain  altars  brought
from  a  certain  field.  Wiegeind  believed  that  it  was  put  under
the  protection  of  Serapis,  whose  temple  was  across  the
street  (4).

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,    1781  rrVaglieri   1883;  Lex  paxieti  facierxdo  in  area  quae  est

ante  aedem   Serapis  trans   uiam   In    area  trans   uiam   paries   qui   est   propter

uiam ex   eo  p<ariete  anta?   duas   ad   mare  proicito.

(2)  Wiegand.  Jahrb.  fur  Phil   u.  Pad.  Sup.  XX  (1893)  668,  696.

(3)  Vitr.    I.    7.    1.

(4)  Wiegand,  op.  cit.  710.  A  plan  of  the  area  is  found  on  plate  I  at  the
end  of  the  volume  containing  his  article.

[37  .


An  Egyptian  god  Nephtho  probably  the  same  as  Neph-
ihys  is  mentioned  in  a  defixio  along  with  the  great  Hebrew
divinity.  Though  the  form  Nephtho  is  rare,  its  equivalent  is
frequently  met  in  inscriptions  of  this  type  (1).

MAGNA  MATER.

When  the  goddess  first  made  her  influence  felt  at  Puteoli
is  uncertain,  as  no  definite  information  is  obtainable.  It  must
have  been  at  a  comparatively  e£U*ly  date  immediately  after
the  close  of  the  Hannibalic  War,  when  the  city*s  commercial
importance  began.  From  that  time  on  a  stream  of  Asiatics
found  their  way  to  the  Italian  coast.  The  influence  of  the  mer-
cheuits  of  Asia  Minor  in  the  first  century  A.  D.  has  already
been  noted  in  connection  with  the  honorguy  statue  of  Tiberius,
which  the  Augustales  erected  in  commemoration  of  his  phil-
anthropy exercised  in  that  province  (2).  In  fact  the  number
of  immigrants  from  Asia  Minor  was  probably  not  much  below
that  of  the  Semites  who  came  from  the  districts  farther  south.
Graillot  conjectures  that  this  goddess  was  introduced  by  mer-
chants of  Cyme  who  had  settled  here,  but  there  seems  to
be  no  particular  reason  for  selecting  this  city  rather  than  any
other  (3) .  In  spite  of  the  evidence  for  this  influence  in  the
propagation  of  the  cult  Dubois  denies  that  its  presence  here
w£is  due  to  commercial  reasons  (4).

As  Puteoli  at  the  height  of  its  activity  was  inhabited  by
a  heterogeneous  crowd  of  many  nationalities  constantly  shift-
ing and  changing  and  was  without  the  restraining  influences
of  conservatism,  the  new  religion  probably  developed  more
rapidly  than  elsewhere.  In  later  times  it  may  have  been  stim-
ulated to  some  extent  by  the  presence  of  the  fleet  at  Mi-
senum,  but  was  naturally  less  affected  thereby  than  the  cult
at   Baiae   (5).    There  are   no  records   for   this   cult   during   the

(1)  Wunsch,    'Antike  Fluchtajeln    8;  Drexler.    Nephtho,    Roschzr,    III.    188.

(2)  S  e  p.    124;  Dubois   104.

(3)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cyb^le,  430.

(4)  Dubois   152

(5)  See  p.  87.

-  138  -


Republic  or  the  first  century  that  followed;  Spinzizzola  strange-
ly cites  an  inscription  regarding  the  restoration  of  a  temple
which  took  place  during  that  period  but  it  belongs  to  Hercu-
laneum  (1).  Yet  there  is  every  reason  for  supposing  that  the
cult  attained  an  unusucJly  flourishing  condition  and  developed
sooner  than  in  such  a  community  as  Herculaneum,  where  it
was  provided  with  a  temple  in  the  first  century  A.  D.  At  Puteoli
it  connected  itself  especially  with  the  warm  springs  (2).

Dubois,  following  the  lead  of  Beloch,  has  doubted  the
presence  of  a  temple  of  this  goddess  at  Puteoli,  and  has  ad-
mitted the  possibility  that  her  adherents  in  this  community
utilized  the  sanctuary  at  Baiae  for  their  ceremonies  and  de-
votions. The  considerations  which  prompted  Beloch  to  ad-
vocate the  theory  of  one  body  of  dendrophori  composed  of
the  citizens  of  both  Cumae  and  Puteoli,  have  already  been
examined  and  pronounced  unsatisfactory  (3).  It  is  much
more  probable  that  there  were  two  associations  of  dendrophori,
one  for  each  town,  both  of  which  consulted  their  respective
local  senates  in  case  of  need.  In  fact  an  example  of  such  a
consultation  discussed  below  is  still  in  existence.  It  is  not,
however,  possible  with  Graillot  to  take  this  record  and  use
it  to  prove  the  existence  of  two  bodies  (4).  For  in  the  case
of  the  erection  of  a  statue  in  Puteoli,  the  dendrophori  would
need  to  consult  only  the  decurions  of  that  town,  although  they
themselves  might  be  composed  of  residents  of  both  Cumae
and  Baiae  (5).  Furthermore  it  is  possible  to  assume  that  two
bodies  existed,  but  that  they  were  dependent  upon  a  single
shrine,  and  there  is  no  evidence  at  hand  which  wholly  dis-
proves such  an  assumption.  Yet  according  to  all  probability
there  was  a  temple  here  long  before  the  one  at  Baiae  was  built.


(1)  Spinazzola,  La  base  figurata  di  Tiberio  in  Atti  Nap.  XXII  (1902)  part
2,  135  (3).  A  similar  inscription  belonging  to  Neapolis  is  also  assigned  incor-
rectly to   Puteoli.

(2)  Graillot,  Mater  Deum  Salutaris  in  Melanges  Cagnat  224.  Cp.  Plin.  nat.
XXXI   2,  and  p.    I II   of   this  work.

(3)  Dubois  153  (I).  A  more  plausible  view  by  the  same  scholar  is  expound-
ed  in  Melanges  XXll    (1902)  35.    See   pp.    90-91.

(4)  Graillot,   Le  culte  de  Cybele  432',   Cp.   however  270.

(5)  See  p.  92.

-  139  -


It  is  indeed  inconceivable  that  a  place  like  Puteoli,  where
the  cult  manifestly  developed  early  and  had  every  opportunity
to  flourish,  should  lack  its  own  shrine  (I).

Although  no  mention  of  a  priest  has  yet  been  found,
two  inscriptions  refer  to  the  dendrophori.  One  is  the  epitaph
of  Q.  Aemilius  Helpediphorus  zJready  cited,  who  besides
being  a  dendrophorus  was  an  Augustalis,  and  even  became
decurion  (2).  The  second  alludes  to  the  organization  collec-
tively and  gives  a  bit  of  interesting  local  information  belong-
ing to  the  year  196  A.  D.  The  members  had  erected  a  statue
for  a  benefactor  M.  Octauius  Agatha,  and  were  now  consult-
ing the  decurions  about  an  appropriate  inscription  to  attach
to  the  monument  (3) .  They  undoubtedly  held  at  this  time
an  entirely  respectable  and  even  important  position  in  current
civic  activity.  Yet  one  must  not  attach  too  much  importance
to  the  use  of  such  a  term  as  the  honestissimum  corpus  here
employed.  When  due  allowance  is  made  for  the  growing  ten-
dency to  use  high  sounding  expressions  and  meaningless  su-
perlatives, the  phrase  has  no  special  value  such  as  is  attached
to  it  by  Graillot  for  proving  the  status  of  the  cissociation  (4).
The  value  of  the  inscription  depends  upon  its  reference  to  the
relations  existing  between  the  collegium  on  the  one  side  and
the  local  senate  on  the  other.  That  the  former  was  to  some
degree  dependent  on  the  latter  is  highly  probable,  but  as  ex-
plained above  the  value  of  the  inscription  is  more  appcirent
than  real  for  the  elucidation  of  this  relation.  Just  as  the  con-
sultation of  the  decurions  at  Puteoli  rather  than  of  any  other
town   was   determined   by   the   location   of   the   statue,    so   the

(1)  Cp.   Dubois,  Melanges,   loc.   cit.

(2)  C.  I.  L.  X.  1790.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1786^Vaglieri  1887:  C.  Domitio  Dextro  II  L.  Valerio  Mes-
sala    Thrasia   Prisco    cos.    VI    idus    lanuar.    in    curia    basilicae    Aug.    Annian.

Scnbundo    :  dfue  unt    A.    Aquilas    Proculus Quod      postulante     Cn.    Haia

Pudente,  o(rnato)  u(iro)  de  forma  inscriptioni  danda  statuae  quam  dendrophor(i)
Octauio    Agathae    p(atrono)    c(olon'ae)    n(ostrae)    statuerunt,    Cn.     Papirius    Sa-

git  a  et  P.  Aelius  Eudaemon  iiuir(i)  rettulerunt  q(uid)  d(e)  e(a)  r(e)  f  (ieri)  p(Ia-
ceret)  d(e)  r(e)  i(ta)  c(ensuerunt).  Placere  uniuersis  honestissimo  corpori  den-
drophorum  inscriptionem ;  quae  ad  honorem  talis  uiri  pertineat  dare  quae
decreto inserta  est.

(4)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cyb^le  431.

-  140  -


possibility  that  it  was  erected  on  public  land  may  account  for
any  consultation  at  all  (1).  It  is  noteworthy  here  that  the
name  of  the  town  is  not  used  formally  to  qualify  the  den-
drophori  (2).

The  name  of  a  caernophorus  is  preserved  in  an 'inscription
which  can  not  surely  be  assigned  to  Puteoli.  It  is  the  epitaph
of  Heria  Victorina,  who  probably  belonged  to  a  well  -  to  -  do
freedman's  family  (3).  This  maiden  was  evidently  a  kind
of  deaconess  or  assistant  of  the  priests  who  were  connected
with  the  temple  of  Magna  Mater.  Her  duty  was  to  heai  the
sacred  lamps  and  assist  generally  in  the  ceremonies  (4).
The  employment  of  women  in  this  position  seems  to  have
been  a  specialty  of  the  religious  communities  of  the  West  (5).
It  is  probable  also  that  the  religiosi  mentioned  in  an  inscrip-
tion found  north  of  the  city  near  the  village  of  Marano  (Ma-
donna del  Piano  di  Quarto)  belonged  to  the  worshippers  of
this  goddess  rather  than  to  the  adherents  of  guiy  other  similao*
cult.  According  to  Graillot  they  were  initiates  who  £ispired
to  the  highest  place  in  the  cult  by  certain  ceremonial  prac-
tices and  outwcird  meurks  of  devotion  without  attempting  to
withdraw  from  the  activities  of  the  world  (6).  At  Puteoli
they  owned  an  ager,  which  was  either  a  cemetery  or  a  plot  of
ground  fitted  up  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  members.  It  was
adorned  with  a  colonnade  eind  provided  with  seats  by  C.  lu-
lius  Aquilinus,   a  rich  devotee  of  the  cult  (7).

In  the  sixteenth  century  a  statue  of  the  goddess  in  a  mu-
tilated state  was  discovered  on  an  estate  known  as  the  Villa
Cordiglia,  which  belonged  to  the  Palatine  quarter  lying  near

(1)  Graillot,   op.   cit.   270.

(2)  Maue  Die  Vereine  der  fabri,  centonarii  und  dendrophori  im  rom.
Reich.   48(5).

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1 803  =  Vaglieri  1905:  Heriae  Victorinae  caernophoro  M.
Herius   Valeriajius    filiae    dulcissimae    .

(4)  De   Ruggiero,    Caernophorus,    Ruggiero   II,    12.

(5)  Graillot,  op.  cit.  253.  For  the  prominence  of  women  generally  in  the
Oriental   cults    see    Maue,    op.    cit.    35.

(6)  Graillot    283-284.    Citations    of    the    term    religiosus    occur    283    (7).

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1894;  Ager  religiosorum.  C.  lulius  Aquilinus  porticus  et
sedilia  de  suo  extruxit.  GraUot  431;  Dubois  152;  De  Marchi,  II  culto  privato
II,    106.

-  141  -


the  highway  joining  Puteoli  and  Cumae.  It  was  accompanied
by  the  fragments  of  a  Hon  or  lions  that  had  stood  at  her
feet  (I).  Whether  these  figures  formed  the  cult  statue  of  a
shrine  or  at  least  a  dedicatory  offering  belonging  to  it,  or  were
merely  decorative  sculptures  of  the  Thermae  close  by,  with
some  slight  allusion  to  Magna  Mater  as  a  goddess  of  water»
remains  uncertain,  but  the  latter  opinion  is  the  more  probable.
A  second  statue,  identified  by  the  presence  of  a  turreted  crown,
was  found  broken  in  many  pieces  (2) .  A  bronze  votive  lamp
such  as  doubtless  burned  in  the  temple  contains  an  inscription
in  the  form  Matri  Magenc^  (3).

BELLONA.

Somewhat  similau*  to  the  Mother  of  the  gods  but  exhibiting^
a  much  more  somber  and  fearful  cispect  was  the  Oriental  Bel-
lona,  originating  at  Comsuia  in  Cappadocia,  who  was  con-
fused by  the  later  Romcms  with  their  native  goddess  of  that
name  (4).  C.  Aninius,  an  adherent  of  this  cult,  is  mentioned
upon  a  marble  fragment  found  in  the  Via  Solfatara,  and  it  is
probable  that  a  shrine  was  erected  here,  modelled  like  the
one  in  Rome  after  the  temple  at  Comana  (5).

There  is  no  extant  record  of  the  performance  of  a  tauro-
bolium  in  this  connection;  the  ceremony  seems,  however,  to
have  been  received  into  the  ritual  of  this  cult  earlier  than  into
the  rites   of   Magna   Mater   (6).    There   were   at   Puteoli   plenty

(1)  Palladini,  Descrizione  di  un  sepolcreto  etc.  14;  Dubois  418,  No.  16;
Graillot   432.

(2)  Loffredo,  Le  antichiia  di  Pozzuolo  8;  Dubois,   cat.   418,   No.    15.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1587:  Ascelapiades  (sic)  Matri  Magenae  (sic)  d.  d.  1.  m.
A  statuette  of  the  goddess  of  unknown  origin  in  the  National  Museum  at  Na-
ples may  have  come  from  Puteoli:  Arndt-Amelung,  Einzelaufnahmen  antikjer
Shulpturen  533;   Reinach,   Rep.    de   la  stat.   gr.   et   rom.    II,  271,   No.   2.

(4)  Reville,  L.a  religion  a  Rome  sous  les  Severes  69 ;  Vaglieri,  Bellona,
Ruggiero,  I.  988 ;  Aust,  Bellona,  P.-W.  Ill,  255  f. ;  Maue.  Die  Vereine  d.  fabri
etc.  23;  Preller-Jordan  II.  386.

(5)  A.  J.  A.  2nd  ser.  II  (1898)  390:  C.  Aninius Bellonae  sacrum.

The    dedications    to    Bellona    are    collected   by    Vaglieri,    Ruggiero    1,    988.

(6)  Cumont,  Le  taurobole  et  le  culte  de  Bellone  in  Rev.  d'hist.  et  de  Htt,
rel   VI   (1901)    102.

-  142  -


of  gladiators,  slaves  and  others  of  the  lowest  ranks  of  society
to  whom  this  worship  mostly  appealed,  and  from  whose  ranks
its  priestly  fanatici  were  recruited.  These  persons  were  noto-
rious for  the  excesses  which  they  committed  when  carrying  out
the  ritual  of  their  office,  and  often  were  covered  with  their
own  blood  (1).  Three  of  these  priests,  who  were  members
of  an  actors'  association,  along  with  other  individuals  of  the
same  fraternity  are  mentioned  in  a  graffito  on  the  wall  of  a
Pompeian  hotel.  They  describe  themselves  as  fanatici  a  puiui-
nare  Synethaei,  which  is  apparently  an  allusion  to  some  shrine
prepared  by  a  certain  Synethus,  and  also  as  sodales  of  the
company  of  Anicetus,  who  elsewhere  in  an  inscription  of  Pu-
teoli  is  recorded  as  being  an  actor  (2).  It  seems  probable,  there-
fore, that  the  fanatici  named  here  were  devotees  of  Bellona,
that  they  were  lodging  temporcirily  at  Pompeii,  and  that  in
pcirt  at  least  they  were  residents   of  Puteoli.

THE  ORIENTAL  LIBER.

The  cult  of  Dionysus-Liber  already  existent  in  the  Re-
publican period  was  modified  or  supplanted  by  the  influence
of  the  Orient.  A  new  system  of  rites  affected  by  the  Asiatic
cults  and  especially  by  that  of  Magna  Mater  made  their  way
into  Italy;  in  Rome  itself  they  found  a  hospitable  reception
from  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar  and  were  zealously  fostered
by  Septimius  Severus  (3).  The  revival  of  the  Dionysiac  mys-
teries under  Oriental  influence  seems  to  have  taken  place
in  the  chief  ports  in  the  second  century  A.  D.  sis  they  were
flourishing  greatly  at  Puteoli  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  (4).

(1)  De  Ruggiero,  Fanaticus,  Ruggiero  III,  33;  Samter,  Fanaticus,  P.-W.
VI.    1986.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  2155  =  D.  4181b  =:VagIieri  1866:  C.  Cominius  Pyrrhicus  et
L.  Nouius  Priscus  et  L.  Campius  Primigenius,  fanatici  tres  a  puluinare  Syne-
thae:  (sic)  hie  fuerunt  cum  Martiale  sodale  Actiani  Anicetiani  Sinceri ;  Saluio
sodali  feliciter.  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.  1946  and  Zangemeister,  Bull.  Inst.  1865,  179;
C.  /.  L.  VI,  490  contains  the  expression  ex  aede  Bellonaes  puluinensis  fanaticus.

(3)  Serv.  eel.  V,  29;  Dio  Cassius  LXXVI,  16,  3;  Wissowa  303  and  Liber,
Roscher  II,  2028.

(4)  Dubois,  Melanges  XXII  (1902)  27  and  Fouzzoles  antique  137;  Taylor.
The  Cults  of  Osiia  31.

-  143  -


TKis  worship  was  closely  associated  with  the  cults  of  Isis,
Mithras  eund  Magna  Mater,  so  that  the  same  person  often
acted  as  priest  for  more  than  one  of  these  deities  (I).  At
Puteoli  the  new  cult  seems  to  have  modified  the  older  cult
rather  than  to  have  usurped  its  place;  at  any  rate  as  in  the
old,  purely  Greek  mysteries,  the  god  was  closely  associated
with  Ceres,  the  chief  mystery  goddess  of  the  earlier  epoch.
A  badly  damaged  inscription  records  the  fact  that  Stlaccia,
a  priestess  of  the  Cereres,  appsurently  at  the  beginning  of  her
term  of  office  made  a  donation  to  the  thiasus  Placidianus  (2).
From  the  mention  of  the  nzunes  of  Cgiracalla  and  Geta  it  has
been  dated  in  the  period  200-209  A.  D.,  in  the  reign  of  Sep-
timius  Severus  (3).  The  attendant  of  the  god  is  an  Italian
as  is  indicated  by  her  name,  but  has  evidently  become  inter-
ested in  the  religions  of  the  Orient.  How  much  the  cult  which
she  herself  served  had  been  modified  by  the  ideas  said  cere-
monies imported  from  the  Eeist  is  uncertain,  nor  is  the  exact
significance  of  the  term  Cereres  understood.  The  use  of  this
word  is  confined  to  Africa  with  the  exception  of  the  present
instance  (4).  Most  commentators  have  considered  that  it  rep-
resented the  two  deities  Ceres-Demeter  and  her  daughter
Persephone  (5);  Birt,  however,  saw  an  allusion  to  the
Greek  and  Roman  forms  of  the  same  goddess,  and  more  re-
cently Audollent  has  argued  in  favor  of  an  interpretation  that


(1)  Wissowa  304.  For  his  relation  to  Magna  Mater  see  Kern,  Dionysos,
P.-W.    V,    1026.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1585  =  D.  3366  =  VagIieri  1138:  Pro  salute  (?)  Imp.  Caesaris
L.  Septim'i  Seueri  Pi  Pjertinacis  Aug.  et  [M.  Aureli  Anto]nini  Pii  Aug.  et
P.    Sept[imi   Getae  nobijlissimi   Caes.    et    Iuli[ae   Domnae   mat.    Augg.]    et    kas-

trorum,    Stla[ccia]    sacerdos  Cererum    introitfus    causa] thietso    Pla-

cidiano  donauit hlauio  T.  f.    Eclectiano  sace[rdote   et   Stlacciis   Sotere   et

Rep£u:[ato .    It   is   possible   that  Stlaccius   should    be   read.    Avellino,   Bull.

Nap.    V   (1847)    113;    Macchioro,    //   sincretismo    religioso    e    I'epigrafia    in    Rev.
arch.   IX   (1907)  261  (3);  Cp.   Suet.   Claud.   9  for  the  custom  exemplified   here.

(3)  Cagnat,  Cours  d' epigraphie  latine  (4)  211;  Dubois  134  (7).

(4)  Audollent,    Cereres    in    Melanges    Cagnat   379    (3).

(5)  Wissowa.  Ceres,  P.-W.  III.  1979  and  Rel.  und  Kult.  (2)  303;  Pesta-
lozza  e  Chiesa,  Ceres,  Ruggiero  II,  207 ;  Toutain,  Les  cultes  paiens  dans
Vempire  romain  I,  350.  A  more  complete  list  of  references  on  this  subject  is
given  by  Audollent,  Melanges  Cagnat,  359  (2).

-  144  -


taikes  account  of  a  double  divinity,   one  aspect  of  which  de-
veloF>ed  from  the  Carthaginian  goddess  Tanit  (I).

The  thiasus  Placidianus  was  a  group  of  persons  similar  to
the  associations  called  spirae  and  like  them  devoted  to  the
worship  of  Liber.  It  probably  included  women  in  its  member-
ship, and  derived  its  neime  from  some  individual  who  wais  a
patron  or  prominent  member  (2).  While  here  as  elsewhere
the  mention  of  these  societies  belongs  to  the  time  of  the  Em-
pire, their  first  appearance  in  Italy  may  go  back  to  the  period
of  the  persecutions  of  Dionysus'  followers  when  worship  even
of  the  Greek  god  in  a  public  way  was  put  under  the  ban.  The
same  inscription  contains  the  names  of  two  other  m^embers  of
the  gens  Stlaccia,  who  were  apparently  connected  with  the
thiasus.  A  priest  of  Liber  T.  Flauius  Eclectianus  reappears
in  another  inscription,  which  bears  witness  to  the  orgiastic
nature  of  the  ritual  at  this  period.  Here  he  is  associated  with
his  son  Olympianus  and  both  are  designated  as  sacerdotes
orgiophantae  (3).  Probably  the  priesthood  was  regulcirly  in
the  heuids  of  this  family,  which  W2is  of  some  prominence  lo-
cally, as  a  M.  Stlaccius  Albinus  was  decurion  (4).  During
the  priesthood  of  the  ssime  Eclectiamus  an  assistant  with  the
title  parastata  appears  in  the  person  of  an  Imperial  freedman
Aurelius  Draco,  who  offered  the  twenty  year  sacrifice,  appar-
ently an  allusion  to  the  taurobolium  (5).  A  simple  dedica-
tion to  the  god  was  the  work  of  another  freedman  of  the  Im-


(1)  Birt,  Ceres,  Roscher  I.  866;  Audollent,  op.  cit.  yil.  Cp.  Toutain,
Le»   cxi^a   romaines   de   la    Tunisie  276.

(2)  C.    /,    L.    X,    Les    associations    religieuses    chez    les    Greca    5 ;    Dubois.
Milanges  XXII   (1902)  26.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1583  =  D.  3364  =  VagIieri  1136:  Libero  patri  sacrum.  TT.
Flauii  Eclectianus  et  Olympianus  fil.  eius  sacerdotes  orgiophantae.  Different
titles  borne  by  similar  priests  are  enumerated  by  Wissowa,  Liber,  Roscher  11,
2028;  Toutam,   Liber  Pater,   D.-S.    III.    1190.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1783  =  D.  5919  =  Vaglieri  1885.  This  inscription  the  date
of  which  is  uncertain  is  assigned  by  Dubois  to  the  second  century  A.  D.,
Pouzzoles  antique  50.  Erroneously  assigned  to  the  year  97  A.  D.  by  the  same
writer   in   Milanges   XXII    (1902)   26    (1).

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1584=D.  3365  =  Vaglieri  1137:  ybero  patri  sacrum.  XX
annuale    T.    FI.    Eglectiani    sacerd.    Aurel.    Aug.    lib.    Draco    parastata    conse-


145  -

10


perial  family  callecl  Lupercus  (1).  It  is  undated  and  does  not
necessarily  belong  to  the  orientalized  cult,  but  as  it  cornea
from  the  epoch  of  the  Empire  and  addresses  the  god  sis  Liher
pater,  it  probably  should  be  assigned  to  that  variety.  There
is  furthermore  no  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  parallel  form
marked  by  a  ritual  of  the  old  Greek  style.

SYRIAN  GODS  -  HELIOPOLITANUS.

Another  Oriental  cult  at  Puteoli  was  that  of  Jupiter  Op-
timus  Msucimus  Heliopolitanus,  which  represented  an  aunal-
gamation  of  the  tuteleu-y  dfeity  of  the  Romein  state  and  an
important  Semitic  god  of  the  sun.  The  cult  of  the  latter  had
its  center  at  Baalbek  aind  was  widely  diffused  through  the
Empire  (2) .  As  it  was  strong  at  the  great  mart  of  Delos,  so
it  contested  with  feiir  success  for  a  high  place  in  the  religious
life  of  the  busy  Italisui  emporium,  where  it  received  the  support
especially  of  the  merchants  of  such  cities  as  Heliopolis  and
Berytus  (3).  The  cult  came  to  Italy  in  fact  by  way  of  trade
perhaps  through  Delos  and  established  itself  first  at  Pu-
teoli (4).  The  adherents  of  this  faith  from  Heliopolis  were
grouped  together  into  an  association  denominated  a  corpus  (5)»
as  appears  from  an  inscription  which  is  attributed  rightly  to
Puteoli.  As  this  term  was  not  generally  applied  to  religious
associations  in  the  early  Empire,  it  tends  to  fix  a  date
for  this  notice  as  late  as  the  third  century.  At  that  time  a
tract  of  land  amounting  to  seven  iugera  with  all  its  buildings
and  other  appurtenances  was  conveyed  as  a  regular  property
to  the  believers  of  the  cult  of  Heliopolitanus,  and  all  persons
who  might  have  occasion  to  pass  through  it  or  use  it  were

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1586.

(2)  Dussaud.  Heliopolitanus,  P.-W.  VIII,  52  f .  ;  Macrob.  sat.  I.  23.
10  f. ;  Drexler,  Heliopolitanus,  Roscher,  I,  1987  f .  ;  Preller-Jordan  II,  402;  Per-
drizet.    Jupiter,    D.-S.    III.    700;    Gruppe    1584    (4).

(3)  Walzing,  Etude  hist,  sur  les  corps,  prof.  I,  204.  Cp.   I,  45.

(4)  C.  H.  Moore.  Oriental  Cults  in  Britain  in  Harvard  Studies  XI  (1900)
51.  Cp.  Homolle,  Les  Romains  a  Dilos  in  Bull.  corr.  hell.  VIII  (1884)  75  f .  ;
Drexler,    Roscher,    I,     1990;    Wissowa    364.

(5)  Cp.  the  use  of  corpus  to  designate  the  dendrophori  at  the  end
of    the    second    century    A.    D.   De    Ruggiero,    Corpus,    Ruggiero    I,    1240-1241,

-  146  -


subject  to  the  will  of  that  body  (I).  Especially  conspicuous
for  their  zeal  in  the  faith  were  a  number  of  emigrants  from
the  Phoenician  city  of  Berytus  (Beyrut) ,  who  are  csJled  in
one  place  the  cultores  Berytenses,  Their  interest  is  explained
by  the  fact  tjiat  in  their  native  city  Heliopolitanus  had  ob-
tained such  a  preeminence  as  to  overshadow  even  their  own
god  Baalim.  Their  activity  is  represented  by  a  dedication
belonging  to  the  ye£ir  115  or  116  A.  D.  in  honor  of  the  Em-
peror Trajan,  which  is  the  oldest  dated  inscription  for  this
cult  (2).  They  were  probably  orgzinized  in  an  association
like  that  of  the  merchants  of  Heliopolis,  where  religious  ser-
vices in  honor  of  their  favorite  deity  were  a  prominent  fea-
ture (3).

The  inhabiteints  of  a  third  Asiatic  city  axe  probably  re-
ferred to  in  the  unknown  and  doubtless  corrupt  word  Gere-
mellensium,  preserved  in  an  uncouth,  poorly  written  inscription.
Though  found  at  Naples,  it  belongs  to  Puteoli  (4).  Meuicini
believed  that  the  town  in  question  wets  Germe  in  Gedatia,
which  W21S  situated  close  to  Pessinus,  and  explained  the  word
in  the  inscription  as  the  diminutive  of  Germenensium  parallel
to  the  known  form  Germenorum  with  the  addition  of  a  paia-


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1579  =  D.  4291=Vaglieri  1923.  Hie  ager  iug.  VII  cum  cis-
terna  et  tabernis  eius,  eorum  FK>ssessoTum  iuris  est  qui  in  cultu  corporis  He-
liopolitanorum  sunt  eruntue,  atque  ita  is  accessus  usque  esto  i>er  ianueis  itine-
raque  eius  agri  qui  nihil  aduersus  lecem  (sic)  et  conuentionem  eius  corporis
facere   perseuerauerint.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1634  =  D.  300  =  Vaglieri  1299:  Imp.  Caesari  diui  Neruae
[f.  Nervae]  Traiem.  optimo  Aug.  Ger.  Dacic.  Parthic.  ix>nt.  max.  trib.  potest.
XX,  imp.  XII,  cos.  VI,  p>atri  patr.  cultores  louis  Heliopolitani  Berytenses,  qui
Puteolis  consistunt.  Cp.  Dussaud,  P.-W.  VIII,  55-56.  A  I'st  of  collegia  that
bear  the  names  of  deities  is  found  in  Walzing,  op.  cit.  I,  197.  Cp.  F.  Lenor-
mant,  Jupiter  Heliopolitanus  in  Gazette  arch.  II  (1876)  79.  A  man  of  Bery-
tU3  addressed  a  dedication  at  Nemausus  (Nimes)  C.  /.  L.   XII,  3072  =  D.  4288.

(3)  Walzing,  Etude  hist,  sur  les  corps,  prof.  I,  224 ;  Dubois  98  and
Melanges   XXII    (1902)   57.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1578  =  D.  4290  =  VagIieri  1118:  Ex  iussu  I.  O.  M.  Helio-
politani Aur.  Theodoro  sacerdote,  filio,  curator(i)  templi  Geremellensium,
adampliante  donis  torquem  et  uelum  sac(erdotes)  et  lucophori  de  suo  posue-
runt,  curante  Acilio  Secundo  Trotomias.  (The  readings  are  often  extremely
uncertain).  Cp.  Colonna,  Scoperte  di  antichith  in  Napoli  473.

.  147


sitic  vowel  after  the  first  syllable  (I).  This  view  is  rightly
criticized  by  Dubois,  who  follows  Gildemeister  in  associating
the  word  with  such  Semitic  place  names  as  Gamala  or  Gemela
(Gemala),  £ind  cites  the  cognomen  Geu-malla  of  an  Oriental  at
Puteoli.  Although  the  exact  place  in  question  can  no  longer
be  determined,  Dubois  conjectures  that  it  W2is  located  in  the
region  of  Mt.  Lebanon,  where  the  cult  of  Heliopolitanus  weis
demonstrably  strong  (2).  According  to  another  interpretation
the  word  Geremellensium  does  not  allude  to  the  inhabitants
of  a  particular  place  but  means  ((  worshippers  of  God  ».  This,
however,  seems  less  satisfactory  (3) .

The  inscription  cited  above  refers  to  the  donation  of  certain
gifts  to  the  shrine  in  consequence  of  a  dream  or  some  other
form  of  divine  admonition.  It  seems  to  have  been  due  to  the
joint  action  of  the  priest  and  a  company  of  persons  called
lucophori  who  had  some  part  in  the  ceremonies  that  is  now
unknown.  Some  have  connected  them  with  the  word  for  light
and  considered  that  they  were  torch-bearers ;  others  with  greater
probability  derive  the  name  from  the  word  for  wolf  (Xovto?);  al-
though what  pait  this  suiimal  may  have  played  in  the  cult  is
wholly  a  mystery  (4).  A  curator  of  the  temple  is  attested
here.  Another  sacerdos  Hermianus,  who  had  not  yet  entered
upon  the  duties  of  his  office,  is  named  upon  the  fragments
of  a  marble  vase  with  sculptured  reliefs  (5).  The  name  of  an
aedituus  m.  [agister?]  has  also  been  preserved,  —  a  species  of
officer  not  cited  elsewhere  in  connection  with  this  cult.  Stim-
ulated by  the  order  of  his  divinity,  he  restored  the  temple  at
an  unknown  date,   as   it   had   become   shabby   and   dilapidat-

(1)  Mancini,  Giomale  degli  scavi  di  Pompei  n.  s.  Ill,  208.  Coins  of
Germe  bear  the  legend  Col.  Germenorum,  Eckhel,  Doctrina  numorum  veter-
um  III.  178.

(2)  De     Witt,     Onomasticon,     see     Gamala     and     Gemela;    Jerome,     De
situ   et  nominibus   locorum  Hebraicorum   226,    247 ;    Gildemeister,    Epigraphische
Nachlesen   in  Zeits.    der   deutschen    morgenldnd.    Gesell.    XXllI   (1869)    153    (1);
Dubois  98  and  Milanges  XXII   (1902)  59;   Ronzcva'le,   Le  simulacre   du  Jupiter
Heliopolitanus  in  Comptes  rendus  dell'ac.  des  inscr.    1901,  482.

(3)  Renan,  Une  nouvelle  inscripiion  Nabaieenne  in  Jour,  asiaiique  seventh
ser.  II   (1873)  384.

(4)  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X  note  to  No.    1578;  Dubois.   156.

(5)  E.   E.   VIII,   359.   s  Hermianus  sacerdos  d[esignatus?]    I.O.M.H.

-  148  -


I


ed  (1).  He  was  evidently  a  person  of  wealth,  holding  a  posi-
tion of  honor  in  the  association  that  carried  on  this  cult.  The
actual  duties  of  his  position  in  regard  to  the  custody  of  the
temple  were  perhaps  delegated  to  a  subordinate  (2).

JUPITER  DOLICHENUS.

The  inscriptions  generally  adduced  to  attest  a  cult  of
Jupiter  Dolichenus  have  already  been  treated  under  Misenum,
where  it  seems  that  they  more  properly  belong.  It  is,  however,
not  at  all  improbable  that  there  were  enough  adherents  of  this
form  of  religion  at  Puteoli  to  support  a  shrine.  The  god  was
perhaps  associated  with  the  warm  springs  abounding  in  this
neighborhood,  becoming  thus  a  rival  of  Magna  Mater  for  the
prerogatives  earlier  maintained  by  the  Nymphs  (3).  In  this
aspect  he  would  be  regarded  as  a  divinity  with  powers  of
healing  and  thus  would  easily  become  a  companion  of
Aesculapius,  with  whom  he  was  associated  elsewhere.  Furth-
ermore like  Aesculapius  he  seems  to  have  been  represented
emblematiccilly  by  a  serpent  (4).

JUPITER  DAMASCENUS.

The  third  form  of  the  Semitic  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus
was  qualified  with  the  epithet  Damascenus  (5).  This  cult,
originating  in  Damascus,  attained  at  Puteoli  a  recognized
standing  but  was  perhaps  never  a  public  cult  (6).  It  was
patronized  by  people  of  means  and  possessed  a  shrine  and
priests.   Two  names  of  the   latter  have  been  preserved,    both


{])  A.  J.   A.    1898   II.   374:   Ex]  iussu   I.   O.   M.   HeIiopolitan[i  aed]

em    dilapsam    M.    Ulpius    Sabinus   aedituus    m[agister?].

(2)  Vaglieri,   Aedituus,   Ruggiero   I,   272.

(3)  See  p.  95.

(4)  Kenner,  Mitteilungen  der  kflis.  kg^-  Central-Comm.  zur  Erforschung
vnd  Erhaltung  der  Denkmaler  n.  f.  II  (1876)  56;  Kan,  De  lovis  Dolicheni  cuUu
25  f.  ;  and  list  of  monuments  36  No.  4  ;  Dubois.  155.  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  Ill,  1128,
1614;  D.  2193a.

(5)  Cumont,  Damascenus,   P.-W.   IV.  2035.

(6)  Dubois.   Milanges  XXII,    (1902)  57.

-  149  -


members  of  the  gens  Nemonia,  one  of  whom,  Eutychianus,  was
also  a  votary  of  the  Genius  Coloniae.  He  was  a  prominent  cit-
izen, who  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  eques  by  Antoninus  Pius
and  at  Puteoli  was  a  decurion  and  aedile  (1).  The  second
Nemonius,  perhaps  the  father  of  the  other,  seems  to  have
provided  the  means  for  the  erection  of  the  honorary  notice;
the  whole  body  of  priests  in  the  name  of  their  patron  deity
gave  the  action  their  official  approval.  A  second  inscription
bearing  the  letters  I.  O.  M.  D.  may  possibly  be  a  reference  to
this  cult,  but  it  belongs  much  more  probably  to  the  better
known  worship  of  Dolichenus,  and  has  been  treated  in  that
connection  (2) .

DEA  SYRIA.

The  important  Syrian  goddess  who  was  revered  as  Derceto
or  Atargatis.  at  Hierapolis  (Bambyce)  W2is  known  to  the  Ro-
mans at  legist  as  early  as  the  Asiatic  expedition  of  Crassus  (3).
She  was  a  prominent  deity  in  the  chief  trade  centers  like  Delos
and  Puteoli;  in  the  case  of  the  latter  commerce  played  the
chief  part  in  her  introduction,  but  the  movement  was  no  doubt
assisted  to  some  extent  by  the  presence  of  slaves,  as  happened
in  Sicily  (4).  She  may  have  been  closely  associated  here
with  Jupiter  Heliopolitanus,  as  at  Hierapolis  she  was  on  terms
of  intimacy  with  the  great  god  of  that  town  (5).  Her  desig-
nation Dea  Syria  in  the  West  appears  in  several  forms  in
the  extant  inscriptions.  Like  Magna  Mater  she  was  portrayed
in  the  company  of  lions,  £uid  to  this  custom  there  is  an  allu-

(1)  C.  /.  L.  1576  =  D.  4326  =  Vaglieri  1115:  lussu  louis  Optimi  Maximi
Damasceni  sacerdotes  M.  Nemonio  M,  filio  Pal.  Eutychiano,  sacerdoti,  hono-
rato  equo  publico  ab  Imp.  Antonino  Aug.  Pio  p.  p.  adlecto  in  ordinem  decu-
rionum  Puteolanor.,  aedili ;  M.  Nemonius  Callistus  p{ater),  sacerdos,  remissa
collatione.  The  supplement  p(ater)  may  not  be  right  eind  p(ublicus)  has  been
suggested,    Dubois,    Milangea    XXII    (1902)    57.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1575.  See  p.  97.

(3)  Plut.  Crassus  17;  Preller-Jordan  II.  356;  Cumont.  Dea  Syria,  P.-W.
IV,  2239;  Moore.  Oriental  Cults  in  Britain  in  Harvard  Studies  XI  (1900)  49;
Cesano,    Dea   Syria,    Ruggiero,    II,    1467.

(4)  Diod.  XXXIV,  I,  5;  Florus  II,  7,  4.  Cp.  Hauvette-Besnault.  Fouilles
de  Dilos  in  Bull  corr.  hell  VI  (1900)  495.

(5)  F.  Lenormant,  Jupiter  Helio;:olitanus  in  Gazette  arch.     II      (1576)      82.

-  150  -


sion  in  an  inscription  engraved  upon  a  little  column,  which  is
the  only  remnant  of  a  dedication  now  extant  from  thii  district.
Although  it  was  discovered  near  Baia,  it  probably  came  ori-
ginally from  Puteoli.  It  records  the  gift  of  a  leontochasma,  a
vessel  in  the  form  of  a  lion's  jaws  from  which  gushed  forth
the  water  of  a  fountain  (I).

Cumont  identifies  this  goddess  with  the  Venus  Caelestis
worshipped  here,  and  so  assigns  to  her  the  taurobolic  altar
beeuring  that  name,  but  the  two  divinities  were  probably  simi-
lar rather  than  identical  (2).  Although  this  cult  sometimes  found
favor  in  high  quarters,  it  never  became  generally  prominent
and  in  the  later  years  of  PagEuiism  had  no  vogue.

DUSARES.

Another  Semitic  god  called  Dusares  was  the  supreme  deity
of  the  Nabataei,  an  Arabian  tribe  whose  cult  centered  at  the
city  of  Petra.  He  was  a  solar  deity  and  probably  was  associat-
ed with  hills  and  mountains  (3).  As  these  people  were  active
in  the  commerce  between  the  iax  Esist  and  Rome,  they  had
a  trading  station  at  Puteoli  to  which  they  brought  their  god.
From  the  number  of  Arabian  names  that  have  been  preserved
here,  it  would  seem  that  a  Icirge  contingent  of  that  nationality
WEis  present  (4).  Elsewhere  in  the  western  peurt  of  the  Romein
world  the  cult  has  left  no  traces;  here  the  evidence  points  to
the  presence  of  a  regular  shrine  as  early  as  the  end  of  the  Re-
publican period.  According  to  an  Aramaic  inscription  written
in  Arabian  characters,  a  mahramta,  which  W2is  probably  some
kind  of  sanctuary,  was  constructed  by  one  of  the  Nabataei  call-
ed Banhobal  in  the  year  39  B.  C. ;  later  during  the  reign  6f
Augustus  three  persons  Ali,  Mactai  and  Saidu  joined  in  the
work  of  restoring  it  in  order  to  promote  the  welfare  of  their

(1)  C.   /.    L.    X.    1554  =  D.    4279  =  Vaglieri    1041:    et    leontoxasma

deae   d(ominae?)  Dasyr{iae)   posuer.    Cp.    Dubois,    157    (3).

(2)  Tert.    nat.   II,   8;   Gruppe  1585   (3).

(3)  De  Ruggiero,  Dusares,  Ruggiero  II,  2078 ;  Cumont,  Dusares,  P.-W.  V.
1866;  Meyer,  Dusares,  Roscher  I,  1206;  Preller-Jordan  II,  403  (4);  Bathgen.  Bei-
trage  zur  semHischen  Religionsgeschichte  92  f,  ;  Mortmann,  Dusares  bei  Ep«-
phanius  in  Zeils.  der  deutschen  morgenldnd.  Ges  XXIX  {1876)  99  i. ;  Eaudissin,
Heilige  Gewdsser,  Baiime  und  Hohen  in  Stud,  zur  semit.  Religionsgesch.
II.  250.

(4)  List  in  Dubois   101.

-  151  -


sovereign  Harerat  and  his  Queen  (I).  Although  Dussures  is
not  openly  named,  the  nationality  of  the  builders  renders  it
quite  certain  that  he  was  the  god  honored.  Besides  its  use  for
worship  this  building  probably  served  as  a  place  for  social  and
business  meetings  like  others  which  were  erected  here  by
groups  of  foreigners  (2).

A  dedication  belonging  to  the  yeeir  II  A.  D.  and  written
in  Aramaic  reports  that  Zaidu  and  Abdelge  have  set  up  as  an
offering  to  Dusares  two  camels,  because  he  answered  their
prayers  (3).  Renan,  justly  objecting  to  the  interpretation
that  live  animals  were  dedicated  to  the  shrine,  proposed  to
understand  the  gifts  in  a  general  sense  as  thank  offerings
(eu)(aptaT7]ipa)  (4).  But  it  is  likely  that  these  Arabs  really  dedi-
cated camels,  even  though  they  were  made  only  of  bronze  or
terra  cotta,  and  the  marble  of  the  inscription  still  shows  holes
where  the  images  were  attached  to  it  (5).

Three  pedestals  still  in  existence  bear  the  simple  inscrip-
tion Dusari  sacrum;  two  of  them  containing  this  phrase  upon
the  front  and  the  one  word  sacrum  upon  the  back  cU-e  plau-
sibly conjectured  by  Dessu.u  to  have  marked  the  limits  of  a
sacred  enclosure  (6).  A  fragment  cited  by  Dubois  as  still
legible  upon  a  stone  lying  in  the  subterranean  parts  of  the
amphitheater  exhibits  the  letters  Dus,  and  may  be  psurt  of  the
same  divinity's  nsime  (7).

(1)  C,  /.  S.  II,  part  1,  No.  158.  Translation:  hoc  est  sacrarium  quod
Tenouauerunt....et  'Ali,    faber   aerarius(?)   et  Martai   qui   nuncupatur   Zabdat

Saidu,  filius  'Abdat  de  suo  pro  uita  Haretat,  regis  Na[bataeorum  et  Huljdu,

uxoris    eius,    reginae    Nabataeorum    et    eorum    filiorum.    Mense    Ab    anni    XIV

[regni   eius]    post   tempus   quo   exstructa    sunt    sacraria  priora,    quae    fecerat

Banhobal,    filius  Bam fanno]   VIII   Maliku,   regis   Nabataeorum,   deposuerunt

in  hoc  sacrum .  Renan,  Une  nouvelle  in&cripiion  nahatienne  in  jour,  asia-

tique  ser  7,  II,  366  f.  ;  Gildemeister,  Epigraphische  Nachlesen  in  Zeits.  der
deutschen  morgenland.    Ges.   XXIII   (1869)   150.

(2)  Renan,   op.   cit.   381  ;   Dubois,   Milanges   XXII    (1902)  64.

(3)  C.  /.  5.  II  part  I,  No.  157.  Translation:  Hie  sunt  duo  cameli,  quos
obtulerunt  Zaidu  et  Abdelge,  filii  Thaimu,  filii  Hani  'u  deo  Dusara,  qui  exau-
diuit  eos.  Anno  XX  regis  Haretat  regis  Nabataeorum  qui  diligit  populum  suum.

(4)  Renein,   Note  sur  deux   inscriptions,   Journal  asiat.    VII   ser.   I,    p.   321.

(5)  Dubois,  Milanges  XXII  (1902)  62.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1556  =  D.  4350  a,  b,  c.

(7)  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique   162.

-  152  -


UNCERTAIN  SEMITIC  GODS.

Besides  the  Semitic  gods  of  Asia  already  discussed,  there
appesir  to  be  references  to  the  divinities  of  two  other  cities
whose  cults  are  less  well  attested  because  of  the  fragmentary-
character  of  the  evidence.  A  mutilated  inscription,  found  in  a
spot  where  perhaps  was  located  the  establishment  of  the  Tyriem
merchants,  contains  a  mention  of  Tyre  itself  and  of  some  god
who  W21S  probably  the  local  form  of  Baal.  On  the  upper
portion  of  the  stone,  appajently  added  by  a  later  hand  are  the
words  sacerdos  siliginius,  the  significance  of  which  is  ob-
scure (I).  According  to  one  interpretation  based  on  Macrobius
the  words  allude  to  a  priest  who  received  offerings  of  bread
destined  for  the  god;  with  this  idea  in  mind  Minervini  conjec-
tured that  the  deity  in  question  was  Hercules-Melquart  (2).
This  view  is  opposed  by  Dubois  on  the  ground  that  Macrobius
referred  to  a  distinctly  Roman  custom,  and  this  scholar  is
inclined  to  see  here  a  proper  name,  rejecting  rightly  the  idea
of  Minervini  that  the  priest  in  question  was  a  servant  of  Ceres
Mundalis   (3).

The  religious  activity  of  the  Tyrian  merchsuits  residing
here  is  shown  by  an  insciption  of  174  A.  D.,  where  they
request  a  contribution  from  their  countrymen  in  Rome  to  meet
their  current  expenses,  a  large  part  of  which  is  caused  by  their
religious  duties.  Here  reference  is  made  to  the  shrines  of  their
ancestral  deities,  which  needed  to  be  maintained  as  in  the  past
and  provided  with  the  requisite  number  of  sacrifices.  At  this
date  the  numbers  and  wealth  of  the  Tyrian  colony  at  Puteoli
had  greatly  declined,  and  consequently  they  were  no  longer
able  to  support  the  burden  which  custom  and  a  feeling  of
obligation  to  their  native  city  and  its  gods  had  laid  upon
them  (4).


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1601=/.  G.  XIV.  831=Vaglieri  1219:  Sacerdos  siliginius
Tyro«  m[etropolis]  foe[derata]  Tupog  Lspa  xat  SauXo^  xac  a0x6vo|j,o^  MrixponoXic,
^oivefxYjc;  [xai  xwv  xaxa  KoiXTjV  Supiav]  uoXswv  Bsqi  &T((p.

(2)  Macr.  sat.  Ill,   11  ;  Minervini,  Bull  Nap.  n.  s.  V  (1857)  92.

(3)  Dubois,  Milanges  XXII   (1902)   58   (1)   and  Pouzzoles  antique    157   (4).
(4)  /.    G.    XIV,    830 ;    Dittenberger,    Orieniis    Graeci    irtscriptiones    seleciae

287,    No.   595    (with   commentary) ;    Momnxsen,    Ber.    der  sdchs.   Gesellschajt  V

-  153  -


Another  fragment  partly  in  Greek  and  partly  in  Latin  al-
ludes evidently  to  a  Semitic  solsu*  divinity  from  the  neighbor-
hood of  Tyre.  It  bears  the  date  of  May  29,  79  A.  D.,  computed
according  to  the  Phoenicieui  reckoning.  So  much  of  the  original
is  lacking  that  the  exact  sense  of  the  whole  is  extremely  du-
bious; however,  the  gist  of  the  matter  is  that  a  Phoenician
deity  was  brought  to  ItaJy  either  as  a  mere  image  to  serve  the
cult  of  certain  Orientals  at  Puteoli  or  else  by  formal  introduc-
tion accompanied  by  fitting  solemnities  to  msurk  the  establish-
ment of  his  worship  (I).  In  the  second  case  there  would
be  a  resemblance  to  the  arrival  of  Magna  Mater  in  Rome  and
of  Astarte  in  Egypt  (2) .  There  has  been  considerable  discus-
sion about  the  details  of  the  inscription  and  also  about  some
of  the  essentials.  According  to  Cagnat's  version,  a  Phoenician
ncuned  Elim  (HX£i{j.)  conducted  the  god  from  Arepta,  a  city
identified  with  the  Arefa  of  the  Notitia  Dtgnitatum  (3).  Ber-
ger  accepted  this  view  in  the  main,  and  cited  the  Phoenician
town  of  Araphat  as  the  place  mentioned  in  the  inscription  (4).
A  perplexing  point  is  the  word  HXelji,  which  Berger  at  first
treated  as  a  reference  to  a  divinity,  but  afterwards  admitted
to  be  the  name  of  a  man,  as  had  been  proposed  by  Cagnat.
Clermont-Ganneau  too  rejected  the  reference  to  a  man  and
translated  it  as  the  equivalent  of  sacred  rites,  while  on  the
other  hand  he  believed  that  the  name  of  a  man  v/as  concealed
in  the  expression  Bsoc — loq.  According  to  this  version  a  cer-
tain  0£oa[£[3]io?  came  by  sea  from  Saxepta  to  Puteoli  and  there


(1850)  57  f.  =  Ges.  Schr.  VIII,  8  f.  and  The  Provinces  of  the  Roman  Empire
(trans,  of  Dickson)  II.  151  (2);  E>ubois  83  f .  ;  Schurer.  Gesch.  d.  Juden,  (4)
III.    102.

{])  N.  S.  1891,  167  =  Comptes  rendus  de  Vacad.  des  inscr.  1901;  192:
ini  U7i;ccxo)v  Aoux{oi)  Katas —  xal  TupCotg  stou^  oS  jJiYjvog  'Ap[xsjj,](.a(ou  ta  xaxs-
TiXsuasv  d[Tc6]  Tupou  bIc,  HoxidXoiQ  6s6g  [''HX]to(s)  SapeuxTjvd?  -JiYaTSvlS^]  "HXst,}!

xax*  imaxoX'qw.     Pro  salute  imp.   Domitiani   l(ocus)   c(once8sus)    [decreto- — .

The   original    irscription  now  at  the  University  of  Michigem  has  the  reading
lOCAREHTHNOC.

(2)  Clermont-Ganneau.     Le    Phenicien      Theosebios    de     Sarepia    et     son
voyages  a  Pouzzoles  in   Recueil  d'arch.   orientale   IV,   228.

(3)  Notitia   Dignitatum    XXXII.     39 ;     Cagnat.     Note   sur     une     inscription
grccque  de  Pouzzoles  jn  Comptes  rendus  de  Vacad.  des  inscr.    1901,   '92.

(4)  Berger,  Comptes  rendus  de  Vacad.  des  inscr.    '901,    196,  578.

154-


performed  religious  ceremonies  (I).  Dubois  with  much  prob-
ability thinks  there  is  ein  allusion  to  a  Helios  of  Scirepta  (2).
As  this  inscription  weis  found  neeu:  the  porta  Erculea  not  far
from  the  place  where  the  one  referring  to  the  Tyrian  god  was
unesurthed,  it  may  well  have  happened  that  both  were  set  up
in  the  extensive  establishment  maintained  here  by  the  mer-
cheoits  of  Tyre.  On  account  of  the  close  proximity  of  Ssurepta
cind  Tyre  and  the  absence  at  the  same  time  of  any  real  ri-
valry, we  may  infer  that  the  two  bodies  of  merchants  lived  on
intimate  terms   (3).

VIRGO  CAELESTIS.

Virgo  Caelestis  or  Urania,  the  great  divinity  of  the  Cai-
thaginians,  was  smother  form  of  the  Tyrian  Astarte,  who  in
the  days  of  the  independence  of  Ceu-thage  w2is  worshipped
under  the  name  of  Temit  (4).  Among  the  Romams  she  was
identified  with  vEurious  deities  such  as  Juno  and  Venus,  psurtic-
ulgu-ly  in  the  ezirlier  times  (5).  As  a  Semitic  goddess  of
v2u-ious  attributes,  she  was  very  much  like  the  Dea  Syria,  and
as  has  been  explained  above,  she  was  identified  with  that
divinity  by  Cumont  (6).  In  a  like  manner  Moore  argues  for
the  identification  of  Caelestis  with  Magna  Mater  and  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  simileu-ity  of  their  attributes  and  ceremonies
tended  to  cause  them  to  blend  together,  so  that  one  with  a
reflective  trend  of  mind  might  unite  them  and  thus  the  syn-


(1)  Clermont-Ganneau,   op.   cit.   230.

(2)  Dubois  160.  Cp.  Schurer.  Geschichte  der  Juden  (4)  III,   162  (20).

(3)  Dubois   161.

(4)  Audollent,  Carthage  romaine  369-371  ;  Cumont,  Caelestis,  P.  -  W.
II,  1247;  de  Ruggiero,  Caelestis,  Ruggiero  II,  4;  Preller-Jordan  II,  406;  Roscher,
luno,  Roscher,  II,  614;  Toutain,  Les  cites  romaines  de  la  Tunisie,  214.  The
identity  between  Caele:tis- Astarte  and  Tan  it  is  denied  bj  Baudissin  who  con-
s.ders  that  the  former  was  expressed  by  Juno  Caelestis,  the  latter  by  Juno
Regina.  Der  phonizische  Gott  Esmun  in  Zeiis.  der  deutschen  morgenland.  Ges.
LIX  (1905)  510  f.

(5)  C.  H.  Moore,  On  the  Origin  of  the  Tauroholium  in  Harvard  Studies,
XVII  (1906)  47.

(6)  Cp.  Cumont,  P.-W.  II,   1249.  See  p.   151.

.  155  -


cretism  would  be  complete  (I).  But  in  a  place  like  Puteoli
the  two  cults  might  exist  side  by  side  supported  by  diflFerent
elements  of  the  population.  In  reality  the  inscription  attesting
the  cult  is  of  unknown  origin,  £ind  is  treated  here  only  because
there  \sras  little  likelihood  of  a  cult  of  Caelestis  in  any  neighbor-
ing town.  It  mentions  the  ceremony  of  the  taurobolium  as
performed  under  the  date  of  Oct.  7,  134  A.  D.,  which  is  the
oldest  extant  reference  to  this  rite  (2) .  The  record  is  impor-
tant because  the  taurobolium  is  generally  cited  in  the  worship
of  Magna  Mater.  It  seems,  however,  to  have  been  gissociated
first  with  other  cults  as  here  and  only  at  a  late  date  to  have
entered  the  Phrygiain  deity's  ceremonies  with  which  finally  it
W£is  for  the  most  part  associated  (3).  It  is  cited  in  no  other
town  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Venus  Caelestis  (4).
The  word  ecitium  of  the  inscription  heis  not  been  satis-
factorily explained  or  emended  (5).  Pantelium  was  taken  by
Preller  as  the  equivalent  of  the  Greek  TravO'^Xioc,  which  he  un-
derstood as  a  title  of  Attis  not  elsewhere  cited;  in  this  case
Attis  would  be  the  sun  god  considered  as  supreme  ruler.  This
opinion  was  refuted  by  Cumont,  who  showed  that  the  word
equals  TravTsXstov,  a  term  used  in  the  mysteries  to  express  the
culminating  day  of  the  festival.  According  to  Zippel  it  signifies
the  highest  consecration  to  the  will  of  a  goddess  who  was  in-

(1)  Mcx>re,  op.  cit.  46  f.  cites  Tert.apol  12;  Aug.  civ.  II,  4,  26  and
C.  /.  L.  VII,  759  from  Britain.  Frere,  Sur  le  culte  de  Caelestis  in  Rev.  arch.
X  (1907)  22.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1596  =  D.  4271  =  Vaglieri  1206:  L.  lulino  Vrso  Seruiano
COS.  Ill  Non.  Oct.  ecitium  taurobolium  Veneris  Celestae  et  pantelium  Heren-
nia  Fortunata  imi>erio  deae  per  Ti.  Claudium  Felicem  sacerd.  iterata  est.  It
is  ix>ssible  that  the  numeral  III  should  be  construed  with  the  following  words.

(3)  For  the  origin  of  the  taurobolium  see  Cumont,  Rev.  arch.  XII
(1888)  132  f.;  Rev.  d'hist.  et  de  litt.  religieuses  VI  (1901)  97  f . ;  Rev.  de  phil
XVII  (1893)  195  f . ;  Textes  et  monuments  figures  relatijs  aux  mysteres  de  Miihra
1,  334;  Anaitis,  P.  -  W.  I,  2031  ;  Wissowa  324a;  Moore.  Harvard  Studies,  XVII
(1906)  43;  Hepding.  Attis  201  ;  Korte.  Aih.  Mitt.  XXIII  (1898)  103;  Esperandieu,
i  auroholium,  D.-S.  V,  46  and  Les  inscriptions  antiques  de  Lectoure  96;  Zippel,
Festschrift  L.   Friedldnder  dargebracht  519.

(4)  Korte,  'Ath.  Mitth.  XXIII  (1898)  103.

(5)  Cumont  conjectures  eximium.  Rev.  arch.  XII  (1888)  133  (1);  Espe-
randieu proposes  aegAium,  Taurobolium,   D.-S.   V,   47   (4)  and  Les  inscriptiions

antiques  de  Lectourz  95;   Graillot  Le  culte  de  Cybele  431    (5)  suggest*  initium.

-  156  -


I


terested  in  sacred  prostitution  (I).  A  priest  appears  here  with
the  name  Ti.  Claudius  Felix;  as  the  same  mam  is  found  in  an
inscription  dated  ten  ye2U*s  later,  it  too  probably  belongs  to  the
cult  of  Venus  Caelestis.  For  some  reason  Frere  does  not  include
this  official  in  his  list  of  the  known  priests  of  Caelestis  (2).
Here  there  is  a  second  reference  to  the  taurobolium,  in  which
the  initiates  Eire  Thalame,  a  female  slave,  and  members  of  her
family.  This  is  an  evidence  for  the  assumption  that  when  the
taurobolium  was  first  introduced  in  the  West,  its  use  wets
confined  to  those  of  lowly  birth  and  humble  station,  and  only
toward  the  close  of  the  third  century  it  began  to  appeal  to  the
rich  and  powerful  (3).  There  is  no  indication  in  this  instance
as  maintained  by  Gohler,  that  only  sacrifice  without  baptism
was  meant  or  that  the  taurobolium  was  essentially  different
in  this  religion  from  that  form  which  it  assumed  in  the  worship
of  Magna  Mater  (4).  There  may  have  been,  however,  cer-
tain peculiEU*  Semitic  rites  along  with  the  regular  taurobolium.
Thus  in  the  expression  iterata  est,  Zippel,  comparing  a  phrsise
used  by  Lampridius  in  regeurd  to  Eliogabalus,  sees  a  reference
to  the  custom  of  sacred  prostitution  prevailing  in  the  worship
of  the  Semitic  Aphrodite,  one  of  whose  manifestations  was  the
Virgo  Caelestis  (5).


MITHRAS.

While  various  soleu*  deities  of  Semitic  origin  were  populeur
at  Puteoli,  little  evidence  has  reached  us  for  the  cult  of  Sol  In-
uictus  Mithras,  who  became  the  most  widely  known  and
influential  sun  god  in  the  Roman  world.  The  designation  Sol
Inuictus  occurs  6nce  in  company  with  the  Genius  of  the  colony,

(1)  Preller-Jordan  II,  392;  Dessau,  Inscriptiones  Latinae  II,  p.  164;  Zippel,
Das  Taurobolium  in  Festschrift  L.  F riedldnder  dargebracht  520.

(2)  Fr^re,  Rev.  arch.  X  (1907)  28.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1597  =  D.  4272  =  Vaglieri  1207:  III  Non.  Dec.  L.  Lolliano
Auito  COS.,  Thalame  Hosidiae  Afrae  cum  suis  condite  per  Ti.  CI.  Felicem
sacerdotem.  Zippel   op.   cit.   517,

(4)  Gohler,  De  Matris  Magnae  apud  Romanos  cultu  55   (1).

(5)  Zippel   op.   cit.   520.

-  157  -


as  reported  above  (I).  An  offering  was  made  by  the  family
of  Claudius  Aurelius  Rufinus,  but  it  is  not  clear  just  which
solar  deity  was  meant,  for  the  appellation  Sol  Inuictus  was
used  as  a  generic  term  to  refer  to  any  of  the  Oriental  sun  gods
as  distinguished  from  native  deities.  Nor  is  it  certain  to  what
extent  Sol  and  Genius  were  amalgamated  in  the  thought  of
the  dedicators.

As  a  proof  for  the  presence  of  Mithras  worship,  Hirsch-
feld  adduces  three  inscriptions,  one  of  which  contains  the  word
pater,  a  recognized  term  in  this  cult  to  designate  one  of  the
grades  of  initiates  (2) .  But  the  word  can  be  explained  in  other
ways  and  so  does  not  necessarily  presuppose  the  presence  of  a
band  of  Mithras  worshippers.  Dubois  takes  it  as  a  term  of
honor  employed  by  the  Augustales  in  reference  to  a  patron.
Perhaps,  however,  it  is  used  merely  to  distinguish  this  man
from  a  son  of  the  seone  name  (3).  The  circumstance  that
the  Augustales  are  called  cultores  would  explain  the  word
coluity  used  in  the  epitaph  of  the  Augustalis  Q.  lusteius
Diadumenus  as  a  reference  to  the  Imperial  cult,  but  this
explanation  does  not  suit  the  S2une  word  when  it  is  applied  to
Afranius  Felix  who  was  not  an  Augustalis  (4).  Mommsen's
opinion  that  the  term  coluit  has  reference  to  the  condition  of  r
colontis  seems  unlikely  (5).  It  appeeurs  to  be  an  allusion  to
religious  devotion,  and  although  its  exact  significance  is  quite
uncertain  it  may  possibly  along  with  the  word  pater  refer  to
the  Mithras  cult.  A  few  remains  of  art  have  been  found  from
time  to  time  in  the  vicinity  of  Naples  but  none  of  these  can
be   definitely  associated   with   Puteoli     (6).   But     although     the

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1591=Vaglieri  1165:  Soli  Inuicto.  Geni(o)  Col(oniae)  CI.
Aurel.  Rufinus  cum  coni-ige  et  filio  d.  d.  Cumont,   Textes  et  monuments  I,  48.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1874  =  Vaglieri  1886:  C.  Caesonio  Eudiacono  patri  cultor.
7  Cornel,  ob  merita  eius.  Hirschfeld,  Zur  Gesch.  des  torn.  Kaiserkulius  in
SHzungsber.    der   Berl    Akad.    1888   2.    838    (28)    =    Kleine   Schrijten   478    (3).

(3)  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.  3685;  Forcellini,  Lexicon  IV.  526  pater  5);  Maiuri.
Studi  romani  I  (1913)  23-24;  Dittenberger,  /.  G.  III.  106;  Dubois  154  and  Mi
langea   XXII    (1902)   41.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1918:  Afranio  Felici q(ui)  uixit  ann(is)  LXXIIII,  co-
luit   ann(is)    XXIII.

(5)  Mommsen.  Rom.  Staaisrecht  III.   455   (6).

(6)  Cumont,    Textes    et  monuments    II,    485.

-   158  -


evidence  for  the  presence  of  Mithras  is  not  abundant  and  in
no  sense  conclusive,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the
cult  flourished  here.  At  the  same  time  there  are  indications
that  it  did  not  become  so  prominent  as  in  certain  other  places  (1).
When  the  worship  of  Mithras  began  to  prevail  in  Italy,  Puteoli,
while  still  a  sea  port  of  prominence  was  no  longer  the  mofit
important  and  had  been  for  some  time  in  a  state  of  decline.
Therefore  it  contained  not  only  fewer  merchants  but  also  fewer
slaves,  who  were  an  important  factor  in  the  propagation  of  the
worship  of  this  god  (2).  As  the  town  was  already  over  supplied
with  shrines  consecrated  to  the  various  Oriental  faiths,  the
adherents  of  which  were  gradually  removing  elsewhere  and
thus  leaving  the  different  congregations  depleted  in  numbers »
there  was  little  encouragement  for  the  growth  of  a  new  form
of  worship  bzised  upon  similar  principles.  Ostia  therefore  rather
than  Puteoli  gave  a  warm  welcome  to  Mithras.

THE  GODS  OF  THE  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK.

The  gods  associated  with  the  worship  of  the  planets,  who
originated  in  connection  with  the  astrological  notions  current
in  the  Orient  and  presided  over  the  seven  days  of  the  week,
made  their  influence  felt  in  the  West  largely  through  this  port.
While  they  were  introduced  in  this  region  as  early  as  the
Christian  era  and  soon  came  into  common  use  to  mark  the
various  days,  they  did  not  as  yet  belong  to  the  official  Roman
calendcirs,  which  were  based  upon  a  week  of  eight  days  until
the  end  of  the  first  century  A.  D.  (3)  A  stone  slab  containing
p£U"t  of  a  list  of  market  days  which  w£is  found  in  a  tomb  near
the  heights  of  Posilipo  includes  the  ncimes  of  the  gods  from

(1)  Cp.  C.  H.  Moore,  The  Distribution  of  Oriental  Cults  in  the  Gauls
and  in  the  Germanies  in  Trans,  and  Proc.  of  the  Am.  Phil.  Assoc.  XXXVIII
(1907)    144.

(2)  The  waning  strength  of  the  Oriental  communities  is  shown  by  the
request  of  the  Tyr'ans  for  fineuicial  aid  t->  meet  the  burdens  'mposed  upon
them  (172  A.  D.)  /.  G.  XIV,  830  =  C.  /.  G.  5853.  Cumont  Textes  et  monuments
I,  265;  Dubois  153;  L.  Taylor,  The  Cults  of  Ostia  82;  Cumont,  Les  mysteres
de  Mithra  (2)  53.

(3)  Maass,   Die   Tagesgotter   in   Rom   und  den  Provinzen   278.

-  159-


Saturn  to  Mais  (I).  It  is  dated  in  the  first  century  A.  D.  To
the  ssune  class  belongs  another  inscription  included  among
those  of  this  city,  but  its  origin  can  not  be  exactly
determined  (2).

JUDAISM.

The  Jews  formed  a  numerous  community  at  Puteoli  but
nothing  is  known  of  its  beginning  and  subsequent  develop-
ment (3) .  It  seems  to  have  been  important  as  early  as  the
first  century  B.  C,  as  is  indicated  by  an  incident  preserved
in  the  histories  of  Josephus.  An  impostor,  who  had  assumed
the  name  of  Alexander,  a  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  and  while
posing  as  that  prince  came  to  Italy  to  claim  his  lights,  landed
at  Puteoli  and  was  welcomed  by  Jews  who  were  friendly
toward  Herod  (4  B.  C.)  (4).  Leu-ge  numbers  of  Jews  had  been
carried  away  from  Palestine  as  captives  by  Pompey  in  63  B.  C.
and  it  is  probable  that  the  community  at  Puteoli  wgis  largely
made  up  of  slaves  or  descendants  of  slaves.  Others  may  have
been  lured  to  locate  here  by  the  advantageous  commercial
prospects  which  the  city  offered,  and  engaged  in  trade  like
the  Phoenicians.  On  account  of  their  uncompromising  attitude
in  religion,  however,  they  naturally  took  no  part  in  the  semi-
religious  societies  maintained  by  other  Semitic  merchzmts  for
social  and  business  reasons  (5).  An  influential  community  is
presupposed  by  the  author  of  the  Acts  of  Peter  and  Paul,  which
enlarges  upon  the  fact  that  Paul  landed  at  Puteoli  on  his
voyage    to    Rome.    According   to   this    account   the    Jews    Eire


(1)  N.  S.  1891.  238  =  C.  /.  L.  I.  (2)  p.  218.  Cp.  a  tabula  nundialU  of
uncertain  origin  in  C.  /.  L.  I  (2)  p.  218  and  Maass,  op.  cH.  265.

(2)  C.   /.   L.   X.    1605.

(3)  Harnack,    Die   Mission    und    Ausbreitung    des    Christentums    II,    216.

(4)  Josephus,  Antiq.  ludaeorum  XVII  12,  1  and  Bellum  lud.  II  7,  1  ;
Schiirer,  Geschichte  der  Juden  III ;  Ferorell*,  Gli  ebrei  nelV Italia  meridionale
in  Arch.  stor.  Nap.  XXXII  (1907)  249,  and  Gli  Ebrei  nelVIt.  merid.  daWeta
romana  al   secolo  XVIII   3.

(5)  Mommsen,  Rom.  Gesch.  (3)  V,  470  =  Provinces  of  the  Roman  Em-
pire (trans,  of  Dickson)  II.  155-156;  Dubois  101;  Friediander  Sittengeseh.  (8)
IV,   237.

.  160  .


supposed  to  have  desired  to  kill  the  Apostle  and  actually  to
have  murdered  the  ship  captain  Dioscorus,  whom  they  mistook
for  him  (I).  Toward  the  close  of  the  Empire  the  Jewish
element  seems  to  have  been  very  important  and  to  have  num-
bered men  of  prominence  among  its  members  (2).  A  cemetery
for  the  use  of  the  Jews  probably  lay  near  the  spot  called  Marano,
as  inscriptions  alluding  to  men  of  this  nationality  have  been
discovered  in  this  vicinity.

Renan  has  pointed  out  the  influence  which  the  volcanic
region  of  the  Sclfatara  seems  to  have  exercised  upon  the  minds
of  the  Jews,  as  is  expressed  in  their  sacred  writings  (3).  In
this  class  belongs  especially  the  apocalyptical  book  of  Enoch,
where  it  is  stated  that  the  fallen  angels  dwell  in  a  subterranean
valley  located  in  the  West.  Here  were  boiling  springs  of
sulphur,  floods  of  fire  and  a  smoke  arising  from  burning
brimstone  (4).  Moreover  the  myths  of  the  Giants  localized
in  the  Phlegraean  Fields  were  adopted  by  the  author  of  this
book  (5).  Rencin  also  considered  that  the  writer  of  the  book
of  Revelation  had  been  at  Puteoli,  and  used  the  Solfatara  as
the  original  of  his  vision  of  the  sun  and  locusts  to  cover  the
eaith.  like  squadrons  of  cavaJry  (6).  Similar  in  substance  is
a  peissage  in  the  Sibylline  oracles  due  to  Jewish  authorship  (7).
Hebrew  divinities  are  named  in  an  imprecation  tablet  writ-
ten in  Greek,  which  Wiinsch  regards  as  the  work  of  a  non-
Greek  and  perhaps  of  a  Latin  (8).  It  prays  for  the  ruin  of
C.    Stlaccius   Liberalis    belonging   to   a   gens,    some   of   whose


(1)  Acta  Petri  et  Pauli  9.

(2)  The  inscriptions  relating  to  the  Jews  are  ztssembled  by  Dubois
103.  Cp.  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  Ill  (1855)  105;  Juster.  Les  Juifa  dans
V empire   romain   I,   445    (3).

(3)  Renan,  Antechrist  330  f.  =  Antichrist  {trans,  of  Allen)  266  and  Les
Apotres  195;  Dubois  166;  Chiappelli,  Aiti  della  r.  Accad.  di  sci.  mor.  e  pol.
(Napoli)  XXXI  (1900)  558.

(4)  The    book    of    Enoch  LXVII,    4-13.

(5)  Enoch    12;   Renan,    Antechriat   332  =  Antichrist    (trans.)  265  (5).

(6)  Revelation    9;    Renan,    Antechrist  396  =  Antichrist    (trans.)    310.

(7)  Oracula  Sibyllina   IV,    130   f.

(8)  /.  G.  XIV  859;  Audollent,  Defixionum  tabellae  No.  208;  Wiinsch.
i4nfi^e  Fluchtafeln  No.  2;  Hiilsen,  Bleitafel,  mit  V erioUnschungsformeln  in
Arch.  Zeit.  XXXIX  (1881)  309.

-  16!  .

11


members,  as  we  have  already  seen,  were  devoted  to  the  cult
of  the  Oriental  Liber  and  the  Cereres  (I).  The  employment
of  Semitic  deities,  who  had  been  made  known  to  the  world
through  the  writings  of  Hellenized  Jews,  is  in  accordance  with
a  tendency  of  the  times  to  form  a  theogony  comprising  both
Semitic  and  Greek  divinities.  Whether  such  a  combination
is  particularly  the  result  of  Gnosticism  is  uncertain.  At  the
head  of  the  list  of  gods  invoked  to  execute  the  work  of
destruction  appears  the  word  Sabaoth,  a  Greek  expression  for
one  of  the  aspects  of  the  great  Jehovah,  which  was  often
utilized  in  similar  cases  (2).  A  prominent  place  is  occupied
by  lao,  another  reference  to  the  Hebrew  deity,  who  in  harmony
with  the  polytheistic  tendencies  of  the  writer  is  named  as  an
independent  god  (3).  With  him  appears  the  Semitic  El,
worshipi>ed  especially  among  the  Phoenicieois  and  sometimes
with  Greek  influence  associated  with  Cronos.  Then  follows
the  mighty  angel  Michael,  the  protector  of  the  Hebrews  after
the  Captivity,  who  played  an  important  part  in  spells  and
incantations,  and  was  believed  to  have  an  extraordinary  power
of  control  over  the  demons  of  evil  and  darkness  (4).  Finally,
as  stated  above,   £in  Egyptian  divinity  completes   the  list.

CHRISTIANITY.

The  modern  Pozzuoli  makes  the  claim  that  it  is  the  oldest
Christian  community  in  Italy  and  is  a  foundation  of  St.  Patrobus.
Such  at  least  is  the  purport  of  an  inscription  engraved  upon
a  pedestal  in  the  market  place  (5).  But  while  this  claim  can
not  be  proved,  the  church  here  was  certainly  one  of  the  oldest
and  in  venerable  antiquity  ranks  with  the  one  at  Rome.  Here
in  the  yeai  66  of  our  era  St.   Paul  landed  on  his  way  from

(1)  See   p.   144.

(2)  Wiinsch,  op.  cit.  p.  7;  Hofer,  Sabaoth,  Roschex  IV  231  ;  von  Baudissin^
Der  Gottername  'law  in  Studien  zur  semitischen  Religionsgeschichte  I  187;
Deissniann,  Bibelstudien    6.

(3)  Se.    p.  84.

(4)  Wiinsch  op.  cit.  8;  Dieterich,  Abraxas  122;  Cumont.  El,  P.-W.
V,  2217  f .  ;  Liiken,  Eine  Darstellung  und  Vergleichen  der  jUdischen  und  der
morgenldndisch-christlichen    TraditioT\    vom    Erzengel  Michael    15    f . ;     117    f.

(5)  Cp.   Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  der  torn.  Kirche  11,  170.

-   162  -


Caesarea  to  Rome,  and  found  a  number  of  Christians  already
located  to  welcome  him;  with  them  he  tarried  for  a  week  (1).
These  people  were  doubtless  converted  Jews  belonging  chiefly
to  the  lower  orders  of  society,  as  was  the  case  eJso  in  other
localities    (2).    The    origin   and    development    of    the    body    of
believers      constituting      the     local      church     is     quite      diffi-
cult   to    follow,     because  the  Apostle  nowhere  else  alludes  to
this  church  nor  to  any  of  its  members,  and  the  later  compos-
itions that  purport  to  relate  incidents  connected  with  his  stay  are
worthless.  The  same  judgment  must  be  passed  on  the  writings
which  attempt  to  connect  Peter  with   the  church  of  Puteoli;
although  recent  attempts  have  not  been  lacking  to  demonstrate
that  it  wets  a  foundation  of  that  Apostle.   At  the  same  time
the   compositions   just   cited,   however   worthless   they   may   be
for  the  facts  which  they  claim  to  relate,  are  of  some  value  in
the  sense  that  they  clearly  indicate  a  belief  that  the  early  com-
pany of  believers  here  was  important  (3).

The  Patrobas  who  is  mentioned  by  St.  Paul  is  cited  in
certain  documents  as  a  bishop  of  Puteoli,  but  no  reliance  can
be  placed  upon  these  sources  (4) .  Another  alleged  bishop
called  Celsus  may  have  been  a  prominent  member  of  the  early
church,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  held  a  bishopric  (5).
In  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  the  nsunes  of  several  incumbents


{])  Aats  28,  13-14;  Weizsacker.  Das  apostolische  Zeitalter  (3)  450;
Duchesne,  Histoire  ancienne  de  Viglise  (5)  I,  58 ;  Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the  Trav-
eller and  the  Roman  Citizen  346;  Renan,  St.  Paul  113,  558-559  and  Ante-
christ  10;  C.  Bigg,  The  Origins  of  Christianity  19;  Weiss,  Das  Urchristen-
tum  290.

(2)  See  p.  39.
(3)  Acta  Petri  et  Pauli  9;  Lipsius  et  Bonnet,  Ada  apostolorum  apoc-
rypha I,  51  ;  Acts  of  St.  Aspren  in  Ada  Sanctorum  August,  I,  p.  201  f. ;  Lip>siu»
Die  apokrrphen  Apostelgeschichten  II,  part  I,  177,  341  ;  Weizsacker  op.  cit.
465  f.  ;  Lanzoni,  Riv.  storico-crit.  delle  scienze  teol.  VI  (1910  119;  Scherillo,
Delia  venuta   di  S.   Pietro  nella   dtta   di  Napoli    150   f.

(4)  Romans  16;  Pseudo-Hippolytus,  De  LXX  apostoUs  =^Migne,  Patr,
Graeca  X,  956,  No.  37;  Selecta  quaedam  ad  illustrationem  Chronici  PaschaUs  =
Migne,  Patr.  graeca  XCII,  1063,  No.  37;  Synaxarium  Costantinopolitanum  in
Ada  sanctorum  Propylaeum  Nov.  194,  1.  10;  786,  1.  14.  Cp.  Scherillo,  op.  cit.
183  f.

(5)  Scherillo,   op.  dt.  203;  Dubois   168  f.

163  -


of  the  office  are  known  (I).  Likewise  the  names  of  martyrs
have  been  preserved,  the  most  important  of  whom  is  St.  Jan-
uarius,  a  bishop  of  Beneventum,  who  became  the  patron
saint  of  the  Neapolitans.  In  the  year  305  the  saint  with  several
companions  w£is  condemned  to  die  in  the  arena,  but  was
actually  executed  by  beheading  near  the  Solfatara.  On  this
spot  perhaps  in  the  fourth  century  a  church  was  erected  in
honor  of  the  saint  (2).  At  an  unknown  date  subsequent  to
this  event  the  temple  of  Augustus  was  transformed  into  the
church  of  S.  Proculo  (3).  Remains  which  refer  to  the  early
Christian  community  are  few.  A  limited  number  of  inscriptions
have  been  found  but  none  that  is  dated  before  the  fifth  cen-
tury. Dubois  cites  also  two  bas-reliefs  with  figures  of  the
apostles  Peter  and  Paul  (4).


{])  Bibliotheca  hagiographica  Latina  I,  613;  Mazocchi,  Acta  Bononi-
ensia  p.  25  f. ;  Greek  life  of  St.  Jeinuarius  in  Bibliotheca  Casinensia  II,  Flori-
legium   227   f . ;    Dubois    171    f.

(2)  Dubois  170  f.

(3)  The  church  is  not  mentioned  before  the  eleventh  century,  Capasso,
Monumenta    Neapol.    Ducatus    11,    Regesta    406,    441.;    Dubois    183.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3298-3333;  Dubois  427,  Nos.  44.45.

-  164  -


CHAPTER  IV,
NEAPOLIS.


Midway  between  Puteoli  and  Mt.  Vesuvius,  on  the  slopes
of  the  hills  that  rise  on  the  western  side  of  the  Bay  of  Naples
there  grew  up  in  ancient  times  a  city,  which  through  all  the
vicissitudes  of  Italian  history  has  maintained  its  identity  to
the  present  moment.  This  is  the  Neapolis  of  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  the  Napoli  of  the  modern  Italian  kingdom.  Built  in
a  strong  natural  position,  it  was  rarely  besieged  with  success,
and  enjoyed  an  almost  unparalleled  good  fortune  in  never
being  violently  destroyed.  It  was  laid  out  systematiceJIy  with
a  Forum  in  the  center  and  three  main  avenues  running  from
east  to  west,  and  this  symmetrical  arrangement  combined  with
its  magnificent  location  in  the  midst  of  a  leoidscape  unexcelled
for  beauty  made  it  one  of  the  most  attractive  spots  in  Italy  (1).
Like  all  the  coast  cities  its  subject  territory  wsts  limited  to  a
few  square  miles.  The  series  of  heights  called  collis  Leucogaeus,
extending  from  the  northeast  toward  the  coast,  formed  its
boundary  on  the  side  of  Puteoli  and  Capua.  On  the  east  its
territory  touched  that  of  the  adjacent  Herculaneum,  and  toward
the  northeast  it  included  the  valley  of  the  Sebethus  about  as
iai  as  the  village  of  Pomigliano,  which  thus  marks  approxi-
mately its  limits  in  the  direction  of  Nola.  In  addition  its  territory

(1)  GenercJly  considered  as  an  illustration  of  the  system  of  city  planning
ascribed  to  Hippodamus  of  Miletus  with  rectangular  rather  ihan  square  blocks.
But  cp.  Haverfield,  Ancient  Town  Planning,  101,  who  considers  that  the  design
shown  here  is  fundamentally  Italian.  T.  von  Duhn,  Der  Diosk.urentenipel  in
Neapel  5  (5).

-  165  -


included  the  islands  of  Capreae  (Capri)  and  PitKecussae
(Ischia)  (I).

The  valley  of  the  Sebethus  produced  grain  in  abundance
and  the  hill-country  an  excellent  sort  of  wine.  Among  other
articles  of  commerce  were  chestnuts,  reputed  to  be  the  best  in
Italy,  and  perfumed  ointments  of  good  quality.  The  location
of  the  city  was  furthermore  adapted  for  commerce;  it  possessed
from  early  times  a  fortified  harbor  district  on  the  low  coast
land,  and  before  the  rise  of  Puteoli  attended  to  most  of  the
transportation  of  wares  between  Campania  and  the  lands  of  the
East.  But  during  the  whole  period  of  Roman  supremacy  under
the  Empire  as  well  as  under  the  Republic,  Neapolis  as  a
business  center  was  of  only  moderate  importance  because  of
the  close  proximity  of  Puteoli,  which  had  become  the  maritime
metropolis  of  the  western  coast.

The  city  continued  to  be  predominantly  Greek  in  its  Ian-
guage  and  institutions  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Rome,  and  in
the  epoch  of  the  Empire  was  the  one  center  of  Greek  civili-
zation in  the  province.  Its  people  were  interested  in  rhetoric,
music  and  the  various  forms  of  culture  and  in  the  contests  of
the  stadium  rather  thzin  in  the  combats  of  the  arena.  Here
Polemon,  the  celebrated  Sophist,  and  other  rhetoricians  taught.
As  a  result  of  all  this  activity  docta  became  a  regular  epithet
of  the  city,  and  when  Nero  wished  to  exhibit  his  musical  ability
in  public,  he  selected  the  Neapolitans  as  a  sympathetic  yet
discriminating  audience.  Finally  the  city  is  prominently  iden-
tified with  Latin  literature  through  the  circumstance  that  Vergil,
Statius  aoid  Silius  at  various  times  had  their  residence  there  (2).

Ancient  writers  assert  that  the  original  settlement  wsts
first  called  Parthenope  from  its  guardian  deity  the  Siren  or  else
Phaleron;  others  have  claimed  the  existence  neai  by  of  another
community  nsuned  Palaepolis.  Although  the  early  traditions
are  extremely  uncertain  and  contradictory,  it  is  probable  that
Rhodians  settled  first  in  the  neighborhood ;  later  at  the  beginning


(1)  Beloch   16-17.

(2)  For  more  complete  accounts  of  the  city  see  Beloch  54 ;  Nissen,  Ital-
ische  Landeskunde  11,  743  f. ;  De  Petra,  /  porti  antichi  deU'Italia  meridionale
324  f.

-   166  -


of  the  sixth  century  B.  C.  a  band  from  Cumae  founded  a
community,  and  within  another  hundred  years  these  colonists
were  joined  by  settlers  from  Athens.  In  421  B.  C.  when  the
Campanians  had  made  themselves  masters  of  Cumae,  Neapolis
served  as  a  refuge  for  the  inhabitants  who  escaped,  and  W2is
henceforth  the  sole  survivor  of  the  independent  Greek  cities
in  this  region,  -  a  rallying  point  for  the  vestiges  of  Greek  civil-
ization in  the  West.

After  the  Oscans  had  obtained  a  place  in  the  state  in
consequence  of  internal  dissensions,  it  continued  to  flourish  in
both  an  intellectual  and  commercial  way.  Its  sea  power  Wcis
supreme,  and  when  the  Romans  began  encroaching  upon
Ccimpania,  it  declared  war  in  328  B.  C.,  and  with  the  help
of  the  Samnites  and  other  allies  was  resisting  the  enemy  with
good  success  until  treachery  rendered  its  efforts  vain.  But,
although  the  Romans  thus  gained  possession  of  the  city,  they
offered  favorable  terms  of  alliance  to  the  conquered  people,
depriving  it  only  of  the  island  Pithecussae  (326  B.  C.);  as  a
result  of  their  liberal  policy  they  were  never  troubled  by  any
attempt  to  revolt  on  the  part  of  the  Neapolitans.  The  latter
after  considerable  hesitation  accepted  Roman  citizenship  under
the  terms  of  the  lex  lulia,  but  were  allowed  to  retain  Greek  as
their  official  language  and  to  continue  the  election  of  their
regular  magistrates.  Augustus  took  away  Capreae  from  their
jurisdiction  but  restored  Pithecussae  (I).  Titus  added  to  the
population  a  number  of  veterans  and  assisted  materially  in  the
rebuilding  of  those  districts  destroyed  by  the  earthquake  of  63
A.  D.  At  some  time  in  the  early  Empire  it  beceune  a  colony;
in  the  later  Imperial  period  it  began  to  outstrip  Puteoli,  and
in  the  sixth  century  Ccissiodorus  speaks  of  its  power  and
wealth  (2) .  During  the  barbarian  invasions  it  escaped  disaster ;
it  was  captured,  however,  by  Beliseirius  in  his  attempt  to  recover
Italy  for  the  Byzantine  empire  (536  A.  D.),  and  was  retaken
later  by  Totila,  who  razed  the  walls.   (543  A.  D.)  (3).

(1)  See  p.   315.

(2)  Cassiod.    Var.   VI,    23.    This   testimony,    however,    must  be    somewhat
discounted  because  of  the  florid,  rhetorical  character  of  the   passage.

(3)  For   the   history   of   Neapolis   see   Beloch   28    f . ;    Franz,    C.    /.    G.    HI.
p.   714  f.:  Kaibel.  /.   G.  XIV  p.    190   f . ;  Mommsen.   C.   /.   L.   X.   p.    170-173;

-    167   -


PHRATRY  GODS.

In  accordance  with  their  Greek  origin  and  institutions  the
Neapolitans  were  grouped  in  phratries,  which  formed  the
component  elements  of  their  state.  They  were  important  in
the  life  of  the  citizens,  and  had  their  own  assemblies,  places
of  meeting,  officers,  and  religious  observances  (1).  The  sac-
rifices and  offerings  made  in  the  interest  of  the  gods  recognized
by  various  phratries  are  alluded  to  in  several  inscriptions,
which  belong  ordinarily  to  a  comparatively  late  period  like
all  those  giving  any  information  about  the  phratries.  From
this  source  it  is  evident  that  sacrifices  were  due  at  regular
intervals.  The  testator  Ariston,  who  with  his  wife  Valeria
Musa  left  a  bequest  to  the  phratry  of  the  Aristaioi  to  be  used
for  feasts  and  sacrifices  and  also  to  serve  as  a  loan  fund,
stipulated  that  the  officers  of  the  phratry  should  not  utilize  his
legacy  for  feast  or  sacrifice  except  upon  the  two  customary
days  of  each  month.  Should  this  prohibition  be  violated,  the
officials  of  the  organization  were  required  to  pay  to  the  phratry
gods'  treasury  the  sum  of  250  denarii  of  silver  as  a  penalty  (2)
M.  Cocceius,  a  freedman  of  one  of  the  Emperors,  probably
Nerva,  offered  in  company  with  his  children  an  enormous
bowl  (sj^phos)  and  Caedicia  Victrix  set  up  a  pedestaJ  for  this
or  a  similar  vessel  (3).  Sometimes  the  divinities  of  a  phratry
are  referred  to  simply  as  Osol  (4);  the  official  designation,
however,  is  Gsoi  (ppdzpioi  or  Osol  (ppT^iops?.  These  deities,  under
whose  protection  the  individual  phratries  stood,  are  generally
distinguished  from  the  Osol  TrdipiOL  worshipped  by  the  state  as
a  whole.  Yet  this  distinction  does  not  seem  always  to  have
been  observed,  at  least  in  the  later  times,  because  in  one  instance


Nissen.  /*.  Landesk..  II,  747  f . ;  Pais,  Storia  di  Napoli  e  Ischia  in  Atti  Nap.
XXI  (1900)  part.  I,  145  L;  La  missione  politico  e  civile  di  Napoli  nelV antichita
in  Flegrea  II  (1900)  part.  1,  300  f . ;  Pirro.  Origine  di  Napoli  and  Nuovo
contributo  della  storia  di  Napoli  greca  in  Studi  stor.  V  (1912)  275  f . ;  De  Petra,
Napoli   e   la  tomba   di  Partenope  in   Atti  Nap.   XXV   (1908)   15   f.

(1)  Lecrivain,  Phratria,  D.-S.   IV  446.

(2)  /.  G.  XIV,  7i9=   C.  I.  G.  5785=Vaglieri  1743.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV,  721=  C.  /.  G.  5788.

(4)  /.  G.  XIV,  724;  /.  G.  XIV.  725=  C.  /.  G.  5808.

-   168  -


the  image  of  the  eponymous  phratry  god  Eumelus  is  designated
by  the  epithet  7uaTp(i)oc  (I).  It  may  of  course  be  true  in  this  case
that  the  god  was  honored  by  a  wider  circle  than  the  members
of  a  single  phratry;  he  seems  in  fact  to  have  been  of  some
prominence  from  the  circumstance  that  Eumelis  replaces
Parthenope  as  a  designation  for  the  nymph  who  guarded  the
city  (2).  But  it  does  not  seem  probable,  as  is  claimed  by  De
Petra,  that  this  god  should  be  put  in  the  saone  category  as  the
major  dii  patrti  of  the  community,  -  Apollo,  Demeter,  and  the
Dioscuri  (3).

The  employment  of  the  term  Osol  'f[j'fizo[jBc  tends  to  indicate
a  belief  in  divinities  conceived  in  a  vague  and  general  way
as  protectors  of  the  phratry  and  not  called  by  individual
names  (4).  At  the  scime  time  the  appearance  of  gods  like
Eumelus  proves  that  in  the  period  from  which  our  evidence
is  derived  specific  divinities  with  particular  names  axe  recog-
nized; the  latter  are  either  in  addition  to  the  former  category,
or  else  became  associated  with  those  deities  in  the  course  of
time  and  gradually  usurped  their  places.  That  additional  gods
were  honored  by  the  associations  composing  the  phratries  in
addition  to  the  original  nameless  ones  is  proved  by  the  in-
scription in  which  the  Theotadai  associate  the  deified  Emperors
with  their  old  phratry  gods  (5).  Among  the  divinities  with
individual  names  are  certain  eponymous  gods  and  heroes
from  whom  the  phratry  derived  its  name,  and  possibly  others
of  the  more  important  divinities  who  were  especially  rever-
enced in  some  of  the  associations.  To  the  first  clciss  belongs
the  Eumelus  mentioned  above,  an  image  of  whom  wets  presented
to  the  Eumeleidai  by  a  father  and  son  of  the  Flauii.  He  has
been   identified    with   the   Thessalian    hero    mentioned    in    the


(1)  /.  G.  XIV.  715  =  C.  /.   G.  5786  =  Vaglieri   1049;  Ignarra.  De  phalriis
92   f.;   96.

(2)  Stat,  sil  IV,  8.  49.   See  p.    182  (3).

(3)  Cai>asso-De   Petra,   Napoli  greco-romana   59.   Cp.    Franz,    C.  I.    G.    Ill,
p.  715;    Avellino,    Bull    Nap.    I    (1843)   22.

(4)  von   Wilamowitz,   Nach.    von    der   l^gl.    Gesells.    der    Wigs.    (Gottingen)
1895,  228   (24).

(5)  /.  G.  XIV,  723  =  C.  /.  G.  5787  and  add.   p.    1254  =  Vaglieri    1044;  Cp
/.  G.  XIV.  728  =  C.  /.  G.  5802b.

-   169-


Homeric  poems,  the  son  of  Admetus  and  Alcestis,  but  is
probably  another  hero  of  Boeotian  or  Euboean  extraction  about
whom  nothing  further  is  known  (1).  One  legend  seems,  how-
ever, to  have  made  him  Parthenope's  father  instead  of
Achelous  (2).  His  name  has  been  associated  with  the  remains
of  what  was  apparently  a  circular  temple  located  on  the  lower
decumanus  near  the  Porta  Puteolana.  Near  this  place  v/as
unearthed  the  large  pedestal  recording  the  gift  of  T.  Flauius
Pius.  Although  this  identification  is  quite  uncertain,  it  is
more  probable  than  others  which  have  been  suggested  (3).
The  names  of  the  phratries  Eunostidai  and  Aristaioi  indicate
that  their  members  honored  respectively  as  guardian  deities
Eunostus,  the  hero  of  Tanagra,  and  Aristaeus,  who  was  highly
honored  in  Boeotia  and  Euboea  (4).  The  eponymous  heroes
that  may  have  served  as  the  objects  of  the  cult  of  the  Theotadai
and  the  Pankleidai  are   altogether   unknown  (5).

Artemis  received  the  special  devotion  of  the  Artemisioi
according  to  a  recently  discovered  inscription,  which  demon-
strates the  intimate  relations  existing  between  goddess  and
phratry  (6).  The  origin  of  the  phratry*s  name  was  formerly
disputed,  although  the  true  derivation  was  conjectured  long
ago  by  Mcirtorelli  (7) .  The  new  inscription,  a  long  document
belonging  to  the  reign  of  Septimius  Severus  (194  A.  D.),  shows
that   through   all   the   vicissitudes   of   the   centuries,    amid    the


(1)  Beloch  148;  Franz.  C.  /.  G.  Ill  p.  716;  Vollmer.  Stat,  sil  p.  490;
Schiff,    Eumeleidai,    P.-W.    VI.    1078.

(2)  Stat,  si  IV.  8.  49;  Franz.  C.  /.  G.  Ill  p.  716;  llberg,  Parthenope,
Roscher  III,  1653;  Heydemann,  Eumelos  und  Parthenope  in  Arch.  Zeit.  XXIV
(1866)    136.

(3)  Capasso-De  Petra.   Napoli  greco-romana  95.

(4)  Gruppe  367;  Schiff,  Eunostos  2)  P.-W.  VI,  1136.  The  cult  of  Aris-
taeus at  Neapolis  is  not  recognized  by  Hiller  von  Gartringen.  Aristaios,  P.-W.
II.    854.

(5)  Franz,   C.   /.    G.    Ill   p.    716.

(6)  Rev.  arch.  XXI  (1913)  476;  MalLardo,  Naova  cpigraje  greco-latina
della  fratria  napoletana  degli  Ariemisi  in  Memorie  Nap.  II  (1913)  150-175;
Maiuri,  La  nuova  iscrizione  della  fratria  napoletana  degli  Artemisi  in  Siudi
romani  I  (1913)  21-36;  De  Marchi,  Studi  romani  I  (1913)  326-328;  De  Sanctis,
Hev.  6pigr.  II  (1914-15)  306-309.

(7)  Martorelli,  De  regia  theca  calamaria  620  f. ;  Ignarra  had  thought  that
the  name  came  from  the  promontory  of  Artemisium  in  Euboea.  Ignarra,  De
phratriis    156.

-   170  -


development  of  other  interests  and  other  lines  of  thought  the
Neapolitans  with  great  conservatism  adhered  to  their  ezurly
form  of  organization  and  still  scrupulously  maintained  the
worship  of  the  deities  of  the  phratry.  The  record  is  in  honor
of  L.  Munatius  Hilarianus,  a  benefactor  of  the  phratry.  who
had  improved  their  quarters  by  embellishing  the  chief  room
(ohoQ),  added  a  banquet-hall  (iaxiaTTf^piov)  better  than  that  of  any
other  phratry,  and  finally  constructed  a  shrine  (vsox;)  for  the
worship  of  Artemis  worthy  both  of  the  deity  and  of  the  organ-
ization. As  a  consequence,  the  phratry  wished  to  reward  him
with  numerous  tokens  of  their  esteem,  comprising  the  right  to
dispose  of  fifty  places  at  entertainments  of  the  phratry,  and
statues  and  pictures  of  himself  and  his  deceased  son,  only  a
part  of  which  he  accepted  (1).  The  son,  a  member  of  this
phratry,  had  been  deified  eifter  his  death  suid  now  received
the  observ2inces  due  to  a  hero  (2).  Maiuri  believes  that  his
cult  was  due  not  so  much  to  the  survival  of  ancient  ideas  in
the  phratry  as  to  the  influence  of  associations  and  societies
developing  in  the  Greco-Roman  period  (3).

From  the  evidence  of  this  inscription  we  get  a  good  idea
of  the  various  features  of  social  and  religious  life  in  the  phratry
both  of  which  were  caurried  on  in  the  rooms  of  the  common
property.  We  are  not  to  suppose  any  innovations  or  extension
of  activity  at  this  time  but  merely  the  restoration  on  a  more
magnificent  scale  of  the  shrine  and  the  room  for  entertainments.
Yet  their  original  equipment  wets  probably  less,  and  wais
perhaps  limited  to  one  apartment,  the  ohoQ  ispd?  for  attending
to  the  religious  duties  of  the  phratry  and  preserving  any  sacred


(1)  The  term  y^(bpa.Q  has  been  explained  in  veirious  ways.  Maiuri.
op.  dt.  30  takes  it  to  mean  parcels  of  ground ;  De  Marchi,  op.  cit.  327,  the
privilege  of  conferr'ng  fifty  menberships  in  tVe  organization.  The  interpre-
tation given  above  is  that  of  De  Sanctis,  Rev.  ipigr.  XI  (1914)  307.

(2)  Mallardo,  op.  cit.  172;  De  Marchi.  op.  cit.  328.  Cp.  Deneken.
Heros,  Roscher  I,  2516  f.  Mallardo  c'tes  a  number  of  cases  of  the  appearsmce
of  the  term  hero  in  epitaphs  from  Sicily  (/.  G.  XIV  223-230),  Rome  and  vi-
cinity (/.  G.  XIV  1327,  1343,  1480,  1649,  1755,  1810,  2133),  and  Forum  lulii
(/.  G.  XIV,  2379).

(3)  Maiuri,  op.  cit.  33.  For  the  worship  of  heroes  in  the  Greek  asso-
ciations generally  cp.   Poland,   Geschichte  des  griechischen   Vereinwesens  22&  f.

-   171    -


objects  it  might  possess  (I).  Under  the  influence  of  the  various
collegia  in  Roman  times  the  activity  of  the  phratries  gradually
enlarged,  and  at  the  same  time  was  more  specieJized  by  dis-
tribution cimong  a  series  of  rooms.  The  oly^oq  became  now  the
chief  room  and  was  used  for  assemblies.  The  religious  activity
in  honor  of  a  patron  deity,  which  was  always  important,  was
now  provided  with  a  regular  shrine  for  the  display  of  the
common  piety  (2).

It  is  more  difficult  to  trace  the  worship  of  gods  not  directly
connected  by  name  with  the  phratry.  The  dedication  of  images
of  Czistor  and  Pollux  in  the  organization  called  Eumeleidai
does  not  necessarily  indicate  that  they  were  here  looked  upon
as  special  patrons,  for  the  dedication  of  the  statue  of  one  gcd
in  the  sanctuary  of  another  was  a  common  occurrence.  The
successful  athletes,  who  made  the  donation  wished  to  honor
the  Dioscuri  as  divinities  interested  in  sports,  and  so  set  up
the  statues  where  they  would  conduce  to  the  adornment  of
their  own  phratry,  an  action  which  received  due  recognition
from  this  source.  Then  to  make  the  tribute  to  the  gods  complete
the  parents  added  altars  and  lights  (3).

Another  inscription,  already  mentioned  as  recording  the
gift  of  a  freedman  of  Nerva  to  the  Kymaioi,  was  inscribed  upon
a  pedestal  which  exhibits  in  the  form  of  sculptured  reliefs  the
figures  of  three  gods,  -  Hephaestus,  Dionysus,  and  Heracles.
The  first  is  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  a  shield,  the  second,
accompanied  by  a  panther,  has  his  customary  emblems,  the
thyrsus  and  the  cantharus,  while  the  last  has  in  his  possession
the  vanquished  dog  of  Hades.  On  account  of  their  connection
with  the  inscription  it  has  been  maintained  by  Engelmann  and
Usener  that  these  three  deities  are  the  Osol  (ppdipioL  of  this
division   of   the  people  (4).    The   former   sees   in   this   worship


(1)  Maiuri,  op.  cit.  28;  Mallardo,  op.  cit.  164.  Cp.  Dittenberger,  Sylloge
inscriptionum  graecarum  II,  360;  Polanl,  Geschichte  des  gr.   V ereintOesens  465.

(2)  Koivog,  as  used   here  refers  only  to  the  phratry.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV.  748=  C.  /.  G.  5805==VagIieri  2163.  Commentary  by  Ci-
vitelli,  /  nuovi  frammenti  d'epigrafi  greche  relative  ai  ludi  augustali  di  Napoli  in
Am  Nap.   XVII   (1894)  part  2,   No.   3,   44.

(4)  Engelmann,  Arch.  Zeit.  XXXI  (1874)  133;  Usener,  Dreiheit  in  Rh.
Mus.  LVIII   (1903)   16;  cp.  Hofer,  Phratrioi,   Roscher.   III.   2457;  Farnell  V,  395.

-   172  -


the  cult  of  a  triad  of  gods,  which  weis  transmitted  from  Chalcis
through  the  medium  of  Cumae,  and  considers  that  their  only
relationship  or  basis  of  existence  as  a  triad  is  the  circumstance
that  they  were  worshipped  by  a  common  body.  But  von  Wila-
mowitz  does  not  regard  the  identity  of  the  figures  as  certain,
and  denies  in  any  event  that  they  were  phratry  gods  (1).  In
all  probability  the  reliefs  were  intended  merely  as  a  work  cf
art  for  decorative  purposes.

It  is  probable  that  the  number  of  phratries  was  twelve,
most  of  whose  names  are  known.  One  name,  that  of  the  Anti-
noitai,  manifestly  can  not  be  dated  earlier  than  the  reign  of
Hadrian,  when  the  cult  of  the  Emi>eror's  favorite  Antinous
came  into  vogue.  One  set  of  inscriptions  preserves  the  names
of  two  men  who  are  called  Sufenas  and  are  described  as
members  not  only  of  this  phratry  but  also  of  the  Eunostidai  (2).
To  explain  this  peculiarity  different  theories  have  been  pro-
posed none  of  which  heis  met  with  genereJ  acceptance.  Beloch,
followed  by  Schiff  and  Capsisso,  considers  that  only  one  phratry
is  represented  by  the  double  name,  and  that  the  organization
formerly  honoring  as  chief  patron  the  Boeotian  hero  from
Tanagra  later  gave  the  place  of  preeminence  in  its  cult  to  the
deified  Antinous  without  entirely  neglecting  the  older  god  (3) .
Schiff  sees  a  point  of  contact  between  the  two  divinities  tending
toward  their  identification  in  the  circumstance  that  both  ceased
to  live  at  any  eaily  age  (4).  On  the  other  hand  there  is  a
probability  that  the  Eunostidai  were  different  from  the  Anti-
noitai,  and  that  the  Sufenates  were  members  of  two  organi-
zations, -  a  state  of  affairs  due  to  the  fact  that  the  old  definite
distinctions  between  the  phratries  had  broken  down  after  they
lost  their  political  importance  (3).


(1)  von  Wi^iamowitz  (loc.  clt.)  who  considers  that  Hephaestus     and    He-
racles   may   well    have   been    held    in    honor    by    an    ex-slave.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  VI,  1851  ;  D.  6188.  The  three  inscriptions  belong  to  a     monu-
ment that  was  set  up  at  Bovillae.   1  he  Sufenates  belonged  to    the     equestrian

order  and  attained   a  number  of   distinctions.

(3)  Beloch    42;    Schi£f.    Eunostidai,   P.-W.    VI.    1136;    Capasso-De    Petra.
op.    cit.    7;    Ignarra,    op.    cit.    119.

(4)  Schiff.  P.-W.  VI.    1136.

(5)  The    exact    manner    in    which  the    Antinoiteii  were    formed    according

-   173  -


PARTHENOPE.

The  most  distinctive  and  one  of  the  most  interesting
Neapolitan  cults  is  that  of  Parthenope,  the  eponymous  goddess
of  the  ancient  community,  who  was  identified  by  the  people
with  one  of  the  three  female  deities  known  as  the  Sirens  (1).
These  were  not  revered  collectively  here  as  at  Surrentum  nor
did  those  qualities  appear  strikingly  in  Parthenope  which  are
usually  assigned  to  them  in  myth  and  folk  lore.  Though
portrayed  with  wings,  she  was  not  one  of  those  ugly  birds
with  human  head  which  in  popular  belief,  as  depicted  on
countless  vases,  were  the  embodiment  of  depsirted  souls  (2).
She  was  not  on  the  other  hand  preeminently  the  seductive
nymph  of  the  Homeric  poems,  although  the  notion  of  her
chagrin  at  the  final  failure  of  her  musical  powers  was  inter-
woven into  the  legend  of  her  death  on  this  coast  (3).  It  is
true  that  since  she  was  a  Siren,  the  legend  ordineurily  repre-
sented her  influence  as  baleful,  and  associated  her  with  the
perils  of  a  treacherous,  if  fair-appearing,  sea.  As  one  who
had  met  death  among  the  waves,  her  spirit  was  regarded
as  haunting  this  shore,  powerful  to  wreak  vengeance  unless
it  were  duly  appeased  with  the  tribute  proper  for  a  chthonic
deity.  But  at  the  same  time  a  tradition  developed  that  Parthe-
nope was  good;  as  one  who  had  defended  her  virginity
ag£iinst   persistent   attacks  she   received   the   epithet   of   saintly


to  this  opinion  is  uncertain.  Whether  this  was  a  fractional  part  of  em  older
phratry,  a  combination  of  two  which  had  suffered  a  decline,  or  an  entirely
new  creation  is  disputed,  but  the  second  supfjosition  seems  most  probable.
Cp.  KaibeJ.  /.  G.  XI V,  p.  91;  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  202;  Maiuri.  36;
Corcia,  Storia  delle  due  Sicilie  II,  218;  De  Sanctis,  Atthis,  Storia  della  repub-
hlica   ateniese   (2)   47.

(1)  That  Parthenope  gave  her  name  to  the  city  is  expressly  stated  by
several    Latin    authors.    List    in    Ilberg,    Parthenope,    Roscher   111,     1654.

(2)  Weicker,   Seirenen,  Roscher   IV,   608   f.,  and  Der  Seelenvogel    1    f.

(3)  Odyssey  XII,  39-54,  166-200  contains  the  oldest  literary  account  of
the  Sirens.  Their  death  is  first  related  by  Lycophron  who  follows  Timaeus
713  f.  Cp.  Schol.  to  Lycophron  712;  Schol.  Odyssey  XII  39;  Sil.  XII,  33.
The    fate   of   Parthenope    is   alluded    to    by   Stephanus    of    Byzemti-m.

Cp.  Stat,  sil  IV,  4.  51  ;  Dion.  Perieg.  358  with  comments  of  Scholias'
and    £ustathius=Geograp/ii    Graeci   minorea    II    p.    445,    280.

-   174  -


(aYVT^). (I).  Although  associated  by  Dionysius  and  Eustathius
with  Cami>ania,  she  is  probably  *  influenced  by  the  character-
istics of  the  Sirens  located  in  Sicily,  who  are  represented  as
the  faithful  friends  of  Demeter  in  her  affliction  (2).  De  Petra
maintains  that  the  version  of  a  beneficent  Parthenope  was
eagerly  accepted  by  the  Neapolitans,  since  it  tended  to  mag-
nify their  deity  in  public  opinion,  and  consequently  it  obtained
a  firm  hold  in  the  popular  belief,  which  survived  in  the
Middle  Ages  (3).  Then  she  had  become  the  daughter  of  a
Sicilian  king,  -  a  conception  depending  upon  the  circumstance
that  the  human  side  of  the  Siren  nature  had  long  been  empha-
sized in  accordance  with  a  peculiarity  of  belief  restricted  to
the  West  (4).

A  knowledge  of  the  Sirens  was  brought  to  Italy  by  the
early  settlers,  who  were  familiar  with  the  localization  of  the
Homeric  enchantresses  on  its  western  shore  (5) .  At  Neapolis
the  cult  of  Parthenope  was  not  introduced  through  the  medium
of  the  colony  at  Cumae,  for  indications  of  such  a  worship  are
totally  lacking  there.  In  fact  according  to  tradition  the  Cumeans
tried  to  destroy  the  town  of  Peu-thenope,  thus  doing  violence
to  the  goddess  who  bore  its  nsime,  and  only  when  they  had
become  victims  of  a  plague  did  they  try  to  build  up  the  city
and  promote  zealously  the  cult  of  the  eponymous  deity.  It  is
true  that  this  legend  was  probably  a  late  invention  designed
to  explain  the  origin  of  the  Siren  worship  here,  yet  the  language
of  the  historian  seems  to  imply  a  situation  in  which  the
Cumeans  were  deeding  with  a  cult  foreign  to  themselves  and

(1)  Dionys,  Perieg.  358;  Eustalh.  comm.  ad  Dionys.  Perieg.  358;  Schol.
ad  Dionys.  358;  Krebs,  Metiochos  und  Parthenope  in  Heimes  XXX  (1895)  144;
Hofer.   Metiochos  Roscher   11.   2938;    Ilberg,   Roscher   III.    1655.

(2)  Ov.  met.  V.  550  f.  Cp.  Hyg.  fab.  141  ;  Apoll.  Rhod.  IV.  898;  Claud-
ian  De  raptu  Proserpinae  III.    190.

(3)  De  Petra,  Partenope  Sicula  in  Miscellanea  Salinas  85  and  Le  sirene
del  mar  tirreno  in  Atti  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  part  1.  27  f.  Cp.  Weicker,  Der  See-
lenvogel    61.

(4)  Cronaca  di  Parthenope,  quoted  by  De  Petra,  Le  Sirene  del  mar
tirreno  11  f .  ;  Boccaccio.  Ameto  Vol.  XV,  139  (opere  volgari.  Firenze  1833).
According  to  th's  account  Parthenope's  tomb  showed  the  following  words :
Qui   Partenope   vergine    Sicula   morta    giace.

(5)  See   p.    14.

-   175  -


existent  at  Neapolis  before  any  settlement  of  theirs  in  that
spot  (1).  The  worship  of  Parthenope  alone  was  restricted  to
this  one  place,  although  Lycophron  erroneously  represents  it
as  more  widely  extended.  He  says  that  she  wEis  welcomed
by  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Clanius  (FXav.?),  which
is  called  by  Tzetzes  in  his  comment  a  river  of  Cumae.  But
here  the  leeirned  Alexandrian,  striving  for  a  display  of  eru-
dition rather  than  for  plain  accuracy,  has  confounded  this
stream  with  the  Sebethus  (2).

The  main  fact  in  this  cult  was  the  grave,  which  the
people  of  Neapolis  were  able  to  show  as  a  proof  of  their  special
relations  with  the  goddess  (3).  Here  the  body  had  been
washed  ashore  £ind  piously  interred  by  the  inhabitants,  and
here  the  rites  of  libation  and  sacrifice  of  oxen  were  performed
in  her  honor  as  to  a  hero  (4).  At  the  tomb  was  erected  a
shrine,  utilized  perhaps  as  an  oracle,  within  which  was  an
image  of  the  deity,  who  was  probably  represented  in  the  guise
of  a  young  woman  with  wings  (5).  In  this  manner  she  is
portrayed  on  a  sardonyx    in    the    British    Museum,    -    a  type

(1)  Lutatius  Daphnis  fr.  2  ==  Philargyrius  on  Verg.  georg.  IV,  564  =  Peter,
Hist.  Rom.  frag.  p.  126;  Lutatius,  lib.  IIII  dicit,  Cumaoios  incola^  a  parentibus
dgressos   Parthenopen    urbem    constituisse,    dictam   a   Parthenop>e  Sirena,    cuius

corpus    etiam postquam    ob     locorum     ubertatem    amoenitatemque     magis

coepta  sit  frequentare,  ueritos  ne  Cymaeam  desererent  inisse  cons'lium  Par-
thenop>en  diruendi  Post  etiam  pestilentia  affectos  ex  respK>nso  oraculi  urbem
restituisse  sacraque  Parthenopis  cum  magna  religione  suscepisse,  nomen  au-
tem  Neafxjli  ob  recentem  institutionem  imposuisse.  Cp.  Weicker,  Der  5ee/en-
vogel  64.

(2)  Lye.    Alex    717,   f.

TYjv  |X£V  $aXi^poo  xupatg  ^xPsPpaaiisvTjv
rXdvig  xe  pstGpotg  Ss^sxat  xsyycov  x^^Sva.

Xoipatai  y.a.1  GuoGXo'.at  IlapBsvdTtYjv  Powv
Ixsia  xuSavouatv  oicovov  Gsdv.

(3)  Strab.  I,  2,  13:  ev  NeauoXet,  IlapGsvoTCYjg  Sstxvuxat  [ivrjfxa  [xtdg  xwv
2£ipT^va)V.     Cp.  V,  4.  7;  Plin.  not.  Ill  62;  Suet.  fr.  203  (ReiflFerscheid  p.  350).

(4)  Lycophron,    loc.    cit.

(5)  Suidas  Sstpi^v.  ev  "^  HapGevoTtYjc  ISpuxat  Seip'^voc  (JyaXiia.  Older  writers
such  as  "CaF>accio,  Historia  Neapolitana  I,  25  conceive  of  Parthenoi>e  in  the
common  Siren  form  as  a  bird  with  humem  face,  but  the  ugliness  of  such  an
image  would  be  repugnant  to  Greek  taste.  Cp.  however  Regling,  Terina,  Pro-
gramm  zum  Winckelmannsfeste   1906,   62.

-    176  -


which  may  be  connected  with  the  contests  held  yeeirly  in  her
honor.  This  festival  was  inaugurated  by  the  Athenian  nauarch
Diotimus,  probably  the  son  of  Strombichus,  who  about  the
year  430  B.  C.  during  a  lull  in  the  Peloponnesian  War  touched
at  the  port  of  Neapolis;  here  he  sacrificed  to  Parthenope  at
the  suggestion  of  an  oracle  and  instituted  a  torch  race  (1).
This  information,  which  depends  on  Timaeus,  an  authority
on  the  affairs  of  the  Western  Greeks,  is  the  eeu^liest  reference
to  Parthenope*s  cult,  and  shows  that  this  had  been  practiced
before  the  fifth  century  B.  C.  At  that  time  it  was  brought
into  relation  with  the  Delphic  oracle,  which  as  a  means  for
averting  some  unknown  deuiger  or  disaster  threatening  Athens
or  the  Athenian  possessions  ordered  that  Parthenope  should
be  propitiated.  The  peculiar  form  of  the  expiation,  manifesting
itself  as  a  torch  race,  correspKjnded  to  current  Athenian
usage  (2).

The  torch  race  thus  introduced  was  repeated  each  year
by  the  inhabitants,  thus  becoming  a  counterpart  of  the  Athenian
Panathenaia,  and  like  it  was  perhaps  exhibited  with  increased
magnificence  the  third  year  of  each  Olympiad  (3).  Though
other  competitive  events  were  doubtless  added  in  the  course
of  time,  the  race  with  lighted  torches  would  remain  the  central
feature  of  the  celebration.  The  gem  alluded  to  above  pictures
the  Siren  holding  in  her  right  hand  a  torch  and  a  wreath,
while  raised  upon  her  left  shoulder  is  an  amphora,  which
may  represent  a  prize  offered  to  the  winner.  As  at  Athens
the  victor  received  an  oil  lamp,  so  here  he  would  get  a  jar
of  wine   (4).  We   aie  informed   that  the  expenses  incurred   in


(1)  Schol.  on  Lye.  732  =  Timaeu8.  fr.  99  (Muller).  Cp.  Lye.  732;  Beloch
30;  A.  Sambon,  Lea  monnaies  antiques  de  I'ltalie  I,  172  (2);  De  Petra,  Le  ori-
gini  di  Napoli  in  Atti  Nap.  XXIII  (1905)  45;  Ilberg.  Parthenope,  Roscher  III,
1654;  Correra,  Le  piik  antiche  monete  di  Napoli  in  Rend.  Nap.  XVI  (1902)
105;  Helbig,  Sopra  le  relazioni  commerciali  degli  Ateniesi  call' Italia  in  Rend,
dei  Lincei  series  4.   V  part   1    (1889)  82.

(2)  Weieker,    op.  cit.   61    f . ;    ep.  Diels,    Sibyllinische  Blatter  47    f.

(3)  Lye.  Alex.  737;  Weieker.  op.  cit.  63.

(4)  Panofka.  Arch.  Zeit.  X  (1852)  477.  PI.  44.  No.  3.  The  interpretation
suggested  by  Panofka  has  net  found  general  aecept  nee.  Muller  thought  that
'he  Siren  we 3  represented  as  bearing  a  v  urn  to  a  funeral  pyre  and  Furtwangler,
that  she  is  trying  to  entiee  to  noeturnal  revels.  Muller-W'eseler,  Denkmaler  der

-    177    -

12


maintaining  the  cult  were  providecl  for  by  the  income  derived
from  tracts  of  land  set  apart  for  Parthenope's  benefit  (I),

The  location  of  grave  and  shrine  has  been  much  disputed
by  local  topographers.  De  Petra,  examining  exhaustively  the
different  theories,  finds  two  main  views  on  the  subject,  which
follow  populsir  tradition  transmitted  from  the  ancient  world  (2).
These  he  thinks  originated  in  the  first  settlements  made  in
this  region,  which  he  professes  to  be  able  to  identify  definitely
with  certain  points  within  the  limits  of  the  modern  Naples.
Thus  he  locates  in  the  district  of  S.  Lucia  the  Rhodian  colo^
nists,  who  claimed  to  possess  the  tomb  in  their  territory  on
the  Pizzof alcone ;  he  likewise  .atssumes  that  this  claim  was
contested  by  the  men  from  Cumae  who  maintained  that  they
themselves  were  its  possessors  (3).  According  to  the  second
claim  the  tomb  weis  located  farther  east  within  the  old  walled
city  of  Roman  times.  Fabio  Giordano,  who  is  followed  by
Capasso,  had  placed  it  in  the  most  elevated  part  of  this  district
where  the  church  of  S.  Aniello  wsis  erected  (4);  whether
Pontano  agreed  with  this  assignmient  or  wished  to  have  it  on
the  present  site  of  S.  Giovanni  Maggiore  is  disputed  (5).  The
main  idea  in  any  case  was   to  select  a  hill  overlooking  the

alien  Kunst  II  No.  753;  Furtwangler,  Die  antiJien  Gemmen  PL  10,  No.  24.
Partrayedi  also  in  Imhoof-Blumner  ur.d  Keller,  Tier  und  Pflanzenh'lder  auf
Miinzen  und  Gemmen  PI.  XXVI,  32  and  Millin,  Galerie  mythologique  PI.
LXXX.   No.   312.

(1)  Gromatici  veteres  p.  235  (Lachmann):  Neapolis:  ager  eius  Sirenae
Parthenopae   a   Graecis   est   in    iugeribus   ads'gnatus.

(2)  De  Petra,  Le  Sirene  del  mar  iirreno  in  'Aiti  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  15  f.
The  author  cites  the  Cronaca  di  Parthenop>e  and  Boccaccio's  Amadeo  as  em-
bodying  popular   tradition.

(3)  On  the  basis  of  the  two  conflicting  theories  De  Petra  op.  cit.  27
expla'ns  an  obscure  passage  in  Solinus  2,  9 :  Parthenope  a  Parthenopae  Si-
renis  sepulchro,  quam  Augustus  postea  Neapolim  esse  maluit.  He  emends
Neapolim  to  Neapoli,   and  understands  quam  as  an   allusion  to  the  Siren.   The

sentence  then  means  that  Augustus,  judging  the  two  versions,  decided  for  the
tomb    at   Neapolis.

(4)  Fabio  Giordano  (quoted  by  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  197  (277);
Capaccio,  Historia  Neapolitana  34;  Pontano,  De  hello  Neapoliiano  VI,  143
(ed.    Gravier,    Naples    1769).

(5)  De  Petra  op.  cit.  20  f .  ;  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  198;  Pirro,  Nuovo
contributo  alia  storia  e  topografia  di  Napoli  greca  in  Studi  stor.  per  I'antichit^
claisica  V  (1912)  289.

-   178  -


J


water,  and  it  is  needless  to  add  that  the  archaeological  evi-
dence sometimes  adduced  to  support  their  theories  is  value-
less (I).

Lycophron,  alluding  to  the  Siren's  arrival,  says  that  she
was  received  neeir  the  tower  of  Phalerum  and  the  Clanius
River,  where  the  natives  prepared  for  her  a  tomb  (2).  In  this
allusion  the  poet  has  in  mind  the  Sebethus,  which  flows  into
the  sea  not  far  from  the  city;  employing  the  nsunes  «  river  »
and  ((fortress  )),  he  refers  to  the  city's  territory  as  a  whole,  and
there  is  nothing  in  his  language  as  stated  by  Beloch  to  show
that  he  wished  to  indicate  especially  the  mouth  of  the  streeun
as  the  location  of  the  tomb  (3).  Beloch *s  own  opinion  that
it  stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbor  southwest  of  the  Porto
Piccolo  is  based  upon  the  belief  that  Parthenope  W2is  a  sea
divinity,  whom  the  citizens  wished  to  protect  their  shipping.
But  Parthenope  wsis  worshipped  more  as  a  hero  or  chthonic
power  than  as  a  real  sea  goddess  such  as  Euploea  or  Leucothea,
and  the  passages  cited  to  prove  the  proposed  location  are
without  importance.  The  term  portus  in  the  statement  of
Statius  that  the  Siren  established  herself  in  a  western  harbor,
designates  Neapolis  in  general  without  any  emphasis  on  the
actual  coa^t  line  (4).

In  the  case  of  Strabo,  who  uses  the  word  ^bIv.wzt.i  in
reference  to  the  grave,  Beloch  asserts  that  the  author  was
following  a  Periplus,  which  pointed  out  the  monument  as
something  visible  from  a  passing  ship  (5).  But  while  the
general  order  of  localities  treated  in  this  part  of  the  Geography
suggests  such  a  source,  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  it
was  followed  in  handling  details.  When  we  consider  the
material  that  both  precedes  and  follows  the  passage  under
discussion,    we   must   either   admit   that   the  Periplus   did   not

(1)  Capasso-De   Petra,    op.    cit.    197-198.

(2)  Lye.   'Alex,   717.

(3)  Beloch    77.    Cp.    Garrucci,    Le  monete    deU'Italia    antica    82.

(4)  Stat.  sil.  IV,  4,52:  Ubi  Ausonio  se  condit  hospita  portu  Parthenope.
Cp.  Vollmer's  Statius  p.   436,  note   to   III,   5.    79.

(5)  Stxab.  V,  4,  7:  MsxaS^  Atxatapxsiav  ia-zi  NeaTioXt^  Kufiafcov —  Suou
5e(xvuxat.  (xv^|ia  xwv  leipr^vwv  iita^  IlapGsvcsTCYjc,  xaL  Si-^oiw  ouvxsXstxat  Y^M-vt^tog
xaxa  |iavxe{av.  Beloch  loc.  cit.

-  179  -


limit  itself  to  an  enumeration  of  prominent  objects  on  the
shore  or  that  the  author  did  not  follow  it  carefully,  -  in  either
case  finding  no  clue  to  the  location  of  the  tomb.  Moreover
Beloch  himself  in  another  place  has  avoided  the  difficulty  by
supposing  that  no  Periplus,  such  as  that  of  Artemidorus,  was
exclusively  used  in  this  section  of  the  work  but  that  instead
there  were  large  additions  from  other  sources,  chiefly
Timaeus  (I).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  word  appears  elsewhere
in  quite  a  different  connection,  in  an  expository  passage  where
there  could  be  no  employment  of  a  Periplus  (2).  In  truth
the  word  employed  is  merely  the  natural  one  to  adopt  in
both  passages  in  alluding  to  a  show  place  of  the  city,  -  a  me-
morial to  which  every  Neapolitan  would  point  with  pride,
and  which  had  been  shown  to  Strabo  as  to  visitors  in  generaJ.
But  while  these  citations  prove  nothing  about  the  location  of
the  tomb,  it  wais  likely  that  it  -was  situated  somewhere  along  the
coast  simply  because  the  Siren*s  body  v/as  washed  ashore
by  the  waves.  As  the  graves  of  Palinurus  and  Misenus  occupied
lofty  promontories,  so  the  sepulcher  of  Parthenojje  in  accord-
ance with  the  words  of  Statius  should  have  some  sightly
location  on  the  shore;  the  exact  place  can  not  be  determined  (3).
Some  numismatists  have  recognized  the  Siren  in  the  fe-
male head  which  appears  on  Neapolitan  silver  coins  in  endless
variety  from  the  earliest  period  (4).  She  is  generally  repre-
sented in  profile  but  also  app>ears  full  faced  with  streaming
hair,  thus  recalling  Syracusan  money  with  the  likeness  of
Arethusa.  Evans  promulgated  a  theory  that  the  Syracusan
money  was  influenced  by  that  of  Neapolis;  but  this  seems
less  plausible  than  to  suppose  that  the  latter  was  affected  by

(1)  Beloch,  Le  fonti  di  Strahone  nella  descrizione  delta  Campania  in
Atti  dei  Lincei  series  III,  X  (1882)  442;  Geffcken,  Timaios'  Geographic  dea
Wesiens  37.

(2)  Strab.  I,  2,    13: ev  NsaTioXst   napGev^TCyjg    SsCxvuxai  [Av^fia  |ii(2s

TWV   Sstpl^VCDV.

(3)  Stat.  ail.  V,  3,  104  relates  that  she  W8«  buried  upon  a  wind-swept
mountain  (adflato  monte).  But  there  is  nothing  to  connect  these  words  with
the  medieval  Porta  Ventosa  above  the  harbor  neeur  the  University.  Cp.  De
Petra,  Atti  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  23   (2).

(4)  A.  Sambon  193  f . ;  Head  Hist.  num.  38;  Gsurdner,  The  Types  of
Creek  Coins  PI.  XI.   Nos.    11.    14;  Garrucci.  PI.   84.

-    180   -


the  former  (I).  Older  scholars  thought  these  heads  a  repre-
sentation of  Artemis,  and  some  of  the  more  recent  authorities
see  in  them  Nice  or  a  personification  of  the  Genius  of  the
city  (2).  But  the  Siren  herself  has  all  the  attributes  of  a
Genius  or  protecting  spirit,  and  when  the  indubitable  impor-
tance of  her  cult  is  taken  into  consideration,  it  is  difficult  to
believe  that  the  coinage  was  not  to  some  degree  influenced
by  it,  or  that  another  Genius  could  exist  by  her  side  endowed
with  enough  vigor  to  maintain  her  independence  (3).  The
latter  would  tend  to  blend  with  the  former  and  thus  lose  her
individual  identity.  The  use  of  Nice  on  these  coins  is  not
improbable  in  itself,  but  seems  less  likely  than  the  omission
in  the  coinage  of  any  trace  of  the  distinctive  deity  of  the
city  (4).

The  influence  of  the  Siren  worship  still  lingers  among
the  people  of  Naples,  and  this  deity  has  given  a  name  to  an
imFK>rtant  class  of  amulets  against  the  terrors  of  the  «  evil  eye  ».
These  sirene  belong  for  the  most  part  to  the  variety  of  pro-
phylactics that  are  hung  up  in  a  house  to  protect  the  inmates,
and  are  of  two  general  kinds.  In  the  one  class  the  Siren
appears  alone  either  as  a  bird  with  human  head  or,  as  is
more  often  the  case,  in  the  form  of  a  woman  wearing  a
crown,  whose  body  terminates  in  a  double  fish  tail  adorned
with  silver  bells.  In  the  second  class  she  is  borne  by  two
sea-horses,  also  a  powerful  protection  against  malign  influen-
ces (5).

(1)  Evans,  Syracusan  «  Medallions  »  and  their  Engravers  in  Num.  Chron.
series  III,  IX  (1891)  279  f.  The  iritermediate  model  fcr  the  Neapolitan  issues
was  probably  Terina.  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  ]9]  =Ricerche  stor.  e  geogr.  239;
A.  Sambon,  Les  monnaies  antiques  de  I'ltalie  I,  173,  and  La  cronologia  delle
monete  di  Neapolis  in  Riv.  Ital.  di  Numis.  XV  (1902)  121  f . ;  But  cp.  Correra,
Le  piu  antiche  manete  di  Naboli  in  Rend.  Nap.  XVI  (1902)  97-98;  L.  Sambon,
Les  monnaies  de  la  presqu'ile  italique   147.

(2)  Eckhel,  Doctr.  num.  vet.  I,  112;  Ilberg,  Roscher  III.  1654;  A.  Sam-
bon. Rio.   iW.   di  numis.  XV   (1902)    121.

(3)  Gardner  op.  cit.  45 ;  Garrucci  82 ;  von  Duhn.  Der  Dioskurentempel
in  Neapel    14.

(4)  Cp.  Eckhel.  loc.  cit.;  Head  39;  De  Luynes,  Ann.  Inst.  XIII  (1841)
132;  A.  Sambon,  I,  173,  176.  This  identification  is  accepted  by  Grose,  Some
Rare  Coins  oj  Magna  Graecia  in  Num.   Chron.   LXIII   (1916)  202.

(5)  Elworthy,  The  Evil  Eye  357  and  Evil  Eye  in  Hastings  Encycl.  of
Relig.  and  Ef^ics ;  Neville-Rolf e,  Naples  in  Encycl.  Britannica  (11)  XIX,
181;   S.    Seligman,   Der  Bdseblick   und    Vertoandtea   II,    148,    310.

-   181  -


ZEUS.

No  mention  has  been  preserved  of  a  cult  of  Zeus  or
Jupiter.  Yet  Zeus  was  unquestionably  prominent  in  the  relig-
ious life  of  Cumae  and  in  that  of  a  still  older  ancestor
Chalcis,  and  ordinarily  had  a  shrine  in  Greek  communities.
These  indications,  therefore,  point  to  the  presence  of  a
sanctuary  here  and  to  a  cult  that  attained  only  a  secondary
i*ank  because  of  the  unusual  prominence  of  other  gods.  Capasso
assigned  to  Neapolis  a  cult  of  Jupiter  Flazzus,  but  the  ori-
gin of  the  inscription  which  he  used  for  evidence  is  uncer-
tain (I).  Attempts  have  been  made  to  determine  the  location
of  a  temple  here;  thus  Capasso  thought  that  ancient  remains
uncovered  beneath  the  Cathedral  should  be  referred  to  that
edifice,  and  Fabio  Giordano  long  ago  wished  to  associate
it  with  the  site  of  the  church  of  the  SS.  Apostoli  in  the
northeastern  comer  of  the  ancient  city  (2).  But  in  this  case
as  in  many  others  which  have  been  treated  by  local  topog-
raphers, the.  identification  rests  upon  no  comj>etent  evidence.

APOLLO.

Apollo  is  enumerated  as  one  of  the  dii  patrii  who  in  the
form  of  a  bird  pointed  out  the  way  across  the  sea  to  the
ancestors  of  the  Neapolitans,  when  they  founded  the  first
Greek  colony  in  Italy.  For  this  reason  he  received  the  grateful
adoration  of  the  city.  Giinther  sees  an  allusion  to  Apollo's
guidance  in  the  figure  of  a  dove  in  a  glass  mosaic  of  the
first  century  A.  D.  which  was  found  at  Posilipo.  But  this
more  probably  is  a  mere  decorative  design  (3).  Apollo'  s  image

(1)  See  the  addenda  p.   396.

(2)  Capasso-De  Petra,  Napoli     greco-rotnana  61  ;     Fabio       Giordano,      un-
published  Historia   Neapolitana,    quoted    by   Capasso-De   Petra    174    (130).

(3)  Stat.  sil.  IV,  8.  45-49.

Di   patrii,    quos   auguriis  super   aequora   magn's
litus  ad  Ausonium  deuexit  Abantia  classis,
tu,    ductor    populi    longe    migremtis,    Apollo
cuius   ac^.huc    uolucrem    laeua    ceruice    sedenten
respiciens    blande    felix    Eumelis    adorat.

von  Duhn,   op.   cH.    12;  Giinther,  Pausilypon  89  eind  A   Mural  Glass  Mosaic  in

Archaeologia  LXIU   (1911-12)   105  (the  mosaic  reproduced  in   both  works).      Cp.

Macchioro,  Neapolis  II  (1914-15)  364.  The  motive  is  not  infrequent  in  mosaics.

See  Rusch.   Cuida  Nos.    161.    173.

-    182  -


is  recognized  upon  silver  didrachmas  of  the  second  half  of
the  fourth  century  B.  C.  and  also  upon  silver  obols  of  the
same  period.  These  issues,  which  have  on  the  reverse  in  one
case  the  figure  of  a  horseman  and  in  the  other  that  of  Heracles
throttling  a  lion,  aie  undoubtedly  due  to  the  influence  of
Tarentum,  a  city  with  which  Neapolis  had  important  business
relations  (1).  But  the  employment  of  the  head  of  Apollo  to
mark  the  obverse  is  due  rather  to  the  loceJ  importance  of  the
god,  as  he  does  not  figure  prominently  in  the  coinage  of
Tarentum.  A  little  later,  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century
he  appe2u:s  upon  three  obol  pieces,  also  of  silver,  where  he
is  always  the  youthful  deity  laurel  crowned  (2).  Still  more
frequently  he  forms  the  design  upon  pieces  of  bronze,  and
indeed  his  likeness  was  in  use  all  through  the  fourth  and
third  centuries  B.  C.  as  long  as  the  city  issued  money.  His
face  is  the  regular  device  in  five  of  the  eight  important  divi-
sions of  the  city's  bronze  money  (3).  The  figure  of  a  tripod
upon  one  division  of  the  coinage  in  this  metal  is  a  reminiscence
of  this  god.  While  its  presence  may  be  eeisily  accounted  for
as  an  effect  of  the  local  cult  of  Apollo,  the  adoption  of  this
particular  symbol  is  perhaps  due  to  outside  influence  (4).

Although  there  is  every  indication  that  this  god  was  much
esteemed  and  publicly  honored,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  was
one  of  the  more  popular  divinities  in  the  sense  of  receiving
requests  to  meet  specific  needs.  Evidence  for  votive  offerings
is  lacking  save  in  one  instance,  and  here  he  is  no  longer  a
pure  Greek  divinity,  but  has  been  merged  in  the  Egyptian
Horus-Harpocrates  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Isis  (5).
He  certainly  had  a  temple,  probably  of  imposing  character,
in  which  stood  a  cult  statue  with  a  dove  perched  upon  the
left  shoulder.   This   then   was  itself   a  very   ancient   image,    or


(1)  A.  Sambon  p.  180  and  No«.    396,    427-434.    Cp.    also    Nos.    423-426.
Head,   op.   cit.   62.

(2)  A.  Sambon  244.  Nos.  553-559.

(3)  A.  Sambon  246  f.

(4)  The  tripod  figures  espyecially     on     the     money  of  Croton.     Head     95 ;
P.    Gardner,    The   Types   of   Greek  Coins   XVI   No.    1.

(5)  See  p.  215.

-    183   -


reproduced  fsuthfully  the  old  tradition  (1).  Not  far  away  was
the  statue  of  a  nymph  called  Eumelis,  who  is  probably
identical  with  Parthenope.  There  is  no  reeison  for  putting  these
statues,  as  von  Duhn  thinks,  either  in  the  temple  of  the
Dioscuri  or  near  the' tomb  of  the  Siren  (2).

The  location  of  the  sanctuary  is  doubtful.  During  the
Middle  Ages  the  present  Strada  del  Duomo,  passing  through
the  central  part  of  the  old  Greek  walled  city  from  north  to
south  bore  the  name  Radii  Soils.  This  was  supposedly  derived
from  a  temple  of  Apollo  as  god  of  the  sun,  and  therefore
the  e2a'ly  antiquarians  sought  to  locate  the  edifice  on  this
Street  on  the  site  of  the  present  Cathedral  (3).  A  somewhat
more  probable  location  is  the  attiguous  church  of  S.  Restituta
going  back  to  the  seventh  century  (4).  This  now  forms  the
northern  pait  of  the  Cathedral  edifice  and  faces  toweurd  the
Strada  AnticagUa,  which  corresponds  to  the  upper  decumanus
of  the  old  city,  one  of  its  three  main  arteries  of  traffic.  Such
a  location  is  in  accord  with  the  theory  developed  by  Beloch
that  the  temples  of  the  three  principeJ  cults  included  in  the
term  dii  patrii  were  located  each  on  a  different  decumanus,
and  that  the  most  northerly  of  these  three  streets,  because
of  the  temple  situated  upon  it,  received  its  name  from  the
god  (5).  But  the  site  of  the  church  of  the  SS.  Apostoli,  which
was  proposed  by  Beloch  himself,  seems  too  remote  from  the
center  of  town  for  so  important  a  public  cult  (6).


(1)  Stat.   loc.  cit.  and  si.   Ill,  5,  80:  Ipse  Dionaea  monstrauit    Apollo    col-
umba.  Veil.  I,  4:  Huius  classis  cursum  esse  directum     alii     columbae    antece-
dentis  uolatu  feiunt.  Summonte,  Hisforia  di  Napoli  I,  85.

(2)  von  Duhn,  op.  cit.   14.

(3)  So  in  the  sixteenth  century  Fobio  Giordano,  who  speaks  of  archi-
tectural remains  including  huge  columns  of  great  height  and  thickness  (quot-
ed by  Ca(>asso-De  Petra  176  (147);  in  the  eighteenth  century  Tutini,  DeU
Vorigine   e   Jundatione   de     seggi    di   Napoli    17.   Cp.   Corcia,    Storia  delle  dudf

Sicilie  II,   239.

(4)  Capasso-De    Petra,    op.    cit.    59 ;    Sorrentino,    La    basilica    costantiniana,
in   Atti   Nap.    XXV    (1908)    parte    seconda   274.

(5)  Beloch   70.

(6)  Capasso-De  Petra  op.  cit.  58.

-   184   -


r


»


DEMETER.

Demeter,  introduced  at  Cumae  by  the  Chalcidians,  was
brought  in  turn  to  NeapoHs,  where  a  flourishing  cult  soon
developed.  This  was  further  strengthened  by  the  influx  of
Athenian  settlers;  its  ceremonies  received  the  peculiar  Attic
impress,  and  the  goddess  henceforth  could  be  properly  de-
scribed under  that  epithet  (Actaea)  (I).  While  she  was
primarily  an  eaith  divinity  and  so  interested  in  agriculture,
she  was  venerated  here  particularly  as  Thesmophorus,  a  title
which  apparently  alludes  to  her  function  as  a  patroness  of
orderly  civil  society,  but  which  in  reality,  as  shown  by  Famell,
indicates  her  power  to  promote  fertility.  ActusJly  she  was
chiefly  a  goddess  who  protected  women,  and  it  may  be
inferred  that  here  as  elsewhere  the  festivals  appropriate  to
her  cult  were  celebrated  by  this  element  of  the  population  (2).
,  The  Athenian  influence  in  promoting  the  cult  of  Demeter-
Thesmophorus  is  unmisteJcable  but  it  is  more  questionable
whether,  as  is  sometimes  assumed,  there  was  here  a  branch
of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  (3).  From  the  passage  of  Statius
cited  above  it  is  clear  that  there  was  some  kind  of  ceremony
of  a  mystic  character  in  which  the  beeuring  of  torches  was  a
prominent  feature.  Here  the  initiates  with  silent  but  rapid
course  acted  a  sort  of  religious  drama,  cis  they  accompanied
Demeter,  the  sorrowing  mother,  in  her  search  for  the  kidnapped
Persephone  (4).  Capasso  supposed  that  comj>etitions  in  poetry,
if  not  in  athletics,  were  held  in  conjunction  with  festivals  of
this  divinity,  and  cited  a  passage  of  Statius,  who  speaks  of
receiving  at  Neapolis  Cerealia  dona.  But  the  reference  is  rather
to  wreaths  of  grain  which  the  victorious  competitor  in  poetry


(1)  Stat,  sil   IV,   8.   50.  quoted  on  p.   64  (1)  Cp.  Capasso-De  Petia,  Napoli
greco-romana    77,

(2)  Bloch.    Kora    und   Demeter,    Roscher    II.    1329.    1331  ;   Kern.   Demeter,
r.-W.   IV.  2752;  Famell.   The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States   III.   75   f..   105.

(3)  Bloch.  Roscher   II.   1337;  Gruppe  1496;   FarneU   201.

(4)  Foucarat.    Les   mysteres    d'E\eusis   464;    Farnell    III.    181;  Capasso-De
Pctra  78.    184  (212).

-  185  -


received   at   the  celebrated   games   in   honor  of  Augustus   (I).

The  priesthood  of  Demeter,  which  sometimes  at  least  was
held  for  life,  was  considered  an  honor  worthy  of  matrons  in
the  highest  social  position.  Two  of  their  names  have  been
preserved.  The  first  is  that  of  Tettia  Ceista,  who  died  in  71
A.  D.  after  having  filled  her  office  in  an  exemplary  manner;
in  return  for  her  faithfulness  as  well  as  her  liberality  in  pro-
viding statues  of  the  gods  to  beautify  the  city  she  received
the  tribute  of  a  statue  and  a  crown  and  was  buried  at  public
expense  (2).  The  other  priestess,  recorded  in  an  inscription
the  genuineness  of  which  has  been  doubted,  was  the  matron
Cominia  Plutegenia,  who  clearly  belonged  to  a  family  of  some
note  (3).  A  third  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  found  at
Pompeii,  which  some  scholars  have  treated  as  of  Neapolitan
origin  because  the  divinity  is  called  legifera  and  a  Greek  version
precedes  the  Latin  (4).  It  will  be  treated  among  the  cults  of
Pompei.

Neapolis  was  extremely  influential  in  spreading  and  popu-
larizing the  worship  of  Demeter  throughout  Italy.  At  the  close
of  the  period  of  the  Roman  Republic,  after  Cumae  had  suffered
a  great  decline,  this  city  and  Velia  were  the  two  great  centers
for  the  propagation  of  the  Demeter  cult  in  its  original  Greek
form.  According  to  a  statement  of  Cicero  the  priestesses  who
served  the  goddess  at  Rome  came  from  these  localities,  and
the  women  who  are  named  in  inscriptions  attributed  to  Pom-
peii and  Puteoli  perhaps  had  a  similar  origin  (5).  In  an  in-
scription already  cited  there  is  apparently  an  allusion  to  a
band   of   women   living  near   the   temple  who   devoted   them-

(1)  Capasso-De  Petra.  op.  cit.   184  (212);  Stat,  sil  V.  3,  lib -111  x

E)    mihi  quod    tantum   patrias   ego    uertice    frondes
so'aque   Chalcidicae    Cerealia  dona  coronae
te    sub    teste   tuli.

(2)  /.  a.  XIV.  760  =  C.  /.  G.  5838=Vaglieri  1735.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV.  756a=C.  /.  G.   5799=Vaglieri   1740.

(4)  /.  G.  XIV.  702  =  C.  /.  G.  5865=Vaglieri  1865.  Tspsvxia  napa|i(5vy]
tdpsia  Ai^lJiyjxpos  BsafiocpdpoD.  Cp.  the  comment  of  Franz  on  No.  5865:  BelocK
52 ;    Capasso-De    Petra,    op.  cit.   78.

(5)  C*c.  Balb.  55:  Has  sacerdotes  uideo  fere  aut  Neapvolitanas  aut  Ve-
lienses  fuisse,  foederatarum  sine  dubio  ciuitatum.  C.  I.  L.  X,  1812;  7.  G.  XIV,
702.  See   p.  26.

-    186  -


selves  to  the  goddess  under  the  charge  of  a  priestess  (I).
Perhaps  these  women  formed  a  school  of  instruction  from
which  experts  in  ritual  went  out  to  supply  demeuids  from
other  communities.

The  location  of  her  temple  is  unknown,  but  as  usual  the
historians  and  antiquarians  of  Naples  have  given  several
opinions  on  the  subject.  Fabio  Giordano  put  it  where  the
church  of  S.  Giorgio  Maggiore  now  stands,  while  Capaccio
and  Corcia  more  plausibly  favored  the  site  of  S.  Gregorio
Armenio;  in  any  csise  it  is  supposed  to  have  stood  in  the
southern  part  of  the  city  (2).  According  to  Beloch's  hypothesis
it  was  located  in  this  district  on  the  lower  decumanus  to  which
the  goddess  in  consequence  gave  her  name  (3).  It  should
be  noted  that  if  this  view  is  true,  the  shrine  was  much  more
centrally  located  than  seems  to  have  been  the  case  at  Cumae,
Pompeii  and  perhaps  in  other  Campanian  towns.

DIOSCURI.

The  last  divinities  included  by  Statius  in  his  roll  of  dii
patrii  are  Castor  and  Pollux,  who  received  here  the  same  vener-
ation as  at  Sparta.  (4)  No  definite  information  is  at  hand
about  their   functions,    but  they  must   have   been  the   special


(1)  /.  G.  XIV,  760  =  C.  /.  G.  5838,  where  lepd?  is  supplied,  b  (Ispos)
twv  '{MVOLiY.CS'i   olxoij  ;    Capasso-De   Petra  op.    cit.    78.

(2)  Ftabio  Giordano,  cited  by  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  184;  Capaccio,
Hiatoria  NeapolHana  I,  189;  Corcia,  Storia  delle  due  Sicilie  II,  215.  It  is  re-
ported that  statues  and  columns  were  removed  from  S.  Gregorio  as  well  as
reliefs  representing  the  rape  of  Persephone  and  the  search  of  Demeter.  A  high
relief,  depicting  a  devotee  with  torch  and  basket  is  cited  by  Capasso  as  beneath
the  arch  of  the  tower  of  this  church,   Capasso-De   Petra   op.   cit.    78.

(3)  Beloch  70.

(4)  Stat.  sil.  IV,  8,  52:

— et  uos,  Tyndaridae,  quos  non  horrenda  Lycurgi
Taygeta  umbrosaeque  magis  coluere  Therapnae.
The  statement  of  Miss  Taylor  in  reference  to  Ostia  {Cults  of  Ostia  25)  that
the  Dioscuri  are  not  known  to  have  had  a  temple  in  amy  other  port  town  must
be  taken  to  include  only  those  of  Roman  foundation ;  otherwise  it  is  contra-
dicted by  the  example  of  Neapolis.  But  as  the  author  cites  Puteoli  in  the  same
passage,    the   assertion   seems   intended   to   be   of   general   application.

-   187  -


protectors  of  the  cavalry  and  of  seamen.  (I)  A  series  of  bronze
coins,  exhibiting  on  one  side  a  besu-dless  male  face  and  on  the
other  a  galloping  horseman,  has  been  regarded  sis  a  reference
to  the  Dioscuri,  but  this  identification  is  not  certain.  (2)  With
the  supposition  that  these  figures  really  allude  to  the  Twins,
it  is  not  necessary  to  see  the  influence  of  Tarentum,  for  the
local  cult  was  importzuit  enough  to  account  for  their  presence.
(3)  The  dedication  of  statues  of  the  Dioscuri  in  the  year
171  A.  D.  by  two  athletes,  who  were  victorious  in  the  quin-
quennial games  has  already  been  discussed.  In  that  instance
these  gods  were  brought  into  connection  with  the  phratry  of
the  Eumelidai.   (4)

Unlike  the  temples  of  Apollo  and  Demeter,  that  of  Caistor
and  Pollux  can  be  definitely  located,  and  in  fact  a  portion  of
it  has  continued  to  remain  till  the  present.  Its  survival  is  due
to  the  circumstance  that  it  W2is  incorporated  into  the  church
of  S.  Paolo  Maggiore  at  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  an
event  recorded  in  an  inscription  of  the  Renaissance.  (5)  The
cult  of  the  Dioscuri  w£is  therefore  carried  on  in  the  very  center
of  the  old  town  in  the  northwestern  corner  of  the  Forum;  (6)
the  entrance  of  the  shrine  faced  the  central  decumanus,  which
followed  the  line  of  the  modern  Strada  de  Tribunali.  This
building  was  undertaken  by  T.  lulius  Tarsus,  who  agreed  to
provide  not  only  the  building  but  also  the  various  accessories

(I)  See  p.   66.
(2)  A.  Sambon    192  and  series  VIII   278;   Garrucci  83.

(3)  Minervini.  Ball.  No^.  n.  a.  VI  (1857)  59.

(4)  /.  G.  XIV  748.

(5)  Et  dirutis  marmoribus  Castori  et  Polluc'  falsis  diis  d'catis,  nunc
Petro  et  Paulo  ueris  diuis  ad  faciliorem  ascensum  opus  faciendum  curauerunt
clerici  regulares  MDLXXVIII.  The  transformation  is  further  alluded  to  in  coup-
lets inscribed  on  the  front  of  the  church  beneath  the  figures  of  Peter  and  Paul.

Audiit  uel   surdus,   Pollux  cum  Castore  Petrum

nee    mora,    praecipiti    mar  more    uterque    ruit.

Tyndaridas  uox   missa    ferit,    peJma    integra   Petri   est,

diuidit   ac   tecum,    Paule,   trophea   libens.
John   the   Deacon,    Gesta   episcoporum  Neapolitanorum    (for    the    years   801  -607)
50  in  Waitz.  Scrioiores  rerum  Longobardicaium  et  Italicarum  428.

{))  The  location  of  this  temple  in  the  Forum  was  recognired  as  far
back  as  Fabio  G'ordano  quoted  by  Cap£isso-De  Petra,  Napoli  greco-romana
178    (154).    Cp.    von  Duhn,    Der  Dioskurentempel    in   Neapcl   5.

-  188  -


of  worship  contained  within  it.  He  seems  not  to  have  lived  to
finish  his  undertaking,  as  it  was  completed  and  dedicated  by  a
freedman  named  Pelagon.  This  inscription  was  chiselled  upon
the  Eurchitrave  in  two  lines;  the  original  does  not  exist  except
in  a  small  fragment  recovered  in  1901,  but  it  was  copied  earlier
when  the  facade  of  the  temple  was  still  in  place.  (1)  As  lulius
Teu-sus  was  probably  a  freedman  of  Tiberius  the  Emperor,
and  Pelagon  seems  to  have  been  a  eunuch  mentioned  as  an  of-
ficer under  Nero,  the  date  of  the  edifice  to  which  the  inscrip-
tion alludes  is  indicated  as  about  the  middle  of  the  first  century
of  our  era.    (2)

Of  course  this  was  not  the  first  building  dedicated  to  these
deities  at  Neapolis,  and  Mallardo  is  clearly  mistaken  in  using
it  as  an  example  of  a  cult  which  received  a  shrine  only  at  a  late
day.  (3)  There  must  have  been  a  structure  dedicated  to  them
on  this  spot  from  the  date  of  the  arrival  of  settlers  from  Cumae,
and  it  has  been  pointed  out  as  eeu-ly  as  the  beginning  of  the
seventeenth  century  that  such  a  state  of  affairs  is  proved  by  the
remains  of  the  foundation  walls,  which  include  large  rectein-
gular  blocks  of  stone  cis  well  as  later  stretches  of  opus  reticula-
turn,  (4)  The  plan  of  the  Imperial  temple  hsis  been  methodi-
cally worked  out  by  Rega.  (5)  Architecturally  considered  it
belonged  to  the  prostyle  variety  with  six  Corinthian  columns
extending  in  a  line  across  the  front  and  two  more  at  the  sides
of  the  pronaos.  This  vestibule  was  reached  by  a  long  flight  of


'n  /.  G.  XIV.  714  C.  /.  G.  5791  :  Tt^epto^  'louXiorx;  Tdpooq  Atoaxoupoi?
xai  T^  n<5Xet  xov  vaov  xal  xa  sv  xi])  vacp  neXotytov  Zepaaxou  dTcsXeuGspog  xal
inixpOTZOi;,  ouvxsXsaai^  sx  xd)v  ISiwv  xaBtspwaev.  Spinazzola,  La  iscrtzione  greca
''-»!  tampio  dei  Dioscuri  in  'Arch.   stor.   Nap.  XXV  (1901)  315.

'?.)  Capas«o-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  79 ;  Correra,  //  tempio  dei  Dioscuri  a
Napoli  in  Atti  Nap.  XXIII  (1905)  part  2.214;  Franz.  C.  /.  G.  No.  5791  ;  Beloch
^3;  von  Duhn,  op  cit.  8.

(3)  Mallardo,  Memorie  Nap.  II  (1913)  166;  cp.  Summonte.  Historia  di  Na-
poli  I.   87.

(4)  Capaccio,  Historia  Ncapoiitana  I.  190;  Summonte,  op.  cit.  I  80;
Correra,  loc.  cit. ;  von  Duhn  9 ;  Beloch  loc.  cit.  In  the  seventeenth  century
«Guides»  a  fantastic  opinion  prevails  that  the  temple  of  the  Dioscuri  was
preceded  by  one  of  Ap>ollo  on  the  same  site.  Cp.  Sarnelli,  Guida  di  Napoli
117;  Summonte,  op.  dt,   I  85.

(5)  Regia,  Le  vestigia  del  tempio  di  Castore  e  Polluce.

-    189  -


steps  greater  in  number  than  the  one  which  serves  the  church
today,  as  the  level  of  the  £incient  pavement  was  considerably-
lower  than  at  present.  The  pediment  was  filled  with  a  series
of  sculptures  representing  a  group  of  divinities  harmoniously
arranged  to  fill  all  the  available  space.  The  main  part  of  the
building  was  a  cx>mmodious  cella.  (1)

To  judge  from  the  remarks  of  a  traveler  Cyriacus,  who
visited  Naples  in  1437  and  tells  of  seeing  a  temple  of  Castor
and  Pollux,  a  considerable  part  of  the  shrine  seems  to  have
stood  through  the  Middle  Ages  (2),  In  1590  began  an  exten-
sive restoration  after  which  only  the  portico  of  eight  columns
remained  from  the  ancient  structure;  its  pediment,  however,
was  still  adorned  with  sculptured  fragments  in  high  relief  of
various  gods  of  which  only  the  central  part  was  missing.  (3)
They  included  Apollo,  Sebethus  (or  Oceanus  ?),  a  personifica-
tion of  Campania  and  others  whose  identity  is  problematical.
The  whole  of  the  portico  was  demolished  by  a  violent  earth-
quake in  1688  with  the  exception  of  two  of  the  pillars,  which
still  stand  in  their  old  places.  Two  torsos  belonging  to  large
sculptured  figures  were  discovered  during  the  rebuilding  of  the
church  and  were  built  into  the  front  wall.  They  have  been
identified  cis  Castor  and  Pollux,  but  whether  they  served  as
acroteria  on  the  summit  of  the  gable  or  stood  in  the  middle  of
the  pediment  is  disputed.  (4)

Here  as  in  many  other  cases  where  temples  were  transform-
ed into  churches  the  old  ideas  connected  with  the  place
largely  remained.  The  two  saints  Peter  and  Paul  took  over
the  activity  of  Castor  and  Pollux  as  gods  who  influenced  the

(1)  TTie  reconstruction  of  the  temple  is  pictured  by  Rega  op.  cit.  1  ;
^ca  Duhn  9;   Capas-o-De  Petra  PI.   XII;   Correra  227.

(2)  Cyriacus,  quoted  by  Kaibel  /.  G.  XIV,  714  and  at  greater  length
by  Mommsen  C.   /.   L.   X.    p.   XXXVI.

(3)  A  design  of  the  front  of  the  building  drawn  in  1540  by  Francesco
d'Olanda  shows  that  the  central  sculptures  had  already  fallen.  Cp.  von  Duhn
9.  Various  references  to  the  building  occur  in  the  work  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury writers  such  as  Pighius  and  Surgente.  Ihe  history  of  the  building  is  given
by    Correra    214.

(4)  Capasso-De  Petra  187;  Rega  12;  von  Duhn  12-20;  Correra  224.
They  are  said  to  have  fallen  miraculovsly  as  the  result  of  a  visit  of  St.  Peter.
Correra   225.

-    190    -


weather.  They  became  Neapolitan  weather  saints;  one  opened
and  the  other  closed   the  floodgates   of  Heaven.    (I)

Another  saint,  however,  more  commonly  assumed  the  pre-
rogatives of  the  Twins  as  saviors  on  the  sea.  This  was  St.
Elmo,  whose  name  is  generally  expledned  eis  a  corruption  of
St.  Erasmus.  (2)  It  has  been  suspected  that  on  the  spot  where
the  castle  of  S.  Elmo  now  stands  there  was  situated  previously
a  chapel  of  the  saint  and  still  earlier  a  shrine  of  Castor  and
Pollux.  In  both  cases  patrons  of  navigation  would  be  appro-
priately honored.  (3)

HERACLES.

As  elsewhere  in  Campania  the  worship  of  Heracles  or
Hercules  flourished  at  Neapolis,  where  he  is  said  to  have  tar-
ried on  his  journey  from  Spain  to  Sicily.  That  it  was  introduced
here  by  the  Rhodians  and  not  derived  through  the  medium  of
Cumae  has  already  been  declared  to  be  its  most  probable
origin.  (4)  An  inscription  ascribed  to  this  city  records  the
fact  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  regio  Herculanensis  decreed  a
statue  to  a  benefactor  Munatius  Concessianus.  (5)  Documents
of  the  Middle  Ages  which  mention  this  district  by  the  name
Herculensis  call  it  also  furcillensis ,  thus  apparently  indicating
the  quarter  of  the  present  Strada  Forcella.  Pontano  who  evi-
dently refers  to  the  same  place,   mentions  a  district  ad  Her-

(1)  Tred»,  Das  Heidenium  in  der  rom.  Kirche  II,  313;  Jaisle,  Die  Dios
ktiren  als  Retter  zur  See   bei   Griechen   und  Komern  38,    39.

(2)  Acfa  sanctorum  June  I,  213,  C;  Encycl.  Briiannica,  St.  ElJmo's
Fire  XXIV.  1.  But  cp.  R.   Harris.  Boanerges  206.

(3)  Jaisle,  op.  dt.  69.  Cp,  Jaireson,  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art.  II,
700;  Harris,  Cult  of  the  Heavenly  Twins  in  Trans,  of  'he  Third  Inter.  Con-
gress for  the  History  of  Religions  (1908)  II,  176.  For  the  traditions  attached  to
this  saint  see  Acta  Sanctorum  June  I,  206  f.  Harris,  Boanerges  201  (6),  dem-
cOn^rating  the  displacement  of   the    Dioscuri    by  St.    Michael,    cites   a    church

dedicated  to  that  saint  which  was  destroyed  by  the  last  great  outbreak  of  Mt.
Vesuvius,    but   does   not    give  its   precise   location.

(4)  Dion.   Hal.   I.   43.

(5>  C.  /.  L.    X,    :492  =  D.    34>9-VagIieri   1732:    Cncessaani.    L.    Munatia

Concessiemo    obque    testimonia    amor';    sincerissimi    reg.    primaria    splendi-

dissima    Herculanensium    patrono    mirabili    statuam    ix>nendam    decreuit.

-    191    -


culis  uiam.  (I)  The  region  denoted  by  the  name  of  Heracles
thus  lay  m  the  eastern  part  oi  town,  and  in  this  locality  near
the  Porta  t'urcillensis  Gabrici  decides  that  he  had  a  shrine.  (2)
His  name  has  been  likewise  preserved  in  connection  with  the
church  of  S.  Maria  ad  Ercole  (near  S.  Agostino),  which  was
later  called  S.  Elegio  de'  ferrari.  (3)  A  reference  to  the  god  is
seen  upon  the  reverse  of  silver  obols  of  the  second  half  of  the
fourth  century  B.  C,  where  he  is  portrayed  in  the  act  of  stran-
gling a  lion.  (4)  The  same  obols  and  bronze  money  of  the
same  period  or  a  little  later  exhibit  a  beardless,  laurel  crowned
head,  which  is  sometimes  identified  as  a  representation  of
Apollo.  But  the  broad  neck  and  somwhat  coarse  features  of
this  figure  are  more  suitable  for  Hercules  than  for  the  other
divinity.  (5)  Although  this  series  may  show  Tarentine  influ-
ence as  is  believed  by  most  numismatists,  this  supposition  is
unnecessary  to  account  for  the  presence  of  the  god  whose  cult
was  of  considerable  importance  in  the  community.   (6)

A  Latin  inscription  refers  to  the  construction  of  an  aedi'
cula  by  the  demarch  P.  Vergilius  Restitutus  in  honor  of  Her-
cules Inuictus.  Capasso  wished  to  locate  it  nezu*  the  Strada  Arih
ticaglia  in  the  northern  part  of  the  old  town,  because  the  in-
scription was  found  there,  but  this  circumstance  offers  no  ac-
ceptable evidence.  (7)  If  Neapolis  was  the  Greek  city  which
Petronius  had  in  mind,  another  reference  may  be  added  to  the

(1)  Libellus  miraculorum  S.  Agrippini,  quoted  by  Capasso,  Monu-
menta  ad  Neapolitani  ducatus  historiam  pertinentia  I,  325  and  Mazochio,  De
sanctorum  Neapolitanae  ecclesiae  episcoporum  cultu  342.  Capasso-De  Petra,
Napoli  greco-romana  169.  (98);  Correra.  Riv.  it.  di  num.  XVI  (1903)  191;  Pon-
tano,   D3    hello   Neapolitano    (ed.    Gravier,    Naples    1769)    144.

(2)  Gabrici,  Reliquie  di  Napoli  antica  in  Atti  dell'accad.  pont.  XIX
(1914)  memoria  7  bis.    1,    10.

(3)  Capasso-De  Petra,   op.   cit.    170   (109).

(4)  A.  Sambon  1,  219  Nos.  427-434.

(5)  The  identification  with  Apwllo  is  favored  by  A.  Sambon  (doubt-
fully) 180  (cp.  270  No.  705);  Poole,  Cat.  Gr.  Coins  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  Italy  108;
Garrucci  85  Nos.  23,  24.  The  claims  of  Hercules  are  advanced  by  Dressel.
Beschreihung  der  anti\en  Miinzen  III  123  No.  143  and  by  Correra.  Osserva-
zioni  intorno  ad  una  moneta  di  Neapolis  in  Riv.  it.  di  num.  XVI  (1903)  193.
Other  numismatists  as  Head  Hist.    rum.    (1)  33   leave   the   question   undecided.

(6)  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  VI  (1858)  59.  Hercules  appears  in  the
Campanian   region   on   the   coinage   of   Capua   and    Teanum.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1478  =  D.  6454.

-   192  -


I


evidence  for  Heracles.  Here  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  portico
of  his  temple,  where  Lichas  had  been  insulted.  (1)  That
there  was  a  temple  at  Neapolis  besides  the  aedicula  alluded  to
above  may  be  accepted  without  question,  but  it  is  more  dif-
ficult to  determine  its  site.  Certain  local  topographers  supposed
that  it  occupied  the  site  of  one  of  the  churches  in  the  southeast-
em  part  of  the  city.  Later  students  identified  its  location  with
that  of  the  importzuit  church  of  S.  Giovsuini  Maggiore  near  the
southwestern  edge  of  the  old  town  and  the  harbor.  (2)  As  a
marble  head  of  the  youth  Antinous  was  discovered  here,  it  was
once  supposed  that  a  temple  had  been  erected  in  this  spot  by
the  Emperor  Hadrieui  for  his  favorite  either  alone  or  as  a
member  of  a  Pantheon.  (3)  In  accordance  with  this  belief
an  inscription  giving  a  history  of  the  edifice  was  placed  above
the  church  door;  it  begins  with  the  words;  templum  hoc  ab
Hadriano  imp.  exsfrucfum.  But  fragments  of  inscriptions  discov-
ered about  the  vicinity  of  the  building  indicate  that  it  was
constructed  by  one  of  the  Emj>erors  preceding  Hadrizm.  Dur-
ing a  restoration  of  the  church  a  fragmentauy  inscription  in
honor  of  Hercules  was  uncovered,  which  has  lent  probability
to  the  suggestion  that  he  had  a  shrine  here.  But  the  frequency
with  which  pieces  of  marble  were  carried  away  from  their
original  site  2ind  employed  in  building  operations  elsewhere
does  not  permit  a  sure  identification.  (4)  Pontano  claims  to
have  beheld  many  ((  monumenta  »  of   this   god.    (5).

(1)  Petron.  106:  Sed  Lichas  memor  adhuc  uxoris  corruptae  contumeli-
arum  quas  in  Herculis  portici   acceperat .

(2)  Capas8o-De  Petra,  op.  cii.   170  (109).

(3)  Pontano.  De  Bello  Neapolitano  VI  146  (ed.  of  Gravier  Naples  1769);
Fabio  Giordano,  quoted  by  Lasena,  DeU'antico  ginnasio  napoletano  104;
Ignarra,    De   Phratriis   201.    The    latter    believed   that   Hadrian    had    instituted    a

Pantheon,  wishing  to  minimize  the  apf>arent  attention  to  Antinous.  This
opinion  is  still  held  by  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  d.   rom.  Kirche   I,   9.

(4)  /.  G.  XIV,  731  ;  Garrucci  in  Galiani  Rivista  napoletana  If  (1873)
Feb.  22  (known  to  me  only  in  the  citation  of  Capass-.-De  Petra  201  (295)  er-
roneously saw  an  allusion  to  Tiberius ;   Caligula   , Claudius,   or   Nero  may   have

been  named.  Sogliano  Di  un  epigrafe  greca  in  14 rch.  ator.  Nap.  I  (1876)  565
is  mistaken  in  asserting  as  a  proof  for  the  temple  here  that  no  other  shrine
of  Hercules  could  be  found  between  Cumae  and  the  promontory  of  Minerva,
/.il  that  can  safely  be  said  is  that  their  existence  can  not  be  absolutely  proved.

(5)  Pontano,  op.  cit.  VI  144.  For  the  possibility  of  Heracles  as  a  god
wor8hipi>ed  in  one  of  the  phratries  see  p.  172.

-    193   -

13


DIONYSUS.

As  elsewhere  in  Campania  the  cult  of  Dionysus  flourished
at  Neapolis,  and  this  locality  did  its  pait  in  the  propagation  of
the  mysteries  which  developed  such  excesses  in  the  North.
The  god  was  revered  under  the  designation  Hebon,  a  form  of
the  cult  which  has  not  been  found  elsewhere.  The  name
oeems  to  allude  to  his  natural  physical  vigor  and  his  youthful
zest  for  life;  yet  he  was  not  portrayed  as  a  youth  but  rather
as  an  old  man  of  the  type  adopted  by  the  Greeks  for  the  depic-
tion of  Dionysus  Bassareus.  (1)  In  giving  resisons  for  sup-
posing .that  Apollo  and  Liber  Pater  stand  for  the  same  deity,
Macrobius  says  that  the  latter  was  conceived  under  different
foims  representing  various  ages,  one  of  which  was  that  of  an
elderly  beeu*ded  personage  whtjm  the  Neapolitans  revered  as
Hebon.  (2)  He  was  also  regularly  described  by  a  secondary
epithet  STut^pavsoTaTOc,  an  inclusive  word  referring  to  his  illus-
trious character  and  more  especially  to  his  power  and  will-
ingness to  give  ready  aid.  (3)  Two  inscriptions  mention  him
with  this  title;  one  is  a  dedication  by  C.  lunius  Aquila,  who
held  the  principal  official  positions  in  the  city,  the  other  by
P.  Plotinus  Glycerus  has  reference  to  his  initiation  into  the
Dionysiac  mysteries.  (4)

Nothing  is  known  about  the  details  of  this  ritual  in  spite  of  the
repeated  appearance  of  Dionysus  upon  Campanian  vases.
From  this  source  it  appears  that  a  female  deity  was  closely
associated  with  him,  either  Cora  or  a  similar  goddess.  Lenor-
mant  maintained  that  this  divinity  wets  Hebe  on  the  analogy


(1)  Cp.  Hesychius  ^pdcv  ;  Prellex-Robert  717;  Roscher,  Hebon,  Ro-
8cher  I,   1871  ;  Steuding,  Flora,  Rosdier  I,   1484;  Poland,  Gesch.  d.  gr.  Verein-

tvesens    226;Welcker,  Griechische    Gotterlehre  \l,   616,    who  derives    from '  Hpir].

(2)  Macrob.  I,  18,  9:  Item  Liberi  patris  simulacra  partim  puerili  aetate,
partim  iuuen's  fingunt.  Praeterea  barbata  8i>ecie,  senili  quoque,  uti  Graeci
eius  quern  Baoaapsa,  Hexn  quern  Bpiosa  appellant  et  ut  in  Campania  Neapoli-
tani  celebrant  "Hpcova  cognominantes.  Farnell  rightly  calls  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  passage  just  cited  represents  the  god  in  human  form  and  not  as
tauriform  with  human  face,  -  the  asertion  of  F.  Lenormant,  Bacchus,  D.-S.  U
620.  Farnell  V,  251    (d).

(3)  Franz,  C.  I.  G.  note  to  No.  5790.

(4)  i.  G.  XIV.  716  =  C.  /.  G.  5790  =  VagUeri  1081.


194


I


of  the  Dionysus  cult  at  Phlius  in  Argolis,  where  Dia-Hebe  had
a  psu-t  in  the  worship.  (1)  In  the  ceremonies  there  was  proba-
bly a  dramatic  representation  of  the  future  life.  (2)  The  ini-
tiates were  called  fjOsoi  or  iuuenes,  a  name  heurmonizing  with
the  cult  epithet  and  the  real  iiature  of  the  god  rather  than  with
his  actual  appearance.  (3)  The  language  used  in  reference
to  plycerus  indicates  that  he  had  reached  the  highest  degree
of  perfection  possible,  therefore  it  tends  to  show  that  there  was
a  regular  stage  of  advancement  as  was  elsewhere  com-
mon. (4)  From  the  reading  of  the  text  it  is  uncertain  whether
the  board  of  lau\elarchoi,  who  chose  him  to  be  senator  also
took  chcQ-ge  of  his  initiation.  The  duties  of  these  commissioners
are  not  well  understood  and  it  is  problematical  whether  they
should  be  classed  as  a  priesthood.  Capasso's  interpretation
that  they  were  priests  of  Dionysus  rests  upon  a  queer  mistrans-
lation of  the  inscription  last  mentioned,  by  which  he  represents
Glycerus  as  selected  to  become  one  of  the  lau\elarch.oi  and
afterwards  as  initiated  into  the  mystery  of  the  ssune  priest-
hood. (5)

Another  inscription  unearthed  in  the  site  of  the  theater
refers  to  a  different  phase  of  the  cult.  It  is  a  marble  pedestal
containing  a  statement  of  the  victories  of  the  flute  player  P.
Aelius  Antigenides,  a  citizen  of  both  Neapolis  and  Nicomedia,
who  was  a  demarch  in  the  former  city  gis  well  sis  high  priest  of
the  sacred  guild  of  the  theater  {i\  Upd  oovoSoc  6o{jl£Xi%7]).  The
inscription  is  dated  later  theui  138  A.  D.  and  probably  belongs
to  the  reign  of  Antoninus,  when  the  society  seems  to  have
reached  the   acme   of   its   power.   (6)     This   association   under

(1)  Paus.  II,  13,  3;  Strab.  VIII,  6,  24;  Lenormant,  Bacchus,  D.-S.
I.  637  and  La  grande  Gr^ce  I.  407;  Thalheim.  Hebe,  P.-W.  VII.  2580.

(2)  Farnell  V,  239  (b).  Cp.  the  cult  of  Dionysus  at  Tarentum,  Evans,
]our.  Hell  Stud.  VII  (1886)   10.

(3)  Poland,  Gesch  d.  gr.  V ereinsweaens  97  (3).

(4)  Cap>asso-De  Petra,  Napoli  greco-romana,    163   (41).

(5)  Capasso-De  Petra  3:  Al  dio  splendidissimo  Ebone  P.  Plozio  Gli-
cero  eletto  a  far  parte  deirillustrissimo  consiglio  dei  laucelarchi,  e  dopo  di
essere  stato  second©  il  costume  interamente  e  i>erfettaniente  iniziato  al  mini-
stero  di  questo  sacerdozio,  divenuto  professo  consacro  (il  presente  dono)  con
Licinio   Pudenziano   iuniore   etc.   Cp.    Kaibel,   /.    G.  XIV,    192.

(6)  I.  G.  XIV,  737;  Minervini,  Notizie  di  alcune  scoperie  in  Napoli  in
Bull.  Nap.   n.    8.   VII   (1859)   73;   Poland  op.   di.    145.

-  195  -


the  patronage  of  Dionysus  included  in  its  membership  poets,
musicians  and  actors,    -  all   in  short  whose   business   brought-
them  into  contact  with  the  stage ;  it  was  a  cosmopolitan  society
whose   miembers  were    largely    transienits   and    had  breuiches
under   the  Empire   in   the   leading  cities.    (1)     At  Neapolis    it
flourished  under   the  Republic.    In   the  turmoil   that   followed
Caesar's  assassination  we  are  told  that  Brutus  made  a  journey
to  Neapolis  to  procure  many'  artists  of  the  guild  of  Dionysus  for
use  at  Rome  in  his  efforts  to  amuse  the  people.  (2)  In  the  reign
of  Hadrian,  who  especially  favored  the  actors  and  hence  receiv-
ed from   them   the  title  of  the  new     Dionysus,   the  society   at
Neapolis  passed  a  decree  in  honor  of  T.  lulius  Dolabella,  who
at  least  at  a  later  time  was  a  prominent  citizen  of  Nemausus
(Nimes)  in  Gaul,  The  service  rendered  to  the  actors  by  Dola-
bella is  unknown,  nor  is  it  clear  why  the  decree  was  peissed  at
Neapolis.  (3)  Since  the  religious  services  in  the  association  and
the  cult  of  Dionysus  were  doubtless  a  prominent  feature  of  its
activity,  the  high  priesthood     seems  to  have  been  an  office  of
honor.   (4)

Without  any  particuleu:  evidence  Capasso  wished  to  place
a  temple  of  Dionysus  Hebon  in  the  southwestern  quarter  of
the  old  city  at  or  near  the  church  of  S.  Severino,  where  cer-
tain remains  of  walls  have  beenj  discovered.  (5)  A  sixteenth
century  writer  Pighius  speaks  of  seeing  a  round  altar  used  as
the  bowl  of  a  fountain  with  reliefs  of  the  Sirens,  Hebon,  and
Sebethus,  which,  if  the  notice  is  dependable,  would  be  impor-
tant as  suggesting  a  ritualistic  relationship  between  these
deities.  (6)  But  the  Sirens  as  a  group  were  not  worshipped  at
Neapolis,  and  the  association  of  gods  seems  unlikely  for  reli-
gious purposes.  If  the  group  is  not  merely  decorative,  the
writer   is  mistaken  in  his  report,    or  has   invented   the  whole

(1)  Liiders,  Die  dionysischen  Kiinstier  93  f.  Cp.  SO;  Friedlander,  Sit-
tengeschichte  II   (8)  90 ;  Foucart,  De  collegiis  scenicorum  artificum  apud  Grae-

cos   92   f. ;   Walzing,   Les   corporations   professionnsUes    IV   120.

(2)  Plut.  Brutus  21  :    xat  xwv  mpi  xov    Atovuaov    texv.xwv    auxd^    stg   Nsav
TCoXtv  xaxa^a^  evdxuxs  irXscoxotg.    Cp.   Foucart,  op.  cit.  91  ;   BelocK  59.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  XII.  3232  =  D.  5082.  with  notes.

(4)  Liiders.  op.  cit.   143;  Minervini,  op.  cit.  75,

(5)  Capasso-De  Petra.  op.  cit.  9.   162  (38).

(6)  Pighius,  Hercules  prodicius  (1609)  329.

-  196  -


i


matter,  gathering  together  the  most  characteristic  divinities  of
the  district  but  confusing  the  cult  of  one  Siren  at  Neapolis
with  that  of  the  three  at  Surrentum.

ATHENA.

The  Hkeness  of  Athena  appears  upon  several  issues  of
silver  coins  going  back  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  fifth  cen-
tury B.  C.  Chronologically  they  seem  to  have  been  nearly
contemporaneous  with  those  coins  which  first  show  the  head
of  the  nymph,  and  betray  the  predominance  won  by  the  Athen-
ians for  a  period  in  the  affairs  of  the  western  Greeks.  (1)
On  many  didrachmzis  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  and  onward
she  appears  wearing  an  Athenian  helmet,  —  a  style  of  coin
that  is  generally  considered  by  numismatists  to  express  the
influence  of  Thurii.  (2)  Though  the  form  of  the  coin  may
well  be  attributed  to  this  source,  it  is  incorrect  to  sissume  with
Beloch  that  the  appearance  of  the  goddess  herself  v/as  due  to
outside  influence.  Rather  was  it  caused  by  the  presence  of  a
cult  of  Athena  in  the  town,  which  was  introduced  or  strength-
ened by  the  surival  of  settlers  from  Athens  and  close  com-
mercial delations.  (3)  Other  coins,  generally  obols,  show
Athena  wearing  a  Corinthian  helmet,  a  type  which  numisma-
tists  attribute   to   Sicilian   influence.   (4)

No  traces  of  an  actual  worship  of  the  Athenian  deity  have
been  left,  although  the  cult  probably  had  some  importance.  On
the  other  hand  the  worship  of  another  Athena  is  attested  by

(1)  A.  Sambon  207,  174;  Correra,  Le  piu  antiche  monete  di  NapoH
in  Rend.  Nap.  XVI  (1902)  98;  E>ressel,  Beschr.  der  antiken  Munzen  III,  part.  I,
104.

(2)  A.  Sambon  208  f.  and.  La  cronologia  delle  monete  di  Neapolis  in
Rid.    ital    di   numis.   XV    (1902)    123;    Poole.  Num.    Chron.    Ill    (1883),    274.

(3)  Beloch  50.  but  cp.  Gr.  Gesch  II,  202;  Pais,  i4ncienf  ItaJy  218  and
Ricerche  star,  e  geog.  277;  A.  Sambon,  Riv.  it.  di  num.  XV  (1902)  122  (2).
It  is  worth  while  to  note  the  character  of  the  Athena  of  Thurii.  According  to
F.   Lenormant,    U   grande   Grkce   II,    338  and    Gazette   arch.    VI    (1880)    185-6,

who  is  followed  by  Head  87,  the  Thurian  coins  represent  Athema  Skyletria,
a  sea  divinity  honored  at  certaim  Faints  on  the  coast  of  Bruttium  and  lapygium.
Cp.   Lycoph.   Alex.   853   and  Scholia,   and  Hofer,   Skyletria,   Roscher,    IV,    1023.

(4)  A.  Sambon  I,   174,  215.

-    197   -


specific  evidence.  An  inscription  found  in  1892  outside  of  the
Porta  Capuana  preserves  the  name  of  a  public  priestess  Domi-
tia  Calliste,  and  so  we  are  justified  in  inferring  the  presence  of
a  shrine.  (I)  The  goddess  is  called  Athena  Sicilieaia,  a  token
that  the  cult  was  not  as  old  £is  the  colony  but  was  imported  at
some  later  period  from  Sicily  where  the  goddess  was  held  in
high  esteem  especially  at  Syracuse,  Agrigentum,  Himera  and
Camafina.  (2)  Gabrici,  calling  attention  to  the  relations
known  to  have  existed  in  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  B.  C.
between  Neapolis  and  the  island,  finds  in  them  a  means  for
the  extension  of  the  cult  to  the  former.  (3)  With  less  proba-
bility Pais  thinks  that  the  Athenian  cult  came  first  from  Sicily
to  Surrentum  as  a  result  of  Syracusan  commercial  activity
between  the  years  474-289  B.  C.  Later  according  to  this  opinion
Neapolis  obtained  jurisdiction  over  the  country  around  Sur-
rentum, and  then  took  over  and  maintained  the  worship  of
important  deities  established  there,  just  as  was  the  cEise  when
Rome  made  new  conquests.  (4)  There  is  no  definite  evidence,
however,  for  the  propagation  of  any  form  of  worship  from
Surrentum.

Although  the  evidence  for  this  cult  is  sc2inty  smd  it  is  not
recorded  in  literature,  it  ought  not  with  Correra  t3  be  consid-
ered as  essentially  a  private  cult,  since  there  is  a  clear  refer-
ence to  a  public  priestess.  (5)  This  woman  in  accordance
with  the  nature  of  her  office  was  installed  in  office  by  the  action
of  the  regular  municipal  senate.  Although  it  is  uncertain  to
what  extent  the  priests  of  the  community  were  considered  as
publici  and  by  what  distinction  they  were  separated  from  the
rest,  it  seems  evident  that  the  appearance  of  a  public  priest  is

(1)  N.  S.  1892,  202;  AoixixCa  KaXHaxY)  *Ae7)vdcc  Upsia  SixeX^c;  bnd
au(Y)xX7^xo(u)  bri[ioata.  ysvoiaivy).  Cp.  Colonna,  Scoperte  di  aniichita  in  Napoli
217;  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  228  and  Ricerche  sior.  e  geog.  288.  The  monument
is  reproduced  in  Ancient  Italy  Pis.  VII,  VIII  and  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  276.

(2)  Holm,  Gesch.  Siciliens  I,  178;  Ciaceri,  Culti  e  miii  nella  atoria  del'
Vantica    Sicilia    153    f.

(3)  Gabrici,  Rend.  Nap.  X  (1896)  31.

(4)  Pais.  Arch.  stor.  Nap.  XXV  (1900)  353.  Ancient  Italy  220  and  Ri-
cerche   stor.   e    geog.    280.

(5)  Correra,  L'iscrizione  napoletana  di  Domizia  Callista  in  !<4rcfi.  Stor.
Sic.  XVIII  (1893)  612.

-   198  -


an  indication  of  the  importance  of  the  cult  with  which  he  is
associated.  (1)  As  to  the  exact  action  of  the  decurions,  which
IS  recorded  here,  opinions  differ  on  account  of  the  confused
and  concise  language  of  the  inscription.  Pais  thinks  it  refers
simply  to  the  selection  of  a  public  priestess ;  Gabrici  less  prob-
ably holds  that  Domitia  Calliste  was  already  serving  the
goddess  and  by  the  present  action  wsis  promoted  to  a  new
dignity  as  sacerdos  publica.  (2)  The  latter  dates  the  inscrip-
tion in  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  A.   D.  (3).

APHRODITE.

Aphrodite,  worshipped  under  the  designation  Euploea,
was  thought  to  be  a  goddess  whose  special  field  w£is  the  sea;
she  protected  the  shipping,  and  her  influence  was  salutary  in
calming  winds  and  waves.  (4)  Her  power  for  good  in  this
direction  is  expressed  twice  in  the  poetry  of  Statius,  where  she
is  called  omen  felix  carinis.  The  szune  poet  in  one  of  these
pgissages,  while  enumerating  in  regular  order  the  details  of
landscape  visible  from  Surrentum  includes  a  locality  called
Euploea  between  his  references  to  the  islands  Nesis  (Nisida)
and  Megalia  (Castel  delFOvo);  (5)  and  from  this  account
attempts  have  been  made  to  find  a  location  for  a  shrine.  It  is
not  explicitly  stated  that  the  point  of  land  here  called  Euploea
took  its  name  from  a  temple  of  this  goddess,  but  such  a  state
of  affairs  is  probable,  as  the  proper  site  would  be  an  eminence
overlooking  the  sea.  Mommsen,  who  is  followed  by  Hiilsen,
identified  the  Euploea  of  Statius  with  the  cliffs  of  Posilipo;  (6)
but  Beloch  and  Cocchia,  whose  views  are  more  generally  ac-

(1)  Heibst,  De  tacerdotiis  Romanorum  municipalibus  14.  Cp.  the  ap-
p>earance  of  the  Ceres  cult  in  Campsmia  with  public  prestesses  and  that  or
Venus   at    Pompeii;    also   E.    £.    IV,    89;    C.    I.    L.    VIII,    993.

(2)  Pais,  Arch.  Stor.  Nap.  XXV  (1900)  348,  '/4nc«enf  Italy  227  and.  Ru
cerche  288;    Gabrici,    Rend.    Nap.    X    (1896)   36.

(3)  Gabrici,   op.   cit.   32.

(4)  The  chief  shrines  of  Eupolea  are  listed  by  Preller-Robert  364  and
Jessen.    Euploia,    P.-W.  VI,    1225.    Cp.    Roscher,    Aphrodite,    Roscher    I.    402.

(5)  Stat.  «/.  11,  2,  29;  III.  1,  149.

(6)  Mommsen,  Inschnft  des  Pollius  Felix  in  Hermea  XVIII  (1883)  158;
Hulsen,  Euploia,  P.-W.  VI,  1226;  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  d.  rom.  Kirche  I,  9.

-    199    -


cepted,  believe  that  the  sanctuary  stood  on  the  heights  of
Pizzofalcone.  The  latter  indeed  has  shown  that  Statius  has
enumerated  in  strict  geographical  sequence  the  various  points
from  Monte  Gauro  to  Naples.  (1)  Furthermore,  this  spot
retained  a  reminiscence  of  the  cult  during  the  Middle  Ages  in
the  name  Euple.  (2)  Kaibel  sav^  in  a  Greek  inscription  an
allusion  to  a  series  of  quinquennial  games  that  were  celebrat-
ed originally  in  honor  of  Aphrodite  and  later  were  diverted
to  serve  the  glory  of  Augustus.  (3)  The  inscription  is  in  honor
of  a  certain  Seleucus  who  held  various  offices  in  the  city  and
Igistly  is  described  as  ap/ovia  tov  §ia  tusvts  Itcov  tl{xy]tlx6v.  The
phrase  was  understood  by  Kaibel  eis  a  reference  to  an  agon
presided  over  by  this  man,  but  is  better  taken  in  the  sense  of
an  ordinary  quinquennial  magistracy  with  censorial  pow-
ers. (4)  The  only  merit  of  Kaibel's  view  is  that  it  proposes
to  explain  the  mention  of  Aphrodite,  which  otherwise  has  not
been  satisfactorily  disposed  of.    (5).

LEUCOTHEA.

Another  goddess  of  the  sea,  similar  to  Aphrodite  Euploea,
W21S  Leucothea,  a  nymph  whose  cult  was  widely  diffused  in  the
Greek  world  not  only  in  Greece  itself  but  also  in  the  West  espe-
cially at  Massilia,  Velia,  Eind  Pyrgi.  (6)  Farnell  calls  attention
to  the  fact  that  she  was  closely  related  to  Aphrodite  Euploea

(1)  Cocchia,  La  tomba  di  Virgilio  in  Saggi  Filologici  III,  169;  Mau,
Pompeji  (2)  121  ;  Capasso-De  Petra,  XXIII ;  Beloch  83;  cp.  466;  De  Petra,  Le
Sirene   del  mar  tirreno  in  Atti  Nap.   XAV   (1908)    17.

(2)  Beloch  loc.  cii.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV,  745  =  C.  /.  G.  5796=Vaglieri  1741.  Cp.  /.   G.  XIV.  741.

(4)  Discussion  by  Civitelli,  /  nuovi  jrammenii  d'epigrafi  grechs  rela-
tive ai  Ludi  Augustali  di  Napoli  in  Atti  Nap.  XVII  (1894)  art  2.  No.  3,  60;
a  summary  of  the  above  article  is  foand  in  Rend.  Nap.  VII  (1893)  78  f.  Kaibel,
/.    G.    XIV.    p.    191  ;    Wissowa.    Wocher^s.    fur   das,,    phil.    XIV    (1897)    769.

(5)  Franz,  C.  /.  G.  Ill,  No.  5796  and  add.  p.  1255.  following  Marto-
relli  adopted  the  supplement  Ispsa  ;  Keil,  going  still  farther  in  the  recon-
struction of  the  text,  conjectured  suTcXota  inr  ead  of  sDvoia.  He  is  followed
by  Jessen,   Euploia,    P.-W.   VI,   1226.

(6)  Hofer,  Leucothea,  Roscher  II,  2014;  Pais,  //  culto  di  Atene  Siciliana  in
Arch.  stor.  Sic.  XXV  (1900)  353  =  Ancient  Italy  23]  ^Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  292;
Coxrera,  Sul  culto  di  Leucothea  in  Napofli  in  Studi  e  mat.  1  (1899)  73.

-   200   -


and  that  ordinsirily  both  divinities,  as  happened  here  at  Nea-
pK>lis,  were  revered  in  the  same  communities.  (1)  As  distin-
guished from  the  Sirens,  she  represented  properly  the  benefi-
cent effects  of  the  sea,  and  perhaps  stood  in  somewhat  the  same
relation  to  Parthenope,  eis  Athena  to  the  Sirens  at  Surrentum,
although  she  was  inferior  to  that  goddess  in  fame.  (2)  From
her  one  of  the  small  islands  neai  Capri  received  its  neune ;  but
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  this  is  cited  three  times  by  the  Latin
authors  nothing  is  known  of  the  nature  of  the  place  or  the
reason  why  it  received  such  a  name,  since  it  always  occurs  in
a  geogfraphical  enumeration  without  comment.   (3)

The  cult  at  Neapolis  was  probably  derived  from  Velia,  the
most  importsmt  center  in  southwestern  Italy.  It  is  definitely
attested  only  by  an  inscription  discovered  in  a  sepulchral
chamber  excavated  in  1895.  Among  a  number  of  simple  epi-
taphs written  upon  the  walls  was  one  alluding  to  Aristagore,
who  had  served  as  a  priestess  of  Leucothea.  (4)  To  the  same
cult  may  belong  a  statue  in  the  National  Museum  at  Naples,
which  was  discovered  in  the  remains  of  the  Roman  villa  of
Lucullus  in  the  district  of  Posilipo  (Marechiano).  Originally  it
stood  in  a  niche  which  may  have  served  as  a  little  shrine.  The
image,  which  comprises  a  female  figure  riding  a  seahorse,
was  first  identified  as  Venus  Euploea  or  as  a  Nereid,  but  more
recently  by  Correra  eis  Leucothea.  (5)  The  same  combination
is  depicted  upon  a  gem  in  the  British  Museum,  which  was
considered  by  King  as  a  representation  of  Venus  Euploea  and
is  listed  in  the  Museum  Catalogue  as  Thetis  or  a  Nereid.  (6)


{])  Farnell  II,  637.

(2)  Pais  loc.  cit.  For  a  recent  theory  of  the  nature  of  this  deity  see
FarneJl,  Ino-Leukothea   in   Jour.  Hell  Stud.   XXXVI    (1916)  36   f

(3)  Plin.   nat:   III.   83;  Mela  II,    121  ;  Mart.   Cap.   VI.   644.

(4)  Gallsmti,  //  sepolcreto  greco  sotto  il  palazzo  di  Donato  in  Atti  Nap.
XVII  (1895)  part.  1.  No.  3.  11;  De  Petra.  Mon.  ant.  VIII.  228;  See  Atti  Nap.
PI.  Ill ;  Correra,  op.  cit.  75.

(5)  Nat.  Mus.  No.  6026;  Reinach,  Rep.  stat.  grec.  et  rom.  II  411,  No.
1  ;  Avellino.  Memor.  della  r.  Accad.  ercol.  V.  248.  Incorrectly  restored  accord-
ing to  Correra,   op.   cit.   77.

(6)  King,  Handbook  of  Engraved  Gems  (2)  230;  Brit.  Mus.  Cat.  F548 ;
Imhoof-Blumer  und  Keller,   Tier  und  Pflanzenbilder  auf  Miinzen  und  Gemmen

PI.    XXVI,    24.    Cp.    Furtwangler,    AnHke    Gemmen    II,    note    to    PI.    XIII,    43

-  201    -


The  identity  of  the  statue  can  not,  therefore,  be  definitely  de-
termined.

The  myth  of   this   goddess   is   among   those   described   by
Philostratus  as  portrayed  upon  a  Neapolitan  portico.   (I)

ARTEMIS.

The  part  played  by  Artemis  in  the  worship  of  one  of  the
phratries  has  already  been  explained.  (2)  In  addition  to  the
special  devotion  accorded  her  by  this  section  of  the  population,
she  was  recognized  as  a  divinity  by  the  city  as  a  whole.  Her
likeness  appears  on  a  series  of  bronze  coins  dated  in  the  first
half  of  the  third  century  B.  C.  Since  the  reverse  of  these  coins
and  not  those  bearing  the  likeness  of  any  other  deity  shows
constantly  the  figure  of  a  horn  of  plenty,  von  Duhn  suspects
that  she  was  looked  upon  as  a  Tyche  divinity.  (3)  Ihe
shrine  mentioned  in  a  Greek  inscription  discussed  under  the
gods  of  the  phratries  Wcis  not  a  public  temple  as  assumed  by
Mollardo.  (4)  A  temple  probably  existed,  but  in  that  case
must  have  been  erected  long  before  the  second  century  A.  D.
to  which  the  inscription  in  question  belongs.  Capasso  sissigned
to  Artemis  a  dedication  made  by  an  archon  C.  Andronicus
and  his  wife  in  which  the  name  of  the  god  who  received  the
gift  is  not  specified.  But  his  supposition  rests  only  on  the  cir-
cumstance that  the  stone  was  found  in  a  neighborhood  where
local  antiquarisms  had  erroneously  located  a  shrine  of  this
goddess.  (5)  In  fact  their  identification  of  the  temple  site
with  the  church  of  S.  Maria  Maggiore  has  very  little  evidence
to  support  it.

Imhoof-Blumer  and  Keller  suggest  Leucothee,   a  Nereid  or  Thetis  as  the  solu-
tion.   Cp.    Dougleis,    5ome   Antiquarian   Notes    258   (1).

(1)  Philostratus,  Imagines  76.

(2)  See  p.  170.

(3)  Von    Duhn,    Der   Dioskurentempel    in    Neapel    14;    A,    Sambon    191,
277.   Nos.   742-751;  Head  40;   Garrucci  86;   Poole,    Cat.    Gr.    Coins   in   the  Brit.

Mus.  Italy    118.

(4)  Mallardo,     Memorie    Nap.     II     (1913)     166;    Maiuri,     Studi     romani    I
(1913)  29.

(5)  Capasso-De    Petra,    Napoli   greco-romano   93,    198    (279);    Maiuri,    op.
cit.  28;  N.  S.  1896,  103:  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  d.  rom.  Kirche  1.  9;  II,  312.

-   202   -


RIVER  GODS,  SEBETHUS  AND  ACHELOOS.

Pecaliar  to  the  Neapolitans  v/as  the  worship  of  the  god  of
their  local  river  the  Sebethus  or  Sepethus.  This  is  an  illustration
of  a  common  feeling  about  the  sanctity  of  rivers,  which  was
manifested  not  only  elsewhere  in  Campsuiia  as  in  the  case  of
the  Volturnus  and  the  Seurnus  but  also  generally  throughout
Italy,  where  the  Numicus,  the  Clitumnus,  and  the  Po  exem-
plify the  s£une  sentiment.  (I)  A  rare  typ)e  of  obols,  dated  in
the  fourth  century  B.  C,  exhibits  on  the  obverse  the  head
of  a  young  river  god  marked  with  the  legend  Xt^tusiGoc;,  and  on
the  reverse  a  winged  female  figure  variously  explained  as  Nice,
Parthenope,  or  a  nymph  Sebethis,  whom  tradition  made  the
mother  of  OebaJus,  an  early  king  of  this  region.  (2)  This
river  god's  shrine  stood  at  some  point  in  the  city,  as  an  inscrip-
tion records  a  restoration  by  P.    Meuius  Eutychus.   (3)

While  Sebethus  is  regularly  represented  as  a  young  man
with  horned  forehead,  it  is  probable  that  another  river  god
Achelous  is  alluded  to  in  the  figures  of  the  man  headed  bull
which  aie  found  upon  so  many  issues  of  Neapoliteoi  coins.
Some  numismatists  have  attempted  to  explain  this  design  as  a
likeness  of  Dionysus  Hebon,  and  a  prolonged  controversy  has
raged  on,  this  subject.  (4)  But,  although  the  bull  was  often
associated  with  this  god,  it  is  not  certain  that  he  was  himself
portrayed  in  the  form  of  that  animal  with  the  addition  of  a
man*s  head.  (5)  Likewise  it  is^  impossible  to  prove  definitely


(1)  For  the  prevalence  of  a  river  god  on  coins  see  Head,  index  p.  955.
Cp.  Waser  Flussgoiter,  P.-W.  2774;  Mirone,  Lea  divin.  fiuv.  rep.  sur  les  mon.
ant.  de  la  Sidle  in  Rev.  Num.  XI.   (1917-18)  I  f.

(2)  Verg.  Aen.  VII.  734  and  Serv. ;  Hofer.  Sebeithos  and  Sebethis,
Roscher    IV.   579-580;   A.    Sambon    181.    218.    No.    422;   Minervini.   Bull    Nap.

n.   8.   V   (1857)    182.   VI    (1858)   57;   Garrucci.   Bull    Nap.    n.    s.    I   (1852)    17;   L.
Sambon.    141  ;  Quaranta.  Mem.  della  r.  accad.  ercol  VI   (1853)  383  f.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1480  =  D.  3901  ;  P.  Meuius  Eutychus  aediculam  rest.
Sebetho.

(4)  P.    Gardner.    The   Types   of   Greek   Coins   88;   L.    Sambon    151;    Eckhel.
Doct,  num.  vet.   I,    138;  Panofka.  Musie  Blacas  94.

(5)  Farnell  V,  251;  Thramer,  Dionysus,  Roscher  I,  1150;  A.  W.  Cur-
tius,  Der  Stier  des  Dionysos  23  f . ;  Garrrcci  83;  A.  Sambon  181.  who  gives  a
list    of    authorities.

-  203  -


that  this  is  Achelous;  but  the  figure  of  the  human  faced  bull  in
other  instances  as  at  Laus  in  Lucania  and  at  Selinus,  Gela,  and
Catana  in  Sicily  almost  certainly  signifies  a  river  god,  and
unless  some  local  deity  is  represented  on  the  coins  of  Neapolis
the  design  must  refer  to  Achelous,  the  only  one  of  the  many
in  river  cults  which  obtained  a  more  than  local  distinction.  (1)
Again,  the  people  of  Neapolis  would  have  an  interest  in  this
cult  because  according  to  the  most  common  version  of  the
legend  this  divinity  wets  the  father  of  Parthenope  and  the  other
Sirens.  (2)  In  some  of  these  coins  the  influence  of  Acarnania
has  been  seen,  where  an  agon  was  held  in  his  honor;  if  the
Neapolitan  coins,  as  is  probable,  were  issued  on  the  occasion
of  athletic  contests,  there  would  be  a  tendency  to  repeat  the
same  design  with  Achelous.  (3)  Some  authorities  ajs  A.
Sambon  and  Head,  while  granting  that  the  basic  notion  under-
lying the  design  is  that  of  Achelous,  believe  that  the  concep-
tion of  the  river  god  tended  more  and  more  to  be  assimilated  to
that  of  Dionysus  until  by  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.  C,
the  latter  predominated.  (4)  The  question  is  incapable  of
proof.

MINOR  CULTS.

Evidence  for  the  worship  of  Hera  is  wanting.  A  series  of
coins  bearing  her  likeness  surrounded  by  rays  has  been  assign-
ed doubtfully  to  this  city,  but  if  this  money  is  readly  a  product
of  the  Neapolitan  mint,  Hera's  appearance  upon  it  can  be
accounted  for  by  assuming  the  influence  of  the  coinage  of
Croton,    where   a   strong  cult   of  Hera  Lacinia   flourished.    (5)

(1)  A  list  of  the  loceJities  that  have  furnished  examples  of  this  type
is  given  by  Lehnerdt,  Heral^les  und  Acheloos  in  Arch.  Zeit.  XLIII  (1885)
III  (10).  For  the  prominence  of  Achelous  see  Stoll,  Acheloos,  Roscher  I,  7;
Wentzel,  Acheloos,  P.-W.  I,  214.  Cp.  Macdonald,  Coin  Types  92,  who  mini-
mizes the  religious  significemce  of  such  emblems,  and  P.  Gardner,  GreeJ^
River   Worship    in    Trans,    of   the   Royal   Society   of   Literature    ser.    2,    XI,  203.

(2)  Stodl  he.  cit.;  Weicker.  5eirenen,  Roscher  IV,  604;  Schol  Od.
XII.   39.

(3)  A.  Sambon  181;  Macdonald  100;  Imhool-Blumer,  Die  MUnzen
'Akarnaniens  in  Numis.   Zeits.   X  (1878)   14  f.

(4)  A.    Sambon    181  ;   Head   39.

(5)  Poole,  op.  cit.  94;  Farnell  I.  212;  Gruppe  370  (3).

-  204  -


ivlaiuri  compares  the  form  of  the  design  with  that  on  coins  of
Calchis,   and  associates   the  goddess  here  2m,d  at    Cumae.     (1)

A  sculptured  relief,  which  is  the  only  evidence  for  a  pos-
sible worship  of  Hephaestus,  has  been  treated  elsewhere.  (2)
Hermes  along  with  Pluto  is  named  in  an  inscription,  but  this
belongs  to  mythology  rather  than  to  religion.  (3).  On  the
mere  finding  of  a  stone  upon  which  was  c€urved  a  caduceus,
certain  writers  would  locate  a  temple  of  this  god  on  the  site
of  the  church  of  the  SS.  Apostoli,  but  it  is  unnecesseu-y  to
discuss  such  an  identification.  Capasso*s  attempts  to  find  the
location  of  temples  of  Aesculapius  and  the  Fates  rest  upon  a
similar  lack  of  evidence.  (4)  Nor  is  there  any  adequate  testi-
mony at  hand  for  supposing  that  the  hero  Orion  received  recog-
nition. Neai  the  hzirbor  was  found  a  marble  slab  bearing  the
likeness  of  a  nude  male  figure  with  dripping  curly  hair  and
a  drawn  sword,  which  was  identified  as  Orion  on  the  ground
that  the  hair  and  sword  were  symbolical  respectively  of  rain
and  storm.  (5)  But  it  is  not  clear  that  Orion  was  regulaurly
represented  in  this  way  and  that  the  type  wais  not  applicable
to  other  deities,  so  that  the  identification  may  be  doubted.  At
the  semnp  time  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  idea  that
Orion  received  suitable  recognition  in  this  community.  He
was  well  known  in  Euboea,  zind  had  a  real  cult  in  Boeotia
especially  at  Tanagra;  from  the  former  he  was  introduced
into  Messana  and  Rhegium,  and  may  have  been  brought  to  the
Chalcidian  colonies  in  Omripania.  (6)  A  temple  of  Victoria
was  assigned  to  Neapolis  by  Baudrillart,  but  there  is  no  evi-
dence for  its  existence.   (7)

A  passage  in  Lycophron  alluding  to  the  wanderings  of
Odysseus  states  that  he  would  set  up  on  Mt.  Lethaeum  a
column  in  honor  of  Pluto  and  Proserpina  and  would  affix  to  it

(1)  Maiuri,  Arcana  cumana  in  Ausonia  VI  (1911)  9.

(2)  See  p.   172.

(3)  y.  G.  XIV.  769.

(4)  Caracciolo,  De  aqcris  Neapol.  eccL  monumentis  293;  Corcia,  Storia
d.    due  Sicilie   II   225;   Capasso-De   Petra,    Napoli  greco-romana  57.    91.

(5)  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  98;  Franz.  C.  /.  G.   Ill,   p.   716.

(6)  Paus.  IX,  20,  3;  Capaccio,  Historia  Neapolitana  I,  198,  Gruppe  73;
Kiientzle,    Orion,    Roscher    III.    1031,    1036.

(7)  Baudrillart,  Lea  divinitis  de  7a  Victoire  en  Grece  et  en  Italie  87.

-  205  -


his  helmet.  No  such  place  in  Campania  is  known,  but  if  there
is  an  actual  reference  to  a  definite  spot  where  these  gods
were  honored,  the  steep  mount  may  possibly  refer  to  Posi-
lipo,  —  a  name  whose  significance  (Pausilypos)  is  suggested
by  the  word  Lethaeum  adopted  by  Lycophron.  (1)  One  of
the  months  in  the  Neapolitan  calender  bore  the  name  Pan-
theon (Ilaveswv),  which  calls  to  mind  the  month  XlavOsiOf;  in
Pergamum.  (2)  On  this  account  some  schoWs  have  assumed
a  cult  of  the  Pantes  Theoi  at  Neapolis  or  the  presence  of  a
Pantheon.  The  notion  advocated  by  Ignarra  in  the  eighteenth
century  that  such  a  temple  was  founded  by  Hadrian  and  stood
on  the  site  of  S.  Giovanni  Maggiore  has  already  been  examined
and  set  aside  as  untenable.  (3)  Franz  thought  that  a  festival
W21S  celebrated  in  honor  of  all  the  gods  collectively,  but  if  so,
nothing  is  known  about  it.  (4)  Finally  two  short  dedications
may  be  mentioned  here;  one  is  in  honor  of  Nemesis,  the  other,
made  by  a  slave,  is  a  tribute  to  Silvanus.  (5)  They  were  dis
covered  on  Mt.  Vesuvius  in  territory  belonging  to  Herculaneum
during  the  existence  of  that  city.  They  axe  assigned  by  Momm-
sen,  however,  to  the  second  century  A.  D.  and  hence  axe  too
late  in  point  of  time  to  have  belonged  to  Herculaneum.

ROMAN  CULTS.

Officials  belonging  to  the  state  religion  of  the  Roman
colony  apart  from  the  Imperial  cult  are  seldom  mentioned.  One
inscription  has  preserved  the  name  of  C.  Octauius  Verus,  who
held  the  position  of  augur  and  is  called  in  addition  a  flamen
Virbialis    and     aedilis     Augustalis.  (6)    Both  of     these     offices

(1)  Lycophron  Alex.  701-711  ;  Von  Holzinger's  edition,  comment  on  this
passage;    Gruppe    403    (5).

(2)  /.  G.  XIV.  759.  I.  16.  Cp.  Dittenberger.  Sylloge,  (2),  No.  592  =  Michel.
Recueil,  No.  519;  Hofer.  Pantheion,  Roschex  III.   1555.

(3)  Ignarra.  De  Phratriis   145.  See  p.    193.

(4)  Franz.  C.  /.  G.  III.  p.  717.  720.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1408  =  Vaglieri  1167;  Nemesi  sanct(ae)  sacr.  Q.  Pont(ius)
Euschemus  u.  s.  1.  m. ;  X.  1 409  =  Vaglieri  1191:  Communis  C.  Petroni  Saltua-
rius  uotum  Siluano  soluit  libes  merito.  Von  Domaszewski,  Silvanus  auf  laieirx'
ischen  Inschriften  in  Philologus  LXI   (1902)   W  z=  Ahhandlangen  69.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1493  =  D.  6457.

-  206  -


I


r


seem  to  have  been  religious  in  their  nature,  but  no  information
about  them  is  at  hand.  The  former  recalls  the  worship  of  Vir-
bius  neai  Aricia  in  Latium,  where  this  god,  identified  with  the
Greek  Hippolytus,  was  associated  with  the  powerful  cult  of
Diana.  The  priest  of  Neapolis  may  be  a  copy  of  a  Roman
flamen  created  at  a  comparatively  late  date,  or  he  may  represent
some  old  Greek  priesthood  that  was  transformed  by  the  arrival
of  iiew   influences.,    (I)

FORTUNA.

The  most  trustworthy  evidence  for  the  cult  of  Fortuna  ap-
peais  in  a  Greek  inscription,  in  which  she  is  designated  as  Ty-
che.  Here  there  is  recorded  a  thank  offering  made  by  M.
Marius  Epictetus  to  the  city*s  Tyche,  considered  apparently  in
the  same  way  as  the  Genius  that  so  often  appears  to  express  the
protecting  spirit  of  a  given  loceility.  (2)  In  other  words  we  have
here  a  Roman  rather  than  a  Greek  cult.  It  is  true  that  during
the  Alexandrian  period  it  became  common  for  Greek  cities
in  the  East  to  develop  local  cults  of  Tyche  and  to  depict  the
goddess  in  statusu-y  and  upon  coins.  (3)  But  a  place  like  Nea
polis  would  not  share  in  this  development ;  it  would  be  exposed
rather  to  the  influence  of  the  Roman  ideas  about  Genius  and
Fortuna,  and  would  develop  the  conception  of  a  deity  associ-
ated closely  with  the  community.  We  may  infer  that  at  first  this
idea  was  embodied  in  the  Siren  Parthenope;  as  her  power  in
the  community  waned,  the  other  conception  becemie  stronger
and  attained  a  full  growth  imder  the  Empire.   (4)

(1)  Mommsen  C.  I.  L.  X,  p.  172;  do  Ruggiero,  ^Aedilis  Ruggiero  I,  271  ;
Samter,  Flamines,  P.-W.  VI.  2492;  Julian.  Flamen,  D.-S.  II.  1173;  Paiis.  Diana,
D.-S.  II,  154;  Birt,  Diana  Roscher  I.  1008;  Herbst,  De  sacerdotiia  Roman,  ma-
nicipalibua  15;  Wissowa.  249  (2);  Fraser,  The  Magic  Art.  (3)   19-21.

(2)  /.  G.  XIV,  720=  C.  /.  G.  5792=Vaglieri  1078:  M.  Maptog  'Eniy^xrixoQ
"^tS  '^^X'Q  Ndag  TtdXscog  dveGTjxsv  X'^P^^'^'^P^^^'  Maiuri.  apparently  following
Capasso-De  Petra,  op.  cit.  196  (270)  erroneously  calls  the  inscription  bilingual.
Maiuri.   N.  S.    1913.    187.

(3)  P.  Gardner,  Countries  and  Cities  in  Ancient  Art  in  Jour.  Hell.
Stud.  IX  (1888)  73  f . ;  L.  Deubner,  Personifikationen,  Roscher  II,  2076;  Hild.
Fortuna,  D.-S.  II.   1265.

(4) -Cp.  Allegre,  Etude  aur  la  deease  jgrecque  Tychi  185.

-  207  -


A  statue  accidentally  discovered  at  Naples,  although  badly
disfigured  retains  enough  characteristics  to  seem  a  representa-
tion of  Fortuna.  It  was  doubtless  not  a  cult  statue  but  designed
for  ornamental  purposes.  As  it  came  to  light  close  to  the  re-
mains of  the  circular  temple  attributed  to  the  god  Eumelus,
Maiuri  conjectures  that  it  was  set  up  on  the  property  belonging
to  the  phratry  of  the  Eumeleidai  and  was  a  dedication  made  by
a  member   of  that  organization.   (I)

Tradition  has  associated  a  shrine  of  Fortuna  with  the  dis-
trict of  the  Capo  di  Posilipo,  which  embraces  the  heights  be-
tween Naples  and  Pozzuoli.Here  accordig  to  one  account  was
discovered  the  inscription  recording  the  liberality  of  T.  Ves-
torius  Zelotus,  who  was  doubtless  a  citizien  of  Puteoli.  (2)
The  record  shows  that  after  the  temple  had  been  handed  over
complete  by  the  builders,  this  man  at  his  own  cost  provided  an
image  of  Pantheus.  (3)  The  cult  of  Fortuna  Panthea  is  cin-
other  evidence  of  the  synqretistic  tendency  to  blend  together
various  divinities  rather  than  to  single  out  and  emphasize  one
of  them ;  it  came  to  be  felt  especially  that  Fortuna  the  promot-
er of  good  luck,  united  in  her  person  the  powers  of  mzoiy
others.  Hence  in  the  image  of  Vestorius  Zelotus  the  attempt
would  be  made  to  include  in  the  figure  the  physical  charac-
teristics of  as  many  deities  as  possible.  (4)  It  was  after  all  a
safe  and  economical  way  of  showing  respect  to  the  whole
compeuiy  of  gods.  In  Italy,  although  Fortuna  Panthea  was  often
portrayed  by  various  forms  of  art,  she  is  cited  in  the  extant
epigraphical  material  only  at  Aletrium   and  Rome.   (5)

(1)  Maiuri.  N.  S.  1913.   187.

(2)  Dubois.  51-52.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1557  =  Vaglieri  1182:  T.  Vestorius  Zelotus  post  adsigna-
tionem  aedis  Fortunae  signum  Pantheum  sua  pecunia  d.  d.  Cp.  X,  3092.  The
provenience  of  the  inscription  has  been  variously  given.  It  is  usually  assigned
to  Puteoli,  as  by  Mommsen,  Dubois,  and  Beloch.  because  of  the  fact  that  the
name  Vestorius  seems  to  belong  there.  But  the  place  of  the  cult  seems  more
likely  to  have  been  that  indicated  above.

(4)  R.  Peter,  Fortuna,  Roscher  I.  1534  f . ;  Drexler,  lais-F orluna  and
Fortuna-Panthea,  Roscher  I,  1549  f . ;  Kild.  Fortuna,  D.-S.  II,  1273;  Wissowa
264;  Allegre.   op.  dt.  234.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  5800.  VI  30,  867.  Cp.  Breccia.  Fortuna,  Ruggiero  III,
190;  Otto.  Fortuna.  P.-W.  VII,  40.

-  208  -


Local  topographers  agree  that  the  shrine  stood  in  the  vicin-
ity of  Posilipo  but  differ  as  to  its  exact  site.  One  opinion  has
identified  it  with  a  few  remains  of  brick  work  and  columns  in
the  little  coast  village  of  Marechiano.  According  to  other  an-
tiqu2U'ians,  however,  its  location  is  to  be  sought  either  fcirther
east,  where  a  church  once  existing  bore  the  name  of  S.  Maria
Fortuna  (or  S.  Pietro),  or  else  at  S.  Agnello.  (I).

THE  IMPERIAL  CULT.

The  worship  of  Augustus  and  his  family  was  carried  on  as
usual  by  the  Augustales,  but  the  collegium  has  left  only  scanty
traces  of  its  activity.  One  of  the  members  is  known,  -  the  mer-
cheuit  M.  Antonius  Trophimus,  who  filled  the  same  position
at  Puteoli.  The  aedilis  Augustalis.  whose  duties  are  unknown,
has  been  treated   above.   (2)

The  Emperor  Augustus  was  chiefly  honored  by  the  cele-
bration of  quinqueruiial  games,  which  attained  a  great  renown
and  attracted  the  most  famous  athletes  of  the  time  to  the
competitions.  (3)  Officially  they  were  called  Italica  Romaea
Sebasta;  thus,  though  they  were  Greek  contests  in  substance
they  received  a  Latin  name.  Noteworthy  is  the  fact  that  the
Neapolitans  were  not  content  to  give  their  games  a  modest
title  of  local  significance  derived  from  their  own  city,  but  in-
stead they  included  in  their  appellation  allusions  to  all  Italy,
to  Rome,  and  to  the  Emperor  and  endeavored  to  flatter  all
alike.  (4)  It  was  declau-ed  that  they  were  on  a  par  with  the
most  famous  contests  of  Greece,  and  Strabo  relates  that  they

(1)  The  various  opinions  are  discussed  by  Giinther,  Pausilypon  182.
Cp.  Cap8isso-De  Petra,  Napoli  greco-romana  96  (270) ;  Beloch  85  ;  Corcia,  Storia
d.   due  Sicilie  11.    195.

(2)  See  pp.    124.  206.

(3)  Ricci.  Athleta.  Ruggiero.  I.  749;  F.  Richter.  Roma.  Roscher  IV.  139;
Beloch  57;  Capasso-De  Petra  38.  Civitelli.  AtU  Nap.  XVII  (1894)  part  III;
Dittenberger  und  Purgold.  Inschriften  von  Olympia  p.  123;  Lasena,  DelVan-
tico  ginnaaio  napoletano,  25  f . ;  Igniarra.  De  palaestra  neapoUtana  139  f . ;
Wissowa,  Wochens,  fur  Klass.  Phil.  XIV  (1897)  763  f . ;  Mie,  Quaestiones  agonia-
ticae  imprimia   ad  Olympiam   pertinentea  43  i.

(4)  CivitoIIi.  /  nuovi  frammenti  d'epigrafe  greche  relative  ai  Ludi  Au-
guaiali  di  Napoli  in  Atti  Nap.  XVII  (1893-4)  part.  II.  No.  55  (3).

-  209  -

14


actually  rivalled  them.  (1)  Until  the  institution  of  the  Ludi
Capitolini  by  Domitian  they  were  unsurpassed  in  Italy,  and
exercised  an  important  influence  upon  all  geunes  instituted
later.  (2)  They  included  gymnastic,  literary,  musical,  and
equestrian  events,  and  were  celebrated  in  midsummer  the  third
year  of  each  Olympiad  beginning  with  the  year  2  B.  C,  -  a  date
known  from  the  statements  of  Dio  Cassius  and  from  the  fact
that  the  forty-fifth  series  was  held  in  1 70  A.  D.  (3)  Another
notice  of  the  games,  which  was  discovered  in  the  excavations
at  Olympia,  has  been  assigned  to  a  period  about  a  century
earlier  than  the  last  named  date.  (4)

Considerable  uncertainty  is  attached  to  the  institution  of
the  games.  Dio  Cassius  states  that  the  ostensible  reason  for
their  introduction  was  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  people  of
Neapolis  to  show  their  appreciation  of  the  generosity  of  Au-
gustus, manifested  in  restoring  deunage  caused  by  fire  eind
earthquake;  but  in  reality,  he  declares,  they  were  influenced
by  their  great  interest  in  Greek  institutions.  (5)  It  is  not  alto  •
gether  clear  that  these  contests  were  entirely  new.  It  is  possible
that  they  were  remodelled  out  of  games  celebrated  in  the  past
like  those  at  Actium  and  the  ludi  Veneris  Genetricis  at  Rome,
which  underwent  a  transformation  in  honor  of  the  Emperor.
The  theory  that  they  were  derived  from  a  contest  in  honor  of
Venus  was  advocated  by  Kaibel,  but  as  already  explained,
there  is  no  generally  accepted  evidence  for  this  series  of
games.  (6)  Beloch  associated  them  with  the  gymneistic  contests
in  honor  of  the  Siren,  which  originated  at  a  remote  period,  but
the  latter  were  still  performed  during  the  early  years  of  the  Em-
pire £is  a  sepEU-ate  festival  which  was  doubtless  of  modest  pre-


(1)  Strab.  V.  4,  7;  Mie,  op.  cit.  48.

(2)  Stat,    sil.    111,    5,    92:     Et    Capitolinis    quinquennia    proxima    lustris.
Cp.   Wissowa  465.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV.  748  =  C.  /.  G.  5805.  Cp.  I.  G.  XIV.  754.  755  and  Civitelli
loc.  cit.  Heinen,  Klio  XI  (1911)  170;  Dittenberger  und  Purgold  loc.  cit.;  Richter,
Roscher  IV.  139;  Franz,  C.  /.  G.  III.  p.  732;  Gardtausen.  Augustus  und  seine
Zeit  part  II  326  (46).

(4)  Dittenberger  und  Purgold,  op.   cit.   No.  56. ;  Wissowa  765.


(5)  Dio  Cassius  LV,   10,  9.

(6)  See  p.  200.


210  -


tensions.  (I)  There  seems,  however,  to  be  some  ground  for
believing  that  a  new  festival  wsis  attached  to  one  previously
existing.  Beurlier  considers  that  the  original  contests  were
grouped  under  the  term  Romaea  Italica  to  which  Sebasta  -was
added  in  the  time  of  Augustus.  (2)  But  Dittenberger  somewhat
more  probably  holds  that  the  earlier  games  bore  the  title
Italica  Olympia  and  that  the  other  two  words  belonged  to  the
new  series.  In  the  extant  inscription  from  Olympia  he  finds
that  the  events  recorded  clearly  fall  under  two  separate  heads
corresponding  to  the  two  parts  of  the  revised  festival.   (3)

The  Emperors  are  frequently  reported  as  attending  the  sa-
cred games.  Augustus  witnessed  the  contests  of  14  A.  D.  just
before  proceeding  to  Nola  where  he  died.  (4)  Claudius  presid-
ed at  the  series  held  in  42  A.  D.,  making  himself  conspicuous
by  the  simplicity  of  his  manners  and  apparel  and  competing
himself  with  success  in  the  literary  section.  (5)  To  this  time
probably  belongs  the  institution  of  a  body  of  youths  called
the  TralSsc:  zXaoSiavoi  in  an  inscription  from  Cauria,  which  re-
cords a  pancratium  performed  at  Neapolis.  (6)  The  contests
at  which  Nero  participated  in  the  year  68  may  have  been  the
regular  quinquennial  games,  which  in  this  case  were  anticipated
by  two  years  to  accomodate  the  impatience  of  the  royal  per-
former. (7)  Titus  served  as  agonothetes  no  less  than  three
times  probably  in  the  years  70,  74,  and  78.  (8)  How  long  the
festival  continued  to  be  celebrated   is  uncertain.   Civitelli,  re-

(1)  Strab.  V.  4,  7:  Kal  dywv  ouvxsXsrxatYuvaixos  xaxa  jiavTsiav;  Beloch  58.

(2)  Beurlier,  Le  culte  impirial  161   (6).

(3)  Dittenberger  und  Pvurgold,  op,  cit.   p.    123.

(4)  Dio  Cassius  LVI,  29  2 :  'Egcop[XT^eYj  xs  sg  xyjv  KajXTiaviav  6  A5you-
oxog  xat  xov  dvwva  xov  ev  xf^  Nscj:  tioXsi  5(,aestg  eixsixa  ev  NwXig  [isx-j^XXags.
Suet.  Aug.  98,  5:  Mox  NeapK>lim  traiecit,  quamquam  etiam  turn  infirmis  intes-
ti^is  morbo  uariante,  tamen  et  quinquennale  cert£unen  Gymnicum  Konori  suo
institutum  perspectavit.  Veil.  II.  123.  Quippe  Caesar  Augustus...  interfuturus
athletarum  certaminis  ludicro,  quod  eius  honori  sacratum  a  Neapolitan's  est,
processit  in  Campemiam.  Gardthausen,  Augustus  und  seine  Zeit  I,    1267.

(5)  EHo  Cassius  LX,  6,    1  ;  Suet.   Claud.  XI,  2.

(6)  C.  /.  G.  2810b.

(7)  Suet.  Nero  20.  Cp.  Franz,  C.  /.  G.  Ill,  p.  732.

(8)  /.  G.  XIV,  729-C.  /.  G.  5809  =  0.  /.  L.  X,  1481.  Bloch  58;  Momm-
sen.  C.  /.  L:  X.   1481.

-  211  -


(uting  a  statement  of  Beloch,  that  it  could  not  be  attested  later
than  182  A.  D.,  cites  evidence  for  its  presence  as  late  as  210»
the  close  of  the  reign  of  Septimius  Severus.  (1)

Nor  is  there  any  indication  that  it  ce£ised  to  be  performed
soon  after  this  period.  The  Philostratus  who  composed  the
Imagines  speaks  of  an  agon  here  at  the  beginning  of  his  book,  -
an  apparent  indication  that  games  survived  at  Neapolis  at  least
into  the  third  century.  Two  other  peissages  cited  by  Civitelli  to
prove  the  continuance  of  the  games  here  are  not  conclusive,
yet  add  a  certain  amount  of  probability  to  the  supposition  that
they  had  a  long  life.  (2)

One  point  still  remains  to  be  considered,  -  the  relation
between  this  festival  and  the  Eusebeia,  which  are  occasionally
cited  as  a  sacred  contest  at  Neapolis.  Couve  considers  that  the
latter  was  a  new  series  of  games  instituted  by  Antonius
Pius.  (3)  Beurlier  states  that  the  Sehasta  after  the  time  of  An-
toninus were  called  Eusebeia,,  probably  as  the  result  of  an  offi-
cial order  on  the  part  of  that  monarch  to  extend  honor  to  the
memory  of  his  predecessor.  If  such  an  action  wets  taken,  it
would  suit  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  and  would  be  in  line  with
his  establishment  of  the  Eusebeia  at,  Puteoli.  Yet  we  find  that
as  late  £is  the  year  182  there  is  a  mention  of  the  Sebasta  at  Nea-
polis parallel  with  the  Eusebeia  at  Puteoli,  a  circumstance
which  makes  it  certain  that  the  name  of  the  contest  W2is  not
officially  altered.  (4)  It  may  sometimes  have  been  called  by  the
name  Eusebeia  as  a  result  of  the  influence  of  the  games  of
Puteoli;  yet  the  only  definite  reference  to  the  Eusebeia  at
Neapolis,  which  occurs  In  the  copy  of  eui  inscription  no  longei


(I)/.  G.  XIV.  1102  =  C.  /.  G.  5913.  Here  are  recorded  the  victories  of
M.  Aurelius  Asclepiades.  Beloch  loc.  cit. ;  Civitelli,  Atti  Nap.  (1893-4)  74;  /.  G.
Ill,  129.  A  table  of  the  contests  is  given  by  Franz,  C.  /.  G.  Ill,  p.  732  f.  The
older  scholars  as  Mazzocchi  and  Ignarra  maintained  that  the  games  ceased
-when  the  place  received  a  Roman  colony,  -  a  i>osition  which  the  extant  evi-
dence renders  wholly  untenable.  Civitelli  loc.  cit. ;  De  Petra,  Napoli  colonia
romana  in  Atti  Nap.  XVI  (1891-2)  56  f . ;  Ignarra,  De  Palaestra  Neapolitana  146.

(2)  Civitelli,    loc    cit.;    Philostratus,    Imagines    763;    Aug.,    c.    Ajcad.    Ill,
16,  35 ;  Codex  lustinianus  X,  54  (de  athletis).

(3)  Couve,  Hadrianeia,  D.-S.  Ill,  2.

(4)  /.  G.  XIV,  1102  =  C.  /.  G.  5913.

-212  -


extant,  may  be  the  result  of  an  error  of  transcription.  (I)  The
instance  cited  by  Beurlier  to  prove  that  the  games  were  also
called  Actia  refers  not  to  this  city  but  to  Nicopolis.  (2)

There  is  no  doubt  that  Augustus  was  worshipped  in  a  shrine
consecrated  to  himself.  In  the  agonistic  fragments  from  Olympia
occurs  the  mention  of  a  Caesareum  to  which  a  procession  made
its  way  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Emperor.  This  seems  to  be  a
reference  to  his  temple.  (3)  Its  site  can  not  be  determined  on
account  of  a  lack  of  evidence.  Fabio  Giordano  thought  that  it
stood  near  the  ancient  Forum,  where  the  church  of  S.  Gregorio
is  now  located.  Capaso  would  associate  it  with  S.  Gennaro  al-
rOlmo  in  the  same  district,  and  goes  so  far  as  to  give  a  descrip-
tion of  the  structure.   (4)  All  this,  however,   is  quite  uncertain.

The  cult  of  the  Emperors  was  czurried  on  also  in  the  phra-
tries,  as  is  attested  by  the  fragment  of  an  inscription  recording
the  6eot  ospaarot  along  with  the  deities  of  the  phratry.  (5)
Avellino,  followed  by  Capasso,  assigned  the  inscription  to  the
age  of  Domitian  and  identifies  the  gods  as  the  deified  Vespa-
sian and  Titus.  (6)  But  Franz  thought  rather  that  there  was
an  allusion  to  a  living  Emperor  and  Empress;  in  reality  the
term  seems  to  have  included  the  reigning  Emperor  and  those
of  his  predecessors  who  were  deified.  (7)  In  another  case  a
certain  individual,  who  wished  to  thank  the  phratry  gods  for
his  safe  return  to  his  home,  set  up  in  their  honor  an  image  of


(1)  The  term  Eusebeia  occurs  in  /.  G.  Ill,  128  =  C.  /.  G.  247  as  EOJoelPJeia,
where  Mommsen  would  read  Sspaoxa  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  171.  It  may  also  be
understood   in  C.   /.   G.    1720   (from  Delphi)  but  is  not   actually   in  the  text.

(2)  P.cLilier.  Le  culte  imperial  162;  Waddington,  Inscriptions  recueilleea
en  Grece  et  en   Asie  Mineure   1839.   Cp.    Reisch,   AkHa,   P.-W.    I.    1214.

(3)  Dittenberger  ynd  Puigold,  Inschr.  v.  Olympia,  No.  56,  I,  48.

(4)  Fabio  Giordano,  quoted  in  Capasso-De  Petra,  NapoU  greco-romana
183   (208);   ibidem   77;   cp.   58.

(5)  /.  G.  XIV.  723.

(6)  Avellino.  Bull.  Nap.   I  (1843)  23;  Capasso-De  Petra,  op.   cit.   58.

(7)  EMttenberger,  /.  G.  Ill  664.  665 ;  5i^//oge  inscr.  Graecarum  I  (2),
363  (2);  and  Hermes  XIII  (1878)  72;  Brandis.  'Apxtspso^.  P.-W.  II.  481;  Kor-
nemann,  Zur  Geschichte  der  antiken  Herrscherkalte  in  Klio  I  (1901)  106  (13);
Geiger,   De  sacerdotibus  Augustorum   municip.   29.


213  -


the  Emperor  Claudius.  (1)  An  inscription  in  honor  of  the  Ge-
nius Caesarum  was  likewise  found  at  Naples.   (2)

ORIENTAL  CULTS.

Neapolis  offered  a  much  less  favorable  field  for  the  devel-
opment of  the  Oriental  cults  than  some  other  places  in  the
vicinity.  There  wais  no  great  amount  of  commerce  at  the  close
of  the  Republic  said  throughout  the  Empire  to  bring  into  the
city  an  influentigJ  foreign  element,  nor  was  there  in  the  imme-
diate neighborhood  a  military  station.  Furthermore,  the  people
with  their  firmjy  rooted  Greek  civilization  were  less  receptive
toward  those  cults  which  had  a  well  marked  orgiastic  tendency
thgm  the  inhabitants  of  other  towns  who  were  not  subject  to  the
restraining  influences  of  Greek  conservatism.  Though  the  extant
evidence  indicates  that  the  most  important  Oriental  religions  had
adherents  in  the  community,  they  did  not  exercise  so  great  an
influence  a&  in  most  other  towns.

THE  GODS  OF  EGYPT.

The  worship  of  the  Egyptian  deities  was  carried  on  by
people  from  that  country  who  had  a  settlement  here.  They  were
in  Icirge  part  natives  of  Alexandria,  some  of  whom  were
brought  to  the  city  by  Nero,  because  he  had  tziken  a  fancy  to
their  race.  In  this  case  the  Imperial  favor  was  due  to  a  new
form  of  applause  which  the  Egyptians  employed  to  express
their  appreciation  of  the  music  rendered  by  the  Emperor  in  his
public  performances.  Aside  from  this  incident  the  interest  of
Nero  in  the  Alexandrians  is  well  authenticated.  (3)  But  in
asserting  that  there  was  a  great  increase  of  these  people  in
Nero's  time  Capasso  exaggerates  the  words  of  Suetonius,  who

(1)  /.  G.  XIV.  728  =  C.  /.  G.  5802b.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1561  :  Genio  Caesarum  Diognetus  uilic.  fee.  Colonna,
Scoperte  di  antichita  221.

(3)  Suet.  Nero:  Captus  autem  modulatis  Alexandxinorum  laudario-
nibus,  qui  de  nouo  commeatu  Neapolim  confluxerant,  plures  Alexandria  euo-
cauit.

-214  -


h


merely  says  that  he  brought  others.  (I)  In  fact  it  is  not  prob^
able  that  the  Alexandrian  colony  ever  became  very  \axge.
Yet  it  was  distinctive  enough  to  leave  the  impress  of  its  name
on  that  pait  of  the  city  where  they  resided,  -  a  name  that  sur-
vived in  the  Middle  Ages  in  the  form  Vico  degli  Alessandrini,
which  was  applied  to  the  street  called  later  Mezzocannone,
Likewise  one  of  the  mediaeval  divisions  of  the  city  w2is  called
the  regio  Nili.  This  circumsteuice  would  tend  to  prove  that  the
Egyptians  were  located  in  the  south-western  part  of  Neapolis
where  they  possessed  a  shrine  consecrated  to  their  nationeJ
gods;  Capasso  would  place  it  precisely  at  the  beginning  of  the
Via  deirUniversita  opposite  the  statue  of  the  river  god  Nilus
cited  below,  where  remains  of  tufa  foundation  walls  were
unearthed.  (2)  But  these  would  point  rather  to  a  building  be-
longing to  an  esurlier  epoch  than  the  one  in  which  the  temple
of  the  Egyptian  gods  was  probably  erected.

Doubtless  in  this  quarter  was  discovered  an  inscription
pertaining  to  the  Eg>'ptian  gods,  which  consists  of  a  dedication
made  by  a  prominent  Roman  official  M.  Oppius  Nauius  Phaui-
nianus,  who  had  lived  in  the  Orient.  He  presented  to  the  shrine
an  image  of  Apollo-Horus-Harpocrates,  a  syncretistic  combi-
nation of  a  Greek  divinity  with  an  Oriental  one  (3).  Horus  in
the  form  Harpocrates,  the  only  eispect  of  this  god  which  appead-
ed  to  the  Greeks  outside  of  Egypt,  has  become  amalgeimated
with  Apollo  for  the  reason  that  each  was  a  god  of  light.  (4)
There  is  no  reetson  to  interpret  the  inscription  with  Franz  as  a
reference  to  three  statues  representing  sepeurately  Apollo  2uid

(1)  Capasso-De  Potra,  op.  cU.  6.

(2)  Capcissoi-De  Petra  6,  161  (24).  Capasso  states  that  the  term  regio
Nili  occurs  as  late  as  1276  in  Notam.  instrumentorum  S.  Gregorii  No.  433,  Arch,
stor.  Nap.  XVII  (1892)  450  and  Pianta  della  cim  di  Napoli  nel  secolo  XI;
Trede,   Das  Heidentum   in    d.    rom.   Kirche    II,    143.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV.  719  =  C.  /.  G.  5793  and  III.  p.  1255=:Vaglieri  1094.  The
inscription  is  assigned  to  Neapolis  by  Kaibel  and  Capasso;  Beloch  regeirds  its
origin  as  doubtful.

(4)  Herodotus  II,  144.  Shrines  of  Harpocrates  are  cited  at  Delos,  Chios
and  Ambracia.  Ed.  Meyer,  Horos,  Roscher  I,  2747.  The  god  is  ment'oned  three
times  in  Latin  inscriptions:  C.  /.  L.  VI,  31  (Rome),  V,  2796  (Patauium),  IX,
4773  (Forum  Nouum)  In  the  first  case  he  is  united  with  Ai>ollo,  de  Ruggiero,
Harpocrates,   Ruggiero,    III,    644.

-  215  -


two  Egyptian  gods.  (1)  A  statue  of  Isis  was  unearthed  in  the
suburbs  of  Naples.   (2)

The  Alexandrians  were  interested  also  in  the  worship  of
the  Nile  as  a  patron  of  fertility  who  promoted  the  growth  of  the
crops  and  the  increase  of  animals  and  the  human  race.  (3)
An  evidence  of  this  sentiment  is  seen  in  a  statue  of  the  river
god,  which  is  still  extant  and  stands  today  in  the  Piazzetta  del
Nilo,  Naturally  the  decorative  idea  was  strong  here,  as  this  type
Wcis  of  common  use  in  sculpture.  The  monument  is  in  the  form
of  an  old  man  in  a  reclining  position  with  his  left  side  leaning
against  a  rough  stone  from  which  issues  a  stream  of  water.  At
his  feet  is  a  crocodile  and  around  him  gambol  naked  child-
ren. (4)

DOLICHENUS.

No  definite  evidence  is  found  for  this  cult.  A  stone,  how-
ever, which  contained  a  complete  Greek  alphabet,  followed  by
the  phrase  xeXeoaav('co(;)  too  6£o5  has  every  indication  of  being
the  work  of  a  follower  of  Dolichenus.  (5)  It  is  extremely  like
the  Latin  inscription  from  Carnimtum  in  Pannonia  as  was  point-
ed out  by  Kubitschek.  In  both  cases  as  well  as  in  that  of  an
inscription  from  Misenum  already  discussed  there  is  an  employ-
ment of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  for  magical  purposes.  (6)
This    supposition,    which    assigns    a    sacred    character    to    the

(1)  Franz.  C.  /.  G.  No.  5793;  Meyer  loc.  cit.  Cp.  Cavedoni.  Bull  Inst.
1852.  76-77.

(2)  Lafaye,  Les  divipitea  d' Alexandrie  hora  de  VBgypte  278  cat.  No.  51  ;
FriedericKs-Wolters,  Die  Gipaahgiisae  antiker  Bildwerke  615,  No.  1550;  von
Sacken.  Die  antiken  Sculpturen  in  Wien  p.  25  and  PI.  IX;  Clarac,  Muaie  de
sculpture  PI.  991.  No.  2577.  Attributes  of  Isis  were  latex  conferred  upon  the
Madonna.  The  cult  of  the  Madonna  as  Healer  is  very  prominent  at  Naples  and
its  vicinity.  Mary  Hamilton,  Incubation   182  f.

(3)  Cp.  Wagner.  Neiloa,  Roschex  III.  93.

(4)  This  statue  has  an  interesting  history,  which  is  related  by  Capasso-
De  Petra,  op.  cit.  159  (22).  It  is  portrayed  in  the  same  work  PI.  3.  For  the
type  see  Wagner,   Neiloa,   Roscher   III,   95   f.

(5)  N.  5.  1894.  173.

(6)  Kubitschek.  C.  /.  L.  III.  Supp.  p.  2281  note  to  No.  11186.  Cp.  Hul-
•en.  Klio,  XX  (1902)  235  (I).

-216  .


stone,  seems  much  more  plausible  than  the  view  published  by-
Viola,  that  the  inscription  was  of  Christian  origin  and  designed
for  scholeistic  purposes.  The  latter  on  epigraphical  grounds
assigns  it  to  the  period  of  the  Empire  not  later  than  the  first
half  of  the  third  century.  (I)

MITHRAS.

The  cult  of  Mithras  is  associated  in  tradition  with  the
Grotta  di  Posilipo  on  the  ancient  way  between  Neapolis  and
Puteoli.  In  the  middle  of  the  passage  through  the  cliff  is  a  Chris-
tian shrine,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  consecrated  orig-
inally to  the  great  solar  deity.  The  association  of  Mithras  with
this  spot  is  due  to  the  discovery  of  a  sculptured  relief  which
exhibits  the  bull  -  slaying  divinity  accompamied  by  various
symbols  peculiar  to  his  cult  and  by  busts  of  Sol  and  Luna.  (2)
Both  above  and  below  the  sculptures  are  the  words  of  an
inscription  recording  the  fact  that  the  dedication  was  due  to  a
uir  clarissimus  Appius  Claudius  Tarronius  Dexter.  The  god  is
designated  as  omnipotens  and  his  name  is  preceded  by  the  word
deus,  as  is  customary  in  dealing  with  a  foreign  divinity.  (3)
But  it  is  worth  noting  that  although  certain  writers,  as  recently
Giinther,  connect  the  monument  definitely  with  the  Grotta,  the
most  ancient  versions  of  the  discovery  are  not  so  precise,  and
assign  it  simply  to  the  region  of  Posilipo.  (4)  A  similar  relief^
the  present  whereabouts  of  which  is  unknown,  may  have  come
from  the  same  locality.  (5)

(1)  Viola,  N.  S.  1894.  174.

(2)  The  relief  is  reproduced  by  Cumont,  Texiea  et  monumenta  II,  250
No.  93.  Cp.  Cumont,  Mithras,  Roscher  II,  3069 ;  Riisch,  Guida  del  Muaeo  Nazio-
nale  di  Napoli  181   No.  668;  Beloch  85.

(3)  C.    /.    L.    X,    1479  =  Vaglieri    1166:    Omnipotenti    deo    Mithrae    Appius
Claudius  Tarronius  Dexter  u.    c.   dicat.

(4)  Giinther,  Fausilypon  16;  Cumont,  Textes  ei  monuments  II,  485
No.  93 ;  Stark,  Zwei  Mithraen  der  Grossherzoglichen  A  UertUmersamntlung  in
Karlsruhe  in  Festgahe  der  XXIV  Philologenversammlung  36;  Riisch,  op.  cit.
181.   No.  668.

(5)  Cumont,  op.  cit.  250,  No.  94.  Cocchia  identifies  the  shrine  in  the
Grotta  di  Posilipo  with  that  which  Petronius  records  as  sacred  to  Priapus.  Saggi
filologici  III,    175    (3).

-  217  -


JUDAISM.

A  large  number  of  Jews  evidently  made  their  home  at  Nea-
polis,  but  no  information  is  at  hand  about  the  origin  of  their
community  or  its  subsequent  development.  (1)  In  fact  they
are  not  mentioned  until  the  very  close  of  the  ancient  world.
Cemeteries  used  by  members  of  this  race  are  known  from  liter-
ary references,  and  one  which  weis  discovered  in  1908  has  yield-
ed epitaphs  belonging  to  the  fifth  century  A.  D.  (2)  A  seal
probably  belonging  to  this  city  contains  a  representation  of  the
branched  candlestick.  (3)  A  small  column  in  the  form  of  a
phallus  showing  the  Greek  word  and  an  obscene  Hebrew  in-
scription was  discovered  in  an  underground  room  adjacent  to
the  burial  cheunbers  of  the  Catacombs  of  S.  Gennaro.  This
object,  which  gave  rise  to  meuiy  theories  about  the  original  use
of  the  room,  is  now  considered  as  of  late  origin  and  in  fact  has
been  put  in  the  fourteenth  century.  (4).  The  Jews  also  left
their  impress  upon  the  nomenclature  of  the  city  giving  rise  to
such  topographical  designations  as  Terra  dei  Giudei  emd  Vico
degli  Ebrei.   (5)

In  the  sixth  century  they  had  a  monopoly  of  the  food  sup-
ply of  the  city;  favored  it  would  seem  by  the  Goths,  they  were
reluctant  to  become  subjects  of  the  Byzantine  Emperors  and
gave  a  valiant  futile  support  to  the  Neapolitans  in  resisting  the


(1)  Haxnack,  Die  Mission  und  Aushreitung  des  Christentums  II,  216;
Gratz-Eppenstein,  Geschichtc  der  Juden  V,  39 ;  Ferorelli,  GH  ebrei  nelVltalia
mendionale  in  Arch.  stor.   Nap.  XXXII   (1907)  244   f.

(2)  Saba  Malaspina,  Rerum  Sicularum  historia  (1250-1285)  in  Del  Re,
CronisU  e  scrittori  sincroni  napoletani  II,  284 ;  Galante,  Un  cemetero  giudaico
in  Napoli  in  Memorie  Nap.   II   (1913)  235,   236  f.   Pis.    II,    III.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  8059  (484)  (instrumenta  domestica).

(4)  Garrucci,  Storia  deU'arte  cristiana  II,  p.  104,  105.  Corcia,  Storia  delle
due  Sicilie  II.  248;  /.  G.  XIV,  65*;  Galante.  op.  cit.  235  with  bibliography;  Fe-
rorelli, GU  ebrei  nell'It.   merid.  dalVeta  romana  23.

(5)  G.  Fusco,  Sulla  topografia  della  citta  di  Napoli  nel  medio  evo  in
Rend.  Nap.  1863-1864,  273;  Galante  op.  cit.  234;  Aloe.  Arch.  stor.  Nap.  in
Atti  del  r.  Inst.  Veneto  LXIIl  (1903-04)  829;  Capasso  Topografia  della  citta  di
Napoli  al  tempo  del  Ducato  39  and  Mon.  Neapolitani  ducatus  II,  part  2,
p.    163-4.

-  218  -


attempt  of  Belisarius  to  make  himself  master  of  the  city.  (1)
At  the  close  of  the  sixth  century  Gregory  the  Great  in  his  letters
to  the  Neapolitan  bishops  Fortunatus  and  Paschsisius  deals  with
the  problems  which  the  presence  of  this  race  created  in  the
administration  of  the  Church.  (2)

CHRISTIANITY.

Legends  which  have  no  bsisis  of  truth,  yet  have  not  lacked
supporters  in  modem  times,  represent  the  church  at  Neapolis
as  a  foundation  of  St.  Peter,  suid  claim  that  St.  Aspren  was
its  first  bishop.  (3)  Nothing  in  fact  is  known  of  this  earlv
period.  Extensive  catacombs,  however,  point  to  the  presence
of  an  important  Christian  community  at  legist  £is  ecirly  as  the
second  century.  (4)  The  Isu-gest,  which  is  known  as  the
Catacombs  of  S.  Gennaro  dei  Poveri,  has  early  ceiling  deco-
ration and  later  paintings  beginning  with  the  third  century.  (5)
The  earliest  dated  Christian  inscription  belongs  to  the  year
377.  (6)  The  list  of  bishops  goes  back  to  the  begiim.ing  of
the  third  century  or  possibly  even  to  the  end  of  the  second,
thus  starting  at  a  date  prior  to  the  persecution  of  Diocletian.

(1)  The  citizens  determined  to  resist  only  after  they  haul  been  assured
by  the  Jews  that  there  would  be  no  lack  of  food.  Procopiua  I,  8,  41  ;  10,  24;
F.  Heman,  Geschichie  des  jUdischen  Volk.es  seit  der  Zeratorung  Jerusalems  74 ;
Tamassia  op.  cit.  815;  Gratz-Eppenstein  op.  cit.  43;  Ferorelli,  op.   cit.   15.

(2)  Gregory  the  Great.  Epist  VI.  33,  IX  36,  XIII,  12  (Migne);  FeroreUi,
op.  cit.  8  f.,  19.  21.

(3)  Acta  Sancii  Aspreni  in  Ada  sanctorum  August  I.  p.  201  f . ;  Biblio-
theca  hagiographica  Latina  I,  117;  Capasso,  Mon.  Neapolitani  ducatus  I,  157  (1);
Dubois  165;  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  d.  rom.  Kirche  II,  175;  Scherillo,  Delia
Venuta  di  S.  Pietro  apostolo  nella  ciita  di  Napoli    10  f.,   222  f.

Kunst    143.

(5)  Kraus,  Real-Encyklopddie  der  christlichen  Alterthixmer  II,  132  and
Geachichte    der    christlichen    Kunst    I,    56-57;    von    Sybel,    Christliche    Anti^e

(4)  Harnack,  op.  cit.  II,  216;  Schultze,  Archdologie  der  AHchristlichen
I.  153;  Galante,  Rdlazione  sulle  caiacombe  di  S.  Gennaro  in  Rend.  Nap.  XIV
(1900)  184;  a  list  of  this  writer's  works  on  the  catacombs  of  Naples  in
Memorie  Nap.  II  (1913)  part  I,  233  (1);  Muller,  RealEncyclopadie  fur  prote-
stantische  Theologie  X,  858 ;  Schultze  loc.  cit.  and  Die  Katakpmben  306.  Biblio-
graphy in  Leclercq,  Caiaconxbes  in  Dictionnaire  d' archeologie  chretienne  II,  2444.

(6)  C.  /.  L.   X,    1518.

-  219  -


So  early  a  list  is  seldom  found  in  Italy.  (I)  Naturally  the
church  was  able  to  adduce  a  goodly  number  of  martyrs.  The
cult  of  St.  Jsmuarius  and  his  companions  who  were  martyred
at  Puteoli  became  very  popular,  and  is  attested  by  paintings
in  the  Catacombs  of  S.  Severo,  assigned  to  the  fourth  and
fifth  centuries.  (2)  The  flourishing  state  of  the  Christian
church  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  is  proved  by
the  fact  that  Constantine  erected  a  bzisilica  here  as  at  Capua;
it  has  been  identified  by  Sorrentino  with  the  church  of  S.  Re-
stituta  which  is  now  an  annex  of  the  Cathedral.   (3)

AENARIA  (ISCHIA).

The  island  called  Aenaria  by  the  Romans  and  Pithecussae
by  the  Greeks  is  associated  with  the  first  settlements  of  the
latter  people  in  Italy.  Coming  imder  the  sway  of  the  Neapol-
itzms,  it  remedned  in  their  possession  until  their  war  with
Rome,  and  after  that  event  becsune  a  part  of  the  Romans*
public  domain  (326  B.  C).  It  was  restored  to  Neapolis  by
Augustus  in  exchange  for  Capreae  (29  B.  C.)  (4).

Aenaria  probably  participated  in  general  in  the  cults
maintained  at  Neapolis.  Its  specialty  was  the  w;orship  of
Apollo  and  the  Nymphs,  who  were  revered  in  the  southern
part  of  the  island  at  the  warm  springs  of  Nitroli  (5).  Ihe
goddesses  who  presided  over  this  locality  were  called  from
the  quality  of   the  water  Nitrodes   or  P^itrodiae,   a  word  from

(1)  Gesia  episcoporum  Neapolitanorum  402  f. ;  Lanzoni,  Le  origini  del
cristianesimo  nella  Campania  romana  in  Ric.  storico-crit.  delle  scienze  ieol.
VI   (1910)    115;   Galante,  Bull   arch,   cri^t.    1883,   86.

(2)  Galante,  Bull  arch,  crist.  V  (1867)  74;  Garrucci,  Storia  delVarte
criaiiana  II,  PI.  105A;  Scherillo,  Ndla  prima  catacomha  di  S.  Gennaro  in  Atti
Nap.  V  (1870-71)  170  f.;  Delehaye,  Les  origines  du  culte  des  martyrs  342.

(3)  Liber  Pontificalis,  Sylvester  XXXII  (Duchesne's  edition  I,  186);  Gesia
episcoporum  Neapolit.  in  Scriptores  rerum  Langohardicarum  et  Ualicarum
p.  404  =  Cai>a880,  Mon.  NeapoUtani  ducatus  I,  165;  Sorrentino,  La  baaalica
cosiantiniana  in  Atti  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  241-2.

(4)  Beloch  204;  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.  X,  679;  Hiilsen,  Aenaria,  P.-W.  I,  594
Pais,  Ancient  Italy   181   and  Ricerche  stor.   e  geog.  227.

(5)  Strab.  V.  49  (248);  Plin,  nat.  XXXI.  9. ;  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  200  (1)  and
Ricerche  stor.   e  geog.  251  (2);  Preller-Jordan  II,    145.

-220  -


J


which  the  modern  name  of  the  place  is  derived,   and   along
with  Apollo    received     adoration     as   healing     divinities    (I).
Their  shrine  was  the  recipient  of  many  dedications  presented
by   its   patrons   who   had   experienced   some   benefit   from   the
kindly   deities.   A   considerable   number   of   inscriptions   which
accompanied  the  offerings  left  at  the  shrine  have  been  recov-
ered; one  of  them  was  made  by  Argenna,   a  freedwomam.  of
the    Empress   Poppaea    (2).    In  the    reliefs    that    portray   both
Apollo  and  the  Nymphs,  the  former  is  usually  depicted  holding
a  lyre    (3).     This     subject    and      a  representation     of   Cupids
struggling  for  the  prize  of  victory  have  led  to  the  belief  that
musical    and    gymnastic    contests    were    celebrated    here,    but
there  is  no  real  evidence  to  support  this  opinion  (4).

A  Greek  inscription  alludes  to  a  dedication  to  the  invin-
cible Mithras   (5).


(1)  The  worship  of  the  Nymphs  -was  common  in  Campania  especially
along  the  coa^t  where  springs  were  abundant.  Another  imp>ortant  seat  of  their
cult  was  on  the  shore  of  Lake  Bracciano  at  Vicarello  in  the  territory  that  belong-
ed in  ancient  t'mes  to  Etruria.  Bloch,  Nymphen,  Roscher  III,  545 ;  Ihm,
Nitrodes,  Roscher  III,  443.

(2)  /.  G.  XIV,  892.  893;  C.  /.  L.  X,  6786-6799  and  addenda  6794;  D.
3873-3875;  Vaglieri  1174-1180:  In  some  casesi  the  origin  is  doubtful.  The  refer-
ence to  Argenna  occurs  in  C.  /.  L.  X,  6787.

(3)  Gerhard-Panofka.  Neapela  aniike  Bildwerke  Nos.  510,  546.  5^;
Riisch,  Guida  183  f.;  Nos.  674,  676.  678.  682.  684.  687.  689.  694.  696.  698.  7(^3;
Baumeister.  Denk.Tndler  des  l^lass.   Aliertums   1,   499   No.    541.

(4)  Preller-Jordan  II,  145  (5).

(5)  y.  G.  XIV.  891=Cumont.  op.  cit  II.  No.  149.

-  221   -


CHAPTER  V.
POMPEII  AND  HERCULANEUM.


Beyond  Herculgineuin  to  the  southwest  of  Vesuvius  are
the  extensive  remains  of  Pompeii.  Its  territory  originally  com-
prised the  lower  portion  of  the  Samus  Valley,  the  remainder
of  which  belonged  to  Nuceria  and  Stabiae.  Standing  formerly
much  nearer  the  shore  than  at  present,  it  had  some  commercial
importance  in  early  times,  and  served  as  the  port  of  entry
for  the  wares  billed  to  Nola  and  Nuceria  and  also,  if  Strabo's
statement  is  credible,  to  Acerrae  (I).  As  it  occupied  elevated
ground  above  the  mists  that  occasionally  hovered  over  the
river,  its  site  promoted  the  health  of  the  inhabitalits  and
offered  an  agreeable  view  in  all  directions.  Its  position,  in  a
word,  was  one  of  the  most  pleasing  that  can  be  imagined,  -
marked  by  a  cheurm  that  has  continued  till  the  present  moment.
Furthermore  in  addition  to  the  walled  town  there  were  sub-
urbs comprising  a  settlement  at  the  mouth  of  the  Sarnus,
emother  at  the  salt-works  by  the  sea,  a  rural  community  of
uncertain  location,  the  pagus  Augustus  Felix  suhurbanus,  and
probably  a  pagus  Campanus.

Though  never  an  important  city,  Pompeii  had  an  active
business  life  which  brought  material  prosperity.  When  it  was
no  longer  a  port  of  any  prominence,   it  still  exhibited  many

(1)  Strab.  V.  247C.  The  relations  of  Acerrae  with  the  Samnite  valley  are
discussed  by  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  ]75  —  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  221  ;  That  this  was
thie  p>ort  of  Acerrae  w£is  denied  by  Mau,  Pompeji  in  Leben  und  Kunst  (2)  3  but
de:fended  by  Nissen,  Pom.  Studien  581  and  Pais,  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  221  ;  Cp.
Tj)e  Petra,  /  porti  antichi  dell'Italia  meridionale  327;  Orlando,  Storia  di  Nocera
dei  Pagani  I,    187.

-  222  -


forms  of  industrial  enterprise  and  derived  favorable  returns
from  the  culture  of  the  vine,  the  raising  of  vegetables,  fishing
and  manufacturing.  ~The  people  themselves  were  a  mixture
of  Oscan,  Latin  and  Greek  elements  with  the  usual  number  of
slaves  belonging  to  all  nationalities;  to  the  stationary  popu-
lation must  be  added  a  number  of  Romans  who  built  villafe
on  the  slopes  of  Vesuvius.  The  total  population  hets  been
variously  estimated  at  from   12000  to   20000.

Pompeii  was  an  Oscan  settlement  founded  at  an  early
date  which  is  quite  uncertain,  but  it  wzis  considerably  in-
fluenced by  the  Greeks  in  the  neighboring  towns.  In  the  fifth
century  B.  C.  it  was  subject  to  Etruscan  domination.  In  the
last  quarter  of  that  century  it  came  under  the  rule  of  the  Sam-
nites  along  with  other  Campanian  cities;  as  a  result  of  the
Samnite  wars  it  beceone  subject  to  Rome.  After  remaining
faithful  till  90  B.  C.  it  joined  the  Italian  allies,  but  was  captured
after  considerable  difficulty  by  Sulla  and  forced  to  receive  a
body  of  Roman  colonists,  who  for  some  time  enjoyed  a  pos-
ition of  superiority.  Henceforth  the  official  language  was
Latin,  although  Oscan  remained  the  speech  of  a  large  portion
of  the  population  beyond  the  Christian  era.  It  suffered  much
from  the  volcanic  disturbances  of  63  A.  D.,  when  a  large  part
was  levelled  to  the  ground,  and  in  79  was  completely  destroyed
by  debris  from  Vesuvius.  (I)  A  commission  of  senators,  sent
by  Titus  to  investigate  the  needs  of  the  stricken  district,  re-
ported in  favor  of  rebuilding,  but  their  recommendation  weis
never  carried  into  effect.  (2)

In  contrast  to  the  meager  information  which  has  reached
us  regarding  the  temples  and  cults  of  most  of  the  ancient
Campanian  communities,  in  the  case  of  Pompeii,  owing  to
the  peculiar  fate  which  fell  to  its  lot  and  the  consequent  re-
searches upon  its  site,  we  have  preserved  for  us  a  considerable
number  of  facts,  so  that  we  can    obtcdn    a    fairly    complete


(1)  There  is  a  possibility  that  the  eaithquake  occured   in  62  A.   D.   The
date  is  discussed  by  Chabert,  Melanges  Boissier    115.

(2)  For  the  history  of  Pomp>ei'  see  Mau  7  f. ;  Mau-Kelsey  Pompeji  (2)  8  f .  ;
Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  89 ;  Thedenat,  Pompei-histoire,  vie  privie  1  f.  ;  Nissen,
669  f.

-  225  -


picture  of  its  religious  life.  In  other  places  the  existence  of
certain  cults  is  largely  problematical  and  based  upon  iso-
lated inscriptions  the  origin  of  which  is  not  free  from  doubt,
but  here  the  varieties  of  worship  are  for  the  most  part  quite
certain,  and  can  generally  be  associated  with  temples  the
ruins  of  which  are  still  visible.  Furthermore  a  great  number
of  wall  paintings  have  been  discovered  which  had  a  religious
or  semi-religious  significance.  Most  often,  it  is  true,  the  gods
appear  in  the  portrayal  of  mythological  legends,  which  are
principally  of  a  decorative  character  and  so  belong  to  the
domain  of  art  rather  than  to  religion.  Yet  not  infrequently  a
style  of  picture,  usually  of  inferior  technical  execution,  is
found  where  the  religious  motive  is  evident.  These  include
details  of  sacrifice  and  ritual,  the  employment  of  gods  upon
the  exteriors  of  houses  zind  shops  as  a  protection,  and  espe-
cially representations  of  the  Lares  and  the  Genius  for  the
worship  of  the  household.  They  prove  the  piety  of  the  occu-
pant  of  the  house  and  at  the  same  time  reveal  something  of
his  taste  in  religion.  (1)

The  advantages  of  a  study  of  religion  here  are,  therefore,
correspondingly  great;  not  only  do  we  derive  a  knowledge  of
the  religious  activity  of  the  Pompeians  themselves,  but  also
we  gain  an  insight  into  conditions  ordinarily  prevalent  in  the
provincial  towns  and  thereby  can  supplement  the  scattered
details  transmitted  to  us  in  the  case  of  the  rest.

PRE-ROMAN  CULTS.   ZEUS-JUPllER

Jupiter  W21S  venerated  at  Pompeii  under  more  than  one
aspect.  There  are  first  a  few  references  to  him  without  any
qualifying  epithet;  these  include  a  fragment  which  mentions
a  temple  and  a  simple  dedication  made  jointly  by  three  persons
in  the   payment   of   a  vow.   (2)     As  Miliohius,   the   beneficent


(1)  Helbig,  Wandgemdlde  der  vom  Vesuv  verschiitteten  Stddte  Campa-
niens  I  ;  von  Mayer,  Pompeii  as  an  'Art  City  23;  De  Marchi,  II  culto  privato  di
Roma  antica  I,  90.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  925:...  M.  f.  aedem  louis. ;  C.  /.  L.  X.  926:  Q.  LoUius  Scylax
«t  Calidia  AntiocKis  mater,  M.  Calidius  Nasta  loui  u.  s.   I.   m.

-  224  -


deity,  interested  in  nature  and  the  life  of  the  agricuhural  folk,
the  god  was  introduced  or  at  least  modified  under  Greek  in-
fluence; the  only  reference,  however,  to  his  cult  is  an  inscription
written  in  Oscan  pointing  specifically  to  a  shrine  which  may
go  back  as  far  as  the  third  century  B.  C.  The  sense  of  this
record  is  that  two  aediles,  while  improving  the  local  roads,
repaired  the  uia  Pompeiana  as  far  as  the  sanctuary  of  Jupiter
Milichius.   (1)

The  allusion  seems  to  be  to  a  shrine  formerly  eiscribed
to  Aesculapius,  which  is  located  northeast  of  the  large  theater,
adjacent  to  the  temple  of  Isis,  and  which  opens  on  the  strada
Stabiana,  (2)  This  building,  the  smallest  in  size  of  the  temples
hitherto  excavated,  consisted  of  a  colonnade  with  a  room  to
the  right  for  the  custodian,  a  court  with  a  large  altar,  a  te-
traistyle  portico,  and  a  cella.  The  various  parts  of  the  remsdns
do  not  all  indicate  the  same  period;  the  more  recent  portion,
including  most  of  the  walls,  has  been  attributed  to  the  eeurly
yeais  of  the  Romeui  colonization,  while  the  remnsuits  of  the
columns  are  referred  to  an  earlier  structure  of  the  Samnite
period  to  which  the  Oscan  inscription  belongs.  At  the  rear  of
the  cella  was  discovered  a  pedestal  supporting  two  images,
one  representing  a  male,  the  other  a  female  divinity,  and
with  them  the  bust  of  a  female  figure.  All  were  rude  terra-
cottas of  poor  quality  whose  identification  has  caused  much
perplexity.   (3)

Nissen,  who  was  the  first  to  recognize  here  the  shrine  of
Jupiter  Milichius  from  the  topographical  indications  of  the
inscription  mentioned  above,  considered  that  the  name  Jupiter
Milichius  was  the  equivalent  of  Aesculapius.  He  thought
further  that  the  terra-cotta  images  represented  this  deity  along
with  Hygia  and  Minerva  Medica,  and  believed  that  this
shrine  primsurily  in  honor  of  the  god  of  healing  was  erected

(1)  Buck  3  =  Conway  39  =  von  Planta  28.  This  inscription  is  put  among
the  earhest  epigraphical   material  written  in  Oscan  that  has  been   found  here.

{2)  Nissen,  Orientation  287  thinks  that  the  temple,  which  faces  the  east,
was  oriented  according  to  the  star  Pollux  of  the  Gemini.

13)  For  a  description  of  the  temple  see  Thedenat,  Pompei  vie  publique  67  ;
Mau,  chap.  XXVI;  Mau-Kelsey  chap.  XXVI.  References  to  older  literature  in
Mau-Kelsey   527.


I


-  225  -

15


to  commemorate  the  advent  of  Greek  medicine  in  the  third
century  B.  C.  (I)  The  same  writer  has  published  also  a  later
theory  based  upon  his  belief  in  the  derivation  of  the  essen-
tials of  Roman  religion  from  Samothrace.  According  to  this
view  Jupiter  Milichius,  the  original  inhabitant  of  the  shrine,
was  identified  with  the  (c  great  god  »  Jupiter  from  that  region,
who  took  with  him  into  the  sanctuary  Juno  sind  Minerva,  the
other  members  of  the  triad.  But  as  Nissan  himself  remeu-ks,
parallels  for  the  identification  of  the  earlier  Jupiter  with  the
Great  God  from  Samothrace  are  not  available.  (2)  More  plau-
sible, if  not  wholly  convincing,  is  the  opinion  of  Mau  that
the  images  represent  the  divinities  of  the  Capitoline  triad,  who
were  temporarily  housed  here  because  of  an  emergency.  (3)
The  read  deity  of  the  temple  was  Milichius,  whose  likeness
p>erhaps  appeeirs  (or  at  least  appeared  at  one  time)  upon  one
of  the  pilaster  capitals,  -  a  bearded  face  with  kindly  expression,
which  attempted  to  make  manifest  the  graciousness  of  the  god.
It  was  a  token  of  Greek  influence  from  an  au-tistic  £is  well  as
from  a  religious  point  of  view.   (4)

Jupiter  was  sometimes  honored  at  street  altars,  one  of
which  may  be  found  not  iax  from  the  northwestern  corner  of
the  Forum.  It  contains  a  relief  in  stucco  exhibiting  a  sacrificial
scene  and  the  representation  of  an  eagle  to  indicate  that  it
belonged  to  the  service  of  Jupiter.  (5)  Besides  innumerable
appearances  in  wall  paintings  that  depict  mythological  scenes,
he  is  sometimes  found  in  pictures  having  more  of  a  sacred
chEU-acter.  Thus  he  appears  in  the  group  of  the  twelve  major
divinities,  and  alone  with  scepter  and  thunderbolt  beneath  a
painted  aedicula  upon  the  exterior  wall  of  a  store.  (6)  His
image  too  was  included  in  private  shrines.  (7)

(1)  Nissen,  Pompejanische  Studien   177,  535  and  Das   Templum    195.

(2)  Nissen,  Orientation  282  f.

(3)  See  p.   244.

W)  Mau  190;  Mau-Kelscy  184;  Mau,  Das  Capitolium  und  der  Tempel  des
Zeus  Meilichios  in  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  47.  Cp.  Preller-Robert  129;  Rubensohn.
Die  MysterienheiligtUtner  in  Eleusis   und  Samothrace    198.

t5)  Mau  240;  Mau-Kelsey  235.

(6)  Helbig.   Wandgemalde  5.   Nos.   7,  8.

(7)  Helbig,  op.  cit.  No.  69b.

-  226  -


APOLLO.

Apollo  was  zealously  worshipped  and  held  in  high  regard
from  the  early  times.  This  cult,  an  example  of  Greek  influence
transmitted  from  neighboring  towns,  was  housed  in  one  of
the  oldest  and  most  magnificent  public  buildings  of  the  city
and  was  located  on  the  west  side  of  the  Forum.  Though  it
was  long  thought  to  be  the  abode  of  Venus,  not  the  slightest
doubt  remains  that  it  should  be  allotted  to  Apollo  (I).  This
fact  is  proved  by  details  found  in  the  temple,  such  as  the
presence  of  a  block  of  tufa  shaped  like  an  omphalos,  the
employment  of  griffins  in  the  decoration  of  the  peristyle,  and
the  painting  of  a  Icirge  tripod  on  a  pileister  of  the  court.  An
inscription  formed  by  metal  dots  inserted  in  the  margin  of  a
part  of  the  cella  floor,  records  the  fact  that  Oppius  Campanius
a  quaestor  had  utilized  funds  from  Apollo's  treasury  for  new
buildings  or  repairs  (2).  The  large  travertine  sAtai  in  front
of  the  temple  contains  a  double  inscription  which  states  that
a  boEU'd  of  quattuoruiri  had  let  the  contract  for  its  erection.  As
the  names  of  the  four  officials  aie  without  cognomina  Mau
suggested  that  the  date  of  the  monument  was  not  later  than
the  time  of  Augustus  (3).  The  cult  image  itself  was  not  dis-
covered when  the  sanctu£u-y  was  excavated.

As  the  location  of  this  building  was  determined  before
the  present  scheme  of  the  Forum's  outlines  was  designed,  it
does  not  stand  quite  parallel  with  the  Forum  colonnade.
Though  the  antiquity  of  the  temple  is  demonstrated  by  this
fact,  the  present  building  is  cleeirly  a  restoration,  since  its
materials  and  style   of  architecture  suggest  no  earlier   a  date

(1)  The  correct  indentification  was  made  by  Mau.  Bull.  Inst.  1882,  189,
205,  but  Engelmann  had  already  pointed  toward  this  solution  in  the  Vosaische
Zeitung  1879  No.  236  and  1882  No.  409  (not  accessible  to  me).  Nissen  had  as-
signed the  shrine  to  Ceres,  Pomp.  Studien  330 ;  Breton,  to  Venus,  Pompeia  (3),
58;  Over  beck,  to  Venus  or  Bacchus,  Pompeji  (3)  94;  Garrucci,  to  Mercury  and
Maia   Quest,    pomp.    7.

(2)  Buck  6  =  Conway  52  =  von  Planta  31,  Cp.  Jordan,  Symbolae  ad  histor-
iam.  religionumi,  Italicarum   16.

(3)  C.  I.  L.  X,  800  =  D.  6354=VaglieTi  1831  :  M.  Porcius  M.  f.,  L.  Sextilius
L.  f.,  Cornelius  Cn.  f,  A.  Cornelius  A.  f.  IIII  v'r  III  luir  d.  d.  s.  f.  locar.  Mau
82;  Mau-Kelsey  86.

-227  -


than  200  B.  C,  and  sire  in  truth  similar  to  those  of  the  surround-
ing buildings.  It  faced  the  south,  thus  belonging  to  the
second  group  of  temples  in  point  of  time  (1).  Architecturally
considered,  it  was  an  example  of  the  Corinthian  order,  and
stood  upon  a  high  podium,  wholly  surrounded  by  a  colonnade
which  formed  a  spacious  court.  The  cella  was  small  and  in-
tended for  a  single  cult  statue  (2).

The  court  exhibited  an  interesting  example  of  the  tendency
of  one  deity  to  associate  with  another.  Here  stood  a  group  of
six  statues  including  Apollo  himself,  Venus,  Diana,  and  Mer-
cury; two-those  of  Venus  and  Diana-were  provided  with  altars
for  sacrifice.  In  the  case  of  the  former  Mau  believed  that  it
was  a  survival  from  early  times  when  the  old  Oscan  goddess
Herentas  had  no  other  place  of  worship,  but,  as  Wolters  has
recently  pointed  out,  it  was  more  probably  a  recent  addition
to  the  shrine,  designed  as  a  temporary  accomodation  for  the
divinity  who  was  rendered  homeless  by  the  earthquake  of  63
A.  D.,  when  her  own  temple  was  demolished  (3).  So  far  as
can  now  be  determined  there  wets  never  a  separate  shrine  for
Diana.  All  the  gods  of  this  court  according  to  Nissen  were
chthonic  deities  like  those  honored  in  the  mysteries  celebrated
at  Andania  in  Messenia  (4).  But  while  some  of  the  PomF>eian
deities  can  be  explained  as  belonging  to  the  nether  realms,
notably  Mercury,  whose  statue  suggests  the  type  of  Hermes
Psychopompus,  others  as  Venus  are  not  so  readily  disposed
of  in  that  way.  Since  the  distinctive  mystery  divinities  do  not
appear  among  these  images,  there  is  no  reason  for  seeing  a
connection  between  them  and  Andania.  In  fact  the  view  was
only  plausible  when  Ceres  was  considered  to  be  the  mistress

(1)  Nissen,  Orientation  284.

(2)  Fox  detailed  informatioin  about  the  temple  see  Thedenat  35-39 ;  Mau
chap.  X ;  Mau-Kelsey  chap.  X ;  Nissen  chap.  XIV.  References  to  older  works  in
Mau-Kelsey,   520.

(3)  Mau  83;  Mau-Kelsey  87;  Wolters,  Der  Skulpturenschmuck  des  ApoU
loheiligtums  in  Pompei  in  Sitzungsber.  der  kgL  hay.  Akad.  der  Wissens.  1915,
47.

(4)  Paus.  IV,  33,  5 ;  Nissen,  Orientation  284  and  Pomp.  Studien  332  f.
The  author  formed  his  views  under  the  influence  of  the  older  idea  that  this
temple  belonged  to  Ceres,  and  still  retains  them  although  he  abandons  the
claim  of  that  goddess.

-  228  -


of  this  shrine.  At  the  same  time  we  may  admit  with  Nissen
the  strength  of  Greek  influence  in  this  temple  during  the  pe-
riod of  Oscan  supremacy.

From  the  age  and  position  of  his  temple  Apollo  must  be
considered  the  leading  god  of  that  era  (1).  His  pxjpulgurity  is
attested  by  the  many  traces  of  his  influence  in  private  houses.
His  name  api^eEU-s  in  two  graffiti,  scratched  upon  a  pillar  of
the  dwelling  known  as  the  Casa  del  Conte  di  Torino  (2).  Be-
sides the  many  statues  erected  in  his  honor,  he  figures  exten-
sively in  wall  paintings  generally  in  connection  with  myths
and  often  accompanied  by  other  gods  (3).  In  one  instsoice
he  appears  as  a  healing  divinity  along  with  Aesculapius  and
Chiron  (4).  Furthermore  his  peculiar  symbols,  the  lyre,  the
bow,  the  quiver,  the  tripod,  and  the  crown  of  laurel  recur
constantly.  Of  course  in  all  this  the  decorative  idea  is  the
primairy  motive;  yet  the  various  artistic  products  were  not
wholly  free  from  religious  associations  and  their  cumulative
msiss  is  an  evidence  of  the  prominent  position  of  the  god  in
the  thought  of  the  times.

DIANA.  .

As  indicated  above,  Diana  seems  not  to  have  had  a
shrine  of  her  own,  but  to  have  received  recognition  in  the
Apollo  temple  where  she  had  an  altar  and  an  image.  In  this
SEUictuary,  during  the  excavations  of  1817  was  discovered  a
perplexing  inscription,  the  interpretation  of  which,  because
of  its  abbreviations,  has  revealed  many  differences  of  opinion.
This  notice,  written  upon  a  small  pedestal  surmounted  by
the  mutilated  figure  of  a  deer,  is  a  dedication  made  with  the
aedile*s  permission  by  M.  Fabius  Secundus,   a  man  of  prom-

(1)  Mau,  Rom.  Mitt.  XI.  XI  (1896)  144.

(2)  N.  S.   1911.  54.  Apollon.  Apoll.

(3)  Helbig  op.  cit.  51  f . ;  Sogliano.  Le  pitture  murali  campane  26.  He  is
found  especially  *n  late  myths  which  received  literary  treatment  during  the  Alex-
andrian period,  as  for  instance  in  that  of  Cyparissus.  Preller-Roberts  271  (2);
Helbig,  LJntersuchungen  uber  die  campanische  Wandmalerei  230  (4) ;  Sogliano
op.  cit.  28.  Nos.   109,   110.

(4)  Helbig  op.  cit.  54.  No.  202.

-  229  -


inence  in  the  life  of  Pompeii  during  its  later  epoch  (I)
The  divinity  here  reverenced  is  concealed  in  the  letters  T.  D.
V.  S.,  which  were  long  interpreted  for  the  most  part  on  the
basis  of  the  erroneous  theory  that  the  temple  in  which  they
were  found  belonged  to  Venus.  Garrucci  and  Fiorelli  assigned
the  dedication  to  Tellus  Maia;  Nissen,  to  Tellus,  Diana  and
Venus;  Brizio,  to  Tutrix  Dea;  Guarini,  to  Dea  Venus  (2).  A
more  acceptable  supplement  for  the  abbreviations  was  pro-
posed by  Taurallo,  who  from  the  presence  of  the  deer  rightly
conjectured  that  the  deity  indicated  was  Diana  and  accordingly
proposed  the  plausible  reading,  Triuiae  Deae  (or  Uianae)  uotum
soluit  (3).  A  similar  supplement  in  which  Triviae  is  repleu:ed
by  Tifatae  seems  less  plausible  (4).  Ihat  a  dedication  should
be  made  here  to  the  great  deity  of  Capua  is  probable  enough,
but  it  seems  less  natural  to  employ  so  abridged  a  form  of  ex-
pression to  designate  a  goddess  whose  home  was  elsewhere,
and  upon  whose  epithet  considerable  stress  should  be  laid
because   of  her  foreign   origin.

CERES.

The  cult  of  Ceres  was  another  ancient  form  of  worship
which  developed  from  Greek  influence,  and  was  not  a  late
growth  derived  from  the  cult  at  Rome  as  stated  by  Birt  (5).
There  is  in  fact  every  reason  to  believe  that  she  was  worship-
ped here  before  the  arrival  of  the  Romans.    Her  shrine  has


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  801  =D.  6386=Vagleri  1217:  T.  D.  V.  S..  M.  Fabius  Se-
cundus  permissu  aedil.  A.  Hordioni  Prcx:uli  Ti.  luli  Rufi.  A  photograph  of  the
monument  is  found  in  Rendic.  dei  Lined  XXI  (1912)  78.  The  dedicator  Fabius
Secundus  is  mentioned  in  the  wax-tablets  of  Caecilius  C.  /.  L.  IV,  Supp.  p.  315.

(2)  Garrucci,  Questioni  pompeiane  72 ;  Forelli,  Descrizione  di  Pompei
240;  Nissen  331  ;  Brizio,  Giornale  degli  scavi  di  P.  n,  s.  I  (1869)  252;  Guarini,
Fasti  duumvirali  di  Pompei  154.

(3)  Tarallo,  Intomo  al  donario  del  Pompeiano  Marco  Fabio  Secundo
in  Rend,  dei  Lincei  XXI  (1912)  69-75.  The  author  gives  b  resume  of  earlier
opinions.

(4)  Wolters,  Der  SkMlpturenschmuck  des  Apolloheiligtums  in  Pompei
in  Sitzungsber.  der  ksl.   bayer.  Akad.  der  Wissensch.    1915,   52.

(5)  Blrt.  Ceres,  Roschex.   I.  863.

-  230  -


not  been  discovered,  but  this  is  due  rather  to  the  circumstance
that  it  was  located  in  a  spot  remote  from  the  center  of  the  town.
In  sF>ecifying  that  Ceres*  sanctuary  should  be  outside  the  city
proper  and  in  speaking  generally  about  temple  sites,  Vitru-
vius  must  have  bsised  his  sissertion  upon  a  state  of  affairs  which
m|ore  or  less  generally  prevailed  (I).  But,  while  the  temple
site  is  unknown,  the  names  of  several  priestesses  have  b^en
preserved,  who  are  designated  regularly  as  sacerdotes  puhlicae.
In  epitaphs  and  in  fragments  discovered  among  the  remains
of  the  ((  Building  of  Eumachia  »  appear  the  names  of  Alleia^
Decimilla,  Clodia,  and  Lassia,  and  the  names  of  others  have
been  lost  (2).  An  inscription  in  Greek,  accompzuiied  by  reliefs
of  the  goddess,  an  altar  and  a  pig,  mentions  Terentia  Paramone
as  priestess  of  Demeter  Thesmophoros ;  this  has  been  some-
times assigned  to  Neapolis  but  probably  belongs  here,  although
there  is  no  other  allusion  to  this  aspect  of  the  deity  at  Pom-
peii (3).  All  these  women  were  probably  matrons;  considering
their  office  a  great  honor,  they  express  with  simplicity  and
dignity  in  their  epitaphs  their  relation  to  their  mistress  Ceres.
As  public  priestesses  they  were  doubtless  chosen  by  the  de-
curions  at  leeist  in  the  later  period  of  the  city's  history  (4).
To  that  age  belong  Alleia  Decimilla,  whose  husband  was
duovir  in  26  A.  D.,  and  Clodia,  who  flourished  about  the
beginning  of  the  Christian  era  or  a  little  later.  This  cult  was  on
friendly  terms  with  that  of  Venus,  as  will  be  shown  later,  but
owing  to  the  extraordinary  prominence  of  the  latter,  there  was
perhaps  a  tendency  for  the  former's  influence  to  be  eclipsed  (5).
Ceres  v/as  also  adored  in  the  home  eJong  with  the  Leu-es,


(1)  Vitr.  I,  30:  Item  Cereri  extra  urbem  loco,  quo  non  quolibet  nomine
semper  homines  nisi  per  -sacrificium  fiecesse  habebant  adire ;  cum  religione,
caste  sanctisque  moribus  is  locus  debet   tueri.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  812;  X.  1036  =  D.  6365=Vaglieri  1768;  X.  1074a.  b  =  D.  5053.
Cp.  Pestalozza  e  Chiesa,  Ceres,  Ruggiero  II,  208.

(3)  /.  G.  XIV.  702=C.  /.  G.  5865;  Bloch.  Kora  und  Demeter,  RoscKer  II,
1309;  Kern,  Demeter,  P.-W.  IV,  2742;  The  reliefs  in  which  Demeter  appears
are  reproduced  in  Kunstblcctt   1828   161.  See  p.    186.

(4)  See   p.   33.

(5)  See  p.   251.

-  231   -


and  statuettes  showing  her  likeness  have  been  found  in  small
domestic  shrines  (1),

HERCULES.

Although  epigraphical  evidence  for  a  cult  of  Hercules  is
lacking,  he  is  associated  with  this  country  in  legend,  and  in
fact  was  an  important  god  throughout  Campania.  According
to  one  of  the  versions  of  Hercules*  travels  he  spent  some  time
in  the  locality  and  a  procession  (pompa)  of  his  booty  gave  its
name  to  the  town.  Not  only  does  Servius  give  this  explanation,
but  also  Solinus  in  his  list  of  towns  founded  by  gods  or  named
from  them  asserts  that  Pompeii  owed  its  existence  or  at  least
its  name  to  Hercules  (2).  It  is  true  that  this  theory  shows  the
attempts  of  the  etymologists  to  derive  the  city*s  nemne  from
some  plausible  source,  yet  it  would  have  lacked  point,  if  the
worship  of  the  god  had  not  been  important  here.  Furthermore
the  salinae  or  salt  works  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  Sarnus,
where  a  village  subject  to  Pompeii  sprang  up,  were  called
Herculeae  (3).

Accordingly,  because  of  the  prominence  of  this  god  in
early  Campanian  traditions,  Fiorelli  thought  that  the  so  called
Doric  or  Greek  temple  must  have  been  used  for  his  worship  (4).
Recently  Cosenza  has  made  the  assertion  that  Hercules  had
a  temple  at  Pompeii,  but  one  does  not  know  where  to  find
it  (5).  But  if  no  public  shrine  of  Hercules  has  yet  been  discov-
ered, various  evidences  for  his  presence  appear.  In  the  first
place  it  has  been  suspected  that  the  missing  herm  in  the  court
of  Apollo's  temple  was   in  reality  Hercules  instead  of  Maia,

(1)  N.  5.  1902,  206.
(2)  Serv.  Aen.  VII,  662:  Veniens  ftutem  Hercules  de  Hispaxiia  per  Cam-
paniam  in  quadam  Campaniae  ciuitate  pompam  triumphi  sui  exhibuit:  unde
Pompei  dicitur  ciuitas.  Sol.  2,  5:  Nam  quis  ignorat  uel  dicta  uel  condita  ...ab
ipso  (Hercule)  in  Campania  Pompeios,  qua  uictor  ex  Hispania  pompam  bourn
duxerat?  Cp.  Dion.  Hal.   I,  43.

(3)  Colum.  X.    135.

(4)  Fiorelli,  Gli  scavi  di  Pompei  app>endix  p.  14.  This  writer  assigned
to  the  domain  of  Pompeii  the  island  Petra  Herculis  about  the  location  of  which
there  is  some  doubt.

(5)  Cosenza,  Stabia  120  (2).

-  232  -


«


as  has  generally  been  assumed  (1).  In  the  aediculae  for  the
worship  of  the  Lares  his  image  has  been  found  accompanied
sometimes  by  that  of  other  divinities  (2).  His  likeness  appears
not  only  in  wall  paintings  with  the  Genius  but  also  upon  the
exteriors  of  houses  as  a  protection  (3).  Upon  one  such  wall
was  found  a  metrical  inscription  containing  an  invocation  to
Heracles  to  guard  the  house  (4).

Cacus,  who  appears  in  myths  eissociated  with  Hercules,
was  according  to  one  interpretation  a  volcanic  deity  whose
haunt  was  Mt.  Vesuvius  (5).

ATHENA-MINERVA.

Minerva  was  regarded  as  the  special  guardian  of  the  city
gates.  On  the  keystone  of  the  arch  of  the  Nola  gate  facing  the
city  a  high  relief  of  her  head  wearing  a  helment  was  carved  in
the  tufa.  Near  the  porta  Marina  a  niche  contained  Ker  image
in  terra  cotta;  another  in  the  wall  of  the  porta  Stabiana  where
the  passage  widens  to  form  an  open  court,  was  likewise  de-
signed to  hold  an  image,  and  the  cover  of  the  well  nesu*  by
is  maurked  with  her  emblem  the  Gorgon  (6).  •  in  this  phsise  of
her  activity  she  must  be  considered  as  a  development  of  the
Greek  Athena,  because  Eunong  the  Romans  Juno  rather  than
Minerva  protected  gates  (7).

She  was  the  patron  deity  of  the  fullers  and  her  symbols
the  owl  and  the  wreath  of  olive  leaves  decorate  the  wall  of
a  cleaning  establishment  (8).  This  bird  is  mentiond  in  a  wall
inscription  evidently  written  by  one  who  followed  the  fuller's
trade,  in  which  there  occurs  a  parody  of  the  first  line  of  the

(1)  Wolters  op.  cit.  47.  Cp.  Mau  64;  Nissen  333.

(2)  Helbig  op.  cit.  No.  69b;  BoKm.  Hercuies,  P.-W.  VIII,  594.

(3)  Helbig,  Nos.  69.  27;  Neapolis  I  (1913)  105;  N.  5.  1899,  341  ;  Sogliano,
Le  pitture  murali  campane  9,  No.  4.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  733.

(5)  Winter.  The  Myth  of  Hercules  at  Rome  in  Univ.  of  Michigan  Stud-
ies IV.  268.

(6)  Thedenat.  Pompei  7 ;  Mau  247 ;  Mau-Kelsey  242.

(7)  Serv.  iAen.  II.  610;  Simul  notandum  quod  deos  iacit  opexa  sua  euer-
tere,  ut  p>ortas  lufionem  quarum  dea  est.

(8)  Real  Museo  di  Napoli  IV.  PI.  49 ;  Mau.  Fig.  243 ;  Mau-Kelsey  Fig.  226.


\


-233  -


Aeneid  (I).  A  fresco  seems  to  contain  a  picture  of  a  festival,
F)erhaps  the  Quinquatrus,  in  which  this  goddess  was  honored
especially  by  the  jullones.  In  one  part  of  the  picture  a  sacellum
is  probably  represented.  The  presence  of  several  owls  shows
that  the  deity  concerned  here  is  Minerva.  The  festival  is
portrayed  as  a  scene  of  pranks  and  merry  making  in  the  open
air  during  which  a  quarrel  arises.  (2)  Finally  the  goddess  like
Hercules,  Mercury  and  other  divinities  was  sketched  roughly
upon  a  house  in  order  to  exercise  a  protection  over  it.  (3)

A  street  inscription  in  the  Oscan  tongue  is  important
because  it  alludes  to  her  shrine.  This  notice  was  discovered
in  1897  in  the  Strada  deirAbbondanza  northwest  of  the
Triangular  Forum.  It  mentions  a  way  leading  to  the  municipal
building  and  to  Minerva,  and  seems  to  refer  to  a  street  that
was  subsequently  closed  at  the  farther  end  (4).  Although  the
goddess  w£is  worshipped  as  one  of  the  triad  in  the  Capitoline
temple,  it  is  quite  probable  that  at  an  earlier  j>eriod  before  the
introduction  of  the  Romsui  state  cult  she  had  another  shrine
as  Athena  to  which  the  above  inscription  alludes.  Recently
she  has  been  associated  with  the  so-called  Greek  temple  of
the  Trieuigular  Forum,  which  has  long  been  a  puzzle  to
surchajeologists.  This  sanctuary,  a  Doric  building  ascribed  to
the  sixth  century  B.  C.  and  so  the  oldest  in  the  city,  was  reared
upon  a  high  podium  composed  of  a  series  of  broad  steps,
thus  differing  from  all  other  temples  in  the  city.  (5)  It  faced
the  east.  (6)  In  front,  in  a  spot  where  the  principal  altau-  might

(I)  N.    S.    1913,    147;   rullones.    Vlulam  ego   cano,    non   arma   uirumque.

'2)  Sogliano,  op.  cit.  134;  Giomale  degli  scavi  di  P.  n.  s.  Ill,  103  und
PI.  IV.  Cp.  Plin.  nat.  XXXV,  143;  JaKn,  Arch.  Zeit  XII  (1854)  191  ;  Mommsen.
Romische  UrJ^nden  in  Zeits.  fiir  geschichtliche  Rechtswiss.  XV  (1850)  330  =
fiesanx.  Schr.  Ill,  99.  For  a  description  of  the  festival  see  Wissowa  253 ;  Fowler,
Roman  Festivals  59.

(3)  Mau  241  ;  Mau-Kelsey  236;  Hdbig  p.  6,  No.    10,

(4)  Buck  18  =  N.  S.  1897,  465.  The  inscription  was  found  on  the  north
side  of  insula  V-VI  of  regio  VIII.

(5)  The  temple  is  dated  by  Pais  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  or  the  begin-
ning of  the  fifth  century,  and  by  Nissen,  Mau,  and  Thedenat  in  the  sixth  cen-
tury. Pais,  -<4ncienf  Italy  1 74  =  Ricerc/ie  stor.  e  geog.  221  ;  Nissen,  Orientation
281;  Mau   138;  Thedenat  5.

(6)  Nissen  280.

-  234  -


be  expected,  was  a  small  sacred  enclosure  containing  perhaps
the  bones  of  some  great  man  of  the  distant  past  who  was
reverenced  as  the  city's  hero.  There  was  also  a  well,  the  water
of  which  served  for  the  necessities  of  the  temple  and  its  ritual;
according  to  epigraphical  evidence  it  was  the  work  of  an
Oscan  magistrate,  the  meddix  tuticus  N.  Trebius.  A  singulzu:
circumstance  is  that  the  temple  wets  practically  in  ruins  when
the  city  met  its  doom,  and  only  a  poor  shrine  maintained  the
customary  worship.  Whether  it  was  overthrown  by  the
esurthqusike  of  63  or  was  already  badly  dilapidated  is
disputed.  (I)

The  double  cella  and  the  presence  of  three  altars  in  front
point  to  the  probability  that  the  temple  was  devoted  to  several
gods  but  these  have  never  been  satisfactorily  determined.
Among  those  that  received  consideration  from  eeirlier  scholars
were  Jupiter,  Hercules,  Liber,  and  Venus.  (2)  According  to
another  theory  based  upon  the  discovery  of  the  foot  of  a  terra
cotta  deer  in  the  temple  itself  and  a  small  statue  resembling
Apollo  not  far  away  in  the  Triangulgu*  Forum,  the  gods  housed
here  were  Apollo  and  Diana.  (3)  Admitting  this  possibility,
Mau  was  inclined  to  attribute  the  shrine  to  them  along  with
Minerva  (4).  Although  Nissen  later  recognized  the  validity
of  the  Oscan  inscription  as  a  reason  for  assigning  the  temple
to  a  deity  known  £is  Minerva,  he  was  inclined  after  a  comparison
with  Greek  shrines  to  think  that  this  goddess  -was  of  a
chthonic  nature.  (5)

The  worship  of  the  Greek  Athena  may  well  have  been
introduced  at  an  early  date  as  the  result  of  Greek  influence.
Yet  at  Pompeii  indications  of  her  early  prominence  are  not  at


(1)  For  a  description  of  the  temple  see  Thedenat  5;  Mau   137-140;  Mau-

IKelsey   (with  bibliography)  523 ;  and  esj>ecially  Koldewey  und   Puchstein,   Die
griechischen   Tempel  in   Unteritalien   und  SiciUen  45  f.   and  Plate   V.   Cp.   So-
gliano,  //  tempio  nel  foro  triangolare  di  Ponxpei   in  Mon.   ant.    I   (1890)    190   f.
(2)  Overbeck-Mau,    Pompeji   88;   Nissen,   336   f.   and  Das    Templum  204;
Breton,  Pompeia  44 ;  Dyer,  Pompeii  246.
(3)  Soglieuio  (following  von  Duhn)  //  tempio  nel  foro  triangolare  in  Mon.
flnf.  1    1890)   198.
(4)  Mau  140.  Cp.  Thedenat  7.
I  (5)  Nissen,  Orientation  281.

-  235  -


hand,  and  generally  in  Campania  except  at  Surrentum  her
cult  seems  not  to  have  been  of  first  rate  importance.  Hence  it
seems  more  probable  that  Apollo  was  the  leading  deity
worshipped  here,  but  that  his  worship  along  with  Diana's
was  transferred  more  and  more  to  the  newer  temple  which
had  been  built  in  his  honor  in  the  Forum.  After  the  practical
departure  of  Apollo  the  temple  was  probably  not  at  once
allowed  to  go  to  ruin,  as  Sogliguio  thought.  (1)  Minerva,  who
had  formerly  been  a  subordinate  deity,  w£is  still  venerated
here,  and  gave  her  name  to  the  building  at  the  time  of  the
Social  War  to  which  belongs  the  inscription  noted  above.


VENUS  HERENTAS.


Venus,  called  by  the  Oscans  Herentas,  was  undoubtedly
one  of  the  deities  of  the  pre-Roman  period.  She  was  of  a
purely  Italic  origin,  and  probably  resembled  the  old  Latin
Venus  of  Ardea.  The  only  evidence  for  a  Venus  cult  at  this
time  is  the  sJtar  that  stood  in  Apollo's  temple  before  an
image.  (2)  Yet  even  when  this  sanctuary  was  restored  in  the
tufa  period  (the  second  century  B.  C),  the  goddess  had
probably  been  materially  modified  by  the  influence  of  the
Venus  of  Elryx  and  was  named  Herentas  Erycina.  (3)  A  survival
of  the  older  conception  is  expressed  upon  a  piece  of  pottery
where  Venus  is  called  the  protectress  of  gardens  £uid  shows
herself  to  be  a  nature  goddtess  whose  interest  centers  in  certain
agjricultural  operations.  (4)  The  later  Venus  cult  introduced
by  the  Roman  colonists  will  be  discussed  in  the  section  devoted
to  Roman  divinities.  (5)      .


(1)  Sogliano   199.

(2)  Mau   83.    See   p.    228.

(3)  Mau  38.  Cp.  the  accooint  of  this  cult  at  Herculaneum  p.  285.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  2776;  Wissowa  288-289;  Preller-Jorcbn  I.  435.

(5)  See  p.  246.

-  236  -


NEPTUNE.


Evidence  for  the  worship  of  Neptune  consists  of  an
inscription  found  outside  the  walls  near  the  harbor  in  the
direction  of  Ceistellameire.  It  records  an  offering  made  by  a
Ubertinus  Sex.  Pompeius  Ruma,  perhaps  a  freedman  of  the
noted  Sextus  Pompey,  and  tends  to  prove  that  there  W8is  a
shrine  of  the  god  somewhere  near  the  city.  (I)  That  it  was
not  merely  an  isolated  dedication  is  rendered  probable  by  the
circumstance  that  in  the  same  place  were  found  a  gold  chain
and  a  portrait  bust  probably  of  some  traveler  who  had  escaped
the  p>erils  of  the  sea.  We  may  therefore  infer  that  in  this
neighborhood  once  stood  a  shrine  of  the  Greek  sea  god
Poseidon  or  of  Neptune  conceived  with  the  characteristics  of
the  Greek  deity.  (2)  Neptune  is  further  mentioned  in  a  graffito
on  the  wall   of  the  temple  of   Venus.    (3)

MERCURY,  MAIA.

The  earliest  traces  of  a  worship  of  Mercury  are  found  in
the  temple  of  Apollo,  where  along  with  the  images  of  other
divinities  stood  a  marble  herm,  which  hsis  been  dated  as
pre-Romsui.  (4)  The  facial  expression  seems  to  suit  Hermes
as  Psychopompus  better  than  any  of  his  other  aspects,  and
he  was  undoubtedly  regarded  as  a  god  of  death.  Though  this
conception  is  not  unnatural  here,  it  is  more  surprising  to  find
the  S8une  kind  of  god  in  a  place  for  gymnastic  exercises.  Yet
this  is  the  form  which  he  assumes  in  the  court  of  the  Stabian
baths,  derived  it  would  seem  from  a  Greek  type,  which  is
described  by  Pauscinias  as    existing     in    the     gymnsisium     at


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  8157  =  N.  S.  1881,  121  :  Sex.  Pompeius  Sex.  I.  Ruma  Nep-
tuno  u.  s.  1.  Von  Duhn,  Der  Hafen  von  Pompei  in  Rh.  Mus.  XXXVI  (1881)
130.

(2)  Cp.  von  Domaszewski,  Nepianus  auf  lateinischen  Inschriften  in
Abhandl.   zur  rom  Religion    19;  Wissowa  226.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  IV.   1764.  Neptunus.

(4)  Mau-Kelsey  88.

-  237  -


Phigalia  in  Arcadia.  (1)  It  is  even  probable  that  the  herm  of
the  Apollo  temple  belonged  originally  to  a  palaestra  and  was
set  up  in  its  new  location  aitei  the  great  earthquake.  (2)
Mau  conjectured  that  a  statue  of  this  god  stood  in  the  open
Palaestra  near  the  Triangular  Forum,  where  a  pedestal  without
a  corresponding  image  was  unearthed.  Others  have  thought
that  a  statue  of  the  doryphoros  type  found  near  by  was  intended
to  represent  him.  (3)

Usually,  however,  Mercury  was  honored  under  an  entirely
different   aspect.   As   a     patron     of     commerce     euid     business
enterprise,    his    cult,    if    not    introduced,    was    at   least    greatly
strengthened  by  Roman  influence  and  he  gained  considerable
populary     with     the    thrifty     Pompeians.      (4)     In  many     wall
paintings  the  conventional  Mercury  as  messenger  of  the  gods
with   winged    petasus    and    sometimes    winged    sandals    is    the
bearer  of  a  purse.   This  is  an  unusual  attribute,   and  alludes
to  the  prominence  given  the  god  as  one  who  promotes  gain.
In  truth  Mercury,   the   protector   of   trade   and  shops,    appears
more  often  than  any  other  deity  in  the  rough  sketches  which
associate  a  tuteWy  divinity  with  a  building.  He  is  not,  however,
always  depicted  alone  but  may  be  accompanied  by  Fortuna,
Venus    or    Apollo.    (5)    Beneath    one    of    his    pictures    is    the
inscription  Mercurius  Felix.     (6)     A  male  figure  in  the  act  of
pouring  wine,  which  was  painted  on  a  tavern  wall,  is  marked
by  the  neune  Hermes;  this  was  taiken  by  Mau  as  a  reference
to   the   proprietor   of   the   establishment,     but     it     might     have
alluded  to  the  god  in  his  function  of  oho'/6o<;  (7).

(1)  Paus.  VIII.  39,  4(6).  Cp.  IV.  32  1;  Mau  204;  Mau-Kelsey  200.
Imhoof-Blumer  eind  Gardner,  NumismaUc  Commeniary  on  Pausanias  in  Jour.
Hell  Stud.  VII  (1886)  110.

(2)  Wolters.    op.   cit.   50.

(3)  Mau,  Der  Fundort  der  Neapeler  Doryphoros  in  Strena  H^ibigiana
186.  Mau   172;   Mau-Kelsey   166;   Nissen    168;   Thedenat  91.

(4)  Scherer,  Hermes  in  der  Kunst,   Roscher   I,   2425-2426.

(5)  Helbig.  Wandgemalde  6.  Nos.  10-20,  Nos.  201,  362;  Sogliano,  Pit-
ture  murali  campane  9  Nos.  1-3;  Eitrem.  Hermes,  P.-W.  VIII.  771;  Scherer,
Roscher  I,  2428;  Neapolis  I  (1913)  105;  De  Marchi,  //  culto  privato  di  Roma
antica   I,   81  (1).

(6)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  812;  Helbig,  Wandgemalde  No.  It;  Steuding.  Mer-
curius Roscher   II.   2815.

(7)  Eitrem,    P.-W.    VIII,    780;    Mau    421.

-238  -


His  cult  was  closely  associated  with  that  of  Maia,  who
was  really  an  old  Italian  deity  of  fertility  and  increase
worshipped  much  around  Rome,  where  she  was  sometimes
associated  with  Bona  Dea  or  Terra  ;  (1)  usually  she  was
confused  with  the  Greek  mythological  character  who  belonged
to  legend  rather  than  to  religion.  She  is  generally  supposed
.to  have  had  an  image  along  with  Mercury  in  the  Apollo
temple,  but  the  missing  figure  there  may  have  represented
Hercules  (2).  A  considerable  number  of  inscriptions,  the  work
of  a  body  of  ministri,  preserve  the  name  of  Maia  along  with
that  of  Mercury.  Until  recently  it  was  generally  believed  that
the  organization  was  originally  devoted  to  the  cult  of  these  two
deities  before  it  adopted  the  worship  of  Augustus,  but  this
opinion  should  probably  be  rejected.  The  question  will  be
considered  under  the  cult  of  the  Emperors.   (3)

DIONYSUS-BACCHUS.

No  shrine  dedicated  to  Dionysus  or  Bacchus  has  yet  been
excavated,  but  without  doubt  such  a  one  existed.  Though  a
painting  exhibiting  this  god  was  found  in  the  custodian *s
room  of  the  Apollo  temple,  it  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any
religious  significance  and  there  is  no  indication  that  he  w£is
worshipped  in  this  spot.  (4)  He  is  mentioned  in  short  painted
inscriptions  and  graffiti,  and  in  the  exterior  wall  paintings  and
sketches  designed  to  safeguard  the  premises,  he  shares  with
Mercury  the  honor  of  most  frequent  appearance.  (5)  Several
of  the  paintings  on  inside  walls  exhibit  scenes  dealing  with
the  cult  of  Dionysus.  Among  the  details  which  commonly
appeeu-  are  a  shrine,  a  cult  statue  of  the  god  sometimes
portrayed  amid  adoring  devotees,  and  his  distinguishing
emblems.  Sometimes  he  is  associated  with  other  divinities,  as
Pan  and  Priapus,  and  accompanied  by  Satyrs  or  Bacchantes.
Again  he  is  the  recipient  of  offerings  either  flowers  or  a  slain

(1)  Cp.  MacTob.  I,   12.  20.

(2)  See  p.  232.

(3)  See  p.   263.

(4)  Helbig  98,   No.    395.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  1626,  3508;  Helbig  9.  Na».  23-26.

-  239  -


animal  (I).  In  paintings,  where  the  idea  of  decoration  is  the
most  prominent  factor,  he  appears  in  innumerable  instances
and  in  sculpture  is  probably  to  be  recognized  in  the  so  called
tronze   Narcissus   of   Naples.    (2)

MINOR  DEITIES.

Flora  was  worshipped  at  an  early  date  among  the  Oscans
and  Sabellians  of  south  central  Italy  euid  wets  regeu-ded  as  an
important  agricultural  deity.  (3)  The  only  testimony  for  her
cult  here  is  a  tiny  alteir  discovered  in  the  Casa  del  Fauno,  which
contains  her  name  in  the  Oscani  form  Fluxxsai.  (4)  A  bronze
statuette  unearthed  at  the  seune  time  has  disappe£u*ed.  The
inscription  is  not  necessarily  very  old;  it  belonged  to  a  house
restored  in  Sulla*s  time,  upon  the  walls  of  which  were  found
several  Oscan  graffiti.  The  owner  seems  to  have  adhered  to
the  language  longer  than  most  of  his  fellow  citizens.

Pan's  influence  is  seen  in  a  wall  painting  referring  to  his
cult.  He  is  portrayed  in  the  form  of  a  bronze  idol  standing
upon  a  column  in  the  shade  of  a  sacred  tree  upon  whoss
branches  some  nets  sure  hanging.  Three  men,  -  a  hunter,  a
fowler  and  a  fisherman,  are  in  the  act  of  doing  obeisance  to
Pan,  and  have  dedicated  to  him  the  nets  upon  the  tree.  Traces
of  letters  remaining  on  the  picture  indicate  that  it  contained
an  epigram  of  Leonidsis  of  Tsu-entum  in  keeping  with  its
theme  (5).  The  many  other  paintings  in  which  Pan  figures
have  a  mythological  rather  than  a  religious  interest.

Slight  evidence  exists  for  the  worship  of  Aesculapius  and
his  companion  deity  Hygia.  The  temple  and  the  images  once
supposed  to  belong  to    him    are    now    assigned     to    Jupiter

(1)  Sogliano,  Pitture  murali  campane  51,  Nos.  241-247  and  Arch.  stor.
Nap,   II,  601.

(2)  Helbig  93  f.  The  statue  is  portrayed  in  Real  Museo  di  Napoli  XVI
PI.  28;  Brunn-Bruckmann.  No.   384;  Mau-Kelsey  452.  Fig.   259.

(3)  Wissowa,  Flora,  P.-W.  VI,  2747;  Steuding  Flora,  Roscher  I,  1484;
Labatut,  Flore,  son  culte  et  ses  jeux  4.

(4)  Conway,  No.  46  =  von  Planta  45.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  3407  {2)  =  Anthologia  Palatina  VI,  13;  Sogliano.  Pittare
murali  campane  No.    197  with  references.

-  240  -


Milichius,  as  explained  above.  (I)  Salus,  adopted  ordinarily
by  the  Latins  as  the  equivalent  of  Hygia,  appears  in  a  one
word  inscription  painted  over  two  cornucopias  that  adorn  an
exterior  house  wall  neai  the  Strada  di  Nola.  Beneath  is  an
altar  where  the  goddess  of  health  was  worshipped,  which
has  the  distinction  of  being  the  only  one  of  its  kind  that  is
labelled  with  a  name.  The  shrine  was  not  of  late  construction,
because  upon  an  earlier  surface  underneath  the  later  coating
another  reference  to  the  same  divinity  appeau-ed  (2).
Aesculapius  has  been  found  among  the  gods  revered  at
household  shrines  but  seldom  occurs  in  wall  paintings.  (3)

The  divinity  of  the  River  Sarnus  who  had  so  high  a  place
among  the  cults  of  Nuceria  was  not  wholly  disregarded  in  the
vicinity  of  Pompeii,  where  traces  of  his  cult  have  been  found
in  the  wall  paintings  (4).  He  was  particulcirly  influential  in
the  district  near  the  river.  In  the  so  called  Scavo  Matrone,
where  a  villa  of  this  region  was  excavated  a  few  years  ago
on  the  road  to  Castellamare,  Seo-nus  is  seen  aunong  the  Penates
in  a  domestic  cult  cis  a  bearded  personage  crowned  with
reeds.  He  is  seated  beneath  the  shade  of  a  sacred  tree,  the  left
elbow  supported  by  an  upturned  urn,  the  right  hand  resting
on  his  knee.  (5)  In  the  market  place  mace  Hum,  in  the  room
for  the  sale  of  meat  and  fish  he  is  represented  among  other
figures  which  personify  psurts  of  the  surrounding  country,  but
this  painting,  though  portraying  various  local  divinities,  is
purely  decorative.    (6)

A  wall  inscription,  found  in  the  Vico  del  Lupanare  is
explained  by  Mommsen  as  an  allusion  to  the  divinities  of  a
bathing  establishment  modelled  upon  those  of  the  capital  city.

(1)  See  p.  225.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  3774a.  b=N.  S.  1891.  265  =  R6m.  Mitt.  Ill  (1888)  121 :  3aU
titis;   Salutei  sacrum.

(3)  Mau  278 ;  Helbig  No.  202.

(4)  Helbig,  Nos  65,  1013,  1018.  No.  65  showing  Venus  and  Vesta  with
the  Lares  and  Sarnus  below  is  reproduced  by  De  Marchi  //  culto  privato  di
Roma  aniica  I,  PI.  IV,  and  Men.  ined.  delVInst.  arch.  Ill,  6a.  Cp.  Sogliano,
op.  cit.  Nos.  39.  44.

(5)  N.  5.    1901.  426.

(6)  Helbig  No.   1019.  Cp.  Mau  94;  Mau-Kelsey  98.

-241-

16


It  is  limited  to  the  two  words  Lumpas  Homanenses .  (1)  There
is  no  evidence  for  Bona  Dea  in  this  town.  Preuner  was  some-
what inclined  at  one  time  to  recognize  her  figure  among  the
Lsires,  but  this  divinity  is  more  plausibly  explained  as  a
Genius.  (2)

ROMAN  CULTS,  OFFICIAL  PRIESTS.

The  care  of  the  official  religious  ceremonies  pertaining
to  the  community  as  a  whole  was  in  the  hands  of  augurs  and
pontiffs.  TTie^  first  class  is  represented  by  M.  Stlaborius  Veius
Fronto  and  by  Mi.  Tullius,  both  of  whom  had  filled  the  offices
of  judical  duumuir  and  quinquennalis  (3).  The  second  of
these  officials,  who  flourished  about  the  time  of  the  birth  of
Christ  will  be  mentioned  again  below  in  connection  with  the
temple  of  Fortuna  Augusta.  The  word  augur  alone  occurs  in
a  graffito  (4).  Two  prominent  citizens  who  were  honored
with  statues  in  the  Forum  and  elsewhere,  held  the  office  of
pontiff.  The  first  C.  Cuspius  Pansa  fiUus  was  a  duumuir  with
judicial  powers,  the  other  M.  Lucretius  Decidianus  Rufus
besides  this  office  served  as  quinquennalis  and  military
tribune.  (5)  The  latter  belonged  to  the  more  recent  period  of
the  city's  history  but  lived  apparently  before  the  reign  of
Tiberius;   the  date   of   the  former  is  unknown.    (6)

THE  CAPITOLINE  TRIAD.

Although  the  Capitoline  triad  was  important  at  Pompeii,
its  deities  were  overshadowed  by  the  extraordinary  prominence
won  by  Venus.  In  the  large  temple  on  the  northern  limits  of
the  Forum  was  found  a  portion  of  an  inscription  headed  with

(1)  Mommsen,  quoted  by  Zlangemedster  in  note  to  C.  /.  L.  IV,  815.
Mommsen,  Unteritalische  Didlekjte  256;  Vaglieri,  note  to  No.  1181;  Bloch,
Nymphen,  Roscher  III,  545.

(2)  Preuner,  Hestia-Vesta  240;  Peter,  Bona  Dea,  Roscher  I,   793.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  806;  X,  820  =  Vaglieri  1849;  X,  822.

(4)  C.  7.  L.   IV,  2091.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  788  =  D.  6363b;  X,  789  =  D.  6363c;  X,  851  =D.  6363d;  X.
791  =D.  6360a;  X.  859  =  D.  6359a.

(6)  Mommsen,  note  to  C.  /.  L.  X,  788,  789.

-242  -


the  letters  I.  O.  M. ;  this  was  set  up  in  the  interests  of  the
Emperor  Caligula  and  belongs  to  the  yeai  37  A.  D.  (I)  In
the  cella  was  found  also  a  large  head  of  Jupiter  which  bears
a  considerable  resemblance  to  the  Zeus  of  Otricoli.  (2)
Another  reference  to  the  god  occurs  in  a  dedication  made  by
Antistia  Methe  a  matron,  where  he  is  associated  closely  with
the  goddess  Venus  Fisica.  The  name  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus
also  forms  a  graffito.  (3)  A  Greek  inscription  found  in  the
temple  just  mentioned,  which  contains  an  allusion  to  the
Phrygian  Zeus  will  be  treated  in  the  section  devoted  to  the
religions  of  the   Orient.    (4)

In  the  Capitoline  cult  Jupiter  was  naturally  honored  along
with  Juno  gind  Minerva.  It  has  already  been  noted  that  terra
cotta  images  of  these  three  divinities  stood  in  the  temple
assigned  to  Jupiter  Milichius  at  the  moment  that  the  city  was
destroyed.  Hence  the  first  supposition  was  to  regeurd  this
sanctuEiry  as  the  city's  Capitolium,  although  the  notion  that
Milichius  had  been  the  first  inhabitgmt  of  the  site  w£is  not
excluded.   (5)

To  this  view  there  are  serious  objections.  Whenever  a
colony  possessed  a  Capitolium,  it  tried  to  imitate  the  one  at
Rome  so  far  £is  its  own  comparatively  slender  resources  and
local  conditions  permitted.  As  this  cult  had  an  intimate  relation
to  the  Roman  state,  and  before  the  rise  of  Emperor  worship
served  as  the  chief  medium  for  the  expression  of  patriotic
devotion  to  the  central  government,  it  was  always  administered
on  as  grand  a  scale  as  possible.  Such  a  temple  was  regularly
one   of   the  largest  shrines   in   a  community,    and   was  raised


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  796  =  Vaglieri  1110:  I.  O.  M.  Pro  salute  C.  Caesaris  Au-
gust! Germanici,  imp.  pontif.  max.,  tribunic.  potestat.  consulis [D]octus  p.  s.

(2)  Gerhard-Panofka,  Neapels  antike  Bildwerke  109;  Brunn-Bruckmann
574;  Overbeck,  Gr.  Kunstmyihologie,  Zeus  62,  No.  13;  Mau  65;  Mau-Kelsey
67;  Riisch.  Guida  97.   No.  296.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  928  =  D.  3180:  Imperio  Veneris  fisicae  loui  O.  M.  Anti-
stia Methe  Antisti  Primigeni  ex  d.  d.  C.  I.  L.   IV,  6864.

(4)  See   p.    278.

(5)  Overbeck-Mau,  Pompeji  110  f.,  637  (49).  Here  two  temples  axe  as-
signed to  these  gods  and  both  cue  called  Capitoiia.  Cp.  91.  Breton,  Pompeia
54  assigns  the  temple  doubtfully  to  Jupiter  and  Juno.

-  243  -


upon  an  elevation  either  natural  or  artificial.  (I)  But  none
of  these  requirements  is  found  in  the  temple  near  the  triangular
Forum,  as  it  was  unquestionably  small  and  insignificant.  It
is  true  that  the  local  cult  of  Venus  surpeissed  that  of  Jupiter
in  an  exceptional  manner,  so  that  his  luster  was  thereby
somewhat  obscured  ;  there  is,  however,  no  reason  to  minimize
the  importance  of  the  Capitoline  triad.  Moreover  it  can  not  be
assumed  on  the  one  hand  that  the  mean  terra  cotta  images
found  here  were  the  regulsur  cult  statues,  and  on  the  other  hand
there  were  no  indications  of  a  solid  base  capable  of  supporting
three  statues  of  marble  or  bronze.  (2)  To  explain  the  presence
of  images  of  the  triad  in  a  place  so  unsuited  to  them,  Mau,
as  stated  above,  advanced  the  theory  that  the  three  figures
were  merely  temporary  substitutes  for  the  regular  cult  statues,
and  that  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus  and  his  companions  had
been  installed  here  until  their  own  temple,  which  had  been
demolished  by  the  earthquake  could  be  rebuilt  (3).

It  is  now  quite  generally  agreed  that  the  temple  of  the
Capitoline  deities  is  to  be  identified  with  the  remains  situated
on  the  north  side  of  the  Forum,  which  belong  to  a  building
badly  damaged  by  earthquakes  and  not  yet  restored  in  79  A.
D.  This  building  rose  upon  a  podium  about  three  meters  in
height  and  was  reached  by  a  long  flight  of  steps  of  peculiar
construction,  so  arranged  that  the  upper  ones  extended  nearly
across  the  whole  front,  while  the  lower  ones  occurred  only
toward  the  two  sides.  The  space  intervening  between  these
side  steps  formed  a  platform  used  by  public  speakers.  A  deep
portico  served  as  entrance  to  the  cella  which  was  richly
adorned  with   columns  and  mosaics     (4).    At  the  rear  was   a


(1)  Mau,  Das  Capitolium  und  der  Tempel  des  Zeus  Milichius  in  Rom.
MHt.  XI  (1896)  142,  147  and  Pompeji  (2)  63,  189;  Toutain,  $:tade  sur  les  capi-
iolea  provinciaux  in  Rapports  de  I'ecole  pratique  des  hautes  etudes  1898-9,  28;
Castan,   Les  Capitoles  provinciaux   du   monde  romain  23,    65,    105.

(2)  Mau,  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  143.

(3)  Mau  63  :  Mau-Kelsey  66.

(4)  The  form  of  the  ancient  temple  is  seen   in  a  wall  relief  showing  the
north  side  of  the  Forum,   which  was  discovered  in   the  house  of  Caecilius  lu
cundus.  Mau  60  and  Rom.  Mitt.  XV  (1900)   115;  Mau-Kelsey  64;  Thedenat  43
Fig.  26.

-  244  -


long  pedestal  for  three  images,  -  Jupiter  in  the  center,  Juno
on  the  right  and  Minerva  on  the  left,  -  and  adjacent  were  three
small  rooms  designed  to  serve  the  needs  of  these  gods.
Noteworthy  was  the  erection  of  the  altar  on  the  platform  rather
than  on  the  ground  below,  -  a  peculiarity  perhaps  due  to  the
belief  that  every  thing  about  the  shrine  should  be  elevated
as  much  as  possible  to  accord  with  the  Roman  Capitolium.  (I)
As  all  these  details  suit  well  the  requirements  of  the  Capitoline
triad,  and  a  head  of  Jupiter  as  well  as  an  inscription  mentioning
his  name  appeared  among  the  ruins,  there  is  no  doubt  that
the  temple  should  be  assigned  to  this  cult.  Its  situation  and
mode  of  construction,  which  must  have  made  it  loom  up
large  in  the  Forum,  and  its  evident  magnificence,  conduce  to
the  s£une  conclusion  (2).

It  is  more  difficult  to  decide  whether  the  Capitoline  triad
was  worshipped  here  from  the  time  that  the  temple  was
erected.  The  age  of  the  building  itself  has  been  variously
estimated.  According  to  one  view  it  antedated  the  Roman
colony  and  belonged  to  the  late  Oscan  period,  -  an  opinion
that  receives  some  support  from  the  circumstance  that  it  faces
the  south  (3).  If  this  date  is  correct,  it  brings  to  the  front
the  perplexing  question  regarding  the  identity  of  the  gods
first  honored  here.  The  theory  promulgated  by  Nissen,  that
the  sanctuary  was  consecrated  in  the  Oscan  period  to  three
popular  Csunpanietn  deities  Ceres,  Liber  and  Libera,  who  were
changed  by  the  Romans  to  correspond  to  their  own  triad  is
unsupported  by  any  evidence  and  has  been  generally
discredited.  (4)  The  same  objection  applies  to  the  theory
advanced  by  Sogliano,  that  the  originaJ  occupants  of  the
Capitol  were  Jupiter,   Venus  auid  Ceres  (5).   If   it  Is  necessary

(1)  Mau  64;  Mau-Kelsey  67.

(2)  For  accounts  of  the  Jupiter  temple  see  Thedenat  40-43;  Nissen
320  {.;  Overbeck-Mau.  Pompeji  90  f . ;  Mau  59  f . ;  Mau-Kelsey  63  f . ;  (with
bibliography  518).

(3)  Overbeck-Mau  95;  Mau-Kelsey  66;  Nissen  367,  dated  the  temple
300-100  B.  C. ;  more  recently  in  Orientation  284  he  fixes  the  date  as  before  80
B.  C.

(4)  Nissen  327.  Cp.  Overbeck-Mau  635  (38).

(5)  Sogliano,  Spigolature  epigrafiche  in  Atti  Nap.  XV  (1890)  158  f.

-  245  -


to  admit  the  existence  of  the  building  a  short  time  before  the
arrival  of  Roman  colonists,  its  presence  may  be  explained  els
the  result  of  a  Romeuiizing  party  in  the  city  at  the  beginning
of  the  first  century  B.  C,  when  it  was  under  Roman  protection.
This  faction  composed  of  persons  interested  in  promoting  close
relations  with  Rome  seems  to  have  been  influential,  as  is
proved  by  the  use  of  Latin  in  some  cases  instead  of  Oscsui
for  official  documents  (I).  It  is  even  conceivable  that  such
a  temple  was  constructed  entirely  apart  from  Roman  influence,
although  this  supposition  seems  less  probable.  It  was
undoubtedly  a  widely  spread  custom  to  introduce  the  worship
of  Jupiter,  Juno,  and  Minerva  at  the  time  a  town  W8is  founded,
but  there  is  no  indication  that  they  were  combined  in  worship
in  the  distinctive  manner  that  marked  the  Capitoline  cult.  (2)
Later  investigations,  however,  tend  to  advance  the  date
of  the  building  to  the  advent  of  the  Roman  colony.  Architectureil
details  which  seem  later  than  the  tufa  period,  the  uniform
employment  of  the  second  or  architectural  style  of  wall
decoration,  and  the  apparent  use  of  the  Roman  measures  in
laying  out  the  work  aie  the  points  in  favor  of  this  date.  We
may  therefore  conclude  that  the  Capitol  was  a  product  of  the
new  era.  (3)

VENUS  POMPEIANA.

Venus  Herentas,  the  Oscan  goddess,  was  worshipped  at
Pompeii  in  the  earlier  period,  but,  as  suggested  above,  had
probably  been  considerably  affected  by  outside  influences.  (4)
A  new  epoch  began  in  80  B.  C.  with  the  arrival  of  the  Romzui

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  794  =  D.  5538;  Mommsen  C.  7.  L.  X.  p.  93  and  note  to
No.  794;  Mau,  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  144-145.  For  the  possibility  of  the  presence
of  Capitols  in  municipalities  that  had  not  received  Roman  colonists  see  the
discussion  of  the  Capitol  at  Capua  p.  366  and  the  references  there  cited.

(2)  Serv.  A  en.  I,  442;  Vitruv.  I,  7,  1;  Kuhfeldt,  De  Capitoliis  imperii
Romani  18,  77-80;  Nissen,  Das  Templum  88,  145;  Mau-Kelsey  66;  Wissowa,
Capitolium,  P.-W.  Ill,  1538;  De  Rossi  e  Gatti,  /  Campidogli  nelle  colonic  e
nelle  altre  citta  del  mondo  romano  in  Boll.  com.  arch,  di  Roma  1887,  66.  Cp.
Miiller-Deecke,  Die  Etrusker  II,  43.

(3)  Mau  61-63;  Thedenat  40.

(4)  See  p.  236.

-246-


I


colonists.  These  people,  conducted  by  a  nephew  of  Sulla,
joined  enthusiastically  in  the  worship  of  Venus  which  the
dictator  was  promoting  and  made  her  straightway  the  leading
deity  of  the  city.  The  colony  itself  was  called  by  her  name,
and  appears  as  Colonia  Veneria  Cornelia  in  an  official  document
bearin  ,the  date  of  10  B.  C.  (I).  At  this  period  was  built
the  first  shrine  of  which  any  remains  have  come  to  light.
Martial  in  his  poem  on  the  destruction  wrought  by  Vesuvius
alludes  to  Pompeii  under  the  guise  of  Veneris  sedes,  «  dearer
to  her  than  Lacedaemon)) ,  and  Statius  speaks  of  Venus  as
lamenting  the  destruction  of  her  favored  city  (2).  GeneraJly
she  was  called  by  the  epithet  Pompeiana  but  also  was  known
as  fisica.  Besides  the  record  of  an  offering  made  to  Jupiter
at  the  behest  of  Venus  Fisica,  she  is  cited  with  this  title  in
graffiti  and  once  in  an  erotic  inscription  with  the  full  appellation
fisica  Fompeiana  (3).  The  combination  Venus  fompeiana
occurs  in  a  wall  F>ainting  and  in  graffiti  (4).

The  meaning  of  the  term  fisica  is  still  undetermined  and
there  is  not  yet  agreement  as  to  the  source  from  which  it  is
derived.  Rossbach,  compeu-ing  the  epithets  ^porCa  applied  to
Leto  and  ^oraXfxioc  used  in  reference  to  Poseidon,  argues  for
a  derivation  from  Greek  and  this  possibility  is  admitted  by
Marx,  who,  however,  favors  the  opinion  that  its  source  is
Oscani  (5).  The  latter  view  was  advanced  by  Preller,  who
believed  that  felix  derived  from  feo  had  the  same  signification,
and   that  Venus  Felix  and   Venus  Fisica   had  reference  alike

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  787  =  C.  /.  L.  I.  1252  =  Vaglieri  1807.  A.  freedman  of  the
colony  so  designated  may  be  the  C.  Venerius  Epaphroditus  of  C.  /.  L.  X,  1013.
Cp.  Nissen  218.  The  name  of  the  goddess  was  applied  to  a  bath  on  property
of  lulia  Felix  C.  /.  L.   IV.    1136.

(2)  Maut.  IV,  44,  5 :  Haec  Veneris  sedes,  Lacedaemone  gratior  illi.
Stat.  atl.  V.  3,   164;  Quos  Veneri  pJorata  domus  neglectaque  tellus  Alcidae....

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  928,  quoted  on  p.  243  (3).  C.  /.  L.  IV,  26:  N(umeiium)
Barcha(m)  Ilu(irum)  b(onum)  o(ro)  u(os)  f(aciatis)  ita  uobeis  Venus  Pomp(eiana)
sacra  [sancta  propitia  sit].  C.  I.  L.  IV,   1520.  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  IV,  6865.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  538  (wall  painting);  4007  (graffito);  2457  (graffito).

(5)  Rossbach,  Vier  pompejanische  Wandbilder  in  Jahrb.  des  deutschen
arch.  Inst.  VIII  (1893)  59(21);  Preller-Robert  586;  Marx,  Ueber  die  Venus  des
Lucrez  in  Bonner  Studien  123(4);  Hofer,  P/iysi^e  (?)  Roscher  III,  2487;  An-
toninus Liberalis  ]7  =  Mythographi  Graeci  II,  93.

-  247  -


to  a  Campanian  goddess  of  fertility  commonly  represented  as
a  mother  with  a  child  in  her  arms  (1).  Nissen  loo  thought
that  this  Venus  was  a  native  deity,  who  was  adopted  by  the
colonists  as  their  chief  god  because  of  Sulla's  well  known
interest  in  one  of  her  forms  (2).  Although  the  goddess  was
depicted  in  wall  paintings  under  another  aspect,  the  difference
was  explained  by  the  supposition  that  she  had  been  already
assimilated  to  Aphrodite.

The  incorrectness  of  this  view  was  demonstrated  by
Wissowa  in  a  comprehensive  treatment  of  the  forms  of  Venus
common  at  Rome.  He  there  shows  that  the  Venus  of  Pompeii
was  a  form  of  Venus  Felix,  and  was  due  to  the  activity  of
the  dictator  Sulla  in  promoting  the  cult  of  his  favorite  deity  (3).
This  Venus  had  attributes  differing  from  those  of  other  tyf>es,
because  qualities  were  assigned  to  her  belonging  properly  to
Felicitas  and  to  For  tuna.  Thus  she  is  regulsu-ly  depicted  in
the  wall  paintings  as  a  standing  figure  fully  clothed  with  tunic
and  pajlium;  she  exhibits  a  steering-oar  and  a  branch  of  olive,  -
the  attributes  respectively  of  Fortuna  and  Felicitais;  her  head
bears  a  mural  crowni  (4).  As  a  result  of  these  peculiar
characteristics  scholars  were  long  in  doubt  about  the  identity
of  the  goddess  represented,  and  there  was  a  tendency  to
recognize  here  Fortuna  (5).  She  was  recognized  as  Venus
only  when  she  wets  found  in  paintings  in  the  company  of  the
eleven  other  major  Olympian  gods       (6).   On  coins  of  Sulla »

(1)  Preller-Jordan  I,   448.

(2)  Nissen    328.    343.

(3)  Wissowa.  De  Veneris  aimulacris  Romanis  in  Gesatntnelte  'Ahhand-
lungen  18.  Rel  und  KuU  (2)  291  ;  and  Rom.  Gotierhilder  in  Neue  Jahrh.  fiir
das  Klass.  AUert.  I  (1898)  170;  Ges.  Ahh.  294;  Sechan,  Venus,  D.-S.  V,
734  (26).

(4)  Helbig.  Wandgemalde  Nos.  7.  60.  65.  66.  295.  296.  1479.  Cp.  Furt-
wangler.  Antike  Gemmen  PI.  44,  No.  85;  Gerhard.  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen
PI.  LI.   12.

(5)  Schulz,  Rappresentazioni  della  Fortuna  in  i4nn.  Inst.  XI,  (1839)
101  f . ;  Cp.  Brizio.  //  culto  della  Venus  Fisica  in  Giomale  degli  Scavi  di  P.
I  (1868-9)  187  f . ;  iGjurrucci,  Questioni  pompeiane  70;  Jahn.  Ueber  die  puteo-
lanische  Basis  in  Ber.   der  sacks.   Gesell.  der  Wiss,   III   (1851)   132.

(6)  Gerhard.  Ann.  Inst.  XXII  (1850)  210;  Conze,  Arch.  Zeit.  XIX.
(1861)  184;  Jahn.  Ber.  der  sacks.  Gesell.  der  Wiss.  XIII   (1861)  341  (188);  Marx.

-  248  -


however,  the  head  of  Venus  with  a  diadem  is  portrayed  in
a  manner  to  suggest  a  clothed  deity,  and  there  seems  no  reaison
to  question  the  substantial  identity  of  the  two  forms  of  the
goddess  (I).  Both  likewise  show  the  same  relation  to  the
Aphrodite  type  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  Cupid  in  the
representations.  .

The  presence  of  the  mural  crown  upon  the  Pompeian
goddess  is  explained  by  Wissowa  as  an  innovation  in  her
attributes  to  signify  that  she  was  the  special  protectress  of  the
city,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  she  did  become  its  tutelary
deity,  holding  the  same  position  that  the  Genius  occupied  in
other  towns,  but  including  in  her  personality  a  much  wider
range  of  attributes  (2).

Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  connect  the  Venus
Pompeiana  with  the  Orient.  Marx  sees  a  close  relation  between
her  and  the  Aphrodite  of  Aphrodisias  in  Caria,  from  whom
he  thinks  that  Sulla's  goddess  was  chiefly  derived.  This  deity
was  the  one  to  whom  that  leader  was  referred  by  the  oracle
after  he  had  recounted  his  dream  of  victory  (3).  Hence
nothing  would  have  been  more  natural  for  the  dictator  than
a  revision  of  his  conception  of  Venus  in  harmony  with  the
aspects  presented  by  that  goddess.  But  actual  traces  of  such
an  influence  do  not  appear,  and  the  traits  common  to  the  Venus
of  Pompeii  and  the  Sullan  Venus  seen  on  coins  have  no  place
in  the  likenesses  of  the  goddess  of  Caria  (4).

Graillot  from  the  evidence  of  a  fresco  asserts  that  she
-was  an  Oriental  and  as  such  was  served  by  a  company  of
dendrophori.  The  fresco  represents  a  religious  procession  in
which  four  men  carry  in  state  a  Phrygian  bonnet,  while  others

Bonner  Studien  122;  Helbig  op.  cit.  5  No.  7;  Ann.  Inst.  XXII.  (1850)  PI.  K.A
similar  painting  of  the  twelve  gods  was  discovered  in  1911,  and  shows  Venus
in  like  guise.  Delia  Corte.  N.  S.   1911.  418  f.

(1)  Babelon,  Monn.  rep.  torn.  406,  No.  28;  Wissowa,  Ges.  Abhandl.
18-19.

(2)  Wissowa,   op.   cit.   21.

(3)  Appian,  b.  civ.  1,  97;  Marx,  Der  Dichier  Lucretius  in  Neue
Jahrb.  fur  das  klass.  A Itert.  Ill  (1899)  542  f.  and  Bonner  Studien  125;  Fredrich.
Die  Aphrodite  von  Aphrodisias  in  Karien  in  Ath.  Mitth.   XXII   (1897)  378.

(4)  Fredrich,  op.  cit.  365  f.  and  Pis.  XI,  XII ;  Marx,  Neue  Jahrb.  fur
das  Moss.  Altert.  Ill  (1899)  543  Fig.    1.

-  249  -


bear  a  throne  upon  which  rests  a  crown  (I).  I'he  evidence
here  is  inconclusive  for  proving  that  processions  of  an  Oriental
character  were  held  in  honor  of  Venus  because  the  scene  in
question  might  be  an  attempt  to  reproduce  a  ceremony  of  the
cult  of  Magna  Mater,  who  was  worshipped  a  great  deal  in
Campania,  if  not  at  Pompeii  itself.  Another  fresco,  however,
dealing  with  a  similar  theme  hats  been  regarded  as  an  allusion
to  the  Pompeieui  Venus  (2).  Here  the  divinity  herself  is
borne  by  elephants  and  thus  there  is  a  strong  indication  of
Oriental  influence.  But  the  appearance  of  the  elephsuits  has
been  plausibly  explained  by  Pais  as  the  reminiscence  of  a
definite  historical  event,  -  the  triumph  of  Pompey,  in  79  B.  C.
when  the  victorious  general  rode  on  a  chariot  drawn  by  these
animals  (3).  Here  the  people  of  Pomp>eii  showed  their
respect  for  Sulla  by  representing  Fortuna  and  Felicitas  in  the
company  of  Venus,  yet  at  the  same  time  showed  their  faith
in  the  approaching  aiscendsaicy  of  Pompey  by  exhibiting  the
guardian  deity  of  their  city  in  such  a  way  as  to  recall  his
triumph.

As  the  Venus  Pompeiana  differed  from  the  other  Venuses
in  the  form  by  which  she  was  portrayed,  so  she  exhibited
other  qualities  and  chau-acteristics  not  commonly  belonging
to  this  goddess.  According  to  an  esurlier  view,  which  has  nothing
to  commend  it,  Venus  was  identical  with  the  old  goddess
Libera  who  seems  to  have  been  important  in  Campania  (4).
Her  emblems  suggest  that  she  possessed  the  customsury
attributes  of  Fortuna  and  Felicitas,  and  Sulla  considered  her
chiefly  as  a  divinity  who  had  influence  over  the  destiny  of
mankind.  Thus  she  was  by  no  means  simply  an  Aphrodite  or
goddess  of  love,  but  embraced  this  as  one  of  her  spheres  of
influence,  as  is  demonstrated  by  graffiti  and  the  presence  of
Amor  in    paintings.    In    the    former    the    Latin    form    Venus

(1)  GraUlot.  Le  culte  de  Cyh^le  134  (5).  328.  433  (2).

(2)  Delia  Corte.  N.  S.  1912.  176  f.  and  Fig.  2;  Macchioro,  NeapoUs  I
(1913)  105.

(3)  Pais,  Venere  Pompeiana  trionfante  sa  di  un  cocchio  tiraio  da  c/e-
fanti  in  Atti  Nap.  n.  s.  II  (1913)  255  f . ;  Plut.  Pomp.  14;  Plin.  nat.  VIII  4;
Granius  Licinianus  XXXVI.

(4)  Nissen.   Pomp.   Studien  328.

-250  -


predominates,  sometimes  with  the  full  name  Venus  Pompeiana.
but  several  times  the  Greek  equivalent  occurs  (1).  In  some
cases  she  was  invoked  as  the  patron  and  promoter  of  domestic
heirmony,  cind  was  looked  upon  as  a  goddess  who  presided
over  and  regulated  marriage  (2).  This  attitude  is  in  accord
with  her  representations  in  the  form  of  a  matron  with  a  long
robe.  Her  dominion  over  nature  was  absolute  and  she  was
a  jx)werful  deity  whose  wrath  was  dreadful  to  incur  (3).

Besides  bemg  on  friendly  terms  with  Jupiter,  as  indicated
above,  Venus  appears  to  have  had  extremely  intimate  relations
with  Ceres  (4);  in  fact  one  priestess  sometimes  served  both,  -
a  condition  of  affairs  which  is  proved  by  the  example  of  a
certain  Alleia,  who  is  thought  to  have  been  the  daughter  of  a
distinguished  citizen,  Cn.  Alleius  Nigidius  Maius,  who  in
gladiatorial  programs  is  called  princeps  coloniae.  This  woman
was  not  the  same  £is  the  Alleia  Decimilla  already  cited  as  a
priestess  of  Ceres  (5).  The  double  priesthood  found  here
is  no  novelty  in  southern  Italy,  as  the  S2une  combination  is
cited  also  from  Surrentum,  Casinum,  and  Sulmo  (6).  Wissowa
thinks  that  the  union  of  the  two  cults  is  to  be  explained  by
the  fact  that  the  Ceres  cult,  originally  of  first  rate  importance,
gradually  declined  after  the  advent  of  the  Venus  Pompeiana,
with  the  apparent  implication  that  the  public  priestesses  of
Ceres  no  longer  had  much  to  do  in  this  cult  and  now  gave
most  of  their  attention  to  Venus  (7).  But,  although  Ceres
Wets  of  less  importcuice  in  this  community  than  Venus,  she
was   by   no   means    obscure,    nor   weis   her    priesthood    always

(1)  Aphrodite:  C.  /.  L.  IV,   1589,  2096,  2411a.  Cp.  4169;  Venus:  C.  /.  L.
IV,  1536.  1625.  1410.   1839.   1921.   1985.  2483.  4200.  Mau-Kelsey  496.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  2457.

(3)  C.   /.    L.    IV.    538;    Wissowa.    Gesam.    AbhandL    18;    Brizio  op.    cit.
219  f . ;  Nissen  329;  Mau   11  ;  Marx.  Bonner  Studien   124.

(4)  See  pp.  231.  242.

(5)  N.    S.    1890.    333:    A]lleia    Mai    f sacerdM    V(eneri)s    et    Ce-

rer[is  sib]!   ex  dec.   deer,   pe Sogliano,  Spigolature  epigrafiche  in   Atti

Nap.  XV  (1890)  159.  C.  I.L.  IV.  1177;  N.  b.  1913.  479.  Rev.  Arch.  XXIV  (1914)
379.  No.  280.

(6)  C.  /.   L.   X.   680.   688.   5191  ;    IX.   3087,   3089    (?).   Pestalozza  e   Chiesa.
Ceres,  Ruggiero  II,  208.  See  p.  310.

(7)  Wissowa.  Gesam.  Abhandl.  23  (5).

-251  ^


combined  with  that  of  the  latter.  There  were  certain  women
who  gave  their  attendance  exclusively  to  Ceres  as  late  as  the
epoch  of  the  Empire,  for  if  they  had  been  priestesses  of  Venus
too,  they  would  not  have  omitted  to  mention  her  in  their  records
as  the  more  important  divinity  (I).  But,  while  the  same  person
sometimes  served  both  deities,  this  condition  of  affairs  did  not
always  prevail.

Priestesses  of  Venus  are  doubtless  meant  by  the  term
sacerdos  publica  without  any  supplementary  eJlusion  to  a
particular  god.  In  the  first  place,  this  cult  because  of  its
importance  would  not  be  without  officials  appointed  by  the
legally  constituted  authorities  and  responsible  to  them;  again
the  absence  of  ciny  specific  designation  would  be  missed  less
in  connection  with  Venus  than  with  any  other  deity.  This
class  of  inscriptions  has  left  a  number  of  examples.  Several
copies  refer  to  the  noted  Eumachia,  who  in  the  first  half  of
the  first  century  A.  D.  improved  the  Forum  by  the  erection  of
a  building  of  uncertain  purpose  upon  the  eastern  side  (2).
It  is  noteworthy  that,  although  she  is  mentioned  four  times  in
the  extant  material,  she  is  called  uniformly  simply  sacerdos
publica.  Other  women  of  prominent  family  who  held  the  same
position  were  Mamia  assigned  to  the  era  of  Augustus,  Holconia,
and  Istacidia  Rufilla;  as  the  records  show,  they  not  infrequently
received  the  honor  of  burial  on  public  land  (3).

An  association  of  persons  interested  in  the  worship
received  the  nsune  of  Venerii  in  the  same  way  that  devotees
of  Isis  were  called  Isiaci.  They  are  mentioned  once  in  a  wall
inscription  as  partisans  of  a  candidate  for  the  duumvirate  (4).

The  temple  of  Apollo  was  long  regarded  as  having  belonged

(1)  See  p.  231.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  810=D.  3785=VaglieTi  1862.  811.  812.  813  =  D.  6368.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  816  =  Vaglieri  1065:  Mamia  P.  f.  sacerdos  publica  Geni[o
Aug.  sjolo  et  pecunia  stia:  X,  998  =  D.  6369:  Mamiae  P.  f.  sacerdod  publicae.
locus  sepultur.  datus  decurionum  decxeto:  X.  950  =  Vaglieri  1863:  Holconiae  M.
f.  sacerdoti  publicae:  X,  999  =  D.  6370:  Istalcidia  N.  f.  Rufilla  sacerd.  publica;
Nissan.  328,  373.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  1146;  Walziag,  Le»  corporations  professionnelles  chez
les  Romaina  I,  170;  Liebenam.  Zur  Geschichte  und  Organisation  des  rom.  Ver-
eintOesens  33 ;  Nissen  355.

-  252  -


I


to  Venus,  but  a  more  probable  identification  is  the  shrine  whose
scanty  remains  began  to  be  investigated  in  1898  on  the  Strada
della  Marina  southwest  of  the  Forum  (I).  Nissen  dates  this
building  in  the  Oscan  period,  because  it  was  laid  out  to  face
the  south,  but  Mau  places  it  at  the  beginning  of  the  Roman
period  as  one  of  the  first  enterprises  of  the  colonists  (2).  The
original  building  w£is  a  modest  structure  of  ordinary  meisonry
covered  with  stucco,  and  in  the  Imperial  period  seemed  mean
and  out  of  date.  Accordingly  a  new  structure  of  marble  was
erected  in  its  place,  -  an  edifice  of  the  Etruscan  type  with  a
deep  portico  in  front  of  the  cella,  and  the  court  which  had
enclosed  the  first  sanctuary  was  enlarged.  But  during  the
building  of  this  coloruiade  occurred  the  earthquake  of  63,
which  overthrew  the  entire  structure  and  rendered  necessary
Emother  rebuilding.  Nothing  daunted  by  this  disaster  the
Pompeians  were  in  the  act  of  erecting  a  still  more  sumptuous
temple  for  their  favorite  goddess,  when  the  eruption  of  79
ended  their  efforts  forever  (3).

In  the  ruins  were  found  a  portion  of  a  statue  belonging  to
the  Aphrodite  rather  than  to  the  Venus  Pompeiana  type,  and
a  bronze  oai  which  had  probably  been  consecrated  to  the  same
divinity  (4).  The  location  of  the  shrine  too  and  its  evident
magnificence  tend  to  establish  the  identification.  Mau  calls
attention  to  the  appropriateness  of  this  site  for  Venus,  as  it
is  on  a  hill  overlooking  the  sea;  although  she  was  not  primaurily
a  marine  deity  at  Pompeii,  an  oversight  of  the  sea  may  have
been  considered  one  of  her  functions  as  in  the  case  of  other
Venuses.  Mau  also  suggests  that  since  the  view  was  obstructed


(1)  In  the  publication  of  excavations  in  the  Notizie  degli  scavi  (1899,
17  and  1900,  27)  the  temple  is  attribued  to  Augustus.  Another  theory  connected
Venus  with  the  Greek  temple  on  the  arx.  Nissen  330.

(2)  Nissen,  Orientaiion  285 ;  Mau  1 20  and  Der  Tempel  der  Venus  Pom-
peiana in  Rom.  Mitt.  XV  (1900)  304.

(3)  Mau  120  f.,  and  Rom.  Mitt.  XV  (1900)  270  f . ;  Mau-Kelsey  124  f . ;
Thedenat  65.  The  latter  believes  that  there  was  but  one  completed  temple,
that  this  was  torn  down  by  the  Pompeians  just  before  63  A.  D.,  and  that  they
were  engaged  on  the  first  rebuilding  in   79.

(4)  Sogliano,  N.  5.  1898,  333,  Fig.  3  and  N.  S.  1899,  294;  Mau,  Rom.
Mitt.  XV  (1900)  307.

-  253  -


by  the  surrounding  colonnade,  this  enclosure  was  provided
with  suitable  openings.  But  absolute  consistency  in  such  a
matter  is  not  to  be  expected  (1).

The  influence  of  Venus  is  very  noticeable  in  private  life
as  represented  by  wall  paintings.  Depicted  in  the  manner
already  described,  she  appears  in  some  of  the  leading  houses
of  the  town  such  as  those  of  Pansa  (Cn.  Alleius  Nigidius  Maius),
the  Dioscuri,  the  Tragic  Poet  and  the  Labyrinth  (2).  On  the
other  hand,  sculptured  reliefs  of  the  Pompeian  Venus  have
been  generally  wanting.  A  recent  discovery,  however,  shows
a  solitary  example  of  this  kind  in  which  she  is  portrayed  at
the  entrance  of  a  cave  (3).

MARS.

The  age  of  the  cult  of  Mars  is  not  known.  Other  Campanian
cities  as  notably  Capua  had  temples  of  this  god  at  a
comparatively  early  date,  and  there  is  no  reeison  for  denying
to  Pompeii  a  cult  before  the  Roman  colonization  (4).  But
there  is  no  evidence  for  this  period,  and  in  the  form  in  which
the  cult  first  appears,  organized  under  the  supervision  of
flamens,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the  later  epoch.
One  of  these  officials,  a  decurion  M.  Lucretius,  is  named  in  a
wall  inscription  which  assumes  the  form  of  an  address  upon
a  letter  directed  to  him.  The  word  flamen  also  occurs  in  a
graffito  with  the  name  Macro  (5).  This  information  is  valuable
because  of  the  paucity  of  allusions  to  this  office  in  the
municipalities,  where,  however,  it  w£is  regarded  as  an  important
position  (6).  The  god's  name  is  seen  also  in  graffiti.  His
shrine  has  not  been  discovered,  but  it  may  have  stood  outside
the  walls  in  agreement  with  the  precepts  of  Vitruvius,  that
temples  of  Mars  should  not  be  located  within  a  town  (7).

(1)  Mau  loc.   cit.

(2)  Th^denat  64;   Mau   278.    See   p.    248.

(3)  Sogliano.  N.  S.   1907.  559.  Fig.  9.

(4)  See    p.    242.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  879:  M.  Lucretio  flam.  Martis  decurioni  Pompei(s).
C.  /.  L.  IV.  2923;  Jullian.  Flamen,  D.-S.  II.   1173.

(6)  Cp.  p.  206.

(7)  C.  /.  L.   IV.  1644,  4016.  Vitruv.  1,  7.  1.

-  254  -


VESTA.

Vesta,  who  had  a  place  in  the  worship  of  the  family,  was
in  particulau:  the  patron  deity  of  the  bakers.  Her  likeness,
appeeuring  between  those  of  the  Lares,  was  frequently  portrayed
on  the  walls  of  beikenes  and  kitchens  either  alone  or  in  company
with  other  deities  especially  Vulcan  (I).  She  bears  a  scepter
and  a  patera,  and  in  the  bakeries  regularly  and  sometimes
elsewhere  is  accompanied  by  the  ass,  which  was  regarded  as
under  her  protection  (2).  In  two  wall  paintings  is  portrayed
a  representation  of  the  Vestalia  celebrated  by  the  bakers,
where  the  place  of  the  latter  is  taken  by  Cupids  (3).  A  similar
figure  regularly  appearing  with  the  Lares  in  household  shrines,
which  Preuner  identified  £is  Vesta,  is  now  regsurded  as  a
Genius  (4).

GENIUS  AND  LARES.

Several  indications  have  been  found  pointing  to  the  worship
of  a  Genius  associated  with  a  particular  spot.  Thus  a  small
shrine  near  one  of  the  entremces  to  the  Macellum,  consisting
of  a  niche  below  which  Eire  painted  two  serpents,  hcis  been
supposed  to  be  consecrated  to  the  Genius  that  presided  over
'this  building  (5).

Street  shrines  for  the  worship  of  the  Lares  Compitales,
which  were  present  at  Pompeii   in   great  numbers,    exhibit   a

(1)  Helbig  61-65,  66b,  68;  Sogliano,  Le  pitture  murali  campane  34,
35,  42.  43  (?).

(2)  Reiffer9chei<l,  De  Larum  piduris  Pompeiania  in  Ann.  Inst.  XXXV
(1863)  126  f . ;  Jordan,  Vesta  und  die  Laren  in  Winkelmannfest  Programm  No.
25  (1865)  1  f. ;  Wissowa,  Monumenia  ad  religionem  Romanam  spectantia  tria
n  Ann  Inst.  LV  (1883)  160;  Gesamm.  Abh.  68;  Hild,  Vesta,  D.-S.  V,  752;
Preuner,  Hestia-Vesta  243.

(3)  Jahn.  Walker-und  MuUerfeste  in  Arch.  Zeit  XII  (1854)  192  and
Darslellungen  antij^er  Reliefs  in  Ber.  der  sdchs.  Gesells.  der  Wiss.  XIlI  (1861)
341;  Museo  Borbonico  VI.  51;  Helbig  777;  Sogliano.  Mon.  Ant.  VIII.  354
Fig.  53;  Mau.  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  80  and  Pompeji  (2)  354  Fig.  186;  Mau-
Kelsey  97-98.

(4)  Preuner,  op.  cit.  237;  Jordan  op.  cit.   14  Cp.  p.  6.
{t)  Mau-Kelsey  101  ;  Mau  97.

-  255  -


large  variety  of  forms.  On  the  west  side  of  the  Strada  Stahiana
not  iai  from  the  Strada  deW Abbondanza  is  a  small  chapel
containing  a  bench  and  a  long  altar,  divided  into  two
compartments  for  the  worship  of  the  Lares  and  the  Genius.  A
niche  in  the  wall  served  as  a  receptacle  for  their  images.
Another  chapel  with  niches  and  a  block  of  limestone  for  an
altar  may  be  seen  in  the  Strada  di  Mercurio.  More  often  these
gods  were  served  by  open  air  altars  either  large  or  small.  At
the  northwestern  comer  of  the  Strada  Stabiana  and  the  Strada
di  Nola  between  the  fountain  and  the  water  tower  still
stands  a  large  altai,  and  on  the  wall  behind  it  is  a  painting,
which  comprises  an  altar,  the  two  L£ires,  worshippers,  and  a
flute  player.  At  other  times  a  small  altar  affixed  to  a  wall  or  a
modest  niche  for  offerings  sufficed.  The  presence  of  the  Genius
of  the  place  is  ordinarily  denoted  by  two  serpents.  In  spite  of
the  fact  that  Augustus  ordered  the  inclusion  of  his  cult  witK
that  of  the  Leires  Compitales.  no  representations  of  his  Genius
have  been  found  in  the  paintings  attached  to  the  street
shrines  (1).

The  cult  of  the  Compitales  in  the  provincial  towns  was
subject  to  the  same  reorganization  that  it  received  at  Rome.
It  was  in  the  hands  of  the  uicorum  magistri^  belonging  generally
to  the  cIeiss  of  freedmen,  who  were  assisted  by  collegia  of
slaves  (2).  A  mutilated  list  of  officials  called  magistri  uici  et
compiti  heis  been  preserved  from  the  years  47  and  46  B.  C.,
when  the  old  conditions  prevailed.  Likewise  two  magistri
probably  belonging  to  the  same  class  have  left  a  record  of  a
gift  mjade  to  the  Lares  Familiares  (3).  A  mutilated  list  of
slaves  has  recently  been  discovered.  At  a  compitum  or  corner
shrine  excavated  in    1911    another     of     these    bodies     with    a

(1)  Mau  238-241;  N4au-Kelsey  233-236;  Overbeck-Mau  242-244.  Wall
paintings  dealing  with  Lares  and  Genius  are  listed  by  Helbig  Nos.  31  f.  and
by  Sogliano  Nos.   9   f.

(2)  Jordan,  De  Genii  et  Eponae  picturia  Pompeianis  in  i4nn.  Inst.
XLIV  (1872)  28;  Mourlot,  L'Augustalite  dans  V empire  romain  32;  Hild,  Lares
D.-S.  III.  940;  Wissowa.  Lares,  Roscher  11.  1875  and  Rel  und  Kult.  (2)  171  f . ;
Saglio,  Compitum,  D.-S.   I,    1430;  Mommsen,   Rom.  Staatsrecht  II    (3)    1036.

(3)  N.  S.  1908.  369:  Felix  et  Dorus  mag(istri)  L{aribus)  F(amiliaribu8)
d.  d.  C.  /.  L.  IV,  60;  Wissowa.  Lares,  Roscher  II.  1875.

-256-


membership  of  four  has  left  traces  of  its  activity  (I).  This
number  occurs  also  at  Caudium  and  Pisaurum  and  in  an
uncertain  inscription  included  among  those  assigned  to  Puteoli,
but  collegia  with  a  different  number  of  members  are  cited
elsewhere.  (2)  On  an  adjacent  house  weJl,  where  sacred
subjects  were  delineated,  three  men  during  their  term  of  office
caused  a  picture  to  be  painted  to  which  they  attached  their
names.  Here  a  priest  surrounded  by  attendants  may  represent
the  magister  and  his  assistant  ministri.  The  work  of  these  slaves
is  dated  by  De  Petra  in  the  closing  years  of  the  history  of  the
city.  (3)  A  number  of  wall  paintings  refer  to  the  sacrifices
offered  by  the  magistri,  who  £ire  generally  supposed  to  be
represented  by  four  toga  clad  figures  that  sometimes  appear
in  the  picture.  (4)

The  Lares  and  the  Genius  along  with  the  Penates  were
also  venerated  habitually  in  the  different  households.  Here  the
Penates  represented  the  powers  that  had  the  stores  of  provisions
under  their  protection,  the  Lares,  regularly  two  in  number,
were  beneficent  spirits  guiding  the  destinies  of  the  house,  the
Genius  was  the  spiritual  representative  of  the  household's
master.  They  were  honored  with  offerings  of  incense,  fruit,
flowers,  cake  and  the  like,  but  sometimes  a  pig  was  sacrificed
to  the  Lares.  (5)  These  too  occasionally  received  special
sacrifices  in  fulfilment  of  vows.  So  the  banker  L.  Caecilius
lucundus  offered  a  bull  to  commemorate  his  escape  from  the
falling  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus  in  63  A.  D.,  emd  represented
the  scene  in  relief  in  his  Lararium  A  similar  votive  sculpture
preserves  the  remembrance  of  a  felicitous  escape  from  the
falling  Porta  di  Vesuvio.  (6)  The  shrines  of  the  household
Lares  did  not  differ  materially  from  those  consecrated  to  the

(1)  N.  S.  1915.  284;  N.  S.  1915.  421-422.  This  is  one  of  the  most  inter-
esting Compita  yet  discovered.  In  his  commentary  Delia  Corte  compwures  the
ancient  Compitalia  to  popular  religious   festivals  celebrated  in   modern   Naples.

(2)  Wissowa  173;  C.  /.  L.  IX,  6293.  XI.  6367.  X.  1582.

(3)  Delia  Corte.  N.  S.   1911.  421.

(4)  Helbig   13.   Nos.  41.  42.

(5)  Hild,  Lares,  D.-S.  Ill,  943;  De  Marchi,  II  calto  privato  di  Roma  an-
iica  I.  55  f.  ;  Preller-Jordan  II.    103  f. ;  Mau-Kelsey  268  f. ;  Mau  275  f.

(6)  Thedenat,  Pompii  vie  privSe  69-70.

-  257  -

17


gods  of  the  cross  roads,  and  hence  exhibit  various  degrees  of
elaboration.  In  extensive  establishments  a  separate  chapel
might  be  devoted  lo  their  worship  as  in  the  Casa  del  Centenario,
but  this  was  of  raie  occurrence.  (I)  More  often  a  little  shrine
constructed  after  the  model  of  a  femple  was  attached  to  the
wall  of  the  atrium  or  garden  as  in  the  houses  of  Epidius
Sabinus,  the  Conte  di  Torino,  and  the  Iragic  Poet.  Sometime:
a  niche  in  the  wall  with  an  altar  beneath  -was  accompanied  by
images  and  painting;  sometimes  a  wall  painting  exhibiting
altar  and  deities  fulfilled  all  requirements.  (2)  IVadition  tended
to  restrict  the  Lararium  to  the  atrium  and  its  retention  there
may  be  accounted  a  mark  of  conservatism.  According  to  the
newer  fashion  it  was  moved  into  the  kitchen,  where  it  is  found
in  the  majority  of  instances.    (3)

At  Pompeii  the  Lares  always  appear  in  pairs  in  the  guise
of  youths  dressed  in  a  short  tunic;  one  hand,  raised  aloft,
bears  a  drinking  horn  from  which  a  stream  of  liquor  falls  into
a  patera  held  in  the  other.  In  other  words  they  beeir  witness  to  a
revised  form  of  the  cult  and  indicate  that  the  two  Lares  of  the
cross  roads  had  now  become  regular  in  the  household.  (4)
The  Genius  is  ordinarily  represented  by  a  standing  figure  clad
in  a  toga,  and  shows  the  face  of  the  master  of  the  house.  One
or  two  serpents  complete  the  picture  below.     (5)     Other   gods

(1)  De  Marchi,  op.  cit.   I,  83,  87.

(2)  Reproductions  of  the  more  elaborate  Lararia  are  found  in  iThe-
denat,  Pompei  vie  privee  69,  Fig.  36,  and  67,  Fig.  34;  in  Mau  277,  Figs.  142,
143;  Spano,  N.  S.  1911,  333.  Fig.  2;  Hild,  D.-S.  III.  949;  De  Marchi,  op.  cit.
Pis.  II,  III,  V.  For  the  Lares  expressed  by  painting  see  De  Marchi  I,  91,  by
sculpture  I,    104,  and  cp.   I,   79.

(3)  De  Marchi  I,  82  f . ;  Thedenat  67;  Spano  N.  5.  1911,  334;  Mau
311;  Mau-Kelsey  297;  Preller-Jordan  II,  116  (3);  Hild,  D.-S.  Ill,  942.  A  list  of
the  various  parts  of  the  house  in  which  Lararia  have  been  found  appears  in
De  Marchi  I.  82.

(4)  Jordan,  De  Genii  et  Eponae  picturis  Pompeianis  in  Ann.  Inst.
XLIV  (1872)  37  f . ;  De  Marchi  I,  45;  Wissowa,  Lares,  Roscher  II  1882-1883.
Cp.  however,  Wissowa,  ibid.  1886  for  the  possibility  of  an  early  form  of  the
Lares  cult  in  southern  Italy  in  which  they  were  regularly  worshipped  in  the
plural.

(5)  Jordan,  op.  cit.  29  and  Vesta  und  die  Laren  in  H^mc^e/mann/esf
Programm,  No.  25  (1865)  6;  De  Marchi  I.  70.  77  f.  The  paintings  exhibiting  ser-
pents furnish  a  good  commentary  to  Verg.  Aen.  V,  90.

-  258  -


to  whom  the  household  was  devoted  were  represented  by  images
or  paintings,  and  practically  all  the  great  gods  have  left  traces
of  their  cult  at  domestic  shrines.  Sometimes  the  Genius  of  the
Emperor  took  the  place  of  the  head  of  the  house  or  w£is  added
as  an  additional  Genius.  (1)  Thus  a  wall  painting  shows  two
Genii  in  the  act  of  sacrifice,  one  of  whom  is  probably  that  of
the  master  of  the  house  while  the  other  refers  to  the  Emperor.
Beneath  the  latter  appears  the  formula  ex  s.  c,  -  in  accordance
with  a  decree  of  the  senate.  This  was  interpreted  by  Mau  in
connection  with  an  order  of  that  body  issued  after  the  defeat
of  Mark  Antony  at  Antium,  whereby  all  persons  in  private
as  well  as  in  public  worship  were  commamded  to  offer  libations
to  Augustus.   (2)

The  habitual  representation  of  the  Genius  between  the
two  Lares,  thus  giving  rise  to  a  total  of  three  gods,  may  be  the
subject  of  an  allusion  in  a  graffito  which  contains  the  words
deos  tuos  tres.  Zangemeister,  comparing  certain  sculptures
containing  the  figures  of  Jupiter,  Neptune,  and  Pluto,  was
inclined  to  see  here  a  reference  to  those  gods,  but  this
explanation  is  impossible.  On  the  other  hand  the  vagueness
with  which  the  Lares  and  Genius  were  conceived  and  their
constant  representation  together  msJces  it  eaisier  to  suppose
that  they  were  meant  by  the  writer  of  the  obscure  graffito.  (3)

These  gods  are  also  mentioned  by  name  in  several  brief
inscriptions.  In  the  house  of  Epidius  Rufus  two  freedmen
made  a  dedication  to  their  patron's  Genius  along  with  the
Lares;  another  reads  simply  Genio  et  LarihvLs.  Likewise  a
Ubertinus  Felix  has  left  an  inscription  honoring  the  Genius  of
his  former  master,  the  well  known  banker  L.  Caecilius
lucundus.    (4)   A  bronze   object   found  in   a   shop  records   the

(1)  De  Marchi,  //  cuHo  privato  I,  75.

(2)  Mau.  Rom.  Mitt.  V  (1890)  244  and  Pompeji  (2)  278;  Mau-Kelsey
270;  De  Marchi  I,  94.  Cp.   Sogliano.  N.  S.    1891.   258;   Dio  Cassius  LI,    19.   7.

(3)  C.    /.    L.    IV,    1679:    Inuicte    Castres habeas    propitios    deos    tuo«

tres  ite(m)  et  qui  leges  Calos  Edone.  Valeat  qui  legerit.  Zangemeister,  Bull.
Inst.  1867  88  (1);  De  Marchi  //  culto  privato  I,  69;  Wissowa,  Lares,  Roscher
II  1884.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  861  ;  Helbig  59b:  Genio  M.  n(c»tri)  et  Laribus  duo  Dia-
dumeni  liberti:  C.  /.  L.  X,  1235;  X.  860:  Genio  L.  nostri  Felix  II.  Cp.  Wissowa
Lares  Roscher  II,    1883.

.  259  -


dedication  made  to  the  family  Laies  by  two  magistri  cited
above;  similarly  expressed  is  a  dedication  made  by  a  certain
freedman  Philoxenus  upon  a  scale  weight.  A  wall  painting  of
altEu:  and  serp>ents  is  accompanied  by  the  title  Lares
propitios.  (1)  Finally  both  Lares  eind  Genius  recur  in
graffiti.   (2)

A  building  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Forum  has  been
identified  by  Mau  as  a  chapel  for  the  public  cult  of  the  Lares
of  the  whole  city  and  the  Genius  of  the  Emperor.  (3)  Although
there  is  no  definite  proof  for  this  assignment,  it  suits  the
circumstances  better  than  the  theories  previously  suggested.  (4)
The  building  consisted  of  a  main  room  with  an  apse  in  the
back  for  the  cult  statues,  and  wings  at  the  sides  as  well  as  a
number  of  niches  afforded  room  for  others  whose  identity  is
altogether  uncertain.  Mau  conjectured  that  the  side  rooms  were
consecrated  to  Venus  and  Ceres.  (5)  The  building  is  a  product
of  the  Imperial  period,  and  doubtless  resulted  from  the  reform
of  the  cult  of  the  Lares  initiated  by  Augustus.  It  would  be  dated
therefore  not  long  after  7  B.  C.  when  the  reorganization  took
place.  (6)  No  certain  epigraphical  material  records  the  worship
of  his  Genius,  but  a  mutilated  inscription  due  to  the  pubUc
priestess  Mamia,  who  flourished  during  his  reign  may  belong
to  this  cult.  (7)


(1)  N.   5.    1908,   369;   8067    (12):    Philoxenus    1.    aed(ituus)  Uaribus)   fam-
(iliaribus)  d.  d.  C.  /.  L.  IV,  844,  See  p.  256  (3).
(3)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  1539,  4198.  N.  5.  1913.  190.

(3)  Mau,  Der  stddtische  Larentempel  in  Pompeji  in  Rom.  Mitt.  XI
^1876)  285-301.  According  to  Nissan  it  was  located  with  reference  to  the  rising
sun  on  May  1,  the  date  of  the  festivsJ  of  the  Lajes  Praestites  and  the  Genius
Augusti,  Pomp.  Studien  272  and  Orientation  286.  Cp.  Wissowa,  Lares,  Ro-
scher  II,  1871 ;  Hild.  D.-S.  Ill,  946.

(4)  Nissen,  Pomp.  Studien  303  f . ;  Overbeck-Mau  131;  Breton,  Pompeia
(3)  131.

(5)  Mau  100.

(6)  Thedenat  I,  52-53;  Mau-Kelsey  102  f.  (with  bibliography  521);  Mau
98  f. ;  Nissen,  Orientation  286.  Cp.  Heinen,  Zur  Begriindung  des  rom.  Kaiser-
kultes  in  Klio  XI   (1911)   175.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X.  816.  See  above  p.  252  (3).  This  fragment,  which  was
found  among  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Vespasian,  was  used  to  attribute
it  to  Augustus.

-260-


THE  CULT  OF  THE  EMPERORS.

The  examination  of  the  cult  of  the  Lares  has  shown  how
it  was  modified  by  that  of  Augustus,  and  the  same  tendency
occurred  in  other  instances,  where  no  definite  meeisures  were
taken  by  the  Emi>eror  to  promote  a  reform.  The  cult  of  Fortuna,
developing  under  the  influence  of  the  times  into  that  of  Fortuna
Augusta,  was  served  by  a  board  of  ministri  beginning  with
the  year  3  A.  D.  (I)  It  is  the  oldest  example  of  this  kind  of
Emperor  worship,  which  was  carried  on  less  in  Italy  than  in
the  provinces,  particularly  Illyricum  and  Africa.  (2)  Four
other  inscriptions  bear  witness  to  the  activity  of  the  collegium,
two  of  which  can  be  assigned  respectively  to  the  years  45  and
56  A.  D.  This  boEird,  which  was  called  officially  the  ministri
Fortunae  Augustae,  was  composed  of  both  freedmen  and  slaves;
it  consisted  normally  of  four  members,  but  apparently  was
not  always  recruited  to  its  full  strength.  (3)  llie  greater  part
of  the  inscriptions  show  a  uniform  significance  and  commemorate
the  public  service  performed  at  the  instance  of  the  city
authorities.  This  consisted  of  the  setting  up  yeeurly  of  a  small
statue,  as  provided  by  a  regulation  made  by  the  ministri
themselves.  On  one  occasion,  for  some  reeison  the  matter  fell
to  the  lot  of  one  of  the  members,  and  he  with  their  consent
substituted  two  marble  pedestals  in  the  place  of  the  image  he
was  expected  to  provide.  The  inscription  which  records  this
event  preserves  the  name  of  a  quaestor  of  the  collegium   (4) .

(1)  There  is  little  evidence  for  a  cult  of  Fortuna  alone.  The  name
occurs  in  a  graffito  euid  the  figure  of  the  goddess  is  seen  in  a  painting  found
in   1899  north  of  Pompeii.  C.  /.  L.  IV.  5371  ;  N.  S.   1899.  494.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  824  =  D.  6382:  Agathemerus  Vetti,  Suauis  Caesiae  Pri-
mae,  Pothus  Numitori,  Anteros  Lacutulani  minist.  prim.  Fortun.  Aug.  iuss.
M.  Stai  Rufi.  Cn.  Melissaei  d.  u.  i.  d.  etc.  Otto.  Fortuna,  P.-W.  VII.  37;  Brec-
cia,  Fortuna,  Ruggiero  III.   189;  Nissan,  Pomp.  Studien   183.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  825  =  D.6385  =  Vaglieri  1873;  X,  826=D.  6383=Vaglieri  1826;
X,  827  =  D.  6384  =  Vaglieri  1816;  X,  828  a  fragment.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  825:  Tauro  Statilio,  Ti.  Platilio  (sic)  Aelian.  cos.  L.
Statius  Faustus  pro  signo,  quod  e  lege  Fortunae  Augustae  ministrorum  ponere
debebat,  referente  Q.  Pompeio  Amethysto  quaestore,  basis  duas  marmoreas
decreuerunt  pro  signo  poneret.  Cp.  Otto.  loc.  cit.;  Mau  131-2;  Mommsen,
C.  /.  L.  X.  p.    100.

-26t  -


The  seat  of  this  cult  was  a  temple  located  due  north  of  the
Forum  at  the  intersection  of  the  Strada  del  Foro  and  the  Strada
di  Nola.  It  was  a  small  sanctuary  with  a  portico  of  Corinthian
columns  in  form  not  unlike  that  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter.  The
cella  contained  niches  for  four  ornamental  statues  as  well  as
the  cult  image,  which  stood  in  a  recess  in  the  rear.  (1)  "Ilie
building  bore  an  inscription  stating  that  it  had  been  built  at
the  cost  of  a  distinguished  citizen  M.  Tullius,  and  was  considered
at  the  first  £is  a  purely  private  enterprise  like  the  temple  of
Augustus  at  Puteoli.  (2)  Nissen  dates  it  in  the  second  decade
before  the  Christian  era,  connecting  its  foundation  with  the
introduction  of  the  festival  of  Fortuna  Redux  in  19  B.  C.  It
belongs  in  fact  to  the  third  group  of  Pompeian  temples
classified  by  him,  and  faces  the  west,  -  a  circumstemce  adduced
in  favor  of  a  late  date.  He  further  calls  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  builder  was  an  augur,  who  would  be  familiar  with  the
principles  of  correct  orientation  and  likely  to  observe  them.  (3)
Mau  on  the  other  hand  believed  that  the  temple  was  constructed
about  the  time  of  the  institution  of  the  minhtri,  (4)  It  is
more  probable,  however,  that  it  had  already  been  in  existence
for  some  years  as  the  seat  of  a  semi-private  cult,  and  that  the
advent  of  the  ministri  marks  the  growing  importance  of
Emperor  worship,  ais  it  became  more  and  more  a  public
affair.  Some  of  the  inscriptions  relating  to  the  ministri  were
found  here  but  this  was  not  their  original  place.  (5)

A  second  abstract  deity  associated  with  the  fortunes  of  the
Imperial  household  was  Concordia,  a  designation  adopted  to
honor  the  empresses  and  princesses  of  the  ruling  family.  At
Pompeii  the  public  priestess  Eumachia  in  her  own  neune  and
that  of  her  son  provided   the   means   for  the  erection   of   an

(1)  Thedenat,  Pompei  vie  puhlique  66-67;  Nissen  Pomp.  Stadien  178
f.  Mau  129  f.  and  Der  Tempel  der  Fortuna  Augusta  in  Pompeji  in  Rom.  Mitt.
XI  (1896)  269  f.;  Mau-Kelsey   130  f . ;  Nicolini,  Pompei,   I.   part    1.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  820;  Vaglieri  1849:  M.  Tullius  M.  f.  d.  u.  i.  d.  ter.
quinq.  augur,  tr.  jnil.  a  ix>p.  aedem  Fortunae  August,  solo  et  i>eq.  sua.  Nissen,
Pomp.  Studien   182.

(3)  Nissen,  Orientation  285.

(4)  Mau  132  and.  Rom.  Mitt.  XI  (1896)  269,  283.

(5)  Mau    132.

-  262  .


importsmt  building  bordering  the  Forum,  which  she  dedicated
to  Concordia  Augusta  and  Pietas.  (1)  The  time  in  general
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  son  of  Eumachia,  Numistrius
Fronto,  is  named  as  a  duouir  in  3  A.  D.  In  this  inscription
Nissen  rightly  saw  an  allusion  to  the  harmonious  feelings
prevailing  in  the  Imperial  household  and  to  the  filial  affection
of  the  Emperor,  but  incorrectly  supposed  that  Nero  and
Agrippina  were  meant.  (2)  Later  researches  have  demonstrated
that  the  wcJl  paintings  of  the  building  axe  somewhat  earlier
than  Nero*s  reign,  while  the  sentiment  of  the  allusion  suits
the  relations  between  Tiberius  and  his  mother  during  the  first
part  of  his  rule.  It  is  dated  by  Mau  at  22  A.  D.  or  earlier;  at
that  time  the  Roman  senate  voted  an  altar  to  Pietsis  Augusta,  -
an  event  followed  in  the  next  year  by  the  use  of  Livia's  likeness
and  the  legend  Pieteis  on  the  coins  of  her  grandson  Drusus.  (3)
The  statue  of  Concordia  Augusta,  which  was  discovered  in  a
headless  condition  among  the  ruins  of  the  building  of  Eumachia,
probably  showed  a  resemblance  to  the  Empress.  (4)

A  close  relation  existed  between  the  cult  of  Augustus  and
that  of  Mercury  and  Maia,  but  its  exact  nature  is  uncertain.  (5)
A  considerable  body  of  inscriptions  record  the  work  of  an  annuaJ
board  of  ministri,  whose  official  designation  changed  in  the
course  of  time.  Like  the  servants  of  Fortuna  Augusta  they
were  ordinzirily  four  in  number  EUid  might  be  either  slaves  or
freedmen;  their  activity  is  represented  by  notices  of  religious
import  pertaining  to  the  dedications  which  they  made  at  the


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  810,  VagUeri  1862:  Eumachia  L.  f.  sacerd.  publ.
nomine  suo  et  M.  Numistri  Frontonis  fili,  calcidicum,  cryptam,  p>orticus  Con-
cordiae  Augustae  Pietati  sua  jjequnia  fecit  aedemque  dedicauit.  C.  /.  L.  X,
811  a  fragment;  X,  892.  For  a  list  of  the  chief  shrines  in  Italy  and  the  most
importsuit  centers  of  the  cult  elsewhere  see  Aust,  Concordia,  P.-W.  IV,  833 ;
Peter,   Concordia,   Roscher   I,   921.

(2)  Nissen.  Pomp.  Studien  290  f.

(3)  Mau  107-108  and  Osservazioni  salVedificio  di  Eumachia  in  Pompei
in  Rom.  Mm.  VII  (1892)  116;  Wissowa.  Pietas,  Roscher  III  2503;  C.  /.  L.  VI,
562;   Mau-Kelsey   111   Cp.   Sallet.  Zeits.  jiir  Numis.  VI   (1879)  61.

(4)  Fiorelli,   Pompeianarum  antiquitatum  historia  I,  210;  Mau    108;  Nissen,
Pomp.  Studien  290.

(5)  See  pp.  264,  384.

-  263  -


instance  of  the  two  classes  of  duouiri.  These  records  show  a
stereotyped  form  of  expression.

The  earliest  extant  inscriptions  are  two  belonging  to  the
year  14  B.  C,  while  a  still  older  one  of  the  year  25  B.  C.  is
partly  preserved  in  a  later  copy.  In  the  latter  case  P.  Stallius
Agatho,  one  of  these  men,  is  called  simply  minister;  in  the
former  M.  Sittius  Papia,  who  made  a  dedication  to  Mercury
and  Maia  preserved  in  two  copies,  is  not  formally  designated
by  the  name  of  his  office.  (1)  A  fourth  inscription  exhibiting
three  names,  and  a  fifth  with  a  complete  roster  of  ministri  exist
only  in  fragmentary  form  and  aie  undatable.  (2)  Both  prove
that  these  officials  had  a  strong  interest  in  the  promotion  of  the
cult  of  Mercury  and  Maia,  but  the  common  mode  of  expression,
ministri  Merc.  Mai  does  not  show  clearly  their  relation  to  it.
The  opinion  expressed  by  Mommsen  and  until  recently
generally  accepted,  supposed  that  the  board  of  ministri  was
directly  in  chsurge  of  the  worship  of  those  deities  2ind  from
them  took  its  name.  (3)  But  Bormann  maintains  that  the
neunes  of  the  deities  are  not  in  the  genitive  case  but  in  the
dative,  and  that  they  were  officials  connected  with  a  pagus
or  a  part  of  the  city  who  made  offerings  to  Mercury  and
Maia.  (4)  This  is  more  likely  the  nature  of  their  relation  to
the  divinities  in  question.

The  ministri,  whatever  may  have  been  their  exact  status
originally,  were  affected  by  the  ever  increasing  tendency  to
make  all  forms  of  worship  redound  to  the  glory  of  the  Emperor.
They  were  now  called  ministri  Augusti  and  plainly  devoted
themselves   to  the   promotion   of   his   worship,    but   sometimes

(1)  C.  L.  /.  X,  885.  Vaglieri  1160;  C.  /.  L.  X,  886;  D.  6389;  C.  /.  L.  X.
884.   D.    6388.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  887;  N.  S.  1895.  215.  D.  3207.  A  fragment  X.  889  seems
to  be  of  similar  import.

(3)  Mommsen,  C.  /,  L.  X,  p.  109;  Heinen,  Zur  Begriindung  des  ronv.
Kaxserknltes  in  Klio  XI  (1911)  150  (3);  Krall.  Wiener  Studien  V  (1883)  315  (1);
Steuding,  Mercurias,  Roscher  II,  2817-18;  Mau  84;  Vaglieri,  Sylloge  epigraphica
p.  144;  Mourlot,  L'AugustalitS  dans  V empire  romain  65  (6);  L.  Taylor,  L4uga5-
tales,  Seviri  Augusiales  and  Seviri  in  Trans,  of  the  Am.  Phil.  Assoc.  XLV
(1914)  238(23).

(4)  Bormann,  Aus  Pompeji  in  Wiener  Eranos  (1909)  314;  f . ;  Wissowa
80(4);   Wolters,  Sitzungsb.   d.   kgl    hay.   Akad.    d.    Wissens.    1915.   30.

-  264  -


still  made  offering  to  Mercury  and  Maia.  (1)  A  reason  for
this  preference  would  lie  in  the  fact  that  Augustus  was  not
infrequently  likened  to  that  divinity,  and  was  even  called  by
his  neune,  as  is  revealed  by  an  examination  of  the  poetry  of
that  period.  Here  the  poets  did  not  have  in  mind  the  Greek
Hermes  but  the  Italian  god  of  commercial  intercourse,  who
brought  unstinted  prosperity  through  business  relations.  Yet
the  identification  of  Augustus  with  Mercury  was  not  taken  too
seriously,  as  the  former  during  his  lifetime  and  after  his  death
when  deified  officially,  preserved  his  independence  and  was
reverenced  as  a  separate  divinity.  (2)  The  first  dated  inscription
containing  the  combination  min.  Aug.  belongs  to  the  year  2
B.  C,  the  second  to  1  A.  D.,  and  the  third  to  3  A.  D.  (3)
To  the  latter  belongs  also  a  dedication  made  by  another  member
of  the  board,  who  is  called  simply  a  minister  with  no  allusion
to  the  Imperial  cult.  (4)  This,  therefore,  seems  to  have  been
the  old  designation,  which  only  gradually  gave  way  before
the  new  one;  the  latter  is  interpreted  by  Bormann  as  ministri
Aug  (ustales)  rather  than  ministri  Aug  (usti).  (5).

The  last  inscription  is  dated  in  the  year  40.  (6)  Thus
the  evidence  for  these  officieJs,  as  Mommsen  pointed  out,
continues  only  as  long  as  the  Emperors  of  the  Julian  gens
remained  in  power;  after  the  reign  of  Gaius  no  trace  of  them
appears.  The  seat  of  the  cult  which  they  had  in  cheu-ge  was
probably   destroyed   at   the   time   of   the   great  earthquake   and


(1)  C.  7.  L.  X,  888;  Vaglieri  1161  :  Gratus  Arri,  Messius  Arrius  Inuentus.

Memor  l8tacidl(i)  min.  Aug.  Merc.  Mai  ex  d.  d.  iu8su[ This  is  dated  by

Bormann  as  later  them  2  B.  C,  op.  cit.  315.

(2)  Kiessling,  Horatius  in  Philologische  Untersuchungen  II,  77  (37);
Steuding   loc.   cit.;  Mau  85;   Wissowa  93.    Cp.    Reitzenstein,   Poimandres   176.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  890;  D.  6391.  Vaglieri  1162;  X.  891.  892;  N.  S.  1900.  270.
Cp.  Stein,  Jahresber.  iiber  die  Fortsch.  der  class.  Altert.  CXLIV  (1909)  251.

(4)  N.  S.  1890.  331.  £.  E.  VIII,  316.  Vaglieri  1024.  The  divinity  honored
here  is  concealed  in  the  letters  A.  A.  P.  R.  D.  D.  for  which  Mommsen  sug-
gests as  supplement:  Annonae  Augustae  pyopuli  Rom£m.i  donum  dat.

(5)  He  regards  the  mention  of  Augusti  in  X,  892  as  an  error,  but  this
seems  improbable.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  there  was  at  first  the  use  of
both  forms  and  that  one  went  out  of  use.   Bormann  op.    cit.   316.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  893-923.  The  latest  inscription  that  actually  names  these
officials  belongs  to  the  year  34.  Taylor   Zoo.   cit.

-265  -


was  not  afterwards  rebuilt,  since  the  need  for  their  services  no
longer   existed.    (I)

Augustus  w^as  likewise  the  chief  object  of  worship  in  the
official  ceremonies  of  the  suburban  district  bearing  his  name.
This  division  of  the  Pompeian  territory,  which  -was  called
pagus  Augustus  felix  suburbanus,  can  not  be  definitely  located,
but  perhaps  consisted  of  a  tract  of  land  north  of  the  Porta
Ercolanese,  where  at  least  one  inscription  referring  to  it  has
been  found.  (2)  Neither  the  pagus,  however,  nor  all  of  its
official  machinery  w£is  a  creation  of  the  Empire;  it  seems
rather  to  have  been  formed  in  Sulla*s  time  and  at  first  to  have
been  called  pagus  felix  from  his  name.  Nissen  considered  that
its  inhabitants  were  Oscans  who  had  been  compelled  to  leave
the  city  proper  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  followers  of  the
dictator,  but  the  district  may  be  merely  a  geographical
division.  (3)  At  this  time  the  magistri  of  the  pagus  were
already  in  existence,  and  are  mentioned  once  before  it  received
the  name  of  Augustus.  (4)  Another  inscription  preserving
the  name  of  this  district  is  of  doubtful  significance  because  of
the  form  of  expression.  (5)  As  interpreted  by  Mommsen,  it
means  that  magistri  of  the  pagus  honored  an  actor  Sorex,  whom
he  identifies  with  one  of  the  favorites  of  Sulla.  He  states  that
a  recollection  of  this  man  had  been  preserved  here  as  Sulla
had  an  estate  at  Cumae.  But  since  the  inscription  alludes  to
the  reign  of  Augustus,  this  opinion  seems  unfounded.  (6)
Mau*s  interpretation,  understanding  magistri  as  a  genitive
case  form,  seems  preferable;  in  this  case  Sorex  himself  was
an  officer  of  the  pagus,  and  in  his  honor  two  herms  were  set

(1)  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.   109.

(2)  N.  S.  1898,  499.  D.  6376:  M.  Mimdicius  Malchio,  M.  Clodius  Agatho
mag.    ex   p(aganorum)   c(onsensu)   f(aciundum)   c(urauerunt).

(3)  Nissen,  Pomp.  Studien  381;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X.  p.  90;  Galli,
Pomjbei  dalV89  alVSO  av.    Cristo  in  Rendic.   Nap.   XXI    (1907)   538.

(4)  E.  E.  VIII.  317.   D.  6377:   lius  C.    1.   PhUomusM   mag.    pagi  fe-

licis  suburban!  ex  testam.   etc.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  814,  D.  5198.  Vagliexi  1872:  C.  Norbani  Soricis,  secunda-
rum,  mag(istri)  pagi  Aug.  felicis  suburban!  ex  d.  d.  loc.  d.  Thedenat,  Pom-
pit  vie  publique  I.  72,  erroneously  calls  him  a  minister.

(6)  Mommsen,  Ber.  der  sacks.  Gesells.  der  Wiss.  XI  (1854)  159;  Vaglieri.
Sylloge  epig.  note  to  No.   1872.  Cp.  Overbeck-Mau   106.

-266-


up,  one  in  the  temple  of  Isis  and  the  other  in  the  «  Building
of  Eumachia  ».  To  both  enterprises  he  had  perhaps  made  a
contribution.  (1)  The  magistri  were  expected  to  provide
amusements  for  the  people,  but  sometimes  at  the  request  of
the  decurions  offered  a  substitute.  Thus  on  one  occasion  they
constructed  a  section  of  seats  in  the  amphiteater.  (2)  Although
they  were  generally  freedmen,  yet  one  of  their  number  was
a  member  of  the  influential  family  of  the  Clodii.  (3)

Pagani  are  likewise  mentioned  individually  and  collectively.
In  their  collective  capacity  they  set  up  an  honorary  inscription
for  M.  Holconius  Celer,  a  wealthy  priest  of  Augustus,  toward
the  close  of  that  monarch's  reign.  (4)  L.  Latumius  Gratus  as
a  slave  had  been  a  minister  and  after  obtaining  his  freedom
served  as  a  paganus;  another  was  an  Augustalis;  a  third
N.  Istacidius  Helenus  is  cited  only  for  this  position.  (5)
While  the  function  of  these  officials  seems  to  have  been
connected  chiefly  with  the  religious  observances  of  their
community,  nothing  is  known  about  their  specific  duties  or
their  relation  to  the  magistri.  (6)  Below  the  latter  were  the
ministri,  who  were  always  slaves.  They  formed  a  board  of
four  £ind  are  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  7  B.  C,  which
purports  to  record  the  services  of  the  first  incumbents  of  this
position.  (7)

More  important  than  the  vcirious  boards  of  ministri  was
the  association  of  freedmen,  who  here  as  elsewhere  in  this
region  bore  collectively     the  appellation     of     Augustales.     (8)

(I)  Mau  182;  Mau-Kelsey  176;  Thedenat  72;  Fornari,  Le  memorie  isi-
ache  di  Pompei  in  Riv.   atorico-crit.   della  scienza  teol.   V.    (1909)  455.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  853;  Vaglieri  1874;  Mag.  pag.  Aug.  f(elci8)  s(uburbani)
pro  lud.  ex  d.  a.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1042;  D.  6378;  £.  £.  VIII.  317;  C.  /.  L.  X.  1074c;  Vaglieri
1789:  A.  Clodius  M.  f.  Pal.  scriba  magist.   pag.   Aug.   fel.   sub.

(4)  C.  I.  L.  X,  944.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1027;  D.  6379;  Vaglieri  1870;  C.  /.  L.  X  1028;  X.  1030;
N.  5.   1894.  15;  D.  6380;  Vaglieri  1871.

(6)  Mau    13.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  924;  D.  6381  ;  Vaglieri  1869:  Dama  Pup{i)  Agrippae,  Man-

Iliemus   Lucreti,    Anteros   Stati    Rufi,    Princeps   Mescini   ministri    pagi    Aug.    fel.
suburban,   primi  posuerunt  etc.
(8)  C.  /.  L.  X.  977.  Cp.   IV,  503,   1731;  and  N.  S.   1892,   120.  conjectur-


-267  -


Five  names  of  the  members  are  known,  who  when  taken
singly  are  designated  simply  by  the  title  of  Augustalis;  in
other  words  there  is  no  trace  of  the  term  seuir.  One  of  them
M.  Cerrinius  Restitutus,  who  is  cited  twice  in  the  wax  tablets
of  Caecilius  lucundus,  belongs  to  the  close  of  the  city's  history;
another  C.  Caluentius  Quietus,  who  can  be  dated  in  the  same
way,  flourished  in  Nero's  reign.  (I)  The  others  have  left  no
indications  of  date  but  Miss  Taylor  is  inclined  to  believe  that
they  are  all  later  than  the  inscriptions  referring  to  the  ministri
Aug  (usti).  (2)  Between  the  two  organizations  there  was
probably  no  direct  relationship.  One  of  the  officers  called
magister  Augustalis,  who  presided  at  meetings  of  the
organization  to  which  he  belonged,  is  also  known.  (3)

In  two  c£ises  Augustales  received  special  dignities  in  the
form  of  a  permission  granted  them  by  the  decurions  for  the
use  of  the  bisellium,  a  special  kind  of  long  seat.  (4)  According
to  Neumann  this  distinction  was  awarded  regulgurly  to
Augustales,  when  there  was  a  desire  to  confer  some  honor
upon  them,  while  seviri  Augustales  under  the  same  conditions
received  the  sella  curulis.  (5)  A  mutilated  inscription,  a  large
part  of  which  has  be'en  lost,  may  belong  to  a  record  of  the
conferment  of  the  ornamenta  Augustalitatis  upon  some  one
who  because  of  age  or  some  other  impediment  was  not  eligible
to  hold  the  office  in  the  regular  way.  (6)  The  evidence  for
the  presence  of  a  special  set  of  Augustales  for  Nero  is  dubious.
It  consists  of  a  graffito,  where  the  reading  Neroneis  Augusta
(libus)  is  uncertain.  (7)  As  Pompeii  was  zealous  m  promoting
the  worship  of  the  Julian  gens,  and  is  known  to  have  fostered

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  994,  995.  1026;  6372.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1034.  1066;  N.  S.  1894.  384.  Taylor,  Trans.  Am.  Phil
Assoc.  XLV  (1914)  238  (23).

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1055;  D.  6374:  C.  Nouellius  Natalis  mag.  Aug.  Von  Pre-
merstein,  Augustales,   Ruggiero  I,   835.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1026;  Vaglieri  1875  (C.  Caluentius  Quietus);  X.  1030;  D.
6373;  Vaglieri  1876  (C.  Munatius  Faustus).  The  figure  of  the  bisellium,  which
is  found  on  the  alteir  of  Faustus  is  reproduced  by  Overbeck-Mau  415,  Fig.  214.

(5)  Fox  instances  of  th's  distinction  see  Neumann,  Bisellium,  Roscher  III,
502  and  De  Ruggiero,  Bisellarius,   Ruggiero  I,   1007.

(6)  C.   /.   L.   X,    1025.

(7)  C.    /.    L.    IV,    1745:    Roma    ual(e);    Neroneis    Augusta(libus)    feliciter.

-  268  -


the  cult  of  Nero,  it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  an
organization  devoted  to  him  during  his  life  time,  but  there  is
as  yet  no  good  evidence  for  believing  in  its  existence.

A  room  in  the  Macellum  provided  with  an  alteir  and
apparently  used  for  serving  meals  of  a  formal,  religious
character  may  have  been  allotted  to  this  collegium.  Possibly,
however,  it  was  assigned  to  a  priestly  organization  of  higher
rank.  (1)

In  addition  to  the  various  forms  of  the  ImperisJ  worship
already  enumerated,  Augustus  and  his  successors  were  honored
by  the  ministrations  of  special  priests  of  high  rank.  (2)  These
men,  called  now  priests  and  now  flamens,  were  citizens  of  the
highest  standing  in  the  community  and  held  the  most  important
offices.  (3)  Thus  a  flamen  of  Augustus  was  the  eminent
M.  Holconius  Rufus,  who  was  a  patron  of  the  colony  and  took
a  leading  part  in  the  restoration  of  the  large  theater.  His
activity  in  municipal  affairs  was  at  its  height  about  the
beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  (4)  As  he  held  the  office  of
quinquennalis  for  the  fourth  time  in  2.  B.  C.  said  wats  then  a
flamen  of  Augustus,  the  worship  of  the  ruler  was  maintained
publicly  at  least  as  early  as  that  date.  (5)  Nissen,  calling
attention  to  the  evidence  that  at  the  beginning  the  cult  of
Augustus  w£is  strictly  of  a  private  nature,  believes  that  there
was  at  first  a  considerable  party  opposed  to  its  development  and
that  it  grew  with  difficulty.  (6)  But,  although  it  developed
gradually  here  and  had  a  less  favorable  atmosphere  for  its
propagation,  there  is  little  indication  that  it  had  a  worse  enemy
to  contend  with  than  indifference.  Not  only  were  a  large  number
of  organizations  occupied  with  its    ceremonies,     but    also    in

(1)  Mau-KeJsey    100;  Mau  96;   Overbeck-Mau    125.

(2)  Cp.  Hirschfeld,  /  sacerdozi  municipali  nelV Africa  in  Ann.  Inst.
XXXVIII  (1866)  53.

(3)  Herbst,  De  sacerdoUis  Romanorum  municipalihus  8;  Beurl'er,  Le
culte  imperial  169,   177-178:  Geiger,  De  sacerdotibus  Augustorum  1  ;  cp.  8.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  830;  D.  6361b;  Vaglieri  1809;  X.  837;  D.  6361  ;  Vaglieri
1808;  X,  838;  D.  6361a;  Vaglieri  1810;  also  the  fragments  X,  947,  948,  949;
Examples  of  the  combination  of  priest  of  Augustus  €md  patron  of  a  colony  are
given  by  Beurlier,  op.  cit.   181   (2).

(5)  Heinen,  Klio  XI  (1911)  171   (1);  Nissen.  Pomp.  Studien  243.

(6)  Nissen  183;  and  Orientation  348.

-  269  -


addition  to  these  persons  of  low  social  standing,  people  of  the
higher  classes  becsune  interested  and  provided  buildings  at
their  own  expense.  A  younger  Holconius  with  the  cognomen
Celer,  who  was  associated  in  the  work  of  the  theater  just
mentioned,  kept  up  the  interest  of  his  family  in  the  worship
of  Augustus,  and  filled  the  same  priesthood.  He  was  an
incumbent  of  the  duumvirate  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of
Tiberius  and  was  filling  the  priesthood  of  Augustus  at  the  time
when  the  latter  was  deified.  (I)

A  fragment  points  to  the  cult  of  the  Empress  Livia  carried
on  by  a  priestess  Vibia  Sabina,  but  the  reading  is  not  certain.
As  she  is  called  apparently  Julia  Augusta,  the  notice  belongs
to  the  period  between  the  death  of  Augustus  and  her
consecration  at  the  hands  of  Claudius,  when  her  worship  by
flaminicae  is  attested  for  Gallia  N£u-bonensis.  (2)  A  gladiatorial
announcement,  the  reading  of  which  is  doubtful,  perhaps
refers  to  a  priest  of  Claudius.  (3)  The  substance  of  the
inscription  is  that  contests  will  take  place  on  the  occasion  of
the  dedication  of  an  altar  in  the  interest  of  the  welfare  of  the
Emperor  and  his  family.  The  priest  is  a  distinguished  citizen
Cn.  Alleius  Nigidius  Maius,  who  was  a  quinquennalis  in  the
year  5'b-'bb.  In  the  Macellum,  as  reconstructed,  a  room  at  the
east  end  was  fitted  up  for  the  cult  of  the  Emperors.  Mau
believed  that  this  was  done  in  the  time  of  Claudius,  who  Wcis
probably  worshipped  at  Pompeii  during  his  life  time.  Here
were  discovered  statues  identified  as  likenesses  of  Octavia  and
Marcellus,  the  sister  and  the  nephew  of  Augustus,  and  with
them  an  arm  holding  a  globe,  which  Mau  attributed  to  a  statue


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  840;  D.  6362:  M.  Holcorxio  Celeri  d.  u.  i.  d.  quinq.  de-
signato  August!  sacerdbti.  X,  945;  D.  6362a:  M.  Holconio  M.  f.  Celeri  sacer-
doti  diui  Augusti.   X,  941-944,  946  fragments.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  961  :  Vibiae  C.  f.  S[abinae  sacerdoti  lu]liae  Aug.  C.  /.  L.
XII.  1363.  4249.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  1180;  Vaglieri  2180.  Pro  salute  [Ti.  Claudi]  Caesaris
Augu[sti]  liberorumqu[e  eius  et  ob]  dedicationem  arae  fam(ilia)  gladiat{oria)  (?)
Cn.  Allei  Nigidi  Mai  flami[nis  Ti.  Claudi]  Caesaris  Augusti  pugn(abit  Pompeis
sine  ulla  dilatione  etc.  Gsurrucci,  Bull.  Nap  .n.  s.  I  (1853)  116.;  Zangemeister.
Arch.  Zeit  XXVI  (1868)  88.

-  270  .


of  the  Emperor  Claudius.   He  further  conjectured  that  statues
of  Agrippina  and  Nero  also  stood  in  the  shrine.  (1)

The  latter  wcis  honored  with  a  special  priest  even  during
the  life  time  of  Claudius.  A  number  of  advertisements  of
approaching  gladiatorial  combats  contain  the  neime  of  his
permanent  priest  D.  Lucretius  Satrius  Valens;  these  notices
belong  to  the  period  50-54  A.  D.  (2)  Although  no  inscriptions
have  been  found  to  prove  a  cult  of  Vespasian,  there  is  reason
to  believe  that  his  worship  wcis  prominent.  A  small  temple  on
the  eastern  side  of  the  Forum,  which  previously  since  the  time
of  Garrucci  had  generally  been  considered  the  shrine  of  the
first  of  the  Emperors,  hais  been  £issigned  by  Mau  to  the  service
of  Vespasian.  (3)  1  he  knowledge  that  the  temple  was  in
honor  of  an  Emperor  is  derived  from  the  fact  that  its  altar
contains  reliefs  exhibiting  oak  leaves  and  laurel,  -  emblems
of  the  Imperial  dignity.  The  circumstance,  also  pointed  out
by  Mau,  that  a  bull  was  represented  as  the  sacrificial  victim,
shows  that  the  temple  W2is  consecrated  to  the  Genius  of  an
Emperor  still  living  rather  than  to  one  of  the  Diui.  (4)  As
the  laurel  wreath  is  absent  from  the  coins  of  the  rulers  between
Augustus  and  Vespasian,  and  the  temple  itself  is  to  be  dated
as  a  late  work  begun  after  the  great  e£U"thquake,  the  theory
that  Vespasian  was  honored  here  is  rendered  very  probable.
On  the  contrary,  ap2U't  from  other  considerations,  tlie  supposition
that  a  temple  should  be  dedicated  to  the  Diuus  Augustus  so
long  after  his  death  is  quite  unlikely.  (5)


(1)  Mau  95  and  Statua  di  Marcello  in  Aiti  Nap.  XV  (1891)  133  f . ;  Mau-
Kelsey  99.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  1185,  3884;  D.  5145;  N.  S.  1914,  106.  Nero's  name  was
afterwards  deleted.  A  list  of  the  flamens  and  priests  in  this  cult  is  given  by
Geiger,   op.cit.   69.

(3)  Garrucci,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  II  (1854)  4  and  Questioni  pompeiane  76;
Nissen,  Pomp.  Studien  270-275  and  Orieniaiion  286,  where  the  shrine  is  still
treated   as   that   of  the   Genius  of   Augustus;   Overbeck-Mau   117.

(4)  Cp.  C.  I.  L.  I,  p.  384;  VI,  2042  (inscriptions  of  the  Arval  Brethren);
Wissowa,  Arvales  Fratres,  P.  W.  II,   1485.

(5)  Mau,  Sul  creduto  tempio  del  Genio  di  Augusto  in  Aiti  Nap.  XVI
(1892)  182-188  and  Pompeji  (2)  102-105;  Mau-Kelsey  106  f . ;  Th^denat  53-56;
Cesano,   Genius,   Ruggiero   III,   460.

-  271  -


ORIENTAL  CULTS.  ISIS.

The  only  Oriental  cult  known  to  have  had  a  temple  at
Pompeii  was  that  which  was  occupied  with  the  worship  of  the
Egyptian  deities.  (1)  Since  it  was  known  to  the  people  of
Cemnpemia  a  long  time  before  it  existed  in  Rome  and  a  temple
was  built  in  the  neighboring  city  of  Puteoli  in  the  second  cen-
tury B.  C,  it  is  probable  that  adherents  of  the  cult  were  to  be
found  at  Pompeii  in  that  period.  Soon  its  devotees  were  nu-
merous enough  to  require  a  temple,  which  was  erected  about
the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.  C.  (2)  Either  at  its  foun-
dation or  at  a  subsequent  date  it  passed  directly  under  the  con-
trol of  the  city;  in  other  words  the  public  authorities  recognized
this  cult,  although  it  was  purely  foreign  in  origin,  as  one  of  the
legitimate  forms  of  worship  for  the  community.  Lgifaye  calls
attention  to  the  use  of  cedes  rather  than  templum  to  designate
this  building  and  regeu-ds  it  as  evidence  for  a  benevolent  tolera-
tion rather  thsui  for  official  recognition.  Likewise,  it  may  be
said  that  this  term  is  strictly  appropriate  for  a  shrine  like  this,
built  without  inauguratio,  but  the  word  is  not  always  accur-
ately used  (3).  That  it  w£is  subject  to  official  supervision  is
proved  by  the  epigraphical  evidence,  which  indicates  that  the
decurions  had  control  over  the  assignment  of  places  for  statues
in  the  court.  (4)

This  shows  that  the  new  religion  made  its  appeal  mostly
to  the  lower  classes  and  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  Empire  had

(1)  The  name  Sarapion,  occurring  at  Pompei,  seems  to  be  that  of  a
workman.  /.  G.  704.  A  dedication  by  a  man  of  the  same  name  was  found  in
a  temple  of  Isis  at  Philae  (Egypt).

(2)  Lafaye,  Les  divinites  d'Alexandrie  hors  de  VEgypte  assigns  the  first
temple  to  the  second  century;  Nissen,  Pomp.  Studien  174  to  the  Oscem  period
200-80 ;  Fornari,  Le  memorie  isiache  di  Pompei  in  Riv.  storico-crit.  delle  scienze
teol.  V  (1909)  451  ;  Cumont,  Religions  orientales  dans  le  paganisme  romain  (2)
121  to  100  B.  C. ;  Mau  175  to  about  J35  B.  C.  Lovatelli,  Nuova  Antologia  se-
ries 3.  No.,  28,  112  (1890)  37;  Wissowa  351  (1).

(3)  Lafaye,  op.  cit.  181.  The  temple  of  Fortuna  Augusta  is  also  called
aedes.  Cp.  Saglio,  Aedes,  D.-S.  I,  92;  Habel,  Aedes.  P.-W.  I.  444.  That  the
temple  was  strictly  an  aedes  and  not  founded  with  the  ceremony  of  inauguratio
is  denied   by  Fornari   op.    cit.   452.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  814.  849;  Mau  176;  Mau-Kelsey  170.

-  272  -


\


made  little  progress  among  the  aristocracy;  in  fact  during  this
same  period  at  Rome,  it  wa3  Erst  persecuted  and  then  tolerated,
and  although  it  was  legitimatii'ed  by  Nero  did  not  become
fully  popular  among  the  ruling  classes  till  after  Pompeii
had  ceased  to  exist.  (1)  Hence  when  the  original  building
collapsed  in  63  A.  D.,  a  rich  freedman's  family  provided  the
means  for  its  restoration,  —  a  fact  recorded  by  an  inscription
affixed  above  the  door  leading  into  the  temple  court.  From  this
source  we  gather  that  N.  Popidius  Ampliatus  and  his  family
were  much  interested  in  the  cult,  and  consequently  determined
to  honor  the  goddess  and  improve  the  city  by  rebuilding  the
fallen  shrine.  As  the  head  of  the  household  himself  was  unable
because  of  his  birth  to  profit  by  his  munificence  to  the  extent
of  receiving  the  decurionship  from  the  grateful  community,  he
did  the  work  in  the  name  of  a  six  yeai  old  son,  who  duly  be-
came a  decurion.  (2)  He  also  contributed  in  his  own  name  a
statue  of  Bacchus,  who  was  sometimes  identified  with  the  Egyp-
tieui  Osiris.  (3)  In  the  mosaic  pavement  of  the  temple  were
placed  the  names  Popidius  Celsinus  belonging  to  the  boy,
Corelia  Celsa,  alluding  to  the  mother,  and  Popidius  Ampliatus,
the  reference  of  which  is  disputed.   (4)

It  has  been  held  by  Nissen  and  Mau  that  another  son  is
meant  here  who  bore  the  same  naone  as  the  fa*:bpr.  (5)  The
evidence  for  this  view  is  the  statue  and  inscription  already  cited
where  the  head  of  *he  household  is  called  pater.  But  this  addition
was  made  to  call  attention  to  his  relationship  to  the  nominal
builder  of  the  sanctuary  rather  than  to  distinguish  him  from  a
son  of  the  same  name.

If  there  was  such  a  son  and  he  w£is  commemorated  by  the

(1)  Wissowa  351    f.  ;  Preller-Jordan   II.   377  f .  ;  Lafaye.   op.   cii.    159   f.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  846.  D.  6367.  Vaglieri  1827:  N.  Popidius  N.  f.  Celsinus
aedem  Isidis  terrae  motu  conlapsam  a  fundamento  p.  s.  restituit.  Hunc  decu-
riones  ob  liberalitatem,  cum  esset  annorum  sexs  ordini  suo  gratis  adiegerunt.
The  word  sexs  has  sometimes  been  regEurded  as  an  abbreviation  for  sexaginia
Breton.  Pompeia  (3)  46  (3) ;   Mazois,  Les  mines  de  Pompei  IV.   25  (2),

(3)  C.   /.    L.   X.   847:    N.    Popidius    Ampliatus   pater   p.    s,    Lafaye,    op.    dt.
7.    190.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  848:  N,  Popidi  Ampliati.  N.  Popidi  Celsini.  Corelia
Celsa.

(5)  Mau   176;  Mau  Kelsey   170;  Nissen.  Pomp.  Studien  347.

-  273  -

18


appearance  of  his  name  in  the  temple  floor,  the  word  filius
should  have  appeared  to  prevent  an  obvious  confusion  with
his  father,  who  without  the  presence  of  a  distinguishing  epithet
would  certainly  be  understood  here  (1).

The  shrine  of  the  Egyptian  deities  was  a  more  complicated
affair  them  those  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  Greek  and
Italieui  deities,  because  its  services  and  ceremonies  were  much
more  extensive  and  complex  (2).  The  temple  proper  was  of
a  peculiar  shape,  not  Egyptian  in  character  and  yet  differing
from  the  common  Roman  models  (3).  The  cella,  which  was
extremely  long  in  proportion  to  its  width,  had  a  narrow  portico
in  front  emd  projecting  niches  at  each  extremity  for  the  recep-
tion of  images.  The  statue  of  Bacchus  mentioned  above  was
fitted  into  the  exterior  wall  of  the  cella  at  the  back.  In  front
were  several  altars  of  different  sizes;  at  one  corner  weis  a  pit
for  the  disposal  of  refuse,  at  the  other  was  an  unroofed  struc-
ture usually  called  the  ((  Purgatorium  »  with  a  flight  of  steps
leanding  to  an  underground  chamber  which  contained  the  holy
((  Nile  ))  water  used  in  the  ritual.  Though  the  temple  itself  had
an  eastern  frontage  probably  because  of  the  exigencies  of  the
available  land,  the  Purgatorium  was  built  in  true  Egyptian
fashion  to  face  the  north  (4).  All  these  accessories  together
with  the  temple  itself  were  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  on  one
side  of  which,  facing  the  entrance  to  the  temple,  was  a  little
shrine  supposed  to  have  been  devoted  to  Horus-Harpocrates.
As  the  ritual  demcinded  the  daily  performance  of  ceremonies,
quarters  were  provided  so  that  a  priest  might  always  be  in
attendance.

Beyond  the  colonnade  in  the  rear  of  the  sanctuary  were
two  other  rooms  utilized  for  the  ceremonies  of  the  cult.  The
Isirger  is  sometimes  explained  as  having  been  employed  for
serving  a  common  ritualistic  meal  to  the  devotees  and  for  pre-

(1)  Thedenat  74;  Fornari  op.  cit.  458;  Fiorelli,  Descrizione  di  Pompei
361.

(2)  Lovatelli,  op.  cit.  47  f . ;  Mau    182  f . ;  Mau-Kelsey   176  f.

(3)  Mau  177;  Mau-Kelsey  171;  Nicolini,  Pompei  I  part.  2.  Nissen,
Orientation  98  thinks  that  it  was  oriented  to  agree  with  the  sun  of  July  20,
the  old  Egyptian  New  Year.

(4)  Nissen.Orien/afion  281  ;  Fornari,  op.  cit.  453;  Lafaye,  op.  cit.   183.

-  274  -


senting  the  myth  of  Isis  and  Osiris.  (I)  Ii  was  mrie  likely
used  as  a  meeting  place  for  the  flourishing  band  of  Isiaci,  who
were  organized  in  connection  with  this  cult.  (2)  The  smaller
room  was  devoted  to  the  secret  ceremonies  of  initiation,  which
appear  to  have  been  held  at  n^ght,  as  a  large  stock  cf  lamps
was  stored  in  an  adjoining  closet.  (3)  Besides  the  lamps  and
other  vessels  accumulated  here,  the  temple  yielded  a  large
number  of  small  objects;  those  pertaining  to  the  ceremonies
include  a  sistrum,  vessels  of  clay,  bronze,  lead,  and  gletss,  a
gold  cup,  an  iron  tripod,  a  marble  table,  a  bronze  knife,  launp,
brazier  and  candlestick,  a  marble  hsuid  and  two  humein  skulls.
These  served  for  the  common  meal,  the  sacrifices,  procession,
and  initiations.  Finally  a  stone  slab  covered  with  hieroglyphics
portraying  scenes  of  prayer  was  uneeu-thed  near  the  great  aitai,
and  fragments  of  inscriptions  and  votive  offerings  are  said  to
have  been  found  in  considerable  numbers.  (4)  There  is  no
evidence  for  the  assertion  of  Trede  that  it  was  used  as  a  dream
oracle.   (5)

The  principal  deities  Isis  and  Osiris  were  represented  by
cult  statues  within  the  cella.  Other  related  divinities  stood  in
the  projecting  niches  at  the  sides  of  the  temple,  —  perhaps
Anubis  and  Harpocrates,  who  also  had  a  shrine  in  front.  These
statues  seem  for  the  most  part  to  have  been  removed  by  the
priests  at  the  time  of  the  great  disaster.  Yet  two  were  left  on
their  pedestals  against  the  west  wall  of  the  colonnade,  one  of
which  represents  Isis.  the  other  Venus.     (6)    Here  as  often  the

(1)  Mau  186;  Mau-Kelsey  180-181.

(2)  Overbeck-Mau  109;  Lafaye  op.  cit.  185;  Walzing,  £:tude  hist  sur
les  Corp.  prof.  I,  216;  Cp.  Guimet,  L'Isia  romaine  in  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcad.
dea   inscr.    1896.    157.

(3)  Mau  186-187.

(4)  Lafaye,  Les  divin.  d'Alexandrie  hors  de  VEgypte  191  ;  Drexler,
iiis,  Roscher  II,  526;  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  der  rom.  Kirche  IV,  313.  For

more  complete  descriptions  and  plems  of  the  temple  see  Mau-Kelsey  168  f.
(with  bibliography  526);  Mau  174  f .  ;  Thedenat  70  f . ;  Lafaye  179  f.,  and  his,
D.-S.  Ill,  585;  Nissen,  Pop.  Studien  170  f .  ;  A  bibliography  is  given  by  Drex-
ler, Roscher  II,  399.  The  temple  of  Isis  and  its  priests  play  a  prominent  part
in   Bulwer-Lytton's   romance    «  The  Last   Days    of   Pompeii  ».

(5)  Trede,  op.  cit.  I,   110.

(6)  C.  /.  L,  X,  849:  L.  Caecilius  Phoebus  posuit  1.  d.  d.  d.  The  statue
of  Venus  has  disappeared.  Overbeck-Mau  649  (208).  That  of  Isis  is  reproduced

-  275  -


two  goddesses  were  associated,  but  there  is  no  probability,  as
maintained  by  Gerhard,  that  Isis  was  assimilated  to  the
likeness  of  the  Pompeian  Venus.  (1)  1  he  first  statue  was  set
up  by  a  freedman  L.  Caecilius  Phoebus  in  the  spot  allotted  by
the  decurions;  it  belonged  to  the  first  temple  and  is  listed  by
Lafaye  among  the  eeirliest  works  of  art  which  illustrate  the
cult  outside  of  Egypt.  (2)  Furthermore,  small  images  of  va-
rious materials  and  many  marble  fragments  of  statues,  which
had  been  Composed  msdnly  of  wood.  Were  discovered.  A
painting  representing  Harpocrates  is  still  extant.  Here  he
appears  as  a  youth  with  his  finger  in  his  mouth,  and  is  accom-
pginied  by  the  familiar  emblems  of  the  horn  of  plenty  and  the
lotus;  before  him  stands  a  priest  and  in  the  background  is  a
temple.  (3)  Stucco  reliefs  in  the  Purgatorium  represent  two
Egyptian  goddesses  and  priests  both  male  and  femeJe  doing
obeiscince  to  a  vase  of  holy  water.  In  the  colonnade  were
painted  priests  of  Isis  and  meirine  subjects,  which  called  atten-
tion to  her  as  mistress  of  the  sea  (Isis  Pelagia).  (4)

These  gods  have  also  left  their  mark  in  various  dwellings.
In  a  wall  painting  belonging  to  a  house  situated  in  the  Strada
Stabtana,  Isis  appears  as  a  winged  deity  wearing  tunic  and
sandals.  Upon  her  head  rests  a  crescent,  in  her  hands  are  the
sistrum  emd  the  horn  of  plenty.  Other  details  of  the  picture  are
a  globe  and  a  steering  -  oar.  She  is  accompanied  by  a  youthful
horseman,  identified  as  Horus,  and  by  a  Cupid-like  figure
carrying  a  torch.  This  picture  came  into  existence  from  the
work  of  a  certain  Philocalus.  It  seems  to  represent  an  early
amalgamation  of  Isis  with  Fortuna,  a  conception  which  does
not  appeeir  in  inscriptions   before  the  second  century  A.   D.  (5)


in  Clarac,  Masee  de  sculpture  PI.  990.  No.  2580 ;  Nicolini,  Tempio  d'Iside  PI.  VI
in  Pompei  I,   part   1.  Cp.   Lafaye  op.  cit.    189-190;   Overbeck-Mau    106.

(1)  Gerhard.    ^Arch.   Anzeiger    1863.    51  ;   Drexler.   Isis,    Roscher    11,   499.

(2)  Lafaye,   op.   cit.   241.

(3)  Helbig  3,  No.  1;  Lafaye  188;  e^nd  his,  D.-S.  III.  580;  Mau.  178;
Mau-Kelsey  173.

(4)  Lafaye.  Les  divin.  d'Alexandrie  191;  Mau  180.  Cp.  Drexler.  Ro-
scher II,  482;  von  Bissing,  The  Cult  of  Isis  in  Pompeian  Paintings  in  Trans
Third  Intern.   Congr.  for  Hist,   of  Rel.   I,  225.

(5)  C.   /.   L.    IV.   882:   Philocalus   uotum   sol{uit)   libes   merito.    Helbig   25.


:fi


-  276  -


The  Casa  degli  Amorini  dorati,  excavated  in  1902-1905,  contains
a  sacellum  eind  a  painting  with  many  symbols  of  the  cult.
Fomari  suspects  from  the  presence  of  tragic  masks  in  the  house
decoration  and  other  details  that  it  belonged  to  an  actor  probably
Sorex,  one  of  whose  herms  came  from  the  Isis  temple.  (1)
Other  paintings  exhibit  Isis  often  in  company  with  Serapis,
Anubis,   and  Harpocrates.    (2)

Stray  notices  appearing  on  the  walls  have  preserved  a
few  bits  of  information  about  members  of  the  congregation  of
Isis  worshippers.  In  election  placards  the  Isiaci  appear  as
backers  of  particular  candidates  for  the  aedileship,  -  C.  Cuspius
Pansa  and  Cn.  Heluius  Sabinus,  who  were  devotees  or  patrons
of  the  cult  or  who  had  manifested  at  least  a  pre-election  interest
in  its  welfare.  The  name  of  Pansa*s  supporter  Popidius  Natalis
is  seen  upon  a  water  jar  found  in  the  temple.  (3)  This
organization,  which  probably  had  a  meeting  place  in  the
shrine,  as  suggested  above,  included  in  its  membership  the
priests  and  most  zealous  worshippers  of  Isis;  it  doubtless  was
large  and  exercised  considerable  influence  in  certain  circles
of  society.  (4)  More  important  is  a  graffito  in  Greek,  which
was  discovered  in  1892  in  the  House  of  the  Silver  Wedding.
It  records  that  one  Theophilus  had  been  performing  his  devotions
in  the  shrine  of  Isis,  and  there  prayed  for  the  welfare  of  a
certain  woman  Beroe.  The  goddess  is  mentioned  simply  by
her   familizu:   title  xupia.  The   house    in   general   showed   strong


No.  78;  Lafaye  326,  No.  2I5.Cp.  Gerhard,  Arch.  Zeit.  V  (1847)  128;  Panofka.
Bull  Inst.  1847.  128;  Cumont,  Panthea  signa,  D.-S.  IV,  314;  Drexler,  Roscher
II,  546.

(1)  Sogliano,    N.  S.     1906,    554    f. ;    Fornari,    Riv.    storico-crit.    di    scienze
teol.  V   (1909)  463.

(2)  Hedbig  Nos.  79,  80,  1094c,  1102;  Lafaye,  Lea  divin.  d'Alexandrie,
catalogue,  Nos.  216,  217,  219-221.  A  list  of  the  Pompeian  houses  exhibiting
scenes  from  the  Isis  cult  is  given  by  Drexler,  Roscher  II,  399.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  1011,  D.  6419  f.,  Vaglieri  1796:  Cuspium  Pansam  aed.
Popidius  Natalis  cliens  cum  Isiacis  rog.  IV,  787,  D.  6420b:  Cn.  Heluium  Sa-
binum  aed.  Isiaci  uniuersi  rog.  Nissen,  355.

(4)  Lafaye,  op.  cit.  145;  Liebenam,  Zur  Geschichte  und  Organisation
dea  rom.    V ereinweaens   296.

-  277  -


indications  of  Egyptian   influence.     (I)     A  graffito   in  Latin  is
limited  to  the  word  Isis.  (2)

MAGNA  MATER.


The  influence  of  Magna  Mater  is  not  so  well  attested  as
that  of  Isis  and  no  shrine  has  yet  been  found.  Some  works  of
art,  however,  were  unmistakably  inspired  by  this  cult.  A  wall
painting  brought  to  light  in  1912  represents  a  heJt  in  the  sacred
procession  which  carried  an  image  of  the  goddess  seated  on  a
throne.  The  bearers  stand  close  by  the  statue  ready  to  resume
their  task.  Among  the  followers  of  the  goddess  are  recognized
a  priest  and  musicians,  who  utilize  the  instruments  appropriate
for  their  cult,  -  the  flute,  drum,  and  cymbals.  (3)  A  mosaic
found  at  Pompeii,  the  subject  of  which  reappears  in  a  wall
painting  of  Stabiae,  shows  three  persons,  two  men  and  a  woman,
who  are  using  the  same  instruments.  This  mosaic,  which  is
signed  by  Dioscorides  of  Samos,  is  generally  considered  as
a  scene  from  comedy,  but  Graillot  suggests  that  it  should  be
interpreted  as  a  reproduction  of  the  [j.YjTpaYopTai  or  begging
priests  of  Cybele.  (4)  Other  works  of  ait  which  may  have
derived  their  origin  from  ihis  cult  include  a  terra  cotta  statuette
probably  of  Magna  Mater  seated  upon  a  lion,  and  perhaps  a
few  wall  paintings,  but  those  cited  by  Graillot  are  not  certainly
connected  with  this  religion.  (5)

Here  must  be  mentioned  a  Greek  inscription  unesirthed
in  the  Capitol.  It  records  the  fact  that  C.  lulius  Hephaestion,
a  priest  of  the  Phrygian  community,  set  up  a  Zeus  Phrygius


(1)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  4189;  Fornar',  op.  cit  462;  Mau,  Rom.  Mitt.  VIII  (1893)
57.  Inscriptions  parallel  in  form  are  found  in  Letronne,  Inscriptions  de  /'£-
gypte  II,  64,  76  etc.

(2)  C.  /.  L.   IV,    1581.

(3)  Spano,  N.  S.    1912,    110.

(4)  Graillot,   Le   culte   de  Cyhele   565,   addition   to   p.    255.    Reproduced   by
Bieber  und  Rodenwaldt,  Jahrb.  des  archaol.  Ins.  XXVI  (1911)   1,  Fig.    1  and  5.
(5)  The  statuette    is   identified  as  Venus   by   Sogliano,    N.    5.    1908,    277;
Graillot.  op.  cit.  568,  addition  to  p.   433;  Helbig  421.  558,    1558.

-  278  -     .


at  a  date  expressed  3ccording  to  the  Egyptian  mode
of  computation  and  equivalent  to  3  B.  C.  The  reference  is  prob-
ably to  Attis-Papas,  who  was  identified  with  Zeus  by  the
Greeks  (1).  Ihe  interpretation  of  this  inscription  has  been
troublesome.  There  is  no  other  evidence  for  the  presence  of  a
contingent  of  Phrygians  at  Pompeii  or  for  a  cult  of  this  deity,
although  some  scholeirs  have  inferred  from  this  record  that  both
were  present  (2).  Wolters  calls  attention  to  the  impropriety  of
a  dedication  to  an  Oriental  deity  in  a  Capitol  representing  the
old  state  religion  of  Rome,  but  if  there  was  no  shrine  dedicated
specifically  to  the  god  of  the  inscription  and  likewise  no  sanc-
tu2u-y  of  Magna  Mater,  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter
might  seem  to  be  the  most  suitable  depository  for  an  offering
made  to  the  Phrygian  god  (3).  But  the  language  of  the  inscription
suggests  Egypt  rather  than  Italy,  and  the  stone  appeeurs  in  fact
to  have  been  placed  originally  in  a  shrine  at  Alexandria,  and
only  later  to  have  reached  Pompeii.  How  or  why  it  wets  convey-
ed hither   is  a   mystery   (4).


THE  GODS  OF  THE  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK.


The  gods  who  presided  over  the  destinies  of  the  v2u:ious
days  of  the  week  were  recognized  here,  £is  is  proved  by  notices
referring  to  them  singly  and  collectively.  In  a  wall  painting
discovered  in  1760  were  represented  the  busts  of  the  seven
deities  arranged  in  the  following  order :  Saturn,  Sol,  Luna,  Mars,
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus.  This  is  considered  the  oldest  extant
record  referring  to  them  and  is  dated  by  Mau  at  about  50  A.


(1)  /.  G.  XIV.  701.  C.  I.  G.  5866c,  Vaglieri  II 19.  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.  796.

(2)  Perdrizet.  Hyriaca  in  Rev.  arch.  XXXV  (1899)  47;  Reitzenstein.
Poimandres  163  and  Zwei  Religionsgeschichtliche  Fragen  104  (3).  Hofer.  Papas,
Roscher,   III.    1560;  Dod.   III.  58.

(3)  Wolters,  Des  Skulpturenschmuck  des  Apolloheiligtums  in  Sitzungs-
her,  der  J^g/.    hayer.  Akad.    1915.  30.

(4)  Dittenberger,  Orientis  Graeci  inscriptiones  seledae  II.  658 ;  Gervasio.
Iscrizione  de  Luccei  in  Mem.  d.  r.  accad.  ercol.  VII.  311;  Graillot,  op.  cit.
568.  corx.to  433  (2).

-  279  -


D.  (I).  A  graffito,  written  in  Greek  at  about  the  same  time
exhibits  a  complete  roster  of  these  gods  beginning  with  Saturn ;
a  second  list  discovered  in  1901  gives  the  same  gods  in  their
Latin  forms  (2).  Naimes  of  single  days  sometimes  appear  in
market  notices  as  the  dies  Solis,  which  is  found  in  a  record  of
60  A.  D.  Another  reference  td  the  dies  Solis,  which  on  etstronom-
ical  grounds  suits  the  year  60,  and  to  the  title  imperator,  is
interpreted  by  Sogliano  as  an  allusion  to  the  acclamations  ac-
corded to  Claudius  after  victories  won  by  his  troops  in  that
year  (3).

JUDAISM.

The  names  Maria  and  Martha,  which  occur  in  wall  inscrip-
tions point  to  the  presence  of  the  Jews,  a  number  of  whom  seem
to  have  lived  as  slaves.  Mau  also  cites  the  name  M.  Valerius
Abinnerichus  found  upon  an  amphora  for  holding  wine  as  a
further  evidence  for  the  presence  of  members  of  this  race  (4)»
On  an  earthen  vessel  appears  the  name  of  a  kind  of  fish  soup
which  Pliny  says  was  in  use  among  the  Jews  (5).

(l)De  Witte,  Les  divinitSs,  des  sept  jours  de  la  semaine  in  Gaz.  arch.
Ill  (1877)  79;  Lersch,  Der  planetarische  Gotterkreis  in  Jahrb.  des  Vereins  von
Alterthumsf.  im  Rheirilande  IV  (1844)  163;  Humbert,  Dies  D.  -  S.  II,  172;
Maass,  Die  Tagesgotter  in  Rom  266;  Dubois  163;  Helbg  200.  No.  1005.  Helbig
suspected  that  the  other  representations  of  gods  found  in  the  same  room
belonged  to  a  cycle  of  divinities  who  were  the  patrons  of  the  pionths.  Here  were
noted  Venus  for  April,  Jupiter  for  July,  Vulcan  for  September,  Disma
for  November.

(2)  C.  /.  L.   IV,   5202,   6779.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  4182;  Nerone  Caesare  Augusto,  Cosso  Lentudo  Cossi
fil.  COS.  VIII  Idus  Februar'as  dies  Solis  luna  XIIIIIX,  nun  (dinae)  Cumis  V
(Idus  Februarias)  nun  (dinae)  Pomi>eis.  C.  /.  L.  IV,  6838:  IX  K  (al)  lunieis  im-
perator, dies  fuit  Solis.  Sogliano,  N.  5.  1908,  55;  Maass  op.  cit.  265;  Mau,
Rom.  Mitt.  VIII  (1893)  31.  In  the  National  Museum  at  Naples  lamps  of  un-
known origin  contain  representations  of  the  moon  and  planets.  C.  /.  L.  X^
8053  (81);  Maass,  op.  cit.  234  (209).

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV.  1507  (6),  5244,  5611-5621,  5630.  FeroreUi.  Gli  Ebrei  neU
V Italia  meridionals  n  Arch.  stor.  Nap.  XXXII  (1907)  251  (2)  and  Gli  Ehrei  neU
I'lt.  merid.  daU'eth  romana  al  secolo  XVIII,  3;  Mau  17;  Le  Blant,  Comptes
rendus  de  I'acad.  des  inscr.  1885,  146;  Sogliano,  Atene  e  Roma  XVII  (1914)  369.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  2569.  Gar  (um)  cast  (imoniale);  cp.  C.  /.  L.  IV,  2609;
Plin.  nat.  XXXI,  95;  Friedlander,  Sittengeschichte  (8)  IV,  237;  Marquardt-Mau.
Das  Privatlehen  der  Romer  440  (8).

-280  -


A  wall  painting  seems  to  have  for  its  theme  the  well  known
subject  of  the  judgment  of  Solomon,  but  this  interpretation  is
not  certain  (I).  Likewise  the  words  Sodoma,  Gomora  scratch-
ed upon  the  wall  of  a  modest  dwelling  seem  to  be  the  work  of
a  Jew.  It  w£is  considered  by  Nissen  to  be  a  prophecy  of  the
destruction  of  Pompeii,  beised  upon  its  similarity  to  those  cities
in  wickedness,  but  more  probably  it  was  written  by  a  Jew  who
had  taken  refuge  here  when  the  city  was  threatened  with
destruction  (2).

CHRISTIANITY.

There  is  a  possibility  that  the  graffito  just  discussed  was
the  work  of  a  Christian  who  had  in  mind  one  of  the  utterances
of  Jesus  (3).  No  other  sure  evidence  has  been  found  to  attest
their  presence.  A  graffito,  which  has  now  disappesured  was  at
one  time  regarded  as  a  reference  to  the  Christians, but  its  reading
was  extremely  doubtful.  A  lamp  reported  as  discovered  in  the
excavations  of  Pompeii  contained  what  appeared  to  be  a  Chris-
tian monogram,  but  it  is  generally  believed  not  to  be  authentic
evidence  for  the  presence  of  adherents  of  the  Christian  faith  (4).
At  the  same  time  there  is  no  reason  to  deny  the  possibility  of
their  presence;  the  words  of  Tertullian  relative  to  the  lack  of
Christians  in  Campania  before  the  eruption  of  Vesuvius  are  an
exaggeration  (5).

(1)  The  so-calledl  ((Judgment  of  Solomon"  is  reproduced  by  Overbeck-
Mau  583,  Fig.  306;  Mau  16,  Fig.  6;  Lucas,  Ein  Mdrchen  bei  Petron  in  Fest-
schrift fur  Hirschfeld  258.  Cp.  Lumbroso,  Sul  dipinto  pompeiano  in  cui  si  e
ravvisato  il  giudizio  di  Salomone  in  Atti  dei  Lincei  series  3,  XI,  (1882-3)  303;
C.  /.  L.  IV,  4976 ;  Martha,  Manuel  d' archeologie  etrusque  et  romaine  260 ;  So-
gliano,  N.  S.  1882,  323;  De  Rossi,  Bull.  Inst.  1883,  37;  Samter,  Jahrb.  des  arch.
Inat.   XIII   (1898)  49;  Lowy,   Rend,    dei  Lincei   1897,   36   f.

(2)  Nissen,  Italische  Landesktmde  II,  766 ;  Sogliano,  Di  un  luogo  dei
Libri  Sibyllini  in  Atti  Nap.  XVI  (1891-3)  178-9;  Herrlich,  Berl.  phil.  Wochens.
XXIII   (1903)    1151;  Harnack,  Die  Mission   u.   Ausbr.    d.    Christeniums   II,   74(3).

(3)  Nestle,  Eine  Spur  des  Christeniums  in  Pompeji?  in  Zeits.  fiir  die
neutest.   Wissens.  V   (1904)   168.

(4)  Mau-Kelsey  18;  Mau  17;  Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the  Traveller  and  the
Roman  Citizen  346;  Labanca,  Giornale  d'ltalia  Oct.  14,  1905;  Harnack  op.  cit,
Nachtrage   II.   312.

(5)  Harnack  op.  cit.  II.  346.

-  281  -


HERCULANEUM.

Between  Neapolis  and  Pompeii  a  small  section  of  the  coast
that  is  washed  by  the  Bay  of  Naples  was  occupied  by  the  terri-
tory of  Herculaneum.  For  the  most  part  it  comprised  the  slope
of  Vesuvius  which  had  lain  dormant  for  centuries,  —  a  chsurming
location  for  the  building  of  villas  and  adapted  moreover  for  the
cultivation  of  the  vine.  As  a  result  of  the  eruptions  of  the  vol-
cano, the  contour  of  the  land  has  been  materially  modified,  so
that  it  no  longer  conforms  to  the  outlines  contained  in  the
descriptions  of  the  ancients.  Sisenna  the  historieui  says  that
the  town  was  built  on  a  considerable  hill  adjacent  to  the  sea
between  two  small  streams  of  water,  and  adds  that  it  wsis  of
no  great  size  (1).  Existing  remains  demonstrate  that  the  town
had  a  regular  arrangement  of  streets  like  its  neighbor  Neapolis.
While  it  was  the  residence  of  many  wealthy  people,  it  was  of
little  economic  and  commercial  importance  (2).

Herculaneum  was  not  often  mentioned  by  ancient  writers.
Submitting  in  succession  to  the  predominance  of  Osceoi,  Etrus-
can, and  Samnite  elements,  it  became  a  member  of  the  league
headed  by  Nuceria.  With  that  city  it  became  subject  to  Rome
in  the  year  307  B.  C.  and  remained  faithful  until  the  period  of
the  Social  War,  when  the  army  of  Papius  Mutilus  invaded  the
Scirnus  valley.  After  its  recapture  by  the  Romans  in  89  B.  C.  it
was  made  a  municipality  and  continued  in  the  same  condition
with  no  particular  history  until  the  outbreak  of  volcanic  su^tivity
in  the  first  century  A.  D.  After  suffering  severely  from  the
earthquake  shock  of  63  it  was  entirely  overwhelmed  and  sub-
merged by  debris  from  Vesuvius  in  79.  It  remained  buried  be-
neath dense  masses  of  ashes  and  lava  from  successive  eruptions,

(1)  Peter,  Hist.  Rom.  frag.  No.  53.  p.   182.

(2)  Nissen,  It.  Landesktinde  II,  759;  Barker,  Buried  Herculaneum  2  f .  ;
Waldstein  and   Shoobridge,   Herculaneum   59   f.

-  282  -


until  in  the  eighteenth  century  a  small  portion  of  its  area  wais
excavated.  Since  that  time  but  little  progress  has  been  made  in
uncovering  it  (I).

Herculaneum  has  left  no  coins,  emd  the  litereury  and  epi-
graphical  material  beeu-ing  upon  the  question  of  religious
conditions  is  especially  scanty.  Although  temples  were  discov-
ered in  the  course  of  investigations,  little  information  has  reach-
ed us  on  the  subject.  They  were  not  excavated  carefully,  and
when  the  works  of  art  that  they  contained  had  heexi  removed,
they  were  straightway  filled  up  again.  As  a  result  of  the  unsys-
tematic excavation  and  the  incomplete  accounts,  the  exact
number  of  temples  discovered  is  uncertain.  La  Vega*s  plan  of
the  excavations,  which,  however,  wets  not  based  on  a  personal
knowledge  of  all  the  points  indicated,  shows  only  three  temples,
but  reports  of  the  works  then  carried  on  demonstrate  the
existence  of  two  others  (2).  On  the  other  hcind,  it  is  probable
that  one  of  the  three  shrines  in  the  first  group  had  no  real
existence  and  its  supposed  presence  was  based  upon  an  error.
At  amy  rate  it  is  cleai  that  the  town  must  have  possessed  more
than  four  or  five  temples.  With  one  exception  no  knowledge
is  at  hsmd  of  the  divinities  honored  in  the  buildings  which
have  been  discovered.  Names  adopted  by  the  excavators  such
as  Temple  of  Theseus,  Temple  of  Jupiter,  and  Temple  of
Demeter  have  no  significance  (3).


(1)  For  the  city's  history  see  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  156;  Beloch
218-219;  Gall,  Herculaneum,  P.-W.  VIII.  533;  Waldstein  and  Shoobridge  op.  cit.
chap.    II;   Barker,  op.    cit.    chap.    II;    de   Ruggiero,   Herculaneum,    Ruggiero   III,

678.

(2)  La  Vega  according  to  Waldstein  was  «  the  last  and  best  of  the  eigh-
teenth century  excavators  » .  The  plan  of  La  Vega  was  first  reproduced  by  Ro-
sini,  Dissertationis  isagogicae  ad  Herculanensium  voluminum  explanationem
pars  prima  4 ;  aftewards  by  De  lorio,  Notizie  sugli  scavi  di  Ercolano  PI.  I ;
Ruggiero,  Storia  degli  scavi  di  Ercolano  PI.  II ;  Waldstein  and  Shoobridge  op.
cit.  11  ;  Mau  532.  Cp.  the  plan  of  DaH'Osso  in  Nuova  Antologia  ser.  131  (1906)
I,   109  and  in  Barker,  op.  cit.  23.

(3)  Besides  the  temple  of  Magna  Mater,  which  will  be  noticed  later,
one  of  the  shrines  is  known  in  some  detail.  See  Weber's  report  for  Sept.  22,
1759  in  Ruggiero,  Scavi  di  Ercolano  289,  Cp.  Ruggiero,  op.  cit.  XL;  Wald-
stein  and  Shoobridge   74-76;  Mau   544.

-  283  -


JUPITER.

The  evidence  for  a  cult  of  Jupiter,  which  without  doubt
flourished  here,  is  uncertain,  and  rests  upon  two  inscriptions,
which  although  sometimes  attributed  to  this  town,  were  assigned
by  Mommsen  to  Pompeii.  This  uncertainty  about  the  place  of
discovery  is  especially  unfortunate  because  one  of  them  refera
to  the  building  or  repairing  of  a  temple.  The  other  is  a  simple
dedication  (1).

HERCULES.

The  nsune  of  the  city  was  naturally  always  associated  by
the  ancient  writers  with  Hercules,  8-nd  it  was  called  now
Herculea  urbs,  now  Herculanense  oppidum  (2).  So  the  poet
Martial,  alluding  to  the  havoc  wrought  by  Vesuvius  speaks  of
the  town  as  ((  the  place  called  by  Hercules'  name  »,  and  Statius
implies  that  the  god  should  have  saved  it  from  ruin  (3).  Here
a  myth  was  localized  the  hero  of  which  was  Hercules.  According
to  this  tale  he  sacrificed  in  the  vicinity  tithes  of  the  booty  that
he  had  acquired  on  his  Spanish  expedition,  and  founded  a
village  on  the  site  where  his  army  had  been  bivouacing;  then  he
continued  on  his  way  to  Sicily  (4).  Actual  evidence  for  his
worship  is  confined  to  a  mutilated  dedication  inscribed  upon  a
bronze  pig,  which  has  not  preserved  the  ngune  of  the  dedicator.
According  to  eighteenth  century  reports  it  was  found  in  company
with  a  bronze  image  of  Hercules  and  various  utensils  designed
for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice  (5).

The  older  scholars  speak  commonly  of  a  temple  of  this
god  discovered  during  the  course  of  the  excavations,  and  such
a  building  is  marked  on  the  plans  of  both  La  Vega  and  Dal-

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  925;  926.  Quoted  on  p.  224  (2).

(2)  Ov.    met.    XV,    71 1  ;    Sen.    naf.   VI,    1  ;    2.

(3)  Mart.  IV,  44,  6,  Hie  loeus  Herculeo  nomine  clarus  exat.  Stat.  sil.  V,  3,
164:    Neglectaque   tellus  Alcidae.

(4)  Dion.   Hal.    1,   44.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1405:  Hei(culi)  uoe(  =  uotum?)  m.  1,  Gerhard-Panofka,
Neapels  antilie  BildwerJze  p.  178;  Riisch,  Guida  del  Museo  Nazionale  di  Napoli
355.  No.  1493;  Waldstein  and  Shoobridge  289.  Reproduced  by  Pirol-  et  Piranesi,
AntiquitSa  d'Herculanum  IV,   44.

-   284   -


rOsso  as  standing  near  the  theater.  Moreover,  the  sacrificial
implements  emd  other  objects  mentioned  above  may  well  have
been  found  in  such  a  place  (I).  Yet  the  investigators,  who  in
those  days  were  prone  to  attach  the  naune  of  temple  to  ciny
public  building,  sometimes  themselves  express  doubts  about
the  identity  of  the  ruin  with  which  they  are  dealing.  As  pointed
out  by  Miss  Barker,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  excavators  confus-
ed the  supposed  temple  with  parts  of  the  ((  basilica  ))  and  the
theater  (2).  Hence  there  is  ample  reason  to  doubt  the  discovery
of  a  public  temple  of  Hercules,  but  none  whatever  to  disbe-
lieve in  its  existence.  Besides  the  smiall  bronze  image  mentioned
above,  two  mutilated  statues  of  this  god  eind  a  small  statuette
were  uneeurthed  in  the  eighteenth  century  excavations  (3).

VENUS.

Venus,  who  was  so  popular  at  Pompeii,  had  a  following
also  at  Herculauieum,  but  there  is  no  evidence  for  believing  that
she  "was  conceived  with  the  peculiar  attributes  which  gave  so
much  individuality  to  the  Pompeian  goddess.  The  age  of  the
cult  is  attested  by  the  fact  that  she  is  mentioned  in  an  Oscan
inscription  as  Herentas,  the  old  Italic  nature  goddess  (4).  It  is
inscribed  upon  a  marble  table  designed  to  receive  offerings,
which  Wcis  found  probably  in  the  theater  along  with  a  small
m2u-ble  Venus  and  a  bronze  statuette  of  Hercules.  The  dedica-
tion w£is  made  to  the  goddess  with  the  epithet  Erycina,  —  an
indication  that  the  cult  had  been  modified  by  the  influence  of
the  Sicilieui  divinity.  It  was  the  work  of  the  meddix  tuticus,  the
supreme  magistrate  of  the  community  (5).  The  terms  centuria
Veneria  and  centuria  Concordia  were  in  use  for  meirking  divi-
sions  of  the  freedmen  (6).

(1)  De  Venuti.  Delle  antichith  d'Ercolano  (ed.  of  1748)  133;  (ed.  of.
(1749)  97;  report  of  Alcubierre  in  Ruggiero,  op.   cit.  44.

(2)  Barker,  Buried  Herculaneum  65-69.

(3)  Barker,   op.   cit.   36.   44.   64.

(4)  Wissowa  290  and  Herentatis,   Roscher    1.    2298.

(5)  Buck.  No.  41=    Conway  87=    von  Planta    117.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1403.  Walzing.  Les  corporations  professionnelles  chez  les
Romains  I,  360  (5);  de  Ruggiero,  Herculaneum  Ruggiero  III,  678;  Liebenam.
Zur  Geschichte  und  Organisation   des  rom.    Vereinwesens   294.

-   285    -


HYGIA.

A  votive  statue  offered  to  Hygia  by  a  woman  named  Julia
is  said  to  have  been  due  to  a  dream  or  a  sinister  omen.  There
is  no  reason  for  believing  that  the  goddess  wais  a  manifestation
of  Isis  (I).  In  fact  she  is  mentioned  again  as  Salus  on  a  small
altar  discovered  in   1872  (2).

ROMAN  CULTS.  GENIUS.

The  pedestal  of  a  little  image  of  Fortuna  contains  an  in-
scription which  is  somewhat  uncertain  because  of  its  conciseness
and  the  employment  of  abbreviations.  It  bears  the  name  of
Philemo,  an  actor  of  the  second  parts,  and  as  supplemented  by
Mommsen  records  the  offering  made  by  the  magistri  of  some
collegium  to  the  Genius  of  that  body.  This  supplement,  alluding
to  an  organization  of  the  actors  is  preferable  to  that  adopted  by
Beloch,  who  thought  of  a  Genius  civitatis  (3).  Another  Genius
the  object  of  private  devotions,  appears  in  a  wall  painting
discovered  in  1 749.  He  is  represented  by  a  serpent  twined  eiround
an  altar  cind  feeding  upon  an  offering;  at  one  side  is  a  naked
youth  identified  by  Zangemeister  as  Harpocrates,  at  the  other
is  an  inscription  commemorating  the  Genius  of  a  mountain  (4).
The  picture  was  earlier  identified  by  Panofka  in  connection
with  the  cult  of  Aesculapius,  who  according  to  this  interpretation
W£is  represented  by  the  serpent;  the  youth  was  regarded  as
Acesius,  the  son  of  Aesculapius  and  like  him  a  healing  divin-
ity (5).  It  seems  to  have  been  made  in  payment  of  a  vow.


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  929:  Julia  Hygia  ex  uisu.  Barker,  op.  cit.   175.

(2)  C.    /.    L.    X,    8167:   Saluti    sacrum.

(3)  C.  /,  L.  X,  1404  =  Vaglieri  1067:  Philemonis  secu(nd£u:um)  inag(istri)
Gen{io)  c(o]legii).   Cp.   X.   814;   Beloch   225.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  IV,  1176:  Genius  huius  loci  montis,  Piroli  et  Piranesi,  An-
tiquites  d'Herculanum  j>eintures  I,  No.  38 ;  Baumeister  Denkrndler  593 ;  Helbig,
Wandgemdlde,  No.  81  ;  Lafaye,  Les  divinites  d'Alexandrie  hors  de  I'Egypte
330,   No.   224;   Birt,   Genius  Roscher   I,    1624;  Museo  Borhonico  IX,  52.

(5)  Panofka,  Asl(lepios  und  die  A s}{lepiaden  in  Abhand.  der  kgl.  Akfld,
der  Wiss.  zu  Berlin   1845,   286;  PI.   II,   2.

-  285  -


THE  CULT  OF  THE  EMPERORS.

The  cult  of  Augustus  and  his  successors  is  attested  by  the
presence  of  Augusta! es.  The  most  prominent  person  who  held
the  position  wets  apparently  a  wealthy  freedman  L.  Mammius
Maximus,  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Claudius.  This  indivi-
dueJ  acted  as  the  community's  benefactor  by  adorning  the  town
with  statues,  and  either  he  or  one  of  his  family  constructed  a
macellum.  He  weis  especially  zealous  in  showing  his  regeird
towEird  all  the  members  of  the  Imperial  feimily.  By  such  acts  he
so  won  the  esteem  of  his  fellow-citizens  that  they  raised  a
cjontribution  'for  a  btonze  statue  in  his  honor  to  be  set  up  in  the
theater  (1).  Another  Augustalis  was  the  freedman  M.  Claudius
Hymenaeus,  who  seems  to  appear  again  in  a  long  list  of  names
attached  to  the  wall  of  the  theater.  An  indication  for  his  date
is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  his  patron  held  public  office  under
Tiberius  (2).  A  badly  damaged  inscription  refers  apparently
to  the  donation  of  a  building  to  the  orgcuiization  of  Augustales
as  a  whole  (3).

Dedications  to  three  of  the  diui  were  discovered  at  Her-
culaneum.  Diuus  lulius  was  twice  honored,  once  by  the  people
as  a  whole  and  once  by  the  Augustales.  Diuus  Augustus  receiv-
ed recognition  at  the  hands  of  the  same  association,  while
Livia,  whp  was  deified  under  Claudius,  appears  in  an  inscription
set  up  for  the  wealthy  Augustalis  Mammius  Maximus  mention-
ed above.  In  each  case  the  inscriptions  belonged  to  statues  (4).

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  M52  =  D.  6352  =  Vaglieri  2197:  L.  Mammio  Maximo  Au-
gustali  municipes  et  incolae  acre  conlato.  Cp.  D.  123,  150,  177,  5581  and  C.  /.  L.
X,  1418.  The  statue  containing  the  above  inscription  is  reproduced  in  the  Real
Museo  di  Napoli  VI,  Pi.  41,  where  the  commentator  asserts  that  he  was  of
noble  birth,  a  conclusion  bsised  in  peurt  upon  the  fact  that  he  belonged  to  the
Augustales.  Barker  op.  cit.  187  erroneously  describes  him  as  a  «  priest  of  Au-
gustus »,  for  which  of  course  another  designation  thein  Augustalis  would  be
required.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1448  =  D.  6353  =  Vaglieri  2196:  M.  Claudio  Marcelli  Aeser-
nini  lib.  Hymenaeo  Augustali.  This  man's  farmer  master  is  cited  by  Tac.  ann.
Ill,   11;   XI.   6.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1462:   d.]  d.  locum  ab  inchoato cum  tectoris  p.   p.

Augustalibus   datum.    The   inscription   itself   was   not  found   but    its  impression.
Alcubierre's  report  m  Ruggiero  Scavi  di  Ercolano  23.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,    1410-1413.

-  287  -


No  evidence  regarding  the  priests  or  the  details  of  the  cult  of
the  Emperors  has  come  down  to  us.

ORIENTAL  CULTS.  ISIS.

As  Isis  worship  was  prominent  at  Puteoli  and  Pompeii  at
the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.  C,  so  it  is  probable  that
there  wcis  a  shrine  here  dating  from  approximately  the  same
period.  But  the  actual  evidence  for  the  cult  in  this  community
is  less  than  in  the  other  towns  of  this  region.  It  consists  of  a
number  of  small  objects  and  accessories  of  the  worship  and  of
wall  paintings  portraying  either  a  god  or  some  scene  coimected
with  the  ceremonies.  Although  the  latter  testify  to  the  Eirtistic
rather  them  to  the  religious  notions  prevalent  in  the  community,
they  nevertheless  show  a  wide  spread  familiarity  with  the  reli-
gious rites  which  they  depict.

One  of  the  wall  paintings  has  been  interpreted  as  a  repre-
sentation of  the  afternoon  service  which  was  held  daily  in
connection  with  the  worship  of  the  Egyptian  gods.  On  the  top
of  the  steps  leading  to  the  temple  stand  two  priests,  one  of
whom  holds  a  vessel  of  holy  water  while  the  others  are  shaking
sistra.  Below  is  £ui  altar  where  a  priest  attends  to  the  fire  and
two  rows  of  priests  and  believers  combined  are  drawn  up  in  two
rows  to  watch  the  ceremony  (I).  Another  painting  has  been
regarded  as  an  allusion  to  one  of  the  features  of  the  autumn
festival  or  as  the  representation  of  the  daily  morning  service  (2).
Small  bronze  figures  portray  Isis-Fortuna  and  Harpocrates.
Among  the  instruments  used  in  the  ritual  of  the  Egyptian  gods
were  found  examples  of  the  sistrum  and  the  crotalum  and  also
a  bronze  vase  covered  with  hieroglyphics  (3).

(1)  Hdbig  221.  No.  nil  ;  Lafaye  op.  cit.  329.  No.  223;  Piroli  et  Piranesi
II.  PI.  31;  Roux  et  Barre,  Herculanum  et  Pompei  recueil  general  II,  PI.  68;
Mau  182  f. ;  Mau-Kelsey  176  f . ;  Comptes  rendus  de  Vacad.  des  inscr.  1896,
PI.  VIII.

(2)  Helbig  222.  No.  1112;  Ufaye  328.  No.  222;  Piroli  et  Piranesi  II,
PI.  30;  Roux  et  Barre  II.  PI.  69 ;  Mau  183.  Cp.  Helbig.  Nos.  1094,  ll04  =  Lafaye.
No8.  225,  226,  A  full  list  of  paitings  is  given  by  Drexler,  Isis,  Roscher  II,
399-400.

(3)  Lafaye.  op.  cit.  catalogue  Nos.  52.  69.  70  with  reftsrences  to  the  books
in  which  they  are  reproduced;  Ehexler  400;  Barker    175.

-   288    -


For  the  presence  of  a  temple  itself  there  is  no  psu-ticular
evidence;  indeed  it  is  never  mentioned.  Since,  therefore,  its
existence  might  be  questioned,  it  is  hazardous  to  attempt  with
Thedenat  to  determine  a  date  for  it,  and  to  speak  of  it  as
something  assured  (1).  Miss  Barker  likewise  tries  to  associate  a
temple  with  the  cult  by  eissuming  that  the  one  destined  for  the
service  of  Magna  Mater  was  really  a  sanctuary  of  Isis.  This
assumption  is  based  on  the  supposed  confusion  between  the
two  goddesses.  But  while  these  had  their  points  of  resemblance
and  lived  on  intimate  terms  with  each  other,  it  is  more  difficult
to  conceive  of  a  real  confusion  (2).  As  time  went  on  the
strength  and  influence  of  Magna  Mater  increased  daily  and
tended  to  absorb  the  activities  of  less  importsuit  goddesses.  But
this  phenomenon  was  comparatively  late  and  occurred  in  fact
after  the  destruction  of  Herculaneum,  when  there  weis  a  notable
tendency  toward  syncretism  (3).  Yet  even  then  we  may  be
sure  that  Isis  was  in  no  danger  of  being  submerged;  under  the
Republic  and  during  the  first  yecirs  of  the  Empire  such  a  pos-
sibility was  extremely  remote  (4).  It  is  in  truth  inconceivable
that  the  temple  at  Herculaneum,  designated  in  an  official
inscription  as  belonging  to  the  ((  Mother  of  the  gods  »  should
have  been  designed  primau-ily  for  the  use  of  Isis.  Though  this
appellation  is  employed  reguleu-ly  for  Magna  Mater,  it  is  not
adopted  for  Isis,  who  is  seldom  called  Isis  Mater  but  frequently
Isis  Regina  (5).  The  latter,  however,  may  have  been  worshipped
in  some  portion  of  the  shrine.

MAGNA  MATER.

The  temple  in  which  the  worship   of   Magna  Mater  W2is
maintained  was  identified  by  means  of  an  inscription  found  on

(1)  Tedenat,  Pompii  vie  publique  70.

(2)  A  temple  at  Brundisium  was  consecrated  to  Magna  Mater,  Dea  Syria
and  Isis.  C.  /.  L.  IX,  6099.

(3)  Cp.  the  statue  described  by  Lafaye  276,  No.  40  as  a  representation  of
Isis  identified  with  Cybele-

(4)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cybele  189;  Corcia,  Di  una  voiiva  statuetta  egi-
zia  in  Am  Nap.   II  (1866)  75  f.

(5)  Graillot,    op.    cit.    189    (3);    Dessau,    Inscriptiones    Laiinae    III,    p.    533
index;  Drexler,  op.  cit.  512,   513;  Vaglieri  Sylloge  epig.  II,   p.   660  index.

-  289  -

19


the  site.  This  record  states  that  the  building  had  collapsed  sis
a  result  of  the  earthquaike  of  63  A.  D.,  and  was  therezJter
restored  by  the  aid  of  the  Emperor  Vespasian  before  the  middle
of  76  (1).  It  was  a  very  large  building  standing  in  the  quarter
of  the  theater  and  the  ((  basilica  »,  in  the  very  center  of  public
life  (2).  A  peculiarity  of  construction  appeau-s  in  the  circum-
stance that  it  had  appsirently  two  stories.  The  ceiling  of  the
lower  one  was  in  the  form  of  a  barrel  vault  richly  decorated  with
a  multitude  of  green,  red  and  yellow  stars  upon  a  white  back-
ground. Among  the  small  objects  found  in  the  neighborhood  of
the  shrine  were  statuettes  of  Venus,  Mercury,  Hercules  and
Isis  (3).  Magna  Mater  is  depicted  on  a  terra  cotta  lamp  in  the
form  of  a  seated  figure  fleuiked  by  lions.  In  the  background
appesu:  on  the  one  side  Attis  and  on  the  other  a  pine  tree  from
which  cymbals  are  suspended  (4).  Every  thing  points  to  a
prosperous  cult  which  had  become  thoroughly  established  for
a  considerable  time.  The  temple  was  one  of  the  leading  shrines
of  the  city;  for  this  reason  as  well  as  from  the  fact  that  Magna
Mater  -was  highly  honored  in  his  birth  place  Reate,  Vespaisian
selected  this  sanctuary  for  an  early  restoration  (5).


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1406=Vagrieri  1287.  Imp.  Caesax  Vesp>asianus  Aug.  pon-
tif.  max.  trib.  pot.  VII,  imp.  XVII,  p.  p.  cos.  VII,  design.  VIII  templum  Ma-
tris  deum  terrae  motu  conlapsum  restituit.  Spinazzola,  Atti  Nap.  XXII  (1902)
135   (3)  strangely  asserts  that  this   inscription  was   found  at  Puteoli.

(2)  Graillot  433  states  that  the  temple  stood  in  the  quarter  of  the  «  ba-
silica »  and  the  Forum,  but  these  terms  seem  both  to  have  been  used  to  ex-
plain the  same  building.  That  the  central  street  itself  served  as  a  substitute
fox  the  Forum  is  refuted  by  Waldstein  67,   72.

(3)  Waldstein  and  Shoobridge  72;  Ruggioro,  Scavi  di  Ercolano  XXXVIII;
Mau  543.

(4)  Piroli  et  Piranesi,  AniiquiUs  d'Herculanum  (ed.  1805)  VI.  PI.  VI.
No.  4.

(5)  Sil.    VIII,   415;    Graillot    148.

-  290  -


CHAPTER  VI,
NUCERIA,  STABIAE,  SURRENTUM,  CAPREAE,


In  the  valley  of  the  River  Szumus,  which  with  the  mounteiin-
ous  district  between  it  and  the  sea  forms  the  southezistern  corner
of  the  Campanian  territory,  were  situated  in  ancient  times  three
cities  Pompeii,  Stabiae,  and  Nuceria.  The  two  former  were
quite  neair  the  coast,  occuying  the  same  relative  position  with
reg2u:d  to  the  third  city  farther  in  the  interior,  which  was  situated
about  twelve  Roman  miles  distant  from  both.  Stabiae,  which
soon  lost  its  existence  as  a  separate  municipgJity,  was  located
not  iai  from  the  modem  town,  called  Castellameure  di  Stabia,
which  by  its  official  designation  still  shows  its  relation  to  its
ancient  ancestor.  The  ground  here  is  full  of  mineral  springs,  —
a  circumsteuice  that  caused  it  to  become  a  heaJth  resort  in
Roman  times  and  to  be  the  site  of  many  villas.

Nuceria,  which  was  always  more  important  than  Stabiae»
stood  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  present  town  of  Nocera  in  a  very
important  sp^jt,  because  in  this  vicinity  was  the  junction  of  a
series  of  main  lines  of  communication.  Here  the  great  highway
connecting  Capua  and  Rhegium  was  intersected  by  roads  from
the  coast  cities  Neapolis,  Stabiae,  and  Salernum.  As  a  result  of
its  favorable  location  and  its  liberal  treatment  at  the  hands  of
the  Romans,  it  remained  during  the  later  Republic  the  metrop-
olis of  southeaistern  Campania  (I).

When  Nuceria  and  Stabiae  first  present  themselves  in  his-
tory in  the  fifth  century  B.  C,  they  are  peopled  by  a  Samnite
population.  Even  then  Nuceria  was  the  leading  city  of  the
Samus  valley  and  the  head  of  an  Oscan  confederacy  embracing

(1)   Beloch  246  f . ;  Nissen.  It.  Landeskunde  II.   766;  Cosenza,  Stahia  91   f.

.  291   -


not  only  Stabiae  but  also  the  kindred  cities  of  Surrentum,
Pompeii  and  Herculaneum.  As  a  result,  these  various  places
are  without  an  individual  history  of  their  own  in  the  early  times ;
likewise  none  of  the  dependent  members  of  the  league  attempted
to  coin  money.

During  the  period  of  the  Samnite  wars  Nuceria  was  at
first  neutral,  then  at  variance  with  Rome,  but  was  finally  obliged
to  surrender  to  Quintus  Pabius  (308  B.  C).  At  the  capitulation
however,  the  city  obtained  very  favorable  terms  on  a  line  with
those  given  to  the  neighboring  Greek  cities,  and  ever  after
remained  loyal  to  the  Romsuis.  Its  inhabitants  resisted  Hannibal
until  constrained  by  hunger  to  capitulate  in  216  B.  C,  and
were  then  forced  to  seek  new  homes  until  the  restoration  of
peace.  The  Social  War  marked  the  end  of  the  relations  between
Nuceria  and  its  tributaries  along  the  coeist,  as  the  latter  declined
to  continue  the  policy  of  friendliness  toward  Rome.  In  the
ensuing  struggle  Stabiae  was  destroyed  (89  B.  C);  the  other
members  of  the  confederation  became  entirely  independent  of
Nuceria,  but  this  city  as  a  compensation  received  the  land  for-
merly belonging  to  Stabiae  and  continued  to  be  a  flourishing
community.

Its  prosperity  was  somewhat  marred  by  the  attacks  of  the
gladiators  in  the  Servile  Weir,  and  after  the  battle  of  Philippi
the  triumvirs  appropriated  tracts  of  land  for  their  veterans.  The
colony,  called  Nuceria  Constantia,  received  other  settlers  of
the  S2une  class  under  Nero  (57  A.  D.).  Nuceria  itself  suffered
little  from  the  earthquakes  of  the  first  century  A.  D.,  but  the
country  around  Stabiae  was  badly  damaged  and  here  the  elder
Pliny  was  killed.  As  a  result  when  the  village  was  rebuilt,  it
w£i$  located  on  the  sea,  where  now  stands  Castellamare.  At  the
beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages  a  battle  took  place  here  between
the  Goths  and  the  Byzantines  (533  A.  D.)  (I).

APOLLO.

The  male  head  wearing  a  wreath  of  laurel  which  appears
on  certain  bronze  coins   of   Nuceria,    was   identified   by   eeirly

(1)  Beloch  239-243;  Mommsenn,  C.  /.  L.  X.  p.  124;  Cosenza,  Stabia  116
i. ;  De  Petra,  /  porti  antichi  dell'Italia  meridionale  328.

-  292  -


numismatists  as  a  likeness  of  Apollo,  but  the  more  recent
authorities  regard  this  identification  as  dubious  (I).  Even  though
the  appearance  of  Apollo  is  admitted,  it  may  be  explained  as
an  imitation  of  the  coinage  of  Neapolis  (2).  Yet,  as  the  cult  of
this  god  had  become  well  established  generally  along  the  Cam-
panian  coast,  it  doubtless  possessed  a  shrine  here.

DIOSCURI.

The  figure  of  a  youthful  horseman,  probably  one  of  the
Twin  Brethren,  is  reguleirly  found  upon  the  obverse  of  silver
coins,  and  that  of  two  galloping  horsemen  appears  sometimes
upon  money  minted  in  bronze.  The  identification  of  these  fig-
ures however,  as  representations  of  the  Dioscuri  is  no  longer
considered  as  altogether  certain,  and  there  is  no  other  evidence
to  prove  the  existence  of  a  cult  (3).

JUNO.

Juno  is  known  to  have  had  a  temple  outside  the  walls  sur-
rounded by  a  sacred  grove;  from  it  an  omen  weis  reported
when  the  Cimbri  were  invading  Italy.  The  top  of  an  elm  tree
had  been  cut  off  and  laid  upon  an  altar  in  the  temenos,  when
suddenly  it  gave  signs  of  life,  a  token  —  as  was  proved  by  the
result  —  of  a  revival  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Roman  j>eople  (4).
This  evidence  shows  that  the  shrine  was  prominent  at  the  end
of  the  second  century  B.  C.  According  to  Otto  it  was  a  Roman
foundation  erected  after  the  conquest  of  Nuceria  by  the  Ro-
mans. He  sees  an  evidence  for  this  opinion  in  the  omen  itself,

(1)  L.  Sambon,  Monn.  de  la  presq'ile  italique  165;  A.  Sambon  Les  monn.
ant.  de  I'lt.  384.  No.    1014.   1015;  Head  41.

(2)  Beloch    245.

(3)  L.  Sambon  165;  A.  Sambon  378,  381-384;  Head  41  ;  Helbig,  Die  Cas-
tores  in  Hermes  XL  (1905)  103;  Garrucci  97;  Dubois  199  (2);  Albert.  Le  Culte
de  Castor  et  Pollux  en  Italie   140.   No.  90.

(4)  Plin.  nat.  XVI,  132:  Factum  hoc  populi  Romani  Quiritibus  ostentum
Cimbricis  bellis  Nuceriae   in  luco   lunonis  ulmo.   poslquam   etiam  cacumen   am-

[putatum  erat,  quoniam  in  aram  ipsam  procumbebat,  restituta  sponte  ita  ut
>rotinus  floreret,  a  quo  deinde  tempore  maiestas  populi  Romani  resurrexit  quae
ante  uastata  cladibus  fuerat.   Roscher,  Juno  Roscher  II,  605.

-   293   -


which  seems  to  show  a  sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  goddess  for
Rome  her  place  of  origin  (I).  But  while  Roman  influence
undoubtedly  existed  here  as  in  other  places  during  the  period
of  alliance,  we  may  question  whether  it  was  as  yet  strong  enough
to  cause  the  adoption  of  many  cults.  We  would  also  expect
these  to  be  introduced  into  the  town  itself,  if  they  represented
an  important  innovation.  But  this  sanctuary  stood  outside  the
fown,  and  probably  represented  an  old  cult  like  that  of  Diana
near  Capua.  The  importance  of  the  omen,  which  caused  it  to
be  especially  noted  and  observed,  depended  largely  on  the
fact  that  it  came  from  a  shrine  of  venerable  antiquity.

This  is  the  only  reference  to  the  cult  of  Juno  at  Nuceria,
though  some  scholars  have  seen  an  allusion  to  the  divinity  of
this  place  in  the  phrase  luno  Sarrana  employed  by  Silius  (2).
This  view  first  appears  in  an  article  by  Minervini,  who  used
it  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  place  called  Saxro,  peopled  by
the  SeuTEistes,  an  ancient  race  who  are  said  once  to  have  dwelt
in  these  pairts  (3).  Later  Beloch  and  recently  Cosenza  state  as
a  fact  that  Juno  Sarrana  was  worshipped  at  Nuceria  (4).  But
whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  the  report  that  the  Sarrsistes  once
lived  here,  the  term  Sarrana  of  this  passage  has  no  reference
to  these  people  or  to  this  locality.  It  means  pertaining  to  Seurra,
a  name  for  the  city  of  Tyre,  and  is  applied  not  only  to  the
Tyrians  but  to  the  Carthaginians,  a  use  that  is  regular  in  Si-
lius (5).  The  phrase  Sarrana  Juno  occurs  in  an  invocation  of
gods  made  by  Regulus  as  security  for  a  return  to  imprisonment


(1)  Otto.  luno  in  Philologus  LXIV  (1905)  173.

(2)  Sil.  VI.  466-469:

Turn  palmas  simul  attollens  ac  lumina  caelo:
iustitiae  rectique   dator.  qui   cuncta   guberneis.
nee   leuior   mihi   diua  Fides  Sarranaque   luno,
quos  reditus  testes  iurata  mente  uocaui

(3)  Minervini.  Intorno  ad  alcuni  dolii  di  terracotta  rinvenuti  vicino  il  Samo
in  Bull  Nap.  n.  s.  VII  (1858)  82-83.

(4)  Beloch  244;   Cosenza.   Stahia    164.

(5)  See  Sarra  in  the  Lexicon  of  Lewis  and  Short.  The  adjective  Sarranus
occurs  ten  times  in  Silius  always  with  this  meaning ;  among  them  is  the  phretse
Sa^iana  numina  referring  to  the  introduction  of  Carthaginian  deities  into  Italy
and  meaning  especially  the  cult  of  Anna  identified  as  Dido's  sister.  Full  list
in  the  index  to  Bauer's  Silius  Italicus  p.  240.

-  294  -


at  Ceuthage;  the  poet  adopts  it  because  of  Juno's  pro-Cartha-
ginian sympathies  and  because  it  makes  an  appropriate  deity  for
his  hero  to  swear  by.  On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  wholly
unnatural  to  represent  Regulus  as  swearing  by  the  local  divinity
of  a  Csmnpanian  provincial  town  never  of  first  rate  importance.
Although  this  shrine  waus  sufficiently  prominent  to  cause  its
prodigies  to  be  noted  by  the  Romeuis  at  the  end  of  the  second
century  B.  C,  it  could  not  be  associated  with  the  Romans  in  the
epoch  of  Regulus.  Juno  Sarrsuia  is  plainly  a  Carthaginian  god-
dess, the  celebrated  female  deity  who  wais  usually  identified
with  Juno  but  sometimes  with  other  divinities  (I).

The  temple  has  been  located  between  the  towns  of  Nocera
and  Pagani  at  a  place  called  Campodara  (Arae  Campus?),
where  remains  were  found,  but  this  identification  is  extremely
dubious  (2).

SARNUS  AND  EPIDIUS.

A  local  hero  Seurnus  seems  to  have  been  associated  with
the  river  besuring  that  name  and  to  have  been  worshipped  like
the  river  god  Sebethus  at  Neapolis.  His  cult,  however,  was
more  important  than  that  of  the  Neapolitan  deity.  His  neune
appe£u-s  in  the  title  Colonia  Sarnensis  Mileu,  which  was  one
of  the  settlements  made  by  P.  Sittius  of  Nuceria  neai  Cirta  in
Numidia  under  the  authority  of  Julius  Caeseur.  As  Venus  and
Minerva,  who  gave  their  names  to  other  colonies  of  the  same
Sitius,  were  the  leading  deities  respectively  at  Pompeii  and
Surrentum,  so  Samus  must  be  considered  as  the  tutelary  divi-
nity of  Nuceria  (3).  Millingen  believed  that  this  hero  was
represented  on  the  obverse  of  the  silver  coins  of  Nuceria,  where
a  young  man's  head  is  portrayed  with  flowing  hair  auid  the
horns  of  a  ram  (4).


(1)  Andollent,  Carthage  romaine  371  (2)  does  not  include  this  passage  in
his  citations  from  the  poets  who  identify  the  tutelzury  goddess  of  Carthage  with
Juno.

(2)  Orlando,  Storia  di  Nocera  de'  Pagani,   1,    167.
i'i)  Wilmanns,  C.  /.  L.  VIII.  pp.  618.   701.

(4)  Millingen,  Considerations  sur  la  numismatique  de  Vancienne  Italic
198.  Cp.  Waser,  Flussgotter,  P.-W.  VI,  2810;  Hofer,  Sarnus,  Roscher  IV,  387.

-  295  -


Some  numismatists  on  the  other  hand  have  associated  this
figure  with  that  of  another  local  divinity,  the  hero  Epidius,
who  was  connected  with  the  same  river,  gmd  very  likely  wsis
not  aJways  distinguished  from  the  real  river  god  Sarnus  because
of  the  similarity  of  their  attributes  (I).  According  to  a  legend
transmitted  by  Suetonius  a  certain  Epidius,  an  ancestor  of  the
Augustan  rhetorician  of  that  name,  tumbled  into  the  waters  of
the  Sarnus,  showed  himself  momenteirily  with  the  addition  of
a  pair  of  horns,  and  then  disappeared  forever.  As  a  result  of
this  accident,  a  new  god  was  added  to  the  local  divinities  by
the  superstitious  populace  (2).  The  circumstance  that  he
showed  himself  with  horns  indicates  according  to  Wissowa  a
Greek  origin  for  this  tale  (3).  It  has  been  suggested,  although
without  any  particulgur  proof,  that  a  colossal  equestrian  statue
of  the  hero  stood  in  the  city  and  that  this  was  known  popularly
as  «  the  big  horse  ».  This  supposition  is  intended  to  explain  the
allusion  to  such  a  horse  set  up  by  a  prominent  citizien,  M.
Virtius  Ceraunus,  a  municipal  official  (4).

DIONYSUS.

The  head  of  the  young  man  with  ram*s  horns  which  has
been  discussed  in  the  preceding  psu-agraphs  has  likewise  been
regarded  as  a  likeness  of  the  African  Dionysus,  who  may  be
represented  on  the  coinage  of  Cyrene.  But  the  horned  figure  on
the  money  of  the  Afric£in  city  may  be  disposed  of  by  other
interpretations  (5).


(1)  Avellino,  Num.  anecd.  22;  Minervini,  Osservazioni  45;  Cavedoni,
Bull.  Inst.  1839,  138;  Garrucci  96.  A  summary  of  the  different  interpretations
of  this  figure   is  given   by   A.    Sambon    1,    378.

(2)  Suet.  4,  6.  The  letters  epid  in  an  mscription  found  at  Pomp>eii  can
scarcely  refer  to  this  hero.  Conway,  Italic  Dialects  1,  p.  66.

(3)  Wissowa.  Gesam.  Abhandl.  135  (1).  Cp.  Peter.  Epidius,  Roscher  1.
1282;   Miinzer.   Epidius  (1),    P.-W.   VI.   58.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.   1081    =    D.  6446;  Cavedoni.  Bull  Inst.   1840.    142.

(5)  A.  Sambon  379;  Thramer.  Dionysos  in  der  Kunst,  Roscher  1.  51;
Head  865  considers  that  the  figure  on  the  coins  of  Cyrene  wzis  intended  to
represent  Aristaeus.

-  296  -


ROMAN  CULTS.

Almost  no  information  has  reached  us  about  the  specifically
Roman  cults,  which  must  have  developed  during  the  Empire.
The  Augustales,  composed  chiefly  or  wholly  of  freedmen,  flour
ished,  but  aside  from  a  few  names  little  is  known  about  their
activities  (I).  The  most  important  -was  a  certain  Caesius  (?)
Daphnus,  who  held  the  same  office  in  smother  town,  the  name
of  which  has  been  lost.  He  aided  the  community  by  a  restora-
tion of  the  temple  of  the  Genius  at  Stabiae  (2).  A  mutilated
inscription,  cited  by  Cosenza  as  unpublished,  appsu-ently
contained  the  names  of  two  menbers  of  this  organization  (3).
A  gladiatorial  notice  advertising  games  to  be  held  at  Nuceria
Constantia  in  honor  of  the  divinity  of  one  of  the  Emperors
contains  the  mention  of  a  flamen  connected  with  the  Imperial
cult  who  provided  the  amusements  offered  at  this  time  (4).
This  individual  seems  also  to  have  filled  the  post  of  AugustgJis ;
he  is  dated  by  Mau  and  Zangemeister  as  not  later  than  the
reign  of  Tiberius.

CHRISTIANITY.

The  Mart5a"ology  to  which  the  name  of  Jerome  has  been  at-
tached mentions  three  martyrs  belonging  to  this  community,  —
Priscian,  Felix  cind  Constantia.  The  first  nemried  martyr  has  been
identified  with  the  bishop  of  Nuceria  to  whom  reference  is
made  by  Paulinus  of  Nola  (5).     Felix     and     Constantia     have

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  452:  N.  Ahius  Successus  Augustalis  Nuceriae  Marciae
Meroe   coiugi    et    sibi    cum    qua    uixit   etc.;    X,    1083;    T.    Cellio    T.    1.    Ingen

August(alis)  Optimo  patrono    T.  Gellius  T.    1.   Ingen ;  X,    1084:  M.   Genicius

Menecrates   Aug.    sibi   et   Acciae    Maximae   ux,   et   Buis.

(2)  X,  772,  D.  5416.  As  the  name  of  the  missing  town  Nola  is  sometimes
supplied,  but  also  Capua,  Caudium,  Cumae,  Stabiae,  Beloch  admits  the  pos-
sibility  of  any   supplement   save   the   last.  Arch.   stor.    nap.    II    (1877)   293.

(3)  Cosenza,  Raccolta  di  antichita  stahiane  in  Rend.  Nap.  XIV   (1900)   146.

(4)  C.   /.   L.    IV,   3882  and  the  annotation  of   Zzingemeister   and  Mau.

(5)  Pseudo-Jerome,  Martyrologium  uetus  Sept.  16,  20;  Paulinus  of  Nola,
Carmina   XIX,    515:

Forte    sacrata    dies    inluxerat    ilia   beati
natalem    Prisci    referens,    quem    et    Nola    celebrat
quamuis  ille  alia  Nucerinus  episcopus  urbe

sederit.   Lanzoni,    Le   origini    del   cristianesimo    nella    Campania    ro-
mana   in  Riv.   storico-crit.   delle  scienze  teol.   VI    (1910)  281.

-  297  -


been  assigned  to  the  reign  of  Nero,  but  the  references  to  sadnts
who  suffered  under  Nero  are  suspicious,  and  their  assignment
to  this  period  was  probably  arbitrary  (1).  The  city  was  appar-
ently an  episcopal  see  before  the  reign  of  Diocletian.

STABIAE.

When  Stabiae  w2is  captured  by  Sulla  during  the  Social
War,  its  existence  as  an  autonomous  municipality  w£is  brought
to  an  end,  £uid  its  territory  was  placed  under  the  jurisdiction  of
Nuceria  (2).  As  a  tributary  district,  it  was  doubtless  treated  as
a  pagus  and  administered  by  magistri,  who  after  the  institution
of  the  cult  of  Augustus  devoted  themselves  mostly  to  his  ser-
vice (3).  One  of  these  officials  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription
discovered  on  the  front  of  a  small  Larsurium,  where  stood  a
bust  of  the  Empress  Li  via.  The  inscription  was  due  to  a  f  reed-
man  Anther  OS  Heracleo,  who  followed  the  profession  of  an
actor;  it  records  a  dedication  to  the  Lares  and  household
gods  (4).

GENIUS.

After  Stabiarum  had  ceased  to  have  a  sepeu-ate  municipal  ex-
istence, its  temples  were  maintained  as  before,  but  were  now
subject  to  the  regulations  of  the  decurions  of  Nuceria.  Only
one  of  these  cults,  that  of  the  Genius  Stabiae,  is  definitely
established  by  the  testimony  of  epigraphical  evidence.  It  was
housed  in  a  temple  which  under  the  Empire  needed  restoration,
and  W21S  rebuilt  with  the  meeois  of  a  rich  AugusteJis  of  Nuceria,
who  has  been  cited  above  (5).  It  is  assumed  by  Beloch  that
the  first  temple  was  a  survival  from  the  Oscan  period  and  dated
before  the  time  of  Sulla.  Cosenza  on  the  contrary  denies  that
the  sanctuary  dated  as  far  back  as  the  days  of  Samnite  suprem-

(1)  Lanzoni,  loc.  cit.;  Orlando,  Storia  di  Nocera  de  Pagani  219  f.  Cp.
210   f.

(2)  Bedoch  248;  Cosenza,  Stabia   159  f.

(3)  Cp.   p.  207.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  773,  Vaglieri  1132:  Anteros  1,  Heracleo  8uinniar(um),
mag(ister)  Larib.   et  famil.  d.d.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  772,  D.  5416:....Aeaiu8  Daphnus  Augustal,  Nuceriae
et aedem   Geni    Stabiar.    delapsis   marmoribus   uexata  aede   restituit.

-   298.  -


acy;  he  considers  that  the  temple  wets  more  recent,  and  vras
restored  only  after  the  earthquake  of  63  (1).  The  latter  part  of
this  supposition,  that  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  falls  in  the
period  63-79  A.  D.  is  doubtless  true  and  is  borne  out  by  the
character  of  the  inscription.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to  believe
that  a  community  without  any  organic  existence  would  erect  a
temple  to  its  own  Genius.  Such  a  sanctuary  suits  better  the
semi-independent  municipality  before  the  Social  Wsu:,  which
w£is  nominally  in  alliance  with  Rome  and  familigu:  with  the
Roman  conception  of  the  tuteleury  Genius  of  the  city-state.

Though  the  exact  location  of  the  shrine  is  unknown,  it
appears  to  have  stood  a  short  distance  east  of  the  present  town
of  Csistellamare  on  the  road  to  Nocera.  Here  remains  of  walls
and  architectural  fragments  were  discovered,  'but  movabje
objects  of  value  had  been  carried  away  before  the  eruption  of
Vesuvius  in  79  (2).  The  plan  of  the  temple  inserted  in  Rosini*s
work  entitled  Dissertatio  isagogica  cein  not,  as  Cosenza  points
out,  have  reference  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Genius,  because  the
reports  of  the  excavations  in  this  region  indicate  that  it  was  not
completely  ime2uthed  (3).

HERCULES.

The  older  antiquariems  who  treated  the  aircheology  of  Sta-
biae  claimed  without  warrant  that  the  city  derived  its  namne
from  the  myth  of  Hercules,  who  stopped  here  on  his  return
from  Spain  and  left  his  ships  at  anchor  on  the  coast  (4).  It  is  true
that  the  nsune  of  this  god  was  attached  to  some  point  in  this
vicinity  that  was  called  Petra  Herculis.  Some  antiquarieins  sup-
posed that  this  was  situated  beyond  Monte  S.  Angelo  toward


(1)  Beloch   249;   Cosenza,    Stahia    135   f.   The   date   of   this  earthquake   is
discussed    by  Chabert,    Melanges    Boissier    115.

(2)  In   the   fondo    Pellicano   west    of   the    church   of    the    Madonna    delle
grazie.  Cp.   Cosenza   136-139.

(3)  Rosini,    Dissertatio    isagogica    ad    Herculanensium    uoluminum    expla-
nationem  pars  prima  88  and  PI.  18;  Ruggiero,  Scavi  di  Stahia  186;  Cosenza  137.

(4)  Capaccio,    Historia    Neapolitana    II,     105;    Corcia,    Storia     delle    due
Sicilie   II.    139.

-   299   -


Surrentum,  where  stands  the  modern  town  Vico  Equense  (1).
But  it  is  generally  thought  that  it  should  be  identified  with  cer-
tain rocks  at  the  mouth  of  the  Sarnus  to  which  the  name  Revi-
gliano  has  been  applied  (2).  In  the  sixteenth  century  a  small
bronze  image  of  the  god  was  found  here,  but  as  Beloch  justly
observed,  this  is  a  very  slight  evidence  on  which  to  base  an
identification.  Milante  devotes  the  greater  part  of  a  page  to
prove  the  existence  of  a  temple  here,  but  this  matter  is  mostly
irrelevant  (3).  Cosenza  rightly  rejects  the  theories  of  the  anti-
quarians just  mentioned,  but  he  admits  too  readily  the  existence
of  a  temple  of  Hercules  at  Stabiae,  for  which  there  is  no
proof  (4).

PLUTO.

Near  Castellamare  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  called  Varano
is  an  oblong  cavern  with  two  entrances  hewn  in  the  rock  near
which  various  remains  of  small  objects  were  found.  Milcinte
compared  it  to  the  oracle  of  Trophonius,  which  Pausanizis  de-
scribes as  existent  at  Lebadea  in  Boeotia,  and  it  was  probably
consecrated  to  Pluto  or  some  other  chthonic  deity.  With  the
advent  of  Christianity  it  retained  its  chsu-acter  of  sanctity,  but
was  assigned  to  a  new  meister;  henceforth  St.  Bleisius  was  the
guardian  of  the  place.  The  spot  is  called  Carmiano,  an  appel-
lation which  is  generally  derived  from  the  word  carmina,
applied  to  the  ancient  responses  of  the  oracle  (5).

UNCERTAIN  CULTS.

The  evidence  cited  for  other  cults  is  not  convincing.  An
altar  of  white  marble  exhibiting  the   figure   of   a   deer's  head

(1)  Plin.  not.  XXXII,  17:  In  Stabiano  (!^mpaniae  eid  Herclis  Petram
melanuri  panem  abiectum  in  mare  rapiunt,  iidem  ad  nullum  cibum  in  quo
hamus  sit  accedunt.   Pelegrino,  Discorsi   I,  348 ;   Parascandolo,   Lettera  sull'anti-

quita  della   citta  d'Equa  91.

(2)  Capasso,     Topogr.    atorico-arch.    della    penisola    sorrentina    8;    31     f,

(3)  Beloch  251  ;  Milante,  De  Stabiis,  biabiana  ecclesia  et  episcopis  eius  8.

(4)  Cosenza  120  (2),   125  (1).  Cp.   164  and  Corcia,  op.  cit.  II,  429.

(5)  Milante,  op.  cit.  13  with  a  picture  of  the  grotto  PI.  IF;  Capvasso  2;
Beloch  251  ;  Trede,  Das  Heidentum  in  der  rom.  Kirche   I,    110.

-   300   -


encircled  by  a  crown  composed  of  various  fruits  has  been  used
as  testimony  for  the  evistence  of  a  cult  and  temple  of  Diana  (I).
Cosenza,  following  the  lead  of  eeirlier  antiqueuricins,  eirgues  for
the  worship  of  Neptune  whose  accepted  sacrifice  W2is  a  horse.
Supposed  evidence  for  cults  of  Ceres  and  Janus  is  valueless  (2).

ORIENTAL  CULTS.

No  evidence  has  been  found  for  the  presence  of  the  va-
rious pagEin  religions  of  the  Orient  save  some  references  to  Isis
worship  which  appeEir  in  wall  decorations.  They  consist  of  a
bearded  priest  wearing  a  long  robe  2ind  a  priestess  clad  in  sim-
ilar garments,  whose  hands  support  a  peculiar  vessel  shaped
like  the  beak  of  a  bird  (3).  There  is  no  direct  testimony  for  the
presence  of  a  Christian  community.  On  the  site  of  the  Cathe-
dral of  Castellamare,  however,  Christiem  epitaphs  were  discov-
ered in  1878,  which  De  Rossi  assigned  to  the  age  of  Const2ui-
tine  or  earlier  (4).


(1)  Milante  8;   Capasso  21.

(2)  Cosenza  165;  Capasso  20.  27;  Milante  9.  12.  The  inscription  used
by  Milante  to  prove  a  cult  of  Ceres  belongs  elsewhere.

(3)  Helbig,  Wandgemdlde  der  von  Vesuv  verschiitteten  Stadte  Cam-
paniens  Nos.  1908  .1101;  Afuseo  Borhonico  X,  PL  55.  No.  2;  Cosenza  188
No.   42;  Lafaye.  Histoire  du  culte  des  divinites  d'Alexandrie  330.   Nos.   227-28.

(4)  De  Rossi.  Bull.  arch,  crist.   1879.   118  f . ;  Lanzoni.  op.  cit.  285.

-  301   -


SURRENTUM.

Surrentum,  the  Tnodem  Sorrento,  wets  located  on  the  northern
shore  of  the  mountainous  peninsula  that  juts  out  from  the
southern  peirt  of  the  Campanian  coast,  thus  sepeurating  the
Bay  of  Naples  from  the  Bay  of  Salerno.  Its  territory,  which
w£is  of  no  great  extent,  was  divided  from  the  Sarnus  valley
By  the  range  of  mountains,  which  is  known  today  as  Monte
S.  Angelo;  on  the  southeeist  its  borders  touched  the  land  of
Salernum.  It  wsis  a  district  of  picturesque  scenery,  which
nevertheless  produced  important  crops  of  olives  and  wine.
In  the  days  of  the  Empire  the  region  was  covered  with  villeis,
and  the  town  thrived  by  reason  of  the  volume  of  commerce
which  passed  through  its  port  en  route  for  Capreae.  As  the
city  from  its  inaccessible  position  was  little  liable  Jto  attack,
it  enjoys  the  rso-e  distinction  of  never  having  been  destroyed.
Consequently  the  arremgement  of  the  streets  h£is  probably
never  been  materially  altered,  and  it  may  be  teJcen  for  granted
that  the  ancient  town  was  systematically  laid  out  (1).

Legends  Eissociate  this  neighborhood  with  Ulysses  and  the
Sirens,  and  the  place  was  long  a  center  of  Greek  influence,  -
a  circumstance  pointing  to  a  colonization  of  which  no  record
has  been  preserved.  In  the  fifth  century  B.  C.  it  appe2u-s  under
the  domination  of  the  Sgunnites,  probably  as  one  of  the  league
which  acknowledged  Nuceria  as  its  head.  At  the  close  of  the
Social  War  it  may  have  received  a  colony  composed  of  Sulla's
veterans.  During  the  eaily  Empire  it  is  scarcely  mentioned
save  in  connection  with  the  bsmishment  of  Agrippina,  and
after  the  reign  of  Tiberius  it  drops  out  of  history  entirely  till
the  end  of  the  Empire  (2).

The    gods   who   were    honored    here    are    attested    almost

(1)   Beloch  258,  264;  Nissen,  It  Landesk-   II.   767.

<2)  Beloch  252-254,  434;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  76;  Pais.  Ancient
Italy  222  f. ;  Ricerche  stor.   e  geog.   282.

.  302   -


solely  by  literary  evidence,  as  the  epi graphical  material  from
this  vicinity  is  very  scanty.  Furthermore  no  coins  of  Surrentum
have  been  found ;  at  one  time  a  number  of  numismatists  thought
that  the  coinage  of  the  unknown  Oscan  town  of  Hyria  should
be  assigned  to  Surrentum,  but  this  hypothesis  was  long  ago
abandoned  (1).  It  should  also  be  observed  that  the  seats  of  the
various  forms  of  worship  are  generally  not  located  in  the  town
itself,  but  are  scattered  over  the  whole  peninsula.

PRE-ROMAN  CULTS,  THE  SIRENS.

One  of  the  ezirliest  and  long  the  most  celebrated  cult  in
the  neighborhood  of  Surrentum  was  that  of  the  Sirens,  who
were  connected  both  with  the  promontory  and  with  the  group
of  rocky  islands  off  the  southern  coast,  which  today  bear  the
name  of  Li  Galli.

Either  these  rocks  or  the  cliffs  along  the  coast  are  referred
to  by  Vergil  in  his  account  of  the  voyage  of  Aeneas  from
Sicily  to  ItEily;  they  Eire  called  ((  dangerous  »  euid  described
as  ((  whitened  with  the  bones  of  men  »  (2).  Pomponius  Mela
makes  a  similsu-  allusion  with  a  direct  mention  of  the  islands
as  distinguished  fronl  the  mainland  (3).  Statius  occasionally
associated  the  Sirens  with  this  peninsula  (4).  Strabo  speaks  of
the  shrine  itself  as  located  on  one  side  of  it,  opposite  to  that
part  which  faces  the  islands,  and  adds  elsewhere  that  the
temple  gave  its  name  to  the  peninsula  (5).  Likewise  Pseudo-

(1)  A.   Sambon  I,  293  with  references  to  earlier  works.

(2)  Verg.  AenV,  864:

lamque   adeo   scopulos   Sirenum  aduecta   subibant
difHciles    quondam    multorumque    ossibus    albos.
Cp.    Dionysius    Perig.    357   smd    the    commenteury    of    Eustathius ;    Berard,    Lea
Phiniciens    et    VOdysaee    II,    341  ;    Champault,    Phiniciens    et    Greca    en    Italie
4S4 ;  Dcuglas,  5iren  Land  40  f.

(3)  Mela  II,  69:  Petrae  quas  Sirenes  habitarunt,  Mineruae  promuntu-
rium Gruppe  362  makes  th's  reference  pertain  to  Terina,  but  as  the  geo-
grapher names  the  rocks  immediately  after  Silerua  omnia  and  Picentia  and
just  before  the  Mineruae  promunturium,    he   can   scarcely   be  referring  to  that

I  city.
(4)  Stat.  Btl    1,  2.    116;   II,  2.    1;   III,    1.  64.   But  in  Silvae  III,  3,    174  the
reference   is  to  the  rocks  of   Pelorum   in    Sicily.
(5)  Strab.    1.   2,    12.
-  303   -
[


Aristotle  and  following  him  Stephanus  of  Byzantium  in  similar
words  mention  both  the  islands  and  the  shrine,  where  the
Sirens  Parthenope,  Leucosia,  Ligeia  were  zealously  adored
with  sacrifices  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  surounding  territory  (1)
Such  references  to  their  cult  and  shrine  depend  ultimately  on
Timaeus  (2).  The  region  called  Mons  Sirenianus  in  the  Liber
Coloniarum  seems  to  have  been  consecrated  in  ancient  times
to  these  creatures;  after  their  shrine  declined  in  importance  the
tract  of  land  W2is  in  part  allotted  to  colonists,  but  it  is  more
questionable  that  a  portion,  as  claimed  by  Pais,  was  bestowed
upon  Minerva  (3).

The  sound  of  the  waves  dashing  against  the  shores  of  the
peninsula  and  the  real  difficulties  encountered  by  the  mariner
in  the  stretch  of  sea  between  it  and  Capri  appealed  strongly
to  the  imagination  and  created  the  legends  of  the  goddesses
who  strove  to  beguile  with  the  winsome  melody  of  song  (4).
They  are  first  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey.  They  were  quite
vaguely  conceived,  and  the  stories  in  circulation  about  them
were  not  always  consistent;  yet  they  were  generally  regeurded
here  as  winged  females  rather  than  partieJly  humanized
birds  (5).  In  fact  they  were  reputed  originally  to  have  been
three  sisters  who  were  drowned  in  the  waters  that  washed
this  shore.  For  that  resison  their  spirits  were  doubtless  reverenced
as  chthonic  deities  (6).  Furthermore  they  were  associated  in
myth  with  Proserpina  by  the  Greeks  of  southern  Italy  and
Sicily.  According  to  one  account  they  were  playing  with  her
when  she  was  kidnapped,  and  because  they  had  not  resisted


(1)  Pseudo-Arist,  de  mir.  ausc.  103.  Stephanus  of  Byzantium  SstprjVoOaai.

(2)  Beloch  276;  Weiker.  Seirenen,  Roscher  IV,  607;  and  Der  Sedlen-
vogel  61.

(3)  Liber  coloniarum  {Die  Schrijten  der  rom.  Feldtnesser  p.  236).  Pais
Ancient  Italy  223,  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  283.

(4)  Odyssey  XII,  154-200;  Berard.  Les  Phiniciens  et  VOdyssee  II,  331;
Michel,  Sirenes,  D.-S.  IV,  1353;  De  Petra,  Partenope  Sicula  in  Miscellanea
Salinas  82  f.

(5)  Michel,  loc.  cit. ;  De  Petra,  Le  Sirene  del  mar  tirreno  in  Atti  Nap.
XXV  (1908)  part  I,  14;  Douglas,  Siren  Land  19;  Patroni  Intomo  al  mito  della
Sirene    A.

(6)  See  p.   174.

-  304  -


her    abduction    were    metamorphosed    by    her    mother     into
birds  (1).

On  account  of  the  reputed  powers  of  the  Sirens  it  was
necessary  to  keep  them  appezised,  and  we  can  be  sure  that
their  cult  prospered  on  account  of  this  beHef.  We  learn  in  fact
that  a  notable  collection  of  venerable  dedications  was  on
display  in  their  shrine  at  an  e£U*ly  day  (2).  Other  localities
had  a  shrine  where  a  single  Siren  was  worshipped,  as  Neapolis
wsis  devoted  to  the  cult  of  Parthenoi>e,  but  nowhere  else  within
historical  times  were  the  Sirens  worshipped  collectively  as
major  deities  either  in  Italy  or  in  another  part  of  the  Greek
world  (3).

Although  the  ancient  authors  were  struck  by  the  magnifi-
cence of  the  cult  csurried  on  in  honor  of  the  Sirens,  they  failed
to  set  down  enough  definite  information  to  determine  exactly
its  location.  From  the  passage  of  Strabo  already  cited  we  learn
that  it  stood  on  the  northern  side  of  the  peninsula.  Statius,
while  speaking  of  the  poetical  efforts  of  his  friend  Pollius,  says
that  on  the  one  hand  he  had  for  audience  the  Siren  dwelling
upon  the  cliffs  of  the  sea  and  on  the  other  the  goddess
Athena  (4).  From  this  brief  suggestion  we  may  gather  that  the
temple  was  on  the  shore  not  very  remote  from  Athena's  shrine
at  the  end  of  the  peninsula,  -  a  view  borne  out  by  the  obscure
statements  of  the  Liber  Coloniaram,  which  associates  the  places
consecrated  to  these  two  cults  (5).

Starting  from  these  indications  modem  scholars  have  come
to  different  conclusions  about  the  precise  location.  Capeisso,
who  studied  exhaustively  the  topography  of  this  region,  placed
it  on  the  coast  between  Sorrento  and  the  village  of  Massa
Lubrense,  which  is  three  and  a  half  miles  nearer  the  end  of


(1)  Hyg.  jah.  141  ;  Ov.  met.  V,  554;  De  Petra,  Le  Sirene  del  Mar  Tir-
reno  in  AUi  Nap.  XXV  (1908)  part  I,  12;  Lenormant,  Ceres.  D.-S.  I.  1032.
Cp.    Eurip.    Helena    175    f . ;  Patroni,    op.    cit.    8,

(2)  Strab.  V.   4,   8.

(3)  So  Terina  and  Poaidonia  each  had  a  S'ren.  Weicker,  Seirenen,  Ro*
«cher  IV.  607.

(4)  Stat.  sil.  II.  2.   116.

(5)  Liber  Coloniarum  (Laclimann  p.  236).

-  305   -

20


the  peninsula  (1).  Beloch  located  it  still  farther  west  on  the
site  of  the  church  called  S.  Mzoria  della  Lobbra,  which  is  quite
negir  the  village  of  Massa.  This  identification  is  favored  by
the  epithet  of  the  church,  which  like  that  of  the  town,  must
be  derived  from  the  Latin  delubrum  (2).

The  claims  of  a  neighboring  site  have  recently  been
advocated  by  Pais,  who  hsis  presented  some  eu'chaeological
evidence  for  his  identification,  and  calls  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  cult  of  S.  Maria  della  Lobbra  has  occupied  its  present
site  only  since  the  sixteenth  century  (3).  The  coast  below
Meissa  Lubrense  between  Capo  Masso  £uid  Capo  Corno  forms
a  little  harbor;  near  it  upon  a  slight  elevation  are  the  remains
of  a  mediaeval  church,  whose  services  were  later  transferred
to  the  S.  Maria  della  Lobbra  mentioned  in  the  preceding
paragraph.  In  the  ground  forming  this  hill  were  unearthed  a
number  of  ancient  marbles  including  pieces  of  statues  and
architectural  fragments.  Among  these  objects  was  a  part  of  an
archaic  head,  which  Pais  is  inclined  to  associate  with  the
dedications  of  the  shrine  of  the  Sirens,  and  to  consider  either
as  one  of  the  venerable  originals  or  a  later  copy.  Moreover
the  cult  of  the  Virgin  as  a  protectress  of  seamen  had
characteristics  here  in  the  Middle  Ages  that  may  well  have
been  transmitted  from  the  rites  of  the  pagan  shrine  (4).

ATHENA-MINERVA.

Despite  the  fact  that  the  cult  of  the  Sirens  had  impressed
itself  so  strongly  upon  this  locality  that  the  latter  was  called
by  their  name,  the  rival  cult  of  Athena  more  and  more  made
its  influence  felt  in  the  designations  applied  to  the  same  region,

(I)  Capasso,   Memorie   storico-archeologiche  deNa   penisola  sorrentina,    51    f.

(2)  Beloch  275.  The  other  circumstance  adduced  to  support  this  opinion,
that  an  old  tradition  connected  the  site  with  a  temple,  is  more  questionable,
in  view  of  the  many  false  indentifications  of  churches  or  ruins  with  temples.
Douglas,  5iren   Land   18;   Gargiullo,   Memorie   della   r.   accad.    ercol.    I,    322.

(3)  Pais,  The  Temple  of  the  Sirens  in  the  Sorreniine  Peninsu'la  in  A.  /•
A.  IX  (1905)  1    f.;  Ancient  Italy  213  f.

(4)  Serafino  Montorio,  Zodiaco  di  Maria  (1713)  199,  quoted  by  Pais
Ancient  Italy  216;   Cp.   Trede,   Das  Heidentum   in  der  rom.   Kirche   IV,    172.

.   306   -


which  W21S  called  Athenaion  or  Promunturium  Mineruae  (I).
In  the  third  century  B.  C.  to  judge  from  the  evidence  based
upon  Timaeus,  the  Sirens  were  still  supreme  at  Surrentum  but
were  gradually  outstripped  in  popularity  by  Minerva.  From  the
first  she  was  supported  by  a  large  eissignment  of  leuid,  similcu:
to  that  which  was  allotted  to  the  Sirens.  This  was  occupied
by  tenants  of  Greek  nationality  (2).  As  early  as  the  beginning
of  the  second  century  B.  C.  her  shrine  was  widely  known  and
had  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Romeui  government.  Thus
in  172  B.  C.  when  the  naval  trophies  of  the  First  Punic  War
upon  the  Capitoline  had  been  struck  by  lightning  and  the
event  was  considered  as  a  serious  omen,  one  of  the  places
where  the  Senate  ordered  expiation  to  be  made  wsis  at  the
temple  of  Minerva  near  Surrentum  (3).  At  the  close  of  the
Republic  and  under  the  Empire  this  temple  was  easily  first
in  public  esteem.  When  P.  Sittius  of  Nuceria  planted  his
colonies  in  Numidia  with  the  authorization  of  Julius  Caes2U',
and  desired  to  honor  the  towns  of  his  home  district  along
with  their  leading  deities  in  the  names  applied  to  his  settlements,
he  selected  the  title  Colonia  Mineruia  Chullu  for  the  one
asociated  with  Surrentum  (4).  Statius  likewise  refers  to
Minerva  as  representing  the  region  of  Surrentum  when  he
enumerates  the  localities  which  sent  pupils  to  listen  to  his
father's  instruction,  and  Pliny  si>eaks  of  the  peninsula  as  the
former  home  of  the  Sirens  (5).  The  increasing  prominence  of
Minerva  was  a  natural  development.  While  the  Sirens  suggested
the  malevolent  spirits  of  the  sea,  Minerva  stood  especially  for
its  beneficent  influence.   She  gained  in  importance  as  the  ait

(1)  Strab.  1,  2.  12;  V.  4.  8;  Tabula  Peutingerana  C.  I.  L.  X,  p.  58.
Templum  Mineruae.

(2)  Liber  Coloniarum :  Surrentum,  oppidum.  Agar  eius  ex  occupatione
tenebatur  a  Grecis  ob  consecrationem  Mineruae.  Sed  et  mons  Sirenianus  li-
mitibus  pro  parte  Auguatianis  est  adsignatus ;  ceterum  in  soluto  remansit.
Iter   populo   debetur   ubi   Sirenae.

(3)  Liv.  XLII,  20,  3:  Decemuiri  lustrandum  oppidi,  supplicationem
obsecrationemque  habendam,  uictimis  maioribus  sacrificandum  et  in  Capitolio
Romae  et  in  Campania  ad  Mineruae  Promunturium  renuntiarunt.  Cp.  Reitz-
enstein,   Ined.   poem.    gr.   frag.    10.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  Vlli,  6710.  6711.  Cp.  Beloch  241.

(5)  Stat.  «i7.  V,  3,    162;  Plin.  nat.  III.  62.

-  307  -


oF  navigation  improved  and  reason  encroached  upon  superstition.
She  had  the  same  function  as  that  exercised  by  Leucothea  in
other  places  (1).

The  goddess  originally  worshipped  here  was  unquestion-
ably the  Greek  Athena.  As  Statius  in  the  passages  cited  above
speaks  of  her  as  Tyrrhena  Miner ua,  it  has  been  supposed,  as
by  Miiller-Deeke,  that  the  origin  of  the  cult  was  Etruscan;
the  phrcise,  however,  adopted  by  the  poet  in  this  case  refers
merely  to  the  power  exercised  by  the  divinity  over  the  Tusceui
Sea  (2).  The  age  of  the  cult  is  dubious;  according  to  tradition
the  shrine  was  of  extreme  antiquity  and  had  been  founded  by
Ulysses,  yet  the  tendency  to  associate  all  the  coast  of  southern
Italy  with  this  hero  makes  the  reference  of  little  value  (3).  More
likely  it  W2is  introduced  considerably  later,  when  the  worship
of  the  Sirens  had  already  attained  a  flourishing  condition,  and
in  consequence  had  to  contend  long  for  supremacy.  The  view
that  the  temple  was  due  to  the  Cumeans  is  unfounded,  as
they  seem  not  to  have  been  much  interested  in  the  worship
of  Athena  at  least  in  the  earlier  period  (4).  Pais,  who  has
treated  fully  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  cult,  considers  that
it  came  from  Syracuse  largely  through  the  intervention  of  the
mariners  from  Lipara,  who  on  the  one  hand  maintained  friend-
ly relations  with  their  Dorian  kinsmen  in  the  great  Sicilian
city  and  on  the  other  showed  a  predilection  for  the  port  of
Surrentum  above  any  other  in  Campania  (5).  The  temple,
situated  upon  a  high  promontory  overlooking  the  sea,  was  the
seat  of  a  goddess  who  wcis  primeirily  a  patron  of  navigators  and
therefore  belonged  to  the  same  class  of  shrines  as  the  temples
of  Athena  at  Syracuse  and  on  Capo  Sallentino.  As  at  Syracuse,
so  at  Surrentum  the  peissing  traveler  poured  out  libations  in  her


(1)  Pais.  'Arch.   Stor.   Nap.   XXV   (1900)  353.   Ancient  Italy   231,   Ricerche
stor.  e  geog.   291-2;   Dougl£i8.   Siren  Land  280.

(2)  Muller-Deecke,    Die    Etrusker    II,     47;    Wissowa,     Minerva,     Roscher
II.  2983.

(3)  Strab.  V.  4.  8;  Pfister,  Der  Rdliquienkult  im  Altertum  16.

(4)  Gargiulo,  Memorie  della  r.  accad.  crcol.   I,  327.

(5)  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  221   f . ;  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  281    f.

-  308   -


honor  (1).  The  maritime  character  of  the  divinity  is  also  shown*
by  the  expiation  made  at  her  temple,  which  has  been  already
recorded.  This  wets  performed  in  the  interests  of  the  Roman
naval  forces  made  up  principally  at  this  time  of  vessels  contrib-
uted by  the  cities  of  southern  Italy,  particulary  Neapolis.
Minerva  -was  recognized  on  other  occasions  as  a  deity  interest-
ed in  the  welfare  of  the  Roman  fleet,  and  the  ceremonies  to
counteract  the  omen  were  therefore  appropriately  assigned  to
her  important  temple  in  the  vicinity  of  Neapolis  (2).

The  location  of  the  temple  can  be  determined  with  consid-
erable accuracy  from  notices  in  the  authors.  It  stood  on  the
point  of  Campanella  at  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula  in  close
proximity  to  Capreae  and  is  mentioned  in  connection  with
that  island  by  Seneca  and  Statius  (3).  According  to  all  accounts
it  was  located  on  a  high  point  neai  the  sea.  The  unknown  poet
in  Seneca  describes  it  as  towering  upon  a  storm-swept  peak;
Statius,  as  perched  upon  lofty  rocks,  whence  the  goddess
enjoyed  an  unrestricted  view  over  the  low-lying  sea  (4).  The
temple  long  medntained  its  prominence  and  its  site  retained  the
ancient  name  in  the  early  mediaeval  period  (5).  No  remains  are

(1)  Stat,  ail  III,  2,  21-24;  Polemo  in  Athenaeua  XI,  462b;  Pais,  An-
cient Italy  228,  Ricerche  stor.  e  geog.  288  and  Storia  della  Sicilia,  Appendix
XI,  554  .Ciacexi,  Culti  e  miti  della  Sicilia  155,  223,  while  recognizing  that  the
ceremony  at  Syracuse  had  some  connection  with  Athena  makes  it  refer  pri-
marily to   Dionysus.

(2)  Pais,  'i4ncien*  Italy  229-30,  Ricerche  ator.  e  geog.  289.  Cp.  Roscher,
Athena,  Roscher  I.  675  f.

(3)  Stat.   ail.  Ill,  2,  22-24:

Prima   salutauit   Capreas   et   margine  dextro
sparsit  Tyrrhenae  Marcotica  uina  Mineiruae.
Sen.    epist.   X,    1  :

Cum    intrauere    Capreas    et    promunturium   ex    quo
alta  procelloso  sjieculatur  uertice  PjJlas
ceterae   uelo  tubentur    esse    contentae.

(4)  Sen.  loc.  cit. ;  Stat.  ail.  II,  2,   1  :

Est   inter   notos   Sirenum  nomine   muros
saxaque  Tyrrhenae  templis  onerata  Miner uao
celsa     Dicharchei    speculatrix     uilla    profundi
qua   Bromio   dilectus  ager,    collisque   per   altos
uritur  et  prelis  non   inuidet   uua  Falernis.
ail.   III.   I,   106;  V,  3.    162  f.

(5)  Tabula  Peutingerana  loc.  cit.

-  309   -


now  extant,  and  those  which  passed  under  this  name  in  former
centuries  were  probably  so  called  without  reeison.  The  ancient
columns,  however,  belonging  to  the  church  of  S.  Pietro  di
Crapolla,  which  is  situated  on  the  southern  side  of  the  penin-
sula, are  supposed  at  legist  in  part  to  be  derived  from  that
edifice  (1).

VENUS  AND  CERES.

Venus  and  Ceres  were  sometimes  or  perhaps  always  served
by  the  same  priestesses,  who  as  at  Pompeii  bore  the  name
sacerdotes  puhlicae.  They  were  regularly  matrons,  members
of  the  best  families,  and  occupied  a  high  social  position  in  the
community.  The  office  is  mentioned  in  two  fragmentary  epi-
taphs, one  of  which  records  the  funeral  honors  decreed  as  a
tribute  to  the  priestess  and  states  that  her  statue  had  been
placed  in  the  temple  of  Venus  (2).  The  only  other  reference
to  the  cult  of  Venus  occurs  in  the  Pseudo-Vergilian  Catalepton,
where  an  altar  on  the  Surrentine  coEist  along  with  Caesar  is  said
to  be  calling  her  (3).  The  two  cults  of  Venus  and  Ceres  proba-
bly had  separate  shrines,  although  they  were  looked  sifter  by
priestesses  common  to  both.  For  the  latter  were  rather  super-
visory officials  occupying  a  public  office  of  the  state  than  actual
attendants  serving  a  particular  shrine.  The  work  of  the  ritual
itself  could  be  done  by  subordinates.  The  Venus  cult,  although
introduced  at  an  early  period,  undoubtedly  grew  strong  £is  a
result  of  the  influence  of  Sulla  and  Caesar  and  the  prestige  of  the
neighboring  shrine  at  Pompeii  (4).  Beloch  locates  her  shrine  at
the  edge  of  the  city  on  the  water  front  in  the  vicinity  of  the
Grotta  di  S.  Giorgio  and  the  Hotel  Sirena.  Here  an  image  of  Cu-
pid was  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  but

(1)  Beloch  276;  Douglas,  Siren  Land    116  f . ;  Capasso,  op.  cit.  59  f.

(2)  C.   7.  L.  X.  680.  Vaglieri    1881.    ....ae  L.   f.  Magnae  sacerdoti  public.

Venenis  et  Cereris;  C.  /.  L.  X.  688,  Vaglieri   1968   sacerd.   public.  Vener...

huic    matronae    statuam    ex    acre    oollato    in    aedem    Veneris    ponendam    cu-
rauerunt.

(3)  Catal   XIV,    11:   Adsis.   O  Cytherea:  tuus  te  Caesar  Olympo  et   Sur-
rentini  litoris  ara  uocat.

(4)  Gargiulo   Mem.    d.    r.    accad.    ercol.    I.    321    suggests    its    introduction
from   Lipaia.

-   310   -


nothing  affording  an  absolute  identification  of  the  site  (I).
The  older  suitiquarians  as  Gargiulo  attempted  to  find  a  temple
site  for  Ceres  (2).

NEPTUNE.

On  the  shore  southwest  of  Surrentum  between  it  and  the
Sirens'  temple  stood  two  ssuictuciries  consecrated  respectively
to  Neptune  and  Hercules,  who  served  as  double  gueirdians  of
the  place.  More  precisely  they  were  situated  along  the  little
indentation  of  the  sea  between  Capo  di  Sorrento  and  Capo  di
Meissa,  and  were  both  in  close  proximity  to  the  magnificent
villa  of  Pollius  Felix,  which  Statius  describes  at  great  length
in  his  Siluae.  As  the  villa  was  situated  on  the  hill  called  Punta
delta  Calcarella,  the  temple  of  Neptune,  which  is  described  as
stcuiding  in  front  of  it,  must  have  been  located  on  the  cliff  that
lines  the  coast  at  this  point  (3).  It  was  on  the  very  edge  of  the
shore  buffeted  by  the  waves  and  wet  with  the  spray ;  eventually
it  W21S  probably  carried  away  by  the  sissaults  of  the  furious
sea  (4).  The  cult  seems  to  have  been  £in  importaint  one,  as
the  district  of  Surrentum  is  associated  especially  with  Neptune
by  Statius  (5).  As  a  maritime  god  he  shgured  with  Minerva  the
office  of  giving  aid  and  protection  to  those  who  sailed  the  seats.

HERCULES.

Since  the  temple  dedicated  to  Hercules  is  the  subject  of
one  of  the  poems  of  Statms,  we  have  considerable  information

(1)  Beloch  266;  Gargiulo  320;  Capasso  48.

(2)  He  builds  his  theoxy  on  the  supposed  corruption  of  Ceres  into  Circo.
Gargiulo  317.

(3)  Stat,   sil   II.  2.  21.

Ante   domum    tumidae    moderatur    caerulus    undae
excubat,   innocui  custos  Laris ;  huius  amico
spumant    templa    salo;    felicia    rura    tuetur
Alcides.    Gaudet    gemino   sub  numine   portus.

(4)  Beloch  272.   Cp.    Gaigiulo  320.

(5)  Stat.  sil.  IV,  8,  6:  Nee  solum  festas  erecta  Neapolis  aras

ambiat ;    et    socii    portus    dilectaque    miti
terra   Dicarcheo   nee   non  plaga   cara   madenti
Surrentina  deo  sertis  altar ia  cingat

-   311    -


about  a  restoration  carried  out  in  the  year  90-91  A.  D.  by  the
poet's  friend  Pollius.  It  stood  upon  the  shore  of  the  Marina  di
Puolo  not  far  from  the  temple  of  Neptune  and  Pollius*  country
home  (I).  Previous  to  the  date  above  mentioned  the  -cult
had  its  seat  in  a  small  insignificant  chapel  built  upon  a  narrow
ledge  of  rocks,  the  dilapidated  condition  of  which  is  exagger-
ated by  the  poet  in  order  to  make  the  new  building  apF>e2ur  all
the  more  splendid*  (2).  The  chapel  was  probably  not  strictly
a  public  temple;  it  served  the  needs  chiefly  of  the  sailors  who
frequented  this  coeist,  cis  Hercules  like  the  other  gods  worshipped
here  was  a  maritime  deity  (3).

According  to  the  poet's  tale,  while  Pollius  and  his  friends
were  eating  a  picnic  dinner  in  the  open  air  on  a  midsummer  day,
they  were  surprised  by  a  sudden  storm  and  sought  shelter  in
the  temple  of  Hercules,  which,  however,  wets  too  small  to
contain  easily  all  the  company  (4).  During  this  time  the  god
chided  the  wealthy  Pollius  because  his  own  shrine  was  mean
and  contemptible  when  compared  with  all  the  adjoining  build-
ings. The  reproaches  did  not  fall  upon  deaf  eaurs  and  touched
their  hearer's  conscience.  A  larger  and  more  magnificent  struc-
ture was  designed,  the  adjoining  rocks  were  removed  to  afford
more  room,  and  in  the  course  of  a  year  a  handsome  edifice
was  erected  to  be  a  credit  to  the  country  side  (5).  Its  dedica-
tion was  accompeinied  by  the  institution  of  athletic  contests
upon  the  sandy  beach,  -  a  festivgJ  that  became  an  annual
event  (6).


(1)  Stat   ail   II,   2.   21;   Boehm,   Hercules,   P.-W.   VIII.   585;   Capasso  55,

(2)  Stat,   sil    III.    1.    1-7.

(3)  Stat,    sil    III,    1,    83;    Stabat    dicta   eacri    tenuis    casa    nomine   templi

et  magnum  Alciden  humili  laxe  i>axua  premebat.
fluctiuagos    nautas    scrutatoresque    profundi
uix  operire  capax.  Cp.  ibidem  107.

(4)  Stat,   sil   III    1.   68  f.

(5)  Stat,  sil  III.  1.   135  f:  Vix  annus  anhelat

alter,   et    ingenti    diues    Tirynthius    arce
despectat    fluctus   et    iunctae   tecta  nouercae
prouocat   et   dignis   inuitat    Pallada   templis.

(6)  Stat,  sil  III.  1.  43  f..  139  f.

.  312  -


MINOR  CULTS.

Somewhere  in  this  region  not  too  far  from  the  shrine  of
Hercules  stood  Juno's  sanctuciry.  Nothing  is  known  about  it
save  the  fact  that  it  afforded  an  easy  view  to  the  former  (I).
Apollo  was  probably  worshipped  in  a  shrine  situated  upon  the
heights  of  the  southern  shore  of  the  peninsula.  A  trace  of  his
name  seems  to  be  preserved  in  the  designation  applied  to  the
church  of  S.  Pietro  di  Crapollo,  which  may  be  derived  from
axpov  'AtcoXXcovoc.  It  is  situated  opposite  the  Sirenusae.  In  the
account  of  the  myth  of  the  Sirens  given  by  Hyginus  they  aie
represented  as  coming  from  Sicily  to  the  rock  of  Apollo  (2).
The  evidence  which  has  been  presented  for  cults  of  other  im-
portant deities  such  as  Jupiter  or  Hecate  is  of  no  value  (3).

Along  with  the  greater  gods  at  least  one  hero  w£is  vener-
ated in  this  locality.  Lipsurus  according  to  legend  was  a  prince
who  had  been  forced  to  flee  from  Italy  to  the  isleuid  of  Lipara^
which  he  colonized  and  named.  Restored  in  the  course  of  time
to  his  native  land  by  his  son-in-law  Aeolus,  he  had  ruled  as  a
king  at  Surrentum  and  after  his  death  received  henceforth  the
honors  of  a  hero   (4).


(1)  Stat.  si7.  Ill,  1,  104  f. :  137;  Capasso  Mem.  atorico-arch.  della  peniaola
aorrentina,  56.

(2)  Hyg.  fab.  141.  An  interesting  modern  religious  procession  starting
from  Sorrento  is  described  by  Gargiulo,  who  thinks  it  a  survival  of  pagan
usage  pertaining  to  the  Apollo  cult.  Too  little  is  known  about  the  Ap>ollo
worship  here  to  draw  any  conclusions  from  it.  Gargiulo  Mem.  d.  r.  accad.
erccfl.  I,  331.  This  writer  tried  to  locate  two  temples  of  the  god  in  the  dis-
trict of  Surrentum.

(3)Gargiulo  tries  to  find  evidence  for  Jupiter  in  Stat.  sil.  Ill,  I,  10ft
but  an  examination  of  the  passage  beginning  with  line  137  indicates  that
only  Minerva  and  Juno  had  temples  in  the  vicinity.  Gargiulo  op.  cit.  325,
326;  Capasso  57.

(4)  Diod.  V,  7.  It  is  not  quite  clear  from  Diodorus  whether  the  last
events  allude  to  Aeolus  or  Liparus.  The  interpretation  in  the  text  seems  the
more  probable  from  the  statements  of  the  Greek.  This  is  the  opinion  of
Schirmer,  Liparos,  Roscher  II,  2063;  Roscher,  Aioloa,  Roscher,  I,  194;  Cia-
ceri,  Culti  e  miti  della  Sicilia  101  ;  Pais,  Ancient  Italy  223;  the  opposite  view
is  held  by  Beloch  435  (1);  Tumpel.  Aioloa,  P.-W.  I,  1038.

-  313  -


ROMAN  CULTS.

Epigraphical  material  relative  to  the  priesthoods  eoid  col-
legia of  the  Empire  particularly  those  associated  with  the  cult
of  the  Emperors  is  almost  entirely  wanting  in  this  locality.  Of
the  older  religious  officials  only  the  augur  is  cited;  of  those
who  carried  on  the  cult  of  the  Emperors  only  a  flamen  of
Roma  and  Tiberius  has  left  any  traces  of  his  presence.  Both
offices  were  filled  by  a  certain  L.  Cornelius  whose  cognomen
has  been  lost  (I).  The  inscription  is  cited  incorrectly  by  Richter
among  the  examples  attesting  a  union  of  the  worship  of  Roma
and  Diuus  Augustus  (2).  Instead  it  belongs  to  the  extremely
rare  evidence  for  a  cult  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius  in  the  West,
and  is  one  of  the  very  few  references  to  a  combination  of  his
worship  with  that  of  Roma  (3).  The  desire  of  that  Emperor  to
prevent  his  worship  was  evidently  respected  for  the  most  pait
in  the  West  generally  and  in  Italy,  but  here  there  was  a  conside-
rable Greek  element  to  be  considered  (4).  His  cult  here  must
have  been  of  an  ephemeral  cheiracter  which  soon  passed;  as
the  cult  of  Roma  herself  was  not  a  popular  one  and  depended
for  its  existence  upon  its  alliance  with  the  Imperial  family,  it
probably  had  no  very  long  life  here.

MAGNA  MATER.

There  is  no  evidence  for  assigning  to  this  town  a  cult  of
Magna  Mater.  The  well  known  pedestal  discovered  here,  which
was  designed  to  support  a  statue  of  one  of  the  members  of
the  Imperial  family,  contains  reliefs  of  several  divinities  con-
nected particularly  with  that  famiily  among  which  appeeirs  a
likeness   of   Cybele   (5).    But   these   figures   are   an   attempt   to

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  668;  VagUeri   1968.

(2)  Richter,   Roma,   Roscher   IV,    145.

(3)  Til>erius  and  Roma  were  worshipped  at  Mograwa  in  the  province
of  Africa  (provincia  Byzacena)  C.  /.  L.  VIII,  11912.  A  doubtful  case  dei>end-
ing  upon  a  supplement  to  a  mutilated  inscription  is  C.  I.  L.  VIII,  16472
also  from  Africa.  Cp.  Toutain,  Les  cultes  paiens  I,  62;  Mommsen,  Rom.
Staatsr  II    (3),    758;   Herbst,   De   sacerdotiis  Rom.    munic.   8.

(4)  A  flamen  of  Tiberius  is  cited  from  Venusia  C.  /.  L.  IX,  652.

(5)  Gerhard,  Neapels  antike  Bildwerke  PI.  22;  Miiller-  Wieseler,  Denkr
mdler  II.   63,   810;  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cybele   112.

-  314  -


portray  leading  divinities  worshipped  in  the  Romaoi  Forum  and
on  the  Palatine,  and  so  have  no  beeuring  upon  local  conditions
at  Surrentum  (1).

CHRISTIANITY.

Among  the  patron  saints  of  the  church  at  Surrentum  are
four  bishops;  these  however  have  been  gissigned  to  the  fifth
century  and  probably  were  not  martyrs  (2).

CAPREAE.

Capreae,  an  island  connected  with  the  earliest  Greek  set-
tlements in  Italy  belongs  geographically  to  the  Sorrentine
peninsula,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a  channel  only  three
miles  wide.  Politically  it  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Neapolis
from  an  unknown  date  up  to  the  reign  of  Augustus,  when  it
became  an  Imperial  possession.  Brought  into  prominence  by
the  long  sojourn  of  Tiberius,  it  sank  again  into  obscurity,  and
is  seldom  mentioned  later.  In  spite  of  its  early  settlement  and
long  period  of  habitation  as  a  Greek  community  it  has  yielded
little  evidence  pertaining  to  ancient  religious  conditions  (3).

One  tradition  made  this  the  home  of  the  Sirens,  but  no
record  of  any  worship  here  has  been  preserved  (4).  It  is  com-
monly affirmed  that  Tiberius  built  twelve  villeis  on  the  island,
which  he  named  after  the  twelve  leading  Roman  gods  (5).
But  it  is  not  certain  that  these  buildings  were  the  work  of  that
prince,  and  the  statement  that  the  largest  was  called  the  villa

(1)  Gargiulo,  0^5.  cit.  319-320,  however,  cites  an  altar  containing  a  fig-
ure of  Magna  Mater  seated  on  a  car  drawn  by  lions  and  followed  by  a  crowd.
The  reliefs  are  spoken  of  as  disappearing.  Cp.  Capasso  48.

(2)  E.  Stevenson,  Bull.  arch,  crist.  1879,  37;  Lanzoni,  Rio.  storico-crit.
delle  scienze  teol.   VI    (1910)  284.

(3)  Hulsen.  Capreae,  P.-W.  Ill,  1546-1548;  Beloch  280-282;  Mommsen,
C.   /.  L.   X.   p.   681.

(4)  Serv.  Aen.  V,  864:  Et  primo  iuxta  Pelorum,  post  in  Capreis  in-
sulis  habitauerunt,  quae  inlectos  suo  oantu  in  naufragia  deducebant ;  Mytho-
graphi  Vaiicani  I,  42  (of  similar  purport);  Douglas,  Some  Antiquarian  notes
VIII,    256;    Canale,   Storia   delVisola   di   Capri  35.

(5)  Suet.  Tib.  65;  Tac.  ann.  IV,  67;  Hulsen,  P.-W.  Ill,  1547;  Be-
loch  282.

-  315   -


of  Jupiter  rests  upon  a  dubious  text  where  the  weight  of  evi-
dence in  the  manuscripts  is  altogether  in  favor  of  the  reading,
villa  of  lo  (1).  A  local  designation  Moneta  applied  to  a  spot
not  far  from  the  Palazzo  di  Tiberio,  is  sometimes  cited  as
testimony  for  the  presence  of  a  shrine  of  ijuno  Moneta  or  at
least  of  a  villa  bearing  her  nsune,  but  no  good  evidence  for
this  deity  is  at  hand  (2).  In  truth  there  is  no  proof  that  the
body  of  greater  gods  w£is  formally  recognized  in  the  names
of  the  buildings  associated  with  Tiberius.

ORIENTAL  CULTS.

In  the  excavations  made  by  Hadrawa  in  1 790  at  the  place
called  Campo  Pisco  (Palazzo  a  mare),  where  one  of  the  largest
villas  was  situated,  a  large  number  of  antiquities  came  to  light
including  an  altar  of  Magna  Mater,  which  is  reported  to  have
been  consigned  to  the  British  Museum  (3).  In  the  eastern  part
of  the  isleuid  the  natural  cavern  called  Grotta  di  Mitromania
once  served  as  the  shrine  of  the  god  Mithras.  The  front  of  the
cave  was  divided  into  three  chambers  once  closed  with  a  wall
of  brick.  It  faced  the  east,  a  situation  which  was  probably
preferred,  but  which  owing  to  existing  conditions  was  not
always  possible.  The  principal  chamber  on  the  left  wais  suc-
ceeded in  the  rear  by  two  terraces  of  semi-circular  form  con-
nected with  each  other  and  with  the  outer  chsunber  by
stairways  (4).  From  this^ ^shrine  perhaps  cam©  a  bas-relief
preserved  in  the  National  Museum  at  Naples.  It  shows  the  bull-
slaying  Mithras  with  his  customary  symbols,  and  also  busts  of
Sol  and  Luna  (5).


(1)  Ihm,    Suetoniana,    Hermes    XXXVI     (1901)    287;    Hirschfeld.    Kleine
Schriften  534(2).

(2)  Canale,  Storia  dell'isola  di  Capri,   71.

(3)  Beloch  286;  Feola,  Rapporto  suUo   stato  attaale  dei   ruderi  ^Augusto-^
Tiheriani   nella  isola   di  Capri  2.

(4)  Cumont,    Texts    et   monuments    I,    58.    58    (3);    II,    251,    No.    95    (de-
scription of  grotto  and  plan);  Feola  op.   cit.    18   f. ;   Beloch  288;  Camale  84.

(5)  Cumont,   II.   252,  Fig.   87,  88;   Riisch,    Guida    182.   No.   671;  Museo
Museo  Borbonico   XIII,   22.

-  316  -


CHAPTER   VIL
CAPUA,


In  the  northern  pait  of  the  Campanian  plain  not  iai  from
the  Volturnus  River  was  situated  in  euicient  times  the  important
city  of  Capua.  Some  two  miles  away  toward  the  north  rose
the  mountain  range  called  Tifata,  an  offshoot  of  the  Apeimines,
but  the  city  itself  was  built  entirely  on  the  level  plain.  Among
its  most  characteristic  features  were  its  comparatively  leu-ge
area  and  its  regularity  of  design ;  with  its  straight,  well-ordered
streets  running  exactly  in  accord  with  the  points  of  the  compass
it  gained  renown  as  a  model  of  symmetrical  beauty.  Of  these
streets  the  principal  avenue  or  Decumanus  was  doubtless  formed
by  the  Via  Appia,  which  at  this  point  changed  its  direction
materially  to  conform  with  the  plan  of  the  town.

Surrounding  the  city  and  extending  southward  neeurly  to
the  sea  stretched  the  broad  expanse  of  level  country  known
as  the  Ager  Campanus.  Originally  the  territory  properly  be-
longing to  Capua  comprised  all  the  western  portion  of  this
plain  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  Volturnus  River.  Eastward
its  jurisdiction  included  the  heights  of  Mt.  Tifata  amd  extended
about  as  far  as  the  modem  village  of  S.  Agatha  de*  Goti.  The
place  called  Scyllas  in  the  Tabula  Peutingerana  appears  to  have
been  located  towEurd  the  eastern  extremity  of  this  territory.  On
the  south  the  co//is  Leucogaeus  three  miles  from  the  coast
seems  to  have  marked  its  boundary  on  the  side  of  Cumae  and
the  other  coast  cities.  Westwsurd  its  possessions  extended  to  the
sea.  Nor  was  the  Ager  Campcuius  all  the  territory  of  this  city;
it  held  sway  likewise  over  the  Ager  Falemus  and  the  Ager
Stellas  or  Stellatis  both  lying  beyond  the  Volturnus.  Although

-  317  -


this  tributary  country  was  later  abridged  by  the  founding  of
RomEin  colonies,  Capua  remained  the  natural  metropolis  of
the  plains.

In  the  first  place  then  on  account  of  its  situation  it  was
naturally  a  great  agricultural  center  inhabited  largely  by  those
who  were  interested  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  cultivation  of
the  soil.  On  the  rich  plains  grain  was  the  chief  crop  sind  had
an  enviable  reputation  for  its  quality,  while  the  raising  of  live
stock  with  the  exception  of  horses  was  less  successful.  As  the
higher  ground  eastward  among  the  mountains  was  favorable
for  olive  culture,  Capua  was  a  great  market  for  oil.  Likewise
the  upland  as  well  as  the  Ager  Falernus  produced  wines  of
high  grade  and  considerable  reputation.  Within  the  city  manu-
factures flourished,  including  such  staple  articles  as  pottery,
metal  and  wood  work,  rope,  carpets,  and  a  line  of  celebrated
perfumed  ointments.  From  all  these  causes  the  city  enjoyed  a
remarkable  growth,  until  it  became  the  second  city  in  Italy  in
population  and  importance.

It  seems  to  have  been  also  the  litereiry  metropolis  of  the
Oscans  during  the  fourth  and  third  centuries  B.  C.  It  wets  the
birth  place  of  several  men  prominent  in  literature  or  scholar-
ship from  time  to  time,  among  whom  Naevius  and  Velleius
Paterculus  are  most  widely  known,  and  it  -was  the  residence
of  Dio  Cassius  while  he  was  composing  his  histories.  But  the
devotion  of  the  people  to  gladiatorial  combats  eclipsed  in  gen-
eral all  their  other  interests.  The  custom  in  fact  became  so
prevalent  that  the  wealthy  citiziens  sometimes  viewed  these
spectacles  at  their  meals.  To  supply  the  demand  at  home  eind
elsewhere  the  famous  schools  for  training  gladiators  w^ere
maintained.  With  good  reason  the  Capuans  were  notorious  for
their  luxury,  yet  the  most  incredible  tales  circulated  must  be
largely  discounted  because  of  the  fact  that  they  are  due  to  the
Romans,  who  were  fond  of  stigmatizing  the  superhia  Cam-
pana  (I).

The  location  of  the  city  on  level  ground  and  its  symmet-
rical sirrangement  point  to  a  compeiratively  late  date  of  settle-
ment. Like  other  ItaliEin  towns  its  early  history  is  wrapped  in

(1)  Cp.  Beloch  334;  Nissen.  Italische  Landeskunde  II,  707;  Hiilsen,
Capua,  P.-W.   III.    1555  f . ;  De  Petra.  /  porti  antichi  deW Italia  meridionale  316.

-   318   -


obscurity,  and  the  traditional  accounts  exhibit  noticeable
vsuriation.  According  to  one  account  it  was  founded  by  the
Etruscans  as  one  of  their  twelve  Campauiisui  cities  and  had  at
that  time  the  name  Voltumum  (I).  But  the  original  settlement
on  this  site  seems  to  have  been  made  by  men  of  euiother  race,
as  is  shown  by  the  name  of  the  city,  now  generally  considered
to  be  Oscan  (2),  by  discoveries  made  in  the  most  ancient  tombs,
eind  finedly  by  the  general  use  of  Oscan  when  the  recorded
history  of  the  city  begins.  Later  it  wsis  certainly  under  Etruscan
domination  for  a  brief  period.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.  C.  the  city  came
under  the  power  of  the  Samnites,  -  a  cheuige  of  government
which  may  have  been  welcomed  by  the  greater  part  of  the
population.  During  the  next  century  as  the  townsmen  were
hard  pressed  by  the  mountaineers,  they  made  some  agreement
with  the  Romans  the  terms  of  which  are  obscure  (340  or  343
B.  C).  They  were  received  as  citizens  sine  suffragio,  and  in  the
succeeding  period  they  probably  issued  the  series  of  coins  with
the  legend  Campanos,  which  are  assigned  by  most  numisma-
tist to  this  city  (3).  During  the  Samnite  Wars,  however,  they
revolted  with  the  result  that  they  forfeited  their  control  over
the  Ager  Falernus,  which  wais  distributed  among  Roman  cit-
izens, and  had  to  submit  to  the  jurisdiction  of  praefecti  sent
out  from  Rome  (318  B.  C).  Yet  Oscan  remained  the  official
language,  the  older  native  officials  did  not  pass  out  of  existence ;
cind  a  series  of  coins  was  minted,  which  when  of  silver  or  gold,
were  stamped  with  the  mark  of  Rome,  but  when  the  material
was  bronze,  bore  the  city's  proper  legend  in  Oscan  (4).

Influenced  by  HannibaFs  unprecedented  success  against
Rome,  Capua  finally  espoused  the  cause  of  Carthage  and  was
brought  back  under  Roman  control  only  after  an  extended
siege  (211   B.  C).  As  a  result  of  this  revolt  the  Capuans  were

(1)  According  to  another  view  the  Etruscans  became  masters  not  of
the  ancient  Capua  but  of  the  adjoining  town  of  Casilinum,  the  modern  Ca-
pua. See  Pais,  Anc.  Legends  of  Rom.  Hist.  252;  Stor.  crit.  di  Roma  I.  234  (1).

(2)  A.  discussion  of  the  name  occurs  in  Beloch  297;  Hiilsen  P.-W,  III,
1555;  de  Ruggiero,   Capua,   Ruggiero   II,    102.

(3)  This  view  is  catnbatted  by  A.  Sambon  I,  286.

(4)  Haberlin,  however,  assigns  these  coins  to  the  period  of  the  revolt
213-211   B.  C.  Die  Systemaiik  des  altesten  rom.  MiinzWesens   10.

-  319  -


severely   punished.   Although   they   retained  the   right   of  con-
tracting legal  marriage,  they  lost  all  their  privileges  as  a  civic
community   and   their  municipal   organization   was   abolished.
Only  now  did  the  Latinization  of  the  district  begin,   the  first
datable  inscription  in  this  language  going  back  no  farther  than
110  B.  C.  The  city  suffered  likewise  some  loss  of  territory;  Ro-
man colonies  were  established  at  Volturnum  and  Litemum  (205
B.  C.)  and  at  Puteoli  (194  B.  C),  which,  howerer,  in  every  ceise
were  composed  of  but  few  colonists  and  occupied  only  a  neirrow
strip  along  the  coast.   The  rest  of  the  Ager  Campanus,^  while
not  definitely  assigned  became  the  property  of  the  Roman  state.
During  the  succeeding  century  several  attempts  were  made
by   popular    leaders    to   colonize    the   country  around   Capua.
During  the  ascend£mcy   of   Mzurius   and   Cinna  a  colony   was
established  under  the  leadership  of  M.   Brutus  (86  B.  C),  but
this  soon  broke  up  after  the  fall  of  the  democratic  party.  At  the
time  of  the  Social  War  and  the  struggle  between  Sulla  and  his
opponents  Capua  had  a  place  of  prominence,  in  the  first  case
as  a  center  for  the  operations  of  the  Roman  armies,    in  the
second  as  a  stronghold  of  the  populares.  An  attempt  to  renew
the  colony  by  the  tribune  P.  Seruilius  Rullus  was  defeated,  but
in  58  B.  C.  through  Julius  Caesar's  influence  20000  colonists
received  allotments  of  ten  iugera  tracts.   Officially  the  colony
was  known  by  the  name  Colonia  lulia  Felix  Capua.  Later  addi-
tions were  made  by  Mark  Antony  after  the  battle  of  Philippi
(43),  by  Octavian,  when  supreme  in  the  West  (36  B.  C),  and
in  the  time  of  the  Empire  by  Nero.  In  the  Civil  War  between
the  partisans  of  Vitellius  and  Vespasian  Capua  gave  allegiance
to  the  former,  while  her  neighbor  and  rival  Puteoli  was  on  the
winning  side.  As  a  result  we  find  later  that  the  southern  part
of  the  Ager  Campanus  as  far  as  Aversa  has  come  under  Pu-
teoli's  jurisdiction,  although  this  loss  Wcis  balanced  in  pait  by
the  accession  of  part  of  the  Ager  Falernus.

Later  references  to  Capua  are  comparatively  few.  In  the
fourth  century  A.  D.  it  was  called  Colonia  Concordia  lulia  Va-
leria Felix  Capua,  and  wsis  the  seat  of  the  consularis  Campa-
niae.  Ausonius  ranked  it  as  eighth  in  the  list  of  cities  in  the
Empire,  designating  it  as  inferior  to  Mediolanum  (Milan)  but

-  320  .


leurger  than  Aquileia  (I).  Captured  by  Gaiseric  during  the
inroads  of  the  barbarians,  it  nevertheless  survived  and  appeeu-s
in  the  sixth  century  as  a  stronghold  of  the  opposition  to  Byzan-
tine rule.  In  840  it  was  completely  destroyed  by  the  Saracens.
Survivors  built  a  new  city  on  the  bank  of  the  Voltumus,  and
the  old  site  remained  deserted  until  well  into  the  Middle  Ages,
when  another  settlement  was  made  under  the  name  of  S.  Mauria
di  Capua  Vetere  (2).

When  we  attempt  tr*  investigate  the  veu-ious  cults  which
had  a  part  in  the  religious  life  of  Capua,  we  find  ourselves
hampered  by  the  lack  of  a  knowledge  of  the  location  of  even
the  most  import£uit  shrines.  In  a  few  cases  notably  at  S.  An-
gelo  in  Formis  Christian  churches  seem  to  occupy  the  site  of
pagan  temples,  one  of  the  meuiy  instances  of  the  tenacity  with
which  sacred  places  meuntain  their  cheuracter  of  ssuictity  un-
impaired through  many  vicissitudes  of  fortune.  But,  although
our  knowledge  of  the  Euicient  topography  is  very  limited  so  far
as  it  concerns  the  religious  side  of  life,  we  possess  what  pur-
ports to  be  a  full  account  of  the  town  site  at  2ui  epoch  when
there  were  more  remains  of  buildings  extant  theoi  are  pre-
served today.  Unfortunately  this  is  the  work  of  the  unreliable
Pratilli,  and  although  some  of  his  supposed  forgeries  have
turned  out  to  be  genuine  and  some  of  his  claims  were  doubtless
bcised  on  reality,  yet  his  statements  alone,  when  not  corrobo-
rated by  other  evidence,  are  of  little  value  (3).  According  to  his
account  there  existed  the  proof  for  no  fewer  than  nine  shrines,
but  the  inscriptions  offered  by  him  to  attest  their  existence  eure
generally  suspected  of  being  his  own  manufacture.  Further-
more, the  ext£int  evidence  mostly  refers  not  to  the  city  itself  but
to  the  country  districts  of  the  adjacent  Campemian  plain.  Then


(1)  Auson.,  Ordo  urbium  nobilium  VIII.  Cp.  Anonymus  Ravennas  Cos-
mographia  IV,  34  (Kapua  caput  Cdmp>aniae)  and  Giiido  Pisanus,  Geographica
42.  68.

(2)  For  the  history  of  Capua  see  Hiilsen,  loc.  cit.;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.
X.  p.  365  f. ;  Desjardins.  La  table  de  Peutinger  203  f . ;  Beloch  296  f . ;  de
Ruggiero,   Capua  Ruggiero  II,    102;  A.   Sambon  387;  Nissen   II,  696.

(3)  Pratilli's  work  entitled  Delia  Via  Appia  was  published  in  1745.  It
purports  to  be  founded  on  the  work  of  older  authorities  (?),  -  Fabio  Vec-
chioni,  Silvestro  Ajossa,  Primicero  d'Isa,  Francesco  Antonio  di  Tomniaso.

-  321    -

21


as  now  this  territory  supported   a  large  population  who  were
well  supplied  with  shrines.

PRE-ROMAN  DIEITIES,  DIANA

The  most  celebrated  cult  of  the  city  was  that  of  Diana
which  had  its  headquarters  about  two  miles  north  of  town  on
the  western  slope  of  Mt.  Tifata  (1).  This  elevation  was  sur-
rounded in  antiquity  by  dense  forests  from  which  it  derived  its
nzune,  and  traversed  by  numerous  water-courses  down  which
trickled  the  salubrious  water  of  various  mineral  springs.  Below
•was  a  mountain  lake,  which  later  becEone  a  swamp  and  today
has  utterly  disapj>eared  (2).  As  this  mountain  is  the  nearest  ele-
vated point  to  the  city  of  Capua  and  dominates  the  Campeinian
plain,  it  naturally  proved  important  in  a  military  way,  and  is
not  infrequently  mentioned  in  accounts  of  the  Ssimnite,  Hanni-
balic  and  Civil  Wars  (3).  In  Sulla's  time  the  whole  region
had  long  been  accounted  sacred  to  Diana.  Its  origin  as  a  holy
place  is  lost  in  the  mists  of  legendary  antiquity.  According
to  tradition  preserved  by  Vergil  and  Silius,  Diana  and  her
jamula,  a  sacred  doe,  were  worshipped  in  this  locality  by  Capys,
the  mythical  founder  of  the  city  (4).  In  fact  this  shrine  in  its
venerable  importance  ranks  with  those  of  Diana  Nemorensis
and  Diauia  Auentina  £is  evidence  for  the  high  place  sissigned
to  this  goddess  by  the  primitive  Italians,  and  was  apparently  a
rallying  point  for  the  inhabitemts  of  this  p£urt  of  the  country,  -
the  center  in  other  words  of  the  Campaniein  league  (5).  Al-
though it  has  been  maintained  that  this  shrine  was  connected

(1)  Beloch  361  ;  Cesano,  Diana,  Kuggiero,  II,  1730.  While  Pausanias
undoubtedly  refers  to  this  temple  (V,  12,  3)  he  overestimates  its  distance  from
the  city.

(2)  Festus,  Tifata  366  M  =  Lindsay8  ed.  503;  Sil.  XIII.  219;  Veil.  II.
25,  4;  Tab.  Pent,  in  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  59;  Desjardins  La  table  de  Pent.  195  PI.
v.;  Pellegrino.  Discorsi  I,  380;  Birt,  Diana,  Roscher  I.  1005;  Cook,  Zeus,  Ju-
piter and  the  Oak  in  Class.  Rev.  XVIII  (1904)  369;  Novi,  Jscrizioni  monumenti
e  vico  scoperti  da   Giuseppe  Novi   8    f.

(3)  As  the  reputed  location  of  Hannibal's  camp,  the  place  long  kept
the   designation   Castra   Hannibalis.    Cp.    Sil.    XII,    489.    Tab.    Peut.    loc.    cit.

(4)  Veil.  loc.  cit.;  Verg.  Aen  VII,  483494;  Sil.  XIII,  115-125.

(5)  Beloch  362.

-  322  .


more  particularly  with  Casilinum,  its  relations  seem  to  have
been  rather  with  Capua,  the  metropolis  of  the  whole  coun-
try (1).  It  was  not  only  the  most  important  Diana  temple  in
Campania  but  the  only  one  the  existence  of  which  is  well
authenticated  (2).  It  should  also  be  noted  that  here  as  in
other  ancient  shrines  the  goddess  is  a  forest  deity  important
in  herself ;  consequently  she  weis  never  associated  with  Apollo.
Treatments  of  this  cult  based  on  the  theory  that  it  was  essen-
tially Greek  are  entirely  erroneous  (3).

The  site  of  the  ancient  temple  has  been  occupied  since
the  tenth  century  by  the  church  of  S.  Angelo  in  Formis,  adorned
with  columns  which  probably  formed  a  peurt  of  the  ancient
edifice.  According  to  a  mediaeval  chronicle  permission  to  use
them  was  grcinted  to  the  adjacent  monastery  by  the  prince  who
became  known  as  Louis  the  Pious  (4).  The  temple  site  is  defi-
nitely established  by  means  of  huge  substructures  yet  in  exis-
tence. Behind  the  church  steinds  a  supporting  wall  to  hold  feist
the  meiss  of  the  moun  ain  and  upon  this  it  has  been  conjectured,
rose  part  of  the  peribolos  of  the  temple.  In  front  of  the  church
in  early  times  stood  an  altar  surviving  from  the  old  regime,
which  contained  the  dedication  Dianae  Tifatinae  Triviae  sa-
crum, so  arrcinged  that  one  word  appeared  on  each  face  of
the  stone  (5).  Excavations  made  in  the  vicinity  revealed  the
remains  of  an  aqueduct,  and  brought  to  light  a  large  quantity
of  small  bronzes,  terra-cottas,  amphorae  and  other  objects  that
were  commonly  left  as  votive  offerings  at  a  shrine  (6).

Beneath  the  sanctuaury  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  a  vil-
lage sprang  up  called  the  uicus  Dianae,  to  which  an  allusion


(1)  Pais.  Anc.   Legends  of  Rom.   Hist.  332   (4).

(2)  The  goddess  Artemis-Diana  was  sometimes  revered  in  the  temple
of  Apollo  as  at  Pompeii,  eind  at  Cumae  may  have  had  a  separate  sanctuary.
Cp.   Boll.   Archiv.   fur  RefUgionswissenschaft  XIII   (1910)   567   f . ;   Beloch   331.

(3)  Corcia,  Gli  Arcadi  in  Italia  in  AUi  Nap.  VIII  (1876)  89;  Albert,  Le
culte  de  Castor  et  Pollux   en  Italie  46.

(4)  Cronicon  Vulturnense  beginning  of  book  II  =  Muratori,  Rerum
Italicarum  scriptores  I,  part  1,  368B.  Cp.  Leo  Cardinal  of  Ostia,  Chronica
sacri  monasteri  Casinensis    =    Muratori   IV,  329.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3795 ;  D.  3270.

(6)  Beloch   365;   Novi   loc.   cil.

-  323  -


is  evidently  made  in  the  Tabula  Peutingerana  as  ad  Diana  (I).
The  same  work  mentions  also  a  uia  Dianae,  stretching  from
the  temple  to  Capua,  which  a  certain  duumuir  of  the  city  G.
Lart  —  Gabinius  Fortuitus  paved  at  his  own  expense  from  the
Porta  Vulturni  to  the  village  just  mentioned.  This  ancient  road
has  been  identified  with  a  fieldway  running  to  the  eeist  of  the
present  public  road  between  S.  Angelo  and  the  town  of  S.  Ma-
ria. In  the  other  direction  the  uia  Dianae,  continuing  its  course
some  six  miles  fgurther,  leads  to  the  village  that  occupies  the
site  of  the  ancient  Syllas  (2).

Our  earliest  direct  evidence  for  Diana's  cult  is  found  in
the  third  century  Oscan  coins.  A  series  in  bronze  shows  her
bust  upon  the  obverse,  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  a
quiver  of  arrows;  upon  the  reverse  appesu-s  the  figure  of  a
rurming  boar.  She  is  probably  to  be  recognized  on  the  reverse
of  certain  coins  in  the  act  of  driving  a  two  horse  chzu-iot,  and
it  has  been  conjectured  by  A.  Sambon  that  the  two  idols  some-
times seen  on  others  are  representation  of  xoana  of  this  god-
dess (3).

A  mutilated  inscription,  dated  by  the  names  of  the  con-
suls in  99  B.  C,  mentions  a  body  of  magistri  or  overseers  at-
tached to  this  shrine,  who  had  control  over  a  considerable
treasury  (4).  They  formed  a  corporation  representing  the  god-
dess with  the  sEune  right  of  private  ownership  as  was  possessed

(1)  C.   /.  L.  X.  p.   59  =  Desjardins.  La  table  de  Peat,    195,   PI.  V.

(2)  C.  /.   L.   X,   3913  =  D  5380=Vaglieri  2080:

G.   Lart    Gabinio   P.    f.    P£j.   Fortuito   dictator!   Lan(uuii)   Iluir(o)   Ca-

puae,  quod  viiain  Dianae  a  porta  Vodturn.  ad  uicum  usq.  sua  pec.  silice  strauer.

ob  munific,  eius  d.   d.

Beloch  365  f.  Cp.   C.  /.  L.  X.  3792.

(3)  A.  Sambon  392.  399.  Nos.  1032.  1034,  1038;  Head  35;  Garrucci
89,  PI.  LXXXVII;  Poole  81  f . ;  Cp.  L.  Sambon,  Recherches  sur  lea  monn.
171  ;  Dressel,  Beschr.  d.  ant.  Munzen  III,  84.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3781  =  C.  /.  L.  1,569  =  D.  5561  =  Vaglieri  2096.  lannelli.
Atti  Terra  di  Lavoro  1888,  75  f. :  ....  M.  Antonio,  A.  Postumio  cos.  Heisce  mag.

murum  ab  gradu  ad  calcidic.   et  calcidicum  et   p>ortic.   ante   culin,   long,    p

et  signa  marm.  Cast,  et  Pol.  et  loc.  priuat  de  stipe  Dian.  emendum  (et  facien-
dum coerauere.  The  significance  of  the  magistri  mentioned  here  and  else-
where will  be  discussed  later.  This  interpretation  is  contested  by  Schulten,
who  maintains  that  Dian(ae)  is  in  the  dative  case,  De  conventihus  civium
Romanorum  74  (2).

-  324  -


by  a  single  person,  -  a  prerogative  the  possession  o£  which
according  to  Mommsen  is  attested  for  no  other  shrine  operat-
ing under  Roman  law  excepted  that  of  the  Venus  at  Mt.
Ejryx,  (I).  In  conformity  with  this  right  appear  inscriptions
containing  the  phrases  Rufa  Dianaes  I  (iherta)  and  Vrsulus  uil
(icus)  Dianae  as  well  as  a  small  bronze  steunp  inscribed  Diane
Tijatine  (2).  These  indications  point  to  the  ownership  of  con-
siderable personal  property  including  slaves,  and  the  posses-
sion of  real  estate  is  proved  by  the  activity  of  the  magistri.
These  officials  besides  buying  additional  land  conducted  build-
ing operations  of  considerable  extent,  constructing  a  wall,  a
portico  and  a  chalcidicum,  and  also  attended  to  the  preparation
of  statues  of  the  Dioscuri  to  adorn  their  shrine  (3).

The  temple  prospered  greatly  under  Roman  control.  After
Sulla  had  defeated  Norbeuius  of  the  opposing  faction  in  this
spot  (83  B.  C.)  he  gave  to  the  goddess  as  a  thank  offering  all
Tifata  and  the  adjoining  plain,  thus  confirming  and  enlsurging
her  domain.  This  grsmt  seems  to  have  been  of  a  generous
character;  six  miles  to  the  east  of  the  temple  the  Tabula  Peut-
ingerana  marks  the  place  called  Syllzis,  which  may  fix  one  of
the  limits  of  his  donation  (4).  According  to  Velleius  it  was
commemorated  by  an  inscription  at  the  door  of  the  sEUictuary
and  also  by  a  bronze  tablet  on  the  inside  (5).

After  this  time  the  lands  of  the  shrine  seem  to  have  formed
a  separate  judicial  district  or  praefectura  in  chcirge  of   which

(1)  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  367.  Cp.  Mommsen,  Zur  Lehre  von  den  rom.
Korporationen  in   Gesam.   Schrif.    Ill,   63.

(2)  C.  I.  L.  X.  4263;  8217;  8059.  Mommsen,  Rh.  Mus.  V  (1847)  464.  notes
the  rarity  of  seals  containing  the  name  of  a  divinity.

(3)  The  probable  significance  of  the  term  chalcidicum  is  discussed  by
de  Ruggiero,   Ruggiero  II,  216.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  59,  No.  9  =  Desjardins.  op.  cit.  206,  Col.  3.  PI.  V.

(5)  Veil.    II,    25,    4:    Post    uictoriam    Sulla    gratis    Dianae,    cuius    nu-

mini  regio  ilia  sacrata  est,  soluit:  aquas  salubritate  medendisque  corporibus
nobiles  agrosque  omnis  addixit  deae:  huius  gratae  religionis  memoriam  et
inscriptio  templi  adfixa  posti  hodieque  et  tabula  testatur  aerea  intra  aedem.
Cesano  (Ruggiero  II,  1739)  calls  attention  to  Sulla's  influence  in  promoting
Diana's  cult  at  Rome  during  the  last  years  of  the  Republic.  The  dictator's
son  Faustus  Cornelius  Sulla  placed  the  figure  of  the  goddess  upon  coins
minted  in  53  B.  C.  Cp.  Cesano,  op.  cit.  1738;  Babelon,  Monn.  de  la  rep.  rom.
I.  421.

-  325  -


was  a  pr(aefectus)  or  pr(aetor)  iure  dicundo,  whose  functions
are  not  well  understood.  The  name  of  one  such  official  be-
longing to  the  Imperial  period  has  been  preserved  (I).  In  these
times  there  were  still  magistri,  but  they  were  probably  quite
different  in  rank  and  general  character  from  those  who  formed
the  collegia  of  pre-colonial  days.  The  management  of  this  im-
portant shrine  was  doubtless  closely  connected  with  the  colonial
government,  and  would  be  one  of  its  chief  tasks.  Lists  of
magistri  are  no  longer  found;  but  individual  exsonples  of  offi-
cials of  the  temple  occur  in  the  cEise  of  Q.  Peticius  £Uid  C.  Vel-
ieius  Urbanus,  the  latter  of  whom  wais  honored  with  the  distinc-
tion of  the  equus  publicus  by  Antoninus  Pius  (2).

The  Emperors  so  far  as  we  have  evidence,  were  watchful
over  the  ancient  prerogatives  of  the  temple,  and  when  they
located  colonists  in  the  vicinity,  were  careful  not  to  encroach
upon  its  lands.  Augustus  had  caused  a  cheu^t  of  the  vaurious
holdings  to  be  prepared;  later  when  the  boundau-ies  were  be-
coming confused,  Vespeisian  ordered  a  new  survey  2Uid  recon-
firmed the  rights  of  Diana  (77  A.  D.).  The  circumstance  that
two  stones  have  been  found  giving  in  similar  but  not  identical
form  the  action  of  the  Emperor  makes  it  probable  that  cippi
thus  inscribed  were  used  to  mark  the  sacred  boundaries  (3).

The  notices  that  have  been  transmitted  to  us  lead  us  to
the  conclusion  that  the  shrine  was  very  rich  in  votive  offerings.
Athenaeus  in  two  places  speaks  of  a  double-handled  silver
drinking  cup  kept  here,  which  was  said  to  have  been  a  pos-
session of  the  Homeric  Nestor,   and  upon  which  in  letters  of

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  4564   =   D.  6306   =   Vaglieri  2109:   D.   m.  s.  C.   Terentio

C.  fil.  Pal.  Chiarino  pr.  i.  d,  mentis  Dianae  Tif.  C.  Terentius  Hypercompus
filio  bono  contra  uotum,  Cp.  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  367;  Rom.  Siaatsr.,  Ill,
799  (2).   and  Cirta  in  Hermes  I.   (1866)  63.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3918   =   D.  6304   =  Vaglieri  2108.   C.  /.  L.  X.  3924   =

D.  6305  =  Vaglieri  2110;  C.  Velleius  C.  f.  Pal.  Vrbano  mag.  fan.  Dian.  Tif.,
honorato  equo  publ(ico)  ab  imp.  Antonino  Aug.  cum  ageret  aetatis  an.  V.  C.
Velleius  Vrbanus  et  TuUia   Nice  parentes.   L.    d.    d.    d.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3828  ==  D.  251  :  Imp.  Caesar  Vespasianus  Aug.  cos.
VIII    fines    agrorum    dicatorum    Dianae    Tifat.    a    Cornelio    Sulla    ex    forma    diui

Aug.  restituit.  P(raedia)  D(ianae)  T(ifatinae).  N.  S.  1893,  161  =  D.  3240.  Thi»
inscription  is  a  reproduction  of  X,  3828  except  that  locor.  takes  the  place  of
agrorum.

-  326  -


1

1


gold  were  engraved  (several  hexameter  lines  (1).  Pausanias
alludes  to  the  tusks,  or  £is  he  would  call  them,  ((  horns  »  of
elephants,  which  he  claims  to  have  himself  seen  attached  to
the  skull  of  one  those  zmimals  in  the  temple  (2).  An  inter-
esting metrical  inscription  of  the  fourth  century  also  has
reference  to  a  dedicatory  offering;  according  to  its  text  a  hunter
Delmatius  Laetus,  who  invokes  the  deity  as  Latona,  the  res-
ident of  Mt.  Tifata,  has  dedicated  to  her  the  horns  of  a
deer  (3).  Besides  the  altar  mentioned  in  another  connection
two  more  short  dedications  have  been  found  in  the  vicinity,
the  first  made  by  L.  Naeuius  Gratus,  the  other  of  unknown
origin  (4).  A  silver  vsise  unearthed  at  Herculaneum  contains
among  other  words  engraved  upon  the  bottom  the  phrase,
scriptum  Capuae  at  Deanam  (5).  To  the  temple  perhaps  be-
longed an  aedituus  Dexter,  mentioned  upon  an  epitaph  from
S.  Angelo  in  Formis,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  word  aedituus
is  a  proper  nsune  (6).

That  the  cult  was  not  exclusively  local  is  proved  by  the
discovery  of  an  inscription  and  relief  in  Gallia  Narbonensis,
perhaps  the  work  of  a  former  resident  of  Capua.  This  stone
in  the  form  of  a  cippus  exhibits  the  neune  of  M.  Iccius
Mummius;  the  relief  shows  the  goddess  in  a  shrine  clad  in  the
appeurel  of  a  huntress  with  the  common  emblems  of  thfe  bow,
quiver,  deer,  and  hounds,  -  an  imitation  in  short  of  the  type
exemplified  by  the  Diana  of  Versailles  (7).

(1)  Athen.  466  E.  Athen.  489  B.  is  of  similar  purport.  Cp.  Cesano,  Dia-
na, Ruggiero  II,   1731.

(2)  Paus.    V,    12.    3.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3796  =  D.  3261  =  Vaglieri  1053.  Cp.  Nissen.  Inschriften
aus  Campanien  in  Hermes  I  (1866)  158,  There  is  some  uncertainty  as  to
which  words  represent  the  dedicator's  name.  Nissen  discusses  the  probability
that  he  was  Delmatius,  a  brother  or  a  nephew  of  Constantine  the  Great.  Cp.

Novi,   Iscrizioni,   mon.   e  vico  scop,   da  G.   Novi  22.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3794:  L.  Naeuius  L.  f.  Grat.  Dianae  sac.  E.  £.  VIII.  472:

Dianae  T.  d.  d.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  8071  (5).

(6)  AUi  Terra  di  Lavoro  1895,  26  =  N.  S.  1895.  233:  Dextro  Dextri  ae-
ditui  et  Campaniae  Albinae  filio  Duronio  a  basilica  cum  suis  uixit  etc.  Stein,
Jahresb.  uber  die  Fortschr.   der  kl<^s.   Albert.  CXLIV  (1909)  241.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  XII.  1705  =  D.  3242:  Dianae  Tifatinae...  M.  Iccius  Mummius.
Cp.  Cesano  loc.  cit.  Other  inscriptions  cited  to  attest  Diana's  cuh  are  probably
spurious.  Cp.  C.  /.  L.  X.  446.*  447.*  444.*

-  327  -


The  Diana  cult  has  also  left  its  traces  in  a  smeJl  shrine
discovered  in  the  remains  of  a  building  excavated  neai  S.  An-
gelo  in  Formis.  Here  facing  the  east  appeeu-ed  a  painted  image
of  the  divinity,  while  on  a  waJl  to  the  right  was  portrayed  a
deer.  This  was  assigned  by  Fiorelli  to  the  beginning  of  the
period  of  decadence  and  more  exactly  by  Minervini  and  Cesano
to  the  third  century  A.  D.  With  the  goddess  are  depicted  a  bow
and  an  arrow,  an  animal  skin  and  a  torch;  more  noticeable
is  her  triple  crown  comprising  a  wreath  of  laurel  on  her
temples  within  which  occur  successively  a  gold  diadem  with
nine  serpent-like  projections  and  a  circuW  nimbus.  Here  she
is  conceived  as  a  huntress  as  a  result  of  Greek  influence,  and
is  assimilated  to  the  form  of  Artemis.  But  the  old  nature
goddess  of  the  forests,  originally  venerated  on  the  mountadn,
was  rather  a  protectress  of  wild  Euiimals  than  a  destroyer.  At
the  sEune  time  the  figure  of  Dieuia  herself  perhaps  was  intended
to  reproduce  accurately  the  cult-statue  of  the  neighboring*
temple;  hence  sis  the  only  painted  likeness  of  this  deity,  the
picture  of  the  little  shrine  has  considerable  importance  (1).

Terra-cotta  antefixes  from  this  region,  now  preserved  in
the  Museo  Campano  at  Capua,  represent  Diana  lightly  clad,
riding  upon  a  galloping  steed.  Her  long  hair  falls  over  her
shoulders,  and  one  hand  holds  a  bow,  while  the  other  guides
her  speeding  horse.  Below  is  seen  the  figure  of  a  goose.  Anoth-
er terra-cotta  figure  shows  the  goddess  holding  by  the  paws
two  wild  animals  either  lions  or  panthers.  In  both  cases  she
retains  her  original  significance  as  a  patron  of  animal  life  (2).
Priests  of  Diana  are  represented  in  mosaics  found  at  S.  Angelo
in  1876,  and  now  in  the  Museo  Campano  (3).


(1)  Fiorelli.  N.  S.  1877,  116.  Cesano.  Ruggiero  II.  1731;  Birt.  Diana,
Roscher  I,  1006;  Wissowa,  Diana,  P.-W.  V,  327;  Minervini,  Di  alcune  antichita
di  Tifata  in  Commentationes  philol.  in  honorem  Mommseni  660  and  Atti   Terra

di  Lavoro  1877,  42.

(2)  F.  Lenormant,  Diane  Tijatine  in  Gazette  archeologique  VII  (1881-
82)  82;  Paris,  Diana,  D.-S.    II.    155,  Fig.  2395.

(3)  Beloch  365;   Mancini.   Giornale  degli  scavi  di  Pompei  n.   s.    Ill,   239.

-  328  -


JUPITER.

In  the  early  days  the  name  Jupiter  was  doubtless  given  to
a  considerable  number  of  more  or  less  vaguely  conceived
divinities,  who  were  supFK>sed  to  have  some  connection  with
light  and  the  open  sky.  They  were  distinguished  from  one
Einother  by  the  addition  of  a  qualifying  epithet,  which  would
usually  be  the  most  important  part  of  the  name.  As  time  went
on  there  was  naturally  a  tendency  to  identify  some  of  these
with  similau-  Jupiters  and  by  this  process  of  syncretism  to  reduce
the  total  number.  Our  information  on  this  subject  goes  back
as  far  as  the  third  century  B.  C,  which  has  left  us  a  number
of  inscriptions  written  in  Oscan  that  pertain  to  Jupiter  wor-
ship (1).  As  a  class,  they  contain  the  word  iouilae  (invilas),  the
exact  force  of  which  is  unknown,  although  it  is  clearly  connect-
ed with  the  sphere  of  religion.  It  seems  to  be  a  technical  name
applied  to  some  kind  of  offering  made  to  the  Oscem  god
Jupiter.  Such  gifts  were  made  by  individuals  and  by  several
persons  jointly  as  members  of  the  fzimily  or  gens.  They  seem
to  have  been  dedicated  regularly  at  festivals  and  sacred  seasons
such  as  the  louiae  or  feast  of  Jupiter  and  the  Martian  Ides,
which  were  celebrated  with  sacrifice  or  banquet.  The  exact
nature  of  the  offering  is  somewhat  uncertain,  but  it  is  now
considered  to  have  been  the  representation  of  coats  of  arms
designed  for  dedication  either  at  graves  or  in  a  sacred  grove
or  temple.  The  material  is  usually  stone  but  in  some  C2ises  is
cheap  terra-cotta  work.  Etruscan  influence  has  been  suggested
by  Conway  but  rejected  in  favor  of  a  belief  in  a  native  IteJiah
custom  (2).

In  these  inscriptions  gods  aie  seldom  mentioned.  The  term
Vesullias,  which  sometimes  occurs  is  probably  not  an  allusion
to  a  group  of  goddessess.  In  fact  the  only  one  of  the  inscriptions
that  clearly  refers  to  a  divinity  is  a  dedication  to  Jupiter  Flagius
(luvei  Flagivi),  which  in  its  details  has  been  variously  trans-
lated (3).  According  to  its  text  iouilae  of  the  customary  isort  were
offered  to  a  certain  Jupiter  by  members  of  the  gens  Caesillii.

(1)  Buck,  Grammar  of  Oscan  and  Vmhrian  p.  247;  Conway,  Italic
Dialects  I,   p.    101    f.

(2)  Conway,  Ancient  Italy  in  Hastings  Encyclopedia  VII,  458.

(3)  Conway,   op.    cit.    pag.    110.

-   329    -


The  terra-cotta  contains  also  upon  its  faces  as  emblems  three
wheels  of  the  three-spoked  variety  and  a  boar  (1).  The  texact
nature  of  the  god  is  unknown,  but  he  wsls  doubtless  akin  to
the  Jupiters  who  had  such  distinguishing  epithets  as  Fulgur
and  Fulgurator  and  to  the  Jupiter  Flazzus  or  Flsiziius  who  is
mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  uncertain  origin  (2).  Thus  he
was  connected  with  the  lightning  and  the  sky  (3).  Because  these
dedications  were  offered  at  graves,  von  Plcinta  identifies  this
Jupiter  with  Dis  Pater,  regeirding  him  as  a  chthonic  divinity;
Jordan  considered  the  identification  already  proposed  as  un-
certain (4).

Numismatic  evidence  for  Jupiter  goes  back  at  least  as  far
£13  the  inscriptions  just  cited;  in  fact  meiny  bronze,  silver  and
electrum  coins  of  the  third  century  B.  C,  when  the  govern-
ment was  leirgely  autonomous,  bear  witness  to  the  influence  of
this  god.  A  silver  eight  obol  piece  2issigned  by  A.  Sambon  to
about  263  B.  C.  and  by  Haberlin  to  the  period  213-211,  bears
upon  one  side  an  eagle  and  upon  the  other  the  laurel  crowned
head  of  the  god.  A  series  of  bronze  coins,  belonging  chiefly
to  the  second  half  of  the  third  century,  exhibit  the  Jupiter  head
with  laurel  wreath,  the  profiles  of  Jupiter  and  Juno  together,
and  fincJly  Jupiter  riding  in  a  swift  chariot  (5).  Toward  the
close  of  the  saime  period  he  is  seen  in  a  simileu:  attitude  on  the
reverse  of  an  electrum  piece,  and  again  ggirlanded  with  laurel
upon  coins  of  bronze  (6).  In  addition  to  this  money  of  a  purely
Oscsoi  character  a  quantity  of  silver  coins  with  the  legend  in
Latin  show  upon  the  reverse  a  likeness  of  Jupiter  in  his  chariot.
But,  although  these  coins  are  generally  assigned  to  the  mint  at

(1)  Buck,  No.  25    =   Conway.  No.    108    =    von  Planta,   No.    138.

(2)  See   p.    396.

(3)  Buck  p.  249;  Conway;  1,  p.  109.  110;  Corssen.  Commentationes
epigraphicae  trea  in  E.  E.  II,  p.  162;  Minervini,  Atti  Terra  di  Lavoro  1873,
99;  Biicheler.  Jenaer  LiUeraturzeitung  I  (1874)  609  (not  accessible  to  me);  Aust.
luppiter,  Roscher  II,  641  ;  Wissowa  121.

(4)  Von  Planta,  Gramm.  der  osJ^isch-utnhrischen  Dialel^te  II,  p.  635 ;
Preller-Jordan   I,   191    (3);  Cp.   Conway   I.    110,    110  (1).

(5)  A.  Sambon  392,  Nos.  1021-1023,  1025,  1032,  1037.  Cp.  Head  34
and  Haberlin.  Die  Systematik  des  dltesten  rom.  MiinzWesens  10,  who  attribute
the  silver  coinage  to  the  period  213-211  B.  C.  Poole  81  f;  Garrucci  88;  and.
PI,  LXXXVI.

(6)  A.    Sambon   405.    Nos.    1050-1052.

-   330    -


Capua,  they  bear  the  name  of  Rome  and  should  be  studied  in
connection  with  that  city  rather  than  here  (1).

Another  evidence  for  the  presence  of  Jupiter  appears  in
the  naime,  Porta  louis,  appHed  to  one  of  the  principgJ  entrances
to  the  city,  hs  location  is  unknown,  but  it  served  sis  a  means
of  ingress  for  the  Roman  armies  that  had  been  besieging  the
city  in  21 1  B.  C.  The  theory  was  held  by  some  antiquau'izuis
that  through  it  passed  a  road  leading  to  a  temple  of  Jupiter,  but
proofs  for  this  view  are  lacking  (2).  Nissen  thinks  that  it  was
situated  in  the  eastern  wall  of  the  city,  whence  a  road  led  to
the  shrine  of  Jupiter  Tifatinus  (3).

Daniele  believed  that  this  road  was  in  the  vicinity  of  the
place  where  an  inscription  mentioning  Jupiter  Liber  or  Liber (tas)
w£is  found.  Dated  in  the  yeai  15  A.  D.,  it  records  the  names  of
six  magistri  who  had  had  cheurge  of  the  cult.  Although  there
is  no  ecU^lier  evidence  for  this  form  of  the  god  at  Capua,  he
was  undoubtedly  a  primitive  deity  worshipped  by  the  old
Italisoi  residents  here  as  in  other  places  especially  among  the
Sabellians.  He  wais  a  god  of  marked  physical  vigor  appealing
strongly  to  an  agricultural  population  (4).  Perdrizet  calls  him
((  the  great  god  of  Capua  »  but  this  statement  seems  an  exag-
geration (5).

A  rural  deity  Jupiter  Compagus  was  worshipped  in  the
pagus  Herculaneus.  His  cult  was  in  the  hands  of  twelve  over-
seers according  to  the  custom  of  the  time;  in  the  year  94  B.  C.
they  were  devoting  the  funds  of  the  pagus  to  the  construction
of  a  portico  (6).   Nothing  more  is  known  about  him,   as  no-


(1)  Haberlin,  Die  Systematic,  des  dltesten  rom.  Miinzwesens  6  f;  A.
Sambon  421.

(2)  Daniele,  Del  cuUo  di  Giove,  di  Diana,  e  di  Ercole  presso  de'  Cam.
pani  in  Miscellanea  Bonghi  70;  Pellegrino  Apparato  alle  antichita  di  Capua
I.    discorso    II.    383;    Beloch  346;    Liv.    XXVI.    14.

(3)  Nissen.   It.    Landesk,    II.    716.    See    below    p.    333.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3786  =  Vaglieri  2103.  Wissowa  120;  Aust.  Roscher  II,
637;   Preller-Jordan  I.    195.

(5)  Perdrizet.   JupHer,   D.-S.    Ill,   709.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3772  =  D.  6302  =  Vaglieri  2094:  Pagus  Herculanetis  sciuit
a.  d.  X  Terminalia:  conlegium  seiue  magistrei  louei  Comi>agei  sunt  utei  in
porticum  paganam  reficiendam  pequniam  consumerent  ex  lege  pagana.  arbi-
tratu  Cn.   Laetori  Cn.   f.   magistrei  pageiei  (sic),    uteique   ei   conlegio   seiue   ma-

-    331    -


where  else  is  a  Jupiter  Compagus  mentioned.  The  old  scholau"
Mcizzocchi  in  his  extended  commentciry  on  the  inscription
maintained  without  good  reason  that  the  god  belonged  not  to
the  pagus  Herculaneus,  which  ought  to  worship  Hercules,  but
to  another  district  otherwise  unnamed,  where  Jupiter  was  the
chief  god  (1).

Still  another  v2u-iation  is  seen  in  the  title  Jupiter  Vesuvius,
who  had  his  seat  upon  the  well  known  volcano.  Veneration
for  this  deity  probably  went  back  to  the  era  of  its  early  activity,
and  the  remembrsunce  of  his  power  lingered  through  the  long
period  while  it  was  dormant.  He  was  worshipped  generally
in  the  country  surrounding  the  volcano,  but  evidence  is  at
hand  for  his  cult  only  at  Capua,  perhaps  one  of  the  farthest
points  to  which  his  influence  extended.  He  is  neuned  in  an
inscription  of  the  Imj>erial  period  (2).

Severed  inscriptions  refer  to  the  god  without  any  quali-
fying epithet.  An  alt£ir  of  uncertain  date  but  belonging  to  about
the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.  C,  when  the  magistri
of  the  shrines  flourished,  becirs  the  warning  that  no  one  should
whitewcish  over  it.  To  the  same  era  (84  B.  C.)  belongs  einother
mutilated  inscription  in  which  the  magistri  constructed  for
Jupiter  a  tank  or  cistern.  The  shrine  to  which  reference  is  made
is  uncertain  (3).  Other  epigraphical  remains  pertaining  to
this  god  include  a  brief  dedication  by  M.  Ennius  Vtilis  and  a


gistri  sunt  louei  Compaged  locus  in  teatxo  esset  tarn  qua  sei  sei  (sic)  ludos  fe-
cissent.  (Followed  by  names  of  magistri  and  consuls,).  Cp.  R.  Peter,  Jovius
Compagus    (?),  Roscher    II,    296.

(1)  Mazzocchi,  Commentarii  in  Campani  amphitheairi  titulum  in  Mis-
scellanea  Bonghi  101  f.  Mazzocchi's  view  is  approved  by  Daniele,  Monete
antiche  di  Capua  96.  That  this  form  of  the  god  arose  from  the  Jupiter  Flagius
mentioned  above,  as  claimed  by  F.  Lenormant  is  improbable.  Ceres,  D.-S.
I.    1062.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3806  =  D.  3079  =  Vaglieri  1123:  loui  Vesuuio  sac.  d.  d.
Beloch  216.  Cp.  Waldstein  and  Shoobridge,  Herculaneum  97;  Cocchia,  La
forma  del  Vesuvio  nelle  pitture  e  descrizioni  antiche  in  Atti  Nap.  XXI  (1901)
part    I,    5    and   Rend.    Nap.    XIII    (1899)  47.

(3)  C.   /.    L.    X,    3785=Vaglieri   2104:    loui   sacrum;    banc    aram   ne    quis

dealbet.    £.    E.    VIII,    473  =  N.    5.     1889.     114  =  Vaglieri    2098:     heisc.)    mag.

lacum  louei  de  stip)e  et  de  sua  peqim.  faciund.  coerauer.  (Preceded  by
names  of  the   magistri  emd   followed  by  those  of  the  consuls.).

-  332   -


4
I


large  altai  with  the  word  Manes  on  one  side,  sacrum  on  the
front,  and  loui  ,on  the  other  side  (1).  The  combination  of
Jupiter  with  the  Manes  is  odd,  and  Conway  suggests  that  the
word  loui  may  be  not  a  reference  to  the  god  but  cin  abbrevia-
tion for  the  gens  louia.  Mommsen  conjectured  that  one  side
referred  to  a  tomb,  the  other  to  an  altau:  of  the  god,  but  admit-
ted the  streuigeness  of  the  combination.  It  does  not  seem  pos-
sible that  Jupiter  Flagius  or  any  other  form  of  the  god  previ-
ously encountered  w£is  a  chthonic  deity.  Most  likely  the  god
who  is  meant  here  is  equivalent  to  Vediouis  or  to  the  Pluto
who  in  another  inscription  from  Capua  is  substituted  for  the
Manes,  and  who  here  may  be  used  like  the  Greek  Zeus
Chthonios  (2).

The  cult  of  Jupiter  Tifatinus  having  its  seat  on  or  near
Mt.  Tifata  is  not  mentioned  in  ancient  literature  nor  in  inscrip-
tions. But  since  the  place  where  his  shrine  stood  seems  to  be
referred  to  in  the  Tabula  Peutingerana  under  the  appellation
of  louis  Tifatinus,  this  notice  may  be  regarded  as  an  indication
of  wide  celebrity  at  one  time.  There  is,  however,  no  certainty
for  the  view  stated  by  Nissen  that  the  Porta  louis  derived  its
name  from  this  god  (3).  The  shrine  has  been  variously  lo-
cated. According  to  one  opinion  it  stood  upon  the  summit  of
the  mountain,  where  now  rises  the  chapel  of  S.  Nicola  (4);
according  to  another  view  it  Wcis  located  south  of  the  mountain
on  the  plain  where  now  stands  the  monastic  church  of  S.  Pie-
tro  in  Piedimonte  near  Caserta.  Daniele  asserted  that  the
columns  of  this  church  and  many  marbles  and  columns  of  the
CathedraJ  of  Caserta  Ccime  from  the  Jupiter  temple.  Pratilli
claimed  that  the  presence  of  the  ancient  shrine  had  greatly
affected  the  loced  nomenclature,  and  a  village  in  the  vicinity
called   Csisagiova  or  Casa  nova  may  perhaps   perpetuate   the


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3801;  loui  sacr.  M.  Ennius  Vtilis ;  C.  /.  L.  X.  3802  =
Vaglieri   1101.

(2  Conway,  The  Italic  Dialects  I.  110  (1);  Mommsen,  comment  on
this   inscription.    Cp.    R.    Peter,  Dis   Pater   Roscher    I,    1186;   Wissowa   236-237.

(3)  Nissen  II,   716.

(4)  Desjaxdins,  La  table  de  Pent.  195,  Col.  1  and  Pi.  V.  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  59,
No.  9.   Cp.    Badeker.   Southern   Italy    and  Sicily    (15)   9.

-  333   -


ancient  tradition  (I).  Beloch  wished  to  locate  the  temple  iat-
ther  west  £uid  nccirer  Capua  at  no  great  distsoice  from  S.  Prisco,
but  he  was  influenced  in  pait  at  least  by  the  erroneous  suppo-
sition that  this  temple  was  identical  with  the  CapitoUum  of
Capua  (2).

Other  attempts  made  by  local  antiquarians  to  identify  the
sites  of  supposed  Jupiter  temples,  as  that  of  Pratilli  to  establish
a  temple  of  lupiter  Tonans,  have  nothing  to  recommend
them  (3).  Several  other  forms  ,of  Jupiter  such  as  Olbius  Sa-
baeus,  which  lannelli  attempted  to  explain,  depend  upon
spurious  inscriptions  published  by  Pratilli  and  others  (4).

CERES.

Another  important  deity  of  the  Capuan  territory  W2is  Ceres,
who  was  worshipped  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  city's
history  by  the  primitive  inhabitants  before  the  eirrival  of
any  influences  from  either  the  Greeks  or  the  Romans.  The
earliest  evidence  that  she  was  recognized  here  goes  back
no  farther  than  the  third  century  B.  C,  when  she  had  long
been  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  Greek  Demeter.  At
that  time  she  was  employed  to  mark  a  series  of  coins,  where
her  head  is  crowned  with  ears  of  grain  (5).

The  goddess  is  next  mentioned  in  a  long  Oscan  inscrip-
tion, assigned  to  the  third  or  to  the  first  half  of  the  second
century  B.  C,  which  was  discovered  in  the  necropolis  of  Capua.
This  contains  several  examples  of  the  expression  Keri  arenti\ai,
which  is  interpreted  as  equivalent  to  Ceres   Vltrix  (6).  Written

(1)  Danide,  Misc.  Bonghi  74;  Pratilli,  Delia  Via  Appia  277,  who  speak»
of  a  Fontana  di  Giove  and  a  Campo  di  Jove  as  well  as  a  Casa  Jove;  G>rcia,
Storia  delle  due  Sicilie  II,   76.   Cp.  A.   Sambon  392;  Raoul-Rochette,   Notice  sur

les  fouilles  de  Capoue  in  Jour,    des  savants   1853,   283,

(2)  Beloch  360.

(3)  Pratilli,  op.  cit.  287.  Refuted  by  Daniele  69.

(4)  lannelli,   Atti  Terra  di  Lavoro   1892,  22.

(5)  A.   Sambon  393.   397,   No.    1027;   Head  35;   Garrucd  89.

(6)  Buck,  No.  19=  Conway,  No.  130=  von  Planta,  No.  128;  Audollent,
Defixionum  tahellae,  No.  193.  The  Oscan  jname  of  the  goddess  occurs  only
in  the  dative.  Cp.  Bucheler,  Rh.  Mus.  XXXllI  (1878)  1;  Bugge.  Altitalische
Studien    57;    Breal,    Revue    critique    n.    s.    V.    (1878)    90;    Audollent,    op.    cit,

-  334  -


upon  a  leaden  tablet,  this  inscription  is  in  substance  a  curse
and  belongs  to  that  class  of  imprecations  which  were  placed
in  graves  because  of  their  reputed  efficacy  cis  potent  chcirms.
Although  a  leirge  part  has  been  destroyed  and  the  sense  is
often  uncertain,  the  purport  of  the  whole  seems  to  be  that  a
certain  woman  Vibia,  because  she  has  been  deprived  of  some
person  or  thing,  consigns  her  enemy  Pacius  Clouatius  and
perhaps  also  his  relatives  to  condign  punishment  emd  retri-
bution. She  hopes  that  he  may  be  tortured  in  the  existence
beyond  the  grave  £Uid  that  his  body  may  have  no  rest  in  the
tomb  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  avenging  goddess.
She  has  the  same  relative  position  in  the  matter  of  curses  that
Demeter  held  in  Greece,  particulgurly  at  Cnidos,  where  the
shrine  of  that  goddess  has  yielded  examples  testifying  to  her
power  (1).

As  an  agricultural  deity  Ceres  was  undoubtedly  popular  in
this  region.  A  shrine,  which  was  probably  located  in  one  of  the
rural  districts,  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  bearing  the  date
of  106  B.  C.  It  was  under  the  control  of  magistri,  the  list  of
whom  in  this  case  shows  thirteen  names  instead  of  the  usual
twelve.  On  this  occasion  they  erected  a  wall  and  a  pluteus  and
celebrated  games ;  two  years  later  they  were  engaged  in  similar
activity  (2).  As  in  other  parts  of  Campeinia  the  priesthood  of
Ceres  must  have  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  highest  of  its
kind  and  sought  accordingly  by  the  ladies  of  the  first  feimilies.
Three  inscriptions  have  left  a  record  of  this  priesthood,  and
have  preserved  the  names  of  two  incumbents  of  the  office,  -
Icuria  and  Herennia  (3).  The  former  of  these  women  bears
the  title  sacerdos  Cerialis  mundialis  in  which  the  chthonic
character  of  the  goddess  shown  in  the  Oscan  inscription  is
again  manifested.   This  title  then  is  in  harmony  with  the  al-


257,  No.   193;  Paschal,  La  tavola  osca  di  esecrazione  in  Rend.  Nap.  VIII  (1894)
128   f.

(1)  Audollent,   Defixionum  tabellae  5   f.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3779  =  D.  3340=Vaglieri  2097.  Cp.  C.  J.  L.  X,  3778  of
the  same  year.  C.  /.  L.  X,  3780  =  D.  3341.  (The  magistri  in  this  case  are
ingenui).

(3)  C.  I.  L.  X,  3926  =  Vaglieri,  2092.  Icuria  M.  f.  saceraos  Cerialis
mundialis  d.   s.  p.    f.  c.   C.  I.  L.  X,  3911,  a  fragment.

-   335    -


legation  of  Festus  that  the  Roman  mundus  was  consecrated  to
Ceres  (1).

According  to  Pratil'i  the  temple  of  this  divinity  wsis  lo-
cated at  a  spot  near  Mt.  Tifata,  which  was  called  Casa  Cerere
in  thirteenth  suid  fourteenth  century  documents,  and  where
statues  and  inscriptions  have  been  found.  This  identification
was  favored  by  Raoul-Rochette  and  is  perhaps  correct  (2).

JUNO.

The  earliest  record  of  this  goddess  appears  upon  a  Igu-ge
number  of  bronze  coins  which  are  dated  in  the  third  century
B.  C. ;  here  she  either  is  united  with  Jupiter  as  already  indicated
or  is  represented  alone,  having  a  crown  upon  her  head  and  a
scepter  on  her  shoulder  (3).  Whether  the  employment  of  this
design  was  due  to  an  important  local  cult  or  to  a  desire  to  honor
upon  this  money  one  of  the  important  Roman  deities  is  unknown.
There  is  no  reason,  however,  to  doubt  the  presence  of  an  early
cult  here  not  only  during  the  domination  of  the  Etruscsuis  but
also  during  the  period  preceding  it  (4).

A  cult  of  Juno  Gaura  is  proved  by  an  interesting  inscrip-
tion of  71  B.  C.  pertaining  to  one  of  the  rural  districts.  It  records
some  action  taken  by  the  board  of  overseers  controlling  the
shrine  perhaps  in  regard  to  a  slave  of  this  goddess,  but  the  brev-
ity of  form  does  not  permit  the  mesoiing  to  be  definitely  deter-
mined (5).  This  cult  is  naturally  associated  with  Mt.  Gaurus,
now  Monte  Barbaro,  which  is  situated  at  the  southern  edge  of

(1)  Festus  142M=  Lindsay's  ed.  p.  126.  Macrob.  {sat.  I,  16,  17)  on
the  other  hand  states  that  the  mundus  was  sacxed  to  Dis  Pater  and  Proserpina.
Pestalozza  e  Chiesa,  Ceres  Ruggiero  II,  205;  Henzen,  Bull.  Inst.  1857,  187;
Minervini.  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  V  (1857)  91.

(2)  Pratilli,  Deilla  Via  'Appia  280;  Corcia,  op.  cit.  II,  74;  Raoul-Ro-
chette,  op.   cit.  286;   Beloch  367.

(3)  A.  Sambon  392,  401,  Nos.  1038-1040,  1048;  Head  35;  Garrucci  88  f . ;
Poole   83.

(4)  Cp.  for  a  contrary  opinion  W.  F.  Otto,  luno  in  Philologus  LXIV
(1905)    173    and  see    p.  294.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3783  =  C.  /.  L.  1,  573  =  D.  6303=Vaglieri  2099:  Heisce
magistr.  ex  pagei  scitu  in  seruom  lunonis  Gaurae  contule.  (Preceded  by  a
list  of  magistri  and  followed  by  the  consuls).  The  meaning  of  this  inscrip-
tion  is  discussed   by   Schulten,   De  conventibus   civium   Romanorum    74  (1).

-  336  -


the  Campanian  plain  a  short  distemce  from  Puteoli.  Although
Mommsen  assigned  the  cult  of  Juno  Gaura  to  Capua,  he  reject-
ed the  view  that  she  was  connected  with  that  mountain  on  the
ground  that  it  was  not  a  part  of  the  Capuan  territory.  Cicero,
however,  counted  it  as  a  part  of  the  state  domain,  and  the  place
called  Hamae  mentioned  by  Livy,  which  Beloch  located  on  its
slope,  was  considered  by  the  Capuans  as  under  their  jurisdic-
tion (1).  Yet,  however  this  may  be,  it  is  not  essential  that  the
mountain  should  be  in  the  same  jurisdiction  as  the  cult.  The
goddess,  whose  seat  was  located  there,  wsts  worshipped  in  one
of  the  Campanian  pagi  just  like  the  Jupiter  of  Mt.  Vesuvius.  Otto
maintains  that  this  cult  like  all  worship  of  Juno  in  Campania
was  due  to  Roman  influence  and  not  a  native  development  (2).
But  in  this  case  we  would  expect  to  find  a  Juno  cult  recognized
by  the  Romans  rather  than  one  connected  with  an  obscure  local
mountain.  In  fact  such  a  cult  as  this,  which  points  to  a  develop-
ment at  an  early  p>eriod  when  only  the  limited  local  influences
were  at  work  has  the  best  indications  of  great  age.  The  fact  of
its  survival  amid  the  competition  presented  by  cults  undoubtedly
new  is  a  proof  of  original  importance.

On  the  other  hand  the  Juno  Lucina,  who  is  mentioned  in
an  inscription  of  the  Republican  period,  inscribed  upon  a  pyr-
amidal altar,  may  be  an  importation,  although  the  inscription
itself  which  records  her  is  old.  The  words  Tuscolana  sacra,
which  follow  the  name  of  the  goddess,  are  not  well  understood.
According  to  one  interpretation  the  dedication  was  made  to
Juno  Lucina  of  Tusculum  by  some  Roman  colonist  originally
of  that  region,  who  wished  to  keep  up  relations  with  one  of  the
leading  divinities  of  his  native  land.  According  to  another  inter-
pretation sacred  rites  were  performed  with  the  ceremonies  adopt-
ted  at  Tusculum  (3).  A  similar  altar  was  dedicated  to  another
divinity  honored  with  similar  rites,  but  his  identity  can  no  longer


(1)  Cic.  leg.  agr.  11.  36;  Liv.  XXIII.  35;  Mommsen.  C.  I.  L.  X.  3783;  Be-
loch 16;  Otto  Phildlogus  LXIV  (1905)  173-174;  Nissen  II,  736.

(2)  Otto   loc.   cit.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3807  =:D.  3099  =  Vaglieri  1099:  lunone  Loucdna  Tusco-
lana sacra.  Ritschl,  Priscae  laiinitatis  monumenta  epigraphica  XXXVI.  and
p.    30.

-  337  -

22


be  determined  (1).  Minervini  believed  that  the  pyramidal  form
of  the  altar  indicated  phallic  worship  and  that  the  divinities
recognized  here  were  both  concerned  with  generation  (2).

VENUS  lOVIA.

■  The  worship  of  Venus  louia  was  carried  on  by  one  of  the
pagi  whose  magistri,  consisting  of  twelve  ingenui,  constructed
a  stretch  of  wall  and  celebrated  games  in  108  B.  C.  (3).  Noth-
ing further  is  known  about  this  particular  deity,  who  was
probably  a  survival  from  the  Oscan  era.  That  she  was  a  trans-
formation of  an  old  Oscan  goddess  Vesuna  or  Vesolia,  and  was
worshipped  along  with  either  Ceres  or  Juno  Lucina  in  the
Roman  period  as  believed  by  F.  Lenormeint,  is  not  a  probable
supposition  and  has  no  evidence  to  support  it.  But  it  is  likely
that  she  was  some  form  of  Venus  and  not  a  Juno,  as  is  stated
by  Beloch  (4).  Pratilli  as  usual  was  ready  to  locate  a  temple,  and
this  time  declared  that  it  stood  near  the  ancient  Forum  in  the
eastern  part  of  the  present  market  place  of  S.  Maria  (5).

THE  MOTHER  GODDESS  OF  THE  FONDO  PATTURELLI

Whatever  uncertainty  may  exist  about  the  age  of  Juno's
cult  at  Capua  or  even  about  that  of  Venus  louia,  there  can  be
none  in  regeurd  to  the  worship  of  smother  goddess  who  has  never
been  definitely  identified.  Her  shrine  was  situated  to  the  eeist  of
the  ancient  city  just  outside  the  walls  and  not  far  from  the
course  of  the  uia  Appia,  Remains  consisting  of  a  podium  of  tufa
blocks,  upon  which  still  stood  a  small  altar,  were  discovered  in
184S  upon  the  estate   of  the  Patturelli   family   lying  near   the

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3808=D.  3099a.

(2)  Minervini.  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  VII  (1858)  18.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3776  =  0.  3185  =  Vaglieri  2102:  Heisce  magistreis  Venerus
louiae  murum  aedificandum  coirauexunt  ped.  CCLXX  et  loidos  fecerunt.
(Preceded  by  the  names  of  the  magistri  and  dated  by  the  mention  of  the
consuls).  Ritschl.  LXIIIa;  C.  /.  L.  X,  3777  =  £.  £.  VIII  460.

(4)  F.  Lenoxmant,  La  grande  Grece  I,  405  and  Ceres,  D.-S.  I,  1062;
Beloch    331.

(5)  Pratilli,  Delia  Via  Appia  288.  He  claims  for  this  site  the  discovery
of    a    statue   and   a    pedestal    marked    Venus   Felix.    Cp.    Raoul-Rochette,   Jour.

des  savants   1853,  287.

-  338  -


village  of  Le  Curti  between  S.  Psisquale  and  the  Carceri  Vec-
chie.  The  owner  of  the  property,  however,  after  making  hasty
sketches  of  the  walls  immediately  destroyed  them.  At  a  later
time  excavations  were  made  here,  which  yielded  a  great  wealth
of  votive  offerings  as  well  as  fragments  of  inscriptions  written
chiefly  in  Oscan.  The  result  of  all  the  discoveries  indicates  that
an  important  cult  had  its  seat  here,  eind  that  it  flourished  in
very  early  times  (1).

According  to  Koch,  who  has  attempted  the  restoration  of
the  podium  and  other  eu-chitectural  details  of  the  temple,  there
was  a  rebuilding  sometime  after  300  B.  C,  which  followed  the
styles  of  the  Hellenistic  period  but  exemplified  some  peculisiri-
ties  not  elsewhere  paralleled  (2).  At  that  time  the  terra-cotta
ornaments  of  the  original  building  were  buried  in  the  surround-
ing land  (3).  During  the  era  of  Oscan  predomineuice  the  cult
must  have  had  a  great  vogue,  if  we  are  to  judge  from  the  vast
number  of  votive  offerings.  Yet  since  these  axe  uniformly  of  a
cheap  and  simple  character,  the  patrons  of  the  shrine  seem  to
have  belonged  chiefly  to  the  lower  classes.  The  latest  evidence
for  its  existence  appeaurs  in  the  discovery  of  three  small  images
with  inscriptions  in  Latin,  which  have  been  assigned  to  the  age
of  Sulla  (4).  They  are  all  of  the  samie  type,  -  a  seated  *woman
holding  children  in  her  au^ms;  they  were  dedicated  by  women
who  have  failed  to  indicate  in  £iny  way  the  name  of  the  deity
they  were  honoring  (5).  Perhaps  the  shrine  gradually  declined  in


(1)  Mancini.  Giornale  degli  scavi  di  P.  N.  s.  Ill,  217  f . ;  Raoul-Rochette,
Notice  sur  les  fouitles  de  Capoue  in  Jour,  des  savants  1853  291  ;  von  Duhn,
Necropoli  e  santuario  di  Capua  in  Bull.  Inst.  1876,  177;  1878,  13;  LenoxmEint,
Gazette    des    beaux    arts    XXI    (1880)    115;    Beloch    353    f .  ;    Koch,    Hellenistiche

Architekturstucke  in  Capua  in  Rom.  Mitth.  XXII   (1907)  361    f.  with  full  refer-
ences  to   early   literature.

(2)  Koch,   op.   cit  365.   Cp.   Cosenza,   Stahia    122.

(3)  For  a  different  explanation  see  Lenormant,  Diane  Tijatine  in  Gaz.
arch.   VII    (1881-2)   82.

(4)  Altmann,  Die  torn.  Grabaltare  der  Kaiserzeit  138.  These  figvires  are
described  and  illustrated  in  Beschreibung  der  antiken  Sktilpttiren  of  the  Royal
Museum  of  Berlin,  Nos.  161-167  and  Winter,  Die  Typen  der  figUrlichen  Ter-
rakotten    I,     147.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3817:  Quarta  Confleia  u.  s.  m.  X,  3818  and  3819  are
fragmentary.

-  339  -


pKDpularity  after  the  RomEin  occupation;  at  amy  rate  the  whole
property  was  finally  abandoned  and  then  occupied  by  graves
like  the  rest  of  the  tract  round  about  the  walls  (I).  Besides
the  podium  and  the  remains  of  altars  an  aedicula  was  discovered
which  with  its  foundations  and  columns  was  made  from  a  single
block  of  tufa  (2).

Unquestionably  a  goddess  was  worshipped  here  either  with
or  without  other  divinities.  Since  the  temple  seemed  to  stsuid
in  the  midst  of  a  necropolis,  von  Duhn  maintained  that  the
goddess  should  be  considered  as  a  chthonic  deity  who  received
unto  herself  the  souls  of  the  departed  (3).  More  likely,  however,
the  shrine  had  no  such  relation  to  the  dead,  but  became  sur-
rounded by  graves  with  the  lapse  of  time.  Among  the  countless
votive  images  of  terra-cotta  the  prevailing  type  was  that  of  a
matron  seated  upon  a  chair  with  one  or  more  children  upon  her
knees  and  in  her  amis.  The  inference  naturally  follows  that  we
have  here  to  do  with  a  goddess  of  motherhood,  who  presided
over  birth  arid  protected  young  children,  -  an  example  of  the
Nutrix  or  Kourotrophos  (4).  Dieterich  saw  in  this  deity  an
example  of  the  goddess  who  was  worshipped  as  an  earth-moth-
er (5).  One  small  statue  of  marble,  representing  a  standing
matron  with  a  child  in  her  arms,  has  sometimes  been  considered
to  be  the  cult  statue,  but  this  identification  is  not  probable  (6).

The  name  of  the  occupant  of  this  temple  remains  unknown.
Some  scholars  have  thought  that  it  belonged  to  Juno  Lucina,
and   Conway,    referring   to    the   character   of    the   dedications.


(1)  Koch,  loc.  cit.  and  411.  414.  Cp.  Beloch  355;  von  Duhn,  Necropoli
e  santuario  di  Capua  in  Bull.  Inst.  1876,  182,  who  assigns  these  offerings  to
the  period  of  the  Flavian  Emperors.

(2)  Koch  389;  Altmann  ioc.  cit.

(3)  von  Duhn   180  f.

(4)  von   Wilamowitz,   Bull.    Inst.    1873,    146;    Gurlitt,    Petauer  i4nfi^en    in
Archdologisch-epigraphische.    Mitt,     aus     Oester. ;     XIX     (1896)     18;     Wissowa

260(1);  Koch  412  f .  ;  Beloch  356;  Preuner,  Jahresbericht  uber  die  Fortschritte
der  Alterthumsw.  XXV  (1891)  439;  Altmann  op.  cit.  138;  Biardot,  Les  terres-
cuites  grecques  funebres  336;  Winter,  Die  Typen  der  figUrlichen  Terra\oi'
ten  I,  CXV  (4).

(5)  Dieterich,    Mutter   Erde    (2)   79.

(6)  von  Duhn,   Bull.  Inst.   (1878),    13;   Gurlitt,   loc.   cit.

-  340  -


regards  the  identification  as  certain  (I).  There  has  likewise
been  a  tendency  recently  revived  by  Koch,  to  consider  that  a
goddess  Dzunia  was  worshipped  here,  who  in  reality  was  no
other  than  the  Roman  Bona  Dea,  as  has  been  already  stated  in
the  chapter  on  Puteoli.  In  the  Oscan  inscriptions  found  in  the
vicinity  the  terms  damn....,  damuse....,  and  damsennias  may
refer  to  offerings  or  ceremonies  connected  with  a  goddess
Daunia  (2).  Guidobaldi,  who  was  a  pioneer  in  making  the
identification  between  Damia  and  Bona  Dea,  believed  that
Damuse  referred  to  a  priestess  (3).  If  this  cult  really  existed
here,  it  probably  came  from  Teu'entum  and  so  this  city  may
have  formed  an  intermediate  point  on  the  road  which  it  fol-
lowed to  reach  Rome  (4).  The  goddess  seems  to  have  been
originally  very  much  like  Ceres.  Whether  the  two  Oscan  words
Diuvia  and  damu....  should  be  read  together,  as  was  done  by
most  of  the  earlier  scholars,  and  considered  £is  a  neune  for  the
divinity  corresponding  to  the  Latin  louia  Damusa  is  uncer-
tain (5).  Other  scholars  as  Hild  and  Wissowa,  comparing  the
known  characteristics  of  this  divinity  with  those  of  Fortuna
are  inclined  to  decide  that  she  too  may  be  a  Fortuna,  -  a  theory
that  seems  the  most  probable  of  those  offered  hitherto  for  the
explanation  of  this  cult  (6).

It  is  furthermore  uncertain  that  a  triad  of  Oscan  deities  was
worshipped  here  as  is  claimed  by  some  scholars.  Thus  Lenor-
mant,  believing  in  the  existence  of  louia  Damusa,  maintained
that  with  her  were  associated  her  two  children  Jupiter  Flagius

(1)  Mancini.  op.  cit.  236  f . ;  Conway,  The  Italic  Dialects  I,  p.  109.  He
thinks  that  she  may  have  shared  her  shrine  with  Jupiter,  as  Zeus  was  wor-
shipped with   Hera  at  Dodona.    (Strab.   VI,    7,    12).

(2)  Buck,  Nos.  24,  31b.  Cp.  Festus  68M  =  Lindsay's  ed.  p.  360,  for
damium   expressing  a  sacrifice  to  Bona   Dea,   and  Damia   for  the   deity's   name.

(3)  Guidobaldi,  Damia  o  huona  dea  2  f,  ;  Cp.  Saglio,  Damia,  D.-S.
II,    21.

(4)  Gruppe   370;   F.    Lenormant,    Ceres,   D.-S.    I,    1076.

(5)  Lenormant,  Ceres,  D.-S.  I,  1062;  R.  Peter,  Damia,  Roscher  I,
944;  Bucheler,  Oskische  Bleitafel  in  Rh.  Mus.  XXXIII  (1878)  71  f . ;  Cp.  Bugge
Altitalische  Studien  12;  Corssen  £.  £.  p.  161.  No.  10  and  Zeitschr.  fur  ver-
gleichende  Sprachforschung    XI    (1862)    322.

(6)  Wissowa,  260  (1);  Hild,  Fortuna,  D.-S.  II,  1270;  Otto,  Fortuna,
P.-W.   VII.   25;   Allmann,   Die   rem.   Grahaltdre   138.

-  341   -


and  Vesolia  (I).  But  it  has  not  been  established  that  the  former
was  worshipped  here,  as  we  do  not  know  the  exact  spot  where
the  inscription  naming  him  was  found,  and  there  is  no  real  evi-
dence for  a  goddess  Vesolia,  or  Vesuna  in  the  extant  material  (2).

MARS.

The  term  Mamerttiais  (Martiis)  applied  in  one  instance  to
the  Ides  of  the  month  and  probably  used  generally  in  connec-
tion with  festivals  in  honor  of  the  god  Mars  occurs  repeatedly
in  the  Oscan  iouUae  inscriptions  of  the  third  century  B.  C.  (3).
These  form  the  earliest  evidence  for  his  influence  at  Capua.
Although  he  is  employed  regularly  as  a  design  upon  bronze
coins  of  the  Romano-Csunpanieui  issues,  he  does  not  appear
upon  the  city's  autonomous  coinage.  He  had  a  temple,  which
was  struck  by  lightning  in  the  year  208  B.  C,  £in  event  that
was  considered  as  one  of  the  many  evil  omens  of  the  time  (4).
Raoul-Rochette,  citing  Pratilli,  is  inclined  to  believe  in  a  tradi-
tion that  the  site  of  this  temple  was  selected  by  Consteoitine
for  the  Christigin  basilica  which  that  monarch  erected  at  Capua,
but  Pratilli  asserts  only  that  the  place  was  sacred  to  Mais  or
some  other  god  (5).  fMothing  is  known  about  the  worship  of
Msu-s,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  old  cults  of  native
origin.


(1)  Lenormant,  Ceres,  D.-S.  I,  1062;  Diane  Tifatine  in  Gaz.  arch.
VII  (1881-82);  La  grande  Grece  I,  405 ;  Deux  nouvautes  archeologiques  de  la
Campanie   in   Gaz.   des   beaux  arts  XXI    (1880)    120.

(2)  Conway,  It.  Dialects,  I,  No.  120.  Cp.  Nos.  109,  110  and  p.  110;
Corssen,  £.  E.  p.  161,  No.  11.  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  II  (1854)  167  thinks
that  the  old  Italian  goddess  Feronia  is  meant  here.  If  the  temple  belonged  to
Damia,  there  would  be  nothing  improbable  in  the  idea  that  a  triad  received
honor  here.  At  Sp>arta  indeed  Damia  was  worshipped  along  with  Zeus  Tale-
titas  and  a  goddess  Auxesia,  and  at  Aegina  aoid  Epidaurus,  with  the  latter
alone.   Cp.   Kern,  Damia,   P.-W.  IV,   2054.

(3)  Buck  p.  247,  Nos  27,  28,  29.  See  p.  329  above,  and  cp.  Roscher.,
Mars,   II,    2394.

(4)  Liv.  XXVII,  23,  2:  Capfuae  duas  aedes  Fortunae  et  Martis  et  se-
pulchra    aliquot    de    caelo    tacta.

(5)  Pratilli,  Delia  Via  Appia  275;  Raoul-Rochette;  Jour,  des  savants,
1853,  287-8.

-  342  -


FORTUNA.

The  cult  of  Fortuna,  who  seems  to  have  been  smother  old
deity  of  this  region,  is  first  heard  of  at  the  close  of  the  third
century  B.  C.  Among  the  list  of  prodigies  for  the  yeau:  209  B.  C.
Livy  states  that  the  wall  and  temple  of  Fortuna  at  Capua  were
struck  by  lightning,  zind  the  next  year,  when  the  temple  of
Mars  was  also  struck,  declares  that  this  shrine  along  with  a
number  of  tombs  suffered  a  similar  mishap  (1).  Pratilli  claims
to  have  found  evidence  for  the  continued  survival  of  the  names
of  this  shrine  smd  that  of  Meurs  in  a  document  of  the  monastery
of  S.  Angelo  dated  1148  (2).  As  stated  above,  the  mother
goddess  who  had  a  sanctu2u-y  near  the  city  (Fondo  Patturelli)
has  been  identified  by  some  scholars  as  a  Fortuna  simileu:  in
nature  to  the  one  at  Praeneste  and  perhaps  al  Antium  (3).  On
Oscan  coins  a  Tyche  or  Fortuna  seems  to  be  represented  by  a
female  head  that  is  encircled  with  a  notched  coronet  (4).
Furthermore  this  goddess  was  revered  in  one  of  the  pagi,  where
she  ha^  a  shrine  along  with  Spes  auid  Fides.  In  the  year  110  B.
C.  the  magistri,  who  were  probably  all  ingenui,  are  reported  as
building  a  wall.  Other  details  of  the  cult  are  lacking  (5).

CASTOR  AND  POLLUX.

Within  the  city  itself  there  is  no  direct  reference  to  the
cult  of  Castor  and  Pollux.  In  the  yeax  340  B.  C,  however,  a
bronze  tablet  weis  placed  in  the  Roman  temple  of  these  deities
to  commemorate  the  services  rendered  to  the  cause  of  Rome
by  the  Capueui  aristocracy,  whence  Jordan  inferred  that  the
Twins  were  accepted  cis  patrons  by  the  equites  in  this  city  as


(1)  Liv.    XXVII,     11,    2;    Tacta     de    caelo    erant et    Capua©    murus

Fortunaeque  aedis.    Liv.   XXVII,   23,  2,   See  above   p.   342   (4).

(2)  Finis  ecdlesia  S.  Nicolai  ad  Fortanam  and  Campa  S.  Marci.  Pra-
tilli, Delia   Via  Appia  288,   Corcia  Stona  delle  due  Sicilie   II,   72.

(3)  Hild,    Fortuna,    D.-S.    II.    1269.    See   p.    341.

(4)  A.    Sambon    397,    Nos.    1028,    1035,    1036.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3775  =  D.  3770  =  Vaglieri  2101:  Heisc  mag.  Spei,  Fidei,
Fortunae  murum  faciund,  coirauere,  (Preceded  by  names  of  magisiri  and
dated   by  the   mention   of   the   consuls).

-  343  -


in  Rome  (1).  Furtwangler  erroneously  speaks  of  their  tult  as
though  it  had  been  introduced  here  and  elsewhere  in  Campania
from  Rome  (2).  But  it  was  rather  brought  in  at  an  early  date
from  the  Greek  settlements  on  the  coast.  Albert  incorrectly
compares  the  introduction  of  their  cult  to  the  arrival  of  Zeus,
Hera  EUid  Artemis;  for  in  the  latter  ceise  the  Greek  gods  were
assimilated  to  pre-existing  Italian  ones,  while  in  the  former  they
probably  preserved  their  identity  unimpaired  (3).  The  Dios-
curi were  certainly  worshipped  in  at  least  one  of  the  rural
pagi  surrounding  the  city,  and  possessed  a  shrine  under  the
control  of  magistri,  who  in  the  year  106  B.  C.  were  engaged
in  the  construction  of  a  wall,  besides  providing  games  to
amuse  their  constituents  (4).  The  inscription  recording  this
fact  was  found  in  the  plain  of  S.  Leucio  near  the  church  of
S.  Erasmo  just  west  of  the  ancient  city  limits;  here  in  Pratilli's
time  extensive  remains  of  a  large  building  still  survived,  which
that  writer  declared  to  have  belonged  to  the  temple  of  these
gods  (5).  A.  further  evidence  for  the  location  of  the  temple
in  this  vicinity  may  be  derived  from  the  circumstance  that  a
church  consecrated  to  S.  Erasmo  was  built  here.  The  func-
tions ascribed  to  the  Twin  Brethren  and  to  this  saint  whose
name  beceune  corupted  to  S.  Elmo,  were  similar;  he  too  was
regeirded  as  a  saviour  on  the  sea,  and  would  naturally  in  this
spot  receive  the  homage  once  consecrated  to  the  Dioscuri  (6).
Another  inscription  seven  years  later  than  the  first,  which


(1)  Liv.  VIII,  11,  16:  Equitibus  Campanis  ciuitas  Romana  data,  mon-
umentoque  ut  aeneam  tabulam  in  aede  Castoris  Romae  finxerunt.  Preller-
Jordan  II  301.  Cp.   Bethe.  Dioscuren,  P.-W.  V,    1104.

(2)  Furtwangler,    Diosl^uren,    Roscher     1,     1169.

(3)  Albert,  Etude  sur  le  culte  de  Castor  et  Pollux  A7.

(4)  C.  I.  L.  X,  3778  =  C.  /.  L.  I,  567  =  D.  3397  =  Vaglieri  2095:  Heisce
magistri  Castor'  et  PoUuci  murum  et  pluteum  faciendu,  coerauere  eidemque
loedos  fecerunt.  (Preceded  by  the  names  of  six  ingenui  and  six  libertini  and
followed  by  the  names  of  the  consuls).

(5)  Pratilli,  op.  cit.  289.  That  this  spot  was  the  site  of  a  temple  was
doubted  by  Raoul-Rochette  Journal  des   savants    1853,   286  and   by   Beloch   353.

Excavations  on  the  site  yielde<l  little.  Minervini,   Bull.  Nap.  n.   s.  VI   (1857)  22.
Cp.    lannelli.    Bull.    Nap.    n.    s.    VI    (1857)    21  ;    Albert    op.    cit.   47.

(6)  Jaisle,  Die  Dioskuren  als  Retter  65,  69.

-  344  -


came  from  the  vicinity  of  Mt.  Tifata,  states  that  their  images
in  mcirble  were  placed  in  the  temple  of  Diana.  It  offers  not  the
least  evidence,  as  believed  by  Furtwangler,  for  the  location  of
a  temple  of  the  Dioscuri  on  that  mountain  ( I ).

Albert  in  his  monograph  treating  these  gods  draws  very
strange  conclusions  from  these  inscriptions  about  the  relations
of  the  Romans  to  the  local  cult  (2).  In  the  first  place  he
asserts  that  the  Twins  were  Greek  divinities  up  to  the  time  of
the  First  Punic  War,  but  that  after  that  date  they  should  be
regarded  as  Romanized.  We  may  wonder,  however,  what  partic-
ular influence  that  struggle  in  the  middle  of  the  third  century
B.  C.  exerted  toward  the  strengthening  of  Rom2ai  power  in
Campania.  He  further  states  that  the  Romans  in  order  better  to
meu-k  their  act  of  taking  possession  of  Capua  —  presumably  eifter
the  Second  Punic  War  —  instituted  festivals  on  two  occasions
in  honor  of  the  twin  deities  and  repeiired  their  temple,  which
he  identifies  with  the  one  described  by  Pratilli.  In  other  words
he  maintains  that  the  work  of  the  magistri  was  all  due  to  Roman
initiative,  and  implies  that  they  themselves  were  Roman  offi-
cials. But  it  is  strange  that  this  activity  should  happen  at  the
end  of  the  second  century  B.  C,  so  long  sifter  the  event  it  was
designed  to  commemorate.  Again,  such  a  view  disregards  entire-
ly the  doings  of  magistri  connected  with  other  shrines,  whose
work  was  on  a  level  with  that  of  the  overseers  of  the  Dioscuri,
and  who  could  equally  well  be  attributed  to  Roman  influence.
As  a  matter  of  fact  we  are  dealing  with  a  local  shrine  of  minor
importeuice ;  neither  the  building  operations  of  its  magistri  nor
their  games  were  of  special  significance.  To  assume  that  the
Romans  were  fostering  all  the  cults  in  connection  with  which
g£imes  were  given  or  shrines  improved  is  to  attribute  to  the
conquerors  a  procedure  that  wcis  far  from  natural.  If  these  had
felt  any  need  for  the  gods  of  the  vanquished,  they  might  have
introduced  them  at  Rome,  -  a  course  that  wcis  not  feasible  in
this  instance,  because  the  Dioscuri  had  long  been  recognized


1169.


h


(1)  C.  /.   L.  X,  3781.   See  p.   324  (4);  Furtwangler,  Dioskuren,    Roscher   I.

(2)  Albert,   op.   cit.   65.

-  345  -


there  (1).  But  there  wgis  no  reason  why  they  should  minister
either  to  the  reUgious  welfare  or  to  the  love  of  pleasure  of  the
people  of  Capua,  their  rebellious  subjects  said  haughty  rivals.
In  short,  Albert's  treatment  of  this  cult  at  Capua  must  be  classed
as  completely  erroneous.

HERCULES.

The  oldest  trace  of  the  presence  of  Hercules  is  found  upon
a  bronze  cinerary  urn  which  v/as  unearthed  at  the  village  of
S.  Ejrasmo  near  S.  Maria  di  Capua  (2).  This  is  a  Greek  work
of  superior  quality  belonging  to  the  fifth  or  the  end  of  the  sixth
century  B.  C. ;  although  it  was  probably  made  in  a  factory  of
Cumae,  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  a  knowledge  of  the  god
and  of  the  legends  in  which  he  was  the  hero  was  well  estab-
lished in  the  district  to  which  this  Vessel  found  its  way  (3).  It
contains  a  strip  of  decorative  figures  running  around  it,  and
these  include  among  other  animals  the  cattle  of  Geryon,  which
are  accompanied  by  Hercules  himself.  The  hero  is  armed  with
club,  bow,  and  lion's  skin,  and  looks  towzurd  the  figure  of  a
man  who  is  tied  to  the  limb  of  a  tree  by  wrists  and  ankles.  In
this  scene  Hercules  himself  is  not  to  be  regsurded  as  the  thief
of  the  cattle,  but  rather  as  having  them  already  in  his  posses-
sion and  warding  off  the  attack  of  some  foe  such  as  Cacus  or
Erys,   who   has   just  met  his   doom    (4).    Probably   some   little

(1)  The  cult  of  the  Voltumus  River,  if  it  had  really  been  introduced
into  Rome  from  this  region,  would  be  a  good  example  of  the  transfer  of  gods
alluded   to   in   the  text.

(2)  It  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  Protrayed  in  Mon.  Inst.  V.  PL  25 ;
Ann.  Inst.  XXIII  (1851)  add.  PI.  A.;  Walters  Cat.  of  the  Bronzes  in  the  British
Museum  80.   No.   560.

(3)  von  Duhn,  Monumenti  capuani  in  Ann.  Inst.  LI  (1879)  130;  Helbig.,
Sopra  alcuni  bronzi  trovati  a  Cuma  e  a  Capua  in  Ann.  Inst.  LII  (1880)  233;
Furtwangler,  Archaische  Lel^then  in  Arch.  Zeit.  XLI  (1883)  162;  Walters  in
Miinzer,  Cacus  der  Rinderdieb  122;  Smith,  Hera\les  and  Geryon  in  Jour.,
Hell.  Stud.  V  (1884)  179.

(4)  The  suspended  figure  was  identified  as  Cacus  by  Miner vini,  Vaso
di  hronzo  rinvenuto  in  S.  Maria  di  Capua  in  Ann.  Inst.  XXIII  (1851)  36  f . ;
who  is  followed  by  Raoul-Rochette,  Jour,  des  savants  1853,  473.  R.  Peter,
Hercules,  Roscher  1,  2275;  and  Walters  loc.  cit.  Wolters,  op.  cit.  123  thinks  of
Eryx.  Cp.  Wissowa,  Cacus,  P.-W.  111.  1169;  Winter.  The  Myth  of  Hercules
at  Rome  in  Univ.  of  Michigan  Studies  IV,  268;  Birch.  Arch.  Anzeiger  1855,
61  ;   Robert,    Hermes   XIX    (1884)   480  (1).

-   346    -


known  version  of  Hercules'  adventures,  which  Wcis  circulated
chiefly  in  Campania,  is  the  theme  of  the  decoration.

He  appesirs  upon  two  series  of  bronze  coins  with  Oscan
legend,  which  are  dated  in  the  third  century  B.  C.  The  prevail-
ing type  is  that  of  a  beardless,  heavy  faced  man  wearing  a
crown,  whose  identity  is  fixed  by  the  presence  of  a  tlub  (I).
Sometimes  upon  the  reverse  is  shown  Cerberus,  the  dog  of
Hades,  a  design  which  Raoul-Rochette  derived  from  the  Cer-
berum  necir  Cumae  (2).  Furthermore,  the  only  one  of  the  pagi
whose  nzune  has  been  preserved  was  called  Herculaneus.  It
contained  a  shrine  of  Jupiter,  as  stated  above,  but  its  location
is  unknown  (3).  Perhaps  in  it  was  also  situated  a  Ishrine  of
Hercules  himself,  the  magistri  of  which  are  mentioned  in  a
badly  mutilated  inscription  (4).  Daniele  speaks  of  a  supposed
temple  in  the  vicinity  of  Caserta  to  the  west  of  the  ancient
Capua,  the  remains  of  which  were  reported  as  still  standing
during  the  life  time  of  Cardinal  Santorio,  an  earlier  writer.  But
in  Daniele *s  day  there  wais  no  longer  any  trace  of  them  (5).

A  short  dedication  by  Sp.  Suetrius  to  Hercules  is  eissigned
to  an  esurly  date  because  of  the  absence  of  cognomen  and  the
use  of  Spurius  as  a  praenomen  (6).  Another  dedication  made
by  a  family  of  the  Nouelli  addresses  the  god  as  tutor,  sui  epithet
not  used  elsewhere  to  designate  him.  It  alludes,  however,  to
the  femiiliEir  significance  of  the  god  as  protector  of  house  and
home.  The  monument  consists  of  an  altar  with  sculptured
reliefs,  which  include  Hercules  and  the  lion,  his  club  and  his
quiver  (7).  More  important  is  an  inscription  belonging  to  the
age  of  Augustus,  which  records  that  a  certain  freedman  P.
Ateius  Regillus  had  thrice  during  his  lifetime  offered  tithes  to

(1)  A.  Sambon  402,  Nos.   1044.   1045;  Head  35

(2)  Raoul-Rochette,  Jour,  des  savants  1853,  694;  L.  Sambon,  Les  Monn.
de  la  presqu'ile  it.  171.  Cp.  A.  Sambon,  393.  The  face  upon  one  series,  the
obverse  of  which  shows  a  lion  holding  a  staff,  was  identified  as  that  of
Dionysus    by    Poole    p.    84.

(3)  See  p.  331.

I     ,       (4)  N.  5.   1893,   164.  About  half  has  been  lost.

(5)  Daniele,  Monete  antiche  di  Capua  89

(6)  C.  I.  L.  X,  3798;  Sp.  iSuetrius  Sp.  f.  H(ercoli)  d.  d.  A  fragment;
(C.  /.   L.    X,    3797)  seems  also   to  commemorate   this   god.

(7)  C.    /.    L.    X,    3799  =  D.    3443  =  Vaglieri     1091:    Herculi    lutori    domus

-  347   -


Hercules  (I).  The  same  custom,  which  formed  a  well  known
detail  of  his  cult  at  Rome,  has  left  its  traces  in  a  few  other
Italian  towns  including  Sora  and  Reate.  The  origin  of  the
practice  here  and  elsewhere  is  not  clear.  It  was  not  a  native
custom  belonging  to  the  old  Italic  religion  as  maintained  by
Preller ;  for  in  that  event  other  gods  rather  than  Hercules  would
have  been  the  recipients,  since  he  was  not  an  old  deity  of
Italy  (2).  Instead  it  was  derived  at  a  late  date  from  the  Roman
cult,  after  Roman  influence  became  paramount  in  Campania.
The  Romans  may  have  derived  their  idea  of  tithing  from  the
Greeks,  £md  in  some  way  Eissociated  it  with  this  god.  An  inde-
pendent borrowing  in  Campania  from  the  Greeks  is  practically
excluded  by  the  fact  that  the  Greek  Heracles  reurely  received
this  mark  of  honor.  The  inscriptions  which  mention  the  practice
outside  of  Rome  are  too  late  in  date  to  throw  cuiy  light  on  its
origin  (3).  Other  inscriptions  purporting  to  attest  the  worship
of  Hercules  at  Capua  and  cited  by  local  historians  are  spurious.
The  god  is  represented  along  with  his  club  and  a  cornucopia
by  terra-cotta  images  of  rather  rough  workmanship,  which
were  unearthed  at    the  neighboring  village  of  Curti  (4).

THE  CAMPANIAN  MAGISTRI.

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  consider  more  in  detail  the
religious  officials  called  magistri,  who  have  appeeired  in  a  con-
siderable number  of  the  inscriptions  already  cited.  The  exact
nature  of  the  office  filled  by  these  men  is  disputed,   but  they

Nouelliana.  Daniele  op.  ci'f.  92  gives  a  reproduction.  Cp.  Calza,  Domus,  Rug-
giero  II,  2059;  Ceseino,  Hercules,  Ruggiero  III,  713;  Peter,  Hercules,  Roscher
I.    2958.

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3956  =  D.  3413-Vaglieri  1084:  P.  Ateius  P.  I.  Regillus
fecit  sibi  et  P.  Ateio  P.  1.  Saluio  patron,  pomario;  is  ter  Herculi  decumam
fecit  etc.

(2)  Preller-Jordan  II,  294.  Cp.  Peter.  Roschen  I.  2937;  da  Marchi,
//  culto   privato   I,    295   (3).

(3)  A  discussion  of  tithing  and  a  summary  of  opinion  is  given  by-
Winter  op.  cit.  261  ;  Cesano,  Hercules,   Ruggiero  III,  697.

(4)  Berlin  Antiquarium,  Nos.  7323,  7324;  Winter,  Die  Typen  der  jig-
iirlichen  Terrakotten  II,  381,  No.  7;  Fernique,  Recentes  acquisitions  du  Musee
de  Capoue  in  Rev.  arch.  XXXIV  (1877)  124;  Furtwangler,  HerakJes  in  der
Kunst.  Roscher  I.  2159.

-  348  .


were  undeniably  connected  with  the  divisions  of  the  people
known  as  pagi.  These  according  to  ancient  Italian  usage  were
definite  portions  of  a  given  rural  territory  formed  for  adminis-
trative purposes  with  officers  who  possessed  a  certain  limited
authority;  like  all  other  organizations  that  developed  in  the
ancient  world,  they  were  essentially  religious  in  character  zuid
had  shrines  for  the  performance  of  their  religious  duties.  Fur-
thermore, they  were  sometimes  named  after  gods,  a  system  of
nomenclature  exemplified  by  the  pagus  Herculaneus  (1).

When  the  autonomous  government  of  Capua  was  dissolved
by  the  Romans  after  its  recapture  in  211  B.  C,  there  "was  no
longer  a  legally  constituted  local  authority  for  the  city  or  the
outlying  districts.  All  the  various  functions  of  government
p2issed  into  the  hands  of  the  Roman  people  to  be  administered
by  their  delegated  representative.  It  has  been  suspected,
however,  that  the  old,  essentially  religious  organizations  of  the
pagi  enlarged  somewhat  the  sphere  of  their  activity  to  meet  the
new  conditions,  and  thereby  preserved  for  the  country  some
measure  of  self  government  (2).  Corresponding  to  these  organ-
izations of  the  open  country  there  existed  within  the  walls  for
the  city  folk  various  collegia  grouped  around  the  principal  trades
and  professions,  one  neone  of  which  has  survived  to  the  present
day  (3).  Their  basis  too  was  a  religious  one.  Although  the
evidence  for  the  magistri  belongs  to  the  end  of  the  second  and
the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.  C. ,  there  is  no  sign  that
they  were  introduced  or  fostered  by  Romem.  influence  except
so  far  as  they  were  aided  by  the  Romans  who  settled  in  this
region  and  took  up  the  worship  of  the  gods  of  the  land  (4).
They  flourished  at  that  time  to  meet  local  needs,  probably
gradually  developing  in  importamce  from  the  close  of  the  Han-


(1)  Hazfeld,  Les  Italiens  residant  a  De'los  in  Bull.  corr.  hell.  XXXVI
(1912)  188;  Schulten,  De  conventibus  cioium  Romanorum  106;  and  Die  Land-
gemeinde  im  rom.  Reiche  in  Philologus  LIII,   (1894)   634   f.

(2)  Momnasen  in  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  366  and  I,  159;  Boak,  The  n  Magistri  n
of  Campania  and  Delos  in  Classical  Philology  XI  (1916)  25;  Kornemann,  De
civibus  Romanis  in  provindis  imperii  consisteniibus  50  f.  ;  Schulten,  De  con-
Ventibus   civium   Romanorum^   71    f . ;    and    Philologus   LIII    (1894)   634.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3773.

(4)  Albert,  Etude  sur  le  culte  de  Castor  et  Pollux  47.   See  p.   343  above.

-  349   -


nibalic  War,  and  they  retained  their  importance  till  the  arrival
of  the  Roman  colonists  (1).

The  magistri  or  boards  of  supervisors,  who  are  mentioned
in  the  pagi,  Eire  always  engaged  in  the  oversight  of  a  particular
shrine.  The  various  cults  which  they  had  in  charge  comprise
those  of  Diana,  Ceres,  Jupiter  Compagus,  Jupiter  Liber,  Juno
Gaura,  Venus  Jovia,  Spes  Fides  and  Fortuna,  Csistor  and  Pol-
lux, and  probably  Hercules  (2).  They  have  left  records  of
their  activity  for  the  period  between  112-111  and  71  B.  C.  Their
term  of  office  seems  to  have  been  limited  to  a  single  yeeir  (3).
Their  number  was  regularly  twelve;  in  one  case  thirteen  names
are  recorded,  but  this  oddity  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that
a  vacancy  arose  during  the  term  of  this  body  of  supervisors  euid
was  filled  by  another  appointment  (4).  The  holders  of  the
office  did  not  always  belong  to  the  same  social  condition;  out
of  a  total  of  eleven  references  to  the  magistri  five  exhibit  only
ingenui,  four  show  lihertini,  and  two  contain  officials  of  both
classes  (5).  In  any  case  they  were  doubtless  men  of  wealth,
whose  only  opportunity  for  holding  office  at  this  time  could  be
found  among  the  magistri  (6).  In  one  inscriptions  has  been  pre-
served the  neune  and  title  of  an  official  of  a  different  sort,  -  the
ingenuus  Cn.  Laetorius,  magister  of  the  pagus  Herculaneus,
\yho  had  the  oversight  over  the  expenditure  of  money  voted
by  his  district  for  the  improvement  of  a  shrine  within  its  juris-


{))  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  366;  Schulten,  De  conventihus  civium
Romanorum    639.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3772  f. ;  E.  E.  Vlll.  460.  473;  N.  S.  1893,  164.  A  list
of  magistri  is  found  in  Walzing,  Etude  historique  sur  les  corporations  profes-
sionnelles   IV,    224.

(3)  At  any  rate  the  composition  of  the  board  of  magistri  for  Ceres
changed  between    106  and    104  B.  C.   (C.      /.   L    .X,   3779.   3780).

(4)  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  367;  Boak,  op.  cit.  31.  The  thirteen
names  occur   in  No.   3779.

(5)  Ingenui  are  found  in  Nos.  3775.  3776  (£.  E.  VIII.  460)  3780.  3782.
3784;  Lihertini  occur  in  3772.  3779.  3785.  £.  £.  VIII,  473.  The  two  classes
appear  together  twice,  once  in  the  proportion  of  six  and  six  emd  once  in  the
proportion   of  three  and   nine.    (3778,  3783).

(6)  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.  X.  p.  367;  Boak,  op.  cit.  33;  Cp.  Hatzfeld.  op.  cit.
186.

-  350  -


diction.   The  sanctuary  was  that  of  a  local  Jupiter,  a  list  of
whose  supervisors  is  attached  (I).

It  is  maintained  by  Hatzfeld  that  each  of  the  vsu-ious
shrines  with  magistri  belonged  to  a  different  pagus  and  was
the  center  of  the  religious  activity  of  that  district.  In  every  case
the  pagus  formed  a  religious  association  at  whose  head  stood
the  board  of  magistri  composing  the  supreme  administrative
body  of  the  locality.  According  to  this  view  the  office  filled  by
Laetorius  was  a  subordinate  position  devoted  to  the  manage-
ment of  the  finances  (2).  But,  if  the  twelve  commissioners
who  were  in  office  at  the  seune  time  as  Laetorius  were  the  heads
of  a  religious  association  comprising  the  dwellers  of  the  pagus,
they  ought  to  be  called  either  magistri  of  the  pagus  or  prefer-
ably magistri  of  Hercules,  the  divinity  who  gave  his  name  to
it  and  presumably  was  recognized  as  its  chief  deity.  Instead
they  are  named  after  another  god,  who  certainly  had  a  shrine
but  probably  not  the  leading  one.  Again,  the  magister  of  the
pagus  was  an  ingenuus,  while  the  twelve  supervisors  were  of
a  lower  social  status.  Although  in  some  other  ceises  they  were
freemen  and  thus  of  the  seune  position  in  society  as  the  magister
pagiy  it  seems  improbable  to  suppose  thai  an  ingenuus  held  an
office  subordinate  to  the  libertini.  Boak  further  objects  that  it  is
impossible  to  regard  these  magistri  as  the  presidents  of  a  reli-
gious college,  since  they  are  specifically  called  a  collegium  and
assigned  posts  of  honor  in  the  theater.  Hatzfeld  himself,  how-
ever, admits  that  the  twelve  officers  formed  a  collegium  (3).

The  older  opinion  of  Mommsen.  which  in  its  general  lines
has  recently  been  defended  by  Boak,  seems  preferable.  Momm-
sen believed  that  there  were  a  considerable  number  of  districts
each  of  which  had  an  administrative  officer  such  as  Laetorius
of  the  pagus  Herculaneus,  while  the  magistri  of  the  various
shrines  occupied  a  subordinate  position  limited  to  the  oversight


(1)  C.    /.    L.    X,   3772  =  D.    6302.  Likewise    a    small     fragment    appears    to
contain  the  reading  p]ag(i)  magis[ter,    followed   by  the  word   magistri  to  head

the   list   of   officials  of  a  shrine.    Cp.    Boak,    op.    cit.  28  (2).

(2)  Hazfeld,  op.  cit.   186  f.

(3)  Boak  29  f.;  Hatzfeld  187.

-  351    -


of  these  sanctuaries  (I).  Schulten  accepted  this  opinion  about
the  relationship  existing  between  the  supervisors  of  the  shrines
and  a  higher  authority,  but  supposed  that  they  were  all  connect-
ed with  the  pagus  Herculaneus  and  that  the  city  of  Capua
formed  a  psirt  of  it  (2).

Yet,  although  the  colleges  of  magistri  occupied  a  subor-
dinate position,  it  was  not  an  insignificant  one.  They  had
cheurge  of  all  the  property  of  their  deity,  suid  were  expected  to
repair  and  improve  it  (3).  In  some  cases,  as  in  the  erection  of
an  altar,  the  construction  of  a  chapel,  and  the  purcheise  of
images,  their  improvements  were  distinctly  connected  with  the
cult  which  they  served.  In  other  cases  such  as  the  building  of  a
tank  or  walls  their  connection  with  any  form  of  religion  is  less
mainifest;  yet  this  work  was  probably  carried  through  on  temple
property,  and  the  walls  were  perhaps  designed  to  enclose  the
sacred  precinct.  They  also  disbursed  money  from  the  temple
tresisury.  On  one  occasion  they  constructed  seats  in  the  theatre,
but  this  action  was  in  line  with  their  relation  to  public  amuse-
ment (4).  In  fact,  unless  they  were  definitely  instructed  by
their  pagus  to  perform  some  service  for  their  shrine  which
consumed  all  their  stipulated  contribution,  they  were  expected
to  provide  gcimes  for  the  amusement  of  their  constitpents  (5).
In  return  for  their  time  and  money  they  received  recognition  to

{])  Mommsen,  C.  /,  L.  X,  p.  366  f. ;  Boak  25  f.  There  is  no  evidence
for  the  existence  of  more  than  one  magister  pagi  as  distinguished  from  the
twelve  magistri  fanorum  regulaurly  found.  Cp.  Mommsen  p.  367  and  the  lex
Coloniae  Genetiuae,  E.  E.  II,  p.  115;  Schulten,  Philologus  LllI  (1894)  641;
Waltzing,  Etude  sur  les  corps  prof.   I,  42.

(2)  Schulten,  De  conventibus  73  f.  He  thinks  that  the  magistri  men-
tioned in  Nos,  3778,  3779,  3782  are  the  collegium  called  elsewhere  that  of
Jupiter   Compagus.

(3)  Boak.  Class.  Phil.  XI  (1916)  30;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  367.

(4)  The  list  of  building  opverations  and  other  improvements  include
murus  (3775,  3776  =  3777  =  £.  £.  VIII,  460),  murus  et  pluteus  (3778,  3779,  3780).

murus(?)  et  pilae  IIII  (3774),  murus  calcidicum  porticus  signa  marmorea  (3781),
porticus  (3772),  ara  (3785),  lacus  (£.  E.  VIII,  473),  sucrunda  {sic)  porticusque
{N   S.    1893    164).

(5)  An  account  of  other  officers,  who  exhibited  similar  amusements,
is  given  by  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  I,  p.  159;  Cp.  Marquardt,  Rom.  Staatsverwal-
tung  I,  180,  These  magistri  in  their  functions  and  prerogatives  are  compared
ty   Mourlot    {L'histoire    de    V augustalite    25)    to   the    magistri    uicorum.

-   352   -


the  extent  of  having  privileged  seats  in  the  theater,  and  were
doubtless  deemed  worthy  of  other  marks  of  honor.  Nowhere
else  indeed  were  places  of  honor  at  the  theater  given  td  simple
magistri,  nor  did  those  of  Capua  enjoy  this  distinction  sifter  the
enactment  of  the  lex  lulia  (1).

The  fact  that  the  building  of  walls  is  mentioned  in  so
meoiy  records  seems  significant.  Thus  the  magistri  of  most  of
the  ishrines  shared  in  that  activity ;  those  of  Ceres  were  engaged
in  the  task  during  the  years  106  and  104  B.  C.  and  in  the  former
year  those  of  Ccistor  and  Pollux  £is  well.  Hatzfeld  maintains
that  the  magistri  of  both  cults,  belonging  to  separate  pagi,  were
engaged  in  the  construction  of  a  wall  which  was  common  pro-
perty gold  therefore  indicative  of  a  common  religious  center  (2).
But  according  to  his  theory  each  district  represented  one  distinct
religious  organization  devoted  in  the  one  c£ise  to  the  worship
of  Ceres  and  in  the  other  to  the  cult  of  the  Dioscuri.  It  seems,
therefore,  unrezisonable  to  suppose  that  there  was  a  consolida-
tion of  the  two  shrines  on  the  border  between  the  two  pagi,
especially  since  it  is  known  that  other  officials  performed  else-
where a  similctr  work.  All  these  shrines  where  a  wall  is  men-
tioned were  plainly  not  located  in  the  same  spot.

Mommsen  on  the  contrary  believed  that  the  magistri  of
Ceres,  Venus  louia  Diana,  Spes,  and  the  Dioscuri  all  belonged
to  one  and  the  same  pagus  located  near  Mt.  Tifata  and  distin-
guished chiefly  by  the  worship  of  Diana.  (3).  He  too  made  use
of  the  evidence  about  the  walls  to  establish  this  conclusion,
maintaining  that  an  enclosing  wall  to  surround  Diana's  sacred
precinct  is  meant;  in  peurticular  he  pointed  to  the  circumstance
that  the  height  of  walls  given  in  two  cases  is  approximately
the  same,  -  twenty  -  one  and  twenty  -  two  feet  (4).  Although
it  seems  a  little  strange  that  the  overseers  of  Ceres  of  Spes  or
Venus  louia  should  expend  their  funds  for  the  advantage  of
another  and  rivsJ  shrine,  this  objection  may  be  overcome  by
recedling  that  the  expenditure  was  made  in  consequence  of  a

(1)  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.  I,  p.   159b.

(2)  Hatzfeld.   Ball   corr.   hdl   XXXVI   (1912)   186.   Cp.    Boak  op.  cit.   32.

(3)  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.   I.  p.    159;  X.  p.  367.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3779.  3780.  They  bear  the  dates  respectively  of    108  and
106  B.  C.

.  353  -

23


scitum  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  community,  who  might  conceiv-
ably wish  their  chief  shrine  to  prosper  at  the  expense  of  the
more  insignificant.  But  an  examination  of  the  evidence  cited  for
the  wall  shows  that  the  two  inscriptions  which  name  a  similar
altitude  both  record  the  work  of  the  magistri  of  Ceres,  who
would  naturally  be  occupied  with  the  same  teisk  during  the
period  of  two  or  three  years  for  which  there  is  evidence,  partic-
ularly if  this  was  done  for  the  improvement  of  their  own  shrine.
Perhaps  some  of  the  other  magistri,  as  for  instztnce  those  of
Venus  louia  devoted  funds  to  the  construction  of  the  same
piece  of  work,  but  this  is  not  an  essential  supposition  (I).  Nor
does  the  provenience  of  the  inscriptions  indicate  that  they  orig-
inated in  the  district  of  Diamia's  temple.  In  many  cases  their
origin  is  unknown.  One,  it  is  true,  was  found  in  that  vicinity,
but  it  is  concerned  with  the  cult  of  Diana,  and  on  interned  evi-
dence alone  would  be  assigned  to  that  spot.  On  the  other  hsmd,
the  inscription  commemorating  the  Dioscuri  is  said  to  have  been
found  around  S.  Leucio  and  therefore  near  the  site  of  the  city
itself  (2).

As  the  members  of  the  free  population  were  chosen  for
the  office  of  magister,  so  the  slaves  sometimes  united  under  the
name  of  ministri  in  colleges,  the  number  of  whose  members
here  also  was  regularly  twelve.  Apparently  they  were  required
to  make  some  payment  or  perform  some  service,  but  no  definite
information  on  this  point  is  available.  In  one  case  with  the  date
of  98  B.  C.  they  have  the  oversight  of  the  Lares  and  attend  to
the  construction  of  something  for  the  cult;  in  smother  instance,
belonging  to  the  year  26  B.  C,  there  is  no  clue  to  the  name  of
the  shrine  they  serve  nor  to  their  mode  of  serving  it  (3).  The

(1)  Mommsen  too  admits  this  view  as  possible  in  another  place.
(C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  367).  «  Alios  quoque  pagos  in  opimo  hoc  territorio  fuisse  ve-
risimile  est,  fierique  potest,  ut  magistrorum  fanorum  illorum  quos  supra  in
Tifatis  recensuimus  eJii  ad   alios  pagos   pyertinuerint  ».    The   height   of   the   wall

suggests  that  it  was  a  retaining  wall  of  some  sort  rather  than  a  mere  enclo-
sure for  the   temenos.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3781.  3778.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3789  =  D.  3609  =  VaglieTi  2100:  Hisce  ministris  Laribus
faciendum  coe(Tanmt.    (The  names  of  twelve  slaves  appear  here).   Haec  pon-

dera  et  pauimentum  faciendum  et C.  /.   L.   X,   3790.   Cp.    Mourlot  op.    cit.

25.   Wissowa   171  (10);  Boak.   op.   cit.  35.

.  354  -


ministri  who  appear  under   the   designation  candidati  will   be
treated  later  (I).

MINOR  DIVINITIES.

Apollo  and  Athena  are  both  represented  upon  the  third
century  Oscan  coinage  in  bronze;  the  former  wears  now  an
Athenian  and  now  a  Corinthian  helmet,  Apollo  bears  a  wreath
of  laurel  (2).  While  this  usage  indicates  that  the  two  deities
were  not  unknown  here,  it  was  due  more  to  influence  from
without,  which  fixed  the  type  of  the  coins,  than  to  the  presence
of  a  real  cult  with  its  shrine.  In  fact  outside  of  the  Greek  settle-
ments and  the  costst  towns  especially  subject  to  their  influence
these  gods  did  not  become  popular  in  Campainia.  Pratilli  without
warremt  as  usual  claimed  a  temple  for  Athena  (3).  A  sculptur-
ed relief  upon  which  she  appears  ^ill  be  treated  in  another
place  (4).

Corcia,  following  the  lead  of  earlier  writers,  tried  to  estab-
lish the  presence  of  an  Apollo  temple  by  explaining  the  name
of  the  village  of  Casapulla  as  derived  from  that  of  the  god,  and
affirmed  that  much  of  the  material  used  in  the  church  of  S.  El-
pidio,  which  is  located  there,  came  from  this  shrine  (5).  As
he  had  a  theory  that  the  villages  around  Capua  were  named
in  antiquity  from  the  gods,  he  was  ready  to  see  the  name  of
some  divinity  concealed  in  almost  all  the  modern  nomenclature,
as  for  example  that  of  the  Muses  in  Musicile  (6).  C.  Robert
states  that  an  Apollo  temple  stood  in  Capua,  which  was  the
work  of  Daedalus,  but  this  is  an  error  (7).  The  supposed
allusion  to  the  shrine  occurs  in  a  passage  of  Silius  Italicus.  But
here  it  is  stated  clearly  that  Virrius,  the  Capuan  leader  fighting
for  the  Carthaginians,  was  addressing  his  men  in  reference  to

(1)  See  pp.  324,  357;  C.  /.  L.  X.  8217.

(2)  A.  Sambon  396  f . ;  Nos.  1024.  1033.  1047.  1041.  1042.  Head  34-35.

(3)  Pratilli  D^lla  Via  Appia  290.

(4)  See   p.    365.

(5)  Corcia,  Storia  delle  due  Sicilia  II,  70-71.

(6)  Corcia  II.  26.

(7)  C.  Robert.  Daidalos,  P.W.  IV,  2005,  « Einen  von  ihm  in  Cumae
erbauten  Apollotempel  erwahnt  Verg.  -<4en.  VI,  14,  einen  gleichen  in  Capua
Sil.    Ital.   XII.    102 ».

•  355  .


Cumae,  whose  wall  they  saw  before  them,  and  his  words  allude
to  the  Apollo  temple  of  that  town.  In  fact  this  account  is  a  close
imitation  of  Vergil's  and  refers  to  the  same  shrine  (1).

Mourlot  has  declzured  that  the  celebrated  actor  of  panto-
mimes L.  Aurelius  Py lades,  who  is  mentioned  at  Puteoli  as  a
sacerdos  synodi,  held  the  position  of  archiereus  synodi  at  Prae-
neste  and  also  served  as  a  priest  of  Apollo  at  Capua  (2).  But
this  statement  is  quite  inaccurate,  due  to  the  confusion  of
Pylades  with  two  other  prominent  actors,  -  M.  Aurelius  Agilius,
who  is  cited  at  Praeneste  as  a  holder  of  the  office  of  archiereus
and  M.  Aurelius  Apolaustus,  sometimes  called  Memphis,  who
is  called  a  priest  of  Apollo  in  inscriptions  coming  from  Litemum
and  Tibur.  The  latter  was  an  Augustalis  with  special  distinction
at  Capua,  but  the  priesthood  of  Apollo  in  both  instcuices  was
doubtless  that  of  the  actor's  league  with  headqueirters  at
Rome  (3).  There  is  therefore  no  real  evidence  for  priest  0r
temple  of  Apollo  at  Capua.

Not  much  evidence  is  at  hand  for  the  cult  of  Mercury.
He  does  not  appeetr  upon  any  of  the  autonomous  money  of  the
city  but  only  upon  certain  Romano-Campanian  issues.  An
inscription  the  reading  of  which  is  doubtful  was  supplemented
tentatively  by  Mommsen  as  an  allusion  to  this  god,  but  the
reading  is  quite  uncertain  (4).  A  resident  of  Capua  M.  Cam-
panius  Marcellus,  who  held  the  position  of  Imperial  represen-
tative in  the  East,  is  described  as  a  procurator  ad  Mercurium
Alexandr  (inum),  but  the  nature  of  the  post  is  unknown  (5).
Pratilli  does  not  fail  in  this  case  to  find  the  remains  of  a  temple,

(1)  Sil.  XII,  83  f.  The  passage  is  oorrecdy  interpareted  by  Heyne
Virgil,    II  excursus    II,    p.    789.

(2)  Mourlot,  Essai  sur  I'hist.  de  I'Augusialiti  62,  «  Un  fameux  pan-
tomine  de  I'epoque  de  Septime-Severe,  rafFianchi  imperiale  Pylade,  est  non
soulement  servir  Augustalis  mais  archiereus  synodi  a  Praeneste,  sacerdos  sy-
nodi a  Puteoli  (N.  5.    1888.  237).  sacerdos  Apollinis  a  Capua  (C.  /.  L.  X.  3716).

(3)  C.  /.  L.  XIV,  2977=D.  5194;  C.  /.  L.  XIV,  4254  =  D.  5191 ;  C.  I.  L.
X,  3716  =  D.  5189;  £.  £.  VIII.  369  =  D.  5186.  See  Friedlander,  Darstellungen
aus  der  Sittengeschichte  Roms  (8)  II,  634  f.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3822:  Ser.  3uettius  Ser.  I.  Cimber  u.  8.  m.  1.  M(er-
curio?)   8(acrum).    Cp.    X.    3773.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3847  =  D.  1398  =  Vaglieri  1553.  Cp.  Steuding,  Mercunus,
Roscher  II.  2815.

'.  356  --


which  he  claims  existed  in  the  village  of  S.  Erasmo.  But  the
inscription  which  he  .cities  as  a  proof  of  this  shrine  is  spu-
rious (1).

Neptune  with  the  character  of  the  Greek  Poseidon  is  men-
tioned upon  a  cippus  which  records  that  a  vow  made  in  the
waters  of  Sicily  has  been  paid  (2).  Pratilli  wished  to  locate
a  temple  in  a  spot  outside  the  city  in  the  direction  of  the  sea,
which  he  says  was  called  la  fossa  di  Nettuno  in  a  document  of
the  year  1269,  belonging  to  the  cloister  church  S.  Giovanni
delle  Monache  (3).  But  the  dedication  just  cited  probably  be-
longed to  some  traveler  grateful  for  an  escape  from  shipwreck,
and  was  not  set  up  in  a  temple  of  this  god.  It  is  doubtful  wheth-
er he  had  a  shrine  in  the  interior  of  Campania.

In  201  enumeration  of  portents  made  by  Cicero,  the  date  of
which  is  uncertain,  the  image  of  Victoria  at  Capua  is  said  to
have  been  found  covered  with  perspiration  like  Apollo's  statue
at  Cumae  (4).  This  image  may  have  been  placed  in  the  temple
of  another  god  especially  in  that  of  Jupiter  with  whom  the  god-
dess was  intimately  associated  at  Rome.  Traces  of  such  an
association  aie  also  found  at  Capua,  for  certain  coins  which
exhibit  him  upon  the  obverse  show  her  upon  the  reverse  in  the
act  of  crowning  a  trophy  (5).  It  is  not  improbable,  however,
that  she  had  a  temple  of  her  own.  Although  little  is  known  of
her  cult  in  Campauiia,  she  probably  represents  a  native  deity
who  has  been  considerably  modified  ais  a  result  of  assimilation
to  the  Greek  Nice  (6).

Silvanus  is  honored  in  a  dedication  discovered  near  S.  An-
gelo  in  Formis.  It  was  made  by  Vrsulus,  a  steward  attached
to  the  temple  of  Diana,  and  by  eight  slaves  called  candidati,

(1)  Pratilli.  Delia  Via  Appia  289;  C.  /.  L.  X.  456*  Cp.  Raoul-Rochette,
Jour,   des  savants    1853,  288.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3813:  Neptuno  sacrum....  uotum  in  Siculo  fretu  »us-
ceptum  soluit.

(3)  Pratilli  289.

(4)  Cic.  div.  I.  98.  See  p.  52.

(5)  Wissowa  139;  Graillot,  Victoria,  D.-S.  V,  843,  833;  Head  35;  A.
Samon  400,  No.  1037.  She  is  also  associated  on  coins  with  Athena.  Cp.
No.   1033.

(6)  Cp.  Graillot,  D.-S.  V,  836.

-  357  -


whose  relation  to  the  cuU  of  the  god  is  unknown.  The  cause
of  their  action  was  a  dream  or  a  sinister  omen.  Here  contraury  to
the  usual  custom  in  expressing  the  neime  of  this  deity  it  is  not
preceded  by  the  word  deus  (1).  The  place  of  the  dedication,
a  locality  which  in  early  times  at  least  was  thickly  wooded,
accords  with  the  original  chciracter  of  this  deity  who  was  vene-
rated particulau-ly  in  the  forests.  Moreover,  the  dedicators  were
of  the  same  class  socially  as  a  large  number  of  people  who  have
left  a  record  of  their  interest  in  him  (2).  The  god  was  not
worshipped  in  a  temple,  but  as  elsewhere  received  the  sacrifices
destined  for  him  upon  altars.

In  the  same  region  of  Mt.  Tifata  were  discovered  frag-
ments of  a  roof -tile  which  preserve  the  name  of  the  Mefites.
An  old  Italian  deity  Mefitis  -was  worshipped  elsewhere  in  the
southern  part  of  the  peninsula  especially  at  Potentia;  she  was
the  embodiment  of  the  unwholesome  vapor  that  issued  from
the  earth  in  vEurious  places.  Here  the  plural  evidently  alludes
to  several  goddesses  who  iwere  conceived  as  a  kind  of
nymph  (3).

A  local  hero  Telephus  is  probably  represented  on  the  third
century  Oscan  coins.  Upon  the  obverse  of  this  money  is  por-
trayed a  head  attired  in  the  Phrygian  style;  upon  the  reverse
is  an  infsuit  suckled  by  a  doe,  -  a  subject  based  upon  a  legend
connected  with  the  life  of  Telephus  (4).  Avellino  believed  that
the  white  doe  trained  by  the  hero  Capys,  which  Silius  describes,
is  a  reminiscence  of  this  myth  (5).  Telephus,  the  son  of  Her-
cules and  a  king  of  Mysia,  wais  the  father  of  the  Etruscem
heroes  Tyrrhenus  and  Tarchon,  £ind  therefore  was  held  in
esteem  by  that  people.  The  reign  of  this  hero  in  Italia  is  re-

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  8217  =  Vaglieri  1195:  Siluano  sacr.  Vrsulus  uil(icus)
Dianae  et  candidati  (followed  by  eight  names)  ex  uiso<  Kiibler,  Candidatus,
Ruggiero  II  79;  Vaglieri,  Deus,  Ruggiero  II.    1718,    1721.

(2)  R.  Peter,  Silvanus,  Roscher  IV,  862,  863 ;  von  Domaszewsky,  SiU
vanus  auf  lateinischen  Inschriften  in  Abhandl.  zur  rom.  Religion  58  i.=Phi'
lohgus  LXI  (1902)  1  f.;  Hild,  Silvanus,  D.-S.   IV,   1343.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3811  and  addenda  part.  2,  p.  976;  Mefitu  sacra.  Cp.
Peter,  Mefitis,   Roscher,  II,  2520;  Minervini,  Atti   Terra  di  Lavoro   1883  65.

(4)  A.  Sambon  403,  No.  1046;  Poole  83,  No.  14;  Minervini,  Ann.  Inst
XXIII  (1851)  40.

(5)  Avellino.  Bull  Nap.  I  (1845)  12.  Cp.  Novi,  Iscrizioni  etc.  14;  Raoul-
Rochette,  Jour,  des  savants  1853,  687-88.

-  358   -


f erred  to  by  the  Byzantine  historian  Cedrenus  (1).  It  has  been
conjectured  that  the  legend  about  him  was  introduced  into
Campcinia  by  the  early  Greek  settlers  and  sdFterward  from  this
source  reached  Etruria  (2).  But  its  presence  here  is  more
likely  a  later  development  due  to  the  Etruscan  domination  in
Ceimpania,  a  fact  to  which  it  itself  bears  witness  (3).

The  head  on  the  obverse  has  been  considered  sometimes
as  that  of  a  male  and  sometimes  as  that  of  a  female,  and  hence
has  been  vEiriously  explained.  Minervini  recognized  the  hero's
mother  Auge;  Head,  influenced  by  the  likeness  of  this  figure
to  that  upon  the  Romano-Campanian  coins  of  this  period,  con-
siders that  it  is  intended  to  represent  the  personification  Roma,
who  beccime  in  fact  associated  with  Telephus  in  myth  and  was
regarded  as  his  daughter  (4).  Most  numismatists,  however
have  identified  the  head  as  that  of  Telephus  himself  (5).

There  Weis  also  a  legend  presumably  of  later  origin,  that
the  city  was  founded  by  an  eponymous  hero  Capys,  who  natu-
rally claimed  the  honors  due  to  one  in  his  position.  At  the
time  of  Julius  Caesar,  when  certain  Roman  colonists  lured  by
the  discovery  of  antiquities  had  turned  circheologists,  an  ancient
grave,  which  people  said  belonged  to  Capys,  yielded  a  bronze
tablet  inscribed  in  Greek  letters  which  purported  to  contain
words  referring  to  him  (6).  As  Capys  was  held  to  be  a  relative
of  Aeneas  the  presence  of  Aeneas  legends  is  indicated  for
this  territory  (7).

(1)  Cedrenus  in  Corpus  scripiorum  historiae  Byzantinae  I,  245.

(2)  Klausen,  'Aenas  und  die  Penaten  II,  1222;  TKramer,  Pergamoa
394    (2);   Gruppe  629(4).

(3)  Pais,  Storia  critica  di  Roma  I,  234,

(4)  Minervini.  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  VII  (1859)  170;  Head  35.  Cp.  RicKter.
Roma,    Roscher    IV.    150;   Plut.    Rom.    2.

(5)  Avellino  Bull.  Nap.  I  (1845)  II;  Cavedoni.  Bull.  Nap.  I  (1845)  72
and  Bull.  Inst.    1853.    124;   A.   Sambon  392;   Garrucci  88.   No.   31.

(6)  Suet,  lul  81  :  Paucos  ante  menses,  cum  in  colonia  CapuA  deduct!
lege  lulia  coloni  ad  exstruendas  uillas  uetustissima  sepulchra  disicerent  idque
eo  studiosius  facorent.  quod  aliquantum  uascolorum  operis  emtiqui  scrutantes
reperiebant,  tabula  aenea  in  monimento,  in  quo  dicebatur  Capys  conditor
Capuae  sepultus,  inuenta  est  conscripta  litteris  uerbisque  Graecis  hac  sententia
etc.   Pais.  Stor.   crit.   I.   234    (2);    Beloch   298.

(7)  Serv.  i4en.  X.  145  =  Caeliu8  Antipater  Fr.  52  (Peter);  Worner,
Aineias,  Roscher  I.  174;  De  Sanctis.  Storia  dei  Romani  I.  252;  Drexler.  Kapis
3).  P.-W.  II.  957.

-  359  -


Another  coin  of  the  s2ane  period  bears  the  likeness  of  a
young  Faun  or  the  god  Pan,  who  is  portrayed  with  a  shepherd's
crook  upon  his  shoulder.  A.  Samhon  sugests  that  he  -was  a
local  divinity  of  Mt.  Tifata  (1).  Like  the  Samus  and  the
Sebethus  in  other  parts  of  Campania,  the  Volturnus  here  weis
considered  as  the  abode  of  a  river  god,  who  received  his  due
honors  (2).  The  only  direct  reference  to  any  sacred  obser-
vances still  extant  occurs  in  the  fourth  tentury  A.  D.  Campa-
nian  calendar  treated  in  the  first  chapter  (3);  but  while  the
place  retained  its  sacred  character,  the  old  ceremonies  connected
with  it  had  doubtless  long  since  cecised  or  at  least  had  lost
their  earlier  significeuice.  As  stated  in  the  first  chapter  the
RomEoi  cult  of  Volturnus  can  not  be  regeurded  as  an  importation
from  this  source  (4).

To  Nemesis  with  associated  divinities  (oovvdotoi  Osoiatv)
a  certain  Arrian  erected  an  altar  according  to  the  text  of  two
elegiac  lines  in  Greek;  below  a  second  record  in  Latin  verses
shows  that  the  companion  goddesses  to  whom  reference  is
made  in  the  Greek  are  Justitia  and  the  Fata  (5).  Although
Ihm  included  this  inscription  zunong  his  Denkjndler  for  the  study
of  the  Celtic  Matres,  he  rightly  affirms  that  the  Fata  mentioned
here  have  no  relation  with  them  (6).  Pratilli  claimed  that
these  divinities  had  a  temple,  and  the  same  assumption  is  made
by  Conway,  who  cities  them  as  an  example  for  the  housing  of
several  deities  together  at  Capua  (7).    But    the    inscription    is


(1)  Gaxrucci  89;  A.  Sambon  402,  No.    1043  Cp.  393.

(2)  Preller-Jordan  II   142;  Pais  of>.  cit.  I.  234  (1).

(3)  The  inscription  cited  by  earlier,  uncritical  writers  is  now  considered
spurious.   C.  /.  L.   X,  460*;  Corcia,  Storia  delle  due  Sicilie  II,  90.

(4)  See  p.   42.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3812  =  D.  3737=Vaglieri  1168;

AsaTioivig  N£|ieaet  xal  auvvotoiat  Beoraiv
'Apptavo^  PcDjiov  T<5v8£  xaGsiSpuaaxo.
lustitiae    Nemesi   Fatis   quam   uouerat  aram

numina    ,sancta     colens,     Cammarius    poswit.     Cp.     Otto,     Fatum,
P.-W.   VI.   2050.

(6)  Ihm,  Die  Mutter  oder  Maironen\ultus  und  seine  Denkmaler  in
]ahrhUcher  des  Vereins  von  Alterthunxsj .  im  Rheinlande  LXXXI  (1886)  100,
177.

(7)  Pratilli,    Delia    Via   Appia   291  ;    Conway,    The  HdUc  Dialects    I,    109.

-  360  -


probably  only  an  example  of  a  sporadic  dedication,  and  does
not  mzike  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  there  was  a  temple  dedi-
cated to  the  Fates  with  Justitia  and  Nemesis.  A  mutilated  in-
scription, the  text  of  which  is  uncertain,  begins  with  a  dedica-
tion to  a  Deus  Scholeu*  (ius  ?)  about  whom  nothing  is  known.
Mommsen  at  first  associated  him  with  the  Mithras  worship,
but  rightly  gave  up  this  view  as  dependent  on  an  incorrect
reading  (I).  A  remarkable  epitaph  marking  the  tomb  of  C.  Lae-
torius  Rufus  has  substituted  Pluto  for  the  Dii  Manes,  a  substi-
tution which  according  to  Mommsen  is  unique  (2).  The  Janus  or
two  faced  Hermes  type  which  is  found  upon  coins  weis  a  com-
mon design  among  the  Greek  cities  in  Sicily  and  elsewhere,
but  at  Capua  is  more  likely  the  result  of  Roman  influence.  In
any  case  it  does  not  indicate  a  cult  of  Janus  (3).

ROMAN  CULTS.

There  is  a  singular  lack  of  evidence  for  the  official  priests
of  the  Roman  colony.  The  name  of  no  pontiff  is  known  and
that  of  only  one  augur  P.  Aelius  Philologus  has  been  preserved.
This  mem  was  a  personage  of  local  importance  and  served  as
decurion  (4).  The  number  of  augurs  and  pontiffs  holding
office  here  is  unknown,  but  it  W2is  perhaps  the  same  as  that
proposed  for  the  colony  which  the  tribune  Q.  Seruilius  Rullus
tried  unsuccessfully  to  establish  in  63  B.  C.  In  the  bill  brought
forward  at  that  time  six  pontiffs  and  ten  augurs  were  includ-
ed (5).  Public  officials  devoted  to  individual  deities  were  also

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3793  =  Vaglieri  1050.  Steuding,  Deus  Scholarius  (?)  Ro-
scher   I.   998.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3815  =  D.  SOOUVaglieri  2358:  Plutoni  sacrum.  C.  Lae-
tori  Rufi  h(ic)  s(ita)  8(unt).  Tulli  et  mater  feceru(nt).  C.  Laetori  C.   f.  Rufi.

(3)  Head  34;  A.  Sambon  395  f . ;  Roscher,  lanus,  Roscher  II,  51.  Cp.
Friedenburg,  Die  Miinze  in  der  KuUurgeschichie  70.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X  3904  =  Vaglieri  2078  =  D.  6311:  P.  Aelio  P.  fil.  Philologo
aug(uri),  decurioni  Capuae,  ornato  sententia  Iluirale  Aelia  Aphrodisia  mater
et  sibi  fecit.  Vaglier'  supplements  the  abbreviation  aug.  to  read  Augustalis
but  a  decurion  would  scarcely  have  held  that  office.

Cp.  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  369a.

(5)  Cic.  leg.  agr.  II,  96:  Hue  isti  X  viri  cum  13  )  colonorum  ex  lege
RuUi    deduxerint,    C    decuriones,    X    augures,    VI    pontifices    constituerint,    quos

-  361    -


found  here,  as  for  example  the  priestess  devoted  to  the  Numen
of  the  city  (1).

The  estabHshment  cf  the  Roman  colony  did  not  put  an
end  at  once  to  the  activity  of  the  magislri  who  had  the  oversight
of  shrines  in  the  different  pagi  (2).  Yet  it  seems  to  have
affected  that  institution  considerably  in  the  course  of  time.  As
these  boards  declined  in  importance,  and  the  new  offices  cre-
ated by  the  establishment  of  the  colony  of>ened  up  fresh  fields
for  the  exercise  of  eunbition  sunong  those  who  wished  to
display  their  talents  for  administration,  it  is  probable  that  posi-
tions in  the  service  of  the  pagus  were  no  longer  attractive  and
were  kept  filled  with  difficulty.  Thus  an  inscription  dated  15
A.  D.,  which  refers  to  magistri  in  the  service  of  Jupiter  Liber
or  Liber  (t£is)  contains  only  six  names,  and  be£u-s  witness  to  a
decline  in  this  department  of  civic  activity  (3).  At  this  time
the  officials  were  still  expected  to  provide  money  for  the  cult
or  for  the  amusement  of  their  fellow  citizens  as  in  the  old  days.
Another  inscription,  which  contains  six  names  and  alludes  to
the  dedication  of  a  shrine,  doubtless  records  the  work  of  magistri,
but  this  fact  is  not  explicitly  stated  (4).

THE  CAPITOLINE  TRIAD.

The  existence  of  a  Capitol  and  consequently  the  worship
of  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus,  Juno  and  Minerva  are  unusually
well  authenticated  at  Capua.  In  his  account  of  the  plains  of
Tiberius  for  taking  a  definite  leave  of  Rome  £ind  withdrawing
into  seclusion,  Tacitus  says  that  the  Emperor  alleged  as  a  resison
for  his  depau-ture  his  intention  to  dedicate  two  temples  in  Cam-
pania, one  of  which  in  honor  of  Jupiter  was  situated  at  Capua

illorum  animos,   quos  impetus,   quam   ferociam   fore  putatis?   Cp.   the  lex  Colo-
niae  Genituae   (C.   /.   L.    11,   supp.    5439   c,   67)  which  calls   for   a  minimum   of
three  ix)ntifFs  and  three  augurs  for  the  exercise  of  cooptatio.
(1)  See  p.   369.
(2)  The    term    pagus    itself    does    not    appear    in    Italy    after    the    passage
of  the  lex  lulia  municipalis   (45  B.   C).   Marquardt,   Rom.  Staatsverw.   I    (2),   6.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3786  =  Vaglieri  2103:  Druso  Caesare  C  Norb.  cos.  loui
Liber   (six  names  of  magistri)  mag.  d.  ».   p.   Mommsen,   C.   /.   L.    X,   p.  367b.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3787.

-  362  -


(26  A.D.)  (1).  Suetonius,  evidently  following  the  same  source,
refers  to  the  same  two  sacred  edifices  but  calls  the  one  at  Capua
a  Capitolium  (2).  The  latter  in  giving  a  list  of  ominous  occur-
rences during  Caligula's  reign  also  states  that  the  Capitolium
of  Capua  was  struck  by  lightning  (3).  It  was  probably  at  once
repaired  or  rebuilt,  if  totally  destroyed,  but  references  in  works
written  at  a  later  date  are  not  wholly  conclusive.  When  Silius
Italicus  was  giving  an  account  of  Hannibal's  reception  into  the
city,  he  represented  the  Carthaginian  leader  £is  noting  its  chief
points  ot  interest,  among  which  was  the  lofty  Capitol  (4).
Here  the  writer  probably  had  in  mind  a  temple  visible  in  his
own  day,  which  he  arbitrarily  placed  in  the  distant  past.  But
he  may  not  have  spoken  of  any  building  that  actually  existed,
and  may  simply  have  assigned  a  Capitolium  to  Capua  to  cor-
respond to  the  one  in  Rome.  Likewise  a  peissage  in  the  late
Acta  Sanctorum  assumes  that  the  temple  was  in  use  during
the  time  of  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  under  Diocletian,
and  asserts  that  it  was  again  destroyed  by  a  bolt  of  lightning  (5).
There  is  no  improbability  in  the  continued  use  of  the  Capitol
at  a  late  date,  but  the  Acta  by  themselves  furnish  no  trust-
worthy evidence  for  such  an  assumption.  The  remark  about
the  lightning  seems  in  fact  to  be  a  direct  borrowing  from  Sue-
tonius and  the  assertion  about  the  end  of  the  persecution  is
false  (6).

(1)  Tac.  ann.  IV,  57:  Inter  quae  diu  meditato  prolatoque  saepius  con-
silio  temdem  Caesar  in  Campaniam  abscessit,  specie  dedicandi  templa  apud
Capuam  loui,   apud  Nolam   Augusto,   sed   certus  procul   urbe   degere.

(2)  Suet.  Tib.  40:  Peragrata  Campania,  cum  Capuae  Capitolium,  Nolae
templum  Augusti,  quam  causam  profectionis  praetenderat,  dedicsisset,  Ca-
preas   se   contulit.

(3)  Suet.  Calig.  57:  Capitolium  Capuae  Id.  Mart,  de  caelo  tactum  est,
item    Romae    cella    Palatini   atriensis.

(4)  Sil.    XI,    265:    Monstremt    Capitolia    celsa.
Stellatisque   docent   campos   Cereremque    benignam.

(5)  Acta  Rufi  et  Carponi  in  Acta  sanctorum,  Aug.  VI,  p.  19:  Quae
acta  sunt  temporibus  Diocletiani  imperatoris  et  Maximiniani  Caesaris  et  Cas-
selliani  proconsulis,  qui  in  Capitolio  deseruiebat  dib  sordidissimis.  Quod  Ca-
pitolium ciuitate  Capua  orationibus  sanctorum  Rufi  et  Carponi  Christus  fulmine
suo  interemit  et  ultra  non  surrexit   persecutio  paganorum.

(6)  Kuhfeldt,  De  Capitoliis  imperii  Romani  II,  15,  This  opinion  is
attacked  by  AUard,  Les  Capitoles  provinciaax  et  les  actes  des  martyrs  in  La
science  catholique  I   (1887)  372.

-   363   -


The  two  main  problems  connected  with  this  Capitol  are
its  site  and  the  date  of  its  erection.  Beloch,  reaisoning  chiefly
from  the  use  of  the  preposition  apud  in  the  account  of  Tacitus
and  the  adjective  celsa  in  the  poem  of  Silius,  identified  the
Capitolium  with  the  shrine  of  Jupiter  Tifatinus  (1).  This
view  would  explain  the  allusion  to  its  height,  as  the  city  itself
was  practically  level,  smd  would  harmonize  with  the  principle
that  it  should  occupy  an  elevated  station.  But  Beloch  himself
afterwEirds  rightly  rejected  this  theory,  because  it  contradicts
the  fundamental  assumption  that  a  Capitol  must  stand  within
the  walls  and  form  the  center  of  the  community  from  a  political
and  a  religious  point  of  view  (2).  For  sis  indicated  in  an  earlier
chapter  it  becaune  the  outward  manifestation  and  public  expres-
sion of  loyalty  toward  Rome  (3).

Kuhfeldt,  who  had  vehemently  attacked  the  opinion  of
Beloch,  refused  to  accept  the  evidence  of  Silius  for  a  high
Capitolium  on  the  ground  that  the  reference  of  this  poet  was
merely  an  imitation  of  Vergil  (4).  But  while  Silius  was  doubt-
less writing  loosely  and  inaccurately,  it  is  not  correct  to  assume
that  he  was  imitating  Vergil,  since  the  similarity  of  the  two
poets  in  this  case  is  confined  to  the  two  words  celsa  Capitolia,
where  this  adjective  is  the  natural  and  appropriate  epithet  for
any  one  to  use  under  the  influence  of  Roman  ideas.  The  Roman
Capitol  in  fact  is  habitueJly  portrayed  under  the  aspect  of  a
central  citadel,  and  the  provincial  imitations,  true  to  the  con-
ception inspired  by  their  original,  must  have  had  attached  to
them  in  fzincy,  if  not  in  reality,  something  of  the  vau-ious  quali-
ties belonging  to  it.  Then  too  in  his  enumeration  of  the  vaorious
features  of  the  city  Silius  would  naturally  mention  an  acropolis
and  call  it  a  Capitolium.  aifter  the  Roman  fashion,  though  this
edifice  had  not  yet  been  erected  in  the  epoch  of  Hannibal.  At
no  time  cam  we  think  of  a  really  lofty  situation,  for  this  did  not
exist  within  the  city.  Yet  the  building  was  perhaps  raised  upon

(1)  Beloch  360.

(2)  Beloch  471;  Kuhfeldt,  op.  cit.  16;  Castan,  Les  Capitoles  provinciaux
65;   Aust,   Juppiier,   Roscher    11,    739.

(3)  See    p.    246.

(4)  Kuhfeiat,    16;   Castan   93.   Verg.   Aen.   VIII,    663:    Stabat   pro   templo

et    Capitolia    celsa  tenebat.

-  364  -


an  artificial  mound  or  at  least  reared  upon  substructures  to  make
it  more  imposing,  -  a  condition  of  affairs  which  seems  to  have
prevailed  quite  generally  as  revealed  by  examples  at  Florentifi,
Ostia,  and  Vesontio  (Besangon)  in  Gaul  (1).

While  there  was  certainly  a  Capitol  somewhere  within  the
city  limits,  its  precise  situation  can  not  be  determined.  The
older  antiquaricms  beginning  with  Cesare  Costa  smd  including
Michele  Monaco  and  Pratilli,  located  it  near  the  theater  and  the
thermae  (cryptoporticus)  in  a  spot  neuned  la  torre  di  S.  Erasmo.
The  latter  claimed  that  an  inscription  reading  Dianae  Capito-
linae  had  been  found  here;  he  also  asserted  that  he  had  found
in  mediaeval  documents  the  phrsises  prope  turrim  Capitolii  and
prope  ecclesiam  S.  Erasmi  in  Capitolio,  and  that  he  himself
saw  a  l2irge  number  of  pillars  and  marble  fragments  from  the
ancient  building  (2).  Mazzocchi  however,  profesesd  to  see
no  special  reason  for  believing  that  the  Capitol  stood  here,  and
the  evidence  of  Pratilli  is  rightly  suspected  (3).

A  marble  relief  discovered  on  this  site  in  the  seventeenth
century  has  sometimes  been  used  to  establish  the  location  of  the
Capitol.  Although  the  divinities  here  portrayed  eire  identified
as  Jupiter,  Diana,  and  Minerva  and  not  the  regulsu:  Capitoline
triad,  it  has  been  supposed  that  at  Capua  Juno  W2is  replaced  by
Diana,  the  predominaait  goddess  of  this  region  in  e£irly  times,
and  that  this  unusual  triad  was  revered  in  the  Capitol  (4).
But,  although  another  divinity  might  sometimes  be  associated
with  the  three  who  are  known  as  the  Capitoline  gods,  there  is
no   likelihood   that   £m.y   one   of  these   was   deposed   from  his


(1)  Cetstan,  op.  cit.  65;  H.  Leclercq,  Capitoles  in  Dictionnaire  d'archi'
ologie  chretienne  II,  2043 ;  Saglio,  Capitolium,  D.-S.  I,  906 ;  Allard,  op.  cit.
359.  The  existence  of  a  Capitol  at  Vesontio  is  doubted  by  Toutain,  Etude  sur
les  Capitoles  provinciaux  de  I'empire  romain  in  Rapports  annuels  de  I'ecole
pratique  des  hautes  etudes   1899,  3.

(2)  Pratilli,  Delia  Via  Appia  228,  278,  287;  Kuhfeldt  17;  Leclercq  2047;
Beloch  343;  Raoul-Rochette,  Jour,  des  savants  1853,  280;  Castan  93;  AUard
372.

(3)  Mazzocchi,   In   mutilum  Campani  amphitheatri  titulum  258.

(4)  Raoul-Rochette,  loc.  cit. ;  Sogliano,  Spigolature  epigrafiche  in  !4fti
Nap.  XV  (1890)  159.  The  relief  is  reproduced  in  Winckelmann-Fea,  Storia  delle
arii  III.  PI.    13;  Millin,   Galerie  mythologique  I.   XXXVIII   No.    139.

.  365  -


rightful  place  (1).  In  this  cult  the  exact  imitation  of  the  Roman
model  was  emphaisized,  and  there  was  no  place  for  important
deviations  from  the  norm  which  had  become  established.  Again
the  triad  seems  to  have  been  introduced  here  at  a  compeu^atively
late  date  not  only  after  its  form  had  become  thoroughly  fixed
but  also  after  Diaina's  importance  had  become  somewhat
obscured  by  the  new  divinities  of  the  Empire  (2).

It  is  better  to  consider  this  group  as  a  votive  offering  made
to  the  three  deities  in  consequence  of  a  dream.  Besides  the
gods,  two  men  are  depicted  as  employed  in  manual  labor  and
a  third  is  wielding  a  chisel.  Likewise  a  Genius  offering  libation
at  an  altar  and  behind  him  a  huge  serpent  appear;  above  the
latter  are  the  words  Genius  theatri  (3).  As  the  dedicator  wets  a
contractor  and  builder  employed  on  the  theater,  the  divinities
honored  were  doubtless  those  from  whom  he  expected  protec-
tion in  his  work  (4).  Consequently  we  can  not  use  this  relief
as  a  proof  for  the  presence  of  a  Capitol  in  the  locality  where
it  was  found.

Although  the  Roman  historians  state  clearly  that  the  Capitol
was  dedicated  by  Tiberius  in  the  year  26  A.  D.,  there  still
remains  the  possibility  that  this  was  not  a  dedication  of  the
first  temple  but  merely  marked  a  restoration.  The  date  of  the
original  structure  hais  been  much  disputed.  Raoul-Rochette
believed  that  it  went  back  to  the  era  of  Etruscan  supremacy  and

(1)  Kuhfeldt  cites  the  Colonia  Julia  Genetiua  as  an  example  of  the
association  of  Venus  with  the  regular  triad,  but  there  is  no  evidence  for  any
permanent  connection  or  association  of  cults.  C.  /.  L.  II,  Supp.  p.  855,  LXXI ;
Kuhfeldt,  De  CapitoUis  imperii  Romani   18  (40);   Saglio,  D.-S.  I,  906.

(2)  Kuhfeldt   18.

(3)  The  Genius  has  been  identified  as  a  Fortuna  by  JaJin,  DarsteJ-
lungen  antiker  Reliefs  toelche  sich  auj  Handwerk,  und  Handelsverkehr  heziehen
in  Berichte  der  sacks.  Gesellschaft  XIII  (1861)  30364,  but  it  has  the  common
form  of  the  Genius  found  in  domestic  shrines.  Jordan,  De  Larum  imaginibus
et  cultu  in  Ann.  Inst.  XXXIV   (1862)  333;  Wissowa    180.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3821=Vaglieri  1080  =  D.  3662:  Genius  [the]  atri.  Lucceius
Peculiaris,  redemptor  proscaeni  ex  biso  (sic)  fecit.  According  to  Castan  Jupiter
was  propitiated  to  restrain  his  destructive  thunderbolts,  Minerva,  as  a  patro-
ness of  the  artistic  efforts  involved  in  the  construction  of  the  theater,  and
Diana,  as  a  protectress  of  the  wood  used  in  the  work.  Castan,  Les  Capitoles
provinciaux  95.

■f  366  »


was  thus  independent  of  any  Roman  influence  (1).  It  is  pos-
sible that  the  Campemisuis  derived  the  idea  of  the  Capitoline
triad  from  them,  but  evidence  for  such  temples  in  this  district
or  elsewhere  is  lacking.  Beloch's  assignment  of  the  Capitol  to
the  pre-Roman  period  w£is  based  upon  the  testimony  of  Silius
Italicus  discussed  above,  but  absolute  accuracy  in  historical
matters  ceui  not  be  expected  from  that  poet  (2).  On  the  other
hand  it  is  not  possible  to  accept  unreservedly  the  opinion  of
Castan  that  the  building  of  a  Capitol  was  conditioned  by  the
presence  of  a  colony  (3).  Hence  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that
Kuhfeldt  may  have  been  right  in  assigning  it  to  the  period  of
Roman  occupation  preferably  after  the  general  granting  of  citi-
zenship at  the  time  of  the  Social  War  (4).  Yet  the  institution
of  the  Capitoline  worship  was  above  all  else  the  manifestation
of  loyalty  to  Rome  and  a  desire  to  copy  eifter  it  as  far  as  local
circumstances  permitted.  At  Capua,  however,  there  wets  present
the  inclination  to  be  a  rival  of  Rome  rather  than  a  docile  imita-
tor, and  this  feeling  seems  to  have  lingered  all  through  the
pre-colonial  period.  According  to  Cicero  the  city's  pride  had
begun  immediately  to  affect  the  first  colonists,  who  were  setting
themselves  up  eis  the  equals  of  Rome  (3).  Although  the  orator
accused  them  of  introducing  customs  and  a  system  of  nomen-
clature belonging  properly  only  to  Rome,  he  made  no  mention
of  an  attempt  on  their  part  to  bring  in  the  Capitoline  cult,  -  a
detail  which  he  would  scarcely  have  passed  unnoticed,
if  it  had  been  possible  to  include  it.  The  colonists  here  were
imitators  in  a  certain  sense,  but  were  moved  by  an  attitude  of
rivalry  far  different  from  the  spirit  of  loyaJty  which  prompted
the  erection  of  Capitolia  (6).


(1)  Raoul-Rochette.  op.  cit.  280.  See  p.  246  (2).

(2)  Beloch  361.

(3)  Ccistan  believed  that  a  Capitol  was  granted  only  to  Roman  colonies
as  a  specisJ  privilege  before  the  extension  of  citizenship  under  Caracalla.
Castan  41  f.;  L.  Friedlander,  Sittengeschichte  Roms  (6)  III,  198;  Allard,  La
science  caiholique  1  (1887)  359.  Cp.  Cell.  XVI,  13;  Cic.  leg.  agr.  II,  73;  Toutain.
op.  cit.  26f.

(4)  Kuhfeldt    15.    78;  Aust.  luppHer,  Roscher.   11,  739.

(5)  Cic.   leg.  agr.   II,  92-9^.

(6)  Saglio,   D.-S.    I,   906;   Castan,   Les  Capitoles  provinciaux  66f.

-  367  -


After  the  colonization  of  Julius  Caesar  (58  B.  C.)  one  can
expect  to  find  a  Capitol  in  this  place,  but  no  evidence  for  it
appears  eaurlier  than  the  notices  of  26  A.  D.  discussed  above.
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that   1  iberius  acted  as  patron  of
the  temple  in  the  sense  of  furnishing  the  means  for  its  erection,
but  he  was  present  at  the  dedication  ceremony  in  his  capacity
of  high  priest  of  the  formal  religion  of  the  Roman  state  (1).
As  he  refused  divine  honors  for  himself  and  discouraged  the
further  spread  of  the  cult  of  Diuus  Augustus,  it  is  possible  that
he  encouraged  the  buildmg  of  Capitolia,  -  the  one  remaining
means    of    showing  attachment   toward   the   central   govern-
ment  (2).    Yet   the   dedication    at   Capua    is   the   only   extauit
example  of  his  interest  in  the  cult  of  Jupiter  (3).   In  short  it
is  not  necessary  to  suppose  with  Kuhfeldt  that  Tiberius  was
present  at  a  restoration  (4).

No  inscriptions  allude  to  the  Capitoline  triad,  but  two
make  mention  of  its  most  potent  member,  Jupiter  Optimus
Maximus.  Qne  is  a  dedication  made  by  a  seeunan  P.  Rammius
Chrestus  and  is  dated  12  B.  C.  (5).  If  the  date  assumed  above
for  the  foundation  of  the  Capitolium  is  correct,  this  record  an-
tedates it  by  a  considerable  period.  It  should  be  regarded,  there-
fore, as  a  sjxjradic  inscription  and  not  as  evidence  for  a  reg-
ular cult.  The  second  reference  to  the  god  belongs  to  the  era
of  the  Empire;  addressing  him  as  summus  excellentissimus,  it
records  the  grateful  piety  of  Marcius  Probus,  an  eminent
Roman,  who  held  the  important  office  of  praefectas  alimentorum.
He  had  escaped  danger  and  recovered  his  health  in  this  locality,
2ind  felt  grateful  toward  the  deity  to  whom  he  ascribed  his  good
fortxme  (6).

(1)  Ckstan,  Le  Capitole  de  Vesontio  et  les  Capitoles  provinciaux  da
xnonde  romain  65,  76  and  Les  Capitoles  provinciaux  42,  45.  Cp.  Suet,  Tib.  47.

(2)  Suet.  Tib.  26;  Tac.  ann.  IV,  37-38;  Castan,  Les  Capitoles  provin-
ciaux 70.  Thet  opinion  of  Castan  {op.  cit.  68)  that  the  building  of  Capitols  was
in  general  a  late  form  of  showing  loyalty  to  Rome  is  erroneous.  See  p.  33f.

(3)  Aust.   lupiter,   Roscher  II,   748.

(4)  Kuhfeldt.   op.    cit.    15.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3804=Vaglieri  1108  =  0.  3004.

(6)  C.  7.  L.  X,  3805  =  Vaglieri  1112;  I.  O.  M.  summo  excellentissimo
Marcius  Probus  u.  c.  praef(ectus)  alim(entorum),  quod  hoc  in  loco  enceps
periculum  sustinueirit  el  bonam  ualetudinem  recii>erauerit  u.  8.

-   368   -


GENIUS.

Aside  from  the  Genius  theatri  treated  above  there  is  no
allusion  to  this  kind  of  deity  either  cis  a  god  who  watches  over
the  individual  or  as  one  who  presides  over  a  place  or  the  entire
community.  A  divinity  of  the  latter  type,  however,  is  con-
cealed under  the  designation  of  Numen  Capuae,  who  seems
to  have  been  the  equivalent  of  the  public  Genii  who  have  left
traces  of  their  presence  at  Stabiae,  Nola  and  especially  at
Puteoli.  The  inscription  recording  the  god  is  mutilated,  but
preserves  enough  of  the  original  notice  to  show  that  he  was
served  by  a  public  priestess  (1).  This  circumstance  is  odd,
as  the  Genius  of  a  community  was  ordinarily  served  by  niale
priests.

LARES.

An  inscription  once  interpreted  by  Minervini  as  a  dedi-
cation to  Jupiter  Larissaeus  is  in  reality  connected  with  the
worship  of  IJupiter  and  the  Lares  (2).  It  contains  the  record
of  the  building  of  a  small  shrine  to  these  divinities  by  a  freed-
man  L.  Cocceius  Papa,  who  had  been  manumitted  apparently
by  three  brothers  of  Cocceius  Nerua.  a  friend  of  Horace  and
Maecenais  and  a  companion  of  Tiberius  on  his  journey  to  Cam-
pania (3).  Cavedoni  believed  that  this  man*s  cognomen  Papa
indicated  that  he  was  a  Phrygieoi,  but  he  W2is  influenced  by  a
belief  that  the  shrine  was  in  honor  of  a  foreign  deity  (4).  The
date  of  the  inscription  is  13  B.  C.

In  an  excavation  made  by  Novi  in  the  neighborhood  of
the  temple  of  Diana  Tifatina  was  discovered  a  wall  painting
containing  three  figures.  Two  of  them  can  be  identified  readily

(1)  C.    /.    L.    X.    3920:     ....aberi(ae    C.    f.)    Tetti(aee)    Prisc(ae    s)acerd(oti)

pub(Iicae    N)uminis    Cap(uae elect(a«)    a    splend.    ordine Cp.    C.    /.    L.

XIV,   373   from   Ostia  and    II,    2126    from    Spain.  Herbst   De  Sacerdotiis   Rom.
munic.   14  reads  sacerdos  publici  Naminis.

(2)  Pau».  II,  24-3;  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  8.  V  (1856)  98.  Cp.  VI,    16.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3803=Vaglieri  1125:  ....  L.  Cocceius  C.  I.  M.  I.  Papa
aedic{ulam)  loui  Lar(ibus)  ex  d.  d.  Cavedoni,  Bull.  Nap.  n.  s.  VI  (1857)  47;
Hor.  sat.  1.  5.  27;  Tac.  ann.   IV.  58;  VI.  26.

(4)  Cavedoni  loc.   cii.

-  369  «.

24


as  the  Lares,  while  the  third,  who  stands  between  them  with
a  patera  and  horn  of  plenity,  is  either  Fortuna  or  Vesta  (1).
The  inscription  belonging  to  the  beginning  of  the  first  century
B.  C.  which  deals  with  the  works  of  a  bosurd  of  ministri  has
already  been  treated  (2).

THE  IMPERIAL  CULT.

1  he  worship  of  the  Emperor  and  family  was  carried  on
under  the  direction  of  Augustales,  a  laurge  number  of  whom
are  known  (3).  TTiey  are  mentioned  chiefly  in  epitaphs  which
prove  that  their  official  title  was  Augustales  Capuae;  out  of  a
group  of  thirteen  inscriptions  in  fact  only  two  omit  the  neime  of
the  city  (4).  One  inscription  reported  to  have  come  from  this
town  contains  the  name  of  a  seuir  Augustalis,  but  this  position
hardly  existed  here,  and  more  probably  the  record  belongs  to
the  town  of  Cales  (5).  The  members  of  the  organisation  were
probably  without  exception  freedmen;  although  this  fact  is
stated  definitely  in  only  three  instaoices,  the  absence  of  any
indication  of  filiation  proves  that  the  other  incumbents  of  the
office  should  be  assigned  to  the  same  class  (6).

One  of  the  members  wets  the  well  known  actor  L.  Aurelius
Apolaustus,  a  freedman  of  Maircus  Aurelius  and  Verus,  who
is  mentioned  in  connection  with  other  Csimpanian  towns.  He  is
called  anAugustalis  maximus,  a  position  which  was  equivalent
to  the  quinquennalis  cited  from  other  places  (7).  In  the  case
of  Apolaustus,  however,  the  post  must  have  been  a  purely
honorary  one.  Another  Augustalis  was  employed  as  an  overseer
of  building  operations  and  a  third  was  a  manufacturer   and


(1)  Mmervini.  Bi£l  Nap.  n.  «.  VII  (1858)  172.

(2)  See  p.  354f.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3943;  3716;  8221.

(4)  C.    /.    L.    X,    3947=Vaglieri    2084;    X.    8221,    Mommsen,    C.    /.    L.
X.  p.  369  a.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3919.

(6)  C.   J.   L.   X.3943.   3947.   8221.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3716-D.  5189.  von  Premerstein,  Augustales,   Ruggiero  I,
849.  See  p.  356.

-  370  -


1


dealer  in  lime  (I).  The  occupations  of  the  rest  are  unknown.
in  accordance  with  the  universal  custom  in  the  provincial  towns
they  were  required  to  make  a  payment  to  the  municipality  in
return  for  the  office  which  they  held,  but  this  was  sometimes
remitted  on  account  of  importauit  services  as  in  the  case  of  the
builder  lanueirius  (2).  One  advantage  of  membership  in  the
organization  was  the  chance  of  sheuring  in  bequests  made  by
philanthropically  inclined  citizens  (3).

A  collegiumi  of  iuuenes  who  were  connected  with  the  cult
of  Augustus  and  from  him  received  the  naune  iuuenes  Aug
(ustales)  is  mentioned  in  one  inscription  (4).  Their  patron
Ti.  Claudius  Rufinus  is  cited  as  a  quinquennalis,  but  hardly
held  the  position  in  this  organization,  as  zissumed  by  Mommsen.
One  dedication  honors  the  Numen  of  the  Emperor,  another
his  Victoria ;  there  is  no  clue  to  the  name  of  the  monarch  whom
the  dedicators  had  in  mind  (5).  Evidence  for  temples  of  the
Diui  is  strangely  lacking.

ORIENTAL  CULTS,  EGYPTIAN  GODS.

Little  evidence  exists  for  the  worship  of  the  Egyptian  gods
but  they  doubtless  were  much  patronized.  In  one  dedication,
made  by  a  uir  clarissimus  Arrius  Balbinus,  the  goddess  Isis  is
eulogized  as  embracing  all  other  divinities.  This  pantheistic
conception  of  the  deity  was  one  that  was  very  popular  in  the
Roman  world,  and  gods  of  all  varieties  easily  merged  in  her
personality  (6).  A  marble  statuette  of  a  naked  man  accompa-

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3907=D.  63l3=Vagliexi  2083.  D.m.s.  Q.  Annio  lanuario
exactori  operum  publ.  et  theatri  a  fundamentis.  Huic  ordo  decurionum  ob
^erita  eius  honorem  Augustalitatis  gratuitum  decreuit  etc.  C.  /.  L.  X,  3947  =
D.  7537  =  Vaglieri  2084  D.m.s.  T.  Flauius  T.  lib.  Salutaris  Augustalis  sibi  et
Titiriae  Felicitati  coniugi  bene  merenti,  negotias  (sic)  calcariarius  uiuus  fecit.

(2)  Cp.  the  'Auguatalea  immunea  at  Misenum  and  Puteoli.  Beuxlier,
Le  culte  imperial  211.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3927.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3909=:Vaglieri  2079.  Cp.  Mommsen  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.   369».

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3816=Vaglieri  1208:  Victoriae  Caesaris  August!  impe-
latoris.   C.  /.  L.   X.  3814  =  Vaglieri    1171;  A   fragment.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3800  =  D.  4362  =  Vaglieri  1093.  To  tibi  una  quae  es
omnia,  dea  Isis,  Arrius  Balbinus  u.  c.  Drexler,  Isis,  Roscher,  11.  546  and
Mythologiache  Beiirdge  I,   125  f ;  Lafaye,  lata,  D.-S.  III.  381.

.  371   -


nied  by  figures  of  little  children,  a  crocodile  and  a  hippopota-
mus, was  found  about  1900  near  S.  Angelo  in  Formis.  It
doubtless  represent  the  river  god  Nilus  (1).

MAGNA  MATER.

Two  inscriptions  bear  witness  to  the  worship  of  Magna
Mater.  One  is  a  dedication  made  by  a  priest  belonging  to  the
local  shrine,  the  archigallus  Virianus  Ampliatus,  who  wats
evidently  a  slave  (2).  This  official  is  found  only  in  the  more
important  cult  centers  such  as  Ostia,  Lugdunum  in  Gaul,  and
Hierapolis  in  Phrygia,  where  he  exercised  important  priestly
and  prophetic  functions  (3).  It  is  probable  that  powers  of
the  Capuan  archigallus  were  limited  to  this  city  and  the  territory
directly  tributary  to  it ;  in  other  words  he  did  not  have  any  juris-
diction over  the  priests  of  a  lower  order  who  lived  in  the  smaller
Campanicim  towns  (4).  He  held  his  position  for  life,  doubtless
receiving  his  authority  from  the  Roman  board  of  quindecem-
uiri  (5).  Nothing  is  known  of  the  date  of  Virianus  Ampliatus,
£is  public  slaves  held  the  position  even  after  the  cult  had  been
reorganized  at  the  end  of  the  second  or  the  beginning  of  the
third  century,  and  the  priesthood  thrown  open  to  Roman  citi-
zens. Probably  he  belonged  to  this  later  era,  when  neither
emasculation  nor  celibacy  was  a  ceremonial  requirement  (6).
The  inscription  was  accompanied  by  a  relief,  which  Pratilli  and
lannelli  regarded  as  a  likeness  of  the  priest,  but  which  Momm-
sen  identified  as  intended  to  represent  the  goddess  her-
self (7).  Graillot  believes  that  the  archigallus  was  ordinarily
a  man  of  imposing  presence  and  dignified  demeanor  who  was

(1)  Gabrici.  N.  S.   1901.  5^0.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3810  =  Vaglieri  1141:  Virianus  Ampliatus  archigallus
M(atris)  d(eum).  Von  Domaszewski,  Magna  Mater  in  Latin  Inscriptions  in  Jour.
Rom.  Stud.  I  (1911)  51.

(3)  A  list  of  places  where  an  archigallus  was  found  is  given  by  Graillot,
Le  culte  de  Cybele  234  (2)  and  de  Ruggiero,  Ruggiero  I,  641-642.  Cp.  Graillot
233  f.

(4)  Graillot  235.

(5)  Graillot.   236.

(6)  Graillot  231-232;   Decharme.   Cyh^le,   D.-S.    I.    1685.

(7)  Pratilli.  Delia  Via  Appia  263;  lannelli.  Atti  Terra  di  Lavoro  1892.
25;  Mommsen.  C.  /.  L.  X,  3810;  Graillot  565,  correction  to  535  (5).

-  372  -


well  advanced  in  years  and  tended  to  command  respect  not  only
for  his  piety  but  also  for  his  age,  but  the  scattered  literary  refe-
rences on  this  point  are  too  few  to  make  a  conclusive  generali-
zation (1).  Another  inscription  found  in  the  Ager  Campanus
records  a  gift  to  the  goddess  by  a  freedman  T.  Flauius  Onesi-
mus  (2).  Both  of  the  inscriptions  from  Capua,  as  is  customary  in
southern  Italy,  address  her  simply  as  Mater  deum  without  the
additional  epithet  Idaea,  a  term  which  when  used  has  been
assumed  to  mark  more  completely  the  Romanization  of  the
cult  (3).  Other  evidence  sometimes  adduced  for  the  presence
of  the  cult  at  Capua  is  of  doubtful  authenticity  (4).

In  the  seventeenth  century  the  site  of  her  temple  wais  com-
monly supposed  to  lie  between  the  ancient  cities  of  Capua  and
Casilinum  (the  modem  Capua)  but  nearer  to  the  latter  than  to
the  former.  The  precise  spot  in  which  it  was  supposed  to  have
stood  is  near  the  church  and  the  hospital  of  S.  Lazguro.  Here
walls  and  remains  of  columns  ceune  to  light  but  the  inscription
which  purported  to  refer  to  the  Mater  deum  was  spurious  (5).
In  ainother  locality  near  Mt.  Tifata  excavations  revesJed  many
statuettes  of  mediocre  workmanship,  which  portrayed  a  beard-
less youth  wearing  a  short  tunic  and  playing  a  flute  with  seven
pipes.  These  would  seem  to  represent  Attis.  As  Magna  Mater
wets  frequently  worshipped  on  mountain  heights,  her  cult  may
have  become  asociated  with  Tifata  (6).  It  probably  did  not
oust  that  of  Diana  from  its  place  of  honorable  preeminence  in
this  locality,  but  rather  merged  with  it  in  accordance  with  the
syncretistic  tendency  prevalent  in  the  later  Empire.  Probably
she  lived  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Jupiter  Tifatinus,  as  else-
where her  relations  with  Jupiter  were  cordial  (7).  There  is  no


(1)  Graillot  236.  Cp.   Ov.  jasL   IV.  337  f. ;  Juv.   VI.   512,

(2)  C,  /.  L.  X,  3809:  Matri  deum  T.  Flauius  Onesimus  donum  dedit.
A  list  of  freedmen  named  as  dedicators  in  inscriptions  is  given  by  von  Do-
maszewski,   op.    cit.    52.

(3)  Graillot  434.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  455* ;  lannelli,  op.  cit.  22  f.

(5)  Pratilli.   loc.    cit,  ;   Graillot  433   (6).

(6)  Graillot  433 ;  Biardot.  Les  terrea-cuites  grecques  funebres  322 ;  cp»
Dechaxme.    Cybele,    D.-S.    I.    1688.

(7)  C.  I.  L.  X,  3764  from  Suessula ;   Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cybele  435,

-  373   -


reason  for  supposing  with  Graillot  that  Magna  Mater  worship
was  connected  in  any  way  with  that  of  the  ancient  divinity  of
motherhood  whose  temple  stood  on  the  site  known  as  the  Fondo
Patturelli  (I).  The  former,  however,  may  be  looked  upon  as
a  successful  rival  of  the  older  goddess,  whose  cult  was  already
in  a  state  of  decline  before  the  Oriental  religions  attauned  the
acme  of  their  popularity  and  influence.

MITHI^S.

No  evidence  remains  for  the  worship  of  Mithras,  as  the
reading  of  the  inscription  cited  by  Beloch  to  prove  its  existence
is  incorrect  (2).  Thus  the  Oriental  religions  have  left  rem2u*k-
ably  few  traces  of  their  presence  in  compeirison  with  the  size
and  importance  of  the  city.  Yet  it  is  unsafe  to  affirm  with  Beloch
that  these  cults  were  only  of  minor  importance  here  (3) ;  in  fact
the  remains  that  might  throw  some  light  on  the  state  of  reli-
gion in  Capua  are  so  comparatively  sceuity  that  little  C2ui  be
done  to  establish  the  degree  of  prominence  attained  by  the
various  forms  of  worship.

JUDAISM.

An  epitaph  preserves  the  name  of  a  leader  of  the  Jewish
community.  This  was  Alfius  luda,  who  was  one  of  the  archon-
tes,  a  group  of  officials  who  are  often  mentioned  but  whose
duties  are  not  clearly  understood.  He  wets  furthermore  the
religious  head  of  his  people,  a  rabbi  or,  as  he  is  called  here,  an
archisynagogus  (4).  A  second  inscription,  discovered  at
Jerusalem,  names  a  Jewish  matron  from  Capua  (5).  Other
inscriptions  do  not  certainly  refer  to  this  race  (6).

(1)  GraUlot  433.   See  p.  338  f.

(2)  Beloch  332-333.  See  p.  361.

(3)  Beloch  loc.  cit.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3905;....  Alfius  luda  arcon  arcosynagogus  qui  uixit
etc.  Juster,  Lea  Juifs  dans  V empire  romain  I,  443  f.,  450  (list  of  archisynagogi^
Tamassia,  Gli  Ebrei  nell'Iialia  meridionale  in  Atti  del  r.  1st.  Veneto  LXIIl
(1903-4)  806;  Schiirer.  Geschichte  dea  judischen  Volkes  (4)  II,  511,  III.  68;
Friedlander.  Sittengeschichte  (8)  IV,  238.

(5)  Reoue  biblique  intern.  XI  (1902)  106-107.

(b)  Justex,  op.  cit.  I,  182  (5);  Harnack,  Die  Mission  u.  Atishr,  d.  Christ'
entnms    II.   217.

-  374  -


CHRISTIANITY.

The  manner  in  which  Christianity  made  its  entrance  into
Capua  is  entirely  unknown,  but  as  usual  attempts  have  been
made  to  give  the  local  church  an  apostolic  foundation  (I).
It  claimed  a  goodly  number  of  mzurtyrs,  but  even  in  the  case
of  those  whose  authenticity  is  less  questionable  there  is  gener-
ally a  complete  ignorance  in  regard  to  the  circumstance  and
date  pi  their  martyrdom.  Lanzoni  considers  that  nine  of  the
alleged  martyrs  can  be  regarded  as  genuine  (2).  The  most
important  saints  to  wliom  this  glory  has  been  attributed  are
called  Priscus,  Marcellus,  Augustinus  and  Rufus.  They  are
mentioned  in  the  meu-tyrology  handed  down  under  the  name
of  Ijerome  smd  were  gonong  the  figures  portrayed  is  mosaics
adorning  the  apse  of  the  church  of  S.  Frisco  necir  the  modem
Capua,  which  have  been  dated  in  the  fifth  century  (3).  Priscus
is  included  also  in  the  spurious  list  of  seventy  disciples  which
circulated  under  the  name  of  Hippolytus  (4).  An  early  Chris-
tian cemetery  was  located  in  the  vicinity  of  the  church  of  S.
Prisco,  where  have  been  found  numerous  epitaphs  beeuing
dates  of  the  fourth  century  (5).

The  earliest  mention  of  a  bishop  who  can  be  regarded  as
authentic  occurs  in  a  report  of  the  church  Council  held  at
Rome  in  313.  The  same  bishop,  who  bore  the  name  of  Pro-

(1)  A  highly  imaginat've  account  of  the  beginnings  of  Christianity  is
found  in  the  eighteenth  century  work  of  Rinaldo,  Memorie  istoriche  della
fedelissima    citta    di  Capua    I,    286    f.

(2)  Lanzoni,  Le  origini  del  cristianesimo  e  dell' episcopato  nella  Cam-
pania romana  in  Riv.  storico-crit.  delle  scienze  teol.  VI  (1910)  29  f . ;  32;  De-
lehaye,  Les  origines  da  culte  des  martyrs  346.

(3)  Pseudo-Jerome,  Martyrologium.  ueiua  (Migne,  Patrol.  Latiruz  XXX,
450  f.)  where  Priscus  is  named  under  date  of  Sept.  I  and  Rufus  under  August
24,  26.  These  mosaics  were  destroyed  in  1766.  Garrucci,  Storia  della  arte  cri-
stiana  IV,  P.  254;  De  Rossi,  Bull,  arch,  criat.  1883  Pis.  II,  III,  and  1884,
104-125;  E.  Miintz,  Rev.  arch.  XVI  (1891)  72  f . ;  Leclercq,  Capoue  in  Diet,
d'arch.  chrit.  II.  2065  f.  Delehaye,  op.  cit.  344;  Bertaux.L'arf  dans  Vltalie  me-
ridionale  53.

(4)  Pscudo-Hippolytus,  De  LXX  apostolis  (Migne,  Patrol,  graeca  X,
956).

(5)  De  Rossi,  op.  dt.  no  f.  The  Christian  inscriptions  from  Capua  are
discussed  by  Leclercq,  op.  cit.  2077  f . ;  C.  /.  L.  X.  4487-4552.

.  375  .


terius,  is  included  aonong  the  numbers  of  a  second  gathering  of
Church  dignitaries  held  only  a  short  time  later  at  Aries  (I).
Constantine  caused  a  basilica  to  be  erected  here,  as  is  recorded
in  the  Liber  Pontificalis,  and  presented  it  with  various  sacred
vessels  of  use  in  its  services  (2).


(1)  Optat.  I,  22;  Concilium  episcoporum  Arelatense  ad  Silvestrum
papam  in  SyUoge  Optatiana;  Mansi,  Amplissima  coUectio  conciliorum  II,
437,  476;  Harnack  op.  cit.  II,  217.  Cp.  Ehichesne,  Le  dossier  du  Donatisme
in  Milanges  X  (1890)  590  f.

(2)  Liher   Pontificalis,    Silvester    XXXI    (Duchesne    I.    185);    Leclcrcq.    op.
cit.  2064.

-  376  -


CHAPTER  VIIL
NOLA  AND  THE  MINOR  CAMPANIAN  TOWNS.


In  the  eastern  portion  of  the  great  Campcinian  plain  lay
the  territory  subject  to  the  city  of  Nola.  This  district,  embracing
a  considerable  area,  weis  surrounded  by  the  smaller  holdings  of
a  large  number  of  the  Campanieoi  towns.  On  the  south  it  was
bounded  by  the  possessions  of  Nuceria  and  Pompeii,  whose
northern  limits  formed  a  straight  line  eastwcird  from  Mt.  Vesu-
vius; on  the  southwest  and  west,  by  the  territory  of  Hercula-
neum,  Neapolis  and  Acerrae;  and  on  the  north  and  northwest,
by  that  of  Suessula  and  Abella.  Toward  the  east  the  jurisdiction
of  Nola  was  separated  from  the  land  of  Abellinum  by  a  rough
and  mountainous  district.

The  ancient  Nola,  occupying  the  identical  site  of  the
modern  town,  was  built  along  the  Appian  way,  which  here
stretches  from  north  to  south.  Although  no  great  distance  from
the  mountains  on  the  east,  it  weis  built  like  Capua  entirely
upon  the  plain,  and  consequently  weis  without  natural  means
of  defence.  Unlike  that  city  however,  it  appeaurs  not  to  have
been  laid  out  according  to  any  regular  plan.  The  fertility  of  the
surrounding  country,  which  Vergil  praised  as  equal  to  the
plain  of  Capua,  and  an  extensive  and  lucrative  commerce
brought  wealth  and  luxury  in  the  early  centuries.  Greek  culture
was  welcomed  with  enthusiasm.  During  the  Empire  Nola  obtzun-
ed  some  distinction  by  the  fact  that  both  Vergil  and  Augustus
had  estates  here  and  especially  by  the  circumstsuice  that  the
latter  here  ended  his  life  (1).

(1)   Beloch  399.

-  377  .


Nola  is  said  to  have  been  occupied  originally  by  the  mys-
terious Ausonisms.  While  there  is  little  probability  that  a
Chalcidian  settlement  was  made  here,  as  cledmed  by  some
Roman  writers,  there  is  good  reason  for  thmking  that  this
local ty  formed  a  part  of  the  conquests  of  the  Etruscans.  But
when  Nola  first  appeared  in  history  at  the  beginning  of  the
fifth  century  B.  C,  it  -was  under  the  sway  of  the  Samnites,  and
joined  in  aiding  the  Campsuiian  Greeks  against  the  Romsins.
During  this  struggle  it  was  taken  by  storm  and  henceforth  be-
came tribut£uy  to  Rome.  When  Hamnibal  became  master  of
Capua,  a  strong  sentiment  developed  in  his  favor  at  Nola,  but
as  a  result  of  the  efforts  of  the  local  senate  the  allegiance  to
Rome  wcis  maintained.  In  the  Social  War  the  city  came  under
the  power  of  the  Samnites,  and  was  only  recaptured  by  Sulla
at  the  close  of  a  decade  of  efforts  for  its  subjection  (80  B.  C).  A
few  years  later  it  was  plundered  by  the  hordes  of  Speurtacus
(73  B.  C).

As  a  result  of  these  reverses,  Nola  became  quite  insignif-
icant. It  was  colonized  at  different  times,  first  probably  by  Sulla
and  sJterwards  by  the  Emperors.  In  the  later  Empire  it  agedn
beccime  a  place  of  importance,  sometimes  the  seat  of  the  prov-
incial governor  and  the  Residence  of  the  noted  bishop  Pauli-
nus.  In  410  it  once  more  suffered  capture  at  the  hands  of
Alaric  (1).

In  comp2urison  with  the  size  and  importsuice  of  Nola  very
meager  evidence  has  been  transmitted  about  its  religious  condi-
tions. This  condition  is  due  chiefly  to  the  lack  of  systematic
excavation.  The  domain  of  Nola  like  that  of  Capua  comprised
veirious  pagi  the  names  of  which  have  been  in  part  preserved.
Unlike  those  around  Capua,  however,  they  were  not  named
from  gods,  and  no  information  has  been  preserved  relative  to
their  religious  exercises  (2).


(1)  For  the  history  of  Nola  see  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  142;  Beloch
389-392;  A.  Sambon  I,  310  f .  ;  Mariotti,  De  urbis  Nolae  aniiquissima  historic
adnotatiunculae  in  Arch.  etor.  campano  1  (1889)  173  f . ;  Nissen,  It.  Landes\,
II.  755.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1278-1280;  N.  S.  1900,  101;  Stein  Jahresber.  Uber  die
Forts,   der  class.  Alterthumsv).   CXL   (1909)  243.

-  378  -


JUPITER.

In  regatrd  to  the  cult  of  Jupiter  the  evidence  is  very  un-
satisfactory. That  the  god  was  recognized  here  is  proved  by
the  appeareince  of  the  neone  regio  louia  applied  to  one  of  the
municipal  divisions  (I).  But  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  the
cult  was  old,  since  the  name  of  the  regio  is  preserved  only  in  a
late  inscription.  Furthermore  the  designation  of  the  other  district
that  has  been  preserved,  the  regio  Romana  points  to  the  naming
of  the  parts  of  the  city  with  these  designations  at  a  compsura-
tively  late  date  after  Romsin  influence  predominated.  On  the
other  hcind  a  comparison  with  the  other  CgunpEinian  cities  in-
dicates the  worship  of  an  Oscan  Jupiter  in  the  eeu-ly  period,
and  it  is  practically  certain  that  he  W2is  present  at  that  time.

According  to  the  old  antiqusurian  Leone  a  temple  of  Jupiter
occupied  the  site  of  the  Cathedral,  and  its  pavement  is  to  be
found  in  the  chapel  of  S.  Felice.  The  evidence  for  the  presence
of  the  distinctly  Roman  cult  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter  will  be
treated  in  a  later  section  (2).

CERES,  DIONYSUS,  VENUS.

Demeter,  Cora,  and  Dionysus  were  probably  worshipped
here  in  the  mysteries  as  elsewhere  in  southern  Italy.  But  the
so-  called  Nolan  vases  which  often  reproduce  the  figures  of
these  deities,  especially  Dionysus,  were  probably  an  importa-
tion rather  than  the  product  of  local  factories;  hence  they  do
not  offer  competent  evidence  for  the  cult  of  these  gods  (3).
Dionysus  is  mentioned  once  at  the  very  close  of  Paganism  in
the  works  of  Paulinus  of  Nola,  who  attacks  the  non-Christian


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1255  =  D.  6348:  Clementiani.  Pollio  lulio  Clementiano  u.  p.
patrono  inimitabili,  largissimo,  cuius  facta  enarari  (sic)  non  ix>ssuiit.  Eius
meritis  regio    louia   statuam    censuit.

(2)  Leone,  De  Nola  Chap.  8;  Beloch  403;  Remondini,  Delia  Nolana  ec-
clesiastica  storia  I,  80.  Both  Remondini  and  Leone  located  a  temple  of  Jupiter
Seruator  on  the  site  of  S.  Salvatore  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the  city.

(3)  Lenormant,  La  Grande-Grhce  I,  407;  Walters,  Hist.  Anc.  Pottery  I,
82;  Patroni,  La  ceramica  antica  nelV Italia  meridionale  in  Atti  Nap.  XIX  (1897-8)
part  2,   33.

.   379   -


denunciation  Dionysus  is  assailed  along  with  Venus.  The  tone
beliefs  and  practices  of  his  fellow  citizens  (1).  In  the  Bishop's
of  the  pzissage,  however,  shows  that  the  vices  and  debauchery
with  which  these  divinities  were  particulsurly  associated  rather
than  their  specific  cults  formed  the  object  of  his  condemnation,
and  that  his  chief  warfeire  was  directed  against  vice  and  intem-
perance. It  does  not  indicate  any  noteworthy  cult  of  Venus  and
Bacchus.  Much  less  can  one  say  with  the  old  writer  Gorio  that
the  former  was  worshipped  zealously  as  Venus  Augusta  (2).

APOLLO  AND  ATHENA.

The  head  of  Athena  weso-ing  an  Athenian  type  of  helmet
appezu-s  upon  many  coins  of  Nola  belonging  to  the  fourth
century  B.  C,  while  Apollo  is  found  upon  issues  of  both  silver
and  bronze,  -which  were  minted  in  the  third  century  (about  270
B.  C.  gmd  later)  under  Roman  domination  (3).  This  money ,.
however,  which  exhibits  on  one  side  the  man-headed  bull,  is
regarded  by  liumismatists  as  an  imitation  of  the  coinage  of
Neapolis,  and  so  offers  little  evidence  for  the  worship  of  these
divinities.  Remondini  erroneously  considered  that  there  waa
evidence  for  a  temple  of  Apollo  (4).

MINOR  DEITIES.

Under  this  head  may  be  grouped  the  divinities,  who  were
perhaps  important  in  the  life  of  the  community,  yet  have  left
almost  no  traces  of  their  influence.  Diana's  worship  is  proved
by  one  mutilated  inscription  recording  a  dedication  made  by  a

(1)  Paulinus  of  Nola,  carmen  XIX,    169  f . :

Sic   itaque   et   nostra   haec  Christi   miserantis  amore

Felicis    meruit    muniri    Nola    sepulchro

in  qua

prostibulum  Veneris  simul  et  dementia  Bacclii
numina  erant   miseris,    foedoque   nefaria  ritu
sacra  celebrabat   sociata  libido  furor i

(2)  Gorio,  quoted  by  Remondini,  op.  cit.  1,  93.  The  inscription  that  waa
formerly  adduced  as  proof  for  the  cult  of  Ceres  and  even  for  a  temple  has
been   pronounced  a  forgery.   C.   /.   L.  X,    175*,   Remondini,   op.   cit.    I,   81.

(3)  A.  Sambon  317-19.  385-6;  Head  40-1  ;  Garrucci  92,  PI.  89.

(4)  Remondini,    1,  89.

-  380  -


certain  D.  Granius  at  the  bidding  of  the  goddess  (1).  She  was
probably  adored  at  a  local  shrine.  A  magister  Mercurialis  is
recorded  in  the  person  of  L.  Sattius  Phileros,  a  freedman  be-
longing to  the  age  of  Augustus;  for  an  early  cult  of  Mercury
no  evidence  is  at  hand  (2).  Remondini,  using  the  uncritical
methods  of  his  age,  claimed  the  existence  of  a  temple  of  Mer-
cury, and  likewise  of  various  other  deities  such  ais  Victoria,
Flora,  and  Cybele  (3).

JUNO.

Besides  the  cults  located  in  or  near  the  city  a  record  has
been  left  of  two  others  whose  sanctuaries  were  some  distance
away.  Somewhere  in  the  district  surrounding  Nola  there  existed
in  early  times  a  town  or  village  called  Celemna,  which  is  men-
tioned by  Vergil  in  an  enumeration  of  Campanian  localities;
it  disappeared  entirely  as  a  separate  community,  but  Servius
states  that  the  place  continued  to  be  sacred  to  Juno  (4).  In  his
attempt  to  prove  the  recent  origin  of  the  Juno  cult  as  a  result
of  Romeui  influence  in  Campania  and  elsewhere.  Otto  disre-
gards this  passage  as  of  lio  importance  (5).  Yet  while  it  is
indefinite,  the  fact  that  a  shrine  stood  here  apparently  as  late
as  the  Empire,  when  the  town  had  ceased  to  exist  or  at  least
had  greatly  declined,  indicates  that  both  together  flourished
at  an  eeirly  period.  As  the  tendency  of  a  spot  once  consecrated
to  maintain  its  sanctity  is  well  known,  it  is  probable  that  the
worship  of  Juno  was  continued  in  this  shrine  long  after  the
decay  of  the  community  that  established  it.

HERCULES.

More  is  known  about  the  cult  of  Hercules,  which  the
people  of  Nola  ceurried  on  jointly  with  the  residents  of  Abella;

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,    1234:   D.   Granius  Her....  ex  imper(io)  Dianae  d.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1272  =  D.  6351=Vagreri  1763:  L.  Sattio  L.  I.  Phileroti
magistro  Mercurial!   et   Augustalei   Nolae,   et   Daeriae    O    I.    Rufae   uxori  etc. —

(3)  Remondini,  op.  cit   1.  97,  89,  94.

(4)  Verg.  Aen.  VII,  739;  Servius'  comment:  Locus  Campaniae  est  Ce-
lemna,   aacer   lunoni,    Roscher,    luno,    Roschex    II,    605.

(5)  Otto,  iuno  in  Philologus  LXIV  (1905)  174.

-  381    -


as  the  latter  city,  in  spite  of  its  inferior  importemce,  is  named
first  in  the  record  it  perhaps  had  a  nominal  precedence  in  the
settlement  of  affairs  connected  with  the  cult.  None  of  this  su-
perority  appears,  however,  in  the  various  provisions  for  the
msuiagement  of  the  shrine,  which  aie  preserved  in  an  impor-
tant Oscan  inscription,  the  cippus  Ahellanus  (]).  These  regu-
lations were  drawn  up  by  a  superior  magistrate  of  each  town
assisted  by  a  committee  selected  for  this  business  by  the  re-
spective senates.  According  to  the  agreement  then  formulated
the  territory  around  the  shrine  and  euiy  building  erected  upon
it  were  considered  £is  the  joint  i>ossession  of  both;  within  the
sacred  precinct  itself  no  one  was  permitted  to  build,  the
treasury  was  common  property  and  any  division  of  its  funds
was  made  on  the  principle  of  share  and  share  alike.  The
temple  was  evidently  on  the  border  of  the  lands  held  by  the
two  cities,  but  its  exact  location  is  unknown.  The  inscription
has  been  eissigned  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.  C,
but  contains  regulations  for  a  shrine  that  had  long  existed.
Nor  is  it  likely  that  many  of  its  provisions  were  innovations  (2).

ROMAN  CULTS.

The  Roman  colonists  at  Nola  had  their  official  priests  two
of  whom,  the  augur  and  the  pontiff,  are  recorded  in  inscrip-
tions. No  individuaJ  who  held  the  latter  office  is  known,  but
the  namie  of  an  incumbent  of  the  former,  Fisius  Serenus  Rutilius
Caesianus  has  been  preserved  in  two  epitaphs  (3).

The  evidence  for  a  Capitolium  at  Nola  is  untrustworthy.
Its  presence  is  definitely  asserted  in  the  Acta  sancti  Felicis
preshyteri  Romani,  where  the  Saint  is  represented  as  calling
upon  his  persecutors  to  Conduct  him  into  the  presence  of  their

(1)  Buck,  No,  1  (with  ample  commentary);  von  Planta,  ^4o.  127;  Con-
way,  No.  95.   Cesano.   Hercules,   Ruggiero,    III,    714.

(2)  For  references  to  shrines  managed  jointly  see  Buck,  Grammar  of
0»can  and  Umbrian  228.

(3)  C.    /.   L.   X,    1269:    Fisiae   Sex.    f.    Rufinae  sorori  Fisi   Sereni   aug(uri8)

Larum   ministri   1.    d.    d.    d.    X,    1275:    Fisio   Sereno  Rutilio   Caesiano    Iluiro

auguri  uixit  etc.  X,   1281  :   q.  bis,  praef.  bis,  Iluir  pontifex  menta  statuas

d(e)  p(ecunia)  s(ua)  f(ecit)

-  382  -


greatest  god  up  on  the  Capitol  (I).  But  two  saints  of  the  same
name  have  been  confused  by  the  author  of  this  account,  and
acta  of  this  cleiss,  which  show  a  tendency  to  associate  a  Capitol
with  the  various  martyrs  are  in  general  unreliable.  Hence  the
assertions  about  such  a  temple  in  this  community  must  be
received  with  scepticism  (2).  At  the  same  time  there  is  no
improbability  is  supposing  that  it  was  present.  As  the  city
wets  built  on  level  ground,  the  Capitol,  if  it  existed,  was
doubtless  elevated  as  much  as  possible  by  the  employment  of
msissive  substructures;  such  indeed  seems  to  have  been  the
regular  mode  of  procedure  in  similar  circumstances  (3).

The  colonists  also  recognized  and  revered  the  protecting
spirit  of  their  settlement,  as  is  demonstrated  by  an  inscription
recording  the  benefactions  of  C.  Catius  in  honor  of  the  Genius
of  the  colony  and  the  colonists  (4).  The  term  Genius  occurs
again  iu  a  very  brief  inscription  coupled  with  the  Lares.  Here,
as  app>ears  from  a  comparison  with  the  evidence  from  Pompeii,
allusion  is  made  to  the  Genius  of  the  master  of  the  house  and
to  the  Lares  of  the  system  of  worship  reorganized  by  Augus-
tus (5).  A  body  of  ministri,  who  probably  served  the  domes-
tic cult  of  a  leading  citizen,  have  left  a  dedication  in  honor
of  the  sister  of  the  augur  Fisius  Serenus  (6).

THE  IMPERIAL  CULT.

The  mention  of  the  cult  of  the  Genius  offers  an  esisy  transi-
tion to  a  discussion  of  the  adoration  of  the  Emperor,  several
phases  of  which  have  left  their  traces.  Because  of  the  fact
that  Augustus  owned  here  a  herediteury  estate  and  here  ended

(1)  Ada  sanctorum  Janusury  II,  233.  Sed  si  uultis  probaie  uirtutem  domini
mei  Ie8u  Christi,  me  ad  Capitolium  ire  iubete,  ut  ipsum  louem  princii>em  dae-
moaiorum    uestrorum  mere    faciam.

(2)  Kuhfeldt,  De  CapitoUia  imperii  Romani  19;  Allard,  Lea  Capitoles
provinciaux  et  les  actes  des  martyrs  in  La  science  catholique  I  (1887)  361  ;
Castan,   Les   Capitoles   provinciaux    du    monde   romain   25.

(3)  See  pp.  243.  364.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1236  =  D.  5392:  C.  Catius  M.  f.  Illluir  campum  publice
aequamdum  curauit,  maceriem  et  scholas  et  solarium,  semitam  de  s.  p.  f.  c.
Genio  coloniae  et  codonorum  honor's  causa,  quod   perpetuo  feliciter  utantur.

(5)  C.  /.  L.   X.    1235:    Genio  et  Laribus.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X.    1269.   See  p.   382   (3).

-  383  .


Kis  life,  the  community  felt  that  in  him  they  had  a  deity  attach-
ed to  them  by  special  ties,  and  took  a  corresponding  interest
in  his  worship.  The  Augustales  naturally  formed  an  important
organization,  which  was  called  either  simply  Augustales  or
ordo  Augustalium.  Their  activity  included  the  adoration  of  the
Victoria  Augusta  in  whose  honor  they  made  a  dedication.
The  only  indication  of  date  in  the  three  extant  inscriptions
that  refer  to  the  organization  collectively  occurs  in  a  fragment
belonging  in  time  after  the  deification  of  Titus  (1).  The  names
of  at  least  two  of  the  members  have  been  preserved,  both  of
whom  seem  to  have  been  freedmen  (2).

Another  inscription  records  the  name  of  L.  Sattius  Phile-
ros,  a  magister  Mercurialis  et  Augustalis  (3).  There  is  some
uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  last  word  in  the  man's  title  should
be  taken  as  a  qualif3ang  adjective  with  magister  or  wh*  her  it
refers  to  a  separate  office.  Mommsen  believed  that  fne  first
alternative  was  true,  but  this  man,  who  belonged  to  the  liber-
tini,  may  well  have  been  an  Augustalis  as  well  as  an  officisJ
in  another  depsurtment  of  the  Imperial  cult.  At  any  rate  the
worship  of  Mercury  here  as  at  Pompeii  undoubtedly  became
blended  with  the  cult  of  Augustus  on  the  basis  of  the  supposed
resemblance  of  the  Emperor  to  that  deity  (4).  The  inscription
recording  this  office  is  assigned  by  Dessau  on  the  authority  of
Mommsen  to  the  life  time  of  Augustus.  To  the  same  period
belongs  another  inscription  relating  that  the  Laurinienses,  who
were  seemingly  the  inhabitants  of  a  ulcus  or  pagus  in  the  terri-
tory of  Nola,  had  restored  some  object,  probably  an  alteir,  used
in  the  Imperial  cult.  These  people  refer  to  themselves  on  the


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1237:  Victorian  Aug.  Augustales;  C.  /.  L.  X.  1249.
See  p.  385  (3).  C.  /.  L.  X,  1261  :  ....procuratoori  diui  Vespasiani  et  diui  Titi
Augustales    1,    d.   <d.   d.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1267:  Caesiae  Archeni  Concus  M.  Critonio  Hipparco  Au-

gustali  etc.;  C.  /.  L.  X,    1268:  L.  Caluidio  L.  1.  Felici  Augustali  locus  datus

utrisque   ex  decurion.   decret.   etc.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1272  =  D.  6351.  See  p.  263  f.

(4)  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.  142a;  Mourlot,  L'histoire  de  VAugustalite
dans  V empire  romain  81.  The  inscriptions  that  present  Augustus  as  Mercurius
Augustus  are  collected  by  de  Ruggiero,  lAuguslua,  Ruggiero  I,  926.  See  p.  264  i.

-  384  -


same  stone  as  cultores  (I).  This  inscription,  which  must  be
dated  prior  to  the  death  of  Augustus  because  he  is  not  alluded
to  as  a  Diuus,  is  accompanied  by  sculptured  reliefs  referring  to
a  sacrificial  scene.

Above  all  others  devoted  to  the  worship  of  the  Emperor
was  the  fletmen,  who  was  regularly  a  man  of  prominence  in  civic
affairs.  Among  the  holders  of  the  priesthood  was  L.  Curiatius,
who  was  an  army  officer  (2).  To  the  same  cult  belonged  the
flamen  perpetuus,  L.  Claudius  Pollio  lulianus  lulius  Galliceuius,
who  belonged  to  the  senatorial  order  and  filled  importeuit  offices
for  the  Roman  people  at  home  and  abroad.  He  lived  during  the
later  Empire,  but  although  he  is  named  as  consul,  his  date  is
uncertain  (3).  The  exact  significance  of  the  word  perpetuus  in
this  man's  title  is  disputed  (4).

Two  places  are  known  to  have  received  consecration  in
honor  of  Augustus.  Immediately  after  his  death  the  house  in
which  he  died  was  converted  into  a  shrine  (5).  Preparations
were  doubtless  made  at  once  looking  toward  the  erection  of  a
splendid  temple,  which  was  completed  only  after  the  lapse  of
some  years.  When  Tiberius  determined  to  retire  to  the  island  of
Capri,  one  of  the  pretexts  which  he  announced  for  visiting  the
region  of  Campania  was  the  desire  to  be  present  at  the  dedica-
tion of  a  temple  consecrated  to  the  divine  Augustus  at  Nola.
This  notice  fixes  the  date  of  the  dedication  as  26  A.   D.   (6).


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1238:  Augusto  sacium.  Restituerunt  Laurinienses  pecunia
sua.  Cultores  d(onum)  d(ederunt).  Cp.  Minervini,  Bull.  Nap.  Ill  (1845)  102.
The  inscriptions  of  the  various  cultores  are  collected  by  Breccia,  Cultores,
Ruggiero  II,    1296.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1262:  L.  Curiatio  L.  f.  flamini  diui  Augusti  prim.  pil.  trib.
milit.    II   praef.  castr.   praef.   fabr.   arbitratu   Hyacinthi  lib.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1249  =  Vaglieri  1484:  L.  CI.  PoUioni  luliano  lulio  Gallicano
c.  u.  Xuiro  sclitibus  (sic)  iudicandis  quaest.  candidato,  adlec(to)  inter  pretor(io8),
procos.  prou.  Baetic(ae)  legato  prou.  Asiae,  patrono  col.,  flamini  perpet(uo),
ordo  Augustal(ium).

(4)  JulUan.  Flamen,  D.-S.  II.  2088;  Hirschfeld,  Hermes  XXVI  (1891)  150;
Beurlier,  Le  culte  impirial  183  f . ;  Herbst,  De  sacerdotiis  Romanorum  munici-
palibus  61.

(5)  Dio  Cassius  LVI,  46,  3:  xaC  ot  xal  Yj  sv  NwXtq  oMa,  dv^  jisxYiXXagsv
6xs[i£vtaerj.

(6)  Tac.    ann.    IV,   57;   Suet.    Tib.   40.

-  385   -

25


Beloch  locates  this  temple  southwest  of  the  modem  city  near
the  railroad  station  where  important  ruins  once  existed.  For
this  identification,  which  goes  back  to  the  antiqusurian  Leone,
an  inscription  reading  templum  Augusti  was  cited,  but  this
evidence  was  rightly  classed  as  spurious  by  Mommsen  (1).
Such  a  designation  does  not  fit  the  sanctuary  at  Nola;  as  this
was  finished  long  after  the  death  of  Augustus,  it  should  have
referred  to  him  as  a  Diuus.  The  location  of  the  temple  is  there-
fore uncertain.  Likewise  no  evidence  exists  for  maintaining  that
a  shrine  for  the  worship  of  Hadrian  was  established  here  (2).

ORIENTAL  RELIGIONS.

Allusions  to  the  religions  that  came  from  the  Orient  are  not
frequent.  Paulinus  of  Nola,  speaking  of  pagan  ceremonies  per-
formed by  bands  of  semiuiri  seems  to  refer  to  the  mysteries  of
Magna  Mater  as  celebrated  in  his  day  (3).  An  epitaph  regarded
by  Tamassa  as  of  no  great  auitiquity  is  partly  written  in  He-
brew (4).

The  city  becEune  an  important  Christian  center  but  no  de-
tails relative  to  the  establishement  or  eairly  history  of  the  Church
have  been  preserved.  At  the  end  of  the  third  or  in  the  fourth
century  lived  a  priest  called  Felix,  who  suffered  as  a  confessor
of  the  faith  during  the  persecutions  but  did  not  meet  the  doom
of  a  martyr.  But  he  was  honored  with  the  tribute  due  to  one  who
had  suffered  a  glorious  martyrdom,  and  received  the  eulogies  of
the  renowned  bishop  Paulinus,  who  was  devoted  to  his  cult  (5).


(1)  C.  I.  L.  X,  174*;  Remondini  Delia  Ndilana  ecclesiastica  storia,  1,  85;
Beloch  404.

(2)  Remondini    I,    97.

(3)  Paul.  Nol.  carm.  XXXII,  88:  Nunc  quoque  semiuiri  mysteria  turpia
plangunt ;   Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cybele  551    (5).

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1367;  Tamassia.  Aiti  del  r.  Inst  Vencio  LXIII  (1903-4)  807.

(5)  Greg.  Tur.,  'glor.  mart.  CIlI ;  Aug.  cur.  mort.  XVI;  Paul  Nol.,  carm.
XIV,  XVI,  XVIII  etc.;  Lucius,  Die  Anjdnge  des  Heiligenkults  in  der  christli-
chen  Kirche  174  (2);  Delehaye,  Les  origines  du  culte  des  martyrs  347;  Lanzoni,
Le  origini  del  cristianesimo  nella  Campania  romana  in  Rid.  storico-crit.  delle
scienze  teol.   VI    (1910)  280.

-   386   -


According  to  a  legend  contained  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum  three
virgins  Archelaa,  Thecla  £md  Susanna  who  had  come  from
Rome  suffered  martyrdom  under  Diocletian  (I).  North  of  Nola
in  a  spot  called  Cimitile  was  an  ancient  Christian  cemetery  which
has  yielded  a  goodly  number  of  epitaphs,  some  of  which  have
been  dated  in  the  fourth  century  (2).  Here  St.  Felix  was  buried,
and  over  his  grave  according  to  the  custom  of  the  time  was
reared  a  basilica  (3).

In  the  flat,  east  central  portion  of  the  Campanisui  plain  were
situated  the  town  and  tributauy  country  of  Acerrae.  The  town
itself  occupied  the  site  of  the  modem  Acerra.  It  was  a  small  dis-
trict, low  Eund  swampy  as  a  result  of  the  overflowing  of  the
Clanius,  and  lay  between  the  little  district  of  Atella  on  the  one
hand  and  the  broad  domains  of  Nola  on  the  other.  Its  neighbor
on  the  north  was  Suessula;  on  the  south  it  touched  the  borders
of  the  Neapolitem  territory.  Like  its  nearest  neighbors  to  the
north  and  west  it  was  an  unimportant  place  with  an  uneventful
history.  Subject  successively  to  the  power  of  Samnium  and
Rome,  it  suffered  destruction  in  the  Hannibzdic  War  as  a  result
of  its  loyalty  to  the  latter  city,  but  after  the  fall  of  Capua  was
rebuilt.  (211  B.  C.)  Beneath  its  walls  the  Romans  won  an  im-
portant battle  in  the  Social  War  against  the  attack  of  Papius
Mutilus.  Its  inhabitEuits  were  few  in  the  epoch  of  the  Empire,
though  certain  veterans  of  Augustus  were  settled  here  (4).

The  few  inscriptions  dealing  with  religious  matters  belong
exclusively  to  the  Empire,  and  from  one  cause  or  another  do  not
afford  us  any  certain  information  (5).  One  connected  with  the
cult  of  the  Emperors  mentions  a  temple,  but  the  mutilated  con-


(1)  Acta  sanctorum   January    II,    555.

(2)  C.  /.  L.   X,    1338-1400.

(3)  Delehaye,  ^loc.  cit. ;  H.  Holzinger,  Die  Basilika  des  Paulinua  zu  Nola
in  Zeits.  fur  bildende  Kunst  XX  (1885)  135  f . ;  Bertaux,  L'art  dans  V Italic  me-
ridionale  31    f.

(4)  Beloch  382;  Hulsen,  Acerrae,  P.-W.  I.  154;  de  Ruggiero,  Acerrae
Ruggiero,    I,   25;   Mommsen,    C.   /.  L.    X,    p.   362.

(5)  An  abbreviated  inscription.  C.  /.  L.  X.  3758  may  belong  to  the  res
sacrae.  It  reads  C.  Fuficio  C.  f.  Fal.  Fangoni  h.  p.  aed.  ex  testamento.  The
supplement  is  generally  made  homini  probo  aedili.  but  it  may  also  be  made
to   read   heredes   posuerunt  aediculam.

-   387   -

25*


dition  of  the  stone  renders  a  sure  interpretation  impossible  (1).
It  evidently  contained  originally  seven  iambic  senarii  flattering
the  ruler,  and  was  due  to  a  primopilaris  L.  Aurelius  Rufus;
from  the  mode  of  designating  his  legion  the  inscription  is
assigned  to  the  first  century  A.  D.  The  words  of  the  first  line
templum  hoc  sacratum  Her  were  first  completed  so  as  to  form
the  word  HercuU,  but  Mommsen's  supplements  first  heroum
and  later  heroibus  seem  more  probable  and  have  been  generally
accepted.  According  to  his  first  opinion  the  Emperor  who  is
flattered  here  is  Domitian;  according  to  his  later  opinion  the
inscription  deals  with  a  shrine  of  the  lares  Augusti,  where  un-
der the  appellation  TJpoos?  the  grandsons  of  Augustus,  Gaius
and  Lucius  Caesar  were  honored  (2).

The  reading  of  the  next  inscription  is  certain,  but  there  is
some  doubt  about  its  provenience.  It  is  an  honorary  decree
passed  by  the  ingenui  honorati  and  Augustales  in  honor  of  a
distinguished  benefactor  of  the  community  Gn.  Stennius  Egna-
tius,  who  w£is  a  priest  of  Isis  and  Serapis.  If  the  stone  really
belongs  to  Acerrae,  it  proves  the  existence  here  not  only  of  the
cult  of  the  Emperors,  which  was  everywhere  prevalent,  but
also  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  of  Egypt,  whose  presence  in  a
little  inland  town  is  much  more  remsurkable.  Noteworthy  is  the
circumstance  that  the  priest  was  a  man  of  high  standing  who
had  filled  all  the  municipal  offices  (3).

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3757=Vaglieri  1133:  Templum  hoc  sacratum  her(oibus
qui)  quod  ger(unt)

Augusta  nomen,   felix  (illis)  remaneat,
stirpis   suae  laetetur   u(t   regno)   parens.
Nam  quom  te,  Caesar,  tem{pus)  expK>scet  deum
caeloque  repetes   8ed(em,  qua)    mundum   reges,
sint  hei,  tua  quei  sorte  te(rrae)  huic  imperent
regantque   nos    felicibus    uoteis    sueis.
L.    Aurelius    L.    f.    Pal.    Rufus    primopilaris    etc.  ;    Minervini,    Bull.    Nap.
n.  8.  IV  (1856)  155;  Nissen,  Inschriften  aus  Campanien  in  Hermes  I  (1866)  151  ;
de  Ruggiero,    op.    cii.,   26.

(2)  Nissen,  loc.  cit.  thought  that  the  ruler  to  whom  alluson  was  made
was  Claudius  and  that  there  was  a  vagtie  reference  to  his  successor  that  would
include  both   Nero  and  Brittanicus.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3759=Vaglieri  2001  ;  Heuresi.  Gn.  Stennio  Egnatio  Gn.
Stenni  Egnati  Rufi  fil  Fal.  Primo,  iiiiuir(o)  iterum  q(uin)  q(uennali),  omnibus
onexibua   et    honoribus    functo,    8ac(eTdoti)    p(ublico)    deae    Isidis    At    &erapidis.

-   388   -


I


The  territory  of  Abel  la  comprised  a  narrow  valley  in  the
extreme  northeastern  part  of  the  Campaniaui  territory,  separated
from  Samnium  by  the  lefty  Mons  Tabernus  (Monte  Vergine).
On  the  south  this  district  was  limited  by  the  possessions  of
Nola,  a  more  powerful  city  with  which  Abella  generally  had
friendly  relations.  The  ancient  town  site  is  situated  northwest
of  the  present  Avella  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  already  men-
tioned. Quite  overshadowed  in  importance  by  its  southern
neighbor  Nola,  it  never  became  prominent ;  but,  though  it  always
remained  small  and  obscure,  it  possessed  the  public  buildings
such  as  theater,  basilica,  and  ampitheater  that  were  regularly
found  in  more  important  places,  emd  carried  on  an  active  muni-
cipal life.

As  a  result  of  the  comparative  insignificance  of  Abella,
reference  is  seldom  made  to  it  in  history.  As  in  the  case  of  Nola
a  few  writers  claimed  for  it  a  Chalcidian  origin;  actually  we
find  it  first  under  the  control  of  the  Samnites  and  having  definite
relations  with  Nola.  After  coming  under  the  Roman  power  it
continued  steadfast  in  its  allegizuice  at  all  times  with  the  result
that  during  the  SocieJ  Wai  it  weis  burned  by  a  band  from  Nola
(87  B.  C).  It  was  made  a  Roman  colony  perhaps  by  Augustus,
though  this  matter  is  quite  uncertain.  In  the  fourth  century
Paulinus  of  Nola  prsdsed  it  as  a  zealous  Christian  community  ( 1 ).

Information  about  religious  conditions  is  exceedingly
scanty.  On  a  series  of  vases  from  Abella  the  relation  of  the  god
Dionysus  to  the  cult  of  the  dead  is  psurticularly  noticeable  (2).
The  temple  of  Hercules  shared  by  this  town  with  Nola  has  been
already  discussed.  As  the  Abellans  in  spite  of  the  smallness  of
their  city  are  mentioned  first  in  the  treaty,  this  circumstance  may
indicate  that  their  right  to  the  worship  and  protection  of  this
god  was  considered  of  paramount  importance  (3).  One  inscrip-
tion mentions  an  association  of  the  cultores  louis,  who  desired

curat(ori)  operum  publ.,  ingenui,  honorati  et  Augustales  patrono  dignissimo
etc.  The  ascription  to  Acerrae  rests  on  the  testimony  of  one  witness  (Lupoli)
alone.    Drexler,    his,    Roscher    U,   399.

(1)  Beloch  411  f.;  Hiilsen,  Abella.  P.-W.  I.  27;  de  Ruggiero.  Abella,
Ruggiero  I,   15;  Monunsen,  C.  /.  L.  X,  p.   136.

(2)  Patroni,  La  ceramica  antica  nell'It.  merid.  in  Atti  Nap.  XIX  (1897-8)
part.  2.   171.

(3)  See  p.   381    f.

.  389  -


to  honor  a  distinguished  benefactor,  N.  Pettius  Rufus,  by  the
erection  of  a  statue.  The  association  forms  one  of  a  considerable
number  connected  with  various  phases  of  the  god  Jupiter,  as
revealed  by  the  extant  epigraphical  evidence.  While  closely
associated  with  the  local  cult  of  the  god,  these  people  doubtless
formed  a  society  the  principal  object  of  which  was  to  provide
proper  burial  for  the  nembers  (1).  Another  inscription,  bearing
the  date  of  Jan.  1,  28  A.  D.,  states  that  L.  Poppaeus  Vrbcinus
dedicated  to  ApK)llo  a  statue  and  pedestal  (2).  The  cult  of  Venus
louia  existed  here  as  at  Capua;  this  is  attested  by  the  name  of
one  priestess  which  has  been  preserved.  This  woman  was  called
officially  sacerdos  louiae  Veneriae  Abellanorum  (3).  A  fragment
seems  to  allude  to  an  aedicula,  but  there  is  no  indication  to
show  what  god  wets  worshipped  there  (4).

ROMAN  CULTS.

Religious  officials  of  the  Roman  colony  are  represented  by
the  mention  of  an  augur  in  a  small  fragment  of  an  inscription  (5).
More  evidence  is  available  for  proving  the  worship  of  the  Emp-
erors, but  is  confined  to  a  few  notices  relative  to  the  collegium
of  Augustales.  M.  Plaetorius  Onirus  was  a  biselliarius  and  re-


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1216;  N.  Pettio  N.  f.  Gal.  Rufo  Iluir,  q.  aliment,  q.  pec.
publicae  curator!  frument.  cultores  louis  ob  meritum  eius  1.  d.  d.  d.  The  in-
stances of  the  cultores  connected  with  the  worship  of  Jupiter  are  collected  by
Breccia,    Cultores,    Ruggiero   11,    1296.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1196  =  Vaglieri  1027:  Ap.  lunio  SiUno.  P.  Silio  Nerua
COS.,  k.  lanuar  L.  Poppaeus  Vrbanus  ApoUoni  signum  sacr.  sedemque  dikauit.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1207  =  Vaglieri  1984  =  D.  3186:  Auilliae  Aeliane.  matri
Egnati  Rufi  equitis  Romani  sacerdoti  louiae  Veneriae  Abellanorum  ....  The  in-
scription is  interpreted  by  Vaglieri  as  an  allusion  to  a  priestess  who  served
both  Jupiter  and  Venus,  but  the  appearance  of  a  priestess  of  Jupiter  is  odd  ;
Dessau  considers  that  the  form  sacerdotis  is  meant  in  the  inscription  with  a
reference  to  Egnatius  Rufus  as  priest.  But  it  seems  more  probable  that  the
intention  of  the  writer  of  the  inscription  was  to  express  the  name  of  a  god-
dess identical  with  the  Venus  louia  worshipped  at  Capua  or  at  least  similar
to  her.

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X,   1197.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X.   1203.

-  390  -


ceived  the  distinction  of  the  ornamenta  decurionaUa  (I).  This
community  at  first  had  officials  called  magistri  Augustales,  one
of  whom  Q.  Calidius  Epaphroditus  is  recorded  in  an  epitaph.
This  mem  held  also  the  position  of  quaestor  probably  in  the
same  collegium.  The  inscription  belongs  to  the  first  century  as
no  magistri  of  the  Augustales  are  cited  later  than  that  period  (2).

SUESSULA.

The  location  of  Suessula  is  determined  by  the  Tabula  Peu-
tingerana,  which  places  it  nine  miles  from  Capua  and  the  ssune
distance  from  Nola.  It  lay  therefore  on  an  important  branch  of
the  uia  Appia  between  the  two  great  inland  cities  of  Campania
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  modern  town  of  Cancello,  where  in  a
place  called  Bosco  d*  Acerra  considerable  remains  were  still  in
existence  in  the  eighteenth  century.  Its  territory,  which  was
bounded  on  the  south  by  that  of  Acerrae,  had  its  greatest  extent
toward  the  north  and  in  that  direction  reached  to  the  borders
of  Seonnium.  As  it  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  Fauces  Caudinae,
it  wets  a  place  of  strategic  importance,  but  the  ground  itself  in
this  locality  has  always  been  low,  and  is  at  present  largely  a
swamp.

The  first  mention  of  the  town  in  history  occurs  in  connec-
tion with  the  events  of  338  B.  C,  when  the  citizens  received
from  Rome  the  privilege  of  limited  citizenship.  Afterward  it  is
frequently  referred  to  in  the  wars  against  the  Samnites  and
against  Hannibal,  in  which  it  formed  the  base  of  the  Roman
operations  in  Campania.  It  received  a  colony  from  Sulla.  In  the
early  Middle  Ages  it  is  mentioned  not  infrequently,  but  at  last
was  deserted  by  its  inhabitants  because  of  the  prevalence  of
malaria  (3).

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  I217  =  Vaglieri  1986:  N.  Plaetorio  Oniro,  Augustali  bisel-
liario,  honorato  ornamentis  decurionalibus  populus  Abellanus  acre  conlato,
quod  auxerit  ex  suo  ad  annonariam  pecuniam  etc.  Mourlot,  Essai  sur  I'kist.
de  I'Augustalite  98.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1209  =  Vaglieri  1985:  Diis  manib.  Q.  Calidius  Epaphro-
ditus, magister  Aug(ustalium),  quaestor  uiuos  sibi  et  Critoniae  uxori.  Hoc  m.
s.  8.  est  h.  n.  s.  Von  Premerstein,  Augustales,  Ruggiero  I,  836.  It  is  possible
that   this   inscription   comes   from  Nola.

(3)  Beloch  385;  F.  Lenormant,  Les  fouilles  de  Suessula  in  Gaz.  dea
beaux-arts  XXI  (1880)   105;  Mommsen,  C.  /.  L.  X.   p.  363.

.  391   -


All  the  information  about  the  religion  of  Suessula  that  has
come  down  to  us  id  contained  in  a  single  inscription;  this  is  a
dedication  made  by  the  cultores  of  Jupiter  Optimus  Msiximus
in  honor  of  a  patron  L.  Pompeius  Felicissimus  (1).  This  person-
age, who  was  a  man  of  prominence  in  the  community,  is
described  as  an  immunis  dendrophorus  and  as  a  sacerdos  of  the
Great  Mother.  In  other  words  he  received  his  position  in  the
association  without  any  payment  on  his  part,  and  as  happened
elsewhere  w£is  interested  in  two  phases  of  the  cult  of  the  great
Phrygian  deity.  As  elsewhere  too  in  southern  Italy  he  held  his
appointment  as  priest  by  virtue  of  an  authorization  on  the  part
of  the  Roman  bogord  of  quindecemuiri,  who  had  the  oversight  of
this  religion  in  the  v2uious  Italian  towns  (2).  The  shrine  of  Magna
Mater,  however,  w£is  not  located  in  the  town  of  Suessula  itself,
but  stood  four  or  five  miles  away  in  a  tributary  village  called
Vicus  Nouanensis,  which  was  situated  in  the  northern  pait  of  the
territory  belonging  to  Suessula  (3).  The  site  of  the  temple  was
perhaps  the  hill  upon  which  now  stemds  the  church  of  S.  Mau-ia
in  Vico.  Here  then  as  in  other  localities  in  Cemnpania  and  the
vicinity  the  goddess  wgis  venerated  as  a  hill  goddess  and  as  a
divinity  connected  with  healing  waters  (4).  As  at  Capua  she
seems  to  have  been  revered  on  the  same  mountain  that  bore  a
shrine  of  Jupiter,  so  here  her  cult  w£is  intimately  associated  with
that  of  the  same  god,  and  her  representative  was  honored  by  the
association  which  bore  his  name  (5).

(1)  C.  /.  L.  X.  3764  =  D.  6341  =  Vaglieri  1966:  L.  Pompeio  Felicissimo
immuni  dendr.  Suessul(ae)  et  sacerd(oti)  M{atris)  d(eum)  xvuir(inali)  et  q.  alim.
et  omnibus  rebus  ac  munerib(us)  perfuncto,  cultor(es)  I(ouis)  o(ptim)i  S(ues-
suleuii?  Hortensens  (sic)  patron,  b.  m.,  ob  sing  erga  se  liberalitatem  et  prae-
stantiam  1.  d.d.  (sic).  The  epithet  applied  to  Jupiter  is  uncertain  on  account
of  the  abbreviation.  Besides  the  supplement  suggested  in  the  text,  s(anctissiTni)
is  sometimes  given.  For  the  cultores  of  this  god  see  p,  389.

(2)  The  instances  of  investiture  at  the  hands  of  the  quindecimuiri  are
collected  by  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  Cyh^le  228.  See  p.  88  and  the  reference*
there.

(3)  This  place  was  called  later  Mutation  Nouae  (Itiner.  Hierosol.)  and
Ad  Nouas   (Tabula  Puet.)

(4)  Graillot,  op.  cit.  246,  419,  433.  Local  tradition  attesU  the  presence  of
a  temple  on  this  site;  Beloch  388.

(5)  Graillot  435  (4).

.  392  -


LITERNUM.

Liternum  was  situated  on  the  Campanian  coast  about  half
way  between  Cape  Misenum  and  the  mouth  of  the  Voltumus
River,  where  today  stands  the  tower  and  village  of  Tor  di  Pa-
tria.  Its  situation  was  unhealthy  because  of  the  stagnation  of
the  water  formed  by  the  lower  course  of  the  Cl2uiius  River,
which  at  that  time  found  its  way  to  the  sea  with  great  difficulty.
The  shore,  flat,  sandy  and  marshy,  has  always  been  covered
with  woods,  the  ancient  silua  Gallinaria.  Since  the  location  of
the  town  was  so  unfavorable,  it  never  became  important,  and
its  designation  in  the  early  Empire  is  ignobilis  (1).  It  first  appears
in  history  at  the  end  of  the  Second  Punic  War  £is  one  of  the  ten
units  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  praefectus  Capuam  Cumas.  It
became  a  Romeui  colony  the  same  year  that  settlers  were  sent
to  Puteoli  and  Vultumum,  its  neighbor  to  the  north.  (194  B.  C).
Here  Scipio  Africanus  (the  Elder)  possessed  a  villa  to  which  he
retired  when  he  gave  up  public  life,  and  here  he  died.  During
the  Empire  the  town  continued  to  exist,  but  is  mentioned  only
by  the  geographers  (2).

GREEK  AND  ROMAN  DEITIES.

The  only  literary  reference  to  Liternum  that  is  connected
in  any  way  with  religion  is  a  vague  allusion  in  the  poem  of  Silius,
who  in  his  account  of  Hgrnnibal's  2u:rival  in  Campania  states
that  the  leader  viewed  the  homes  and  temple  of  sweimpy  Liter-
num (3).  But  here  the  author  probably  had  in  mind  no  real
temple,  and  merely  mentioned  such  a  building  as  a  preliminary
to  his  description  of  the  deeds  of  Roman  heroes,  which  osten-
sibly were  pictured  there.

(1)  Val.  Max.   V.   3.  2,

(2)  For  the  history  and  geography  of  th*s  place  see  Nissen,  It.  Landes\.
II.  713-5;   Mommsen,  C.   /.  L.   X.    p.   356;   Beloch  377.

(3)  Sil.  VI,  653-657:

Hie    dum    stagnosi    special    lemplumque    domosque
Litemi  duclor,  uaria  splendentia  cernit
pictura  belli  patribus  monumenta  i>rioris
exhausti-nam  porticibus  signata  manebant  -
quis   ineral  longus  rerum  el   spectabilis  ordo.

-  393  -


An  inscription,  discovered  in  this  district,  mentions  the
distinguished  actor  of  pantomimes  L.  AureUus  Apolaustus  as
a  parasitus  and  sacerdos  of  Apollo;  these  positions,  however,
were  held  in  connection  with  the  society  of  actors  which  had
its  headquarters  in  Rome,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  Liter-
num  (I).  Venus  gave  her  name  to  a  bathing  establishment,
which  was  restored  in  the  fourth  century  A.  D.  by  Domitius
Seuerianus,  governor  of  the  province,  but  has  left  no  traces  of
her  cult  (2).

MAGNA  MATER.

A  mutilated  inscription  discovered  in  this  vicinity  in  1885
alludes  to  the  cult  of  Magna  Mater,  and  contains  the  term
sacerdos  and  a  part  of  the  phrase  condidit  uires  regularly  used
in  reference  to  the  taurobolium  (3).  The  meaning  of  the  latter
expiession  is  not  entirely  clear  on  account  of  the  indefiniteness
of  the  word  uires.  According  to  one  interpretation  it  has  refer-
ence especially  to  the  blood  of  the  bull  which  the  initiated
received  and  regarded  as  a  potent  means  of  regeneration.  Gen-
erally it  is  understood  as  signifying  some  specific  pKDrtion  of
the  bull's  anatomy,  particuleu-ly  the  genital  organs,  which  in
such  a  case  was  considered  sacred  (4).

It  hcis  been  supposed  that  the  words  in  the  inscription  im-
mediately before  condidit  were  originally  ad  Hamas,  an  allusion
to  the  small  village  east  of  Cumae  which  is  treated  elsewhere.

(I)  C.  /.  L.  X,  371 6  =  D.  5189.  This  actor,  whose  full  name  was  L.  Aelius
Aurelius  Apolaustus  Memphis,  was  a  freedman  of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Va-
rus, and  is  mentioned  in  six ,  inscriptions.  See  p.  356  and  the  references  there
cited.

(2)N.  5.  1885,  80  =  £.  £.  VIII,  456  =  D.  5693:  Balneum  Veneris  lon{gi
tempo)ris  uetustate  corruptum  Domitius  Seuerianus  u.  c.  cons(olaris)  Campa-
niae  ad  pristinam  faciem  (aedifi)cauit,  curante  hac  (sic)  dedican(te)  Sentio
Marso  u.  c.  comite  diuinorum,  curatore  Capuensium,  Literni(norum)  et  Cu-
manorum.

(3)  N.    5.     1885,    81=£.    E.    455:    sacerdos Matris    deum hamas

condidit.

(4)  Z'ppel,  Das  Tauroholium  in  Festchrift  fur  Friedldnder  502  f. ;  Gohler,
De  Matris  Magnae  apud  Romanos  cultu  55 ;  Esperandieu,  Taurobolium,  D.-S.
V,  49;  C.  H.  Moore  The  Distribution  of  Oriental  Cults  in  Trans,  and  Proc.  of
the  Am.  Phil  Assoc.  XXXVIII  (1907)  132;  Fiorelli.  N.  S.   1885.  81.

-  394  -


It  seems  more  probable,  however,  to  assign  the  temple  to  Litem-
um  itself  rather  than  to  the  little  village  of  Hamae,  and  to  consid-
er that  before  condidit  stood  the  name  of  the  man  who  received
the  energy  of  the  bull  from  the  ceremony  of  the  taurobolium.
At  any  rate  a  cult  and  shrine  were  found  in  this  region.  Graillot
supposes  that  this  was  a  very  old  foundation,  the  work  of  the
first  Roman  colonists  (I).  But  this  would  take  it  back  to  a  time
only  ten  years  later  than  the  official  arrival  of  the  goddess  in
Rome.  It  would  be  necessEuy  to  assume  a  wide  popularity  im-
mediately smiong  the  citizenship  of  Rome;  otherwise  when  a
few  hundred  colonists  were  sent  to  Litemum  there  would  be  no
likelihood  that  amy  considerable  proportion  of  them  would  be
interested  in  the  cult.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  though  the  Italian
municipalities  followed  the  example  of  the  capital  in  recog-
nizing the  legality  of  the  new  cult,  it  seems  at  first  to  have  pro-
gressed slowly  in  winning  adherents  outside  of  the  lowest  clas-
ses (2).  It  is  more  natural  to  suppose  that  at  Litemum,  where
there  W2is  no  large  foreign  element,  the  cult  was  fairly  late,
smd  introduced  only  when  it  had  become  fairly  well  established
elsewhere  in  Campania.


(1)  Grallot,   Le  culte   de  Cybe/e  432.

(2)  Von  Domaszewski,  Magna  Mater  in  Latin  Inscriptions  in  Jour.  Rom.
Stud.   I   (1911)  50.

-  395  -


ADDENDA.

A  considerable  number  of  inscriptions,  for  the  most  part
broken  and  badly  mutilated,  are  preserved  in  the  National  Mu-
seum of  Naples  and  elsewhere  without  any  indication  of  the
source  from  which  they  came.  In  the  Corpus  of  Latin  inscriptions
they  are  included  with  those  from  Puteoli,  although  the  author
of  this  part  of  the  work  states  that  their  provenience  is  uncer-
tain ( 1 ).  Most  writers  who  have  haul  occasion  to  cite  this  evidence
assign  it  definitely  to  Puteoli,  —  an  inaccuracy  without  impor-
tant consequences  for  a  general  study  of  the  different  cults  but
inadmissible  in  a  detailed  investigation  of  the  sepsurate  localities.
Hence  it  has  seemed  better  to  treat  here  this  clsiss  of  inscriptions.

JUPITER.

An  Oscan  cult  of  Ijupiter  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription
which  Dubois  without  weurrant  assigns  to  Puteoli  and  de  Rug-
giero  erroneously  declares  to  have  been  uneeirthed  at  Pompeii.
Capasso,  differing  from  both  the  others,  assigns  the  cult  to  Nea-
polis  (2).  This  notice  relates  that  T.  Flauius  Antipater  in  com-
pany with  his  wife  and  a  freedman  Alcides  gave  images  of
Aesculapius  and  Hygia  as  votive  offerings  to  a  Jupiter  Flazzus  or
Flazius  (3).  The  significance  of  his  epithet  is  not  well  understood,
but  has  been  interpreted  on  the  basis  of  a  connection  with
flagare  and  (pXsYsiv.  The  god  is  evidently  one  of  the  various
deities  of  the  bright  sky  found  so  frequently  throughout  ItaJy,
and  is  similar  to  the  Jupiter  Flagius  who  was  worshipped  at


(1)  The  index  of  C.  /.  L.  X,  which  includes  all  these  under  Puteoli,  is
very   misleading.

(2)  Dubois,  Pouzzoles  antique  138  and  Cultes  et  dieux  a  Pouzzoles  in  Me-
langes XXII  (1902)  30;  De  Ruggiero.  Flazzus,  Ruggiero  111,  161  Capasso,  Na-
poli   greco-romana  61  ;   Capaccio,   Historia  Neapolitana   I,   212.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1571  =D.  3852  =  Vaglieri  1107:  T.  Flauius  Antipater  una
cum  Flauia  Artemisia  uxore  et  Alcide  (liberto)  Asclepium  et  Hygiam  loui
Flazzo  uotum.  T.  Flauius  Antipater  una  cum  Flauia  Artemisia  uxore  loui
Flazio  uotum  soluit.  Alcide  is  treated  as  feminine  in  Ruggiero  III,    161.

-  396  -


Capua  (1).  Mancini  saw  a  proof  of  the  fact  that  this  god  was  a
solar  divinity  in  the  circumstance  that  he  received  as  offerings
the  statuettes  of  Aesculapius  and  Hygia.  But,  although  in  the
Greek  cult  the  sun  gods  Apollo  and  Aesculapius  were  sissocia-
ted,  there  is  no  such  bond  of  union  to  be  sought  here,  as  the
donation  of  statues  of  one  god  in  honor  of  another  w£is  a  custom
too  widely  spread  to  require  a  specific  explanation  in  this  in-
stance (2).

DIANA  LOCHEIA.

Diana  Locheia  api>ears  upon  an  inscription  that  was  assign-
ed without  cause  to  Puteoli  by  Dubois,  but  which  on  account  of
the  Greek  name  of  the  dedicator  and  the  Greek  epithet  applied  to
the  goddess  might  be  attributed  as  readily  to  Neapolis,  where
the  vessel  containing  the  record  once  formed  the  mouth  of  a
well  (3).  The  supplement  Loch(eia)  w£is  not  favored  by  Momm-
sen,  but  no  other  is  at  hand;  the  half  Latinized  title  seems
in  fact  to  be  the  result  of  an  amalgamation  between  the  Greek
Artemis  Locheia  and  the  Latin  Dieina  Lucina  both  of  whom
were  goddesses  who  presided  over  childbirth.  Dubois  plausibly
suggests  that  the  dedicator  of  the  vessel,  who  styles  herself
Graecia  Rufa  Pompon.,  was  a  foreigner  from  the  Orient  (4).
Sculptured  reliefs  contain  figures  of  Paris,  Helen,  Venus  and
three  Muses  (5).

(1)  Wissowa,  tlazzus,  P.-W.  VI,  2740;  Steuding,  Flazzus,  Roscher  I,
1483.  Mazzocchi  wrote  a  dissertation  in  eight  chapters  (published  in  1830  by
the  Accademia  Ercolanese)  to  show  that  this  god  was  similar  to  Jupiter  Ve-
suvius.

(2)  Mancini,  Giomale  degli  scavi  di  Pompei  n.  s.  Ill,  206;  Dubois,  loc.
cit.;  Gxuppe;  1443,

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1555:  Graecia  P.  f.  Rufa  Pompon.  Dianae  Loch(eiae)  s.
p.  8.  c.  p.  s.  The  abbreviations  are  obscure.  According  to  Jahn,  Ber.  der  sacha.
Ges.  der  Wissens.  II  (1850)  185  n.,  the  inscription  is  more  recent  than  the
vessel  upon  which  it  is  inscribed.

(4)  Dubois,  142  Cp.  Hofer.  Locheia,  Roscher  II,  2072;  Wissowa,  Diana,
P.-W.  334.

(5)  Jahn,  op.  cit.  184;  The  sculptures,  which  are  of  a  high  order  of  mer't,
are  portrayed  in  Specimens  of  Ancient  Sculpture  by  the  Society  of  Dilettanti,
London  II,  PI.  16.  The  marble  formed  originally  the  7i£ptaxc5|AiOV  of  a  well,
but  was  afterwards  converted  into  a  vase.

-   397   -


BONA  MENS.

This  divinity  is  recorded  in  a  dedication  first  heard  of  in
Naples.  It  was  attributed  by  Henzen  to  Paestum  because  of  the
well  known  cult  there,  and  by  Mommsen  hesitatingly  to  Puteoli.
It  commemorates  the  work  of  two  freedmen  Cn.  Cornelius  Papia
and  L.  Galonius  Agathocles,  who  were  serving  as  magistri  (I).
The  worship  of  this  goddess  here  as  in  other  localities  -was  carried
on  by  the  lower  classes  of  society  (2).

DEUS  PATRIUS.

A  number  of  inscriptions  contain  allusions  to  a  deity  csJled
deus  patrius  whose  identity  is  not  clesu*.  One  in  honor  of  Veratus
Seuerianus  announces  that  he  gave  a  series  of  amusements  in
honor  of  the  festival  of  deus  patrius  occurring  Jan.  1  (3).  The
origin  of  this  inscription  is  doubtful.  It  was  2issigned  by  Momm-
sen to  Cumae,  but  this  manner  of  disposal  has  been  questioned,
because  duumuiri  rather  than  praetors  are  named  as  magis-
trates (4).  A  second  inscription  dealing  with  the  same  divinity  was
found  at  Misenum;  it  records  the  liberality  of  a  curator  of  the
Augustales  named  L.  Laecaenius  Primitiuus,  who  made  dona-
tions to  his  fellow  citizens,  one  of  which  was  connected  with
a  festival  of  deus  patrius  (peruigilium)  on  the  twelfth  day  of
February  165  A.  D.  (5).  A  sacerdos  immunis  of  this  god,  who
belonged  also  to  the  Augustales,  seems  to  be  alluded  to  in  a


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1550;  Cn.  Cornelius  Cn.  1,  Papia,  L.  Galonius  L.  I.  Aga-
thocl(es)  mag(istri)  Bonae  Menti  d.   s.   fac.   coer.

(2)  Cp.  Wissowa  313;  Axtell,  Deification  oj  AhatTact  Ideas  in  Roman
Literature  24;  Preller-Joxdan   II.  265;  Peter,  Mens,   Roscher   11,  2798.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  3704  =  D.  5054=.Vaglieri  2138.

(4)  Dubois  40  (1).  For  attempts  to  zissign  the  inscript'on  to  other  places
as  Abella  and  Neapolis  see  Gervasio,  Iscrizioni  di  Napoli  in  Mem.  delta  r.  ac'
cad.   ercdl.  V,  95.

(5)  C.   /.    L.   X,    1881  =D.    6328,    who   assigns    it   to   Puteoli.    The   same   as-
signment is  made  by  von  Premerstein  Augustales,   Ruggiero  I,  856.

-   398   -


fragment  (I).  Finally  lulius  Secundus  Faonius  in  payment  of
a  vow  made  some  dedication  to  the  same  god  (2).  The  last  two
inscriptions  were  unearthed  near  Puteoli  and  along  with  the
preceding  one  were  thought  by  Mommsen  to  belong  to  that
city.  But  Dubois  considers  that  the  deity  called  deus  patrius  was
an  expression  for  the  Genius  coloniae  of  Misenum,  a  deity  never
mentioned  in  the  usual  way ;  hence  with  considerable  probability
he  heis  attributed  all  the  inscriptions  to  that  town.  He  shows
furthermore  that  the  name  Laecaenius  belongs  to  the  district
around  Cumae  (3).

The  generous  L.  Laecaenius  Primitiuus  mentioned  above
held  the  office  of  curator  of  the  Augustales,  which  has  not  appear-
ed elsewhere  in  Campania.  Besides  the  donation  already  men-
tioned he  bestowed  property  upon  the  Augustales,  who  in  both
cases  appear  in  the  form  corporati.  (4)  Another  inscription  con-
tains the  name  of  P.  Aemilius  Conon,  who  is  described  as  an
Augustalis  corporatus  (5).  This  is  usually  assigned  to  Puteoli.
There  are  three  other  references  to  Augustales :  the  epitaph  of
T.  Marcius  Taur(us),  a  fragment  mentioning  an  Augustalis
immunis,  and  a  fragment  recording  the  erection  of  a  temple  of
the  Victoria  Augusta  by  a  freedman  Phileros  who  filled  this
post  (6).  The  last  inscription  preserves  the  name  of  a  second
member  of  the  association  called  Atticus,  who  set  up  the  stone.
One  fragment  refers  to  Hercules  Augustus,  another  to  Fortuna
Publica  and  to  a  priest  of  Claudius,  who  here  received  divine


(1)  C.  I.  L.  X.  i805.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.    1553.

(3)  Dubois  40  (1)  148;  Dessau,  comment  on  No.  6328.  Var'ous  conjec-
tures were  made  by  older  scholars  to  explain  this  god.  According  to  one  view
Julius  Caesar  was  meamt ;  according  to  another,  Hercules.  Orelli  Inscriptiones
Lahnae  No.  2533.  A  deus  patrius  accurs  in  an  inscription  of  Ostia  (C.  /.  L,
XIV,  3),  where  he  has  been  tentatively  associated  with  Vulcan.  Dessau,  No.
3299;  Taylor,   Cults  oj  Ostia  20;  Wissowa  224  (8).

(4)  C.  /.  L.  X.   1880.

(5)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1870.

(6)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1884,  1891.  1887.  The  last  inscription  is  assigned  to  Pu-
teol  by  von  Premerstein,  Ruggiero  I,  835  and  by  Babelon,  Victoria,  D.-S.  V,
842,  but  is  marked  as  uncertain  by  Dubois   144   (6).

-  399  -


honors  during  his  lifetime.  It  bears  the  date  of  46  A.  D.  (1).
Other  inscriptions  preserve  the  names  of  Mosculus,  a  pontiff  and
flamen  of  Augustus,  of  L.  Bouius  Celer,  an  augur,  C.  Minatius
Bithus,  an  aug(ur)  or  Aug(ustalis),  and  of  Rufinus,  a  har-
uspex  (2).

The  Lares  appear  in  two  inscriptions  at  Naples,  one  of
which  is  a  brief  dedication  by  an  individual,  the  other,  a  dedi-
cation by  four  magistri  (3).  They  comprise  two  freedmen  and
two  slaves  engaged  as  niagistri  uici  in  the  worship  of  the  Lares
Augusti.  The  inscription  is  dated  in  the  year  I  A.  D.  Though
assigned  by  Wissowa  to  Puteoli,  its  origin  caoi  not  now  be  de-
termined (4).

A  statue  of  Magna  Mater  of  unknown  origin  is  at  present
in  the  court  of  the  National  Museum  at  Naples.  The  figure  of
the  goddess  which  is  below  life  size,  is  represented  ais  seated
on  a  throne  flanked  by  two  lions  (5).  A  fragmentary  inscription
records  a  peurt  of  the  list  of  gods  who  were  thought  to  preside
over  the  days  of  the  week  (6).

Several  other  fragments  of  inscriptions  dealing  with  religion
are  extant  (7).


(1)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1558.  1570.

(2)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1806,  1685,  1895.  Cp.  also  X,  961.  Celer  is  assigned  to
Puteoli  by  Spinazzola,   Gli  augures   150.

(3)  C.  /.  L.  X,  1580,  1582.

(4)  Wissowa    173    (2).

(5)  Graillot,  Le  culte  de  CybeZe  432  (5);  Reinach,  Ripettoire  de  la  sta-
tuaire  grecque  et  romaine  II,  p.  271,  No.  2,  Arndt-Amelung,  Einzelcnxfnahmen
antik.er  Sculpturen,  No.   533.

(6)  C.    /.    L.    X.    1605.

(7)  C.  /.  L.  X.  1599.  1600.  1602,  1610,  1606.  1611.  1612.

.  400  .


INDEX


Abella  381,  389

Acenrae  387

Achelous  203  f.

Aenaria  220  f.

Aeneas  13,  55,  303.

Aesculapius  229,  240  f.,  386;  at  Puteoli

109  f.
Antoninus  Pius,  temple  of  at  Puteoli   131.
Aphrodite  Euploia   199.
Apollo   10.  380,  390;  at  Capua  355;  at

Cumae  50  ff. ;   at  Neapolis   182  ff.;  at

Nuceria   292;    at   Pompeii   227  ff.;  at

Puteoli    103    ff.;   at   Rome  24   f. ;    on

Aenaria  220.     «  -/-ill^
Artemis,    at    Cumae   61     f.  ;    at    Neapolis

170,  202.
Athena  16,  355,  380;  at  Neapolis  197  f. ;  at

Pompeii  233  S. ;  near  Surrentum  306  ff.
Augurs,  atAb5lla390;  at  Capua  361;  at

Nola  382;  at  Pompeii  242;  at  Puteoli

117;  at  Surrentum  3 1 4.
Augustales  35,  82,  388,  390,   398;    at

Capua  370 ;   at    Herculaneum    287  ;  at

Misenum  94;  at  Neapolis  209;  at  Nola

384;  at  Nuceria  297;  at  Pompeii  267

f.;  at  Puteoli   124  ff.
Augustus  383  f.,  cult  of  at  Capua  80  f. ;

at  Neapolis  209;    at   Pompeii  261   ff. ;

at  Puteoli   125  ff. ;  at  Stabiae  298.
Avernus  74  f.


B£kCCl\US

Baiae  84  S.
BauU  85.
Bellona  142.


30,  273.


Berytus   147.

Bona  Dea,  at  Puteoli   112.

Bona  Mens  398.

0€k]Xip£liIli£k,  boundaries  of  2  ;  during
later  Republic  29  f . ;  progress  of  religion
under  Empire  34  f.

Capitoline  Triad,  at  Capua  362  ff. ;  at
Pompeii  242  S.

Capitolium  243  f.;  363  f . ;  382  f.

Capreae  315  f.

Capua  317  ff. ;  shrine  of  Diana  near  6.

Capys  359.

Castor  and  Pollux  350,  353 ;  at  Capua
343  ff.;  at  Cumae  66  ;  at  Neapolis  187
ff.;  at  Puteoli   113.

Ceres  7,  251,  310,  350,  353,  379;  at
Capua  334  f.;  at  Pompeii  230  f.;  at
Puteoli   105  f.

Christianity  39  f.,  301,  386;  at  Capua
375  f.;  at  NeapoUs  219  f.;  at  Nu-
ceria 297 ;  at  Pompeii  281  ;  at  Pu-
teoli 162  ff.

Concordia  123,  262.

Cora   II,  379.

cumae  45  ff,

Dea  Syria  150,  155.

Demeter  10,  334;  at  Cumae  64  f. ;  at
Neapolis   185  ff.;  at  Rome  25  f.

Dendrophori  89  f. ;   139  ff.

Deus  Patrius  398.

Diana  6,  301,  350,  353,  380;  at  apua
322  ff. ;  365  f. ;  at  Pompeii  228  f . ;
at  Puteoli  (?)   115;  Locheia  397.


-  401  -


Dicaearchia   101  ;  see  Puteoli.

Dionysus  11.  379,  389;  at  Cumae  70  f . ;

at  Neapolis    194  S.;    at  Pompeii  239;

at  Puteoli   143  S.
Dioscuri  1 1,  66,  293  ff.;  at  Neapolis  187  ff.
Diovis  5.

Dolichenus  95  f.,    149.  216.
Dusares  131   f.

Egyptian  Deilles  31,  136.  288.

301,  388;  at  Capua  371  ;  at  Neapolis
214  ff.;  at  Pompeii  272  ff.;  at  Puteoli
133  ff.

Epidius  296.

Etruscan  influences  8  f.

Eumachia  232.

FelicMeis  248.

Festivals  36  f.

Flora  240.

Fortuna  7,  248.  286,  341,  330  ;  at  Capua

343;   at   Neapolis   207  f.;    at  Pompeii

261  ;  at  Puteoli   122.

GfkineS,  of  Augustus  at  Neapolis  209.
Genius,  at  Capua  366,  369 ;   at   Hercula-

neum   286;    at   Nola  383;   at  Pompeii

233 ;  at  Puteoli  1 18  ff.,   157 ;  at  Stabiae

298  i.
Gods   of  the  Days  of  the  Week  400;  at

Pompeii  279;  at  Puteoli   139.
Greek  cults,  introduction  of   10  f.

Hadrian,  games  in  honor  of  at  Puteoli

130.
Hamae  98.

Harpocrates  276,  288.
Haruspex  94.
Hebon   194.
Heliopolitanus   146.
Hephaestus   1 1 3,
Hera  66.
Heracles    14;    at  Cumae   69;    at  Neapolis

191    ff.;  at  Rome  22.
Herculaneura  282  ff.
Hercules  330.  381   f..  389;  at  Capua  346

ff. ;  at  Herculaneura   284 ;    at    Neapolis


191  ff..  at  Pompeii  232  f . ;  at  Puteoli
108;  at  Stabiae  (?)  299;  near  Surren-
tum  311   f.

Herentas  236,  283.

Honor   122.

Hygia,  286,  396;  at  Puteoli  109  f.

Imperial  Cull  34  f.,  387 ;  at  Ca-
pua 79  ff.,  370  f. ;  at  Herculaneura  287
f. ;  at  Neapolis  209  ff. ;  at  Nola  383  ff.;
at   Pompeii  261    ff.;  at  Puteoli   123  ff.

Ischia  220.

Isis,  31.  136,  288,  301.  388;  at  PompeU
272  ff.

Judaism,  at  Capua  374 ;  at  Neapolis
218;  at  Pompeii  280;  at  Puteoli  160  ff.

Juno  3.  313.  381  ;  at  C^apua  336  ff.,  362;
at  Nuceria  393  ff. ;  at  Pompeii  242
ff. ;  Gaura  336,  330;  Lucina  337,  340.

Jupiter  5.    390,   396;    at  Capua    329  ff.,
362    ff.;    at    Cumae  48  f.;   at  Hercu-
laneura 284 ;  at  Misenura  93 ;  at  Pom-
peii  224   ff.,  243  ff.,  279;    at  Puteoli
102,  118;  Compagus  331,   350;  Da-
mascenus    149;    Dolichenus    95,    149
Flagius   329;   Flazzus   5,    330,   396
Heliopolitanus    146;    Liber  331,    350
Milichius  224  ff  ,   243 ;  Optimus  Maxi-
mus    243,    362,    368,    392;    Vesuvius
332.

Lares  255.  354.  369,  400 ;  Compitales

255.
Leucothea  200  f.
Liber  143  ff.
Liparus  313.
Litem um  393.
Luna  279.

Magisfri  324,  332.  335,  343,  344,
348  ff.

Magna  Mater  392,  394.  400;  at  Baiae
87  f . ;  at  Capua  372  f. ;  at  Hercula-
neura 289 ;  at  Pompeii  278 ;  at  Puteoli
138  ff.

Maia  239,  263.

Mars,  at  Capua  342 ;  at  Pompeii  254,  279.


402


Mefites  358.

Mercury    228,    356;    at    Pompeii   237   ff..

263  f..  279;  at  Puteoli  114.
Minerva,    at    Capua    362    ff. ,    at    Pompeii

233  ff.,  242  ff. ;  near  Surrentum  306  ff.
Misenum  93  f.
Mithras  38,  220,  31^6;   at  Neapoiis  217;

at  Puteoli   157  ff.
Mother   Goddess    of   the    Fondo   Patturelii

near  Capua  338  ff.
Mt.  Tifaia  6.  317,  322.

Narcissus  240.

Naples   166  ff.

Neapoiis   166  ff.

Nemesis  360.

Neptune  357;  at  3aiae  86;  at  Pompeii
237  ;  at  Puteoli  1 07  f. ;  near  Surren-
tum 311.

Nitrodes  220.

Nola  377  ff.

Nuceria  291    ff.

Nymphs  72 ;  at  Puteoli  111  f . ;  on  Aena-
ria  220.

Oracle  of  Sibyl  at  Cumae  57  f.
Oriental  Culu   37  f.,    228,   316.   386;  at

Cumae   83  f. ;    at  Pompeii   272  ff. ;  at

Puteoli    131    ff.
Oscan  deities,  traces  of  225.  235  f.,  285.

324,  329,  334,  338,  339.  342.  396.

Pagi  349  ff.

Pagus  Herculaneus  331,  347,  350  ff.

Pan  240.

Parthenope  174  ff..  304.

Paul.  St..  at  Puteoli   160.   162.

Penates  257.

Phratry  Gods,  at  Cumae  47  f.  ;  at  Puteoli

168  ff.
Pithecussae  220  f.
Pluto  300.  361.
Pollius  312.
Pompeii  222  ff.
Pozzolana   100.
Puteoli  99  ff.


Roman  Gulfs,  at  Herculaneum  286  ;
at  Pompeii  242.

SI.  Elmo  191.

St.  Paul  160,  162,  190.

Salus  241.

S.  Giovanni  Maggiore   193.

Sant'Angelo  in  Formis  323.

S.  Polo  Maggiore   188  f.

Sarnus  241.  291.  295.

Saturn  279.

Sebethus  203.

Serapis  133,  388.

Sibyl,  of  Cumae.  55  f.

Silvanus  357.

Sirene   181.

Sirens  14.   174  f.,  303  ff.

Sol  279.

Solfatara   113.   161.

Sorrento  302  ff.

Spes  Fides  and  Fortuna  350.

Stabiae  291    f..  298.

Suessula  391.

Surrentum  302  ff.

Taurobollum  156.  156  note  3.

Telephus  358.

Tiberius  314.  315.  366.  385.

Torch  race   1  77.

Tyre   153  ff.

Urania  155.

Venus  6.  228.285.  310;  at  Pompeii
236.  246  ff..  275.  279;  at  Puteoli
109;  Felix  247;  Fisica  247;  Herentas
236.  285 ;  Jovia  338,  350,  390  ;  Pom-

peiana  246  ff.
Veata  255.
Victoria  357.
Vicus  Nouanensis  392.
Virgo  Caelestis   155.
Volturnus  42,  317.  360.

Zeus,  at  Cumae  48  f. }  at  Neapoiis  182 ;
at  Pompeii  224  ff.


403


BINDING  SECT.       I|IN30  1981


feG


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


BL  Peterson,   Roy  Merle

813  The  cults  of  Campania
