A Critical History of the Celtic Religion and Learning (John Toland, 1726)
======================================================
Toland's posthumous 1726 history (this text from the 1815 edition) — the Enlightenment's first critical, demystifying account of the druids. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/criticalceltic00tolauoft).

TOLAND'S  HISTORY.


H


«PH


A

CRITICAL    HISTORY

OF  THE

CELTIC  RELIGION,

AND

LEARNING:

CONTAINING  AN   ACCOUNT  OF  THE

'    U>  R  U  I  JD  SSl.

I     OR,   THE

PRIESTS  AND  JUDGES,

OF  THE  VAIDS,  OR  THE  DIVINERS  II    AND  OF  THE  BARDS,  OP.  THE
AND  PHYSICIANS;  POETS  AND  HERALDS  ;


OF    THE


ANCIENT  GAULS,  BRITONS,  IRISH  AND  SCOTS,    j

BY    JOHN     TOX.AND,     M.     A.

WITH  THE

HISTORY

OF

ABARIS,  THE  HYPERBORIAN,  PRIEST  OF

THE  SUN.


TO  WHICH   IS    ADDED,

An  Abstract  of  the  Life  of  the  Author.

"•+' i  r .''  i

EDINBURGH:  ^

PRINTED  BY    JOHN    FINDLAY  *,  AND,  SOLD    BY  GILBERT

AND    HODGES.    AND    THE  OTHER    PRINCIPAL

BOOKSELLERS    IN    DUBLIN.


1815.


TO  THE

REV.  PAUL  OVBRIEN,

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  IRISH  LANGUAGE,
ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  ST,  PATRICK,
M  A  Y  N  O  O  T  H.


SIR,     -

I  take   the  Liberty   of

DEDICATING  this  Edition  of  Toland's
HISTORY  OF  THE  DRUIDS  to  you,  as  a  Tes
timony  of  High  Esteem  for  your  great
Learning;  Veneration  for  your  Christian
Virtues;  and,  as  a  public  Acknowledgement
of  the  liberal  Encouragement,  and  generous
Assistance  which  you  have  rendered

YOUR    MUCH  OBLIGED,
AND  OBEDIENT  SERVANT,

JOHN  FIND  LAY.


The  Editor  having  followed  the  Original  Copy  in  order  to  make

no  alteration  in  the  Work,  believes  the  following  to  be  a

necessary  Eratta  thereto;


For  the  following
whereTer  they
occur,

48  Fourbery,
53  Instignation,
78  C»ntemt,
...  Atchievments,
„..  Diverse,
80  Symboll,

90  •  :>ntroll,
..     Kxemted,

91  Ouuegall,

92  'oveing,

...Dy,

93  Suceedeing,
...  Alurdrung,

94  Then,

96  Forcn,
...  Brutish,
...  I  binds,
...lie,

97  Pyramyds,
99  Fheatei,

100  1 5,

103  Contemtible,

104  Tliroout,
10(j  Volum,
lOo,  Travellers,

, ...  Fanietched,
112  Fnlrals,
115  Treble,
119     lewith,
1<J2  f^xcede,
133  Ban an,
,...  Entitling,
.,,.  Mettals,


7or  the  following

Read,

wherever  they                              Read.

occur,

Forgery,

136  Onely,             Only.

Instigation,

..  .  Bein,               Been,

Contempt,

138  Soverain,        Sovereign,

Achievements,

143  Neighbors,     Neighbours,

Diveri,

14b'  Vocobulary,  Vocabularly,

Symbol,

160  Judgements,  Judgments,

Controul,

151  Sufiiciant,      Sufficient,

Exempted,

153  Welcom,        Welcome,

Donegal,

.  .  .   Som  thing,      Something,

Moving,

154  Gray,              Grey,

Die,

156  Hony,             Honey,

Succeeding,

160  Olde,               Old,

Murdering,

..  .  Croos'd,           Crossed,

Than,

161  Shoot,             Shoes,

Foreign,

lo'5  Maritim,         Maritime,

British,

166  Neighboring,  Neighbouring,

Islands,

167  Scepter,          Sceptre,

Isle,

179  Felow,            Fellow,

Pyramids,

184  Shipwrnck,    Shipwreck,

Theatre,

188  Submitt,         Submit,

His,

190  Endeavored,  Endeavoured,

Contemptible,

196  Vail,                Veil,

Throughput,

201  Sault,              Salt.

Volume,

.  .  „  Begetting,       Begeting,

T,,ivellers,

203  Harbors,         Harbours,

Farfetched,

205  Ly,                  Lie.

Entrails,

...  Ey-  witness,    Eye-witness,

Trouble,

210  Mony,             Money,

Blueish,

212  Suteable,        Suitable,

Exceed,

.  .  .  Widdow,         Widow,

Barren,

215  Harkt  n,          Hearken,

Entitling,

216  Faboulously,  Fabulously.

Metals,

.

ABSTRACT

OF   THE

LIFE  OF  JOHN  TOLAND.


J  OHN  TOLAND  was  born  on  the  30th  November,
1670,  in  the  most  northern  Peninsula  in  Ireland,  on
the  Isthmus  whereof  stands  Londonderry.  That  Pen
insula  was  originally  called  I?iis-Eogan,  or  Inis-Eogain,
but  is  now  called  Enls-Owcn.  Toland  had  the  name
of  Janus  Junius  given  him  at  the  font,  and  was  call
ed  by  that  name  in  the  school  roll  every  morning;  but
the  other  boys  making  a  jest  of  it,  the  master  ordered
him  to  be  called  John,  which  name  he  kept  ever  after.

Mr.  Toland,  as  far  as  now  can  be  collected,  was  the
son  of  a  Popish  Priest ;  and,  he  hath  been  abused  by
Abbot  Tilladet,  Bishop  Huetius  and  others,  on  the
ground  of  his  alleged  illegitimacy:  which,  were  it  true,
is  a  most  base  and  ridiculous  reproach  ;  the  child,  in
such  a  case,  being  entirely  innocent  of  the  guilt  of  his
parents*  Had  Mr.  Toland  been  really  illegitimate,

A


which  was  not  the  case,  no  infamy  could  have  at
tached  to  him  on  that  account,  unless  he  can  be  sup
posed  to  have  had  the  power  of  directing"  the  mode  of
His  coming  into  existence.  The  following  testimonial
given  him  at  Prague,  where  he  was  residing  in  1 708,
will  however,  sufficiently  remove  so  foolish  and  ground
less  an  imputation.-  It  runs  thus  :

Infra  script!  testamur  Dom.  Joanirein  Toland,  ortum
esse  ex  honesty  rtobili  et  antiquissima  familia,  quie
per  plums  eenteiios -annos,.  ut  Ilegni  Historia  et  con-
tinua  monstrant  niemona,  in  Peninsula  Hiberniae
Enis-Oit'en  dicta  prope  urbem  Londino-Derwnsem  in
Ultonia,  perduravit.  In  eujus  rei  firmiorem  fidem,  nos
ex  eadem  patria  oriundi  propriis  manibus  subscripsi-
mus,  Pragae  in  Bohemia,  hac  die  2.  Jan..  1708.

Joannes  O'Niell  superior  Collcgii  Hibernorum.
L.  S.  Francisus  O'Deulin,  S.  Theologiae  Professor,
Rudolphus  O'Niellr  S.Theol.  Lector.

TRANSLATION  ;

«  We  Subscribers  testify,  that  Mr.  John  Toland  is
"'  descended  of  an  honourable,  noble,  and  very  ancient
"  family,  which  resided  several  centuries  on  the  Pen-
"  insula  of  Ireland,  called  Enis-Owen,  near  the  city  of
"  Londonderiy  in  Ulster,  which  the  history  of  that
•«  kingdom,  and  continual  mention  of  the  family
"  clearly  establish.  For  the  surer  credence  of  this,
"  we  natives  of  the  same  country  have  subscribed  with


*<  our  own  hands  .at.  Prague  in  Bohemia,  this  2d  Jan.
"  1708."

The  Reader  will  see  from  this  Certificate  of  the
Irish  Franciscans  at  Prague,  that  Mr.  Toland  was
honourably,  nobly  and  anciently  descended.

We  may  however  take  it  for  granted,  that  his  rela
tions  were  Papists;  for  in  his  preface  to  Christianity  not
Mysterious,  he  tells  us,  "  that  he  was  educated  from
-  the  cradle  in  the  grossest  Superstition  and  Idolatry.,
"  but  God  was  pleased  to  make  his  own  reason,  and
«  such  as  made  use  of  theirs,  the  happy  instruments
*'  of  his  Con-version."  He  again  informs  us,  in  his
Apology,  "  that  he  was  not  sixteen  years  old  when
ft  he  became  as  zealous  against  Popery,  as  he  has  ever
•rt  since  continued."

From  the  school  at  Redcastle,  near  'Londonderry,  he
went  in  1687,  to  the  College  of  Glasgow  ;  and  after
jthree  years  stay  there,  visited  Edinburgh,  where  he
was  created  Master  of  Arts  on  the  30th  of  June,  1690,
.and  received  the  usual  Diploma  from  the  Professors,  of
which  the  following  is  a  copy.

Universis  et  singulis  ad  quos  praesentes  literae  perve-
nient,  NOS  universitatis  Jacobi  Regis  Edinburgenae
Professores,  Salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam  compre-
>ramur :  Unaque  testamur  ingenuum  hunc  bonae  Spei
Juvenem  Magistrum  Joannem  Toland  Hibernum,  mo-
s,  diligentia,  et  laudabili  successu  se  nobis  ita  ap-


probasse  ut  post  editum  Philosophic!  profectus  examen,
Solenni  more  Magister  in  Artibus  liberalibus  renunti-
aretur,  in  Comitiis  nostris  Laureatis  anno  Salutis  Mil-
lesimo,  Sexcentesimo  et  Nonagesimo,  trigesimo  die
Junii :  Quapropter  non  dubitamus  eum  nunc  a  Nobis
in  patriam  redeuntem,  utegregiumAdolescentem,  om
nibus  quos  adire,  vel  quibuscum  versari  contigerit,  de
meliori  nota  commendare,  sperantes  ilium  (opitulante
divina  gratia)  Literis  hisce  Testimonialibus  fore  abunde
responsurmn.  In  quorum  fidem  inclyta  Civitas  Edin-
burgum  Academise  hujus  parens  et  Altrix  sigillo  suo
publicoliterassyngraphis  Nostris  porro  confirmarijussit.

Al.  Monro,  S.S.T.D.  Professor  Primarius.

Jo.'Strachan,  S.  S.  T.  D.ejusdemque  Professor.

D.  Gregorie,  Math.  P.

J.  Herbertus  Kennedy,  P.  P.
L.  S.     J.  Drummond,  II.  L.  P.

Tho.  Burnet,  Ph.  P.

Jlobertus  Henderson,  B.  et   Academise  ab
Archivis  «Scc.

Dabamus  in  supradicto  "1
Athenaeo   Regio    22do.  |^
die    Julii    anno    JErae  f
Christianae  1690.  J

TRANSLATION.

"  To  all  and  every  one,  to  whom  the  present  letter
^  may  come,  We  the  Professors  of  the  University  of  E-
fc-  diuburgh,  founded  by  King  James,  wish  eternal  sal va-
"  tion  in  the  Lord  :  and  at  the  game  time  testify,  that


«  this  ingenuous  youth,  Mr.  John  Toland  of  excellent
"  promise,  has  so  highly  satisfied  us  by  his  good  conduct,
"  diligence  andlaudable progress,  that  after  Ja  public  ex-
"  animation  of  his  progress  in  Philosophy,  he  was  after
**  the  usual  manner  declared  Master  of  the  liberal  Arts,
"   in  our  Comitia  Laureata,  in  the  year  of  Redemption
"   1 69O, 30th  June :  Wherefore  we  do  not  hesitate  to  re-
"  commend  him  now  returning  from  us,  to  his  native
"  country,  as  an  excellent  young  man,  to  all  persons  of
"  better  note,  to  whom  he  may  have  access,  or  with
"  whom  he  may  sojourn,  hoping  that  he  (through  the
"  aid  of  Divine  Grace,)  will  abundantly  answer  the  cha-
"  racter  given  him  in  this  Diploma.      In  testimony  of
"  which,  the  ancient  city  of  Edinburgh,  the  Parent  and
"  Benefactress  of  this  Academy  has  ordered  this  writ-
"  ing  with  our  subscriptions,  to  receive  the  additional
(i  confirmation  of  their  Public  Seal."

Given  in  the  aforesaid  Royal  )
Athenaeum,  22d  July,  1690.  }

Mr.  John  Toland  having  received  his  Diploma,  re
turned  to  Glasgow,  where  he  resided  but  a  short  time.
On  his  departure,  the  magistrates  of  that  citv  gavtf
him  the  following  recommendation.

"  We  the  Magistrates  of  Glasgow  under  subscribing,
*•'  do  hereby  certifie  and  declare,  to  all  whom  these  pre-
"  sents  may  concern,  That  the  bearer  John  Toland,
"  Master  of  Arts,  did  reside  here  for  some  yeares,  as  a
"  student  at  the  Universitie  in  this  City,  during  which


«  time  he  behaved  himself  as  ane  trew  Protestant,  and
«  Loyal  Subject,  as  witness  our  hands  at  Glasgow,  the
6f  penult  day  of  July  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  nine-
"  tie  yeares,  and  the  common  Seal  of  Office  of  the  said
*  City  is  hereunto  affixt,

"  JOHN  LECK.
"  L.  S.  GEORGE  NISBITT."

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  Mr.  Toland  resided  at
Glasgow  during  the  years  1688  and  1689,  the  two  last
of  the  Bloody  Persecution  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,
and  must  have  been  an  eye  witness  of  many  tyranni
cal  and  relentless  scenes.  It  is  well  known,  that  the
students  of  Glasgow,  as  a  collective  body,  repeatedly
joined  the  citizens,  in  repelling  several  of  the  military
parties  sent  against  them  ;  and  there  can  hardly  re
main  a  doubt,  that  Toland  made  one  of  the  number,
This  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  Certificate  given  him
by  the  Magistrates  of  Glasgow.

Mr.  Toland  dates  his  conversion,  from  the  16th  year
of  his  age,  which  nearly  coincides  with  his  arrival  in
Glasgow  ;  for  it  will  be  recollected,  that  he  did  not
complete  his  20th  year,  till  the  30th  of  November  af
ter  leaving  this  city.  It  is  therefore  most  probable,
that  he  was  here  converted  from  Popery,  and  imbibed
these  notions  of  the  simplicity  and  purity  of  Christiani
ty  which  he  afterwards  retained.

Instead  of  returning  to  Ireland,  Mr.  Toland  went  to


England,  where  he  lived,  (as  he  informs  us  in  his  Apolo
gy,)  in  as  good  Protestant  families  as  any  in  the  king
dom,  till  he  went  to  'the  famous  university  of  Ley  den,
to  perfect  his  studies,  under  the  celebrated  Spanhemius,
Triglandius,  &c.  There  he  was  supported  by  some
eminent  Dissenters  in  England,  who  had  conceived
great  hopes  from  his  uncommon  parts,  and  might  flat
ter  themselves,  he  would  one  day  become  the  Colossus
of  the  party ;  for  he  himself  informs  us,  in  a  Pamphlet
published  at  London  in  1697,  that  he  had  lived  in  their
communion,  ever  since  he  quitted  Popery.  "  Mr.  To-
land  (says  he,  in  answer  to  the  imputation  of  being  a
rigid  Non-conformist)  will  never  deny  but  the  real  sim
plicity  of  the  Dissenters'  worship ;  and  the  seeming  e-
quity  of  their  discipline,  (into  which,  being  so  young,
he  could  not  distinctly  penetrate,)  did  gain  extraordi
narily  on  his  affections,  just  as  he  was  newly  delivered
from  the  insupportable  yoke  of  the  most  pompous  and
tyrannical  policy  that  ever  enslaved  mankind,  under
the  name  or  shew  of  religion.  But,  when  greater  ex
perience  and  more  years  had  a  little  ripened  his  judg
ment,  he  easily  perceived  that  the  differences  were  not
so  wide,  as  to  appear  irreconcileable,  or  at  least,  that
men  who  were  sound  Protestants  on  bath  sides,  should
barbarously  cut  one  anothers*  throats ;  or  indeed  give
any  disturbance  to  the  society  about  them.  And  as
soon  as  he  understood  the  late  heats  and  animosities
did  not  totally,  if  at  all,  proceed  from  a  concern  for
mere  religion,  he  allowed  himself  a  latitude  in  several


8


things,  that  would  have  been  matter  of  scruple  to  him
before.  His  travels  increased,  and  the  study  of  Ec
clesiastical  History  perfected  this  disposition,  wherein
he  continues  to  this  hour ;  for,  whatever  his  own  opin
ion  of  these  differences  be,  yet  he  finds  so  essential  an
agreement  between  French,  Dutch,  English,  Scottish,
and  other  Protestants,  that  he  is  resolved  never  to  lose
the  benefit  of  an  instructive  discourse,  in  any  of  their
churches,  on  that  score  ;  and,  it  must  be  a  civil,  not  a
religious  interest  that  can  engage  him  against  any  of
these  parties,  not  thinking  all  their  private  notions
wherein  they  differ,  worth  endangering,  much  less  sub
verting,  the  public  peace  of  a  nation.  If  this  (pursues
he,)  makes  a  man  a  Non-conformist,  then  Mr.  Toland
is  one  unquestionably."

In  1692,  Mr.  Daniel  Williams,  a  Dissenting  Minis
ter,  published  a  Book,  entitled,  Gospel  Truth  Stated
and  Vindicated,  in  opposition  to  Dr.  Crisp.  Mr.  Tol
and  desired  the  Author  of  the  Bibliotheque  Universelle
to  give  an  Abstract  of  it  in  that  Journal.  The  Jour
nalist  complied ;  and,  to  the  Abstract  of  Mr.  William's
book,  prefixed  MY.  Toland's  recommendatory  letter,
and  styles  him  Student  in  Divinity.  Bibliothcque  Uni
verselle,  torn  23rd,  page  506.

Having  staid  about  two  years  at  Ley  den,  he  returned
to  England,  and  soon  after  went  to  Oxford,  where,  be
sides  the  conversation  of  learned  men,  he  had  the  ad
vantage  of  the  public  library.  Here  he  collected  ma-


9


terials  on  various  subjects ;  and,  composed  some  pieces,
among  others,  a  Dissertation,  wherein  he  proves  the
received  history  of  the  tragical  death  of  Atilius  Regu-
lus,  the  Roman  Consul,  to  be  a  fable  ;  and,  with  that
candour  which  uniformly  characterizes  him,  owns  him
self  indebted  for  this  notion  to  Palmerius*

In  1695,  he  left  Oxford,  and  came  to  London.     In
1696,  he  published  his  Christianity  not  Mysterious;  or,
a  Treatise,  shelving  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Gospel
contrary  to  reason,  nor  above  it ;  and,  that  ?w  Christian
Doctrine  can  properly  be  called  a  Mystery.      Mr.  To-
land  defines,  MYSTERY  to  be,  a  thing  intelligible  in  it*
self,  but  which  could  not  be  known,  without  special
Revelation.    And,  to  prove  the  assertion,  he  examines
all  the  passages  in  the  New  Testament,  where  the  word
MYSTERY  occurs;  and  shews,  1st,  That  MYSTERY  is  read
for  the  Gospel  ;  or,    the  Christian  Religion  in  gener
al,  as  it  was  a  future  dispensation,  totally  hid  from  the
Gentiles.,  and  but  imperfectly  known   to  the   Jews.
Secondly,    That   some   peculiar   doctrines,   occasion
ally  revealed  by  the  Apostles,   are  said  to  be  mani
fested  mysteries  ;  that  is,  unfolded  secrets  :    and  3dly,
that  mystery  is  put  for  anything  veiled  under  parables,
or  enigmatical  forms  of  speech.     But,  he  declares,   at
the  same  time,  that,  if  his  adversaries  think  fit  to  call
a  mystery,  whatever  is  either  absolutely  unintelligible
to  us,  or  whereof  we  have  but  inadequate  ideas  ;  he

B


10


is  ready  to  admit  of  as  many   mysteries  in  religion  as
they  please.

So  far,  the  candid  reader  will  be  apt  to  think  thcrr
is  no  great  harm  done.  If  Mr.  Toland's  adversaries
did  not  choose  to  adopt  his  definition  of  the  word  mys
tery,  he  professes  himself  willing  to  accede  to  theirs  ;
and  indeed,  all  that  has  be$n  advanced  on  either  side
of  the  question,  is  merely  a  dispute  about  words.  He
pretends,  that  he  can  give  as  clear  and  intelligible  an
explanation  cf  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  as  of  the  phe
nomena  of  nature :  and,  do  not  our  divines  do  the  same
thing,  by  attempting  to  give  a  rational  explanation  of
the  Trinity,  and  the  Resurrection,  the  greatest  mys
teries  of  the  Christian  religion  ?  Such  explanations  are
the  tests  of  the  soundness  of  their  doctrine  ;  and,  who.
knows  but  Mr.  Toland's  explanation,  had  he  given  one,
might  ftave  been  orthodox.

This  Treatise  alarmed  the  public  ;  and  several  cler
gy  replied  to  it.  Messrs.  Beconsal,  Beverley,  Norris,
and  Elys  ;  Doctors  PAIN,  and  STILLINGFLEET  ;  the
Author  of  the  Occasional  Papers  ;  Messrs.  Millar.,
Gaithard,  and  Synge,  all  entered  the  lists.  It  was  even
presented  by  the  Grand  Jury  of  Middlesex  ;  but,  this
measure  had  no  other  effect,  than  to  promote  the  sale  of
the  book,  mankind  being  naturally  prone  to  pry  into
What  is  forbidden  them.

This  same  year,  Mr.  Inland  published  a  Discourse


11


en  Coins,  by  Signior  Bernardo  -Davanzati,  a  gentle
man  of  Florence,  delivered  in  the  academy  there,  ann*
1588  ;  translated  from  Italian  by  John  Toland.

Christianity  not  Mysterious  having  found  its  way  in
to  Ireland,  made  some  noise  there,  as  well  as  in  Eng
land  ;  but,  the  clamour  was  considerably  increased,  on
the  author's  arrival  there,  in  the  beginning  of  1697.
Mr.  Mollineux,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Locke,  dated  10th
April,  1697,  says,  "  The  Irish  clergy  were  alarmed  a-
*•'  gainst  him  to  a  mighty  degree ;  and,  jthat  he  had  his
"  welcome  to  that  city,  by  hearing  himself  harangued
"  against,  from  the  pulpit,  by  a  Prelate  of  that
£i  Country."

Mr.  Toland  himself  tells  us,  in  his  Apology,  that  he
was  hardly  arrived  in  that  country,  when  he  found
himself  warmly  attacked  from  the  pulpit,  which  at  first
could  not  but  startle  the  people,  who  till  then,  were
equal  strangers  io  him  and  his  book  ;  but  that  in  a
short  time,  they  were  so  wrell  accustomed  to  this  sub
ject,  that  it  was  as  muck  expected,  as  if  it  had  foeeA
prescribed  in  the  Rubrick.  He  also  informs  us,  that
Siis  own  silence  respecting  the  book  in  question,  made
iiis  enemies  insinuate  that  he  was  not  tlie  author  of  it.

When  this  rough  treatment  of  Mr.  Toland  from  the
pulpit  proved  insignificant,  the  Grand  Jury  was  solicit
ed  to  present  him,  for  a  Book  ?,  ritten  and  published  iiji
presentment  of  the  Grand  Jury  of  Mid-


12


dlesex,  was  printed  with  an  emphatical  title,  and  cried
about  the  streets.  Mr.  Toland  was  accordingly  pre
sented  there,  the  last  day  of  the  term,  in  the  Court  of
Ring's  Bench.

At  that  time,  Mr.  Peter  Brown,  Senior  Fellow  of
Trinity  College,  Dublin,  published  a  book  against  Mr.
Toland's  Christianity  riot  Mysterious;  in  which  he  repre
sented  him,  as  an  inveterate  enemy  to  all  revealed  religi
on  ;  a  knight  errant ;  one  who  openly  affected  to  be  the
head  of  a  sect,  and  designed  to  be  as  famous  an  im
postor  as  Mahomet.  Mr,  Brown  was  afterwards  made
bishop  of  Cork  ;  and  Mr.  Toland  used  frequently  to
say,  "  That  he  made  him  a  bishop."  This  is  the  same
jacobitical  gentleman,  who,  because  he  could  not  bear
that  any  person  should  drink  the  health  of  King  Wil
liam,  wrote  a  pamphlet  against  health-drinking,  as
being  a  profanation  of  the  Lord's  Supper  !

Mr.  Mollineux  sent  Mr.  Brown's  book  to  Mr.  Locke,
and  in  a  letter  to  him,  dated  20th  of  July,  1697,  says,
"  Mr.  Toland  has  had  his  opposers  here,  as  you  will
-*  find  by  a  book  T  have  sent  you.  The  author  is  my
"  acquaintance  ;  but,  two  things  I  shall  never  forgive,
<•  in  his  book  :  the  one,  is  the  foul  language  and  op-
"  probrious  epithets  he  has  bestowed  on  Mr.  Toland.
<;  The  other  is,  upon  several  occasions,  calling  in  the
<;  aid  of  the  civil  magistrate,  and  delivering  Mr.  To-
k>  land  up  to  secular  punishment.  This  indeed  is  akil-
u  ling  argument ;  but,  may  dispose  some  to  think,


"  that  where  the  strength  of  reason  failed  him,   there
«  he  flies  to  the  strength  of  the  sword,"  &c.

Mr.  Toland,  it  seems,  was  dreaded  in  Ireland  as  a
second  Goliath,  who  at  the  head  of  the  Philistines  de
fied  the  armies  o£  Israel,  in  so  much,  that  Mr.  Han
cock,  the  Recorder  of  Dublin,  in  his  congratulatory  ha
rangue,  to  the  Lords  Justices  of  that  kingdom,  in  the
name  of  his  corporation,  begged  their  Lordships  would
protect  the  Church  from  all  its  adversaries  ;  but,  parti
cularly  from  the  Tolandists.

But  to  give  the  last  and  finishing  stroke  to  Mr.  To-
land's  book,  it  was  brought  before  the  parliament.  Se
veral  persons  eminent  for  their  birth  ;  good  qualities,
and  fortune,  opposed  the  whole  proceedings ;  but,
finding  themselves  over-ruled  in  this,  they  urged,  that
the  objectionable  passages  should  be  read.  That  Toland
should  be  heard  in  his  defence  personally  ;  or  at  least,
by  letter.  All  these  propositions  were  rejected,  and
Mr.  Toland,  unheard  and  undefended,  was  ordered  to  be
taken  into  the  custody  of  the  serjant  at  arms.  Mr.
Toland  made  his  escape,  but  liis  book  was  burnt  by
the  common  hangman,  on  the  llth  September,  1697>
before  the  gate  of  the  parliament-house  ;  and  also,  in
the  open  street,  before  the  town-house  ;  the  sheriffs
and  all  the  constables  attending.

Dr.  South  in  the  preface  to  his  third  volume  of  Ser
mons,  compliments  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  on  his


14


treatment  of  Toland,  whom  he  calls  a  Mahometan
Christian  ;  and  particularly,  that  he  made  the  kingdom
too  hot  for  him,  without  the  help  of  a  faggot.  The  fag
got  had  been  kindled  in  Scotland  from  the  one  end  to
the  other,  during  the  twenty-eight  years  persecution,
and  innocent  and  holy  men  burnt  alive,  merely  for  being
non-conformists!  or  in  other  words,  for  not  preferring
the  dogmas  of  arbitrary  and  interested  men,  to  the  sa
cred  Scriptures.  Toland's  crimes  appear  to  have  been
much  of  the  same  kind,  and  it  was  very  consistent  in
the  Doctor  to  hint  at  a  similar  punishment.

On  Mr.  Toland's  return  to  London,  he  published  his
Apology,  .giving  an  account  of  his  conduct,  and  vindi
cating  himself  from  the  aspersions  and  persecutions  of
his  enemies.

In  1698,  party-disputes  ran  high.  The  partizans  of
the  house  of  Steuart  wished  to  facilitate  the  Preten
der's  return,  by  keeping  up  jio  standing  army  at  all.

Their  opponents  took  different  ground. —Several

pamphlets  appeared  ;  and  among  the  rest,  one  from
the  pen  of  Mr.  Toland,  wherein  he  recommends  model
ling  the  militia  on  such  a  plan,  as  to  render  it  adequate
to  the  maintenance  of  internal  tranquillity,  and  repul
sion  of  foreign  invasion.  Indeed,  on  every  occasion,  we
'find  Mr.  Toland  a  staunch  friend  to  the  revolution,  and
.the  Protestant  succession  ;  and,  though  this  was  not
the  .ostensible,  still  there  is  every  reason  to  reckon  it


15


the  real  cause  of  his  persecution  ;  his  enemfes,  almost
to  a  man,  entertaining  very  different  sentiments.

This  same  year,  he  published  the  life  of  John  Milton,
which  was  prefixed  to  his  works,  in  three  volumes
folio.  In  the  course  of  Milton's  life,  Mr.  To!  and  prov
ed  that  Icon  Basilike  was  not  written  by  Charles  1st,
but  by  Dr.  Gauden,  and  took  occasion  to  remark,  that,
when  this  imposition  was  practised  on  the  nation,  at
no  greater  distance  of  time  than  forty  years,  he  ceased
to  wonder  how  so  many  suppositions  pieces,  under  the.
name  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  should  be  published^
approved,  <%<?.  Had  he  denied  the  Trinity,  or  bias-,
phemed  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  would  have  been  nothing
in  comparison  of  curtailing  the  literary  fame  of  the  rojr
al  Martyr  of  the  church  of  England.

Accordingly,  Mr  Blackall,  chaplin  to  the  king,  in  a
Sermon  preached  before  the  house  of  commons,  30th
January,  1689,  says,  "  We  may  cease  to  wonder,  that
"  he  (Mr.  Toland,)  should  have  the  boldness,  without
"  proof,  and  against  proof,  to  deny  the  authority  of
"  this  book,  who  is  such  an  Infidel  to  doubt,  and  ig
"  shameless  and  impudent  enough,  even  in  print,  and
"  in  a  Christian  country,  publicly  to  affront  our  holy
"  religion,  by  declaring  his  doubt,  that  several  pieces
"  under  the  name  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  ,(he  must
"  mean  those  received  by  the  whole  Christian  church,
"  for  I  know  of  no  other,)  are  supposititious,"  <|c.  The


reader  will  here  smile,  to  see  that  Mr.  Blackall  rests
the  whole  stress  of  Mr.  Toland's  Infidelity,  on  his  own
ignorance.  Mr.  Blackall  expressly  says,  "  Mr.  To-
*'  land  must  mean  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,"
because  he  knows  of  no  other.  Excellent  Logician  !

In  order  to  vindicate  himself,  Mr.  Toland  published
Amyntor,  in  which  he  re-doubles  his  arguments,  to
prove  Dr.  Gaudcn  the  author  of  Icon  Basilike  ;  and,
at  the  same  time,  published  a  list  of  supposititious
pieces,  ascribed  to  Christ,  his  Apostles,  and  other  emi
nent  men,  extending  to  no  less  than  forty-three  octavo
pages.  After  having  given  that  catalogue,  he  proceeds
thus  :

"  Here  is  a  long  catalogue  for  Mr.  Blackall,  who,
"  it  is  probable,  will  not  think  the  more  meanly  of
"  himself,  for  being  unacquainted  with  these  pieces  ;
"  nor,  if  that  were  all,  should  I  be  forward  to  think  the
«  worse  of  him  on  this  account  :  but  I  think,  he  is  to
«  blame,  for  denying  that  there  were  any  such,  be-
(f  cause  he  knew  nothing  of  them  ;  much  less  should
"  he  infer  from  thenca,  that  I  denied  the  Scriptures  ;
«  which  scandal,  however,  as  proceeding  from  igno-
"  ranee,  I  heartily  forgive  him,  as  every  good  Christian
"  ought  to  do."

What  a  calm,  dignified,  Christian  reply  to  the  very
man,  who,  without  the  least  shadow  of  fact,  proclaim-


ed  Mr.  Toland  an  impudent  and  shameless  Infidel,  be
fore  the  whole  House  of  Commons.  Poor  Mr.  Blackall
was  obliged  to  say  something  or  other  in  his  own  de
fence.  He  published  a  pamphlet,  wherein  he  labours
hard  to  prove,  that  Mr.  Toland's  words  were  liable  to
misapprehension ;  and  says,  "  I  charged  Mr.  Toland
with  doubting  of  the  bodks  of  the  New  Testament,
but  he  declares,  he  does  not  mean  those  books,  there
fore  we  are  now  agreed :  there  can  be  no  dispute  be
tween  us  on  that  subject."

In  the  same  year,  1699,  Mr.  Toland  published  the
Memoirs  of  Denzil,  Lord  Plollis,  Baron  of  Ifield  in,
Sussex,  from  1641  to  1648.  The  manuscript  was  put
into  his  hands,  by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  was
one  of  his  patrons  and  benefactors  ;  and  he  dedicated
the  work  to  his  Grace.

In  1 700,  he  published  in  folio,  Harrington's  Oceana,
with  some  other  pieces  of  that  ingenious  author,  not  be
fore  printed,  to  which  he  prefixed  the  life  of  the  author.
From  the  preface  to  this  work,  which  is  dated  30th
November,  1699,  we  learn  Mr.  Toland's  exact  age,  for
he  there  informs  us,  that  this  very  day  he  was  begin
ning  his  thirtieth  year.

About  the  same  time,  appeared  a  pamphlet,  entitled
Clito  ;  or  the  force  of  Eloquence.  The  printer  gave
Mr,  Toland  as  the  author.  This  piece,  consists  of  a

C


dialogue  between  Clifo  and  Adcisidcemon.  This  *s  »
poetical  performance.  Mr..  Toland  is  known  by  the
name  ADEISIDIEMON,  which  lie  translates,  unsupersti-
tious.  This  was  animadverted  on,  by  an  anonmyous
deigyman,  who,  after  a  torrent  of  Billingsgate  abuse,
translates  Adeisidsemon,  (in  open  violation  of  all  the
rules  of  etymology  and  common  sense,)  one  that  fears
neither  God  nor  deviL  To  such  pitiful  lengths  will  the
rancour  of  party-spirit  drive  men,  when  they  are  deter
mined  to  calumniate  with,,  or  without  reason.

In  the  beginning  of  1701,  lie  published,  The  Art  of
Governing  by  Parties,  which  he  dedicated  to  King
William  the  Hid. ;  and,  about  the  same  time,  published
a  pamphlet,  in  quarto,  entitled  Propositions  for  uniting
the  two  East-India  Companies.

In  March  following,  the  lower  and  upper  house  of
Convocation,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  bishops,  re
solved  to  proceed  against  Mr.  Toland's  CHRISTIANITY
NOT  MYSTERIOUS,  and  his  AMYNTOR,  with  all  possible
rigour.  After  passing  some  resolutions  against  these
books,  they  found  they  could  not  proceed  without  a
license  from  the  king.  Rather  than  solicit  this  BOON,
they  dropped  their  proceedings  against  Mr.  Toland.
Can  any  circumstance  speak  more  strongly  in  the  vin
dication  of  Mr.  Toland  ?  Can  any  thing  shew  the  in
nocence  of  our  author,  in  a  clearer  point  of  view,  than
that  the  whole  united  English  hierarchy,  durst  not  so-


licit  a  license  from  the  king  to  prosecute  him,  because
they  were  sure  it  would  he  refused  ?  This  circum
stance  affords  more  than  a  presumption,  that  .Mr-  To-
land's  principal  crimes,  in  the  eyes  of  his  enemies,  were
his  predilection  for  Presbyterianism  .;  and,  attachment
to  King  William.

Be  that  as  it  may,  when  on  the  death  jof  the  Duke
of  Gloucester,  an  act  was  passed  in  June,  1701,  for  the
better  securing  the  Protestant  succession  to  the  crown.
Mr.  Toland  published  his  ANGLIA  LIBERA  ;  or  the  Li
mitation  and  Succession  of  the  Crown  of  England  ex
plained  and.  asserted  ;  as  grounded  on  his  Majesty's
Speech  ;  the  proceedings  of  Parliament  4  the  desires
*)f  the  People ;  the  safety  of  our  Religion  ;  the  Nature
of  our  Constitution  ;  the  Balance  of  Europe  ;  and,
the  Rights  of  Mankind.  This  Treatise,  he  dedicated
to  his  patron,  the  duke  of  Newcastle,

The  king  having  sent  the  earl  of  Macclesfteld  t&
Hanover,  with  the  act  of  succession,  Mr.  Toland  ac
companied  him,  and  presented  his  ANGLIA.  LIBERA  to
her  Electoral  Highness  the  Princess  Sophia  ;  and  was
the  first  who  had  the  honour  of  kneeling  and  kissing
her  hand,  on  account  of  the  act  of  succession.  The  Earl
cf  Macclesfield  recommended  him  warmly  to  her
Highness.  Mr.  Toland  staid  there  five  or  six  weeks,  and
at  his  departure,  their  Highnesses  the  Electress  Dow
ager,  and  the  Elector  presented  him  with  several  gold
,  as  a  princely  remuneration  for  the  book  he  had


written,  about  the  succession,  in  defence  of  their  title
and  family.  Her  highness  condescended  to  give  him
likewise,  portraits  of  herself,  the  Elector,  the  young
Prince,  and  of  her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Prussia,  done  in
oil  colours.  The  Earl  of  Macclesfield,  on  his  return,
waited  on  the  king  at  London,  and  presented  Mr.  To-
land,  who  had  the  honour  of  kissing  his  Majesty's  hand.

The  Parliament  was  dissolved  1 1th  November,  and  a
new  one  summoned  to  meet  the  30th  December.  The
Tory  party  appeared  horribly  afraid  that  Mr.  Toland
would  obtain  a  seat  in  the  ensuing  Parliament,  and
circulated  a  report  that  he  was  to  be  returned  for
Blechingley  in  Surry,  a  borough  in  the  interest  of  Sir
Robert  Clayton.  Mr.  Toland,  who  had  no  intention
whatever  of  this  kind,  contradicted  the  report,  by  an
advertisement  in  the  Post-man.  Even  this  harmless  act
could  not  pass  without  censure,  but  gave  occasion  to
an  anonymous  author  to  publish  a  pamphlet,  entitled
"  Modesty  mistaken  ;  or  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Toland,  up-
**  on  his  declining  to  appear  in  the  ensuing  Parlia-
"  ment."

On  the  opening  of  parliament,  Mr.  Toland  publish
ed  his  Paradoxes  of  Stale,  grounded  chiefly  on  his
*najesty's  princely,  pious,  and  most  gracious  speech.

Soon  after,  he  published  "  Reasons  for  addressing  his
"  Majesty  to  invite  into  England,  the  Electrcss  Dow-
"  ager,  and  the  Electoral  Prince  of  Hanover  ;  and  for
(<  attainting  -and  abjuring  the  pretended  Prince  of


21


"  Wales,"  c%c.  This  was  answered  by  Mr.  Luke  Mil-
burn.  But,  Mr.  Toland  had  the  high  gratification  to
see  parliament  attend  to  his  suggestions.  An  act  was
accordingly  passed  for  the  attainder  of  the  pretended
Prince  of  Wales  ;  and  another,  for  the  better  security
of  his  Majesty's  Person,  and  the  Protestant  succession
<%c.  and  enjoining  an  oath  of  abjuration  of  the  Preten
der.  Thus,  instead  of  an  enemy  to  religion,  or  civil
liberty,  we  find  him  strenuously  recommending  the  most
efficacious  measures  for  the  preservation  of  both.

Some  difference  having  arisen  between  the  lower
and  upper  house  of  Convocation,  on  a  point  of  jurisdic
tion,  respecting  their  proceedings  against  Christianity
not  Mysterious,-  the  year  before,  a  paper  war  commen
ced  between  them,  and  several  pamphlets  appeared
on  both  sides.  Those  written  by  the  partizans  of
the  upper  house,  were  favourable  to  Mr.  Toland';  but,
those  written  in  favour  of  the  lower  house,  the  reverse.
He  therefore,  seized  this  opportunity  of  publishing  his
Vindicius  Liberius  ;  being  a  vindication  of  his  Chris
tianity  not  Mysterious  ; — a  full  and  clear  account  of
his  religious  and  civil  principles  ;  and,  a  justification
of  those  called  Whigs  and  Common-wealth  men,  against
the  mis-representations  of  all  their  opposers.

After  the  publication  of  this  book,  Mr.  Toland  went
to  the  courts  of  Hanover  and  Berlin,  where  he  wa*,
very  graciously  received  by  the  Princess  Sophia,  anil
the  Queen  of  Prussia.  He  was  often  admitted  to  their


conversation  ;  and  wrote  some  pieces,  which  he  pre
sented  to  herMajesty.  There  he  wrote  also,  an  account
of  the  courts  of  Prussia  and  Hanover.

On  his  return  to  England,  1704,  he  published  seve
ral  philosophical  letters  ;  three  of  which,  he  inscribed
to  the  Queen  of  Prussia,  under  the  designation  of
Serena.

1st,  The  Origin  and  Force  of  Prejudices.

2d,  The  History  of  the  Soul's  Immortality  among
fhe  Heathens.

3d,  The  Origin  of  Idolatry,  and  Reasons  of
Heathenism.

4th,  A  Letter  to  a  Gentleman  in  Holland,  shewing
Spinoza  s  System  of  Philosophy,  to  be  without  Princi
ple  or  Foundation.

5th,  Motion  essential  to  Matter ;  in  answer  to  some
remarks,  by  a  noble  Friend,  on  the  confutation  of
Spinoza.  Mr.  Toland  informs  us,  that  the  Queen  of
Prussia  was  pleased  to  ask  his  opinion,  respecting  the
Subjects  treated  of,  in  the  three  Letters  inscribed  to
her.

These  Letters  were  animadverted  on,  by  Mr.  Wot-
tcn,  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  "  Letters  to  Eusebia."

At  the  same  time,  he  published  an  English  transla
tion  of  the  Life  of  JEsop,  by  Monsieur  De  Mtziriae,
and  dedicated  it  to  Anthony  Collins,  Esq.


In  1 705,  he  published  the  following  pieces,

1st,  Socinianism  truly  stated,  c%c.

2d,  An  Account  of  the  Courts  of  Prussia  and  Han
over,  dedicated  to  the  Duke  of  Somerset,

3rd,  The  Ordinances,  Statutes  and  Privileges  of  the
Royal  Academy  at  Berlin.  Translated  from  the  origi
nal.

The  same  year,  Counsellor  Pooley,  and  Dr.  Drake,
wrote  the  Memorial  of  the  Church  of  England,  with  $
view  to  influence  the  ensuing  parliamentary  election,,
by  representing  the  Whig  Administration,  as  plotting
the  ruin  of  the  Church.

By  the  direction  of  Mr.  Harley,  secretary  of  state,
this  memorial  was  answered,  by  Mr.  Toland,  in  a
Pamphlet,  entitled,  "  The  Memorial  of  the  State  of
*  England,  in  Vindication  of  the  Queen,  the  Church,
•4  and  the  Administration :  designed  to  rectify  the  mu-
"  tual  mistakes  of  Protestants ;  and,  to  unite  their  af-
«'  fections,  in  defence  of  our  Religion  and  Liberty J*
On  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Harley,  who  was  one  of  Mr,
Toland's  patrons  and  benefactors,  this  treatise  was
published,  without  the  author's  name.

This  pamphlet  was  answered,  by  Thomas  Hauling
Esq.,  who  made  a  direct  attack  on  the  duke  of  Marl-
borough's,  and  Mr.  Harley's  conduct.  Mr.  William
Stephens,  rector  of  Sutton,  in  Surry,  being  found  the
publisher ;  and,  refusing  to  bear,  evidence  against  Mr,


24


Raulins,  was  sentenced :  to  stand  on  the  pillory  ;  but*
the  sentence  was  afterwards  remitted.

Ivlr.  Toland  was  directed  by  Mr.  Harley  to  answer
tl  ix  Pamphlet,  which  he  did  ;  but,   for  some  reasons,
row  unknown,  the  design  was  dropped,  after  part  of
'Poland's  answer  had  been  printed.

Mr.  Harley  having  found  among  his  manuscripts,  a
Philippic  against  France,  written  in  Latin,  by  one
Cardinal  Matthew,  in  1.5 14,  gave  it  to  Mr.  Toland  who
edited  it,  both  in  English  and  Latin  :  along  with  o-
ther  violent  expressions,  it  contains  the  following,
Gallonim  Ungues  non  resecandos,  sed  pentius  cvellendos
cssf  ;  i.  e.  That  the  nails  of  the  French  were  not  to
be  pared,  but  torn  out  by  the  roots.

Seen  after,  he  published  the  Elector  Palatine's  De
claration,  lately  published  in  favour  of  his  Protestant
Subjects,  <|c.  This  Mr.  Toland  did,  at  the  particular
request  .of  the  Elector  Palatine's  minister.

In  the  Spring,  Mr.  Toland  went  to  Germany,  and
visited  Berlin,  Hanover,  Dusseldorp,  Vienna  and  Pra
gue  in  Bohemia.  At  Dusseldorp,  he  was  most  graci
ously  received  by  his  Electoral  Highness,  who,  in  con
sideration  of  the  English  pamphlet,  published  by  him,
presented  him  with  a  gold  chain  and  medal,  besides  a
hundred  ducats.  From  Prague,  he  returned  to  Hol
land,  where  he  staid  till  1710.

In  Holland,  he  published  the  following  Dissertations,


25


viz.  1st,  Adeisidcemon,  sive  Titus  Livius  a  Superstitions
Vindicates,  &c.

Qdo.  Qrignes  Judaicce,  &c.  In  the  course  of  this  Dis
sertation,  he  animadverted  on  Huetius'  Demonstratio
Evangelica.  He  ridicules  Huetius  for  affirming  that
several  eminent  persons  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament
are  allegorized  in  the  Heathen  Mythology;  and  parti-
culary  Moses  under  the  names  of  Bacchus,  Typho,
Silenus,  Priapus,  and  Adonis.  Though  Mr.  Toland
was  unquestionably  in  the  right,  Huetius  was  greatly
incensed,  and  expressed  his  resentment  in  a  letter,
first  published  in  the  Journal  of  Trevoux,  and  after
wards  printed  by  Abbot  Tilladet.  It  will  be  recollec
ted,  that  these  are  the  two  gentlemen,  who  endeavoured
to  convict  Mr.  Toland  of  the  high  and  unpardonable
crime,  of  not  directing  his  parents  to  propagate  him
legitimately.

In  1 709,  he  published  at  Amsterdam,  a  second  edi
tion  of  his  Philippic  against  France.

In  1710,  he  published  without  his  name,  a  French
pamphlet,  relating  to  Dr.  Sacheverell.

While  in  Holland,  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  get
acquainted  with  prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,  who  gave
him  several  marks  of  his  generosity.

After  his  return  to  England  in  1711,  he  published
D


the  Humours  of  Epsom  \  and  at  the  same  time,   a
translation  of  four  of  Pliny's  Letters.

In  1712,  he  published  Imo.  a  Letter  against  Popery,
written  by  Sophia  Charlotte,  late  Queen  of  Prussia.
2c?o.  Her  Majesty's  reasons  for  creating  the  Electoral
Prince  of  Hanover  a  Peer  of  that  realm.  3t  lo.  The  Grand
Mystery  laid  open  ;  namely,  by  dividing  the  Protes
tants,  to  weaken,  the  Hanoverian  Succession,  §c.

About  the  same  time,  he  published  a  new  edition  of
Cicero's  works,  an  undertaking  for  which  he  was  emi
nently  qualified.  This  work  alone,  is  sufficient  to  trans
mit  Mr.  Toland's  name  to  posterity.  It  is  extremely
scarce,  he  having  printed  only  a  few  copies,  at  his  own
charge,  to  serve  his  particular  friends.

In  1713,  he  published  "An  Appeal  to  Honest  Peo
ple,  against  wicked  Priests,"  fyc.  :  And  much  about
the  same  time,  a  pamphlet  on  the  necessity  of  de
molishing  Dunkirk..

In  1.714,  he  published  a  pamphlet  relative  to  the  res
toration  of  Charles  the  lid.  by  General  Monk  ;  also,  a
collection  of  letters,  written  by  the  General  relating  to
the  same  subject.

The  same  year,  he  published  the  Funeral  Elogy  of
her  royal  highness,  the  late  Princess  Sophia,  &c.  ;  and
much  about  the  same  time,  "  Reasons  for  naturalizing
the  Jews  in  Great  Britain,"  «$c.  This  he  dedicated  ra-,


27


ther  ironically,  to  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both
Provinces.

In  1717,  he  published  the  State  Anatomy  -of  Ore  at
Britain.  This  was  answered  by  Dr.  Fiddes,  chaplain
to  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  and  by  Daniel  De  Foe.  In  reply,
Mr.  Toland  published  the  second  part  of  the  State
Anatomy.

In  1717,  he  published  Nazarenits.  In  this  treatise,
according  to  Mr.  Toland,  the  original  plan  of  Chris
tianity  was  this  :  "  that  the  Jews,  though  associating
with  the  converted  Gentiles,  and  acknowledging  them
for  brethren,  were  still  to  observe  their  own  laws  ;  and
that  the  Gentiles,  who  became  so  far  Jews  as  to  ac
knowledge  one  God,  were  not,  however,  to  observe
the  Jewish  law  :  but,  that  both  of  them  were  to  be  e-
ver  after,  united  into  one  body  or  fellowship,  in  that
part  of  Christianity  particularly,  which,  better  than  all
the  preparative  purgations  of  the  philosophers,  requires
the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  renova
tion  of  the  inward  man  ;  and  \vherein  alone,  the  Jew
and  the  Gentile;  the  Civilized  and  and  the  Barbarian;
the  Free-man  and  the  Bond-slave,  are  all  in  oneChrut,
however  differing  in  other  circumstances."  This  trea
tise  was  animadverted  on,  by  Messrs.  Mangey  and
Paterson  ;  and  by  Dr.  Brett.

This  year,   he  also  edited  a  pamphlet,   called   the
Destiny  oftfome;  or,  the  speedy  and  final  destruction


28


of  the  Pope,  founded  partly  on  natural  and  political
reasons,  and  partly  on  th^famous  prophecy  of  St.  Ma-
lachy,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  in  the  thirteenth
century,  fyc.

In  the  beginning  of  1720,  Dr.  Hare  published  the
fourth  edition  of  his  Visitation  Sermon ;  and,  ani
madverted  on  Christianity  not  Mysterious ;  asserting
that  Mr.  Toland  often  quoted  Mr.  Locke,  to  support
notions  he  never  dreamed  of.  As  this  assertion  was
totally  groundless,  the  doctor  had  Mr.  Locke,  and  Mr.
Toland  on  his  back  at  once.  Finding  his  ground  un
tenable,  he  published  the  following  advertisement  in
the  Daily  Courant.

"  Just  published,  the  fourth  Edition  of

"  The  Dean  of  Worcester's  Visitation  Sermon.  In
"  the  Postscript,  line  nintk  from  the  end,  instead  of,  is
"  often  quoted,  read,  makes  great  use  of  Mr.  Locke's
"  principles.

"  London,  Feb.  1st.  1720."

Thus  the*  reverend  doctor  had  the  contemptible
meanness  to  shelter  a  bare-faced  falsehood,  under  the
subterfuge  of  a  typographical  error.

This  pitiful  conduct  of  Dr.  Hare,  produced  from
Mr.Toland,  a  pamphlet,  entitled  a  Short  Essay  on  the
Art  of  Lying;  or,  a  Defence  of  a  Reverend  Dignitary,


who  suffers  under  the  Persecution  of  MY.  TOLAND /or  a
LAPSUS  CALAMI.

About  this  time,  he  published  Pantheisticon ;  sive
formula  cekbrandce  Sodalitatis  Socraticce,  &c.  Some
of  his  enemies  pretended  this  tract  was  written  to  ri
dicule  the  Romish,  and  Episcopal  Liturgies  ;  and,  as
it  was  made  up  of  Responses,  Lessons,  a  Philosophical
Canon,  and  aLitany;  and,  the  whole  written  both  in  red
and  black  ink,  their  opinion  is  perhaps  well  founded.
Mr.  Toland  was,  at  all  times,  a  rigid  advocate  for  the
primitive  apostolic  simplicity  of  the  Christian  religion.
This  tract,  ihstead  of  being  a  proof  of  our  author's
heterodoxy,  is  so  far  the  reverse,  that  had  John  Knox
been  alive,  I  am  persuaded,  he  would  have  thanked
him  for  it.  To  this  treatise,  he  prefixed  the  name  of
Janus  Junius  Eoganesius,  which,  though  it  was  his
real  Christian  name,  and  the  name  of  his  country,  was
as  good  a  disguise  as  he  could  have  invented.

A  Bill  having  been  introduced  into  the  House  of
Lords, '  to  make  the  parliament  of  Ireland  more  de
pendent  on  that  of  Great  Britain,  Mr.  Toland  wrote  a
Treatise  in  opposition  to  that  measure.

Some  time  after,  he  published  a  book,  entitled  Te-
trddymus :  containing  1  mo.  Hodegvs ;  or,  the  Pillar  of
cloud  and  fire  that  guided  the  Israelites  in  the  wilder
ness,  not  miraculous,  §<?.  2do.  Ctydophorus ;  or
the  Exoteric  and  Esoteric  Philosophy  of  the  antients,


30


S$c.  3tio.  Hypatia ;  or,  the  History  of  a  most
beautiful,  most  virtuous,  most  learned,  and  every  way
accomplished  young  Lady,  who  was  torn  to  pieces  by
the  clergy  of  Alexandria,  to  gratify  the  pride,  emula
tion  and  cruelty  of  their  Archbishop  Cyril,  commonly,
but,  undeservedly  styled  St.  Cyril.  4>to.  Man-
goncutes  \  or,  a  Defence  of  Nazarenus,  addressed  to
the  right  Rev.  John  Lord,  Bishop  of  London,  against
his  Lordship's  Chaplin  Dr.  Mangey,  his  dedicator  Mr.
Paterson,  and  the  Rev.  Dr.  Brett,  once  belonging  to
his  Lordship's  church.

In  this  last  Address  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  Mr.
Toland,  states  the  injurious  treatment  he  had  received
from  Dr.  Hare  at  considerable  length ;  and,  concludes
with  the  following  account  of  his  own  conduct,  and
sentiments  :  "  Notwithstanding,  says  he,  the  imputa
tions  of  Heresy  and  Infidelity,  so  often  published  by
the  clergy,  as  lately,  in  the  vauntingest  manner,  by
one  not  unknown  to  you  ;  the  whifling  and  the  igno
rant,  being  ever  the  most  arrogant  and  confident,  I  as
sure  your  Lordship,  that  the  purity  of  religion,  and
the  prosperity  of  the  state  have  ever  been  my  chiefest
aim.  Civil  liberty,  and  religious  toleration,  as  the
most  desirable  things  in  this  world ;  the  most  condu
cing  to  peace,  plenty,  knowledge,  and  every  kind  of
happiness,  have  been  the  two  main  objects  of  all  my
writings.  But,  as  by  liberty,  I  did  not  mean  licenti
ousness  ;  so  by  toleration,  I  did  not  mean  indifference,


31


and  much  less  an  approbation  of  every  religion  I  could
suffer.  To  be  more  particular,  I  'solemnly  profess  to
your  Lordship,  that  the  religion  taught  by  Jesus  Christ
and  his  Apostles,  but  not  as  since  corrupted  by  the  sub
tractions,  additions,  and  other  alterations  of  any  pa**
ticular  man,  or  company  of  men,  is  that  which  I  in
finitely  prefer  before  all  others.  I  do  over  and  over  a-
gain,  repeat  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  exclusive  of  either
oral  traditions,  or  the  determinations  of  synods,  adding
what  I  declared  before  to  the  world,  that  religion  as  it
came  from  their  hands,  was  no  less  plain  and  pure,
than  useful  and  instructive ;  and  that,  as  being  the  busi
ness  of  every  man,  it  was  equally  understood  by  every
body.  For,  Christ  did  not  institute  one  Religion  for
the  learned  and  another  for  the  vulgar,"  <$c.

In  1721, Dr. Hare  published  a  Book,  entitled  "Scrip
ture  Truth  vindicated ;  from  the  misrepresentations  of
the  Lord  Bishop  of  Bangor,"  <%c. ;  and,  in  the  Preface,
takes  occasion  to  observe,  that  none  are  prevented  from
settling  in  Carolina,  but  down-right  Atheists,  such  as
Mr.Toland  ;  and  most  unjustly  asserts,  that  in  some
copies  of  the  Pantheisticon,  he  inserted  a  prayer  to  the
following  effect  :  Omnipotent  et  sempiterne  Bacche  ;
qui  humanam  societatem  maxime  in  bibendo  constituisti  ;
concede  propitius,  ut  istorum  capita,  qui  hesterna  com-
potatione  gravantur,  hodierna  leventur  ;  idque  fiat  per
pocula  poculorum.  Amen.  i.  e.  "  Omnipotent  and  e-
verlasting  Bacchus,  who  foundedst  human  society


principally  by  drinking,  propitiously  grant,  that  the
heads  of  those,  which  are  made  heavy  by  yesterday's
drinking,  may  be  lightened  by  this  day's,  and  that  by
bumper  after  bumper.  Amen."

M.  Maizeuz,  a  Frenchman,  and  Mr.  Toland's  bio
grapher  assures  us,  that  Mr.  Toland  never  dreamed  of
such  a  matter.  He  assures  us,  that  he  knows  the
author,  but  forbears  to  mention  him,  on  account  of  his
profession.  Indeed,  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt,  that
Dr.  Hare  himself  was  the  author.

The  same  year,  Mr.  Toland  published  Letters  from
the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  to  the  Lord  Viscount  Moles-
worth  ;  as  also,  two  Letters  written  by  Sir  George
Cropsley.

Mr.  Toland  had  these  four  years  past  lived  at  Putney,
whence  he  could  conveniently  go  to  London,  and  re
turn  the  same  day.  Being  in  town  about  the  middle
of  December,  he  found  himself  very  ill,  and  an  ignorant
physician,  by  his  improper  prescriptions,  very  much  in
creased  his  disorder.  But,  he  made  a  shift  to  return
to  Putney,  where  he  grew  better,  and  entertained
some  hopes  of  recovery.  In  the  interval,  he  wrote  two
^Treatises  ;  the  one,  entitled,  Physic  without  Physicans ;
and  the  other,  The  Danger  of  mercenary  Parliaments.
This  last,  he  did  not  live  to  finish  ;  for,  he  died  on
Sunday  the  llth  March,  1722,  about  four  o'clock  in
the  morning-.  He  behaved  himself  throughout  the


whole  course  of  his  sickness,  with  the  greatest  calm
ness  and  fortitude  ;  and,  looked  on  death  without  the
least  perturbation  of  mind  ;  biding  farewell  to  those
about  him,  and  telling  them,  he  ivas  going  to  fall  a-
sleep.
A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  composed  the  following

EPITAPH  :

H.  S.  E.

JOANNES    TO  LAND  US..
Qui,  in  Hibernia  prope  Deriam  naius,

In  Scotia  et  Hibernia  Studuit,
Quod  Oxonii  quoqite  fecit  Adolescent ;

Atque  Germania  plus  semel  petita,
Virilem  circa  Londinum  transegit  cctatem.

Omnium  Literarum  excultor

Ac  Linguarum  plus  dccem  Sciens.

Veritatis  Propugnator

Libertatis  Asserlor:

Nullius  autem  Sectator,  aut  Client,

Nee  minis,  nee  mails  est  injlexus,

fyiin,  quam  elegit,  viam  pemgcref,

Utili  honestum  anteferens.

Spiritus  cum  Mtlicreo  Patre,

A  Quo  prodiit  olim,  conjungilur  :

Corpus  item  naturae  cedens,
In  Materno  grcemio  reponitur.
Ipse  vero  ceternum  est  resurrecturus,
At  Idemfuturus  TOLANDUS  nunquam.
Natus  Nov.  SO.  16  7O.

G&tera  ex  Script'^  pete,
£


34


TRANSLATION.

"  Here  lies  JOHN  TOLAND,  born  in  Ireland,  near
"  Londonderry,  who  in  his  youth  studied  in  Scotland,
"  Ireland,  and  at  Oxford  ;  and,  having  repeatedly  vi-
"  sited  Germany,  spent  his  manhood  about  London.
*•'  He  was  ^cultivator  of  every  kind  of  Learning ;  and
"  skilled  in  more  than  ten  languages  :  the  champion
"  of  Truth,  and  the  assertov  of  Liberty,  but  the  fol-
"  lower  or  client  of  none  ;  nor  was  he  ever  swayed
"  either  by  menaces  or  misfortunes,  from  pursuing  the
"  path,  which  he  chalked  out  to  himself,  uniformly
"  preferring  his  integrity  to  his  interest.  His  Spirit
"  is  re-united  to  his  heavenly  Father,  xfrom  whom  it
"  formerly  proceeded  ;  his  Body  yielding  to  Nature,
u  is  also  re-placed  in  the  Bosom  of  the  Earth.  He
"  himself  will  undoubtedly  arise  to  Eternal  Life,  but
"  will  never  be  the  same  Toland.  Born  3Oth  No-
"  vember,  1670.  Seek  the  rest  from  his  Writings."

Mr.  Toland's  belief,  that  lie  will  never  be  the  same
Toland  after  the  resurrection,  is  not  heterodox,  though
liis  enemies  have  not  failed  to  represent  it  in  this  light,
The  gospel  uniformly  declares,  that  a  considerable
change  will  take  place  in  the  human  body  at  the  re
surrection  ;  and,  that  we  shall  all  be  changed.  Mr.
Toland  must  therefore  not  be  considered  as  here  de
nying  his  absolute  future  Identity,  but  merely  as  allud
ing  to  that  partial  change  which  the  Scriptures  s*
clearly  point  out.


35


Hitherto,  I  have  almost  implicity  followed  M.
Maizeuz  ;  and,  as  far  as  the  nature  of  this  Abstract
would  admit,  have  a/lopted  his  own  words,  being  well
aware,  that  by  so  doing,  no  body  will  accuse  me  of
partiality  to  Mr.Toland.  M.  Maizeuz  was  a  French
man,  a  friend  to  Popery  and  arbitrary  power, — he  did
not  undertake  our  Author's  Biography  voluntarily,
nor  from  any  motive  of  respect.  On  the  contrary,  when
requested  by  a  friend  of  our  author's,  (who  was  at  the
same  time  the  Frenchman's  benefactor,)  to  undertake
the  task,  he  positively  declined  it.  A  second  request
more  peremptory  than  the  first  had  the  desired  effect.
M.  Maizeuz  has  not  in  one  single  instance,  made  the
slighest  allusion  to  the  complexion  of  the  times  in
which  Mr.Toland  lived,  without  a  knowledge  of  which,
it  is  impossible  duely  to  appreciate  either  his  princi
ples,  or  the  scope  of  his  writings.  He  seems,  however,
to  have  been  under  great  obligations  to  his  benefactor,
and  knowing  him  to  be  a  friend  of  our  deceased  au
thor,  was  obliged  to  confine  himself  to  matters  of  fact.
But,  what  will  place  the  conduct  of  M.  Maizeuz  in  a
very  unfavourable  point  of  view,  is,  that  when  Mr.  To-
land's  works  were  printed  at  London,  in  1726.  M.
Maizeuz  not  only  with-held  his  own  name  from  his
life,  but  also,  that  of  the  gentleman,  at  whose  request
it  was  written.

This  gentleman,  having  been  guilty  of  these  unpar
donable  omissions,  I  shall  endeavour,  as  concisely  as
possible,  to  remedy  the  defect,  and  shall  .principally


confine  myself  to  Mr.Toland's  Christianity  not  Mysteri
ous,  which  has  made  so  much  noise  in  the  world.

Previous  to  the  Reformation,  the  infallibility  of  the
Pope,  in  spiritual  ;  and,   the  divine  right  of  Kings  in
temporal  matters,  were  carried  to  the  very  highest
pitch,  and  the  servile,  ignorant  and  debased  state,  to
which  mankind  were  reduced,  by  the  operation  of  these
abominable  doctrines,   is  too  well  known  to  need  any
comment.     At  the  dawn  of  the  Reformation,  a  better
order  of  things  began.     The  Scriptures  were  read  and
studied,  and  the  monstrous  impositions,  for  more  than
ten  centuries,  practised  on  mankind  clearly  displayed.
Neither  the  infallibility  of  the  Pope,  nor  the  divine
right  of  Kings,  could  stand  the  criterion  either  of  rea
son,  or  Revelation  ;  and,  both  were  discarded.     After
a,  long  struggle,  during  more  than  a  century  and  a
half,  our  civil  and  religious  liberties  were  effectually
secured,  by  the  glorious  Revolution.     That  the  Whig-
interest  placed  King  William  on  the  throne  ;  and,-  that
the  Tory-party,  to  a  man,  were  attached  to  the  cause
of  the  abdicated  Monarch,  are  facts  that  can  admit  of
no  dispute.     From  the  date  of  the  Revolution,   the
Torys,  as  far  as  regarded  state  affairs,  v/ere  obliged  to
alter  their  tone.     To  have  declaimed  in  support  of  the
Indefeasible,  Hereditary  right  of  Kings,   would  have
been  a  direct  insult  to  King  William,  who  had  en
croached  on  this  right,  and  might  have  been  construed
high-treason.     The  Toleration  Act  secured  all  deno
minations  in  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion.     This


37

v.  as  another  source  of  discontent  to  the  Torys,  who
had  uniformly  aimed  at  religious  and  exclusive  supre
macy.

That  the  Torys  thwarted  King  William's  measures,
meditated  the  restoration  of  the  abdicated  Monarch  ;
and,  shook  the  stability  of  the  Protestant  succession,
for  more  than  half  a  century,  needs  na  demonstration
Their  absurd  tenets,  respecting  civil  and  religious  ty*
ranny  were  founded  on  a  perversion  of  the  Sacred  Re
cords.  With  the  exception  of  the  Whig-party,  all
ranks  of  mankind  were  kept  in  profound  ignorance  of
the  Divine  Writings,  under  pretence  of  mystery  and  un-
intelligibility.  By  these  means,  the  bulk  of  mankind
were  blindly  led,  without  using  their  senses,  or  their-
reason.

To  drive  arbitrary  power  from  this  last  resource,
Mr.  Toland  wrote  CHRISTIANITY  NOT  MYSTERIOUS.
In  this  Treatise  he  clearly  proves,  that  man's  reason
was  not  given  him,  in  order  to  lie  dormant.  That  if
he  was  allowed  to  judge  forhimself  in  the  ordinary  occur
rences  of  life  ;  and  respecting  the  Phenomena  of  Na
ture,  he  cannot  be  denied  the  same  privilege,  as  far  as
respects  matters  of  Religion,  and  the  principles  of
Christanity.  Mr.  Toland  was  well  aware,  that  if  he
could  once  induce  mankind  to  read  the  Scriptures  with
impartial  attention,  no  man's  interpretation  on  earth
could  mislead  them.

However  convenient  this  mode  of  conduct  might  be


for  the  interests  of  true  religion,  it  was  in  fact,  a  death
blow  to  Popery,  which  had  reared  its  monstrous  fab
ric  on  ignorance,  mystery  and  superstition.  The  gos
pel  was  by  the  Popish  priests,  as  carefully  kept  from
the  vulgar,  as  if  it  had  contained  the  antidote,  instead
of  the  means  of  their  salvation.  When  Mr.  Toland
wrote,  not  one-fourth  of  the  population  of  the  British
empire  were  allowed  to  read  the  Scriptures ;  and,  even
at  the  present  day,  nearly  five  millions  are  denied  this
important  privilege.

Had  Christianity  been  so  intricate  and  mysterious,,
as  designing  and  interested  men  have  represented  it,
certainly  the  twelve  Apostles  were  very  ill  calculated
to  propagate  the  Gospel.  In  many  Popish  countries,
not  one  of  them  would  have  been  considered  qualified
to  read  or  explain  a  single  verse  of  it.  That  the  con
duct  of  Christ,  and  of  his  pretended  Vicegerents,  has
been  widely  different,  I  readily  admit,  but,  the  simple
question  is  this,  "  Whether  Christ  was,  or  was  not-,
best  qualified  to  judge  of  the  nature  of  the  Christian
System,  and  the  instruments  best  calculated  to  pro
mote  it  ?"

When  we  have  duly  weighed  Mr.  Toland's  definition
of  the  word  Mystery  ;  CHRISTIANITY  NOT  MYSTERI
OUS,  means  no  more,  than,  Christianity  intelligible  to  ail
Christians.  This  was  certainly  sapping  the  very  foun
dations  of  Papal  and  Tyrannical  Power,  by  asserting
jtliat  every  Christian  had  a  ri^rUt  to  read  and  under-


39

stand  the  Gospel,     That  the  Treatise  was  considered
by  the  adherents  of  the  abdicated  Monarch,  as  having
this  tendency,  is  evident  from  this  circumstance,  that
Mr.  Toland's  antagonists,  were  to  a  man,  advocates  for
arbitrary  power;    and,   religious    intolerance.      The
Church  of  Scotland,  has  at  all  times  been  forward  to
stem  the  torrent  of  impiety  and  irreligion  ;  but,  it  is
not  known  that  any  one  of  that  venerable  Body,  ever  ob
jected  to  Mr.  Toland's   Orthodoxy  ;  a   circumstance
which  could  not  have  happened,  had  his  writings  been
hostile  to  true  religion.     On  this  head,    I  shall  only
add,  that  the  same  party  which  persecuted  Mr.  To-
land,   would  have   treated  King  William,    and  the
CHURCH  OF  SCOTLAND  with  as  little   ceremony,  had
they  stood  as  unprotected  as  the  illustrious  Subject  of
these  Memoirs.

Mr.  Toland's  Amyntor,  and  his  Pantheisticon,  have
been  already  taken- notice  of.  The  first,  proved  that
King  Charles  was  not  the  author  of  Icon  Basilike  ;
and  the  last,  is  supposed  to  contain  a  sarcastical  allu
sion  to  the  Romish  and  Episcopal  Liturgies  ; — The
torrent  of  abuse  consequently  poured  on  him,  by  the
Torys,  is  no  more  than  might  have  been  naturally
anticipated.

His  Biographer  has  descended  so  low,  as  to  inform
us,  that  Mr.  Toland  was  sometimes  under  pecuniary
difficulties,  and  as  running  in  debt  for  his  Wigs,  fy\
But.  as  this  was  a  charge  of  the  same  nature,  with  his


40


Deism,  Atheism,  Mahometanism,  Pantheism,  Illegiti
macy,  <%c.  I  shall  not  detain  the  Reader  with  a  confu
tation  of  it.

Mr.  TOLAND's  CHARACTER.

It  is  difficult)  to  determine  in  what  department  of
Literature  this  great  man  most  excelled.  He  seems
to  have  been  a  kind  of  univei*sal  genius.— In  contro
versy  he  was  irresistible;  and,  at  the  very  moment  when
his  adversaries  thought  they  had  confuted  him,  they
found  they  had  only  furnished  materials  for  their  own
degradation. — He  was  skilled  in  more  than  ten  Lan
guages,  and  the  Celtic  was  his  native  tongue. — Educat
ed  in  the  grossest  superstition  of  Popery,  at  the  early
age  of  sixteen,  he  became  a  Convert  to  Presbyterianism,
and  remained  steadily  attached  to  it,  till  the  hour  of  his
death. — Popery,  Prelacy,  and  arbitary  Power  he  utter
ly  detested  ;  and,  on  every  occasion,  resisted  them  to

to  the  utmost  of  his  power.    To  the  Revolution  in

1689,  he  was  a  warm  and  steady  friend. — Real  and  un
affected  piety,  and  the  Church  of  Scotland,  which  he
thought  bore  the  greatest  resemblance  to  the  primitive
simplicity  of  the  Apostlic  times,  always  found  in  him,
an  able,  and  inflexible  advocate. — Though  his  pen  was
his  estate,  yet  he  never  prostituted  it  to  serve  the  inter
est  of  his  party,  at  the  expence  of  truth. — There  was
interwoven  with  his  whole  frame,  a  high  degree  of  stub
born  and  inexorable  integrity,  which  totally  unfitted
feim  for  the  tool  of  a  party  ;  and,  like  poor  Yorick,  he


41


invariably  called  things  by  their  right  names,  regard
less  of  the  consequences. — There  was  not  in  his  whole
composition,  one  single  grain  of  that  useful  quality
which  Swift  calls  modern  discretion.  Like  an  impreg
nable  rock  in  the  midst  of  the  tempestuous  ocean,  he
stood  immoveable,  against  all  his  assailants  ;  and,  his
calm,  dignified  answers,  in  reply  to  their  most  vim-
lent  and  unmerited  calumnies,  equally  characterize  the
Hero,  the  Philosopher,  and  the  Christian. — To  his  trans-
cendant  literary  abilities  even  the  most  inveterate  of
his  enemies  have  paid  the  most  ample  tribute  of  re
spect. — His  Latin  compositions,  in  point  of  classical
purity,  have  not  been  excelled,  even  by  Cicero  him
self.  To  him  the  Celtic  tribes  are  highly  indebted  for
that  unequalled  production,  the  HISTORY  OF  THE
DRUIDS. — Pinkerton,  as  often  as  his  Gothic  Manialed
him  to  controvert  any  of  Toland's  positions,  respecting
the  Druids  and  Celts,  is  obliged  to  shrink  from  the  con
test. — Dr.  Smith  with  a  non-candour,  for  which,  even
his  best  friends  must  blush,  has  borrowed  the  whole  of
Toland's  materials,  for  his  History  of  the  Druids ;  not
only  without  making  any  acknowledgement,  but,  with
a  studied  and  deliberate  design  to  conceal  the  pla
giarism.  Wherever  Mr.  Toland  enters  into  detail,  Dr.
Smith  is  concise  ;  and,  wherever  Mr.  Toland  is  concise,
Dr.  Smith  enters  into  detail.  The  important  history
of  Abaris,  the  Hyperborean  Priest  of  the  Sun,  is  dis
missed  by  Dr.  Smith  in  a  few  words  ;  whereas,  in  Mr.
Toland's  history,  it  takes  up  several  pages.  In  the

P


space  Of  twenty-five  years,  Mr.  Toland  published  about
one  hundred  different  works  ;  some  of  them  on  the
most  intricate  subjects;  but,  the  far  greater  part,  on  con
troversial  matters,  in  opposition  to  those,  who  wished  to
restore  the  abdicated  Monarch,  and  re-establish  arbitra
ry  power,  and  religious  intolerance.  As  it  was  the  first,
so  it  was  the  last  effort  of  his  pen,  to  render  Civil  Govern
ment  consistent  with  the  mialienable  rights  of  mankind;
and,  to  reduce  Christianity  to  that  pure,  simple,  andun-
pompous  system,  which  Christ  and  his  Apostles  e-
stablished.  It  has  often  been  objected  to  John  Knox>
as  well  as  Mr.  Toland,  that  he  was  a  stubborn,  ill-
bred  fellow.  But,  when  the  Aitgcean  Stable  of  Civil
and  Religious  corruptions  is  to  be  cleansed,  the  Her
culean  labour,  requires  Herculean  instruments.  Per
haps  the  delicacy  and  refinement  of  the  present  day,
might  have  shrunk  from  the  arduous  task,  and  left  the
desireable  work  not  only  unfinished,  but  unattempted.
Toland's  fame  has  triumphed  over  all  opposition  ;  and>s
will  be  transmitted  to  the  latest  posterity.  That  very
party  whicli branded  him,  when  alive,  with  the  Epithets
of  Atheist,  Infidel,  Deist,  Mahometan^  &c.  have  now
discovered,  that  he  was  only  tinctured  with  Socinian-
ism  ;  and,  in  less  than  fifty  years,  the  same  party  will
discover,  that  he  was  a  rigid  Presbyterian, — peace  to

his  Manes. It  were  ardently  to  be  wished,  that  the

British  Empire,  in  all  great  and  critical  emergencies,
may  possess  many  Christians,  like  JOHN  TOLAND.


THE    FIRST

LETTER,

TO  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  THE  LORD
VISCOUNT  MOLESWORTH.


SOME  men,  my  Lord,  from  a  natural  greatness  of
soul,  and  others  from  a  sense  of  the  want  of  learning
in  themselves,  or  the  advantages  of  it  in  others,  have
many  times  liberally  contributed  towards  the  ad
vancement  of  letters.  But  when  they,  whose  ex
cellent  natural  parts  are  richly  cultivated  by  sound
literature,  undertake  the  protection  of  the  Muses,  wri
ters  feel  a  double  encouragement  ;  both  as  they  are  hap
pily  enabled  to  perfect  their  studies,  and  as  their  Pa
trons  are  true  judges  of  their  performances.  'Tis  from
this  consideration  alone  (abstracted,  My  Lord,  from  all
that  you  have  already  done,  or  may  hereafter  deserve
from  your  country,  by  an  unshaken  love  of  liberty)  that
I  presume  to  acquaint  your  Lordship  with  a  design,
which  I  form'd  several  years  ago  at  Oxford,  and  which
I  have  ever  since  kept  in  view  ;  collecting,  as  occasion
presented,  whatever  might  any  way  tend  to  the  advan
tage  or  perfection  of  it.  'Tis  to  write  the  Hislon/  of
the  Druids,  containing  an  account  of  the  ancient  Cel
tic  Religion  and  Literature  ;  and  concerning  which  I
beg  your  patience  for  a  little  while.  Tho'  this  be  a


44  THE  HISTORY


subject,  that  will  be  naturally  entertaining  to  the  curi
ous  in  every  place  ;  yet  it  does  more  particularly  con
cern  the  inhabitants  of  antient  Gaule,  (now  France,
Flanders,  the  Alpine  regions,  and  Lombardy)  and  of
all  the  British  Islands,  whose  antiquities  are  here  part
ly  explain'd  and  illustrated,  partly  vindicated  and  re-
stor'd.  It  will  sound  somewhat  oddly,  at  first  hear
ing,  that  a  man  born  in  the  most  northern  (1 )  Peninsula

(1)  This  peninsula  is  7 nis-Eogain ,  vulgarly  Enis-owen,
in  whose  Isthmus  stands  the  city  of  Londonderry,  itself  a
peninsula,  and,  if  the  tradition  be  true,  originally  a  famous
Grove  and  School  of  the  Druids.  Hence  comes  the  verv
name  Doire,  corruptly  pronounced  Derry,  which  in  Irish
signifies  a  Grove,  particularly  of  Oaks.  The  great  COLUM-
BA  changed  it  into  a  College  for  Monks  (who  in  his  time
were  retir'd  Laymen,  that  lived  by  the  labour  of  their
hands)  as  most  commonly  the  sacred  places  of  the  Hea
thens,  if  pleasant  or  commodious,  were  converted  to  the
like  use  by  the  Christians  after  their  own  manner.  This
Derry  is  the  Roboretum  or  *  Campus  roborum,  mentioned  by
BEDE  in  his  Ecclesiastical  History  :  but  not  Ardmacha,  novtr
Armagh,  in  the  same  province  of  Ulster,  as  many  have
erroneously  conceived  ;  nor  yet  Durramh,  no\v  Durrough,
irt  that  of  Leinster,  as  some  have  no  less  ground lesly  fan*
cied,  among  whom  Archbishop  U^HEK.  Dearmack  is  com
pounded  ot  Dair  an  oak  and' the  anr.ient  word  Mack  (now
Machaire)  afield.  They  who  did  not  know  so  much,  have
imagined  it  from  the  mere  sound  to  be  Armagh,  which,  far
from  Campus roboruifap\gri\fies  thcheight  wtnovnt O/MACH  A,
(surnamed  MongTuadh  orredhair'd)  a  Queen  of  Ireland,  and
the  only  woman  that  ever  svyay'd  the  sovereign  sceptre  of
that  kingdom.  But  Armagh  never  was  a  monastery  found
ed  by  Co  LU  MB  A,  who  in  BEDIMS  time  was  called  f  Co-
LUIM-CILLE,  as  he's  by  the  Irish  to  this  day:  whereas  it
was  from  the  monasteries  of  Dcrry  and  t-cdtaikdl  (which


— ,.„..-..«-,..  v-or.t'MBA)  priiis  quam  in  Britanniarn  vcnirr-t  Mnnastcrfuffi  no'i;'»
in  Hibprui.i,  quod  a  coj>ia  roborum  Dvarrtiach  ling-ua  S  -otorurn,  hoc  cst  campus  r»-
ftorujn,  vooatnr.  Hist.  Fc"lcs.  lib.  3.  ca/>.  4.

t  Qtn",  videlicet  COMIMBA,  nunr  a  nonnulli.s,  roTinsosito  a  ("*•"••  •?   ''•'  ^?"?i»»
«»'a-?    CoLi'MCEiax  vocalsr.     /#>/</.  /;6.  5   rnrn.  1<>.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


of  Ireland,  shou'd  undertake  to    set  the    antiquities
of  Gaule  in  a  clearer  light  than  any  one  has  hitherto
done.      But  when  'tis  consider'd,   that,   over  and  a-
j)ove  what  he  knows  in  common,  relating  to  tlieDntids,
with  the  learned  of  the  French  nation,  (whose  works
he  constantly  reads  with  uncommon  esteem)  he  has
also   certain  other  advantages,   which  none  of  those
writers  have  ever  had  :  when  this,  I  say,  is  consider'd,
then  all  the  wonder  about  this  affair  will  instantly  cease.
Yet  let  it  be  still  remember'd,  that  whatever  accom
plishment  may  consist  in  the  knowledge  of  languages,
no  language  is  really  valuable,  but  as  far  as  it  serves
to  converse  with  the  living,  or  to  learn  from  the  dead  ;
and  therefore  were  that  knowledge  of  times  and  things
contain'd  in  Lapponian,  which  we  draw  from  the  Greec,
and  that  this  last  were  as  barren  as  the  first  :  I  shou'd
then  study  Lapponian,  and  neglect  Greec  ;  for  all  its
superiority  over  most  tongues,  in  respect  of  sonorous
pronunciation,  copiousness  of  words,  and  variety  of  ex
pression.  But  as  the  profound  ignorance  and  slavery  of
the  present  Greecs  does  not  hinder,   but  that  their  an
cestors  were  the  most  learned,  polite,  and  free  of  all
European  nations  ;  so  no  revolution  that  has  befallen
any  or  all  of  the  Celtic  colonies,   can  be  a  just  preju-

Inst,  though  the  second  erected,  became  the.  first  in  digni
ty)  that  ail  the  other  monasteries  dedicated  to  (.'OLT.AJBA,
whether  in  Scotland  or  Ireland,  were  FO  many  roio-iies.
This  is  attested  by  tlie  just  mentioned  J  BLDB.  nol<*ss  t'na
by  all  the  Irish  Annalists  since  their  several  foundations.

J  Fx  quo  titroque  nxnr.rtpteno  perpfarima  oxhide  mouastoria,  per  diseipolos  c'\  ;•;
&  in  Britannia.  <k  in  Uihornia  propagata  stint  ;  in  quihus  omnibus  icK>m  mim.^'.-
liuni  insv.latiuni,  ia  (^uo  ips*»  ivquiescit  tf>rpoi'i'.  prim  ii«8t;im  t?'iot.  Hnr..  lift,  $•  C3r>.  4  •


46  THE  HISTORY


dice  against  the  truly  antient  and  undoubted  monu
ments  they  may  be  able  to  furnish,  towards  improving1
or  restoring  any  point  of  Learning.  Whether  there  be
any  such  monuments  or  not,  and  how  far  useful  or
agreeable,  will  in  the  following  sheets  appear.

II.  Among  those  institutions  which  are  thought  to
be  irrecoverably  lost,  one  is  that  of  the  Druids  ;  of
which  the  learned  have  hitherto  known  nothing,  but
by  some  fragments  concerning  them  out  of  the  Greec
and  Roman  authors.  Nor  are  such  fragments  always
Intelligible,  because  never  explain'd  by  any  of  those,
\vho  were  skill'd  in  the  Celtic  dialects,  which  are  now
principally  six ;  namely  Welsh  or  the  insular  British,
Cornish  almost  extinct,  Armorican  or  French  British,
Irish  the  least  corrupted,  Manks  or  the  language
of  the  Isle  of  Man ;  and  Eqrse  or  Highland  Irish,
spoken  also  in  all  the  western  Hands  of  Scotland.
These,  having  severally  their  own  dialects,  are,  with
respect  to  each  other  and  the  old  Celtic  of  Gaule,  as  the
several  dialects  of  the  German  language  and  Low
Dutch,  the  Swedish,  Danish,  Norwegian  and  Islandic  ;
which  are  all  descendants  of  their  common  mother,
the  Gothic.  Not  that  ever  such  a  thing  as  a  pure  Go
thic  or  Celtic  language  either  did  or  cou'd  exist  in  any
considerable  region  without  dialects,  no  more  than  pure
elements:  but. by  such  an  original  language  is  meant
the  common  rogt  and  trunk,  the  primitive  words,  and
especially  the  peculiar  construction  that  runs  thro*
all  the  branches ;  whereby  they  are  intelligible  to  each
other,  or  may  easily  become  so,  but  different  from  aU


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  47

kinds  of  speech  besides.  Thus  the  Celtic  and  the  Gothic,
which  have  been  often  taken  for  each  other,  are  as  dif-
frent  as  Latin  and  Arabic.  In  like  manner  we  con
ceive  of  the  several  idioms  of  the  Greec  language  for
merly,  in  Greece  itself  properly  so  call'd,  in  Mace
donia,  in  Crete  and  the  Hands  of  the  Archipelago,  in
Asia,  Rhodes,  part  of  Italy,  in  Sicily,  and  Marseilles  ;
and  at  this  time  of  the  Sclavonian  language,  whose
dialects  not  only  prevail  in  Russia,  Poland,  Bohemia,
Carinthia,  and  Sei  via,  but  in  a  great  many  other  places,
too  tedious  to  recite.  But  of  this  subject  we  shall
treat  professedly  in  a  (2)  Dissertation,  to  be  annex'd
to  the  work,  whereof  I  am  giving  your  lordship  an  ac
count.  Neither  shall  I  in  this  Specimen  dwell  on  some
things,  whereof  I  shall  principally  and  largely  treat  in
the  designed  History  ;  I  mean  the  Philosophy  of  the
Druids  concerning  the  Gods,  human  Souls,  Nature  in
general,  and  in  particular  the  heavenly  Bodies,  their
magnitudes,  motions,  distances,  and  duration  ;  where
of  C,ESAR,DlODORUS  SlCULUS,  STRABO,  PoMPONius  ME
LA,  and  AMMIANUS  MARCELLINUS  write  more  specially
than  others.  These  subjects,  I  say,  will  be  copiously
handled  and  commented  in  my  History.  In  the  mean
time  I  do  assure  you,  My  Lord,  from  all  authors,  that
no  Heathen  Priesthood  ever  came  up  to  the  perfection
of  the  Druidical,  which  was  far  more  exquisite  than
any  other  such  system  ;  as  having  been  much  better
calculated  to  beget  ignorance,  and  an  implicit  disposir

(2)   A  DISSERTATION  concerning  the  Celtic  Lansua^e
qml  Wonies.


43  THE  HISTORY

lion  in  the  people,  no  less  than  to  procure  power  and
profit  to  the  priests,  which  is  one  grand  difference  be
tween  the  true  worship  and  the  false.     This  Western
Priesthood  did  infinitely  exceed  that  of  ZOROASTER,
and  all  the  Eastern  sacred  policy  :  so  that,  the  His-
Lory  of  the  Druids,  in  short,  is,  the  complete  History  of
Priestcraft,  with  all  its  reasons  and  ressorts  ;  which  to
distinguish  accurately  from  right  religion,  is  not  only
the  interest  of  all  wise  princes  and  states,  but  likewise
does  especially  concern  the  tranquillity  and  happiness
of  every  private  person.     I  have  used  the  word  Priest
craft  here  on  purpose,  not  merely  as  being  the  best  ex
pression  for  the  designed  abuse,  and  reverse  of  religion,
(for  superstition  is  only  religion  misunderstood)  but  al
so  because  the  coining  of  the  very  word  was  occasion
ed  by  the  DRUIDS  :    since  the  Anglo-Saxons  having
learnt  the  word  Dry  (3)  from  the  Irish  and  Britons
for  a  Magician,  did  very  appositely  call  JMagic  or  In-
chantment  Drycrceft  (4) ;  as  being  nothing  else  but
trick  and  illusion,  the  fourbery  of .  Priests  and  their
confederates.

III.  Now,  this  Institution  of  the  Druids  I  think
myself,  without  any  consciousness  of  vanity,  much
abler  to  retrieve  (as  having  infinitely  better  helps  in
many  respects,  of  which,  before  I  have  done)  than  Dr.
HYDE  was  to  restore  the  knowledge  of  the  ancient
Persian  Literature  and  Religion  ;  which  yet  he  left
imperfect  for  want  of  due  encouragement,  as  I  have

(3)   Pronounced  as  Dree  in  English,
(r-   Dry  mn?us,  Dnjcrcrjt  incantatio,  sEJfric.  in  Glossar.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  49

shown  in  the  first  chapter  of  Nazarenus.  From  un
doubted  Celtic  monuments,  join'd  to  the  Greec  and
Roman  remains,  I  can  display  the  order  of  their  Hier
archy,  from  the  ARCH-DRUID  down  to  the  meanest  of
their  four  orders  of  Priests.  Of  these  degrees,  the
ARCH-DRUID  excepted,  there's  little  to  be  found  in  the
Classic  authors,  that  treat  of  the  Druids  :  but  very
much  and  very  particularly,  in  the  Celtic  writings  and
monuments.  For  many  reasons  their  History  is  most
interesting  and  entertaining :  I  mean,  as  on  the  one
hand  we  consider  them  seducing  their  followers,  and
as  on  the  other  hand  we  learn  not  to  be  so  deceiv'd.
They  dextrous!  y  led  the  people  blindfold,  by  commit
ting  no  part  of  their  Theology  or  Philosophy  to  writ
ing,  tho'  great  writers  in  other  respects  ;  but  their
dictates  were  only  hereditarily  convey'd  from  masters
to  disciples  by  traditionary  Poems,  interpretable  (con
sequently)  and  alterable  as  they  shou'd  see  convenient :
which  is  a  much  more  effectual  way,  than  locking  up  a
book  from  the  Laity,  that,  one  way  or  other,  is  sure  to
come  first  or  last  to  their  knowledge,  and  easy  perhaps
to  be  turn'd  against  the  Priests.  The  Druids,  as  may
be  seen  in  the  6th  book  of  CAESAR'S  Commentaries ,  ,
drew  the  decision  of  all  controversies  of  Law  and
Equity  to  themselves,  the  distribution  of  all  punish
ments  and  rewards ;  from  the  power  that  was  first
given,  or  afterwards  assumed  by  them,  of  determining
matters  of  Ceremony  and  Religion.  Most  terrible
were  the  effects  of  the  Drnidical  (5)  Excommunication
(5)  It'  the  learned  reader,  who  knows  any  of  the  passages,
<K  the  unlearned  reader  who  wants  authorities  for  proving

G


THE  HISTORY


on  any  man,  that  did  not  implicitly1  follow  their  di-
ivotinns,  aud  submit  to  their  decrees  :  not  only  to  the
excluding  of  private  persons  from  all  benefits  of  society,
and  even  from  society  itself ;  but  also  to  the  depos
ing-  of  the  princes  who  did  not  please  them,  and  often
devoting  them  to  destruction.  Nor  less  intolerable
was  their  power  of  engaging  the  nation  in  war,  or  of
making  a  disadvantageous  and  dishonourable  peace  ;
while  they  had.  tlie  address  to  get  themselves  ex
empted  from  bearing  arms,  paying  taxes,  or  contribut
ing  any  thing  to  the  public  but  charms :  and  yet  to
have  their  persons-  reputed  sacred  and  inviolable,  by
those  even  of  the  contrary  side,,  which  veneration  how
ever  was  not  always  strictly  paid.  These  privileges
allur'd  great  numbers- to  enter  into  their  communities,
for  such  Sodalities  or  Fraternities  they  had  ;  and  to
take  on  them  the  Druidical  profession^  to  be  per
fect  in  which,  did  sometimes  cost  them  twenty  years
study.  Nor  ought  this  to  Seem  a  wonder,  since  to  ar
rive  at  perfection  in  Sophistry  requires  a  long  habit,  as
well  as  in  juggling,  in  which  last  they  were  very  ex~

the  following  assertions,  should  wonder  I  do  not  always  cite
them;  let  it  be  known  to  bsrth,  that  as  in  this  Specimen  I
commonly  touch  but  the  heads  of  things  (and  not  of  all
things  neither)  so  I  would  not  crowd  the  margin  with  long
passages,  nor  yet  curtail  what  in  my  History  shall  be  pro
duced  at  large:  and  therefore  all  the  following  citations  (the
original  manner  o{  writing  Celtic  words  excepted)  are  ei
ther  samples  of  the  quotations  I  shall  give,  or  proofs  of  what
I  would  not  for  a  moment  have  suspected  to  be  precarious
ly  advanced,  or,  finally,  for  the  better  understanding  of
certain  matters  which  come  in  by  way  of  digression  or  il
lustration.  Otherwise  they  wou'd  not  he  necessary  in  a
mere  Specimen,  though  in  a  finished  work  indispensable.


OF  -THE  DRUIDS.


pert  :  but  to  be  masters  of  both,  and  withal  to  learn
the  art  of  managing  the  mob,  which  is  vulgarly  call
ed  leading  the  people  by  ike  nose,  demands  abundant
study  and  exercise.

IV.  The  children  of  the  several  kings,  with  those  of
all  the  nobility,  were  committed  to  the  tuition  of  the
Druids,    whereby  they  had  an  opportunity  (contrary
to  all  good  politics)  of  moulding  and  framing  them  to
their  own  private  interests  and  purposes  ;  considering
which  .direction  -of  Education,  Patr.ic,  had  they  been  a
landed  clergy,  wou'd  not  have  found  the  conversion  of
Ireland  soeasy  a  task.  Soeasy  indeed  it  was,  that  the  Ilea-
then  monarch  Laogirius  (who,  as  some  assert,  was  ne
ver  himself  converted)  and  all   the  provincial  kings,
granted  to  every  man  free  liberty  of  preaching  and
professing  Christianity.     So  that,  as  Giraldus  Cam-
brensis  remarks,  this  is  the  only  country  of  Christians,
where  nobody  was  obliged  to  suffer  (6)  Martyrdom  for
the  gospel     This  justice  therefore  I  wou'd  do  to  Ire
land,  even  if  it  had  not  been  my  country,  viz.  to  main
tain  that  this  tolerating  principle,  this  impartial  liber
ty  (ever  since  unexampled  there  as  well  as  elsewhere,
China  excepted)  is  a  far  greater  honour  to  it,   than
whatever  thing  .most  glorious  or  magnificent  can  be

((3)  Omnessancti  terrae  i*tius  cpnfcssores  stint,  $  nultus
martyr;  quod  in  olio  regno  Christiana  difficile  erit  wvemre.
Mirum  itaquequod  gens  cruddhsima  &  sanguinis  sitibunaa,

iristo


r

fides  ab  antique  fundata  $  semper  tepidis$ima,  pro
"ecclesia  corona  'martyrii  mdla.  Kon  igitur  inveutus  est  in
parties  istis,  oui  eccledae  surgentis  fundamenta  sanguiws
<ffusionecemenlaret:  non  fuit,  qui  faceret  hoc  bonum;  non
jut  usque  ad  unum.  Topograph.  Ilibern.  Distinct,  3,  cap.  29.


THE  HISTORY


said  of  any  other  country  i'i  the  world.    Girald  an  the
contrary  (as  in  his  days  they  were  wont  to  over-rate
Martyrdom,  Celibacy,  and  the  like,  much  above  the
positive  duties  of  religion)  thinks  it  a  reproach  to  the
Irish,   That  none  of  their  Saints  cemented  the  founda
tions  of  the  growing  Church  with  their  blood,  all  of  them
being  Confessors,  (says  he,)  and  not  one  able  to  boast  of  the
crown  of  Martyrdom.     But  who  sees  not  the  vanity
and  absurdity  of  this  charge  ?  It  is  blaming  the  princes
and  people   for  their  reasonableness,  moderation  and
humanity  ;  as   it  is  taxing  the  new  Converts  for  not
seditiously  provoking  them  to  persecute,   and  for  not
madly  running  themselves  to  a  voluntary  death,  which
was  the  unjustifiable  conduct  of  mrny  elsewhere  in  the
primitive  times  of  Christianity.     ?Tis  on  much  better
grounds,  tho1  with    a  childish    and  nauseous  jingle,
that  he  accuses  the  Irish  Clergy  of  his  own  time  :  and
so          "in  I  from  being  an  enemy  to  the  clergy,   that
I  heartily  wish  the  like  could  not  be  said  of  any  clergy,
whether  there,  or  here,  or  elsewhere,  from  that  time  ta
this.     Well  then  :  what  is  it?  They  are  Pastors,  (says
he)  (7),  who  seek  not  to  feed,  but  to  be  fed  :  Prelates,
who  desire  not  to  profit,  but  to  preside  :  Bishops,   who
embrace  not  the  nature,  but  the  name  ;  not  the  burden,
out  the  bravery  of  their  profession.     This,  My  Lord,  I
reckon  to  be  no  digression  from  my  subject,  since  what
little  opposition  there  happened  to  be   in  Ireland  to

(7)  Sunt  cnim  pastores,  qui  non  pasccrc  quaerunt>  s? d  p(i~
sci:  sunt  praclati,  tjui  non  prodesse  cvpiunt,  sed  prcrcssr  .
sunt  episcopi,  qui  non  omen,  sed  rtomen  ;  non  eww*,  sed
fern  amplcctv.ntnr.  Id.  Ibid.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  5$

Christianity,  was  wholly  made  by  the  Druids,  or  at
their  instignation  :  and  that  when  they  perceiv'd  thi$
new  religion  like  to  prevail,  none  came  into  it  speedier,
or  made  a  more  Advantageous  figure  in  it,  than  they,
The  Irish  however  have  their  Martyrologies  (lest  this
shou'd  be  objected  by  some  trifler)  but  they  are  of  such
of  their  nation  as  suffered  in  other  countries,  or  under
the  Heathen  Danes  in  their  own  country,  some  hund
reds  of  years  after  the  total  conversion  of  it  to  Chris
tianity.

V.  Those  advantages  we  have  nam'd  in  the  two  last
Sections,  and  many  the  like  articles,  with  the  Druids
pretences  to  work  miracles,  to  foretel  events  by
augury  and  otherwise,  to  have  familiar  intercourse
with  the  gods  (highly  confirmed  by  calculating  Ec
lipses)  and  a  thousand  impostures  of  the  same  (8)  na
ture,  I  can  by  irrefragable  authorities  set  in  "such  a
light,  that  all  of  the  like  kind  may  to  every  one  ap
pear  in  as  evident  a  view  ;  which,  as  I  hinted  before,,
cannot  but  be  very  serviceable  both  to  religion  and
morality.  For  true  religion  does  not  consist  in  cun
ningly  devis'd  fables,  in  authority,  dominion,  or  pomp  ;
but  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  in  simplicity  and  social  vir
tue,  in  a  filial  love  and  reverence,  not  in  a  servile  dread
and  terror  of  the  Divinity.  As  the  fundamental  Law
of  a  Historian  is,  daring  to  say  whatever  is'  true,  and

(8)  The  heads  of  the  two  last  Sections,  with  these  here
mentioned  (though  conceived  in  few  words)  will  yet  eack
make  a  separate  chapter  in  the  History  ;  this  present  Spe
cimen  being  chiefly  intended  for  modem  instances,  as  by
the  seqnel  will  appear.


THE  HISTORY


not  dai  ing-  to  write  any  falsehood ;  neither  being  sway
ed  by  love  or  hatred,  nor  gain'd  by  favour  or  interest :
go  he  ought  of  course  to  be  as  a  man  of  no  time  or
country,  of  no  sect  or  party  ;  which  I  hope  the  se
veral  nations  concern'd  in  this  enquiry,  will  find  to  bt
particularly  true  of  me.  But  if  in  clearing  up  anticnt
rites  and  customs,  with  the  origin  and  institution  of
certain  religious  or  civil  societies  (long  since  extinct,)
any  communities  or  orders  of  men,  now  in  being,  should
think  themselves  touched  ;  they  ought  not  to  impute
it  to  design  in  the  author,  but  to  the  conformity  of
tilings,  if  indeed  there  be  any  real  resemblance  :  and,
in  case  there  be  none  at  all,  they  should  not  make
people  apt  to  suspect  there  is,  by  crying  out  tho'
they  are  not  hurt.  I  remember,  when  complaint  was
made  against  an  honourable  person  (9),  that,  in  treat
ing  of  the  Heathen  Priests,  he  had  whipt  some
Christian  Priests  on  their  backs  ;  all  the  answer  he
made,  was  only  asking,  What  made  them  get  up  there?
The  benefit  of  which  answer  I  claim  before-hand  to
myself,  without  making  or  needing  any  other  apology.
Yet  if  the  correspondence  of  any  Priests  with  heaven
be  as  slenderly  grounded  as  that  of  the  Druids,  if  their
miracles  be  as  fictitious  and  fraudulent,  if  their  love  of
riches  be  as  immoderate,if  their  thirst  after  power  be  as
insatiable,  and  their  exercise  of  it  be  as  partial  and  ty
rannical  over  the  Laity  :  then,  I  am  not  only  content
they  should  be  touched,  whether  I  thought  of  them  or
Jtot ;  but,  that  they  shouldbeblastedtoo,  without  the  pts-
(9)  Sir  ROBERT  HOWARD.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


sibility  of  ever  sprouting  up  again.  For  truth  will  but
shine  the  brighter,  the  better  its  counterfeits  are  shewn  :
and  all  that  I  can  do  to  shew  my  candour,  is  to  leave
the  reader  to^make  such  applications  himself,  seldom
making  any  for  him  ;  since  he  that  is  neither  clear
sighted,  nor  quick  enough  of  conception  to  do  so,  may
to  as  good  purpose  read  the  Fairy-tales  as  this  history.

VI.  Besides  this  impartial  disposition,  the  com
petent  knowledge  I  have  of  the  Northern  language^
dead  and  living  (though  I  shall  prove,  that  no  Druids,
except  such  as  towards  their  latter  end  fled  thither  for
refuge,  or  that  went  before  with  Celtic  invaders  or  co
lonies,  were  ever  among  the  Gothic  nations)  I  say,
these  languages  will  not  a  little  contribute  to  the  per
fection  of  my  work,  for  a  reason  that  may  with  more
advantage  appear  in  the  book  itself.  But  the  know-
ledge  of  the  ancient  Irish,  which  I  learnt  from  my
childhood,  and  of  the  other  Celtic  dialects,  in  all  which
I  have  printed  books  or  manuscripts  (not  to  speak  of
their  vulgar  Traditions)  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  these
having  preserved  numberless  monuments  concerning
the  Druids,  that  never  hitherto  have  come  to  the  hands
of  the  learned.  For  as  the  Institutions  of  the  Druids
were  formerly  better  learnt  in  Britain,  br  CAESAR  said
to  be  the  native  seat  of  this  superstitious  race,  than  in
Gaule  where  yet  it  exceedingly  flourished  :  so  their
memory  is  still  best  preserved  in  Ireland  and  the  High-
lands  of  Scotland,  comprehending  the  Helridce,  Hebri
des,  or  Western  Isles,  among  which  is  the  Isle  of  Man  ;
where  they  continued  long*  after  their  extermination  in


56  THE  HISTORY


Gaulc  and  South-Britain,  mostly  by  the  Romans,  but
finally  by  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  Besides,
that  much  of  the  Irish  Heathen  Mythology  is  still  ex
tant  in  verse,  which  gives  such  a  lustre  to  this  matter,
and  of  course  to  the  Greek  and  Roman  Fragments
concerning  the  Druids,  as  could  not  possibly  be  had
any  other  way.

VII.  Thus  (togive  an  example  in  the  Philological  part)
the  controversy  among  the  Grammarians,  whether  they
should  write  Druis  or  (10)  Druida  in  the  nominative
ease  singular,  can  only  be  decided  by  the  Irish  writ
ings,  as  you  may  see  demonstrated  in  ths  margin*
where  all  Grammatical  remarks  shall  be  inserted  a-
mong  the  other  Notes  of  the  History,  if  they  do  not
properly  belong  to  the  annexed  Dissertation  concerning
ine  Celtic  Language  and  Colonies.  This  conduct  I  ob
serve,  to  avoid  any  disagreeable  stop  or  perplexity  in

(10)  Ttu:  Irish  word  for  Druid  is  Drui,  corruptly  Droi9
and  more  corruptly  Draoi;  yet  all  of  the  same  sound,  which
in  Etvmologies  is  a  great  matter;  and  in  the  nominative
plural  it  is  Hruidhe,  whence  conies  no  doubt  the  Greek
and  Latin  Dfuidex;  as  Druis  in  the  singular  was  formed  by
only  adding  s  to  Drui,  according  to  those  nation's  way  of
terminating.  But  as  these  words  in  Irish  as  well  as  the
British  Drudioi,  are  common  to  both  sexes;  so  the  Romans,
according  to  their  inflection,  distinguished  Druida  for  a
She-Druid  (wl)ich  sort  are  mentioned  by  authors)  where
of  the  nominative  plural  being  Druidce>  it  ought  by  us  to
be  used  in  that  sense  only :  and  so  I  conclude,  that  in  on-
modern  Latin  compositions  Druides  and  Druidce  should
i)ot  be  confounded ;  as  they  have  frequently  been  by  the
Transcribers  of  old  writings,  who  mislead  others.  We  are
not  to  be  moved  therefore  by  reading  Druidcc  in  any  Latin
author  in  the  masculine  gender,  or'in  the  Greek  writers,
who  certainly  used  it  so.  All  equivocation  at  least  will  be-
thus  taken  awav.


OF  THF.  DRUIDS.


the  work  itself,  by  uncouth  words  or  of  difficult  pro
nunciation.     For  as  every  thing  in  the  Universe  is  the
Subject  of  writing,  so  an  author  ought  to  treat  of  every
subject  smoothly  and  correctly,  as  well  as  pertinently
and  perspicuosly  :  nor  ought  he  -to  be  void  of  ornament
and  Elegance,  where  his  matter  peculiarly  requires  it
Some  things  want  a  copious  stile,  some  a  concise  ;  o-
thers  to  be  more  floridly,  others  to  be  more  plainly
handl'd:  but  all  to  be  properly,    methodically,  and
handsomely  exprest.     Neglecting  these  particulars,  is
neglecting,   and  consequently  affronting,  the  reader.
Let  a  Lady  be  as  well-shap'd  as  you  can  fancy,  let  all
her  features  be  faultless,  and  her  complexion  be  ever
so  delicate  :  yet  if  she  be  careless  of  her  person,  tawdry
in  her  dress,  or  auk  ward  in  her  gate  and  behavior,  a
man  of  true  taste  is  so  far  from  being  touched  with  the
charms  of  her  body,  that  he  is  immediately  prepo^est
against  the  beauties  of  her  mind  ;   and  apt  to  behave
there  can  be  no  order  within,  where  there  is  so  much
disorder  without.    In  my  opinion  therefore,  the  Muses
themselves  are  never  agreeable  company  without  the
Graces.     Or  if,  as  your  Lordship's  stile  is  remarkably
strong,  you  wou'd,  with  (11)  CICERO,  take  this  simile
from    a  man  ;   you'll  own  '"tis  not  enough  to  make
him  be  lik'd,  that  he  has1  well-knit  bones,  nerves  and
sinews  :  there  must  be  likewise  proportion,  muscling,
and  coloring,   much  blood,  and  some  softness.     To
relate  facts  without  their  circumstances,  whereon  de
pends  all  instruction  ;  is  to  exhibit  a  skeleton  without
the  flesh,  wherein  consists  all  comeliness.      This  I  say

HI)  DC  Oratore,  lib.  I.

II


58  THF  HISTORY


to  your  Lordship,  not  pretending  to  teach  the  art  of
writing  to  one,  who's  so  fit  to  be  my  master  ;  but  to
obviate  the  censures   of  those,  and  to  censure  'em  in
their  turns,  who  not  only  do  not  treat  of  such  subjects
as  I  have  now  undertaken  in  a  flowing  and  continu'd
stile,  but  peremtorily  deny  the  fields  of  Antiquity  and
Criticism  to    be  capable  of  this  culture  :    and   indeed
as  suffering  under  the  drudgery  of  their  hands,  they
generally  become  barren  heaths  or  impassable  thickets;
where  you  are  blinded  with  sand,    or  torn  with  bryars
and  brambles.     There's  no  choice  of  words' or  expres
sions.     All  is  low  and  vulgar,  or  obsolete  and  musty ;
as  the  whole  discourse  is  crabbed,  hobbling,,  and  jejune.
Not  that  I  wou'd  have  too  much  license  taken  in  this
respect  ;   for  though  none  ought  to  be  slaves  to  any
set  of  words,   yet  great  judgement  is  to  be  employ 'd
in  creating  a  new,  or  reviving  an  old  word  :   nor  must
there  be  less  discretion  in  the  use  of  figures  and  sen
tences  ;  which,  like  embroidery  and  salt,  are  to  set  off
and  season,   but  not  to  render  the  cloth  invisible,   or
the  meat  uneatable.     To  conclude  this  point,  we  are
lold  by  the  most  eloquent  of  men,  that  a  profuse  (12)
volubility,  and  a  sordid  exility  of  words,  are  to  be  e-
qually  avoided.     And  now  after  this  digression,  if  any
thing  that  essentially  relates  to  my  task  can  be  pro
perly  call'd  one,  I  return  to  the  Druids,   who  were  so
prevalent  in  Ireland,    that  to  this  hour  their  ordinary
word  for  Magician  is  Druid  (13),   the   art  Magic,  is

(12)  CICERO  dc  Oratore,  lib.  1.

(13)  Drui.


•


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


call'd  Druidity  (14),  and  the  wand,  which  was  one  of
the  badges  of  their  profession,  the  rod  ofDnddlsm  (15).
Among  antient  Classic  authors  Pliny  is  the  most  ex
press  concerning  the  Magic  of  the  Druids,  whereof
the  old  Irish  and  British  hooks  are  full:  which  Leger
demain,  or  secrets  of  natural  Philosophy,  as  all  magic
is  either  the  one  or  the  other,  or  both,  we  shall  en
deavour  to  lay  open  in  our  history  of  the  Druids  ;  not
forgetting  any  old  author  that  mentions  them,  for
there's  something  particular  to  be  learnt  in  every  one
of  them,  as  they  touch  different  circumstances.  Hav
ing  occasionally  spoken  of  the  Wand  or  Staff  which
every  Druid  carry'd  in  his  hand,  as  one  of  the  badges
of  his  profession,  and  which  in  a  chapter  on  this  sub
ject  will  be  shewn  to  have  been  a  usual  thing  with
all  pretenders  to  magic,  I  must  here  acquaint  you
further,  that  each  of  'em  had  what  was  commonly
call'd  the  Druid's  Egg,  which  shall  be  explain'd  in
the  history,  hung  about  his  neck,  inchas'd  in  gold.
They  all  wore  short  hair,  while  therestof  the  natives  had
theirs  very  long  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  they  wore  long
beards,  while  other  people  shav'd  all  theirs,  but  the  up
per  lip.  They  likewise  air  wore  long  habits;  as  did
the  Bards  and  the  Vaids  :  but  the  Druids  had  on  a
white  -surplice,  whenever  they  religiously  officiated.  In
Ireland  they,  with  the  graduate  Bards  and  Vaids,  had
the  privilege  of  wearing  six  colours  in  their  Breacans
or  robes,  which  were  the  striped  Braccae  of  the  Gauls,
still  worn  by  the  Highlanders,  whereas  the  king  and

(14)  Druidhcacht.

(15)  Slatnan  Druidheacht,


THE  HISTORY


queen  might  have  in  theirs  but  seven,  lords  and  ladies
five,  governors  of  fortresses  four,  officers  and  young
ilemen  of  quality  three,  common  soldiers  two,  and
common  people  one.  This  sumtuary  law  most  of  the
Irish  historians  say,  was  cnackted  under  King  (16)
AcLaii't  t!ie  1st. ;  {ho*,  others,  who  will  have  this  to
be  but  the  reviving-  of  an  old  law,  maintain  it  was  first
established  by  king  Tigemmhas.

VIII.  As  the  Druids  were  commonly  wont  to  re*
tire  into  grots,  dark  woods,  mountains,  and  (17)  groves,
in  which  last  they  had  their  numerous  schools,  not
without  houses  as  some  have  foolishly  dreamt,  so
many  such  places  in  France,  Britain,  and  Ireland,  do
still  bear  their  names  :  as  Dreux,  the  place  of  their
annual  general  assembly  in  France ;  Kmg-ij-Drudi~
on,  or  Druid-stones,,  a  parish  so  call'd  in  Denbigh
shire,  from  a  couple  of  their  altars  there  still  remain
ing.  In  Anglesey  there  is  the  village  of  Trer  Driv,
the  town  of  the  Druid,  next  to  which  is  Tre'r
JBcirdh  or  Bards-town  :  as  also  in  another  place  of  the
same  island  J\Iae?i-i/-Drmi9  that  is,  the  Druid's  stone ;
and  Caer-Dreuiuy  or  the  city  of  the  Druids,  in  Meri
oneth-shire.  The  places  in  Ireland  and  the  Hebrides
are  infinite.  The  present  ignorant  vulgar,  in  the  first
of  the  last-mention'd  places,  do  believe,  that  those  in-
dianters  were  at  last  themselves  inch-anted  by  thek

(Ifj)  EOCIIAID  ELJDGHATHACH.

(17)  These  Groves  for  pleasure  and  retirement,  as  well  a»
i'T  awe  and  reverence,  were  different  from  the  lurk  lag  pla
nes  in  forests  and  cayes,  into  which  they  were  ibrc'd  when
iuU-.rdicted  in  Gaule  mid  Britain.


OF  TTJF  DRUIDS.  61


Apostle  Patric  and  his  disciples,  miraculously  confin
ing-  them  to  the   places  that  so  bear  their   names  ;
where  they  are  thought   to  retain  much  power,    and
sometimes  to  appear,  which  are  (18)  fancies  like  the
English  notionof  Fairies.  Thus  theDru.d  O  Mumin  in
habits  the  hill  of  Creag-a-Vanny,  in  Inisoen  ;  Aunius
(19)  in  Benavny  from  him  so  call'd  in  the  county  of
Londonderry,    and    Gealcossa,     (20)     in    Gealcossa's
mount   in  Inisoen  aforesaid   in  the  county  of  Dune-
gall.     This  last  was  a  Druidess,   and  her  name  is  of
the  Homerical  strain,   signifying   White-leggd   (21).
On  this  hill  is  her  grave,   the  true  inchantment  which
confines  her,  and  hard  by  is  her  temple  ;  being  a  sort
of  diminutive  Stone-henge,  which  many  of  the  old
Irish  dare  not  ev.en  at  this  day  any  way  prophane.     I
shall  discover  such  things  about  these  temples,  where
of  multitudes  are  still  existing,  many  of  them  entire,
in  the  Hebrides,  in  Orkney,  and  on  the  opposie  Con
tinent;  as  also  many  in  Wales,  in  Jersey  and  Guernsey,
and  some  in  England  and  Ireland,  the  most  remarkable
to  be  accurately  described  and  delineated  in  our  history,
I  shall  discover  such  things,  I  say,    about  the  famous
Egg  of  the  Druids,  to  the  learned  hitherto  a  riddle,  not
to  speak  of  their  magical  gems  and  herbs  :  as  also  a-

(18)  Such  fancies  came  from  the  hiding  of  the  persecut
ed  Dmids,  from  the  reign  of  TIBERIUS,  who  made  the  first
law  against  them  (having  been  discountenanced  by  AU
GUSTUS)  but  strictly  put  in  execution  by  CLAUDIUS,  and
the  following  Emperors,  till  their  utter  extirpation  by  the
general  conversion  of  the  people  to  Christianity.

(19)  AlBHNE    Or  OlBHNE.

(20)  GEALCHO^SACH.

21      Cnuc  ?ia  GEALCHOSSAIGHL


THE  HISTORY


bout  their  favourite  All-heal  or  (22)  Misselto,  gather'd
with  so  much  ceremony  by  a  Priest  in  his  white  Sur
plice,  as  PLINY  (23)  tells  us,  and  with  a  gold  pruning,
knife  ;  as  well  as  about  the  abstrusest  parts  of  their
Philosophy  and  Religion,  that  the  like  has  not  yet  ap-
pear'd  in  any  author,  who  has  treated  of  them.  The
books  of  such  are  either  bare  collections  of  fragments,
or  a  heap  of  precarious  fables ;  I  mean  especially  some
French  writers  on  this  subject,  as  PICARD,  FORCATU-
LUS,  GUENEBAUT,  with  others  of  no  better  allay  in  Bri
tain  and  Germany  ;  for  as  I  admit  nothing  without
good  authority,  so  I  justly  expect,  that,  without  as
good,  nothing  will  be  admitted  from  me.

IX.  But,  My  Lord,  besides  these  Druids,  the  antient
Gauls,  Britons,  and  Irish,  had  another  order  of  learned
men,  call'd  Bards,  whereof  we  shall  sufficiently  dis
course  in  our  propos'd  work.  Bard  is  still  the  Irish
and  Scottish  word,  as  Bardh  the  Armoric  and  British.
There's  no  difference  'in  the  pronunciation,  tho',
according  to  their  different  manner  of  writing  in  ex
pressing  the  power  of  the  letters,  they  vary  a  little  in
k  the  orthography  (24).  The  Bards  were  divided  into

(22)  All  these  heads  will  be  so  many  intire  Chapters.

(23)  Sacerdos,  Candida  vcstc   cultus,  arhorem  scandit :
fa  Ice  aurea  dcmettt.     Hist.  Nat.  Lib.  16.  Cap.  44.

(24)  Let  it  be  noted  once  for  all,  that  as  in  other  tongues,
so  in  Irish  and  Welsh  particularly,  t  and  d  are  commonly
put  for  each  other*  by  reason  of  tneir  ajlinily  ;  and  that  dk
and  gh  being  pronounc'd  alike  in  Irish,  and  therefore  often
confounded, yet  an  exact  writer  will  always  have  regard  to
the  origin  as  well  as  to  the  analogv  of  any  word  :  and  so  he'll
write  Drvidke  (for  example)   and  not  Druighe,  much  less

broadly  and  aspuately ;  nor  will  he  use  any  other


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  63

three  orders  or  degrees  ;  namely,  to  give  an  example
now  in  the  British  dialec^t,  as  I  shall  give'  their  turns
to  all  the  Celtic  colonies,  Privardh,  Posvardh,  and
Arwjvardh  :  but,  with  regard  to  the  subjects  whereof
they  treated,  they  were  call'd  Prududh,  or  Tevluur,  or
Clerur;  which  words,  with  the  equivalent  Irish  names,
shall  be  explain'd  in  our  history,  where  you'll  find
this  division  of  the  Bards  well  warranted.  The  first
were  Chronologers,  the  second  Heralds,  and  the  third
Comic  or  Satyrical  Poets  among  the  vulgar  :  for  the
second  sort  did  sing  the  praises  of  great  men  in  the
heroic  strain,  very  often  at  the  head  of  armies,  like
him  in  VIRGIL

Cretea  musarum  comitem,    cui  carmlna  semper
Et  citharae  cordi,  numerosque  intendere  nereis ;
Semper  equos,  atq  ;  arma  virumy  pugnasq  ;  canebat :

VIKG.  AEN.  Lib.  9.

And  the  first,  who  likewise  accompany'd  them  in  peace,
did  historically  register  their  genealogies  and  atchiev-
ments.  We  have  some  proofs  that  the  panegyrics  of
the  Gallic  Bards  did  not  always  want  wit  no  more
than  flattery  ;  and  particularly  an  instance  out  of  A-
theneus,  who  had  it  from  Posidonius  the  Stoic,  con
cerning  (26)  Luernius,  a  Gallic  Prince,  extraordinary

mispellings,  tho*  ever  so  common  in  books.  This  is  well
observ'd  by  an  old  author,  who  writing  of  CONLA  a  hea
then  freethinking  Judge  of  Connacht,  thus  characterizes
him  ;  Se  do  rinne  an  choinbhliocht  ris  na  Druidhibh  :  'twas
he  that  disputed  against  the  Druids.  These  Criticisms,
some  wou'd  say,  are  trifles  :  but

Hae  nugae  i?i  seria  ducunt.
[26]  Whether  it  beLuERNius,  or  as  STKABO  writes  it


C4  THE  HISTORY


rich,  liberal,  and  magnificent.  He  was  the  father  of
that  same  Bittus,  who  was  beaten  by  the  Romans.
Now  this  Luernius,  says  (27)  my  author,  "  Having
"  appointed  a  certain  day  for  a  feast,  and  one  of  the
41  Barbarous  Poets  coming  too  late,  met  him  as  he
"  was  departing  ;  whereupon  he  began  to  sing  his
"  praises  and  to  extol  his  grandeur,  but  to  lament
"  his  own  unhappy  delay.  Luernius  being  delighted,
"  call'd  for  a  purse  of  Gold,  which  he  threw  to  him,
"  as  he  ran  by  the  side  of  his  chariot :  and  he  taking
"  it  up,  began  to  sing  again  to  this  purpose  ;  THAT

"  OUT  OF  THE  TRACKS  HIS  CHARIOT  HAD  PLOWED  ON  THB
"    GROUND,     SPRUNG  UP  GOLD    AND    BLESSINGS  TO  MAN-

"  KIND."  As  some  of  the  Gallic  Bards  were  truly  in
genious,  so  were  many  of  them  mere  qniblers  :  and
among  the  bombast  of  the  British  and  Irish  Bards,
there  want  not  infinite  instances  of  the  true  sublime.
Their  Epigrams  were  admirable,  nor  do  the  modern  I-
talians  equal  them  in  conceits.  But  in  stirring  the
passions,  their  Elegies  and  Lamentations  far  excede
those  of  the  Greecs,  because  they  express  nature
much  more  naturally.  These  bards  are  not  yet  quite
extinct,  there  being  of  them  in  Wales,  in  the  High
lands  of  Scotland,  and  in  Ireland  :  nor  did  any  coun
try  in  the  world  abound  like  the  last  with  this  sort  of

LUERIUS,  the  name  is  frequent  either  way  in  theantient-
cst  Irish  Writers,  as  LOAKN,  and  LUIFIL  or  LUIGHAIRI%

(27)  A;)liorisartos  (F  autou  prolhesmiavi  pote  tei  thoine.,  aphystere^aTita  tinu  ton
Barbara n  poietcn  aphikesthai  ;  kai  syuaiitesaita  mot'  ode ;  liyrun  -i'.i  autou  ten
kyperochen,  heauton  d'  hypothi",  vm  holi  hyitereke  :  toade  tuiplithenta  thylaLioa
*itesai  chrysiou,  kai  ripsai  auto  paratrorhonti  ;  knelomenoa  do  ekeiaon  palin
kymnein,  leyonta,  dio  kai  ta  ichne  t">s  ^P.S  (pph'  lies  harmatelutei)  cbryson  iii
cuer^esias  anthropois  ph'erei.  Edit.  J.ugd.  Lib.  4.  Pa£.  152-


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  (>5

men,  whose  licentious  panegyrics  or  satyrs  have  not  a
little  contributed  to  breed  confusion  in  the  Irish  his
tory.     There  were  often  at  a  time,  a  thousand  Ollaws
(28)  or  graduate  Poets,  besides  a  proportienable  num-
'ber  of  inferior  Rhymers,   who   all  of  'em  liv'd   most
of  the  year  on  free  cost :  and,  what  out  of  fear  of  their
railing,    or  love  of  their  flattery,    no  body  durst  deny
them  any  thing,  be  it  armour,  fewel,  "horse,  mantle,  or
the  like  ;  which  grew  into  a  general  custom,  whereof
the  Poets  did  not  fail  to  take  the   advantage.     The
great  men,    out  of  self-love  and  interest,    encourag'd
no  other  kind  of  learning,  especially  after  they  profes
sed  Christianity  :  the  good   regulation,    under  which
they  were  in  the  time  of  Druidism,    as  then   in  some
manner  belonging  to  the  temples,  having  been  destroy
ed  with  that  religion.      In  a  small  time   they  became
such  a  grievance,  that  several   attempts  were  made  to
rid  the  nation  of  them  :  and,  which  is  something  comi
cal,  what  at  least  our  present  Poets  would  not  extra-
ordinarly  like,  the  orders  for  banishing  them  were  al
ways  to  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  ;  while  they  were
as  often   harbour'd  in  Ulster,  till   upon  promise  of  a-
mendment  of  their  manners  I  mean    and  not  of  their
poetry,   they   were  permitted  to  return  to  the  other
provinces.     At  last,  in  a  general  national  assembly,  or
parliament,  at  Drumcat,   (29)  in  the  country  we  now
call   the  county  of  Londonderry,   under  [30]  Aldus
Anmireus,  Xlth. Christian  king,  in  the  year  597,  where
(i58)     Ollamh  is  a  Professor  cr  Doctor  in  any  faculty.
('29)  Druim-ceat  alias  Druimcheat.

[20]    AODJIMHAC    AlNMMfRE.

I


THF  HISTORY


was  also  present  (31)  Adius  king  of  Scotland  and
the  great  (32)  Columba,  it  was  decreed  :  that  for  the
better  preservation  of  their  history,  genealogies,  and
the  purity  of  their  language,  the  supreme  monarch,
and  the  subordinate  kings,  with  every  lord  of  a  can-
tred,  should  entertain  a  Poet  of  his  own,  no  more  be
ing  allowed  by  the  antient  law  in  the  iland  ;  and
that  upon  each  of  these  and  their  posterity  a  portion
of  land,  free  from  all  duties,  shou'd  be  settl'd  for  ever  ;
that,  for  encouraging  the  learning  these  Poets  and
Antiquaries  profest,  public  Schools  shou'd  be  appoint
ed  and  endow'd,  under  the  national  inspection  ;  and
that  the  Monarch's  own  Bard  should  be  Arch-poet  (33),
and  have  super-intendency  over  the  rest.  'Tis  a  com
mon  mistake,  into  which  father  Pezron  has  fallen  a-
mong  others,  that  the  Bards  belonged  to  the  body  of
the  Druids  :  but  this  is  not  the  place  to  rectify  it.
They  made  hymns  for  the  use  of  the  temples,  'tis  true,
and  manag'd  the  music  there  ;  but  they  were  the
Druids  that  officiated  as  Priests,  and  no  sacrifices
were  offer'd  but  by  their  ministry.

X.  In  the  History  likewise  shall  be  fully  explained
the  third  order  of  the  Celtic  Lilerati,  by  the  Greecs  call
ed  OUATEIS,  and  by  the  Romans  VAXES  ;  which  yet  is
neither  Greec  nor  Roman,  but  a  mere  Celtic  word,  viz.
FAIDH,  which  signifies  to  this  day  a  prophet  in  all  Irish
books,  and  in  the  common  language,  particularly  in  the

(31)  AODHANMHAC    GAURAIN.

(32)  COLUIM-CILLE.

(33)  Ard-Ullamh.


OF  THE  DPUins.  (57

Irish  translation  of  the  Bihle  ;  where  Druids  (34)  are
also  commonly  put  for  Inchanters,  as  those  of  Egypt,
and  especially  for  the  Mages,  or  as  we  translate,  the
wise  men  (35)  that  came  from  the  East,  to  visit  JESUS
in  his  cradle.  So  easily  do  men  convey  their  own  ideas
into  other  men's  books,  or  find  'em  there  ;  which  has
been  the  source  of  infinite  mistakes,  not  onely  in  Divi
nity,  but  also  in  Philosophy  and  Philology.  The  Cel
tic  (36)  VAIDS  were  Physicians  and  Diviners,  great
proficients  in  natural  Philosophy,  as  were  likewise  the
Druids,  v/ho  had  the  particular  inspection  of  Morals,
but  CICERO,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  one  of  the
prime  Druids,  remarks,  that  their  predictions  were  as
much  grounded  on  (37)  conjecture,  as  on  the  rules  of
Augury  :  both  equally  fortuitous  and  fallacious.  For
the  saying  of  EURIPIDES  will  ever  hold  true,  that  (38)

(34-)  Draoithe.  Fxod   7.  11.    Anois  OraoitliP  na  Her:inte
dorinnedursanfpsa  anniodhgceadnal  nan  'roigheachtuibb.

(35)  Mat.  2. 1.  Feuch  Tangadar  Draoithe  o  nairl  shoir
go  Hiarusalern.

(36)  The  word  is  Faidk  (or  Vait  bv  the  usual  conversion
of  the  Letters  F  into  K  and  Din  to  T  J  whence  the  Latins
made  Vates  ;  and  their  Critics  acknowledge,  that  they  took
many  words  from  the  Gauls.     The  Euchages  and  Eubages,
in  some  copies  of  AMMIANUS  MARCELLINUS,  are  false
readings,  as  in  time  will  appear.     So  are  Drusi,  Drusides,
and  Drv-siades  for  Druidcs :  as  likewise  Vardi,  from  the
Brittish  and  Irish  oblique  cases  of  Bard

(37)  Sitptidem  &  in  GalUa  Druides  sunt,  e  quibus  ipse  Dr-
VTTIACUM  Aeduum,  hospitem  tuuiri  laudatoremque,  cognovi
(inquit  QUINTUS)  qm  ^'naturae  rationem^nam  physiologi-
am  Graed  appellant,  notam  esse  sibi  prqfitebatur  ;  qpartim
AuvurU.s,    partim  conjee tura,   quae  essent  futura  dicebat.
De  Divinat.  lib.  1.  cap.  41.

(3B)  Mantis  aristos,  hos'«s  elkaz-i  kalos.


THE  HISTORY


the  best  gucsscr  is  the  best  Prophet.     He  that  is  nearly
acquainted  with  the  state  of  affairs,    that  understands
the  springs  of  human  actions,  and,  that,  judiciously  al
lowing  for  circumstances,  compares  the  present  time
with  the  past  :  he,  I  say,  will  make  a  shrewd  guess  at
the  future.     By  this  time,  My  Lord,  you  begin  to  per
ceive  what  is  to  be  the  subject  of  the  History  I  intend
ta  write  ;   which,  tho'  a  piece  of  general  learning  and
great  curiosity,,  yet  I  shall  make  it  my  business  so  to
digest :  as  ta  render  it  no  less  intertaining  than  instruc
tive  to  all  sorts  of  readers,   without  excepting  the  la
dies,,  who  are  pretty  much  concern'd    in  this  matter  ;
throwing,  as.  I  told  you  before,  all  my  Critical  observa-
vations,   and  Disquisitions  about  words,   into  the  mar
gin,  or  the  Dissertation  annext  to  the  History.    As  to
what  I  say  of  the  ladies  being  concern'd  in  this  His
tory,  there  were  not  only  Druidesses ;  but  some  even
of  the  highest  rank,  and  Princesses  themselves  were
educated  by  the  Druids:  for  in  our  own  Annals  we  read,
that  the  two  daughters  of  king  (39)  Laogirius,  in  whoss
reign  Patric  preach'd  Christianity,   were  educated  by
them  ;   and  we  have  the  particulars  of  a  long  dispute
those  young  ladies  maintained  against  this  new  Re
ligion,  very  natural  but  very  subtil.     Several  other  la
dies  bred  under  the  Druids  became  famous  for  their
7.*ritings  and  proficiency  in  learning,  of  some  of  whom
Tve  shall  occasionally  give  an  account :  but  lest  I  shou'd
be  thought  in  every  thing  to  flatter  the  Sex,  how  much
soever  I  respect  them,  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  story  in
my  third  Letter.     But,  in  order  to  complete  my  design,.

(39)     LAOT..HAIJU


OF  THE  DRWDF.


so  as  to  leave  no  room  for  any  to  write  on  this  subject
after  me  ;  and  also  to  procure  several  valuable  Manu
scripts,  or  authentic  copies  of  them,  well  knowing  where
they  ly,  I  purpose  towards  the  Spring  to  take  a  journey
for  at  least  six  months  :  which,  at  our  next  meeting,  I
shall  do  myself  the  honour  to  impart  to  your  Lordship  i
very  particularly,

XI.  The  Irish,  a  few  Scandinavian  and  Danish  words
excepted,  being  not  only  a  Dialect  of  the  antient  Cel
tic  or  Gallic,  but  being  also  liker  the  mother  than  her  o-
ther  daughter  the  British  ;    and  the  Irish  Manuscripts
being   more  numerous  and   much    antienter  than  the
Welsh,  shows  beyond  all  contradiction  the  necessity  of
this  language  for  retrieving  the  knowledge  of  the  Cel
tic  Religion  and  Learning.     CAMDEN  and  others  have
long  since  taken  notice  of  the  agreement  between  the
present  British  and  those  old  Gallic  words  collected  by
learned  men  out  of  Greec  and  Roman  authors  :    and
the  industrious  Mr.  EDWARD  LHUYD,  late  keeper  of  the
Museum  at  Oxford,  perceiv'd  this  affinity  between  the
same  words  and  the  Irish,  even  before  he  study'd  that
language,  by  the  demonstration  I  gave  him  of  the  same
in  all  the  said  instances.     Nor  does  he  deny  this  agree
ment   in  the  comparative  Etymologicon   he  afterwards
made  of  those  languages,  T/here  he  quotes  CAMDEN  and
BOXHORNIUS  affirming  it  about  the  Gallic  and  British;
but  there  being,  says  he  (40),  no  Vocabulary  extant,  mean
ing  no  doubt  in  print,  of  the  Irish,  or  antient  Scottish,
they  coiCd  not  collate  that  language  therewith,  which  the

'40}  In  the  preface  to  his  Arehccologia  Britannica,  pag.  1»


TIIR  HISTORY


curious  in  these  studies  will  now  fnd  to  agree  rather
more  than  oursy  with  the  Gaulish.     That  it  does  so,  is
absolute  fact,  as  will  be  seen  by  hundreds  of  instances
in  this  present  work.     I  am  aware  that  what  I  am  go
ing"  to  say  will  sound  very  oddly,  and  seem  more  than
"  a  paradox ;  but  I  deserve,  My  Lord,  and  shall  be  con
tent  with  your  severest  censure,  if,  before  you  have
finislvd  reading  these  sheets,  you  be  not  firmly  of  the
same  mind  yourself:  namely,  that,  without  the  know
ledge  of  the  Irish  language  and  books,  the  Gallic  Anti
quities,  not  meaning  the  Francic,  can  never  be  set  in
any  tolerable  light,  with  regard  either  to  words  or  to
things';  and  numerous  occasions  there  will  occur  in  this
History  of  illustrating  both  words  and  things  even  in
the  Greec  and  Roman  authors.      I  shall  here  give  one
example  of  this,  since  I  just  come  from  treating  of  the
several  professors  of  learning  common  to  the  antient
Gauls,  Britons,  and  Scots,  viz.  the  Druids,  Bards,  and
Vaids.  Lucian  (41)  relates  that  in  Gaule  he  saw  HER
CULES  represented  as  a  little  old  man,  whom  in  the
language  of  the  country  they  call'd  OGMIUS  ;  drawing1
after  him  an  infinite  multitude  of  persons,  who  seem'd
inost  willing  to  follow,  tho:  drag'd  by  extreme  fine  and
almost  imperceptible  chains  :  which  were  fasten'd  at
the  one  end  to  their  ears,  and  held  at  the  other,  not  in
cither  of  HERCULES' s  hands,  which  were  both  otherwise
imploy'd  ;  but  ty'd  to  the  tip  of  his  tongue,  in  which
there  was  a  hole  on  purpose,  where  all  those  chains
center d.    Lucian  wondering  at  this  manner  of  portray-
on  >      Toti   Her-K'lra  Tu-i   Kt-1:  .i  G-'-MIOV  onomazousi  phor.e  le  epbJchorir,
ft  <pttK  seqvnntiir  in  HERv'-JiE  GAILICO:  Gr&ca  ct.-nJm  fongtor*  lyafo  cuovi  i-.i
?..c  commcde  inscri


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  71

ing  HERCULES,  was  inform'd  by  a  learned  Druid  who
stood  by,  that  HERCULES  did  not  in  Gaule,  as  in  Greece,
betoken  Strength  of  Body,  but  the  Force  of  Eloquence ;
which  is  there  very  beautifully  display 'd  by  the  Druid,
in  his  explication  of  the  picture  that  hung  in  the  temple.
Now,  the  Critics  of  all  nations  have  made  a  heavy  pe-
ther  about  this  same  word  OGMIUS,  and  laboriously
sought  for  the  meaning  of  it  every  where,  but  just
where  it  was  to  be  found.  The  most  celebrated  BO-
CHART,  who,  against  the  grain  of  nature,  if  I  may  so
speak,  wou'd  needs  reduce  all  things  to  Phenician ;  says
it  is  an  oriental  word,  since  the  Arabians  (42)  call
strangers  and  barbarians  Agemion :  as  if,  because  the
Phenicians  traded  antiently  to  Gaule  and  the  British
Hands,  for  Colonies  in  them  they  planted  none,  they
must  have  also  imported  their  language ;  and,  with
their  other  commodities,  bartered  it  for  something  to
the  natives,  naming  their  places,  their  men,  and  their
Gods  for  them.  Our  present  Britons,  who  are  at  least
as  great  traders,  do  not  find  they  can  do  so  in  Phenicia,
nor  nearer  home  in  Greece  and  Italy,  nor  yet  at  their
own  doors  in  this  very  Gaule  :  besides  that  Lucian  does
positively  affirm  OGMIUS  was  a  Gallic  word,  a  word  (43)
of  the  country.  This  has  not  hinder'd  a  learned  Eng
lish  Physician,  Dr.  EDMUND  DICKENSON,  from  hunting
still  in  the  East  for  a  derivation  of  it;  conjecturing  HEII-

(42)  In  Geographia  Sacra,  sive  Canaan,  part.  2.  cap.  42.

(13)    Phone  te  rpichone.     Uli  supra.


THE  HISTORY


CULES  to  be  (44-)  JOSHUA,  who  was  surnamed  OGMIUS,
for  having  conquer'd  OG  King  of  Bashan  :

O  /  sanctas  gentcs  !  quibits  haec  nascuntur  in  horiis

Numina.

JUVENAL.  Sat.  15  ver.  10.

I  could  make  your  Lordship  yet  merryer,  or  rather  an
grier,  at  these  forc'd  and  far-fetch'd  Etymologies,  to
gether  with  others  hammer'd  as  wretchedly  out  of
Greec,  nay  even  out  of  Suedish  and  German.  But  the
word  OGMIUS,  as  Lucian  was  truely  inforrn'dj  is  pure
Celtic;  and  signifies,  to  use  TACITUS* s  (45)  phrase  about
the  Germans,  the  Secret  of  Letters,  particularly  the
Letters  themselves,  and  consequently  the  learning  that
depends  on  them,  from  whence  the  Force  of  Eloquence
precedes  :  so  that  HERCULES  OGMIUS  is  the  learned
HERCULES,  or  HERCULUS  the  protector  of  learning,  hav
ing  by  many  been  reputed  himself  a  (46)  Philosopher.
To  prove  this  account  of  the  word,  so  natural  and  so
apt,  be  pleas'd  to  understand,  that,  from  the  very  be
ginning  of  the  Colony,  OGUM,  sometimes  written

(44)  JOSUAM  ijuofjue  spcctasse  vidcttir  iilud  women,  quo
Galti  antiquilus  HERCULEM  nunciipabaut.     Uncle  vcro  ( )j^-
mios  ?  Annon  ab  OG  virtu.-    Del  ph.  Phccnicizant.  cap.  3.

(45)  IJtcrarum  Secreta  viri  pariter  ac  foeminac  ingno-
rant.     De  moribus  Germanorum,  cap.  19.

(46)  En  de  tois  chronois  tea  Basileias  tou  Phoiuicos  en  Heracles  ho  Philoso-
phos  Tyrios  hostis  epheure  ten  congchylen,  &c»  PalacphatifragmcntiiminCranu-
co  Alexandrine,  Heracles  Alkmeiiea  hyios,  Teuton  Philosophou  hystorousi,  &c.
Suidus  in  Voce  Heraclee*  El  diu  ants  Suitiam  aitdicbat  apud  Iftrai'litum,  in
Allegoriis  Homericis,  Auer  emphron,  kai  sophias  ourauinu  mystes,  hospcrci  ku-
ta  Batheias  achlyos  epitht~,lylcyian  cpliotizft  tea  philcaopbiuu,  Kathaper  homo,
logousi  kai  SwiL~:i  h&i


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  73

OGAM,  and  also  (47)  OGMA,  has  signify'd  in  Ireland  the
Secret  of  Letters,  or  the  Irish  Alphabet ;  for  the  truth
of  which  I  appeal  to  all  the  antient  Irish  books,  with
out  a  single  exception.  'Tis  one  of  the  most  authentic
words  of  the  language,  and  originally  stands  for  this
notion  alone.  Indeed  after  Patric  had  converted  the
nation,  and,  for  the  better  propagating  of  Christian
books,  introduc'd  the  use  of  the  Roman  letters,  instead
of  the  antient  manner  of  writing,  their  primitive  let
ters,  very  different  from  those  they  now  use,  began  by
degrees  to  grow  obsolete ;  and  at  last  legible  only  by
Antiquaries  and  other  curious  men,  to  whom  they  stood
in  as  good  stead  as  any  kind  of  occult  characters  :
whence  it  happened  that  Ogum,  from  signifying  the  se
cret  of  writing,  came  to  signify  secret  writing,  but  still
principally  meaning  the  original  Irish  Characters.
There  are  several  Manuscript  Treatises  extant,  describ
ing  and  teaching  the  various  methods  of  this  Secret
Writing;  as  one  in  the  College-Library  of  (48)  Dub
lin,  and  another  in  that  of  h>j  Grace  the  Duke  of  (49)
Chandois.  Sir  James  Ware,  in  his  Antiquities  of  Ire-
hind,  relating  how  the  antient  Irish  did,  besides  the
vulgar  characters,  practise  also  divers  ways  and  arts
of  occult  writing,  caWd  Ogum,  in  which  they  wrote  their

(47)  As  in  the  Dublin  College  Manuscript,  to  be  pre
sently  cited.

(4S)  'Tis,  among  other  pieces,  in  the  Book  of  Baltimore  ;
being  the  255th  volume  in  the  Dublin  Catalogue,  in  parch
ment,  folio,  D.  18.

(49)  Anonymi  cujusdam  Tractatus  de  variis  apud  Hiber-
xospeteres  ocacltis  sciibendifonnutis,  Hibernice  OGUM  dictis.


7*  THE  HISTORY


secrets;  I  have,  continues  (50)  he,  an  antient  parchment
book  full  of  these,  which  is  the  same  just  now  said  ta
belong  to  the  Duke  of  Chandois :  and  Dudley  (51)
Forbes,  a  hereditary  Antiquary,  wrote  to  the  rather
laborious  than  judicious  Chronologist  (52)  O  Flaherty,
in  the  Year  1688,  that  he  had  some  of  the  primitive
(53)  Birch-tables,  for  those  they  had  before  the  use  of
parchment  or  paper,  and  many  sorts  of  the  old  occult
writing  by  him,  These  are  principally  the  Ogham-
beith,  the  Ogham-col?,  and  the  (54)  Ogham-craoth,
which  last  is  the  old  one  and  the  true.  But  that  the
primary  Irish  letters,  the  letters  first  in  common  use,
which  in  the  manner  we  have  shown,  became  acciden
tally  occult,  were  originally  meant  by  the  word  Ogum  ;
besides  the  appeal  made  above  to  all  antient  authors,
is  plain  in  particular  from  Forchern,  a  noted  Bard  and
Philosopher,  who  liv'd  a  little  before  Christ.  This
learned  man  ascribing  with  others  the  invention  of  let
ters  to  the  Phenicians,  cr  rather  more  strictly  and  pro
perly  to  Phenix,  whom  tke  Irish  call  Fenius  farsaidh,
or  Phenix  the  aniient,  says,  that,  among  other  Alpha
bets,  as  the  Hebrew,  Greec,  and  Latin,  he  also  com-
pos'd  that  of  (55)  Bethluisnion  an  Oghum,  the  Alphabet

(50)  Prceter  characteres  mil  gar  cs  ittvbantur  ctiam  vettres
Hiberni  variift  occultis  fcribendiformuiis  scu  artifciif,  Ogum
dictis,  quihits  serreta  sua  scribtbani:  hit  refer  turn  habco

him  mem^ranactum  antiquum.     Cap.  2.

(51)  DUALTACH   MHAC  FlRBIS.

(52)  RuDiiRL'iGH  O  FLAITH-BHEARTUIGII.
(5.3)   Ogygia,  part.  3.  cap.  30.

(54)  Ogum-branchcs.

(55)  FENIUS  FARSAIDH  Alphaleta  prima


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  75


cf  Ogum,  or  the  Irish  Alphabet,  meaning  that  he  in
vented  the  first  letters,  in  imitation  of  which  the  Al
phabets  of  those  Nations  were  made.     Ogum  is  also
taken  in  this  sense  by  the  best  modern  writers  :  as
William    (56)    O  Done II,    afterwards   Archbishop   of
Tuam,  in  his  preface  to  the  Irish  New  Testament,  de
dicated  to  King  James  the  First,  and  printed  at  Dub
lin  in  the  Year  1609,  speaking  of  one  of  his  assistants,
says,  that  he  enjoin  d  him  to  write  tnP  other  part  ac
cording  to  the  Ogum  and  propriety  of  the  Irish  tongue;
where   Ogum  must  necessarily  signify  the  Alphabet,
Orthography,  and  true  manner  -of  writing  Irish.  Frr>m
all  this  it  is  clear,  why  among  the  Gauls,  of  whom  the
Irish  had  their  Language  and  Religion,  Hercules,  as
the  protector  of  Learning,  shou'd  be  call  d  Ogmius,  the
termination  alone  being  Greec.     Nor  is  this  all.     Og-
ma  was  not  only  a  known  proper  name  m  Ireland,  but
also  one  of  the  most  antient ;  since  Ogma  Grianann>
the  father  of  King  (57)  Dalboetius,  was  one  of  the  first
of  the  Danannan  race,  many  ages  before  Luicans  time.
He  was  a  very  learned  man,  marry  d  to  Eathna,  a  fa
mous  Poetess,  who  bore,   besides  the  fore-mention'd
Monarch,  Cairbre  likewise  a  Poet :  insomuch  that  Og
ma  was  deservedly  surnamed  (58)  Grlanann,  which  is

Grcecorum,  Latinorum,  et  Bethluisnion  AN  OGHUIM,  compo-
suit.  Ex  FORCHERNI  libro,  octiugentis  retro  annis  Latiue
reddito.

(56)  WILLIAM  ODOMHNUILL.

(57)  DEALBHAOITH.

(58)  Grianis  the  Sun,  and  Grianann  Sun  like,  or  belong*
ing  to  the  Sun,


7G  THE  HISTORY

r-  •  !•••••••••  _mmm

to  say  Pkebean,  where  you  may  observe  Learning*  still
attending  this  name.  The  Celtic  Language  being
now  almost  extinct  in  Gaule,  except  onely  in  lower
Britanny,  and  such  Galic  words  as  remain  scatter  d
among  the  French  ;  subsists  however  intire  in  the  se
veral  (59)  dialects  of  the  Celtic  Colonies,  as  do  the
words  Ogum  and  Ogma  particularly  in  Irish.  Nor  is
there  any  thing  better  known  to  the  learned,  or  will
appear  more  unfdeniable  in  the  sequel  of  this  work,  than
that  words  lost  in  one  dialect  of  the  same  common  lan
guage,  are  often  found  in  another  :  as  a  Saxon  word,
fof  example,  grown  obsolete  in  Germany,  but  remain
ing  yet  iri  England,  may  be  also  us  d  in  Switzerland  ;
or  another  word  grown  out  of  date  in  England,  and
florishing  still,  in  Denmark,  continues  likewise  in  Ice
land.  So  most  of  the  antiquated  English  words  are
more  or  less  corruptly  extant  in  Friezland^  Jutland,
and  the  other  Northern  countries ;  with  not  q,  few  in
the  Lowlands  of  Scotland,  and  in  the  old  English  Pale
in  Ireland.

XII.  Now,  from  the  name  of  HERCULES  let's  come
to  his  person,  or  at  least  to  the  person  acknowledg'd  to
have  been  one  of  the  Heros  worship'd  by  the  Gauls,
and  suppos'd  by  the  Greecs  and  Romans  to  be  HER
CULES.  On  this  occasion  I  cannot  but  reflect  on  the
opposite  conduct,  which  the  learned  and  the  unlearned
formerly  observ'd,  with  respect  to  the  Gods  and  divine
matters.  If,  thro'  the  ignorance  or  superstition  of  the

(.VO)   These  are  British,  Welsh,  Cornish,  Irish,  Manks,
and  Earse.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  77


people,  any  fable,  tho'  ever  so  gross,  was  generally  rc-
eeiv'd  in  a  Religion ;  the  learned  being  asham'd  of  such
an  absurdity,  yet  not  daring  openly  to  explode  any
thing  wherein  the  Priests  found  their  account,  explain
ed  it  away  by  emblems  and  allegories  importing  a  rea
sonable  meaning,    of  which  the  first  authors  never
thought :  and  if  the  learned  on  the  other  hand,  either
to  procure  the  greater  veneration  for  their  dictates,  or
the  better  to  conceal  their  sentiments  from  the  profane
vulgar,  did  poetically  discourse  of  the  elements  and
qualities  of  matter,  of  the  constellations  or  the  planets,
and  the  like  effects  of  nature,  veiling  them  as  persons;
the  common  sort  immediately  took  them  for  so  many
persons  in  good  earnest,  and  render'd  'em  divine  wor
ship  under  such  forms,  as  the  Priests  judg'd  fittest  to
represent  them.     Objects*  of  divine  worship  have  been
coin'd  out  of  the  rhetorical  flights  of  Orators,  or  the
flattering  addresses  of  Panegyrists :    even  metaphors
and  epithets  have  been  transformed  into  Gods,  which
procur'd  mony  for  the  Priests  as  well  as  the  best ;  and
this  by  so  much  the  more,  as  such  objects  were  multi-
ply'd.     This  is  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  deviat
ing  ever  so  little  from  plain  Truth,  which  is  never  so
heartily  and  highly  reverenc'd,  as  when  appearing  in
her  native  simplicity;  for  as  soon  as'her  genuine  beauties
are  indeavour'd  to  be  heightn'd  by  borrow'd  ornaments,
and  that  she's  put  under  a  disguise  in  gorgeous  ap
parel  :  she  quickly  becomes,  like  others  affecting  such
a  dress,  a  mercenary  prostitute,  wholly  acting  by  vani
ty,  artifice,  or  interest,  and  never  speaking  but  in  am-


78  THE  HISTORY


biguous  or  unintelligible  terms  ;  while  the  admiration
of  her  lovers  is  first  turn'd  into  amazement,  as  it  com
monly  ends  in  contemt  and  hatred.  But  over  and  above
the  difficulty,  which  these  proceedings  have  occasion
ed  in  the  history  of  antient  time,  there  arises  a  greater
from  time  itself  destroying  infinite  circumstances,  the
want  whereof  causes  that  to  seem  afterwards  obscure,
which  at  the  beginning  was  very  clear  and  easy.  To
this  we  may  join  the  preposterous  emulation  of  nations,
in  ascribing  to  their  own  Gods  or  Heros,  whatever  qua
lities  were  pre-eminent  in  those  of  others.  That  most
judicious  writer  (60)  about  the  nature  of  the  Gods,
commonly  call'd  PHURNUTUS,  tho5  his  true  name  was
CORNUTUS,  a  Stoic  Philosopher,  whom  I  shall  have  fre
quent  occasion  to  quote  hereafter,  "  Owns  the  great
"  (61)  variety,  and  consequently  the  perplexedness  and
"  obscurity,  that  occurs  in  the  history  of  HERCULES  ;
"  whereby  it  is  difficult  to  know  certainly  what  were
"  his  real  atchievments,  or  what  were  fabulously  father-
"  ed  upon  him:  but  having  been  an  excellent  General,
"  who  had  in  diverse  countries  signaliz'd  his  valor,  he

(00)  Phournoutou  theoria  peri  tes  ton  theon  physeos,  vulgo  :  serf,  ut  Ravii
codex  <£  Vaticanus  legunt  (not ante  doctissinw  Galeo)  vei-us  titulus  est  Kornout«u
epidrome  ton  kata  ten  Helleniken  theorian  paradidomeuon.

(61)  To  de  dysdiakrita  gegonenai  ta  tou  theou  idia,  apo  ton  peri  tou  Hd-
roos  historoumenon.  Tacha  d'an  he  leonte  kai  to  ropulon  ek  tes  palaias  tlie-
ologias  epi  touton  raeteneuegmena  eie  ;  strateg-on  g'ar  aut.on  genomenon  ag-athon,
kai  polla  mere  tes  ges  meta  dynameos  epelthonta  ouch'  hoion  tc  g-yoinoii  edox-
an  peiielelytbenai  xylo  mono  hoplismenon  :  alia  tois  *  episemois  tou  theou,  meta
ton  ajicuhunatistnon,  hypo  ton  euerg-etounienon  kekosraesthai  ;  symbalon  gar
hekat^ron  oie  romes  kai  gennaiotitos,  &c.

*  Alii  pisynois.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  79

"  thinks  it  not  probable,  that  he  went  onely  arm'd
"  with  a  Lion's  skin  and  a  Club  ;  but  that  he  was  re-
"  presented  after  his  death  with  these,  as  symbols  of
"  generosity  and  fortitude,  for  which  reason  he  was
"  pictur'd  with  a  bow  and  arrows."  To  this  let  me
add,  that  several  valiant  men  in  several  nations  having,
in  imitation  of  some  one  man  any  where,  been  called
or  rather  surnam'd  HERCULES;  not  only  the  works  of
many,  as  subduing  of  Tyrants,  exterminating  of  wild
beasts,  promoting  or  exercising  of  commerce,  and  pro
tecting  or  improving  of  learning  have  been  ascrib'd  to
one  :  but  that  also  wherever  any  robust  person  was
found  represented  with  a  skin  and  a  club,  a  bow  and
arrows,  hewas  straight  deem'd  to  beHERCULEs;  whence
the  Egyptian,  the  Indian,  the  Tyrian,  the  Cretan,  the
Grecian  or  Theban,  and  the  Gallic  HERCULES.  This
was  a  constant  way  with  the  Greecs  and  Romans,  who,
for  example,  from  certain  resemblances  perfectly  acci
dental,  conjectur'd  that  Isis  was  honour'd  by  the  (62)
Germans,  and  BACCHUS  worship'd  by  the  (63)  Jews,
which  last  notion  is  refuted  even  by  their  enemy


()2)  Pars  Snevorum  §•  Ixidi  sacrificat.  Unde  caitfa  et
peregrino  sacro  pantm  comperi\  nisi  quod  signum  ip~
sum,  in  modnm  Liburnaejiguratum,  docet  advectam  Religi-
onem.  TACIT,  de  mor.  German,  cap.  9.

(63)  PLUTARCH.  Symposiac.  lib.  4.  quern  prolixius  dis«
serentcm  oiiosus  consulas,  lector.

(64)  Quia  sacerdotes  eorum  tibia  tympamsque  concinebant,
kedera  mnciebantur,  vitisque  aurea  templo  reperta,  Liberum
putrem  colt,  domitorem  Orientis,  ijuidam  arbitrate  sunt,  ne~
quaquam  con^ruentibns  institntis:  quippe  Liber  festos  lae~
fasqrte  ritus  posuit,  Judxorum  mos  absurdus  sordidusque.
Lib.  5.  cap.  5,


80  THE  HISTORY


TACITUS.     Such  superficial  discoveries  about  the  Cel
tic  Divinities  I  shall  abundantly  expose.     Yet  that
OGMIUS  might  be  really  the  Grecian  HERCULES,  well
known  in  Gaule,  it  will  be  no  valid  exception  that  he
was  by  the  Druids  Theologically  made  the  symboll  of
the  Force  of  Eloquence,  for  which  that  country  has
been  ever  distinguish'd  and  esteem'd :  since  even  in
Greece  he  was,  as  PIIURNUTUS  assures  us,  mystically
accounted  (65)  that  Reason  which  is  diffused  thro'  all
things,  according  to  which  nature  is  vigorous  and  strong,
invincible  and  ever  generating',  being  the  power  thai
communicates  virtue  andjirmncss  to  every  part  of  things.
The  Scholiast  of  APOLLONIUS  affirms,  that  the  natural
Philosophers  understood  by  HERCULES,  the  (66)  intel
ligence  and  permanence  of  beings :  as  the  Egyptians
held  him  to  be  (67)  that  Reason,  which  is  in  the  ivhole
of  things,  and  in  every  part.     Thus  the  learned  allego-
riz'd  away  among  others,  as  I  said  before,  the  fabulous
atchievments  and  miraculous  birth  of  this  Hero,  on
which  we  shall  however  touch  again,  when  we  come
to  explain  the  Heathen  humor  of  making  all  extraor
dinary  persons  the  Sons  of  Gods,  and  commonly  begot
on  Virgins ;  tho'  this  last  is  not  the  case  of  Hercules,
who  was  feign 'd  to  be  the  Son  of  Jupiter  by  Ahmena,

(65)  Heruclcs  de  estin  ho  en  tois  holois  logos,  kath*  hon  he  physis  isc-hyra
kai  krataia  estin,  aniketos  kai  aperigeimeloj  ousa  :  niutadotikos  ischyos,  kai  tes
para  meros  alkes  hyparchon.

(66)  Para  tois  Physikcjs  ho  Heracles  synesis  kai  alke  lanibanelai.

(G7)     Ton  en  pasi,  kai  oUa  panton,  logon ;  non  Helion,  ui  ?urr*vU  legi  cum
GALEO  suspicor  in  MAG^OBIO,  Sattrtal.  lib.  1.  cap.  20.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  81

another  n::ir*s  wife.  This  wou  d  be  reckon  d  immoral
among  men,  but  Jupiter,  said  the  Priests,  can  do  with
hie  own  what  he  pleases  :  which  reason,  if  it  contented
the  husbands,  cou  d  not,  displease  the  batchelors,  who
mi^ht  chance  to  be  sometimes  Jupiter's  substitutes.
The  Druidical  allegory  of  Ogmius,  or  the  Gallic  Her
cules,  which  in  its  proper  place  I  shall  give  you  at
large,  is  extremely  beautiful :  and  as  it  concerns  that
Eloquence  whereof  you  are  so  consummate  a  master,
cannot  but  powerfully  charm  you.

XIII.  In  the  mean  time  'tis  probable  your  Lord
ship  will  be  desireous  to  know,  whether,  besides  the
language  and  traditions  of  the  Irish,  or  the  monuments
of  stone  and  other  materials  which  the  country  affords,
there  yet  remain  any  Literary  records  truly  antient  and
unadulterated,  whereby  the  History  of  the  Druids,  with
such  other  points  of  antiquity,  may  be  retrieved,  or  at
least  illustrated  ?  This  is  a  material  question,  to  which
I  return  a  clear  and  direct  answer;  that  not  onely  there
remain  very  many  antient  Manuscripts  undoubtedly
genuine,  besides  such  as  are  forg'd,  and  greater  num
bers  (68)  interpolated,  several  whereof  are  in  Ireland
itself,  some  here  in  England,  and  others  in  the  Irish
Monasteries  abroad:  but  that,  notwithstanding  the  long
state  of  barbarity  in  which  that  nation  hath  lain,  and

(68)  As  the  Uraiceackt  na  neigios,  i.  e.  the  Accidence
of  the  Artists,  or  the  Poets;  which  being  the  work  of  FOR-
CHCRN  before-nam'd,  was  interpolated,  and  fitted  to  his
own  time,  by  CEANN  FAOLADH  the  Son  of  OXLIOLL,  iiv
the  Year  of  Uhiist  6C28.

L


82  THE  HISTORY


after  all  the  rebellions  and  wars  with  which  the  king
dom  has  been  harrass'd  ;  they  have  incomparably  more
antient  materials  of  that  kind  for  their  history,  to  which
even  their  Mythology  is  not  unserviceable,  than  either
the  English,  or  t&e  French,  or  any  other  European  na
tion,  with  whose  Manuscripts  I  have  any  acquaintance.
O£  these  I  shall  one  day  give  a  catalogue,  marking  the
places  where  they  now  ly,  as  many  as  I  know  of  them  ;
But  no£  meaning  every  Transcript  of  the  same  Manu-
script,  wJiicfLWQu'd  be  endless,  if  not  impossible.  In  all
conditions  the  Msh  have  been  strangely  sollicitous,  if
not  in  soms  degree  superstitious,  about  preserving  their
books  and  parchments;  even  those  of  them. which  are
so  old,  as  to  Be  BOW  partly  or  wholly  unintelligible.
Abundance  thro'  overcare  have  perished  under  ground,
the  concealer  not  having  skill,,  or  wanting  searcloth  and
otiteE- proper  materials; for,  preserving  them.  The  most?
valuable  pieces^  both  in:  verse  and  prose,  were  written
by  their  Heathen-  ancestors ;  whereof  some  indeed  have
been  interpolated  after  the  prevailing  of  Christianity,
which  additions  or  alterations-  are  nevertheless  easily
distinguish'd :  and  in  these  books  the  rites  and  formu
laries  of  the  Druids,  together  with  their  Divinity  and
Philosophy  ;  especially  their  two  grand  doctrines  of  the
eternity  and  incorruptibility  of  the  universe,  and  the
incessant  Revolution  of  all  beings  and  forms,  are  very
specially],  tho  sometimes  very  figuratively  express  d.
Hence  their  Allanimation  and  Transmigration.  Why
none  of  the  natives  have  hitherto  made  any  better  use
of  these  treasures  ;  or  why  both  they,  and  such  others


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  83

-asliare  written  concerning  the  History  of  Ireland,  have
onely  entertain'd  the  world  with  the  fables  of  it,  as  no
country  wants  a  fabulous  account  of  its  original,  or  the
succession  of  its  Princes,  why  the  modern  Irish  His
torians,  I  say,  give  us  such  a  medley  of  relations,  un-
pick'd  and  unchosen,  I  had  rather  any  man  else  shou'd
tell.  The  matter  k  certainly  ready^  there  wants  but
will  or  skill  for  working  of  it;  separating  the  Dross
from  the  pure  Ore,  and  distinguishing  counterfeit  from
sterling  coin.  This  in  the  meantime  is  undeniable,  that
learned  men  in  other  places^  perceiving  the  same  dishes
to  be  eternally  servld  up  at  every  meal,  are  of  opinion
that  there  is  no  better  fare  hi  the  country ;  while  those
things  have  been  concealed  from  them  by  the  ignerant
or  the  lazy,  that  would  have  added  no  small  ornament
even  to  their  classical  studies.  Of  this  I  hope  to  con
vince  the  world  by  the  lustre,  which,  m  this  work,  I
shall  impart  to  the  Antiquities  not  only  of  Gaule  and
Britain,  but  likewise  to  numerous  passages  of  the
Greec  and  Latin  authors.  How  many  noble  discoveries
of  the  like  kind  might  be  made  in  all  countries,  where
the  use  of  Letters  has  long  subsisted  !  Such  things  in
the  mean  time  are  as  if  they  were  not :  for

Paulum  sepultce  distal  inertias
Celata  virtus*

HORAT.  lib.  4.  Od.  9.

The  use  of  letters  has  been  very  antient  in  Ireland,
which  at  first  were  cut  on  the  bark  Of  trees  (69),  pre-
for  that  purpose  ;  or  on  smooth  tables  of  birch-

(69)    Oraium.


84  THE  HISTORY


wood,  which  were  call'd  [70]  Poets  tables  ;  as  their
characters  were  in  general  namd  [71]  twigs  and
branch-letters,  from  their  shape.  Their  Alphabet  was
call  d  Beth-luis-nion,  from  the  three  first  letters  of  the
same,  B,  L,  N,  Beth,  Luis,  Nion  [72]  :  for  the  parti
cular  name  of  every  letter  was,  for  memory-sake,  from
some  tree  or  other  vegetable  ;  which,  in  the  infancy  of
writing  on  barks  and  boards,  was  very  natural.  They
had  also  many  characters  signifying  whole  words,  like
the  Egyptians  and  the  Chinese.  When  Patric  intro-
duc  d  the  Roman  letters,  as  I  said  above,  then,  from  a
corruption  of  Abcedarium,  they  call'd  their  new  Alpha
bet  [73]  Aibghittir  ;  which,  by  the  Monkish  writers,
has  been  Latiniz  d  [74]  Abgetorium.  But  there  florish-
ed  a  great  number  of  Druids,  Bards,  Vaids,  and  other
authors  in  Ireland  long  before  Patrick  arrival  ;  whose
learning  was  not  only  more  extensive,  but  also  much
more  useful  than  that  of  their  Christian  posterity  this
last  sort  being  almost  wholly  imploy  d  in  scholastic

[70]    Taibhle  Fileadh.

[71]    Feadha:  Craobh  Ogham.

[72]   Birch,  Quicken,  and  Ash.

[73]  At  first  it  was  very  analogically  pronounc'd  Ab~ke~


z'r,  since  the  letter  C  then  in  Latin,  as  still  in  Irish  and
British,  had  the  forte  of  K  no  less  before  i?,  and  I,  than  be
fore  \,  O,  U  ;  having  jfiever  been  pronounc'd  like  S  by  the
antieut  Romans,  who  said  KIKEKO,  kenseo,  koecus,  but
not  SISERO,  senxeo,  soecus,  when  the  words  CICERO,  censeo,
coccus,  or  such  like  occurr'd  :  so  that  Abkedair  did  natural
ly  liquidate  into  Aibghittir,  in  the  mariner  that  all  Gramma
rians  know.

[74]  Scripsit  Abgetoria  [scilicet  Patricius]  355,  et  eo  am*
plius  numero.  NENN.  Hist.  Britan.  cap.  59.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  85

Divinity,  Metaphysical  or  Chronological  Dispute?,  Le
gends,  Miracles,  and  Martyrologies,  especially  after  the
eighth  century.  Of  all  the  things  committed  to  wri
ting  by  the  Heathen  Irish,  none  were  more  celebrated,
or  indeed  in  themselves  more  valuable,  than  their
laws  ;  which  were  deliver  d,  as  antiently  among  some
other  nations,  in  short  sentences,  commonly  in  verse,
no  less  reputed  infallible  Oracles  than  the  Lacedemo
nian  Rethrce  (15)  :  and,  what's  remarkable,  they  are
expresly  term'd  (76)  Celestial  Judgements  ;  for  the
pronouncing  of  which,  the  most  famous  were  Forchern,
Neid,  Conla,  Eogan,  Modan^  Moran,  King  Cormac,
his  Chief  Justice  Fithil,  Fachma,  Maine,  Ethnea  the
daughter  of  Amalgad,  and  many  more.  The  Celestial
Judgements  were  only  preserv  d  in  traditionary  poems,
according  to  the  institution  of  the  Druids,  till  commit
ted  to  writing  at  the  command  of  (77)  Concovar  king
of  Ulster  ;  who  dy'd  in  the  year  of  Christ  48,  where
as  Patric  begun  his  Apostleship  but  in  the  year  4352.
The  Poets  that  wrote  were  numberless,  of  whose
works  several  pieces  remain  still  intire,  with  diverse
fragments  of  others.  The  three  greatest  incouragers
of  learning  among  the  Heathen  Irish  monarchs  were,
first,  King  (78)  Achaius,  surnamed  the  Doctor  of  Ire
land,  who  is  said  to  have  built  at  Tarah  an  Ac»!emy,
calld  The  Court  of  the  Learned  (79).  'Twas  he  that

(75)  Retrai.

(76)  Breatha  nimlie.

(77)  CONCHOBHAR.  NfiSSAN,  1.  C.  J/ffC  NEASSA.

(78)  EOCHAIDH  OLLAMHFODLA.

(79)  Mur-Ollamhan.


86  THE  HISTORY


or-dain'd,   for  every  principal  family,   hereditary  Anti
quaries;   or,  in  case  of  incapacity,  the  most  able  of  the
same  historical  house,  with  rank  and  privileges  imme
diately  after  the  Druids.     The  next  promoter  of  Let
ters   was  Ring   (80)  TUATHALIUS,   whose  surname  is
render'd  Bonaventura,  tho'  not  so  properly,   and  who
appointed  a  triennial  revision  of  all  the  Antiquaries
Books,  by  a  committee  of  three  Kings  or  great  Lords,
three  Druids,  and  three  Antiquaries.     These  were  to
cause  whatever  was  approved  and  found  valuable  in
those  books,  to  be  transcribed  into  the  royal  (81)  Book
of  Tarah  ;  which  was  to  be  the  perpetual  standard  of
their  history,  and  by  which  the  contents  of  all  other
such  books  shou'd  be  received  or  rejected.     Such  good
regulations  I  say  there  were  made,   but  not  how  long
cr  how  well  observed  :  or,  if  truth  is  to  be  preferred  to  all
other  respects,  we  must  own  they  were  but  Very  slightly
regarded :  and  that  the  Bards,  besides  their  poetical
license,  were  both  mercenary  and  partial  to  a  scandal
ous  degree.     The  ordinance  however  is  admirable,  and
deserves  more  to  be  imitated,  than  we  can  ever  expect
it  to  be  so  any -where.  The  third  most  munificent  pat
ron  of  Literature  was  King  CORMAC,   surnamed  (82)
Long-beard,  who  renew'd  the  laws  about  the  Antiqua
ries,   re-built  and  inlarg'd  the  Academy  at  Tarah  for
history,  law,  and  military  prowess :  besides  that  he  was
an  indefatigable  distributer  of  justice,  having  written

(80)  TUATHAL  TEACHTMHAB.

(81)  Leabhar  Teamhra.

(82)  ULFHADA.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  87

himself  abundance  of  laws  still  extant.  So  is  his  (83)
Institution  of  a  Prince  (%4>)  or  his  Precepts  to  his  son
and  successor  CARBUE  (85)  LIFFECAIR,  who  in  like
manner  was  not  superficially  addicted  to  the  Muses,
CORMAC  was  a  great  proficient  in  Philosophy,  made
light  of  the  superstitions  of  the  Druids  in  his  youth  ;
and,  in  his  old  age  having  quitted  the  scepter,  he  led
a  contemplative  life  :  rejecting  all  the  Druidical  fables
and  idolatry,  and  acknowledging  only  one  Supreme
Being,  or  first  Cause.  This  short  account  of  the  pri-
mevous  Irish  Learning,  whereof  you'll  see  many  proofs
and  particulars  in  the  more  than  once  mention'd  Dis
sertation  concerning  the  Celtic  Language' and  Colonies,
to  be  annext  to  our  Critical  History,  will,  I  am  confi
dent,  excite  your  curiosity.

XIV.  The- custom-  therefore,  or  rather  cunning  of
the  Druids,  in  not  committing  their  rites  or  doctrines
to  writing,  has  not  deprived  us  as  some  may  be  apt  to
imagine,  of  sufficient  materials  to  compile  their  His
tory.  For,  in  the  first  place,  when  the  Romans  be
came  masters  of  Gaule,  and  every  where  mixt  with
the  natives ;  they  cou'd  not  avoid,  in  that  time  of  light
and  learning,  but  arrive  at  the  certain  knowledge  of
whatever  £icts  they  have  been  pleas'd  to  hand  down

(83)  'Tis,  among  other  most  valuable  pieces,  in  the  Col
lection  call'd  O  Du  VEGAN'S,  folio  190.  a,  now  or  late  in  the
possession  of  the  right  honourable  the  Earl  of  CLANRIC-
KARD.  There  are  copies  of  it  elsewhere,  but.  that's  the
oldest  known.

(84)    Teagarg  Riogh.

'35^  CAIRBRB


83  THE  HISTORY


to  us,  tho'  not  alway  rightly  taking  the  usages  of  o-
ther  nations  :  as  it  must  needs  be  from  a  full  convic
tion  of  the  Druidical  fraudulent  superstitions,  and  bar
barous  tyranny  exercis'd  over  the  credulous  people,
that  these  same  Romans,  who  tolerated  all  religions,
yet  supprest  this  institution  in  Gaule  and  Britain,  with
the  utmost  severity.  The  Druids  however  were  not
immediately  extinguish'd,  but  only  their  barbarous,
tyrannical,  or  illusory  usages.  And  indeed  their  hu
man  sacrifices,  with  their  pretended  Magic,  and  an
authority  incompatible  with  the  power  of  the  magi
strate,  were  things  not  to  be  indured  by  so  wise  a  state
as  that  of  the  Romans.  In  the  second  place,  the
Greec  colony  of  Marseilles,  a  principal  mart  of  Learn
ing,  could  not  want  persons  curious  enough,  to  ac
quaint  themselves  with  the  Religion,  Philosophy,  and
Customs  of  the  country,  wherein  they  liv'd.  STRABO
and  others  give  us  an  account  of  such.  From  these
the  elder  Greecs  had  their  information,  not  to  speak
now  of  the  Gauls  seated  in  Greece  it  self  and  in  Les
ser  Asia,  as  the  later  Greecs  had  theirs  from  the  Ro
mans  ;  and,  by  good  fortune,  we  have  a  vast  number
of  passages  from  both.  But,  in  the  third  place,  among
the  Gauls  themselves  and  the  Britons,  among  the
Irish  and  Albanian  Scot?,  their  IJistorians  and  Bards,
did  always  register  abundance  of  particulars  about  the
Druids,  whose  affairs  were  in  most  things  inseparable
from  those  of  the  re?t  of  the  inhabitants  :  as  they
were  not  only  the  judges  in  all  matters  civil  cr  re
ligious,  but  in  a  manner  the  executioners  too  in.  crimi-


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


nal  causes  ;  and  that  their  sacrifices  were  very  public,

-vhich  consequently  made  their  rites  no  less  observable.

One  thing  which  much  contributed  to  make  them

Known,  is,  that  the  King  was  ever  to  have  a  Druid  a-

bout  his  person  ;  t^  pray  and  sacrifice,  as  well  as  to  be

judge  for  determing  emergent  controversies,  tho'  he

had  a  civil  judge  besides,     So  he  had  one  of  the  chief

Lords  to  advise  him,  a  Bard  to  sing  the  praises  of  his

ancestors,    a  Chronicler  to  register  his  own  actions,   a

Physician  to  take  care  of  his  health,  a  Musician  to  in-

tertain  him.     Whoever  was  absent,  these  by  law  must

be  ever  present,   and  no  fewer  than   three  Controllers

of  his  family  :  which  Decemvirate  was  the  institution

of  King  CORMAC.    The  same  custom  was  taken  up  by

all  the  Nobles,  whereof  each  had  about  him  his  Druid,

Chief  Vassal,  Bard,  Judge,  Physician,  and  Harper;  the

four  last  having  lands  assign'd  them,  which  descended

to  their  families,  wherein  these  professions  were  here

ditary,  as  were  their  Marshal,  and  the  rest  of  their  of

ficers.     After  the  introducing  Christianity,  the  Druid

was  succeeded  by  a  Bishop  or  Priest,  but  the  rest  con

tinued  on  the  antient  foot  :  insomuch,  that  for  a  long

time  after  the  English  Conquest,  the  Judges,  the  Bards,

Physicians,  and  Harpers,  held  such  tenures  in  Ireland.

The  ODuvegans  were  the  hereditary  Bards   of  the

OKellies,  the  OClerys  and  the  OBrodins  were  also

hereditary  Antiquaries  :  the  O  Sheils  and  the  O  Can

cans  were  such  hereditary  Doctors,   the  Maglanchys

such  hereditary  Judges,  and  so  of  the  rest  ;  for  more

examples,  especially  in  this  place,  are  needless  :  it

M


90  THE  HISTORY


wou'd  be  but  multiplying  of  names,  without  ever  mak
ing  the  subject  clearer.  Only  I  must  remark  here,
from  the  very  nature  of  things,  no  less  than  from  facts,
that,  tho'  CESAR  be  silent  about  it,  there  were  civil
Judges  in  G'aule  just  as  in  Ireland,  yet  under  the  direc
tion  and  controll  of  the  Druids.  This  has  led  many
to  imagine,  that,  because  the  Druids  influenced  all,
there  were  therefore  no  other  judges,  which  is  doubt
less  an  egregious  mistake.

XV.  Further,  thoT  the  Druids  were  exemted  from
bearing  arms,  yet  they  finally  determined  concerning
Peace  and  War  :  and  those  of  that  order,  who  attend
ed  the  King  and  the  Nobles,  were  observed  to  be  the
greatest  make-bates  and  incendiaries ;  the  most  averse
to  Peace  in  Council,  and  the  most  cruel  of  all  others
in  Action.  Some  of  them  were  ally'd  to  Kings,  and
many  of  them  were  King's  sons,  and  great  numbers  of
them  cull'd  out  of  the  best  families  :  which  you  see  is
an  old  trick,  but  has  not  been  always  effectual  enough
to  perpetuate  an  order  of  men.  This  however  made
Historians  not  to  forget  them,  and  indeed  several  of
them  render'd  themselves  very  remarkable;  as  the
Druid  TROSDAN,  who  found  an  antidote  against  the
poyson'd  arrows  of  certain  Brittish  invaders  :  (86)
CABADIUS,  grandfather  to  the  most  celebrated  cham
pion  (81)  CUCULANI>;  (88)  T AGES  the  father  of  MOR-

(86)  CATHBATD.

(87)  CUCHULAID.

(88)  TADHG.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  91

NA,  mother  to  the  no  less  famous  (S9)  FIN  MAC  CUIL  :

DADBR,  who  was  kill'd  by  EOGAN,  son  to  OLILL  OLOM

King   of  Minister  ;    which   EOGAN  was    marry'd   to

MOINIC,  the  daughter  of  the  Druid  DILL.    The  Druid

MOGRUTH.  the  son  of  Sinduinn,  was  the  stoutest  man

in  the  wars  of  King  CORMAC  :  nor  less  valiant  was

(90)  Dubcomar,   the  chief  Druid  of  King   FIACHA  ;

and  Lugadius  Mac-Con  the  abdicated  King  of  Ireland,

was  treacherously  run  thro'  the  body  with  a  lance  by

the  Druid  ( 91)  Firchisus.     IDA  and  ONO,    Lords  of

Corcachlann  near  Roscommon,  were  Druids  ;   wherof

ONO  presented  his  fortress  of  Imleach-Ono  to  Patric,

who  converted  it  into  the  religious  house  of  Elphin,

since  an  (92)  Episcopal  See.     From  the  very  name  of

(93)  LAMDERG,   or  Bloody-hand,   we  learn  what  sort

of  man  the  Druid  was,  who  by  the  vulgar  is  thought

to  live  inchanted  in  the  mountain  between  Bunncranach

and  (94)  Fathen  in  the  county  of  Dunegall.    Nor  must

we   forget,    tho*   out   of    order  of  time,    King   (95)

NIALL  of  the  nine  hostage's  Arch-Druid,  by  name  (96)

(89)    FINN  MHAC  CUBHAILL.

(30)  DUBHCHOMAR.

(1)1)    FEARCHIOS.

(•92)  Ailfinn,  from  a  vast  Obelise  that  stood  by  a  well  m
that  place ;  and  that  fell  down  in  the  year  1675.  The  word
signifies  the  white  Stone,  and  was  corrupted  into  Oi/finn.
borne  wou'd  derive  the  name  from  the  clearness  of  the
fountain,  but  'tis  by  torture:  others  from  one  OILFINN,  3
Danish  commander.

(03)   LAMBHDEARG.

(94)  Taobhsaoil-treach.

(95)  NIALL  NAOIGHI-ALLACH.

[%)  LAIGIIICHIN  MHAC  BARRECHEADHA,


92  THE  HISTORY

LAGICINUS  BARCHEDIUS  ;  who  procured  a  most  cruel
war  against  EOCHA  King  of  Munster,  for  committing
manslaughter  on  his  son  ;  and  which  the  Druids  mak
ing  a  common  cause,  there  was  no  honor,   law,  or  hu
manity  observ'd  towards  this  King  ;  whose  story,   at
length  in  our  book,  will  stand  as  a  lasting  monument
of  Druidical  bloodiness,  and  a  Priest-ridden  State.     I
conclude  with  BACRACH,  chief  Druid  to  CONCHOBHAR
NESS  AN  King  of  Ulster,  who  is  fabl'd  by  the  Monks
long  after  the  extinction  of  the  Druids,  to  have  before
it  happened,  others  say  at  the  very  time,  describ'd  the
Passion  of  Jesus  Christ,   in  so  lively  and  moveing  a
manner  ;   that  the  King  transported  with  rage  drew
his  sword,  and  with  inexpressible  fury  fell  a  hacking
and  hewing  the  trees  of  the  wood  where  he  then  was,
which  he  mistook  for  the  Jews:   nay,  that  he  put  him
self  into  such  a  heat  as  to  dy  of  this  frenzy.   But  even
O  Flaherty  fully   confutes    this  silly  fiction,  (97)  not
thinking  it  possible  that  such  circumstances  cou'd  be
any  way  inferred  from  an  Eclipse,   which  is  the  foun
dation  of  the  story,  noi  that  a  clearer  revelation  shou'd
be  made  of  those  things  to  the  Irish  Druids,  than  to
the  Jewish  Prophets  ;  and,  finally,  by  shewing,   that
Conchobhar  dy'd  quietly  in  his  bed  fifteen  years  after
the  crucifixion  of  Christ.     BACRACH   however  was  a
great  man,  and  the  King  himself  had  a  Druid  for  his
step-father  and  instructor.

XVI.   It  can  be  no  wonder  therefore,  that  men  thus
(97)    Ogyg.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


sacred  in  their  function,  illustrious  in  their  alliances,
eminent  for  their  learning,  and  honour'd  for  their  valor,
as  well  as  dreaded  for  their  power  and  influence,  should
also  be  memorable  both  in  the  poetry  and  prose  of  their
country.     And  so  in  fact  they  are,  notwithstanding
what  DUDLEY  FORBES,  before  mention'd,  did,  in  a  let
ter  to  an   Irish  writer,  (98)  in  the  year  1683,  affirm:
namely,  that,  in  PATRICKS  time  no  fewer  than  180  Vo
lumes,  relating  to  the  affairs  of  the  Druids,  were  burnt
in  Ireland.     Dr.  KENNEDY  says,  (99)  that  PATRIC  burnt
300  volumns,  stuft  with  the  fables  and  superstitions  of
Heathen  Idolatry :  unfit,  adds  he;  to  be  transmitted  to
posterity.     But,  pray,  how  so?  why  are  Gallic  or  Irish
superstitions  more  unfit  to  be  transmitted  to  posterity,
than  those  of  the  Greecs  ^md  Romans  ?    Why  shou'd
PATRIC  be  more  squeamish  in  this  respect  than  MOSES
or  the  succeding  Jewish  Prophets,  who  have  transmit
ted  to  all  ages  th*  Idolatries  of  the  Egyptians,  Pheni-
cians,  Caldeans,  and  other  Eastern  nations  ?  What  an
irreparable  destruction  of  history,  what  a  deplorable
extinction  of  arts  and  inventions,  what  an  unspeakable
detriment  to  Learning,  what  a  dishonor  upon  human
understanding,  has  the  cowardly  proceeding  of  the  ig
norant,  or  rather  of  the  interested,  against  unarm'd
monuments  at  all  times  occasion'd!  And  yet  this  book-
burning  and  letter-murdring  humor,  tho'  far  from  being
commanded  by  CHRIST,  has  prevail'd  in  Christianity

(98)  O  FLAHERTY.

(99)  Dissertation  about  ike  Family  of  the  STUARTS,  Pref,
page  29.


94  THE  HISTORY


from  the  beginning :  as  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we
read,  (IOOJ  that  many  of  them  which  believ'd~and  us'd
curious  arts,  brought  their  books  together •,  and  burnt
them  before  all  men ;  and  they  counted  the  price  of  them,
and  found  it  Jifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver,  or  about
three  hundred  pounds  sterling.  This  was  the  first  in
stance  of  burning  books  among  Christians ;  and  ever
since  that  time  the  example  has  been  better  follow'd,
then  any  precept  of  the  Gospel.

XVII.  From  what  we  have  hitherto  observ'd,  you
see  that  our  Historians,  My  Lord,  do,  in  spite  of  all
chances,  abound  with  matter  enough  to  revive  and  il
lustrate  the  memory  of  the  Druids.  Besides  that  the
rites  and  opinions  of  other  nations  serve  not  only  to
give  light  to  theirs,  but  were  many  of  them  of  Druidi-
cal  or  Celtic  extraction.  This  no  body  will  deny  of
the  Aboriginal  Italians,  who  having  been  often  over
run  by  the  Gauls,  and  having  several  Gallic  Colonies
planted  among  them,  they  partook  both  of  their  Lan
guage  and  Religion  ;  as  will  be  very  easily  evinc'd  in
our  Dissertation,  and  has  been  already  tolerably  done
by  father  PEZRON  in  his  Celtic  Originals.  Diogenes
Laertius,  in  the  Proem  of  his  Philosophical  History,
reckons  the  Druids  among  the  chief  Authors  of  the
Barbarous  Theology  and  Philosophy,  long  anterior  to
the  Greecs,  their  disciples:  andPhurnvtus,  in  his  treatise
of  the  nature  of  the  Gods,  says  most  (101)  expresly,  that
(100)  Acts  19.  19.

(101)     Ton  de  pollas  kai  poikilas  peri  theon  grgonenai  para  tois  palaiois  Hel-
Itfsi  mythopoias,    hos  allai  men  epi  Magois  gcgonasiu,    allai  de  par'    aigyptiois


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  95

among  the  many  and  various  fables  which  the  antient
Greecs  had  about  the  Gods,  some  were  derived  from  the
Mages,  some  from  the  Egyptians  and  Gauls,  others
from  the  Africans  and  Phrygians,  and  others  from  o-
ther  nations :  for  which  he  cites  Homer  as  a  witness,
nor  is  there  any  thing  that  bears  a  greater  witness  to
it  self.  This  however  is  not  all :  for,  over  and  above
the  several  helps  I  have  mention'd,  there  are  likewise
numerous  monuments  of  the  worship  of  the  Druids,
their  valor,  policy,  and  manner  of  habitation,  still  re
maining  in  France,  in  Britain,  in  Ireland,  and  in  the
adjacent  Islands  ;  many  of  'em  intire,  and  the  rest  by
the  help  of  these  easily  conceiv'd.  Most  are  of  stone,
as  the  lesser  ones  are  of  glass,  and  others  of  earth  bak'd
extremely  hard.  The  two  last  kinds  were  ornaments
or  magical  gems,  as  were  also  those  of  Chrystal  and
Agat,  either  perfectly  spherical,  or  in  the  figure  of  a
lentill  ;  or  shap'd  after  any  of  the  other  ways,  which
shall  be  describ'd  and  portrayed  in  our  book.  The
Glass  Amulets  or  Ornaments  are  in  the  Lowlands  of
Scotland,  call'd  Adder-stanes,  and  by  the  Welsh  Gleini
na  Droedh,  or  Druid-Glass,  which  is  in  Irish  Glaine
nan  Druidhe,  Glaine  in  this  language  signifying  Glass,
tho'  obsolete  now  in  the  Welsh  dialect,  and  preserv'd
only  in  this  Gleini  na  Droedh.  But  the  more  massy
Monuments  shall,  in  a  day  or  two,  be  the  subject  of
another  Letter  from,  My  LORD,

Your  Lordship's  most  oblig'd  and  very
June  25,  1718.  Humble  Servant.

kai  Keltois,  kai  Libysi,  kai  Phryxi,  kai  tois  allois  ethnesi.  Cap.  17.  Thus  the
Jdanusciipt  very  accurate/)/:  kiti  the  printed  <vpj/  has  tois  allois  Hellesi  superflu
ously  in  the  end,  and  wants  Phryx.  before,  which  is  very  esfcntiul.


THE   SECOND

LETTER,

To   the   Eight  Honourable   the   Lord
VISCOUNT  MOLESWORTH.


p


ERMIT  me  at  this  time,  My  Lord,  according  to  the
promise  with  which  I  concluded  my  last,  to  send  to
your  Lordship  A  Specimen  of  the  Monuments  relating
to  the  Druids,  that  are  still  extant,  either  intire  or  im
perfect.     I  have  ever  indeavour'd  to  avoid  deserving
the   blame,  with  which   an  approv'd  author  charges
those  ;  who,  while  very  conversant  in  the  history  of  o-
ther  places,  appear  to  be  absolute  strangers  in  their
own  country  :  and  as  I  know  no  man  better  versed  in
foren  affairs  or  in  our  own,  which  an  able  statesman
will  never  separate,  nor  a  greater  master  of  antient  or
modern  history  than  yourself ;  so  I  am  apt  to  hope,
that  the  collection  of  Brittish  and  Irish  Antiquities  I
here   take    the    liberty    to   present    to   your   Lord
ship,    may  not  prove  altogether   disagreeable.     The
French  examples,  a  few  excepted,    I  reserve  for  the
larger  work,  and  in  the  mean  time  I  procede.     On  the
tops  of  mountains  and  other  eminences  in  Ireland,  in
Wales,  in  Scotland,  in  the  Scottish  Hands  and  in  the
He  of  Man,  where  things  have  been  least  disordered  or
displac'd  by  the  frequency  of  inhabitants,   or  want  of
better  ground  for  cultivation,  there  are  great  heaps  of


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


stones,  like  the(l)MEBcuRiAL  heaps  (2)  of  the  Greecs,
whereof  when  we  treat  of  the  Celtic  MERCURY  in  par
ticular.     The  heaps,  which  make  my  present  subject,
consist   of  stones  of  all  sorts,  from  one  pound  to   a
hundred.     They  are  round  in  form,  and  somewhat  ta
pering  or  diminishing  upwards  :  but  en  the  summit
was  always  a  flat  stone,  for  a  use  we  shall  presently
explain.     These  heaps   are  of  all  bignesses,  some  of
them  containing  at  least  a  hundred  cartload  of  stones  :
and  if  any  of  'em  be  grown  over  with  earth,  'tis  pure
ly  accident  in  the  long  course  of  time  wherein  they
have  been  neglected  ;   for  HO  such  thing  was  intended
in  the  first  making  of  them,  as  in  the  sepulchral  bar
rows  of  the  Gothic  nations,  which  are  generally    of
earth.     Such  a  heap  is  in  the  antient  Celtic  language,
and  in  every  dialect   of  it,   call'd  CARN  ;  and  every
Cam  so  disposed,  as  to  be  in  sight  of  some  other.    Yet
they  are  very  different  from  the  rude  and  much  smaller
pyramyds,  which  the  old  Irish  erect  along  the  roads  in
memory  of  the  dead,  by  them  calFd  Leachda,  and  made
of  the  first  stones  that   offer.     From   the   devotional
rounds  perform'd  about  the  Cams  in  times  of  Heathen
ism,  and  which,  we  shall  see  anon,  are  ret  continued
in  many  places  of  the  Scottish  Highlands  and  the  He
brides,  any  circle,  or  turning  about,  is  in  Armoric  call
ed  cer?i  (3)  as  CERNA  in  that  dialect  is  to  make  such  a

(1)     Prossoreuousi  de  tous  lithous  tois  Hermais  heoastos  ton  parion'on;  hena
t:r.;t  autois  prostetheis,  tXc.     PHURVUT.  dc  Nat.  Dor.  cap,  16.

(  2)     Hermdia,  i.  e.  Accrvi  Nercurlnles.

(3}     C  is  pronounc'd  as  A^.

N


9*  THE  HISTORY


turn.  On  the  Carn  call'd  Crig-y-dyrn,  in  the  parish
of  Tre'lech  in  Carmarthenshire,  the  flat  stone  on  the
top  is  three  yards  in  length,  five  foot  over,  and  from
ten  to  twelve  inches  thick.  The  circumference  of  this
Carn  at  the  bottom  is  about  sixty  yards,  and  'tis  about
six  yards  high  ;  the  ascent  being  very  easy,  tho'  I  sup
pose  there  was  originally  a  ladder  for  this  purpose.

II.     Let  this  Carn  serve  for  an  example  of  the  rest,
as  to  their  form  and  bulk  ;   only  we  may  take  notice
here  by  the  way,  what  odd  imaginations  men  are  apt
to  have  of  things  they  do  not  understand.     Thus  Mr.
WILLIAM  SACHEVERELL,  Governor  of  the  lie  of  Man
under  the  right  honorable  the  Earl  of  Derby  in  part
of  King  William's  reign,  mistaking  these  Cams  in  his
(4)  Description  of  that  Hand,  "  The  tops  of  the  moun-
«  tains  (says  he),  seem  nothing  but  the  rubbish  of  na-
*  ture,   thrown  into  barren  and  unfruitful  heaps,   as
"  near  two  thirds  of  the  Hand  are  of  this  sort.     Some
"  seem  particularly  worthy  our  remark,  as  the  two  Ba-
"  rowls,  Skeyall,  the  Watch-hill  of  Knock-a-low  :  but
"  particularly  Sneafeld,  where  it  is  not  unpleasant,"
(continues  he),  "  when  the  weather  is  clear  and  se-
w  rene,  to  see  three  noble  nations  surrounding  one  of
"  the  most  obscure  in  the  universe :  which  is,  as  it  were,
"  the  center  of  the  Brittish  empire."  These  heaps  our
author  thought  the  work  of  chance,  tho'  artfully  con-
triv'd  in  all  the  Celtic   countries  ;   as  Dr.  MARTIN
thought  a  Carn  in  the  He  of  SAINT  KILDA,  wherof  pre-
14)    Page  13.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


sentry,  to  be  a  signal  effect  of  Providence  :  But  as  for
the  Mannian  nation,  which  is  visibly  the  center  of  the
Brittish  world,  it  is  very  undeservedly  become  obscure,
whether  we  consider  wha,t  has  been  transacted  in  for
mer  ages,  it  having  been  the  theater  of  many  surpriz
ing  revolutions  :  or  the  particular  usages  in  religious
and  civil  affairs,  that  even  now  obtain  there,  especially
their  laws,  which  still  continue  mostly  unwritten,  for
which  reason  they  call  them  Breast-laws,  being  with
out  expense  or  delay,  and  undoubted  remains  of  the
justice  of  the  Druids.     For,  wherever  they  were  not
themselves  a  party,  neither  the  Egyptians,  nor  Persians,
nor  Greecs,  nor  Romans,  did  surpass  the  wisdom,  e-
quity,  and  strictness  of  the  Druids  in  the  sanction  or
execution  of  their  laws  ;  which  made  all  sorts  of  men
leave  their  controversies  of  every  kind  to  their  deter
mination,  without  any  further  appeal.  Nor  without  some
regard  in  fact,  and  a  vast  deal  more  in  profession,    to
moral  virtue,  cou'd  any  set  of  Impostors  in  any  count
ry  possibly  support  their  false  doctrines  and  supersti
tious  observances  ;  which  receive  credit  from  hence,  as
the  teachers  of  'em  do  all  their  power  and  authority,
in  proportion  to  the  austerities  they  practise,  or  the  ap
pearances  they  have  of  devotion.     I  say  appearances,
because  this  in  most,  join'd  to  real  self-denial  in  a  few,
who  by  the  rest  are  deem'd  silly  tho'  useful  creatures,
will  long  uphold  an  institution  both  erroneous  and  ty
rannical  :  which  is  the  reason  that,  to  this  hour,  the
memory  of  the  Druids  is  highly  venerable  among  those
of  the  He  of  Man  ;  and  that  their  laws  are  infinitely


100  THE  HISTORY


preferr'd  to  all  otlrers  by  the  Manksmen,  who  say  the
family  of  Derby  comes  nearest  their  excellence  of  any
r::ce  of  men  now  in  the  world.     Wherefore,  as  well  in
these  regards,  as  in  many  others  essential  to  my  de
sign,  I  shall,  in  the  body  of  the  history,  give  a  true  idea-
of  the  past  and  present  customs  of  this  antientr  though
rnixt  people.    Their  numerous  Cams,  of  whose  origin
anon,  are  not  the  onely  monuments  they  have  of  the
Druids.     But  that  the  chief  College  of  these  Philoso
phers  was  ever  _  establish  VI  there,    and  much  less  any
such  College  appointed  by  the  Kings  of  Scotland,    as
Hector  Boethius  feign  tf,  I  shall  demonstrate  to  be  pure
romance  :  and  at  the  same  time  will  not  fail  doing  jrcs-
ticeto  the  memory  of  the  greatHero  and  Legislator  of  the
Hand,  MANANNAN  ;  reported,  after  the  manner  of  those
ages,  to  have  been  the  Son  of  (5)  LEAR,  or  the  God  of
the  Sea,  from  his  extraordinary  skill  in  navigation  and
commerce.     He  was  truely  the  son  of  (6)  ALLADIUS,
who  was  of  royal  blood,  and  is  own  name  Orbsen ;  but
call'd  Manannan  from  his  country,    and  kill'd  by  one
ULLIN  near  Galway,  in  Ireland :  of  all  which  the  par
ticulars  will  be  given  in  their  proper  place,  especially-
the  Republic  of  'MANANNAN  ;  who,  from  his  instruction?
by  the  Druids,  was  reputed  a  consummate  Magician,
and  was  indeed  most  happy  in  stratagems  of  war  both
by  land  and  sea.     Mr.  Sacheverell,  except  in  affirming
Manannan,  whom  he  mis-names  Mannan.,  to  have  beea

(5)     MANANNAN  MHAC  LEIR.

(G)      ALLAIDi


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  101

(7)  the  father,  founder,  and  legislator  of  the  Hand,  is
out  in  every  thing  he  says  concerning  him  :  for,  in
stead  of  living  about  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,
he  liv'd  as  many  centuries  before  Christ ;  and  so  cou'd
not  be  contemporary  with  Patric,  the  Apostle  of  Man
as  well  as  Ireland,  Neither  was  Manannan  the  son  of  a
King  of  Ulster,  nor  yet  the  brother  of  FERGUS  II.  (8)
King  of  Scotland  :  and  as  for  his  not  being  able  to  get
any  information  what  became  of  him,  I  have  already
told  that  he  was  kill'd  in  Ireland,  and  by  whom,

III.  In  process  of  time  the  Cams,  to  which  we  now
return,  serv'd  eveiy  where  for  beacons,  as  many  of  them
as  stood  conveniently  for  this  purpose  :  but  they  were
originally  design'd,  as  we  are  now  going  to  see,  for
fires  of  another  nature.  The  fact  stood  thus.  On  May-
eve  the  Druids  made  prodigious  fires  on  those  CarnS;
which  being  every  one,  as  we  said,  in  sight  of  some  o-
ther,  cou'd  not  but  afford  a  glorious  show  over  a  whole
nation.  These  fires  were  in  honour  of  Beal  or  Bealan9
latiniz'd  by  the  Roman  authors  into  (9)  Belenus,  by
which  name  the  Gauls  and  their  colonies  understood  the
Sun  :  and  therefore  to  this  hour  the  first  day  of  May
is  by  the  Ab-original  Irish  call'd  La  Bealteine,  or  the
day  of  Bel  ens  fire  (10),  I  remember  one  of  those  Cams

(7)  Page  20,

(8)  Ibid.

(9)  Herodi'in.  Alison.  Capitolin.  Tertul.  $c.  Videantuf
€tiam  Grutcr.  et  Reims,  in  Inscriptionibus.

(10)  Etiam  Bealltaine,  #  antiquitus  Beltine.


102  THE  HISTORY


on  Fawn-hill  within  some  miles  of  Londonderry,  known
by  no  other  name  but  that  of  Bealteine,  facing  another
such  Carn  on  the  top  of  Inch-hill  :  and  GREGORY  of
Tours,  in  his  book  de  Gloria  Confessor  urn,  mentions  a
(11)  hill  of  the  same  name  (12)  between  Artom  and
Kiom  in  Auvergne  in  France,  from  which  Riom
might  be  fairly  view'd.  But  tho'  later  writers  affirm
with  Valesius,  in  his  Galliarum  notiiia^  this  hill
to  be  now  unknown  ;  yet  Helen's  heap  on  the  top  of  it,  is
a  sure  mark  whereby  to  discover  it.  His  circular  tem
ple,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  is  still  there,  if  not  the
the  Carn,  having  certainly  existed  in  Gregory's  time.
Abundance  of  such  heaps  remain  still  on  the  mountains
in  France,  and  on  the  Alps.  Those  writers  however  are
not  to  be  blamed,  as  being  strangers  to  the  origin  or
use  of  such  heaps  ;  and  not  able  to  distinguish  them
from  certain  other  heaps,  under  which  robbers  and
traitors  were  bury'd.  These  last  are  call'd  in  general
by  the  Welsh  Carn-Vraduyr  and  Carn-Lhadron  (13)  ;
or  particularly  after  the  proper  names  of  the  underly
ing  criminals,  as  Carnedh-Leuelyny  Carnedh-David,
and  such  like.  As  far  from  Auvergne  as  the  Hand  of
Saint  KILDA,  in  the  58th  degree  of  northern  latitude,
there  is  another  hill  denominated  from  Belenus,  which
more  consonant  to  the  Celtic  idiom  Herodian


(11)  Cum  [ex  Artonensi  vico]  venisset  in.  cacumen  montis
Belenatensis,  de  quo  vici  Ricomagensis  positio  conUmplatyrt
vidit  hos,  4rc.     De  Gloria  Confessor,  cap.  5.

(12)  Mons  Beleriatensis.

(13)  Traitor  and  thiefs  Carn  :  in  Irish  Carn-bhrateoir
&  Carn  an  JLadroin.

(14)  Lib.  8.  Cap.  7.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.       ,  103

writes  Belin,  corruptly  call'd  Otter-Veaul(15),or  Beleris
heigth  ;  on  which  is  a  vast  heap,  whereof  Doctor  Mar
tin,  in  his  account  of  that  Hand,  did  not  know  the  use,
as  I  said  before  (16) :  but  the  Carn  being  on  the  hill
just  above  the  landing  place,  he  thinks  it  so  order'd  by
Providence  ;  that  by  rouling  down  these  stones,  the  in
habitants  might  prevent  any  body's  coming  ashore
against  their  will.  In  the  church  of  Birsa,  near  which
stands  a  very  remarkable  Obelise,  at  the  west  end  of
the  Hand  call'd  Po??iona,  or  the  mainland,  in  Orkney,
there  is  an  erect  stone,  with  the  word  BELUS  inscrib'd
on  it  in  antient  characters.  Yet  whether  this  be  any
remembrance  of  BELENUS,  better  according  to  the  Irish
idiom  BELUS,  or  be  the  Monument  of  a  native  Prince
so  calFd,  I  shall  not  here  decide.  The  fact  it  self  is
told  us  by  Mr.  BRAND  (17),  in  his  Description  of  Ork
ney  and  Zetland.  I  wish  he  had  also  told  us,  of  what
kind  those  antient  characters  are,  or  that  he  had  exact
ly  copy'd  them :  and  if  there  be  a  man's  portraiture  on
the  stone;  as  Dr.  Martin  affirms  (18),  the  dress  and
posture  will  go  a  great  way  towards  clearing  the
matter.

IV.  But  to  make  no  longer  digression,  May-day  is
likewise  call'd  La  Bealteine  by  the  Highlanders  of
Scotland,  who  are  no  contemtible  part  of  the  Celtic

(15)  Uachdar  BHEIL.

(16)  Page  64.

(17)  Page  14.

(18)  Page  358.


104  THE  HISTORY


off-spring.     So  it  is  in  the  He  of  Man :  and  in  Armoric
a  Priest  is  still  call'd  Belec,  or  the  servant  of  Bel,  and
Priesthood  Belegieth.      Two  such  fires,  as  we  have
mention'd,  were  kindl'd  by  one  another  on  May-eve  in
every  village  of  the  nation,  as  well  throout  all  Gaule,
as  in  Britain,  Ireland,  and  the  adjoining  lesser  Hands,
between  which  fires  the  men  and  the  beasts  to  be  sa-
crific'd  were  to  pass  ;  from  whence  came  the  proverb,
between  Bel's  (19)  two  fires,  meaning  one  in  a  great
strait,  not  knowing  how  to  extricate  himself.     One  of
the  fires  was  on  the  Carn,  another  on  the  ground.    On
the  eve  of  the  first  day  of  November  (20),  there  were
also  such  fires  kindl'd,  accompany'd,  as  they  constantly
were,  with  sacrifices  and  feasting.     These  November
fires  were  in  Ireland  call'd    Tine  tlach*d-gha9   from
llach'd-gha  (21),  a  place  hence  so  call'd  in  Meath,
where  the  Arch-Druid  of  the  realm  had  his  fire  on  the
said  eve ;  and  for  which  piece  of  ground,  because  origi
nally  belonging  to  Minister,  but  appointed  by  the  su
preme  Monarch  for  this  use,  there  was  an  annual  ac
knowledgement,  caird  sgrcaboll,  paid  to  the  King  of
that  Province.     But  that  all  the  Druids  of  Ireland  as-
sembl'd  there  on  the  first  of  November,   as  several
authors  injudiciously  write ;  is  not  only  a  thing  impro
bable,  but  also  false  in  fact :  nor  were  they  otherwise
there  at  that  time,  nor  all  at  any  time  together  in  one
place,  but  as  now  all  the  Clergy  of  England  are  said

(19)    Ittir  dha  theine  BHEIL.

('*0)     Samhbhuin.
(21)     Fire-grounJ.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  105

ra-niiiii-nni   ima7».T..t.,.«  i.  .....  .,..„...—  ...,-..          lf,  ......  ml  „„    MMaMj..ji_i«gBtMiiiMa

to  be  present  in  their  Convocations  ;  that  is,  by  their
representatives  and  delegates.  Thus  Cesar  is  likewise
to  be  understood,  when,  after  speaking  of  the  Arch-
Druid  of  Gaule,  he  says  that  (22)  the  Druids  at  a  cer
tain  time  of  the  Year  assembled  in  a  consecrated  grove
in  the  country  of  the  Carnutes  (23),  which  is  reckoned
the  middle  region  of  all  Gaule.  But  of  these  assemblies
in  their  place.  On  the  foresaid  eve  all  the  people  of
the  country,  out  of  a  religious  persuasion  instill'd  into
them  by  the  Druids,  extinguish'd  their  fires  as  intirely;
as  the  Jews  are  wont  to  sweep  their  houses,  the  night
before  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread.  Then  every  master
of  a  family  was  religiously  oblig'd,  to  take  a  portion  of
the  consecrated  fire  home,  and  to  kindle  the  fire  a  new
in  his  house,  which  for  the  ensuing  year  was  to  be  lucky
and  prosperous.  He  was  to  pay  however  for  his  future
happiness,  whether  the  event  prov'd  answerable  or  not  ;•
and  tho'  his  house  shou'd  be  afterwards  burnt,  yet  he
must  deem  it  the  punishment  of  some  new  sin,  or  ascribe
it  to  any  thing,  rather  than  to  want  of  virtue  in  the
consecration  of  the  fire,  or  of  validity  in  the  benedic
tion  of  the  Druid  ;  who,  from  officiating  at  the  Cam-,
was  likewise  call'd  (24)  Cairneach,  a  name  that  con-
tinu'd  to  signify  a  Priest,  even  in  the  Christian  times.


(22)  If.  £Druidcs~]  rcrto  anni  tempore  injinibus
quae  rcgio  tofius  Galliae  media  habetur\  consMunt  in  lucr
consecrato.    De  hello  Gallico.  lib.  (5.  cap.  13


(C3)  Now  h  Pais  Chartrain,  the  place?  '

(£4)    This  is  the  true,  origin  of  theUvord  €tairneach,  R.I
signifying  a  Priest  :  but  not  derived,  as  men  ignorant  r-f

o


10(5  THE  HISTORY


But  if  any  man  had  not  clear' d  with  the  Druids  for  the
last  year's  dues,  he  was  neither  to  have  a  spark  of  this
holy  fire  from  the  Carns,  nor  durst  any  of  his  neighbors
let  him  take  the  benefit  of  theirs,  under  pain  of  Ex
communication  ;  which,  as  managed  by  the  Druids,
was  worse  than  death.  If  he  wou'd  brew  therefore  or
bake,  or  roast  or  boil,  or  warm  himself  and  family,  in
a  word,  if  lie  wou'd  live  the  winter  out,  the  Druids
dues  must  be  paid'  by  the  last  of  October :  so  that  this
trick  alone  was  mare-effectual,  than  are  all  the  Acts
of  Parliament  made  for  recovering  our  present  Cler
gy's  dues  :  which  Acts  are  so  many  and  so  frequent,
that  the  bare  enumeration  of  them  wou'd  make  an
indifferent  voluim  Wherefore  I  cannot  but  admire
the  address  of  'die  Druids,  in  fixing  this  ceremony
of  rekindling  family-fires  to  the  beginning  of  Novem
ber,  rather  than  to  May  or  Midsummer,  when  there
was  an  equal  oppoTtuaky  for  it.

V.  A  world  of  places  (25)  are  denominated  from
those  Cams  of  all  sorts,  as  in'  Wales  C or  n-Lhe  chart,
Carn-Lhaid  ;  in  Scotland  Cam-  Wath,  Carn-tullock,
Drum-cairn,  Glen-cairn ;  in  Ireland  Cam-mail,  Cam-
aret,  Carnan-tagher,  Carnan-tober  (26)  ;  and  in  Nor
thumberland,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  North  of  Eng
land,  they  are  sometimes  call'd  Laws  or  Lows,  a  name

antiquity  fancy,  from  Coroineach,  alluding  to  the  crown-
fortn'd  tonsure  of  the  Monks,  not  near  so  old  as  this  word.

(25)  The  places  are  numberless  in  all  these  countries,,

(26)  Carnan  is  the  diminutive  of  Cam.


'OF  THE  DRUIDS.  107

they  also  give   the  Gothic   Barrows.     The  Lowland
Scots  call  'em  in  the  plural  number  Cairns,  whence  se~
.  veral  Lordships  are  nam'd,  as  one  in  Lennox,   another
in  Galloway,  to  mention  no  more,  from  which  the  sur
name  of  CAIRNS.     The  family  of  CARNE,  in  Wales,  is
from  the  like  origin al.:  but  eiot,  as  some  have  thought,
the  OK.EARNYS  (27)  of  Ireland  ;  «one  of  which,  Mr,
JOHN  KEARNY,  Treasurer  of  Saint  PATRIC'S  in  Dublin,
was  very  instrumental  in  getting  the  New  Testament
translated  into  Irish,  about  the  end  of  the  last  century
but  one.     As  to  this  fire-worship,  which,  by  the  way,
prevail'd  over  all  the  world,  the  Celtic   nations  kind*
led  other  fires  on  midsummer  eve,  which  are  still  con
tinued  by  the  Roman  Catholics  of  Ireland  ;  making-
them  in  all  their  grounds,  and  carrying  flaming  brands
about  their  Corn-fields.     This  they  do  likewise  all  o-
ver  France,  arid  in  some  of  the  Scottish  lies.     These
Midsummer  fires  and  sacrifices,  were  to  obtain  a  bles
sing  on  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  now  becoming  ready  for
gathering  ;   as  those    of  the  first   of  May,  that  the/
might  prosperously  grow  :  and  those  of  the  last  of  Oc
tober,  were  a  Thanksgiving  for  finishing  their  Harvest.
But  in  all  of  'em  regard  was  also  had  to  the  several  de
grees  of  increase  and  decrease  in  the  heat  of  the  Sun  ;
an   in  treating  of  their  Astronomy,    and  manner   pf
reckoning  time,  we  shall  clearly  show.    Their  ether
trials,  with  their  peculiar  observations,  shall  be  likewise
explain'd  each  in  their  proper  Sections;  especially  thai
of  New-years  day,  or  the  tenth  of  March,  their  fcurlr.
(27)    0  Cca/vraig/tj  besides  0 Ceatharnaigh.


108  THE  HISTORY


grand  festival,  which  was  none  of  the  least  solemn :  and
which  was  the  day  of  seeking,  cutting,  and  consecra
ting  their  wonder-working  All-heaL  or  Misselto  of  Oak.
This  is  the  ceremony  to  which  VIRGIL  alludes  by  his
golden-branch,  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid,   for
which  there  is  incontestable  proof,  which  we  shall  give
in  a  section  on  this  subject.  "Tis  PLINY  who  says,  that
the  Druids  call'd  it,  in  their  language,  by  a  word  sig
nifying  (28)  All-heal ;  which  word  in  the  Armorican
dialect  is  oll-yach,  in  the  Welsh  ol-hiach,  and  in  the
Irish  Uil-iceach.     Here  by  the  way,  we  may  observe,
that  as  the  Greecs  had  many  words  from  the  Barbarians,
for  which  PLATO  in  his  (29)  Cratylus,  judges  it  would
be  lost  labor  to  seek  Etymologies  in  their  own  langu
age  :  so  it  is  remarkable,  that  certain  feasts  of  APOLLO
were  call'd  (30)  Carnea,  from  the  killing  of  no  body
knows  what  Prophet  CARNUS.    Some  said  that  he  was
the  son  of  JUPITER  and  EUROPA,  kill'd  for  a  Magician
by  one  ALES  ;  and  others  yet,  that  Garni  was  a  com
mon   name  for  an  order  of  Prophets  in   Acarnania.
APOLLO  himself  was  surnamed  CARNUS  (31) ;  and,  from
him,  May  was  call'd  the  Carnean  Month.     Nay  there
were  Carnean  Priests,  and  a  particular  kind  of  Music,
which  we  may  interpret  the  Cairn-tunes,  was  appro-

(<28)   Ofnniu-spn&ntem  appcllantes  suo  vocabulo,  «Syc.  Lib.
!C\  Cap.  -ii

(£9)    ~Ei  tis  zetoi  tauta  kata   t"n  THler.iken  phoru'n,  ho*  co<Kotr,s  U-itoj  ;  al
ia    iu3  kat'  fkeinor,  ex    lies  to  onrv.rj.i.  tyagehanei'  on,     oi.stha    hoi;    ui-'.ir.-ii  ^n-

littcr  ;yerc,  edit.  Paris.  Vol.  1.  P.IO.  -r

(f-Co  Ta  Karnca.

.  \  Kuracios  m


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  109

priated  to  those  festivals  in  May,  perfectly  answering
those  of  the  Celtic  tribes.  It  is  therefore  highly  proba
ble,  that  the  Greecs  did  learn  these  things  from  the
Gauls  their  conquerors,  and  in  many  places  seated
among  them ;  or  from  some  of  their  travellers  in  Gaule
it  self,  if  not  from  the  Phocean  colony  at  Marseilles.
We  know  further,  that  the  making  of  hymns  was  a
special  part  of  the  Bards  office  ;  who  by  STRABO,  are
expresly  term'd  Hymn-makers  (32) :  and  I  show'd  be
fore,  that  the  antient  Greecs,  by  their  own  confession,
learnt  part  of  their  Philosophy,  and  many  of  their  sa
cred  fables,  from  the  Gauls.  So  that  this  crkicism  is
not  so  void  of  probability,  as  many  which  pass  current
enough  in  the  world.  However,  I  fairly  profess  to  give
it  onely  for  a  conjecture  ;  which  I  think  preferable  to
the  farr-fetcht  and  discordant  accounts  of  the  Greecs :
who,  in  spight  of  PLATO  and  good  sense,  wou'd  needs
be  fishing  for  the  origin  of  every  thing  in  their  own
language.  In  the  mean  time  it  is  not  unworthy  our
remark,  that  as  (33)  Priz  es  were  adjudg'd  to  the  Vic
tors  in  this  Carnean  Music  among  the  Greecs  :  so  the
distributing  of  Prizes  to  the  most  successful  Poets,  was
no  less  usual  among  the  Gauls  and  their  colonies;  where
of  there  is  undeniable  proof  in  the  Brittish  and  Irish
Histories,  as  will  be  seen  in  our  Section  concerning  the
Bards.

VI.      Another  Criticism  relating  immediately  to

(32)  HmnCtai.

(33)  Timotheos— ~-ta  Karnciu  agoiiizcmeacs,     Plutarch,  in  Apophthegm*


liO  THE  HISTORY

»

APOLLO,  for  which  I  think  this  a  proper  place,  I  give
as  something  more  than  a  conjecture.    In  the  Lordship
of  Merchiston,  near  Edinburgh,  was  formerly  dug  up  a
stone  with  an  Inscription  to  Apollo  Grannus ;  concern
ing  which  Sir  James  Dairy  mple  Baronet,  in  his  second
edition  of  Cambderfs  Description  of  Scotland,  thus  ex
presses  himself  after  his  (34)  author.      Who  this  Apol
lo  Grannus  might  be,  and  whence  he,  should  have  his
\  name,  not  one,  to  my  knowledge,  of  our  grave  Senate
of  Antiquaries   hitherto    coiCd    ever  tell.       But   if  I
might   be  allowed,  from   out  of  the  lowest   bench,    to
speak  what  I  think  ;  I  wou'd  say  that  Apollo  Grannus,
among  the  Romans,  was  the  same  that  (35)  Apollon  Aker-
sekomes,  that  is,  APOLLO  with  long  hair,  among  the
Greecs :  for  ISIDORE  calls  the  long  hair  of  the  Goths
GRANNOS.     This  consequence  will  by  no  means  hold  :
for  what  are  the  Goths  to  the  Romans,  who  exprest  this
Greec  by  intonsus  APOLLO  ?     And  since  Goths  speak
ing  Latin  had  as  little  to  do  in  the  shire  of  Lothian,
it  will  not  be  doubted,  but  that  it  was  some  Roman
who  paid  this  vow  ;  as  soon  as  *its  known,  that,  besides
tlie  man's  name  QUINTUS  Lusius  SABINIANUS,  Grian,
among  the  many  (36)  Celtic  names  of  the  Sun,  was

(34)   This  passage  in  C  A  MB  DEN  is  in  the  897th  page  of
CHURCHILL'S  edition,  anno  1695.

(35)  Appollon  akcrseioir.es  item  akeirekoini-s.

(36)  Besides  the  Sun's  religious  attribute  of  BKL,  HJ:AI,
BELIN,  or  BELENUS,  it  is  cail'd  Hat/I  in  Welsh,  Uu^-l  in
Cornish,  Heol  in  Armoric;  in  all  which  the  aspirate  h  is
put  for  s,  as  in  a  world  of  such  oilier  words  :  for  atw  word
beginning  with  .9  in  the  autient  Celtic,  dees  in  the  oblique
cases  begin  with  h.  Yet  ,«?  is  still  n;f?nn'd  in  the  Armono
Disul,  in  the  Cambrian  Dyc//^?/e}  ind  the  Cornubian  l)ez\l^


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  Ui.

one,  being-  the  common  name  of  it  still  in  Irish :  and
that,  from  his  beams,  Greannach  in  the  same  language
signifies  long-hair  d,  which  is  a  natural  epithet  of  the
Sun  in  all  nations^  There  is  no  need  therefore  of  go
ing  for  a  Gothic  derivation  to  Isidore,  in  whom  now  I
read  Scots  instead  of  Goths ;  and  not,  as  I  fancy,  with
out  very  good  reason.  It  wou'd  be  superfluous  to  produce
instances,  the  thing  is  so  common,  to  show  that  the
Romans,  to  their  own  names  of  the  Gods,  added  the
names  or  attributes  under  which  they  were  invok'd  in
the  country,  where  they  happen'd  on  any  occasion  to
sojjourn.  Nor  was  this  manner  of  topical  worship  un
known  to  the  antient  Hebrews,  who  are  forbid  to  fol
low  it  by  Moses  in  these  words  :  (37)  Enquire  not  af
ter  their  Gods,  saying,  how  did  these  nations  serve  their
Gods  ?  even  so  will  I  do  likewise.  GRIAN  therefore
and  GREANNACH  explain  the  (38)  Lothian  Inscription

that  is  to  say,  Sunday.  It  was  formerly  Diasoil  in  Irish,
whence  still  remain  Solus  light,  Soillse  clearness,  Soillseach
bright  or  sunny,  Solleir  manifest,  and  several  more  such,
Tis  nowcall'd  Dia  Domhnaigh,  or  Dies  Dvminicus,  accord
ing  to  the  general  use  of  all  Garistians.

(.37)  Deut.  xii.  30.

^  (38)  This  Inscription,  as  given  us  by  CAMBDEN  from
Sir  PETER  YOUNG,  preceptor  to  King  JAMES  VI.  [for  the.
Laird  of  Merchistou's  Exposition  of  the  Apocalyps  I  never
""^rans  thus:

APOLLINI
GRAXNO

Q.  L  us  i.us

SABINIA

NUS-

*  Procurator,


112  THE  HISTORY

very  naturally,  in  the  antient  language  of  the  Scots
themselves,  spoken  still  in5  the  Highlands  and  Western
lies,  as  well  as  in  Ireland,  Avithout  any  need  of  having
recourse  to  Gothland,  or  other  foren  countries.

VII.     To  return  to  our  Carn-firesr  it  was  customary

for  the  Lord  of  the  place,  or  his  son,    or  some  other

person  of  distinction,   to  take  the  entrals  of  the  sacri-

iic'd  animal  in  his  hands,  and  walking  barefoot  over

the  coals  thrice,  after  the  flames  had  ceas'd,  to  carry

them  strait  to  the  Druid,  who  waited  in  a  whole  skin

at  the  Altar.     If  the  Nobleman  escap'd  harmless,  it

was  reckon'd  a  good  omen,  welcom'd  with  loud  accla

mations  :  but  if  he  receiv'd  any  hurt,  it  was  deem'd

unlucky  both  to  the  community  and  to  himself.    Thus

I  have  seen  the  people  running  and  leaping  thro'  the

St.  John's  fires  in  Ireland,  and  not  onely  proud  of  pas

sing  unsing'd  :  but,  as  if  it  were  some  kind  of  lustra

tion,  thinking  themselves  in  a  special  manner  blest  by

this  ceremony,   of  whose   original  nevertheless  they

were  wholly  ignorant  in  their  imperfect  imitation  of  it,

Yet  without  being  apprized  of  all  this,  no  reader,  how

ever  otherwise  learned,  can  truely  apprehend  the  be-

olnning  of  the  Consul  FLAMINIUS'S  speech  to  EQUAN-

us  the  Sabin,  at  the  battle  of  ThraL*imenus,  thus  intel

ligently  related  by  (39)  SILIUS  ITALICUS.


AUG*

V.  S.  S.  L.  V.  M  *  *  Votum  susceptuni  solvit

lubens  merito.

(39)  Turn  Soracte  satum,  praestantem  corpore  et  armis,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.

Then  seeing  EQUANUS,  near  Soracte  born
In  person,  as  in  arms,  the  comely est  youth ;
Whose  country  manner  'tis,  when  tJi  archer  keen
Divine  APOLLO  joys  in  burning  HEAPS,
The  sacred  Entrals  thro'  the  f  re  unhurt
To  carry  thrice :  so  may  you  always  tread,
With  unscorch'dfeet,  the  consecrated  coals',
And  o'er  the  heat  victorious,  swiftly  bear
The  solemn  gifts  to  picas' d  APOLLO'S  Altar.

Now  let  all  the  Commentators  on  this  writer  be  con
sulted,  and  then  it  will  appear  what  sad  guess-work
they  have  made  about  this  passage ;  which  is  no  less
true  of  an  infinite  number  of  passages  in  other  authors
relating  to  such  customs:  for  a  very  considerable  part  of
Italy  follow'd  most  of  the  Druidical  rites,  as  the  in
habitants  of  such  places  happened  to  be  of  Gallic  ex
traction,  which  was  the  case  of  many  Cantons  in  that
delicious  country.  But  this  is  particularly  true  of  the
Umbrians  and  S'abins,  who  are  by  all  authors  made
the  (40)  antientest  people  of  Italy,  before  the  coming
thither  of  any  Greec  Colonies,  But  they  are  by  (41)

AEQUANUM  noscens\  patrio  cui  ritiis  in  arvo,
J)utn  pius  Arcitenens  incensis  gaudet  ACERVIS,
ttxta  ter  innocuos  fate  portare  per  ignes :
Sic  in  APOLLINEA  semper  vestigia  pruna  *
Imiiolata  terat,  ;  victorque  vaporis,  ad  aras
Dona  serenato  referas  Solennia  PHOSBO.

Lib.  5,  ver.  175.  ,

(40)  Dionys.  Halicarnass.  Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  1.    Plin«
Hist.  Nat.  lib/ 3.  cap,  14.     Flor.  lib.  1.  cap.  17,  &c.

(41)  BOCCHUS  absohit  Gallorum  vcterum  propaginem
Umbros  essc.     Polyhist.  cap.  8.

P


114  THE  HISTORY


Solinus  from  the  historian  Bocchus,  by (42)  Servius  from
the  elder  Marc  Antony,   by  (4<3)  Isidore  also  and  (44)
TZETZES,  in  direct -terms  stil'd  the  issue  of  the  antient
Gauls,  or  a  branch  of  them  :  and  Dionysius  Halicar-
nasseus,    the  most  judicious  of  Antiquaries,,  proves-  out
of  Zenodotus,  that  the  Sabins  were  descendants  of  the
Umbrians  ;  or,  (4.5)  as  he  expresses  it,  Umbrians  un
der  the  name  of  Sabins.     The  reason  I  am  so  particu
lar  on  this  head,  is,  that  the  mountain  (46)  Soracte  is
in  the  Sabin  country,    in  the  district  of  the  Faliscans,
about  twenty  miles  to  the  north   of  Rome,  and  on  the
west  side   of  the  Tyber..    On  the  top  of  it  were  the
Grove  and  Temple  of  APOLLO,  and  also  his  Carn  (47),
to  which  SILIUS,    in  the  verses  just  quoted  out  of  him,
alludes.     PLINY  has   preserved  to   us   the   very  (48)
name  of  the  .particular  race  of  people,  to  which  the
performing  of  the  above  described  annual  ceremony  be-

(42)  Sane  Umbros  Qallornm  vcterum  propagi??em  e$se>
MARCUS  ANTONIUS  refer  t.     In  lib.  12.  Aeneid.  ante  fin.

(43)  Umbri  Italiae  gens  est,  sed  Gallorum  veterum  pro-
pago.     Origin,  lib.  9.  cap.  2.

(44)  Ombroi  genos  Galaticon  e  Galaton.      Schol.  in  Lycopliron.      Alex,   c.d
ler.  1360.

(45)  Sabinous  ex  Ombrikon.      Antiq.  R.om.  lib.  1.

(46)  Now  Monte  di  San  sylvcstro.

(47)  Acer-ens.

(48)  Hand  procul  urbe  Roma,  in  Faliscorum  agro  fami-
liae  suntpaucae,  quae  vocantur  HIRPI^E;  quaequesacrificio
annito,  quod  fit  ad  montem  Soracte  APOLLI'NI,  super  ambus*
tarn  ligni  struem  ambulantes,  non  aduruntur :  tt  ub  id  pcrpe-
tuo  senatus  consulto  militiae,  aiiorumque  munerum,  vacatio-
nem  habent.    Hist.  Nat.  lib.  2.  cap.  2.  Idem  ex  todem  Sulin
Polyhist.  cap.  S,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  115

longed  :  nor  was  it  for  nothing  that  they  ran  the  risk
of  blistering  their  soles,  since  for  this  they  were  exemted
from  serving  in  the  wars,  as  well  as  from  the  expense
and  IroUe  of  several  offices.  They  were  called  HIR-
PINS.  VIRGIL,  much  elder  than  SILIUS  or  PLINY,  in
troduces  AIIUNS,  one  of  that  family,  forming  a  design
to  kill  CAMILLA,  and  thus  praying  for  success  to  A-
POLLO,

0  patron  O/SORACTE'S  high  abodvs,

PHEJBUS,  the  ruling  pow'r  among  the  Gods!

Whom  first  we  serve,  whole  woods  of  unctuous  pine

Burn  on  thy  HEAP,  and  to  thy  glory  shine:

By  thce  protected,  with  our  naked  soles

Thro"  flames  wising  d  ice  pass,  and  tread  the  kindVd  coals.

Give  me,  propitious  pow'r,  to  wash  await

The  stains  of  this  Dishonourable  day  f^9j'.

DIIYDEN'S  Version.

A  Celtic  Antiquary,  ignorant  of  the  origin  of  the  Um-
brians  and  Sabins,  wou'd  imagine,  when  reading  what
past  on  Soracte,  that  it  was  some  Gallic,  Brittish,  or
Irish  mountain,  the  rites  being  absolutely  the  same.
We  do  not  read  indeed  in  our  Irish  books,  what  pre
servative  against  fire  was  used  by  those,  who  ran  bare
foot  over  the  burning  coals  of  the  Cams  :  and,  to  be
sure,  they  wou'd  have  the  common  people  piously  be-

(49)  Summe  Deum,  sancii  cusias  Soraciis,  APOLLO,
Quern  primi  colimus,  cui  pineus  ardor  ACER(rUt
Pascitw,  et  medium,  freti  pietatn,  per  ignem
Cultores  multa  premimds  vestigia  pruna  :
JJa,  pater,  hoc  nwtris  auoleri  dedecus  cinnis.

Aen,  lib,  11.  ver.  785,


115  THE  HISTORY


lieve  they  used  none.  Yet  that  they  really  'did,  no  less
than  the  famous  fire-eater,  whom  I  lately  saw  making
so  great  a  figure  at  London,  men  of  penetration  and
uncorrupted  judgements  will  never  question.  But  we
are  not  merely  left  to  our  judgements,  for  the  fact  is
sufficiently  attested  by  that  prodigy  of  knowledge,  and
perpetual  opposer  of  Superstition,  MARCUSVARRO;  who,
as  SERVIUS  on  the  above-cited  passage  of  VIRGIL  af
firms  (50),  described  the  very  ointment  of  which  the
HIRPINS  mad?  use,  besmearing  their  feet  with  it,  when
they  walked  thro'  the  fire.  Thus  at  all  times  have  the
multitude,  that  common  prey  of  Priests  and  Princes,
be£n  easily  gulFd  ;  swallowing  the  secrets  of  Natural
Philosophy  for  Divine  Miracles,  and  ready  to  do  the
greatest  good  or  hurt,  not  under  the  notions  of  vice  or
virtue  :  but  barely  as  directed  by  men,  who  find  it
their  interest  to  deceive  them.

VIII.  But  leaving  the  Druids  for  a  while,  there
are  over  and  above  the  Cams,  in  the  Highlands-  of
Scotland,  and  in  the  adjacent  lies  numberless  OBE-
LISC?,  or  stones  setup  on  end;  some  thirty,  some
twenty-four  foot  high  ;  others  higher  or  lower :  and
this  sometimes  where  no  such  stones  are  to  be  dug,
Wales  being  likewise  full  of  them  ;  and  some  there  are
in  the  least  cultivated  parts  of  England,  with  very
many  in  Ireland.  In  most  places  of  this  last  kingdom,

(50)  Sed  VARAIO,  ubique-Rettgionte  cvpugrtator,  ait,  cum
qnoddam  medic-amentum  dtscriberct,  eo  uti  solent  H1RPINI,
qui  ambulaturi  per  ignem,  meciicamerito  Plautas  tingunt.
Ad  ver.  787,  lib.  11.  Aeneid.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  117

the  common  people  believe  these  Obelises  to  be  men,
transformed  into  stones  by  the  Magic  of  the  Druids.
This  is  also  the  notion  the  vulgar  have  in  Oxford
shire  of  Roll-wright  stones,  and  in  Cornwall  of  the
Hurlers  ;  erect  stones  so  call'd,  but  belonging  to  a
different  class  from  the  Obelises,  whereof  I  now  dis
course.  And  indeed  in  every  country  the  ignorant
people  ascribe  to  the  Devil  or  some  supernatural  power,
at  least  to  Giants,  all  works  which  seem  to  them  to
excede  human  art  or  ability.  Thus  among  other  things,
for  recording  their  traditions  will  have  its  pleasure  as
well  as  usefulness,  they  account  for  the  Roman  Camps
and  Military  Ways,  calling  such  the  DeviVs-Dykes,  or
the  like  :  while  the  more  reasonable  part  are  persuad
ed,  that  the  erect  stones  of  which  we  speak,  are  the
Monuments  of  dead  persons,  whose  ashes  or  bones  are
often  found  near  them  ;  sometimes  in  Urns,  and  some
times  in  Stone-coffins,  wherein  scales,  hammers,  pieces
of  weapons,  and  other  things  have  been  often  found,
some  of  them  very  finely  gilt  or  polish'd.  Dogs  also
have  been  found  bury'd  with  their  masters.  The
erect  stones  in  the  midst  of  stone-circles,  whereof  be
fore  I  have  done,  are  not  of  this  funeral  sort ;  nor  does
it  follow,  that  all  those  have  been  erected  in  Christian
times,  which  have  Christian  Inscriptions  or  Crosses  on
them  :  for  we  read  of  many  such  Obelises  thus  sancti-
fy'd,  as  they  speak,  in  Wales  and  Scotland.  And,  in
our  Irish  Histories,  we  find  the  practice  as  early  as


US  THE  HISTORY

PATRIC  himself;  who,  having  built  the  Church  ot
Donach-Patric  on  the  brink  of  Loch-Placket  (5 1 )  in  the
county  of  Clare,  did  there  on  three  Colosses,  erec
ted  in  the  times  of  Paganism,  inscribe  the  proper
name  of  CHRIST  in  three  languages  :  namely,  JESUS  in
Hebrew  on  the  first,  SOTER  in  Greec  on  the  second,  and
SALVATOR  in  Latin  on  the  third.  That  Obelise,  if  I
may  call  it  so,  in  the  Parish  of  Barvas,  in  the  Hand  of
Lewis  in  Scotland,  call'd  the  Thrushel-stone,  is  very
remarkable ;  being  not  onely  above  twenty  foot  high,
which  is  yet  surpass'd  by  many  others  :  but  likewise
almost  as  much  in  breadth,  which  no  other  comes
near.

IX.  Besides  these  Obelises,  there  is  a  great  num
ber  of  FORTS  in  all  the  lies  of  Scotland,  very  different
from  the  Danish  and  Norwegian  Raths  in  Ireland,  or
the  Saxon  and  Danish  Burghs  in  England :  nor  are
they  the  same  with  the  Gallic,  Brittish,  and  Irish  Lios,
pronounc'd  Lls  (52)  ;  which  are  fortifications  made
of  unwrought  stones  and  uncemented,  whereof  there  ,
are  two  very  extraordinary  in  the  lies  of  Aran,  in  the
Bay  of  Galway  in  Ireland.  Dun  is  a  general  Celtic
word  for  all  fortifications  made  on  an  eminence,  and
the  eminences  themselves  are  so  call'd  ;  as  we  see  in
many  parts  of  England,  and  the  Sand-hills  on  the  Bel-

(51)    Formerly  Domhnacli-mor  and  Loch-seal  go,.  ''•

•J  O

(.i2)     Lhs  in  Irish,  Lcs  in  Armoric,  and  Lhys  in  Welsh,
signifies  in  English  a  Court ;  as  Lis-Luhi,  Lynscowt.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


gic  Coast.     Yet  Rath   and  Lis  are  often  confounded
tog-ether,  both  in  the  speech  and  writing  of  the  Irish.
But  the  Forts  in  question  are  all  of  wrought  stone,  and
often  of  such  large  stones,  as  no  number  of  men  cou'd
ever  raise  to  the  places  they  occupy,  without  the  use  of
Engines  ;  which  Engines  are  quite  unknown  to  the
present  inhabitants,  and  to  their  ancestors  for  many  ages
past.  There's  none  of  the  lesser  lies,  but  has  one  Fort
at  least,   and  they  are  commonly  in  sight  of  each  a-
ther  :  but  the  Dan  in  St.  KILDA,  for  so  they  call  the
Old  Fort  there,  is  about  eighteen  leagues  distant  from
North  Uist,  and  twenty  from  the  middle  of  Lewis  or
Harries,  to  be  seen  only  in  a  very  fair  day  like  a  blewish
mist  :  but  a  large  fire  there  wou'd  be  visible  at  night,
as  the  ascending  smoak  by  day.     In  this  same  He  of
Lewis,  where  are  many  such  Duns,  there's  north  of  the
village  of  Brago,   a  round  Fort   composed  of  huge
stones,    and  three  stories  high  :  that  is,  it  has  three
hollow  passages  one  over  another,  within  a  prodigjous
thick  wall  quite  round  the  Fort,  with  many  windows
and  stairs.     I  give  this  onely  as  an  example  from  Dr.
MARTIN   an  eye-witness,    who,   with  several  others,
mention  many  more  such  elsewhere  :  yet,  which  is  a
great  neglect,  without  acquainting  us  with  their  di
mensions,  whether   those   passages   in   the    wall   be
arch'd,  or  with  many  such  things  relating  to  the  na
ture  of  the  work  ;  and  omitting  certain  other  circum
stances,  no  less  necessary  to  be  known.     I  mention
these  Forts,  my  Lord,  not  as  any  way,  that  I  yet
know,  appertaining  to  the  Druids  :  but,   in  treating


150  THE  HISTORY


of  the  Monuments  truely  theirs,  I  take  this  natural
occasion  of  communicating,  what  may  be  worthy
ef  your  Lordship's  curiosity  and  consideration  ;  es
pecially  when,  like  Episodes  in  a  Poem,  they  serve
to  relieve  the  attention,  and  are  not  very  foren
to  the  subject.  Considering  all  things,  I  judge  no
Monuments  more  deserving  our  researches  ;  especi
ally,  if  any  shou'd  prove  them  to  be  Phenician
or  Massilian  Places  of  security  for  their  commerce :
since  'tis  certain  that  both  People  have  traded  there,
and  that  PYTHEAS  of  Marseilles,  as  we  are  informed
by  STRABO^  made  a  particular  description  of  those
Hands  ;  to  which  CESAR,  among  other  Descriptions*
without  naming  the  authors,  does  doubtless  (53)
refer.  But  my  own  opinion  I  think  fit  at  pre
sent  to  reserve.

X.  From  the  conjectures  I  have  about  these
numerous  and  costly  Forts,  in  Hands  so  remote
and  barren,  I  pass  to  the  certainty  I  have  con
cerning  the  TEMPLES  OF  THE  DRUIDS,
whereof  so  many  are  yet  intire  in  those  Hands,
as  well  as  in  Wales  and  Ireland ;  with  some  left
in  England,  where  culture  has  mostly  destroy'd
or  impair'd  such  Monuments.  These  Temples  are
Circles  of  Obelises  or  erect  stones,  some  larger,

(53)  In  hoc  media  CUTSU  [inter  Hiberniam  scilicet  &  Bri-
tanniam]  est  insula,  quae  appellatur  Mona.  Complures  prae-
terea  minores  objectae  insulae  cxlstimantur^  de  quibusinsulis
nowulli  scripserunt.  dies  continuos  30  nub  bmma  esse  noctem*
De  BeUo  Gallico,  lib.  5.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


some  narrower,  as  in  all  other  Edifices,  some  more
and  some  less  magnificent.  They  are  for  the  great
est  part  perfectly  circular,  but  some  of  them  semicir
cular  :  in  others  the  Obelises  stand  close  together,
but  in  most  separate  and  equidistant.  I  am  not
ignorant  that  several,  with  Dr.  CHARLTON  in  his
Stone-henge  restored  to  the  Danes,  believe  those
Circles  to  be  Danish  works  ;  a  notion  I  shall  easily
confute  in  due  time,  and  even  now  as  I  go  a-
long.  But  few  have  imagined  'em  to  be  Roman,
as  the  famous  Architect  INIGO  JONES  wou'd  needs
have  this  same  Stone-henge,  according  to  me  one
of  the  Druid  Cathedrals,  to  be  the  Temple  of  CE-
LUM  or  TERMINUS,  in  his  Stone-henge  restored  to
the  Romans.  Nevertheless,  My  Lord,  I  promise  you
no  less  than  demonstration,  that  those  Circles  were
Druids  Temples  :  against  which  assertion  their  fre
quenting  of  Oaks,  and  performing  no  religious  rites
without  Oak-branches  or  Leaves,  will  prove  no  valid
exception  ;  no  more  than  such  Circles  being  found
in  the  Gothic  countries,  tho'  without  ALTARS,  where
of  we  shall  speak  after  the  Temples.  The  out
side  of  the  Churches  in  Spain  and  Holland  is  much
the  same,  but  their  inside  differs  extremely.  As
for  INIGO  JONES,  he  cannot  be  too  much  commend
ed  for  his  generous  efforts,  which  shows  an  uncom
mon  genius,  to  introduce  a  better  taste  of  Architec
ture  into  England,  where  'tis  still  so  difficult  a  thing
to  get  rid  of  Gothic  Oddnesses  ;  and  therefore  'tis
no  wonder  he  shou'd  continue  famous,,  when  so

Q


THE  HISTORY


few  endeavour  to  excede  him  :  but  we  must  beg
his  pardon,  if,  as  he  was  unacquainted  with  His
tory,  and  wanted  certian  other  qualifications,  we
take  the  freedom  in  our  Book  to  correct  his  mistakes.

XL  In  the  Hand  of  Lewis  beforemention'd,  at
the  village  of  Classerniss,  there  is  one  of  those
Temples  extremely  remarkable.  The  Circle  con
sists  of  twelve  Obelises,  about  seven  foot  high
each,,  and  distant  from  each  other  six  foot.  In
the  center  stands  a  stone  thirteen  foot  high,  in
the  perfect  shape  of  the  rudder  of  a  Ship.  Directly
south  from  the  Circle,  there  stand  four  Obelises  run
ning  out  in  a  line  ;  as  another  such  line  due  east,
and  a  third  to  the  west,  the  number  and  distances  of
the  stones  being  in  these  wings  the  same  :  so  that
this  Temple,  the  most  intire  that  can  be,  is  at
the  same  time  both  round  and  wing'd.  But  to
the  north  there  reach,  by  way  of  avenue,  two
straight  ranges  of  Obelises,,  of  the  same  bigness
and  distances  with  those  of  the  Circle;  yet  the
ranges  themselves  are  eight  foot  distant,  and  each
consisting  of  nineteen  stones,  the  thirty-ninth  be
ing  in  the  entrance  of  the  avenue.  This  Tem
ple  stands  astronomically,  denoting  the  twelve  signs
of  the  Zodiac  and  the  four  principal  wrinds,  sub
divided  each  into  four  others ;  by  which,  and  the
nineteen  stones  on  each  side  the  avenue  betoken
ing  the  Cycle  of  nineteen  years,  I  can  prove  it
to  have  been  dedicated  principally  to  the  Sun ;


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  123

but    subordinately   to    the    Seasons    and    the    Ele
ments,    particularly     to    the    Sea   and    the   Winds,
as  appears    by    the   rudder  in    the    middle.     The
Sea,   consider'd   as   a  Divinity,  was   by   the    antient
Cauls  call'd  ANY  ANA  or  ONVANA,  as  the  raging  Sea
is  still  call'd  Ana/a  in  so  many  Letters  by  the  Irish
(54) ;  and  both  of  'em,  besides  that  they  were  very
good  Astronomers,   are  known  to  have  paid  honor
not  only  to  the  Sea,  but  also  to  the  Winds  and  the
Tempests,    as   the   (55)  Romans  were  wont   to   do.
But  of  this  in  the  account  of  their  worship,     I  for
got  to  tell  you,  that  there  is  another  Temple  about
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  former  ;  and  that  com
monly  two  Temples  stand  near  each  other,  for  rea
sons  you  will  see   in  our   History.     East  of  Drum-
cruy   in    the    Scottish    He   cf  Aran,     is   a   Circular
Temple,     whose   area   is   about   thirty   paces  .  over  :
and    south   of    the    same   Village   is    such   another
Temple,   in   the  center   of  which    still  remains  the
Altar  ;   being   a  broad    thin   stone,    supported    by
three   other  such   stones.      This   is   very   extraordi
nary,  tho',  as  you  may  see  in   my  last  Letter,  not

(54)  They  vulgarly  call  the  sea  mor  or  muir,  mar  a,  cuan,
ftiirge,  &c.

(55)  Sicfatus,  meritos  arts  mactavit  honorcs :
Taurum  NEPTUNO,  taurum  tibi,  pulcher  APOLLO  ;
Nigram  HYEMI  pecudem,  ZEPHYR  is  Jdicibus  albam*

Aen.  lib.  3,

Videatur  etlam  Hnrativs,  Epod.  10.  rer.  ult.     Cic.  de  not,
Peer,  lib,  3.    Et  Aristuph.  in  Ranis  cum  suo  Scholiafte.


1S4  THE  HISTORY


the   onely   example  ;    since   the   zeal  of  the   Chris
tians,     sometimes    apt   to   be   over-heated,     us'd   to
leave   no  Altars  standing   but  their   own.      In   the
greatest   Hand  of  (56)  Orkney,   commonly  call'd  the
Mainland,  there  are   likewise   two  Temples,  where
the  natives  believe  by  Tradition,  that  the  Sun  and
Moon  were  worshipt  :    which  belief  of  theirs  is  very
right,    since  the  lesser  Temple  is  semi-circular.     The
greater   is    one   hundred   and   ten    paces     diameter.
They     know    not    what    to    make     of    two   green
Mounts   erected   at   the   east   and  west  end   of  it  :
a   matter  nevertheless  for  which  it   is   not   difficult
to    account.     There's    a  trench   or  ditch  round  each
of    these   Temples,     like   that    about   Stone-henge  ;
and,     in    short,     every   such   Temple   had   the  like
inclosure.     Many  of  the  stones  are  above  twenty  or
twenty-four   foot    in  heighth,  above   the   ground,  a-
bout   five   foot   in   breadth,    and   a   foot   or   two   in
thickness.     Some  of  'em    are  fallen  down  :   and  the
Temples   are   one   on   the    east   and   the    other   on
the   west   side   of  the    Lake    of  Stennis,     where   it
is   shallow   and   fordable,   there   being  a   passage  o-
ver    by    large    stepping    stones.      Near    the   lesser
Temple,   which   is   on   the  east   side   of  the   Lake,

(56)  The  lies  of  Orkney  are  denominated  from  Orcas  or
Orca,  which,  in  DIODORUS  SICULUS  and  PTOLEMY,  is  the
antient  name  of  Caithness;  and  this  from  Ore,  not  a  salmon
[as  by  some  interpreted]  but  a  whale  :  so  that  in  old  Irish
Orc-z  is  the  Whale  Hands.  The  words  of  DIODORUS  are,

To  de  Hypolipomenon  (tes  Brctanias)  anekein  men    hLlorousin  eis  to   pelagon,
de  Orcan.      Lib.  4.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  195

as  the  greater  on  the  west,  there  stand  two  stones
of  the  same  bigness  with  the  (57)  rest  ;  thro*
the  middle  of  one  of  which  there  is  a  large  hole,
by  which  criminals  and  victims  were  ty'd.  Like
wise  in  the  Hand  of  Papa-Westra,  another  of  the
Orkneys,  there  stand,  near  a  Lake,  now  call'd  St.
TREDWELL'S  (58)  LOCH,  two  such  Obelises,  in  one
of  which  there  is  the  like  hole  ;  and  behind  them
lying  on  the  ground  a  third  stone,  being  hollow
like  a  trough.

XII.  These  few  I  only  give  for  examples  out  of
great  numbers,  as  I  likewise  take  the  liberty  to
acquaint  you,  My  Lord,  that'  at  a  place  call'd
Biscau-woon,  near  Saint  Burien's  in  Cornwall,  there
is  a  circular  Temple  consisting  of.  nineteen  stones,
the  distance  between  each  twelve  foot  ;  and  a
twentieth  in  the  center,  much  higher*  than  the
rest.  But  I  am  not  yet  informed,  whether  this
middle  stone  has  any  peculiar  figure,  or  whether
inscrib'd  with  any  characters  ;  for  such  characters
are  found  in  Scotland,  and  some  have  been  ob-
serv'd  in  Wales  ;  but,  except  the  Roman  and
Christian  Inscriptions,  unintelligible  to  such  as  have
hitherto  seen  them.  Yet  they  ought  to  have  been
fairly  represented,  for  the  use  of  such  as  might  have
been  able  perhaps  to  explain  them.  They  would
at  least  exercise  our  Antiquaries.  The  Circle  of

(57)  Brand,  pag.  44.

(58)  Brand,  pag.  58.


126  THE  HISTORY

Rollrich-stoncs  in  Oxfordshire,  and  the  Hurlers  in
Cornwall,  are  two  of  those  Druid  Temples.  There
is  one  at  Aubuiy  in  Wiltshire,  and  some  left  in
other  places  of  England.  In  GREGORY  of  Tours
time  there  was  remaining,  and  for  ought  I  know
may  still  be  so,  one  of  those  Temples  on  the
top  of  HELEN'S  Mount,  between  Arton  and  Riom
in  Auvergne.  It  was  within  this  inclosure  that
MARTIN,  the  sainted  Bishop,  stood  taking  a  (59)
view  of  the  country,  as  before  mention'd.  Now
of  such  Temples  I  shall  mention  here  no  more,
but  procede  to  the  Druids  ALTARS,  which,  as
I  said  before,  do  ordinarily  consist  of  four  stones  ;
three  being  hard  flags,  or  large  tho'  thin  stones,
set  up  edge-wise,  two  making  the  sides,  and  a
shorter  one  the  end,  with  a  fourth  stone  of  the
same  kind  on  the  top  :  for  the  other  end  was
commonly  left  open,  and  the  Altars  were  all  ob
long.  Many  of  'em  are  not  intire.  From  some
the  upper  stone  is  taken  away,  from  others  one
of  the  side-stones  or  the  end.  And,  besides  the
alterations  that  men  have  caus'd  in  all  these  kinds
of  Monuments,  Time  it  self  has  chang'd  'em  much
more.  Mr.  BRAND  speaking  of  the  Obelises  in  Ork
ney,  many  of  'em,  says  (60)  he,  appear  to  be  much
worn,  bij  the  washing  of  the  wind  and  rain,  which

(59)  E-rtat  nunc  in  hoc  loco  canceUiis,  in  quo  Sanctus  di-
citur  sUtisse.    Gfegor.  Turon.  de  Gloria  Confessor,  cap.  5.

(60)  Pag.  40.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  127

shows  they  arc  of  a  long  standing  :  and  it  is  very
strange  to  think,  how,  in  those  places  and  times,
they  got  such  large  stones  carry1  d  and  erected.  JTis
naturally  impossible,  but  that,  in  the  course  of
so  many  ages,  several  stones  must  have  lost  their
figure  ;  their  angles  being  exposed  to  all  weathers,
and  no  care  taken  to  repair  any  disorder,  nor  to
prevent  any  abuse  of  them.  Thus  some  are  be
come  lower,  or  jagged,  or  otherwise  irregular  and
diminished  :  many  are  quite  wasted,  and  moss  or
scurf  hides  the  Inscriptions  or  Sculptures  of  others ;
for  such  Sculptures  there  are  in  seveial  places,
particularly  in  Wales  and  the  Scottish  He  of  A-
ran.  That  one  sort  of  stone  lasts  longer  than  another
is  true  :  but  that  all  will  have  their  period,  no
less  than  Parchment  and  Paper,  is  as  true.

XIII.  There  are  a  great  many  of  the  AL
TARS  to  be  seen  yet  intire  in  Wales,  particu
larly  two  in  Kerig  Y  Drudion  parish  mentioned
in  my  other  Letter,  and  one  in  Lhan-Hammulch
parish  in  Brecknockshire  ;  with  abundance  else
where,  diligently  observ'd  by  one  I  mention'd  in
my  first  Letter,  Mr.  EDWAJID  LHUYD,  who  yet  was
not  certain  to*  what  use  they  were  destin'd.  Here;
I  beg  the  favor  of  your  Lordship  to  take  it  for
granted,  that  I  have  sufficient  authorities  fbr  e-
very  thing  I  alledge  :  and  tho'  I  do  not  always
give  them  in  this  brief  Specimen,  yet  in  the  his
tory  it  self  they  shall  be  produc'd  on  every  pro-


128  THE  HISTORY


per  occasion.  The  Druids  Altars  were  commonly
in  the  middle  of  the  Temples,  near  the  great  Co
lossus,  of  which  presently  ;  as  there  is  now  such
a  one  at  Carn-Lhechart  in  the  parish  of  Lhan-
Gyvelach  in  Glamorganshire,  besides  that  which  I
mentioned  before  in  Scotland.  They  are  by  the
Welsh  in  the  singular  number  call'd  Kist-vaen,
that  is  a  stone-chest,  and  in  the  plural  Kistieu-vaen,
stone-chests.  These  names,  with  a  small  variation,
are  good  Irish  :  but  the  things  quite  different  from
those  real  stone-chests  or  coffins,  commonly  of  one
block  and  the  lid,  that  are  in  many  places  found
under  ground.  The  vulgar  Irish  call  these  Altars
(61)  DERMOT  and  CRANIA'S  bed.  This  last  was  the
Daughter  of  King  CORMAC  ULFHADA,  and  Wife
to  (62)  FIN  MAC  CUIL  ;  from  whom,  as  invincible
a  General  and  Champion  as  he's  reported  to  have
been,  she  took  it  in  her  head,  as  women  will  some
times  have  such  fancies,  to  run  away  with  a  no
bleman,  call'd  (63)  DERMONT  O  DUVNY  :  but  be
ing  pursu'd  every  where,  the  ignorant  country  people
say,  they  were  intertain'd  a  night  in  every  quar
ter-land  (6k)  or  village  of  Ireland  ;  where  the  in
habitants  sympathizing  with  their  affections,  and
doing  to  others  what  they  wou'd  be  done  unt.0j

(61)  Leaba  DHIARMAIT  agus  GHRAINE.

(62)  FINN  MHAC  CUBHAILL.

(63)  DlAKMAIT  ODUIBHNE.

(64)  Seisreach  £  Ceathr&uihach,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


made  these  beds  both  for  their  resting  and  hid
ing  place.  The  Poets,  you  may  imagine,  have
not  been  wanting  to  imbellish  this  story  :  and  hence
it  appears,  that  the  Druids  were  planted  as  thick
as  Parish  Priests,  nay  much  thicker.  Wherever
there's  a  Circle  without  an  Altar,  'tis  certain  there
was  one  formerly ;  as  Altars  are  found  where  the  Cir
cular  Obelises  are  mostly  or  all  taken  away  for
other  uses,  or  out  of  aversion  to  this  superstition,
or  that  time  has  consum'd  them.  They,  who,  from
the  bones,  which  are  often  found  near  those  Al
tars  and  Circles,  'tho'  seldom  within  them,  will
needs  infer,  that  they  were  burying  places  ;  for
get  what  CESAR,  PLINY,  TACITUS,  and  other  Authors,
write  of  the  human  sacrifices  offer'd  by  the  Druids  :
and,  in  mistaking  the  ashes  found  in  the  Cams,
they  show  themselves  ignorant  of  those  several  an
niversary  fires  and  sacrifices,  for  which  they  were
rear'd,  as  we  have  shown  above.  The  huge  cop
ing  stones  of  these  Cams  were  in  the  nature  of
Altars,  and  Altars  of  the  lesser  form  are  frequent
ly  found  near  J;hem  ;  as  now  in  the  great  Latin
and  Greec  Churches,  there  are,  besides  the  High
Altar,  several  smaller  ones.

XIV.  There's  another  kind  of  Altar  much
bigger  than  either  of  these,  consisting  of  a  great
number  of  stones ;  some  of  'em  serving  to  sup
port  the  others,  by  reason  of  their  enormous  bulk.
These  the  Britons  term  CROMLECH  in  the  sin-

R


130  THE  HISTORY


gular,    Cromlechu   in   the   plural   number  ;    and  the

Irish    CROMLEACH   or   Cromleac,    in   the    plural

Cromleacka    or   Cromleacca.      By    these   Altars,   as

the   center   of  the  Circular  Temples,   there  com-

•\     stands,     or   by  accident   lyes,     a   prodigious
stone,    which    was  to  serve   as   a   Pedestal  to    some

V  :    for   all   these    Cromleachs    were    places   of
worship,    and  so   call'd   from  bowing,  the   word  sig-

ing  the  (65)  bowing-stone.  The  original  desig
nation  of  the  Idol  CRUM-CRUACH,  whereof  in  the
next  Section,  may  well  be  from  Cruim,  an  equi
valent  word  to  Tairneach  Tar  an  or  Tarman,  all
signifying  Thunder  :  whence  the  Romans  call'd
the  Gallic  Jupiter  Taramis  or  Taranis,  the  thun-
derer  :  and  from  these  Cromleachs  it  is,  that  in
the  oldest  Irish  a  Priest  is  call'd  Cruimthear,  and
Priesthood  Cruimtheacd,  which  are  so  many  evi
dent  vestiges  of  the  Druidical  (66)  religion.  There's
a  Cromlech  in  Nevern-Parish  in  Pembrokeshire,
where  the  middle  stone  is  still  eighteen  foot  high,
and  nine  broad  towards  the  base,  growing  nar
rower  upwards.  There  lyes  by  it^a  piece  broken
of  t?n  foot  long,  which  seems  more  than  twen
ty  oxen  can  draw  :  and  therefore  they  were  not

(65)     From   crom  or  crum,  which,   in  Armoric,  Irish,
awl    \\relsh,  signifies  bent-,  and  Lech  or  Lcac>  a  broad
.stone.


((?(>)  Of  I  he  same  nature  is  Cvirrreach,  of  which  be-
ft-iv  ;  for  Sagart,  the  cniinary  word  for  a  Priest,  is
ii.aiiiie:>tly  torm'd  from  Sacerdos.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  131

tllttto^iiiBJBtH&*aim**H*n***l***l*i*t*111^^

void   of  all   skill  in   the  Mechanics,   who  could  set
up   the  whole.     But   one   remaining  at    Poitiers   in
France,     supported    by   five    lesser   stones,   excedes
all   in   the   British   Hands,   as   being    sixty   foot   in
circumference  (67).     I  fancy  however  that   this   was
a   Rocking-stone  :    There's   also  a   noble    Cromlcach
at   Bod-ouyr   in   Anglesey.      Many   of  them,    by   a
modest   computation,    are    thirty   tun   weight  :    but
they   differ   in  bigness,  as    all  pillars  do,    and  their
Altars   are   ever  bigger  than    the   ordinary  Kistieu-
vaen.     In   some  places   of  Wales   these   stones    are
call'd   Meineu-guyr,   which    is    of  the    same    import
with    Cromlechu.      In   Caithness,   and   other   remote
parts  of  Scotland,    these   Cromleacs  are    very    num
erous,    some  pretty  entire  ;    and  others,   not  so  much
consum'd   by   time,  or  thrown   down  by   storms,  as
disorder'd    and  demolished   by   the    hands   of  men.
But   no    such   Altars   were    ever    found   by   OLAUS
WORMIUS,   the   great   northern   Antiquary,   which    I
desire   the   abettors   of  Dr.  CHARLTON   to  note,  nor
by   any   others   in   the    Temples    of  the  Gothic  na
tions  ;   as   I  term   all   who    speak   the   sevaral   dia
lects   of  Gothic  original,   from   Izeland   to  Switzer
land,   and   from   the   Bril  in   Holland   to   Presburg
in   Hungary,   the     Boehemiaris   and   Polanders    ex-
cepted.      The  Druids  were   onely   co-extended  with

(67)     La  pierre  levee  de  Poitiers  a  soixante  picds  de
tour,  <Sf  elle  tst  poste  sur  cinq  autres  pierres,  sans  quun
sache  non  plus  ni  pourquoi,    ni  comment*
Memoires  d'  Angleterre,  page  3tSO.


13-3  THE  HISTORY


the  Celtic  dialects  :  besides  that  CESAR  says  ex-
presly,  there  were  (68)  no  Druids  among  the  Ger
mans^  with  whom  he  says  as  expresly  that  seeing
and  feeling  was  believing,  honoring  onely  the  Sun,
the  Fire,  and  the  Moon,  by  which  they  were  ma
nifestly  benefited,  and  that  they  made  no  sacri
fices  at  all  :  which  of  course  made  Altars  as  use
less  there,  tho'  afterwards  grown  fashionable,  as
they  were  necessary  in  the  Druids  Temples,  and
which  they  show  more  than  probably  to  have  been
Temples  indeed  ;  nor  are  they  calFd  by  any  o-
ther  name,  or  thought  to  have  been  any  other
thing,  by  the  Highlanders  or  their  Irish  progeni
tors.  In  Jersey  likewise,  as  well  as  in  the  other
neighbouring  Hands,  formerly  part  of  the  Dutchy
of  Normandy,  there  are  many  Altars  and  Crom
lechs.  "  There  are  yet  remaining  in  this  Hand,'*
(says  Dr.  FALLE  in  the  115th  page  of  his  Account  of
Jersey)  "  some  old  monuments  of  Paganism.  We
"  call  them  Pouqueleys.  They  are  great  flat  stones,
"  of  vast  bigness  and  weight  ;  some  oval,  some
"  quadrangular,  rais'd  three  or  four  foot  from  the
"  ground,  and  supported  by  others  of  a  less  size.
"  'Tis  evident  .both  from  their  figure,  and  great
"  quantities  of  ashes  found  in  the  ground  there-

(68)     Germani neqite  Druides  habent,  qui  relms  di~

mnis  praesint,  neque  Sacrificiis  student.  Deorum  nume~
TO  eos  solos  ducunt,  quos  cernunl,  et  quorum  operibus
aperte  juvantur ;  So/em,  et  Vulcanum,  et  Lunam:  reti-
quos  ne  fama  quidem  acccpetunt.  De  Beilo  Gailico,
lib.  6,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  133

"  abouts,  that  they  were  us'd  for  Altars  in  those
"  times  of  superstition  :  and  their  standing  on  emi-
"  nences  near  the  sea,  inclines  me  also  to  think,
"  that  they  were  dedicated  to  the  Divinities  of
"  the  Ocean.  At  ten  or  twelve  foot  distance  there
"  is  a  small  stone  set  up  an  end,  in  manner  of
«  a  desk  ;  where  'tis  suppos'd  the  Priest  kneel'd,
"  and  perform'd  some  ceremonies,  while  the  Sa-
"  crifice  was  burning  on  the  Altar."  Part  of  this
account  is  mistaken,  for  the  culture  of  the  inland
parts  is  the  reason  that  few  Pouqudeys  are  left,
besides  those  on  the  barran  rocks  and  hills  on  the
sea  side  :  nor  is  that  situation  alone  sufficient  for
entitling  them  to  the  Marine  Powers,  there  be
ing  proper  marks  to  distinguish  such  wheresoever
situated.

XV.  But  to  return  to  our  Cromleachs,  the  chief-
est  in  all  Ireland  was  CRUM-CRUACH,  which
stood  in  the  midst  of  a  Circle  of  twelve  Obe
lises  on  a  hill  in  Brefin,  a  district  of  the  coun
ty  of  Cavan,  formerly  belonging  to  Letrim.  It
was  all  over  covered  with  gold  and  silver,  the
lesser  figures  on  the  twelve  stones  about  it  be
ing  onely  of  brass  ;  which  mettals,  both  of  the
stones  and  the  statues  that  they  bore,  became  every
where  the  prey  of  the  Christian  Priests,  upon  the
conversion  of  that  kingdom.  The  legendary  writers
of  PATRIC'S  Life,  tell  many  things  no  less  ridi
culous  than  incredible,  about  the  destruction  of


134  THE  HISTORY


this  Temple  of  Moyslect  (69),  or  the  Field  of
Adoration,  in  Brefin  ;  where  the  stumps  of  the
circular  Obliscs  are  yet  to  be  seen,  and  where
they  were  noted  by  writers  to  have  stood  long  before
any  Danish  invasion,  which  shows  how  groundless
Dr.  CHARLTON'S  notion  is.  The  Bishop's  See  of
Clogher  had  its  name  from  one  of  those  stones,
all  cover'd  with  gold  (Clochoir  signifying  the  gol
den  stone)  on  which  stood  KERMAND  KELSTACH,
the  chief  Idol  of  Ulster  (70).  This  stone  is  still
in  being.  To  note  it  here  by  the  way,  Sir  JAMES
WARE  was  mistaken,  when,  in  his  Antiquities  of
Ireland,  he  said  Arcklow  and  Wicklow  were  foren
names  :  whereas  they  are  mere  Irish,  the  first  be-
in  Ardeloch,  and  the  second  Buidhe-cloch,  from  higk
and  yellow  stones  of  this  consecrated  kind.  'Tis
not  to  vindicate  either  the  Celtic  nations  in  gene
ral,  or  my  own  country-men  in  particular,  for
honoring  of  such  stones,  or  for  having  stony  sym
bols  of  the  Deity  ;  but  to  show  they  were  neither
more  ignorant  nor  barbarous  in  this  respect  than
the  politest  of  nations,  the  Greecs  and  the  Rom
ans,  that  here  I  must  make  a  short  literary  ex
cursion.  Wherefore,  I  beg  your  Lordship  to  re
member,  that  KERMAND  KELSTACH  was  not  the  one-
Iy  MERCURY  of  rude  stone,  since  the  MERCURY
of  the  Greecs  was  not  portray'd  antiently  in  the

(69)  Magh-sleucht.

(70)  MF.RCURIUS  CELTICUS.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  135


shape  of  a  youth,  with  wings  to  his  heels  and
a  caduceus  in  his  hand  ;  but  (71),  without  hands
or  feet,  being  a  square  stone,  says  PHURNUTUS,  and
I  say  ,  without  any  sculpture.  The  reason  given
for  it  by  the  Divines  of  those  days,  was,  that  as
the  square  figure  betoken' d  his  solidity  and  stabili
ty  ;  so  he  wanted  neither  hands  nor  feet  to  exe
cute  what  he  was  commanded  by  JOVE.  Thus  their
merry-making  BACCHUS  was  figured  among  the  The-
bans  by  a  (72)  pillar  onely.  So  the  Arabians
worship  I  know  not  ivhat  God,  says  (73)  MAXI-
MUS  TYRIUS,  and  fhe  statue  that  I  saw  of  him,
was  a  square  stone.  I  shall  say  nothing  here  of
the  oath  of  the  Romans  per  Jovem  Lapidem.  But
no  body  pretends  that  the  Gauls  were  more  subtil
Theologues  or  Philosophers,  than  the  Arabians,  Greecs,
or  Romans;  at  least  many  are  apt  not  to  believe
it  of  their  Irish  Ofspring :  yet  'tis  certain,  that  all
those  nations  meant  by  these  stones  without  statues,
the  (74)  eternal  stability  and  power  of  the  Deity
and  that  he  cou'd  not  be  represented  by  any  simi
litude,  nor  under  any  figure  whatsoever.  For  the

(7t)    Plattetai  da  kai  acheir,  kai  apons,  kai  tetra-onos  to  schciaati,  d'  H»r

roes  :  tetra-onos  men,  to  edraion  te  kai  asphales  echein Acheir  dc  kai  ^  oo-1S

epei  oute  pod5n  onta  cheiron  deitai,  pros  to  anucin  to  prokeimciMW  auto.      />'-
JVuf.  Dear.  cap.  16.

(72)     Stulos  Thebaioisi  Dionussos  polujothes.      Clem.  Akx.  Stromat.  1*.  j,

tvo!^    Arab'IOi  ^^t  men  h0nti"a  d'    °uk  °Ida  '•  to  **  -Sal-aa  ho  eidon  11.
tboa  en  tetragonos.      Sena.  38.

<74)     To  aneikunistoo  to-j  theou  kai  monimon.      Id.  Hid,


136  THE  HISTORY

numberless  figures,  which,  notwithstanding  this  doc
trine,  they  had,  some  of  'em  very  ingenious,  and
some  very  fantastical,  were  onely  emblematical  or
enigmatical  symbols  of  the  divine  attributes  and
operations,  but  not  of  the  Divine  Essence.  Now  as
such  symbols  in  different  places  were  different,  so
they  were  often  confounded  together,  and  mistaken
for  each  other.  Nor  do  I  doubt,  but  in  this  manner
the  numerous  Cams  in  Gaule  and  Britain  induced
the  Romans  to  believe,  that  MERCURY  was  their
(75)  chief  God,  because  among  themselves  he  had
such  heaps,  as  I  show'd  above  ;  whereas  the  Celtic
heaps  were  all  dedicated  to  BELENUS,  or  the  Sun.
The  Roman  Historians  in  particular  are  often  mis
led  by  likenesses,  as  has  been  already,  and  will  not
seldom  again,  be  shown  in  our  History ;  especially
with  regard  to  the  Gods,  said  to  have  been  been
worship'd  by  the  Gauls.  Thus  some  modern  Critics
have  forg'd  new  Gods,  out  of  the  sepulchral  inscrip
tions  of  Gallic  Heroes.  I  shall  say  no  more  of  such
pillars,  but  that  many  of  them  have  a  cavity  on  the
top,  capable  to  hold  a  pint,  and  somtimes  more;
with  a  channel  or  groove,  about  an  inch  deep,  reach
ing  from  this  hollow  place  to  the  ground,  of  the
use  whereof  in  due  time.

XVI      Nor   will  I  dwell  longer   here,   than   our
subject  requires,  on  the  FATAL  STONE  so  calTd,

(75)      Deum   maxime   Merc.urium  colunt.      Hit  jits  sunt
plurima  simulacra,  $c.      Cues,  de  bello  Gallico,  lib.  a


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  137

on  which  the  supreme  Kings  of  Ireland  us'd  to
be  inaugurated  in  times  of  Heathenism  on  the
hill  of  (76)  Tarah  (77):  and  which  being  inclos-

(76)  Teamhuir,    or   in   the  oblique   cases    Teamhra,
whence  corruptly  Taragh,  or  Tarah.

(77)  The  true  names  of  this  stone  are  Liag-fail  or
the  fatal  stone,  and  Clock  na  cineamhna  or  the  stone  of

fortune :  both  of  them  from  a  persuasion  the  antient
Irish  had,  that,  in  what  country  soever  this  stone  re-
main'd,  there  one  of  their  blood  was  to  reign.  But
this  prov'd  as  false  as  such  other  prophesies  for  300
years,  from  EDWARD  the  first  to  the  reign  of  JAMES
the  first  in  England.  The  Druidical  Oracle  is  in  verse,
and  in  these  original  words :

Cioniodh  scuit  saor  an  fine,

Man  ba  breag  an  Faisdine,

Mar  a  bhfuighid  an  Lia-fail,

Dlighid  flaitheas  do  ghabhail.  •

Which  may  be  read  thus  truely,  but  monkishly  tran-*
slated,  in  HECTOR  BOETHIUS:

Ni  fallat  fatum,  Scoti,  quocunque  locatum
Invenient  lapidem  hunc,  regnare  tenentur  ibidem,

The  Lowland  Scots  have  rhymM  it  thus:
Except  old  Saws  do  feign,
And  wizards  wits  be  blind,
The  Scots  in  place  must  reign,
Where  they  this  stone  shall  find,

And  some  English  Poet  has  thus  render'd  it;
Consider  Scot,  wher'e'er  you  find  this  stone?
If  fates  fail  not,  there  fixt  must  be  your  throne.

The  Irish  pretend  to  have  memoirs  concerning  it  for
above  2000  years :  nay  Ireland  it  self  is  sometimes,

S


138  TOR  HISTORY


ed  in  a  wooden  Chair,  was  thought  to  emit  a
sound  under  the  rightful  Candidate,  a  thing  easi
ly  manag'd  by  the  Druids,  but  to  be  mute  un
der  a  man  of  none  or  a  bad  title,  that  is»  one
who  was  not  for  the  turn  of  those  Priests.  E-
very  one  has  read  of  Memnon's  vocal  statue  in
Egypt.  This  fatal  stone  was  superstitiously  sent
to  confirm  the  Irish  Colony  in  the  north  of  Great
Britain,  where  it  continued  as  the  Coronation-
seat  of  the  Scottish  Kings,  even  since  Christiani
ty  ;  till,  in  the  year  one  thousand  three-hundred,

from  this  stone,  by  the  poets  call'd  Inis-fail.  But  how
soon  they  begun  to  use  it,  or  whence  they  had  if,
lyes  altogether  in  the  dark.  What's  certain  is,  that
after  having  long  continued  at  Tarah,  it  was,  for  the
piurpose  I  have  mentioned,  sent  to  FERGUS,  the  first
^actual  King  of  Scots;  and  that  it  lay  in  Argile  (the
original  seat  of  the  Scots  in  Britain)  till,  about  the
year  of  Christ  842,  that  KENETH  the  2d,  the  son  of
ALPIN,  having  inlargM  his  borders  by  the  conquest
of  the  Picts,  transferred  this  stone,  for  the  same  pur
pose  as  before,  to  Scone.  So  great  respect  is  still  paid
by  Christians  to  a  Heathen  Prophesy!  not  onely  false
in  fact,  as  I  have  this  moment  prov'd;  but  evidently
illusory  and  equivocal,  it  being  a  thing  most  difficult
to  find  any  prince  in  Europe,  who,  some  way  or  other,
may  not  claim  kindred  of  every  other  princely  race
about  him,  and  consequently  be  of  that  blood.  This
is  tha  case  of  our  present  Soveraio  King  GEORGE,  who
is  indeed  descended  of  the  Scottish  race,  but  yet  in  pro
priety  of  speech  is  not  of  the  Scottish  line;  but  the
first  here  of  the  Brunswick  line,  as  others  begun  the
Brittish,  Saxon,  Danish,  Saio- Danish,  Norman,  Saxo-
Norman,  and  Scottish  lines.  Yet  this  not  being  the
sense  in  which  the  Irish  and  Scots  understand  the  Oracle,
they  ought  consequently  at  tais  very  time  to  look  upon
it  as  false,  and  groundless.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.

EDWARD     the    first    of    England  brought   it    from
Scone,    placing     it    under    the  Coronation-chair   at
Westminster  :    and  there  it  still  continues,  the   an-
tientest    respected    monument    in    the    world;     for
tho'    some  others   may   be  more   antient   as  to    du
ration,     yet  thus  superstitiously    regarded   they   are
not.      I    had   almost    forgot   to   tell   you,    that  'tis
now  by   the   vulgar   call'd  JACOB-STONE,   as  if  this
had  been   JACOB'S   pillow    at    Bethel  (78).     Neither
shall  I  be  more  copious  in  treating  of  another  kind
of  stones,   tho'  belonging   also  to  our  subject.  They
are   roundish    and   of  vast   bulk ;   but   so   artificial
ly   pitch'd  on   flat   stones,    sometimes   more,     some
times   fewer   in   number  :    that    touching   the    great
stone   lightly,   it   moves,    and   seems   to   totter,    to
the   great   amazement  of    the   ignorant ; ,  but    stirs
not,     at  least   not   sensibly,    for   that    is   the   case,
when   one   uses   his  whole    strength.      Of  this   sort
is   Maen-amber    in   Cornwall,     and   another  in  the
Peak  of  Derby,   whereof  Dr.  WOODWARD  has  given
me   an    account   from   his   own   observation.     Some
there  are   in   Wales,   one   that   I   have   seen   in  the
Parish  of   Clunmany   (79)  in  the  north   of  Ireland,
and   the   famous  rocking  stones  in  Scotland  ;  of  all
which,  and   many   more,     in   our  History.      Yet   I
cou'd  not  excuse   it  to  my  self,  if  I  did  not  with

(78)  Gen.  xxviii.  11,  18,  19,*

(79)  Cluainmaine*


140  THE  HISTORY


the   soonest,   let   your   Lordship  into   the   secret  of
this    reputed  Magic  ;     which   the    no    less  learned
Antiquary   than    able   Physician,    Sir   ROBERT  SIB-
BALD,   has  discovered  in   the  Appendix   to   his  His
tory  of  Fife  and  Kinross.     That  Gentleman  speak
ing    of    the   Rocking-stone    near   Balvaird,    or  the
Bards-town,  "  I  am  informed,    (says  he),   that   this
61  stone   was  broken    by   the  Usurper   CROMWELL'S
**  Soldiers  ;    and   it   was   discover'd   then,    that    its
<*•  motion   was   performed   by  a  yolk  extuberant  in
**  the  middle  of  the  under-surface  of  the  upper  stone,
**  which  was  inserted  in  a  cavity  in  the  surface  of
**  the  lower  stone."    To  which  let  me  add,  that  as
the  lower   stone  was  flat,   so  the  upper   stone  was
globular :  and  that  not  onely  a  just  proportion  in  the
motion,  was  calculated  from  the  weight  of  the  stone,
and  the  wideness  of  the  cavity,  as  well  as  the  oval
figure  of  the  inserted  prominence ;  but  that  the  vast
bulk  of  the  upper  stone  did  absolutely  conceal  the
mechanism  of  the  motion  ;  and  the  better  still  to  im
pose,  there  were  two  or  three  surrounding  flat  stones,,
tho'  that  onely  in  the  middle  was  eoncern'd  in  the
feat.    By  this  pretended  miracle  they  condemn'd  of
perjury,   or  acquitted,   as  their  interest  or  their  af
fection  led  them ;  and  often  brought  criminals  to  con
fess,  what  could  be  no  other  way  extorted  from  them.
So  prevalent  is  the  horror  of  Superstition   in  some
cases,  which  led  many  people  to  fancy,  and  among
them  the  otherwise  most  judicious  STRABO,   that  it
Knight  be  a  useful  cheat  to  society :  not  considering;


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  14!


that  in  other  cases,  incomparably  more  numerous
and  important,  it  is  most  detrimental,  pernicious,
and  destructive,  being  solely  useful  to  the  Priests
that  have  the  management  of  it ;  while  it  not
onely  disturbs  or  distresses  society,  but  very  of
ten  confounds  and  finally  overturns  it,  of  which
History  abounds  with  examples.

XVII.  I  come  now  to  the  DRUIDS  HOUSES,
by  which  I  don't  mean  their  Forts  or  Towns,  of
of  which  they  had  many,  but  not  as  Church-
lands  ;  nor  yet  the  Houses  for  their  Schools,  situ
ated  in  the  midst  of  pleasant  groves  :  but  I  mean
little,  arch'd,  round,  stone  buildings,  capable  only
of  holding  one  person,  where  the  retir'd  and  con
templative  Druid  sat,  when  his  Oak  could  not
shelter  him  from  the  weather.  There's  another
sort  of  Druid's  houses  much  larger.  Of  both  these
sorts  remain  several  yet  intire  in  the  lie  of  Sky,
and  also  in  some  other  lies  ;  being  by  the  Na
tives  (80)  call'd  Tighthe  nan  Druidhneach,  that  is,
Druids  Houses.  Many  of  them  are  to  be  seen  in
Wales,  and  some  in  Ireland  :  but  different  from
those  under-ground  houses,  or  artificial  Caves,  which
are  in  all  those  places ;  consisting  frequently  of
several  chambers,  and  generally  opening  towards
rivers  or  the  sea  :  having  been,  as  those  of  the

(90)    Corruptly  Tinan  Druinich.


142  THE  HISTORY

Germans  describ'd  by  (81)  TACITUS,  magazines  a-
gainst  the  extreme  rigor  of  winter,  or  hiding  places
for  men  and  goods  in  time  of  war.  The  vulgar
in  the  Hands  do  still  show  a  great  respect  for  the
Druid's  Houses,  and  never  come  to  the  antient
sacrificing  and  fire-hallowing  Cams,  but  they  walk
three  times  round  them  from  east  to  west,  ac
cording  to  the  course  of  the  Sun.  This  sanctifi
ed  tour  or  round  by  the  south,  is  calTd  (82)
Deiseal  ;  as  the  unhallow'd  contrary  one  by  the
north,  (83)  Tuapholl.  But  the  Irish  and  Albani
an  Scots  do  not  derive  the  first,  as  a  certain
friend  of  mine  imagined,  from  Di-sul,  which  sig
nifies  Sunday  in  Armorican  British,  as  Dydh-syl
in  the  Welsh  and  De-zil  in  Cornish  do  the  same  ;
but  from  (84)  Deas,  the  right,  understanding,  hand
and  Soil,  one  of  the  antient  names  of  the  Sun,
the  right  hand  in  this  round  being  ever  next  the
heap.  The  Protestants  in  the  Hebrides  are  al
most  as  much  addicted  to  the  Deuiol,  as  the  Pa
pists.  Hereby  it  may  be  seen,  how  hard  it  is
to  eradicate  inveterate  Superstition.  This  custom

(81)  Sulent  et  subterraneos  specus  aperire,  eosque  multo
insuperfimo  onerant:  swffugium  hiemi,  ac  receptaculumfru-
gipus  ;  quia  rigorem  frigorum  ej  us  modi  locis  molliunt.  Et
si  quando  hostis  advenit,  aperta  papula  tur  :  abdita  autem  et
defossa  aut  ignorantur,  aut  eo  ipto  fallunt,  quod  quaerend&
De  moribus  German,  cap,  3.


Dextrorsum.

(83)  Sinistrorsum.

(84)  Item  Deis.


OF  THE  DRUIDS. 143

was     us'd    three    thousand    years   ago,     and    God
knows  how  long  before,   by  their  ancestors  the  an-
tient   Gauls  of  the  same  religion   with  them  ;  who
turned  round  right-hand-wise,    when   they   worshiped
their  Gods,   as  (85)    ATHENEUS   informs   us   out   of
POSIDONIUS  a  much  elder  writer.     Nor  is  this  con
tradicted,    but    clearly    confirm'd   by    PLINY,    who
says,   that  the  Gauls,  contrary   to  the  custom  of  the
(86)  Romans,    turned  to  the    left    in   their   religious
ceremonies ;    for    as   they   begun   their  worship    to
wards   the   east,    so   they   turn'd   about,   as   our   II-
anders   do  now,    from   east    to    west   according  to
the   course  of  the  Sun,  that   is,   from   right   to  left,
as  PLINY  has   observ'd  ;    whereas   the   left  was   a-
mong    the   Romans  reputed   the  right   in   Augury,
and  in  all  devotions  answering  it.     Nor  were  their
neighbors,   the  Aboriginal  Italians,   most  of  'em  of
Gallic  descent,  strangers  to  this  custom  of  worship
ping  right-hand-wise,  which,  not  to  allege  more  Pas
sages,  may  be  seen  by  this  one  in  the  (87)  Curculio  of
PLAUTUS,  who  was  himself  one  of  them  :   when  you
worship  the  Gods,  do  it  turning  to  the  right  hand;
which  answers  to  turning  from  the  west  to  the  cast.
It  is  perhaps  from  this  respectful  turning  from  east  to

(85)  Houtoi  theous  proskunou&in,  epi  la  dexia  Strephomenoi.  Lil.  4.  Pag.  152,

(86)  In  adorando  dexteram  ad  osculum  referimus,  to-
tumque  corpus  circumagimus -,  quod  in  laevum  ferisse  GaUi
religionus  credunt.      Hist.  Nat.  lib.  28.  cap.  Q.

(87)  Si   Deos  salutas,  dextroi-orsum  censeo.     Act.   1.
Seen.  1.  ver.  70.


14*  THE  HISTORY

west,  that  we  retain  the  custom  of  drinking  ove
left  thumb,  or,  as  others  express  it,  according  t
course  of  the  Sun;  the  breaking  of  which  ord<
reckoned  no  small  Impropriety,  if  not  a  downrigl
decency,  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  And  no
der,  since  this,  if  you  have  faith  in  HOMER,  wa
custom  of  the  Gods  themselves.  VULCAN,  in  the
book  of  the  (88)  Iliad,  filling  a  bumper  to  his  rn
JUNO,

To  th*  other  Gods,  going  round  from  right  to  hj
Skenk'd  Nectar  sweet,  which  from  full  flask  he  /><

But  more  of  the  right  hand  in  the  chapter  of  Auk

XVIII.     To  resume  our  discourse  about  the  D
houses,   one  of  them  in  the  Hand  of  St.  KIL
very  remarkable;    and,   according  to  the   tra<
of  the  place,  must  have  belonged  to  a  Druidess.
be  this  as  it  will,  it  is  all  of  stone,  without  lin
mortar,  or  earth  to  cement  it :  'tis  also  arch'd,  a
a  conic  figure ;  but  open  at  the  top,  and  a  fire
in  the  middle  of  the  floor.     It  cannot  contain  above
nine  persons,  to  sit  easy  by  each  other*  and  from
this  whole  description  'tis  clear,  that  the  edifice  call
ARTHUR'S  Oven  in  Sterling  shire,  just  of  the   same
form  and  dimensions,  is  by  no  means  of  Roman  ori
ginal,   whatever  our  antiquaries   have    thoughtlesly
fancy'd  to  the  contrary.     Some  make  it  the  Temple

(P8)     Autar  ho  tois  alloisi  theois  endexia  pasin  onochoei,  gluku  nektar  apo
kretcros  aphusson.     It.  1.  Ver.  a97.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  145

of  TERMINUS,    and  others  a  triumphal  arch,   when
they  might  as  well  have  fancy'd  it  to  be  a  hogtrough :
so  little  is  it  like  any  of  those  arches.      As  to  the
house  in  St.  KILDA,  there  go  off  from  the  side  of  the
wall  three  low  vaults,  separated  from  each  other  by
pillars,    and   capable    of    containing   five   persons    a
piece.     Just   such  another  house  in  all  respects,  but
much  larger,   and  grown  over  with   a  green  sod  on
the  outside,  is  in  Borera,  an  lie  adjacent  to  St.  KIL
DA  ;  and  was  the  habitation  of  a  Druid,  who  'tis  pro
bable  was  not  unacquainted  with  his  neighbouring
Druidess.     Shetland    abounds  with   another  kind  of
stone  houses,  not  unfrequent  in  Orkney,  which  they
ascribe  to  the  Picts ;  as  they  are  apt  all  over  Scotland
to  make  every  thing  Pictish,  whose  origin  they  do
not  know.     The  Belgae  or  Fir-bolgs  share  this  honor
with  the  Picts  in  Ireland,  and  King  ARTHUR  is  re
puted  the  author  of  all  such  fabrics  in  Wales,  except
that  those  of  Anglesey  father  7em  on  the  Irish.    These
instances  I  have  given  your  Lordship,  to  convince
you,  how  imperfect  all   Treatises  about  the  Druids
(hitherto  publish'd)  must  needs  be ;  since  they  con
tain  nothing  of  this  kind,   tho'  ever  so  essential  to
the  subject :  and  that  none  of  these  Monuments,  very
frequent  in  France,  are  there  ascrib'd  to  the  Druids,
their  records  about  such  things  being  all  lost ;  while
very  many  of  ours  happily  remain  to  clear  them,  since
the  usages  were  the  same  in  both  countries.     Nor
are  those  Treatises  less  defective  in  the  more  instruc
tive  part,  concerning  the    Druidical  Philosophy  and

T


146  THE  HISTORY


Politics,  whereof  the  modern  French  and  Brittish
\vriters,  have  in  reality  known  nothing  further,  than
the  Classic  authors  furnish'd  'em ;  or  if  they  add  any
thing,  'tis  absolutely  fabulous,  ill-invented,  and  unau-
thoriz'd.  These  subjects  I  reserve  intire  for  my
greater  work.  JOHN  AUBREY  Esq;  a  Member  of  the
Royal  Society,  with  whom  I  became  acquainted  at
Oxford,  when  I  was  a  sojourner  there ;  and  collecting
during  my  idler  hours  a  Vocobulary  of  Armorican
and  Irish  words,  which,  in  sound  and  signification,
agree  better  together  than  with  the  Welsh,  was  the
only  person  I  ever  then  met,  who  had  a  right  notion
of  the  Temples  of  the  Druids,  or  indeed  any  notion
that  the  Circles  so  often  mention'd  were  such  Temples
at  all :  wherein  he  was  intirely  connrm'd,  by  the  au
thorities  which  I  show'd  him;  as  he  supply'd  me  in
return  with  numerous  instances  of  such  Monuments,
which  he  was  at  great  pains  to  observe  and  set  down.
And  tho'  he  was  extremely  superstitious,  or  seem'd
to  be  so :  yet  he  was  a  very  honest  man,  and  most
accurate  in  his  accounts  of  matters  of  fact.  But  the
facts  he'  knew,  not  the  reflections  he  made,  were  what
I  wanted.  Nor  will  I  deny  justice  on  this  occasion,
to  a  person  whom  I  cited  before,  and  who  in  many
other  respects  merits  all  -  the  regard  which  the  curious
can  pay ;  I  mean  Sir  ROBERT  SIBBALD,  who,  in  his
foresaid  History  of  Fife,  but  very  lately  come  to  my
hands,  affirms,  that  there  are  several  Druids  Temples
to  be  seen  every  where  in  Scotland,  particulary  in  the


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  147

County  he  describes.  These  (says  he)  arc  great  stones
placed  in  a  circle,  at  some  distance  from  each  other,  &cc.
Mr.  AUBREY  show'd  me  several  of  Dr.  GARDEN'S  let
ters  from  that  kingdom  to  the  same  purpose,  but  in
whose  hands  now  I  know  not.

XIX.  I  shall  conclude  this  Letter  with  two  ex
amples  of  such  works,  as  tho'  not,  that  I  can  hitherto
learn,  belonging  any  way  to  the  Druids,  yet  they  may
possibly  be  of  that  kind  :  or  be  they  of  what  kind  you
will,  they  certainly  merit  our  notice ;  as,  together
with  those  for  which  we  can  truely  account,  they
highly  serve  to  illustrate  the  Antiquities  of  our  Brit-
tish  world.  My  first  example  is  in  the  Main-land  of
Orkney,  describ'd  among  the  rest  of  those  Islands  by
Dr.  WALLACE  and  Mr.  BRAND  ;  where,  on  the  top  of
a  high  rocky  hill  at  the  west  end  of  the  Hand  neaT  the
village  of  Skeal,  there  is  a  sort  of  pavement,  consist
ing  of  stones  variously  figured,  some  like  a  heart,  o-
thers  like  a  crown,  others  like  a  leg,  some  like  a
weaver's  shuttle,  others  of  other  forms :  and  so  on  for
above  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length,,  and  from  twenty  to
thirty  foot  in  breadth.  In  taking  up  any  of  these
stones,  the  figure  is  as  neat  on  the  underside  as  the
upper :  and  being  as  big  as  the  life,  all  of  one  color,
or  a  reddish  kind  of  stone  pitch'd  in  a  reddish  earth,
and  the  pavement  being  so  very  long  ;  it  cannot  pos
sibly  be  any  of  the  tessellated,  or  chequer d  works  of
the  Romans.  "  I  saw  a  part  of  the  garden  wall  of
"  the  house  of  Skeal,  says  (89)  Mr,  BRAND,  decor  v'

(89)     Pag.  43.


148  THE  HISTORY


"•'  ed  with  these  stones :  and  we  intended  to  have
"  sent  a  parcel  of  them  to  our  friends  in  the  south,
"  as  a.  rarity  ;  if  they  had  not  been  forgot,  at  our  re-
"  turn  from  Zet-land."  Dr.  WALLACE  (90)  also
says,  that  many  of  the  stones  are  taken  away  by  the
neighboring  gentry,  to  set  them  up  like  Dutch  tiles  in
their  chimneys :  so  that,  at  this  rate,  in  less  than  a
century  this  pavement  will  in  all  likelihood  subsist
only  in  books.  All  such  Monuments,  when  I  go  to
Scotland,  I  shall  so  accurately  describe  in  every  re
spect,  and  give  such  accounts  of  them  where  account
able  ;  that  I  hope  the  curious  will  have  reason  to  be
satisfy'd,  or  at  least  some  abler  person  be  emulous  of
satisfying  the  world,  and  me  among  the  rest.  Where-
ever  I  am  at  a  loss,  I  shall  frankly  own  it ;  and  never
give  my  conjectures  for  more  than  what  they  are,
that  is,  probable  guesses  :  and  certainly  nothing  can
be  more  amiss  in  Inquiries  of  this  kind,  than  to  ob
trude  suppositions  for  matters  of  fact.  Upon  all  such
occasions,  I  desire  the  same  liberty  with  CRASSUS  in
CICERO  de  (91)  Orator e :  that  I  may  deny  being  able
to  do,  what  Tme  sure  I  cannot ;  and  to  confess  that  I
am  ignorant^  of  what  1  do  not  know.  This  I  shall  not
onely  be  ever  ready  to  do  my  self,  but  to  account  it  in
others  a  learned  ignorance.

XX.     But,  My  Lord,  before  I  take  my  intended
journey,  I  desire  the  favour  of  having  your  thoughts

(90)  Pag.  55.

(91)  Mihi  liceat  negare  posxe,  quod  nonpotero;  ctfateri
net/tire,  quod  nesciam,    lib.  2.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  149

upon  my  next  example.  I  speak  of  a  couple  of  in
stances,  really  parallel ;  brought  here  together  from
parts  of  the  world  no  less  distant  in  their  situation
and  climates,  than  different  in  their  condition  and
manners.  Egypt,  I  mean,  and  the  lies  of  Scotland.
Yet  this  they  have  in  common,  that  Egypt,  once  the
mother  of  all  arts  and  sciences,  is  now  as  ignorant  of
her  own  monuments,  and  as  fabulous  in  the  accounts
of  them,  as  any  Highlanders  can  be  about  theirs.
Such  changes  however  are  as  nothing  in  the  number
less  revolutions  of  ages.  But  to  our  subject.  HERO
DOTUS  says,  in  the  second  Book  of  his  History,  that
near  to  the  entry  of  the  magnificent  Temple  of  MI
NERVA  at  Sais  in  Egypt,  of  which  he  speaks  with  ad
miration,  he  saw  an  edifice  twenty-one  cubits  in
length,  fourteen  in  breadth,  and  eight  in  heigth,  the
whole  consisting  onely  of  one  stone ;  and  that  it  was
brought  thither  by  sea,  from  a  place  about  twenty
days  sailing  from  Sais.  This  is  my  first  instance.
And,  parallel  to  it,  all  those  who  have  been  in  Hoy,
one  of  the  Orkneys,  do  affirm,  without  citing,  or  many
of  them  knowing  this  passage  of  HERODOTUS,  that
there  lies  on  a  barren  heath  in  this  Hand  an  oblong
stone,  in  a  valley  between  two  moderate  hills ;  call'd
I  suppose  antiphrastically,  or  by  way  of  contraries,  the
DWARFY-STONE.  It  is  thirty-six  foot  long,  eigh
teen  foot  broad,  and  nine  foot  high.  No  other  stones
are  near  it.  'Tis  all  hoilow'd  within,  or,  as  we  may
say,  scoop'd  by  human  art  and  industry,  having  a  door
on  the  east  side  two  foot  square  ;  with  a  stone  of  the


150  THE  HISTORY


same  dimension  lying  about  two  foot  from  it,  which
was  intended  no  doubt  to  close  this  entrance.  With
in  there  is,  at  the  south  end  of  it,  cut  out  the  form  of
a  bed  and  pillow,  capable  to  hold  two  persons :  as,  afe
the  north  end,  there  is  another  bed,  Dr.  WALLACE  says,
a  couch,  both  very  neatly  done.  Above,  at  an  equal
distance  from  both,  is  a  large  round  hole :  which  is
suppos'd,  not  onely  to  have  been  design'd  for  letting  in
of  light  and  air,  when  the  door  was  shut ;  but  like
wise  for  letting  out  of  smoke  from  the  fire,  for  which
there  is  a  place  made  in  the  middle  between  the  two
beds.  The  marks  of  the  workman's  tool  appear  every
where ;  and  the  tradition  of  the  vulgar  is,  that  a  Giant
and  his  wife  had  this  stone  for  their  habitation :  tho'
the  door  alone  destroys  this  fancy,  which  is  wholly
groundless  every  way  besides,  Dr.  WALLACE  thinks
it  might  be  the  residence  of  a  Hermit,  but  it  appears
this  Hermit  did  not  design  to  ly  always  by  himself.
Just  by  it  is  a  clear  and  pleasant  spring,  for  the  use  of
the  inhabitant.  I  wish  it  were  in  Surrey,  that  I  might
make  it  a  summer  study.  As  to  the  original  design
of  this  monument,  men  are  by  nature  curious  enough
to  know  the  causes  of  things,  but  they  are  not  patient
enough  in  tbeir  search :  and  so  will  rather  assign  any
cause,  tho'  ever  so  absurd ;  than  suspend  their  judge
ments,  till  they  discover  the  true  cause,  which  yet  in
this  particular  I  am  resolv'd  to  do.

XXI.     Now,  rnv  LORD,   imagine  what   you  please
about   the   religious  or  civil  use   of  this   stone,  my


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  151


difficulty   to   your   Lordship   is  ;   how   they   were  a-
ble    to   accomplish   this    piece    of  Architecture,    a-
mong   the   rest    that  I   have   mentioned,     in    those
remote,  barren,   and  uncultivated  Hands  ?     And  how
such    prodigious   Obelises   cou'd    be    erected   there,
no    less   than    in    other    parts    of  Britain,   and   in
Ireland  ?    for  which   we  have  scarce   any   sufficiant
machines,    in  this  time  of  Learning  and  Politeness.
These  Monuments    of    every   kind,    especially    the
Forts   and   the  Obelises,   induc'd  HECTOR  BOETHIUS
to    tell    strange    stories   of    the    Egyptians   having
been   there  in   the  reign   of  MAINUS  King   of  Scot
land  :     nor   do   they    a    little    confirm    the   notion,
which  some  both   of  the   Irish   and  Albanian   Scots
have    about    their   Egyptian,     instead   of  Scythian,
or    as   I     shall    evince,    a    Celtic    original  ;   tho'   I
assign   more   immediately   a   British    for   the   Irish,
and    an   Irish    extraction   for    the    Scots.     Nor    is
there   any   thing   more    ridiculous    than   what  they
relate   of  their   Egyptian   stock  ;    except   what   the
Britons    fable   about    their   Trojan    ancestors.     Yet
a   reason   there   is,   why   they   harp   so   much   upon
Egyptians  and  Spaniards  :    but  altogether  misunder
stood   or  unobserved  by   writers.     But,   not  to   for
get   our  Monuments,    you   will  not    say,  what,  tho'
possible,    appears/  improbable,  that,  according   to  the
ceasless   vicissitude   of    things,   there    was    a   time,
when    the    inhabitants   of    these    Hands     W€re    as
learned    and   knowing,     as    the    present   Egyptians
and  ths  Highlands    are   ignorant.      But   say    what


THE  HISTORY


you  will,  it  cannot  fail  diffusing  light  on  the
subject  ;  and  to  improve,  if  not  intirely  to  satis
fy,  the  Inquirer.  The  ILE  OF  MAN,  as  I  said
above,  does  no  less  abound  in  these  Monuments
of  all  sorts,  than  any  of  the  places  we  have  nam
ed  ;  and  therefore  sure  to  be  visited,  and  all  its
ancient  remains  to  be  examin'd,  by,


MY  LORD,
Your  Lordship's   most   obliged,

And  very  humble  Servant.
July  1.


lyl.   )
1718.  )


THE     THIRD

LETTER,

TO    THE

EIGHT  HONOURABLE  THE  LORD

Viscount  Molesworth.


.|_  TARE  the  Liberty,  My  Lord,  to  treble  you  a
third  time  with  the  company  of  the  DRUIDS  ;
who,  like  other  Priests,  resort  always  to  the  place
where  the  best  intertarament  is  to  be  found  :  and
yet  I  must  needs  own,  it  derogates  much  from
the  merit  of  their  visit;  that,  In  the  quality  of
Philosophers  they  know  not  where  to  find  a  hear
tier  welcom  than  in  your  Lordship's  study.  Tho1
I  have  very  particularly  explain'd  the  plan  of  my
History  of  the  Druids9  m  the  two  last  Letters  I
did  my  self  the  honor  to  send  you  on  this  subject ;
yet  the  work  being-  considerably  large,  and  con
taining  great  variety  of  matter,  have  still  sornthing
to  impart,  in  order  to  give  the  clearer  idea  of  my
design,  And  it  is,  that,  besides  the  citations  of
authors,  indispensably  requisite  in  proving  matters
of  fact  newly  advanc'd^  or  in  deciding  of  antient
doubts  and  controversies,  not  to  speak  of  such  as
come  in  by  way  of  ornament,  or  that  a  writer
modestly  prefers  to  his  own  expressions,  I  have

U


154  THE  HISTORY

sometimes  occasion  to  touch  upon  passages,  which,
tho'  I  cou'd  easily  abridge,  or  needed  but  barely
hint  with  relation  to  the  purpose  for  which  I  pro
duce  them :  yet  being  in  themselves  either  very
curious  and  instructive,  or  lying  in  books  that  come
into  few  people's  hands,  I  chuse  to  give  them  in
my  History  intire.  This  method  I  have  learnt
from  my  best  masters  among  the  antients,  who
practis'd  it  with  much  success ;  tho',  like  them,  I
use  it  very  sparingly.  One  or  two  instances  you'll
not  be  sorry  to  see.  The  explication  I  have  given,
in  the  llth  section  of  my  first  Letter,  of  OGMIUS,
the  antient  Gallic  name  of  HERCULES,  I  am  no
less  certain  you  do  not  forget*  than  that  you  re
member  I  promis'd  to  take  an  "opportunity  of  send
ing  you  the  whole  piece ;  which  I  have  thus  tran
slated  from  the  original  Greec,  with  the  utmost
arruracy.  "  The  Gauls,  says  (1)  LUCIAN,  call
"  HERCULES  in  their  country  language  OGMIUS.
"  But  they  represent  the  picture  of  this  God  in
"  a  very  unusual  manner.  With  them  he  is  a
"  decrepit  old  man,  bald  before,  his  beard  extreme-
"  ly  gray,  as  are  the  few  other  hairs  he  has
"  remaining.  His  skin  is  wrinkl'd,  sunburnt,  and
"  of  such  a  swarthy  hue  as  that  of  old  mariners:
"  so  that  you  wou'd  take  him  to  be  CHARON,  or
"  some  IAPETUS  from  the  nethermost  hell,  or  any

(1)       Ton  Heroklea  hoi   K«'ltoi  OGMION   or.omadsousi  phr>ne  t~>.   epichorio,

et  quctc  sequuntur  in  HERCULE  Galiico  :    Graeca  etcnim
longiora  stint,  quam  tit  hie  commode  insert  possint.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  155

"  thing  rather  than  HERCULES.  But  tho'  he  be
"  such  thus  far,  yet  he  has  withall  the  Habit  of
"  HERCULES  ;  being  clad  in  the  skin  of  a  Lion,
"  holding  a  Club  in  his  right  hand,  a  Quiver
"  hanging  from  his  shoulders,  and  a  bent  Bow  in
"  his  left  hand.  Upon  the  whole  it  is  HERCULES.
"  I  was  of  opinion  that  all  these  things  were  perver-
"  sely  done,  in  dishonor  of  the  Grecian  Gods,  by
"  the  Gauls  to  the  picture  of  HERCULES  :  re-
"  venging  themselves  upon  him  by  such  a  repre-
"  sentation,  for  having  formerly  over-run  their  count-
"  ry,  and  driving  a  "Prey  out  of  it  ;  as  he  was
"  seeking  after  the  herd  of  GERYON,  at  which
"  time  he  made  incursions  into  most  of  the  wes-
"  tern  nations.  But  I  have  not  yet  toldi  what
"  is  most  odd  and  strange  in  this  picture  ;  for
a  this  old  HERCULES  draws  after  him  a  vast  mul-
"  titude  of  men,  all  ty'd  by  their  Ears.  The
"  cords  by  which  he  does  this  are  small  fine  Chains,
"  artificially  made  of  gold  and  electrum,  like  to
"  most  beautiful  bracelets.  And  tho'  the  men  are
"  drawn  by  such  slender  bonds,  yet  none  of  'em
"  thinks  of  breaking  loose,  when  they  might  easily
"  do  it  ;  neither  do  they  strive  in  the  least  to
"  the  contrary,  or  struggle  with  their  feet,  lean-
"  ing  back  with  all  their  might  against  their
"  Leader:  but  they  gladly  and  cheerfully  follow,
"  praising  him  that  draws  them ;  all  seeming  in
:  haste,  and  desirous  to  get  before  each  other,
"  holding  up  the  chains,  as  if  they  should  be


156  THE  HISTORY


w  very   sorry   to   be   set   free.     Nor  will   I   grudge

"  telling   here,   what   of  all   these   matters  appear-

"  ed   the  most   absurd  to  me.      The  Painter  find-

"  ing    no  place   where   to   fix   the   extreme    links

"  of  the    Chains,    the   right   hand   being   occupy'd

<•  with   a   Club,     and   the     left   with    a   Bow,    he

"  made   a   hole   In   the   tip   of  the    God's    tongue,

'•'  who   turns   smiling   towards    those   he   leads,  and

"  and   panited   them    as    drawn    from    thence.      I

"  looked   upon   these   things   a   great   while,   some-

"  times   admiring,  sometimes  doubting,   and   some-

"  times   chafing   with    indignation.      But    a   certain

"  Gaul  who   stood  by,    not   ignorant  of  our  affairs,

"  as    he   show'd   by    speaking  Greec   in   perfection,

"  being   one   of  the  Philosopers,  I  suppose,  of  that

"  nation,     said,    I'll   explain     to   you,    O    stranger,

"  the   enigma   of    this   picture,    for   it    seems   not

"  a  little   to   disturb   you.     We  Gauls  do  not  sup-

"  pose,  as  you  Greecs,  that  MERCURY  is  SPEECH

"  or  Eloquence  ;  but  we  attribute  it  to  HERCULES,

"  because  he's  far  superior  in  strength  to  MECURV.

"  Don't   wonder,    that   he's   represented   as   an    old

"  man:   for  SPEECH  alone  loves  to  show  its  ut-

<c  most  vigor  in  old  age,  if  your  own  Poets  speak

"  true.

All  young  mens  breasts  are  with  thick  darkness  Jill' d:
But  age  experienced  has  much  more  to  say,
More  wise  and  learnedt  than  rude  untaught  youth.

"  Thus,  among  your  selves,  hony  drops  from


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  157

"  TOR'S   tongue;    and   the   Trojan    Orators   emit   a

"  certain   voice   call'd   Lirioessa,    that   is,    a   florid

"  speech ;    for,    if    I   remember   right,    flowers   are

"  call'd  Liria.     Now  that  HERCULES,  or  SPEECH,

"  shou'd   draw   men   after   him  ty'd   by  their   Ears

"  to   his  Tongue,   will   be  no   cause  of  admiration

"  to   you;   when   you  consider  the  near  affinity  of

"  the  Tongue  with  the  Ears.      Nor  is  his  Tongue

"  contumeliously   bor'd :   for   I   remember,   said  he,

"  to  have  learnt  certain  Iambics  out  of  your  own

"  Comedians,  one  of  which  says,

The  tips  of  all  Prater's  tongues  are  bord.

"  And  finally,  as  for  us,  we  are  of  opinion,  that
"  HERCULES  accomplished  all  his  atchievments  by
"  SPEECH ;  and,  that  having  been  a  wise  man,
"  he  conquer'd  mostly  by  persuasion  :  we  think
t(  his  arrows  were  keen  Reasons,  easily  shot,  quick,
*(  and  penetrating  the  souls  of  men ;  whence  you
"•  have,  among  you,  the  expression  of  wing'd  words,
"  Hitherto  spoke  the  Gaul."  From  this  ingeni
ous  picture  LUCIAN  draws  to  himself  an  argument
of  Consolation  :  that  the  study  and  profession  of
Eloquence  was  not  unbecoming  him  in  his  old
age,  being  rather  more  fit  than  ever  to  teach  the
Belles  Letters ;  when  his  stock  of  knowlege  was
most  complete,  as  his  Speech  was  more  copious,
polish'd,  and  mature,  than  formerly.

II,    As  my  first  instance  is  furnish'd  by  a  man5


153  THE  HISTORY

I  i     ^f~m~~~——">       ii  i       _  _•«••—•••  I     I      «•

who,  for  his  Eloquence  and  love  of  Liberty,  qualities
no  less  conspicuous  in  your  Lordship,  deserv'd  to
have  his  memory  consecrated  to  Immortality,  which
was  all  that  the  wisest  of  the  antients  understood
by  making  any  one  a  God ;  so  my  second  instance
shall  be  taken  from  a  woman,  whose  frailty  and
perfidiousness  will  serve  as  a  foil  to  those  learned
Druidesses,  and  other  illustrious  Heroines,  which
I  frequently  mention  in  my  History.  I  introduce
her  in  a  passage  I  have  occasion  to  allege,  when
I  am  proving,  that  wherever  the  Gaids  or  Britons
are  in  any  old  author  simply  said  to  offer  sacri
fice,  without  any  further  circumstances  added,  this
nevertheless  is  understood  to  be  done  by  the  mi
nistry  of  the  Druids;  it  having  been  as  unlawful
for  any  of  the  Celtic  nations  to  sacrifice  other
wise,  as  it  was  for  the  Jews  to  do  so  without
their  Priests  and  Levites.  The  Druids,  says  (2)
JULIUS  CAESAR,  perform  divine  service,  they  offer
the  public  and  private  sacrifices,  they  interpret  re
ligious  observances :  and  even  when  particular  per
sons  wou'd  propitiate  the  Gods,  for  the  continu
ing  or  restoring  of  their  Health ;  they  make  nse
of  the  Druids,  adds  he  (3),  to  offer  those  sacrifices.


(2)  Illi  rebus  divhiis  intersunt,  sacrificia  publica  ac  pri-
Tata  procurant,  rcligiones  inter prctantur.    De  Bdio  Galileo,
lib.  6.  cap.  12.

(3)  Adminjjtrisque  ad  ea  sacrificia  Dmidibus  uiuntur.
Ibid.


OF  THE  DKUIDS.  159

9^Tis   the   established   custom   of  the    Gauls,   says   (4)
DIODORUS    SICULUS,    to   offer   no   sacrifice   without  a
Philosopher,  which  is  to  say,  a  DruiS:  and  STRABO
so  expresses  it,  affirming,  that  (5)  they  never  sacri
fice   without  the   Druids.     This   unanswerable   proof
being   premis'd,   now   follows   one   of   the   passages,
wherein   a   Gaul  being   said   simply   to   sacrifice,    I
think  fit  to  relate  the  whole  story.      Tis  the  eigth
of  PARTHENIUS  of  Nicea's  Love-stories,  related  before
him  (as  he  says)  in  the  first  book  of  the  History
vritten  by  ARISTODEMUS  of  Nysa,  now  lost.     This
'ARTHENIUS  addresses  his  book  to  CORNELIUS  GAL-
US,  for  whose  use  he  wrote  it,  being  the  game  to
/'horn  VIRGIL  inscrib'd  his  tenth  Eclog.     The  story
uns  thus.     "  When  (6)  the  Gauls  had  made  an  in
cursion  into  Ionia,  and  sack'd  most  of  the  cities,
the    Thesmophorian    festival    was    celebrated    at
Miletus;  which  occasioning  all  the  women  to  as
semble  together  in  the  Temple,  that  was  not   far
from  the  city  :    part  of  the  Barbarian  army,  which
separated  from  the  rest,  made  an  irruption  into  the
Milesian  territory,  and  seiz'd  upon  those  women;
whom  the  Milesians  were  forc'd  to  ransom,  giving
in  exchange  a  great  sum  of  gold  and  silver.     Yet
the  Barbarians  took  some  of  them  away  for  do-

(4)     Ethas  <T  auto's  esti,  raeJeaa  tlausian  poiein  anea  philosopher.     Lift.    '6.
pag.  303.  Edit.  Hanov.

5)     Ethtton  de  ouk  aneu  Druidon.     Lib.  4.  pag.  303.  Edit.  Amstcl.
tf)     Hote  de  hoi  Galatai  katrJramon  ten  Ionian,  ct  quac  scqui^ntur.


160  THE  HISTORY


((  mestic  use,  among  whom  was  ERIPPE  (7)  the  wile
"  of  XANTHUS  (a  man  of  the  first  rank  and  birth  in
"  Miletus)  testing  behind  her  a  boy  onely  two  years
"  olde.  Now  XANTHUS  passionately  loving  his  wife,
"  turn'd  part  of  his  substance  into  money,  and  having
"  amass'd  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  he  crooss'd  over
"  with  the  soonest  into  Italy ;  whence  being  guided
"  by  some  whom  he  had  intertain'd  in  Greece,  he
"  came  to  Marseilles,  and  so  into  Gaule.  Then  he
"  went  to  the  house  where  his  wife  was,  belonging
«  to  a  man  of  the  greatest  authority  among  the
"  Gauls,  and  intreated  to  be  lodg'd  there ;  whereupon
"  those  of  the  family,  according  to  that  nation's  usual
"  Hospitality,  cheerfully  receiving  him,  he  went  in
"  and  saw  his  wife ;  who  running  to  him  with  open
"  arms,  very  lovingly  led  him  to  his  apartment.
"  CAVARA  (8)  the  Gaul,  who  had  been  abroad,  re-
"  turning  soon  after,  ERIPPE  acquainted  him  with
"  the  arrival  of  her  Husband  ;  and  that  it  was  for  her
"  sake  he  came,  bringing  with  him  the  price  of  her
"  redemption.  The  Gaul  extoll'd  the  generosity  of
"  XANTHUS,  and  strait  inviting  several  of  his  own
"*  friends  and  nearest  relations,  hospitably  treated
"  him ;  making  a  feast  on  purpose,  and  placing  his
<(  wife  by  his  side :  then  asking  him  by  an  interpreter
"  what  his  whole  estate  was  worth,  and  XANTHUS

(7)  ARISTODEMUS  calls  her  GYTHIMIA.

(8)  So  he's  nam'd  by  ARISTODEMUS:  and  it  is  to  this
clay  a  common  name  in  Ireland*     Vid.  Act  fur  attainting
SHANE


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  161


V.'


"  answering  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold ;  the  Barbarian
"  order'd  him  to  divide  that  sum  into  four  parts,
<•'  whereof  he  should  take  back  three,  one  for  himself,
"  one  for  his  wife,  and  one  for  his  little  son,  but  that
"  he  shou'd  leave  him  the  fourth  for  his  wife's  ran-
*'  som.  When  they  went  to  bed,  his  wife  heavily
"  chid  XANTHUS,  as  not  having  so  great  a  sum  of
"  gold  to  pay  the  Barbarian  ;  and  that  he  was  in
"  danger,  if  he  could  not  fulfill  his  promise.  He
"  told  her,  that  lie  had  yet  a  thousand  pieces
'•'  more  hid  in  the  shoos  of  his  servants  ;  for
"  that  he  did  not  expect  to  find  any  Barbarian
*•'  so  equitable,  believing  her  ransom  wou'd  have
cost  him  much  more.  Next  day  the  wife
•  inform'd  the  Gaul  what  a  great  sum  of  gold
*•'  there  was,  and  bids  him  kill  XANTHUS  ;  assur-
''  ing  him,  that  she  lov'd  him  better  than  her
country  or  her  child,  and  that  she  mortally
*•'  hated  XANTHUS.  CAVARA  took  no  delight  in
this  declaration,  and  resolv'd  in  his  own  mind
from  that  moment  to  punish  her.  Now  when
Xanthus  was  in  haste  to  depart,  the  Gaul  very
kindly  permitted  it,  going  with  him  part  of
the  way,  and  leading  Erippe.  When  the  Bar
barian  had  accompany'd  them  as  far  as  the  moun
tains  ofGaule,  he  said,  that,  before  they  part-
ed,  he  was  minded  to  offer  a  sacrifice  ;  and
having  adorn'd  the  victim,  he  desir'd  Erippe
to  lay  hold  of  it  :  which  she  doing,  as  at  o-
ther  times  sh^  was  accustom'd,  he  brandished


THE  HISTORY


his  sword  at  her,  ran  her  thro',  and  cut  off
her  head ;  but  pray'd  Xanthus  not  to  be  at  all
;  concern'd,  discovering  her  treachery  to  him,  and
"  permitting  him  to  take  away  all  his  Gold."  TB
no  more  hence  to  be  concluded,  because  no  Druid  is
mentioned,  that  Cavara  offered  this  sacrifice  with
out  the  ministry  of  one  or  more  such,  unless  he
was  of  their  number  himself,  which  is  not  im
probable,  than  that  a  man  of  his  quality  was  at
tended  by  no  servants,  because  they  are  not  spe
cially  mentioned;  for  ordinary,  as  well  as  neces
sary  circumstances,  are  ever  supposed  ly '  good
writers,  where  there  is  not  some  peculiar  occa
sion  of  inserting  them.

III.  In  my  third  instance  I  return  again  to
HERCULES,  of  whom  a  story  is  told  in  the  same
book,  whence  we  had  the  last  ;  which,  tho  relat
ed  and  recommended  by  the  author  as  a  good  ar
gument  for  a  Poem,  affords  however  no  small  illus
tration,  to  what  I  maintain  by  much  more  posi
tive  proofs,  viz.  that  "  Great  Britain  was  dencmin-
"  ated  from  the  province  of  Britain  in  Gaule,  and
u  that  from  Gaule  the  original  inhabitants  of  all
"  the  Brittish  Hands  (I  mean  those  of  CESAR'S  time)
"  are  descended."  Listen  for  a  moment  to  PARTHE-
KIUS.  Tis  (9)  said  "  That  Hercules,  as  he  drove

(9)     Legetai  dp  kai  HeraVIea}  hote  ap'  'fcrrthtias  tas  Cerucnoa  Ix  us
Kalmnenen  <Jia  t£s  Keltcu  choras,  aphikesthai  para  Bretanuon  :  to  d*  aia  hupar-
thein  thupatpra.   Keitir.t'n  ononia  :  tauten  de,  erasthi-i^an  tou  Herakleocs,  ^;/.aK-
'.  i|S.u  tas  bous  ;  ic«  thelem  te  apodoiiuai,  ri  n,e  jroteron  aii^  nuckthr-..


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  1ft?

"  away  from  (10)  Erythia  the  oxen  of  Geryon,
"  had  penetrated  into  the  region  of  the  Gauls,
"  and  that  he  came  as  far  as  Bretannus,  who  had
"  a  daughter  called  Celtina.  This  young  woman
"  falling  in  love  with  Hercules,  hid  his  oxen ;
"  and  vrou'd  not  restore  them,  till  he  shou'd  in-
"  joy  her  first.  Now  Hercules  being  desirous  to
"  recover  his  oxen,  and  much  more  admiring  the
"  beauty  of  the  maid,  he  lay  with  her  ;  and  in
"  due  time  was  born  to  them  a  son  named  Cel-
"  tus  (11),  from  whom  the  Celts  are  so  denomin-
"  ated."  Many  of  the  antient  writers  mention  the
incursion  of  Hercules  into  Gaule,  when  he  made
war  against  Geryon  in  Spain ;  which  the  judicious
JDiodorus  Siculus  shows  to  have  been  at  the  head
of  a  powerful  Army,  not  with  his  bare  Club  and
.Bow,  as  the  Poets  feign  ;  and  that  it  was  he, who
built  the  fortress  of  Alexia,  whereof  the  Siege,
many  ages  after  by  Julius  Cesar,  became  so  fam
ous.  Diodorus  likewise  tells  this  very  story  of
Parthenius,  but  without  naming  Bretannus  or  Cel
tina.  He  onely  says  (12J,  "  A  certain  illustrious

de  Heraklea,  to  men  toi  kai  tas  bous  epeigomenon  auasosasthai :  polu  mallon  to
Vallos  ekpla^ enta  tes  kores  snngen«sthai  ante  :  kai  autois,  chronou  periekontos,
genesthai  paida  Keiton,  aph*  hou  de  Keltoj  prosegoreatheaan.  Ccp,  30*

(10)  Now  Cadiz.

(11)  CALLUS,  GALLT.

<1?)     Tes  Xeltikes   toinun  to  palaioa,   hos   phasis,    edunasteusea  epiphan«9

aair,  ho  thagater  e^eneto,  &c michtheisa  de  to  HerakJei   eg-eaneseQ  kuiou

ouoma  Galaten    .  .  periboetos  de   genomenos    ep'  andreia,    tous  hup'   auton   te«


104  THE  HISTORY

"  man,  that  governed  a  Province  in  Gaule,  had
"  a  daughter  exceeding  the  rest  of  her  sex,  in
"  stature  and  beauty  :  who,  tho  despising  all  that
"  made  court  to  her,  being  of  a  very  high  spi-
•"  rit  ;  yet  fell  in  love  with  Hercules,  whose  cour-
"  age  and  majestic  person  she  greatly  admired.
"  With  her  parents  consent  she  came  to  a  right
**  understanding  with  this  hero,  who  begot  on  her  a
"  son,  not  unworthy  the  pair  from  whom  he  sprung,
ce  either  in  body  or  mind.  He  was  called  Galates
*•  (IS),  succeeded  his  grandfather  in  the  gofernment ;
**  and,  becoming  renown'd  for  his  valor,  his  subjects
"  were  called  Galatians  (14)  after  his  name,  as
«  the  whole  country  it  self  Galatia  (15)."  This
is  plainly  the  same  story,  onely  that  one  writer
supplies  us  with  the  names,  which  the  other  omits  ;
and  Armorican  Britain  being  probably  the  Province,
wherein  Bretannus  rul'd  (since  we  find  it  insinuated,
that  Hercules  had  penetrated  far  to  come  to  him)
'tis  still  more  than  probable,  that  it  was  deno
minated  from  him  :  as  I  shall  prove  beyond  the
possibility  of  contradiction,  that  our  Britain  had
its  name  from  that  of  Gaule,  as  New  England

tagraenous  onomazen  apV  beau  ton  Galatas,   arh'  h5n  he  sumpasa  Galatia  pro-
segoreuthe.     Lib.  4.  pag.  303.

(13)     CALLUS.
Galli.
Gallia.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


165


has  from  the  Old.  Hesychius,  in  the  word  Bretan-
nus,  is  of  the  same  opinion  with  me.  So  is  Di-
onysius  (16)  Periegetes,  with  his  Commentator  (j7)
Eustathius :  and  I  am  not  a  little  countenanced  by
PLINY  the  elder,  who  places  (18)  Britons  on  the
maritim  coasts  of  Gaule  over  against  Great  Bri
tain.  But  I  have  more  evidence  still.  To  say
nothing  at  present  of  CESAR  so  many  ages  be
fore  Eustathius,  Tacitus  likewise  among  the  (19)
antients,  BEDA  among  those  of  the,  middle  (20)
ages,  and  some  of  the  most  celebrated  modern
writers,  are  as  express  as  words  can  possibly  make
any  thing,  that  Britain  was  peopled  from  Gaule.
Nor  is  the  epithet  of  Great,  added  to  our  Britain,


(16)


-Eatha  Bretanoi.


Leuka  te  j^hula  nemoatai  areimaneon  Gcrraanon.


Vcr.  284,


(17)     Ton  de  Brettaaon  tauton  paronumoi,   hai  antiperan  Brettaaides

(18)  A  Scaldi    incolunt    extera   Toxandri    pluribus
nominibus  :  delude  Menapij,  Morini,  Oromansaci  juncti
Pa^o  qui  Gessoriacus  vocatur:  *  BRIT  ANN  1,  Ambiani
Bellovaci  Hassi.  Nat.  His.  Lib.  4.  Cap.  17.

(19)  In  universum  tamen  aestimanti,  Gallos  vicinum
solum  occupasse  credibile  est  :  oorum  sacra  depreheuda.s,
superstitionutn  persuasione  :  Sermo  baud  multuni  divcr-

sus,  ^-c.  Vit.  Agric.  Cap.  11.

(20)  Haec  Insula  Britones  solum,  a  quibus  nomcn  ac-
cepit,  incolas  babuit;  qui  de  tractu  Armoricano,  ut  t'ertur,
Bntanniam  advecti.australes  sibi  partes  illius  vindicaruiit*
Hist.  Eccles.  Lib.  1.  Cap.  1.

J]     In  quibusdam  exemplanbus,  seJ     crperam,  Br.     ,


THE  HISTORY


any    more    an  objection  to  this    assertion  ;    than  the
coast    of    Italy,     formerly   called   Magna    Graccia,
cou'd  be  made  the  mother  country  of  Greece,  when
the  cities  of  that  coast  were  all  Colonies  from  thence :
besides    that  Great  Britain  was  antiently  so  call'd
with  respect   to  Ireland,  which,  before  the  fable  of
the  Welsh  colony  in  Gaule  was  invented,  is  call'd
Little  Britain,  as  you'll  see  anon.     These  disquisi
tions  come  not  into  the  History  of  the  Druids,  but
into    the    an  next  Dissertation   concerning  the   Celtic
Language  and  Colonies.     There  you'll  see  the  folly
of  deriving  Britain   from    the   fabulous    Irish    Hero
BRIOTAN,    or  from    the    no    less    imaginary    BRUTUS
the  Trojan ;    nor   is  the  word   originally  PRIDCAIN,
Prytania,  Bridania,  or  descended  from  either  Pheni-
cian,  or  Scandinavian,  or  Dutch,  or  even  any  Brit-
tish  words.     The  insular  Britons,  like  other  Colonies,
were  long  govern'd  by  those  on  the  continent ;  and
by  the  neighboring  Provinces,  who  join'd  in  making
settlements  here.     It  was  so  even  as  low  down  as  a
little  before  JULIUS  CESAR'S  conquest;  in  whose  (21)
Commentaries  it  is  recorded,   that  those  of  Soissons
had   within   their   memory,    say   the    ambassadors    of
Rheims  to  him,  Divitiacus  (22)  for  their  King,  the

(21)  Suessones  esse  suos  finitimos,  latissimos  feracis-
simosque  agros  possidere  :  apud  eos  fuisse  Regem  nostra
eiiam  memoria  Divitiacum,  totiusGalliae  potentissimum  ;
qui,  cum  magnae  partis  haruin  regiomim,  1um  eliam  By*
tamiiae  imperium  obtinuerit.  De  Bello  Gallico,  Lib.  2.
Cap.  4.

Different  from  DIVITIACUS  the  Eduan  orBerundian.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  Id?

most  potent  Pri?ice  of  all  Gaule  :  who  sway'd  tl*e
scepter,  not  onely  of  a  great  part  of  those  regions,
but  also  of  Britain.  In  the  same  Dissertation,  after
exploding  the  Welsh  fable  about  Britain  in  France,
you'll  read  as  positive  proofs,  that  the  ancient  Irish,
not  one  of  their  Colonies  excepted,  the  Ncmetes,  the
Firbolgs,  the  Danannans,  and  the  Milesians,  were  all
from  Gaule  and  Great  Britain  ;  whose  langTia^c,  reli-

O         O     '

gion,  customs,  laws  and  government,  proper  names  of
men  and  places,  they  constantly  did  and  do  still  use  :
whereas,  to  forbear  at  present  all  other  arguments,
not  one  single  word  of  the  Irish  tongue  agrees  with
the  Cantabrian  or  Biscaian,  which  is  the  true  old
Spanish  ;  the  present  idiom  being  a  mixture  of  Latin,
Gothic,  and  Arabic.  Besides  this,  all  the  antients
knew  and  held  the  Irish  to  be  Britons,  as  Ireland  it
self  is  b>  PTOLOMY  call'd  (23)  Little  Britain.  They
were  reckon'd  Britons  by  ARISTOTLE,  who  in  his  book
de  Mundo,  calls  the  country  (24)  lerne  ;  as  Orpheuj
before  him  (2.5)  lernis,  if  ONOMACRITUS  be  not  the
author  of  the  Afgondutica,  or  rather,  as  Sitidas  asserts,
Orpheus  of  Crotona,,.  contemporary  with  the  Tyrant
Pisistratus.  And  if  this  be  true,  Archbishop  USHER
did  not  Gasconnade,  when  he  (26)  said,  that  the

Oify     Mikra  Br^ttaaia,  in  Almagest.     Lib.  2.  cap.  Q.

(24)     En  touto  g-R  mt'a  (ok;'ano)  nesoi    me^istcu  te  tunchaaoasia  ,OUSHJ   djo,
-kai  If-j-c.tit-uui,  Albiuii  kai  lerae.      Cap.   3.


(2'))     Aukiiios  d'  oiok;is  ftpistamenos  ttitaine,

Par  d'  at:i  ce?o:i  M'-h-il^u  It-riiidi  -  .  —  Vcr.   1240.


Prinwrd.  E^cles.  Britannicar.  pay.  7.3-1%


16S  TH[<    HISTORY


i  people  cou'd  not  any  where  be  found  so  an-
tiently  mention'd  as  lernis.  Dionysius  Periegetes,
before  cited,  is  of  the  same  opinion  in  his  description
cf  the  (27)  world,  that  the  Irish  were  Britons :  as  Ste
phanas  Byzantius  names  it  (28)  Brittish  Juvernia,  the
least  of  the  two  Hands.  Diodorus  Siculus  mentions
(29)  the  Britons  inhabiting  the  Hand  caWd  Iris,  a
name  better  expressing  Ere,  vulgarly  Erinn,  the  right
name  of  Ireland,  than  lerne,  Juverna,  Hibernia,  or
any  name  that  has  been  either  poetically  or  otherwise
us'd.  STRABO  stiles  Ireland  (30)  Brittish  lerna,  as
his  antieiit  Abridger  calls  the  Irish  (31),  the  Britons
Inhabiting  lerna  :  and,  if  we  may  intermix  ludicrous
with  serious  things,  where  'tis  now  read  in  the  same
Strabo,  that  the  Irish  were  great  eaters  (32)  his  said
Abridger  reads  it  kerb-eaters  (33) ;  which  wou'd  in
duce  one  to  believe,  that  so  long  ago  Shamrogs  were
in  as  great  request  there  as  at  present.  PLINY  says
in  express  words  (34),  that  "  every  one  of  the  Brit-

(,27)     Dissai  ucsoi  easi  Bretianities  ai.tia  RGriou.   T'Vr.   5uG.
v28)     louernia  he  Fretauuike,  tou  duo  elasson.

(29)     .     .  .  Hosper    kai  ton  Bretaiion,   tous  katolkouiitas   tva  ouQiaazomeaSui
Irki.    Lib.  5.  pag.  309.

(.SO)  Koi  ten  Bretaaikon  lernea  icloiites,  &c.     lib.  i.  pa*.  110.

(.31)  Hoi  ten  lernen  iiesoa  katoikouates  Bretanoi.     lib.  S.

(.32)  Polupha^oi.

(,33)  Poe^hagoi.

(34)     Britannia  clara  Graecis  nosi.r»^:;ue  scriptoribu*^


Of1  TtfE  DttUIDS.


8«  tish  Hands  was  call'd  Britain  ;  whereas  Albion  wa3
"  the  distinguishing  name  of  the  Britain  now  pecu-
"  liarly  so  call'd*  and  so  famous  in  the  Greec  and
"  Roman  writings."  These  particulars*  I  repeat  it>
much  below  the  dignity  of  our  History  >  will  be  found
in  the  before-mention'd  Dissertation  ;  which,  tho'  infi*
nitely  less  useful,  I  dare  prophesy  will  be  full  as  much
read,  if  not  much  more  relish'd.  The  greatest  men
However  have  not  thought  it  unbecoming  them*  to
search  at  their  leisure  into  such  Originals :  and  I,  for:
my  part,  found  it  almost  a  necessary  imployment,  con*
sidering  the  light  it  adds  to  my  principal  work*

IV»  To  return  thither  therefore*  there  are  diverse
passages,  some  longer  some  shorter,  in  the  most  antient
Greec  authors  we  have*  or  copy'd  by  these  from  such
as  are  quite  lost ;  which*  tho'  generally  neglected  and
unobserved*  will  be  no  small  ornament  to  the  History
I  have  taken  in  hand.  And,  to  say  it  here  by  the
the  way*  'tis  certain  that  the  more  antient  Greec
Writers,  such  as  HECATEUS,  EUDOXUS,  HIPPARCHUS,
ERATOSTHENES*  POLYBIUS,  POSIDONIUS  (not  to  speak
of  DICEARCHUS  and  others)  knew  a  great  deal  of  truth
concerning  the  Brittish  Hands  *  by  reason  of  the  fre
quent  navigations  of  the  Greecs  into  these  parts,  after
the  way  was  shown  them  by  the  Phenicians ;  so  anti*
ent  an  author  as  HERODOTUS  affirming,  that  his  coun-

Albion  ipsi  nometi  fuit.cum  Britanniae  vocarentur  omnes
Insulae  nempe  Bntaanicae,    Nat*  Hist,  lib,  4,  cap.  16*

Y


170  THE  HISTORY


trymen  had  their  Tin  from  (35)  hence,  tho'  he  cou'd
give  little  account  of  the  Hand.  But  this  commerce
being  interrupted  for  several  ages  afterwards,  the  later
writers  did  not  onely  themselves  vend  abundance  of
fables  about  these  northern  parts  of  the  world ;  but
treat  as  fabulous,  what  their  Predecessors  had  record
ed  with  no  less  honesty  than  exactness.  Of  this  I
shall  have  occasion  to  give  some  convincing  proofs  in
this  very  Letter.  But  not  to  forget  the  passages  of
the  antients,  when  you  call  to  mind  those  Rocking-
stones  set  up  by  the  Dm  ids,  describ'd  in  the  xivth  and
xvith  Section  of  our  second  Letter,  and  whereof  seve
ral  are  yet  standing ;  you'll  not  doubt- but  'tis  one  of
them,  that  is  mention'd  in  the  Abridgement  we  have
of  PTOLOMY  HEPHESTION'S  History :  who,  in  the  third
chapter  of  the  third  book,  is  said  to  have  written  about
the  (36)  GIGONIAN  STONE  standing  near  the
ocean ;  which  is  mov'd  with  such  a  small  matter  as  the
stalk  of  asphodel,  tho'  immoveable  against  the  greatest
force  imaginable.  This  passage  needs,  in  my  opinion,
no  comment.  But  we  are  to  note,  when  those  old
writers  talk  of  any  thing  near  the  Ocean  with  respect
to  the  straights  of  HERCULES  (37),  and  without  speci
fying  the  place  ;  that  it  may  then  be  on  the  coast  of

(35)  ....      Oute  nesoas  oida  Kassiteridas  eousas,    ek  ton  ho  kassiteros  hemif}
phoita.     Lib.  3.  cap.  115.

(36)  P«ri  tes  peri  ton  Okeanon  Gigonias  petjras,   kaj  fcoti  nono  asphodel
kkeitai,  pros  pasan  bian  ametakinetos  ousa.

(37)    Now  of    Gibraltar,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  I?l

Spain,  or  of  France,  in  the  Brittish  Hands,  or  on  any
of  the  northern  shores.  It  is  onely  to  be  discoverd
either  by  matter  of  fact,  or  by  probable  circumstances :
as  this  Gigonian  stone  (for  example)  was  necessarily  in
some  of  the  Celtic  or  Brittish  territories,  whose  Druids
alone  set  up  such  stones.  So  were  the  Birds,  whereof
I  am  now  going1  to  speak.  "  What  Artemidorus  has
"  deliever'd  concerning  the  Ravens,  says  (38)  Strabo,
"  sounds  very  much  like  a  fable.  He  tells  us,  that
"  there  is  a  certain  lake  near  the  Ocean,  which  is
"  call'd  the  lake  of  the  two  ravens,  because  two  ravens'
"  appear  in  it,  which  have  some  white  in  their  wing :
"  that  such  as  have  any  controversy  together  come
"  thither  to  an  elevated  place,  where  they  set  a  table,
"  each  laying  on  a  cake  separately  for  himself :  and
"  that  those  birds  flying  thither,  eat  the  one  while
"  they  scatter  the  other  about ;  so  that  he,  whose
*'  cake  is  thus  scatter'd,  gets-  the  better  of  the  dispute."
Such  fables  does  he  relate !  But  I  wou'd  ask  Stra-
&o,  what  is  there  fabulous  in  all  this  ?  or  why  shou'd
the  rude  Gauls  and  Britons  being  inflnenc'd  by  the
eating  or  not  eating  of  ravens,  be  thought  more
strange  or  fabulous,  than  the  tripudium  solistimum  oT
chickens  among  the  polite  Romans  ?  which  CASAU-
BON,  I  will  not  say  how  truely,  thinks  was  deriv-
^S)  Touto  d'  eti  muthodesteron  eirekeu  Artemidoros,  to  peri  tous  Korakas
svimbainon.  Liraena  gar  tina  tes  parokeanitidos  historei  duo  korakon  eponoma-
zomenon ;  phainesthai  ci'  en  tout5  duo  korakas,  ten  dexian  pteruga  para-
leukon  echontas ;  tous  oun  peri  tinon  amphisbutountas,  aphikomenous  <  Heuro
eph'  hupselou  topou,  sanida  thentas,  epiballein  psaista,  ekateron  choris :  tous
d'  orneis  ephiptantas  ta  rct-n  esthiein,  tade  skorpizein  ;  ou  d'  an  skorpisthe  ta
ekeinoa  nikan.  Tauta  mea  oun  rauthodestera  legei.  Lib,  4.  pa£,  303.


THE  HISTORY


ed  from  these  very  (.9)  ravens,  If  STRABO  had
Said,  that  the  Divination  it  self  was  superstitious
and  vain,  or  that  it  was  ridiculous  to  imagine  the
yavens  cou'd  discern  the  cake  of  the  guilty  from
that  of  the  innocent,  tho'  they  might  greedily  eat,
ane  of  them  when  hungry,  and  wantonly  sport
with  the  other  when  their  bellies  were  full,  no
inan  of  judgement  would  contradict  him.  As  for
yavens  having  some  white  in  their  wings,  it  con*
tains  nothing  fabulous,  I  my  self  having  seen  such,
^nd  no  Ornithologists  omitting  them.  I  will  own  in
deed,  that  so  uncommon  a  thing  as  white  in  the
•wing  of  a  raven,  and  far  a  couple  of  them  to  hold  a
place  so  cunningly  to  themselves,  was  enough  to  work
ypon  the  superstitious  fancies  of  ignorant  people,  who
laid  such  stress  above  all  nations  upon  Augury ;  so
that  in  this  whole  story  of  the  two  ravens,  nothing
appears  to  me  either  fabulous  or  wonderful  Nay  I
am  persuaded  ARTEMIDORUS  was  in  the  right,  there
being  examples  at  this  time  of  ravens  thus  securing  a
place  to  themselves °,  and  the  first  I  shall  give  is,  for
ought  any  body  knows,  the  very  place  hinted  by  AR
TEMIDORUS,  Pr,  MARTIN,  in  his  Description  of  the
Jles  of  Scotland^  discoursing  of  Bernera,  which  is  five
jnilea  in  circumference,  and  lyes  about  two  leagues  to,
the  south  of  Harries,  «  in  this  Hand,  says  (40)  he,
«  there's  a  couple  of  ravens,  which  beat  away  all

(39)    In  Annotatione  ad  hunc  STRABONIS  locum*
140)    Page  47.


OF  THE  fiRUIDS.


173


"  ravenous  fowls ;  and  when  their  young  are  able  to
*<  fly  abroad,  they  beat  them  also  out  of  the  Hand,
«  but  not  without  many  blows  and  a  great  noise.'*
In  this  Hand  moreover,  to  remark  a  further  agree
ment  with  ARTEMIDORUS,  there's  a  fresh-water  lake
called  Loch-hruist,   where  many  land  and  sea-fowl
build,     He  tells  us  (41)  elsewhere  of  another  such
Couple,  which  are  of  the  same  inhospitable,  or  rather
cautious  and  frugal  disposition,  in  a  little  Hand  near
North-Uist;  and  still  of  such  another  couple  (4-2),
in  all  respects,  upon  the   lie  of  Trod  a  near   Sky.
But  as   Eagles  were  no  less  birds  of  Augury  than
Tavens,  the  Doctor,  in  his  account  of  a  little  Hand
near  the  greater  one  of  Lewis  (43),  says  that  he  saw
&  couple  of  eagles  there ;  which,  as  the  natives  assured
him,  would  never  suffer  any  other  of  their  kind  to
continue  in  the  Hand :  driving  away  their  own  young
ones,  as  soon  as  they  are  able  to  fly.     The  natives
told  him  further,  that  those  eagles  are  so  careful  of
the  place  of  their  abode,  that  they  never  killed  any
sheep  or  lamb  in  the  Hand ;  tho*  the  bones  of  lambs,
fawns,  and  wild-fowl,  are  frequently  found  in  and
about  their  nests  :  so  that  they  make  their  purchase
in  the   opposite  Hands,  the  nearest  of  which  is  a
league  distant*     There   is   such  another  couple  of
eagles,  and  as  tender  of  injuring  their  native  country,

(41)  Page  60,
(43)  Page
(43)  Page


174  THE  HISTORY


on  the  north  end  of  St.  Kilda  (44)  which  Hands  may
be  viewed  in  the  map  of  Scotland.  I  must  observe
on  this  occasion,  that  there  is  no  part  of  our  educa
tion  so  difficult  to  be  eradicated  as  SUPERSTI
TION  ;  which  is  industriously  instilled  into  men
from  their  cradles  by  their  nurses,  by  their  parents,
by  the  very  servants,  by  all  that  converse  with  them,
by  their  tutors  and  school-masters,  by  the  poets,
orators,  and  historians  which  they  read  :  but  more
particularly  by  the  Priests,  who  in  most  parts  of  the
world  are  hired  to  keep  the  people  in  error,  being
commonly  backed  by  the  example  and  authority  of
the  Magistrate.  Augury  was  formerly  one  of  the
most  universal  Superstitions,  equally  practised  by  the
Greecs  and  the  Barbarians ;  certain  Priests  in  all  na
tions,  pretending,  tho'  by  very  contrary  rites  and
observations,  to  interpret  the  language,  the  flight,  and
feeding  of  birds :  as  ENEAS  thus  addresses  HELEN
the  Priest  of  (4,5)  APOLLO,

Trojugena,  interpret.  Divum,  qu>  numina  PHOEBI,
Qui  tripodas,  CLARII  lauros,  qui  sidera  sentis,
JLt  volucrum  linguas,  et  praepetis'omina  pennae,
Fare  age.

Now  to  comprehend  what  deep  root  Superstition
takes,  and  how  the  sap  keeps  alive  in  the  stump,
ready  to  sprout  forth  again,  after  the  trunk  and
branches  have  for  many  ages  been  cut  off;  I  beg

(44)  Page  299.

(45)  Virg.  Aen.  lib.  3.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


175


your  patience  to  hear  the  following  story,  espe
cially  since  we  are  upon  the  subject  of  ravens,
When  I  was  in  Dublin  in  tho  year  1697,  I  walk
ed  out  one  day  to  the  village  of  Finglass,  and
overtook  upon  the  way  two  gentlemen  of  the  old
Irish  stock,  with  whom  I  had  contracted  some
acquaintance  at  the  coffee-house.  They  told  me
they  were  going  a  good  way  further,  about  a  bu
siness  of  some  importance  •,  and  not  many  minutes
after  one  of  them  cried  out  with  joy  to  the  other,
see  cousin,  by  heaven  matters  will  go  well :  point
ing  at  the  same  instant  to  a  raven  feeding  and
hopping  hard  by,  which  had  a  white  feather  or
two  in  the  wing  that  was  towards  us.  The  o-
ther  appeared  no  less  transported,  nor  would  they
stir  till  they  saw  what  way  the  raven  flew  ;  which  be
ing  to  the  south  of  them,  and  with  a  great  noise,
they  were  fully  confirmed  about  the  success  of
their  business.  This  brought  to  my  remembrance
that  oblative  Augury  in  (4>6J  VIRGIL  :

Scarce  had  he  said,  when  full  before  his  sight  •
Two  doves,  descending  from  their  airy  flight,
Secure  upon  the  grassy  plain  alight — -

With  watchful  sight

Observing  still  the  motions  of  their  flight,
What  course  they  took,  what  happy  signs  they  shew !
They  fled,  and,  fluttjring  by  degrees,  withdrew^— Sec.

DR YUEN'S  Translate

(46)     •  •  Geminae   cum  forte  Columbae

Ipsa  sub  ora  viri  coelo  venere  volantes,

Et  viridi  sedere  solo vestigia  pressit,

Observans  quae  signa  ferant,  quo  tendere  pergant.

Aeneid,  lib.  6,  vera  190,


176  THE  HISTORY ^^

Nor  was  I  unmindful,  you  ma,y  be  sure,  of  that  pas*
sage  in  (47)  PLAUTUS,

'Tis  not  for  nought,  that  the  Raven  sings  now  on  my  left  5
And,  croaking,  has  once  scrap"  d  the  earth  with  his  feet.

Upon  my  putting  some  questions  to  those  gentlemen,
they  said  it  was  certain  b;/  the  observation  of  all  ages,
that  a  raven  having  any  white  in  its  wihgs,  and  flying
on  the  right  hand  of  ahy  person,  croaking  at  the
same  time,  was  an  infallible  presage  of  good  luck.
J  used  a  great  many  arguments  to  show  them  the
vanity  and  unreasonableness  of  this  piece  of  Supersti
tion,  comparing  it  amorig  other  extravagancies,  to  the
no  less  absurd  one  of  dreams  ;  where  if  one  happens  by
chance  to  come  to  pass,  while  ten  thousand  fail,  these
are  forgot  and  the  other  remembered.  But  I  am
persuaded  all  I  did  or  could  say,  even  my  argument
AD  HOMINEM,  in  proving  that  Augury  was  specially
forbid  by  the  Law  of  MOSES,  would  have  made  little
impression  on  them ;  had  it  not  been  that  they  mis-
carryed  in  what  they  went  about,  as  one  of  them
candidly  owned  to  me  some  weeks  afterwards,  who
could  then  listen  to  my  reasons,  and  seemed  to  taste
them.  Thus  far  have  I  been  led  by  the  ravens  of
ARTRMIDORUS.  But  I  have  not  rambled  yet  so  far
after  birds  as  the  old  Gauls,  "  whereof  a  part,  to  use

(47)    Non  temere  est,  quod  corvos  cantat  mihi  ntinc  ab

laeva  manu  ;

Semel  radebat  pedibus  terram*  et  voce  crocitabat
sua.

AuluL  Act.  4,  Seen.  &  ver*  1«


OF  THE  DRUIDS,

ff  the  words  of  (48)  JUSTIN  after  TROGUS,  settled  in
"  Italy,  which  took  and  burnt  the  city  of  Rome ;
"  while  another  part  of  them  penetrated  into  the
"  Illyric  bays,  by  the  slaughter  of  the  Barbarians,  and
"  under  the  guidance  of  birds,  FOR  THE  GAULS  EX-

"     CELL     ALL     OTHERS      IN     THE      SKILL     OF      AuGURY,

"  settled  in  Pannonia :"  telling  next,  how,  after  di
viding  their  forces,  they  invaded  Greece,  Macedonia,
and  most  parts  of  Asia,  where  they  founded  the  Gal-
logrecian  Tetrarchy.  But  still  you  see  they  were
birds,  that  guided  those  famous  expeditions.

V.  I  have  by  good  authorities  shown  before,
that  the  antientest  Greec  writers  had  much  great
er  certainty,  and  knew  many  more  particulars,  con
cerning  the  Brittish  Hands,  even  the  most  remote
and  minute,  than  such  as  came  after  them  ;  by
reason  that  the  Grecian  trade  hither,  open'd  first
by  the  Phenicians,  had  been  for  a  long  time  in
terrupted,  or  rather  quite  abandon'd.  Thus  in
time  the  original  Relations  came  to  be  look'd  up
on  as  so  many  fables,  at  which  I  do  not  so  much
wonder  in  any  man,  as  in  the  most  judicious  of
all  Geographers  and  the  most  instructive,  I  mean
the  Philosopher  STRABO.  These  later  Greecs  were
implicit/  credited  and  transcribed  by  the  Roman

(48)  Ex  his  portio  in  Italia  consedit,  quae  et  urbetn
Romam  captain  iucendit  ;  et  portio  Illyricos  sinus,  duel-
bus  Avibus  (nam  Augurandi  studio  Galli  praeter  ceteros
callent)  per  strafes  Barbarorum  penetravit,  et  in
consedit.  Lib,  24,  cap.  4.

Z


17S  THE  HISTORY


writers,  till  Britain  came  to  be  fully  known,  hav
ing  rather  been  shown  than  conquer'd  by  JULIUS
CESAR;  and  scarce  believed  to  be  an  Hand,  tho'  it
was  constantly  affirmed  to  be  so  by  the  most  antient
discoveries,  till  VESPASIAN'S  Lieutenant,  AGRICOLA,
found  it  beyond  all  possibility  of  contradiction  to  be
an  (4»9)  Hand,  part  of  the  Roman  fleet  sailing-  round
it.  But  of  the  remotest  Hands  there  has  been  113
exact  account  from  that  time  to  this.  That  of
DONALD  MONRO,  in  JAMES  the  fifth  of  Scotland's
time,  is  very  imperfect :  and  iho'  in  our  own  time
Doctor  MARTIN,  who  is  a  native  of  one  of  those
Hands,  Las  travelled  over  them  all  to  laudable  pur
pose  ;  yet  his  descriptions  are  in  many  instances  too
short,  besides  that  he  omits  several  observations,
which  his  own  materials  show  he  ought  to  have  fre
quently  made.  Considering  therefore  the  curious
things  out  of  him  and  others,  that  may  be  agree
ably  read  in  my  two  former  Letters,  together  with
many  more  accounts  of  Monuments  there,  which
I  have  from  good  hands,  I  own  that  I  am  pas
sionately  desirous  to  spend  one  Summer  in  those
Hands,  before  the  History  of  the  Druids  makes
its  public  appearance  in  the  world.  But  I  return
to  the  antient  writers  who  mention  the  remotest
Brittish  Hands,  of  whom  PYTHEAS  of  Massilia,  a
Greec  colony  in  Gaule,  now  Marseilles,  is  the  very

(49)  Hanc  oram  novissimi  maris  tune  primum  Ro-
mana  Classis  circumvecta,  insuiam  esse  Britanniam  a£-
tirmavit.  Tacit,  in  Vita  Agric*  cap.  10.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


first  on  record.  He  liv'd  in  the  time  of  ALEX
ANDER  the  Great,  and  published  his  Geographical
work,  or  rather  his  Voyages,  intitled  (5O)  the
Tour  of  the  Earth  before  his  contemporary  Ti-
MEUS  wrote,  or  DICEARCHUS,  or  ERATOSTHENES,  or
PQLYBIUS  ;  who  followed  each  other,  and  who  in
some  things  disagree.  This  PYTHEAS,  and  also  one
EUTHYMENES,  were  sent  by  the  Senate  of  Mar
seilles  to  make  discoveries  ;  the  former  to  the
north,  the  latter  to  the  south.  EUTHYMENES,  sail
ing  along  the  coast  of  Africa  past  the  line  :  and
PYTHEAS,  landing  in  Britain  and  Ireland,  as  well
as  on  the  German  coast  and  in  Scandinavia,  sail
ed  beyond  Iceland.  Both  the  one  and  the  other
made  such  discoveries,  as  long  past  for  fables  :
but  time,  by  means  of  our  modern  navagation,
has  done  both  of  them  justice.  PYTHEAS,  on  his
part,  was  terribly  decry'd  by  STRABO,  who  with
out  ceremony  calls  him  (51)  a  most  lying  felow  :
tho'  he's  since  found,  and  now  known  by  every
body,  to  be  much  more  in  the  right  than  him
self.  Nothing  is  more  exact,  than  what  he  has
related,  or  that  is  related  after  him,  of  the  tem
perature  of  the  Brittish  climate,  of  the  length  of
tlie  nights  and  days,  of  the  strange  birds  and
monstrous  fishes  of  the  Northern  Ocean  :  nor  is
it  a  small  loss,  that  a  Treatise  he  wrote  in  par-

(50)  Ges  periodos.  Scholiast,  in  Apollomi  Argonautica,  Lib.  4.  ad  uers,  761.

(51)  Putheas  auer  pesudestatos  eksetastai.     Lib.   1,  p.  110.


180  THE  HISTORY


ticular  of  the  Ocean  has  perished  with  his  other
works,  whereof  we  have  onely  a  few  fragments.
He  was  the  first,  for  ought  appears,  that  mention
ed  Thule,  meaning  thereby  the  utmost  inhabited
Hand  beyond  Britain  ;  from  which  he  says  it  is
about  (52)  six  days  sail,  and  near  the  frozen  sea,
which  perfectly  agrees  to  Iceland.  But  STRABO
denies  that  there  was  ever  any  (53)  Thule,  or
that  any  thing  beyond  Iceland,  which  he  places  to  the
north  of  Great  Britain,  whereas  it  fe  due  west
of  it,  either  was  or  cou'cl  be  inhabited.  "  They,
"  says  he,  in  his  (54}  first  Book,  who  have  seen
«  Brittish  Ireland,  speak  nothing  about  Thule,  but
"  onely  that  there  are  several  small  Hands  near
"  Britain."  In  the  second  Book,  he  (55)  says,

(5?)  -.  -  -  Dia  "Thoule.s,  hiin  phesi  Putheas  apo  men  tes  Bretanikes  heks  he-
xneron  ploun  apechein  pros  arktou,  ong-us  deinai  tes  pepeguias  thalattes.  Ibid,
fag.  109.

(53)  Tul  in  the  ancient  language  signifies  naked  and
bleak,  as  Iceland  has  neither  tree  nor  shrub;  so  that  Tul-i,
without  any  alteration,  is  the  naked  Hand,  the  most  proper
name  for  Iceland,  and  which  foreners  must  have  naturally
learnt  of  the  Britons,  whether  Ibernian  or  Albionian.  Tul,
gach  ni  nocht,  Tul  is  every  naked  thing,  says  O  CLERY  in
his  Vocabulary  of  obsolete  words.  It  was  a  slender  affinity
of  sound,  that  made  Ha  (one  oCthe  western  Scottish  lies)
to  be  taken  for  Thule  •  for  neither  is  it  the  utmost  land  of
Europe,  nor  yet  of  the  Brittish  Hands  themselves.  See
what  I  have  written  in  the  second  book  concerning  the.  dis
putes  about  ThJite.

(54)  Hoi  t»~n  BreiarrkSn  lernpn  idon*«s,  onden  peri  ^teg  Thoules  legousin ;
alias  nSsous  le^ontes  michras  peri  ten  Bretaniken.  Ibid.  pag.  110.

<$K)  Ho  <ie  ge  ayv>  tes  Keltikes  pros  arkton,  pious  cschatos  legctai  p»ra
tcis  r.vm,  ho  eti  ten  lernfn,  epekeina  men  ousan  tes  Bretanikes,  athlios  de  Hia
psuchos  oikoumenen :  host,-  ta  cpt-keina  nomizcin  aoikCta.  Id.  Lib.  2.  pag.  124.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  181

"  The    utmost   place    of  navigation  in    our   time,
«  from   Gaule    towards    the  north,    is  said  to   be
«  Ireland  ;     which   being   situated   beyond   Britain,
<(  is  by  reason  of  the  cold,  with  difficulty  inhabit-
"  ed  :   so   that   all,  beyond  it,"    continues  he,  "  Is
«  reckoned  uninhabitable."     This  of  Ireland,   name
ly,    that   it   is   the  north   of  Britain,     and   scarce
habitable   for  cold,    he    repeats    again   in   two    or
three  places  ;   from  which   he  draws  this  conclusion,
that    there   is   no    Thule   at  all,    since   nothing  is
habitable    beyond    Ireland :     which    therefore,    ac
cording   to    him,     is    the    most    northerly   part    of
the     habitable    earth.       You   see    here   how    much
more    in   the    right    PVTHEAS   was,     who    liv'd   in
the   time  of  Alexander,   than   Strabo  who   lived  in
the    time   of  Augustus   and    Tiberius ;    and   that   it
is   a   proceeding    no   less   impertinent    than   unjust,
to   have   any  man   contradicted  who  was   upon   the
spot,   but   by  such   others   as  were  also  there:    un
less   the    things    related    be   manifestly   impossible,
or   that   the   relator  is   no   competent  judge ;   as  if
a  traveller,  who  understands  no  mathematics,  should
affirm   the   Malabarians   to   be   the   best   Mathema
ticians   in   the  world.     But  STRABO,   who,   notwith
standing   all   these   gross  mistakes   in   the   extremi
ties   of    Europe,    is   one   of    the   foremost    authors
in   my   esteem  :    STRABO,   I   say,   a  little   lower  in
the   same   book,    as   doubting  whether    he   was   in
the  right,   and   pretending  \  it  was   no   great  matter
should  he  be  in  .  the   wrong,   affirms   that  at  least


189  THE  HISTORY


it  is  not  known  whether  there  be  any  habitable
place  beyond  Ireland,  which  he  still  places  to  the
north  of  Britain,  "  nor  (56)  is  it  of  any  importance
"  to  the  Prince,  says  he,  to  have  an  exact  no-
"  tice  of  such  regions  or  their  inhabitants ;  espe-
"  dally  should  they  live  in  such  Hands,  which
"  cannot  contribute  any  thing  to  our  damage  or
"  profit,  meaning  the  Romans,  there  being  no  in-
"  tercourse  between  us."  This  reflection  might
perhaps  be  true  with  respect  to  the  Emperor  and
the  Empire :  yet  it  is  a  very  lame  reason  for  a
Geographer,  who  is  accurately  to  describe  all  places,
let  them  have  relation  to  his  Prince  or  not.  But
the  truth  of  it  is,  he  would  not  believe  the  an-
tient  Greec  and  Massilian  sailors ;  neither  had  he
any  better  information  himself,  whereby  to  sup
ply  or  to  correct  them.

VI.  As  for  Ireland,  it  was  very  well  known  to
the  more  antient  Geographers,  as  I  showed  before ;
it  being  directly  in  the  way  of  the  Phenicians,  who
are  said  by  (57)  ARISTOTLE  to  have  discovered  it,
when  they  sailed  for  Britain.  Lying  therefore  so
conveniently  for  the  Phenicians,  Grecians,  Spaniards,

(56)  Pros  te  tas  Hegemonikas  chreias  ouden  an  eie  pleonckteraa,   tas  toi-
antas  gnorizein  choras  kai  tous  oikountas :  kai  malista  ei  nesous  oikein  toiautas,
hai  mete    lupein  mete,    ophelein    hemas    dunanta    raeden,    dia  to    anepiplekton.
Ibid    pag.  176.

(57)  En  te  thalasse,  te  ekso  Herakleion  stelon,  phasin  hupo  Karchedonioa
neson  eurethenai  ereraen,   echousan  hulen  te   pantodape,    kai  potamous  plotans,
kai  tois  Soipois  Karpois  thanmasten,  apechonsan  de  pleionon  hemeron ;    et  quac
sequuntur  illic  reliqui,  Hiberniac  imprimis  convenicntia.     De  Mirabil,  Auscultat,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  183

and  Gauls,  it  was  always  a  place  of  great  trade  :  and
for  this  reason  TACITUS  (58)  says,  agreeable  to  the
Irish  annals,  "  that  it's  ports  were  better  known  for
"  trade,  and  more  frequented  by  merchants,  than
"  those  of  Britain."  Neither  is  PYTHEAS'S  account
of  the  frozen  sea,  any  more  than  that  of  Thule,  a
fable.  Whoever  was  in  Greenland,  knows  it  to  be
literally  true.  It  is  therefore,  in  the  antient  Greec
and  Roman  books,  called  the  Icy,  the  slow,  (59)  the
congealed,  the  dead  sea ;  as  I  have  read  that  it  is  in
some  Arabic  books  very  properly  written,  the  dark
sea  and  the  sea  of  pitch.  In  the  oldest  Irish  books
it  is  called  by  words  (60)  that  import  the  foul,  and
the  foggy  sea;  and  likewise  Muir-chroinn,  or  the
coagulated  (61)  sea,  from  the  word  Croinn,  which
signifies  close  and  thick  as  well  as  (62)  round.  From
this  original,  which  Pytheas  and  other  travellers
learnt  no  doubt  from  the  Britons,  this  sea  was  named
(63)  Cronium :  and  not,  as  afterwards  invented  from
the  mere  sound,  because  Cronos,  or  Saturn,  was  in-

(58)  Melius  aditus  portusque,  per  commercia  et  ne-
gotiatores,  cogniti.     Vit.  Agric.  cap.  24*.

(59)  Mare  glaciale,  pigrum,  congelatum,  mortuum.
(6QJ     Muircheacht,  Muircheoach.

(61)  Mare  concretum.

(62)  Crunn  has  the  same  signification  in  Welsh  ;  and
Cronni  or  Croinnigh  in  both  the  languages  signifies  to  ga
ther,  to  obstruct,  to  heap, and  particularly  Cron ni  to  thicken
or  stagnate  waters  :  so  that  this  derivation  of  the  Cronian,
and  congeal' d  sea>  cannot  be  reasonably  call'd  in  question.

(63)     Hals  kronie.


HISTORY


chanted  in  Ogygia,  an  Hand  west  of  Britain  ;  which
is  fabulously  reported  by  (64)  Plutarch  and  other
writers,  who  have  hitherto  been  inconsiderately  fol
lowed  by  every  .body.  I  wonder  they  do  not
affirm  after  them,  since  they  may  do  so  with  equal
reason,  that  some  of  the  west  and  north  Brittish
Hands  are  possest  by  (65)  heroes  and  departed  souls,
The  northern  sea,  even  before  one  comes  to  the  Icy
part,  and  perhaps  most  properly,  may  be  termed  slow
and  dead,  by  reason  of  the  Rousts*  or  meetings  of
contrary  Tides  ;  whose  conflict  is  sometimes  so  equal,.
that  they  are  a  great  impediment  to  the  boat  or  ship's
way  :  nay  sometimes,  tho'  under  sail,  they  can  make
no  way  at  all  ;  but  are  very  often  impetuously  whirled
round,  and  now  and  then  quite  swallowed  up.  This
kind  of  shipwraek  is  no  less  naturally  than  elegantly
described  by  VIRGIL,  when  he  relates  the  fate  of
ORONTES  who  commanded  a  ship  under  ENEAS  :


ante  oculos  ingens  a  vertice  pontus
In  pup-pirn  ferit  ;  excutitur,  pronusque  wagister
Volmtur  in  caput  :  ast  illam  ter  fluctus  ibidem
Torquet  agens  circum,  et  rapidus  vorat  aequore  vortex.

Aen.  lib.  1.
I  should  not  forget  here,  that,  upon  the  discovery  of

(64)  De  facie  in  orbe  Lunae  :  de  Defectu  Oraculor.  Vi-
dendi  etiam  ORPHEUS  in  Argonautici*,  PLINIUS,  SOLIN-
us,  ISAACIUS  TZETZES  in  LYCOPHRONIS  Alexandram,  &c*

(65)  lidem  consulendi,  quorum  in  Annotatione  praece-
denti  mentio  :  nee  non  in  HOXATII  Epodam  16  commeu-
tautes  legendi.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  185

Thule  by  Pytheas,  one  Antonius  Diogenes  wrote  a
Romance  in  twenty  four  books,  which  he  intituled  the
Incredibilities  of  Thule ;  where  he  laid  his  scene,  and
whereof  Photius  has  given  some  (66)  account,  I
have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  these  Hands,  because
they  did  not  onely,  like  the  other  parts  of  Britain,
abound  with  Druids,  who  have  there  left  various
memorials  of  themselves :  but  also  because  the  last
footing  they  had  in  the  world  was  here,  which  makes
it  little  less  than  essential  to  my  subject.  Nor  was
it  in  the  lie  of  Man  alone,  that  a  peculiar  Govern
ment  was  set  up  by  their  procurement  or  approba
tion  ;  as  you  have  read  in  my  second  Letter  of
their  Disciple,  the  admirable  Legislator  Manan-
nan.  There  was  likewise  another  Government  of
their  erection,  singular  enough,  in  the  (67)  Hebudes  ;
where  better  provision  was  made  against  the  chang
ing  of  an  elective  into  a  hereditary  Monarchy,  and
against  all  other  exorbitances  of  the  Prince,  than
ever  I  read  in  any  author  antient  or  modern.  So-
linus  speaking  of  these  Hands,  "  there  is  one  King,
*'  mys  (68}  he,  over  them  all;  for  they  are,  as

(66)     Ton  huper  Thouleu  apiston  logoi  kd.      In  Bibliotheca,  cod.  166.

(67)  Another  name  for  the  Western  lies,  equivalent  to
the  Hebrides  :  if  they  were  not  originally  the  same,  hav
ing  perhaps  by  the  mistake  of  Transcribers  been  written
for  each  other  ;  nothing  being  easier,  than  to  confound  ui
with  rf,  or  ri  with  ui,  as  antientiy  written.

(68)  Rex  unus  est  universis  :  nam  quotquot  sunt,  om-
nes  angusta  interiuvie  dividuntur.    Rex  nihii  suum  habet.


186  THE  HISTORY


ss  many  as  be  of  them,  divided  onely  by  narrow
ol  channels.  This  King  has  nothing  of  his  own,
"  but  shares  of  every  thing  that  every  man  has.
"  He  is  by  certain  Laws  obliged  to  observe
"  equity :  and  lest  avarice  should  make  him  de-
"  viate  from  the  right  way,  he  learns  justice
"  from  Poverty ;  as  having  no  manner  of  pro-
"  perty,  being  maintained  upon  the  public  ex-
"  pence.  He  has  not  as  much  as  a  wife  of  his
"  own,  but  by  certain  turns  makes  use  of  any
"  woman  towards  whom  he  has  an  inclination, ;
"  whence  it  happens,  that  he  has  neither  the  de~
"  sire  nor  the  hope  of  any  children."  'Tis  pity
this  author  has  not  specify ed  those  Laws,  by  which
€quity  was  prescribed  to  the  Hebudian  Monarch,
in  injoying  what  was  proper  for  him  of  other
men's  goods :  and  that  he  has  not  told  us,  how
those  vicissitudes  were  regulated,  whereby  he  had
the  temporary  use  of  other  men's  wives,  who
nevertheless  were  to  father  all  the  children.  As
I  showed  this  passage  one  day  to  a  couple  of
my  friends,  one  of  them  readily  agreed,  that  the
State  must  needs  find  their  account  in  this  con
stitution ;  both  as  it  saved  the  expence  of  trea
sure  in  maintaining  a  numerous  Royal  Progeny,

omnia  universorum.  Ad  aequitalem  certis  Legibus  strin-
gitur ;  ac,  ne  avaritia  divertat  a  vero,  discit  paupertate
justitiam  :  utpote  cui  nihil  sit  rei  familiaris,  verum  alitur
e  publico.  Nulla  illi  datur  foemina  propria  ;  sed  per  vi-
cissitudines,  in  quacunque  commotussit,  usurariamsumits
unde  ei  nee  votum,  nee  spes,  Ljberorum.  Cap,  2&


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  187

and   as   it  saved   the   expence  of  blood   in   settling
their    several    claims   or   contentions :    but   had    it
not  been,  said  he,  for  the  strict  care  taken  against
accumulating   riches    or    power    on    the    Prince,    I
should    have   naturally   thought,    that    it   was    one
of  those   Druidical  Priests,    who   had   thus    advan
tageously  carved  for  himself.     Hereupon  the  other
reply ed,    that    he   fancy ed    such   Priests   would    be
contented   to   have    plentiful   eating   and    drinking,
and   variety    of   women,    thus    established    by    Law
for  them;    since   it  was   for   no  other   end,    he  con
ceived,    but   to    obtain   these,    that    they    struggled
so    hard   any    where    for   power   and     riches.     But
if  this  were   so,    the  Druids   could   be  at    no  manr
ner  of  loss   about   their   pleasures ;   considering  the
sway    they   bore   in   the   civil    authority,    and   their
management   of    the   much   more    powerful   engine
of    Superstition :     "   for   without   the    Druids,    who
"   understand  Divination  and    Philosophy,    says  (69)
"   DION    CHRYSOSTOM,    the    Kings   may   neither   do
nor   consult   any  thing ;   so   that    in    reality  they
are    the    Druids   who   reign,    while     the    Kings,
<fi   tho'   they   sit   on   golden   thrones,    dwell   in  spa-
«'   cious   palaces,     and   feed    on    costly   dishes,     are
<f   onely  their  Ministers,    and    the  executioners   of

(69)  Keltoi  de  hous  onomazousi  Druidas,  kai  teutons  peri  mantiken  ontas
kai  ten  alien  sophian,  hon  aneu  tois  Basileusin  ouden  eksen  prattein  oude  bou-
Jfrsthai  ;  hSste  to  men  alt-thes  ekeinous  archem,  tons  d&  basiieas  autSn  hupere-
tas  kai  diakoneus  gegnethai  tes  gnomes,  en  thronois  chrusois  katheraenous,  kai
oikias  magalas  oikountas,  kai  polutin&os  euochounienous.  De  rtcus&tione  Magi*
XrS.,  in  Senatu,  pag.  538.  Edit.  Pans.


188  THE  HISTORY

"  their  Sentence."  Judge  now  what  influence  those
Priests  had  upon  the  People,  when  they  might
thus  control  the  Prince ;  and  consequently,  whe
ther  they  could  possibly  want  any  thing,  that
brought  them  either  pleasure  or  power.  The  Kings
bore  all  the  envy,  and  the  Druids  possesst  all
the  sweets  of  authority.

VII.  But  leaving  both  a  while,  I  submitt  to
your  Lordship's  consideration,  upon  such  evidences
and  proofs  as  I  am  going  to  produce;  whether
the  Hyperborean  Iland9  so  much  celebrated  by  an
tiquity,  be  not  some  one  or  more  of  the  remotest
Brittish  Hands:  and  particularly  the  great  Hand
of  Lewis  and  Harries,  with  its  apendages,  and
the  adjacent  Hand  of  Sky ;  which  in  every  cir
cumstance  agree  to  the  description  that  DIODORUS
SICULUS  gives  of  the  Hand  of  the  Hyperboreans.
Let's  mention  some  of  those  circumstances.  He

(70)  says   that   the   Harp   was   there    in  great  re
pute,   as   indeed   it   is   still ;   every  Gentlemen  hav
ing   one    in    his    house,    besides    a    multitude    of
Harpers  by  profession,   intertained  gratis  wherever
the  come.     He  tells  us,   that   above  all  other  Gods

(71)  they  worshipt    APOLLO;    which,    in   my   first
Letter,   I  evidently  show   they  did  under  the  name


(70)  Ton  de  katoikounton  auten  tous   pleistcus  einai  Kitharistas.    Lib.
pag.  130.

(71)  Ton  Apoll5  raalista  t5n  allon  theon  par'  autois  tlmasthai.    Ibid.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  189

of  BELENUS  (72).  He  says  further,  that  besides
a  magnificent  sacred  Grove,  Apollo's  remarkable
Temple  (73)  there  was  round,  whereof  I  have
given  a  particular  description  and  plan  in  my
second  Letter  (74.),  it  subsisting  in  great  part
still.  He  affirms  that  they  had  a  peculiar  Dia
lect,  which  in  reality  continues  the  same  to  this
day;  it  being  Earse,  or  the  sixth  among  the  Cel
tic  Dialects  I  enumerated  in  my  first  Letter:  and
approaching  so  near  to  that  of  the  Irish,  that
these  and  the  Ilanders  discourse  together  without
any  difficulty.  But,  omitting  several  other  mat
ters  no  less  concordant,  he  adds,  that  the  Hand
was  frequented  of  old  by  the  (75)  Greecs,  and
in  friendship  with  them;  which  will  be  easily
admitted,  after  perusing  the  fourth  and  fifth  Sec
tions  of  this  present  Letter*  where  I  manifestly
prove  this  intercourse.  I  very  well  know,  that
others,  who  are  far  from  agreeing  among  them
selves,  do  place  the  Hyperboreans  elsewhere:  nor
am  I  ignorant  that  diverse,  after  the  example
of  (76)  ANTONIUS  DIOGENES'S  Thulian  Romance,

(72)     In  the  Celtic  language  BEAL  and  BEALAN.

(73)     Huparchein  de  kata  ten  neson  temenos  te  Apollonos  megaloprepes,  fcai
&aon  aksiologon,    anathemas!    poliois    kekosmemenon,  sphairoeidti    to   scheruati.
'    Ibid.

(74)    Section  XI.

(75)    Pros  tous  Hellenas  oikeiotata  diakeisthai,  &c.     Ibid

(76)    See  the  last  Section,


390  THE  HISTORY


have    indeavored   to    divert   their   readers,     no  less
than   themselves,    with   Hyperborean   fictions ;    and
so    made    such   variations   of  site    or   circumstances,
as   best    suited    their   several   plans,    to   speak   no
thing    of    such   as    were   grossly    ignorant    in   Geo
graphy.      Allowances    ought   to    be    made  for    all
these    things.       And    the    Hyperborean    continent
(which   was    questionless   the    most   northern    part
of  Scythia,     or   of  Tartary   and   Muscovy,    stretch
ing    quite   to    Scandinavia,     or    Sweden   and    Nor
way)    this    Hyperborean   continent,    I  say,   must   be
carefully  distinguished  from  the  Hyperborean  Hand ;
whose   soil  was   more   temperate    and  fertile,    as  its
inhabitants     more    civilized,     harmless,     and   happy.
But,    to   prevent   all   cavils,   I   declare   before-hand,
that   as   by   Thule   I   mean   onely  that  of  Pytheas,
or   Iceland,    and   not   the   conjectures    or   mistakes
of  people   that   lived   long   after   him;    some   mak
ing   it   to   be   Ireland,     others    Schetland,     which    I
believe   to   be   the   Thule   of    (77)    Tacitus,    others
the  northermost   part  of  Great   Britain,   and  others
other  (78)  places :    so   by   the  Hand  of  the  Hyper
boreans,   I  mean  that  described  by  Diodorus   Sicu-
lus   after   Hecateus   and   others,   as  being  an  Hand
in  the   Ocean   "beyond  (19)  Gaule   to  the   north%  or

(77)  Insulas,  qu  s  Orcadas  vocant,  invenit  domuitque.
Despecta  est  et  Thule,  quam  hactenus  nix  et  hiems  abde-
bat.     In  vita  Agric.  cap.  10.

(78)  See  the  Essay  concerning  the  Thule  of  the  Antients,
by  Sir  ROBERT  SIBBALD.

(79)    — — ______  En  iois  antiperan  tts  Kcltikes  topois,  kata  ton  okeanon,


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  191

•••^•••••••••••••••••••^••••••••^••^••aMM^^aBa^^^

under  the  Bear,  where  people  lived  with  no  less
simplicity,  than  indolence  and  contentment ;  and
which  Orpheus,  or,  if  you  please,  Onomacrifas,
very  rightly  places  near  the  (80)  Cronian  or  Dead
Sea.  'Tis  by  this  situation,  as  hereafter  more
particularly  marked,  that  I  am  willing  to  be
judged :  showing  it  also  to  be  an  Hand  near  the
Scots,  whether  Hibernian  or  Albanian ;  who  are,
by  (81)  Claudian,  made  borderers  on  the  Hyper
borean  Sea.  From  this  Hand  the  Argonauts,  after
touching  there  coming  out  of  the  Cronian  Ocean,
according  to  Orpheus,  sailed  to  (82)  Ireland  in
the  Atlantic  Ocean  ;  and  so  to  the  (83)  Pillars
of  Hercules,  where  they  entered  again  into  the
Mediterranean  (84*).  No  marks  can  be  plainer,

einai  neson,  ouk  elattu  tes  Sikelias  ;  tauten  huparchein  men  kata  tous  arktous,
Lib.  2.  pag.  130.

(80)     — — Kronionte  epikleskousi

Ponton  huperboreen  meropes  nekrente  thalassan.

Argonaut*  ver.  1079»

(81) Scotumque  vago  mucrone  secutus,

Fregit  Hyperboreas  remis  audacibus  undas.

De  3  Cons.  Honor,  ver.  55»

(82)  Ankaios  d'oiakas  epistamenos  etitaine,

Par  d'ara  nesoo  ameiben  lernida  .    n

Hid.  ver.  1140.

(83)  Kuma  diapressontes,  ana  stoma  ternesoio

Uikometha,  stelaisi  d'ekelsarnen  Herakleeoe,

Ibid.  ver.  1240.

(84.)     Now  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.


THE  HISTORY


so  there  is  no  other  Hand,  those  of  Faroe  and
Iceland  excepted,  but  the  northwest  Brittish  Hands,
between  the  Cronian  and  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  as
every  one  knows  that  has  once  looked  into  a  map;
which  express  situation  of  the  Hyperborean  Hand,
together  with  its  being  said  by  Diodorus  to  ly
beyond  the  Gallic  regions  towards  the  north,  or
the  Bear,  the  frequent  use  .of  the  Harp  there,
and  the  worship  of  Apollo  in  a  round  Temple,
amounts  I  think  to  as  full  a  proof  as  any  thing
of  this  nature  requires.  Diodorus  adds,  in  the
place  where  I  last  quoted  him,  that  the  Hyper
borean  City  and  Temple  .were  always  governed
by  the  family  of  the  (85)  Boreads  (S6),  who
with  no  more  probability  were  the  descendants  of
BOREAS,  an  imaginary  Person  or  Deity,  than  the
Hyperboreans  were  so  called,  from  being  situated
more  northerly  than  the  (87)  North-wind:  but  in
reality  they  "were  then,  as  they  are  still,  govern
ed  by  their  chiefs  or  heads  of  tribes,  whom  they
called  in  their  own  language  Boireadhach ;  that
is  to  say,  the  Great  ones,  or  powerful  and  vali
ant  men,  from  Borr,  antiently  signifying  Gran
deur  and  (88)  Majesty.  The  Greecs  have  in  a
*

(85)  Basileueinte  tes  poleos  tautes,  kai  tou  temenous  eparchein  tous  onomaz-
oipencus  Boreadas,  apogonous  ontas  Boreou,  kai  katageuos  aiei  diadeehasthai  taa
archas.  Lib.  2.  pag.  130.

(86)      BOREADES.
(87")     Apo  tou  prossotero  keisthai  tes  borciou  pnoes.     Lib.  2.

(88)   As  for  these  words  Eorr  and  Buireadhach  or  Boin«


OF  THE  DRUIDS.

thousand  instances  applyed  foren  words  to  the  very
different  sense  of  other  words  approaching  to  the
same  sound  in  their  own  language.  Their  first
sailors  into  those  parts  gave  the  Ilanders  the  name
of  Hyperboreans,  from  their  lying  so  far  towards
the  North  with  respect  to  the  straights  of  HER
CULES,  (89)  for  which  I  have  indisputable  au
thorities  ;  and  after  having  once  thus  stil'd  them,
they  greedily  catch'd  at  the  allusive  sound  of  their
Leaders  or  Magistrates,  Grecizing  'those  Grandees,
or  BoiRfiADHACH,  into  BOREADES  :  which  was  li
terally  understood  in  Greece  of  the  fabulous  '  des
cendants  of  BOREAS,  very  consonantly  to  their
Mythology,  or,  if  you  will,  to  their  Theology.  But
I  noted  (90)  before,  that  PLATO,  in  his  Cratylus,
was  of  (91)  opinion  the  Greccs  had  borrowed  many
words  from  the  Barbarians  ;  especially  9  adds  he,

cdhach  "  the  vowels  tt  and  o  being  with  us  most  frequently
put  for  each  other"  I  might  appeal  to  several  authentic
Manuscripts  ;  but,  because  such  are  not  obvious  to  many*
1  cliuse  rather  to  refer  my  readers  to  the  Seanasan  nuadh,
or  printed  vocabulary  of  obsolete  words  by  O  CLERY,  and
to  LHUYD'S  printed  Irish-English  Dictionary:  so  that  these
words  are  no  children  of  fancy,  as  but  too  frequently  hap
pens  in  Etymologies.  From  the  same  root  are  Borragach
couragious,  and  Barri&oradft  awe  or  worship,  with  the  like.


(89)  Now  of  Gibraltar.

(90)  Letter  II.  Section  V.

(91)      Eanoo  gar,    hole  polla  hoi  Hellenes  onomata,    allos  te  kai  hoi  hnpo
tois  barbarois  oikountes,  para  ti?a  barburon  eile^hasi.     Inter  Opera,  Edit.  l'ari£.


Vol.  1.  pay.  409

B  2


THE  HISTORY


juch  of  the  Greecs  as  liv'd  in  the  Barbarian  ter
ritories :.  which  may  be  fairly  supposed  to  include
those  who  navigated,  or  that  drove  any  traffic
among  them.  And  hence  the  divine  Philosopher
himself  draws  this  accurate  (92)  inference,  "  That
"  if  any  man  would  indeavor  to  adjust  the  Ety-
"  mologies  of  those  words  with  the  Greec  lan-
"  guage,  and  not  rather  seek  for  them  in  that
"  to  which  they  originally  belong,  he  must  needs
"  be  at  a  loss,"  ,  ;Tis  farther  most  deserving
observation,  that  ERATOSTHENES,  an  antient  Chro-
nologer  and  Geographer  of  vast  reputation  for
Learning,  speaking  of  APOLLO'S  famous  Arrow,
with  which  he  slew  -the  Cyclopes,  and  in  honor
of  which  one  of  the  Constellations  is>  so  called,
says  that  (93)  "  he  hid  it  among  the  Hyper-
*•'  boreans,  where  there  is  his  Temple  made  of
"  wings,  or  a  winged  Temple,"  the  words  being
capable  of  both  senses.  If  the  latter  was  the
meaning  of  ERATOSTHENES,  we  have  already  given
the  Description  of  such  -a  winged  Temple,  yet
standing  there :  and  if  the  former,  no  place  un
der  heaven  could  furnish  more  feathers,  nor  of
more  various  kinds,  to  adorn  men  or  buildings,

o.    '

than   those   same  , Hands ;    where   many   of  the   in
habitants   pay    thek   rent   with   them,    and   make  a

(92)  Ei  tis  Zetoi  tauta  kata  ten  Helleniken  plionen  bus  eoikotos  k«itai,  al
ia  me  kat'  ekeinen  ex  lies  to  ouoma  tunchanei  on,  oistha  hoti  aporoi  an.     Ibid.  ,

(93)  Ekrupse    de  anto  (lo  toksikon)  en    huporboreiois,    hou  kai  ho  naos    ho
pterinos.      Jn  Catusterniis,  inter  Qpuscula  Mythvlogica  et  Physica.  Edit.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  195

considerable  profit  besides.  For  this  reason  per
haps,  and  not  from  its  promontories,  the  lie  of
Skie  is  in  the  language  of  the  natives  called
Scianach,  (94<)  or  the"  winged  Hand,  whereof  the
English  name  Skie  is  an  abbreviation  or  corrup
tion.  Now,  if  the  Hebrides  were  the  Hyperbo
reans  of  DIODORUS,  as  I  fancy  it  can  scarce
hereafter  be  doubted,  then  the  most  celebrated
ABARIS  was  both  of  that  Country  and  likewise
a  Druid,  having  been  the  (95)  Priest  of  APOLLO.
SUIDAS,  who  knew  not  the  distinction  of  Insular  Hy
perboreans,  makes  him  a  Scythian ;  as  do  some
others  misled  by  the  same  vulgar  error,  tho'
DIODORUS  has  truly  fixed  his  country  in  the  Hand,
not  on  the  continent.  And  indeed  their  fictions
or  blanders  are  infinite  concerning  our  Abaris.
This  is  certain  however  among  them  all,  that  he
travelled  quite  over  (93)  Greece,  and  from  thence
into  Italy,  where  lie  familiarly  conversed  with
PYTHAGORAS  ;  who  favoured  him  beyond  all  his
Disciples,  by  imparting  his  doctrines  to  him,  espe
cially  his  thoughts  of  nature,  in  a  more  com
pendious  and  plainer  method,  than  to  any  others.

(94)     Oilean  Seiathanach.

(95)  To  men  £ar  hot!  ton  ra^ron  clirusoun  epcdeiksen  Abaridit5  Huperboreo,
eikasanti  auton  Apollona  einai  ton  en  Huperborcois,  houper  ea  hiereus  ho  A-
barL>,  bebaionta  hos  touto  alcthes  tc'tbrulletai.  Porphyrius  in  vita  Pythagoras.
.'Ed-Jem,  et  iisdtm  cquidem  wrbis  habct  Jamblichus,  lib.  1.  cop.1  28.

<96)      Hosautos  de  kai  ek  ton  huperboreori  Abarin   eis  ten    Hellada

;  ti-santa  to  palaioa.     &c.   Ubi  supra.


THE  HISTORY


This  distinction  could  not  but  highly  redound  to
the  advantage  of  Abaris.  For,  the  reasons  of
Pythagoras's*  backwardness  and  retention  in  com
municating  his  doctrines,  being,  in  the  first  place,
that  he  might  eradicate,  if  possible,  out  of  the
minds  of  his  Disciples  all  vitious  and  turbulent
passions,  forming  them  by  degrees  to  a  habit  of
virtue,  which  is  the  best  preparative  for  receiv
ing  Truth ;  as,  next,  to  fit  them,  by  a  compe
tent  knowlege  of  the  Mathematical  Sciences,  for
reasoning  with  exactness  about  those  higher  con
templations  of  nature,  into  which  they  were  to
be  initiated;  and,  lastly,  to  have  repeated  proofs
of  their  discretion  in  concealing  such  important
discoveries  from  the  ignorant  and  the  wicked,  the
latter  being  unworthy,  and  the  former  incapable
of  true  Philosophy :  it  follows  therefore,  that  he
judged  Abaris  already  sufficiently  prepared  in  all
these  respects,  and  so  he  obliged  him  with  an
immediate  communication  of  his  most  inward  sen
timents;  concealed  from  others  under  the  vail  of
numbers,  or  of  some  other  enigmatical  Symbols.
The  Hyperborean  in  return  presented  the  Samian,
as  if  he  had  equalled  Apollo  himself  in  Wisdom,
with  the  sacred  Arrow;  riding  astride  which  he's
fabulously  reported  by  the  Greec  writers,  to  have
flown  in  the  air  over  rivers  and  lakes,  forests
and  mountains :  as  our  vulgar  still  believe,  and
no  where  more  than  in  the  Hebrides,  that  wi
zards  and  witches  waft  whither  they  please  upon


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  197


Broom-sticks.     But   what   was   hid  under   this   Ro
mantic   expedition,   with   the   true   meaning  of  the
Arrow   it   self,   the    nature   of  the   predictions   that
Abaris   spread    in   Greece,   and   the    doctrines   that
he   learnt   at    Crotona;    with   the   conceit   of  these
Hyperboreans   that   Latona   the   mother   of    Apollo,
was   born   among   them,   nay   that   he  was   so    too,
and   their   most   exact   astronomical   cycle   of  nine
teen  years :    these   particulars,    I  say,   you'll  read  at
large    in    my    History  of  the  Druids,  stript  of   all
fable  and  disguise ;  as  well  as  a  full  discussion  of
the   Question,    about  which  antient  writers   are  di
vided,   "  whether  the  Druids  learnt  their   (97)  sym-
"   bolical  and  enigmatical    method  of  teaching,    to-
"   gether  with  the  doctrine  of  Transmigration  from
"    Pythagoras,  or  that  this  Philosopher  had  borrow-
«   ed    these    particulars    from    the    Druids?"     The
Communication  between  them  was  easy  enough,  not
only   by   means  of    such    travellers    "as   Pythagoras
and  Abaris,  but  also  by  the  nearness  of  Gaul e  to
Italy :    tho'    there  will   still   remain    another  Ques
tion,    viz.  whether   the    Egyptians    had    not    these
things  before  either  of    them ;    and  therefore  whe
ther  they  did  not  both   receive  them  from  the  E-
gyptians  ?

VIII.     Yet  before  all  things  we  must  here  exa
mine  what  can  be  offered,  with  any  color,  against

(97)     Kai  phasi  tons  men  Guranosophistas    kai  Druidas  ainigmatodos  apoph-
thengoraenous  philophesai.     Diogcn>  Laert.  in  prooem.  Sect.  6.


198  THE  HISTORY


Our  account  of  the  Hyperborean  Hand;  after  that
so  many  circumstances,  and  particularly  the  situa
tion,  seem  to  point  demonstratively  to  the  true
place;  nor  certainly,  when  things  are  duely  con
sidered,  will  the  objections  that  have  been  started
in  private  conversation,  as  I  know  of  no  other  that
can  be  publickly  made,  be  found  to  have  the
least  difficulty.  Thule  t>r  Iceland,  rightly  placed
by  Claudian  in  the  (9$)  Hyperborean  Climate,  be
sides  the  incongruities  of  the  soil  and  the  intem-
perateness  of  the  air,  is  distinguished  by  Diodorus
himself  from  the  Hand  in  question :  and  the  lies
of  Faroe,  being  onely  a  parcel  of  barren  rocks  of
very  small  extent,  without  any  monuments  of  anti
quity,  deserve  not  so  much  as  to  be  mentioned
on  this  occasion.  Neither  indeed  has  any  of  my
acquaintance  insisted  on  either  of  these.  But  Dio
dorus,  says  one  of  them,  tho'  exactly  agreeing  to
your  situation  or  that  of  Orpheus,  and  that  your
other  circumstances  do  perfectly  tally  to  his  de
scription  :  yet  is  different  in  this,  that  he  speaks
onely  of  one  Hand,  not  less  than  (99)  Sicily ;
whereas  you  understand  this  of  several  Hands,  which
altogether  have  scarce  that  extent.  I  answer,  that
the  marks  of  the  right  place  which  I  have  men-

(98)     Te,  quo  libet  ire,  sequemur  :

Te  vel  Hyperboreo  damnatam  sidere  Thulen,
Te  vel  ad  mcensas  Libyae  comitabor  arenas.

In  Rufn.  lib.  2.

(1>9)    Ouk  tlatto  tes  Sikelias.     t?bi  supra.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  109

tioned  already,  and  such  others  as  I  shall  present
ly  alledge,  will  more  than  counterbalance  any  mis
take,  if  there  be  any,  about  the  bigness  of  the
Hand.  Travellers  and  Mariners,  who  either  have
not  been  ashore  or  not  staid  long1  enough  in  any
place  to  survey  it,  are  known  to  speak  onely  by
guess,  and  frequently  very  much  at  random.  Has
not  Great  Britain  it  self,  so  much  celebrated,  as
PLINY  justly  (100)  writes,  by  the  Greec  and  Ro
man  authors,  been  taken  to  be  of  vast  extent,  and
not  certainly  known  by  the  'Romans  to  be  an
Hand,  till  the  time  (101)  of  Vespasian?  Endless
examples  of  this  kind  might  easily  be  produced.
And  as  for  the  multitude  of  those  Hands,  which
are  separated  onely  by  narrow  channels,  it  makes
nothing  at  all  against  me.  For,  besides  that  such
an  aggregation  of  Hands  is  often  taken  in  com-
inon  speech  for  onely  one ;  as  not  to  go  out  of  our
own  Dominions,  such  is  Schetland,  in  name  one
country,  but  in  effect  consisting  of  more  than  30
Hands  :  so  there  are  several  indications,  joined  to
the  Tradition  of  the  Inhabitants,  of  which  see  Dr.
MARTIN  in  his  Account  of  Saint  Kilda  and  else
where,  that  some  of  those  western  Hands  have
been  formerly  united,  and  many  of  them  nearer
each  other  than  at  present.  However,  taking  them
as  they  now  are,  Lev/is,  otherwise  call'd  the  Long

(100)  See  Section  III.

(101)  See  Section  V.


200  THE  HISTORY


Hand,  being  at  least  a  hundred  miles  in  (102)
length,  Skie  forty,  several  of  the  rest  above  four
and  twenty  each,  and  all  appearing  as  one  Hand,
having  many  winding  bays  or  inlets,  to  one  who
sails  without  them,  or  that  touches  onely  at  some
of  the  greatest;  considering  this,  I  say,  the  mis
take  will  not  be  reckoned  so  enormous  in  a  sailor
or  stranger,  if  he  compares  them  in  the  lump  to
Sicily  for  extent.  Another  person  granting  all
this,  objects  that  Diodorus  represents  the  Hyper
borean  Hand  a  very  (103)  temperate  region;
which,  according  to  my  friend,  cannot  be  said  of
any  place  in  the  northern  Latitude  of  58,  and
partly  of  59.  But  whoever  has  travelled  far  him
self,  or  read  the  Relations  of  such  as  have ;  will
be  convinced  that  the  seasons  in  every  region  of
the  world,  do  not  always  answer  to  their  posi
tion  :  of  which  the  causes  are  various,  as  huge
ridges  of  mountains,  the  neighborhood  of  vast
lakes  or  marshes,  winds  blowing  from  places  co
vered  with  snow,  or  the  like.  Thus  Britain  and
Ireland  are  known,  not  onely  to  be  much  more
temperate  than  the  places  on  the  Continent  of  the
same  position  with  them,  but  even  than  some  of

{102}  I  reckon  as  Dr.  MARTIN  ami  the  natives  do,  from
the  most  northerly  pointof  Lewis  to  Bernera  south  ot'Bar-
lah,  this  string  of  Hands  being  onely  divided  by  channels
mostly  fordable  :  sipcl  if  it  be  considered  that  I  make
use  of  Scottish  miles,  eve'fy  place  is  at  least  a  third
part  more,  according  to  the  English  or  Italian  measure.

(lO."5)      Ousan  d'  auten  eugeionte  kai  pamphoran,  eti  de  eukrasia  diapherou-
sou,  dittQus  kat'  etys  ekpbereia  karpyus.      Vl/i.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  201

such  as  are  more  southerly ;  by  reason  of  the
sault  vapors  and  continual  agitations  of  the  sur-
roundirig  Ocean,  which  dissolve,  allay,  and  miti
gate  the  frosts  and  winds  blowing  from  the  Con-

^  O

tinent.- This   holds    as  true   with  regard   to  the

Hebrides,  which  by  experience  are  allow'd  to  be
t  more  temperate  ;  the  snow  not  lying  near  so
long  as  in  Britain,  and  a  tepid  vapor  being  very
sensible  there  in  the  midst  of  winter.  This  was
enough  to  fill  the  greec  sailors  with  admiration,
which  to  us  ought  to  be  none ;  since  their  learn
ed  men  often  spoke  of  many  places,  not  as  they
actually  were  in  themselves,  but  as  in  their  specu
lations  they  imagin'd  they  ought  to  be :  without  con
sidering  whether  there  might  not  occur  some  of  the
diversifying  circumstances  we  have  just  now  hinted,  or
any  others  begetting  the  like  influences.  But  that
most  sagacious  interpreter  of  nature,  HIPPOCRATES,
knew  better  things,  when  he  taught  what  he  learnt
by  experience,  having  been  an  Ilander  himself,  that
Hands,  situated  (104)  far  in  the  sea,  are  kindly  warm,
and  that  no  snow  can  lie  on  them  in  winter ;  while
such  as  are  near  the  shore  become  scarce  habitable  for
cold,  by  reason  of  the  snow  and  ice  remaining  on  the
continent,  which  from  thence  transmit  bleak  winds
into  those  Hands.  The  antients,  who  judged  of  places
where  they  never  were  by  their  bare  positions,  did

(104)  Ton  de  ne.sim,  liai  rcen  en^us  ton  epeiron,  dusrheimeroterai  eisin ;
hai  de  pontiai,  aleinoterai  ton  cheimona :  dioti  hai  t.iiones  kai  pagoi  en  men
tisin  epeiroisin  ecliousi  stasiu,  kai  ta  pneumata  psuchra  pempousin  es  tas  eng'us
ous.  Ta  de  pelagia  ouk  echei  stasiu  en  cheimoni.  De  Diaeta,  lib,  2.  cap,  3.

C  2


THE  HISTORY


consequently  enough  from  thence  conclude  the  torrid
Zone  to  be  inhabitable :  but  since  this  Zone  has  not
onely  been  frequently  visited,  but  is  daily  penetrated
to  the  temperate  and  cold  Zones  beyond  it,  it  is  not
onely  found  every  where  inhabited ;  but  those  breezes
and  showers,  with  other  causes,  that  make  living-
there  very  comfortable,  are  the  common  themes  of
Philosophers.  This  brings  me  to  the  last,  and  seem-
the  strongest  Objection,  viz.  that  the  Hyperbo
rean  Hand  of  Diwijnis,  or  rather  of  Hecateus  and  o-
thfu-s  long  before  him,  was  so  plentiful  as  to  have
(305)  two  crops  a  year.  Yet  this  expression,  upon  a
fdr  construction,  will  be  so  far  from  embarassing,  that
it  will  highly  illustrate  my  explication.  It  onely  sig
nifies  great  plenty  and  abundance,  which  I  could  in
stance  by  many  passages  of  the  antients ;  but  shall
chuse  the  nearest  home  I  can,  and  that  is  what  (106)
Virgil  says  of  Italy  :

Perpetual  spring  our  happy  Climate  sees,  -\

Twice  breed  the  cattle,  and  twice  bear  the  trees  ;    I
And  summer  tuns  recede  by  slow  degrees.

DRY  DEN'S  Translation.

But  who  is  ignorant,  that  this  is  not  literally  true  ?
and  as  to  the  plenty  meant  by  it  in  general,  it  is  cer-

(105)  Read  the  Note  immediately  proceeding,  bateing

one.

(106)  Hie  vcr  assiduum,  atque  alienis  mensibus  aestas;
Bis  zravidae  pecudcst  bis  pornis  ntilis  arbos.

Georgic.  lib.  2.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  203

tain  that  no  country  abounds  more  with  the  neces
saries  of  life,  and  at  less  labor  or  charge,  ^than  the
Hebrides.  I  shall  dwell  so  much  the  longer  on  this
head,  as  my  History  may  possibly  reach  further  than
the  Celtic  Nations.  Wherefore,  in  the  first  place,
there  is  known  to  be  in  those  Hands  a  prodigious
plenty  of  Flesh  and  Fish.  Their  cattle  of  all  sorts,
as  Cows,  Sheep,  Goats,  raid  Hogs,  are  exceeding  nu
merous  and  prolific :  small  indeed  of  size,  as  are  like
wise  their  Horses,  but  of  a  sweet  and  delicious  taste.
So  are  their  Deer,  which  freely  range  in  herds  on  the
mountains.  No  place  can  compare  with  this  for  tame
and  wild  fowl,  there  being  of  the  latter  no  where  in
the  world  a  greater  diversity,  many  sorts  of  them  ex
tremely  beautiful  or  rare,  and  utterly  unknown  else
where.  The  like  may  be  said  of  their  various  amphi
bious  animals.  Numberless  are  their  fountains  and
springs,  rivulets,  rivers,  and  lakes,  very  whdlesom  in
their  waters,  and  every  where  super-abounding  with
fish,  especially  the  most  delicate,  as  Trout  and  Sal
mon  :  nor  is  it  by  Herrings  alone  that  all  Europe
knows  no  Seas  to  be  better  stored,  nor  with  more
kinds,  from  the  shrimp  to  the  whale  ;  as  no  harbors
or  bays  are  superior,  whether  regard  be  had  to  number
or  cotnmodiousness.  Add  to  this  their  variety  of  ex
cellent  roots  and  plants,  particularly  those  of  marine
growth,  every  one  of  them  serving  for  food  or  physic.
Their  pastures  are  so  kindly,  that  they  might  live  on
milk  alone,  with  that  inconceivable  quantity  of  Eggs
they  yearly  gather  of  the  desart  rocks  and  Ilets.  But


204  THE  HISTORY

flesh  and  fish,  milk-meats,  eggs,  and  sallads  in  the
greatest  abundance,  some  will  be  apt  to  say,  are  slen
der  and  comfortless  food  without  the  staff  of  bread.
On  this  assertion,  tho'  I  might  fairly  dispute  it  from
the  practice  of  whole  nations,  and  the  experience  of
particular  persons  no  strangers  to  me,  I  will  not  how-
ever  insist ;  bread,  among  their  other  productions,  be
ing  plentiful  enough  in  the  Hebrides,  which  some
times  cannot  be  said  of  the  neighboring  Hands.  The
ground  is  generally  allowed  to  be  much  richer  than
on  the  Scottish  continent,  some  parts  whereof  are  not
seldom  supplyed  (107)  hence  with  corn:  and  I  have
also  such  proofs  of  it  from  Dr.  MARTIN,  who,  when
he  wrote  his  Description  of  those  Hands,  was  far  from
dreaming  of  the  Hyperboreans,  as  will  sufficiently
justify  the  expression  of  Diodorus  about  their  crops  or
harvests.  Lewis  is  very  fruitful  :  and  tho'  Barley,
Oats,  and  Rye,  be  the  onely  grain  sown  there  at  pre
sent  ;  yet  the  ground  both  in  that,  and  in  most  of  the
other  (108)  Hands  is  fit  to  bear  wheat,  and  conse
quently  Legumes  of  all  sorts.  It  is  truely  amazing
they  have  any  crop  at  all,  considering  how  unskilful
they  are  in  Agriculture,  how  destitute  of  the  properest
instruments  to  till  the  ground,  and  that  they  scarce
use  any  other  manure  but  sea-wrack  or  tangles.
From  the  ignorance  of  the  inhabitants  in  these
respects,  as  also  in  planting,  inclosing,  and  drain-

(107)  See  Dr.  MARTIN'S  Description,  page  140.

(108)  £age  53,  337,  &c.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  205

ing-,  many  fruitful  spots  ly  uncultivated :  but  the
abundance  of  choice  Eatables,  and  namely  the  most
nourishing  shell-fish  of  various  kinds,  with  which
they  are  richly  supplyed  by  bountiful  nature,  con
tributes  more  than  any  thing  to  that  Indolence,
which  the  antient  Greecs  esteemed  their  Happi
ness.  The  goodness  of  the  soil  appears  by  no
thing  more  evidently,  than  by  the  want  of  cul
tivation,  whereof  I  have  been  just  complaining.  Dr.
MARTIN,  who  was  an  Ey- witness,  and  strictly  ex
amined  the  fact,  affirms  (109)  that  in  Bernera,
near  Harris,  the  produce  of  Barley  is  many  times
from  twenty  to  thirty-fold;  that  in  Harries  and
South-Uist  (HO)  one  barley-grain  sometimes  pro
duces  from  seven  to  fourteen  ears,  as  in  North-
Uist  from  ten  to  thirty-fold  (111)  in  a  plentiful
year;  that  at  Corchattan,  in  Skie,  the  increase
(112)  amounted  once  to  thirty-five;  that  if  the
ground  be  laid  down  for  some  time,  it  gives  a
good  (113)  crop  without  dunging,  some  fields  not
having  been  dunged  in  forty  years ;  and  that  he
was  informed  a  small  tract  of  ground,  at  Skerry-

(109)  Page  42.

(110)  Ibid.

(111)  Page  53.

(112)  Page  132.

(113)  Page  13k


203  THE  HISTORY


breck  (114)  in  the  said  He  of  Skie,  had  yielded
a  hundred-fold.  Nay,  I  have  been  told  my  self
by  a  native  of  that  He,  that  the  people  there
believe  they  might  have  two  crops  a  year,  if  they
took  due  pains.  For  this  I  beged  their  pardon,  but
allowed  what  was  tantamount,  since  the  words  of
Diodonis  may  no  less  justly  be  rendered  a  double
crop,  than  two  (115)  crops,  which  last  however
is  in  some  respects  literally  true.  For  with  re
gard  to  their  pastures,  of  which  somewhat  before,
nothing  is  more  common  than  for  a  gheep  tQ

have  two  (II 6)  lambs  at  a  time.  This  not  onely
confirms  my  construction,  and  puts  me  in  mind
of  that  verse  in  (111)  Virgil,

She  suckles  twins,  and  twice  a  day  is  milk'd:

but  also  of  what  the  so  often  mentioned  Dr.  MARTIN
relates  on  this  (118)  occasion;  which  is,  that  be
sides  the  ordinary  rent  a  tenant  paid,  it  was  a
custom  in  the  Hands,  if  any  of  his  cows  or  sheep
brought  two  young  ones  at  a  time,  one  of  them
was  to  go  to  the  Landlord  :  who,  on  his  part,

(114)     Ibid.

(115     Dittous  karpous.

(116)  Page  108,

(117)  Bis  venit  ad  mulctram,  Unas  alit  ubere  foetus.

Eclog.  3,  ver.  30.

(118)  Page  109.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  207

was  obliged,  if  any  of  his  tenant's  wives  bore
twins,  to  take  one  of  them  into  his  own  fami
ly;  and  that  he  himself  knew  a  Gentleman,  who
had  sixteen  of  these  twins  in  his  house  at  a
time.  It  is  no  wonder  they  are  populous.  Even
the  wild  Goats  on  the  Mountains,  for  such  there
are  in  Harries,  are  observed  to  bring  (119)  forth
their  young  twice  a  year  :  all  which  put  toge
ther,  makes  the  last  objection  against  me  to  be
none,  and  therefore  finally  justifies  my  explica
tion  of  the  passage  in  DIODORUS.  From  hence  'tis
evident,  MY  LORD,  that  those  Hands1  are  ca
pable  of  great  improvement,  as  they  abound  like
wise  in  many  curiosities,  especially  in  Subjects  of
Philosophical  observation.  Nor  is  it  less  plain  by
the  many  antient  Monuments  remaining  among
them,  and  the  marks  of  the  plow  reaching  to
the  very  tops  of  the  mountains,  which  the  art
less  inhabitants  think  incapable  of  culture,  that  in
remote  ages  they  were  in  a  far  more  flourishing
condition  than  at  present.  The  ruins  of  spacious
houses,  and  the  numerous  Obelises,  old  Forts,
Temples,  Altars,  with  the  like,  which  I  have  de
scribed  (120)  before,  undeniably  prove  this  :  be
sides  that  the  country  was  formerly  full  of  woods,
as  appears  by  the  great  Oaks  and  Firr-trees  daily
dug  out  of  the  ground,  and  by  many  other  to
kens  ;  there  being  several  small  woods  and  cop-

(119)  Page  35.

(120)  Letter  II.  Sections  VIII,  IX,  X,  &c.


209  THE  HISTORY


pices  still  remaining-  in  Skie,  Mull,  and  other
places.  Tho'  I  don't  pretend,  no  more  than  Dio-
DORUS,  that  these  were  the  fortunate  Hands  of
the  Poets,  or  ihe  Elyzian-fields  of  the  dead,  by
some  plac'd  in  those  [121]  seas,  as  by  others  else
where  ;  yet  the  following  lines  of  [122]  of  HO
RACE  agree  to  no  spot  better,  than  the  Hands
we  have  been  just  describing.

«  from  lofty  hills

"  With  murmuring  pace  the  fountain  trills.
"  There  Goats  uncall'd  return  from  fruitful  vales,

"  And  bring  stretch'd  dugs  to  fill  the  pails.
"  No  bear  grins  round  the  fold,  wo  lambs  he  shakes  ;

"  No  field  swells  there  with  poys'nous  snakes.
"  More  we  shall  wonder  on  the  happy  plain  :

"  The  watery  East  descends  in  rain*
4£  Yet  so  as  to  refresh,  not  drown  the  fields  ;

"  The  temperate  glebe  full  harvest  yields.
"  No  heat  annoys  :  the  ruler  of  the  Gods

'*  From  plagues  secures  these  blest  abodes."

CREECH'S   Translation.

The  Inhabitants,  that  I  may  make  a  complete
commentary  on  the  passage  of  Dlodorus,  are  not
to  be  mended  in  the  proportion  of  their  persons :
no  preposterous  bandages  distorting  them  in  the
cradle,  nor  hindring  nature  from  duely  forming
their  limbs  ;  which  is  the  reason,  that  bodily  im
perfections  of  any  sort  are  very  rare  among  them.

(121)     V ideas  Annotatiunem  63  &  64.

altis


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


Neither   does   any  over-officiously  preventive  Physic
in   their   infancy,    spoil   their   original   constitution  ;
whence    they    have    so    strong    a    habit   of.,  body,
that    one   of    them    requires    treble    the    dose,    as
will    purge    any   man    in    the    south   of    Scotland.
But   what    contributes    above    all    things    to    their
health    and   longevity,   is  constant   Temperance  and
Exercise.       As    they   prefer    conveniency   to    orna
ment     both    in    their     houses     and    their    apparel,
which    last    I  think    not    disagreeable,    so,    in    their
way    of    eating    and    drinking,    they   rather    satisfy
than  oppress  nature.    Their  food  is  commonly  fresh,
and   their    meals  two    a   day,   water   being    the    or
dinary    drink    of    the    vulgar.     They    are    strangers
to    many  of  the    Distempers,    as    they   are   to  most
of  the  Vices  of  other   nations,   for   some  of  which
they  have   not   so    much  "as   a   name  :    and   it  may
no   less   truely   be   observed   of   these   than   of  the
ancient     Scythians,     that     (123)    the    ignorance    of

%     Levis  crepante  lympha  desilit  pede.
Illic  injussae  veniunt  ad  mulctra  capellaet

Refertque  tenta  grex  amicus  ubera.
Nee  vespertinus  circumgtrnit  ursus  ovile,

Nee  intiimescit  alia  viperis  humus.
Pluraque  feliccs  mirabimur  :  ut  neque  largis

Aquosus  Burns  urva  radat  imbribus^
Pinguia  nee  siccis  urantur  scmina  glebis;

U-trumque  Rege  temperante  Coelitum.

Epod.  16.  ver.  47.

(123)  Tanto  plus  in  illis  proficit  vitiorbm  ignoratio,
quarn  in  his  (Graccis  mmirurrij  cognitiavirtutis.  JUSTIX.
Mist,  lib.  ^  cap.  2.

D2


210  THE  HISTORY


vices  has  had  a  better  effect  upon  them,  than
the  knowledge  of  Philosophy  upon  politer  nations.
They  owe  every  thing"  to  nature.  They  cure  all
disorders  of  the  body  by  simples  of  their  own
growth,  and  by,  proper  diet  or  labor.  Hence  they
are  stout  and  active,  dextrous  in  all  their  exer
cises  ;  as  they  are  Avithall  remarkably  sagacious,
choleric  but  easily  appeazed,  sociable,  good  natur-
ed,  ever  cheerful,  and  having  a  strong  inclination
to  Music  :  all  which  particulars,  with  the  other
parts  of  their  past  and  present  character,  I  have
not  onely  learnt  from  the  concurrent  testimonies
of  several  judicious  authors ;  but  also  from  the
intimate  knowledge  I  have  had  my  self  of  many
scores  of  the  natives  as  well  in  Scotland  as  else
where.  They  are  hospitable  beyond  expression,
intertaining  all  strangers  of  what  condition  soever
gratis;  the  use  of  mony  being  still  in  some  of
those  Hands  unknown,  and  till  a  few  ages  past
in  all  of  them.  They  have  no  Lawyers  or  At
torneys  :  which,  no  more  than  several  other  par
ticulars  here  specified,  I  do  not  understand  of
the  Highlanders  on  the  continent;  tho'  speaking
the  same  language,  and  wearing  the  same  dress
with  them.  The  men  and  women  plead  their
own  causes ;  and  a  very  speedy  decision  is  made
by  the  Proprietor,  who's  Perpetual  president  in
their  courts,  or  by  his  Bailiff  as  his  substitute.
In  a  word,  they  are  equally  void  of  the  two
chief  plagues  of  Mankind,  Luxury  and  Atnbition;


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  2ll

which  consequently  frees  them  from  all  those  rest
less  pursuits,  consuming  toils,  and  never-failing
vexations,  that  men  suffer  elsewhere  for  those  airy,
trifling,  shortlived  vanities.  Their  contempt  of
superfluities  is  falsly  reckoned  Poverty,  since  their
felicity  consists  not  in  having  much,  but  in  co
veting  little ;  and  that  he's  supremely  rich,  who
wants  no  more  than  he  has:  for  as  they,  who

^

live   according   to   nature,   will   never   be   poor ;    so
they,     who   live   according    to   opinion,    will   never
be   rich.     It   is   certain   that   no   body  wants,  what
he   does   not   desire :     and   how   much    easier  is   it
not    to    desire    certain    things,    than    otherwise  ?    as
it   is   far   more   healthy   and   happy   to   want,   than
to  injoy  them.     Neither  is  their  ignorance  of  vices
in    these   Hands    any   diminution    to    their   virtue,
since,    not  being    by   their   situation   concerned    in
any  of  the   disputes   about   dominion  or  commerce,
that   distract   the   world,   they  are   not   oaely   rigid,
observers  of  Justice,   but  show  less  propensity  than
any   People    to    tumults;     except   what    they   may
be   unwarily   led    into     by   the   extraordinary   defe
rence    they   pay   to     the    opinion   of    their    Chiefs
and   Leaders,    who    are   accountable    for   the   mis
chiefs   they  sometimes   bring,   as  at   this  very  (124\
time,    on   these   well-meaning   Hyperboreans.      For
Hyperboreans   I   will    now   presume   to   call    them,
and  withall  to   claim   Abaris  as   a   Philosopher  of

{124}    1719.


THE  HISTORY

the   Brittish  world,   which  has   principaUy  occasion
ed  this  Digression;    on    that   account   not  improper,
nor,    I   hope,    altogether  useless    in   other   respects.
Bo  this    as  your  Lordship  shall  think  fit    to  judge,
I  will   not   finish    it    before  I    have    acquainted  you
with     an    odd    custom     or    two,    that    have    from
time  immemorial  obtained    in  Barra   and   the  lesser
circumjacent    Hands,    which     are    the     property    of
MAC-NEIL.      The    present   is   the    thirty   fifth    Lord
of  Barra    by   uninterrupted    lineal    descent,  a  thing
whereof    no    Prince    In    the    world -can    boast:    and
he     is    regarded,    you    may    imagine,    as    no    mean
potentate   by   his    subjects,   who   know    none   great
er   than   lie.     (125)  When   the  wife   of  any   of 'em
dies,   he   has   immediate   recourse   to   his   Lord,   re
presenting   first    his   own    logs   in    the    want    of    a
meet   help;    and   next   that   of    MAC-NEIL   himself
if  he     should    not     go   en    to   beget    followers     for
him.       Hereupon    MAC-NEIL    finds    out    a   sateable
match,    neither   side   ever   disliking   his  choice,    but
accepting   it   as    the   highest   favor,    and   the   mar-
riage   is   celebrated   without    any  courtship,   portion
or   dowry.       But    they   never   fail     to   make    merry
on    such    occasions    with    a   bottle   or   more   of  Us-
quebah.     On    the  other   hand,    (126)  when  any  wo
man  becomes   a  widdow,   she   is   upon  the   like  ap
plication  soon   provided  with'  a   husband,   and   with

(125)  MARTIN,  page  97.

(126)  Ibid.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  %\3


as  little  ceremony.     Whoever  may  dislike   this  Hy
perborean    manner  of  preventing    delay,    disdain,  or
disappointment,    yet   he   cannot    but   approve   MAC-
NEIL'S    conduct,     in     supplying     (127)     any    of    his
tenants    with     as     many    Milch-cows,     as    he     may
chance   to    lose    by   the     seventy   of    the   weather,
or    by   other   misfortunes;    which    is    not   the    less
true  charity,   for   being   good   policy.     Most  worthy
likewise   of    imitation   is   his   taking   into   his   own
family,   building   a    house    hard   by    on    purpose   for
them,    and   maintaining   to  the  day  of  their  death,
as  many  old  men,    a?5   thro'  age    or  infirmity,  (128)
become    unfit   for  labor.     But    I    should  never  have
done,    if  I    preceded  with   the   particular   usages  of
the    North   and   West   Ilanders.      Several   of  them,
retained   from   the    remotest   times   of    the   Druids,
are   explained   in   this   and   the    preceding   Letters.
Yet   one    custom,    very   singular,    I  cannot   help  re
lating   here,     tlio'    long     since    grown    obsolete  ;    or
rather   that  it   has  been    in    disuse,  ever  since  their
conversion    to  Christianity.      When   a   man   had   a
mind   to  have   a   wife,  (129)    as  soon  as    he   gain'd
the    consent  of  the  maid   he  lik'd,  he  took  her  to
his  bed  and   board  for  a  whole    year ;    and   if,  up
on   thus    coming    thoroughly    acquainted    with    the

(127)  Ibid.

(128)  Page   98.
Page   114.


214.  THE  HISTORY


conditions  both  of  her  mind  and  body,  he  kept
her  any  longer,  she  then  became  his  wife  all  her
days  ;  but  if  he  dislik'd  her  to  such  a-  degree  on
any  account,  as  to  be  persuaded  she  shou'd  not
make  him  easy  during  life,  he  return'd  her  (with
her  portion,  if  she  had  any)  at  the  twelve  months
end  to  her  parents  or  guardians ;  legitimating  the
children,  and  maintaining  them  at  his  own  charge
in  case  there  were  such.  Nor  was  this  repudia
tion  any  dishonor  or  disadvantage  to  the  young
woman  in  the  eyes  of  another  man,  who  thought
she  would  make  him  a  better  wife,v  or  that  he
might  to  her  be  a  better  busband  It  was  a
custom,  I  must  own,  like  to  prevent  a  world  of
unhappy  matches :  but,  according  to  our  modern
ideas,  it  is  not  onely  unlawful,  but  also  barbar
ous.

IX.  To  return  whence  I  digressed,  having  thus
happily  discovered  and  asserted  the  country  of
Abaris,  and  also  his  profession  of  a  Druid ;  I  shall
give  here  some  account  of  his  person,  referring
to  another  place  the  History  of  his  adventures.
The  OrJitoi*  Himcrius,  tho'  one  of  those,  who,
from  the  equivocal  sense  of  the  word  Hyperbo
rean,  seems  to  have  mistaken  him  for  a  Scythian  ;
yet  accurately  describes  his  person,  and  gives  him
a  very  noble  character.  That  he  spoke  Greek
with  so  much  facility  and  elegance,  will  be  no
matter  of  wonder  to  such  as  consider  the  antient
intercourse,  which  we  have  already  prov'd  between


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  215

the  Greecs  and   the  Hyperboreans :   nor  would  the
latter,  to  be  sure,  send  any  ambassador,  as  we'll  see
presently  they  did  Abaris,  to  the  former,  unless,  a-
mong  the  other  requisite  qualifications,  he  perfectly  un
derstood  their  language.     But  let's  harken  a  while  to
Himerius.     "  They  relate,  (says  he,)  that  Abaris  the
"    Sage  was  by  nation  a  Hyperborean,  become  a  Gre-
*6  cian  in  speech,  and  resembling  a  Scythian  in  his  habit
*£   and   appearance.     Whenever   he   moved   his   ton-
fi  gue,    you   would   imagine   him   to   be   some   one
*e  out  of  the    midst  of  the  Academy   or  very  Ly-
"   ceum"  (130).     Now  that  his  habit  was  not  that
of  a   Scythian   ever   covered   with   skins,   but  what
has    been   in   all   ages,     as   generally   at   this    pre
sent,   worn   in   the   Hebrides   and    the   neighboring
Highlands,   it   needs  onely  to   be   described   for  re
moving   all   doubts    and   scruples.      ((  Abaris   came
<•'   to   Athens,    continues    (131)    Himerius,    holding
(i   a    bow,     having    a     quiver    hanging     from    his
"   shoulders,     his   body   wrapt   up   in    a  plad,     girt
"   about   his   loins   with   a   gilded   belt,    and   wear-
*•   ing    trowzers    reaching    from     the   soles   of    his
*•'   feet   to   his   waste."       A  gun   and  pistol,   being
of  modern  date,   could  make  no  part  of  his  equi-

(130)  Abarin  men  sophon  geaos   men  Huperboreion  leg-ousin,    Hellena   de
fhonea  gegenGsthai,    kai  Skuthen    men  achri  stoles  de    kai  schematos.     Ei   de
pou  glottan  kinSseie,  touto  ekeinon  ek  meses  Akademias  kai  autou  Lubeiou  no-
mizesthai.     Ex  Orations  ad  Ursicium  apud  Photium  in  Bibiioth.  cod  243.  edit.
Rotkomag.  pag.  1135.

(131)  Heken  Abaris  Athenaze   toxa  tenon,  pliaretran  hcmmenos  eis  omon,
clilamudi    sphingomenos  :    Zone  en    kat'  iksuon  chrose^   anaxuiiJes    ek  tarsou

achri  kai  gloutoa  anatciaousui.    Id.  ibiU»


THE  HISTORY


page :  and  you  see  he  did  not  make  his  entry  in
to  Athens  ridding  on  a  broom-stick,  as  faboulous-
ly  reported,  but  in  the  native  garb  of  an  abo-
Tiginal  Scot.  As  for  what  regards  his  abilities,
it  was  impossible  for  his  principals  to  have  made
a  better  choice ;  since  we  are  informed  by  the
same  (132)  Himerius,  that  «  he ,  was  affable  and
"  pleasant  in  conversation,  in  dispatching  great
"  affairs  secret  and  industrious,  quicksighted  in
"  present  exigences,  in  preventing  future  dangers
"  circumspect,  a  searcher  after  wisdom,  desirous
"  of  friendship,  trusting  indeed  little  to  fortune,
"  and  having  every  thing  trusted  to  him  for  his
«•'  prudence."  Neither  the  Academy  nor  the  Ly
ceum  could  furnish  out  a  man  with  fitter  quali
ties,  to  go  so  farr  abroad  and  to  such  wise  na
tions,  about  affairs  no  less  arduous  than  impor
tant.  But  if  we  attentively  consider  his  modera
tion  in  eating,  drinking,  and  the  use  of  all  those
things,  which  our  natural  appetites  incessantly
crave;  adding  the  candor  and  simplicity  of  his
manners,  with  the  solidity  and  wisdom  of  his  an
swers,  all  which  well  find  sufficiently  attested,  it
must  be  owned,  that  the  world  at  that  time  had
few  to  compare  with  ABARIS.

Thus   I   have   laid    before   your  Lordship   a  Spe
cimen   of    my   History   of    the   Druids.      Give   me

(132)  En  hedus  entuchein,  dcinos  hesuche  naegalen  praxin  ergasasthai,  ox-
tis  to  pajon  idein,  promethes  to  raellon  phulattesthai,  sophias  hctton,  eraites
pbilias,  olig-a  men  tuche  pisleuon,  gnomu  de  ta.  panta  pistoumenos.  Id.  ibid*


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  217

leave  to  send  you  with  this  Letter  two  small
Pieces  which  I  don't  doubt  will  be  agreeable  to
you,  One  is  Mr.  JONES'S  Answer  to  Mr,  TATE'S
Questions  about  the  Druids,  and  the  other  British
Antiquities  >  which  I  transcribed  from  a  Manuscript
in  the  Cotton  Library  (133) ;  and  the  other,  some
Collections  mentioned  in  one  of  my  Letters  (134),
shewing  the  Affinity  between  the  Armoric  and
Irish  Language,  &c.

I  am,

MY  LORD,

YOUR  LORDSHIP'S

MOST  OBLIG  Dj

AND
VERY  HUMBLE  SERVANT,

April  18,
1719,

(133)  Vitel  &  v.  6,

(134)  Letter  1L  Sect.  18.  pag.


Mr.  TATE's.

QUESTIONS*

ABOUT    THE

DRUIDS,

AND    OTHER

BRITTISH  ANTIQUITIES?

WITH
Mr.  JO^ES's

ANSWER  TO  THEM.

Mr.   TATE's   QUESTIONS'        .

JL$Y  what  naines  were  they  call'd,by  the  Britto
which  the  Latins  callfiruidea  or  Druides  ?

II.  Whether  the  Druids  and  Flamens  were  all  oner
and  the  difference  between  them  ?    how  the  Flamens
were  called  in  Brittish,  and  their  antiquity  and  hatiits  ?

III.  What  degrees  were  given  to  the  Professors  of
Learning-  ?  when,  where,  and  by  whom,  and  their  ha
bits  or  apparel  ?

IV.  Whether  the  Earth  had  any  office  in  war  ans
wering  our  Heralds  ?   their  garments  and  enseigns  ?


OF  THE  DTIUIDS.  220

juid  whether  they  used  the  Caduceus  ?  many  fetching
the  .original  thereof  from  the  Britten's  charming  of  ser
pents,

V.  What  Judges  and  Lawyers  had  tiie  Brittons
that  followed  the  King  ?  and  what  are  Tri  anhepcor
£rcnhin,  and  their  use  ?

'VI.  What  Judges  and  Lawyers  were  their  resident
in  the  country  ?  their  number  ?  what  Judges  were
there  per  dignitatem  Terrac  ?  and  what  their  duty  ?
and  how  were  they  assembl'd  to  do  the  same  ?

VII.  It  appeareth  ;there  were  always  -many  Kings
and  Princes  in  this  Realm  before  the  coming  in  of  the
Saxons  :  were  their  countries  divided  into  Talaiths,
.as  all  between  Severn  and  the  Sea  was  after  their


VIII.  Was  there  any  division  into  Shires  before  the
Saxon's  coming,  and  what  difference  betwixt  a  Shire
and  a  Sirydh  ?  There  were  anciently  with  you
Macnors,  Com?nods,  Cantreths,  answerable  whereunto
are  our  Manors,  Ty  things,  Hundreds.  And  that  mak-
eth  me  to  .encline  .that  Swydh  shou'd  be  like  our  Shire,
as  Swyd  cacr  Bhyrdin,  S-wyd  Amwythig,  Swyd  caer
Wrangon  ;  and  the  General  Officers  of  them  were  call
ed  Swydogion,  under  whom  were  Macr,  Gnghcllaivr,
•RhingJiill,  'Ophiriat,  and  Brawdur  trwyr  Swyd,  except
all  bear  the  name  of  Swydoglon.  I  find  in  ancient
Book  of  Landaff  Gluiguis  or  "Gllvisus  King  of  Deme-
tia  (which  of  this  King  is  cali'd  Glenguissig)  of  whom


221  THE    HISTORY

it  is  said  septem  pagos  rexit,  whereof  Glamorgan,  now
a  Shire,  was  one ;  and  pagus  is  us'd  for  a  Shire,

IX.  Whether  flie  Britons  had  Noblemen  bearing
the  name  ofDuccs,  Comitcs,  Bar  ones  ?  and  what  they
were  called  in  Brittish  ? — In  the  Book  of  Landaff  I
find  it  thus  written,  "  Gandeleius  Rex  totam  regionera
"  suam  Cadoco  filio  suo  commendavit,  privilegiumque
"  concessit,  quatenus  a  fonte  Faennun  haen  donee  ad
"  ingressum  fluminis  Nadavan  pervqnitur,  omnes  Re-
"  ges  et  Comites,  Optimates,  Tribuni,  atque  domesti-
"  ci  in  Coenobij  sui  coemeterto  de  Lancarvan  sepeli-
"  antur."  And  K,  E.  I.  enquiring  of  the  Laws  of  the
Britons,  demandeth  how  the  Welsh  Barons  did  adminis
ter  justice,  and  so  distinguisht  them  from  Lords  Mar
chers,

X.  What  is  the  signification  of  the  word  Assach  f
A  statute  of  King  Henry  VI,  saith,  some  offered  to  ex
cuse  themselves  by  an  Assach  after  the   custom   of
Wales  :    that  is  to  say,  by  an  oath  of  thirty  men.

XI.  What  officer  is  he  that  in  the  Laws  of  Howcl
Da  is  called  Distein,  and  the  signification  of  the  word?

XII.  What  do  you  think  of  this  place  of  Petrus
Ramus  in  his  Book  de  moribus  vctcrum  Gallonim  ;
Hae  civitatcs  J3rulos  suos  habebant.   Sic  a  Cacsare  no~
minantur  Senatus  Eburonicum,  Lcxoblorwn,  Vendor um*
Was  there  any  Counsil  or  Senate  in  the  Brittish  Go
gernment,  and  by  what  name  were  they  call'd  ?


Mr.  Joneses  Answers  to  Mr.   Tatts
Questions.


J[  O  to  the  first  I  say,  that  Druides  or  Druidae  is  a
word  that  is  derived  from  the  Brittish  word  Drudion  ;
being  the  name  of  certain  wise,  discreet,  learned,
and  religious  Persons  among  the  Brittons.  Druidon
is  the  plural  number  of  this  primitive  word  Drud.  By
adding  ion  to  the  singular  number,  you  make  the
plural  of  it  secundum  formam  Britannorum  ;  sic  Drud,
Drudion.  This  primitive  word  Drud  has  many  signi
fications.  One  signification  is  Dialwr,  that  is  a  reven
ger,  or  one  that  redresseth  wrong  :  for  so  the  Justicers
call'd  Drudion  did  supply  the  place  of  Magistrates.
Another  signification  Krevlon,  and  that  signifies  cruel
and  merciless ;  for  they  did  execute  justice  most  righte
ously,  and  punisht  offenders  most  severely.  DRUD  sig
nifies  also  glew  and  prid,  that  is,  valiant  or  hardy.
Drud  is  also  dear  or  precious,  unde  venit  Drudanieth,
which  is  Dearth.  These  Drudion  among  the  Brittons
by  their  office  did  determine  all  kind  of  matters  as  well
private  as  publick,  and  were  Justicers  as  well  in  religi
ous  matters  and  controversies,  as  in  Law  matters  and
controversies,  for  offences  of  death  and  title  of  Laws.
These  did  the  sacrifices  to  the  Heathen  Gods,  and  the
sacrifices  cou'd  not  be  made  without  them,  and  they
did  forbid  sacrifices  to  be  done  by  any  man  that  did
toot  obey  their  decree  and  sentence.  All  the  Arts,


222  THE  HISTORY


Sciences,  Learning,  Philosophy,  and  Divinity  that  was
taught  in  the  land,,  was  taught  by  them  ;  and  they
taught  by  memory,  and  never  wou'd  that  their  know
ledge  and  learning  shou'd  be  put  in  writing :  whereby
when  they  were  supprest  by  the  Emperor  of  Rome  in
the  beginning  of  Christianity,  their  Learning,  Arts,
Laws,  Sacrifices,  and  Governments  were  lost  and  ex-
tinguisht  here  in  this  land ;  so  that  I  can  find  no  more
mention  of  an»y  of  their  deeds  in  our  tongue  than  I
have  set"  down,  but  that  they  dwelled  in  rocks,  ^nd
woods,  and  dark  places,  and  some  places  in  our  land,
had  their  names  from  them,  and  are  called  after  their
names  to  this  day.  And  the  Hand  of  Mone  or  Angle-
sea  is  taken  to  be  one  of  their  chiefest  seats  in  Britain,
because  it  was  a  solitary  Hand  full  of  wood,  and  not
inhabited  of  any  but  themselves ;  and  then  the  He  of
Mone,  which  is  called  Anglesea,  was  called  yr  Iwjs
DowyH,  that  is,  the  Dark  Hand.  -  And  after  that  the
Drudion  were  supprest,  the  huge  groves  which  they
favor' d  and  kept  a-foot,  were  rooted  up, and  that  ground
tilFd.  Then  that  Hand  did  yield  such  abundance  and
plenty  of  corn,  that  it  might  sustain  and  keep  all
Wales  with  bread  ;  anil  therefore  there  arose  then  a
Proverb,  and  yet  is  to  this  day,  viz.  Mvn  mam  Gymbrv,
that  i>,  Mon  the  mother  of  Wales.  Some  do  term  the
proverb  thus,,  Mon  mam  Gynedd,  that  is,  Mon  the
mother  of  North-wales,  that  is,  that  Mon  was  able  to
nourish  and  foster  upon  bread  all  Wales  or  North-
Wales.  And  after  that  this  Dark  Hand  had  cast  out
for  many  years  such  abundance  of  corn  where  the  dis-


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  223


closed  woods  and  groves  were,  it  surceased  to  yield
corn,  and  yielded  such  plenty  of  grass  for  cattle,  that
the  Countrym  en  left  off  their  great  tilling,  and  turned  it
to  grazing  andbreeding  of  cattle,  and  that  did  continue
among  them  wonderful  plentiful,  so  that  it  was  an
admirable  thing  to  be  heard,  how  so  little  a  plat  of
ground  shou'd  breed  such  great  number  of  cattle  ;  and
ROW  the  inhabitants  do  till  a  great  part  of  it,  and
breed  a  great  number  of  cattle  on  t'other  part.

II.  As  for  the  second  Question,  I  do  refer  the  ex
position  of  it  to  those  that  have  written  of  the  Flamens
in  Latine.  The  Drudion  in  Britain,  according  to  their
manner  and  custom,  did  execute  the  office  and  function,
of  the  Flamens  beyond  the  sea  :    and  as  for  their  ha
bits,  I  cannot  well  tell  you  how,  nor  what  manner
they  were  of.

III.  To  the  third  Question :  there  Were  four  sever
al  kinds  of  Degrees,  that  were  given  to  the  Professors
of  Learning.     The  first  was,  Disgiblii/s'bas,  and  that
was  given  a  man  after  three  years  studying  in  the  art
of  Poetry  and  Musick,  if  he  by  his  capacity  did  deserve
it.     The  second  degree  wras  DISGIBLDISGYBLIAIDD,  and
that  was  given  to  the  Profeflbr  of  Learning  after  six
3rears  studying,  if  he  did  deserve  it.  'The  third  degree  was
DiSGiBLPENKEnftDiAiDD  ;  and  that  was  given  to  the
Prosessor  of  Learning  after  nine  }^ears  studying,  if  lie
deserve  it.      ^nd  the  fourth  degree  was  Pentcerdd  or
Athro,  and  Athro  is  the  highest  degree  of  Learning  a-
mong  us,  and  in  Latine  is  called  Doctor.     All  these


THE  HISTORY


degrees  were  given  to  men  of  Learning  as  well  Poets
us  Musicians.  All  these  foresaid  degrees  of  Learning
were  given  by  the  King,  or  in  his  presence  in  his  Pa
lace,  at  every  three  years  end,  or  by  his  License  from
him  in  some  fit  place  thereunto  (appointed)  upon  an
open  disputation  had  before  the  King  or  his  Deputy  in
that  behalf,  and  then  they  were  to  have  their  reward
according  to  their  degrees.  Also  there  were  three  kinds
of  Poets.  The  one  was  Prududd  :  the  other  was
Tcvluwr  :  the  third  was  Klerwr.  These  three  kinds
had  three  several  matters  to  treat  of.  The  Prududd
was  to  treat  of  Lands,  and  the  praise  of  Princes,  No
bles,  and  Gentlemen,  and  had  his  circuit  among  them.
The  Tevluwr  did  treat  of  merry  jests,  and  domestical
pastimes  and  affairs,  having  his  circuit  among  the
Countrymen,  and  his  reward  according  to  his  calling,
The  Clerwr  did  treat  of  invective  and  rustical  Poetry,
differing  from  the  Prududd  and  Tevluwr  ;  and  his  cir
cuit  was  among  the  Yeomen  of  the  Country.  As  for
their  habits,  they  were  certain  long  apparel  down  to
the  calf  of  their  leggs  or  somewhat  lower,  and  were  of
diverse  colours,

IV.  To  the  fourth  Question,  I  say,  the  Bard  was  a
Herald  to  record  all  trie  acts  of  the  Princes  and  Nobles
and  to  give  arms  according  to  deserts.  They  were  al
so  Poets,  and  cou'd  prognosticate  certain  things,  and
gave  them  out  in  metre.  And  further,  there  were  three
kinds  of  Belrdd  (the  plural  of  Bardd),  viz.  Privardd,
Poswardd,  Arwyddvardd.  The  Priveirdd  (plurally,)


•  OF  THE  DRUIDS.  225

were  Merlin  Silvester,  Merlin  Ambrosius,  and  Talies-
sin  ;  and  the  reason  they  were  call'd  Priveirdd  was,
because  they  invented  and  taught  such  Philosophy  and
other  Learning  as  were  never  read  or  heard  of  by  any
man  before.  The  interpretation  of  this  word  Pri
vardd  is  Prince,  or  first  learner,  or  learned  man  :  for
Bardd  was  an  appelation  of  all  learned  men,  and  pro
fessors  of  Learning,  and  Prophets,  as  also  were  attri
buted  to  them  the  titles  of  Privardd,  Posvardd,  and
Arwyddvard.  Bardd  Telyn.  And  they  call  Merlin
Ambrosius  by  the  name  of  Bardd  Gortheyrn,  that  is,
Vortiger's  Philosopher,  or  Learned  man,  or  Prophesyer.
Bardd  Telyn  is  he  that  is  Doctor  of  the  Musicians  of
the  Harp,  and  is  the  chief  harp  in  the  Land,  having  his
abode  in  the  King's  palace  :  and  note  no  man  may  be
called  Privardd,  but  he  that  inventeth  such  Learning,
and  Arts,  or  Science,  as  were  never  taught  before.
The  second  kind  of  Bardd  is  Posvardd,  and  those
Posveirdd  were  afterwards  Prydiddion  :  for  they  did
imitate  and  teach  what  the  Priveirdd  had  set  forth,
and  must  take  their  author  from  one  of  them  ;  for
they  themselves  are  no  Authors,  but  registers  and  pro
pagators  of  the  Learning  invented  by  the  others.  The
third  kind  is  Arwyddvard,  that  is  by  interpretation  an
Ensign-bard,  and  indeed  is  a  Herald  at  Arms  ;  and
his  duty  was  to  declare  the  Genealogy  and  to  blazon
the  Arms  of  Nobles  and  Princes,  and  to  keep  the  re
cord  of  them,  and  to  alter  their  Anns  according  to  their
dignity  or  deserts.  These  were  with  the  kings  and
Princes  in  all  battles  and  actions.  As  for  their  Gar-

F  2


THE  HISTORY


merits,  I  think  they  were  long,  such  as  the  Prydiddion
had  ;  for  they  challenge  the  name  of  Beirdd  nt  supra,
Whereas  some  writers,  and  for  the  most  part  all  fore-
ners  that  mention  the  Beirdd,  do  write  that  Bard  has
his  name  given  him  from  one  Bdrdus,  who  was  the
first  inventor  of  'Barddonieth,  and  some  say  he  was
the  fourth  King  of  Brittain  ;  I  say  it  is  a  most  false,  -
erroneous,  and  'fabulous  surmise  of  foren  writers,  for
there  never  was  any  of  that  name  either  a  king  or
a  King's  son  of  Brittain.  But  there  was  a  great  Scho
lar  and  Inventor  both  of  Poetical  verses  and  musical
Lessons  that  was  some  time  King  of  Brittain.  His
name  was  Blegywryd  ap:  Geisylltr  and  he  was  the  fif
ty-sixth  supreme  king  of  Great  Brittain,  and  dy'd  in
the  2067th  year  after  the  deluge,  of  whom  it  is  writ
ten  that  he  was  the  famousest  Miisican  that  ever  lived
in  Britain.  No  writer  can  show  that  BARD  had  his
name  from  Bardus,  it  being  a  primitive  Brittish  woi  d
that  has  the  foresayd  .significations.  And  BarddoTiieth
(which  is  the  art,  function,  and  profession  of  the
Bardd)  is  also  used  for  Prophesy  and  'the  interpreta
tion  thereof,  and  also  for  all  kinds  of  Learning  a—
mong  us  that  the  jSjzrddwere  authors  of.

.

V.  As  for  the  fifth  Question,  the  King  had  .always
a  chief  Judge  resident  in  his  Court,  ready  to  decide
all  controversies  that  then  happen'd,  and  he  was  call
ed  Egnat  Llys.  He  had  some  privilege  given  him  by"
the  King's  houshold  officers,  and  therefore  he  was
to  determine  their  causes  gratis.  As  for  the  tri  anheb-


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  227


•Jcor  brenin,l  think  it  superfluous  to  treat  of  them  here,
-seeing  you  have  this  matter  in  my  Book  of  Laws
more  perfect  than  I  can  remember  it  at  this  time.
Look  in  the  Table  among  .the  trioedd'kiffraith,  and
those  are  set  down  in  two  or  .three  several  places  of
the  Book.  And  if  you  cannot  find  it -there,  see  in  the
cfSce  of  Egnat  Llys.,  or  Pvn.tevlu,  or  yjfelriaid  Itys,
and  you'll  be  sure  -to  find  it  in  some  of  those  places.  I
do  not  find  it  in  my  Book  oi"  Laws,  that  there  were
any  officers  for  the  Law  that  did  dwell  in  the  King's
.Palace,  but  onely  his  Egnat  Lli/s,  that  was  of  any
name,  or  bore  aay  great  office  :  for  -he  was  one  of  the
•tri  anhelkor  brcnin*

VL  As  for  the  sixth  Question,  I  say  that  there
were  resident  in  the  Country  but  EGNAT  COMOT,  that
I  can  understand-  But  when  an  Assembly  met  to
gether  for  the  title  ,cf  Lands,  then  the  King  in  his
own  Person  carne-upGii:the  Land  ;  and  if  he  could  not
come,  he  appointed  some  Deputy  for  him,,  There
rame  with  the  King  his  chief  Judge,  and  called  unto
•him  his  EGNAT  KOMCT,  or  County- Judge,  together
•with  some  of  his  Council  .that  dwelt  in  the  Komot,
where  the  Lands  Jay  that  were  in  the  controversy,  and
the  Free-holders  also  of  the  same  Place,  and  there
c.ime  a  Priest  or  Prelate,  two  Counsellors,  and  two
Rhingill  or  Serjeants,  and  two  Champions,  one  for  the
Plain tiiT  and  another  for  the  Defendant  ;  and  when
jail  these  were  assembled  together,  the  King  or  his
p.rputy  viev/ed  the  Land,  and  when  they  had  viewed


THE  HISTORY


it,  they  caused  a  round  Mount  to  be  cast  up,  and  up
on  the  same  was  the  Judgment-Scat  placed,  having  his
back  toward  the  Sun  or  the  Weather.     Some  of  these
Mounts  were  made  square  and  some  round,  and  both
round  and  square  bore  the  name  of  Gorseddevy  dadle,
that  is,    the  Mount  of  Pleading.     Some  also  have  the
name  of  him  that  was  chief  Judge  or  Deputy  to   the
King  in  that  judicial  Seat;   and  it  was  not  lawful  to
make  an  assembly  nowhere  for  title  of  Lands,  but  up
on  the  Lands  that  were  in  controversy.     These  Gor-
sedde  are  in  our  Country,  and  many  other  places  to
be  seen  to  this  day  ;    and  will  be  ever,  if  they  be  not
taken  down  by  men's  hands.       They  had  two  sorts  of
Witnesses,  the  one  was  Gwybyddyeid,  and  the  other
Amhiniogev.     The  Gizybyddyeid  were  such  men  as
were  born  in  the  KOMOT,  where  the  Lands  that  were
in  controversy  lay,  and  of  their  own  perfect  knowledge
did  know  that  it  was  the  Defendant's  right.     And
Amhiniogev  were  such  men  as  had  their  Lands  mear-
ing  on  the  Lands  that  were  in  controversy,    and  hem
med  upon  that  Land.     And  the  Oath  of  one  of  those
Amhiniogev^  otherwise    called  Keidweid,  was  better
than  the  Oath  of  twain  that  were  but  Gwybyddyeid.
Look  in  the  Table  of  my  Book  of  Laws  for  the  de
finition  of  KEIDWEID,  AMHINIOGEV,  and  GWYBYDDYEID,
and  how  the  king  did  try  his  Causes  ;    and   that  will
manifest   it   more   at   large.     The    Mayer    and    the
Kangellawr  had  no  authority  amongst  the  Brittons  for
any  lands  but  the  king's  lands  ;  and  they  were  to  set
it  and  let  it,  and  to  have  their  circuit  amongst  the


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


king's  tenants  ;  and  they  did  decide  all  Controversies
that  happened  amongst  them.  Vide  in  the  Table  of
my  Book  of  Laws  for  the  Definition  of  Mayer  and
Kandlawr.


VII.  To  the  seventh  Question,  I  say  that  there
were  in  this  land  about  a  hundred  superial  King.?,  that
governed  this  land  successively  :  that  wore  of  the
Brittish  blood  :  yet  notwithstanding  there  were  un
der  them  divers  other  Princes  that  had  the  name  of
kings,  and  did  serve,  obey,  and  belong  to  the  superial
king,  as  the  king  of  Alban  or  Prydyn  or  Scotland,  the
king  of  Kymhery  or  Wales,  the  king  of  GWNEYDD,  or
Venedotia.  Yet  notwithstanding  the  same  law  and
government  was  used  in  every  Prince  or  king's  domi
nion,  as  was  in  the  superial  king's  proper  dominion  ;
unless  it  were  that  some  Custom  or  Privilege  did  be
long  to  some  place  of  the  kingdom  more  than  to  an
other  :  and  every  inferior  king  was  to  execute  the
Law  upon  all  transgressors  that  offended  in  their  do
minion.

In  the  time  of  Kassibelanus  there  arose  some  con
troversy  between  the  superial  king  Kaswallawne  and
Ararwy  king  of  London,  one  of  his  inferior  kings,  a-
bout  a  murther  committed.  The  case  is  thus.  The
superial  King  keeping  his  Court  within  the  dominion
of  one  of  the  inferior  Kings,  a  controversy  -falling  be
tween  twain  within  the  Court,  and  there  and  then  one
was  slain,  the  Question  is,  Whether  the  murtherer
ought  to  be  tried  by  the  officers  and  privilege  of  the


230  THE  HISTORY


superior  Ring,  or  of  the  inferior  King.  I  think  that
the  murtherer  ought  to  be  tried  by  the  Law  and  Cus
tom  of  the  inferior  king's  Court,  because  it  is  more
seemly  that  the  superior  king's  Court,  which  did  in-
dure  in  that  Country  but  a  week  or  twain,  or  such  like
time,  should  lose  his  privilege  there  for 'that  time,  than
the  inferior  king's  Court  should  lose  it  for  ever.  Vide
in  libro  meo  de  Icgibus.  It  may  seem  to  those  that
have  judgement  in  histories,  that  this  was  the  very
cause  that  Arlarwy  would  not  have  his  kinsman  tried
by  the  Judges  and  Laws  or  privilege  of  Kaswallawne,
whose  Court  did  remain  in  the  dominion  of  Ararwy
but  a  little  while,  but  would  have  the  felon  tried  by
his  Judges  and  his  Court  There  is  no  mention  made
of  Talaith  any  where  amongst  the  Brittons  before  the
destruction  of  Brittain,  but  that  there  were  in  Brittain
but  one  superial  Crown  and  three  Talaith  or  Coronets
or  Prince's  Crowns',  one  for  the  Alban,  another  for
Wales,  and  the  third  for  Kerniiv  or  Kornwale.  There
were  divers  others  called  kings  which  never  wore  any
Crown  or  Coronet,  as  the  kings  of  Dyved  in  South
Wales,  the  king  of  Kredigion,  and  such,  and  yet  were
called  kings,  and  their  Countries  were  divided  as  you
shall  see  in  the  next  Question.

VIII.  To  the  eighth  Question,  I  say,  that  accord
ing  to  the  primitive  Law  of  this  Land,  that  J)yfnwdl
Moel  Mvd  made,  for  before  the  Laws  of  Dtjfnwal
J\foel  Mvd  the  Trojan  laws  and  customs  were  used  in
this  Land,  and  we  cannot  tell  what  division  of  Land;


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  251

they  had,  nor  what  officers  but  the  Druidion,  he  divid
ed  all  this  Land  according  to  this  manner,  thus :  Tri-
hud  y  gronin  ha'cdd*  or  thrice  the  length  o-f  one  Bar'ey
Corn  maketh  a  Modvedd  or  inch,  three  Modvedd  or
Inches  maketh  a  Palf  or  a  Palm  of  the  hand,  three
Palf  or  Palm  maketh  a  Troedvedd  or  foot,  three  feete
or  Troedvedd  maketh  a  Kamt  or  Pace  or  a  stride,  three
Kara  or  strides  to  the  Naid  or  leape,  three  Naid  or
leepe  to  the  G?'wmg,  that  is,  the  breadth  of  a  Butt  of
Land  or  Tir  mr  and  mil  of  those  Tir  maketh  Miltirf
that  is,  a  thousand  Tir  or  mile.  And  that  was  his
measure  for  length  which  hath  been  used  from  that
time  to  this  day  ?  and  yet,  and  for  superficial  measur
ing  he  made  three  hud  gronin  haid(fr  or  Barley  Corn
length,  to  the  Modvedd,  or  Inch,  three  Modvedd  or
Inch  to  the  Palf  or  hand  breadth-,  three  Palf  to  the
Troedvedd  or  foot,  four  Troedvedd  or  foot  to  the  Ver*
iav  or  the  short  yoke,  eight  Tr(fedvedd  or  foot  to  the
Neidiav,  and  twelve  Troedvedd  or  foot  in  the  Gcssti*
tiav  and  sixteen  Troedvedd  in  the  Hirlav.  And  a
Pole  or  Rod  so  long,  that  is  sixteen  foot  long,  is  tlie
breadth  of  an  Acre  of  Land,  and  thirty  Poles  or  Rods
that  length,  is  the  length  of  an  E'rw  or  Acre  by  the
Law,  and  four  Erw  or  Acre  maketh  a  Tyddyn  or
Messuage,  and  four  of  that  Tyddyn  or  Messuage
maketh  a  RHANDIR,  and  four  of  those  RHANDIREDD
maketh  a  GAFEL  or  Tenement  or  Houltf  and  four  GA-
rfeL  maketh  a  TREF  or  Township,  and  four  THEFOI-
Townships  maketh  a  MAE  NO L  cr  MAENOR,  and
twelve  Maenol  or  Maenor  and  dwy  dref  or  two  Town-


\

THE  HISTORY


ships  niiiketh  a  Kwmwd  or  Goinot,  and  two  Kwmwd
or  Gomot  niaketh  a  Kantref  or  Cantred,  that  is  a
himdicd  Towns  or  Townships,  And  hy  this  reckon
ing-  every  TYDDYN  containeth  fourEuw,  every  Ilhan-
air  containeth  sixteen  Erw,  and  every  Gaiel  contain
eth  sixty-four  Erw.  Eveiy  Town  or  Township
containeth  two  hundred  fifty-six  Erw  or  Acres,
these  Erws  being1  fertile  arable  land,  and  neither
meadow  nor  pasture  nor  woods.  Eor  there  was  no
thing-  measured  but  fertil  arable  ground,  and  all  o-
thers  were  termed  wastes.  Every  Maenol  containeth
four  of  these  Townships,  and  every  KWMWD  contain
eth  fifty  of  these  Townships,  and  every  CANTRED  a
hundred  of  these  Townships,  whereof  it  hath  its  name.
And  all  the  Countries  and  Lords  dominions  were  di-
vidc-d:  by  CANTREDS  or  CANTRE,  and  to  every  of  these
CANTREDS,  GOMOTS,  MAENORS,  TOWNS,  GAFELS  were
given  some  proper  names.  And  GWLAD  or  Country
was  the  dominion  of  one  Lord  or  Prince,  whether  the
GWLAD  were  one  CANTRED  or  two,  or  three  or  four,  or
more.  So  that  when  I  say  he  is  gone  from  GWLAD  to
GWLAD,  that  is,  from  Countrey  to  Countrey,  it  is  meant
that  he  is  gone  from  one  Lord  or  Prince's  dominion  to
another  Prince's  dominion;  as  for  example,  when  a  man
(.•ommitUth  an  offence  in  GWYNEDD  or  NORTHWALKS,
which-  containeth  ten  CANTREDS,  and  fleeth  or  goeth
to  Powysr  which  is  the  name  of  another  Country  and
Prince's  dominion,  which  containeth  ten  other  CAN
TREDS,  he  is  gone  from  one  Country  or  dominion  to
another,  and  the  Law  cannot  be  executed  upon


OF  THfi  DRUIDS.  233

for  he  is  gone  out  of  the  Country.   Tegings  is  a  Count
ry  and  containeth  but  one  Cantred,  and  Dyfrvn  Ghvyd
was  a  Country,  and   did  contain   but  one  CANTRED.
And  when  any  did  go  out  of  Tegings  to  Dijfrvn  Glwyd,
for  to  flee  from  the  la\v,  he  went  out  from  one  Count
ry  to  another.     And  so  every  Prince  or  Lord's  domi
nion  was  GWLAD  or  Country  to  that  Lord  or  Prince,
so  that  GWLAD  is   PAGUS   ia  my  judgment.     Some
times  a  Cantred  doth  contain  two  Comot,  sometimes
three,  or  four,  or  five  ;  as  the  CANTREFE  of  Glamorgan
or  MORGANWG  containeth  five  Comots.    And  after  that
the  Normans  had  won  some  parts  of  the  Country,  as
one  Lord's  dominion,  they  constituted  in  that  same
place  a  Senescal  or  Steward,  and  that  was  called  in
the  Brittish  tongue  SWYDDOG,  that  is  an  Officer ;  and
the  Lordship  that  he  was  Steward  of  was  called  SWYDD
or  Office,  and  of  these   SWYDDEV  were  made  Shires.
And  GWYDD  is  an  Office  be  it  great  or  small,  and  SWYD
DOG  is  an  Officer  likewise  of  all  states  ;  as  a  Sheriff  is
a  SWYDDOG,  his  Sheriff-ship  or  Office,  and  the  Shire
•whereof  he   is    Sheriff,   is   called   Swydd.      So   that
Swydd  doth  contain  a^  well  the  Shire  as  the  Office  of
a  Sheriff,  as  SWYDD  AMWYTHIG  is  the  Shire  or  Office
of  the  Steward,  Senescal,  or  Sheriff  of  Salop,  &c.

IX.  As  for  the  ninth  Question,  The  greatest  and
highest  degree  was  Brenm,  or  Teyen,  that  is,  a  king ;
and  next  to  him  was  a  Twysog,  that  is  a  Duke ;  and
next  to  him  was  a  Jarll,  that  is  an  Earl ;  and  next  to
him  was  an  Arglwydd,  that  is  a  Lord  ;  and  next  to  hiin
was  a  Barwrif  and  that  I  read  least  of.  And  next  to

G  2


THE  HISTORY


that  is  the  Prelr  or  Vchelur>  which  may  be  called  the
Squire  :  next  to  this  is  a  Gwreange,  that  is  a  Yeoman ;
and  next  to  that  is  an  Altiud ;  and  next  to  that  a  Kaeth,
which  is  a  Slave ;  and  that  is  the  meanest  amongst
these  nine  several  Degrees.     And  these  nine  Degrees
Lad  three  several  tenures  of  Lands,  as  Maerdir,  Vche-
lordir,   Prwdordir.     There  he  also  other  names  and
degrees,  which  be  gotten  by  birth,  by  office  and  by  dig
nity  ;  but  they  all  are  contained  under  the  nine  afore
sa  d  Degrees,

X.  As  for  the  tenth  Question,  I  do  not  find  nor
have  not  read  neither  to  my  knowledge,  in  any  Chro
nicle,  law,  History  or  Poetry,  and  Dictionary,  any  such
word  :  but  I  find  in  the  Laws  and  Chronicles,  and  in
many  other  places  this  word  Rhaiih  to  be  used  for  the
oath  of  one  hundred  men,  or  two  hundred  or  three
hundred,  or  such  like  number,  for  to  excuse  some  hein
ous  fact ;  and  the  more  heinous  was  the  fact,  the  more
men  must  be  had?  m  the  Rh-ailk  to  excuse  it ;  and  one
must  be  a  chief  man  to  excuse  it  amongst  them,,  and
that  is  called  Penrhatth,  as  it  were  the  foreman  of  the
Jury,  and  he  must  be  the  best,  wisest,  and  discreetest
of  all  the  others.  And  to  my  remembrance  the  Rhait-
hwijr,  that  is  the  Men  of  the  Rhalth,  must  be  of  those
that  are  next  of  kin,  and  best  known  to  the  supposed
offender,,  to  excuse  him  for  the  fact

XL     As  for  the  eleventh  Question,  I  say  that  I  find
a  Steward  and  a  Controller  to  be  used  for  a  Distain  in


OF  THE  DRUIDS.  235

my  Dictionary.  I  cannot  find  any  greater  definition
given  it  any  where,  then  is  given  it  in  my  Book  of
Laws.  Vide  Disttfine,  in  the  Table  of  my  Book  of
Laws.

XII.  To  the  twelfth  Question,  I  say,  that  the  Brit-
:ons  had  many  Councils,  and  had  their  Counsellors  scat-
rer'd  in  all  the  Lordships  of  the  Land.  And  when  any
controversy  or  occasion  of  Counsel  happened  in  Swyncdd,
.he  king  called  his  Counsellors  that  had  their  abode
.here,  for  to  counsel  for  matters  depending  there,  toge-
hcr  with  those  that  were  there  of  his  Court  or  Guard  :
or  the  king  and  his  chief  Judge  and  certain  of  his
Jouncil  always  in  his  company  ;  and  when  the  king  had
my  occasion  of  Counsel  for  matters  depending  in  De-
metia,  or  Powys,  or  Cornwal,  lie  called  those  of  his
Counsel  that  dwelled  in  those  coasts  for  to  counsel  with
them.  And  they  went  to  a  certain  private  house  or
tower  on  a  top  of  a  hill,  or  some  solitary  place  of  coun
sel  far  distant  from  any  dwelling,  and  there  advised
unknown  to  any  man  but  to  the  Counsellors  them
selves  ;  and  if  any  great  alteration  or  need  of  counsel
were,  that  did  pertain  to  all  the  land,  then  the  king
assited  unto  him  all  his  Counsellors  to  some  convenient
place  for  to  take  their  advice  ;  and  that  happen'd  but
very  seldom.


CATALOGUES  vocum  quarnndam  ARMORICARUM  quas
HIBERNICAS  csse  deprekendi,  qua&que  ex  libello
quern  mihi  mutuo  dedit  CL  et  Rev.  Dominus,
Dominus  Jo.  MILUUS  S.  S.  T.  in  Academia
Oxoniensi  P.  ibidcmque  Aulae  Sanct.  Edmundanat
Principalis,  collegi  et  desumpsi.


Armorici  Angliam  Bro-saos  vocant,  hoc
est,  Saxonum  patriam  ;  quo  nomine  paululum  variato,
Hiberni  idem  regnum  indigitare  solent  :  et  ipsos  in-
colas  Clan  na  Sassanacht  id  est,  Saxones  ;  ad  ver-
bum  vero  Saxonum  Jilios,  appellant.

Hibernis  gen  til  is  sernio  Gaolac  dicitur,  quod  idem
sonat  significatque,  ac  Armoricorum  Gallec,  qua  voce
Gallorum  linguam  in  hodiernum  usque  diem  intelli-
gunt,  ut  in  ambarum  gentium  scriptis  videre  est.

Etiamsi  in  sequent!  Parallelo  aliquando  litterae  et
syllable  quaedam  non  levem  dlscrepantiam  prae  se  ferre
videantur  ;  eadem  tamen  illis  est  potestas,  et  sonus
idem.  Sic  at,  ajft  et  es  finales  Armoricae,  respondent
ach,  agh,  et  as  Hibernicis.  Gvy  initialis  cum  Jit  b
cum  p,  d  cum  /,/cum  v  Scepissime  commutantur.

Sed  de  hisce  fusius,  et  similis  argument!  omnibus,
in  Disscrtatione,  quam  de  veterum  Lingua  Gallorum,
cum  primum  llomanorum  arm  a  expert!  sunt,  annuente
summo  numine,  scripturi  sumus.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


237


Oxoniae,   19  Decembris,  Anno  a  Christo  nato,   1693.

ARMORICE.

HlBERNICE.

LATINEo

Isel.

Iseal.

Hum'lis.

laelhat

Tsealacht.

Hmniiiatio.

Oan.

Uan.

Agnus.

Oanic.

Uauin.

Agnellus.

Flem.

Flemh  *.

Aculeus.

Den.

Duine.

Homo.

Denbihan.

Duinebuineach.

Hotnuncio.

Caret.

Caraid  f.

Aniicus.

Carantes.

Carrantas  ||.

Amicitia.

Guyr.

Coir.

Jus.

Hirra  hat.

Direachagh.

Elonejatio.

Bloaz.

Bltaghuin.

Am»us.

Amser.

Amsrir.

Ten»pus.

Gronan.

Gruan  *.

A  rena.

Asen.

Assil.

A«inus.

Ball.

Dall.

Cnecus.

Dallaf.

Dail'^h.

{'aecitas.

Gonalen.

Gualun.

Humerus.

Qu^rch.

Co  ire.

A  vena.

Ives.

ives.

l.tiamu

Guile.

Oile.

Alias.

P'.rq

Pog.

Osculum.

Scubellen.

Scuab.

S^opa.

Scuba  f.

Scuabagh.

Verrere,  Scopa,

Lezron,

Leasrach.

Femora.

Mat.

Matth.

Bonus

M  attract.

Maithghnioth.

Beneficium.

Madelez.

Maittieas.

Bou'tas.

Cam.

Cam.

Curvus.

Ber.

Bear.

VeriL

Losq

Lo^cath.

Ustio.

Qu<irrec.

Carrie.

Hupes.

Gonris.

Cris.

Cin^u'um.

Ludu.

Luoth.

Cinis.

Codoer.

Caithir.

Cathedra.

*  Gath  etlim  Hibernice.

t  Cura  Hibernis  Australibus.

t  Cardis  etiam  Hibernice.

*  Ganibh,  «tiara  Hibernice,


238


THE  HISTORY


Caboun.

Cabun.

Capo.

Glaouen.

Gualan.

L

Car  bo.

MotlL

Maoi1.

Cnlvus.

Derven.

Dairf.

Quercus.

Gaor.

Gaur.

Caper.

Em  ty  me.

An  rna  thi.

In  Domo  mea.

Quy.

Cu.

(.'anis  venaticus

Caoll.

Cal.

B'asMca.

Ancuff.

Nemh.

Cotlum.

Coar.

Ceir.

Cera.

Garan.

Garagh.

Taig.

Tairne.

Clavus,

Coulm,

Coluira.

Columba.

Evel,  eguis

Evail,  eguis

Ut.

Quillocq.

Cuilloch.

Gallus  Gallinaceuss

Ilin.

Him.

Aer.

A^hir,

•("oluber.

Laes.

LlF.

Dora  us  regia.

Guiriff.

Gurigh0

Ova  pone  re.

GoiofF.

Foluigh.

Tererc.

Crouezr.

Criathar.

•Cribra.

CridifF.

Credimh.

Credere,

Creven.

S'creavog.

-Crust  a.

Creiz.

Cre.

Lutum,

Lezr.

Leathir.

•Cor  in  m.

Die.

Dliagh.

Debiturn.

Dref.

Deregh.

Pone.

Diaoull.

Diabhil.

Diabolus.

Lavaret.

Lauaii  t.

Loqui.

A  creis.

A  chreis.

E  medio.

Droue.

Droch.

Malui.

MezuitF.

Mi.  see.

Ebrius,

CUoar.

Seiiar.

Soror.

Tremenguae.

I)  re  mi  re.

Sea  la.

Cleztu.

Claiau.

Gladius.

Teoahat.

Tiuhact.

Spissitas.

Ober.

Obuir.

Opus.

Tan.

Tinne.

lanis.

Map.

Mac.

pi  It  us.

Moch.

Muc.

Porctis.

Saez.

Suste.

Inibecillis.

Dine4-z.

Dineart.

Vis.

J  Uncle  forte  droi  Druides,  doire  neraus.


OF  THE  DRUIDS.


239


Nerz.

Neart.

Vis.

Poull.
Delyou.

Poll.
Duillcg.

Fossa,  puteus.
Folium.

Techet.
Glin.

Tetbagh.

Glun.

Fugere.
Genii.

Croucq.

Croith.

Patibulum.

Stut.

Sdiuir.

C  Navis  *;uberna-

>    culuin,

(irtunen..

Gran  in.

Granuni.

Bloanee.
Kurniat.
Hoary.

Bkinic.
Uainuhaith,
Uavar.

Pingaedo.

Auspicium,
Lucius,

JLnebin..

Inis,

lUSlllcl.

M\ant.
Led  an.
Lenfr.

.Tfangha,
Lethan,
Leabhar,

Lingua.
Largus.
Liber.

Dorn.

'  I  '      A

Pugnus.

Tvj

1  1    .

Doinus.

Drouchoberer.

Clabh,
Drochobri,

Aeger.
Malesicus.

La*  smam.

Leasiiihattdir,

Xnvrrra.

Miutin.

Madin.                         Mflrti*""

IVlor.

Muirf,

Mare

Tmgarez.

Tiocare.

Misericordia.

Coch.

Cac,

Merda.

Quemesq,

M'eascagh,

Miscere.

Offerer).

AiilVin  -t,.

IMissa.

Manach.

Vianach,

Monachue,

Mis.

Mi,

IVlensis.

Boncq.

Bog,

Moll  is,

Maru.

Marv,

Mortuus.

B'ugale.

Cuachvill,

Queigeuen.

Cuileog,

Musca.

Guenell.

Gineml,

Nasci.

Nedelec.
Du.

Nolluic,
Du.

\  Nativitatis
t   Christi  test  urn.
Niger.

])uat.
Cfeaouen.

Duach,
Croa,

Nig  redo.
Nuces.

Btuzer.

Baite.

MersuSe

||  Deac  etiam  Hihernice.  ,

t   Morh  et  Moir  etiam.

||  Haud  dubium  quin  a  Latino  ofero  deducecduia  sit.


2-40


THE  HISTORY


Ui.

Ui  vet  Oi,

Ovum.

Plu  quen.

Blusc,

Plusqueu  un  ui.

Blusc  na  hui.

Ezn.

Ean,      '

Avis,

Eznic.

Eanin.

Avirula.

Eznetaer.

Fanadair.

A  urt  ps.

Diegus.

iJiabhum.

Otiosus,

Laeshann.
Ivin.

Leasainm.
Ighuin.

Cognomen.

Colo.

Calog.

PaU-a,

Bara.

Atari.

Panis,

Ratiuaff.

Rannagb.

Dividere,

Quetren.

Keavrin.

Particula,

Golven.

Gnlvun.

Passer.

Cmchen,

Ci  ocean.

Pellis.

Crib.

(  ir*.

Pecten.

Collet.

Cailte.

Perditus.

Tat.

At  hair.

Pater,

Brain.
Troat.

Br:m.

Trottb.

Ventris  crepitus,
Pes.

Truez.
Leun.

Truaighe,
Lan.

Compassio.
Pienus.

GoiUrlafT

G.ilagh.

Fie  re.

Goueluan.

Gulan,

F  e'us.

.Av.'l,

Avull,

M.-.lus,  arbor.

SquevenU

St.ivan.

Pulmo.

Bremaff.

Breanagh.

Pu  ties  cere,  foetere.

Biein.

Biein.

PutiJus,

Doun.

Dovuin,

Piofutidus.

QueigueL

Cvi?eal,

Coius.

Scuillaf.

Sfiiiltagh

Solve  re.

Segal.

Segul,

Secale,

Bouzar.

Bcvar,

^urdus.

Logoden.

Lucbog.

Mus.

Tarus.

'!  arv

T«  urns.

Guyader.

Fiadoir.

I*  xior.

Li<  -n.

I>»ian

I'intcui'D

Bieuch.

Beach,

Btstia  f.

Leve.

Laoi.

Vitulus.

Gms.

Glas.

Vtririia.

Guyrionez.

Fioriontas.

Veriras.

Boutt.

Biaih.

Cibus.

$  Hiberni  etlam  di^cunt  Criban.
j|  Speciatim  Vacca  Armoricis.


OF  THE  DRUID?.                        Hi

Btu.

Beo.

Vivus.

Seuzl.

Sal,

Calx  pedis.

Amman.

Eim.

Butyrus.

Olen,

Sulun.

Sal.

^ous-iouen.

Lus,  Lussan,

Herba,

Vlismeurz,

Miinairt.

Mensis  Martiua,

vliseproil.

Miobreal.

Aprilis  f.

Vlismesuen,

Vliinhea^vach.

Junins  f+

'vlisgouare.

Miguare.

Julius  A%

VIisguengulo,

Mifinfqloi,

September  B%

Vlistezre,

Miheasri,

October  c.

>li  stlu.

Mi  dhu.  ,

November  o.

Mesqutrdu,

Michrumdu,

December  E.

Vlnguenuer.

Micainvair.

Januarius  r.

Miscbeurer.

Michuir,

Febi  uanus  0,

Sizun,

Seaclituin.

Septimana.

Dillun.

Dealluin,

Dies  Lunae.

Doue.

f)ia.

Deus.

Aelez,

Ai^hle.

Angfli.

Caer,

Caihir,

Civitas.

Menn.

Meatman,

Hoedus.

LVouer.

Cruigbeoir.

Creator,

Iffern.

ItJVin,

Tartarus.

I'hoareil.
Ezom.

Buane^ez.

Corgas.

Eassomb,
Banegbag,

Quadragesima.
Indigentia.
Furor.

Marchyat,
lourch.

Marcuiacbt,

Tore,

Aequitatio.
Aper.

*  Operarius.          |  ,,      .

$  Formosus.             IViensis-

A   Portunm.     s  Albiteo-umenti.
z.  Nigerrimus.       r    Initialis.


c  Aratorius.     D  NI»er.
o  Semeatarjus,


H  2


VOCARULARIUM

j4rmo.j:ico  -  Hibern  icum .


ARMORICE.


AER.

Aur.

Ar.

All.

Angor..

Argant.

Arm.

Alt.

Ane,

Aval.


Bara.
Brun.

BrecL
Bu.

Brochc

Berr.
Bresych.
Bach,  Bagl.

Brenn,  Brennyn,

Bardd.
Baar.
Breur.
Brcn.


HISERNICE.              LATINE,

A.

Aighir.

Aer.

Or.

Aurum,

Ar,  Aras.

Terra.

Oile.

Alius.

Ancoire.

Anchora.

Argiod,

Argentunu

Arm.

Arm  a.

Alt.

Saltus.

Anam.

Anima.    .

Aval.

Pomum,

Barin.

Pan  is.

Brunn.

Venter,  ma-
milla.

Braighc

Brachium.

Bo.

Bos.

Vas  fictile

'

vel  ligneum

Bearr.

Brevis.

Praysseach.

Rrassica.

Batta,  Bachull.

Baculus.

(  Brennin,         V
(  Breatheamh.  j

Rex,  Judex

Bard.

Poeta.

Barra.

Vectis.

Brathair.

Frater.

1  Breun.

Foetidus,

OF  THE  DttUIDS.


243


Buch,  Bouch.        Buc.                       \  Caper  mas.

C

Ci,  Can.              I  Cu,  Cun,

Canis,  canes.

Cren.                     i-Cruinn.

Hotundus.

Crou.                    ICruaigh.

JDurus.

v    arms  aut

Carr.                    [-Carr.

£    urms.

Cat,.<Caz.              [Cat.

Felis.

Canab.

Canaik

Canals  Is.

Cantol.

CoianeoL

(  andela.

Craou,  Craouen,

Cru,  Cuu.

Nux,

Coir.

Ceh.

^era.

Caul.

CaL

C  <  aulis.vel
:<_  Brassica.

Cist.

Caiste.

Cista.

Can,

v  ann,,  Caintic,

(  anticuxn.

Cans.

^anagh,

Canere.

Cambr.

Seomra,

C  amera.

Cam.

am.

C  urvus.

Cant.

Cant,  <"cud.

(  entum.

Caaol.

(  anal.

^  anaiis.

Caru,  Caro.

C  arr-fliiggh.

Cervus,

Chaden.

Caddan.

Catena.

CounicL

cunin.

•Cuniculus.

Gale.

(  oilL

-Cylva

Car.

(  ara.

<  hams.

Croug.

Cros*

('nix.

Curun,  coron.

toroin.

(  orona.

Corf.

Corp.

Corpus.

Coch.

Coch,  Corkire.

(  '   OCCUS,

\  Purpureus.

Crin.

Crian.

Aridus.

Coq.

Coctiire.

C  oquus.

Carchar.

Carcan.

Career.

Caban.

Caban.

^Casula.

Caleb.

Cailce.                      !  Creta.

Cans.                     i-Caise.                      |  Cascus.

?7,  HT9TORY


D.

Deni.

Dair.

Quercus.

Dun.

Dun,

Collis.

Daigr.

Deor.

Gutta,  lachiyma.

Deilen.
Dour.

(  Duille,
(  Duilleog.
Dorn.

Folium.
Pugnus.

Dour.

Dur.

Aqua.

Doun.

Domhain.

Profundus.

Di,  Deiz,

De.

Dies.

Dec.

Deag,  Deich.

Decem,

Dolur,

Dolas.

Dolor.

Dug-

Duihhee.

Dux.

Dor.

Dorus.

Ostium.

Dag.

Daggear.

Pugio.

DreuCo

Droch.

Mains.

Dol.

Dal*

Vallis.

Den,

Duine.

Homo.

E.

Eduyn.

Eadhan.

Videlicet.

Erigea.

Eirigh.

Surgere.

F.

Forn,

Ftiirn.

Furnus.

Fin.

Fin.

Subtilis.

Fin.

Finn.

Candidus.

Feur.

Fear.

Nundinae.

Foen.

Feur.

Foe  num.

Ffruyn.

Sreun.

Froenum.

Fron.

Sron,  Sronin.

Nasum,  Nares.,

Fals.

Falsa.

Falsus.

Fallat.

FaJlagh.

Fall  ere.

Forth.

Fore.

Finca.

Furm.

Foirrn.  .

Forma.

Fest.

Feasta.

Festus.

OF  THE  DRUIDS.


245


G.

Gouin.

Fion.                       Vinum.

Greun.

Grain.

Granum.

Gaour.

Gabhar.

Caper.

Glu,  Glut.

Gieu.

Gluten.

Groin.

Grinn.

i  Porcorum
i  proboscis.

Glas.

Glas.

Viridis.

Glin.

Glim.

Genu.

G'oar.

Gloir.

Gloria.

Glaif.

Claidheamb.

Gladius.

Goaz.

Giagh.

Anser.

Gard.

Gardin.

Hortus.

Garm.

Gairm.

Beatus.

H.

Hun.

Sun.

Somnus,

Henu.

Sean.

Vetus.

L

Imaich.

Imhaigh.

Imago.

Isge.

Uisge.

Aqua.

L.

Lin.
La.

Linn.
Lamb.

Stagnum,  lacus.
Manus.

Lin.

Lion.

Li  num.

Lili.

Lili.

Lilium,

Lug.

Lug.

Corvus.

Laguen.
Lech.

Lag.
Leac.

Lacuna,  stagnum
Hupcs.

Lin.

Lin  in  r

Linea.

Liffr.

Leabhar.

Liber.

Lance.

Langa.

Lancca.

Lace.

Nask.                    !  Laqueus.

Lys,   Los.

Lis.                        j  Aula,  Curia,

Leu.

Leornhan.              <  Loo.

Ledr,  Lezu.

Leathar.

Corium.

Lcgis.

Lostio.

Huspitium.

246


THE  HISTORY


M.

Mis.

Mi.

Mensis.

Milin.

Mulinn-

Molendinum.

Mantel.

Mantal.

f  Muliebre
\  pallium.

Mai.

Mala.

Sacci  genus,

Moch.

Muc.

Porcus.

Mam.

Mathair.

Mater.

Migu.

Measgah.

Miscere.

Mor,  Mar.

Muir,  Mara.

Mare.

Mel.

Mr!.

MeL

MilL

Mile.

Mille.

Mall.

MallachU.

JMalus,  seek-

I     ratus.

Maestr.

Maghisdir.

Magister.

March.

Marc.

JEquus.

Marg~

Meirg.

Fernigo,

N.

Nos.

Noiche.

Nox.

Neu,  neues.

Nua,  Nuattu

Novus.

Nef.

Neamh.

Nubes.

Nith,  Neis.

Nead.

Nidus.

Neuth.

Snaithe.

FiluHi.

Neza,  Niddu,

Snaighthagh.

Nere.

Niul,   Niful

Neull.

Nebula.

Naou.

Naoi.

Novem.

Nith.

Nigheann.

Neptis.

Nalur.

Naduir.

Natura.

0.

Oil.

OH,  uile.

Omriis.

Orgouil.

Orgoill.

Superbtis.

Ober.

Obuir.

Opera.

OleK,  Eol.

Ola.

Oleum.

Office.

Offig.

Officium.

Once.

Unsa.

Uncia.

Or,

Ore.

Terminu5.

OF  THE  DRUIDS.


247


P.

Pemp,

J  Pemp,  vox  an-
1      tiqua.

Quinque3

Pis.

Pis.

Pisum,

Fez.

Pisa.

Frustum^

Pris.

Pris.                      I   Pretium,

Forth,

Purt.

Portus,

Porfon

Purfur.

Purpura,

Post.

Posta.

Postis,

Punt.

Punta.

Pondo,

Pobl.

Pobul.

Populus,

PerilL

PericT.

Periculum,

Plant.

Planta.

Planta,

Pare,

Pairc.

Viridarium,

Pul,  Poul,

PolL

4  Stagnum,  La-
^      cuna,  Sinus,

R.

Rhodl,

Ramha,

Remus,

Raden,  Radin,

Rathin,

Filix,

Rhy,

Riogh,

Dominus,  Rex,

Rac,

Rach,

Enim,  nam,

Raeson,

Resun,

Ratio,

Rot,  Rhod,

Rhotha,  lit.

Rota,

Rousin,

Rosin,

Resina,

Ros,  Rosen,

Rosa.

Rosa.

S,

Sebon,

Sopa,

Sapo,

Segal,

Seagul,

Secale,

Saeth,

Saghid,

Sagitta,

Sug,

Su,

Succus,

Sgub,  ysgub,

Scuab,

Scopa,

Sul,

Solus,.

Sol,  Lux,

Siell,  SeL

Seala.

Sigillum.

248


THR  HISTORY


T,

Taru,  Tare,

Tarbh,

Taurus,

Tur,

Tor,

Tunis,

Tumbe,

Tumba,

(  Tumulus,  Se-
(  pulchrum,

Tir,

Tir,

Terra,

Tec,

Deach,

Domus,

Termen,

Tearmonn,

Terminus,

Ti,

Ti,  Tigh,

Domus,

Taran,

c  Torman,
'  Tarneaoh,

Tonitru,

Torch,

Torch,

Torques,

Titl,

Tiodal,

Titulus,

Teyrn,

Tighearna,

Dominus,  Rex,

Teyrnas*

Tighearnas,

Dominatio,

Tasg,

Taisce,

Vectigal,

Tonn,

Tunn,

Cadus,

Teuth.

Tuath.

Gens^.

V*

•

Oibh,                    I    Ovum,

Ur^Gur.

Fear,                        Vir,

3n

SPECIMEN


OF  THE

AfcMORICAN  LANGUAGE.

THE  BEATITUDES,  Matt  viil  l.  $c.


&  /rus  bras  Von  pcuryeri  ves
b  spc-  ct  rac  rouariietez  an  eiif-
Jaon  a  apparchdni  unte.

Etc/us  bras  co  an  re  debon-
neri  rac  drt  douar  a  possedint^

Eurus  bras  eo  an  re  a  gouel,
ftic  ionsolei  tiezint.

Eiirus  bras  ko  an  re  ho  ae~
tiez  ndoiifi  hd  recheit  rac  ms^
sassiet  vczittt.

burns  bras  eo  an,  re  tniga*
tedits  b  tteiezo.

Bur  its  bras  eo  art  re  b  deve§
ho  baioiiri  ndtti  rac  gtie/ef  a
taint  bove.

fett^i  bras  ed  &ti  re  paci
fic^  rdc  gudttet  veziril  btigale
"


Miiriis  bras  ted  art  re  pere  d
pehetiori  a  pdlariidur
dd  j^lice  rac  rbtidnteiez  an


Blessed  are  the  poof  in  Spi
rit,  tor  the  kingdom  of  Hea
ven  is  theirs,  &c.

PRONUNCIATION.

Cha  as  shd,  &c.  C  as  s.  A
final  /  is  mute.  Double  JF  as
v  Consonant,  t?a^  go,  gti,
hard  ;  Ge,  gi  sbft.  Gn  as  ni
in  Opinion,  H  is  always  pro
nounced;  J  Consonant  as  in
Dutch;  A  final  re  as  s.  £
lias  a  particular  pronuncia
tion.  Jet  art;  Diminutive
terminations;  as  Map,  Ala*
pic;  MereA,  Merchic\
br  Grfoch


250


OP  THE


The  Sum  of  the

7V  a  raro  an.   Atitraou.  da

Done  a  creis  a  a  calfm<  a  creis

da  ernf,  hac  a  creis  da  eiiten-

da  rent.

'(  e  a  caro  ia  wssaffeueldot
da  hu  '{"n.
The;  t-n  Commandments  itr

vtrse.
f.   En  un  Doue  parfaet  ez


Ha  parfaetamant  a  quiry.

II.  Doice  e  vaert  ne  tuuy
quct,

JVa  dememes  ncttra  erbet.

III.  An  Sulyon  hac    an
Goneli/o't  Din

A  obse^vy  %a»t  pedcnnou.

IV.  Da  tat  da  mam  hep
b<,ut  fell.

A  enory  hac  ez  bevy  pell.

V.  Mountrer  yeez  ne  vizy

quet,
A  vvioniez  »ac  a  effet.

VI.  Lnxuriu$  rnir  ma  vizy;

Na  dre  effect  na  dre  desi>:
VI  1.  Latzerez  na  miret  ma

daou  den

En  ep-  guys  ue  ry  bizu*
icquen.


Law  and  Gospel.

Thou  siiait  love  the  Lord
thy  God  will*  all  thy  heart,
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with
all  thy  understanding.

Th<>u  sh<)lt  love  thy  ne  igh*
bour  as  thy  own  self.

In   English  prose.

I.  One  onely  God  shalt  then

Ix-lieve,
And  perfectly  love.

II.  By  Go  1  in  vain  thou  shalt

not  swear,

Nor  likewise  by  any  other
thing.

II 1.  Sundays  and  Holy  days

shalt  thou  keep
In   serving  God  devoutly,

IV.  Thy  ftiher  and   mother
shalt  thou  honour,

That  thou  mayst  lead   a
long  life.

V.  Thou   shalt  likewise  do

no  murther,
By  Wdl  nor  Deed.
VL  Nor  shalt  thou  be  luxu
rious

la  Deed  or  Desire.
VII.    Th  u   shalt  not  keep

the  goods  of  anoiher
Privately  or  by  force,


THE  HISTORY


251


F//7.  Nac  a  cue/;  denfals

testeny

Gaon  e  lech  guir  ne  liciry.
JX.  Na  desir  euffr  uu  qu-

icq  bizuicquen.
Fernet  gaut  priet  ep  muy

quen.
X*  \Jadaon  da  hentez  ne

hoantai  quet,
Eult  ep  racsvun  ho  mirct.

The  Lord's  Prayer.

lion  Tat  pehiny  so  en  evf~
fun.

Hoz  hano  bezel  sanctifiet.

H\)  rouantelcz  devet  dcmp.

Ho  volontez  bezet  graet  e/a
douar  end  en  cuff.

Rait  demp  hizyau  lion  bara
pemdizyec.

Ha  pardonet  dem  hon  off<in-
cont  eud  ma  purdonamp  dan
Teen  deves  ny  riffancet.

Ha  na  permettet  quet  ez
coveze  men  tentation.

Hoguen  hon  delivret  a
droue.

Ma  Done  ko  pet  tnifz  on*
z'tjftrcez  ho  trugarez  bras.

The

]\Ie  a  crct  en  Done  e  Tat
fllgalloudcc,  c roller  dan  E'^ff


Vill.    Thou  shalt  not  be.ar

false  witness
Nor  ly  in  any  wi«e.

IX.  Thou   shalt  not  do  the
\vurks  of  the  flesh,

But  in  marriage  onely.

X.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy

neighbours  ^oods
To  k<  ep  them  without  rea
son.

In  English.

Our  Father  which  art  ia
Heaven.

Hallowed  be  thy  name.

Thv  kingdom  co-me.

Thy  will  br  done  on  [iarthB
as  it  is  in  Heaven.

G:vt  us  this  day  our  daily
bread.

And  forgive  us  our  offen
ces,  as  we  forgive  those  that
of  lend  us.

Suiter  us  not  to  fall  into
tern j> tan  on.

But  deliver  us  from  evil.

Lord  have  pity  upon  me
according  tot'.iygrtatmeicy.

Creed.

I  believe  in  God  the  Fa-
ther,  &c.


OF  THE


ha  dan  donur.     Hac  en  Jesus
Christ  e  map  unic  hon  Antra-
hou.      P thirty  so  }>et  concevet
ves  au  Speret  scintel,  guanet
ves  an  guerches  Mary       En
drees  gouzavet  didvi   Ponce,
Pilot,  so  bet  crucifiet,  maru^
ha  sebeliet.     Fo  het  disyuen-
net  en  iffernaou^  ha  dan  frede
dez  resswcitet  a  maru  da  beu.
'from   Death  to    Life}    So
pingnet  en  Euffaon,  hoc  ase*
net  an  («  dehou  da  l)ouet  e
Tat  ollgalloudec.     A  fiane  ez
duy  da  barn  an  re  beu,  hac  an
re  maru.      Me  cret  en  Spent
santely  hac  an  His  Catholic.
Ha  communion  an  sent.     Re
mission  an  pechcdon.    Resur*
recticn  tin  Quic.
An  buhez  eternel.
Eu  al-se  bezet  gract.


Au.traoii  J)otuj  discuezit
diff  hos  rntho'.i,  ha  q  icleiinet
cliff  ho  garautehuu.  En  harm
an  Tut,  an  Map,  an  Speret
santel.

That  is,

Lord  Goil  shew  me  thy
way--  and  tench  me  thy  paths,
in  the  name  pf  the  Father,
Son,  nn<i  holy  Spirit.

Jesus  mnp  f>uue  ho  pet
trout  7,  <>U7.iff.

Jesus  Son  pf  God  have
pity  upon  me.

Hanu  Doue  bezet  ben*
nigiicL

Tl>e  name  of  the  God  be
blessed.,
.  Antraou  hoz  bet  i,ruygarez


Lord  have  mercy  upon  us.
A  bremman,  beprct  da  bl*
zuicquen.

From  this  time  to  Eternity.
So  be  iL


Numbers*

Untw,  daoit,  tryt  pcnar,  One,  two,  three,  four,  five,
pcmp,  huech,  seiz,  eiz,  nao,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  teu,
dec,  unnec,  daouzec,  tryzec^  eleven,  twelve.'thi  rteen,  four-
pcnarzcc,  pempzec.  seittec^  teen,  fifteen,  sixteen,  scven-
,  naontec,  uguenl.  teen,  eighteen,  nineteen,

twenty.


OF  THP,  DRUIDS.


253


One  au(i  twenty,  &c.

Thirty,  toity,  iialfn  burn
dred,  2  e.  fifty,  thie<  scoie,
tti  ei  score  an  i  len,  fourscore,
fourscore  and  ten,  a

TtjousaocJi  Million.


Unun  war  rt'ugtnt,  &c.

Tregont,  daovgtttfit,  ha?(ter
cant  try  vguent  dtc  a  try  u*
guent,  penur  ugnrnt,  uec  a
peiar  uguentt  Cart,  Mil,
Million.


Days  of  the  Week,

Dyssvll*  Dyflun,  \)tmtu>z,  Sunday,    Munday,  Tues-

Dtmercher,  Diziou,  Drrgue-  day,  Wednesday,  l'hurs<i  »y,

ner,  L)essqdorntun'b\z\\ntun  Fnday,  Saturday,  a  WeeK,
Dtz.

Done    da   roiff  dez  mat
dech.

H<i  dechhu  Ivez

Penaus  a  hanochhu  $

Yach  ouf  a  tiugarez  Doite^
Pea  lech  ez  it-hu  ?
Me  govezo  an  ^uiryonez,

Dll    GALLORUMc


TARAMIS,

Hesus.

Teut^es.

Beleuus,  vel

Abili'p

Onvana.     Anara,  Hib.

Hogmius,

Adiast«.    An  date.

SUMMUS  MAGISTRATUS^


God    give    you    a    good
3  ay.

And  to  you  i:kewise.

Ho.V  do  you  do  ?

I  ti  in  well  by  Cod's  m<  rcy.

Wnit'ier  go  ^ou  ?

J  st^ali  know  the  truth.

OFPICIORUM   MAXI
me  sacrorum    no*


I  aenflB.

Bardi    Bard,  Bw'rd,  H.

Druid^.    ^
Eijbages.  torrupte  pro


Ger.


Alauila.
Caterva.


~Bellicae.


MIUTUM  SPECIES,


Vargi.
Crupellarii,


,  H,


Mangae.  ^  i-v  •
Mangana.  i  J
Mangonalia.  )

Currwm  Nomina,
Beuna,


254  THE  HISTORY,  &c.


Bagaudoe.     Bagada't.  Petoritum.

Galearii.  Carrus.

Covinum.

ARMORUM  NOMINA,  Essedum.

Spatha.  Rhfida.
Gessum.

Lancea.  fostiun

Cateia.

Matara.  Rheno.

Thyreus.     Tarei,  Hib.  Sagus.

Cetra.  Liana  f.

Carnon    £  Car  nan,  videas,      Gaunaeum.

(_    quasras.  Bardtacus,  pro  Bardis.

Bardocucullus,  etiam   pro   Bardis.
Braccae,  pro  omnibus.      Breaccan.
Maniaci.

Animalium  Nomina,

Marc,   Equus.

Rhaphius,  Lupus  Cervinus.
Abrana,  Simia.
Barracaceae,   Pellium,   &c.
Lug,  Comix.  Mus.
Clupea.      Piscis   species.


t     Linnae,   saga  quadra  ct  moilia  sunt,   dc  quibus   Plaut.       pinnae   cooperta,
est  textrino  Gallia.     Isidor-

Linna  Diodoro  est  SAG  is  PSILOS,  et  Varroni  mollis  sagus,  Ilibernis  hodier^
nis  indnsium  est  non  una  mutata  littera.

FINIS,


AN  ELEGY

On  the  late  ingenious  MR.    TOLAND.

O  TOLAND  r  mighty  friend  to  Nature's  laws,

Thou  great  support  of  Truth,  and  Reason's  cause;

Art  Ihou  more  ?  Is  thy  lastbreaih  expir'd  ?

And  nature  to  her  ancient  seat  retir'd  ?

Each  jarring  element  gone  angry    home  ?

And   Master  TOLAND   a  Non-ens  become?

Is  all    thy   el'qufnt   bre;ith,  thy  \voiuf  rous  boast

Of  argument,  iri  boundless   ^Ether   lost  ?

Earth  gone  to  earth,  the  mould'ring   substance  must.

By  slow  degrees,  dissolve   to  native  Dust.

The  cooler  fluids,  and    the   \vat'ry   part

That  dampt  thy    blood,  and  quench'd  thy   noble  heart,

Now   leave   the  stiff  nnariimated   clay,

And  to  then*   mother  Ocean  seek   their  way.

The   purer  genial  pow'rs,   tlie  vital   flame,

That    mov'd  and    quicken'd  the   mechanic   frame,

Is  flown   aloft,   a   spark,   a   borrow'd   ray,

And  re-united  to  the   Prince  of  Day.

Oh!    weep,  Britannia's  Sons,  your  Champion's  dead,

The  Patron  of  your   Liberty  is  fled.

O   Liberty  !  thou  Goddess    heav'nly  bright  !'

Thou   dost  impart  thy   radiant  beams    of  light

To  this  blest   Isle    which  of  thy   darling   train,

Will,  like  this  Hero,  thy  just  cause  maintain?

How  greatly  brave   has  he   undaunted  stood


AN  ELFGY.


Ayi»iu>t   a    to  u  m,   an   impetuous  ttood>

Of  b  gutted    Enthusiasts^    an  i    tricks

Of  Pedantry,  and    priestly    Politicks  !

Thru   pregnant  Genius,    who   thy   praise  can   tell?.

Th\    Reason  did,   like   morning  Sun,  dispel

Jjark   clouds  of  Ignorance,  and  break  the   spell

Of  Rome's,  fm  hantmentSj  and   t^ie   lesser   frauds

Of  Churches    Piotestant,   and  English   LAUDS.

To  tuee    we  owe,  to   thy   Victorious  'handj

A   rescu'd  Ptople,   and  a   fansom'd   land.

Thou   hast   broke  otf  our  manicies   and   chains,

And  freed  our  minds   of  stipersritiniUs   pains.

Thy   shining   lamp   has   hiougttt  respl^rident    day,

Fmtly   describM   the   plain  and   easy    way<

Clt-ai'd  rf  the  rubbish   of  mysterious  8choolSj         .

And    mazes   intricate  of  pious  fools,-


Ensluv'd  to  narrow  Porais^jnd  caphVatirig  ftules.
Oh  !   hadst   thou   l.v'd  to   bdrnah   all   the   Dreams
Of  fab'lous   Ages,  and     he'  Monkisk   Themes
Of  Miracle*,  of   My?nefies4   ftud  Tales'^
(Whfie  fancy  oVer   cominorl  sense  prevaiis)
Then   mighi    we   niourri   thy  fate  frith   less
With  less   regret   behold    thy   sacred    Urn.
Ho  v\  e'er,  thy   great  example   hag  inspir'd
A    noble  emulation^  it   has  firV
The  glf.wing  breasts  of  our    tritanrtid   Youth,
With   love   of  Liberty,  ami  love   of   Truth.
Tu'ou   hast   not  teit  us  i:rt   the  glooui  of  night,
Some  Stars   we   have,   thut  ierttl  a  frrendiy    light,,
That  shed   a  kin  5,  aujpiefOu^  hifl  thence,'
To  cherish   Reasorc*  aiid  t&  ttp^a  S*eus«;v


Printed  by  J,  Findlaj.


BIND!


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
