ACCOUNT OF A PHOTOGRAPHIC EXPEDITION TO THE SOUTHERN GLACIERS OF KANGCHENJUNGA IN THE SIKKIM HIMALAYA
By N. A. Tombazi — 1926
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1926 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier india.history.resource.117543). The 1926 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the chapter 'The Reported Wild Man' with the 1925 yeti sighting at 15,500 feet.

========================================================================

UOMDNUL VU IM UN AY M 
00109662 


UIQ EAT TTT AY a 
00109662 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Observer Research Foundation 


on 11 March, 2020 


AGGOUNT OF A PHOTOGRAPHIC EXPEDITION 


- TO THE 


SOUTHERN GLACIERS OF KANGCHENJUNGA 


IN THE 


SIKKIM HIMALAYA 


109662 


i 


BY 
N. A. TOMBAZI, F.R.G.S. 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS, 
MAP_AND TABLES OF OBSERVATIONS — 


Published by the Author 
. for Private Circulation. 
Edition limited to 180 numbered copies, 


of which this 42. Ne. “ae 


O | DE: 198 
GIs «Gr 
Tom/ Aec 
1Oo4hGe 


Printed in British India 
at the Maxwell Press, Bombay. 


SOLITUDE AMIDST THE ETERNAL SNOWS. 


TO 
DOUGLAS W. FRESHFIELD 


D.C.L., GOLD MEDALLIST ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, 
MASTER OF THE MOUNTAINS, 
WITHOUT WHOSE PIONEER WORK 
A GRATEFUL DISCIPLE 
WOULD NEVER HAVE HAD THE IRRESISTIBLE IMPULSE 
TO ADVENTURE IN THE SIKKIM-HIMALAYA. 
TO ITS FIRST CAUSE, THEN, 
THIS BOOK IS IN ALL HUMILITY DEDICATED. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Of the independent State of Sikkim, situated within the greatest 
mountain range of the world, it can easily be said, because of its accessi- 
bility, that it fulfils the ambitions of all keen travellers, whether they tour 
for the sake of “scenery” or “climbing”. 

The Darjeeling visitor will find many delightful “spots” for picnics 
or excursions into the district; the traveller possessing loftier ambitions will 
seek an unfrequented valley within the virgin forests ; whilst the more 
adventurous mountaineer will find some remote peak or glacier among the 
snowy highlands of the Sikkim Himalaya. . 

Personally, I love the mountains, and those of Sikkim have always 

attracted me most for their wonderful scenery, which affords such scope for 
mountain photography, I have no pretensions to the abilities of a moun- 
taineer ; but sheer love of mountain adventure, the assault of a peak 
(whether the result be success or defeat), and the urge to see what none 
or few have seen before—these have drawn me irresistibly to the little~ 
known Icefields of the upper valleys of Sikkim. There is a fascination in 
attacking an unconquered crest, be it high or low; yet to the summit of 
which a route has first to be visualised from afar, then discovered in 
practice. I believe this fascination is greater than that experienced in 
following a known and mapped route to the peak of a higher or even a 
more difficult mountain, 


My previous journeys in Sikkim, 1919 & 1920, covered chiefly the 
Northern part of the country, in which I travelled as far as the Kangra 
La and, after visiting Chumiomo and the Eastern glaciers of Kangchenjau, 
(on which I reached a height of 20050 feet) I crossed the Donkya La and 
pushed southwards following the course of the Lachung river. In the 
South my tours extended from the Singalella range in the West to the 
passes of Tibet in the East. 


Before giving my account of the last tour, I may mention that 
early in the year I received a letter from the Royal Geographical Society, 
from which I gathered that it was considered desirable that somebody 
should make a serious photographic record of Eastern Nepal from well 
defined points on the Singalella Range. To achieve this was the main 


object I had in mind when starting on the journey. I already possessed 
most of the survey and photographic instruments required for. the purpose 
and had only to complete my equipment with one or two additional acces- 
sories and the available survey information to be ready to define accurately 
the stations of observation. 


My next plan, provided time permitted, was to visit the North 
Eastern part of Sikkim, about which my knowledge was confined to what 
I had read in books. In glancing over the maps I imagined a route across 
the Guicha La and thence, for the sake of “ testing a short cut”, over the 
Zemu, otherwise known as “19300 feet” Gap, This Gap is situated on 
the great Eastern ridge of Kangchenjunga, near Simvu, and has so far, 
I believe, never been crossed by man, 


Iam far from being a writer, and all I can claim is to have 
attempted as faithful a record as-has been possible in the few pages time 
has allowed me. I therefore entreat the readers’ indulgence for the inco- 
herence of this account of the vivid impressions which the peaks and 
glaciers of the Great Kangchenjunga Range have left in my mind—visions 
which can never be forgotten. 


-MY SINCEREST THANKS are due to Mr. Freshfield for per- 
mission to include excerpts from his Round Kangchenjunge and also for 
-the use I have made of his map; to Captain Meade of the Survey of India 
Office, Calcutta, for much valuable topographical material; to Mr. Hider 
-of Messrs. Clifton, Bombay, for personal attention in the reproduction of 
photographic work; to Mr. Sain of Darjeeling for developing the negatives; 
and to Mr, Evelyn Wood for assistance with the proofs. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
INTRODUCTION 
THE JOURNEY TO DARJEELING ee he ‘ ‘ ‘ 1. 
DARJEELING AND FINAL PREPARATIONS . ..  .: . ; : 1 
ACROSS THE FOOTHILLS TO THE DIVINE ALTAR OF BUDDHA : 3 
BY A WINDING TRACK TO THE LAND OF THE THREE CHIEFS . , 8 
THROUGH VIRGIN FORESTS TO THE HIGH PASTURES OF JONGRI . - 10 
DAWN ON KABRU : : e ge 4 P ; ; ‘ 16 
THE VALE, OF ALUKTANG ; : ees : . @ : 18 
DAWN ON KANGCHENJUNGA AND PANDIM ° , : : - ‘ 21 
TO THE GUICHA LA . 7 : . ‘ ‘ ‘ : : 3 
SUNRISE OVER THE SUBLIME QUEEN OF THE SNOWS - ‘ : 28 
UP THE GUICHA GLACIER ON TO THE EASTERN SPUR OF KABRU : 31 
ACROSS THE TALUNG AND TONGSHYONG GLACIERS! TO THE ZEMU GAP 38 
RETREAT - . ‘. : ‘ : A : ‘ : ‘ ‘ 48 
THE RETURN TO JONGRI SR. Te ce et ae ck | BR 
THE CLIMB OF KABUR ‘ . ‘ : ; ; : : 53 
THE REPORTED “WILD MAN” : ‘ Sn ot : ' : 55 
FROM CAMP VII TO THE RATHONG GLACIER. é ; : ‘ 57 
THE RETURN TO PAMIONCHI %, .- 41. Va, “at. Zar ote: 400 
THE PAMIONCHI MONASTERY , . - : ‘ . , 64. 
ALONG THE SINGALELA RANGE TO DARJEELING . : & ga 66 
TABLE OF STAGES, CAMPS ETC - , : ‘ j Appendix a 
CHART OF METEOROLOGICAL AND ALTITUDE OBSERVATIONS . i B 
LIST OF SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS ‘ : ‘ ‘ rn % c 
SOME ARTICLES OF USE AND ORNAMENT IN SIKKIM ‘ . x eo DD 
INDEX Ae a. 1 ‘ * : : : . ‘ AT END, 


4 
9 


SO ONTO oe Bo DD 


co Ww WW O& WH & CO t OD DD DD DO DO DD 
bo 
CON SAR OH EH SSCHONSaERSRES SES ER ee eee 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Solitude amidst the Etérnal Snows” 


The author , fe: : 
The party é ‘ 7 

The MENDONG at Geysing . § 
Pamionchi Gumpa . . . 

The Kazt of Yoksun and his wife . 

Forest near Nibi . < < 

“ Ronnie ” ; a 

A halt at Bakim . Aces 

Rhododendron ARGENTEUM 

Kang La Nagma ‘ 

Sunrise ‘on Kabru ° i 

Kabru_ . . 

Little Kabru, Kabru, Dome and Forked Peake 
Little Kabru ° é F : 


Forked Peak : 


Looking — North, from the pitige over the Praig Chu . 


Pandim ‘and the upper course of the, Praig Chu 


The vale of Aluktang; looking South’ towards the heights of Jongri 


Kangchenjunga and the vale of Aluktang ; 
Second crest of Kangchenjunga 
Dawn on Pandim 


FACING 


PAGE 


( Frontispiece ) 


The Guicha glacier and heights to the Noth- West of Guicha La 


Kangchenjunga and Pandim 

Glacial lake below Chemthang 

Guicha glacier’ and Pyramidal Peaks 

Camp IV; loaking South 

Looking South from Camp II on Guicha La 
Camp II on Guicha La 

Guicha giacier, from Camp II on Guicha La 
Sunrise gn Kangchenjunga, from Camp II 
Sunrise on Talung Peak 


Saxirraca’ ARcTIcA 
Talung glacier, from> ee North of Guicha La 


Simvu. a 
Jubonu at dawn ive Camp IV 
Jubonu from above Chemthang , 
Sunset on Pandim from Aluktang 
Jubonu from Aluktang : ‘ : 


NO. 


40 
4l 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 


59/60 


61/62 


FACING 


PAGE 

The Peaks of Jubonu in clouds; from ridge N. E. of Jongri 54 
Camp near the snmmit of Kabur . . 55 
Looking South from near Camp VII on Kabur % . 57 
Heights to the North of Kabur; Kabru in distance . . 58 
Jongri huts by mist . . P . 4 60 
A-last glimpse of Jongri . ‘ < , j 60 
Kabru, Dome and Forked Peak, from Pamionchi ° * 63 
Image of Buddha and altar; Pamionchi cumpa - ‘ 64 
Wall painting; Pamionchi Gumpa . ‘. < . 64 
Section of library; Pamionchi cumpa . < . 65 
Model temple in the library of Pamionchi cumpa ‘ Fi 66 
Sangachelling GUMPA F - 67 
Group of instrumentalist monks é ‘< ‘ ; 67 
CHartens and prayer flags near the Sangachelling cumpA ; 68 
A stream near Dentam Ps ° ‘ 5 . 68 
What remains of the old bungalow at Chiabanjan ‘ ‘i 69 
Rhododendron Barsatum (Singalela Range) . 7 3 70 
Rhododendron Arcenteum (Singalela Range) . ‘ i 70 
Some articles of use and ornament in Sikkim 7 Appendix D 

PANORAMAS (in teat) 

Forked Peak and heights to the North-West of Chemthang (rrom 
STATION OF OBSERVATION ON WesTERN SPUR of PanpIm) . ° 25 
Kabru, Dome, Forked Peak, Kangchenjunga, Zemu Gap and Simvu 

(Looxine Norra rrom NEAR Camp VII on Kasur ) ‘ : 58 
MAP (4% pocket ) 
Southern Glaciers of Kangchenjunga and Sikkim-Nepal frontier . at end, 


& a» = ra 
Ovk €a por kaderderr 
ta tod MtAtradoy tpovara” 


Bepretokage 


THE 
JOURNEY 

TO 
DARJEELING 


DARJEELING 
AND 
FINAL 


AFTER a somewhat trying railway journey from Bombay I 
reached Calcutta during one of the hottest months of the year. An equally 
unattractive trip across the swampy plains of Bengal, planted with jute 
and rice and here and there tufts of giant bamboos, brought me to Siliguri, 
at the foot of the Hills, 

The weather was dull and oppressive and the higher mountains 
were partly hidden behind a morning haze. Having completed the sorting 
and counting of the moderate number of twenty nine packages—none 
missing so far—I took my seat in the small compartment of the toy rail- 
way, accompanied by my faithful Airedale Terrier “Ronnie”. 

There was a sudden and complete change in scenery and flora as 
the train entered the deep forest of the foothills. Hardly a square yard 
was to be seen denuded of trees or bushes. As we climbed, the tropical 
jungle of bamboos and palm trees gave place to forests of oak and chestnut. 

At every bend of the road a new landscape presented itself— 
rounded hills covered with dense vegetation appeared, broken here and 
there by sheer precipices and deep glens in the shadow of which one caught 
an occasional glimpse of silvery streams and waterfalls. 

A halt was made at Kurseong which, next to Darjeeling, is an 
important hill station, at an altitude of 4800 feet. Here the air grew 
sensibly fresher and, after another steep climb and a series of zigzags along 
open slopes, I reached Darjeeling, the end of sitting still and the beginning 
of action. 


- DARJEELING is among the most important hill stations in 
India and is certainly the most popular to those who live on the delta of 
the Ganges. .Built on the summit of a long ridge, at a height of 7150. feet 


PREPARATIONS above sea level, it commands a magnificent view of the snowy range of 


2 


Kangchenjunga. The villas, surrounded with their gardens, in which grow 
‘all manner of European flowers, are perched on the steep hill-side among 
dark fir trees, forming a jagged sky-line to the picturesque landscape. 


- One can safely say that few places in the world—at least of the 
size of Darjeeling—show such a diversity of types in their inbabitants. 
Here one may see all sorts and conditions of Asiatics from the Lepcha, the 
primitive inhabitant of Sikkim, with his fine-cut feature and long pigtail 
swinging down his back, to the sturdy Bhutea with his high cheek bones, 
oblique eyes and copper complexion. Here are the small, wiry little men 
of Nepal and a crowd of dandy porters or rickshaw drivers whose broad 
smiling faces greet the visitor on arrival, One is certain to see a venerable 
Tibetan Lama spinning his prayer wheel and murmuring his eternal “Om 
Mani Padme Hun”, 


On my arrival in Darjeeling the mountains were still shrouded 
in a dense mist which turned into a downpour before I had time to reach 
the hotel. My first task was to interview the Sirdar. And here was the 
first hitch. It was Sirdar Gyaljen, a man who had done good work in con-. 
nection with the Everest Expeditions, who had made all the excellent 
‘arrangements, and I have nothing but praise for him. It was a great 
disappointment to learn that indisposition prevented him from accom- 
panying me; but he had recommended as a substitute Sirdar Nursang to 
whom also much credit must be given for the actual practical work. 


These and the coolies are all hillmen and their efficiency was not 
surprising ; but I must mention in passing a plainsman, whom I took as 
far as the base camp in charge of my dog. This very energetic and willing 
young boy quite disproved the rule that a plainsman is useless and helpless 
in the mountains. 


It continued to rain throughout the night and on the following 
morning it seemed, if anything, worse. I had little time to spare and, 
as to commence my journey westward would, most probably, have meant 
crossing the Singalella Range in very unfavourable weather for photogra- 
phic purposes, I decided to reverse the order of my plans and to start 
first on the Northern journey, leaving the Singalella for the return. 

I spent the whole day in making my final arrangements for the trip 
the departure of which was fixed for the following morning. There was 
little packing to be done in the way of provisions as I had brought these 


The author, 


The party. 


ACROSS 
THE 
FOOTHILLS 
TO 

THE 
DIVINE 
ALTAR 

OF | 
BUDDHA 


3 


up with me from the Army & Navy Stores, ready packed in light cases 
each containing a complete assortment of all that was necessary for a 
fixed number of days. Tents, snow-boots and clothing for myself and for 
the coolies, ropes and ice axes were also apportioned in loads. No load 
exceeded 45 lbs., the average being well below 40. 


My party consisted of Nursang,a hard working and able man, 
who had served with 5 of the other coolies during the Everest Expeditions, 
3 special coolies to whom I entrusted my photographic and survey 
instruments, and 22 coolies of whom 14 were to carry tents, clothing and 
other equipment, and another 8 for the coolies’ rice and provisions ; 26 in 
allincluding the Sirdar, At first sight this figure may seem enormous ; 
but I had to reckon that beyond Yoksun, the fourth march out of 
Darjeeling, nothing can be had on the way to replenish provisions, and 
also that the duration of the tour beyond the limit of trees, where fuel 
must be carried, was still indefinite. 


WE set out from Darjeeling at 8-30 on the morning of the 3rd, 
of April 1925. Torrents of rain had fallen during the night and, though 
the day broke more promisingly than I had expected, it turned again into 
drizzle. Heavy clouds were passing over the hills completely veiling the 
distant view. | 


‘The first march was 20 miles to Chakung, a fairly long distance, 
but an easy walk on a good road. I had travelled over this part of Sikkim 
before and, knowing how attractive bazars are to coolies, I sent Nursang 
ahead with the men who carried the heavier baggage, thus hoping to avoid 
late arrivals at destination. I followed an hour later with the camera 
porters whom I had instructed to be always within call. 


The beginning of the journey was over a broad cart road descend- 
ing gradually along the Western slope of the long ridge on which 
Darjeeling is built. About.4 miles North we struck to the left whence 
started a steep descent of some 5000 feet through interminable tea- 
plantations, 


4 


A short halt was made about half-way down by the Takvar Tea 
Estate where, notwithstanding the complete absence of sun, I already 
began to feel an appreciable difference in temperature. The descent con- 
tinued for another hour on a muddy foot-path, broken occasionally by 
slippery short-cuts through the tangled undergrowth of tea plantations, I 
was thoroughly drenched by the time we reached Singla bazar at noon. 


My premonition was fulfilled, for I found the rest of the party 
gathered under the shed of an old buniya’s shop gaily enjoying a cup of 
tea. It was very hot—90° F. in the shade, or 30° higher-than it had been 
in Darjeeling a few hours ago—and, to make wings worse, the sun peered 
faintly through the steamy atmosphere. 


The whole party was soon on the way again. We first descended 
to the bed of the Little Rangit—a wide stream flowing in a North Easterly 
direction where it meets the waters of the Rangit coming from the North; 
thence across duries till we reached the Ramman. [Both these rivers con- 
tained less water than normally and we managed to cross them on foot, 
thus avoiding a detour to the bridges which are about half-a-mile East. 


From here we made an ascent of about 3500 feet, for the .most 
part by steep short-cuts which the coolies took with the greatest ease. 
The Sikkim coolie always prefers a short-cut, whether going up or coming 
down, and it is surprising to see the amount of strain they can stand in 
their way of tackling the maximum slope, irrespective of temperature or 
road-conditions, 

The vegetation I noticed on this part of the journey consisted 
chiefly of bamboos, sal trees, gordonia and other semi-tropical plants, 
There were by now but few tea plantations scattered on the slopes of the 
mountain. After a climb of about two hours, the path became more level 
and a pleasant walk through a wooded slope brought me to the Chakung 
dak bungalow, Though we had had no rain during the later part of the 
afternoon, the sky was still threatening and the air was cooler. 

The following morning, hoping to have a good view of the snows, 
I was up at daybreak, but was soon disappointed in finding that only the 
near hills were visible, whilst far to the North a curtain of mist concealed 
the higher peaks, Itook advantage of this opportunity to study the 
outline of the closer mountains from the top of a knoll where the plane 
table was set up for the first time on this journey. 


£9] 


As far as the eye could see the hiks stretched range after range 
in all the shapes and all the depths of green nature can create, and in the 
shadows of the deep valley below the foaming waters of the Rangit could 
be glimpsed through the foliage of overhanging trees—a typical landscape 
of the lower valleys of Sikkim, yet so vivid as to impress even one who has 
seen it many times before. 


Our next march was a delightful one through forests of a great 
variety of semi-tropical and temperate vegetation, and included the cross- 
ing of two main streams, the Ratho Chu and Rishi Chu, which, flowing in 
an easterly direction, are tributaries of the Rangit. It will perhaps 
describe this part of the journey more vividly to say that we commenced 
with a descent of 1700 feet followed by an ascent of 2000, then down 1330 
to end at the bungalow of Rinchinpong after another climb of 1425 feet ; 
all these “ ups” and “downs” being within the comparatively short dis- 
tance of 11 miles, The reader can ensily imagine the changes that take 
place in the flora when all these zones ‘pass in succession before the 
traveller's eyes. 


. Among other flowers of the forest, orchids, forget-me-nots and 
climbing vines attracted me particularly, Of the orchids I collected seven 
species, all of which were in flower; the beautiful white Cwlogyne cristata was 
perhaps the most conspicuous and then two kinds of delicate Dendrobiums, 
a purple and a yellow. As I was nearing Rinchinpong, in the depths of a 
silent forest I came across a great trunk of a fallen tree covered with moss 
from which grew masses of white orchids; it occurred to me that Nature 
had perhaps planted them there to adorn the grave of some fallen giant of 
the forests, 


I soon discovered that it was getting late and, by hurrying, I 
reached the bungalow just in time to see the summit of Kabru glistening in 
the last gleams of daylight. The clouds had lifted and at last I had caught 
a glimpse of the snows tinged with all the magnificence of one of those 
glorious sunsets on the mountains of Sikkim. 


The small village of Rinchinpong is situated on the North shoulder 
of a spur which runs from West to East, at about 6000 feet above sea level. 
The bungalow is higher up near the crest of the ridge, a few minutes walk 
through a forest, and is surrounded by a small garden in which grow roses 
and other flowers. 


6 


The following day broke fine, and the Sirdar, who usually called 
for orders at 5-30 in the morning, found me in a comfortable armchair on 
the open verandah of the bungalow, busy studying the distant snowy heights 
through my field glasses, 


My plans for the day were to make an early start and thus avoid 
the heat in the deep valley of the Kalet:Chu* which flows parallel to the 
ridge on which Pamionchi is perched. I could see quite distinctly the 
Pamionchi gumpat and the bungalow on the summit of the opposite hill; 
they seemed quite near, yet we were separated by a plunge of 3690 feet and 
a steep rise of 4610, 


Having crossed the forest and village of Rinchinpong, we com- 
menced to descend through fields of Indian corn, then over terraces of 
cultivated land; Eleusine coracana, a kind of millet, was growing in 
profusion, also hill-rice and the winter crop of potatoes, which, at the time, 
were hardly as big as a walnut but good enough to replenish our stock of 
fresh vegetables, The grain of the millet is used by the inhabitants of 
Sikkim to make their native wine which is called murwa. The preparation 
isa simple one; the seed is moistened and allowed to ferment for few 
days, it is then placed in a bamboo jug in which boiling water is poured. 
The drink, which is a refreshing one, but inclined to be slightly intoxicat- 
ing, is sucked through a reed of thin bamboo which is dipped into the 
fluid through a hole in the upper part of the jug. 

We passed some typical Lepcha dwellings, huts perched on _plat- 
forms, with small balconies of rickety planks, On one of these an infant 
had crawled to watch the party go by, and sat like a brown owl on the 
edge of the balcony; but without the owlish characteristic of solemnity. 
In fact when we approached, it proved the power of mountain-bred lungs 
in mighty bellowings for its mother, who came to the rescue. 

The descent continued down the steep mountain side by occasional 
short-cuts, meeting the bridle-road further down, until the roar of water 
announced that we were approaching the river. 

The valley of the Kalet Chu is among the most fertile in Sikkim, 
with many hamlets and small farms scattered on the slopes of spurs which 
project from the surrounding mountains. We crossed the stream over a 
suspension-bridge and ascended the mountain on the other side, Though 


* As noted in the Indian Survey map, but pronounced by the local inhabitants as “Kulhait”. 
t Native name for Monastery. 


The mendong at Geysing. 


Pamionchi gumpa. 


7 


it was only nine o’clock when we were a good way up, the heat was intense, 
and a mishap to one of my coolies, whose nose bled profusely, delayed us. 
My scanty medical knowledge proved only of temporary use and I even- 
tually decided to leave the invalid in charge of another coolie, whilst a sturdy 
Bhutea, who boasted of being able to lift as much as a hundred pounds, 
volunteered to carry the extra load of forty pounds, besides his own of the 
same weight, 


Further up, on an open slope of the mountain, we came to the 
village of Geysing, which has a small market place and, according to the 
official maps of Sikkim, a “Post Office”; my own note book reads “a rusty 
letter box, supposed to be cleared once a week by a runner”. I believe a 
letter I posted here to a friend in Darjeeling has not yet reached its 
destination, but anyway, this is the last post office before striking out 
“into the blue” and the delay may therefore be excused. 


Geysing is famous in Sikkim for its great mendong, a wall of some 
two hundred yards in length built of layers of stone, very like the unce- 
mented field-walls of Derbyshire, In the mendong, however, there are flat 
tablets inserted vertically at intervals, held between two projecting hori- 
zontal elements of the wall. That of Geysing has about seven hundred such 
vertical pieces, all inscribed with various prayers (mostly the everlasting 
“Om Mani Padme Hun”) and with religious symbols of Buddha in his 
many incarnations. 


At each end of the wall is a large charten, and many smaller ones 
at irregular intervals along the mendong. I must again digress to describe 
the charten which, although it is universally recognised as the symbol of 
Buddhism, much as the village crucifix is that of Catholicism in Latin 
countries ; yet its actual derivation is in dispute. One explanation of its 
origin is to be found in Nature-symbolism. Reference to the illustration 
will show the square plinth typifying Earth; the hemisphere, Water; the 
pillar, Fire ; and the signs at the head, the starry elements of the Air. 
Close by the charten are usually seen prayer flags fluttering in the wind, 
which is said to convey the inscribed prayers of the faithful to their gods. 


From Geysing we climbed gradually up the bridle-road through. 
lovely woods of oak, chestnut and magnolia, and by green forest-clearings 
to Pamionchi. The temperate character of this vegetation was noticeably 
distinct from that encountered before Geysing. 


BY A 
WINDING 
‘PRACK 
TO TRE 
LAND 
OF THE 
THRER 
CHIEFS 


g 


The Pamionchi bungalow has perhaps the best situation of any 
in Sikkim. It is on the summit of a spur, at about the same height as. 
Darjeeling, and commands a magnificent view of the snows. Close by is 
the gumpa for which the place is held sacred; but stern necessities of 
reapportioning the coolies’ loads occupied the short time too fully to allow 
me a visit, which I promised myself for the return journey. 


I could not, however, resist the impulse to take advantage of the 
bungalow’s splendid position, from an observer's point of view. . Looking 
Northwards up the valley of the Rathong Chu, a deep cleft broken and twisted’ 
by the mountain spurs, the snowy mass of Kabru looms in. the distance,. 
flanked by Little Kabru on the left and Pandim on the right. Mighty 
Kangchenjunga is partly hidden by the nearer hills. 


The bridle-road ends abruptly at Pamionchi, and the way to 
Yoksun, for which we set out at dawn, was the first of really uncivilised, 
not to say rough conditions. There was still, however, a track of sorts, 
though its convolutions led us apparently aimlessly through all points of the 
compass, up and down steep hillsides aggregating climbs of 3810 feet, 
descents of 5050, in three stages totalling about 9000 feet. 

_ The country we were now entering has no more bungalows; 
that of Pamionchi being the last; and for the rest of the journey we had- 
to depend on our tents or shelters offered by Nature, 


At first we moved downhill through a denso forest of oak, maple, 
magnolia and laurel, which took half-an-hour to traverse. We then 
continued down a long slope of arable land, sown with millet and Indian 
corn, among which wild plantains flourished. The cultivators were the 
villagers of Chongpong, which we soon passed, observing its small gumpa, 
raised on a knoll. From here the way led from farm to farm untill the fields 
ended and the path dipped sharply to the edge of the Ringbi Chu. We cross- 
ed the torrent by a narrow bridge which spans a gorge where the silvery 
water boils over huge eroded boulders in its confined space. The unbear- 
able heat of the valley was tempered Dy the cool breath of the river, fretting 
and leaping at its bonds. - 


9 


Over the bridge, a rough track climbs by zig-zags over a steep 
mountain covered with dense fern, acacia, gigantic grasses and plantain. 
At the end of this we came to an open slope of barley fields scattered with 
Lepcha buts, which terminated at the village of Tadong. 


From this place the track was level and skirted a shoulder of the 
hill forming the valley of the Risu Chu, a tributary of the Ringbi. There 
was no bridge over the former ; so we crossed on foot by a causeway of 
natural stepping-stones. Another climb: confronted us up a steep, bare 
hillside which was being cleared by fire while we were passing. 


We thus reached the spine of a narrow ridge where we came across 
another mendong and chartens, To our left, a little higher up on the hill, 
stood the gumpa of Katsuperri overlooking the village of Tingling, From 
here we had a clear view of Yoksun on a grassy plateau across the valley of 
the Rathong Chu, two thousand feet below it. The heat had been intense 
all day and I was thankful to halt for lunch under the shade of a huge — 
chestnut tree. I was busy examining the aneroids and thermometers when 
threatening clouds came up from the Rathong valley. Soon the first drops 
of rain began to fall, and by the time we were about half way down towards 
the river, we were in the midst of a deluge such as I have rarely experienced 
in the Himalaya. 

We made all haste to reach the Rathong Chu which we crossed 
by a bridge similar to that over the Ringbi Chu; but bigger, for there was 
no convenient gorge to be spanned. Then came the final climb to Yoksun. 
We started from the bridge up a very steep zig-zag track over bare rocky 
surface till the slope lessened and cultivated fields appeared. This part was 
sparsely dotted with semi-tropical trees, bamboo, berberis and walnut; and 
here also were several farms and huts inhabited by Lepchas, The last mile 
was easy walking across the lush meadows of the Yoksun tableland, — 

I had sent the Sirdar and the tent coolies ahead from the bridge 
to fix a suitable camp-site. I found the tents pitched successfuly, although 
pretty wet, in a sheltered hollow below the house of the Kazi* of Yoksun, 
This gentleman had been interviewed by the Sirdar and had announced 
his intention of calling on me at breakfast the following morning. 

According to tradition, Yoksun (which means “three chiefs”) was 
the residence of three influential Lamas who, in the seventeenth century, 
appointed the first Tibetan sovereign to rule this part of Sikkim, 


* Title conferred on officers of state in Sikkim 


THROUGH 
VIRGIN 
FORESTS 
TO THE 
HIGH 
PASTURES 
OF JONGRI 


10 


' It continued pouring most of the night, but by daybreak the sky 
had cleared and I was in a better mood to receive the local landowner, He 
came, accompanied by his wife and a retinue of various sons of toil, bearing 
the usual gifts of flowers, vegetables and fruit, eggs and chickens and, last 
but not least, several bamboo jugs of hot, pungent merwa, 


While the customary compliments were being exchanged between 
myself and the Kazi, the Sirdar was busy supervising the drying and the 
rather tedious packing of the outfit at the break-up of the first camp. 


We set off at eight o'clock towards Tzubuk, at first over cultivated 
land. This was the last of the fields, and regular habitations ceased at its 
confines, The Kazi kindly showed us the way as far as the end of his 
estate and, in bidding me au revoir, expressed his wish to see us all back 
safely on the return journey, when he promised to have a fresh supply of 
fruit and vegetables ready for us. 


From here we followed the right bank of the Rathong and soon 
struck into scrub, succeeded by a dense, virgin forest of maple, chestnut, 
birch, oak and jasmine. Here we entered the zone where some of the 
beautiful rhododendrons flourish, those of the species growing at heights 
from six to eight thousand feet. I noticed the Argenteum with its glorious 
mass of white flowers and long, deep green, leaves; and the Arhoreum, so 
common in the valleys of Sikkim. All kinds of ferns, begonias, orchids 
and wild hydrangeas sprang from the sides of the track. Dew drops hung 
scintillating from the tips of foliage which laid brushing fingers on us as 
we passed. Gigantic creepers swung gracefully in twined curves from the 
roof of interlaced boughs. 


The way was not easy here, where the valley was almost choked 
with the luxuriance of growing things. The track became so vague as to 
be almost non-existent and our feet. were snared by the tangle of grasses 
and plants that were intertwined along the floor of the dim woods, Often 
the track was only discoverable by instinct or some landmark half-remem- 
bered by one of the coolies, Sometimes the way led upwards by a natural 
stairway of rocks, supplemented witb a stone here and there inserted by 
man, where the step was too great; and, even with these aids, we had often 
to scramble up with a ready hand for rhododendron and tree-roots. 


Landslips and fallen trees considerably delayed our march and 
upset our bearings at many points. I believe the track would have been 


The Kazi of Yoksun and his wife. 


Forest near Nibi, 


11 


easier had we started out at a later date, when either the herdsmen driving 
their yaks up to Jongri or the salt-traders, working between Nepal and 
Sikkim, would have cleared the way. With the exception of a friend of 
mine from Darjeeling, who had pushed through to Jongri at the end of 
December, we were the first to open the route this year and to contend 
with the accumulated debris of winter. 


The gradient was very great at many puints. Often there was a 
sequence of ascents, which ended in steep zig-zags, and descents plunging 
us deep into the valley where the thunderous waters of the river could be 
heard below. From a clearing of the forest, looking southwards, I had a 
good view of the green plateau of Yoksun with its fields and buts and 
the Kazi’s house below which our camp had been. It seemed so near, yet 
it was a full two hours’ march away. The landscape tailed off into the 
distance with the long spur of Pamionchi on which the gumpa was just 
visible through a morning mist. We crossed several brooks of crystal water, 
rippling and cascading through the slender stipes and delicate fronds of 
maidenhair ferns, and by noon we reached Tzubuk which is a tiny clear 
space of level ground, a crows’-nest masked by dense vegetation. 


There was just room for the camp on this grassy shelf, and T 
pitched my tent in the middle under the twisted branches of a giant oak 
tree, on a slight rise. Only a faint light from an overcast sky filtered through 
the tracery of leaves and boughs overhead. The tree-trunk was hollow, 
and its burnt cavity showed that it must have served as a shelter for some 
previous traveller, The coolies tents were pitched on the other side of the 
tree, at a short distance, and soon the glow of the camp fire and its cheery 
crackle converted desolation into a “home from home”, Luncheon was 
served and proved more than welcome. 


The day’s march, though fairly toilsome, had been a short one, for 
I wished to avail myself of the opportunity to study the local flora. I spent 
the afternoon botanising; and with the help of two coolies, forced a way 
down to the Rathong for about half-a-mile through a very dense thicket. 
Kukri knives had to be used freely to cut down rhododendron and bamboo 
stems which grew in every direction. 


I returned from below at sunset and found the coolies drinking tea 
and chatting gaily near their tent. I always found it most interesting to 
hear their travel-talk and simple philosophy (partly translated to me by the 


12 
Sirdar ) and I may say that I have nothing but admiration for their un- 
failing cheerfulness and their simple way of life. Their hardiness is amazing, 
yet I suppose comfort is an uaknown quantity to those who can sleep as 
soundly on a hard rock as a child in bed, and who can appreciate the con- 
venience of an iron load-carrier as a pillow! 


Eventually I retired to my tent and, as the night deepened, I 
hear 1 the coolies’ voices fade gradually to a murmur, then into silence. 
Far away a cuckoo sounded his fairy notes; and my lamp flickered, 
reminding me that it was time to sleep. 


The next morning was bright, with a fresh breeze blowing down 
the Rathong valley. Barometrical observations gave the height of the camp 
as 6700 feet. The conditions of the track ahead being purely conjectural, 

_I was hoping to reach Jongri on the same day, failing which a halt would 
be necessary at Bakim. Jongri is just over sixteen miles from Tzubuk, 
and nearly seven thousand feet higher. However, to reckon on so many 
miles per hour is always impossible in mountain travel, where road-condi- 
tions, gradient and altitude are such preponderant and varying factors, 
Reference to the appendix, at the end of this account, will show how one’s 
speed drops as one gets off the beaten track. 


Notwithstanding all my prearrangements in the packing of provi- 
sions and distribution of loads, it was not an easy matter to get the coolies 
early on the move, especially from camping-places. With a heroic effort, 
however, the Sirdar succeeded in hastening the packing of tents and baggage 
and by seven o'clock, the column of twenty-seven men was moving snake- 
wis2 on its way towards Bakim. ‘Ronnie” led the way, barking with his 
always new delight at the prospect of another march. He raced on ahead, 
up and down the coolie-line, in and out among the men’s feet, presumably 
after quite imaginary birds, I am sure he must have gone twice as far as 
we in the day ; and the burning question of “speed” certainly did not worry 
him in the least. 


Tt was still too early for the sunbeams to have penetrated the 
depths of the valley; yet above us, looking upwards, was a delicate 
arabesque of blue sky glimpsed through the chinks of green leaves. At first 
the way was more or less a continuation of yesterday’s conditions, The 
passage in my diary ends with the remark “dense forest with short ups 
and downs; ground thickly carpeted with dead leaves, concealing slippery 


* Ronnie” 


13 


stones”. In fact the greatest precautions had to be taken by the coolies 
who carried my cameras and other scientific instruments; for a skid at 
such a place would have meant disaster and my deprivation of some 
essential to the journey, 


We came to an enormous outcrop of brilliant biotite gneiss which 
leant its forty-foot height over the path so that twenty coolies could have 
sheltered under its slant. A little further on, following the advice of two 
coolies who apparently knew the way, we took a short-cut to the right by 
a very steep descent and.a climb up a rocky ladder, where again we had to 
pull ourselves up partly by clinging to rhododendron roots. Within half- 
an-hour this brought us back on to the main track, having avoided the 
detour of following a deep ravine which cut into the main valley at an angle. 
From here onwards, the ground was more level and, after a march of nearly 
two hours from camp, we reached a place called Nibi, which is a good 
camping site, much larger than that of Tzubuk, similarly situated in a 
clearing of the forest, At one end of the open space were the remains of a 
shelter made of plaited bamboos, no doubt the refuge of a yak herdsman. 
I halted here for a while to consult my aneroids and found that we had 
only gained six hundred-feet from Tzubuk. And now the walking was 
somewhat easier, though the track continued its winding course through 
the dense trees, slightly undulating. 

Round a sharp bend a distant murmur of water could be heard, 
gradually swelling into a mighty roar as we pushed on. An abrupt drop 
down a narrow and slippery path brought us to the source of the thunders. 
This was the Praig Chu, whose waters, leaping and bounding among the 
huge boulders of its bed, pour down in a cataract here. 


The Praig Chu starts from the Aluktang Glacier and, flowing 
almost due South for about ten miles, as the crow flies, meets the Rathong 
Chu at a point some two hundred yards from the rapids. The latter, rising in 
the moraine of the Rathong Glacier, runs at first parallel to the Praig, and 
then turns South-East about three miles before their confluence. Between 
them they: drain the labyrinth of glaciers lying between the great spurs 
which shoot from Kabru southwards, The Rathong* is swelled on the 


* From enquiries I made on my return, I gathered that the whole stretch of the river from 
the Rathong Glacier to its confluence with the Ringbi Chu is known as the Rathong Chu; the 
Praig Chu and all other feeders to' it being considered witutary. The Indian Survey map 
describes that reach of the river from where it swings south-eastwards before receiving the waters 
of the Praig Chiu to their actual meeting as the * Kokchurang Chu”, which seems to be mislead- 
ing, as the river, both before the turn and after its union with the Praig, is definitely known as 
the Rathong Chu; and no engutries I could make discovered any knowledge of the 
name “ Kokchurang Chu”, 


14 


right bank by streams rising on the slopes of the northernmost spurs of the 
Singalella Range, taking its waters from the Eastern side of that water- 
shed ; and on the left bank by the watercourses of the West side of the 
Jongri spur, which projects southwards from Kabru. The Praig Chu is 
fed by the innumerable streams down the Eastern side of the Jongri spur; 
and by those of the Western side of the Pandim-Jubonu Range, with all the 
runnels from the hanging glaciers around those peaks. 


We crossed the Praig by a small and very doubtfully secure ee 
of planks which were green with moss and rotten, and then began the steep 
climb to the Jongri highlands. Leaving the Praig Chu to the right, we 
climbed by a very steep zig-zag up the side of the mountain overlooking 
the Rathong Chu. Soon we turned north-easterly up an even steeper path, 
through a forest of oaks, gigantic magnolias, stunted pines, bamboos (smaller 
than those we had left in the. valley) and two kinds of rhododendrons: 
Argenteum and Falconeri, the latter some forty feet high with long shiny 
leaves.. This brought us, through a thousand feet, to Bakim (8310 feet) 
at noon, where I halted an hour for the coolies to have their meal, as we 
had a long march ahead. They settled down in batches to finish cooking 
their rice, which had been half-boiled, to save time before the morning’s 
hasty start. While they were lighting fires and eating I improved the 
shining hour by observing the near-by vegetation. There were now magnifi- 
cent. Abies Brunoniana and silver fir, their branches decorated with bunches 
of moss and festooned with creepers. Many Brunoniana trees must have 
been ‘a hundred feet high and twenty feet in girth at the foot, 


The weather continued fine, but it was gradually. becoming over- 
cast and colder. We took to the road again just after one o'clock, up 
through a close-set forest of bamboos which met above our heads like a long, 
vaulted corridor in some dim Gothic castle. The regularity was peculiar, 
but was broken at places by bamboo stems thrown by winter storms 
athwart the track; and here the Aukris had to be produced to cut our way 
through in the hulf-light, 

- I sighted some snow-cocks feeding on juniper berries; and was 
surprised to notice the tameness of these birds, They allowed me to 
approach within ten yards or so before scuttling away among the trees, 


_ A fairly easy, if rather steep climb of forty minutes brought us 
up another thousand feet; and here the bamboos had given place to giant firs. 


A halt at Bakim. 


Rhododendron Argenteum. 
Yellowish-white flowers, suffused with 
pink. Deep green leaves. 

(One ninth natural size). 


15 


We crossed a clearing carpeted with thick grass and strewn with wild 
strawberries in flower and passed up into the fir-wood beyond, where juniper 
and many species of rhododendron were growing; but many of the trees 
were blasted by the cold, 


Here the weather changed rather suddenly. Mist or cloud swept 
up about us and wrapped us round for the rest of the day. A cold North 
wind sprang up; and this and the damp vapour made the surroundings 
appear pretty desolate for the time. On to Jongri the way lies along the 
spine of the ridge and is a sequence of level stretches and short climbs, not 
so steep as those lower down. 


At 11,000 feet we met the first patches of snow, lying in drifts 
under the shade of trees, where, exposed to the sun, it had thawed to slush. 
We traversed magnificent forests of rhododendrons; but on reaching 12,500 
feet, the species degenerated into the alpine varieties, notably Hodgsont and 
Nivale. The latter is one of the hardiest of woody plants. 


At six o'clock night overtook us and the cold became intense, 
with a chilling mist floating round the mountain. I passed several groups of 
coolies gathering brushwood for the camp-fire, of which need, instinct always 
warns them when they get near the fuel limit. They had piled wood high 
on top of their loads, and, in the misty obscurity of the dusk their gnome- 
like figures appeared most eerie, toiling upwards to fire and rice, We waded 
in soft snow for what seemed like an eternity and, after a short climb to a 
pass, at 13,450 feet, we crossed a slight hollow and reached Jongri at 7-15 
p.m. Some of the more energetic coolies had already arrived and the stragg- 
lers were all in within an hour. The first thing for me was a fire and tea, 
then shelter ; and the coolies, too, always considered shelter quite secondary 
so long as they had fire and rice. . 


Jongri has two stone huts, but as these were innocent of doors 
or windows, and were very tumbledown, I pitched my tent ona knoll 
above, from where I hoped to have a clear view all round. The coolies made 
themselves thoroughly at home in the shelters, inside which they lit huge 
fires and settled down to forget the weariness of the day in steaming cups 
of tea. We had actually been over twelve hours on the road, with aggregate 
halts of less than two hours. “Ronnie”, still irrepressible, and myself fed 
together in one of the huts, by a fire, where the Sirdar came to discuss the 
next day’s plans, 


DAWN 
ON 
KABRU 


16 


We were still enveloped in mist; but presently a light easterly 
breeze sprang up and the sky showed signs of clearing. It was the night 
of a full moon, which by ten o’clock was well above the horizon, glimmering 
like a pale ghost through the haze. 


Long after I had retired to my tent, when opening its small window 
to hang out the thermometers, I was met by one of those unforgettably 
impressive visions of the mountains. The mist had quite blown clear from 
the Jongri spur, revealing to the North-East the magnificent peaks of 
Pandim and Jubonu soaring, so it seemed, in middle heavens, above the 
clouds which shrouded their lower slopes. Their crests glittered with silvery 
moonshine like fairy cloud-castles, impalpable butresses with their aerial 
pinnacles spired to the heavens. Gradually the vapour drifted towards the 
Guicha La and only Pandim remained wreathed with a halo of mist across 
the great Southern precipice, above which its massive snowy head was 
thrown against the dark purple sky. To the West, the undulating highlands 
of Jongri rolled away, thinly covered with moonlit snow, to the dark outline 
of the Kang La ridge. 


I slipped inside my sleeping-bag, busy with speculations on the 
possibility of seeing next day the greater snow-capped giants; which had so 
far been hidden by mist and near hills; and was thus kept awake for some 
time, The temperature had dropped to 29° F-, so that. my sleeping-bag 
proved barely sufficient to keep off the cold, and I felt too chilly to get up 
and unpack the extra blankets which were reserved for greater heights, 


_ THE FOLLOWING morning, in accordance with orders given 
to the Sirdar, I was woken up at 4-15a,m. I had planned to goon a local 
excursion with the Sirdar and two camera coolies, and I was delighted to 
grant a morning's leave to the rest of the party. I was well aware of the 
climatic conditions of the higher regions of Sikkim, where usually the early 
mornings are clear, and, about an hour or so after sunrise, clouds come up 
from the lower valleys, clinging on to the higher peaks for the rest of the 
day. I therefore hurried as much as possible and by 4-45 a.m. I was out 
of the tent. The air struck sharp, but it was a perfectly still night, with 
not a breath of wind. The moon had nearly completed its orbit and was 
about to dip behiad the heights of the Kang La, 


Kang La Nagma. 


Pe 


Sunrise on Kabru. 


Kabru ( 24,015 feet ). 


Little Kabru, Kabru, 
Dome and Forked Peak. 


17 


At first we set off in a north-westerly direction, crossing undulat- 
ing pastures covered with tufts of long, dried grass. Here and there grew 
low bushes of alpine aromatic rhododendrons, with their curled leaves show- 
ing black against the white, scattered patches of snow. An hour later we 
struck to the North over rough ground strewn with angular granitic rocks. 
This brought us, in half-an-hour, to a Gap situated on the South-Western 
flank of Kabur, and, suddenly in the pale light of dawn, with not a speck of 
cloud or vapour in the sky, a glorious sight unfolded itself before my eyes. 

Here was a colossal amphitheatre of giant mountains. In the 
middle, Kabru dominated the landscape, with the whole of its Southern face 
visible, Against the dim blue of the dawn-sky its sharp white spine stood 
out, sweeping up at either end into a crest; and, below, the massive slopes 
swept down to the depths of the Rathong valley, where the shadows of 
night still lingered. 

To the left of Kabru, from a gradual slope of deep snow, Little 
Kabru reared its solitary peak. Its Southern face, in which is a great 
hanging glacier, plunged down into the valley at an angle of fifty. degrees, 
Further to the left the eye followed a long spur of rocky heights with a 
glacier horizontally along its snowy spine, ending in the buttress-like Kang 
Peak, overlooking the Kang La, as if it had been placed there by Nature 

to repulse any attack on the pass. 

To the right of Kabru, just in front of its North-Eastern spur, 

rose the massive Dome with its thick mantle of snew; again to its right, 
further South, we saw the jagged heights of the Forked Peak with its fluted 
icy curves of a delicate construction unparalleled by any I have seen else- 
where in the Himalaya. The panorama terminated with ridges of rock, 
near the Gap of Kabur, of the most fantastic architecture imaginable. 
And all the time the eyes were drinking in this lovely picture, Nature 
proved herself a perfect painter as well as draughtsman. 

The sky, which was dark at first, slowly faded through the delicate 
shades of blue, then, high above the peaks, began to shine with pale mauve 
which grew faintly into a flush of red, glowed brighter with the deeper 
fires of dawn, and last radiated molten gold from the sparkling summit of 
Kabru with the swift rays of the rising sun. As the first sunbeams struck 
Little Kabru, the sky deepened with a pink flush and-the whole landscape 
reflected its fires—the pure snow was dyed orange and pink, ‘and, as the sun 
breasted the mountains, the deep amber turned to a lake of golden light. 


THR VALE 
OF 
ALUKTANG 


18 


For two long hours I stood gazing at these gigantic citadels of 
snow and studying their architecture through my field glasses, My ambi- 
tions carried me in thought up to the broad summit of Kabru by the 
Rathong and Kabru glaciers and on to the zéré above them. This appeared 
possible, if difficult; and I passed on to the mental conquest of the Dome; 
but imagination boggled half-way up the great glacier across its Southern 
face. I had dreamt myself up the Rathong glacier, along its lateral moraine, 
to where the slanting glacier joins it behind a spur diagonally across the 
face of the mountain, I had struggled up this glacier as far as the upper 
ice-fall, where ridge and glacier ended; and here came back to earth with 
the realisation that no mountain can be considered climbable unless it is 
actually tested. As for the Forked Peak, with its precipitous wall of some 
four thousand feet of roches moutonées and its icy eaves, unless the would- 
be climber is prepared to take uncommonly great risks, he will perhaps do 
better to attack the mountain from any other side than that which I could 
see from this view-point, In my opinion, even the boldest mountaineer 
may be obliged to allow this peak to remain among the untrodden giants of 
the Himalaya. 

I was in deep thought when, turning South, I saw clouds coming 
up the Rathong valley with great velocity ; but I had won the race, for my 
photographic work was over. Within ten minutes, armies of clouds had 
reached the higher level of the Rathong glacier, and were sweeping up to- 
wards the peaks, Meantime, another cloud attacked the Gap of Kabur, 
and, before I had time to pack my cameras and instruments, we were 
surrounded by a dense, cold mist. We retraced our steps, and after a long 
hour’s walk through a white blinding opacity, we reached the huts before 
noon, where a good lunch and hot tea awaited us. 


DURING my absence in the morning the coolies had had ample 
time to rest and recover from the fatigues of the previous long march. 
With new life, therefore, we started at 12-30 p.m. for Aluktang. In the 
dismal mist, which still hung about the mountains, the beginning of the 


"journey was uninteresting, especially as an anticlimax to the glorious view 


we had just left. 


Little Kabru ( 21,970 feet ) 


Forked Peak (21,140 feet ) 


Looking North, 
from the bridge over the Praig Ohu. 


Pandim 
and the upper course 
of the Praig Chu. 


19 


We followed a north-easterly direction across the undulating table- 
land of Jongri, which, at this time of the year, has but little grass, The 
mountains being concealed by clouds, I paid more attention to the flora; 
but this, too, was poorly represented with dwarf rhododendrons; and the 
only alpine flowers I noticed were gentians. 


Here the Jongri plateau ended suddenly in a plunge of 1550 feet 
‘to the valley of Aluktang. The descent, though mostly by zig-zags, was 
fairly abrupt, and, about half-way down, the camera porters were delayed 
by having to negotiate a steep slope where soft snow lay deep among rhodo- 
- dendron bushes, As we were nearing the valley, the track improved and 
we entered a forest of fir, juniper and several kinds of rhododendrons. We 
were then, at least temporarily, back again on the level of trans-alpine 
vegetation. The sound of water was heard and we soon reached our old 
acquaintance, the Praig Chu—but on its upper course this time. We first 
had to cross a tributary stream flowing south-eastwards, then, by a couple 
of rickety wooden planks, the Praig Chu itself. 


As we were crossing the river the weather cleared most unexpec- 
tedly. Looking from the bridge up the valley, the eye took in thousands 
of glistening boulders, hardly covered by the icy water which foamed and 
raced among them, This sunlit picture filled the foreground, while further 
up the valley the shadows of hills barred the scene with darkness, In the 
background, the gleaming heights of Pandim rose above the shadows, out 
of which the few stunted firs, silhouetted black against the snows, added 
the last ethereal touch of beauty to the landscape. And this was to be our 
last view of trees for some time, for we were entering the unwooded levels. 


Beyond this place, and for the rest of the forward journey, of an 
unknown duration as yet, we had to depend on what fuel we could carry 
and to economise as much as possible for the greater heights. The coolies 
whole-heartedly endorsed my suggestion to make the last unrestricted 
blaze a brilliant one, Under the Sirdar’s direction the valley-woods re- 
sounded to the echo of the Awkris, working literally at full swing. As I 
anticipated that the coolies would indulge the imp of destruction to some 
extent in their delight in attacking the last of the trees, I went on ahead 
and made use of the delay caused to have a closer view of the head of the 
valley. 


20 


I followed up the left bank of the Praig Chu by a stony track, 
indeterminate at many places, winding among rhododendron bushes and beds 
of dried-up rivulets which traversed the slopes of the mountains on the right. 
The gradient was gentle but steady, and after an hour’s walk I came to 
Thangme—a level, open space where long grass, now withered, indicated a 
yak grazing station. Here the valley became wider, with a long, steep, rocky 
spur rising to the West and the slopes of Jubonu to the East. I tried in vain 
to catch a glimpse of its peaks above, but evidently I was too near the lower 
flanks of the mountain to allow a view of the upper slopes. Low clouds in 
the North concealed the head of the valley in the direction of Kangchenjunga 
which I had not seen so far; but Pandim remained very conspicuous the 
whole afternoon and towered above me as I approached. 


Half-an-hour’s walk up a stony track, then across a second trickle, 
brought me to a broad, level ground on which I decided to fix the camping 
site for the night. I was a long way ahead of the coolies and, while waiting 
for the tents to arrive, I took a stroll towards the Praig Chu which ran a few 
hundred yards to the West. At this place the river was a mere stream 
trickling along the bottom of its rocky bed, which was several feet below the 
level of the camping ground. Tiny bushes of aromatic rhododendrons grew 
on the banks of the river among the rocks. To my delight I discovered two 
species of alpine flowers, a Potentilla and a gentian. It was a long hour till 
all the baggage arrived, during which time I watched the sunset on Pandim, 
which was a magnificent sight. Its snowy mantle was tinged a pale red, 
which deepened as the sun sank behind the mountains to the West. 


At last the coolies came up, with a big quantity of wood piled on top 
of their loads. The tents were pitched and two roaring fires were lit. I had 
a busy evening making my plans for the rest of the tour, which I reckoned 
to include also ascents on neighbouring mountains, whence I could survey the 
district and ascertain, if possible, the prevailing conditions beyond the Guicha 
La. I took careful barometrical observations, which gave the height of our 
camp as 13,150 feet, or about 300 feet lower than that of Jongri. My 
aneroids and all other instruments had worked perfectly so far, and all I could 
wish was favourable weather to allow good photographic work. 


Our camp at Aluktang, though exposed to the unexpected gusts of 
southerly winds, was well situated and not far from either fuel or water. I 
therefore decided to make it provisionally a Base camp, and to leave a small 


The vale of Aluktang. 
Looking South toetds theheights of Jongri. 


Kangchenjunga, and the valley of Aluktang. 


DAWN ON 
KANGCHEN- 
JUNGA 

AND PANDIM. 


21 


tent, two loads of rice and a case of provisions, in charge of a coolie, the young 
servant and my dog. I was reluctant to leave “Ronnie”; but after due con- 
sideration, I decided that it was necessary to do so in order to avoid possible 
trouble and delays. 


The night was moonlit and cold, with the temperature dropping 
to freezing point inside my tent. The valley was still; but high up the wind 
was passing swiftly across the sharp-edged rocks of the Western sky-line, 
producing a hissing sound which, at intervals, disturbed the silence of the 
night. 


IT WAS a clear and sharp morning, long before sunrise, when I set 
off to climb to the upper slopes of the valley, in the direction of Tingchingkang, 
or the northernmost peak of Jubonu. As on the previous day, I left the 
coolies at the camp and only took the Sirdar and the camera porters with me. 


‘When I was leaving the tent I caught the first. glimpse of Kangchen- 
junga—by moonlight. Pandim dominated the foreground and, being close, 
shot up to a great apparent height, so that the giant in the distance was 
hardly recognisable as the third highest peak in the world. It was dwarfed 
by distance, and I could only see a section of its Eastern ridge peeping from 
behind the spur to my left. 


The ascent of a trackless mountain dimly lit by the moon, was not as 
easy as I had imagined the previous evening. The memory of two nasty falls 
remained with me for some days afterwards; but, luckily, the cameras survived 
the ordeal, thanks to special precautions. As we climbed, Kangchenjunga 
gradually revealed itself, until its beautiful pyramidal peak appeared in the 
distance. My scheme to follow the ridge of a spur leading straight to the 
upper slopes of the valley did not prove satisfactory, and I had to look for a 
more practicable way along the steep, dried-up bed of a stream. Dawn over- 
took us while struggling up the last stretch; and when I emerged from behind a 
side ridge, which temporarily concealed the view, I found myself perched on a 
rock (14,010 feet), whose few square yards of level ground offered an attractive 
halting place. I had gained 860 feet in 55 minutes—by no means a record ; 


22 


but, considering the condition of the ground and the time wasted in the semi- 
darkness, I was pleased to have reached this spot just as the first rays of the 
sun touched the summit of Kangchenjunga. 


What this sunrise lacked in breadth, as compared with that I had 
seen on Kabru, it made up in height. Mighty Kangchenjunga reared its 
majestic head high above its buttresses of rock and snow, dyed red in the 
dawn-light. The face of its second peak (27,820 feet), by far the most con- 
spicuous from this point of view—was visible for its whole length, in the 
shape of a pyramid, with one rocky flank dropped almost vertically a couple of 
thousand feet. At many places it seemed too steep to retain the mantle of 
eternal snow. The highest crest (28,150 feet), peeped over the left shoulder 
of Kangchenjunga behind its-Southern spur, from which rose the Talung 
Peak. 


The sky-line was formed by the great Eastern spur which sloped 
down from the 27,820 feet crest, to vanish behind the heights of Pandim. 
This colossal shoulder of snow was buttressed all along by enormous crags 
which jutted out from the ridge, casting sharp, black shadows on the dazzling 
whiteness. 

Closer to us than Kangchenjunga, between the Talung and Guicha 
glaciers, a solitary peak stood up, outlined faintly against the far snows of the 
giant. At first sight this appeared almost part of Kangchenjunga itself; but 
a closer examination by binoculars showed me that it formed part of the zig- 
zag spur which shoots East of Kabru in the direction of the Guicha La. Its 
Southern face seemed extreemly steep and fluted, rising out of the semi-circular 
head of the Guicha glacier. Further away, I discovered several traces of 
recent avalanches across the great snowy slope of Kangchenjunga which dips 
into the Talung glacier. 


I then turned my attention to Pandim, whose snowy head, bravely 
set on broad shoulders, rose magnificently from their robe of white. From 
the shoulders, this mantle swept down in gentle curves to the brink of an 
appalling precipice where the snow forsook the bare rock for a sheer fall of 
over three thousand dizzy feet. The outflow of the upper névé, where the 
excess snow of the Southern face shoots down the abyss, can be seen at the 
bottom of the photograph facing this page. 

To the South-West, the heights of Jongri and the Kang Peak were 
silhouetted against the sky-line. The sun was well above the horizon before 


Second crest of Kangchenjunga, 27,820 feet. 
(Telephoto from Western slopes of Jubonu). 


Dawn on Pandim 

(22,020 feet). 

(Telephoto from Western 
slopes of Jubont). 


The Guicha glacier and heights to the North- 
West of Guicha La (from camp IV). 


Kangchenjunga, and 
Pandim. 

Moraine and source of 
Praig Chu, in foreground. 


TO THE 
GUICHA 
LA, 


23 


I finished devouring these mountains through my telescope; and a steep but. 
easy descent, over another route, more to the northward, with several halts on 
the way to take photographs, brought us back to the camp before eight o'clock. 

Having given my final instructions to the coolie and the servant, who 
were to remain here until further orders, I pushed on in a northerly direction. 
The parting from my dog had been rather a wrench; and for a good half hour 
the valley re-echoed with his deep bark—as if he were trying to recall the 
gradually disappearing caravan. 


BEYOND Aluktang the gradual ascent continued and the mountain 
became more and more bare. A couple of miles away, at the head of the 
valley, a moraine was visible, with its wedge-shaped heap of greyish debris 
pointing down towards us. And by now, in sharp contrast to the shadows 
below, the snows of Kangchenjunga and Pandim raised their heads above, 
glittering in the morning sun. 

About a mile further, we passed a mendong which eee a 
number of inscribed stones, indicating the sanctity of the vale. Aluktang is 
visited every year by Lamas who come to offer their prayers to the goddess of 
Kangchenjunga, and no better atmosphere could have been selected for con- 

templation than the desolate solitude of this great valley. Near the mendong 
were the ruins of a small hut built of layers of stone, with no roof, barely 
‘sufficient as a protection against the southern squalls—made, perhaps, to 
shelter these Lamas on their occasional pilgrimages. 

We soon reached the moraine, and were scrambling up its pile of 
angular stones, when a sudden change took place in the weather. Threatening 
grey clouds appeared above Jongri, coming up towards Aluktang. Before long 
they had engulfed the valley, and we enjoyed a repetition of the previous 
day’s chilling mist. 

We then followed the raised left edge of this moraine, which a little 
further on mingled with the debris of a couple of other terminal moraines of 
two glaciers from high up on Pandim. After half-an-hour of more or less 
gymnastic balancing on treacherous stones, we reached the shores of a glacial 


24 


lake, enclosed between the lateral moraine of the Aluktang glacier on the left. 
and the tongue of a Pandim glacier on the right. Notwithstanding the drizzle, 
which had now turned into sleet, a short halt was made here to survey the 
little that could be seen of the surroundings 


é I estimated this lake to be some 500 yards long and 300 wide. The 
whole of its surface, except a small portion of its Northern end, was frozen’ 
hard and would have been ideal for skating; but I had unluckily left my 
skates in Bombay. On examination I found the ice to average about three 
inches thickness, and several big stones flung from a fair height failed to crack 
it. This was rather a surprising contrast to the banks of the lake, where 
traces of alpine flowers were still visible, and to the surrounding hills which 
were almost bare of snow. The Southern shores of this tarn consisted of a 
morainic sediment of pebbles, which’ presumably also formed the basin of the 
lake. Having taken barometrical. observations which gave the height as 
14,310 feet, I pushed on and skirted the right bank of the lake, until I reached 
its northernmost point. Here a small stream, trickling down the moraine, 
emptied its milky water into the lake. From this point, looking South, the 
scenery reminded me of my 1919 trip to Eastern Sikkim. Except for the 
higher altitude and for the presence of moraines, this mere could have been 
taken for the Changu Lake, on the way to the Nathu La.* The similarity 
was specially marked by the same narrowing Southern outlet and the same 
ring of contrasting black hills. Curiously enough the dull, dreary weather, 

“under which I had seen the Changu Lake, was identically reproduced this time 
‘on the way to the Guicha La. 


_ A gradual ascent over a slope sparsely tufted with long, withered 
grass—the last signs of fodder for yaks—brought us to a second lake, much 
smaller than the first, and almost dry. After a short climb across a ridge and 
down to a hollow, we reached a broad open space with an almost level surface 
of sand and pebbles. This was the basin of another tarn and over its space a 
rivulet spread out, flowing down into the second lake from the glacier above. 
The place is called Chemthang, and stands at 15,325 feet. 

The Sirdar, thinking in this a suitable camping-ground, was about 
to give the order to halt; but a couple of conspicuous boulders on the opposite 
‘hillside, attracted my attention and I decided to push on. Our tents were 
pitched at the foot of these rocks which offered a certain amount of protection 


* One of the passes in Eastern Sikkim leading into Tibet, 


Glacial lake below Chemthang. 


Guicha glacier and pyramidal Peaks, 


Forked Peak and heights to the North-West of Chemthang. 
(from station of observation on Western spur of Pandim). 


25 


against the cold wind. As the tents were being opened, a squall struck us, 
followed by a heavy snowfall. 


It was hardly three o'clock, and I had a long afternoon before me, 
which I spent in adding a few notes to the diary of the journey; whilst outside, 
through the small window of my tent, I could see the snowflakes whirling 
round against the grey sky. I spent the later part of the afternoon with the 
coolies, drying my boots by their fire. The smoke inside their tent had literally 
choked the atmosphere so that one’s eyes smarted abominably; but they them- 
selves revelled in it and would never do without their blaze. 


In the evening, a thick layer of snow covered the mountain-side; 
and the outer fly of my tent bent under its soft weight. When I disappeared 
inside my sleeping-bag, on top of which were stacked all the available blankets, 
the thermometer registered 21° F. 


The next morning, when I opened my tent, I was met by an expanse 

of whiteness. There was not a cloud in the sky and the fresh morning air 
sparkled like wine. The whole surroundings seemed ethereally clean, as if 
newly-made; and in that limpid atmosphere, one felt that one could throw a 
stone easily to the peaks on the horizon. Away to the West, only the snowcaps 
of the Forked Peak and the beginnings of the spurs could be seen. From 
this position however, location was most confusing, for the camp was deep in 
the glacier-bay which includes the Aluktang and Guicha glaciers. I therefore 
stepped back eastwards some two hundred feet. up the slopes of a Western 
spur of Pandim. This was fairly steep and rocky, thinly snow-covered ; and 
I exercised all the care taught me by the previous day’s mishaps. The cameras, 
instruments and myself were all safe when we reached an excellent vantage- 
point, whence could be seen the tops of the Southern and Eastern spurs of 
Kabru, with all their many glaciers and ridges slanting down. From the 
point of view of local survey this was the very place. 


Looking across the glacier-valley westwards I saw above the dark 
shadows of a long, irregular ridge, the white crests of the Forked Peak. This 
side of it appeared just as impregnable as its Southern flank (as seen two days 
before). The Dome was mostly hidden behind the shadowed ridge; but it 
appeared climbable, if with difficulty, from the Aluktang glacier, the upper 
slopes of which I could see. Another ascent I imagined was on to the saddle 
of the Eastern spur of Kabru, by way of a glacier to the North-West and then 
hetween two gendarmes which threw their heads high up on the sky-line. 


26 


The glacier I mention might be described as the Main glacier, sincé 
it occupies the centre of the glacier-bay, lying between’ the Aluktang and 
Guicha glaciers. It showed no signs of crevasses, and, if the snow is in good 
condition, I believe it should prove practicable to a roped party. Towards 
the head of the Main glacier, on the right, an almost perpendicular wall of 
black rock rose a sheer thousand feet from its visible base. Behind this crag, 
the tip of the Talung Peak was just visible, dimly white above the black 
escarpment. This peak (whose height I make to be 23,080 feet on triangula- 

tion from camp IT on the Guicha La, at four miles distance) is situated on the. 
great West-of-South aréte of Kangchenjunga, midway between the 27,820 feet 
crest of that mountain and the North-Eastern peak of Kabru. Unfortunately 
none of the Kabru summits were visible here, from the slopes of Pandim. 


In the North, my attention was held by the beautiful icy pyramid 
which I had seen from Aluktang; but, from this nearer point of observation, 
I could clearly see a double-apex bridged by a curving shoulder. To its left, 
a col linked it up with another pyramid—the whole forming the horseshoe- 
head of the Guicha glacier. The latter was visible for its full length, inclined 
at about 23° and running South-East towards the Guicha La. Its surface 
was very hummocky. 


To its right, through a dark V-gap, a white section of the Kang- 
chenjunga Eastern Ridge walled-up the distance. Above this barrier floated 
a cloud of mist, which had, a moment before, shrouded the far view. To the 
right again of the V-gap, a ridge abruptly terminated the panorama with two 
huge rocks shooting straight up from the mountain-slope. These marked the 
heights of the Guicha La, 


One more word as to the Glacier-bay, which was crossed and re- 
crossed not only with spurs of the mountains, but also with the complex. 
moraines of the three ice-streams, Below us, the lateral moraines of the Main 
Glacier ran parallel, exactly like canal embankments, first East-of-South, then 
by a curve to the South where the Aluktang glacier joins this one. The 
surface of both these glaciers looked very rough and dirty. Frozen pools of. 
water lay among the amorphous chaos of the convergent moraines. 


Having completed my observations, I signalled down to the coolies 
to start on their march, and, by the time we reached camp, the heavy baggage: 
was again moving on its way to the Guicha La, <A puff of mist drifting up 
the valley heralded a change in the weather, confirmed by the clouds which 


Camp IV (below the Guicha La). 
Looking South, Jubonu in the distance. 


Looking South, from 
Camp Ii on Guicha La, 
(Main glacier and mor- 
ainic lakes, in the fore- 


ground, 
Valley of Aluktang and 
Praig Chu, in the dis- 
tance), 


Oamp II on Guicha La. 
Kangchenjunga in the distance. 


Guicha glacier (from 
camp IIT on Guicha La.). 


27 


soon followed in close succession; but it was only vapour this time—without 
snow. My immediate plans were to reach the Guicha La and to camp on the 
pass itself, so as to be all ready with cameras and other instruments before 
the dawn. 


The walking was fairly easy as far as the foot of the Guicha ridge, 
which we reached in half-an-hour. Here, however, we were confronted by a 
steep slope of about 1000 feet sweeping up to the Pass. To the left, through 
occasional clearings of mist, I could see the great vertical rocks which inclined 
their craggy heads to the North-East. From the force with which the clouds 
were being driven over the pass, I inferred that the wind was very strong on 
the heights. Because of the difficulty of moving in the mist, and for the sake 
of saving time, I decided to split the party for the first time on the journey. 
I therefore took only the Sirdar, the camera porters and two extra coolies for 
tent, fuel and food for the small party. The extra coolies were instructed 
to return to the lower camp for the night, where I left all the heavy 
stuff to follow the next morning, by which time I should have completed 
my surveying. 


The climb was very rough and tiresome at the beginning; at first 
some five hundred feet up over coarse rubble, and then, about half-way up, we 
had to negotiate a traverse over a stretch of loose snow, sloping diagonally 
across the mountain. A further climb of about 350 feet brought us to the 
Guicha La (16,430 feet), where a heap of stones in a snow-drift marked 
the Pass. 


A sharp, cold wind was blowing the clouds across the mountain; 
and in this hazy atmosphere I could hardly distinguish objects at thirty yards’ 
distance. After a vain search of twenty minutes to find a suitable tent-ground, 
I climbed to the North-West on to the sloping summits of the great rocks, 
which stood about a hundred feet higher than the Pass. Up here, there was 
a raised ledge on the South-West face of the rib which was enough to prevent 
the tent being blown over. A few square yards of the ground were levelled. 
with flat stones, and on top of this platform the tent was pitched, or rather 
secured with ropes and stones. Over the South-West parapet we had a sheer 
precipice overlooking the glacier-bay, the bottom of which was faintly visible 
through veils of mist; whilst to the North-East, a gentle down-slope of some 
thirty yards led to the edge of another steep plunge down to the Talung 
glacier, which was completely obscured by clouds. 


SUNRISE 
OVER THE 
SUBLIME 
QUEEN OF 
THE SNOWS. 


28 


The outer fly at the back of my tent came in very useful, by 
a cunning device of the Sirdar, who turned it into an annexe. Here we 
stacked the little luggage we had; and, soon after, the sibilant flaring of 
the Primus stoves and the bubbling of liquid promised me some hot 
soup. Notwithstanding all our precautions to make the tent as windproof 


as possible, the temperature inside dropped to 12° F.; and I can truthfully 


say that the loading of my photographic slides, with frozen hands, in a 
tent full of five men, proved a mighty task. 


The night was cold and very windy. On one or two occasions 
the tent shuddered terrifyingly under the gale; then I heard a crash— 
and for a moment I thought we were being blown over the edge—but it 
was only the roof of the annexe and kitchen which had collapsed on top 
of the baggage, dragging down a couple of ice-axes and saucepans. 


AT ABOUT four o'clock in the morning the wind abated and 
the mists showed signs of clearing. The moon, half-way up the. 
meridian, turned a streak of floating mist to pale silver. Gradually the 
clouds drifted away to, the North and revealed one of the most 
magnificent spectacles of my dreams, moonlit and phantastic. 


Slowly the moonlight gave way to the wan shades of the false 
dawn until the sunrise itself blazed over the mountains and lit every 
detail of this unequalled panorama. Kangchenjunga in the North claimed 
all my attention at first, rising from its shadowy depths to aerial heights. 
The second peak, at 27,820 feet, was the highest crest visible, flanked 
on either side by an icy saddle, cut off by the black spurs of the Talung 
Glacier-valley. 


The twilight did not last long; the rose of dawn had scarcely 
crept over the mountain when its amber fire swept up and shrivelled it. 
And first the strong sun lit a rising cloud of driven snow over the peak 
itself, where the high-altitude wind-currents still persisted. One by one 
the peak, and all the sharp facets of its Eastern shoulder were touched 
with golden flame, and the sky-line stretched out like an incandescent 


Sunrise on Kangchenjunga (from camp IT). 


Sunrise on Talung Peak (28,080 feet), 
Guicha glacier and pyramidal Peaks, in foreground. 


29 


filament of gold. In a short time the sun had topped the Eastern 
mountains and had driven the last shades of night from the deepest 
valleys. I watched the Hunter of the East chase the flying shadows 
down the whole length of the Guicha glacier, from the pyramidal Peaks 
to its snout. 


Kangchenjunga in the full light of morning must have made 
the most indifferent observer shiver with awe. The whole of its Southern 
face hung within a glance of one tiny eye—a stupendous wall from the 
27,820 crest to the Talung glacier 13,000 feet below. 


To the East, the shoulder sloped away with its enormous crags 
and buttresses of ice to the Zemu Gap, where it dipped suddenly into a 
snow-field in the Pass. It rose again to the heights of triple-crowned 
Simvu (22,300 feet), whose white shoulder I could see above the black, 
fissured rocks of a nearer spur. A little to the East, over the same rocks, 
Siniolchum (22,570 feet) thrust its lovely pinnacle above the distant haze. 


Westwards of Kangchenjunga I could see very little of the 
great Southern spur and nothing at all of Kabru. Over the Guicha 
glacier, and to the West of the pyramidal Peaks at its head, the Talung 
Peak and Saddle were visible. Practically due West, the Dome stood up 
above the central moraine of the triple-glacier-bay. South of this, the 
Forked Peak rose out of the valley, behind the Aluktang glacier. And 
looking almost due South, the meeting of the glaciers, their outflow into 
the frozen lake and the valley of the Praig Chu, all dwindled into the 
deep, shadowy distance. 


My original plan was to cross the Talung glacier and gain the 
Zemu Gap, and I turned my attention to this side of the Guicha La, I 
could see a slope of unbroken snow leading down to the eastward valley, 
and therein the Talung glacier, the surface of which appeared very messy, 
rather like a turbulent, rain-swollen river. At the foot of Kangchenjunga 
but little was visible of the extreme Northern end of that great snowy 
amphitheatre which forms the head of the glacier. A colossal rock, 
which seemed to have been hurled down the face of the mountain, lay 
among the drifts below. A ridge, running South-East, separated the 
Talung from the parallel Tongshyong glacier. To reach the Zemu Gap 
I planned to skirt the Southern end of this ridge and to pass up the 
corridor of the smaller snow-field. 


30 


I was studying the Zemu Gap itself when I heard a deafening 
crash from the direction of Kangchenjunga. Wheeling round I was just 
in time to see a colossal mass of snow and rocks cascading down the 
mighty Southern face. The rumbling of the rushing snow and _ boulders 
resounded and rocked round the valley, punctuated with distinct knocks 
from the stones as they rolled and leapt, and, as the avalanche bit any 
large obstacle, its snows were scattered in a polychromatic shower. I 
could not see the end of its fall, which was hidden by the nearer spurs; 
but the impact on the Talung glacier must have been terrific, for the 
whole of the Northern amphitheatre seethed with a spray of flying 
snow—like steam over a burst boiler, 


The photograph facing page 28, taken some twenty minutes 
before the avalanche, shows a black rock in the valley which was 
smothered in snow when the cloud dispersed. The actual fall lasted 
about ten seconds, during which several tons of rock and snow were 
flung down. I then examined by telescope the upper face of the mountain 
and soon discovered the exact spot whence the avalanche had started. 
It was at the foot of a pyramidal rock to the right of the second 
summit, where the first rays of the sun had proved sufficient to dislodge 
a coat of superficial snow. I estimated the altitude at 24,000 feet; and 
the fact that the avalanche came down uninterruptedly over the 9,000 feet 
to the glacier, proves the steepness of that part of the mountain’s face. 


The weather again became threatening and before nine o'clock 
heavy clouds rolled up from the Talung valley. Reviewing the situation, 
I decided to postpone for a day or two the crossing of the Talung 
glacier, and to push a camp higher up to a place whence I could have 
a better view of the surroundings, especially towards Kabru and the 
great Western aréte of Kangchenjunga. At the same time I would thus 
satisfy the desire which had been smouldering in me for the last few 
days, to set my ice-axe to work. 


There was little to choose in deciding on the route to reach an 
elevated point in the immediate neighbourhood. Though I was well 
equipped with all that was necessary for a party of six to force a way 
up across a snow-slope, the head of the Main glacier which had appeared 
to me attractive from Chemthang, did not seem to be as promising from 
this point of view. The Northern end of the Guicha glacier, along the 


Saxifraga Arctica (snow-white); 
Gathered among the rocks above the Guicha La, 
It is among the most arctic of the everlasting 
species of alpine mosses, (About 
one-sixth natural size), 


UP THE 
GUICEA 
GLACIER 
ON TO THE 
EASTERN 
SPUR OF 
KABRU, 


31 


cliffs of the pyramidal Peaks, likewise appeared a difficult slope, involving 
also the danger of falling stones from the steep rocks above. The only 
route that was left, with no apparent difficulties, was that along the 
Southern edge of the glacier, and this was my final choice. 


TO REACH the snout of the Guicha glacier we had to retrace 
our steps to the camp below, as the descent over the rocks to the 
North-West was totally out of the question. It was now 9-30 a.m. and 
we were again enveloped by clouds, so there was little time to spare. 
I sent a messenger down to stop the coolies coming up from Camp IV, 
but before the message reached them they had already got half-way. 
The descent was easy, except for the last bit over big, loose stones; and, 
in less than forty minutes, we reached the place where the coolies had 
camped the previous night. 


Here we replenished our stores, and I organised a party of five 
including the Sirdar, two camera porters and one of the best coolies; a 
strong lad who had up to now distinguished himself in being always the 
first to arrive at the destination of the days march. Our loads consisted 


. of strict necessities only; full equipment, warm clothing, two small ten- 


pound high-altitude tents and a Primus stove; rice and a few tinned 
provisions, enough for a day, with a little extra thrown in in case of 
emergency. The remaining coolies were ordered to re-establish their camp 
here; and I appointed the senior coolie to be in charge of the others 
during our absence. This was the venerable Lama of the party—an 
influential man, good enough for this post, but perhaps too old for any- 
thing requiring more exertion than giving orders. 


It was past eleven o'clock when we left camp. The weather 
conditions were not very bright, but in my optimistic way I was always 
looking forward to the time when the clouds should clear. Having 
surmounted a long mound, we reached the left edge of the Guicha glacier 
whose snout stretched across the bottom end of the V-gap, all confused 
with heaps of morainic rubbish. Here we came to a rocky spur which, 


32 


though toilsome at places, proved of great assistance in gaining some 
eight hundred feet height. At a few spots only, where the rocks were 
too steep and slippery, did we have to set foot on the glacier. The 
surface to our right was often extremely rough, with holes and small 
watercourses cutting diagonally across it; but no crevasses were noticeable. 
In a little less than two hours from the camp we had gained 1,200 feet, 
and stood at about 300 feet higher than the Guicha La. Here the 
ascent became steeper and we were confronted with a snow-field.. The 
surface-condition was fairly good, though in one step out of ten the foot 
broke through the crust, and one sank in the snow to below the knee. 
I took the lead myself for the first half hour, the porters and the Sirdar 
following at a few yard’s intervals. Then we reversed the order and the 
Sirdar had the task of beating the track. Occasional soundings with the 
ice-axe minimised the number of knee-deep plunges. 


It was bitterly cold and misty when we reached, at 1-30 p.m.,, 
the foot of a very steep snow-slope. JI had not realised until we had 
got nearer that this was the Western pyramidal peak I had seen at the 
head of the glacier from below. The aneroids gave the height as 17,050 
feet; and here we came across a “snow-bog” whose powdery surface, 
driven from the cliffs and slopes above, had settled on a gentle incline. 
It puzzled me at first what direction I was to follow, especially as the 
mist added to my uncertainty. To the left I was faced with a steep 
cornice whose slope was not a bit attractive; so I decided to strike to 
the right in the direction of a snow-saddle, which I had examined from 
the Guicha La. 


Before proceeding further we all needed a short rest and a halt 
of fifteen minutes was made for’a cup of hot tea, ready in the thermos 
flask. The crossing of the “snow bog” was very exhausting as one sank 
knee deep at each step, and we were tired when it camé to attacking 
subsequently an ice-fall which led to the saddle, South-West of the 
double-apex Pyramids. Here we roped-up to negotiate a series of sérucs 
which had choked up the chasms of the lower ice-fall. Further up the 
ice was shattered in all directions, forming rectangular masses cut across 
by cracks and clefts. I recollect more than one instance of an impasse 
where we had to retrace our steps; but on the whole we worked steadily 
through and within three-quarters of an hour had attained the lower 


33 


saddle between the two pyramids. Up here there was a very strong 
wind blowing, and no shelter apparent. 


It was about three o'clock and I planned to work round to the 
North of the double-apex Pyramid, hoping to find there not only leeward 
protection but also a better climbing route for the last lap. Without 
much difficulty we manoeuvred round the edge, and my sanguine expecta- 
tions were fulfilled by a promising slope leading to the upper saddle, 
which was faintly visible through a rift in the mist. The aneroid 
readings gave 17,930 feet and I estimated that another 800 feet separated 
us from the summit. The snow was in good condition; and an ascent 
over a fairly steep but easy slope brought us in one and a half hours to 
the upper saddle between the double apices. As we reached the higher 
levels we were again met by the full fury of the wind, and the cold was 
intense. Nothing could be seen of the surroundings beyond a few 
hundred yards, and, with our previous exertions, the mastery of one of 
the crests would have been pointless, besides involving considerable risk 
and discomfort. It was nearing five o'clock and time to.seek shelter for 
the night. Conditions were so unpleasant that I merely took altitude 
readings, showing 18,660 feet, and started the descent. 


A halt of ten minutes in this cold wind had proved sufficient 
to benumb my limbs, and I had some difficulty in taking the first steps. 
We effected the descent over the same track, all the time looking for a- 
tolerable camp-site. It is surprising how difficult it is to find even a few 
square yards of anything approaching level ground on these mountains, 
Eventually, as the night was drawing near, we had to be content with 
a rough shelter under the lee of an ice-cliff, beneath which was a slight 
hollow. Here the cold, lumpy ground was levelled as well as possible 
with the ice-axes, and our small tents were pitched in the _hollow.. 
Barometrical observations gave the height as 18,350 feet, or 1,825 feet. 
higher than our previous camp on the Guicha La. : 


The night was more than bitterly cold, the minimum temperature 
registered being 6° F-. The only effect of the height was that one of 
the coolies complained of severe headache; but this passed off with the 
administration of aspirin. I felt too tired myself to attempt any cooking 
on the Primus stove, but it was lit to prepare fresh tea, to which I 
added a few tinned provisions. This camp was only fifty feet lower than 


34 


that I had pitched five years before on: Kangchenjau glacier, and the 
memory of that trip passed like a dream through my mind as I fell 
sound asleep. 


In the morning the Sirdar woke me at five o'clock, to report 
that the clouds had not: lifted and I considered that it had become 
hopeless to wait here for an improvement in the weather. The food that 
was left was just sufficient for the day; but before turning my back to 
these inhospitable heights I decided to make a last dash to reconnoitre 
what the weather would allow me to see of the Eastern ridge of Kabru.: 


In making my plans for the day I decided to push south- 
westwards, hoping to find a practicable way along the snowy saddle 
which lies at the back of the rocky spurs heading the Main glacier. If 
it were feasible, my intention was to seek a route down the Aluktang 
glacier. From the observation point above Chemthang, a couple of days 
ago, I had carefully studied the position of these rocks relative to the 
snow saddle; but, at the same time, I had seen little of the upper slope, 
and knew that what appears practicable from down below may often 
prove not so when viewed from close quarters. Anyway, the snow was 
still in good condition and the wind which had completely abated pro- 
mised a less toilsome march than that of the previous day. 


We left camp shortly after six o'clock and roped up to negotiate 
the short descent of a couple of hundred feet, which brought us to the 
saddle above the upper slope of the ice-fall. Here we met a steep snow- 
slope, difficult in parts, and our progress was consequently delayed. I 
had to cut steps for about 200 feet in hard snow-ice and, when this 
obstacle was overcome, we had only gained about 75 feet in height. 
Then followed an easy traverse ending in a rocky, slippery surface, mostly 
covered by verglus. I had some difficulty in ascertaining our exact position 
but, from the distance we had covered, we could not have been far from 
the snow-saddle I was hoping to reach. The pyramidal peaks had’ long 
ago been obscured by clouds, and, a short distance ahead, ‘a mass of black 
rocks, partly snow-covered, appeared faintly through the mist.’ Steering 
by compass in such a place is next to impossible, when not only is 
one’s own position difficult to locate; but, even if this be determined, 
obstacles may compel several detours in directions entirely different to 
that originally decided upon for the march. . 


35 


After a somewhat circuitous wandering among these rocks we 
came to more even ground, which helped progress considerably. At eight 
o'clock I halted for twenty minutes to take readings of altitude and 
temperature, which stood at 19,225 feet and 18° F-. I cannot do better 
than to quote here the passage of my diary which reads: “ satisfactory 
progress but miserably dull and cold, persistent clinging mist obscuring 
the view beyond fifty yards”. 


The direction we then followed was almost due West, over a 
fairly steep snow-saddle. The surface condition was good at first, but 
further on the presence of occasional crevasses made the use of the rope 
necessary. This ascent proved very exhausting and we had to stop every 
ten minutes to regain breath. My pulse was beating hard. Here the 
slope became steeper and narrowed towards a dark rocky peak whose top 
was hardly visible in this dim atmosphere. The last effort of a vanishing 
hope, or perhaps the impulse of conquest carried me on towards its 
summit. Further progress in these conditions was obviously hopeless; 
and, having left the three coolies near the shelter of a rock, I breasted. 
the last lap of a couple of hundred feet with the Sirdar. It was a stiff 
rock-climb; and when we reached the summit I was out of breath for 
several minutes. The three aneroids and a thermometer were the only 
instruments I had taken with me and these gave the height as 20,150 
feet, and a temperature of 11° F.. 

Perched on this eyrie I gazed round trying to pierce the opaque 
sheet of mist which enveloped us, but nothing could be seen beyond the 
near rocks sloping down towards what seemed to be a bottomless abyss 
at our feet. Ten minutes at this height proved more than enough to 
chill me to the bone. It was past eleven o'clock and time to retreat. 


We retraced our steps; but it was not without difficulty that 
we were able to find our way through this chaos of rocks. To seek for 
a new route down the Aluktang glacier was out of the question, as I 
was unable to determine our exact position, except to estimate that we 
were somewhere near the head of the glacier and that the peak we had 
climbed could not have been far from approximately a mile North-East 
of the Dome. 


After a toilsome march of nearly six hours, including short 
halts on the way, we reached Camp IV, where we were heartily glad to 


“36 


be back among the flesh-pots once again, with a good fire, unstinted 
covering for the night, and solidly cooked food after our two days of 
‘jiced nastiness in tins. 


There was no improvement in the weather for the rest of the 
evening, and the packed clouds grew even more threatening till, at nine 
o'clock, we had a light snow-fall. Notwithstanding the continuance of 
bad weather the coolies kept up their usual. spirits, and, in fact, I do 
not remember having seen them before as gay as they were that evening. 
They had lit what I considered a wasteful fire, regardless of economy iu 
fuel. For my part, I was sorely perplexed as to my prospective movements, 
and I summoned ‘the Sirdar in my tent to discuss matters with him. 


My next object was to find a route to the North as time did 
not allow me to prolong the stay at Camp IV. Then came the. question 
of finally deciding on the route to follow. My original plan was to test 
the Zemu Gap, the nearest Pass to the East of Kangchenjunga, on its 
great Eastern spur, immediately to the West of Simvu. Mr. Freshfield’’ 
“ Round Kangchenjunga”, a narrative of his great expedition round this 
mountain in 1899, will, I think, remain for years to come the predominant 
authority on this mountainous region. Relating to this Gap, Mr. 
Freshfield, who approached it to within a couple of miles from the North, 
on the Zemu glacier, writes: The snowy corridor leading up on this 
side to the 19,300 feet gap is by no means steep, and, when the snow is in 
good condition, a party of roped mountaineers should hace little difficulty in 
walking up to it. To attempt to descend on the other side into the Talung 
valley would, however, as we afterwards ascertained, be a far more doubtful 
and huzardous experiment. It is one which in my opinion ought not to be 
made. And on examining this Pass from the Guicha La (about 5 miles 
distance), Mr. Freshfields’ account reads: «The slope below the Gap has 
an unpleasant resemblance to the Giissfeldt Sattel, in the Bernina Group, 
but no slope can be judged until it has been tried, If this gap should prove 
practicable for coolies, it will be of the greatest service to mountaineers....... 
My impression, however, is that this gap, though it can be forced by moun- 
taineers, will prove of no use for a baggage-train of natives. 

The conclusions I drew from my own observations of the pre- 


vious day from Camp If, coincided with Mr. Freshfields opinion regarding 
the Southern slopes of this Gap. On the other hand, conditions of snow 


37 


and weather are worthy of much consideration; and, during the last two 
days, I had been lucky in the former but unlucky in the latter. Another 
factor I had to bear in mind was the variable nature of weather conditions 
in the Himalaya — greater than in many other parts of the world. One may 
start off in the morning under most favourable conditions and be caught 
in a snow-storm before the day is over. The terrific storm Mr. Freshfield’s 
party experienced, when on the Zemu glacier, lowered the normal snow- 
line by four thousand feet. I concluded therefrom that the conditions I 
would have to face should normally be better in that respect. The other 
possible route, leading to the North of the Zemu glacier, lay over the 
Simvu Saddle, of which little is known, at any rate of its Southern slope. 
This Saddle (18,000 feet?) stretches between the slopes of Simvu to the 
West and Siniolchum to the East. I believe it has never been reached, 
but Mr. Freshfield’s account refers to the Northern slope as feasible; and 
it was his intention to climb it had he not been prevented by the un- 
fortunate storm. Regarding the Southern slope I knew nothing, as it 
did not show to advantage from Camp II. The third and last route we 
discussed (I believe the easiest, but the most distant) was the Yumtso 
La (15,800 feet), at the head of the Rindiang Chu, leading to the 
Eastern extremity of the Zemu glacier and West of Lama Anden (19,210 
feet). This Pass was crossed by Messrs. White and Hoffmann in 1891, 
and has perhaps been tackled by others since. 

In reviewing the whole situation, and taking all probabilities 
into account, I finally decided not to deviate from my initial plan of 
testing the Zemu Gap; but to do so with a small party of picked men, 
with light loads, instead of dragging the whole party of 27 coolies, among 
whom there were a few whose ability in snow-fare I had reasons to doubt. 

Tired as I was I did not delay my sleep after I had completed 
the sorting of the equipment required for our further march. It was a 
cold but windless night. 


ACROSS THE 


38 
AT DAWN it was freezing hard and the overnight snow had 


TALUNG AND powdered the landscape with a thin coat of fresh whiteness. In this 
ToncsHrona Clear atmosphere I hoped at last to have a good day’s photographing 


GLACIERS 
T0 THE 
ZEMU GAP. 


and surveying; and I therefore speeded up the final preparations for the 
start. The small party consisted of eight in all with sufficient provisions 
for four days, the essential instruments, and an extra supply of clothing— 
apportioned so that no load exceeded 32 lbs». Six men were ordered 
back to the Aluktang valley for fuel, and the remainder of the expedition 
were to stay at Camp IV until further orders. 


Shortly after seven o'clock we set off up the rocky slopes of the 
Guicha La. I had by now grown acclimatised to these heights and we 
reached the Pass in less than an hour, finding it far easier than before. 
Kangchenjunga in the North was a superb sight, rising majestically above 
its walls of ice. To the West, however, distant clouds had already 
gathered and were pressing up the valleys. I foresaw another dose of 
mist; but speculating on a clearer atmosphere at the lower levels, pushed 
on, after only ten minutes on the heights of the Pass. 


Descending the Northern slope, I found the snow in good 
condition, with a fairly crisp surface; and satisfactory progress was made 
for the first half-hour. I took a number of clinometer measurements to 
estimate the angle of the snow-slope, which showed an average of 19° 
against 32° on the Southern side. The first banks of mist had by now 
reached the long spur along the North-East edge of the Talung glacier ; 
and, in a short time, its crags were smothered in clouds. The great 
snowy amphitheatre at the head of the glacier, gradually revealed itself; 
but I had only just time to glimpse the colossal ice-wall below the Talung 
Peak, when the mist blotted it out of sight, storming the precipice and 
gaining the Talung Saddle. Simvu in the North-East bore its head 
above the clouds for several minutes, until, at last, it also was engulfed 
in the ubiquitous haze. 


We had descended some six hundred feet when we came to a 
greensward where alpine flowers were growing in profusion. I particularly 
noticed beautiful sky-blue gentians, clumps of edelweiss and several species 
of Saxifraga. This place would have made a very good camping-ground 
for there was only a little snow in patches and it was generally sheltered 
from the southerly squalls. In half-an-hour we reached the end of the 


Talung glacier, 
From descent North of 
Guicha Tha, 


Simvoo (22,300 feet). 


39 


grassy slope, where the turf tailed off into the right lateral moraine of 
the Talung glacier. I examined some of the stones of the moraine and 
found them to be chiefly Augen gneiss with traces of Biotite schist. 
The height, as determined by several observations, was 15,480 feet—-900 
feet below the Guicha La; but I would not take the stone structure as 
typical of this height, nor of the immediate surroundings, for the blocks 
must have been carried down by the glacier from the heights of Talung 
and its spurs. 


Here we were confronted with the problem of where to cross 
the glacier; and I disagreed with the Sirdar, whose opinion was to skirt 
the moraine entirely, as far as the South-Eastern extremity of the Talung 
glacier. I considered this route to be a useless detour, involving not 
only a descent of about 1,500 feet, but also the danger of falling stones 
from the steep slopes to our right. I therefore decided to effect, or at 
least to attempt, a crossing at the spot we had reached. After a certain 
amount of scrambling over a chaotic wilderness of loose stones and debris, 
we struck hard ice mixed with morainic rubbish.’ This was the first 
step leading on to the glacier itself, which, at this spot, was almost on a 
level with its stony embankment. The spur to the North of the glacier 
was completely veiled by mist; and my compass served therefore as our 
only guide. I fixed North-East as our general direction, trusting to luck 
in any small deviations that local obstacles might compel. 


The glacier-surface was fairly even at first, and the apparent 
absence of crevasses made the use of the rope unnecessary. Further on, 
however, it grew more lumpy and irregular with rows of ice-hummocks 
and treacherous cracks which had to be negotiated with care. Our 
progress was consequently delayed, and to make things worse, about half 
way .across, the mist thickened. From here we struck to the East, 
where the surface appeared to be more even; and after a march of over 
an hour from the Southern moraine, which had seemed to me an 
eternity, we reached the other end of the glacier. And still our toils 
were not over, for we were again faced with a scramble over heaps of 
loose stones; and presently the slope grew more difficult. Here a long 
morainic wall of rocks, at an unpleasant angle, checked our further 
eastward advance. I was more perplexed than ever as to the next move, 
when the Sirdar, who was slightly ahead of me, shouted back that he 


40 


had found a way some fifty yards further South: It seemed to me 
impracticable at first; but, after a good deal of hand and knee clambering, 
we succeeded in gaining the top and in finding a passage which brought 
us to the foot of the rocky spur. 


Though it was only just past noon, I decided to look for a 
tent-site, as I thought it unwise to attempt any further advance under 
the prevailing conditions, The best place we could find was a tiny 
stretch of almost level ground at the foot of a projecting rock, where, 
if not comfortable, we were at least protected to a certain extent from 
falling stones. 


For most of the afternoon, which seemed endless, I was occupied. 
with the amplification of the somewhat hieroglyphic signs of my diary— 
the only notes time had permitted me to make during the last two days. 
Then I took barometrical observations, which gave the height of our 
camp as 15,750 feet; but owing to the persistence of the mist, I could 
only estimate our position to be about a mile from the Southern 
extremity of the spur which separated us from the Tongshyong glacier. 
Towards sunset there was a sign of the clouds lifting, and I planned an 
early start for the next day. In the stillness of the night, the only sound 
that kept me awake was the rumbling of many small avalanches, which 
echoed in the valley like distant gunfire. 


The following morning I was disapppdinted to find that the 
weather was generally unchanged, and that vapours were still clinging to 
the upper slopes, masking the “head of the amphitheatre. My optimism 
failed a little when I considered the project of the Tongshyong glacier; 
but the lower levels were clear of clouds, and from above the moraine I 
obtained a good, though not very extensive, view of the Talung glacier. 
Its surface, which 1 examined carefully, appeared like a rough sea, with 
grey waves heaving and breaking into broad flecks of white foam—these 
were symbolised by the greyish mounds of ice, here and there cut to 
show a white facet of clean ice. To the South-West, across the glacier, 
the rocky heights of the Guicha La piled up in a blurred sky-line; whilst 
to the South-East visibility was limited to about a mile, beyond which 
the mist and glacier merged into an indefinite white haze. 


It was almost impossible to keep oneself warm, standing still, in 
this penetrating cold, and the only way to make the blood flow was to 


41 


resume the march. My plan was to explore the approaches of the Gap, 
and to push a camp as high as possible, leaving the last lap to the 
following morning. After a good meal, which I thought might have 
to satisfy us till late in the day, we packed up and set off shortly after 
six o'clock. 


At first we followed along the left lateral moraine of the Talung 
glacier in a south-easterly direction, zig-zagging among shapeless heaps 
of debris, and ascending now and then mounds of loose stones to avoid 
concealed pits and pools of frozen water. The ice-bed to our right 
produced an occasional crackling noise, characteristic of a living glacier, 
whose downward, sinking movement is slow but intermittently regular, 
Here we came across a glacier-table, with a great polygonal rock, of a 
most curious shape, perched on a pinnacle of ice which rose a couple of 
feet above the glacier-surface. The action of water and the tremendous 
evaporation which takes place when the sun’s rays strike on the ice had 
been responsible for this fantastic piece of architecture. I could hear 
the murmur of water trickling underneath the glacier and percolating 
through the stones of the moraines. It is difficult to describe the 
impression created upon the traveller by the sense of estrangement from 
the world produced by the uncanny silence filled with such unfamiliar 
sounds. Yet, comparing this impressive solitude by a glacier with that 
by a rushing torrent in the lower valleys, one is forced to the realisation 
that, the same law governs both. Gravitation is at work, and water or 
ice must find their own level, irrespective of the speed at which they 
do so. 


Looking at these vast masses of rock and ice, I often wondered 
if the supply were inexhaustible. In seons to come might not the 
surrounding giants quite alter their form— even melt like snowmen— 
with this constant attrition of avalanche and glacier-erosion, which seems 
to strip them of their vesture, denuding the mighty shoulders and 
tumbling the living rocks down to their feet? 


I am afraid I have gone into geological theories which are 
really beyond my powers to support; so I had better resume the march, 
After an hour’s wandering among this living museum of natural marvels, 
we reached at last what seemed to be the end of the long spur to our 
left. Here the-snout of the Tongshyong glacier emptied its colossal heap 


42 
of debris across the steep mountain slope. The main moraine, however, 
terminated some 350 feet higher up, and mist made it impossible to 
estimate its exact direction. All I could see was a steep, rocky slope 
leading to the recess: of the glacier. To find a way up the loose stones 
was not an easy matter, and it. was only after a long half-hou’s 
search that I decided to:strike diagonally across the slope, a couple of 
hundred yards to the West of a runnel which appeared to issue from 
below the moraine. The stony desolation we had to traverse was beyond 
all imagination. There were all the difficulties of a steep -slope, the 
doubtfulness of steering towards a height which every now and then 
.was blotted out by mist, and the maddening effort of struggling over 
loose and tipping stones of all shapes and sizes. The infernal journey 
seemed interminable; and we had to make several short halts to regain our 
strength, until we finally reached the right lateral moraine of the glacier. 


From here our march was somewhat easier, following the course 
of an icy streamlet, which must have served as a drain to the Western 
flank of the dividing spur that still concealed the glacier. As we emerged 
from this corridor, suddenly the glacier came into sight, with a steep 
snow-slope descending from the great spur to the East. The place we 
had reached was exposed to a cold wind, which prevented. me from 
making a prolonged stay to examine the surroundings; I therefore confined 
myself to an altitude reading which gave 16,150 feet; the rises in height 
being 400 feet from Camp V, and 735 feet from the point where, we 
had commenced the day’s ascent, below the snout of this glacier. From 
these figures the steepness of the frontal moraine, and the difference in 
level between the Talung and Tongshyong glaciers may well be imagined. 
About a hundred yards further on we came across the scanty shelter of 
a rock, where we halted to decide on the next move. 


It was nine o'clock and the unrelenting clouds showed no signs 
of unveiling my goal. We could not have been more than three or four 
miles away from the Gap; but it was a question of finding a route 
across an untrodden snow-field with unforeseeable obstacles on the way. 
In normal weather-conditions, when visibility is good, there should be a 
better charice of avoiding dangers, whereas, in this case, I had to take 
my chance of following what would appear to be a practicable route, ~ 


The glacier, which stretched for about half-a-mile before me, 


43 


had.an unpleasant resemblance to a staircase, at an angle rather difficult 
to estimate. The steps, typified by its transversal undulations, were 
regular and ran approximately North-East to South-West, with a greater 
incline along the Western edge. The ice was clean and of a blue-green 
hue, unlike the dirty grey of the Talung. No crevasses were visible 
from this point of view. I decided to cross the glacier at this place so 
as to reach its Eastern edge, which promised a more feasible climb. 
For the sake of precaution I formed two roped parties —one with 
myself at the head, followed by the camera porters; and the other led 
by the Sirdar. The snow was hard and at many places I had to cut 
steps across steep slant-faces of ice. Our progress was as good as could 
be expected, and in less than an hour, with no mishap on the way, we 
reached the lateral moraine of the glacier. 


For the next half-hour we scrambled over rocks covered with 
ice, when, suddenly, we were brought up short by a great chasm, some 
twenty feet wide. We had to retrace our steps for a little way and 
take to the centre of the glacier again; but here also the surface was 
shattered, and transversal crevasses prevented any headway. After this 
fruitless crossing, which cost us an hour’s hard work, I had reluctantly 
to fall back on the Western edge. 


We had now reached the upper level of the slope I had seen 
before traversing the glacier, and in front of us lay a long stretch of a 
more even surface which gave promise of a good advance. At first it was 
almost level and we made fair progress for about half-a-mile; but, as we 
pushed on, the rise grew parabolically steeper and became very exhausting, 
though the snow was in good condition and no serious obstacles presented 
themselves on the way. In a little less than two hours we reached the 
lower end of an awkward-looking ice-fall (presumably the one I had seen 
by telescope from the Guicha La, on my first ascent of that Pass ). 
Here the surface was split up into great rectangular blocks with deep 
parallel clefts. The upper slope was concealed by mist and I halted for 
a while to decide on the direction of attack. Altitude readings gave 
17,490 feet. . 


I tried to discover a passage along the rocks to the West; but 
they proved unsurmountably steep and dangerous, The ice-fall at this 
place descended in three successive cascades of s¢racs, separated by 


“44 


slanting terraces. A gap at the end of the first slant was ‘found to be 
equally impassable. After several fruitless attempts in other directions, I 
eventually decided to strike to the East again. A couple of hundred 
yards further on, a natural bridge of ice, formed by a fallen mass of 
sérac, helped us across the chasm, which would have otherwise been 
impracticable. This obstacle overcome, we were still faced with the 
difficulty of finding a way through a confysed maze of ice-pinnacles, where 
the greatest care had to be exercised to avoid accidents, One felt as if 
one were in an enchanted forest of trees turned to ice, wherein not a 
breath of wind stirred, and utter silence reigned, broken only by the crackling 
of icicles, like fallen branches, under our feet and the tinkle and splash 
as the fragments fell into the pits and crevasses which gaped at our feet. 
The thin trickle of water came up faintly from the depths. Slowly but 
steadily we worked through and, when we emerged from this labyrinth 
of ice-corridors upon the flatter but still. wavy glacier above, we were 
again met by a strong wind. Aneroid readings gave the height as 17,635 
feet; and we had therefore gained only 145 feet in reaching the upper 
limit of the ice-fall. 


Here a small, secondary glacier, down the slope to our left, made 
a barrier of bluish ice falling abruptly towards the Tongshyong. At the 
point of intersection there was almost a complete absence of morainic 
debris, which must have been buried deep in the snow. Beyond this; 
the surface-snow grew softer, and the slope once more rose steeply 
between the walls of the great side spurs which seemed almost vertical 
at this place, as they narrowed towards the Zemu Gap itself. 


Visibility was disappointing and had, if anything, deteriorated ; 
while threatening grey clouds, coming up from the South, passed swiftly 
above our heads in the direction of the col. We plodded along for a 
short distance until exhaustion and the menace of a storm reminded me 
that we were approaching a height and locality where prudence was 
essential. I was therefore on the lookout for a suitable place to camp— 
a need: which was rapidly -becoming of desperate urgency. We went on 
and on in the deep snow, till, for the first and only time on the trip, 
my perplexity was increased to areal anxiety. This was accentuated 
by the pitiful state of two of my coolies. They were trembling, teeth: 
chattering, both complained of severe headache; and wound up by sitting 


45 


on the snow, swearing that they could go no further. I gave them a 
little brandy and*tried to persuade them with encouraging words; but 
in vain. 

It was nearing three o'clock and I felt pretty certain that, if 
we were to retrace our steps, we should be overtaken’ by night long 
before reaching the site of Camp V. On the other hand I thought that 
going back a short distance might encourage the coolies, and we would 
perhaps find a hollow or some rock to protect us against the wind, which 
was now blowing hard enough to prevent tents being pitched in the 
open. I was about to give the order of retreat, when two of the camera 
porters, who had been searching the surroundings, ran back to tell me 
that they had discovered a good place for camping, some hundred yards 
further on. 


The suffering coolies seemed to recover on hearing the news, 
and within a few minutes we were under shelter, in a hollow cut deep 
in the almost vertical wall of the Western spur. I could not have hoped 
to find anything better than this grotto, which offered protection not 
only against the wind but also against avalanches. We had ample room 
to stretch sleeping bags and to do the cooking. While the Sirdar pre- 
pared our meal, I took altitude observations which gave the height as 
17,940 feet. We had gained a height of 2,190 feet from Camp V on 
the Talung and we had been a long nine hours “on the march, including 
a couple of hours’ halts. The temperature registered outside the cave at 
eight p.m. was 9° F-, and the minimum during the night was 6°. 

The coolies lit a small fire with the few pounds of wood they 
had frugally hidden inside the loose folds of their garments. It was some 
kind of aromatic rhododendron collected near the Talung slopes, and when 
its last twigs were thrown into the fire, the grotto was filled with a 
mephitic smoke. They sat close to each other, and almost to a point of 
burning their boots in the flame, singing monotonous little tunes, and 
beating time on their cooking outfit of empty provision tins. 


Late in the evening the wind slackened, and was replaced by 
the rumbling of avalanches. .We were much nearer to these baneful falls 
that night and I could distinctly hear the rolling of. the stones, which 
sounded exactly like a lorry passing at full speed over a stony road. 
One of the worst falls woke me up with a sense of terror, coupled with 


46 
the memory of the avalanche I had seen a few days before across the 
‘face of Kangchenjunga. 

The day broke yet again unchanged, with the same greyish 
‘clouds concealing all but our immediate surroundings. The wind, which 
had subsided during the night, again sprang up from the South, and 
in the circumstances I saw very little hope of succeeding in any 
photographic or survey work. This was the fifth day at altitudes over - 
15,000 feet, and the weather had been miserable all the while. The 
distant views from these. heights must have been magnificent, and I was 
still hoping to catch a glimpse of the visions which, so far, had been 
denied me. On the other hand I could not indefinitely prolong my stay 
in a provisionless country, where the duration of travel has to be 
regulated according to supplies available; and I had further to allow for 
probable delays due to unforeseen weather conditions. 

The two invalid coolies had completely recovered from their 
headache ; but when they heard of my plans to push further on, they 
promptly found some other pretext of complaint. Anticipating more 
trouble than use in dragging them again on to the snow, I decided to 
leave them here with sufficient food and another “broken reed” who 
bravely volunteered to keep them company until my return. 


My plans were to reach the Gap “with the least delay and to 
ascertain if a descent were practicable on the Northern side. If so far 
successful, my next project was to push a camp as far down as possible, 
so as to visit the head of the Zemu glacier early on the following morning, 
returning to Camp VI in the afternoon of that day. Supplies were still 
ample, so there was no necessity to stint ourselves; but because of the 
reduction in porterage I had to confine myself to bare necessities, I 
therefore hastened to re-apportion the loads which now included only one 
of the ten-pound tents for the five of us, one of the cameras with other 
instruments, clothing, and food for two days. — 


_ It was nearing seven o'clock before all these arrangements were 
completed; and after striking some hundred yards eastwards, to avoid a 
crack cutting diagonally across the Western edge of the glacier, we roped 
up and set off in a northerly direction. The morning was very chilly 
and the strong wind drove the clouds furiously. up the narrowing passage 
leading to the col. ' 


47 


The ascent was gradual at first, and the condition of the snow 
was better than that of the previous evening. We made good progress 
for half-an-hour and gained a height of 160 feet from camp (barometrical 
observations, 18,100 feet), when a steep slope gradually revealed itself 
ahead of us through the mist. As we got nearer, I was exasperated to 
discover that it was another ice-fall— perhaps the beginning of the last 
barrier separating us from the Gap, which, according to the height given 
in the maps, must have been another 1,200 vertical feet higher. 


Our first obstacle was a fairly wide crevasse whose edge seemed 
particularly unsafe; but we managed to effect a crossing after some 
detours to the East. Here we found ourselves entangled in a chaos of 
séracs and terraces similar to those of the lower ice-fall. Four successive 
slopes were thus gained after a good deal of ‘step-cutting; but we were 
still a long way from seeing anything which might have suggested our . 
approach to the upper limit. The ground consisted of hard crackling 
snow-ice with, here and there, bare, slippery ice shining through. Not a 
breath of air stirred the atmosphere, which had become stifling in this 
icy labyrinth. The grey sky above was more obscured then ever, and, 
before I had time to realise the reason of this sudden change, the first 
snowflakes appeared, falling slowly and quietly through the windless air. 


I knew that the final slope could not be far from the place we 
had reached, and, as the snow caused no immediate anxiety, I decided 
to push on. After some very rough going, we came to a furrow where 
the séracs were arranged in a line permitting good progress. We soon _ 
reached the upper level, and the next hour saw us struggling up the 
steep slope leading to the eol. 


It was now snowing hard, and the last lap, of a couple of 
hundred feet, proved very exhausting. At 10-30 we had ‘gained the 
highest point of the Pass, from where a gentle slope vanished in the 
depths towards the North. Visibility was limited to the stupendous 
rocky walls which rose almost vertically on either side of the Gap. We 
were about a hundred yards from the base of the Western spur; whilst 
that to the East, forming a buttress of Simvu, was faintly visible 
through the mist. It must have been some three hundred yards away. 
Of the Zemu glacier nothing could be seen through this white veil of 
drifting snowflakes eddying against the fathomless grey sky. 


RETREAT, 


48 

' Though there was only a light wind blowing from the South, it 
was bitterly cold, and I imagine a position on this col must be untenable 
in a strong wind. Heavy snow was falling and the deep drift around 
us had already been coated with a few inches of fresh whiteness. To 
attempt the descent, or.even part of it, to the North would have been 
madness and complete disregard of any mountaineering rules; not so 
much for the probable difficulties ahead, but for the danger of being cut 
off from the South, if the snow were to continue for any length of time. 


In the circumstances I was forced to turn all my ambitious 
plans into a hasty retreat. I took careful and repeated barometrical 
observations of the highest point of the drift,. which gave 19,375 feet. 
Then, before quitting the place, we advanced towards the Western wall, 
by the foot of which we raised a small cairn with a few stones. A 
crampon, which had been broken on the last ice-fall, was placed in a 
cranny of the rock above; whilst the coolies. murmured a prayer to the 
divine goddess of Kangchenjunga, and threw, as is customary in their 
religion, a handful of rice on the heap of stones. 


IT WAS not without regret; that I gave the order to retreat ; 
and a weary feeling crept over me because of the disappointment 1 had 
just faced. The snow was falling fast, and the descent seemed to me 
much more tortuous than the ascent had been. At any rate the down- 
ward march occupied almost the same number of hours as the climb; 
and by the time we had worked through the upper ice-fall, and 
completed the short stretch to Camp VI, it was past two o'clock. 


On my arrival at the grotto I found. the three coolies shivering 
with cold; they had covered themselves up with their blankets and had 
evidently not moved for the last seven hours. JI doubt whether they 
would have survived had I left them here until the following evening. 
Meantime the weather had become worse; and with no fuel and an 
impending danger of the retreat to the Talung being cut off, I decided 
to make a forced march down to Camp V on the same day. I allowed 


49 


half-an-hour for a meal and for tea with brandy which was most 
restoring in such circumstances. 


At three o'clock we left in most unfavourable weather. The 
snow was piling up; and the change that had taken place in the 
surface-condition since the previous day, soon made me realise that my 
decision to return to the lower levels had been a wise one. ° 


In the last few pages I think I have written enough about 
mountain difficulties and about sufferings; and to recount those of our 
downward journey would, I am afraid, burden both my account and the 
reader with details of adventures and incidents which, after all, should 
be expected when travelling among the remote corners of the Himalaya. 
Personally, I consider that mountain-travel without its characteristic 
incidents would lose half its pleasure—not because I despise comfort, 
which is always welcome, but because I doubt whether much could be 
achieved on the higher slopes if the necessities required for “comfort” 
- were to accompany the traveller to those levels. 


My conclusions regarding the Zemu Gap are that, though it 
has proved practicable but difficult to native coolies, the saving in time 
would hardly compensate the traveller whose aim is to reach the Eastern 
approaches of Kangchenjunga. Even under more favourable weather- 
conditions, and with picked and specially trained men for high altitude 
climbing, I still think that venturing this way will not prove very 
advantageous. I can safely say that one should not rely on this Pass as 
an open line of coolie-transport for a base camp on the Zemu glacier. 


We continued the march, plodding through snow and scrambling 
down over stones until eight o'clock, when we reached the rock of Camp 
V. The last two hours had been in darkness, and it was still snowing 
hard when the tents were opened. 


During the night the weather remained unchanged and the 
morning brought a new problem of the ever-deepening snow, due to the 
almost uninterrupted fall of the last eighteen hours. Drifts were all 
piled up a clear extra foot. I considered staying a day here; but 
abandoned the idea in fear that conditions might grow worse rather 
than better, and so involve us in no little danger. We therefore started 
early for Camp IV, where I hoped to. have a badly-needed rest, after 
the ardours of the last five days. 


50, 


The crossing of the Talung glacier proved extremely slow and, 
at first, it seemed to me as if we were making no headway whatever. 
Visibility had slightly improved and,no flakes were dropping; but this 
was more than outweighed by the toil of knee-deep ploughing through a 
treacherous layer of fresh snow. The worst part of the day’s march 
was up the slope leading to the Guicha La, which we reached after a 
. struggle of nearly three hours. The descent, however, over the Southern 
side proved somewhat easier, notwithstanding a persistent mist which 
prevented us from sighting the camp until we got to within fifty yards 
of the tents. 


_ After four days of strenuous but vain effort to attain the Zemu 
glacier, one experienced a sense of unreality in being back at a good 
camp, by a crackling fire. My eyes lit on a huge pile of wood, brought 
- up according to my instructions from the Aluktang valley, and I could 
not help projecting in my mind a possible fresh attempt to the North. 
With all these supplies ready, the temptation was intense, and especially 
so after the last few days’ privations. I suppose it was like a starving 
man, who will fall upon food and choke himself, if he be not restrained. 
I remembered this and also that one may plan great things in comfort ; 
but that one is always brought heavily against facts when one attempts 
the accomplishment. I therefore put aside all such dreams till my 
next visit to Sikkim and concentrated on the return journey. I was 
determined to achieve the photographic work along the Singalela Range 
and this decided me to return again via Jongri. I had a few more 
days to spare and, weather permitting, thought of utilising them in 
reconnoitring the Rathong glacier and the approaches to Kabru from 
that side. 


During the long afternoon I spent at Camp IV, the weather 
remained dull; but towards the evening the mist thinned and there were 
at last signs of the sky clearing, Even here, where there had hardly 
been a patch of snow on our outward journey, there was now a white 
blanket, in which the valances of the tents were buried, as if they had 
been pitched several weeks ago, ‘The night was windless but cold; and 
the minimum temperature registered outside my tent was 11° F-. 


It may be of interest if I give some details of my experiences 
with invalids and mountain sickness. Besides the two coolies who had 


51 


suffered from severe headache at Camp VI, the sick-list of the last 
week included also a case of frost-bite which, however, was not a very 
serious one. In the absence of any better medical treatment the 
sufferer’'s toes had been rubbed with snow and he recovered in a day, 
subsequently accompanying us for the rest of the tour without any 
difficulty whatsoever. 


Another case which caused me some anxiety at first was one 
of snow-blindness. I had suffered from this myself, when on a trip to the 
Passes of Tibet, six years ago; but then it was only for one night that 
I had the pain. The state in which I found this coolie was probably 
far more intense than that which I had endured. The application of 
a few drops of castor oil in his eyes proved very soothing, but he had 
to be helped along for the next two days and only recovered at 
Jongri, Such cases usually occur through the obstinacy of a coolie who, 
though provided with snow-goggles, prefers the primitive way of smearing 
his face with soot or wrapping his head like a mummy. For a case of 
diarrhea, I found Tabloid Beta-Naphtol Compound a very efficient cure. 


With regard to symptoms of mountain sickness and difficulty 
in breathing, I recorded nothing beyond a slight lassitude and the 
headaches to which I have already referred. These were particularly 
noticeable between 16,000 and 17,000 feet, and were accompanied by a 
slackening of pace and occasional shortness of breath. 


By the preceding paragraphs I do not wish to undervalue the 
quality and constitution of the Sikkim coolie. His physique is magni- 
ficent and he is a born hillman, with the natural characteristic of 
fitness, engendered by a hardy, open-air life from infancy. He may also 
be expected to have an instinct for mountain-fare, and, it follows, will 
grasp the use of rope and ice-axe fairly quickly. Any traveller, who 
has to becume acclimatised, get fit, and adapt himself to the peculiar 
conditions: of the mountains, will obviously start at a disadvantage to the 
man who is born and bred among the foothills leading to the great 
heights. 


HE 
RETURN 
TO 
JONGRI. 


52 


THE NEXT DAY broke unexpectedly fine; and remained so 
for an hour only. It seemed as if the Clerk of the Weather had 
decided to concentrate several days’ sunlight into that short space, for 
one’s eyes were dazzled by the intolerable whiteness stretching away in 
all directions. Then the morning vapours began to gather and soon the 
glacier-valley was bathed in a luminous mist. 


The packing of the tents and provisions proved an unusually 
long process that morning, either on account of the accumulation of 
impedimenta or perhaps because the coolies were intentionally trying to 
delay the start in order to break the journey at Aluktang. All was 
finally ready for the march; but the big pile of wood had to be left 
behind, and, as the Sirdar regretfully remarked, the next traveller should 
consider himself very lucky to find ready-cut fuel at that place. 

We left camp at eight o'clock. Though it would have been 
possible to reach Jongri the same evening, there was still a lot of snow 
in the direction of Chemthang and I decided to split the distance into 
two stages. The snow was soft and at many places had turned 
into slush, concealing loose stones; all of which delayed our progress. 
Beyond the lower lake, whose surface I found entirely frozen, there was 
less snow, and, at eleven o'clock, we were descending the rocks of the 
moraine which brought us to the grassy slope of the Aluktang valley. 
Here the snow was scattered about among clumps of withered grass. 
Another hour’s easy walk brought us within view of the knoll behind 
which the tent had been pitched before. 


Whether it was the sense of hearing or that of scent I could 
not say; but ‘we were still about half-a-mile away when the sound of a 
distant bark caught my ear. The sound approached quicker than I did, 
and within a couple of minutes there was “Ronnie” jumping all over 
me, leaping and barking like a mad thing. His delight continued for 
the rest of the day, and it was utterly impossible to keep him quiet. 

When we reached Aluktang, the whole party was once more 
united round the roaring fires of a comfortable camp. Late in the 
afternoon the sky cleared and the summits of Pandim and Jubonu 
glistened in the pale light of the setting sun. 

My project for the next day was to climb Kabur, the conspi- 
cuous tooth-shaped rock, rising some 2,500 feet above the Jongri plateau, 


Jubonu‘at dawn from Camp IY. 


Jubonu from above Chemthang. 


Sunsei on Pandim, 
from Aluktang. 


-Jubonu, 19,480 feet, 
from Aluktang. 


THE CLIMB 
OF KABUR. 


53 


a couple of miles due North of the huts. As I expected to meet with 
more snow on the heights, I again decided on a small party of five — 
by far the easiest and quickest way of moving at such places. The rest 
of the party, with invalids and heavy baggage, were to proceed to the 
Jongri huts and await our return. 


THE FOLLOWING morning was clear and frosty, and we 
started off early along the left bank of the Praig Chu. The snow had 
almost completely melted in the lower levels we were now crossing, and 
the sight of the first trees, after ten quite barren days, caused some 
excitement among the coolies. After a gradual descent of about a 
thousand feet, we came to the bridge of the Praig Chu, where we 
crossed to the right bank; then over the tributary stream, and up the 
steep slope leading to the Jongri tableland. About half way we were 
delayed by soft snow which grew deeper as we went on; and the end 
of the slope was reached after a good deal of knee-deep plodding. 


The arrival of the last loiterers occupied a long half-hour, by 
which time heavy cumulus clouds had banked up above the Southern 
horizon. The shoulders of the Pandim-Jubonu Range were soon smoth- 
ered, but its peaks remained visible for some time amongst columns of 
rising vapour. 

Having sent the heavy baggage off to Jongri, I struck out in a 
North-westerly direction over the trackless mountain-side which sloped 
towards the massif of Kabur. <A gentle.incline over undulating ground, 
mostly snow-covered, brought us to a knoll, where I halted to survey 
the surroundings and to decide on the plan of attack. 


The South-Western flank of the mountain seemed to offer a 
fairly easy route leading to the base of a rock-wall, which buttressed 
the ultimate heights on their South-Eastern side. Though involving a 
detour, this appeared to be the best way to strike the weakest spot of 
the wall, and, barring delays, I reckoned to gain the summit in less 
than two hours. After taking altitude readings, which gave 13,710 feet, 
we set off at eleven o'clock. 


54 


A couple of short “ups and downs” brought us to the South- 
Western flank, whence the ascent gradually became steeper. Snow, a 
foot deep at many places, again retarded our pace, and the next 
half-hour saw us floundering in the drifts towards the South-Eastern 
extremity of the buttress. At noon I ordered a ten-minute halt under 
the lee of a rock which commanded a good view of the Jongri plateau; 
but unfortunately the sky had again assumed a threatening aspect, with 
flocks of grey clouds approaching. We had gained 1,280 feet during 
the first hour. Near the rock I noticed several stems of weather-beaten 
Rheum Nobile* (wild rhubarb). The plants had shed their leaves; but 
the stems were about three feet high and ten inches in girth at 


the base. 

At one o’clock we reached another big rock, the base of which 
was cut deep in the mountain-side, offering a magnificent shelter; and 
after a short scramble over stones, partly hidden in snow, we came to 
the wall along the South-Eastern shoulder. The vapours had by then 
reached the heights. of the mountain, and were being driven swiftly 
across the upper slopes by a strong southerly wind. Here we were 
confronted by a rock-climb where hands and knees were of advantage ; 
only at one place, over a “pitch”, did I consider it wise to use the rope, 
owing to the slippery nature of the rock. This was followed by a slope 
of loose stones; and at three oclock we reached the summit, 

“A chilly wind was blowing and there was only a bare apology 
for a shelter in the shape of a couple of boulders some three feet high. 
Whether or not these were included in the official triangulated height of 
15,814 feet, I was not inclined to check at the moment; but curled up 
under the scanty protection, I proceeded with my observations. The 
average readings I obtained gave 15,845 feet—near enough to satisfy me 
that the corrected averages of my previous observations during the tour 
had been sufficiently accurate. 


*TI first came across beautiful specimens of these giant rhubarbs some years ago in 
North Sikkim. On that occasion my insatiable curiosity drove me a thousand feet up the 
slopes of Lama Anden in order to examine these extraordinary plants closely. Their usual 
habitation is among rocks at altitudes from 14,000 to 16,000 feet. When the plants are 
full grown during the monsoon, they are very conspicuous from afar, with their pale- 
yellow leaves making conical shapes stand out against the dark stone—for all the world 
like an encampment of Sioux Indians’ tepees. More prosaically I may add that the stems are 
hollow and contain acid water which quenches. the thirst. The Sikkimese call the plants 
Chuka and eat them both raw and boiled. I have tried this myself and found it excellent. 


The peaks of Jubonu in clouds; from ridge North-East of Jongri. 


Camp near the summit of Kabur, under a shelter provided by Nature, 


THE 
REPORTED 


"WILD MAN", 


55 


Of the Northern view there was nothing to be seen beyond a 
prominent black rock which held its head high above the sea of mist, 
billowing and breaking in waves round its mass. This was only a few 
hundred yards away. It was too miserably cold to prolong the stay 
here for no definite purpose, so I planned to return in the morning, 
after spending the night in the grotto at the base of the rock-wall. 


On our way down, driving snow-flakes caught us full in the 
face, and the rope had to be used along the steeper slants, At four 
o'clock we reached the welcome shelter with which Nature had provided 
us for the night. Two big slabs formed the floor, and about halfway 
inside the grotto the tent-poles were jammed between deck and roof. 
Our den faced South-easterly and consequently offered only a partial 
protection against the Southern blast, which unfortunately strengthened 
towards sunset. Heavy snow fell for about three hours; but at nine 
o'clock conditions improved. The minimum temperature registered at 
night was 28° F-, whilst altitude readings gave 15,500 feet. 


THE MORNING broke gloriously fine; and the sun streamed 
into the mouth of the grotto, lighting up the hanging icicles which 
fringed its upper lip. The heat melted the slender fingers and their 
fragments fell, tinkling on the floor. I was preparing my instruments 
and cameras for the start when my attention was attracted by shouts 
outside the grotto; soon afterwards, the Sirdar and. two of the coolies 
hwried to the tent with the news that a man had been sighted in the 
valley. below. I rushed out—forgetting even to put on one of my snow- 
boots—and gazed searchingly in the direction in which the Sirdar was 
pointing. 

The intense glare and brightness of the snow prevented me 
from seeing anything for the first few seconds; but I soon spotted the 
“object” referred to, about two to three hundred yards away down the 
valley to the East of our camp. Unquestionably, the figure in outline 
was exactly like a human being, walking upright and stopping occasionally 


56 


to uproot or pull at some dwarf rhododendron bushes. It showed up 
dark against the snow and, as far as I could make out, wore no clothes. 
Within the next minute or so it had moved into some thick scrub and 
was lost to view. ; 


Such a fleeting glimpse, unfortunately, did not allow me to set 
the telephoto-camera, or even to fix the object carefully with the 
binoculars; but, a couple of hours later, during the descent, I purposely 
made a detour so as to pass over the place where the “man” or “beast” 
had been seen. JI examined the foot-prints which were clearly visible 
on the surface of the snow. They were very similar in shape to those 
of a man, but only six to seven inches long by four inches wide at the 
broadest part of the foot. The marks of five distinct toes and of the 
instep were perfectly clear; but the trace of the heel was indistinct, and 
the little that could be seen of it appeared to narrow down to a point. 
I counted fifteen such foot-prints at regular intervals ranging from one- 
and-a-half to two feet. The prints were undoubtedly of a biped, the 
order of the spoor having no characteristics whatever of any imaginable 
quadruped. Dense rhododendron scrub prevented any further investiga- 
tions as to the direction of the foot-prints, and threatening weather 
compelled me to resume the march. From enquiries I made a few days 
later at Yoksun, on my return journey, I gathered that no man had 
gone in the direction of Jongri since the beginning of the year. 


When the news reached Darjeeling the press, as usual, headed - 
their comments with captions of “Wild Man”, “Snow Man”, and the 
like — seen near Kangchenjunga by an “Italian” traveller. By the time 
the British and Continental papers had got the news, the length of the 
foot-prints had been more than doubled; and some ingenious young 
gentleman on the Manchester Guardian had produced a bird-theory out 
of his own fertile brain, , . 


When I asked the opinion of the Sirdar and the coolics 
they naturally trotted out fantastic legends of “ Kangchenjunga-demons ”. 
Without in -the least believing in these delicious fairy-tales myself, 
notwithstanding the plausible yarns told by the natives, and the refer- 
ences I have come across in many books, I am still at a loss to express 
any definite opinion on the subject. However, I can only reiterate with 
a sufficient degree of certainty that the silhouette of the mysterious 


Looking South from near Camp VII on Kabur; 
banks of clouds racing up. 


FROM 
CAMP VII 
TO THE 
RATHONG 
GLACIER, 


57 


being was unmistakably identical with the outline of a human figure. I 
personally rejoice in particularly acute vision and am sufficiently familiar 
with the appearances of mountain fauna, to be able to distinguish a 
bear, monkey, snow-leopard, ostrich, kiwi (if you like)— and even a man. 
I am also somewhat versed in the simple analysis of spoor, and can 
unhesitatingly state that the prints were those of no wild animal 
common to the Sikkim-Himalaya. It should be borne in mind that the 
foot of the Tibetan tribes is inclined to be short, flattened-ous and wide 
across the toes. 


I have a theory, which may be worth consideration, if it be 
not thought too far fetched. Tibet and the contiguous countries are the 
very citadel of the Buddhist Faith, which in itself is actuated very 
largely, like the Early Christian Church, by the spirit of asceticism. The 
country of the Lamas is filled with monasteries; and we must remember 
that it is only civilisation and increased population that has favoured the 
cloistral community-system. In Early Church days anchoritism was well 
recognised and it seems reasonable to suppose that the Buddhist monks 
may well have turned to this form of mortification, in the same way as 
the ancient Christian hermits of the Syrian Desert. 


I conjecture, then, that this “wild man” may be either a 
solitary or else a member of an isolated community of pious Buddhist 
ascetics, who have renounced the world and sought their God in the 
utter desolation of some high place, as yet undesecrated by the World. 
However, perhaps I had better leave the conclusions to ethnological and 
other experts. 


BAD LUCK had again prevented me from seeing the much- 
desired view from the summit of the rock, only a few hundred feet 
above our camp. As we were leaving the grotto, I was dazzled with 
the brilliance of the surroundings before the clouds came racing up from 
the South once more. In this lucid interval we made another dash for 
the summit; but, before we had started to scale the rock-wall, I decided 


58 


not.to waste the obviously short time allowed and to make a survey 
from below. 


Looking northwards, over the snow-covered black rocks and 
irregular minor crests of the foreground, my attention was riveted on 
Kangchenjunga, soaring high on the far horizon. Both the 28,146 and 
27,820 feet peaks were visible, the shoulder of the latter sweeping 
eastwards — like a sword-blade reflecting the sunlight — to the Zemu 
Gap. Eastwards again, Simvu raised its craggy head. 

Westwards of Kangchenjunga, the Dome and Forked Peak, 
considerably closer to me, were faintly visible through a sheet of vapour. 
Beyond them, westwards still, Kabru lifted its two peaks above the 
rocky spine running southwards from the Dome, which formed the fore- 
ground. I had only a few minutes in which to grasp all this, when the 
banks of clouds had raced up. 


The descent from Camp VII to the Jongri plateau was effected 
after a good deal of tiresome snow-wading, through drifts which had 
piled up the previous evening. We were further delayed by the detour 
made down the valley to the East of our camp, in search of the foot- 
prints of the enigmatic “wild man”. 

It was nearing noon when we reached the Gap South-West of 
Kabur. The pass was hardly recognisable as we had seen it on our 
outward journey. Where we had faced that magnificent amphitheatre of 
mountains there was now a dingy curtain of mist — yet again a 
repetition of the unfortunate weather conditions by now well known to 
the reader. 

Beyond the Kabur Gap we had a steep descent over slippery 
rocks, but there was practically no snow on the Northern side of the 
pass. After a scramble of half-an-hour we came to the Rathong Chu — 
at this place but a small, icy stream, fed by a net-work of the runnels 
draining the Rathong-Kabru glaciers and those descending the slopes of 
the Dome and Forked Peak. We followed the left bank of the stream 
for two long hours on a gradual ascent which became steeper towards 
the end. Here the mountain-side rose sharply to the North, with the 
snout of the Rathong glacier on its flank. 


My original plan being to reach the Southern morainic mound 
of the Rathong glacier, I decided to cross the stream at this place and 


Heights to the North of Kabur and the saddle of Kabru in the distance, 
(From near Camp VII on Kabur). 


Kabru, Dome, Forked Pk, Kangchenjunga 


Zemu Gap, Simvu. 
(24,015) (21,140) 28,146) 


(19,875) (28,300) 


Looking North from near Camp VII on Kabur. Alltit. (15,500 feet). 


59 


to fix'a camp on the higher levels, from where I could obtain a better 
view of the surroundings if the clouds would only clear. So we set off 
up a steep and rocky trench running North-westwards, and situated 
between a spur on the left and an ancient, grass-grown moraine on the 
right. From rough observations, I estimated that the snout of the 
Rathong glacier could not have been much under 14,000 feet. After an 
hour’s exasperating scramble up this narrow passage, stumbling over 
unstable stones and splashing through shallow pools of greenish water, 
we reached what may be called the right lateral moraine of the glacier, 
Here we camped in a hollow between the rocky hillside and a wall of 
morainic fragments which separated us from the main glacier, 


Though we were sheltered from the wind, the dank, cold mist 
made our surroundings unutterably dismal. At least there was one 
consolation in the shape of a small fire, for which I gave thanks to the 
thoughtfulness of the coolies who had collected a few twigs of rhododen- 
dron on the way. It was not till four o'clock that we settled down 
to prepare our meal; and the rest of an otherwise monotonous evening 
was spent in listening to all the coolies had to es about the “demons 
of Kangchenjunga ”. 


To my great disappointment, the morning broke without the 
least change in the weather which, had actually become worse than ever. 
After waiting in vain for three long hours, during which I was unable 
to do more than local reconnoitring, I decided to return forthwith to the 
Jongri huts. The peaks remained completely covered and on the return 
we were chilled to the bone by driving snow which fell at intervals. 


My arrival at Jongri marked the end of local excursions and 
the beginning of the homeward journey. The next question was to 
select the return route to Darjeeling. Besides the one we had. followed 
on our way out, there was another possible direction to be considered. 
This was by way of the Western border of Sikkim, along the Singalela 
Range, over the Oma La (15,320), Dui La (14,900) and Ghara La 
(14,000), joining further South the Sandakphu-Phalut bridle path. 
This would undoubtedly have suited me better for photographic work ; 
but, under prevailing weather conditions, it seemed hopeless to drag the 
baggage-train over this series of Passes. For a moment the idea of a 
small party occurred to me; but I rejected it, for I did not wish to 


THE 
RETURN 

TO 
" PAMIONCHI. 


60 


split up the party during the last week of my tour. I finally decided 
to follow the same route as on our outward journey as far as Pamionchi, 
and thence, if the weather improved, to strike on to the Singalela 
Range by way of the Kalet Chu, Dentam and Chiabanjan. 


At Jongri, my tent was pitched as before on the knoll over- 
looking the huts, There was little snow about, but the afternoon 
remained dull and I only found warmth by the side of the fires which 
the coolies had lit in the huts. We had an exceptionally good meal 
that evening and I indulged myself by opening tins which had been 
providently kept for “later on”. As for “Ronnie”, after his vociferous 
delight on my return, he did not move from my side for fear that his 
master might again disappear into the ewigkeit. 


- THE EARLY mist of a dull morning was the send-off accorded 
by Jongri to a long procession of twenty-seven men marching in a 
southerly direction. In this case I did not find it necessary to hurry 
the coolies for the start, for, to a man, they were like horses headed 
for stable. 

We soon reached the zone of magnificent rhododendrons again, 
and then the forests of pines and the upper limit of bamboos. The path 
we were now following seemed to have improved during our absence, 
accustomed as we were to wanderings in the trackless mountains, for 
the last fortnight. 

An uninterrupted march of three hours brought us to Bakim 
where a halt was made for lunch. The dark sky had grown darker 
since our plunge into the dense thickets, and the temperature stood at 
fully 25° higher than in the early morning. The first drops of rain and 
the presence of numerous leeches soon drove us on the march again. 
These beastly parasites looped themselves all over our clothes in their 
insatiable lust for blood, and were a perfect plague. 

The descent continued down the steep mountain-side, choked 
with the tangle of vegetation, prolifically flourishing in this steamy 


Jongri huts by mist, 


A last glimpse of Jongri. 


61 


atmosphere. Everything round us seemed extraordinarily green, and the 
impression of walking through a hothouse was intensified as we neared 
the lower levels. The thunderous waters of the Praig Chu were crossed 
shortly after, and the last lap, to Nibi, was in heavy rain beneath the 
streaming boughs. The downpour continued till late that night, soaking 
our tents and once more encouraging the leeches to their horrid feasts 
on my shrinking flesh. 


I woke to the song of many birds, in the cool freshness of a’ 
bright, rain-washed morning; and anticipating that the coolies would 
indulge in a prolonged halt at Yoksun, I ordered an early start. The 
tents and the rest of the baggage were packed up in their wet state, as 
I was counting on the use of the Kazi’s compound at Yoksun as a 
drying ground. 

At eight o'clock we were passing the camping-place of Tzubuk, 
and a couple of hours later, after a number of zig-zags, up and down 
narrow gullies amid a riot of semi-tropical vegetation, we emerged from 
the forests on to the plateau of Yoksun. The Sirdar had sent a coolie 
ahead to announce my arrival, and I was met by the Kazi who had 
assembled his whole entourage with the usual gifts of fruit and vegetables. 

I wished to talk with the landlord; and so told the coolies 
that they might take two hours off. No sooner had I given the order 
than they had vanished into thin air—actually, I expect,. into the houses 
of the hospitable villagers and their mugs of steaming murwa. .By the 
same token, that same beverage was set before me by the Aazi, whilst 
we were conversing. He took a keen interest in my tour, the story of 
which was related to him by the Sirdar, with rather exciting gesticula- 
tions from both when they got to the episode of the “wild man”. Of 
course I found in the Kazi another believer in the “demons of Kang- 
chenjunga” with histories enough to fill volumes. 


In the afternoon I visited the Dubdi monastery which is 
situated on the summit of a forest-clad hill, about a thousand feet above 
the meadows of Yoksun. On the way up, in a dense thicket, I came 
on a couple of prayer-wheels driven by the water of a small torrent. 
These were set with the axis vertical, with the “Om Mani Padme Hun” 
inscribed on the upper and lower edges of the drum, and were painted 
in the most gorgeous colours. This type of prayer-wheel* is fairly 


* Called chukhor by the natives of Sikkim, 


62 


popular in Sikkim, and certainly achieves the ideal of prayer without 
that effort which the commoner hand-wheel necessitates. The prayers, 
written on parchment or dried bamboo-leaves, are dropped inside the 
drum by a slot, like a letter-box, and it is most gratifying to the pious 
lama, no doubt, to think of the spiritual and temporal necessities of his 
_ flock being conveyed to the Powers that Be by the perpetual hand of 
Nature. One cannot help being fascinated by this unique ritualism, 
working alone among the silent forest atoning, perhaps, for the natural 
languor of the faithful. 


The Dubdi * gumpa is one of the oldest monasteries in Sikkim. 
It stands on a raised platform under the shade of weeping cypresses 
which add considerably to the beauty of the surroundings. I was 
cordially received by the monks and the Teshoo Lama who himself took 
me round the cloister. 


Passing under a double portico of carved and decorated wood, 
I found myself in a rectangular room with two parallel rows of pillars 
supporting the roof, likewise of wood, massively draped and decorated. 
At the far end stood the altar with the image of Gooroo Rimpoche in 
the centre and his disciples on either side; whilst the walls had garish 
paintings, chiefly in red, yellow and green — grotesquely representing 
demons, dragons and lamas. Another smaller chapel, in a more or less 
dilapidated state, stood at the back of the main temple. 


The view from Dubdi gumpa is very impressive. To the North, 
the deep and shaded valley of the Rathong Chu, stretched away to the 
snowy heights of Kabru, which glistened in the sun. To the North- 
West, lofty, pine-clad mountains lifted their crags to the sky (and were 
reported to be the habitat of black bears). To the South, the eye 
travelled over the long spurs of Tingling and Pamionchi, all dotted with 
their monasteries which were perched on the high points, 


On my return to Yoksun I found some of the most energetic 
and punctual coolies—the latter rather uncommon — folding the tents 
and clothes which had already dried in the Kazi’s compound. The 
majority of the men, however, were still not in evidence, and it took me 
some time to satisfy myself that nothing and nobody had been left 
behind, before I could get away. After sincerely thanking the Kazi for 
oe ei ee 

* Means “the hermit’s cell”, . 


Kabru Dome and Forked Peak (Telephoto from Pamionchi). 


63 


his kindness, I caught up the coolies, whose steps down the steep 
descent to the Rathong Chu were a shade uncertain, as a result of the 
mellow Yoksun hospitality. 

It was much too late to carry out my project of reaching 
Pamionchi before nightfall, and I therefore decided to split the journey, 
leaving the last long slope for the next morning. I found it extremely 
hot down in the lower valleys and, wishing to avoid these for the night, 
I pushed on in search of a camp-site on the higher ridges, Having 
crossed the Rathong Chu and reached the heights of Tingling, we then 
descended to the Risu Chu, and eventually came to Tadong, where 
Lepcha huts, raised on wooden platforms, were scattered on the hillside 
among banana trees. 


My tent was pitched at a distance from the farms, where a 
grassy plot of land offered a far more comfortable bed than any I had 
found in the last few weeks. Most of the coolies took shelter in the 
huts; whilst others slept out in the open. My observations gave the 
height as 5,730 feet—an altitude where the air is neither cold nor 
uncomfortably hot; and I would have enjoyed a delightful sleep had I 
not been disturbed by big rats, who made rather a noisy attack on the - 
provisions, and a still noisier retreat, upsetting the cooking utensils as 
they fled, chased by ‘“ Ronnie”. 

The morning broke exceptionally fine and I hurried off ahead 
of the baggage train, to avoid the heat down in the valley and allow 
the whole afternoon for the visit to Pamionchi gumpa. A descent of a 
couple of thousand feet along a winding track, first across cultivated 
land, then down a steep mountain-side, brought me to the Ringbi Chu, 
whose waters were swollen by the recent rainfalls. Beyond this torrent 
there remained, to complete the comparatively short march of the day, 
an almost unbroken stretch of a 3,500 feet rise to Pamionchi. I only 
made a short halt at Chongpong, whence the view of the distant snowy 
range was magnificent; and after a pleasant walk through a forest of 
giant’ magnolias and oak trees I reached Pamionchi, and was thus back 
again among the comforts of a bungalow. 


THRE 


64 
EARLY in the afternoon I paid a visit to the gumpa, which 


pamroncut stands on a hillock at the Eastern extremity of the lofty spur stretching 
monastery. West to East from the Singalela Range. The path led through the 


forest, where I passed a beautiful charten, Then we came on the 
beginnings of the monastery in the shape of rows of monks’ cells leading 
up to the cloister itself. This is built on a platform of stone at the 
end of a paved courtyard, on the Western side of which is the chapter 
house, where the Lamas lodge. 


Ascending the steps to the cloister proper one saw a quad- 
rangular building, of the usual Sikkim style, with massive stone walls 
slightly bulging at the base. It would be a good specimen were it not 
for its more modern corrugated iron roof, which looks entirely out of 
keeping with the rest of the structure and spoils its outer appearance. 
The roof is secured along the four sides of the eaves by chains, 
embedded in the pavement below, to prevent it from being blown over 
by the strong winds to which the ridge is exposed. The idea of crown- 
ing a five-century old building with this tinny monstrosity does but 
little credit to the taste of the Sikkim ruler who suggested this 
innovation, I was told by the Lamas that the previous wooden roof 
allowed extensive damage to the interior decorations, as it was constantly 
leaking. On my arrival, the courtyard was somewhat congested with 
corrugated iron sheets which were being used to repair this architectural 
atrocity. 


The main entrance of the gumpa faces the courtyard, immediately 
above the steps, and is surmounted by a narrow, latticed balcony. The 
ground-floor windows on either side of the entrance are similarly covered 
in, and the upper frames of these as well as the beam above the 
entrance are finely carved and painted in vivid colours. Heavy drapery 
hangs from below the balcony, in front of a small verandah which serves 
as a vestibule to the ground-floor. The walls of this are decorated with 
polychrome paintings of fantastic demons, lamas, dragons, monkeys and 
the like. 


Entering the shadowy depths of the inner shrine, which for 
centuries has been shrouded in religious obscurity, one cannot fail to be 
impressed with the solemnity of the Buddhist Faith. One’s attention” is 
irresistibly rivetted on the great Image of Buddha on the reredos of the 


Image of Buddha 
and Altar, 
(Pamionchi gumpa). 


es 


hg Fey 
ee eyiy* ee b 
=e er 
Sg, + 


Wall painting, 
(Pamionchi gumpa). 


Section of library 
showing sacred books, 
(Pamionchi gumpa). 


65 


altar. He is sitting cross-legged with the left heel up, left hand holding 
the lotus on the thigh; whilst the right hand is raised with the doré 
in it. His pediment symbolises a huge lotus leaf, with the petals carved 
on its sides. On either hand of Buddha stand the Mahatmas, and the 
whole richly ornamented group is under a complicated canopy of wide- 
mouthed dragons, with their tails twined round the side-columns. 


The altar, in front of Buddha, bears the essential articles of 
ritual: seven small brass holy-water bowls, beakers, incense-burners, 
peacock feathers, dovjés, prayer-wheels etc: Many small tables, benches 
and shelves are crowded with an assortment of choir-instruments : 
trumpets over six feet long (dhungchen), smaller ones (radung), brass 
cymbals and giant conchs. 


From the altar to the vestibule, two lines of pillars run with 
the choir-stalls parallel and against them. The whole place is bristling 
with Buddhas, ritualistic objects and weird instruments on walls, shelves, 
tables and benches and, besides these movables, every square inch of 
wall is covered with designs and legendary pictures in glaring shades of 
red, blue, green and yellow. This has a most fascinating effect in the 
dim, religious light, the colours being toned down to a degree of sombre 
splendour. Many banners and other heavily embroidered silk hangings 
are disposed from ceiling and pillars, heightening the sense of obscurity. 
The atmosphere is close, damp as the grave and permeated with an 
indefinable odour of incense and the dust of centuries. 


The Lamas then kindly took me up to the top floor where there 
were several rooms of which I will describe only the library, the biggest. 
The staircase is remarkable for its balustrade of which each upright is 
the axis to a vertical prayer-wheel. As the monks go up and down 
stairs, they strike each successively, giving an extra turn to the 
supplications therein. 


The library has shelves like pigeon holes, in each of which is a 
“book” — that is, documents on daphne or similar paper tied between 
two boards. Each has a hanging label for rapid reference. The rest of 
the wall space is covered with brilliant paintings; but of later date than 
those in the shrine below. In the centre of the room stands a pagoda- 
shaped model temple, with scores of Buddha images in carved and 
painted wood. The pedestal terminates at each side in the head of a 


ALONG 

THE 
SINGALELA 
RANGE 

TO 


DARJEELING. 


66 


giant dorjé (the thunderbolt-symbol), from which a wooden rainbow 
springs in an arc over the whole structure. A number of other images 
of Saints and venerable Lamas, under separate canopies, occupy various 
corners and niches in the room. 

On leaving the gumpa, I returned to the bungalow in time for 
tea. It had been a glorious day and was followed by a wonderful 
sunset, 

The great panorama seemed to combine the spacious grandeur 
of the Himalaya with the fire and colour, the living magic of the Greek 
Highlands, As the sun sank in a cloudless West, the last gleams of 
gold shot up above the Singalela Range, paled to primrose and merged 
into that amethystine afterglow so inseparably connected with the hills 
‘where the gods dwelt. 

I could almost see the mauve veils of light on the ee of 
Mount Hymettus, and, as the delicate glow faded into the majestic 
purple of night, the great mountains unmistakably took on the sombre 
green shadows of those of Hellas. 

There were the dark, craggy heights of Taygetus, the very 
pine-clad slopes of Kiona and double-headed Parnassus itself— that magic 
mountain where shaggy Pan was wont to hunt the glimmering nymphs 
through the trees. 


Early by next morning I awoke to a wild caterwauling of 
trumpets and conchs. It was festival-day, and the villagers were going 
up to the gumpa to lay their offerings of fruit, flowers and rice at the 
feet of the Lord Buddha. I determined to have a glimpse of this 
ceremony before starting on the march, and went as far as the entrance 
of the monastery, so as not to disturb the worshippers. 

To my ear, ignorant of the subtleties of Oriental harmony, the 
music sounded as if each instrumentalist were bent on making his own 
pet melody predominate. The drums beat a separate rythm; the 
trumpeters and conch-blowers each had a completely different tune, and 


Model temple, in the library 
of Pamionchi gumpa. 


Sangachelling gumpa. 


Group of 
instrumentalist monks. 


67 


the whole effect was too lugubrious for words, At the same time the 
Lamas chanted their doleful psalms, with a chorus of monks taking up 
the nasal responses. The cacophonous din would end abruptly on a 
crescendo and crash of cymbals, followed by a breathless silence; and 
would then start again, sforzando, on another cymbal-crash. 


The weather was delightful and the far snows shone in the 
morning sunshine. Under such favourable conditions I was more hopeful 
than ever of a successful trip along the Singalela Range. We set off at 
8-40, followed for some time by the sound of the musical instruments, 
gradually fading away in the distance. 

Henceforth our journey took us along a magnificent bridle path, 
which for the first two miles, due East, wound through a forest of 
luxuriant vegetation—across green glades carpeted with ferns and orchids, 
and past the dark trunks of giant trees from which hung festoons of 
bright green moss. The path was almost level as far as Sangachelling 
where a short halt was made to visit the gumpa. 


This monastery,-though smaller, is very much of the same type 
as those I have already mentioned; but its giant prayer-wheel, which, 
after that of Lachen, is among the biggest in Sikkim, merits a detailed 
description. ‘The mechanism occupies a separate lodge near the entrance 
of the enclosure. The wheel is balanced on a vertical iron axle, bearing 
on a beam across the ceiling and on another laid along the stone floor. 
Just above the bottom bearing is a crank, to which is attached a cord. 
The wheel itself is a hollow cylinder of wood about ten feet high by 
five feet diameter, decorated with gorgeous designs and the eternal “Om 
Mani Padme Hun” inscribed on the periphery at the upper and lower 
edges. The upper edge is armed with projecting nails which strike on 
a circle of bells hung from the ceiling as the wheel rotates. 


An old monk—who seemed too old for any other job — sat 
cross-legged on the floor, mechanically jerking at the crank-cord and 
murmuring perpetual invocations while the wheel turned and the bells 
tinkled overhead. In theory this performance is never interrupted; but 
in this case, as my hand approached my pocket, there was a pause, after 
which the eternal movement recommenced at such a speed that the 
prayers could not keep up with the bells. 


On the hillside, beyond a wall, rows of chartens were outlined 


68 


~ 


against the blue sky, among magnificent clumps of scarlet rhododendrons. 
Down the slope, for a hundred yards or so, the wall was lined with 
prayer flags which fluttered gaily in the morning breeze. The view of 
the distant snows was very fine above the sea of vapours which filled 
the intervening valleys. 


We continued the gentle descent by a path which wound in a 
steady slope, following the contours of the shady mountain-side. We 
were moving due South-West and the southward view extended over the 
deep valley of the Kalet Chu whose foaming waters twisted like a white 
ribbon down the dark cleft. Beyond the river rose the long spur which 
stretches West to East from the Singalela to Rinchinpong.. The lower 
slopes of the valley were dotted with villages and farms on plots of 
cultivated land. Further on, some six miles from Pamionchi, the descent 
became steeper and ended abruptly in a zig-zagging path which brought 
us to the level of the Kalet Chu. 


This place was called Dentam and had a small bazar about 
half-a-mile to the East, on the other side of the river. There was a 
good bungalow ona knoll overlooking the torrent; but the heat ‘was 
intense, and once more the idea of putting up in the depths of the 
valley did not appeal to me in the least. However, the’ way to the 
Singalela from here being a steep seventeen-mile rise, I decided to push 
further on and to find a green glade in which to pitch my tent in 
preference to the roof of a bungalow. 


Having crossed the bridge over the Kalet Chu,” we continued 
the march in an easterly direction, for the first mile by a path winding 
along the right bank of the river. Here occurred an incident which 
might have had serious consequences. As we were crossing a small side 
stream, the Sirdar lashed out spasmodically with one foot,.and a snake 
fell away from the heel of his boot, to be instantly despatched by my 
ice-axe. It was a deadly viper, which had no doubt been sunning itself 
among the stones. Oddly enough, this was the only snake I had seen; 
but then, Sikkim is known to harbour very few. 


After a somewhat tiresome walk in the heat. of a boulder-strewn 
area, we struck in a South-westerly direction, where the path followed 
the right bank of a tributary to the Kalet Chu. Then came a steep 
ascent by zig-zags, and at 5-30 p.m. we reached a beautiful grassy slope 


Chartens and prayer flags 
near the 
Sangachelling gzmpa. 


A stream near Dentam. 


What remains of the old 
bungalow at Chiabanjan. 


69 


by the edges of a forest, where the camp was pitched. Here the air 
was much fresher and the evening was pleasant. Altitude readings gave 
6,750 feet; so that, with the extra five. miles from Dentam, we had 
almost regained the height of Pamionchi. I was informed by local 
herdsmen that the place is called Outari, but no such name appears on 
the maps. 


The morning broke fine, but steamy and hot, with the rays of 
the sun shining through a light haze. The first mile was along the 
tributary which we had followed on the previous day. Then the track 
rose steeply over 3,000 feet through beautiful forests. After a small 
torrent, spanned by a bridge (altitude 8,200 feet), which we reached at 
9-15, the last couple of thousand feet led by a rocky and steep short-cut 
to the grassy, open space of Chiabanjan (altitude 10,475 feet ). 


Here the atmosphere was very much cooler and at this height 
magnificent rhododendrons grew in profusion. I noticed especially the 
Argenteum, some thirty feet high, with its white clusters of delicate, 
bell-shaped flowers. Fadconeri spread its giant leaves, deep green on top 
and red below; but was not in flower. The most conspicuous of all was 
the Barbatum, the magnificent, sanguine blossom of which struck a 
-glorious note of decoration on the mountain-side, which appeared as if 
drenched in blood where the flowers grew. 


I halted at Chiabanjan for lunch near the ruins of a bungalow, 
deserted for the last twenty years, of which nothing remained but. two 
chimneys and its broken walls, overgrown by vegetation. 


From here, the six miles to Phalut were along the spine of the 
Singalela Range, having Nepal on the right and Sikkim on the left. As 
we were leaving Chiabanjan, mist came up from the valleys and we were 
soon surrounded by clouds which totally obscured the view. The first 
three miles were uphill through beautiful. rhododendrons which, however, 
were reduced to the dwarf species as we neared Mount Singalela. 


A steep ascent by zig-zags brought us to the summit, where a 
heap of stones, surmounted by bamboos from which hung prayer flags, 
marked the highest point. The place is regarded as of considerable 
sanctity, and the coolies as usual contributed their token of rice and 
offered their prayers. Of the so much desired view there was, un- 
‘fortunately, nothing to be seen owing to the dense mist. In fact it was 


70 


so bad at the time that I could scarcely distinguish the path a couple 
of hundred feet below the summit. Altitude readings gave the height as 
12,130 feet.* Beyond Mount Singalela, we hada steep descent by short- 
cuts; and the last couple of miles were over a more or less level path 
which brought us to Phalut (alt. 11,816 feet) at four o’clock. 


A. party of other travellers had just arrived at the bungalow 
from the direction of Sandakphu, and during the following three days 
we travelled together on our way to Darjeeling. They very kindly 
‘asked me to dine with them that evening. I thoroughly appreciated 
that dinner party, primarily on account of the most agreeable society ; 
but, also, I must confess, because of the joy of eating food properly 
cooked and served. 


There were no signs of the weather improving and it remained 
misty and fairly cool. I could not help reiterating the hope that we 
should have fine weather for the rest of the way —in fact, so insistent 
was I on the certainty of an improvement, that my unquenchable 
optimism became a standing joke to my new-found friends. They were 
themselves inclined to be bitter, I think, for, while I had experienced 
fine weather for the last three days, they had had persistent mist all 
that time on the Singalela Ridge. { can only conclude that this spur 
must attract more rain-clouds than the surrounding country. In any 
case, I myself seem to have been unlucky in striking mists; a fact 
which was particularly disappointing here, where I had come expressly 
for photographing purposes. JI was obliged to miss that magnificent 
view of the Everest Group from the Ridge, which I had seen some 
years ago, and which I have always considered to be among the finest 
mountain-panoramas in the Himalaya. 


The following morning broke dull and misty with no change 
whatever, and I set off for Sandakphu at eight o'clock. This march, of 
just over twelve miles, was by far the easiest of the whole journey, 
being along a well-kept bridle path. Descending first by a series of zig- 
zags, the next eight miles were over a fairly level stretch, among the 
stunted pine-trees of a storm-swept saddle. Rhododendron bunches of 
the scarlet Barbatum broke like fire at every bend of the path, relieving 
the general drabness of things. The walk ended with a short ascent 
which brought us to Sandakphu (alt. 11,929 feet), where I pitched my 


* The oficial triangulated height is 12,108 feet. 


Rhododendron Argenteum, 
(white, slightly yellowish suffused 
with pink ; deep green leaves) 
80 feet high ; flowers in April 
Singalela Range. 

Alt. 8,000 to 10,000 feet. 
(About one-ninth natural size). 


Rhododendron Barbatum, 
(blood-coloured) 40 to 60 feet high, 
flowers in April 
Singalela Range. 

Alt. 9,000 to 10,000 feet ; 
(About one-ninth natural size). 


Th 
tent on a knoll overlooking the bungalow. I fell asleep still dreaming 
vain dreams of a fine morrow. 


Alas, the next day was exactly the same; but with the 
additional curse of occasional showers. The track led down by steep 
zig-zags, made still steeper by the interminable short-cuts to which the 
traveller in Sikkim eventually gets inured. Then, for a mile, we passed 
over more open ground, followed by a forest of pines and a repetition of 
zig-zags, which brought us to the small village and farms of Kala-Pokri, 


On the way, I met several zobos, grazing by the roadside. 
These animals are of the domestic type, a curious cross between the 
Tibetan yak and the Sikkim hill-cow. Their general characteristics are 
.common to these two beasts; but they differ in some details, especially 
of hair and colour. The zobo lacks the long, black hair of the yak, and 
its colour varies between pearl-grey and dun-brown. 


The yak proper, which is nearly always black, is an animal 
worth description to those who have not seen it. It is a handsome 
beast, resembling closely the North American bison. Actually its origin 
is to be found in the bison of Turkestan, which produced first the wild 
yak of Tibet and eventually the present domesticated animal. It has 
long, silky hair, concealing the limbs; rather a small head, with large 
expressive eyes, full of a docile intelligence; beautiful spreading horns, 
and a bushy, sweeping tail like an enormous chowry.* The hefty yak 
would appear to be a clumsy, slow-moving beast. It is certainly not 
speedy, but is amazingly hardy and agile. Almost as sure-footed as an 
antelope, it will scale the steepest slopes at impossible angles to reach 
its grazing-ground. To the highlanders of Tibet and Sikkim the yak 
is as the cow to the plainsman of India — the inseparable guide, 
philosopher and friend. The hillman, however, gets more out of his 
animal, for his fabrics are woven from its hair and its flesh provides 
him with food. Its milk is very creamy and nourishing. In the 
summer months the yak inhabits the high pastures from 13,000 to 
17,000 feet; but the winter snows drive it to the levels of 7,000 to 9,000 
feet, below which height it cannot live. 


Leaving Kala-Pokri, the descent continued by well-defined 
zig-zags, until the lowest limit of the day’s march was reached at 8,300 
feet. From here the bridle path wound in and out; and after several 


* Fly whisk much used in India. 


12 


ascents and shorter descents, passing through bamboo glades, I reached 
a small bridge spanning the cascade of a torrent where I halted for 
lunch, in drenching rain. Beyond this watercourse and for the rest of 
the afternoon the track led uphill to Tonglu. Many lovely rhododendrons 
again attracted my attention, and I rather concentrated on their accessible 
beauty, in default of the distant view which was persistently denied me. 

We reached Tonglu (alt. 10,074 feet),.at four o’clock, where the 
tent was pitched on a hillock to the South of the bungalow. Shortly | 
afterwards, a heavy shower fell; but at sunset there were signs of the 
weather improving, and some of the nearer mountains of Nepal, to the 
North-West, became visible for a short time. 


Whilst opening a small case, in which I had packed specimens 
of rocks collected from the Talung and ongshyong moraines, I des- 
covered an empty }'scuit tin, the existence of which I had entirely 
forgotten. In this, to my astonishment, I found two bunches of the 
Saxifraga which I had’ gathered on the rocks above the Guicha La. 
The plants had survived a fortnight under the lid of a tin and were in 
a flourishing condition. They lived for another couple of months, in the 
kind care of friend in Darjeeling, during which period they almost 
doubled in size and produced buds; but at the outbreak of the monsoon 
they withered. Evidently they could stand the lower altitude, but 
could not survive the humidity. The photograph facing page 30 was 
taken in Mr. Santis Studio in Darjeeling, and shows these plants in the 
condition in which they arrived. 


' Yet another showery morning was the beginning of the last 
day of my journey. The drizzle and mist of an early forenoon saw us 
down the 3,750 feet leading. to Manibanjan; whence, by short-cuts, we 
reached Simana basti, which is linked to Darjeeling by a broad cart- 
road, through Sukia-Pokri and Ghum. 


As I had a very limited number of days at my disposal, and 
wished to develop all my negatives in Darjeeling, I sent a coolie ahead 
to make arrangements for a car which I found awaiting me at Simana 
basti. Though only a rickety Ford, it seemed a luxurious method of 
covering the last lap. It was drizzling when I reached Darjeeling and 
it continued so, with occasional breaks, during the next few days which 
I spent in developing my negatives. . 


73 


And so, after many vicissitudes, my journey was over. It is 
unfortunate that the end of the way descended from the sublime visions 
of the heights to the ridiculous mists of the Singalela. It was an 
anticlimax, for the dulness of which I must freely apologise to the 
patient reader. For the more tedious parts of my account the only 
excuse I can find is that of the persistent blanketing of cloud which, 
indeed, had prevented me from attaining my greatest ambitions. Perhaps 
I flew too high, Icarus-like; but again I excuse myself by the undoubted 
fact that the phenomena of cloud conditions at high altitudes are 
sufficient to cause the most intrepid and skilled mountaineer to look 
before he leaps. I have no such pretensions and, moreover, had the 
factor of time to consider, which often necessitated a choice between 
going very slowly or not at all. In these cases I always had to abandon 
the particular project. ; 


Despite all difficulties, however, I conside. myself extraordinarily 
lucky to have attained the modest heights recorded by a pen for the 
clumsiness of which I must repeatedly apologise to the reader. If what 
has (or has not) been read seems rather boresome in parts I crave 
indulgence and, further, belief that the actual travel itself transcends all 
possible description. I have only attempted to convey a fraction of the 
intense pleasure I experienced in my Sikkim month. Perhaps, in 
touching on expert scientific matters in dilettante fashion, I shall 
have aroused criticism and have earned a name as a snapper-up of 
unconsidered trifles. Still, it is all so interesting that I was tempted 
beyond my strength. I confess it. I have dabbled; but the mountain- 
fever is in my blood and those who have been there will understand 
how one is bewitched by the magic of a strange and wonderful world. 


The kindly reader will realise that desire has outrun per- 
formance; and that my ability has simply proved hopelessly insufficient 
to describe the soaring heights, the abysmal depths, the illimitable 
horizons, the dazzling snows, the enchanted forests and rivers and all 
the marvels of colour and shape in those far solitudes. I can only 
asseverate that given the slightest opportunity, no one with his five 
senses capable of absorbing the most perfect beauty imaginable should 
hesitate. Go and see. 


(uncom posoyn) ‘Vy614) doyon[H Suoqwy 

anqvy jo piuuins vant 

(doy nmoz mojoq hyrwo.o? usayHtoN) ILOLYH AuosysSuoy, 
“(eugntow poso7n) 92)) sorvovjy Banyo, 

(wz wyongy nopeg) A2YOV]H VYOINH Jo outvIoUT vO N 
(copom vyoimy fo yrtoy ) naquy, Jo ands ws0jsvy 

“WI VYING Jo 989A\-tIION ands AYooy 

Buvymoyy 


Stl mas) vO) 
4 este Bayoatavg 
9 FLO01 es njauoy, 
G26IT “ nydyvpuyg 
fz 91ST (poduno) you 


Guu payNO 
(aopnéung) Wouormyg 


0269 


9 0829 (pxdwno) rayuny Suopuy, 
fo oogs dine WN 
fo oghel (pediare) sy 1a300¢ 
it OzerI mA ” 
fe ooeeT ITA dung 
¥ Oorst (duo sen) Sunyary 
TF Osgct ADS Sy 
oD) isd A * ov ee00m 

t ¢ | OFGLT | . TAS 
te be oozgt yo 
‘ at osocr AT “ 03 gou0K) 

t ee Guns 

é Tighe 
ts ] dung 
fs (duivo esog) Banynty 
for (pedune) synq 1aSa0¢ 

& dupa ynquz], 
to (pedro) of vypta unsyox 
ag “* youoguty gy 

t “ Suodurqoury 
fz (mojndung) Banyyp 


hii |g oL 


1A 
nA 
TA 
A 
AI 
Il 
II 
I 
nysnoy, 
ngdyepaug 
anquqg 
ving 
fyouopuegy 
Zaopyy, 
UN 
wauoe 
A " 
TIA dar 
dung osvg 
AI “ 
A dan 
(véuntuayoduny 


J) obpra usosngy uo) 
«£2661, dep Jo quoosy 
ti 
AT dare 
(naqoy 
J vb pre usorsngy wo) 
wOL1OGy YI Jo Juoosy 
py 
J dmv 
: dug oseg 
Hiuoe 
ynquzy 
unsqoX, 
Wouorawy 
Suodurqouny 
Sunywqg 
Saypoaling 


wosg 


HOUVIN TWALOV 40 SWIL @ GVO AD JONVISIO . 
SLVWIXOUddY HLIM SLHOIZH JALLV13H HISHL 8 SdWV9 @ S30VLS 
a0 


a19vl 


V XIGNIddV 


APPENDIX B. 


s. 


RVATION 


BSE 


5 
: 
I 
5 
= 
5 
eS 


25th | 26th | 27th | 28th | 2oth | APRIL, 1908) 


AND ALTITUDE 0 


| } } | . } | 
| 
e ry j rr - | wer ® =| = ; = 7 
aa Saeed = ; 5 ; fees rset 
} | | | : | } SF) 
s | | | 5 AL: 5 | : 
Sth] 7en ] Bth | 9th | Orn] wth | sth | 13th | 14th | wth Lag | 17th | veh | wet | 20tn | 21st | 22nd | zara | 24th 


APPENDIX C 


LIST OF SOME OF THE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS 
USED DURING THE TOUR 


— POC =) OK on : 
SURVEY — 


3 inch Transit Theodolite (complete outfit with Base Line measuring apparatus 
and 100 feet “ Invar” tape). 


Plane Table, fitted with Alidade etc. 
Mercurial Barometer. 
3 Aneroid Barometers :— 


range 0 to. 23,000 feet. 
12,000 to 25,000 ,, 
15,000 to 30,000 , 


Prismatic Compass, radium (Large A. S, pattern). 
Max. and Min. Thermometers (? sets in cases.), 
Clinometer etc. 
PHOTOGRAPHIC :— 
Camera, + pl. Sinclairs’ “ Una” (triple extension, with Ross Combinable lens). 
Camera, } pl. Sanderson “ Tropical ” 


Tele~photography, complete outfit with :— 
Ross Telephoto Tube setting, Atkin-Swan Tilting Table, special Tripods, 
Lens Hoods, Filters and other instruments required for Telephotography. 


Plates, Panchromatic and others, of various makes, Cut films etc. for 300 


exposures in all. 


NOTE—Most of the above instruments were supplied by Messrs, Cary, Porter & Co., and J. A. 
Sinclair & Co., Ltd., London, and tested by the National Physical Laboratory. 


APPENDIX D 


SOME ARTICLES OF USE AND ORNAMENT IN SIKKIM, 


THESE FORM PART OF THE COLLECTION MADE ON MY TRAVELS, AND 
INCLUDE OBJECTS OF DAILY USE, RITUALISTIC ARTICLES FROM 
THE GUMPAS, AND ORNAMENTAL DETAILS. THEY ARE 
MOSTLY OF TIBETAN ORIGIN. 


(1&2) Yak Horns, used for carrying water. 
(3) Beulo, the Sikkimese sepoy’s shako, made of plaited cane, with 
peacock-feather aigrette. 
(4) Butter-dish, copper with brass bands. 
(5) Woman's Jewel Box, copper, with brass ornamentation and turquoise 
studs on the lid. 


(6) Tibetan Holy-Water Font, copper, richly ornamented with brass 
figures representing Buddhas, animals and demons’ heads. 


(7) 
mC) 
(9) 


(10) 
(11) 


(12) 


(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 


(17) 
(18) 


(19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 


.{23) 
(24) 
(25) 


2 


| Murwa I ug, bamboo stem with brass bands; a reed passes through a 


hole in the lid. 


Man’s Tibetan Boots, inade of green, blue and scarlet felt, with soles 
of yak hide. 


Tibetan Teapot, copper, beautifully decorated with brass ornaments 
representing dragons. This is also used in gumpas for pouring holy water into 
the small vases which are placed in front of the idols. 


Woman’s Earrings, turquoise, mounted on silver. 


~ Dorjé, brass instrument, about four inches long, said to represent a double- 


headed thunderbolt. It is held by the Lamas in the right hand during 
religious ceremonies, . : 


Dhilboo, bell used by Lamas in conjunction with the dorjé and‘ held 
in the left hand. The handle is a replica of half a doryé. 


Tibetan High Official’s Belt, yak leather, with engraved silver couplings. 
Buddha, relief carving of wood, painted in brilliant colours. 

Tibetan Pipe, with jade mouthpiece. 

“Smoker’s Companion”, linked up with a leather thong, consisting of ~ 


(«) Tinder Pouch, ornamented with silver medallions. The bottom of 
' the pouch is a steel segment, on Be is struck the flint contained in 
' the leather pocket. 


(6) ‘Tobacco Pouch, of yak leather, with pipe scraper attached. 
(c) . Sandalwood Bowl, in which the tobacco is prepared for the pipe. 


Jade Vases, perhaps imported from’ China. 


Tibetan Amulet, worn as a pendant from a necklace of coral, turquoise 
and other stones. 


Brass Casket, with idol of Buddha showing through the small window. 
Prayer-Wheel, with inscription-“Om Mani Padme Hun” on cylinder. 


. Tibetan Charm-Box, of engraved brass, which contains written prayers. 


Woman’s Tibetan Boots, gorgeously coloured, with soles made of thick 
layers of felt. . 


Amber beads, probably imported from Siberia. 
Brass Plate. 
Brass Medallion, representing the “Wheel of Life”. 


(39) 


31) 
(32) 
(38) 
(34) 
(35) 


5 
Kukri Knives. In the smal ‘pockets of the sheath are knives, scissors, 
tweezers, steel tooth-picks and many other instruments. 

(26) and (27) have yak-horn handles, (28) ivory, and (29) wood. 
Turquoise-studded, Silver chatelaine, worn on the bosom. From 
the chain depend articles of manicure, pedicure and the toilet generally; but 
judging from appearances these are seldom put to their proper uses. The 
tweezers are used for.pulling out hair from the face, or for extracting thorns. 
There are also tooth-picks and ear-scrapers. 

Dagger, with ivory handle. 

Dagger, in silver scabbard. 

Sword, in copper scabbard. . 
Battle-axe, with poniard sheathed in the handle, and drawn by unscrewing. 
Belt, of High Officials and Lamas. The eight ornaments placed between the 
brass studs are said to symbolise the Buddhist Law. 


INDEX 


. Block figures indicate main description 
reference 


Italic — figures indicate = mere 


Chu = 


River; Za: = Pass; 


leg. KABRU; 17, 26. | 


Kang = Snow. 


ACACIA; §. 
ALPINE ‘vegetation ; 14, 15, 17, 19, 
20, 24, 38, 60, 67, 69. 

ALTITUDES ; see Appendices A&B. 

ALUKTANG; 18, 20, 52. 

glacier : 24, 25, 26, 29, 35. 
—_— valley ; 19, 23, 38, 52, 

ANEROIDS ; 20, 35, 54, ” Appendix C. 

ARCTIC vegetation ; 54, 72. 

ASIATICS ; 2. 

AVALANCHES; 22, 30, 40, 45. 


——s0 


Baxi; 12, 14. 

BAMBOOS alpine ; 14, 60, 72. 

tropical ; 1, 4, 9 
BANANAS; 8, 63. 

BARLEY ; 9. 

BAROMETRICAL observations; 20, 54, 


Appendices A&B. 
BEARS; 62. 


BEGONTAS; 10. 
BENGAL; 1. 
BERBERIS; 9. 
BHUTEAS; 2. 

BIRCH ; 10. 

BISON; 71. 

BLEEDING from nose; 7. 


BREATHING, at high altitudes; 35, 51. 


BRIDGES; 4, 6, 8, 9, 14, 19, 53, 68, is 


BRIDLE paths ; 5, 6, 7, » B, 59, 67, 
> ? 1. 
BRUNONIANA, Abies; 14. 
BUDDHAS; 64, 65. 
BUDDHISTS ; 57. 


71, 72. 


CALCUTTA; 1. 

CAMPS; see Appendices A & B. 
CART ROADS; 8, 72. 
CHAKUNG;; 2, 4. 

CHANGU lake; 24. 
CHARTENS; 7, 9, 64, 67. 
CHEMTHANG:; 24, 52. 
CHESTNUT trees; 1, 7, 9, 10. 
CHIABANJAN ; 60, "69. 
CHONGPONG:;; 8, 63. 


CHUMIOMO ; see Introduction. 
CLIMBING vines; 5. 


| CLINOMETER ; 38 


CLOTHING; 3. 

CG@ILOGYNE cristata; 5. 

COOLIES, customs; 4, 12, 15, 19, 36, 
45, 61, 62. 

efficiency ; 2, 4, 51. 

means of transport by; 3 

27, 81, 38, 46, 58. 


es 


— 


CORN; 8. 

CREEPERS: 10, 14. 
CREVASSES ; 85, 43, 44, 46, 47, 
CUCKOO ; 12. 

CYPRESSES ; 62. 


Danpvy; 2 

DARJ EELING:; , 72. 
DENDROBIUM; 5 

DENTAM ; 60, £8, 69. 
DIARRHEA; 

DOME peak; ts 18, 25, 29, 35, 68. 
DONKYA LA; see Jntroduction. 
DORJE ; 65, 66, Appendix D. 
DUBDI gumpa; 61, 6 

DUI LA; 59. 


EDELWEISS; 32. 
ELEUSINA coracana; 6. 
EQUIPMENT; 3, 31. 
EVEREST; 70.. 


FERNS; 9, 10, 67. 
FIR trees; 14, 15, 19. 
FOOTHILLS ; 1, 3, ss 5, 6, 


FORESTS; 1, 5, 7, 10 - 15, 19, 
60; 67, 

FORGET-ME-NOTS; 6. 

FORKED Peak; 17, 18, 25, 29, 58. 


FRESHFIELD, 2. W. paler 36, 37. 
FROST-BITE; 
FUEL; 15, 38, on 

— limit of ; 8, 15, 19. 


GEENDARMES; 25. 

GENTIANS; 19, 20, 38. 
GEOLOGICAL notes ; 13, 39, 41. 
GEYSING:; 7. 

GHARA uA 59. 

GHUM; 

GL! ACIER, “Aluktang 13, 25, 26, 29, 35, 


Kabru; 18, 58. 

Kangchenjau ; 84. 

Pandim; 24. 

Rathong; 13, 18, 60, 58, 59, 

Talung; 22, 29, ‘30, 36, 38, 

39 to 41, 42, 50. 

Tongshyong 29, 40, 41 to 
47, 


TIT 


formation; 41. 
movement; 41. . 
table; 41. 
GNEISS ; 13, 39. 
GORDONIA ; A. 
GRASSES, gigantic ; 9.° 
GROTTOES; 45, 54, 55, 


GLACIER 


———ee 


rey 


GUICHA glacier ; 


Guicha; 22, 25, 26, 29, to 32, 


22, 25, 26, 29, 30 
to 32. 
GUICHA LA; see Jntroduction, 20, 
22, 26, 27 to 30, 36, 

38, 40, 43, 72. 

GUMPA,.- -Chongpong; 8 : 

. Dubdi; 61, = 
Katsuperri; 9 5 
Pamionchi; 8, 64 to 66. 
Sangachelling ; 67. 

GYALJ EN, Sirdar ; 2. 


> qmentonen 
— 


HEADACHES; 88, 44, 51. 
HERMITS; 57. 

HILL rice; 6. 

stations; 1, 2. 

tribes ; 2. 
HOFFMANN, Mr.; 37. 
HUTS, Lepcha; 6, 9. 
HYDRAN EAS; 10. 
HYMETTUS, Mount ; 66. 


— 


— 


ICE- AXES; 8. 
— -falls; 18, 32, 34, 48, 44, 47. 
— + innacles ; 


INDIAN corn; 8. 


JASMINE; 10. 
JONGRI; 72, 15, 16, 19, 22, 50, 53, 
8, 59, 60 


JUBONU; 16, 20, 21, 62, 53. 
JUNIPER; 16, 19. 
JUTE; 1. 


JC ABRU; 5, 8, 17, 18, 26, 29, 59, 
58, 62. 


? 


KABUR;; 52 to 55, 57, 58. 
—— GAP; 17, 58. - 

KALA POKRI; 71. 

KALET Chu; 6, 60, 68. 
——~ Valley; 6, 68. 


KANGCHENJAD; see Introduction, 34. 
KANGCHENJUNGA; see Jntrod._.8, 
"20, 21, 22, 28, 25, 26, 28 


to 30, 36, 38, 49, 58. 
KANG LA;-16, 17. 
KANG Peak; 17, 22. 
KANGRA LA; see Introduction. 
KATSUPERRI Gumpa; 9. 
KAZI of Yoksun; 9, 10, 61. 


KIONA, Mount; 66. 


KOKCHURANG Chu; 13 (foot-note ). 


KUKRIS; 11, 14, 19, Appendix D, 
KULHAIT; see Kalet Chu. 
KURSEONG;; 1. 


LAcHEN; 67, 

LACHUNG River ; see Jntroduction. 
LAKES; 24, 52. 

LAMA ANDEN; 387, 54. 
LAMAS; 2, 23, 62, 64 to 67. 

. LANDSLIPS; 10. 

LAUREL; 8. 

LEECHES ; 60, 61. 

LEPCHA huts; 6, 9, 63. 
LEPCHAS; 2. ° 


LIBRARIES; 65. 

LIMIT of fuel; 3, 15, 19. 
LITTLE KABRU;; 8, 17. 
LITTLE RANGIT; 4. 
LOADS, coolies’; 3, 7, 38. 


MAGNOLIA; 7, 8, 14. 
MAHATMAS; 68. 
MAIDENHAIR fern; 11. 
MANIBANJAN; 72. 


MAPLE; 8, 10. 

MARCHES; see Appendices A & B. 

MENDONGS ; 7, 9, 23. 

MILLET; 6, 8. 

MONASTERIES ; see Gumpas. 

MONKS; 62, 65 to 67. 

MOONSHINES; 16, 28. 

MORAINES; 23, 26, 31, 39, 41, -42, 
43, 44,62, 58, 59. 

MOSS; 14, 67. 

MOUNTAIN sickness; 45, 50, 61 

MURWA ; 6, 10, 61, Appendix D. 

MUSIC 66, 67. 

MUSICAL instruments; 65, 66, 67. 


NATHU LA; 24. 

NEPAL; see Jntroduction, 69, 
NEPALESE; 2. 

NEVE; 18, 22. 

NIBI; 13, 61. 
NOSE-BLEEDING ; 7. 
NURSANG, Sirdar ; 2, 3. 


OAK trees; 1, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14. 
OMA LA; 89. 

ORCHIDS; 5, 10, 67. 
OUTARI; 69. 


PALM trees; Z. 
PAMIONCHI; 7, 8, 60, 62, 63. 
— Gumpa; 8, 64 to 66. 
PANDIM;; 8, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
26, 26, 52, 68. : 
——— Glaciers; 24. 
PARNASSUS, Mount; 66, 
PASSES of Tibet; Jntrod., 24. 
PATHS; see Bridle Paths and Tracks. 
PHALUT; 69, 69, 70. 


PHOTOGRAPHIC _ instruments::.-see 
Intr od. , Append. “G. 
PINES ; 


14, 60, 70, 71. 
PLAINSMAN; 2. 
PLANE Table; 4, s Ppenix C. 
PLANTAINS, Wild; 

POST OFFICES ; 7. 


POTATOES; 6.. 
POTENTILLA : 20. 
PRAIG Chu; 13; 14, 19, 20, 53, 61. 
PRAYER WHEELS, hand-driven; 2, 68, 
Appendix D. 
water-driven; 61, 62. 
giant; 67. 
PRIMUS Stoves; 28, 31, 33. 
PROVISIONS; 2, 3. 
PYRAMIDAL Peaks ; 


‘ees 


RAMMAN;; 4. 
RANGIT; 4, 5. 
RATHO Chu; 5. 
RATHONG Chu; 8 to 10, 13, 14, 58, 


62, 63. 
— Glacier ; 18, 50, 58, 59. 
_—_ Valley; 10 to-13. 
RATS; 63. 
RHEUM Nobile; 54. 


RHODODENDRONS, generally; 10, 15, 
17, 19, 20, 60, 67, 69, 72. 


Arboreum ; 10. 
Argenteum ; 10, 14, 69, 
Aromatic; 17 
Barbatum ; 69, 70. 


-ELTTTTTT| 


' Dwarf; 19, 69. 
Falconert ; 14, 69. 
Hodgsoni ; 16. Se 
Nivale; 15. 
RHUBARB; see Rheum Nobile. 
RICE; 7, 6. 
RICKSHAW ; 2, 


RIDIANG Chu; 97. 
RINCHINPONG; 5. 
RINGBI Chu; 8, 9, 63. 


26, 29, 32 to 34. 


4 


RISHI Chu; 5, 

RISU Chu; 9, 63. 

RIVES Kalet. Chu; 6, 60, 68. 

Kokchurang Chu; 13 (foot-note). 

‘Kulhait; see Kalet Chu. 

Lachung ; see Introduction. 

Little Rangit; 4. 

Praig Chu; 13, 14, 19, 20, 
7 58, 61. 

Ramman ; 4. 

Rangit ; 4, 5. 

Ratho Chu; 5. 

Rathong Chu; 8 to 10, 13, 14, 

58, 62, 63. 

Ridiang Chu; 37. 

Ringbi Chu; 8, 9, 63. 

Rishi Chu; 5. 

Risu Chu; 9, 63. 

RIVER System ; 13, 14, 

ROADS ; see Cart Roads. 

ROCHES Moutonées ; 18. 

ROCK climbs; 35, 54. 

formations ; 13, 17, 18, 39, 41. 

“RONNIE”; 1,12, 15, 21, 28, ‘2, 60, 68, 

ROPE, use of; 3h, 86, 48, 46, 64. 

ROSES; 6. 


— 


SAL trees; 4. 

SALT traders; 11. 

SANDAKPHU ; 59, 70. 

SANGACHELLING;; 67. 

SAXIFRAGA ; 38, 72. , 

SEMI-TROPICAL Plants; see Vegetation. 

SERACS ; 82, 48, 44, 47. 

SHORT-CUTS ;.4, 13, 69, 71. 

SICKNESS, symptoms of Mountain 
sickness; see Mountain. 

SIKKIM; see Jntr oduction. 

previous journeys ; see oe od. , 

24, 51, 64, 

SILIGURI; 1. 

SILVER FIR; 14. 

SIMANA. basti; 72. 


5 


SIMVU ; see Introduction, 29, 86, 47, 58. TINGLING; 9, 62, 63. 


Saddle; 37. 
SINGALELA, Mount; 69, 70, 
Range; see Introduction, 
2, 14, 60;: -59, 60, 66 to 
68, 69, 70, 72. 
SINGLA Bazar; 4. 
SINIOLCHUM ; 29, 37. 
SIRDARS ; 2, 3. 
SLEEPING-BAG ; 16, 265. 
SNAKES ; 68. 


SNOW - blindness ; 51. 

: - boots; 3. 

-cock; 14, 

condition of; 32 to 35, 37, 38, 

48, 44, 47 to 50, 53, 54, 58. 

first signs of; 15. 

SNOWFALIS; 25, 47 to 49, 55. 

SNOW-goggles ; 51, 

SPEED of travel; 12, 51, Appendix A. 

STAGES; see A ndices A & B. 

STRAWBERRI , Wild; 15. 

SUKIA POKRI; 72, 

SUNRISES ; 17, 22, 28, 29. 

' SUNSETS; 20, 52, 66. 

SUSPENSION bridge ; 6. 

SURVEY Instruments ; see Introduction, 
Appendix C. 


—re 


—_— 
ed 


— 


— 


TADONG; 9, 63. 

TAKVAR Tea Estate; 4. 

TALUNG Glacier; 22, 29, 36, 38, 39, 
0, 42, 50 

Peak; 22, 26, 29, 38. 

Saddle; 29, 38. 

TAYGETUS, Mount; 66. 

TEA plantations; 3, 4. 

TEMPERATE Vegetation ; 5, 7. 

aaa see Appendix: B. 

TENTS; 8, 


THANGME: a 
TIBET Passes : see Int rdton, 8 24. 
TINGCHINGKANG ; 


rt 


TONGLU ; 72, 
TONGSHYONG ats 29, 40, 41 to 
44, 


TRACKS; 8 to in 18 to 15, 19, 20, 


TRANSPORT: 8, "97, 31, 38, 46, 53. 
TRAVEL, speed of; 12, 5, Append. A. 
TRIANGULATIONS; 26, 54, 
-TROPICAL Vegetation ; 1, 9. 
TZUBUK;; 10, 11, 61. 


Wier lower of Sikkim; 5, 6, 63. 

Aluktang; 19, 23, 38, 52. 

Kalet; 6, 68. 

Rathong; 10 to 13, 

VEGETATION, Alpine; 14, 15, 17, 19, 
20, 24, 38, 60, 67, 69. 

Arctic; 54, 72. 

cease 4, 5, 9, 61, 69. 

ea 

Tropical ; 1 

VERGLAS; 84. 

VINES, climbing ; 8. 


— 
ed 
—an 


mel 


WALNUT; 9. 

WEATHER conditions generally; see 
ppendix B 

WHITE, Mr. J.C; 37. 

“WILD MAN’; 55 to 57. 


YAKS; 17, 71. 

azing stations; 19, 20, 24. 
YOKSU ; 9, 61, 62. 
YUMTSO LA; 37. 


ZEMU Gap; see Introduction, 29, 80, 36, 
44, 46, 47 to 49, 58, 
aes 86, 37, 46, 47, 49, 50. 


ZOBOS ; 


ANNUAL VON A LL AV 
00109662 


KANGCHENJUNGA 


SIKKIMNEPAL 


FRONTIER
