A System of Speculative Masonry (Salem Town, 1818)
==========================================================
Town's 1818 system; the American Masonic educator's history and defense of the craft. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/asystemspeculat00towngoog).

Google


This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher lo a library and linally lo you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for
personal, non -commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/|


Kf


\o\n*ma


/**- ^L


RECOMMENDATIO


Grand Chapter of the State of .Yew- fork, convened in the City

of Albany \ February 7, 5817

Resolved Uwaiimouslt, That this Grand Chapter recom-
mend »o t»»e public in general, and more especially to all Ma-
sonic Brethren, " The System of Free- Masonry," about to be
published by compt -ion Salem T.»wji, Grand Chaplain. The
subjects of that work, having b -en exhibited before the mem-
bers of this Grand Chapter, in a series of addresses, we do re-
commend it as a most valuable production, on Speculative Ma-
sonry, an 1 believe it r ill be of great importance to the institu-
tion in general, and interesting to every friend of truth, of
sound principles and benevolent feelings

ISAAC HEMI'STED,
Grand Secretary of the Grand Chapter:

Wit, the undersigned, having heard companion Salem Town's
Masonic \ddrosses, which, by the special request of the Grand
Chapter, he has reduced to « regular system, do most cordial*
lv recommend it to all our brethren and companions, as a most
valuable production, and in our opinion, calculated to advance
tin* general interests of the Masonic Institution, and open a
field for individual improvement in Masonic knowledge, more
than any work which to our knowledge has appeared .to the
public. We therefore feel the highest confidence in recom-
mending it to the perusal of every Mason, entertaining no
doubt, hut his mind will be thereby replenished with ru»ny
new and interesting ideas, calculated to show the great impor-
tance of the Institution.

M - R Ezra \mes, G~and Hi?h Priest.

E Joseph E*<*s, Jtm. Grand King ,

E Jon* Brush, Grand Scribe

E Isaac Hempsted. Grand Treasurer:
M.- E Samuel Edmonds, P. DO H Priest, •

E. Elisha Gilbert, Past Grand King.

K Asa Fitch, Past Grand Kiny

E. Chris. C Yates, Past Grand Treasurer.

IS, Ebehezer Wadswortb, Past Grund s'ci&c.

Grawvtlle, March 2, 18 IT.
I have examined companion Salem Town's Addresses to the
Gr«nd Chapter of New-York, and tor extent of Masonic re-
scrch, purity of moral, correctness of Masonic principle, and
fervency of piety, I consider them unequalled j and therefore
most cordully recommend them to the perusal and patronage of


*


*Y» • ' >


the lovers of Masonry and human happiness. They develop
the origin, principles and use of the institution, and redeem the
sacred order at once from the ignorance, spleen and mistaken
dread of a too censorious world. They enlighten the dark,
teach the novice, confirm the weak, and add grace and beauty
to what the discerning eye has ever deemed beautiful

Z. It. SH1PHERD, Past Dep. Grand H Priest.

Recommendation of the Honourable and Most Excellent Compan-
ion DE WITT CLWTQJST> General Grand High Priest of
the General Grated Chapter of the United States of America,
Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of the State of JKerv-l'oi h t
&c* &c.

Having perused some chapters of a manuscript, entitled " A
System of Speculative Masonry" by companion Sait.m Town,
of Washington county, highly approving the general outlines
of this work, and being satisfied of its accurate and able illus-
tration of the benign principles of Free-Masonry, I have no he-
sitation in recommending it to the patronage of the fraternity.
Dated at Albany, 20th March, 5817.

DE WITT CLINTON.

Since the publication of the first edition t the Grand Royal Arch
Chapter of the state of Vermont, and the Grand Master cfthe
sUte of New- Jersey t have been pleased to communicate to the
Author ; the following : —

The Grand Royal Arch Chapter of the state of Vermont, ten-
der you their most grateful acknowledgments for your valua-
ble and interesting publication on Speculative Masonry. They
consider this book well calculated to do good, to remove the
suspicions of prejudice, and to secure to the institution, a name
and a praise, among all the lovers of science and virtue.

By order of the Grand Chapter*

M. E JOHN II. GOTTEN, Grand H P.
M E. CHARLES K. WILLIAMS, Past G H P.
Itcv.&nd&l. E. JONATH\N N\"E, Grand Chaplain of
the Gtn. G. C. of the United States

I have derived great pleasure from the perusal of a system
of Speculative Masonry, by companion Salem Town. While
the mind is recreated,* the heart is improved, and the under-
standing informed. Believing this useful and benevolent work
well deserving the most Pxt naive circulation, I do not hesitate
to give i< my recommendation.

M. W Jamfs Giles, G M of the G L. of the state of
•Yew- Jersey, and U. P* ofBcardsleij It* A* C.


*


jfoZu- *¥ &** J4***~>


A SYSTEM


OF


SPECULATIVE MASONRY.


\ \


\\ ~ v^ V


SYSTEM

of '--. . ;

IN ITS

ORIGIN, PATRONAGE* DISSEMINATION, PRINCIPLES, DUTIES, AND ULTI-
MATE DESIGNS, LAID OPEN FOR THE EXAMINATION
OF THE SERIOUS AND CANDID :

BEING A

COURSE OF LECTURES,

DELIVERED BEFORE THE

GRAND CHAPTER OF THE STATE OF NEW-YORK,

AT THEIR

ANNUAL MEETL\GS,

HELD JS TEMPLE CHAPTER ROOM, IN THE CITY OF ALBANY.


Br SALEM TOWN, A. M. Grand Chaplain, t

PRINCIPAL OF GRANVILLE ACADEMY.


44 To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna,
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which no inao knowetb, saving he that receiveth it." st. john.

* ' According to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept se-
cret since the world began. 1 ' bt. pall.


SECOND EDITION.


\


k . f


\ \ SALEM, JV. r.


/


PRINTED BY H. DODD AND CO

1822. ,

4


ul


PSVLU- M uu»»-

MML U«»* AI ?. a

Northern District of Netv- York, ss.

Be it hemembered. that on the twenty third day of April,
io the forty-sixth year of the Independence of the United
(l. 8.) States of America, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and
twenty two, Salem Town, of the said District, has deposited in
this Office, the title of a Book, the right whereof he claims
as Author in the words following, to wit : " A System of Speculative
Masonry in its Origin. Patronage. Disip.miMatmn, Principles. Duties
and Ultimate Designs, laid open/or the Examination of the Serious and
Candid ; being a Course of Lectures delivered before the Grand Chap-
ter of the State of New- York, at their Annual meetings held in Temple
Chapte\ Room, in the City of Albany. By Salem T«m, A. M. Grand
Chaplaiix, Principal of Granville Academy.

'* To him that overcometh will J give to eat of the hidden manna and
will ghfe him a white stone* and in the stone a new name nritten, which
no man knoweth saving he thai receiveth it," St. John.

" According to the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept set ret
since the world began, St. Paul.

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, en-
titled '• An Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the
copies of Maps, Charts, and Books, to the authors and proprietors of
such copies, during the times therein mentioned." And ako, to the
Act, entitled " An Act, supplementary to an Act, entitled ' an Act for
the encouragement of Learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts,
and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the
times therein mentioned, 1 and extending the benefits thereof to the arts
of designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints.

* RICHARD R. LANSING,

Clerk if the Northern District of New- York.


Ml

FOLLOWING WORK

II HUMBLY DEDICATED
TO THE

MOST EXCELLENT GRAND CHAPTER

^ OF THE STATE OF NEW- YORK,

H B7 THEIR

^ BROTHER AND COMPANION,

"I SALEM TOWN.


^Feb.4, A. L.58I7.


%


PREFACE.

THE public are informed, that the
following pages were originally prepared
in separate addresses, only to be exhibited
before Masons. That the author had not
the most distant idea of their appearing in
print. Not that he thought some publica-
tion, of a similar nature, might not be ex-
ceedingly important; but that it should
pooie from one better able to do justice to
a subject of so much public interest.

The sentiments contained in this little
book, have been exhibited before the
" r and Chapter of this state, and the most
y them in the same languafl^they are now
* 0|, nd. The arrangement in chapters, was
jo throw the work into v the form of a -regit*
Jar system.-

yVt tbs annual meeting of the Grand
^' l5 *pter in February, eighteen hundred
an *J sixteen, the idea was suggested of pre-
P at "ing for the press, several Masonic ad-
Jj lf *5iSM, which had been delivered before
,^t honourable body. On mature delibeia-
" (> *~i, the measure was thought expedient,
? nc * therefore adopted. Relying on the
? e t ter discernment of respectable and well
HtffVirmed brethren, the work has been sub-
m *t.ttd. It is, therefore, ^presented to the


VI PREFACE.

public, not for its elegance of composition,
but for its truth. The primary object was,
to give a plain, concise description of
Speculative Pice-Masonry.

Some few repetitions will be found to
occur in language and sentiment, which
are to be ascribed to the original prepara-
tion in distinct addresses. It is, however,
sincerely hoped, some good may result to
community. It is confidently believed, the
brotherhood will take occasion to improve
on those general ideas suggested in the
work ; that the community in general, will
be inclined to think favourably of our In-
stitution. We mean not to deceive. We
mean, to statc^acts, in relation to Specula-
tive Pree-M snronry. We have no doubt,
but what you find in these pages, would
accord with your own views and feelings
on the subject, should you unite with our
Society, and fully understand its. princi-
ples. We are not deceived as to the na-
ture of those important instructions deri-
ved from the institution. We know we
are not. They are plain, and according to
the common acceptation entertained of mo-
ral fitness, not only by the wise and pru-
dent and discerning, but the more hum-
ble capacity. As we are your neighbours
and friends, we wish to be your brethren.
To love and cherish you as such, and per-


p • * » • .


•


• •


PREFACE. VU

form all those mutual and reciprocal acts
of friendship, which are required, and are
binding on members of this Society. We
wish to be fellow helpers with you, in pro-
moting the general happiness and well be-
ing of mankind. Our charity is more ex-
tensive. We wish the whole world might
become brethren of one common family,
and fulfil all those offices of kindness, re-
sulting from such a relation.

These are privileges peculiar to our pro-
fession, and we desire they may be com-
mensurate with human wants. Many, how-
ever, are restricted to members of our own
Society. This, we think, cannot be wrong
in itself. It is according to the very na-
ture of things. It is precisely what exists
in every associated body of men, formed
for any laudable purpose whatever. In
su ch bodies we expect to find privileges
Peculiar to their own members.

Nothing is intmded by this work, but a
plain, unadorned statement of Masonic
principles. Nothing is designed to be con-
strued unfavourably, as to the sacred scrip-
tures, or the churches of Christ, or any re-
ligious denomination. Nothing is design-
ed to reflect, either on the community in
general, or individuals of that community.
# The plain truth is, we, as Masons, do be-
lieve in the high importance and utility of


Till PREFACE.

the Institution, and are not only willing,
but desire that others should be informed,
as far as consistent, what our privileges are.
If, therefore, the public are pleased with
us as citizens, as neighbours, as friends and
cortnexions, why not esteem us as Masons ?
If we are wholesome citizens, good neigh-
bours, honest merchants and mechanics, or
wise and prudent statesmen, why may we
not be good and honest Masons? If our
opinions in other mailers* are esteemed
equally sound withother men's, why should
we be disbelieved in our opinions of Ma-
sonry ? Let the inquiry be made, whether
it is in any way probable, that all Masons
should have been deceived. Let us exer-
cise charity towards each other, and be as-
sured, neither our happiness, nor our friend-
ship, nor our interest will, in the least, suf-
fer by it.

THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.

Page.
Preliminaries. - - - -13

CHAPTER I.

The great outlines of Speculative Free-Ma-
sonry* 20

CHAPTER II.

The ultimate End of the Material Creation,
to subserve the Moral World. — The pro-
per object of human Association, and the
Origin of various Societies. - 36

CHAPTER III.

General Nature and Design of the Masonic
Institution. — Summary of Duties. — Prin-
ciples in the abstract. - - 42

CHAPTER IV.

Coincidence of Masonic Principles with Di-
vine Revelation. 46

CHAPTER V.

Ancient Masonry, Operative and Reli-
gious. ..... 51


X CONTENTS.

CHAPTER VI.

Modern Free- Masonry ', Speculative and Re-
ligious. ----- 59

CHAPTER VI L

Speculative Free-Masonry unfolds the Out-
lines of History in several great and lead-
ing Events, both in the Natural and Mo-
ral Worlds. .... 62

CHAPTER VIIL

Moral Improvement from the Order and Suc-
cession of Masonic Degrees. - 71

CHAPTER IX.

Ancient Masonry, ancient Christianity. 78

CHAPTER X.

Outlines of Masonic History. — The Proba-
ble Origin as an organized System* — The
Dissemination of its Principles and Ce-
remonies amongst the various Nations of
the Earth. .... 87

CHAPTER XI.

Names and Masonic Characters of Ancient,
Pious Patrons. - - - 109

■ ■ ■

* Whatever is found in the first chapter of " Bradley on Ma-
sonry," in the same words as contained in this chapter, was by
him quoted from an address of the author, published by the
G. R. A. Chapter of this state, some years since.


CONTENTS. XI

CHAPTER XII.

Ancient Mysteries. — Philosophers. — Wist
Men. - - - ' - - 122

CHAPTER XIII.

Masonic Word, or Divine Logos. — How
transmitted. - - - - 137

CHAPTER XIV.

The Unity and Fellowship of Masons. — All
agree in the great essentials. — Things un-
essential break not the Unity of the Bro-
therhood. - - - - 145

CHAPTER XV.

Masonry as a Charitable Institution. 1 52

CHAPTER XVL

Millenial state. — General prosperity and pre-
valence of Speculative Free- Masonry. 1 59

CHAPTER XVIL

Motives, Persuasives and Inducements to
maintain the true Dignity of the Masonic
Character. - - - - 168

CHAPTER XVIIL

Address to Lodges and Chapters. - 181


Xll CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XIX.

Evidences that Masonry has been the Medi-
um through which the Pentateuch, or Jive
Books of Moses, have been preserved to
the World. - - - • 190

CHAPTER XX.

Speculative Masonry one great Medium
through which the world will be civilized
united and Christianized. - 219

CHAPTER XXI.

Monuments of ancient Architecture, and his-
torical facts of the origin and progress of
Geometry, and other Sciences, connected
with ancient, Operative Masonry. 234

CHAPTER XXII.

Extracts from the Valedictory to the Grand
Chapter. - - - - 255


r


PRELIMINARIES.

THE great field of Masonic research
has, for many centuries, been'explored by
-the most able, ingenious and fruitful ima-
ginations. The origin of the Institution,
its principles and design have employed
many pens, in every age. But, notwith-
standing those numerous, as well as great
-exertions, so often and so ably repeated,
much still remains. The subject is not,
neither can it be exhausted. The great
and paramount point has never been clear-
ly and fully presented to the world.

That point is, that the principles of Spe-
culative Free- Masonry have the same co-
eternal and unshaken foundation, contain
^and inculcate, in substance, the same truths,
and propose the same ultimate end, as the
doctrines of Christianity taught by Divine
Revelation.

This is a position of very high import,
and great extent ; yet the truth of it is not
doubted by those who are thoroughly ver-
sed in Masonic knowledge. To explain
fundamental principles, and establish the


14 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

Institution, to the satisfaction of every per-
son, on a tried foundation, becomes a mat-
ter of primary importance. It is, however,
thought plain and conclusive evidence can
be adduced, sufficient to satisfy every can-
did mind. If, therefore, the above position
can be fairly established, Masonry will be
hailed by all Christian nations as a precious
repository of truth, sacred in their eyes,
and hallowed in their esteem. Those na-
tions whose characteristic is Christian, are
usually sanguine in their devotions to such
establishments as they have reason to be-
lieve are founded on Divine revelation. —
Taught, from their youth, that hence are
derived those principles which emanate
from the very throne of God, their venera-
tion increases with their years, and excites
in the mind admiring views of truth- and
sanctity.

Such is the infallible result of a sound
faith in revelation. It is evident, if we
would give universal celebrity to our In-
stitution, the world must be convinced
that the foundation is laid in evangelical
truth. When evidence shall be exhibited
to this effect, the great point is fully ac-
complished. The ignorant and supersti-
tious will be constrained to behold the
light. The sober and discreet will rejoice
in Masonry as a compendious system of


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 15

moral and religious instruction ; while the
pious and devout will embrace it as an aux-
iliary to human happiness, and a guide to
a blessed immortality.

This truth, being well understood, would
present a powerful motive before men of
integrity and worth to solicit the benefits
of the Institution.

As we, my brethren, have a special at-
tachment to the principles of Speculative
Free-Masonry, why should we feel indif-
ferent to the clear manifestation of so im-
portant a truth as that contained in the pro-
position, and one which may be subservient
to the general good of mankind ? Why sub-
mit to the calumnies of the illiberal, with-
out attempting a refutation?

The learned Doctor Robertson has la-
boured to identify Masonry with Ulumin-
ism. No plan could have been more fatal-
ly concerted to fix deep rooted prejudices
in the mind. Illuminism, in Europe, was
justly considered the bane of empire, the
secret and skulking enemy of all civil and
ecclesiastical institutions, and the very
school of licentiousness. The writings of"
this man, therefore, from his character and
high literary fame, were peculiarly calcu-
lated to raise alarms, and excite odious de-
nunciations against Free-Masonry. Cha-
rity, however, inclines us to believe that


16 SPECULATIVE MAS0NR1T.

tbe doctor thought his opinion well found-
ed, though it has since appeared to the world
he was greatly deceived. Time, and a re-
gular course of unimpeachable conduct in
the great body of the fraternity, have near-
ly, or quite obliterated those unjust im-
pressions.

It is now manifest to the world, from the
history of the Institution, that Masonry
has never been tbe exciting cause of evil
in governments, policy or religion. Can a
single charge of this nature be substantia-
ted ? How astonishing, that a world which
cannot bring and maintain one charge of
this kind, either of a public or private na-
ture, as an authorized act of the Institution,
should stand aloof, and still harbour un-
founded suspicions ! Has not the experi-
ence say of two hundred years, been suffi-
cient for an experiment ? Faithful records
have been preserved during that period.
Is not the testimony of thousands of indi-
vidual members, persons of religion, can-
dor and truth, to be credited ? Can no con-
fidence be reposed in those of our friends
with whom we are on terms of the utmost
intimacy ? Has not the Institution been pa-
tronised by kings, princes and presidents,
as well as men in every station of civil au-
thority ? Would such men take to their bo-
soms, and patronise and recommend what


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. • 17

was aiming to dethrone them, or in any
way subvert their governments or disturb
the peace of society ? The thing is incredi-
ble in its nature, and carries a plain con-
tradiction in terms.

Have not many holy ministers of the al-
tar, and a multitude of meek, humble, pi-
ous and devout Christians embraced the In-
stitution, frequented the regular commu-
nications, promulgated the principles, and
lived and died recommending them to the
world? How can this practice be reconcil-
ed with a profane, irreligious, demoralising
establishment ? Those pious ministers of
the gospel spend their days in declaiming
against vice and irreligion, in preaching
the unsearchable riches of righteousness,
and their lives testify to the sincerity of
their hearts. The private christian, also,
gives strong, if not indubitable proof of the
same t ruth by his daily deportment. Does
not the same contradiction, therefore, most
manifestly appear in this case, as in the
former, if the society be instituted for vi-
cious purposes? If it does, the institution
must necessarily be good, or all those pat-
rons who claim to be considered pious, are
mere hypocrites.

Do not great numbers of our acquain-
tances now belong to the Masonic Institu-
tion, who in all things are considered men

2*


18 • SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

of approved integrity, men of sound judg-
ment, and whose character for honesty and
truth was never suspected ? And do they
not, by the very fact of continuing their
membership, and frequenting our assem-
blies, bear public testimony to the proprie-
ty, as well as the utility of the institution ?
How shall we reconcile such conduct in
those persons on the supposition that the
Masonic society is, in its nature, immoral?

But we will name one example, familiar
to every person.

The great and immortal Washington
was a Free- Mason: — That father of bis
country's salvation was our brother. In
him was combined every excellence of
character, in the field, in the cabinet, and
in the church. He was one of our fairest,
brightest, greatest ornaments. The weight
of his talents and character was never with-
bolden from Masonic support. This man
could have no motive in deceiving the
world, no motive in patronising Masonic
assemblies, unless, in his view, the institu-
tion ought to be supported and maintain-
ed. Suffice it to say, therefore, as Free-
Masonry was countenanced and approved
by this great and good man, it could be on
no other ground than that of its own in-
trinsic worth, and consequent importance
to mankind. If such men have not only


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 19

honored the society with their presence^
but sanctioned the institution by precept
and example, who shall presume to con-
demn it ? If the testimony of men, first in
the affections of their countrymen, is valid
in relation to other matters, why not e-
qually so in the case before us ?

But there is one more consideration to
be noticed. Those who denounce the In-
itiation are certainly ignorant of its true
nature and principles, and of consequence,
in that state cannot be competent judges*
It is necessary first to understand what the
tenets are, before we can decide correctly
as to their propriety or impropriety, use-
ful or destructive tendency. The farther
persons are made acquainted with the true
principles, the more beauty they discover,
and hence that general love to the Society
by its own members, that universal attach-
ment to its principles, and that brotherly
affection which always prevail.


•^*o /^


CHAPTER I.

The Great Outlines of Speculative Fre

Masonry.


BELOVED BRETHREN AND COMPANIONS,

THROUGH the merciful Provide
of God, another opportunity is preser
of addressing you in terms of fraternal
fection. Once more, of asking that k
indulgence, that serious and candid atl
tion you have never denied me.

An attempt will now be made, briefl;
exhibit, some of the great outlines of &
culative Free-Masonry, in one gen<
view. General I say, because a single
dress cannot embrace but the mere outl
of a system, on which the mind may ra
with fresh and admiring prospects, or d>
with unspeakable delight. A subject
vojving Jruths weighty aiKl importam
thqjrk nature, aqpl consecjuenres serious
eternal!** ^ \ * % j\ \*

The science of Speculative Firee" I\^
ry seems to have been mace a subject
inquiry, in some general 'degree, in ev
age ©Mbe waiJ^h # Heye vajLnii oflini
have been entertained by mankind, a
its origin and proper design. While sc


&>ECtJLATIYE MASONRY. 21

have really approved the Institution, oth-
ers have wholly condemned it. While some
have expressed a belief, that in a few instan-
ces it might he beneficial to individuals,
others have utterly denounced it as the bane
of society. While some have wisely sus-
pended their opinions, others have cast o-
dium on the very name. In the abodes of
ignorance, where the genial rays of science
have faintly shone on the human intellect,
Masonry has usually been denominated a
scheme of practical impiety, bewildering
the head and corrupting the heart. From
such unfounded and uncharitable opinions
have originated numerous fables, by which
enchantment and witchcraft are said to be
practised in Masonic assemblies. From
these and various other causes, the public
mind has long been labouring under seri-
ous doubts, whether to consider, the Insti-
tution laudable and good in its nature and
design, or not. In view of such a consid-
eration, we are loudly called upon, as Free
and accepted Masons, to unfold the tenets
of our system in the most plain and une-
quivpcal terms. Distinctly to explain the
moral nature of the Institution to the world,
and by convincing the understanding, lay
a sure foundation for its universal appro-
bation.
That Speculative Free- Masonry is wise-


22 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ly calculated to irradiate the understand-
ing, enlarge tbe capacity of the mind, and
improve tbe heart, no man can doubt, who
has been correctly taught in its principles.
These are facts capable of as positive proof
as the nature of moral fitness will admit.
We are, therefore, bound by that benevo-
lence and charity we profess, to adopt eve-
ry laudable expedient to remove error,
firejudice or misconception from the pub-
ic mind. On the accomplishment of this
desirable object depends much of the ce-
lebrity of the order.

That our minds may be refreshed on this
subject, let us turn our thoughts on some
of the more prominent features of the Ma-
sonic Institution.

Speculative Free-Masonry, as a system,
evidently embraces, in body and 3ubstance >
the whole duty of man as a moral being;
comprising a summary of principles, con-
formable to the very nature and fitness of
things. Here is presented that variety and
richness of scenery which charms the under-
standing, that beauty, sublimity and gran-
deur of objects which fill the contemplative
mind with admiring views. Here we dis-
cover the wisdom of God in the symmetry
of nature, and the finger of Providence in
the government of the world. The great
outlines in the history of creation are also


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 23

unfolded. The primitive innocence of man,
the fail and consequent scenes of natural
and moral evil. In a word, tbe history of
nature and grace is most beautifully taught
in a lively display of Masonic symbols. —
Here we view the coincidence of principle
and design, between the Christian religion
and Speculative Free-Masonry, with that
pleasing admiration which satisfies inquiry,
and clearly proves our system based on the
Rock of eternal ages. As the subject con-
tinues to open, the mind is presented with
an endless variety of g*blime contempla-
tions. Such are the deep mysteries of the
Divine Word, in whom all the fulness of
the Godhead dwells bodily. Such the ter-
rible majesty of Him that rideth upon the
heavens by his name J AH, who plants his
footstepsin the sea, and manages the storms.
Such the boundless displays of the unsearch-
able riches of Divine Benevolence. Such
the Grand Council of Eternity, which de-
vised and executed that great plan of man's
redemption. The mind is thereby present-
ed with the co-equal and co-eternal exist-
ence of the adorable Persons in the Sacred
Trinity. The allusions are direct, and
meet the understanding in a convincing
light. Here we view the numerous allu-
sions to that essential Divinity, which foil-
ed the powers of darkness, and brought sal-


24 ' SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

vation to the world. Here are we taught
in meekness to reverence the name of Je-
hovah, and dwell on the infinitude of his
perfections, the eternity of his nature, —
Within these consecrated walls are clearly
unfolded the numerous relations of man,
as a being destined to survive the general
destruction of nature herself, and triumph
in immortal existence. The wisdom and
goodness and mercy and justice of the great
God as displayed in the moral world, and
his controling, governing power in the na-
tural. AH the combined, unspeakable ex-
cellencies of the Omnipotent Creator. —
Time with all its interesting relations, e-
ternity with its everlasting consequences.
This world, as a dreary wilderness, heaven
as the paradise of God. Mortal existence,
interwoven with pains and sorrows and
death, a happy immortality, endless frui-
tion in the regions of bliss. Vice with her
scorpions to the naked conscience, virtue
with her sceptre of peace, and her crown
of rejoicing. Here, in short, is an endless
variety of moral and religious instructions.
The admiring views are sometimes turn-
ed on that wisdom which could devise, and
that power which could call into being
worlds and systems of worlds by the Word
of his power. To adore that Divinity,
Avhose goodness and mercy are so astonish-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 25

ingly displayed in the salvation of man.
Here we are led to trace the streams of hu-
man happiness, to the inexhaustible foun-
tain of Divine goodness.

Such are a few of the numerous excel-
lencies found in the system of Speculative
Free-Masonry. On these are indelibly im-
pressed the seals of imperishable worth.
If such in very deed were not the facts, no
man of sense and independence of mind,
could, in any shape, become attached to the
Institution. If all were a mere specious
form, a shadow without substance, a name
without meaning — was there no other/nor
higher attainment, than the mere externals,
the naked ceremonies, the semblance of
virtue, the appearance of sincerity, a kind
of hypocritical sanctity, the badge of inno-
cence to conceal the blackest crimes, the
mask of friendship to allure and deceive, a
mantle and profession of charity to wrap
up a heart of fraud and malevolence, the
empty names of moral and religious prin*
ciples, basely prostituted and stripped of
their appropriate meanings, the Institution
would justly deserve nothing but infamous
disgrace, and meet with little else than vir-
tuous contempt. The sober and discreet
part of the community, who might become
members, indignantly frowning on such
base duplicity, such sanctimonious, yet

3


26 SPECULATIVE MASONRY,

damnable deception, long ere this time,
would have stripped off the mask, and ex-
posed the monster naked to the world. —
Regardless of the frowns or flatteries of
men, they would have triumphed in the ex-
tinction of the Institution. No age of hu-
man depravity, no country so far sunk in
the depths of moral pollution, but has been
honoured with Masonic members, who,
dreading nothing but the displeasure of
heaven, would have trampled in the dust
the very constitution of a corrupt and wick-
ed association. Such attempts, however,
are 'nameless on the records of time. And
such we are sure never will be made, till
the laws of nature shall be reversed, till
light become darkness, and virtue, morality
and religion, the blackest of human crimes.
No individual, however corrupt in heart or
abandoned in principle, however lost to a
$ense of duty or honour, however regard-
less of present conduct or future conse-
quences, has yet been found, who could
for once concentrate the whole vileness of
bis nature into a single point sufficiently
daring and desperate, to revile the true
principles of Speculative Free-Masonry.
An admiring world has often witnessed this
cautious reserve with astonishment, and as
often been inclined to ascribe it to some
mysterious, controling influence of the


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 27

powers of darkness. Little, howeyer, do
mankind imagine, that nothing but some
lingering sense of the great, intrinsic ex-
cellencies attached to this Institution,, can
at any time, restrain slanderous expressions
in disgraced and apostatized members. The
very name itself of Masonry, forces on the
mind some faint, perhaps, unwilling re-
membrance of truths, which, for tbe mo-
ment, command the approbation of the
heart, and draw the tribute of praise even
from polluted lips*.

This consideration, and this alone, is suf-
ficient to account for that uniform applause
from the vain and worthless, or prudent re-
serve in the vile and abandoned. Such,
we know, is the fact. When an unprinci-
pled member, one who cannot be reclaim-
ed, is expelled from the Society, his lips
are closed in eternal silence, or only open-
ed to approve that Institution from which
be is for ever excluded.

Brethren, have you not sometimes con-
sidered these things with a degree of aston-
ishment? What nation or government on
earth, but has been execrated by disaffect-
ed members of its own domain ? What so-
ciety or institution, except the Masonic, in
any age or country, but has been reviled
and slandered by outcast individuals, once
the members of its own body ?


28 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

Have you not sometimes, in a measure,
been lost in contemplating the great anti-
quity and universal identity of Masonic e-
conomy, as now existing amongst all civil-
ized nations? Have you not sometimes
viewed the Institution, in that point of light,
which filled the mind with a high and ex-
alted sense of its divine excellence ? Have
you not sometimes been truly astonished,
that this institution hath survived the ruins
of states, of kingdoms and empires ? That
in every nation under heaven, amidst the
clashing interets of religious sectarians, the
merciless persecutions of enthusiastic big-
ots, the jealousies of unpilying ty ranis, and
all the convulsions of the moral, and revo-
lutions of the political world, Masonry hath
escaped the ruin, preserved her integrity
and purity, and by the influence of her
principles, like the sun in his strength, hath
again and again irradiated the nations. —
Herein is abundantly verified that wise re-
mark of Gamaliel, a doctor of the Jewish
law ; " If this counsel, or this work, be of
men, it will come to nought, but if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it."

Brethren, the design of this address, as*
was said, is merely to present the outlines
of Speculative Free-Masonry. But, if
what has been advanced be true, you alrea-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 29

dy discover, through the magnitude of the
subject, the greatness of the undertaking.

The characteristic principles are such
as embrace the whole subject matter of di-
vine economy. The farther you attempt
to investigate the whole system, the more
deep and solemn and interesting the sub-
ject appears.

Such, therefore, is the nature of Specu-
lative Free- Masonry, that the most exalted
human intellect can never survey the whole
field of improvement. The attainment of
a full and adequate view, lies far beyond
the powers of any finite mind.

Perhaps my brethren may consider this
description too great. If so, be persuad-
ed to suspend your final decision for one
moment.

Where is the beginning and where is
the end of eternity t What is the length
and breadth and height and depth of eter-
nal truth? Where, the finite mind, which
can look through the vast machinery of na-
ture ? Where, the vain presumer, who dare
assort he can trace unerringly the footsteps
of Omnipotence in all his works? Where,
the created being, however exalted in rank,
of ethereal mind, who comprehends the
great mystery of God in the plan of redemp-
tion ? The wonder of angels, the eternal
Word manifested in the flesh ! Where, the

3*


. 30 SPECULATIVE MASONRV.

profound wisdom, which can fathom tha$
mystery of mysteries, a Trinity in Unity ?
In a word, where is that created being, in
the universe of God, who will fully com-
prehend, through a boundless eternity, the
great and unsearchable riches of uncreated
Divinity ; or the amazing displays of the
divine character and perfections? Or who
can trace immortal existence through all
its relations ?

These subjects, collectively considered,
constitute the vital parts of Speculative
Free-Masonry. Full of interest as the na-
ture of immortality, solemn and momen-
tous as everlasting consequences. Say
then, my brethren, who is sufficient for
these things ? Who can unfold the myste-
ries of this Institution, or explore the ut-
most boundaries of the Masonic system ?

Brethren, are our minds duly and so-
lemnly impressed with these truths ? We
may pass through all the forms, understand
all the ceremonies, participate in all the
communicative knowledge, but unless we
discover the great point to which these pre-
cious instructions allude, and experience
in very deed what they were designed to
effect, we fail of the great object in view.
Although many things are discovered in
the midst of pur ceremonies which affect
the mind with peculiar delight, yet these


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 31

are but the mere externals, the appendages,
the symbols, the visible features, the index
of those sublime principles whichcharacter-
ize the nature of our Institution.

The man who desires to improve in
knowledge,, must apply the constituted
means. Here are we presented with an
inexhaustible fountain ; yet this fountain,
with all its streams of knowledge, in itself
considered, avails nothing till we approve
the instructions in our heart, and practice
them in our life and conduct. Notwith-
standing the moral precepts of our Order
may be equally sacred and equally pre-
[ cious with those of Christianity, yet, unless
tbey become ours by sentiment, identified
with our affect ions,and flow from the heart
in every act of duty, how are we benefit-
ed ? Notwithstanding this plain truth, that
the Masonic requirements coincide with
revealed Religion, yet if these require-
ments are not conscientiously obeyed, from
a view of their reasonable nature, and a
just sense of Divine authority, they avail us
nothing. No moral truth presented to the
mind can be more evident, more compre-
hensive, more universally binding, and at
the. same time more reasonable in its na-
ture and requirements, than wh&t is taught
in the first Masonic lesson; that is, to dis-
charge every incumbent duty which arises


32 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

from the nature of our existence, to our
God, our neighbor, and ourselves. Here-
in is comprised the whole subject matter
of divine revelation, as respects the du-
ty of man. These duties, therefore, must
be discharged with that sincerity of heart
which comports with the fitness of n oral
propriety, or no relative good is derived
to ours* Ives or others.

Hence, brethren, for our own personal
happiness, and the increasing celebrity of
our useful institution, we are loudly called
upon to prove the excellency of our pro-
fession by the purity of our practice. Let
us, therefore, bear this strong testimony to
the world, not only by publicly avowing
what we are taught by precept, but also
by exhibiting the reasonable fruits, in the
bright example of our life and conversation.
In this way truth may be displayed with a
convincing power ; the principles of Ma-
sonry will then appear to mankind in their
original purity, combining all the moral
excellencies in the moral world. Then,
and not till then, will the tongue of slander
be silenced, or the lip of prejudice sealed.
Then, and not till then, will the Institution
appear in all its loveliness to the world ;
then, and not till then, shall we experience
that sw?et consolation which flows from a


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 33

heart and conscience approved in the sight
of God.

Brethren, I cannot close this address
without expressing the most earnest solici-
tude, that the Companions of this Grand
Chapter will redouble their exertions, will
use all their influence and weight of char-
acter to remove every prejudice or miscon-
ception from the minds of the community,
and plainly set before the world the lead-
ing principles of Speculative Free- Mason-
ry. We, as Masons, do hkow, that the
sjstera as such, is truly and emphatically
excellent in its nature, and we are bound
by conscience, and every benevolent af-
fection which warms the heart, which re-
joices in the promotion of human happi-
ness, to proclaim it distinctly to the world.
Let the veil of ignorance, therefore, be rent
from the understanding, let the true light
shine into the heart, and Masonry will be
hailed with acclamations of joy as the
harbinger of peace.

By a full and fair exposition of our great
leading principles we betray no Masonic
secrets ; these are safely locked up". * l :z,
heart of every Mason, and are never to h
imparted, except in a constitutional in
ner. Were these secrets communic
they could be of no material servn.
Mankind : their appropriate use is


*


\


34 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

tinguish our brethren of every nation ;
kindred and language. On these no r
has any claim, except he enter the doo
Masonry. By these, Masons of every
tion are recognised as brethren, and the
by entitled to privileges which the wc
can never enjoy in common. No mc
quality can be predicated on those tok
% by which Masons distinguish each othe
These considerations, therefore, sho
silence every murmur, allay every un<
apprehension, and satisfy every can
mind.

But our leading tenets are no seer

It is no secret that the system embraces j

inculcates evangelical truth. It is no

cret that there is not a duty enjoined,

a virtue required in the volume of Insp

tion, but what is found in, and taught

Speculative Free-Masonry. It is no

cret that the appropriate name of God i

preserved in this Institution, in every co

. try where Masonry existed, while the 1

\ of the world was literally sunk in heath

X^m. It is no secret that we feed the h

%£ and clothe the naked, protect the w

■ gnd orphan, and in all things, accord

^r ability do good to the whole

%)ily. And, above all, it is not, r

^Mt be a secret, that a good Mai


•■■■*


%:


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 35

is of necessity, truly and emphatically, a
Christian.

Finally, my brethren, in view of this
whole subject, we see what a great myste-
ry is involved in Speculative Free-Mason-
ry, [low weighty, and solemn and inter-
esting is our profession ! No period, short
of a boundless eternity, can fully display
the moral beauties, the unsearchable rich-
es of this system. Let us, therefore, re-
joice ki the light, persevere in ways of well
doing unto the end, that we may, at the
last, receive a crown of righteousness in-
corruptible, which can never fade away.


CHAPTER II.

The ultimate end of the Material Creation
to subserve the Moral World. The pre
per object of human Association, and th
origin of various Societies.

IN surveying the material world, wit
all its numerous appendages, the contenr
plative mind is naturally led to inquire a
ter the great efficient cause. Prom the v$
ried scenery of nature, the sublimity of th
heavens, and the order of the universe, w
are constrained to ascribe wisdom, desig
and superintendence to their Author.

In contemplating the moral world, \e
behold that perfect order of beauty, b
whi -h we admire the unspeakable goodne ;
of God in e^very display of his moral p&
fections.

From those constituted laws of matt*
which pervade the natural world, and tho*
harmonizing principles of moral fitness, s
essential to the peace,and happinessand ge-
neral well-being of society, we necessari
infer some great and ultimate end, to whi«
all things and all events are mpde subse?
vient. We hence, infer that the prima i
object of the material creation, was to for"
a propf i theatre, on which to unfold l*
counsels of eternity, in relation to thegre*


SPECULATIVE MAS0KRY. 37

moral system. Man was, therefore, crea-
ted in the image of his God, endowed with
reason and understanding, and constituted
asocial being. Through the medium of
social intercourse, those intrinsic excel-
lencies of mind are unfolded, which fully
bespeak the dignity of man. ft therefore
appears that the principles of human as-
sociation are inherent in our nature, and
constitute the highest subordinate means
in advancing the common happiness of
mankind, in duly honouring our Creator,
and answering the proper end of our cre-
ation. It is certain that our intellectual
faculties are susceptible of vast improve-
ment ; improvement depends on means,
and means are derived through, the m<»di-
u*n of society* We hence infer most con-
clusively that social intercourse is accord-
tog to Divine constitution, and is the great
Jl ^dium through which are displayed the
beauties of the moral system.

The establishment of civil government,
*llat powerful safeguard of individual
r ights and privileges, at once constitutes
* he broad foundation of a common associ-
ation. Here is erected the standard, and
** £ re the great rallying point for civilized
life. All mankind are, from the nature
^^f their existence, constituted me-nbers of
this common society. A way is thus pre-

4


38 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

pared under the most favourable circum-
stances, for individuals to establish and
organize subordinate societies, with an ul-
timate reference to the general good. As
individual exertions proved inadequate to
remedy incidental evils, and fully to sub-
serve the purposes of social Jife, a union
of means, of energy and wisdom became
indispensible. Numerous are the objects
essential to the present and future well-be-
ing of mankind, which are not sufficiently
embraced by civil polity. The legislative
and executive departments of a nation can-
not minutely extend their protecting care
to every object, separately considered
which may contribute in the best tnanne
to the peace and happiness of the commia
nity. A remedy for these deficiency
was readily found in the voluntary assoc?
ations of men. This is a natural conclLJ
sion as to the origin of various individus
societies, in every age and country. Tbm
accomplishment of different objects, les
to different systems of organization. — ■
Hence, all those religious and moral insU
tutions, both ancient and modern : tl-^
co-operation of individuals to promote ar
and sciences — to encourage agricultu*i
and manufactures — to relieve the unfort *
nate — to civilize the savage — to emanc- -
pate the slave — to suppress vice and it i


SPECULATIVE MASOMiY. 39

morality — to diffuse the gospel and chris-
tianize the world. AH these associations,
so far as the members are actuated by
proper motives, have one ultimate end in
view; to meliorate the condition of man,
and render his whole existence a blessing.
The aggregate of happiness produced in
the moral system through the instrumen-
tality of those various humane, benevolent,
moral and religious societies of the world,
is far beyond all human conception. No
period short of eternity, can fully show
bow much misery has been prevented, and
how much relative good introduced. In
point of antiquity, and universal prevalence^
the Masonic institution ranks with the first,
^hese are points long since established by
known historical facts.

From what has been said, it appears
that mankind were not only created ration-
al beings, but destined to act in a social
Capacity. Our existence, therefore, neces-
sarily creates a relation to ail mankind,
«*nd our social compacts, in many respects,
a dd an increasing weight to each original
Obligation. Every relation we sustain,
whether it arise from the constituted laws
°f movzXjilntsSt or from voluntary engage-
****nt in mutual association, is inseparably
c °nnecled with relative duties. Such is
°Ur relation to God the supreme governor


40 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

of Ihe universe, that we are undei
greatest obligations to love and obej
commands, to reverence his name,
adore his perfections. These are d
which accord with the nature of ou;
istence and are necessarily binding o
created intelligences. Our relation t<
whole human family, as beings of the s
intellectual endowments, liable to the i
vicissitudes of fortune, and exposed l<
same incidents of life, is also attended
its relative duties. Our relation to
government under which we live, imj
other duties correspondent with our
ous stations. Our relation to any \
cular society, duly organized for the
pose of advancing, or the more effecti
accomplishing some important end, b
its relative duties. The members of
ry society are justly considered as pi
ing themselves, faithfully to disci
each incumbent duty. Those duties
not be neglected, nor the obligations
ded without disappointing the exp
tions, and betraying the confidence n
ed in the solemnity of their engagem
Wherever a duty exists, it necess
imposes a corresponding obligation.
be the duty of rational intelligence
leverence arid adore their Creator,
are of necessity under the most solem


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 41

ligations cheerfully to comply with that
divine requisition. If we owe certain du-
ties to mankind as brethren of one com-
mon family, to government as instituted
for the greater personal security and gen-
eral good, or to individual societies form-
ed for moral, benevolent or other impor-
tant purposes, the weight of obligation in
either case is strictly commensurate with
the duty.

Hence we may discover the extent of
our relations, bur consequent -duties and
reciprocal obligalionsi


*


CHAPTER III.

The general nature and design of the Ma~
sonic Institution. — Summary of Duties,
— Principles in the abstract.

THE way is now prepared to speak
of the nature and design of the Masonic
institution. Its real, as well as professed
object, is to promote the highest possible
good of rational intelligences. To incul-
cate the sound doctrines of moral it v and
virtue, and deeply impress on the heart
those great and fundamental principles,
which constitute the beauty and divine
excellency of the moral system. These
are objects noble and praise-worthy. —
Such as ought to command the affections,
and secure the universal approbation ol
mankind. That such is the professed ob-
ject of this institution, has long been knowc
to the world. That such also is the fact,
it is confidently believed, can be clearly
established. In proportion, therefore, tc
the importance of the end proposed, musi
be the worth of the Institution, the extent
of duties, and the weight of obligations.

These things being premised, it will be
in order to treat of Masonic principles ir
the abstract. To show that thev are fun-
damental in the great moral system, and


4*


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 43

consequently involve the ultimate end of
all human existence.

An acknowledgment of the existence of
God, as the moral governor of the universe,
is the first profession made by the candi-
date for Masonry. An unequivocal assent,
and professed belief therein, is the only
condition, by wlik'h any person can law-
fully and regularly gain admission. A
serious conviction of this truth is indis-
pensibly necessary, that rational beings
* may feel their responsibility to the Su-
preme mofal Governor. Such a princi-
ple, therefore, lying at the threshold of
our institution, must be a sanctifying cir-
cumstance.

Three great and important duties are
solemnly inculcated on every Mason at
his initiation ; to his God, his neighbour
and himself. He is exhorted to love and
adore, to reverence and worship his God
in sincerity and truth — to contemplate his
character as a being transcendent ly excel-
lent — to live in the exercise of humble de-
pendence, and acknowledge him as the
Governor of the universe, and dispenser of
every blessing.

His neighbors are the fVorld of mankind.
Integrity and justice, benevolence and fi-
delity are to characterize his conduct in
every relation.


44 SPECULATIVE MASONRY*

To himself, be owes the constant duti
of sobriety, temperance, chastity and
due control over all the unruly and ti
bulent passions of the human heart*

All these duties originate from divi
constitution, and are fundamental in t
moral system. Their excellence consii
in their peculiar fitness to render o
whole existence the greatest blessing. 1
these are added numerous subordinate d
ties, in a relative point of view. The e
ercise of brotherly affection towards e\
ry being capable of happiness, or expos
to misery — relief, or benevolent condu
towards objects of commiseration — tin
and uprightness in all our intercourse wi
mankind — temperance, or a due restrai
upon all our passions, afTections, pleasun
or enjoyments of life — fortitude, or th
steady purpose of mind which leads to l
exercise of every virtue, and the perfon
ance of every duty, notwithstanding M
frowns or the flatteries of the world— pr
dence, to manage wisely in all matte
which relate both to time and eternity-
justice, whi< h is the standard and criteric
of moral rectitude — faith, which consi
tutes the mental eye, as respects the invi
ible world, and fixes our confidence (
God — hope, that powerful anchor of tl
soul amidst the storms and boisteroi


he

r*
he

i
/?


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 45

waves of human adversity — charily, which
is the bond of perfect ness, elevating the
affections and leading them to centre in
God alone.

These are duties of intrinsic excellence,
and such as will necessarily promote the
peace and harmony of society, the present
and future well-being of individuals, and
the general good of the intelligent uni-
verse. Principles and duties, which lie at
the foundation of the Masonic system, and
are solemnly enjoined on every brother.
Whoever, therefore, shall conscientiously
discharge them, in the fear of God, fulfils
the whole duty of man.

Such, we pledge ourselves to the world,
we Masonic tenets and duties. In these,
every Mason ought to be thoroughly in-
structed within his own Lodge, where the
highest inducements are presented, which
way affect the heart and regulate the
whole tenour of life.


CHAPTER IV.

Coincidence of Masonic Principles with Di-
vine Revelation.

AFTER what has been said, in rela-
tion to some of the leading principles em-
braced in the Masonic system, it may not
be improper briefly to show their coinci-
dence with Divine Revelation. The Scrip-
tures of the Old and New Testament, are
now received and acknowledged, by all
Christian nations, to be given by Divine
Inspiration. Hence, all Christendom quote
the authority of this book in all matters of
religious faith and practice. To this alsa
we appeal as a standard for the correct-
ness and sanctity of our principles.

Masonic faith acknowledges the holy
Bible to be the word of God, that it waa
written by persons Divinely inspired, an4
reveals the whole duty of mail. Let u*
therefore candidly compare the Masonic
system with that standard of truth.

That sacred volume clearly reveals the
existence of one Supreme Eternal God*
The Masonic system is first opened to the
view of every member, by a solemn ac-
knowledgment o f this fundamental truth.
The Bible exhibits the nature, character
and perfections of God as essentially and


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 47

infinitely excellent, and himself as a being
in vshotn all our holy affections should ul-
timately centre. Masonry, in the strong-
est and most impressive language, incul-
cates the same interesting truths. The
Scriptures enjoin supreme love to God,
and universal benevolence to all mankind.
These are the first duties impressed on the,
heart of a Mason. Inspiration urges the
exercise of brotherly love, and a due re-
gard to the well-being of our neighbour.
Masonry considers the whole human fami-
ly as brethren, and imperiously enjoins
mutual and reciprocal friendship and af-
fection.

The holy Bible enforces a strict adhe-
rence to truth, as a Divine attribute. This
is a distinguishing tenet in the Masonic sys-
tem, and impressed on the mind by all the
authority of the institution. The Word
of God requires a conscientious and scru-
pulous observance of justice in every re-
lation. Masonry adopts this principle as
a criterion of moral rectitude. The Sa-
cred Writings enforce a religious attention
to the Sabbath, as a day of holy rest. Ma-
sonry is equally emphatic in all her com-
mands and injunctions, to keep that day
holy. The Word of God enjoins submis-
sion and obedience to the powers that be,
*s ordained of God. Masonry lays simi-


48 SPECULATIVE MASOXRY.

Iar commands on all her members, ar

enforces them by constant admonitions.-

The Scriptures teach us, in general tenr

all the duties of charit\, to feed the hu

gry and clothe the naked, to visit the w

do» and fatherless, and keep ourselves u

spotted from the woild. Masonry dwel

upon these subjects in every degree, at

la) s her members under solemn obligatio

to exercise Christian charity and benev

l^nce, and never to violate the laws of cto

tity. The Word of God teaches us

love our enemies, and render good for ev

Masonry will feed a brother, though a p«

sonal enemy, even at the point of a swoi

should his necessities absolutely require

and uniformly exhorts to overcome e

with good. Inspiration commands us

live peaceably with all men, and purs

our lawful avocations with diligent apj

cation. The nature of the Masonic In*

tution accords with those principles, a

enjoins similar commands in numerc

ways. The Scriptures of truth, in eve

part, hold forth such duties, in gene

terms, as are incumbent on moral beii

in every situation of life. Masonry i

system, which, in this particular, convc

every station and condition of life int«

subject ol useful instruction.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 49

By the Oracles of Truth we are also for-
bidden to indulge in anger and resentment,
profanity, rioting and intemperance, false-
hood and slander, hatred, malice and re-
venge, and every vice which corrupts the
human heart, disturbs good society, or in
any respect is repugnant to a sober and vir-
tuous life. Masonry interdicts every vice,
lays her restraints, prohibitions and com-
mands on every member, and enforces obe-
dience by the authority of her discipline.
The Scriptures, in a word, require a strict
obedience to the whole moral law. This
law is summarily interwoven with every
part of the Masonic system.

Such are some of the more general prin-
ciples and duties contained in the Scrip-
tures of truth : — the same are fundamental
in the system of Masonry.

For the truth of these sentiments, and
the correctness of their statement, an ap-
peal is made to every Mason, who under-
stands the system, and every just memori-
al of the order, both ancient and modern.

It hence appears, that the same system of
faith, and the same practical duties taught
by Revelation, are contained in, and re-
quired by, the Masonic Institution. If,
therefore, the former be justly entitled to
the approbation of mankind, from the na-
ture and excellence of its principles, the

5


50 SPECULATIVE MASOSRT.

latter must be. If the former is wisely cal
cuiated to alleviate human misery and pro
mote the happiness of man, so must th
latter be. As the former accords with til
nature and fitness of things, so does the lai
ter. If the Christian system displays tti
glory of the moral Governor of the im
verse, and constrains us to admire and lov
his character, so also does the Masonic.

It is, therefore, believed, in view of tbes
considerations, every unprejudiced min
will draw a favourable conclusion of oil
system. Surely it cannot be otherwise
These are the genuine principles of Ms
sonry, and every member is solemn I.
bound to believe them in his heart, an
practice them in his life. **


CHAPTER V.

Ancient Masonry Operative and Religious.

THE next point, in order, will be to
establish this position, that Ancient Mason-
ry was Operative and Religious. By ope-
rative Masonry, we allude to the proper
application of the useful rules of architec-
ture, whence a structure will derive its fi-
gure, strength and beauty." Hence, Ma-
sonry and architecture or geometry were
anciently used as synonymous.

"In the beginning," we are informed,
(< the earth was without form and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep."
•Then did the Supreme Architect of uni-
v ^rsal nature display the greatness of his
Power, and the excellency of his wisdom.
<c He spake and it was done : He command-
ed, and it stood fast." The amazing sub-
J } f nity and grandeur of the material crea-
* lo n, the beauty and variety, the harmony
ar Kl order, excited the liveliest emotions
°f joy amongst the angelic hosts. This
^^s the first display of the operative prin-
c, ples pertaining to the science of £eome-
fy. Not that we would convey the idea
*hat the Creator performed th?, work of
Cr ^ation by the formal application of the
Principles of geometry or architecture, but


52 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

that such principles may clearly be deck
ced from the order, beauty, symmetry aa
proportion discoverable in his works. I
this point of view only we wish to be ur
derstood, in relation to the first display c
those principles whence operative Masor
ry anciently arose. It will be easy t
prove that the science of architecture, g
operative Masonry, in the first ages of Ih
world, was divinely taught to men divini
]y inspired ; that moral and religious ii
structions were originally designed to a<
company, and be inferred from the open
live part, for the improvement and bapp
ness of mankind.

To the law and the testimony we apnea
The experience and testimony of Noal
Moses and Solomon are directly in poin

Noah* was a preacher of righteousnes
to the inhabitants of the old world, a hui


* Let it be remarked in this place, and carefully recolle<
ed by every reader, that when mention is made of Noah, Abrai
Moses and others, who lived before the building of the first ter
pie, that the Masonic character and knowledge of those persoi
is to be understood in a qualified sense- It is not meant to I
asserted that they belonged to regular bodies and associated i
members of this Institution It is not pretended that they wei
initiated into the Order, as in modern times ; neither is it sti]
posed they were known by the name or style of Masons. A
we wish to have understood is, that Noah, and others after hie
embraced and taught such geometrical and moral principles t
were fundamental in the first establishment of the Institutio:
when duly organized, and such as are essential in the syste
of Speculative Masonry as it now exists We, therefore, me*
to say, that many principles peculiar to our Institution were u


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 53

dt> dred and twenty years. In consequence

'oc of the wickedness of man, God determined

Ii[ to destroy all flesh, except Noah and his

unj family. The Divine purpose was, th*-re-

4 fore made known to this man, and the way

w by which his deliverance should be eflect-

m ed. Divine instructions were from time to

®l time communicated in relation to that great

M undertaking, by which his deliverance

W should be effected ; and it is literally true,

®l 'bat Noah was specially taught, by the Spi-

*l r U of God, the length and breadth, the

l height and depth, the form, manner, and

/ Workmanship of that building, which he

f Prepared, by divine command, to the sav-

,r *5J of his house. It hence appears, that

'hf Ark was erected under the immediate

a nd special superintendence of a Divine a-

£tent. Such is the testimony of Inspiration,

a s recorded in the Scriptures of truth.

When Moses conducted the Hebrews
*Vom Egypt towards the promised land, his
journeying* arid encampments were direct-
ed by a pillar of a cloud by day, and a pil-
lar of fire by night. Divine agency was a-
bundanlly manifest in the deliverance and
protection, the support and preservation of
that people, during forty years' travel in

derstood and patronised by those men. Such, we feel confident,
is the fact, llence we claim them as ancient patrons, because
through their bands have been transmitted those excellent prin-
ciple* which now characterize Speculative Masonry.

5*


i


54 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

the wilderness. Moses, their prophet ar
leader, being called up into Mount Sina
talked with God fare to face, as a man tall
eth with his friend. Here were delivere
to him the tables of stone, containing tl
decalogue, written by the finger of Goc
Here, also, was shown to Moses the who
pattern of the tabernacle. This taberhar
was designed as a visible pledge and tokc
that God would go with that people, th
he would communicate divine instruction
that he would guide them in their duty,
well as in their journey, and finally cau
the nation to inherit the promised land.-
Moses was not only directed by words ha
to build this tabernacle, but was shown i
a model, exactly representing the form, tl
symmetry and proportion of every par
" For see," saith Inspiration, " thou mal
all things according to the pattern show*
to thee in the Mount." Hence, also, v
discover that Divine knowledge was coi
municated to Moses in every particul;
which related to the building of the tabe
nacle.

The next example is that of king Sol
mon's temple. Previous to the eommenc<
ment of this great undertaking, Solomo
went to Gibeon, where he offered numetoi
sacrifices, and humbly and devoutly wo
shipped the God of his fathers agreeabl


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. f)5

to the custom of his nation. Meet ing the di-
vine approbation in these services, God in-
spired him. with wisdom and understanding
in a most eminent degree. Under Divine
superintendence, he built the temple at Je-
rusalem with such perfect symmetry, that
it became the beauty and the wonder of the
World. All civilized nations admit Solo-
mon most probably was a Mason, and the
fact is admitted from the circumstance of
his building the temple. If therefore, his
Masonic character rests on this ground, the
conclusion is irresistible, that his Masonic
knowledge was Divinely derived. The
same inference is equally true of Moses.
*W the temple of Solomon was built after
the similitude of the tabernacle, whose pat-
tern was showed in Mount Sinai. In each
c ^e, therefore, we observe the same Di-
v *ne Author directing, the same principles
°f symmetry and proportion taught, and the
s &uie important end kept in view. Hence
^ derive this certain truth from divine
a uthority, that just as far as the operative
principles of architecture or Masonry were
n ^cessary in building the Ark, to preserve
* posterity in the earth, in rearing the ta-
bernacle in the wilderness, that token of
pod's presence, and the temple at Jerusa-
; e *n, that bright emblem of heaven itself;
J u st so far Divine knowledge was coauxui-


56 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

nicated, Divine superintendence exercised^
arid Divine approbation manifested. Noah a
Moses and Solomon were men highly fa _
voured of God, and received their sever
communications from the same Divin<
source. It therefore follows, by parity
reasoning, that according to primitive ac
ceptation, Noah, Moses and Solomon we
skilled in the science of architecture or a
cient Masonry ; and as they did not, wil
their own hands, build the ark, the tabe
nacle and temple, those principles neeess
ry for that purpose must, of consequenc
have been communicated to others.

These several buildings had their spirit-
ual allusions, and were typical of very itn-
portant events in the economy of the mor-
al system, and originally designed to con-
vey religious instruction.

The ark most beautifully typified {he
great Redeemer of the world, who endur-
ed the flood of Divine wrath for a season*

that he might atone for the sins of man.

It was also emblematical of that great sal-'
vation which constitutes the sure ark of-
our safety in the day of final retribution-*
The tabernacle was a type of the humar*
nature of our glorious Mediator. It alscr*
had a manifest reference to every true be-"
liever, to the church of God, and even tcr
heaven itself. Numerous references were?


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. . 57

lade to this tabernacle, under the Jewish
ixpensation, which are replete with reli-
ious knowledge and instruction. Its very
i#ure and partitions, its ornaments and
overings, with its whole plan, workman-
bip and service, were subjects of moral
nd religious explanations. Thus did the
ncient Jews understand them, and thus
o modern expositors.
The temple of Solomon was an assemblage
f types, which, in a peculiar manner, pre-
^ured those numerous moral events on
hich the salvation and future happiness
T man depended. The whole workman-
tip, its materials and building, its pillars,
Arches and partitions, the brazen sea and
t* lavers, the candlesticks and the uten-
ls of service, the cherubim, the ark of
ie covenant, the altar of incense, the cen-
>r and the mercy-seat, all pointed to those
iblime events which issued in man's re-
emption. All things pointing to the pu-
liation of the soul, through the office-
ork of the promised Messiah, to the great
toneroent which should be wrought out
y him,to the gospel dispensation, tot lie call-
ugof the Gentiles, to the futureglory of the
hurchon earth,andto the final admission of
be righteous to that u temple not made with
aruls, eternal in the heavens." Such was
>e Divine appointment under the Jewish


58 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

economy, that sensible objects were con-
stituted emblematic of moral events, in sc
striking a manner, as in view of them to
impress the mind with devotional contem-
plations. The ancient Jews were looking
forward, with anxious expectations, to the
coming of the promised Messiah. And the
constant employment of the craftsmen who
wrought at the temple, was on those sensi-
ble objects which pointed to his appear-
ing, and constantly reminded them of its
happy and glorious consequences. Hence,
we may reasonably conclude that archi-
tecture, or ancient Masonry, was not only
operative, but in many respects, religious.
Suffice it, therefore, to say, in addition to
all other considerations, that just and sat-
isfactory evidence of this truth is contain-
ed within the sacred veils of our Institution;
and every person who is regularly introduc-
ed, may on this head obtain such evidence.
That ancient Masonry was operative,
there can be no doubt ; and, from this view
of the subject, all may have reason to be-
lieve it was improved for moral and reli-
gious purposes.


CHAPTER VI.

dtrn Fret-Masonry, Speculative and Re-
ligious.

MODERN Masonry is not opera-
), ljut speculative and religious. "By
culative Masonry we learn to subdue
passions, act upon the square, keep a
gue of good report, maintain secrecy,
I practice charity." " It leads the con-
lplative mind, to view* with wonder and
rriration, the stupendous works of crea-
i, and inspires the most exalted ideas of.
perfections of the divine Creator."
speculative Masonry, according topre-
t acceptation, has an ultimate reference
that spiritual building erected by vir-
in the heart, and summarily implies
arrangement and perfection of those
y and sublime principles by which the
1 is fitted for a meet temple of God in
'orld of immortality. In this point of
w every enlightened Mason understands
t excellent system of Masonic virtues
ich adorns the man, and displays the
>erior excellencies of a benevolent
*rt. Such is the only proper and sig-
icant meaning, which accords with the
Session, and such the only one justly
iwn from the true nature of the Institu-


60 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

tion under its present form. The superi<
excellence of Masonic precepts great!
consists in that lively display of truth t
which deep and lasting impressions ai
made on the heart. Little, therefore, nei
be said under this head. If what has bee
exhibited, in relation to belief and princ
pie, as embraced in the body of the sy
tern, be true ; if the duties of a Masc:
are what have been stated, something of
serious nature must be attached to the Ii
stitution. And we again appeal to ever
enlightened Mason on the globe for th
truth and correctness of the above pos
tions.

There are men of eminent piety, mee
and humble Christians, who greatly d<
light in Masonic instructions. There ar
men who minister before the sacred alta
who conscientiously approve and admir
this system of moral virtues. There ar
multitudes who possess ar\ honest heart,
correct taste, a sound underst ending, an
an inflexible attachment to truth, who b
practice and profession support the dign
ty f and evidence the worth of this Institi
tion. Some few there are who speak wil
indifference and act with coldness; bi
such, most surely, are ignorant of the tri
Masonic principles. It is confidently b
lieved no man well instructed in Free-M


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 61

sonry, and possessing a correct taste, can
avoid being pleased with its moral beau-
ties. Notwithstanding the system may be
abused, and its principles perverted by
men of corrupt hearts and licentious con-
duct; notwithstanding individual members
may bring odium on the Masonic name by
an irreligious life ; and notwithstanding
some Lodges may improperly neglect dis-
cipline and duty, by suffering disorderly
members to pass with impunity, yet these
defects do not subvert the fundamental
principles of the system, or in any impor-
tant sense alter the real nature of the In-
stitution. The same interesting truths are
retained, and the same duties continue
solemnly binding, and must be thus con-
sidered, as long as virtue shall retain its
amiable nature, and religion and morality
n ece ssa riiy promote the happiness of man-
kind.


CHAPTER VII.

Speculative Free-Masonry unfolds the ou.
lines of History, in several great ait **
leading Events, both in the natural art- <**
moral World.


AN attempt will now be made to sho
that are great leading event?, both in t
natural and moral world, are in some re-
pects brought to view in the Masonic sy
tern. In this point of light, Masonry b
comes a subject highly interesting, a
worthy the attention of every investig
ting mind. According to the great plan 4? J
Divine operation, we know that all thin^f^
are happily ordered to answer the tx-$^
and wisest purposes. Even "the invisible^
things of Him, from the creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even His eter-
nal power and Godhead." Hence we may
discover so many things in the natural
world, in some respects, analogous to oth-
ers in the moral, that we are without ex-
cuse if we neglect suitably to improve
those means of knowledge to our own edi-
fication, and the declarative glory of our
God. From a due and careful attention to
Masonic emblems, we may, without any
unnatural or forced construction, derive


SPECULATITE MASONRY. 63

s o me knowledge as to the creation of the
*** stterial world, the general deluge, and
**Xe final consummation of all things in the
& *^d of time. Masonic representations are
r*<eculiarly calculated to raise, in the con-
templative mind, ideas which allude to
■ Viose grand and sublime events. The first,
^ oth in the order of nature and time, was
-^iat, when, by the voice of Omnipotence,
eeping nature awoke, and the first flood
light burst on the astonished world. A
^*ianifest allusion to this event appears in
kihe first degree of Masonry. An audible
oice is heard by the candidate, which Js
llowed by scenes new, mysterious, beau-
iful and sublime. Were it admissible to
^enumerate the ceremonies of initiation, e-
Tery person would at once discover a ma-
nifest reference to the creation of the ma-
terial world. Such are the ceremonies in
their coincidence, that the manner of the
one may be inferred from the manner of
the other. The grandeur and sublimity
of the former event, compared with the
simplicity and beauty of the latter, detracts
nothing from the symbolical reference. —
We may easily discover, in the sacred
writings, the introduction and proper ap-
plication of numerous symbols, infinitely
inferior to their antitype. Such are all
those which relate to the Saviour. It is


64 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

a point sufficiently established by ex
tors, that the figurative and melaphc
language of Scripture often has a twc
allusion. That the type and antity]
prototype are presented in the same fi
or meet in the same object. A si
mode of conveying useful and impci
knowledge is embraced by the Ma
system.

The next great event in the na
world, was the general deluge. Thi
a very awful exhibition of divine dis
sure. The material world, with all i
habitants, appeared to be consigned
to undistinguished ruin. The wboli
man race, with the exception of one
ly, in astonishment and dismay, sav
prelude to their inevitable destructi<
Deserted by a former protecting F
dence, they gave themselves up to I
less despair. Gloomy in the extreme
their situation in view of all surroui
objects. This melancholy event i
some circumstantial points, faintly c
up to the mind in the third Masonic de
Notwithstanding the primary referen
this degree to the melancholy fate o
ram, yet a partial allusion may be se
the destruction of the old world. 1
inconceivably great calamities, v
seemed to threaten the total and final


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 60

Auction of all things, were not experienc-
ed in their full extent. By a wonderful
deliverance, Noah and his family were
preserved, the flood of waters was dried
11 p» and the earth again appeared. Then
* v as made and confirmed that sure pro-
mise-in relation to the plenitude of the earth
a nd a multiplied increase of temporal and
s piritual blessings. In a similar joyous
banner, is the apparently gloomy scene in
the third degree suddenly changed. A
r **y of hope enters the desponding mind,
ar *<J the heart exults in the prospect of fu-
' l| re peace and consolation. Let every
Masonic brother attentively compare the
c ^remonies and representations of this de-
£ r **e, with that amazingly awful catastro-
Rf'e w«hicbbefell the antediluveans, and say
'* the allusion does not appear at least
Probable.

% Tbe last great and overwhelming scene

*^ll be the closing point in the grand dra-

***** of nature, when the trump of God shall

^Wake the slumbering dead. This will be

«* moment, from the very nature of the

Stent, of unutterable astonishment. That

period will arrive, when the curtain shall

drop, and time Khali be merged in eternal

duration, Yet however great may be the

awful grandeur of this scene, however

bright the ineffable displays ot 0\\\v\V^

6*


66 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

tent power, and the terrible majesty of tha
Highest, the beauty of the moral world wiU
arise, from the ruins of na1ure r irradiate*
with the beams of immortality. The brigta
effulgence of the Divine glory and justice
and all the adorable perfections of the ve
ry Godhead shall fill the universe, and be
displayed before its countless million
while the righteous shall ascend, in traiv.
ports of joy, to realms of everlasting feW
city. This solemn event is faintly prefi
gured in the sublime degree of a ROUT-
AL ARCH JMASON.

Let every Companion seriously consider
the circumstances attendant on his exalta-
tion: let him duly examine all those sym-
bolical representations which pass before
him, and say if there does not appear to
be a manifest allusion to the final consum-
mation of all things. To particularize
those Masonic representations is not ad-
missible. The destruction of the city and
temple at Jerusalem was typical of the
end of the world; and the rebuilding of
this temple, and the restoration of the
Jews, of the New-Jerusalem, which should
come down from God out of heaven. The
signs of the times, foretold by our Sa-
viour, had a manifest reference both to the
destruction of Jerusalem and the final dis-
solution of all things terveslriaL Hence s


*.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. t>7

Masonic emblems are wisely designed, in
their nature, to enforce interesting truths,
and impress the mind with a deep sense of
those solemn transactions which shall issue
in a boundless eternity.

In the Masonic system, we are not only
taught something of the history of the ma-
terial world, but numerous fads pertain-
ing to the moral, which are infinitely more
important. Such is the apostacy of our
first parents. This melancholy event is
explicitly brought to view in so many
words, and so strikingly represented, as
seldom to fail of making deep and lasting
impressions on the h^art. The wretched
and destitute and deplorable situation of
Adam, which was the fruit of his disobe-
dience, is affectingly brought to view by
the most lively Masonic representations.
In view of this state, naked and exposed to
Divine displeasure, the candidate is con-
strained to look forward to the great Foun-
tain and source whence all his temporal as
well as spiritual wants may be supplied.
A series of emblematical explanations suc-
ceed, by which the mind is led to see that
the sacrifice of a pure heart is the only ac-
ceptable offering in the Divine sight : —
that every duty is to be performed under
a sense of human accountability, ^\\A \w
obedience to Divine commands \ — VbaX ^^


68 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

must constantly remember the all-seeing
eye is upon us, and although the feelings
of our hearts, as well as our actions, may
be concealed from the eye of man, yet
they cannot be hidden from the Searcher
of all hearts, whose justice is commen-
surate with every other attribute: — and
that, as life is short, and rapidly drawing
to a close, we need the anchor of a well
grounded hope, that when we launch into
eternity, w T e may arrive on those peaceful
shores where the " wicked cease from
troubling, and the weary find eternal rest."
We are also favoured with all that mo*
ral instruction, which rnav be derived frotf*
the high commission received by ftlosesa*
Mount Horeb, to deliver the Hebrew^
from Egyptian bondage — their journey **
ings through the wilderness to the promis *"
ed land — their being fed with manna ani£
defended from their enemies. By all ot
which, we are taught, that in this woild-
we are emphatically in a state of bondage^
— that a way of deliverance is provided
bv the Great Redeemer, " ordained of God
to be a Prince and a Saviour" — that our
journey is through the wilderness of a sin-
ful world — that we are fed with the manna
of divine consolation, protected and deliv-
ered from our spitifual enemies, until we
finally arrive at the heavenly Canaan, The


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 69

k, the tabernacle and the temple, also,
come subjects of extensive moral in-
notion. These have their appropriate,
[nifieant allusions, which in many res-
ets, are peculiar to the Masonic Insti-
lion.

The Babylonish captivity, the restora-
nof the Jews, and the rebuilding of the
nple, are converted into subjects of mo-
' and religious instruction, sublime and
autiful in the highest degree. The grace
humility, or the exercise of a meek and
iet spirit, is recommended, under the
I assurance, that " he that humbleth him-
r shall be exalted"

Hence, we discover a Providence in all
ngs, we draw instruction from all things,
1 are taught our duty in all things.
In addition to these useful lessons, so of-
i repeated and religiously enforced with-
every regular Lodge, the evidence of

holy Trinity meets our view on every
e. The lodge is emblematically sup-
ted by three grand pillars — the princi-

officers are three — three articles con-
ute the furniture, the holy bible, square
I compasses — three precious jewels —
ee governing tenets— three lights on three
lestals — three great duties— three rounds
Facob's theological ladder — three orna-
nts — three moveable and three immovea-


70 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ble jewels — three articles of service for the
craft — and in a great variety of instances, J
which may not be mentioned, the number "
three occurs, and as often reminds us,
" there are three that bear witness in Heath
en, the Father, the Word and the ifo/jf
Ghost, and these three are one" — that there .,
are three also, that bear witness in the j
earth, " the Spirit, the water and the blood,
and these three agree in one."

How wonderful is this system, whence
moral and religious instructions aredratfft
from every object and every relation !


CHAPTER VIII.

Moral Improvement from the Order 1 and
Succession of Masonic degrees.

NOT only are the several Masonic
Jrtures replete with moral and religious
istructions, but their very order and t>uc-
5ssion are sources of improvement, and
fford great consolation and encourage-
lent to the good man, when viewed in
ieir proper light. The first degree in
lasonry, naturally suggests that state of
'oral darkness, which begloomed our
orld. On the apostacy of our first com-
on parent, not a gleam of light was left
1 irradiate and cheer his desponding mind,
o his surprise and amazement, he found
ttiself in total obscurity, as to those fu-
re and interesting scenes, on which he
*s entering. Soon, however, to bis inex-
essible joy, the first kind promise was
ade. This promise, though hut a single
y, afforded much consolation. Although
e true light now began to shine, yet how
int were its beams compared with that
ight and meridian splendour, afterwards

illuminate the. moral world ! — Adam,
erefore, was, in a comparative sense, still

darkness, as to those great displays and
onderful manifestations of divine love


72 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

and complacency, which were in due time
made. Such is the very nature of the firs
degree, that every observing candidate 1
led to view his moral blindness, and de
plorable state by nature. Under thes*
impressions he enters on the second de
gree, which in view of his moral blindness
he is to consider emblematical of a stat<
of improvement and trial. Such was tb«
second state of Adam. Hence arises th*
idea of probationary ground. Some lifjh
and knowledge having been imparted,
reasonable improvement is not only reqir
red, but the probationer, by seeing his state
feels the increasing weight of obligation t
the faithful discharge of duty. A due ot
servance of all former requisitions, and
sincere desire to make advances in knov
ledge and virtue, open the way for the rf
ception of more light, and prepare the mill
for greater views, and consequent enjo^
menls. He who perseveres in well, doini
and is actuated by pure motives in the dii
charge of incumbent duties, wisely to im
prove his probation season in this world
is thereby prepared to be strengthened an*
supported and animated in his course, t(
hold on his way rejoicing, that he may u
due time receive clearer manifestations o
tlv divine character, and ultimately expe
rie-nce such joys as the stranger doth no


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 73

intermeddle wilh. Having diligently per-
severed in the use of appointed means, the
third degree prefigures the life of the good
man in his pilgrimage state. Passing
through a vale of tears, and often beset
with the allurements of vice, he is some-
times diverted from his Christian course.
Although the true light has shone into his
heart, and he has experienced much conso-
lation, vet he sometimes wanders into de-
vious and forbidden paths. His spiritual
enemies arise, and are ready to destroy
him. The evil propensities of his heart,
and the remaining corruptions of his na-
ture beset him at every point. His pros-
pects are at times darkened, and a gloom
settles around his mind. Death appears
frightful and stares him in the face. The
grave is opening to receive him. In the
midst of such trials he resolves to be faith-
ful, and manfully to withstandlemptations.
He determines to preserve thai sacred
trust committed to his care, and therefore,
endeavours to escape for his life to the
great Rock of his salvation. He is, how-
ever, humbled in view of past offences, and
lies prostrate in the dust. Suddenly then
does his hope revive, bis faith strengthens,
and with confidence and composure he
looks forward to a blessed immortality, and
doubts not but, in the glorious morn of the

7


74 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

resurrection, his body will arise and to*
come as incorruptible as his soul.

In advancing to the fourth degree, tto
good man is greatly encouraged to perse
vere in ways of well doing, even to the end
Although he meet with frowns and con-
tempt from the ignorant and vain-glorious
and is reputed a man of naught, buffete<
and rejected by the world, yet he has *
name which no man knoweth, save he tha
receivelh it* A conscious rectitude ena.
bles him to support his integrity, thougl
tried on every side. If, therefore, he bi
rejected and cast forth amongst the rubbisl
of the world, he knows full well, the grea
Master Builder of the universe, having cho
sen and prepared him as a lively stone ir
that spiritual building in the heavens, wil
bring him forth with triumph, while shout
ing grace, grace to his Divine Redeemer,

In advancing to the fifth degree, he dis
covers his election to, and his glorified sta
tion in, the kingdom of his Father. Hen
he is taught how much the chosen ones ar<
honoured and esteemed by those on eartt
who discover and appreciate the image o
their common Lord. This image beinj
engraven on his heart, he may look foi
ward to those mansions above, where
higher and more exalted seat has been pre
pared for the faithful from the foundatio


}


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 7f>

of the world. There all will be ruled by
We, and all submit with holy reverence
to tbe Supreme Grand Master of the uni-
verse.

With these views the sixth degree is con-
ferred, where the riches of Divine grace
are opened in boundless prospect. Every
substantial good is clearly seen to be con-
ferred through the great atoning sacrifice.
*hat precious work of grace hopefully
brought in his heart, having been begun,
^nd thus far carried on by an invisible,
though powerful agent, he believes will be
perfected in the completion of that spiritu-
al building of God, eternal in the heavens.
-Hence the good man is induced again and
*rgain to dedicate himself entirely to the
service of his Divine Master. To rejoice
in opportunities of communicating, to oth-
ers less informed than himself, that know-
ledge which passeth understanding.

In the seventh degree the good man is
truly filled with heartfelt gratitude to his
heavenly Benefactor, for all those wonder-
ful deliverances wrought out for him, while
journeying through the rugged paths of
human life. Great has been his redemp-
tion from the Egypt and Babylon of this
world. Great his preservation through a
wilderness of temptations. Great is his
joy, even in affliction?, while travelling to-


76 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

wards the heavenly Jerusalem. Though
dangers and snares are still found thick in
his way, yet animated with the cheering
prospect, and trusting in that faithful Pro-
vidence which wrought his deliverance, he
perseveres in the comfortable assurance of
being finally admitted into the favourable
presence of the great High Priest of his
salvation.

There he beholds, in the eighth degree,
that all the heavenly sojourners will be ad-
mitted within the veil of God's presence,
where they will become kings and priests
before the throne of his glory for ever and
ever. Having been consecrated by that
blood, shed for the remission of sins, born
of the Spirit and anointed with the oil of
Divine grace, having on the robe of righte-
ousness and the breastplate of salvation,
he doubts not but a crown of glory and re-
joicing will be put on his head, and the
praises of the Redeemer for ever dwell on
hi* tongue.

In advancing to the ineffable degrees,
the pious heart is filled with joy, in view
of those infinite displays of the Divine
character and perfections which will con-
tinue to unfold through a boundless eter-
nity. Here will be an endless progression
in know ledge and holiness and consequent
happiness. Here the triumphant thought


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 77

Resents to the mind an everlasting series
^f new, sublime, ineffable, transporting
Joys. Here is viewed the consummation
of the great plan of human redemption,
where every saint will be filled with the
fulness of God for ever and ever.

Such, my brethren, in brief, is the moral
ind religious instruction derived merely
Tom the order of Masonic degrees* No
brother or companion can fail of discover-
ng those plain yet instructive lessons. —
Fust as far as his knowledge extends, in a-
ly or all the above degrees* their separate
>r connected allusions will appear perfect-
y evident. All leading from one degree
>f grace to another, by a regular gradation ;
til pointing to the great ultimate object in-
volved in human existence.

If such useful instruction may be drawn
rom the order of the degrees, how great
nust it be from the system itself ! Let e ve-
y brother duly examine the subject for
limself. Here is wisdom. Here is a vast
ield for moral improvement.

On every side, from every consideration,
ind in every point of view, the system, the
iibject, and the whole economy are suffi-
:iently interesting, to engage the atten-
ion, and affect the heart of every reflect-
ng brother^

7*


CHAPTER IX.

Ancient Masonry, Ancient Christianity.

WHEN we speak of Masonry ante-
rior to the building of Solomon's temple,
we do not mean to be understood of an
Institution regularly organized. We do
not mean to convey an idea that individu-
als were associated and convened at sea-
sons regularly appointed, and at places ex-
clusively or principally devoted to Mason-
ic purposes. We do not intend to be uti-
stood that similar ceremonies were observ-
ed at opening and closing, or of conferring
the degrees, as at the present day. We
do not intend to affirm the existence of
forms as indispensable in the Masonic
economy, according to its ancient accept-
ation. But we wish to be understood as
speaking of principles geometrical, moral,
religious and sacred. Let this explanation
be carefully recollected, that no misappre-
hensions may hereafter arise. According
to this explanation, therefore, we shall at-
tempt to show, that ancient Masonry com-
prised what may, with much propriety, be
termed ancient Christianity. Although
the term Christianity is peculiarly applica-
ble to the New Testament dispensation,
yet, in treating of this subject, it will


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 79

5 used as a comprehensive term to ex-
ress whatever, in ancient times, involved
^ligious and sacred considerations, or
uch principles as are found to comport
vith true religion,* as more clearly reveal-
ed in the New Testament.

In speaking, therefore, of ancient Ma-
sonry, or its ancient patrons, we are to un-
derstand nothing more than a knowledge of
'hose principles, which, in due time, gave
rise to the Institution in its organized state,
*nd now constitute the great excellence of
the System.

It is thought, sufficient evidence has
been exhibited, in the former part of this
work, as to the knowledge of those opera-
tive principles of geometry, or Masonry,
displayed in the construction of the Ark.
This building, we are informed, was erect-
id through the agency of Noah, under Di-
vine superintendence. And Noah, being
*n inspired man, as well as a preacher of
igbteousness, most probably had some true
knowledge of those spiritual allusions, so
Manifestly des'ujned to convey moral in-
duction to himself and to his descen-
lants.

If, therefore, religious knowledge, as to
>acred and divine subjects, is now attaina-
ble, through this medium, the same truths
Must have existed, in each antecedent pe-


80 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

riod, since the days of Noah, and might
have been discovered and duly improved.
And if we, in this age of the world, can
discover those very interesting and sub-
lime allusions involved in the typical ap-
plication of the ark, may we not reasona-
bly suppose, that Noah, as an inspired man,
had a more deep and affecting sense of
their moral and spiritual applications. It
hence appears, that ancient geometry or
Masonry, in relation to the ark, did involve
many religious truths. Just as far, there-
fore, as the mind was led, through this me-
dium, to contemplate the Divine plan in
the economy of redemption, just so far
ancient Masonry involved ancient Chris-
tianity. If the ark was originally design-
ed to prefigure the eternal salvation of
man, through the temporal deliverance of
Noah and his family, we have much reason
to believe it was thus understood by that
holy man.

The tabernacle, erected by Moses, fur-
. nishes another source of religious instruc-
tion. A knowledge of the form and work-
manship of this moveable tent was, by in-
spiration, communicated to Moses. All
the appendaues, as well as the whole ser-
vice, presented many obvious allusions to
future events, and prefigured many impor-
tant facts, in relation to the Divine plan>


i


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 81

as now displayed in tiie moral system. No
doubt, the Jews were taught much reli-
gious truth from those symbols. At the
feasl of tabernacles, it appears, that occa-
sion was taken to lead their minds from vis-
ible objects to contemplate the invisible
things of God, in the future manifestations
of his goodness and mercy.

This tabernacle, with all its appendages,
was evidently designed by Jehovah, to
bring to view religious truths. No doubt,
therefore, can be entertained but such
knowledge was thence derived according
to Divine purpose.

A knowledge, belief and due reverence
of the Divine word, constitutes the very
essence of all true religion, whether an-
cient or modern. St. John begins his gos-
pel by saying, "In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and
the word -was God." Even that Omnipo-
tent Being, " who spake and it was done,
who commanded and it stood fast :" For
whom, by whom, and through whom, all
things visible and invisible subsist. That
infinite Personage, through whose mediato-
rial office-work are displayed every Di-
vine attribute and perfection, which.angels
admire, and man is bound to love and
adore. This word, however mysterious
it may appear to the world, has been un-


82 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

derstood, and held sacred by the Masonie
order from time immemorial.

From every consideration, therefore,
which has been presented on this subject,
we have much reason to conclude, that
those holy patriarchs of antiquity who un-
derstood the name and true character of
God, were, in that sense, according to an-
cient acceptation, patrons of the genuine
and fundamental principles of Masonry.—
Just as far as they did understand and em-
brace and patronise such principles, they
understood, embraced and patronised what
now are, and ever have been, as far as re-
cords can be traced, absolutely essential to
the Masonic Institution.

The more substantial part of modern
Free-Masonry, consists in exhibiting the
great outlines of the Divine economy, in
relation to an intelligent universe ; in pre-
senting to view our numerous social and re-
lative duties ; impressing the heart with a
lively sense of moral propriety ; and in pre-
paring mankind for the sublime entertain-
ments of a happy immortality.

May we not hence conclude, that those
venerable patriarchs of ancient times, were,
in many respects, led to a discovery of that
blessedness, which should afterwards be re-
vealed ; that they were made to under-
stand, by special revelation, most, if not


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 83

all, of the typical allusions of their altars,
and the event prefigured in the choice of
their sacrifices ; that the whole service of
the tabernacle, while in the wilderness, was
spiritualized, in a very solemn manner, to
the understandings of the pious and devout
worshipper ; and that the temple of Solo-
fl)on,also, displayed, to the contemplative
mind, a still higher exhibition of the eter-
nal purposes of Jehovah, in the great plan
of redemption.

That all these things pointed, in some
shape, to the great sacrifice which was to
Hone for the sins of the world, is now abun-
lantly evident. And that most, if not all,
>f the ancient fathers, did thus understand
hem, is highly probable, if not certain. —
This sacrifice was the eternal word, or the
econd Person in the adorable Trinity, as
Manifested in the flesh. The same word,
>y which Masons in every country do now
ecognize each other, as having been regu-
arly advanced to the more sublime de-
crees. This word, with its Masonic pro-
mnciation, can, for a certainty, be traced
>ack in the Institution for more than two
housand years. If so, it affords strong
resumptive evidence, to say the least,
hat it has descended, not merely from the
>uilding of the temple, but even from the
ncient fathers, to whom God himself com-


84 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

municatec] the knowledge of his holy name.
However this may have been, the period
cannot be fixed when the true name of
God was not known and reverenced in the
Masonic Institution. Since, therefore, e-
very fudamental principle of our holy re-
ligion, emanates from, and centres in Him
" who is the brightness of his Father's glo-
ry , and the express image of his person,"
just as anciently as the reverential use of
this Name can be traced in our Institution,
just so long, it must appear, that ancient
Masonry was, in a very important sense,
ancient Christianity. In whatever extent
it. shall be found, that those principles,
which are now comprised in our system?
were, in ancient times, understood in a spi-
ritual sense, as to the ark of JNooh, the ta-
bernacle of M oses, and the temple of So-
lomon, in the same extent, we must be al-
lowed to infer, that ancient Masonry was
of a sacred and religious nature.

We cannot deny that the device and
workmanship of those buildings, had a J)i m
vine origin, and we doubt not, but a know-
ledge of their mystical allusions, was also
divinely intended, so that something of the
invisible things of God mi^ht thereby be
manifested. Hence, we again infer from
the eternal purpose of God, that whatever
religious knowledge was, either wholly, or


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 85

in part, derived through this medium, may
properly be termed ancient Christianity.

Ceremonies of service necessarifv fol-
lowed, and depended on, the establishment
of those buildings. AH the utensils of ser-
vice, therefore, had their appropriate allu-
sions and were wisely calculated to inspire
the mind with serious and devout contem-
plations. The thing signified, in connex-
ion with whatever was the type, would
lead the devout worshipper, from the view
of the one, seriously to contemplate the
t>ther.

We must, therefore, conclude some re-
ligious knowledge must necessarily have
been drawn from the very construction, as
well as application, of those things which
were wrought according to thejprinciples
of geometry or Masonry.

Herein is great wisdom displayed. The
divine plan was not merely, intended to be
brought to view, but also carried into ef-
fect, through the instrumentality of nume-
rous subordinate means. Hence it seemed
good in the sight of Omnipotence to direct
Moses to build a tabernacle, and thereby
unfold many interesting truths embraced
in the plan of redemption. It was also put
into the heart of David to give a solemn
charge to Solomon his son, to build a house
to the name of the God of Israel. And

8


86 SPECULATIVE MASONRY*

Solomon, in executing this great and glo-
rious work, was instrumental of displaying
the Divine economy, in a much greater de-
gree than had been done in any antece-
dent period.

If, therefore, it be true, that any thing
of ancient Masonry consisted in bringing
to view more and more of the divine plan,
in the great moral system ; in unfolding
the deep mysteries of redemption, and
leading the mind to a discovery of those
interesting truths, which are connected
with eternal salvation, we must conclude
it partook, in the same extent, of the na-
ture of a moral and religious institution.

It is, therefore, thought, from what has
been suggested,vevery brother may obtain
satisfactory evidence, in his own mind, as
to the truth of our first proposition, that
ancient Masonry, in this sense of the term,
was ancient Christianity.


CHAPTER X.

Outlines of Masonic History. — The proba-
ble Origin of Masonry as an organized In*
slitution. — The dissemination of its Prin-
ciples amongst the Nations of the Earth.

YT is now proposed to exhibit a suc-
cinct history of ancient Masonry, so far as
the same can be ascertained, or fairly in-
ferred, from the records of ancient, pro-
fane, sacred or church histories. Some of
the most distinguished ancient patrons and
benefactors of the Institution will be nam-
ed* Perhaps something of this nature may
be useful and satisfactory to every friend
of truth.

Various have been the opinions of his-
torians, who have said any thin? on this
subject, as well as Masons, relative to the
origin- of ancient Free-Masonry : and this
very circumstance will afford us incontro-
vertible evidence of its great antiquity.
Had it been of modern date, no difficulties
could have arisen on this point ; its origin
would have been recorded in numerous
instances and immediately published to
the world. Some persons from an enthu-
siastic fondness for its antiquity, have tra-
velled back to the commencement of time
for its origin* It has been asserted, that


88 SPECULATIVE MASOKRY.

" ever since symmetry existed, and harmo-
ny displayed her charms, our order ha9 had
a being.'* That (be moralising principles
were co-existent with those of true religion,
there can be no doubt ; yet with no sem-
blance of propriety can we hence date Ma-
sonry, under its systematized form. It is
by no means correct to speak of Masonry
in the abstract, merely considering its prin-
ciples, when we are only aiming to prove
the origin of the Society, in a state of or-
ganization. The materials of an excellent
edifice may all exist, either in a wrought
or unwrought state, yet, with no propriety
can we speak of the existence of that edi-
fice, until those materials are collected,
properly arranged, and duly put together.
Such, in this respect, is Masonry ; though
its principles existed " ere time began, or
nature received her birth." Notwithstand-
ing there are many symbolical representa-
tions highly instructive, pointing out man?
important truths, and illustrating their
excellencies, which claim great antiquity,
yet these, in themselves considered, afford
not sufficient proof that Free- Masonry
must necessarily have been co-existent —
Should we argue thus, it would prove more
than any Brother would be willing to ad-
mit. For in the order of time, many of
our symbols have originated in periods


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 89

distant from each other. This argu-
nl, therefore, by proving too much;
»ves nothing. Hence, it is evident* if
H our moralizing principles we date the
jin of Masonry, we must fix its era co-
ntent with the Almighty. If we date it
n the existence of symmetry and pro-
tion, we date it from the creation of the
Id; yea, before man existed : and if we
) it from the intoduction of our sym-
i, we plainly contradict ourselves. It
lid, therefore, be absurd to infer the o-
n of Masonry in its organized state,
neither of those considerations. Could
in truth affirm that the earth had an ab-
ite existence, merely from the Divine
pose to call it into being, while as yet
energies of Almighty power had not
n put forth in its formation ? If not, nei-

can we affirm it of Masonry. Nothing
e can be understood by its origin, than

period when its principles were sys-
atized, and an Institution organized by
ual association. It would hence ap-
% that we have substantial reasons to
?lude, that an organized state of the
iety termed Masonic, arose from the
ortance of social intercourse, the lo-
sing relative duties of mankind, and an
i*>st solicitude amongst individuals to
note the general good.- Meu, vd\o ImA

8*


90 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

a sacred regard for the Divine charade:
would endeavour to honour bis name by
faithful discbarge of each subordinate di
ty. Motives of benevolence would indue
such men to unite their exertions in tb
cause of humanity.

Profane history confirms the fact, bt
yond the shadow of a doubt, that Masonrj
in its primeval state, was principally opt
rative. The same truth has also been mad
to appear from sacred history. Symbol
cal representations were introduced forth
purpose of impressing on the heart, th
importance and religious nature of thos
things which were prefigured. Hence th
serious and weighty considerations of ete
nity, were constantly kept in view. By a
easy and natural transition, the Order \\i
been changed from ope rative to Speculativ
Masonry. This truth also appears in pr<
fane history. That the operative principle
are coeval with the creation of the materii
world, cannot be doubted. That the m<
ralizing principles are, at least, co-existei
with true religion, is equally certain. Bu
that the existence of the Society in its o
ganized state, was previous to the buildin
of the temple, during the reign of Solomoi
king of Israel, to me appears highly imprc
hable. Those Masonic representation
which every brother must necessarily wi


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 91

£ r | ness on receiving the several degrees, are
sufficient to convince me, that the Society,
according to common acceptation of the
«f term, then had its origin, or those repre-
*l sentations must be groundless and absurd.
It is also evident, as will hereafter be made
^f to appear, that the principles which con-
•t stitute the foundation of the Masonic In-
L jf stitution, were known to the ancient wise
t men and fathers, from time immemorial ;
by them held sacred and transmitted to the
pnident and faithful, during all succeeding
a ?es, to the time of Solomon. It is, there-
fore, thought, in view of all considerations,
I and all the evidence which can be had on
r thi s subject, that we may safely date an-
ient Masonry, as a regular institution,
r from the reign of Solomon. Every cir-
^nstance attendant on that period fur-
nishes corroborating evidence. This car-
* ,e s U back to the year one thousand and
twelve before the birth of Christ, or two
*"°Usand eight hundred and twenty-nine
^ r .°'Jh the present time. Solomon, who was
,|r inely inspired, found it indispensably
f^'cssary, in prosecuting such an under-
ling as he had been directed, that the
I °**kmen should be formed into a regular-
ly organized body, that every part of the
I l| 'Ming might be executed without the
^^st confusion, and with the gieate&t dea-


92 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

patch. Nothing could he more conducive
to the improvement and profit of the buil-
ders, or to the prudence, wisdom and hon-
our of their employer. The whole num-
ber of men employed at the building of
the temple, exclusive of the three grand
officers, was one hundred and thirteen
thousand six hundred. Of these, eighty
thousand were stone-squarers, polishers,
and sculptors; all of them ingenious and
faithful craftsmen. Thirty thousand were
employed in the cedar forests of Lebanon,
in the rotation often thousand per month-
Three thousand and three hundred being
expert masters in working, were appointed

overseers and inspectors of the work.

Three hundred rulers or masters to lay out
the work and superintend Hie gene rah can-
cer ns. And t hree principal officers, not nui * 1- "
bered, to direct in the whole plan, the forr* 1 *
manner and workmanship of the whole bu i la-
ding.

Thus, all the materials were prepare"
with the utmost promptitude, every p* *"*
of the temple completed with the greater s *
skill, and all confusion prevented, whil*|
harmony and brotherly love reign^"
through all the different ordersof workme ** m

After the completion of this building, **
would be a dictate of reason to conclude*
that the workmen must be eminently skii' - "


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 93

ed in theii; arj ; that, anticipating the pe-
riod of their separation, they would strength-
en the cords of friendship by such ties and
obligations as remain permanently bind-
ing; that they would introduce a kind of
language, unknown to the world, by which
'bey might for ever thereafter make them-
selves known to each other; and that such
additional regulations would be adopted,
as should be best calculated to render the
association lasting, useful and respectable.
. After the completion and dedication of
*he temple, we may reasonably conclude,
toany of those craftsmen would travel not
°nly through, the different tribes of Israel,
kut amongst other contiguous nations, in
J ^arch of employment equal to their skill.
Fbose who had shown sufficient specimens
*JT their skill, whose faithfulness and integ-
ity had gained them distinction, whose
* riderstandings were improved, and whose
l ^arts were modeled and expanded by the
^>und principles of morality and virtue,
v ouId most probably be instructed and re-
vive commission to organize their breth-
'^n, and form similar societies in different
-*>untries, where they might travel or re-
Mde. At any rate, this is a natural con-
clusion, and what might necessarily be ex^
ejected to grow out of that order and mu-
t ual friendship, which existed amongst the


94 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

craftsmen at the building of tbe temple.—
We may, therefore, reasonably act ount,io
part, for the early and rapid dissemination
of ancient Masonry amongst different na-
tions, as well as for that striking similarity
in the whole body of the Institution.—
Some nations with which the world has
had no intercourse for hundreds of years
are in possession of all tbe Masonic secrets
and have regular Lodges, similar ceremo
nies, and in all essential points perfectly
agree with the rest of the world.

Hiram, who was the king of Tyre, \
country contiguous to the Jews, was no
only in league with Solomon, but his ac
tive and zealous friend;* and Hiram tb
celebrated artisan, had a Tyrian for bi
father, though his mother was a Jewess.-
Many of the Tynans were actively et
gaged, with the workmen of Solomon, i
preparing the materials and erecting tb
temple. A friendly intercourse contini
ed for many years between these nation
on the principles of mutual reciprocity
Masonry must, therefore, have existed an
flourished amongst the Tyrians, nearly i
the same degree as amongst the Jews. Th
language of tbe Tynans, being almost ei
tirely derived from the Hebrew, woul

* l. Kings, chap. 5,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 95

r facilitate this intercourse between
) nations.f

hundred and sixty-four years after
lication of the temple, the Tyrians
1 a colony in the northern part of

whence arose the Carthagenians*
9opIe in a short time became ex-
\\y commercial and opulent. A
rcial and friendly intercourse ever
led between the Tyrians and Car-
ians, in such a manner, and on such
as would induce us to believe, if
ry existed amongst the former, it
of course amongst the latter; The
s not only sent colonies into Africa,
-y into Europe. The city of Cadiz,
las since become the great empo-
f Spain, was very anciently founded

Tyrians. The Carthagenians in
j of time possessed themselves of
jatest part of Spain, together with

important Islands in the Mediter-

sea; all of which possessions/to-
with their own country, afterwards
o the hands of the Romans,
ing the reign of Solomon especial-
veil as before and after, a very inti-
onnexion was kept up, between the
md Egyptians. This is sufficiently

•

Lin, Book 2, Part l,6ec. 1.


96 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

evident from one of the wives* of Solomon
being the daughter of the king of Egypt;
from their commercial intercourse, and i
from many of the nobility of Egypt visit-
ing the court of Solomon.
. From this connexion, perhaps, we may*
with some propriety, infer the introduction
of ancient Masonry amongst the Egyp -
tians. Be this however as it may, we are
substantially informed by several ancient
historians, that Masonry did flourish in
Egypt soon after this period. It is we]*
known, that the Egyptian priests have uni-
formly been considered, by ancient histo-
rians, as possessing many valuable secrets,
and as the greatest proficients in the arts
and sciences of their times. Whether they
actually possessed the Masonic secrets o*"
not, we cannot absolutely determine, but
we have strong circumstantial reasons to
believe they did. It was here that Pytha-
goras was initiated into their mysteries*
and instructed in 4heir art. It was lier^
that sculpture and architecture, and all tb^
sciences of those times,* were so greatly
perfected. And here, it has been thought*
<by some of the most curious observers oi
antiquity, that Masonry was formerly cul-

* 1. Kings, Chap. x. verses 28, 29 —Also Indent History oi
Egypt.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 97

»d and held in high estimation. Seve-
Egyptian obelisks still remain, some
lieh were, in the reign of Augustus,
*yed to Home.* On these obelisks
uriously engraved many hieroglyphic
Masonic emblems. Egypt, by an-
philosophcrs, was considered the
of science. Hence we find that Ho-
Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato,
>s and many others of the ancient po-
atesmen and philosophers, frequently
d Egypt, where many of them, accor-
to profane history ,f were by the E-
an priests initiated into their mys-
u

crops, an Egyptian, was the original
ler of Athens. Hence a correspon-
5 would necessarily follow for some
h of time between those countries. —
if this connexion and correspondence
ot afford a suitable medium for the
Per of their mysteries, yet those phi-
hers, who were in the habit of visit-
Igypt, would, of course, carry back,
eir native country, whatever they
ed valuable for their own citizens. —
y incidental circumstances, however,
• in the history of the Grecian states*

lin, Book 1, Part 1, Chap. 2, Sec. 1.
lin, Book 1, Part 2, Chap. 1.

9


98 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

which strongly favour the idea oftheexte*-
ence of Masonry amongst that people, i*
they do not prove the very fact. Fro** 1
the many considerations which might t>6
mentioned, two shall in this place suffice
At the time when the plague proved so
mortal in the city of Athens, Hippocrates,
a native of the island of Coos, being err»^-
nent as a physician, was invited to Ather*. s.
He immediately complied with the invit ^"
tion, and proved abundantly serviceab Mt
in that pestilential disorder.

Such was the gratitude of the Atheniar^s,
that it was decreed "he should be initm *■
ted into the most exalted mysteries ^of
their nation."*

When Alexander the great, in bis c<^ in-
quest of nations, approached the city *>f
Jerusalem, he was met by the high prie ^t
clad in all his pontifical robes. No soc^ n-
er did the conqueror discover this venear^B-
ble person, with the insignia of his officr~e,
than, halting his army, he instantly advanc-
ed, reverently bowed, saluted the h\^b
priest, conferred with him, and depart «^d
in peace.f This singular circumstance
happened three hundred and thirty-thr^e
years before the birth of Christ.

The Romans, who succeeded the Gre-


* Rollin, book vii chap, 3, sec. 2. f Ibid, book xi sec. 7.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 99

ei ^Hs in universal empire, had a favourable
opportunity, in numerous ways, both from

iu ^ recians > ^ ie Carthagenians, and even
[**s Jews themselves, of obtaining a know-
^dge of those mysteries which might ex-
l $t in either of those nations.

To every critical reader of the Roman
history, especially one who hasa knowledge
Jimself of the Masonic Institution, very
striking evidence will appear of the actu-
al existence of Masonry amongst that na-
ion.

On the whole, it is confidently believed,
.hat many of the Roman geneials were not
>nly Masons themselves, but great en-
:ourageis of the art, both amongst their
)wn citizens, and those of ancient Britain.
Although tlie Britons were unknown to
the Romans until the time of Julius Cae-
3ar, yet are there many convincing evi-
dences that Masonry had long been known,
even amongst that barbarous people, an-
terior to tuat period.

The Druids, who were the ancient priests
of Britain and Gaul, are thought to have
derived their government, rights and cer-
emonies from Pythagoras.

These Druids, who were the public in-
structors of £he people, were held in high
estimation. From tueir history, it is evi-
dent, they, in a degree, understood geome-


100 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

try and natural history, and also believed
in the immortality of the soul. They had
an Arch- Druid in each nation, who held
sufficient authority to convene the others
at pleasure, or whenever the general good
required counsel. And it was their uni-
form practice, on receiving any youth un-
der their instructions, to retire to some re-
mote place, where he was duly taught the**
mysteries.* These circumstances are cal-
culated to induce every person to believe
certain mysteries, unknown to the peop^ e
in general, were attached to their ceren* 45 "
nies.

Ptthagoras is considered to have be^ n
the founder of those institutions of \wf&
Druids, and as he was ever thought to ha ~^ c
been a Mason, we have strong eircumsta^f 1 '
tial reasons to believe something of lM^^ a
sonry was known to the Druids. Mason r .
therefore, might have existed amongst t^ "
ancient Britons and Gauls, previous to th(
having been conquered by the Romai
However this may be, w T e find no count r
in which it has flourished to that degn
or been productive of greater good to nu
kind than on the island of Great Brita
In consequence, however, of those vari<


* Harris's Encyclopaedia, vol. 2— and other Histories oF tke
piuids.


ok
otk.


-v,


;l

1


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 101

lerfe ^ n «S?le? between the Picts and Scots, the
Britons, Saxons and Danes, Masonry was
not extensively cultivated until about five
hundred and fifty years after the com-
rupl ^ncement of the Christian era. About
h\J *^at time» St. Austin, with a number of
e J brethren came from Italy to England,
k| * v here they devoted their time and talents,
itf e **hisively, to the interests of Christianity
r . : j a nd Masonry. At this time St. Austin
Presided, in person, in laying the founda-
'*ons of several important buildings.
m In the vear six hundred and twenty-six,
K +ng Athelstan summoned all the brethren
?F the kingdom to attend a general meet-
**>g; he then granted them a charier, and
^^tablished a Grand Lodge, which has con-
c *nued, by succession, until the present
*^ay. Hence arose the ancient York Ma-
^tDns. In consequence of thjs high patron-
**#e many of the nobility immediately came
forward, and were united to the society.

In the year six hundred and ninety, Ed-

^ar became a distinguished patron of the

T^rder. In eight hundred and ninety six,

-Alfred the great, havingexpelled the Danes

^Vom his kingdom, became a zealous and

hearty encourager of Masonry. Such was

Iris attachment to the Order, that he appro-

priated one seventh part of his revenue to

promote the Institution.

9*


a

102 SPECULATIVE MASOKRr.

In one thousand and sixty-six the tower
of London, the jpalace and hall of West-
minster, and London bridge were begun
under the joint patronage of the bishop of
Rochester and the earl of Shrewsbury, both
of whom were distinguished Masons. Du-
ring the reigns of Henry I. and Stephen,
the Order was liberally patronised by the
crown ; and the chapel at Westminster, the
house of commons and many other magni-
ficent edifices were erected. In the reign
of Edward III. lodges became numerous*
and Masonry highly honourable. Richard
II. and Henry IV. V. and VI. devoted
much of their time to promote the respec-
tability and usefulness of the Society.
Henry VI. however, was a most virulent
enemy, during the former part of his reign;
but his prejudices having in a measure sub-
sided, he was initiated, in fourteen hundred
and forty two, and, thenceforward, was as
eminent for his attachment, as before for
his enmity.

James I. of Scotland, honoured the lodg-
es with his royal presence, often presided
in person, and actually settled an annual
revenue of an English noble, to be paid to
every Master Mason in Scotland.

On the twenty-fourth of Juhe, fifteen
hundred and two, Henry VII. formed a
grand lodge in his palace, proceeded in


SPECULATIVE MASONRT. 103

reat splendour to the east end of West-
inster abbey, and, wilb bis own hand, laid
e first stone in thai excellent and much
Imired building

During the reign of James I. of England,
en of literature came from all parts of
urope, and attended the lodges in Eng-
nd, as seminaries where the arts and sci-
ices were properly taught.
Charles I. the successor of James, assem-
ed the brethren, and, in person, laid (he
rner stone of St. Paul's cathedral, with
eat solemnity.

Sir Christopher Wren surpassed all who
d gone before him, in his constant and
defatigable exertions to promote Ma-
nry.

After the great fire in London, in six-
en hundred and sixty-six, the Masons had
undant employ to display their skill, and
nultitude of objects on whom to bestow
sir charity.

Thus we find that Masonry has proba-
ta existed in England since the time the
uids received their instructions fromPy-
igoras, about five hundred years before
irist. And not to speak of what has tran-
ired in more modern times, yet, from the
pulsion of the Danes, by Alfred the
eat, in eight hundred and ninety-six, till
illiam III. in sixteen hundred and nine-


104 BPECULATIVE MASONRY.

t)-five, more than one hundred pubic }
buiMings of the first importance, were ei-
ther founded and completed, rebuilt or re-
paired, under the immediate superintend
ence and direction of the Masonic order.*
Amongst this number, the following kinds
are the mo4 important, viz. colleges, (Im-
pels, towers, palaces, cathedrals, monaste-
ries, churches, abbeys, halls, bridges, and
the house of commons of England.

After the great fire in London, in six-
teen hundred and sixty-six, the whole plan
of the new city was committed to Sir Chris-
topher Wren, then Grand Master of Eng-
land. The plan on which that excellent
Mason designed the city should be rebuilt,
although admirably calculated for health,
convenience and elegance, was unfortu-
nately disapproved by the citizens, in con-
sequence of their enthusiastic, supersti*
lions attachment to their former local sit-
uations. Thus the most favourable oppor-
tunity was lost of rendering that city the
ornament of the world. 5 *

By these brief remarks, we may see in
what manner, and by whom, Masonry has
been patronised in England. Men of the
highest rank, in state arid church, have been
its most active encouragers. Kings have

* See BriUnnica Encyclopaedia, first Amer. edition, vol. x«


I


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 105

*n brought to kneel before their subjects,
1 philosophers have been taught wis-
m within the lodges. The most haughty
i imperious monarchs, subdued by the
Te of truth, have discovered themselves
be but men, resigned the Masonic
air to the most expert workmen, care-
lly submitting to their control.
Since the reign of William III. the In-
tution has generally preserved a flour-
)ing condition on the island of Great-
itain. In other European countries, a
nilar prosperity and patronage have
irked the Society.

Masonry was introduced into the Uni-
1 States at an early period after their set-
ment by Europeans. In the year seven-
in hundred and thirty-three, a charter
.8 granted by the grand lodge of Eng-
ld, to a number of brethren, then resid-
5 in Boston, with full powers to consti-
te Masonic lodges throughout North A-
3rica, as occasion might require. Under
^ authority of this charter, lodges were
iablished in various parts of our then in-
it colonies, in Canada, and several of
^ West- India islands. In the year seven-
*n hundred and seventy-three, a commis-
n was received in Boston, from the
*nd lodge in Scotland, appointing the
;ht worshipful Joseph Warren grand


106 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

master of Masons for the continent
merica. In consequence of the coiiini
ment of hostilities between the co,
ami the mother country, the regulai
gress of Masonry was in some trie
interrupted, until the restoration off
Since that time its progress has bee
interrupted, and still remains an In
tion of high and distinguished cele
Little need be said, therefore, in rel
to the history of Masonry in the 13
States.

' 'It is a subject well understood, ar
miliar to every well informed brott
Let this circumstance, however, b
membered, that the great, the imii
Washington was a most firm, zealou
active patron of this Institution,
the greatest statesmen and civilia
which our country can boast, have
and are now, members of this society
attached to its principles. That ver
ny persons who minister at the sacred
and others of distinguished piety, a
heart attached to the Masonic Institul
Thus, my brethren, I haveendeav(
to give you a concise, and it is thou;
true history of the great leading evei
our order* Hence we may discov
antiquity, and rapid dissemination am-
mankind.


SPECULATIVE .MASONRY. 107

From this brief account of -those many
aferences which might be drawn, one shall
rt this- time suffice. A truth, pre-eminent-
ly important, as it relates to social life.;
that this Institution has been a most hap-
py medium of preserving some of the most
valuable AKTS* during the dark ages of
the world, and transmitting them to pos-
terity. In those periods of time when
barbarism triumphed over refinement, this
Institution held the arcana«of that know-
ledge without which mankind must have
been deprived of numerous and important
privileges in civilized life. A faithful few
preserved this noble science, which has so
abundantly contributed to the convenience
and happiness of mankind. When Chris-
tianity was first promulgated, the fervour
of enthusiastic superstition having subsid-
ed, Mabonrv exhibited her charms, was em-
braced, and went hand in hand with Chris-
tianity in effecting that important change
wrought on society. We have, therefore,
by coincidence in effect, most convincing
proof of coincidence in principle. This
fact has been clearly exemplified in the
Saxon heptarchy. At the same time when
those petty monarchs became converted
to Christianity, they embraced and patro-
nised the Masonic art. The same is true
at the present day. The united effects of


108 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

Christianity and Masonry in its purity,
ever productive of the best society,
rude savage of the wilderness, who has
degrees, now meets the civilized Maso
his brother. All distinctions of nat
sect and color, are most happily forgo!
on Masonic ground, while the great ob
with all, so far as they act in charactei
the promotion of human happiness.

A spacious field is therefore opened
virtuous Masonic labours, The worl
the grand theatre on which Masons an
display the benevolence of tbeir hea
by deeds of chanty to mankind. Th
great and important duties first taught
relation to our God, our neighbour!
ourselves, if duly complied with, from
sincerity of our hearts, will fit us to civ
in the new Jerusalem, the everlasting
bode of the righteous.


CHAPTER XL

tes and Masonic Characters of Ancient
and Pious Patrons.

IT will now be in order to introduce
names and Masonic characters of some
the most venerable personages of anti-
ty. Some light may be reflected on
Jern Masonry, by a reference to the
ellencies of those men, who were the
ourites of Heaven, the light of their ge-
ation, the fathers of Masonry, and the
laments of the Christian world.
Snoch, who was the seventh from Adam,
ever been acknowledged as a father in
Institution. Masonic traditions inform
he was, in many respects, instructed in
t science from which ancient Masonry
>se. The Arabian history ascribes much
^wledge to this excellent man ; and a-
ngst other things, that he was instructed
Heaven in a " mysterious science."
>ephus speaks of the same man in terms
high distinction ; but sacred history in-
rns us, " that he walked with God," that
e pleased God," and was translated,
t he should not see death. It appears
m Josephus, as well as other ancient
iters, that (wo pillars were erected in
time of Enoch, on which were engra-

10


IK


jn


110 SPECULATIVE MASONRV.

veil some general knowledge of (he heaven-
ly bodies, and more especially of geome- li1
try. Some writers have ascribed these pit- li)i
lars, with their engravings, to Seth ; but hx
Masonic tradition, from time immemorial, |i«
affirms that they were erected by Enoch.
However this may have been, it is very
certain, that both Seth and Enoch were
truly pious and devout persons, and, in
many respects, skilled in geometrical know-
ledge. The probable design, therefore, of
those pillars, with their inscriptions, was to
transmit the knowledge of geometry to fu-
ture generations. All Masons, therefore,
who are properly instructed in the history
of our Order, believe Enoch was, in a spe-
cial manner, acquainted with those princi-
ples of geometry, whence in process of
time the Masonic Institution arose.

In relation to the Masonic character of
Noah, little more need be said. That he
was commanded of God to build the aik,
and divinely taught as respects the work-
manship, is attested by unerring truth*
From the dimensions of this building, it- 9
peculiar construction and fitness to answe**
its destined purpose, to preserve man an**
beast from an overwhelming flood, whet*
" the windows of heaven were opened,
and " the fountains of the great deep br<*~
ken up," we must infer Divine wisdof* 1


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. HI

in the design, as well as Divine preserva-
tion in the event. No mere man, in that
early period of the world, could have de-
vised and executed a work of such magni-
tude, unaided by heavenly wisdom.

From this event, therefore, arose the ark-
mariner's degree, comprising the general
outlines in this important mechanism, re-
plete with useful and interesting moral in-
structions.

Abraham, the father of the faithful, is
claimed as one of the primitive brethren,
and an active patron of the ancient princi-
ples of our order. This man by nation
was an idolatrous Chaldean, yet, being call-
ed- of God, he became a most eminent
Christian, and a distinguished instructor of
the principles of Christianity, and the art
of geometry or Masonry. To him God
made special manifestations of his loving
kindness, and established the true church
in his family. The writings of Josephus
inform us, when Abram sojourned in the
land of Egypt, that he was principally em-
ployed incommunicatingtothem the know-
ledge of arithmetic, and instructing them
in the science of astronomy ; that he was
reputed a man of wisdom, of deep sagaci-
ty, and of profound understanding. In the
-stories of ancient heathens, Indians, Ma-
hometans and other Asiatics, Abraham is


112 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

represented as a celebrated teacher of a-
ritbmetic and astronomy. The Egyptians
and Chaldeans long maintained and pro-
mulgated the same opinion. Masonic tra-
ditions, time out of mind, have handed
down the name and character of this man,
as enhinently skilled in the true prihciples
of ancient Masonry. That solemn inter*
view between Abraham and Melchizedeck*
is full of Masonic instruction, well under-
stood, and duly appreciated, by those ad-
mitted to that sacred degree.

Melchizedeck, priest of the Most High
God, who met Abram, returning from the
slaughter of the five kings, and blessed him,
was an eminent type of the promised
Messiah. Abram appears to have looked
through Melchizedeck to the great Shilob,
who was to come. For he kneeled be-
fore him to receive his kind benedictions.
From this solemn and interesting event
arose one of the most grand, sacred and
sublime degrees pertaining to our Institu-
tion. Ancient Masonry recognises Mel-
chizedeck, as one of her most venerable
patrons. His name, his office, his virtues
and his typical character, furnish abundant
instructions in a Masonic point of view,
and are wisely improved to direct our
thoughts to the " Lamb of God, which ta-
keth away the sins of the world." Hence


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 113

our ancient brethren, through him, could
look forward to the Great High Priest of
our salvation. The Jewish order of priest-
hood from Aaron to Zacherias, and even
till the coming of Messias, was in confir-
mation, of that great event, which issued in
the redemption of man. AH pointed to
ttie eternal priesthood of the Son of God,
who by his own blood made atonement for
sin, and consecrated the way to the Holy
°f Holies. This constitutes the great and
ultimate point of Masonic research.

Joseph, the son of Jacob, who by his un-
natural brethren was sold for a slave, be-
anie, in a certain extent, the Grand Mas-
ter of Egypt. This chaste and pious youth,
ftj'ly exemplified the superior excellence
" Various principles, interwoven in the bo-
'y of our system. To him was revealed
"^ divine purpose, that God was about to
^s?te the land by a distressing famine. —
^seph, therefore, suggested to Pharoah
"^ expediency of gathering the fruits of
"^ land into store-houses, and providing
( **~ the sustenance of the nalion. When
^^ famine had not long prevailed, the hreth-
e n of Joseph came down to Egypt to buy
: °rn, whence arose one of the most tender
nf l affecting interviews left on sacred re-
°i*c|. All this was widely designed to af-
ec t their hearts in view of their former

10*


]M SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

conduct, to show them human frailty ar
dependence, to humble their pride, at
give them a just sense of a superintendii
Providence in all the incidents of life.-
During this scene Joseph gave vent to tl
tenderest feelings of his nature, address*
his brethren in the most melting terms
artless friendship, and loaded them wi
rich favours. Mis readiness to forgive, ai
his zeal to subserve their wants, were tr
ly characteristic of a benevolent heart, ai
a distinguishing criterion of Masonic ch
rity. The chastity, benevolence, cbarit
filial and paternal love and affection of tt
amiable man, are interwoven with oursj
tem of precepts, and obligatory on all o
brethren in a very peculiar sense. Josej
w T as skilled in Egyptian science, and en
nent as a man of wisdom. No reasonafc
doubt, therefore, can be entertained of!
Masonic knowledge, according to its p
milive acceptation.

The Masonic character of Moses, t
deliverer of the Hebrews from Egypti
bondage, has been introduced in the begi
ning of this work. It is therefore thougl
little more need be added in relation
him. If it be admitted, that ancient M
sonry was operative and religious, no dou
can remain as to his knowledge of this s<
ence. That it was operative is abundai


"speculative masonry. 115

ly manifest from profane history. That it
was clothed with religious instructions, is
equally evident from the Sacred writings.
Divines and expositors in every age, have
made the tabernacle and its appendages, a
fruitful source of moral and religious in-
struction. From these considerations, as
well as from numerous others, which may
n °t be named, Masons entertain no doubt
°f his masonic character. Joshua, the dis-
ciple and successor of Moses, by Divine
a ppointment, led the Hebrews into the
promised land. Previous to the death of
Moses, Joshua was solemnly installed in
"is high and responsible office. Long had
" e been instructed by Moses in all things ♦
*uich pertained to the Jewish religion. —
" *se in heart, and prudent in counsel, he
. Wf *s qualified to go before that people, to
instruct them in their duty, and the wor-
ship of their God. When the river Jordan
w ***s divided before the ark of the Lord, Jo-
s "Ua erected twelve stones where the feet
?* the priests stood, and twelve others ta-
* e n from the bed of the river, were set up,
ori the farther side, as a memorial of that
m| raculous event. On Ebal, also, he e-
re **ted stones, and wrote thereon some part
?f the Mosaic law. Now, as Joshua was
instructed by Moses during forty years,
Wa s present at the setting up of Uvfc \&fefcx-


116 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

nacle, often experienced Divtae manifes-
tations, was appointed of God to divide tbe
land of Canaan for inheritance, was tho-
roughly taught in the Jewish religion, and
the ceremonies of service pertaining to the
priesthood, and lived in the exercise of vi-
tal piety, we must of necessity infer,1hat be
was thoroughly acquainted with all those
allusions and typical references, in which
ancient Masonry in its more important
part consisted.

Passing a series of names, especially in
the line of high priesthood, we will next
speak of David, the man after God's own
heart. This man, we believe to be the
last distinguished patron of ancient Ma-
sonic principles, previous to the regular
organization of the Institution. David
was a man of early piety, set apart for the
deliverance of his nation, to subdue their
enemies and prepare the way for the build-
ing of that temple, which should be typi*
cal of the favourable presence of God in
the New Jerusalem. Early did he form
the design of executing this great work
himself, and establishing a place for the name
and worship of the Holy One of Israel. —
His pious heart was fervently engaged in
this laudable design. His zeal was approv-
ed, though a Divine prohibition prevent-
ed his execution of the work, attended


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 117

with a sure, promise, that his son should
accomplish what had been in his heart to
do. David, though a man of war, affords
numerous examples of active Masonic vir-
tues. The mutual friendship between
bim and Jonathan, the fidelity of Jonathan
in apprizing David of approaching dan-
gers, their affectionate interviews, their
mutual pledges of love, the earnest solici-
tude and bitter lamentations of David on
the death of 'his brother Jonathan, are
characteristic examples of Masonic prin-
ciples. The forbearance of David in the
cave of Engedi, when the enemy of his life
Jay defenceless before him, strongly marks
that spirit of forgiveness, which is solemn-
ly enjoined on every Masonic brother.

These considerations induce us to be-
lieve, that David, the sweet musician of
Israel, was one of our ancient brethren,
^ friend and patron of Masonic princi-
ples.

In relation to Solomon, the son of Da-
vid, sufficient has already been said. Yet,
K may not be improper to add in this
place, that from a full view of Masonic
symbols and representations, from the na-
ture and import of our ceremonies in con-
ferring the several degrees, and from the
whole tenor of the system, there can be no
joubt, but he was the man, who ftrsfc ox*


118 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ganized the Institution, and laid the foun-
dation, on which this great Masonic edifice
has been erected ; that the government of
the Lodge, its precepts, laws, rights and
ceremonies, were measurably fixed and
ordained by this good, wise and discerning
man. The evidence of these facts has
been satisfactory to all well informed Ma-
sons, in every age and country- Prom
this period, therefore, we date our Institu-
tion in its regular, organized form.

Zerubbabel, who was constituted the
governor of Israel, Joshua the high priest,
and Haggai the prophet, who rebuilt the
temple at Jerusalem after the Babylonish
captivity, were most evidently skilled in
ancient Masonry, and very distinguished
patrons of the craft. It appears from sa-
cred and profane history, that soon after
the subversion of the Babylonish empire,
Cyrus issued a proclamation by which the
Jews were not only liberated and permit-
ted but encouraged to return to their na-
tive country, and rebuild their temple.—
Many of them returned, yet nothing was
attempted in forwarding the work, until
the reign of Darius. At the commence-
ment of his reign, Zerubbabel, who had
been a friend and companion of Darius,
suggested the importance of the underta-
king, and, as Joteftavk* oWto ^reminded


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 11 9

the king of his own vows, to aid the Jews
in rebuilding the house of the Lord at Je-
rusalem. Darius, therefore, added his own
edict to that of Cyrus, by which he author-
ized Zerubbabel and his brethren to com-
mence their work without delay. The
foundation, therefore, of this temple was
laid with great joy, and the building com-
pleted and solemnly dedicated to the God
of Israel. During the whole of this peri-
od, Zerubbabel encouraged his brethren
in their labor, while Joshua, the high priest,
ministered in holy things, and Haggai pro-
phesied and taught them the fear of the
Lord.

Thus was the second temple erected in
Masonic form, under the superintendence
of men of piety, and the true worshippers
of God. No person can receive the
seventh degree of Masonry, without feel-
ing convinced that those three men pertain-
ed to the ancient brotherhood.

Ancient Masonry, as appeared in chap-
ter fifth, was operative and religious. —
Have we not, then, some reason io con-
elude that the patriarchs taught their de-
scendants in the religious, or speculative
principles ? To me this appears evident,
in as much as this part, most surely, then
consisted, as well as now, in communica-
t ing the knowledge of God and his works.


120 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

We are sure that Noah must have taught
his sons in the operative, and religious
principles. Abram, also, as appears from
historical facts, taught many individuals,
in different nations, the name ,and attri-
butes of the true God, In the same man-
ner did all the patriarchs instruct their pos-
terity in the knowledge and worship of
the one supreme, eternal God. In the
days of Samuel, mention is made of a
school at Najoth, others of a similar cast
are noticed at Bethel and Jericho. From
EzekieFs conferences with the eiders of
the Jewish nation, these schools appear to
have been maintained, even during the
Babylonish captivity.

The Egyptians, Chaldeans, Greeks, and
Romans had schools where ancient philo-
sophy was taught as a religious science.—
Great care was exercised, that none should
be admitted into those schools, but such
as were of a regular life, and approved
character. Due examination and strict
trial of their fidelity and love of truth, was
always made an indispensable requisite to
their admission. Those wise men of the east,
who came to do homage to the infant Sav-
iour, at Bethlehem, w T ere probably men of
distinction in their own country. Their
names from some cause, have never been
transmitted to posterity. Yet as most, if


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 121

not all the wise men and philosophers
of ancient Eastern nations, were initi-
ated into (he mysteries of those limes,
and obtained their knowledge in a princi-
pal degree through this medium, may we
not reasonably conclude, such might have
been the source of information to those
who came to inquire, " where is he that is
born king of the Jews !" One thing is evi-
dent, that they were favoured with Divine
communications, and probably understood
the name of jthe Logos or Word, with
its divine essence and offices, for they pre-
sented an offering of gold and myrrh and
frankincense, which are thought to be an
acknowledgment of his divinity. No doubt
they received arid embraced in their hearts
the true light, and were enabled to walk
therein.


11


CHAPTER XM.

Ancient Mysteries. — Philosophers. — Wise

Men.

TO every person conversant with an-
cient history, it is abundantly evident,
that certain individuals, in most of the eas-
tern nations, were in possession >of what
was termed mysteries, or a mysterious sci-
ence, studiously concealed from the pro-
miscuous multitude.

Of those ancient mysteries there were
several kinds. Some contained nothing
but a heterodox tissue of heathen mytho-
logy. Some were instituted and adapted
to subserve venal purposes of the most odi-
ous cast. Some introduced for political
ends, to awe an ignorant multitude, and
promote the cause of tyrannical usurpa-
tion. While others, manifestly had a ve-
ry different origin, proposed the accom-
plishment of a different end, and were
•common to some individuals in many na-
tions. The main object of these mysteries
was philosophical, moral and religious. —
They also contained certain requisitions,
as a test of the secrecy, fidelity and justice
of the disciple. From these mysteries,
some true knowledge of natural and' moral
philosophy was obtained. While the otb-


' SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 123

i were either confined to particular
jntries, or had their origin from the evil
>pensities of the human heart. In those
'steries, however, which engaged the at-
ition of men of wisdom and prudence,
ich-of truth was contained. Something
theunity and character and attributes of
* one true God ; and many principles of
irai ity were taught,and seriously impress-
on the mind. It was a general practice
ancient' philosophers, totravel from one
untry to another, in search of such wis-
m as might lead to a right understand-
f of God and nature. Hence it appears,
>m their own accounts, or what has been
:orded of their lives, they never were
nied such knowledge in any country,
iere it was to be found. And it further
pears, either from their own writings,
ancient records concerning their opin-
is, that much truth, which comports with
vine revelation, was collected and taught
them. It being evident, from the ex-
rience of many ages, that the knowledge
sucli truths was not the result of human
sdom or foresight, we must look to some
;her source: and this source must be
vine revelation. According to the o-
lions of the greatest divines and antiqua-
ms, all that knowledge found in the phi-
jophy of the ancients which comports


124 SPECULATIVE MASONRY,

with truth, was originally derived from
revelation. Let us now take a view of
the opinions of some of those ancients in
relation to God and his character,

Zoroaster, one of the most distinguished
mathematicians and philosophers of his
age, flourished about live hundred and ten
years before Christ. His scheme, though
in many respects erroneous, contained
something of truth, in relation to the Su-
preme Being, which he taught amongst the
Persians, by which their religion approxi-
mated, in some essential points, to the sim-
plicity of the gospel.

Simonides * of the island of Ceos, died
four hundred and sixty-nine vears before
Christ. This man, being asked by Hiero,
king of Syracuse, "What is God ?" desired
one day to consider the question. On
the morrow he asked two days, and as of-
ten as called upon for his answer, doubled
the time. When Hiero demanded the
reasons for such delays, Simonides replied,
" The more I consider the question, the
more obscure it seems." How wise was
this reply ! " Who by searching, can find
out God ? who can find out the Almighty
to perfection?" Simonides visited many

•Rollin's Ancient History.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 125

cities in Asia, where be obtained much
useful knowledge.

Socrates* was one of the most celebra-
ted moral philosophers of ancient Greece.
He flourished about four hundred and
nineteen years before Christ. The foun-
dation of his eminence seems to have been
laid by Anaxagoras, According to Xeno-
pbon, as quoted by Hall in, Socrates pos-
sessed much (rue knowledge of the char-
acter and attributes of the one Supreme
God. The following sentiments are wor-
thy of particular notice, as recorded by
Xenophon : " This great God has created
the universe, and upholds in being its stu-
pendous work, every part of which was
completed with goodness and harmony. —
This God makes himself visible by the nu-
merous wonders of which he is the author.
Let us not, therefore, refuse to believe
even what we do not see. Let us supply
the defect of our corporeal eyes, by using
those of the soul. Especially, let us learn
to render the just homage of respect and
veneration to the Divinity, whose will it
seems to be, that we should have no other
perception of him than by his effects. —
Now this adoration, this homage,. consists


•'Rolling Ancient History.

11*


126 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

in pleasing him ; and we can only please
him by doing his will."

When Socrates was falsely accused of
corrupting the Athenian youth, he replied,
" I shall rather choose to obey God than
you, and, to my latest breath, shall never
renounce my philosophy. I am more con-
vinced of the existence of God, than my
accusers, and so convinced that I abandon
myself to God and you, that you may
judge of me as you shall deem best for
yourselves and me."

Thus, conscious of the truth and impor-
tance of those sentiments, as well as of his
own innocence, he manifested great com-
posure of mind, amidst the most trying
scenes of his life. " If," said he, " what I
advance upon the immortality of the soul
prove true, it is good to believe it. If
the soul be immortal, it requires to be cul-
tivated with attention, not only for what
we call the time of life, but for that which
is to follow, I mean eternity ; and the least
neglect, in this point, may be attended
with endless consequences." Thus, it ap-
pears, Socrates held some just principles
in relation to the true Divinity, and often
spake in the most exalted terms, of the
existence of the one God, the eternity of
his nature and perfection, and his govern-
ing providence.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. J 27

Anaxagoras, an eminent philosopher of
reece, died about four hundred and t wen-
-eight years before Christ. Cicero in-
rms us, " he dedicated himself entirely
the divine pleasures of learning and in-
riry. He held the riches of this world
utter contempt, and devoted himself to
e improvement of the mind." Anaxago-
s visited Egypt, where he was instruct-
I in such geometrical knowledge as exist-
l amongst the learned. This philoso-
ler obtained the surname of " Intern-
et," from the peculiar excellence of his
inciples. He maintained the idea, that
e existence of the universe was not to be
cribed to chance, or any fatal necessity,
it was the work of a Superior Intelli-
nce ; and that the world was governed
the same Being. Anaxagoras dilligent-
taught his pupils in the knowledge of
ysics, which, according to ancient ac-
ptation, chiefly consisted in the know-
Ige of spiritual things. Such sentiments
ve him strength of mind and greatness
soul, far above most philosophers of his

Tamblicus, who has given some account
the life of Pythagoras, says, "that phi-
opher drew his system of symbolical
rning and instructive tenets from the
sterious knowledge of the Egyptians,


128 SPECULATIVE MASONRV.

who, in their mysteries, held wise doctrines^
which were ever kept secret."

The Egyptian king Xopper, command-
ed that the secret of which he was possess-
ed, should not be divulged to any but those
who were found skilful in every step tbey
advanced,

Anaxarchus, according to Pliny, " being
apprehended, in order to extort his secrets,
bit his own tongue in the midst, and spit it
in the tyrant's face, choosing rather to lose
that organ, than to discover those secrets
he had promised to conceal."

" The great heathen king Zopholel, or-
dered the grand secret, of which he was-
possessed, to be revealed to none but to
those who, after thorough examination,
were found to be worthy."

Thales, who lived about six hundred
years before Christ, has been thought the
most illustrious of the seven wise men of
Greece. He visited Egypt, and many oth-
er places, in search of wisdom, and main*
tained the opinion that there was one God.

Plato and Eusebius, the historian, held
the same truth. Plato often used the term
Logos, or divine Word, in a very signifi-
cant point of light.

Between three and four hundred years
before Christ, one of the high priests of
Athens, having passed through all the sub-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 129

irae mysteries of the age, near the elose
)f his life, was asked, " What is God ?" He
Jeliberately replied, " That which has nei-
ther beginning nor end : A pure Spirit.
That God created the world, and commu-
nicated regularity to it. That the soul of
naan was a spirit, an unperishable being."
The poet A rat us, who died at Athens
too hundred and thirteen years before
Christ, repeated those remarkable words,
ffhich are quoted by St. Paul in the seven-
eenth chapter of Acts : " In Him, (that
s in God,) we live, and move* and have our
eing, for we are also his offspring" This
>assage was quoted by that eminent apos-
le ai Athens, in proof of the doctrines of
lirist himself. Clemens, the fellow-la-
ourer with St. Paul, and Justin Martyr,
iat amiable and excellent father in the
hurch, Eusebius, Origin and others of the
rimitive Christian fathers, on the intro-
uction of Christianity, laboured abun-
antly to prove from the ancient mysteries
lat the knowledge of the true God had
sen preserved and transmitted down from
le first ages, in perfect accordance, with
le Christian religion. When Justin Mar-
7 r had embraced Christianity* without lay-
ig aside his philosopher's robe, he taught
le doctrines of the gospel at Home,


130 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

Origin was so charmed with the ancient
mysteries, that he taught them in conjunc-
tion with Christianity. In many instances
the dignified title of the Jewish priesthood
was conferred on Christian teachers, with-
out distinction of nation. In many case?,
the sublime realities of the gospel were
taught by symbols, and in some instances
the great and fundamental truths contain*
ed in ancient mysteries, were introduced
into the church institutions.

The learned and pious divine, Warbur 4
ton, who died in seventeen hundred and
seventy-nine, has in a very able manner
most clearly proved, "that the ancient mys-
teries inculcated the unity of God, who ex ;
ists from himself, is the source of all exist-
ence, invisible to every eye, though to biro
all things are visible."

Under this head, quotations might be
multiplied, by which it appears, that a-
mongst ancient eastern nations, there was
ONE order of mysteries, in which many
sublime truths were contained ; that some
individuals, wise men and philosophers, ac-
quired most, if not all those principles
which comport with revealed truth from
that source ; that they travelled much in
search of knowledge, and, notwithstanding
all their errors, actually did collect some
just ideas of the unity, nature and characr


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 131

?r of the true God ; and that those myste-
ies, whence such knowledge was derived,
irere not local, nor circumscribed bv-coun-
ry, but common to every age, and known
o individuals in most, if not every nation.

The above examples are all without the
pale of the Jewish nation, unless it be Zo-
roaster. Some have thought him to have
been a Jew by descent. So far, there-
fore, as the knowledge of those men has
been found according to truth, it must ori-
ginally have been derived from some high
ind genuine source. It therefore remains
o show what this source might have been.

Noah and his family, after the general
eluge, repeopled the earth. In this in-
tance there can be no doubt, but the name
nd character of God was by them trans-
lated to their immediate posterity. How
>ng the same practice might, have continu-
d, we cannot determine. For aught we
now, individuals in. every line of descent,
light have preserved the same truths, or
:> me traces of them, for many ages, if not
ven till the general spread of the gospel
i the days of the apostles.

Abram and Lot sojourned in strange
mds, and Abram, especially, was much
steemed and celebrated for his wisdom
nd piety. Jacob fled from Esau, and


J 32 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

" came into the land of the people of tbe
east."

Joseph was sold into Egypt, where he
became a father to Pharoah and that na-
tion. Moses fled from Egypt into tbe
land of Midian, where he was commission-
ed to deliver the Hebrews from their cru-
el bondage. David fled from the face of
Saul, and dwelt in the cities round about
Israel.

Solomon held free intercourse with E-
gypt and Tyre, employed workmen from
foreign countries, and, after the completion
and dedication of the temple, honourably
discharged those workmen, many of whom
are said to have been employed in Bythi-
nia, Greece, Italy and adjacent countries.
The Jews were carried away captive to
Babylon, where Daniel the prophet stood
before three succeeding kings. Haggai,
Joshua, Zerubbabel and Ezra, were great-
ly beloved and esteemed, even in the laud
of their enemies. Many persons came
from afar to see the temple and hear tbe
wisdom of Solomon, and worship the God
of Israel.

From these facts it is not only probable,
that in some, or many of those ways, all
the true knowledge of God, and principles
of morality and religion were disseminated,
but it appears very certain it was. The


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 133

lews derived their knowledge by special
revelation made to Abram, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Moses, Joshua, their prophets and
high priests, and held in possession the law
written by Moses under the immediate in-
spiration of Jehovah himself. It follows,
therefore, nearly as a matter of course,
from the above considerations, that many
individuals in most, if not all the surround-
ing nations, in some of these ways derived
what of truth they had embraced.

What then are the most natural inferen-
ces to be drawn ? From the foregoing facts,
there are four which seem most clearly to
be deduced.

First, that many of those ancients, whose
names and words have been quoted, lived
several hundred y^ars before the introduc-
tion and promulgation of Christianity : —
Lhat they were not of the Jewish nation,
but dwelt in countries where the Old Tes-
tament scriptures were unknown : — and
lhat they did travel in search of true wis-
dom.

Secondly, that they held sentiments of
Lbe unity, eternity, superintendence, na-
ture and character of God, which are found
!o accord with Divine revelation ; and that
hey held some opinions truly sublime, in
relation to those interesting subjects.

Thirdly, that most if not all this know-

12


134 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ledge was obtained through the medium of
that higher order of wysteries, which were
known only to individuals, jet existed in
every country. And,

Fourthly, on the introduction of Chris-
tianity, the eminent Justin Martyr, in con-
junction with several other ancient fathers
in the church, who had proper means of
ascertaining those facts, laboured to prove,
that the ancient mysteries did embrace
and inculcate some true knowledge of (he
character and attributes of God as contain-
ed in, and taught by, the system of Chris-
tianity.

Why, it may be asked, should such men
attempt to prove what they had no reason
to believe? And why should they be incli-
ned to believe without some evidence!
They lived in such an age, and were situa-
ted in such a- manner, as to know for a c-er-
tainty, whether the opinion was true or
false. All were men eminent in science,
most or all bad been initiated into those
mysteries to which they alluded, bad after-
wards embraced Christianity, were teach-
ers in the church, and of course competent
in all respects to judge correctly. The
learned Wai burton, also, has clearly pro-
ved the same truth from the writings and
testimony of those very men.

J f, therefore, we reject such evidence, as


«."


SPECULATIVE MASONRV. 13 J

not conclusive in this case, we at once de-
stroy the whole foundation of human be-
lief, just as far as it is grounded on the ex-
perience and testimony of others. But this
testimony cannot reasonably be rejected.
Hence, brethren, as all true light first e-
rnanated from a Divine source, and as some
Fays are found to have illuminated the un-
derstandings of wise men and philosophers,
even amongst Pagan nations, must we not
necessarily infer some connexion between
individuals of different countries, forming
a proper medium through which such light
might have been perpetuated to succeeding
generations? That this- might have been
the case cannot be denied. That it was the
case there is much, very much reason to
believe. However might have been the
feet, there is no evidence to contradict the
above conclusion. If so, it appears more
than probable, that ail those persons, not
onlv from Adam to Noah, but from Noah
to Solomon, who held the true knowledge
of God, were, in some sense, according to
ancient acceptation, Speculative Free- Ma-
sons : that those principles were systema-
tized by Solomon, and a regular Institution
formed, both operative and speculative :
that through this medium, ancient philo-
sophers obtained their speculative princi-
ples : and that, not only from Solomon to


136 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

the advent of Christ, but down to the pre-
sent day, certain fundamental truths have
been preserved, even through those dark
ages of the world when a long night of
barbarism seemed about to involve the hu-
man family in the thick shades of ignorance
and superstition. The opinions of the most
pious and learned of our brethren, du-
ring many ages past, are found to corres-
pond with the above sentiments. Ir> reten-
tion to modern Speculative Free-Masonry,.
it is abundantly evident to the world, that
the great doctrines of morality and religion
are summarily comprised in the lectures,
and taught in the lodges. In travelling
back to the remote ages of antiquity, no
period can be found when Masonic cus-
toms, ceremonies and tenets were not, in
substance, the same as at present. If, there-
fore, nocharacteristic change for many hun-
dred years can be proved, why may it not
be true, that those fundamental and char-
acteristic principles did actually originate
in the earliest periods of time ?

In view of all that hath been exhibited
under this head, it is earnestly recommen-
ded to every Brother and Companion, du*
ly to examine the subject for himself.


CHAPTER XIII.

Masonic Word, or Divine Logos. — How

transmitted.

BY tracing Masonic custom?, and
comparing certain- ceremonies in the eco-
nomy of the Institution, there appears to
be a«< existing fact, indicative not only of
the antiquity, but high object, of ancient
Masonry. From. this fact it appears, that
ancient Masons were in possession of the
appropriate name of the promised Messias,
termed in the New-Testament the Logos
or Word* The knowledge of this Word
was an object of great moment, and sought
with all diligence by the members of the
Institution. This divine Word has, in e-
*ery age of the world, been held sacred,
and faithfully transmitted from one to an-
other irv ancient form to the present day.
From that conscientious reserve in the
use of the true name of God amongst the
ancient Jews, we are induced to believe this
name was communicated, at least for many
ages, with great solemnity, attended with
moral and religious instructions. The truth
of this appears, not only from the testimo-
ny, but the example, of Josephus himself.
So conscientious was he, when writing the
history of bis nation, that he dared uol e*^\

12*


]38 SPF.OfTLATIVE MASONRY.

put clown the very same words contained in
the decalogue, but only their sense. This
practice seems to have been of very ancient
date. For aught we know, it might have
commenced, even from Adam. No doubt
Adam, in his state of innocency, held fel-
lowship and sweet communion with bifl
God. No doubt he held the same com-
munion in nature, though not in degree,
as soon as he had embraced the first pro-
mise, after the apostacy. Adam must ne-
cessarily have bad some name to mark the
idea of his divine Creator. This name, in
all human probability, would be suggested
by Divine inspiration, as an appropriate
term, exegetical of the idea of Divine ex-
cellence. In no other manner, according
to our present conceptions, could Adam
communicate any speculative knowledge
of God to the understandings of his poste-
rity. We know that Adam had experi-
mental, as well as speculative knowledge,
and must conclude some appellative term
indispensably necessary, to communicate
his conceptions to his posterity. It, there-
fore, appears perfectly consistent, as well
as desirable, that our common ancestor
should have been in possesion of an appro-
priate name, significant, as far as it could
be, of the great majesty, and real excel-
Icnce of the Creator. TVA*ta\\\^ admitted,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 139

be very name*of God, from the idea of the
Jreatness and excellency of his character,
>nd infinitude of his perfections, would he
leld sacred, and with the same forms, if
lot ideas, of sanctity, handed down to suc-
eeding generations. Hence, may we not
tith reason conclude, the Jewish custom
i relation to pronouncing the true name
f Deity, as descending through the fami-
V of Noah, had its origin in the early ages
f the world ? May we not conclude, the
ewish high priests did from time to time
ommunicate the true name of God with
>lemn ceremonies? The name was known
y the nation, and must have been commu-
icated in some way. But their law writ-
en by .Moses, was not in the hands of the
eople, but of the priests, and by them ex-
hined and taught. The people, there-
ure, must have received the name from
he priests, attended with some peculiar
orms, or in the common way of hearing it
e'ad to them in the law. But if only by
earing it read in the law, why those con-
cientious scruples in writing or pronoun-
ing it, when their intentions were good,
nd their views were to honour and reve-
ence the character? Such we know was
heir silence and reserve, for which it may
>e difficult to account, except on the
[round that this name was first comxmmsft-


J 40 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ted in solemn form and wider solemn in-
junctions. It therefore appears from those
consideration?, that the priests and eldersof
the people might have imparted the name
of God, in a solemn and impressive man-
ner, to prevent a frequent or profane use
of that sacred Word, If such were their
intentions, they seem, from the effect, to
have been founded in wisdom. How much
did it guard against the profane or irreve-
rent use of the name of God ! And how
deeply serve thereby to impress the mind
with a sense of reverential awe !

Previous to the regular organization of
the Masonic Institution, a knowledge, of
this name might have constituted that mark
of distinction, amongst our ancient bretb*
ren, by which they did recognize and fel-
lowship each other. To the world this
may appear hypothetical, but to well in-
formed brethren, who are sufficiently ad-
vanced, there can be scarcely a doubt of
its correctness. That a knowledge of the
divine Logos or Word, should have been
the object of so much religious research
from time immemorial, adds not a little to
the honor of Speculative Free-Masonry.
The same Word which breathed the spirit
of life into Adam, which translated Enoch
to heaven, which moved Noah to prepare
the ark, which called A&ram, and separa-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 141

him from bis kindred ami bis father's
ise, which was manifested to Jacob,
ich appeared to Moses in the burning
sh, which went before, and Jed the Is-
Ktes from Egyptian bondage, which
id the tabernacle with the glory of his
sence, which overshadowed the mercy-
t in the temple of Solomon, and which
jeared in the flesh for the salvation of.
n, has been peculiar to the Masonic In-
ution, since its organization by Solo-
n, and probably to the patrons of Ma^-
ic principles since the days of Enoch.
*lato, and some of his disciples, used the
gos, as a term of high import. — Whe-
r they rightly understood its appropri-
meaning or not, we cannot certainly
ermine. That it was used in a high
se, is evident from ancient records. —
3 Jews also were taught, that the Word
> of the same import in essence, as God ;
erwise St. John could not have intro-
•ed his gospel in any manner adapted
heir understandings, when he said " In
beginning was the Word, and the Word
\ with God, and the Word was God."
Prom the whole Masonic economy, it
>ears, that one great point in that dis-
sation was to attain and preserve the
? knowledge of the mysteries of this
ird. The fact now existing amongst


142 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

all Masons, however remote in country, is
strong presumptive evidence that the same
hath been from ancient times. Indeed this
appears to have been a precious and weigh-
ty consideration, long before the organi-
zation of the Institution. Noah honoured
this name, was accepted of God, and a
covenant established, the token of which
is seen in the bow in the east. Abram de-
voutly worshipped God, and called the
place where he w r as about to sacrifice Isaac,
JEHOVAH-Jireh. At Bethel jGod spake to
Jacob, I am Jehovah, and Jbcob built an
altar to his name. When God revealed
himself to Moses, in a flame of fire, out of
the midst of a bush, he said unto Moses, I
am that I am. And Moses reverenced
the name of God, and with signs and wodm
deis, wrought through that name, led forth i
the Hebrews from Egypt. The patriarchs,:
therefore, did call upon God by this name,
signifying His all- sufficiency, and immu-
tably perfect being.

In each of the above cases, the same
Being is intended to be understood wbicbj
St. John calls the Logos or Diviae Wokd
It therefore appears, this sacred name wai Jr
duly reverenced by the ancient patriarch*
and elders of Israel, and became a tokeflr'
known and recognized, on which togrounJ^
their visible fellowship with each other.-r'


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 143

^ence the injunction to Moses, in case his
iretbren did not credit his special mission
rom God, to effect their deliverance, "The
3od of Abram, the God of Isaac and the
Bod of Jacob hath appeared unto me;"
plainly implying, that this was a token
Nell understood, and sufficient to justify
their confidence in him.

The same general truth, in relation to
a knowledge of this name, will apply to
some of the antediluvians. Adam must
be supposed to have communicated the
name of bis Creator, which St. John calls
the Logos, in some intelligible manner, to
bis posterity, and tbey to theirs, down to
the time of Noah. Noah and his sons, who
re-peopled the earth, would be inclined to
adopt the same course, not only in pre-
serving the name itself, but even the man-
ner of pronouncing it. In this way, both
might have been transmitted, with little or
no variation, through Abram, Jacob, Mo-
ses and the Jewish priests, till the days of
Solomon. That language might have va-
ried, during this period, can be no objec-
tion. Since the time of Solomon, howev-
er, we have no doubt but the very same
Word, with the manner of pronunciation,
has been religiously observed in the Ma-
sonic Institution, in every age and country,
;o the present day.


144 SPECULATIVE MASONRY,

If, therefore, the above be correct, we
may plainly discover why Speculative
Five-Masonry involves so many princi-
ples which are fundamental in 4he Chris-
tian system. As the Word, in the first
■verse of St. John, constitutes both f lie
foundation, the subject matter, and the
great ultimate end of the Christian econo-
my, so does the same Word, in all its re-
lations to man, time and eternity, consti-
tute the very spirit and essence of Specu-
lative Free-Masonrv.


CHAPTER XIV.

\e Unity and Fellowship of Masons. — All
agree in the great essentials. — Things un-
essential break not the Unity of the Bro-
therhood.

SUCH is the nature of man, that he
seldom altogether satisfied with his pre-
ut situation, be it ever so agreeable, or
cempt from those cares incident to hu-
an life. He is naturally aspiring, and
uch inclined to picture, in imagination,
any inconveniencies in his present condi-
gn, which have no real existence. He
ricies his situation may be greatly impro-
*d, by which his happiness and enjoy-
ent may be advanced. Hence that pro-
snsity for change and variety. From
ng experience, such a disposition has
*en found to actuate mankind, in every
age and condition of life. In govern-
cnts, also, changes and innovations have
sen effected no less than in habits of life,
ave the latter often arisen from unfound-
i discontent ? so have the former, t^as
ride or ambition been the moving cause
f the one? so has it ol the other. A si-
lilar restless disposition hass been found
> exist, in a greater or less degree, in the

13


146 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

members of various societies and institu-
tions of the world.

While some, from the best of motives,
have exerted themselves to improve the
general constitution of society, or the ad-
ministration of its principles, to promote
the extent of its usefulness ; others, from
motives far different, have often attempt-
ed innovations, with too much success.—'
Such attempts have seldom failed to excite
party feelings, create jealousies, originate
slanders, weaken confidence, and some-
times wholly destroy that social friendship,
created by virtue of membership. Such
is the much lamented fact, even amongst
the churches of the blessed Immanuel.
Here, in truth, there is one Lord, one
faith, one Spirit, one communion, and one
heaven. Yet differences altogether un-
essential in their nature, as respects the
great subject matter, have crept in, and by
degrees rent asunder those strong cords of
union, which should have bound them to-
gether, as disciples of the same Lord, and
heirs to the same inheritance.

Such secondary considerations have se-
vered their visible fellowship and com-
munion with each other as beloved breth-
ren. Where unity should have existed,
there has been schism* Where love should
have abounded, there has been coldness,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 147

and sometimes jealousies. Where the
most perfect union should have been main-
tained, by virtue of a common interest in
the same future blessedness, there has been
individual sectarian interests, and an open
refusal, both of Christian fellowship and
communion. Such things ought not to bfe,
and nothing but the want of sufficient char-
ity has led to this state of things. As it
respects the Masonic Institution, disunion
is a stranger. Although its members are
found dispersed through every quarter of
the globe, although no special arrange-
ment for official intercourse exists between
the Institutions of different countries, yet
the unity and fellowship of the great body
has never been broken. How surprising
does this appear, when not another society
in the world can be excepted ! Although,
in some countries, long periods have elaps-
ed, during which Masonry has flourished
unnoticed and unassisted by brethren of
any other country, yet the same forms
have, in substance, been observed, the
same fundamental principles carefully
maintained, and the same unison of bro-
therly affection perpetuated. Notwith-
standing the Institution has existed from
ancient time, and is now to be found a-
mongst all civilized nations, yet the same
unity of sentiment, in relation to that sys-


148 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

tern, is commensurate with the existence
of the Society itself.

From this consideration, the purity of
the system may be inferred : here the con-
trolling influence of its principles are ex-
emplified in a surprising manner. It is
not to be supposed, that a corrupting, de-
moralizing institution, secretly aiming to
subvert government, under any or every
form, or contrary to the principles of or-
der and decorum, religion, morality or
virtue, could have preserved its unity du-
ring every age, in every nation and state
of society, both ancient and modern.

The existing fact, therefore, of univer-
sal Masonic unity in all periods, is high pre-
sumptive evidence that the principles ac-
cord with the nature and fitness of things.
Mankind, whether savage or civilized, na-
turally possess an aptitude to discover the
propriety and reasonableness of things,
when once presented to the mind. Mason-
ic unity and fellowship are, in truth, very
precious considerations. There is some-
thing so peculiar in this relation, that no
one can describe it. The great fundamen-
tal points constituting the system, are so
manifestly plain and unexceptionable, ac-
cording to the just apprehensions of every
sound mind, as to unite heart to heart in
the strongest bonds of social and brotherly


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 149

affection. Nothing, therefore, can sunder
this union and fellowship, wherever the
characteristic marks of a true and faithful
brother are found impressed on the heart;
no matter of what nation, complexion or
language.

Here is a privilege no where else to be
found. Are you a Free and accepted
Mason? you have a home in every coun-
try, a friend and benefactor in every wor-
thy brother, through the whole fraternity.
Do you travel for curiosity, health or
knowledge? in every clime you meet well-
informed brethren, who will serve you in
either case as far as time, means or oppor-
tunity will permit. Are you driven to a
ret urnless distance, or cast on the shores
of a foreign land ? the hand of a brother
is there extended to alleviate your wants,
to animate your sinking spirits, or console
your agonized mind. Do you fall into
the merciless hands of unrelenting Turks?
even there the shackles of slavery are bro-
ken from your hands, through the interpo-
sition of a brother. Do you meet an ene-
my in battle array ? the token of a Mason
instantly converts him into a guardian an-
gel. Even the bloody flag of a pirate is
changed for the olive branch of peace, by
the mysterious token of a Mason. 3 * Is

* The author states this on the authority of * \WwR*\&\ft%~

13*


150 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

your life in jeopardy from any casually
ofti'iie, place or circumstance? a brother's
arm is nerved for your assistance, and his
own life jeopardized for your safety. He
vir\\h not your condition with supine in-
diffcrence, nor shrinks in view of surround-
ing dangers.

Such being the undeniable facts, attest-
ed by the experience of the world, what
heart would not reciprocate the friendship,
and kindle into love at the sight of a bro-
ther, in whose bosom dwells such tender-
ness and compassion ! The language of a
Alason is universally understood by all
the brotherhood, wheresoever found. It
speaks to the heart, is answered from the
heart, and excites such feelings as mingle
in kindred souls. The unity of the great
body is preserved entire, and the cords of
friendship extend to every Masonic heart,
throughout the four quarters of the globe.
Wherever a Mason may sojourn, wherever
he may be found, whether in prosperity
or adversity, on a throne or in a prison,*

iher, who escaped from Ireland, during their last national dif-
ficulties, and who protected the whole crew from a pirate, by
his knowledge of Masonry. This brother was a man of res-
pectability, and the truth of his relation was not doubted.

* Two facts deserve to be related. During the American

revolution, a citizen on board % privateer, was captured by

the British, and the whele crew imprisoned at Edinburgh.—

The following night, after their imprisonment, a lodge held

its communication net? thtpt'wm. Dosing the time of re-


i*


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 151

same interchange of feelings and bro-
rJy affection, and union of heart exists
ivery country and every nation. The
r of every lodge opens to welcome
admission, and every band presents a
igeoflove. Brethren, this is truly a
ering reflection. It excites such lively
>tions in the heart as may be felt, but
er can be described.


nent, some of the brethren visited the prisoners. This
•ican manifested himself to be a Mason, and was* recogni*
s such. During the same evening 1 , he was permitted to
the lodge, and associate with the craft By the friendly
F his brethren, he was liberated from confinement, had
eedom of the city, and shortly after was sent back to his
ry and family.

e other instance was an American on board a British ves-
i- a passage to Europe. The vessel was captured, and

to Brest. This was at the time when Bonaparte was in
ssion of Egypt. The crew, therefore, was sent to Alex*
a, and put into close confinement. A man was seen to
the street by the prison, wearing a sash of many colours.
American believing it to be a Masonic badge, wanted no-

but an opportunity to make himself known as a Mason.

however, it happened the same person, wearing the same
came to the prison. This person proved to be the prin-
officer of the city, and recognizing the American as a
>n, took him to his own house The American thence*
ird enjoyed the liberty of the city, and the privilege of
tfficer's table* Some months after, an opportunity pre-
d t by which the American might go on board a vessel,
1 would put him in a situaiion, eventually, to arrive at
ec. The officer then paid his passage in the first vessel,
him sixty crown*, and dismissed him. Suffice it to say,
rived at Quebec, came to Montreal, and thence to White-
at the head of Lake Champ tain, where he taught a school
at months. All circumstances in relation to the above
nent having been duly examined and compared, it was
rained, to the reasonable satisfaction of the lodge at that
, to be correct. Who would not wish, for humanity's

principles, which product such tn effect* mvgjhX ta
geaendJjr understood ?


CHAPTER XV.

Masonry as a Charitable Institution.

THE slate of human existence is such f
that mankind are in some respects depen-
dent on each other in most, if not all, of
the relations in civilized life. As the/
have mutual wants, and stand in need of
mutual assistance, no one can be placed in
absolute independence of circumstances-
Each individual, in the midst of all hi? af-
fluence, is still dependent. Hence arise
those mutual obligations, by which, not on-
ly the members of a neighborhood or so-
ciety, but the citizens of a nation, and the*
inhabitants of the world, are bound, mutu-
ally to subserve each other's interest, and
to promote each other's happiness. Tlii*
obligation corresponds with the very na~
ture of things, and is necessarily binding
on all mankind. But, not withstanding this,
multitudes of the human family seldom feel
its force, or comply with its requisitions*
The unfortunate sufferer often wanders
through the world unpitied &nd forloiru
There are unfortunate sufferers, and suck
there will be till the end of time. Not-
withstanding all human foresight, orudenc©
and provident care, individuals are expo-
sed, in numerous ways, to be suddenly pre—


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 153

ated from a state of affluence to penu-
nd want. The virtuous citizen may
irown into Circumstances, in which he
have a just claim for charitable assist-
. It is the glory of a nation or soeie-
> have its citizens or members kindly
>sed, mutually to rejoice or sympa-

together. A charitable disposition
e view of the world, marks a charac-
f true worth, and draws kind benedic-
i on the memory.

asonry therefore as a charitable Insti-
n, aside from all other considerations,
itly entitled to the approbation of mau-
. Individuals, in their private capaci-
ire never expected promptly to meet
le exigencies of innocent sufferers. A
n of individuals for benevolent purpo-
will generally afford the more sure
is of effecting this important objert.
i, in a special manner, is our Instil u-
Here is a charitable society ; here
unds expressly reserved for charitable
•oses. Although indigent members,

widows and orphans, are first to be
idered, and first to be relieved, jet
r>nic charity is not wholly confined to
ircle of brotherhood. VVherever siif-
ig humanity is found, there is an object,
h fniu'ties the Masonic heart with sym-
y, excites compassion, and is promptly


154 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

relieved. Such has been the uniform pre*
tice of our society, time out of mind, and
such, it is known to the world, is the liberali-
ty of individual members*. The experience
of ages can testify to this excellent practice
in a manner never to be forgotten. No stin- ■
ted pittance of cold hearted charity de-
grades the brother, who acts in character as
a Mason ought. Ask those wretched men-
dicants of the eastern hemisphere,. Whose
hand has contributed to their necessities t
Ask the inhabitants of those cities, desola-
ted by unpitying elements, Whose bounty
has afforded them timely aid ? Ask the war-
worn soldier, who by the fate of arms, ha*
been dragged from the country he loved,
and the family he adored, Whose interfe-
rence has released him from captfrity?
Whose charity nourished his famishing life,
and restored him to the dear objects of his-
affection ?

Much, very much has been done by this
Institution to relieve the unfortunate, to
supply the destitute and lessen the aggre-
gate of human misery. In England spe-
cial provision has in every age been made,
since the first introduction of Masonry, or
as early as any records have been preser-
ved. On some of the first records of Ma-
sonry in that island, we find donations to
individual. objects of distress, from five t»


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 155

twenty pounds sterling- As early as the
fifteenth cerriury the whole attention of the
brotherhood was engaged to improve the
system of charity, so as to meet the exi-

Snces of every unfortunate member. In
>rmany were similar exertions and dona-
tionfe. In Switzerland, Italy, France and
most European countries, very liberal as-
sistance has been afforded to the indigent,
Dot merely of the fraternity, but to many
others without distinction of nation, colour,
«ect or country.

In America we need only look into Ma*
«onic records to satisfy ourselves of the
charities of the Institution. In no country
has this society been more liberal, or more
cheerfully and promptly administered to
the relief of the unfortunate, than in our
own. It is confidently believed, not a
Lodge or Chapter is here to be found,
whose organized state has been sufficient-
ly long to acquire the means, but has wi-
ped from the cheek of sorrow at least one
tear, or thrown a friendly mantle over one
naked wanderer, or fed one famishing suf-
ferer. But how many institutions, whose
age is great, and whose means are ample,
have contributed largely and repeatedly
for the relief of suffering innocence !

Such charitable acts, however, are not
•penly proclaimed to the world. The per-


156 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

son in distress applies to bis brethren j if
his case is such as justly to demand atten-
tion, bis wants are supplied, and tbe on)/
remaining testimony, is the records of the
Lodge, and the grateful heart of thesuA
feier. Let every person who wishes fur-
ther evidence of this fact, examine the. re-
cords of tbe Lodges and Chapters in the ci-
ties of New- York, Albany, Hudson, and
every other city or viibge in the slate
where a Masonic Institution is -established.

In the city of New- Y oik, calls are nu-
merous, and thousands of dollars are annu-
ally appropriated to e.ducate the orphan,
to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and
supply the destitute. In Albany, and all
other places where proper objects of cha-
rity are found, the same liberal hand af-
fectionately supplies their wants. Auk the
grief-worn, brexken heai ted widow ; a^k the
wandering, famishing orphan, naked, friend-
less and destitute, who has fed and clothed)
provided for, and protected him ? Ask suchf
who has been a lather to the fatheilessi—
$V ith emotions of gratitude, which neaily
foi bid utterance, will they falter out tbe
name of Mason, and point to their bene-
factors.

It will be but just, in this case, to name
one instance, from its geneial publicity.
In consequence of that disastrous event at


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 157

iuffalo, in the lale war, most of the citi-
zens in that unfortunate place were noton-
y deprived of house and home, but even
stripped of all the comforts, as well as ne-
cessaries, of life. An application, recom-
mended by the Hon. De Witt Clinton,
Grand Master, was made to the chapters
and lodges in the state in behalf of our
brethren, and collections made. It is,
therefore, stated, from certain knowledge
Bf the fact, that contributions were made
throughout the state, by individual lodges
*nd chapters, from ten to seventy -five dol-
ors each according to their several ability.
Nothing more need be said in relation
o the fact. It is well known to the world,
hat the Institution is a charitable one, and
is such is justly entitled to all that merit
vhich can arise from affording relief to the
listressed. If charity to the destitute is a
luty, and a charitable society a blessing
o a country, then the Masonic Institution
'escrves the patronage of every benevolent,
umane and charitable person, and the ap-
lause of mankind in general. It is a wise,
universal and a permanent establishment.
lot circumscribed, as to charitable dona-
ons, by country, or confined to nation,
jet, age or condition. It considers all
ankind the children of one common Pa-
Tit, and brethren in one great family. It

14


158 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

shields from danger, and on some degrees
will even feed an enemy at the point oi a
sword, should his necessities absolutely re-
quire it. Such charity is God-like. It for-
gives an enemy, and renders good for evil.
It covers a multitude of faults. Such be-
nevolent charity, if universally exercised,
would restore and perpetuate universal
peace to the world. Hence the principles
of Speculative Free-Masonry, when carri-
ed into practice, aim directly at the alle-
viation % of human misery, and the advance-
ment of the peace, harmony and happiness
of society, and the friendship and unanimi-
ty of all the inhabitants of the earth.


CHAPTER XVI.

Millennial slate. — General prosperity, and
prevalence of Speculative Free- Masonry.

THE great scheme of Redemption
began to be published to our first parents
immediately after their apostaey. Early
was the first promise made of a Saviour,
even that divine Word, which created all
things. Here was laid that deep foundation,
on which the whole superstructure of the
gospel dispensation was erected. The same
precious promise is the great corner stone
in the edifice of Speculative Free-Mason-
ry. The seed of the woman, the divine
Word, which in due time should be made
fleshy early became a subject deeply inte-
resting. The character and office- work of
this Mediator, were for many ages known
and understood but by few : few also un-
derstood the great subject matter of an-
cient Masonic principles. As the know ? -
ledge of the one was transmitted +>y oral
tradition from Adam to Noah, so also was
the other. After the general deluge, both
were communicated to the world by hinv
who alone found favour in the sight of God.
When Abram was separated from his kin-
dred, and called to sojourn in a strange
land, God established the true church m


ICO SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

his family. Through his lineal descend-
ants, this church was preserved, from one
generation to another, till the advent of
the promised Messias. During the whole
of this period, the light of Divine Revela-
tion was gradually increasing in the moral
world, some rays of which reached the un-
derstandings of individuals without the
pale of the Jewish nation.

Such, also, was the early and gradual
dissemination of ancient Masonic princi-
ples, in the first ages of the world. Some
few of those general truths were known to
individuals in pagan nations.

As divine light shone more clearly in the
Christian world, forms of devotion became
more regular, and spiritual worshippers ap-
proximated nearer to the simplicity of the
gospel.

In a manner not very dissimilar, were an»
cietit Masonic principles discovered to be
emanations from the great source of moral
excellence, and assumed more and more
the form of a regular system, as light in-
creased and irradiated the understanding.
After the advent of the Saviour, the church
was duly organized, and the scripture ca-
non of the Old Testament filled up. The
gospel was then, by Divine command, to
be «ent to all the nations of the earth, and
churches established. In a much similar


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 1GJ

nner, during the reign of Solomon, Ma-
le principles were duly arranged, the
Lem properly organized, and reduced to
)resent admirable form. After Ihe corn-
lion and dedication of the temple, those
sons who had been well instructed, not
y in the operative, but speculative parts,
?ived authority from Solomon, with
:ial directions, to establish the craft in
ry country where they might travel,
communicate to faithful persons those
ortant principles in which they had
n instructed. Thus, the Institution, in
systematized form, began to be intro-
3d amongst ancient nations. We may
?e conclude, from the following consi-
itions, that Speculative Free-Masonry
rout to enter a very glorious and hap-
: j ra .

l its primitive state, it was summarily
prehended in the knowledge of the
acter and attributes of the divine
rd. As light increased, the nature and
acter of this Word, were unfolded in
ore extensive and interesting point of
?. Duties and obligations, in their va-
s connexions, were more distinctly un-
tood.

oah, Moses and Solomon were speci-
taught by Divine Inspiration. This ap-
ed in chapter fifth. It appears* U\fcC£-

14*


162 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

fore, that the system, in some shap<
passed through many ages, even froi
cient times, commended and approve
men of manifest piety.

It is also certain, as in former time
in these last days, Speculative Mas
comprises those great and fund am
principles which constitute the ver
sence of the Christian system.

Yet, in modern times, much piou
search has been bestowed on the Vol
of Inspiration, and many mportant
weighty truths have been clearly discc
ed, which in former ages were overloc
This detracts nothing from that pre(
Volume, but only shows the weaknes
human intellect, and the depth of Di
truth.

In a similar manner, many useful
interesting truths have been discover*
the Masonic system; truths ever con
sed in that scheme, yet overlooked, or
dimly seen by the ancients; truths, \
once presented, striking the mind
clear evidence, and satisfying every
est inquirer. Neither does this del
from Masonry, but only evinces those <
and unsearchable riches of moral e:
lence embraced in the system.

In view, therefore, of the Divine oi
of ancient Masonry \ i\a ^v^dw^l^ud c<


SPECULATIVE MASONRT. 163

lar progress and dissemination, through
the instrumentality of pious men, devoted
to the service of their God and the good of
mankind; from the nature of Ihe Institu-
tion, the manifest coincidence in principle
and design with the Christian economy,
its harmonizing and controlling influence
over the human heart ; from its general
patronage by those who best understand
the true nature and effect of its principles ;
from its general flourishing state in this
age of light,- of truth and knowledge : from
all these have we not strong, yea, conclusive
evidence, in reasoning from analogy, to be-
lieve a period is not far distant, when this In-
stitution will appear in beautiful garments,
shine forth in the glory and excellence of
her principles, the world be enlightened
by her radiance, united in friendship, and
rejoice together as brethren of one com-
mon family ? Such an age we have abun-
dant reason to expect, and such a one
will fully display the moral beauty of Spe-
culative Masonry in its true characteristic
light. Such a display, I entertain no doubt,
would command universal approbation. —
It is a sacred truth, and weighty as eternity,
that the present and everlasting good and
well-being of mankind, are solely .and ul-
timately intended. And, if we may safely
infer the future from the p^sX, *ta^vs


164 SPECULATIVE MASONUV.

Masonic millennial period will soon com-
mence, to the inexpressible joy of all llie
inhabitants of the earth.

Why should such an opinion be consi-
dered hypothetical ? why rejected as alto-
gether improbable ? The analogy between
Speculative Free-Masonry and Christiani-
ty is not partial, but complete : it is not
imaginary, but real. This analogy has, in
its outlines, been briefly exhibited. Pre-
vious to the Christian era, the true church
of God had different external rights, cere-
monies and requisitions, yet in its very es-
sence was substantially the same as at the
present day. This fact every person must
admit, who acknowledges the church of
God to be one. Masonry, in its earliest
stages, was unsystematized in mam res-
pects, and probably much less explicit as
a science. In relation to membership, or
what constituted the distinguishing Inarks
of visible brotherhood, it might have been,
in some unimportant sense, different from
what it now is ; but as to first principles,
most unquestionably, the same as at the
present day. As the church of God was
established in the family of Abram, and
descended through his line, till Moses, by
divine direction, introduced the Jewish ri-
tual; so Masonry was transmitted from
Enoch, through NoaYi, A.Y>taA\\,Mswfis> and


SPECULATIVE MASONRV. 165

heir successors, till Solomon, being inspi-
ed of God, established a regular form of
administration.

After the commencement of the Chris-
tian era, the church was duly organized,
and from that time to the present has, in a
great mMsure, maintained the same forms,
and observed the same memorials then in-
stituted. Analogous to this, ancient Ma-
sonry, since the time of Solomon, has been
handed down, in all essential points, in per-
ect conformity to the rights and ceremo-
nies then established. The dissemination
md prevalence of the one and the other,
*ave been nearly the same in every civili-
-ed country. During the past century,
be two Institutions have had a more gen-
ial spread and patronage than in any an-
^cedent, equal period of time. Within a
ew years past the increase of both has
>een altogether unexampled. In every
ountry where Christianity has had a gene-
al prevalence, Masonry has flourished to

similar extent.

This parallel, my brethren, exhibits a
?w of the more prominent features in the
rogress of Free-Masonry, from the earli*
?t ages to the present time. Although
jey are few, yet are they most strikingly
nalogous to the progress of Christianity,
rid, of consequence, justly entitled to our
>rioU5 examination,


ICG SPECULATIVE MASOXRY.

It is believed a glorious millennial peri-
od will soon be experienced in the church,
and this belief is founded on Divine testi-
mony. In view, therefore, of the forego-
ing comparisons, have we not the same
reasons to believe an era similar, in some
respects, will soon commence in the Ma-
sonic world I It is well known that great
researches have been made, and are sii!'
continued with increasing perseverance,
to discover the manifold riches of Divine
revelation ; that light increases ; and that
Christian churches are ari>ing, trimming
their lamps, and purifying their bodies.
This most surely evidences the approach
of the millennium.

It is also well known, that great resear-
ches are making, as respects the deep and
hidden mysteries of Speculative Free-Ma-
sonry ; that light increases in the Institu-
tion; and that the lodges are renewing their
discipline, and pursuing such measures as
shall more effectually promote the general
good of mankind. Hence the general In-
stitution is rapidly increasing in numbers
and respectability, and patrons are greatly
multiplied from the mnM virtuous and re-
spectable part of the community. These cir-
cumstances, collectively considered, sure-
ly indicate something important. But,
whatever may be the final result, we are


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 167

strongly inclined to believe the Institution
will continue to rise in the estimation of
mankind, till it shall eventually receive
universal approbation from all nations. —
Principles so important in their nature,
cannot always be overlooked. A society
embracing so much historical, moral and
religious instruction, cannot always be dis-
regarded. The time will come, when man
shall be a friend to man ; when peace and
hdrmony shall reign; when brotherly love
shall abound, and all shall practice what
is now taught within the Lotfge.


CHAPTER XVII.

Motives, Persuasives and Inducements to
maintain the true Dignity of the Mason-
ic Character.

To attain a character, justly distinguish-
ed by true greatness and goodness, is an
object worthy of human existence. The
principles of imitation are engendered in
our nature, and excited by a spirit of em-
ulation. Various are the ways and means,
suggested by different minds, for the at-
tainment of the same desirable end. To
each profession or station in civilized life,
is necessarily attached a corresponding
propriety of conduct and deportment, suit-,
ed to the sphere in which we move, or the
station we fill. A corresponding proprie-
ty between practice and profession, forms
a consistency in character.

Excellency of character, in the view of
the world, is principally estimated from
the honourable nature, or religious impor-
tance of profession, harmonizing with a
uniformity of practice. If the employ-
ment be of a public nature, or in any way
open to the inspection of mankind, a de-
portment corresponding thereto, is uni-
formly expected. Such is the propensity
of the human heart to censure and con


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 169

tlenin each devious step, each semblance
of inconsistency when found in another*

Amongst all those numerous associations
oi men, on which the jealous and scrutini-
zing eye of the world has been fixed, none
is more conspicuous, or more narrowly
observed, than the Masonic. Hence, the
more special necessity oi maintaining such
a character, and exhihiting such examples,
as it may be virtuous and praiseworthy in
others to imitate. Every member of the
institution is, by profession, magnanimous,
liberal, humane, benevolent and upright.
These are woros of very great latitude and
high import. To these we add justice, integ-
rity of heart, fidelity , sobi iety and temper-
am ; , prudence arid enonomy, friendship
and brotherly affection, with every virtue
which ran ddorn human nature, and consti-
tute all the appendages of a finished charac-
ter. Here then is a puhlic pioiession which
demands a corresponding dignity in the life
and conduct of every member of the institu-
tion. Notwithstanding the high import of
this profession, yet, it is believed, the con-
stituted means to form the character to this
standard, are truly adequate. Long has it
been evinced to the world, that the most
brilliant and overwhelming oratory, even
when employed in the cause of truhs the
most weighty in themselves, often iades

15


170 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

from the mind like the fictions of a dream.

The mind of desultory man, flying from
object to object, with the rapidity of
thought, is never seriously affected, except
by what does, in some way, engage the
understanding and interest the feelings.
Through this medium, lies that avenue
which leads directly to the heart, and fast-
ens convictions on the conscience.

In Speculative Free-Masonry, precept
and example are most happily designed to
harmonize, and thereby present the most
powerful motives to impress on the mind
the sentiments of virtue, and the precepts
of wisdom, with a favourahle prospect of
success. On this ground the Lodge becomes
a school for improvement, where man is
taught the duties of life, and the sublime
precepts of our holy religion. Here the
candidate is instructed in the numerous
relative duties of decorum, subordination
and modesty, kindness, gentleness and af-
fability, which can render the possessor
amiable and lovely in the ejes of the
world. Within these walls, impervious to
the vulgar eje, the mind is nurtured in all
that soundness of intellect, that discreet,
engaging deportment, thai benevolence and
charity of disposition, which constitute the
more excellent and noble appendages of
the human character. An habitual pntc-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 171

tice of every commendable virtue, is taught
by suitable and appropriate Masonic em-
blems, with that gravity and solemnity,
which comport with the nature of the insti-
tution. The maxims of wisdom are gradu-
ally unfolded, till the whole duty of man is
clearly and persuasively exhibited to the
mind. By duly improving those means,
the intellectual faculties may receive high
improvement, and the manners, those soft
blandishments for social intercourse, which
give currency and importance to charac-
ter. Such, indeed, are the instructive les-
sons of Speculative Free- Masonry.

An unjustifiable neglect, or obstinate re-
fusal to comply with, and improve, instruc-
tions of this nature, betrays a heart wholly
inclined to malevolent designs, or a judg-
ment fatally misguided. VVe are hence
furnished with the proper means of form-
ing a character, as nearly answerable to
our public profession, as human frailties
and imperfections will admit.

Brethren, the more prominent features
of a true Masonic character, are literally
marked with the highest beauties. They
are such as will survive the ruins of a per*
ishable world, and shine with increasing
lustre, when time shall have merged in the
ocean of eternity. If such are the excel-
lencies of our Institution, and such the in-


172 SPECULATIVE MASOIfRY.

junctions we, as Masons, are under to im-
prove all those faculties which Heaven has
bestowed to render ourselves and others
happy, by forming and supporting a cha-
racter, pure and blameless, before God and
man ; how circumspect should we ever be
found ! How scrupulous to maintain the
true dignity of our profession ! An habitual
practice of justice, equity, truth, benevo-
lence, charity and sobriety, should ever ap-
pear conspicuous in our lives, shed a lus-
tre on our actions, and adorn our publie
and private walks. The whole tenou.- of
life should manifestly appear to be the
fruit of an honest, sincere, and upright
heart. Each manly feeling of the soul
should swell with those tender emotions of
gratitude and love, which meet and mingle
in kindred spirits. Such a life and con-
duct would draw benedictions even from
the adamantine heart.

Brethren, should you ask for additional
motives to the performance of the practi-
cal duties of Speculative Free-Masonry,
let me point each individual to his own
personal character and fame. Where is
the man so callous to nature's feelings ; so
lost to inbred honour; so indifferent to the
attainment of virtuous fame, as not to as-
pire to human excellence ?

The love of personal character is so nicely


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 173

interwoven with the filaments of the heart,
as usually to form a predominant motive
to action, a powerful incentive to glory.
It therefore becomes a noble and high-
minded emulation, for the attainment of
unusual and exalted merit. The agency
of this principle is confined to no class, ei-
ther in savage or civilized life, and often
inspires that magnanimity which leads to
the exercise of those amiable charities and
virtues of the heart, which always charac-
terize the man of real worth. Such has
been the force of this ruling motive, in e-
very age and every country. Multitudes
of our ancient brethren, stimulated to ac-
tion through the force of this principle,
have, by the greatness of their achieve-
ments, and goodness of their lives, enrol-
led their names on the imperishable records
of fame, and left an everlasting memorial
of their virtue and pre-eminent usefulness.
Brethren, do we still ask for motives, in
a case involving such high considerations
and desirable consequences ? They are
found in that eternal weight of glory, that
ciown of joy and rejoicing, laid up for the
faithful in a future world. Here is an in-
finite reward ; here is that ultimate point,
to which all others are subordinate, and in
which all others do eventually centre. A
more interesting and weighty considera-

15*


174 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

tion cannot be presented; Yet, astonish-
ing to be told, some of our brethren, not
merely in foreign countries, but even in
these United States, with such powerful
motives before them, and such momentous
consequences staring them in the face,
plunge headlong into vice, and riot on the
precipice of their own destruction. Such
persons violate, not only the very laws of
nature, but the most solemn injunctions of
Masonry. Having thrown off all restraint,
in vie w of principle, character or fame, they
have plunged themselves into the depths
of human degradation, and literally pulled
down the curses of mankind on their heads.
Totally regardless of the dictates of wis-
dom, their temporal enjoyments or eternal
happiness, they have awfully apostatized
' from their profession, disgraced themselves
and their friends, brought misery on their
families, and merited the sovereign con-
tempt of the world.

Wretched spectacle of human depravi-
ty ! A man endowed with reason and un-
derstanding, privileged with light and in-
formation, to debase the dignity of his na-
ture, and overleap every barrier of human
restraint, could not be credited, had we
not witnessed the melancholy truth. What
brother does not shrink back in amazement
at such a spectacle ? Let such apostate


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 157

numbers (should any be found) make one
leep and solemn pause, even in the midst
)f their unrestrained licentiousness: Jet it
i)e the awful pause of that mind, fixed on
"uture and eternal consequences. Let
hem remember, " of them to whom much
s given, much will" most assuredly " be
equired." Let them call to mind for one
noment those precious Masonic instruc-
tors, which they once received, and duly
onsider the amazing event to which their
nrestrained conduct will infallibly lead.
Conscience will not always slumber. Ere
>n<{ it will awake in the bosom of every
postate, with more awful thunder's than
lose which shook Sinai's mount. Such
re the festering wounds of unpitying re-
lorse ; such the stints of conscience, in
it* breast of him, who has long wandered
i the bewildering mazes of vice, that

" Sh:MiUl he bestride the swiftest steeds of day,
Or mount on whirlwinds with unnumbered wings,
Stilt guilt would seize the dastard on his way,
\nd conscience dart unutterable stings.

4 IK uce, no sweet balm from consolation caught,
n >vorlds uuheen, the guilty soul can find,
Unless it fly as rapidly from thought,
\.ud leave both sense and memory behind."

Should he look back on his past life,
jen remorse must seize on every thought ;
forward, black despair hangs on bis sight
d shrouds his trembling hope in dismal
ospects. Not a single ray of consolation


]76. SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

to cheer the desponding soul, or ease the
pained heart. Who then, in the sober ex-
ercise of his reason, would not avoid the
path of vice as the bane of his happiness?
Who would not choose and delight in vir-
tue, as the soul of his existence ? Be assur-
ed the reward is not only inestimable, but
commensurate with eternity itself.

The stars shall fade, the sun's broad beams expire,

Creation sink on nature's funeral pyre;

Hut virtue's gifts, unfa ling shall endure,

When skies and stars and sun's shall be no more.

What heaving bosom breathes not forth one ardent s : g!»,
To grasp th' immortal prize, and triumph in the joy !

Brethren, do we not evidently discover
the imperious necessity of plain dealing
with those who may err from the path of
duty ? A Mason, above all others, is under
solemn obligations to be a good man, and
faithful to his charge. Where, I ask, is
the advantage, or what the benefit, of uni-
ting with this Society, if there is nothing
to be done ? What good can result from
that capacity of usefulness, that wisdom
and prudence, which is never exercised ?
The fact is, our brethren need our advice,
counsels, admonitions and reproofs ; and
we need theirs. We are all imperfect, fal-
lible beings, and should freely consult each
other, in all matters of importance, remem-
bering, that " in the multitude of counsel-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 177

lors there is safety." It is our privilege to
unbosom our souls to a brother, and his
duty to hear and advise. We feel a con-
fidence in this relation, to which the world
is an utter stranger.

Are we not also under solemn obliga-
tions to deal faithfully and affectionately
with each other as beloved brethren I Are
we 'not bound, and it may be hoped, con-
sistently with the feelings of our hearts, to
use every wise, prudent and friendly ex-
ertion, to warn a brother of approaching
danger, to reclaim his wandering steps, if
he stray from the path of duty ? The best
of men are but imperfect, liable at times,
in some evil hour, to be overtaken in vice.
As one error often paves the way for oth-
ers more dangerous, seasonable and saluta-
ry advice, given by an affectionate brother
may be the means of preventing a once a-
miable and virtuous character from being
plunged into vice, with all its attendant ca-
lamities. No satisfactory reason can be
assigned, why we as Masons, and acting in
that character, ought not to aim at the ab-
solute extinction of vice and immorality ;
and no substantial excuse can be urged in
the neglect of one duty for the accomplish-
ment of this end. Vice necessarily in-
volves the vicious in difficulties, destroys
character and reputation, and is the high


178 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

road to wretchedness and misery. Had we
rather our Masonic brother, when once be-
ginning to stray from duty, should be suf-
fered to persist till his ruin is inevitable,
than lake him by the hand, in a most friend-
ly and affectionate manner, and point out
his danger, and strive by all the means in
our power to reclaim him ? Should kind
admoiiit ions be faithfully administered, with
the true spirit of brotherly love and ten-
derness of affection, we have every reason
to believe, scarcely one instance in a thou-
sand would fail of restoring to the world a
usi'ful citizen, to the lodge a grateful bro-
ther, and to his family a friend indeed.
Such affectionate solicitude in behalf of
our brethren, would at once seal the lips
of slander, check the spread of vice, avert
the stings of an accusing conscience, and
save a brother from impending ruin.

Do we fear the giving of offence ? Let
us rather fear to neglect our duty. Do we ;
dread our brother's displeasure? Let us ra-
ther dread an accusing conscience. Are
we unwilling to interfere, lest his feelings
should be wounded ? Let us rather fear to
have them wounded when they can never
be healed ; let us rather guide his feet to
the path of virtuous enjoyment, which is
substantial, and to that happiness, which
will be everlasting. Such a course would


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 179

truly be characteristic of Masonic friend-
ship ; such would be the dictates of hu-
manity and benevolence, and such, breth-
ren, is our unequivocal duly.

What brother, now beloved and esteem-
ed by all who know him, happy and pros-
perous in all his relations and pursuits,
could he foresee himself, at some future pe-
riod, ensnared and seduced from the path
of virtue, and in danger of becoming a nui-
sance to society, would not solemnly en-
gage his brethren beforehand, to pursue
him, should he stray, to the very last extre-
mity, and if possible, compel him to aban-
don what eventually would land him in
wretchedness ? No virtuous brother, on the
truth of this supposition, but with tear* in
his eyes would pledge his friends by the
most sacred promises to be faithful to him.

The beneficial effects resulting from
such frankness and affection, would be pro-
ductive of consequences durable as tbey
are important. Instead of producing en-
mity, it would create tiue love. Instead
of alienating the feelings of brethren, it
Would warm, cement and harmonize. In-
stead of weakening our social bonds, il
would make them " stronger than a three-
fold cord. Vice would stand appalled, and
virtue in smiling countenance. Such faith-
fulness would add an unextinguishable lus-


180 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ire to the Masonic Institution, and secure
to posteiity the piecious blessings result-
ing from " precept, teaching by example."

Brethren and Companions, let it be ask-
ed with solemn emphasis, what would be
the probable result, if every worthy mem-
ber, in all our numerous Institutions, should
in this paiticulai discharge hisduty Av.ilb
fidelity I Would it riot be a glorious fart,
that immorality of every description would
be banished from the Society, and seldom
he chargeable against a single individual!
Would not the great Institution literally
become a nursery of piety, its members the
pillars of state, and the salt of the earth?
Tlii< would indeed be a joyful era.

From the experience of ages we are
taught, that where precept and example
are united in a good cause, they are atit nd-
ecl with powerful influence over the human
heart. Seldom do they fail of controlling
the general current of opinion in society.
Tie principles of imitation are inherent in
our nature, and imperceptibly incline us
to imbibe the sentiments, and adopt the ha-
bits of those we esteem. How exceeding-
ly impoi tant then, that every Masonic bro-
ther embrace those sentiments, exercise
that friendship, culivate those habits, and
maintain that excellence of character,
tti icb may render it truly virtuous to imi-
tate his examples.


CHAPTER XVIII.

An Address to Lodges and Chapters.

BELOVED BRETHREN AND COMPANIONS,

THE honourable Institution of which
you are members, lays claim to great me-
rit, as well as high antiquity. In every age
of the world, and almost every country,
Masonry has met with distinguished pat-
ronage. Not only men of great intellec-
tual powers and eminent science, but ma-
ny clothed with the highest civil authority,
have been its hearty and zealous advocates.
Not a few, also, distinguished for their pie-
ty and devotion, whose virtues have adorn-
ed their age, and whose names will descend
to posterity as the friends and benefactors
of mankind, have gone before you in that
long trodden path of Masonry.

Such has been that illustrious succession
of the guardidVts of thr institution whose
vigilance and care have been constantly
exercised, in preserving in their purity,
from age to age, those princ iples now com-
mitted to jour charge. Through your
bands are they to descend to succeeding
generations. How sacred is that deposit
committed to you, in trust for future ages!

In view of the oii^in and true nature of
the Institution, its hiv.h importance to the

16


% SPECULATIVE MASONRY. ^ 3

world, (he sacredness of its principles, its
harmonizing influence, and the whole ex-
cellence of the system, whether it be con-
sidered in an historical, benevolent, moral
or religious point,* your minds must be so-
lemnly affected, and your hearts seriously
engaged to maintain the purity of its pre-
cepts; not only as a plain and reasonable
duty, but as examples worthy to be imita-
ted by those who shall come after you.
In view of such high responsibility, you
cannot be insensible, that the greatest cau-
tion, wisdom and prudence are indispensa-
bly necessary, as respects the present ce-
lebrity, and future usefulness of Specula*
live Free- Masonry. Seeing your profes-
sion is built on a tried foundation, you
stand solemnly pledged to the world to
maintain the cause of truth against all the
assaults of vice, or the inroads of error.—
Your several lodges are, or ought to be,
so many temples of virtue, and schools of
moral and religious instruction. Each in-
dividual is, or ought to be, a watchful sen-
tinel over the happiness of mankind ; ever
on the alert to rescue injured innocence,
or avert impending dangers.

Such, however, is the state of the world,
and such the unhappy lot of all Institutions,
that none have been preserved free from the
unhallowed tread of unworthy members.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 1 83

Even in thy little family, O blessed Imma-
nuel ! was a betraying Judas. Nor is thy
sacred table in this world, always surround-
ed by sanctified hearts.

Although such is a sore evil, and greatly
to be lamented, yet from the nature of man,
it cannot wholly be prevented in our pre-
sent state; much however, may be done, to
remedy this general evil.

Let it, therefore, be remembered, and
written as with sunbeams on the heart of
every Mason, that the harmony and happi-
ness of your assemblies* and your true en-
joyment as individuals, do not, cannot, de-
pend on your numbers, but on the real in-
trinsic worth, the virtue, the integrity and
the moral excellence of your members. —
This is a great peint as respects the unity
and fellowship of Masonic brethren. You
are, therefore, under solemn obligations to
make a full and thorough examination, as
to the true character of those who present
themselves for the benefits of vour order.
Here Is a point, never to be left unguard-
ed. All the internal, social friendship and
happiness of your communications, vitally
depend upon it. Let the world know assur-
edly,ifany individual desires admittance to
your privileges, that the square of justice,
and the plumb-line of rectitude must fit
his character for that important place. Let


184 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

it be well understood, that vice is not to be
winked at ; that the doors of your lodge
can never be opened for the reception e-
ven of a doubtful character ; that the sanc-
tity of the Institution is not to be trampled
under foot by the profane ; and that the
precepts of Masonry, present an insur-
mountable barrier against every immoral
person.

Hence, the effect would be of great con-
sequence to yourselves, even in a private
capacity ; to the reputation of your lodge,
as a wise Institution ; arid the general good
of mankind, as a standard and rallying point
for virtue. The more pious and meritorious
part of the community, many of whom now
stand aloof, would then crowd your assem-
blies* Then might you enjoy more abun-
dant social friendship in your stated com-
munications, and the world, in view of your
regular tenets and increasing respectabili-
ty, be more deeply affected with the gene-
ral utility of Masonry.

Should an unworthy person, however,
gain admittance within the veils of your
Sanctorum, remember, something ought
immediately to be done. Adopt all pro-
bable and proper means to mend his heart,
correct his habits, improve his virtue and
establish his good character. Persuade him
to practice virtue from the love of it. Re-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 185

member, that not only a visible and mani-
fest reformation must be effected, but one
that is real and genuine ; such as shall be
deemed satisfactory by every unprejudiced
brother. But in case of non-compliance,
or wilful obstinacy, by open violation of
Masonic principles, such a one must be ex-
pelled. The purity of the system itself
does demand it, and the peace and harmo-
ny of the Lodge imperiously require it. A
just and righteous discipline must be main-
tained, or the Institution necessarily fails
of its great object*

Those brethren, who from any cause be-
come immoral, and thereby disgrace their
profession, are diligently and tenderly to
be laboured with, and brought to a sense
of their duty : but if they cannot, and will
not, be reclaimed, the sentence of expul-
sion must be pronounced. The irreclaima-
ble must be excluded, by the fixed laws of
the Institution, from those precious Mason-
ic privileges, peculiar to worthy brethren*
A distinction must be maintained between
virtue and vice. Although cases of disci-
pline are always painful, yet this can in no
instance exonerate us from duty. Hence,
the increasing importances before sugges-
ted, of guarding the entrance to your pri-
vileges with the utmost prudence. At that
point, you meet with little or no difficulty

lb*


186 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

in maintaining your purity and fellowship.
No person found unworthy of admittance,
need fear the loss of public reputation if re-
jected ; for none except Masons are appri-
zed of the fact : if rejected, the world will
for ever remain ignorant of the case, unless
divulged by the candidate himself. It is a
maxim universally adopted, to injure no
man's public or private character ; if you
cannot, by the use of means, correct his vi-
ces and improve his moral character, do
him no injury : leave him, says the maxim,
on the same ground you found him, and
your consciences are guiltless.

In relation to Masonic discipline, we all
know, that, in general, it is too remiss.
Members are sometimes suffered to trans-
gress and pass with impunity. Each indi-
vidual excuses himself on the ground, that
it will be more proper, or attended with
more salutary consequences, for some o-
ther brother to enter the complaint. In
this way, it is sometimes finally neglected,
so that what was every one's duty is even-
tually performed by none.

To remedy this evil, should each Chap-
ter and Lodge, by an article in their by-
laws, constitute their three first officers,
ex-officio, a standing committee, whose du-
ty it should be made, in all cases within
their knowledge, to take cognizance of un-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 187

iasonic conduct, and report the offenders
> their Lodge ; few instances would pass
n noticed, and few errors uncorrected. —
'he government of the Lodge being in the
inds of those officers, the measure might
npose a general restraint on vice, and be
roductive of public as well as private
ood. To promote the happiness and well-
bing of mankind, is the great object of
peculalive Free- Masonry. In carrying
tto effect an object of such magnitude, no
xpedient, wise and prudent in its nature,
lould be left untried.

Brethren and Companions, in the fore*
Ding pages you have seen some of the ge-
eral outlines of the great body of the Ma-
>nic system. You have seen how nume-
)us, solemn and interesting are the con-
derations involved in our profession.-—
ind you may easily discover, from the na-
lre and moral fitness of those principles
'hich constitute the foundation of the In-
litution, how inestimable is their impor-
ince to the world. You, as Masons, be-
ig"well informed, can look back and see
i how great a variety of instances, the mo-
al state of the world has been benefited
y the existence of this ancient association,
io on, brethren, in the path-way of virtue.

Do good, and to communicate forget
ot." " Add to your faith virtue, and


138 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

knowledge, and temperance, and patience,
and brotherly kindness, and charity/ 9 till
your life shall be crowned with substantial
joy, and the smiles of an approving con-
science shed peace in your soul. Search
deep into those hidden mysteries to which
your profession leads. Raise your admi-
ring views, and look abroad in the vast fields
of Masonic research. Look through the
forms of Masonry to the substance; through
the symbols contemplate their high and sa-
cred allusions. Think not you understand
Speculative Free-Masonry, when you have
regularly received the degrees. You are
then just prepared to acquire true know-
ledge. You are just entering the school of
moral improvement. Think not, when all
those useful and interesting lectures are
thoroughly committed, you have done.—
Much, very much, still remains. These
principles must be exemplified by a regu-
lar life and honest deportment. Nor is this
the end of your duty. You may still look
forward in boundless prospect. You may
view the collective excellencesof the whole
moral system, summarily comprised in the
body of Speculative Free- Masonry. You
mav dwell on the subject, till overwhelmed
and lost in admiration. Such is the nature
of our Institution; and it is hoped every
brother will be suitably affected with those


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 189

momentous considerations ; that every
member will duly appreciate bis privile-
ges ; that each presiding officer will exhi-
bit a bright example of all that is praise-
worthy, and the whole bedy universally
appear to the world, as a " spiritual build-
ing;, in which every part, being fitly joined
together, may grow up into a building of
God."

Finally, brethren, " let us keep the uni-
ty of the spirit in the bonds of PEACE."
* Let us love one another, for love is of
God."

" Behold how good and how pleasant it
is for brethren to dwell together in unity,
It is like the precious ointment upon the
head, which ran down upon the beard, even
Aaron's beard, which went down to the
skirts of bis garments. As the dew of fler-
mon, and as the dew that descended upon
the mountain of Zion, for there the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for e^


vermore."


CHAP! ER XIX.

Evidences thai Masonry has been the medi-
um through which the Pentateuch, or five
Books of Moses y have been preserved to
the world.

A SUBJECT is now to be presented
for consideration, which cannot fail to en-
gage the attention, and interest the feelings
of every friend of truth and sober inquiry.
It is, therefore, presumed every brother
will prepare his mind to judge of such facts,
and candidly examine such evidence, as
may be exhibited.

It is my design to quote some of tte
highest authorities to be found, in proof of
this grand proposition ; viz. that ancient
Masonry has been that medium, through
which the Pentateuch, or five hooks of Mo-
ses, have been preserved to the world. If
this position can be supported by argu-
ment, and proved to the reasonable satisfac-
tion of the judicious and candid, the result
will seal the true dignity of our Institution.
In view of such an important truth, if sup-
ported by preponderating evidence, the
world would be constrained to acknow-
ledge the instrumentality of the Masonic
Institution, in a matter deeply involving


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 191

e Universal good, and general happiness
the whole human family.
A few preliminary remarks are necessa-
r to prepare the way, and lead our minds
• a natural introduction of this subject.
When God separated Abram, the He-
ew, from his country and kindred, be
id a fixed and unalterable purpose, e-
mtually to make the greatest displays
the infinite excellence of his own
a ratter. Hence, the posterity of this
an were chosen, to be the active instru-
ent8, tinder Providence, of introducing
id perpetuating the greatest subordinate
tod in the moral system. This is a
ain truth, clearly and fully attested by
controvertible facts, in connexion with
vine testimony.

By those early communications, made
► Abram and his descendants, God man-
-sted his immutable designs to preserve
e Hebrew nation as his covenant [>eo-
!e, and through them to magnify the
rhes of his goodness, by unfolding, and
urying into effect, his infinite plan of
race and salvation. .Numerous were the
itermediate steps, to the accomplishment
f this great and important end.
The land of Canaan was, therefore, giv-
i to Abram by promise, and fixed as the
leatre of divine exhibition. Many ages,


192 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

however, must intervene ; during which,
Jacob and bis sons should remain under
Egyptian bondage. When the time of their
servitude was about to expire, it became
necessary, in the chain of events, that God
should raise up a deliverer for his chosen
people. Moses, the man child, who had
been preserved in an ark of bulrushes,
and instructed in all the wisdom of Egypt,
received this high mission. Under the
guidance of a special Providence, he de-
livered his nation, and led that holy en-
terprise, which was made to issue in the in-
troduction and promulgation of the great-
est manifestations of goodness, and dis-
plays of mercy, our world has ever wit-
nessed.

Moses, in executing his mission, con-
ducted the Hebrew** to the mount of God
There be received the decalogue on tables
of stone, written by the finger of Jehovah,
and delivered amidst thunderings and light-
nings and trembling elements. Moses
was here commanded to prepare an ark,
consecrated and set apart, as the sacred
depository for the laws of God, the histo-
ry of the antediluvian world, the revela-
tions of grace, and the records of his na-
tion. Thus far was the way prepared for
God himself to communicate, and Moses
to record those great and sublime events,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 193

which none could dictate but that Being
who inhabits eternity. Under divine su-
perintendence, therefore, Moses began his
history with the morning of time, when,
from the energizing voice of Omnipotence,
worlds and systems of worlds rose into
being. This was a most signal display
of the majesty and power of Essential Di-
vinity, at which " the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy." From these writings we derive
all our knowledge of what transpired " ere
time began, or nature received her birth."

The book of Genesis, then, is the first and
only authentic history extant, of all those
events which pertain to the natural and
moral world, for a period of two thousand
three hundred and sixty-nine years. To
say the least, this is a history above all
others, rich in the most interesting matter,
grand and gublime in description, and ac-
tually constitutes the first link in the great
chain of Divine operation.

The book of Exodus continues the his-
tory from Genesis, one hundred and forty.
five years, until the building of the taber-
nacle, and records many supernatural dis-
plays of the power of God, before ar ad-
miring world.

Leviticus conlains the laws of the Jew-
ish priesthood, with numerous typical ser-

17


191 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

vices and offerings, pointing out the way in
which atonement for sin should he made.

The book of Numbers continues the
history from Exodus, thirty-nine years.

Deuteronomy is principally a recapitu-
lation of those laws and institutes before
delivered, to impress them on the minds
of that people, and solemnly engage them
to walk in all the statutes and ordinances of
God blameless.

This was the last of the five books of
Moses, comprising an account of divine
operations, in the natural and moral
world, for more than two thousand five
hundred years. The subject matter of
these writings, collectively considered,
shows the necessity, and lays the proper
foundation for the whole canon of Scrip-
ture. Hence, we may at once discover
their inestimable value, not merely in an
historical view, but with a more special re-
ference to the general good of the moral
world. The vast importance, therefore, of
having these writings carefully preserved,
never can be fully appreciated.

The way is now prepared to introduce
the faithfui testimony of Scripture, as to
the writing, and place of deposit, of this
part of sacred history.

Thus saith inspiration : " When Moses
had made an end of writing all these words


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 195

in a book, till they were finished, he com-
manded the Levites, who bear the ark of
the covenant, to take this book of the law,
and put it in the side of the ark." From
this quotation we learn the time when, and
the place where, this sacred deposit was
made. The exposition, however, of that
clause, " put it in the side of the ark," has
been controverted. Yet it must evident-
ly be construed in one of twa ways. Ei-
ther that the deposit was actually made
within the ark, or in some place so closely
attached to the side, as, in common accep-
tation, to be identified with the inward a-
partment.

That the two tables of sfone, delivered
to Moses at Horeb, were within the ark,
at the dedication of the temple, we have
the positive testimony of inspiration. But,
as to the book of the law, we have not the
same explicit proof. Some expositors give
their opinion, that it was laid up, and kept
within, and others, at th^ side of the ark.
On this point we may introduce the testi-
mony of the Rabbinical fathers.* They
inform us, that " Solomon durst not make
a new ark, which was the only thing that
prince did not imitate, and make more
glorious ; but this, he dared not to o?m T

* Origincs Hebrstx, vol. 2, page 350.


196 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

or to take out the book of the law, and
put it in an ark of his own making." This
quotation is directly in point, and entitled
to more weight, as coming from the an-
cient fathers in Israel. In support of the
same opinion, we can add the uniform prac-
tice of the Jews, since the days of Ezra.

It is well known from history that Ez-
ra did place the books of Moses within
the ark, after the completion and dedica-
tion of the second temple; and the same
practice has uniformly prevailed in all the
synagogues of that nation down to the pre-
sent day.

It is, therefore, thought these considera-
tions ought to govern our belief on this
subject. Hence, we shall conclude, that
the books of Moses were designed if not
actually kept within the ark, as the ap-
pointed place of deposit. This point, how-
ever, is not material in our present discus-
sion, so long as it is evidently intended,
the ark and the law should remain to-
gether.

From this view of the subject, therefore,
we may safely conclude three points will
readily be admitted ; that the writings of
Moses constituted the original copy of the
pentateuch ; — within or at the side of the
ark, the appointed place in which they
should be kept ; — and in obedience to Di-


SPECULATIVE MASONKY. 197

rine command, that they were here de po-
rted, fourteen hundred and fifty-one years
oefore Christ. These are facts, sufficient-
ly established from the plain and positive
testimony of Scripture.

The way is now prepared to trace the
listory of this book of the law, and Ihe ark
>f the covenants Wherever we find the ark
stationary, we shall consider the laws of
Moses laid up withdn, or by its side. No
ioubt the one, in some way, contained the
>ther, during, the journeyings of Israel in
the wilderness..

After the conquest of Canaan, the ark
was placed in the tabernacle, at Shiloli,
where it remained between three and four
hundred' years.

In the days of Eli, it was carried to the-
field of battle, where it fell into the hands
of the enemy, but wa» afterwards returned,,
and placed in the house of Abinadab, at
Gibe ah. Here it remained between fifty
rod ninety years* whence, in the time of
David, it was removed to the house of
Qbed-£dom, and soon after to* Jerusalem.-
Ab >ut forty years from that: tirae r Solo-
mon caused it to be deposited by the
priests, in solemn form, within the most
holy place in the temple. Hence, from-
the time the laws of Moses were delivered
la the Levites, until the ark, which is sujf-

17*


198 SPECULATIVE MASOKRV.

posed to accompany or contain them, was
placed in the temple of Solomon, it was
four hundred and forty-seven years. And
it appears there is no evidence to disprove
that both were at the same time deposited,
and both remained in the most holy place,
except when read to the people, for about
three hundred years, until the reign of
Manasseh, or Amon, his son ; making the
whole period from Moses, seven hundred
and forty-seven years.

Brown, Scott and other expositors, give
it as their opinion, that during the reign of
Manasseh, or about that time, some zealous
priest removed the book of the law from
its accustomed place, to secure it from
that wicked and idolatrous prince. How-
ever this may have been, it is abundantly
evident, those sacred writings were un-
known to the Jewish nation from that time
until the reign of Josiah, six hundred and
forty-one years before Christ. Josiah was
a pious prince, and abhorred the idolatry
of his fathers. He therefore gave orders
to cleanse and repair the temple, and re-
establish the true worship of the God of
Israel. In executing these orders, " Hil-
kiah, the high priest, found the book of
the taw, and delivered it to Shaphan the
scribe, who read it before the king."

In Scott's exposition of this text, be says,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 199

" The book which Hilkiah found seems to
have been the original book of the law,
deposited bv Moses at the side of the
ark." From the writings of Josephus we
derive the same testimony ; — while the an-
cient rabbins unequivocally affirm, " that
it was the very copy itself that Moses wrote
with his own hand." In addition to this tes-
timony, we only add, that in Chronicles it is
expressly called " the book of the law of
the Lord, given by Moses."

Hence it is thought no reasonable doubt
can remain that this was the identical copy
delivered to the Levites, who bear the ark.

The next point in order, is to show ne-
gatively, that no other entire copy existed
in the days of Josiah, about fifty years be-
fore the destruction of the temple. In re-
lation to this particular, we have the result
of the most profound and indefatigable re-
searches of the learned world. On the one
band, infidel writers have laboured to show
that this book, found by Hilkiah, was the
only entire copy claiming divine authori-
ty, that it might not be the original, if such
ever existed, but a mere fabrication, and,
therefore, unworthy our religious confi-
dence.

On the other hand, Christian writers,
with their utmost research and investiga-
tion of this subject, have not been able to


200 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

show, by satisfactory proof, the existence
of any other entire copy, and on that ac-
count have been obliged to establish (be
authenticity of this book, by quotations
found in other Scriptures, given by inspi-
red penmen. If, therefore, neither the af-
firmative nor negative of this question can
be made to appear by positive proof, our
belief must rest on such circumstantial e-
vidence as may arise from other known
collateral facts..

That many extracts, made by the priests
and Levites, and perhaps by some of the
more pious kings, were preserved, there
can be no doubt ;. but that more than one
entire copy existed in the days of Josiab,
is what never has been, and probably never
can be, certainly proved.

Although the kings of Israel were com-
manded to transcribe the law for them-
selves, yet it can neither be determined
from Scripture or history that any of them
strictly complied with that command. On
this point Mr. Scott gives his opinion in
the following words: — u If the kings of Jui-
dah had observed the rule of transcribing
the law with their own hands, very saluta-
ry effects might have been produced ; but
it seems," says he, " to have been entirely
neglected." And he adds, " Josiab cer-
tainly acted like a man who had never


SPECULATIVE MASONRV. 201

seen the law before, and this most likely
was tiie case."

Such, then, is the crpinion of that pi«>us,
learned and able expositor, which, on the
point before us, is entitled to much weight.
Indeed, it is difficult to conceive that the
king of Jerusalem should commence such
a thorough reformation, and continue it so
zealously for the space of eleven years,
both in his own kingdom, and that of Israel
also, not only causing the cities and villa-
ges, but even the private dwellings of the
people, to be carefully examined, which
we know was the fact, without finding other
books of the law, if they existed.

But there is another strong circumstance
found recorded in the second book of
Kings : " And Josiah sent, and they gath-
ered unto him all the elders of Juclah and
Jerusalem. And the king went up into the
house of the Lord, and all the men of Ju-
dah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
with him, and the priests and the prophets,
and all the people, both small and great,
and he read in their ears all the words of
the book of the covenant, which was found
in the house of the Lord. And the king
stood by a pillar, and made a covenant be*
fore theLord. And all the people stood to
the covenant." Hence, from the very na-
ture of this transaction, from the assembly's


202 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

being composed of all the elders and pro-
phets and priests, as well as the common
people, both small and great ; from the unu-
sual surprise of the king himself, on the dis-
covery of the law, and from the silence of
Scripture, we have just reasons to conclude
no oilier entire copy then existed, or was
known amongst all that vast multitude.

The next point, is to show that those
writings, found by Hilkiah, were in some
way providentially secured, both from the
idolatrous rage of Josiah's successors, and
that general destruction brought on the ci-
ty and temple by the Chaldeans.

After the temple had undergone all ne-
cessary repairs, the Scriptures inform us,
that " Josiah commanded the Levitesto put
the holy ark in the house which Solomon,
the son of David, king of Israel, did build."
In this transaction, no mention is made of
the book of (he law ; and the reason is per-
fectly obvious. The ark was the know&
and long established depository for those
writings, according to a Divine command ;
and we should naturally conclude the one
was deposited when the other was restored
to its accustomed place. This opinion k
greatly strengthened by that zeal which
Josiah manifested in every respect, both
it erally and conscientiously, to comply
with the laws of Moses, not only as a rea-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 203

enable duty, but, if possible, to avert im-
ending judgments. If, therefore, he had
ny knowledge of that express command,
ecorded in the book of Leviticus, we can
ave no good reasons to doubt his strict
nd literal compliance. However the fact
lay have been, it is certain there is nothing
o disprove such a conclusion, or weaken a
ational belief of its truth. Hence, it is
bought, we may justly conclude, when Jo-
iah replaced the ark, he caused the book
>f the Jaw to be deposited, as Moses had
lirected.

From this time the book of the law is
lot again mentioned, until the days of Ez-
a and Hehemiah, a period of about one
mndred and eighty years. Different opin-
ons have been entertained by the learned,
n every age, how that part of revelation
♦scaped the general destruction, which be-
el Jerusalem, and where it remained du-
ing the captivity. This becomes an in-
juiry, therefore, of the utmost importance.

After the restoration of the Jews, from
be Babylonish captivity, we learn from the
writings of Ezra a»d \Nehemiah, that the
aws of Moses were, for eight days, public-
y read and expounded to the people. It
berefore appears absolutely certain, these
writings were, in some way, safely preserv-
ed, from the time of Josiah till the days


w^


204 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

of Ezra. Tf so, it must have been accord-
ing lo some one of the following supposi-
tions: — 1. They were either publicly or
privately seized, retained and preserved,
by some person, or persons, of the Jewish
nation : Or, 2. They were taken by the
Chaldeans, and, with other spoils, carried
to Babvlon, and afterwards returned to Ez-

w

ra, or some of his companions : Or, 3. Tbey
perished in the destruction of Jerusalem,
and Ezra was enabled to write them again,
letter for letter, and word for word : Or, 4.
They were thoroughly concealed by Josi-
ah, or by others, at some time previous to
the destruction of Jerusalem, and after-
wards discovered and brought to light. Be-
side these, it is thought, there is no other
possible way in which they could have been
preserved to (he world. As to the first sup-
position, the truth of it is wholly improba-
ble, since all the priests were put to death,
except Josedek, and he was carried bound
to Babylon, and all the principal men of
Judah were taken, and brought to Riblab,
and slain before the king. The city of Je-
rusalem was laid in ruins, its inhabitants
carried captive to Babylon, and none were
left " but the poor of the land, to be vine-
dressers and husbandmen." As to the se-
cond and third suppositions, it never has
been pretended by those who have examin-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 20 J

cd this subject, that the Chaldeans either
took or destroyed the book of the law, or
that Ezra wrote it from memory, or by in-
spiration. All those spoils taken from the
temple, are carefully enumerated in Scrip-
ture, and the same were re-numerated when
returned to the Jews. Josephus, also, gives
a minute relation to the same effect. It is,
therefore, not in the least degree probable,
that the books of Moses were carried to
Babylon, since neither the Scriptures, nor
the writings of Josephus or any other re-
cord of antiquity, afford the least shadow
of evidence that they were. Hence, we
are constrained to believe the fourth sup-
position is, substantially, true : viz. That
the book of the law was thoroughly con-
cealed, and lay buried beneath tue ruins of
the city, during the captivity. This sup-
position receives strong support, from se-
veral important considerations.

We can have no doubt that the ark of the
covenant, and the book of the law, were with-
in the confines of toe city, when the sie^v of
Jerusalem commenced. The temple and ci-
ty were plundered and burnt, and all their
magnificence laid in ruins. It is, therefore,
exceedingly difficult, aside from special,
Divine agency, to account for the escape
and preset vation of this book, on any other
ground than that of a thorough conceal-

ia


206 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

merit. In support of this opinion, we can
adduce the positive testimony of the Jew-
ish Rabbins. By examining the history of
the Jewish republic,* we find that all those
ancient fathers agreed as to the fact, that
the book of the law was concealed. Some
say 1 Liis was done by the prophet Jeremi-
ah ; hut others, and by far the most nume-
rous class, give their opinion in the follow-
ing remarkable words: "That king Josiab,
being foretold, by Huldah, the prophetess,
that the temple would be destroyed soon
after his death, caused the .ark to be put
in a vault, under ground, which Solomon,
foreseeing this destruction, had ordered
to be built on purpose for the preserving
of it."

No mention is made of the book of the
law in this quotation, for the same reasons
already assigned ; and because the Rab-
bins speak of the ark, as containing the
law ; but more especially so in this in-
stance, for the whole scope of their reason-
ing is to show in what manner the Jaws of
Moses were safely preserved. On the score
of reason, also, no person, of common dis-
cernment, would suppose the Jews would
have the precaution to conceal the less im*
portant of those two articles, aud leave the

* Origines Hebrre, vol. 1, page 2£9.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 207

more valuable and precious entirely at the
mercy of the enemy, or in danger of pe-
rishing in the ruins of the city.

Such then, are some of the existing evi-
dences, that the ark and the law were both
concealed. If, therefore, these considera-
tions prove any thing, they prove the very
fact. Hence, it is thought, we may safely
conclude, in view of substantial reasons,
that the books of Moses were preserved
from the general destruction which befel
Jerusalem, by a thorough concealment.

It now remains, that we inquire when,
and by -whom, the book of the law was
found, and restored to the world.

As no mention is made, in Scripture or
history, of these writings, from the days
of Josiah, until the time of Ezra, we are
strongly induced to believe, they were un-
known, during the captivity, and were ac-
tually found at the time when the city and
temple were rebuilt. When those spacious
ruins were overhauled, that Providence,
whirh could direct their concealment and
preservation, could, also, direct their disco-
very and restoration. Such we, as Koyal
Arch Masons, are taught to believe was tho
fact. We have a tradition descending from
time immemorial, involving certain facts,
unknown to the world, that the sacred ark,
together with the book of the law, wa* re-
moved from the most holy place, under Ma-


208 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

sonic direction, and so deposited, as io es-
cape that overwhelming destruction, which
swept the whole land of J udea. From this
tradition we learn where, and under what
circumstances, the book of the law was
found. The very name, of Royal-Arch,
has n significant allusion, well understood
by every brother of that degree. The very
foundation of that degree rests on this fact.
As Royal Arch Masons, therefore, we en-
leiliiin no doubt, this important discovery
was made during the building of Uie second
temple, by Zerubhabel and his compan-
ions. Directed by a special Providence
they are said to have found this treasure,
with Masonic inscriptions, in the very place
where it had been deposited by their an-
cient brethren, to prevent its destruction
h> the Chaldeans. This tradition, therefore,
must have been founded on the fact of the
concealment and discovery of the book of
the law, or baselv fabiicated and intiodu-
red, at some period subsequent to the re-
storation of the Jews. But its origin never
has, 01 can he traced to any subsequent pe-
riod, and no important object could there-
by have been effected. The same tradi-
tion, in substance, has existed amongst all
Royal Arch Masons, in every age and eve-
ry country. Who, then could suppose a-
ny body of men, of different languages, in-


SPECULATIVE MASOMIY. 20. )

habiting countries so remote, should all
combine to admit and perpetuate a false-
hood ! Were it a mere fabrication, it must,
of necessity, have been detected as such,
in the very first instance, and consequent-
ly discarded, and could in no shape have
been imposed on the body of the Institu-
tion. But the Masonic evidence of truth,
contained in this tradition, is so strong and
conclusive, in the view of Roval Arch Ma-
sons, they are seldom inclined to indulge a
doubt, that such was the /act, as to the con-
cealment, preservation and discovery of the
book of the law.

Nothing, therefore, remains but to .show
through whose hands we have received the
five books of Moses. On this point authori-
ties might be multiplied ; but as there is
little doubt that Ezra is entitled to this ho-
nour, we shall only quote such authority
as may prove that he held the original, as
well as the only copy extant after the re-
turn of the Jews.

In the days of Rehohoam, the son of So-
lomon, a schism was produced, which ter-
minated in the establishment of two go-
vernments, the one of Judah, and the other
of Israel. Pertaining to the latter, was the
citv of Samaria ; whence the Samaritan.
In process of time a temple was erected
on mount Gerizim, and religious services

18*


210 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

instituted. Hence arose a contention rela-
tive to the original manuscript of t lie Jaws of
Moses. Tlie Samaritan?, from resentment,
and perhaps envious motives against the
Ji u>. attempted to maintain that Ezra co-
pied his bonk of the law from their manu-
script, which was said to he the original.

Father Simon, a verj just and able critic
on the Old Testament, has cleat I v derided
this point. After thoroughly, and very
candidly, examining all the evidences in re-
lation to this matter, he decides, in view of
substantial reasons, that the Samaritan wa9
not the original, but a mere transcript made
from Ezra's copy. And he further add?,
that Ezra was, in his opinion, possessed of
the original manuscript, as given by Moses.
It would hence seem abundantly evident,
both from the testimony of father Simon*
and fiom the origin and nature of this dis-
pute, that the Jews, as well as the Samari-
tans, virtually admitted the existence of
only owe copy, at, or soon after, the time
Ezra arrived in Jerusalem. All expositors
agree in this point, that the pentateuch, now
in our possession, was received through the
hands of Ezia, and is the true and genuine
copy of the laws of Moses.

From those three considerations above
mentioned, we have strong evidence, if
not abundant proof, that Ezra bad the ori-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 211

ml manuscript, [f so, have we not sub-
ntially the same evidence, that this
inuscript was secured and preserved
*ough the instrumentality of our ancient
ethren?

As to the Masonic character of Zerub-
bel, Ezra, and their companions, little
ed he said. It is evident, they, as well
many others of that nation, were skilled
geometry and architecture ; which were
nonymous with ancient Masonry.
Authentic histories of that people in-
?m us, " The public structures amongst
» Hebrews, if we consider either the
ignificence of the temple, or the state-
ess of their buildings in Jerusalem and
ier cities, are undeniable testimonies

their skill in architecture, above other
lions." No doubt, Solomon perfect-

those principles, and fully exemplifi-

their proper application, in the sym-
'try, beauty and grandeur of the tem-
*. The same geometrical or Masonic
owledge was perpetuated, as appears
nil history, t ill the days of Herod; who,

repairing the temple, " employed ten
->u sand artificers to fit all things for the
irick, and a thousand priests, skilful in

parts of architecture, to supervise and
•ect the whole."*


* Hebrew Republic, rol. 2, page 418,


212 SPECULATIVE MASOKRY.

It hence appears, the Jewish priests
weie considered the most eminently quali-
fied, from their knowledge and skill in an-
cient Masonic principles, to superintend
and direct the operative concerns of the
Institution.

The fact is, however, admitted by all
who have duly examined this subject, that
Solomon was a Mason; and his Masonic
character is justly inferred from his build-
ing the temple. The Scripture account
of the different orders of workmen, enga-
ged in that great and splendid undertaking,
affords something more than presumptive
evidence of the existence of a regularly
organized body. That such was the fact,
few who are not Masons are inclined to
disbelieve. When, therefore, it was un-
derstood, that a man endowed with such
distinguished attainments, stood at the
head of the association, both the founder
and the patron, who could doubt the ge-
neral celebrity of the Institution, or the
rapid increase of its members ?

Our own experience and observation
teach us, there is a natural propensity in
man to associate. Whenever, therefore,
associations are formed on such principles
as are congenial to the heart, and accord
with the sober dictates of wisdom and piu-
dence, such associations become lasting;


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 213

ind nothing but a dissolution of the kin-
Jred ties of nature, and the sympathies of
the heart, can sunder those strong bands of
union, or destroy the social compact.

Judging from human nature in every
state of society, and under every degree of
refinement, we find there is a vibrating
cord in human composition, capable of
binding heart to heart, which is neither re-
laxed by time, nor weakened by revolu-
tions of kingdoms or fall of empires.

Such, it must be admitted, is the nature,
and such the heart-uniting influence of Ma-
sonic principles, or its members never
could have braved the strong prejudices of
mankind, and maintained the Institution,
amidst the commotion and revolutions of
the world.

It would therefore appear, aside from
every other consideration, that an organi-
zed society, formed under such favourable
circumstances, as those which attended the
building of the first temple, combining in-
terests dear to individuals, and involving
the general good of mankind, could not
fail to excite the attention, and draw to its
bosom the most valuable part, of the com-
munity.

8uch are the natural conclusions, drawn
from the state of things during the build-
ing of the temple, and from the propensi-


214 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ties of the human heart to unite in social
compact.

Hence, if this society was formed, and
the first temple built under Masonic di-
rection, which has seldom heen question-
ed by the learned, we may safely infrr
the regular itiaintainance of that order,
through each succeeding period of li;ne.
The building of the second temple, there-
fore, would be considered as a right of pre-
rogative, sufficiently confirmed by those
powers and privileges, delegated b>, and 1
descending from, Solomon, as the instru-
ment of Providence in that great nnd cho-
rions work. A* Solomon combined every
virtue arising from piety and wisdom, and
was, at the same time, clothed with the
highest temporal dignity, no one could
think him unworthy of imitation in his Ma-
sonic life and character, ft is, therefore,
presumed, such dignity and patronage
could not fail to unite and engage the
priests and prophets and elders, and all the
principal men in that nation, to support
and perpetuate ihe order and principles of
ancient Masonry.

As Masons, however, we need not resort
to a train of circumstances in support of
the Masonic character of those concerned
in the repairs of Jerusalem, and the erec-
tion of the second temple. The evidence!


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 215

>f those farts, is clear and conclusive io
hose admitted within the veil. On that
rround, we are convinced the high jliiest,
to iw the nature of his office, stood at
Lhe head of the Masonic-Apartment ; the
whole superintendence of each temple,
with all its services, furniture and appen-
dages, being under the control of the high
priest, was virtually under Masonic direc-
tion ; and whatever of the sacred treasures
escaped destruction must have been depo-
sited in the secret archives of the Institu-
tion, and thus safely preserved to the
world.

Brethren, what conclusion ought we to
form, in view of all which has been said on
this interesting subject ? We know, most
assuredly, from Divine testimony, that the
ark was prepared, and the book of the law
deposited therein, fourteen hundred and
fiftv-one years before Christ ; and that no
other fixed place for it was known for more
than eight hundred and sixty years : — That
in the reign of Manasseh, or Amon, this
book was removed from its accustomed
place, and safely deposited, where it lay
concealed till the time of Josiah, when it
was found, and publicly read to the people :
That it never has, and probably never can
be proved, any other entire copy then ex-
isted, or was then made : — That Josiah or-


216 SPECULAIVE MASONRY.

dered (be ark to l>e replaced, " in (be house
which Solomon did build ;" and from that
time, 'no mention is made of the book of
the law, until t£*e days of Ezra and IN e he-
rnial), a period c^ane hundred and twenty,
or perhaps one hundred and eighty years.

When Ezra returned from Babylon, he
zealously engaged with his countrymen, in
the general concerns of the nation, but
soon retired from public view, and remain-
ed unnoticed, for about thirteen years ; af-
ter which, he again came forward, and, for
th* 4 first time after the captivity, mention
is made of the reading and expounding of
the laws of Moses.

Expositors agree in the opinion, that Ez-
ra was then employed hi studying the law,
and transcribing, and arranging the wri-
tings of the prophets.

The fact is beyond all question, that the
book of the law was not publicly known,
or publicly read, during the captivity;
and the evidences are strong, if not con-
clusive, that it lay beneath the ruins of
the city. The ancient Rabbins affirm,
that Josiah caused it to be placed in a
vault, expressly prepared for that purpose.
Masonic traditions support the same opin-
ion, and add the pi evidential discovery of
the law, on removing the ruins of the temple.
The Rabbins speak '/its concealment as


SPECULATIVE MASONRY 217

a matter of unquestioned fact, and ascribe
its discovery to Ezra, who on that account,
is styled, " the second 31oses, the restorer
of their Jaw." Masonic tradition coin-
cides with the same sentiment, but ascribes
the discovery to Zerubbabel, in connexion
with bis associated companions.

Such, therefore, are the facts, such the
evidence, and such the corroborating cir-
cumstances, in support of our first propo-
sition, that Masonry has been that medium
through which the pentatevvh % or Jive books
of Moses, has been preserved to the world.

If these considerations are entitled to
any weight, they go very far if) point of
absolute proof. How important then does
it render ancient Masonry ! To those
of my brethren who are Roval Arch Ma-
sons, nothing further need be urged. It is
confidently believed, from the very nature
of this degree, you can entertain no doubt
of the truth of what is therein taught. How
deeply interesting, therefore, does this sub-
ject appear !

If the foregoing conclusions are justly
drawn from fact and evidence, what claims
of gratitude has ancient Masonry on the
whole Christian world, as the angel of mer-
cy in protecting the revelations of grace!

Companions, how shall we express our
own gratitude, that the infinite Cod should

1.9


248 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

fix on our Institution, as the handmaid of
his 'Providence, in safely watching over,
and preserving to the world, this invalua-
ble treasure ? Shall we not hereby be
constrained to admire the riches of his
goodness and mercy, to live more and
more to the honour and glory of his name,
wisely to improve his sacred word, and
thereby, be preparing ourselves for those
sublime entertainments -of bis iioly <aod
heavenly kingdom ?


CHAPTER XX,

Speculative Masonry, one great mtdium r
through which the world will be civilized,
united and Christianised.

ALL mankind. are by nature brethren,
•members of one great family, and share the
munificence of one common Parent. Their
wants are reciprocal ; and mutual depen-
dence is their common lot. Divine consti-
tution imposes our moral obligations, and
defines our relative duties. Each individu-
al is bound to exercise friendship and fideli-
ty, and practice universal benevolence.

The world* however, is sunk in pollu-
tion, and whelmed in misery. Intervening
rivers and mountains and seas often make
enemies of nations. Local considerations*,
diversity of interests, sectarian creeds,and a-
thousand casualties of time, place and cin~
cumstance, frequently excite bitter enmity
between man and man, and raise the arm of
personal, revenge. Such is the malignity
of unrestrained passion, that the peace of
society is often interrupted, and whole na-
tions involved in bloodshed, or bloltedi
from political existence. Under the influ-
ence of such passions, the social harmony
of the domestic circle, the peace and tran-
quility of civil government, and even the-


220 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

happiness of the world is often disregarded.

Since the days of murderous Cain, the
earth has been a field of blood. Countless
millions have expired on the point of the
sword. The dagger of the midnight assas-
sin, has converted the calm and innocent
repose of thousands into the iron slum-
bers of death. How many have sunk heart-
less, beneath the hand of cruel oppres-
sion ? How many have fallen, magnani*
inously fallen, in defence of jthe common*
rights of man ? How many have pined ia
chains and dungeon glooms ? How many,
under sullen despair, have arrested life with
their owu hands? How many, during
this very moment, are involved in actual
wretchedness and misery ? Could angels
weep, a full view of suffering humanity
would cause celestial tears to flow.

This deplorable condition of the world
has originated from the corrupt propensi-
ties of the heart, and the want of that
genuine benevolence which seeks for the
peace, and combines the happiness, of all
our species. Almost six thousand years
have rolled their floods of misery over the
earth. But we have, for our encourage-
ment, Divine assurance, that this world is
not destined to remain a perpetual scene
of niinous desolation. The great Author
of nature has been pleased to reveal rich


UL


SPKCT7LATIVE MA&ONftY. 22 1

blessings in reserve ; and the moral world
will soon experience an important renova-
tion. Even now, the radiant beams of ci-
vilized lift*, Jike the eyelids of the trior*
ning, are dispelling the lengthened shades
of native barbarism. The day star of Mil-
lennial glory, has already arisen; and nu-
merous proofs might be adduced, in support
of an approaching reign of uninterrupted
peace, unanimity of sentiment, and univer-
sal philanthropy.. All Christian nations
hold this period in joyful anticipation. —
Speculative Masonry, as- the Christian
handmaid, has ever been labouring to
disseminate those benign principles of
peace on earth, and good will towards
men; Animated with a commendable zeal,
all the faithful patrons of our Institution,
have steadfastly persevered in the dili-
gent use of such means as were directed to
this end. That strong chain of Masonic
friendship which connects individual mem-
bers, binds nation to nation, and country
to country; The 6ound maxims of wis-
dom, and the sublime doctrines of morality,
bave been preserved with fidelity, and per-
suasively taught from age to age. Ere
long the voice of wisdom will reach the
understanding : ere long the world will
be purged from all the pollutions of vice.
Man shall again resume the moral dignity

19*


*


222 SPFXULATITE MASOffftT*

of his nature, and abundantly participate
in the rich blessings of Christian enjoy-
ment, and Masonic fellowship, fidelity and
love. Christianity, in a pre-eminent sense,
points out the path, and opens the door to a
blessed immortality ; while Spec illative Ma-
sonry lays the foundation for the improve-
ments of civilized lite, and is a powerful
auxiliary in the advancement of temporal
enjoyments, and the attainment of uiinier-
rupted felicity. Leaving the superior in-
fluence and divine efficiency of ihe former,
to writers on theology, we will only attend
to the latter; a sister Institution in that
great and important work, the Millennial
peace of the world.

The first argument in support of this o-
pinion, is drawn from the early establish-
ment, uninterrupted succession, and pre-
sent existence of Speculative Masonry. —
The moral principles of this institution are
at least co-extensive with those of the
Christian System*

Masonry, in its organized slate, has "li-
ved with ages, and been a traveller with
time." Its perpetuated descent strongh ar-
gues intrinsic worth. " Trine has subdued
the greatest efforts of human ability, and le*
veiled in the dust the proudest monuments
of human ingenuity/ 9 Other societies, en-
gendered in the corruption oi their age, have


SPECULATIVE, MASONRY. 259

expired in the hands that gave them birth.
This has escaped the ruin of empires, and
outlived the storms of persecution. Under
the guardian protection of Heaven, it has
descended on the lapse of time, an angel
of peace and a minister of consolation to
the destitute and afflicted of every age.
Lt't the records of time bear witness, if
aught of genuine Vlason y, has cast a blot
on the page of human existence. We do
hence infer, that our Institution did origi-
nate from Divine wisdom, and has been
preserved, in mere mercy, to aid some wise
and important end. And what end can be
more important, or better comport with the
nature of genuine Free-Masonry, than the
general advancement of human happiness?
Our second argument is drawn from an
•abstract view of Masonic principles. The
fundamental tenets of our faith, evidently
comprehend the sublime doctrines of the
great moral system. The main pillars in
the Masonic edifice, are emblems of that
Divinity, whose nature is perfection, and
whose works are the displays of his wisdom.
These principles are virtuously maintain-
ed, unshackled by sectarian creeds or reli-
gious partialities. No man of sober re-
flection can witness the beauty and har-
mony of a well regulated Lodge, and lis-
ten to the voice of wisdom, without belie-


224 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

ving in the existence of a God. No man,
under an impressive sense of human de-
pendence, as? here (aught, rati refuse to
obey, reverence and a dure that Being. —
Those moral truths, inculcated within the
Lodge, are of that solemn import, and so
diiectly meet the understanding, that the
heart embraces, and the conscience ap-
proves them.

The acknowledgment of a God, and
the obligation of worship, are first princi-
ples in every religion, and common to
every faith. These truths being once ad-
mitted, the way is fully prepared to intro*
duce and enforce every subordinate duty,
required of man. Of these, are truth, jus-
tice anil fidelit\, which hold the first rank
in the estimation of every nation, whatever
may be their practice. Temperance, so-
briety, and rectitude of conduct, comport
with the testimony of everv man's con-
science, whatever may be his real charac-
ter, or religious profession. Add the bles-
sings of peace and unanimity*, the exercise
ot charitv and affection, and above all a
heart of pure benevolences and the climax
of human virtues is completed.

As light breaks upon the understanding,
through the medium of instruction, all
these virtues and duties are appioved and
admired, and wilt for ever remain the land-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY*. 226

marks of a distinguished moral institution.
Hence the whole system presents the most
lively display of every moril. beauty,- in
connexion with every desirable and happy-
fying consequence. When such truths are
inculcated and enforced on the candidate*
in the simplicity of nature, they are cor-
dially embraced, whatever his country his
nation, his faith or his ptactice. And the
way ineffectually prepared, under the most
favourable circumstances, to effect union in
sentiment, unity in design, and of conse-
quence, in the same extent, the advance-
ment of universal peace. Let all mankind
embrace and practice those moral princi-

Eles, precepts and duties, which are taught
y Speculative Masonry, and no inference
can be more justly drawn, than that the
whole human family would dwell together
in love, as the children of one common pa-
rent. The mind cannot reject the unavoid-
able deductions of reason ; and this is one*
enforced with the clearness of demonstra-
tion. Should our Institution, therefore, do
her perfect work, the weakest capacity
would discover and the strongest prejudice
yield the conclusion, that it must issue in
the reign of millennial peace.

Our third argument is derived from
known and existing facts. In the honnn
of every lodge, are men of different habits


226 SPECULATIVE MASONRY*

of life, and different religious tenets*. Yd
all things appertaining to the Institution;
are conducted with perfect accordance.—
Peace and order reign within. All their
members cordially unite in the great essen-
tial doctrines and duties*. Other conside-
rations not affecting the vital principles of
the Institution, are wholly excluded. The
same is substantially true, of each Chapter
and Lodge within the confines of every na-
tion. As Masons, and acting in character,
there is no clashing of interests, no colli-
sion in sentiment, no interruption of friend-
ly intercourse,, and no abatement of kin-
dred affection. Brethren of different na-
tions, and distant countries, maintain and
perpetuate the same mutual. friendship, on
terms of reciprocal kindness. No excep-
tions are taken from the nature of that go-
vernment, under which we may chance to
be born, nor that religion in which we were
educated.

The ruthless hand of war may desolate
kingdoms and empires ;. the dashing of
nations may fill the world with terror and
dismay, yet, in the midst of all these conh
motions, our Brethren, composed of every
nation, and kindred, and language, meet
on the level, and part on the square.—
No slate of moral or political confusion*
has ever been known to alienate the affee-


SH&ULATIVB MASON**. 227

tions of the great body of Masons, weaken
their fidelity, or sunder the strong cords of
coMHtion fellowship. Though mountains
rise and oceans roll between, though chains
and dungeon glooms confine them, still do
their kindred spirits meet and mingle with
emotions of one common joy. Let masonic
fidelity and friendship predominate in eve-
ry beart,and who candenv, that it would re-
sult in the bighebt earthly bliss? Here then
is precept teaching the world by example.
Our fourth argument 4s predicated on
the exercise of one Masonic virtue ; -chari-
ty or the pure benevolence of the gospel.
This pre-eminent virtue assumes different
names, from its varied agency. Witness
those indescribable emotions, fisnaHy ma-
nifest, when the candidate first enters the
threshold of our Institution. Under the
impressions of his common relation, nature
begins to stir in his bosom, and awakens
his conscience to a fively sense of duty,
his heart is inspired with a laudable zeal
to advarrce the happiness of his species.- —
He looks abroad into the world, and views
its inhabitants as Brethren. Hence the
powerful influence of that principle, which
may be traced, through every circle of
private and domestic life, up to the great
source of universal benevolence. It is a cha-
ritable and benevolent disposition, which


228 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

warms the heart, subdues the passions, and
brings home peace to our own bosoms. It
is this which lays the foundation for every
substantial enjoyment within the domestic
circle. It is this which confirms the barmo- '
ny of every well governed Lodge, It is
this which prompts the true patriot boldly
to defend the liberties of his country. It
is this which creates the peace, and perpe-
tuates the happiness, of social and civilized
life. It is pure friendship, arising from be-
nevolent feelings, which leads to a union in
heart and sentiment, a love of country and
kindred, national peace and tranquility)
with every concomitant blessing.

It is the same Divine principle, expand-
ing into universal benevolence, which can
ever embrace or secure the peace of the
world. No moral truth can be more ob-
vious, no deduction of reason more abso-
lutely certain. To argue the peace of na-
tions, the mutual friendly intercourse of the
world, arid the consummation of the highest
earthly bliss, asicte from the general prac-
tice of Masonic chaiity, or Christian bene-
volence, contradicts the common sense, and
daily experience, of all mankind. Where
this virtue has no agency in the heart, the
mind is left, to brood over the solitude of
its own inhospitable reflections. Cruel
jealousy, revenge, misanthropy, or mere


SPECULATIVE MASONRT. 229

stoic indifference, are the only miserable
tenants of the mind.

From this view of Masonic charity, it is
difficult to avoid an important conclusion,
that our Institution, next to the Christian
system, will be a distinguished agent, in
the great work of millennial peace.

Our fifth argument rests on Masoniccoin-
cidencfc with Divine revelation. This con-
sideration is weighty, if nol conclusive, in
the case before us. Our system of reveal-
ed truth, is the touchstone of every vir-
tue ; the criterion of faith and practice*
Masonry glories in b'.'ing second to no in-
stitution, except the Christian, that first,
and of all others most pre-eminent. In
the inspired writings, the ancient fathers
and prophets have taught us to expect a
day of millennial glory. The Christian
world is now alive with joyful anticipations
of its speedy approach. Notwithstanding
all events, both in the natural and moral
world, are under the control of Omnipo-
tence,. yet are they brought forward, and
carried into execution, by the use of con-
stituted means. In this great work, it ia
confidently believed, Speculative Mason-
ry will bear a distinguished part. The
Christian religion must and will be publish-
ed to all the nations of the earth. This is
tbo power and the wisdom of God, in re-

20


230 SPECULATIVE MASOJCRY.

d'-i'ining mankind from the miseries of lire
f <11. Speculative Masonry, judging from
the moral excellence of its principles, must
of necessity, hold an equal rank.

Two substantial facts will confirm this
point. The first is, the present existing con-
cord, and harmonious progress, and pros-
perity of both Institutions. In whatever
country or kingdom the one is embraced,
there, in the same extent, is the other pa-
tronised. Numerous historical facts might
here be quoted, in Italy, Germany, Eng-
land and America. That eminent philan-
thropist who first attempted to Christian-
ize the island of Great Britain, presented,
on the one hand, the sweet consolations of
the. Christian faith, and on the other, the in-
viting doctrines of 'Speculative Masonry.
The same individual who now ministers be-
fore the Christian altar, pays his devotions
at the altar of Masonry. Many of those
heralds of the gospel, now gone to the pa-
gan nations of the eastern hemisphere, have
enrolled their names on the records of our
Institution. What multitudes of private
Christians have patronized Masonry, from
a conviction of its benign influence on the
human heart ! These facts afford us a stri-
king specimen of Christian sentiment, as
well as Christian attachment.

In the second place, this point is conclu-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 231

ftivefy argued from tbe fact, that the dis-
tinguishing doctrines of Speculative Ma-
sonry, happily coincide with those of Re-
velation. If, therefore, there is coincidence
in principle, there must of consequence-
he coincidence in the ultimate design. To
suppose it otherwise, involves a? manifest
contradiction. No man of common obser-
vation, ever questions the benign effects of
true Christian piety. If, therefore, the mo-
ral precepts of Speculative Masonry are
in any degree identified with, or flow from,
Divine Revelation, a belief and practice of
the one, must correspond, in every essen-
tial point, with that of tbe other. Hence,
to me, it appears difficult to avoid tbe fol-
lowing important conclusion, viz. that Spe-
culative Masonry, as a moral institution,
mill* in the most important sense, aid Chris-
tianity, in establishing the peace of the world,,
in civilizing the rude nations of the earth, in-
troducing common fellowship and brotherly
affection, and ultimately perfecting the high-
est earthly bliss.

Brethren and companions, if what you
have heard on this interesting subject com-
port with Masonic faith ; if moral princi-
ples, rendered efficient on tbe heart, are
productive of the peaceable fruits of righte-
ousness, we have preponderating, if not
conclusive evidence in support of our final


232 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

conclusion. The opinion has been advan-
ced, and the attempt made to support it,
under the fullest conviction, that time will
present a fair demonstration of its truth.
In my view, the contrary involves an un-
natural war in principles, and actually le-
vels every distinction between virtue and
vice.

Suppose for one moment, the moral prin-
ciples of our system should be carried into
full operation ; suppose each precept writ-
ten, as with sunbeams, on the heart; suppose
every Mason should live up to the stan-
dard of his profession ; add to this number
every male inhabitant of the earth, who is
of lawful age ; let each action flow from
the heart, in perfect accordance with Ma-
sonic rules; and I ask, could anv state of
society approximate nearer the standard
of human perfection? Let the truth of
these suppositions be once admitted, and
we may speak of the result with absolute
certainty.

Taking the volume of inspiration as the
standard of truth, we have full assurance,
the moral principles which characterize
our system, will bear the investigations of
time, and brighten in the searching light
of eternity.

Brethren, seriously contemplate our
principles, precepts and duties ; compare


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 233 :

m with Revelation ; test them by the
Mill experience of ages ; view them as
ried into effectual operation, and rea*
will enforce conviction of their truth
I importance on the heart of every dis-
ning mind.


20*


^
n


CHAPTER XXL

Monuments of ancient Architecture, and his*
torical facts of the origin and progress
of Geometry, and other Sciences, connect'
ed with ancient, Operative Masonry.*

TO trace some of the ancient records
and monuments of art, and the early intro-
duction and progress of the more useful
sciences, shall be the object of the present
address. A subject, much of which is
involved in that impenetrable darkness,
which broods over the ruins of antiquity.
We will, however, commence with the ori-
gin of our species, and diligently search
amongst the works of time, for such mate-
rials as may afford us some information on
this interesting subject.

The history of the arts and sciences in
the antediluvian world, would be exceed-
ingly interesting, could they be traced to
their origin and followed in their progress.
On this subject, our knowledge is princi-
pally confined to the sacred record. From
the account given by Moses, we learn that
the first city was built by Cain, the eldest


* All those historical facts, embodied in this chapter,
taken from the Encyclopaedia, Anacharsis's Travels during iht
middle of the tourvh century, before Christ ; Muv«r*s Unifer-
•al Hatory, and several publications on Asiatic antiquities.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 235

son of Adam; but of the extent and con-
struction, we have no account. Tubal-
Cain wrought in brass and iron, and pro-
bably, from the fact that bis name is record-
ed as such, was either the inventor of this
craft, or the most experienced of his time.
Jabal and Jubal, sons of Lamech, either
invented, or greatly improved some of the
useful and ornamental arts.

Jabal was the father of such as dwell in
tents, and Jubal of such as handle the harp
and organ. The Jewish Rabbins likewise,
inform us, that the posterity of Seth were
eminently skilled in astronomy.

Joseph us tells us, there were antediluvi-
an stone pillars, to be seen in his day, co~
vered with astronomical inscriptions. That
such pillars might have been erected and
inscribed by the antediluvians, is not per-
haps, improbable ; but we have reason to
believe, their tradition, rather than their
existence, remained till the time of Jose-
phus. The construction of the ark, how*
ever, was a distinguishing specimen of an*
tediluvian art. Although its dimensions
ivere Divinely communicated, yet there
can be little doubt, that Noah was left to
hi? own ingenuity, in the style of finishing.

Some writers have doubted, whether this
fir-t race of men were acquainted with the
Use of letters. But St. Jude inform* us, that


236 SPECULAIVB MASONRY.

Enoch, the seventh from Adam, delivered
prophecies ; if so, we would naturally Mip-
pose there wassomemedium,through which
they could he recorded and pteserved.—
When was it ever known, in any age, 1 hat'
society had made such advances in the use-
ful arts as the antediluvians evidently did,
without some acquaintance of letters? or
something, hy which to record their know-
ledge ? It is also the opinion of the most
learned and judicious antiquarians, that
science, together with many brandies of
the useful and ornamental arts, was under*
stood and cultivated hy the antediluvians;
the wrecks of which, in all probability, laid
the foundation for their early introduction
in the first ages of the postdiluvian world
One specimen at least, of their architec-
ture, the ark, survived the general destruc-
tion.

The tower of Babel, and the city of
Bab> Ion, are amongst the first displays of
art, after the deluge. This ancient city,
according to the concurrent testimony of
history, was one of the most splendid
works of human art ; yet who could l>e-
lieve, such an extensive and rich combina-
tion of civil architectural works should
spring up, amongst any people, without
the aid of long experience, or a previous
knowledge of its fundamental principles.


SPKCULATIVE MASONRY. 23?

Ve will next recur to India, Egypt
Persia, which, by antiquarians, are
ught to be amongst the first countries,
*re civil architecture, geometry, and
sciences were advanced to any consi*
able degree of perfection, Within the
fines of those countries, are still to be
nd the remains of the most proud archi*
,ural works ; the era of whose construc-
i, has never been satisfactorily deter-
.ed. Of these we will only mention a
, as specimens of oriental art; The
ient city Oude, northeast of Bengal, is
I to be the first imperial city of that
jjdom. According U> the Bramin^ it
snded on a line of about forty miles,
continued the imperial city one thou-
I five hundred years, or till one thou-
t years before Christi Canngue, ano-
• ancient city of the Indians, according
Strabo, from Megasthenes, who bad
i it, stood on the Ganges, was of a quad-
jular form, most strongly fortified, and
tained some of the richest specimens of
ient art. SherrifHden, a Persian historic
informs us, that old Delhi contained a
ice, built by some ancient king, in
ch were one thousand marble columns,
it richly ornamented,
^hese cities are thought, by sir William
es and Maurice, with regard to extent


238 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

and splendour, to have exceeded the most
magnificent cities in the western world.
To these rich specimens of ancient art, we
may add, from the best authorities, p>ra*
mids, vaiiou^ly constructed ; excavation*
in the sides of rocky mountains, of vast ex-
tent, divided into separate apartments,
by ranges of sculptured pillars, while the
walls are covered with a multitude of hu-
man figures, elephants, horses and lions, of
the most exquisite workmanship..

In the vicinity of Bamiyan, are two co-
lossal statues, the one is said to be tilt}, the
other eighty ells high, standing: erect, and
adhering to the mountain from whence tbey
were cut. And we are likewise told, that
in Shoubab of Cashmere, are sculptured
in rock^ similar figures of astonishing mag-
nitude: and tbat before the great tempi*
of the sun, there was a pillar, of an octa-
gon form, fifty cubits high ; and two fi-
gures of elephants, wrought in black stone,
with two human figures on their trunks,
and several horsemen near by, completely
armed.

The ancient Persian history, as given by
Tabari, contains many interesting con-
siderations on this subject ; some t>f which,,
however, may be fabulous- The first reign-
ing prince is said to be Caiumeras, who is
thought to have been a descendant of Sbem,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 23d

the son of Noah. Other historians have
considered him, the Chederlaomer, king of
Elam, mentioned in the fourteenth chap*
ter of Genesis. It is argued, however, by
all, that be undertook the arduous task of
civilizing mankind, and instructed them in
many of the useful arts. Tabari considers
this monarch, the founder of the city I*tak-
har, which was afterwards called Perse-
poiis, and of Baikal).

. Jemshid, the fourth in the regal line,
brought to perfection, those useful arts
which were introduced by his predecessors.
Be divided his subjects into four classes;
priests and learned men, fcoldiers, husband-
lien and artisans. The same historian tells
is, their religion, at this time, was that of
Enoch. The use of the solar year was in-
troduced by -this prince, and a feast insti-
tuted in its commemoration, which is said
still to be observed by the Persians. Cai-
kobad, another of the Persian kings, on
the testimony of Tabari, was cotempora-
ry -with Solomon. H is successor devoted
much time to the pursuits of astronomical
studies, and actually erected a lofty build-
ing for an observatory.

The ancient architecture of Egypt in
said to bear a strong resemblance to that
of the Indians, and is thought originall> to
have been borrowed from that country.


240 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

Of Egyptian art and science, we need say
nothing, as they are distinctly known to
have flourished to an extensive degree.

Of Grecian architecture, also, little need
be said. It is believed they derived much
aid, in their infant state, from Egypt and
Persia. No nation, perhaps, ever stood
on a prouder eminence, tjjan Greece in
her glory. The first distinct character
which architecture received in this coun-
try, was denominated Doric, from the
place of its invention. This was followed
by the tonic, and Corinthian.

The Phenicians of Tyre arc, on aH
hands, admitted to be the descendants of
Canaan the grandson of Noah. Many ves-
tiges of ancient art are still found rchrre
T\ re once stood. From the eai liest .peri-
ods of their history, civil and naval archi-
tecture were understood, and philosophy,
arithmetic and astronomy taught, with a
degree of accuracy. Abihel is the first
Tyrian prince distinctly known in pro-
fane history; and he was cotempoiary
with David, king of Israel. His son and
successor, Hiram, formed an alliance with
SolornoB, and furnished materials for the
temple at Jerusalem. Many of Solomon's
most skilful craftsmen wereTyrians; which
sufficiently evinces the early architectu-
ral .perfection of that people.


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 241

Prom the history of the Romans, it ap-
pears that little attention was paid to archi-
tecture, until after the conquest of the an-
cient Britons, the Macedonians, and some
.parts of Persia* From those numerous
and rich specimens of art, which were col-
lected in their eastern conquests, and con-
veyed to Rome, the attention of that peo-
ple became engaged, and their history fur-
bishes us ample proof of their skill and
progress. Uniting the Ionic and Corin-
thian orders, ihe Romans formed the Com-
posite ; and by a change of style in the Dor-
ic, instituted the Tuscan. In the schools of
modern architecture, the history and the
progress of the art, are within the reach of
<ev4^ reading man. In the comparison,
however, between tire ancient and modern
style, there appears to have been a gradu*
al change, from the boldness and strength
of antiquity, to an extreme of delicacy,
and profusion of ornament.

In proof of the early existence of an-
cierft art, one more fact shall suffice ; and
that is, the Artmdelian Marbles* These are
now deposited in the University of Oxford,
and are considered the mo«t stfperb re-
mains of antiquity. The Earl of Arundel,
leaving his native country, and residing in
Italy, employed several men of eminent
science, at vast expense, to explore many

21


242 SPECULATIVE MASONIW.

parts of the eastern world, in search of fbe
monuments of antiquity. In this labori-
' ous undertaking, he procured more than
five hundred pieces, of which, thirty-seven
were statues, one hundred and twenty-
eight busts, and two hundred and fifty
ineciibed marbles, -together -with various
cither fragments, of -various descriptions.
These were obtained at Morea, Delos,
Faros, Ephesus, Pergamus, Smy rna, and in
other eastern countries. Some were pur-
chased, and others dug up from ancient
ruins : and notwithstanding the numerous
inscriptions, found on most of these mar-
bles and that profound erudition which
ha- been employed to decipher them, yet
the age of some. pieces has hitherto baffled
every exertion, and 4he era of their for-
mation still slumbers beneath the Jmpene-
trahle veil of antiquity.

The origin of the arts, is most evidently
founded in the natural wants of man. But
1he sciences are justly considered the ne-
cessary and natural offspring of the arts.
Such, in a -special manner, h geometry.
For we can neither build houses nor tern-
plcs,<nor apportion territory, without an
application of some of its principles. An-
cient writers generally suppose it was first
-cultivated- in .-Egypt. Herodotus fixes its
arigin here, at the time Sesostris inter-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 243

sected Egypt with canals, and divided (be
country amongst his people. This was the
opinion of sir Isaac Newton. At the same
time, the researches of the learned have
actually brought to light astronomical
tables, found in India, which must have
been formed on geometrical principles*
the era of whose construction cannot be de-
termined. It is,* however, thought their
date cannot be less- than three thousand
years before Christ. The Hindoos have
a treatise now extant, whose date is fixed
at two thousand years. This treatise con-
tains a rational system of trigonometry,,
which is said to differ materially from the
Egyptian and Grecian. But according to
tbe natural progress of knowledge, astro-
nomy and geometry must necessarily pre-
cede trigonometry. It would, therefore,
seem, that geometry had an origin anterior
to this,.treatise on trigonometry. If so, it
is also prior to that of Egypt. But this,
perhaps, is not material, since the know-
ledge of the science can be traced back*
till lost in the remotest ages of antiquity.
We are, however, well assured, that geo^
metry was understood in Egypt, and that
Thales, of Miletus, transplanted this, with
other sciences, to Greece in the sixth cen-
tury before Christ. This philosopher, ac-
cording, to Diogenes Laertius, first me a-


244 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

sured the heights of the pyramids by their
shadows; and Plutarch states the surprise
of king Amasis, at this instance of sagaci-
ty. It is however true, that some loose*
geometrical principles were known in
Greece, before the time of Thales ; be-
cause Euphorbus discovered some of the
principles of a triangle, and Theodorus,
of Santos, the square and level. Yet it
was Thales undoubtedly, who laid the
foundation of this science in his native
country. Many of the scholars of Thales,
attained great celebrity ; amongst whom
was Pythagoias. He, visiting Egypt, ex-
amined the columns oTSoslhis, deposited i&
subterranean vase?, on which were engra-
ved the principles of geometry. This phi-
losopher, before his return to his native
country, visited India, and learned much
of the Bramins. Titles founded the Ioni-
an school, and Pythagoras, after his exam-
ple, the Italian. In like manner arose the
Platonic school. Plato, after the example
of his predecessors, travelled into Egypt*
and was instructed by the priests.- The
fourth school was that of Alexandria, es-
tablished by Ptolemy Lagus, three hun-
dred years before Christ. This school con-
tinued to flourish more than ten centuries.
It was here that the celebrated Euclid
flourished, whose works are held in the
highest estimation at the present day. —


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 24 1)'

"We might go on, and mention the many
discoveries and inventions of Archimedes,
Eratosthenes, Apollonius, and a multitude
of others,- whose geometrical improve-'
merits are more distinctly known. De-
scending on the lapse of time, we pass over
the many fluctuating stages of the sciences,
as well as the arts. Vast revolutions were
produced by the eruptions of the Saracen v
and other barbarous nations, which were
followed by the dark ages of the world.
By degrees-, however, both art and science
began to revive, and have gradually pro-
gressed to 4 their present state of compara-
tive perfection.

In the history of arithmetic, little need
tfe said. For it is impossible to determine,
with any degree of accuracy, at what peri-
od of time, or to what individual, the world
» "indebted for this important invention.
It U the concurrent testimony of hi.-tory,
however, both sacred and profane, that it
arose in those eastern countries, where art
and science first began to dawn on the*
postdiluvian world. Some ascribe the in-
vention to the Chaldeans ; but more to the
ancient Indians of the east, amongst whom
astronomy is known to have been under-
stood at a very early period. St ra bo gives
the invention to the Phoenicians, because
the first system, as mentioned by Cedrenus,

21=*


216 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

was written by Agenor, in the Phoenician
language. Josephus ascribes it to A brain,
who is said to have taught it to the Egyp-
tians. Notwithstanding the precise date
cannot be fixed, nor the early progress of
tliiw science known, yet we have every rea-
son to believe, from common necessity, it
was almost, or quite, coeval with our spe-
cies ; and that improvements were made,
in every succeeding age of antiquity.

We will next inquiie into the probable
origin and progress of astronomy. This
sublime science, is said to have been un-
derstood and cultivated by the antedilu-
vians. The opinion is highly probable, al-
though we have no certain proof of the
fact. It is evident from ancient historical
accounts, that astronomy was amongst the
first of the sciences, cultivated in the ear-
liest stages of society ; and from the fact
of its existence, nearly at the same era,
amongst those nations, it would seem, that
the hint was given, and the excitement
produced, by some wrecks of the science,
which had escaped the convulsions of ages
still more remote: For it is a natural and
necessary conclusion, that its origin was
from long and actual observation. From
history it appears that astrology, and as-
tronomy, were for many ages used nearly,
or quite, as synonymous terms* In pro*


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 247

cess of time, however, they were different-
ly applied. Although the absolute origin
is lost in antiquity, yet it can he traced till
about twenty two centuries before Cluist.
We have it on the authority of Porphyry,
that Calisthenes, at the, request of Alexan-
der the Great, collected the Chaldean as-
tronomical observations, for one thousand
nine hundred and three years, and sent
them to Aristotle, And it is said by fiail-
ly, that the rules and facts of the Chaldean
and Indian astronomy, are the mere wrecks
of a great system, which had been carried
to a high degree of perfection in early ages,
but through some mighty revolution in hu-
man affairs has only left those fragments
of the science, which have been gleaned
from the ruins.

The Indians, the Babylonians, and the
Egyptians hold the earliest historical tes-
timony. Thales, of Miletus, whose name
lias been mentioned, seems to have been
the first of the Greeks, who made astro-
nomical discoveries, and Pythagoras suc-
ceeded him. When Anacharsis, in his tra-
vels, visited Greece, he was informed by
Euclid, three hundred and fifty jears be-
fore Christ, that all their knowledge of this
science, was originally derived from Egvpt
arid Chaldea ; that he had in his possession,
astronomical tables, some of which were of


248 SPECULATIVE MASONRf.

very high antiquity. From Greece, as-
tronomy was transplanted to Rome, and
other countries. But in those succeeding
revolutions, which overturned the civilized
world, this, with all the inestimable pro*
ductions of antiquity, wa9 nearly lost a-
midst those ruins ; and it remained, in more
modern times, for Copernicus to revive,
and restote to the world, the true know-
ledge of the solar system.

It only remains to show* what connex-
ion, if any, exists- between what you have-
heard and the ancient principles of this In-
stitution. I believe I am justified in say-
ing, that Masonry in its original sense, ha^
ever been considered nearly, if not alto-
gether, synonymous with geometry. But*
we can neither build houses nor temples,
nor designate and apportion territory, with-
out the aid of Geometrical principles in :
dome shape. Some rude application of
these principles must, of necessity, have
been coeval with the first constitution of
local dwellings, and the first designation
of personal and individual territory. This-
application, in all human probability, had
not, in the first instance, a single feature of
a connected system. Necessity led the way*
and human ingenuity pursued the hints.
But geometry, as a science, must necessa-
rily have preceded astronomy ; and trigo-


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 24 9

&o me try is the legitimate offspring of them
both. Hence we discover that- common u-
aion, not only between t be sciences them-
selves, but between an and science.. Uni-
tedly, they constitute one common family,
mutually subservient, each to the perfec-
tion of the other.. But Masonry is admit-
ted by all writers on that subject, ancient-
ly to have been operative ; and geometry,
from the same authorities, was anciently
held synonymous with Masonry. I only
state the facts, and leave my companions
to draw the inference.

Permit me, in a few closing remarks, to
fix on a definite period in our history, and
travel back to the first landmarks of Ma-
sonry, in its ancient character..

From modern history we learn distinct-
ly, that in a very early period, an associa-
tion of artisans was known under the name
and style of Free-Masons. This associa-
tion, was composed of Greeks, Italians,
Franks, Germans and Flemish. Under the
distinct name of Free-Masons, they obtain-
ed special privileges, and travelled from
country to country, to erect churches, cha-
pels and other important public buildings.
These members lived in huts erected near
their works, where under a surveyor, or
master, every tentli man was called a war-
den, and had the oversight and superintend


250 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

dence of those under his care. Moreover,
history informs us, this travelling Lodge
disseminated the mysteries of the Institu-
tion through many parts of modern Eu-
rope.

Now look back into ancient history, and
here we are told, that the Dionysian arti-
sans were associated for the same purpose,
in the erection of temples, theatres, and
other public buildings, some hundred years
before Christ-. That this association tra-
velled through Asia Minor, and the adja*
cent countries, in the prosecution of the
same art. That they erected; that very
magnificent temple at Teos, and were, by
the ancient kings of Pergamus, incorpora-
ted, and enjoyed the exclusive privileges
of their art, and were actually subdivided
into different Lodges. These facts are sup-
ported on the authority of Chandler's Tra»
vels in Asia Minor, and Chishull's Asiatic
Antiquities. Here then is a fact so stub-
born, in the history of ancient, operative Ma-
sonry, as never to have been denied. All
historians, who have introduced this subject*
admit the fact, and infer the connexion.

Once more, history gives us these words:
" When Pythagoras, having visited Phoeni-
cia, ChaJdea, India and Egypt, .returned to
Saiiios, and the inhabitants of that place re-
jecting his instructions, he established him*


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 251

;elf in Italy, loaded with intellectual spoils,
md the Mysterious Science of the east."
&lso, at Cratonia, he established a secret
issociatiou, where he taught the doctrines
>f the Ionian school,. in connexion with that
nysterious science he had acquired in his
)\vn travels. ,But if we take for granted,
'what. 1 believe, has never been disputed
>y any writer,) that geometry and Mason-
ry, in their original acceptation, were ever
iseH-as synonymous terms, that is, signifi-
cant of the knowledge and application of
such geometrical principles, as are subser-
vient to human wants, and inseparably con-
lected with civil refinement in all architec-
tural works, we must draw an important
conclusion. JFor, if this is a true definition
i>f ancient operative geometry, it i* a true
iefinition of ancient operative Masonry ;
because both rest on the same foundation,
and are likewise in accordance with every
historical fact on this subject. If, there-
fore, we admit this definition (and I believe
it has never been denied) it will follow as
a necessary, and certain consequence, that,
in whatever age, or under whatever circum-
stances, men have been associated in the
study, or prosecution, of those useful arts
involving geometrical principles of this
description, they were to all intents and
purposes, ancient Masons ; or if you please.


252 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

they were ancient -Geometricians, which is
only the other name. JNow the name is al-
together immaterial, so long as we identify
and describe the same art. It is, therefore,
evident, if there is any truth In history, that
Geometry was the ancient, and Masonry
the modern name for the same art. Tbat
the former preceded, and the latter follow-
ed -the dark ayes of the world. The Greek
and Italian associations, distinctly ca//ed
Masons, in history, studied the -same prin-
ciples, and prosecuted the same operative
art, with other associations which had pre-
ceded them, for many centuries.

Hence, it cannot be denied, that even
the antediluvians were skilled inoperative
geometry, and we know, from existing fads,
that the postdiluvians were ; that even in
the remotest periods of that age, the aiti-
sans were classed, or associated, and, in
some instances, history records the fact of
their enjoying 'exclusive privileges, and
travelling from country to country, in
the prosecution of their art.

Taking history for our guide, and the
monumental fragments of antiquity fortes*
timonv, we are led to this unavoidable con*
elusion ; that ancient Geometry, in connex-
ion with its collateral branches, was to the
ancients, under one name, what Operative
Masonry, amongst theirs/ of the moderns,


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 253

N2L8 under another name. But to put the
natter beyond all reasonable doubt, as to
:he inseparable connexion between the
irts and sciences, whose history has been
hus briefly given, and ancient, Operative
Vlasonry, I need only refer Masons to a
•egular Lodge, properly furnished. By
jvhat principles are the dimensions of your
Lodge taken ? Like the perfect workman-
ihip of a spacious edifice, the whole are
?omposed of regular, geometrical propor-
ions. Every Lodge is laid out on the
principles of mensuration, and is an oblong
square. This is emblematically support-
ed by pillars, or columns, and in the same
Tianner covered by the starry heavens.
Light is occasionally intercepted by bro-
ken clouds. The sun, the moon and the
stars appear in their different splendour ir-
radiating the whole scene.

Why are all Masonic signs, especially
in the first degrees, an entire combina-
ion of different geometrical lines ? You
speak of the perfect square, the level,
ind the plumbline ; the triangle, with
its properties, proportions, and applica-
tion. You speak of the circle, its centre,
radii, and all its governing properties.
You introduce the several orders of archi-
.ecture, and fully explain their dimensions,
>rnaments, and history. You speak of the

22


254 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

globes, with their different circles, their
lines of demarcation, and geometrical mea-
surements. The cube, with length, aod
breadth, and depth, is explained, and its
numerous and important applications. In
short, you rise from this terrestrial sphere,
to a contemplation of the starry heavens,
and consider their distance, their motion,
and magnitude ; and travel over the ut-
most boundaries of the universe, on the
line and the circle. By the. aid of the tri-
angle, the square, and the cube, you are
taught to mark out, and describe the vast
dimensions of the material creation. But
why need I add ? Is there an impoitant
IMasonic emblem, or symbol, connected
with the operative branch of the Institu-
tion, whose existence does not, in some
shape, depend on the above sciences]
Does not every ceremony of initiation,
step by step, rest on some mathematical
rule ? And is not the very name itself de-
rived from geometiical science ? If such is
the fact, can any man explain, in what ope-
rative Masonry does consist, unless it is in
the knowledge of the science of architec-
tural art, founded on geometiical princi-
ples ? Can any man, on any other giouud,
assign one satisfactory reason, wbj Mason-
ry as an operative science, from the foun-
dation to the capstone, together with the


SPECULATIVE MASONRY. 255

whole superstructure, is an entire exposi-
tion of the various and useful principles of
geometrical science ?

Thus briefly, I have endeavoured to set
before you the plain matters of fact, on
this subject, as exhibited before you in
every Lodge room, and as collected from
the records and the ruins of antiquity ;
and with this evidence,* and those facts, I
leave every brother, and every companion,
to draw his own conclusion.


\


CHAPTER XXII.

Extracts from the Valedictory to the Grand

Chapter.

BELOVED COMPANIONS OF THIS GRAND CHAPTER,

IN closing that dutv you have been
pleased to assign me, I feel it a privilege
to unbosom my feelings, and address you
in that language which at best can give but
a faint idea of the emotions of the heart.
Here ha* been my favoured seat for many
year* past, the remembrance of which can
never be erased from the mind. Under the
fostering care of many worthy and bc!o*«
ed companions, whom I now behold, this
Grand Chapter has advanced to its present
state of celebrity. It is now justly consi- ,
dered the most respectable, both in point
of number and weight of character, of any
within these United States. The fruits
hence arising are abundant lv manifest.
Chapters and Mark Lodges have been
multiplied in every section of the state,
with a general prevalence of Masonic prin-
ciples. Men high in civil authority, of li-
terary fame and hopeful piety, have come
forward, and united with the Institution.
Fathers and brethren, these are the fruits
of your labours. On you the genius of
Masonry has fixed her eye and cast her


SPECULATIVE MASONRY, 257

mantle, as the virtuous patrons of her Or-
der and the guardians of her Institutions.
Great and responsible is your trust, high
and imperious your duties. You, as ho-
nourary members, or the presiding officers
in your several departments, constitute
this superintending Grand Chapter. In
this character you regulate the great body
of Masons, in the higher degrees, through
this state. Your wisdom and prudence
have been abundantly manifested, as ap-
pears from the present flourishing state of
Masonry within your jurisdictions. You
also, are the governing officers in your re-
spective Lodges and Chapters. To you.
therefore, the members of our general bro-
therhood look for precept and example.
In a very special manner are you distin-
guished in the affections of your brethren.
Being thus promoted, it is your preroga-
tive -to govern, and theirs to obey. It is
presumed, therefore, your examples have
been, and ever will be, such as may with
safety be imitated. In every point of view,
your relations are exceedingly interesting,
and will be attended with important, as
well as lasting consequences.

By your special request, I have been
called repeatedly to address you on the
subject of Speculative Masonry. These
calls have been promptly obeyed, though


258 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

the duty bas been but imperfectly dis-
charged. The time has arrived, in which
I contemplate, in this relation, bidding; you
an affectionate farewell. Not, however,
without expressing the utmost gratitude
for those distinguishing tokens of yourlove
and esteem, so kindly and affectionately '
bestowed. Not without the most sincere
acknowledgment of tho^e obligations, I am
bound for ever to keep in remembrance;
I can never express the emotions of the
heart, in view of that friendship, so long
continued, and so intimately ami cordially
maintained. These walls can witness our
iT/uitiai pledges of love and affection. Here
have we assembled a& a band of brethren. .

Here have we taken sweet counsel toge* . J
ther. Here have we sat, and equally ad- j
mired the wisdom and prudence of that '
EXCELLENT COMPANION * Dear
brother, your name and your memory will
live in every heart, and be embalmed in
the bosoms of Masons yet unborn. We
do appreciate your worth, and believe
your distinguished merit will receive its
due reward. May you still continue a
long and rich blessing to this Institution.
Here also, I behold some of the fathers of
this establishment. Your counsels and ex-
amples, your vigilance and care and la-

• The most excellent Ezra Ames, Grand High Priest


\


SPECULATIVE MASONRT. 259

■_»

bours of lave have moulded our hearts in
true friendship, and cemented our affec-
tions in pure love. You are, intruth, the pil-
lars ofcthis Institution, and the^ornaments of
our assembly. Long; have I witnessed} our
unshaken attachment to the ancient land-
marks of Masonry ; long;, your indefatiga-
ble exertions for the advancement of hu-
man happiness. You, also, are endeared
to us by every tie which entwines the
hearts of kindred beings. Your names
will descend to the latest posterity, as the
founders of this establishment, and the
. benefactors of mankind.

The present members of this Institution
merit the esteem of all their brethren. The
wisdom of their deliberations, marks their
Worth, and will, record their virtues for the
imitation of succeeding generations. How
then-hall thatcord betouched which cairies
-vibrations to the very heart of the speaker?
How name the sundering of a relation so in-
kier woven with the affections, and strength-
ened by -time-? Nothing in the composi-
tion of man, is more exquisitely tender,
than that sensibility arising from the pure
friendship of the heart. It is this which
/touches the very springs of life. Yet pain-
ful as may be the reflection, to me it evi-
dently appears a duty, all things consider-
ed, to decline a re-appointment. The high


260 SPECULATIVE MASONRY.


*■■


and increasing importance of able Mason-
ic discourses does demand a readier pen,
and more commanding powers of mind.
The greatness of the subject is such, as lo
require corresponding greatness of intel-
lect. A change in relation, however, can-
not change that ardour of affection which
warms this bosom. May I, therefore, in-
dulge the sanguine hope that my brethren
will accept these affections, and beartbem
in the secret chambers of their hearts? Will
they cast the mantle of Masonic charity
over the frailties of life ? Will they accept
the sincere desire to subserve the true in-
terests of Free iMasonry, and forget the
weakness or imbecility of the attempt?

The sweet remembrance, that I ma) still
live in the memory, and share in the affec-
tions of my brethren, will cheer the most
pensive hour of my life. Surely we are
brethren, and cannot forget the endea-
ring name. May we, therefore, all have
true wisdom to look forward, and contem-
plate with composure and serenity of mind
the close of mortal life, and the opening
scenes of an immortal existence* And, fi-
nally, may we all be prepared to meet
again, and rejoice together in a world of
puie arid sublime happiness, where friend-
ship will be perfect and Jove without alloy.

THE KKD.


\


Three things should be particularly
noticed by all who have occasion to exa-
mine this list of subscribers.

1st. The order of the officers' names is
uniformly the same, and is as follows : of
Chapters, High Priest, King, Scribe, Trea-
surer and Secretary ; of Lodges, Master,
Senior Warden, Junior Warden, Treasurer
and Secretary. Titles are generally omit-
ted for wain of room.

2d. Some of the subscriptions having
been received in 1819, and others during
the past and present years, the officers va-
ry accordingly.

3d, The names of subscribers are ar-
ranged according to states and towns. —
But as it is probable some names may be
received aft^r the iirst arrangement is com-
pleted, such will, if sufficiently numerous,
be inserted, in at least part of the edition,
under the title of Additional Subscribers.

NEW YORK.
ALLEGANY COUNTY.

RUMIFOKD.

liushford Lodge, So. 275*
Officers. — R. \\. John Hammond, Wm»

23


262 SUBSCRIBERS.

Hull, Levi Benjamin, Eliab Going, Ma-

thew P. Cady, 18

BROOME COUNTY.

BINGHAMTON.

Bingham Ion Lodge, No. 79.

Officers.— R. W. David D. Whitmore,

Myron Merill, Jerel Goold, John M'Kin-

ney, Elias M'Neil, 12

CATTARAUGUS COUNTY.

OLEAN.

Hamilton Lodge, No 274.

Officers. — R. W. Walter Wood, James

Auk ins, Amos R. Orton, Andrew B. Nor-

thrup, John A. Bryan, J8

CAYUGA COUNTY.

WoLCOTT.

Northern Light Lodge, No. 280.
Officers— R. W. Nathan Cook, Oliver
Whitmore, Adonijah Church, James Al-
exander, Hervey Hyde, 6
CHENANGO COUNTY.

PfEW-BERMN.

Phctbvs Ledge, No. 94.
Officers.— R. W. Rouse Clark, William
Hall, John Pike, Harry W. Green, Augus-
tus C. Welsh, 10

GREENE.

Eastern Light Lodge, No. 208.
Officers. — R. W. W ancr; Gra\, John L. !
43k<tJ, Phiio B. Palmer, Chaises Josslyn,
Elijah Rathbun, 5


SUBSCRIBERS. 263

OXFORD.

Harmony Chapter, No. 25.

Officers. — M. E. John Noyes, Levi Shef-

woo«l, Samuel A. Skeels, George Mowry,

Levi Sherwood, Jr. 5

DELAWARE COUNTY.

DELHI.

Cassia Loitge, No. 180.
Officers.— R. W. H. R. Phelps, Ebene-
zer Steele, Morris L. Farrington, Oliver
Prak, Richard W. Stockton, 6

M1DDLETOWN.

Golden Lodge, No.

Officers.— R. W. Richard M. Goodrich,
Noah Dimmick, John Van Waggoner, Gil-
bert Foster, Edward Sands, J,
DUTCHESS COUNTY.

POUGHKEEPSIE.

Solomon's Chapter, No. 31.
Officers.— M. E. Thomas L. Davis, Al-
bert Cocks, John D. Robinson, Clapp Ray-
mond, 4
Solomon's Lodge, No. 5.
Officers. — R. W. Abra. Innis, Charles P.
Barnum, T. L. Davis, John D. Robinson, 4
GENESEE COUNTY.

GAINES.

Genesee Union Lodge, No. 332.
Officers. — R. W. Aphael Lee, Jacob'
Flint, John Daw by, John Proctor, Joseph
K. Brown, 12


261 SUBSCRIBERS.

PEMBROKE.

Allegany Lodge, No. 277.

Officers. — R. VV. Wm. Seaver, Jr. Josiah
Lee, Amos Wright, Joseph Peters, James
E. Seaver, 6

RIDGEWAY.

Alluvion Lodge, No. 257.

Officers. — R. W. Eiijah Haw ley, David
Hooker, John Ripley, Cotton Nast), Jere-
miah Brown, 1

Eii ward Arnold, J. Seaman, J. Brown,
Israel Murdock, Alex'r. Coon, 5

MIDDLEBURY.

Daniel W. Phillip*, 12

GREEN COUNTY.

CAIRO.

Morning Star Lodge, No. 199.
Officers.— \i. W. Ira T. Day, Erastus
Barnes, Pliny Barton, Jr. Elisha Bishop,
Truman H. Bagley, 5

HERKIMER COUNTY.

SCHUYLER.

Clinton Lodge, No. 258.

Officers.— R. W. Benjamin Taber, Tho-
mas B. Gill is, John Hicks, Reynolds Ed-
get, Lulher Stone, 5

John Joslin, 1

LITCHFIFLD.

Olive Branch Lodge, No. 221.
R. W. Jonathan Butler, M. I


SUBSCRIBERS. 265*

ONONDAGA COUNTY.

MARCELLU*.

Morning Star Jjodge, No 290.
Officers. — R. W. Cyrus Curti*, Samuel*
Parker, Austin Godard, Nathan Keley,
Gerry Humastun, 7

OTISCO.

Mount- Moriah Lodge y No. 245.
Officers.— R. W. Luther French, Ethan
Squire, Josephus Barker, 12-

ONTARIO COUNTY.

GORHAM.

Harmony Lodge, No. 293.
Officers. — R. W. Chester Loom!?, Jainea
P. Robinson, Ira Merrill, Oliver Harwood,
David Sprague, h

OSWEGO COUNTY.

RICHLAITD.

Fellowship Lodge* No. 288.
Officers. — R. W. Chester Hay den, John
T. Uavis, Luther Howe, Jeremiah A. Mat-
thewson, Smith Dunlap, 6*

OTSEGO COUNTY.

COOPERSTOWN.

Otsego Chapter.-

Officers. — M. E. Win. Nichols, Harvey

Luce, George S. Crafts, E. R. Crandai, B*

Fitch, ' 6

E. B. Crandall, H. Luce, G, S. Crafts,

Thomas Allen, 4«

23*


266 subscribers;

Ofsego Lodge, No. 41.
Officers.— 1\. VV. Harvey Lure, E. B.
Cr uncial, J. J. Crandal, Buckingham Fitch,
Israel Day, 6

CHERRY-VALLEY.

Cherry- Valley Lodge, No. 276.
Officers— R. VV. Jonathan Hall, Jlluslri-
ous Remington, David Woodburn, Chester
Judd, Arnold Remington, 3

RENSSELAER COUNTY.

TROY.

Zachariah Curtis, member of Apollo
Chanter , No. 48, 1

SARATOGA COUNTY.

GALWAY.

Galnay Lodge, No. 267.
Officers. — R. VV. Isaac Talman,Pinklianr
Mosher, Cornelius Gillis, Samuel Rider,
Carlton Morehouse, 5

WATERFORB.

Orange Lodge, No. 43.
R. W. Nathan D. Sherwood, 1

SCHOHARIE COUNTY.

M1DDLEBURGH.

R. W. Storm A, Becker, John Becker,

Secretary, Jacob Feeck, Treasurer, Wil-

halmus Efnor, Jasper Lower, Dederick D.

Snyder, 7

ST. LAWRENCE COUNTY.

MASSINA.

St. Lawrence Chapter, No. 24,
Officers. — M. Eu 3o\\\x$Afc\N&> Jesse M'-


SUBSCRIBERS. 26?

Clary, John Garvin, Calvin Hubbard, Na-
than Covev, 12
STEUBEN COUNTY.

PAINTKD POST.

Painted Post Lodge, No. 203.
Officers.— R. W. Joseph Gillit, Eldad
Mead, David Wolcott, E. H. Hough, 2&~
SUFFOLK COUNTY.

SMITH TOWN.

Suffolk Lodge, JSo. 57.

Officers.— R. W Chas. A. Floyd, John

R. Satterly, John M. Williamson, Isaac

Jayne, Joel L. Griflfing, 6

TIOGA COUNTY.

ELMIRA.

Union Lodge 9 No. 30.
Officers. — R. W. John Cherry, Orange
Chapman, George Guest,, ' l§

ULSTER COUNTY.

KING>TON.

Kingston Lodge, No. 20.
Officers.— R. W. Seth Couch, John
Chipp, John Roggen, John Beekman, Wil-
liaip Holmes, 6

HURLEY,

Derick Du Bois, 1

WESTCHESTER COUNTY.

NEW KOCHtLLE.

Westchester Lodge, No. 46. .
Officers.— R. W. Win. G. M* ad, S. W.
Arnold, J. W. Coggshall, Zadock New-
man, Stephen Olmsted, 2


268 SUBSCRIBERS.

MASSACHUSETTS.

SALEM.

Washington Royal Arch Chapter.

Officers. — M. E. Henry Whipple, Jo-
seph G. Sprague, Thomas Carlile, Joseph
Everletb, Nathaniel Peabody, 5

Essex Lodge.

Officers. — R. W. Henry Whipple, Ben-
jamin Day, Jesse Smith, Jr. J. Everletb,
Thomas Palfray, 3

Thomas Cole, Thomas Carlile, J. G.
Sprague, H. Whipple. 4

ASHLEY.

Social Lodge.

Officers.— R. W. Abram T. Lowe, Ste-
phen Wyman, Ezra Yates, Nathaniel A-
dams, Gen. I. Jewett, Rev. Ezekiel L. Bas-
cmu, Chaplain, R. W. Alexander T. Wil*
lard, P. M. 7

Walter Russell, Charles Stearns, Oliver
Kendall, Gushing Burr, Jr. John Conn,
Charles Barrett, Timothy Stearns, Joshua
Townsend, &

LENOX.

Evening Star Lodge.
Officers.— R. W. Alvab Morell; Mand-
ley Whiton, Eli Bradley, Jr. Joseph Tuck-
er, David Osborn, 1 j

GROTONi

St- Paul's Lodge.
Officers.— B» W. Thomas Farnswortb,


SUBSCRIBERS. 269

David Blood, 2d. George Lawrence, Jona-
than Loring, David Child, 12

CAMBRIDGE.

Amicable Lodge.
Officers. — R. W. Lusher Gay, John Tar-
bell, Esq. Eliab W. Metcalf, Josiah Ho-
▼ey, William J. Whipple, Esq. . 1

AMHERST.

Pacific Lodge.
Officers. — R. W. Azahel Thayer, Zebi-
rm Rankin, Calvin Merrill, itheman Con-
key, Azel Dunbar, 12

MILFORD;

Charity Lodge*

Officers. — R. W. Nahum Legg, Zurial
Haj wood, Arial Bragg, Ezra Nelson, Sa-
muel Leeds, Jr. 2

Peasely Hunt, Esq. 1

BARNSTABLE.

fraternal Lodge.
m Officers.— R. W. William Lewis, Wil-
liam Bragg, Joshua Hinckley,. Robert Lo-
th rop, Job C. Davis, 9

P^IDGEWATER.

Fellowship Ledge.

Officers. — R. W. Artemas Hale, Rufus
Perkins, Branch Byram, Nahum LeonarcJ,
Joseph Alden, 5

Jonathan Ames, Jr. Zenas Crocker, Cal-
vin Seaver, 3


270 SUBSCRIBERS.

TEMPLfcTON.

Harris's Lodge.
Officers.— Tl. W. Rev. Ez'l. L. Bascora,
Cof. Leonard Stone, Cyrus Winship, Col.
Ephraim Stone, Dr. Silas Marshall, 6

BARRK.

Rev. James Thompson, Chaplain, 1

BROOKF1ELD.

Meridian Sun Lodge.
Officers.— R. W. Skelton Felton, Pliny
Upham, Pliny Nye, Rufus Dodge, Luther
Stovvell, 3

DORCHESTER.

Union Lodge.
Officers. — R. W. Cyrus Balkcom, Wm.
Henley, Lemuel Blackman, Samuel Glo-
Ter, Jonathan Bridgham, 20

NORTHFIELD.

Harmony Lodge y No. 28.
Officers.— R. W. Richard Colton, Wit
lard Armes, John Fowler, Charles Bowen,
Josiah D. Lyman, 6

READING.

Good Samaritan Lodge.
Officers.— H. W. Jacob Goodwin, Dan-
iel Flint, George Flint, Kendall Flint, Je-
remiah Nichols, 12

SOITTH READING.

Mount Moriah Lodge.
Officers. — R. IV. Joseph At well, Thomas
Emerson, Jr. Archibald Smith, Nathaniel
Cowdrey, William Nichols, 5


SUBSCRIBERS. 271

MAINE.

PORTLAND.

Mount- Vernon Chapter.

Officers.— M. E. Charles Fox, Arthur
Shinty, C. B. Smith, J. M. Genish, VVrn.
Lord, 3

Simon Greenleaf, Joseph M. Gerrish, 2

OTISFIELD.

Oliver Pierce, ]

WISCASSET.

N. Coffin, 1

BRUNSWICK.

United Lodge.
Officers. — R. VY. Rohert P.Dunlap,1>aac
^Lincoln, Charles May, Nabuiti Houghton,
-Joshua Herrick, 10

HALLOW ELL.

Kennebec Lodge.
Officers. — R. W. J? *%*- Robinson, Peleg
Sprajiue, Benjamin Adams, John Sewall,
JVlosed VVhilticei, 4

READFIELB.

Thomas Nickerson, 1

VERMONT.

TERGENKES.

Jerusalem Chapter, No. 3.
Officers — M. E. William Whit ford, Seth
Geer, John Bowers, J. W. Copeland, Jo-
seph Everts, 24


272 SUBSCRIBERS.

BROOKFItLD.

Federal Lodge, No. 1 5.
Officers' names lost, 6

Cornelius Lynde., Jr. Abiel Smith, 2

RANDOLPH.

Dudley Chase, John French, 2

ST. JOH1VSBURY.

Harmony Lodge, Xo. 14.
Officers. — R. W. Jude Kimball, Calvin
Je wet, John Barker, John Armington, Dan-
iel Chamberlin, 10

BR1DPORT.

Morning Sun Lodge, No. 1 8.

Officers. — R. W. John Bowers, Luther
Ferns Nahor Wbeelock, Daniel Hamblin,
George Clayes, 12

F. Hemenway, Joshua S. Strong, Dan-
iel Hamblin, 3

CHESTER.

Washington Chapter. No. ft.
Officers.— M. E. John P. Williams, Dan-
iel Wait, Joshua Leland, 1

GUILFORD.

Columbia Lodge, No. 34.
Officers. — R. W. Emerson Burhham, Sa-
muel. Root, Henry Clark, Erastus Root,
Elihu Field, 3

TOWNSHEND.

Central Lodge, No. 47.
Officers. — R. W. M. Henry, Esq. Amzi


SUBSCRIBERS. 273

DooKttle, Jr. Asa Stevens, Ebenezer Hun-
tington, Timothy Barton. 10

JOHNSON.

Mount Vernon Lodge.
Officers — R. W. Joseph Sears, Francis
Smaile v, Joseph W. Safford, Breed Noyes,
Joseph Waterman, 6

DERBY.

Lively Stone Lodge, No. 22.
Officers.— B. W. David M. Camp, Wra.
Verbark, Moses F. Colby, Bufus Stewart,
Benj. Hinman, 5

ROCKINGHAM.

King Solomon's Lodge, No. 44.
Officers. — >B. W. Thomas Gould, Jona-
than Barron, Dana Miller, Carter Whit-
comb, Horace Baxter, 5

MIDDLEBURY.

Union Lodge, No. 5.
Officers.— R. W. B. B. Brown, J. Hack-
ett, John Sandford, Asahel Parsons, Cal-
vin C. Waller, 6

BETHEL.

Bethel Mark Lodge, No. II.
Officers. — B. W. Benj. Putnam, Love!
H ihhard, Samuel Lillie, Luther Davis, J us-
tin Morgan, 12

HARDW1CK.

Meridian Sun Lodge, No. 1 7.
Officers.— B. W. Bichard Hill, Alviii

21


271 SUBSCRIBERS.

House, Jacob Babbet, Levi Stevens, Fran-
cis C. Fuller, 6

BR ATTLEBOROFGH.

Lebanon Forest Chapter, No. 8.
Officers.— M. E. Lemuel Whitney, Phi-
neas White, Jonathan Robinson, Joseph
Metcalf, Nahum Cutter, Henry Clark, 3

HARTFORD.

George E. Wales, Daniel Spooner, Ben-
jamin Green, Theophilus Cushing, Zebu-
Jon Delano, Stephen Underwood, James
Udall, Nathan Cushing, Daniel Ela, 9

STRAFFORD.

Temple Lodge, No. 49.
Officers.— R. W. D*vid M. Lane, Albi-
jenre Pierce, Nathaniel Morrill, Seth Nor-
ton, Gilman Judd, 1

PENNSYLVANIA.

w\>ox.
Union Lodge, No. 8.
Officers.— R. W. harry Morgan, Burr
Ridgway, Adonijah Warner, Stephen Wil-
ton, Adolphus Martin, Hiram Mix, 7
olive branch, Chester Co.
Brandt/wine Lodge, No. 1 32.
Officers.— R, \V. David H. Hacket,
Richard Walker, W T illiam~ Brown, John
Seright, Joseph Whisler, 3

MEAirVlLLE.

Western Siar Lodge, No. 146.
Officers. — R. W .bve^ii Barlow, David


SUBSCRIBERS. 275

Malthrop, James Herriotl, Conner Clark,

Robert L. Potter, 3

VV. W White, L. Jonhston, D. Malthrop,

Samuel Eaton, Hunt and M'Namara, 5

hHENANGO.

William Shilletto,. 1

JN'tW LONDON CROSS ROADS.

Fidelity Lodge, No. 1 1312.
Dr. A. F. Cunningham, W. M. Thomas
Middleton, J. W. D. Dirkey, T. Jas. Mc-
Dowell, S. 4
Josiah Dince, Josiah B. Foard, Dr. Ro-
bert Thomson, Je**e Townsend, Nathan
B. More, William C. Mound, John Car-
lisle, Wm. Murdock,. 8
calico, Lancaster Co.
Ephrala Lodge, No. 46.
Officers. — R. W. Geo. Rollison, Benja*
min Morrell, Uriah Kinsey, Samuel Kin-
sey, Richard Ream, 6
chesnitt level, Lancaster Co.
Washington Lodge, No. 156.
Officers. — R. W. Philip Housekeeper,
Gardner Furnip, Stephen Boyd, Leonard.
Johnson, Richard Kearns ; and Robert
King, Past Master, 6

DOYLESTOWN.

Benevolent Lodge, No. 168.
Officers. — tt. VV. Samuel VV. Preston,
Joseph Hou^h* Jun. Joseph Dunn, Enoch
Harvey, Wm. Field, 9


276 SUBSCRIBERS.

NEW-HAMPSHIRE.

HOPKINGTON.

Trinity Chapter.
Officers. — M. E. John Harris, Albe Ca-
dy, Aquila Davis, Nathaniel Johnston,
Thomas W. Colby, 6

CHARLESTON.

r Faithful Lodge, No. 12.

Officers. — R. VV. James A. Gregg, John
Robh, Luther Hammond, Samuel Faring-
ton, Moses W. Hastings, 6

DUBLIN.

Altemont Lodge, No. 26.
Officers.— R. W. Peter Tuttle, Levi Fish,
John H. Steele, Cyrus Chamberlain, Jo-
seph Appleton, 6

WOLFSBOROUGH.

Morning Star Lodge, No. 17.

Officers. — R. VV. Jonathan Copp, Levi
Merill, Samuel Meder, John Pipen, Jun.
Asa Crosby, 1

J. Copp, A. Crosby, D. Brewster, 3

TUFTONBOROUGH.

John Pipen. 1

WASHINGTON.

Mount Vernon Lodge.
Broughton White, Joseph Healy, David
Farnsworth, Samuel P. Bailey, 4

BATH.

Meridian Sun Lodge, No. 25,
OJftcers. — R, VV. Wm. Morison, Charlei


SUBSCRIBERS. 277

Abbott, William Lang, Jun. Abm. Tho-
mas, Asa Putnam Smith, 5

ALSTEAD.

St. Pauls Lodge, No. 30.
Officers.— R. W. John Wakefield, Eber
Carpenter, Cyrus Field, Francis Hol-
brook, Charles W-ebstei*, 12

WARNER.

Warner Lodge, No. 35.

Officers. — R. W. Stephen Putney,

bulon Davis, Joshua Sawyer, D. George,

Abner B. Kelley, 12

SANDBORNTON.

Centre Lodge, No. 20.
Officers. — R. YV. Thomas Taylor, Jere-
miah Sandborn, Jun. Samuel Dusten, Jo-
seph Smith, Jun. James Clark, \

HILLSBOROUGH.

Bible Lodge, So. 27.
Officers. — R. W. Robert Dunlap, Jona-
than Aiken, Joseph Philbrook, Thomas
Raymond, Jesse Can% 6

concord.
Blazing Star Lodge, No. 11.
Officers. — Abner Jones, Jacob Silver,
D.Johnson, Albe Cady, Abel Hut chins, 6

CLARKMONT.

Hiram Lodge, No. 9.
Officers. — R. W. Zenas Hitchcock, 0.
Jones, Roswell Elmer, Joseph Rice, Eli-
9 ha Hitchcock, 10

24*'


278 SUBSCRIBER^

CONNECTICUT.

ANDOVER.

Warren Lodge, No. 50.
O/pccrs. — R. W. Leonard Hendee, Elish^
Pe Kins, John Graves, John Payne, Simon
Hou*e, 6

BFRLTN.

Berlin Harmony Lodge, No. 20.

Officers. — K. VV. Luther Berkley, Moses
W- Heckle}, Oiii; Berkley, John Dun-
ham, 2d. Ahijah Flagg, &

EIMiama Brandesjeo, Jun. Norman Wil-
cox, O. Beckley, Berdsey Judson, M. W.
Beckley, 5

?AI.ISB11RY.

Montgomery Lodge, No. 1 3.
Officers. — R. \V. Samuel Church, Rich-
ard Hollister, Albert Moore, David Sco-
vell, 6

MANSFIELD.

thiol Lodge, No. 24.
Officers. — R. W. Jasper Gilbert, Elisha
Brigham, John M. Freeman, 4

WATERTOWN.

Hanson Warner, secretary of Frederic
Lodge, No. 17, 1

COLCHESTER.

John R. Watrous, Past G. H. P. Grand
Chapter, David Deming, G* K. Grand
Chapter, Guy Bigelow, H. P. Vander-
hrook Chapter, Newhall Janitor, j3. W.


SUBSCRIBERS. 279

Woosler Lodge, Amherst D. Scovell, J.
"W. Wooster Lodge, Nathaniel S. Wood-
bridge, Roger G. Ichome, Samuel H.Fox,
Kissel Williams, Ezekiel W. Parsons, Dan-
iel R. Pratt, Japbeth Chapel, Meshullam
Gillet, 13

GKANBY.

St. Marks Lodge, No. 36.
Officers. — 11. VV. James O. Pond, Daniel
B. Holcomb, James Farward, Alexander
Holcomb, Ambrose Adams, 2

M1DDLKTOWN.

Washington Royal Arch Chapter, No. 6.
Officers. — M. E. John Lawrence Lewis,
Samuel Cooper, Joseph Hubbard, Stephen
Rainey, Charles Brewer, 10

RHODE FSLAND,

CUMBERLAND.

Morning Star Lodge, No. 13.
R. W. Pardon Sales, W. Oliver Harris,
Rev. Reuben Potter, Jun. Ahab Capron,
Jes^e Whiting, Marvel Shove, John J. Car-
penter, Joseph Whipple, 3rd, William
Jenckes, Otis Capron, Cullen Lamb, Otis
Mason, Arnold Sayles, Jonathan Ballon,
W. A. Jenckes, Charles Scott, 16

PAWTUCKKT.

Harmony Lodge, No. 9.
Officers.— R. W. Tully Dot ranee, Sion A,
Rhodes, James Harris, Peleg C. Reiuing-
ton, George Sheldon, ^


280 SUBSCRIBERS.

WARREN.

Washington Lodge, No. 3.
Officers. — R* \V. Samuel Randall, Jno.
Haile, Miller Barney, William Carr, Lew-
is Hoar, 8

NEW-JERSEY".

TUCKERTOWN.

Tvckertown Lodge, No. 43.
Ebenezer Tucker, W. M. Samuel Tag-
gert, Win. K. Mason, S. W. Jas. Budins,
Thus. Evans, Abm. Woolston, S. D. 6

CKDARV1LLK.

Cedarville Lodge 9 No. J5.
J. S. Nixon, Jas. D. Weseol, Daniel Par
Tin, and Josiah Parvin, Enquires; 4

SALEM.

Salem Lodge, No. 1 9.
Officers.— R. W Win. N. Jeffers, R. Cra-
ven, Win. Phemer, S. Pinly, J. M. Sailer, 5

DELAWARE.

WILMINGTON.

Washington Lodge, No. I.

Officers.— R. W. John M. Chinff y Wm.

Harbinson, Albeit Robinson, David Bush,

John Adams, 5

Hiram Lodge, No. 6.

Officers.- R. W. E. W. Buchanan, Jas.

Calender, John Jones, Ellis Hughs, Hugh

Biaiuian, £


t


SUBSCRIBERS. 281

Temple Lodge, No. 11.

Officers.— R. W. William K. Sellers,
Geoige VV. Worrell, Benj. W. Brack in,
W:ii. Clark, S. E. Brander'y, 5

F. Hamilton, P. G. H. P. G. C.of Dela-
ware, John M'Ching, Augustus Scont, Jo-
seph S. Gibbs, Win. Reeves, Elisha Kim-
bly, Arthur A. Wells, G, W. Woirell,
Samuel R Green, 9

The following names were transmitted
without the name of the Lodge.

Officers. — R. W. Holmes Parvin, Benj.
Diarnent, David Nore, George Sander,
Isaac Whitaker, 5

NEWARK.

Hiram Lodge, No. 3.

Officers.— R. W. G. Enos, Eli Know-
land, Thomas Shepherd, John JVTGee,John
Bell, 10

George A. Crookham, J. Deacon, Geo.
Reed, S. Deacon, 4

PHILADELPHIA.

Gersham Craft, No. 60, Union Strerf.

SUSSEX.

Hope Lodge.
Subscription paper lost.

MARYLAND.

HAGEMtf-TOWN.

Mount Moriah Lodge, No. 33.
Officers.— R, VV. Otho H. Williams, Wil-


282 SUBSCRIBERS.

1 in 111 D. Bell, lfenr\ UwK.Tobn V.Swea- .
viuger, Geoi'ttf F. Keeps, 30

LKION TOWN j

Door to Virtue Lodge, No. 46
Offietrs.— It W. A.AJ'lili.nnv,il.Ving- !
linn", .1. Bluntlil'urd, W. B. Uebtanl, Wra.

Cum-y, 20

EAfTKRN 8HURK.

Catubrtd"' Jjuttre.
Subscription paper unfortunately lo=f.

VIRGINIA.

K£*SVH.I,K.

Charlotte Lodge, No. I 7.
Officers.— It. W. Catch B. Hudson, Ed-
wind Land, Thomas Tnombes, James B.
Buck, Wood-on Clay, 10

DANVILLE.

Henry O. Neilt, Ja-nes Conner, 2

PITT.- YLV ARIA, C. H.

George Craghead, R. Hopkins 2

s :-.., POKT ROYAL.

AHUatbtiinn Cross Lodge, No. 2.

OJ&^*— Jto -W\ William R. Care, P. C.
Rol»!.-v*J£na. Gray. James M. Turner, 4

TiKiwaB-Manrudht^Vulifn Gravatt,
Past Mhsi, ;s,-llev. VKF; Cray, Chap-
lain, Charles' ttn^Qrl, Tlkinas Girthrie,
Gfoffie Tiitrif i . HnktJi! ;"»;-. Thomas J.
O'Ffaht'ily, visit in *£p Si*-'- L. of

Ireland,


SUBSCRIBERS. 283

WYTHE, C. H.

Lodge No. 55.
Members. — John R. Nye, Montgomery
Friei, Sherpherd Brown, Joseph W. Da-
ns, Tuoiiias J. Micbie, Jacob Fisher, 6

OHIO,

CLEAVELAND.

Concord Lodge, No. 15.
Officers. — R. W. Win. Coleman, Daniel
M. Gregg*-*, Asahei Abel, William Craw-
ford. 36

LOWER CANADA.

QUEBEC.

Louis Plamiriden, Esq. P. S. G. W. Jo-
seph F. H. Pei-raull, Esq. I). G. &l. Julin
D. Estemanville, Esq. G. T. Joshua Whit-
ney, W?n. Ross, P. G. S. Valleurs De St.
Real, Esq. J. G. W. for himself, and for
Lodge, No. 23, John G. Thomson, Esq.
Phillip A. De Gaspe, members, and Jo-
seph Stilson, W. M. of Lodge, No. 22, 10

HULL.

Columbian Lodge, No. 25.
Officers. — R. W. Hera Id us Eastabrooks,
Win. Hudson, Tiberius Wright, Edmond
Chamberlin, James F. Taylor, 12

THUEE RIVEKS.

St. George's Lodge, No, 16.
R. W. Robert Bews, J as. Dickson, E. W.


284 SUBSCRIBERS. I

R. Anlrobus, Solomon Benjamin, Thomas
Whitehead, 5

Erastus Woolsvvorth, Felix Ward, S. j
Benjamin, T. Whitehead, 4 !

UPPER CANADA.

Lo A \GriLE, Ottawa.

Preacolt Lodge.

Officers.— R. W. David Pattee, Olmsted

Gates, S. Stephens, Elijah Kellogg, Tlios.

Meats, John Ctiesser, Jeremiah Center,

Silvester Cobb, 11

Samuel Downes, A. M. of Lodge, No.

8, Registry of Ireland, 2


NEW-YORK.

BRiixiEWATER, Oneida Co.
Warren Chapter, No. 22.
Officers.— M. E. Jona. Bartlelt, Miles
Squire, Israel Brewer, Thompson Hold-
ridge, Nathaniel Crandall, Jr. 12
Western Star Lodge, No. 56.
Officers. — R. W. Israel Brewer, Jas. A.
Rhodes, Marquis F. Lee, Joshua Babcock,
Asber Flint, 12
salem, Washington Co.
Anthony Blanchard, Esq. 1


ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBERS. 286

WASHINGTON COUNTY.

HAMPTON.

Aurora Lodge, No. 25.
Officers. — R. W. John P. Adams, Hiram
P. French, David Rood, Isaac Davis, Na-
thaniel S. Adams, 10

HEBRON.

Hebron Lodge, No. 216.

Officers. — R. W. Joseph Ward, Abner
Duel, Hiram Case, Daniel Woodard, J.
B. Lyons, 5

Wm. Chapman, Daniel D. Dixon, John
Gary, jun. Andrew S. Gilchrist, Alexander
Brown, 5

WHITEHALL.

Williams Chapter, No. 37.
Officers.— M. E. Nathaniel Hall, Charles
A. Budd, Samuel Smith, John Parke, Gi-
deon Taft, 12

GRANVILLE.

Washington Encampment.
Officers. — Names not furnished, 12

ALBANY COUNTY.

ALBANY.

Mount Vernon Lodge, No: 3.
Officers. — R. W. Wm. Eppes, Sylvamis
Stanford, Abraham Sickles, Richard Dun-
can, Ebenezer Wright, 20
OTSEGO COUNT Y.

CHERRY-VALLEY.

Levi Beardsley, 1

26


286 ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBERS.

ST. LAWRENCE COUNTY.

CANTON.

Canton Lodge, No. 325.
Officers. — R. W. Samuel Storms, Minot
Jenison, Ezra P. Prentice, Daniel Prentice,
Henry Foote, 18

ONONDAGA COUNTY.

CICERO.

Cicero Benevolent Lodge, No. 330.
Officers. — R. W. Benjamin French, Eli
Gage, Constant W. Wadswortb, James I.
Anderson, Asa East* ood, 6

ERIE COUNTY.

AURORA.

Officers. — R. W. Joseph Wadswortb, jr.
Jairus Hitchcox, James W. Griffin, Isaac
Hall, John Wadswortb, 6

HAMBURGH.

Elder Thomas Baker, Major Luther
Colvin, 2

COURTLAND COUNTY.

HOMER.

Enos Stimson, ]

PREBLE.

Joseph Crofoot, I

TRUXTON.

Truxton Lodge, No. 333.
Officers. — Alanson Coats, Arnold Hicok,
Oliver Houghton, John Jeffery, Harvey
Keeler, - 5


ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBER*. 2X1

VERMONT.

MANCHESTER.

Adoniram Lodge, No. 46.
Officers. — R. W. Martin Roberts, Loring
Dean, Leonard Sargeant, Peter Dudley,
•1 oseph Buswell, 5

POULTNE1T.

Harris Hosford, I

DANBY.

Farmer's Lodge, No. 30.
Officers. — R. W.. A. Hillyard, A. Eggles-
ton, I. Peck, M. Hillyard, N. Jenks, 3
D. Young, P. M. 1

CONNECTICUT.

NORFOLK.

Western Star Lodge, No. 37.
Officers. — R. W. Joseph Riggs, Ira Whi-
ting, Josiah Pettibone, Augustus Phelps,
Wm. S. Holebard, 6

MASSACHUSETTS.

GLOUCESTER.

Tyrian Lodge.
Officers. — R. W. Wm. Ferson, John Cor-
liss, Henry Smith, Benjamin K. Hough,
Wm. Stevens, 2

VIRGINIA,

STAUNTON.

Rev. Daniel Stevens, Isaac Collect, M.
Chambers, Wm. Young, John Cochran,
Richard C. Kinney, Samuel Clark, A. H.
Brooks, L. JLampier. 9


288 ADDITIONAL SITRSCRTH1HUL

PENNSYLVANIA,

HARRISBURGH.

Perseverance Lodge, No. 21.

Officers.— R. W. Isaac M'Cord, William
H. Dole, Jofin N. Kurtz, R. T. Jacobs,
James Wrijfht, 5

N. B. Wood, Sec'y. R. A. C. Joel Bai-
ley, John Buffington, Thomas Wallace,
Charles Le Baron, James Roberts, Henry
Bitchier* 1


MAR 7 - 1950
