FACTS IN MESMERISM, with Reasons for a Dispassionate Inquiry into It.
By the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend. London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1840.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/factsinmesmeris00towngoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FACTS


IN


MESMERISM,


WITH

REASONS

FOR

•  •  •'  .■::>//

A  DISPASSIONATE  INQUIRY INTO  IT. (  /<:  >  -  ;<0.*^


BY  THE


REV.  CHAUNCY  HARE  TOWNSHEND,  A.M.

LATE OF TRINITY HALL, CAMBRIDGE.


**  A  great  perturbation  in  nature  !->  to  receive  at  once  the  benefit  of
sleep,  and  do  the  effects  of  watching.  In  this  slumbery  agitation,  besides
her  walking  and.  other  actual  performances,  what,  at  any  time,  have  you
heard  her  say  ?"—  Shakspbarb.

"  I'll  charm  your  blood  with  pleasing  heaviness,
Making  such  difference  *twixt  sleep  and  'wake.
As  is  the  difference  *twixt  night  and  day,  ~
The  hour  before  the  heavenly-hamess'd  team
Begins  its  golden  progress  in  the  east."  Shakspbare.


LONDON:
LONGMAN,  ORME,  BROWN,  GREEN,  &  LONGMANS,

PATERNOSTER-ROW.
1840.


n


/.


LoNOOK  :
Frinted  by  A.  Spottiswoodb,
New^treet-Sqiure.


INTRODUCTORY  EPISTLE.


TO  JOHN  ELLIOTSON,  M.  D.  Cantab.  F.R.S.

My  dear  Sir,

On  seeing  that  I  dedicate  the  following  pages
to  you^  the  world  will,  perhaps,  be  kind  enough  to
say  —  "  Here  is  a  Coalition  ! "  I  not  the  less  fear-
lessly place  the  work  under  your  auspices ;  trusting
that  some  persons  at  least  may  conceive  that  two  may
be  of  one  mind  on  a  subject,  and  yet  guiltless  of  a
conspiracy  against  Church  or  State  —  Truth  or
Science.  And  what  if  we  are  ranged  under  the  same
banner  ?  Union  is  not  Treason ;  —  and  I  trust  that
there  is  no  harm  in  our  being  equally  impressed  with
a  conviction  of  the  reality  of  Mesmerism,  and  equally
animated  by  a  resolution  to  disclose  honestly  that
which  we  know  certainly.  Here,  then,  is  our  coali-
tion—  if  any  one  so  chooses  to  term  it,  —  a  coalition
to  defend  truth  —  and  not  to  spread  imposture.
Perhaps,  however,  it  may  be  as  well  to  state  (lest  we
should  leave  too  much  to  the  sagacity  of  those  who
smell  a  plot  in  every  thing),  that  I  have  pursued  my

A  2


IV  INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.

mesmerical  researches  entirely  apart  from  yourself ;
nay,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Channel ;  and  that,  yet
more,  we  were  but  recently  made  acquainted,  by
letter  only  —  through  the  medium  of  a  mutual  friend,
who  is  not  a  mesmeriser,  but  a  public  functionary  and
man  of  letters.  Again  :  let  it  be  known  that  I  never
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  till  within  the  last  two
months ;  though,  indeed,  I  must  add,  that  I  think  it  a
loss  not  to  have  made  your  acquaintance  earlier.  It
was  said  of  some  great  man  — Burke,  I  think,  —  that
you  could  not  stand  up  with  him  under  a  shed  during
a  shower  of  rain,  without  finding  out  that  you  were
in  company  witli  a  fine  genius.  The  remark  may  be
applied,  with  some  diversity,  in  most  cases.  Our  first
impressions  of  persons  are  often  an  instinctive  judg-
ment, of  which  our  after  feelings  towards  them  are
only  a  developement ;  and,  with  regard  to  yourself  in
particular,  I  am  not  singular  in  remarking,  that  to
converse  with  you,  but  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  is  to
carry  away  a  pledge  of  your  honour  as  a  gentleman,
and  of  your  sincerity  as  a  man  of  principle ;  and  this,
independently  of  the  knowledge  that,  to  the  cause  of
truth,  you  have  made  every  sacrifice  except  that  of
integrity.  I  must  speak  my  opinion,  —  though  at
the  risk  of  being  suspected  of  flattery.  You^  at  least,
shall  not  have  the  credit  of  countenancing  the  pane-
gyric, as  this  letter  will  only  be  read  by  you  on  the
day  it  is  given  to  the  public.


INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.  V

These  things  ought  to  be  known ;  —  for  they  are
testimony  to  mesmerism.  Here  are  two  persons,  in
diiferent  countries,  wholly  unconnected,  setting  out
on  an  inquiry  by  different  paths,  and  yet  meeting,  at
length,  in  one  common  conclusion  and  point  of  union.
As  regards  myself,  I  may  affirm  that  no  one  could
possibly  have  taken  up  and  pursued  a  subject  more
independendy,  or  in  a  more  unbiassed  manner  than
I  have  taken  up  and  pursued  mesmerism.  I  have
not  drawn  my  ideas  of  it  from  books,  but  from  ex-
perience; I  have  even  abstained  from  reading  articles
on  it,  lest  I  should  lose  the  originality  and  freshness
of  personal  observation.  But  I  need  not  insist  on
this.

My  work  itself  contains  internal  testimony  that  our
coincidence  of  opinion  is  honest,  not  concerted ;  —
for,  in  truth,  we  differ  while  we  agree.  I  have  not  de-
scribed, because  I  have  never  seen,  the  curious  delirium,
and  coma,  which  some  of  your  patients  have  dis-
played. Not  being  myself  of  the  medical  profession,
I  have  naturally  treated  mesmerism  as  a  phenomenon
of  our  nature,  rather  than  as  a  curative  means;
and  the  maladies,  which  you  have  so  successfully
combated  by  the  new  agency,  have  of  course  pro-
duced modifications  in  its  action,  which  the  healthy
subjects  to  whom  I  have  confined  my  practice  could
not  have  displayed.  However  various  the  degrees
of  mesmeric  developements portrayed by  me,  the

A  3


VI  INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.

principal  features  of  the  state  have  been  similarly
characterised  throughout,  my  object  being  to  de-
lineate that  species  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  which,
I  conceive,  may  be  induced^  to  a  certain  extent,  in
any  indifferent  person.  So  far  we  are  shown  as
drawing  from  separate  and  independent  sources;  and
this  involuntary  kind  of  testimony  is  favourable  to
our  cause:  but,  inseparable  from  this  benefit,  is  a
collateral  disadvantage,  on  which  I  must  briefly  touch.
The  greater  part  of  the  London,  I  may  say  of  the
English,  world  have  derived  their  ideas  of  mesmer-
ism from  your  experiments,  which  so  many  have
personally  witnessed.  Hence  the  general  reader,
comparing  his  preconceptions  on  the  subject  with  the
portrait  I  have  set  before  him,  may  surmise  that  the
new  science  is  not  in  unity  with  itself,  confounding,
by  a  very  common  mistake,  diversity  with  discre-
pancy. But,  in  truth,  while  there  is  much  that  is
different  in  our  facts,  there  is  nothing  whatever  that
is  contradictory.  The  subject  is  large,  and  cannot
but  present  itself  in  various  points  of  view  to  various
observei's.  Even  where  we  most  appear  to  disagree,
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  same  phenomenon
may  have  more  than  one  phasis,  justas  the  celebrated
shield,  that  was  black  on  one  side,  was  not  the  less
certainly  white  on  tlie  other.  Thus,  it  is  very  true
that  a  kind  of  delirium  may  be  developed  under
mesmeric  influence,  while,  at  the  same  time, it  is


INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.  Vll

capable  of  eliciting  the  highest  state  of  moral  and  in-
tellectual advancement,  to  which  man,  in  this  existence,
can  probably  attain.  This  remark  is  the  more  neces-
sary to  be  made,  inasmuch  as,  throughout  my  work,  I
have  laboured  to  prove  the  mesmeric  condition  a  rise  on
our  actual  mode  of  being ;  and,  according  to  the  view
I  have  taken  of  the  subject,  if  it  be  not  this,  it  is  no-
thing. For  what  does  a  writer  achieve,  who  does  not
contribute,  in  however  small  a  measure,  to  the  hopes
and  welfare  of  humanity  ?

It  has  struck  me  that  the  world,  who  is  very  fond
of  proving  that  an  author  did  not  write  his  own  book,
may  inquire  —  What  share  had  Doctor  Elliotson  in
this  treatise  ?  I  therefore  think  it  not  perhaps  al-
together useless  to  state,  that  neither  yourself,  nor
any  body  else,  has  dictated  or  suggested  to  me  one
opinion  which  is  therein  contained.  The  only  debt
that  I  have  to  acknowledge,  is  on  the  trifling  score  of
some  advice  respecting  the  terms  to  be  employed  in
writing  on  this  particular  subject.  You  observed  to
me,  that  the  phraseology  of  mesmerism  could  not  too
soon  be  fixed,  and  rendered  precise ;  and  you  sug-
gested the  substitution  of  Mesmeric  Sleepwaking  for
Induced  Somnambulism,  on  the  ground  that  Som-
nambulism, strictly  speaking,  was  not  always,  nor
necessarily,  an  adjunct  of  the  condition  I  wished  to
describe.  In  all  other  respects,  the  faults  or  merits
of  the  publication  must  be  charged  on  my  own  head.


Vlll  INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.

For  the  former,  indeed,  as  probably  numerous,  few
persons  would  like  to  become  responsible; and  on
their  account  (especially  should  any  repetitions  dis-
figure my  pages),  I  shall  have  to  claim  indulgence
from my  readers,  in  consideration  of  the  circum-
stances under  which  the  work  was  composed;  one
part  being  despatched  from  abroad  to  the  printer,
while  other  portions  were  written  at  distant  intervals,
as  health  and  opportunity  permitted. I  know  not,
however,  whether,  on  the  whole,  a  residence  on  the
Continent  has  not  been  favourable  to  the  consider-
ation of  such  a  subject  as  mesmerism ;  for  I  can  assure
my  countrymen  that  their  own  prejudices  respecting
it  are  no  measure  of  the  reception  which  it  meets
with  from  enlightened  foreigners. I  have  scarcely
conversed  with  one  pereon  of  education  in  Germany,
who  was  not  able  to  detail  to  me  some  interesting
fact  relating  to  mesmerism, which  had been per-
sonally witnessed and authenticated; and every
where  abroad,  during  those  travels  whicli  in  search  of
health  I  have  undertaken,  my  information  respecting
this  remarkable  phenomenon  of  our  nature  has  been
extended. Opportunities  also  of  mesmerising  differ-
ent individuals  (many  of  them  distinguished  for  rank
and  science)  have  been  freely  and  agreeably  accorded
me. Since  I  sent  to  England  a  list  of  the  persons  I
had  mesmerised,  I  have  experimented  on  some  thirty
others  at  Rome,  Naples,  &c.,  and  I  have  still  found  the


INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE.  IX

proportion  stated  in  my  work  of  mesmerisable  indivi-
duals singularly  preserved,  and  the  phenomena  exhi-
bited perfectly  accordant  with  previous  observation.
In  the  Appendix,  some  documents  relative  to  these
experiments  will  be  found,  some  of  which  are  of
high  interest ;  especially  those  from  the  pen  of  Pro-
fessor Agassis  of  Neufch^tel,  and  of  Signor  Ranieri,
the  distinguished  historian  of  Naples.

But  I  am  insensibly  converting  a  letter  to  you
into  an  address  to  the  general  reader,  and  I  perceive
I  have  so  far  extended  a  dedication  as  to  render  a
preface  unnecessary.  For  this  service,  at  least,  let
me  thank  you.  I  have  always  thought  prefaces  very
troublesome  things  to  write.  And  are  they  not,  in
fact,  pieces  of  falseness  throughout  ?  standing  first,
though  written  last  —  expressing  a  humility  which
the  author  does  not  feel  —  and  claiming  the  especial
attention  of  everybody,  while  it  is  a  wonder  if  they
are  read  by  anybody.  I  therefore  not  unwillingly
take  this  opportunity  of  making  my  introductory  bow
to  the  Public,  while  at  the  same  time  I  beg  you  to
believe  me,

My  dear  Sir,
With  sentiments  of  high  respect.

Yours  very  sincerely,

C.  HARE  TOWNSHEND.

Innspruck,  Nov.  25. 1839.


CONTENTS.


BOOK  I.

TMge
Review  of  the  Causes  that  have  made  Mesmerism  unpopular,
and  which  render  it  a  Subject  difficult  to  be  treated . - i

BOOK  11.

SECT.  I.
Mesmeric  Somnambulism,  or,  more  properly,  Sleepwaking - 47

SECT.  II.

Showing  the  Claims  of  Mesmeric  Sleepwaking  to  be  considered
a  peculiar  Condition  of  Man ...... gg

SECT.  III.

Showing  certain  of  the  physical  and  metaphysical  Conditions  of
Mesmeric  Sleepwaking - - - - - . -134

BOOK  III.

SECT.  I.
Conformity  of  Mesmerism  with  our  general  Experience - .  269

SECT. II.
On  the  Mesmeric  Consciousness ......  29s

SECT.  III.
On  Mesmeric  Sensation  • - - - - - -S21


Xll  CONTENTS.

SECT. IV.

Page

On  the  Medium  of  Mesmeric  Sensation  ....  390

BOOK  IV.

The  Mesmeric  Medium  .....  409

SUPPLEMENT.
Testimony  of  A.  Vandevyver  ......  543

— — ^-^—  M.  Van  Owenhuysen  .... -  546

— ^— —  Dr.  Foissac .......  551

Viscount  N ......  554

Baron  de  CarloMriz - - ... -  556

I  a  Friend  . - - - - - -  559

Dr.  Wild 563

— —  Professor  Agassis  .....  567

Dr.  Filippi 572

— ^— — — —  Signor  Ranieri  --..--  573

Errata  -- 576


MESMERISM.


BOOK  I.

REVIEW  OF  THE  CAUSES  THAT  HAVE  MADE  MESMERISM
UNPOPULAR,  AND  WHICH  RENDER  IT  A  SUBJECT
DIFFICULT TO BE TREATED.

Having  had  many  opportunities  of  convincing  myself
that  man  can  really  influence  his  fellow  in  the  manner
called  mesmeric,  I  have  determined  to  arrange  and
classify  the  phenomena,  relative  to  this  influence,  which
have  fallen  under  my  observation,  in  the  hope  of  re-
ducing them  to  a  few  simple  and  general  principles.
In  thus  coming  forward,  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  ob-
stacles which  I  have  to  encounter.  The  fatal  word
Imposture  has  tainted  the  subject  of  my  inquiry;  and
Ridicule,  which  is  not  the  test  of  truth,  has  been
pressed  into  the  service  of  talent,  in  order  to  annihilate
the  supposed  absurdity  before  the  dread  ordeal  of  a
laugh.

But  it  is  not  only  the  witty  who  have  set  up  mes-

B


2  MESMERISM.

tnerism  as  the  mark  of  their  fine  arrows ;  men  o(
science  have  attacked  it,  because  they  could  not  make
it  harmonise  with  their  preconceived  notions ;  and
many  of  the  Galens  of  our  day,  instead  of  wisely
taking  it  under  their  patronage,  and  into  their  own
hands,  have  treated  it  with  a  desperation  of  hostility ;
—  as  if,  were  it  allowed  to  flourish,  their  glory  was
tarnished  and  their  "  occupation  gone."

What  is  worse,  some  of  the  friends  and  supporters
of  mesmerism  have  done  it  more  disservice  than  its
bitterest  foes.  Instead  of  setting  before  the  world
the  simplest  features  of  the  new  discovery,  they  have
at  once  produced  to  view  its  most  astounding  marvels,
thus  dazzling  into  blindness  the  eyes  which,  by  a
more  cautious  conduct,  they  might  have  taught  to
see* — Then  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  name  of
Mesmerism,  or  Animal  Magnetism,  has  sometimes
served  as  a  watchword  to  exploded  quackery  and
impudent  deceit:  and  who  does  not  know  how  diffi-
cult it  is  to  separate  the  merits  of  any  doctrine  from
the  faults  of  its  partisans?  Mesmerism  has  occa-
sionally been  foimd  in  company  with  the  vicious  and
the  designing;  and  its  good  repute  has  suffered
accordingly.

Another  circumstance  has  contributed  to  the  dis-
grace of  this  unfortunate  subject.  In  its  palmy  days,
when  De  Maineduc  plunged  his  visionary  fingers
into  the  stomachs  of  gouty  earls  and  dyspeptic  mar^
chionesses,  nothing  less  was  expected  from  the  new
remedy  than  the  renovation  of  human  nature,  and
an  absolute  conquest  over  all  diseases.  That  it  should


MESMERISM^  ft

subsequently  fiill  into  oblivion,  will  not  astonish  those
who  have  observed  the  invariable  fate  of  every  fashion-
able panacea  —  of  Peruvian  bark,  for  example.  From
thinking  that  it  can  perform  everything,  men  doubt
whether  it  is  capable  of  anything;  and  the  more  ex-
travagant have  been  the  hopes  which  it  has  excited,
the  more  deep  is  the  disgust  which  disappointment
naturally  creates.

But  mesmerism  has  been  looked  upon  as  worse
than  false  or  nugatory.  Many,  who  have  believed
in  its  powers,  have  believed  only  to  tremble.  Cre-
dulity has  done  it  worse  service  than  incredulity.
It  has  been  proscribed  as  an  unholy  thing :  books
have  been  written  upon  its  dangers;  the  good
Catholic  crosses  himself  when  he  names  it ;  and  the
careful  Protestant,  even  if  he  hesitates  to  brand  it  as
diabolical,  thinks  at  least  that  it  may  be  prostituted
to  evil  purposes.  And  so  it  undoubtedly  may  be.  But
then  the  same  objection  applies  to  all  that  is  most
beneficial  upon  earth.  All  great  engines  are  capable
of  great  perversion.  This  is  tacitly  allowed  in  the
whole  conduct  of  life.  Yet  we  do  not  abstain  from  the
use  of  fire  because  it  can  destroy,  nor  firom  the
medical  application  of  laudanum  because  it  is  a
poison.

That  the  world's  quarrel  against  mesmerism
should  be  so  very  bitter,  is  hardly  accounted  for  by
any  of  the  foregoing  considerations.  Prima  facicj
one  would  say  that  there  were  attractions  in  this
despised  doctrine,  more  than  sufficient  to  countervail
evieiy  objection  that  might  be  brought  against  it.

B  2


4  jtfESMERISM*

Fond  as  we  are  of  the  shadowy  and  the  unknown,
its  very  mystery  might  seem  congenial  to  our  nature ;
and  even  those  vague  suspicions  concerning  its  sin-
fulness which  hover  darkly  round  it,  might  be  sup-
posed to  have  a  charm  for  man  —  the  wilful  —  who
rushes  to  the  forbidden  with  so  keen  a  zest.  But
there  is  a  sort  of  unexplained  odium  attached  to
mesmerism,  which  quells  curiosity  and  deadens  in-
terest. From  this  odium  it  appears  almost  necessary
that  I  should  raise  my  subject,  before  entering  fully
upon  it;  I  must  secure  a  hearing  before  I  can  plead
my  cause ;  I  must  show  that  there  is  in  itself  no  in-
herent fault,  which  can  justly  exclude  it  from  a  fair
and  candid  examination.  This  end,  as  it  appears  to
me,  I  shall  best  attain  by  exposing  the  primary  causes
which  have  degraded  mesmerism;  and  by  showing
that  these  are  extrinsic  to  itself.

Having  done  this,  I  propose,  also,  to  touch  upon
the  reasons  that  make  the  subject  I  have  chosen  not
only  distasteful  to  the  general  reader,  but  of  extreme
difficulty  to  the  Author  himself.

First  The  original  cause  of  the  ill  reception  which
mesmerism  has  met  with  from  the  world,  is  undoubt-
edly to  be  found  in  the  character  of  its  discoverer
—  Mesmer,  —  in  his  want  of  candour  and  philosophic
strictness.  Had  it  been  introduced  to  notice  by  a
Newton  or  an  Arago,  by  one  who  would  have  stated
his  facts  honestly,  and  drawn  from  them  none  but
legitimate  conclusions,  the  difference  of  its  career
may  be  estimated  by  all  who  are  aware  how  much/
depends  upon  a  propitious  begimiing. But  unfortUT>


MESMERISSl.  S

tiately,  from  the  very  outset,  mesmerism  was  asso-
ciated with  the  soiling  calculations  of  self-interest^
and  the  errors  of  an  over-heated  brain.  Mesmer
wished  to  make  a  monopoly  of  that  which  should
have  been  the  property  of  all  mankind :  he  sold  his
secret — he  bartered  for  gold  his  future  fame  and
the  reputation  of  his  darling  subject  * ;  and,  losing
the  light  which  emanates  only  from  an  upright  spirit,
he  became  the  dupe  of  his  own  miracles,  so  miserably
as  to  surround  his  really  simple  and  sublime  disco-
very with  fictitious  terrors  and  misleading  puerilities*
The  result  of  this  moral  and  scientific  suicide  has
been  the  degradation  of  mesmerism.  First  asso-
ciations are,  from  the  very  law  of  our  minds,  all  but
indestructible;  and  therefore  it  is  that  with  a  few
original  thinkers  alone  one  can  hope  to  replace  the
subject  on  its  true  and  primitive  footing  —  namely,
its  own  merits.  The  false  has  been  so  blended  with
the  true,  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  both  should  be
rejected  together.  The  waters  come  not  to  us  pure,
but  from  a  foimtain-head  that  is  itself  disturbed  and
sullied ;  so  that,  instead  of  spreading  forth  into  a  lucid
mirror,  reflecting  heaven  and  earth,  and  enlivening
all  around,  they  stagnate  in  a  thick  and  blinding

*  In  justice  to  the  memory  of  Mesmer,  it  should  be  stated
that  against  the  fact  of  his  having  sold  his  magnetic  secrets  for
a  hundred  louis  to  each  candidate  for  initiation,  should  be  set
certain  extenuating  circumstances,  which  are  related  in  Mr.
Cblquhoun's Isis  Kevelata,  vol.  i.  p.  237.

B  3


8  MESMERISM.

marsh.  Had  mesmerism  he&a.  amiounced  to  the
world,  not  as  a  studied  enigma,  but  in  the  form  of  a
simple  proposition ;  had  all  men  been  invited  to  test
the  truth  of  the  principle,  and  to  investigate  the  laws
of  its  operation;  had  it  been  practised  in  unostenta*
tious  privacy  instead  of  crowded  assemblies;  had
there  been  in  the  chambers  devoted  to  its  service,
neither  mystical  machines  nor  exciting  music,  no
convulsionaries,  no  hysterical  women ;  had  mesmer-
ism from  the  first  appeared  that  which  it  eminently
is  -—  a  spirit  of  calmness  and  of  reason ;  then  had  it
interested  the  scientific  and  conciliated  the  wise ;  then
had  it  been  transmitted  to  the  present  age  pure  and
unenveloped  by  the  mists  of  prejudice.  The  mere
fiu^t  that  man  can  produce  a  kind  of  slumber  in  his
fellow-man  by  a  few  and  simple  means,  is  surely  not
to  be  confounded  with  the  heap  of  absurdities  attached
to  it.  To  say  that  the  one  is  inextricably  and  neces-
sarily linked  with  the  other,  were  want  of  sense  as
well  as  of  candour ;  and,  unless  we  choose  to  admit  a
principle  which  would  make  even  our  religion  answera-
ble for  the  sins  committed  in  its  name,  we  must
allow  that  mesmerism  is  in  no  way  affected  either  by
the  errors  of  its  partisans  or  the  prepossessions  of  its
enemies.

Secondly^  As  mesmerism  was  ill-omened  in  its  birth,
so  also  was  it  unfortunate  in  its  baptism.  Shak-
speare's  often-quoted  query  finds  here,  if  no  where
else,  its  answer ;  —  and  we  are  forced  to  reply  —
There  is  much  in  a  name,  except  where  true  love  or
true  philosophy  renders  the  mind  insensible  to  those


MSftBfERIEOf.  7

externals  "which  are  all  in  all  with  the  generality  of
mankind.

The  dis^rvice  rendered  to  meBmerism  by  its
name,  is  this  ^-^  It  has  turned  men  from  true  in*
quiiy,  and)  like  a  tub  thrown  out  to  the  whale^  has
served  as  an  object  of  attack,  while  the  real  point  in
debate  has  remained  untouched  altogether.  We  have
asked  whether  such  a  power  as  mesmerism  exists;
when  we  should  rather  have  demanded  whether  there
is  a  state  so  denominated.  It  will  at  once  be  seen  in
what  material  respects  the  two  questions  differ.  The
first  presumes,  even  while  it  professes  to  seek,  a
specific  cause  for  certain  phenomena ;  —  the  second
merely  regards  the  phenomena  themselves,  and  in-
quires—  Do  such  and  such  facts  exist?  Each  in-
quiry should  be  kept  carefully  distinct,  and  yet  they
have  unfortunately  been  mixed  up  together ;  or  rather
an  unhappy  priority  has  been  granted  to  the  first,  in-
volving the  very  existence  of  the  second.  For  it  is  plain
that  when  we  demand,  **  Is  there  such  a  power  as  mes
merism?"  the  answer  may  ever  be  "No;**  and  then,
by  a  too  common  injustice,  we  extend  the  negative  over
the  whole  question,  there  being  but  few  who  will  not
confound  a  mistake  and  the  object  mistaken  in  one
general  anathema.  Did  we,  however,  clearly  per-
ceive that  "  Power  is  nothing  more  than  the  relation
of  one  object,  or  event,  as  invariably  antecedent  to
another  object  or  event,"*  we  should  perceive  that
the  facts  called  mesmeric,  have  as  much  claim  to  be

•  Brown's  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind.

B  4


8

MESMERISM.

considered  realities,  as  if  indeed  there  were  a  mag"
netic  power  or  influence.

Of  the  error  of  the  mesmerists  in  bestowing  an  ill-
judged  appellation^  the  opposite  party  have  taken
ample  advantage. They  have  thrust  forward  the  un-
lucky cognomen  into  the  very  van  of  discussion^  and
have thus  compelled  an  inquiry  into  the  cause  of
mesmerism,  before  the  phenomena  could be well
considered. Surely  it  must  be conceded  that  so
singular  an  inversion  of  true  philosophical  investiga-
tion cannot  but  have  proved  highly  detrimental  to  the
subject  of  our discussion. In  what  other  matter
have  we  acted  so  strangely  as  to  inquire  into  the
secret  eause,  before  men are  well  agreed  respect-
ing the  visible  effects  ? Do  we  not,  in  conducting  an
important  analysis,  first  ascertain  the  phenomena,
their characteristics, and  the  circumstances  under
which  they  appear ;  and  then,  after  long  and  careful
induction,  name  —  but  with  caution —  some  pervad-
ing principle  into  which  they  may  all  be  harmoniously
resolved  ? Not  only  is  it  natural  thus  to  commence  a
course  of  reasoning  with  what  is  nearest  to  our  ap-
prehensions, but,  by  so  doing,  we  secure  that  essential
requisite  to  an  argument  —  a  firm  and  undebateable
ground,  where  both  he  who  would  convince,  and  he
who  is  to  be  persuaded,  may  meet  as  on  a  neutral  ter-
ritory, and,  taking  a  common  point  for  starting,  be
advantaged  with  at  least  a  probability  of  arriving  at
a  common  conclusion. Facts  are  this  neutral  groimd ;
—facts  are  this  point  of  vantage ;  —  for  it  is  to  be  re-
marked that  respecting  outward  and  visible  pheno-


MESMERISM.  9l

iaens,  ttiere  Is  ordinarily  but  little  difiPerence  of  opinion,
while,  in  reference  to  hidden  causes,  men  ever  are
and  must  be  divided.  For  instance,  every  one  knows
the  sensation  of  light,  and  may  convince  himself,  if
he  pleases,  that  under  such  and  such  circumstances,
such  and  such  phenomena  do  occur.  So  far  mankind
are  agreed :  but  when  we  would  assign  the  primary
cause  of  light  and  its  phenomena,  we  find  the  war  com-
menced, and  opinions  far  divided  —  some  adopting
the  undulatory  theory,  while  others  fondly  cling  to
the  Newtonian  doctrine  of  emitted  rays.

It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  the  premature  assumption
of  a  specific  cause  for  the  phenomena  of  mesmeric
somnambulism  should  have  shocked  men  in  the  outset,
and  have  indisposed  them,  through  the  medium  of
their  prejudices,  for  calm  investigation.  Under  this
head  of  offence  may  be  classed,  also,  such  technical
expressions  as  "magnetised  water,"  "magnetised
trees,'*  &c.  The  ideas,  which  these  terms  convey,
are  vague  and  unpleasing.  Who  can  tell  that  their
meaning  simply  is,  —  water,  or  trees,  breathed  upon,
or  touched  by  the  hand,  after  a  certain  formula?  The
vocabulary  of  every  science  has  been,  to  the  unin-
itiated, foolishness ;  —  but  the  nomenclature  of  mes-
merism is  worse :  it  has  been  a  scare-crow  even  to
the  wise.

I  confess  that  of  all  the  causes,  which  have  con-
tributed to  render  mesmerism  unpopular,  this  is  to
me  the  most  discouraging.  To  make  a  dispute
verbal  is  to  make  it  endless,  and  the  erroneous  way
in  which  our  subject  has  been  considered,  has  trans-

B  5


10  MESICERISM.

ferred  its  merits  from  things  to  words — a  sad  and
barren  exchange  I  —  All  hope  of  an  accommodation
between  the  friends  and  foes  of  mesmerism  is  thus
rendered  doubtful.  How,  indeed,  can  they  calmly
discuss  the  matter,  when  the  first  bare  mention  of  it
is  a  sort  of  Slogan  or  battle-yell,  that  raises  a  conflict
sufficient  to  drown  the  voice  of  Reason  for  ever?
How  shall  they  decide  a  truth,  whose  fate  depends
upon  the  propriety  or  impropriety  of  its  name  ?  How
shall  they  adjudge  the  real  business  in  hand,  seeing
that  preliminaries  can  never  be  adjusted?  The
subject  has  indeed  fallen  into  the  very  Chancery
Court  of  Philosophy.

That  men  should  be  so  easUy  entrapped  into  pur-
suing a  shadow,  while  the  substance  has  eluded  their
observation,  may  seem  strange;  but,  words  being  the
media  of  our  thoughts,  we  are  naturally  so  influenced
by  them  that  even  the  most  clear-judgingfindit  difficult
not  to  be  diverted  by  a  verbal  inaccuracy  from  more
important  matters.  The  fate  of  Hartley's  Theory  of
Sensation  is  a  proof  of  this.  All  the  world  fastened
so  vehemently  upon  the  unlucky  term  **  vibration,"
and  were  so  intent  upon  proving  that  the  soft  and
loose  chords,  which  compose  the  nervous  system,
could  never  properly  be  said  to  vibrate,  that  the  true
merits  of  a  very  beautiful  hjrpothesis  were  over-
looked.

Thirdly.  Nearly  connected  with  the  erroneous  nam-
ing of  mesmerism,  is  the  circumstance  next  in  order,
which  has  thrown  a  blight  over  its  pretensions,  —  I
mean  the  decision,  in  its  disfevour,  of  the  French
Academy,  in  1784. Since  then,  it  has  been  con-


M£SM£RISM.  1  i

sidered  as  worse  than  unexamined ; -^— it  has  been
conceived  to  have  undergone  examination^  and  to
have  been  found  worthless.  Since  then,  to  revive  an
interest  upon  such  a  condemned  subject  has  been
nearly  as  impossible  as  to  restore  life  to  a  corpse  by
galvanism.  Since  then,  instead  of  a  mystery,  it  has
been  regarded  as  a  delusion;  and  the  world  has
turned  away  from  it  with  the  same  sort  of  flat  dis-
appointment which  we  experience,  when,  after
having  trembled  at  the  haunted  chambers,  dusky
veils,  and  heaving  coverlids  of  a  romance,  we  are
chilled  into  our  sober  senses  by  the  earthly  explana-
tions of  its  concluding  pages.  The  magician's  wand
is  broken  for  ever:  we  like  to  be  frightened,  but
hate  to  find  ourselves  deceived.  The  attractive  ever
perishes  with  the  supernatural.  But  to  those  who
read  and  inquire  for  themselves,  there  is  nothing
whatever  in  the  decision  of  the  French  Academy  of
Science  which  can  be  considered  as  destructive  of
mesmerbm.  What  is  it  that  the  Academy  decided  ?
Few  know,  —  few  care  to  inquire.  A  general  im-
pression has  gone  abroad,  that  mesmerism  received,
in  1784,  its  amp  de  grace  ;  and  there  men  are  con-
tent to  let  the  matter  rest ;  for  are  they  not  thus  saved
the  trouble  of  thinking  ?  How  pleasant  to  believjp
in  the  eternal  banishment  of  a  subject,  concerning
which,  the  idle,  the  self-interested,  and  the  prejudiced
have  each  their  several  motives  for  saying,  as  some
honest  churchman  did  of  the  Athanasian  Creed,  *^  I
wish  we  were  well  rid  of  it."  The  blessed  consum-
mation is  not,  however,  so  easy  of  attainment;  for

B  6


12  MESMERISM.

what  is  the  truth?  The  French  Academy  merely
decided  that  there  was  not  sufficient  evidence  to  show
that  the  phenomena  called  magnetic  are  caused  by
the  action  of  a  fluid.  As  to  the  phenomena  them-
selves the  Academy  not  only  allows  them,  but,  as  it
appears  to  me,  concedes  the  real  question  in  debate,
in  terms  the  most  explicit.  These  are  the  very  words
in  which  the  examiners  sum  up  their  report.  "  Ce
que  nous  avous  appris,  ou,  du  moins,  ce  qui  nous
a  ete  confirm^  d'une  maniere  demonstrative  et
^vidente  par  Texamen  des  proc^des  du  magn^tisme,
c'est  que  Vhomme  pent  agir  sur  Vhomme  a  tout  moment,
et  presque  a  volonte,  en  frappant  son  imagination ;
c'est  que  les  gestes,  et  les  signes  les  plus  simples
peuvent  avoir  les  plus  puissans  efFets;  c'est  que
Taction  de  Thomme  sur  Timagination  peut-etre
reduite  en  art,  et  conduite  par  une  methode,  sur
des  sujets  qui  ont  la  foi."*

Translating  the  above  as  literally  as  possible,  we
find  that  the  Commissioners  have  thus  expressed
themselves :  —

"  That  which  we  have  learnt,  or,  at  least,  that
which  has  been  proved  to  us,  in  a  clear  and  satis-
factory manner,  by  our  inquiry  into  the  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  is  —  that  man  can  act  upon  man,  at  all
times  and  almost  at  will,  by  striking  his  imagination ;
—  that  signs  and  gestures  the  most  simple  may  pro-
duce the  most  powerful  effects;  that  the  action  of

*  Expos^  des  Experiences  qui  ont  €t€  faites  pour  PExamen  du
Magnetisme  Aiiimale. Paris^  1784.


MESMERISM.  13

man  upon  the  imagination  may  be  reduced  to  an  art,
and  conducted  after  a  certain  method,  when  exercised
upon  patients  who  have  faith  in  the  proceedings.''

The  above  passage  will  show  that  the  French
Academy  decidedly  agrees  with  the  first  promoters
of  mesmerism  as  to  the  existence  of  certain  remark-
able phenomena :  it  is  only  respecting  the  cause  that
the  two  are  at  issue ;  the  one  asserting  that  it  is  a
fluid  —  the  other  that  it  is  imagination.  Whether
the  latter  may  not  herein  be  as  guilty  of  a  /low-
sequitur  as  the  former,  we  may  hereafter  consider.
At  present  I  merely  remark  that,  granting  the
magnetic  phenomena  to  spring  from  the  imagination,
we  do  not  thereby  condemn  them  to  contempt,  or
oblivion ;  far  less  do  we  (as  some  persons  seem  to
suppose)  abrogate  them  altogether.

Were  mesmerism  only  viewed  as  illustrative  of
the  mind's  influence  upon  the  organisation,  it  would
hold  out  high  claims  to  notice.  What  subject,  we
may  ask,  is  more  fertile  of  important  reflections?
Materialists,  curiously  enough,  adduce  it  to  disprove
mesmerism,  which  makes  against  their  views  of  man
as  a  mere  machine  —  of  thought  as  a  mere  elabora-
tion of  the  brain; — but,  in  so  doing,  they  open  a
field  of  speculation,  which  they  would  be  sorry  to
enter  upon  further  than  they  find  convenient.  In
the  very  terms  of  their  dissent,  they  admit  of  two
things  of  a  wholly  different  nature — that  is,  the
imagination  and  the  organisation ;  —  the  first  not
only  modifying  the  action  of  the  latter,  but  actually
mastering  it  altogether. Granting  that  the  imagin-


1 4  JtfESMERISM.

ation  can  influence  the  bodily  frame  to  the  extent
allowed  by  the  French  Academy  in  its  report  on
mesmerism;  if  what  they  say  be  true:— "Nous
avons  vu  I'imagination  exalted  devenue  assez  puis-
sante  pour  fiure  perdre  en  un  instant  la  parole." —
"  We  have  seen  the  imagination,  when  exalted,
become  powerful  enough  to  make  a  person  lose  the
fiiculty  of  speech  in  a  moment :"— if  we  believe  this,
then  indeed  we  admit  of  a  motive  force,  to  which  we
can  hardly  set  bounds,  and  which  makes  mesmerism,
with  aU  its  pretensions,  a  feeble  and  unnecessary
agent  The  supposition  of  an  existing  fluid  can  add
nothing  to  miracles  like  these.  By  demonstrating
the  omnipotence  of  mind  over  organisation,  the
opponents  of  mesmerism  prove  too  much.  They
bring  us  to  a  point  where  it  is  only  one  analogical
step  further  to  inquire,  whether  the  force,  which  can
so  act  on  the  organisation  to  which  it  is  attached,
may  not,  peradventure,  extend  its  influence  to  a
sphere  external  to  itself?  For  peremptorily  answer-
mg  this  question  in  the  negative,  we  can  assign  no
reason,  but  that  external  offices  for  such  an  agent
come  not  within  the  pale  of  our  experience; — and
reasoning  like  this  we  cannot  but  reject  as  an
effectual  bar  to  all  inquiry  whatever.  We  must
remember  that  human  experience  is  ever  on  the
increase,  and  that  there  exists  not  one  power,  even
the  most  palpable,  of  which  we  can  affirm  that  we
have  ascertained  all  the  functions.  There  is  not  a
discovery  of  modern  times,  but  teaches  us  that  the
force  which  performs  some  things  whereof  we  are


MESMERISM.  15

cognisant,  may  also  perform  others  of  which  we
hsLve,  as  yet,  no  notion  whatever.  Let  my  reader
bear  in  mind,  that  I  by  no  means  affirm  that  the
imagination  is  the  agent  in  mesmerism,  internally  or
externally.  All  I  mean  to  assert  is,  that  the  careful
French  Academy,  and  their  subsequent  followers,
have  gone  further  than  the  magnetisers  themselves,
in  attributing  power  to  mind,  and  in  relating
wonders  to  prove  that  power.  Say  what  we  will,  the
important  point  in  mesmerism,  —  the  influence  of
man  upon  his  fellow, — was  conceded  by  the  French
Academy  in  no  doubtful  terms ;  —  through  the  ima-
gination, it  is  true;  yet  still  it  is  conceded.  The
imagination  is  but  considered  as  the  means ;  man  is
still  die  agent.  Are  the  phenomena  themselves
altered  by  being  referred  to  the  imagination,  instead
of  a  magnetic  fluid  ?  Not  in  the  least.  Do  we  com-
prehend them  better,  when  so  referred?  By  no
means.  We  only  seem  so  to  do,  because  in  the  one
case  they  are  referred  to  a  cause  of  which  we  cannot
but  confess  our  ignorance ;  while,  in  the  other,  they
are  attributed  to  the  action  of  a  power  which  we
think  (how  vainly  !)  that  we  comprehend.

Fourthly.  The  fourth  cause,  which  has  banished
mesmerism  from  the  rank  and  position  to  which  it  is
entitled,  is  the  early  attempt  to  assimilate  it  to  the
certain  sciences  in  an  erroneous  manner.  In  our
researches  into  the  discovery  of  Mesmer,  we  have,
from  the  beginning,  struck  into  a  path  which  never
could  lead  us  to  the  desired  end ;  and  then,  most
unreasonably,  we  have  charged  upon  the  subject  of


16  MESMERISM.

our  inquiry  the  fault  which  existed  in  ourselves.
Because  we  have  found  nothing,  when  we  did  not
seek  aright,  we  have  impatiently  concluded  that
there  was  nothing  whatever  to  be  found.  Perhaps*
the  error  has  originated  with  the  Mesmerists  them-
selves. To  secure  the  suffrage  of  scientific  men  for
their  favourite  pursuit  is  evidently  desirable.  How
should  they  accomplish  this?  The  days  are  long
since  past,  in  which  men  were  content  to  reason  after
the  vague  mode  of  the  Aristotelian  philosophy,  which
leant  upon  conjecture  rather  than  experiment,  and
discussed  absurdities  as  gravely  as  the  ordinary  phe-
nomena of  nature.  The  world  has  reached  an  era,
in  which  facts,  attested  by  the  senses,  independent  of
the  human  will,  and  invariably  reproduced  under  the
same  circumstances,  can  alone  engage  the  attention
of  the  learned.  With  the  scientific  men  of  our  day,
(and  far  be  it  from  me  to  censure  this)  certainty  is
the  great  object.  In  order,  then,  to  claim  tlie  notice
and  the  fostering  protection  of  science,  the  friends  of
mesmerism  have  long  endeavoured  to  identify  their
presumed  agent  with  physical  forces,  already  ascer-
tained and  of  invariable  action.  In  their  principle,
perhaps,  they  are  right  —  in  its  application,  wrong
altogether.  Forgetting  that  mesmerism  is  a  mental
and  vital,  not  less  than  physical  phenomenon,  and
that  mind  and  life  are  in  perpetual  opposition  to  the
laws  of  the  material  world,  they  have  endeavoured  to
recognise  in  mesmerism  an  operation  as  constant  as
that  of  the  galvanic  battery,  or  the  electric  vial.  A
certain  school  of  German  writers,  especially,  have


MESMERISM.  17

theorised  on  our  subject  after  the  &lse  method  of
es^laining  one  class  of  phenomena  in  nature  by  its
fancied  resemblance  to  another.  Wishing,  perhaps,
to  avoid  the  error  of  the  Spiritualists,  who  solve  the
problem  in  debate  by  the  power  of  the  soul  alone^
they  have  ransacked  the  material  world  for  analogies
to  mesmerism,  till  the  mind  itself  has  been  endued
with  its  affinities  and  its  poles.  Such  attempts  as
these  have  done  the  greatest  disservice  to  the  cause
we  advocate.  They  submit  it  to  a  wrong  test.  It  is
as  if  the  laws  of  light  should  be  applied  to  a  question
in  acoustics.  It  is  as  if  we  should  expect  to  find  in
a  foreign  kingdom  the  laws  and  customs  of  our  own.
Thus  wrongly  biassed,  we  turn  away  from  mesmerism,
as  provoked  at  finding  it  other  than  we  deemed  it  to
be ;  as  the  prince  in  the  fairy  tale,  who  found  his
betrothed,  though  very  charming,  not  in  the  least
like  her  portrait,  and  so  sent  her  back  in  disgrace.
Who  has  not  experienced  a  thousand  times  the  same
feeling?  We  read,  perhaps,  a  description  of  some
lovely  scene ;  we  thence  form  an  image  of  it  in  our
thoughts.  We  at  length  behold  it,  and  are  discon-
tented to  find  it  endued,  perhaps,  with  even  more
beauty  than  we  had  imagined ;  because  the  beauty  is
of  a  different  kind.  There  is  rock  where  we  expected
smooth  turf;  there  is  wildness,  where  we  looked  for
cultivation ;  there  is  a  withered  oak,  where  we  had
in  fancy  placed  a  human  dwelling.  If,  in  matters  of
taste,  preconceptions  like  these  prepare  the  way  for
disappointment ;  in  matters  of  reason  they  are  not  less
calculated  to  awake  disgust A  science  that  is  mis-*


18  JJiESMERISM.

conceived  labours  under  peculiar  disadvantages;
Thus,  then,  till  the  initial  step  towards  a  comprehen-
sion of  mesmerism  be  taken  anew,  there  is  no  hope
that  it  will  ever  be  understood  or  appreciated.  Why
unavailingly  seek  to  reduce  it  to  a  formula  of  which
it  is  insusceptible?  If  we  ascribe  it  to  a  power
already  ascertained,  why  not  treat  it,  at  least,  as  an
entirely  new  function  of  that  power  ?  Why  limit  it
to  what  we  know,  when  possibly  it  may  be  destined
to  extend  the  boundaries  of  our  knowledge  ?  Why
are  we  to  be  trammelled  with  foregone  conclusions  ?
Yet  upon  these  very  restrictions,  the  opponents  of
mesmerism  insist;  thus  taking  away  from  men  the
means  of  investigating  the  agency  in  question,  by
forcing  them  to  set  about  it  in  the  wrong  way.

The  case  is  the  more  perplexing,  inasmuch  as  this
apparent  unfairness  is  grounded  on  instinctive  pro-
pensities of  our  nature,  with  which  it  were  vain  to
quarrel,  since  they  are  actually  a  part  of  man's  most
valuable  inheritance  and  absolutely  essential  to  the
whole  conduct  of  life.  That  attraction  towards
sensuous  objects,  which  is  fitted  to  a  being  that  lives
in  a  visible  and  tangible  world,  draws  us  inevitably
away  from  whatever  shuns  the  senses  to  that  which
may  be  seen  and  handled ;  and  that  constitution  of
our  minds,  which  leads  us  to  rely  on  the  invariable-
ness  of  nature's  sequences,  necessarily  brings  with  it
a  love  of  the  certain  and  the  permanent.  With  tend-
encies like  these,  at  once  to  be  cherished  and  guarded
against,  it  is  difficult  to  deal.  Thus  refiecting,  I  am
not  surprised  at  the  hostile  reception  winch  mesmer-


ItffiSBCERISM.  19

Ism  has  met  with  in  ahnost  every  quarter— -I  see
that  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise.  Unfortunately
toO)  those  men  who  are  the  last  to  be  gained  over,  are
generally  the  best  worth  gaining  ;  while  those  whose
habits  of  mind  lead  them  to  embrace  the  new  doctrine
without  hesitation,  are  mostly  visionaries,  who  find
thanselves  more  at  home  in  the  a&irs  of  heaven
than  of  earth,  and  are  ever  more  disposed  to  speco*
late  wildly  than  to  submit  to  the  rules  of  strict  and
severe  analysis.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that
it  is  the  province  of  man  to  mount  from  the  known
to  the  unknown,  and  to  reason  from  that  which  can
be  seen  to  that  which  is  invisible.  If  one  strong
instinct  teaches  us  to  repose  in  the  objects  which  lie
open  to  our  immediate  apprehension,  another  not  less
powerful  calls  us  imperatively  to  rise  to  the  detection
of  secret  causes.  And  true  wisdom  consists  in  the
just  balance  of  these  two  contending  propensities.
Nor  are  we  invited  to  ascend  beyond  the  level  of
more  obvious  things  by  the  constitution  of  our  minds
alone.  Between  the  quenchless  desire  of  our  bosoms,
and  the  dispositions  of  the  external  world,  there  is  a
harmony  as  perfect  as  it  is  beautiful.  The  simplest
of  nature's  sequences,  should  we  trace  it  further  up
the  scale,  conducts  us  inevitably  to  somewhat  beyond
our  visual  ken,  while  at  the  same  time  we  are  encou-
raged to  proceed,  by  our  success  in  analysing  the  in-
visible and  ascertaining  the  obscure.  For  instance,
by  imperceptible  exhalation  and  absorption,  there
is  carried  on  throughout  the  world  a  perpetual  loss


20  MESMERISM*

and  gain,  conversion  of  substance,  and  exchange  of
power,  which  is  scarcely  conceivable,  yet  which  man,
in  many  instances,  has  reduced  to  rule,  and  expressed
in  number.  We  have  measured  the  undulations  of
light,  and  the  waves  of  sound.  The  microscope  has
shown  us  worlds,  of  which  our  unassisted  senses  have
no  cognisance;  and  science,  aided  by  the  telescope,
has  traced  from  stars,  unseen  by  the  naked  eye,  the
one  great  law  of  attraction  prevailing  to  the  very
verge  of  ascertained  creation.  Ought  we,  then,  in
any  case,  to  turn  away  from  facts  that  indicate  a
hidden  influence,  merely  because  that  influence  has
not  yet  been  tested  by  the  senses  ?  Even  our  con-
duct in  earthly  matters  will  reprove  us  here.  Of  the
machinery,  wrought  by  human  hands,  the  results
alone  are  presented  to  vulgar  view,  while  it  is  left  to
the  thoughtful  and  the  wise,  to  explore  the  finer
springs  and  hidden  motory  powers.  How  much
more,  then,  in  viewing  the  mechanism  of  the  universe,
should  we  believe  that  we  discern,  as  it  were,  only
the  hands  and  the  dial-plate,  while,  behind  these,  .
^*  wheel  within  wheel  involved  "  is  hidden  from  our
gaze,  in  order  to  tempt  our  inquiry,  and  to  develope
the  higher  part  of  our  nature  by  the  stimulus  of
curiosity  ?

There  is,  then,  in  the  nature  of  things  no  necessity
that  mesmerism,  because  it  is  recondite,  should  be
imexplored.  To  investigate  it  may  indeed  be  diflScult;
but  appears  to  be  rather  enjoined  than  forbidden  —
enjoined  by  the  tendencies  of  mind,  not  less  than  by
the  constitution  of  matter. It  may,  however,  still  be


IdESMERISM,  21

urged  in  reply,  that  the  variableness,  which  must  be
granted,  in  some  respects,  to  characterise  mesmerism,
13  the  true  disqualification  which  debars  it  &om  the
reahns  of  science.  How,  may  it  be  argued,  can  that
which  is  confessedly  irregular  be  shaped  into  a  system ;
how  can  phenomena,  which  contradict  each  other  at
every  turn,  admit  of  classification  ?

I  answer  that  such  an  objection,  if  carried  out  into
a  principle,  would  effectually  arrest  the  progress  of
all human knowledge. It would make us rest
satisfied  with  the  apparent  and  the  supei'ficial,  when
we  should  be  striving  after  the  real  and  the  profound.
It  would  make  our  own  imperfect  observation the
measure  of  Nature's  regularity. Are we entitled
to  conclude,  in  any  case,  that,  because  we  have  not
hitherto  been  able  to  assign  a  law  to  certain  opera-
tions, they  are  therefore absolutely without law  ?
Are  we  to  assert  that  the  orderly  dispositions  of  the
universe  are  deformed  by  a  monstrous  exception,  or
is  it  not  wiser  to  believe  that  our  own  knowledge  is
in  fault,  whenever  Nature  appears  inconsistent  with
herself  ? Surely  we  have  enough  order  around  us
to  suggest  that  all,  which to us seems  chance,  is
<^ direction  which  we  cannot  see;"  that  all  apparent
anomalies  are  but  like  those  discords  which,  in  the
most  masterly  music,  prepare  the  transitions  from  one
noble  passage  to  another,  and  are  actually  essential
to  the  general  harmony. In  many  instances,  this  is
not  mere  conjecture. How  much  of  fancied  imper-
fection and  disorder  has  fled  before  our  investigation  !
The  motions  of  comets  at  first  appear  to  offer  an  ex-


\


S2  MESMERISM*

oeption  to  the  exact  arrangements  of  the  universe*
They  traverse  all  parts  of  the  heavens.  Their
paths  have  every  possible  inclination  to  the  plane  of
the  ecliptic ;  and^  unlike  the  planets,  the  motion  of
more  t^m  '^half  of  those,  which  have  appeared,  has
been  retrograde;  —  that  is,  from  East  to  West,*
Yet  have  we  been  able  to  detect  the  elements  of
regularity  in  the  midst  of  all  this  seeming  confusion)
and  to  predict  with  certainty  the  day,  the  hour,  and
the  minute,  of  a  comet's  return  to  our  region  of  the
sky.

Experience  also  shows  that  apparently  msulated
and  lawless  phenomena  may  not  only  be  reduced  to  a
law,  but  to  a  well-known  law ;  —  that  many  a  familiar
agent  puts  on  strange  disguises ;  and  that  events,  with
which,  in  their  mazy  channels,  we  seem  to  be  un-
acquainted, may  be  perfectly  recognised  by  us  at  their
source.  Thus  galvanism  and  the  magnetic  force  are
proved  by  recent  discoveries  to  be  only  forms  of  elec-
tricity ;  showing  that  a  fact  may  be  altered— not  in
itself,  but  in  the  circumstances  that  surround  it,  and
that  complexity  of  development  is  perfectly  con-
sistent with  unity  of  design.  Instances  like  these^
while  they  encourage  us  to  inquiry,  should  teach  us

to  believe  tiiat  all  which  is  needed  to  vindicate  the
regularity  of  nature  is  a  more  extended  observation
on  our  parts.

Far,  then,  from  granting  that  mesmerism  is  de-

*  Mrs.  Somerville's  Connection  of  the  Physical  Sciences.
Ftage  877.


DfESMSBISM.  23

barred  from  the  province  of  strict  analysis  by  an
apparent  irregularity,  I  cannot  admit  that  there
exists  in  it  one  disqualification,  that  has  not  equally
been  shared,  at  one  time  or  other,  by  every  science.
All  that  I  concede,  is  that  it  is  in  a  different  stage  of
its  existence,  compared  with  subjects  of  ascertained
knowledge.  It  must  not  be  likened  to  optics,  or
hydrostatics,  in  their  actual  development,  but  to
those  sciences  in  their  dim  and  early  condition;  when
rude  guesses  were  accepted  as  substitutes  for  truth)
and  when  objects  were  discerned  as  mistily  as  the
landscape  is— •


'*  What  time  the  shepherd^  blowing  of  his  nails.
Can  neither  call  it  perfect  day  nor  night.**


There  is  indeed  this  difference  —  the  advances
(hat  we  have  made  in  knowledge,  generally,  render  it
more  easy  for  us  to  study  any  subject  in  particular.
Still  mesmerism  (represented  indeed  by  some  as  in
its  dotage)  is  but  in  its  infancy,  and  it  is  a  folly  to
call  upon  it  to  exhibit  the  features  of  a  riper  age.

Moreover  the  uncertauities  of  mesmerism  have
been  much  exaggerated.  I  may  ask,  can  that  be  so
irregular  an  influence,  which  the  French  Academy,
in  the  height  of  its  learned  displeasure,  acknowledged
was  capable  of  being  conducted  by  art  and  method  ?

My  own  experiments,  also,  will  hereafter  show  that
it  exhibits  a  definite  <^  form  and  pressure, "  and
IvM^  the  conjecture  that  it  may  have  its  own  laws


24  MESMERISM*

of  certainty,  though  not  precisely  those  to  whidk  we
would  refer  it.

On  the  whole  it  appears,  there  is  no  reason  to  con-*
elude  that  mesmerism,  because  once  wrongly  pre-
sented to  science,  should  never  be  presented  to  science
at  all ;  —  that  because  its  agent  has  not  been  ana-
lysed, it  is  therefore  unfit  for  analysis;  or  that
because  often  erroneously  identified  with  known  forces
it  should  at  no  time  be  found  to  be  connected  with
them;  but  —

Fifthly.  Our  impatience  of  whatever  we  cannot  ac-
count for,  has  prevented,  and  will,  I  fear,  long  pre-
vent mesmerism  from  being  rightly  examined,  or
even  from  being  classed  generally  amongst  realities.

This  cause,  at  the  basis  of  all  the  others,  which
have,  at  any  time,  operated  most  powerfully  against
mesmerism,  deserves  our  particular  attention.

This  it  is,  which  induced  the  friends  of  mesmerism
to  bestow  on  it  a  name,  and  refer  it  to  agents,  which,
by  seeming  to  indicate  its  origin,  should  render  it
easier  of  belief.

This  it  is,  which  led  the  members  of  the  French
Academy  of  Sciences  —  not  being  able  to  get  rid  of
it  altogether  —  to  banish  it  to  the  airy  realms  of  the
imagination.  And  this  it  is,  which,  at  the  present
day,  can  alone  explain  the  standing  miracle  —  as
great  as  that  of  mesmerism  itself — namely,  that
facts,  whicthave  been  witnessed  by  thousands,  should
be  rejected  as  if  no  testimony  to  their  truth  had  ever
been  offered.

If  in  inquiring  into  the  deep grounds  of  thia


singularity,  I  should  trespass  on  my  readers'  pa-
tience, let  the  following  consideration  plead  my
excuse.  Every  secret  cause  of  the  judgments  we
form,  in  which  the  constitution  of  our  own  minds  is
concerned,  requires  to  be  thoroughly  probed  and
exhibited  in  its  soundness  or  unsoundness ;  for  how
shall  we  attain  to  certain  truth,  unless  sure  of  the
principles  on  which  we  seek  it  ?  As  he,  who  would
take  an  observation  of  the  sun  must  first  ascertain
that  his  instrument  is  correct^  so  must  we,  before
examining  nature,  duly  regulate  the  organ  of  our
perception.

Whence,  then,  arises  it,  that  with  the  world  in
general,  "  I  comprehend  not,"  is  equivalent  to  "  I  do
not  believe  "  ?

Many  of  our  most  important  and  habitual  modes
of  thinking  would  seem  to  revolt  against  this  error.
Granting  that  whatever  is  beyond  the  pale  of  our
knowledge  is  a  delusion,  we,  by  parity  of  reasoning,
must  deny  the  existence  of  ourselves,  and,  conse-
quently, of  all  external  things :  for  the  soul  is  an  un-
solved problem,  and  man  is  the  great  anomaly  of
creation.  Yet  thus  do  we  not  argue  ?  On  the  con-
trary, we  not  only  acknowledge  that  we  are,  but  cease
not  to  inquire  what  we  are,  ever  studying  the  volume
of  our  intellectual  being,  in  order  to  discover  some
law,  which  should  be  to  mind  what  attraction  is  to
matter.  Consenting  thus  to  take  our  minds  as  we
find  them,  and  to  observe  and  to  ascertain  rather  than
to  decide  and  to  excommunicate,  why  is  it  that,  on  so
many  other  occasions,  we  pursue  a  directly  contrary

c


26  MESMERISM.

course?  For  this  reason.  With  regard  to  ourselves,  our
own  consciousness  compels  us  to  begin  by  recognising
the  reality  of  certain  phenomena ;  but,  with  regard  to
other  things,  we  are  at  liberty  to  speculate  before  we
examine.  Unless  restrained  by  some  strong  control-
ling force,  our  natural  tendency  is  ever  to  rush
onward  to  causes  and  conclusions  —  to  simplify  and  to
generalise  —  and  hence  to  dismiss  from  our  consider-
ation whatever  does  not  harmonise  with  our  own  sys-
tems. This  propensity  to  resolve  the  complex  and
the  partial  into  the  simple  and  ultimate  appears  to  be
a  part  of  our  original  constitution,  and  is  one  of  those
strong  impulses  which  seem  made  to  carry  us  too  far,
lest  they  should  fail  of  carrying  us  far  enough.  By
it  we  trace  that  unity  amidst  variety,  which  stamps
creation  as  the  work  of  one  hand ;  but  by  it  also  we
are  led  to  invert  the  true  process  of  reasoning,  and
to  snatch  at  the  higher  antecedents  of  nature's  se-
quences, before  we  have  brought  the  lower  within
our  grasp.  Those  comprehensive  principles  which
are,  in  truth,  the  latest  fruit  of  experience,  we
would  force  to  our  impatience,  and  mature  at  our
pleasure.  All  knowledge  being  identified  with  a
progression  towards  primary  causes,  and  primary
causes  being  of  necessity  the  simplest,  we  fall  into
the  mistake  of  striving  after  simplicity  that  we  may
reach  wisdom  —  whereas  it  is  only  through  wisdom
that  a  safe  simplicity  can  be  reached.  Instead  of
accommodating  ourselves  to  nature,  we  would  com-
pel nature  to  accommodate  herself  to  us.  Instead  of
ascending cautiously  from  the individual to th©


JMTESMEBISM.  27

general,  we  take  our  general  rule,  and  force  the  in-
dividual circumstance  to  bend  to  it.  Instead  of
adapting  our  theory  to  oiu:  facts,-  like  a  gracefully
fitting  garment,  we  clip  and  torture  our  facts  to  make
them  suit  the  construction  of  our  theory,  or,  should
they  prove  especially  rebellious,  banish  them  alto-
gether. This  is  fatal  to  the  very  clearness  we  aim  at.
To  simplify  rashly  is  but  to  confuse.  Until  we  con-
sent to  view  things  as  they  are,  rather  than  as  we
would  make  them  to  be,  we  shall  advance  only  to  be
led  astray.  Until  we  learn  to  consent  for  a  while  to
philosophic  doubt,  we  shall  never  arrive  at  certainty.
For,  in  truth,  we  are  debarred  from  that  comprehen-
siveness of  principle,  which  is  so  attractive  to  our
pride  by  the  deficiencies  of  our  own  understanding.*
Our  laws  must  necessarily  be  multiplied  because  our
faculties  are  bounded.  Nature,  indeed,  may  be  one ;
but  the  aspect  she  presents  to  us  is  varied,  and  we  can-
not climb  high  enough  to  behold  her  mighty  land-
scape subject  to  our  gaze.  Our  ardent  inclination  to
generalise  thus  struggling  with  our  defect  of  power^


•  "  I  thought  that  the  first  step  towards  satisfying  several
inquiries,  the  mind  of  man  was  very  apt  to  run  into,  was  to  take
a  survey  of  our  own  understandings,  examine  our  own  powers,
and  see  to  what  things  they  were  adapted.  Till  that  was  done,
I  suspected  we  began  at  the  wrong  end,  and  in  vain  sought  for
satisfection  in  a  quiet  and  sure  possession  of  truths,  that  most
concerned  us,  whilst  we  let  loose  our  thoughts  into  the  vast
ocean  of  being,  as  if  all  that  boundless  extent  were  the  natural
and  undoubted  possession  of  our  understandings."  —  Lockers
^idy  on  the  Human  Under  standhig,

c  2


28  MESMERISM*

how  difficult  is  the  task  of  impartially  examining  a
new  and  extraordinary  agent !  Impatient  of  our
ignorance,  and  making  no  estimate  of  our  own  mindsj
we  attempt  to  soar  into  the  full  light  of  truth,  with-
out considering  whether  our  pinions  may  not  be
made  of  such  materials  as  to  melt  beneath  its  beams.
From  these  considerations  it  appears  that  the
only  course  of  investigation  which  is  fitted  to  our
faculties  is  to  observe  with  patience,  and  not  to  be
frightened  from  our  propriety  because  a  phenomenon
appears  strange  to  us,  either  in  itself  or  its  con-
comitants. In  a  world,  where  it  must  be  allowed
that  all  is  wonderful,  or  that  nothing  is  wonderful,
there  is  no  intrinsic  reason  why  one  sequence  of
events  should  be  more  astonishing  than  another.
Neither  should  we  be  afraid  of  multiplying  laws
(which  are,  in  truth,  nothing  more  than  "  the  expres-
sion of  the  most  general  circumstances,  in  which  the
phenomena  to  which  they  refer  have  been  felt  by  us
to  agree"),  as  if,  by  so  doing,  we  offended  against
some  unknown  and  mysterious  power.  In  proposing
a  new  law,  we  only  adopt  a  convenient,  and  it  may
be,  temporary  expedient ;  we  only  mean  to  acknow-
ledge that  we  have  not  sufficiently  observed  a  new
fact  as  yet  to  perceive  its  relationship  with  others^
wherewith  we  are  already  acquainted.  And,  indeed,
if  offence  there  be,  it  is  not  of  our  creating.  It  is  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  natural  phenomena
by  which  the  number  of  our  laws  is  diminished  or  ex-
tended. Above  all,  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  not
we  who  are  to  give  laws  to  the  fact,  but  the  fact  to


Mesmerisi^.  ^d

Ms.  We  have  simply  to  trace  its  immediate  arid  re-
moter antecedents,  keeping  in  mind  that  a  fact  is  a
virtual  unity,  and  that  the  nobler  province  of  analy-
sis lies  not  in  ingenuity  of  dissection  but  in  mount-
ing, step  by  step,  the  scale  of  apparently  divergent
<»uses  until  we  re-unite  them  in  one  common  centre ;
—  not  in  distinguishing  the  parent  stem  from  the
branches  and  the  leaves,  which  together  make  up  one
tree,  but  in  tracing  back  the  tree  itself  to  that
which  is  the  general  origin  of  all  plants  —  a  seed.
Thus  Gall,  as  I  have  heard,  developed  the  brain,
instead  of  cutting  it  in  pieces,  and  demonstrated
that  its  convolutions  were  but  parts  of  one  beautiful
and  consistent  whole.

But  even  should  we  utterly  fail  in  this, — should
a  phenomenon  stand  single  and  alone,  and  baffle  all
our  attempts  to  assimilate  it  to  aught  around  us,  we
cannot,  in  true  philosophy,  pronounce  that  it  exists
not  The  circumstance  that  water  expands  when
cooled  down  below  a  certain  temperature,  is  utterly
at  variance  with  the  usual  law  by  which  all  sub-
stances contract  under  a  diminution  of  heat.  Yet
we  do  not  deny  that  the  fact  is  so.  Surely,  when  we
jconsider  that  every  event  is  but  one  term  of  a  series,
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  which  are  alike  lost  in
infinity,  we  should  expect  to  trace  back  many  a  phe-
nomenon into  an  obscurity  that  should  seem  impene-
trable. Surely,  when  we  reflect  on  the  vastness  of
the  visible  creation,  and  on  the  still  vaster  universe
pf  thought ;  when  it  seems  probable  that  our  system
is  but  one  of  countless  numbers,  that  are  revolving;

c  3


90  MESMERISM.

round  some  unknown  centre,  in  periods  which  thought
cannot  measure  nor  science  determine;  that  these,
again,  are  peopled  with  various  orders  of  intelligence,
— we  should  rather  wonder  that  we  know  so  much,  than
that  some  facts  should  transcend  our  knowledge,  and
acquiesce  in  our  ignorance  rather  than  deny  exist-
ence to  diat  which  we  cannot  comprehend.

But  I  may  be  reminded  that  mesmerism  may  be
one  of  those  subjects  which  surpass  our  intellectual
vision ;  and  that,  if  so,  to  examine  it  is  superfluous,
and  to  search  for  its  principle  a  pure  waste  of  time.
Undoubtedly.  But  are  we  now,  or  can  we  be,
indeed,  at  any  time,  entitled  to  class  mesmerism
amongst  unfathomable  things?  If  **the  proper
study  of  mankind  is  man,'*  this,  bs  regarding  man
especially,  presents  to  his  faculties  a  &ir  field  of
investigation ;  and  with  respect  to  such  legitimate
subjects  of  inquiry,  the  point  at  which  we  should
abandon  enterprise  has  not  yet  been  ascertained*
While,  then,  we  admit  the  difficulties  that  beset  us
on  every  side,  let  us  advance,  and  fear  not,  and  take
caution  with  us  in  our  pursuit  of  truth;  not  to
check  but  to  steady  us  in  our  course.  Discovery
may  be  nearer  to  us  than  we  suppose.*  The  enigma
in  which  every  point  seems  to  contradict  the  other,

*  This,  above  all,  is  not  the  time  for  despair,  when  such  a
man  as  EUiotson  has  dedicated  his  powers  of  learning
and  of  observation  to  the  service  of  mesmerism ;  treating  the
subject  (as  far  as  I  can  judge  from  the  scanty  account  of  Dr.
Elliotson's  experiments  which  has  reached  me  abroad)  in  a
^irit  which  seems  to  render  any  remarks  of  mine  useless.


/


MEIMCIUSBf.  81

may  be  rendered  clear,  perhaps,  by  one  word  alone ;
and  may  «et  us  wondering  that  we  did  not  sooner
perceive  its  siii\ple  solution.  To  me,  at  least,
nature  has  just  read  a  beautiful  lesson,  inculcating
doubt  in  ourselves^  trust  in  her,  and  patience  to  wait
upon  her  revelations.  All  day  the  mountains  were
covered  with  a  biist  so  uniform  that,  to  a  stranger's
eye,  they  might  have  seemed  like  clouds,  or  altogether
have  escaped  his  notice  ;-^  but  at  this  moment  there
is  light  and  clearness ;  and  where  almost  a  blank  was,
are  now  the  glorious  Alps,  snow-K^overed,  lit  up  with
sunshine  ^-—  seeming  to  link  earth  with  heaven.

Having  now  detailed,  at  too  much  length,  perhaps,
the  principal  causes  that  have  rendered  mesmerism
obnorious  to  the  world,  it  now  only  remains  for  me
to  touch  briefly  on  one  or  two  minor  causes  of
oflfencew  Mesmerism  is  one  of  nature's  great  re^
sources  in  the  cure  of  maladies ;  and  it  is  not,  there-
fore, wiDnderful,  if  isome  of  its  most  striking  effects
should  have  been  developed  rather  in  the  ailing  and
the  delicate  than  in  the  healthy  and  robust.  Hence
the  world,  always  ready  to  build  up  error  on  truth,
has  connected  it,  in  idea,  with  weakness  of  mind  as
well  luB  of  body^  and  has  classed  it  amongst  those
idle  imaginings  which  beset  the  fanciful  invalid.
But  what  is  the  fact  ?  Mesmerism  does,  indeed,  act
more  peculiarly  on  the  nervous  system ;  and,  on  that
account,  affects,  in  an  especial  manner,  persons  whose
nervous  system  is  finely  organised.  But  we  must
not  confound  sensitiveness  with  imbecility.  The
universal  temperament  of  genius  gives  the  lie  to  such

c  4


S2  JtfESM£RISM«

an  error ;  and  it  would  be  plainly  ridiculous  to  say
that  the  timid  and  susceptible  author  of  an  elegy  in
a  coimtry  churchyard,  or  Rousseau,  or  Pascal*,  who
were  both  nervous  even  to  hypochondriacism,  were
weak  in  intellect,  because  they  were  strong  in  sensi-^
bility.  Besides,  before  we  identify  mesmerism  with
weakness  of  any  kind,  it  should  be  shown  that  none
but  the  feeble  are  susceptible  of  its  influence.  Now,
as  far  as  my  experience  goes,  I  can  aflSrm,  that  not
only  does  a  certain  degree  of  intelligence  appear
requisite  for  the  favourable  manifestation  of  the
mesmeric  phenomena,  but  that  persons  in  perfect
health  have  frequently  exhibited  them.  It  may  also
be  asserted,  that  fear  and  nervous  agitation  are
wholly  incompatible  with  their  genuine  develop*
xnent.  These  may,  indeed,  accompany  a  spurious
sort  of  mesmeric  affection,  but  are  wholly  distinct
from  the  power  with  which  they  co-exist,  and  to
which  they  are  invariably  hurtful.  They  are  the
corruptions  of  the  true  faith,  and  not  the  faith  itself.
In  fine,  sensibility,  and  not  weakness,  is  the  real
condition  on  which  mesmerism  depends.

But  it  is  not  only  an  apparent  identity  with
weakness  which  has  degraded  this  unfortunate
subject;— it  has  suffered  still  more  from  a  re-
pulsive connection  with  disease.  The  discoverer  of
mesmerism  was  a  physician,  and  its  extraordinary


•  Pascal,  after  having  once  been  nearly  upset  into  a  river
was,  for  a  long  time,  tormented  with  the  idea  of  bein^  continu-
ftlly  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice.


mesmerism;  39

curative  powers  have  naturally  placed  it  in  medical
hands ;  so  that  of  the  existing  works  upon  it  there
are  few  that  are  not  written  by  members  of  the
medical  profession,  and  fewer  still  that  do  not  bear
immediate  reference  to  the  treatment  of  maladies.
This  alone  is  suflScient  to  exclude  it  from  general
interest,  and  to  lower  its  pretensions  to  literary
consideration*  Medical  books  are  read  but  by  a
few,  —  ordinarily,  indeed,  by  those  alone  whose
vocation  compels  them  to  the  perusal.  To  the
greater  part  of  mankind  they  are  as  closely  shut
as  the  dissecting  room.  It  might,  however,  be
supposed  that,  as  all  men  are  liable  to  pain  and
sickness,  all  would  be  interested  in  that  which,  at
one  time,  claimed  to  be  a  panacea.  But  whatever
may  be  said  of  the  sufferings  of  humanity,  the  mass
of  health  is  greater  than  the  mass  of  disease;  and
roost  persons  instinctively  dislike  to  have  their
well-being  disturbed  by  hearing  of  remedies  which
they  do  not  require,  or  of  ailments  with  which  they
cannot  sympathise.  There  is  something  also  in
medical  details,  which  is  peculiarly  quenching  to  the
imagination,  and  consequently  distasteful  to  the
man  of  letters  and  refinement.  It  is  not,  then,
extraordinary  that  mesmerism,  treated  medically,
should  have  been  restricted  to  a  narrow  sphere ;  but
is  this  the  fault  of  mesmerism  itself?  Surely  not.
On  no  subject  is  it  less  permitted  to

"  Give  up  to  party  what 's  meant  for  mankind."

The  doors  of  this  temple  should  be  thrown  widely

c  5


34  MESMERISM*

open  to  the  world*  As  mental,  it  regards  the  meta-
physician and  the  moralist ;  as  physical,  the  physiolo-
gist and  the  man  of  science ;  and  I  would  call  upon
each  and  all,  separating  it  from  its  ridiculous  con-
comitants, to  contribute  to  raise  it  to  that  intellectual
grandeur  of  which  it  is  so  eminently  susceptible.

Such  are  the  causes  which  have  condemned  mes-
merism to  lie  beating,  like  a  wreck,  on  the  shore  of
substantial  knowledge.  The  vessel,  in  itself,  was
beautiful  and  well  built,  but  adverse  currents  turned
it  from  its  course,  and  by  many  a  storm  its  sails  were
rent,  and  its  noble  frame  was  shattered.

But  it  is  not  so  much  the  causes  which  I  have
separately  enumerated  as  their  combination  which
has  marked  the  discovery  of  Mesmer  with  peculiar
odium,  and  rendered  it  a  by  word  and  a  reproach.
All  the  circumstances  which  are  unfavourable  to
mesmerism  end  in  one  fatal  word  —  contempt.
Everything  tends  to  raise  a  laugh  at  its  expense ;  —
and  against  a  laugh  who  shall  have  the  courage  to
contend?  This  is  the  last  possible  degradation.
Men  love  the  mysterious  and  the  proscribed,  but
shrink  from  the  ridiculous;  they  can  bear  to  be
thought  wicked,  but  not  to  be  deemed  fools ;  they
will  endure  to  be  hated,  but  not  to  be  despised.  Now
mesmerism  has  become  not  merely  a  persecuted  but
a  ridiculous  faith.  There  is  no  pomp  of  circumstance
about  it  to  uphold  the  proselyte  who  is  called  upon
to  defend  it  to  the  death.  The  glory  of  martyrdom
for  its  sake  is  done  away.  There  is  no  dignity  in
suffering  in  such  a  cause.


mSSMERISM.  35

Thus,  then,  the  advocate  of  mesmerism  comes
befbre  a  prejudiced  tribunal,  and  labours  under
disabilities  which  it  were  just  to  bear  in  mind  when
we  feel  inclined  to  measure  the  merits  of  his  subject
by  the  reception  with  which  it  meets.  We  should,
however,  take  but  a  partial  view  of  the  case,  were
we  to  attribute  the  writer's  want  of  success  entirely
to  the  partialities  of  those  whom  he  addresses.  Be-
fore we  can  have  a  true  notion  of  the  diflSculties  of
his  undertaking,  the  causes  of  failure,  personal  to
himself,  must  also  be  added  to  the  account.  He  has
to  battle  not  only  with  the  minds  of  others  but  with
his  own  —  to  fight  his  way  through  obstacles  which
arise  fi-om  within  as  well  as  from  without,  and  to  force
himself  to  calmness  where  all  conspires  to  agitate  and
to  excite»  However  difiBcult  it  may  be  for  him  to
obtain  a  hearing;  to  treat  his  subject  impartially
and  so  as  best  to  conciliate  an  adversary  is  perhaps
a  still  harder  task.  He  is  his  own  worst  enemy,  and,
amidst  every  ambush  laid  for  him,  has  most  to
beware  of  the  snares  of  his  own  spirit.  For  what  is
a  man's  state  of  mind,  when,  for  the  first  time,  he
withdraws  the  curtain  which  separates  the  region  of
mesmerism  from  the  scenery  of  common  life  ?  He  is
bewildered  with  rushing  thoughts  and  wondrous
speculations.  He  has  beheld,  but  scarcely  knows
what  it  is  he  has  beheld.  A  world  of  magic  has
opened  on  his  gaze ;  and,  should  he  be  a  person  of
imagination,  who,  like  Schiller's  idealist,  is  tired  of
rough  reality,  he  finds  there  all  that  can  intoxicate  and
enchain, and keep  him lingering on enchanted

c  6


39  JMESMERISM,

ground  when  he  should  be  struggling  onward  to  the
domain  of  truth.  Thus  fascinated,  thus  enthralled,
it  is  no  wonder  that,  if  called  upon  to  abdicate  his
paradise,  he  should  exclaim,  like  Milton's  Eve  when
sentenced  to  quit  Eden  —

"  From  thee
How  shall  I  part,  and  whither  wander  down
Into  a  lower  world,  to  this  obscure
And  wild  ? How  shall  we  breathe  in  other  air
Less  pure,  accustomed  to  immortal  fruits  ?  "

There  is,  moreover,  in  the  sensations  of  him  who
finds  that  he  is  capable  of  exercising  the  mesmeric
influence  that  peculiar  charm  which  ever  waits  upon
the  development  of  a  new  faculty.  Even  the  swim-
mer, who  learns  at  length  to  surmount  the  boisterous
surf,  or  to  stem  the  adverse  stream,  will  revel  in  the
consciousness  of  awakened  power.  How  much  more
must  the  mental  enthusiast  riot  in  the  display  of
•energies  so  long  concealed,  so  wondrously  developed !
Self-love  adds  her  flattering  lure  to  the  attractions  of
novelty ;  —  the  pride  of  exerting  an  influence  over
others  awakens  in  his  breast  It  is  he  himself  who  is
the  author  of  his  own  enjoyment;  and  the  fairy
scenes  appear  to  him  fairer  still,  because  they  are  of  his
own  creating.  Unexpectedness,  too,  that  principal
ingredient  of  pleasure,  yet  more  entrances  and  be-
wilders the  astonished  novice,  who  perceives  such
mighty  effects  resulting  from  his  employment  of  a
few  and  simple  means.  He  feels  that  he  is  "  greater
than  he  knows,"  and  he  advances  into  the  yet  un-


MESMERISM*  87

conquered  province  that  lies  before  him,  with  all  those
alternations  of  rapture  and  surprise  which  agitate  yet
please  the  explorer  of  strange  regions. He  trembles  —
he  hesitates  —  he  catches  a  glimpse  of  a  new  pro-
spect. Still  is  he tempted  onward  —  ever  onward
iresh  wonders  still  opening  around  him,  and  fresh
complacency  a^vakening  in  his  heart :  for  mesmerism
is  not  one  of  those  pursuits  of  which  a  man  soon  tires.
Founded  on  human  nature,  it  presents  a  perpetual
variety,  like  diat  of  humanity  itself. Its  successful
votary  runs  the  risk,  therefore,  of  turning  his  thoughts
upon  it  not  only  too  vividly,  but  too exclusively.
Absorbed  by  a  mighty  interest,  he  is  too  apt  to  pass
into  that  mood  wherein,  as  to  a  lover,  all  nature  is
to  us  but  a  reflection  of  the  beloved  object ;  when,  if
we  turn  a  page,  we  think  that  it  bears  reference  to
the  subject  of  our  ceaseless  contemplation; — when
every sound teems  with appropriate oracles, and
every  sight  with  omens  addressed  to  us  alone  —  all
figuring  the  image  of  our  own  thoughts. Of  this  there
is  the  greater  danger,  because  there  exists,  in  fact,  so
much  of  unconscious  mesmerism  in  life,  that it  is
not  surprising  if,  like  Alonzo  in  The  Tempest,  we
should  exclaim  —

**  Methought  the  billows  spoke  and  told  me  of  it ;
The  winds  did  sing  it  to  me,  and  the  thunder —
That  deep  and  dreadful  organ-pipe  —  pronounced
Its  name."

But,  to an  enthusiast in particular,  how much
there  is  about  him  and  within  him  to  recall  and


38  MESMERISM.

Strengthen  the  first  impression^  and  to  speak  to  him
perpetually  of  that  which  has  kindled  his  imagination !
That  mysterious  bliss^  wherewith  the  very  atmosphere
of  those  we  love  seems  to  be  impregnated ;  —  that  at'^
traction  of  an  unknown  face,  which  beams  upon  us
from  the  passing  crowd,  a|id  which  we  would  give
worlds  to  see  again;— -the  sleep  of  the  infant  that
is  **  rocked  by  the  beating  of  its  mother^s  heart ; "  —
all  teems  with  an  influence,  potent  yet  invisible,  and
which  we  may  call  mesmerism,  if  we  will.  But,  alas  !
feelings  are  not  proofs ;  and,  on  these  occasions,  how
much  we  feel  that  we  can  by  no  means  prove  - — ^how
much  we  seem  to  understand  of  which  we  can
render  no  account !  It  will  be  easily  seen  how  un-
favourable is  this  vagueness  of  emotion  —  this  uni-
verscdity  of  reference  —to  the  strictness  of  philosophy
and  the  particularity  of  rigid  research.  We  have  at
hand  too  ready  a  solution  of  every  difficulty.  We
are  tempted  to  generalise  before  we  have  performed
the  work  of  analysis,  and  to  allow  hypothesis  to
supersede  investigation.  On  a  subject  so  wide  and
so  fertile,  analogies  oflFer  themselves  in  crowds,  and
being  easier  than  inductions,  are  more  readily
accepted  by  our  effervescing  imagination.  So  much
of  nature's  inner  processes  is  apparently  laid  open  to
our  view,  that  we  seem  to  be  on  the  point  of  snatch-
ing the  last  word  of  her  secret,  and  of  breaking  down
the  barriers  that  separate  the  visible  from  the  imseen,
the  finite  from  the  unbounded.

Thus  excited,  how  shall  we  subside  into  the  calm-
ness,  wherein  alone  the  mind  can compare^ can


MESMERISM.  39

select,  or  reject  ?  How  shall  we  exchange  the  wand
of  the  magician  for  the  disenchanting  rod  of  truth  ?
How,  from  the  very  heights  of  contemplation,  shall
we  stoop  to  the  observation  of  petty  facts  —  to  the
detection  of  feUacies  —  to  the  routine  of  ordinary
examination  ?  Deeming  that  we  know  all  things  by
intuition,  how  can  we  condescend  to  reason  ?  Rather
are  we  tempted  to  frame  some  vast  and  all-embracing
theory  —  to  rush  at  every  subject,  and  consequently
to  fail  in  all.  It  is  at  least  worthy  of  remark,  that  the
writers  on  mesmerism,  who  have  treated  it  otherwise
than  medically,  have  been  too  much  of  that  schooh
which  philosophises  "  de  omnibus  rebus,  et  quibus-
dam  aliis.'*  They  have  passed  the  flaming  bounds  of
the  universe,  when  they  ought  to  have  been  consider-
ing the  peculiar  influence  which  one  human  being,
under  certain  circumstances,  exerts  upon  another.

Mesmerism,  then,  is  no  matter  of  indifierence,  on
which  a  man  may  argue  with  a  clear  head,  because
he  argues  with  a  quiet  heart.  It  is  a  subject  which
not  only  calls  into  action,  but  has  a  decided  influence
on  all  the  most  essential  principles  of  the  human
mind;  disturbing  the  emotions,  and  through  them
die  exercise  of  the  intellectual  powers.  Self-love,
wonder,  and  desire  of  novelty,  we  have  already  seen
enlisted  in  its  service,  and  troubled  by  its  apparent
miracles.  But  deeply  as  it  may  engage  these
feelings,  still  greater  is  the  efiect  which  it  produces
upon  the  principle  of  belief —  a  part  of  our  mental
constitution  which  so  largely  concerns  our  modes  of
action  —  our  present,  and  our  future  well-being,  that


40  MESMERISM.

whatever  tends  to  modify  it  is  of  vital  consequence,
and  should  be  treated  with  all  the  caution  which  the
importance  of  the  occasion  demands.  With  how
much  self-watchfiilness,  then,  should  we  approach  a
subject  which  is  calculated  to  work  an  entire  re^
volution  in  the  very  regulator  of  our  being  —  to
substitute  a  rash  credulity  for  a  sound  and  safe
belief?  This  is  the  great  snare  of  his  own  mind,
against  which  a  writer  on  mesmerism  has  perpetu-
ally  to  be  on  his  guard.  He  has  beheld  phenomena
which  are  beyond  the  pale  of  his  former  experience ;
^.nd,  impelled  as  we  all  are  to  reason  from  that  which
we  ourselves  have  seen  to  that  of  which  we  are
personally  ignorant,  he  is  tempted  to  ask  himself,  —
"  If  this  be  true  (as  I  perceive  it  is),  why  not  also  a
thousand  other  things,  of  which  I  have  hitherto
doubted  ?  "  Thus  is  he  led  to  trust  rather  to  analogy
than  to  observation ;  and  his  vsdllingness  to  accept  a
fact  upon  due  evidence  is  turned  into  a  disposition  to
credit  all  things  upon  no  evidence  whatever.  The
barrier  of  prudent  hesitation  is  cast  down^  and  his
mind  is  left  a  prey  to  the  invasion  of  every  idle  fancy.
That  he  was  once  even  of  a  sceptical  spirit  will  profit
him  nothing.  Rather,  with  that  propensity  to  rush
into  extremes  which  is  a  part  of  human  imperfection,
the  more  incredulous  he  has  hitherto  been,  the
greater  will  be  his  rebound  to  credulity.  The  more
he  has  hitherto  refused  to  put  faith  in  the  testimony
of  others,  the  more  entirely  will  he  submit  himself  to
•that  of  his  own  senses ;  and  finding  that  he  is  force4
to  believe  what  once  he  deemed  incredible,  he  feels


MESMERISM.  41

that  he  has  scarcely  a  right  to  refuse  assent  to  the
wildest  dreams  of  a  diseased  imagination.  The
wise  admonition,  —  "Believe  not  every  spirit," — is
disregarded ;  —  nay,  there  is  danger  that  he  should
become  in  love  with  marvels,  and  not  only  welcome
them,  when  they  are  offered  to  his  consideration,  but
go  out  of  his  way  to  seek  them,  even  where  they
exist  not ;  elevating  every  trifle  into  importance,  till
he  falls  into  the  absurdity  of  perpetual  wonder.
Thus  it  is  to  be  feared  that  he  who  adventures  his
bark  of  discovery  into  the  great  deep  of  mesmerism
will  not,  Columbus-like,  steer  ever  towards  one
anticipated  point,  deterred  neither  by  portents  nor
by  passions  in  mutiny ;  but  that  he  will  enter  upon
a  course  resembling  rather  the  fabled  voyage  of
Ulysses,  haunted  by  prodigies  and  embarrassed  by
delays;  and  it  will  be  well  if  imagination,  like
another  Circe,  does  not  seduce  from  their  allegiance,
and  transform  those  faculties  which  ought  to  guide
and  serve  him  under  the  stern  control  of  reason.

But,  even  supposing  that  a  man  has  strength  of
mind  sumcient  to  elude  these  perils,  and  to  discipline
his  fancy  to  the  proper  standard  of  belief,  stating
only  that  which  he  has  ascertained  by  the  most  rigid
observation,  there  is  still  a  difficulty  in  his  way,
which  relates  mutually  to  himself  and  to  those  whom
Jie  addresses.  However  reasonable  he  may  be,  and
however  unprejudiced  his  reader,  still  each  party  is,
as  regards  the  subject  in  question,  in  a  very  different
state  of  experience.  It  is  true  that,  in  a  degree,  this
jemark  applies  to  every  case  where information  is


42  M£8M1SIUSM.

given  and  received;  but  then,  in  all  other  casesr,
there  is  a  groundwork  to  go  upon,  cotnmon  both  to
the  instructor  and  the  instructed.  The  experience
of  the  former  is  indeed  more  enlarged  than  that  of
the  latter :  yet  it  is  ever  to  the  experience  of  the
pupil  that  the  teacher  appeals ;  a&d  the  basis  of  the
new  edifice  of  knowlec^e  which  he  undertakes  to
erect  consists  in  a  few  simple  principles  which  are
generally  recognised  by  nil  mankind.  For  instance,
an  ignorant  msm,  when  told  of  the  enormous  dis-
tances at  which  the  stars  are  placed,  relatively  to  the
earth  and  to  each  other,  may  at  first  feel  inclined  to
doubt  the  facts:  but  let  the  size  of  the  heavenly
bodies  be  stated  to  him ;  let  him  be  reminded  that
all  objects  appear  less  in  proportion  to  their  distance
from  us ;  and,  that  which  he  knows  already  helping
him  to  that  he  does  not  know,  the  matter  is  at  once
brought  within  the  scope  of  his  comprehension.  But,
as  regards  mesmerism,  we  are  excluded  from  any
such  appeal  to  universal  experience.  On  this  subject,
he  who  undertakes  to  persuade,  and  he  who  consents
to  listen,  are  not  only  in  difierent,  but  in  opposite
states  of  mind.  There  is  no  common  point  from
which  they  may  start  together,  —  there  is  no  centre
of  belief  where  they  may  meet  and  be  reconciled.
The  pupil,  at  the  very  outset,  is  called  upon  to  assent
to  a  series  of  propositions  not  only  startling  but
repugnant  to  his  experience.  That  a  man  can  throw
another  into  a  kind  of  sleep  by  certain  gestures;
diat  the  person  thus  apparently  deprived  of  con*
sciousness can answer questions rationally, and


MfiSUERISM.  48

diBcem  objects,  though  his  eyes  are  fast  shut; — >
these  are  the  estraordinary  statements  which  alarm
him  into  oppositi(m  before  the  discussion  is  begun,
and  excite  eidier  his  incredulity  or  his  scorn. By
diem he is  thrown  into a perplexing dilemma.
Unexplained  as  are  the  facts  of  mesmerism,  or  (what
is  worse)  inefficiendy  explained,  it  seems  as  if  he  had
only  to  choose  between  rejecting  them  as  absurdities,
or  admitting  them  as  miracles. In  eidier  case,  an
inquiry  into  their  causes  seems  a  pure  waste  of  time.
If  nullities,  they  sprang  from  nodiing;  if  miracles,
tfiey  cannot  be  accounted  for. Moreover,  to  admit
diem  as  miracles  is  repugnant  to  human  feeling  in
general. Men  love  not  to  have  their  faith  taxed
more  than  is  absolutely  necessary ;  and,  in  this  case,
there  is  no  religious  motive  which  can  compel  fiiith :
on  the  contrary,  many  a  person  of  weak  but  zealous
piety fears to lessen the miracles recorded in
scripture, by  allowing that any  thing  whatever,
which appears  to  interrupt  the course  of  nature,
can,  at  this  day,  be  wrought  by  mortal  power. With
these  feelings,  though  once,  perhaps,  experienced  by
himself, die  mesmeriser finds it  difficult  duly  to
sympathise. He  has  left  them  far  behind. To  him
the  facts  of  mesmerism  are  no  miracles, -—for  one
plain  reason: from  the  moment a  thing  takes  its
station  anu>ng3t  every-day  occurrences  it  ceases  to
be  a  wonder. Let any unwonted  term  in any
sequence  of  events  with  which  we  are  already  ac-
quainted  interpose  itself  sufficiendy  often, and  it
will  itself  become  a  part  of the  series  which  it


44  MESMERISM.

appeared,  at  first,  to  interrupt.  In  brief,  out
familiarity  with  a  fact  is  the  measure  of  our  opinion
concerning  it  Drawing  lightning  from  the  clouds
was  once  a  feat  that  appeared  almost  necromantic ;
but  custom  has  deprived  it  of  its  marvel,  and  we
place  conductors  on  our  houses  as  a  matter  of  course.
Had  the  sun  always  begun  the  day  in  the  west,  such
would  appear  to  us  his  natural  mode  of  rising.  Now
the  mesmeriser  has  probably  been  in  the  constant
habit  of  witnessing  those  phenomena,  at  the  bare
mention  of  which  others  are  alarmed  or  revolted;
and  so  rivetted  together  in  his  thoughts  are  certain
trains  of  physical  or  mental  changes,  that  not  to
behold  them  would  be  the  surprise ;  not  to  find  the
usual  result  consequent  upon  the  usual  causes  would
be  the  miracle.

Thus,  then,  the  writer  on  mesmerism  and  his
reader  are,  as  it  were,  at  antagonist  poles  of  belief;
and  it  is  as  difficult  for  the  one  to  divest  himself  of
his  present  knowledge,  and  to  revert  to  his  ancient
incredulity  or  wonder,  as  for  the  other  cordially  to
assent  to  facts  which  belie  the  whole  tenor  of  his
experience.  To  find  the  resolution  of  these  discords
is  no  easy  task.  Let  the  author  approach  his  subject
as  guardedly  as  he  may,  still  he  cannot  but  state
fects  that  are  astonishing;  and  the  manner  of  his
discourse  will  avail  him  little  while  the  matter  of  it

*

is  so  exceptionable.  To  those  who  disbelieve  the
phenomena  whereof  he  treats,  an  inquiry  into  their
causes  is  but  an  impertinence.  The  very  calmness
with  which  he  propounds  hb  heretical  opinions,  and


M£SM£RISJMr«:  43-

which  results  from  a  deep  conviction  of  their  truth,
must  appear  to  others  the  worst  symptom  of  incurable
error ;  —  his  impartiality  will  seem  prejudice ;  his
utmost  caution  madness.  Let  him  be  ever  so
sound  m  mind,  he  will  encounter  more  than  one
Felix  who  will  be  ready  to  exclaim,  "Thou  art
beside  thyself.*'

An  opposition  so  great  between  the  writer  on  our
subject*  and  his  reader,  would  seem  to  render  the
task  of  the  former  not  only  diflScult  but  hopeless.
On  more  mature  reflection,  however,  we  shall  per-
ceive that  though  there  is  much  to  make  him  lower
his  expectations  of  success,  there  is  enough  to  encou-
rage him  not  to  abandon  tliem  altogether.  Amongst
those  to  whom  facts  interesting  and  new  are  stated,
there  will  ever  be  some  persons  who  will  be  led  to
think  and  to  inquire  for  themselves.  Thus  the  mes-
meriser  only  loses  the  suffrages  of  the  prejudiced
who  refuse,  or  the  careless  who  are  incompetent,  to
examine  the  question,  and  the  very  causes  that  con-
tribute to  narrow  the  circle  of  his  auditors  tend  only
to  render  it  more  select.

In  conclusion :  —  The  result  of  the  preceding
deliberations  seems  to  be  this.  We  should  lay  aside
all  prejudice,  connected  either  with  the  origin,  name,
or  injudicious  exposition  of  mesmerism,  and  try  the
subject,  wholly  and  impartially,  upon  its  own  merits.

Unalarmed  by  the  apparent  strangeness  and  in-
congruity of  the  phenomena  to  be  investigated,  we
should  call  to  mind  how  frequently  "  appearances  of
external  nature,  puzzling  at  first  sight,  and  seem-


46  MESMERISM.

ingly  irreconcileable  with  one  another,  have  all  been
solved  and  harmonised  by  a  reference  to  some  one
pervading  principle,"  and  should  thus  be  led  to
surmise  that  the  irregularity  and  variations  oi  the
mesmeric  world  may  be  found,  upon  mature  observ-
ation, less  inexplicable  than  a  careless  spectator
could  imagine.  Even  should  this  hope  be  long  de-
ferred, we  are  not,  on  that  account,  to  deny  the  re-
ality of  well-attested  &cts.  Are  these  things  so  ?  is
the  one  great  question  which  we  have  to  ask ;  and  to
separate  this  from  all  its  accidental  accompaniments
is  the  first  step  towards  its  satisfactory  solution.


BfESMERISBCi  47


BOOK  IL


SECT.  I.

MESMERIC SOMNAMBULISM,  OR, MORE PROPERLY,

SLEEPWAKING.*

In  entering  upon  the  examination  of  a  new  subject,
we  should  strive  to  place  it  in  the  clearest  and  least
disputable  point  of  view.  To  this  end,  I  shall  for
the  present  consider  mesmerism  simply  as  a  distinct
species  of  somnambulism,  into  which  it  has  been
asserted  that  man  has  the  capacity  of  passing,  through
the  influence  of  his  fellow-man.  Were  this  all  —
did  none  other  of  the  extraordinary  allegations  re-
specting mesmerism  exist,  — this  alone  appears  to
me  a  subject  of  deep  interest,  and  worthy  of  being
submitted  to  that  patient  investigation,  which  should
either  confirm  it  as  a  fact,  or  banish  it  as  an  illusion.
Mesmeric  sleepwaking — if  proved  to  be  a  reality  —
wiU  claim  to  be  considered  as  one  of  the  conditions
of  man,  and,  as  such,  must  concern  all  mankind  —
but  especially  the  philosopher,  who,  in  order  to  in-
vestigate our  nature  truly,  should  explore  it  in  its

*  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  the  chapter  on  mesmerism  in  his  Physi-
ology, has  adopted  the  term  sleepwaking,  because  walking  is
but  one  result  of  the  combination  of  the  waking  with  the  sleep-
ing state,  and  because  in  this  state  persons  may  not  walk,  or  may
even  be  unable  to  walk.


48  ItfESMERISM.

weakness  and  its  strength,  its  integrity  and  its  disorder.
Sleep,  fever,  irritation  of  the  nervous  system,  have
each  their  several  trains  of  physical  and  mental
phenomena,  which  are  anxiously  investigated  by  him
who  would  know  man  as  he  is.  Even  drunkenness
has  had  its  anatomists,  and  with  what  fearful  interest
we  strive  to  fathom  the  abyss  of  madness,  as  if  we
could  evoke  from  thence  the  secret  of  our  complicate
and  wonderful  existence  !  There  is  good  sense  in
this.  From  the  derangement  of  a  machine  we  are
often  led  to  ascertain  the  uses  of  its  several  parts.
Now,  though  mesmeric  sleepwaking  can  scarcely  be
called  a  derangement  of  the  animal  economy,  still  it
is  an  aberration  from  man's  normal  state ;  and,  so
considered,  cannot  fail  to  be  replete  with  instruction
to  the  careful  observer.  Unless  we  peruse  this  page,
our  study  of  the  great  volume  of  human  nature  must
be  incomplete.

Surely  likewise,  independently  of  the  philosophical
view  of  the  question,  all  who  share  this  suffering
mortal  frame  —  all  who,  during  long  and  tedious
hours,  have  vainly  courted  sleep,  that  perverse  power
which,  in  the  poet's  beautiful  words,  is  "still last
to  come  where  it  is  wanted  most, "  —  all  who  mourn
the  past,  or  fear  the  future,,  cannot  but  be  inter-
ested in  a  discussion  respecting  the  reality  of  a
power  in  man  to  withdraw  for  a  while  the  senses  of
his  fellow-mortals  from  this  world  of  troubles.

In  thus  considering  mesmerism  as  nothing  more
than  a  state  to  be  investigated  like  any  other  state
into  which  man  has  the  capacity  of  passing,  I  shall


MESMERISM.  49

probably  surprise  those  who  have  been  accustomed
to  regard  the  matter,  either  as  too  mysterious  to
claim  affinity  with  aught  on  earth,  or  as  too  fanci-
fully wild  to  be  brought  under  the  laws  of  rational
research.  It  may  be  doubted  also,  whether,  with
some  persons,  our  subject  may  not  lose  its  charms,
when  robbed  of  its  controversial  title,  and  whether
the  plain  view  I  have  taken  of  the  question  may  not
equally  offend  the  argumentative  opposer  who  seeks
to  show  his  eloquence  in  dispute,  and  the  warm  par-
tisan who  would  invest  his  favourite  science  with  an
awful  and  unknown  dignity.  But  the  earnest  and
impartial  pupil  of  nature  will  be  content  to  take  his
stand  with  me  on  the  sure  ground  of  experimental
proof,  and,  even  should  he  become  my  opponent,  will
attack  the  true  subject  in  debate  instead  of  the  man
of  straw,  which  has  so  long  and  so  often  been  warred
with  under  the  name  of  mesmerism.

The  proofe,  which  I  shall  offer,  regarding  this  pe-
culiar phasis  of  our  mortal  state,  will  be  drawn,
almost  exclusively,  from  the  proceeds  of  iny  own
observation.  To  make  use  of  the  materials  accumu-
lated by  others,  in  order  to  construct  a  theory
of  one's  own,  has  always  appeared  to  me  inconsistent
with  the  earnestness  of  true  inquiry.  That  deep
conviction  of  the  reality  of  his  subject,  which  is  an
author's  life  and  soul,  is  the  result  of  personal  ex-
perience alone.  Besides,  it  should  be  the  aim,  as  I
conceive,  of  every  one  who  undertakes  a  cause,  to  add
to  the  stock  of  real  information  thereupon.  Thus
only  can  the  boundaries  of  human  knowledge  be  en-


50  MESMERISM.

larged ;  —  for  what  new  fact  can  be  elicited  by  those,
who  copy  everlastingly  from  the  old  ?  Moreover,  a
person  who  observes  for  himself  may  perchance  re-
mark what  has  hitherto  escaped  the  notice  of  even
clearer  eyes  than  his.  Let  twenty  men  witness  a
transaction^  and  the  attention  of  each  will  probably
be  directed  to  a  different  feature  of  that  transaction.
By  the  combined  result  of  such  individual  scrutiny,
we  come  to  a  perception  of  the  whole  truth.  Each
carefiilly  observed  fact  is  an  heirloom  to  mankind ;
and  he  who  verifies  a  new  phenomenon  does  more,
perhaps,  for  science  than  he  who  constructs  a
theory.

Before,  however,  bringing  forward  the  records  of
my  own  personal  experience,  I  must  warn  my  reader
that  if  he  imagines  I  have  anything  miraculous  to
relate  he  will  be  disappointed.  It  is  true  that  I
might,  were  I  so  inclined,  give  a  zest  to  my  pages
by  recording  circumstances  which  were  passing
strange ;  but  I  have  avoided  these,  from  reasons
which  partly  regard  myself,  partly  those  whom  I
address.

With  respect  to  the  latter,  I  think  that  persons  in
general  would  only  be  revolted  by  particulars  which
they  would  scarcely  credit  on  any  testimony ;  and
thus  I  should  rather  injure  than  promote  the  cause  I
have  undertaken  to  defend.

Secondly,  as  concerning  myself.  For  my  own  sake
I  shun  those  tracts  of  thought,  which,  if  not  belonging
to  superstition,  at  least  closely  border  upon  her
domains. When  once  we  pass  the  bounds  of  the


MESMERISM.  51

definite  and  the  probable,  we  can  scarcely  settle  with
our  own  minds  what  degree  of  credit  we  ought  to
attach  to  the  mystic  circumstances  that  surround  us,
or  on  what  basis  we  should  place  them.  Of  every
fact  of  this  nature  there  are  ordinarily  two  explana-
tions to  be  given  —  a  rational,  and  a  marvellous.
The  marvellous  would  lead  us  too  far;  the  rational
does  not  content  us.  As,  for  instance,  a  sleepwaker
describes  to  me  what  her  family,  in  a  distant  house,
are  doing  at  a  particular  hour.  I  inquire  subse-
quently into  this,  and  find  that  she  has  been  correct
in  every  point.  Now  there  are  two  interpretations
of  this  seeming  miracle:  —  we  may  either  suppose
that  the  sleepwaker  has  really  seen  what  she  stated ;
or  that,  from  her  knowledge  of  what  the  occupa-
tions of  her  family  generally  are,  at  a  certain  hour,
she  was  enabled  to  divine,  almost  certainly,  the
truth.

Again  :  a  sleepwaker  tells  me  —  "  My  brother,
who  has  been  to  the  Havannah,  and  of  whom  we  have
not  heard  for  some  months,  is  returned,  and  is  at  this
moment  anchored  off  Flushing.  He  is  just  coming
from  watch,  and  on  such  a  day  he  will  be  here."
This  is  verified  to  the  letter ;  but  again  there  are  two
methods  of  explaining  wherefore:  —  either  the  sleep-
waker was  gifted  with  extraordinary  knowledge  and
prescience,  or,  from  expecting  her  brother  about  a
certain  time,  she  calculated  on  probabilities,  per-
haps, more  acutely  than  in  her  natural  state ;  and
this,  combined  with  that  sort  of  coincidence  which
occurs  more  frequently  than  some  may  suppose,  is

n  2


52  MESMERISM.

sufficient  to  accoont  for  the  verification  of  her  asser-
tions and  her  prophecy.  This  may  be  true ;  but  I
confess  that  such  reasoning  as  the  latter  does  not
always  satisfy  me,  and  that,  in  my  opinion,  after
subtracting  from  the  account  all  of  the  mavellous  that
we  possibly  can,  there  will  yet  remain  a  residuum  of
something  strange  and  perplexing.  For  this  reason^
I  turn  my  attention  to  facts  that  appear  to  me  more
important,  as  well  as  more  certain ;  conceiving  that
to  dwell  on  wonders,  that  are,  at  best,  doubtful,  is  fiur
fi-om  healthy  to  the  mind.  I  have  therefore  always
discouraged  my  sleepwakers  from  making  to  me
extraordinary  revelations,  and  I  have  endeavoured  to
confine  both  them  and  myself  within  a  walk —
narrow,  indeed,  but  safe ;  less  interesting,  perhaps,
but  certainly  more  direct.

-All  facts  connected  with  the  senses,  or  which
illustrate  the  close  affinity  between  the  mesmeriser
and  his  patient  (indicative  as  they  are  of  some  medium
of  communication  existing  between  them)  seem  to  me
unexceptionable  in  their  tendency,  and  strictly  rela-
tive to  the  influence  we  have  to  consider.  To  these
then  I  have  chiefly  limited  myself  at  the  hazard  of
ofiending  by  over-caution,  rather  than  by  superfluous
zeal.  Hence  my  narrative  will  have  an  humble  air,
which  may  contrast  oddly,  perhaps,  with  the  high
terms  in  which  I  have  spoken  of  the  pretensions  of
mesmerism  in  my  first  book.  I  may  be  asked  the
cui  bono  of  certain  trifling  details,  and  may  be  told
that  the  experiments  I  have  related  are  neither
beautiful nor useful. To what  end, it  may be


MESMERISM.  53

demanded^  do  these  sleepwakers  perform  things
asleep  which  were  better  done  awake?  I  can
imagine  a  critic  saying — "  Never  was  the  *  partm*iunt
montes,'  more  admirably  exemplified  than  in  the
work  before  us.  We  are  told,  in  the  first  place  that
the.mesmeriser  withdraws  a  curtain  that  conceals  a
magic  world,  and  we  are  then  presented  with  nothing
better  than  a  Bartholomew  show  of  farthing  rush-
lights. We  first  read  of  awakened  powers  and  in-
tellectual influences  that  unlock  the  mysteries  of
nature,  and,  then,  proceeding  to  the  experiments,  we
meet  with  trash  little  better  than  the  following :  —

*  Are  you  asleep?' *  Yes  !'  —  *Do  you  see  me?'  —

*  No  ! '  &c.  &c."  This  is  all  easily  said ;  but  I
beseech  my  reader  to  remember  the  vast  dispropor-
tion between  the  experiments  themselves  and  the
deductions  to  be  drawn  from  them:  they  are  but
mean  steps  to  a  mighty  temple ;  yet  they  must  be
mounted  before  we  can  enter  the  sanctuary  itself.
Is  this  preliminary  humiliation  in  approaching  a
science  peculiar  to  mesmerism?  Let  us  turn  to
Newton's  optics,  where  we  shall  find  such  small  par-
ticularities as  the  following :  —  "I  made  in  a  piece  of
lead  a  small  hole  with  a  pin,  whose  breadth  was  the
forty-second  part  of  an  inch ;  for  twenty-one  of  those
pins  laid  together  took  up  the  breadth  of  half  an  inch."
We  are  neither  amused  nor  prejudiced  by  this,
because  we  know  to  what  mighty  consequences  the
apparent  trifles  led.  But  in  mesmerism  unfortunately
we  look  not  forward  thus;  and  unfortunately  also
there  is no  existing  subject  which more requires

D  3


54  MESMERISM.

men  to  look  beyond  externals.  The  object  experi*
mented  on  is  man ;  and,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,
whatever  has  to  do  with  man  contains  some  of  the
ludicrous.  Human  life  and  the  pages  of  Shakspeare
will  show  how  near  akin  in  us  are  tears  and  laughter,
sublimity  and  littleness.  Our  postures,  our  gestures,
our  peculiarities  of  countenance  may  all  become
matter  of  mirth  to  each  other  of  us.  When  their  best
friend  falls  down,  the  first  impulse  with  most  persons
is  to  laugh.  It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  in  mesmer-
ism we  experience  a  sense  of  the  comic,  which  the
inanimate  objects  that  are  operated  upon  in  other
sciences  cannot  excite.  No  one  feels  disposed  to
ridicule  a  crystal,  or  to  smile  at  a  mineral ;  but  there
will  be,  perhaps,  moments  in  mesmerism,  when  "to  be
grave  exceeds  all  powers  of  face."  The  motions  of
the  mesmeriser  especially  must  seem  ridiculous  to
those  who  see  him  gesticulate,  and  know  not  to  what
end.  He  is  using  those  means  which  experience
has  shown  him  to  be  most  eflScacious  in  calling  forth
the  phenomena  he  desires  to  produce ;  —  but  the
uninitiated  cannot  be  aware  of  this,  and  an  action
that  appears  to  want  motive  is  essentially  ludicrous.
Any  one  who  has  stopped  his  ears  to  the  music,
while  people  are  dancing,  will  remember  how  fantas-
tic the  scene  of  gaiety  appeared  to  him.  This,  and
more,  I  can  allow.  I  have  as  lively  a  sense  of  the
ludicrous  as  any  man,  and  could,  myself,  most  easily
travestie  mesmerism,  and  exhibit  it  in  a  ridiculous
point  of  view ;  for  ridicule  is  always  easy.  I  can  also
laugh, where  a  grave  subject  is goodhumouredly


MESMERISM.  55

bantered ;  as,  for  instance,  where  Hood  writes  a  lively
and  pleasant  article  —  into  which  one  can  plainly  see
no  malice  enters  —  on  what  he  facetiously  calls  som-
bamboozleism ;  and  represents  a  Yorkshire  grazier
as  much  disappointed,  when  he  finds  that  mesmerism
is  not  a  new  mode  of  fattening  animals  and  has
nothing  to  do  with  mangel  wurzel.  But  there  is
something  in  solemn  and  malignant  ridicule  which
is  not  so  easy  to  be  endured ;  —  though,  indeed,  we
should  remember  that  whether  scoffers  laugh  at
mesmerism  or  not  can  matter  little.  The  subject  is
not  for  them,  nor  for  any  who  cannot  look
through  the  trifling  to  the  important,  without
being  diverted  from  their  object  by  things  which
may  make  them  smile  at  the  moment  but  ponder
deeply  afterwards ;  —  as,  for  example,  the  mesmer-
iser  makes  faces,  and  the  sleepwaker,  though  seeing
him  not,  imitates  them  exactly.  Some  may  stop
short  at  the  ludicrous  part  of  this ;  but,  for  him  who
views  the  experiment  as  proving  an  unseen  medium
of  communication  between  the  mesmeriser  and  his
patient,  the  fact  is  full  of  an  absorbing  interest  which
checks  all  lighter  thoughts.  Thus  some  have  mocked
at  the  simplicity  of  diction  or  of  events  that  charac-
terises the  writings  of  Wordsworth,  while  others  have
seen  that  the  poet  has  only  adopted  nature's  mode  of
teaching  us  philosophy.  This,  at  least,  must  be
granted.  The  merest  trifles  are  interesting  that
suggest  to  us  an  action  in  man  independent  of  his
present  organisation.  Now  mesmerism  teems  with
^ore  than  slight  indications  of  this ;  and  we  should

D  4


56  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

treasure  up  such  glimmerings  of  futurity  —  however
feint,  and  however  presented  to  us  —  as  inestimable
proofs  that  we  possess  a  germ  of  being  which  God
permits  us  to  behold  partially  unfolded  here,  in  order
to  confirm  our  faith  as  to  its  fuller  development
hereafter.

This  being  premised,  I  proceed  to  give  an  account
of  the  first  experiments  in  mesmerism  which  it  fell  in
my  way  to  witness ;  conceiving  that  such  a  narrative
will  form  not  only  the  simplest  but  the  best  com-
mencement to  the  series  of  proofs  I  have  to  offer,
respecting  the  state  and  characteristics  of  mesmeric
sleepwaking.

If  to  have  been  an  unbeliever  in  the  very  existence
of  the  state  in  question  can  add  weight  to  my  testi-
mony, my  reader,  should  he  be  also  an  heretic  on  the
subject,  may  be  assured  that  his  incredulity  in  this
respect  can  scarcely  be  greater  than  mine  was  up  to
the  winter  of  1836.  That  at  the  time  I  mention  I
should  be  both  ignorant  and  prejudiced  on  the  score
of  mesmerism  will  not  surprise  those  who  are
aware  of  its  long  proscription  in  England,  and  the
want  of  information  upon  it  which  till  very  lately
prevailed  there.

In  the  course  of  a  residence  at  Antwerp,  a  valued
friend  detailed  to  me  some  extraordinary  results  of
mesmerism,  to  which  he  had  been  eye-witness.
I  could  not  altogether  discredit  the  evidence  of  one
whom  I  knew  to  be  both  observant  and  incapable  of
felsehood ;  but  I  took  refuge  in  the  supposition  that  he
had  been  ingeniously  deceived. Reflecting,  however,


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  57

that  to  condemn  before  I  had  examined  was  as  unjust
to  others  as  it  was  unsatisfactory  to  myself,  I  ac-
cepted readily  the  proposition  of  my  friend  to  intro-
duce me  to  an  acquaintance  of  his  in  Antwerp  who  had
learned  the  practice  ofthe  mesmeric  art  from  a  German

physician.  We  waited  together  on  Mr.  K ,  the

mesmeriser,  (an  agreeable  and  well-informed  person)
and  stated  to  him  that  the  object  of  our  visit  was  to
prevail  on  him  to  exhibit  to  us  a  specimen  of  his  myste-
rious talent.  To  this  he  at  first  replied  that  he  was
rather  seeking  to  abjure  a  renown  that  had  become
troublesome,  half  the  world  viewing  him  as  a  conjuror,
and  the  other  half  as  a  getter  up  of  strange  comedies ;
but,*'  he  kindly  added,  "  if  you  will  promise  me  a
strictly  private  meeting,  I  will,  this  evening,  do  all  in
my  power  to  convince  you  that  mesmerism  is  no  delu-
sion. This  being  agreed  upon,  together  with  a  stipu-
lation that  the  members  of  my  own  family  should  be
present  on  the  occasion,  I,  to  remove  all  doubt  of

complicity  from  every  mind,  proposed  that  Mr.  K

should  mesmerise  a  person  who  should  be  a  perfect
stranger  to  him.  To  this  he  readily  acceded;  and  now
the  only  difficulty  was  to  find  a  subject  for  our  ex-
periment. At  length  we  thought  of  a  young  person,
in  the  middling  class  of  life,  who  had  often  done  fine
work  for  the  ladies  of  our  family,  and  of  whose  cha-
racter we  had  the  most  favourable  knowledge.  Her
mother  was  Irish;  her  father,  who  had  been  dead
some  time,  had  been  a  Belgian,  and  she  spoke  En-
glish, Flemish,  and  French,  with  perfect  facility.
Her  widowed  parent  was  chiefly  supported  by  her

D  5


58  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

industry,  and,  in  the  midst  of  trying  circumstances,  hei*
temper  was  gay  and  cheerful,  and  her  health  excel-
lent.  That  she  had  never  seen  Mr.  K we  were

sure;  and  of  her  probity  and  incapacity  for  feigning  we
had  every  reason  to  be  convinced.  With  our  request,
conveyed  to  her  through  one  of  the  ladies  of  our
family,  for  whom  she  had  conceived  a  warm  affection^
she  complied  without  hesitation.  Not  being  of  a
nervous,  though  of  an  exciteable  temperament,  she
had  no  fears  whatever  about  what  she  was  to  undergo.
On  the  contrary,  she  had  rather  a  desire  to  know
what  the  sensation  of  being  mesmerised  might  be.
Of  the  phenomena  which  were  to  be  developed  in
the  mesmeric  state  she  knew  absolutely  nothing.
Thus  all  deceptive  imitation  of  them  on  her  part  was
rendered  impossible.

About  nine o'clock in the evening  our party
assembled  for  what  in  foreign  phrase  is  called "  une

stance  magnetique." Anna  M ,  our  mesmeris^ef

was  already  with  us. Mr.  K arrived  soon  after,

and  was  introduced  to  his  young  patient,  whose  name
we  had  purposely  avoided  mentioning  to  him  in  the
morning  —  not  that  we  feared  imposition  on  either
hand,  but  that  we  were  determined,  by  every  precau-
tion, to  prevent  any  one  from  alleging  that  imposition
had  been  practised.  Utterly  unknown  as  the  parties
were  to  each  other,  a  game  played  by  two  confederates
was  plainly  out  of  the  question.  Almost  immediately
after  the  entrance  of  Mr.  K— —  we  proceeded  to  the
business  of  the  evening.  By  his  directions,  Mademoi-
sdle  M placed  herself  in  an  arm-chair  at  one  end


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  59

of  the  apartment,  while  he  occupied  a  seat  directly  facing
hers.  He  then  took  each  of  her  hands  in  one  of  his,
and  sat  in  such  a  manner  as  that  the  knees  and  feet
of  both  should  be  in  contact.  In  this  position  he  re-
mained for  some  time  motionless,  attentively  regard-
ing her  with  eyes  as  unwinking  as  the  lidless  orbs
which  Coleridge  has  attributed  to  the  Genius  of
Destruction.  We  had  been  told  previously  to  keep
utter  silence,  and  none  of  our  circle, —  composed  of
some  five  or  six  persons  —  felt  inclined  to  transgress
the  order.  To  me,  novice  as  I  was  at  that  time  in
such  matters,  it  was  a  moment  of  absorbing  interest.
That  which  I  had  heard  mocked  at  as  foolishness  —
that  which  I  myself  had  doubted  as  a  dream,  was
perhaps  about  to  be  brought  home  to  my  conviction,
and  established  for  ever  in  my  mind  as  a  reality.
Should  the  present  trial  prove  successful,  how  much
of  my  past  experience  must  be  remodelled  and  re-
versed !

Convinced  as  I  have  since  been  to  what  valuable
conclusions  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  may
conduct  the  inquirer,  never,  perhaps,  have  I  been
more  impressed  with  the  importance  of  its  preten-
sions than  at  that  moment  when  my  doubts  of  their
validity  were  either  to  be  strengthened  or  removed.
Concentrating my  attention upon the motionless

pair,  I  observed  that  Mademoiselle  M seemed

at  her  ease,  and  occasionally  smiled,  or  glanced  at
the  assembled  party ;  but  her  eyes,  as  if  by  a  charm,
always  reverted  to  those  of  her  mesmeriser,  and  at
length seemed unable to turn away  from them

D  6


60  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.

Then  a  heaviness,  as  of  sleep,  seemed  to  weigh  down
her  eyelids,  and  to  pervade  the  expression  of  her
countenance;  her  head  drooped  on  one  side;  her
breathing  became  regular ;  at  length  her  eyes  closed
entirely,  and,  to  all  appearance,  she  was  calmly
asleep  in  just  seven  minutes  from the  time  when

Mr. K first commenced his operations. I

should  have  observed  that,  as  soon  as  the  first  symp-
tom of  drowsiness  was  manifested,  the  mesmeriser
had  withdrawn  his  hands  from  those  of  Mademoiselle

M and had  commenced  what are  called  the

"mesmeric  passes,'**  conducting  his  fingers  slowly
downward,  without  contact,  along  the.  arms  of  the
patient.  For  about  five  minutes  Mademoiselle
M-  ■  ■  continued  to  repose  tranquilly,  when  sud-
denly she  began  to  heave  deep  sighs,  and  to  turn
and  toss  in  her  chair.  She  then  called  out,  "  Je  me
trouve  malade  !  Je  m'etouffe  !  '*  and,  rising  in  a  wild
manner,  she  continued  to  repeat,  "  Je  m'etouffe ! "
evidently  labouring  under  an  oppi*ession  of  the
breath.  But  all  this  time  her  eyes  remained  fast
shut,  and,  at  the  command  of  her  mesmeriser,  she
took  his  arm,  and  walked  —  still  with  her  eyes  shut

—  to  the  table. Mr.  K then  said,  "  Voulez-

vous  que  je  vous  ^veille?" "  Oui,  oui,"  she ex-
claimed, "  Je m'etouffe.*' Upon  this, Mr.  K
again  operated  with  his  hands,  but  in  a  different  set
of  movements, and, taking  out his  handkerchiefi

*  The  term  means  nothing  more  than  such  motions  as  I  have
described.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  61

agitated  the  air  around  the  patient,  who  forthwidi
opened  her  eyes,  and  stared  about  the  room  like  a
person awaking from sleep. No traces of her
indisposition, however, appeared  to remain, and,
soon  shaking off  all drowsiness,  she  was able  to
converse  and  laugh  as  cheerfully  as  usual. On  being
asked  what  she  remembered  of  her  sensations,  she
said  that  she  had  only  a  general  idea  of  having  felt
unwell  and  oppressed ;  that  she  had  wished  to  open
her  eyes,  but  could  not. They  felt  as  if  lead  were
on  them. Of  having  walked  to  the  table  she  had  no
recollection. Notwithstanding  her  having  suffered,
she  was  desirous  of  being  again  mesmerised,  and  sat
down  fearlessly  to  make  a  second  trial. This  time
it  was  longer  before  her  eyes  closed,  and  she  never
seemed  to  be  reduced  to  more  than  a  state  of  half
unconsciousness. When  the  mesmeriser  asked  her  if
she  slept,  she  answered  in  the  tone  of  utter  drowsi-
ness, **  Je  dors,  et  je  ne  dors  pas.*' This  lasted  some

time,  when  Mr.  K declared  that  he  was  afraid

of  fatiguing  his  patient  (and  probably  his  spectators
too),  and  that  he  should  disperse  the  mesmeric  fluid.
To  do  so,  however,  seemed  not  so  easy  a  matter  as
the  first  time  when  he  awoke  the  sleepwaker.  With
difficulty  she  appeared  to  rouse  herself,  and  even
after  having  spoken  a  few  words  to  us,  and  risen
from  her  chair,  she  suddenly  relapsed  into  a  state
of  torpor,  and  fell  prostrate  to  the ground,  as if

perfectly  insensible. Mr.  K entreating  us  not

to  be  alarmed,  raised  her  up,  placed  her  in  a  chair,
and  supported  her  head  with  his  hand. It  was


62  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

then  that  I  distinctly  recognised  one  of  the  asserted
phenomena  of  mesmerism.  The  head  of  Mademoi-
selle M followed everywhere,  with imerring

certainty,  the  hand  of  her  mesmeriser,  and  seemed
irresistibly  attracted  to  it,  as  iron  to  the  loadstone.

At  length Mr. K succeeded in thoroughly

awaking  his  patient,  who,  on  being  interrogated
respecting  her  past  sensations,  said  that  she  retained
a  recollection  of  her  state  of  semi-consciousness,
during  which  she  much  desired  to  have  been  able  to
sleep  wholly ;  but  of  her  having  fallen  to  the  ground,
or  of  what  had  passed  subsequently,  she  remembered
nothing  whatever.  To  other  inquiries  she  replied
that  the  drowsy  sensation  which  first  stole  over  her
was  rather  of  an  agreeable  nature,  and  that  it  was
preceded  by  a  slight  tingling,  which  ran  down  her
arms  in  the  direction  of  the  raesmeriser's  fingers.
Moreover,  she  assured  us  that  the  oppression  she  had
at  one  time  felt  was  not  fanciful,  but  real  —  not
mental,  but  bodily,  and  was  accompanied  by  a
peculiar  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  which,
however,  ceased  immediately  on  the  dispersion  of  the
mesmeric  sleep.  These  statements  were  the  rather
to  be  relied  upon,  inasmuch  as  the  girl's  character
was  neither  timid  nor  imaginative.

Second  Sitting,

On  this  occasion  Mademoiselle  M sat  down,

as  she  assured  me  afterwards,  with  a  resolution  to
resist  the  mesmeric  drowsiness  to  the  utmost,  and
with  a  strong  impression  that  she  sohuld  not  sleep.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  69

This  want  of  co-operation  on  her  part  seemed  to
render  the  mesmeriser's  task  more  difficult,  yet  in
about  twenty  minutes  she  was  brought  into  that  state
of  imperfect  slumber  into  which  she  had  fallen  on
the  first  evening.  As  then,  so  now,  she  affirmed,
"  Je  dors,  et  je  ne  dors  pas ; "  while  all  the  time  she
seemed  incapable  of  opening  her  eyes.  At  other
times  she  expressed  an  impatience  of  her  semi-
conscious state,  and  exclaimed,  ^^  Faites-moi  dormir
tout-a-fait ; "  but  the  nagain  she  murmured ;  "  Non,
vous  ne  le  pouvez  pas.'*  In  this  half  torpid  state  she
remained  so  long,  that  we  feared no other  result

would  be  obtained ; and  Mr.  K himself  turned

round  his  head  towards  us,  and  shook  it,  as  much
as  to  say  that  he  despaired  of  success.  At  length,
however,  appearing  to  rally  his  powers,  he  laid  his
hands  upon  the  shoulders  of  his  patient,  who  almost
instantly  heaved  a  deep  sigh,  and  fell  back  in  her
chair  with  every  symptom  of  the  profoundest  slumber.
Soon  after  this,  I  observed  that  her  head,  as  on  the
last  occasion,  followed  every  motion  of  the  mesmer-
iser's hands. Mr.  K now  asked her if  she

slept,  and  she  replied  softly,  but  distinctly,  "  Oui,  je
dors."  He  then  asked  her  if  she  would  quit  her
chair,  and  walk  a  little,  but  to  this  proposition  she
strongly  objected,  declaring  that  she  wished  to  rest,
and  that she  thought  she  should  fall  were  she  to

attempt  to  get  up. Mr.  K ,  however, assured

her  that  such  would  not  be  the  case,  and  rising  from
his  chair,  and  going  to  a  short  distance,  he  made  a
motion  with  his  arms, as  if  he  would  draw  her


64  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.

towards  him.  Sighing  deeply,  she  then  got  up,  and
moved  towards  him,  but  tottered,  and  exclaimed,
"  Oh  je  vais  tomber."  Upon  this  the  mesmeriser
seized  her  hand,  and  said,  in  a  tone  of  decision,
"  Non,  vous  ne  tomberez  pas."  In  effect,  she  after-
wards stood  firmly,  and  even  walked  about  the  room,

holding  the  arm  of  Mr.  K but  still  retaining

the  expression  of  a  sleeping  person,  though  the
extreme  torpor  which  weighed  down  her  head  before
she  left  her  chair  seemed,  in  a  great  measure,
removed.  To  all  appearance  her  eyes  were  closely
shut,  and  there  was  even  a  sealed  look  about  the  lids
which  was  very  remarkable.  Notwithstanding  this,
she  appeared  to  be  very  sensible  to  the  light,  and
never  approached  the  lamp  without  complaining  of
the  glare.  One  of  our  party  having  expressed  a
doubt  that  she  slept,  and  this  having  been  explained
to  her  by  the  mesmeriser  (for  she  did  not  seem  to
attend  to  any  one  else),  she  exclaimed,  with  an  air  of
surprise,  "  Yes,  certainly,  I  am  asleep."  During  the
time  (upwards  of  an  hour)  that  she  remained  thus
abstracted, or entranced, I noted the following

phenomena :  —

1st. Attraction towards the mesmeriser  —  mental

and  physical.  —  She  could  not  endure Mr.  K

to  leave  her  for  an  instant;  and  there  was  a
nervous  anxiety  in  the  manner  in  which  she  often
exclaimed,  "  Mais,  il  ne  faut  pas  me  quitter."
The  most  apparently  uncomfortable  posture  seemed
agreeable  to  her  so  long  as  she  could  rest  her
head  on  the  mesmeriser's  hand. If  another  hand


MESMERIC SLEEFWAKINO.  65

was  substituted,  however  adroitly,  she  was  imme-
diately aware  of  the  change,  and  betrayed  un-
easiness. On  one  occasion  I  took  the  mesmeriser's
place  at  a  moment  when  he  stood  behind  her.  After
a  few  seconds,  an  expression  of  utter  discontent  and
repugnance  came  over  her  countenance,  and  she  re-
moved her  head  from  my  support. At  this  moment

Mr.  K- was  stealing  away  noiselessly  to  another

part  of  the  room,  and  I  observed  that  her  face  turned
towards  him,  and  followed  his  every  motion.  When
he  made  a  gesture  as  if  he  would  beckon  her  towards
him,  she  got  up  immediately,  and  walked  to  where
he  was,  threading  her  way,  exactly  as  he  had  done,
between  the  chairs,  tables,  &c.,  without  stumbling  or
coming  in  contact  with  any  obstacle.

2dly.  A  knowledge  of  what  the  mesmeriser  ate  or  drank^
indicating  community  of  sensation  with  him,  —  This
phenomenon  appearing  to  me  to  constitute  one  of  the
most interesting  features of  the  mesmeric  state,  I

took  particular  pains  to  verify  it. Mr.  K stood

behind  the  sleepwaker,  but  in  contact  with  her  (for
otherwise  the  experiment  did  not  seem  to  answer)  one
hand  slightly  touching  her  shoulder. In  this  position

of  the  parties,  we  handed  to  Mr.  K from  behind

(so  as  to  prevent  any  possibility  of  the  sleepwaker
seeing  what  we  were  about,  even  had  her  eyes  been
open)  different  things  to  drink  or  eat.  While  the
mesmeriser  was  taking  these.  Mademoiselle  M—
imitated  precisely  all  the  motions  of  tasting  and  swal-
lowing, just  as  if  she  herself  had  taken  the  substances
into  her  mouth.' On  being  asked  what  she  tasted.


66  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

she  Stated  correctly  what  the  mesmeriser  was  oc-
cupied with  at  the  moment.  In  this  way  she  re-
cognised tea,  wine, and water, and  distinguished

between  them,  change  them  as  often  as  we  would.
The  accuracy  with  which  she  described  a  peculiar

kind  of  roll,  which  we  gave  Mr.  K to  eat,  was

extraordinary.  "  Ce  n'est  pas  du  pain ;  ce  n'est  pas
pr^cisement  du  biscuit.  C*est  quelquechose  que  les
matelots  mangent."  The  last  assertion  was  perfectly
correct,  for  at  Antwerp  this  kind  of  roll  is  a  favourite
article  of  diet  with  the  sailors.

3dly.  An  increased  quickness  of  perception, — Privately
and  with  precaution,  I  changed  rings  with  the  mes-
meriser. The  moment  the  sleep waker  subsequently
took  his  hand,  she  exclaimed,  "  Vous  avez  quelque
chose,  qui  n'est  pas  de  vous  ! " "A  qui  est  ce  done  ?  "

asked  Mr.  K :  she  immediately  named  the  right

owner.  I  should  remark  that,  in  her  waking  state,
she  assured  me  she  did  not  know  whether  even  I
wore  a  ring  or  not.  Another  proof  of  the  acute-
ness  of  her  perceptions  was  the  accuracy  with  which
she  distinguished  her  mesmeriser's  hand  from  every
other.  We  made  the  experiment  together  with
her  mesmeriser,  giving  her  all  our  hands  suc-
cessively many  times,  in  a  different order,  but  she

invariably  recognised the  hand  of  Mr.  K at

the  first  touch,  exclaiming  "  Ah  c'est  de  lui."

4thly.  A  development  of  the  power  of  vision.  —  I  am
aware  that  I  here  approach  dangerous  ground.  Our
very  nature  rises  up  in  arms  against  whatever  seems  in-
vCompatible  with  our  personal  experience;  and  that  men


MESMERIC SLEEFWAKINO.  67

should,  under  any  circumstances,  see  otherwise  than
in  the  appointed  way  of  vision  appears  so  entirely  to
contradict  the  very  purposes  of  our  organisation,  that
we  shrink  from  the  bare  mention  of  such  an  anomaly.
Accordingly,  what  is  called  clair-voyance  has  been
ever  the  great  stumbling-block  to  the  unbeliever  in
mesmerism.  To  decide  that  mesmeric  sleepwakers
do  really  possess  the  faculty  of  seeing  through  closed
lids,  or  other  obstacles,  would  in  this  place  be  pre-
mature. I  waive  that  question  until  I  can  place  it
upon  the  sure  ground  of  proof.  But  allowing  to  pass
for  the  present  an  hypothesis  which  has  been  sug-
gested to  me ;  namely,  that  mesmerised  persons,
being  in  a  state  of  nervous  excitement,  see,  like  those
afflicted  with  a  peculiar  irritability  of  the  retina,
with  less  light  and  through  a  smaller  aperture
between  the  lids,  than  others ;  still,  even  the  fact  that
the  sensibility  of  vision  can  be  thus  increased  by
apparently  insignificant  means,  appears  to  me  highly
interesting  and  worthy  of  investigation.  This  I  can
safely  affirm  —  that  there  was  something  new  and
astonishing  in  the  manner  in  which  Mademoiselle
M distinguished  objects.  The  closest  observa-
tion of  the  six  members  of  the  party,  who  witnessed
the  experiments  I  am  now  detailing,  could  detect  not
the  slightest  opening  of  her  eye-lids;  nevertheless  she
gave  undoubted  proofs  of  possessing  a  considerable
degree  of  vision,  for  she  recognised  and  named
every  person  present,  when  brought  up  to  her  in  any
order.  The  exercise,  however,  of  whatever  new
mode  of  vision  she  had  acquired,  appeared  to  her


68  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

difficult  and  fetiguing ;  and,  when  an  object  was  held
before  her,  she  usually  declared  it  to  be  too  small  for
her  to  know  what  it  was.  When  urged  to  look  at
any  thing,  she  expressed  the  greatest  repugnance  to
do  so ;  and  it  was  only  at  the  reiterated  command  of
the  mesmeriser  that  she  aroused  herself  to  the  neces-
sary effort  At  those  times,  her  whole  deportment
was  that  of  a  person  who  wished  to  rest,  yet  who  by
some  external  force  was  compelled  into  exertion.  No
exorcised  spirit  could  have  done  its  work  more  grudg-
ingly ;  and,  like  the  enchantress  evoked  by  Odin,  she
continually  entreated  to  be  left  to  repose.  Sometimes
addressing  those  around  her,  when  asked  to  look
at  any  object,  she  exclaimed,  "You,  who  see  so
much  better  than  I  do,  why  do  not  you  rather  tell
me  what  it  is.  I  beg  of  you  to  tell  me."  Twice,
however,  she  gave  singular  proofs  of  correct  vision.
Some  music-paper  was  put  into  her  hand,  and  she
was  asked  what  was  written  on  it.  She  replied,
**  There  is  notliing  written  on  it ;  it  is  music  paper."
The  mesmeriser  gave  her  his  watch,  and  asked
her  the  hour.  After  the  usual  reluctance  and  some
delay,  and  moving  of  her  fingers  over  the  watch-glass,
in  the  direction  of  the  hands,  she  named  the  hour
and  minute  with  precision.

During  this  sitting,  there  was  no  return  of  the  op-
pression from  which  Mademoiselle  M had  suf-
fered on  first  being  mesmerised.  Both  in  countenance
and  manner  she  remained  perfectly  calm.

The  experiments  being  at  an  end,  she  was  asked  if
she  wished  to  awake,  when she  answered  in the


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  69

affirmative,  but  at  the  same  time  declared  her  ina-
bility to  do  so  unless  the  mesmeriser  took  off  the
heaviness  from  her  eyes,  as  in  the  preceding  sitting.

Upon  this  Mr.  K made  some  lateral  motions

with  his  hands,  across  her  face,  as  if  he  were  removing
something  from  before  it,  and  in  about  a  minute  the
sleepwaker  opened  her  eyes,  rubbed  them,  and  stared
about,  like  a  person  awaking  from  heavy  slumber.
Her  first  question  was,  "How  long  have  I  been
asleep  ? "  She  then  complained  of  considerable
heaviness  in  her  limbs,  but  this  was  soon  removed,
as  it  seemed,  by  some  mesmeric  "  passes"  which  Mr.

K made  over  them. When  interrogated  as  to

what  she  remembered  of  her  past  state,  she  said  that
the  last  thing  which  she  distinctly  recollected  was  the
mesmeriser's  laying  his  hands  on  her  shoulders  —
that  they  felt  to  her  bmrning  hot,  and  as  heavy  as
lead,  and  seemed  to  weigh  her  down  into  unconsci-
ousness. All  su1}sequent  to  this  was  a  blank,  with
the  exception  of  a  confused  notion,  as  of  something
in  a  dream  that  many  hands  had  touched  her  own.

Third  Sitting.

This time,  Mr.  K brought  to us, as his

mesmeric  patient,  a  young  man  of  about  seventeen
years  of  age,  whom  I  shall  call  Theodore,  the  son  of

most  respectable  persons  in  Antwerp. Mr.  K

had  already  mesmerised  him  several  times,  and  had
excited  our  curiosity  respecting  him  by  detailing  to
us  extraordinary  proofs  of  his  powers  of  vision  in  the
state  of sleepwaking. From  the  moment  of  his


70  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

entering  the  room,  this  young  man  prepossessed
every  one  in  his  favour.  His  quiet,  and  even  timid
manners,  and  his  ingenuous  countenance,  made  us
feel  that  we  might  rely  upon,  as  genuine,  any  phe-
nomena he  might  exhibit.  He  was  in  a  state  of
perfect  health.

In about ten  minutes from the time he was
submitted,  in  the  usual  manner,  to  the  influence  of

Mr.  K he  gave  tokens  of  having  passed  into  the

mesmeric  state,  his  head  following  every  motion  of
the  mesmeriser's  hand.  Slight  shudderings,  from
time  to  time,  seemed  to  pass  over  his  frame,  and
were  occasionally  repeated  during  the  whole  time
of  his  sleepwaking.  This  unusual  state  was  ac-
companied by  a  marked  change  in  his  demeanour.
He  seemed  to  have  lost  his  shyness,  and  conversed

with  Mr.  K- '  in  an  unembarrassed  manner,  as

if  no  longer  conscious  of  the  presence  of  strangers.
He  became  more  animated,  frequently  laughed
aloud,  and  even  went  the  length  of  committing  a
pleasantry.  When  led  up  to  a  very  pretty  girl  in
company,  the  mesmeriser  (in  order  to  try  his  powers
of  vision)  said,  "  Savez  vous  qui  est  ce  jeune  homme  ?  "
to  which  Theodore  replied  directly,  "Je  voudrais
bien  voir  un  jeune  homme  aussi  joli  que  cela."

The  principal  phenomena  which  I  noted  in  the

case  of  Mademoiselle  M were  all  developed  in

this  sleepwaker,  with  the  slight  exception  of  his
more  patiently  suffering  the  mesmeriser  to  go  to  a
short  distance  from  him.  On  the  former,  however,
trying  to  steal  from  the  apartment  as  noiselessly  as


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINGk  71

possible,  he  rushed  to  him  and  dragged  him  back
with  considerable  agitation,  which  was  only  calmed
by  the  mesmeriser  caressing  him,  as  it  were,  with
the  hand.  On  all  occasions  he  testified  the  strongest
attachment  and  affection  to  Mr.  K— —  frequently
leaning  his  head  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  latter,  and
running  to  him,  when  placed  at  a  little  distance,  on
the  slightest  motion  of  his  hand,  with  such  simple
and  natural  gestures  as  a  child  uses  when,  half
playfully,  it  runs  for  shelter  to  its  mother's  side.

His  physical  attraction  towards  the  mesmeriser  was
as  strongly  marked  as  the  mental. As  he  was  sitting

down,  Mr.  K approached  his  hand  to  the  leg

of  the  patient,  and  then  slowly  drew  it  upward.
The  limb,  as  if  compelled  to  follow,  rose  also,  and,

as long as Mr.  K held his hand over  it,

remained  in  a  raised  position.

A  very  important  proof  that  this  physical  attrac-
tion was  wholly  independent  of  the  patient's  imagin-
ation was  the  following:  —  Theodore  was  standing
with  his  back  to  the  mesmeriser,  while  some  one
engaged  his  attention  in  front,  and  the  mesmeriser
going  to  a  good  distance,  so  as  to  render  any  cog-
nisance of  his  gestures  by  feeling  impossible,  gently
beckoned  towards  him  the  patient,  who  actually  ran
backwards  for  some  steps,  then,  turning  quickly
round,  hastened  to  the  mesmeriser.  Community
of  sensation  was  manifested  not  only  by  a  recog-
nition of  what  the  mesmeriser  ate  or  drank,  but  in
another  way,  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  sense
of  feeling,  as  well  as  of  taste,  was  placed  in  some


72  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

mysterious communication  with the corresponding

function  of  the mesmeriser. Mr.  K having

left  Theodore  standing  apart  for  a  few  instants,  went
to  the  fire  and  warmed  himself.  During  this  time
the  patient  rubbed  his  hands  and  spread  them  out,
as  if  over  the  flame,  precisely  as  the  mesmeriser  did,
and  with  a  look  of  evident  satisfaction  and  enjoy-
ment. Mr.  K said, "  Que faites vous  la

Theodore?'' "  Je  m'^chauffe "  was  the  answer.

Our  young  patient  also  exhibited  other  pheno-
mena, which  I  have  since  found  to  be  generally
characteristic  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  and  which
I  shall  caU —

Occasional  Community  of  Motion  with  the  Mes^
meriser.  —  Isolation  from  all  others  than  the  MeS"
meriser.

In  illustration  of  the  first,  I  might  adduce  the  fact,
that  there  was  no  person  present  who  did  not  remark
that,  in  walking,  Theodore  took  the  step  and  air  of

Mr.  K as  if  his  body  were  a  machine  directed  by

the  mesmeriser.  But  this  may  be  objected  to  as  a
proof  not  sufficiently  rigorous.  The  correctness,  how-
ever, of  the  following  experiment  cannot  be  contested.

The  mesmeriser  was  placed  with  his  back  to  the
patient.  In  this  position,  the  former  made  sundry
grimaces  and  contortions  of  visage,  which  were
exactly  and  simultaneously  imitated  by  the  latter.

Secondly.  Upon  first  passing  into  the  mesmeric
state,  Theodore  seemed  absolutely  insensible  to  every
other  than  the  mesmeriser's  voice. Some  of  our


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINGt.  73

party  went  close  to  him,  and  shouted  his  name,  but

he  gave  no  tokens  of  hearing  us,  until  Mr.  K ,

taking  our  hands,  made  us  touch  those  of  Theodore
and  his  own  at  the  same  time.  This  he  called
putting  us  "en  rapport"  with  the  patient.  After
this,  Theodore  seemed  to  hear  our  voices  equally
with  that  of  the  mesmeriser,  but  by  no  means  to  pay
an  equal  attention  to  them.

With  regard  to  development  of  vision,  the  eyes  of
the  patient  appeared  to  be  firmly  shut  during  the
whole  sitting,  and  yet  he  gave  the  following  proofs
of  accurate  sight :  —

Without  being  guided  by  our  voices  (for  in  making
the  experiment  we  kept  carefully  silent)  he  dis-
tinguished between  the  different  persons  present  and
the  colours  of  their  dresses.  He  also  named  with
accuracy  various  objects  on  the  table,  such  as  a
miniature  picture,  a  drawing  by  Mr.  K ,  &c.

When  the  mesmeriser  left  him,  and  ran  quickly
amongst  the  chairs,  tables,  &c.,  of  the  apartment,  he
followed  him,  running  also,  and  taking  the  same
turns,  without  once  coming  in  contact  with  any  thing
that  stood  in  his  way.

He  told the  hour accurately  by  Mr.  K 's

watch.

He  played  several  games  at  dominos  with  the
different  members  of  our  family,  as  readily  as  if  his
eyes  had  been  perfectly  open.  On  these  occa-
sions the  lights  were  placed  in  front  of  him,  and  he
arranged  his  dominos  on  the  table  with  their  backs
to  the  candles  in  such  a  manner  that,  when  I  placed

£


74  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKINO.

my  head  in  the  same  position  as  his  own,  I  could
scarcely,  through  the  shade,  distinguish  one  from  the
other.  Yet  he  took  them  up  unerringly,  never
hesitated  in  his  play,  generally  won  the  game,  and
announced  the  sum  of  tlie  spots  on  such  of  his
dominos  as  remained  over  at  the  end,  before  his
adversaries  could  count  theirs.  One  of  our  party,
a  lady,  who  had  been  extremely  incredulous  on  the
subject  of  mesmerism,  stooped  down  so  as  to  look
under  his  eyelids  all  the  time  he  played,  and  declared
herself  convinced  and  satisfied  that  his  eyes  were
perfectly  closed.  It  was  not  always,  however,  that
Theodore  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  exercise  his
power  of  vision.  Some  words,  written  by  the
mesmeriser,  of  a  tolerable  size,  being  shown  him,  he

declared  (as  Mademoiselle  M did  on another

occasion)  that  it  was  too  small  for  him  to  distinguish.
Towards  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting,  tlie  patient
seemed  much  fatigued,  and,  going  to  the  sofa,  arranged
a  pillow  for  himself  comfortably  under  his  head,  after
which  he  appeared  to  pass  into  a  state  more  akin  to

natural  sleep  than  his  late  sleepwaking. Mr.  K

allowed  him  to  repose  in  this  manner  for  a  short
time,  and  then  awoke  him  by  the  usual  formula.
A  very  few  motions  of  the  hand  were  sufficient  to
restore  him  to  full  consciousness,  and  to  his  usual
character.  The  fatigue  of  which  he  had  so  lately
complained  seemed  wholly  to  have  passed  away^
together  with  the  memory  of  all  that  he  had  been
doing  for  the  last  hour.
* I  must  now  pause  to  set  before  my  reader  my  own


HfESMERIC SL£EFWAKIKO«  75

jitate  of  mind  respecting  the  &cts  I  had  witnessed.
I  perceived  that  important  deductions  might  be
drawn  from  them,  and  that  they  bore  upon  disputed
questions  of  the  highest  interest  to  man,  connected
widi  the  three  great  mysteries  of  being — life^  death,
and  immortality.  On  these  grounds  I  was  resolved
to  enter  upon  a  consistent  course  of  inquiry  con-
cerning them :  though,  as  yet,  while  all  was  new  and
wonderful  to  my  apprehensions,  I  could  scarcely  do
more  than  observe  and  verify  phenomena.  It  was,
however,  necessary  that  my  views,  though  for  the
present  bounded,  should  be  distinct.  I  had  already
asked  respecting  mesmeric  sleepwaking  —  does  it
exist  ?  and  to  this  question  the  cases  which  had  fallen
under  my  notice,  and  which  were  above  suspicion,
seemed  to  answer  decidedly  in  the  affirmative.  But
it  was  essential  still  further  to  inquire  —  does  it
exist  so  generally  as  to  be  pronounced  a  part  —
though  a  rarely  developed  part  —  of  the  human  con-
stitution ?  In  order  to  determine  this,  it  was  requi-
site to  observe  how  far  individuals  of  different  ages,
stations,  and  temperaments,  were  capable  of  mesme-
ric sleepwaking.  I  resolved,  therefore,  by  experi-
ments on  as  extensive  a  scale  as  possible,  to  ascertain
whether  the  state  in  question  were  too  commonly  ex-
hibited to  be  exceptional  or  idiosyncratic.  Again,  the
two  cases  that  I  had  witnessed  coincided  in  charac-
teristics. But  could  this  coincidence  be  acciden-
tal ?  It  might  still  be  asked,  were  the  phenomena
th^  displayed  uncertain,  mutable,  such  as  might
never  occur  again ; —  or  were  they  orderly,  invariable^

£  2


76  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

the  growth  of  fixed  causes,  which,  being  present,  implied
their  presence  also  ?  In  fine,  was  mesmeric  sleepwak-
ing,  not  only  a  state,  but  entitled  to  rank  as  a  distinct
state,  clearly  and  permanently  characterised ;  and,  as
such,  set  apart  from  all  other  abnormal  conditions  of
man  ?  On  its  pretensions  to  be  so  considered,  rested,  I
conceived,  its  claims  to  notice  and  peculiar  investiga-
tion. To  decide  this  point  was,  therefore,  one  of  my
chief  objects ;  and  respecting  it  I  was  determined  to  seek
that  certainty  which  can  only  be  attained  by  a  careful
comparison  of  facts  occurring  under  the  same  cir-
cumstances. To  sum  up  my  intentions, '—  I  desired
to  show  that  man,  through  external  human  influence,
is  capable  of  a  species  of  sleepwaking  differing
from  the  common,  not  only  inasmuch  as  it  is  other-
wise produced,  but  as  it  displays  quite  other  charac-
teristics when  produced.

Thus  the  inquiry  on  which  I  desired  to  enter  was
twofold,  for  I  had  to  consider  —

1st.  Sleepwaking,  as  mesmerically  induced.

2d.  As  possessing,  when  so  induced,  its  own  class  of
phenomena.

Before  relating  with  what  success  I  pursued  the
above  objects,  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  say  a  few
ivords  as  to  the  plan  to  which  I  shall  adhere  in  the
detail  of  my  "  proofs  by  experiments."  Each  branch
t)f  my  inquiry  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  treated  separately;
but,  in  that  case,  I  should  have,  in  the  first  instance,
only  to  draw  up  a  barren  statement  of  the  number  of
different  persons,  in  whom  I  had  seen  sleepwaking
^nduce^ ;  and  then  I  should  have  to  return  to  these


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING*  77

same  cases  for  an  elucidation  of  the  constancy  of  the
phenomena.

This  would  be  at  once  cumbrous  and  useless,  and
I  therefore  take  the  simpler  course  of  detailing  my
mesmeric  cases  just  as  they  occurred,  strengthening
my  cause  at  once  by  their  number  and  by  their
identity  of  feature.  That  I  should  thus  let  the  two
arguments  run  parallel  has  this  advantage  also,  —  I
present  a  portrait  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking  from  the
outset  —  a  very  needful  preliminary.  So  at  least
will  they  who  diflFer  from  me  in  opinion  be  sure  that
they  and  I  are  speaking  of  the  same  thing.

It  may  be  also  that  to  paint  mesmerism  as  it  is
will  remove  objections  to  its  validity  more  surely  than
a  method  more  elaborate.  It  should  never  be  for-
gotten that  in  all  states  there  is  a  spurious  and  a  true  ;
and  of  our  unfortunate  subject  it  may  especially  be
affirmed  that  there  exist  many  counterfeit  present-
ations. It  has  been  drawn  by  its  enemies,  and  even
in  early  times  by  its  friends,  as  a  convulsed  and  de-
crepid  hag,  with  Superstition  on  her  right  hand  and
Spleen  upon  her  left ;  but  the  influence  whereof  I  treat
is  of  a  tranquil  brow,  and  has  Truth  and  Reason  for  her
handmaids.  Should  I  become  tedious  by  presenting
again  and  again  the  same  features  to  view,  I  have  at
least  thus  much  to  urge  in  my  defence :  each  successive
copy  of  the  original  type  strengthens  the  evidence  that
the  thing  is ;  while,  if  the  picture  once  drawn  be  faith-
fully adhered  to,  there  will  be  every  reason  to  con-,
elude  that  the  thing  is  such  as  represented,  and  no
other. Facts,  unaccompanied  by  deductions,  may,

£  3


78  BfESMOERIC SLEEPWAKING.

indeed,  be  wearisome;  but,  at  present,  the  great
point  is  to  portray  phenomena  as  they  occurred ;
for  a  discussion  upon  mesmerism  is  not  like  a  discus-
sion upon  any  known  science,  which  men  are  at  least
agreed  to  treat  as  a  reality.  The  inquiry  is  not
merely  into  its  nature  but  its  very  existence.

I  must  further  observe  that,  with  regard  to  the
great  characteristics  of  mesmerism,  I  have  never  had
occasion  to  change  my  opinion  from  the  beginning.
I  trusted  to  my  impressions  then,  on  the  ground  that
the  first  view  of  a  subject  often  seizes  its  character  the
best,  and  that  a  fresh  eye  will  fix  upon  the  salient
points  of  phenomena,  to  which  habit  may  afterwards
blunt  the  perceptions.  Tlius  reasoning,  I  have  not
since  been  convicted  of  erroneous  views.  The  pro-
duction of  a  bodily  sleep  through  another's  influence,
while  the  mind  continued  waking  —  the  community
of  motion  and  sensation  with  the  mesmeriser  —  the
development  of  the  perceptions,  —  these  were  the
phenomena  which,  from  the  first,  struck  me  in
mesmerism  as  the  most  important,  the  most  replete
with  interest ;  and  they  seem  so  still.  I  have  beheld
them  often  enough  repeated  to  fix  in  my  mind  a  con-
viction of  their  truth ;  and,  believing,  as  I  do,  that
they  may  be  brought  home  to  every  man's  business
and  bosom,  I  am  anxious  to  impart  to  others  the
belief  which  I  possess  myself

Thus,  then,  it  is  my  intention  plainly  to  narrate
that  which  I  have  witnessed,  leaving  it  in  general  to
my  reader  to  refer  to  their  separate  tracts  of  inquiry
the  phenomena  which  I  shall  detail,  and  to  mark  theip


MESMERIC  sleepwaking;  79

correspondence  with  others  previously  observeA
Nor  shall  I  confine  myself  altogether  to  a  descrip-
tion of  the  completed  state  of  mesmerism,  since  I  con-
ceive it  to  be  interesting  in  its  dawn  also ;  and  it  is  in-
structive to  see  in  certain  cases,  the  same  phenomena,
indicated  in  their  rise,  which  were,  in  others,  deve-
loped during  their  progress.  At  any  rate  the  begin-
nings of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  even  if  they  go
no  furtlier,  tend  to  prove  that  there  is  an  influence
which  one  human  being  can  exert  over  another,  —
hitherto  but  partially  observed,  yet  more  general  than
is  usually  supposed.  By  such  cases  my  first  lemma
is  advantaged,  even  if  the  second  is  not  benefited
by  it.

It  may  be  even  that  the  imperfect  cases  of  mesmer-
ism present  the  strongest  testimony  to  its  truth.  As
a  fi)rce  confessedly  acting  on  the  nervous  system,  the
strong  and  the  insusceptible  should  be  altogether
subtracted  from  its  influence,  so  that  the  circumstance
of  such  persons  being  subdued  at  all  is  more  con-
vincing than  the  entire  subjugation  of  the  weaker  and
more  sensitive.  That  a  healthy,  unimaginative  man
should  be  reduced  to  a  sort  of  spell-bound  slumber
in  five  or  ten  minutes,  by  the  agency  of  another,
under  circumstances  the  most  unfavourable  to  sleep,
strikes  the  mind,  perhaps,  as  much  as  any  of  the
mightier  miracles  of  mesmerism.  It  is  a  fact,  of
which  the  senses  are  clearly  cognisant,  and  it  has
made  its  converts  accordingly.  It  is  true  that,  in  the
physical  sciences,  the  detail  of  an  imperfect  experi-
ment Is  altogether  futile;  but  it  is  not  so  in  respcQt

E  4


80  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKINO*

of  the  investigation  of  mind.  Relative  to  this,  the
merest  trifle  is  important,  the  slightest  indication
interesting.  Besides,  every  state  has  a  beginning,
a  middle,  and  an  end;  and  the  first  is  surely  best
examined  when  it  remains  stationary,  instead  of
merging  rapidly  in  the  others.  Let  my  reader,  then,
keep  in  mind  that  I  divide  mesmeric  sleepwaking
into  imperfect  and  perfect;  the  former  being  alto-
gether in  harmony  with  and  elucidating  the  latter.

In  all  the  subsequent  experiments,  I  was  myself
the  operator,  having,  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.

K ,  received  such  instructions  as  put  it  in  my  own

power  to  practise  the  mesmeric  art ;  for  it  is  plain
that  the  course,  on  which  I  was  desirous  of  entering,
required  that  I  should  be  independent  of  the  extra-
neous assistance  which  I  could  by  no  means  always
have  at  hand,  and  demanded  the  full  force  of  the
most  careful  and  personal  experience.

CASE I.

The  first  person  whom  I  succeeded  in  mesmerising
was  Theodore.  The  phenomena  of  the  third  sitting
were  repeated  —  with  this  additional  proof  of  the  pa-
tient's community  of  sensation  with  the  mesmeriser:  —

A  member  of  our  party,  having  heard  it  asserted
that  mesmerised  persons  could  feel  any  injury  that
was  inflicted  on  the  mesmeriser,  standing  behind  me,
pulled  my  hair,  without  warning,  and  without  a  pos-
sibility of  my  patient  being  made  aware  of  the  cir-
cumstance in  any  usual  way ;  —  for,  first,  his  eyes
were  closed;  secondly,  his  head  was  bent  down  and


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINGt.  81

drooping,  as  frequently  happens  in  the  mesmeric
sleepwaking;  thirdly,  the  position  in  which  I  stood
completely  screened  from  him  the  person  who  tried
the  experiment  Nevertheless,  Tlieodore  immediately
winced  as  if  he  himself  had  felt  the  injury,  and  put
up  his  hand  to  that  part  of  the  back  of  my  head
where  my  hair  had  been  pulled,  throwing  his  arm
round  my  neck,  as  if  to  defend  me  from  any  other
attacks  that  might  be  made  upon  me.

I  observed  that  when  he  exerted  himself  to  play  at
dominos  he  was  more  particularly  affected  by  those
slight  convulsive  twitchings  which  I  had  remarked
on  a  former  occasion.

CASE II.

A.  L ,  a  Belgian  gentleman  of  our  acquaint-
ance, who  thoroughly  laughed  at  mesmerism,  con-
sented, mockingly,  one  evening,  to  let  me  mesmerise
him.  He  was  twenty-three  years  of  age  —  in  good
health ;  —  in  character  imaginative,  but  of  a  scoffing
turn,  and  lively  even  to  boisterousness.  On  first
sitting  down,  while  I  held  his  hands  in  the  usual
mesmeric  manner,  he  laughed  much  and  made
ridiculous  faces,  opening  his  eyes,  and  pretending,  in
his  turn,  to  mesmerise  me.  Shortly,  however,  the
same  drowsy  expression  which  I  had  remarked  in

Mademoiselle  M stole over  his countenance.

He  became  serious,  and  seemed  to  struggle  against
the  torpor  which  was  evidently  coming  over  him.
At  length,  as  if  disliking  to  be  vanquished,  he  got  up
from  his  chair  with  evident  effort,  and  walked  about

£  5


82  inSSMERIC  SLEEPWAKINGU

the  room,  but  soon,  complaining  of  an  irresistible
drowsiness,  lay  down,  as  if  he  did  not  at  all  know
what  he  was  doing,  on  the  sofa,  in  the  presence  of
ladies,  before  whom,  under  other  circumstances,  he
never  would  have  dreamed  of  committing  such  a
breach  of  etiquette.  I  came  to  him,  and,  curious  to
know  how  far  my  influence  over  him  might  extend^
made  the  usual  mesmeric  passes  in  front  of  him.
Upon  this,  his  upper  eyelidb,  with  a  motion  almost
as  slow  and  imperceptible  as  that  of  the  hour  hand
of  a  watch,  began  to  fall,  while  his  eyeballs  seemed
drawn  upwards.  After  a  time,  the  lids  became
stationary  and  remained  a  little  open,  showing  only
the  whities  of  the  eye.  His  head  began  to  follow  the
motions  of  my  hand.  I  now  asked  him  if  he  slept,
to  which  he  replied,  in  a  very  low  voice,  **Not
altogether ;  I  wish  I  could."  "  Do  you  suffer  in  any
way  ?  "  I  inquired.  "  Yes,  I  have  a  pain  in  the  back
of  my  head."

Upon  this,  I  made  mesmeric  passes  over  the  part
affected,  and  soon  after  asked  —

Q.  —  Do  you  feel  better  now  ?

A.  —  Yes,  the  pain  is  quite  gone.

Q.  —  Do  you  wish  to  be  awakened  ?

A.  —  No,  I  wish  to  sleep  more  soundly.

Q.  —  Why  do  you  not  open  your  eyes  wider  ?

A.  —  I  cannot;  it  is  as  if  lead  were  on  them  (lis
sent  comme  plomb^s).

Q.  —  Can  you  see  any  thing  ?

A.  —  I  see  you.
- Q.  —  Nothing  else?


»£j3M£RIC 8L£EPWAKINQr  89

' A.  —  Nothing  whatever.

I  now  made  a  motion  as  if  I  were  going  away,
when  suddenly  the  patient  seized  my  hands,  one  in
each  of  his,  and  exclaimed,  "  You  must  not  go  away,
on  any  account'* After  this,  he  grasped  my  hands
80  tightly  that  it  would  have  been  no  easy  matter  foi:
me  to  libemte  them. Fearing to irritate  him,  I
remained  quiet,  and  as  long  as  I  did  so  he  lay  per-^
fectly  motionless,  but  always  with  his  eyes  a  little
open. His  complexion,  which  was  naturally  pale,
was  changed  to  a  ghastly  hue,  and  his  whole  appear*
ance  was  so  death-like  that  the  spectators  in  the  room
became  alarmed,  and  I  own  that  I  was  myself  un-
easy. To  ray  questions,  however,  he  replied  that  he
did  not  wish  to  wake, —  that  he  was  very  well,  but
that  I  roust  not  leave  him. Thus  circumstanced,  I
scarcely  knew  what  course  to  take. That  he  should
be  awakened  was  desirable,  for  it  was  late ;  but  every
effort  that  I  made  to  free  my  hands  only  made  him
grasp  them  more  firmly. My  position  was  sufficiently
ridiculous. I  had  raised  a  spirit  which  I  could  not
quell,  and  the  work  of  my  own  hands  had  become
as unmanageable  as  the  creation of  Frankenstein.
At  length,  after  matters  had  remained  in  this  state  a
full  hour,  I  so  strongly  insisted  upon  his  awaking,
that  he  reluctantly  permitted  me  to  take  the  neces-
sary measures  for  arousing  him. I  then  made  before
the  patient  the  motions  which  are  usually  employed
for  dispersing  the  mesmeric  slumber; and  it  was
curious  to observe  how  quickly,  by  means (as it
seemed)  of  these  few  and  simple  gestures,  the  torpo^

E  6


64  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

passed  away.  At  the  same  time,  the  natural  colour
and  appearance  returned  to  the  countenance  of  my
patient^  who  got  up,  rubbed  his  eyes,  looked  much
confused  at  having  slept  in  the  company  of  ladies
{a  circumstance  that  shocked  his  foreign  politeness),
and,  with  many  apologies,  bade  us  hastily  good
night  The  next  day,  when  I  called  to  inquire  after
him,  he  seemed  to  be  half  ashamed  of  his  mesmeric
-exploits,  but  owned  that  the  way  in  which  he  had
been  affected  was  at  least  a  convincing  proof  to  him
of  the  influence  he  had  denied.  A  drowsiness,  he
said,  and  slight  confusion  of  head  were  still  felt  by
him;  and  these,  he  declared,  were  relieved  by  my
moving  my  hand  across  his  forehead.  When  I  asked
him  what  he  remembered  of  his  mesmeric  state,  he
said  that  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  had  always  retained
in  it  a  sort  of  twilight  consciousness,  and  that  he
recollected  having  been  very  anxious  to  exchange
these  "  twinklings  of  oblivion  "  for  a  deeper  slumber.
Of  my  having  spoken  to  him,  however,  or  of  his
having  answered  me,  he  remembered  nothing ;  and
when  I  told  him  how  forcibly  he  had  kept  me  near
him,  he  was  much  surprised.

Shortly  after  making  the  foregoing  experiments,  I
returned  to  England,  it  being  the  spring  of  1837.
Like  a  person  full  of  a  new  subject,  I  discoursed,
amongst  my  friends,  upon  what  I  had  witnessed  of
the  mesmeric  influence.  The  result  may  be  ima-
gined. Those  who  knew  me  well  were  forced  to
believe  that  I  had  really  beheld  the  phenomena  I
described;  but  here  they  were  content  to  stop. It


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.  85

was  all  very  extraordinary,  they  declared,  and  they
would  rather  not  think  about  it. Some  swore  —

"  'Twas  strange  —  'twas  passing  strange."
And  others  that  —

"  'Twas  pitiful  —  'twas  wondrous  pitiful."

A  few,  more  sagacious  than  the  rest,  surmised  that  it
savoured  of  the  black  art;  and  the  ladies  thought,
indeed,  that  "the  naughty  man  might  have  some-
thing to  do  with  it."  One  or  two  confessed  that  they
were  too  old  for  the  introduction  of  new  ideas  into
their  brains,  —  and  I  fully  believed  them  when  they
said  so.  More  distant  acquaintances  listened  to  my
story  with  a  look  of  polite  incredulity ;  — others
yawned.

The  practice  of  the  Baron  Dupotet,  and  the
efforts  of  Mr.  Mayo  and  Dr.  Lardner  in  promulgat-
ing Dr.  EUiotson's  experiments,  had  not  yet  familiar-
ised the  London  world  with,  at  least,  the  name  of
mesmerism;  — so,  in  the  great  thinking,  unthinking
metropolis,  I  met  with  scarce  any  disciples  of  the
new  creed.  The  only  experiment,  therefore,  which
I  had  any  opportunity  of  making  was  upon  a  young
cousin  of  my  own, — a  lad  of  about  fifteen.  He,
however,  proved  at  that  time  insensible  to  the  mes-
meric influence;  but  he  took  an  interest  in  the
subject  of  mesmerism,  and  actually  tried  to  mesmerise
a  younger  brother  of  his,  who  was  not  more  than
twelve  years  old.  The  results  of  his  attempt  are
sufl&ciently  curious  to  tempt  me  to  swerve  from  my


86  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKINO.  '

usual  rule  of  only  recording  that  which  I  have
personally  observed.  Besides,  the  actors  in  the  little
drama  are  so  well  known  to  me,  that  it  almost
appears  as  if  I  had  been  eye-witness  to  the  scene,  the
circumstances  of  which  were  related  to  me  by  the
mother  of  the  two  boys.

The  elder,  in  her  presence,  sat  down,  partly  in
joke,  to  mesmerise  his  brother,  who  was  wholly
ignorant  of  the  process  and  eflTects  of  mesmerism;
and,  taking  the  hands  of  his  patient,  went  through
the  forms  of  which  he  had  seen  me  make  use  when
mesmerising.  Be  it  remarked  that  the  time  was
midday,  when  the  light,  the  noise  in  the  streets,  and
the  natural  liveliness  of  youth,  would  particularly
indispose  a  boy  to  slumber.  Nevertheless,  in  about
ten  minutes,  a  manifest  effect  was  produced.  The
patient's  eyes  closed  as  by  a  spell,  and  his  head
followed  the  mesmeriser's  hand  in  the  usual  manner.
Charles,  the  elder  brother,  now  got  up  from  his
chair,  when  Edward  rose  also.  The  former  raised
his  right  arm ;  the  latter  immediately  raised  his ;  —
his  left  arm  —  the  same  result.  Charles  walked
forward  —  Edward  advanced  also.  Charles  stopped,
and  Edward  stood  still  on  the  instant ;  —  in  short,
all  the  gestures  of  the  one  were  faithfully  imitated
by  the  other.  But  the  mother  became  now  alarmed,
and  insisted  upon  the  young  mesmeriser  awaking
his  patient.  This  was  soon  effected,  and  Edward,
opening  his  eyes,  and  staring  about  like  one  just
startled  from  slumber,  expressed  the  greatest  as-
tonishment at  finding  himself  standing  in  the  middle


M£8MSRIC  SLXEPWAXIKO.  87

of  the  room,  —  declaring,  at  the  same  time,  that  his
unconsciousness  had  been  complete.

In  one  point  of  view  the  above  relation  lays  claim
to  a  peculiar  interest.  The  effects  of  a  new  influence,
vdien  manifested  by  the  young,  are  especially  to  be
relied  upon ;  they  can  be  neither  prompted  nor  im-
peded by  those  prepossessions  which  are  the  growth
of  maturer  years ;  nor  can  they  be  attributed  to  those
nervous  imaginings  which  spring  from  infirmity.
Youth,  moreover,  is  the  season  of  candour,  when  all
is  bold,  healthy,  unsophisticated ;  and  the  phenomena
which  it  exhibits  are  valuable  in  proportion  as  they
are  exempt  from  the  suspicion  which  attaches  to  the
doings  of  the  older  inhabitants  of  this  crafty  world.


88  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.


SECT.  IL

SHOWING THE CLAIMS OF MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING
TO  BE CONSIDERED  A  PECULIAR  CONDITION  OF  MAN.

In  the  spring  of  1837,  I  went  to  Cambridge,  on  a
visit  to  some  friends.  That  I  should  have  succeeded
in  interesting  them,  and  others  of  the  University,
upon  the  ^subject  nearest  my  thoughts,  will  not  sur-
prise those  who  have  observed  that,  where  science  is
most  studied,  new  statements  respecting  natural
phenomena  obtain  the  most  patient  bearing.  I  did,
in  fact,  at  Cambridge,  meet  with  many  persons  really
desirous  of  witnessing  experiments  in  mesmerism,  and
even  of  submitting  themselves  to  the  mesmeric
influence.

CASE III.

In  my  first  essay  of  mesmerism,  at  Cambridge,  I
experimented  —  before  seven  or  eight  persons  —
upon  a  servant,  whom  I  had  brought  from  Belgium,
a  man  of  about  27  years  of  age,  in  good  health,  lively
and  quick-tempered ;  able  also  to  speak  English.  I
had  attempted  to  mesmerise  him  once  before,  but^  at
that  time,  he  had  advanced  no  further  than  imperfect
sleepwaking,  during  which  he  retained  his  con-
sciousness, but  could  neither  move  nor  open  his  eyes.
On  the  present  occasion,  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's
mesmerisation,  he  closed  his  eyes,  but  seemed  restless,


MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.  89

and,  in  answer  to  a  question  I  made  him,  declared
that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  sleep  on  account  of
noises  in  the  street  and  the  constraint  caused  by  the
presence  of  so  many  persons.  Scarcely,  however,  had
he  said  this,  when  I  perceived  that  his  head  followed
my  hand ;  and,  continuing  the  mesmeric  passes  for
about  five  minutes  more,  I  again  asked  him  if  he  felt
disposed  to  sleep.  To  my  surprise,  (for  I  had
not  expected  a  perfect  result  so  soon)  he  replied,  —
'^  I  am  asleep."  "  Can  you  rise  from  your  chair?"
I  inquired.  "Yes,  but  I  had  rather  stay  quiet."
When,  however,  I  got  up  and  removed  to  a  short
distance  from  the  patient,  he  also  rose  and  moved  a
step  or  two  towards  me,  but  tottered  and  would  have
fallen,  had  I  not  hastened  to  his  assistance.  He
leaned  heavily  against  me,  and  seemed  unable  to
stand  without  my  support;  I  therefore  placed  him
in  a  chair,  when  he  complained  of  a  pain  at  the  chest,
and  begged  me  earnestly  to  wake  him.  "  Can  you
not  awake  of  yourself?"  I  asked;  to  which  he
replied,  "By  no  means  —  but  I  beg  of  you  to
awake  me."  Reluctant  to  do  so  without  exhibiting
to  the  party  present  some  of  the  marked  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  I  soothed  my  patient  as  well  as  I  could,
and  persuaded  him  to  remain  a  little  while  longer  in
the  state  of  sleepwaking.  As  he,  however,  mani-
festly suflFered,  I  was  unwilling  to  fatigue  him  by
many  experiments.  The  following  were  the  prin-
cipal :  —  wine,  water,  and  coffee  were  handed  to  me,
and  I  tasted  them,  successively,  in  such  a  way  as  to
prevent  the  patient  from  perceiving,  by  any  usual


90  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

means,  what  the  liquids  were.  He,  however,  cor-
rectly named  them  In  their  order.  The  order  was
then  changed,  and  the  results  of  the  experiment  were
the  same.

Flowers  were  given  me  to  smell :  I  was  holding
the  patient  by  one  hand,  at  the  time,  but  turning
altogether  away  from  him  to  a  table,  over  which  I
bent,  so  as  to  interpose  myself  between  him  and  any
thing  that  might  be  handed  to  me.  He,  however,
when  I  smelt  to  the  flowers,  imitated  the  action,  and
on  my  asking  him  what  he  perceived,  replied,  without
hesitation  "  flowers."  Upon  this,  one  of  the  party
silently  changed  the  flowers  for  a  bottle  of  eau  de
cologne^  when  he  observed,  "  That  is  not  the  same
smell;  it  is  eau  de  cologneJ^  With  the  manner  of
conducting  this  experiment,  and  its  results,  all  who
were  present  declared  themselves  perfectly  satisfied.

The  patient,  on  being  awakened,  declared  that  he
remembered  nothing  of  what  had  passed  since  the
moment  when  he  complained  of  the  noise  in  the
street.  His  mesmeric  sleepwaking  had  been  com-
plete.

CASE  IV.

T.  S.,  an  undergraduate  of  Trinity  College,  con-
sented to  try  how  far  I  could  influence  him  mes-
merically.  He  possessed  abilities  of  no  common
order,  was  extremely  lively,  by  no  means  of  a  wonder-
peeking  nature,  and  altc^ether  seemed  the  last
person  in  the  world  who  could  be  worked  upon  by
nervous  apprehensions. He  sat  down  to  be  mesmer*'


HCESMERIC  SLEEFWAKINOi  91

ised,  laughingly,  and  with  perfect  calmness.  In  about
ten  minutes  his  eyelids  drooped,  and  closed  graduaUy ;
his  head  followed  my  hand;  his  features  became
fixed  and  rigid ;  his  colour  fled,  and  a  dead  stillness
came  over  his  countenance :  the  change  was  the
more  striking  on  account  of  the  usually  animated  and
mobile  character  of  his  physiognomy.  It  painfully
resembled  the  alteration  caused  by  death.  Neverthe-
less, on  being  interrogated  as  to  his  state,  he  declared
that  he  was  well,  with  the  exception  of  a  slight  pain
in  the  back  of  his  head*,  which  was  shortly  relieved  by
the  mesmeric  passes.  To  other  questions  he  replied
that  he  did  not  sleep,  but  was  unable  to  move,  or  to
open  his  eyes.  As,  after  long  mesmerisation,  I  saw
no  probability  of  his  advancing  further  into  sleep-
waking,  I  awoke  him  in  the  usual  manner,  when
his  countenance  resumed  its  accustomed  expression.
On  attempting,  however,  to  rise,  he  complained
of  feeling  extremely  weak  and  dizzy,  and,  for  a  short
time,  he  was  unable  to  stand  with  any  firmness.  He
was  convinced  that  he  had  experienced  the  effects  of
an  influence  independent  of  the  imagination.

CASE  V.

C.  M.,  a  bachelor  of  Trinity,  aged  about  twenty-
five^  submitted  to  be  mesmerised;  he  was  clever,
thoughtful,  and  rather  grave  in  character.  On  first
sitting  down,  he  seemed  very  wakeful,  and  declared
that  it  would  be  strange,  if,  under  circumstances  the

•  See  C^c  ii» .


92  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

most  unfavourable  to  sleep,  he  could  be  charmed  into
any  thing  like  drowsiness.  In  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  during  which  a  perfect  silence  was  by  no  means
observed,  some  force  seemed  to  close  his  eyes  as
irresistibly  as  if  they  had  been  touched  by  Mercury's
wand  of  slumbrous  notoriety,  and  he  passed  into  a
state  of  imperfect  sleepwaking,  in  which  his  head
followed  my  hand  and  he  answered  my  questions.
On  my  removing  to  a  short  distance  from  him,  he
leant  forward  towards  me,  and  would  have  fallen,
had  I  not  resumed  my  former  position.  I  awoke
him  in  about  half  an  hour ;  he  had  not  been  in  any
way,  unpleasantly  affected,  and  retained  a  vague
recollection  of  an  agreeable  state  of  reverie,  similar  to
that  which  precedes  slumber.

CASE  VI.

On  this  occasion  some  ten  or  twelve  persons  were
assembled  to  witness  my  experiments ;  and  amongst
them  was  a  man  of  luminous  intellect  and  varied
acquirements,  whom  I  was  naturally  desirous  of
interesting  in  the  question  of  mesmerism.  He  was
decidedly  sceptical  on  the  subject,  but  I  knew  that
his  was  a  mind  which,  if  once  fairly  convinced,
would  be  firmest  in  faith  and  foremost  in  investi-
gation. I  was  therefore  vexed  when,  after  long  mes-
merisation,  my  servant,  whom,  from  his  having  once
passed  into  perfect  sleepwaking,  I  had  chosen  as
the  subject  of  our  experiments,  remained  uninflur
enced.  Two  or  three  of  the  party,  tired  of  waiting
for  a  result  that  came  not,  went  away,  and  the  person


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  93

whom  I  was  chiefly  anxious  to  convince^  and  whom  I

will  call  V i  having  an  engagement,  was  about  to

follow  their  example,  when  I  urged  him  to  stay  a  very
short  time longer, while I  tried  another  patient,
D.  C,  an  undergraduate  of  Trinity,  who  wished,  as
he  said,  to  try  the  eflFects  of  mesmerism,  in  order  to
prove  their  nothingness. After  this,  I  need  not  add
that  he  was  very  incredulous  on  the  subject ;  every
circumstance  seemed  to  diminish  the  probability  of
my  success. The  man  I  had  agreed  to  mesmerise
was  in  the  strength  of  three  and  twenty  years  of  age,
six  feet  in  height,  and  muscular  in  proportion. The
stillness  of  the  meeting,  once  broken,  could  not  be
restored. Persons  were  talking,  and  moving  about
the  room,  and  my  recent  failure  had  thrown  an  air
of  ridicule  about  the  proceedings  of  the  evening,
which,  if  the  mesmeric influence  were dependent
on  imagination,  would  have  been  sufficient  to  annihi-
late it  at  once. V—— looked  hopeless  of seeing
any  thing  remarkable,  and  had  taken  up  a  book.
The  following  facts  then  occurred:  —
I  had  not  held  the  hands  of  D.  C.  more  than  five
minutes,  when  I  remarked  a  dizzy  look  about  his
eyes,  which  is  peculiarly  indicative  of  the  incipient
stage of mesmeric  sleepwaking. Encouraged by
this  success,  I  had  recourse  to  the  mesmeric  passes,
when  by  degrees  the  eyes  of  the  patient  closed,  and
shortly  after  the  head  followed  every  motion  of  my
hand. V—,  at  this  moment  looking  up  from  his
book,  was  surprised  to  see  what  had  been  effected.
I  beckoned  him  to  come  near,  and,  by  reiterated


94  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKING.

trials,  convinced  him  that  my  hand  had  an  attractive
power  over  the  patient.

I  now  spoke  to  D.  C,  and  asked  him  if  he  were
asleep ;  to  which  he  replied,  "  Not  precisely."  I  then,

at  V 's  request  said,  "  How  do  you  feel."  "  Very

strangely/'  he  said,  "  as  I  never  felt  before."  Shortly

afterwards,  V himself  spoke  to  the  patient,  and  I

called  him  by  his  name,  but  he  seemed  to  pay  no  at-
tention to  the  circumstance. When  V happened

to  lay  his  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  the  effect  of  the
touch  was  like  that  of  an  electric  shock.  The  patient's
whole  body  quivered,  his  features  were  convulsed,  his
countenance  became  deadly  pale,  and  he  seemed  to
gasp  for  breath,  like  a  person  who  has  been  suddenly
immersed  in  cold  water.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not
awake,  and  the  affection,  whatever  it  was,  seemed
entirely  physical  (as  if  his  mind  had  no  longer  its
usual  partnership  with  the  body).  He  himself  appeared
to  be  unaware  of  it ;  and,  when  I  asked  him  what
had  disturbed  him  —  what  was  the  matter  with  him,
he  said  that  he  felt  nothing  whatever.  Still,  however,
he  continued  to  tremble,  until  by  the  application  of
my  hand  to  his  forehead,  and  by  mesmeric  passes
from  the  head  downwards,  I  restored  him  to  tran-
quillity. V  ,  whom,  since  he  touched  him,  the
patient  seemed  to  hear  equally  with  myself,  now
recommenced  speaking,  and  asked  D.  C.  if  he  knew
him. He  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  named  him.

•<  Do  you  see  at  all  ?  "  V- inquired.  «  Not  much ;

I  see  a  red  light  about  so  large ; "  and  D.  C.  made  a
circular  motion  with  his  hands  to  express  the  size  of


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIKO.  95

the  light.  I  then  asked  him,  "  Do  you  see  me  ?  "  to
which  he  answered  "  Yes,  I  see  you  always.'*  "  Well,"
I  said,  "  I  wish  you  now  to  get  up  jfrom  your  chair."
**  Oh  no,  no  !  I  prefer  staying  where  I  am ;  but  you
must  stay  with  me."  "  No ! "  I  replied,  "  I  am
going :  "  whereupon,  he  seized  both  my  hands,  and
exclaimed,  "You  must,  on  no  account,  leave  me."
I,  however,  rose  up,  when  the  patient  also  rose ;  I
walked  forward,  and  he  walked  also,  but  unsteadily,
and  leaning  upon  me.  As  he  seemed  to  dislike
remaining  in  an  upright  position,  I  placed  him  in  a
chair  in  a  part  of  the  room  opposite  to  where  he  had

been. I  then  preceded  to  show  V some  of  the

characteristic  phenomena  of  mesmerism.  I  drank
wine,  water,  coffee,  with  the  usual  precautions,  and
the  patient  distinguish^  them  all,  going  through  the
motions  of  tasting  simultaneously  with  myself.  There
were  various  articles  of  food  upon  the  table,  amongst
others  some  sandwiches.  These  last  were  given  me,
and  he  said  directly,  "  You  are  eating  sandwich."
This  may  seem  strange  —  it  is  so  to  myself;  but  I
state  the  fact  as  it  occurred.  Some  snuff  that  I  took
from  the  chimney-piece  behind  me,  turning  ray  back^
and  suppressing,  as  much  as  possible,  the  usual  indi-
cations of  smelling,  was  named  directly ;  this  being
exchanged  for  flowers,  the  result  was  equally  satis-
factory.

Remembering  with  what  acuteriess  of  perception

Mademoiselle M had distinguished between

objects  that  did  or  did  not  belong  to  her  mesmerist^
I  asked  for  the  pocket-handkerchiefs  of  all  the  partj>


96  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

twisted  up  my  own  in  the  midst  of  them,  and
laid  them  on  the  knee  of  D,  C.  He  was  immediately
affected  with  slight  shuddering ;  and  tossed  away  very
quickly  all  the  pocket-handkerchiefs  but  mine.  The
experiment,  repeated,  gave  the  same  results ;  but  the
second  time  he  grasped  and  firmly  held  my  hand-
kerchief, until  the  time  of  his  awaking.

At  a  yard's  distance  his  hand  rose  up  to  meet
mine,  as  iron  flies  to  the  magnet.  From  the  approach
of  other  hands  he  recoiled.

These  experiments  concluded,  V said  to  me  —

"  I  am  now  satisfied  that  all  you  asserted  to  me  re-
specting the  mesmeric  state  is  correctly  true.  I  do
not  know  that  we  are  liable  to  elicit  any  new  fact  by
keeping  D.  C.  any  longer  asleep.  He  looks  ill  and
suffering,  and  I  think  you  had  better  wake  him."

Upon  this,  I  asked  the  patient  if  he  desired  to
wake,  and  he  replied  "  Yes ;  I  feel  much  fatigued."

I  awoke  him,  by  the  usual  mesmeric  passes,  when
he  expressed  the  utmost  astonishment  at  finding  him-
self in  a  different  part  of  the  room  from  that  where
he  had  first  been  mesmerised.  The  last  half-hour
had  been  a  blank  to  him,  with  this  single  exception

—  he  thought  that  he  remembered  hearing  V ^*s

voice,  asking  him  if  he  knew  him.  Faithful,  however,
to  his  character,  he  refused  to  believe  that  he  had
exhibited  the  phenomena  to  which  we  bore  witness.

The  next  day,  as  may  be  supposed,  I  talked  over
with  V  the  circumstances  of  our  mesmeric  even-

ing. I  found  him  entirely  persuaded  that  mesmeric
sleepwaking was a distinct state, worthy to be


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  97

investigated  as a part  of  man. His concluding
words  were  these :  —

"  I  thank  you  for  having  enlarged  my  experience
by  facts  perfecdy  new  to  it.  I  have  seen  a  some-
thing which  is  not  sleep,  which  is  not  delirium,  but  a
tertium  quid,  for  which,  as  yet,  we  have  no  accurate
name.  The  thing  is  most  interesting,  but  should,  I
see,  be  exercised  with  caution.  The  effect  of  my
touching  D.  C.  was  fearful.  You  have  verified  many
phenomena.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that  you  might
try,  when  you  have  an  opportunity,  whether  the  sense
of  touch  in  the  mesmerised  sympathises  with  that  in
the  mesmeriser,  as  do  the  senses  of  smell  and  taste.
Try  whether,  throuffh  you,  the  mesmerised  person
may  have  a  cognisance  of  form  — whether  he  can
ascertain  by  means  of  your  perceptions  if  you  are
handling  square  objects  or  round  —  rough  or
smooth." To  this  suggestion  I  promised  to  attend.

CASE  VII.

On  this  occasion  my  patient  was  G.  T ,  aged

19,  the  son  of  a  gentleman  at  whose  house  in
the  country  I  spent  a  few  days,  after  quitting  Cam-
bridge. He  was  strong  and  healthy,  and  possessed
good  sound  sense,  with  but  a  trifling  infusion  of
imagination.  After  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  mesmer-
isation  he  passed  into  imperfect  sleepwaking,  in
which  state  his  corporeal  powers  were  held  in  com-
plete and  singular  enthralment,  while  those  of  his
jnind  remained  unaltered. Unlike  my  other  sleep-


98  ;m£sm£ric  sleepwaking.

wakers,  he  was  utterly  incapable  of  speaking  dur-
ing the  mesmeric  trance,  though,  as  he  told  me
subsequently,  he  heard  every  question  I  put  to  him,
and  was  desirous  of  answering  me.  He  was  also
unable  to  open  his  eyes,  or  to  move,  except  so  far  as
regarded  the  involuntary  tendency  of  his  head  to-
wards my  hand.  Another  time,  being  curious  to  ascer-
tain how  far  the  influence  (whatever  it  might  be)
which  I  exercised  over  the  patient  was  dependent  upon
physical  causes,  I  made  the  experiment  of  mesmer-
ising him  in  the  open  air,  on  a  fine  June  day,  when
the  weather  was  warm,  but  refreshed  by  partial
breezes.  The  following  were  the  diflFerences  between
this  mesmerisation  and  the  last :  —

The  patient  did  not  close  his  eyes  so  soon  as  on
the  preceding  occasion,  nor  pass  into  the  imperfect
crisis  by  so  regular  a  progression.

In  the  beginning  of  his  sleep,  the  power  to  move
and  to  open  his  eyes  seemed  slightly  restored  when-
ever the  gust  came  by.

He  told  me  afterwards  that  when  I  commenced
mesmerising  the  action  of  the  air  produced  a  decided
difference  in  his  sensations.  When  the  wind  swept
across  his  forehead  it  was,  he  said,  as  if  there  were  a
disturbance  of  some  drowsy  weight  that  was  gather-
ing over  it.  By  degrees,  however,  he  became  in-
sensible to  this  apparent  remission  of  the  sleeping
influence.  Nothing,  he  declared,  could  be  more  sin-
gular than  the  feeling  of  utter  inability  to  speak,  move,
or  open  his  eyes.  He  heard  me  command  him,  urge
him,  in  every  way,  to  answer  my  questions,  but  his


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  99

organs  of  speech  seemed  to  be  as  completely  para-
lysed as  those  of  vision.  In  fact,  the  only  external
indication  that  he  had  given  of  his  desire  to  reply
to  me  was  the  slightest  possible  motion  of  his  lips.

CASE  VIII.

The  family  with  whom  I  was  staying  having  but
few  prejudices  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  I  was
permitted —  in  consideration,  I  suppose,  of  my  years
and  gravity  —  to  mesmerise  the  sister  of  my  preced-
ing patient,  a  young  lady  of  most  amiable  temper,
cheerful,  and  by  no  means  of  a  nervous  temperament.
Of  the  experiment  to  be  tried  she  had  no  apprehen-
sion, as  she  had  already  seen  her  brother  support  mes-
merisation  without  injury ;  and  it  should  be  especially
kept  in  mind  that  her  ideas  of  the  mesmeric  state
were  limited  to  what  she  herself  had  witnessed  of  it ;
for  I  had  expressly  abstained  from  describing  the
higher  phenomena  of  sleepwaking  to  herself  or  to
any  member  of  her  family,  in  order  that  their  minds
might  be  uninfluenced  on  the  subject.  Under  these
circumstances,  to  ascribe  the  curious  results  which  I
am  about  to  detail  to  imagination  or  to  imitation
would  be  absurd.

I  sat  down  to  mesmerise  my  patient  about  nine
o'clock  in  the  evening.  In  about  seven  minutes  her
eyes  closed,  and  in  three  minutes  more  her  head
followed  my  hand.  I  asked  several  times,  "  Do  you
sleep  ?  "  but  no  answer  was  given,  and  I  began  to
fear  that  this  incapacity  of  speech  under  mesmerism
was  a  family  failing. At lengthy however, on  a

F  2


100  TtfESMERIC SLEIEPWAKINO.

repetition  of  my  question,  Miss  T answered  in  a

very  low  voice,  "  Yes."  From  this  time  she  replied  to
all  I  said,  and  displayed  the  higher  characteristics
of  mesmeric  sleepwaking  in  a  perfection  which  I
never  saw  evinced  upon  a  first  essay.  The  effects  of
mesmerisation  upon  the  patient  seemed  to  be  alto-
gether of  an  agreeable  nature.  She  felt  no  pain  of
any  kind,  and  her  colour  did  not  vary,  or,  if  any
thing,  was  slightly  heightened.  Her  appearance
only  differed  from  the  natural  in  these  respects ;  —
her  eyes  were  entirely  closed,  and  her  head,  drooping
as  if  with  the  heaviness  of  slumber,  swayed  dizzily
from  side  to  side,  except  when  I  strongly  commanded
her  attention,  and  desired  her  to  raise  her  head,  at
which  times  she  seemed  with  an  effort  to  resume
the  power  over  her  organisation. In  this  state,  the

phenomena manifested by Miss T may  be

ranged  under  the  usual  heads,  as  follows :  —

1st.  Attraction  towards  the  mesmeriser,  —  TTiough
indisposed  at  first,  like  others  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,

to  motion.  Miss  T ,  when  I  arose  from  my  chair,

rose  also.  Without  touching  her,  I  moved  onwards,
and  she  seemed  compelled  to  follow  me.  At  one
time  I  ran  quickly  to  a  distance  from  her,  when  she
remained  standing  where  I  had  left  her,  but  bent
towards  me,  and  wavered  as  if  she  would  fall.  I
made  a  motion  with  my  arms  as  if  I  would  draw  her
to  me,  when,  recovering  herself,  she  slowly,  and,  as  it
were,  reluctantly,  came  to  where  I  stood.

When  her  hands  were  lying  on  her  lap,  if  I
held  mine  above  them  they  were  attracted  upward,
more  quickly  as  they  drew  nearer  my  own. It  was


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO^  101

much  like  the  eflPect  which  a  piece  of  rubbed  sealing-
wax  has  on  a  bit  of  paper.  In  proportion  to  the  at-
traction towards  her  mesmeriser  seemed  the  patient's
repulsion  from  others.  If  any  but  myself  presented
their  hands  to  her  she  drew  back  her  own  with  a  slow
but  singularly  repugnant  shrinking,  her  fingers
becoming  rigid  and  curved  inwards.  This  experi-
ment was  often  repeated  with  the  same  results.
Remembering  how  painfully  one  of  my  patients  had
been  affected  by  an  unadvised  touch,  I  was  careful
not  to  allow  any  one  to  come  into  actual  contact  with

Miss  T y  until  1  had  established  what  mesmerisers

call  a  "rapport"  between  the  parties,  and  which  is
effected  by  the  mesmeriser  taking,  at  the  same  mo-
ment, the  patient's  hand  and  that  of  a  third  person.

2dly.  Community  of  sensation  with  the  mesmeriser,  —
Wine,  water,  and  a  stand  of  liqueurs  were  on  a  side-
table. Placing  the  patient  as  far  from  me  as  was  con-
sistent with  my  still  touching  her  hand,  turning  also
away  from  her,  I  tasted  alternately  water  and  wine,
between  which  she distinguished  correctly,  moving
her  lips as if  she  herself  were drinking. Some
brandy  and  water,  already  mixed,  was  in  a  tumbler
on  the  table ;  for  this  I  suddenly  changed  the  first
mentioned  liquids,  when  the  moment  I  had  taken  it
into  my  mouth  the  patient  made  wry  faces,  and  ex-
claimed, **  Nasty,  nasty." "  Why  do  not  you  like-
it?"  I  asked.  "Because  it  is  too  strong." "Have
you  ever  tasted  it  before?" "Yes,  once, when  1
had  a  sore  throat." "  You  know,  then,  what  it  is  ?'*
"  Yes ;  it  is  brandy  and  water."

F  a


102  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

A  member  of  the  party  gave  me,  from  behind,
some  wild  flowers,  which  the  young  people  had
gathered  that  day.  "Do  you  know  what  1  am
smelling?"  I  inquired.  "Something  that  comes
from  the  fields,"  was  the  reply.

The  flowers  were  silently  changed  for  snufiP,  when
the  patient  again  exhibited  symptoms  of  dislike.  On
being  asked  the  reason,  she  said,  "  I  smell  tobacco."

It  now  occurred  to  me  to  try  the  experiment
which  V had  suggested  with  respect  to  the  cog-
nisance of  form.  With  every  precaution,  I  took  up
from  a  table,  on  which  were  many  other  articles,  a
small  square  box,  and  passed  my  finger  over  the
edges ;  I,  at  the  same  time,  asked  the  patient,  "  Can
you tell  me  what sort  of  thing  I am  touching?*'

Upon  this Miss T made motions with her

fingers,  as  if  she  had  the  object  under  her  own  hand,
and  replied,  "  It  is  something  with  edges,  like  a
box."  I  next  took  into  my  hand  a  chess-man,
some  parts  of  which  were  carved  in  points,  and  felt
alternately  the  carved  and  uncarved  portions  of  the
piece.  Between  these  she  discriminated  correctly,
saying,  "  Now  it  feels  rough ;  now  smooth ; "  and
always  before  speaking  she  went  through  the  same
motions  of  touching  with  myself.

One  of  the  patient's  sisters,  without  giving  notice
of  her  intention,  went  out  of  the  room  and  fetched  an
egg,  which  she  concealed  carefully  in  her  hand  and
gave  me  from  behind.  The  patient  now  said,  **  I
feel  something  smooth  and  round."  Being  urged  to
tell  what  it  was,  she  said,  "I  think  it  is  a  ball.'^
Stretching  out  my  hand  behind  me,  I  whispered  to


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  lOS

one  of  the  party,  to  hurt  me  in  some  way ;  I  was
pricked  with  a  pin,  when  my  patient  started  and
shook  her  hand  as  if  she  felt  the  injury.  On  being
asked  what  she  felt,  she  answered,  "  As  if  they
pricked  my  hand."

At  another  time,  when  I  inquired  if  she  suffered  in
any  way,  she  replied,  "  No,  only  my  feet  are  very
cold."  My  own  feet  being  exceedingly  cold  at  the  mo-
ment, I  suspected  that  her  feeling  was  sympathetic  :
I  conjectured  rightly,  for,  awaking  soon  after,  she
assured  me  that  her  feet  were  perfectly  warm.

3dly.  Isolation  from  every  one  hut  the  mesmeriser.  —
Even  after  having  been  placed  "en  rapport"  with
all  present,  the  patient  seemed  incapable  of  hearing
any  voice  but  mine,  unless  the  person  who  spoke
were  in  actual  contact  with  me  and  with  herself  at
the  same  time.  On  one  occasion,  when  I  was  asking
her  if  she  knew  what  some  object  was  that  I  held
before  her,  her  father  told  her  very  loudly  that  it  was
a  wine-glass  (which  it  actually  was),  but  the  patient
did  not  profit  by  the  intelligence,  for  on  being  again
questioned  she  said  impatiently,  "I  do  not  know;
I  cannot  tell."  Her  name  shouted  close  to  her  ear
by  different  members  of  her  family  seemed  to  make
no  impression  whatever  upon  her  organs  of  hearing ;
—  while,  on  the  contrary,  she  attended  to  the
slightest  word  that  I  addressed  to  her.

4thly. Development  of  vision,  —  The  patient's  eyes
were,  to  all  appearance,  firmly  shut  during  the  whole  *
period  of  the  mesmeric  sleep. When  I  first  asked
her  if  she  saw any  thing, she answered in the'

F  4


104  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.

negative;  but  added,  after  a  pause,  "I  see  you^
After  this,  she  seemed  by  degrees  to  acquire  a  more
general  vision.  She  recognised,  on  being  led  up  to
them,  the  several  members  of  her  family,  consisting
of  nine  persons,  and  could  not  be  deceived  by  any
change  in  their  position.  At  length,  I  held  a  book
before  her  on  a  level  with  her  eyes,  when  she,
without  hesitation  named  what  the  object  was.
Upon  this  I  opened  the  book  at  the  title-page,  and
pressed  her  to  try  if  she  could  distinguish  any  words.
She  at  first  begged  me  not  to  trouble  her  to  do  this ;
but  at  length,  as  if  making  a  great  effort,  she  made
out  the  word  "  London,"  at  the  bottom  of  the  page.
This  was  the  first  time  I  had  seen  any  sleepwaker
read  any  written  or  printed  word.  The  experiment,
however,  though  curious,  was  not  strictly  enough
conducted  to  serve  as  the  basis  of  any  theory  on  the
mysterious  subject  of  vision  through  the  closed  lids-
The  book,  at  the  moment  when  the  word  was  dis-
tinguished, was  resting  upon  the  patient's  lap,  below
the  level  of  her  eyes.  Those,  however,  who  were
observant  of  the  circumstance,  could  detect  not  the
smallest  opening  of  the  eyelids.

Holding  my  watch  before  the  patient,  in  the  usual
line  of  vision,  I  asked  her  the  hour,  when  she  correctly
told  that  it  was  five  minutes  to  eleven.

Directly  after  this  last  experiment,  I  awoke  my
patient,  who  testified  great  surprise  at  finding  herself
on  a  chair  instead  of  the  sofa,  where  she  last  re-
membered to  have  been  seated.  Mr.  T  — now
came  up  to  her  and  said,  "  H ,  do  you  know


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINCr,  10$

what  o'clock  it  is  ?"  to  which  she  replied,  **  I  suppose
about  ten,  or  perhaps  half-past  nine. I  am  sure  I

cannot  tell." Mr.  T ,  then said,  "  Why,  it  is

not  five minutes since you told us the  hour."

Upon this Miss  T seemed much astonished,

but  declared  her  utter  ignorance  of  the  circum-
stance, and  indeed  of  all  that  had  occurred  during
her  sleepwaking.  The  last  thing  which  she  recol-
lected was  hearing  me  ask  whether  she  slept,
when  she  desired  to  answer  me  but  could  not.  A
moment  after,  she  became  unconscious.  Her  feelings
after  the  mesmerisation  was  over  were  those  of  plea-
surable excitement,  and  she  felt  none  of  the  heavi-
ness which  sometimes  succeeds  sleepwaking.  The
next  morning  she  declared  that  she  had  not  been
able  to  close  her  eyes  all  night,  but  had  felt  no  want
of  sleep,  nor  subsequently  did  she  experience  any  of
the  lassitude  usually  resulting  from  a  wakeful  night.
On  a  second  mesmerisation  Miss  T con-
firmed by  repetition  the  results  of  most  of  the  preced-
ing experiments*  A  cambric  pocket-handkerchief
tied  over  her  eyes  made  no  difference  whatever  in
her  powers  of  vision.  She  did  not  even  seem  to  be
aware  when  I  put  on  the  bandage,  or  when  I  took  it
off.  While  bandaged,  she  read  the  words  '^  Edin-
burgh Guide,"  and  "  Travels  in  Russia,"  from  the
title-pages  of  two  books,  which  I  took  up  at  random
fi:om  amongst  others  lying  about  the  room,  and  held
before  her,  in  about  the  usual  position  a  person  holds
a  book  in  reading.  The  effort  to  distinguish  these
words  seemed  to  be  great,  and  subsequently  Miss

V  5


106  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

T r-  refused  to  make  any  more  exertions. I  urged


her  to  look  at  my  watch,  but  she  remained  silent,
and  soon  after  large  tears  forced  their  way  through
her  closed  lids.  Having  tranquillised  my  patient  by
such  motions  of  the  hands  as  I  have  ever  found  bene-
ficial and  soothing  to  mesmerised  persons,  I  awoke
her,  when  she  at  once  resumed  her  cheerfulness,  and
began  laughingly  to  ask  her  sisters  what  she  had  been
doing,  and  how  long  she  had  slept.  She  was  not  in
the  least  aware  that  she  had  been  crying,  and  I  begged
that  she  might  not  be  told  of  it.

I  might  here,  perhaps,  close  my  series  of  proofs
relating  to  mesmeric  sleepwaking  and  its  pheno-
mena ;  but,  as  regards  this  argument,  numbers  are
strength,  and  each  additional  instance  of  the  mesmeric
sleep,  accompanied  by  the  same  characteristics,  is  a
step  towards  that  firm  and  decisive  conclusion  on  the
subject,  which  can  only  be  attained,  on  any,  by  a  re-
petition of  the  same  fact  under  the  same  circum-
stances. At  the  risk,  therefore,  of  wearying  my
readers,  I  add  the  following  cases,  which  occurred
after  I  had  returned  to  the  Continent  in  1837  :—

CASE  IX.

J.  G ,  of  Antwerp,  aged  22,  not  very  strong,

but  having  no  particular  ailment,  was  brought  by
me  into  imperfect  mesmeric  sleepwaking.  His  head
followed  my  hand,  and  he  was  unable  to  move  or
open  his  eyes,  though  he  replied  to  my  questions.
He  felt  a  drowsiness  during  the  whole  of  the  day
succeeding  to  the  mesmerisation.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  107

CASE X.

W— ,  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  aged  45,  in  delicate
health,  of  a  calm,  reflective  mind,  and  sceptical  as
weU  as  uninformed  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  was
thrown  into  perfect  sleepwaking  at  the  first  sitting.
He  displayed  the  usual  characteristics  of  the  state.
TTiere  were  circumstances  relating  to  this  patient
which  I  shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to  detail,  and
which  are  therefore  omitted  here.

CASE  XI.

T.  B ,  (English)  aged  nine,  an  extremely  lively

boy,  and  full  of  the  restlessness  natural  to  his  age,  con-
sented to  be  mesmerised,  but  observed  that  he  thought
he  never  should  be  able  to  sit  still  while  I  tried  my
experiments.  Notwithstanding  this,  and  the  time  of
day  (two  o'clock),  his  eyes  closed  after  about  ten
minutes'  mesmerisation,  and  shortly  after  he  gave
every  token  of  having  passed  into  perfect  sleep-
waking.  He  answered  all  my  questions,  heard  no
other  voice  than  mine,  was  attracted  towards  me  in
the  usual  manner,  and,  with  his  eyes  to  all  appearance
shut,  saw  me,  and  indicated  the  position  of  my  hands
and  the  number  of  fingers  which  I  held  up  before
him.  In  about  half  an  hour  he  begged  me  to  awake
him,  and,  on  returning  to  the  natural  state,  declared
that  his  unconsciousness  had  been  complete.

CASE  XII.

Mrs.  O  a  married  English  lady,  clever  and

F  6


108  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

firm-iDinded,  was  thrown  by  me  into  imperfect  sleep-
waking  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  In  this  state
her  countenance  was  pale,  her  head  moved  towards
my  hand  involuntarily,  and  she  was  unable  to  get  up,
or  to  open  her  eyes,  until  I  had  de-mesmerised  her.

CASE XIII.

R,  V  ,  a  young  Belgian,  of  the  medical  pro-
fession, was  so  far  susceptible  of  the  eflPects  of  mesmer-
ism as  to  display  the  usual  symptoms  of  imperfect
sleepwaking.  Having  an  engagement  on  the  evening
that  he  was  mesmerised,  and  rather  ashamed  of  having
slept,  he  hurried  away  before  the  mesmeric  drowsiness
had  been  entirely  dispersed.  The  consequence  was  that
he  nearly  fell  down  in  the  street,  and  was  obliged  to
have  recourse  to  the  support  of  a  fellow  student.  On  the
following  day,  he  still  felt  a  confusion  in  his  head.  This
is  not  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have  remarked  that
the  sensations  which  attend  and  follow  an  imperfect
crisis  are  by  no  means  so  agreeable  as  those  which
result  from  complete  sleepwaking.  In  the  one  case,
there  is  an  apparent  disturbance  of  the  system,  ac-
companied by  feelings  of  drowsiness  and  fatigue  — *
in  the  other,  the  frame  seems  to  be  invigorated,  arid
a  wakefulness  and  vivacity  are  the  after  symptoms.  %

CASE  XIV.

At  the  time  when  this  occiurred,  I  was  staying  at  a
country  house  in  Switzerland,  and  my  friends,  the
Countess  of "  and  Lord  > were  passing  a  few


JUESMERIC SL££FWAKINO«  lOd

days  at  the  town  which  was  nearest  our  residence.
Having  heard  from  me  some  interesting  detailsr
respecting  mesmerism,  they  were  desirous  of  witness-
ing its  phenomena;  but,  as  no  patient  was  forth-
coming, it  seemed  unlikely  that  the  wishes  of  my.
noble  friends  would  be  gratified.  However,  late  one
evening,  the  Countess  sent  her  carriage  and  a  note,
pressing  me  to  come  to  her  immediately,  as  she  had,
met  with  some  friends  amongst  whom  I  should  find,
one  at  least  willing  to  be  mesmerised. On  arriving

at  the  town  of I  was  introduced,  for  the  first

time,  to  a  most  agreeable  English  family,  the  friends
of  whom  the  Countess  had  spoken ;  and  after  some
conversation,  in  the  course  of  which  I  ascertained
that  the  newly  arrived  visiters  had  but  a  very  vague
notion  of  what  they  were  to  witness  or  to  experience,
it  was  decided  that  I  should  mesmerise  Miss  ,  a

young  lady,  who  might  have  seen  some  eighteen
summers,  of  a  lively  disposition,  and  not  in  the  least
timid  or  nervous  with  regard  to  the  experiment
about  to  be  made.  Lady  — —  took  down  a  kind  of
procis  verbal^  during  the  proceedings  of  the  evening,
and  from  this  I  extract  the  following  details :  —

*'  Mr.  T" began  to  mesmerise  Miss  at

ten  o'clock.  Five  minutes  after  her  eyes  closed,  her
head  followed  the  mesmeriser's  hand  wherever  he
moved  it. The  mesmeriser  then  asked  —

Are  you  asleep  ?

Patient.  — •  No ;  I  am  not  asleep.

Mesmerisen  —  Do  you  like  being  mesmerised?

P.  —  No. (On  repetition)  Yes.


110  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKINO.

The  apparently  mesmerised  person  here  started
from  her  seat,  opened  her  eyes,  and  said  ^^  I'm  not  in
the  least  mesmerised."  All  present  thought  she  had
been  feigning,  and  were  oreparing  to  join  in  a  laugh
against  the  mesmeriser,  when,  to  the  surprise  of  every
one,  the  patient  fell  back  into  her  chair,  her  eyes  at
the  same  time  closing  with  a  sleepy  expression.  The
mesmeriser  continued  his  passes.  The  head,  as  before,
followed  the  hand.

The  mesmeriser  then  said  —

Do  you  feel  sleepy  ?

P.  —  Yes.

M.  —  Why  then  do  not  you  sleep  ?

P.  — I  do.

M.  —  Are  you  quite  asleep  ?

The  mesmeriser  here  drank  some  wine,  turning
his  head  away,  and  asked  —

Do  you  taste  any  thing  ?

P.  —  No,  but  I  smell  wine.  (The  wine  was,  however,
too  far  oflP  from  the  patient  to  have  been  distinguished
by  her,  in  any  way,  under  ordinary  circumstances.)

M.  —  Do  you  know  where  my  hand  is  ?

P.  —  (her  hand  going  directly  to  where  the  mes-
meriser's  was)  Yes.

M.  —  Can  you  see  me  ?

P.  —  Yes,  but  not  very  distinctly,  (Her  eyes  ap-
peared to  be  closely  shut.)

M.  —  (smelling  to  a  nosegay  which  he  took  from
the  table)  What  is  this  ?

P.  —  Flowers.

The  mesmeriser  now  urged  the  patient  to  rise  from


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  Ill

her  chair,  but  she  expressed  the  strongest  reluctance
to  move :  at  the  same  time  she  entreated  the  mesmer-
iser  not  to  leave  her.  He,  however,  went  to  a  little
distance,  when  Miss  -—  seemed  to  be  forced  to  get
up  and  follow  him.  Supported  by  the  mesmeriser,
she  walked  half  across  the  room,  but  begged  that  she
might  be  permitted  to  sit  down  again.  The  mesmer-
iser then  placed  her  in  a  chair  in  the  middle  of  the
apartment,  and  held  up  various  objects  (not  belong-
ing to  him)  before  her  eyes.  These  she  declared  she
could  not  see,  but  whenever  the  mesmeriser  held
before  her  any  thing  which  belonged  to  himself,  she
named  the  object  directly.  In  this  way  she  told
rightly  when  the  mesmeriser  successively  presented
his  pocket-handkerchief,  purse,  and  watch,  also  a
letter  which  he  took  from  his  pocket.  On  being
asked  if  she  could  distinguish  the  hour  on  the  mes-
meriser's  watch,  she  held  it  before  her  closed  eyes,
and  said,  ^^  It  is  a  quarter  to  something."  In  effect  it
was  a  quarter  to  eleven.

The  mesmeriser  now  asked  —

What  am  I  tasting  ?

P.  —  (seeming  to  swallow  something)  Q)ld  water.
(Right.)

M.  —  What  am  I  eating  ?

P.  —  (seeming  also  to  eat)  Something  like  bread,
but  sweeter. (It  was  cake.)

M.  —  Do  you  like  it  ?

P.  —  Yes.

M.  — What  am  I  smelling  ?

P.  —  Eau  de  Cologne. (Right.)


112  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIXG^

Miss  'S  father  and  mother  now  approached

her,  and  would  have  taken  her  hand,  but  she  drew  it
back  with  a  shudder.  To  the  mesmeriser*s  hand,  on,
the  contrary,  her  own  seemed  always  attracted,  and
rose  up  to  meet  it  when  held  at  a  considerable  dis-
tance. She  distinguished  between  her  father's  and
the  mesmeriser's  handkerchiefe,  by  throwing  the
former  away,  and  retaining  the  latter  in  her  posses-
sion. She  also  refused  to  part  with  a  small  piece  of
coin  on  which  the  mesmeriser  had  breathed,  and
which  she  held  fast  grasped  in  her  hand.

The  patient  being  now  asked  if  she  was  tired,  re-
plied that  she  did  indeed  feel  much  fatigued,  and
seemed  pleased  to  rest  her  head,  leaning  forward,
upon  the  mesmeriser's  hand:  at  this  moment  she
seemed  to  sleep  very  deeply.  Her  countenance  was
extremely  pale.  She  seemed  to  hear  no  one  speak
but  the  mesmeriser,  but  always  answered  his  ques-
tions. On  his  asking  if  she  felt  well  and  comfortable,
she  replied,  "  Oh,  so  comfortable ! "  nevertheless  the
position  of  the  patient,  as  she  bent  forward,  with  her
neck  stretched  out,  was  the  most  uneasy  that  could
well  be  imagined.

M. — Would  you  not  be  more  at  your  ease  on  the
sofa?

P. — Oh  no  !  I  am  so  well  here  I  But  you  are  not
going  away  ?

The  mesmeriser  here  rose  and  went  to  the  sofa,
when  Miss  -^—  seemed  obliged  to  do  so  likewise.

M. — Are  you  not  better  here.

P. — ^Yes,  so — sitting  quiet;


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  113

-  The  mesmeriser  now  asked  his  patient  if  she
would  awake,  but  she  said  she  would  rather  remain
as  she  was,  and  begged  of  him  to  allow  her  to  sleep
some  time  longer.  At  length,  however,  the  mesmer-
iser said,  "  I  must  wake  you,"  and  passed  his  hands
rapidly  over  the  patient's  eyes,  when  they  partially
opened,  but  she  shut  them  again  directly,  exclaim-
mg,  **  I  had  rather  sleep."  The  mesmeriser  however
continued  to  use  the  same  motions  as  before,  when
the  patient  again  opened  her  eyes,  and  to  the  question
*'  Are  you  quite  awake  ?"  answered  in  the  affirma- .
tive.  She  tlfbn  looked  about  with  an  air  of  surprise
and  asked  how  she  came  to  be  sitting  on  the  sofa?
Then  she  held  up  her  hand,  which  still  remained,
closed  upon  the  piece  of  money  that  the  mesmeriser
had  given  her,  and  exclaimed,  "  What  is  this?"  When
it  was  explained  to  her  that  she  had  refused  to  part
with  the  coin,  she  seemed  much  surprised,  and,  when
informed  of  all  that  had  passed,  would  scarcely
believe  what  we  told  her.  The  only  circumstance
that  she  remembered  of  her  sleepwaking  was
having  seen,  at  a  moment  when  her  eyes  were  partly

open,  the upper  part  of  Lady  S ^*s  face. She

declared  the  only  disagreeable  thing  in  mesmerism
was  the  awaking,  and  compared  it  to  what  she  should
imagine  of  the  feelings  of  a  drowned  person  in  return-
ing to  life."

Fearing  lest  my  reader  should  now  exclaim  with
Macbeth  —

**  What  I  will  the  line  stretch  out  to  the  crack
Of  doom  ? ■  Fll  see  no  more ! " —


114  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

I  here  close  my  detailed  cases  of  mesmeric  sleep-
waking,  merely  stating  in  conclusion  that,  in  addition
to  those  already  particularised,  I  have  mesmerised,
between  January  1837,  and  December  1838,  nine
other  individuals,  seven  of  whom  passed  into  the
perfect,  and  two  into  the  imperfect  crisis.  These  all
displayed  phenomena  coincident  with  the  above,
though  in  some  cases  higher  and  more  interesting  in
their  degree  of  development.  Of  course  as  I  pro-
ceeded in  my  career  of  investigation,  my  views
cleared,  and  my  experiments  became  extended-  It
was  impossible  to  be  so  long  conversant  with  one  set
of  facts  without  hazarding  some  conjectures  as  to  their
efficient  causes.  I  theorised,  and  endeavoured  to
prove  or  disprove  the  theories  that  I  constructed  by
bringing  them  to  the  test  of  actual  experiment.  How
far  I  succeeded  in  this  labour  it  is  my  intention  to
relate  hereafter.  My  intention,  up  to  this  point,  has
simply  been  to  answer  the  objections  raised  against
mesmerism  on  account  of  its  limited  manifestation,
and  variable  as  well  as  hypochondriac  character.  I
have  wished  to  show  that  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  a
state,  and  a  peculiar  state,  into  which  man  gene-
rally has  the  capacity  of  passing ;  and  surely  I  have
said  enough  to  remove  from  it  the  reproach  of  being
limited  to  a  few  nervous  and  fanciful  persons,  chiefly
of  the  weaker  sex.  Out  of  three  and  twenty  indi-
viduals in  whom  I  induced  sleepwaking,  more  or
less  perfectly,  six  only  were  women,  one  only  a  de-
cided invalid.  Let  me,  however,  hasten  to  anticipate
an  objection  which  may  have  been  forming  in  my


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  Il6

reader's  mind.  I  ought,  it  may  be  urged,  to  have
noticed  my  cases  of  failure  as  well  as  of  success.
This  objection  shall  not  long  be  valid  —  I  have
already  stated  that  a  cousin  of  mine  could  not  be  in-
fluenced by  me  mesmerically.  The  trial  was  how-
ever scarcely  serious  or  protracted  enough  to  be
considered  as  decisive  one  way  or  the  other.  At
Cambridge  two  persons  experienced  no  effects  from
mesmerisation.  The  one  was  determined  to  resist
the  influence,  and  to  that  end  was  solving  an  abstruse
mathematical  problem  all  the  time  that  I  was  mes-
merising him.  The  other  disliked  being  mesmerised
and  was  afraid  of  it ;  —  and  fear  I  have  always  found
to  be  in  mesmerism  a  most  disturbing  force.  Sub-
sequently among  those  whom  I  have  essayed  to  mes-'
merise,  I  have  met  with  but  four  persons  who  mani-'
fested  either  no  symptoms  of  being  affected,  or  those
so  slight  and  equivocal  that  they  may  not  be  relied
upon.  Of  these,  two  were  ladies,  who  ought  (accord-
ing to  the  received  notion  of  mesmerism)  to  have
been  more  easily  influenced  than  persons  of  the  other
sex,  especially  as  they  allowed  me  a  fair  and  suflScient
trial,  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  two  other  individuals
alluded  to  jumped  up  from  their  seats  after  a  mes-
merisation of  a  few  minutes,  one  of  them  exclaiming,
"I  feel  nothing;  and  now  believe  in  mesmerism,
less  than  ever!"

However,  allowing  these  cases  to  pass  as  absolute
failures,  it  appears  that  in  the  space  of  less  than  two
yeai's,  the  number  of  persons  mesmerised  by  one
single individual  was  in  the  proportion  of  twenty-


116  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

three  to  eight  Striking  off  even  the  imperfect  cases,
there  will  remain  fourteen  persons  out  of  thirty-one
in  whom  sleepwaking  was  fully  developed  with  all  its
attendant  train  of  characteristic  phenomena,  —  these
too,  not  being  selected  by  myself  as  likely  subjects
for  mesmerism,  but  oflfering  themselves  accidentally :
and  surely  they  who  consider  how  difficult  it  is,  first,
to  prevail  on  persons  to  submit  to  mesmerisation  at
all,  and,  secondly,  to  secure  an  adequate  trial,  will
wonder  that  the  cases  are  so  many  rather  than  so
few.  The  great  argument,  therefore,  against  mesmer-
ism, of  infrequency  and  irregularity,  falls  to  the  ground.
Nor  can  any  one  rationally  demand  a  universality  of
mesmeric  sleepwaking,  before  he  will  admit  that  it  is
one  of  the  states  into  which  man  generally  has  the
capacity  of  passing.  The  exceptions  forbid  not  the
existence  of  the  rule.  All  persons  are  not,  it  is  to  be
hoped,  mad;  yet  we  pronounce  madness  to  be  an
affliction  to  which  any  man  whatever  is  liable.

**  Perhaps  some  doctor  of  tremendous  paunch,
Burly  and  big  —  a  black  abyss  of  drink,"  —

may  see  all  his  fellow  topers  under  the  table,  himself
sober  the  while ;  yet  this  by  no  means  affects  the  pro«
position,  that  drunkenness  is  a  state  into  which  man
generally  has  the  capacity  of  passing.

But  there  yet  remain  two  important  questions  to
ask  and  to  answer,  respecting  the  phenomena  which
I  have  detailed.

1st.  Have  I  been  deceived?

2d.  Have  I  been  mistaken  ?


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  11?

The  first  implies  that  my  patients  feigned;  the
second  that  my  senses  were  incompetent  to  discern
the  objects  presented  to  them.

The  wilful  and  determined  opposers  of  mesmerism
(carefully  to  be  separated  from  the  class  of  honest  ob-
jectors) are  very  ready,  in  judging  of  mesmeric  state-
ments, to  have  recourse  to  one  or  both  of  the  above  sup-
positions, not  perceiving  that,  in  so  doing,  they  decide
abstract  questions  which  can  never  be  limited  to  the
single  subject  of  mesmerism,  but  which  bear  largely
upon  the  whole  conduct  of  life. In  their  blind  zeal
to  overthrow  the  particular  object  of  their  dislike,
they  would  strike away  universally  the  two  great
props  of  humanity, namely,  —  belief  in  our  neigh-
bour, whereby  we  greatly  regulate  the  moral  part  of
our  nature ; and  confidence  in  the  sufficiency  of  our
senses,  whereby  alone  we  judge  of  any  thing  external
to ourselves. Allow that a large proportion of
persons  deceive, (as  we  must  do,  if  we  suppose  all
whom  we  mesmerise  to  be  feigning,)  and  what  becomes
of  our  faith  in  the  founders  of  our  holy  religion,  even
in  the  credibility  of  human  testimony  on  which  we
ground  our  present  actions  and  our  future  hopes  ?
Again,  grant  that  we  are  deluded  by  our  senses  to
the  extent  we  must  be  when  we  are  mistaken  in  a
multitude  of  cases,  and  what  remains  in  the  universe
but dreams  and  uncertainties? The  splendid  la-
bours of  Galileo  and  Herschel,  based  as  they  are  on
the  competency  of  the  human  senses,  are  but  as  .a
vapour, and the  discoveries  of Newton, sublinxe


'118  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

as  they  appear,  must  be  as illusory  as the  organs
through  which  they  were  transmitted.

But  it  may  be  replied,  —  We  are  not  to  distrust
our  senses  generally,  but  only  in  those  particular
cases,  when  they  appear  to  bear  testimony  incom-
patible with former experience. This  manner  of
viewing  the  question  is  plausible,  and  has  accordingly
been  much  adopted  by  those  who  would  make  short
work  of  mesmerism  and  banish it  at  a  blow. On
these  grounds,  some  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  say
—  Should  we  even  see  the  imputed  wonders  of  mes-
merism with  our  own  eyes,  we  should  not  credit  our
senses. Whether  such  determination  be  as  wise  as  it
is magnanimous,  remains  to  be  proved. There  is
unfortunately  just  that  mixture  of  good  in  it  which
makes  evil  dangerous. Every  reasonable  man  will
grant  that  we  should  examine  with  becoming  caution
any  appearances that  may  seem  to  contradict  our
former  experience ;  —  but  to  reject,  when  we  should
only  distrust  —  to  be  positive  when  we  ought  to  be
merely  sceptical  —  is  certainly  not  the  part  of  reason.
The  mistake  seems  to  have  originated,  as  so  many
other  misconceptions  on  important  points  have  done,
not  so  much  in  a  false  idea  as  in  the  misplacement
of  a  truth  —  in  taking  that  as  a  basis  which  is  only
superstructure. The  maxim,  "  Doubt  all  that  does
not  harmonise  with  previous  knowledge,"  is  just  in
itself,  but,  in  this  case,  becomes,  by  its  position,  erro-
neous. It  is  excellent  as  a  monitor,  but  insuflScient  as  a
guide  — an admirable servant, but a miserable
master. Were  the  ultra  ante-mesmerists  consistent^


MESMERIC SL£EPWAKINQ«  119

and  should  they  carry  through  their  principle,  what
groundwork  would  they  have  for  any  belief  what-
soever ?  I  may  be  answered,  "  Experience  !  "  Yes;
but  should  it  be  forgotten  that  experience  itself  is  the
fruit  of  the  senses  ?  What  becomes  of  the  product,
if  the  parent  itself  be  found  so  very  fallible  ?  If  we
grant  that  we  are  the  fools  of  our  senses  in  one  im-
portant branch  of  their  observation,  why  not  in  all  ?
The  absurdity  is  this :  we  are  to  trust  our  general
experience,  but  allow  that  it  may  err  in  the  particular,
as  if  the  general  were  not  composed  of  the  particular  !
It  is  as  if  we  were  to  talk  of  a  good  form  of  govern-
ment under  which  every  individual  was  grossly
wronged.  Now,  trust  in  the  testimony  of  our  senses,
or  rather  of  our  consciousness,  is  not  only  the  ground-
work of  all  we  believe,  but  is  the  cement  of  each  fact
that  makes  up  the  whole  fabric  of  our  certain  know-
ledge. Of  the  external  world  we  can  ascertain  no-
thing but  through  the  faculties  by  which  we  observe
it ;  and  of  the  external  world  we  can  believe  nothing
but  by  our  trust  in  the  accuracy  of  those  faculties  —
our  organ  of  information  is  either  competent  or  incom-
petent. If  it  be  competent,  there  is  no  reason  why
we  should  distrust  ii^  ctBteris  paribtis^  in  one  case  more
than  another.  If  incompetent,  there  is  no  reason  why
we  should  trust  it,  cceteris  paribtis,  at  one  time  more
than  another.  There  is  no  alternative :  either  we
must  place  confidence  in  our  sole  medium  of  knowr
ledge,  or  take  refuge  in  universal  scepticism.  Grant
that  every  anomaly  presented  to  us  be  a  reason  for  tem-
porary doubt;  still,  when  it  is  often  enough  presented


120  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

to  us^  our  doubts  as  to  its  existence  cannot  but  cease.
Allow  that  to  accept  facts  on  insufficient  grounds
is  folly ;  still,  to  reject  them  when  properly  demon*
strated  is  equally  absurd : nay,  the  greater  danger
waits  upon  unfounded  hesitation. A  too  great  rash-
ness may  correct  itself; but  distrust  in  the  evidence
of  our  senses  is  a  radical  defect,  which,  as  it  annihilates
all  things,  so  does  it  preclude  the  possibility  of  a  re-
medy ;  —  not  that  any  wise  man  would  attempt  to  deny
that,  though  our  senses  are  competent,  we  ourselves
may  be  in  fault ;  and  that,  through  a  careless  use  of
our  means  of  knowledge,  we  may  sometimes  err  in
our  estimate  of  things. But  though  this  may  happen
once  or  twice,  the  most  slovenly  observer  can  scarcely
be  deceived  as  to  the  actuality  of  a  series  of  facts
which  occur  before  him  again  and  again. Moreover,
in  witnessing  aught  so  remarkable  as  an  exhibition  of
the  mesmeric  phenomena,  the  gazer's  mind  is  in  the
attitude  of  roused  attention ;  a  state  the  most  oppo-
site imaginable  to  the  careless  mood,  in  which  we  are
apt to  be  deceived. They  who  would represent
mesmerism  as  the  cheat  of  our  own  eyes  should  re-
member, that  the  worst  mistakes  of  our  senses  are
but  transient,  even  momentary,  and  that  their  very
errors tend to correct  themselves. For  instance,
when  alone  in  my  apartment  at  the  witching  time  of
night,  I  may  suppose  I  see  a  face  gazing  at  me  from
t)ut  the  window-curtains. But  my  immediate  im-
pulse is  to  look  again,  and  to  bend  a  stricter  scrutiny
upon the delusive  appearance, which I  discover
forthwith to have arisen  from certain fortuitous


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  121

arrangements  of  light  and  shade.  It  might,  indeed,
have  happened  that,  overcome  by  sudden  panic,  I
should  have  fled  from  the  room,  while  still  undec  a
delusion,  and  have  proclaimed  ever  after  I  had  seen
a  ghost.  But  such  conduct  is,  happily,  the  exception
to,  and  not  the  rule  of,  that  of  mankind  in  general.

Besides,  there  is  plainly  no  analogy  whatever  be-
tween a  momentary  and  fear-engendered  delusion
of  this  sort,  and  a  persistence  in  error,  with  regard  to
objects  which  we  behold  very  frequently  and  in  the
calmest  frame  of  mind.  Other  apparent  inaccuracies
there  are  in  the  action  of  the  senses :  but  these  are
well  known,  and  deceive  no  one ;  and  exceptions,
when  known  and  invariable,  become  themselves  a
part  of  the  original  law  from  which  they  seem  to
deviate.  Allowances  are  made  for  them;  and  on
every  subject  to  which  they  relate  our  judgments  are
quite  as  exactas  if  no  such  limitations  were  enjoined.
Thus,  when  we  apparently  see  a  flash  of  light  from
bringing  into  contact  zinc  and  silver  in  our  mouths,
we  soon  come  to  know  that  there  is  no  such  thing;
and  when  a  juggler  by  the  rapidity  of  his  movements
bewilders  our  apprehensions,  we  admire  his  dexterity,
but  are  not  deceived  by  it  in  the  least.

But  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  come  not  within
the  category  of  these  transient  illusions.  The  pa-
tients who  exhibit  them  are  not  jugglers,  but  per-
sons of  good  faith,  unpractised  in  sleight  of  hand  or
dexterity  of  any  kind.  Even  supposing  them  to  be
adepts  in  deception,  they  manifestly  cannot  play  a
part  of  which  they  know  nothing ;  and  I  have  shown

G


122  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKIN6.

that  those  whom  I  have  mesmerised  were  generally
unaware  what  was  to  be  felt  or  done  in  mesmeric
sleepwaking.  Am  I  to  entertain  a  thought  so  mon-
strous,  as  that  a  number  of  respectable  individuals
whom  I  casually  met  at  diflferent  times  and  in  dif-
ferent places  were  united  in  a  conspiracy  to  deceive
me  ?  I  cannot  think  so,  even  if  I  would.  He,  who
observes  a  state  frequently,  attains  at  length  to  a  cer-
tain experience  in  its  minute  symptoms,  which,  like
IthuriePs  spear,  detects  falsehood  at  once.  Now,  in
mesmerism,  there  are  a  thousand  such  trifling
but  decisive  tests  of  authenticity.  To  instance  only
clockwork  lowering  of  the  eyelids  and  the  remark-
able manner  of  their  closing  —  it  maybe  affirmed  that
these  phenomena  are  not  imitable ;  for  they  are  out
of  the  reach  of  human  muscular  power,  as  long  as  it
remains  under  its  usual  conditions.

Perceiving,  then,  that  imposition  on  the  part  of  my
mesmeric  patients  is  not  only  in  the  highest  degree
unlikely,  but  actually  impossible,  and  confiding  in
the  testimony  of  my  own  senses,  I  am  assured  that  I
have  witnessed  a  state  of  man  which  is  peculiar  and
distinctive,  1st,  as  induced;  2dly,  as  possessing  its
own  characteristics  when  induced.

Nor  are  these  conclusions  at  all  invalidated  by  the
common  argument  so  often  adduced  by  the  ante-mes-
merists, that  the  whole  of  what  are  called  the  mes-
meric conditions  are  brought  about  through  the
agency  of  the  patient'^s  imagination,  and  are  therefore
self-induced.  This  is  plainly  quibbling ;  for,  granting
that  imagination  be  the  proximate  cause,  or  imme-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  12d

diate  antecedent  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  still  we
require  a  moving  cause,  or  a  prior  antecedent  whereby
the  imagination  itself  is  set  in  action ;  and  this  moving
cause  is  indisputably  external,  and  to  be  referred  to
certain  looks  or  gestures  or  mere  proximity  of  the
mesmeriser.  Equally  futile  is  the  attempt  to  nullify
the  fact  of  external  influence  by  assertions  "  that
some  individuals  on  whom  the  effects  of  mesmerism
have  repeatedly  been  produced  may  exhibit  like
effects,  without  being  mesmerised  afresh,  provided
they  are  led  to  believe  that  the  process  is  carried  on
as  usual  and  that  they  are  under  its  influence.'*  This
proves  nothing  more  than  the  usual  law  of  our  nature,
whereby  trains  of  sensations  grow  into  habits,  and
occur  in  certain  series  when  the  idea  that  is  linked
with  them  can  be  raised  in  the  mind.  But  then
they  must  always  owe  their  origin  in  the  first  place  to
some  exciting  cause,  which  remains  the  true  basis  of
their  production ;  since  but  for  it  they  would  never
have  existed.  Thus  the  peculiar  sensation  called
tickling  was  in  the  first  instance  made  known  to  us
through  the  contact  of  something  external  (it  being  a
curious  fact  that  no  one  can  tickle  himself  so  as  to  fall
into  that  convulsive  laughter  which  characterises  the
sensation) ;  yet  if  any  one  presents  his  finger  to  sus-
ceptible persons,  as  if  with  an  intention  of  tickling,
the  feeling  will  be  excited,  and  those  on  whom  the
experiment  is  tried  will  shrink  and  laugh,  as  if  ac-
tually touched  by  the  finger.  The  idea,  then,  of  the
primary  cause  of  a  sensation  confessedly  precedes  the
sensation itself;  and,  when  mesmeric  patients  obey

G  2


124  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

this  law,  they  appear  to  me,  instead  of  disproving  the
influence  which  primarily  affected  them,  to  establish
it  altogether.  In  supposing  the  actions  of  the  mes-
meriser  to  be  present,  the  patient  owns  them  as  the
primary  cause  of  his  sensations ;  and  the  reproduction
of  the  accompanying  phenomena,  under  certain  con-
victions, is  a  perpetual  recognition  of  that  force
which  first  set  the  hidden  springs  in  play.

In  mesmerism,  then,  tlie  influence  of  man  is
always  the  proper  antecedent;  —  the  state  of  mesmeric
sleep  waking  the  proper  consequent.  Will  any  one
declare  that  external  causes  have  nothing  whatever  to
do  with  the  production  of  the  mesmeric  state  ?  Yet
this  he  must  aflSrm  before  he  can  consistently  class
mesmerism  with  self-originating  states  of  mind  or
■body.

In  vain,  therefore,  is  the  mesmeric  sleep  likened
to,  or  identified  with,  natural  sleepwaking,  hypo-
chondriasis, catalepsy,  &c.,  for  it  differs  in  one  most
important  particular,  from  any  of  these  states:
it  is  consequent  upon  external  influence;  it  is
induced^  and  that  (whatever  intermediate  machinery
may  be  set  in  motion)  by  the  agency  of  man.  We
should  consider  also  how  utterly  distinct  from  con-
stitutional disorders  like  the  above  is  mesmeric  sleep-
waking,  which  may  be  produced,  almost  at  will,,  in  all
kinds  of  temperaments.  Catalepsy,  which  it  in  some
respects  resembles,  is  a  disease;  but  the  mesmeric
sleep  is  not  a  disease.  Surely  every  event  has  its
adequate  cause,  and,  if  mesmeric  patients  are  not
sleepwakers  either  from  malady  or  by  constitution^


MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.  125

how  is  it  that  they  become  so  ?  It  has  been  shown
that  not  only  the  healthy  and  the  strong  are  suscep-
tible of  the  mesmeric  slumber,  but  individuals  ad-jj#
vanced  in  life,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  that
restlessness  of  the  blood  which  sometimes  afflicts
younger  persons  with  Weepwaking.  How  then  can
we  confound  mesmerib  with  natura:l  sleepwaking?
The  causes  which  are  explanatory  of  the  one  have
nothing  in  common  with  the  other.  Besides,  the
sleepwaking  we  are  considering  is  gudiiiikl  and
wielded  by  external  agency;  —  and  this  alone,
exclusive  of  other  considerations  which  we  have  be-
fore suggested,  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  those  who
allege  that  the  so-called  mesmeric  state  can  be  pro-
duced apart  from  the  mesmeriser;  since,  when
genuine,  it  presupposes,  the  exhibition  of  phenomena
that  spring  from  the  tnesmeriser's  actual  presence.

Another  distinguishing  feature  of  mesmeric  sleep-
waking which  stamps  it  with  an  individuality  the
most  remarkable,  is  (as  far  as  my  own  observation  of
the  state  extends)  the  extreme  clearness  and  truth  of
its  perceptions.  Mesmeric  patients  act  upon  real
impressions,  and  in  perfect  conformity  with  external
circumstances.  They  retain  all  their  sense  of  locality,
all  their  cognition  of  time,  and  their  knowledge  of
the  persons  who  may  be  around  them.  Now  natural
sleepwakers  are  generally  acting  under  some  delu-
sion. They  will  get  astride  upon  a  chair  and  fancy
that  they  have  mounted  a  horse,  and,  advancing  still
further  into  hallucination,  will  whip  and  spur  their
imaginary  steed,  supposing  that  they  are  performing

o  a


126  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

twelve  miles  within  the  hour.  Like  Lady  Macbeth,
they  will  see  what  is  not,  and,  their  waking  thoughts
continuing  to  influence  their  slumbers,  they  will
suppose  themselves  still  engaged  in  deeds  which
have  been  long  numbered  with  the  shadows  past.  I
do  not  say  that  this  is  always  the  case ;  —  but  facts  will
bear  me  out  in  the  assertion  that  auto-sleepwaking
can  never  be  characterised  as  an  unillusive  state.

Again,  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  in  some  respects,
resembles  the  exaltation  produced  by  opium;  but  we
have  only  to  read  the  celebrated  Confessions  of  an
Opium-eater  to  be  convinced  that  the  votaries  of  that
drug  live  in  a  fantastic  and  ideal  world.

With  natural  sleep  mesmeric  sleepwaking  can  least
of  all  be  identified.  That  it  is  as  different  from  this
as  natural  sleep  itself  is  from  waking  may  be  j  udged
from  the  following  circumstance.  E.  A.,  returning
with  me  and  two  other  persons  from  an  evening
party,  fell  asleep  in  the  carriage.  I  made  the  mes-
meric passes  over  him  without  contact  and  in
silence.  After  about  the  usual  time  required  for
mesmerising  him  when  awake,  he  began  to  stir  and
testify  uneasiness.  Soon  after,  he  spoke  and  up-
braided me  for  taking  him  at  a  disadvantage  and  for
changing  his  natural  sleep  into  the  mesmeric.  There
was  as  marked  a  change  in  his  condition  as  if  he  had
actually  shaken  off  slumber.  A  lady*,  whose
daughter was sometimes singularly aflected by  a

*  See  note  page  152.  (relating  to  Madlle.  EsteUe  TH.)  in
Book  II.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  127

species  of  auto-sleepwaking,  presenting  many  of  the
features  of  the  mesmeric state,  told me that  the
patient  would  occasionally  go  to  bed,  while  in  what
she  called  the  "  crise,"  fall  into  a  natural  sleep,  rest
well,  yet  rise  the  next  morning,  still,  as  it  were,  self-
mesmerised. Chardel also, a French writer on
mesmerism, gives an interesting  account of  two
sisters  whom  he  mesmerised,  as  a  physician,  with  the
hope  of  checking  a  tendency  to  consumption  which
they had both evinced. One evening, being in
sleepwaking, they, as if prompted by a natural
instinct,  entreated  their  mesmeriser  to  leave  them  in
that  state,  only  so  far  demesmerising  them  as  to  en-
able them  to  open  their  eyes  and  to  be  committed  to
their  own  self-guidance. Day  after  day  they  renewed
their  petition  —  for  day  after  day  they  felt  health  re-
turnings  under the  mesmeric influence. In  other
respects  they  pursued  their  usual  habits,  and  their
mesmeric  existence  had  its  alternate  periods  of  sleep
and  of  waking,  as  regular  as  those  of  the  natural  life.
At  the  end  of  three  months,  their  cure  appearing  to
be  complete,  M.  Chardel  conducted  the  sisters,  ac-
companied by  their  mother,  to  a  beautiful  spot  in  the
country,  where  he  restored  them  to  a  knowledge  of
themselves. He  describes,  in  lively  terms,  their  sur-
prise and  joy  on  returning  to  consciousness. It  was
winter  when  they  entered  the  mesmeric  state —  it  was
now  spring. The ground was  then covered  with
snow,  but  now  with  flowers. They  were  then  looking
forward  to  an  early  grave ;  but  now  the  feeling  of
renewed  health  tinged  every  thing  with  hope  and

G  4


128  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

life  —  almost  doubting  if  they  did  not  dream,  they
threw  themselves  into  their  mother's  arms,  gathered
flowers,  and  smelt  to  them,  and  endeavoured,  by  the
exercise  of  their  senses,  to  convince  themselves  that  it
was  all  a  blessed  reality.  Not  a  circumstance  of  the
three  past  months  survived  in  their  memory.

And  this  leads  me  further  to  remark  that  the  abso-*
lute  forgetfulness  which  severs  the  mysterious  state  of
mesmeric  sleepwaking  from  the  cognisance  of  ordinary
consciousness  sets  a  peculiar  seal  upon  this  very  re-
markable condition  of  man.  The  drunkard  has  his
glimpses  of  remembrance ;  the  opium-eater  can  re-
count his  visions;  the  natural  sleepwaker  may
sometimes  recall  the  dreams  that  influenced  his  sleep-
ing actions  :  but  he  who  emerges  from  the  mesmeric
state,  when  it  is  true  and  perfect,  has  shaken  hands
with  memory  on  the  threshold.  It  is  true  that
reverie  shares  this  complete  oblivion;  but  then
reverie  is  a  state  of  illusion  and  of  incoherent  think-
ing. Darwin,  who  has  treated  of  it  at  length,  charac-
terises it  as  such,  and  mentions  a  young  lady  (in
whom  reverie  had  become  a  malady),  who,  when
under  a  paroxysm  of  this  complaint,  would  converse
with  imaginary  visitors.  On  one  occasion,  while  thus
afflicted,  she  took  off  her  shoe,  looked  at  it,  and  said
**  A  little  longer  and  a  little  wider,  even  this  would
make  me  a  coffin  !  '*

With  reverie,  then,  mesmeric  sleepwaking  cannot
be  identified,  and  in  every  point  of  view  we  seem
justified  in  considering  it  as  a  state  apart  from  all
others  —  a  distinct  and  peculiar  condition  of  man.


JtfESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  129

•

I  do  not,  however,  forget  that  these  deductions  are
founded  on  the  proceeds  of  my  individual  observ-
ation, nor  that  it  is  essential  that  the  experiments
which  are  their  base  should  be  capable  of  repetition,
in  order  that  each  man  may,  if  he  so  pleases,  bring  my
accuracy  to  the  test  of  his  own  senses.  Convinced
that  personal  observation,  if  sincere,  will  establish  all
that  I  have  advanced,  I  urge  every  one  to  inquire
and  to  judge  for  himself.  And  this  peculiar  advantage
attends  upon  mesmerism,  —  the  proof  of  it,  by  ex-
periment, is  in  the  hands  of  all.  The  mesmeriser
makes  no  mysterious  monopoly  of  his  art,  but
contends  that  the  power  to  mesmerise  and  the
capacity  of  being  mesmerised,  however  modified  by
circumstances,  may  be  developed  in  every  human
being.  Moreover,  for  that  repetition  of  the  mes-
meric phenomena  which  is  necessary  to  produce  a
conviction  of  their  reality  there  is  not  needed,  as  in
chemistry  or  optics,  an  assemblage  of  substances,  or  a
complicated  apparatus  which  few  can  command.  The
follies  of  the  baquet  and  of  the  magnetic  rod  have
perished  with  Mesmer,  and  at  the  present  day  the
mesmeriser's  eye  and  hand  are  his  sole  "conjuration
and  mighty  magic."

But  here  it  may  be  asked,  "  Why  then,  if  the  proof
be  so  easy,  is  the  world  so  hard  of  belief?"  The
answer  is  obvious :  because  there  are  few  who  will
take  the  trouble  to  prove  facts,  which,  from  causes
already  numbered,  men  had  rather  not  believe.  Be-
sides, though  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  all  who
are  really  desirous  to  obtain  proofs  of  mesmerism

o  5


130  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIKG.

may,  with  comparative  ease,  obtain  them;  still,  in
searching  for  these,  a  virtue  is  required,  which  is  by  no
means  a  general  attribute  of  mankind ;  namely,  per-
severance. Nothing,  indeed,  is  easier  than  for  a  man,
who  dislikes  being  troubled  with  the  new  ideas  which
the  subject  of  mesmerism  introduces  into  the  mind,
to  make  a  hasty  trial  of  the  alleged  power,  and,  failing
to  elicit  or  to  experience  any  of  its  effects, to  say,
*^  I  have  proved  it,  and  found  it  nought. " But  he
who  adopts  this  facile  mode  of  dismissing  a  trouble-
some question  can  scarcely  be  called  an  inquirer,  nor
can  his  verdict  have  much  weight. To  examine  a
phenomenon  is  not  sufficient :  we  must  examine  it
also  adequately ;  and  if  it  be  recognised  as  a  prin-
ciple that  a  fact  is  not  to  be  admitted  till  after  a  re-
peated scrutiny,  neither,  in  common  justice,  should
it  be  rejected  till  after  the  same  deliberate  investiga-
tion. But  whether  the  difficulties  attendant  upon  a
verification  of  those phenomena  which  I  have  wit-
nessed and  carefully  noted  have  been  under  or  over-
stated, I  must,  as  a  principle,  inculcate  a  dependence
upon  the  observer  who  makes  a  subject  his  study,
rather  than  on  the  captious  opponent  or  indifferent
idler  who  approaches  the  same  theme  with  a  want  of
temper or  a  want  of  patience, which  equally  dis-
qualify a  man  from  judging  rightly.  Putting  myself
wholly  out  of  the  question,  and  speaking  as  if  I  were
only  justifying,  and  claiming  belief  for,  the  first  dis-
coverer of  mesmerism,  I  cannot  but  assert  that  there
was  a  much  greater  chance  of  his  being  in  the  right
than  all  who  have  subsequently  proclaimed  him  in
the  wrong. In  every  case,  the  boldness  and  acut(^


r


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  131

ness  which  lead  a  man  to  take  new  views  of  a  subject
and  to  combat  ancient  prejudices  are  in  his  favour*
There  is  an  innate  consciousness  attendant  upon
correct  observation  which  upholds  him  and  encou-
rages him  to  war  with  the  world.  The  sudden  light
that  has  struck  him  is  like  a  light  from  heaven  and
brings  conviction  to  his  breast.  His  eyes  are  not  de-
luded, but  sharpened  by  desire.  No  other  person
can  have  that  intimate  zeal  —  that  interest  in  the
inquiry  which  urges  him  onward.  His  all  is  at
stake,  and  consequently  no  one  is  so  strict  with  him
as  he  is  with  himself.  Who  can  compare  the  cursory
and  partial  views  of  the  great  body  of  mankind  with
his?  We  may  call  him  a  visionary  or  a  heretic,  but,
remembering  the  slow  but  certain  triumph  of  Harvey
and  Galileo,  we  should  be  cautious  how  we  brand
him  with  epithets  which  may  only  recoil  upon  our-
selves. How  abundant  are  the  proofs  that  all  which
is  most  opposed  to  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  men
is  most  likely  to  be  true  !

Again,  in  the  history  of  all  observational  science
there  are  precedents  to  show  that  the  accuracy  of  the
most  genuine  experiments  has  been  called  in  question
by  those  who  were  unable  to  repeat  them.  Of  this
the  reception  which  the  Newtonian  doctrine  of  light
and  colours  met  with  from  the  world  is  a  familiar  in-
stance, the  more  to  be  noted  on  account  of  Newton's
reputation  as  a  strict  investigator.  Abjuring  all  hy-
pothesis and  cautiously  pursuing  the  method  of  in-
duction which  Bacon  had  substituted  for  the  worth-
less dogmatism  of  the  schools,  the  great  philosopher

o  6


132  * M£SM£RIC  SLEEPWAKING.

one  might  have  thought,  could  have  had  nothing  to
apprehend  from  the  petulance  of  opposition.  His
theorems  were  facts  which  every  man  might  verify  to
himself  by  the  aid  of  his  own  senses.  And  yet  in
many  cases  Newton  appealed  in  vain  to  the  commott
testimony  of  our  common  nature.  The  correctness
of  his  experiments  was  doubted  by  many  scientific
men  both  of  his  and  other  countries;  a  host  of
enemies  impeached  the  soundness  of  his  conclusions ;
and  even  in  a  later  age,  after  the  general  voice  had
ratified  his  theory,  the  celebrated  Goethe,  quitting  his
domain  of  high  imagination,  undertook  to  expose
its  errors  in  a  work  which  will  ever  remain  a  monu-
ment of  perverted  genius.

A  certain  dependence,  then,  upon  the  first  observer
of  new  phenomena  is  inculcated  both  by  reason  and
by  experience,  and  appears  to  be  requisite,  when  we
would  ourselves  examine  the  phenomena,  to  guard  us
from  impatience  and  to  support  us  through  deceptive
appearances.

But,  I  would  ask,  is  this  the  course  pursued  by  the
opponents  of  mesmerism  ?  Certainly  not:  they
bring  forward  the  defective  trial  of  an  experiment  as
a  complete  refutation  of  the  experiment  itself,  and
select,  with  curious  partiality,  the  one  failure  amongst
innumerable  instances  of  success,  as  an  illustration  of
the  nullity  of  mesmerism.  Yet  what  would  be  said  of
a  man  who,  going  to  see  some  well-known  chemical
or  other  effect  exhibited,  and  finding  it  fail  through
unforeseen  circumstances,  were  to  return  home  con-
vinced that  no  such  thing  had  ever  existed  ? What,


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  133

again,  would  be  thought  of  this  man's  state  of  intellect,
were  he  to  write  a  book  to  prove  that  certain  phe-
nomena, because  he  had  not  witnessed  them,  had
never  been  seen  by  thousands  who  could  support
them  by  their  testimony  ?  Yet,  cannot  even  such  an
original  sceptic  as  this  be  considered  a  whit  more  ab-
surd than  they  who  fondly  fancy  that  by  exparte
statements  and  scattered  histories  of  failure,  collected
from  men  as  prejudiced  as  themselves,  they  can  put
down  mesmerism  ?  Do  they  forget  that  all  which
appears  to  be  a  mass  of  negative  evidence  is  but  air
in  the  scale  when  weighed  against  one  positive  fact  ?

"  It  is  a  very  obvious  principle,"  says  Chalmers,
"although  often  forgotten  in  the  pride  of  prejudice,
and  of  controversy,  that  what  has  been  seen  by  one
pair  of  human  eyes  is  of  force  to  countervail  all  that
has  been  reasoned  or  guessed  at  by  a  thousand  human
understandings."

Let,  then,  body  after  body  of  learned  men  deny  the
phenomena  of  mesmerism  and  logically  disprove  their
existence,  an  appeal  may  ever  and  at  any  moment  be
made  to  the  "  proof  by  experiment;"  and,  even  should
experiment  itself  fail  a  thousand  times,  the  success
of  the  thousandth  and  first  trial  would  justify  further
examination.  Till  the  authority  of  observation  can
be  wholly  set  aside,  the  subject  of  our  inquiry  can
never  be  said  to  have  undergone  its  final  ostracism.


134  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.


.  SECT.  III.

SHOWING  CERTAIN OF  THE PHYSICAL  AND METAPHY-
SICAL CONDITIONS OF MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

Hitherto  1  have  exhibited  to  ray  reader  a  succes-
sion of  patients,  the  greater  part  of  whom  I  had
po  opportunity  of  mesmerising  again.  I  may  have
been  considered  as  trying  an  experiment  upon  a
great  scale,  as  to  the  mesmerisibility  of  mankind  in
general.  Such  a  mode  of  proceeding  has  this  advan-
tage:— persons,  who  have  been  frequently  mesmerised
may  be  charged  with  having  been  well  practised  in
their  parts ;  but  they  who  exhibit  for  the  first  time
the  mesmeric  characteristics,  without  even  having
heard  them  previously  described,  stand  aloof  from
all  suspicions  of  the  kind.  There  is  neither  habit
nor  imitation  nor  duplicity  to  be  charged  upoti
them;  and  therefore  the  phenomena  they  display
may  be  regarded  as  eminently  genuine.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  it  should  be  considered  that  such  pheno-
mena, if  more  to  be  relied  on,  are  also  humbler  in
degree  than  those  belonging  to  a  more  advanced  stage
of  sleep  waking:  and  this,  I  think,  may  be  owned
without  prejudice  to  mesmerism;  for,  as  I  have
before  observed,  we  cannot  liken  it  to  those  purely
mechanical  agencies  which  affect  persons  as  forcibly


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  135

the  first  time  as  in  all  succeeding  trials.  Many  of
the  phenomena  are  of  such  a  kind  as  to  be  obviously
capable  of  developement ;  and  in  demanding  a  cer-
tain license  on  this  account  we  ask  no  more  for  mes-
merism than  is  conceded  in  every  case  where  man's
intellect  is  concerned.  Let  it  be  always  kept  in  mind
that  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  more  than  an  exhibition
of  involuntary  motions  or  mere  physical  changes.
It  is  a  state  which  appears  to  possess  its  own  laws  of
perception  and  of  action ;  and,  in  this  point  of  view,
a  mesmerised  person  may  be  considered  as  learning
a  new  language  in  which  he  cannot  express  himself
with  eloquence  or  with  ease  until  he  has  mastered
its  idioms  and  possessed  himself  of  its  copiousness.
When  we  reflect  upon  the  diflSculty  we  all  find  in
acting  in  any  unusual  way,  we  cannot  but  perceive
that  time  must  be  requisite  to  the  developement  of  a
mode  of  existence  which  seems  to  be  abnormal  in  the
highest  degree.

It  is  evident,  then,  that,  in  order  to  study  the  pheno-
mena of  mesmeric  sleepwaking  in  their  maturer  de-
velopement, it  was  necessary  for  me  to  mesmerise  the
same  person  frequently.  This  I  have  done  in  more
than  one  instance,  and  the  following  has  been  the
result  of  my  observations :  —

In  accordance  with  what  has  been  suggested  above,
it  is  to  be  remarked  that  each  successive  time  a  per-
son is  mesmerised  he  becomes  mope  easy  of  mesmer-
isation,  and  more  at  homie  in  his  new  capacities.
Hence  without  effort  he  exhibits  many  phenomena
which  may  be  called  spontaneous,  in  distinction  to


136  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKIKO,

those  which  result  more  clearly  from  the  peculiar
relationship  in  which  the  mesmeriser,  pro  tempore^
stands  to  his  patient.  The  two  classes  of  phenomena
should  be  accurately  distinguished,  and  their  difference
borne  in  mind.  At  present,  I  have  chiefly  given  in-
stances of  the  latter ;  as  was  natural,  considering  that
my  earlier  patients  were  more  dependent  upon  myself
Aan  those  whom  I  subsequently  treated,  and  that  in
consequence  my  attention  was  chiefly  turned  to  the
mesmeric  processes  necessary  for  producing  or  direct-
ing their  sleepwaking.  It  was  not  till  later,  and  till
the  task  of  guiding  my  patients  could  be,  in  a  degree,
remitted,  that  I  was  able  to  add  some  remarks,
(which  indeed  appear  essential  to  complete  our  view
of  mesmerism  as  a  separate  condition  of  man),
upon  the  state  of  the  bodily  organs,  and  of  the  mental
Acuities,  in  the  mesmeric  sleep waker.  Beginning
with  the  former,  and  dividing  the  corporeal  functions
into  the  sensitive,  the  vital,  and  the  motory,  we  first
inquire  — What  is  the  state  of  the  actual  apparatus  of
the  senses  during  mesmeric  sleepwaking  ? And  first,

Of  the  Eye.

This  is  a  part  of  the  body  which  is  earliest  afiected
under  that  which  we  may  call,  without  theory,  the
human  influence.  One  of  the  first  tokens  a  person
gives  of  passing  into  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  a  look
of  stupor  in  the  eyes,  and  an  apparent  lack  of  power
in  the  eyelids  to  perform  the  usual  oflSce  of  nictation.
The  upper  lid,  as  I  have  before  observed,  falls  very
gradually  over  the  organ  of  sight,  and  spmetimes,


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  1^7

ceasing  to  move  altogether,  remains  suspended,  as  it
were,  in  such  a  manner  as  that  the  eye  appears  to  be
three  quarters  closed.  When  this  continues  to  be
the  case,  the  patient  rarely  falls  into  sleepwaking,  the
exceptions  occurring  commonly  amongst  those  who
sleep  with  their  eyes  partly  open  and  who  keep  them
in  the  same  state  during  the  whole  period  of  their
sleepwaking.  The  patient,  when  interrogated  as  to
his  sensations,  will  declare,  (retaining  his  conscious-
ness at  the  time)  that  he  feels  prickings  in  his  eyelids,
and,  as  far  as  outward  actions  can  be  proof,  the  same
uneasy  sensation  remains  or  recurs  at  intervals  during
the  sleepwaking.  For  all  the  sleepwakers  that  I  have
seen  rub  their  eyes  frequently,  so  that  any  one
would  think  they  were  about  to  awake;  but  their
slumber  remains  undisturbed,  and  the  action  alluded
to  seems  simply  automatic,  as  when  in  natural  sleep
we  brush  off  a  fly  from  the  face  without  being  con-
scious of  the  movement.  I  once  asked  a  sleepwaker
why  she  rubbed  her  eyes,  and  she  replied, "  Did  I  do
so  ?  I  suppose  it  is  a  trick  I  have  "  ("  je  suppose  que
c'est  une  habitude").  I  have  before  remarked  that
many  persons  in  semi-sleepwaking  retain  their  con-
sciousness, yet  are  wholly  unable  to  open  their  eyes.
A  scientific  man,  accustomed  to  investigation,  being
in  this  state,  assured  me  that  he  experienced  a  gra-
dual paralysis  of  the  nerves  connected  with  the  eye,
and  with  the  motive  powers  of  the  eye-lid,  and  that
at  length  his  utmost  efforts  of  volition  were  insuf-
6cient  to  make  the  orbicular  muscles  obey  him  as
usual. Sleepwaking  being  complete,  the  eye  is  gene^


138  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

rally  first  closed,  yet  not  exactly  as  in  sleep. The
following  difierences  may  be  noted:  — ^^Ist.  The  place
where  the  eye-lids  meet,  in  a  natural  way,  is  much
below  the  level  of  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  eye ;
but  I  have  observed  that  in  sleepwaking  the  line  of
contact  is  often  thrown  so  high  above  its  ordinary
situation  as  to  coincide  with  what  Haller  calls  the
equator  oculL 2dly. There  is  a  compressed  look
about  the  lids,  as  if  they  were  rather  held  down  by
force  than  quietly  and  naturally  closed. 3dly.  The
ball  of  the  eye  is  in  frequent  and  violent  motion,
which,  in  those  who  have  prominent  eyes  especially,
can  be  plainly  discerned  beneath  the  skin  of  the  eye-
lids. All  these  circumstances,  it  should  be  remem-
bered, are  actually  distinctive  of  the  mesmeric  sleep ;
for  many  persons  who  form  a  wrong  notion  concern-
ing it  suppose,  before  assisting  (as  the  French  say)
at  a  siance  of  mesmerism,  that  they  are  to  see  a  some-
thing precisely  like  natural  slumber,  and  exclaim,  when
the  reality  is  before  them,  "  This  must  be  all  a  trick,"
only  because  their  erroneous  ideas  are  contradicted.
With  regard  to  the  internal  state  of  the  eye  during
mesmeric  sleepwaking,  it  is,  of  course, diflScult  to
judge. No  force,  short  of  that  which  would  seriously
injure  the  sleepwaker,  can  wrench  asunder  the  eye-
lids. I  have  tried  this  and  made  others  try  it,  and
the  resistance  to  such  efforts  was  so  great  that,  to  be
appreciated,  it  must  be  felt. But  that  which  violence
cannot  accomplish,  the  command  of  the  mesmeriser
can  ordinarily  effect, though  that  he  should  use  this
power  with  great  discretion  the  following  occurrence


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING*  139

will  show.  I  once  asked  Mademoiselle  Anna  M  »•
(whom,  after  returning  to  the  Continent  in  1837,  I
frequently  mesmerised)  whether  she  could  open  her
eyes,  which,  at  the  time,  were  fast  shut  in  mesmeric
deepwaking.  Her  reply  was,  "  I  can  do  it,  if  you
insist  that  I  should ;  but  I  warn  yon  that  you  will  see
something  very  disagreeable,  and,  besides,  the  effort
will  do  me  no  good."  Notwithstanding  this  warning,
I  commanded  my  mesmeris^e  to  open  her  eyes.  She
did  so.  It  was  really  a  fearful  sight.  The  eye-
balls were  turned  up,  and  converged  towards  the
nose,  the  white  of  the  eye  was  bloodshot,  and  the
whole  organ  quivering  and  convulsed.  As  may  be
supposed,  I  did  not  long  keep  my  sleepwaker  in  what
appeared  to  me  a  painful  state,  and,  at  my  command,
she  again  closed  her  eyes.  On  awaking  her  shortly
after,  what  was  my  alarm  to  hear  her  declare  that
she  saw  nothing  whatever  !  She  appeared  to  be
much  agitated,  and  my  thoughts  may  be  conceived,
as  long  as  I  had  the  least  reason  to  fear  that  my  rash
experiment  might  end  in  her  being  blind  for  life.
The  exigence  of  the  moment,  however,  roused  me  to
exertion,  and  the  idea  occurred  to  me  that  the  best
thing  I  could  do  was  to  re-mesmerise  my  patient  as
quickly  as  possible.  This  I  did.  As  soon  as  she
had  passed  into  the  mesmeric  state,  she  became  calm
and  begged  me  not  to  be  alarmed,  as  the  blindness
/  she  had  just  experienced  was  but  the  momentary
effect  of  the  fatigue  to  her  eyes,  caused  by  the  effort
to  open  them.  She  then  requested  me  to  breathe^
on  her  eyes,  and  to  lay  my  hand  on  them,  after  which,


140  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

she  assured  rae  that  I  might  awake  her  without  any
further  apprehension.  In  effect,  the  transient  but
fearful  attack  of  blindness  was  passed  away.  After
this,  as  may  be  supposed,  I  was  not  very  ready  to  bid
my  sleepwakers  open  their  eyes.  I  have  also  found
in  them  all,  when  consulted  on  the  subject,  an  ex-
treme dislike  to  the  idea.  I  have,  however,  reason
to  think  that  the  position  of  the  eyeball  is,  in  most
deepwakers,  the  same  as  it  appeared  in  Mademoiselle
M— .  I  once  asked  one  of  my  patients,  while  in
the  waking  «tate,  if  he  knew  in  what  position  the  eyes
were  during  sleepwaking,  and  he  replied,  **  I  do  not
at  all  know,  but  I  should  suppose  just  the  same  as
now.  Why  should  there  be  any  difference  ?  "  Having
thus  ascertained  that  he  had  no  preconceptions  on  the
subject,  I  again  asked  him,  when  in  sleepwaking,
"  In  what  position  are  your  eyes  ?  "  ^*  I  will  show
you,"  he  replied ;  and  without  a  moment^s  hesitation^
seized  a  pencil  and  a  paper  that  lay  on  the  table,
and  drew  on  eye,  with  the  ball  turned  up  to  one
corner,  and  only  partly  seen.  [I  should  observe
that  this  sleepwaker  had  an  extraordinary  power
of  vision  in  the  mesmeric  state,  to  which  I  shall
hereafter  have  occasion  more  particularly  to  al-
lude.]

Another  time,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  making  fur-
ther remarks  on  the  state  of  the  eye,  under  mesmeric
sleepwaking,  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Berckmans,
architect  of  the  province  of  Antwerp  —  a  man  whom
I  have  pleasure  in  naming,  as  one  who  utilises  mes-
merism by  employing  it  (and  successfully)  in  the  relief


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  141

of  maladies.  This  gentleman  permitted  me  to  see  one
of  his  sleepwakers,  who,  from  a  natural  predisposi-
tion, often  kept  her  eyes  open  during  sleep  waking.
During  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour  that  I  saw
her  thus,  I  could  most  truly  affirm  that,  though  her
eyes  were  open,  their  "sense  was  shut*"  A  dull
film  seemed  to  overspread  them ;  the  pupil  was  di-
lated, and  did  not  contract  with  light.  A  candle
brought  near,  or  a  hand  waved  suddenly  and  quickly
before  the  patient's  eyes,  produced  no  perceptible
alteration  or  motion  either  in  the  lid  or  in  the
■apparatus  of  vision*

Altogether,  there  seems  to  be  every  reason  to  con-
clude that  the  eye  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  either
so  disordered  or  so  paralysed  in  its  functions  as  to
cease  to  convey  impressions  to  the  mind  —  in  any
mode  at  least  that  can  be  termed  ordinary.

Secondly.  1  now  proceed  to  show  that  a  similar
derangement  of  function  seems  to  take  place  as
regards  the  sense  of  hearing.

In  proportion  as  persons  sink  deeper  into  mesmeric
sleepwaking,  their  external  senses  seem  blunted,  one
by  one,  and  so  far  there  is  certainly  a  relation  be-
tween the  mesmeric  and  the  natural  sleep.

The  eye,  as  we  have  seen,  yields  first  to  the  slum-
brous influence.  Long  after  this  organ  has  ceased
to  act,  the  hearing  retains  all  its  acuteness,  and  the
sleepwaker  is  able  to  indicate  what  sounds  are  going
on  around ;  but  at  length  the  "porches  of  the  ear  "
are  closed  as  well  as  the  "  curtain  of  the  eye,''  and
the  patient,  though  still  alive  to  feeling,  is  dead  to


142  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

every  sound  save  that  of  the  mesmeriser's  voice.  I
have  proved  this  times  innumerable  —  so  frequently,
indeed,  that  it  is  better  to  give  the  general  results  of
the  experiments  I  have  witnessed  than  to  state  one
in  particular.  Often  have  the  members  of  my  family,
or  visitors,  who  perhaps  were  but  little  inclined  to
believe  in  mesmerism,  tried  to  awaken  Mademoiselle

M or  to  startle  her  by  sudden  noises. Logs

of  wood  have  been  dashed  against  the  floor ;  plates
have  been  suddenly  broken;  her  name  has  been
shouted  out,  close  to  her  ear ;  in  vain.  Other  persons
present  have  shown  that  they  were  startled  —  but
not  the  sleepwaker.  Once  or  twice,  indeed,  on  such
occasions,  when  asked  if  she  heard  any  thing,  she  has
replied,  "  No,  I  heard  nothing;  but  I  thought,  just
now,  something  pushed  against  my  chair;"  a  mode
of  expression  which  deserves  to  be  remarked,  as
analogous  to  that  used  by  deaf  persons  to  describe  the
sensations  given  them  by  the  concussion  of  the  air
produced  by  great  sounds.  I  once  met  a  young
lady,  perfectly  deaf  and  dumb  from  her  birth,  who
was,  in  this  way,  remarkably  sensitive  to  the  undula-
tions of  the  air.  I  have  frequently  seen  her  start
when  a  door  was  opened,  or  when  any  thing  fell  sud-
denly, and  the  account  she  gave  to  me  of  this,  in
writing,  was  that  she  fejt  as  if  some  one  had  pushed
against  her.  So  susceptible  indeed  was  she  to  aerial
vibrations  that  she  could  distinguish  a  certain  mea-
sure and  rhythm  in  harmonious  chords  which  gave
her  a  marked  degree  of  pleasure.  She  would  take  a
stick,  and,  putting  one  end  of  it  in  her  mouth,  would


HESMERIC.  SLEEPWAKING.  143

place  the  other  in  contact  with  the  piano,  while  any
one  was  playing  on  it.  Discords  struck  upon  the
instrument  made  her  shudder,  and  convulsed  her
features  with  all  that  pantomimic  exaggeration  so
usual  in  the  dumb ;  but  soft  and  pleasing  sequences
of  sound  soothed  her  and  brought  a  satisfied  smile
over  her  countenance.

It  has  appeared  to  me  that  the  mesmerised  possess
similar  perceptions  of  sound  apart  from  the  natural
sense  of  hearing,  and  that,  like  the  young  lady  above
alluded  to,  they  require  certain  conductors,  in  order
to  make  them  apprehend  a  regular  series  of  aerial
vibrations.  Be  it  however  remarked  that  the  degree
of  this  isolation  from  sounds,  considered  as  sounds,
depends  on  the  intensity  of  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  for
it  -should  ever  be  kept  in  mind  that  mesmeric  sleep-
waking  has  its  shades  and  graduations,  varying  from
consciousness  fully  retained  to  its  faintest  twilight  or
utter  extinction.  A  due  recollection  of  this  truth
will  prevent  many  mistakes  and  unfounded  expecta-
tions relative  to  our  subject.

In  the  case  of  Mademoiselle  M ,  as  being  a

perfect  sleepwaker,  the  insulation  from  all  sounds
to  which  1  did  not  serve  as  conductor  was  complete.
This  phenomenon,  as  indeed  most  of  the  others  I
have  mentioned,  was  rather  accidentally  offered  to
my  remark  than  looked  for  or  expected.  A  lady,
present  when  Mademoiselle  M had  been  mes-
merised by  me,  went  up  to  the  sleepwaker  and  spoke
to  her  for  some  time.  She  however  did  not  seem
to  hear  what  was  said,  and indeed  held  her  head


144  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO*

down  with  every  sign  of  inattention.  By  mere  accident
the  speaker  touched  me.  Then  suddenly  the  sleep-
waker  lifted  up  her  head,  and  assumed  the  expression
of  listening.  A  slight  movement  drew  me  away  from
contact  with  the  speaker,  when  the  sleepwaker  said  -—
"I  hear  nothing  now."  She  then  herself  took,  the
lady's  hand,  placed  it  in  mine,  and  laid  her  own  upon
both  so  as  to  be  in  contact  with  each,  saying,  "  Now
I  hear  well."  We  subsequently  found  that  it  was
under  such  an  arrangement  as  this  that  the  sleep-
waker could  best  hear  any  one  speak,  though  did  a
person  talking  merely  touch  me  she  manifested  some
perceptions  of  sound.  On  one  occasion,  when  a
musician  was  singing  and  playing  during  her  mes-
meric trance,  she,  seeing  him  at  the  piano,  expressed
a  desire  to  hear  the  performance,  and,  to  accomplish
this,  requested  me  to  lay  one  hand  on  the  musician's
shoulder,  while  she  herself  laid  a  hand  upon  mine.
So  placed,  she  heard  the  singing  well,  but  the  piano
indistinctly.

Others  of  my  sleepwakers  manifested  similar  phe-
nomena, some  even  the  first  time  of  being  mesmer-
ised, when  they  knew  nothing  of  the  characteristics
of  mesmeric  sleepwaking.  The  scientific  person  to
whom  1  have  once  before  alluded,  and  whose  testi-
mony is  valuable,  inasmuch  as  his  habits  of  mind  led
him  ever  to  separate  illusion  from  truth,  assured  me,
when  in  the  mesmeric  state,  that  he  could  hear  no
sound  whatever  except  my  voice.  I  made  another
person  speak  who  was  in  the  room  on  that  occasion,
and  the  sleepwaker  was  unaware  that  any  thing  had
been  said.


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKIN6.  145

Another  patient  (K  A ,  to  whom  I  shall  have

occasion  to  allude  hereafter)  said,  when  I  was  sing-
ing, "  You  should  ask  Mr.  V-  '*  (a  musician  who
was  in  the  room)  "  to  accompany  you. " I  did  so ;

but,  though  Mr.  V made  a  loud  accompaniment

to  my  voice,  E.  A.  kept  calling  out,  "  Why  does  he
not  play  ?  "

3dly.  State  of  the  nerves  of  touch. — Every  one
has  heard  of  the  insensibility  of  sleepwakers  to
external  stimuli.  Even  in  the  present  crisis  of
hostility  to  mesmerism,  the  world  seems  agreed  to
go  the  length  of  believing,  with  Mr.  Edwin  Lee,  that,
"  in  the  states  of  partial  torpor,  not  unfrequently
occurring  in  nervous  persons,"  (so  does  the  cautious
doctor  define  mesmeric  sleepwaking,)  "the  indivi-
duals are,  to  a  certain  extent,  insensible  to  mechani-
cal stimulants. "  This  being  granted,  the  evidence
which  I  can  bring  forward  to  confirm  the  alleged
phenomenon  is,  fortunately,  but  little  needed ;  and,  in
truth,  I  was  too  little  inclined  to  try  such  cruelties
upon  my  sleepwakers,  as  plunging  in  pins  and  apply-
ing moxas,  to  be  able  to  oflFer  numerous  proofs  upon
the  subject.  Such  experiments,  however  unfelt  at
the  time,  cannot  but  produce  effects  of  which  the
patients  will  become  sensible  afterwards;  and,
when  they  are  smarting  under  the  pain  occasioned
by  the  burning  away  of  half  an  inch  of  skin,  they
will  be  but  ill  consoled  by  the  glory  of  having  suf-
fered in  the  cause  of  science.  On  these  grounds,  I
have  refused  either  to  torment  my  sleepwakers  or  to
allow  them  to  be  tormented. However,  a  friend  of


146  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKING.

mine  was  once  determined  to  try  an  experiment  of
this  kind;  and,  without  giving  me  any  notice  of  his
intentions,  he  suddenly  plunged  a  large  pin  into  the
back  of  the  hand  of  Anna  M — • — ,  so  that  the  blood
came  when  it  was  withdrawn.  She  neither  moved
her  hand  nor  started,  nor  seemed  in  any  way  sen-
sible of  the  injury.  About  half  an  hour  after,  being
still  in  the  mesmeric  state,  she  looked  at  her
hand,  as  if  by  accident,  and,  seeing  the  congealed
blood  on  it,  asked,  "  What  in  the  world  is  this  ?  '*
At  another  time,  being  lightly  touched  with  the  end
of  a  feather  about  the  lips  and  nostrils,  (a  proceeding
which  few  can  endure,)  she  gave  no  token  of  sensa-
tion, and  once,  while  I  was  mesmerising  her,  she  said,
"I  feel  now  quite  comfortable,"  at  the  very  mo-
ment when  some  one,  fond  of  experiment,  was  pulling
her  ear  till  it  became  scarlet.  [This  inflaming  of  the
cuticle  seems  to  show,  by  the  way,  that  the  skin,  in
sleep  waking,  loses  none  of  its  functions,  though  it  no
longer  transmits  sensations  to  the  mind.]  Other
litde  circumstances,  naturally  presenting  themselves^
have  confirmed  to  me  the  physical  insensibility  of

sleepwakers. Anna  M had  once  a  swollen  and

very  painful  finger.  In  her  waking  state  she  com*
plained  bitterly  of  the  torment  she  endured  from  this,
and  was  constantly  breathing  on  the  disordered  part.
Once,  in  sleepwaking,  she  seemed  to  forget  her
finger  altogether;  and,  on  being  interrogated,  de»
clared  that  she  felt  no  pain*

Another  of  my  sleepwakers  (E.  A )  watched

his  sensations,  while  he  was  entering  into  the  mesmeric
state,  up  to  the  last  moment,  when  consciousness  be-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  147

eaine  extinguished.  He  told  me  that  he  could  dis-
tinctly, perceive  a  gradual  deadening  of  sensation;
that  at  length  he  no  longer  felt  his  limbs;  but  that  all
his  life  and  feeling  seemed  to  rally  towards  the  brain.
In  the  mesmeric  state,  he  continued  to  assure  me
that  he  was  corporeally  insensible ;  and,  anxious,  as
it  seemed,  to  try  experiments  upon  himself,  he  would
bite  his  own  hand  till  he  drew  blood,  without,  as  he
affirmed,  exciting  sensation.

4th]y.  State  of  the  organs  of  taste.  —  That  these
also share the insensibility of the other senses

I  have  had  every  reason  to  believe. Anna  M

could  never  distinguish  one  substance,  that  was  placed,
with  precaution,  in  her  mouth  from  another.  I
have  told  her  that  cheese  was  very  good  orange,  or
water  wine ;  and  she,  trusting  to  my  veracity,  has
implicitly  believed  me:  her  faith  in  my  assertions
being  uncorrected  by  the  exercise  of  her  usual  facul-
ties, and  preponderating  manifestly  over  these.  I  have
tried  upon  her,  when  in  sleepwaking,  the  well-known
experiment  of  placing  a  piece  of  zinc  and  a  piece  of
silver,  the  one  above,  the  other  below,  the  tongue,
and  then  bringing  them  suddenly  in  contact;  but
no  metallic  taste  was  perceived  by  her.  The  same
experiment,  repeated  in  her  waking  state,  produced
its  usual  result.

5thly«  The  smell  seems  equally  unaffected  by  eor-
temal  stimulus.  —  I  have  held,  for  a  considerable
time,  strong  ammonia,  which  made  my  own  eyes
water,  even  at  a  distance,  close  under  the  nose  of  a
sleepwaker^  while  the  mouth  was  shut  and  respir«

H  2


148  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKlNCf,

ation  carried  on  only  through  the  nostrfls.  The
breathing  proceeded  as  regularly  as  before;  there
was  no  watering  of  the  eye :  in  short,  the  patient
(a  sister  of  Theodore)  gave  no  token  whatever  of
sensibility  in  the  olfactory  nerves,  or  those  of  common
sensation  or  touch.

Having  finished  our  review  of  the  sensitive  organs,
we  now  proceed  to  consider  the  state  of  those  which
may  be  called  vital,  viz.  the  respiratory,  the  circula-
tory, and  the  digestive.

In  those  mesmerised  persons  who  liave  fallen
under  my  observation,  the  respiration  has  been
slower  and  more  regular  than  usual,  resembling  what
it  is  in  sleep.  Occasionally,  when  the  sleepwaker  hasf
been  permitted  to  repose,  either  in  a  sitting  or
recumbent  posture,  the  breathing  has  become  louder,
almost  approaching  to  stertorous.  Any  one  seeing
the  mesmerised  at  such  times  would  pronounce  them
to  be  really  asleep ;  but  the  proof  that  this  cannot
be  the  case  is,  that  they  still  hear  and  answer  the
mesmeriser's  voice.

I  have  found,  also,  that,  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,.
the  heart  beats  more  slowly  and  evenly  than  in  the
normal  state,,  and  that  the  pulse]  indicates  a  icorre-*
sponding  change  in  the  circulation.

On  one  occasion,  two  medical  men,  by  no  means
favourable  to  mesmerism,  were  present  when  I  was

about  to  mesmerise  Mademoiselle  M . It  wad

during  the  festivities  of  the  Antwerp  carnival ;  and
my  fair  patient,  having  been  at  a  ball  for  two  nighta
running,  was  fatigued,  and  feverish  —  complaining
much  of  pains  and  stiffness  in  her  limbs. Before  be-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  149

ginning  to  mesmerise,  I  requested  the  medical  men
to  feel  her  pulse.  On  doing  this,  their  exclamation
was,  "  You  ought  to  be  in  your  bed,  Mademoiselle,
for  you  have  a  great  deal  of  feven "  In  fact,  her
pulse  was  120,  her  skin  hot  and  dry,  and  her
tongue  white.  I  then  threw  my  patient  into  sleep-
waking  ;  and  after  she  had  continued  in  that  state,
reposing  on  a  chair,  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hoUr,  I
again  asked  the  doctors  to  feel  her  pulse.  Each  took
a  wrist,  as  before,  with  due  professional  gravity,  and
with  a  stop-watch  counted  the  pulsations.  "  Mar-
vellous I "  they  both  exclaimed.  "  The  pulse  beats
quite  other  than  when  we  last  felt  it.  TThe  sharp
wiry  rebound  of  fever  is  gone,  and  the  pulsations,
besides  being  soft,  full,  and  regular,  are  not  more
than  80  in  a  minute. "  After  this  I  made  my  pa-
tient rise  from  her  chair,  and,  during  the  hour  that
she  remained  in  sleepwaking,  she  was  in  almost  con-
stant motion;  yet  she  neither  complained  of,  nor
betrayed  in  her  gestures,  the  fatigue  and  stiffness
from  which  she  had  previously  been  suffering.  On
awaking,  the  doctors  again  inspected  her  state,  and
assured  me  that  every  symptom  of  malady  had  dis-
appeared. The  patient's  pulse  had  sunk  to  74  in  the
minute;  her  skin  was  cool;  her  tongue  no  longer
indicative  of  fever.  When  asked  for  an  account  of
her  own  personal  sensations,  she  declared  that  she
felt  so  renovated,  and  so  entirely  free  from  pain  and
imeasiness,  that  she  should  have  thought  that  the
sleep  of  two  nights  had  been  put  together  in  the
jingle hour of her sleepwaking. Hearing  this,

H  3


150  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

the  doctors  were  inclined  to  exclaim,  with  him  of  the
fraternity  in  Macbeth,  *'A  great  perturbation  in
nature !  To  receive  at  once  the  benefit  of  sleep,
and  do  the  effects  of  watching."

The  Effect  of  the  Mesmeric  Sleep  on  the  Digestive  Or-
gans  seems  equally  reparatory^  and  indicative  of  in^
creased  Power,

E.  A. a  youth  aged  fifteen,  whom  I  frequently

mesmerised,  and  whose  general  health  was  excellent,
was  suffering  one  day  from  an  accidental  attack  of
indigestion,  accompanied  by  slight  sickness.  During
an  hour's  sleepwaking  his  uneasy  feelings  were  sus-
pended, and,  when  he  awoke,  were  found  to  be
completely  removed.  At  another  time  —  not  with
a  view  to  any  particular  experiment,  but  in  the  way
of  a  pleasantry  —  I  kept  the  same  sleepwaker  in  the
mesmeric  state  for  a  longer  period  than  usual,  so  as
to  make  him  eat  his  supper  with  our  family  party,
while  still  in  sleepwaking.  Our  evening  meal  was
brought  in;  and  the  patient,  at  my  request,  (for
otherwise  he  did  not  seem  to  care  about  taking  any-
thing,) ate  whatever  was  given  him ;  and  as  our  object
was  to  make  him  feel^  on  awaking,  that  he  had  had
his  supper,  and  to  wonder  how  this  had  come  to  pass,
we  supplied  him  plentifully  with  food,  so  that  he
actually  made  a  fuller  meal  than  was  usual  with  him
at  the  same  hour.  We  then  had  the  supper  things
removed ;  and,  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after-
wards, I  awoke  the  patient.  His  first  question  was,
"Have  I  been  long  asleep?" "How  long  should


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKINO.  151

yoii  suppose?'*  we  inquired.  "I  cannot  imagine,**
he  replied ;  *'  but  I  hope  we  shall  soon  have  supper,
for  I  am  very  hungry  !"  At  this  we  all  laughed,  and
assured  him  that  he  had  just  made  a  capital  meal  —
a  piece  of  information  which  he  at  first  refused  to
believe.  The  bell  was  rung,  and  the  servant  called
in  to  depose  to  the  fact,  before  he  could  credit  it ;
and  then  he  appeared  by  no  means  disposed  to  rest
contented  with  what  seemed  in  his  idea  a  refection
as  visionary  as  that  wherewith  the  Barmecide  in  the
Arabian  Nights  regaled  the  beggar.  He  begged
to  have  if  it  were  only  a  crust  of  bread,  to  appease
the  cravings  of  hunger ;  and,  the  wherewithal  being
afforded,  soon  made  a  second  repast  as  substantial
as  that  which  we  had  forced  upon  him  during  his
sleepwaking.*

*  At  the  time  that  the  above  phenomenon  presented  itself,  I
had  not  met  with  an  interesting  account  of  an  extraordinary
cure  by  mesmerism,  written  by  M.  Despine,  physician  at  Aix«
en-Savoie.

Subsequently,  on  reading  the  Doctor's  pamphlet,  I  was  struck
with  the  following  passages  and  their  relation  to  the  subject  we
have  been  considering : —

**  Estelle  a  I'appetence  de  tout  ce  qui  lui  convenait,  et  de  ce
qu'elle  aimait  dans  ses  premiers  ans.  De  plus,  elle  en  mange,
pendant  sa  crise,  avec  abondance  et  impunement,  sans  jamais  en
sentir  le  moindre  mal-aise  ;  pendant  que,  dans  son  ^tat  naturel,
elle  ne  saurait  s*ecarter  de  son  regime  vegetal  habituel,  sans  en
eprouver  des  crampes,  &c.

**  On  dirait  que  notre  malade  semblait  avoir  deux  estomacs  —
Pud  pour  Petat  de  crise,  I'autre  pour  celui  de  veille.

'*  Mais  ce  qui  paraitra  plus  singulier  encore,  c*est  que  les
alimens,  pris  en  abondance  dans  la  crise,  ne  paraissaient  pas,  le

H 4


152  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  ^

Again,  before  the  above  occurrence  had  taken
place,  I  mesmerised  the  same  person  near  the  hour
of  luncheon ;  he  having  previously  observed  that  he
was  very  hungry,  and  therefore  hoped  I  should  wake
him  soon,  in  order  that  he  might  eat  his  accustomed
meal.  When  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  he  com-
plained no  more  of  hunger ;  and,  indeed,  assured  me
that  he  felt  nothing  whatever  of  the  powerful  appetite
which  had  so  recently  tormented  him.  He  had  no
desire  to  awake ;  and,  as  I  was  engaged  in  trying  upon
him  some  interesting  experiments  relating  to  vision,
I  did  not  think  of  demesmerising  him  till  late  in
the  day  —  about  half  an  hour  before  dinner.  The
moment  he  was  restored  to  the  normal  state,  he
declared  that  he  was  almost  mad  with  hunger;  and,
when  I  told  him  how  long  he  had  been  in  sleeps
waking,  was  quite  angry  that  I  had  not  waked  him
sooner.  Though  told  that  dinner  would  soon  be  on
the  table,  he  begged  to  eat  something  immediately.

moins  du  monde,  la  rassasier  pour  le  temps  de  veille,  et  vice


versa.


Since  reading  the  above,  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing
the  young  person  mentioned  —  a  most  interesting  little  girl,  o
thirteen  years  of  age,  living  at  Neufchatel,  in  Switzerland.
Her  mother  certified  to  me  all  the  above  particulars,  and  told
me  that  mesmerism  alone  had  cured  her  daughter  Estelle  of
paralysis  and  spine  complaint,  after  all  other  means  had  beeii
tried  in  vain.  Of  the  degree  of  the  patient's  previous  illness  of
course  I  can  only  speak  from  the  testimony  of  others ;  but  this
1  can  certify,  that,  when  I  saw  Mademoiselle  Estelle  L'H— — ^
she  was  apparently  in  perfect  health  and  enjoying  the  activity
natural  to  her  age.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  159

Thi&  and  the  preceding  anecdotes  «eem  to  indicate
that  the  digestive  functions  are  by  no  means  disor-*
dered  or  suspended  during  mesmeric  sleepwaking;
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  they  act  more  powerfully :
while,  on  the  other  hand,  they  do  not,  as  usual,  con-
vey intimations  of  their  condition  to  the  mind ;  for,
in  the  first  instance,  we  have  seen  indigestion  re-
moved during  sleepwaking  —  a  proof  that  the  appa-
ratus of  digestion  is  strengthened  in  the  mesmeric
slumber.  Secondly,  we  have  been  made  aware  of
digestion  having  been  rapidly  performed  in  the  mes-
meric state:  a  full  meal  having  been  so  quickly
assimilated  to  the  juices  of  the  body  as  to  cause
the  sensation  of  hunger  to  recur  almost  immediately
after  it  was  taken.  Thirdly,  we  have  been  shown
hunger  progressing  as  usual,  but  unfelt,  during  the
whole  period  of  the  mesmeric  sleep.

I  may  add  that  the  increased  energy  given  to  the
digestive  functions  during  mesmeric  sleepwaking  has
seemed,  in  some  cases,  to  confer  a  lasting  benefit.

Mademoiselle  M ,  though  in  other  respects  strong

and  healthy,  suffered,  when  I  first  saw  her,  from
indigestion,  which,  manifested  itself  in  painful  fits  of
colic  Subsequently  she  thus  wrote  to  me : — "  With
regard  to  my  complaints  of  the  stomach,  I  have  not.
felt  the  least  symptoms  since  my  last  mesmerising.
My  malady  has  been  too  severe,  and  the  relief  I  have
experienced  too  effectual,  for  me  to  doubt  of  the
good  effects  of  mesmerism."

Again,  that  the  human  influence  is  reparatory  of
the  vital  functions  generally,  I  had  a  proof  in  the  case

H  5


l54  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINGr

of  a  gentleman  (already  mentioned  in  Sect.  II.)
who  allowed  me  to  mesmerise  him  when  he  was
suiFering  from  the  fatigue  of  a  long  journey  and
night-travelling.  He  remained  in  the  mesmeric
state  half  an  hour  only,  yet,  on  awaking,  he  exclaim-
ed, "Je  me  sens  comme  nouveau-tie."  All  sense  of
lassitude  was  gone.

From  the  vital  we  proceed  to  a  consideration  of
the  motive  powers.

Any  one  who  has  attended  to  the  cases  of  mes*
meric  sleepwaking,  which  I  have  detailed  elsewhere,
must  have  remarked  that  the  natural  inclination  of
mesmeric  patients  is  to  remain  perfectly  still.  It  is
only  by  the  mesmeriser's  persuasion  that  they  are
induced  to  move ;  and  their  first  attempts  at  walking
are,  like  those  of  an  infant  learning  to  use  its  limbs,
weak  and  tottering.  After  a  time,  however,  by  a  sort
of  education  from  the  mesmeriser,  the  sleepwaker
is  enabled  to  move  freely  and  firmly.  The  mind
has  evidently  resumed  its  empire  over  the  nerves
of  motion,  yet  still  is  disconnected  from  the  nerves
of  sense;  — a  circumstance  which  strongly  illustrates
Sir  Charles  Bell's  valuable  discovery  respecting
the  absolute  distinctness  of  these  two  sets  of  nerves;
and  which  confirms  the  thesis,  that  motion  is
ever  propagated  downward,  from  the  brain  to  the
exterior  of  the  body;  while  sensation  is  conveyed
upward,  from  the  extremities  of  the  nerves  to  the
brain.  I  think,  also,  that  the  power  which  sleep-
wakers  possess  over  their  motory  system  proves
satisfactorily  that,  according  to  the  ingenious  sug-


MESMERIC SLE£FWAK1NG«  155

gestion  of  Sir  C.  Bell,  there  exists  a  distinct  muscular
sense ;  for  we  see  it  here  insulated^  and  acting  at  a
time  when  all  the  other  senses  have  ceased  their
functions.  Nor  does  the  muscular  sense  merely  act
under  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  but  it  acts  (from  the
time  that  the  patient  is  habituated  to  his  new  exist-
ence) in  a  very  perfect  manner.  I  have  seen  dis-
played by  sleepwakers  an  activity  which  they  did
not  possess  awake.

Availing  myself  of  the  attraction  which  draws  the
patient  after  the  mesmeriser,  I  have  made  Made-
moiselle M follow  me, when mounting upon

chairs  or  wardrobes.  Another  of  my  mesmeris^es,
when  I  got  upon  a  chair,  leapt  lightly  up  after  me ;
and,  there  being  scarcely  room  for  her  to  stand,
remained  poised  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner,  on
the  extreme  edge  of  the  chair,  exhibiting,  in  that
position,  an  ease  and  graceful  firmness,  quite  remote
from  the  characteristics  of  her  usually  reserved  de-
meanour.

Additional  strength  as  well  as  agility  of  body
seems  to  accompany  the  more  advanced  periods  of

the mesmeric state. E.  A , in sleepwaking,

could  throw,  in  wrestling,  a  person  he  could  not
master  when  awake ;  and  once  he  burst  a  locked
door  open  with  an  ease  that  was  extraordinary.  The
same  phenomena,  which  occur  with  respect  to  the
motor  muscles  in  general,  take  place  also  as  regards
the  muscles  of  the  larynx.  On  first  mesmerisation,
the  voice  of  the  patient  is  weak,  and  it  is  evidently
an  exertion  for  him  to  speak  at  all ;  but  subsequently

II  6


156  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKINO.

he  resumes  his  powers  of  speech^  and,  if  musical,  can
sing  as  well  as  in  the  waking  state.  I  should,  how-
ever, observe,  that  the  tone  to  which  he  pitches  his
voice  in  conversation  depends  much  upon  that  in
which  the  mesmeriser  addresses  him:  should  the
former  whisper,  he  whispers  too, or  the  contrary.

This  is  the  general  rule ;  but  Anna  M offered

an  exception  to  this.  Her  voice  in  sleepwaking  was
generally  very  feeble,  and  she  used  to  complain  of
its  extinction.

Though  hitherto  treating  of  the  patient  separately
from  the  mesmeriser,  it  appears  to  me  that  this
branch  of  my  subject  would  be  incomplete,  did  I  not
add  to  such  phenomena  of  motion  as  are  proper  to
the  sleepwaker  others  which  are  caused  by  the  mes-
meriser's  influence  over  his  patient.

I  have  already  remarked  that  the  sleepwaker  ex-
hibits an  occasional  community  of  motion  with  the
mesmeriser,  and  adopts  something  of  his  general
deportment.  Some  additional  instances  of  these
phenomena  may  be  interesting.

Anna  M , in her mesmeric state,  mounted

a  staircase  with  me,  in  oi:der  to  visit  an  invalid  lady
of  our  party.  I  observed  that  she  ascended  two  stairs
at  a  time,  after  a  manner  that  had  become  habitual
to  me.  At  another  time,  when  I  had  a  cold,  she,
though  free  from  such  an  affection  in  her  natural
state,  coughed,  in  her  sleepwaking,  whenever  I  did.
I  extract  the  following  from  a  register  of  our  mes-
meric proceedings,  once  kept  by  one  of  our  family.

January  % 1838. "The  mesmeriser  rubs hi^


JMIESMERIC SL££FWAKINll,  157

hands, and Anna  M immediately does the

same.  When  the  mesmeriser  blows  his  nose,  the
patient  puts  her  hand  up  to  hers,  as  if  doing  the
same  thing.  When  the  former  began  to  dance,  the
latter  did  so  too,  imitating  exactly  the  movements  of
her  mesmeriser,  and  snapping  her  fingers  as  he  did*
The  mesmeriser,  having  turned  from  the  patient,
who  was  sitting  at  a  table,  took  up  a  pencil,  and,
without  her  seeing  him,  made  some  strokes  upon
paper.  The  patient  took  up  another  pencil  which
lay  at  hand,  and  made  similar  strokes."

With  respect  to  the  times  when  these  phenomena
were  exhibited,  I  remarked  that  they  occurred  espie-
^ially  when  any  more  violent  muscular  motion  took
place  on  my  part,  such  as  in  the  act  of  blowing  my  nose,
of  dancing,  &c. ;  —  also,  when  my  attention  was  par-
ticularly directed  to  the  production  of  the  pheno*-
mena.  When  such  was  the  case,  I  have  turned  my
back,  and  made  gestures  in  perfect  silence,  (so  as  to
prevent  any  suspicion  of  the  patient  being  influenced
by  sight  or  sound,)  and  they  have  been  perfectly  imi-
tated by  her.  Once,  I  agreed  with  a  friend  of  mine
to  put  my  hand  into  my  coat  pocket  at  a  certain  signal
from  him.  The  sleepwaker,  though  standing  where
she  could  know  nothing  of  the  circumstance,  thrust
back  her  hand  immediately  into  a  similar  position
with  my  own.  The  same  friend,  who  was  determined
to  try  everything  to  put  the  sleepwaker  at  fault,  used
to  imitate  my  rubbing  my  hands,  coughing,  or  blow-
ing mj  nose,  in  order  to  induce  Anna  M to  do

the  same;  and  thus  to  prove  that  she  was  guided  by


158  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKINa

sound,  not  by  sympathy  of  motion.  The  patlenl^
however,  was  never  influenced  in  the  slightest  degree
by  these  artifices.  Whether  such  correspondences
of  motion  result  from  purely  mechanical  causes  may
be  much  doubted ;  —  but  there  is  another  class  of
motory  phenomena  in  which  the  body  of  the  mesmer-
iser  must  clearly  be  considered  as  the  depository  of
some  attractive  force,  entirely  independent  of  his
will;  for  they  result  simply  from  the  position  in
which  the  patient  may  be  placed  relatively  to  the
mesmeriser,* .

Having  frequently  remarked  that  the  head  of  a
mesmerised  person  follows  the  hand  of  the  mesmer-
iser,  as  iron  does  the  loadstone,  I,  in  order  to  sub-
mit the  phenomenon  to  the  surest  proof,  bandaged

the  eyes  of  E.  A previously  to  mesmerising  him,

and  filled  with  cotton  every  possible  interstice  that
might  be  left  between  the  cheek  and  the  handker-
chief, in  such  a  manner  as  to  convince  every  person,
who  witnessed  the  experiment,  that  for  the  patient  to

*  This  mechanical  attraction  appears  to  have  been  first  no-
ticed by  M.  De  Lausanne,  who  observed  it  in  a  patient  of  his
own  —  a  female,  whose  sensitiveness  was  remarkably  developed.
In  a  work  on  mesmerism,  published  at  Paris,  this  author,  who
still,  I  believe,  is  living,  gives  a  particular  account  of  some  in-
teresting experiments  relative  to  the  subject.  When  M.  De
Lausanne  was  in  another  room,  or  even  outside  the  house,  the
sleepwaker,  above  alluded  to,  turned  her  head  in  the  exact  direo*
tion  of  her  mesmeriser.  This  was  established  by  repeated  trials,
before  witnesses.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  development
of  similar  phenomena,  in  so  striking  a  degree,  presupposes  always
a  rare  and  advanced  stage  of  sleepwaking.


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.  ISd

perceive  by  sight  the  motions  of  my  hand  was  entirely
out  of  the  question.  As  soon,  however,  as  E.  A
bad  entered  into  sleepwaking,  his  head  followed  my
hand,  at  the  distance  of  at  least  two  feet,  with  uner-
ring certainty.  Did  I  place  it  on  the  left  of  his  head)
his  head  instantly  inclined  to  that  side ;  was  it  in  front)
he  bent  forward  to  meet  it ;  was  it  behind  him,  he
leant  back  towards  it  with  what  would  seem  a  painful
and  unnatural  effort

■  Again,  I  held  my  hand  above  his  leg ;  immediately
the  limb  was  attracted  upwards.  I  continued  to
withdraw  my  hand ;  and  the  leg  was  so  ipuch  elevated
as  to  form  an  acute  angle  with  the  body  of  the
patient.  Finally,  I  ran  quickly  away  to  the  other
end  of  the  room ;  and  the  sleepwaker  followed  me
quickly  and  unerringly.

At  another  time,  being  in  one  of  the  folds  of  a

screen,  and  Anna  M in  another,  I  put  out  my

hand  (but  not  beyond  the  projection  of  the  screen),
when  instantly  the  patient's  hand  came  round  to
meet  mine.

One  evening,  when  I  had  mesmerised  the  same
sleepwaker,  and  I  was  sitting  near  her,  it  occurred  to
me  to  inquire,  ^^  If  my  hand  possesses  so  singular  a
property  of  attraction,  what  power  of  a  similar  kind
may  reside  in  my  foot?"  With  this  thought,  I
raised  my  foot,  not  in  any  unusual  manner,  but  as  if
I  were  laying  one  leg  over  the  other.  The  sole  of
my  foot  was  thus  presented  to  the  patient.  In  a  very
short  time  she  began  to  turn  round  upon  her  chair,
ao  as  nearly  to  fall  into  the  fire. Struck  with  this


160  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINa,

oddity,  I  made  the  sleepwaker  rise,  and  again  pre-
sented my  foot,  when  she  commenced  a  series  of  re^
gular  revolutions,  from  right  to  left,  stopping  always,
when  she  had  half  completed  the  circle,  with  a  bend
and  a  dip,  like  that  of  the  magnetic  needle.  The
experiment  repeated  always  produced  the  same
results«

Again,  when  standing  opposite  to  my  patient,  who
was  in  an  upright  position,  I  began  to  turn  round.
She  also  seemed  forced  to  revolve,  but  in  a  direction
contrary  to  mine.  If  I  turned  from  left  to  right,  she
turned  from  right  to  left,  and  vice  versd.

I  tried  the  same  experiments  on  other  sleepwakers..
They  also  turned  round  when  I  did,  and  inversely  to
myself;  but  my  foot,  when  presented  to  them,  instead
of  making  them  revolve  (a  phenomenon  apparently

confined  to  Anna  M ),  seemed  simply  to  repel

them.  I  tried  this  with  the  sister  of  Theodore.  Every
time  that  I  held  out  ray  hand  she  was  attracted  to-
wards me;  whenever  I  held  out  my  foot,  she  was
repelled ;  and,  by  the  alternate  exercise  of  these  two
influences,  she  was  kept  oscillating  to  and  fro  like  the
pendulum  of  a  clock.

That  the  mesmeriser  can  create  motion  in  the
sleepwaker  is  not  the  only  proof  of  the  power  that  he
possesses  over  the  organisation  of  the  latter.  He  is
also  capable  of  paralysing  those  motory  agencies
which  he  so  much  sways.  But  experiments  of  this
kind  should  be  undertaken  with  the  greatest  caution.
Puysegur  relates  that,  having  tried,  from  curiosity,  to
^paralyse  the  respiratory  organs  of  a  sleepwaker,  he


.MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  161

threw  the  patient  into  a  state  resembling  death,  which
lasted  for  several  hours.  Dr.  Sigmond  has  also
reported  the  case  of  a  lady  whom,  without  intending
it,  he  threw  into  an  alarming  state  of  insensibility,  —
a  circumstance  which  (if  I  may  venture  to  say  so)  is
explained  by  the  Doctor's  own  statement  of  his  mes-
meric principles.  His  words  are  —  "  It  is  upon  the
respiration  that  my  efforts  are  directed ;  and  the  prin-
ciple is  precisely  that  which  is  called  *  stealing  the
breath  away.' "

The  account  is  in  "  The  Lancet"  for  Dec.  1837, and
I  have  since  had  no  opportunity  of  learning  any  of
Dr.  Sigmond's  subsequent  experiments.  I  do  not,
however,  doubt  but  that  experience  has  brought  him
to  the  same  conclusion  as  myself;  —  namely,  that
those  motions  and  intentions  of  the  mesmeriser  which
are  most  directed  towards  equalising  the  influence
he  wields  are  the  best;  and  that  we  should  above
all  avoid  concentrating  the  action  upon  any  vital  part
Being  fully  persuaded  of  this,  I  have  seldom  ventured
upon  paralysing  the  nerves  of  motion,  save  in  the  less
important  parts  of  the  body, — as  in  the  hand  or
arm,  for  instance.  What  led  me  to  try  such  experi-
ments at  all  was  this  :  —  Mr.  K ,  of  Antwerp,  my

first  instructor  in  mesmerism,  had  exhibited  to  me  a
curious  phenomenon  which  occurred  whenever  he
closed  the  hand  of  one  of  his  sleepwakets  over  a  piece
of  coin  (silver  or  copper).  The  hand  remained  rigidly
shut,  and  the  patient  seemed  utterly  incapable  of  open-
ing it,  until  after  the  dispersion  of  the  mesmeric  sleep.
JFrom  a  train  of  analogous  reasoning,  I  was  much


162  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

inclined  to  l)elieve  that  the  coin  had  no  more  to  do
with  the  phenomenon  in  question  than  the  magnet
and  the  baquet  with  the  effects  which  Mesmer  pro-
duced upon  his  early  patients. I  accordingly  closed

the  hand  of  Mademoiselle  M without  the  coin,

and  again  with  it.  As  I  had  anticipated,  the  result
in  both  cases  was  the  same.  Moreover,  I  discovered
that,  by  breathing  on  the  patient's  hand,  I  could
always,  and  under  any  circumstances,  restore  it  to
its  functions —  in  fact,  that  myself,  and  not  the  metal,
was  the  depository  of  the  paralysing  power,  what-
ever it  might  be.

I  relate  this  in  the  hope  that  it  may  warn  others,
as  it  did  me,  against  attributing,  in  mesmerism,
effects  to  wrong  causes.  In  all  that  regards  mesmeric
sleepwaking  there  is  especial  danger  of  felling  into
such  an  error,  from  the  curious  blending  that  it
exhibits  of  human  and  of  mechanical  action ;  and
never  can  we  adjust  the  balance  properly,  until  the
mesmeriser's  influence  over  his  patient  be  fully  taken
into  account.

A  curious  circumstance,  attending  the  mesmeriser's
power  over  the  patient's  organisation, is  this: — When
the  two  are  in  frequent  mesmeric  relationship,  the
phenomenon  is  carried  forward  into  the  natural  state.
This  I  found  to  be  the  case  after  I  had  often  mesmer-
ised Anna  M and  E.  A . I  could,  at  any

time,  fix  the  hand  or  arm  of  either  of  these  persona
in  any  position  I  pleased,  and  in  all  the  rigidness  of
catalepsy.  The  means  I  used  to  produce  this  effect
were  as  follows :  —  I  first  placed  the  limb  as  I  wished


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  163

h  to  remain,  and  then  brought  the  fingers  of  both

hands  into  contact  with  it,  at  opposite  poles,  as  it
were,  and  pointing  to  each  other,  so  that,  supposing
they  emanated  a  stream  of  galvanic  or  other  influ*
ence,  it  would  pass  exactly  through  the  part  to  be
affected.  The  desired  result  did  not  ensue  imme-
diately, but  in  two  or  three  minutes ;  and  its  intensity
was  proportioned  to  the  length  of  time  I  acted  on  the
limb.  The  patients  described  a  sensation  of  gradual
paralysis,  and  a  deadness,  as  when  a  leg  or  arm,  in
common  parlance,  goes  to  sleep.  At  length  a  spas^
modic  contraction  of  the  muscles  took  place :  the
hand  looked  white  and  bloodless,  and  the  fingers  un-
naturally rigid.  To  the  touch  they  seemed  as  chords
that  are  pulled  tight;  and,  if  the  numbness  con^
tinned,  they  lost  all  feeling.  No  force,  short  of  what
would  have  produced  mechanical  injury,  could  undo
them.  On  one  occasion,  I  placed  the  arm  of  E.  A*
in  a  position  so  twisted  and  constrained,  that  it  was
not  possible  for  him  to  oppose  much  voluntary  force
to  any  one's  efforts  to  pull  it  down ;  yet,  when  once
paralysed,  there  was  not  a  person  present  who  could
stir  it.  It  offered  the  resistance  of  marble.  More-
over, this  patient  was  not  in  the  least  imaginative,
and  ridiculed  the  idea  that  fancy  could  produce  the
phenomenon  in  question.  When  I  wished  to  restore
motion  to  a  limb  thus  paralysed  I  breathed  on  it,
and  made  some  magnetic  passes  down  it,  accompa^
nied  sometimes  by  slight  friction.  The  return  of  life
and  feeling  was  gradual  as  their  loss,  and  was  accom*
panied  by  those  tinglings  called  pins  and  needless


164  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

A  slight  numbness  was  generally  felt  for  some  time

after  the  experiment Once  I  persuaded  E.  A

to  permit  me  to  try  whether,  in  his  waking  state,  I
could  prevent  him  from  opening  his  eyes.  The  ex-
periraent  was  perfecdy  successful.  By  pressing  down
the  upper  eyelid  with  a  finger  of  one  hand,  and  plac-
ing a  finger  of  the  other  upon  the  lower  lid,  I  could
so  influence  the  levator  muscle  as  (after  withdrawing
my  hands)  to  keep  either  eye  closed  while  the  other
was  wide  open.  The  patient  could  not,  in  general,
shut  his  right  eye  without  also  shutting  the  left.

I  have  now  taken  a  review  of  the  condition
of  the  bodily  organs,  and  of  the  motive  powers,
under  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  being  at  the  same
time  fully  aware  how  much  is  left  to  be  performed
by  abler  hands  than  mine.  I  am  no  physician;
and  a  very  minute  inquiry  into  the  physical  state  of
jnesmeric  patients  is  not  my  province.  I,  however,
seriously  recommend  to  all  who  study  medicine  as  a
profession,  especially  to  the  younger  aspirants  in  this
branch  of  science,  (since  they^  at  least,  are  not  grounded
and  rooted  in  antique  prejudices,)  to  pay  attention  to
mesmerism,  after  the  plan  that  I  have  laid  down ;
2.  e»  to  ascertain,  during  its  operation,  the  exact  and
peculiar  state  of  every  organ  and  function  of  the
human  body.

By  mesmerism  we  best  dissect  man,  whether  men-
tally or  physically ;  and,  if  ever  the  vital  influences
are  to  be  understood,  it  is  not  by  anatomising  the
dead,  or  by  torturing  the  living,  but  by  observation
of  our  fellow-beings  when  in  the  state  we  call  mes-
meric.


|I^£SM£RIC SLEEPWAKING,  165

I  now  proceed  to  offer  some  remarks  upon  the
mental  condition  of  patients  under  mesmeric  sleep-
waking,  considering  the  soul  in  its  moral,  intellectual^
and  sensitive  capacities.

First,  as  regards  our  moral  being :  —

That  the  state  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  a  rise  in
man's  nature,  no  one,  who  has  been  conversant  with
it,  can  doubt.

Separated  from  the  usual  action  of  the  senses,  the
mind  appears  to  gain  juster  notions,  to  have  quite  a
new  sense  of  spiritual  things,  and  to  be  lifted  nearer
to  the  fountain  of  all  good  and  of  all  truth.  The
great  indication  of  this  elevated  state  of  feeling  is  a
horror  of  falsehood,  which  I  have  found  common  to
all  sleepwakers*  Sincerity  is  their  especial  charac-
teristics ;  they  cannot  feign  or  flatter  :  they  seem  to
be  taken  out  of  common  life,  with  ^1  its  heartless
forms  and  plausible  conventions. .

I  proceed,  by  one  or  two  instances,  to  show  how
forcibly  sleepwakers  are  impelled  to  speak  the  thing
that  is,  and  to  clear  their  consciences  of  that  dis-*
simulation  which  clings  so  much  to  man  in  his
natural  state.

During  the  Antwerp  carnival,  a  lady,  who  took  a  *
sincere  interest  in  Anna  M.'s  welfare,  advised  her  not
to  go  to  the  masked  ball,  which  is  usually  given  at
that  season.  The  night  after  the  ball,  Anna  came  to
be  mesmerised,  and,  though  complaining  of  fatigue^
would  not  own  that  she  had  acted  in  opposition  to  the
advice  that  she  had  received.  When,  however,  ii|
deepwaking,  she  acknowledged,  of  her  own  accord^


166  M£SMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

that  she  had  been  at  the  masked  ball,  and  said  that
she  felt  she  had  done  wrong  in  practising  conceal-
ment, though  her  motive  had  been  to  avoid  giving
pain  to  her  kind  monitress.

A  similar  instance  of  candid  confession  occurred  in
£•  A.  I  had  given  him  a  bottle  of  lotion  for  his  eyes,
which  were  weak  at  the  time :  he  took  it  home  with
him ;  and  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  in  reply  to  my
inquiries  as  to  the  benefit  received,  answered  in
some  prevaricating  way,  so  as  to  make  me  suppose
that  he  had  used  the  lotion  to  advantage.  Sub^
sequently,  however,  being  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,
he  said,  quite  voluntarily,  "  There  is  something
that  I  wish  to  tell  you.  In  going  home  the  other
night  I  broke  that  bottle  which  you  gave  me.  I
feared  you  would  be  angry  if  you  knew  this,  and  I
dared  not  own  it  when  awake ;  but  now  I  feel  that
I  did  not  act  rightly."

In  the  mesmeric  state,  the  character  of  this  sleep-
waker  presented  generally  a  strong  contrast  to  its  wak-
ing exhibition.  Good  talents  and  a  good  disposition
had,  in  him,  been  warped  by  an  unfortunate  educa*
tion ;  and,  young  as  he  was,  he  had  imbibed  at  Paris
certain  infidel  opinions,  of  the  worst  kind,  which  he
scarcely  studied  to  conceal.  I  asked  him  once,  in  his
waking  state,  what  he  thought  became  of  us  after
death ;  and  his  answer  was,  ^^  Des  qu'on  est  mort,  on
tf  est  plus  rien  du  tout.'*

This  extreme  ignorance  on  most  subjects  was  ac-
companied by  a  vain  belief  that  he  knew  a  good  deal;
9nd  if  one  stated  to  him  the  commonest  &cts  of  phi-


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKINO.  167

•

losophy,  (the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth,  for
example,)  he  suspected  a  design  of  playing  upon  his
credulity,  and  entrenched  himself  in  absolute  un-
belief. In  sleepwaking  all  this  was  changed.  His
ideas  of  the  mind  were  correct,  and  singularly  op-
posed to  the  material  views  he  took  of  all  questions
when  in  the  waking  state.  He  once  chided  me  for
calling  the  soul  **  une  chose  ;  '*  and  said,  "  Ce  n'est
pas  une  chose^ — c'estune  pensee."  "Can  the  soul
ever  die?"  I  asked.  "  Certainly  not.  It  is  the  soul,
which  is  the  only  true  existence,  and  which  gives
existence  to  all  we  apprehend."  "  Whence  came  the
soul  ?  "  "  From  God,  who,  by  his  thoughts,  created
the  universe."  His  words  were,  "  L'^me  provient  de
Dieu,  qui  a  cree  I'univers  par  sa  pens^e. "  "  Is  there
a  future  punishment  for  evil-doers  ?  "  Undoubtedly,
a  great  one."  "  In  what  will  it  consist  ?  "  "  In  seeing
themselves  as  they  are,  and  God  as  he  is."

On  another  occasion,  I  mesmerised  E.  A.,  when  a
lady  of  great  talents  and  feeling,  and  an  author,  well
known  to  English  literature,  were  present.  The  latter
was  suffering  under  a  severe  domestic  affliction.  He
had  recently  lost  a  beloved  daughter;  and  the  tone  of
mind,  induced  by  that  bereavement,  naturally  inclined
him  to  question  the  sleepwaker  on  subjects  relative

to  a  future  state. In  order  that  Mr.  • might

speak  with  the  greater  freedom,  I  placed  him  "  en
rapport"  as  it  is  called,  with  E.  A.,  and  took  but  little
part  in  the  conversation  that  ensued.  The  convers-
ation itself  I  cannot  accurately  detail ;  but  the  gene-
ib1  impression  that  it  left  upon  my  mind  can  never


168  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKIKG.

be  effaced.  The  isleepwakef  ib^e  into  feloqutoce
which  seemed  tinearthly.^'It^Vay  simple -^^  it  was
beautiful— it  W2^' like  ah  '  inSpirAtibH.  'He  spoke
of  the  nevier-aying^ifaituiS^  of  the''  febiil';^  of  its
ransomed  beatitude^  '6fi^  its  'j^rd^^i^s  through  va-
rious eras  of  exis^eiicfe,  Siiring  whifch  he '  asserted
(for  here  I  reW^iribii^'' hi^  vety 'wtA'dsy,  -««  EUe
conserve  la  mem'bire' dii 'pltss^, 'et  dfe' aimti&  feites
sur  la  terre ;  et  elle'  a'^Tehtle'de  riefvoir  ceux
qu'elle  a  cheris  aiitrefbfs.  ''Toiit  1e  bi^h  de  Mme
s'en  va  avec  elle,  et  diire  a^e$  lafWbrt;  et  1^  justes
qui  se  sont  pleui'^s  ici  bas'  ^eirtfM.  r^unis  -devant
Dien."  Every  one  presettt  was'iaflfect^  ^— -  sohic  even
to  tears.  It  was,  indeed*,'  beautiftil  tb  see  the  young
prophet  —  whose  counteiidrl6e  liad  retaken  an  ex-
pression of  candour  and  of  childish  ianocehce  —
speaking  so  calmly  the  words  of  hblih6ss  atid  of  com-
fort, and  the  older  listener  humbly  stbbjiing  to
drink  of  the  waters  of  refreshnifeiit  from  so  lowly  a
source.

The  same  sleepwaker,  thoroughly  unsentimental  in
his  natural  state,  seemed  always,  when  mesmerised,  to
take  a  pleasure  in  losing  himself  in  imaginations  of
another  world.  Beautiful  are  the  things  he  has
said  to  me  respecting  the  soul's  recognition  of  those  it
loved  on  earth,  and  of  the  privilege  of  departed
friends  to  watch  over  the  objects  of  their  solicitude
while  toiling  through  the  pilgrimage  of  life ;  but  were
I  particularly  to  record  these  speculationsy  as  they  would
be  called,  I  should  probably  be  deemed  a  visionary^
or  branded  as  an  enthusiast. It  is  enough  to  say


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  169

that^  under  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  all  the  hard  incre-
dulity which  characterised  E.  A.  when  awake  was
gone.  His  wilfulness  was  become  submission ;  his
pride^  humility;  and,  in  precise  proportion  as  he
seemed  to  know  more,  he  appeared  to  esteem  himself
less.  Often  would  he  regret  the  errors  of  his  waking
hours,  and  speak  of  his  natural  state  as  of  an  exist*
ence  apart.  Often  would  he  exclaim,  in  sleepwaking,
"  How  I  wish  I  could  always  see  things  as  I  do  now ! ''
There  is  not  a  person  who  saw  him  in  the  mesmeric
state  but  remarked  the  change  for  the  better  that  his
physiognomy  underwent.  His  affections,  also,  were
enlarged.  Egotistical  in  general,  and  displaying  but
little  sensibility,  he,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  showed
all  the  warmth  of  a  kind-hearted  nature.  Shortly  be-
fore leaving  me  I  mesmerised  him.  Immediately  on
passing  into  sleepwaking  his  countenance  assumed
an  expression  of  the  deepest  sorrow,  and  he  seemed
scarcely  able  to  speak.  When  asked  the  cause  of  his
sadness,  he  said,  "  1  am  going  away :  how  deeply  I
feel  it ! "  Restored  to  his  waking  state,  he  laughed,
and  talked,  and  seemed  as  unconcerned  as  usual.

That  in  the  mesmeric  state  the  mind's  sensibility
is  exalted  and  refined,  I  had  also  a  proof,  when  one

day  I  was  reading  to  Mademoiselle  M (then  in

sleepwaking)  Wordsworth's  touching  poem  of  Lucy
Gray.  Utterly  insensible  to  poetry  in  her  waking
state,  she  at  that  time  felt  all  its  charms :  her
countenance  varied  with  emotion ;  she  watched  the
progress  of  the  little  story  with  the  deepest  interest ;
and,  when  I  arrived  at  the  stanza  —

I


170  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKINO.

**  The  storm  came  on  before  i%a  tune.
She  wandered  up  aod  down;
And  many  a  hill  did  Lucy  climb.
But  never  reached  the  town,**

she burst  into  a  passion  of  tears,  and  cried  out,
^^  Oh  !  cease,  cease !  I  can  bear  it  no  longer."

Yet,  that  this  increased  sensibility  was  regulated
by  considerable  self-control  appeared  manifestly  on
a  certain  occasion>  when  some  one,  placed  ^'en  rapportT
with  her  in  sleepwaking,  made  an  unfortunate  allu-
sion to  the  death  of  a  person  to  whom  Mademoiselle
M.  had  been  strongly  attached.  She  wept  much,
but,  seeing  me  uneasy,  said,  ^^  Do  not  mind,  sirt  I
will  control  myself;"  which  she  accordingly  did,  and,
by  a  moral  effort,  she  resumed  her  tranquillity*

Another  feature  of  the  moral  state  in  mesmerism
is  a  tendency  to  replace  the  conventional  forms  of
the  world  by  a  frank  exhibition  of  general  good  will
and  cordial  regard  to  all  men.  Justinus  Kerner  (in
his  "  Leherin  von  Prevorst, "  published  at  Stutgart
and  Tiibingen,  1832,)  relates  that  the  sleepwaker,  to
whom  he  has  given  the  above  high-sounding  ap-
pellation, would  never,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  address
any  one  in  the  third  person  plural,  which  is  the  cere-
monial manner  of  speaking  in  Germany ;  but  always
in  the  second  person  singular,  which  the  Germans
consider  as  expressive  of  intimacy  and  affection.  I
have  observed  something  of  the  same  kind  in  those
sleepwakers  who  have  come  under  my  notice.  E.  A.
was  once  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  state  in  the  pre-
sence of  a  gentleman  whom,  as  his  superior  in  age  and


MESMERIO  SLEEPWAKIKO.  171

:station  in,  society,  he  regarded  with  the  greatest
respect*  Having  written,  as  requested^  some  music
for  this  gentleman,  he  inscribed  it  thus :  —  ^^  A  mon
,cher  V.  O."  It  is  curious  to  compare  this  familiar
dedication  with  those  which  were  written  in  his
waking  state,  where  every  title  was  given  its  due
weight,  and  nothing  was  presented  save  **  avec  les
faomms^es  les  plus  respectueuses,"

A  state  of  mind  so  simple,  so  religious,  so  tender,
yet  so  pure,  is  in  itself  a  refutation  of  the  charge  of
immorality,  which  they  who  lack  the  charity  that
h(q>e8  and  believes  the  best  have  attempted  to  bring
against  mesmerism.  If  to  this  be  added  the  absolute
deadness  of  corporeal  i^ensation  which  I  have  shown
to  accompany  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  there  will  be  a
manifest  absurdity  in  the  supposition  that  it  is  (as
some  one  clalled  it)  a  mere  **  voluptuous  juggle^"  —
an  affair  of  the  senses  and  of  sexual  feeling.

The  attraction  towards  the  mesmeriser,  testified  by
Ae  patient,  which  has,  perhaps,  contributed  to  give
birth  to  this  monstrous  idea,  is  of  a  nature  totally
distinct  from  the  promptings  of  passion.  If  compared
to  any  love,  it  must  be  likened  to  self-love;  for  it
seems  to  result  from  that  identification  of  the  vital
and  nervous  system  of  the  two  parties  of  which  I
have  already  given  many  examples,  and  which  admits
of  still  farther  illustration.  For  instance,  a  gentle-
man, whom  I  was  mesmerising  for  the  first  time,
asked  me,  when  I  had  laid  my  hand  on  his  forehead,
whether  he  felt  his  own  hand  or  mine  placed  there,
declaring  himself  wholly  unable  to  decide. Anna

I  2


172  |klS:S])(E|iIC{  fiUBEPWAKINGU

Mr»--trr,  wbettj  Jwfve  been  suffering' i^rom  a  sensation
otjsfA^'haiS  ^Qt,jpnljr  complaii)^  of  being  chilly,  but
b^r^ajdi .  ">WiU  yo*  .wopafifiyouraelf)^  w^?"  J  Once
wh^  (unkiwwp»flo  her)  I' bad  a  blister  oja  my  side^
I:obs^ved,.tbat:>  dwii^i^epiwakiag,  she  cop^tmtly
carried  h^iF\  hand /to  h^r  q^^  ,-  aide*  I  a^k^^  her*  jwhy
^he.  di4i  this,  m^  ^bC.^d»£."  There  i^  sopietfcipg.  tbere
l^at 'paiji^r^nie)  nJs  if  ;the  skitt  were  torn  oSlr"  At
'aoothei'ttiine, twhenf  I^aslhirsty^  aisleepwaker  -oom^
plajined;  alaoi  of  tlursit^'  r/I'>  offered;  togive  her^scone
SiFC^ri  btttjsb^eaid^.^^'No*;  y©u/'mt«sfc*dri^  for.rm^*
I4^iSt> tbirst>  h9ing'i|$i$f)cbed9,tbe  sleepwaker'aijiuneasir
5;^^fisi>i^?as^  r^5aoyed^;n.Tb^^  patient,  i^,  dari^  lUiea^
JJ[J^ri&al,^a4^ptai5,to^,c^0aia>^exte^tr  the  m^^s^na^riser's
likipga,  anfi-  di^likioig^s;  S.  Ar^rTrTiin  .bis  ..iriatuffal
state,  was  very  fQii4iOtfrthQ  swell  of  hrfioJ^r^pe,  which
I  ibjind:ttM>  s^kly,foi>;ifly  tast^.j  but,  ia.sleepwaking,
;wheD9,  thr^^gb^tpe^rhe  ^^  mad?  to  smell  it,  he  found

4be,Q49>FrUnptea^iPg-J  •')  •
,,.,,^|ieA,j]w^,jcpa^^r,.  tb€ise  ^nd  otber  p^oo&  disF-
gjayi§td  ]i^y,§leepwjajceps  of  ^eositive  and  moitive  sym-
pathy ,wit)ijith,^i^{5n)|^sfl^ser;,,  when  wje  refleet'that
^bey,f.^.ey§c^;i^l|y  b^l^ess  of  injuries  UijQiQted  on
,then^s^^yf^y  l?*ijtr,|t^ei3ablingly  alive. to  all  that  the  is
j^iade  to,  $^ff^5,  W|9  m^yiwell  imagine, that  he. stands
|x>,tjbw.  ifti*  K^ry. .p^QHliar  c^nd  vital  relation:  flor
jcaait  .s(een^^?»rpndei;^l;tb^t^.wben  .geveired  feom  him,
tlv?y  §hpuld  aclfnftWjWd^e  s^iachi&m  in  their  beiiiig,  and
ip^ew  4^Vit;  ,pf  .alj,.  w"f;y  w^thi  U^^^mselves..  .Besides,
seyefal  pirc^pi.§)tances  prove,  how  remote  from  sexual
lipeling  is  the  pqe  in  question. In  the  first  place,  it


MESMERIC  8LEEPWARINO.  173

is  exhiUted;  equs^lly*  by  erety  mesmerised  person,
withoiio  respect  of  age^  sex^or  diaracter.  »  The  cold
and  the  smbbbi*riiartB><snb}agi^d  by  it'lis  effectually
as  diewann  and  the- yielding:  thepride^of  talent
exempt  rtot  from  Uiis  Miespotismy  neithet  does  the
simple 'innocence  of>  childhood.  Never  have  I  iseen
its  force  more '  strongly  exemplified  than  in  the  case
of  a  sister  of  Anna  M  "■  'y  a  child  of  nine-  or  ten
years  of  age.  Having  once  left  her  on  a  sofa  in  the
meaneric  state,  while  I  went  to  take  some  tea  at  a
table  which  stood  near,  I  beard,  after  I  had  been
away  about  five  minutes,  low  stifled  sobs  proceeding
from  my  little  patient.'  I  hastened  to  her,  and  found
her  crying.  Being  asked  by  me  the  cause  of  this
distress,  she  replied^  **  Because  you  staid  so  long
awt^y. It  makes  me  suffer  so  much."

Again,  the  attraction  manifested  by  patients  to-
wards their  mesmeriser  is  not  in  the  least  modified
by  circumstances,  or  by  the  relation  of  the  parties  to
each  other ;  and  it  is  openly  exhibited  by  those  whom
I  have  shown  to  be  in  a  state  of  high  moral  feeling.

Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  it  is  an
instinct,  not  a  passion :  the  springs  of  life  are  touched,
and  the  powerful  impulse  of  self-preservation  is  set
in  play.  So,  also,  the  repulsion  from  all  others  than
the  mesmeriser  is  but  a  measure  of  the  attractive
force  which  draws  the  patient  there,  where  he  exists
even  more  than  in  himself.  Illustrative  of  this  phy-
sical necessity,  I  may  bring  forward  a  circumstance
wluch  was  related  to  me  by  an  eye-witness,  whose
word  I  have  never  had  reason  to  doubt, A  young

I  3


174'  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKING/

man,  mesmerised  for  the  first  ^ime,  became  unwell  ^
under 'the  extraordinary  stimulus  of  tnesmerism,
which  sometimes,  if.unskilfidty  applied,' does  s^Ceot*
persons  unpleasantly,  i  His  mesmerist  was,  in  fac^
inexperiienced  in  his  art ;  aurdj  becoming  alarmed  at*
die  result  -  of  his  operations,  attempted  to  quit  the
room.  The  consequences  of  this  injudicious  conduct
were  fearful.  The  patient  became  furious,  and
actually  tote  his  own t. clothes  and  the  hangings  ^of
the  apartment.  Had  his  mesmeriser  succeeded  ia
lea'viirrg  him^  he  might  have  /suffered  serioosly ;  but,
by  good'ibrtune^  a  more experiencedmesmeriser,  who
wafl'piie'sent,  forced  back  the  ines^rt  pcactitioner^
and  instructed  him  how  >tO' allay  the  tempest  of
menital';and  bodily  agitation  whi^  he  bad  so  uiiwitr>
tingly  provoked.  This  may  serve  as  a  general  type
of  the  kind  of  feeling  exhibited  by  patients  towards
their  medmerisers;  and  widi  (this  th^  language  of
sl^p^wakers  themselves  is  in  essact  iaccordance. A;

geiitlMtein^  who  •  «aw  E.  A >  mesmerised  by  <  me^

said^to  him,^*  Vous  aimer  biend'etre'avec  Monsienri''
To  whieh  the  sleepwaker  replied,  ^'  Oui,  mais  pas  tou-
jouYs'^omme  a  pi^ent.  D'autrrfois,  je  peux  le  qmU
ter,'  ^t^e  ne  se^  rien ;  'maihbetkant  je  ne  pouvais-  paa  le
quitter,  quand  m^itie- je  le  voudrak."  In  the  same
matiner,  Anna  M'  .  ■■  »  who- was  exceedingly  fend  of
my  wife,  could  not  quit  me  to  goto  her,  when  in  the
meti'meric'  ^te.  Bein^  good-bumouredly  rallied  upon
this,  she  said,  "  You  know,  dear  lady,  how  much  I
love  you,  and  that  the  feeling  I  have  for  my  mesmer-
iser is  sincere  respect. That  which  keeps  me  near/


MBSMERIC  SLEEPWAKINO*  175

him  now  is  quite  .different  from  .any  affection.:  it  ia
n€t  that  I  would  not  wish  to  come  to  you,  but  .ab-
sduiOely  I  cannot^  unless  my  mesmeriser  comes  too/'
When  seated  between  us  both  she  declared  herself
quite  happye.  Nevertheless^  it  was  necessary  even
for  my  wife  to  approach  ber^  wh^  mesmerised^  with
caution^'  Touching  her  once  suddenly,;  without
having  be^i  placed ^ properly  "en  rapport"  with
her,:  she  produced  in  the  patient  a  violent  fit  of
shiveritig*  »  ,.

.:  But  it  may  still  be  objected,  that  the  mesmeriser^
if  so  disposed,  may  make .  a  wrong  use  of:  the  influx
enee<  which  he  possesses  mer  the  patient.  Possibly :
for,  as  I  havie  onc^  before  remarked^  all  power  is
^ipable  of  dbi]se#  A  rbad  physiotan ,  may  lemploy  his
knowledge  «f  drags  to  the.  worst  =  purposes ;  but  are
wie  therefore  to  have  no  physicians  ?  And  is  mesnf^rf
ismy  because  dangerous  in  evil  hands,  not  to  be  cent
signed  to  any  hands  at  all  ?  There  are  some  who
wrest  the  Scriptures  to  their  own  destruction  and  that
of  others ;«'  but  shall  the  Scriptures  not  be  preached  ?
A  pursuit,  too^  like  mesmerism,  which,  so  far  jrom
conducting  to-  gsuaor  glory,  subjects  its  votaries  Ux  a
species  of '  martyrdom,  holds  out  but  few  temptations
to  the  base' minded«  Besides,  the  fault  rests  with
mesmeric  patients  themselves,  if  they  give  up  their
powers:  of  self^^control  to  ■  evil,,  or  even  doubtful,
guidance^  or,  indeed^.fto  any  foreign  guidance  what-
ever^ unless  before  proper  witnesses.

Exercised  judiciously, ,  there  is  not  a.  doubt  that
mesmerism,  might  be  mad^  an  important  instrument

I  4


176  MJ^MEI^P:  SLE£]pi9fAK;NQ«

pJT.wqTj^  gpod.lp,,Jwn„5ilWJf?,  i^npt  qnly  tends  natU'-

its. , imn^q<jliaj:^  4^flu^WeJ|ia3, passed,  away.,, .  iA. .  jaes-
lE^^rise^rvPanra^lF^y^  ^  strjengtjknenrthe  vir^tqpqs,  teuden-
ci(^  .deve|qped  by;B^  pa,tient  in  sli^pwakipg,  ^  to
pj^qlong  tjt^^pi,  f^  it wer^ into, the, waking gt^tte^.  Often
h^s  |E^  -^"TT  entr^ate^^e,  whqn  I  have  giv/^n  feim
good j^dy^f^Ja^(th^j3pLei5Pip^^  sleep,  to Jropr^^it  in
such.  ^J|p[]iaf^ler.  upQia,.bi£f^ind  as  that  if  might  influ-
ea;ie  J^P^  ?y^  thqu^  Jipperc^ptibly,  wh^  «wak;e.
Mof.^ypr^it|is  a  x^urioua  fact  that,  if  .thep^smeriser
t^ll^Jtus  pati^i^t  to  ^taiufrpm  any  jtbing  at  »  ci^idain
tiip0T-r,eve^;iijoin;  that  pjE  which  j  he  may  be  most
fojid-rr^the^la^tie^.ftcts;  upon  the  injunctioi^,  in  Ipiis
i^^tyr^l  jstj^te,  ,^ithopt/ bein^  ^ware  of  the  springs
that  impel  his  condm^t*  To  wliat  benefiqial  ^ses  tfais^
peculiar  iiifluence"  might  be  ren<iere4  subsemeni  I,
need,  not  suggest;  f.^pr.  how  efifecti^ally  it  might  wean
p^rson^s  frpm  l|a4  habits,  by  ri^ndering  them  positively
averse  to  fbe,  sin^  t):^>n^pst  easily  beset  them,.
.  'j^hata  propprt;ioi>able  increase  of  the  intellectual
powers  3ho,uld  ^con^any  so  marked  a  dev^lopement
olth?  ropralSf ill  not  seem  surprising,  if  we  reflect
tbat  every,  jBtcuUy, of  .our  being  plays,  as  it  were,  into
the  bands  of  the .  otjbier ;  j^pd  tbat  a  rise  in  moral
feeling  alpio^t  pf:esu,pposes  a  rise  in  intellectual  dig-
nity. If  it  b^  gi:apted  that. "  want  of  decency  is  want
of  sense,"  it  may  also  be  conceded  that  a  want  of
moral  perceptions  generally  is  the  produce  and
accompaniment  of  a  degraded  intellect The  in-*


ytiMtatt'  *tf:Et»#AitiNG.  177

creft^etf '^iefrity  #liich  pei^M^ntS'ttllanifest  in  the  mes-
me«d'^tete  wAtiM  tl[loftfe'|pi^  tTi'e  paretiit  of  a

quibkeMted  ridibni ' '  'Tk^  ^rdfeive  kll  't!icl  irrationality
of  IWsfehooai ''X)ttifef'^^r(!*fe,^  h^^^  the  sleep-

vrsM^  adVatridi  ill  \tit^Ut^^Airii  by  nil  ftteaiis  wahting.
-"Hfe  v;6iti'^dS(iilfe  ^s^bjbtts^hich;  in  the  waking
trtdt^^^ar^-'^ar  *ij^hd  'W^  dapacity,  and

solve^^ikidiik'WKifcTij'it-  '<y^  are  to  him  as

an  ttnkE(6*ri '  tong^^  '  1  ^  dlj^el^ed  *  this  e^ecidlly  in
thi^^^itefe^^^bf  EJAiJ-^:^'  Hi$'^iiab1tiiar<i)hfrisi6ri  of
thdoght  ^l¥*W^ch^gfedi  dtbrfefg '  'sl^eifiWakiiig,  into  jiist-
il^^^f  ifl^pt^l^nslori  i 4d  iiidtrlge ' in  Abstract  speCiila^
tf^Wsrefehied ^lUlb&i^^'f^ttik  -df 'hc^  cohditibn ;  "atid  he
di^^ky^  iffthisU^Ve}t)t)eifefent  of  bii^iiktiiiid,  a  p^cu-
1«*  ateutefiesi^bf 'k'eiriatkH^Mch  look^^
s^Sfl^.  ^'1le^*'apAi'6Hfend6(f  widV 'e^se,  mid  leimt
wiffi  ^qffiickiifesi' A '  Mm  tvks  suffitllerit  ft)  ptf t  him  in

pOS^iicto^'bf  ^  6i*j'^;'; "'' "'-^^ />'o;;.i.=

BtiVifeS^  efepeiS^lfy  *y  t!hcf'ii«ih-ov(ed'tbihdition'of
the  rii«ilbr3^,  ih  Hife'iiifeirileiAjStirt^p^  flif^t  the  general
strengtheilihg  offtife  irttdWdiia-pBwei^^m^Ay  be  esti-
raatedJ ''Fbrfe  nbt,ih^titth;'W^fh^dty  t^  life  and
Tirektfe  6f  ih^Wiiia;SWthdiit  ^6^^  (qiitckferiihg  irispi-
ratllte  alP the  el^Siti  dftWhtfeg' x^erebu't  ife  so  much
dtfMU?  ''I^it^^k)nfie^ej\\ity'^^^  every

ercffit  *  WHerSii  We  "hslve  -  Ijifeeri  c^cerhed," '  ev^y  frag-
n^t '  Wf 'kiibWfed^e^iia^bf  ftib^ll^liiig'Hvhich  has
dwfie  to  ife^athel^  ftbtfi  the^^eiifeWiaV^worid  or  ^e
univefefe  of  WiS^'oM'MHds,  fotd'dfte  fife-mbnious  and
ikelligiBlfe  whole  ?  It  ife'true  tfeat^ni^iridr^j^ithbut
the  reasoning  &cultie4'  wete  but  a  vain  ^t ;  but  it

I  5


17B  ME8MBB1C  fnJKEVilfMi^^

is  equal^  trae  that^  without  meomory,  aU  the  &eultie»
in  wlndbi'  y^  -glory^  were  cintirdy  worthless* Their
siifaplest^^eiteroise  presupposes' its  abiding  <  presence.
It  is  the  jneasure  of  our  attention,  els  aaentibn  itsdf  is
the^meadure  of  the  Ixiind's  strength  br  wieakness. >  <
^^l^at'this  importani/  poHirer  is  largely  developed
tmde^vihesmerijc  sittepwikldng  i»  a  fact  to  which  par-
tieillab ^attention  should.be  giyen;  since'  it  explains^
in  a  ndftoral  way^  certain  ]^henoniena  which  too  many
of  ther&iends  of  mesmerism  wonder  over  as  miracui-
knis^'vnd  which,  cohsequently,  tx>6>mlany  of  its  adTers-
ariesr Deject  as  false.  <  How  mtoch'  injury  this  present'*
atiokriof  startling^  circuiEiBtanoes^juhaceompanied  by
any  rational  solutibn^;  has /caused'  to  mesmerism  maj
fae^esthnated  by  a  comparison  of'  thereo^tioh  given
to  a  £iiet^.  wheU  radoibally  set  forth  by, -a-  philosopher,
wittv'tthait  which,  it  veoeivei  when  wildly  stated!  by
an'^etitinisiast. Many  of  the;  (stories  told  by  the
jlidfeiouB, ' '  and  i  irankly  accepted .  by  the  inrorld  in
geneial,  are  eveiiy  whit  as  wonderfid  as  the  tales  of
jBJdsm&nO'daix'^oyance  which  'SO^  shock  the.incredu^
loua^^^ibut  then' they  ar^  otherwise  presaited,  and
charm  us  by  being  seen  through  the  clear  glasa  of
nattlr% instead  of  coming  to /us  coloured  by  the
Claude^  i  Lorraiiie  ■  medium  of  the  imagination* A
proof  of  this  assertion  may  be  found  in  the  high
estimation  which  Dr« Aberorombie's  work  on  the
Intellectual Powers  so  justly  enjoys* Th^  work
itself -is  full  of  interesting  and  remarkable  anecdotes,
iiiany  of  them  especially  relating  to  auto-^leep waking
—  yet  who  dreams  of  doubting  these  ? And  why  ?


They  are  jiatvircmy  and  philosophically  treated..  For
histance  :—^  Jihe  author  relates  tliat  a;  girl^  who  was
coii6titutioDallyfa>  sleepwalkerv  ignorant^  and  of  the
lowest  :rank^  f^.  has- been  known  to  conjugate  correctly
Latin  verbBf  which  ^e  had  probabb/.  heard  in  the  aeh4M>l
rem'ofihefimihf;  and  «he.  waa  ooe|3  heard,  to  .^ak
several  sehtences  y«iry  correctly  ip  French ;  at^  same
timeitatinffitliatshe  heaa^ihemfwmiikfvrtigngent^
whom  she  had.metaeoideniaSy  m  a  shapJ*  Now^  con*
ceive  the  atony  to  have  beenitold  without  the  sentences
whick  I  havie  markedby  italics^  and  the  inefre  workings
e£iBeii^ry:arei£[^rthwith  magnified  into  a  miraculous
gift  of  tongues,  which  wervegard  with  quite  other  feetr
logs  than  the  present  cautious  and  instructive"  state*
msht.  We  cannot,  then,  foe  too  guarded  in  our  liews  of
the&cnltiesdiBplayedb'ysleepvi^ers.  Theleasthintof
a  thing, ;pretiously  heard  and  forgotten  awhile  awake,
will  servethem^in  the  mesmeric  ^i(tate,  as-  aolue  to
knowledge  'that  /shall  seem  jupernatural ;  but  a i  little
investigation,  will  often  clear  up  the  apparent  miracle ;
add  the  prmci|>lev'  once  ascertained^  may  foe  extended
even 'to;  cases  which  baffle  our  most  accurate  ^re-

The  memory  of  Anna  M-^  "■  Was  much  developed
during  (mesmeric  sleepwaking*  AH  the  renuniscences
of  her  childish' years  seemed  to  recur  to  her  mind;
and  thence  she  was  enabled  to  show^  an  acquaintance
with  the  past  histories  of  the  inhabitants  of  her  native
town,  which,  in  primitive  timesy  would  have  been  by
no-means  to  her  advantage.  Under  James  the  First
she  would  infallibly  have  been  burnt  for  a  witch.

I  6


180  MSdlkTCiltO  &Lfi£PW^XIN«.

Often^  in  her  jnesmerikt*  state,  *she  recalled,  ta  the
Sniiids  of  persons^ '  who  faadi:  p^rhs^s- '  fongotten  that
th^ihad  ever  seen  her,  partieularj  circumstances,  Iritfa
Vhich  they  imagined  none  btit  themselves  peoidd  be
acquainted.  On  one  occmsioni  especially,  I  remember
apen8on«a()erii^)thie.room^hiieshewas  in  mesmeric
sleet^waking.ai^ iiad  benches  ^perfectly  closed^ .  His
ntitae  wasr  noti  mehtibnedf  but,  having  been  placed
**en  rapport ^^:wit]|i>hlbn,^M8hei  recognised  hfan^  by  the
i^ice  alane^  as  aaa^ndi^dual  inborn' ehe  hcul  known  in
her.yeiyieaiifly  childhood^rbut'had  not metrnth^since*
Sh^  naimed  Jaim^tand  brought^back/io  his  veeollection
manyminuteipartdcuiat&iireljating  ta  bis  iamUy^and
to  himself.  •  Oiliiiwakiiig;  she  was  mudi /surprised,  to
see  another  person  added  to  our  party,  and  could  by
noeiSirt  of  ^memory  ((even  after /he  had  spoken  y^'.make
him:  appear  other  than)apei*fect  stranger  to  .berk  It
was  not  until^he^baddeclated  himself,  and,  on  his
part,  recalled  to  her  sundry  circumstances,  that  she
could  remember^  ever  to  have  seen  him.  Yet,  even
then,  the  greater  paxt  of  the  particulars,  with  which
in  mesmerism:  she- a^emed  so  fiilly  acquainted,  could
by.no  means  be  restored  to  her  remembrance.

lAnother  time^'the  same  sleepwaker,  being  asked  to
write  some  Flemish  poetry  from  memory,,  noted  down
with  a  pencil -two -lines^.  which,  on  awaking  (though
we  told  her  the  first  words  of  the  distich),  she  could
not  repeat.  Being-  shown  the  lines,  she  at  length
recognised,  by  their  general  sense,  something  which  she
had  heard  as  a  child.  In  mesmeric  sleep  waking,  Anna
M  displayed  a  greater  aptitude  to  learn  than  in


tier  waldn^^iate;  I'l  badoniy  feeit^  ^txsi  her  a  little
poem  of <OiQtldBiiHC^<^y  beginning^  *f  Ohymss^oij  ikhon
tlaiA  deceiven/'  twice  ioyeiv|(vheni  she  iwasalre^y
ablellorepeali'it-ooilpectljr.  '.:wt  :".MJi)i::i  /■•m ,r^--

'E^'Av^^^  iri^imfeejted^  a  similar )ixK
l^tentivenesisyrinoi^iremitrkable^pethapi^i  inasm  as
his  meihory  (iBbrefroiii  negleety  I  Mstgine^*  > thto  firom
natiiit^l  rincapajcity)!  tiras'  singolsDrlyM  defective.  We
bkve  'tried  hbn-' da' mesmeric  dee^wakiiigiwth  the
hardesit  phitus^sahditedmical- expressions  which  the
English  tongue  (of  Uvhich  <he  »kn^tr>  'Tiery/little')^  couM
fbmishi;  aoid^idn  >one>o^cadoc^ia  gentlemkik^  who  had
traTell^>'in  the  East^  supplied'  hum  wi^h  a  long  and
Btrakige  <7ui4tikh  word^'  which^heicati^htViir^ctly  with
th^!great09teasei''-;<i  •:.''•  m  {>•!>• :.  -I'V.  .<\  -j  mi--- •■  -

This  slei^pwaker:  played  beautiiVi%  on  tfaei  fiute,  and
was  aceiistonied!oft^i:to[  iiqpro\ise  uponthat.instni**
ment  with*  M  the  milsijoal rgemu)9i:that )  hie^  possessed ;
but  the' chapmiiag!  strain,  tilMaS)  uttered^  iwas  lost  for
ever^  'H^  couldl  not  repeat  one/of>  his  extempore
compositions.  r02ie4)ay>  I  had  been  forced  !lo  improve
h&»  forborne  f£^ult,  wben,  taking  lus  flute^ he  poured
forth  some^metoicholy  notes  \t4iich  seenied  to  express
regret  «aid  penitenbe^.  ;  I  begged  Mm  <  to  repeat  the
touching  air,  jwit  'it  had'  wholly  ^  |passed>  from  i  his  re-
mombranQcu '  Subsequently^  when  be  was  •  in  mesmeric
sleepwaking^  iit'  ocoorred  to  me  to  ask  him  if  he
could  then  write  do^^^n  the  composition^  that  so  much
pleased  me.  Instantly  he  seized-  music-paper  and
41  pen,  and  wrote  down  the  air  which  I  here  sub-
join, and  which,  as  &r  as  my  own  memory  can  deter-


182


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKZKQi


mine,  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  which  I  had  beard'
twQ -daya^  before.

POUR  LA  FtUTE.


"/ .  ■  r'


j/ \'*f'  L>'^


i.llV.i'^


MESMERtC  SLEEPWAKIK6;  168^

Another  proof  of  increased  memory  given  by  this'
sleepwaker  was  his  comprehending  and  speaking
English  (which  otherwise  he  was  ranarkably  slow  to
learn)  far  better  in  the  mesmeric  than  in  the  natural
state*

♦' 4:  cwtoflistancevto  be  remai*ked»  as  showing^  a
connection  between  the  mesmeric  and  the  common
deep,  js  thk  -7- sleppwakers  will  remember  those  noc**
mrBal  dr&ams  which  they  catk  by  no  means  recall
When  waking..  I  once  aske4  Anna  M— if  she  could
Recollect  ai&y  thing  in  sleepwaking  which,  out  of  it^
she  had  forgotten.  She  replied,  "  Certainly,  many
il4pgs;  and  j.ust  now  I  clearly  remember  something
wi^chi  I  wished  to  recollect  when  I  was  awake,  but.
couM  not.  It  is  a  drean;  which  I  had  on  Sunday,
night.  (She  said  this  on  Wednesday,  14th  February,
1888.)  I  screamed  out  in  my  sleep,  and  alarmed
ioEiy  ^athet ;  biSt  1  could  not  call  tp  mind  what  I  had
t)een  dreaming  about :  now,  however,  I  know  what
it  was.  I  thought  that  a  very  frightful  old  woman
entered  the  room :  she  was  dressed  in  scarlet,  and
had  a  \^ite  filtet  bound  across  hj^r  forehead.  She.
came  slowly  in,  and,  coming  up  to  me  in  bed,  laid
her  hand  upon  my  chest  I  tried  to  scream,  but
could-jiQt:  at  '^^  however,  I  screamed,  and  woke
iny  mother.'^  Afterwards,  when  the  sleepwaker  had
returned  to  her  natural  states  she  was  <|uestioned
about  the  dream ;  but  it  had  again  past  from  her
memory.  Wishing  to  establish  the  circumstance
by  as  much  evidence  as  possible,  I  took  an  op«
portmiity  of  sjpeaking  to  her  mother  on  the  subject,


184  MESMERIC  6LEEPWAK1K0*

when  the  latter  confoborated  all  th^t  Anna  had
affirmed,  arid  acld^cl  that  her  daughter  wis^'fn  the
habit  of  relafting  hef*  direams*  t'o  h^r  fartifly  at  bresQc-
fast ;  but  of  tlife  partii6ular  6he  she  hid  be^n  abfe  to
give  no  accounts ^ '  ' '  - '  ^

K  A.  coiild  also,  in  sleepwakirig,  recall  the  visiblls
of  the  night,  which  had  gone  from  iiini  as  the'  dr^atti
from  the  Babytoniktt  monarch.  MbreoVer,  he 'had
been,  as  a  child, '  a  natural  sleepwaker,  "'afttJ^hcf
assured  me,  when  in  ^he  mesmeric  statfe;  that  ill  the'
minutest'  circuiiistanc^s  '  of  his  elarly  'si^epi?aMn^'
recurred  to  hini.'  Wheri  asked  if  thie  liiilhd'  cH^r'
ceased  to  think  iii  sliiinb^r,  li^iiieplied,  <*l^e^feip
an  in^tarit :  the  soul  fe  wisei'  kridlesiriis  ninch  durff^ '
sleep! '  It  r^flect^'bri  all'it  ha^  setfn  ih'd  h^ltl,1iiidi
profits  more  1b!y  this'  thaii"  in  t!h6  ddytimfe. '  We  cto-
not,  indeed,  be  aware'  of  thi$^  because  "Ive'^^d  ifi  i
difierent  state  when  waking,  and'fbrget'what'w'e
think  of  by  lii^ht.  Yet,  he  continued,  have  yott  not
remarked  that,  if  you  read  a  thing  over^night,  ybti'
remember  it  better  on  awaking  the  next  morning?
This  is  tlie  ftuit  of 'the  sotirs  labour  (c'est  le  fruit  du
travail  de  Pame)^  though  we  do  n6t  kiibw  Svhende  it
comes."  Asked  again  about  dreams,  he  iHeplieclt
"In  general  they  are  a  kind  of  Recreation  of  the
soul*,  an  exercise  of  its  inventive  faculty  J  but  We  afe
only  acquainted  with  the  results.  As 'a  cai'ptot^
takes  a  tree  and -saws  it"int6  boards,  and  theii  ffbm
those  boards  constructs  something  whi6h  hie  had
previously  determined,  so  the  soul  arranges  the
mechanism  of  the  brain  to  form  a  dream ;  -—  and


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  185

^e  <lream  itself  which  we  imagine  to  last  a  loDg
time,  passes,  in  fa,Qt^  with  inconceivable  rapidity*  It
only  pccupies  ti^e  ,ngipment  immediately  previous  to
our  ^^king.  Other,  dreams,  again,  ari^,  as  it  were,
forced  upon  the  soul  by  something  disordered  in  the
bi^ain.:  but  they  all  ^rf|e  in  this  —  they  immediately

precede  our  waking/'  . . .. ;

J  relate  the.  above,  as ., curiously  consonant  with  a

circumstance  in  the  lif^  of  Lavdette*  He  had  in
prison  a  horrible  dream,  in  which  he  saw  an  infernal
procession  pass  by  his  cell.  Whole  armies  seemed  to
defile  before  him ;  but  the  rid^ra^/were  all  skeletons,
and  t]^,  horses,  stripp^  of  their  skii^s^  presented  a
masy  of, raw  an4' bleeding  flesh*  A  clanking  of
ehams  accompanied  the  terrific  vision,  which  seemed
to  be  of  infinite  difration.  He  was  awakened  by  the
gaoler  entering  his  dungeon,  when  he  found  that  the
dream,  which^  had t been,  an  "  eternity  to  thought|"
wa^  in  reality,  the  .ifnpression  pf  a  moment,  caused
by  the  dropping  of  the  chains  in  unfastening  his
door.  ,

The  l^s%  phenomenon  of  memory,  which  may  here
be  mentioned  as  regarding  the  sleepwaker  alone,  is  that,
when  the  mesmeric  sleep  is  perfect,  the  subsequent
oblivion  is  perfect  too.  Of  the  truth  pf  this  fact,  it
has  been  generally  asserted  that  there  is  no  other
assurance  than  the  allegations  of  the  sleepwakers
themselves.  I  cannot  concede  this  point.  Place  a
mesmeric  patient  under  circumstances  difi'^rent  to
those  in  which  he  went  to  sleep,  but  without  hinting
that  you  expect  any  display  of  surprise  on  his  part.


186  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

and  he  must  be  shrewd  mdeed,  as  wallas  a  consum-*
ate  actoT)  if  he  can  counterfeit  to  the  life  such  an  as*
tonishment  on  waking  as  he  must  exhibit  naturally,
supposing  him  really  to  have  forgotten  the  events  of

his  sleepwaking. Mademoiselle  M- ^  under  cir^.

Cumstanees  the  more  remarkable^  because  not  at  all
lurranged  for  the  specific  purpose,  was  once  evidently
almost  alarmed  into  illness  by  finding  herself  in  a
different  apartment  (whither,  it  may  be  rememberedf'
she  had  be^  brought  to  see  an  invalid  lady)  from
diat  iu;  which  she  had  been  mesmerised.  She  start-
ed, shuddered,  looked  wildly  around  her,  exclaim**
ing,  *^  Good  God  }  what  is  this  2  How.  did  I  come>
here?-  This  is  too  much;*'  and  was  thrown  into^
a  fit  of  trembling  which  we  had  mu^h  difficulty'  ita
allay,  •  i  .-

.  Again,  supposing  a  sleepwaker  to  be  under  the^
same  roof  with  yourself,  his  mesmeriser,  and  expcaeA
to  your  constant  observation,  the  chances  are  that»^  if
he  feigns,  he  will  sometimes  be  caught  tripping.  A
deceivj^r  cannot  be  always  on  his  guard;  and  what  a
power,  of  memory  does  it  presuppose  in  the  fictitious
sleepwaker  to  imagine  that  he  can  arrange  •.  aad
separate  in  his  own  mind  those  circumstances  of
which  he  may  or  may  not  speak !  Passing  a  great
pcMTtion  of  bis  time  in  sleepwaking,  will  it  not  be
difficult,  nay  impossible,  for  him  never  to  advert  to
that  which  has  engaged  his  attention  so  much  and
has  formed,  indeed,  half  his  life?  I  conceive,  thepj
that  when  I  assert  that,  during  four  months,  £•  A*
was  staying  in  nciy  house,  and  constantly  mesmerist


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  187

by  mjself,  with  the  eyes  of  a  whole  family  placed  in
guard  ilpon  him,  yet  that  never,  in  a  single  in*
stance,  be  was  known  to  mingle  his  mesmeric  with  his
ordinary  existence  by  word  or  action,  I  do,  in  facty
show  that  the  assenionls  of  sleepwakers,  are  not  the
sole  evidence  that  they  actually  forget  the  occurrences
of  then:  mesmeric  states  We  have  tried  in  €very  pos-
sible way  to  put  this  to  the  test ;  we  have  plotted
agamst  thesleepwaker,  as  i^  indeed,  we  Imd  wished  to
convict  hiln  of  imposition  on  this  point;  we  have
laid  trapd  for  him  in  conversation ;  but  the  most
searching  ordeal  only  sehned  to  convince  us  of  his
sincerity.  Be 'it  observed, ' moreover,  that,  in  his
mesmeric  state,  I  conversed  with  him  frequently  on
subjects  which' he  was  incapable  of  discussing  in  his
waking  hours,  and  that,  after  the  sleepwaking  was
pa»t,  I  found  him,  with  respect  to  the  same  subjects,
at  unenlightened  as  ever*  Now  I  know  from  his
dharaeter -that,  had  he  retained  any  little  piece  of
information  acquired  in  his  mesmeric  state,  he  could
not  hasve  resisted  the  temptati(m  of  displaying  it,  at
some  time  or  other,  for  our  edification  and  astonish-
ment. 'What  adds  to  the  probability  of  this  is  that,
bis  Txm&oiy  being  in  some  respects  defective,  he
wouM  often  retail  to  persons  the  very  story,  or  the
ve^'bit  of  ^knowledge,  which  he  had  learned  from
themselves^: with  a  perfect  unconsciousness  that  he
was  only  giving  back  a  man  his  own.  Besides,  he
talkki  much  and  reflected  little;  so  that,  had  he
wished  t6  feign  oblivion  of  his  mesmeric  state,  every
chance' wa&  against  die  success  of  his  attempt.  Surely


188  MESMERIC SL££PWAKING«

all  these  proofs  presumptive  (on.  which  I  have  dwelt
the  more,  because/arguments  of  this  nature  seem
hitherto  to  have  been  withheld)  amount  nearly  to
proof  positive  that  sleeplvaking  has  its  own  memory
and  its  own  consciousness,  tehich  do  not  overpays  the
boundaries  of  its  duration. '  •

The  fact  that,  under  peculiar  conditions,  we  may
enjoy  the  exercise  of  all  our  faculties,  yet  retain  no
recollection  of  having  done  so,  may  be  applied,'  as  I
imagine,  to  the  solution  of  many  curious  questions  in
metaphysics  —  such  as,  that  one  of  .Locke's,  ^'  Whe-
ther the  soul  thinks  always??  which  that  great
philosopher  has  decided  in  the  negative,  on  the
ground  that  after-consciotisness  is  the  s6le  testimony
we  can  have  of  the  mintfs  activity ;  and  that,  since  we
are  by  no  means  conscious  that  we  think  always,  we
ought  not  to  assume  that  we  do  think  always*  H  But
in  some  cases^  and  most  especially  in  that  of  mes^
meric  sleepwaking,  we  are  forced  to  admit,  for  the
activity  of  our  minds^  an*  evidence  which  Locke  has
omitted  to  notice;  namely,  the  testimony  of  our
fellow*being8  (a  testimony,  indeed,  on  which  we  build
half  our  knowledge),  iassuring  us  that  the  state  which,
once  ended,  appears  a  blank  to  us,  was  marked  by
energy  and  activity  of  the  highest  order.  Hence,
setting  aside  our  own  want  of  memory  of  our  past
intelligence,  as  an  inadequate  proof  that  such  intelli-
ligence  never  existed,  we  manifestly  arrive  at  a  pre-
sumption that  what  we  have  forgotten  in  one  case  we
may  have  forgotten  in  many  more ;  and  that  the  mind
is  probably  always  active,  though  we  cannot  always


Mi:SM£RIC  SLEEFWAKINOt  189

as3yre  ourselves  of  its  activity.  Such  a  probability
will.b^  peppliarly  grateful  .to.  those  who  deem  that
i(}ei^  ;^<e  cou9titutiv^  of.  the  juind,  and  that  Locke
wa^.fi^ndai??eQUtlly  wrong  when. he  called  ^<  thinking
the  AQtion  and  not;  the  essence  of  the  soul ;''  being  so
far  misled,  by  a  false  analogy  between  things  material
ap4  things  spiriMial,  as  to  conceive  ^^  that  the  per-
ceptibly .pf  i^eas  is  to  the  soul  what  motion  is  to  the
b9{ly.",.T,heywh9. would i;iQ^ .

■''■  ■'  TTmJu^  ftill  of  paffr/this  intellectual  being,
1'  Tkete  thoughts  that  wonder  through  eternity,"

ye^^if^p.be^ye,  that  to,  cease  to  think  is  to  cease  to
l]^iQUSt  rj^ie^j.i^  all  tl^at  tCAds  to  prove  the  conti-
xVMity,,of  thqqght,.  it^,  unceasing .  and  inexpressible
apdvity^; .  Jt  isi  alap  r,emarkable  thj^t  the  state  of  mes-
jjBt^Ci  sleepwakipg^  though  one  of  oblivion,  leaves
always  a^  Ijhave.obseryeds  a  sort  of  agreeable  savour
pn  thf^.jpijid,  which  .renders  persons  of  every  age,
fiex,  and  temperament^  desirous  to  enter  it  again.  It
hc^:^PP^^^^  to  me  aff  if  the  soul  rejoiced  in  it,  as  in
anifilienie»t  to  whiqh  it  was  "  native  and  endued,"  and
eagerly,  pursued  it,  as  a  foretaste  of  its  development
through  eternity.  We  might  also  enter  upon  some
c^ious  speculations,  suggested  by  this  severing  of
eKis|»npes;  this  forgetfulness  in  one  state  of  that
which  we  haye  done  in.  another.  It  is  an  answer  to
our  inquiry,  whether  Lazarus,  when  restored  to  the
body*  brought  back  with  him  the  secrets  of  another
world;  it  lefids  us  to  conjecture  that  they,  who  have


190  .MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIKO.

seemed  dead,  yet  have  been  recalled  to  this  morbid
existence,  may  have  visited  the  world  of  shadows,
although  they  know  it  not.*  It  makes  the  river  Lethe
seem  no  fable,  and  half  realises  to  us  the  inspired
words  of  the  poet:  —

"  Our  birth  is  but  a  sleep  and  a  forgetting  ;
The  soul,  that  rises  with  us,  our  life's  star.
Hath  had  elsewhere  its  setting.
And  Cometh  from  afar."  '

In  a  practically  religious  point  of  view,  also,  the  phe-
nomena regarding  memory,  under  mesmeric  sleep-
waking,  are  fiiU  of  instruction.  The  prodigious  in-
crease in  this  state  of  the  recollective  powers  seems  to
indicate  that,  in  our  normal  existence,  they  are  but
partially  developed;  and  that  hence  the  moralislfs
suggestion,  that  all  our  lives,  with  all  their  good  and
evil,  will,  in  some  future  era  of  being,  be  spread
before  us  as  an  open  scroll,  is  not  to  be  slighted  as  a
fiction,  but  to  be  duly  regarded  as  a  probability,  of  which
we  have  the  presumptive  evidence  in  our  own  hands.
I  proceed  to  speak  of  phenomena  of  memory  in  the
sleepwaker,  resulting  from  the  mesmeriser's  influence.

1st.  Strange  and  inexplicable  as  the  fact  may
seem,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  mesmeriser  bias
the  power  of  impressing  some  things  upon  the
memory  of  his  patient,  in  such  a  manner  as  that  the
latter  shall  retain  them,  and  them  alone,  on  awaking.

•  I  have  a  relation  who  lay  for  twenty-four  hours  in  a  state
of  seeming  death,  and  who  was  wept  for  as  dead.


MESMEEIC  SL£EPWAKINO«  .191

Thus,  at  my  desire,  E.  A.  used  to  remember  English
words  which  I  had  taught  him  during  his  sleep  waking.
Persons  who  were  present  when  he  was  mesmerised
would  amuse  themselves  by  proposing  to  him,  through
me,  words  the  most  difficult  for  a  foreigner  to  pro-
nounce ;  such,  for  instance,  as  "  boatswain's  whistle,"
which  a  gentleman  one  day  gave  him  as  a  puzzle,  yet
which  he  repeated  correctly,  and  retained  after  his
sleepwaking.  Anna  M.  when  mesmerised,  if  asked
to  remember  anything,  used  to  tap  her  forehead  on
either  side,  just  where  she  had  two  singular  promi-
nencies, and  say,  "  I  will  do  my  best  to  fix  it  in  my
brain."  After  this  she  always  recollected  what  she
bad  been  desired  to  retain.  I  did  not  find,  however,
this  faculty  extend  to  circumstances  connected  with
the  unusual  mode  of  sensation  apparently  opened  to
sleepwakers.  Even  if  so  requested,  neither  E.  A.  nor
Anna  M.  could  give  any  account,  on  awiaking,  of  their
perceptions  during  mesmerism,  nor  how  objects  were
presented  to  their  minds.  The  subjects  adapted  to
their  after-memory  seemed  to  be  chiefly  of  a  verbal
nJBiture,  such  as  a  few  lines  of  poetry,  or  the  par-
ticular day  fixed  for  a  subsequent  mesmerisation.

This  possibility  of  making  sleepwakers  remember
what  they  have  learned  in  the  mesmeric  state  (and
learned,  too,  with  superior  ease  and  quickness)  might,
I  imagine,  be  turned  to  important  uses.  I  have  read,
though  where  I  have  forgotten,  of  a  lady  who  ac-
quired a  new  language  through  mesmeric  recollection ;
and  my  experience  inclines  me  to  believe  that  such
might  be  the  case.


192  MESMEaiC  fiL£X;PWAKINO«

2dly.  The  mesmeriser,  by  the  expression  of  his  de^
sire,  can  make  the  patient  remember  certain  things  at
a  particular  time,  subsequent  to  sleepwaking,  and
not  till  the  very  moment  fixed  beforehand  for  the
recurrence  of  the  suspended  recollection.

Thus  E.  A.,  in  mesmerism,  was  told  to  remember,
at  i^ine  the  following  mornings  and  not  till  then,  that
he  should  come  to  fetch  one  of  our  party  to  hear  a
beautiful  mass  that  was  to  be  performed  in  a  church
at  Antwerp.  The  person  with  whom  he  lodged,  and
in  whose  room  he  slept,  informed  me  subsequently
that,  when  the  clock  struck  nine,  £.  A.  was  in  bed,
when  suddenly  he  started  up,  saying,  **  It  is  very
odd ;  but  I  seem to remember  that  I  am to  take

Mrs. to  church." He  then  dressed  quickly,  and

came  to  fulfil  his  engagement.  I  asked  him  in  what
manner  the  idea  had  recurred  to  his  mind,  if  it  was
like  the  recollection  of  something  heard  in  a  dream?
He  replied  that  it  did  not  resemble  this^  in  the  least,
but  was  a  very  curious  and  indescribable  sensation,  as
if  a  thought  flitted  past  him  from  he  knew  not  where,
and  fled  again  so  rapidly  that  to  trace  its  origin  was
impossible.  In  sleepwaking  he  could  not  give  me  a
much  better  account  of  the  phenomenon.  It  was,
he  said,  a  something  pre-arranged  in  the  mechan-
ism of  the  brain,  and  which,  like  the  spring  of  a
watch,  was  set  in  motion  at  a  given  moment.  There
was  nothing  very  satisfactory  in  this  explanation.  As
to  the  phenomenon  itself,  I  and  the  members  of  my
family  have  witnessed  it  again  and  again.  We  have
tried  it  in  minute  circumstances,  difficult  of  remem-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  193

brance,  such  as  (on  the  day  succeeding  the  sleep-
wakmg)  to  sit-in  a  particular  chair^  or  begin  with  a
particular  dtsh  at  dinner;  to  cut  a  potato,  when
first  taken  on  the  plate;  Into  fourpieces,  &6. ;  and  the
result  was  alwaya  featirfactory.  I  hdVe  also' tried  if
the  circumstances,  desiired  to  be  remembered,  could
be  recalled  to  the  sleepwaker  befoffe  the  proper  hour ;
but  there  was  evidently  no  medfm  of  doing  so.  The
very  first  time  I  told  Anna  M.  to  remember  anything
at  a  fi^^  horn-,  I  desir^kl  her  to  call  to  mind,  at  three
the  following  day,  that  she  must  ask  one  of  our  party
to  take?  a  walk.  After  her  awaking,  some  one  inad-
vertently said, -^^  T)&  you  remember  any  thing  about
coming  to-morrow  to -walk  with  us?**  She  said,
after  reflection^  ■**  No,'  indeed,  I  remember  nothing
about  that;  and  besides  I  ha^^e  an  engagement  for
to-morrow."  Soon  aftet*  three,'  however,  the  next
day,  Anna  appea^d-.  out  of  breath,  and  with  a  face
of  wonder,  exclaiming,'  "Do  tell  itie;  was  I  to  come
here  or  not?**  She  then  related  that  she  had  been
out  to  dinner,  and  that,  in  the  midst  of  that  meal,
something  seemed  to  tell  her  that  she  had  promised
to  come  to  us ;  and  that,  such  was  the  force  of  the  im-
pression, she  could  not  help  leaving  her  party  and
hastening  to  ascertain^  the  truth  fi*om  ourselves.

Having  now  described  in  what  manner  the  memory
is  afi*ected  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  both  as  regards  its
spontaneous  exercise  and  its  direction  through  the
mesmeriser,  I  proceed  to  state  other  remarkable
peculiarities  in  the  metaphysical  condition  of  mes-
meric patients,  without  adverting  to  which  my  view

K


}94  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

of  mesmeric sleepwaking, as  a  condition  of  man,
would  be  incomplete.

The  peculiarities  alluded  to  regard  the  action  of
the  whole  mind  of  the  sleepwaker,  and  not  of  any
particular  faculty.  They  may  all  be  ranged  under
two  heads :  —

1st,  With  respect  to  the  patient  himself.  These
are  peculiarities  of  consciousness.

2ndly,  Of  will,  resulting  from  the  patient's  relation
to  the  mesmeriser.

The  peculiarities  of  mesmeric  consciousness  will  be
treated  of  in  the  succeeding  book,  as  being  explanatory
of  many  circumstances  ccmnected  with  our  subject.

The  peculiarities  of  mesmeric  will  may  be  expressed
briefly  thus :  —  ^JThat  lower  degree  of  will  which  we  call
volition,  and  which  chiefly  regulates  the  motive  func-
tions, is  active,  but  will  (in  its  freedom  and  absolute
sense)  is  passive,  in  the  sleepwaker,  through  the  influ*
ence  df  the  mesmeriser.

The  motory  adroitness  of  persons  in  the  mesmeric
state  proves  the  first  part  of  my  assertion.  The  second
branch  of  it  is  susceptible  of  equal  demonstration,  as
the  following  reflections  must  render  evident.

Common  sleep,  it  will  be  granted,  is  the  indication
of  an  abjured  will  —  voluntarily  abjured,  it  is  true,  in
some  cases ;  but,  in  others,  suflering  a  forced  abdica*
tion,  as  when  the  sentinel,  who  knows  that,  if  found
slumbering  on  his  post,  his  very  life  must  pay  the
penalty,  is  vanquished  by  the  slumber  he  would  shun#
In  sleep  itself,  also,  we  are  no  longer  our  own  masters^
but  at  the  mercy  of  our  dreams*


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIKG.  195

'*  Reason  then  retires
Into  her  private  cell,  when  Nature  rests*
Oft,  in  her  absence,  mimic  Fancy  wakes
To  imitate  her;  but,  misjoining  shapes.
Wild  work  produces  oft."

In  this  state  we  seem  to  commit  crimes  wbich^
waking,  we  regard  with  abhorrence ;  and  often  the
impotence  of  our  will  is  shown  by  an  utter  inability
to  throw  off  the  yoke  that  oppresses  us.  We  would
wake]  —  but  cannot :  we  strive  to  cry  —  but  we
find  no  voice :  we  endeavour  to  move  our  limbs  — •
but  they  remain  idle.

If  common  sleep,  then,  be  so  manifestly  the  index
of  a  suspended  will,  the  mesmeric  slumber  is  not  less
clearly  an  indication  of  a  will  that  is  over-ruled  and
held  in  abeyance  by  a  force  that  is  external  to  itself.
The  proof  is  simple.  The  mesmeric  sleepwaker  can-
not awake  without  the  mesmeriser's  aid.  The  sub-
jugation of  his  will  is,  therefore,  even  more  complete
than  under  the  condition  of  common  sleep ;  for,  after
certain  efforts  we  often  succeed  in  throwing  off  the
latter  when  it  becomes  disagreeable  to  us,  or  the
casual  touch  of  any  one  who  witnesses  our  perturbed
slumber  may  recal  us  to  ourselves ;  but  the  mesmeric
patient  can  neither  throw  off  his  bonds,  nor  be  de-
livered from  them  by  any  other  than  the  mesmer-
isar.  I  have  seen  such  efforts  vainly  made  to  arouse
a  sleepwaker  otherwise  than  by  the  mesmeriser,  that
I  have  been  led  to  conceive  that  he  might  be  torn
limb  from  limb  (as  certain  animals  may  be  in  certain

states  of  torpor)  without  awaking. As  with  the  mes-

K  2  '


196  MESMERIC  sl£;epwakino.

meriser  his  sleep  began,  so,  it  appears,  by  the  mes-
meriser  alone  it  can  end ;  and  thus  the  peculiar  slum-
ber, called  mesineric,  is  not  only  the  proof  of  a  sus-
pended will,  but  of  a  will  subdued,  and  actually  held
subject,  by  another.

But  it  is  not  only  the  duration  of  the  mesmeric
sleep  which  proves  this  predominance  of  a  foreign
will :  the  conduct  of  the  sleepwaker,  while  it  lasts,
is  an  additional  warranty  that  the  rudder  of  his
being  having  changed  masters,  the  whole  vessel  is
also  under  another's  direction.  At  the  command  of  the
mesmeriser  he  walks  when  he  would  naturally  repose,
and  brings  his  faculties  to  bear  upon  any  point,  at  a
moment  when  otherwise  he  seems  powerless  to  exer-
cise them.

Summing  up  the  evidence,  we  find  the  argument
run  thus :  —

Natural  sleep  is  the  indication  of  a  suspended  will.
A  sleep  that  begins  and  ends  by  another  must  be
allowed  to  show  a  will  that  is  held  in  abeyance  by
external  agency.

A  sleep,  during  which  a  person  is  made  to  act  by
another,  demonstrates  a  will  that  is  swayed  by  that
other  in  precise  proportion  as  the  obedience  is  prompt
and  absolute.

The  state  of  things  resulting  from  this  sway  on  the
one  side  and  submission  on  the  other  is  most  remarkable.
We  have  the  phenomenon  before  us  of  an  existence  at
once  dual  and  single ;  for,  when  the  sleepwaker's  ca-
pacities are  acting  under  the  immediate  directioa  of
the  mesmeriser,  the  latter may  be considered  as


MESIVTEHIC SLEEP^TAKING.  197

making  up  together  with  him  the  complement  of  one
full  being,  whereof  the  mesmeriser  supplies  the  willing
and  the  conscious  portion,  and  the  patient  the  intel-
lectual part.  The  one  impels,  the  other  obeys  im-
pulsion :  the  one  designs,  the  other  executes  :  the
one  sets  in  motion  a  machine,  (and  what  a  machine !
the  mind  of  man,  with  all  its  complicated  marvels  ! )
the  other  is  the  machine  itself,  instinct  with  life,  as  was
the  fiery  car  of  Kehama,  innately  active,  yet  guidfed
by  the  volition  of  another  1

This  is  no  poetic  fiction. The  facts  are  before  us.
The  volition  of  a  sleep waker  is  swayed  in  an  arbitrary
fashion,  fully  to  conceive  which,  we  have  only  to  con-
sider the  difference  between  the  mesmeric  subjugation
of  the  vnll,  and  any  other  that  occurs  in  our  ordinary
state  of  existence. I  may  tell  my  servant  to  do  such
or  such  a  thing. When  he  obeys,  it  may  be  said,  in
a  certain  sense,  that  his  will  is  subject  to  mine;  yet,
all  the  time,  he  does  actually  retain  the  functions  of
his  own  will  in  perfection.  In  truth,  he  wills  as  much  as
I  do,  and  on  the  same  principles  :  good  to  be  sought,
uneasiness  to  be  shunned,  is  the  eflBcient  cause  of
volition  in  either  case. I  cotnmand ;  his  mind,  with
rapidity,  strikes  a  balance  with  itself,  and  finds  it
better  to  obey. If,  however,  the  balance  should  in-
cline to  the  other  side,  my  servant  has  it  in  his  power
to  disobey,  and  to  manifest  that  his  will  is  in  free  and
unimpaired  operation. Moreover,  he  may  obey  me
firom  fear,  and  not  by  any  means  from  desire, or
identity  of  his  will  with  mine. I  sway  the  outward
and not  the inward man. But, in mesmerism^

K  3


198  A^SMERIC SLEEPfTAKINO.

it  is  not  only  the  manifestation^  but  the  very
function  of  the  will  which  is  dominated.  It  can-
not, if  it  would,  rise  to  freedom:  it  is  under  a
more  than  mor^  restraint.  Its  motive  force,  desire,
is  evidently  changed,  since,  as  I  have  shown,  the
sleepwaker  adopts,  pro  tempore^  the  likings  and  dis-
likings  of  the  mesmeriser.  Hence,  when  the  patient
is  engaged  in  an  act  of  obedience,  there  is  an  identi-
fication between  the  mesmeriser's  will  and  his  own ;
a  phenomenon  which  can  never  obtain  in  the  case  of
simple  obedience.  The  inner  springs  are  touched,
and  not  the  mere  mechanism  swayed.

Such  a  view  of  the  state  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking
may  seem  unpleasing,  and  incompatible  with  its  being
a  rise  in  man's  condition ;  but,  let  it  be  remembered,
we  do  not  rob  the  soul  of  any  one  faculty,  we  only
change  its  mode  of  action,  and  that  mode  of  action
has  its  own  undeviating  law.  In  order  to  sleep,  we
must  abdicate  our  will ;  yet,  in  order  to  enjoy  intel-
lectual activity,  it  is  plain  that  we  must  substitute  a
presiding  will;  for  it  is  the  absence  of  this  which
makes  slumber  a  state  of  disorganised  and  inconse-
quent thoughts.  Thus  the  terms  are  absolute.  If
we  desire  to  be  freed  from  the  thrall  of  the  senses,
yet  to  retain  the  mental  faculties,  we  must  abjure  our
own  will,  yet  find  an  intellectual  substitute.

Again,  we  may  have  observed  that  the  superior
activity  of  any  one  power  of  the  mind  greatly  depends
on  the  non-action  of  certain  others.  With  some  in-
dividuals fancy  revels  at  the  expense  of  reason ;  with
others,  the  cultivation  of  the  exact  sciences  deadens


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINQ.  199

the  imagination ;  and  this  inequality  of  power  results
naturally  from  the  imperfection  of  our  nature*  Were
we  strong  throughout,  we  should  be  as  gods*  But,  in
mesmeric  sleepwaking,  the  question  is  not  whether  we
shall  cancel  one  of  our  faculties  in  order  to  increase
another ;  but  whether  we  shall,  in  a  degree,  change
their  directive  force,  in  order  to  obtain  a  genergd
and  immense  expansion  of  them  all.  Large  advan-
tages demand  large  sacrifices ;  and  the  price  to  be
paid  for  the  increase  of  mental  powers  and  of  sensitive
capabilities,  which  attends  upon  the  state  of  mesmeric
sleepwaking,  is  a  certain  forfeiture  of  the  will.  Does
this  seem  a  hard  condition  ?  How  many  who  have
suflFered  from  self-direction  would  be  glad  to  place
the  government  of  their  being  in  other  hands  !  How
many  a  one,  who  *^  has  felt  the  weight  of  too  much
liberty,"  would  gladly  cease  to  be


«c


Lord  of  himself  —  that  heritage  of  woe  —
That  doubtful  empire,  which  the  human  breast
But  holds  to  rob  the  heart  within  of  rest."


This,  at  least,  is  my  view  of  the  limitations  of  the
will  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking ;  it  may  be  accepted  or
rejected,  but  the  facts,  on  which  it  is  founded,  remain
the  same.

The  power  which  the  mesmeriser  has  over  his
patient  is,  indeed,  as  great  as  it  is  undeniable,  and
involves,  in  my  apprehension,  an  immense  respon-
Mibility  on  the  part  of  the  former.  Should  he  direct
the  patient's  attention  to  firivolous  or  evil  things,  he

K  4


200  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

might  do  harm,  for  which  he  would  be  justly  answer-
able. But,  fortunately,  as  I  have  before  remarked,
there  is,  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  a  natural  elevation
of  the  mind  above  what  is  base  and  sensual ;  and  the
powers  that  appertain  to  reason,  though  the  subjects
on  which  they  shall  exercise  themselves  may  be  much
at  the  mesmeriser's  disposal,  are  neither  to  be  clouded
nor  controlled.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at.  The
mesmeriser  can  hardly  be  expected  to  command  in
another  that  which  he  can  by  no  means  dispose  of  in
himself.  In  him,  in  every  one  of  us.  Reason,  though
too  often  we  would  quench  her  voice,  will  speak  as
loudly  as  conscience,  which,  indeed,  is  but  a  more
rapid  reason ;  and  he  who  takes  the  evil  path  beholds,
and  reluctantly  approves,  the  better  way.  This  shows
a  godlike  capability  in  reason,  apart  from  volition :
it  seems  less  to  belong  to  ourselves  than  to  be  heaven
speaking  in  us ;  and,  in  proportion  as  we  obey  its
dictates,  we  are  exalted  in  the  scale  of  creation.  Its
peculiar  luminousness,  then,  under  the  mesmeric  con-
ditions, is  at  once  a  safeguard  to  the  sleepwaker,  and
a  clear  record  of  the  most  valuable  birthright  of  man.
Many  persons,  as  I  am  aware,  have  disliked  the  idea
of  being  mesmerised,  from  the  fear  of  making  wrong
revelations,  when  deprived  of  their  usual  conscious-
ness. But  this  is  a  vain  apprehension.  It  is  true
that  mesmeric  patients  act  from  impulse,  but  then  their
impulses  are  good.  They  will  say  severe  but  whole-
some truths  to  persona'  faces;  but  their  instinctive
sense  of  right  forbids  them  to  speak  ill  of  any  one
behind  his  back. Anna  M— ,  with  all  her  know-


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKINO.  201

ledge  of  circumstances  relating  to  others,  never  sea-
soned her  talk  with  scandalous  disclosures,  never
uttered  a  word  that  could  injure  a  human  being ;  and
once,  being  pressed  to  relate  something  which  might
have  compromised  another  person,  not  only  kept
silence  on  that  head,  but  reproved  the  curiosity  of
the  querist.

Before  proceeding  to  consider  the  mind  under
mesmerism,  in  its  relation  to  external  things,  it
seems  necessary  to  notice  a  class  of  its  intelli-
gences which  may  be  called  instinctive,  and  which,
as  seeming  to  occupy  the  middle  ground  between
mind  and  matter,  may  properly  claim  our  consider-
ation in  this  part  of  our  inquiry.  Instinct  being
the  very  reverse  of  artificial  acquirement,  a  high
degree  of  the  one  is,  under  ordinary  circumstances,
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  the  other.  In
proportion  as  we  are  educated  we  recede  from  our
intuitive  perceptions.  But,  as  in  many  instances,  so
in  this,  mesmeric  sleepwaking  reconciles  two  seeming
opposites,  which  co-exist  not  in  any  other  known
state  of  being.  Retaining  the  advantages  acquired
by  art,  the  mesmeric  patient  is  restored  to  those
which,  in  a  more  primitive  condition,  we  might  in-
herit from  nature.

The  instinctive  knowledge  of  sleepwakers  appears
to  be  chiefly

1.  Of  remedies.

2.  Of  all  that  relates  to  the  mesmeric  state.

3.  Of  the  elapse  of  time.

Firsty  The  instinct  of  remedies,  evinced  by  sleep-

K  5


202  MESlfERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

wakers,  has  been  frequently  remarked  and  illustrated.
As  I  have  never  studied  mesmerism  in  a  medical
point  of  view,  I  have  naturally  had  but  few  opportu-
nities of  verifying  all^ations  to  this  eflFect.  The  fol-
lowing instances,  however,  of  the  mesmeric  powers  of
prescribing,  fell  under  my  notice,  and  will,  perhaps,
be  the  less  suspected  by  the  incredulous,  as  having
presented  themselves  unsought  to  one  who  is  not  of
the  medical  profession*

The  first  time  that  I  succeeded  in  mesmerising
E.  A—-—,  a  gentleman  present  told  me  to  ask  him,
while  in  sleepwaking,  what  remedy  a  lady  of  their
mutual  acquaintance  should  apply  for  the  cure  of  a
chronic  sore  throat  with  which  slie  had  been  for
some  time  afflicted.  The  question  being  put  to  the
fileepwaker,  he  immediately  replied,  '*  Mademoiselle
De should,  on  going  to  bed  every  night,  enve-
lope her  throat  in  a  linseed  poultice,  which  should
be  kept  moist  the  whole  night  through."  He  then
added  some  very  particular  directions  about  the  mak-
ing and  applying  of  the  poultice,  &c.  When  the  reader
reflects  that  this  piece  of  medical  advice  came  from  a
lively  boy  of  fifteen,  who  was  never  ill  in  his  life^  and
who  hated  every  thing  appertaining  to  disorders  and
their  remedies,  he  will,  I  think,  experience  somewhat
of  the  surprise  with  which  I  listened  to  the  young
sleepwaker.  Conceiving  that  he  might  not  be  origi-
nal in  the  remedy  which  he  had  proposed,  I  asked
the  gentleman,  who  had  told  me  to  consult  him,
whether  Mademoiselle  De  had  been  recom-
mended any  thing  of the  kind. 'He  assured me


MESMERIC SLEEPWARINO.  203

that  such  had  not  been  the  case,  but  that  she  had
tried  many  other  things  with  no  eflFect.  When  E.  A.
awoke  and  we  told  him  of  his  medical  exploits^  he
was  the  first  to  laugh  at  his  own  oddity :  however,  it

was  an  oddity  at  which  Mademoiselle  De had

reason  to  rejoice ;  for  the  remedy  prescribed  for  her
in  sleepwaking  removed  the  painful  ailment  from
which  she  had  so  long  suffered.

The  above  circumstance  gave  me  more  confidence
in  the  remedial  instincts  of  sleepwakers,  and  induced
me,  on  one  occasion,  to  ask  a  young  lady  whom  I
had  mesmerised  what  measures  she  should  recom-
mend me  to  take  for  subduing  a  pain  in  my  side,  to
which  I  had  long  been  subject,  in  consequence  of  a
blow  received  there  in  a  fall  from  horseback.  The
sleepwaker,  without  hesitation,  told  me  that  I  ought
to  wear  a  perpetual  blister  on  the  part  for  some  time,
and  gave  the  minutest  directions  about  the  size,  ap-
plication, &c.  of  the  irritant.  Yet  I  did  not  have
recourse  to  it  until  I  had  consulted  a  medical  man^
who  assured  me  that  I  could  do  no  better  than  follow

Miss ^'s  advice,  and  that,  had  the  lady  in  question

taken  out  a  diploma,  she  could  not  have  counselled
me  more  wisely.  Yet  the  fair  doctress  was  a  shy  and
delicate  girl  of  sixteen,  who,  when  awake,  was  shocked
at  herself  for  having  touched  on  medical  matters  in
her  sleepwaking.  The  application  which  she  recom-
mended me  was  of  great  service,  and  subdued  the
chronic  pain  from  which  I  had  suffered  incessantly
for  many  months.

Under  the  head  of  Case  X.,  mentioned  in  the

K  6


204  MESMERIC SLEEPWA&ING.

preceding  book,  I  have  related  that  I  mesmerised  a
gentleman  who  was  not  in  good  health ;  and  I  pro-
mised to  detail  some  additional  particulars  respecting
him,  I  now  redeem  that  pledge.  Mr.  W.  had  long
been  in  what  is  called  an  ailing  state.  Without  be-
ing precisely  ill,  he  felt  generally  incommoded.  He
had  no  idea  whatever  of  the  cause  of  his  indisposition,
and  he  had  consulted  no  one  respecting  it ;  having,  as
he  said,  a  particular  dislike  to  medicines  of  all  kinds.
While  he  was  sleeping  mesmerically,  it  occurred  to
me  to  ask  him  whether  he  was  more  cognisant  of  his
malady  than  when  in  his  natural  state.  He  replied
directly,  "  Yes.  I  see  now  exactly  what  is  the  matter
with  me ;  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that  there  is  no
organic .  complaint  My  disorder  is  a  weakness  of
the  lower  intestine,  which  proceeds  from  sedentary
habits,  and  which  can  only  be  cured  by  alterative
measures."  He  then  prescribed  for  himself  a  course
of  the  waters  and  baths  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  and  a
certain  regimen  (which  I  carefully  noted) ;  and  finally
pronounced  with  decision  that,  in  strictly  following
these  rules,  he  should  be  radically  cured  before  the
end  of  the  year.  When  the  patient  was  awake,  I  told
him  all  that  he  had  been  saying  in  sleepwaking,  at
which  he  was  much  astonished ;  and  assured  me  that
the  idea  of  taking  baths,  or  drinking  the  waters  of
Aix,  had  never  entered  his  head  while  in  his  natural
state.  I  urged  him  to  pursue  the  curative  plan  which
he  had  traced  out  for  himself.  This  he  promised  to
do;  and  last  autumn  (I  had  mesmerised  him  in  the
spring  of  the  same  year)  I  received  a  letter  from


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKTNG.  206

him, announcing  that,  by  following  my  advice,  or
rather  his  own,  he  was  nearly  restored  to  health.

Secondly^  The  instinct  of  sleepwakers,  relating  to
all  that  concerns  the  mesmeric  state,  is  one  of  the
•  first  that  seems  to  awaken  within  them.  As  soon  as
they  have  passed  into  sleepwaking,  they  will  indicate
the  best  means  whereby  the  mesmeriser  may  deepen
their  slumber,  soothe  them,  or  remove  any  slight
uneasiness  they  may  feel.

Anna  M — '- — ,  on  one  occasion,  while  I  was  mes-
merising some  water  for  her,  took  the  glass  from
my  hand,  and  said,  **  You  do  not  employ  the  best
method. I  will  show  you  what  you  must  do." She
then  placed  one  hand  on  the  top,  the  other  at  the
bottom,  of  the  tumbler,  held  it  so  for  a  short  time,
and  then  again  applied  her  hands  to  the  sides  of  the
glass,  in  a  very  methodical  manner. Another  time,
being  asked,  in  sleepwaking,  if  she  could  say  how  a
person  present  ought  to  be  mesmerised  for  a  pain
from  which  he  was  sufiering,  she  proceeded  to  show
how  the  operation  should  be  performed,  and  executed
the  mesmeric  passes  as  if  she  had  studied  them  all  her
life. Curious  to  see  how  &r  this  kind  of  instinct
would  extend,  I,  one  evening,  requested  her,  while  in
the  mesmeric  state  herself,  to  mesmerise  a  younger
sister,  who  was  present. She  did  not  hesitate  to  do
tliis ;  and,  placing  her  sister  in  a  proper  position,  pro-
ceeded to  mesmerise  her  in  the  most  skilful  manner.
The  most  singular  thing  is  that  she  used  gestures
•  which  were  perfectly  new  to  me,  but  which  I  at  once
perceived to be  very  effective. Frequently she


206  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

breathed  upon  her  own  hand,  and  then  laid  it  on  her
sister's  forehead*  In  a  short  time  the  little  girl
began  to  be  affected  with  sleeps  when  my  sleepwaker
told  me  that  I  must  aid  her  to  complete  the  work*
She  took  one  of  my  hands,  and  instructed  me  to
mesmerise  with  the  other,  whUe  she  herself  continued
to  mesmerise  with  one  hand.  The  effect  of  this
double  operation  upon  our  young  patient  seemed  to
be  great.  Her  head  was  alternately  attracted  towards
each  of  her  mesmerisers,  and  she  was  soon  in  a  pro-
found sleep.  Nothing  could  be  more  curious  than  to
see  the  two  sisters  sitting  opposite  each  other,  both
with  their  eyes  shut,  and  yet,  by  the  expression  of
their  countenances,  appearing  to  look  at  each  other,
I  now  went  away  to  another  part  of  the  room,  when

Anna  M got  up,  and  walked  to  just  half-way

between  her  sister  and  myself,  but  she  seemed
arrested  there  by  the  attraction  of  contending  forces,
and  so  she  remained,  turning  from  me  to  her  sister,
and  vice  versdy  as  if  she  knew  not  to  which  she  should
go,  till  I  put  an  end  to  this  curious  scene  by  return-
ing to  my  sleepwaker,  and  begging  her  to  awake  her
sister.  This,  however,  she  declared  that  she  could  not
do ;  but  added,  "  The  moment  that  you  awake  me,  my
sister  will  wake  also."  The  event  justified  her  asser-
tion, Anna  M seemed  to  possess,  when  in  the

mesmeric  state,  a  curious  power  of  divining  whi6h
persons  of  the  company,  who  might  happen  to  be  pre-
sent during  her  mesmerisation,  would  be  capable  of
mesmeric  sleepwaking.  In  such  particulars  as  these
I  have  never  known  her  err. It  has  also  happened


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  207

that,  while  she  was  mesmerised,  some  other  person
in  the  room  has  mesmerised  another  patient.  At
these  times  she  would  indicate,  with  exact  precision,
the  degrees  of  sleep  through  which  the  other  patient
was  passing ;  and  often,  when  every  one  else  has  sup-
posed the  slumber  to  be  complete,  she  has  declared  it
was  not  so,  and  was  always  right  in  her  judgments.
I  should  observe  that,  in  her  natural  state,  she  had
none  of  this  knowledge ;  and  once,  when  I  asked  her
to  mesmerise  some  one,  declared  her  inability  to  do
any  thing  of  the  kind.

Thirdly.  The  appreciation  of  time  displayed  by  per-
sons in  the  mesmeric  state  is  remarkable.  I  have  never
known  perfect  sleepwakers  overpass  the  exact  moment
at  which  they  may  have  been  told  to  remind  the  mes-
meriser  to  awaken  them ;  and  yet,  directly  after  re-
turning to  their  natural  state,  they  will,  if  questioned,
make  the  widest  guesses  of  the  time.  I  extract  the
following  from  our  mesmeric  register :  —  "  Anna,  on
being  asked  the  hour,  says  it  is  ten  o'clock:  the
cathedral  bell  strikes  ten  five  seconds  after.  She  did
not  know  the  time  when  the  mesmeriser  began  his
operations,  yet  can  now  tell  correctly  that  she  has
been  sleeping  an  hour  and  five  minutes.  —  On  being
asked  when  she  would  awake,  she  named  half-past
ten ;  and,  before  we  had  heard  the  first  chime  of  the
cathedral,  she  interrupted  the  conversation  suddenly,
saying,  with  a  start.  Ah !  you  ought  to  awake  me
now."  I  used  to  remark  that,  when  this  sleepT^Tiker
was  asked  the  time,  she  did  not  reply  so  correctly  as
above ;  but  when,  as  was  often  the  case,  she  spon*


208  MESMERIC SLEEFWAKIKO.

taneouslj  called  out  the  hour,  she  never  erred.  The
least  degree  of  effort  on  her  part  seemed  to  spoil  the
instinct.

I  now  proceed  to  consider  the  mind  under  mesme-
rism, in  relation  to  its  susceptibility  to  external  things.

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  bodily  senses,  in
the  mesmeric  sleep,  have  been  shown  to  be  as  dead,
an  inquiry  into  the  sensations  of  sleepwakers  may
seem  inconsistent  in  the  highest  degree ;  but  we  may
perhaps  discover,  on  reflection,  that  the  apparent
contradiction  is  only  to  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  our
own  erroneous  notions.  Did  persons  clearly  perceive
the  simple  fact,  that  sensation  is  not  seated  in  the
senses,  but  in  the  mind,  they  would  be  less  astonished
at  hearing  of  a  means  of  sensation  apart  from  the
usual  action  of  the  senses ;  but  there  are  few  —  very
few — who  discern  this  important  truth  (which,  indeed,
lies  at  the  base  of  all  metaphysical  knowledge)  with
such  perfection  as  to  be  wholly  free  from  a  certain
confusion  of  thought  respecting  it.  Thus,  the  pre-
paratives of  sensation  have  been  studied  as  sensation
itself;  but,  as  Sir  James  Mackintosh  has  admirably
observed,  "All  the  changes  in  our  organs,  which
can  be  likened  to  other  material  phenomena,  are
nothing  more  than  antecedents  and  pre-requisites  of
perception,  bearing  not  the  faintest  likeness  to  it:
as  much  outward,  in  relation  to  the  thinking  prin-
ciple, as  if  they  occurred  in  any  other  part  of
matter;  and  of  which  the  entire  comprehension,  if  it
were  attained,  would  not  bring  us  a  step  nearer  to
the  nature  of  thought."


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  209

'  Nothing  can  be  truer  than  this ;  but  our  minds
and  bodies  are,  in  this  life,  so  strongly  identified,  that
it  is  a  hard  matter  for  us  sufficiently  to  discern  the
huge  gulf  between  mind  and  matter,  and  to  per-
ceive that  we  may  throw  in  matter  for  ever,  without
filling  up  the  abyss  of  separation.  God  alone  has  solved
that  dilemma ;  and,  by  attaching  the  external  senses  to
the  soul,  has  built  a  bridge  for  us,  arching  the  chasm
across.  He  has  thus  brought  us  into  conscious  connec-
tion with  matter  and  certain  of  its  qualities,  primary
and  secondary ;  but,  if  we  could  be  made  aware  of  the
same  things  in  another  way,  is  it  not  plain  that  the
great  end  would  be  equally  answered  ?' If  the  soul
be  brought  into  relationship  with  matter  and  its  pro^
perties,  the  means  are  but  of  small  importance,  either
as  regards  their  nature  or  their  number.  So  that
the  visible  universe,  which  is  but  an  expression .  of
God's  ideas,  be  in  some  measure  read  and  compre-
hended by  us ;  so  that  there  be  a  language  estab-
lished between  man  and  his  Creator;  the  particular
types  and  configurations  of  that  language  are  of  no
more  consequence  than  the  forms  of  our  written  or
printed  alphabets.  This  is  not  the  place  to  dwell
further  upon  these  reflections  (to  be  resumed  here-
after) ;  but  the  mere  smatterer  in  metaphysics,  who  has
learned  that  odour,  colour,  savour,  sound,  are  abso^
lutely  only  known  to  us  as  sensations,  and  can  be  said
to  have  no  proper  existence  but  in  ourselves,  should
by  no  means  be  alarmed  at  my  viewing  sensation  in  its
results,  rather  than  in  its  pre-requisites ;  while  the
truest  metaphysician  will  be  the  best  prepared  to  ex-


210  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

amine,  without  prejudice,  a  mode  of  perception
differing  from  the  normal.  There  are,  however,
weaker  minds,  for  whose  sake  I  must  here  expose
a  fiJlacy  which  has  prevented  many  well-meaning
persons  from  even  venturing  to  think  upon  mesmer-
ism. It  has  been  argued,  with  a  show  of  plausibility,
^  God  gave  us  our  senses  for  such  and  such  uses :
is  it  not,  then,  an  impiety  to  say  that  we  can  do  as
well  without  them  ?  Is  not  their  beautiful  contriv-
ance, their  unrivalled  mechanism,  thus  thrown  into
contempt  ?  Shall  God  be  said  to  create  needlessly,
and  to  endow  without  wisdom  ?**  Reasoning  like
this  is  an  d  priori  condemnation  of  mesmerism ;  —
but  is  it  just?  A  child  might  refute  it.  It  proceeds
all  along  upon  false  assumptions.  Does  the  advo-
cate of  mesmerism  assert  that  we  can  do  as  well  with-
out our  senses  in  the  normal  state  ?  Certainly  not
Does  he  any  more  deny  that  our  present  senses  are
exquisitely  adapted  to  that  state  in  which,  being  our
natural,  the  greater  proportion  of  our  time  must
necessarily  be  passed  ?  Far  from  it :  he  acknowledges
this  and  far  more.  He  reaches  a  cause  of  gratitude
to  God  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  narrow-
minded  bigot.  For  what  liobler  purpose,  he  may
ask,  could  a  change  in  our  mode  of  perception  be
permitted,  than  to  show  the  necessitarian  that  the
arrangements  of  the  Almighty  depend  upon  the
almighty  will  alone ;  that  what  is  might  easily
have  been  otherwise ;  and  that  infinite  wisdom  can
vary  its  resources  infinitely?  Believing,  thus,  that
to  witness  a  change  in  our  mode  of  perception  may


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING*  211

be  allowed  for  the  instruction  of  the  sceptic,  he  may
also  conjecture  that  the  privilege  of  beholding  an
improvement  therein  may  be  accorded  for  the  en-
couragement of  the  believer.  He  can  well  imagine
that  the  beneficent  Being,  who  ever  in  the  present
gives  indications  of  the  future,  has  placed  within  us
a  palpable  proof  of  our  high  immortal  destiny ;  and
will  permit  the  soul,  even  in  this  restricted  sphere,
to  view  the  temporary  expansion  of  its  yet  folded
wings.

This  may  be  deemed  too  vague ;  but  to  the  colder
reasoner  I  should  suggest,  that,  in  truth,  mesmer-
ism does  in  no  way  contradict  our  former  experi-
ence :  it  merely  enlarges  it.  We  do  not  learn  that
our  senses  are  not  the  organs  of  sensation  to  us  in
our  usual  state ;  but  we  learn  an  additional  truth  —
namely,  that,  in  another  and  anomalous  condition,
we  find  some  unwonted  medium  of  sensation.  Nor
by  this  are  nature's  established  principles  necessarily
violated,  or  even  infringed.  They  who  believe  that
the  perceptive  peculiarities  of  mesmerism  proceed
(as  Coleridge  seems  to  hint  they  may  do)  from  "  a
metastasis  of  specific  functions  of  the  nervous  energy  **
may  still  agree  to  that  definition  of  sensation,  which
a  great  philosopher  has  pronounced  the  only  one  that
can  be  given,  namely,  "  A  state  or  affection  of  the
mind,  arising  immediately  and  solely  from  a  state  or
affection  of  the  body."  *

It  is  important,  also,  to  remark,  that  the  inform-

*  Brown's  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind.


212  M£SMERIC SLEEPllTAKING.

ation  respecting  external  objects,  obtained  through
the  new  action  of  the  senses  in  mesmerism,  though
sometimes  exceeding,  does  not  at  all  vary  from,  that
which  we  receive  by  the  usual  channels.  Thus  we
have  a  double  witness  to  the  truth  and  reality  of  the
things  around  us  :i^e  feel,  with  Descartes,  that  God
is  not  the  author  of  a  lie ;  and,  far  from  being  led  to
doubt  or  to  under*-value  our  present  organs  of  sen-
sation, are  more  than  ever  disposed  to  confide  in
them :  scepticism  itself  allowing  the  potency  of  evi-
dence which  springs  from  two  separate  yet  concurrent
sources. •  •■

But,  whether  the  preceding  remarks  be  admitted
to  be  just  or  not,  the  truth  must  be  stated.  Mes-
meric sleepwaking  has  its  own  mode  of  perception ;
the  peculiarities  of  which  I  now  proceed,  to  the  best
of  my  ability,  to  represent.

In  the  first  place,  the  mode  of  sensation  in  mes-
merised persons  is  (like  their  mode  of  motion)  of  a
twofold  nature :  the  one  resulting,  as  it  seems,  from
a  species  of  nervous  comihunication  with  the  mes-
meriser,  the  other,  from  the  peculiar  state  of  their
own  nervous  system  under  an  exciting  and  develop-
ing stimulus.  To  discriminate  between  these  two
modes  of  sensation  is  important,  but  by  no  means
easy.  The  intimate  union  between  the  patient  and
his  mesmeriser,  subsisting  throughout  the  mesmeric
trance,  complicates  the  phenomena,  and  renders  them
hard  to  disentangle.  Moreover  there  are  decep-
tive appearances,  which  are  calculated  to  perplex
an  inquiry  as  to  the  exact  medium  through  which


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  213

sensation  is  conveyed  to  the  mesmerised  person.  For
instance  :  —  we  will  suppose  the  mesmeriser  to  place
something  in  the  patient's  hand ;  —  after  a  time  the
latter  can  tell  the  form  of  the  object,  appareTOly  by
the  usual  sense  of  touch.  Now  this  is  in  diametrical
opposition  to  the  fact,  that  pins  thrust  into  the
patient's  hand  excite  no  sensation  there.  How  shall
we  reconcile  the  seeming  contradiction  ?  One  mo-
ment we  see  the  nerves  of  sensation  useless  and
dead ;  the  next,  we  see  them  apparently  acting  as
usual.  All  this  is  very  paradoxical ;  but,  if  we  ding
to  what  we  have  proved^  and  take  some  evident
principle,  thence  educed,  to  guide  us  through  the
darkling  maze,  we  shall  perhaps  find  that  the  oppo-
site poles  belong  to  one  common  orb  of  reasoning,
and  are,  indeed,  the  axis  upon  which  the  whole
revolves.

FirsL  We  have  established,  by  a  series  of  experi-
ments, that  the  nerves  of  sensation,  in  mesmeric
patients,  are  of  themselves  quite  estranged  from  their
usual  modes  of  action.

Secondly.  We  may  deduce  from  this,  that,  if  the
patient  experiences  sensation,  it  must  be,  whatever
appearances  might  lead  one  to  suppose,  by  some
other  than  the  usual  mode  of  nervous  action.
Thirdly.  Facts  come  in  aid  of  this  deduction.
Let  us  observe  a  mesmerised  person  holding  any
thing  in  his  hand,  after  a  command  to  examine  it.
How  unconscious,  how  unmeaning,  is  the  action  with
which  he  turns  the  object  about !  How  palpable  is
his  hesitation,  as  if  the  mere  attempt  to  use  the  ac*


214  MESMERIC  SLEEFWAKING.

customed  channel  of  sensation  were  embarrassing !
Can  we  indeed  affirm,  should  he  correctly  name  that
which  he  holds,  that  it  is  by  touch  he  has  formed  his
judgment  ?  Having  once  proved  that  his  sense  of
touch  is  null,  surely  it  is  wiser  to  conjecture  that  his
tactual  perceptions  now  come  to  him  in  some  other
way.  Agreeably  to  this  conjecture,  1  may  remark
that  my  sleepwakers  have  often  failed  to  recognise  by
touch  objects  which  they  have  at  other  times  seemed
to  distinguish  rather  by  a  species  of  vision. Once

Anna  M was,  for  a  time,  made  to  believe  that  a

piece  of  wood  that  had  been  given  her  to  hold  was  a
piece  of  snow.  Another  time,  an  orange  was  placed
in  her  hand.  She  told  what  it  was,  but  observed,
*^  You  may  think  I  know  this  by  feeling :  it  is  not
so.  In  the  mesmeric  state  I  have  only  one  method
of  knowing  things  ;  and  whether  I  see  them^  smell
them,  or  feel  them,  it  is  all  the  same."*

I  explain,  then,  the  circumstance  that  mesmeric  pa-
tients sometimes  handle  objects,  by  mere  habits  of  mo-
tion ;  —  the  circumstance  that  they  occasionally  recog-
nise objects  so  handled,  by  the  new  perceptions,  which,
as  I  shall  hereafter  show,  ai'e  opened  to  them  in  their
new  condition.

•  This  is  curiously  consonant  with  the  account  which  the
sleepwaker  of  Prevorst  gave  of  her  own  sensations.

"  She  was  earing  some  soup  while  her  eyes  were  shut,  and  she
Aaid,  '  I  can  find  whatever  I  will  upon  my  plate  with  the  spoon
—  I  know  well  where  it  is  ;  but  I  cannot  tell  whether  I  see  or
feel  it ;  —  and  so  with  regard  to  all  other  objects  :  I  know  not
whether  I  see  or  feel  them.' "  —  Die  Leherin  von  Prevorst,Yo\.u
page  152.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  215

Should  this  be  granted,  our  path  to  a  comprehen-
eion  of  the  mystery  will  be  at  least  smoothed  and
prepared ;  and  there  will  be  no  obstacle  to  our  sub-
scribing to  a  proposition,  which  goes  far  to  explain  and
reconcile  the  antithetical  phenomena  of  mesmerism,
namely,  that  the  conditions  of  ordinary  sensation  are
only  restored  to  mesmeric  sleepwakers  through  their
mesmeriser.

In  demonstration  of  this,  I  need  not  re  urge  the
deadness  of  sleepwakers  to  ordinary  sensation.  I  have
only  to  bring  forward  some  singular  proofs,  hitherto
held  back,  that  impressions  of  the  external  world  not
only  reach  the  mesmeric  patient,  when  transmitted
through  the  mesmeriser,  but,  in  such  cases,  are
actually  transmitted  through  the  usual  nervous
channels.

Did  any  one  strike  or  hurt  me  in  any  part  of  the

body,  when Anna  M was  in  sleepwaking,  she

immediately  carried  her  hand  to  a  corresponding  part
of  her  own  person.  Thus,  she  would  rub  her  own
shoulder  when  mine  was  smarting  with  a  blow,  mani-
festing that  the  actual  nerves  of  that  part  were,  pro
tempore^  restored  to  their  functions.  Once  an  incre-
dulous person  came  near  me  unawares,  and  trod
upon  my  foot,  which  was  quite  hidden  under  a  chair.
The  sleepwaker  instantly  darted  down  her  hand,  and
rubbed  her  own  foot,  with  an  expression  of  pain.
Again,  if  my  hair  was  pulled  from  behind,  Anna
directly  raised  her  hand  to  the  back  of  her  head.  A
pin  thrust  into  my  hand  elicited  an  equal  demon-
stration of  sympathy.


216  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

I  have  already  remarked  that,  when  the  mesmer-
iser  eats,  or  drinks,  or  smells  anything,  his  patients  go
through  the  same  motions,  as  if  the  impact  of  the
substances  were  on  their  own  nerves. But  this,  it
may  be  said,  might  be  referred  to  the  simultaneity  of
motion  which  I have shown  to  exist  occasionally
between  the  sleepwaker  and  the  mesmeriser. I  have,
however,  a  very  strong proof  that  the  former has
really  an  impression  on  the  nerves  of  taste,  corres-
ponding with  that  of  the  latter. Three  of  my  sleep-
wakers  (on  whom  alone  I  tried  the  experiment)  could
in  no  way  distinguish  substances  when  placed  in  their
own  mouths,  nor  discriminate  between  a  piece  of  apple
and  a  piece  of  cheese;  but,  the  moment  that  I  was
eating,  they,  seeming  to  eat  also,  could  tell  me  what
I  had  in  my  mouth. Once  I  tried  this,  before  many
witnesses,  on  the  sister  of  Theodore,  with  some  pieces
of  fig  which  I  had  carefully  concealed,  and the  ex-
periment answered  perfectly.

Again, Anna M heard my watch  ticking

when  I  held  it  to  my  own  ear,  though  not  when  she
held  it  to  her  own.  In  the  former  case,  she  assured
me  that  she  heard  the  sound  exactly  as  if  the  watch
were  close  to  her  own  ear.

We  are  then,  I  think,  justified  in  concluding  that,
in  certain  cases,  the  actual  capacity  of  the  nerves  to
convey  impressions  is  restored  to  mesmeric  sleep-
wakers  through  the  mesmeriser,  but  in  no  case
spontaneously.  Indeed,  the  very  thraldom  of  their
will  seems  to  forbid  the  latter  supposition:  and  it  is
not  extravagant  to  suppose  that  the  mesmeriser,  who.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  217

by  facts,  has  been  shown  capable  of  paralysing  the
nerves  of  his  patient,  should  also  have  the  power  of
restoring  to  them  the  conditions  of  sensation.

It  may  not  be  amiss,  however,  to  answer  here  an
objection  that  has  been  raised  by  some  who  have  not
suflSciently  considered  the  nature  of  mesmeric  sleep-
waking.  It  has  been  asked,  why,  if  there  be  such  a
sympathy  between  the  patient  and  the  mesmeriser,
the  latter  does  not  also  share  the  sleepwaker's  sensa-
tions ?  For  one  plain  reason ;  the  one  is  active,  the
other  passive;  there  is  union,  but  not  reciprocity.
The  mesmeriser  is  not  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  the
patient  is ;  and  only  he  who  is  in  the  mesmeric  state
can  appreciate  sensations  in  the  mesmeric  manner.
The  mesmeriser  must  be  considered  as  the  bestower
of  a  stimulus  which  exalts  another  to  a  particular
pitch  of  feeling ;  and  the  patient  as  the  recipient  of
that  stimulus,  which  if  he  were  to  re-bestow,  he  must
fall  back  into  his  old  habitual  state.  Thus  there  can
be  no  re-action  on  the  mesmeriser.  A  proper  view
of  the  relationship  between  the  parties  will  at  once
clear  up  the  diflSculty.

I  proceed  to  show  what  are  the  principal  pheno-
mena of  sensation  which  more  properly  belong  to  the
patient  himself.

First.  In  some  cases,  the  class  of  perceptions,  de-
pendent upon  a  particular  sense,  are  restricted  in
number  only  to  be  increased  in  degree.

Anna  M ,  in  sleepwaking,  ordinarily  heard

nothing  but  my  voice  and  the  voices  of  those  who
were  in  a  certain  contact  with  me ;  but  her  appre-

L


218  MESMERIC SLEEP  WAKING.

ciation  of  such  musical  sounds  as  she  was  made  to
hear  was  much  greater  than  in  the  waking  state.  I
was  in  the  habit  of  singing  to  her  when  mesmerised ;
and,  though  at  other  times  she  cared  little  for  mu-
sic, she  then  evinced  a  pleasure  which  indicated  an
extreme  susceptibility  to  musical  impressions.  She
listened  with  the  deepest  attention  :  as  the  measure
changed,  her  countenance  became  animated  or  serious ;
and  she  marked  such  parts  of  the  performance  as
were  most  pleasing  to  her  by  a  motion  of  her  head
or  by  raising  her  finger.  It  was  remarkable  that  my
voice,  when  I  was  singing,  acted,  in  relation  to  the
sleepwaker,  as  a  conductor  to  other  sounds.  Then,
and  then  only,  she  appeared  to  be  sensible  of  the
most  trifling  noises  in  the  apartment,  and  was  im-
patient of  them  to  the  highest  degree ;  holding  up  her
forefinger,  as  if  to  enjoin  silence,  and  uttering  pro-
longed hushes.  On  one  occasion,  a  person  joined  me
in  singing,  when  Anna  testified  the  strongest  disgust,
making  wry  faces,  and  gestures  of  repugnance.

We  then  tried  the  experiment  of  making  the
person  sing  alone;  but  the  sleepwaker  no  longer
showed  dislike,  and,  on  being  questioned,  said  that
she  heard  nothing.  Occasionally  this  patient  mani-
fested a  slight  agitation  or  oppression  in  the  mes-
meric state  ;  but  these  uneasy  feelings  invariably
passed  away  under  the  influence  of  music.  When
brought  into  "  rapport "  with  other  performers  than
her  mesmeriser,  she  still  exhibited  an  unusual  degree
of  musical  sensibility ;  marking  the  best  passages  of  a
composition  with  so  much  taste,  and  beating  time  so


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  219

accurately,  as  once  to  make  a  musician  suppose  that
she  was  intimately  acquainted  with  bis  art.  She
always,  however,  heard  a  voice  more  distinctly  than
the  piano.  The  conduction  of  the  sound  was  thus
accomplished : —  I  laid  one  hand  upon  the  performer's
shoulder,  while  she  herself  touched  him  with  one
hand  and  myself  with  the  other.  We  have  often
tried  what  eflFect  music  would  have  upon  the  patient
when  awake ;  and  it  was  evident  that  her  musical
feeling  had  passed  away  with  her  mesmeric  state.

Perhaps  I  ought  here  to  record  a  phenomenon,  rela-
tive to  the  sense  of  hearing,  which  spontaneously  pre-
sented itself. Anna  M ,  in  sleepwaking,  had  my

watch  in  her  hand,  in  order  to  tell  the  hour;  but,
disregarding  this,  she  seemed  to  be  amusing  herself
with  the  watch,  alternately  carrying  it  from  her  ear  to
the  pit  of  her  stomach,  when  suddenly  she  exclaimed,
"  This  is  wonderful !  I  cannot  hear  the  watch  tick
when  at  my  ear,  but,  placed  below  my  chest,  I  hear
it."  Other  experiments  showed  that  she  could  also
hear  the  ticking  of  the  watch  when  it  was  held  close
to  her  forehead,  or  to  my  own  ear.  I  should  observe
that,  in  her  waking  state,  she  knew  nothing  whatever
of  the  alleged  transposition  of  the  senses  in  mesmer-
ism, and  that  I  had  not  much  taste  for  developments
in  the  "  cerebrum  abdominale."

E.  A.,  who,  in  sleepwaking,  could  hear  nothing
when  persons  shouted  close  to  his  ear,  did  yet  evi-
dently retain,  in  certain  cases,  a  very  delicate  per-
ception of  sound.  This  was  proved  by  his  being  able
still  to  play  the  flute  with  his  ordinary  precision  and

L  2


220  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

even  more  than  his  usual  brilliancy.  Often,  too,
he  composed  original  airs  during  his  sleepwaking
with  a  great  fertility  of  invention;  and,  though  it  was
not  easy  for  him,  accomplished  musician  as  he  was,
to  display  more  musical  talent  in  his  new  state  than
he  evinced  commonly,  yet,  on  some  occasions,  he
demonstrated  that  his  discrimination  of  sounds  had
attained,  under  mesmerism,  a  higher  development.

First  He  played  on  the  piano,  correctly,  an  air,
which,  awake,  he  played  but  imperfectly,  not  having
the  same  power  of  execution  on  the  piano  as  on  the
flute  — his  peculiar  instrument.

Secondly.  Playing  an  air  on  the  piano,  in  sleep-
waking,  he  adapted  to  a  particular  note  a  new  chord,
which  I  at  once  perceived  to  be  a  great  improvement
on  the  original.  Not  willing,  however,  to  trust  to
my  own  judgment,  I  consulted  a  musician  on  the
point ;  when  he  declared  the  chord  played  in  sleep-
waking  to  be  the  best,  and  indeed  the  very  one  which
was  required  by  the  laws  of  harmony.  Curious  to
observe  whether  E.  A.  would  discover  this  of  himself,
in  the  waking  state,  I  never  mentioned  the  subject
jefore  him ;  and  I  found  that,  unless  sleeping  mes-
merically,  he  continued  to  play  the  air  with  the  erro-
neous chord.

The  second  peculiarity  of  perception  in  the  state
of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  which  it  occurs  to  me  to
point  out,  is  —

A  sensibility  to  influences  which  in  no  way  affect
persons  in  the  waking  condition.

A  prism,  which  I  held  in  my  hand,  and  turned


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  221

with  the  point  towards  the  patient,  produced,  in  two
several  cases,  startings  and  slight  shudderings.

Again,  I  concealed  a  magnet  in  my  hand,  with
such  precautions  that  the  patient  could  have  no
idea of  any thing unusual, unless through  some

development  of  feeling. The  patient  (Anna  M )

started  each  time  that  I  extended  towards  her  the
hand  which  held  the  magnet,  and  exhibited  convul-
sive movements  in  the  hands.  When  questioned
respecting  her  sensations,  she  replied,  "  I  feel  as  if  I
were  beginning  to  be  mesmerised,  but  not  pleasantly
—  I  feel  all  cold. "

Desirous  to  try  if  the  different  poles  of  the  magnet
would  produce  diflFerent  effects,  I  held  the  south  pole
to  the  forehead  of  the  sleepwaker,  when  she  made
sundry  oscillations  with  her  head,  which  at  length
slowly  advanced  towards  the  magnet.  On  presenting
the  north  pole,  her  head  began  to  retreat  gently,  and
with  an  unsteady  motion,  like  that  of  the  magnetic
needle.  The  same  experiments,  tried  upon  two  other
sleepwakers,  gave  the  same  results.  Sometimes,  when
I  have  presented  the  north  pole  of  the  magnet,  the
patient's  head  has  retreated  by  jerks,  as  if  driven
backward  by  successive  shocks.  The  south  pole,  on
the  contrary,  has  always  seemed  to  exercise  a  very
powerful  attractive  force  over  sleepwakers ;  yet,  as  far
as  I  can  judge,  they  dislike  to  be  submitted  to  mine-
ral magnetism,  which,  as  they  affirm,  produces  in
them  disagreeable  sensations.  I  have  known  one
individual,  who  was  sensible  to  the  action  of  a  mag-
net lying  on  a  table  at  some  distance  and  covered

L  3


222  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

by  a  piece  of  paper,  and  who  begged  it  might  be
removed.  I  once  asked  a  sleepwaker  whether  she
could  perceive  any  analogy  between  animal  and
mineral  magnetism,  when  she  replied,  "  There  is  an
analogy  —  but  the  latter  is  of  a  coarser  nature."
Minerals,  in  general,  seem  also  disagreeable  to  sleep-
wakers. Once,  I  gave  a  pair  of  scissors to  Anna

M (then  in  the mesmeric  state),  m  order  to

cut  some  thread  belonging  to  a  work  she  was  en-
gaged in.  Having  cut  the  thread,  she  shuddered
and  threw  the  scissors  from  her.  When  asked  if  she
did  this  because  of  the  old  proverb,  that  "  scissors  cut
love, "  she  smiled,  and  said,  "  In  my  present  state,  I
have  no  such  superstitions;  but  I  threw  the  scissors
away,  because,  when  mesmerised,  I  cannot  bear  to
touch  metal. "  *

The  effects  which  precious  stones  produce  upon
sleepwakers  are  also  curious.  In  three  cases,  where  I
had  the  opportunity  of  making  experiments  of  the
kind,  I  found  a  certain  correspondence  of  sensation,
which  inclines  me  to  believe  that  a  more  extended
observation  might  lead  to  some  certain  and  interest-
ing results.

The  diamond,  when  presented  to  the  forehead  of
a  sleepwaker,  seemed  invariably  to  excite  agreeable
feelings :  the  opal  had  a  soothing  effect ;  the  emerald

*  Caspar  Hauser,  whose  nervous  sensibility  had  been  ex-
alted by  an  unnatural  seclusion  from  the  stimulus  of  external
things,  was  extremely  alive  to  metallic  influences,  and  could  tell,
through  obstacles,  where  a  needle  was  placed ;  pointing  to  the
exact  spot,  and  saying,  **  It  draws  me  here."


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  223

gave  a  slightly  unpleasing  sensation;  and  the  sapphire
one  that  was  positively  painful.  What  is  singular  is
that,  if  the  last-named  stone  was  applied  to  Anna

M *s  forehead,  she  complained  of  its  roughness,

though  it  was  polished  perfectly  smooth,  —while,  on
the  contrary,  on  contact  with  the  diamond,  which
was  cut  in  facets,  she  experienced  a  sensation  of
smoothness.  One  sleepwaker  loved  the  diamond  so
much  as  to  lean  forward  after  it,  when  I  held  it  in
my  hand,  and  to  rub  her  forehead  against  it.  In
general,  however,  I  did  not  touch  the  patients  with
the  gems,  but  held  them,  concealed  in  my  hand,  at  a
few  inches  distance  from  the  forehead ;  and  I  changed
their  order  sufficiently  often  to  prove  that  the  sleep-
waker's  judgment  of  them  was  not  accidental.*

Another  proof  of  the  increased  sensibility  of  sleep-
wakers  is  the  ease  and  certainty  with  which  they  dis-


*  The  following  is  extracted  from  our  mesmeric  diary  :  —
"  Being  shown  several  precious  stones,  Anna  put  her  forehead
towards  them,  and  started,  more  or  less,  at  each.  Some,  she
says,  produce  agreeable,  others  disagreeable  feelings.  Being
asked  if  it  is  because  they  are  cold,  she  answers,  "  Oh  no  !  far
from  it.  Some  are  very  hot,  and  others  scratch  me  as  if  they
would  tear  the  skin  off  my  face.  After  several  experiments,  she
declared  that  the  opal  gave  a  soft  feeling,  but  was  neither  parti-
cularly agreeable  nor  disagreeable.  The  sapphire  was  hot,  and
very  disagreeable.  The  Brazilian  diamond  had  a  pleasing  effect,
as  if  it  were  the  hand  of  her  mesmeriser.  The  emerald  she
made  faces  and  pouted  at,  saying  it  was  not  agreeable.  When
the  stones  were  held  to  her  forehead,  concealed  in  the  mes-
meriser's  hand,  she  knew  them  all  again,  and  gave  the  same  ac-
count of  her  feelings."

L  4


224  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

tinguish  water  that  has  been  breathed  on  or  touched
by  the  mesmeriser.  I  have  sometimes  thus  mesmer-
ised^ as  it  is  called,  a  glass  of  water,  half  an  hour
before  it  was  presented  to  the  sleepwaker,  amongst
three  others,  exactly  similar  and  filled  to  exactly  the
same  point.  The  result  of  one  of  these  trials  shall
be  given,  as  taken  down  at  the  time  by  an  eye-
witness of  the  experiment :  —  "  Four  glasses  of  water

being  presented  on  a  tray  to  Anna  M ,  one  of

which  was  mesmerised,  she  passes  her  hands  over
them  all,  feeling  the  rims,  and  fixes  on  the  mesmer-
ised one.  The  order  of  the  glasses  being  changed
behind  the  mesmeriser's  back,  who  stood  so  as  to
screen  the  tray  from  the  patient,  she  feels  them  all
again,  and  fixes  on  the  mesmerised  water  a  second
time.  Changed  again,  again  she  finds  it,  and  drinks
half  of  the  contents  of  the  tumbler,  saying  it  will  do
her  good. "

This  sleepwaker  seemed  to  have  two  methods  of  dis-
tinguishing the  mesmerised  water  - —  the  one,  as  above
described,  by  running  her  fingers  over  the  glasses ;
the  other  by  carrying  each  glass  to  her  lips,  and
slightly  tasting  the  water  it  contained.  In  the  latter
case,  she  invariably  marked  both  her  knowledge  and
her  preference  of  the  mesmerised  water,  by  taking
a  deep  draught  immediately  on  tasting  it.  When
asked  how  it  seemed  to  taste  to  her,  she  replied,  "  So
agreeably,  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  it"

On  one  occasion,  a  person  who  suspected  that  the
mesmerised  water  was  discovered  through  some
slight  diflFerence  in  the  taste  or  look,  from  its  having


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.  225

been  handled,  tried  to  deceive  the  sleepwaker,  by
presenting,  amongst  the  other  glasses,  one  that  con-
tained the  weakest  possible  solution  of  toast  and
water ;  but  the  instincts  of  the  sleepwaker  were  in
no  way  disturbed.  She  chose  the  mesmerised  water
unerringly  as  before.

Whatever  I  had  touched  she  distinguished  with
equal  certainty,  and  would  only  accept  such  articles
of  diet  as  were  transmitted  through  my  hand.  Once,
when  I  was  giving  her  some  cherries,  a  friend,  who
was  incredulous,  tried  in  every  way  to  place  the
fruit  in  her  hand,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  her
suppose  that  I  was  continuing  to  present  it,  but  she
threw  away  instantly  every  cherry  that  my  friend
had  touched,  making  a  face  expressive  of  dislike.  Is
this,  by  the  way,  more  extraordinary  than  the  acute-
ness  of  sense  by  which  the  dog  recognises  its  master's
property,  or  do  we  only  deem  it  so  because  less
within  the  scope  of  our  daily  experience  ?

But  it  was  not  only  as  regarded  objects  that  be-
longed to  myself  that  Anna  M exhibited  extra-
ordinary powers  of  discrimination.  More  than  once,
the  pocket-handkerchiefs  of  five  persons  have  been
tossed  to  her  indiscriminately,  (sometimes  they  have
been  all  cambric  and  all  nearly  alike,)  yet,  after  they
had  been  jumbled  together  on  her  lap,  she  has  quickly
and  correctly  restored  each  to  its  several  owner.

Occasionally,  this  finer  perception,  manifested  by
Anna  M-  in  sleepwaking,  was,  like  certain  other

of  the  mesmeric  faculties,  continued  forward,  for  a
brief  moment,  into  the  natural  state. I  and  another

L  5


226  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

person  have  presented  the  sleepwaker  with  two
flowers,  or  two  strips  of  paper,  as  nearly  alike  as
possible,  discriminating  them  by  some  little  mark
which  could  only  be  known  to  ourselves ;  —  we  have
seen  her  hold  these  carelessly  in  her  hands,  and
frequently  change  their  position ;  yet  can  we  testify
that,  if  bid  to  remember,  and  asked,  immediately  on
awaking,  who  gave  her  the  articles  in  question,  she
could  give  them  back  to  their  respective  donors
without  hesitation,  though  without  knowing  how  or
by  what  impulse.

E.  A.  manifested  similar  faculties.  On  being
asked  how  he  distinguished  the  mesmerised  water,  he
said,  "  J'y  vois  une  espece  de  lumiere. "

All  this  demonstrates  the  truth  of  Laplace's  as-
sertion, that,  "  of  all  the  instruments  by  which  the
finer  emanations  of  the  natural  world  can  be  de-
tected, the  most  delicate  are  the  nerves ;  especially
when  their  sensibility  has  been  developed  through
particular  causes  *,"  and  I  am  thence  led  to  suggest
that,  instead  of  quarrelling  about  the  exalted  sensation
of  sleepwakers,  we  should  endeavour  to  turn  it  to
account.  Even  should  we  never  succeed  in  fathom-
ing its  principle,  there  is  an  obvious  probability  that
it  may  be  rendered  practically  useful.  If  worthless
as  an  object  of  analysis,  it  may  at  least  be  valuable  as
a  test.  But  it  is  the  nature  of  man  to  insist  upon  a
thing  being  just  as  he  would  make  it,  or  to  have
none  of  it.  We  reject  the  benefit  that  we  cannot
comprehend ;  and,  like  children  crying  for  the  moon,
*  Theorie  Analytique  du  Calcul  des  Probabilit^s.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  227

are  rendered  unhappy  by  seeing  an  object,  however
beautiful,  which  cannot  be  brought  down  to  our  level
and  given  us  as  a  plaything.

Yet,  on  the  Continent,  men  of  science  have,  in
some  instances,  been  wise  enough  to  profit  by  the
extraordinary  perceptions  of  the  mesmeric  state.  It
is  related,  in  "  Die  Leherin  von  Prevorst,"  that  the
sleepwaker,  so  called,  was  able  to  detect  in  certain
stones  a  certain  ingredient  which  always  affected  her
in  a  particular  manner ;  and  that  a  mineralogist  made
much  use  of  this  discrimination ;  subsequent  expe-
riment completely  establishing  the  capacity  of  his
informer.*

Thirdly.  The  organs  of  vision  being  under  quite
other  than  the  normal  conditions,  a  faculty  analogous
to  sight  is  developed  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking.

In  approaching  the  phenomena  that  result  from
such  an  overstepping  of  the  ordinary  limits  of  our
nature,  I  deeply  feel  the  difficulties  that  bar  my  way.
That  persons  can  hear  and  answer  questions  while
in  a  kind  of  slumber  may  be  conceived ;  but  that
they  should  see  with  their  eyes  shut  comes  not  within
the  compass  of  our  faith.  It  is  contrary  to  nature
—  it  is  utterly  incredible.

Even  they  who  behold  the  fact  are,  when  it  is
first  presented  to  them,  incapable  of  reasoning  for
very  wonder. They  perceive  that  the  mesmeric  pa-

*  The  same  sleepwaker  distinguished  between  twelve  different
kinds  of  grapes,  and  their  several  degrees  of  excellence,  astrin-
gency,  &c.  —  Leherin  von  Prevorst,  vol.  i.  p.  81.,  published  at
Stutgart  and  TUbmgen.

L 6


228  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

tient's  mode  of  vision  is  different  from  any  within  the
range  of  their  experience ;  but  what  that  mode  may
be  appears  to  them  a  mystery  unfathomable.

Such  were  my  own  feelings  on  first  witnessing  an
exhibition  of  what  is  called  dair-voyance  in  mesmer-
ism ;  and  I  now  endeavour  to  recal  them,  in  order
that  I  may  sympathise  more  with  the  astonishment  or
incredulity  of  my  readers  over  the  statements  which
I  am  about  to  make.  Should  they  suspend  their
belief  as  to  certain  phenomena  till  they  have  actually
beheld  the  alleged  wonders  with  their  own  eyes,  I
can  scarcely  blame  them  for  a  doubt  which  is,  per-
haps, but  proper  caution.  Rather  must  I  address
them  in  the  words  of  Treviranus,  when  speaking  to
Coleridge  of  mesmeric  marvels,  —  "I  have  seen
what  I  am  certain  I  would  not  have  believed  on  your
telling,  and  in  all  reason,  therefore,  I]  can  neither
expect  nor  wish  that  you  should  believe  on  mine."
Even  they  who  are  most  firmly  convinced  that  mes-
merism has  its  own  mode  of  vision  must  be  content
to  accept  the  phenomenon,  without  having  that  surety
of  it  which  personal  experience  alone  can  give  of  any
thing.  The  mesmeriser  witnesses  the  wonder,  but
does  not  feel  it  in  himself:  the  sleep  waker,  who  is  the
subject  of  it,  seems  incapable  of  analysing  his  new
sensations  while  they  last,  still  more  of  remembering
them  when  they  are  over.  The  state  of  mesmerism
is  to  him  as  death.* He  cannot,  when  he  awakes,

*  I  once  asked  a  young  lady,  who  was  in  sleepwaking,  why,
on  awaking,  she  forgot  all  that  she  did  with  such  apparent  in-
telligence. Her  answer  was,  **  D^  qu*on  est  magneiis^  on
est  comme  mort."


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINQ.  229

reveal  the  mysteries  of  that  great  deep.  His  mes-
meric feelings  are  to  him  as  though  they  had  n^ver
been ;  and  less  favoured,  in  this  respect,  even  than  they
who  have  beheld  him  in  his  unusual  condition,  he
is  forced  to  take  his  own  actions  upon  trust,  and  to
exercise  his  own  faith,  while  he  draws  so  largely  upon
the  realising  faculty  in  others.

It  is  manifest,  then,  that  we  cannot  believe  in  the
dair^voyance  of  sleepwakers,  in  the  same  manner
that  we  believe  and  know  that  we  ourselves  see  with
our  eyes.  It  is  a  fact  which  transcends  our  present
understanding.

To  what  end,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  should  I
state  phenomena  which  will  be  believed  by  few,  and
perfectly  comprehended  by  none?  Because  many
things  that  are  mysteries  are,  nevertheless,  profitable
subjects  of  contemplation.  Whatever  is  beyond  our
actual  state  of  being  is  confessedly  out  of  the  pale  of
empirical  knowledge ;  yet  shall  we,  on  that  account,
banish  the  higher  developments  of  nature  from  our
thoughts,  or  even  from  our  own  scientific  examina-
tion ?  Were  all  our  ideas  confined  to  that  which  we
certainly  know,  the  domain  of  our  intellect  would  be
limited  indeed.  Besides,  by  careful  study,  we  may
always  extend,  though  we  cannot  complete,  our  appre-
hension of  things  above  us ;  and,  by  discovering  their
analogy  to  things  already  known,  bring  them  at  least
nearer  to  our  experience.  Clearly  then,  where  there
is  so  much  room  for  progress,  it  is  our  duty  to  ad-
vance, remembering  that  the  point  where  we  should
abandon  enterprise  has  not  yet  been  decided. In


fidO  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

the  present  instance,  the  objects  that  I  propose  to
myself  are  these :  —  To  show  in  our  present  being
the  elements  of  a  fiiture  existence ;  to  prove  that  our
actual  senses  are  limitations  of  our  percipient  power ;
and  that,  in  proportion  as  the  mind  is  detached  from
them,  it  acts  more  largely,  overcoming  obstacles
which,  by  means  of  our  usual  organs,  it  is  impossible
to  surmount.  It  may  be,  also,  that  the  facts  on
which  I  found  man's  capacity  of  development,  being
supported  by  good  testimony,  may  convince  some
who  have  hitherto  been  incredulous,  and  may  supply
others,  who  already  believe,  with  additional  light  to
guide  them  further  on  their  way.

I  have  already  stated  that  I  have  seen  sleepwakers
descry  objects,  when  their  eyes  were,  to  all  appear-
ance, perfectly  closed ;  but  my  experiments  on  this
head  were  not  so  rigorous,  but  that  it  might  still  be
objected  that  mesmeric  patients,  like  certain  politi-
cians,

"  See  through  all  things  with  their  half-shut  eyes."

I  now  proceed  to  show  that,  in  many  cases,  such
a  supposition  is  untenable ;  and  that  the  mesmeric
sleepwaker  may  have  a  mode  of  vision  to  which  the
usual  conditions  of  sight  are  altogether  wanting.

The  first  time  that  I  mesmerised  Anna  M ,  a

workbox,  which  she  had  never  seen  before,  was  held
before  her.  She  stooped  her  forehead  towards  it,  in
a  manner  that  struck  me,  and  immediately  named
what  it  was.  The  box  having  been  opened,  the
sleepwaker  again  bent  her  forehead  till  it  was  nearly


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  231

parallel  with  its  surface;  then  rapidly  named  the
various  objects  it  contained ;  and,  taking  them  up  one
by  one  in  her  hand,  seemed  desirous  of  examining
them  more  particularly.  But,  to  my  surprise,  she
waved  the  articles  about  before  her,  as  if  trying  in
what  point  of  view  she  could  best  descry  them,  hold-
ing them  to  various  parts  of  her  face  and  forehead,
and  exclaiming,  as  if  perplexed,  "  Where,  then,  art
my  eyes  ?  '*  At  length  she  seemed  best  satisfied,  when
holding  objects  before  her  forehead,  at  the  distance
of  a  few  inches,  declaring  that  she  saw  them  most
distinctly  there.  In  order  to  put  her  assertions  to
the  proof,  I  held  my  watch  before  the  forehead  of
the  sleep waker,  without  descending  it  to  the  level  of
her  eyes.  She  took  it  from  me,  and,  not  lowering  it
in  the  least,  held  it  so  turned  as  that  it  formed  an
acute  angle  with  her  forehead,  immediately  above
the  eyebrow.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  she  thus
presented  the  watch  to  her  forehead,  first  on  the  right
side,  then  on  the  left,  as  if  to  submit  it  to  the
scrutiny  of  a  double  organ.  After  this  she  named
the  exact  hour  and  minute.  The  hands  having  been
altered,  she  found  the  time  with  equal  correctness.

A  poppy  being  held  before  her  forehead,  she  said,
"  I  see  a  red  flower ;  but  I  do  not  exactly  know  its
name."

Remembering  that  an  experienced  mesmeriser  had
told  me  that  sleepwakers,  in  general,  perform  most
readily  anything  which  gives  them  pleasure  in  their
waking  state,  and  observing,  in  conformity  with  this
statement,  that  Anna  M ,  who  was  an  expert


882  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

needle-woman,  took  particular  interest  in  the  work-
box  and  its  appendages,  I  proposed  to  her  to  proceed
with  a  piece  of  work  which  was  at  hand.  She  im-
mediately took  the  work,  and,  holding  it  always  on  a
level  with  her  forehead,  went  on  methodically  with
the  hem  of  the  piece  of  muslin  I  had  given  her.  When
necessary,  she  turned  down  a  new  fold ;  and,  in  every
respect,  performed  her  task  as  well  as  she  could  have
done  awake.  The  work,  submitted  to  female  judg-
ment, was  pronounced  to  be  a  capital  piece  of  semps-
tress-craft, the  stitches  being  even  and  not  one  of
them  dropped.

After  this,  we  often  gave  Anna  M work  to

do  in  the  mesmeric  state,  when  parties  of  ten  or
twelve  persons  have  been  present,  to  witness  her
extraordinary  development  of  vision.  She  conti-
nued to  hold  every  thing  to  her  forehead ;  and  with
her  hands  raised  to  that  level,  in  a  position  which,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  be  diflScult  and
painful,  has  embroidered  delicate  flowers  upon  mus-
lin, and  even  threaded  her  needle,  without  apparent
effort.

As  it  is  my  sincere  desire  to  give  a  correct  picture
of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  I  would  on  no  account
represent  this  power  of  vision  as  greater  than  it
really  was,  or  omit  the  inconsistencies  which  attended
its  exercise.  That  it  was  by  no  means  even  or  con-
stant cannot  but  be  acknowledged,  though  I  am  by
no  means  prepared  to  develope  the  cause  of  its
caprices.  Thus  Anna,  though  giving  incontestable
proofs  of  vision  by  the  forehead,  could  not  be  brought


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  233

to  distinguish  printed  or  written  letters  in  the  mesr
meric  state,  except  on  one  occasion,  when  she  read
her  own  name,  which  I  had  written  in  a  large  hand,
and  held  at  once  before  her  forehead.  It  seemed
to  me  that  her  new  visual  faculty  was  always  in  its
best  condition  when  spontaneously  exerted,  and  that
any  effort  on  her  part,  any  over-anxiety  to  fulfil  our
requisitions,  marred  it  altogether.  I  have  often
asked  her  to  name  an  object,  which  I  have  allowed
her  to  examine  as  she  would ;  but  sh^  has  not  named
it,  though  apparently  striving  earnestly  to  do  so.
Again,  she  has  indicated  other  things  spontaneously
when  it  was  quite  impossible  for  her  to  have  dis-
cerned them  in  the  ordinary  manner.  It  was  when
she  was  sitting  quietly,  and  apparently  forgetful  that
she  was  an  object  of  observation,  that  she  displayed
the  most  remarkable  phenomena  of  vision.  One
instance  however  is  better  than  a  thousand  assertions.
She  was  sitting  with  her  head  so  much  bent  down  as
to  bring  the  upper  part  of  her  forehead  parallel  to  the
wall  of  the  apartment.  In  this  position,  with  her
eyes  closed,  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  have  seen,  in
any  usual  way,  objects  that  were  immediately  fronting
her.  So  placed,  I  observed  her  smile,  and  asked
her  why  she  did so ? "I  am  smiling,"  she  said,

"  because  I  am  pleased  to  see  Mrs. opposite  to

me."  "  You  see  her,  then,  well ?  "  I  inquired.  Yes;
she  has  a  cup  of  tea  in  her  hand."  Upon  this,  the
lady  in  question  adroitly  changed  the  cup  of  tea  for
a  book;  upon  which  Anna  immediately  remarked,
**  But  now  she  has  taken  a  book." The  lady  then


234  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

Opened  the  book,  and  held  it  by  the  two  sides,  spread
out  exacdy  on  a  level  with  the  forehead  of  the  sleep-
waker,  who  said  directly,  "  Oh !  she  holds  the  book
quite  open  by  its  two  ends."

This  experiment,  nether  suggested  nor  in  any
way  conducted  by  myself,  was  interesting  to  me  in
no  trifling  degree,  and  was  convincing  to  all  who
witnessed  it.

Another  singular  circumstance  was,  that  no  one
could  put  on  an  ugly  mask  that  lay  about  the  room,
and  to  which  Anna,  in  her  mesmeric  state,  had  a
great  aversion,  without  her  testifying,  by  faces  ex-
pressive of  dislike,  that  she  was  aware  of  the  circum-
stance. We  have  tried  this,  when  the  sleepwaker
was  occupied  by  other  things,  and  with  every  pre-
caution, of  making  no  noise,  &c. ;  yet  the  result  was
always  the  same.

When  placed  before  a  looking-glass,  she  could
indicate,  more  correctly  than  at  any  other  time,  the
gestures  of  persons  standing  near  her,  and  seen  by
reflection.  I  have  pulled  out  her  comb,  and  she  has
arranged  her  hair  again  perfectly  before  a  mirror,
holding  her  forehead  parallel  to  its  surface.  Being
asked  if  she  saw  herself  with  her  eyes  open  or  shut,
she  replied,  "  Open,  to  be  sure ;"  and,  when  I  reasoned
with  her  on  this  point,  she  replied,  "  I  see  as  if  my
eyes  were  open;  and  so  they  must  appear  to  me
open."  It  is  singular  that  another  sleepwaker  gave
me  exactly  the  same  answers  under  the  same  circum-
stances. I  shall  refer  again  to  the  subject,  which  is
of  metaphysical  importance.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  236

A  gentleman  who  was  once  present  during  a  mes-

merisation  of  Anna  M ,  being  placed  "  en  rapport'*

with  her,  laid  his  hand  upon  her  forehead,  when  she
exclaimed,  "  Why  do  you  cover  my  eyes  ?  "  He  then
touched  her  eyes,  and  asked,  "  What  part  of  your  face
am  I  touching  now  ?  "  The  sleepwaker  seemed  per-
plexed, and  at  length  answered,  "  It  is  a  part  of  my
cheek,  is  it  not  ?  "

When  asked  to  point  out  where  different  persons
were  placed  in  the  apartment,  during  her  sleep-
waking,  she  never  failed  to  do  so,  however  their
respective  positions  might  be  changed ;  leaning  her
forehead  forward  all  the  time,  and  presenting  it  to
each  individual.  At  the  instant  of  recognising  each
person  she  always  gave  one  or  two  convulsive  starts,
as  if  her  forehead  came  in  contact  with  some  invisible
thing.

The  account  that  she  gave  of  her  visual  perceptions
was  suflSciently  confused.  These  are  her  own  words,
relative  to  this  subject,  taken  down,  on  one  occasion,
by  a  friend :  —  "It  is  all  clear  through  my  forehead.
Sometimes  I  see  so  clear  !  But  then,  again,  there  is  a
sort  of  light  cloud*that  comes  over  the  clearness,  and
then  I  can  hardly  see  anything.  I  do  not  see  as  with
two  eyes,  but  here  (passing  her  hand  across  her  fore-
head), with  my  brain.*'

Already,  in  various  accounts  of  experiments,  I  have

mentioned  E.  A ,  a  boy  aged  fifteen,  whom  I

had  opportunities  of  frequently  mesmerising.  This
patient,  of  all  whom  I  have  ever  seen,  manifested  in
sleepwaking  the  most  extraordinary  development  of


236  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

visual  power.  As  I  have  before  said,  he  had  been,
in  childhood,  a  natural  sleepwaker ;  and  I  now  add,
on  the  testimony  of  his  father,  that  he  would  some-
times rise  in  the  night,  take  out  his  flute,  (an  instru-
ment which  he  was  studying  professionally,)  place
music  before  him,  and  play  from  notes,  continuing
to  turn  over  the  leaves  of  the  music-book  correctly,
although  his  eyes  were  closely  shut.  On  one  occasion,
while  his  father  was  watching  him  in  a  paroxysm  of
this  kind,  the  only  light  in  the  apartment,  a  lamp,
went  suddenly  out ;  but  the  sleepwaker  continued  to
play  as  before,  and  was  heard  to  turn  over  the  leaves
of  his  music  until  he  had  come  to  the  end  of  the
piece,  which,  moreover,  he  could  not  execute  without
book.  Thus,  it  will  be  perceived,  there  was  in  this
sleepwaker  a  sort  of  natural  ground  for  the  develop-
ment of  extraordinary  vision;  and  it  was  this  con-
sideration which  led  me,  after  having  heard  the
anecdotes  above  related,  to  request  the  boy  to  submit
himself  to  the  effects  of  mesmerism.  He  consented
to  a  trial,  the  result  of  which  will  show  how  careful
persons  ought  to  be  in  deciding,  from  one  or  two
unsuccessful  experiments,  that  a  patient  is  insuscep-
tible of  mesmerisation. I  had  mesmerised  E.  A

twice  (each  time  an  hour),  and  he  had  shown  no
symptom  of  being  affected  by  any  influence.  I
should not  have made a  third  trial,  but  for  the

following  circumstance : — I  had  thrown  Anna  M

into  mesmeric sleepwaking  before  a  large  party  of

persons,  amongst  whom  was  E.  A . I  think  I

have  every  reason  to  affirm  that  the  sleepwaker  did


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.  237

not  know  anything  whatever  respecting  E.  A ,


not  even  his  name,  nor  that  I  had  attempted  to
mesmerise  him ;  yet,  being  aecidently  near  him,  she
said  to  me,  (as  if  guided  by  that  extraordinary
instinct,  respecting  all  that  relates  to  the  mesmeric
state,  which  I  have  before  noticed  as  characteristic
of  true  sleep  waking,)  "You  should  mesmerise  this
young  man :  he  is  a  natural  sleep waker ;  and  will
become  very  dair-voyanU^^  I  answered  that  I  had
already  tried  to  mesmerise  the  boy,  and  that  I  had
failed  in  my  object.  "  You  should  try  again,"  re-
plied the  sleepwaker,  "  and  you  will  succeed."  But
before  relating  how  truly  this  prophecy  was  accom-
plished, and  its  further  results,  I  must  observe,  in
order  to  remove  all  suspicion  of  Anna  M 's  sin-
cerity, that  in  recommending  me  to  mesmerise  E.

A she  was  speaking  strongly  against  her  own

interest,  and  even  her  own  general  feelings ;  for,  with
a  sort  of  sentiment  that  may  be  called  mesmeric
jealousy,  she  never  could  endure  me  to  mesmerise
any  one  but  herself.  Then,  again,  I  was  endeavour-
ing to  educate  her  powers  of  mesmeric  vision,  in  the
hope  that  she  might  gain  the  prize  offered  by  the
academy  of  medicine,  at  Paris,  to  a  sleepwaker  who
could  read  without  the  aid  of  the  eyes ;  and,  knowing
that  attention  to  any  one  else  must,  in  a  degree,  dis-
tract me  from  this  object,  she  had  every  reason  to
fear  a  rival  in  my  mesmeric  graces.  Moreover,  in
order  to  avoid  giving  her  the  least  uneasiness,  I
carefully  concealed  from  her  my  relations  with  E.
A ;  and  as,  when  awake,  she  forgot  wholly  the


238  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

events  of  her  sleepwaking,  she  never  knew  (as  far  as

I  can  judge)  either  that  I  had  mesmerised  E.  A

at  any  time,  or  that  there  was  any  question  of  my
doing  so.

Having  said  thus  much  in  justice  to  Anna  M ,

(a  precaution  not  unnecessary  in  the  present  hos-
tility to  mesmerism,)  I  proceed  to  state  that,  the  third

time  I  mesmerised  E.  A ,  he,  at  the  end  of  an

hour,  passed  so  far  into  sleepwaking  as  to  be  able
to  answer  questions  without  awaking  —  questions  of
which  he  retained  no  recollection  in  his  natural  state.
On  a  fourth  mesmerisation,  he  manifested  all  the
characteristic  symptoms  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking;
was  able  to  move  about  with  tolerable  ease;  and
began  to  display  those  extraordinary  phenomena  of
vision  which  I  have  prepared  my  reader  to  expect.
These  may  be  divided  into  two  classes  —  namely,  such
as  presented  themselves  spontaneously,  and  such  as
were  developed  during  a  course  of  strict  experiment.

With  regard  to  both  it  may  be  observed  that
there  was  exactly  that  progress  in  their  develop-
ment which  attends  the  education  of  a  new  faculty.
At  first,  the  patient  could  only  descry  the  larger
objects  around  him,  or  such  as  most  interested  him,
or  to  which  he  was  the  most  habituated.  Thus,
though  able,  in  the  early  stages  of  his  sleepwaking,
to  discriminate  between  the  persons  present  in  an
apartment,  and  though  testifying,  in  all  that  related
to  music,  great  powers  of  sight,  (for,  from  the  first,  he
could,  while  mesmerised,  write  out  music  with  pre-
cision,) yet,  for  a  long  period,  he  found  considerable


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIKGk  239

diflSculty in reading from a  book  —  always  com-
plained of  the  smallness  of  the  type,  and  could  rarely
be  prevailed  upon  to  look  at  more  than  two  or  three
words at  a time. Subsequently, his eyes being
always  firmly  shut,  (as  far  as  the  strictest  observation
could  determine,)  he  was  able  to  read  any  number  of
words  in  the  minutest  type  with  perfect  ease,  and  to
discern  small  and  large  objects,  near  or  distant,  with
exactly  the  same  facility  of  vision  which  is  possessed
by  a  waking  person. In  proof  of  this  I  may  mention
that  I  and  the  members  of  my  family  have  seen  him,
when  in  the  mesmeric  state,  thread  a  small  needle,
and  sew  a  button  on his  coat,  and,  again, distin-
guish minute  letters  on  a  seal  which  a  gentleman
showed  him,  and  which  I  could  not  make  out  myself.
At  another  time,  in  mesmerism,  he  played  on  the
flute a  piece  of  music which he had  never seen
before,  from  a  book  that  was  set  up  before  him  at  the
distance  of  some  feet ;  and  once  being  mesmerised
out  of  doors,  and  led  to  a  spot  where  he  had,  never
been,  he  described  all  its  features,  and  indicated  the
form  and  position  of  the  distant  mountains. This
power of  perception, analogous to sight, seemed
principally to reside in the forehead. Whatever
objects he took up to examine he immediately
carried there; and  once,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.
Foissac,  at  Paris,  he,  being  given  a  set  of  eye-glasses
which he had  never  seen when awake, of  eight
different  colours,  shut  up in a  tortoise-shell  case,
unfolded  them,  and  applying  one,  at  hazard,  to  his
forehead,  without  descending  it  to  the  level  of  his


240  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

eyes,  exclaimed,  «  Every  thing  appears  blue  to  me  ! "
at  the  same  time,  boy-like,  imitating  the  gestures  of
a  Parisian  dandy,  and  observing  that  he  should  like
to  show  off  his  pretty  lorgnette  in  the  street.  The
glass  which  he  had  accidentally  chosen  was,  in  fact,
blue.  Subsequently,  he  at  various  times  has  named
the  principal  tints  of  the  eight  glasses  correctly,  when
presented  to  his  forehead  in  any  order.  The  same
result  took  place  when  his  eyes  were  bandaged.  It
was,  however,  remarkable  that  a  powerful  magnifying
glass  being  placed  before  his  forehead  was  not  per-
ceived by  him  to  enlarge  objects,  though  he  read  in
a  book,  through  the  glass,  with  perfect  ease.

Though  the  power  of  vision  was  greatest  in  the
forehead,  yet  at  times,  and  especially  when  he
was  excited,  and  not  in  any  way  called  upon
to  exhibit,  (for  such  requisitions  often  seemed  to
fetter  his  faculties,)  he  seemed  to  see  on  every  side
of  him,  as  if  his  head  were  one  organ  of  visual  per-
ception. This  is  no  exaggeration,  as  the  following
instance  will  show :  —  He  was  once  sitting  on  a  sofa,
in  the  mesmeric  state,  when  a  gentleman  with  whom
he  was  well  acquainted  came  behind  the  sofa,  and
made  all  kinds  of  antics.  On  this,  the  sleepwaker
exclaimed,  "  Oh,  Mr.  D !  do  not  suppose  I  can-
not see  you :  you  are  now  doing  so  and  so  (describing

all  Mr.  D ^*s  gestures) .  You  have  now  taken  apaper-

cutter  into  your  hand,  and  now  a  knife.  Indeed,  you
had  better  go  away,  and  not  make  yourself  so  ridicu-
lous, **  Another  time,  he  was  sitting  at  a  table,
writing  music,  with  his  back  to  the  door,  when  a


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  241

#

-servant  entered  the  apartment,  "  Oh,  Mademoiselle
L  ■ "  !  is  that  you  ?  he  said.  How  quietly  you
stand  there  with  your  arms  folded."  He  was  quite
correct  in  all  he  said.  Directly  after  this  I  took  up
a  bottle  from  a  table  behind  the  patient,  and  held  it
up  to  the  back  of  his  head,  asking  him  if  he  knew
what  I  held.  He  instantly  replied,  "  A  bottle,  to  be
sure. "

Having  mentioned  the  principal  phenomena  of
vision  which  E.  A.  spontaneously  presented,  I  pro-
ceed to  state  those  which  he  manifested  under  strict
experiment.

Well  convinced  that  doubts  would  exist,  not  only
in  the  minds  of  others,  but  in  my  own,  respecting  the
patient's  manner  of  seeing,  so  long  as  there  was  the
remotest  possibility  of  his  discerning  objects  through
any  aperture,  however  small,  between  the  eyelids,  I
studied  to  put  this  out  of  the  question  by  precautions
so  severe  as  to  forbid  imposition,  and  so  varied  as  to
supply  that  accumulated  and  concurring  evidence
which  circumstances  that  contradict  experience  impe-
ratively require.

1st.  I  laid  the  patient  on  a  sofa,  in  bright  day-
light, with  his  face  turned  towards  the  window,  and
made  him  lean  his  head  back  until  I  could  see  com-
pletely under  his  eyes.  When  he  was  so  placed,  I
could  have  detected  the  slightest  gleam  of  the  eye
through  the  smallest  opening  of  the  lids.  I  have
then  given  him  a  book,  from  which  he  has  read  with
ease,  (holding  it  nearly  parallel  to  his  forehead,)
while  all  the  time  I  fixed  my  eyes  earnestly  on  his,

M


242  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

and  yet  could  perceive  not  the  slightest  tendency  in
them  to  unclose.

2dly.  I  laid  the  palms  of  my  hands,  the  fingers
pointing  upwards,  on  the  eyes  of  various  persons,  in
such  a  manner  as  that  the  projecting  parts  of  each
hand  should  exactly  fit  into  the  concavities  about  the
eyes.  These  persons  assured  me  that,  with  their
eyes  so  covered,  they  could  see  nothing  whatever.  I
have  given  them  cards  or  books  in  their  hands,  but
by  no  efforts  on  their  parts  could  they  distinguish
these  objects.  I  have  repeated  the  same  experiment
again  and  again  upon  E.  A.,  in  a  state  of  sleepwak-
ing,  and  never  found  that  the  palms  of  my  hands  in
any  way  impeded  his  vision.  He  could  see  cards,  or
read  in  books,  under  the  above  circumstances,  with
perfect  ease.  I  never  felt  any  motion  beneath  my
hand,  as  if  the  patient  were  trying  to  open  his  eyes ;
nor  did  he  evince  the  slightest  inclination  to  draw
his  head  back  from  the  pressure  of  my  hands.

3dly.  Standing  behind  the  patient,  I  have  laid  my
closed  fingers  over  his  eyes  horizontally,  or  I  have
forcibly  pressed  down  his  lids  with  one  finger  of  each
hand.  This,  which,  when  tried  on  others^  effectually
impeded  their  sight,  made  no  alteration  in  the  visual
perceptions  of  the  sleepwaker.  In  order  to  avoid
repetition,  I  here  state,  generally,  that  the  efficacy
of  the  means  I  employed  to  stop  the  eyes  of  my
patient  was  always  first  proved  upon  the  eyes  of
indifferent  persons.  I  should  remark,  moreover,
that  the  patient  had  no  objection  to  permit  any  one,
who  was  previously  placed  "en  rapport"  with  him,


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  243

to  try  upon  him  all  the  above  experiments.  I  there-
fore usually  engaged  other  persons  to  do  this,  in  pre-
ference to  myself,  as  the  most  satisfactory  way  of  con-
vincing them  that  there  was  no  complicity  between  me
and  my  sleep  waker,  and  of  bringing  the  matter  home
to  their  own  business  and  bosoms.  This  manner
of  proceeding  has  shaken  many  from  their  incre-
dulity.

4thly.  Having  iSlled  a  couple  of  china  eye-glasses
with  wadding,  I,  or  some  other  person,  held  them
firmly  to  the  patient's  closed  eyes  when  in  sleep  wak-
ing. This  also  made  no  difference  in  his  visual
perceptions.  When  the  same  eye-glasses  have  been
applied  without  the  wadding,  notwithstanding  their
perfect  opacity,  the  patient  has  declared  that  he  could
see  the  light  very  plainly  through  them ;  and  that  they
were  so  transparent  that  he  could  not  conceive  why
we  imagined  they  should  prevent  him  from  seeing.

5thly.  I  have  tried  various  methods  of  bandaging
the  patient's  eyes.  I  have  tied  a  broad  and  thick
silk  handkerchief  over  them,  and  then  I  have  held
down  with  my  fingers,  or  the  palms  of  my  hands,
the  whole  of  the  bottom  part  of  the  bandage.  Thii?
method  seems  to  me  as  perfect  as  any.  It  did  not  at
all  impede  the  sleepwaker's  vision.  In  addition  to
this,  (the  same  result  always  ensuing,)  I  have  laid
strips  of  wadding  over  the  eyes  before  applying  the
handkerchief,  and  I  have  firmly  secured  every  pos-
sible interstice  between  it  and  the  cheek  with  cotton.
In  the  presence  of  Dr.  Foissac,  strips  of  diachylum
were  added  to  all  the  above  apparatus,  in  order  to

M  2


244  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

-fasten  down  the  edges  of  the  handkerchief  to  the
cheek;  but  the  sleepwaker  saw  as  well  as  ever.  On
several  occasions  I  bandaged  his  eyes,  adding  the
cotton  and  the  wadding  before  beginning  to  mes-
merise him,  when  he  has  assured  me  that  he  could  not
distinguish  day  from  night.  Then,  having  passed
into  sleepwaking,  he  has  immediately  given  proofs  of
perfect  vision — quite  as^  perfect,  indeed,  as  that  en-
joyed by  persons  whose  eyes  are  open  and  unbound.
Again,  on  awaking,  (the  bandage  never  having  been
stirred  during  the  whole  period  of  his  sleepwaking,)
he  has  found  himself  in  perfect  darkness.  The
transition  was  marked.  One  moment,  drawn  by  the
strong  attraction  of  my  presence,  he  was  following  me
about  the  room,  through  intricacies  of  chairs  and
tables,  with  perfect  ease ;  the  next,  he  was  standing
helpless,  not  caring  to  be  near  me,  and,  if  called
upon,  unable  to  move,  except  with  the  groping  hesi-
tation of  a  blindfold  person.  I  remarked  that  he
did  not  wake  so  easily  with  the  bandage  on  as  when
he  had  no  bandage.  The  action  of  the  transverse
passes  that  I  used  to  that  effect  seemed  modified  by
the  interposing  substance.  The  striking  proofs  of
vision  that  the  patient  gave,  when  properly  ban-
daged, were,  that  he  read  in  books,  and  distin-
guished cards,  their  colours,  suit,  &c.,  often  playing
with  me  at  various  games  upon  them.  I  remarked  that
in  sleepwaking  he  was  quite  adroit  at  the  game  of
cassino,  which  I  had  almost  vainly  tried  to  teach  him
in  the  waking  state.  It  will  be  allowed  that  for  a
person,  even  bandaged  in  a  slovenly  manner,  to  per-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  245

ceive,  at  a  glance,  the  combinations  on  the  board,
would  be  no  easy  matter;  yet  this  he  did  with
rapidity,  completely  bandaged  as  he  was.

6thly.  I  threw  over  the  patient's  head  two  thick
and  large  towels,  which  covered  him  in  front  down  to
the  hips.  Through  these  he  has  read,  holding  the
book  at  an  angle  with  his  forehead,  and  has  distin-
guished cards  with  perfect  accuracy.  This  kind  of
experiment  was  occasionally  varied.  Sometimes  the
sleepwaker  has  been  bandaged,  and,  in  addition  to
this,  a  towel  has  been  thrown  over  his  head ;  but  the
result  was  equally  satisfactory.  This  power,  how-
ever, seemed  to  have  its  limits.  The  addition  of  a
third  towel  greatly  impeded  the  patient's  vision,  yet
even  "thus  he  has  distinguished  cards.  On  one  occa-
sion, a  visiter,  instead  of  covering  up  the  patient's
eyes,  enveloped  the  object  to  be  seen  in  the  folds  of
a  napkin.  The  experimenter,  in  order,  if  possible,
to  mislead  myself,  the  sleepwaker,  and  all  who  were
present,  gave  us  to  understand  that  he  had  placed
one  card  only  in  the  napkin^  (he  had  performed  the
operation  with  his  back  turned,)  but  the  patient  was
not  to  be  deceived.  At  first,  indeed,  he  seemed
puzzled ;  but  even  this  transient  perplexity  elicited  a
curious  proof  that  he  saw  not  only  through  the  triple
folds  of  the  napkin,  but  through  the  back  of  one  of
the  cards.  He  said,  "  There  seems  to  me  to  be  a
Jioe^  but  the  points  are  not  of  the  same  colours
— "  Oh !"  he  exclaimed,  after  a  pause,  "how  could  I
be  so  stupid  !  there  are  two  cards. One  is  the  ace

M  3


246  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.

of  hearts,  the  other  the  four  of  clubs."  He  was  per-
fectly right.  The  four  of  clubs  had  its  face  upper-
most, the  ace  was  laid  under  it,  and,  in  order  to  form
a  five,  the  sleepwaker  must  have  seen  the  ace  under-
neath the  other  card.

7thly.  One  day  I  was  curious  to  observe  whether
my  patient  could  discriminate  colours  or  forms,  on
apparently  flat  surfaces,  by  the  touch,  as  the  blind
sometimes  have  been  known  to  do.  To  this  end,  I  held
an  open  book  over  a  little  round  French  paper  box,
which  had  no  distinction  of  top  or  bottom,  except  that
there  was  a  picture  on  what  was  meant  for  the  upper
side.  I  gave  the  sleepwaker  the  box  into  his  hand,
(holding  the  book  always  so  as  to  screen  the  object
from  him,)  and  asked  if  he  knew  whereabouts  the
picture  was.  He  immediately  turned  it  right  side
uppermost,  and  with  his  finger  pointed  out  the  prin-
cipal features  of  the  little  painting  —  a  shepherdess
sitting  under  a  tree,  &c.  "  Then,"  I  said,  "  you  do
perceive  by  your  fingers."  "  No,"  he  replied,  "  but
I  see  through  the  book.  "  Desirous  of  testing  this
more  perfectly,  I  held  open  a  large  book  exactly
before  his  face,  and,  taking  up,  at  hazard,  a  card
from  a  pack  that  lay  near  me,  I  kept  the  figured  side
concealed  against  my  hand,  until  I  could  turn  it
towards  the  sleepwaker,  immediately  behind  the
book.  Stooping  his  forehead  forward,  till  it  nearly
touched  the  back  of  the  volume,  he  told  correctly
what  the  card  was.  This  experiment  I  frequently
repeated,  with  equal  success ;  sometimes  varying  it.


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  247

by  bandaging  the  patient's  eyes  before  I  held  the
book  before  them.  The  additional  obstacle  seemed
to  make  no  difference.  Sometimes  I  have  placed  a
card,  with  due  precaution,  in  the  midst  of  a  book  which
I  kept  open  only  by  the  interposition  of  a  finger,
holding  the  face  of  the  card  pressed  against  the
leaves  of  the  book,  and  thus  entirely  concealing  it,
I  have  then  held  the  book  upright  before  the  patient,
who  has  bent  his  forehead  forward,  as  usual,  till  it
was  parallel  to  the  cover  of  the  book,  and  has  then
told  the  card  correctly.  What  is  singular  is  that,  if  I
withdrew  my  finger  and  quite  closed  the  book,  the
experiment  failed.  The  sleepwaker  said  that  the
reason  of  this  was  that  the  vibrations  of  the  medium,
by  which  he  pretended  to  perceive  objects,  were  too
much  intercepted  by  the  perfectly  closed  book.  I
should  observe,  once  for  all,  that,  when  I  record  the
sayings  of  my  sleepwakers,  it  is  not  because  I  give
faith  to  them,  but  for  reasons  to  which  I  shall  advert
hereafter.  Indeed,  nothing  can  be  more  contra-
dictory or  unsatisfying  than  the  account  which  mes-
merised persons  render  of  their  own  mode  of  sensa-
tion. For  instance,  E.  A.  told  me  once  that  he  saw
ihrougli  the  book  that  was  held  between  him  and  an
object ;  but  at  another  time  he  propounded  a  long
and  confused  theory,  by  which  he  made  it  appear
that  his  sight  did  not  penetrate  the  obstacle,  but  re-
ceived an  impression  from  certain  rays,  that  did  not
come  to  his  eye  in  direct  lines,  but  were  bent  round
the  edges  of  the  book.

8thly.  Another  class  of  precautions  which  I  have

M  4


248  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

taken,  to  convince  myself  that  the  mechanism  of  the
eye  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  mesmeric  mode  of
vision,  consisted  in  spreading  out  a  pack  of  cards  on
a  table,  face  downward,  (frequently  changing  the
pack,  lest  any  of  the  cards  might,  in  any  way,  become
known  to  the  sleep waker,)  and  in  sliding  a  card,  at
random,  onto  the  palm  of  my  hand,  so  that  its  faced
side  was  never  for  a  moment  exposed  until  I  had
lifted  it  above  the  patient's  head,  when  I  presented
it  at  once  to  his  forehead  or  occiput.  In  the  same
way  I  have  taken  up  a  written  paper,  previously
prepared,  or  a  book,  which  I  have  not  opened  until
it  was  above  the  level  of  the  patient's  eyes ;  and  I
have  held  these  objects  to  various  parts  of  his  head.
The  following  are  the  results  of  observations  made
imder  the  above  circumstances  :  —

The  sleepwaker's  power  of  perception  seemed  to
become  weaker  as  it  withdrew  from  the  region  of
ordinary  sight.  I  have  known  him  read  half  a  page
from  a  book  which  was  held  immediately  above  the
eyebrow ;  and  he  found  but  little  difficulty  in  telling
any  number  of  cards  which  were  held  in  the  same
position.  He  did  not  at  all  like  to  have  objects  held
behind  him;  saying  that  perception  by  the  occiput
was  very  fatiguing,  and  cost  him  an  effort  which  did
him  harm.  It  certainly  is  a  fact  that,  after  he  had  told
things  in  this  way,  he  used  to  complain  of  uneasiness
on  awaking.  Still  he  gave  indubitable  proofs  that  he
could  occasionally  exercise,  by  means  of  the  back  or
other  parts  of  his  head,  a  faculty  analogous  to  sight.
The  following  are  the  most  striking  instances  of  this ;—


Mesmeric  sleefwaking.  249

I  wrote  in  my  pocket-book  (holding  it  above  the
patient's  head)  the  words,  "  Voulez-vous  aller  k
Milan?"  I  then  presented  the  writing  immediately
to  his  occiput.  He  immediately  called  out,  "  Oh !
je  vois  la  le  nom  d'une  grande  ville ! "  and  then,
word  by  word,  he  seemed  to  make  out  the  whole
sentence,  which  he  at  length  repeated  correctly.

On  another  occasion,  I  took  up  a  book  at  random,
and  opened  it  just  behind  the  patient's  ear,  holding
the  book  parallel  to  the  side  of  his  head.  I  had
opened  it  at  the  beginning  of  a  chapter.  His  first
exclamation  was,  "  There's  a  great  deal  of  white  on
that  page."  I  said  nothing,  but  continued  to  hold
the  book  as  before,  when  he  began  to  repeat  some
numbers  that  were  on  the  page,  —  "1425,  1426.**
Then,  without  pausing,  he  read,  distinctly  and  cor-
rectly,  the  title  of  the  chapter,  which  was  as  fol-
lows :  —  "  Scenes  Historiques,  —  La  Main  Droite  du
Sire  de  Giac  (1425,  1426.)"*  He  continued  with
one  or  two  words  of  the  chapter  itself,  but  suddenly
broke  off,  in  a  way  that  was  habitual  with  him,  pushed
away  the  book  and  declared  himself  fatigued.

In  telling  cards  by  means  of  various  parts  of  his
head,  he  liked  to  observe  certain  conditions  which
were  executed  either  by  himself  or  at  his  direction.
His  favourite  mode  of  proceeding  was  to  lift  his  own
hand  above  his  head,  and  to  take  the  card  [from  me,

•  Taken  from  a  work  called  "  Dod6cation,  ou  le  Livre  des
douze." Bruxelies,  1836.

M  5


250  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

which  he  held  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  part
where  I  told  him  to  exercise  his  perception,  observ-
ing that  no  one  ever  put  a  thing  they  wanted  to  see
close  to  their  eyes.  When  I  held  the  card  myself,
and  approached  it  nearer  than  he  liked,  he  always
gave  indubitable  proofs  of  being  aware  of  the  cir-
cumstance, begging  me  to  place  the  object  farther
off.  Sometimes,  when  he  found  a  difficultv  in  ascer-
taining  the  card,  he  would  beg  me  to  breathe  on  it ;
and,  when  I  had  done  so,  he  would  tell  it  directly.
At  other  times,  he  would  hold  the  card  horizontally
above  his  head ;  and  then,  without  stirring  the  centre
of  the  card  from  its  place,  would  dip  down  first  one
end  and  then  the  other,  like  the  two  extremities  of  a
see-saw.  This  he  called  "  Le  moyen  electrique. "
He  was  generally  successful  in  telling  cards  in  this
manner,  sometimes  on  the  first  operation,  sometimes
after  two  or  three  repetitions  of  it.

Occasionally  I  have  placed  the  patient's  own  hand
on  a  table  with  the  palm  uppermost,  and  have  glided
onto  it  a  card  drawn  at  random  from  the  pack,  with
the  face  downward.  Then  I  have  told  him  to  what
part  of  his  head  he  should  lift  the  card ;  but  it  has
often  happened  that,  while  in  the  act  of  conveying
the  card  (the  back  always  uppermost),  he  has  said,
**  I  need  not  trouble  myself  to  take  the  card  any  far-
ther, for  I  know  already  what  it  is."  On  these
occasions  he  was  sure  to  be  right;  and,  notwithstand-
ing his  assertions  to  the  contrary,  I  was  by  this,  and
other  minute  circumstances,  led  to  imagine  that  his
whole  nervous  system  shared  something  of  the  per-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  251

cipient  faculty  which  more  peculiarly  manifested
itself  in  the  forehead.  His  own  account  of  this  was,
that  he  received  perceptions  through  the  motions  of
a  fluid,  which  was  conducted  by  the  brain  generally,
but  was  transmitted  with  the  greatest  facility  through
the  orbits  of  the  eyes  and  the  region  immediately
above  them.  He  declared  that  the  ball  of  the  eye
had  no  share  in  the  production  of  his  mesmeric  vision,
but  that  the  impression  was  made  direct  upon  the
brain;  moreover,  that  the  sensations  caused  in  him
by  the  motions  of  the  fluid  resembled  those  excited
by  light.  When  cards,  &c.,  were  held  behind  his
head,  he  rarely  distinguished  the  whole  object  at
once ;  but  (as  in  the  case  of  a  card,  for  instance)  he
would  first  name  the  suit  and  colour,  then  count  the
pips  one  by  one,  and,  finally,  name  the  whole  card.
When  questioned  (not  by  myself,  but  by  a  person
who  took  interest  in  my  experiments)  why  he  did  not
tell  the  object  at  once,  he  replied,  "  The  light  that
seems  to  strike  upon  it  falls  partially,  and  first  I  see
one  part  of  the  card,  then  another."

9thly.  I  have  been  making  still  larger  and  larger
demands  upon  the  belief  of  my  reader,  and  now  I  am
about,  perhaps,  to  revolt  him  altogether ;  but,  having
once  undertaken  to  give  a  faithful  relation  of  that
which  I  have  witnessed,  can  I  draw  back  from  the
accomplishment  of  my  task?  No;  while  conscious
that  I  only  speak  the  strictest  truth,  I  am  prepared
even  to  have  that  truth  doubted.  Time  will  "  bring
in  its  revenges."


M 6


^52  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

Remembering  that  E.  A— — ,  on  his  father's  tes-'
timony,  had,  in  natural  sleepwaking,  seemed  to  per-
ceive objects  in  total  darkness,  I  was  curious  to  ascer-
tain whether,  in  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  he  would
manifest  a  similar  phenomenon  of  sensation.  I  there-
fore, having  mesmerised  him,  took  him  with  me  into
a  dark  press  or  closet,  of  which  I  employed  a  friend
to  hold  to  the  door,  in  such  a  manner  as  that  no  ray  of
light  should  penetrate  through  crevice  or  keyhole.
Then,  like  the  hero  of  "  The  Curse  of  Kehama,"

"  I  open'd  my  eyes  and  I  closed  them,
And  the  blackness  and  blank  were  the  same."

My  utmost  efforts  to  see  my  hand  only  produced
tliose  sparks  and  flashes  which  waver  before  the  eye
in  complete  obscurity.  Having  thus  ascertained  the
perfect  darkness  of  the  closet,  I  drew  a  card  at  hazard,
from  a  pack  with  which  I  had  provided  myself,  and
presented  it  to  the  sleepwaker.  He  said  it  was  so
and  so.  I  repeated  this  to  my  friend,  whom  I  then
told  to  open  the  door.  The  admission  of  light  es-
tablished the  correctness  of  the  sleepwaker :  it  was
the  card  he  had  named.  The  experiment  repeated
four  times  gave  the  same  satisfactory  result.  This
peculiar  development  of  vision  was,  like  the  other
faculties  of  the  sleepwaker,  capable  of  improvement
through  exercise.  At  first,  he  seemed  unable  to  read
in  the  dark ;  then,  like  a  person  learning  the  alphabet,
he  came  to  distinguish  large  single  letters,  which  I
had  printed  for  him  on  card ;  and  at  length  he  could
make  out  whole  sentences  of  even  small  print  While


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  253

thus  engaged  in  deciphering  letters,  or  in  ascertaining
cards,  the  patient  always  held  one  of  my  hands,  and
sometimes  laid  it  on  his  brow,  affirming  that  it  in-*
creased  his  clair-voyance. He  would  also  beg  me  to
breathe  upon  the  objects  which  he  desired  to  see.
He  used  to  declare  that,  the  more  complete  the  dark-
ness was,  the  better  he  could  exercise  his  new  mode
of  perception ; asserting  that,  when  in  the  dark,  he
did  not  come  to  the  knowledge  of  objects  in  the  same
manner  as  when  he  was  in  the  light :  "  Quand  je  suis
dans  Tobscurite,"  he  said,  "  il  y  a  une  lumiere  qui
sort  de  mon  cerveau, et  qui  tappe  justement  sur
Tobjet ;  tandis que, dans la lumiere,  T impression
monte  depuis  Tobjet  jusqu'a  mon  cerveau." Often,
when  I  could  not  see  a  ray  of  light,  he  used  to  com-
plain that  the  closet  was  not  dark  enough,  and,  in
order  to  thicken  the  obscurity,  he  would  wrap  up
his  head in a  dressing-gown which  hung  in the
closet. At  other  times  he  would  thrust  his  head  into
the  remotest  corner  of  the  press. His  perception  of
colours,  when  exercised  in  obscurity,  sustained  but
little  alteration. He  has  named  correctly  the  different
tints  of  a  set  of  coloured  glasses. It  was,  however,
worthy  of  remark  that  he  was  apt  to  mistake  between
the  harmonic  colours,  green  and  red,  not  only  when
he  was  in  the  dark,  but  when  his  eyes  were  ban-
daged.

Many  persons  can  bear  testimony  to  the  accuracy  of
the  above  experiments  ;  and  I  refer  to  the  Appendix
for  proofs  that  I  sought  for  witnesses  and  invited  scru-
tiny, feeling  that  such  things  as  I  had  to  narrate  could
scarcely  be  credited  on  the  word  of  a  single  person*


@54  AfESMERlC  SLEEPWAKINO.

Desirous  of  neither  exaggerating  nor  detracting
from  the  powers  of  mesmeric  vision,  I  subjoin  a  few
general  remarks  upon  what  I  observed  of  its  develop-
ment in  the  case  of  E.  A ,  begging  the  reader  at

the  same  time  to  remark  the  coincidence  between  the
feelings of this sleep waker and of Mademoiselle

M . Like  the  latter,  he  declared  that  he  was  not

always  "  i '  the  vein  "  to  exercise  his  faculty,  and  that
it  was  a  power  which  came  and  went  He  would  some-
times say  to  me,  "  Do  not  think  that  I  can  always  see
a  thing  when  I  desire  it ;  on  the  contrary,  the  more
I  wish  the  less  I  can  do."  In  conformity  with  this,
I  observed  that  he  always  did  things  best  when  sum-
moned to  them  without  preparation,  without  any  idea
of  difficulty  being  raised  in  his  mind.  It  was  also
evident  that  he  did  not  like  being  experimented
upon,  and  hence  I  was  obliged  to  use  a  little  manage-
ment with  him,  in  order  to  make  it  appear  that  he
was  acting  without  constraint.  Very  often  it  hap-
pened that  he  would  seem  stupid,  and  unable  to  per-
ceive a  single  thing,  when,  all  at  once,  the  power
would,  as  it  were,  descend  upon  him ;  and  he  would
suddenly  read  a  whole  page  from  a  book,  or  tell  five  or
six  cards  running.  In  the  latter  case,  he  was  not  ac-
customed to  name  the  cards  separately,  as  he  looked  at
them,  but  afterwards,  from  memory.  The  first  time  he
did  this,  I  thought  he  did  not  know  the  cards.  I  showed
him  one,  and  he  said,  without  telling  what  it  was,
**  Now  show  me  another."  This  also  was  put  aside,
and  so  on  to  five ;  when  suddenly,  to  my  no  small
astonishment^  he  repeated  from  memory  the  whole


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  255

five,  correctly  in  their  order.  This  was  one  of  his
self-originated  caprices.  Another  was,  that  he  would
occasionally  refuse  to  tell  a  card  which  he,  however,
manifestly  knew.  That  he  did  so  I  discovered  in  the
following  manner  :  —  He  had  refused  to  tell  a  card,
saying,  "  I  know  it,  however."  "  Indeed,"  I  replied,
"  I  doubt  that."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  ask  me  what
the  card  is,  as  soon  as  I  awake.  Impress  on  my  mind
that  I  am  to  remember  it  then,  and  I  promise  you
then  to  tell  it  you."  He  kept  his  word  exactly.  It
is  not  to  be  supposed,  however,  but  that,  by  exercising
my  influence  over  the  will  of  the  sleepwaker,  I  could
at  any  time  compel  him  to  execute  whatever  was  in
the  compass  of  his  ability ;  but  I  preferred  allowing
his  mesmeric  character  to  develope  itself  sponta-
neously. By  pursuing  a  similar  course  with  all  my
sleepwakers,  I  was  enabled  to  ascertain  that  the  mes-
meric state,  though  broadly  marked,  has,  in  addition
to  its  striking  and  invariable  characteristics,  slight
shades  of  difference  which  individualise  it  in  the
individual  cases.  These  generally  consist  in  some
little  caprice,  or,  rather,  odd  development  of  sensitive-
ness. For  instance,  E.  A could  never  endure

spades  amongst  the  cards  I  showed  him,  and  Theo-
dore's sister  shuddered  and  showed  marked  dislike  if
wadding  were  presented  to  her,  even  in  a  box.

I  have  also  remarked  that  sleepwakers,  when  once
disturbed  by  the  presence  of  objects  that  influence
them  disagreeably,  become  indisposed  to  a  further
exertion  of  their  faculties.  Any  thing  like  a  doubt  of
their  sincerity  will  also  distress  them  exceedingly.


256  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKIN6.

and  obstruct  the  exercise  of  their  powers.  Moreover,
they  display  extraordinary  penetration  in  discovering
which  of  the  persons  around  them  entertain  feelings
of  incredulity  or  suspicion ;  and,  should  they  have  to
encounter  a  large  amount  of  unbelief  and  hostility  to
mesmerism,  they  will  become  reserved  and  irritable,
and  will  fail  in  everything  they  undertake. Thus  I

have  known  E.  A ,  after  having  told  a  card  held

behind  a  book,  seem  quite  incapable  of  repeating
the  effort,  from  the  moment  that  a  certain  person,
who  .  was  sceptical  about  mesmerism,  entered  the
apartment.  I  found,  too,  that  the  sensibility  of  the
sleepwaker  might  be  exhausted  by  a  multiplicity  of
experiments,  or  their  too  rapid  repetition.  Some-
times^ after  having  named  many  objects  correctly,
he  would  begin  to  make  mistakes,  and  evidently  to
guess  instead  of  to  perceive.  At  other  moments,  he
would  push  impatiently  away  from  him  the  cards,
books,  &c.  that  were  presented  to  him,  and  exclaim,
**  Maintenant  je  ne  puis  plus."  Again,  when  allowed
to  remain  quiet  for  awhile,  he  would  recover  his
clair^voyance^  in  the  same  manner  that  the  nervous
energy  of  persons  in  the  normal  state,  when  impaired
through  over-excitement,  returns  to  its  pristine  func-
tions after  an  interval  of  repose.  That  my  own  state
of  mind,  or  body,  or  both,  influenced  the  sleepwaker,
it  was  impossible  to  doubt.  Nor  can  this  seem  sur-
prising, when  it  is  considered  that  I  was  the  deposi-
tory and  the  dispenser  of  the  agency  which  threw  the
patient  into  the  condition  of  clair-voyance.  I  observed
that  on  days  when  my  thoughts  were  pre-occupied,  or


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  257

my  health  a  little  out  of  order,  E.  A ,  in  the  mes-
meric state,  was  dull,  spiritless,  and  disinclined  ta
exertion.  The  variations  of  the  atmosphere  seemed
also  to  affect  him.  In  dry  clear  weather  his  mes-*
meric  faculties  were  best  developed ;  on  damp  misty
days  they  were  less  alert ;  and  when  thunder-storms
were  passing  they  were  singularly  disordered.  Mes-
meric passes,  renewed  at  intervals  during  the  period
of  sleepwaking,  were,  under  all  circumstances,  favour-
able to  the  improvement  or  the  maintaining  of  the
patient's  clair-voyance.

It  is  absolutely  essential  that  the  experimentalist  in
mesmerism  should  be  acquainted  with  particulars
such  as  the  above,  and  should  inform  himself  of  all
the  conditions  under  which  mesmeric  sleepwaking
is  either  promoted  or  impeded.  This  has  been  too
much  forgotten.  Many  failures,  which  have  stamped
mesmerism  as  an  imposition,  may  be  attributed,  I  am
convinced,  to  the  action  of  disturbing  causes,  or  the
absence  of  those  circumstances  which  are  requisite  to
ensure  success.  That  this  has  not  been  acknowledged
on  all  hands  is,  perhaps,  as  much  the  fault  of  mesmer-
isers  themselves  as  of  their  opponents.  The  former,
proud  of  the  faculties  of  their  patients,  do  not  like  to
admit  that  these  faculties  are  variable  and  liable  to  a
number  of  restrictions.  They  therefore  fail  to  fore-
warn those  whom  they  invite  to  witness  their  pro-
ceedings that  the  whole  exhibition  may  chance  to  be
a  failure,  and  that  the  clair-voyant  of  to-day  may  be
nothing  remarkable  to-morrow.  What  is  the  conse-
quence of  this  mistaken  disingenuousness  ?  Even  they,


258  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

■

who,  if  duly  advertised  of  the  true  state  of  things,
would  be  the  first  to  acquiesce  in  the  necessities  of  the
case,  are  revolted  by  finding  a  discrepancy  between
the  performance  and  the  promise  — the  fact  and  their
expectation  of  the  fact.  Mesmerisers,  then,  cannot
be  too  careful  in  stating  all  the  drawbacks  to  their
success ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  every  person  should,
in  all  fairness  concede  to  mesmeric  experiments
the  same  privilege  which  is  accorded  to  all  others,
namely,  a  precognition  of  those  causes  which  may
render  them  difficult  or  impossible  to  be  repeated.
At  present,  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  never  was
any  subject  capable  of  physical  experiment  submitted
to  such  unjust  requisitions  as  that  of  mesmerism.  It
has  been  expected  to  give  the  same  results  at  all  times
and  under  all  circumstances.  The  truth,  however,
is  that  mesmeric  sleepwaking  does  not  only  present
different  degrees  in  different  persons,  but  in  the  same.
The  patient  may  at  one  time  be  mesmerised,  but  not
to  dair-voyance ;  at  another  he  may  display  the  most
admirable  faculties  of  the  mesmeric  state.

Having  ascertained,  in  this  and  the  previous  case,
that  persons  under  the  mesmeric  conditions  could
exercise  a  faculty  analogous  to  sight,  without  the
intervention  of  the  ordinary  apparatus  of  vision,  I
was  desirous  still  further  to  inquire  how  far  the  optic
nerve  played  a  part  in  this  development  of  the  sen-
tient powers.  In  order  to  solve  this  question,  it  ap-
peared to  me  essential  to  mesmerise  a  person  in
whom  the  optic  nerves  were  inefficient  or  destroyed.
Should  such  a  person  be  found  to  see  in  the  mes-


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKINO.  259

meric  state,  it  would  thenceforth  be  evident  that  man
might  possibly,  in  certain  states,  exhibit  a  perception
of  objects  of  sight  which  could  have  nothing  in
common  with  the  system  of  ordinary  vision.

Soon  after  the  idea  had  arisen  in  my  mind,  ac-
cident threw  in  my  way  a  lad  of  nineteen  years  of
age,  a  Swiss  peasant,  who  for  three  years  had  nearly
lost  the  faculty  of  sight.  His  eyes  betrayed  but  little
appearance  of  disorder ;  and  the  gradual  decay  of
vision  which  he  had  experienced  was  attributed  to
a  paralysis  of  the  optic  nerve,  resulting  from  a
scrofulous  tendency  in  the  constitution  of  the  patient.
The  boy,  whom  I  shall  call  by  his  christian  name  of
Johann,  was  intelligent,  mild- tempered,  extremely
sincere,  and  extremely  unimaginative.  He  had  never
heard  of  mesmerism  till  I  spoke  of  it  before  him,  and
I  then  only  so  far  enlightened  him  on  the  subject  as  to
tell  him  that  it  was  something  which  might,  perhaps,
benej&t  his  sight.  At  first  he  betrayed  some  little
reluctance  to  submit  himself  to  experiment,  asking
me  if  I  were  going  to  perform  some  very  painful
operation  upon  him ;  but,  when  he  found  that  the
whole  affair  consisted  in  sitting  quiet,  and  letting  me
hold  his  hands,  he  no  longer  felt  any  apprehension.

Before  beginning  to  mesmerise,  I  ascertained,
with  as  much  precision  as  possible,  the  patient's
degree  of  blindness.  I  found  that  he  yet  could  see
enough  to  perceive  any  large  obstacle  that  stood  in
his  way.  If  a  person  came  directly  before  him,  he
was  aware  of  the  circumstance,  but  he  could  not  at
all  distinguish  whether  the  individual  were  man  or


260  MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKING.

woman.  I  even  put  this  to  the  proof.  A  lady  of  our
society  stood]  before  him,  and  he  addressed  her  as
"meinherr"  (sir).  In  bright  sunshine,  he  could
see  a  white  object,  or  the  colour  scarlet,  when  in  a
considerable  mass,  but  made  mistakes  as  to  the  other
colours.  Between  small  objects  he  could  not  at  all
discriminate.  I  held  before  him  successively  a  book,
a  box,  and  a  bunch  of  keys,  and  he  could  not  dis-
tinguish between  them.  In  each  case  he  saw  some-
thing, he  said,  like  a  shadow,  but  he  could  not  tell
what.  He  could  not  read  one  letter  of  the  largest
print  by  means  of  eyesight ;  but  he  was  very  adroit  in
reading  by  touch,  in  books  prepared  expressly  for  the
blind,  running  his  fingers  over  the  raised  characters
with  great  rapidity,  and  thus  acquiring  a  perception
of  them.  Whatever  trifling  degree  of  vision  he  pos-
sessed could  only  be  exercised  on  very  near  objects :
those  which  were  at  a  distance  from  him  he  perceived
not  at  all.  I  ascertained  that  he  could  not  see  a
cottage  at  the  end  of  our  garden,  not  more  than  a
hundred  yards  off*  from  where  we  were  standing.

These  points  being  satisfactorily  proved,  I  placed
my  patient  in  the  proper  position,  and  began  to  mes-
merise. Five  minutes  had  scarcely  elapsed  when  I
found  that  I  produced  a  manifest  effect  upon  the  boy.
He  began  to  shiver  at  regular  intervals,  as  if  affected
by  a  succession  of  slight  electric  shocks.  By  degrees
this  tremour  subsided,  the  patient's  eyes  gradually
closed,  and  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  replied
to  an  inquiry  on  my  part,  "  Ich  schlafFe,  aber  nicht
ganz  tief." (I  sleep,  but  not  soundly.) Upon  this


MESMERIC SLEEPWAIKINGF,  26l

I  endeavoured  to  deepen  the  patient's  slumber  by
the  mesmeric  passes,  when  suddenly  he  exclaimed,
his  eyes  being  closed  all  the  time,  "  I  see  !  — I  see  your
hand  !  I  see  your  head."  In  order  to  put  this  to  the
proof,  I  held  my  head  in  various  positions,  which  he
followed  with  his  finger :  again,  he  told  me  accurately
whether  my  hand  was  shut  or  open.  "But,"  he
said,  on  being  further  questioned,  "  I  do  not  see  dis-
tinctly. I  see,  as  it  were,  sunbeams  (sonnen  strahlen)
which  dazzle  me."  " Do  you  think,"  I  asked,  "that
mesmerism  will  do  you  good  ?  "  "  Ja  freilich"  (yes
certainly)  he  replied:  "repeated  often  enough  it
would  cure  me  of  my  blindness."

Afraid  of  fatiguing  my  patient,  I  did  not  trouble
him  with  experiments ;  and,  his  one  o'clock  dinner
being  ready  for  him,  I  dispersed  his  magnetic  sleep.
After  he  had  dined  I  took  him  into  the  garden.  As
we  were  passing  before  some  beehives  he  suddenly
stopped,  and  seemed  to  look  earnestly  at  them :  —
"  What  is  it  you  see  ?  "  I  asked.  "  A  row  of  bee-
hives," he  replied  directly,  and  continued,  "  Oh  !
this  is  wonderful !  I  have  not  seen  such  things  for
three  years."  Of  course  I  was  extremely  surprised ;
for,  though  I  had  imagined  that  a  long  course  of  mes-
merisation  might  benefit  the  boy,  I  was  entirely  un-
prepared for  so  rapid  an  improvement  in  his  vision*
My  chief  object  had  been  to  develop  the  faculty  of
sight  in  sleepwaking ;  and  I  can  assure  my  readers
that  this  increase  of  visual  power  in  the  natural  state
was  to  me  a  kind  of  miracle,  as  astonishing  as  it  was
unsought. My  poor  patient  was  in  a  state  of  abso-


262  MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.

lute  enchantment.  He  grinned  from  ear  to  ear,  and
called  out,  "  Das  ist  prachtig ! "  (That  is  charming.)
Two  ladies  now  passed  before  us,  when  he  said,  "  Da
sind  zwei  frauenzimmer  ! "  (There  go  two  ladies.)
"  How  dressed  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Their  clothes  are  of  a
dark  colour,"  he  replied.  This  was  true.  I  took  my
patient  to  a  summer-house  that  commanded  an  ex-
tensive prospect.  I  fear  almost  to  state  it,  but,  never-
theless, it  is  perfectly  true,  that  he  saw  and  pointed
out  the  situation  of  a  village  in  the  valley  below  us.
I  now  brought  Johann  back  to  the  house,  when,  in
the  presence  of  several  members  of  my  family,  he
recognised,  at  first  sight,  several  small  objects,  (a
flower-pot,  I  remember,  amongst  other  things,)  and
not  only  saw  a  little  girl,  one  of  our  farmer's  children,
sitting  on  the  steps  of  a  door,  but  also  mentioned  that
she  had  a  round  cap  on  her  head.  In  the  house  I
showed  Johann  a  book,  which  it  will  be  remembered
he  could  not  distinguish  before  mesmerisation,  and  he
named  the  object.  But,  though  making  great  efforts,  he
could  not  read  one  letter  in  the  book.  Having  ascer-
tained this,  I  once  more  threw  Johann  into  the
mesmeric  state,  with  a  view  to  discovering  how  far  a
second  mesmerisation  would  strengthen  his  natu-
ral eyesight  As  soon  as  I  had  awaked  him,  at
the  interval  of  half  an  hour,  I  presented  him  with
the  same  book,  (one  of  Marryat's  novels,)  when  be
accurately  told  me  the  larger  letters  of  the  title-page,
which  were  as  follow  :  —  "  Outward  Bound.  "
Johann,  belonging  to  an  institution  of  the  blind,
situated  at  some  distance  from  our  residence,  I  had,


MESMERIC SLEEPWAKING.  263

unhappily,  only  the  opportunity  of  mesmerising  him
three  times  subsequently  to  the  above  successful
trial.  The  establishment,  also,  of  which  he  was  a
member,  changed  mastei's;  and,  its  new  director
having  prejudices  on  the  score  of  mesmerism,  there
were  diflSculties  purposely  thrown  in  the  way  of
my  following  up  that  which  I  had  so  auspiciously
begun.

The  following  is  the  general  result  of  my  after
experiments:  —

On  first  passing  into  the  mesmeric  state,  Johann
always  spoke  of  a  kind  of  internal  light,  which  he
compared  to  sunbeams,  diffusing  itself  over  the
region  of  the  forehead.

Whenever  I  pointed  the  tips  of  my  fingers  towards
his  closed  eyes,  at  the  distance  of  about  two  inches,
with  a  quick  darting  motion,  he  had  the  sensation  of
a  flashing  light,  and  sparks  of  fire  passing,  as  it  were,
before  him.

Being  led  up,  accidentally,  to  a  large  mirror,
when  in  sleepwaking,  he  called  out  that  he  saw
"  eine  grosse  klarheit."  (A  great  clearness.)  Never-
theless, the  mirror  was  in  the  shade.  After  this,  I
conducted  him  to  a  glass  door  that  led  into  the  gar-
den, through  which  the  light  of  day  was  shining
brightly,  but  he  made  no  remark ;  and,  on  being
questioned,  declared  that  he  was  not  sensible  of  any
peculiar  light.  Again  taken  up  to  the  mirror,  he
again  said  that  he  saw  before  him  much  light  and
clearness.  By  whatever  route  I  led  him  up  to  the
looking-glass,  he  was  always  aware  when  he  came
before  it,  though  his  eyes  were  perfectly  closed.


264  JAESMERIC SLEEPWAKING*

Occasionally  I  presented  the  points  of  my  fingers
to  the  mirror,  in  the  same  manner  as  to  his  forehead,
in  order  to  ascertain  whether  he  would  perceive  any
thing  like  reflected  sparks,  but  the  experiment  did
not  succeed.

Music  seemed  to  have  a  pleasing  effect  upon  him
when^in  the  mesmeric  state ;  and  the  sound  of  my
voice  always  palpably  increased  the  depth  of  his
slumber.

On  first  awaking  from  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  the
patient's  powers  of  vision  were  always  stronger  than
at  any  other  time;  but,  in  addition  to  this  temporary
benefit,  there  was  a  gradual  bettering  of  his  eye-
sight, which,  though  less  striking,  was  more  valuable
from  its  permanence.  Even  the  external  appearance
of  his  eyes  was  improved,  in  the  course  of  mes-
merism, to  a  degree  which  attracted  the  notice,  and
excited  the  wonder,  of  the  master  of  the  institution
to  which  Johann  belonged.

On  one  occasion,  being  rather  indisposed,  I  found
that  I  could  not  influence  Johann  so  forcibly  as
usual ;  so  that,  after  long  mesmerisation,  I  had  only
brought  him  as  far  as  an  imperfect  sleep,  in  which  he
retained  his  consciousness.  Having  met  with  an
account  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  experiments,  by  which  it  is
proved  that  the  mesmeric  agency  is  capable  of
increase  by  means  of  other  individuals  co-operating
with  the  mesmeriser;  having  also  experienced  the
truth  of  this  when  mesmerising  the  little  sister  of

Mademoiselle M , conjointly with herself; I

requested  a  friend,  who  was  present,  to  aid  me,  by


MESMERIC  SLEEPWAKINGT.  265

hiotions  of  the  hand,  in  deepening  the  patient's
dumber.  Each  of  us  held  a  hand  of  Johann,  and
each  of  us  manipulated  with  the  band  that  remained
at  liberty.  The  effect  was  very  remarkable.  In  a
short  time  the  patient  passed  into  complete  sleepwak-
ing ;  but  that  there  was  a  remission  of  the  mesmeric
influence,  whenever  my  friend  ceased  to  be  in  contact
with  me,  was  proved  by  this:  Johann's  head  did
not  then  follow  my  hand  so  readily;  and,  at  such
moments,  when  questioned,  he  said  that  he  did  not
sleep  so  profoundly.  The  patient  being  still  uncon-
scious, I,  being  always  in  contact  with  him,  drank
half  a  glass  of  sherry,  when  he  exclaimed,  sponta-
neously, "  Das  ist  wohl  stark.  Das  steigt  mir  im
kopf. "  (That  is  very  strong.  It  mounts  into  my
head.)

The  last  time  that  I  mesmerised  Johann  was  in  the
evening,  by  candle,  or,  rather,  lamp  light.  On  this
occasion  he  manifested  an  extraordinary  increase  in
mesmeric  clair-voyance,  giving  proofs  that  he  had
sensations,  analogous  to  sight,  of  a  far  stronger  nature
than  those  which  his  visual  organs  could  afford  him
in  the  waking  state.  With  ease  he  indicated  the
relative  positions  of  the  party  present,  consisting  of
three  persons  besides  myself;  and,  though  the  seve-
ral individuals  often  and  silently  exchanged  places,
he  continued  to  show  that  he  was  acquainted  with
the  exact  situation  of  each.  Occasionally  he  would
remark,  and  always  with  perfect  correctness,  that  a
lady  was  smiling  and  pointing  her  finger  at  him.
Three  dahlias,  which  were  respectively  of  a  bright

N


S66  mSMERlC  SLEEPWAKIMO*

scarlet,  deep  crimson,  and  yellow  colour,  were  held
before  his  closed  eyelids.  He  discriminated  between
them  with  singular  accuracy,  saying,  "  Das  ist  feuer-
roth,  das  ist  dunkel-roth,  und  das  ist  gelb. "  He
also  distinguished  a  large  leaf,  which  was  held  before
him,  to  be  green.

The  lady  above  alluded  to  handed  me  a  nosegay,
directing  me,  in  English,  what  to  do  with  it.  Agree-
ably to  her  request,  I  gave  the  nosegay,  consisting  of
red  geranium,  white  stock,  and  other  flowers,  to
Johann,  telling  him  that  he  must  select  some  of  the
red  flowers  to  give  to  the  lady.  He  instantly  and
accurately  separated  the  geranium  from  the  other
flowers:  "and  now,  I  said,  you  must  add  some  of
the  white  to  your  bouquet. ''  This  he  also  did  with
equal  readiness.

Again,  he  told  the  letters,  B,  M,  and  O,  which  I
wrote  in  a  large  printing  hand  on  pieces  of  card  and
held  before  his  closed  lids.  When  led  before  the
mirror,  which  was  then  in  deep  shade,  being  at  the
farther  end  of  an  apartment  forty  feet  in  length  and
lighted  only  by  a  single  lamp,  he,  as  usual,  ex-
pressed his  perception  of  "etwas  hell  und  heiter**
(something  clear  and  bright) ;  but,  when  brought
close  up  to  the  lamp,  he  made  no  observation  of  the
kind.  Again  I  took  him  to  a  glass  over  the  chim-
ney-piece, on  which  the  light  of  the  lamp  fell  strongly,
when  he  cried  out,  "viel  licht,  viel  licht!"  (Much
light,  much  light !)  While  the  patient  was  still  in
the  mesmeric  state,  tea  was  brought  in.  I  ate  some
dry toast,  while  holding  Johann's  hand. He imi-


tf£SMERIC  8LE£FWAKIN(K  267

tated  the  movements  of  mastication ;  and»  on  being
asked  what  he  tasted,  replied,  "  Bread  of  some  kind.*'
Upon  this  one  of  the  party  present,  without  speak*
ing,  gave  me  quickly  a  piece  of  sugar,  signing  me  to
substitute  it  for  the  toast.  This  I  did,  and  the  sound
which  I  made  in  eating  was  not  perceptibly  changed,
yet  Johann  instantly  and  spontaneously  exclaimed,
"  I  taste  something  sweet"

I  here  close  the  proofs  which  I  have  to  offer,  that
the  perfect  mesmeric  sleepwaker  does  indeed  possess
a  faculty  of  perception  apart  from  the  mere  external
mechanism  of  the  senses.  The  means  which  I  have
been  led  to  take,  in  order  to  convince  myself  of  this
&ct,  have,  besides  conducing  to  the  end  which  I  had
in  view,  been  productive  of  other  results,  which  some
persons  may  deem  more  important  to  the  welfare  of
humanity  than  any  discovery  of  new  modes  of  sens-
ation or  of  extraordinary  developments  of  vision.  I
have  established  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  action  of
mesmerism  is  highly  remedial  in  affections  of  that
precious  organ  whereby  we  enjoy

**  Or  sight  of  vernal  bloom,  or  summer's  rose.
Or  flocks,  or  herds,  or  human  face  divine.  **

Not  only  as  regards  Johann  have  I  proved  this,

but  also  in  the  case  of  E.  A ^  who,  when  I  first

began  to  mesmerise  him,  suffered  so  much  from
A  weakness  in  his  eyes  that  he  could  neither  see  to
read  nor  write  by  candlelight  At  first,  indeed,
before  I  became  fully  aware  of  the  eflScacy  of  mes-
merism as  a  remedy,  E.  A  ■  ,  by  my  advice,  oc-
casionally used  a  lotion  of  rose-water  for  his  eyes ;

N  2


268  ]f£8]f£RIC SLEEPWAKING^

but  in  deepwaking  he  declared  that  mesmerism
would  cure  him  without  the  emplojrment  of  any
additional  means.  The  lotion,  therefore,  was  dis-
continued, almost  in  the  beginning  of  the  mesmeric
treatment;  and,  under  the  beneficial  influence  of
mesmerism  alone,  the  patient  not  only  recovered  the
healthy  action  of  his  sight,  but,  before  he  left  me,
attained  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  remarkable  strength
of  vision.

Again,  I  once  mesmerised  another  boy,  nearly
blind,  belonging  to  the  same  institution  of  which
Johann  was  a  member.  After  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour's  mesmerisation,  he  fell  into  a  profound  sleep,
which  lasted  for  nearly  four  hours.  Though  the
patient  gave  no  other  token  of  being  mesmerically
affected,  his  sleep  was  evidently  the  result  of  mesmeric
action,  for  neither  caUing  to  him  nor  shaking  him
could  dispel  it ;  and  he  walked  without  awaking  ftt>m
a  chair  to  a  sofa,  where  he  remained  till  he  awoke.
This  sleep  was  followed  by  an  improvement  in  his
powers  of  vision  ;  and,  when  I  saw  him  at  the  insti-
tution some  time  afterwards,  he  told  me  that  the  bene-
fit had  been  lasting,  for  that  he  then  saw  better  than
before  I  had  mesmerised  him,  adding  that  he  much
wished  I  could  be  permitted  to  mesmerise  him
again.

These  are  facts  which  can  scarcely  be  regarded
with  indifiFerence,  even  by  those  who  will  not  see  in
mesmerism  a  promise  that  transcends  this  life  and
the  purposes  of  our  present  organisation.


26»


BOOK  III.


SECT.  I,

CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM WITH OUR GENERAl^

EXPERIENCE.

Having  now  described  the  state  of  mesmeric  sleejH
waking  and  its  accompanying  manifestations,  I  am
desirous  of  elucidating  it  by  such  reasonings  as  may
prepare  the  minds  of  men  to  receive  this  peculiar
phasis  of  our  nature  as  a  confirmed  fact,  not  as  an
insulated  phenomenon ;  —  as  a  link  in  the  eternal
chain  of  things,  not  as  an  interruption  to  the  uni-
versal order.  With  this  end  in  view,  it  is  necessary
to  inquire  under  what  conditions  men  believe  that
they  comprehend  any  thing  whatever ;  and,  this  being
ascertained,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  endeavour  to  place
under  those  conditions  the  object  we  wish  to  explain,
and  to  adapt  our  arguments  thereupon  to  the  dispo-
sition of  the  listener's  mind.  Attaching  something
mysterious  to  the  idea  of  causes  in  general,  and  to
all  that  relates  to  the  explanation  of  unusual  circun^-
stances,  we  are  too  apt  to  forget  that  causes  are  them-
selves but  facts,  and  that  to  explain  is  only  to  mak^
^e  unknown  c|ear  by  a  reference  to  that  which  wiP

N  3


270  CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM

already  know.  But,  if  we  rightly  consider  the  springs
whence  arises  our  seeming  comprehension  of  any
subject,  we  shall  find  that  they  all  reduce  themselves
to  three  very  natural  and  intelligible  sources,  namely,
traditional  faith  —  personal  experience  —  and  an  idea
of  adequate  power.

For,  I  ask,  when  is  it  that  we  rest  contented  with
our  knowledge  of  a  fact  ?

Undeniably,  then,  1st,  When  we  have  accepted  it,
as  a  received  truth,  from  infancy.

2dly.  When  we  have  felt  it  in  our  own  persons.

3dly.  When  we  imagine  that  we  can  refer  it  to  an
adequate  cause.

For,  as  to  the  first  condition  of  our  belief,  let  us
consider  what  a  multitude  of  things  we  trust  in
merely  because  we  have  heard  them  from  our  nurse^s
lips,  and  though,  these  things  should  be  mere  errors,
we  still  find  that  to  tear  them  from  the  hold  they
have  upon  our  minds  is  always  difficult  —  often  im-
possible. In  such  a  case,  we  do  not  reason  upon  our
notions;  — we  do  not  strive  to  render  them  more
clear ;  -*—  we  are  indifferent  about  mounting  to  their
source;  —  we  rest  in  them  with  simple  confidence.
The  vei'y  religion  of  many  persons  reposes  upon  such
a  basis,  and  this,  relating  as  it  does  to  our  highest
interests,  may  serve  as  an  instance  of  the  power  of
early  association  and  of  the  traditional  credence  upon
which  I  am  insisting.

Secondly ;  it  is  no  less  evident  that  we  accept,  on
the  testimony  of  our  personal  experience,  whatever
we  find  assimilated  thereunta No  one  dreams  of


WITH OUR OENERAZi  EXPERIENCE.  271

doubting  that  other  men  may  sleep,  eat,  walk,  or
write.  The  force  of  this  principle  may  be  gathered
from  the  strength  of  its  antagonist  feeling.  We  have
an  actual  repugnance  to  credit  that  which  we  have
not  felt  ourselves.  To  give  an  example  of  this.
There  is  a  singular  state  of  mind,  which  is  known  to
some,  and  which  has  been  adverted  to  by  various
poets  (as,  for  instance,  Coleridge)  —

^  Which  makes  the  present,  while  the  flash  doth  last,
Seem  but  the  semblance  of  an  unknown  pai^t,"

when,  according  to  Tennyson's  more  particular  de-
acription  of  this  mental  phenomenon,  —

"  We  ebb  into  a  former  life,  or  seem
To  lapse  far  back  in  a  confused  dream,
To  states  of  mystical  similitude.
If  one  but  speaks,  or  hems,  or  stirs  his  chair.
Ever  the  wonder  waxeth  more  and  more  ;
So  that  we  say  —  *  All  this  hath  been  before '  —
All  this  hath  been,  I  know  not  when,  or  where."

Now  let  any  one,  who  has  experienced  this  per-
plexing reference  to  events  which  he  seems  to  have
rehearsed  in  some  prior  state  of  existence,  speak  of
the  feeling  to  another  who  is  wholly  ignorant  of  it.
The  latter  will  very  likely  exclaim,  as  a  friend  of
mine  to  whom  I  described  this  mood  of  mind  actu-
ally did  exclaim,  —  "  Had  I  ever  felt  any  thing  like
what  you  mention,  I  should  think  myself  fit  for
Bedlam."

N  4


272  CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM

On  the  other  handy  he,  who  knows  th^  Sensation
kxxd  can  sympathise  with  it,  will  listen  to  a  similai^
statement  without  surprise,  and  will  probably  say  — »
"  I  can  well  believe  this,  for  I  have  felt  it  myself."

A  more  common  instance  of  this  incredulity  re-
specting all  that  lies  beyond  our  own  experience  is
our  reluctance  to  believe  that  pains,  which  we  have
never  known,  can  really  be  as  acute  as  they  are  re».
presented  to  us.  "  He  jests  at  scars,  who  never  felt  a
woujid,"  arid  he,  who  has  been  always  free  from  the
toothach,  will  almost  laugh  at  a  friend  under  a
paroxysm  of  that  torment ;  not  because  he  is  hard-
hearted, but  because  he  cannot  conceive  the  mattei^
deeply  enough  to  be  serious.

There  is  an  actual  inherent  propensity  in  human
nature  to  make  person^  knowledge  the  measure  of
truth,  so  strong  as  to  incline  us  to  believe  any  thing
that  has  reference  even  to  our  prior  experience.  I
have  read  somewhere  of  an  old  woman  whose  son,
returning  from  foreign  parts,  related  to  her  the  won-
ders he  had  seen.  He  spoke  of  flying  fish,  and  of  a
burning  mountain;  but  the  cautious  mother  cried
out,  "No,  no.  Jack!  I  know  what  travellers*  tales
are  !  That  Vl\  never  believe  ! "  At  last,  after  many
similar  truths  rejected,  the  sailor,  in  despair,  hatched
a  lie,  and  said,  "  In  Jamaica  I  saw  sugar  growing  on
trees,  and  rivers  of  rum."  "  Ay,  ay,  child,"  ex-
claimed the  beldam,  "  Now  you  speak  sense.  That
I'll  well  believe,  for  I  know  that  rum  and  sugar  come
from  Jamaica !  "  Now,  in  mesmerism,  it  is  just  thusl.
There  is  much  rejected  that  accords  not  with  the  pre-'


WITii OUR  GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  j273

vious  experience  of  persons?  yet  perhaps  every  one
has  his  rum  and  sugar  reservation — some  greater
marvel  than  those  which  he  refuses  to  credit.  After
all)  it  is  not  the  marvellousness  of  mesmerism  that
shocks;  it  is  only  its  discrepancy  with  each  indi-
vidual's experience  or  figment  of  the  brain.

In  the  third  place,  we  need  reflect  but  little  in
order  to  perceive  that  we  rest  contented  with  our
knowledge  of  events  so  long  as  the  idea  of  an
adequate  cause  for  them  is  present  to  our  minds.
Yet  this  tendency  of  our  nature  to  refer  events  not
only  to  a  cause,  but  to  an  adequate  cause,  has  not
been  suflSciently  distinguished  from  the  simple  pro-
pensity (also  inherent  in  our  intellectual  structure),
which  inclines  us,  when  we  see  an  effect  with  which
we  are  familiar,  to  suppose  that  its  usual  antecedent
either  is,  or  has  been,  also,  present ;  for  we  are  not
only  inclined  to  take  things  in  connection,  and  to  view
the  relationship  between  them,  but  likewise  to  account
for  the  phenomena  we  behold  by  tracing  them  to
their  primary  and  eflScient  impulses.  When  we  fail
to  ascribe  an  event  to  an  adequate  agency,  we  are
troubled  and  discontented,  and  a  restless  idea  of  the
supernatural  {here  truest)  haunts  and  agitates  us ;  oil
the  other  hand,  whenever  we  deem  that  we  can  assign
a  sufficient  cause  to  an  appearance,  however  startling
and  unusual,  we  are  satisfied,  and  seek  to  know  no
further.  For  this  reason,  they,  who  are  in  the  habit
of  overlooking  all  the  intermediate  processes  of  nature,
and  who  resolve  every  thing  at  once  into  the  power
of  God,  enjoy  a  pleasure  distinct  from  the  merely

y  5


874  CX>KFOaMITT  Ol^  MESHfiRISM

pious  one  of  attributing  every  thing  to  one  beneficent
Creator.  They  rest  in  a  sufficient  cause ;  they  are
tormented  by  no  importunate  questionings  of  spirit ;
their  answer  to  every  enigma  of  the  universe  is  ever
ready.  They  who  are  not  of  this  happy,  but  (it  may  be
suspected)  indolent  frame  of  mind,  and  who,  at  the
same  time,  have  not  knowledge  sufficient  to  ascend,
surely  and  gradually,  the  steps  of  nature's  temple,
are  actually  forced  into  an  irregular  flight  upwards,
and,  rather  than  ascribe  perplexing  appearances  to  an
inadequate  cause,  will  attribute  them  to  an  unknown
and  mysterious  one  (the  inadequacy  of  which  cannot
be  put  to  the  proof  at  least),  to  some  cloud-bom
agency,  which  flatters  their  imagination  with  a  sens^
of  power.  Hence,  where  gross  ignorance  prevails,
superstition,  with  all  its  notions  of  demoniac  influences,
takes  its  rise ;  hence,  in  darker  ages,  the  learned  have
been  deemed  wizards,  and  the  man  of  science  has
been  supposed  to  have  signed  a  contract  with  Satan.
Hence,  even  in  our  own  day,  some,  whose  minds  are
in  arrear  with  time,  will  attribute  the  whole  of  mes-
meric agencies  to  the  machinations  of  the  evil  one,
being  unaware  how  much  they  are  influenced  in  their
judgment  by  the  propensity  we  all  have  to  cut  a  knot
when  we  cannot  untie  it.  But,  after  all,  the  fondness
of  some  persons  for  diabolic  agency  is  not  a  little
surprising  and  unaccountable.  For  my  own  part  I
had  always  rather  rest  in  God  than  in  the  devil.
Observe  we,  too,  that  many  a  person  will  deem  him-
self vastly  enlightened  by  a  fine  word,  and  that  hence
knowledge  is  too  often  turned  into  a  few  high-sounding


WITH OUR  GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  275

phrases.  Wherefore  is  this  ?  A  pompous  term  may
stand  as  the  representative  of  an  efficient  force;  and^
in  the  case  where  the  event  to  be  accounted  for  ap-
pears very  wondrous,  the  alleged  cause  always  pleases
the  ignorant  better,  the  more  incomprehensibly  it  is
expressed.  But,  where  phenomena  come,  or  seem  to
come,  nearer  the  level  of  our  experience,  then  we  are
apt  to  explain  them  by  some  familiar  force,  which,
however,  may  have  as  little  to  do  with  them  as  any
cause  with  which  we  are  entirely  unacquainted.  This,
however,  is  hard  to  be  perceived,  for,  whatever  we
know  and  have  proved  to  be  capable  of  effecting  some-
thing, we  are  inclined  to  exalt  into  a  power  and  to
force  into  offices  alien  to  its  sphere  of  operation.  For
instance,  every  man  has  felt  that  the  frequent  repeti-
tion of  any  action  increases  the  tendency  to  it.  This
phenomenon  of  our  nature  we  personify  under  the
name  of  Habit,  and  recognise  the  potency  of  its  in-
fluence, binding  us,  as  the  Lilliputians  did  Gulliver,
not  by  the  individual  strength,  but  by  the  number,  of
its  subtle  bands.  Again,  when  one  part  of  our  bodies
is  deranged,  another  often  partakes  in  the  dfiection,
or,  as  we  express  it,  suffers  by  sympathy.  Sympathy,
then,  must  be  accounted  as  a  power,  explanatory  of
many  mysteries  of  our  being ;  so  must  association  —
so  must  imitation,  and  a  host  of  other  shadowy  im-
personations, which  are  but  names  for  certain  mental
or  bodily  states.  To  words  like  these,  when  hard
pushed  for  an  explanation  of  any  thing,  we  can  resort
with  much  complacency ;  not  that,  after  having  done
so,  we  tmderstand  the  matter  one  whit  better  than

N  6


^276  COnOSMTIT  OF  MEaCEEISM

before^  but  we  hare  referred  it  to  a  principle  with
whkh  we  are  in  part  acquainted,  and  wfaidi,  deemii^
it  the  eflicient  came  of  some  things^  we  suppose  may
abo  produce  the  (me  in  question.

These  strivings  after  adequate  causation  I  ccmsider
to  be  the  upward  and  inevitable  tendency  of  mind  to
its  sources  of  reason,  teaching  us  by  internal  admo-
nitions that  all  phenomena  whatever  emanate  firora
thought;  but,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to
make  some  remarks  on  power,  and  whence  our  notion
of  it  is  derived,  I  will,  at  present,  advance  no  deeper
into  this  subject,  having,  I  trust,  said  enough  to  show
that  we  rest  satisfied  with  our  knowledge  of  events  in
proportion  as  we  think  that  we  can  refer  them  to  an
adequate  cause;  and  that  consequently  the  surest
means  to  obtain  general  credence  for  any  fact  is  to
exhibit  it  in  connection  with  a  cause  which  shall  at
once  be  perceived  adequate  to  its  production.

Applying  the  above  reflections  to  mesmerism  and
its  phenomena,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  of  the
three  great  sources  of  human  conviction  which  we
have  been  considering, — namely,  traditional  faith,
personal  experience,  and  adequate  agency,  —  there
is  not  one  which  has  been  called  into  play  in  a  man-
ner favourable  to  our  subject

Whatever  may  be  the  case  on  the  Continent,  it  will
be  admitted  that  in  England  the  present  generation
have  been  educated  in  a  profound  contempt  and  dis-
belief of  mesmerism.  Thus  from  traditional  faith  it
-receives  no  support,  but  the. contrary;  for  the  les-
sons of  our  childhood  have  raised  a  barrier  between


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  ^77

it  and  us,  the  strength  of  which  no  one  can  have  felt
more  forcibly  than  myself.

From  personal  experience  mesmerism  is  not  less
removed;  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  writers  on
the  subject,  in  general,  have  not  contributed  to  bring
it  nearer  to  the  home-felt  conviction  of  mankind.  Too
often  they  have  endeavoured  to  illustrate  it  by  a  refer-
ence to  marvels  as  far  distant  from  personal  experi-
ence as  itself.  In  its  behalf,  ancient  chronicles  have
been  ransacked ;  classical  authorities  have  been  mar-
shalled in  formidable  array ;  the  tomb  has  given  up
its  vampires,  and  Egyptian  mysteries  have  been  drag-
ged to  light, — for  what  purpose?  Mesmerism  is
not  at  all  rendered  more  credible  by  being  bol-
stered up  by  histories  which  themselves  are  doubt-
ful; nor  is  it  explained  (ignotum  per  ignotitis)  by
means  of  phenomena  that  surpass  human  compre^
hension.

In  the  third  place,  it  appears  to  me  that  mesmerism
has  not  been  viewed  in  connection  with  an  adequate
cause,  since,  as  I  have  elsewhere  observed,  men  of
science  would  refer  it,  with  all  its  intellectual  pheno-
mena, to  a  simply  physical  agency;  while  men  of
imagination  would  force  even  its  physical  affections
into  the  domain  of  pure  spiritualism.

It  should  then  be  the  object  of  a  writer  on  mes^
merism  to  supply  his  subject  with  those  advantages
of  which  concurring  circumstances  have  tended  to
deprive  it.  Others,  I  feel  confident,  will  effect  far
more  than  I  can  in  this  cause ;  yet  I  trust  I  shall
not  be  deemed  presumptuous  in  bringing  forward


278  CONFORMITV OF MESMERISM

some  considerations  which  have  offered  themselves
to  my  mind,  tending  to  approximate  at  least  the  new
condition  of  man  to  those  grounds  of  credibility  on
which  I  have  shown  our  quiet  possession  of  truths
in  general  to  repose.

Of  the  three  claims  to  confidence,  wherein  mesmer-
ism is  deficient,  the  hardest  to  supply  is  undoubtedly
that  of  early  association.  Yet  even  here  it  may  be
urged  that  we  have  all,  from  childhood,  supposed
natural  sleepwaking  to  be  an  undoubted  pheno^
menon  of  man's  constitution.  There  are  many,  per-
haps, who  remember  to  have  heard  tell  of  some
sleepwalker,  whose  feats  have  been  the  wonder  of
their  native  village,  who  has  been  known  to  rise  from
his  bed,  and  to  display,  in  slumber,  even  more  than
his  ordinary  activity,  crossing,  it  may  be,  some  peril-
ous ford,  or  balancing  himself  on  the  edge  of  a  preci-
pice, where  the  waking  eye  would  sicken  and  the
conscious  brain  would  reel.  Who  does  not  believe  in
the  existence  of  such  a  state  ?  Doctors  have  descanted
upon  it  with  the  precision  of  medical  lore;  meta-
physicians have  examined  it  as  a  curious  feature  of
humanity :  and  the  light  and  gay,  regarding  it  as  a  mere
matter  of  amusement,  have  flocked  to  see  its  mimicry
in  dramatic  representation,  enhanced  by  all  the  charms
of  music  and  the  fascinations  of  genius.  Nay,  in  the
higher  departments  of  scenic  art,  it  has  illustrated  one
of  the  sublimest  creations  of  the  poetic  mind : — I  allude,
of  course,  to  the  tragedy  of  Macbeth,  in  which  Shak-
speare,  who  painted  every  shade  and  variety  of  our  na^
lure,  has  not  left  untouched  this  its  most  peculiar  and


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  279

interesting  development.  In  brief,  it  is  one  of  the
truths  which  cannot  be  torn  from  the  texture  of  our
minds,  or  erased  from  the  book  and  volume  of  the
brain.

This  being  the  case,  is  there  any  good  reason  why
we  should  exclude  from  our  belief  so  similar  a  state
of  man  as  is  mesmeric  sleepwaking;  — or,  rather,  is
not  our  conduct,  on  this  occasion,  the  most  striking
proof  of  the  really  inefficient  grounds  on  which  the
greater  part  of  mankind  believe  or  disbelieve  any-
thing? How  greatly  we  are  inconsistent  with  our-
selves !  We  hear,  without  one  feeling  of  doubt,  tales  of
sleepwaking,  quite  as  wonderful  as  the  following  ac-
count of  Lady  Macbeth's  sleepwaking : — "  I  have  seen
her  rise  from  her  bed,  throw  her  night-gown  upon  her,
unlock  her  closet,  take  forth  paper,  fold  it,  write  upon
it,  read  it,  afterwards  seal  it,  and  again  return  to  bed ;
• — yet,  all  this  while,  in  a  most  fast  sleep:" — but,
should  the  very  same  things  be  stated  respecting  a
person  under  mesmerism,  the  name  seems  suddenly
to  make  all  the  difference :  we  no  longer  believe;  we
cry  out  that  it  is  all  an  imposture ;  —  our  whole  being
is  in  a  state  of  hostility  and  agitation.  Is  this  wise?
Is  this  in  accord  with  human  dignity  of  thought?  I
would  more  particularly  ask  medical  men  whether
they  have  not  been  accustomed  to  regard  as  true  not
only  certain  phenomena  of  natural  sleepwaking,  to
the  full  as  wonderful  as  any  which  mesmerism  pre-
sents, but  also  of  catalepsy  —  a  state  under  which  the
most  extraordinary  developments  of  nervous  sensi-
bility may  take  place;  and  I  would  then  urge  them  to


Q8Q  CONFORMITV OF MESMERISM

examine  well  the  real  causes  of  their  denying  in  onA
case  what  they  accede  to  in  another.  Also  I  woul4
inquire,  with  what  patience  they  who  have  attended,
in  a  medical  capacity,  many  an  unfortunate  wretch
dying  of  hydrophobia,  can  listen  to  the  prabble  of  a
man  who  contends  that  human  nature  is  liable  to  np
such  affliction,  merely  because  he  has  heard  from
childhood  the  fact  spoken  of  as  doubtful  ?  If  no  good
answer  can  be  given  to  these  questions,  surely  a  rea-
sonable being]  may  suspect  that  there  is  some  grea^
error  at  the  root  of  all  these  discrepancies  and  con-
tradictions in  feeling  and  belief;  and  it  may  be  con-
tended that,  if  we  accept  traditional  faith  as  the
ground  of  our  confidence  in  certain  particulars,  we
must  retain  it  still  as  corroborative  of  the  same  par-
ticulars, whatever  change  in  their  nomenclature  may
occur.

In  truth,  when  we  demand  acceptance  for  many
of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  we  only  require  £^
sacrifice  of  men's  prejudices,  and  not  a  dereliction
from  their  ancient  principles  of  belief.

The  mention  of  natural  sleepwaking  leads  us
almost  insensibly  into  realms  that  border  closely  upon
those  of  personal  experience.  There  are  few  of  us
probably  who  have  not,  in  early  years,  had  some
touch  of  this  malady,  so  incident  to  childhood,  or,  at
least,  so  far  beheld  its  effects  in  a  brother,  sister,  or
young  relative,  as  to  be  convinced  that  persons  may,
being  all  the  time  asleep,  perform  many  of  the  action^
of  their  waking  hours,  and  answer  short  questions,
either  rationally  or  with  a  certain  ingenuity. Many


WitH OUR GENEItAL  EXPERIEltfCE.  ^8l

also  have  perhaps  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing^
stories  relative  to  sleepwaking  from  the  lips  of  the
parties  actually  concerned  in  them^  At  least,  I  can
affirm  that,  in  the  course  of  my  own  experience,  I
have  met  with  several  persons,  who  have  either  been
sleepwakers  themselves,  or  have  been  eye-witnesses
of  sleepwaking  in  others.  On  such  individual  tes-
timony, I  present  to  my  reader  the  following  nar-
rations, which  show  at  once  the  connection  and  the
difference  between  natural  and  mesmeric  sleep-
waking.

Mr.  Matthieu,  president  of  the  Academy  of  Paint-
ing at  Louvain,*told  me  that,  not  many  years  since,
having  an  essay  to  write  for  what  the  French  call  a
eoncours,  he  was  in  an  anxious  state  of  mind.  His
thoughts  did  not  flow  readily,  and,  after  many  effijrts
at  composition,  he  could  not  produce  anything  to
please  himself.  What  was  his  astonishment,  one
morning,  to  find  upon  his  table,  in  his  own  hand-»
writing,  the  beginning  of  an  excellent  dissertation
upon  the  subject  which  had  lately  occupied  him !
He  could  not  doubt  that  this  was  the  work  of  hi^
sleeping  hours ;  —  but,  curious  to  ascertain  how  fai?
his  mind  would  proceed  with  its  train  of  thought
under  the  same  conditions  which  had  originated  it,  he
left  the  manuscript  untouched,  imtil  he  could  inspect
it  again  after  the  interval  of  another  night  The  re-
isult  of  the  experiment  showed  that  he  had  resumed
the  pen  in  sleep,  and  had  continued  his  composition
in  a  perfectly  connected  manner.

Another  gentleman,  Mr.  Z— —  of  Neufchatel,  rp*


382  CONFORMITV OF MESMERISM

lated  to  me  the  following  instances  of  his  own  sleep-
waking.  When  he  was  about  seventeen,  his  father
being  dead,  the  management  of  an  extensive  mercan-f
tile  establishment  principally  devolved  upon  himself.
One  day  he  had  transacted  a  great  deal  of  business,
and  still  there  were  certain  invoices  to  be  written
before  the  departure  of  some  merchandise  early  on
the  following  morning.  Worn  out  with  fatigue,  he
went  to  bed,  having  given  orders  to  be  called  in  time
to  supply  the  deficient  inventories.  At  day-break,  ac-
cording to  his  directions,  he  was  awakened  by  a  servant,
and  went  immediately  to  his  mother  (who  generally
assisted  him  in  his  labours),  informing  her  that  he  was
ready  to  begin  the  invoices.  "  What  can  you  mean  ?  "
she  exclaimed ;  "  do  not  you  know  that  you  wrote
them  last  night?  and  here  they  are!"  —  At  the
same  time  she  placed  in  his  hand  the  papers  properly
executed,  and  in  his  own  handwriting. On  inquiry

it  appeared  that  Mr.  Z ,  half  an  hour  after  he  had

retired  to  his  room  on  the  preceding  evening,  had  re-
turned, dressed  as  usual,  to  his  mother's  apartment,
where  he  sat  down  before  a  writing-table  and  com-
pleted the  documents  in  question ;  Madam  Z 9

nothing  doubting  of  his  being  awake  at  the  time,
though,  on  subsequent  reflection,  she  remembered
to  have  observed  something  fixed  and  strange  about
his  eyes  (they  were  open  during  his  sleepwaking),
—  an  appearance  which  she  had  attributed  to  her
son's  fatigue  and  want  of  sleep.

On  another  occasion  —  not  more  than  a  few  months
ago  —Mr.  Z formed,  over-night,  an  engagement


WITH OUR  GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  28^

to  cross  the  mountains  with  a  party  of  friends,  who
were  to  call  for  him  early  in  the  morning.  This
arrangement  gave  rise  to  the  following  cuiioas  cir-
cumstances, which  subsequently  were  made  evident
by  collating  the  different  particulars  of  the  case. It

happened  that,  on  the  same  night,  when  Mr.  Z

was  iast  asleep  in  bed,  a  party  of  young  men,  strangers
to  him,  stopped  under  his  window  accidentally,  and,
being  not  very  sober,  laughed  and  talked  loudly  for
some  time.  The  noise  influencing  the  sleepwaker,
gave  him  the  idea  that  his  friends  were  come  to  call
him.  Under  this  impression  he  arose,  threw  open
his  window,  and  addressed  the  party  in  iamiliar  terms.
The  young  men,  being  in  an  irritable  and  touchy
state,  replied  to  him  in  no  agreeable  manner,  until  a
quarrel  arose  between  the  sleeping  man  and  the  group
below,  who  were  in  no  better  possession  of  their  senses
than  himself.  The  tumult  was  only  appeased  by  the
Ivatchman  dispersing  the  rioters,  and  counselling  the
sleepwaker  (not  suspected  to  be  such)  to  return  to
bed.  The  next  day  Mr.  Z retained  no  recollec-
tion whatever  of  the  events  of  the  night,  and  made,
as  agreed  upon,  the  expedition  with  his  friends.  On
his  return,  however,  to  Neufchatel,  two  of  the  gay
party,  who  had  been  imder  his  window,  waited  on
him,  and,  to  his  utter  astonishment,  begged  him  to
(explain  why  he  had  called  to  them,  and,  in  a  manner,
insulted  them,  on  such  a  night. ^^  How  could  I  insult

you,  when  I  never  saw  you  before  ?"  was  Mr.  Z ^'s

exclamation ;  and  great  was  the  perplexity  of  both  the
parties,  until  Mr.  Z ,  remembering  his  addiction


284  CONFORMtTT OF M£SMERISM

to  sleepwaking,  suggested  an  explanation,  which  every
circumstance  tended  to  confirm.

Mr.  M ,  also  of  Neufch^tel, has  a  brother^

who  is  subject  to  sleepwaking.  The  following  is  au
amusing  specimen  of  his  exploits  in  that  way.  Mr^
M— —  was  on  a  journey  with  him,  and  one  night,
when  they  occupied  the  same  apartment,  the  sleep-
waker  awoke  the  former  by  loud  and  earnest  talking^

There  was  a  light  in  the  room,  and  Mr.  M (as  he

told  me)  could  see  his  brother  standing  upright  on
the  edge  of  his  bed,  occasionally  leaning  forward  and
peering  over  (though  his  eyes  were  shut)  with  the
expression  of  a  man  who  earnestly  gazes  after  some-*
thing.  "  What  is  the  matter  with  you,  John  ?  "  asked
Mr.  M  **  Oh,"  replied  John,  "  take  care  of  you|?

steps,  for  Heaven's  sake !  Do  not  you  see  that  W0
are  just  on  the  brink  of  a  horrible  precipice?  " — "  Not
at  all,"  rejoined  Mr.  M— — ;  you  are  under  a  delu-*
sion,  and  I  pray  you  to  calm  yourself !  " — "  What ! ''
said  the  sleepwaker,  "you  say  there  is  no  preci*
pice  ?  I  'II  throw  a  great  stone  down  to  prove  it  to
you.  —  There  I "  he  cried,  snatching  off  his  night-
cap, and  flinging  it  on  the  floor,  —  "  there  it  goes  !
—  and  what  an  awful  depth  the  precipice  must  be,
for  the  stone  makes  no  noise !  "

Such  facts  as  the  above  will  perhaps  be  credited  — r
just  because  they  are  not  headed  "  Mesmerism,"
They  are  at  least  sufficient  to  show  that  many  of
the  features  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking  have  prece-
dents which  are  to  be  met  with  in  acknowledged
phenomena  common  to  map. These,  however,  res|


WltH OUR GENERAL EXPERlEl^fCE.  285

rather  on  personal  evidence  than  on  personal  expe-
rience. The  sleepwaker,  when  once  awake,  does
not  remember  the  occurrences  or  the  sensations  of
his  sleepwaking,  and  the  spectator  who  bears  testi-
mony to  his  actions  is  a  stranger  to  their  inward
sources.

I  would,  however,  give  mesmerism  a  stronger  hold
upon  human  conviction  than  can  be  supplied  by  any
external  proof.  I  would  introduce  it  into  the  very
bosom  and  private  feelings  of  each  individual,  by
showing  that  parts  of  it,  so  far  from  being  removed
from  our  daily  life,  are  altogether  familiar  to  us,
though  under  another  guise  and  bearing  other
names.

I  would  prove  this  —  1st.  As  regards  the  produc-
tion of  the  mesmeric  state.  2dly.  As  regards  the
state  itself.

First,  then,  let  us  inquire — Are  the  means  by
which  the  mesmeric  slumber  is  produced  in  any  way
approximated  to  our  experience  ?

The  subsidiary  agents,  which  have  been  found  most
efficacious  in  aiding  one  person  to  influence  another
in  the  manner  called  mesmeric,  are  the  eye  and  the
hand.

Now,  I  would  ask,  who  is  there  that  has  not  felt  the
influence  of  the  human  eye  —  that  window  of  the
soul  ?  What  is  there  which  equally  with  itself  arrests
attention,  fascinates,  fixes,  calms,  and  subdues?  Anger
is  quelled  before  its  steady  gaze ;  even  madness  be-
comes docile  beneath  its  dominion.  The  late  Dr.
fVillis  used  to  say  that  by  the  eye  chiefly  he  controlled


286  CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM

his  most  refractory  patients.  Acting  at  once  physU
cally  and  morally,  it  seems  to  affect  the  nervous
system  in  a  real  and  peculiar  manner;  for  brutesy
which  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  misled  by  imagination,
are  extremely  sensible  to  the  influence  of  the  human
eye.  Nay,  even  to  certain  of  the  brute  creation  a
remarkable  power  of  eye  seems  to  belong.  To  say
nothing  of  some  doubtful  stories  respecting  the  fasci-
nation  which  serpents  exercise  over  weaker  creatures,
I  have  seen  a  bird  fluttering  before  a  cat,  as  if  held
and  bound  by  her  watchful  gaze,  and  so  almost  con-
strained to  offer  itself  a  voluntary  sacrifice  to  its
enemy.

When  we  consider  these  things  we  can  scarcely
marvel  that  powers  even  magical  have  been  attributed,
by  ignorance  and  superstition,  to  the  wonderful  organ
of  which  we  are  speaking ;  nor  that  diseases,  and  even
death,  should  have  been  supposed,  in  some  cases,  to
have  originated  in  the  stroke  of  an  evil  eye.

Now,  be  it  remembered,  that  the  doctrine  of  mes-
merism is  that  the  mesmeriser's  force  should  become
predominant  over  that  of  his  patient;  and  mesmeric
phenomena  do  really  show,  as  I  have  formerly  demon-
strated, that  the  mesmeriser's  will  sways  the  patient's
volition  in  a  very  peculiar  manner.  The  relation  be-
tween the  mesmeriser  and  the  patient  is  that  of  acti-
vity to  passivity.  The  one  is  to  guide,  direct,  and
influence ;  the  other  is  to  receive,  and  to  be  influenced.
The  first  process,  then,  of  mesmerism  may  be  called
a  strife  between  the  two  forces  of  mesmeriser  and
patient There  is  a  will  to  be  subdued,  and  a  body


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIElfCE.  287

to  be  brought  into  subjection ;  yet  this  is  to  be  ac-
complished in  all  the  tranquillity  of  a  religious  silence.
What  instrument  is  adequate to such  an effect?
Surely  we  should  at  once  name  the  eye  as  the  great
agent  in  this  strife. By  a  sort  of  natural  instinct,  we
do  use  it,  where  we  wish  to  prevail. The  meanest,
striving  with  another,  will  call  the  first  blenching  of
his adversary's gaze, — victory. Men  of  energetic
characters  and  calculated  for  dominion  have  always
been  remarkable  for  the  potency  of  their  glances,
and  have  been  celebrated  as  not  only  "  Lords  of  the
lion  port,"  but  also  of  "  the  eagle  eye." Few  could
endure  the  searching  gaze  of  Napoleon. The  rulers
of  the  domain  of  intellect  have  been  as  famous  as  the
kings  of  the  earth  for  a  keen  regard. The  glance  of
Dr.  Johnson  from  imder  shaggy  brows  availed  no  less
than  the  eloquence  of  the  sage's  tongue. I  remember
that  Dr.  Parr,  who  was  a  sort  of  Johnson  in  his  way,
was  very  proud of  his  own  visual  prowess,  and  I
once  heard  him  boast  that  his  eye  had  saved  the
nation.

Pitt,  he  declared,  was  about  to  bring  forward  some
disastrous  measure,  when  he,  having  previous  know-
ledge of  the  statesman's  evil  intentions,  repaired  to
the  House  of  Commons.  "  I  fixed,  sir,"  said  he,
"  my  eye  upon  Pitt  I  gave  him  one  of  my  looks
(every  body  knows  my  looks),  and  he  could  not  utter
a  word,  sir.  He  rose,  stammered,  and  sat  down
again,  —  and  there  I  kept  him  off  his  legs  till  Fox
had  taken  possession  of  the  ear  of  the  house ;  and  so
the  measure,  when  brought  forward,  was  nugatory*


289  CONFORMITY OF  ME81CERISK

Yes,  yes,  I  think  I  may  say  that  my  eye  saved  ikt
nation."

In  fact,  we  perceive  that  Dn  Parr  mesmerised  Pitt
But,  jesting  apart,  I  need  only  refer  to  my  readers  own
feelings  for  a  testimony  to  the  all  but  miraculous
powers  of  the  human  eye.  It  seems  to  be  life  and
will  made  visible ;  and,  when  life  is  fled,  we  may  ex-
claim with  the  poet  —

"  Oh,  o'er  the  eye  Death  most  exerts  his  might.
And  hurls  the  spirit  from  her  throne  of  light.''

If  the  eye  be  powerful  to  influence  and  to  subdue,
the  human  hand  is  not  less  remarkable  for  its  sooth-
ing properties.  We  naturally  apply  our  hands  to  any
part  of  our  bodies  in  which  we  feel  pain,  and  how
often  are  we  sensible  of  a  mitigation  in  our  sufierings !
The  mother  soothes  her  child  to  sleep  by  the  applica-
tion of  her  hand,  and  calms  it  into  patience,  when  it
has  received  an  injury,  by  her  gentle  touches.  A
lady,  on  whose  word  I  can  rely,  told  me  that,  during
a  heavy  malady,  she  could  gain  no  sleep  except
when  holding  her  husband's  hand,  and  that  the  mo-
ment he  withdrew  it,  however  gently,  she  awoke.
Similar  phenomena,  if  oftener  attended  to,  might
doubtless  press  upon  our  remembrance  and  justify
mesmerism  by  the  analogies  of  common  life.  Touching
for  the  toothach  is  a  sort  of  charm  that  is  often  re-
sorted to  by  the  vulgar  with  success ;  and  in  Con-
stantinople, I  have  been  informed,  there  are  men
who  actually  make  it  their  business  to  cure  tooth-
ach in  this  manner. Once  it  was  supposed  that  a


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  289

certain  insect,  being  crushed  and  held  to  a  painful
tooth,  acted  as  an  anodyne,  and  learned  papers  were
accordingly  written  on  the  virtues  of  this  particular
remedy.  Unfortunately,  however,  it  was  soon  dis-
covered th^t  the  finger  which  applied  the  insect  was
the  real  depository  of  the  soothing  virtue ;  for  the
desired  effect  took  place  just  as  well  without  tlie  in-
sect as  with  it.

A  travelled  friend  of  mine  tells  me  that  he  has
seen  a  sort  of  mesmerism  exercised  by  the  dancing
Dervises  of  the  East  upon  each  other.  After  whirl-
ing round  in  their  mystic  and  exciting  dance,  they
are  apt  to  fall  upon  the  ground  in  strong  convulsions.
On  such  occasions,  one  of  the  calmer  brethren  comes
up  to  the  extatic  patient,  and,  by  gentle  touches  of
the  hand,  invariably  succeeds  in  soothing  him  to  re-
pose.

That  the  hand  should  be  an  agent  in  dispensing
the  human  or  the  mesmeric  influence  can  hardly
seem  wonderful  to  those  who  consider  how  much  the
hand  is  identified  with,  and  distinctive  of,  man.
Considering  the  perfection  of  its  form,  and  the  dis-
criminative delicacy  of  its  touch,  we  can  almost
pardon  those  who  have  gone  so  far  as  to  affirm  that
the  hand  alone  is  the  efficient  cause  of  our  supremacy
over  the  brute  creation.  The  tactile  nerves,  with
which  it  is  so  abundantly  supplied,  seem  peculiarly
to  adapt  it  to  the  task  of  transmitting  an  influence,
which,  in  some  mysterious  way,  yet  manifestly,
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  nervous  and  vital
forces. In some old  systems  of  physiology each


"28^  CaNFORMITY OF  MESAIERISM

Yes,  ye%  I  think  I  may  say  that  my  eye  saved  the
nation."

In  fact,  we  perceive  that  Dr,  Parr  mesmerised  Pitt
But,  jesting  apart,  I  need  only  refer  to  my  reader's  own
feelings  for  a  testimony  to  the  all  but  miracolons
powers  of  the  human  eye.  It  seems  to  be  life  and
will  made  visible ;  and,  when  life  is  fled,  we  may  ex-
claim with  the  poet  —

"  Oh,  o'er  the  eye  Death  most  exerts  his  might,
And  hurls  the  spirit  from  her  throne  of  light.'*

If  the  eye  be  powerful  to  influence  and  to  subdue,
the  human  hand  is  not  less  remarkable  for  its  sooth-
ing properties.  We  naturally  apply  our  hands  to  any
part  of  our  bodies  in  which  we  feel  pain,  and  bow
often  are  we  sensible  of  a  mitigation  in  our  suflerings  I
The  mother  soothes  her  child  to  sleep  by  the  applica-
tion of  her  hand,  and  calms  it  into  patience,  when  it
has  received  an  injury,  by  her  gentle  touches.  A
lady,  on  whose  word  I  can  rely,  told  me  that,  during
a  heavy  malady,  she  could  gain  no  sleep  except
when  holding  her  husband's  hand,  and  that  the  mo-
ment he  withdrew  it,  however  gently,  she  awoke.
Similar  phenomena,  if  oftener  attended  to,  might
doubtless  press  upon  our  remembrance  and  justify
mesmerism  by  the  analogies  of  conunon  life.  Touching
for  the  toothach  is  a  sort  of  charm  that  is  often  re-
sorted to  by  the  vulgar  with  success ;  and  in  Conr
stantinople,  I  have  been  informed,  there  are  men
who  actually  make  it  their  business  to  cure  tooth-
ach in  this  manner. Once  it  was  supposed  that  a


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  289

certain  insect,  being  crushed  and  held  to  a  painful
tooth,  acted  as  an  anodyne,  and  learned  papers  were
accordingly  written  on  the  virtues  of  this  particular
remedy.  Unfortunately,  however,  it  was  soon  dis-
covered th^t  the  finger  which  applied  the  insect  was
the  real  depository  of  the  soothing  virtue ;  for  the
desired  effect  took  place  just  as  well  without  the  in-
sect as  with  it.

A  travelled  friend  of  mine  tells  me  that  he  has
seen  a  sort  of  mesmerism  exercised  by  the  dancing
Dervises  of  the  East  upon  each  other.  After  \iliirl-
ing  round  in  their  mystic  and  exciting  dance,  they
are  apt  to  fall  upon  the  ground  in  strong  convulsions.
On  such  occasions,  one  of  the  calmer  brethren  comes
up  to  the  extatic  patient,  and,  by  gentle  touches  of
the  hand,  invariably  succeeds  in  soothing  him  to  re-
pose.

That  the  hand  should  be  an  agent  in  dispensing
the  human  or  the  mesmeric  influence  can  hardly
seem  wonderful  to  those  who  consider  how  much  the
hand  is  identified  with,  and  distinctive  of,  man.
Considering  the  perfection  of  its  form,  and  the  dis-
criminative delicacy  of  its  touch,  we  can  almost
pardon  those  who  have  gone  so  far  as  to  affirm  that
the  hand  alone  is  the  efficient  cause  of  our  supremacy
over  the  brute  creation.  The  tactile  nerves,  with
which  it  is  so  abundantly  supplied,  seem  peculiarly
to  adapt  it  to  the  task  of  transmitting  an  influence,
which,  in  some  mysterious  way,  yet  manifestly,
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  nervous  and  vital
forces. In some old  systems  of  physiology each

o


289  CONFORMITY OF  MESMERISM

Yes,  ye%  I  think  I  may  say  that  my  eye  saved  the
nation."

In  fact,  we  perceive  that  Dn  Parr  mesmerised  Pitt
But,  jesting  apart,  I  need  only  refer  to  my  reader's  own
feelings  for  a  testimony  to  the  all  but  miracoloiis
powers  of  the  human  eye.  It  seems  to  be  life  and
will  made  visible ;  and,  when  life  is  fled,  we  may  ex-
claim with  the  poet  —


Oh,  o'er  the  eye  Death  most  exerts  his  might.
And  hurls  the  spirit  from  her  throne  of  light.**


If  the  eye  be  powerful  to  influence  and  to  subdue^
the  human  hand  is  not  less  remarkable  for  its  sooth-
ing properties.  We  naturally  apply  our  hands  to  any
part  of  our  bodies  in  which  we  feel  pain,  and  how
often  are  we  sensible  of  a  mitigation  in  oursufleringsl
The  mother  soothes  her  child  to  sleep  by  the  applica-
tion of  her  hand,  and  calms  it  into  patience,  when  it
has  received  an  injury,  by  her  gentle  touches.  A
lady,  on  whose  word  I  can  rely,  told  me  that,  during
a  heavy  malady,  she  could  gain  no  sleep  except
when  holding  her  husband's  hand,  and  that  the  mo-
ment he  withdrew  it,  however  gently,  she  awoke.
Similar  phenomena,  if  oftener  attended  to,  might
doubtless  press  upon  our  remembrance  and  justify
mesmerism  by  the  analogies  of  common  life.  Touching
for  the  toothach  is  a  sort  of  charm  that  is  often  re-
sorted to  by  the  vulgar  with  success ;  and  in  Con-
stantinople, I  have  been  informed,  there  are  men
who  actually  make  it  their  business  to  cure  tooth-
ach in  this  manner. Once  it  was  supposed  that  a


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  289

certain  insect,  being  crushed  and  held  to  a  painful
tooth,  acted  as  an  anodyne,  and  learned  papers  were
accordingly  written  on  the  virtues  of  this  particular
remedy.  Unfortunately,  however,  it  was  soon  dis-
covered the^t  the  finger  which  applied  the  insect  was
the  real  depository  of  the  soothing  virtue ;  for  the
desired  effect  took  place  just  as  well  without  the  in-
sect as  with  it.

A  travelled  friend  of  mine  tells  me  that  he  has
seen  a  sort  of  mesmerism  exercised  by  the  dancing
Dervises  of  the  East  upon  each  other.  After  wliirl-
ing  round  in  their  mystic  and  exciting  dance,  they
are  apt  to  fall  upon  the  ground  in  strong  convulsions.
On  such  occasions,  one  of  the  calmer  brethren  comes
up  to  the  extatic  patient,  and,  by  gentle  touches  of
the  hand,  invariably  succeeds  in  soothing  him  to  re-
pose.

That  the  hand  should  be  an  agent  in  dispensing
the  human  or  the  mesmeric  influence  can  hardly
seem  wonderful  to  those  who  consider  how  much  the
hand  is  identified  with,  and  distinctive  of,  man.
Considering  the  perfection  of  its  form,  and  the  dis-
criminative delicacy  of  its  touch,  we  can  almost
pardon  those  who  have  gone  so  far  as  to  aflSrm  that
the  hand  alone  is  the  efficient  cause  of  our  supremacy
over  the  brute  creation.  The  tactile  nerves,  with
which  it  is  so  abundantly  supplied,  seem  peculiarly
to  adapt  it  to  the  task  of  transmitting  an  influence,
which,  in  some  mysterious  way,  yet  manifestly,
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  nervous  and  vital
forces. In some old  systems  of  physiology each

o


289  CONFORMITY OF  MESMERISM

Yes,  ye%  I  think  I  may  say  that  my  eye  saved  the


nation."


In  fact,  we  perceive  that  Dr,  Parr  mesmerised  Pitt.
But,  jesting  apart,  I  need  only  refer  to  my  reader's  own
feelings  for  a  testimony  to  the  all  but  miraculous
powers  of  the  human  eye.  It  seems  to  be  life  and
will  made  visible ;  and,  when  life  is  fled,  we  may  ex-
claim with  the  poet  —


Oh,  o'er  the  eye  Death  most  exerts  his  might,
And  hurls  the  spirit  from  her  throne  of  light.^


If  the  eye  be  powerful  to  influence  and  to  subdue,
the  human  hand  is  not  less  remarkable  for  its  sooth-
ing properties.  We  naturally  apply  our  hands  to  any
part  of  our  bodies  in  which  we  feel  pain,  and  how
often  are  we  sensible  of  a  mitigation  in  our  suflerings !
The  mother  soothes  her  child  to  sleep  by  the  applica-
tion of  her  hand,  and  calms  it  into  patience,  when  it
has  received  an  injury,  by  her  gentle  touches.  A
lady,  on  whose  word  I  can  rely,  told  me  that,  during
a  heavy  malady,  she  could  gain  no  sleep  except
when  holding  her  husband's  hand,  and  that  the  mo-
ment  he  withdrew  it,  however  gently,  she  awoke.
Similar  phenomena,  if  oftener  attended  to,  might
doubtless  press  upon  our  remembrance  and  justify
mesmerism  by  the  analogies  of  common  life.  Touching
for  the  toothach  is  a  sort  of  charm  that  is  often  re^
sorted  to  by  the  vulgar  with  success ;  and  in  Con-
stantinople, I  have  been  informed,  there  are  men
who  actually  make  it  their  business  to  cure  tooth-
ach in  this  manner. Once  it  was  supposed  that  a


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  289

certain  insect,  being  crushed  and  held  to  a  painful
tooth,  acted  as  an  anodyne,  and  learned  papers  were
accordingly  written  on  the  virtues  of  this  particular
remedy.  Unfortunately,  however,  it  was  soon  dis-
covered th^t  the  finger  which  applied  the  insect  was
the  real  depository  of  the  soothing  virtue ;  for  the
desired  effect  took  place  just  as  well  without  the  in-
sect as  with  it.

A  travelled  friend  of  mine  tells  me  that  he  has
seen  a  sort  of  mesmerism  exercised  by  the  dancing
Dervises  of  the  East  upon  each  other.  After  wliirl-
ing  round  in  their  mystic  and  exciting  dance,  they
are  apt  to  fall  upon  the  ground  in  strong  convulsions.
On  such  occasions,  one  of  the  calmer  brethren  comes
up  to  the  extatic  patient,  and,  by  gentle  touches  of
the  hand,  invariably  succeeds  in  soothing  him  to  re-
pose.

That  the  hand  should  be  an  agent  in  dispensing
the  human  or  the  mesmeric  influence  can  hardly
seem  wonderful  to  those  who  consider  how  much  the
hand  is  identified  with,  and  distinctive  of,  man.
Considering  the  perfection  of  its  form,  and  the  dis-
criminative delicacy  of  its  touch,  we  can  almost
pardon  those  who  have  gone  so  far  as  to  affirm  that
the  hand  alone  is  the  efficient  cause  of  our  supremacy
over  the  brute  creation.  The  tactile  nerves,  with
which  it  is  so  abundantly  supplied,  seem  peculiarly
to  adapt  it  to  the  task  of  transmitting  an  influence,
which,  in  some  mysterious  way ,  yet  manifestly,
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  nervous  and  vital
forces. In some old  systems  of  physiology each

o


*290  CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM

part  of  the  body  had  its  separate  spirits :  there
were  the  spirits  of  the  knees,  the  spirits  of  the  feet,
&c.  Could  we  adopt  so  fanciful  a  notion,  we  should
say  that  the  spirits  of  the  hand  are  particularly
potent.  After  the  eye,  the  fingers  seem  to  enjoy  a
fuller  share  of  the  sentient  and  motory  power  than
any  other  part  of  the  body.  Seldom  are  they  at
rest— -seldom  are  their  functions  suspended.  The
marvels  of  the  painters',  sculptors',  musicians'  skill
depend  upon  their  agency.  Apart  from  their  re-
cording powers,  the  headwork  of  the  poet  and  phi-
losopher would  be  vain:  to  them  belong  all  the
triumphs  of  architecture,  all  the  splendid  results  of
industry ;  in  fine,  all  the  success  of  all  the  ingenuity
of  man.  Their  free  and  constant  exercise  seems
more  than  any  thing  to  betoken  life:  the  baby's
clutched  hand  is  a  type  of  its  unfolded  being.  The
purposeless  action  of  the  same  organ  is  a  presage  of
death  :  "  After  I  saw  him  fumble  with  the  sheets,"
says  Hostess  Quickly,  "  and  play  with  flowers,  and
smile  upon  his  fingers'  ends,  I  knew  there  was  but
one  way."

Shall  the  general  feeling  of  mankind  be  in  vain
appealed  to  ?  If  that  be  true  which  Shakspeare  has
affirmed  —  "  One  touch  of  nature  makes  the  whole
world  kin,"  — the  influence  of  the  human  hand  must
be  universally  acknowledged.  It  has  a  language  of
its  own ;  it  can  appeal  from  man  to  man ;  it  can
bless,  and  it  can  curse:  the  most  ancient  belief
connects  it  with  authority  and  power.  The  holding
up  of  Moses's  hands  gave  victory  to  the  Israelites.


WITH OUR GENERAL EXPERIENCE.  291

"  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand»
that  Israel  prevailed;  and,  when  he  let  down  his
hand,  Amalek  prevailed."  *

Gifts  of  healing,  not  less  than  of  power,  belong  to
the  hand  by  prescriptive  right.  If  the  potency  of  the
royal  touch  in  curing  the  king's  evil  be  but  a  super-
stition, let  us  remember  that  it  took  its  origin  from  a
holy  source  :  Christ  and  his  disciples  laid  their  hands
upon  the  sick,  and  they  were  healed.  The  miracles
of  our  Lord  were  remarkably  accompanied  by  actions
of  the  hand  f ,  as  if  they  were  in  some  manner  con-
nected with  that  external  means.  In  restoring  sight
and  hearing,  he  touched  the  ears  and  eyes  of  the
afflicted  persons.  Even  the  imparting  of  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Spirit  followed  the  imposition  of  hands;
and  this  external  ensign  of  a  spiritual  agency  is  still
retained  in  our  church.  Who  that  has  undergone  or
witnessed  the  beautiful  rite  of  confirmation  but  has
felt  its  power  ?

The  eye  and  the  hand,  then,  appear  to  be  fitting
instruments  in  transmitting  a  potential  and  remedial
agency.

If  we  seek  for  such  a  general  instance  of  the  in-
fluence of  one  human  being  on  another  as  may  seem
like  that  mutual  loss  and  gain  and  interchange  of
vital  force  which  is  the  principal  wonder  in  mes-
merism, we  have  only  to  look  at  the  effects  produced
when  young  persons  sleep  with  old. Since  the  days


•  Exod.  xvii.  11.

f  See  Matt.  viii.  15. ;  Mark  vii.  33.,  and  viii.  95.

o  2


5292  CONFORMITY OF MESMERISM, ETC*

of  King  David  *,  it  has  been  known  that  the  latter
are  strengthened  at  the  expense  of  the  former.  Some
painful  instances  of  this  have  fallen  under  my  own
observation :  one,  in  which  the  future  well-being  of  a
person  very  dear  to  me  was  compromised ;  and  I
was  acquainted  with  an  infirm  old  lady,  who  was  so
aware  of  the  benefit  that  she  derived  from  sleeping
with  young  persons,  that,  with  a  sort  of  horrid  vam-
pirism, she  always  obliged  her  maid  to  share  her  bed :
thus  successively  destroying  the  health  of  several
attendants.f

Even  amongst  animals  it  has  been  found  that  the
young  cannot  be  too  closely  associated  with  the  old
without  suffering  detriment.  Young  horses,  standing
in  a  stable  beside  old  ones,  become  less  healthy.

*  1  Kings,  ch.  i.

f  The  celebrated  German  physiologist,  Hufeland,  has  re-
marked the  longevity  of  schoolmasters,  and  attributes  it  to  their
living  so  constantly  amidst  the  healthy  emanations  of  young
persons.


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  ^93


SECT.  11.

ON THE MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

I  NOW  proceed  to  assimilate  the  state  of  mesmeric
sleepwaking  itself  to  our  intimate  personal  convic-
tions, striving  to  demonstrate  that  all  its  phases  and
phenomena  are  only  intense  degrees  of  known  and
even  ordinary  conditions  of  man.  I  would  render  it
not  only  comprehensible,  but  familiar  —  not  under-
stood merely,  but  also  felt.

I  have  elsewhere  remarked  that  there  are,  in  the
mesmeric  state,  peculiarities  of  consciousness,  of  which
I  postponed  the  consideration  until  I  could  adduce
them  as  explanatory  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking.  To
this  portion  of  my  subject  I  now  turn  my  attention.
But,  before  proceeding  to  demonstrate  that  the  pecu-
liar conditions  of  mesmeric  consciousness  arise  from
novelty  of  combination  —  not  of  principle,  it  is
absolutely  essential  that  I  should  fix  in  what  sense  I
use  the  word  consciousness,  —  a  precaution  the  more
necessary  on  account  of  the  different  significations
which  have  been  attached  to  it  by  various  metaphy-
sicians ;  some  making  it  a  distinct  faculty  of  the  soul,
others  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  every  mental
operation  and  in  no  way  to  be  distinguished  from
the  operation  itsel£

Examining,  however,  whence  springs  this  diversity

o  3


294  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

of  notion  respecting  consciousness,  we  find  that  all
the  confusion  has  arisen  from  this  —  Consciousness
is  susceptible  of  various  developments,  which  have
never  been  properly  distinguished  into  their  several
grades;  one  person  applying  the  generic  term  in
question  to  one  only  of  its  specific  degrees ;  another
equally  restricting  it  to  a  difierent  class  of  its  oper-
ations. Dr.  Thomas  Brown,  indeed,  has  some  ad-
mirable remarks  upon  the  subject,  and  has  well  dis-
tinguished between  the  simple  consciousness  of  the
moment  and  remembered  consciousness.  But  he
has  omitted  to  observe  that  there  is  again  a  difference
between  these  two  actions  of  consciousness  and  a
third  —  namely,  reflective  consciousness,  or  internal
observation.  It  is  true  that  he  once  casually  observes,
"  consciousness  is  only  another  name  for  internal  ob-
servation ; "  but  herein  I  conceive  him  to  speak  with
less  than  his  usual  accuracy ;  for  consciousness  is  not
another  name  for  internal  observation,  but  internal
observation  is  one  of  the  operations  of  consciousness,
which,  as  not  identical  with  its  parent,  should  not
be  involved  with  it  in  one  common  definition.
Simply  to  feel,  or  simply  to  pass  again  through  a
succession  of  former  feelings  with  a  sense  of  their
relation  to  one  personal  identity,  is  not  the  same  as
to  be  self-regardant  and  watchful  of  our  own  sensa-
tions as  they  arise.  Under  the  last  circumstances
the  mind  is  manifestly  in  another  state  and  tone  of
feeling.  Besides,  nothing  can  be  clearer  than  that
the  mind  may  act  without  internal  observation,  while
without  simple  consciousness  it  cannot  act ;  since,  as


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  295

Dr.  Brown  himself  logically  observes,  "  The  con-
sciousness which  we  have  of  our  transient  thoughts
or  sensations  is  nothing  more  than  the  thoughts  or
sensations  themselves,  which  could  not  be  thoughts
or  sensations  if  they  were  not  felt."  But  Dr.  Brown
errs  as  much,  perhaps,  from  simplicity,  as  others
from  multiplicity,  of  system.  Nothing,  indeed,  can
be  more  admirable  than  his  view  of  the  mind  —  not
as  a  bundle  of  faculties,  but  as  a  unity,  capable  of
passing  into  various  consecutive  states.  But,  had
not  this  great  philosopher  been  as  anxious  to  reduce
all  mental  phenomena  whatever  to  suggestion,  as
Locke  was  to  compress  the  world  of  intellect  into  the
two  faculties  of  sensation  and  reflection,  I  think  he
would  have  admitted  distinctions  which  his  theory
caused  him  to  overlook.  Nature,  however,  will  not
thus  be  restricted.  She  is  simple,  but  her  effects  are
manifold ;  and  the  very  necessities  of  our  language
demand  as  distinctive  a  reference  to  her  various
operations,  as  if  the  differences  were  actual,  and  of
kind,  instead  of  degree.  Gothe,  in  his  Morphology
of  Plants,  has  beautifully  shown  that  all  their  various
parts  are  but  developments  of  one  original  principle ;
yet  what  confusion  in  botany  would  arise  were  some
naturalists  to  apply  the  generic  word  plant  to  the
leaves,  others  to  the  blossoms,  of  a  vegetable  !  Yet
an  absurdity  as  great  as  this  is  committed  when  we
apply  the  generic  term  consciousness  indiscriminately
to  all  the  different  manifestations,  degrees,  and
varieties  of  that  action  of  intelligence.  The  safer
plan  is  to  mark  difference,  where  difference  can  be

o  4


^96  MESMERIC  consciousness;

discerned,  and  to  give  distinct  names  to  distinct  de-
velopments, whether  of  matter  or  of  mind.  In  doing
this,  however,  we  have  to  guard  against  unnecessary
multiplication,  and  we  should  never  omit  to  trace
the  original  source  amidst  the  mazes  of  its  various
channels.  Simplicity  of  principle  —  variety  of  deve-
lopment,—  these  are  the  points  to  be  kept  in  view.
Thus,  while  we  admit  sensation,  perception,  atten-
tion, reflection,  to  be  excellent  terms  to  express  cer-
tain acts  of  the  mind,  we  must  not  forget  that  these
so-called  faculties  are  but  different  forms  and  mani-
festations of  consciousness.  A  little  consideration
will  show  that  they  are  truly  so.

A  sensation  of  which  the  mind  is  not  conscious  is
no  sensation  at  all ;  neither  can  we  feel  without  per-
ceiving, nor  perceive  without,  in  some  degree,  attend-
ing to  that  which  we  perceive.  When  we  say  that
we  attend  to  a  thing,  which  before  we  barely  per-
ceived, it  is  not  that  consciousness,  perception,  and
attention  are  going  on  together,  but  that  conscious-
ness has  advanced  through  the  stage  of  perception
into  that  of  attention,  —  attention  only  expressing  a
higher  degree  of  consciousness,  while  reflection,
again,  indicates  a  different  operation  of  the  same.
This  last  is  attention  directed  towards  ourselves,
instead  of  external  things;  but  the  principle  is  un-
changed. A  reflection  is  just  as  much  the  consci-
ousness of  the  moment  as  is  a  simple  sensation.

If  it  be  asked,  then,  in  what  sense  I  use  the  term
consciousness,  I  answer,  as  a  general  expression  for
every  act  and  state  of  the  mind. I  do  not  say  with


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  i297

Reid  that  it  is  "  an  operation  of  the  understanding  "
(though  I  do  grant  him  that  it  cannot  be  "  logically
defined  " —  for  how  can  we  define  existence  ?  ),  but  I
affirm  that  it  is  the  operation,  not  of  the  undet*-
standing  only,  but  of  the  whole  man.  To  explain
myself  still  further,  I  conceive  that  consciousness
stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the  mind  that  physical
force  does  to  the  body.  As  the  least  of  our  motions
implies  a  degree  of  the  latter,  so  does  the  most
trifling  mental  change  infer  a  degree  of  the  former.
Let  it  be  remembered,  however,  that  consciousness,
like  physical  force,  has  no  real  existence  out  of  the
subject  that  manifests  it.  Nevertheless,  for  purposes
of  analysis,  we  must  not  only  speak  of  it  separately,
but  distinguish  its  various  intensity  of  action.  In
order  to  do  this,  yet  as  much  as  possible  preserve  an
unbroken  unity,  I  conceive  that  the  best  nomen-
clature for  the  varieties  of  consciousness  Would  be
one  that  should  ever  recall  the  primary  quality,  yet
distinguish,  by  means  of  epithets,  its  various  mani-
festations. Omitting  its  minor  developments,  I
propose,  therefore,  to  classify  thus  the  operations  of
the  agency  in  question :  —

Simple  consciousness,  —  that  is  to  say,  the  mind's
action  in  those  absent  and  dreamy  moods,  when
much  thought  is  accompanied  by  no  reflection,  and
is  succeeded  by  no  memory  of  the  subjects  of  its
meditation.

Retrospective  consciousness,  —  the  mind's  action,
when  it  passes  through  a  series  of  former  thoughts

o  5


298  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSl^ESfS.

and sensations, without  making them objects of
scrutiny.

Introspective  consciousness,  —  the  mind's  action,
when  self-regardant.  It  is  distinguished  from  mere
memory  in  two  marked  particulars.  It  immediately
succeeds  the  thought,  on  which  it  casts  a  reflective
glance,  and  it  has  ourselves  for  its  object.  It  is  a
state  in  which  thought,  and  observation  of  thought,
succeed  each  other  so  rapidly,  and  with  such  even
alternation,  as  to  seem  identical.

But  the  end  which  I  have  in  view  compels  me  still
further  to  observe  that  the  mind  has  a  physical  as
well  as  intellectual  sensibility,  and  takes  cognisance
of  the  motions  and  sensual  conditions  of  the  body  to
which  it  is  attached.  Its  observation  of  these  seems
to  constitute  a  consciousness  apart.  The  proof  may
be  drawn  from  our  simplest  actions.  When  walking
and  thinking  on  various  subjects,  we  never  cease  for
a  moment  to  direct  our  limbs  properly,  yet  never
once  interrupt  our  train  of  thought,  unless  some
unusual  circumstance  should  call  upon  us  for  an
unusual  attention  to  our  manner  of  progressing.
Now  allowing,  as  axiomatic,  that  bodily  motions  (the
vital  arid  involuntary  of  course  excepted)  spring  from
the  mind,  and  that,  cause  ceasing,  effect  also  ceases,
we  must  perceive  that  to  every  act  of  the  body  an  act
of  the  mind  is  requisite.  Of  how  many  acts  of  the
mind,  then,  is  walking  composed !  consequently  of
how  many  simple  consciousnesses  !  But  other  con-
sciousnesses have  been  shown  progressing  identically
with these. While occupied in  walking,  we  pre-


MESMERIC CGNSCIOUSKESS.  299

served  a  chain  of  intellectual  thought  as  consistent
and  as  unbroken  as  the  physical  one  whereby  our
external  actions  were  directed.

This  is  a  phenomenon  of  our  nature,  in  the  con-
sideration of  which  we  may  indeed  cast  out

"  Philosophy's  deep  seapline,  but  to  find
Truth's  ocean  fathomless."

But,  while  we  confess  it  to  be  a  mystery,  we  should
also  value  it  as  a  blessing ;  for,  were  we  forced  ever
to  attend  to  those  motions,  which  may  now  be  called
automatic,  we  should  scarcely  have  leisure  for  any
other  mental  process.  If  the  mind  that  now  guides
the  pen  wherewith  these  lines  are  traced  were  occu-
pied in  the  mere  act  of  writing,  what  would  become
of  the  thoughts  which  it  desires  to  record  and  to
transmit  to  others  ?

That  the  physical  consciousness  is  capable,  like
the  intellectual,  of  a  triple  development,  is  also
manifest.

It  has  its  simple  action;  as  when  each  motion  of
our  bodies  is  carelessly  performed,  and  cannot  be
remembered  so  as  to  be  exactly  repeated.

It  has  its  retrospective  action ;  as  when  we  re-
member and  repeat,  yet  do  not  observe  our  motion
(in  the  case  of  playing  an  air  from  memory,  for  ex-
ample, while  we  are  thinking  of  something  else).
And,

It  has  its  introspective  action ;  as  when  we  attend
to  our  footsteps,  in  descending,  with  precaution,  a
snow-covered  and  slippery  hill.

o  6


300  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

It  would  be  easy  to  show  the  various  states  pro-
duced by  the  mixture  of  these  elements  in  various
proportions,  tracing  the  degrees  from  the  constant
self-scrutiny,  both  mental  and  physical,  that  some
persons  carry  on  in  society,  when  they  observe  their
every  least  word,  fearful  to  utter  aught  amiss,  and
their  own  least  gesture,  lest  they  should  commit  an
awkwardness,  to  the  unmixed  and  simple  conscious-
ness of  reverie.  But  this  would  lead  me  too  far  from
my  present  purpose.  The  two  states  above  men-
tioned may  be  taken  as  the  extreme  points  of  con-
sciousness, while  its  medium  condition  may  be  found
in  our  usual  and  habitual  modes  of  conduct,  when
we  are  sufficiently  attentive  to  our  motions,  not  to
knock  our  heads  against  a  wall,  and  to  our  thoughts^
as  to  be  sure  we  are  thinking.

Regarding  these  states  according  to  their  value,
we  find  that  in  none  of  them  would  man  ever  be
capable  of  much  intellectual  exertion.  In  the  first,
the  attention  is  too  generally  diffused,  in  its  opposite
too  restricted,  in  the  medium  too  alternating.  Would
we  find  man's  distinguishing  stamp  of  mental  supe-
riority, we  must  seek  it  in  a  fourth  state  —  namely,
that  of  abstraction,  in  which  the  pure  intellectuality
reigns  nearly  alone,  and  almost  free  from  any  dis-
turbance of  the  introspective  consciousness,  which,
being  of  itself  an  act,  annihilates,  pro  tempore^  all
other  acts.  Were  we  perpetually  to  exercise  the  re-
flex act  of  the  mind,  and  to  pause  upon  our  thoughts
with  self-observation,  our  train  of  ideas  would  halt,
and  fall  to  pieces  for  want  of  connection.


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  301

But  this  is  not  all.  Any  admixture  of  the  intro-
spective consciousness  detracts  from  the  perfection  of
once-acquired  and  habitual  motions,  as  much  as  it
spoils  the  freedom  and  bold  expansion  of  our  thoughts.
Of  this  we  may  soon  convince  ourselves.  Though
generally  insensible  to  the  act  of  breathing,  we  may,
by  attention,  become  aware  of  the  process.  What
follows  ?  An  immediate  sense  of  uneasiness,  and  an
interruption  of  that  regular  motion  which  seems  to
go  on  so  well  by  itself.  Again,  that  winking  of  the
eye,  whereby  the  organ  is  healthily  preserved,  becomes
a  torment,  if  we  think  about  it.  If  these  instances  be
objected  to  by  persons  who  would  confound  the  above
motions  with  such  as  are  vital  and  involuntary,  I  may
appeal  to  a  known  phenomenon,  which  regards  the
voluntary  motion  of  our  fingers.  Every  musician
must  have  felt  that,  when  he  has  learnt  to  play  a
piece  of  music  by  heart,  if  he  thinks  upon  the  direc-
tion of  his  fingers,  he  is  apt  to  play  false.  Let  him
trust  to  the  simply  memorial  consciousness  of  his  phy-
sical being,  and  he  does  not  err.  I  have  even  known
persons  successfully  consult  this  memory  of  the  fingers
(as  it  may  be  called)  when  they  have  in  vain  ques-
tioned their  intellectual  memory.  I  remember  a  lady
trying  to  recall  an  air,  which  once  she  could  execute
on  the  piano,  and  she  could  not  do  this,  until  she
had  (as  she  expressed  it)  "  ceased  thinking  about  it,
and  let  her  fingers  go  of  themselves.''  Again :  the
operations  of  memory  are  impeded  by  the  introspec-
tive consciousness.  As  Darwin,  in  his  Zoonomia,
observes,  —  "  We  firequently  experience,  when  we  are


d02  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

doubtful  about  the  spelling  of  a  word,  that  the  greater
voluntary  exertion  we  use  —  that  is,  the  more  intensely
we  think  about  it^  the  further  we  are  from  regaining
the  lost  association,  which  readily  recurs  when  we
have  become  careless  about  it."

Introspective  consciousness,  then,  appears  equally
to  mar  our  liberty  and  our  memory  both  of  thought
and  of  motion ;  and  consequently  it  should  seem  that,
in  proportion  as  we  can  be  exempted  from  its  inter-
ference, we  must  attain  a  higher  state  of  intellect  and
of  corporeal  activity.

This  we  may  surmise ;  but  proof  is  not  wanting
to  confirm  it  to  us.  The  state  of  the  philosopher
who  solved  the  problem  of  the  universe  was  avowedly
a  state  of  abstraction  and  of  self-forgetfulness ;  and
it  is  equally  well  known  that  natural  sleepwakers,
who  can  never  be  supposed  capable  of  self-scrutiny,
will  achieve  feats,  which  would  be  the  horror  of
their  waking  moments.  They  will  stand,  self-balanced,
on  the  ridge  of  a  house,  where,  under  the  usual  con-
ditions of  consciousness,  they  could  not  preserve  their
equilibrium  for  a  single  moment :  they  will  cross  a
roaring  torrent  on  a  single  plank;  —  but,  if  suddenly
awakened  to  a  contemplation  of  themselves  or  their
situation,  they  will  lose  their  footing,  or  perhaps  die
of  alarm.  Are  these  examples  too  far  removed  from
general  experience  ?  We  will  then  bring  the  matter
at  once  home  to  every  one's  personal  feelings.  What
is  it  that  accompanies  and  adds  to  the  awkwardness
caused  by  timidity  ?  An  over-watchfulness,  a  care
that  mars  itself —  in  fine,  the  too  predominant  pre-


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  303

sence  of  the  introspective  consciousness.  The  shy
scarcely  ever  forget  themselves,  as  it  is  called — '
make  them  do  so,  and  their  deportment  is  at  once
improved.

Consciousness  having  now  been  defined,  and  its
principal  varieties  of  action  noted,  it  will  be  instruc-
tive to  observe  how  far  it  is  peculiarly  modified  in
mesmeric  sleepwaking,  and  how  far  it  is  acting  in
harmony  with  known  and  established  laws.  On
examination,  I  imagine  it  will  appear  that  mesmerism
is  not  that  violation  of  nature's  order  which  it  has  by
some  been  deemed  to  be ;  —  but  that,  on  the  contrary,
the  changes,  which  it  induces  in  our  being,  are  in  strict
accordance  with  well-known  principles,  which  are  of
the  commonest  application,  and  which  may  be  easily
tested  in  ourselves.

First,  then,  we  have  gathered,  from  the  observ-
ations which  have  lately  been  brought  forward,  that,
in  proportion  as  introspective  consciouness  is  annulled,
the  powers  of  thought  and  of  motion  are  developed.

Now  that  the  mesmeric  state,  compared  by  some  to
that  of  sleep,  by  others  to  that  of  delirium,  can  be  a
state  of  self-watchfulness,  no  one  will,  I  think,  main-
tain. It  is  what  is  vulgarly  called  a  state  of  complete
unconsciousness.  In  corroboration  of  this,  it  may  be
observed  that  mesmerised  persons  speak  with  a  free-
dom, instances  of  which  being  related  to  them  in  their
waking  condition  cause  them  surprise  and  even  vexa-
tion. Anna  M ,  in  sleepwaking,  once  lectured

me  on  burdening  myself  with  so  many  effects  in
travelling,  and  yet,  in  her  natural  state,  almost  wept


804  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

to  think  she  had  been  guilty  of  so  much  rudeness*
It  was  plain  that,  when  awake,  she  was  able  to  reflect
upon  her  own  conduct  in  a  manner  which  she  could
not  while  sleeping  mesmerically.

Again:  sleepwakers  seem  wholly  unable  to
scrutinise  their  own  sensations,  and,  if  questioned
concerning  them,  will  (as  I  have  in  other  places  re-
marked) give  confused  and  even  irrational  replies.
Moreover,  if  asked  to  be  self-observant,  when  perform-
ing any  thing,  their  actions  come  to  a  stand  still,  and
the  very  efforts  which  they  make  at  reflection  prove
their  inability  to  exercise  that  faculty.

Introspective  consciousness,  then,  may  be  pro-
nounced to  be  absent  in  the  mesmeric  slumber;
and,  consequent  upon  that  absence,  we  find  —  exactly
as  in  the  normal  condition  of  man  —  an  improvement
both  of  thought  and  motion  in  the  mesmeric  sleep-
waker.  Proofs  of  this  will  be  found  in  former  pages
of  this  work.  Not  only  have  mesmerised  persons  been
shown  to  reason  with  a  perspicuity  of  which  they
were  incapable  at  other  times,  but  to  display  a  grace
and  freedom  of  gesture  wholly  different  from  the
constraint  of  their  habitual  deportment.

Thus  the  perfection  of  motion,  and  superior  coher-
ence of  thought,  which  mesmeric  sleepwakers  dis-
play, in  connection  with  the  absence  of  introspective
consciousness,  is  but  a  higher  grade  of  a  known  con-
dition,—the  extension  and  not  the  alteration  of  a
principle.


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  305

Tbe  second  law  of  our  normal  condition,  with  which
I  would  show  the  mesmeric  state  to  coincide,  is  —
that.  In  proportion  as  the  intellectual  consciousness
is  heightened  in  its  character  and  spirituality,  the
physical  consciousness  is  deadened  and  depressed.

The  accuracy  of  this  position  may  be  tested  by
every  one  under  the  most  common  circumstances  of
life.  In  states  of  even  trifling  abstraction  we  become
insensible  to  slight  bodily  discomforts ;  and,  while  me-
ditating inwardly  on  themes  that  are  interesting  to
us,  we  frequently  maintain  one  position  until  our
nerves  are  compressed  and  our  circulation  hindered
to  a  degree  sufficient  to  compel  us  back  to  our  phy-
sical sensations.  Again :  when  we  are  suffering  from
slight  headach,  or  other  temporary  derangements  of
the  system,  should  any  subject  strongly  rivet  our  at-
tention, we  become,  by  degrees,  less  and  less  sensible
of  the  inconvenience,  and,  at  length  (as  it  is  phrased)
forget  our  pains.  The  principle  runs  through  all
mankind  —  from  infancy  to  age.  A  child  falls,
receives  a  hurt,  and  begins  to  cry.  Speak  to  it  —
arouse  its  mental  activity,  and  its  tears  cease  long
before  the  mere  mechanical  ^njury  that  set  them  flow-
ing has  been  done  away.  Pursuing  the  same  law  to
its  higher  instances  of  application,  we  arrive  at  the
holy  abstraction  of  religious  men  and  the  elevated
faith  of  martyrs,  who  have  smiled  on  bodily  anguish
to  the  last,  not  only  triumphing  over,  but  becoming
insensible  to,  agony,  while  their  songs  of  praise  and
joy  ascended  to  heaven  from  the  torturing  wheel  or
-the  consuming  flame.


306  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

But  this  entire  spiritualising  of  humanity  is  of  rare
occurrence,  and,  should  we  desire  to  behold  the  more
striking  conquest  of  mind  over  matter,  it  is  plain  that
we  must  seek  them  in  some  other  than  our  normal
condition,  —  amidst  our  loftiest  abstractions,  as  we
are  at  present  constituted,  the  body  drags  us  down  to
earth.  Those  busy  inlets  of  conscious  sensation,
which  yield  us  so  many  pleasures  and  so  many  pains,
are  continually  marring  the  higher  processes  of  our
intellect  by  their  exquisite  capacity  to  receive  im-
pressions. A  Newton's  chain  of  thought  may  be  for
ever  broken  by  the  buzzing  of  an  unlucky  fly ;  and
links  so  subtle,  when  once  severed,  how  difficult  are
they  to  be  again  united !  The  power  of  total  ab-
straction were,  to  great  minds,  power  indeed  !  In
sleep,  it  is  true,  our  senses  are  under  a  strict  warden-
ship,  but  then  reason  is  also  fettered.  Yet  even  from
sleep  we  may  gather  how  much  stronger  is  the  force
of  mind,  when  no  longer  dissipated  by  external
things.  Every  one  who  has  dreamed  of  sorrow  and
alarm  will  confess  with  what  unusual  awfulness  their
stern  images  have  stood  forth  from  amidst  the  sur-
rounding blankness  of  slumber.  It  is  only  in  sleep
that  we  can  become,  as  it  were,  one  thought  of
agony.  Our  impressions  are  then  violent,  because
they  are  unmitigated.  There  is  none  of  that  counter-
poise of  the  senses,  which,  under  true  waking  sorrow,
we  acknowledge  to  be  so  merciful  a  part  of  our  con-
stitution; for,  could  we  live  under  the  pressure  of
some*  afllictions,  did  not  external  things  sometimes
take  us  off  from  ourselves  ? Occasionally,  also,  we


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  807

enjoy  in  sleep,  happiness  which  appears  to  be  more
than  earthly,  —

**  Dreams  such  as  luU  the  hermit  in  his  shades.**

Yet,  strong  as  are  the  bands  which  slumber  can  cast
around  us,  the  senses  are  not  always  so  entirely  fet-
tered but  that  their  imperfect  action  shall  dimly
influence  the  nature  of  our  visions.  Moreover,  a
mere  touch,  a  casual  noise,  may  at  any  time  disperse
the  most  agreeable  pictures  of  sleep's  shadowy  crea-
tion, and  recall  us  at  once  to  the  world  and  to  the
pressure  of  all  its  trifles,  —


u


Heavy  as  frost,  and  deep,  almost,  as  life."


Where  then  shall  we  find  an  abstraction  so  profound,
yet  so  peculiar,  as  to  bind  the  senses  fast,  yet  leave
the  intellect  a  wider  scope,  a  vigour  more  effective  ?

These  conditions  we  find  alone  united  in  the  mes-
meric slumber.  More  perfect  than  any  that  opiates
can  produce,  it  is  also  so  far  beyond  the  reach  of
accidental  dispersion  that  painful  surgical  operations
have  been  performed  during  its  continuance.  Yet,
on  the  other  hand,  reason,  which  in  the  natural  sleep
is  either  quenched,  or  but  feebly  active,  burns
brighter  in  that  which  we  are  now  considering.

That  mesmeric  patients  speak  always  truth,  is  no
doubtful  proof  of  this,  —  they  perceive  all  the  irra-
tionality of  falsehood.  Be  it  observed,  too,  that  the
insensibility  of  the  body  under  mesmerism,  bears  no
resemblance whatever  to the deadness caused  by


308  M£SMERIC  CONSCIOUSNESS.

narcotics  or  any  thing  that  affects  the  mere  me-
chanism of  existence.  The  mind  of  the  mesmeric
sleepwaker  is  not  benmnbed  together  with  the  body,
but  it  has  retired  into  its  inner  fastnesses,  with  all  its
susceptibilities  and  functions  unimpaired.  It  medi-
tates, and  is  absorbed,  and  gives  to  the  countenance
(even  should  the  physiognomy  in  general  be  of  no
elevated  cast),  a  loftier  character,  and  a  look  of  in-
ward contemplation,  which  has  frequently  struck  even
the  most  careless  observer  of  the  mesmeric  slumber.

To  the  state  of  abstraction,  then,  a  state  so  well
known  in  its  inferior  degrees  to  all  persons,  mes-
meric sleep  waking  bears  no  trifling  analogy,  and  it
exhibits  the  two  phenomena  of  intellectual  activity  and
corporeal  deadness,  heightened  indeed  to  an  extra-
ordinary pitch,  yet  still  preserving  the  same  coexist-
ence which  they  present  in  ordinary  life.

A  third  law  of  our  being,  with  which  mesmerism  is
in  perfect  harmony,  is  the  following.

Consciousness,  whether  it  relate  to  sensation  or  to
intellectual  exertion,  acts  more  forcibly  the  more  it  is
brought  to  bear  upon  a  single  point.

Who  has  not  felt  that  the  senses,  by  their  simul-
taneous action,  are  restrictions  the  one  upon  the
other?  How  seldom  can  we  be  wholly  absorbed  in
the  pleasures  of  the  eye !  How  seldom,  when  listen-
ing to  sweet  sounds,  can  we  become  "  all  ear !  *'
There  is  almost  always  a  something  to  be  deducted
from  our  feelings  by  the  interference  of  some  other
sense  than  that  we  desire  to  exercise.  Were  all  our
capacities  of  sensation  concentrated  upon any  one


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  809

property  of  matter,  we  may  judge  how  much  stronger
would  be  the  force  of  our  perceptions,  by  observing
that,  where  one  sense  is  actually  wanting  (as  in  the
blind  or  deaf,  for  instance),  the  vivacity  of  impressions
revived  through  the  other  organs  is  greatly  in-
creased. We  may  remark,  too,  in  ourselves,  that
not  only  the  stillness  of  night,  but  its  obscurity,
which  concentrates  our  attention  upon  objects  of
hearing,  quickens  the  auditory  powers  in  an  extra-
ordinary degree.

Again,  as  regards  the  exercise  of  our  mental  capa-
cities, experience  inculcates,  as  one  of  the  precepts  of
wisdom,  that,  if  we  wish  to  do  a  thing  perfectly,  we
must  do  it  singly ;  and,  though  stories  have  been  told
of  great,  or  would-be  great  men,  who  have  played
games  at  chess  and  dictated  letters  to  secretaries  at
the  same  time,  it  has  not  been  said  that  the  chess
would  not  have  been  better  played  and  the  letter
better  composed,  had  the  attention  been  directed
solely  either  to  one  or  the  other.  Napoleon  had  an
extraordinary  power  of  directing  his  mind,  when
needful,  to  a  multitude  of  simultaneous  occupations ;
but,  when  tracing  the  plan  of  a  battle,  he  sate  alone
in  his  tent,  and  watched  while  others  slept.  Besides,
correctly  speaking,  it  is  not  pretended  that  the  mind
can  do  more  than  one  thing  at  once,  it  merely  leaps
from  one  object  of  attention  to  another  with  astonish-
ing swiftness  and  versatility;  while,  in  that  very
versatility  it  loses  force,  and  abjures  that  continuity
which  is  the  element  of  greatness.

When  then  we  find  that  there  is  a remarkable


310  M£SM£RIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

singleness  in  the  consciousness  of  mesmeric  sleep*
wakers,  and  that  whatever  they  do  absorbs  them
wholly,  we  shall  perhaps  have  less  reason  to  be
astonished  at  the  great  eminence  to  which  their  per-
ceptive and  reasoning  faculties  attain.  Indeed,  the
concentration  of  the  mind,  in  mesmerism,  is  such  as
I  should  imagine  to  be  unattainable  under  any  other
condition, —  all  the  bodily  organs  being,  as  it  were,
annulled,  there  are  none  of  those  conflicting  con-
sciousnesses which,  in  actual  life,  destroy  each  other,
like  meeting  waves  in  water.  Whatever  source  of
perception  mesmerised  persons  possess  appears  rather
to  consist  in  one  sense  than  in  many,  —  in  one  sense
which  can  become  each  of  the  others,  so  that  he,  who
exercises  it,  seems  to  become,  by  turns,  a  hearing,
seeing,  or  feeling  unity.

It  occurs  to  me  here  to  make  a  remark  connected
with  this  part  of  my  subject.

Persons  in  the  mesmeric  state,  however  generally
sentient  to  any  injury  inflicted  on  their  mesmeriser,
will,  if  expressly  employed  by  him  in  any  absorbing
effort,  appear  heedless  of  those  experiments  of  pain
which  may  be  tried  upon  him.  This  is  but  a  natural
result  of  ^their  singleness  of  perception ;  and,  more-
over, it  is  evident  that  all  persons,  even  in  the  normal
state,  will  be  insensible  to  pain,  if  it  bear  an  inferior
proportion  to  the  degree  of  their  mental  abstraction.
Yet  some  persons  have  triumphantly  referred  to  tliis
as  a  proof  of  the  nullity  of  an  experiment,  which
only  failed  because  it  was  not  tried  under  the  proper
and  necessary  conditions.


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  311

On  the  whole,  it  appears  that  the  increase  of  per-
ception and  of  mental  power  in  mesmerised  persons,
found  as  it  is  in  combination  with  a  concentrated
attention,  is  in  exact  accordance  with  the  constitution
of  our  intellectual  and  physical  being.

Yet  more  than  this,  the  forgetfulness,  in  the  waking
state,  of  thoughts  which  occupied  the  mind  during
mesmeric  sleepwaking,  is  in  harmony  with  other
known  phenomena  of  consciousness.

It  appears  to  be  a  law,  that  the  less  of  introspective
consciousness  has  been  present  to  a  state,  the  less
memory  is  there  of  that  state.

This  is  evident ;  for,  when  we  have  been  engaged
in  a  reverie,  or  a  series  of  simple  consciousnesses,
which  die  as  soon  as  born,  —  "  the  perfume  and  sup-
pliance  of  a  minute,"  that  we  have  bfeen  thinking  is
very  sure,  but  of  the  subject  matter  of  that  thinking
we  retain  no  recollection.  Locke  says,  "  I  confess
myself  to  have  one  of  those  dull  souls,  that  doth  not
perceive  itself  always  to  contemplate  ideas ; "  and  the
poet  Cowper,  evidently  copying  from  the  illustrious
metaphysician,  before  drawing  an  admirable  picture
of  himself  in  a  reverie,  confesses

**  Fearless,  a  mind  that  does  not  always  think.*'

Every  one  will  probably  be  ready  to  make  a  similar
avowal;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  this  state  of
apparent  no-thought,  is,  in  fact,  only  one  of  our
modes  of  thinking.  Acknowledging  that  we  do  not
perceive  ourselves  always  to  contemplate  ideas,  we


312  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

by  no  means  affirm  that  we  have  not  always  ideas  to
contemplate  (though,  indeed,  I  believe  Locke  meant
his  readers  to  draw  such  a  conclusion),  and  the
absence  of  the  reflex  act  of  the  mind,  whereby  we
are,  as  it  were,  present  to  ourselves,  cannot  annihilate
the  simple  unreflective  action  of  momentary  con-
sciousness. Cowper,  indeed,  by  his  description  of
the  objects  which  he  has  seen  in  his  winter's  fire,
during  what  he  calls  "  a  waking  dream,'*  proves  that,
in  that  dream,  his  mind,  though  but  idly  busy,  was
still  employed,  nay  even  somewhat  attentive  to'il--Q»wn
operations,  for  he  remembers  vaguely  the  shadowy
ideas  that  floated  across  his  fancy.  It  is  not  every
one,  however,  who  can  have  a  poet's  reverie,  or  turn
it  to  such  good  account  as  Cowper.  In  general,
when  we  have  fallen  into  what  some  call  '*  a  brown
study,"  the  fit  is  succeeded  by  a  total  forgetfulness  of
the  elements  which  composed  it,  and  the  friend  who
startles  us  from  our  absent  mood,  by  tapping  us  on
the  shoulder,  and  exclaiming,  "  a  penny  for  your
thoughts,"  can  obtain  no  other  answer  than  '*  I  was
thinking  of  nothing."  Still  we  retain  a  confused
notion  that  the  apparent  blank  was  really  peopled  by
the  ever-restless  mind ;  though,  not  having  observed
our  thoughts,  we  feel  that  we  cannot  remember  them.
This  is  common  reverie ;  but  there  is  a  deeper
degree  of  it  than  this.  In  some  cases,  as  Darwin  has
remarked,  "  it  becomes  a  formidable  disease ;"  and
this  advanced  stage  of  a  mood,  which  is  experienced
in  a  less  degree  by  us  all,  is  characterised  (acording
to  the  authority  just  quoted) by  "  the  total  forget-


MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.  813

fulness  of  what  passes "  during  its  continuance,  and
"  surprise  on  recovering  "  from  it*

Observe,  too,  how  the  loftier  state  of  abstraction
indicates  the  same  proportion  between  the  intro^
spective  consciousness  and  memory.

In  abstraction,  ^s  I  have  already  shown,  there  is
but  a  low  degree  of  self-observation  present ;  for
from  the  moment  that  we  examine  our  springs  of
thought  too  curiously  they  cease  to  play.  But  it  may
further  be  remarked  that,  during  abstraction,  the
r^^  )c;ctive  consciousness  supplies  the  place  of  the
introspective,  we  stopping  from  time  to  time  to  re-
view our  thoughts,  and  to  fix  in  our  own  memories
that  which  originated  from  our  own  minds.  Only  in
so  far  as  we  do  this,  are  the  workings  of  our  intellect
rendered  permanent.  Should  any  one  suddenly  in-
terrupt our  train  of  ideas,  in  one  of  our  inattentive
intervals,  or  before  the  whole  series  is  connected  and
complete,  how  often  we  (to  use  a  common  expression)
"lose  the  thread  of  our  thoughts,"  which  by  no  effort
of  memory  we  can  recover.

In  abstracted  study,  also,  it  should  be  remembered
that  we  are  often  writing  down  the  actual  thoughts
of  the  moment,  making  our  pen  the  engraver  of  our
ideas,  and  our  paper  the  organ  of  our  remembrance.
Thus  is  preserved  much  of  our  brain-work,  which
otherwise  would  have  perished  in  the  thinking.  This
is  more  than  conjecture ;  for  often,  after  a  few  hours,
we  have  so  far  forgotten  our  compositions,  as  to  read
them  with  what  is  called  "  a  new  eye,"  and  to  detect
faults  in  them  which  surprise  ourselves,  they  having

p


314  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

escaped  our  observation  so  l(mg  as  our  efiervescing
fancy  predominated  ov^  our  self-consciousness.  Dr.
Johnson,  it  is  well  known,  met  with  his  own  Rasselas
many  years  after  its  publication,  and  read  it,  as  he
himself  declares,  with  as  strange  a  feeling  as  if  it  had
been  the  work  of  another  person.  In  Lockiiart's  life
of  Scott,  a  similar  and  more  remarkable  phenomenon
is  recorded.  The  great  novelist  composed  that  grand
story,  the  Bride  of  Lammermoor,  while  suffering
from  excruciating  spasmodic  attacks  which  caused
him  to  have  recourse  to  frequent  doses  of  laudanum.
He  dictated  nearly  the  whole  work  under  these
painful  circumstances ;  and  it  is  said  that,  ^'  though
he  often  turned  himself  on  his  pillow,  with  a  groan
of  torment,  he  usually  continued  the  sentence  in  the
same  breath.  But,  when  dialogue  of  pecidiar  ani^-
mation  was  in  progress,  spirit  seemed  to  triumph
altogether  over  matter — he  arose  from  his  couch,  and
walked  up  and  down  the  room,  raising  and  lowering
his  voice,  and,  as  it  were,  acting  the  piuts."

But  what  is  most  extraordinary  is,  that,  after  the
book  was  published,  Scott  assured  James  Ballant3nne
that,  ^^  when  it  was  first  put  into  his  hands  in  a  com-
plete shape,  he  did  not  recollect  one  single  inddent,
character,  or  conversation  that  it  contained  !  *  For  a
long  time,'  he  said,  *  1  felt  myself  very  uneasy,  in  the
course  of  my  reading,  lest  I  should  be  startled  by
meeting  something  altogether  glaring  and  fantastic'  **
Ballantyne,  by  whom  the  anecdote  was  preserved,
adds,  **  I  do  not  think  I  ever  ventured  to  lead  to  the
discussion  of  this  singular  phenomenon  again;  but


MESMERIC  CONSCIOUSNESS.  815

you  may  ckpend  on  it,  that  what  i  have  now  said  is
as  distinctly  reported  as  if  it  had  been  taken  down  in
short-hand  at  the  moment;  I  should  not  otherwise
have  ventured  to  allude  to  the  matter  at  all.  I
believe  you  will  agree  with  me  in  thinking  that  the
history  of  the  human  mind  contains  nothing  more
wonderful."

A  similar  instance  (though  on  a  small  scale)  of  the
mind's  forgetfulness  of  its  own  previous  operations
fell  under  my  own  cognisance.

Some  years  ago,  I  met  once  in  society  poor  Mrs.
Maclean  —  then  the  admired  L.  E.  L.  A  song^  was
sung,  the  words  of  which  struck  me  as  very  beautiful,
and  the  young  poetess  seemed  to  be  of  the  same
opinion,  for  she  expressed  her  admiration  of  them
warmly,  asking  at  the  same  time,  who  wrote  them  ?
The  gentleman  who  had  sung  the  song  laughed,  and
said,  "  Surely  you  remember  your  own  poetry ! ''
It  was  a  long  time,  however,  before  the  authoress
could  be  made  to  recall  when  or  where  she  wrote  the
words;  whidh,  however,  at  last  die  recognised  as
one  of  those  improvisations  which  she  was  accuse
tomed  to  write  down^  give  away^  and  never  think  of
again.

That  we  occasionally  remember  the  dreams  that
we  have  had  in  sleep  may  be  lurged  as  contradictory
of  the  theory  I  am  advocating ;  for  can  dreaming,  it
may  be  asked,  in  any  way  be  called  a  state  of  intro-
spective consciousness  ?  I  reply,  certainly  it  can  and
must.  Nothing  is  more  evident  than  that,  in
dreaming,  the  mind  watches  its  own  fantastic  train

p  2


816  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

of  thought^  since  what  is  the  imagery  of  our  dream»
but  its  own  creation,  and  who  is  the  spectator  of  that
imagery  but  itself?  There  is  in  the  phenomenon  of
dreaming  an  especial  duality  of  action,  only  to  be
explained  (unless,  indeed,  we  admit,  with  some  wild
author,  whose  name  I  forget,  that  all  our  dreams  are
the  work  of  spirits,)  by  that  reflex  act  of  the  mind
which  is  so  swift  in  its  operation  as  virtually  to  double
our  existence.  Moreover,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that
natural  sleepwaking  —  a  state  very  different  from
that  of  common  sleep  —  is  almost  always  succeeded
by  complete  forgetfulness.  The  exceptions  occur
when  the  patient's  visions  more  resemble  those  of
ordinary  dreaming,  and  when  the  mind  has  been
manifestly  more  employed  about  its  own  creations
than  about  those  real  external  objects  which  often
seem  to  influence  the  sleepwaker,  though  in  a  wild
and  unconnected  way.

We  may  then  dismiss,  as  uncorroborated  by  any
fact  whatever,  the  notion  that  we  can  remember  any
past  series  of  thoughts  to  which  introspective  con-
sciousness has  been  altogether  wanting;  conse-
quently, that  mesmeric  patients  should  forget  all
that  occupied  them  during  their  sleepwaking  is  no
miracle,  but  an  absolute  illustration  of  nature's  laws.

But  still  further,  if  we  choose  to  acquiesce  in  the
structure  of  our  own  being,  and  to  examine  laws
rather  than  frame  them,  we  may  perceive  that  the
sleepwaker  must  naturally  resume  his  mesmeric  re-
collections, when  he  returns  to  the  mesmeric  state ;
for  ii  it  not a principle, that a  former  series  of


MESMERIC  CONSCIOUSNESS.  31^

thouffhts  should  recur  to  us  then,  and  then  only,  when
we  are  under  conditions  of  consciousness  similar  to  those
in  which  they  were  conceived  ?

Let  any  one  reflect  how  he  sets  to  work,  when,
having  what  is  called  lost  the  thread  of  his  ideas,  he
would  take  it  up  again  at  the  point  where  it  was  dis-
severed. Does  he  not  endeavour  to  place  himself  in
the  same  state  and  frame  of  mind,  in  fact,  to  regain
the  same  conditions  of  consciousness  in  which  he  was
when  conceiving  the  lost  idea?  Most  certainly.  And
what  is  also  to  be  remarked  is,  that  a  restoration  of
even  the  same  conditions  of  physical  consciousness,
under  which  our  intellectual  trains  of  thought  were
engendered,  greatly  promotes  our  recollection  of  the
latter.  Not  only  a  particular  position  of  mind,  but
a  particular  posture  of  body,  aids  us  to  regain  a
frame  of  feeling  to  which  it  has  become  associated.
When  we  throw  ourselves  on  our  knees,  our  prayer
of  childhood  seems  to  recur  of  itself.  There  are  some
even  who  can  only  pursue  their  trains  of  thought
while  engaged  in  some  exertion  of  the  physical  con-
sciousness which  has  become  familiar  to  them.  The
following  anecdote  from  the  memoirs  of  Sir  Walter
Scott  will  illustrate  this  truth.  It  is  recorded  in
a  memorandum  of  his  own.  He  says,  "  there  was  a
boy  in  my  class  at  school  who  stood  always  at  the
top,  nor  could  I  with  all  my  efforts  supplant  him.
Day  came  after  day,  and  still  he  kept  his  place,  do
what  I  would;  till  at  length  I  observed  that  when
a  question  was  asked  him,  he  always  fumbled  with
his  fingers  at  a  particular  button  in  the  lower  part  of

F  3


318  M£81fERIC  COKSCIOU8NES8.

his  waistcoat  To  remove  it,  therefore,  became  ex-
pedient in  my  eyes ;  and,  in  an  evil  moment,  it  was
removed  with  a  knife.  Great  was  my  anxiety  to
know  the  success  of  my  measure  —  and  it  succeeded
too  well.  When  the  boy  was  again  questioned,  his
fingers  sought  again  for  the  button,  but  it  was  not  to
be  found.  In  his  distress  he  looked  down  for  it  —  it
was '  to  be  seen  no  more  than  to  be  felt.  He  stood
confounded,  and  I  took  possession  of  his  place.''

Again,  we  may  observe  that  that  action  of  the
physical  consciousness,  which  relates  to  the  operation
of  our  senses,  is  fer  more  linked  with  memory  than
is  the  intellectual  operation  of  consciousness.  That
which  we  have  seen,  heard,  and  felt,  we  remember
far  more  strongly  than  that  which  we  have  only
thought.  The  immediate  action  of  the  sensual  con«
sciousness  is  also  peculiarly  renovative  of  that  which
is  past.  The  smell  of  a  flower,  which  we  knew  in
former  days,  will  recall  a  thousand  old  forgotten
feelings ;  and  the  tinkling  of  a  sheep-bell  will  bring
before  us  the  wild  heath,  or  the  grassy  hill-side,
where  our  childhood  sported.  Thus,  when  the  poet
invokes  memory,  he  does  not  summon  her  to  appear
in  the  pomp  of  intellectual  splendour,  but  he  says  —

"  Come  from  the  woods  that  belt  the  grey  hill-side.
The  seven  ehns,  the  poplars  four.
That  stand  beside  my  father's  door.
And  chiefly  from  the  brook  that  loves
To  purl  o'er  matted  cress,  and  ribbed  sand.
Or  dimple  in  the  dark  of  rushy  coves."

Tennyson.


MESMERIC  CONSCIOUSNESS.  319

Now  let  us  consider  that,  to  a  mesmeric  patient^
the  ordinary  sensual  consciousness  is  closed,  —  that
the  motive  of  consciousness  has  ceased  to  be  intro-
spective,—in  fine,  that  all  the  conditions  of  conscious-
ness are  unusual.  Can  we,  then,  wonder,  either  that
he  cannot  grasp  mesmeric  memories  in  his  normal
state,  or  that  he  should  return  to  them  with  ease  and
perfection  as  soon  as  the  unwonted  conditions  of  his
mesmeric  existence  are  restored?  To  understand
this  perfectly,  we  have  only  to  extend  the  principle
whereby  we  lose  or  recover  any  train  of  thought
whatever.  Thus  epileptics  have  been  known  to  finish,
in  a  new  paroxysm  of  their  complaint,  a  sentence
begun  in  an  attack  which  had  occurred  days  or  weeks
before;  and  every  one  must  remember  the  quaint  story
of  the  old  gentleman  who,  in  passing  a  particular
bridge,  answered  a  question  that  had  been  put  to
him  long  ago  on  the  same  spot.  "  Do  you  like  peas
or  beans  best  for  dinner  ?  "  his  old  domestic  had  in-
quired, as  he  rode  soberly  behind  his  master.  There
was  no  reply;  — but,  just  a  year  after,  when  master
and  man  were  jogging  on  as  before,  the  former
turned  slowly  round,  and  said,  "  Peas,  John."

Certain  facts,  relative  to  the  mesmeric  state,  still
further  confirm  our  previous  view  of  the  question.
Sometimes,  when  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  not  perfect,
it  seems  to  alternate  with  the  natural  state;  and  the
patient,  occasionally  waking,  as  it  were,  for  a  few
moments,  employs  his  ordinary  senses  in  the  ordinary
way.  Now,  by  frequent  experience,  I  have  ascer-
tained that  the  remembrance  which  these  patients

F  4


320  MESMERIC CONSCIOUSNESS.

retain  of  circumstances  that  occurred  during  their
sleepwaking  is  in  exact  proportion  to  the  usued  action
of  their  senses ;  in  other  words,  to  their  approxima-
tions to  their  ordinary  conditions  of  consciousness.

The  real  waters  of  oblivion  —  the  fabled  Lethe  —
is  only  to  be  found  where  consciousness  flows  on
through  channels  that  are  altogether  unwonted.

Thus,  then,  if  I  have  shown,  in  a  former  book,
that  mesmeric  sleepwaking  is  a  peculiar  state,  and
therefore  worthy  of  distinct  investigation,  I  have  now
proved  that,  though  peculiar,  it  is  in  harmony  with
the  general  laws  of  our  mental  constitution ;  and
therefore  proper  to  be  classed  with  other  metaphysical
phenomena  incident  to  man.  I  am,  indeed,  far
from  saying  that  it  presents  no  extraordinary  ap-
pearances ;  but  I  must  assert  that  it  is  by  no  means
one  of  those  subjects  in  which  we  cannot  arrive  at
a  comprehension  of  things  unknown  by  that  with
which  we  are  already  acquainted.  Every  common
reverie  is  a  sort  of  mesmeric  slumber ;  and  an  absent
man  lives,  as  it  were,  in  a  mesmeric  world.  In  order
to  have  a  perfect  idea  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  as  far
as  regards  the  patient  merely  and  his  mental  condi-
tion, we  have  only  to  imagine  a  fusion  between  the
two  known  states  of  reverie  and  of  abstraction;  for  the
mesmeric  sleep  approximates  to  the  first  in  its  single-
ness of  consciousness,  its  deadness  to  external  stimu-
lants, and  its  complete  after- forgetful ness :  while  it
resembles  the  latter  in  coherence  of  thought  and  in-
tellectual development.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  921


SECT.  III.


ON MESMERIC SENSATION.


Having  shown  that  the  metaphysical  condition  of
mesmeric  patients  is  in  harmony  with  general  laws
and  with  personal  experience,  it  is  now  my  intention
to  offer  sotne  observations,  whereby  the  phenomena
of  sensation,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  may  also  be
brought  nearer  to  our  convictions.

In  attempting  this,  I  must  necessarily  sometimes
abandon  the  region  of  purely  personal  experience.
The  real  causes  of  even  our  ordinary  sensation
(though  they  may  be  made  mathematically  evident
to  reason)  are  themselves  at  variance  with  our  com-
mon feelings,  and  are  altogether  hidden  from  the  per-
ception of  the  vulgar.  Yet  to  these  real  causes  I
must  appeal  in  explanation  of  mesmeric  phenomena.
In  order  to  reveal  one  and  the  same  base  for  normal
and  for  mesmeric  sensation,  I  must  pierce  that  which
seems,  and  penetrate  to  that  which  is.  Yet  will  it,  I
trust,  be  found  that,  wherever  the  subject  permits,  I
retain  that  best  mode  of  argument —  the  argumentum
ad  hominem.

Already  I  have  remarked  that,  sensation  being
really  seated  in  the  mind,  a  change  in  its  pre-requi-
sites  can  never  imply  an  abolition  of  itself.  But  we
may  affirm  more  than  this,  and  adduce  facts  which

p  6


322  MESMERIC SENSATIOK.

shall  afford  us  the  strongest  presumption  that,  in  the
mesmeric  state,  the  pre-requisites  of  sensation,  how-
ever changed,  are  only  altered  in  conformity  with
established  laws;  in  fine,  that  the  development  of
mesmeric  feeling  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  nature.
That  it  has  not  hitherto  appeared  so,  seems  to  be  rather
the  fault  of  its  expositors  than  the  necessity  of  its  own
mode  of  action.  They  who  would  examine  into
the  conditions  of  mesmeric  perception  are,  in  gene-
ral, so  engrossed  by  its  more  prominent  and  super-
ficial wonders,  that  they  rest  in  external  differences
of  development,  instead  of  going  deeper  to  discover
internal  identity  of  origin.  They  look  merely  to  un-
usual effects,  and  do  not  consider  that  the  causes  of
these  may  be  such  as  are  actually  familiar  to  us.

The  pervading  peculiarity  of  mesmeric  perception
may  be  thus  briefly  expressed :  —

Inaction  of  the  external  apparatus  of  the  senses,
co-existent  with  the  life  and  activity  of  some  inner
source  of  feeling.

That  such  an  apparent  anomaly  is  not  so  far  re-
moved from  the  ordinary  operations  of  our  being,  as
on  a  cursory  view  of  things  we  might  suppose,  I  trust
in  the  course  of  the  following  reflections  to  demon-
strate.

Every  fact,  adduced  to  prove  the  reality  of  mes-
meric perception,  has  been  hitherto  met  with  but  one
argument,  which  your  established  formalist  —  your
limiter  of  Providence  and  its  resources,  deems  un-
answerable. "  Our  external  organs  are  the  sole  ap-
pointed means  of  sensation. How  would  you  then


MESMERIC SENSATION.  323

that we should  perceive  any  thing  without their
aid?'*

That  there  is  a  flaw  in  this  reasoning  is  not  so
difficult  to  be  discovered.  It  is  a  mere  begging  of
the  question,  and  proceeds  altogether  upon  an  as-
sumption, the  fallacy  of  which  I  will,  at  least,  endea-*
vour  to  expose.

Many  and  striking  are  the  circumstances  which
assure  us  that  the  nerves  are  the  true  media  of
sensation,  to  which  the  external  organs  are  only
instrumental  and  subsidiary.

For,  in  the  first  place,  from  the  anatomist  we  may
learn  that  many  apparently  essential  portions  of  the
external  senses  may  be  removed,  or  may  exist  not,
without  any  perceptible  difference  in  sensation.  As
regards  the  ear,  we  find  that  "  the  pinna  is  not  indis-
pensable to  hearing ;  for,  both  in  men  and  animals,
it  may  be  removed  without  any  inconvenience  beyond
that  of  a  few  days."  Again :  "  The  membrane  of  the
tympanum  may  be  torn,  or  even  totally  destroyed,
teithout  deranging  the  hearing  in  any  sensible  de-
gree ; "  and  "  the  loss  of  the  small  bones  in  the  tym-
panum, with  the  exception  of  the  stapes,  does  not
necessarily  incur  a  loss  of  hearing."

With  respect  to  the  sense  of  smelling,  it  appears
that  ^  the  olfectory  apparatus  is  but  little  developed  at
birth.  The  nasal  cavities,  the  different  convoluted
bodies  scarcely  exist ;  the  sinuses  do  not  exist  at  all,
and  yet  the  faculty  of  smelling  appears  to  exist."  *

*  Milligan's  Magendie.
p  6


324  MESMERIC SENSATION.

Nay,  even  parts  of  a  mechanism  so  wondrous  as
that  of  the  eye  seem  not  to  be  essential  to  vision.

"  The  contraction  of  the  pupil,  though  it  assists
our  vision  of  distant  objects,  is  not  absolutely  neces-
sai*y,  since  Daviel  has  shown  that  patients  having  the
pupil  immovable  see  well  enough."  Also,  "  Persons
who  have  had  the  lens  removed  for  cataract,  still
see  suflSciently  well."  *

Considerable  alterations,  then,  may  occur  in  the
external  apparatus  of  the  senses  without  sensation  be-
ing impaired.  But  is  this  indifference,  as  to  losses  in
their  structure,  shared  by  the  nerves  ?  Far  from  it.
The  smallest  abstraction — the  slightest  change,  even,
is  of  consequence  here  !  Whatever  deranges  the
nerves  manifestly  introduces  a  corresponding  dis-r
turbance  into  our  sensations,  and,  should  any  of  them
undergo  a  substantial  change  or  be  entirely  annulled,
the  sensitive  functions  of  the  part,  to  which  they  re-
fer, cease  altogether.  Thus  injuries  to  the  optic  or
acoustic  nerve  will  produce  blindness  or  deafness
respectively,  though  the  external  mechanism  of  sight
or  hearing  remain  entire ;  and,  if  the  lingual  nerve
be  cut,  the  tongue  continues  to  move,  but  has  lost  its
sensibility  to  savours.  "  These  effects  may  be  pro-
duced at  pleasure  upon  animals,  by  tying  or  com-
pressing the  nerves.  When  the  ligature  or  pressure
is  removed,  the  part  then  becomes  sensible  as  be-
fore."

Magendie  also  states  that,  where  there  is  faulty

^  Milligan's  Majendie.


MESMERIC SENSATION,  325

sensation,  it  generally  originates  in  defects  rather  of
the  nervous  than  of  the  organic  structure.  This  de-
pendence of  the  external  senses  upon  the  nerves
should  diminish  our  surprise  at  finding  the  former
occasionally  retreat  from  oflSces  which  they  only  fulfil,
as  it  were,  by  delegation,  while  the  true  powers,  as  in
mesmerism,  come  forward  to  manifest  their  capaci-
ties, more  palpably,  indeed,  but  not  more  essentially,
than  usual.

Secondly^  The  nerves,  or  portions  of  the  brain
with  which  they  are  in  immediate  relation,  are  ca-
pable of  gradations  in  their  sensibility.

The  proofs  of  this  lie  before  us  in  every  direc-
tion. Though  the  structure  of  the  external  organs
be  alike  in  all  (of  course,  we  except  cases  of  ac-
knowledged malformation),  the  capacities  to  which
they  minister  are,  in  different  individuals,  infinitely
varied.  Thus,  of  two  persons,  whose  auditory  organs
are  equally  perfect,  one  shall  have  a  far  finer  sense  of
hearing  than  the  other.  The  one,  perhaps,  may
mistake,  as  did  a  friend  of  mine,  the  tuning  of  instru-
ments before  a  concert  for  the  overture;  the  other
shall  detect  the  slightest  false  note  which  may  occur
in  an  otherwise  well-executed  piece  of  music.  While
some  again  possess  by  nature  that  sense  of  colour
which  guided  Rubens  to  all  the  harmonies  of  vision ;
others,  with  no  perceptible  defect  in  the  mechanism
of  their  eyes,  cannot  distinguish  between  the  most
opposite  colours.  A  man  with  this  infirmity  has  been
known  to  order  a  pair  of  trousers  of  the  most  flagrant
red,  supposing  them  all  the  time  to  be  modest  blue.


326  MESMERIC SENSATION.

Others  are  incapable  of  even  hearing  certain  sounds^
for  which


«


Nature,  though  giving  two,  gave  them  no  ear.'


I  was  acquainted  with  a  gentlemen,  who  was  com-^
pletely  insensible  to  the  chirp  of  the  cricket.  Walk-
ing with  him  and  with  a  large  party  one  summer
evening  in  his  grounds,  I  observed  to  him  that  the
grasshoppers  were  more  numerous  and  more  noisy
just  then  than  I  had  ever  heard  them.  They  literally
seemed  to  get  the  better  of  our  voices.  To  my  sur-
prise, my  friend  refused  to  believe  that  any  grasshop-
pers were  chirping,  and  was  only  at  length  convinced
of  the  fact  by  the  united  testimony  of  all  the  persons
present.  In  order  to  ascertain  whether  this  peculi-
arity of  sensation  depended  upon  any  general  defect
in  the  organs  of  hearing,  I  held  a  watch  at  a  consi-
derable distance  from  my  friend's  ear,  but  he  dis-
tinctly perceived  it  ticking.  Again,  I  placed  the  watch
at  an  equal  distance  from  him  and  from  myself,  at  a
point  where  the  grasshopper  concert  completely  pre-
vented me  from  hearing  it ;  yet  to  him  it  was  as  audi-
ble as  if  perfect  stillness  had  prevailed.  He  was  also
cognisant  of  words  spoken  in  the  lowest  whisper,
which  no  other  person  but  himself  could  distinguish
amidst  the  din  of  the  insects.  What  can  be  more
evident  than  that  this  inability  to  distinguish  a  par-
ticular sound  arose  from  a  defective  sensibility  in  the
acoustic  nerve,  which  had  not  the  capacity  of  respond-


MESMERIC SENSATION.  327

ing  to  aerial  vibrations,  rapid  as  those  by  which  a
note  so  shrill  as  the  cricket's  cry  is  produced  ?

Thus  it  appears  that  the  nervous  sensibility  of  one
man  varies  as  much  from  that  of  another,  as  the  mes-
meric from  the  normal.

This  again  should  lessen  our  wonder  when  we  be-
hold a  state  of  nervous  sensibility  which  surpasses  our
conceptions  even.  That  we  cannot  judge  of  it  no
more  proves  its  non-existence  than  the  defective
hearing  of  some  persons  annihilates  certain  sounds.
When  we,  being  in  one  state,  pronounce  a  verdict
upon  phenomena  exhibited  by  those  who  are  in  an-
other, we  act  as  does  the  blind  man  who  dictatorially
gives  his  opinion  respecting  colours.

Thirdly^  The  nerves  are  subject  to  varieties  of
condition,  not  only  in  different  individuals,  but  in
the  same.

That  the  nerves  may  vary  in  their  functions  of
transmission  is  not  only  possible,  but  inevitable,  and
consequent  upon  the  very  constitution  of  man's  na-
ture. Not  only  does  every  disease  which  affects  the
nervous  tissue  affect  the  phenomena  of  sensation,  but
the  commonest  occurrences  of  our  ordinary  existence
influence  them  likewise.  Viewing  the  nerves  as  con-
ductors, along  whose  sentient  line  dart  those  electric
impulses  which  convey  to  us  information  of  the  ex-
ternal world,  we  may  assert  that  they  are  seldom  in
the  same  conducting  condition.  In  reverie,  how
deadened  is  their  transmitting  power  !  how  enlivened
under  the  excitement  of  hope,  or  fear,  when  we  look
or  listen  for  the  arrival  of  a  friend,  or  of  some  mes-


328  MESMERIC SENSATION,

senger  of  evil !  How  differently  do  they  act  under
the  relaxation  of  fatigue  or  the  tension  of  vigorous
energy  !  Sleep  alters  their  capacities  of  conduction
in  a  thousand  varying  degrees,  exhibiting  phenomena
only  less  wonderful  than  those  of  mesmerism  because
more  frequently  repeated.

In  how  extraordinary  a  manner  trifling  causes  may
change  the  nature  of  sensation,  one  or  two  incidents
which  have  fallen  under  my  own  notice  may  demon-
strate. A  friend  of  mine,  when  suffering  from  slight
derangement  of  stomach,  is  apt  to  see  every  object
double  (smile  not,  reader,  he  is  a  water-drinker) ;
and  I  am,  myself,  occasionally  subject  to  a  singular
affection  of  the  optic  nerve.  When  fatigued  by  an
effort  of  continued  attention,  where  the  light  is  too
vivid  (as  in  a  theatre,  for  instance),  I  see  every  object
diminished  and  removed  to  a  distance,  as  if  I  looked
on  it  through  the  reversed  end  of  a  telescope.*

At  one  period,  for  three  months,  during  which  my
digestion  was  slightly  out  of  order,  I  was  entirely
deprived  both  of  taste  and  of  smell.  All  that  I  ate
was  as  so  much  earth;  and  I  could  not  distinguish
between  a  cabbage  and  a  cabbage-rose :  again,  a
gentleman  of  my  acquaintance  lost,  and  never  after-
wards recovered,  his  smell,  in  consequence  of  a  fall
from  his  horse,  which  had  no  other  perceptible  re-
sult.

*  Here  it  is  evident  that  the  weaker  impression,  caused  by  the
exhausted  and  over-excited  state  of  the  nerve,  produces  the  idea
of  diminution  aiid  distance,  just  as  we  judge  that  a  feeble  sound
proceeds  firpm  afar.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  329

Phenomena  like  these,  not  less  than  everyday
events,  assure  us  that  every  separate  state  of  man
is  a  separate  and  peculiar  condition  of  nerves ;
and  that  every  peculiar  condition  of  nerves  has  its
peculiarity  of  sensation.  When,  then,  we  learn  that
mesmerism  induces  alteration  in  our  sensitive  capa-
cities, why  should  we  be  as  full  of  wonder  as  if
nothing  else  could  work  a  change  in  them  ?  Were
we  wise,  we  should,  from  all  we  know  of  the  nerves,
be  prepared  at  least  to  anticipate  new  results  from
new  conditions  of  man  ;  and  certainly  to  expect  from
a  state  so  singular  as  that  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking
some  singular  variety  of  nervous  action.  That  the
effects  of  the  human  influence  on  the  nerves  should
be  new  to  our  experience,  so  far  from  being  extraor-
dinary, is  but  in  the  common  routine  of  things ;  for
the  state  of  mesmerism  itself  is  new  to  our  experience.
Did  the  nervous  system  present  the  same  phenomena
under  this  peculiar  phasis,  as  under  other  circum-
stances, then,  indeed,  would  it  violate  the  laws  of
nature,  and  forego  its  own.

The  nerves,  then,  are  capable  of  changes  in  their
condition  :  but,  change,  it  may  be  argued,  is  not  im-
provement, and  the  instances  adduced  of  nervous
alteration  tend  to  show  that  their  power  may  be  les-
sened, rather  than  increased,  —  deranged,  rather  than
brilliantly  exhibited.  But  mesmerism  purports  to  be
an  expansion  and  a  gain  in  nervous  energy.  Let  us
then  inquire  whether  the  same  force,  which  is  suscep-
tible of  diminution  or  disturbance,  possesses  also  in-
herent capacities  of  development. That  nerves  are


S30  l^ESMERIC SENSATION.

sensible  to  stimuli  we  know.  When  their  power
has  been  impaired,  —  nay,  to  all  appearance  per-
fectly lost,  it  may,  by  particular  influences,  be  tran-
siently restored  to  all  its  pristine  vigour.  That  the
blind  occasionally  regain,  beneath  the  warmth  of  a
summer's  noon,  a  power  of  vision  which  declines  with
the  sun  and  is  again  altogether  lost  at  its  setting,  is
a  fact  which  I  need  not  insist  upon  to  physiologists ;
and  a  friend  of  mine  has  assured  me  that  he  has  fre-
quently known  the  opium-eaters  of  the  East,  after
they  had  become  both  blind  and  deaf  from  over-in-
dulgence in  their  favourite  drug,  regain  both  sight
and  hearing  while  under  the  accustomed  excitement.
Stimulus,  then,  may  appear  to  work  nervous  miracles,
and  this  plainly  indicates  a  capacity  in  the  nerves  to
rise  as  well  as  sink  —  to  gain  force  as  well  as  to  lose
it.  But  we  may  go  farther  still.  The  nervous
power,  under  certain  circumstances,  may  not  only  be
exhibited  as  recovering  the  energy  it  had  lost,  but  as
transcending  itself,  arid  displaying  a  capacity  of
development,  the  limits  of  which  have  not  been  as-
certained. They  who  have  had  opportunities  of
studying  disease  in  all  its  forms  will  corroborate  me
when  I  assert  that,  on  a  depression  of  the  vital  powers,
an  increase  of  the  sentient  capacities  is  often  conse-
quent ;  and  that  persons  under  certain  derangements
of  the  system  have  manifested  a  nervous  sensibility,
than  which,  mesmerism  can  display  nothing  more
astonishing.  The  Chevalier  Filippi  of  Milan,  doctor
of  medicine,  and  a  most  determined  opponent  to
mesmerism,  has  acknowledged  to  me  that  some  of  his


MESMERIC  SENSATION*  331

patients,  more  particularly  women  after  their  confine-
ment, when  suffering  from  nervous  excitement,  have
distinguished  the  smallest  objects  in  darkness  which
appeared  to  him  complete.  The  same  physician
related  to  me  the  following  occurrence :  —  Visiting  a
gentleman  who  had  an  abscess,  he  found  that  the  pa-
tient had  not  many  hours  to  live ;  this,  however,  he  did
not  tell  him,  but  answered  his  inquiries  about  himself
as  encouragingly  as  he  could.  Taking  his  leave,  he
shut  the  door  of  the  sick  chamber,  and,  passing
through  two  other  rooms,  the  doors  of  which  he  also
carefully  shut,  entered  an  apartment  where  some
friends  of  the  patient  were  assembled.  To  these  he
said,  speaking  all  the  time  in  that  low  and  cautious
tone  which  every  one,  in  a  house  where  illness  is,  un-
consciously adopts,  —  "  The  Signor  Valdrighi  (that
was  the  name  of  the  invalid)  is  much  worse.  He
cannot  possibly  survive  till  morning."  Scarcely  had
he  uttered  these  words,  when  the  patient's  bell  was
heard  to  ring  violently,  and,  soon  after,  a  servant
summoned  the  doctor  back  again  into  his  presence.
^  Why  did  you  deceive  me  ?  "  exclaimed  the  djdng
man;  "  I  heard  every  word  you  said  just  now  in  the
farther  apartment."  Of  this  extraordinary  assertion
he  immediately  gave  proof  by  repeating  to  the  asto-
nished physician  the  exact  expressions  he  had  made
use  of.  Subsequently,  upon  Dr.  Filippi  testifying  his
surprise  at  this  occurrence  to  the  servants  of  Signor
Valdrighi,  they  declared  that  their  master's  hearing
had  become  so  acute  since  his  illness,  that  he  had
frequently  told  them  all  they  had  been  talking  of  in


332  MESMERIC SENSATION.

the  kitchen,  which  was  even  more  remote  from  the
sick  room  than  the  apartment  before  alluded  to.*

The  gnat-strainers  and  camel-swallowers  may  be
content  to  accept  this  story,  just  because  it  only  pro-
fesses to  relate  an  instance  of  exaltation  in  the  usual
senses ;  but  what  does  this  convenient  phrase,  "  ex-
altation of  the  senses  "  mean  ?  Is  it  not  "  Words  —
words  —  words ; "  one  of  those  formulae  which  seem
to  account  for  every  thing,  while,  in  fact,  explaining
nothing  ?  Considered  as  a  not  very  precise  statement,
it  may  pass ;  but  when  persons  would  palm  it  upon
us  as  a  solution,  I  would  ask  them  whether  "  exalt-
ation of  the  senses  "  (in  the  common  acceptation  of
the  term)  be  possible  ?  There  may  be  development,
or,  if  you  will,  exaltation  in  our  sensitive  capacities  —
but  how,  or  where?  If  we  desire  to  have  clear
notions  on  this  subject,  we  must  perforce  inquire
whether  any  increase  of  sentient  power  which  may
fall  under  our  observation  be  in  the  external  organs,
or  whether  it  be  derived  from  the  nerves  which  are
masked  by  those  organs  ?

In  what  manner  we  should  resolve  this  problem
would  not  be  doubtful,  but  for  a  certain  confusion  of
idea,  which  is  extremely  prevalent,  respecting  two
portions  of  our  being,  between  whose  functions  and
qualities  there  can  be  no  parallel.  Led  by  custom,
and  blinded  by  apparent  simultaneity  of  action,  we
associate  the  external  apparatus,  and  the  internal
sources  of  sensation  in one common term,  —  the

*  See  Appendix,


MESMERIC  SENSATION*  333

senses,  namely ;  while,  in  fact,  not  only  are  they  not
the  same,  but  opposed  to  each  other  in  every  essential
particular.

While  the  action  of  the  exterior  organs  is  always
the  same,  under  the  same  circumstances,  that  of  the
nerves  is  ever-variable.  The  powers  of  the  one  are
limited  and  known ;  that  of  the  other  has  not  been
ascertained.

Is  it  not  evident,  then,  that  the  mechanism  of  sens^
ation  is  swayed  and  regulated  by  something  which  is
not  mechanical  ?

Is  it  not  plain  that  the  external  senses  are  but  the
letters  ahd  ciphers  of  the  scale, —  fixed  marks,  which,
by  their  unalterable  character,  point  out  how  high
may  rise,  or  how  low  may  fall,  the  variable  mercury
of  our  internal  sensibility  ?

These  truths,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  are  known  to  phy-
siologists at  least ;  yet  how  many  even  of  these  speak
and  argue  as  if  they  were  entirely  ignorant  of  them.

When  sensitive  power  is  manifestly  increased,  where
then  shall  we  look  for  an  explanation :  there,  where
all  is  precise,  limited,  ascertained ;  or  there,  where  all
is  free  and  boundless,  where  variety  is  infinite,  and
capacity  unknown  ?  Can  we  for  a  moment  make  it  a
question  as  to  where  the  true  power  lies  ?  Can  we
for  a  moment  ascribe  it  to  the  external  organs,  which,
far  from  being  Capable  of  development,  seem  rather
to  be  restrictions  upon  internal  sensibility  by  their
exact  and  circumscribed  action  ?

Now  let  us  once  more  refer  to  the  examples  of  de-
veloped sensibility  which  prefaced  the  abov^  remarks.


334  MESMERIC SENSATIOK,

Certain  invalids,  it  was  affirmed,  upon  indubitable
testimony,  had  been  known  to  distinguish  the  smallest
objects  in  a  room,  whence  light,  according  to  ordinary
vision,  seemed  perfectly  excluded,  or  had  heard  arti-
culate sounds  athwart  impediments,  which,  in  ordi^
nary  cases,  are  sufficient  to  prevent  all  transmission
of  acoustic  impulses. The  usual  organs  of  s^ise  were
not  in  any  way  mechanically  assisted  during  the  ex**
hibition  of  the  phenomena  by  external  aids,  such  as
those  of  optical  glasses,  or  acoustic  tubes  ;  they  were
dependent  solely  on  their  own  resources. Those  re-
sources, as  we  have  just  observed,  are  very  strictly
limited  by  mechanical  and  physical  laws,  wnich  are
incapable  of  change. In  the  case  of  the  eye,  where
there  is  light,  there  will  be  a  picture  formed  upon  the
retina  with  a  clearness  and  vivacity  prc^ortioned  to
the  intensity  of  that  light ;  or,  supposing  the  pheno-
menon to  regard  the  ear,  wherever  aerial  vibrations
exist,  they  will  strike  the  tympanum  with  a  force  that
corresponds  with  the  violence  and  extent  of  the  ori-
ginal impulse ;  but,  in  the  instances  cited  of  sensitive
acuteness,  the  effect  is  inverse  to  the  known  cause.
The  patient  sees  in  a  dark  room  where  no  picture
<5an  be  supposed  to  be  formed  on  the  retina ;  or  hears
in  a  situation  where  vibrations  of  the  air,  if  even  pro-
pagated so  far,  can  with  difficulty  be  conceived  to
affect  any  membrane,  however  elastic. Under  such
circumstances,  everything  is  plainly  against  an  increase
of  sentient  power :  yet  power  is  gained  —  how  ?  or
whence  ? Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  credulity
of  a  mesmeriser,  I  have  not  faith  enough  to  believe  in


MESMERIC SENSATION*  835

modem  miracles,  when  they  are  so  interpreted  as  to
falsify  mechanic  laws.  I  will  not»  then,  load  the  ex-
ternal organs  with  the  onus  of  impossible  causation ;
but  that  the  nerves  of  sensation  may,  in  particular
states,  vibrate  to  fiiinter  impulses,  or  even  other
media*  than  those  which  more  grossly  move  the
mechanism  of  sense,  I  may  admit  to  be  a  probable
explanation  of  events  like  the  above:  — at  any  rate»
one  truth  from  the  preceding  observations  is  clear.
The  extraordinary  exaltation  of  the  senses,  whereof
we  have  been  speaking,  was  not  in  the  organs,  {thai
is  barred  by  an  ex  absurdo)  but  in  the  nerves  that
minister  to  the  organs.

Thus  it  appears  that,  in  certain  cases,  the  nerves
may  be  exhibited  in  a  state  of  development  which
manifestly  owes  nothing  to  the  mere  organs  of  sensei
and  which  far  oversteps  the  province  of  any  one  por-
tion of  our  external  mechanism.  When,  then,  mes-
merism palpably  excludes  the  external  organs  from  a
share  in  the  sensitive  developments  which  it  elicits,
when  it  effectuates  a  revelation  of  sensibility  springing
from  an  internal  source,  it  may  in  this,  as  in  many
other  respects,  be  said  to  detect,  rather  than  to  vio-
late, principles.  It  sweeps  away  imagined  power,
which  a  multitude  of  circumstances  had  already  shown
to  be  only  apparent  and  superficial :  it  exhibits  power
where  power  evidently  exists,  and  might  be  expected
to  be  found.

But  here,  perhaps,  I  may  be  assailed  with  the  oft-

*  See  the  ensuing  remarks  on  the  media  of  sensation.


336  MESMERIC SENSATIONS.

repeated  question  (to  which  I  have  once  before
alluded), "  Granting  all  this  to  be  true,  of  what  use
are  our  external  senses  ?  "

Coleridge,  impressed  with  an  idea  of  the  lavish
wealth  and  boundless  resources  of  Providence,  whea
asked  of  what  use  were  the  stars  and  planets  if  not
inhabited,  replied,  "  I  suppose  to  make  dirt  cheap.**
In  the  same  manner  I  might  answer  when  persons
demand,  "  Of  what  use  is  the  eye,  if  we  can  see
without  it  ?  "  —  "  To  show  us  how  to  make  a  camera
obscura." In  graver  phrase,  how  much  we  learn
from  the  construction  of  this  marvellous  organ ;  how
dependent  on  that  construction  are  all  the  discoveries
which  have  been  made  respecting  the  physical  pro-
perties of  the  luminous  medium  ! It  is  a  mechanism
exquisitely  adapted  to  the  mechanical  arrangements
of  the  universe. And  is its beauty  nothing?  its
power  of  speaking  the  soul  ? And  these  advantages,
be  it  remembered,  are  contingent  upon  the  office,
place,  and  station  which  the  eye  now  holds  in  the
human  economy. But  while  we  adore  the  Creator's
wisdom  and  goodness  in  thus  suiting  our  organs  to
our  condition,  and  to  the  agents  with  which  they  are
immediately  in  contact,  let  us  remember  that  it  is  our
duty  to  explore,  and  to  seek  out  the  true  grounds  of
our  adoration,  and  not  to  rest  in  a  sort  of  stupid
amazement. They  who  so  triumphantly  take  their
stand  against  mesmerism  upon  the  all-importance  of
the  external  organs  of  sense,  would  do  well  if  they
would  condescend  to  learn  the  real  and  most  valuable
part  which  they  play  in  our  economy. While  it  is


MESMERIC SENSATION.  337

f

the  office  of  the  nerves  to  receive  and  to  transmit  ex-
ternal impulses  with  a  degree  of  sensibility  propor*-
tioned  to  their  ever-varying  condition,  that  of  the
external  organs,  is  to  modify  those  impulses,  with  a
regularity  as  constant  as  Nature's  own.  They  are  the
weights  and  the  balance-wheel  in  our  constitution.
Thus  the  eye  is  composed  of  parts  that  are  refractive,
and  of  membranes  that  have  each  their  use  in  altering
light,  such  as  it  acts  externally,  into  light  such  as  it  is
perceived  by  us.  The  air,  again,  is  modified  in  the
mysterious  labyrinths  of  the  ear ;  and  these  organs,
by  their  form,  contribute  to  direct  the  impulse  thus
modified  to  its  proper  recipient  —  the  nerve.  Hence
it  appears  that  the  apparatuses  of  the  senses  are  con-
trivances for  blunting,  not  for  heightening,  the  sensi-
bility. They  are  masks,  and  careful  coverings  to  in-
struments of  too  exquisite  delicacy  to  be  bared  and
exposed  to  the  outer  world.  The  cutis  defends  the
nerves  from  the  agony  of  harsh  impact  upon  their
tender  surfaces;  the  sieve-like  mechanism  of  smell
disarms  odour  of  its  over-stimulus,  ere  we

"  Die  of  a  rose  in  aromatic  pain."  *

That  degree  of  sensibility  which  is  exhibited  to  us
in  the  mesmeric  state,  as  if  to  give  us  a  permitted
glimpse  of  the  capacities  of  our  being,  would  be

*  The  choroid,  by  its  dark  colouring,  absorbs  the  light,  and
mitigaites  it  to  the  eye,  as  is  proved  by  the  distressing  effect
which  daylight  produces  on  those  persons  called  Albinos,  who
are  deficient  in  the  pigmentum  nigrum.  An  ordinary  degree  of
light  dazzles  them  into  blindness,  and  they  can  only  see  in  twi-
light.

Q


338  MESMERIC SENSATION.

wholly  unsui ted  to  the  purposes  of  every-day  existence;
and  I  cannot  too  often  remmd  our  opponents  that
man  was  no  more  created  to  pass  his  days  in  mesmeric
sleepwaking  than  in  any  other  state  of  abstraction
from  the  affairs  of  this  world. How  terrible  would
be  the  condition  of  a  being  laid  bare  and  naked  to
the  irritating  influences  of  all  external  things,  may
be  imagined  from  the  sufferings  of  persons  whose
nervous  sensibility  has  become  predominant  over  the
mechanic  action  of  the  senses. The  Seherin  von
Prevorst  fell  into  horrible  convulsions  if  iron  were
within  a  certain  distance  of  her,  or  if  vinegar  were
in  any  part  of  her  room* Even  patients  in  the  ordi-
nary mesmeric  state  are  sensible,  as  I  have  shown,  to
emanations  from  precious  stones,  some  of  which  affect
them  with  very  disagreeable  feelings. The  valuable
experiments  of  Dr.  EUiotson  with  minerals  on  mes-
meric individuals  speak  to  the  same  effect Let  it
not,  then,  be  thought  that  the  mesmeriser  underrates
the  uses  of  the  external  senses. That  they  are  as  va-
luable for  modifying  as  the  nerves  are  for  receiving
impulses  he  fully  admits ;  he  is  only  desirous  of  ex-
hibiting them  in  this  their  proper  sphere,  conceiving
that  he  thus  renders  them  service ;  for  a  faculty  is
never  seen  to  such  advantage  as  when  cleared  from
the  rubbish  which  ignorance  has  heaped  around  it.
The  aggrandisement  which  is  based  on  error  is  but
for a  time,  and  God  is best  honoured  where  his
work  is  best  understood.

Considerations  favourable  to  mesmerism  have  now
been  drawn  —


MESMERIC SENSATION.  339

1st.  From  the  predominance  of  the  nerves  over
the  external  organs  of  sense.

2dly.  From  their  degrees  and  variations  of  sensi*
bility.

3dly.  From  their  capacities  of  development.

And  facts  have  been  adduced  which  may  prepare
us  to  resolve  the  apparent  paradox  of  sensation  ex*
isting  apart  from  our  usual  senses.

But  the  agency  of  the  nerves  is  capable  of  still
further  elucidation  which  will  throw  yet  more  light
on  the  mysteries  of  mesmeric  sensibility.  If  from  the
varied  modes  of  nervous  action  we  proceed  to  its  simple
principle,  we  shall  find  abundant  reason  to  conclude
that  mesmerism  does  never  really  infringe  any  esta-
blished and  universal  law.

As  on  the  true  nature  of  sensation  I  ground  much
that  is  explanatory  of  my  subject,  I  must  be  excused
if  I  endeavour  to  lead  to  the  fidl  comprehension  of
my  future  observations  on  that  head  by  some  pre-
liminary remarks,  which  will  not  be  deemed  needless
by  those  who  appreciate  the  difficulties  that  surround
this  branch  of  our  inquiry.

There  are  evidently  but  two  ways  of  perceiving
objects ;  —  the  one  by  being  present  to  them  in  their
essential  verity;  the  other  by  communication  with
them  through  the  intervention  of  types  or  shadows.

The  first  mode  of  perception  belongs  to  God  alone.

The  second  is  imposed  on  man  by  the  necessities
of  his  nature.

We  cannot  go  to  the  object :  the  object  must  be
conveyed  to  us.

Q  2


840  MESMERIC SENSATION.

We  cannot  penetrate  its  essence :  we  must  descry
it  as  in  a  glass,  darkly,  —  by  reflection,  —  by  an
image  which  is  not  itself.

For  this  reason,  in  some  previous  observations  re-
lative to  this  same  subject,  I  likened  sensation  to  a
language  established  between  man  and  his  Creator*
I  now  proceed  to  point  out  in  what  that  language
consists,  and  how  truly  it  may  be  called  a  language,
since  its  symbols  no  more  resemble  the  ideas  they
excite,  than  do  words  the  pictures  they  raise  in  the
mind,  or  the  printed  sentences  of  a  book  the  thoughts
and  feelings  which  they  occasion  in  those  who  read
them.

Limited, and closed in by  walls  of  flesh,  with
which,  for  a  time,  we  are  almost  identified,  we  can-
not but  allow  that  through  our  body  comes  all  that
knowledge,  appertaining  to  external  things,  to  which
we  have  given  the  name  of  sensation. This  is  indeed
the  tenure  on  which  we  hold  our  individual  exist-
ence ;  for  all  intelligence  that  is  not  limited  is  God,
and  in  the  force  of  the  restrictions  which  confine  the
creature  (paradoxical  as  it  may  sound)  consists  the
independence  of  its  action,  and  the  liberty  of  its
will. The  universal  ideas,  which  originate  with  God,
must,  in  order  that  they  may  become  proper  to  our-
selves, be  transmitted  to  us  through  personal  expe-
rience, and  be  coloured  by  the  tinge  of  our  own
nature. Deceived,  indeed,  when  we  think  not  deeply,
by  the  apparent  extremity  of  effects  which  we  only
experience  in  our  own  persons,  we  refer  our  feelings
to  the  object  that  occasions  them,  and  speak  of  sound


MESMERIC SENSATION.  341

or  of  colour,  as  if  it  existed  as  a  thing  apart,  forget-
ing  that  aerial  vibrations  are  only  sound  where  there
is  an  ear  to  receive  them,  and  that  light  is  only
colour  when  it  is  reflected  from  surfaces  to  an  eye
that  vibrates  in  unison  with  its  rapid  scintillations.
Our  free  communication  with  external  objects  is
another  source  of  error  to  our  minds.  Borne  on  the
wings  of  thought,  we  seem,  as  it  were,  to  go  out  of
ourselves  —  to  annihilate  distance  —  mock  at  separa-
tion, and  pervade  the  universe ;  but  maturer  reflec-
tion assures  us  that  sensation  does,  in  fact,  never  stir
one  inch  beyond  the  corporeal  boundaries  which
have  been  assigned  to  it.  Close  the  ear,  and  silence
is  around  us,  though  to  others  the  brook  is  murmur-
ing, or  the  trees  are  rustling  as  before :  —  shut  the
eye,  and  the  slight  veil  of  a  tender  membrane  has
blotted  out  all  that  glorious  creation  with  which  we
so  freely  conversed,  —  has  for  us  expunged  the  beau-
ties of  earth,  the  magnificence  of  ocean,  and  made
a  blank  of  the  boundless  heavens.  Were  we  essen-
tially cognisant  of  these  objects,  we  could  not  be
parted  from  them  thus ;  but  it  is  evident  that  all  our
sentient  mechanism  (as  Newton  intimates)  is  truly
constituted  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  the  species  of
things  to  our  sensorium,  and  that  all  that  vast  ex-
pansion to  which  we  seem  present  is,  in  reality,  pre-
sent to  us  within  the  narrow  compass  of  our  brain.

Sensation,  then,  is  personal  to  ourselves,  and  man
is  strictly  confined  to  his  individual  sphere ;  yet,  at
the  same  time,  our  consciousness  assures  us  that  we
are  in  sensible  communication  with objects  which

Q  3


342  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

are  not  ourselves,  and  which  are  more  or  less  remote
from  us.  Consequently,  between  us  and  them  there
must  be  media ;  and  thus,  in  considering  sensation^
we  have  three  things  to  take  into  the  account;
namely,  the  external  object,  or  the  exciting  cause;
the  medium  whereby  we  are^  as  it  were,  linked  to
that  object;  and  the  change  in  our  own  corporeal
frame,  which  stands  as  the  representative  of  the
object.

Hereafter  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of  the
media  whereby  we  are  brought  into  communication
witli  the  visible  imiverse.  At  present  I  restrict
myself  to  considering  the  signs  of  things,  of  which  our
own  persons  are,  as  it  were,  the  living  alphabet  and
recording  volume.*

First,  that  we  reaUy  do  draw  our  sensations  from
the  signs  of  things,  and  not  from  things  themselves^
a  very  simple  and  well-known  experiment  may  con-
vince us.

Crossing  the  middle  over  the  fore-finger,  let  any
one  rub  between  their  extremities  a  little  ball,  and  he
will  have  exactly  the  same  sensation  as  if  there  were
two  balls  instead  of  one.f

*  Locke  mentions  "the  perception  of  the  signification  of
signs  "  as  a  chief  act  of  the  understanding.  See  his  chapter  on
**  Power."

-I-  The  reader  is  b^ged  to  remember  that  experiments  like
these  are  not  presented  as  new  (as  indeed,  being  appeals  to  ex-
perience, how  can  they  be  ?  )  but  as  known  proofs  of  known
propositions,  equally  necessaiy  to  be  repeated  in  a  certain  train
of  argument  as  the  problems  of  Euclid  in  a  course  of  mathe-
matics.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  343

This  phenomenon  is  capable  of  but  one  explanation.
Those  parts  of  the  fingers  which,  in  the  experiment,
are  brought  into  contiguity,  are  ordinarily  prevented
by  their  position  from  touching  one  object  at  the
same  moment.  Simultaneous  impact  on  them  has
therefore  become  associated  by  habit  with  an  idea  of
a  duplicate  impression.  The  mind  has  learnt  its
lesson,  which  it  cannot  forget  —  its  language,  which
it  can  only  interpret  in  its  own  established  manner.
We  touch  a  single  superficies  with  nervous  surfaces
which  are  used  to  come  in  contact  with  two ;  there-
fore we  think  that  we  touch  two  objects.  The  con-
ventional signs  are  present,  and  we  deem  that  the
accustomed  realities  are  also  acting.

An  interesting  fact,  recently  observed  at  Paris,
may  be  adduced  in  confirmation  of  the  above  views.

A  celebrated  surgeon,  M.  Blaudin,  succeeded  in
making  a  new  nose  for  a  soldier  named  Eustache
Gressan,  who  had  lost  that  member  from  a  sabre  cut
at  Waterloo,  by  means  of  skin  cut  away  from  the
forehead  of  the  patient  When  Gressan  has  his  eyes
shut,  if  any  one  pricks  with  a  pin  the  end  of  his  new
nose,  asking  him  at  the  same  time  where  he  has  been
touched,  he  immediately  lifts  his  hand  to  his  fore-
head, evidently  referring  the  feeling  to  its  old  place
from  association.  This  anecdote,  which  is  taken
from  a  thesis  sustained  before  the  faculty  of  medicine
at  Paris  by  M.  Chomette  of  Bordeaux,  is  extremely
valuable,  as  showing  decisively  that  sensation  depends
on  the  nerves  and  their  associated  actions,  not  on
their  particular  localities.

Q  4


344  MESMERIC SENSATION.

.  Certain  signs,  then,  are  really  representatives  to  us
of  certain  objects ;  and  of  the  nature  of  those  signs
we,  from  the  above  considerations,  may  partly  judge.
It  is  necessary,  however,  that  on  this  subject  our
ideas  should  be  perfecdy  clear  and  precise.

Let  us,  therefore,  inquire  wherein,  individually
and  generally,  consists  the  language  of  sensation  ?

Not  in  that  which  is  commonly  and  vaguely  called
.the  action  of  the  senses,  but  in  motions  of  those
nerves  which  are  the  life  and  eflScacy  of  the  senses.
Tor,  let  us  consider,  with  Locke,  that  **all  the  actions
that  we  have  any  notion  of,  reduce  themselves  to
these  two,  thinking  and  motion,"  (thinking  being
the  action  of  mind,  as  motion  is  of  matter).  Now
that  the  nerves  act  in  sensation  no  one  will  attempt
to  deny ;  and  how  they  can  act,  being  material  sub-
stances, except  by  a  change  in  the  position  of  their
relative  parts ;  in  other  words,  by  motion,  it  is
utterly  impossible  to  conceive.

That  sensations  are  the  results  of  changes  or  mo-
tions in  some  portion  of  our  nervous  system  does  not,
however,  rest  upon  abstract  reasoning  alone.  The
proposition  may  be  proved,  by  fact,  in  a  twofold
manner.

First,  we  may,  by  giving  motion  to  a  nerve  of
sense,  convince  ourselves  that  a  sensation  is  the
result.

Secondly,  knowing  that,  when  bodies  are  jarred  oi;
stirred,  their  particles  continue  for  some  little  time
in  motion,  after  the  impulse  which  set  them  vibrating
is  at  rest;  we  may,  by  observing  that  a  sensation


MESMERIC SENSATION.  345

continues  for  a  few  moments  after  its  cause  has  ceased
to  act,  conclude  that  the  nerve,  on  which  sensation
depends,  produces  its  effect  by  motion.

Each  of  the  senses  is  susceptible  of  affording  either
species  of  demonstration.

First.  1.  A  blow  on  the  ears  will  make  them  what
is  vulgarly  called  ring^  independently  of  the  sound  of
the  percussion.

2.  When  a  sound  has  been  of  long  duration,  we
still  conceive  that  we  hear  it,  though  it  may  have
been  for  some  time  discontinued.

Secondly,  1.  An  electric  shock  gives  such  sensation
to  the  nerves  of  touch  as  a  violent  blow  usually
excites  in  them.

2.  Should  a  fly  have  settled  on  the  face,  we  often
raise  our  hands  to  brush  it  off,  after  it  is  really  gone,
being  deceived  by  a  continuation  of  the  same  feeling
which  it  gave  us  when  actually  in  contact  with  the
skin.  The  tickling  of  a  feather  produces  a  similar
effect.

Thirdly.  1.  Let  any  one  place  a  piece  of  zinc  under
his  tongue,  and  a  piece  of  silver  upon  the  upper  part
of  the  same  organ.  At  the  moment  when  the  two
metals  are  brought  into  contact,  a  strong  taste  will
be  perceived  in  the  mouth,  resulting  from  the  gal-
vanic concussion,  and  not  from  any  actual  flavour.

2.  The  sensation  endures  for  a  short  time  after  the
experiment  has  been  tried.

Fourthly.  I.  A  spark,  drawn,  by  means  of  pointed
metal,  from  the  nose  of  a  person  who  is  charged  with

Q  5


846  MESMERIC SENSATION*

electricity,  will  give  him  the  sensation  of  smelling  a
phosphoric  odoiu-.

2.  Musk,  however  carefully  inhaled,  so  as  to  pre-
vent any  actual  particles  of  the  substance  from  being
stopped  upon  the  pituitary  membrane,  will  produce  in
us  sensations  of  odour  for  some  time  after  we  have
ceased  to  smell  to  it

Fifthly.  To  perceive  the  connection  between  motion
and  sensation,  with  respect  to  such  of  our  senses  as  I
have  already  mentioned,  is  not  difficult.  But,  when
we  come  to  consider  the  eye,  it  is  hard  to  apprehend
that  all  its  beautiful  representations  of  that  external
world  with  which  it  holds  such  distant  communion
are  but  signs  and  characters,  consisting  in  nervous
motions,  which  the  soul,  by  an  intellectual  operation,
translates  into  its  own  glorious  and  native  language.
For  this  reason,  I  have  reserved  the  consideration  of
vision  to  the  last,  in  order  to  bestow  on  it  more  at-
tention. Mesmeric  vision  also  being  that  part  of
mesmeric  sleepwaking  which  most  alarms  the  pre-
judices of  mankind,  I  am  most  anxious  to  reduce  it
to  analogy  with  nature.

If  it  can  be  shown  that  vision  does  really  consist,
like  all  our  other  sensations,  in  motion  communicated
to  a  certain  nerve,  I  conceive  that  my  task  is  partly
executed,  since  it  is  plain  that,  though  other  condi-
tions which  we  deem  essential  to  vision  may  be  want-
ing to  the  mesmeric  state,  the  great,  the  primary
requisite  may  yet  be  present.  There  may  still  be
motion.

But  let  us  proceed  to  proofs.


MESMERIC SENSATION*  347

Sir  Isaac  Newton  asks  (Query  12th)9

"  Do  not  the  rays  of  light  in  falling  upon  the  bot-
tom of  the  eye  excite  vibrations  in  the  tunica  retina,
—  which  vibrations  being  propagated  along  the  solid
fibres  of  the  optic  nerves  into  the  brain,  cause  the
sense  of  seeing  ?  "

And  again  (Query  16th),

"  When  a  man  in  the  dark  presses  either  corner  of
his  eye  with  his  finger,  and  turns  his  eye  away  firom
his  finger,  he  will  see  a  circle  of  colours,  like  those  in
the  feather  of  a  peacock's  tail.  If  the  eye  and  the
finger  remain  quiet,  these  colours  vanish  in  a  second
minute  of  time ;  but  if  the  finger  be  moved  with  a
quavering  motion  they  appear  again.  Do  not  these
colours  arise  from  such  motions  excited  in  the  bottom
of  the  eye  by  the  pressure  and  motion  of  the  finger,
as,  at  other  times,  are  excited  there  by  light,  for  caus-
ing vision?  and  do  not  the  motions,  once  excited,
continue  about  a  second  of  time  before  they  cease  ?
And  when  a  man,  by  a  stroke  upon  his  eye,  sees  a
flash  of  light,  are  not  the  like  motions  excited  in  the
retina  by  the  stroke?  And,  when  a  coal  of  fire,
moved  nimbly  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  makes
the  whole  circumference  appear  like  a  circle  of  fire,
is  it  not  because  the  motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of
the  eye  by  the  rays  of  light  are  of  a  lasting  nature,
and  continue  till  the  coal  of  fire,  in  going  round,  re-
turns to  its  former  place?  And,  considering  the
lastingness  of  the  motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of
the  eye  by  light,  are  they  not  of  a  vibratory  nature  ?  "
These  observations,  which  the  great  philosopher  has

Q  6


348  MESM£RIC SENSATION.

SO  modestly  thrown  into  the  interrogative  form,  mo-
dern science  has  done  little  else  than  repeat  affirm-
atively.

It  is  true,  we  no  longer  talk  of  rays  of  light  as  the
causes  of  our  visual  sensations ;  we  have  substituted
for  these  (and,  as  I  believe,  with  truth,)  the  undu-
lations of  an  elastic  ether.  Still  the  theory  of  sens-
ation remains  the  same ;  and  motions  of  the  nerves,
which  minister  to  the  eye,  are  accepted  as  productive
of  our  ideas  of  light.  The  fibres  of  the  retina,  ac-
cording to  M.  d'Arcet,  continue  to  vibrate  for  about
the  eighth  part  of  a  second  after  the  exciting  cause
has  ceased;  and  therefore  it  is  that,  if  we  look  at  the
sun  and  then  turn  our  eyes  from  it,  or  even  shut
them,  we  still  perceive  a  bright  image, before  us.
The  phenomenon  is  explicable  on  no  other  hypo-
thesis.

I  might,  perhaps,  allow  the  subject  to  rest  here,
but  it  is  too  important  to  be  abandoned  before  our
misapprehensions  concerning  it  are  perfectly  cleared
up.  The  great  source  of  error  respecting  vision  has
been,  and  is,  the  miniature  representation  of  objects
on  the  retina,  which  was  once  undoubtingly  accepted
as  the  cause  of  vision  —  a  venerable  delusion,  with
which  it  is  almost  a  pity  to  part ;  for  the  endeavour
to  explain  how  an  inverted  image  (as  that  on  the
retina  is,)  could  make  men  see  right  end  upwards,
has  given  rise  to  an  infinite  display  of  learned  inge-
nuity.

Then,  also,  the  notion  of  the  soul  giving  a  peep
into  the  show-box  of  the  eye  is  sufficiently  ludicrous


MESMERIC SENSATION.  349

to  be  amusing.  Still,  before  we  can  have  just  ideas
concerning  vision,  those  that  anciently  found  place
with  us,  however  captivating,  must  be  altogether
swept  away.  The  undulatory  theory  of  light  has^
it  is  true,  at  the  present  time,  already  [effected  this
in  part :  still,  nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  get  well
rid  of  old  errors,  especially  when  these  are  based  on  a
plausible  association  of  ideas.  We  behold  external  ob-
'jects —  the  same  objects  are  known  to  be  represented
on .  the  retina  —  and  we  jump  at  once  to  the  conclu-
sion thkt  here  is  cause  and  there  effect  Unfortu-
nately, never  were  two  things,  apparently  connected,
so  wide  asunder.  Did  not  whatever  is  too  near  our-
selves in  general  delude  us  greatly,  surely  we  should
not  accept  the  image  on  the  retina  as  explanatory  of
vision,  only  because  that  image  is  in  the  eye,  and  be-
cause we  know  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  our  eyes
serve  us  to  see  with.  For  let  us  remember  that  the
connection  between  seeing  and  the  picture  on  the
retina  has  never  been  proved.  The  theory  that  links
them  together  is  perfectly  gratuitous.  On  the  other
hand,  the  connection  between  seeing  and  motion  of
the  optic  nerve  has  been  proved.  We  cannot  indeed
see  without  a  retina;  —  but  why?  Because  the
retina  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  set  in  motion  by  the
impact  of  light,  and  to  communicate  motion  to  the
optic  nerve.  Error  continues  to  be  propagated  by
the  loose  phraseology  employed  upon  this  subject.
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  impressioriy  when
applied  to  visual  action  ?  An  impression  gives  the
idea  of  something  stamped  and  durable; but  the


350  IdtESMERIC SEKSATION.

image  on  the  retina  endures  no  longer  than  while  the
external  object  is  before  it.  This  is  totally  at  vari-
ance with  the  lasting  nature  of  luminous  impulsions
on  the  eye,  which  consideration,  it  might  be  sup-
posed, would  alone  be  sufficient  at  once  to  refer  vision
to  a  motive  cause.  Above  all,  how  can  the  optic
nerve  convey  impressions  ?  —  a  mode  of  speech,  how-
ever, which  is  but  too  common.  What  is  really
conveyed,  or  communicated  to  the  brain  ? — a  stamped
figure,  like  the  impression  of  a  seal  on  wax  —  or  a
picture  ?  —  No  !  a  motion,  and  nothing  but  a  motion.
Notwithstanding  that  this  is  palpable  to  reason,  and
doubtless  well  known  to  the  physiologist,  still  it  is  to
be  suspected  that  the  multitude  are,  even  yet,  misled
by  a  fencied  analogy  between  the  act  of  seeing  and
taking  off  the  impressions  of  objects,  just  as  ladies,  by
an  ingenious  and  almost  instantaneous  process,  trans-
fer engravings  to  the  tops  of  their  work  boxes.

This  must  be  reformed  altogether.

Taking  the  question  on  its  widest  grounds,  let  us
inquire.  Does  the  image  on  the  retina  enable  us  to
see  ?  To  see  is  not  merely  to  have  ideas  of  colour,
but  to  appreciate  the  relative  size  and  distance  of
bodies.  Now,  in  spite  of  the  beautiful  perfection  of
the  forms  represented  upon  the  retina,  and  the  pro-
portion of  their  distances,  many  facts  contribute  to
assure  us  that  we  gain  no  perception  of  form  or  dis-
tance by  the  eye.  We  learn  from  it  absolutely  no
more  than  relates  to  light  and  colour.  Thus,  though
images  are  formed  upon  the  retina  of  the  new-born


MCSMEftIC S£NSAT10K.  351

infant  as  perfectly  as  upon  that  of  the  adult,  yet^
during  the  first  month  of  its  existence,  it  cannot  be
said  properly  to  see.  It  only  betokens  a  certain  sen-*
sibility  to  light  by  shutting  its  eyes  when  exposed  to
a  strong  glare.  That  it  has  actually  no  idea  of  the
size  or  distance  of  objects,  even  long  after  it  appears
pleased  with  bright  and  lively  colours,  is  evident  from
its  stretching  out  its  hand  to  seize  objects,  however
distant,  or  of  whatever  dimensions.

Even  persons,  who,  being  born  blind,  attain  to
sight  at  an  advanced  period  of  life,  arrive  but  slowly
at  a  correct  appreciation  of  external  objects.  No
where  is  the  parallel  between  language  of  the  pre-
cedents of  sensation  more  remarkable  than  here.
Learning  to  see  is  precisely  analogous  to  learning  a
new  tongue.  It  is  said  of  a  blind  youth,  spoken  of
by  Cheselden,  "  When  he  saw  the  light  for  the  first
time,  he  knew  so  little  how  to  judge  of  distances
that  he  believed  the  objects  which  he  saw  *  touched
his  eyes,'  (this  was  his  expression)  as  the  things  which
he  felt  touched  his  skin."  *  It  is  related  also*  of
Kaspar  Hauser,  who  was  in  the  condition  of  a  blind
person  from  long  captivity  in  a  dark  dungeon,  that,
when  led  up  to  a  window,  for  the  first  time,  whence
there  was  an  extensive  view,  he  uttered  a  cry  of  pain
and  hid  his  eyes  with  his  hands ;  wh^n  able  subse-
quently to  describe  his  sensations,  he  declared  that
the  landscape  had  appeared  to  him  as  an  upright

*  Milligan's  Magendiei


352  MESMERIC SENSATION.

plane,  daubed  all  over  with  dazzling  and  discordant
colours.*

Were  vision  mechanically  resultant  from  a  pictured
representation,  it  is  evident  that  effects  like  these
could  not  ensue.

But,  finally,  how  are  we  made  aware  that  there  is
a  picture  at  all  on  the  retina?  By  its  being  shown
to  us  in  the  eye  of  a  dead  animal.  So  that  we  look
upon  it  externally  as  we  would  on  any  otlier  object.  It
is  we  ourselves  who  create  the  picture  by  our  previous
conceptions  of  form  and  distance,  which  have  been
drawn,  as  the  metaphysician  knows,  from  the  sense
of  touch  or  rather  muscular  action.  Thus,  we  only
know  that  there  is  a  picture  on  the  retina,  becatise  we
are  able  to  see.  Can  that,  then,  be  itself  the  cause
of  our  seeing?  The  absurdity  is  manifest  It  is
clear,  then,  that  when  we  call  upon  the  image  on  the
retina  to  account  for  our  visual  perceptions,  the  effect
does  in  no  way  answer  to  the  cause  proposed.  View
it  as  we  will,  it  appears  to  be  merely  the  collateral
result  of  certain  mechanical  dispositions,  which  in  no
way  regard  it  as  an  end.  From  what  has  been  said,
it  appears  that,  in  considering  the  sense  of  vision,  we
must  absolutely  look  upon  it  as  no  more  than  the
medium  of  our  information  respecting  light  and  colour.

To  light  and  colour,  then,  we  have  to  confine  our
attention  and  to  limit  our  argument  But  our  per-
ceptions of  light  have  been  proved  to  be  occasioned

*  Kaspar  Hauser  has  been  accused  of  deception ;  but  surely
this  trait  of  nature  alone  would  suffice  to  prove  the  most  essen-
tial fact  in  his  story.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  353

foy  motions  of  the  optic  nerves,  and  colours  consist  so
certainly  in  vibrations,  that  the  number  of  undulations
producing  each  tint  of  the  solar  spectrum  has  been
mathematically  ascertained.  "  The  determination  of
these  minute  portions  of  time  and  space,"  observes
Mrs.  Somerville,  "  both  of  which  have  a  real  exist-
ence,  being  the  actual  results  of  measurement^  do  as
much  honour  to  the  genius  of  Newton  as  that  of  the
law  of  gravitation."

Thus  it  appears  that  the  real  office  of  the  retina  is
to  vibrate  in  correspondence  with  the  vibrations  of
light ;  as  they  are  modified  by  being  turned,  inter-
cepted, or  broken  by  meeting  with  various  objects. ;

Need  we  observe  how  much  this  diminishes  the
wonder  of  mesmeric  vision  ?  It  has  been  shown  that
the  picture  on  the  retina  is  not  the  cause  of  seeing*
In  cases,  therefore,  where  a  picture  on  the  retina  is
rendered  impossible  (as  when  the  eyes  are  closed  in
mesmeric  slumber)  the  true  cause  of  vision  is  not,  it
seems,  on  that  account,  put  out  of  the  way.  There
still  may  be  motion  of  the  optic  nerve.  If  it  be  in-r
quired,  how  produced,  I  must  send  on  my  reader  to
the  remarks  which  will  shortly  ensue  on  communicat-
ing media.  This  at  least  cannot  be  contested :  — •  the
faculty  of  vision  has  been  proved  to  result  from  mo-
tion, and  is  therefore  brought  under  the  same  law,
which,  it  has  been  shown,  predominates  over  the
other  senses.  Hence  it  appears  that  few  propositions,
not  absolutely  mathematical,  are  more  certainly  esta-
blished than  this.

Motions  of  the  nerves  are  representative  to  man  of


354  MESMERIC SENSATION.

external  objects.  Nor  is  it  less  demonstrable  that
those  portions  of  the  nervous  system  which  are  cen-
tral, or  proximate  to  the  brain,  occasion  in  us,  by
their  motions,  sensations,  rather  than  those  portions
of  the  nervous  system  which  are  superficial  or  most
remote  from  the  brain.  For,  in  many  instances,  it
may  be  shown  that  internal  causes,  wholly  inde*
pendent  of  any  thing  external,  produce  sensations
exactly  similar  to  those  excited  by  external  things ;
their  manner  of  reproduction  plainly  exhibiting
their  original  mode  of  production.

In  fever  there  is  a  repetition  of  images  before  the
eye,  which  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  a
repetition  of  the  sensations  which  formerly  suggested
them.  But  those  sensations  are  themselves  correla-
tive with  certain  changes  or  motions  of  the  nervous
system.  Their  recuri'ence  in  a  confused  and  incohe-
rent manner  is  confessedly  the  fruit  of  disorder.  And
what  is  disorder  ?  An  agitation  of  the  frame,  occa-
sioned often,  and  always  accompanied  by,  a  deranged
action  of  the  nerves.  The  soul  is  reading,  as  it  were,
an  incoherent  treatise,  of  which  the  disjointed  sen-
tences were  once  familiar  to  her  in  their  proper
order.

Under  the  influence  of  strong  emotion  persons  may
perceive,  as  with  the  actual  organs  of  sense,  objects
which  have  no  existence  but  in  themselves ;  nay,  even
like  Macbeth,  when  marshalled  by  the  air-drawn
dagger,  may  stretch  forth  their  hands  to  clutch


•*  The  false  creation,


Proceeding  from  the  heat-oppressed  brmn,"


MESM£RIC SENSATION.  855

There  are  also  mysterious  affections  of  the  nervous
system,  in  which  the  patient,  retaining  all  his  reason,
seems  palpably  to  behold  various  forms  of  men  or
animals.  Walter  Scott,  in  his  Demonology,  gives  a
detailed  and  interesting  account  of  the  case  of  a
lady  who  was  thus  spectre-haunted  for  months.

I  was  myself  personally  acquainted  with  a  physi-
cian who  told  me  that,  one  evening  while  he  was
writing,  he  chanced  to  raise  his  eyes  and  saw,  as  he
imagined,  his  housekeeper  standing  close  to  his  desk,
with  a  candle  in  her  hand.  "  You  may  go  to  bed,
Betty,"  he  said,  and  went  on  writing.  A  few  minutes
afterwards  he  again  looked  up :  there  was  Betty  still.
"  Did  you  not  hear  me  ?  "  he  repeated ;  "  I  want
nothing  more.  Go  to  bed."  A  third  glance,  how-
ever, showed  him  the  seemingly  obstinate  Betty  yet
nearer  to  his  chair,  when,  raising  his  hand  with  a
gesture  of  impatience,  he  found  that  it  passed  through
the  figure,  which,  however,  retained  all  its  apparent
corporeality.  With  much  shrewdness  and  presence
of  mind,  the  physician  then  felt  his  own  pulse,  which
indicated  fever.  He  proceeded  forthwith  to  bleed
himself,  and,  as  he  had  anticipated,  while  the  blood
flowed,  the  phantom  gradually  disappeared  —  a  proof
the  most  convincing  that  it  was  the  creation  of  his
own  disordered  state  of  body.

Nor  are  such  illusions  confined  to  the  sense  of
vision.  A  lady  of  my  acquaintance,  while  in  a  weak
state  of  health,  heard  constantly  a  band  of  music
with  as  much  distinctness  as  if  an  orchestra  had
actually  been  present  As  she  recovered,  the  imaginary


356  MESMERIC SENSATION.

sounds  diminished,  till  at  length  she  heard  no  more
of  the  aerial  performers.

These  facts,  however,  are  not  within  the  experience
of  all  persons.  But  a  proof,  as  easy  of  access  as  it  is
interesting,  that  internal  motions  of  the  nerves  can
cause  in  us  a  perfect  idea  of  something  external  to
ourselves,  is  afforded  in  the  following  experiment.
Let  any  one  take  a  five  shilling  piece,  and  thrust  it
far  up  between  the  inside  of  his  upper  lip  and  his
teeth ;  then  let  him  lay  a  piece  of  zinc  on  his  tongue^
and  suddenly  bring  together  the  edges  of  the  two
metals.  At  the  moment  when  contact  takes  place  a
faint  glimmering  light  will  seem  to  pass  off  on  either
side  his  head,  which,  as  nobody  else  sees  it,  must  be
an  optical  error,  —  the  mere  motion  of  a  nerve,
caused  by  the  galvanism  elicited  from  the  two
metals.

Finally,  discoveries  of  recent  date  demonstrate  tliat
the  impulses  of  sense  proceed  to  a  point  remote  from
the  organ  in  which  they  originate.  It  is  found  that
the  optic,  acoustic,  and  olfactory  nerves,  though  re-
maining entire,  may  fail  to  transmit  their  accustomed
intelligence  to  the  seat  of  perception,  after  the  sever-
ing of  the  fifth  pair.  The  following  experiment  gives
still  more  consequence  to  the  internal  action  of  our
sensitive  system.  "  I  destroyed  in  a  dog,"  says  Ma*
gendie,  "  the  two  olfactory  nerves.  I  presented  to
the  animal  strong  odours.  He  perceived  them  per-
fectly, and  conducted  himself  exactly  as  he  would
have  done  had  he  been  in  his  ordinary  state. It  may


M£SM£RIC SENSATION.  357

then  be  possible  that  the  olfactory  nerve  is  not  the
nerve  of  smell."  *

How  much  these  facts  throw  light  upon  the  in-
ternal sensibility  displayed  by  sleepwakers  I  need
not  remark.  They  tend  to  concentrate  sensation,  to
refer  it  to  a  common  source.  They  actually  display
our  senses  dependent  for  their  action  upon  an  internal
cause.

But,  farther  still,  it  may  be  shown  that  a  quiescent
state  of  the  external  portions  of  the  nerves  is  per-
fectly consistent  with  an  increased  and  independent
activity  of  their  central  system.

Nay,  the  repose  of  the  outer  is  an  absolute  con-
dition for  the  revelation  of  the  inner  sensibility.

We  all  may  feel  that,  in  order  to  call  up  before  our
mind's  eye  the  face  of  a  dear  friend,  or  the  beauties
of  a  familiar  landscape,  we  must  retreat  from  the
obtrusive  impulses  of  the  external  world.

Would  we  rise  to  a  yet  higher  discernment  of  re-
membered objects,  we  must  yet  more  calmly  check
the  beating  of  our  pulses,  until  we  pass  into  that  state
of  mind  so  beautifully  described  by  Wordsworth,  —

— ^^  **  That  serene  and  blessed  mood
In  which  the  affections  gently  lead  us  on,
Until  the  breath  of  this  corporeal  frame,
And  even  the  motion  of  our  human  blood
Almost  suspended,  we  are  laid  asleep
In  body,  and  become  a  living  soul :
While,  with  an  eye  made  quiet  by  the  power
Of  harmony,  and  the  deep  power  of  joy.
We  see  into  the  life  of  things."

*  Milligan's  Magendie.


358  MESMERIC SENSATION.

An  instance  of  another  kind  of  abstraction  is  to  be
found  in  the  visionary,  who  conceives  that  he  pos-
sesses the  power  of  really  discerning  absent  objects,
or  of  anticipating  such  dramas  of  life  as  have  not
yet  been  acted.  These  seers,  or  pretenders  to  the
second  sight  as  it  is  called,  are  described  as  falling  at
the  time  of  their  beholding  a  vision  into  a  species  of
trance.  Their  limbs  become  rigid,  their  eyes  remain
fixed  and  are  insensible  to  the  light.  While  all  within
them  is  in  a  kind  of  anarchy,  their  exterior  appearance
is  that  of  the  dead.

But  we  need  not  resort  to  an  extreme  case  like
this,  to  demonstrate  that  our  greatest  enjoyment  of
the  inner  mobility  of  sensation  is  to  be  found  in  the
moment  when  we  are  most  externally  tranquil.
Dreams,  beyond  all  other  phenomena  of  our  nature^
prove  a  central  activity  of  the  nervous  system.
When  we  have  passed  into  their  world  of  separate
existence,  the  outer  organs  of  sense  are  closely  shut,
yet  we  see,  or  hear  *,  or  feel,  or  partake  of  imaginary
banquets.  To  say  that  the  soul  alone  reproduces
these  ideas,  were  to  charge  her  with  unworthy  foUy,
for  what  can  be  less  exalted  or  less  coherent  than  are
our  sleeping  visions  generally ;  yet,  were  the  spirit
really  free  to  act  unencumbered,  would  not  her  oper-
ations be  distinguished  by  superior  majesty  and  con-
nection ? Rather  must  we  affirm  with  him,  whose

*  Dr.  Abercrombie  doubts  that  a  sense  of  hearing  is  ever  en-
joyed in  slumber.  It  is,  however,  no  uncommon  occurrence
with  me  to  dream  that  I  hear  music,  either  vocal  or  instru-
mental, as  distinct  as  any  that  voice  or  orchestra  can  produce.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  359

every  comment  on  our  nature  was  poetically  beautiful
and  philosophically  true,  —

**  Dreams  are  the  children  of  an  idle  bram."

It  is  indeed  evident  that,  in  sleep,  some  cause  (per-
haps the  circulation  of  the  blood  through  the  brain)
agitates  the  nerves  of  sensation,  and  gives  to  our
ideas,  by  their  associate  motions,  a  particular  impulse^
form,  and  feature.  This  view  of  the  case  is  strength-
ened by  the  manifest  influence  which  our  state  of
body  exercises  over  our  nocturnal  visions,  which  are
calm  or  disturbed,  agreeable  or  painful,  accordingly
as  our  digestion,  and  consequent  pulsation,  is  orderly
or  irregular.

A  surplus,  then,  of  internal  sensibility,  co-existent
with  a  deficiency  in  the  external,  is  not  exhibited  in
the  mesmeric  state  alone.  If,  indeed,  mesmerism
could  display  an  inner  development  of  sensation,
without  any  sacrifice  of  the  external  capacities,  we
might  have  reason  to  exclaim  against  its  miraculous
deviation  from  nature's  laws;  but  the  increase  of
internal  power,  which  it  reveals,  in  connection  with
the  abrogated  activity  of  the  surfaces  of  the  nerves,
appears  to  be  the  illustration,  and  not  the  infringe-
ment of  a  principle.

Still  are  we  more  and  more  depriving  the  super-
ficial extremities  of  the  nerves  of  potentiality  in  sens-
ation,—  still  are  we  giving  more  and  more  importance
to  their  central  motions.  Proceeding  in  our  exami-
nation of  nervous  action,  we  find  proof  not  wanting,
that  like  impulses,  at  whatever  part  of  the  nerve  they


360  MESMERIC SENSATION.

commence,  terminate  in  like  motions,  and  produce
like  sensations.

*^  After  the  amputation  of  a  foot,  or  a  finger,  it  has
frequently  happened,  that  an  injury  being  offered  to
tlie  stump  of  the  amputated  limb,  whether  from  cold
air,  too  great  pressure,  or  other  accidents,  the  patient
has  complained  of  a  sensation  of  pain  in  the  foot  or
finger  that  was  cut  off."  *

From  this  fact  we  may  infer,  that  nerves  have  the
same  conducting  capacity  throughout  their  whole
length,  and  that  the  loss  of  their  extremities  or  ulte-
rior expansions  does  not  deprive  them  of  their  power
to  convey  impulsions.

The  common  property  resident  in  any  part  of  a
nerve,  or  series  of  nerves,  to  excite  similar  sensations,
is  also  evinced  by  the  difficulty  we  often  experience
in  referring  our  pains  to  the  real  seat  of  the  disorder
which  occasions  them.  Thus  it  not  unfrequently
happens,  that  a  person  has  had  a  sound  tooth  ex-
tracted instead  of  a  defective  one  which  caused  the
torment.

But  all  these  phenomena  of  sensation  are,  as  it
were,  subservient  to  one  great  principle,  which,  if
laws  be  only  the  general  expression  of  concurring
facts,  is  most  truly  Nature's  law  as  regards  sensation  ;
universal  — immutable  — admitting  of  no  exception.
It  is  this :  —  similar  ultimate  motions  of  the  nerves,,
however  produced,  excite  similar  sensations.

A^  priori  reasoning  would  alone  suffice  to  convince

*  Darwin's  Zoonomia,  vol.  i.  p.  35.


MESMERIC SENSATION^  361

US  of  this ;  or  rather  it  is  self-evident,  as  an  axiom,
that,  where  a  sign  is  representative  of  an  object,  it
must  be  so  universally  and  under  all  circumstances.
It  would  produce  as  much  confusion  did  that  par*
ticular  sensation,  which  now  invariably  signifies  to  us
a  tree,  occasionally  call  up  in  us  the  idea  of  a  mauj  as
interpreting  vice  to  mean  virtue,  or  meanness  gene-
rosity, does  actually  bring  about,  in  some  instances,
in  this  our  wicked  world.  God's  works  are  charge-
able with  no  such  imperfections.  It  is  true  that  the
invariability  of  our  sensations  may  occasionally  lead
us  into  momentary  error  (we  rashly  concluding  that,
where  the  accustomed  sign  is  present,  the  pheno-
menon which  usually  causes  it  is  also  at  hand) ;  but
this  is  only  the  necessary  accompaniment  of  a  mighty
benefit.  The  advantages  are  great  and  regular;
the  drawbacks  from  these  advantages  trifling  and
exceptional.  That  like  signs  are  productive  of  like
ideas,  is  a  principle  which  is  the  groundwork  of  all
our  knowledge.  Is  it  ever  violated  in  mesmeric  sens-
ation ?  Not  within  my  experience.  An  interesting
proof  that  Suggestion  continues  to  be,  under  mes-
merism, the  law  of  our  thoughts  may  be  found  in
the  fact,  that  sleepwak«rs,  with  closed  eyes,  when
asked  how  they  appear  to  themselves  in  a  mirror,
reply,  "  as  if  my  eyes  were  open.'*  Accustomed  to
connect  the  two  ideas,  of  sight  and  having  the  eyes
open,  in  one  sequence,  the  first  suggests  the  second
to  their  minds.

To  prove  by  general  experiment  that  ultimate
motions  of  the  nerves,  however  produced,  are  signs

R


863  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

which  the  Mind  interprets  in  one  uniform  manner,  »
but  to  repeat  &cts  which  have  been  already  stated*
The  truth  of  the  proposition  is  involved  in  that  of
preceding  ones.  For  it  has  been  shown  that  pressure^
or  a  blow  on  the  eye,  or  galvanic  concussion,  pro*
duces,  not  less  than  the  vibrations  of  the  luminous
ether,  a  sensation  of  beholding  light;  that  smell,
feeling,  taste  may  be  deceived  into  action  by  agents
which  are  not  the  proper  objects  of  those  senses,  and
that  hearing  may  result  from  any  cause  that  seta
the  tympanum  in  motion  or  agitates  the  acoustic
nerve.

And  that  all  these  impulsions  tend  inward,  and
that  the  last  nervous  change  is  the  immediate  pre-
cedent of  sensation,  has  been  made  also  evident.

Adopting  Dr.  Thomas  Brown's  definition  of  power,
we  may  not  inaptly  call  central  action  of  the  nerves
the  power  of  sensation.

Wonderful  and  complex,  then,  as  is  the  external
mechanism  of  the  senses,  their  principle  is  one.  In
vain  will  a  thousand  adverse  arguments  be  based  upon
the  favourite  theme  of  our  opponents  —  namely,  the
speciality  of  oflSce  with  which  each  nerve  in  our
economy  is  invested;  in  vaski  will  it  be  contended
that  one  nerve  is  sensible  to  the  touch  of  light  alone
—  that  another  converses  solely  with  the  world  of
sound.  But  however  varied  their  action  may  appear,
however  diversified  the  ideas  which  they  excite,  how-
ever distinct  and  separate  the  different  properties  of
matter  which  they  reveal  —  still,  as  many  rays  unite
in  one  centre,  or,  rather,  as  a  thousand  harmonies


MESMERIC  SENSATION^  36^

may  be  all  evolved  from  one  fundamental  note,  so  da
their  multiplied  resources  all  coincide  in  a  single  sim-
plicity of  plan  and  operation.  Motion  is  their  lan-»
guage  —  motion  is  their  mode  of  communicating
information  to  us  from  without*

This  is  sensation's  one  great  law,  to  which  all  other
are  minor  and  attribute ;  and  this,  once  established,
deprives  all  but  the  last  preparative  of  sensation  of
that  constancy  which  is  the  attribute  of  power.  All
other  laws  relating  to  our  sensibility  admit  of  ex-
ceptions, and  are  not  therefore  really  laws.  This
alone,  throughout  the  whole  history  of  man,  we  have
never  found  transgressed.  And  how  beautiful,  how
wonderful  is  the  contrivance !  A  few  insignificant
signs,  capable  of  infinite  permutations,  are  repre-
sentative to  us  of  the  whole  glorious  universe !  The
finger  of  God  is  here.

Having  explored  the  principle  of  sensation,  we
find  that  the  changes  which  mesmerism  induces  in
its  superficial  developments  are  comparatively  un-
important. They  in  no  way  affect  the  great  internal
cause,  or  throw  the  mesmeric  sensibility  out  of  the
pale  of  nature.  We  have  seen  that  similar  motions
of  the  nerves  may  be  produced  in  various  ways,  and
that  a  change  in  the  pre-requisites  of  sensation  can
never  imply  a  change  in  sensation  itself.  Now,  though
in  the  mesmeric  state  the  nervous  motions  are  appa-
rently not  jororfi^ccrf  in  the  normal  way,  still  that  there
may  be  normal  motions  is  evident.  However  altered
by  mesmerism  the  mere  externals  of  sensation  may
appear,  the  internal  efficient  change  in  {he  nervous

R  2


864  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

Structure  need  not  in  any  way  falsify  our  habitual
mode  of  being.  In  exposing  tlie  secrets  and  apparent
mysteries  of  a  new  condition  of  man,  we  do  but  lay
bare  the  fountain  of  sensation,  not  change  its  nature.
We  pierce  beyond  external  developments  only  to
arrive  at  their  origin  and  their  base  more  surely
even  than  the  anatomist  with  his  scalpel.

Let  me,  however,  hasten  to  anticipate  an  objection
which  may  be  raised  against  the  mode  of  argument
that  I  have  recently  been  pursuing.  The  feelings
which  I  have  adduced  to  prove  that  similar  ultimate
motions  of  the  nerves  are  interpreted  always  by  the
mind  in  a  simUar  manner,  are,  it  may  be  urged,
mere  delusions,  in  no  way  correspondent  to  the  truth
of  external  things :  whereas  it  has  been  set  forth  as
the  glory  of  mesmerism,  that  all  its  revelations  regard
realities  ;  —  that,  without  eyes,  it  beholds  actual  ob-
jects of  sight;  without  ears,  it  appreciates  aerial
vibrations  which  do  essentially  exist.

I  answer,  that  my  object  was  to  show  the  uniform
manner  in  which  the  sentient  nerves  perform  their
functions,  and  that,  in  order  to  judge  of  any  func-
tions aright,  we  must  study  them  in  their  derange-
ment.  Even  their  errors  point  out  the  truth.  Though
the  mind  may  be  mistaken  in  its  judgment,  the  nerves
do  not  vary  in  their  action ;  and  this  was  the  great
point  to  establish.  In  every  case,  also,  of  delusive
sensation,  let  it  be  remembered  there  still  is  a  distinct
perception  of  each  several  quality  of  the  external
world.  Ideas  of  light,  sound,  odour,  &c.,  have  been
perfectly  reproduced,  and  have  thus  plainly  indicated


MESMERIC SENSATION.  365

the  manner  of  their  original  production.  It  has  fully
appeared  that  Nature's  mode  of  conveying  to  us  in-
formation is  one,  and  with  this  one  the  mesmeric  per-
ception need  not  be  at  variance.

But  is  there,  it  may  still  be  asked,  any  one  ac-
knowledged instance  in  nature,  by  which  the  possi-
bility of  receiving  correct  information  respecting
actual  existences,  otherwise  than  by  the  usual  inlets
of  sense,  can  be  demonstrated  ?  There  is.  It  is  well
known  that  sound  may  arrive  in  the  tjrmpanum  by
another  way  than  the  external  ear.  Let  any  one  stop
his  ears  with  his  hands  as  perfectly  as  he  can,  and
hold  his  mouth  open.  Let  a  watch  be  introduced
between  his  teeth,  but  without  touching  them,  by
another  person.  As  long  as  there  is  no  contact,  he
will  not  perceive  the  slightest  sound  of  a  watch  tick-
ing, but,  the  moment  he  closes  his  teeth  upon  the
watch,  he  will  hear  it  distinctly,  -—  a  manifest  proof
that  the  sound  has  reached  him  by  the  mouth,  not  by
the  ear,  in  fine  by  another  mode  of  conduction  than
the  ordinary.

This  simple  and  common  experiment  is  extremely
interesting  and  instructive,  for  it  shows  how  impulses
may  arrive  at  the  accustomed  seat  of  sensation  by
novel  ways;  warning  us  how  rashly  we  should  judge
in  deciding  that,  because  the  first  preparatives  of  sens-
aticm  are  unusual,  the  last  must  be  so  likewise.
They  who  desire  the  most  to  cling  to  experience  in
judging  of  mesmerism  may  by  this  consideration  be
propitiated.  It  may  also  be  conjectured  that  an  optical
impulse  may  reach  the  retina  by  some  new  route,  even

R  3


866  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

as  a  certain  sound  was  shown  to  have  been  transmitted
to  the  tympanum.  Should  we  agree  with  Magendie^
as  to  the  analogy  between  sight  and  hearing*,  so  &r
as  to  say,  that  ^^  sound  is  to  the  hearing  what  light  is
to  the  sight,''  we  shall  be  yet  more  disposed  to  admit
this.

It  may,  however,  be  asked.  If  in  the  state  of
mesmeric  sleepwaking  all  the  extremities  of  the
nervous  system  be  as  dead,  does  not  this  form  an
insurmountable  barrier  against  the  transmission  of
external  impulses  to  the  inner  seat  of  sensibility  ?
By  no  means.  In  the  first  place,  though  the  ex-
ternal sensibility  of  sleepwakers  is  not  manifested  in
the  accustomed  localities  it  does  not  follow  that  it
exists  not  somewhere.  The  truth  is,  that  it  appears
to  be  restricted  and  circumscribed  only  to  be  increased
in  intensity.  All  mesmeric  sleepwakers  seem  to  pos^
sess  a  concentrated  sensibility  in  some  one  part  of
their  bodies,  affording  a  free  inlet  for  the  conduction

*  **  Some  experiments  have  lately  taught  me  that  the  ear
presents  physiological  circumstances  analogous  to  those  of  the
eye."

Again :  ^  In  the  same  manner  as  in  the  apparatus  of  vision,
there  are  i  in  that  of  hearing  a  number  of  organs,  which  appear
to  concur  in  that  function  by  their  physical  properties,  and
behind  them  a  nerve  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  and  transmitting
impressions.'*  —  MageiuUe's  Physiology, By  Dr.  £.  Milligan.

Herschel,  also,  in  his  Treatise  on  Sound,  says,  speaking  of
those  feeble  soimds  which  catch  our  attention  at  night :  —  **  The
analogy  between  sound  and  light  is  perfect  in  this,  as  in  so  many
other  respects,  &c.  The  ear,-  like  the  eye,  requires  long  and
perfect  repose  to  attain  its  utmost  sensibility ."


MESMERIC SENSATION.  867

of  external  impulses  to  the  nerves ;  nay,  if  we  will,  to
the  accustomed  nerves  of  sensation.  Objects  of  sight
(it  will  be  remembered)  were  transmitted  to  Made-
moiselle M by  the  forehead. Sounds  reached

her  by  the  same  path;  for  proof  of  which  I  refer  to  an
experiment  precisely  analogous  to  the  just  mentioned
one  of  bringing  a  watch  into  contact  with  the  teeth.
To  the  slightest  touch  upon  the  forehead,  even
while  apparently  dead  to  feeling  elsewhere,  she  was
peculiarly  sensible.  Ammonia  held  to  her  nose  had
no  efiect  upon  her,  but,  when  brought  before  her
forehead,  made  her  suddenly  draw  back  with  affected
respiration;  and,  moreover,  exhibit  action  in  the
muscles  of  the  nose ;  -—which  last  circumstance  more
especially  adds  to  the  presumption  that  the  external

unusual  point,  is  finally  transferred  to  the  accustomed
nerves  of  sensation.

Again,  even  supposing  all  upward  conduction  from
tlie  extremities  to  the  brain  to  be  impossible  in  the
mesmeric  state,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  there  will
be  no  sensation ;  for  many  &cts  concur  to  show  that
the  mind  can  act  downward  from  the  brain  towards
the  extremities,  and  so,  as  it  were,  create  sensation
for  itself.

The  mere  thought  of  something  sour  will  set  the
teeth  on  edge,  or  of  a  good  dinner  will  excite  action
in  the  salivary  glands,  while  feelings  of  awe  or  fear
will  affect  the  whole  external  surface  of  the  body,  so
as  to  produce  a  visible  change  in  the  papillae  of  the
skin  ■  Mrs.  SomerviUe  has  observed,  in  her  Connexion

B  4


S68  MESMERIC SENSATION.

of  the  Physical  Sciences,  that  ^^  the  imagination  has  a
powerful  influence  in  our  optical  impressions^  and  has
been  known  to  revive  the  images  of  highly  luminous
objects,  months,  and  even  years  afterwards."

Again,  Sterne  says,  in  his  odd  book,  the  Koran,  -—
^*  I  am  in  possession  of  a  faculty,  at  any  time  I  please,
of  communicating  a  sensible  pleasure  to  myself,  with-
out action,  idea,  or  reflection,  by  simple  volition
merely.  The  sensation  is,  in  a  degree,  between  feel-
ing and  titillation,  and  resembles  the  thrilling  which
permeates  the  joints  of  the  body  upon  stretching  and
yawning."

Even  the  motions  of  the  iris  of  the  eye^  which
are  strictly  subject  to  nervous  influence,  and  appa^
rently  dependent  upon  the  external  impulsion  of  lights
have  been  proved  by  Magendie  to  be  greatly  under
the  dominion  of  the  will.  He  says  —  "I  ascertained
this  in  the  following  manner : — I  selected  a  person,
whose  pupil  was  very  moveable,  for  there  exist  great
differences  in  this  respect.  I  placed  one  sheet  of
paper  in  a  fixed  position  with  regard  to  the  eye  and
the  light,  and,  ascertaining  the  state  of  the  pupil,  I
requested  the  person  to  endeavour  without  moving
his  head  or  eyes,  to  read  the  small  characters  which
were  traced  upon  the  paper.  Instantly  I  saw  the
pupil  contract,  and  its  constriction  continue  during
the  whole  effort."  *

Lastly,  my  own  personal  experience  has  convinced
me  that  the  mind  can  act  from  within  towards  the

*  Milligan's  Magendie,  p.  43.


ME6MERIC SENSATION.  369

external  organs  of  sense.  Often  I  have  gone  to  sleep
holding  a  book  in  my  hand  and  continuing  to  hold  it.
For  a  few  seconds  after  awaking,  I  could  distinctly
perceive  that  I  was  unaware  of  having  any  thing  in
my  hand,  and  I  have  marked  the  restoration  of  feel-
ing consequent  upon  the  restoration  of  perfect  thought.
My  mind  has,  as  it  were,  proceeded  again  to  the  ex-
tremities, from  which,  during  slumber,  it  had  re-
treated.

By  these  phenomena  we  establish  a  truth  which
all  analogy  must  have  suggested  to  us. The  senses
act  on  the  mind. Granted ;  but  action  supposes  re-
action. Reason  and  fact  therefore  both  concur  in
proving  that  the  mind  has  a  certain  mastery  over  the
senses,  even  as  it  has  over  the  limbs,  though  the  ap-
parent passivity  of  the  senses  have  so  &r  deceived
many,  even  acute,  physiologists,  as  to  lead  them  to
assert,  that,  while  the  nerves  of  motion  have  a  down-
ward action,  proceeding  from  the  brain,  the  nerves  of
sensation,  on  the  contrary,  act  invariably  upwards,  or
towards  the  brain. We  have,  however,  seen  that  this
is  a  fallacy. It  may,  indeed,  be  made  a  question
whether  the  mind  can  ever  be  said  to  be  purely  pas-
sive in  any  true  and  philosophical  sense. This  at
least  is  clear  —  it  can  only  know  that  it  has  been  pas-
sive, by  an  act. Moreover,  that  only  in  as  far  as  we
attend  to  nervous  motions  we  become  sensible  of  them
is  a  positive  law  of  our  being. Many  an  object  sends
visual  beams  to  the  retina,  which  yet  we  cannot  be
said  properly  to  see — many  an  aerial  vibration  strikes
on  the  tympanum,  which  yet  excites  in  us  no  idea  of

R  5


370  MESMEmiC  8ENSATIOX.

sound.  How  often,  for  instance^  a  dock  may  strike
and  we  not  hear  it !  The  power  that  we  poflaeas,
ako,  of  sdecting  particalar  objects  for  our  notice^
and  even  of  excluding  others  firmn  any  share  in  onr
attention,  proves  that  the  mind  does  really  —  in  some
cases  at  least —  turn  die  senses  to  a  higher  kind  of
service  than  a  mere  passivi^  implies.  In  looking  on
a  landscape,  when  we  are  attentive  to  one  pleasEing
portion  of  it,  how  all  the  rest  of  the  view  dies  away,
as  it  were,  from  the  sight!  How  easily  fit>m  the
conversation  of  a  crowd  of  persons  talking  around  us
we  can  select  that  information  which  we  most  desire
to  hear!  Again,  the  cultivation  of  our  senses  is
manifestly  dependent  on  a  power  whidi  is  not  thdr
own.  CSiildren,  till  they  have  learnt  to  use  their
eyes  and  ears,  give  but  feeble  tokens  that  they  possess
them ;  —  a  proof  that  the  mind  does  not  even  attend
to  signs,  of  which  it  comprehends  not  the  significanqr^
and  that  neither  external  impulses  nor  material
organs  can  produce  sensation,  without  the  active  co-
operation of  the  intellect.

These  remarks  are  of  importance  to  mesmerism —
a  state  in  which  the  mind  displays  more  of  its  active
than  its  passive  character,  —  casting  aside,  as  it  were,
the  external  organs  of  sense,  in  order  to  attend  to  its
own  abstracted  trains  of  thought.

Is  nature  violated  or  not  by  this  development  of
internal  power  ?

We  have  followed  sensation  inward  only  to  arrive
at  the  mind  itself,  and  to  exhibit  it  as  not  the  play-
thing of  the  senses,  but  their  lord  and  master.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  371

Is  this  a  truth  which  is  new  to  us  ?  If  so,  it  is
well  that  we  should  learn  it  now.  It  is  time  that  we
who  talk  of  the  march  of  intellect  at  the  present  day
should  rise  above  the  vulgar  view  of  sensation,  and,
as  Coleridge  phrases  it,  endeavour  ^^to  create  the
senses  out  of  the  mind,  and  not  the  mind  out  of  the
senses."  Let  us  no  more  return  to  gone-by  errors.
Anciently  courage  was  seated  in  the  heart,  sorrow  in
the  spleen,  love  in  the  liver,  &c. ;  yet  this  was  not
worse  than  deeming  sensation  to  be  actually  in  the
organs  of  sense.  We  may  as  well  say  that  modesty
is  inherent  in  the  cheeks,  because  they  blush.  Again,
when  smell  is  lost  through  the  absence  of  its  external
organ  — -  when  hearing  is  impaired  by  a  collapse  of
the  external  ear  —  when  a  person  is  near-sighted
from  convexity  of  the  cornea,  art  can  supply  a  false
nose  whereby  odorous  impulses  are  again  properly
gathered  and  perceived  —  can  concentrate  in  an  ear-
trumpet  the  vibrations  of  the  air  —  can,  by  proper
glasses,  restore  the  purblind  to  perfect  vision.  Are
we,  on  that  account,  to  say  that  sensation  is  seated  in
our  false  nose,  artificial  ear,  or  spectacles?  What
better  reason  have  we  to  suppose  that  any  external
apparatus  of  sense  can  actually  create  ideas  in  the
soul?

A  higher  philosophy  must  teach  us  that  the  senses
are  but  the  instruments  —  the  mind  the  power  —  of
knowledge.  The  development,  indeed,  of  its  im-
mortal stores  may  depend  upon  some  external  touch,
which  imlocks  the  treasures  of  the  casket,  and  one  by
one  exposes  them  to  the  light ;  but,  as  a  seed  includes

R  6


372  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

potentially  the  future  plant,  leaf,  blossom,  and  firuit^
so  does  the  mind  contain  within  itself  its  own  capacities
of  expansion.  Even  granting  that,  till  written  upon
by  the  finger  of  the  universe,  it  is  a  blank,  and  that
all  the  magnificent  endowments  which  it  displays  are^
until  called  into  action  and  educated  by  external  ex*
istences,  as  though  they  were  not,  still,  when  onoe
vivified  and  instructed^  it  is  able  to  act  for  itself,  and
to  use  its  material  organs  as  instruments  of  its  intel-
ligence and  will.  Till  we  recognise  this  truth  in
perfect  clearness,  there  will  be  confusion  even  in  our
physiological  researches.  Before,  also,  we  can  study
sensation  aright,  we  must  learn  to  separate  it  logically
into  ite  two  great  divisions  of  general  and  special-
the  first  relating  to  us  when  considered  as  sentient
beings  only;  the  second  relating  to  us,  when  con<*
sidered  as  sentient  beings  fitted  and  adapted  to  a
peculiar  state  of  existence  and  to  the  mechanical
arrangements  of  this  our  world.  The  first  is  funda-
mental,  the  second  occasional ;  the  first  is  a  principle,
the  second  the  modification  of  a  principle.  Our
present  organisation  has  reference  to  our  present
condition;  but  sensation  is  of  no  time — of  no  era:  it
is  as  old  as  creation  itself.  Now  mesmerism  tends
to  expose  to  us  the  fundamental  sensation  apart  from
the  organic.  Unless,  then,  we  can  approach  it  with
a  due  knowledge  of  this  distinction,  its  revelations
will  be  spread  before  us  in  vain;  they  will  darken
rather  than  illuminate  our  understandings.  Till  -we
thus  study  man  and  mesmerism  (which  is  almost  an-
other word  for  man)  we  shall  remain  far  behind  the


MESMERIC SENSATION.  373

German  school,  both  of  metaphysicians  and  of  physi-
ologists. But  unfortunately  we  incline  to  the  phi-
losophy of  a  lighter  nation^  who  have  anatomised  the
body  till  they  see  nothing  beyond  the  play  and  spring
of  nerve  and  muscle.  With  their  accuracy  of  mate-
rial examination  I  do  not  quarrel;  I  will,  if  they
please,  give  up  the  term  soulj  which  seems  to  offend
them  so  mightily ;  but  I  will,  even  from  themselves,
force  the  confession  that  man  thinks;  and  whoever
does  not  see  clearly  that  thinking  has  no  likeness  or
relation  whatever  to  any  material  operation  is  in  no
condition  to  judge  any  subject,  or  to  argue  on  any
point  whatever.  There  is  a  radical  defect  and  con-
fusion in  his  mind,  or  (if  he  prefer  so  to  phrase  it)  in
his  brain.  These  remarks  are  not  uncalled  for,  be-
cause it  is  to  be  suspected  that  one  of  the  sins,  of
which  mesmerism  is  guilty,  is  that  of  giving  prepon-
derance to  mind  over  matter,  and  of  rescuing  sens-
ation from  its  connection  with  certain  organs  with
which  some  persons  would  absolutely  and  inextricably
identify  it.  Can  it  be  denied  that  too  many  phy-
siologists love  to  view  man  as  only  a  resvlt  of  various
organs?  It  has  even  been  affirmed  by  those  who
would  make  us  wholly  dependant  on  our  material
organisation,  that  the  loss  of  an  external  sense  in-
volves the  loss  of  ideas,  which  have  been  furnished  by
that  sense.  Nothing  can  be  more  absurd  or  untrue.
I  have  questioned  on  this  very  point  many  individuals,
who  had  lost  their,  sight  for  years,  and  they  have  all
concurred  in  saying  that  in  dreams  they  had  a  lively
sense  of  vision.


374  MESMERIC SENSATION.

Milton's  beautiful  sonnet,  beginning  —

"  Methought  I  saw  my  late-espoused  saint,"  7

and  ending  —

"  But  oh !  as  to  embrace  me  she  inclined,
I  woke  —  she  fled — and  day  brought  back  my  night,"

is  a  written  record  that  sensation  survives  the  sense
to  which  it  formerly  was  indebted.  Beethoven,  it  is
well  known,  became  perfectly  deaf  at  the  age  of
twenty-Height,  and  thenceforth  his  whole  world  of
wondrous  harmony  was  seated  in  his  mind.  A  cele-
brated living  artist  is  blind  of  one  eye.  According
to  the  theory  of  some  persons  he  should  be  only  half
an  artist ;  but  his  works  are  remarkable  for  correct-
ness of  design,  and  splendour  of  colouring.  These
are  facts  which  are  in  harmony  with  mesmerism.  Let
not,  then,  the  determined  materialist  quarrel  with
this  infiuit  science,  as  if  it  alone  proclaimed  the  supre-
macy of  mind  over  matter.  Even  should  it  go  to
prove  that  we  can  see  without  our  eyes,  there  is  no
such  great  cause  for  alarm.  Metaphysicians  have
told  us  again  and  again  that  we  do  not  see  with  our
eyes,  but  with  our  understandings,  —  and  the  world
is  not  yet  come  to  an  end.

Let  us  now,  by  the  aid  of  the  principles  we  have
ascertained,  combine  into  one  view  the  peculiarities,
and  the  correspondences  with  nature,  of  the  mesmeric
mode  of  sensation ;  pointing  out  where  it  agrees  with
and  where  it  differs  from  the  proceeds  of  our  expe-
rience.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  875

I  have  already  likened  the  nerves  to  conduetors :
the  expression  is  perfectly  correct.  Setting  vehoUy
aside  any  theory  as  to  their  being  the  vehicles  of  a
more  elBBcient  force,  as  the  electric,  (which,  neverthe-
less, certain  phenomena  of  muscular  motion  render
extremely  probable),  it  is  only  a  fact  that  they  are
conductors  of  impulses  from  the  external  world  to  the
brain,  and  thence  again  to  the  mind  i  and  also,  as  has
been  proved,  from  the  mind  and  brain  reversely  to
the  surfaces  of  the  body.  Again,  it  is  a  fact  that
their  faculty  of  conduction  varies  in  many  ways,
without  any  discoverable  change  in  their  texture  and
substance,  or  even  in  the  external  circumstances  by
which  they  are  surrounded,  though,  from  analogy,^  we
may  infer  that  their  alteration  does  really  depend  on
causes  extraneous  to  themselves.

Viewing  the  nerves  in  a  mechanical  light,  we  ac-
tually find  that,  like  other  substances,  they  have  their
own  class  of  influences,  which  affect  their  transmissive
power.  In  some  cruel  experiments  tried  upon  half-
dead  animals,  alcohol  applied  to  the  brain  was  found
to  produce  action  in  the  nervous  system  after  every
other  stimulus  failed  of  this  effect;  and  salt  placed  upon
the  limbs  of  frogs,  long  after  they  have  been  severed
from  the  body,  will  rouse  them  into  life-like  motion.
Even  such  mechanical  properties  as  these,  inherent  in
the  nerves,  prepare  us  to  expect  varied  effects  from
submitting  them  to  various  conditions.  Here,  how-
ever,  our  knowledge  is  so  imperfect,  that  it  is  safer  to
study  nervous  action  as  it  is  connected  with  our  own
thoughts  and  feelings :  the  causes  are,  indeed,  less


376  MESBiERIC  SENSATION.

obvious,  but  the  phenomena  more  familiar  to  our  ex-
perience. We  are  not  acquainted,  and  probably  never
shall  be,  with  the  conditions  by  which  nervous  con*
duction  is  varied.  That  it  does  vary  we,  however,
certainly  know.

In  the  normal  state  we  have  the  extreme  and  cen-
tral  parts  of  the  nervous  system  both  in  full  activity.

In  sleep,  the  nervous  capacities  die  off  towards  the
centre,  and  the  extremities  are  in  no  condition  to
transmit  sensation.

In  palsy,  conduction  from  the  centre  to  the  extre-
mities  is  impeded,  for  the  brain  can  no  longer  trans*
mit  the  impulses  of  the  will  to  the  limbs.

Nervous  deafness,  or  blindness,  afford  instances  of
non-conduction  from  the  extremities  to  the  centre^
occurring  often  without  any  apparent  cause.  I  have
a  friend,  who  used  frequently  to  be  afflicted  with  a
complete  though  temporary  blindness.  At  first,  he
said,  it  was  as  if  a  black  spot  were  before  him,  blot-
ting out  external  objects.  This  black  spot  increased
till  it  obscured  every  thing,  and  he  was  in  perfect
darkness.  I  once  was  forced  to  lead  him  out  of  a
concert-room  at  Cambridge,  while  he  had  an  attack
of  this  kind.

In  certain  cases  of  catalepsy,  the  power  of  nervous
conduction  seems  to  be  limited  to  one  particular  spot
in  the  body.  A  lady,  whose  daughter  was  afflicted
with  cataleptic  fits,  in  which  she  would  sometimes  fall
down,  at  others  be  fixed  rigidly  in  one  attitude,  told
me  that  the  patient  heard  nothing  that  was  said  to
her  in  her  attacks,  unless  the  person  speaking  touched


MESMERIC SENSATION.  377

the  pit  of  her  stomach,  and  addressed  the  sound
thither.  On  one  occasion  the  child  was  seized  with
catalepsy  when  standing  in  the  middle  of  a  large
public  swimming  bath,  which,  for  her  health's  sake>  she
was  ordered  to  use.  The  mother,  unable  to  reach  her
child,  was  in  great  alarm  lest  she  should  fall,  and  called
out,  in  hopes  to  wake  her  from  the  lethargy,  in  vain:
she  gave  no  token  of  hearing.  The  thought  then  sud-
denly occurred  to  the  mother  to  hold  her  mouth
dose  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  using  it  as  a  sort  of
conductor  to  convey  the  sound  to  the  patient.  On
this  being  done,  the  little  girl  showed  at  once  that
the  voice  had  reached  her,  and  was  roused  from  her
catalepsy,  as  she  usually  was  on  her  attention  being
strongly  excited  in  attacks  of  that  malady.

It  being  then  ascertained  that  nerves  vary  in  their
capacity  of  conduction,  we  have  only  to  mention  pre-
cisely what  shade  of  their  conducting  power  charac-
terises the  mesmeric  state,  when  it  will  be  found,  I
imagine,  that  we  have  not,  in  considering  this  part  of
man's  constitution,  to  unlearn  our  previous  know-
ledge, but  merely  to  intensify  known  conditions,  or  to
combine  them  anew.

First.  Under  mesmerism,  the  nerves  generally  have
ceased  to  conduct  from  the  superficies  to  the  centre ;
—  in  other  words,  from  the  usual  inlets  of  sensation
towards  the  brain ;  but  it  also  appears  that  con-
duction usually  takes  place  from  some  one  limited
portion  of  the  nervous  surfaces,  whence  it  propar
gates  external  impulsions,  by  unusual  routes,  to  the
brab.


378  MESMERIC SENSATION.

The  first  branch  of  the  phenomenon  is  partially
exhibited  in  cases  of  nervous  deafiiess,  or  blindness.
The  second,  namely^  the  limited  conduction  of  sen-
tient impulses,  has  sometimes  been  observed  in  cata-
lepsy. It  has,  however,  been  objected  that,  in  cases
where  the  nervous  sensibility  has  been  reported  to  be
confined  to  the  epigastrium  or  pit  of  the  stomach,  the
communication  between  this  part  and  the  brain  has
not  sufficiently  been  accounted  for,  the  system  of  the
ganglions,  as  some  persons  affirm,  scarcely  making  a
part  of  the  general  nervous  system.  This  is  bat  a
feeble  objection.  Every  part  of  the  system  of  man
is  evidently  in  reciprocal  connection ;  and  if  it  be
asked  how  the  great  sympathetic  communicates  with
the  nerves  of  sensation,  we  may  answer  this  question
in  resolving  another.  How  does  the  arterial  com-
municate with  the  venous  system  ?  By  vessels  so
fine  as  to  have  called  their  very  existence  into  doubt,
and  to  have  rendered  the  circulation  of  the  blood  a
great  discovery.  Our  senses  are  not  always  so  subtle
as  to  trace  nature  in  all  her  links.

The  second  peculiarity  of  nervous  conduction
which  the  mesmeric  state  presents,  is  as  follows.

In  using,  for  the  purposes  of  sensation,  that  portion
of  the  nervous  system  to  which  conduction  seems
confined,  the  sleepwaker  demonstrates  more  of  the
active  than  passive  character  of  the  mind.  To  speak
technically,  there  is  more  manifestly  conduction
fi*om  the  brain  outwards  than  from  the  superficies
inwards.  The  common  process  of  sensation  seems
reversed ;  for  the  nerve  appears  to  conduct  the  sen-


M£SMERIC SENSATION.  379

tient  power  to  the  superficies,  where  it  tahes^  as  it
were,  the  information  it  seeks,  instead  of,  as  usual,
conducting  the  impulsion  to  the  brain,  where  the
sentient  power  may  receive  notice  of  what  is  pass-
ing ^in  the  external  world.  More  briefly,  in  the  one
case  the  mind  takesj  in  the  other  it  receives  inform-
ation.

I  ground  my  observation  on  certain  facts,  and  on
this  especially :  — A  mesmeric  sleepwaker  rarely  ob-
serves any  external  object  of  his  own  accord.  His
state  is  one  of  concentration,  abstraction,  and  internal
thought.  If  he  be  conversant  with  material  objects^
it  is  in  the  mu-ror  of  his  own  mind.  Only  when  the
mesmeriser  stimulates  his  volition  does  he  attend  to
any  external  thing,  and  then  it  is  by  seeming  to  apply^
as  it  were,  his  new  organ  of  perception  to  the  object,
with  something  of  visible  effort.  If  I  may  be  per-
mitted the  illustration,  I  should  say  that  he  seems  to
feel  out  the  object,  as  an  insect  examines  things  by
putting  forth  its  antennae  and  usin^  them  as  instru-
ments of  exploration.

This  is  more  especially  observable  in  the  early
stages  of  the  mesmeric  state,  beyond  which  some
persons  never  advance.  There  is  also  a  difference
which  results  from  native  character,  some  manifest-
ing from  the  first,  some  acquiring  by  degrees,  a
greater  power  of  independent  action  than  others,  —a
power  less  evidently  derived  from  the  mesmeriser.
When  this  is  the  case,  there  is  more  attention  mani-
fested towards  external  things,  but  always,  I  imagine,
in  the  manner  that  I  have  above  indicated ;  namely.


880  MBSMERIC SENSATION.

by  active  exercise  of  the  new  organ  of  sense  rather
than  by  passive  reception  of  impulsions  through  it.

Some,  who  exhibit  a  very  extended  perception  in
the  mesmeric  state,  seem  to  possess,  to  a  certain  de»
gree,  the  faculty  of  shifting  the  external  sensibility
of  the  nervous  system,  though  it  continues  alwajrs
restricted,  from  one  spot  to  another,  changing,  as  it
were,  the  site  of  their  single  organ  of  sensation.
Thus  E.  A.,  who  perceived  things  by  the  forehead,
would  occasionally  receive  information  relative  to  ex-
ternal objects  by  the  back  of  his  head,  the  side,  or
the  top ;  but  he  seldom  did  this  spontaneously,  and
would  always  say  it  was  a  great  effort  and  did  him
harm.  And,  in  effect,  after  having  induced  him  to
make  many  such  efforts,  I  always  observed  that  he,
on  awaking,  manifested  uneasiness  and  fatigue.

Other  considerations  support  my  view  of  the  case.
The  mesmeriser  can,  by  stimulating  the  patient's
volition,  restore  the  sense  of  feeling  (but,  I  believe,
that  sense  alone)  momentarily  to  the  extremities  of

the nervous system. Thus, Anna M ,  when

mesmerised,  felt  nothing  if  pinched  in  the  hand  by
an  indifferent  person ;  but  if  I  told  her  to  attend
and  try  to  feel,  she  could  transiently  perceive  that
she  was  touched.  This  proves  that  the  mind  of  the
patient  can  proceed  from  its  inner  abstraction  for  a
moment  to  the  extremities  of  the  nervous  system,
and  re-occupy  its  accustomed  channels.  Take  this  in
conjunction  with  other  facts,  which  demonstrate  that
conduction  towards  the  brain  is  barred,  and  I  think
our  point  is  proved. E.  A.  being  mesmerised  (as  will


MESMERIC SENSATION.  381

be  remembered)  at  a  time  when  he  was  suffering
from  hunger,  was  no  longer  conscious  of  the  sensa-
tion  from  the  time  of  his  entering  the  mesmeric  state.

Again,  Anna  M suffering,  when  awake,  from  a

gathering  in  her  finger,  had  no  longer  a  sense  of
pain  when  in  the  mesmeric  slumber.  In  these  cases,
the  nerves  of  feeling,  whether  internal  or  external,
did  evidently  no  longer  convey  impulsions  towards
the  brain,  but  were  as  inefficient  for  that  purpose  as
if  they  had  been  tied  or  cut.  The  reader  may  also
consult,  for  further  information  on  this  subject,  the
Monthly  Chronicle  for  July,  1838,  wherein  a  most
interesting  experiment  on  mesmeric  insensibility  is
detailed.  By  this  it  appears  that  a  galvanic  shocks
which  produced  a  very  severe  effect  on  Sir  William
Molesworth  and  other  persons,  had  no  visible  in-
fluence on  Elizabeth  and  Jane  Okey,  patients  of  Dr.
Elliotson.  Yet  were  these  girls  able  to  attend  to  all
that  was  passing  on  every  side  of  them ;  or,  in  other
words,  to  use  their  nervous  system  actively,  while
incapable  of  being  influenced  by  it  passivety.  There
was  no  conduction  towards  the  brain,  but  only  from  it.
Again,  in  the  case  of  Mile.  Estelle  L'H- ,  re-
lated by  Dr.  Despines  of  Aix,  and  once  before  referred
to,  it  is  stated  that  when  she  was  unable,  from  a  spe-
cies of  nervous  paralysis,  to  stir  a  limb,  she  could,  in
the  mesmeric  condition,  into  which  she  sometimes
spontaneously  fell,  actively  use  all  her  members  as
when  in  perfect  health.  The  transition  from  a  state
of  active  exertion  to  one  of  passive  helplessness  was
very  marked,  and  often  very  alarming ;  since  if  her ,


882  MESMERIC SENSATION.

natural  mesmerism  dissipated  itself  (as  sometimeii
would  occur)  when  she  was  walking,  or  even  riding,
she  would  tall  suddenly,  and,  if  not  timely  assisted,
come  with  force  to  the  ground.

Some  of  these  phenomena  are  by  no  means  pecu-
liar to  mesmerism.  The  partial  restoration  to  feeling
effected  through  stimulation  of  the  patient's  will  i«
paralleled  by  those  cases  in  which  nerves  under  the
influence  of  strong  excitement  have  been  suddenly
restored,  after  years  of  inaction,  to  a  conducting
capacity.  Paralytic  patients,  it  is  well  known,  have
recovered  the  use  of  their  limbs  for  a  short  time,
when  they  were  forced  to  save  themselves  from  fire
or  other  threatened  evils,  but,  the  excitement  with-
drawn, have  fallen  helpless  to  the  earth :  even  those
who  had  been  dumb  for  years  have  spoken  under
circumstances  where  strong  emotion  burst  their  bonds
of  speech.  Nor  are  these  the  only  cases  to  which
mesmeric  sensation  bears  analogy.

The  inversion  of  nervous  action  has  been  pointed
out  by  Darwin,  and  particularly  described  in  his
chapter  on  Reverie  in  the  Zoonomia.  A  young  lady,
it  is  there  related,  suffering  under  this  singular
malady,  neither  saw,  heard,  nor  felt,  during  its  at-
tacks, any  of  the  surrounding  objects ;  yet  did  she
manifest  occasionally  in  her  state  of  reverie  a  percep-
tion of  external  things  (as  when  smelling  a  tuberose
and  drinking  a  dish  of  tea),  ^'  but  this  was  only  wJien
she  voluntarily  seemed  to  attend  to  themP

Darwin,  remarking  on  the  case,  observes  :  —

"  In  the  present  history  the  strongest  stimuli  were


MESMERIC SENSATION.  383

not  perceived,  except  when  the  faculty  of  volitioq
was  exerted  on  the  organ  of  sense;  and  then  even
common  stimuli  were  sometimes  perceived :  for  her
mind  was  so  strenuously  employed  in  pursuing  its
own  trains  of  voluntary  or  sensitive  ideas,  that  no
common  stimuli  could  so  far  excite  her  attention  as
to  disunite  them ;  that  is  the  quantity  of  volition,  or
of  sensation  already  existing  was  greater  than  any
which  could  be  produced  in  consequence  of  common
degrees  of  stimulation."

Darwin  has  well  stated  this ;  and  this  appears  to
be  the  history  of  the  sensations  in  all  cases  of  sleep-*
waking  and  states  which  are  analogical  to  sleep-
waking.  The  mind  is  deeply  occupied  on  its  own
train  of  thought,  so  as  to  become  inattentive  to  every
thing  in  which  it  does  not  sympathise,  and  with
which  it  does  not  co-operate.  It  is  exhibited  in  the
position  of  origiruxting  action  ;  and  every  action  which
it  does  not  itself  originate  is  to  it  as  a  nullity ;  as,
for  instance,  the  natural  sleepwalker  will  be  uncon«
scious  of  the  presence  of  other  persons,  and  will
suffer  much  from  them  without  awaking ;  yet  will  he
exert  —  yes,  here  it  may  be  truly  said  exert — his
percipient  power  on  such  objects  as  he  pleases ;  thus
manifestly  exhibiting  a  freedom  of  choice  and  a  ca-
pacity of  selection  which  does  not  belong  to  man
generally.  Thus,  however  paradoxical  it  may  appear,
the  state  from  which  volition  seems  the  most  absent,
is  really  the  fullest  of  free-will.

These  things  throw  light  on  mesmerism,  and  ap-
proximate it  to  experience. They  are  known  to  be


884  MESMERIC  SENSATION.

parts  of  the  constitution  of  man;  they  are  demon-
strated to  resemble  perfectly  the  state  which  we  deem
so  anomalous.  How  comes  it  that  the  likeness  has
not  been  recognised  before,  —  that  mesmerism^  in
truth,  so  old,  should  seem  so  new  — '  so  near,  should
seem  so  distant?  The  fault  has  been  in  this: —
viewing  mesmerism  as  a  strange  thing,  men  have
sought  strange  solutions  for  it.  Deserting  the  sure
path  of  common  life,  they  have  thought  themselves
obliged  by  the  dignity  of  their  subject  not  to  be  too
explicit  in  their  explanations,  but  to  wrap  the  ap-
parent mystery  in  tenfold  darkness.  As  Arago  has
well  observed,  in  his  life  of  James  Watt,  '^  Les  forces
naturelles  ou  artificielles,  avant  de  devenir  vraiment
utiles  aux  hommes,  ont  presque  toujours  6t6  ex*
ploitees  au  profit  de  la  superstition."  So  have  we
been  taught  to  view  with  superstitious  fear  the
home-born  stranger  of  our  own  bosoms.  Thus  has
every  effort  to  approximate  it  to  man  thrown  it
farther  off.  They  who  chase  it  most  will  find  it
least.  To  go  far  for  it  is  like  hunting  for  happi-
ness—

"  Which  still  so  near  us,  yet  beyond  us  lies,
O'erlook'd,  seen  double,  by  the  fool  and  wise."

The  very  terms  heretofore  in  use,  in  speaking  of
mesmeric  phenomena,  have  been  strange  and  por-
tentous. This  is  an  error.  We  have  undoubtedly
startling  things  to  relate ;  let  them  not  be  related  in
startling  language ! Words  have  much  power  for


MESMERIC  SENSATION.  385

good  and  for  evil.  On  this  account  I  regret  that  the
term  "  transposition  of  the  senses  "  should  ever  have
been  applied  to  mesmeric  perception;  for  it  is  a
manifest  inaccuracy.  The  senses,  as  I  trust  I  have
demonstrated,  are  never  by  mesmerism  transposed
or  removed  from  their  real  seat.  Still  more  unfor-
tunate is  it  that  the  early  mesmerists  should  have
sinned  against  precision  of  language,  so  far  as  to  talk
of  their  patients  seeing  tviih  the  epigastrium  —  the
fingers,  &c.  To  those  who  might  inadvertently  re-
peat such  an  error,  we  might  suggest  that,  when  we
are  made  to  hear  the  ticking  of  a  watch  bt/  means  of
its  contact  with  the  teeth,  it  would  be  a  rash  conclu-
sion that  we  hear  with  our  teeth.  Such  expressions
as  these  remove  mesmerism  farther  and  farther  from
the  safe  regions  of  experience.  Our  object  should
be  ever  to  show  that  it  does  not  alter  sensation,  save
in  certain  comparatively  unimportant  particulars  of
its  mode  of  conduction.  But  such  stumbling  blocks
as  these  are  fast  being  removed  out  of  the  way  of
objectors,  so  as  to  leave  them  no  excuse  for  hanging
doubts  on  words  and  arguments  on  verbal  inaccu-
racies. Already  the  obnoxious  term  magnetism  has
given  way  to  the  unobjectionable  name  which  is
well  derived  from  the  discoverer  or  reviver  of  the
agency  in  question.  Once  the  whole  learned  world
fastened  furiously  on  the  word  Jluid,  unfortunately
applied  to  this  agency.  This  can  occur  no  more;
for,  through  the  excellent  judgment  of  Dr.  EUiotson,
raesmerisers  themselves  agree  in  exposing  the  ab-

s


886  MESMERIC SENSATION.

surdity  of  deciding  positively  on  the  nature  of  mes-
meric influence.

But  there  still  remains  a  stronghold  to  those  who
think  that  to  attack  a  name  is  to  quash  a  fact.  "  What !  '*
exclaim  some  persons,  "  do  you  assert  that  any  one
can  see  with  the  eyes  shut  ?"  By  no  means.  We  will
change  the  term.  Why  quarrel  about  a  word  ?  We
will  couch  the  fact  of  mesmeric  perception  in  any
language  that  is  most  agreeable  to  the  objector ;  we
will  allow  that  to  have  certain  perceptions  othei'wise
than  by  the  eye  is  not  properly  to  see.  Let  us  say,
then,  that  it  is  to  perceive  or  know  ;  for  knowledge,  at
any  rate,  is  the  end  and  object  of  all  the  senses.
Kjuowledge  is  a  general  expression  of  the  nature  of
man.  But,  be  this  as  it  may,  the  nomenclature  of
mesmerism,  however  faulty,  evidently  makes  no  dif-
ference whatever  in  the  facts.  It  is  with  these  we
have  to  deal,  and  —  unless  we  actually  desire  to
quibble  —  it  is  these  we  must  alone  consider.  But
the  advocates  of  mesmerism  are  placed  in  a  singular
dilemma.  The  world  calls  out  for  facts;  and,  when
we  offer  such  as  we  alone  have  to  offer,  hurls  them
back  in  our  teeth.  The  mesmeric  vision,  or  clatr-
vot/ancey  especially  has  been  gravely  and  grandly
pronounced  to  be  "physically  and  physiologically
impossible."  How  can  we  reply  to  this  ?  Only,  I
suppose,  as  Pascal  did  to  some  one  who  asserted  that
it  was  impossible  for  God,  being  so  great,  to  busy
himself  about  our  little  world,  —  «  II  faut  etre  bien
grand  d'en  juger."  —  "To  decide  such  a  question,


MESMERIC SENSATION.  387

one  must  be  great  indeed  ! "  Or  again  (for  there  is
no  lack  of  answers),  "  Must  every  thing  be  impos-
sible, which  our  insufficience  cannot  account  for?
Are  there  not  innumerable  mysteries  in  nature,
which  accident  reveals,  or  experimental  philosophy
demonstrates  to  us  every  day  ?  And  shall  we  yet
presume  to  limit  the  powers  of  the  great  Author  of
that  very  nature  ?  "

But  should  we  still  be  met  with  the  same  weari-
some assertion,  so  as  to  be  provoked  out  of  all  phi-
losophical endurance,  we  may,  perhaps,  at  last  be
allowed  to  exclaim  with  Young  —

"  Impossible  is  nowhere  to  be  found,
Except,  perhaps,  in  the  fool's  calendar."

Did  these  positive  persons  know  all  the  offices  and
functions  of  the  nerves,  they  might  be  thus  dogmatic.
But  the  study  of  the  nervous  capacities  is  itself  of
recent  date,  and  the  powers  of  nervous  development
are  unknown.  That  the  nerves  do  not  always  act  in
concert  with  the  external  organs  —  that  they  tran-
scend them  —  that  they  can  occasionally  altogether
dispense  with  their  aid,  has  been  proved.  What  if
it  were  reserved  for  mesmerism  to  show  the  nerves
not  only  acting  alone,  but  acting  in  correspondence
with  external  things  ?  Is  this  a  reason  for  rejecting
an  evidence  precious  in  itself — the  more  precious
from  its  novelty  and  rarity  ?  A  new  science  must  be
based  on  new  facts. Were  all  phenomena  alike  in

s  2


388  MESMERIC SENSATION.

the  world,  knowledge  must  come  to  an  end,  and  in-
vestigation be  circumscribed  indeed.  Surely,  all
that  is  required  to  render  any  class  of  facts  interesting
is,  that  they  should  be  new,  yet  not  out  of  analogy
with  nature;  and  those  we  have  been  considering
come  under  both  these  conditions.  Even  though
they  should  stand  alone  as  a  class,  yet,  having  been
shown  to  be  uncontradicted  by  nature's  general  tend-
encies, they  should  be  admitted  to  examination.  Yet
here  again,  though  demanding  but  justice,  we  are
baulked.  We  entreat  the  adversaries  of  mesmerism  to
come  and  witness  our  facts.  They  come  not ;  or,  if
hey  come,  scarcely  deign  to  look  at  the  most  im-
portant and  interesting  phenomena;  or  again  try
experiments,  not  with  a  rigour,  but  with  an  unfair-
ness unknown  in  other  inquiries,  expecting  the  sen-
sitive being  we  exhibit  to  them  to  act  as  so  much
brute  matter,  and  to  be  in  the  right  when  their
sensibility  is  exhausted.

"  But,"  piteously  exclaim  the  systematic  men,  "  if
mesmerism  be  true,  then  all  we  have  hitherto  learned  is
false."  By  no  means.  But  even  were  this  so,  surely
it  is  better  to  get  into  the  right  path  late  than  never.
It  is  better  also  gracefully  to  yield  than  to  be  held  up
as  a  spectacle  of  vanquished  yet  impertinent  obsti-
nacy. And  light  —  resistless  light  is  pouring  in  on
every  side  to  illustrate  nature,  and  to  display  mes-
merism in  the  first  rank  of  acknowledged  truths.

It  requires  but  little  sagacity  to  perceive  that  they
who  now  place  mesmerism  in  the  category  of  impossi-


MESMERIC SENSATION.  389

bilities  will  shortly  be  in  the  situation  so  well  de-
scribed in  the  following  lines  :  —

'*  So  fares  the  system-building  sage,
'  Who,  plodding  on  from  youth  to  age,
Has  proved  all  other  reasoners  fools,
And  bound  all  nature  by  his  rules ;
So  fares  he  in  that  dreadful  hour,
When  injured  Truth  exerts  her  power
Some  new  phenomenon  to  ndse.
Which,  bursting  on  his  frighted  gaze,
From  its  proud  summit  to  the  ground,
Proves  the  whole  edifice  unsound."  *


*  Beattie.


s  3


3M  THE  MEDIUM OF


SECT.  IV.

ON  THE MEDIUM OF MESMERIC SENSATION.

Having  shown,  from  the  real  nature  of  the  changes  in
man's  personal  frame  which  precede  sensation,  that
an  inner  sensibility,  coincident  with  an  inaction  in
external  organs  of  sense,  is  but  accordant  with  the
principles  of  true  physiology,  I  now  pui'pose  briefly
to  consider  the  pre-requisites  of  sensation,  which  are
external  to  ourselves ;  the  media  namely,  which  place
us  in  communication  with  foreign  and  distant  objects ;
and  I  trust  here  also  to  demonstrate  that  mesmerism,
instead  of  violating  laws,  does  in  fact  bring  us  to
grounds  and  principles.

Should  the  problem  be  given  us  to  solve  of  con-
veying to  a  being,  limited  in  perception  and  place,
knowledge  from  a  distance  —  how  should  we  accom-
plish the  desired  end?

By  contact,  certainly,  and  motion.

We  will  imagine  a  person,  deaf  and  dumb,  placed
at  a  distance  from  us,  with  his  back  towards  us.  He
has  been  taught  to  distinguish,  like  the  pupils  in  the
Abb^  Picard's  institution  at  Paris,  words  written  on
the  back.  We  are  too  far  off  to  write  these  with  the
finger  —  we  take  a  stick  and  write ;  and  the  person.


MESMERIC SENSATION.  891

though  distant  from  us,  understands  what  we  mean
as  well  as  if  our  thoughts  were  actually  present  to
himself-  Here  a  certain  motion  and  configuration
convey  from  our  own  mind  intelligence  of  what  is
there  existing  to  the  mind  of  another,  through  the
intervention  of  a  moving  medium.

So  God's  intention  is  manifestly  to  convey  to  us
certain  ideas  from  his  own  mind,  through  inter-
mediary types  or  shadows;  and  all  knowledge  is
God's  writing  on  the  soul  by  means  of  certain
touches  from  afar,  prolonged  even  unto  us  by  com-
municating media.  Should  this  view  of  the  subject
be  refused,  and  should  we  be  required,  with  cold
philosophy,  to  limit  ourselves  to  material  objects,  and
to  their  effects  upon  our  physical  frame,  it  will  still
be  perfectly  evident,  that  particles  of  matter  cannot
act  upon  other  particles  without  some  means  of  com-
munication.

When  then  we  are  made  aware  of  the  existence  of
distant  bodies,  it  is  plain  that  these  are  brought  into
contact  with  our  nervous  system,  either  by  a  pro-
longation and  extension  of  the  atoms  which  compose
them,  or  by  an  impulse  continuously  carried  on  from
themselves  to  us  by  the  successive  agitation  of  the
particles  of  some  intervening  substance.  The  latter,
in  cases  where  the  object  with  which  we  communi-
cate is  extremely  remote,  appears  to  be  the  most
rational  supposition,  and  with  this  modern  science  is
perfectly  in  accord,  no  longer  considering  even  light
itself  as  a  corporeal  emanation  from  the  sun,  but  as  a

s  4


892  THE MEDIUM OF

vibratory  impulse  communicated  from  the  self  lumi-
nous solar  body  to  an  ethereal  medium,  and  thence
again  to  our  optic  nerves.

By  analogical  appearances  and  reasoning,  it  seems
also  to  be  decided,  that  ^^  heat,  like  light  and  sound,
consists  in  the  undulations  of  an  elastic  medium ; "
and  it  may  perhaps,  in  process  of  time,  still  further
be  proved  that  odour  is  not  a  material  emanation,
but  a  mere  action  of  matter  communicated  to  our
perception  by  the  nerves.  This  at  least  would
account  for  the  now  incomprehensible  fact,  that  a
grain  of  musk  will  diffuse  its  odour  for  years  without
any  perceptible  diminution  of  its  weight.

In  the  admirable  language  of  Mrs.  Somerville,
**  The  human  frame  may  therefore  be  regarded  as
an  elastic  system,  the  different  parts  of  which  ar6
capable  of  receiving  the  tremors  of  elastic  media,  and
of  vibrating  in  unison  with  any  number  of  superposed
undulations,  all  of  which  have  their  perfect  and  inde-
pendent effect."

This  view  of  the  nature  of  our  sensations  cannot
but  greatly  simplify  our  notions  concerning  them^
and  it  is  astonishing  how  much  is  effected  towards
the  comprehension  of  a  subject,  when  we  put  out  of
the  way  all  its  less  important  elements.  The  astro-
nomer, finding  it  impossible  to  determine  the  motion
of  each  heavenly  body  when  disturbed  by  all  the
rest,  takes  a  simpler  problem,  and  calculates  the
mutual  relations  of  three  bodies  only ;  yet  thence
he  learns  to  judge  of  the  whole  celestial  system. In


MESMERIC  SENSATION.  393

the  same  manner,  the  problem  of  the  action  of
matter  upon  mind  should  be  rendered  as  little  com-
plicate as  possible;  and  thus,  in  considering  sensation,
it  is  desirable  to  bring  into  one  comprehensive  view
its  chief  conditions,  to  the  exclusion  of  such  con-
tingencies as  merely  arise  from  the  modifying  in-
fluence of  particular  circumstances.  Now  we  have
seen  that  the  external  and  mechanical  portions  of
our  senses  are  not  indispensably  and  fundamentally
connected  with  sensation,  but  rather  are  adaptations
to  the  exigencies  of  this  our  temporary  existence.
The  two  absolute  essentials  of  sensation,  without
which  it  could  not  take  place  under  any  circum-
stances, in  which  it  bears  coincident  relation  to  real
external  objects,  are  —  a  medium  and  a  system  ca-
pable of  responding  to  that  medium.  Now  the
question  is,  whether  there  be  any  fact  which  renders
impossible,  during  the  mesmeric  sleep,  the  co-exist-
ence of  the  two  essential  conditions  of  sensation.
One  of  them  —  that  is,  motion  of  the  nervous  sys-
tem —  has  been  shown  to  be  by  no  means  of  necessity
abrogated  during  mesmeric  sleepwaking;  but  the
other,  that  is  the  correlative  motion  of  a  medium,
does,  on  a  cursory  view,  seem  forbidden  in  cases
where  the  patient  sees  through  obstacles  which  inter-
cept the  light,  and,  to  our  common  apprehensions,
break  up  the  continuity  of  visual  impulsions.  On
maturer  consideration,  however,  we  must  own  that
the  great  principle  of  sensation  —  namely,  motion
communicated  by  media  —  may  not  only  subsist  in  its

s  5


394  HIE  Mt^BtVU  Ot

integrity  daring  the  mesmeric  vision,  but  subsist  alscr
analogically  to  all  we  know  or  can  discover  of  nature's
constitution.

It  is  true  that,  in  the  endeavour  to  reconcile  mes-
meric sensation  with  established  laws,  we  are  in  a
manner  forced  into  hypothesis.  But  is  this  a  fault?
A  great  metaphysician  has  pronounced  that  "  an
hypothesis,  in  the  first  stage  of  inquiry,  far  from
being  inconsistent  with  sound  philosophy,  may  be  said
to  be  essential  to  it."  Now  the  case  of  mesmerism
is  one  in  which  we  are  absolutely  obliged  from  given
data  to  draw  deductions,  and  to  reconcile  two  facts
by  the  intei'position  of  a  third.  With  regard  to
mesmeric  vision,  for  instance,  we  have  a  phenome-
non, accurately  determined  by  rigorous  experiment^
which  involves  two  things,  —  a  perceiving  mind,  and
an  object  perceived ;  and  these  we  are  forced,
through  reason,  to  connect  by  a  third,  namely,  a
medium,  for  we  never  knew  mind  to  perceive  but
through  an  intermediary,  and  we  have  reason  to
think  that  none  but  the  Almighty  mind  can  imme-
diately perceive  obj  ec ts.  Yet  more, — the  sleep waker
has  a  nervous  system,  which,  though  externally  inert,
is  manifestly  in internal  activity;  and  there  is  no  I

ground whatever to suppose that  the  established  i

language  of  sensation,  namely,  motion  of  a  nerve,
is,  in  mesmerism,  abolished,  though  it  be  produced
in  an  unusual  way.  If  then  there  be  motion  of  a
nerve  correlative  with  an  external  object,  it  is  plain
that  this  motion  must  be  brought  about  by  means,
and  by  material  means. What  these  means  are  we


MESMERIC SENSATION.  395

do  not  indeed  exactly  know,  and  we  are  therefore
compelled,  in  a  degree,  to  form  conjectures  about
them.  Certainly  the  less  of  this  the  better,  but  at
any  rate  we  cannot  but  imagine  such  a  medium
as  shall  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case ;  herein,  at
least,  we  have  a  sure  guide.  If,  taking  the  facts,  we
proceed,  step  by  step,  to  deduce  from  them  the  cha-
racteristics of  our  medium,  fitting  always  the  sup-
position to  the  reality,  and  not  the  reality  to  the
supposition,  it  seems  as  if  we  could  not  greatly  err.

The  first  thing  of  which  we  may  be  sure  is,  that
the  medium  which  connects  mesmeric  persons  with
external  objects  is  not  any  of  those  which  we  believe
to  be  efficient  in  ordinary  sensation.  The  mechanism
of  the  senses  being  null,  the  media  especially  adapted
to  that  mechanism  must  also  be  useless  in  conveying
information.  The  ear  was  made  for  air,  and  the  eye
for  light;  but,  in  this  case,  the  ear  is  closed,  and  the
eye  is  an  abolished  organ.  That,  however,  there
should  be  no  communication  between  the  sleepwaker
and  external  objects  does  by  no  means  follow.  We
have  seen  that  real  information  respecting  the  mate-
rial world  can  be  conveyed  through  other  inlets  of
the  body  than  the  ordinary.  In  the  same  manner,
it  may  be  affirmed  that  even  our  common  experience
may  show  us  sensation  taking  place  through  other
external  media  than  the  ordinary.  Let  us  adhere  to
our  principle,  that  similar  motions  of  the  nerves  may
be  produced  in  various  ways,  and  different  causes
end  in  the  same  result;  and  here  also  it  will  not
fail  us.

s  6


396  THE MEDIUM OF

The  deaf,  who  hear  and  enjoy  music  by  means  of
a  staff  connecting  their  teeth,  or  their  chest,  with  a*
musical  instrument,  do  really  use  another  medium
than  the  air  for  the  conveyance  of  acoustic  impulses.
In  the  same  way,  we  have  instances  to  show  that  real
information  respecting  external  actions  of  matter
may  reach  from  great  distances  by  other  than  the
usual  media.  Water  is  even  a  better  conductor  of
sound  than  air.  "  According  to  the  experiments  of
M.  Colladon  the  sound  of  a  bell  was  conveyed  under
water,  through  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  to  the  distance
of  about  nine  miles."  Yet  again :  "  The  velocity
of  sound,  in  passing  through  solids,  is  in  proportion
to  their  hardness,  and  is  much  greater  than  in  air
or  water.  A  sound,  which  takes  some  time  in  tra-
velling through  the  air,  passes  almost  instantaneously
along  a  wire  600  feet  long ;  consequently  it  is  heard
twice;  first,  as  communicated  by  the  wire,  and
afterwards  through  the  medium  of  the  air.  The
facility  with  which  the  vibrations  of  sound  are
transmitted  along  the  grain  of  a  log  of  wood  is  well
known.  Indeed,  they  pass  through  iron,  glass,  and
some  kinds  of  wood,  at  the  rate  of  18,530  feet  in  a
second."

Does  any  thing  similar  take  place  with  regard  to
light?  There  does;  and  even  in  a  more  remarkable
manner.  The  electic  medium  is  a  far  more  swift
and  subtle  messenger  of  vision  than  is  the  luminous
ether.  "  A  wheel  revolving  with  celerity  sufficient
to  render  its  spokes  invisible,  when  illuminated  by  a
flash  ef  lightning,  is  seen,  for  an  instant,  with  all  its


MESMERIC SENSATION.  397

spokes  distinct,  as  if  it  were  in  a  state  of  absolute  re-
pose ;  because,  however  rapid  the  motion  may  be,  the
light  has  come  and  already  ceased,  before  the  wheel
has  had  time  to  turn  through  a  sensible  space."
Again,  some  ingenious  experiments,  by  Professor
Wheatstone,  demonstrate  to  a  certainty  that  the  speed
of  the  electric  fluid  much  surpasses  the  velocity  of
light.  It  is  therefore  a  different  medium  —  yet  can
it  serve  for  all  the  purposes  of  vision,  and  even  in  a
superior  manner.  After  hearing  these  things,  shall
we  start  at  the  notion  of  mesmeric  sensation  being
conveyed  through  another  medium  than  that  in  or-
dinary action  ?  Even  should  the  sleepwaker  perceive
the  most  distant  objects  (as  some  are  said  to  have
done),  can  we,  from  the  moment  a  means  of  commu-
nication is  hinted  to  us,  be  so  much  amazed?  If
his  perception  be  more  vivid,  there  seems  to  be  an
efficient  cause  in  his  abjuring  the  grosser  media  for
such  are  more  swift  and  subtle.

But  the  mesmerised  person  perceives  objects  not
only  at  a  distance,  but  through  obstacles  which  are
complete  impediments  to  ordinary  vision.  Let  us
keep  in  view  our  principle.  Motions  of  the  nerves,
and  something  to  produce  those  motions,  in  corre-
spondence with  an  external  cause,  are  the  required
conditions  which  we  seek  to  unite.  If  a  mesmerised
person  seems  to  behold  an  object  through  an  ob-
stacle which  commonly  bars  vision,  let  us  not  take
so  vulgar  a  view  of  this  apparent  miracle  as  to  sup-
pose that  the  sleepwaker's  sight  piercfes  through
opaque  bodies. It  is  not,  in  any  case,  the  eye,  but


398  THE MEDIUM OF

the  medium,  ivhich  penetrates  the  obstacle. The
impulsion  on  the  optic  nerve  is  the  cause  of  vision,
and,  if  we  can  find  a  medium  to  transmit  that  im»
pulsion,  athwart  whatever  impediments,  vision  will
take  place. Any  interruption  in  the  medium  would
be  the  real  obstacle  to  vision. Cut  that  oflP  by  the
finest  and  most  imperceptible  barrier,  you  at  once
render  vision  impossible ;  but,  as  long  as  it  continues
to  be  transmitted  through  bodies,  the  most  appa-
rently  dense  vision  will  not  be  prevented — an  object
is  brought  into  relation  with  us. TThis  is  the  whole
history  of  seeing; — and  is  it,  in  fact,  more  wonderful
that  any  one  should  be  brought  into  relation  with  an
object  by  means  of  an  impulse  transmitted  through
an obstacle, than  that  the  astronomer  should  be
brought  into  relation  with  a  star  by  means  of  light
which  left  it  a  thousand  years  ago  ? We  seek,  then,
a  medium,  which  shall  act  through  obstacles,  which
is  able  to  transmit  impulses  athwart  them,  unimpeded,
unimpaired. Now,  as  Newton  observes,  "  the  effluvia
of  a  magnet  can  be  so  rare  and  subtile,  as  to  pass
through  a  plate  of  glass,  without  any  resistance  or
diminution  of  their  force,  and  yet  so  potent  as  to
turn  a magnetic  needle  beyond  the  glass." And
this  effect  of  magnetism,  as  we  now  know,  is  but  one
of  the  actions  of  electricity,  which  can  pierce  not
only  through  diaphanous  but  through  opaque  bodies,
and  which  is  now  supposed  to  pervade  not  only  the
regions  of  space,  but  every  interstice  between  the
particles  of  apparently  solid  matter. The  electric
force,  then,  will  naturally  occur  to  him  who  seeks  a


MESMERIC  SEJ^SATIOK.  399

penetrating  and  pervading  medium,  as  resolvable  of
the  enigma. of  mesmeric  sensation.

The  philosopher  also  will  remember  that  electricity,
when  brought  to  act  upon  the  nerves,  in  that  peculiar
form  of  it  which  is  called  galvanism,  is  capable  of
affecting  all  the  senses,  making  us  seem  to  hear,  see,
taste  or  feel. Moreover,  it  has  just  been  proved  to
equal  or  surpass  light  in  its  capacity  of  producing
real  sensations  of  vision  in  correspondence  with  ex-
ternal objects. It  may,  however,  here  be  objected
that  electricity  never  does  this  save  in  a  manner  visi-
ble to  all  men ;  that  if  there  be  vision  by  means  of
electricity,  there  is  also  an  actual  electric  spark,  or
flash;— whereas,  in  mesmerism,  it  is  not  pretended
that  there  is  any  agency  cognisable  by  any  person
but  the  sleepwaker  himself. This  is  true. But,  then,
be  it  remembered,  the  luminous  medium  itself  can  be
manifestly  shown  to  have  other  actions  than  those
with  which  men  in  general  are  acquainted^ — actions
which  can  only  be  perceived  by  beings  in  a  peculiar
state  of  sensibility,  or  more  finely  organised  than  our-
selves. As  an  author,  to  whom  I  am  already  deeply
indebted,  has  remarked,—"  It  is  quite  possible  that
many  vibrations  may  be  excited  in  the  ethereal  me-
dium, incapable  of  producing  undulations  in  the  fibres
of  the  human  retina,  which  yet  have  a  powerful  effect
on  those  of  other  animals,  or  of  insects. Such  may
receive  luminous  impressions,  of  which  we  are  totally
unconscious,  and,  at  the  same  time,  they  may  be  in^
sensible  to  the  light  and  colours,  which  affect  our  eyes ;
their  perceptions  beginning  where  ours  end."


400  THE MEDIUM OF'

A  proof  of  the  soundness  of  the  above  conclusions
is  the  fact  that  the  owl  and  the  cat  pursue  their  prey,
just  when  the  increasing  obscurity  renders  other  ani-
mals purblind.  The  degrees  of  visual  sensibility  in
different  persons  are  also  to  be  remarked.  A  lady  of
my  acquaintance  performed  one  evening  what  might
have  passed  for  a  mesmeric  miracle,  deciphering  a
letter,  written  in  a  small  cramped  hand,  at  a  time
when  there  was  so  little  light  that  five  or  six  persons
of  our  society  (myself  amongst  the  number)  could  not
make  out  a  single  word  of  the  letter.  That  some  in-
dividuals, in  certain  states  of  the  nervous  system,  see
in  an  obscurity  which  to  other  persons  appears  total,
has  been  before  observed.  A  case  of  this  kind  was
very  recently  mentioned  to  me  by  a  medical  man,
with  every  particularity  of  detail.  A  peasant,  who
had  fallen  into  a  state  of  illness  from  having  im-
prudently plunged  his  head,  when  heated,  into  a
bucket  of  cold  water,  could  no  longer  bear  the  light
of  day,  but  was  able  to  discern  objects  in  apparent
darkness.  A  number  of  gentlemen  visiting  him  out
of  curiosity,  made  him  tell  the  time  (in  darkness)  by
their  watches,  which  they  altered  sufficiently  often  to
be  sure  of  the  correctness  of  the  experiment.  As
the  man  recovered  his  health,  the  susceptibility  of
his  optic  nerves  gradually  subsided  to  the  usual
pitch.  These  facts  should  lead  us  to  beware  under
what  circumstances  we  pronounce  vision  impossible ;
and  should  teach  us  not  to  limit  the  perception  of
others  by  the  boundaries  of  our  own.  It  is  evident
that  a  finer  medium  and  a  finer  degree  of  sensi-


MESMERIC SENSATION.  401

bility,  co-operating  to  produce  mesmeric  vision,  are
causes  perfectly  adequate  to  account  for  all  its  phe-
nomena.

There  is  one  remark  respecting  mesmeric  sensation
important  to  be  made.  In  our  normal  state,  the  use
of  our  external  organs  is  not  only  to  modify  impulses,
but  to  concentrate  them,  properly  modified,  on  a  par-
ticular nerve.  Now,  it  may  be  asked,  how,  when  the
concentrating  organs  are  removed  out  of  the  way,
can  impulsions  be  concentrated  upon  the  nervous  sys-
tem, so  as  to  bring  the  sleepwaker  in  correspondence
with  particular  objects,  it  being  evident  that,  in  the
general  motions  of  a  general  medium  there  could  be
none  of  that  particularity  and  selection  which  sensa-
tion evidently  requires  ?  To  satisfy  ourselves  on  this
question,  we  have  only  to  remember  that  the  sleep-
waker does  not,  in  general,  seem  to  know  on  every
side,  but  that  the  most  common  mode  of  mesmeric
perception  (there  being  two,  as  I  have  pointed  out)  is
by  a  concentrated  sensibility  in  one  particular  portion
of  the  frame,  which  constitutes,  as  it  were,  an  organ
whereby  in  fact  impulses  coming  from  without  are
concentrated,  as  they  ordinarily  are,  in  another  wayi
by  the  usual  organs.  That  sleepwakers  really  do  use
some  part  of  the  nervous  system  as  an  organ  of  con-
centration, I  have  had  frequent  occasion  to  remark —
Anna  M.  always  bringing  her  forehead  in  a  line
with  an  object  she  wished  to  examine,  and  often  start-
ing at  the  moment  when  her  forehead  came  opposite
the  object,  as  if  she  were  struck  by  the  impulses  of
some  invisible  medium. When  this  was  the  case,  she


402  THE MEDIUM OF

was  always  correct  in  her  perceptions.  In  thus
bringing  the  nervous  system  into  immediate  relation
with  an  object  by  means  of  one  restricted  portion  of
the  nervous  system,  it  is  evident  that  the  analogies  of
nature  are  preserved.

Thus  in  examining  the  media,  the  action  of  which
forms  the  external  pre-requisites  of  sensation,  we
seem  to  arrive  at  a  general  ground  or  principle^
just  as,  in  examining  the  action  of  the  nerves,  or  ,
the  internal  pre-requisites  of  sensation,  we  formerly
arrived  at  a  ground  or  principle.  And  the  one
seems  perfectly  adjusted  to  the  other.  From  what
we  know  of  the  constitution  of  nature,  also,  we
should  expect  to  come  to  some  ground  in  sensation,
for  the  discoveries  of  modern  science  tend  to  resolve
all  forces,  even  gravitation  itself,  into  varied  actions
of  one  medium ;  and,  the  universality  of  that  medium
being  once  allowed,  it  is  plain  that  it  must  be  the
,  ground  in  sensation,  as  in  all  things  else.  Besides,
viewing  man  as  more  than  the  ephemeral  being  of  a
day  and  more  especially  viewing  him  in  his  extended
relationships  to  creation,  considering,  too,  all  we
know  or  see  as  but  parts  of  one  great  system,  we
should  expect  not  only  to  arrive  at  some  ground  in
sensation,  which  had  not  precisely  reference  to  the
transitory  purposes  of  this  life,  but  at  some  general
ground,  which  might  be  common  to  all  beings,  and
which  might  largely  pervade  the  universe.

The  media,  which  now  act  upon  our  organs,  we
should  as  much  conceive  to  be  modifications  of  the


MESMERIC SENSATION.  409

pervading  and  ethereal  medium,  as  our  organs  them-
selves are  manifestly  modifications  of  the  sentient
principle.  So,  in  a  new  state  of  man,  which  takes  him,
as  it  were,  out  of  his  sphere,  for  a  while,  and  extends
his  relations  to  things  in  general  by  removing  the
modifications  of  the  external  senses,  we  should  expect
to  find  a  corresponding  removal  of  the  modifying
media,  and  a  correspondent  approximation  to  the
general  groundwork  of  sensation.  Something  like
such  a  universal  principle  or  agency  in  sensation  has
long  been  suspected  to  exist.

Newton,  speaking  of  his  celebrated  ether,  says :  -—
"  Is  not  vision  performed  chiefly  through  the
vibrations  of  this  medium,  excited  in  the  bottom  of
the  eye  by  the  rays  of  light,  and  propagated  through
the  solid,  pellucid,  and  uniform  capillamenta  of  the
optic  nerves  into  the  place  of  sensation  ?  And  is  not
hearing  performed  by  the  vibrations  either  of  this  or
some  other  medium,  excited  in  the  auditory  nerves
by  the  tremors  of  the  air,  and  propagated  through
the  solid,  pellucid,  and  uniform  capillamenta  of  those
nerves  into  the  place  of  sensation  ?  And  so  of  the
other  senses."

Admit  this,  and  the  mysteries  of  sensation  in  sleep-
waking  stand  revealed.  When  once  we  see  clearly
(as  see  we  must,  if  we  consider  nature  aright),  that
the  communication  between  all  portions  of  the  uni-
verse is  continuous  and  incapable  of  interruption  —
that  there  is  a  pervading  medium,  filling  all  things,
permeating  all,  —  the  extended  sphere  of  mesmeric


404  THE MEDIUM OF

Acuities  appears  no  longer  miraculous.  The  hiatus
once  supplied,  which  seeming  obstacles  created  to  our
apprehensions,  there  is  no  link  wanting  in  the  chain
which  connects  us  with  external  objects.  All  is  har-
monious—  all  is  clear.  And  the  facts  of  mesmerism
alone  would  establish  this  beautiful  simplicity  in  the
economy  of  nature  and  in  our  own ;  proving  that
Newton,  when  he  suggested  a  universal  agent  in
sensation,  outran  his  age,  and  in  a  moment  divined
that  which  to  elucidate  will  occupy  future  ages.  But,
alas !  he  who  defends  the  cause  of  mesmerism,  be-
cause he  is  penetrated  with  its  truth,  is  "cabin'd,
cribb'd,  confin'd"  in  his  mode  of  argument.  He
cannot  support  a  theory,  however  noble,  by  the  facts
of  mesmerism,  nor  reason  from  them  by  the  most
legitimate  induction :  for  he  is  called  upon  to  prove
that  the  facts  themselves  are  not  absurdities, — that  all
which  he  perceives  to  be  so  admirably  illustrative  of
Nature's  order  is  not  anomalous  and  monstrous.  The
foundation-stones  of  belief  for  his  system  are  not  yet
laid ;  and  he  has  to  lay  them  in  a  quaking  and  un-
stable soil,  even  as  the  first  builders  of  Venice  had  to
waste  their  materials  beneath  the  engulphing  sea,
long  before  the  ocean  city  could  rise,  in  stability  and
beauty,  from  the  waves.  A  time,  however,  is  at  hand,
when  the  facts  of  mesmerism,  being  accepted  as  facts,
will  themselves  be  used  as  the  most  valuable  demon-
$trations  of  truths  and  principles,  which  the  genius
of  great  men  foreknew.

If  it  may  be  permitted  me,  for  a  moment,  to  antici-


MESMERIC SENSATION.  405

pate  that  era,  I  may  remark  that  the  fact  of  the  sleep-
waker  seeing  colours,  when  the  usual  action  of  light  is
plainly  absent,  while  he  does  not  behold  objects  mag-
nified through  a  convex  glass,  is  a  proof  that, as
Newton  conjectured,  the  eflScient  cause  of  vision  is  the
vibration  of  another  medium  than  light,  and  is  not
dependent  on  the  anterior  mechanism  of  the  eye.  All
this  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  science. Colours
depend  on  vibrations  of  the  optic  nerves,  which  vibra-
tions are  shown  to  be  more  perfectly  and  permanently
produced  by  electricity  even  than  by  light;  for  Pro-
fessor Wheatstone  exhibited  by  electric  light  colours
distinctly,  and  as  at  rest,  when  they  were  revolving  so
rapidly  as  to  be  all  mingled  together  into  white  under
any  ordinary  illumination. On  the  other  hand,  the
enlargement  of  objects  by  a  magnifying  glass  is  a
mechanical effect dependent  on  a  modification  of
light,  which  could  not  take  place  where  the  con-
ditions are  so  plainly  absent  as in  the  mesmeric
slumber. The  result  of  the  experiment  is  at  once
conformable  to  reason  and  to  science,  and  indicative
of  the  sincerity  of  the  sleepwaker. Here,  also,  we
may  see  the  difierence  between  sensation  general  and
special. The  peculiar  action  of  light,  whereby  an
object  is  magnified,  is  only  an  adaptation  to  our  pre-
sent imperfect  organs. By  it  we  gain  no  new,  no
peculiar,  no  fundamental  idea :  we  only  see  objects
when  magnified,  as  if  they  were  nearer; but  the
notion  of  colour  is  specifically  different  from  every
other,  and  is  common,  we  may  suppose,  to  aU  ani-


406  THE MEDIUM OF

mated  creatures.  Thus  is  mesmerism,  in  all  its  parts,
calculated  to  lead  us  to  principles  of  exten^ve  appli-
cation. If  it  seems  to  contradict  our  former  know-
ledge, it  only  contradicts  it  in  its  externals  and
deceptive  appearances.  But  in  truth  it  never  does
contradict  either  nature  or  previous  knowledge ;  it  is
only  in  opposition  to  narrow  views.  The  more  we
become  aware  what  true  experience  is,  the  more  shall
we  find  that  from  experience  mesmerism  strays  not.
If  men  had  wished  to  believe  it,  half  the  evidence
that  is  now  brought  forward  to  prove  it  possible
would  have  proved  it  sure.

I  conclude  my  remarks  on  sensation  by  recalling
to  the  reader's  mind  a  few  of  the  most  important  re-
flections on  which  we  have  been  engaged,  taking
sight,  our  chief  sense,  as  the  type  and  example  of
the  rest.

The  real  nature  of  vision  is  as  shut  to  the  vulgar
as  the  mesmeric  mode  of  sight  is  to  the  learned.

By  the  eye  we  appreciate  light  and  colour :  only
the  rest  is  an  operation  of  the  judgment.

Viewed  metaphysically,  seeing  is  but  a  particular
kind  of  knowledge  :  viewed  physically,  seeing  consists
in  certain  nervous  motions,  responsive  to  the  motions
of  a  medium.  That  medium,  in  our  ordinary  con-
dition, is  light,  the  action  of  which  seems  cut  off  and
intercepted  in  the  case  of  mesmeric  vision.

When,  therefore,  we  hear  that  a  mesmerised  person
has  correctly  seen  an  object  through  obstables,  which
to  us  appear  opaque,  we,  conceiving  no  means  of


MESMERIC SENSATION.  407

communication  between  the  person  and  the  object,
exclaim  that  the  laws  of  nature  have  been  violated.
But,  in  all  cases  where  information  is  conveyed  through
interrupted  spaces,  show  but  the  means  of  communi-
cation, and  astonishment  ceases.

When  we  know  that  there  is  a  medium,  permeating
in  one  or  other  of  its  forms  all  substances  whatever,
and  that  this  medium  is  eminently  capable  of  exciting
sensations  of  sight,  and  when  we  take  this  in  conjunc-
tion with  a  heightened  sensibility  in  the  percipient
person,  rendering  him  aware  of  impulses  whereof  we
are  not  cognisant,  we  are  no  longer  inclined  to  deny
a  fact  or  suppose  a  miracle.

Finally,  all  sensation  has  but  one  principle.  All
that  is  required  for  its  production  is  that  objects
should  be  brought  into  a  certain  relation  with  us  by
something  intermediate ;  and  this  is  effected  by  the
impulsions  of  certain  media  upon  nerves,  the  last
changes  in  which  are  the  immediate  forerunners  of
completed  sensation.

Thus  things,  which  are  beheld  in  their  primal  es-
sences by  the  Almighty,  are  to  us  known  in  their
beautiful  results.  It  is  to  the  idea,  not  to  the  con-
trivance for  exciting  the  idea,  that  we  are  to  look ;
for  the  unlettered  peasant,  who  has  a  conviction  and
a  feeling  what  light  is,  has  in  reality  as  true  a  notion
of  this  the  first  effluence  of  supernal  power  as  he  who
has  divided  the  sunbeams  with  a  prism  or  calculated
the  undulations  of  the  etherial  medium.  With  respect
to  external  things,  we  have  only  to  consider  God  and
man  —  not  God  and  the  philosopher.


408 THE MEDIUM OF MESMERIC SENSATION.

Taking  this  simple  view  of  sensation,  we  find  no-
thing in  mesmerism  contradictory  of  nature.  Under
its  influence  the  human  frame  continues  to  be  still  a
system  of  nerves  acted  upon  by  elastic  media,  for  the
purpose  of  conveying  to  us  the  primal  impulses  of  the
Almighty  mind,  which  made,  sustains,  and  moves  the
universe.


409


«


BOOK  IV.

To  every  form  of  being  is  assign'd
An  active  principle :  —  howe'er  remov'd
From  sense  and  observation,  it  subsists
In  all  things,  iu  all  natures,  in  the  stars
Of  azure  heaven,  the  unenduring  clouds.
In  flower  and  tree,  in  every  pebbly  stone
That  paves  the  brooks,  the  stationary  rocks,
The  moving  waters,  and  the  invisible  air."

Wordsworth.


SECT.  L

THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.


Having,  as  I  trust,  shown  the  conformity  of  mes-
merism, in  all  essential  points,  with  the  principles  of
nature  and  the  inferences  of  reason,  I  now  proceed
to  exhibit  it  in  connection  with  such  a  cause  as  its
peculiar  manifestations  indicate  and  demand.

First,  I  affirm  that,  productive  of  the  effects  called
mesmeric,  there  is  an  action  of  matter  as  distinct  and
specific  as  that  of  light,  heat,  electricity,  or  any  other
of  the  imponderable  agents,  as  they  are  called ;  —
that,  when  the  mesmeriser  influences  his  patient,  he
does  this  by  a  medium,  either  known  already  in
another  guise,  or  altogether  new  to  our  experience,

T


410  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

What  proofs,  it  will  be  asked,  can  I  bring  forward
of  this  assertion  ?  I  answer,  such  proofs  as  are  con-
sidered available  in  all  cases  where  an  impalpable
imponderable  medium  is  to  be  considered;  facts,
namely,  or  certain  appearances,  which,  bearing  a  pe-
culiar character,  irresistibly  suggest  a  peculiar  cause.

Let  us  take  only  one  of  these.

Standing  at  some  yards  distant  from  a  person  who
is  in  the  mesmeric  state  (that  person  being  perfectly
stationary,  and  with  his  back  to  me),  I,  by  a  slight
motion  of  my  hand  (far  too  slight  to  be  felt  by  the
patient,  through  any  disturbance  of  the  air),  draw
him  towards  me,  as  if  I  actually  grasped  him.

What  is  the  chain  of  facts  which  is  here  presented
to  me  ?  First,  an  action  of  my  mind,  without  which
I  could  not  have  moved  my  hand;  secondly,  my
hand's  motion ;  thirdly,  motion  produced  in  a  body
altogether  external  to,  and  distant  from  myself.  But
it  will  at  once  be  perceived,  that,  in  the  chain  of
events,  as  thus  stated,  there  is  a  deficient  link.  The
communication  between  me  and  the  distant  body  is
not  accounted  for.  How  could  an  act  of  my  mind
originate  in  an  effect  so  unusual  ?

That  which  is  immaterial  cannot,  by  its  very  defi-
nition, move  masses  of  water.  It  is  only  when
mysteriously  united  to  a  body  that  spirit  is  brought
into  relationship  with  place  or  extension,  and  under
such  a  condition  alone,  and  only  through  such  a
medium,  can  it  propagate  motion.  Now,  in  some
wondrous  way,  spirit  is  in  us  incorporate.  Our
bodies  are  its  medium  of  action. By  them,  and  only


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  411

by  them,  as  far  as  our  experience  reaches,  are  we
enabled  to  move  masses  of  foreign  matter.  I  may
sit  and  may  will  for  ever  that  yonder  chair  come
to  me,  but  without  the  direct  agency  of  my  body
it  must  remain  where  it  is.  All  the  willing  in  the
world  cannot  stir  it  an  inch.  I  must  bring  myself
into  absolute  contact  with  the  body  which  I  desire  to
move.  But,  in  the  case  before  us,  I  will  —  I  extend
my  hands ;  I  move  them  hither  and  thither,  and  I  see
the  body  of  another  person  —  a  mass  of  matter  ex-
ternal to  myself,  yet  not  in  apparent  contact  with
me  —  moved  and  swayed  by  the  same  action  which
stirs  my  own  body.  Am  I  thence  to  conclude  that  a
miracle  has  been  performed — that  the  laws  of  nature
are  reversed  —  that  I  can  move  foreign  matter  with-
out contact,  or  intermediate  agency?  Or  must  I
not  rather  be  certain  that,  if  I  am  able  to  sway  a
distant  body,  it  is  by  means  of  some  unseen  lever  —
tliat  volition  is  employing  something  which  is  equi-
valent to  a  body  —  something,  which  may  be  likened
to  an  extended  corporeity,  which  has  become  the
organ  of  my  will  ?

Surely  there  is  no  effect  without  a  cause;  and
from  actions  we  may  infer  the  existence  of  an  agent.
We  do  this  a  thousand  times  in  other  cases, — in  that
of  mesmerism,  for  instance.  We  never  behold  this
power  but  in  its  results.  It  cannot  even  be  made
evident,  like  the  electric  spark,  or  felt  in  our  own
persons,  like  the  galvanic  concussion.  The  needle
that  has  become  a  magnet,  has  undergone  no  change
which  any  mortal  sight  is  fine  enough  to  appreciate,

T  2


412^  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

has  acquired  no  weight  which  can  be  detected  by
our  earthly  senses. Yet,  solely  because  we  are  sure
that  we  behold  certain  phenomena,  we  allow that
there  is  a  distinct  form  of  electricity,  to  which  we
have  given  the  name  of  magnetism. Why  should
we refuse to mesmerism that  which  we  grant  to
magnetism  ? It  is  true  that  as  yet  we  have  no  ba-
lance of  torsion,  whereby  the  mesmeric  force  can  be
measured; but in the human body  itself  we do
possess  an  instrument  whereby  its  presence  may  be
ascertained;  nor  would  it be  reasonable to insist
upon  separate  agencies  being  detected  by  the  same
test. Why,  then,  but  from  the  force  of  prejudice,
should  we  call  the  mesmeric  medium  a  gratuitous
assumption? That  such  a  medium  exists  is  not  a
gratuitous  assumption,  but  an  unavoidable  deduction
of  reason. But  there  is  a  class  of  persons  who  refuse
to  admit  of  anything  which  they  cannot  see,  taste,
or  handle ;  with  such  it  is  difficult  to  argue. Should
proofs  by  experiment  be  exhibited  to  them  again  and
again, they still return to their cuckoo note  —
"  Show  me  the  agent." One  of  these  practical  men,
^s  they  are  called,  actually  said  to  me  on  one  occa-
sion, "  I  never  will  believe  that  what  you  call  mes-
merism exists,  unless  you  can  put  it  in  a  bottle,  and
submit  it  to  analysis."

To  what  end,  then,  is  reason  given  us,  if  not  to
judge  of  things  invisible  by  those  which  are  clearly
seen  ?  For  what  purpose  possess  we  the  irresistible
propensity  to  supply  deficient  links  in  a  chain  of  caus-
ation, if  not  to  prompt  us  where  our  senses  fail  ? We


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM*  413

move  a  magnet  over  a  needle ;  the  needle  moves  in  a
corresponding  manner;  and  the  human  mind  is  so
constituted  that  we  cannot  behold  these  two  facts,  in
seeming  connection,  without  uniting  them  by  a  thirds
which  we  consider  as  proved  by  them,  since  it  is  in
truth  their  necessary  consequence.  We  infer  that
the  effect  is  produced  by  means  of  a  magnetic  current
or  medium,  —  a  something  which  propagates  motion
from  the  magnet  to  the  needle.  This  something  we
cannot  indeed  behold;  —  yet  do  we  believe  in  it,  —
and  with  justice,  for  that  which  reason  perceives  to
be  necessary  is  not  an  invention,  and  can  never  be
superfluous :  on  the  contrary,  the  only  immutable  and
essential  truths  come  out  of  the  mould  of  the  intuitive
reason,  which,  as  Coleridge  observes,  stops  not  at
"  this  will  be  so,"  but  at  once  decides,  "  This  must
be  so."

Now,  in  all  cases  where  motion  is  communicated
from  one  body  to  another,  the  line  of  communication
must  be  maintained  unbroken.  The  first  impulse
gives  motion  to  certain  atoms,  which  in  their  turn
propel  others,  and  so  on,  till  the  whole  series  between
the  active  body  and  the  body  which  is  to  receive  the
original  impulse  is  set  in  motion,  and  then,  at  length,
the  sequence  of  events  is  complete,  and  the  body,  to*
wards  which  motion  tended,  is  set  vibrating.  If  the
medium  that  propagates  the  first  impulsion  be  undu«
latory  and  elastic,  its  atoms  only  oscillate  on  either
side  a  fixed  point  of  rest;  but,  if  it  be  composed  of
travelling  atoms,  there  is  an  actual  progression  of  the
medium. In  either  case,  motion  is  propagated  by


414  TSE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

a  real  action  of  matter  till  it  reach  its  final  desdnation.
This  b  the  history  of  all  communicated  motioii,  and
it  is  plain  that  this  holds  good  whether  we  behold  the
collection  of  atoms,  in  a  bodily  shape,  that  transmits
the  motion,  as  in  the  case  of  one  billiard  ball  propel-
ling another,  or  whether  we  behold  them  not,  as  in
the  case  of  sound  being  communicated  to  the  ear  from
a  vibrating  body,  by  means  of  the  intervening  air.
I  grant  that  the  old  axiom,  ^  A  body  cannot  act
where  it  is  not,"  is  very  prc^rly  exploded ;  but  fi>r
it  we  must  substitute  another ;  namely,  ^  A  body  can-
not act  where  it  is  not,  save  by  deputy,  or  transmis-
sive  means."  Yet  some  have  overlooked  this  trntfay
and  in  their  zeal  to  avoid  theories,  when  diey  bdicdd
two  sensible  actions,  evidently  dependent  the  <me  on
the  other,  and  yet  apparently  disjoined,  fear  to  unite
them  properly  by  suggesting  the  presence  of  an  un-
seen link,  which  nevertheless  cannot  but  occur
between  the  visible  antecedent  and  the  visible  conse-
quent ;  for  motion  is  not  an  entity  that  can  go  through
void  spaces  independently  and  alone ;  it  is  merely  a
property  which  has  no  existence  out  of  the  subject
that  manifests  it ;  and,  where  matter  &ils,  there  mc^
tion  fails  also.  It  is  vain,  then,  to  hold  such  lan«
guage  as  if  it  were  possible  for  one  body  to  produce
motion  in  another  without  something  intermediate,  -^
that  is,  miraculously  and  without  means ;  yet  your
good  hater  of  theories  will  even  dare  to  blame  Newton
for  having  suggested  an  ether  to  account  for  that
action  which  one  body  produces  on  another,  and  even,
in  many  cases,  from  vast  distances,  and  which  we  call
attraction. It  is  true  that  Newton  may  be  wrong  in


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  415

the  manner  in  which  he  manages  his  ether,  and  ac-
counts for  impulsion  and  re-impulsion  by  differences
of  dense  and  rare;  but  he  cannot  be  wrong  in  pre-
serving an  unbroken  series  of  atoms  between  separate
bodies  which  manifestly  influence  each  other,  —  be-
tween the  sun  and  the  earth  for  instance,  —  since,  in
this  case,  there  is  mutual  action,  and  motion  commu-
nicated &om  a  distance.  Extending  the  principle,
and  perceiving  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  were  in
mutual  relationship,  and  the  whole  celestial  system
harmoniously  bound  together,  Newton  supposed  his
ether  to  be  of  universal  action,  and  to  fill  and  pervade
creation,  establishing  a  means  of  communication  be-
tween all  its  several  parts.  Were  this  allowed,  there
would  be  but  little  difficulty  in  explaining  mesmerism ;
but  a  sublime  divination  of  this  kind  is  too  vast  for
the  general  understanding.  Accordingly,  even  New-
ton's name  has  failed  to  render  the  theory  palateable,
and  men  of  small  views  have  dared  to  call  even  this
suggestion  of  a  mighty  mind  ffratuitous,  treating  its
author  with  a  levity  which  can  only  lessen  one's  re-
spect for  the  objectors.  Have  these  cavillers  an  in-
tellect superior  to  Newton's  own  ?  If  they  have,  let  ^
them  give  us  something  better  than  Newton's  sug-
gestions (better,  not  only  in  their  own  opinion  but  in
ours)  respecting  the  great  problems  of  creation ;
some  theory  more  solid  and  sublime  to  satisfy  the
cravings  of  humanity  after  pure  and  lofty  generalis-
ation :  till  then  let  them,  at  least  by  silence,  acquiesce
in  Professor  Playfair's  beautifully  expressed  opinion
of  the  queries :  —  "  Such  enlarged  and  comprehensive

T  4


416  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

views,  SO  many  new  and  bold  conceptions,  were  never
before  combined  with  the  sobriety  and  caution  of
philosophical  induction.  The  anticipation  of  future
discoveries,  the  assemblage  of  so  many  facts  from  the
most  distant  regions  of  human  research,  all  brought
to  bear  on  the  same  points,  and  to  elucidate  the  same
questions,  are  never  to  be  sufficiently  admired."  In
recalling  this  to  the  reader's  mind,  I  trust  that  I  seem
not  to  stray  from  my  subject,  which  is  in  truth
so  deeply  implicated  in  the  truth  or  falsehood  of
Newton's  principal  suggestions.  But  1  might  leave
this  great  man's  defence  to  time,  which  already  has
*'  brought  in  its  revenges,"  science  being  even  now
occupied  in  developing  Newton's  ideas,  and  in  esta-
blishing as  undoubted  truths  the  greater  part  of  all
which  he  so  modestly  advanced  as  queries.  Facts  re-r
lative  to  the  acceleration  observed  in  the  mean  motion
of  comets  have  demonstrated,  to  the  ssitisfaction  of
men  of  science,  the  existence  of  a  resisting  medium,
undulatory  and  elastic,  which  pervades  the  known
universe.

How  frequently  it  has  thus  happened  that  the  de^
ductions  of  the  pure  reason  have  triumphed  over  the
cavils  and  hesitations  of  the  understanding  which,
being  conversant  with  matters  of  experience  only,
cannot  step  beyond  the  sensuous  and  the  known  !
Kepler  believed  that  the  harmony  of  our  system  re-
quired a  planet  between  Mars  and  Jupiter,  and  the
deficiency  is  now  actually  supplied  by  the  discovery
of  the  four  singular  orbs  which  seem  once  to  have
formed  but  one  single  body.  My  reader's  memory
will  doubtless  supply  other  instances  where  the  philo-


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.^  417.

sopher  in  his  closet  has  outrun  experiment,  and  has
divined  what  future  observation  has  verified  and
facts  confirmed*  When,  then,  we  find  Mesmer  (who,
whatever  were  his  faults  of  conduct,  was  no  con-^
temptible  thinker)  suggesting  a  universal  medium  as.
alone  explanatory  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  let  us,
instead  of  unwisely  scoffing,  inquire  whether  the  cirn
cumstances  of  the  case  may  not  possibly  render  the
existence  of  such  a  medium  a  positive  necessity,  an4
a  truth  palpable  to  reason.  This  at  least  we  know,
that  all  science  seems  now  tending  to  refer  the  appa-^
rently  distinct  agencies  of  nature  to  the  varied  oper-
ation of  one  medium ;  to  establish,  in  fine,  an  ether
such  as  Newton  had  imagined,  and  such  as  Mesmer
perceived  would  satisfactorily  account  for  the  appa-
rent miracles  of  his  new  science.

Now  whether  mesmerism  be  a  distinct  medium,  or
only  the  distinct  effect  of  a  general  medium,  widely
manifested  in  other  offices,  I  will  not  take  upon  myr*
self  to  decide.  We  no  longer  consider  electricity,
magnetism,  even  light  itself,  to  be  separate  and  inde-?
pendent  agents;  we  call  them  effects.  And  this  \^
well,  if  we  remember  to  refer  effects  to  causes^  anci
properties  and  qualities  to  real  substances  and  sub-
jects. We  must  not  turn  all  the  goings-on  of  the
world  into  mere  abstractions.  Vibrations  imply  a
vibrating  body;  electric  motions  or  concussions,
something  that  moves  or  is  concussed.  It  will,  in-
deed;  greatly  simplify  our  ideas,  to  consider  all  th^
various  appearances  of  hatiu'e  as  so  many  actions  of
matter,  but  we  must  beware  of  supposing  that,  where

T  5


418  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

action  is  present,  matter  can  be  absent. I  am  very
willing,  then,  to  call  all  mesmeric  phenomena  effects;
but  I  not  the  less  contend  that  they  must  be  effects  of
something.  I  am  willing  to  consider  mesmerism  itself
as  an  action  of  matter,  yet  still  of  matter. I  cannot
tell  whether,  in  the  case  of  mesmeric  agency  matter
assumes  the  form  of  a  fluid  or  a  gas,  but  I  know  and
am  sure  that  material  agency  there  is. This  agency
may  be  only  one  of  the  modifications  of  a  substance
which  operates  in  other  ways,  or  it  may  be  the  single
action  of  a  single  substance. But,  in  fact,  the  proba-
bility is,  that  there  are  really  various  media  in  nature,
the  finer,  we  may  suppose,  occupying  the  interstices
of  the  grosser,  distinct  yet  interfused,  wheel  within
wheel,  a  subtle  mechanism. Every  one  knows  that
the  atmosphere  is  the  medium  through  which  sound
is  conveyed  to  us. A  bell  rung  under  the  exhausted
receiver  of  an  air-pump  is  inaudible ;  but  the  crystal
walls,  that  keep  out  air,  bar  not  the  passage  of  light
and heat. Newton's  experiment of  this,  and  bis
consequent  reasoning  on  the  fact,  appear  to  me  con-
clusive. He  says,  Qu.  18.  —  *'  If,  in  two  large,  tall,
cylindrical  vessels  of  glass,  inverted,  two  little  ther-
mometers be  suspended,  so  as  not  to  touch  the  ves-
sels, and  the  air  be  drawn  out  of  one  of  these  vessels,
and  these  vessels,  thus  prepared,  be  carried  out  of  a
cold  place into a  warm  one,  the  thermometer  in
vacuo  will  grow  warm  as  much  and  almost  as  soon  as
the  thermometer  which  is  not  in  vacuo. And,  when
the  vessels  are  carried  back  into  the  cold  place,  the
thermometer  in  vacuo  will  grow  cold  almost  as  soon
as  the  other  thermometer. Is  not  the  heat  of  the


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  419

warm  room  conveyed  through  the  vacuum  by  the
vibrations  of  a  much  subtiler  medium  than  air,
which,  after  the  air  was  drawn  out,  remained  in  the
vacuum  ?  And  is  not  this  medium  the  same  with  that
medium  by  which  light  is  refracted  and  reflected?"

The  conclusion  which  such  experiments  force  upon
us  is,  that  there  really  exist  in  nature  different
media,  related,  yet  distinct.  If,  therefore,  I  am  un-
derstood literally  instead  of  figuratively,  when  I  speak
of  mesmerism  as  an  individual  agency,  I  shall  not
seem  greatly  to  have  violated  the  analogies  of  nature.
This  at  least  I  affirm,  mesmerism  has  its  own  pecu*
liar  action ;  and  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  conve-
nience, I  shall  denominate  matter,  as  it  is  developed
in  this  particular  way,  the  mesmeric  medium,  a  term
with  which,  I  trust,  none  of  my  readers  will  be  dis-
posed to  quarrel;  the  advantage  and  propriety  of
referring  one  class  of  effects  to  one  cause  being  ma-
nifest. We  do  this  naturally  in  all  cases  where  dis-
tinction is  required.  The  imponderable  fluids  are
still  characterised,  pro  form&y  by  individual  names,
though,  we  believe,  that  they  may  be  children  of  one
parent.  From  certain  effects  we  are  allowed  to  pre-
sume the  existence  of  a  luminous  medium.  I,  there-
fore, by  parity  of  reasoning,  may  be  allowed,  from
other  effects,  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  mesmeric
medium.

And,  in  truth,  there  is  no  agency  which  more
manifestly  than  this  may  claim  to  be  distinctive,  since
it  is  developed  under  quite  other  circumstances;
and,  being  developed,  presents  quite  other  pheno-

T  6


420  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

mena  than  any  material  action  with  which  we  have
hitherto  been  acquainted*

It  neither  results  from  a  union  of  gases,  nor  from
chemical  composition.  It  is  not  developed  by  the
rubbing  of  amber  or  the  juxtaposition  of  minerals.
It  is  elicited  by  certain  actions  of  living  nature  alone*

Viewed  merely  as  a  physical  agency,  it  originates
a  sleep,  sui  gemris,  which  pervades  the  external
organs,  yet  leaves  the  intelligence  free ;  it  brings  the
nervous  system  into  a  state  of  exceeding  sensibility,
rendering  it  cognisant  of  influences  by  which  at
other  times  it  is  wholly  unaflFected.

Now,  what  is  the  medium  we  know  not ;  and  there-
fore all  that  remains  for  us,  in  our  ignorance,  to  do,  i$
to  gather  as  much  information  concerning  it  as  wie  can.
We  cannot  analyse  it  in  the  same  manner  as  light,  or
separate  it  into  its  component  parts,  like  the  atmo-
sphere ;  but  every  agent  has  its  own  elements,  and
consequently  a  method  of  analysis  proper  to  itself.
This  is  clear ;  in  its  mode  of  action  it  can  alone  be
made  manifest ;  its  sensible  action,  therefore,  is  the
legitimate  sphere  in  which  it  may  be  studied ;  and,
till  we  have  all  its  facts  and  relations,  we  have  only
to  observe  its  phenomena,  and  to  state  the  results  of
our  observation  as  plainly  as  possible.

First,  then,  it  is  an  agency,  which  has  physical
effects  on  man.*

That  any  one,  who  has  been  conversant  with  even

*  And  on  brutes  also.  On  this  point  I  could  state  many
curious  particulars :  but  I  desire  to  startle  my  reader  as  little  as
possible,  and  to  exclude  from  the  present  work  whatever  bears
not  strict  reference  to  the  human  influence.


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  421

the  first  symptoms  produced  by  mesmerism,  should
doubt  the  physical  and  distinct  character  of  the
agency,  seems  impossible.  However  marvellous  be
the  train  of  mental  phenomena  consequent  upon  its
operation,  its  primary  effects  are  undoubtedly  upon
the  body  of  the  patient.  Those  who  are  neither
under  the  predisposing  influence  of  fear  or  of  imar
gination,  who  know  not  what  they  have  to  expect,  who,
perhaps,  close  their  eyes  from  the  beginning  of  the
experiment,  all  agree  in  feeling  a  weight  upon  the
eyelids,  accompanied  by  a  slight  pricking ;  then  fol-
lows the  sensation  of  a  cold  current  of  air,  streaming
in  the  direction  of  the  mesmeriser's  fingers,  and  of  a
torpor  in  the  limbs,  which  gradually  increases,  until
spontaneous  motion  becomes  not  only  difficult  but
impossible  to  the  patient.

A  lady  of  much  intelligence,  whom  I  recently
mesmerised  at  Rome,  was  determined  to  observe,  as
long  as  she  could  retain  her  consciousness,  what
would  be  her  sensations  under  the  mesmeric  influ-
ence. On  recovering  from  the  sleep  into  which  she
had  been  ^successfully  thrown,  she  told  me  that  at
first  she  felt  an  increasing  weight  upon  the  eyelids,
and  an  inclination  to  close  them,  which  she  endea-
voured to  combat  by  looking  often  at  a  vase  con-
taining flowers  that  stood  opposite  to  her.  By
degrees,  however,  a  kind  of  vapour  seemed  to  steal
between  herself  and  the  object  she  regarded,  until
she  could  distinguish  nothing  whatever.  Her  eyelidg
were  then  irresistibly  drawn  together.  After  closing
them  she  was  aware  of  a  tingling  in  the  arms,  and
currents  of  air  seemed  to  move  around  her  in  various


422  THE  MESMERIC MEDIUM.

directions*  The  strength  and  velocity  of  these  cur-
rents appeared  constantly  to  increase,  until  the  power
of  observation  failed  and  consciousness  was  sua*
pended.  Subsequently,  when  in  the  natural  state,
she  begged  me  to  say  whether  I  had  not  moved  my
hands  rapidly  and  violently  when  mesmerising  her,
so  as  to  produce  those  currents  of  air  which  she  had
felt.  I  assured  her  that,  on  the  contrary,  I  had
moved  my  hands  slowly  and  gently  all  the  time.
She,  then,  still  incredulous,  begged  me  to  repeat  the
same  movements  which  I  had  used  in  mesmerising.  I
did  so,  and  she  declared  that  she  could  not  at  all  feel
those  currents  to  which  she  had  been  sensible  in  the
incipient  state  of  sleepwaking.

E.  A.,  (the  youth  who  enjoyed  such  a  high  degree
of  mesmeric  vision,)  used  to  describe  similar  sensa-
tions, and  has  frequently  spoken  to  me  of  a  kind  of
vapour  rising  before  his  eyes  during  mesmerisation.
When  questioned  about  this  in  sleepwaking,  he
declared  that  the  vapour  proceeded  from  me,  and
seemed  to  penetrate  and  pervade  his  frame.  This  he
asserted  to  be  the  effectual  cause  of  the  mesmeric
sleep.

Nothing  is  more  interesting  than  to  mark  the  cor-
respondences of  sensation  under  mesmeric  treatment,
manifested  by  different  persons,  at  different  times,
and  in  different  places.  Every  fresh  instance  of  such
analogical  feeling  is  as  a  new  argument  in  favour  of
the  reality  and  constancy  of  mesmeric  influence.

Other  facts  are  not  wanting,  which  contribute  to
bring  the  agency  within  the  domain  of  physics.


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  423

Like  the  galvanic  force  it  seems  capable  of  aggre*
gation  in  being  transmitted  through  kindred  sub-
stances.

I  have  sometimes  formed  what  may  be  called  a
mesmeric  pile,  by  seating  five  or  six  persons  together
in  a  line,  or  half-circle,  holding  each  other's  hands :
I  have  then  mesmerised  the  first  in  the  rank,  who
has  passed  on  the  influence  to  the  second,  who  has
again  transmitted  it  to  the  third,  and  so  on,  by  each
pressing  the  hand  held  by  each,  at  regular  periods  of
time.  Under  this  treatment  I  have  invariably  found
that  the  mesmeric  influence  was  most  powerfully  de-
monstrated in  the  person  who  was  farthest  from  my-
self; that  is,  in  the  person  who  received  the  original
impulse  through  the  greatest  number  of  intervening
transmitters.  The  shades  of  gradation  were  also  in
these  experiments  justly  preserved :  the  first  person
scarcely  experiencing  any  sensation,  the  second  feel-
ing a  more  decided  influence,  and  so  in  progression,
till  the  last  was  thrown  into  the  complete  mesmeric
state.

Again :  That  the  mesmeric  influence  is  capable  of
exhaustion  and  repair,  like  any  other  physical  agency,
has  been  frequently  forced  upon  my  conviction.  That
when  I  am  strongest  I  can  best  mesmerise,  is  a  fact
known  to  me  from  personal  experience;  also,  that
my  power  declines  in  proportion  to  the  fatigue  con-
sequent upon  its  exertion.  This  was  very  strikingly
exemplified  in  some  experiments,  in  which  Professor
Agassiz  of  Neufchatel,  in  Switzerland,  kindly  bore  a
part; thus  enabling  me  to  honour  mesmerism  by


424  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

associating  it  with  the  name  of  one  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished natuarlists  in  Europe.

After  mesmerising  the  Professor  himself  for  an
hour,  during  which  I  felt  considerably  fatigued,  I
made  an  essay  upon  a  person,  whom  I  usually  influ-
enced with  full  success.  This  time,  however,  I  only
partially  succeeded;  and  a  third  trial  upon  another
individual,  who,  m  general,  was  most  susceptible  to
the  mesmeric  influence,  was  wholly  unsuccessful.
The  failure  was  quite  unlooked  for,  and  astonished
the  patient  himself,  who  exclaimed,  after  I  had  mes-
merised him  for  a  considerable  time,  "  This  is  surpris-
ing !  I  feel  nothing  whatever !  You  produce  no
eflect  upon  me  this  evening."  After  resting  half  an
hour,  and  taking  a  glass  of  wine,  I  again  attempted  to
influence  this  patient.  I  now  succeeded  better  than
on  the  first  trial,  yet  still  could  bring  him  no  further
than  the  first  stage  of  imperfect  mesmeric  sleep.

I  may  also  remark  that  the  act  of  mesmerising  is
followed  by  a  very  peculiar  sensation  of  exhaustion
and  fatigue,  for  which  the  slight  muscular  exertion
which  the  process  demands  is  quite  insufficient  to
account.  Exercise  in  the  open  air,  and  such  means
as  are  best  calculated  to  restore  the  bodily  strength
in  general,  I  have  found  to  be  the  best  restoratives
on  such  occasions.  Yet,  though  particular  acts  of
mesmerising  induce  temporary  fatigue,  it  is  quite
certain  that  the  general  mesmeric  force  of  an  indi-
vidual is  strengthened,  like  any  other  corporeal  gift,
by  just  and  regular  exercise.  As  a  magnet  which  is
laid  by  has  not  half  the  power  that  it  has  when  kept


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  425

in  action,  so,  as  I  have  found  by  experience  that  a
mesmeriser  who  is  out  of  practice  has  actually  less  of
mesmeric  influence  than  when  he  mesmerises  regu-
larly, with  a  due  attention  to  the  "  ne  quid  nimis."
This,  again,  brings  the  medium  within  the  domain
of  physics.

Another  discovery  which.  I  have  been  enabled  to
make  respecting  the  action  of  mesmerism  is,  that  it
decidedly  bears  a  relation  to  the  slowness  or  rapidity
of  the  mesmeriser's  respiration  during  the  act  of  mes-
merising. I  have  tried  this  again  and  again,  and
always  with  the  same  result.  In  proportion  to  the
rapidity  of  my  breathing  was  the  effect  produced  —
an  effect  independent  of  the  actual  effluence  of  the
breath  upon  the  patient  (though  this  indeed  also  aids
the  mesmeric  processes),  for  the  same  result  has  en-
sued when  my  head  has  been  turned  away  from  the
person  I  was  mesmerising.  How  singularly  this  fact
connects  the  mesmeric  with  the  chemical  and  vital
forces  I  need  not  observe.

At  present  it  seems  necessary  that  I  should  reply
to  an  objection,  which,  with  some  apparent  justice,
may  be  advanced  against  the  claim  which  mesmerism
puts  forward  to  be  considered  as  a  phyisical  agent.

It  has  been  asserted  that,  when  the  attention  of
mesmeric  patients  is  preoccupied  and  diverted  from
the  mesmeric  processes;  or,  when  the  imagination
has  not  been  previously  advised  of  an  effect  to  follow,
the  agency  is  null.

This  statement  demands  an  examination  the  more
serious,  inasmuch  as  it  is  one  of  those  half-truth^


426  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

which  Coleridge  has  denounced  as  fatal  to  true  phi-
losophy.

It  must  be  allowed  that  the  mesmeric  influence  is,
to  a  certain  degree,  impeded,  should  it  be  essayed
upon  a  person  who  is  determined  to  resist  it,  or  whose
mind  is  actively  engaged  upon  other  matters;  but
does  this,  can  this  prove  that  the  agency  is  null,  save
in  the  imagination  of  the  patient?  The  only  thing
that  it  demonstrates  with  certainty  is  that  which  every
rational  man  who  has  at  all  studied  the  subject  must
concede  —  namely,  that  the  force  employed  in  the
mesmeric  processes  is  not  sudden,  or  violent  in  its
action,  but  of  the  nature  of  those  subtle  influences
which  it  requires  a  certain  attention,  and  indeed  edu-
cation of  the  sensibility,  to  perceive.  A  savage  has
been  known  to  track  his  prey,  like  a  dog,  by  the
scent  alone ;  and,  in  doing  so,  he  must,  of  necessity,
fix  all  his  attention  upon  the  fine  exhalations,  whereby
he  is  guided.  But  how  plainly  absurd  it  would  be  to
affirm  on  that  account,  that  there  was  no  actual  ex-
citing cause  of  the  sensations  of  the  savage  !  But,  it
is  argued,  the  imagination  must  be  forewarned  before
the  effects,  called  mesmeric,  can  occur ;  and  is  not
this  sufficient  to  refer  them  to  the  imitative  power  of
the  imagination  ? The  answer  is  not  difficult.

Imagination,  indeed,  imitates;  but  then  it  must
have  something  to  imitate.  The  very  expression
presupposes  a  model,  and  gives  real  existence  to  the
subject  in  debate.  Granting  that  which  indeed  I  do
not  concede  —  namely,  that  the  effects  of  mesmerism
can  be  proved  without  mesmerism,  and  by  the  im-


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  427

agination  solely,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  certain
eflPects  have  not  at  certain  times  been  produced  by
mesmerism,  and  by  pure  mesmerism.  That  which  is
spurious  argues  that  which  is  true,  and  many  copies
of  a  picture  place  the  existence  of  an  original  beyond
a  doubt.

Again :  they  who  draw  strong  conclusions  against
mesmerism  by  affirming  that  it  cannot  take  eiFect  un-
less the  imagination  be  prepared  to  receive  it,  should
remember  that  they,  who,  deeming  they  shall  feel
nothing  imder  mesmerism,  and  do  actually  feel  no-
thing, are  both  forewarned  and  forearmed  offainst  the
influence  in  debate,  and  are  thus  themselves  under
the  predisposing  sway  of  the  imagination  as  much  as
their  opponents,  only  in  a  different  manner ;  the  one
party  believing  they  shall,  the  other  that  they  shall
not,  experience  certain  effects.  Under  these  circum-
stances, how  the  latter  can  pretend  to  a  more  accurate
judgment  on  the  point  than  the  former,  I  confess  I
cannot  perceive,  "  Imagination  does  much,"  say  the
anti-mesmerists  —  granted ;  and  let  us  have  the  full
benefit  of  the  principle.  If  imagination  be  so  potent,
it  may  also  render  insensible  to  mesmeric  influence
those  who  are  predetermined  to  feel  nothing  of  it.
Yet  more ;  the  force  of  the  mind  to  resist  even  the
most  powerful  influences  may  be  easily  shown  by  facts
to  be  great  —  nay,  incalculable.  In  Lockhart's  Life
of  Scott,  an  anecdote,  proving  this,  is  related  by  Scott
himself,  of  one  of  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh's  farmers.
^^  His  father  had  given  him  a  quantity  of  laudanum
(writes  Sir  Walter)  instead  of  some  other  medicine.


428  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

The  mistake  was  instantly  discovered ;  but  the  young
man  had  sufficient  energy  and  force  of  mind  to  combat
the  operation  of  the  drug.  While  all  around  him
were  stupid  with  fear,  he  rose,  saddled  his  horse,  and
rode  to  Selkirk  (six  or  seven  miles) ;  thus  saving  the
time  that  the  doctor  must  have  taken  in  coming  to
him.  It  is  very  curious  that  his  agony  of  mind  was
able  to  suspend  the  operation  of  the  drug  until  he
had  alighted,  when  it  instantly  began  to  operate.  He
recovered  perfectly."

The  degree  to  which  a  person  may  resist,  yet  still
be  influenced  by,  the  mesmeric  agency,  when  pre-^
occupied  by  some  counteracting  idea,  was,  on  one
occasion,  demonstrated  to  me,  and,  as  it  were,  marked
off  and  measured  in  an  interesting  manner.

A  friend  of  mine,  at  Cambridge,  who  knew  nothing
whatever  of  animal  magnetism  (as  it  was  then  called)
but  the  name,  consented  to  let  me  try  an  experiment
upon  him  before  some  incredulous  persons,  who  had
said  that  they  never  would  believe  in  the  agency  until
they  saw  it  exhibited  upon  some  one  who  did  not
even  know  that  he  was  to  go  to  sleep.  It  being  as-
certained that  Mr.  H (the  sincerest  of  all  men)

was  really  ignorant  of  even  so  much  mesmeric  lore,
I  and  my  patient  sate  down  in  our  proper  relative
positions. At  the  end  of  five  minutes  (though  it  was

the  unsleepy  time  of  noon)  Mr.  H began  to  close

his  eyes,  and  to  nod;  but  soon  started,  rubbed  his
eyes,  shook  himself,  and  went  through  all  the  usual
formula  of  a  person  who  wishes  to  keep  awake.  This
alternate  nodding  and  arousing  went  on  for  some


THE M£SM£RIC JVTEDIUM.  429

time,  when,  tired  at  length  of  such  unsatisfactory
results,  I  gave  the  matter  up  and  quitted  my  chair*
The  patient  was  then  questioned  as  to  what  he  had
felt  ?  "  Only  very  sleepy,"  he  replied,  "  I  experi-
enced no  electric  shock,  nor  any  thing  of  the  kind,
though  I  watched  and  waited  for  it."  *'  But  if  you
felt  sleepy,  why  did  not  you  goto  sleep?"  asked  some

one. "  Oh,"  answered  Mr.  H ,  "  what  would  I

not  have  given  to  have  gone  to  sleep ;  but  1  thought
I  must  on  no  account  do  this,  as  I  was  to  keep  a
sharp  look  out  for  the  electric  shock  !"  My  reader
may  smile  at  this,  but  I  can  assure  him  that  the
ignorance  of  my  friend  respecting  the  effects  of  mes-
merism is  no  measure  of  his  information  on  other
subjects.

It  appears,  then,  that  the  only  concession  we  have
to  make  to  the  anti-mesmerist  is,  that  the  mood  of
mind  and  body  which  is  most  favourable  to  the  re-
ception of  mesmeric  influence  is  that  which  Words-
worth has  characterised  under  the  title  of  "  a  wise
passiveness."  How  completely  this  refutes  the  argu-
ments, or  rather  assumptions,  of  those,  who  would
resolve  all  mesmerism  into  imagination,  is  manifest.
But  it  is  time  that  this  question  should  be  for  ever
set  at  rest.  How  such  a  cause  as  imagination  could
at  any  time  be  assigned  or  accepted  as  explanatory
of  mesmeric  phenomena,  is  matter  of  wonder,  and
that  it  should  be  so,  diminishes  one's  respect  for  the
sagacity  of  the  human  species.  Here,  indeed,  is  in-
efficient causation  !  Here,  truly,  is  gratuitous  assump-
tion ! I  have  heard  of  imagination  keeping  persons


430  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

awake,  but  never  of  its  setting  them  to  sleep.  This
busy  power  holds  no  possible  alliance  with  mesmer-
ism, whose  gentle  influences,  like  streams,  that  are
only  heard  when  we  listen  for  them  in  the  hush  of
night,  must  be  attended  to  with  the  quiet  patience  of
a  peaceful  spirit.

But  the  imagination  theory  is  really  too  absurd  to
merit  a  serious  refutation.

A  thousand  times  I  have  seen  mesmeric  patients
placed  under  circumstances  where  the  action  of  im-
agination was  plainly  impossible.  In  proof  of  this,
I  have  only  to  refer  to  the  preceding  books  of  this
work.  Persons,  it  will  there  be  seen,  have  been
thrown  into  the  mesmeric  state  when  asleep,  and
wholly  unadvised  of  any  experiment  to  be  tried  upon
them.  They  have  been  drawn  towards  the  mesmer-
iser  from  a  distance,  when  standing  with  their  backs
to  him ;  they  have  manifested  phenomena,  coinciding
with  those  displayed  by  other  mesmeric  patients  at
different  times  and  at  different  places,  and  which
could  not  have  resulted  from  imitation,  since  the
patients  themselves,  not  knowing  a  previous  type,
were  plainly  incapable  of  producing  a  copy.

Surely  facts  like  these  imperatively  call  upon  us  to
acknowledge  an  agency,  which  we  may  call  mesmeric,
or  what  we  please,  so  long  as  we  confound  it  not  with
imagination,  imitation,  et  hoc  genus  omne  of  ineffi-
cient and  inapplicable  causes.

But  our  views  of  mesmerism,  as  a  distinct  and
physical  agent,  would,  indeed,  be  imperfect,  were  we
to  stop  here. Ourselves  would  then  be  guilty  of


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  431

Uttering  only  half  the  truth.  Physical  though  the
agent  be,  its  offices  all  touch  upon  life  and  thought
so  nearly,  that  to  regard  it  simply  in  a  mechanical
light  is  impossible.  In  order  to  know  it  rightly,  or
in  any  other  than  a  partial  manner,  we  must  consider
it  in  its  relationship  to  ourselves,  living,  breathing
men.  If  purely  physical,  why  should  it  produce  such
singular  mental  effects  ?  and  why  should  it  not  aflFect
all  men  alike  ?  These  are  questions  which  will  occur,
and  which  demand  a  satisfactory  answer.

The  cause  must  be  sought  in  its  acting  more  espe-
cially upon  that  most  mysterious  part  of  us — the
nervous  system ;  —  on  the  apparatus  of  sensation,  the
builder-up  of  all  we  are,  of  all  we  know ;  —  on  that
wondrous  portion  of  our  being,  which  occupies  the
very  confines  where  mind  and  matter  dimly  meet ; —
on  that  which  is  more  intimately  ourselves  than  our
mere  external  frame,  of  which  it  appears  to  be  the
strength  and  the  life :  for  we  may  lose  any  member
of  motion  and  yet  preserve  in  their  integrity  all  our
sources  of  information ;  but  a  trifling  injury  to  the
optic  or  auditory  nerve  will  cut  us  off*  from  a  whole
world  of  knowledge,  and  a  slight  pressure  on  the
brain  may  remove  us  at  once  beyond  the  pale  of
humanity,  into  that  fearful  region  where  man's
"thoughts  are  combinations  of  disjointed  things."
Let  us  further  consider  that,  in  fact,  there  is  nothing
which  affects  us  physically  that  does  not  also,  to  a
certain  extent,  affect  us  mentally,  nay  morally;  every
agent  in  nature  being  calculated  to  call  into  action
all  the  capacities  of  our  being;  thus  showing  how


432  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

exquisitely,  according  to  Wordsworth's  beautiful
philosophy,

"  The  external  world  is  fitted  to  the  mind.*'

Light,  by  its  presence  or  absence,  disposes  us  to
courage  or  fear,  joy  or  sorrow,  hope  or  despondency.
Heat,  when  properly  moderated,  gives  us  a  sensation
of  well-being,  of  good-humour,  and  is  favourable  to
the  exercise  of  our  intellectual  faculties;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  cold  is  apt  to  extinguish  both  our  wit
and  our  amiability.  Pope  remarks  that  the  benevo-
lence of  some  persons  depends  on  the  state  of  the
atmosphere,  and  solves  a  generous  action  emanating
from  a  churlish  mind,  by  suggesting  that


C(


Perhaps  the  wind  just  shifted  from  the  east."


Shakspeare's  advice  not  to  ask  a  favour  of  a  man  till
he  has  well  dined  will  also  be  remembered.  Wine,
and  every  species  of  stimulus,  affect  the  mind  through
the  medium  of  the  body.  Even  so  mechanical  a  force
as  that  of  electricity,  if  made  to  operate  upon  us,  ex-
cites in  us,  according  to  our  several  characters,  feelings
of  surprise,  fear,  aversion,  or  curiosity.  If  these  re-
marks be  true,  as  regards  such  powers  as  act  only
partially  on  the  nervous  system,  how  much  more
must  they  apply  to  an  agency  which  stimulates  not
locally,  but  generally,  the  very  capacities  of  sensation !
Other  agents  affect  the  nerves  circuitously,  through
the  intervention  of  modifying  organs,  but  this,  remov-
ing out  of  the  way,  as  has  been  seen,  the  barriers  of


J


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  433

the  external  senses,  proceeds  at  once  and  directly  to
the  seat  of  internal  sensibility.  Its  effects  also  have
been  shown  to  be  as  durable  as  they  are  potent,  not
operating,  like  electricity,  which  gives  a  shock  and  is
gone,  but  manifesting  itself,  when  once  set  in  action,
for  a  lengtii  of  time,  so  as  to  demonstrate  that  the
nervous  system  can  be  charged  with  it  in  a  very  per-
manent and  peculiar  manner.  What  singular  results
may  not  be  expected  from  the  operation  of  an  agency
like  this !

That  mesmerism,  then,  should  develope  certain
mental  phenomena  in  those  whom  it  influences,  is
no  proof  whatever  tliat  it  may  not  originate  physi-
cally.

Neither,  if  it  should  appear  to  affect  all  men
diversely,  and  some  not  at  all,  is  the  reality  of  its  ex-
istence to  be  called  in  question.  All  agencies  in  na-
ture are  neither  electric  nor  irresistible,  and  we  can-
not  but  allow  that  there  is  a  class  of  powers  which
act  upon  man  constitutionally  rather  than  mechani-
cally, and  so  are  modified  by  accidental  circumstances
of  health  or  temperament.  Even  should  we  ulti-
mately be  forced  to  rank  mesmerism  amongst  these,
we  should  by  tto  means  have  annulled  its  agency;  we
should  but  have  ascertained  correctly  its  specific
character.

Still  keeping  in  view  that  its  influence  is  more  pe-
culiarly directed  upon  the  nervous  system,  we  shall
learn  to  appreciate  it  justly,  and,  even  should  it  ap-
pear hopelessly  irregular,  accept  that  irregularity  as
the  condition  of  its  existence. How,  indeed,  can  we

u


434  THE  MESMERIC MEDIUM.

(expect  {1*0111 mesmerism  the  constancy  of  a  mere
mechanical impulse? Its diversities have their
origin  in  the  very  essence  of  our  nature.  The  agency^
which  we  have  to.  examine,  is  almost  identified  with
man,  the  ever-changeful  —  the  infinitely  varied* No
two  constitutions  are  alike,  and  the  nervous  system
exhibits  a  separate  character  in  every  separate  per-
son. If,  then,  we  consider  that  the  action  of  medical
remedies,  or  of  material  substances,  even  though  they
may  not  directly  affect  the  economy  of  the  nerves,  is
greatly  modified  by  the  temperament  of  the  indi-
vidual  to  whom  they  are  applied,  so  that  certain
idiosyncrasies  will  convert  a  means  of  cure  or  a  whole-
some nutriment  into  a  poison ;  above  all,  if  we  re-
flect on  the  varied  peculiarities  of  the  senses  of  various
men,  causing  that  which  is  a  pleasing  odour  to  one  to
become  an  overpowering  torture  to  another  (as  in
the  case  of  the  Roman  women,  who  swoon  at  flowers
sind  perfumes),  and  that  which  is  discord  to  certain
ears  to  sound  as  harmony  to  those  which  are  differ-
ently constituted :  thus  reasoning,  we  must  perceive
that  an  influence,  which  should  act  immediately  and
generally  on  the  nervous  system,  would,  of  necessity,
exhibit  somewhat  of  a  distinctive  character  in  every
separate  case.

It  is,  above  all,  of  importance  to  remember  that
the  variability  of  the  recipients  does  by  no  means
prove  the  agent  itself  variable.  How  would  you
that  the  effects,  even  though  coming  from  a  single
and  permanent  cause,  should  be  similar,  seeing  that
the  subjects  who  manifest  them  are  diverse  ? Does


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  43d

not  the  air  produce  differeut  sounds  from  different
instruments  of  music,  though  it  be  a  single  known
and  permanent  agent  ?

Even  should  a  man  be  altogether  insusceptible  of
the  mesmeric  influence,  he  has  surely  no  just  cause
for  disavowing  its  reality.  Is  he  not^  perhaps,  insen-
sible to  the  operation  of  many  other  powers  by  which
a  number  of  his  fellow-beings  are  invariably  affected?
May  it  not  be  argued  that  mortal  temperaments  —
from  the  phlegmatic  to  the  sanguine  —  differ  as
essentially  as  water  and  mercury,  and  that  as  little
should  we  expect  men  of  opposite  constitutions  to  be
similarly  affected  by  mesmerism,  as  that  the  above-
named  substances  should  freeze  at  the  same  degree  of
temperature?  We  should  also  remember  that  he,
who  is  at  present  insensible  to  the  force,  may,  at
some  future  time,  obtain  a  personal  proof  of  its
efficacy.  We  are  not  always  in  the  same  frame,  nor
always  capable  of  being  affected  by  the  same  causes.
An  exposure  to  cold,  which  we  brave  with  impunity
to-day,  may  be  our  death  to-morrow,  and  the  dose  of
laudanum,  or  of  mercury,  which,  when  we  su£fer,  is
but  a  blessed  relief  from  pain,  may,  at  another  time,
be  to  us  deleterious  or  even  fatal.  That  these  ob-
servations hold  good  as  respects  mesmerism  has  been
proved  in  the  recorded  case  of  M.  Itard,  one  of  the
members  of  the  French  Academy  of  Medicine,  who,
in  1826,  experienced  no  effect  from  mesmeric  treat-
ment, but  in  the  year  following  was  relieved  by  it
from  headach  and  chronic  rheumatism;  and  is  it
always  so  certain  that  they,  who  will  not  own  even  to

u  2


436  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.^

diemselves  that  they  are  affected  by  an  influence  they
despise,  are  in  truth  so  proof  against  it?  One  thing
at  least  I  know.  Aware  by  experience  of  the  ex-
ternal indications  of  mesmeric  affection,  I  have  been
able  to  detect  them  in  some  who  professed  to  feel
nothing  unusual  under  the  mesmeric  processes.  It
may  also  be  suspected  that  they,  who,  like  a  certain
friend  of  mine,  commemorated  in  these  pages,  en-
deavour to  solve  a  problem,  during  mesmerisation,
do  in  fact  experience  something  of  the  agency  to
which  they  oppose  such  stout  methods  of  resistance.

Let  us  but  grant  to  mesmerism  that  licence  which
we  concede  to  every  agent  upon  an  examination  of
which  we  desire  to  enter.

In  all  physical  sciences,  which  are  based  on  expe-
riment and  observation,  it  must  be  granted  that  the
most  important  phenomena  depend  for  their  repro-
duction on  the  co-presence  of  a  number  of  condi-
tions, difficult  to  be  obtained  separately,  harder  still
to  be  assembled  and  concentrated  in  one  general  re-
sult. If  this  be  true  as  regards  physical  science,  it
still  more  forcibly  applies  to  a  science  confessedly
mental  as  well  as  physical.  In  mesmerism  we  have  a
task  incomparably  more  diflScult  than  to  resolve  the
light  into  its  definite  and  primal  elements,  to  study
the  formation  of  a  crystal,  or  to  superintend  the  ac-
tion of  a  voltaic  battery ;  we  are  called  upon  to  dis-
sect the  mind  with  all  its  delicate  and  fleeting  hues,
and  to  unfold  the  caprices  and  the  varieties  of  the
human  constitution.

Under  these  circumstances,  when  a  mesmeric  phe-»


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  437

nomenon  has  been'observed,  how  many  causes,  impos'-
sible  in  the  shifting  train  of  casualties  to  be  summoned
up  at  will,  must  be  reunited  before  it  can  recur  I
The  instrument  with  which  we  have  to  deal  is  too  de-
licate to  be  calculated  upon  as  one  would  calculate
on  mathematical  certainties.  The  powers  which  we
have  to  investigate  are  amongst  the  most  occult  in
nature,  to  be  traced  only  by  a  few  of  their  scattered,
but  most  extraordinary  effects.  Add  to  this  that
observation  respecting  the  influence  in  question  is  yet
in  its  infancy ;  the  relation  between  its  forces,  whether
negative  or  positive,  is  yet  a  mystery ;  its  statics  have
not  yet  been  ascertained ;  but  yet,  and  in  spite  of  all
these  drawbacks  (and  this  is  much  to  say),  the  reader
may  gather  from  former  portions  of  this  work  that  the
irregularity  of  mesmerism  is  to  be  understood  with  a
limitation.  It  is  of  degree  rather  than  kind.  The
diversity  consists  in  the  proportion  wherein  the  agent
affects  various  persons,  —  in  the  extent  of  the  scale,
and  the  fineness  of  the  gradations,  as  they  ascend
from  effects  which  are  almost  imperceptible  to  pheno-
mena which  exhibit  the  full  mesmeric  force.  The
friends  of  mesmerism,  perhaps,  need  only  claim  for  it
the  same  experimental  patience  that  is  required  in
examining  the  properties  of  light,  where  a  cloud  that
passes  over  the  solar  rays  may  prevent  those  beautiful
appearances,  which  are  dependent  upon  their  polaris-
ation, from  captivating  the  gazer's  eye.

These  views  of  the  action  of  the  mesmeric  medium
are  not,  be  it  remembered,  presented  as  complete,
but  rather  as  such  as  are  fprced  upon  us  by  the

u  3


438  THE  MESMERIC MEDIUM.

recency  of  the  discovery,  and  the  consequently  imper-
fect state  of  observation  respecting  it.  I  have  not  for-
gotten that  the  great  agencies  of  nature  stand  in  a
two«-fold  relation  to  man,  namely,  physical  and  phy-
sico- mathematical,  and  are  therefore  csapshle  of  being,
considered  in  a  two*fold  point  of  view ;  that  is,  either
as  they  a£fect  all  men  alike,  mechanically,  or  each
man  in  a  different  manner,  constitutionally.  But  i
contaid  that  the  one  effect  is  not  less  real  than  the
other,  and  perhaps  that  which  presents  the  roost  va^-
riety  is  not  the  least  interesting  to  be  considered,
though  it  is  with  the  certain  and  the  steadfast  that
science  is  chieSy  occupied.  If,  before  the  analysis  of
the  atmosphere  had  been  complete,  and  its  laws  of
density  or  temperature  established,  a  man  had  as^
serted,  because  of  its  various  effects  on  the  various
constitutions  of  men,  that  there  was  no  atmosphere^
how  plainly  ridiculous  would  have  been  the  induc-
tion !  —  or,  if  a  pseudo-philosopher,  in  a  sort  of  fool-
ish rage  and  spite  against  himself,  were  known
formerly  to  have  renounced  as  fiat,  stale,  and  unpro-
fitable, the  study  of  the  constitutional  effects  of  the
atmosphere  upon  his  fellow-beings,  because  he  could
not  reduce  them  to  mechanical  laws,  how  manifestly
erring  and  absurd  would  his  conduct  now  appear  to
us.

Experience  of  the  past  should  teach  us  not  to  de-
spair of  seeing  the  statics  and  dynamics  of  the  mes-
meric force  plainly  laid  down.  Who,  in  the  early
periods  of  science,  would  have  ventured  to  predict  the
invention  of  a  balance,  whereby  the  magnetic  action


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  431^

could  be  reduced  to  weight  and  measure  ?  Look  at
the  history  of  magnetical  discoveries  !  What  patience
—  what  erroneous  guesses  —  what  feeble  dawnings  of
truth  —  what  lessons  of  hope  are  there  I  The  know-
ledge of  magnetical  effects  is  as  old,  at  least,  as  the
aera  of  Homer,  by  whom  they  are  distinctly  referred
to ;  but  it  is  less  than  a  century  ago  *  that  Michell
established  the  true  law  of  magnetic  action :  and  mes-
merism has  not  yet  completed  its  seventieth  year,  —
a  measure  of  existence  which  the  Psalmist  has  assigned
as  the  period  of  one  man's  life !  Is  this  a  sufficient
space  for  the  development  of  a  subject  the  most  fer-
tile and  the  most  vast,  because  the  most  intimately
connected  with  man  ?

This,  at  least,  even  in  the  present  state  of  mesmeric
science,  may  be  affirmed,  that,  considered  as  a  force,
the  agency  betrays  no  slight  indications  of  its  affinity
with  mechanical  powers,  and  that  certain  circum-
stances regarding  it  bring  to  us  nearly  a  full  con<^
viction  that  its  effects  are  dependent  on  a  certain
invariable  proportion  between  the  mesmeric  force  of
the  individual  who  dispenses,  and  that  of  him  who
submits  to  receive  the  influence.  What  that  propor-
tion is,  once  ascertained  (and  how  can  this  be  but  by
repeated  observation  ?  ),  would  reduce  mesmerism  to
a  law,  and  to  a  certainty*  Its  mental  and  remedial
effects  will  indeed  necessarily  always  continue  to  be
varied  according  to  the  character  and  temperament
of  its  patients,  but  its  purely  physical  agency  might

*  In  1750.
u  4


440  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

be  brought  within  conditions,  perhaps  narrower  and
more  simple  than  we  can  now  conceive.  Supposing
(as  some  now  deem)  the  vital  action  to  be  electric,
tliat  which  is  called  a  man's  nervous  force,  or  consti-
tution, would  depend  on  the  possession  of  a  certain
original  measure  of  the  electric  fluid.  Were  this
found  to  be  the  case  (my  idea  may  raise  a  smile),
a  neurometer,  or  instrument  to  ascertain  the  ner-
vous power  of  a  person,  might  give  to  mesmerism
the  precision  which  science  requires.  Who  would
have  thought,  at  one  time,  a  measure  of  magnetism
possible  ?

My  suggestion  may  be  deemed  absurd ;  but  this
will  not  alter  the  facts  of  mesmerism.  At  present  we
are  only  acquainted  with  the  general  result,  and  not
with  the  elements  that  compose  it;  but  this  is  no
more  a  proof  that  it  is  not  composed  of  elements,
than  the  ancient  ignorance  what  water  was  could  have
demonstrated  that  it  was  not  composed  of  two  airs  in
certain  proportions.

I  will  state  two  or  three  cases  out  of  the  many  that
have  inclined  me  to  think  that  mesmerism  is  a  ques-
tion of  proportional  force.  A  friend  of  mine  at  Cam-
bridge was  susceptible  of  being  influenced  by  myself,
but  transiently  and  imperfectly,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  he  was  at  once  and  invariably  brought  into  the
mesmeric  state  by  being  subjected  to  the  action  of  a
young  fellow-student,  who  (as  to  the  rest)  used  no
art  in  his  manipulations,  and  merely  imitated  rudely
my  proceedings  and  gestures.  Again  :  the  brother  of
a  celebrated  sculptor  at  Rome  was  dways  mesmerised


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM*.  441

by  me  in  a  few  minutes  without  difficulty,  but  to
other  influence  he  was  by  no  means  so  susceptible.
On  one  occasion,  before  a  large  party  at  Rome,  I
instructed  a  distinguished  artist  in  the  necessary
movements,  and  set  him  down  to  mesmerise  tlie  gen-*
tleman  alluded  to,  precisely  as  I  was  accustomed  to
do.  No  result,  however,  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour
had  ensued.  I  then  took  the  patient's  hands  myself,
and  in  a  very  few  minutes  he  was  thrown  into  a  deep
mesmeric  slumber.  Other  persons  tried  the  same
experiment  with  a  similar  result

E.  A.,  whom  I  could  mesmerise  in  a  few  seconds,
was  operated  upon  for  an  hour  by  another  person,
who,  in  other  cases,  had  displayed  immense  mesmeric
power,  without  experiencing  any  effect  whatever.

An  interesting  anecdote,  related  to  me  by  Dr-
Chapelain  of  Paris,  corroborates  the  above.

An  English  lady,  ^hom  he  was  treating  mes-
merically,  continued,  after  many  days,  insensible  to
his  influence.  Her  son,  a  child  of  about  ten  years  of
age,  who  was  present  while  the  doctor  mesmerised,'
exclaimed  one  day,  "  I  think  I  could  make  mamma
sleep.  Will  you  let  me  try  ?  "  Dr.  Chapelain,  curious
to  see  what  the  little  fellow  would  do,  laughingly  con-
sented. He  was  surprised  at  the  gravity  and  skill
with  which  the  boy  imitated  all  the  processes  which
he  himself  had  employed,  but  still  more  surprised  to
behold  that  in  ten  minutes  the  patient  was  thrown
into  a  mesmeric  slumber.

From  facts  like  these  we  cannot  but  conclude  that
it  is  not  the  strength  of  the  mesmeriser,  but  the  pro-

u  5


442  THE  MESMERIC MEDIUM.

portion  between  the  respective  strengths  of  mes-
ineriser  and  patient,  which  ensures  success,  and  that
the  less  or  more  on  either  side  would  indifferently
prevent  a  perfect  result.  To  ascertain  these  rela-
tions seems  to  me  to  be  the  great  end  and  object  of
research  as  regards  mesmerism  at  present.  In  this
labour,  let  us  not  be  less  active  and  enduring  than
men  of  science  have  shown  themselves  for  many  a
meaner  object.  What  can  be  so  ungrateful  a  toil  as
that  of  endeavouring  to  reduce  the  weather  to  a  l^w,
and  the  variations  of  atmospheric  temperature  to  a
certainty?  Yet  this  has  been  attempted,  and  is
attempted  still.  And  how  ?  by  the  accumulation  of
observations,  which,  since  art  is  long  and  life  is
short,  must  rather  serve  as  a  valuable  bequest  to
posterity  than  as  a  profit  to  ourselves.  All  that  we
have  yet  ascertained  on  this  point,  and  that  is  much,
is,  that  the  sum  of  each  year's  weather  and  tem-
perature is  very  nearly  alike;  that,  as  Whewell
expresses  it,  "  there  is  an  invariable  result  of  the
most  variable  quantities."  A  similar  discovery  re-
specting the  apparently  lawless  agency  of  mesmerism
will,  I  am  certain,  reward  the  perseverance  of  those
who  continue  to  observe  its  phenomena  with  honesty
and  patience.

Having  shown  that  the  mesmeric  agency  may  truly
be  ranked  amongst  physical  influences,  and  that  it
is  as  real  an  action  of  matter  as  any  other  which  is
made  known  to  us  by  visible  effects,  I  proceed  to
state  such  additional  particulars  respecting  the  agency


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM*  443

as  I  have  ascertained  by  careful  and  cautious  ex-
periment.

That  which  I  have  now  unequivocally  to  affirm  of
the  mesmeric  medium  is,  that  it  is  primarily  set  in
motion  by  the  human  mind.

I  am  aware  that,  in  asserting  this,  I  am  com*
mitting  Use  mqjesti  against  the  French  goddess  of
reason,  who  has  banished  the  mind  altogether  out  of
her  dominions ;  but  for  justification  I  must  appeal  to
a  higher  sovereign.  Truth,  namely,  under  whose  aegis
I  would,  if  possible,  take  refuge  from  the  storms
which  are  probably  brewing  against  me.  "  What !"
it  will  be  said,  "  do  you  render  your  mesmeric
agency  dependent  on  the  shifting  human  mind,  on
the  variable  human  will,  and  yet  claim  for  it  the
character  and  constancy  of  a  physical  influence?
What  power  over  physics  have  the  mind  and  will  ?
When  was  thought  ever  known  to  set  matter  in
motion  ? "  These  questions  I  dare  not  answer,  fal-
lacious though  they  be,  on  my  own  authority.  I  am
a  mesmeriser,  and  my  reasoning  will  be  suspected.
Let  me,  then,  appeal  to  the  great  intellect,  which  long
ago  and  unanswerably  solved  the  inquiry,  "  Whence
we  derive  our  ideas  of  power?"  From  Locke's
splendid  chapter  on  this  subject  I  select  as  much  as
is  necessary  for  my  purpose.

^^  Bodies,  by  our  senses,  do  not  afford  us  so  clear
and  distinct  an  idea  of  active  power  as  we  have  from
reflection  of  the  operation  of  our  minds;  for  all  power
relating  to  action,  and  there  being  but  two  sorts  of
action,  whereof  we  have  any  idea,  viz.  thinking  and

u  6


444  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

motion,  let  us  consider  whence  we  have  the  clearest
ideas  of  the  powers  which  produce  these  actions :  — >
1,  Of  thinking.  Body  affords  us  no  idea  at  at  all ;
it  is  only  from  reflection  that  we  have  that,  2.  Neither
have  we  from  body  any  idea  of  the  beginning  of  motion.
A  body  at  rest  affords  us  no  idea  of  any  active  power
to  move,  and  when  it  is  set  in  motion  itself,  that  motion
is  rather  a  passion  than  an  action  in  it ;  for  when  the
ball  obeys  the  stroke  of  a  billiard  stick,  it  is  not  any
action  of  the  ball,  but  bare  passion;  also  when,
impulse,  it  sets  another  ball  in  motion  that  lay  in  itst
way,  it  only  communicates  the  motion  it  had  received
from  another,  and  loses  in  itself  so  much  as  the
other  received,  which  gives  us  but  a  very  obscure
idea  of  an  active  power  of  moving  in  body,  whilst  we
observe  it  only  to  transfer^  but  not  produce  any
motion ;  for  it  is  but  a  very  obscure  idea  of  power
which  reaches  not  the  production  of  the  action,  but
the  continuation  of  the  passion.

*'  The  idea  of  the  beginning  of  motion  we  have  only

from  reflection  on  what  what  passes  in  ourselves^  where

we  find,  by  experience,  that  barely  by  willing  it,

barely  by  a  thought  of  the  mind,  we  can  move  the

parts  of  our  bodies,  which  were  before  at  rest. * *

**  This,  at  least,  I  think  evident,  that  we  find  in  our-
selves a  power  to  begin  or  forbear,  continue  or  end
several  actions  of  our  minds,  afid  motions  of  our  body,
barely  by  a  thought^  or  preference  of  the  mind,  order-
ing, or,  as  it  were,  commanding  the  doing,  or  not
doing  such  or  such  a  particular  action  :  —  this  power,
which  the  mind  has  thus  to  order  the  consideration


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  44$

of  any  idea,  or  the  forbearing  to  consider  it,  or  to
prefer  the  motion  of  any  part  of  the  body  to  its  rest,
and  vice  versa  in  any  particular  instance,  is  that  which
we  call  the  wilL"

If  we  allow  (and  how  can  we  deny?)  the  truth  of
the  above  reflections,  we  must  perceive  that  not
merely  our  very  idea  of  motion  is  derived  from  the
mind's  operations,  but  liiat  reasoning,  as  alone  we
can  reason,  from  what  we  know,  we  must  conclude
that  all  motion  whatever  originates  with  mind  and
with  mind  alone.  And  why  start  at  the  notion  that  the
mind,  in  mesmerism,  is  the  acting  force  ?  Do  we
know  any  other  ?  Mind  and  motion,  as  cause  and
consequence,  are  indissolubly  connected,  the  only
real  antecedent  and  consequent  that  can  be  shown  in
perfect  juxtaposition,  and  demonstrated  to  us  truly
by  our  self-consciousness.  Besides,  shall  we,  who
may  be  said  to  create  to  ourselves  all  we  see  by
thought,  doubt  of  the  power  of  the  human  mind  ?
One  should  think  that,  above  all  persons,  the  man  of
science,  who  bases  all  mechanics  on  the  principle  of
the  inertia  of  matter,  and  yet  cannot  but  admit  "  that
there  is  probably  no  portion  of  inorganic  matter  that
is  not  in  a  state  of  relative  motion,'*  must  be  aware  of
the  necessity  of  quite  another  than  a  material  force  to
produce  all  this  action  in  naturally  quiescent  bodies.
Even  Descartes  (as  Pascal  says)  was  forced  to  bring
in  God  to  set  the  world  in  motion,  though,  had  it
been  feasible,  he  would  have  shoved  him  altogether
out  of  his  philosophy.  The  principle  once  admitted
that  motion  originates  with  mind,  it  is  plain  that  such


446  THE MESM£tlIC  MEDIUM.

motions  as  occur  in  the  mesmeric  medium,  and  are
thence  transferred  to  a  human  body,  are  primarily
produced  by  mind ; — in  other  words,  by  will.

Why  should  we  be  startled  at  the  expression  ?  Is
the  will  a  nullity  ?  Has  it  no  force,  no  prerogatives  ?
Let  us  consider  what  every  day  and  every  hour  our
will  effects,  merely  in  controlling  and  wielding  matter.
How  accurately  we  move  th^  complicated  mechanism
of  our  limbs,  through  the  injpulsions  of  our  volition  !
The  least  disobedience  or  want  of  pliability  on  their
part  would  mar  the  slightest  of  our  bodily  actions*
Let  us,  with  Dr.  Maculloch,  take  the  cases  of  archery
and  slinging.  **  It  requires  little  reflection  to  see
that,  under  the  complicated  action  of  so  many  muscles,
the  problem  to  be  solved  is  so  intricate  that^o  mathe-
matician could  ever  hope  to  assign  what  was  neces-
sary to  produce  a  result,  which  it  as  certainly  as  it  is
rapidly  affected,  without  any  calculation. * *

**  But  the  precision  of  muscular  action  becomes  much
more  wonderfiil  when  we  refer  to  the  cause,  and  ask
in  what  manner  a  definite  quantity  of  cohesive  at-
traction and  also  various  definite  and  unequal  quan-
tities in  succession  can  be  transmitted  through  a  nerve^
while  this  too  is  done  by  an  act  of  the  will,  yet  of
will  merely  knowing  what  it  desires,  not  what  it  per-
forms." *

Our  knowledge  that  the  will  acts,  yet  our  ignorance
how  it  acts,  on  matter,  should  prepare  us  to  receive,
without  a  dogmatic  denial  at  least,  proofs  of  an  exten-

*  Dr.  Macullocby  on  the  Attributes  of  God.


\


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  447

sion  in  its  capacities  and  its  sphere.  If,  in  some
mysterious  way,  I  actuate  another,  it  is  scarcely  more
wonderful  than  that  I  actuate  myself.  It  is  true  that
the  latter  comes  within  the  range  of  my  every  day
experience;  but  can  I  any  more  comprehend  it?

How  great  a  force  the  will  either  has,  or  wields,
may  be  almost  measured  off  to  our  senses  in  a  very
simple  but  striking  manner.

Let  two  covered  vessels  precisely  alike,  the  one
empty,  the  other  full  of  some  heavy  substance,  such
as  leaden  bullets,  be  placed  before  a  person.  Let
him  first  lift  the  full  vessel,  and  let  him  then  be  told
to  raisie  the  empty  one,  with  an  understanding  that
it  is  of  equal  weight  with  the  first.  The  person  do*
ing  this  will  put  into  the  action  so  much  unnecessary
force,  from  the  expectation  of  being  about  to  lift  a
great  weight,  that  his  baffled  vigour  will,  in  its  re-
action, cause  quite  a  painful  concussion  in  the  mus-
cles of  the  arm.  Now,  could  that  force,  which,  as  it
were,  returns  upon  himself,  be  directed  outwards,  it
is  plain  that  it  might  produce  a  very  powerful  and
peculiar  action  in  the  media  wherewith  we  are  sur-
rounded. And  wherefore  not  directed  outwards?
This  at  least  we  know,  that  the  will  is  really  the
primary  agent  which  enables  us  to  move  all  bodies
foreign  to  and  apart  from  ourselves.  In  these  cases,
indeed,  it  acts  through  intermediate  agencies  which
are  visible  to  us.  But  there  is  nothing  whatever  to
render  it  impossible  that  the  mind  should  act  some-
times by  unseen,  yet  even  more  potent  intermediaries
than  the  accustomed. After  all,  what  astonishes  us


448  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

in  mesmerism  is  not  that  the  mind  is  shown  capable
of  producing  motion,  but  that  it  is  exhibited  produc-
ing motion  in  a  different  way,  as  we  conceive,  from
tliat  with  which  our  experience  is  familiar. That
the  mind  should  originate  a  series  of  motions  of  which
we  cannot  behold  certain  of  the  intervening  links  (I
speak  of  cases  in  which  the  mesmeriser  influences  his
patient  from  a  distance),  —  this  is  the  true  ground  of
oiu"  wonder  and  incredulity. Yet,  in  fact,  the  very
same  thing  occurs in our  commonest experience.
When  I  move  one  of  my  fingers,  I  am  only  acquainted
with  the  first  fact  and  the  last  in  a  sequence  of  events,
the  intermediate  circumstances  of  which  are  hidden
from  my  knowledge,  and  which  are,  probably,  very
numerous. Some  of  the  hidden  links  in  the  series  I
know  from  reason. From  the  anatomist  I  learn,  that
my  mind,  in  the  first  instance,  moves  a  portion  of  my
brain  (for  certain  injuries  to  the  brain  render  volun-
tary motion  impossible) ;  that  this  again  communicates
an  impulse  to  a  nerve  —  (for  cut  the  nerve  and  the
impulse  reaches  not  the  muscle)  that  then  again  a
muscle  is  moved,  and  finally  the  finger. The  sim-r
plest  voluntarily  motion,  then, is  but  an  impulse,
originating  with  mind  in  the  first  place,  and  thence
transferred  through  a  series  of  atoms. There  is  a
sequence  of  changes,  nothing  more ;  some  of  which
are  known  to  iis  —  others  not. There  is  (to  use  the
language  of  Locke)  but  one  real  action,  yet  many
passions,  or  communicated  motions. And  what  is
mesmerism  but  this  ? The  same  definition  suits  mo-
tion whether  produced  mesmerically,  or normally.


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  449

The  same  circumstances  attend  both.  Again,  even
should  we  pursue  motion  beyond  the  limits  of  our
own  bodies,  we  shall  find  that  there  are  invisible  links
in  all  the  impulsions  which  we  communicate  to  mat-
ter. The  philosopher  knows  that  we  are  not  in  real
contact  with  anything  which  we  appear  to  touch  —
that  there  is  always  something  invisible  between  us
and  the  object  that  we  handle.

Again :  do  I  not,  by  every  motion  of  my  body,
change  the  relative  position  of  the  atoms  of  the  media
that  surround  me  ?  Do  I  not  displace  the  air,  cause
various  motion  in  the  waves  of  light,  and  influence
nature  to  a  distance  around  me,  which  it  were  vain
to  attempt  to  calculate  ?  The  wonder,  then,  seems
to  be  —  not  that  the  mind  should  produce  changes
in  surrounding  objects  —  but  that,  being  itself  "  the
fountain-head  of  motion,"  it  should  not  move  matter
more  forcibly  and  generally.  Doubtless  it  would  be
so,  had  not  the  all-wise  Ruler  of  creation  confined  the
human  mind  within  necessary  limits.  Could  the  will
sway  the  material  as  it  does  the  immaterial  world,
what  bounds  would  there  be  to  the  tyrant's  caprice,
to  the  conqueror's  ambition  ?  Mountains  would
crumble  as  a  dream,  and  oceans  be  dried  up  at  our
bidding.  A  Napoleon  would  "  make  a  sop  of  all  the
solid  globe."  These  ideas  are  not  so  extravagant  as
his  who  doubts  of  the  power  of  the  human  will.  By
that  alone  we  do  great  things ;  by  that  alone  we  con-
quer kingdoms,  or  ourselves ;  by  that  alone  we  achieve
the  hourly  miracle  of  moving  matter,  united  with,  or
extraneous  to  ourselves. Is  the  will,  then,  a  nullity.


450  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

whose  influence  is  to  be  excluded  from  our  consider-
ation when  we  treat  on  any  subject  which  nearly
concerns  man  ?

Let  us  now  proceed,  perhaps  with  fewer  prejudices,
to  consider  the  proofs  before  us,  that  in  mesmerism  it
is  the  mind  which  originates  the  impulse.  It  is  true
that,  in  general  cases,  the  mesmeriser  employs  visible
and  physical  means  to  produce  his  effects.  He  is
either  placed  in  contact  with  the  person  he  desires  to
influence,  or  he  makes  use  of  certain  looks  and  ges^
tures,  which,  to  those  who  regard  only  the  superficial
and  the  visible,  may  appear  to  be  the  moving  causes
of  the  impression  produced  on  the  other  person.  But
let  us  remember  that  even  the  most  careless  of  our
looks  and  gestures  do  really  spring  from  mind  and
will,  acting,  indeed,  with  various  degrees  of  force,
yet  still  always  with  a  certain  force.  Now  even  as
respects  these  outward  manifestations  of  an  acting
mind,  I  have  invariably  found  that  mesmeric  effects
were  always  in  exact  proportion  to  the  degree  of
voluntary  effort  I  put  into  the  performance.  This
was  more  especially  the  case  as  regarded  the  action
of  the  eye.  When  my  patient's  eyes  were  closed,  and
he  therefore  had  no  means  of  knowing  what  I  was
about,  I  have  still  found  that,  the  more  of  active  gaziny
I  employed,  the  greater  was  the  effect  produced.  The
necessity  of  giving  an  undivided  attention  to  my  work
was,  of  course,  most  palpable  in  the  first  few  times  of
mesmerising  a  person ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  more
the  patient's  sensibility  was  developed  under  success
&ive  mesmerisation,  the  less  force  he  would  require


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  451

to  be  used  in  influencing  him ;  consequently  the  less
mental  effort  would  be  required  on  my  part.  This
is  a  remark  to  which  it  is  of  importance  to  attend,  for
some  persons  in  very  advanced  stages  of  mesmeric
sensibility  will  be  affected  by  gestures  in  which  the
mind  of  the  performer  would  seem  to  have  little  share;
that  it  can  have  no  share  therein  I  trust  I  have  de-
monstrated to  be  impossible.

Yet  even  when  acting  on  a  patient  so  accustomed
to  my  influence  as  was  E.  A.,  I  found  that  I  by  no
means  mesmerised  him  so  well  as  usual  on  days  when
my  mind  was  preoccupied  with  other  matters.  He
was  himself  peculiarly  sensitive  to  any  remission  of
my  attention  towards  him,  and  would  frequently  say
to  me  (and  always  with  justice),  "You  are  not  think-
ing of  me  just  now."  The  poor  blind  German  boy
used  similarly,  and  with  equal  correctness,  to  complain
of  my  ceasing  to  influence  him  properly;  and  this,
from  the  absence  of  one  of  his  senses,  and  that  the
most  observant,  is  testimony  the  more  remarkable
and  uncorrupted.

A  very  certain  proof  that,  when  attention  remits,
there  is  a  remission  also  of  mesmeric  power,  was
afforded  me  also  in  the  course  of  some  experiments,
which  Professor  Agassiz,  of  Neufchatel,  permitted  me
to  try  upon  himself.  In  these  I  was  of  course  pecu-
liarly desirous  of  concentrating  all  my  atteiuion  upon
the  effects  to  be  produced  on  a  man  of  learning  and
of  science.  The  very  circumstances  of  the  case  com-
pelled me  to  exert  my  mind  in  an  undivided  manner.
But  one  evening  tlie  non-arrival  of  expected  letters


452  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

from  home  forced  me  into  another  train  of  feeling,
and,  during  the  mesmeric  processes,  I  could  not  pre-
vent my  thoughts  from  occasionally  straying  from  the
scene  before  me  into  anxious  surmises  as  to  the  cause
of  the  silence  of  my  friends.  My  patient,  although
he  had  his  eyes  closed,  and  his  limbs  paralysed  in  the
torpor  of  the  mesmeric  slumber,  was  not  slow  to  per-
ceive the  wanderings  of  my  attention,  and,  although
I  was  at  the  time  engaged  in  the  mesmeric  processes,
to  all  outward  appearance  as  actively  as  usual,  called
out  to  me  constantly  and  coincidently  with  the  remis*
sion  of  my  thoughts — "  You  influence  me  no  longer^
You  are  not  exerting  yourself."

On  another  occasion  1  was  convinced  in  a  manner
the  most  odd,  and  even  comic,  how  great  is  the  in-
fluence of  the  will  in  directing  the  impulses  of  the
mesmeric  medium.  I  should  hesitate  about  relating
the  story  were  it  not  that,  in  a  new  science,  every
thing  has  its  importance,  and  the  least  studied  eflFects
are  often  the  most  valuable  and  sure.  Travelling  in
a  stage  coach  in  England,  with  three  other  inside
passengers  (one  of  them  a  Cambridge  friend,  to
whom  I  can  appeal  for  the  truth  of  the  relation),  I
fell  into  the  following  train  of  thought:  "  If  mes-
meric effects  occur  only  through  certain  contact  and
gestures,  why  is  it  that  men  never  mesmerise  each
other  unawares  ?  At  a  public  meeting,  in  a  church,
in  a  theatre,  in  all  places  where  human  beings  con-
gregate, there  is  plenty  of  the  mesmeric  influence
going  about  unappropriated.  Why  is  it  that  this
does  not  take  effect,  and  that  no  one  should  sleep  in


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  453

such  circumstances,  unless  the  orators  are  prosy,  and
the  play  stupid  enough  to  act  as  a  soporific  ?  Surely
this  is  because  the  influence  requires  a  will  to  con-
centrate it  and  to  give  it  a  particular  direction,  before
it  can  individually  operate.  Now,  here  am  I,  in  a
most  favourable  position  for  mesmerising  the  person
opposite  to  me.  His  knees  and  feet  are  in  contact
with  mine  —  in  the  true  mesmeric  position.  At  pre-
sent he  does  not  look  sleepy  in  the  least  f  and  up  to
the  present  moment  the  idea  of  mesmerising  him
has  not  entered  my  head.  Let  me  see  if  this  want  of
the  idea  is  the  true  cause  why  I  have  not  hitherto
affected  him.  If,  by  a  silent  exertion  of  my  will,  I
can  now,  from  wide  awake,  bring  him  fast  asleep  in  a
very  short  period,  the  relation  between  cause  and  effect
will  be,  I  think,  pretty  well  established."  "  Sur  ces
entrefaites,"  as  the  French  say,  I  began  mentally  to
exert  my  volition,  and  to  fix  my  attention  on  my  un-
conscious patient.  From  time  to  time  I  looked  at
him  mesmerically,  but  watched  my  opportunity,
when  his  own  attention,  being  turned  elsewhere,  per-
mitted me  to  stare  at  him,  without  the  fear  of  being
challenged.  In  about  ten  minutes  the  charm  began
to  operate.  My  victim's  eyes  kept  reverting  uncon-
sciously, as  it  were,  to  my  face,  which,  however,  I
turned  away  whenever  I  saw  him  looking  at  me,  and
at  length  he  began  to  shut  them  with  that  slow  and
peculiar  motion  which  is  indicative  of  mesmerisation.
They  did  not,  however,  close,  but  remained  more
than  half  open,  becoming  perfectly  fixed,  and,  as  it
were,  dead,  displaying  the  whites  in  a  manner  which


454  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

by  no  means  contributed  to  embellish  a  physiognomy
naturally  none  of  the  handsomest.

Behold,  then,  my  man  asleep ;  so  soundly,  indeed,
that  the  coach  stopped,  and horses  were  changed
without  his  being  in  any  way  disturbed  from  his
mesmeric  nap. When  we  were  again  in  motion  I
b^an  to  be  agitated  by  some  strange  doubts,  whether
my  will  would  be  found  as  effectual  to  end,  as it
had  been  to  create,  the  spell  which  held  the  slum-
berer,  who  always  remained  in  the  same  position  as
at  first,  with  his  eyes  more  dead  than  ever. As  I  had
soon  to quit  the  coach,  I really feared that  my
sleeper,  unawakened,  might  follow  me,  attached  by
mesmeric  attraction,  to  ray  side. The  question  of
the will's supremacy  was  now  to  be  tried  to  the
utmost. First,  without  any  effort  of  volition  directed
to  the  end  of  awakening  may  patient,  I  stirred  about,
spoke  loud,  and  let  down  the  window  next  me  with
a  rattle ;  my  fellow-passenger  did  not  awake.  I  then,
concentrating  my  will  on  the  one  idea  of  dissipating
the mesmeric  influence,  leant  forward  with  some-
thing of  that  motion  of  my  hands  which,  in  usual
circumstances,  accompanied  the  idea. Immediately
my  patient  began  to  stir,  move  his  eyes,  and  rub
them,  staring  still  rather  wildly,  and  in  a  confused
manner  muttering  that  he  really  thought  he must
have  been  asleep.

I  now  proceed  to  relate  some  more  serious  ex-
periments, tried  at  Antwerp,  on  Anna  M ,  re-
lating to  the  influence  of  thought  and  will  on  the


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  455

mesmeric  medium,  and  its  power  of  communicating
impulses  to  a  distance.

The  patient  just  mentioned  was,  it  will  be  re-
membered, in  a  state  of  mesmeric  sensibility  and
relation  with  myself,  which  successive  mesmerisings
had  carried  to  a  very  high  pitch. Yet  by  my  mere

bodily  presence  Anna  M was  in  no  way  aifected.

Unless  I  mesmerised  her  with  intention,  no  effect
was  produced.  Never  had  I  led  her  to  conceive  it
possible  that  I  could  mesmerise  her  in  any  than  the
usual  way,  that  is,  by  contact  and  gestures.  She  had
never  read  any  books  on  mesmerism.  She  had  no
preconceived  notions  on  the  subject.  All  being  thus
propitious  to  the  essay  of  a  pure  experiment,  I  con-
certed  with  my  family  what  was  to  be  done  on  a

certain  evening,  when  Anna  M was  coming  to

drink  tea  with  us.  According  to  our  arrangements,  I
pretended  to  leave  the  room,  while  Anna  M—  was
engaged  in  conversation  with  my  wife  on  a  so&  near
the  fire ;  but  taking  advantage  of  a  large  screen  that
hid  the  door  entirely  fi'om  view,  and  which  had
always  stood  in  the  same  place  —  that  is  at  the  very
farther  end  of  an  apartment  twenty-six  feet  in  length
—  I  shut  myself  into  the  room  instead  of  out  of  it.  I
then  tried  to  concentrate  my  thoughts  on  my  sleep-
waker,  and  to  mesmerise  mentally.  At  first  I  found
this  diflScult,  but  at  length  I  succeeded  in  bringing
myself  into  the  same  frame  and  action  of  mind  which
usually  accompanied  my  emplo3anent  of  outward
means,  when  mesmerising.  Then,  and  not  till  then,
I  suddenly  heard  Anna  M (breaking  off  in  the


456  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

very  midst  of  an  animated  conversation)  exclaim  —
"  Oh,  where  is  he  ?  What  is  he  doing  ?  "  Directly
after,  the  concerted  signal,  which  was  to  inform  me
that  my  patient  slept,  was  given;  and,  advancing
into  the  room,  I  saw  Anna  M— —  as  completely
mesmerised  as  ever  she  had  been  by  contact  and
gestures.  In  the  notes  taken  at  the  time,  by  one  of
our  party,  of  this  transaction,  I  find,  that,  after  this,
the  patient's  first  words  were,  —

P.  —  "  Why  did  you  go  ?  You  only  wanted  to  de-


ceive me."


M.  —  "  Only  to  magnetise  you  from  a  distance."

P.  —  "  Yes.  You  can  magnetise  me  now  from  any
distance.*'

Anxious  to  try  a  second  experiment  of  the  same
nature  with  the  above,  yet  aware  that,  if  i  took  the
same  means,  the  experiment  could  not  be  pure  (since
the  patient  forewarned  might,  on  my  apparently
leaving  the  room,  imagine  me  still  in  the  apartment),
I  agreed  again  on  certain  measures  with  my  family,
which  took  effect  as  follows :  —

After  the  interval  of  a  few  days,  during  which  I
mesmerised  Anna  occasionally  in  the  usual  manner,
I,  on  her  coming  one  evening  to  see  us,  was  found
deeply  absorbed  over  a  volume  of  Wordsworth's
poems ;  which,  after  the  first  greetings  were  over,  I
continued  to  read,  while  Anna  was  busily  imparting
to  her  kind  friend,  my  wife,  all  her  little  plans  for
bettering  the  condition  of  her  family  —  her  hopes
and  fears  for  the  coming  winter.  While  this  went
on  I  was  trying  to  withdraw  my  mind  from  the  book,


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  457

mi  which  my  eyes,  shaded  by  my  hand,  were  fixed,
and  to  concentrate  my  thoughts  on  my  patient.  This,
however,  was  no  easy  task ;  Wordsworth  is  not  an
author  to  be  quitted  with  indifference.  At  length,
by  dint  of  repeated  efforts,  I  acquired  the  proper
frame  of  mind  for  mesmerising;  and,  coincidently
with  my  success,  Anna,  as  before,  suddenly  broke  off
in  the  midst  of  a  sentence,  and  exclaimed  *^  Oh,  he's
magnetising  me ! "  (we  called  the  thing  then  by  its
old  name) — falling  back  at  the  same  time  on  the
sofa  in  a  profound  mesmeric  slumber.

The  third  trial  that  I  made  to  mesmerise  this  pa-
tient from  a  distance  was  still  more  remarkable  and
decisive.

One  evening,  when  sitting  with  my  family,  the
idea  occurred  to  me,  —  "  Could  I  mesmerise  Anna

M there,  as  I  then  was,  while  she  was  in  her  own

house?"  to  which  I  knew  she  was  just  then  confined
by  slight  indisposition.  Acting  on  this  thought,  I
begged  all  the  party  present  to  note  the  hour  (it  was
exactly  nine  o'clock),  and  to  bear  me  witness  that
then  and  there  I  attempted  a  mesmeric  experiment.

This  time  I  endeavoured  to  bring  before  my  ima-
gination very  vividly  the  person  of  my  sleepwaker,
and  even  aided  the  concentration  of  my  thoughts  by
the  usual  mesmeric  gestures ;  I  also,  at  the  end  of  an
hour,  said,  "  I  will  now  awake  Anna,"  and  used  ap-
propriate gestures.  We  now  awaited  with  more
curiosity  than  confidence  the  result  of  this  process.

The  following  morning  Anna  made  her  appear-
ance, just  as  we  were  at  breakfast,  exclaiming  *^  Oh,

X


458  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.*

sir !  did  you  magnetise  me  last  night  ?  About  nine
o'clock  I  fell  asleep,  and  mother  and  sisters  say  they
could  not  wake  me  with  all  their  shaking  of  me^  and
they  were  quite  frightened ;  but  after  an  hour  I  woke
of  myself;  and  I  think  from  all  this  that  my  sleep
must  have  been  magnetic.  It  also  did  me  a  great
deal  of  good,  for  I  felt  quite  recovered  from  my  cold
^fter  it.  After  a  natural  sleep  I  never  feel  so  much
refreshed.  When  I  sleep  for  an  hour  in  magnetism,
it  is  as  if  I  had  rested  a  whole  night." These  were

the  words  of  Anna  M ,  noted  down  at  the  time

as  accurately  as  possible.

Unless  the  reader  will  do  me  the  honour  to  believe
that  I  tricked  my  family,  and  was  in  concert  with  a
poor  honest-hearted  girl  to  deceive  every  one,  I  know
not  what  he  can  say  to  statements  such  as  the  above.
They  are  facts,  to  the  accuracy  of  which  more  than
one  person,  will  pledge  all  the  credit  of  their  in-
tegrity.

To  me,  who  think  at  least  that  I  behold  clearly
the  principle  of  mesmerism,  they  appear  not  so  won-
drous, as  doubdess  to  those  who  have  not  yet  thought
out  the  subject  they  will  and  must  appear.  Impulses
conveyed  to  a  distance  cease  to  be  miracles  the  mo-
ment there  is  a  communicating  medium  made  visible.
That  news  should  be  conveyed  from  Dover  to  York  in  a
few  seconds  may  seem  a  mighty  marvel  to  the  ignorant ;
but  to  those  who  are  aware  of  the  nature  of  the  tele-
graph, a  mere  common  occurrence.  Let  us  not  be
so  near  the  vulgar  as  to  be  astonished  at  effects  from
causes  to  us  invisible;  let  us  not  gape  at  the  ascend-


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  459

ing  or  descending  deities,  as  if  they  really  floated  in
the  air,  only  because  our  vision  cannot  detect  the
strings  and  wires  by  which  they  are  guided  and  sup-
ported. The  mechanism  once  revealed  to  reason's
eye»  everything  appears  easy  and  natural.  But,  if
we  only  rest  in  what  we  see^  we  must  live  in  wonder
and  perish  in  our  ignorance.

The  following  considerations  may  tend  to  reconcile
us  to  the  phenomenon  of  thought  giving  tendency  to
matter,  and  propagating  its  impulses  to  a  distance.

Mental  action  produces  motion  in  the  brain,  for
the  sensible  fatigue  in  that  organ,  consequent  upon
intense  thinking,  proves  that  during  thought  it  has
been  exercised  in  a  real  and  physical  manner.  The
materialist  even  will  confess  this,  and  more  energeti-
cally, for  he  will  affirm  that  motions  of  the  brain  pro^
duce  thought.  Let  it  be  so,  if  he  will ;  that  makes
no  difference  in  our  argument.  Motion  of  the  brain
is  still,  and  under  all  circumstances,  allowed  to  be  the
accompaniment  of  thought,  either  as  its  antecedent  or
consequent.  Gan  that  motion  be  possibly  insulated
amidst  the  connected  mechanism  of  the  universe,
where  one  thing  hinges  on  another,  and  where  the
touching  of  a  single  spring  is  but  the  commencement
of  a  series  of  actions  ("wheel  within  wheel  involved"),
which  may  reach  to  the  throne  of  Omnipotence  itself?
Can  any  one  motion  live  to  itself  alone,  die  where  it
was  born,  and  be  bounded  by  the  substance  in  which
it  has  originated  ?

Granting  that,  which  few  will,  in  the  present  day
be  disposed  to  deny,  that  there  is  one  pervading  me-

X  2


460  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.'

dium  throughout  nature,  infinitely  elastic  and  impresH
sionable,  it  follows,  as  a  consequence,  that  our  thoughts
must  necessarily,  in  agitating  the  brain,  agitate  alsa
the  great  ocean  in  which  animate  and  inanimate  mat-
ter has  its  being,  with  which  we  are  in  partial  rela«*
tion,  with  which  God  is  in  infinite  relation.

Let  philosophers  pursue  their  own  views  to  their
termination,  and  subscribe  to  the  consequences  of
their  own  theories,  and  I  shall  be  content.  He  wbd
adopts  the  undulatory  hypothesis,  and  contends  for
the  existence  of  a  pervading  ether,  is  already  more
than  half  way  on  his  road  to  mesmerism.

These  reflections  may  serve  to  introduce  another
class  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  which  appear  miracu-
lous only  when  insulated  and  taken  apart  from  the
proposition  that  Mind  must  in  its  every  action  impress
a  certain  motion  on  surrounding  matter.

It  has  been  said  that  persons  in  certain  states,^
either  mesmeric  or  akin  to  the  mesmeric,  can  become
aware  of  the  thoughts  of  others  without  the  usual
communication  of  speech.  Bertrand,  who  (be  it  re-
membered) wrote  against  mesmerism  in  the  later
years  of  his  life,  relates  an  amusing  story  to  this
effect,  a  story  in  which  he  professes  his  full  belief,  for
he  knew  the  parties  concerned  in  it :  —  A  little  girl
of  about  ten  years  of  age  fell  into  a  singular  state  of
abnormal  sensibility.  In  her  fits  of  auto-mesmerism,
she  alai'med  her  family  by  proclaiming  aloud  to  them
all  the  subjects  of  their  thoughts.  She  would  say  to
her  sister,  "You  are  now  meditating  whether  you
should  or  should  not  go  to  such  a  place,  to  meet  such


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  461

fi  person  ;  I  advise  you  to  stay  quietly  at  borne ;  "  or,
to  her  mother,  ^*  Do  not  ponder  why  papa  stays  out
so  late ;  it  will  do  you  no  good."  These  revelations
were  at  times  not  a  little  awkward  and  mal-apropos,
and  so  the  poor  little  girl  was  not  thanked  for  her
discernment,  but  voted  to  be  under  the  influence  of  a
deluding  and  wicked  spirit.  For  the  purpose  of  ex-
orcising this  familiar,  so  much  more  malevolent  than
that  of  Socrates,  the  young  patient  was  committed  to
the  care  of  a  pious  community  of  nuns,  with  directions
that  much  prayer  and  holy  water  should  be  spent
upon  her ;  but,  in  the  convent,  matters  went  on  much
worse.  The  holy  water  threw  the  patient  into  con-
vulsions, and  (still  more  horrible)  whenever  a  metal
cross  was  laid  on  her  breast,  she  threw  the  precious
ensign  of  redemption  from  her  with  symptoms  of  the
greatest  aversion.  The  pious  sisterhood,  though  not
aware  of  the  fact  that  the  touch  of  metal  powerfully
influences  persons  in  certain  states  of  sensibility,  hap-
pened, however,  to  exchange  the  metal  cross  for  one
of  wood,  which,  having  been  blessed  by  the  pope,  was
supposed  to  be  of  peculiar  efficacy ;  and,  lo  !  in  proof
of  that  efficacy,  the  little  girl  allowed  the  relic  to  re-
main quietly  on  her  breast.  This  was  a  most  favour-
able omen ;  but,  alas  !  the  evil  spirit  was  not  to  be
thus  tamed  !  —  the  great,  the  terrible  symptom  of
diabolic  agency  broke  out  in  fresh  vigour ;  for  the
patient  began  to  proclaim  the  thoughts  of  those
around  her.  When  irritated  by  the  kind  but  mistaken
oflSciousness  of  the  nuns,  she  was  especially  formidable
in  that  way,  so  formidable,  indeed,  that  at  length  she

X  3


462  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

completely  controlled  and  governed  the  saintly  conr-
munity*  "  Sister  Agatha,"  she  would  exclaim,  **you
had  better  not  bring  that  cross  here,  or  I  '11  tell  why
it  was  you  nailed  your  ear  so  close  to  the  key-hole  of
the  abbess's  parlour."  "  Sister  Ursula,  do  not  force
me  to  say  any  more  paternosters,  or  all  the  world
shall  know  what  you  were  thinking  of  in  your  cell
last  Tuesday/'

Now  this  phenomenon  of  thought-reading  has  been
observed  by  me,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  some  of  my
mesmeric  patients.

The  first  occasion  of  my  remarking  it  was  in  con-
sequence of  an  accidental  occurrence  —  for,  in  truth,
I  have  never  souffht  for  marvels  in  mesmerism;,  if
marvels  I  have  to  relate,  they  have  presented  them-
selves naturally  to  my  notice. E.  A.,  when  in  his
normal  state,  used  sometimes  to  exhibit  a  trick  on  the
cards,  which  consists  in  a  long  and  rather  tedious
process  of  arranging  a  certain  number  of  cards  ac-
cording to  the  letters  of  certain  words,  and  then,  by
the  correspondence  of  the  letters,  discovering  any  two
cards  which  may  have  been  chosen  by  another  per-
son. I  was  curious  to  observe  whether  my  sleep-
waker  retained  enough  of  his  calculating  and  com-
bining powers  in  the  mesmeric  state  to  go  through
this  trick  as  usual,  and  I  therefore  asked  a  lady,  who
happened  to  be  present one day  when  E.  A.  was
mesmerised,  to  choose  two  cards  from  amongst  the
little packets of  pairs,  which the sleepwaker had
already  placed  in  proper  order  on  the  table. The
lady  chose  the  cards  by  her  eye  only,  in  perfect


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM^  463

silence  and  standing  behind  the  sleepwaker,  so  that
there  was  absohitely  nothing  of  word  or  gesture  to
guide  him  in  his  subsequent  discoverji  He  began  to
gather  up  the  cards  as  usual  preparatory  to  com>-
pleting  the  trick,  when  suddenly  he  threw  them  down
with  an  air  of  disgust,  saying  words  to  this  effect :— ^
*'Why  should  I  go  through  this  farce?  I  know
already  the  two  cards  which  the  lady  thought  of.
They  were  so  and  so."  He  was  perfectly  right.
Another  time^  a  little  basket,  brought  in  by  my  wife
during  his  sleepwaking,  was  standing  on  a  table  near
him.  He  took  it  up  and  considered  it  (always  with
his  eyes  shut),  and  said  to  my  wife,  "Ah,  you  are
thinking  now  of  making  this  a  present  to  Mr.  V.  O.'s
little  girl."  This  was  quite  true*  Again  s  I  asked
the  same  sleepwaker  in  his  state  of  mesmerism,  if  he
knew  of  any  application  which  would  strengthen  his
eyes  —  then  weak.  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  something  of
which  you  have  been  thinking — a  wash,  for  the  pre-
scription of  which  you  Wrote  to  a  physician  in  Paris
not  long  ago  for  the  use  of  a  friend  of  yours."  He
spoke  correctly;  and  I  declare  most  positively  that
the  sleepwaker  had  no  means  whatever  of  knowing
the  facts  he  stated,  except  through  the  medium  of  my
own  thoughts.

Anna  M occasionally  manifested  phenomena

similar  to  the  above,  and  (woman-like,  perhaps)  ac-
companied them  by  a  far  more  delicate  and  accurate
perception  of  the  state  of  my  feelings,  at  such  times
as  she  was  placed  in  mesmeric  relation  to  myself,
l^requently  she  has  surprised  me  by  the  manner  in

X  4


464  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM^

which  she  anticipated,  on  these  occasions,  my  wishes
with  regard  to  any  little  experiment  I  desired  to
make.  "  Come,"  she  would  say,  "  you  are  now  wish-
ing that  I  should  do  a  piece  of  needle-work..  I  own
just  now  it  is  rather  a  trouble  to  me,  but  I  will  do  it
notwithstanding."

In  my  notes  relative  to  the  same  period  I  find  the
following  fact  mentioned. A  musician,  with  whose

name  or  person  Anna  M was  not  in  the  least

acquainted,  was  in  the  room  during  her  sleepwaking
—  February  16  th,  1838,  Not  a  word  had  been
spoken  about  music;  all  present  were  engaged  in
observing  the  sleepwaker^  when  suddenly  she  said  to
me,  "  You  know  there  is  a  gentleman  here  who  sings
and  plays  very  well.  You  were  wishing  a  while  ago
to  ask  him  to  sit  down  to  the  piano.  You  must  ask
him  now,  and,  when  he  is  playing,  lay  one  of  your
hands  on  his  shoulder,  and  the  other  on  mine,  and  I
shall  hear  the  music  too."

These  phenomena,  as  I  have  said,  were  manifested,
not  Jbrcedj  and  I  had  occasion  to  observe  that,  like  all
other  phenomena  pertaining  to  mind,  they  were  best
exhibited  when  most  spontaneously  exhibited.  At-
tempts to  elicit  them  in  any  other  manner  generally
failed.  Once,  standing  near  Anna  M I  ad-
dressed to  her  a  sentence  mentally,  but  she  did  not
comprehend  it,  though,  that  I  wished  to  say  some->
thing  to  her  and  that  there  was  an  action  of  my
mind,  she  manifested  knowledge.  Her  words  on  this
occasion  were  remarkable.  "  Why  do  you  speak  so
low, sir  ? Speak  louder, that  I  may  hear  you  I  **


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM;  465

Now,  be  it  remembered,  I  had  not  spoken  at  all,  nor
given  her  to  understand,  in  any  way,  that  I  was  ^bout
to  address  any  thing  to  her.

One  experiment,  however,  of  this  nature,  was
almost  invariably  successful.  If  I  mentally  ran  over
a  tune  in  my  head,  Anna  would  immediately  begin
to  beat  time,  and  sway  her  head  about  in  the  mea-.
sure  of  the  air.  Anxious  to  have  a  correct  witness
of  the  experiment,  I  agreed  with  a  musician  that  at  a
certain  silent  signal  I  should  begin  mentally  to  re-
peat an  air,  and,  at  another  signal,  change  the  air
and  measure  from  slow  to  fast.  I  made  the  musician
acquainted  with  both  the  airs  before-hand,  in  order
that  he  might  accurately  judge  whether  the  sleep*
waker  kept  to  the  time.  The  experiment  answered
perfectly,  both  as  *to  beating  time  in  the  first  place
with  accuracy,  and  then  as  accurately  changing  ther
measure.

I  could  relate  a  crowd  of  other  circumstances  of  a
similar  nature,  and  some  perhaps  even  more  remark-
able than  the  above ;  but  I  forbear :  the  above  are
sufficient  to  illustrate  the  principle  which  I  am  en
deavouring  to  educe  from  facts. Should  the  prin*
ciple itself  remain unacknowledged,  I shall have
already  drawn  too  largely  on  the  faith  of  my  reader.
Admit  that thought  communicates  action  to sur-
rounding media;  admit  that  the  mesmerised  are  sen-
sible to  that  action ;  and  all  that  may  seem  wondrous
in my  statements  vanishes. It  may be  doubted,
indeed,  whether  the  prejudice  that  exists  with  respect
to  such phenomena may  not have  been  wholly-

X  5


466  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM*

caused  by  their  having  too  often  been  brought  for^
ward,  not  only  unaccompanied  by  a  proper  explan-*
ation  and  in  disconnection  with  a  sufficient  cause,  but
actually  expressed  in  such  a  way  as  to  deepen  mys-
tery and  to  shock  the  scientific.  The  power  which
sleepwakers,  in  certain  states  of  sensibility,  un-
doubtedly possess,  of  perceiving  the  thoughts  of
others,  has  been  called  divination;  a  term  which
approximates  the  &culty  in  question  to  witchcraft
and  all  its  vulgar  associations.  The  sleepwaker  does
not  divine  what  passes  in  the  minds  of  others ;  he
reads  it  there  by  means  which  are  in  perfect  accord-
ance with  the  economy  of  our  being.  Let  me  endea-
vour to  set  this  in  the  strongest,  clearest  light.  Should
I  even  repeat  myself,  it  will  scarcely  be  a  fault  on  a
subject  like  this,  where  indeed  a  certain  iteration
seems  necessary  to  familiarise  our  minds  with  themes
so  new  and  of  such  grave  importance.

As  we  are  more  acquainted  with  that  corporeal
change in ourselves  which accompanies sensation^
than  with  that  other  more  hidden  which  accompanies
reflection,  let  us  reason  by  analogy  from  the  one  we
best  know  to  the  one  we  know  the  least. Both  are
mental  operations,  but  the  one,  as  we  are  sure  from
facts,  is  connected  with  a  series  of  material  move-
ments which  stand  as actual signs  and  represent-
atives of  itself. There  is  sensation,  and  there  is  also
the  language  of  sensation ;  in  other  words,  nervous
motions,  which  are  equivalent  to  a  language. Now,
were  we  enabled  with  equal  certainty  to  say,  when
speaking  of  our  intellectual  operations,  —  "  There  is


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  467

thought,  and  there  is  the  material  sign  of  thought:  "
could  we  affirm  positively  that,  as  every  sensation  has
its  peculiar  nervous  motion,  so  also  every  reflection
has  its  peculiar  action  of  the  brain,  we  should  be
greatly  helped  to  a  comprehension  of  the  point  in
question.  For  it  is  plain  that,  could  another  person
be  made  aware,  in  any  way,  of  the  motions  of  my
brain  during  thought,  and  were  he  also  properly
instructed  in  the  significancy  of  those  motions,  he
might  read  from  "  the  book  and  volume  of  my
brain"  as  readily  as  from  any  other  collection  of
symbols.  For  it  is  not  the  nature  of  the  sign,  when
once  its  meaning  is  fixed,  that  can  make  any  dif-
ference or  create  any  difficulty.  The  deaf  and  dumb
converse  as  well  by  motions  of  their  fingers  as  per-
sons in  general  by  giving  impulse  to  the  air.  Now
the  presumption  certainly  is  that  every  thought  really
has  its  particular  conBguration  in  that  texture  of  our
brain;  for,  1st,  we  know  that  thought  does  indeed
move  the  brain  generally,  whence  we  might  infer
particular  motions  for  particular  thoughts.  :2dly.  We
are  sure  that,  in  some  instances,  individual  thoughts
do  move  the  brain  and  thence  certain  nerves  in  an
individual  manner ;  as,  for  instance,  in  cases  where
a  thought  reproduces  a  corporeal  phenomenon,  ge-
nerally dependent  on  sensation,  such  as  a  distinct
visual  image,  or  a  certain  feeling  in  the  nerves  of  the
teeth.

From  these  phenomena  it  seems  that  we  only
draw  a  legitimate  conclusion,  when  we  say  that  every
thought moves the  brain in  its own  appropriate

X  6


46d  THB MESMERIC  MEDIUM;

manner.  Our  personal  ignorance  of  these  specific;
changes,  though  they  occur  in  our  own  persons,  is
no  proof  whatever  that  they  do  not  take  place.  We
are  perfectly  unaware  that  sensation  depends  on  a
corporeal  sign ;  yet  a  corporeal  sign  there  is.

If  it  should  be  asked  in  what  manner  the  sleep-
waker  has  come  to  be  so  well  acquainted  with  the
signs  and  characters  of  thought,  I  might  think  it
perhaps  a  sufficient  answer  to  reply,  "  The  soul  is
wise  —  yes,  wiser  than  we  know.*' There  are  more
intuitions,  or  (as  Kant calls  them) ^^  cognitions  d
priori"  than  we  suppose. What  if  motions  of  the
ethereal  medium  were  the  native  and  universal  lan-
guage of  the  mind  ? Or,  to  answer  one  question  by
another, how, in sensation,  have certain motions
come  to  be  representative  of  certain  external  objects  ?
I  may  be  told,  by  experience ;  but  again,  experience
itself  must  have  a  basis. What  Jirst  taught  the  mind
the  connection  between  the  sign and  the  object?
P^inly  an  intuition ;  for  it  is  self-evident  that  we
cannot  advance  to  new  knowledge  but  by  the  aid  of
previous knowledge. But where is this  previous
knowledge  to  begin  ? It  must  begin  somewhere,  or
we  shall  never  know  anything. When we  grant
that  we  do  know  something,  we  also  imply  that  this
our  knowledge  had  a  beginning,  and  this  beginning
could  only  be  a  truth  so  clear  as  to  be  apprehended
at  once  without  the  aid  of  anterior  knowledge ;  for,
to  suppose  a  knowledge  anterior  to  the  beginning  of
knowledge is  manifestly  absurd. Thus  it  appears
that  we  cannot  but  concede  the  existence  of  a  first


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  469

knowledge,  which  came  to  us  in  a  totally  different
manner  from  any  other,  about  which  we  could  neither
have  pondered  nor  reasoned;  a  knowledge  which,
luminous  itself,  required  no  light  for  its  illustration  ;
a  knowledge  which  is  the  guiding  torch  to  all  other
knowledge  whatever;  in  fine,  an  intuition  or  cog-r
nhion  d  priori.

This  reasoning,  applicable  to  all  knowledge  what-*
ever,  is  more  especially  so  to  that  peculiar  know-
ledge which  we  call  sensation,  and  which  Locke  has
satisfactorily  proved  to  be  the  avenue  at  least  to  the
greater  part  of  all  we  know,  of  all  we  are;  the
occasion  of  development  to  the  mind,  the  awakening
touch  that  sets  in  motion  the  germ  of  all  our  faculties.
Locke,  indeed,  by  his  unfortunate  and  misconceived
comparison  of  the  mind  to  a  sheet  of  white  paper,
has  obscured  his  own  beautiful  system ;  but  to  him
who  studies  the  work  on  the  "  Human  Understand-
ing" as  a  whole,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  reflection  of
Locke  is  nearly  identical  with  the  pure  reason  of
Kant,  Locke  allowing  clearly  that  sensation  is  only
(to  use  his  own  words)  "  one  of  those  ways  whereby
the  mind  comes  by  its  ideas."

Now,  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  mind  in  the
complete  mesmeric  state  has  been  proved  to  be  more
rational,  more  reflective,  than  in  its  normal  condition;
consequently  nearer  to  that  which  Wordsworth  so
finely  calls  —


**  The  fbuntain-light  of  all  our  day*


The  master-light  of  all  our  seeing.*


470  TUB  XESHmc  MEDIUX.


Is  it  then  wondrrfiil  that  its  fiist-deidoped  iDtn*
itioos  should  be  recalled  with  superior  case  and  ciear-
iKss  to  its  perceptioits  ?

This  is  the  liev  of  the  sobject  vhidi  searches  it
most  deeply  and  entirelT ;  hot,  while  I  maintain  that
die  mind^  knowledge  of  the  mesmeric  signs  most  in
the  Grst  instance  be  intuiciTe,  I  am  abo  enaUed  to
modi^tfae  statement  so  as  to  render  it  more  analogoos
to  onr  ordinary  views  and  common  experience.  Like
oar  other  intuitions,  this  particolar  one  is  derdoped
manifestlT  throngh  time  and  circumstance.  The
phenomena  of  silent  perception  are,  let  it  be  re-
membered, not  only  rare  in  occurrence,  bnt  slow  to
occur.  As  fiu-  as  I  have  observed,  they  only  take  place
when  a  person  has  been  brought  by  d^rees  into  a
very  exalted  condition  of  sensibility,  tmly  whm  he
has  learnt,  and,  as  it  were^  perfected  himself  in  his
new  mode  of  being,  and  in  the  language  appertaining
to  tliat  mode  of  being.

In  the  chain  of  our  argument,  then,  there  appears
to  be  no  link  wanting.  It  is  thus  connected.  £very
thought  moves  the  brain  in  its  own  appn^riate  manner.

A  pervading  medium  being  allowed  to  exist  throngh*
out  nature  (such  as  the  electric),  it  follows  as  a  con-
sequence that  every  thought  which  moves  the  brain
imparts  motion  also  to  the  ethereal  medium.

Mesmerised  persons,  being  in  a  state  of  extreme
sensibility,  are  cognisant  of  the  motions  of  finer  media
than  common.

The  motions,  created  by  the  thoughts  of  other
persons,  being  transferred  through  the  brain,  and


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  471

through  a  certain  medium,  to  the  sensorium  of  a
mesmerised  person,  are  to  him  intelligible  signs  of
thought  ^—  a  language  which,  though  new  to  him  at
first,  he,  by  a  gradual  process  of  association,  gives
meaning  to  and  learns  to  comprehend.

We  may  further  remark  (in  order  to  elucidate
certain  other  phenomena  of  mesmerism)  that  a  mes-
meric patient  is  in  such  relation  with  his  mesmeriser
as  to  be  peculiarly  attentive  to  the  workings  of  his
mind ;  with  these  he  is  evidently  far  more  connected
than  with  the  intellectual  operations  of  any  indifferent
individual.  Hence  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the
mesmeriser  are  transferred  to  the  patient  more  vividly,
and  with  a  superior  degree  of  accuracy,  so  as  (if  I
may  so  express  myself)  to  bring  into  sympathetic
vibration  the  very  brain  and  nervous  fibres  of  mes-
meriser and  patient.  Facts  coincide  with  this  sup-
position. In  various  parts  of  this  work  it  will  be  seen
that  the  mesmeric  patient  takes,  pro  tempore^  the  tone
of  his  mind  from  that  of  the  mesmeriser's  mind.  It
may  farther  be  asserted  that  he  shares  the  knowledge
of  the  latter  —  a  circumstance  which  accounts  for
many  apparent  miracles  regarding  the  information
of  sleep wakers  on  subjects  with  which  they  were  not
previously  acquainted.  When  I  first  began  to  mes-
merise, I  used  to  consult  my  sleepwakers  on  dark  and
dubious  points,  with  something  of  the  blind  faith  of  a
novice  in  a  new  and  wondrous  science.  Their  an-
swers to  such  inquiries  were  calculated  to  bewilder
me  by  the  pure  influence  of  astonishment;  for  the
simple  had  become  theorists  —  the  uneducated  were


472  TH£ MESMERIC  MEDIUM,

turned  into  philosophers.  At  length  I  was  awakened
from  my  dream  of  somnambulic  knowledge  by  finding
that  my  patient's  idea  shifted  so  visibly  with  my  own,
and  were  so  plainly  the  echo  of  my  own  thoughts,
that  not  to  have  perceived  the  source  whence  they
originated  would  have  been'  pertinacious  blindness
indeed.  I  was  but  taking  bact  my  own,  and  re-'
ceiving  coin  issued  from  my  own  treasury.  I  par-*
ticularly  observed  that  what  I  had  last  read,  or  most
recently  reflected  on,  was  most  vividly  returned  to
me  by  my  sleepwaker.  It  was  a  vexatious  discovery.
Would  that  I  could  present  to  my  reader,  as  oracles,
the  speculations  of  my  patients  on  the  ethereal  me-
dium !  Would  that  I  could  enlighten  the  world  by
displaying,  as  authenticated  by  a  preternatural  illu-^
mination,  the  harmony  and  mutual  relationship  of  all
things  !  But,  alas  !  I  should  only  be  repeating  my
own  feeble  explorations  of  the  regions  of  truth ;  I
should  but  be  retailing  my  own  mortal  and  uninspired
surmises !

A  few  particular  instances  of  the  coincidence  be-
tween my  own  thoughts  and  those  of  my  sleepwakers
may  interest  the  reader,  and  prove  that  which,  as  yet,
I  have  only  generally  advanced.

E,  A.  was  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  mechanism  o.
the  eye,  or  of  the  fact  that  images  on  the  retina  are
reversed  representations  of  external  objects.  I  had
been  reading  some  works  on  this  knotty  subject,  in
which  needless  [pains  had  been  taken  to  turn  the
image  the  right  way  upward,  when  I  questioned  my
patient  as  to  our  mode  of  seeing. To  my  surprise.


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM^  473

he  entered  immediately  upon  the"topic  of  the  reversed
image  on  the  retina,  and — though  confusedly,  indeed
—  repeated  partly  some  mystical  stuff  which  I  had
been  reading  in  the  "  Seherin  von  Prevorst,"  (he  did
not  understand  German,)  upon  that  head  —  and
partly  a  scientific  statement  of  the  mere  fact,  which
latter  he  illustrated  by  drawing  on  paper  the  very
same  mathematical  fiorure  which  I  had  been  con-
templatipg  that  morning,  and  which  represented  the
intersection  of  the  rays  at  the  focal  point,  which
causes  the  phenomenon  in  question.

The  following  coincidence  was  still  more  remark-*
able  and  perfect  than  the  preceding.

In  a  work  by  M.  Despines  of  Aix,  in  Provence,  I
had  been  reading  some  speculations  on  the  (supposed)
vital  fluid.  It  was  there  conjectured  that  some  of
our  maladies  take  their  rise  from  the  unequal  distri-
bution of  this  fluid  along  the  channels  of  the  nerves.
I  declare  most  positively  that  the  sleepwaker  had
never  seen  the  work  in  question,  which  had  just  been
forwarded  to  me  by  Lord  N— — ,  from  Geneva,
Nevertheless,  when  in  the  mesmeric  state,  he  dpropos
of  something  said  respecting  a  person's  illness,  thu»
expressed  himself :  —

"  II  y  a  des  maladies  qu'on  ne  peut  pas  voir.  Ce
sont  les  derangemens  de  la  fluide  nerveuse,  qui  est
accumulee  ou  par  ci,  ou  par  la;  et  c'est  cela  qui  fait
les  maladies."

I  copy  the  words  exactly  from  notes  taken  at  the
time  they  were  uttered.
. It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  this  refle<?-»


474  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

tion  of  thought  from  the  raesmeriser  to  the  patient
destroys  the  individual  character  of  the  latter.  The
knowledge  returns  to  its  originator,  tinged  always  by
the  medium  from  which  it  has  reverted.  Thus  Anna
M—  did  not  philosophise  like  E.  A.  Her  specu-
lations were  influenced  by  the  synthetical  habits  of
woman's  mind.  In  her  there  was  more  of  the  heart,
in  the  other  more  of  the  head.  In  every  case  I  found
that  sleepwakers  do  not  retail  things  like  mere  par-
rots, but  as  thinking  beings,  themselves  elevated  to  a
higher  intellectual  region  than  the  ordinary.  Besides,
there  is  always  in  the  mesmeric  state,  a  certain  inde-
pendent power  of  thought,  proper  to  the  patient,  the
degree  of  which  varies  with  the  natural  independ-
ence of  the  character.  Those  ideas  I  was  never  con-
scious of  in  my  own  mind  might  be  fairly  attributed
to  my  sleepwakers  as  their  own  property.  From
some  of  these  I  have  taken  hints,  at  least ;  especially
in  all  that  regards  the  mesmeric  state,  of  which  mes-
meric individuals  may  be  supposed  to  have  the  same
personal  knowledge  that  we  have  of  our  normal
existence.  Let  us  now  pause  to  generalise  the  more
important  of  our  facts  in  the  spirit  of  the  following
remark.

"  The  great  object  of  philosophy  is  to  ascertain  the
simple  or  ultimate  principles,  into  which  all  the  phe-
nomena of  nature  may,  by  analysis,  be  resolved."

Striving  after  the  philosophic  unity  recommended
by  Dr.  Chalmers,  yet,  keeping  within  the  verge  of
safe  analogy,  we  may  affirm  that  we  have  been  consi-
dering —  relative to  mesmeric  action  —  a  medium


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  475

which,  by  its  character  and  offices,  is  capable  of  being
identified  with  that  other  medium  treated  of  under
the  head  of  "  mesmeric  sensation."

For  that  which  is  predicated  of  the  one  may  be
said  equally  of  the  other :  —

Both  have  been  shown  capable  of  communicating
impulsions  to  the  human  system  from  a  distance.

Both  act  through  obstacles  which  are  impediments
to  grosser  media.

Both  bear  an  especial  relation  to  the  human  mind.

In  the  one  case,  indeed,  it  appears  that  the  medium
acts  upon  mind,  while,  in  the  other,  it  is  manifest
that  mind  acts  upon  the  medium ;  but  this  distinction
will,  I  imagine,  vanish,  when  it  is  remembered  that
we  have  already  proved  sensations  to  be  in  reality
actions,  and  not  mere  passive  performances  of  the
sentient  principle,  and  that  it  is  more  probable  that  the
mind  always  consults  actively  its  book  of  signs  (as  the
nervous  system  may  be  called),  than  that  it  is  swayed,
in  any  case,  inertly  by  the  impulses  of  the  external
world.

More  briefly,  sensation  and  reflection  are,  in  truth,
both  actions,  though  different  actions,  of  one  thinking
substance.

This  being  allowed,  a  pervading  medium  being
allowed,  and  it  being  manifest,  as  a  consequence,  that
this  mere  ethereal  medium  must  respond  to  every  ac-
tion of  the  mind  and  brain,  it  will  be  evident  that  the
mind  impresses  motion  on  the  medium  by  the  very
act  in  which  it  seizes  the  meaning  of  the  motions  to
which  it  had  been  passive.  Taking  the  proposition  in  a


476  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

material  point  of  view,  it  may  be  said  that,  in  the  un-
dulations of  the  nervous  system,  and  the  elastic  media,
of  which  it  is  the  centre,  there  must  be  reaction  not
less  than  action.  In  either  case,  the  motions  of  the
medium  have  been  shown  to  be  symbolical  of  some->
thing  beyond  themselves,  and  to  compose  a  lan-
guage which  the  mind  recognises  and  interprets.

Other  points  of  resemblance  between  the  sentient
and  the  mesmeric  medium  may  be  found.

It  appeared  probable  that  the  former,  from  its
action  from  a  distance,  and  the  rapidity  of  its  com-
munications, was,  like  the  luminous  ether,  of  ati
elastic  and  vibratory  nature.  Now  considerations  of
a  similar  kind  induce  us  to  come  to  a  similar  conclu-
sion with  respect  to  the  mesmeric  medium.  We  have
seen  that  physical  effects  have  been  produced  by  one
person  on  another  from  distances  and  through  obsta-
cles which  render  the  supposition  of  a  material  sub-
stance emanated  from  the  body  absurd.  Anna  M

was  by  me  brought  into  the  mesmeric  state  when  I
was  divided  from  her  by  a  screen,  and  by  the  whole
length  of  a  large  apartment ;  and  again  when  I  was
in  a  house  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  that  in
which  she  was  sensible  to  my  action.  Facts  like  these
intimate  not  doubtfully  that  the  mesmeric  medium
has  not  a  real  transitive  motion,  but  only  a  motion
of  oscillation  ;  that  the  mesmeriser  does  not  project  a
means  of  communication  to  his  patient,  as  one  would
toss  a  string  to  a  person  at  a  distance,  but  merely
agitates  an  already  existing  means  of  communication,
as  one  would  impart  vibration  to  a  string  already


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  477

Stretched  from  one's  own  hand  to  that  of  another  per-
son.

The  phenomena  of  sympathetic  sensation  between
mesmeriser  and  patient  come  in  aid  of  the  above
conclusion.  It  has  been  shown  that,  in  certain  cases^
where  a  mesmeric  relation  is  perfectly  established  be-
tween two  persons,  the  impressions  of  tact  and  savour
are  transferred  accurately  from  the  nervous  system  of

one  to  that  of  the  other. Thus  Anna  M ,  when

any  one  gave  pain  to  my  shoulder,  foot,  &c.  immedi«
ately  began  to  rub  the  corresponding  part  of  her  own
person  ;  and  she  could  also,  from  a  real  impression  on
her  nerves  of  taste,  correctly  state  what  I  was  eating
or  drinking.  Miss  T—  likewise,  through  nervous
motions  in  her  own  hand,  became  aware  of  the  size
and  form  of  objects  which  I  was  secretly  handling.

These  phenomena  extremely  resemble  those  of
sympathetic  vibration  produced  by  the  tremors  of  the
air.  "  It  is  thus  '*  (says  Mrs.  Somerville,  speaking
of  the  latter)  "  that  sympathetic  undulations  are  ex-
cited by  a  body  vibrating  near  insulated  tended
strings,  capable  of  following  its  undulations,  either  by
vibrating  entire,  or  by  separating  themselves  into  their
harmonic  divisions.  If  two  cords  equally  stretched,
of  which  one  is  twice  or  three  times  longer  than  the
other,  be  placed  side  by  side,  and  if  the  shorter  be
sounded,  its  vibrations  will  be  communicated  by  the
air  to  the  other,  which  will  be  thrown  into  such  a
state  of  vibration,  that  it  will  be  spontaneously  divided
into  segments  equal  in  length  to  the  shorter  string.'*
Again,  w  hen  sand  is  strewed  on  paper  or  parchment


478  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

Stretched  over  a  large  bell-shaped  tumbler,  with  pro*
per  precautions,  "  if  a  circular  disc  of  glass  be  held
concentrically  over  this  apparatus^  with  its  plane
parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  paper,  and  set  in  vibration
by  drawing  a  bow  across  its  edge  so  as  to  make  sand
on  its  surface  take  any  of  Chladni's  figures,  the  sand
on  the  paper  will  assume  the  very  same  form,  in  con-
sequence of  the  vibrations  of  the  disc  being  commu-
nicated to  the  paper  by  the  air."

*^  When  a  slow  air  is  played  on  a  flute  near  this
apparatus,  each  note  calls  up  a  particular  form  in  the
sand,  which  the  next  note  effaces  to  establish  its  own."
It  is  plain  that  this  visible  manifestation  of  an  invi-
sible agent  might  be  made  a  language,  and  might
suggest  to  a  person  versed  in  its  symbols  the  air
played  on  the  flute  so  perfectly  as  to  enable  hini  to
write  it  down,  even  though  he  neither  saw  nor  heard
the  musical  instrument  from  which  it  emanated,  each
form  in  the  sand  indicating  to  him  a  particular  note.
The  analogy  between  this  musical  language  and  mes-
meric sensation  is  manifest. Just  as  the  vibrations  of
strings,  or  of  vibrating  plates  are  reproduced  in  other
strings,  or  visibly  represented  in  the  sand  by  the
agency  of  the  intervening  air,  so  are  the  nervous  mo-
tions of  the  mesmeriser's  system  reproduced  and  faith-
fully represented  in  that  of  his  patient  by  the  agency
of  the  mesmeric  medium. It  is  true  that  the  aerial
vibrations  are  only  manifested  in  tense  substances,
and  that  the  nerves  are  not,  as  generally  supposed,  in
a  state  of  tension,  and  herein  our  parallel  is  not  com-
plete ;  but  then,  in  the  latter  case,  if  the  undulating


THE M£SM£RIC M£DIUM.  47$

body  is  not  tl;'*  same,  neither  is  the  medium  that  ex-
cites the  undulations  the  same.  The  true  and  im-
portant point  of  resemblance  is  this ;  —  the  nerves
have  a  capacity  to  vibrate  in  unison  with  a  certain
medium,  just  as  tended  strings  have  a  capacity  to
vibrate  in  correspondence  with  the  air,  and  sympa-
thetic vibrations  may  undoubtedly  be  just  as  well
propagated  from  one  system  of  nerves  to  another  by
their  own  proper  medium,  as  from  one  string  to  an-^
other,  or  from  the  glass  disc  to  paper,  by  the  air.

This  being  allowed,  is  it  any  marvel  that  the  trans-
ferred vibrations  of  the  nerves  should  be  an  intelli-
gible language  ?  Even  as  regards  the  mere  tremors
of  the  air,  we  find  that  "  by  the  vibrations  of  sand
on  a  drum-head,  the  besieged  have  discovered  the
direction  in  which  a  countermine  was  working."  If
personal  interest  can  thus  awaken  the  intellect  to  a
comprehension  of  mere  external  motions,  how  much
more  keenly  must  personal  feeling  rouse  the  sentient
being,  who  is  himself  the  subject  of  sympathetic  ner-.
vous  action,  into  a  perception  of  every  change  in  the
system  with  which  he  is  in  unison  ?  Besides,  motions
of  the  nerves  are  more  than  a  language ;  they  are  the
language  of  sensation ;  each  of  their  changes  is  not
merely  a  sign  of  something  occurring  externally  to  a
man's  self,  but  in  his  very  frame  and  being :  thus,
when  a  mesmerised  patient  has  a  nervous  vibration
transmitted  to  him  from  another,  he  has  also  an  actual
corporeal  feeling,  not  only  coincident  with  that  vi-
bration, but  also  perfectly  corresponding  with  the
original  feeling  in  the  other  person. It  is,  however.


480  TH£ MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

of  importance  to  remark  that  to  all  these  phenomena
the  will  of  the  mesmeriser  bears  more  than  a  relation ;
—  it  has  an  evident  share  in  their  very  existence.
The  degree  of  attention  that  he  bestows  on  producing
the  phenomena  of  sympathetic  sensation  has  a  great
influence  on  the  time  and  manner  of  their  occurrence ;
neither  in  this  instance,  nor  in  any  other  relating  to
mesmerism,  can  we  leave  the  will  out  of  our  calcu-
lations ;  it  is,  indeed,  the  focus,  where  all  the  rays  of
our  information  meet,  —  the  centre  without  which
there  would  be  no  general  relationship  —  no  union
between  our  forces :  this  premised,  we  proceed  to  our
conclusion,  that  the  relation  between  mesmeriser  and
patient  is  established  by  an  elastic  medium  is  to  be
presumed  from  the  nearly  simultaneous  and  cotrcv
spondent  action of the nervous systems of  both*
Here,  as  in  former  cases,  admit  a  vibratory  medium,
and  that  the  mesmerised  are  sensible  to  that  medium,
and  everything  is  clear  and  satisfactorj' ;  without  it
all  is  dark.

They  who  watch  for  my  halting,  and  are  on  the
look  out  for  discrepancies,  may  here  remind  me  that
I  have  in  other  places  advanced  facts  which  are  at
variance  with  the  supposition  of  a  vibratory  medium
in  mesmerism,  and  which  rather  tend  to  establish  the
existence  of  a  material  emanation,  of  which  the  mes-
meriser*s  body  is  the  original  source.  Contact,  th6
breath,  motions  of  the  hand  near  the  patient,  have
been  described  as  powerfully  aiding  the  transmission
of  the  mesmeric  influence.  To  this  I  reply,  that  it
is  now  very  generally  admitted  that  heat  is  but  a


THE MESMERI^ MEDIUM.  481

modification  of  the  same  agent  which  produces  the
sensation  of  light,  —  in  other  words,  no  real  entity^
but  a  peculiar  action  of  matter.  Thus  to  heat  a  body
is  only  to  bring  the  atoms  which  compose  that  body
into  a  particular  state  of  vibration.  Yet  in  order  to
effect  this,  in  order  to  induce  that  peculiar  action  of
matter  which  we  call  heat,  we  employ  certain  means,
which,  being  themselves  material,  tend  to  invest  the
agent  with  a  material  character,  but  which  are  in
reality  only  the  occasions  of  bringing  certain  atoms
into  a  particular  state.

It  may  well,  then,  be  allowed  by  those  at  least
who  adopt  the  undulatory  theory,  that  the  material
means  employed  in  mesmerism,  to  charge  a  patient
with  the  mesmeric  influence,  are  no  proof  whatever
of  the  material  character  of  that  influence,  but  are
simply  methods  whereby  a  medium  may  be  thrown
into  a  particular  state  of  action.  That  there  is  no
just  reason  why  that  action  should  not  be  vibratory
is  also  manifest.

Pursuing  the  analogy  between  heat  and  the  mes-
meric agency,  we  know  that,  with  regard  to  ex-
citing the  former,  the  means  are  not  only  various,
but  that  they  may  be  altered  according  to  circum-
stances. Occasionally  they  may  appear  very  com-
plex, as  where  chemistry  employs  its  resources  to
develope  heat  by  the  union  of  two  liquids  or  gases ;
and  occasionally  nothing  can  be  more  simple,  as;
where,  by  mere  friction,  we  produce  heat.  This
should  warn  us  not  to  be  surprised  that  mesmeric
results  should  accrue  from  different  processes,  simple

y


482  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

as  well  as  complex ;  that  at  one  time  the  mesmeriser
should  employ  all  the  intermediate  aids  of  gesture,
look,  and  respiration ;  yet  at  another,  with  equal
success,  influence  his  patient  by  the  mere  action  of
his  mind  and  brain*

I  can  assure  my  reader  that  I  am  as  anxious  to
give  the  subject  a  fair  consideration  as  he  himself
can  possibly  be ;  and  I  can  suggest  to  myself  objec-
tions to  a  vibratory  cause  in  mesmerism,  which,  per-
haps, might  not  have  occurred  to  his  own  mind.
Thus  I  found  on  one  occasion,  when  I  mesmerised  a
person  out  of  doors,  that  the  wind  had  a  manifest
power  to  disturb,  and,  as  it  were,  bear  away  the
mesmeric  influence.  This,  on  a  cursory  view,  goes
very  near  to  investing  it  with  a  transitive  character ;
but,  on  a  more  accurate  examination,  does  not  in  any
way  affect  our  previous  conclusions  to  the  contrary.
We  have  only  to  remember  that  even  the  transmission
of  light  depends  on  the  condition  of  the  atmosphere,
and  that  wind  disturbs  that  vibratory  property  of  the
air,  which  produces  sound,  in  a  marked  and  acknow-
ledged manner.  All  then  that  is  really  proved,  when
the  wind  is  found  to  disturb  the  mesmeric  influence,
is  that  wind  has  the  power  to  affect  the  vibratory
properties  of  the  medium.

Again :  substances  touched  or  breathed  upon  by
the  mesmeriser  will,  when  tested  by  such  patients  as
are  extremely  sensitive,  be  found  to  retain  something
of  a  mesmeric  virtue  for  a  considerable  period,  as  if
a  material  emanation  clung  around  them,  and  at
length  became  dissipated  in  the  surrounding  atmo<


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  483

sphere.  Nay,  I  must  avow  a  circumstance,  that,
more  than  any  other,  seems  to  shake  my  hypothesis

of  undulations. I  have  mesmerised  Anna  M ,

by  sending  to  her  from  a  distance  a  note,  which  I
had  previously  carried  about  me  for  some  time.  But
what  do  these  phenomena  in  reality  prove  ?  Merely
that  the  mesmeric  medium,  like  other  media,  has  the
power  of  imparting  a  change  to  the  particles  of  the
substance  on  which  it  acts.

The  following  reflections  will  at  once  support  my
hjrpothesis,  and  set  my  meaning,  as  I  trust  at  least,
in  a  clearer  light.

Whatever  is  corporeal  is  ponderable.  When,
therefore,  we  pronounce  that  an  agent  is  imponder*
able,  we  at  once  pronounce  that  it  has  no  existence
(that  is  to  say,  virtually,  and  as  far  as  our  senses  ate
concerned),  but  in  motion  — that  it  is  only  an  eflect
or  action  of  matter,  and  not  an  individual  substance.
Such  agents,  then,  as  affect  bodies  without  adding  to
their  weight,  can  only  be  conceived  to  act  by  intro-
ducing a  change  into  the  relative  position  of  their
particles.  Thus,  when  a  grain  of  musk  perfumes  a
sheet  of  paper,  without  either  losing  in  its  own
weight,  or  imparting  additional  substance  to  the
paper,  what  can  it  prove  more  than  that  the  action
of  one  thing  can  be  imparted  to  another  ?  Or,  when
what  we  call  infection  is  conveyed  from  one  person
to  another  by  wearing  appard,  or  by  a  letter ;  and
again,  when  fumigating  the  apparel  or  the  letter
properly  is  found  to  restore  those  substances  to  their
former  innoxious  oonditiorf,  is  it  not  because,  in  the

Y  2


484*  THE  MESMERIC MEDIUM.  '

one  case,  the  substances  had  acquired  the  property  of
imparting  a  change  to  the  atoms  of  the  body  witk
which  they  should  come  in  contact;  and,  in  the^
other,  had  this  new  mode  of  action  abstracted  from
them  ?  This  at  least  we  know,  that  colour,  which
appears  to  be  a  material  body,  and  is  transferable
from  one  body  to  another,  is  actually  nothing  more
than  a  chemical  change  in  the  position  and  arrange-,
ment  of  those  atoms  which  by  their  varied  manner
of  cohesion  produce  what  we  call  the  different  textures
of  substances.  Again :  science  has  ascertained  that
the  mere  action  of  the  luminous  medium  can  pro-
duce an  internal  change  in  the  texture  of  crystals,
and  can  develope  magnetic  properties  in  iron  ;  while
our  own  observation  may  assure  us,  by  daily  ex-
amples in  the  fading  of  vegetable  colours,  that  light
alone  can  so  alter  the  atoms  of  bodies,  as  to  change
their  capacities  of  absorption  and  reflection.  The
recent  discovery,  whereby  a  landscape  is  transfer-
red, in  all  its  natural  hues,  to  paper  prepared  with
nitrate  of  silver,  by  the  simple  agency  of  light,  speaks
more  strongly  still  to  the  same  effect.  Nor  is  it  by
any  means  fatal  to  our  cause,  that  the  change  which
mesmerism  induces  in  bodies  should  be  but  tempo-^
rary.  Electricity  induces  temporary  alteration  in
bodies ;  the  magnetic  virtue  in  iron  may  be  dimi-
nished or  reinforced  by  light,  by  heat,  and  other  ex-
ternal agencies;  while  to  or  from  such  metals  as^^
only  become  magnetic  by  induction,  the  properties
of  magnetism  can  be  given  or  taken  away  at  plea-
sure. Heat,  also,  can  impkrt  a  temporary  change  ta


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  485

the  molecules  of  matter,  giving  them  a  new  vibra-
tion and  impulse,  which  gradually  ceases  and  leaveis
the  body  they  compose  in  its  former  condition.  The
analogy  in  this  case  to  mesmeric  action  is  particularly
striking,  and  would  alone  be  sufficient,  oiie  might
imagine,  to  rank  this  agency  amongst  the  imponder-
able media.  It  renders  perfectly  comprehensible
not  only  the  transference  of  mesmerism  from  the
mesmeriser  to  an  inanimate  substance,  but  the  sub-
sequent and  further  transmission  of  the  action  fronfi
the  inanimate  substance  to  a  mesmeric  patient.

It  may  further  be  conceived  that  this  particulat
action  of  matter,  when  weakened  by  transference  to  a
mesmeric  billet,  for  instance,  can  only  affect  such
frames  as  are  predisposed  to  receive  the  influence,
just  as  the  contagion  of  illness  conveyed  by  letter
will  act  most  readily  on  persons  predisposed  to  take
infection.  In  every  case,  where  an  agency  so  subtle
as  that  of  inesmerism  is  to  be  appreciated  in  its  minute
gradations,  there  must  exist  a  previous  acquaintance
with  its  effects,  and  an  acute  degree  of  sensibility
both  natural  and  acquired.  Beings  possessing  such
<][ualification3  are  indeed  rare,  and,  as  detectors  of
nature's  finer  influences,  most  interesting  to  the  ob-
server. They  alone,  it  is  evident,  can  throw  new
light  on  the  action  and  properties  of  the  mesmeric
medium.  If  we  only  regarded  them  as  instruments
of  extreme  delicacy,  we  should  value  them  as  the
-chemist,  his  test  and  reagents,  or  as  the  student  in
lelectricity,  his  balance  of  Jtorsion. Dr.  Elliotson,  by

Y  3


486  TB£  MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

means  of  two  young  females,  who  from  their  extreme
sensibility  may  be  called  mesmerometers  of  the  high-
est precision^  has  ascertained  particulars  which  bid
iair  to  develope  the  laws  of  this  remarkable  agency.
Amongst  other  things  he  has  discovered  that  mesmer-
isable  substances  may  be  mesmerised  by  the  eye
alone»  without  contact  of  any  kind»  This  is  of  im-
portance ;  for,  to  what  can  we  refer  such  an  effect,  but
to  a  change  in  the  atomic  relaticms  of  the  affected
substances,  which  change  cannot  but  be  brought
about  by  impulsion  on  some  medium  subsisting  be-
tween the  eye  and  the  objects  ?  Thus,  if  some  phe-
nomena seem  to  giv^  a  material  character  to  mesmeric
agency,  others  again  more  truly  invest  it  with  all  the
finer  attributes  of  that  subtle,  ethereal,  and  elastic
medium,  which  pervades  creation.

Whatever  objections,  then,  may  be  urged  against
the  undulatory  character  of  the  mesmeric  medium
are  shown  to  be  null ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we
should  be  forced  into  absurdities,  did  we  attribute  to
it  any  other  mode  of  action.

Thus  proved  to  be  undulatory,  elastic,  pervading^
in  peculiar  relation  with  the  mind  of  man,  it  should
seem  clearly  to  be  identified  with  the  medium  spoken
of  in  sensation.

But  of  this  we  have  a  yet  closer  method  of  proof.

First. The  phenomena  of  sensation  proper  to  the  ,

mesmeric  patient  proved  to  us  originally  the  exist-  I

ence  of  a  certain  medium,  which  circumstances  led  us
to  suspect  might  form  the  groundwork  in  all  sens-
ation whatever,  since  it  acts  pervadingly,  and  by  sim-


THE MESMEEIC MEDIUM.  467

pie  impulsion  on  the  nerves,  which  are  the  real  agents
in  sensation.

Secondly.  The  phenomena  of  sympathetic  sensation^
originating  with  the  mesmeriser,  and  from  him  trans-
ferred to  his  patient,  bring  the  sentient  medium  into
relation  with  the  mesmeriser,  and  presumably  identify
it  with  the  mesmeric  medium;  especially  as  it  is
found  that  the  mesmeriser's  will  and  attention  aid
the  production  of  the  phenomena.  Besides,  it  is  fair
to  infer  that  all  the  relations  between  mesmeriser  and
patient,  being  connected  in  one  series,  and  bearing
one  character,  are  brought  about  by  one  medium,
which  we  call  mesmeric.

Thirdly.  That  such  a  medium  is  really  the  great
medium  in  all  sensation  we  may  again  deduce  from
this.  It  is  found  capable  of  transferring  sensations
from  the  mesmeriser  to  the  patient ;  we  may  there*
fore  conclude  that  it  is  capable  in  general  of  produc-
ing sensation, —  a  task  to  which  it  seems  peculiarly
adapted  from  its  acting  (as  has  been  shown)  with  such
exquisite  precision  on  the  nerves.

The  chain  of  evidence  seems  thus  complete.

In  the  first  place  we  have  a  particular  medium  of
sensation  indicated  to  us  by  the  phenomena  of  mes-
meric perception ;  in  the  second  place  that  medium
is  connected  with  the  mesmeriser,  by  his  capacity  of
using  it  so  as  to  produce  sensation  in  his  patient.
Finally,  it  is  again  reciprocally  connected  with  sens-
ation in  general  by  its  capacity  of  acting  on  the
nerves  of  a  human  being,  so  as  to  produce  sensation
of  various  kinds.  *'

Y  4


468  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM!

Having  thus  assimilated  the  mesmeric  medium  td
such  a  medium  or  to  such  media  (if  there  be  many)
as  form  the  groundwork  in  the  external  preparatives
of  sensation,  I  would  endeavour  atill  further  to  asso^
ciate  it  with  other  media,  now  generally  considered
to  be  of  an  undulatory  nature  and  universally  allowed
to  be  proper  objects  of  physical  and  certain  experi-
tnent.

If  we  can  succeed  in  this,  we  shall  at  once  give  td
our  agency  a  claim  on  science ;  connecting  it  with
calculation  and  with  mechanical  analysis.

It  is  plain  that  this  can  only  be  effected  by  detect-
ing and  bringing  to  view  similarities  between  its
action  and  the  action  of  such  other  forces  as  are  sub-
jects of  the  physico-mathematical  sciences,  —  forces
which  are  now  considered  to  be  mere  modifications
of  the  electric.

Already  we  have  seen  that,  like  heat,  it  can  be
imparted  by  one  body  to  another,  and  that,  like  heat,
it  gradually  leaves  the  body  to  which  it  is  commu«>
nicated.

Some  interesting  experiments  by  Dr.  Elliotson
prove  that,  like  light,  it  may  be  reflected  from  mirrors.
A  celebrated  sculptor  at  Rome  assured  me  that  he
had  seen  the  experiment  tried  and  verified  on  his  own
brother  by  a  nobleman,  whose  name  it  might  be
thought  an  impertinence  in  me  to  mention.

These  are  striking  analogies  between  the  mesmeric
and  other  media;  —  but  to  electricity  —  now  con-
sidered as  the  great  parent  of  them  all  —  it  bears  a
yet  greater  resemblance.  >


HIE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  489

first.  We  know  that  electricity  is  capable  of  all
that  modification  in  its  action  which  the  necessities
of  our  case  demand.  Sometimes  its  effects  are  sudden
and  energetic;  sometimes  of  indefinite  and  uninter-
rupted continuance.  It  is  "  capable  of  moving  with
various  degrees  of  facility  through  the  pores  or  even
the  substance  of  matter;"*  and  is  not  impeded  in
its  action  "  by  the  intervention  of  any  substance
whatever,  provided  it  be  not  itself  in  an  electric
state."

This  capacity  of  varied  action  and  of  pervading
influence  has  already  been  shown  to  characterise  the
mesmeric  medium.

Secondly^  Electricity  may  be  called  into  activity
by  heat.  Here  the  resemblance  between  the  electric
and  the  mesmeric  medium  is  still  more  marked.

I  have  found  that  I  could  not  successfully  mesmer-
ise in  a  cold  room,  or  when  I  was  in  a  low  state  of
bodily  temperature ;  while,  on  tiie  other  hand,  a  warm
atmosphere,  and  warmth  in  my  own  hand,  have  always
intensified  and  expedited  the  transmission  of  mes-
meric influence  from  myself  to  another.  The  first  time
I  ever  saw  a  mesmeric  experiment,  the  mesmeriser
made  it  an  express  condition  that  he  should  have  a
warm  room  for  his  process.  The  experiment,  as  will
be  remembered,  was  quickly  and  successfully  per-
formed. Now,  of  electricity  we  know  that  it  may  be
called  into  activity  by  heat,  and  that  the  heat  of  the

*  These  and  the  following  characteristics  of  electricity  are
taken  from  Mrs.  Somerville's  admirable  work  on  the  Connexion
of  the  Physical  Sciences.

Y  5


490  THE  BfESMEBlC  MEDIUM.

air  is  intimately  xx>Dnected  with  its  electrical  con-
dition.

Thirdly.  <<  Electricity  readily  escapes  from  a  point ;
and  a  pointed  object  receives  it  with  most  fiwulity.**

I  have  found,  by  experience,  that  the  mesmeric
medium  is  most  powerfully  conducted  by  the  tips  <^
the  fingers,  and  that  mesmeric  actions,  directed  also
towards  the  tips  of  the  patient's  fingers,  have  a  more
remarkable  effect  than  when  simply  directed  over  the
surfaces  of  the  body.

Fourthly.  ^^  Iceland  spar  is  made  electric  by  the
smallest  pressure  between  the  finger  and  thumb,  and
retains  it  for  a  long  time.''

How  analogous  is  this  to  the  transference  of  mes-
merism to  certain  metals  by  human  contact,  and  to
the  manner  in  which  they  slowly  part  with  the  com*
raunicated  property  I

Fifthly.  Electricity  may  be  transferred  from  one
body  to  another  in  the  same  manner  as  heat  is  com*
municated,  and  like  it,  too,  the  body  loses  by  the
transmission.

This  resembles  the  exhaustion  and  repair  of  mes*
meric  force,  of  which  I  have,  in  another  place,  taken
notice.

It  is  true  that,  in  the  case  of  mesmerism,  a  human
body  is  the  electric  machine,  another  human  body
the  recipient  of  the  force,  and  that  neither  are  repre-
sented to  be  in  a  state  of  electrical  insulation; — but,
be  it  remembered,  we  are  contending  —  not  for  the
identity  of  the  agency  with  the  electric,  but  for
the propinquity. While  we  affirm  that  th^re  are^


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  491

analogies  too  great  to  admit  of  a  separate  source,  we
not  the  less  contend  that  there  are  differences  too
striking  not  to  demonstrate  a  varied  action*  Their
powers  not  being  identical,  it  is  evident  that  the
laws  of  their  retention  and  escape  may  vary,  as  do
those  that  regulate  the  transmission  or  accumulation
of  the  galvanic  or  magnetic  forces*  Thus,  a  body
may  be  in  a  state  of  mesmeric  though  not  of  electrical
insulation.  Magnetic  or  electric  agency  seems  to  aid
the  mesmeriser  in  influencing  his  patient*  I  found,
when  mesmerising  Professor  Agassiz,  that  a  magnet
held  in  my  hand  assisted  me  to  raise  his  limbs  by  that
species  of  attraction  which  may  be  called  mesmeric.
It  is  singular,  likewise,  but  true,  that,  whenever
I  took  the  magnet  into  my  hand,  however  secretly,
he,  having  his  eyes  always  shut,  invariably  com
plained  of  a  palpitation  at  the  heart

It  has  also  been  told  me,  by  Dr*  Elliotson,  that  a
lady,  who  is  remarkably  gifted  with  mesmeric  force,
gains  an  additional  share  of  that  power  when  she
mesmerises  standing  on  a  glass  stool  and  in  a  state  of
positive  electricity.  This  fact  aproximates  the  two
agencies  in  a  very  obvious  and  striking  manner*

A  few  additional  remarks  on  the  connection  of  the
human  body  with  electricity  may  be  pardoned.

Much  needless  pains  have  been  expended  to  prove
that  the  force  in  question  is  an  agent  in  our  economy.
It  cannot  but  be  so.  Its  presence  in  our  own  frames
is  only  one  of  the  consequences  of  its  universal  pre-
sence —  now  accorded  by  all  philosophers.

Recent  discoveries  tend  to  prove  that  gravitation

Y  6


492  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

itself  is  but  a  residual  and  comparatively  feeble  pot^
tion  of  the  electric  energy ;  and  the  power  which
electricity  displays  in  effecting  chemical  combination^
or  separation,  demonstrates  that  it  really  binds  or
looses  the  atoms  of  which  material  bodies  are  com*-
posed.  To  separate  one  drop  of  water  from  another,
it  has  been  calculated  that  as  much  electric  force
must  be  employed  as  would  be  called  into  activity
during  an  ordinary  thunder-storm.  How,  then,  can
the  electric  principle  be  absent  from  the  frame  of
man,  which  is  itself  but  a  collection  of  material  par-
ticles? Facts  moreover  prove  that  our  bodies  are
electric,  and  that  the  degree  of  electricity  varies  in
different  individuals.  The  silk  stocking  drawn  off
hastily  at  night  rustles  with  electricity ;  the  hair  when
rapidly  combed,  especially  in  frosty  weather,  will
crackle  and  emit  sparks;  and  these  phenomena  are
more  or  less  evident  in  different  persons.  All  this  is
true  and  undeniable.  The  fault  has  been  in  theorists
to  assign  specific  oflSces  to  the  electric  agency  in  the
human  frame,  —  offices  which  it  may  indeed  fulfil,
but  which  the  march  of  experiment  has  not  yet  suf-
ficiently demonstrated  that  it  does  fulfil.  The  inquiry
has  not,  as  it  seems  to  me,  been  conducted  rightly.
We  have  sought,  as  I  said  before,  to  demonstrate  the
presence  of  electricity  in  the  human  body ;  and  that
was  needless.  The  only  sure  way  of  demonstrating
that  any  agency  in  the  human  body  is  akin  to  the
electric  is  to  identify  the  laws  of  action  of  the  two
forces.

I  think,  then^  at  present,  that  the  most  striking  fact


•tHE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  493

^f  which  I  have  heard  relative  to  the  identity  of  the
nervous  and  electric  agencies  is  the  discovery  of  Dea-
moulins,  that  the  transmission  of  sensation  and  motion
is  made  by  the  surface  of  the  spinal  marrow,  and  not
by  its  central  pa:rts.  This  is  exactly  parallel  to  the
action  of  electricity,  which  is  developed  only  and
transmitted  along  the  surfaces  of  bodies.  That  nerves
really  do  conduct  a  matter  similar  at  least  to  the
electric  has  been  also  proved  by  the  fact,  that  a  mag-
net held  between  the  two  sections  of  a  recently  di-
vided nerve  was  observed  to  be  deflected  as  by  an
electric  current.

But  the  kind  of  electricity  which  is  in  the  human
frame  is  probably  a  modification  of  the  original  prin-
ciple. In  many  particulars  it  bears  more  resemblance
to  galvanism,  and  it  is  really  ascertained  by  experi-
ments on  dead  animals  that  the  nervous  fibre  has  a
property  of  being  galvanically  affected,  which  (though
varying  of  course  like  other  properties  with  the  con-
dition of  the  substance  in  which  it  resides)  may  be
called  inherent.  Some  most  interesting  experiments,
by  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  which  patients,  by  a  reinforce-
ment of  mesmeric  power,  were  shown  capable  of
swinging  round  large  weights,  impossible  to  be  even
lifted  by  them  in  their  ordinary  condition,  prove
again  the  intimate  connection  between  the  mesmeric
medium  and  the  muscular  force,  which,  as  every  one
knows,  is  dependent  on  the  state  of  the  nerves  and
by  them  conducted  from  the  brain.  If  personal  evi-
dence may  be  allowed  to  have  importance,  I  may  add
that  I  am  of  an  electric  temperament^  so  much  so,  that


494  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

long  ago  when  a  child  I  used  to  amaze  and  even
alann  my  young  companions  by  combing  my  hair
before  them  in  the  dark  and  exhibiting  to  them  the
electric  coruscations. Of  course,  also,  this  phenome-
non takes  place  most  remarkably  in  a  dry,  and,  there-
fore, non-conducting  atmosphere. Now  between  this
electrical  endowment  and  whatever  mesmeric  proper-
ties I  may  possess  there  is  a  perfect  relationship  and
parallelism. Whatever  state  of  the  atmosphere  tends
to  carry  off  electricity  from  the  body  hinders  in  so
far  my  capacity  of  mesmerising ;  and  whatever  state
of  the  atmosphere  tends  to  accumulate  and  insulate
electricity  in  the  body  promotes  greatly  the  power
and  facility  with  which  I  influence  others  mesmeri-
cally.

My  feelings  of  bodily  health  also  vary  with  the
plus  or  minus  of  electricity;  and,  perhaps,  did  persons
oftener  attend  to  such  things,  a  similar  phenomenon
might  not  uncommonly  be  remarked. This  at  least
we  may  admit,  that  the  welfare  of  the  human  body
depends  on  the  equilibrium  or  proper  distribution  of
its  forces,  and  that  the  electric  is  one  of  these  just  as
much  as  heat  or  oxygen. The  mesmeric  force  has,
more  than  any  other,  been  shown  to  be  inherent  in
man;  and,  taking  all  the  above  facts  into  consideration,
it  is  by  no  means  a  strained  conclusion  that  it  actually
is  that  particular  modification  of  electricity  which  is
appropriate  to  the  human  constitution. When,  then,
after  having  mesmerised  a  person,  I  have  a  peculiar
feeling  of  loss  of  strength  and  general  uneasiness,
which  can  by  no  means  be  traced  to  usual  causes,  I


TH£ MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  495

^am  compelled  to  consider  this  as  a  proof  that  1  have
suffered  by  a  temporary  destruction  of  equilibrium
in  that  medium  wherewith  I  have  charged  another
person^ — that  medium,  namely,  which  we  have  agreed
to  call  mesmeric.  That  which  greatly  adds  to  the
presumption  is  the  fact  that  there  is  gain  in  the  patient
as  there  is  loss  in  the  mesmeriser.  The  tendency  of
mesmeric  influence  to  restore  equilibrium  to  the  bodily
forces  is  manifest.  Under  its  beneficial  action  I  have
seen  headachs  cured,  fatigue  dissipated^  and  trifling
bodily  ailments  removed  in  a  short  time.  How  much
it  calms  and  equalises  the  circulation  was  shown  in
the  case  of  Anna  M  ■  ■  ,  whose  pulse^  agitated  by
fever,  was  rendered  even  and  natural  after  the  occurs
rence  of  the  mesmeric  slumber.  I  have  had  occasion
also  to  remark  that  my  own  sense  of  exhaustion  bore
a  perceptible  relation  to  that  which  I  was  called  upon
to  cure.  In  mesmerising  the  weak,  even  when  using
very  slight  exertion,  I  have  found  myself  more  than
commonly  fatigued.  A  young  lady,  whom  I  mesmer-
ised occasionally  at  Antwerp,  and  who  was  in  deli-
cate health,  remarked  once  to  me,  with  that  quick
perception  of  every  thing  relative  to  mesmerism
which  persons  under  that  influence  display,  —  "  I
am  afraid  it  is  a  great  fatigue  to  you  to  mesmerise
me,  because  I  feel  so  much  strengthened."  It  was
perfectly  true.

A  medical  man  at  Berne  told  me  also  that  he
once  undertook,  by  mesmerism,  to  treat  a  lady  who
was  suffering  from  periodical  convulsive  fits.  By
mesmerising  her  every  day  a  little  before  the  hour


496  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

when  the  fits  usually  came  on,  he  first  deferred^
and  finally  altogether  prevented,  the  recurring  at-
tacks of  the  malady ;  but  he  himself  suffered  in  a
singular  manner.  Sometimes,  after  mesmerising  his
patient,  he  would  faint  away  from  the  consequent
exhaustion.

From  these  facts,  as  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  every
reason  to  conclude  that  the  principle  of  mesmeric
action  is  a  disturbance  of  equilibrium,  and  that  its
mechanical  effects  may  be  all  explained  by  differ-
ences of  positive  and  negative,  of  plus  and  minus,  in
the  mesmeriser  and  the  patient.

Add  to  these  features  of  coincidence  between  elec-
tric and  mesmeric  agency,  that  both  are  subject  to
actions  and  reactions,  and  that  the  one,  like  the  other,
may  be  accumulated  in  bodies  to  a  great  extent  with-
out producing  any  sensible  change  in  their  proper-
ties ;  and  it  is  impossible  but  that  the  analogy  between
the  two  media  should  appear  remarkable.

Thus  generalising,  we  have  arrived  at  the  point  to
which  all  science  seems  tending,  —  namely,  the  de-
monstration of  an  ethereal  medium,  of  which  all  other
agencies  are  but  the  effects.  Should  I  have  been
successful  in  proving  the  existence  of  a  mesmeric
agency  and  its  connection  with  other  actions  of  matter,
I  trust  that  I  may  be  allowed,  not  to  have  annulled,
but  to  have  extended  the  sphere  of  former  knowledge.
I  have  only  exhibited  that  ether,  which  Newton  ima-
gined and  subsequent  philosophers  have  proved  to
exist,  in  a  new  point  of  view  and  engaged  in  new
offices. I  have  shown  that  that  medium  is  the  proper


tUE MEISMEUIC MEDIUM.  497

t)rgan  of  the  mind,  and  the  transmitter  of  all  sensation^
—  that  its  motions  are  identical  with  thought,  and  ar*
not  the  accidental,  but  the  permanent,  language  of
Bentient  beings.  Let  our  contribution  be  received.
The  question,  —  Can  mesmerism  take  its  stand
amongst  the  sciences  ?  is  even  now  decided.  Even
now  mesmerism  is  a  science  of  observation.  They  who
have  always  rejected  the  undulatory  theory  may  be
pardoned  for  rejecting  it  on  the  present  occasion  :  but
they  who  allow  it  will  not  be  excusable,  should  they
refuse  to  trace  it  in  a  new  and  most  interesting  depart-
ment of  its  agency ; — at  least,  they  cannot  but  confess
it  to  be  capable  of  the  effects  now  ascribed  to  it.
What  then  will  be  thought  should  the  very  supporters
t)f  the  undulatory  system  desert  us  here  —  reject  our
facts  as  absurd,  and  proscribe,  in  this  particular  in-
stance only,  the  hj^othesis  that  would  render  them
•credible,  nay,  even  necessary  ?

An  elastic  ether,  modified  by  the  nerves,  and  the
•conduction  of  which  depends  on  their  condition;
which  can  be  thrown  into  vibration  immediately  by
the  mind  of  man,  and  mediately  by  the  nervous  sys-
tem ;  which  manifests  itself  when  thrown  out  of
equilibrium,  and  produces  mental  effects  through  un-
usual stimulation  of  the  brain  and  nerves,  cannot
but  be  allowed  to  be  a  cause  which  answers  to  all
the  conditions  that  we  desire  to  unite,  and  which
is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  phenomena  that
we  have  been  considering.  And,  be  it  remembered
ever,  we  have  not  created  the  medium  for  our  pur-
poses, —  the  necessities  of  the  case  have  created  the


498  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

medium  for  us,  as  alone  adequate  to  the  production
of  certain  effects  which  do  really  and  visibly  exist.

Even  should  my  theory  of  undulations  be  rejected,
we  cannot  but  conclude  that  in  mesmerism  there  is
an  especial  agency.  Not  one  argument  against  the
reality  of  its  existence  is  available,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  a  mass  of  positive  evidence  demonstrates  that  it
does  exist.  Should  then  the  learned  at  once  refuse
to  examine  and  to  believe,  I  own  that  I  shall  feel
surprise.  But,  that  the  world  in  general  should  reject
mesmerism,  till  the  great  leaders  of  opinion  have
marshalled  the  way  to  its  precincts,  I  not  only  expect,
but  am  ready  to  forgive^  since  there  are  so  many  ^re-
ceived truths  (as  they  are  called)  from  which  it  seems
incorrect  to  differ,  and  which  the  most  part  of  man-
kind carry  about,  as  Foster  says  we  do  our  characters
and  our  watches,  without  scrutinising  of  what  they
are  composed.  In  the  mean  time  let  me,  at  least,  in
drawing  to  a  conclusion,  set  forth  the  claims  of  mes-
merism to  general  attention  —  to  the  philosopher  as  a
philosopher  —  to  man  as  man.  My  own  debts  to
this  despised  science  are  too  many  and  too  various  to
permit  me  to  leave  undischarged  this  duty  towards
others  and  myself.

First,  in  a  philosophical  point  of  view,  mesmerism
may  be  aflSrmed  not  only  to  touch  nearly,  but  to
throw  light  on,  questions  which  have  long  agitated
the  intellectual  world.

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  these  is  whether
there  may  not  exist  a  special  though  invisible  agency
appropriate  to the  nervous  system,  through  which


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  499

sensation  is  accomplished  and  animal  motion  per-
formed. Charles  Bonnet  of  Geneva,  a  century  ago,
suggested  that  there  was  an  elastic  ether  resident  in
the  nerves  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  in  which
the  electric  fluid  resides  in  the  solid  bodies  along
which  it  is  conducted.  He  says,  "  Should  we  admit
that  there  is  in  the  nerves  a  fluid,  which  in  subtlety
and  elasticity  resembles  light,  or  ether,  by  the  help  of
such  an  agency  we  may  easily  explain  the  celerity
with  which  external  impressions  are  communicated
to  the  mind,  and  that  with  which  the  mind  executes
so  many  diversified  operations."  {Essai  AnaLchaL^.v.)

•This  suggestion  has  been  variously  received,  or
combated,  but  never  absolutely  dropped  or  decided
one  way  or  the  other,  so  recent  a  writer  as  Mrs.
Somerville  (who  may  be  supposed  to  represent  the
prevailing  authorities  of  the  day)  allowing  that  the
galvanic  fluid  "  may  ultimately  prove  to  be  the  cause
of  muscular  action."*

Now  it  appears  to  me  that  mesmerism  is  more  cal-
culated to  decide  this  point  than  galvanic  batteries
or  experiments  on  the  divided  nerves  of  dogs  and
rabbits.

We  have  seen  that,  in  cases  of  mesmeric  sympathy,
the  actual  sensation  of  one  person  is  transferred  ac-
curately to  another :  so  also  the  mental  action  of  the
mesmeriser  can  —  so  to  speak  —  perform  motion  in
another.  I  have  actually  seen  mesmerised  persons
make  the  most  laughable  faces  simultaneously  with
their  mesmeriser,  though  the  latter  was  standing  quite

*  Connexion  of  the  Physical  Sciences,  p.  331.


500  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

behind  them.  If  he  put  out  his  tongue,  the  patient
also  protruded  his ;  if  he  wrinkled  his  brow,  the  pa-
tient wrinkled  his  brow  likewise.  These  things  may
appear  ludicrous  —  to  those  who  view  but  the  outside
of  things  they  are  purely  so ;  but  to  the  thoughtfiil
inquirer  every  trifle  connected  with  a  grave  subject
is  of  importance.

Be  it  remembered  that  the  phenomenon  of  which
we  are  speaking  does  not  take  place  indifferently  in
all  cases  of  mesmeric  relationship  between  two  per-
sons; but  only  (with  few  exceptions)  when  the  mes-
meriser  exerts  his  will  and  attention  to  that  particular
end.  Where,  indeed  the  relation  between  the  parties
is  very  strong,  the  patient  is  apt,  as  it  were  involun^-
tarily,  to  adopt  the  gestures  and  mode  of  walking  of
his  mesmeriser.  He  is  as  a  machine  swayed  ever  by
the  volition  of  the  latter.  But  in  general  the  con-
nection between  particular  acts  of  will  and  intention,
originating  with  the  mesmeriser,  and  particulur  mo-
tions occurring  simultaneously  in  the  patient,  is
marked  and  decisive.  The  inference  is  irresistible.
One  mind  originates  motion  in  two  bodies ;  one  act
tends  to  two  performances.  The  medium,  set  in
motion  between  mesmeriser  and  patient,  does  not,  in
this  instance,  move  the  latter  in  the  manner  of  a
mere  stick  or  rod ;  it  is  plainly  impulse  as  well  as
guide,  and  conveys  to  the  motory  nerves  of  the  pa-
tient the  exact  impulsion  which  it  takes  from  the
will  of  the  mesmeriser.  Whatever  be  the  force  which
has  moved  the  muscles  of  the  one,  precisely  the  same


TH£ MESMERIC MEDIUM.  501

degree  of  that  force  is  meted  out  to  the  muscles  of
the  other,

I  may  now  ask  whether  the  mesmeriser,  having
thus  in  the  truest  sense  performed  muscular  motion
in  another,  and  evidently  by  a  medium  (for  actions
are  not  propagated  save  by  transference  from  atom
to  atom),  may  not  legitimately  infer  that  what  is  so
efficient  to  influence  the  nerves  and  muscles  of  another
person  is  also  adapted  to  act  upon  his  own  and  is
capable  of  the  production  of  that  very  effect  in  him-
self which  he  has  remarked  in  another  ?  So  also,
when  he  extends,  as  it  were,  to  his  patient,  or  rather
gives  action  to,  a  medium  of  sensation  the  finest  and
most  delicate  imaginable,  may  he  not  at  least  con-
jecture that  a  similar  medium  of  sensation  is  em-
ployed in  conveying  to  himself  impulsions  from  the
external  world  ?

But  to  consider  the  matter  more  closely.  The
first  effect  of  mesmerism  is  a  bodily  sleep,  from  which
volition  seems  to  be  absent  In  such  a  state,  that  it
is  not  natural  for  persons  to  get  up  and  walk  must
be  conceded.  Constitutional  sleepwaking  is  the  af-
fliction of  but  a  few,  and  of  those  who  are  mesmerised
scarcely  one  perhaps  has  been  addicted  to  sleep-
waking.  In  accordance  with  this,  it  will  be  remem-
bered that,  in  my  cases  of  mesmeric  sleepwaking,  the
patient  always  manifested  at  first  the  strongest  re-
luctance to  move,  nor  indeed  would  stir  until  com-
pelled by  the  strong  command  of  tlie  mesmeriser.
There  is,  then,  at  such  moments  as  the  patient  is-
njoving,  a  force  in  operation  entirely  opposed  to  a;


502  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

natural  (ie^ire,  and  of  sufficient  strength  to  prevail
over  that  natural  desire.  But  this  is  not  all ;  we
have  not  here  a  common  case  of  sleepwaking,  whose
only  phenomenon  is  that  motion  ordinarily  per-
formed with  consciousness  is  performed  uncon-
sciously; but  we  have  sleepwaking  directed  by  an
external  force;  we  have  even,  be  it  remembered,
potion  cosentaneous  with  the  motion  of  another,  as
often  as  the  mesmeriser  wishes  to  produce  the  phe-
nomenon. We  have  the  nerves  of  motion  inert  and
incapacitated  one  moment,  yet  brought  the  next  into
involuntary  action.

Professor  Agassiz,  who  could  not  of  himself  stir  s^
muscle  when  mesmerised,  moved,  when  impelled  by
me,  like  an  automaton  across  the  room.  Even  while
retaining  his  consciousness  enough  to  resist  my  efforts,
by  mere  gestures,  without  contact  of  any  kind,  to
move  his  limbs,  he  subsequently  owned  that  he  was
actually  compelled  into  such  motions  as  I  wished
him  to  perform.  Surely  a  phenomenon  like  this  can
be  interpreted  but  in  one  manner.  The  mesmeriser
restores  to  his  patient's  nerves  of  motion  that  force,
the  previous  abstraction  of  which  rendered  them  in-
capable. Whether  that  force  be  galvanic  or  not  is  a
different  question.

Again,  pins  have  been  thrust  into  the  flesh  of
healthy  persons  during  the  mesmeric  slumber,  and
they  have  betrayed  no  mark  of  feeling.  Now,  in  such
cases,  it  is  plain  that  the  nerves,  which  ordinarily
convey|sensations  of  touch  to  the  mind,  areas  inefficient
to  propagate  impulsions  upward  to  the  brain,  as  if  they


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  608

•

had  been  tied  or  cut  —  But  wherefore  ?  The  nerves
have  been  neither  tied  nor  cut ;  they  have  undergone
no  alteration  that  we  can  perceive.  What  are  we
then  to  conclude  but  that  they  have  ceased  to  become
conductors  to  some  invisible  force  which  is  indis-
pensable to  their  action  ?  For,  lo  I  the  same  person
who  does  not  feel  pins  thrust  into  his  own  flesh
betokens  sensibility  to  the  slightest  injury  which  can
be  offered  to  his  mesmeriser,  and  that  not  merely  by
a  simple  idea  conveyed  in  some  way  to  his  mind,  but
by  an  actual  impulsion  on  a  nerve  of  touch ;  for  he
will  raise  his  hand  to  the  part  of  his  body  correspond-
ing with  that  which  suffers  pain  in  the  mesmeriser.
Seeing  this,  what  can  we  surmise  but  that  the  nerve
which  was  so  lately  inactive  has  been  restored  to
action  by  the  very  force  whose  absence  marred  its
efficiency ; — that  the  mesmeriser  communicates  to  his
patient  not  merely  a  conductor,  but  a  means,  of  sensa-
tion ?  And  impressions  of  this  kind  are  conveyed
in  no  other  way  to  the  patient ;  for,  unless  the  mesmer-
iser act,  his  nervous  extremities  are  in  general  as  dead.

Since  then  we  see  the  motory  and  sentient  powers
of  the  mesmerised  person  as  active  through  the  mes-
meriser as  they  were  shown  to  be  powerless  in  them-
selves, we  infer  that  the  latter  restores  the  very  force
through  the  obstruction  of  which  they  become  in-
efficient.

And  thus  a  new  antecedent  to  sensation  and  pal-
pable motion  becomes  manifest :  for,  however  uncer-
tain a  person  may  be  that  there  is  an  intermediate
agency  between  his  own  will  and  the  motions  of  his


504  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM*

own  body,  he  cannot  doubt  that  there  is  an  intei^
mediate  agency  between  himself  and  the  motions  he
produces  in  another;  and  again,  however  doubtful
he  may  be  that  his  own  nerves,  in  sensation,  are  but
conductors  to  some  more  efficient  force,  he  must  be
certain  that  he  produces  sensation  in  another  person,
not  by  nerves  merely,  but  by  some  invisible  medium
acting  on  those  nerves  and  restoring  to  them  their
capacities.  And  that  this  is  all  effected  by  one  medium
seems  certain,  for  the  mesmeriser  can  concentrate  its
motory  and  sentient  efficacy  into  one  act ;  as  whea
he  handles  a  ball,  or  other  object,  and  the  patient
(with  his  back  turned  and  at  a  distance)  goes  througix
the  same  motions ;  and,  by  sympathetic  feeling,  be*
comes  aware  what  it  is  that  the  mesmeriser  holds  in
his  hand.  It  would  be  perhaps  rash  to  say  that
hence  he  may  decidedly  infer  that  motion  and  sensa-«
tion  are  performed  by  a  medium  in  himself;  yet
speculation  cannot  but  tend  that  way,  and  surely  he
may  be  forgiven  if  he  supposes  that  he  reads  and
scans,  as  by  reflection  in  a  faithful  mirror,  the  mys-'
teries  of  his  own  being  in  the  manifested  operations
of  his  who  sympathises  with  him  so  wondrouslyw
This,  at  least,  is  clear :  —  if  ever  we  hope  to  arrive  at
a  just  notion  of  what  has  been  called  the  nervous,
energy,  it  must  be  through  means  like  these*  Only
thus  can  we  at  once  demonstrate  its  existence,  and
analyse  its  nature.  The  action  on  ourselves  of
those  powers  which  constitute  our  vitality  is  toa
near  us,  too  intimately  blended  with  our  being,  to
form  a  subject  of  personal  contemplation. Our  un-^


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  505

consciousness  of  their  agency  is  a  law  of  our  being,  and
has  hitherto  been  the  great  argument  against  admit-
ting the  very  existence  of  a  nervous  medium,  which,
however  plausibly  presented  to  reason,  can  in  no  way
be  rendered  palpable  to  sense.  Here,  however,  the
mesmeriser,  seeing  that  he  is  unconscious  how  he
actuates  the  person  whom  he  sways,  while  that  he
does  actuate  him  through  a  medium  is  manifest  by
visible  signs,  perceives  that  his  ignorance,  how  he
feels  or  performs  his  own  voluntary  movements,  is  no
proof  whatever  that  he  may  not  unconsciously  use,
both  in  sensation  and  in  motion,  a  subtle,  elastic,  and
ethereal  medium.

While  physiologists  have  been  engaged  in  surmis-*
ing  or  disputing  the  existence  of  a  nervous  agency,
metaphysicians,  on  their  parts,  have  transferred  the
question  into  a  more  spiritual  region,  speeulating  on
the  strange  marriage  between  mind  and  matter,  and
proposing,  in  order  to  effect  a  union  between  such
opposites,  an  intermediary  partaking  of  the  qualities
of  both.  That  a  link  does  really  seem  wanting  be-
tween the  mind  and  the  grosser  matter  with  which
we  are  visibly  surrounded  is  to  be  presumed  from
the  subject  having  engaged  men's  attention  from  the
earliest  ages ;  from  the  period  when  the  ancient  phi-
losophy devised  intermediary  images  of  things,  to
that  in  which  Cudworth  imagined  a  plastic  mediator.
This  palpable  hiatus  between  the  visible  and  the  in-
visible—  the  subtle  and  the  gross — mesmerism  seems
calculated  to  supply.  Let  me  not  for  one  moment  be
misunderstood. The  notion  of  a  half-intelligent  roe-

z


506  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

dium  is  as  absurd  a  jumble  as  the  idea  of  a  half-
thought  would  be.  Mind  cannot  be  cut  up  into
fractions ;  and  to  divide  it,  or  mingle  it  with  matter,
in  any  way,  is  just  the  same  as  if  we  were  to  talk  of
pounds  of  intellect  or  square  inches  of  rationality.
When  I  speak,  then,  of  the  possibility  of  a  medium
subsisting  between  the  mind  and  the  grosser  mani-
festations of  matter,  I  must  by  'no  means  be  con-
ceived to  intimate  that  this  medium  partakes  in  any
degree  of  the  qualities  of  spirit.  In  this  respect  I
perfecdy  agree  with  Sterne.  "The  ancient  philo-
sophy materialised  spirit,  and  the  modern,  in  order
to  be  even  with  it,  has  spiritualised  matter.  What
extremes  are  men  liable  to  run  into,  who  depiu:t  one
line  from  common  sense.''  Besides,  this  petitio  prin"
cipii  is  altogether  useless,  and  explains  nothing.
Thought  and  sensation  are  in  the  mind  alone.  The
latter  sensation,  at  least,  seems  brought  there  from
afar,  but  we  cannot  shorten  the  road.  When  we
have  traced  it  to  the  brain,  it  has  still  a  journey  to
perform,  as  long  and  as  difficult  as  ever,  —  the  transi-
tion, namely,  from  motion  to  thought,  from  a  sign
to  an  idea,  from  matter  to  spirit;  and,  however  we
may  deem  that  we  facilitate  the  passage  by  a  medium,
half-mind,  half-matter,  we  in  reality  have  left  the  op-
posing principles  just  where  they  were.  We  have
only  assumed  the  very  point  which  we  were  desirous
of  proving.  I  would,  then,  plainly  state  that  I  re-
cognise only  two  grand  divisions  in  nature,  namely,
of  cogitative,  and  incogitative  —  that  which  thinks,
and  that  which  thinks  not. Yet  that,  in  a  different


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  507

sense,  there  may  exist  a  medium  between  sensible
objects  and  the  mind,  I  trust  to  demonstrate  is  not
impossible.

Striving  to  arrive  at  the  true  source  whence  arises
so  obstinate  an  idea  in  us  of  a  medium  between  mind
and  matter,  I  imagine  it,  like  most  of  our  notions,  to
proceed  from  the  ground  of  our  own  personal  expe-
rience. We  see  and  know  that  we  never  move  matter
external  to  ourselves  except  through  the  medium  of
our  own  bodies.  Our  minds  we  feel  to  be  inadequate
per  86  to  stir  one  atom  of  extraneous  matter.  In  the
isame  way  we  feel  and  know  that  all  information  re-
specting external  things  comes  to  the  mind  through
the  medium  of  the  body;  and,  apart  from  this
medium,  we  feel  that  our  minds  are  inadequate  to
take  cognisance  of  external  objects.  Hence  arises  in
the  mind  a  general  proposition  that  mind  affects
matter,  or  is  affected  by  matter  only  through  a  me*
dium  ;  and  we  carry  this  piece  of  reasoning  even  into
the  precincts  of  our  own  corporeal  frame  —  conceiv-
ing that  this  also,  being  matter,  can  only  be  moved
by  our  minds  through  a  medium,  and  can  act  on  our
thinking  principle  only  through  a  medium.  Now
this  reasoning,  though  imperfect,  is  not  altogether
null  and  baseless.  That  mind  can  only  act  on  matter
through  a  medium,  and  vice  versd,  is,  indeed,  a
false  proposition ;  for  allowing  a  medium,  however
ethereal,  between  the  mind  and  brain,  we  cannot  but
allow^  that  medium  itself  to  be  matter,  unless  indeed
we  fall  into  the  old  absurdity  of  a  half-intelligent
medium. Still  there  are  media  which  manifiastly

z  2


508  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

exist,  and  are  made  evident  in  their  effects ;  which,
though  they  cannot  be  in  any  way  confounded  with
mind^  inasmuch  as  they  are  incogitative^  do  reiJly
differ  from  our  common  notions  of  matter  in  many
particulars ;  —  I  speak  of  media,  to  which  we may
apply  that  which  Dr.  Maculloch  has  beautifully  said
concerning  light. ^^  Imponderable,  intangible,  incor
pable  of  being  arrested  and  accumulated,  ever  under
the  most  rapid  motions,  though  we  cannot  discover  a
projectile  force ;  coming  we  know  not  how,  and  vanish-
ing we  know  not  where,  it  is  in  all  but  the  power  of
thought  a  spirit." Now  to  matter  in  general  we  cer-
tainly attach  the  ideas  of  weight  and  palpable  solidity ;
and  though,  when  we  say  of  the  ethereal  medium  that
it  is  co-extensive  with  space,  and  composed  of  impene*
trable,  indivisible  atoms,  we  really  classify  it  with
matter,  still  there  is  a  lurking  feeling  in  the  mind
which creates a  distinction  between  matter  of  so
ethereal  a  texture  and  that  which  we  can  see,  weigh,
and  handle. Why  matter  of  this  nature  should  seem
to  us  more  adapted  to  act  upon  mind,  and  vice  versd,
than  any  other  sort  of  matter,  we  can  perhaps  give  no
very  philosophical  reason ;  yet  the  fitct  is  that  there  is
some  such  notion  in  the  mind  of  most  persons.

But,  again,  this  notion  is  really  in  harmony  with
some  striking  facts.  The  grosser  media,  which  are
palpable  to  our  senses,  act  upon  and  modify  the
finer  media,  which  are  in  truth  always  the  most
forceful  and  pervading ;  but  are  either  not  palpable
to  our  senses,  or  are  perceived  only  by  such  a  sense
as  sight,  which  is  in  truth  a  complicated  intellectual


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  509

operation.  The  atmosphere  modifies  the  electric
principle,  and  its  insensible  action  on  our  bodies;
the  atmosphere  modifies  light,  and  adapts  it  to  the
visual  capacities  of  man.  Light  itself  has  been  re-
cently conjectured  to  depend  on  electrical  actions  and
reactions.  Should  this  prove  to  be  so,  and  should
subsequent  experiments  demonstrate  that  man  com-
mmiicates  with  his  own  body  through  electric  agency,
the  following  proposition,  now  but  a  theory,  would
gradually  evolve  itself.  Grosser  media  act  on  the
finer,  the  finest  on  the  mind  of  man ;  and  again  the
mind  of  man  reacts  from  finer  to  grosser  media.  I
confess  that  to  a  system  like  this  the  phenomena  of
mesmerism  incline  me  to  lean ;  while,  as  it  appears
to  me,  the  analogies  of  the  visible  universe  tend  also
to  the  same  conclusion. In  the  words  of  the  poet  —

**  Look  nature  through ;  't  is  just  gradation  all.
By  what  minute  degrees  her  scale  ascends  !
Each  middle  nature  joined  at  each  extreme.
To  that  above  is  join'd,  to  that  beneath :
Parts  into  parts  reciprocally  shot
Abhor  divorce.**

Again.  Whatever  we  turn  our  contemplation,
there  is  a  manifest  progression  from  finer  to  grosser
media.  An  ethereal  and  infinitely  subtle  fluid,  per-
vading the  realms  of  space,  is  the  first  known  step
from  Deity  to  matter.  Distributed  through  this,
and  probably  condensed  from  the  prime  element,  are
discerned  masses  of  a  luminous  substance,  which
have  received  the  name  of  nebulae  from  astronomers.

z  3


510  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

Amidst  these  luminous  masses,  which  constitute  the
first  traces  of  matter  of  which  we  have  ocular  evi-
dence, are  beheld  certain  nuclei,  forming  the  germs  of
future  suns  or  worlds.  So,  at  least,  we  may  safely
conjecture ;  for  all  geology  goes  to  prove  that  **  all
this  fair  variety  of  things,"  which  our  earth  di8pla3rs,
was  once  in  a  fluid,  or  rathar  gaseous,  state.  Nay,
there  needs  but  a  sufficient  application  of  the  uni-
versal solvent  —  heat,  to  meltdown  all  again  into
fluidity  and  vapour.  Thus,  again,  with  science^  we
arrive  at  a  primal,  universal  element,  such  as  is
now  supposed  to  be  the  substratum  even  of  the  gases :
and  this  element  (I  speak  it  with  reverence)  is  the
first  demonstrated  action  of  the  Almighty  mind.

If  I  err  in  thus  expressing  myself,  I  err  with  no
less  an  authority  than  Milton,  who  speaks  of  light »
the  first  effluence  of  divine  power:  —

"  Hail,  holy  Light,  offspring  of  Heaven,  first-bom.
Or  of  the  Eternal  co-etemal  beam,
May  I  express  thee  unblam'd  ?  since  God  is  light.
And  never  but  in  unapproached  light
Dwelt  from  eternity,  dwelt  then  in  thee,
Bright  effluence  of  bright  essence  increate.
Or  hear'st  thou  rather,  pure  ethereal  stream.
Whose  fountsdn  who  shall  tell  ? Before  the  Sud,.
Before  the  Heavens  thou  wert,  and  at  the  voice
Of  God,  as  with  a  mantle,  didst  invest
The  rising  world  of  waters  dark  and  deep.
Won  from  the  void  and  formless  infinite.*'

Now  that,  in  mesmerism,  a  subtle  medium  is  set
in  motion  by  the  mind  has  been  proved,  but  whether


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM*  511

this  be  accomplished  through  the  intermediate  agency
of  the  brain,  or  whether  the  brain  itself  is  moved  by
the  medium  —  whether,  in  brief,  the  brain  or  the
medium  be  most  proximate  to  the  mind,  it  is  impose
sible  for  us  to  decide  with  absolute  certainty,  it  being
evident  that  a  man  must  be  palpably  proved  to  have
acted  without  a  brain  before  the  question  can  be
finally  settled.  There  is,  however,  a  sort  of  reluc-
tance in  the  mind  (instinctive,  I  grant,  and  not  phi-
losophical,) to  conceive  that  spirit  can  act  at  once
and  directly  on  nerve  and  fibre,  and,  above  all,  on
a  torpid  viscus  like  the  brain,  which  may  be  cut  and
pierced  without  the  subject  of  such  an  operation
being  conscious  of  any  particular  feeling.  Rather
we  incline  to  imagine  that  an  impalpable  ethereal
medium,  such  as  the  mesmeric,  must  be  the  next
thing  to  mind  itsel£  A  medium  differing  in  so  far
from  ordinary  matter,  as  it  is  set  in  motion  by  the
human  mind  immediately.  In  such  a  sense  only
could  we  admit  the  existence  of  an  intermediary
between  mind  and  matter.

So  much  may  be  said  without  much  thought  or
carefiil  induction :  but,  when  we  come  to  examine  into
the  principles  of  common  muscular  motion,  we  are
compelled  to  use  stronger  language.  The  physio-
logist here  cannot  &irly  have  recourse  to  his  old
stalking-horse  of  vital  acti<Mj  on  which  he  hobbles
away  so  often,  when  pressed  for  an  explanation  of
the  mysteries  of  our  firame.  He  himself  must  grant
that  it  is  will  which  originates  and  governs  the
duration  of  muscular  contraction. He  must  also

z  4


512  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

grant  that  contraction  cannot  take  place  witfaoat  the
immediate  influence  of  the  brain  and  nerves — though
what  that  influence  is  he  very  wiselj  forbears  to  tell
us.  Muscular  motion,  then,  is  perfbrmed  by  the
will  or  mind  (for  will  is  but  an  attribute  of  the  mind),
through  the  medium  of  the  nerves.  But  are  the
nerves  of  themselves  a  medium  fitting  for  this  work  ?
Let  us  examine  them,  and  we  shall  find  nothing
whatever  to  account  for  their  marvellous  capacities.
They  are,  to  appearance,  the  weakest  of  all  weak  in-
struments —  mere  soft  white  filaments,  enveloped  in
a  fine  cellular  membrane — and  yet  the  strength  and
the  power  of  all  the  body  is  derived  firom  them !
This  simple  fact  reduces  us  to  a  dilemma.  Either
we  must  believe  the  nervous  substance  to  be  the
channel  of  some  ulterior  and  efficient  energy,  to  us
invisible,  or  we  must  admit,  according  to  Pascal's
generally  received  definition  of  a  miracle  —  namely,
'^  an  effect  exceeding  the  natural  force  of  the  means
employed  ^  —  that  a  constant  miracle  is  taking  place
in  our  mortal  frames.  Following  the  good  old  advice
of  the  poet,  who  said  "  Nee  Deus  intersit,"  &c.  we
rather  shrink  from  attributing  to  direct  divine  agency
every  minute  corporeal  motion  which  our  &ncy  may
incline  us  to  make.  It  is  not  the  mind  itself  which
directly  moves  the  muscle ;  if  it  did,  we  should  have
to  seek  no  &rther  for  an  adequate  agency,  since  we
have  never  measured  the  power  of  mind  to  move
matter.  But,  as  we  know,  the  mind  moves  the
muscle  indirectly,  and  through  the  medium  of  the
brain  and  nerves. In  this  case  there  is  a  known


THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  5lS

sequence  of  events;  and  a  sequence  which,  as  it
stands  at  present,  is  an  absurdity.  The  weak  soft
fibre  stirs  the  muscle,  as  we  are  told,  so  immediately,
so  mightily,  that  "  its  fibres  shorten  and  become  hard,
without  any  preparatory  oscillation  or  hesitation,  and
they  acquire  all  at  once  such  an  elasticity,  that  they
are  capable  of  vibrating  or  producing  sounds."  *
There  is  nothing  in  mesmerism  more  wonderful  than
this,  more  difficult  of  digestion  to  credulity  itself,
when  we  take  the  matter  as  it  stands,  without  bring-
ing into  view  an  ulterior  agency,  —  an  efficient  force.
Why  shrink  we  from  so  doing?  When  we  look
upon  the  heavens,  and  the  magnificent  system  of
sidereal  worlds,  harmoniously  moving  round  a  com-
mon centre,  we  acknowledge  all  this  harmony  to  be
the  result  of  a  force  which  we  call  gravitation.  But
what  is  the  wonder  of  the  universe  compared  to  the
mystery  of  the  mind  linked  to  matter  and  actuating
it?  It  is  a  mystery;  but  we  need  not  on  that  ac-
count render  it  an  absurdity  by  inefficient  causation
—  by  denying  the  mind  an  adequate  intermediate
agency.  Such  denials  betray  physiologists  into  great
inconsistencies ;  as,  for  instance,  Magendie  one  mo-
ment censures  every  attempt  to  explain  muscular v
contraction,  and  the  very  next  explains  it  himself
by  the  vaguest  of  vague  terms  —  "cerebral  influ-
ence," affirming,  from  the  strength  of  maniacs,  that
"  the  muscular  power  may  be  carried  to  a  wonderful
degree  by  the  action  of  the  brain  alone."

*  Magendie.
z  5


514  THE  MESBIERIC  MEDIUM*

What  is  this  brain,  what  are  the  nerves,  that  they
should  possess  such  power  of  action  ?  Is  it  inherent
in  them  ?  If  so,  why  does  it  not  endure  when  man
has  ceased  to  think  and  live.  Examine  a  nenre
apart  from  the  intelligent  being  it  once  served,  pore
over  it  with  the  microscope ;  then  take  the  brain  and
weigh  it  well,  or  cut  it  up  into  sections :  where  is
the  innate  power  of  action,  where  is  all  that  may
truly  be  called  power  — namely,  the  enduring  and
essential  capacity  of  originating  motion  ?  If,  then,
it  be  an  absurdity  to  attribute  an  inherent  power  of
motion  to  flesh  and  fibre,  it  is  also  an  absurdity  to
attribute  to  weak  instruments  like  the  nerves  an
inherent  power  of  stirring,  in  an  instant,  the  strong
volume  of  a  muscle.  And  if  the  power  be  not  inhe^
rent,  where  is  it  ?  Granting  all  that  we  can  grant  as
regards  the  efficiency  of  mind  to  stir  its  own  organ-
isation, we  must  beware  how  we  charge  inconsistency
upon  the  Creator  by  supposing  Him  to  violate  those
laws  of  action  which  he  points  out  to  us  by  manifest
signs ;  and  never  has  our  experience  shown  that  by  a
weaker  agent  we  can  move  a  stronger  —  in  a  case,  too,
where  the  disproportion  is  manifest,  and  where  there
are  no  connecting  links  to  prepare  the  way  for  the
action  of  the  much  weaker  upon  the  much  stronger.
Again  we  ask  —  where  are  we  to  look  for  the  force
that  effects  such  wonders  ?  Now  we  fear  not  to  ex-
plain muscular  action  in  the  dead  by  a  force  that  we
call  galvanic.  Why  will  we  not  explain  it  in  the
living  by  some  efficient  force  at  least  —  for  here  we
have  equally  a  sensible  phenomenon  that  calls  on  us


THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM*  515

for  €ui  adequate  explanation.  I  know  not  what  philo-
sophic doubt  may  make  of  this  question,  but  cer-
tainly common  sense  decides,  from  the  ordinary  phe-
nomena of  muscular  motion,  that  the  mind  actually
dispenses  and  metes  out  a  material  force^  of  which
the  brain  is,  perhaps,  the  elaborator,  and  the  nerves
decidedly  the  appointed  conductors.  This  renders
the  question.  Whether  the  mind  acts  on  the  body,
mediately  or  immediately?  much  more  easy  of  de-
cision ;  and,  when  we  weigh  probabilities,  inclines  the
balance  in  favour  of  those  who  adhere  to  the  doctrine
of  a  medium.

Finally.  When  we  agree  to  divide  matter  into
ponderable  and  imponderable,  we,  in  fact,  create  a
distinction  to  the  full  as  great  and  important  as  any
which  can  be  devised  by  supposing  a  third  substance
which  is  neither  mind  nor  matter.  And,  this  distinc-
tion once  admitted,  there  is  no  inconsistency  whatever
in  saying  that  by  matter  imponderable  we  communi-
cate with  matter  ponderable.

Be  it  remembered,  I  assert  no  more  than  that
mesmerism  bears  on  this  disputed  point ;  —  that  it
decides  the  question  is  not  affirmed.  But,  when  we
reflect  that  the  whole  of  mesmerism  seems  to  consist
in  discarding  ordinary  intermediaries,  such  as  the
external  mechanism  of  the  senses  and  the  media
adapted  to  this,  and  in  arriving  at  grounds  and  prin^
ciples;  above  all,  when  we  see,  by  the  experiments  of
Dr.  Elliotson,  that  mesmerism  can  be  a  succedaneum
at  least  for  muscular  force^  enabling  the  weak  to  raise
heavy  weights;  and  when  again  we  combine  this  with

z  6


516  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

all  that  has  been  just  adyanced  respecting  an  inter-
inediary  in  muscular  action, — •  surely,  all  this  con-
sidered, we  cannot  be  far  from  the  belief  that  the
mesmeric  medium  is  really  the  long*soaght  link  that
was  to  render  our  system  more  complete  and  more
harmonious.

Should  we  come  to  this  conclusion,  we  remoTe  at
once  the  objection  so  often  raised  against  the  very  ex-
istence of  mesmerism,  that  its  agent  cannot —  in  our
usual  state  at  least  —  be  made  the  object  of  our  senses.
It  is  a  medium  to  enable  us  to  perceive  objects,  and
therefore  that  it  should  not  be  itself  a  direct  object  of
sense  seems  natural.  Light  itself  is  the  true  object  of
the  eye,  and  is,  in  certain  cases,  its  sole  object ;  and
whether  we  communicate  even  with  this  directly  may
be  made  a  question.  Should  we  establish  a  medium  be-
tween the  mind  and  all  matter  perceivable  by  us,  still
the  principle  must  here  also  be  adhered  to.  It  woidd
only  be  in  analogy  with  what  we  have  ascertained  in
other  cases,  should  we  decide  that  we  only  communi-
cate with  light  through  the  medium  of  another  and  an
imperceptible  agency.  Of  course  the  same  reasoning
will  apply  to  air,  and  to  the  action  of  all  media  on
our  senses.  Such,  at  least,  as  we  have  seen  was  the
view  which  Newton  took  of  the  economy  of  sens-
ation —  not  giving  all  his  reasons  why  he  did  so ;  but
who  can  doubt  but  that  such  a  mind  as  his  kept  back
within  itself  more  reasoning  on  most  subjects  than
common  thinkers  have  promulgated  and  found  ade-
quate to  secure  a  very  tolerable  reputation  ?

But,  in  truth,  the  objection  to  the  reality  of  mes-


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  517

merism,  because  it  cannot  be  brought  before  our
senses,  is  not  worth  much.  We  see  it  in  its  effects,
and  of  these  we  can  judge  by  more  senses  than  one.
The  mesmerised,  perhaps,  being  in  a  different  state
to  ourselves,  may  see  or  feel  indications  at  least  of  this
subtle  agent,  when  they  speak  of  perceiving  a  kind  of
fine  vapour,  or  electric  light.  If  so,  the  essential
difference  between  the  mesmeric  and  the  normal
state  would  consist  in  the  power  of  being  sensible  to
the  very  medium  which  furnishes  the  means  of  sense.

But,  in  truth,  what  is  the  invisible  ?  The  micro-
scope will  prove  our  vision  to  be  capable  of  a  de-
velopment, the  limits  of  which  will  not  easily  be  found.
Revealed  by  this,  "world  within  world  enclosed"
will  burst  upon  our  sight,  where  we  had  supposed  a
void.  It  would  be,  then,  ridiculous  to  make  the  ex-
istence of  a  medium  between  mind  and  body  de-
pendent on  the  cognisance  of  our  senses  as  at  pre-
sent constituted.  That  which  is  not  discerned  by  us
may  be  clearly  seen  by  more  spiritual  optics.  I  should
be  sorry  if  my  existence  depended  on  the  perfection
or  imperfection  of  some  persons'  organs  of  sight  and
general  sensibility.

Indeed,  if  we  lay  to  heart  the  deceptiveness  and
mutability  of  all  the  external  species  of  matter,  at
the  same  time  considering  that  we  have  no  reason  to
deem  it  capable  of  change  in  its  ultimate  and  imper-
ceptible particles ;  if  also  we  reflect  that  whatever  is
not  palpable  in  itself  yet  is  indicated  by  its  effects,
forces  us  on  pure  reason  by  withdrawing  at  once  the
aid  and  the  illusion  of  our  external  senses]  we  shall


JS18  THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

perhaps  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  invisible  is
the  only  true,  exclaiming  with  the  old  Latinist,
^*  Invisibilia  non  decipiunt'*

These  remarks  will  be  received  with  indulgence  or
not,  by  no  means  according  to  their  merit,  but  ac-
cording to  the  turn  and  character  of  each  several
reader's  mind ;  and  this  observation  involves  a  gene-
ral truth  not  sufficiently  attended  to.  We  all  have
our  own  modes  of  reasoning,  and,  as  our  minds  are
analytic  or  synthetic,  we  love  those  who  never  reach
or  those  who  jump  to  a  conclusion.  Again,  some
delight  in  all  theories,  and  some  love  no  body's
theories  but  their  own.  Now,  whether  I  belong  to
those  who  hastily  snatch  up  an  hypothesis,  because  it
so  nicely  accounts  for  things,  or  to  those  who  draw
deductions,  because  their  reason  is  convinced,  I  leave
to  others  to  decide ;  that  is,  provided  they  be  of  a
party  who  decide  on  any  thing.  For  my  own  part
I  confess  my  weakness.  I  like  to  come  to  a  decision;
and  herein  I  am  at  a  manifest  disadvantage,  for  in
all  ages  the  doubters  have  lorded  it  greatly  over  the
deciders.  It  is  so  grand,  and  so  philosophic  to  doubt,
even  of  one's  own  senses.

I  leave  the  world  to  apply  this  to  mesmerism  gene-
rally. Whether  the  speculations  into  which  this  sin-
gular subject  leads  us  almost  without  our  wills  be  or
be  not  generally  acceptable,  it  must  be  owned  that,
in  suggesting  to  us  a  mode  of  sensation  more  direct
and  worthy  of  the  mind  itself  than  the  common,  they
do  us  no  ill  service ;  and  surely  we  cannot  grossly
err  in  giving  to  thought  so  swift-winged  a  messenger


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  519

of  Tolition,  so  subtle  a  vehicle  of  sensibility,  as  the
mesmeric  medium.

The  idea  of  nature's  constitution,  which  the  appre-
hension of  such  a  medium  excites,  are  at  once  com-
prehensive and  ennobling;  and  the  philosopher,  who
desires  to  have  large  views  of  man  and  of  creation
in  general,  cannot  take  his  stand  on  a  better  vantage-
ground  than  the  one  which  the  inquirer  into  mesmer-
ism is  compelled  to  occupy.  Thus  expanded,  his
mind  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  cured  of  that  dogmatism
which  cries  out  ^^  impossible  "  to  all  that  is  not  within
the  narrow  round  of  its  own  experience.  The  first
time  of  witnessing  a  successful  experiment  in  mesmer^
ism  must  be  an  era  in  the  life  of  every  thinking
being;  while  the  student  in  this  science,  who  at
length  arrives  at  the  knowledge  of  an  ethereal  me-
dium, connected  with  all  animated  beings  and  with
thought  in  particular,  beholds  a  flood  of  light  illumi-
nating mysteries  which  have  probably  long  weighed
on  his  heart  and  brain.  He  beholds  all  life  and  in-
telligence at  once  connected  and  individualised-—
reciprocally  connected  in  all  its  parts  universally  with
God  ;  and  he  has  a  glimpse  at  least  of  the  waves  of
the  great  ocean  agitated  by  thought  eternal,  and
tending  to  thought  again  in  the  limited  portions  of
intelligence  which  the  Almighty  has  gifted  with  in-
dividual consciousness.

Should  his  mind  be  less  excursive,  should  he
study  mesmerism  with  practical  severity;  still  he
cannot  but  view  it  with  interest  as  a  link  between
sciences  at  present  disunited  or  standing  remotely


520  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

connected.  Physics  and  metaphysics  are  now  at  dag-
gers-drawing;  but  here  they  may  embrace  and  be
reconciled.  It  so  evidently  touches  on  all  and  blends
all.  Without  it  the  connection  of  the  physical  sci-
ences is  incomplete,  for  this  alone  concentrates  them
personally  in  man.  I  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt
that  a  future  generation  will  hail  mesmerism  as  the
very  note  which  was  wanting  to  render  all  nature
harmonious,  as  the  key  which  fits  every  ward  of
knowledge  and  unlocks  all  the  treasures  of  science.
The  ornithorhyncus  was  deemed  at  first  a  fictitious
creature,  but  was  found  at  last  to  be  the  very  link
that  was  wanting  to  the  animal  creation.

Let  me  hope  that  if,  in  endeavouring  to  advance  a
consummation  so  desirable,  I  have  fallen  into  scien-
tific errors  or  partial  inadvertences,  I  may  be  for-
given on  the  score  of  motive  at  least ;  though  I  am
quite  willing  to  be  charged  with  the  fault,  provided
mesmerism  be  not  blamed.  In  setting  forth  a  new
science  there  is  always  a  probability  that  errors  will
be  committed,  especially  in  setting  forth  a  science
like  this,  which  to  solve  entirely  would  be  to  solve
the  riddle  of  man.

There  is  one  imputation,  however,  from  which  I
shall  with  difficulty  escape,  a  charge  of  which  I  fear
not  even  my  own  conscience  can  acquit  me.  In  the
first  part  of  this  work  I  uttered  disrespectful  words
regarding  those  who,  treating  on  mesmerism,  took
occasion  to  frame  systems  of  the  universe ;  and  now,
behold,  I  am  myself  found  guilty  of  soaring  upwards
from  my  subject  into  the  regions  of  space,  and  of


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  521

drawing  from  a  few  despised  facts  the  highest  con-
clusions. So  easy  is  it  to  blame ;  so  difficult  to  avoid
blame ;  so  difficult,  also,  when  treating  of  man,  not
to  touch  upon  lofty  topics  and  to  be  led  even  un-
awares to  speculate  on  the  sublimities  of  creation.

It  remains  for  me  now  to  exhibit  mesmerism  in
such  points  of  view  as  regard  all  men  equally,  whether
considered  as  material  or  immaterial  beings.

First,  as  a  remedial  agent,  mesmerism,  when  better
known,  cannot  but  be  universally  important  and  in-
teresting. That  it  should  not  already  be  so  is  only  a
proof  how  inveterate  prejudice  can  be,  then  most
when  most  irrational.  When  we  see  persons  eagerly
running  after  every  new  or  old  new-revived  remedy,
consenting  to  be  starved,  as  is  now  the  fashion  in
Germany  (where  men  are  mad  for  what  is  called
the  hunger*  cure);  or  to  have  their  insides  drenched,
Sangrado-like,  with  water ;  or  to  sit  smilingly  plunged
up  to  the  neck  in  mud.  When  we  see  such  instances
of  more  than  martyr  fortitude  displayed  too  on  the
occasion  of  every  trifling,  or  perhaps  imagined,  ma-
lady, we  cannot  but  wonder  that  mesmerism,  so
fraught  with  hope  and  healing  to  the  human  race,
should  be  neglected;  more  especially,  too,  as  its
therapeutics  are  neither  disagreeable  nor  disgusting.
"  Blest  be  the  man  who  first  invented  sleep,"  says
Sancho ;  and  in  this  a  man  has  only  to  sleep  and  to
be  cured.

Not  being  medical  myself,  I  cannot  bring  forward
a  number  of  personally  observed  cases  in  which  mes-
merism has  been  useful. I  have,  however,  sometimes


522  THE liESMERIC  MEDIUM.

mesmerically  treated  slight  indispositions  in  members
of  my  own  family  with  success,  and  I  have  had  occa-
sion to  be  struck  generally  with  the  power  of  mes-
meric agency  to  equalise  the  circulation  and  to
relieve  pain.  I  have  known  it  to  be  particularly
successful  in  cases  of  severe  headach — by  no  means
one  of  the  least  ills  ^^  which  flesh  is  heir  to/'  On
one  occasion,  a  friend  of  mine,  the  Baron  de  Karlo*
witz,  whom  I  used  to  mesmerise  sometimes  for  mere
purposes  of  experiment,  came  to  me  with  a  severe
cold  and  hoarseness  which  prevented  him  from
speaking  above  a  whisper.  We  neither  of  us  had  any
idea  of  curing  this  affection ;  yet,  after  he  had  been
mesmerised  for  about  an  hour,  during  the  greater
part  of  which  time  he  slept,  he  rose  from  his  chair
perfectly  relieved  from  his  catarrhal  sjrmptoms.  He
also  found,  after  I  had  mesmerised  him  a  few  times,
that  he  had  got  rid  of  a  chronic  riieumatism  in  one
arm,  from  which  he  had  been  suffering  for  many
weeks.

From  medical  friends  I  have  received  many  parti-
cular accounts  of  the  beneficial  agency  of  mesmerism ;
but  these  the  limits  of  my  work  do  not  allow  me  to
detail.  I  can  only  state  generally  that,  as  might
have  been  expected  from  the  evident  action  of  this
influence  on  the  nerves,  mesmerism  is  especially
useful  in  those  derangements  of  the  nervous  system
which  are  generally  beyond  the  reach  of  medicine.
Epilepsy,  palsy,  nervous  depression,  madness  even,
have  been  successfully  combated  and  subdued  by
this,  which  may  most  emphatically  be  called  the


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  523

natural  remedy.  If  only  in  its  power  to  calm,  when
opiates  are  hurtful  and  improper,  this  tranquillising
influence  is  of  incalculable  value,  enabling  nature,
during  the  periods  of  repose,  to  balance  and  recruit
her  disordered  forces.  Dr.  Foissac,  of  Paris,  has
assured  me  that  he  has  seen  men  restored  to  calmness
and  finally  to  health  by  mesmeric  action,  when  suf-
fering in  the  last  stage  of  spasmodic  cholera.  Rea-
soning from  analogy,  we  should  conjecture  that  this
is  probably  the  only  power  available  to  counteract
hydrophobia.  At  any  rate,  the  instinct  whereby
persons  in  the  mesmeric  state  prescribe  remedies  fbr
themselves  or  others  might  here  be  turned  to  most
valuable  account.  The  insensibility  to  bodily  suf-
fering, which  has  been  proved  to  characterise  the
mesmeric  state,  may  also,  as  it  has  already  in  some
few  instances,  prove  of  the  greatest  service  in  en«
abling  patients  to  undergo  the  amputation  of  limbs
or  other  painful  operations.  In  reply  to  a  question
I  addressed  by  letter  to  Di*.  Foissac,  I  received  the
following  communication :  —

^^  Vous  pouvez,  en  toute  surety,  magnetiser  des
femmes  enceintes ;  vous  leur  ferez  beaucoup  de  bien.
Quelques  somnambules  ont  accouche  sans  la  plus
petite  souffirance ;  dans  tout  cas  le  magnetisme  rend
les  douleurs  tr6s  supportables.''

The  last  and  most  important  point  of  view  in
M^iich  we  have  now  to  consider  mesmerism  is  in  its
reference  to  the  future  prospects  of  man,  considered
as  an  improveable  being,  capable  of  immortality.
My  object  here  is,  as  it  has  heretofore  been,  at  once


524  THE MS8MERIC  MEDIUM.

to  explain  and  to  utilise  mesmerism.  Already  I  have
cast  light  on  its  apparent  mysteries:  first,  by  the
laws  of  our  normal  consciousness ;  secondly,  by  the
true  nature  of  sensation ;  thirdly,  by  the  native  force
and  faculties  of  the  mind ;  fourthly,  by  demonstrating
that,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  the  mind  is  not  only  de-
tached from  its  present  restricted  organs,  but  gifted
with  a  medium  of  sensation  more  direct  and  more
worthy  of  itself;  and  now,  finally,  I  purpose  to  render
Evident  whatever  in  my  subject  may  yet  appear  to
be  unexplained,  by  considering  man  as  a  being
capable  of  a  development  unsuited  to  his  present  era
of  existence.  The  subject  is  most  unportant.  The
other  topics  on  which  we  have  been  engaged  are  but
speculative  points,  and  are  comparatively  devoid  of
interest

This  comes  home  at  once  to  our  business  and
bosoms.  Wretched,  indeed,  must  be  the  view  of
man  which  confines  him  to  this  bank  and  shoal  of
time,  which  does  not  regard  him,  and  all  his  glorious
endowments,  as  intended  for  a  series  of  existences.


«


For,  we  live  by  hope.


And  by  desire ;  we  see  by  the  glad  light.
And  breathe  the  sweet  air  of  futurity."  *

Here,  only,  when  we  doubt,  we  are  vastly  too
humble ;  refusing  to  recognise  our  own  dignity  and
the  privileges  accorded  to  humanity.  That  man  is
improvable  and  capable  of  a  development,  the  limits

♦  Wordsworth.


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  525

of  which  have  not  yet  been  ascertained,  is  his  high
prerogative  which  distinguishes  him  from  the  brute
creation.  Even  common  life  will  teach  us  this :  but
mesmerism,  in  an  especial  manner,  proves  the  capa-
cities of  man  to  be  susceptible  of  progression ;  for  it
not  only  exhibits  him  in  a  state  of  moral  and  intel-
lectual improvement,  but  in  a  condition  of  increased
sensitive  power.  Let  this  propitiate  the  religious
mind  at  least.  Mesmerism  is  no  miracle,  but  a  de-
velopment of  faculties  inherent  in  man.  It  is
fraught  with  instruction  the  most  holy,  so  that  we
may  say  of  it  that  which  Galen  affirmed  of  anatomy,— «
To  examine  it  is  to  sing  a  hymn  to  the  Creator  of  all
things.  Here,  indeed,  "  qui  studet  orat."  It  calls
attention  to  our  being,  frame,  and  structure ;  and,  by
proving  that  we  have  an  immaterial  principle  which  is
7wt  dependent  on  the  organs  of  sense,  it  is  calculated
to  reclaim  to  a  purer  faith  the  materialist,  as  it
actually  did  reclaim  a  young  French  physician,
(named  Georget)  of  great  promise,  who,  dying,  left
on  written  record,  desiring  it  by  will  to  be  made
public,  that  mesmerism  had  convinced  him  that  man
was  not  a  mere  compound  of  organs,  but  a  spiritual
as  well  as  corporeal  being.

The  light  which  this  phasis  of  our  nature  gathers
from  and  reciprocally  sheds  on  revelation  is  remark-
able, and  to  reason's  eye  most  precious.  By  exhibit-
ing man  as  at  once  delivered  from  the  thraldom  of
his  exterior  senses  and  enabled  to  attain  to  greater
heights  of  moral  excellence,  it  leads  one  to  see  that
there  is  something  more  in  the  scriptural  expression^


526  THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

^*  Sins  of  the  flesh  "  than  a  mere  form  of  speech.  In
mesmerism  the  mind  recurs  to  its  native  character
and  fundamental  endowments,  seeming  to  cast  aside
the  accidental  differences  induced  by  education,  cir-
cumstances, and  n^lect  of  moral  discipline.  We
thus  learn  how  great  a  part  of  the  evil  that  clings  to
us  is  our  own  work,  from  our  omitting  to  discipline
and  subdue  the  grosser  principle  and  to  combat
those  temptations  which  are  actually  engendered  by
our  present  position  and  manner  of  organisation.  I
have  been  told  that  some  writer  has  called  mesmerism
<<  a  miserable  compound  of  faith  and  fear."  I  can
assure  the  author  of  this  sentence  that  one  at  least  of
these  elements  must  be  wanting  to  true  mesmerism ;
and  I  would  ask  him  why  he  should  confound
faith  with  base  things,  or  identify  that  holy  power
with  credulity?  I  would  send  him  to  Thalaba  for
instruction,  where,  when  all  that  is  noble  is  to  be  per-
formed, when  all  that  is  evil  is  to  be  vanquished,

"  The  talisman  is  faith."

With  faith,  then,  with  Christian  faith,  I  would  asso-
ciate mesmerism ;  and  with  that  which  so  largely  pro*
mises  another  existence  it  can  easily  be  allied.

As  regards  our  future  state  (a  question  that  con-
cerns every  mortal  being),  there  is  the  greatest  reason
to  believe  that  mesmerism  is  a  boon  granted  by  God
to  confirm  our  faith  and  to  cheer  us .  on  our  way.
All  its  phenomena  combine  to  identify  it  with  that
which  Coleridge  has  called  *^  the  fundamental  life."


THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  527

As^  however,  in  this  expression,  there  may  seem  to  be
some  ambiguity  and  vagueness,  especially  to  such  per-
sons as  have  not  turned  their  thoughts  to  the  subject  we
are  treating ;  and  as  I  wish  to  be  particularly  dear  on
a  point  so  important,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  pre-
cisely what  is  the  fundamental  life,  and  wherein  it
differs  from  the  organic.  If,  in  attempting  this,  I
adopt,  more  than  I  have  hitherto  permitted  myself,  an
a  priori  and  abstracted  mode  of  reasoning,  there  will
be  at  least  this  benefit,  —  we  shall  have,  fi*om  pure
reason,  an  additional  ground  of  confidence  for  our
belief  in  an  hereafter ;  and  surely,  in  respect  of  this,
we  cannot  build  up  the  edifice  of  human  hope  on  too
strong  a  foundation,  or  protect  it  by  too  many  but-
tresses against  the  inherent  weakness  of  its  own  im-
perfection.

Already  I  have  hinted  at  a  distinction  between
sensation  transitory  and  permanent  —  occasional  and
fundamental,  and  have  insisted  on  the  necessity  t)f
taking  so  large  a  view  of  man  as  to  distinguish  the
accidents  of  his  present  situation  firom  his  immutable
character,  when  considered  as  a  being  destined  for
immortality.  I  now  proceed  more  particularly  to  de-
velope  this  idea.

No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  In  His  works
alone  we  can  behold  Him :  they  are,  in  the  truest
sense,  His  expressed  thoughts;  —  as  the  poet  says,
addressing  the  Creator,  —

*'  Glorious ! Because  the  shadow  of  Thy  might,  '  [

A  step,  or  link,  for  intercourse  with  Thee !  **


628  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.

If  by  the  word  of  revelation  we  learn  to  diacem
God  spiritually  and  to  discover  our  moral  relatjon-
ship  towards  Him,  we  no  less  by  the  universal  manu-
script of  nature  learn  to  view  Him,  as  it  were^  with
the  eyes  of  the  body,  thus  enlarging  our  views  of  His
power,  wisdom,  and  design.  Without  this  source  of
instruction,  corporeal  as  well  as  intellectual,  our  re-
lation to  the  author  of  all  things,  we  being  composed
of  body  and  spirit,  would  be  incomplete.

Now,  thus  to  hold  converse  with  the  attributes  of
God,  as  expressed  in  the  visible  creation,  is  not  a
temporary  object ;  for  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose
that  matter  and  its  properties,  whatever  changes  they
may  undergo,  will  ever  be  annihilated,  matter,  indeed,
being  the  only  thing  respecting  which  we  have  sen-
sible evidence  that  it  perishes  not :  and  from  this  the
great  advocate  of  man's  immortality,  the  poet  Young,
draws  a  chief  argument  in  favour  of  his  subject :  —

"  The  world  of  matter,  ^rith  its  various  forms.
All  dies  into  new  life. Life,  born  from  death.
Rolls  the  vast  mass  and  shall  for  ever  roll.
No  single  atom,  once  in  being,  lost.
With  change  of  counsel  charges  the  Most  High.
What  hence  infers  our  reason  ? Can  it  be  ?
Maker,  immortal,  and  shall  Spirit  die  ?  "

Moreover,  on  matter  hang  all  our  hopes  of  indivi-
dual existence,  for,  as  I  have  before  shown,  the  indi-
viduality of  all  spirit  but  God  must  consist  in  being  im-
pacted and  restricted, —  in  being  less  than  pure  spirit,
which  the  Absolute  alone  can  be,  —  in  having  a  body


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  529

through  which  all  information  respecting  the  original
ideas  of  God  being  transmitted  should  become  proper
to  itself.  Reason,  then,  proclaims  external  matter,  not
less  than  that  portion  of  it  connected  with  ourselves,
to  have  been  created  for  a  durable  existence ;  and,  this
being  the  case,  it  is  evident  that  to  bring  the  mind
acquainted  with  all  the  qualities  of  the  universe  is  an
end  and  object  which  remains  immutable,  and  which,
unless  we  can  suppose  this  world  to  be  the  be-all  and
the  end-all,  and  God  to  be  limited  in  creation  and
invention,  can  only  be  fulfilled  here  in  a  partial  and
imperfect  manner.  Supposing  man  to  enter  on  indi-
vidual  existence  for  the  first  time  in  this  our  planet,
it  is  here  he  takes  his  first  lessons  in  natural  divinity ;
and  it  would  be  indeed  to  charge  the  Almighty  with
"change  of  counsel"  and  vain  expense  of  mighty
means,  were  we  to  suppose  that  what  man  learns
here  is  to  be  unlearned  hereafter.  Wise  earthly
parents  deal  not  so  with  their  children.  Now  by
what  means,  at  any  time,  shall  we  continue  our  pro-
cess of  instruction  ?  Surely,  as  we  began  it;  by  means
of  a  body,  the  great  purpose  of  body  being  to  con-
nect mind  individually  with  matter  and  its  properties.
A  body,  then,  that  shall  endure  seems  essential  alike
to  the  continuation  of  our  individual  existence,  and  to
our  continued  commerce  with  the  qualities  of  the
visible  creation.  Revelation  is  perfectly  in  accord
with  this  idea.  The  Bible  philosophically  says,  at
man's  creation,  —  "  And  man  became  a  living  soul,"
that  is,  an  individual  soul,  a  soul  embodied,  and  ca-
pable of  communicating  with  external  matter. When

A  A


530  THE  MESMERIC  MEDIUM*

we  say,  then,  that  man  is  to  live  hereafter,  we  also
affirm  that  he  is  to  continue  embodied ;  and  in  this
again  revelation  sanctions  the  deductions  of  our
reason,  one  great  object  of  Christ's  mission  on  earth
being  to  preach  the  resurrection  of  man  with  a  body.
Such  a  body  then  as  would  endure,  and  cleave  to  the
mind  through  all  external  changes,  is,  in  fiu;t,  the
fundamental  life ;  while  the  organic  life  is  but  that
visible  and  grosser  envelope  which  forms  our  tangible
body  in  this  world,  and  which  is  furnished  with  or-
gans which  have  especial  reference  to  this  particular
state  of  existence.

More  briefly :  the  fundamental  life  is  the  body  (for
what  is  life,  in  our  case  at  least,  but  mind  incorpo-
rate?)  that  we  are  to  retain  throughout  eternity-
The  organic  life  is  the  body,  or  means  of  conununi-
eating  with  matter,  which  we  now  palpably  possess,
and  which  may  be  imagined  to  be  a  temporary  de-
velopment of  the  other,  just  as  leaves,  flowers,  and
fruits  are  the  temporary  development  of  a  tree.  And
in  the  same  manner  that  these  pass  and  drop  away,
yet  leave  the  principle  of  reproduction  behind,  so
may  our  present  organs  be  detached  from  us  by  death,
and  yet  the  ground  of  our  existence  be  spared  to  us
continuously.

When  St.  Paul  affirms  that  there  is  a  spiritual
body  as  well  as  a  natural  body,  he  not  doubtfuUv
declares  the  same  thing.  He  does,  in  fact,  draw  a
distinction  between  the  body  we  now  have  for  pur-
poses connected  with  the  economy  of  this  world  and
the  more  lasting  body  which  is  to  connect  us  with


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  531

the  universe  in  general.  He  was  too  good  a  logician
to  have  used  the  words  **  spiritual  body  "  in  a  vague
and  mystical  sense.  Body  is  body,  and  the  only
differences  between  one  body  and  another  which  can
possibly  obtain  are  gradations  from  grosser  to  finer,
or  the  contrary.

That  we  should  rather  evolve  from  our  present
corporeal  elements  the  body  which  is  to  be  ours  be-
yond the  grave,  than  begin  existence  de  novo ;  that,
in  other  words,  we  should  really  possess  a  fundamen*
tal  life,  or  (to  speak  more  intelligibly)  a  fundamental
body,  incapable  of  passing  away  with  the  grosser
covering  that  envelopes  it ;  that,  at  death,  we  should
retain  something  physically  from  our  actual  condition,'
seems  pointed  out  to  us  by  all  the  analogies  of  na-
ture.

Everjrwhere  we  behold  that  one  state  includes  the
embryo  of  the  next,  not  metaphysically,  but  materi-
ally; and  entering  on  a  new  scene  of  existence  is  not
so  much  a  change  as  a  continuation  of  what  went
before.  A  sudden  leap  from  one  condition  to  an-
other is  not  compatible  with  nature's  evident  tenden-
cies. The  very  rudiments  of  organs,  intended  in  a
higher  stage  of  animal  life  to  be  useful,  are  found,
uselessly  as  it  were,  appearing  in  the  lower  classes  of
animated  creatures,  or — stronger  still — lying  in  em-
bryo in  the  same  creature  in  one  state,  only  to  be
developed  in  another.  It  is  an  old  allusion,  but  ever
beautiful,  —


"  ■  The  wings  that  form

The  butterfly,  lie  folded  in  the  worm,*'

A  A 2


532  THE MESMERIC MEDIUM,

We  should  then,  dpriori^  expect  to  find  the  principle
that  individualises  man,  and  is  the  true  medium  of
his  instruction,  attached  to  him  from  the  beginning,
and  that  the  germs  of  future  capacities,  physical  not
less  than  intellectual,  should  be  discoverable  in  his
constitution.  Here  again  we  are  reminded  of  St
Paul's  beautiful  comparison  between  man's  transitory
body  and  a  seed  that  loses  in  the  ground  only  its
exterior  husk  or  covering,  while  the  very  circumstance
that  produces  in  it  a  partial  loss  and  decay  is  the  oc-
casion of  development  to  that  germ  which  from  the
first  included  within  itself  all  that  it  would  be  here*
after.  Thus  it  appears  manifest  that  the  apostle
supposes  that,  even  from  analogies  before  our  eyes,
we  may  draw  conclusions  respecting  our  future  con-
dition;— nay,  he  seems  to  find  this  truth  so  clear
that  he  thinks  it  argues  much  want  of  intellect  in  a
person  not  to  perceive  it,  as  it  is  evident  by  his  say-
ing, "  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quick-
ened except  it  die."  In  another  place  he  strongly
intimates  that  the  doctrine  of  a  permanent  body  was
not  unknown  to  his  converts.  "  For  we  know,"  he
says,  "  that,  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle
(meaning  evidently  our  present  body)  were  dissolved,
we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  And  with  this  he
desires,  at  death,  to  be  "  clothed  upon,"  or,  in  other
words,  embodied :  not  wishing  to  be  "  unclothed,"
or  to  be  disembodied,  which  would  be  equivalent  to
annihilation,  as  if  he  were  tired  of  existence ;  but  only
longing  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ  —  in  other


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  S33

words  to  continue  existence  in  a  more  elevated  state
of  being,  putting  oflF  the  external  weeds  but  not  the
Unchanging  vesture  of  the  spirit.

From  considerations  like  these  we  may  surmise
that  the  mind  is  capable  of  being  organised  in  two
ways  —  visibly  and  invisibly.  It  may  have  a  subtle
envelope,  adapted  generally  to  its  own  active  and
subtle  essence,  and,  in  addition  to  it,  it  may  have  a
coarser  covering,  as  our  mortal  body,  adapted  to  its
present  state  of  existence  and  furnished  with  particu-
lar organs  for  particular  purposes.  The  dissolution
of  this  coarser  covering  is  by  us  called  death ;  that  is,
we  seem  unto  men  to  die :  but  with  our  inner  body
we  never  part,  and,  consequently,  by  that  we  still
retain  our  hold  upon  individual  existence.  As
Leibnitz  has  remarked :  "  There  is  no  such  thing
as  death,  if  that  word  be  understood  with  rigorous
and  metaphysical  accuracy.  The  soul  never  quits
completely  the  body  with  which  it  is  united,  nor  does
it  pass  from  one  body  into  another  with  which  it  had
no  connection  before ;  a  metamorphosis  takes  place ;
but  there  is  no  metempsychosis."  *

Let  us  now  examine  the  validity  of  our  h  priori
ireasoning  by  a  reference  to  the  facts  of  mesmerim.
Man  is  shown  by  these  to  be  capable  of  increased
sensitive  power.  Cui  bono  —  to  what  end,  if  here-
after this  increase  of  faculty  become  not  permanent  ?
Would  it  be  consistent  with  the  goodness  of  Pro-
vidence to  tantalise  us  by  imperfect  glimpses  of  that

^Encyclopedia  Britannica — Preliminary  Dissertations.

A  A  3


534  THE  MESBfERIC  MEDIUM.

which  we  shall  never  be  permitted  to  realise  ?  Would
wings  be  folded  in  the  worm  if  they  were  not  one
day  to  enable  it  to  fly  ?  We  cannot  think  so  poorly
of  creative  wisdom  or  of  thrifty  nature.  Throughout
her  realms  there  is  no  mockery  of  unmeaning  dis-
plays of  power;  and,  if  so,  then  is  mesmerism  a
pledge  irrefragable  of  a  future  state  of  existence,
calculated  for  the  exhibition  of  those  energies  which
are  but  a  promise  here.  Relative  to  this  subject,  I
have  particular  pleasure  in  remarking  the  coincidence
of  thought  between  myself  writing  on  mesmerism
and  an  esteemed  author,  who,  in  framing  a  ^^  physical
theory  of  another  life,"  has  unconsciously  borne  wit-
ness by  reason  to  the  truth  of  mesmeric  development
Such  unbought  testimony  is  precious.  He  is  speak-
ing of  what  an  enlarged  perception  might  effect
"  Doubtless,"  he  says,  "  the  mind  might  bring  its
percipient  faculty  into  contact  with  the  properties  of
matter  more  at  large  and  under  fewer  Umitations.
The  medullary  substance  we  may  easily  suppose  to
be  laid  open  to  sensation  otherwise  than  it  actually
is,  and  also  to  be  endued  with  a  more  refined  or
exquisite  sensibility.

'^  The  mind,  perhaps,  in  its  next  stage  of  life,  and
when  its  active  and  higher  principles  have  become
mature,  may  be  well  able  to  sustain  and  advantage-
ously to  use  a  much  more  ample  correspondence  with
the  material  world  than  would  now  be  good  or  pos-
sible. Perception  is  at  present  a  circumscribed  fe-
culty ;  and  we  confidently  anticipate  an  era,  when  it
shall  throw  off  its  confinements, and  converse  at


THE MESMERIC MEDIUM.  535

large  with  the  material  universe,  and  find  itself  fa-
miliarly at  home  in  the  height  and  breadth  of  the
heavens.  We  may  assume  that  it  only  needs  to  be
free  from  the  husk  of  animal  organisation  to  know
on  all  sides  perfectly  ths^  which  now  it  knows  at
points  only,  and  in  an  abated  degree.  And  besides
knowing  efiects,  it  would  also  know  causes.  The
inmr  form  of  matter,  as  it  has  been  termed,  may,  as
well  as  the  external  species,  be  discernible.  Instead
of  looking  only  at  the  dial-plate  of  natiwe,  we  should
be  admitted  to  inspect  the  wheel-work  and  the
springs."

The  above  passage  offers  a  delightful  contrast  to
those  narrow-minded  views  of  man  which  limit  both
himself  and  his  Almighty  author  to  the  ipse  dixit  of
some  peevish  sceptic.  The  whole  work,  from  which
it  is  extracted,  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  is  in  per-
fect accordance  with  mesmeric  phenomena ;  nor  can  I
refrain  from  believing  that  its  clever  author  would  re-
joice to  see  realised  in  this  life  anticipations  which
he  only  framed  concerning  the  next.  From  his  re-
marks, which  we  have  just  cited  above,  we  gather
that  he  looks  forward  to  the  future  enlargement  of
human  perception  in  three  several  particulars  —
namely,  in  an  increased  refinement  or  sensibility ;  in
an  extension  of  the  sphere  in  which  that  sensibility
shall  display  itself;  and  in  a  power  of  discerning  ob-
jects and  their  qualities  through  impediments  which,
in  our  present  state,  form  insurmountable  barriers  to
the  action  of  our  senses.  Now,  in  order  to  behold
these  anticipated  prerogatives  really  conferred  on

A  A  4


536  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.

human  perception^  we'  have  only  to  behold  the  higher
phenomena  of  mesmerism.  Not  even  the  commonest
observer  (supposing  him  to  possess  common  honesty  7
can  witness  them  without  being  struck  with  the  con-
viction that  a  new  and  more  pervading  kind  of  per-
ception has  been  opened  to  the  mesmerised  person ;
but  he  who  should  have  reasoned  previously  on  the
subject,  as  the  author  from  whom  I  have  quoted,
would  at  once  perceive  that  every  thing  which  was
passing  before  his  eyes  was  in  beautiful  harmony
with  science,  philosophy,  and  truth.  He  would  be-
hold that  fineness  of  perception  —  that  enlargement
of  the  mind's  sphere  —  that  power  of  acting  through
obstacles,  which  his  own  reason  had  told  him  must
belong  to  man  when  the  mechanical  restrictions  of
the  senses  should  be  laid  aside.

Let  me,  however,  hasten  to  qualify  whatever  may
appear  exaggerated  in  the  above  statements,  lest  I
prepare  disappointment  for  the  sanguine,  or  arouse
the  apprehensions  of  the  timid.  In  pure  compas-
sion, I  would  appease  the  fears  of  those  who  de^n
mesmerism,  if  true,  a  perilous  truth,  that  should  be
Imddled  up  from  knowledge,  and,  like  the  Bible  in  a
Catholic  land,  be  restricted  only  to  the  use  of  the
initiated.  Such  persons  (and  there  are  such)  actu-
ally dread  lest  the  new  science  should  make  man  too
wise,  and  too  powerful,  and  look  on  it  with  fear  and
trembling  as  a  pernicious  stepping-forward  from  our
sphere,  —  as  the  very  Babel-tower  of  this  era.  Let
these  apprehensions  subside.  In  being  permitted  tb
view  the  mesmeric  state,  there  is  nothing  to  make


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  537

man  proud,  but  all  to  keep  him  humble,  while  he
sees  that  the  least  step  out  of  our  present  condition  is
an  improvement  upon  our  faculties,  and  that  phe-
nomena so  despised,  so  vilified  by  common  ridicule,
are  beyond  the  compass  of  our  powers  to  achieve.
Then,  too,  mesmerism  has  its  restrictions,  which  keep
it  low  to  earth,  even  while  it  hints  of  heaven.  Seldom
does  it  occur  in  a  degree  to  astonish. Many  are  the
conditions  it  requires  for  its  accomplishment. Care-
fully hedged  about  is  it  by  the  barriers  of  opposing
will,  by  defective  sensibility,  even  by  a  spirit  of  scep-
ticism. Its  highest  capacities are exercised  with
difficulty,  its  loftiest  wonders  are  few  and  fleeting,
and  exhaust  evidently  the  person  by  whom  they  are
displayed. Still,  it  is  a  rise  upon  our  actual  exist-
ence. Its  true  office  is  not  to  make  us  confident,  yet
still  to  encourage  us  to  hope  by  the  transient  and
imperfect  display  of  faculties,  the  permanent  con-
tinuance of  which  would  be  incompatible  with  our
present  state  of  being.

A  state  of  such  manifest  development,  once  seen,
would  naturally  be  deemed,  as  I  before  have  said,  a
kind  of  earnest  of  that  which  is  to  come  —  a  corro-
boration of  hope,  a  first-fi'uit  of  prerogatives,  which,
though  temporary  here,  should  be  durable  hereafter.
And  it  would  further  be  conceived  that,  as  the  tran-
siently-developed faculties  were  to  accompany  man
into  a  future  state  of  existence,  the  means  through
which  they  were  developed  would  also  cleave  to
humanity  and  be  assured  to  its  possession.  For,  as
we  have  seen,  we  do  not  merely  behold  in  mesmerism

AA  5


638 THE  ME8MEB1C  UEDIVM0

a  shadowy  advantage,  but  a  tangible  benefit,  a  mate*
rial  good,  working  by  material  means;  an  actual
physical  improvement  in  sensation,  brought  about  by
the  action  of  a  more  pervading  and  subtle  medium
than  any  of  which  we  have  ordinary  cognisance.
Hereby,  then,  we  may  be  enabled  to  exchange  the
abstracted  notions  of  theologians  respecting  a  future
state  (which,  like  all  other  abstracted  notions,  touch
the  mind  but  feebly,)  for  something  which  may
satisfy  the  natural  longings  of  man  after  the  real  and
the  permanent,  —  a  conclusion  to  which  even  the  *
ideal  tends.

We  perceive  the  possibility  of  parting  with  the
externals  of  sensation,  yet  retaining  its-  inner  ground;
we  reason  &om  the  partial  and  temporary  abolition
of  the  mechanical  portions  of  our  being,  revealed  in
mesmerism,  to  the  total  and  permanent  abolition  of
those  same  portions  of  our  being  which  is  to  be
undergone  in  death.  As  one  of  my  sleepwakers  said
to  me,  before  I  had  myself  conceived  such  a  notion,
"  The  mesmeric  state  is  a  far  truer  image  of  death
than  sleep  is."  All  points  in  mesmerism  to  an  invi-
sible means  of  setisation,  as  real  as  it  is  invisible  —
a  means  of  which  the  nerves  themselves  seem  to  be
merely  the  subsidiaries  and  conducting  channels ;  — >
all  points  in  mesmerism  to  a  finer  organ  of  the  mind
than  those  which  are  palpable  and  external  —  an
organ  to  which  our  visible  body  is  but  as  a  veil,  or
(as  the  author  of  the  physical  theory  of  another  life
calls  it)  a  mere  "husk  of  animal  organisation."
These  are  not,  be  it  remembered,  mere  speculations*


THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM.  539

They  are  all  grounded  on  fects.  Facts  force  on  our
minds  a  fundamental  medium  in  sensation;  facts
identify  it  with  mesmerism;  facts  lead  us  to  infer
that  it  is  the  immediate  organ  of  mind  —  the  real
element  in  which  we  have  our  being ;  and  facts  lead
us  to  hope  that  it  will  serve  us  permanently  in
another  state  of  existence.  If  our  feelings  lead  that
way,  our  reason  not  less  accompanies  and  sanctions
their  instinctive  appeal.  The  demonstrated  con-
nection of  mesmerism  with  the  vital  principle  (or
action)  in  man;  the  striking  manner  in  which  sleep*
wakers  have  been  shown  to  cling  to  their  mesmeriser,
as  if  in  governing  the  mesmeric  medium  he  held  the
talisman  of  their  being,  -—  as  if,  in  touching  this,  he
roused  all  the  instincts  of  self-presanration ;  the  im«
portant,  nay  essential,  offices  which  the  medium  has
been  shown  to  fulfil  in  sensation,  all  proclaim  forcibly
that  the  agency  we  have  been  considering  may  with
truth  be  called  the  fundamental  life.  It  abounds
with  instances  wherein  its  own  permanent  and  uni*
versal  action  is  contrasted  with  the  transitory  and
partial  operations  of  the  organic  life.

With  facts  like  these  before  us,  where,  but  to  the
mesmeric  medium,  shall  we  look  for  indications  of
that  inner  body  —  that  germ  of  a  better  existence^
which  analogy  shows  must  be  so  intimate  a  part  of
us,  and  which  is  nevertheless  so  much  a  stranger  to
ourselves  ?  Where,  but  in  the  medium  of  the  funda-
mental sensation,  shall  we  look  for  the  fundamental
life ;  for  are  not,  in  truth,  life  and  sensation  identi-
fied in  their  purpose,  at  least,  of  bringing  us  into

A  A 6


540  THE MESMERIC  MEDIUM*

sensible  connection  with  the  world  of  matter?  This
being  admitted,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  conceiving-
that  this  action,  as  relates  to  the  mesmeric  medium^,
shall  be  continuous.  As  now  it  so  manifestly  appears
to  be  an  intermediate  between  us  and  our  present
body,  so  hereafter  it  may  become  the  means  of
linking  us  to  a  new  organisation ;  or  it  may  itself
remain  as  our  spiritual  body,  appropriated  to  us  in
a  certain  portion,  when  this  visible  and  fleshly  taber-
nacle  is  dissolved  to  its  primal  elements.  Where
shall  we  find  so  obedient  a  servant  to  our  commands,
—  where  force  to  our  strong  desire  after  individual
existence,  —  where  an  agency  so  swift,  powerful,  and
penetrating,  so  near  to  our  essence,  so  kindred  to  our
thoughts  ?  In  proportion  as  we  value  whatever  tends
to  bridge  our  way  across  the  gulf  of  death,  whatever
tends  to  carry  on  a  train  of  old  familiar  thought  into
the  unknown  void,  let  us  esteem,  cherish,  and  reve-
rence this  cheering  manifestation  of  our  being,  which
so  beautifully  exhibits  a  pre-existent  harmony  be-
tween our  human  hopes  and  their  accomplishment.
That  the  mesmeric  medium  should  link  science  to
science  is  comparatively  but  a  trifling  benefit.  That
it  should  connect  this  world  with  a  future  is  its  last
and  greatest  service.


SUPPLEMENT.


TESTIMONIES.


■■•l


4


, ' t I


I- ■


I


;!


j

r


i.»


hi  i.  I  .

;•  = ;

' I I


t'  ■  i ■  !


1 '

■


I


■■■


643


TESTIMONIES.


Testimony  by  A.  Vandevtveb^  of  Antwerp,  Surgeovt.

Je,  soussigne^  Docteur  en  Medecine  et  en  Chirurgie,  certifie
avoir  eu  le  plaisir,  vers  le  commencement  de  1838,  d'etre
invit^^  avec  quelques  uns  de  mes  amis^  a  deux  seances  •  dans
lesquelles  M.  Townshend  s'est  appliqu^  k  nous  demontrer  les
efFets  etonnants  du  magndtisme  animal,  auxquels  jusques-1^,
faute  de  preuves  personnelles,  je  n*ayais  sgont^  qu'une  croyance
bien  faible,  et  qui  parrinrent  k  me  donner  nne  conviction
inebranlable  sur  I'authenticit^  de  tout  ce  que  Ton  rapportait
de  presque  miraculeux  a  Tdgard  de  cet  agent  physique.

Parmis  plusieiurs  experiences  ^galement  concluantes,  je
citerai  entre  autres  celle  faite  sur  la  personne  de  Mademoiselle
Mesdagii,  que  M.  Townshend,  apres  quelques  passes  de  courte
dur^,  parvint  k  plong^r  dans  un  veritable  somnambulisme,  et
dans  laquelle  je  pus  me  convaincre  de  la  grande  influence  que
produit  le  magnetisme  sur  les  principales  fonctions  de  notre


Trahslation.

I,  the  undersigned  Doctor  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  certify  to
having  had  the  pleasure  of  being  invited,  about  the  beginning  of  18S8,
with  some  friends,  to  two  sittings,  in  which  Mr.  Towr^end  purposed
to  show  us  the  astonishing  effects  of  mesmerism,  —  a  matter  tiiat  I
had  as  yet  given  little  credit  to  in  the  absence  of  personal  observ-
ation, and  which  firmly  convinced  me  of  the  authenticity  of  all  that
is  reported,  miraculous  as  it  is,  respecting  this  physical  agent.

Amongst  many  equally  conclusive  experiments,  I  will  adduce  that
made  on  Mademoiselle  Mesdagh,  whom  Mr.  Townshend,  after  a  few
passes  of  short  duration,  threw  into  genuine  sleepwaking,  during
which  I  had  an  opportunity  of  convincing  myself  of  the  great  in-
fluence which  mesmerism  produces  on  the  principal  functions  of  our


644  SUPPLEMENT.

economie^  et  notamment  sur  la  circulation  du  sang.  Cette
demoiselle,  avant  le  commencement  de  la  stance,  fatiguee
d' avoir  ^t^  la  veille  ^  un  bal  ou  elle  avait  dans^  la  plus  grande
partie  de  la  nuit,  se  croyait  peu  propre,  disait-elle,  a  ressentir^
ce  8oir  1^,  les  effets  du  magnetisme.  Aussi  je  lui  trouvais  la
face  coloree  et  toute  sa  personne  agitee  d'un  veritable  ^tat  de
fievre :  le  pouls  rendait  120  pulsations  par  minute.  Cependant
I'influence  magn^tique  ne  se  dementit  point  pour  cela.  M.
Townshend  parvint  bientot  a  la  rendre  somnambule,  t  a  peine
cet  etat  avait-il  ete  rendu  complet,  qu'un  calme  general
s'etablit  cbez  elle^  —  que  les  battemens  de  Tartere  de  120  etaient
tombes  jusqu*a  72.

Un  autre  pbenom^ne  qui  excita  ma  surprise  consistait  dans
les  impressions  re9ues  par  le  magnetiseur,  et  qui  furent^  au
meme  instant,  apper^ues  par  la  magnetisee.  M.  Townshend
nous  ay  ant  un  moment  entretenus  de  ce  ph^nomene,  se  mit  en
rapport  avec  la  demoiselle  en  la  tenant  par  la  main,  et  il  me
prit  I'idee  de  lui  pincer  differens  points  du  tronc  et  des  mem-
bres,  en  mettant  le  plus  grand  soin  a  ce  que  la  magnetise,  qui
d'ailleurs  avait  les  yeux  band^s,  ne  put  par  aucun  moyen
d^couyrir  quelles  Etaient  les  parties  du  corps  de M.  Towns-


economy,  and  particularly  on  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  This
young  lady,  from  having  been  the  previous  evening  at  a  ball,  where
she  had  danced  the  greater  part  of  the  night,  was  fatigued  before
the  sitting,  and  said  she  did  not  think  herself  likely  to  experience  the
effects  of  mesmerism  that  evening;  accordingly  I  found  her  &ce
flushed  and  her  whole  frame  in  reaUy  feverish  excitement.  Her  pulse
was  120  in  a  minute.  Nevertheless  the  mesmeric  influence  did  not
fiul  to  manifest  itself.  Mr.  Townshend  soon  succeeded  in  producing
sleepwaking,  and  scarcely  was  this  state  become  complete,  when  a
general  calm  came  over  her,  so  that  her  pulse,  which  had  been  120,
fell  to  72.

Another  phenomenon  which  excited  my  surprise  was,  that  the  im-
pressions which  the  mesmeriser  received  were  at  the  same  instant
perceived  by  the  mesmerisee.  Mr.  Townshend,  having  conversed  with
us  a  short  time  respecting  this  phenomenon,  placed  himself  in  relation
with  the  young  lady  by  taking  hold  of  her  hand ;  and  the  idea  struck
me,  of  pinching  different  parts  of  his  body  and  limbs,  taking,  however,
the  greatest  care  that  the .  mesmerisee,  whose  eyes,  moreover,  were
bandaged,  should  have  no  means  of  discovering  on  what  parts  of  Mr.


SUPPLEMENT.  545

hend  sur  lesquelles  je  voulais  faire  ines  experiences^  et  dissiper
ainsi  le  reste  de  mon  incredulite  mddicale ;  mais^  a  mon  grand
etonnement^  je  vis  que  chaque  fois  que  je  lui  froissai  tel  ou  tel
point,  du  bras  par  exemple^  la  magnetisee^  tout  en  exprimant
par  les  traits  de  sa  figure  ainsi  que  par  la  parole^  la  douleur
qu'elle  ^prouvait,  porta  automatiquement  la  main  qui  lui
etait  restee  libre  a  la  partie  de  son  autre  bras,  exactement  cor-
respondante  k  celle  que  je  yenais  de  pincer  sur  le  bras  du  meme
cot^  du  magnetiseur.

Une  foule  d'autres  faits^  non  nioins  curieux^mais  trop  longues
a  detainer^  et  dont  M.  Townshend  eut  la  complaisance  de  me
rendre  t^moin^  m'avaient,  a  la  fin  de  la  seance,  procure  une
telle  somme  de  preuves  irrefragables  sur  les  efFets  prodigieux
du  magne'tisme  animal,  que  je  me  retirai  pleinement  con-
vain  cu  de  tout  ce  que,  ce  soir  la^  mes  yeux  m'avaient  si  mani-
festement  fait  voir.

A.  Vandevyver,  Dr.

Anvers,  le  26  F^vrier,  1839.


Townsbend*s  body  I  was  making  my  experiments,  and  of  thus  dispel-
ling the  remainder  of  my  medical  incredulity ;  but,  to  my  great  asto-
nidmient,  I  saw  that  each  time  I  bruised  any  particular  part,  of  his
arm  for  example,  the  mesmerisee  expressed  by  her  features,  as  well  as
by  her  speech,  the  pain  which  she  experienced,  and  involuntarily
earned  the  hand  which  was  at  liberty  to  the  part  of  her  arm  exactly
corresponding  to  that  which  I  had  pinched  on  the  mesmeriser*s  arm
of  the  same  side.

A  host  of  other  fiicts,  not  less  curious,  but  too  long  to  detail,  and
which  Mr.  Townshend  had  the  kindness  to  afford  me  an  opportunity
of  witnessing,  furnished  me,  towards  the  end  of  the  sitting,  with  such
an  amount  of  undeniable  prooiis  of  the  extraordinary  effects  of  mes-
merism, that  I  retired  fully  convinced  of  all  that  I  had  so  clearly  seen
that  evening.

A.  Vakdevyvir,  Dr.

Antwerp,  26th  February,  1839.


546  SUPPLEMENT.


TeBTIMOKT to MESMERIgM^ BT  M.  VaX OwENHUTSEN^

Antwerp.

Le8  efFets  du  magn^tisme  m'avaient  toujours  sembl^  pins
que  probl^matiques  et  incertains ;  je  les  avals  souvent  taxes
de  chim^riques^  et  ma  preyention  allait  si  loin^  que  j'etais
presque  convaincu  que  les  experiences  niagn^tiques  ^taient  le
r^sultat  d'une  entente  parfaite  de  deux  personnes  complete-
ment  eveiUees.  Aigoiu*d*hui^  mieux  conseill^,  et  abdiquant  les
preventions  d'un  ignorant  qui  pent  et  ne  veut  s'instruire^  j'ai
eu  le  bonheur  de  reconnaitre  mes  erreurs,  et  de  me  convaincre
de  nouveau  que  le  jugement  cbez  I'homme  ne  doit  jamais
d^vancer  les  preuves.

Monsieur  Hare  Townsbend  ayant  eu  la  bont^  de  m'inviter
a^une  stance,  dans  laquelle  il  devait  renouveller  quelques  ex-
periences sur  le  jeune  E.  A  ,  j'acceptai  avec  empresse-
ment,  et  je  veux  consigner  en  sortant  de  cbez  lui^  et  sous
I'impression  de  ce  que  je  viens  de  voir^  le  resultat  de  ces  ex-
periences aussi  interessantes  que  r^elles:  en  void  done  un
fidele  recit.

E.  A——,  decide  a  se  soumettre  a  I'influence  de  Monsieur


Translation.

The  effects  of  mesmerism  had  always  appeared  to  me  more  than
problematical  and  uncertfiin.  I  had  often  treated  them  as  chimerical,
and  my  prejudice  went  so  far  that  I  was  almost  convinced  that  mes-
meric experiments  were  the  result  of  a  complete  understanding  be-
tween two  persons  perfectly  awake ;  but  now,  being  better  advised,
and  giving  up  the  prepossessions  of  an  ignorant  person,  who  can,  but
will  not,  be  instructed,  I  have  had  the  happiness  of  seeing  my  errors,
and  convincing  myself  anew  that  man*s  opinion  ought  never  to  precede
proo&.

Mr.  Hare  Townshend  having  had  the  kindness  to  give  me  an  invita-
tion to  a  sitting  at  which  he  was  to  repeat  some  experiments  on  the

young  E.  A ,  I  eagerly  accepted  it,  and,  on  leaving  him,  and

under  the  impression  of  what  I  have  just  seen,  am  anxious  to  record
the  result  of  the  experiments,  which  were  as  interesting  as  real :— here,
then,  is  a  faithful  account  of  them.

£.  A ,  having  consented  to  submit  himself  to  the  influence  of


SUPPLEMENT.  547

Townshend^  s'assit  a  une  heure  moins  huit  minutes^  et  il  se
releva  somnambule  k  une  heure  moins  deux  minutes.

Je  retracerai  maintenant  sans  commentaires  les  diverses  ex-
periences qui  ont  eu  lieu^  en  declarant  que  Monsieur  Towns,
hend  m'avait  autoris^  d'indiquer  et  de  faire  toutes  les  questions
et  toutes  les  epreuves  que  mon  imagination  et  ma  curiosity
pouvaient  me  sugg^rer ;  j'ai  largement  use  de  cette  facilit^^
car  je  voulais  me  convaincre.

10.  Le  magn^tiseur  prit  un  yerre,  le  remplit  de  Tin,  et
demanda  ce  qu*il  contenait ;  le  magn^tisd  repondit^  sans  hesi-
tation^ ^^  Du  vin:  '*  il  en  fut  de  meme  pour  un  biscuit  que
mangea  le  premier.

2®.  Interrog^  par  ou  il  voyait,  E.'A r^pondit  que  c'^tait

par  le  front ;  il  reconnaissait  tous  les  assistants,  et  repondait  k
toutes  leurs  questions^  apres  qu*il  avait  4t6  mis  en  rapport  avec
eux  ;  ce  rapport  ne  s'opera  que  par  la  yolonte  du  magndtiseur.

3^.  II  lui  fut  prdsente  im  petit  dessin  de  Kremers  repr^.
sentant  un  chien :  il  en  indiqua  le  sujet  aussitot  qu'il  I'eut  en
main. — Ensuite  un  portrait  de  femme^  qu'il  d^clara  ressembler

a  Mons.  T :  c'^tait  cdui  de  sa  sceur ! — Interroge  s'il  aurait

pu  dire  si  cette  dame  existait  encore^  —  reponse,  ^^  Non."  —
En  effet,  elle  ^tait  morte.


Mr.  Townsbend,  sat  down  at  eight  minutes  before  one  o'clock,  and  at
two  minutes  before  one  got  up  in  a  state  of  sleepwaking.

I  shall  now  describe,  without  comment,  the  different  experiments
which  were  made,  remarking  that  Mr.  Townsbend  authorised  me  to
suggest  and  put  any  questions,  and  make  as  many  trials  as  my  imagi-
nation or  curiosity  could  prompt.  I  made  great  use  of  this  permission,
for  I  wished  to  satisfy  myself.

1st.  The  mesmeriser  took  a  glass,  filled  it  with  wine,  and  asked
what  it  contained;  the  mesmerisee  answered,  without  hesitation,
<*  Wine :  "  the  same  thing  occurred  with  a  biscuit  which  the  former  ate.

2d.  When  asked  with  what  part  he  saw,  E.  A  answered  that  it

was  with  the  forehead  he  recognised  all  the  bystanders,  and  answered
all  their  questions,  after  having  been  placed  in  relation  with  them.
This  relation  took  place  only  throi^h  the  will  of  the  mesmeriser.

3d.  A  small  drawing  of  a  dog  by  Kremers  was  shown  him :  he  de-
clared the  subject  of  it  as  soon  as  he  had  it  in  his  hand.  Then  the  por-
trait of  a  lady,  which  he  said  resembled  Mr.  T  :  it  was  that  of
Mr.  Townshend's  sister  1  Being  asked  if  he  could  say  whether  this
lady  was  still  living, —  answer,  **  No.**  —  In  fiict,  she  was  dead.


548  SUPPLEMENT.

40.  Je  ltd  ofFiis  ma  montre,  avec  invitation  de  m'indiqner
I'heure :  ma  montre  est  k  guichet.  II  declara  ne  rien  y  com-
prendre.  Une  autre  montre  lui  fut  passe^^  et  I'heure  fut  aus-
4dt6t  indiqu^e  avec  justesse.

5^  On  lui  pr^senta  les  fables  de  La  Fontaine,  Edition  illus*
tree  par  Grandville ;  il  eut  de  la  peine  a  reconnaitre  les
animaux  personnifi^  des  gravures,  et  cela  devait  porter
confusion  dans  son  imagination,  mais  il  lut,  sans  hesiter  un
seul  instant,  et  le  titre  du  livre  et  les  num^ros  indicati&
des  fables  ;  il  ne  voulut  cependant  pas  se  donner  la  peine  de
chercher  k  lire  les  fables  m ernes;  I'impression  en  etait  trop
petite,  disait-'il.

&*»  «r^crivis  son  nom :  il  le  lut,  et  rejetta  le  papier  en  disant,
*'  Ce  n'est  que  mon  nom."  Un  autre  nom,  inscrit  par  un  autre
assistant,  lui  fut  pr^sent^ ;  il  le  lut  aussi,  mais  en  declarant  qu'il
n'y  reconnaissait  pas  mon  ^criture.  J'inscrivis  un  nouveau  mot,
il  reconnut  ma  main.  Toutes  les  pr^c^dentes  experiences  ont
ete  faites  sans  couvrir  les  yeux  et  le  front  du  magnetise  ;  ici

Monsieur  T les  lui  couvrit  completement  d'un  mouchoir,

et  les  ^tonnantes  epreuves  suivantes  eurent  lieu.

7®.  Conduit  devant  une  glace,  E.  A declara  se  voir ;  re-


4th.  I  presented  my  watch  to  him,  and  desired  him  to  tell  tlie
hour.  My  watch  is  double-cased,  with  a  small  central  glass.  He
declared  he  could  not  understand  it  at  all.  Another  watch  was  passed
to  him,  and  immediately  he  told  the  hour  correctly.

5th.  The  illustrated  edition  of  the  fables  of  La  Fontaine,  by  Grand*
grille,  was  given  him  ;  he  could  scarcely  recognise  the  engravings  of  the
animals,  and  this  might  have  confused  his  thoughts ;  but  he  read,
without  hesitating  for  an  instant,  both  the  title  of  the  book,  and  the
numbers  referring  to  the  fables ;  yet  he  would  not  give  himself  the
trouble  of  trying  to  read  the  fables  themselves :  the  impression,  he
said,  was  too  small.

6th.  I  wrote  bis  name ;  he  read  it,  and  threw  the  paper  away,
saying,  "  That  is  only  my  name.**  Another  name,  written  by  another
bystaifider,  was  presented  to  him ;  he  read  it  also,  declaring  that  he
did  not  recognise  my  writing  in  it.  I  wrote  a  new  word,  and  he  re-
cognised my  hand.  All  the  preceding  experiments  were  made  with-
out covering  the  eyes  and  forehead  of  the  mesmerisee.  Mr.  T
now  covered  them  completely  with  a  handkerchief,  and  the  following
astonishing  facts  took  place :  —

7th.  Being  led  before  a  glass,  £.  A  declared  he  saw  himself:


SUPPLEMENT.  549

eonnut  et  d^signa^  en  les  nommant  successivement^  sans  aucune
hesitation^  les  assistans  qui  yinrent  Ten  tourer^  en  indiquantles
changements  de  leurs  positions^  et  suivant  du  front  tons  leura
mouvemens.

80.  Je  pris  ma  bourse ;  je  la  serrai  dans  la  main  de  maniere
a  ce  qu*il  ne  put  rien  reconnaitre  de  ce  que  je  tenais ;  il  de.
dara  cependant^  apres  un  pen  d'hesitation^  que  c'^tait  ma
bourse^  et  qu'elle  renfermait  de  Targent.  Je  renouvellai  cette
experience  avec  un  morceau  de  pain  ;  il  indiqua  bien  yague-
ment  ce  que  je  tenais^  mais  il  ne  parvint  pas  k  le  pr^ciser.

9®.  Le magnetiseur lui donna du papier de musique.

E.  A composa^  ayec  un  aplomb  admirable^  et  sans  hesiter,

deux  difFdrens  motifs  de  musique  pour  la  flute  ;  il  les  signa,  et
les  executa  sur  son  instrument^  ayec  exactitude  et  precision.

II  ofFrit  Tun  de  ces  motifs  a  Monsieur  T ,  et  Tautre  a

moi.  Je  garde  celui-ci  comme  un  souyenir  i4e\,  irr^yocable^
de  cette  int^ressant  stance.

Pendant  qu*il  composoit^  E.  A  r^petait  de  la  tete^  du

pied  et  de  la  boucbe,  tons  les  mouyemens  d'une  personne  qui
compose  et  qui  compte  la  mesure.

Le  magnetise  a  et^  r^yeill^  a  3  h.  5  m.  de  releyee ;  il  ne  con-


he  recognised,  pointed  out,  and  named  the  bystanders  successively,  with-
out any  hesitation,  mentioning  the  changes  of  their  position,  and  fol-
lowing all  their  movements  with  his  forehead.

8th.  I  took  my  purse,  and  squeezed  it  up  in  my  hand  in  such
a  manner  that  he  could  not  tell  what  I  was  holding ;  he  declared,
nevertheless,  after  a  little  hesitation,  that  it  was  a  purse,  and  that  it
contained  money.  I  repeated  this  experiment  with  a  morsel  of  bread ;
he  described  very  vaguely  what  I  held,  and  could  not  arrive  at  a  know-
ledge of  the  precise  thing.

9th.  The  mesmeriser  gave  him  some  music  paper.  E.  A
composed  with  admirable  accuracy,  and  without  hesitation,  two  dif-
ferent airs  for  the  flute ;  he  signed  them,  and  executed  them  on  his
own  instrument,  with  exactness  and  precision.  He  offered  one  of  these
airs  to  Mr.  T ,  and  the  other  to  me.  I  keep  it  as  a  true  and  irre-
vocable remembrance  of  that  interesting  sitting.

While  he  was  composing,  E.  A made,  with  his  head,  foot,  and

mouth,  all  the  movements  of  a  person  who  is  composing  and  coimting
the  time.

The  mesmerisee  was  awakened  at  five  minutes  past  three. On


550  SUPPLEMENT.

servait  aucun  souYenir  apparent  de  ce  qui  s'^tait  passe,  ou  de

ce  qu'il  avait  fait  pendant  son  somnambulisme.

Jean  Van  Owenhuysen.
Anyers,  Mars,  1838.


waking  he  had,  apparently,  no  recollection  of  what  had  happened  to
him,  or  of  what  he  had  done  during  his  sleepwaking.

JxAK  Van  Owekhutssn.
Antwerp,  March,  1838.


SUPPLEMENT.  561


Testimony. (Mesmeric  Vision.) Dr.  Foissac.

Vous  Ites  plus  heureux  que  moi ;  je  n*ai  rien  ^crit  depuis
un  siecle^  tandis  que  vous^  vous  publiez  un  ouvrage  sur  le
magn^tisme,  qui  je  n'en  doute  pas  sera  de  nature  a  exciter  a
la  fois  rint^ret  des  savants  et  des  gens  du  monde.  Si  tou»
vos  documens  sont  semblables  a  ceux  qui  concernent  le  jeune
£.  A  ,  ils  feront  certainement  sensation.  De  tous  les  som-
nambules  que  j  ai  vus^  c'est  Tun  de  ceux  qui  m'a  plus  attache,
et  je  dois  diire  ^tonn^.  C'est  de  grand  coeur  que  je  vais  rappeler
quelques  uns  des  faits  dont  j'ai  4t6  t^moin.

La  vue  sans  le  secour  des  yeux  est  I'un  des  ph^nomenes
que  j'ai  le  plus  rarement  rencontres  dans  la  pratique  du  mag-
netisme^  aussi  vous  t^moignai-je  le  vif  d^sir  de  verifier  par
inoi-meme  les  observations  que  vous  aviez  faites  sur  le
jeune  E.  A .

Vous  eutes  la  complaisance  de  le  faire  venir  a  Paris  le  prin-
tems  dernier^  et  dans  le  peu  de  jours  qu'il  y  resta^  je  pus
m'assurer  que  vous  n'aviez  rien  exag^r^  dans  le  r^cit  que  vous
m'aviez  fait  des  etonnantes  facultds  de  cet  interessant  som-
nambule. Je  me  rappelle  parfaitement  que  dans  les  deux  ou


Translation.

You  are  more  fortunate  than  myself  I  have  written  nothing  for
an  age,  whereas  you  are  publishing  a  work  on  mesmerism,  which  I
doubt  not  will  interest  both  learned  men  and  the  public  at  large.  If
all  your  documents  are  like  those  which  relate  to  the  young  £.  A  ,
they  will  certainly  create  a  sensation.  Of  all  the  sleepwakers  that  I
have  seen,  this  is  one  of  those  who  have  the  most  interested,  indeed  I
ought  to  say  astonished,  me.  It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  proceed
to  report  some  of  the  facts  which  I  witnessed.

Vision,  without  the  assistance  of  the  eyes,  is  one  of  the  phenomena
that  I  have^the  most  rarely  met  with  in  the  practice  of  mesmerism ;  you
therefore  found  me  exceedingly  desirous  df  verifying  the  observations
that  you  had  made  on  young  E.  A .

You  had  the  kindness  to  bring  him  tojParis  last  spring,  and,  during
the  few  days  that  he-  remuned,  I  was  able  to  assure  myself  that  you
had  exaggerated  nothing  in  the  report  that  you  had  made  of  the  asto-
nishing faculty  of  that  interesting  sleepwaker. 1  remember  perfectly


552  SUPPLEMENTw

trois  stances  ou  je  le  vis  pendant  le  sommeil  magn^tique^  nous
lui  appliqu^mes  nn  bandeau  sur  les  yeux^  nous  bouchames  tous
les  interstices  avec  des  linges  fins  et  du  coton,  de  maniere  a
emplcher  tout  rayon  lumineux  de  parvenir  jusqu  a  Torgane

visuel^  et  cependant^  malgr^  ces  precautions^  £.  A dis-

tinguait  les  cartes  qui  lui  ^taient  pr^sent^es^  indiquait,  sans
hesitations  dans  un  livre  ouvert  au  hasard,  la  lettre  majuscule
qui  commen^ait  un  chapitre^  le  nombre  des  lignes  d'une  page,
et  meme  a  la  fin  il  pouvait  lire  quelques  phrases.

II  n  avait  pas  toujours  besoin  de  presenter  le  liyre  vis-a-vis
des  yeux ;  il  lui  arrivait  souvent  de  placer  Tobjet  sourois  a
son  exploration  a  la  partie  sup^rieure  du  fronts  qui  semblait
alors  devenir  Torgane  de  la  vision^  et  toutes  les  indications
etaient  justes  et  precises.  Chacun  des  assistants  voulait  k  son
tour  faire  une  experience ;  sans  le  pr^venir,  et  sans  contact
aucun^  on  lui  pr^sentait  une  carte  a  quelques  pouces  du  som-
met  de  la  tete ;  E.  A*  levait  brusquement  le  bras  pour

saisir  la  carte^  et  jamais  sa  main  ne  portait  a  faux.

Une  fois^  quelquun  promenait  sans  rien  dire  le  journal
VEntre-acte  derriere  la  tete  du  jeune  somnambule,  et  celui-d
dit,  <'  C  est fEntre-acte.'* II  indiqua  aussi  Theure  de  ma


that,  at  the  two  or  three  sittings  when  I  saw  him  during  the  mesmeric
sleep,  we  applied  a  bandage  over  his  eyes,  we  stopped  up  all  the
interstices  with  fine  linen  and  cotton,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent
a  single  ray  of  light  from  arriving  at  his  visual  organs  ;  and  yet,  not-
withstanding these  precautions, £.  A distinguished  the  cards

which  were  presented  to  him,  and  pointed  out,  without  hesitation,  in  a
book  opened  at  random,  the  capital  letter  which  commenced  the  chap-
ter, the  number  of  lines  in  a  page,  and  even  towards  the  end  he  could
read  some  passages*

It  was  not  always  necessary  to  place  the  book  opposite  his  eyes  ;  he
frequently  placed  the  object  submitted  to  his  inspection  at  the  upper
part  of  his  forehead,  which  seemed  then  to  become  the  organ  of  vision,
and  all  his  remarks  were  just  and  acute.  Each  of  the  bystanders  in  his
turn  made  an  experiment.  Without  any  hint,  and  without  any  con-
tact, each  placed  a  card  at  the  distance  of  a  few  inches  from  the  top  of

bis  head ;  E.  A abruptly  raised  his  arm  to  seize  the  card,  and  hit

hand  never  missed  its  aim.

Once,  somebody,  without  saying  anything,  presented  the  journal
Entre-acte  behind  the  head  of  the  young  sleepwaker,  and  he  said,
"  That  is  r Entre-acte." He  also  told  the  hour  by  my  watch,  and


SUPPLEMENT.  553

montre^  et  il  renouvela  cette  ^preuve  avec  le  meme  succes^
Iprsque  j*en  eus  a  dessein  derang^  les  aiguilles.  Ainsi  je  ne
doute  pas  £.  A—  voyait  k  la  fois  par  toutes  les  parties  de  la
tSte  ;  11  se  levait  de  son  siege,  courait  avec  vitesse,  ^vitant  tres*
bien  les  obstacles,  et  atteignant  le  but  qu'il  se  proposait.

£n  finissant  cette  courte  relation,  je  ne  veux  pas  omettre  I'un
des  faits  de  vision  qui  me  frappa  le  plus  vivement  chez  ce
somnambule. Sur  la  table  k  c6t6  de  laquelle  il  ^tait  assis,  il  y

avait  une  multitude  de  verres  diversement  colori^s ;  E

en  saisit  un,  le  porte  k  la  partie  sup^rieure  du  front  en  faisant
le  geste  d'une  personne  qui  regarde  avec  un  lorgnon,  et  dit
aussitot,  ^^  Je  vols  tout  bleu."  C'etait  en  effet  un  verre  de
cette  couleur  dont  il  faisait  usage.

FOISSAC.
Paris,  le  18  Mars,  1839.


repeated  this  proof  with  the  same  success  when  I  had  intentionally

altered  the  hands. I  have  consequently  no  doubt  thai  E.  A saw

at  once  with  all  parts  of  his  head :  he  rose  from  his  seat,  ran  quickly,
avoiding  obstacles  very  well,  and  reached  the  place  he  intended.

In  concluding  this  short  account,  I  cannot  omit  one  of  the  facts  of
vision  which  struck  me  most  forcibly  in  this  sleepwaker.  On  the
table,  by  the  side  of  which  he  was  sitting,  there  were  a  number  of  dif-
ferent coloured  glasses;  E  took  one,  raised  it  to  the  upper
part  of  his  forehead,  imitating  the  action  of  a  person  looking  with  an
eyeglass,  and  immediately  said,  **  I  see  all  blue.'*  It  was  in  fact  a
glass  of  that  colour  that  he  had  taken  up.

FOISSAC.

Paris,  18th  March,  1839.


B  B


654  SUPPLEMENT.


Testimony  bt  Viscount  N ,  relative to  mesmeric

Vision  (before  £.  A—-—  was  far  advanced  in  per-
ception).

On  the  26th  July^  1838^  I  saw  £.  A——  to  all  intents  and
purposes  asleep^  his  eyes  quite  shut,  and  his  countenance  quite
in  keeping  with  this  state.  To  make  sure  of  his  not  seeing,
supposing  he  was  shamming  (I  say  this  for  security,  not  that
I  douhted  his  heing  asleep),  I  handaged  his  eyes  with  a  large
silk  handkerchief ;  to  make  more  sure,  the  space  hetween  his
nose  and  the  temples  was  filled  with  cotton ;  and  then,  and
not  till  then,  cards  were  produced,  and  he  played  a  game  of
"  beggar  my  neighbour  "with  Mr.  Townshend.  Notwith-
standing all  Mr.  and  I  did  by  pinching  £ ,  and  talking

and  laughing,  he  never  made  a  mistake,  and  always  detected
Mr.  Townshend's  faults  without  the  least  hesitation,  but  ex-
actly as  if  his  eyes  were  as  unincumbered  as  those  of  the  rest
of  the  party.  The  next  day  I  saw  E.  A——  put  into  the
same  state  of  sleepwaking.  I  then  went  into  an  armoire,
about  five  feet  high,  and  just  room  enough  for  two  persons  to
stand  in.  The  door  was  shut,  that  I  might  be  satisfied  there
was  no  light  admitted. When  I  came  out,  Mr.  Townshend

took  E in,  and  I  gave  them  different  cards,  some  of  which

E read ;  also  some  letters  on  separate  bits  of  paper;  then,

for  fear  he  might  get  time  to  see  while  the  door  was  opened
to  give  in  the  cards,  I  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper,  dog,  cat,  or
some  such  word,  and  drew  a  monster  figure,  and  folded  up  the
paper  like  a  note.  He  could  not  read  the  words,  but  men-
tioned most  of  the  letters,  and  their  position  on  the  paper,  and
laughed  at  the  figure,  but  could  not  make  it  out ;  this  was
enough  to  prove  he  saw  in  the  dark.  I  afterwards  took  a  card
off  the  table,  without  seeing  it  myself,  or  letting  any  one  else
see  it.  I  presented  the  hack  of  it  to  the  hack  of  his  head;  he
said  "  he  could  not  read  it  so :"  it  was  a  French  card,  aU  over
little  stamped  flowers,  or  other  marks.  I  then  turned  its  face
to  the  ha^k  of  his  head^  and  he  told  me  what  it  was.  I  par-
ticularly remarked  the  change  of  his  countenance  from  a  tired


SUPPLEMENT.  555

heavy  look  to  his  usual  cheerfulness^  on  waking. £.  A
has  told  me  cards  placed  in  or  shut  up  in  a  hook. I  have  also
seen  him  write  music,  nih  his  pen,  put  his  flute  together,  and
play  as  well  as  usual  in  a  state  of  sleepwaking.

Viscount  — — .
Rome,  11th  February,  18S9.


B  B 2


556  SUPPLEMENT.


Testimony  (Mesmeric  Vision,  etc.)  by  the  Baron  db

Carlowiz. Berne,  1838.

Conform^ment  k  la  plus  stricte  verite,  je,  soussigne,  atteste
le  fait  suivant :  —

Mr.  Hare  Townshend  avait  chez  lui  un  jeune  homme,
d'environ  l6  ans,  qu'il  avait  magnetise  depuis  quelque  tems,  et
qui  setrouvait,  a  ce  que  j 'avals  ou'i  dire,  en  etat  de  clair-voyance.
Quoique  j'eusse  lu  plusieurs  ouvrages  sur  ce  sujet,  et  bien  que
Mr.  Townshend  qui,  enneroi  de  toute  sorte  de  charlatanisme,
se  distingue  par  une  Erudition  profonde  autant  que  par  la  v^rite
de  son  caract^re,  m'inspir^t  de  la  confiance,  mon  incredulity
a  regard  des  merveilles  du  niagn^tisme  animal  etait  n^an-
moins  encore  assez  grande..  C*est  pourquoi  je  r^solus  d'i^
porter  une  attention  minutieuse  a  tout  ce  que  je  verrais  pendant
que  ce  jeune  homme  serait  en  sommeil  magn^tique.  Mr.
Townshend  Yy  mit  en  ma  presence.  L'op^ration  meme  ne
durait  que  dix  minutes,  et  le  magn^tiseur  nsait  de  peu  de  ma-
nipulations, qui  pourtant  faisaient  une  impression  tres-visible
sur  le  magnetise.  Celui-ci  eut  enfin  les  yeux  fermes,  et  re-
pondit  aux  questions  qu'on  lui  faisait  par  Tentremise  de  son


Translation.

In  conformity  with  the  strictest  truth,  I,  the  undersigned,  attest
the  following  facts : —

Mr.  Hare  Townshend  had  at  his  house  a  young  man,  about  sixteen
years  of  age,  whom  he  had  mesmerised  for  some  time,  and  who  bad
become,  as  I  was  told,  clair-voyant.  Although  1  had  read  several
works  on  this  subject,  and  Mr.  Townshend,  who  is  opposed  to  every
kind  of  charlatanism,  and  distinguished  by  profound  erudition,  as  weU
as  by  truth  of  character,  inspired  me  with  confidence,  my  incredulity  in
respect  to  the  wonders  of  mesmerism  was  still  very  great.  I  therefore
resolved  to  give  close  attention  to  every  thing  I  might  see  during  the
time  this  young  man  remained  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Mr.  Townshend
sent  him  to  sleep  before  me.  The  operation  continued  only  ten  mi-
nutes, and  the  mesmeriser  made  but  few  manipulations,  which,  never-
theless, produced  a  very  visible  impression  on  the  mesmerised.  His
eyes  at  length  became  closed,  and  he  answered  questions  which  we


SUPPLEMENT.  557

inagnctiseur.  II  distinguait  tous  les  objects  comme  s'il  avait
ks  yeux  ouverts,  ce  qui  m'^tonnait  fort  peu^  parceque  je  n'etais
pas  encore  d^livre  de  mes  anciens  soup9ons.

Par  cette  raison  j'etais  bien  curieux  d'observer  des  preuves  de
dair-voyance  apres  que  ce  jeune  homme  fut  mis  dans  Timposd-
bilit^  parfaite  et  incontest^  d'ouvrir  les  paupieres.  Pour  cet
effet  on  alia  lui  bander  les  yeux.  Ayant  d'abord  bien  examine
le  mouchoir  qui  devoit  servir  de  bandage,  je  contribuai  mon
possible  pour  le  bien  appliquer  et  serrer,  et  afin  qu'aucun  vide
ne  restat  entre  le  bandage  et  les  paupieres,  ce  qui  lui  aurait
permis  de  lever  les  yeux,  on  y  mit  du  coton.  Mais  je  fus  bien
surpris  lorsqu'il  voyait,  malgr^  ces  appareils,  aussi-bien  qu'au-
paravant.  Je  choisis  parmi  un  grand  nombre  de  livres  qui  se
trouvaient  dans  le  salon,  et  designai  les  passages  qu'il  devait
lire,  ce  qu'il  executait  avec  vitesse,  et  sans  se  tromper.  II
voyait  aussi  ime  petrifaction  que  j 'avals  saisie  clandestinement,
et  que  je  tenais  dans  la  main  serr^.  On  lui  montrait  derriere
la  tete,  et  k  plusieurs  reprises,  Tetui  qui  renfermait  sa  flute,  et
il  s'appercevait  toujours  si  la  fliite  y  ^tait,  ou  si  on  Ten  avait
otee.

J'ai  assist^  deux  fois  a  Tacte  ou  Mr.  Townshend  magne-


put  to  him  through  the  medium  of  the  mesmeriser.  He  distinguished
every  object  as  if  he  had  his  eyes  open,  which  surprised  me  very
little,  for  1  was  not  yet  freed  from  my  old  suspicions.

For  this  reason  I  was  very  curious  to  observe  the  proofe  of  clair-
voyance, after  the  young  man  was  so  placed  that  it  was  perfectly  and
incontestably  impossible  for  him  to  open  his  eyelids.  For  this  pur-
pose we  proceeded  to  bandage  the  eyes.  Having  first  carefully  ex-
amined the  handkerchief  which  was  to  serve  as  a  bandage,  I  did  all
I  could  to  apply  it  effectually  and  fix  it ;  and,  to  prevent  any  space
from  being  left  between  the  bandage  and  the  eyelids,  which  would  allow
him  to  open  his  eyes,  it  was  stopped  with  cotton.  But  I  was  much
surprised  when  he  saw,  notwithstanding  these  bandages,  as  well  as
before.  I  chose  a  book  from  among  a  great  number  that  were  in  the
room,  and  pointed  out  passages  for  him  to  read.  This  he  did  with
rapidity,  and  without  mistake.  He  also  saw  a  petrifaction  which  I
had  taken  secretly,  and  held  in  my  closed  hand.  We  repeatedly
showed  him  behind  his  head  the  case  which  contained  his  fiute,  and
he  always  perceived  whether  the  fiute  was  there,  or  had  been  taken
away.

I  was  twice  present  when  Mr.  Townshend  mesmerised  this  young

BB 3


568  SUPPLEMENT.

tisait  ce  jeune  homme,  et  j'ai  fait  k  peu  pr^s  les  memes  re-
marques.  La  seconde  fois^  Mr.  Townshend  lui  banda  les  yeox
dans  la  maniere  indiqude  avant  de  le  magn^tiser.  Da  reste^
il  m'a  paru  que  le  magn^tis^  faisait  tous  ces  exp^rimens  avec
une  certaine  rdpugnance^  et  qu*il  aurait  plutot  pr^f^re  de  rester
dans  une  situation  tranquille  et  passive,  attach^  a  son  magn^-
tiseur.

£n  foi  de  quoi,  j'ai  muni  le  present  cerlificat  de  ma  signature.

GUBTAVE AbOLPHE, BaRON DE CaBLOWIK.
Seme,  le  13  F^r.  1839.


man,  and  I  made  nearly  the  same  observations.  On  the  second  oc-
casion, Mr.  Townshend  bandaged  his  eyes  in  the  manner  described
before  mesmerising  him.

It  appeared  to  me  that  the  masmerisee  submitted  to  all  these  expe-
riments with  an  evident  repugnance,  and  that  he  would  have  preferred
remaining  in  a  tranquil  and  passive  situation  close  to  his  mesmeriser.

In  testimony  to  which,  I  have  signed  the  present  certificate  with
my  name.

GasTAVE  Adolfhs,  Baron  de  Carlowiz.

Berne,  13th  February,  1839.


SUPPLEMENT.  559

Testimony  to  Mesmerism. By  a  Friend.

Credo  versus  NoU'credo.

^'  I  THINK  myself  justified  in  suspending  my  assent  to  the
facts  related  of  mesmerism^"  said  I  one  day  to  my  friend

C ,  *'  till  some  opportunity  of  observing  diem  in  proprid

persond  shall  offer  itself.''

**  You  shall  have  that  opportunity  this  very  morning,"  he
replied ;  '^  and  it  will  be  the  best  answer  I  can  give  to  your
arguments."  So  saying,  C—  proceeded  to  an  adjoining
room,  taking  with  him  a  youth  about  fifteen  years  of  age,
whom  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  for  some  weeks
past ;  he  told  me  to  remain  where  I  was  till  he  should^  call
me.  In  about  twenty  minutes  C—  called.  On  entering,
I  found  them  sitting  vis-d^vis ;  C—  held  a  book  in  his
hand,  and  a  pack  of  cards  was  placed  by  his  side ;  the  boy

(whose  name  was  E.  A )  had  his  eyes  tightly  bandaged

with  a  pocket-handkerchief,  which  nearly  enveloped  his  face.
I  was  struck  with  the  change  which  so  short  an  interval  had
wrought  in  them  both ;  the  mesmeriser  looking  rather  wild
and  exhausted,  whilst  the  patient  before  him,  without  seeming
exactly  asleep,  yet  had  an  air  of  such  perfect  resignation,
abandonment,  and  even  prostration,  as  made  me  think  that  he
was  without  consciousness,  and  that  some  great,  and  to  me
unknown,  influence  was  operating  upon  him.  C— -  then
took  up  a  card  at  hazard,  begging  me  to  observe  accurately
that  he  held  it  with  its  back  always  turned  towards  E.  A  ■,
and  placing  it  behind  a  large  octavo,  he  turned  it  again  with
its  face  towards  E.  A  ,  keeping  the  open  volume  exactly
between  it  and  the  bandage.  I  positively  affirm  that  there
was  no  possibility  of  the  boy's  seeing  the  card  during  its  whole
progress,  or  of  his  being  assisted  either  by  the  direction  of
light,  or  any  mirror  opposite.  Now  came  the  critical  moment,
and  I  had  no  doubt  whatever  of  convincing  my  friend  that  he
had  been  living  under  a  delusion.  C—  asked  his  waking,
sleeper,  or  somnambule  (as  they  term  it),  to  tell  him  the
number  and  suit  of  the  card  —  to  me  the  most  unreasonable

question possible, considering  A 's  state  of  incapacity.

The  latter,  without  seeming  to  relish  this  request,  bent  a  little

B  B  4


560  SUPPLEMENT.

forward,  eo  as  to  bring  his  forehead  nearly  opposite  the  back

of  the  book;  but  remained  silent^  till^  on  C 's  gently

cbi^ng  him  for  his  slowness^  he  named  the  card  quite  cor-
rectly, to  my  no  small  astonishment  and  utter  confusion,  hav-
ing kept  strict  watch  the  whole  time  to  see  that  the  experiment
was  properly  conducted.

Without  betraying  my  thoughts^  I  then  asked  my  friend  to
repeat  the  experiment,  and  selected  a  card  which  he  himself
did  not  know.  Upon  this  the  patient  showed  signs  of  great
uneasiness,  and  complained  of  fatigue.  I  took  care  that  the
same  precautions  should  be  taken.  The  sleepwaker,  this  time,
showed  a  little  obstinacy,  declaring  he  could  not  tell  that  card,
as  he  was  sure  it  would  be  followed  by  another ;  and  in  this
he  guessed  rightiy.  The  mesmeriser,  however,  becoming  a
littie  furious,  urged  his  patient  to  tell  the  card  instantiy,  as  a
third  person  was  present  for  the  express  purpose  of  witnessing
the  experiment  and  making  a  report  of  it  to  a  learned  society.
Upon  this  the  patient  turned  full  towards  me,  and  looked  as
if  he  could  stare  at  me  through  his  bandage ;  then  he  said
that  he  could  not  see  very  clearly,  but  thought  the  card  was
the  sia;  of  spades.  In  this,  however,  he  was  mistaken,  it
being  the  eight  of  spades ;  but  the  approximation  was  too
great  to  admit  of  my  expressing  any  disappointment  at  this
failure.  I  therefore  only  begged  for  a  third  trial,  beginning
now  to  feel  a  most  lively  interest,  in  spite  of  my  previous  in-
credulity, in  what  was  taking  place  before  me.  C con-
sented ;  so  pulling  out  a  card  from  the  middle  of  the  pack,  I
carried  it  unseen,  with  its  face  downwards,  to  the  book,  and
carefully  turned  it ;  and  after  holding  it  there  a  few  seconds,

C asked  E.  A to  tell  him  the  card  accurately.  "  The

ten  of  clubs,"  cried  the  latter,  with  a  tone  of  confidence  and
triumph  that  might  have  confounded  a  greater  sceptic  than

myself ;  —  that  was  indeed  the  card  that  C held  in  his

hand  !  !

What  could  I  say  to  this  ?  To  doubt  any  longer  would  be
doubting  my  own  senses,  —  would,  in  short,  be  madness,  for
I  could  in  no  way  justify  my  doubts ;  yet  to  believe,  on  the
other  hand,  would  be  another  kind  of  madness,  unless  saying
that  I  witnessed  a  person  name  a  card  which  was  intercepted
by  a  solid  opaque  substance  deserves  to  be  called  by  any
other  name.


SUPPLEMENT.  561

'^  The  deuce  is  in  it  if  you  are  not  convinced  now,"  said
my  friend,  turning  about,  and  displaying  a  visage  truly  Me-
phistophelian.

"  I  am  convinced  that  the  deuce  is  in  it^  that's  all,"  cried
I ;  and  forthwith  tried  to  make  my  escape,  but  I  found  the
door  locked.

"  Will you  have the  goodness to wait  a  few minutes

longer  ?"  said  C ,  stlQ  insulting  me  by  a  look  of  the  most

cruel  satisfaction.

"  Will  you  have  the  goodness  to  let  me  out  of  this  illusive
atmosphere  ?  I  will  have  none  of  it,"— I  retorted.

"  Come  this  way,  then,"  said  he,  opening  a  door,  through
which  I  hurried,  bent  only  on  my  escape.  He  locked  it  upon  me,
and  left  me,  not  as  I  had  hoped  to  find  myself,  in  the  garden,
but  in  a  dark,  narrow,  dismal  closet,  darker  Uian  the  darkest
corner  of  a  dungeon.

^'  What  do  you  see  in  there  ?  "  ironically  asked  my  tor-
mentor.

**  *  Blue  spirits  and  white ;
Black  spirits  and  grey/  —

all  the  spirits  of  darkness,"  I  exclaimed.

^^  You  see  no  spirits  of  light,  then,  it  seems  ?  "

"  No  !  "  groaned  I :  ''  let  me  out."

Satisfied  with  my  answer,  C opened the  door,  and

wished  to  make  me  believe  that  his  sleepwaker  could  see  in
that  place.

Having  consented  to  witness  this  new  experiment,  C

took  the  boy  A  into  the  closet.  I  handed  the  former
some  cards,  unknown  to  him,  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  con-
cealed from  £.  A ,  till  I  had  locked  and  leant  against  the

door.  This  being  duly  accomplished,  I  desired  that  one  of
the  cards  should  be  presented  to  the  patient.  It  was  done,
and  in  about  one  minute  he  named  the  card,  correctly,  and  with-*
out  the  slightest  hesitation.  My  astonishment,  notwithstanding,
was  as  great  as  ever.  "  What !  "  thought  I ;  '^  was  I  to  be  thus
ousted  out  of  my  conviction,  that  mesmerism  was  a  thorough
humbug  —  a  system  of  refined  deception,  (this  was  the  straw
to  which  I  vainly  clung,)  of  the  most  puerile  buffoonery,  of
the  lowest,  most  shameful,  vulgar,  highway  charlatanism  ?  "

B  B 5


562  SUPPLEMENT.

And  yet  how  could  I  avoid  the  humiliation  of  being  at  length
conrinced^  after  so  long^  obstinate,  and,  as  I  thought,  rational
a  resistance.  As  a  last  hope,  I  determined  to  re-enter  the
closet,  and  investigate  more  closely.  I  did  so,  and  the  door
was  locked  upon  me.  At  first  there  seemed  to  flit  before  my
eyes  the  indistinct  forms  of  objects,  which  had  attracted  my
notice  in  the  room;  these  impressions  became  gradually
fainter,  till  at  length  I  was  enveloped  in  perfect  darkness;  all
endeavour  to  see  tiie  cards  I  had  taken  with  me  was  fruitless.
I  poked  into  every  comer,  strained  to  catch  tiie  slightest  ray
of  light,  but  it  was  almost  genuine  darkness — impenetrable
obscurity  to  ordinary  vision.  I  was  glad  to  be  liberated,  and
to  let  tile  mesmeriser  and  his  sleepwaker  take  my  place.  I
now  waited  in  actual  fear,  lest  tiie  cards  should  be  again  dis-
covered by  £.  A ,  and  stood  listening  in  cruel  suspense.

After  a  few  minutes  the  sleepwaker  cried  out  that  he  held  in
his  hand  the  knave  of  spades.  On  opening  the  door,  I  found
that  it  was  so.  This  experiment  was  repeated  three  times
successfully ;  and  I  was  at  length  obliged  to  congratulate  my
friend  on  the  dexterity  shown  by  his  dair-voyant  pupil ;  but
I  felt  ashamed  of  using  the  term  in  a  sense  so  different  to  that
I  had  always  attached  to  it,  more  especially  when  I  remem-
bered my  scoffing  incredulity  of  tiiat  very  morning,  which
nothing  but  the  most  genuine  and  convincing  proofs  could
have  caused  to  give  way.

D.  C.

Berne,  1838.


SUPPLEMENT.  563


TEStlMONY  RELATIVE  TO  MeSMEBIC  ViSION. By  Dr.  WilD,

OP Berne^ wHEir  E.  A  had greatly advanced

IN  olair-voyance.

J* ATTESTS  par  la  pr^sente  d*avoir  assiste^  le  27  Sept.  ]  838,
a  des  experiences  magnetiques,  faites, par  Monsieur  Hare

Townshend,  sur  la  personne  d*E.  A ,  ag^  de  15  ans,  ne  a

Boom,  en  Belgique,  musicien  disdngu^.

Quoique  convaincu  de  Texistence  de  I'influence  morale  d'une
personne  sur  une  autre,  que  Ton  nomm^  ordinairement  mag-
netisme  animal,  tant  par  des  propres  experiences  sur  mes  ma-
lades,  que  par  la  complaisante  amitie  de  feu  M.  Deleuze,  a
Paris,  je  voulus  pourtant  proceder  dans  cette  occasion  comme
incr^dule.  Pour  m'assurer  personnellement  de  la  reality  des
faits,  je  fis  les  experiences  suivantes :  —

1  ^.  Je  m'assis  sur  une  chaise,  tournant  le  dos  a  la  fenetre,
et  me  fis  mettre  sur  la  tete  deux  serviettes  de  toile  ^paisse,
qid  me  pendaient  autour  du  corps  jusqu'aux  hanches;  ces
serviettes  m'empecherent  de  voir  ma  main,  que  je  passai  plu-
sieurs  fois  devant  mes  yeux ;  je  n  en  distinguai  rien  du  tout.

2°.  Je  me  fis  fermer  les  yeux  par  les  mains  de  M.  Towns-


Translation.

1  hereby  certify  to  having  been  present,  on  the  27th  of  September,
1838,  at  some  mesmeric  experiments  made  by  Mr.  Hare  Totrnshend

on  the  person  of  E.  A ,  aged  fifteen  years,  born  at  Boom,  in  Bel-

giiun,  a  distinguished  musician.

Although  convinced  of  the  moral  influence  of  one  person  over  an-
other, which  is  commonly  called  animal  magnetism,  as  much  by  my
ovrn  experiments  upon  my  patients,  as  by  the  kindness  of  the  late  M.
Deleuze,  at  Paris,  I  wished,  nevertheless,  to  proceed  on  this  occasion
as  if  incredulous.  To  assure  myself  personally  of  the  reality  of  the
iacts,  I  made  the  following  experiments :  —

1.  I  sat  down  in  a  chair,  with  my  back  to  the  window,  and  put
upon  my  head  two  thick  napkins,  which  hung  around  my  body  as
low  as  the  hips ;  these  napkins  prevented  me  from  seeing  my  hands,
which  I  passed  several  times  before  my  eyes.  I  could  not  distinguish
them  at  all.

2.  I  had  my  eyes  closed  by  Mr.  Townshend's  hands,  either  by  his

B  B 6


564  SUPPLEMENT.

hend^  soit  par  les  doigts  serr^s,  soit  par  la  pomme  de  ses  mains^
et  mes  yeux  ne  distinguerent  rien  du  tout.  M.  Townshend
pla9a^  avec  le  meme  resultat  sur  mea  yeux,  deux  petite  gobelets
en  porcelaine  (qui  servent  pour  baigner  les  yeux)  remplis  de
coton.

S^,  Je  me  fis  enfermer  dans  une  armoire  vide,  et,  roalgre
mes  recherches,  je  ne  pus  decouvrir  aucune  ouverture,  qui
aurait  laisse  entrer  un  seul  rayon  de  lumiere.

Nous  fimes  alors  entrer  le  jeune  A . M.  Townshend

le  mit  en  sommeil  magn^tique,  et  lui  adressa  quelques  ques-
tions pour  me  convaincre  de  son  isolement  magnetique.  Je
lui  dis  inopin^ment  a  tres-haute  voix  quelques  mots,  mais  le
calme  parfait  de  sa  mine  me  prouva  assez,  qu'il  n'en  entendit
rien  du  tout.  Quelques  minutes  apres,  je  me  mis  en  rapport
avec  lui,  et  depuis  ce  moment  il  me  r^pondit  toujours.  Je
Tassis,  et  lui  posai  les  memes  deux  serviettes  sur  la  tete,  de  la
meme  maniere  qu  ^  moi-meme  un  quart  d*heure  avant.  Je  lui
donnai  dans  la  main  un  carte  a  jeu,  que  je  tirai  moi-raeroe
d'un  jeu,  place  sur  une  table  deux  pas  de  distance  de  nous; —
apres  Fa  voir  tenue  quelques  moments  dans  la  hauteur  du  front,
de  sorte  que  la  plaine  de  la  carte  formait  avec  la  partie  supe-


Hngers,  brought  into  close  contact  with  each  other,  or  by  the  palmn
of  his  hands,  and  my  eyes  could  discern  nothing.  Mr.  Townshend
placed  two  small  porcelain  eye-goblets,  such  as  are  used  for  bathing
the  eyes,  filled  with  cotton,  on  my  eyes  with  the  same  effect.

3.  I  allowed  myself  to  be  shut  up  in  an  empty  wardrobe,  and,
notwithstanding  every  effort,  I  could  not  discover  any  opening  which
would  allow  a  single  ray  of  light  to  enter.

Young  A was  then  brought  in. Mr.  Townshend  threw  him

into  mesmeric  sleep,  and  put  some  questions  to  him  for  the  purpose
of  convincing  me  of  his  mesmeric  insulation.  I  suddenly  addressed
a  few  words  to  him  in  a  very  loud  voice ;  but  the  perfect  quietude  of
his  countenance  fully  convinced  me  that  he  heard  nothing.  Some
minutes  afterwards  I  placed  myself  in  relation  with  him,  and  from
that  moment  he  invariably  answered  me.  I  set  him  down,  and  placed
the  same  two  napkins  on  his  head  just  as  they  had  been  placed  on
myself  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before.  I  gave  him  a  playing  card  which
I  had  myself  taken  from  a  pack  lying  on  a  table  at  two  paces  distant
from  us.  After  holding  it  a  few  moments  to  the  top  of  his  forehead,
to  that  the  flat  surface  of  the  card  formed  with  the  upper  part  of  his


SUPPLEMENT.  565

rieure  de  son  front  un  angle  d'k  pen  pres  quarante-cinq  degr^s^
il  me  dit  exactement  les  couleurs  et  figures  imprim^es  dessous  ;
je  changeai  trois  fois  la  carte  avec  une  autre,  avec  le  meme
resultat  satisfaisant.

Alors  je  pris  un  livre,  ouvrai  une  page^  et  lui  indiquai  avec
le  doigt  une  ligne  qu'il  devait  lire,  ce  qu*il  fit  avec  la  meme
facilite ;  je  lui  presentai  un  volume  d'un  autre  ouvrage,  avec
le  meme  resultat.  Apres  lui  avoir  6t4  les  serviettes^  M.
Townshend  lui  ferma  les  yeux  avec  les  mains,  et  plus  tant
avec  les  gobelets  a  bains  d'yeux,  remplis  de  coton^  exacte-
ment de  la  meme  maniere  comme  il  Tavait  fait  a  moi ;  et  le

jeune  A lisait  dans  les  livres,  et  distingua  les  cartes  a  jeu

que  je  lui  presentai,  et  que  je  tirai  toujours  au  hazard  d'un
jeu  de  cartes  complete.  Je  Tenfermai  enfin  dans  la  meme
armoire ;  il  ne  s*y  trouvait  qu'une  robe  de  chambre ;  il  s'y
assit  dans  un  coin^  me  pria  de  la  bien  envelopper  avec  la  robe
de  chambre^  disant  que  plus  il  y  avait  obscurity  complete
autour  de  lui^  mieux  il  pourrait  voir,  puisque  les  rayons  de
lumiere  partirent  de  son  cerveau.  Je  lui  donnai  trois  autres
cartes  a  jeu,  je  fermai  Tarmoire  a  clef,  et  boucbai  le  trou  de  la
clef  avec  la  pomme  de  ma  main  ;  dans  peu  de  temps  il  me
nomma  les  cartes. Alors  M.  T.  me  pria  d'ecrire  quelque


forehead  an  angle  of  nearly  forty-five  degrees,  he  told  me  exactly  the
colours  and  figures  printed  on  its  underside ;  I  changed  the  card  for
another  three  times,  and  always  with  the  same  satisfactory  result.  I
then  took  a  book,  opened  a  page,  and  pointed  out  a  line  which  I  wished
him  to  read.  This  he  did  with  the  same  facility.  I  then  gave  him
a  volume  of  another  work  with  the  same  result.  After  having  removed
the  napkins,  Mr.  Townshend  closed  his  eyes  with  his  hands,  and  after-
wards with  the  goblets  for  bathing  the  eyes,  filled  with  cotton,  ex-
actly in  the  same  manner  as  he  had  done  to  me ;  and  young  A

read  the  bo«ks,  and  distinguished  each  playing  card  which  was  pre-
5;ented  to  him,  and  which  I  took  always  at  random  from  a  complete
pack.  I  then  shut  him  up  in  the  same  wardrobe,  in  which  there  was
nothing  but  a  morning-gown.  He  sat  down  in  a  comer,  and  begged
me  to  cover  him  up  well  with  the  morning-gown,  saying  that,  the
more  complete  the  darkness  around  him,  the  better  he  could  see,  be-
cause the  rays  of  light  came  off  from  his  brain.  I  gave  him  three
other  playing  cards,  and  locked  him  up  in  the  closet,  stopping  the
key-hole  with  the  palm  of  my  hand ;  in  a  short  time  he  told  me  the
cards. Mr.  Townshend  then  begged  me  to  write  something  on  paper.


566  SUPPLEMENT.


chose  sur  an  papier.  Je  m'^oignai  dans  un  autre  coin  de
la  chambre^  et  j'^crivis  sur  un  morceau  de  papier  epais  —
^'  Vous  etes  complaisant  aigourd'hui."  Je  pliai  le  papier  deux
fois^  le  lui  donnai^  et  fermai  vite  de  la  meme  maniere  Tarmoire
et  le  trou  de  la  clef.  Quoique  le  premier  mot  lui  etait  bien
nouveau^  il  le  lut  exactement,  ainsi  que  le  reste  du  billet.

Sorti  de  Tarmoire^  je  le  priai  de  lire  avec  Tocciput.  ( Jusqu'a-
lors^  il  avoit  toujours  tenu  les  cartes  et  livres  de  la  maniere
decrite  d-dessus  derant  le  front.)  Je  melai  le  jeu  de  cartes,
r^tendai  sur  une  table  eloignee  de  quelques  pas  de  lui,  en  ayant
soin  que  le  cot^  impriro^  soit  tournd  vers  la  table.  E,  A
s'approcha  alors  de  la  table,  en  marcbant  k  r^culons,  prit  une
carte,  la  pla9a  sur  son  occiput,  et  la  nomma,  en  toumant  ton*
jours  le  dos  k  la  table  d'ou  il  Tavoit  prise. Je  trouve  superflu

de  dire,  que  M.  Townshend  magnetisait  le  jeune  A de

temps  en  temps,  entre  les  diffc^rentes  experiences,  pour  entre-
tenir  la  clair-voyance.

Si  jamais  experiences  magnetiques  ont  6te  faites  avec  ex-
actitude et  mefiance,  je  crois  que  Ton  pent  mettre  celles-ci  en
premiere  ligne.

Chas.  Wild,  Docteur  Medecin.

Berne,  10  Fdvrier,  1839.


I  went  away  into  another  corner  of  the  room,  and  wrote  on  a  slip  of
thick  paper  —  "  You  are  obliging  to-day."  I  folded  the  paper  twice,
gave  it  him,  and  quickly  closed  the  closet  and  the  key-hole  in  the
same  manner.  Although  the  first  word  was  quite  new  to  him,  he
read  it  correctly,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  note.

On  coming  out  of  the  closet,  I  begged  him  to  read  with  the  back
of  his  head  (for  hitherto  he  had  always  held  the  cards  and  books  before
his  forehead  in  the  manner  above  described).  1  mixed  the  pack  of
cards,  and  spread  them  on  a  table  a  few  paces  distant  from  him,  taking
care  that  the  printed  side  should  be  turned  towards  the  table.  £.  A—
then  approached  tlie  table,  walking  backwards,  took  a  card,  placed  it
on  the  back  of  his  head,  and  named  it,  keeping  his  back  constantly
towards  the  table  whence  he  had  taken  it. It  is  unnecessary  to  say,

that  Mr.  Townshend  mesmerised  young  A from  time  to  time,

between  the  different  experiments,  to  keep  up  the  lucidity.

If  ever  mesmeric  experiments  were  made  with  accuracy  and  dis-
trust, I  believe  that  these  may  be  placed  in  the  first  rank.

Charlbs  Wild,  Doctor  of  Medicine.

Berne,  10th  February,  1839.


SUPPLEMENT.  567


AocouNT  OF  Sensations  under  Mesmerism. By  Profes-
sor Agassis^  of  Neufohatel^  Switzerland.

Notes  relatives  au  MagnStisme  Animal,  22  Fivrier,  18S9>

au  matin.

D^reux  de  savoir  k  quoi  m'en  tenir  sur  le  magn^dsme
animal^  je  recherchai  depuis  long-temps  Toccasion  de  faire
des  experiences  a  ce  sujet  sur  moi-meme^  afin  d'^viter  les
doutes  qui  pourraient  exister  sur  la  nature  des  sensations  que
I'on  entend  rapporter  par  des  personnes  magnetis^es.  M.  Desor,
dans  une  course  qu'il  fit  a  Beme^  engagea  hier  M.  Towns-
hend^  qui  Tavait  magnetise  anterieurement^  a  Taccompagner
a  Neuchlitel^  et  a  tenter  de  me  magnetiser.  Ces  messieurs
arriverent  hier  par  le  courrier  du  soir,  et  me  firent  prevenir.
A  huit  heures  j'^tais  aupr^s  d'eux.  Nous  soup&mes  jusqu'a
neuve  heures  et  demie^  puis  vers  dix  heures  M.  Townshend
commen9a  k  op^rer  sur  moL  Assis  vis- ^- vis  Tun  de  I'autre^
il  ne  fit  d'ahord  que  me  prendre  les  mains  en  me  regardant
fixement.  J*€tais  fermement  r^solu  a  arriver  a  la  connaissanoe
de  la  v^ritd^  quelle  qu'elle  fut ;  aussi  le  moment  ou  je  vis  qu*il


Translation.

Note*  relating  to  Metmerism,  the  morning  of22d  February,  18S9.

Desirous  of  knowing  what  to  think  of  mesmerism,  I  for  a  long
time  sought  forfan  opportunity  of  making  some  experiments  in  regard
to  It  upon  myself,  so  as  to  avoid  the  doubts  which  might  arise  on  the
nature  of  the  sensations  which  we  have  heard  described  by  mesmerised
persons.  M.  Desor,  yesterday,  in  a  visit  which  he  made  to  Berne,
invited  Mr.  Townshend,  who  had  previously  mesmerised  him,  to  ac-
company him  to  Neuch^tel  and  try  to  mesmerise  me.  These  gen-
tlemen arrived  here  with  the  evening  courier,  and  informed  me  of
their  arrival.  At  eight  o'clock  I  went  to  them.  We  continued  at
supper  till  half  past  nine  o'clock,  and  about  ten  Mr.  Townsend  com-
menced operating  on  me.  While  we  sat  opposite  to  one  another,  he,
in  the  first  place,  only  took  hold  of  my  hands  and  looked  at  me  fix-
edly. I  was  firmly  resolved  to  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,
whatever  it  might  be ;  and,  therefore,  the  moment  I  saw  him  endea-


568  SUPPLEMENT.

tentait  d'exercer  une  action  sur  nioi,  eut-il  quelque  chose  de
solennel ;  je  m'addiessai  en  silence  a  T Auteur  de  toutes  choses^
pour  lui  demander  de  me  donner  la  force  de  r^sister  a  Tentraine-
ment^  d'etre consciencieux  \is-a-vis de  luoi-meme comme
vis-a-vis  des  faits ;  puis  je  regardais  M.  Townshend^  attendf
a  ce  qui  se  passait. J'etais  dans  une  position  tres-commode ;
I'heure  peu  avanc^^  k  laquelle  j'ai  I'habitude  de travailler^
etait  loin  de  me  disposer  au  soromeil;  j'^tais  assez  maitre  de
moi  pour  n'^prouver  aucune  Amotion,  et  pour  reprimer  tout
^lan  d'imaginatton  si  j*eusse  ^te  moins  calme. Aussi  fus-je
assez  longtemps  sans  ^prouver  aucun  effet  de  la  presence  vis-
a-vis de  moi  de  M.  Townshend.  Cependant^  apres  un  quart
d'heure  au  moins,  je  sentis  comme  un  couraut  dans  tons  roes
membres,  et  des  ce  moment  ma  paupiere  s'appesantit. Je  vis
alors  M.  Townshend  tendre  ses  deux  mains  devant  mes  yeux^
comme  s'il  eut  voulu  y  enfoncer  ses  doigts^  puis  operer  divers
mouvemens  circulaires  autour  de  mes  yeux,  qui  m'appesan-
tissaient  toujours  plus  les  paupieres. J'avais  par  devers  moi
le  sentiment  qu'il  cherchait  a  me  faire  fermer  les  yeux^  et
cependant  ce  n*^tait  point  comme  si  Ton  eut  menace  mes
yeux  a  T^tat  de  veille,  et  que  je  les  eusse  fermes  pour  ^viter
un  attouchement ;  c'etait  un  poids  insurmontable  des  paupieres


vouring  to  exert  an  action  upon  me,  I  silently  addressed  the  Author
of  all  things,  beseeching  him  to  give  me  power  to  resist  the  influence*
and  to  be  conscientious  in  regard  to  myself  as  well  as  in  regard  to  the
iacts.  I  then  fixed  my  eyes  upon  Mr.  Townshend,  attentive  to  what-
ever passed.  I  was  in  very  suitable  circumstances ;  the  hour  being
early,  and  one  at  which  I  was  in  the  habit  of  studying,  was  far  from
disposing  me  to  sleep.  I  was  sufficiently  master  of  myself  to  experi-
ence no  emotion,  and  to  repress  all  flights  of  imagination,  even  if  I
had  been  less  calm ;  accordingly  it  was  a  long  time  before  I  felt  any
effect  from  the  presence  of  Mr.  Townshend  opposite  me.  However,
after  at  least  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  I  felt  a  sensation  of  a  current
through  all  my  limbs,  and  from  that  moment  my  eyelids  grew  heavy.  I
then  saw  Mr.  Townshend  extend  his  hands  before  my  eyes,  as  if  he  were
about  to  plunge  his  Angers  into  them ;  and  then  make  different  cir-
cular movements  around  my  eyes,  which  caused  my  eyelids  to  become
still  heavier.  I  had  the  idea  that  he  was  endeavouring  to  make  me
close  my  eyes ;  and  yet  it  was  not  as  if  some  one  had  threatened  my
ey«s  and,  in  the  waking  state,  I  had  closed  them  to  prevent  him.;  it
was  an  irresistible  heaviness  of  the  lids  which  compelled  me  to  shut


SUPPLEMENT.  569

qui  me  les  faisait  clore,  et  peu  k  peu  je  sentis  que  je  n'avais
plus  la  force  de  les  tenir  ouverts ;  mais  je  n'en  conservais  pas
moins  la  conscience  de  ce  qui  se  passait  autour  de  moi;  ainsi
j'entendais  M.  Desor  parler  a  M.  Townshend^  je  coroprenais
ce  qu'ils  se  disaient^  j'entendais  ce  qu*ils  me  demandaient
comme  ^tant  eveill^,  mais  je  n'avais  pas  la  force  d'y  r^pondre.
J'essayai  plusieurs  fois  inutilement  de  le  faire^  et  lorsque  j'y
parvenais^  je  sentais  que  je  sortais  de  I'^tat  de  torpeur  ou  je
m'^tais  trouv^,  et  qui  m'etait  plutot  agreable  que  p^nible.

Dans  cet  etat^  j'entendis  le  guet  crier  dix  heures,puis  sonner
dix  heures  et  quart ;  mais  plus  tard  je  me  trouvais  dans  un
sommeil  plus  profond,  quoique  je  n'aie  jamais  perdu  entiere-
ment  connaissance.  J'avais  le  sentiment  que  M.  Townshend
cherchait  k  m'endormir  compl^tement ;  mes  mouvemens  me
paraissaient  lui  etre  soumis^  car  je  voulus  plusieurs  fois  changer
la  position  de  mes  bras^  sans  avoir  assez  de  force  pour  le  faire
ou  pour  le  vouloir  r^Uement^  tandis  que  je  sentais  ma  tete  se
porter  a  droite  ou  a  gauche  sur  mon  ^paule^  et  en  arriere  ou
en  avant,  sans  que  je  le  voulusse,  et  meme  malgr^  la  resistance
que  je  cherchais  a  opposer^  et  cela  a  plusieurs  reprises.

J'eprouvais  meme  un  sentiment  de  grand  bien-etre  a  c^der


them  ;  and,  by  degrees,  I  found  that  I  had  no  longer  the  power  of
keeping  them  open,  but  did  not  the  less  retain  my  consciousness  of
what  was  going  on  around  me ;  so  that  I  heard  M.  Desor  speak  to
Mr.  Townsend,  understood  what  they  said,  and  heard  what  questions
they  asked  me,  just  as  if  I  had  been  awake,  but  I  had  not  the  power
of  answering.  I  endeavoured  in  vain  several  times  to  do  so,  and,
when  I  succeeded,  I  perceived  that  I  was  passing  out  of  the  state  of
torpor  in  which  I  had  been,  and  which  was  rather  agreeable  than
painful.

In  this  state  I  heard  the  watchman  cry  ten  o'clock  ;  then  I  heard
it  strike  a  quarter  past ;  but,  afterwards,  I  fell  into  a  deeper  sleep,
although  I  never  entirely  lost  my  consciousness.  It  appeared  to  me,
that  Mr.  Townsend  was  endeavouring  to  put  me  into  a  sound  deep ;
my  movements  seemed  under  his  control,  for  I  wished  several  times
to  change  the  position  of  my  arms,  but  had  not  sufficient  power  to  do
it,  or  even  really  to  will  it ;  while  I  felt  my  head  carried  to  the  right
or  left  shoulder,  and  backwards  or  forwards,  without]  wishing  it,
and,  indeed,  in  spite  of  the  resistance  which  I  endeavoured  to
oppose :  and  this  happened  several  times.

I  experienced  at  the  same  time  a  feeling  of  great  pleasure  in  giving


570  SUPPLEMENT.

a  Tattrait  qui  m'entnunait  tantot  d'un  cote^  tantot  d'un  autre;,
puis  une  sorte  de  surprise  a  sentir  ma  tete  tomber  dans  la
main  de  M.  Townshend^  qui  me  paraissait  des-lors  la  cause
de  cette  attraction.  A  sa  question  si  j'etais  bien,  ce  que
j'^prouvais,  je  sentis  que  je  ne  pouvais  pas  repondre^  mais  je
souris ;  je  sentais  que  men  visage  s'epanouissait  malgr^  ma  re-
sistance ;  j'etais  int^rieurement  confus  d'^prouver  du  bien-etre
d'une  influence  qui  m'^tait  occulte.  Des-lors  j'aurais  voulu
me  reveiller^  j'etais  moins  a  Taise^  et  cependant  sur  la  question
de  M.  Townshend,  si  je  voulais  m'^veiller,  jefis  un  mouvement
dlieffltation  des  €paules.  Alors  M.  Townshend  fit  de  nouveau
quelques  frictions  qui  me  rendormirent  davantage ;  cependant
j'etais  toujours  sacbant  de  oe  qui  se  passait  autour  de  moi.
Puis  il  me  demanda  si  je  voulais  devenir  clair-voyant^  tout  en
continuant  ses  frictions  de  la  figure  aux  bras^  que  je  sentais.
J'^prouvais  alors  un  sentiment  indefinissable  de  joie^  et  un  in-
stant je  vis  devant  moi  comme  une  gerbe  de  lumiere  ^blouis-
sante  qui  disparut  au  moment  meme.  Je  fus  alors  attriste
interieurement  de  ce  que  cet  etat  se  prdongeait ;  il  me  semblait
qu'on  en  avait  assez  fait  avec  moi ;  j'aurais  voulu  me  reveiller^
mais  je  ne  le  pus.  Quand  cependant  M.  Townsbend  et
M.  Desor  se  parlaient^  je  les  entendais  ; j'entendis  aussi  son-


way  to  the  attraction  which  dragged  me  sometimes  to  one  side,  some-
times to  the  other,  then  a  kind  of  surprise  on  feeling  my  head  Ml
into  Mr.  Townshend's  hand,  who  appeared  to  me  from  that  time  to
be  the  cause  of  the  attraction.  To  his  inquiry  if  I  were  weU,  and
what  I  felt,  I  found  I  could  not  answer,  but  I  smiled ;  I  felt  that  my
features  expanded  in  spite  of  my  resistance ;  I  was  inwardly  confused
at  experiencing  pleasure  from  an  influence  which  was  mysterious  to  me.
From  this  moment  I  wished  to  wake,  and  was  less  at  my  ease ;  and  yet
on  Mr.  Townshend  asking  me  whether  I  wished  to  be  awakened,  I
made  a  hesitating  movement  with  my  shoulders.  Mr.  Townshend
then  repeated  some  frictions,  which  increased  my  sleep ;  yet  I  was
always  conscious  of  what  was  passing  around  me.  He  then  asked
me  if  I  wished  to  become  lucid,  at  the  same  time  continuing,  as  I
felt,  the  frictions  from  the  face  to  the  arms.  I  then  experienced  an
indescribable  sensation  of  delight,  and  for  an  instant  saw  before  me
rays  of  dazzling  light  which  instantly  disappeared.  I  was  then  in-
wardly sorrowful  at  this  state  being  prolonged ;  it  appeared  to  me
that  enough  had  been  done  with  me ;  I  wished  to  awake,  but  could
not. Yet  when  Mr.  Townshend  and  M.  Desor  spoke  I  heard  them.


SUPPLEMENT.  671

ner^  et  le  guet  crier,  maisje  ne  bus  quelle  heure;  puisM,  Towns-
hend  me  pr^senta  sa  montre  en  me  demandant  si  je  voyais
rheure^  si  je  le  voyais  lui-meme,  mais  je  ne  distinguais  rien  ;
j'entendis  encore  sonner  un  quart  a  Thorloge^  mais  je  ne  pouvais
sortir  de  mon  ^tat  d'assoupissement,  Enfin^  M.  Townshend
m'^veilla  par  quelques  mouvements  rapides^  transverses  du
milieu  de  la  face  en  dehors^  qui  m'ouvrirent  instantan^ment  les
yeux ;  et  au  moment  meme  je  fus  debout  en  lui  disant,  '^  Je
Tous  remercie."  II  ^tait  onze  heures  et  quart.  II  me  dit  alors^  et
M.  Desor  me  le  r^peta^  que  le  seul  fait  qui  leur  eut  donn^  la
certitude  que  j'^tais  dans  un  etat  de  sommeil  magn^tique^  avait
6t6  la  facility  avec  laquelle  je  suivais  de  la  tete  tous  les  mouve-
mens  de  la  main  de  M.  Townshend,  bien  qu'il  ne  me  touch^t
pas^  etle  bien-etre  que  je  paraissais  ^prouver  dans  les  momens  ou^
apres  plusieurs  frictions  r^it^r^es^  il  d^pla9ait  ainsi  ma  tete  a
Tolont^  dans  tous  les  sens.

Agassis.


I  also  heard  the  clock,  and  the  watchman  cry,  but  I  did  not  know  what
hour  he  cried.  Mr.  Townshend  then  presented  his  watch  to  me,  and
asked  if  I  could  see  the  time,  and  if  I  saw  him  ;  but  I  could  distin-
guish nothing :  I  heard  the  clock  strike  the  quarter,  but  could  not
get  out  of  my  sleepy  state.  Mr.  Townshend  then  woke  me  with
some  rapid  transverse  movements  from  the  middle  of  the  face  out-
wards, which  instantly  caused  my  eyes  to  open,  and  at  the  same  time  I
got  up,  saying  to  him,  "  I  thank  you."  It  was  a  quarter  past  eleven.
He  then  told  me,  and  Mr.  Desor  repeated  the  same  thing,  that  the
onlj  fact  which  had  satisfied  them  that  I  was  in  a  state  of  mesmeric
sleep,  was  the  facility  with  which  my  head  followed  all  the  move-
ments of  his  hand,  although  he  did  not  touch  me,  and  the  pleasure
which  I  appeared  to  feel  at  the  moment  when,  after  several  repetitions
of  friction,  he  thus  moved  my  head  at  pleasure  in  all  directions. '

Agassis.


572  SUPPLEMENT.


Testimont  to  a  curious  Fact. Dr.  Filippi^  of  Milan.

M.  TAvocat  Valdrighi  avait  Touie  tellement  fin  et  exalt^^
qu*il  put  entendre  des  mots  prononces  k  la  distance  de  deux
chambres^  dont  les  portes  ^talent  fennees^  quoique  prononces  a
▼oix  tres-faible  et  basse.

L  exaltation  de  la  vie  qui  s'observe  chez  quelques  individus

malades^  arrive  au  point  qu'un  d'eux  voyait  les  objets  les  plus

minces  et  fins  dans  la  plus  grande  obscurity. Cela  est  re-

marquable  dans  les  personnes  nerveuses  et  tres-d^licates.

Dr.  Filippi.
Milan,  Juillet,  1839.


T&AKSLATION.

M.  Valdrighi,  advocate,  had  his  sense  of  hearing  so  exquisite  and
exalted  that  he  could  hear  words  pronounced  at  the  distance  of  two
rooms,  the  doors  of  which  were  shut,  although  pronounced  in  a  weak
and  low  voice.

The  exaltation  of  life  which  is  observed  in  some  patients  attains
such  a  height,  that  one  of  them  could  see  the  roost  delicate  and
minute  objects  in  the  greatest  darkness.  This  is  noticed  in  nervous
and  very  delicate  persons.

Dr.  Filippi.

Milan,  July,  1839.


SUPPLEMENT.  573


Account  of  Sensationi  during  Mesmebisatiok. By
SiGNOR  Ranieri^  of  Naples.

At  ANT  ete  magnetise  par  mon  honorable  ami^  M.  Hare  Towns-
hend^  j'exposerai  tout  simplement  les  ph^noroenes  que  j'ai
eprouves  ayant^  pendant^  et  apres  ma  magnetisation.  M.  Towns,
hend  commen9a  par  me  faire  asseoir  sur  un  sofa :  il  s'assit  sur
une  chaise  vis-a-vis  de  moi>  et  ayant  pris  mes  mains  dans  les
siennes^  il  les  pla9a  sur  mes  genoux. II  me  regardait  fixe-
ment^  et  de  temps  en  temps  il  laissait  mes  mains^  et  pla9ait
les  pointes  de  ses  doigts  en  droite  ligne  de  mes  yeux^  a  un
pouce,  je  crois^  de mes  prunelles ;  puis^  en  d^crivant  une
espece  d'ellipse,  il  redescendait  ses  mains  sur  les  miennes.
Apres  dix  minutes quil  eut  porte  comme  cela  alternative-
ment  ses  mains  de  mes  yeux  sur  mes  genoux,  j*eprouvai  un
besoin  irresistible  de  fermer  mes  (paupieres. Je continual
cependant  d'entendre  sa  voix,  et  celle  de  ma  soeur  (qui  etait
dans  la  meme  chambre)^  lorsqu*ils  me  faisaient  des  questions.
Je  leur  repondais  meme  toujours  pertinemment,  mais  tout
mon  systeme  musculaire  ^tait  dans  un  etat  d*affaiblissement
singulier,  et  de  desobeissance  presque  complete  a  ma  volont^  ;
et  par  consequent  la  prononciation  des  mots  que  je  voulais
repondre  m'etait  devenue  d'une  difficult^  extreme. Tandis


Translation.

Having  been  mesmerised  by  my  honourable  friend  Mr.  Hare
Townshend,  I  will  simply  describe  the  phenomena  which  I  experi-
enced before,  during,  and  after  my  mesmerlsation.  Mr.  Townshend
commenced  by  making  me  sit  upon  a  sofa :  he  sat  upon  a  chair  oppo-
site me,  and,  having  taken  my  hands  in  his,  placed  them  on  my  knees.
He  looked  at  me  fixedly  ;  and  from  time  to  time  let  go  my  hands,
and  placed  the  points  of  his  fingers  in  a  straight  line  opposite  my  eyes,
at  an  inch,  I  should  think,  from  my  pupils;  then,  describing  a  kind
of  ellipse,  he  brought  his  hands  down  again  upon  mine.  After  he  had
moved  his  hands  thus  alternately  from  my  eyes  to  my  knees  for  ten
minutes,  I  felt  an  irresistible  desire  to  close  my  eyelids.  I  continued
nevertheless  to  hear  his  voice,  and  that  of  my  sister,  who  was  in  the
same  room,  whenever  they  put  questions  to  me.  I  always  answered
him  correctly,  but  the  whole  of  my  muscular  system  was  in  a  state  of
peculiar  weakness,  and  of  almost  perfect  disobedience  to  my  will ;  and
consequently  the  pronunciation  of  the  words  with  which  I  wished  to
answer  had  become  extremely  difficult.


574  SUPPLEMENT.

que  j'eprouvais  jusqu  a  un  certain  point  les  effets  du  sommeil^
non  seulement  je  n'etais  pas  Stranger  a  tout  ce  qui  se  passait
autour  de  moi;  mais  aussi  j'y  prenais  plus  de  part  qu'a
I'ordinaire.  Toutes  mes  conceptions  €taient  plus  rapides ;
j'^prouTais  des  secousses  nerveuses  qui  ne  me  sont  pas  habi-
tuelles ;  enfin,  tout  mon  systeme  nerveux  ^tait  dans  un  etat
d'exaltation^  et  semblait  avoir  acquis  tout  le  surplus  des  forces
que  le  systeme  musculaire  avait  perdu.

Voila  les  principaux  ph^nomenes  qu'il  me  fut  possible  de
ressentir  d'ime  maniere  incontestable.  M.  Townsbend  ne
manquait  pas  de  me  demander  de  temps  a  autre^  se  je  pouvais
Toir  lui  ou  ma  soeur  sans  ouvrir  les  paupieres  ;  mais  c'est  oe
qui  me  fut  toigours  impossible^  et  tout  ce  que  je  pus  dire
d'avoir  vu^  ce  fut  une  lueur  entrecoup^e  par  les  images  noires
et  confuses  des  objets  qu'on  me  presentait,  lueur  qui  me
parut  un  peu  plus  claire  que  celle  qu'on  voit  ordinairement
lorsqu*on  ferme  les  paupieres  vis-^-vis  du  soleil  ou  d'une
chandelle.

Enfin  M.Townshend  rdsolut  de  me  demagndtiser.  II  com-
men^a  a  faire  de  ses  mains  des  mouvements  elliptiques  in-
verses a  ceux  qu'il  avait  faits  dans  le  commencement ;  je  pus
ouvrir  les  paupieres  sans  aucune  espece  d'effbrt^ tout  mon


Whilst  I  experienced  to  a  certain  point  the  effects  of  sleep,  not  only
was  I  not  a  stranger  to  all  that  was  passing  around  me,  but  I  even  took
more  than  usual  interest  in  it.  All  my  conceptions  were  more  rapid  ;
I  experienced  nervous  startings  to  which  I  am  not  accustomed ;  in
short,  my  whole  nervous  system  was  in  a  state  of  exaltation,  and  ap-
peared to  have  acquired  all  the  superabundance  of  power  which  the
muscular  system  had  lost.

The  following  are  the  principal  phenomena  which  I  was  able  to  feel
distinctly.  Mr.  Townsbend  did  not  fail  to  ask  me  occasionally  if  I
could  see  him  or  my  sister  without  opening  the  eyelids  ;  but  this  was
always  impossible,  and  all  that  I  could  say  I  had  seen  was  a  glimmering
of  light  interrupted  by  the  black  and  confused  images  of  the  objects  pre-
sented to  me,  a  light  which  appeared  to  me  a  little  less  clear  than  that
which  we  commonly  see  when  we  shut  the  eyelids  opposite  the  sun
or  a  candle.

Mr.  Townsbend  at  last  determined  to  demesmerise  me.  He  began
to  make  elliptical  movements  with  his  hands,  the  reverse  of  those
which  he  had  made  at  the  commencement ;  I  could  now  open  my
eyes  without  any  kind  of  efibrt»  my  whole  muscular  system  became


SUPPLEMENT.  575

systeme  musculaire  devint  tres-ob^issant  a  ma  volont^ ;  je  pus
me  lever  debout,  et  je  fus  parfaitement  ^veiU^^  mais  je  demeurai
presque  une  heure  dans  une  espece  de  stupefaction  tres-sem-
blable  a  celle  qui  me  prend  quelquefois  le  matin^  si  je  me
leve  deux  ou  trois  heures  plus  tard  qu'a  I'ordinaire.

Antoine  Ranikri.
Naples,  15  Juin,  1839.


perfectly  obedient  to  my  will ;  I  was  able  to  get  up,  and  was  perfectly
awake,  but  I  remained  nearly  an  hour  in  a  kind  of  stupefaction  very
similar  to  that  which  sometimes  attacks  me  in  the  morning  if  I  rise
two  or  three  hours  later  than  usual.

Antoins  Ranizri.
Naples,  15th  June,  1839.


THE END.


LONDONf!;

Printed  by  A.  SporriswooDi,
New-Street-Square.


ERRATA.

Page  214.  last  line  but  one  of  notCf  and  page  227.  line  8.  from  top,

for  «  Leherin,"*  read  «  Seherin.'*
406.  line  11. from bottom,  for  "colour:  only  the  rest,'*  read

"  colour  only :  the  rest.**
506.  line  14.  from  bottom,  for  the  **  latter  sensation,'*  read  the

**  latter,  —  sensation."
