The Travels of Ibn Batuta (Ibn Battuta; Samuel Lee (trans.), 1829)
==========================================================
The great 14th-century world traveler's Rihla — 75,000 miles from Morocco to China — in Samuel Lee's 1829 English translation for the Oriental Translation Committee (the first English rendering, from the Arabic). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive 1829 scan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.132127).

TEE


T E A VELS


IBN BATETA.


IIdj'hI Asiatic Societys HousCi
Cuotlon London,

April 27, ib.>y


SIU

direction of the Okuntal T/iasslatidv Covuittee, I have
the pleasure of presenting a copj «1 the 1U\ I’tokvmr Lee s Translation of the Travels of
Ibn Baiuta to ^ ^ -t- r - -hlc

fUis being the first work pubhilied bj the CoinroiUcc, 1 hast the honour of informing jou,
that an annual subscription of Ten Guineas, commencing « ith tlic present ^car, mil entitle the
Subscriber to all the noiks that mil be printed b^ the Committee

The rrospectus and other document*, that arc appended to Ibn DatutasTratcIs, fully
develop the objects of tlie Oriental Translation Committee, but I presume to mention, that
their principal object is the publication of translations of Oriental works free of expense to the
Translators, who arc entitled to tnenty^fivc copies of their version when printed . and that
rewards, m money or gold medals art given by the Committee for the best translations

In addition to the Aiitohiography of the Tnipcror Jthangeer, which will be pubhshtd in
the courr of this month the vvorksnumbcrtd 7, tl, 10, IS, IG, 17, 18, and SI, desrnbed on
pages <3 and 14 of the Committee s Report, are in Uit prc*$

1 Inve the honour to be,

SIR,

With great rvspcct,

Tout verj obedant Servant,

WILLIAM nUTTMANN,

Vn-rr/nry


THE


TRAVELS

OP

IBN BATtiTA;


TEAKTLATED TZOY^ THE AEEIDGED


ARABIC ilAMJSCRIPT COPIES,

P2ESEEV£D IX

THE PUBLIC LIBRARY OF CAMBRIDGE-

VITH

NOTES,

ILLCSTEATIVE OF

THE HISTORY, GEOGRAPHY, BOTAA^Y, ANTIQUITIES, 6cc.

OCCUREIKG THROUGHOUT THE VTORK-


BY

THE REV, SAMUEL LEE, B.D.

D.D,of IKt XJtdzcnilg of IlalU; Jlazarcrij MernifroJ ths Asislic Sodd^ of Parir, HcrjTray Anocude of tAi Rcjal
Scdd^of Lilerciirre^ Mombir of the Orie:dcl Trczilcticn Corurtzltee, end of the Raj A AAsHc Sedeiaof
Grad Bniisn CT,d Jrelcr.d; FtUas ef the Cembridge PhSa^e^hiccl Sedstj; end
Professor of Arabic in ths UrJxerntj cf Ccmlrid§t,


LONDON:

PRINTED FOR THE ORIENTAL TRANSLATION COMJHTTEE,

Am SOLD ET

J. MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET; PARBURY, ALLEN, & CO„ LEADENHALL STREET
Am HOWELL & STEWART, HOLBORN.


1829 .


JOHNSON FEPP.INT CORPORATION JOHNSON REPRINT COMPANY LTD.
Ill Fifth Avenue, N'ev YorV, N.Y. 10003 Beriefej Square Hccs«; Lon^otj, 1


II £<^ I"] feOT

fETTRi U8 l<&

jlM-‘P-


P. V.-88


Wr by


©Ji ^5' \-


First reprinting, 1968, Johnson Reprint Corporation
Printed in the United States of America


TO


LIEUTENANT-COLONEL FITZCLARENCE,

FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON,

HONORARY MEMBER OF THE -ASIATIC SOCIETY OF CALCUTTA,

MEMBER OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF PARIS,

MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LITERATURE,

A VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND

AND

TREASURER OF THE FUND APPROPRIATED TO THE TRANSLATION OF ORIENTAL
WORKS BY THE COMMITTEE OF TRANSLATION ATTACHED
TO THAT BODY.


DEAR SIR:

I think myself fortunate in having it in my
power to dedicate to yon the first-fruits of an Institution, which
owes its origin and efficiency almost entirely to your exertions :
and, as my author traversed and described many parts of the
East, of which you, nearly five hundred years after his time,
have given so many interesting and confirmatory accounts, this
will constitute an additional reason for doing so.

The principal motive, however, which has induced me to
inscribe this work to your name has been, the consideration of
public utility. No one, perhaps, can better estimate than your-
self the duty incumbent on this country to possess an accurate
knowledge of the histoiy, geography, commerce, manners,
customs, and religious opinions of the East. Placed as we
are in the proud situation of legislating to perhaps its richest


DEDICATION


\1

and most impoitant part, and hence looked up to by its almost
countless inhabitants for protection, instruction, government, —
nothing can be moie obvious, than, that it is just as binding
upon us to acquaint ourselves with their wants, in order to these
being provided for and relieved, as it is that we should calculate
upon the wealth of then commerce, or the rank and influence
which oui Governors, Judges, and Magistrates, should hold
among them Unhappily, howevci, prior to the times of Sii
William Jones, knowledge of this kind was scarcely accessible
to the bulk of Society , and, since that period, notwithstand-
ing his glowing predictions to the contrary,* the study of
Oriental literature Ins seldom been carried beyond its first
elements A fen Scholars have, from time to time, appeared
among the servants of the Honour iblc East-lndm Company but,
when we take into the account the vnstness of the means which
ne possess, together with the duty laid on us as a nation,
accurately to know the condition of so many of our fellow subjects
in the East, it must appear, that all whicli has been done, so fai
fioin being matter of exultation, must rather tend to lower us in
the opinion we would entertain of oui selves, and much more in
that of the suiTounding nations It is not my intention to dwell
here, with the admirable Sir William Jones, on the beauty of tbeir
poetry, the value of their sentiments as inorahsts oi philosophers,
or the almost boundless extent and variety of their languages
but on the paramount necessity of our possessing an accurate
knowledge of their countries, histones, laws, commerce, con-
nexions, tactics, antiquities, and the like for purely practical


• Preface to I a Pcr an Grammar


DEDICATION. vii

purposes. Other considerations, indeed, vrill, and ought to weigh
with the Divine, the Gentleman, and the Scholar ; and, here,
perhaps, our knowledge of philology may be mentioned as likely
to receive as much improvement, as any science cultivated in
polite society possibly can.

It is customary, I know, to look to the Universities for the
tone of learning in any country : but, in this respect, these bodies
are with us very inadequately provided for. The majority
of students is interested in other pursuits ; while those which
are intended for the East are expected to keep Terms at one or
other of the seminaries provided by the Honourable Company.
The utmost, therefore, that can be brought to bear here upon the
ardour of youth, or to stimulate the enterprising to the toil of years,
which is indeed necessary to a moderate acquaintance with the lan-
guages of the East, is, perhaps, a Professorship with an endowment
of forty pounds a year, accompanied with duties and restraints of
no ordinary nature. And, the natural consequence has been,
that, whatever may have been known on these subjects, few have
been found hardy enough to undertake laborious and expensive
works, with no other prospect than of being eulogized by their
biographers, as having “ immortalized and ruined themselves.”

Our Institution, therefore, will, I trust, even here be the
means of creating a stimulus to the cultivation of learning, for
which, indeed, some provision has been made, and which the
greatest ornaments of our Church and Nation have deemed of
the very highest importance : I mean, that which immediately
bears on the study of the Christian Scriptures, an acquaintance
with the Hebrew and its sister dialects. As things formerly were.


DEDICATION.


viii

n Wheloclc, Castell, orPococko, may have delivered lectures; but,
as it was then facetiously said, ** the Lecture-room would exhibit
an Arabia deserta, rather than an Arabia felix ;** and for the most
obvious of all reasons, namely, that where neither emolument
nor consideration arc to be had, there will never be any consider-
able public effort made. In this point of view, therefore, I
believe, that under prudent government our Institution may be
productive of the greatest public good, in filling up a chasm in
our means of information wliich nothing else could effect. And,
I think I may say, that whether we consider the amazing extent of
its operations, the unprecedented support which in so short a time
it has experienced, the aggregate quantity of literary power con-
centrated in its Committee, or the number of works of the first
importance which it already has in the progress of publication,
to have projected and brought into active operation such an
institution, cannot but be gratifying to every one (and particularly
to yourself), who took any part in its formation.

1 have the honour to be,

DEAR SIR,

Your most obliged humble Servant,

THE TRANSLATOR AND EDITOR.


Cambndge,
January 2Uh 1829.


PREFACE.


Some years having elapsed since I first made known my intention to translate and
publish these travels,* and having at length succeeded as far as my abilities and
opportunities would allow me, it now becomes a duty to say, why the work has
been so long delayed, and to give some account of the manner in which it has been
completed.

Soon after I undertook this translation I was informed by a gentleman, a
native of Tripolif then residing in this country, that he had in his own library at
Tripoli a copy of the entire original work ; and, that if I would wait till he should have
returned, he would send me that copy. Upon this, I deemed it most prudent to wait.
Hearing, however, two or three years afterwards, that the same promise had been made
to several gentlemen in London, not one of whom ever heard again from Mr. Dugais
on the subject, I naturally gave up all further expectation from that quarter. But, as
I had then engaged in other undertakings, and. besides, had not within my power the
means of publication, I had no resource but to let the work lie dormant rmtil opportuni-
ties for completing it should present themselves. Finding myself, at length, a little
more at leisure, I determined to complete the translation; and accordingly, during the
last summer-vacation, more than one half of it was made, and a few notes were
written. Since that time the rest has been completed in the manner now presented to
the Public: and I have now only to give some account of the manuscript copies used, and
of the rules by which I have been guided in my proceedings.

* As afterwards published in the Quarterly Review for May 1820, p. 238,

-j- Mr. Dugais, son of a rich merchant in Tripoli (Mr. D’Ghies of Major Denham’s Africa).

b


PREFACE


The Arabic manu^cnpls of this work arethicc m number, and arc all copies of the
same ttbndgment They were ongicially bequeathed to the library of the Umvcrsity of
Cambndge by the late Mr Burckhanll, where they may at any time be Been It ib,
indeed, much to be regretted that they arc only abndgments , but, as they contain much
cunous and valuable information, and that obtained at a time of \cry considerable inte-
rest, namely, when the Tartars were making pn^rcas m Asia Minor, and the empire
of Ilmdustln was verging towards its final subjugation to the Mogul dynasty, 1 have
thought it would be quite unpardonable to let the manuscript lie any longer untranslated,
especially as its publication may possibly be the means of bnnging the entire work to
light, wliicli Mr Biirckhardt has a'^sured us is still m existence •

About the time these MSS were deposited in ourpublic library, Bome parts of the abndg-
ment were published in Germany, by Mr Kosegarlen, and bir Apetr, both of Jina t
The work of Mr Kosegarten contains m its first section a very learned dissertation
on the Itinerary of Mohammed Ibn Batuto,^ which is followed by the preface to his
eopy§ with some notes IIis second section contains the journey through Perns into


* Travels lo Nubia, p 63i.

\ C have lately been informed, that there u now alio a copy la France
X Mr Kosegarten a work appeared m ISIS, bearing the followiog title, “ Dc Mohammede
Ebn Ratuia Arabc Tiagitano ejus<]uc Iiincribus — Commentaiio Academics, A D Ml Marta
ciaiocccxvtu Auctar Joannes Gothoftclwlus Ludovicut Kosegarten Lingua. Owcntal In
Umversitatc Littcrar Jcncnsi Profewor Publicus Onlmarws

f The following is the text which forms the prdace to our work ; it Is here given in order to
enable the Qcicnul scholar toforiasorne estimate of the dilTerencc observable in ous several texts
nil tVwsc lijw4 alll ^ vU.x)l

isUH! U.« l< alJt ^ OUJSV ij jy^ JoJ J

4DI Juc ^ ix*js^ «dJl 0-.C |_jj1 aJs!! ^ (J^

y£l JaJH j_y\i »—

tM k— kJlfc iJnJl fcS S

oj Aju b* jUsjUIj ^11 jL>-l L«

JmJ! yioUc SJJsl>& !,< AS^j ^ ^i3 t« k-i>taC'

jfjl WIj ^ 1*^ jJjli ^ jbLuJ 3.9^!

^ jA lilU! sU^I

WSl aiU<x«

tbLlrf X.J , &c , a translation of which will be found at the outset of the travels


PREFACE.


XI


Tartary, which, although apparently a copy of the same abridgment with our’s, contains
scarcely half the quantity of matter which we have, as the reader will see by comparing
the translations. Mr. Kosegarten’s third section contains the account of the Maidive
Islands, which differs less from ours than the preceding. The fourth section of Mr.
Kosegarten’s work contains the travels into Africa : and here also our difference is but
little. These extracts are all accompanied with a Latin translation, and some very
ingenious notes, with a few geographical extracts from some other works. The work of
Mr. Apetz contains only the account of Malabar given by our traveller ; its title is
“ Descriptio Terrae Malabar ex Arabico Ebn Batutce Itinerario edita, interpretatione et
annotationibus instructa per Henricum Apetz. Jence MDCCCXIX.” The copy here
followed is that used by Mr. Kosegarten, as Mr. Apetz himself informs us in his preface.
The varieties observable between this text and ours are not many, nor of much impor-
tance : some of these, however, I have marked, as the reader will find in the notes. A
few notes accompany the translation of Mr. Apetz, some of which I have also noticed.
In some instances Mr. Kosegarten’s copy gives the orthography of the proper names of
places : one of our copies also occasionally does this, while one or other of the others
supplies the vowels. But this is neither constant, nor indeed always to be relied on when
found : and, when this is the case, and such name is not to be found in any of the dic-
tionaries, which often happens, I must now say, I cannot be at all answerable for
my own orthography of such words. In some cases, indeed, we find the same word
written differently in the same MS. and in the same line : and when this happens, and I
have no means of rectifying the mistake, I must make the same apology.

In making my tremslation, I have followed those readings which appeared to me to be
the most correct ; and, where the differences have been important, I have marked them in
the notes. It has not been thought worth while to print the Arabic text, as it presents
nothing remarkable, being in general very plain and entirely void of every attempt at
what is called fine writing. Where I have had any doubt, however, as to the sense
of the passage, I have given the original Arabic in a note. Still, should the original be
called for, there will be no difficulty in putting it to press.


Who brought Mr. Kosegarten's text into Europe he does not inform us, only that it came from
Cairo, and was first presented to him by a dear friend (pp. 8, 9). Mr. Seetzen’s name he only
mentions, to regret his having made the attempt to translate a part of the travels, whence one
would suppose, that Mr. Kosegarten did not follow his copy.

b 2


PREFACE.


Xii

In translating I bare followed the onginal as c!o«ely as our idiom would generally
allow; and m a style as neaily assimilated to that of my author as the nature of the case
would permit. My attempt to put the poetical extracts into verse will, I hope, be
excused, my only object being to give my translation throughout the spint of the ongmal,
as nearly as I could.

The notes which have been added will, 1 trust, be foimd neither tedious nor entirely
unmteresting I thought it important both to examine and to explain many of the
statements of my author; and for this end the notes were added. That they are either
so extensive or so good as the subject requires, I do not so much as suppose: and my
apology must be; it has not been m my power to command either the time, or the
opportumties, which many others can. I have done then, if not the best, the best in my
powevt and as such, I hope it will be received. My principal object in makmg
these inquiries, was to ascertain the accuracy and fidelity of my author, and, m this
point of view I have succeeded to my own satisfaction at least, having no doubt
that he is worthy of all credit. Superstitious, and addicted to the marvellous, indeed,
he occasionally is, but for this allowance must be made, as it occasionally must in
travellers of much later times. It is for his historical, geographical, and botanical
notices, that he is pnncipally valuable; and I concur with his Epitomator, Mr.
Burckhardt and Mr. Kosegarten, in believing, that in these he is truly valuable. In
botany, perhaps, his skill may be called m question; and, m this respect, I am sorry to
say, it has not been in my power to correct him. In some of his geographical excui-bions,
too, I have been unable to follow him; not because I have not endeavoured to do so, but
because no geographer accessible to me bas noticed such places. Those who have been
in the East themselves, or those who may hereafter visit those parts will, perhaps, make
all dear, and to thrai I leave such instances As 1 have occasionally cited some Arabic
and Persian works m the notes, I take the opportumty here of apprizing the reader what
they are, and where the copies ated arc to be found.

1. The “RauzatEl Safa is a very celebrated and wellknown history of Persia, written
by Mir Khand m seven volumes. The copy here cited, formeily belonged to the Right
Honourable Lord Teignmouth, and IS nowinmyown possession; copies, however, are to
be found in most of the public Iibranes,


PREFACE.


xiii


2. The^'Khulasat El Akhbar, an abridgment of tbe Persian bigtorians generally. This
is also in my possession.

3. The 'Gwalior Namah, a history of the fortress of Gwalior, by Heraman Ibn Kardhar
Das the Munshl, a small neatly written quarto, bearing the class-mark 324 of the library
of Eton College. From this the notice of Gwalior has been taken.

4. The '^Tartkhi Badayum, a valuable history of Hindustan, by'Abd El Razzak Maluk-
shah of Samarcand. A neatly written thick folio, bearing the class mark of the Eton
library 439.

5. The first volume of the -^Matlaa El Saadain by ®^Abd El Razzak Ibn Is-hak of
Samarkand, a general history of Persia. A moderate-sized folio, incorrectly written,
bearing the Eton class mark 366. These three volumes were lent me for this work, by
the kindness of the Reverend the Provost and Fellows of Eton College, for which, and
the very ready access they afforded me to thek valuable library, I take this opportunity
of returning my warmest thanks.

6. The ^Tabakati AkbarT, a history of the Emperors of Hindustan prior to the times of
Akbar, compiled at that monarch’s request, by 'Nizam Oddm Mohammed Muklm of
Herat. The copy cited formerly belonged to my late valued and learned friend Jonathan
Scott, Esq. of Shrewsbury: it is a thick quarto very neatly written, and is now in my
possession.

7. The citations from Ferishta are taken from a copy also in my possession.

8. The ^Kanun El Tijarat is a well-written work in Persian on the nature and value of
jewels, silks, &c. taken from the A-Ini AkbarT and other works, written originally id the
Hindustani language by ^latimad El Daulat, and translated into the Persian, A.D.
1806. The copy is in my possession ; it is a thin neatly written folio.

9. The ’"A-Tni AkbarT, a most valuable work giving a statistical account of Hindustan,
with particulars as to its officers, customs, &c. compiled under the superintendence
of Abul Fazl, prime minister to the Emperor Akbar ; large folio, in the ■ University
library of Cambridge. This work has been translated into English by Mr. Gladwin, but
the copies are very scarce : our library does not possess one.


PREFACE


10 The Medical Dictionary of Al\ Ibn El Husam, known bytl\e"Haji Zain El Attar.
Tins work is entitled " Ikhtiarati BadTaT, and contains a list of medicines simple and
compound, arranged according to the Arabic alphabet, it is neatly wntten, and in the
Persian language. The form is small Iblio, and contains about 300 closely wntten pages
The copy cited is m my possession

11 The^Dabistan,a %€ry valuable and inietesUt^ work on the religious opinions of the
Onentals, usually ascribed to ^Mohammed Mohsm Fan! of Kasbmire • the leal author,
houever, seems to be yet unknonn This work ivas first brought to notice by Sir William
Jones ; but has not jet been translated, if we except the first book on the religion of the
ancient Persians, whicdi was translated and pubbshed in India by Mr. Gladwin. The
whole Persian work was printed in Calcutta in 1811. Two MS. copies of this work ate
m my possession, one of which is the very copy noticed by Sir William Jones. If I
eanerer command leisure sufficient, tt is my intention to translate this work.

12 The Ikllra, a very valuable biographical and geographical work m Persian,
by 'Amm Ahmed Bazl, giving notices of some of the most emiDent Persian writers
of every clime. The copy here cited is in large folio, very thick, and neatly written ,
It was lately purchased by the public library of Cambndge.

The'Maathan Rahimi, a valuable and elaborate history of some of the Emperors and
other eminent men of Tartary, Hindustan, &c , by "Mohammed Abd El BakI £1 RahTmT
El Kahawendl. The copy used by me formerly belonged to Mr. Hindley, but has lately
been purchased by the Cambndge public library: it is fairly wntten in large foUo,
and contains perhaps 2,000 leaves.

13 The 'Hafahat £1 Ins, a History of the Mohammedan Saints by the celebrated JamT.
This work contains all that was valuable m two writers who had preceded him, together
with considerable additions made by himself from other works, as well as from mforma-
tion obtained by personal inquiry It ^vas dedicated to the Emir ^ Niiam Oddtn AU
Shir, A H. 881. A. D 1476; but according to a note at the end, in 1478. The work,
wluch IS m my possession, is a large octavo of about three hundred and fifty leaves, very
neatly but not very accurately wntten in Pattan m Hindustan, A. D. 1612


i— ^ * jUajJl “

jjU ' . * . |*Jil ' li’j ,_r~sr« ’

^'ieu j^\ ^ tiUl X*^ "


PREFACE.


XV


14. The ‘Khulasat El Ansab, a short history of the Afghans by "Ibn Shah Aalam of
the tribe Kot-lia Khail. A work in one small octavo volume, Persian. There are
two copies of this work in the public library of Cambridge.

The Arabic works cited are the following ;

15. The ^Kitab El Isharat by El HarawT. This is an account of the pilgrimages per-
formed by the Sheikh All of Herat early in the thirteenth century. The book is but
short, and, according to the author, contains only an abstract of a larger work, which had
been taken from him by the King of England, when engaged in the Crusades, This
abstract was made from memory ; but of this the author does not fail to remind his
reader when treating of particulars, which might have escaped him. I had the use of
two copies, one in the collection of Mr. Burckhardt in our public library, the other was
lent me by the kindness of Mr. Lewin. These copies are near the size of our duodecimos.
Mr. Burckhardt’s contains part of two copies, the latter of which was written 537 years
ago, perhaps in the time of the author. I have generally cited him by the name of
El HarawT.

16. ' Abulfeda’s Geography. The copy used by me is in the hand-writing of Erpenius,
which is probably a transcript of that in the University Library of Leyden. It is in very
large folio, and like its original presents many imintelligible readings; it is preserved
in die public library at Cambridge, and has the class marks Dd. i. ii. This work is, I
understand, either entirely or for the most part, given in a translation by Reiske in
Buesching’s Magazine ;* a woik published some years ago in Germany, but which has
never come to my hands.

17. The Geographical Work of EdrTsT is too well kno^vn to need any description.
I used the Roman impression.

18. The “^Marasid El Itlaa. This is a sort of geographical dictionary not unlike our
gazetteers. It is occasionally cited in M. De Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe. Like all


oi jli '

i-jU O'

••• ^ aiCclil I

&c.

* Buesching’s Magazine, fur Histone und .Geographie, tom. iv.


XVI


PREFACE


other Arabic dictionaries it is very defective: otherwise many places unnoticed by me,
would have been more exactly described.

19. Tlie geographical work of Ibn El Ward! is too well known to need description.
The copy I have cited belongs to the pobltc library of Cambndge, and bears the class-
marks LI. 5. 30 There la also another copy m the collection of Mr DurcJdiardt.

20. The*YatTmat El Dahar, a remarkably elegant and interesting work on thepnncipal
Arabian poets, with some extracts from their writings, compiled A. H. 384, A. D. 994,
by Abu Mansur El ThayabT The work is occasionally cited by M. de Sacy in the
second edition of his Chrestomathie Anibe. The copy used m this work la a large sized
neatly written octavo containing about 250 leaves. It formerly belonged to Mr. Hindley,
but 18 now in my possession.

21. The-^Sukkardin, a work by IbnHajela on Egypt : it is occasionally noticed by M.
De Sacy, in his Chrestomathie Arabe The copy here used is a moderately sized octavo,
tolerably well wntten, it is to be found in the collection of Mr. Durckhardt m the
public library of Cambndge.

22. The ^Khulasat TahkTk £1 Zunun, a biographical dictionary, apparently ao abndg-
mentof HSjiKlialfa, but of this I am not certain, as the copy of HajiXhalfa with which I
have compared it, contains scarcely half the munber of works of which this gives some
account I suspect, however, that this copy of Ha;t Khalfa is only an abndgment
itself The Epitomator's name is *Kamal Oddm Abu Futuh Ibn Mustafa Ibn Kamal
Oddlo Ibn Ah £1 Sidikt. The book is m Mr. Burckhardt’s collection.

23. Another book from which some citations have been made is, Ibn Khaldun's history

of the Berbers : and, as this book is extremely scarce and valuable, I may be excused if I
describe it a little more particularly. The full title, then, which stands on the dnt
page is as follows ■ j j-llj jt^lj lJj^\ |•y *— jjUl

,^1 iji iJwi i-jjO jdVi ^

sill .i-c Zddl j»USl 1 , e. The seventh


JUS" ^ ^ JUS'*

. yjt


PREFACE.


XVII


part of the book of examples and of the Diwan of the commencements * and accounts,
ou the times of the Arabs, Persians, Berbers, and others contemporaiy with them,
who came into supreme power; a publication of the Priest and learned Sheikh the
very learned Wall OddTn Abu Zaid Abd El Rahman, son of the Priest and very learned
Abu Abd Allah Mohammed Ibn Khaldun, of the sect of Ibn Malik, and of the country
of Hadramaut. The work is closely and accurately written in the Mogrebine hand in
large quarto upon stout well polished paper. The history of the Berbers covers three
hundred and sixty-nine pages; the remainder of the book, which contains seventy-seven
pages, is an account of the family and life of the author, written by himself. This part
is prefaced by these words,

book we have ^ ajUju ^ The cessation from

writing it out was on the 8th of Moharram, in the year 1008, A.D. July 21, 1699. This
book does not belong to the University Library of Cambridge as some have supposed,
but to the Rev. Richard Edward Kerrich, A.M., son of our late principal librarian, the
Rev. Thomas Kerrich, A. M., who informed me that it had belonged to his father, which
is no douht the truth, as an engraving containing his arms and name, Samuel Kerrich,
S. T. P., is pasted within the cover at the beginning of the book. Upon discovering to
^r. Kerrich, our Librarian, the character and rareness of this work, I was permitted to
copy and translate it, upon tendering a bond of five hundred pounds, ensuring its safe
return at the end of two years.

In writing the proper names of persons and places, I have generally retained the
Oriental orthography, as I deemed it proper to preserve these as nearly as possible,
rather than attempt to follow the varying models of different travellers. But, in order
to know how these words ought to be pronounced, it is necessary I should explain my
system of orthography. Consonants then will be pronounced as they generally are
in English, excepting kh, which must be sounded like the German ch, i. e. as a deep
guttural. The vowels thus : A as n in America : a as a in war, wall, &c. : m as oo in


* The terms and signify the subject and predicate in grammar, as shewn by Dr.
Nicoll in his continuation of Uri's Catalogue, after M. de Sacy, p. 1 14. M. de Sacy has,
however, since changed his mind, as may be seen in the Second Edition of his Chestomathie
Arabe, and now thinks that the literal meaning is the true one. Dr. Nicoll has made a trifling
mistake in giving in the title instead of , m which our copy agrees with that used

by M. de Sacy. See Chrest. Arab., tom. ii. pp. I , ^, 290, &c. This work it is my intention
to translate and publish with the original text as soon as circumstances will allow.


c


xvm


PREFACE.


ffood, stood: uas oo in boot, root,’. tltketin£u£, nrf,: i like the i of the Itaham,
French, 8x.c. or like our ee m meet, seeh, &.c. • (7 as o m rose : m and ei as i m bite, I have
judged It expedient to mention this, because ray orthography wll stand for nothing, until
readers know how it is intended to be pronounced. I have also retained the orthography
of proper mmes, throughout, in the Arabic character : and in representing the defi-
nite article (J\) El, I have followed the example of Mr. Durckhardt, who always
wntes it El. Some wntera, indeed, follow tlie rules of the Arabic grammav, chang-
ing the 1 (J), whenever what is termed a solar letter follows, for such letter;
which, however, has the effect of so much ob«cunng proper names, when they happen
to begin with one of these letters, that it requires some knowledge of the Arabic lan-
guage, to be able to lecognise them, e. g. in the word 'Elkhaflf, I can easily see that
it 13 a compound of El and Khafif , but in that of ^Emtvoman, if I do not understand
Arabic, and am told that a place was so called, because it was built by iVliomun, I
shall be at a loss to conceive where the mark of connexion is to be found ; not to insist
on another difficulty, in winch tho rowel belonging to this article is changed by the con-
struction of the preceding word, making it at one time Unnuomun, at another, InnoomTin,
and at another, Annoomun, or Ennoman. In a few very w ell known words, such os Oddtn,
Allah, and the like, I have not tliought it worth while to depart from the usual orthography.
The text too I have dmded into chapters, to which an abstract of the contents of each
is prefixed, for the convenience of the reader.


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

The passage alluded to in p. 18, note, is found in pp. 218-19 of Psalmanazar’s (not Psiil-
ineser, as there erroneously printed) valuable Essays, entitled “ Essays on the following
Subjects, &c. By a Layman in Town. London, 1753.” The place mentioned by him, and to
which I could not refer, because the book was not then accessible to me, is the following :

Hie populi numerosi habitavere Gergesaei, Jebusaei, aliSque habentes nomina Hebrteis vo-
luminibus memorata : qui quum inexpugnabilem conspicerent advenarum exercitum, patrios
fines deserentes in jEgyptum vicinam migraverunt, ibique numero ac sobole excrescentes,quuni
non satis commodum tantae multitudini locum invenissent, in Africam penetravere, ubi civitates
quamplures habitantes omnem eum tractum usque ad Herculis columnas tenuerunt, semi-
phoenicia lingua ac catalecto utentes. Oppidumque Tingen situ munitissimum in Numidia
ffidificaverunt, ubi duo ex albo lapide columnae prope magnum fontem constitutse, in quibus
Phoenicum lingua litter® incis® sunt hujuscemodi. Nos a facie fugimus Jesu pradonis fllii
Nave, &c.” Procopius de Bello Vandilico, Lib. ii. p. 222. edit. 1531. — The edition of Dow’s
Hindustan quoted is the quarto of 1768.


ERRATA.


Page

line

read.

Page

line

read.

4

19

judice.

100

22

Dabistan.

13

19

Kalawuii.

112

18


14

30

Moniat.


16

13

Sayyad.

116

28

Ferishta.

17

24

u

123

10

Kalyur.

18

4

Bejah and.

135

6

Haiia.

. . ■

23, 27

EdrIsT.

140

16

Hejaz.

24

3

Yours is.

—

E®pe.

Methhal.


31

JawharT.

145

21


25

35


149

34

Munshl.

28

30


157

27

•

33

3

midnight.

178

8

is a sea ...

45

13

HarawT.

184

23


49

17

Kanun.

—

24


SO

23

by her.

187

35


54

3

Oddin.

Ub.

occ. lege Gbayath pro Ghiath.

55

32

Makdishu.

230

14


69

26

Khazir.

232

14


87

12

.

237

1

Kabara.

95

6

Hanifa.


35


TIT 2

TRAVELS


or

IBN BATTJTA.


CHAPTER I.

Tanjitrs — Tilimsan — Milyana — Algiers — Tiijaya — Kosanlina — Buna — Trinis — Siisa — Sajalnis —

Kahis — Tripoli — Meslafa, ^c.

Ix THE XAIIE OF THE COUP ASSIOX ATE AXD ilERCIFUL GOD.

Praise be ascribed to God the lord of worlds; and the blessing of
God be upon our Lord Mohammed, and upon all his posterity and com-
panions. But to proceed: The poor, and needy of the forgiveness of his
bountiful lord, Mohammed Ibn Fat,h Allah El Bailuni states, that the fol-
lowng is what he extracted from the epitome of the Katib IMohammed Ibn
Jazz! El Kelbi (upon whom be the mercy of God), from the travels of the
theologian “Abu Abd Allah Mohammed Ibn Abd Allah El Lawati* of Tanjiers
kno^vn by the surname of Ibn Batuta :t and, that he did not extract any

. idrJsJ Aj t_i. A..S J AAs:* iJll A..S “

* El Lawatl. W e have in the geographical trork entitled s- 1.*-:! ^ t> A -< ‘ &c.

the following account of two places, to one of which this patronymic is undoubtedly to be referred.

U~iA uT' iUAc ildh . Lawata is a district of

Karlsh in Spain. It is also the name of a tribe of the Berbers. According to the same work

Jazza is a place in Khorasan ^L-l^ Au , to which the patronymic Jazzi is probably

to be referred.

f Mr. Burckhardt writes this name Ibn Batouta, adopting the French pronunciation of ou I
suppose. I bare thought it more conformable with our orthography and pronunciation to write

B


2


BARBARA


thing except wliat was strange and unknown, or, known by report, but not
believed on account of its ranty, and the frequent carelessness of histonans
in delivering down what has been reported, but what he himself considered
as true, in consequence of the fidelity of the Traveller, and because he had
written what he believed to be credible from histones of various nations and
countnes, and, because that which has been reported by faithful ivitnesses,
generally recenes credit and excites inquiry Some of his statements,
indeed, are opposed to the statements of others , as, for instance, his
accounts of what he saw of the aromatic roots of Hindustan, ^^hlch differ
from tho'se guen by the physicians and yet his accounts are probably the
true ones

The Sheikh Ibn Datlita, the author of these travels, left his native city,
‘Tanjiers,* for the purpose of performing the pilgnmage in the 725th jear

Asai *


Batuta « There ere t»o abridgments of these travels, sa^sMr Burcklmrdt, ' one bjiba
Djeiy el Kclby ( ) vhe other by Ibn r-Mhallah el Beyloony ( JjLJ\
printed by mistake AiJl iJlyLJI) > tlic latter I possess He tells us in the tame page

that he possessed tno co^es of this abridgment, but the fact is, there are three among his
books begueatl «d to the University of Cambridge, all of which present the same text the few
variations found have evidently originated in the mistakes of the transcribers Mr Burckhardt
writes Djeii/ giving Dj for the Arabic ~ I have adopted Fococke s method of giving our ] for
this letter, with which it exactly corresponds In this word some of the MSS have^^^

doubling thcj r which 1 have no doubt is the true orthography From the extracts printed in
Germany by ProfessorKoscgarlen ond Mr Apclr, it u quite certain that Mr Seetzen s copy, which
they probably used, is nothing more than on nbndgment of the great work of Ibn Batuta and
although It presents some varieties with our copies, it is most likely a copy of the same abridgment
I may remark here, once for all, that, os the proper names of places ore extremely erroneous
in Mr Burckhardt s abstract (Travels m Nubia, Appendix HI), I shall not in future notice
them but shall g ve such words in this work as correctly as I can from the documents m my
hands

* The Arabian geographers divide Northern Afnca into three parts, as given by Abiilfeda in
the following extract Ji».L ^ c-Jyw ^

Ifio— I iX tej ^ ^ o'—

lT* ijWl Axlsillj byo- j

jJ! Ay jJ! i-A! ji\ AyiJl a:31sJ 1 Aniul!^ ajUt j-'j

Tlie regions of the west consst of three divisions, the most western of which u


B ARBARY.


3


of the Hejira (A.D. 1324-5). I shall mention here only the names of some
of the districts through which he passed, although this may contribute but
little towards impressing the reader with the greatness of his courage, his
religious confidence, or his indefatigable perseverance, in overcoming the
difficulties of passing deserts and of crossing mountains.

The first city, therefore, at which he arrived, was 'Tilimsan*; the next ''Mil-
yana; the next 'El Jazaer (Algiers): the next -^Bijaya; the next '’Kosantmaf


kno^\’n by “ the Extreme West.” This part extends from the shores of the ocean to Tilimsan,
considered in an eastward or westward direction : and again, from Subta to Morocco and thence
to Sijilmasa with the parts adjacent, considered from north to south. The second division is
known by “ the Middle West,” and it extends from the east of Wahran, which is one day’s
journey from Tilimsan eastward, to the boundaries of the kingdom of Bijaya. The third and
eastern division is termed Africa, and this extends from Barca to the boundaries of Egypt.
Abulfeda places Algiers in Bijaya, and states the longitude and latitude to be respectively 20=’ SO',
33" 30', reckoning the longitude eastward from the cul jJli . 'perpetual islands, f. e. from

Ferro, the most westward, of the Canary Islands 17° 52' west of Greenwich. The ■ ’• -t.-. :

Kosantlna of our traveller is by him written s-..U ; Kosatina, but the n has probably been
omitted by the copyist. He makes the longitude and latitude, according to the Atwal, 23° 30',
31 30'; Ibn Said 24 40', 33° 22' respectively.

In the we have ^^1 Jjxj • 'tJAic (jL-Aj

d-'C. 2. e. Tilimsan : some pronounce it Tinimsan with an ;i instead of the !.• they are two
walled and neighbouring cities in the west, between which there is the distance of a stone’s throw :
the one is ancient, the other modem. — Tlie word is probably a dual. I notice this, because I find
M. de Sacy writing it Telmisan.

f We have Kosantlnia, in the ^31 v=ith this account of the place, itoJcc

(t— ^ t

j*Ui£ jUil U-c e. “ A city and tower, the latter of

which is termed Kosantlnia el Hawa. It is an extremely large and high tower, so that the birds
cannot get to it without considerable effort. It is situated in the boundaries of Africa which limit
the western parts, upon three large rivers navigated by ships." This place is also styled by El
Harawi, in his book of pilgrimages, a*. .t-.U , Costantina El Hawa, in which he says was a
most wonderful bridge having only one arch, and that with a span of 150 paces : the only building
like it was another in Khuzistan. .v^li J yj U,

B 2


4


BAllBAKY


the next*Buna, the next 'Tunis*, the next‘Sawsa, the next 'Safakiis

jSj j ^uJ' I’ J' ir" ^ LJ^;' u-'l

ijlasw j iU j1ja< U j*Ul In this plare is a bridge

to which there is no equal m the countries of Islaaii<in for its wonderful construction it consists
of one arch of 150 paces in extent between two pierS, if we except that at the gates of Atjatl
upon the borders of Khuzistan which is referred to El Dailaml the phjsician of El Hejaj

Of this other wonderful bridge we find some account in the work of Mr Ulenbroek taken from
Ibn Haukal (p 44), a^ follows *— Wj

jr>

LjjU- ^ U A»y A- J'

«>“' >;kj CL-ai' (jU-jll t— >l» J1

y— ii>- J«_ jisrvii ci j-JU j-lij I/*

he thus translates “ ad fluwos Persidis quod ottinet habct bonas aquas onentes in confiniis
Isphahanc ejusque montibus et apparentes in regione A1 Sardan postquam transierunt trscCum
AI Bordj Sese exooerant lu fluvium Masen, qui itidem e tractu Isphahaas versus ilium Sardani
procedit Con^unguntur prope vicum Masen dictum nequedesimt aqua fiuere ubenus quam
tncolarum necessitates postulant usque ad postam al Radjan sub ponte Tsakan qui pons inter
Fen dem et Khouzistanum exstans paucos sibi pares habet, ita ut. roe quidem judic, opera
pnestantior sit ponte Condubs et ex laudatissimis Pen> s rebus Rigat paguin et urbem deinde
locidit in mare prope condnia Schiniz It ma; be remarked here that the place termed (jl»yl
by El Harawi is given by Mr Ulenbroek The former, however, is the reading given in

the Calcutta edition of the Kamoos thus j , i e El Aijan, a district m Ears

Abulfeda gives , but says that it is also wnlteo with ^ Instead of ^^ too,
Abulfeda gives ^... . (See also pp 31, 88 in Mr Ulenbroek s Translations)

• In Abulfeda, j^UjI ^ ,Js>'Lj ,jle LjUj»\i iuAsr* U^y

Js-sc* ^ V^y U^J U"^ i.^

lA ^bl ^ j^j y'^ Tunis

is a large modem city in Afnca situated upon the sea shore It was built from the ruins of
Carthage which is two miles from it It has been called TarsTs also Its walls are said to enclose
twent} one thousand cubits It is now a village of Africa They dnnk from wells and canals
supplied bj ram water The port is towards its eastern part Upon the authority of the geogra
pineal work entitled the Moshtorik (l*J^ ?41) Carthage, says Abulfeda, iju y\ JL4.^1 ^ jjii

JU-l tail JIj KcS. jU <— |];S- U^y ‘“■y

It IS a town in the distnets of Afnca near Tunis, hut now in rums there are in
It many marks of ancient splendour He also says, Biat this is the name of a city in Spam m
the district of Tadmir, which was overflowed by the sea and destroyed


BARBARY.


5


Ibn Jazzi El Keibi states, that on this place the following verses were written
by ’"Ibn Habib El Tenukhi.*

May showers enrich thy happy soil,

Fair land, where fanes and towers arise :

On thee let sainted pilgrims pour
The richest blessings of the skies.

The wave that round thy bosom plays.

Conscious of its endeared retreat.

When the rude tempest rocks thy domes.

In sighs resigns its happy seat.

Yet urged another glance to steal
Of thy loved form so good so fair,

Flies to avoid the painful view
Of rival lovers basking tbence.

And, on the other hand, "Abu Abd Allah Mohammed Ibn Abi Temim f
has said :


* As the Arabic text of this work is not likely soon to be printed, I shall occasionally give, in
notes, such portions as I may think necessary, either for the purpose of promoting farther
inquiry, or to present the reader with such specimens of Arabian poetry as may occur. Tlie
original lines of the above verses are as follows :

5 Sj\) j

This verse is a species of that termed or expanded. See Clarke’s Arabic Prosody, p.

51. The measure will be found at page 60, as follows, with its varie-

ties. Tenukh is the name of a tribe in Bahrein, from which this poet probably took his origin.
I have not been able to find any particulars respecting him.

i The following are the original lines :


bji Ijl IjJjo Ulilj

The verse is of the species termed expanded, and may be measured by ^IrU -

, with its varieties. See Clarke’s Prosody, p. 52.


The author is probably ‘OJl ‘-V= Ji

given at n. 628 of Tydeman’s Conspectus operis Ibn Chalicani. Lugd. Batav. 1809.


c


EGYPT.


See tlie swelling angry tide,

Rnge and beat against her side
But, only a**k a moment's staj, —

It hisses foams, and rolls away

The next city was that of “Kabis, the next 'Tarabulus (Tripoli) Tbn
Batata has stated, that he then pa^ed on to ’JMesldta and 'Mesurata, and
'Kasura Surt (or Palaces of Suit) We then passed, says he, the 'low
grounds* (which may also mean the Forest), and proceeded to the palace of
“Barsis the devotee, to the 'Kubbat El Islam, and to the city of “’Alexandria,
where we saw one of its most learned men, the judge 'Fakhr Oddm El Riki,
whose grandfather is said to have been an inhabitant of ' Rika This man
was exceedingly assiduous m acquiring learning he travelled to ‘Hejaz, and
thence to Alexandria, where he arrived m the evening of the day He was
rather poor, and would notenter the city until he had witnessed “some favour

“ <jU !1 * *

' Ia^j * ^ ^ ^ j-XjIII *” I’S *

• In the we hare, ^ J>.U ^ ^ g-j

Ij-J J JS' ^ Vy “

a city Bituated between Tripoli and Safukus near Ei Mehiliyat, upon the shore of the western sea.
In It IS a station for ships from all pares it is three miles distant from the sea^El Harawi writes
this name as above , and, m mentioning this place, stops to give an account of Etna as

It was in Ins day, j e early in the tbirteenih century He says Jili« iji j^sTj

lULt ^ Jii-J J-lh '.i

y* ijby b«._j ^\j ial olLJt

AIE.V HI Uj

ij iiiAi VsjV^ ^i.4 iJ->- ij\SjU (Jmj lU^-b

“In the island of Sicily is there a fiery nauntain, which hangs over the sea It is veiy
high in the air, and during the daytime smoke is seen arising out of it, and in the night fire
One of the learned men of the country told me, that he saw an animal like a quad of a leaden
colour fiy out of the middle of this fire and ^in return to it This he said was a tamandal
(salamandar) For my part, I saw nothing but black perforated stones, like the stone of the pes
columbinus, falling from this mountain on thepart nearthe sea fhey say, that there is a similar
mountain in Fargana which bums stones, the ashes of which are sold three ounces for the
dirhem, and with this they whiten their clothes ” Fronfi this it should seem, that salamandar is a
corruption ofsomnnrfnl, an Arabic compound signifyuig Tnoii hie


EGYPT.


7


able omen. He sat, accordingly, near the gate, until all the persons had gone
in, and it was nearly time for closing the gate. The keeper of the gate was
irritated at his delay, and said to him ironically, enter Mr. Judge. He replied,
yes, judge ! if that be God’s will. After this he entered one of the colleges,
and attended to reading, following the example of others who had attained
to eminence, until his name and reputation for modesty and religion reached
the ears of the king of Egypt. About this time the judge of Alexandria
died. The number of learned men in Alexandria who expected this
appointment was large : but of these, the sheikh was one who entertained
no expectations of it. The Sultan, however, sent it to him ; and he was
admitted to the office, which he filled with great integrity and moderation ;
and hence obtained great fame.


CHAPTER II.

Alexandria — Tatiija — Damanhur — Faxonidk — FSriskSr — Ashmun ElRomman — Samanud — Cairo,

One of the greatest saints in Alexandria, at this time, was the learned
and pious Imam, Borhan" Oddin ELAaraj, a man who had the power of
working miracles.* I one day went in to him, when he said, I perceive
that you are fond of travelling into various countries. I said yes ; although
I had at that time no intention of travelling into very distant parts. He
replied, you must visit my brother '’Farid Oddin in India, and my brother
'Rokn Oddin Ibn Zakarya in Sindia, and also my brother Borhan Oddin in
China : and, when you see them, present my compliments to them. I was
astonished at what he said, and determined with myself to visit those coun-
tries ; nor did I give up my purpose till I had met all the three mentioned
by him, and presented his compliments to them.

• Jj ' • “

* It is generally believed among the Mohammedans, that every saint has it in his power to
perform miracles without laying claim to the office of a prophet. This kind of miracle they
term karamet benevolent action. See my Controversial Tracts on Christianity and

Mohammedanism, p. 2, 352, &c.


8


EGYPT.


Another singular man was the ' Sheikh Yakut, the Abyssinian, disciple
of the Sheikh *Abu Abbas El MursI This Abu Abbas was the disciple
of the servant of God, ^Abu El Hasan El Shldali, See author of the ' Hizb
El Bahr,t famous for his piety and miracles 1 was told by the Sheikh
Yakut, from his preceptor Abu El Abbas El Mursi, that the Sheikh Abu El
Hasan El Shadhali performed the pilgrimage annually, making his way
through Upper Egypt, and passing over to Mecca, in the month of Rejeb,
and so remaining theie till the conclusion of the pilgrimage that he visited
the holy tomb, and returned by the ‘great passage to his city On one of
these occasions, and which happened to be the last, he said to liis servant,
Get together an axe, a casket, and some spice, and whatever is necessary
for the interment of a dead body Tlie servant replied and why, Sii,
should X do this ’ He rejoined, you shall see ‘Homaitara Now Homaitara
IS situated in Upper Egypt , it is a stage m the great desert of ‘Aidhab,
in which there is a well of very pernicious and poisonous water XYhen he
had got to Homaitara the Sheikh bathed himself, and had performed two of

u-U ,.1 • ^1 '


* The title of Well ( h) seems to be applied to nooe but such ashaveattamedto the very last
degree of mystic excellence Janu tells us in the first chapter of that

the appropriation of (his title belongs to those only, who bare omvecl at the last stage of mysti*
cism, and may be said to be annihilated u) the divmc essence >- -^ 1

tiUSlj i-j jA ^ tS <^-•'1

Ij f&c. where also several other definitions, all tending to the same point, ere adduced In the chapter
ujU-fi fcS) given a little farther on, we have the diflerent degrees of these
worthies pointed out

In the first volume of M de bacys Chrestomathie Arabe (Sd edit p 481), we have an
account of the death of this Sheikh, taken from the Jahan Nama, a little different from this
and, what is the most curious part of it, the discovery of coffee is attributed to acommunica
tion made by him after his death to one of his disciples Works by this Sheikh are to be found
in the libraries of both Cambridge and Oxford but they appear to be of no great usv.

t In a bibliographical work entitled the lch>. preserved in

Mr Burckhardts collection, we have, under the word, . j-

the Hizb El Bahr by the Sheikh Alml Hasan El Shadhali Etjemeni
On this place tee tlie “ Index Geographicus in vitam Saladini ' by Schuhens under the word
Aidabum, and Burckhardt s Travels in Nubia, Appendix III p 519


EGYPT,


9


the prostrations of his prayers, T\'hen he died ; he was then buried there.
Ibn Batuta states that he visited the tomb, and saw upon it an inscription
tracing his pedigree up to Hosain the son of Ali.

I heard, continues the Traveller, in Alexandria, by the 'Sheikh El Salih
ElAabid* El Munfik, of the character of Abu Abd Allah ElMurshidi, and
that he was one of the great interpreting saints t secluded in the Minyat
of Ibn Murshed : and that he had there a cell, but was without either ser-
rant or companion. Here he was daily visited by emirs, viziers, and crowds
of other people, whose principal object it was to eat with him. He accord-
ingly gave them food, such as they severally wished to have, of victuals,
fruit, or sweetmeats : a circumstance which has seldom taken place in any
days but his. To him also do the learned come for patents of office, or
dismissal. These were his constant and well-known practices. The Sultan
of Egypt too, El Malik El Nasir, often visited him in his cell.

I then left Alexandria (says the Traveller) ndth the intention of visiting
this Sheikh (may God bless him), and got to the village of^Taruja, then to
the city of "Damanhur the metropolis of the Delta; then to "Fa^^wah not far
from which is the cell of the Sheikh Abu Abd Allah El Murshidi. I went
to it and entered, when the Sheikh arose and embraced me. He then
brought out victuals and ate wth me. After this I slept upon the roof of

. Jjj " ’

* This word designates an order of the religious, vrhose business, according to Jami in the
is to attend constantly on the service of God, particularly on works of superero-
gation with a view to their final reward, while a complete Sufi follows truth, purely from the
love of it; bis words are; JiW ^

j' ‘-r-'lP

t UjSi These seem to be nothing more than perpetuators of the ancient practices

of divining mentioned so often in the Hebrew Bible. The influence these impostors still possess
in the East is very great, as may be collected from the text in this place. It may not be unin-
teresting to the student of the Hebrew to find, that we have here the very word which is used to
designate these pretenders in the Bible, namely, or , ; \ \( ^ discoverer, revealer. A

curious note on the methods employed by dinners of this sort will be found extracted from Ibn
Khaldun, in the second volume of M. de Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe, pp. 298-301. See also
my Controversial Tracts on Christianity and Mohammedanism, p. 212.

c


10


PT


his 'cell/ dfld BH'k tft d''drfeatn tHe sadio rfghfr/ mysdf tjllacefl oh tho'wbgs
ofttgreathird{*\ifhich'fied iNvaywithnW towards ^thfetdmpleat'Mefccai He
thfen verged iovrards Yemed;t then towards the oaSt »h©thentookihiScourse
to Ihd sdulh After 'this h© Tt’dnt^fhr dt^ayantbithe east, leaid alighted -with
Did safely •irit'heTegioha'df darkness (oti arctic ilrcgioiiw) Hrhdroihe'leftJinoJi

I was astpriishfediat this ^ihsion,! and dud tA-mysblf^ do doubt/ thb SheiHi
will intw^irol it fbr mej Ibr hb hb ssuHtd do thingd'of theisorti When the
momiilg'had arrived! ^and I was about to perfbrm byi devotions^ the Sheikh
made rad officiate , '-aftei' this, hisoisuhl visitors, consisting bf crohs} »n^s,
and othdrs, radde theiH calls Hipot hiin(fknd took Iheir leave, afldr each had
receivfed a small cake froA him

"When the pVayer at noori was ove^ ho called md, I tiien told him tny dream,
and fie interpreted it for meU <He baifl, '^fou itill perfond the pilgntnage,
and visit the tomb of ' tho Prophet, »yoa vliU then'trahersefthe ebuntnes of
Yemen, 'Irak, Turkey, and 'Jn^ia/and will remain m these -iorae time In
India you will meet 'with ray brother DilahUd, who will save you from a
calamity, ihto which, you trill happed to fall He then pnoiiddd me with
somb dned cakes dnd eome dirhems, and I bode^him farewell Since I lel^
him, I experienced noUiing but good fortune m my travels, but never met
with a person like lum, except my Lord 'El Wall Mohammed El Mowwalla,
m India

I next came to the city of “El NahrSriat, then toXIMohalla El Kohra (or
the great station), from this I went to 'El Barlas, then to *Daraietta, iti which
IS the cell ot the Sheikh ‘Jamal Oddin El Sawi, leader of the sect called
'Karenders * These are they who shave tU^r chins and eyebrows

ii “ «clAl jusr* oltJo ' Sh ’ C^\ * . J'jt '

^ ’JweO

* Tins, it should seem is a sect of Sufts who paj httic regard to any thmg but persuading
themselres (hat they stand well with the Almighty, as may be seen m an interesting note from
Makrizi by M De Sacy (Chrest Arab, tom i p 263 edit 2) In one instance, however, the
learned Frenchman has mistaken his outhor, which it is important to rectify Alter stating that
they fast and pray but little, Maknzi proceeds, is"U,l Jjljj jJ^wb'cli I

translate thus •• they care nothing about the enjoyment of lawful pleasures but winch stands
thus m M de Sacy ils ne font point de difficulte d user des plaisirs 1 cites by which I sup
pose he means, they make no scruple in indulging in lawful pleasures In the extract from


EGYPT.


II


It is said, that the feason which induced the Sheikh to shave off his beard
and eyebrows was the following. He was a well made and handsome man ;
one of the women of 'Sawah consequently fell in love with him; after
this she was constantly sending to the Sheikh, presenting herself to him in
the street, and otherwise soliciting his society : this he completely resisted.
When she was tired of this, she suborned an old woman to stop him on his
way to the mosque, with a sealed letter in her hand. When the Sheikh
passed by her she said, Good Sir, can you read? Yes, he replied. She
said, this letter has been sent to me by my son ; I wish you would read it
for me. He answered, I will. But when she had opened the letter she
said. Good Sir, my son has a wife who is in yonder house ; could I beg the
favour of your reading the letter at the door, so that she may hear ? To this
he also assented; but, when he had got through the first door, the old
woman closed it, and out came the woman with her slaves, and hung about
him. They then took him into an inner apartment, and the mistress began
to take liberties with him. When the Sheikh saw that there was no escaping,
he said, I will do what you like : shew me a sleeping room. This she did :
he then took in with him some water and a razor which he had, and shaved


Makrizi, moreover, two sects of these are noticed ; the last of which, termed Melametl,

pay very great regard to their actions and carriage in society.

The account given of these sects in the King of Oude’s Persian Dictionary, entitled the Seven
Seas, is as follows : The term Kalender (or Karender), signifies a being, perfectly relieved
from the forms and objects of earthly usages, which do not confer happiness; and who
is so fiir advanced m spiritual acquirements, as to be entirely freed from the restraints of
custom or address. Having freed both body and soul from every person and thing, the
Kalender seeks nothing but the beauty and glory of the Deity; and this he believes he
obtains. Rut, such an one, feeling the least inclination to any thing existing, is termed a repro-
bate, not a Kalender. The difference between a Kalender, a Melametl, and a Sufi, consists in
this : the Kalender labours to be freed and removed from all forms and observances. The
Melametl, on the other hand, conceals his devotions from others, as he does every thing else
tending to virtue ; while he conceals nothing that is bad and vicious. The Sufi is that person,
who allows his feelings to be affected by no created being, and has no liking or dislike to them.
The degree of the Sufi is the highest ; for perfectly separated and simplified as they are from
worldly concerns, they nevertheless obey their spiritual senior, and walk in the footsteps of him
and of the prophet. See also d’Herhelot, Bib. Or., under the word Calendar, and d’Ohsson’s
Tabl. Emp. Ott., tom. ii. p. 315, as cited by M. de Sacy.

C 2


12


EGYPT


off his beard and both his eyebrows He then presented himself to the
'\voman, who, detesting both his person and his deed, ordered him to be
ffnven out of the house Thus, by diNinc providence, was his chastity pre-
served This appearance he retained ever after, and every one who
embraced his opinions also submitted to the shaving off of his beard and both
his eyebrows *

It IS also said of the Sheikh Jamal Oddin, that after he had gone to
Dafmetta, he constantly attended the bunal-grounds of that place There
was at that time m Damietta ajudge, known by the surname of IbnOtnaid,
who, attending one day at the funeral of one of the nobles, saw the Sheikh
m the bunal-ground, and said to him, you are a beastly old fellow He
replied, And you are a foolish judge, who can pass with your beast among
the tombs, and know at the same time, that the respect due to a dead man,
IS just as great as that due to a h\mg one The judge replied, worse than
this is your shaving off jour beard -f The Sheikh said, mark me he then
rubbed a little alkohol on his eye-brows, and lifting up his head, presented
a great black beard, which very much astonished the judge and those with
him, so that the judge descended from his mule J The Sheikh applied the
alkohol the second time, and, lifting up his head, exhibited a beautiful white
beard He then applied the alkohol the third time , and, when he lifted
up his head, his face ivas beardless as before The judge then kissed his
hand, became his disciple, and building a handsome cell for him, became
his companion for the rest of his life After a while the Sheikh died, and
Was buned m the cell , and when the judge died, he was buried, as it had
been expressed m his will, m the door- way of the cell, so that every one
who should visit the tomb of the Sheikh, would ha\e to pass over his grave


* A very different account or tfie ongin of this practice is given in a note from Ara&rizi, by
M de Sacy (Chreat Arabe, tom i p 264, 2d edit ) in which it is said, that it must have
onginated about four hundred years before Maknzt s time , but, as Ibn Batuta lived more than
one hundred years before Makrizi, it is probable that hia account is the true one Maknzi, besides
cites no author m support of his optnion, and probably says only what he might have heard
^ From this, as well as from what is related above about this woman, it may be seen how
exceedingly reproachful it is considered in the East to shave off the beard Compare Leviticus,
xix. 27 , XXL 5 2 Sam^ x 5 1 Chron , xix 5

t Rebecca, we find, alighted from her camel (Gen xxiv 64), m order to pay respect to her
future husband Isaac, just as the Judge here did to the Sheikh


EGYPT.


13


I then proceeded from this place to the city of '“Fariskur, then to ‘'Ashmun :
El Romman, then to the city of -^Samanud, then to ^Misr (Cairo), the prin-
cipal city of its district. The Nile, which runs through this country, excels
all other rivers in the sweetness of its taste,* * * § the extent of its progress, and
the greatness of the benefits it confers. It is one of the five great rivers of
the world, which are, itself, the '* Euphrates, the ’Tigris, the^Sihun, the
'Jaihun (or Gihon). Five other rivers too may be compared with them,
namely, the river of ""Sindia, which is called the" Panj ab (or five waters);
the river of India, which is called the °Gung (or Ganges), to which the
Indians perform their pilgrimages, and into which they throw the ashes of
their dead when burnt : they say it descends from Paradise ; also the river
^Jun (or Jumna): the river ’Athil (Volga) in the desert of ’'KiQak, and
the river 'Sarv in Tartary, upon the bank of which is the city of 'Khan
Balik,| and which flows from that place to “El Khansa, and thence to the
city of 'Zaitun in China, of which we shall give accounts in their proper
places. The course of the Nile, moreover, is in a direction from the south
to the north, contrary to that of all other rivers.

When I entered Egypt the reigning prince was El Malik El Nasir Mo-
hammed Ibn El Malik El Mansur Kala-wun. J The learned men then in Egypt
were, 'Shams Oddin El Isphahanl,§ the first man in the world in meta-
physics; ^Rokn Oddin Ibn El Karia, one of the leaders in the same


.JjT’ .1^^"


* That the water of the Nile was commonly drunk as early as the times of Moses, we are
informed in the book of Exodus, chap. vii. See also Diodorus Siculus, lib. i, p. 49, edit. Wes-
seling. Tlie Arabs, too, generally term this river the .sfa in order to distin-


guish it from the Mediterranean, which they term the salt sea
Chrestomathie Arabe, tom. ii. p. 15.


See M. de Sacy's


f Pekin, as will be shewn hereafter.


:j; See D’Herbelot, under Nasser Ben Calaoun: Annales Moslem., tom. v. p. 116, 331, &c.

§ See D’Herbelot, under Schamseddin.


14


EGYPT.


science:* and the Sheikh ‘AthlrOddin Abu Haian of Granada, the greatest
grammanan t


CHAPTER III.

Upper Egppl—Baush ‘—Dtlat ^Biba—Bahtutta Jl/ifljrat Ihn hhasth—‘Maidav>l—Ma7^aliU^

Esoyut—Ekhmim—HavMxi—KMa—Kata^El Aitar—Armnnat^—Etna^Edfu—Ajarna El

Fil^El Atwani—Dugain—Hotnaitara^Aidhah^— Cairo

The traveller continues I then left Cairo, with the intention to go on
the pilgrimage by way of ' Upper Egypt, and came to the ^Der El Tin (or
monastery of clay) From this place I went to 'Baush, then to ^Dilas, then
to'Biba, then to^Bahnasa, then to the 'Mmyet ofibn Khasib,J which
^vas formerly attached to the government of Cairo It is said, that one
of the Califs of the house of Abbas was displeased wth the people of
Egypt, and took it into his head to place over them one of the meanest of
his slaves, by way of punishment, and that he might afford an example
to others At this time Khasib was the lowest 6la\e m the palace, and
his business was to get the baths warmed He ^vas accordingly appointed
to the government, with the hope that he would sufficiently punish them
by his tyranny, as it is usual with those who have not been brought up for
such a station But when Khasib was established m Egypt, his con-
duct was exemplary m the extreme, and, for this, his fame was spread far
and wide the consequence \vas, he was visited by the relations of the Calif,
and other persons attached to the court, and these he loaded with presents
Upon one of these occasions the Calif missed some of his relations, and upon


• Annales Mu«leniici tom v p 300 I -t See D Herbelot, under Abou Haian

t This place is noticed in an extract given in M de Sacy a Chrestoraathie Arabe, tom ii, pp »
and 3 of the Frencbtran btton as al<o in the Annales Musleniici, vol in p 750, where, as well
0$ in the Appendix to M de Sacj s Itelaiions <1 Eg}'pt, by \bd el Latlf, the first of these words
IS w ritten Moniat or Monpet It could have been widicd that M de Sacy had, in his Chrcsto
trnthie, given liis reasons for changing his orthogriphy


E&YPT.


15


inquiry found, that one of thernihad absented himself. After a time this man
presented himself to the Calif, who interrogated him as to his absence. The
man replied, that he had been paying a visit to Khasib in Egypt : he then
told him of the gifts he had received, which were indeed of great value.
This enraged the Calif so that he ordered the eyes of Khasib to be put out,
that he should be expelled from Egypt, and cast out into one of the streets
of Bagdad. When the order for his apprehension arrived, it was served
upon him -by an artifice, at some distance from his palace. He had with
him, however, a large ruby, which he had hidden by sewing it up in his
shirt during the night. His eyes were then put out, and he was thrown out
in a street of Bagdad, Upon this occasion a poet happened to pass by,
who said, O Khasib, it was my intention to visit thee in Egypt, in order
to recite thy praises : bpt thy coming hither is the more suitable to me.
Will you then allow me to recite my poem ? How, said Khasib, shall I
hear it ? You know what circumstances I am in. The poet replied, my
only wish is that you should hear it : but as to reward — may God reward
you, as you have others ! Khasib then said, go on with your verse. The
poet proceeded;

Thy bounties like the swelling Nile,*

Made the plains of Egypt smile, &c.

When he had got to the end of the poem Khasib said, open this seam.
He did so. Khasib then said. Take this ruby. The poet refused ; but being

* The words of the original are;

jsT IKi Uij J*j l,-

Thou art khasib (or plentiful year, for the word has this meaning), and this Egypt increases and
abounds with plenty, like the Nile. The point of this distich seems to consist in the play upon the
word khasib, which could not be transfused into the English translation, unless by some such
circumlocution as the following :

Stores of the richest bounty! This thy name.

Spreads like the Nile, at once its blessings and tby fame, &o.

I notice this merely to shew how difficult it is to preserve the spirit of this kind of poetry in a
translation. The thirty-ninth story of the first book of Saadi’s Gulistan (Persian Rose-garden)
is founded on the history of this man. In some of the editions the name is erroneously pointed

u—waci. Khosaib for l Khasib,

The line above cited is of the species U.. ..'1 ^ and of the measure Jjje .j .

with its varieties. See Clarke’s Prosody, p. 60.


16


EGYPT


adjured to do so, he complied; he then went to the street of the jewellers, and
offered it for sale. He was told that such a stone could belong to none but
the Calif The account of it was accordingly earned to him, who ordered
the poet to be brought into the presence When he came there, he ivas
interrogated on the subject, and Ins answers developed the whole matter.
The Calif was then sorry for what he had done to Khasib, and ordered
that he should be brought before him. When he came, the Calif gave him
some splendid presents, and ordered that he should have whatever he might
wish. Khasib requested to have this Mmyel given to him, which was
done, and he resided there till the time of his death. After tins his
descendants held it, until the family became extinct. — I then proceeded
to the city of * Manlawl, then to'Manfalut, then to*Esoyut, then to 'Ekh-
raim, and then to "Hawwa. Here I visited the Sheikh, Sayyud "Abu Moham-
med Obaid Allah El Hasani, who was one of the great samU. When he
asked me what my object was, I told him, that Jt was my wish to perform
the pilgrimage by way of *Judda. He replied, you will not succeed in this,
upon this occasion , you had better return, therefore : for, the first pilgrimage
you will perform, will be by the plain of 'Syria. When I left him, I made no
effort to follow his advice, but proceeded on my way till 1 arrived at*AidhAb,
and found that I could not go on. I then returned to ’’Cairo, and after that
to ‘Syria (or Damascus) , and the way 1 took, m my first pilgrimage, was
just as the 'Sherif liad told me, by the plain of Syria.

From Hawwa, therefore, I proceeded to“Kana, then to'Kaus, then to
the city of 'El Aksar, then to ‘Armanat, then to’EsnS, then to *Edfii,
then to ‘Ajarna El Fil, then to the village of '*E1 Atwani, m company with
a tnbe of Arabs known by the name of 'Dugaim. Our course was through
a desert, in which there were no buildings, for a distance of fifteen days
One of the stages at which we halted was'^’Homaitara, the place in which
the grave of 'El Wall Abu’I Hasan El Shadheli is situated. After this we


° . aUI X " '3*"* • * . kj-jl * . *


EGYPT.


17


came to the city of '‘Aidhab, the inhabitants of which are the 'Bejah,*
who are blacks. Among these people the daughter never succeeds to
property.

.

* On these people see Hamaker’s Liber de expugnatione Memphidis et Alexandri®, pp.57, 58.
Burckhardt’s Travels in Nubia, pp. 192-228. In this part of Mr. Hamaker’s work a notice
is given of the Berbers ; and, as he seems to have mistaken its import, I may be excused in

transcribing and translating it. jUjj jlb ^

. ^ >*<11 (lego jjlo-jSU The Berbers are another people whose country is

situated upon the southern sea, between the districts of the Abyssinians and those of the Zinj ;
they are called Berbera. They are blacks, and are the people who make the dower for wives
(this) that they (the men, not the women, as Mr. Hamaker proposes, by inserting tbe reading
»V.oi ) shall cut off the virilia of a man (perhaps an enemy), and also steal. They are more

ti/ ** '

like beasts than men. Mr. Hamaker seems to have forgotten, that in the East, the person who
marries a wife must provide the dower, just as gentlemen in this countiy make the jointure.
Something like this seems formerly to have prevailed in Palestine; see 1 Sam., xviii. 25, 27;
2 Sam., iii. 14 ; and if these Berbers are actually of the same stock with those on the north of
Africa, which Mr- Hamaker thinks to be the case, it is not improbable that this custom was
brought with them from Palestine, as it is very probable these people are a part of those formerly
expelled that country by Joshua. No one, perhaps, has taken so much pains to examine this
question as Ibn Khaldun has done; and his opinion decidedly is, that the Berbers are derived
from Palestine, and descendants of Canaan. He also affirms that they are brothers to the
Abyssinians, Copts, and Nubians; his words aretj^ji) ^ SJ ^ (jj,

(•f'djo Jlj Jk-ksT* jjI JUi lili Wj <tJlj lili jJj

Ij^y .... |•b>-

cT* s? i_-~J aJlA-tSl CjI .... j»lr- ^

V i— ij

. J! ^ genealogy (i. e. the Zenata tribe) among

the Berbers, there is no discrepancy among tbe genealogists, that they are of the posterity of
Shana ; and to him is their origin referred. As to this Shana, Abu Mohammed Ibn Hazim
has said, in the book^^called the Jamharat (or collection), some have affirmed that this person is
Jana, son oi Yahya, son of Bidyan, son of Canaan, son of Ham, which is the truest statement.
Of these are the tribe of Zenata and others, as we have already said; but they are the brothers
of the Berbers because they all trace their descent up to Canaan the son of Ham. But, as to
his (a certain writer) entering the pedigree of Goliath in that of the Berbers, since he is of

D


18


EGYPT.


At this time, two-tbirds of the revenue of AidhSb went to the king of
the Bejah, whose name was *EI Hadrabi, the remaining third to the king
of Egypt The cause of our not proceeding thence to Judda, was a war
that had broken out m these parts between the ‘Bejahand "Bamau
people 1 accordingly returned with the Arabs to " Kaws in Upper Egypt,
and descended by the Nile to Cairo, where I lodged one night, and then
set out for Syria This, happened in the month * Shaaban in the year
twenty-six (A. H 726— A D 1326)


CHAPTER IV

Bdhtf—El SalAta—El Ssviad^—Et JVand—Kalta-^Matilah — El Amh—El Kharuha — Rafaj-^
Gaia-^El Ifiom

After this I amved at ‘Baibis,* then at *El Salihia From this place 1
entered the sands (Desert), m which are the stages *El SawHa, ‘'El Wand,

*

the postenty of Mldaghls aod Sakat, it m ao error, aod, m the sane maimer, ii hit inei&g
theta to the Amaleltites (also an error) For the truth is, Gohath » of the sons of Philtstla,
son of Kaslulilm, eon of ^Iisraim, con of Ham, one of the nations of Ham the son of Koah
hut these are the brothers of the Copts, Berbers, Abyuinians, and Nubians, as we have said in
the genealogy of the sons of Ham Between these Phihstins, however, and the children of
Israel, there were many wars • for there were m Syria many of the Berbers, their (i e the
Philistines) brothers, ond of the rest of the descendants of Canaan Ibn Khaldun explodes the
opinion held by IdrIsI (see part i dim 3) and others, that the Berbers are descended from the
Himyantes of Arabia Felix See an extract to the same cfiect in Pococke s Specun Hist
Arab , by M de Sacy, pp 462, 540 A very cunous article on ibis subject, too, is to be found
'n the Desenptio Afnca; by Leo Africonus (pp roihi 12, IS), where he states the opinions of
IdrTsi, and in almost the same words, of these people coming from Arabia Felix, as well as that
held by Ibn Khaldun of their coming from Palestine, adding, that they were driven out by the
AssjTians, which must put every body in mind of the story of Fheniaan Dido We are told
somewhere in the discourses of Psalmezer, that an mscnption formerly appeared on s column
m one of the Barbarv states, saying, that the people who had erected it had been expelled
from Palestine by Joshua. It w h ghly probable. I think, that the Tuarick of Major Denham s
Narrative are Berbers, as the letters he gives at page Ixvm are, as far as they can be traced,
evidently Phenician (See also The Universal Histoiy, vol xvu p 220, Ac. ed. 1748 )

* This woid IS pronounced either Balbls or Bilbls , it u, aecoidmg to the ^

ten farsangs from Fustat m Cairo, on the road to Syna. klk-i Zj-Xv


SYEIA.


19


'Katia, •'’El Matilab, ^EI Aarish,f "El Kharuba, and ‘Rafaj. At each of
these there is an inn, which they call *E1 khan. Here the travellers put up
with their beasts : here are also watering camels, as well as shops, so
that a traveller may purchase whatever he may want either for himself or
his beast.

I next arrived at 'Gaza, and from thence proceeded to the city of "El
Khalil Ibrahim (Abraham the friend). In the mosque of this place is the
holy cave, and in this are the tombs of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
those of their ■wives. This cave I visited. As to the truth of these being
the graves of those persons, the following is an extract made by me, from
the work of Ali Ibn Jaafar El RazI, entitled El Musfir Lilkulub, on the true
position of the graves of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ;* and which rests on
a tradition from "Abu Horaira, who has said. It was related by the prophet,
that when he was on his night journey to Jerusalem, Gabriel took him by
the grave of Abraham and said, descend and perform two prostrations, for
here is the tomb of Abraham thy father. He then took him by Bethlehem


See an interesting note on this place in Haraaker’s Liber de expugnatione
Memphidis, &c., pp. 48, 49. The following from Makrizi I cannot forbear copying and translating :


UJ (I read f'i

jlj— 11 (tEoUil j!>-\ iJ-aj ^J!j jjjjI

.jc .^ ^ JAj lajcq Balhis is called, in

the law of Moses, Jashan (Goshen), and is the place to which Jacob went down after he had
presented himself to his son Joseph. So he went down to the country of Jashan (Goshen), which
is Balbis, to the pasturage on account of their cattle. Ibn Said, who was governor of this place,
has said, that its territory extends to El Waridat, which is the extreme limit of Egypt. To this
place is the common silver coinage current : but beyond it, and to El Arlsh, which is the first
place of Syria, but as some say, the last of Egypt, are the fulus (i. e. a sort of small copper coin)
in circulation.

* On this place, which is the Rhinocorura or Rhinocolura of the ancients, see Hamaker’ s
Liber de expugnatione Memphidis et Alexandria, p. 15.


-j- The name of the author with the whole title runs thus ; tsU-.,


D 2


20


SYRIA


and said, perform two prostrations, for here was bom thy brother Je'^us
He then went on ^Mth him to El Sakhrat, and so on, as recorded m the
tradition

In the city of El Khahl was the aged saint and Imam, “Borhan Oddm El
Jaaban, him I asked respecting the truth of the grave of Abraham being
there He answered, Every learned man I have met with has considered
it as the fact, that these three graces are the graves of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob , and that the three graves opposite to them are those of their
wives , nor does any one, continued he, think of contradicting accounts so
generally received from the ancients, but the heretics


CHAPTER V

Jenueitm-^Asketon—^ElJiamldh^i^aphtit—^Bimod-^Ei Ghaur—Bl Kosatr-Acca—Tyre-^Si
do t—2Mertat—Bairul — rrtpoli—Emessa—HamoA-^Moarrai E( Moomon—Somtn’—Al^po
—‘Tutn‘—A'’liOii—Saiyun—Jaia/i:—£aodtcea^Mcn«l Biiamis—BaaHei—J^amitscus

I THEN passed on to Jerusalem, and on the road visited the tomb of
Jonas, and Bethlehem the birth place of Jesus But, as to the mosque of
Jerusalem, it vs said, that there is not a greater upon the face of the earth
and m sacredness, and pru ileges conferred, this place is the third From
Jerusalem I paid a visit to * Askelon, which was m rums In this place was
the meshhed,* famous for the head of llosam,*! before it was removed to
Egypt Without Askelon is “ the valley of bees, ’ said to be that mentioned
in the Koran I next proceeded to *EI Ramlah, then to 'IVapIous.J then
to ‘‘Eglon From this place I set out for the maritime parts of Syria,
passing by the route of *Bawad between two mountains, and called 'El
Ghawr Here was the tomb of the guardian saint of this people, 'Abu
Obeidat Aamir Ibn El Jarah, which I visited and then passed by a village

Oly * uA** "

cW' o’ ^

* This word, which is ohen seen m maps meaos a place of attestation, t e the assembly of
persons to giro attestation to some fact, and should be pronounced meshhed
f Til s was one of the sons of Ah, who fell to the battle of Karbela
t The principal town of the Samanlsns


SYRIA.


21


called El Kosair, in which was the tomb of *Moadh Ibn Jabali, which I also
visited.

From this place I proceeded to'Acca; in this is the tomb of '‘Salih
the prophet, which I visited. After this I arrived at the city of 'Tyre,
which is a place wonderfully strong, being surrounded on three sides by
the sea. Its harbour is one of those which have been much celebrated.
I next visited “Sidon, and from this place went into the parts of "Tiberias,
which it was my wish to see. The whole was, however, in ruins, but
the magnitude of it was sufficient to shew that it had been a large place.
The place is wonderfully hot, as are also its waters.* The lake is well

. <0^ ‘ ■ * . Ulc ‘ .

^ The baths, &c. of Tiherias are thus described by El Harawi : ^ \a\ Jliu L jAs

iJjih ^iXii (jli ‘-r’V njjtsij:.

ci b! {J'du liT*

AJj ^ llLdl ^t4.c

CU j l_J-^r>-U5 4i.< L'l ijyc [xJyo

Ij yj-aw

4^l b' . Vr ... sl \ by y^\b (Cj &c. t. c.

“ The baths of Tiberias, which are said to be one of the wonders of the world, are not those
which are near the gates of Tiberias and upon the side of the lake, for many like these are to be
seen elsewhere ; but those which are described as wonders are in a place to the east of the city
called El Hosainiya, and situated in a valley. It is evidently an ancient structure, and is said
to have been built by Solomon. It consists of a pile of building, from the front of which issues
water. It came formerly from twelve places, each of which was appropriated to the cure of some
disease, so that when any one thus afflicted washed himself, he recovered by divine permission.
This water is excessively hot, and is very pure and sweet, both to the taste and smell. To this
place come many afflicted persons, maimed, aged, or those affected with bad smells, and wash
themselves in it. Its fountains run into a large and handsome place, and in this the people
bathe. The advantages it affords are evident; nor have we ever seen any thing like it except the
Tliermte (baths) which are in the confines of Constantinople.” We are told a little farther on,
that on the road from Tiberias to Acca is Kafar Manda, and that this is said to be Midian :
and that the writer also visited Midian, which is to the east of Sinai ; the words are : ^ Lblj

<Sy^ \>jj .Wj l^l by ^ Jliu Kc

lij.j &c. That a Midian was formerly found in both these parts appears from the Hebrew bible ;
but whether they were connected, or if they were, how, I believe no one can tell.


22


SYRIA


known: its length is six parasangs, its width three. In the town is a
mosque, known by “ the mosque of the prophets and m this is the tomb
of “Shoaib (Jethro) which I visited. I alsonsited the well of Joseph, which
IS famous m these parts.

I next arrived at'Bairut which is on the sea-shore, and then set out to
visit the tomb of * Abu Yaakub Yusuf, who is supposed to have been one of
the kings of the west It is situated in a place called 'Kark Nuh, and upon
it IS a cell endowed by the sultan *Salah Oddin Ibn Ayub.* It is said,
that this Abu Yaakub lived by weaving mats • it is also said, that he was
hired to keep some orchards m Damascus, for the sultan *Nur Oddin the
martyr, the preceptor of Salah Oddin After he had been some time m this
situation, Nur Oddin happened to come into the orchard, and to ask the
keeper for a pomegranate He brought several, one after another, each of
which, however, had the appearance of being sour. It was said to him,
have you been all this while in the orchard, and do not yet know a sweet
pomegranate from a sour one ’ He replied, I was hired to keep the orchard,
not to eat the pomegranates. By this the sultan knew who he was, and
sent for him accordingly , for he had had a dream, in which he thought he
met Abu Yaakub, and derived some advantage from him. 'When he was
come, he believed he knew his countenance too, and said, are not you Abu
Yaakub^ He replied, I am The sultan then rose and embraced him, and
made him sit by his side After this Abu Yaakub took the sultan to his
house, and entertained him out of his honest earnings • and with him the
sultan remained some days After this Abu Yaakub escaped, and could no
where be found The weather was at that time exceedingly cold, and Abu
Yaakub had betaken himself to a village, where he was honourably enter-
tained by one of the villagers. This man had a daughter whom he wished
to dispose of m. maxna^ and on this account tepcesented. to Abu Yaakub
the difficulty he expenenced in affording him support. Upon this he was
ordered to bnng together all the copper furniture he had provided for her
dower, and moreover, to borrow as much as he could from his neighbours


. . y\ * . *

. jy ' . i^y\ ^ *


* This was SalaJm, who distinguished luinsalf so tDUch during ihe Crusades


SYRIA.


23


The villager accordingly got together a considerable quantity of this metal.
Abu Yaakub then dug a pit and put the whole into it. Upon this he made
a fire which fused the metal, he then took out some elixir which he had with
him, and putting it upon the metal, the whole became pure gold. When
the next morning had arrived, Abu Yaakub wrote a letter to his host for
Nur Oddin the martyr, telling him to take out of this gold as much as would
make a handsome portion for the young woman ; also to give as much as
would be sufficient to her father, and to expend the remainder in pious uses.
He then made his escape by night. With this gold Nur Oddin built the
infirmary which is in Damascus.

I next arrived at “Tarabalas (Tripoli) in Syria, which is a large city,
and may be compared with Damascus. From this place I went to the for-
tress of the Kurds, then to ''Emessa, and visited the tomb of "Khalid Ibn
El Walid,* which is in its environs. I next arrived at the city of ""Hamah.f
— ^The epitomator Ibn Jazzi El Kelbi says that the following verses were
composed on this place by “Abu’l Hasan Ibn Said of Granada.

I May heaven from the seat of fair Hamah divide

The breath, thought, or glance, which may make her repine ;

Wreak its vengeance on him who would part from her side.

For the smiles of the fair or the juice of the vine.

But when through her streets rolls triumphant along
Rebellion's foul tide, all in current so fair ;

Then who shall refrain from the glass and the song,

When the banquet is spread and so plentiful there ?

Yet, when the full goblet goes round, let me view
Her breasts flow with sweets for her children within :

Mark the tear of the mother — then say O how true.

How vile, yet how lovely’s the city of Sin !

■ *' • ^

* The general who conquered S3fria. See Ocldey’s History of the Saracens; Hamaker’s
Incerti Auctoris Liber de expugnatione Memphidis et Alexandri®; Lugd. Batav. 1825, p. 13.
f The Hamath of Scripture.

\i^\; aJII

^ yolc IgA yi


24


SI RIA


The following too has been composed on the same place
• Heroes of HamaVs happier
Yours my themcj my tribute, praise
or you, the recollections sweet
Hang on my heart, and still we meet
And should forgetfulness despoil
The flowret reared with so much pain,

A stnnner*s tears shall diench the soil.

And then ’twill sweetly bloom again

The *Aasi (sinner or rebel) is a nver of Hamah I next went to the city
of *Maarrat El Nooman, the place from which the patronymic of ^Abu El
Ala El Maari'l' is derived It was named Maarrat El Nooman because *El
Nooman Ibn Bashir the Ansar and companion of the Prophet, lost a son
there, when he held the government of Emessa Before this time it was
called 'Dhat El Kusur (i e enduedtcilh palaces) It is also said, that it is so


jy^\ cylo ' ^ ^U*J1 ' i’/-* * *

(a) Ldix!!

(a) With or CDilU they draw up water out of weJIs m order to supplygardens &c

The word also nieaos a vein pouring out blood , and bence tbe allusion id the text is not unlihe
Shakspeare s ‘ life'renderiag pelican For some account of the author of these lines, see M
de Sacy a Chrestomathie Arabe Sd edit , tom i p 240 3

($) This verse IS ofthe species termed The measure with Ihc usual vaneties will be

jjUaW* Jyw See Clarke 8 Prosody, p 35, &c

* Tbe text is as foHow"

fjS- sjLi b

Ujlb UUl

Where the play is m these, as la the preceding lines on the name of the river AasI (^^U)
which signifies sinner or rebel.

f This was a very celebrated poet and commeiitator, named generally Abu 1 Ala El Tenubbl
and sumaii ed £1 MaarrI Tenukh is according to Jurhan, tbe name of a tribe m Yemen, and
this SoyuU places m Babrem The autl or of the Kamus and Pococke say generally, that it is
the name of a tribe See Pocockes Set Hist Arab p <tS 141 Chrestom Arabe, tom ii>
p 89


SYRIA.


25


called from a mountain named ^’Nooman, wliich overhangs it. Without this
place is the tomb of *Omar Ibn Abd El AzTz, commander of the faithful.
After this I arrived at 'Sarmln, then at * Haleb (Aleppo). Its citadel is
large and strong ; and within it is a meshhed, in which Abraham is said to
have performed his devotions.* On this place El KhalidI, the poet of ^Saif
El Doulat Ibn Hamdan, has said :

Land of my heart, extended -wide.

Rich in beauty, great in pride:

Around whose head to brave the storm.

The rolling clouds a chaplet form.

Here ’tis the empyreal fires glow,

And dissipate the gloom below.

‘ ^ ■' • °

* In the the booh of intimations respecting the knowledge

of the places of pilgrimage, by ^ ^ Ali Ibn Abu Bekr El Harawl, who

travelled during the times of the Crusades', and fell into the hands of the king of England,
are the following notices of this place : ids! aj iJj -Aj: JL^\ (*lLc hs.dsj_.

£U.sJjb ^ if. l5^

citadel is the station of Abraham the friend (of God), and m it is also a chest in which there
is a piece of the head of John the son of Zachariah. It was observed in the year 435, f. e.
A.D. 1043. A little lower down we have an account of a custom, which will in some degree
illustrate the homage, if not the idolatrous worship, formerly addressed to the pillars called in
the Hebrew bible JT)32Jt3’ The first account we have of these is in Gen. sxviii. 18, where we
are told that Jacob set one of them up and poured oil on the top of it. Here, says the traveller,

^ ^ ^ gLs t^*Jl

jj.il -dJlj UjHlj l^i'l jyirjyJ Jlw j (/. e. at Aleppo). Without the gate of the

Jews there is a stone upon the road : to this vows are made, and upon it they pour rose-water
and perfumes; both Mohammedans and Christians have faith in the practice. It is said that the
grave of some prophet is under^ it ; hut God knows best. This work I shall occasionally cite.
See a very interesting note on this subject in the Specimen Hist. Arab, by Pococke, ed. 1806,
p. 102-3, where, 1. 15, read JLs^l ct appellabafur Saiumiis, not “ Jlr^Jl Jim appel-

Idbatur vir iste.” This veiy' learned miter, having been betrayed info the very mistake which he
corrects at the foot of the page in De Dieu. Edrlsl mentions a similar custom as prevailing in
the islands of the Indian sea, sect. vii. dim. i. His words are r,jj Lj .

uliC*— 1\ V~' 'j

Barwah is the last of those belonging to the infidels who believe in nothing, hut who take stones
which they set up on their ends, pour the oil of fish upon them, and then worship them.

E


20


SYRIA.


About tby breast in harmless blaze,

The Ughtnmg too for ever plays,

And like the unveiling beauty’s glance,

Spreads round its charms t astonish and entrance *

The following lines are by "Jamal Oddin Alt Ibn Abu Mansub *

f Thy milky towers in proud array.

Stop in Its course the galaxy

'When see, the children at thy side

Rise and sip the ambrosial tide

See too thy Hocks the glones share, . | ^

And crop the gemsf that glitter there ' — * O


K8


* The text IS as follows, of the measure
IjAS

Jl*. ^

For tone account of Saif El Doulat, see M de Sacy s Chrestomathie Arabe, tom iii p S3 ed
2, and the authorities there cited But as the countenance he afforded to the poets and other
geniuses of his times, has oot been mentioned by M de Sacy, or the authorities referred to 1
Will give an extract on this subject here, from my own copy of the ^ by ^Uil!

Abu Monsur £1 ThaSlabt Ailer stating that he was descendeil from noble ancestors it is said

All (JWy aA> j ^i-Sy A-as.*

^jJl X.}^ lT* ^^-^1 1* <lAs?l Olw iXs-l (_jLj “ His

presence was the object of (ravel, and source of liberality the temple of hope and the inn of
tlie traveller the concourse of the polite, and the banquet of poets It is said that there assem
bled at the door of no king since the tunes of the Cahf^, a number so great of the poets and
geniuses of his tune, as there did at hi» From this, es well as other passages in this work, it
ahouJd seem, that he was one of thegreatest patrons of polite literature the world ever saw. He
was himself a tolerable poet, and an excellent judge of the merits of those who attended at h s
court The author of these verses, said here to be El Khalidi, is probably one of the

two poets mentioned by that name by M de Sa^, Chrestomathie Arabe, tom ii p 333,
edit 2

-J- The verses are these, the measure of whidt is V.. J j See Clarke, p 52, Ac

yUl tliidl iSjSS

^ The word star signifies also in Arabicany email plant, and hence (he play upon the word
here


Sec Clarke s Prosody, pp 35, 36, Ac

Wi’ ur* LS^ Vv

lUU— i— ».c>‘

aJ1>. iiJAJ Jj) U Id!


SYRIA.


27


I then left Aleppo for "Tizin. and soon after came to 'Antioch, before
v.-hich is the river ^EI AasT. In this place is the tomb of ^ Habib El Xajar,
which I visited. After this I arrived at the fortress of nest at that
of 'El Kosair, then at that of 'El Shaghar. I next came to the city of
"Sahyun, then to the fortress of 'El Kadmus, then to that of ’^El Aalikat,
next to that of 'El Manikat, next to that of 'iMasyaf, then to that of ‘El
Kahf. These fortresses all belong to a people called the 'Ismalliah; they
are also called the '‘FidawTa. Ho person can go among them except one of
their own body.* These people act as arrows for El Malik El Hasir ; and
by their means he comes at such of Hs enemies as are far removed from
him, as in Irak and other places. They have their various offices : and,
when the Snltan wishes to despatch one of them to waylay any enemy, he
bargains with him for the price of his blood. If then the man succeeds and
comes safely back, he gets the reward : but if he fails it is then given to his
heirs. These men have poisoned knives, and with these they strike the
persons they are sent to kill.

From the fortresses of the FidawTa I went to the city of ' Jabala, where I
visited the tomb of the Sheikh ^El^ali El Salih Ibrahim Ibn Adham,t "'^ho
had not succeeded to the kingdom from the father’s, but finm the mother’s
side. The father was originally one of the pious wandering Fakirs : his
story of giving up the throne is generally known. I then proceeded to
^'Laodicea, the king of which is said to seize by violence every ship
within his power. I then proceeded to the fortress of El Markab, then to
the mountain ‘El Akraa, then to ‘hlount Libanus, which is the most fruitful
mountain in the world : and on which are various fruits, fountains of water,
and leafy shades.- Hor is it destitute of those who have retired from the


.^WJi


— i:S


, j


* On this sect, which are sometimes termed AEr«rrn'7rr, see the Dahistan, nsaallv escribed to
rdohammed Jlohsin FarJ, Caicntta edition, p. T rA, Sacj’s Cnrest. Arabe, tom- i, pp. 89,

tom.ii. pp. 92, 93 ; Joanial Asiatique, nmnbers for Jlsy and Jtme 182-1, and De Gcignes’ His-
tOixe generale des Huns, tome i- p. 3A1. i See the a little &cni the beginning.

E 2


28


SYRIA


world and devoted themselves to God, numbers of whom I myself saw
From this place I proceeded to 'Baalbek, and thence to "Damascus,
in the month of Ramazan, and m the year twenty-six (i c A H 726,
A D 1326) It has been said by the Epitomator, Ibn JazzI El Kelbi,
that "Sharf Oddm Ibn Anin wrote the following lines on this place *

Damascus ! though the slanderer fill
Worlds with thy blame, I love thee still
Spot, where alone the trav Her meets
Balmy winds and pearly streets
Where tearful streamlets weavef their chains,

Yet joy and freedom bless the plains
Where too the gales with lusty love
Fan into bloom tlie fainting grove

The following was written on the ‘•ame place by the eminent judge, "Abel
El Rahim El Baisani J

(-/ ""

An extract from the works of this author will be found m the Annales Moslenici, vol iv
p 268, and some account of his life At p 416, of the same volume The lines mentioned by Ibn

Batuta are the following

J.As ^ IjJ' ^

Jy*.A JUiJl kl jil

jAe

f The orientals, instead of saying that a streamis nppling, say that it hnirorybmirfom,
hence the comparison of the chaining of the nvers with the freedom of the plains

I Some notice is taken of this writer id M. de Sacy s Chrestomathie Arabe, tome i pp 233, SOS
Tlie original verse is as follows, and is of the species U. .1 1 See Clarkes Prosody, pp 52, S3, &c

ILL) iLioU u..^Lu

JlCcj

m jiyij

El Harawi says of this place j SLi\ ,A 1^ ^}lsr ^ JUl jUa1\ ^ J

U.U JJ, j.,j |.U. ^ ^ ItL

Damascus abounds with high buddings, sudi as have not el&ewherc been constructed It
was built by Dimashik, son ofKabi, son oTMalik, con of Sham, son of Koah it is also said that


A-as? JUls-1 tS iAO J* b
Us^l j»l)l ijtj jS'b

'iyJ

Ui ^j\ Ui ^


SYRIA.


29


Lightning ! with thy pouring rain.

How dost thou befriend the plain ?

Why, ’ere the morning’s dawn arise,

Spread’s! terror through Damascus’ skies ?

Is’t that thy flames may bid her glow.

Or gild her flow’rets opening blow ?

Or, that her plains refreshed be seen.

Filled with fruits, and clothed in green ?

Yes, ’tis that blessings round may spring,

And verdure make the vallies sing.

The mosque of Damascus, termed '’El Amawi, is too well known to
need description here. Of its learned men, professors, and theologians, of
the sect of Hanbal, ’Taki Oddin Ibn Timla may be mentioned as one in
great repute for his lectures, if we except a few of his peculiarities. The
people of Damascus, however, think very highly of him. In many instances
he has preached things to which the theologians have objected ; and, hence
an information was laid against him to ’’El Malik El Nasir, who sent for
him to Egypt, and there imprisoned them. When in prison he published a
commentary on the Koran in forty volumes, entitled ' El Bahr El Muhit,*
After this he was liberated ; but, going again to Damascus, he returned to
his old practices of preaching heterodoxy. I happened one Friday to be
present when he was addressing a congregation from the pulpit, and this
was one of his assertions : God came down, said he, to the heaven of this


Zohak built it, and also that it was the residence of Noah. There is a passage in the book of
Genesis (chap. xv. v. 2) in which our authorized version has “ This Eliezer of Damascus,” and
which I believe to be erroneous. The original stands thus: pli/Dl not ’pt^Din

as the version gives it. My opinion is, that this is the proper name of Abraham’s servant and
nothing more : Damascus might, indeed, have been built by him, but of this we have no knowledge.
A little farther on we are told, that there is a column in the mosque near the little gate, to which
pilgrimages and vows are made : this is probably one of the ancient rUlJD of which we so often read
in the Hebrew bible. His words are these id liij: ... .

*•' This is probably the work noticed by D’Herbelot under the t'tle Bahar al Mohith, although
the name does not agree with that given here. Neither of them, however, has given the full
name, and this will perhaps account for the discrepancy.


30


SYRIA


world, just as l nuw go do^vn ai i upon this he descended one of the steps
of the pulpit A theologian of the sect of Ibn Milik, happening to be
present, contradicted this, for which he %\as beaten by the congregation
The opponent, howe\er, lodged an information with El JIalik El Nlsir,
who again cited the Sheikh, and put him m prison, where he continued till
his death He w as afterwards buned at Damascus

Without the gate called ' El Jlbiat are the tombs of “ Om Habiba wife
of the prophet, of her brother ' Moawia, of ' Bal il the Moazin of the pro
phet, and of * Awis El Karam • The gra>e of the last, however, is said
to be in a burying ground between the citj and Syria, in which there is no
building It IS also said to be m 'Siphm with that of Ali It is said by
Ibn Jazzi El Kelbi the epitomator, that the latter is the truer opinion Ibn
Batuta proceeds wthout Damascus on the way of the pilgrimage, is the
mosque of the foot,’ which is held in great estimation, and in which
there is a stone having upon it the print of the foot of Moses t In this
mosque they offer up their prayers in times of distress I myself was pre
sent at this mosque m the year 746 (AD 1345), when the people were
assembled for the purpose of prayer against the plague which ceased on
that %ery day The number that died daily in Damascus had been two
thousand but, the whole darlyj number, at the timel was present, amounted

* Accord ng to Ibn El AlliTr, m his abndgment of p3lronjTn:cs from £1 Samaioi, eolilled
jjjU ‘ *1 "1 cjLf I this patronymic (i c karanl) is derived from one Karan of
the tribe of Morad he nas the son of Ridman, sooof Nahm, son of Morad This Awls vai
son ofAdmer of this family he was agrcat saint, and is said to have been kJled among the infantry
of All at Sifln , others say he died at AIccca, others at Damascus Tlie passage is this.

aJI ^ ij) t/ Lir A Ur*

aua alii aJl^^ X/*^ U® si

J-Sj aXr

f There can benodoubt, I think, that these marls ^tbe fool, whether we find them at
Damascus, m t-cylon, among the Burmese, at Mecca or wherever else, are nothing more than
remains of Buddhaism The best rel qne of this superstition to be seen m Europe is perhaps,
the mark of the foot of Buddha placed in the ball of the Bnti'h Aluseum by Captain Marryat
t The passage, which 1 suspect is erroneons stands thus a*JjI ^

Ul ^ words ar® perhaps adscititious


SYRIA.


31


to twenty-four thousand. After prayers, however, the plague entirely
ceased. On the north of Damascus is the mountain ' Kasayun, in which
is the cave where Abraham was bom. From this (cave) he saw the sun,
moon, and stars.* There is also a village in Irak called ' Burs, between
■^EI Hilla and Bagdad, which is said to be the birth place of Abraham.
This is the truer notion. On the farther part of the Kasayun is the ^ mount
of flight and assistance,! the asylum of Jesus.


CHAPTEB. VI.

£/ jiriis — El Kadeiia — Meshhed Jit — Basra — KhafaJa—KhattiamaJt — Wasit — El Oballa

Abhadan — El Ear — Irak — Magun — Ramin — Tostar.

When things were ready, the Syrian pilgrims proceeded on their pil-
grimage, and I myself with them, with the same intention. This turned
out well ; for, thank God, I duly performed the pilgrimage ; and, then
proceeded with the pilgrims of Irak to the tomb of the prophet at Medina.
After three (days) we descended into the valley of '‘El Arus.f We then
entered the territory of ' Nejd, and proceeded on in it till we came to ^ El
Kadisla§ the place in which the remarkable event happened, by which
the fire-worship of Persia was extinguished, and the interest of Islamism
advanced. This was, at that time, a great city, but it is now only a small
wllage. We next proceeded to the city of ' Meshhed All, where the grave
of Ali is thought to be. It is a handsome place and well peopled ; all

-k/}/

* AlluQmg to a passage in the Koran.

f It is doubtful whether we ought to read tjy'J or ^^1 cjlJ, as the MSS. have both
readings : if the latter, then residence must be substituted in the translation for Jlight.

t The name of a fortress in Yemen, according to the Kamoos : but this can hardly be the
place mentioned here.

J A. village near Kufa where Saad, one of the generals of Omar, obtained a decisive victory
over the Persians. See the Annales Muslemici, vol. i. p. 231,


32


I RAK


the inhabitants, however, are of the Rlfiza (or Shiah) sect There is no
goi emor here, except a sort of tnbune The inhabitants consist chiefly of
rich and brave merchants About the gardens are plastered walls adorned
with paintings, and withm them are carpets, couches, and lamps of gold
and Sliver Within the city is a laige treasury kept by the tribune,
which arises from the \otive offerings brought from different parts foi
when any one happens to be ill, or to suffer under any infirmity, he will
make a \ow, and thence recene relief The garden is also famous for
Its miracles , and hence it is believed that the grave of Ali is there Of
these miracles, the " “ night of revival ’* is one for, on the 17th day of the
month Rejeb, cripples come from the different parts of "Firs, "Room,
'Khorasan, ’Irak, and other places, assemble m companies from twenty

** jyj* " LsM aJJ

• Mr Wolfe, the missionar;, when last m th«s country, reported that tho L*)*! aU or
" night of revival, among the Yezidt sect, la n night on which they worship the
devil 1 should doubt whether Mr Wolfe did not misunderstand the accounts he might
have heard of this matter In the Dook of Pilgnmagei, by AIi Ibn Abubeker of Herat,
we have a <imilar account given of a place m the iicutenancy of Aleppo, his words are

u' * cj — Jy

US' jJIai aJJ! Jjjb j4>yiu> aJx »Ou» ^ j-s-i ^ ijlUl ,^1 J JyU

Jil Ijjfo Borak is one of the villages of its lieutenancy, in which there is a »acreil
place visited by the aged and lofirm of vanous places, nod in it they lodge Now, if such person
should see (in bis dream) some one sayingto him, such or such a thing is thy remedy, or
if he should see him rubbing his hand over him, be will then be well, as the people of that
place report ' And further on where the city of Balat ^yj ajx«) u noticed, we are told that
this Author saw a man who had been lame many years, but had been recovered merely by bathing
according to the injunctions of Ah which he had received in a dream His words are

■' J-flilu ij'l

1— iijls bUf AaL w

aJ jb All joj j*m ^5 A-c aJ]i i_jik

Ai ^ia!! U)1 ^—11 U luJs ajI i‘ ^ t l/ j*'

jjjil aJJIj sLs!t ^ AiJ, Jj: JUS Am*jS ^ LiU That such miracles (f

such they may be called) can be performed, without any extraordinary effort being exerted, has
long been known A strong persuasion of the mind has always proved wonderfully efficacious
and to this the Mohammedan, as well as the Roman Catholic, hierarchy owes perhaps more than
half Its authority.


IRAK.


33


to thirty in number. They are placed over the grave soon after sun-set.
People then, some praying, others reciting the koran, and others prostrating
themselves, wait expecting their recovery and rising, when, about night,
they all get up sound and well. This is a matter well known among them:
I heard it from creditable persons, but was not present at one of these nights.
I saw, however, several such afflicted persons, who had not yet received,
but were looking forwards for, -the advantages of this “ night of revival.”

I next arrived at ’’ Basra, and proceeded on with the Badawm Arabs of
'Khafaja, for there is no travelling in these parts, except with them. We
next came to ‘ Khawarnak, the ancient residence of “ El Nboman Ibn Mond-
hor, whose progenitors were kings of the tribe '‘Beni Mii El Sama, (sons of
heavenly seed). There are still traces of his palace to be seen.* It is si-
tuated in a spacious plain, and upon a river derived from the Euphrates;
We left this place, and came next to the city of Wasit. It is surrounded by
an extensive tract of country, and abounds with gardens and plantations.
Its inhabitants are the best of all Irak. From this place I set out to visit
the tomb of El Wall El Aarif, my Lord Ahmed of ' Rephaat, which is

*■ Some notices of this person and his palace will be found in the Historia imperii vetustis-
simijoctanidarum in Arabia Felice, by A. Schultens, p. 129. And in his Monumenta vetus-
tiora Arabise, pp. 11, 39, ii7.

f The following is an abstract of the account given of this devotee in the cjls**
Nafahat El Ins, by Jami: the miraculous intercourse, &c. there ascribed to him, I have not
thought it worth while to copy out. aJJl

ajjj ajhsuj ,011 crjUlsil jO . . . . Jbo

j ‘UlsT’l cAIj <*-1

JjfjJ} |♦bol oSjl jl iSj <0i)b Oj.v IsMl iijC- Lo

ur= Sheikh my lord Ahmed

Ibn Abu El Hasan El Raphal, may God sanctify (a word wanting). His rank as a saint and
confessor was high. By him God performed many miracles, and converted to him many persons
of distinction. He also did many wonders. Of his disciples, some are good, others bad. Some
of them will enter fires, and play with serpents. This is what the Sheikh the head of saints
taught them. God protect us from Satan. He was one of the sons of the great Imam Musa
Kazim, upon whom be peace. He resided at Om Obaida, and died on the Thursday the 22d
of the first Jumada, in the year (of the Hejira) 578, A. D. 1182.

F


34


PERSIA


Situated in a \iUage called ‘Om Obaida, at the distance of a day from
^Vrisit At this place I amied, and found that the grandson of the
Sheikh, upon whom the dignity of Sheikh had also devolved, had come
thither before me for the same purpose He was also named Sheikh
Ahmed, and held the dignity of his grandfather, which he exercised
in the cell formerly occupied by him In the afternoon, and after the
reading of the koran, the religious attached to the cell got together
a great quantity of wood, to which they set fire* they then walked mto
it, some eating it, others rolling m it, and others trampling upon it,
till they had entirely extinguished it Such is the sect called* El Re
phma, and this the custom by which they are particularized Some of
them too will take great serpents in their teeth and bite the head off It
happened that, when I ^vas in a certain part of India, there came to
me a company of the religious of the *Hydana sect,* having m their
hands and about their neck« iron chains Their leader was a black of a
filthy colour They requested me to solicit the governor of the place to
bnng them some wood to which they may set fire, and then smg and walk
mtoit I did so, and he brought them ten bundles, they then set fire to it,
and commencing their song, ^vent into it nor did they cease dancing and
rolling about in it until they had extinguished it The leader then asked
me for a shirt I ga\e him a very fine one, which he put on, and then pro
ceeded to roll about in the fire, and to strike it noth his sleeies, until he
had put It out He then brought me the shirt, upon which the fire had
not made the least impression At this I very much wondered.

After visiting this Sheikh I proceeded to Basra, a place much abounding
with palms The inhabitants are so friendly to strangers that a traveller has
nothing to fear among them We have here the mosque of AIi, in which
prayers are said every Friday • it is then closed till the next This u'as
formerly m the middle of the town , but is situated two miles-f from its

Aj -g 1*1 °

* tVben we come to KhordSan in this work, some account of the leaner and practices of ihis
sect wiU be gwen

+ As the term mile ( J..^) will occasionally occur in this work, we shall here determine its
extent According to the Succardan of Ibn HajQa, a mile is = 1,000 baas a baa = 4 cubiW .
a cubit = 24 digits , a digit 6 barl^ corns placed side by side and a barJeycom = 6 hairs
taken out of the tail of a mule. A Parasang = 3 miles , a band =; 4 parasangs ^ ca) 1 J-l'j


PERSIA.


35


present population. In this is the koran which Othman had sent (for the use of
the inhabitants), and in which he was reading when he was killed. The marks
of his blood are still visible in the words dJi , Sec. I then went on

board a ‘'Sambuk (Turkish 'Senbuki) which is a small boat, and proceeded
to "^El Oballa,* which was once a large city, but is now only a village ;


clb

•.^\j ImJ. JLd -iilj J tkM' Golius- sub

voce iiji , we have “ mensura itineraria XII. milliarium, seu III. parasangarum,” where for III
we ought to read IV. Now, m order to determine the relative value of an Oriental with an
^ English mile, I take 18|^ parasangs to the degree, as given in the preface to Koehler’s Syria of
Abulfeda ; and getting rid of the fractions the ratio null be, that of 1 12 to 139 : and inverting this,
the Oriental mile will be to the English one, as 139 to 112; and, if this be correct, the Oriental
mile will contain 2, 1842 English yards. From this the value of the other measures mentioned above
maybe known. According to the author of the Kamoos, however, the mile (ij^) is a perfectly
lax and vague measure, and differing just as the parasang did in ancient and times.

* Abulfeda says of this place 4 j . 1! . ^ iti . J . ^. Ai Jbtl iLlil that, accord-
ing to the'Atwal the longitude is 74° 8' lat. 30° 55' and according to the Kanun long. 74° 8' lat
31° 55'. He then describes it, Ut ^JiX<

j IaAjAC- i_cfAJ j UJsS Ublc^.iJ\ \ jjb>

iLsLe lijSi tdl'ilj ^yzj\ ixlj\ Jjb j

As-i^ ^ A3 bbsT A^^ A3 A^l>

^ ~1 blsT k'U ;_e iO ^ Ibn Hawkal states,

that Oballa is a small, strong, and well peopled city. Its river, the Oballah, after issuing from the
Tigris which is over against the city, makes its way to it, and thence to Basra. The channel of
this river reaches to the sea, and to Abbadan. The length of its course to Basra is four
parasangs, upon the banks of which are palaces and gardens, so close to each other, that they
appear to form one garden passing on in a direct line : its palms also spread out in like manner in
an extended line. All the gardens too of these parts are so situated one by another, that when
the tide of the sea comes out towards them, it passes into all the channels until it comes to their
palms, and into their valleys without the least difficulty ; and, when it ebbs, it rolls hack, leaving
the gardens and palm-plantations. The channels here mentioned are, according to Dr. Russell,
Nat. Hist. Aleppo, generally so contrived as to bring the water into the gardens, and then, out of
these still smaller channels are cut, which carry the water into the several parterres and
divisions of the gardens. 'The Psalmist seems to have had these channels in view when he speaks
of the “ tree planted by the rivers of waters,” better, the divisions of the waters, the original being

F 2


36


PERSIA


which, with Its gardens about it, is about ten miles from Basra I then
sailed from El Oballa m an arm of the Persian gulf, and arrived the next
morning at 'Abbidin,* which is a village situated in a salt marsh It
was my intention to have gone to Bagdad , but a person at Basra advised
me to go on to the country of * El Lnr, then to ‘ Ir“ik El Ajam,f then to
Arabian Irak and I did so I then proceeded from Abb'idln by sea , and
after four days, arrived at the city of * Mlgun (or hlagul, of the quantity
Fa-u1, with the g pronounced hard). Tins is a small town on the Persian
gulf I passed from this by land, during a journey of three days, through


• and


D'D 'jbs which exactly corresponds mth Dr Ilussclls description —See also AssemansBi*
blioth Orient , ton iii^ P 3, p dccvi, and D Ilerbelot under Obollah
* According to El Ilarawi ihii is an island in the sea in «hich there is a meslihed dedicated
to the prophet It also has Aha well, and a meshhed sacred to El Kliirr, and other cstabl sh
menti the pious of which are much nsitcd from other parts. His words arc ^ ybL-

1*^1 Ssle ^ Vy ^

t)L«!l Ai

Abulfeda says this place is in the longitude 74* SO', lat So* SO' according to the Atwal but
others give 75*55, and 75*30^ longitude He then thus describes it after Ibn Said Jj
fcS vIXjs a 1>-0 i— jAsJl 11 ^1
.^1 ^ ^ j a« JLs

jjbUe iij Jb i—e^j ub»‘'-!l

SJ ISjjlsVilj i_^l^ jscdl J s2jU!L: i— j

He has said that Abbadan is on the tea of Pars, which encircles it, leaving only a small
part of land (or isthmus) On the south-east ofth s place the Tigris joins the sea Others hare
said, that Abbadan is upon the mouth of the T^s towards its east, and on the sea ofFors. From
It la thasbaras oF Mehruban ttebavl faarttages FiomDatta ititsctagaeadskslS Ithssbe^
said too, that on the south and east of Abbadan arc the KAusftiab, t e marks placed in the sea
for the purpose oflimiting the approach of vessels, and beyond which they never pass, lest upon
the ebbing of the tide they should strike upon the ground Khushbab , > 1 . » Castell tells us
are moderately siaed ropes if so, they are here so placed as to mark the places to which ships
may s^ely come See also Assemans Bibliotb Orient tom iii P. 2 p dccvi, SirV'm
Ouseley s Oriental Geography, p 11, Ac , and D Ilerbelot sub voce Abadan
+ The geography of these parts has been well illustrate*! bj Ulenbroek in his Iraca: Per
s cm descnptio, Ac Lugduni Batarorum, 1822 See pp 4 and o Asseman s Bibhoth Orient
tom u» P 2, p dccxlv


PERSIA.


37


a plain inhabited by Kurds, and came to the city of ' Ramin,* a beautiful
place abounding with fruit and rivers. I then proceeded on through a plain,
in which were villages of the Kurds, and in three days arrived at the city of
"’Tostar,'!* which is at the extremity of this plain. On the first of the
mountains there is a large and beautiful city, abounding with fruits and
rivers, surrounded by a river, known by the name of " El Azrak the blue.
This river is wonderfully clear, and is cold in the summer season .


CHAPTER VII.


Idhaj—El Lu! Ushturkdn — Fairiczan — Tashnta Firuz — Shiraz — Kaltl — Yezd Khas — Majd

Oddin, founder of the College El Mnjdta — Mohammed Khudd Banda becomes a Sunni — Abu
Is-hak — His liberality — Abu Abd Allah Khaflf the first Mohammedan who went from India
to Ceylon — Kazerun — El Zai in— El Hawaiza — Kufa.

I THEN travelled for three days over high mountains, and found in every
stage, in these countries, a cell with food for the accommodation of travellers.
I then came to the city of “Idhaj,:]: which belongs to the '‘Sultan Atabek
Afrasiab.§ With these people the word Atabek means any one governing a
district. The country is called ’El Lur.|| It abounds with high mountains
and has roads cut in the rocks. The extent in length is seventeen days
journey ; in breadth ten. Its king sends presents to the king of Irak, and
sometimes comes to see him. In every one of the stations in this country,
there are cells provided for the religious, enquirers, and travellers : and.


f 9 V 7 « ^

* This is perhaps the Bomon or ,.^3 Beth Raman, of Asseman. See Bibliotb.

Orient, tom. iii., P. 2, p. dcclxxii, which he writes in Arabic : — or perhaps the

or of Mr. Ulenbroek, see p. 65, Arab, text,

f See Asseman’s Bibliotb. Orient., tom. iii. P. 2., p. Jcclxxxi.

J See Ulenbroek Iracae Pers. descriptio, p. 25, Arab. text.

§ This is probably the “ Mudaffereddin Afrasiab, fils tie Rokneddin,” of De Guignes, who
was the last of the d 3 ’'nasty of the Atabeks of Laristan ; according to him he died A. H. 740,
A.D. 1339, a little after the time our traveller must have visited these parts.

11 See Mr. Ulenbroek’s “ Irac® descriptio,” pp. 4 and 5, and Arab. text.


for e\crj one ^\llO 'irrnes there are bread, flesh, -ind sweetmeats I
travelled fortendajs in this country o\er high mountains, with ten other
religious, one of vhom was a pncst, another a moazm (a person who calls
t\ie people to praters), and two professed readers of the koran The Sultan
sent me a present, containing money for tn\eUing expences, both for
mj self and my companions Having finished the districts belonging to this
king on the tenth day, ne entered those of Isphah in, and arrived at the citj
of 'Ushtoikm after this at ‘Famizin,* the name of which had been
‘Tashnia Firuz and then at Isphah in, one of the cities of Irak El Ajam
This IS a large and handsome city I remained m it some days I then set
out for "Shir'iz, between which and Isphah vn there are twenty stations
with the intention of v isiting the Sheikh Majd Oddin at that place In my
journey, 1 passed by the towns of* Kahl and 'Yezd Klus, the latter of which
IS small, and arrived at Shir tz It is an extensive, and well built citj, though
inferior to Damascus, m the beauty of its streets, gardens, and waters The
inhabitants arc people of mtegrity, religion, and virtue, particularly the
women For my own part I had no other object than that of visiting the
Sheikh Majd Oddin the paragon of saints and worker of miracles I came
accordingly to the college called *E1 Majdia, which had been founded bj
him He was then judge of the city, but, on account of his age, the
duties of the office were discharged by his brother s sons -f I waited on
him "When he came out, he shewed me great kindness, and, embracing

Jjf * '

* According to the this is b village of Isphahan and is a most beaut ful and

tealthj pte the tvordi ate 5)^^ ^ ^

f This roan is mentioned in the Khulasut El Alchbur, by Khondemir, as having great influence
at this time at Sh raz, so much so, that he succeeded in bringing about an accommodation
between the Emir Juban , and the partizans of the Emir Mohammed MozafTer IIis words are

these ) cyS— 9j iS ^

3X*\ J<i jA AjJ, Ac

At length, by the mediation of the Kazi Majd Oddin Ismail Ibn Yahva, who was one of the
great saints and men of eminence, an agreement took place and the Em r Plr Hosa n Jubam
entered the city m the greatest splendour and del ght This is related as taking place in the
year of the Hejira 740


PERSIA.


3&


me, asked me about different places : to which I gave suitable answers.

I was then taken into his college. The Sheikh is much honoured by the
Emirs of these parts, insomuch, that when they enter his company, they
take hold of both their ears, a ceremony of respect paid only to the king.
They, therefore, pay him the respect due to their king. The reason of this is,
that when the king of Irak, “Mohammed Khuda Banda, received Islamism,
he had a favourite of the Rafiza (followers of Ali), named ^ Jamal Jbn
Mutahhar, who induced him to join the Shiah sect, which he willingly
did. The king then wrote to Bagdad, Shiraz,* and other places, inviting
them to be of this sect. The people of Bagdad and Shiraz, however,
refused to do so, and continued to be of the sect of the Sonnee, He
then commanded the judges of these districts to be brought to him ;
and the first who arrived was this of Shiraz. The king ordered him
to be thrown to some great dogs which he had, and which were
kept with chains about their necks, for the purpose of tearing to
pieces any one, with whom the Sultan should happen to be
angry. When, therefore, the Kazi Majd Oddin was thrown
to the dogs, they came, and looking upon him, began to wag their
tails, making no onset upon him, nor, in any way molesting him.
This was told to the Sultan 'Khuda Banda, who came running to him in a
great fright. He then kissed his hands, and stripping off all his own
robes put them upon the Sheikh. He then took him by the hand, and
led him to his mansion. This, therefore, became the source of great dig-
nity to the Sheikh, his children, and to all belonging to him : which is the
case with every one, upon whom the Sultan puts all his robes. The king
then gave up the Shiah sect, and became a Sonnee, and to the Sheikh he
gave a hundred villages in the district of Shiraz. Thus both the king and
his courtiers bestowed the greatest honours upon the Sheikh and upon his
successors. I also visited this Sheikh after my return from India, in the
year 748 of the Hejira (A. D. 1347); and, for this purpose, I travelled a
distance of five and thirty days. I once saw the Sultan of Shiraz Abu
‘'Is-hak holding his ears before him, by way of respect. The Sultan of

. iMJ IaA- ' ‘‘ ■ ”

* See on this place Asseman’s Biblioth. Orient, tom. iii. P. ii. p. dcclxxv — vi.


40


PERSIA


Shiraz, on my first arrnal at that place, was Mohammed Abu Is hak Ibn
Sh ill Yanju He ^\as one of the best of princes His father Sh ih Yanju
was governor of Shirlz, under the King of Irak * but when he died, the
government was put into the hands of anotlier ^Yhen, however, the Kmg
of Irak died and left no issue, each of tlie governors assumed the govern*
ment of the district over which he had been placed and, m this way, the
government of Shirvz, &c came under the control of Abu Is h\k He
was a man much beloved on account of his courage and good conduct,
and possessed a territory of a month and a half s journey, with an army of
fifty thousand men t

In liberality Abu Is-hSk imitated the kmg of India : for, on one occasion,
he gave to a person, who had come before him, the sum of seventy thousand
dinars No one, however, can be compared to the king of India * for he

* Accord to Mlrkhond, the prormce of r4M w#s commitied to the cvre of the Eroir
Mosdfarinak, A H 734, and the Emir Mahmud Shah Anju was, for years, the protector
and asiistant of the Emir Juban, vho uas magstrato of those parts His vords are

liy jjt aU> IjiUj li-iU jIjI

And, that in the districts of Shiraz and Shabankara, ho had possessions to such an eatent as to
bring him in annually 100 tSmans, vhich, he goes on to say, was the cause ofhs being
brought snto disgrace at the court of Abusaid A htlle lower down we are told that Abu
Is hak was one of the sons of Mahmud Shah Anju y ulr^

alAjb jir^ ij— <A3g^

The sons of Em r Mahmud Shah fled from Tebriz, the Emir Mahmud Shah went to Room,
and the Emirs KTalimud and Sheikh Abu Is hak betook themselves to the service of the Emir Ah,
the king What power Abu Is hak exercised in Sliiraz is not mentioned in the historians , but
that he had great power there can be no doubt In 742 he succeeded to the government of
Isphahan, and in 743 he vigorously opposed the descent of Malik Ashraf upon Shiraz, and by
the help of the citizens forced him to retire E-bondemir, under this date This authors
account of Abu Is hak agrees exactly with that given by our traveller His words are

j! -yy H*hak

was distinguished among the rulers of the world, by tus extreme liberality, and the politeness of
Ins address

t The accounts given of the liberihty of Mohammed Shah, who was the reigning emperor
when Ibn Batuta entered India exceed all descnption Dow (Hindustan, vo! i pp SIS, &c)
has noticed some instances and Ferishta many more He also says, that nobles, learned men, and
persons who had suS’ered shipwreck, came with the hope of relief from Khorasan, Irak, Mawaia,


PERSIA.


41


Will give sums equal to this many times in the same day, particularly to
those who come from the parts of Khorasan. He once said to one of his
courtiers, Go into the treasury and bring as much gold as you can carry at
once. The courtier filled thirteen purses with gold ; and, tying them on
his shoulders, attempted to go out, but fell through the weight of the
purses. The king then commanded him to take and weigh it, which he
did, and found it to be thirteen 'maunds of Dehli, the maund of Dehli
being equal to five and twenty ratls of Egypt. On another occasion, he
placed one of his Emirs, namely, ^Sharf U1 Mulk Emir Bakht of Khorasan,
in a pair of scales, putting gold in the opposite part, till the gold prepon-
derated. He then gave him the gold and said, give alms out of this for
your own salvation. He also appointed to the theologian and collector of
traditions, *Abd El Aziz El Ardabili, for his daily expenses, the sum of
one hundred dinars of silver ; five and twenty of which are equal to the
golden dinar. Upon one occasion the above mentioned Sheikh entered into
the presence of the king, who rose ; and, having kissed his feet, poured
upon his head with his own hand a vessel full of gold, and said, both the
gold and the vessel, which is gold, are thine.

The most famous meshhed of Shiraz is that of Ahmed Ibn Musa, the
brother of ' El Riza, which is indeed held in the highest estimation. In
this is the tomb of the Imam '"El Kotb El Wali Abu Abd Allah Ibn Khafif,*

. and CdlJll u_^ ^ 111^ ^ ^ '

. I—S-M- <UJi 1^1 ^ . ^J\ '

El Nahr, Arabia, and Turkey, to Hindustan.

y.-d ..,,. Uijiy iiJiiji 1 jl jfjbjj, &c. and received more than they had ima-

gined they should. I cite this merely to show the minute accuracy of our traveller.

"*■ This saint is frequently mentioned in the cuLs.^ by Jitml as one of the first authorities
in judging of matters peculiar to the Sufis ; and is occasionally styled both Wall and Kotb, as
here by Ibn Batuta.

In vol. i. p. 546, of the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, I have made some allu-
sion to this Sheikh, supposing it probable that his grave may be that of the person mentioned in
an inscription there translated. The traveller, however, here sa3'’s that his tomb is in Shiraz :
and, if that be the fact, there is an end to the probability ; but we shall find, when we get to
Ceylon, that there is a belief of his grave being in that country. We have no account, however,

G


42


PERSIA


who IS the great exemplar of all the region of Fars This Abu Abd Allah ts
the person, who made known thewayfrom India to the mountain of Seren
dib, and 'nho wandered about the mountains in the island of 'Ceylon Of
bis miracles, his entering Ceylon, and \vandenng over its mountains m
companj wth about thirty fakeers is one for when these persons were all
suffering from extreme hunger, and had consulted the Sheikh on the neces
sity of slaughtering and eating an elephant,* he positivfely refused and
forbade the act They, nevertheless, impelled as they were by hunger,
transgressed his commands, and killed a small elephant, which they ate
The Sheikh, however, refused to partake When they had all gone to
sleep, the elephants came m a body, and smelling one of them* put him to
death They then came to the Sheikh, and smelled him, but did him no
injury One of them, however, wrapt his trunk about him, and lifting
him on his back, carried him off to some houses When the people saw
him, they were much astonished The elephant then put him down and
walked off The infidels were much delighted with the Sheikh, treated
him very kindly, and took him to their king The king gave credit to his
story, and treated him with the greatest kindness and respect When I


of b)s haviDg founded a college or an; thing of the sort although, from the euiination in which
he appears (0 hare been held at court) he might have bad jt in his power to do so Upon turning
over the lives of the saints b; Jaml O'lsf') I find that this Sheikh died A H S3l , and

according to the inscription, tins endowment was made in the ;ear?17, and the inscription
itself written in S37 So (hat he m ght have been in Ceylon in 317, and obtained the pnvileges
here atlverted to frorathekicg and if he died in S3l, the inscription might have been wriltcn
m 337 Jaml, however, gives no such name as Khahd Ibn Abu Baka;a, &c he onl; tells ns
that his name was Moliammed Ibn Khaflf Ibn lsfiL5h4r El Zabi (under ■ ^ iJJl < »

Abu Abd Allah Ibn Khaflf of Shins), where he sajs ^ ^ ^J^ j»|j

The date nf Ins death is given in these words SL-i jii

in the year 331 he left the wwld ” A certain fonner king »ayaKnox,in
his Ceylon, '• gave this temple (i e a mosque m Candy) this pnvilege, that every freeholder
should contribute a ponnam to it," p 171 I am disposed to believe, therefore, that my con
jecture respecting this Sheikh is just , and that he was the first who obtained security for the pro*
pert; of the Mohammedans in this island

* The elephant IS unclean with the Mohammedans, so Saadt ZcAj sltJl ‘The

sheep IS clean, but (he elephant is camon ’ — Cultstan, chap i tale in


PERSIA.


43


fentered Ceylon I found them still infidels, although they had given great
credit to the Sheikh. They also very much honour the Mohammedan
Fakeers, taking them to their houses and feeding them, contrary to the
practice of the infidels of India ; for they neither eat with a Mohammedan,
nor suffer him to come near them.

I then left Shiraz intending to make ^ Kazerun, situated at the distance
of two days’ journey, in order to visit the tomb of the Sheikh ” Abu Is-hak
El Kazeruni.* This Sheikh is held high in esteem both in India and
China: and even the sailors, when labouring under adverse winds, make
great vows to him, which they pay to the servants of his cell, as soon as
they get safely to shore. I accordingly visited the tomb of the Sheikh.

I then left Kazerun and went to the city "El Zaidain (the city of the
two Zaids). It was so called, because ^Zaid Ibn Thabet and ’ Zaid Ibn
Arkam,t two of the companions of the prophet, were buried there. I then
went to ’’El Huwaiza,J a small town inhabited by Persians, bet\veen
which and Basra is the distance of four days: but from Kufa, that of
five. From this place I went to Kufa through a desert, in which water was
only to be found at one of its stages. This is one of the mother cities of
Irak : but, it is now very much in ruins. In the mosque is the oratory.


UJJJ


1 ^’


• i:/


* This is, no doubt, the Abou-Ishak Alkarzouni of D’Herbelot ; vide sub voce; and if he be
right, this word ought to be nvitten iJjJjlCJi. under Carzuni, however, he writes Cazruni and
Cazeruni. It is said in the ^\j<i that Kazerun is a city in Ears, situated between the
sea and Shiraz, and is said to be the Damietta of the Persians. Something not unlike kasab (or
fine Egyptian cloth), is made there from cotton. It abounds with palaces, gardens, and palms,
extending its palaces far to the right hand and the left (north and south), and is at the dis-
tance of three days from Shiraz. The words are ; Jlxj ^ ...

jyas .isJi ybXJl la

■f Annales Muslemici, tom. i. p. 1 19.

t This name is given in the ^'Jl . El Huwaiza thus : Ijcsj

S? ^ place situated between Wasit, Basra, and

Khuzistan, in the marshes.

G 2


44


PERSIA


in which Ah ^\'as killed by the Mle 'Ibn Moljim, In the back part of the
mosque, is the place m which Ifoah is said to haie groim warm from the
oven in the time of the ‘deluge *


* This IS one of the absurd aod silly legends, of vhich the Orientals are so fond
but, as a Vnowledge of mankind consists »n knowing the follies, as ivell as the wisdom,
practised in the world I may be excased, perhaps, if I give Mirkhonds edition of it
'i— ' ^ jsi j\ oy. Jju ,*tJ\ Ale.

^ JJIj A*i ^ ^ «L? till Ajt^

jyl jy-J J' jy„*s^y iX*! J\ lijj y_^y<

uTj u'^

JjU< j‘> 1?- tJl jirf j-yj AJj? uSy SJufll 4_!\i

AU? AwUy All AJI^ jJ CXlo A-Jy^ *^jJl l^^l A^ J**

A? JjA J— » J J^y Ayr S-'l— il u^U>* (jl^OyO J f- Oj\

yytl yl CJl jiAiUAj yl jy-i yl A? i ^y OyJ Aftlj^ Ij^ jlj ^ yt yl lyU

They have related from Ah the commander of the faithful, that the meanmg
of the oven s heat is, the appearance of the dawn of the morning Some have said that the
meaning of “ and the oven became hot,'* is the boihog up of the water from the surface of the
earth Eotada says, that it was a high place of the earth, from which the water boiled up
But generally it is held, that by *• the oven is meant the oven of a baker, id which the wife
and daughter of Noah baked their bread, and which came to him by hereditary right Th s
oven was s tuated near the gate Et Kenda of the mosque at Kufa, and from this place hoah
took hib seat id the ark Mokatei says that it was id Syria, in a place which they call ' the
Fountain of the Ro«e near Baalbec, some say th?r n is in India others, that Noah was
standing at the door of a baker s shop, when the baker said by way of jest, where is the
water you have been frightening us about, and trom what place is it to come ? Koah repl ed,
from your own oven and, at tbe same moment, water began to boil out of his ovea £l
Harawi gives a similar account under his mention of Kura, but it is not worth copying


PEESIA.


45


CHAPTER VIII.

El f/iV/fl— — Abu Said, now King of Iroh — Ibn BalTda accompanies his army —

Samarra Tehnt —Island of Ibn Omar — Nisihin — Sinjar — Dara — Mardin — Bagdad — Mosul

— Mecca.

I NEXT arrived at the city of “El Hilla,* which runs far along by the side
of the Euphrates. Its inhabitants are all followers of the twelve Imams. "We
have here a mosque, over the gate of which is an extended veil of silk.
They call it the Mosque of the last ® Imam. It is said, that Mohammed
Ibn El Hasan El Askar! entered. this mosque, and became concealed in it.
This person is, according to them, the Imam Mehdi (or leader), who has
long been expected. It is a practice with them to come daily, armed to

. L^U ® . UJ] "

* Ann. Mosl. tom.iii. p. 716. This is very near the site of ancient Babylon. El Harawl tells
us that the Jews make pilgrimages to the graves of Ezekiel and Joseph, which they believe to
be here. See Mr. Rich’s Notice of the Ruins of Babylon ; Les Mines de I’Oriente, tom. iii.

-j- The following is the creed of the Shiah on this subject, as given by the author of the Dabistan :

ir'^J ^ |*U:1 iS jjhe iijj

^ ol v . c fri ^., 1 L **■ ... r . ^ I

yLc Jti tXj> Jii L/jt^ Ct

tXjiiji Ld—d pW ^

<b pUI jjl '^.3 dl^ d^'*^ <So^3 dJhj

Z'd j)\ jj\ Xju JLs Jsbsb i) '-ryy j]} X.^.sc^jSx=^ jjI

>■' j' LSy-J\ (^1 jjb d>y~. j\ aw j'j ^

^ J Aw AjA^ AW.A Aa.3

db \c)3jf. s_ 5 *s^y • 1*^ 1® established among the

Imamia (followers of the Imams), that the Imam Mohammed Ibn Askarl is still alive,
but that he is invisible. This they term the less, and greater concealment. The less
concealment lasted Seventy-three years, and happened in the times of Muatamid of the
house of Abbas, in the year 266 (A. H.). The greater concealment happened in the time of
Razl, the son of Muktadir, of the house of Abbas. The difference between these two conceal-
ments is this : that in the less, a book and ministers were mediatorial between the Imam and
the pious of the people : but in the greater, all communication was cut off. The first Wakeel
was Othman Ibn Said El Omari ; and, after him, by command of the Imam of his time,
it was transferred to his son Abu Jaafar Mohammed, who executed the office about fifty
years. After him Abu El Kasim Hosain Ibn Ruh Ibn Abi Bahr Nawbakhti, who after-
wards left it by will to Abu El Hasan Ali Ibn Mohammed El Samari ; and he was the last


46


PERSIA


tbe number of a hundred, to the door of this mosque, bringing uith them a
beast saddled and bridled, a great number of persons also with drums and
trumpets, and to say. Come forth. Lord of the age, for tyranny and base-
ness now abounds this then is the time for thy egress, that, by thj
means, God may divide between truth and falsehood They wait till night,
and then return to their homes I next came to “Karbela, and there visited
the meshhed of the Imam El Hosain, the son of All * This is one of the
greatest meshheds The inhabitmits are of the sect of the twelve Imams


.hj-


of the Wakeela When he was sick the Shiah asked him, who should hold this sacred
office after him, upon which he drew oat an instrument forbidding a will, which is this
(oI dJjj) CJ-J iJJt jJiil ufr*-" lT*' LT*^'

aM cJi^ls.4 ^ cX..j U

(ol jou ij-i <il\ ^ol M 31 jjJs lU au

31 JjAllil ^ {J* (el tJjUlLi) s«.j^l

^1 431) 31 iy 3j J_ja- 3j JAftliil J^ajj
lA-ol cybj AlUiijj ji.£j ^UJ " In the name of the compas

siooate and merciful God 0 Ah, son of Mohammed of Samaria, majr God increase the reward
of thy brethren by thee but thou art a dead man between me and thee are (only) six days
Arrange thy matters, therefore, and turn towards no one for supplying thy place after thy death
for now has happened the complete concealment oor shall there be a rerelation, except by the
permission of God, whose memorial be roTctenced, (ill after the duration of tbe age, andheans
shall be hardened, and the earth shall be filled with violence But there shall come out of my
people one who shall lay claim to a testimony He, however, who shall lay claim to this before
the outgoing of El Sofyani and the shout that man is tlie antichrist, the corrupter There is no
power or virtue except in the great God " He died in the middle of the month Fhaaban An Hej
S28 See my Persian Controversies p 433 I have been the more particular in explaining
tins passage, in order to shew the great similarity there is, between the Shiah and our own
Mdlenanans in this respect. The Shiah expect the Mehdi to appear, when Mohammed and
Jesus are olso to descend from heaven, and this is to happen at the end of an age or dispcnsatioo,
when the world shall be filled with oppression and sm Upon this occasion, they further tell us,
there is to be a general resurrection of tbe wicked, and then a horrible slaughter is to ensue and
after this the earthly Paradise is to comineiice It js my intention hereafter to shew, that the
Mohammedans have retained this from tbe early heretics, as well as many other things peculiar
to one or other of their sects

* At this place Hosain was killed Annales Moslem tom i pp 389 391 , and D Herbelot undtr
Kerbela


PERSIA.


47


I next arrived at Bagdad, which, notwithstanding the injuries it has
sustained, is still one of the largest of cities. Its inhabitants are mostly
of the sect of Hanbal. In this place is the grave of "^Abu Hanifa, over
which is a cell, and a mosque. Not far off is the grave of the Imam ^Ahmed
Ibn Ilanbal ;* as also that of 'El Shiball,f of “Sari El SaktI,J of Bashar
El Hafi,^ of ‘Baud El Tai,|| and of Abu Kasim El “^Jonaid,^ all of them
Imams of the Sufis. When I entered Bagdad, the Sultan of the two Iraks
and Khorasan was ®Abu Said Bahadur Khan, son of Mohammed Klfuda

• ^ • (_ i |— ’ • L,V^ ^ '

. >■' ' • '' • ‘ij' J '


* Two of the leaders of the four principal sects of the Mohammedans, see D’Herbelot, sub
vocibus, i. e. Abou-Hanifah, and Hanbal.

f Jami calls him U ^ jjl and tells us, that he was contemporary with Jonaid.

In his history, which occurs in the last quarter of the we have some very

strange miracles recorded of him, which, however, are not worth copying out.

I This saint, according to the where his history will be found a little from the

beginning, was the preceptor of Jonaid, and the rest of the enlightened of Bagdad. His full
name was his surname contempo-

rary with the following.

§ Thefullnameofthis saint, according to the(_^l!\ izAsP a little from the beginning, where his

history will he found, is lijl jtj sud the surname ^.ai _»j1

Bashar Ibn El Harith Ibn Abd El Rahman, surnamed Abu Nasr; he died A. H. 227 — A. D. 841.

II See the Annales Muslem. tom. ii. p. 41. In the Itinerary of El Harawi, the graves of these

worthies are placed ijJjiJL' in the part of Bagdad termed Shunizia, and they receive the
titles of Jljql Abdal, UjUl Awlia, pious persons, and martyrs. In the

we are told, that is the burying ground situated on the west side of Bagdad, and

that several of the above-mentioned saints are buried there ; and that there is a mosque and inn
for the Sufis in this ground.

^ This, according to Jami, is a saint of the second class : his surname was Abul Kasim
j\ his title Karvarlrl, Zajaj, and Khazaz j

He was one of the three who flourished, A. H. 298-9 (A. D. 910-11) who in intellectual powers
are without a fourth sjjj jJl Wo ^ jj!

((^^1 & c .


48


TURKEY IN ASIA


Banda,* * * § which last %vas one of those Tartar kings who embraced Islamism
and with his brother-^ Kazan, ruled ra these parts When this Abu Said died
he left no issue, and the consequence was, his Emirs, each claimed and exer-
cised the rule in those parts m which he had been placed J When Abu Said
left Bagdad for his own country, I travelled for ten days with him, and
saw the wonderful anangement of their march, and their numerous army
I then went with one of his Emire to*Tebnz, which is a large and beautiful
city ^ In this I lodged one night , but, when an order came from the
Sultan commanding the Emir *A!h Oddin s presence in the camp, he set
out the next day, and took me with him The Sultan, however, became
acquainted with my being there, and sent for me accordingly I presented
myself to him, and was honoured with a dress and other large presents
The Emir Ala Oddm told him, that it was my intention to go on the
pilgrimage , he accordingly ordered such conveyances and provisions for
me as would be necessary for the undertaking He also wrote to the same
effect to the Erair of Bagdad I then returned to Bagdad, and claimed
the royal bounty from the Emir But, as the time for the pilgrimage was
distant, I set out for ‘Mosul and ‘Diarbeker I then went from Bagdad
to the city of 'SamarrH,|| which was m rums There had been a"meshhed

* According to De Guigncs " Aldgiaptou Klian, sumomin6 Gaialhedtn Kliodabendeh Mo
hammed, meurt le 27 dc Ramadhan, A D 1316 ' And, Abousaid bahadur Khan, his dA!d
giaptou, regne 19 ans, mortle 12 de Rabi elakher, A D 1335 Mogoh tie Perse, oude I Iran”
Histoire Gdnerale des Huns, tom i p 282 3 See also d Herbelot under Algiaptu, and Abm
Said

f See D Herbelot art Gazan, and Annales Musleraia, tom v p 190

So De Guigncs and others "La puissance de ces Moguls finit avec le regne d Abousaid
Khan Les princes dela D/nastie AcsDgiaubaniens meUoienl sur leUbne, et ie
posoient a leur gri les Khans ses successeurs tom i p 283 See Mirkhond, vol v sub an
Hej 736, &c , and D Herbelot sub voce Abou Said

§ See Asseman s Biblioth Orient torn iii pup dcclxxxir and D Herbelot, art Tabriz
II Abulfeda says, ^ lu ./IT*

Li ybj jljuo t—jUJl tJ

U \jSa iS JU V^Us ^


TURKEY IN ASIA.


49


in itj dedicated to the last Imam by the Rafiza, as in "El Hilla. I then
proceeded to "Tekiit,* a large city; then, after many stages, to Mosul.
This is an ancient and strong place. Its citadel ^El Hadba is splendid.
From this I went to the island of ® Ibn Omar,-)- where I arrived after two
days. This is a large city surrounded by a valley, and has thence been
called the "Island. The greatest partof it is now in ruins. The inhabitants
are well informed, and are kind to strangers. From this place I went to
'NisibIn,J where I arrived after a journey of two days. This is an ancient
city; but is now mostly in ruins. It abounds in water and gardens, and
is surrounded by a river as with a 'bracelet. Rose-water incomparable in
scent is made here.

I then went to the city of "Sinjar,§ a place abounding with fountains


“ .j\^\ '


.AJI"

* S


h . Sarmar Ray, also called Samar, has its longitude according to the
Atwal in 69° 8', lat. 34° S' ; according to the Kanan in 69° 45', 34° 50' ; the Rasam 60° 45',
34° 8'. It is said in the Lobab, that Sarmar Ray is a city in Irak above Bagdad: it is a well-
kno:vn place. People have abridged its name and called it Samarra. El Moatasim built it, but
it w’as soon destroyed. It is said in El Aazizi that from Sarmar Ray to Okbara is twelve far-
sangs : it is also said to be on the eastern shore of the Tigris. The air and soil of this place
are pure : but it is said to be now without inhabitants, except in a very few instances, like a
village. Ibn Said says, that El Moatasim built it, and El Wathilc added to it the city El
Harunia, and El Mutawakkel the city El Jaaferia, and very much enlarged it. See also D’Her-
belot under Samara. Annales Muslera. tom. ii. pp. 169, 205, 221.

• See Ulenbroek's Iracre Persiee descriptio. Proleg. p. 40 Asseman, Biblioth. Orient, tom.
iii. P. II., p. dcclxxxiii. ; and D’Herbelot sub voce Tacrit.

f “ Le Geziret ben Omar,” says De Guignes (tom. i. p. 257) " est une ville batie par les
descendans d’Omar dans une isle du Tigre, au-dessus de Moussoul. Elle Stoit de la dependence
du Royaume de Moussoul, sous le regne de Seifeddin gazi.” See D’Herbelot, art. Gezirat ;
Asseman, Bibl. Orient., tom. iii. P. II. p. dccli. “ Qui Ibn-omar qualis fuerit non liquet,” says
Mr. Ewald in his Mesopotamia of El Wakedl.

t For an account of this place under the Christians, see Asseman’s Biblioth. Orient., tom. iii.
P.II, pp. dcclxvii-viii. El Harawl tells us, that there is a jujube tree here, about which strange
things are said, and also a Greek inscription which will cure pains in the back, S-f ejusdem
farinm. See also D’Herbelot under Nassibin.

f El Harawl says of this place : ai]| ^ iij

e— -A-j L+iis ^ 4’j

H -


60


TURKEY IN ASIA


and rners, much like Damascus The inhabitants are Kurds, a generous
and warlike people At this place I saw the Sheikh 'El Salih El 'Wall 21
Aabid Abd Alla El Kurdi, the theologian I met him with a party on the
highest part of the mountain They say, that he does not break his fast
of forty dajs,* except with a crust of barley-bread Many miracles are
ascnbed to him I then went to the citj of "Drini then to *MardiQ;|; m
which there is a \ erj celebrated and strong citadel The Sultan of Mardin
at the time I entered it, ^vas El Melik El Salih the son of *'E1 Melik El
Mansur ^ This is aiery generous prince, and much praised by the poets,
on w horn he bestows splendid gifts

I now returned through Mosul to Bagdad, and there found the con-
lej'ances ready for the pilgrimage With these 1 proceeded, and arrived

* I j\<i “ M j-j: jjWI Jjil '

cM ^1 ciui

ij>— t Jh7 cU aJI ij — wj ^ (i)JU liU *1

1^3 (^) ii)i< o-UI ijl ts- — . 1^1 cJiaS" j iSi a-*Jl ^ J!

jilfl city of Smjlr is a mosque of Alt the son of AbuT&lib This is

upon the mountoio, and within it is the hili of Kambar It is said that the ark of Noah struck
upon an eminence (tooth of the mountain, and thence received a fracture the place wss
hence called Smjar, because he resided (■ jiva) upon it But the truth «, the city was
built by SinjSr, son of Malik, son of El Dhnar, and to him the name relates In like manner Htnid
is named atler Amid son ofEl Somaid, because he built it , and Roha(Edessa) received its name
from Roha the daughter of Bolaicl, son of Malik, (son} of £1 Dhaar, because it was built by him ”
I have deemed iC important to make this extract to shew among other things, that according to
the Orientals, places take their names from persons, and not the contrary, as some, with the great
Bochart at their head, nave supposed Sec Asseman, Biblioth Orient, tom in P II, p dcclxxix,
and Mr Ewald s Mesopotamia of El Wakedi, p xv Annal Muslein , tom ni p 702 D Her
beht, s^t Ssngisr

• Tins fasting, which however continues only during the day, is one of the qualifications of a
saint in the East

Here, according to El Harawi, are mins to be seen, which may be referred to the times of
Darius ^ Vy SeeMr Ewalda “LibtiWakedude

Mesopotamiie expugnata Histona,” p xir

^ See Asseman 8 Biblioth Orient, tom ni PII,p dcclxii

§ It will he in vam to look into De Gmgnes tor this and several other princes mentioned in
these travels The truth seems to be, Mr De Guigoes had not documents before him by any
means so ample as he felt necessary for his pnipose to supply these chasms is a consummiition
devoutly to be wuhed.


TURKEY IN ASIA.


51


at Mecca in the same year ; and remained there during another. In the
second year arrived the caravan from Irak, with a great quantity of alms
for the support of those who were staying at Mecca and Medina.


CHAPTER IX.


Mecca — Judda — Satcahin — Halt — Sarja — Zabtd — Gkasana — Jahala — Tiazz — Senaa — Aden —
Zatla — MaMashu — Mombasa — Kalwa — Zafar — Hadramaul — Amman — El Ahkaf — Fruits,
Sfc.'^El Hasik — The Island of Tair — Kolhal — Amman — Nazmo.

At this time, that is, in the year 729 (A.D. 1328), prayer was made,
during the sermon, for the King of Irak "Abu Said, and after that for "El
Melik El Nasir. I remained there during the third year also, and then left
Mecca* with the intention of visiting Yemen. I arrived accordingly at


* The following account of the temple of Mecca, by El Harawi, as to its state both before
and after its being destroyed and rebuilt by the Koreish, is well worthy the attention of the
reader. ^jJl ^ji\

^ t . I l.sj 1 ^ t il

bcls^l ci U.c ItSjjjbtfj

^ ULy UU> \^\jj <^l-r U=U^1

t f " * " ^rAsi

(till Jj-y |*lc UJi |4lLJl Uidc

Jcc j_j!l (Jc^lo |*LJi it^ AssTii cfiill .


“ From the western side one and thirty cubits, and from the pillar in which the black stone is
found, to that which is opposite to it on the south, were two and twenty cubits, and from the
northern opposite part, twenty cubits. Its circumference was one hundred and five cubits, and
thus it remained, until destroyed and rebuilt by the Koreish in the times of the prophet. They
also made it smaller than it was at first, so that there remained six cubits and a half in its capa-
city (internal length and breadth I suppose). Its height they increased by nine cubits, so that it
became eighteen cubits. Its building consisted of a layer of wood and another qf stone ; so


H 2


62


ARABIA


* Judda From this place I went with a company of merchants who were
ing to Yemen , but, as the wind changed upon us, we put into the island of
'bawakin, the Sultan of which was ‘‘El Shanf Zaid Ibn Abu Nomma,* son
of the Emir of Mecca Sawakm fell to him on the part of the *Beja,f who
were nearly related to him, and from whom he had an army attending
upon him From Saw ikin I set out for Yemen with the merchants and
oame to-^Hali,J a large and handsomely built city The inhabitants are
aboriginal Arabs, governed by the Sultan ^Aamir Ibn Dhuwaib of the tribe
'Beni Kenana He is one of the most elegant, generou'* and poetical
geniuses (of his time) , he took me with him and entertained me very hos
pitably for some days From this place I travelled with the merchants to

jrlanir

that there were fifteen couriea of wood and ^teen of etone Within it were six columns ss
also images of the angels the prophets, the tree, and of Abraham the friend, with the diriamg
arrows in fail hand there was also an image of Jesus and another of his mother Mar^ But in
the year of victory the prophet ordered them all to be destroyed There were also in it, thehorai
of the ram which Abraham sacnticed (ml euof his ton) They were hung up within the temple
and thus they remained to the times of Ibo Et Zobair, and then they were burnt That this
temple was at first the residence of some of the patriarchs seems to me extremely probable
and as It was at first larger than it is now, it might then have been quite sufficient for all the
purposes of a shepherd If, indeed it contained an image of Abrabam the ram s horns &c as
here mentioned a curious proof is afforded to the truth of the original history and if there
was an image of our Lord and hia mother, it should seem that the Christians of Arabia had
adopted images before the tiroes of Mobamoed, for from them the pagans must have taken
them

* We are told by Abulfeda (Ann Muslem .tom v p 2S2-3, t e. A D ISIS) that AbulGbaith
Ibn Abu Naim (as Reiske writes it) accompamed him to Mecca, m order to be put in possession of
the government of that place in lieu of his brother The appo ntment took place , and it is pro
bable that ^e person here mentioned was son to the same governor, who must have held Mecca
when our traveller visited it

■y bee Ouseley s Oriental Geography, p IS

{ Abulfeda puts this place, according to the Atwal, in long 66'’ 20', lat IS'’ 50' , accord ng
to the Eanun, long 66° 50 He then says ur"j L7*

di-Jj L£»s.J,

!•«- Hall IS one of the parts of Yemen El Edtlsl says, that any oue who wishes to pass
the desert from Tahama to Senaa, let him go about six staites fipm Sirram, and in those parts
(he will find) the aty of Hall


ARABIA.


6 ^


the town of ‘ Sarja, a small place inhabited by merchants of Yemen, a liberal
and hospitable people. From this place I went to the city of-' ZabId,* * * § where
I arrived in two days. This is one of the primary cities of Yemen; it is large
and handsome, and abounding with every commodity. The inhabitants are
generous, well-informed, and religious. In its environs the village of ^ Gha-
sanaf is the grave of El Wali El Salih Ahmed 'Ibn ElOjail El Yemeni.
The doctors of Zabid told me of one of his miracles, which was this : The
doctors and great people of the ZaidiaJ sect once came to his cell. The
Sheikh sat without the cell, and received and returned their salutations. At
length a question arose on the subject of predestination ; the Zaidia affirm-
ing, that there was no such thing, and that every man was the author of
his own actions. The Sheikh replied: If the matter be as you say it is,
get up from the place where you are now sitting. They all endeavoured to
rise, but not one of them could do so. The Sheikh left them in this situa-
tion, and went into his cell. They accordingly remained in this state, sub-
ject to the burning rays of the sun and lamenting their sad condition, till
after sunset, when some of the Sheikh’s companions going in to him
told him, that the people had repented and turned from their corrupt
creed. He then came out to them ; and, taking them by the hand, joined
them in their, conversion to the truth, and dereliction of error. They
arose and entered the cell, where he hospitably entertained them, and
sent them home. I went to the village in order to visit the grave of the
Sheikh, which I did, and met his son ’"El Khashia Ismail, who enter-
tained me very hospitably. I then went to "Jabala,§ which is a small


. * • Aiii-c al al <OL»c '


* See D’Herbelot under Zebid.

f This, according to the Marasid El Itlaa is the name of several lakes in

Arabia, on one of which the Beni Mazin resided ; of another at the obstruction of Maarab in
Yemen, which is said to be near Jahfa, and perhaps of another in Yemen, between .... and
Zabid, ciP

" J ..

Jj • • • ijjsi . 1 . . . ihc jSi .

J See D’Herbelot art. Zeidiah, and Annales Muslera., tom. iii. p. 734f.

§ This place, according to Abulfeda, is named Jubla and is said after Abu Akul to

be in long. 65° 8', lat. 13° 55' not as in our copy, which is manifestly wrong). It is


54


ARABIA


lo^\n , and from that to the city of *Tia2z,* the residence of the King of
Yemen This is one of the most beautiful and extensn e cities of Yemen
The Sultan of this place was El Malik El Mojahid Nur Odden Ah, son
of the Sultan’ El Jlawayyid Baud, son of ’Rasiil.t {sent or commts-
stoned) The grandfather of these sultans was called Ttasul,\ because one
of the Califs of the house of Abbas had sent or commissioned him as the
Emir of Yemen, after which his descendants kept possession of his govern-
ment I was introduced to the king with the KazI of the place Their

Jj-y ' ■">' ' ^

Situated between Aden and Senaa, in the mountains It stands upon two rivers, and hence has
been called the city of the tiro rivers It is modem, and n-as built by the Sulaihl when they had
pon er in 1 emen Some respectable travellers have stated that Jubla is less than a day from
Tiatz in on eastern direction, inelining a little to the north The pissage is ^

U1 UUj L>x< yjij JLslt Iwj

^ <j* u* ^ Vj-'

JUl!l J\

* Abulfeda pronounces this word Tiaz (jiw), and gues the longitude and latitudeahcr the
dilTerent aatliors as follows long C4’30,lit 13*8 Ibn Said, long 70*8, lat 14*30 Ana
logy, long 65* SO , lat 13* 40 , and says, that it wa» in 1 times the residence of the kings of
lemen, was a fortress situated on the mountains overhanging the coasts and the country of
Zabid Beyond Tiaz is a pleasure ground called Sahlah, to which water has been brought from
the mountains by the king of Yemen , and in this he has erected some spacious and strong edifices
in the middle of a garden Jk< JLJ* J J

^ aJ (JW Sj,^ jfj iXJ j

^ Ark. ^

f We are told in the Annales Kfnsleroici, tom v p 348 9 that the father of this prince died
at Tiarz ^ which Reiske writes Teez) A D 1321 , and, that on this occasion, his son, A i
received the title of El Malik El Mojatud Saif El Islam, and succeeded to his throne but, as he
was very young and inexperienced, he was near losing it with Ins life more than once (p 357,
361, &c ) He neieriheless continued in power, and was, no doubt, king of Yemen when our
traveller ^vas there

t A title of this sort seems to ha\e ongmated the Prester ^/ofinof Ahjssinia, of which the mis
Eionary accounts said so much A Tartar king seems also to have assumed this title, which
m Persian was translated ^jU- Ferishta Jan, John ike Angel, probably, because he had
receued Christianity Hence the European Prester John but, how this became ascribed to
the King of Abyssinia it is not easy to say, unless he had assumed the title mentioned here
by our traveller which belonged to the kingofYemcn See A'seman’sBiblioth Orient tom ii
P ir,p 404


ARABIA.


55


custom in saluting their king is this : any person coming before him, first
places his fore-finger on the ground, and then, putting it on his head, says,
“ May God perpetuate thy power.” I was received very courteously, and
then invited to a banquet.

After this I travelled to the city of ' Senaa,* the capital of Yemen. It is
a large and well-built city. From this place I went to the city of ' Aden,t
which is situated on the sea-shore. This is a large city, but without either
seed, water, or tree. They have, however, reservoirs, in which they col-
lect the rain-water for drinking. Some rich merchants reside here : and
vessels from India occasionally arrive here. The inhabitants are modest
and religious. I then went from Aden by sea, and after four days came to
tlie city of “ Zaila.:|: This is a city of the Berbers, a people of Soudan, of
the Shafia sect. Their country is a desert of two months’ extent. The first
part is termed Zaila, the last " Makdashu.§ The greatest part of the inha-

9 ^

1.S

• • % ■I 1 « • I . )

> ♦*> W

* See Asseman. Biblioth. Orient, tom. iii. P. II., p. dccdxxv., and D'Herbelot, under the word
Sanaa.

f For an account of tlus place, see the geographical Index appended to the life of Saladin,
by Schultens, sub voce Adenum, Asseman, Biblioth. Orient, tom. iii. P. II. p. dccvii, and
D'Herbelot, sub voce Aden.

t On this place see Rinck’s Tract, containing extracts from Makrizi and Abulfeda on Abys-
sinia, Lugd. Batav. 1790, p. 9, Arab, text, and p. 10 Lat. trans. Also p. 12, Arab, text from
Abulfeda; also Eichhom’s Africa, p. 31, -which I thus translate; Ibn Said has said, that Zaila is
a well-known city of the Abyssinians. Its inhabitants are Moslems. It is situated upon a canal
which comes from the sea, and is low : its heat is excessive. Its waters are sweet, and are got
from welis. The people have no gardens, and know nothing of fruits. Zaila is said in the
Kanun to be a port of Abyssinia not far from Yemen ; and to be a place of scarcity. It is
situated between the equinoctial line and the first climate. Those who have seen it have stated,
that it is a small city nearly the size of Aidhab. It is situated upon the shore, and is governed
by Sheikhs. Merchants frequent the place, who are treated -with hospitality and traded with.
See also D’Herbelot, art. Habasch.

§ Abulfeda, as given by Rinck and Eichhom (Afr. p. 33) pronounces this -word Mahdishii,
and says, that it is situated on the Indian sea ; that its inhabitants are Moslems. It has a large
river like the Nile of Egypt, which swells in the summer season : it is said to be a branch of the
Nile which issues from the lake of Kaura, and runs into the Indian sea near Makdishu. Abul
Majd of Mosul has said in the Mazil El Irtiab, that Makdishu is a large city, lying belween the
Zinj and Abyssinians. See also Sir Wra. Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, p. 14. On the fruits,
&c. of these countries see Rinck’s Tract above-mentioned. Arab.text.pp.il, 12, &c. It is
worthy of remark, that Ibn Batiita afBliates these people with the Berbers of Sudan ; see note at
p. 17. This is the Magadocia of the Portuguese navigators.


56


ZANGUEBAR


bitants of Zaila, however, are of the Rafiza sect. Their food is, for the
most part, camel’s flesh and fish The stench of the country is extreme
as IS also its filth, from the stmk of the fish, and the blood of camels which
are slaughtered in its streets I then proceeded by sea for fifteen days, and
came to Makdashu, vv hich is an exceedingly large city. The custom here
IS, that whenever any ships approach, the young men of the city come out,
and each one addressing himself to a merchant, becomes his host If there
be a theologian or a noble on board, he takes up his residence with the
Kazi When it was heard that X was there, the Kazi came with his stu-
dents to the beach : and I took up my abode with him. He then took me
to the Sultan, whom they style Shetkh. Their custom is, that a noble or
a theologian, must be presented to the Sultan, before he takes up his abode
in the city. When, therefore, the Kazi came to the palace, one of the
King’s servants met him The Kazi was then “’Borhan Oddin El Misn
(of Egypt), and to him he mentioned my having come The servant
then went to the Sultan, and informed him: but soon telutned to us with a
basket of vegetables, and some ‘fawfel nut These he divided among us,
and then presented us with rose-water , which is the greatest honour done
among them to any one He then said: It is the command of the King,
that this person should reside m the student’s house. The Khz! then took
me by the hand, and conducted me to it. It was near the palace, was
spread with carpets, and prepared for a feast. The servants then brought
meats from the palace

Their meat is generally nee roasted with oil, and placed in a large wooden
dish Over this they place a large dish of elkushan, which consists of
flesh, fish, fowl, and vegetables. They also roast the fruit of the ^plan-
tain, and afterwards boil it m new milk : they then put it on a dish, and
cusdUd TOjJk. oo. They sj.lv3. erv. dishes., setne of ’jre-

served *lemon, bunches of preserved pepper-pods salted and pickled, as
also grapes, which are not unlike apples, except that they have stones
These, when boiled, become sweet like fruit in “general, but are crude
before this : they are preserved by being salted and pickled. In the same


Z ANGUEB AR.


57


manner they use the green ginger. When, therefore, they eat the rice,
they eat after it these salts and pickles. The people of Makdashu are
Teiy corpulent : they are enormous eaters, one of them eating as much as
a congregation ought to do.

The Sultan then sent for me and for each of my companions a dress ;
after which I was presented to him. Their custom in giving a salute is the
same with that among the k ings of Yemen. I remained some days the
King’s guest, and then set out for the country of the 'Zanuj,* proceeding
along the sea-shore. I then went on board a vessel and sailed to the island
of ‘^Mambasa,'}' which is large, abounding with the 'banana, the lemon, and
the-^ citron. They also have a fruit which they call the ^ jammoon (jambu).
It is like the olive nnth a stone except that this fruit is exceedingly
sweet. There is no grain in this island; what they have is brought to them
from other places. The people are generally religious, chaste, and honest,
and are of the sect of Shafia. After lodging there one night, I set out,
hy sea, for the city of ^ Kulwa, which is large, and consists of wooden
houses. The greater part of the inhabitants are Zunuj of the sect of
Shafia, of religious and peaceful habits. The king of this place, at the
time I entered it, was 'Abu El Mozaffir Hasan, a person who had obtained
great victories over the countries of the infidel Zunuj. He gave much
away in alms. The greatest gift bestowed by the people of these countries
is ivory, which is the elephant’s tooth: they seldom give gold. I then
proceeded to the city of Zafarj: by sea; this is the farthest city of Yemen,

•csSi' -Jp'

* See D’Herbelot, under Zeng. From this word the Zanguehar of the maps seems to be
derived. It is doubtful, however, whether our traveller proceeded so far south as to touch on
those countries as there given.

t This is the Mombas of Hamilton. India, chap. i.

j; Asseman's Biblioth. Orient., tom. iii. P. 2, p. dcclsxv. ; and D’Herbelot under Dhafar. Abulieda
puts this place in the following longitudes and latitudes, fir. after the Atwal in long. 66° 30', lat.
13° 30 ^ i the Kanun, long. 67° S', lat, 13° 30' ; Ibn Said, 73° S’; the Basam, 73° S'. No reliance cjin
be placed on the other numbers given, I therefore omit them. He then describes the place thus :

'I ^ ■


58


ZANGUBBAK.


and situated on the shore of the Indian sea From this place they carry
horses to India, and when the wind is fair they pass from it to the
Indian shores m a full month Bet%vcen Zafar and Aden, by land, is the
distance of a month, but between it and * Hadramaut * that of sixteen
days, and between it and ‘Amman f twenty days This city of ZafTir
stands alone m a large plain, in which there is no other village or governed
district. It IS a filthy place, and full of flies on account of the great
quantity of fisli and dates which are sold there They feed their beasts
and flocks also with fish, a custom witnessed by me no where else. Their
money is made of copper and tin they bathe several times m the day
on account of the heat of their country Their diseases are generally the
elephantiasis and hernia The greatest wonder among them is, that they
injure no one unless he have previously injured them Many kings have
attempted their country, but have been forced to return, with the effects of
their devices upon their own necks At the distance of half a day from
this place is the city of "EIAlikrif,J the residence of the people of


t* JUj^Uh J-Jl,

Lij jUb Zafir is a city standing upon the margin of an

estuary which stretches out from the southern sea, and mates an indenture into the land in a
southern directioa for about one hundred miles, upon a part of this estuary therefore is Zafar
No vessel leaves Zufar and this estuary but by a land breeze , but there clear out fcocn it
vessels for India Zafar is a principal city of the districts of £1 Shajr, and in its lands are
found many of the productions peculiar to Indio, such as the cocoa nut and the betel leaf To
the north of Zafar arc the sand bardis of Ahkaf between it too aod Sanaa » a distance of
twenty four farsaegs According to some this place is on the shores of Yemen, and abounds
with gardens, dc

• See D Herbelot, under Iladhramout

f Vie have, m the Marasid B1 Idas, this word pronounced Oman, and the place is said to
be B westerly tract of land on the shore of the sea of Yemen, and on the east of Hsjar , that it
contains two towns, Us heat is proverbial, and its mhabuants of the Ibasiasectof heretics

Jr- A 1^ >j:f f-l uy* f**'

a-:1jI Jill Isys; J.*aU .

{ Tins word means sand hills or hanks, os mentioned In the note on Zaf^r The author of the
Mnrasid LI Itlaa says on it ^ J.^1 jAj J.^1 <_£-£>• ^*5-


ARABIA.


59


" Aad.* In this city there are many gardens, in which there is the large and
sweet fruit of the "banana, the seed of one of which will weigh ten ounces.-j'
There is also the ^betel-tree, and that of the cocoa-nut, which are gene-
rally found no where else except in India, and to those of India may
these be compared. I shall now describe both. With respect to the betel-
leaf, its tree is supported just as that of unripe grapes generally is ; they
prop it up with reeds.;}; It is planted near the cocoa-nut, and is sometimes
supported by it. The betel-tree produces no fruit, but is reared merely for
its leaf, which is like the leaf of the ’’thorn, and the smallest are the best.
These leaves are plucked daily. The people of India esteem it very highly,
for whenever any one of them receives a \dsit from another, the present
made is five of these leaves, which is thought to be very splendid, parti-
cularly if the donor happen to be one of the nobles. This gift is esteemed
among them as being much more valuable than that of gold or silver. Its
use is as follows : A grain of fawfel (which is in some respects like a “nut-
meg) is first taken and broken into small pieces : it is then put into the
mouth and chewed. A leaf of the betel is then taken, and when sprinkled
with a little quick lime is put into the mouth and chewed with the fawfel.
Its properties are to sweeten the breath, help the digestion, and to
obviate the danger incident to drinking water on an empty stomach : it
also elevates the spirits and stimulates to venery.

As to the ‘ cocoa nut, it is the same with the “Indian nut. The tree is
very rare and valuable. It is something like the palm. The nut is like a

<— >bXll

El Ahkaf is the plural of Hikf, sand, and it is taken to signify a crooked sand-bank. But the
Ahkaf which is mentioned in the Koran is a valley between Omman (al. Amman) and the country
of Mahrat ; it is also said to be between Omman and Hadramout : they are sand-banks which
approach the sea.

* A trihe mentioned in the Koran.

t As this passage appears obscure to me, I give the original

t Knox says : “ the tree that bears the betel-leaf, so much loved and eaten in these parts,
grows like ivy, twining about trees or poles which they stick in the ground for it to run up by,
and as the betel grows, the poles grow also.” Ceylon, p. 34.

I 2


GO


ARABIA


man’s head, for it has something like two ejes and a mouth, and
when green, IS like the brains Upon it too is a fibre like hair From this
they make cords with which they sew their vessels together, instead of iron
nails Thej also make great ropes for their anchors out of it *

The properties of this nut are, to nounsh and quickly to fatten the body,
— to make the face red, and greatly to stimulate to venery Milk, oil olive
and honey, are also made out of it They make the honey thus hav in" cut
off the tendril on which the fruit would be formed, leaving it, however,
about the length of two fingers, they then suspend a larger or smaller pot
to it, and into this a kind of water drops, which they collect morning and
evening They tlien expose it to the fire, just as they do dried grapes, and
it becomes stiff, and exceedingly sweet, honey out of this they make
sweetmeats As to the making of milk, they open a side of the nut,
take out the whole of the inside with a knife, and put it on a plate
This they macerate well m water It then becomes milk, both as to taste
and colour and is eaten as such The oil-oh\e is thus made When the
nut IS ripe and has fallen from the tree, they peel off the bark and cut it


* According to Mr Cranrfunl a species of tins palm, called the gomutt in the islands of the
Indian nrcliipelago, produces a superior kind of cordage to that of the cocoa nut and while
that of the cocoa nut is most m use in the Maldives, Ceylon, &c , this prevails in the parts he is
describing, vol i pp 390, 399 It is curious enough to observe, that the same thing is said by
Abu Zaid El Hasan, m his remarks on the Arab travellers of the ninth century, translated by
Renaudot, when speaking of the ships of these parts , and that the editor doubts the truth of
the statement See Pinkerton s Voyages and Travels, vol vii pp liOl, 220, where the whole
process of making is described

f Mr Crawfurd s description of the manner in which the toefe^ is extracted from the gomuti
palm IS so nearly allied to this, that I cannot forbear copying it, vol i p 398 “ Tlie principal
production of this palm is the toddy, which is procured in the same manner as from other palms
or in the following mode one of the tpaiha, or shoots of fructification, is on the first appear
ance of Us fruit beaten for three successivedays with a small stick, with the view of detemuning
the sap to the wounded part The shoot is then cut off a little way from the root and the
liquor which pours out is received in pots of earthenware, in bamboos, or other vessels
\V1 cn newly drawn the liquor is clear, and in taste resembles fresh must In a very short tune
It becomes turbid, whitish, and somewhat aend and quickly runs into a viscous fermentation,
acquinng an intoxicating quality A still larger quantity is immediately applied to the purpose
of yielding sugar With this view the liquor is boded to a syrup, and thrown out to cool in
small vessel*, the form of which it takes and m this shape it is sold m the markets. The man
ner of making the oil is also mentioned by Mr. Crawfurd, pp 391, 392


ARABIA.


61


into pieces ; it is tien placed in the sun, and -when it is Tvithered they beat
it in a pot, and having extracted its oil, eat it with their breakfast and
other meals. The Sultan of Zalar is '^El iMalik El Mogith, uncle’s son
to the King of Yemen.

Leaving Zafar, I proceeded by sea towards Amman, and on the second
day put into the port of ^Hasik ; where many Arab fishermen reside. Ve
have here the incense tree.* This tree has a thin leaf, which when scari-
fied produces a fluid like milk : this turns into gum, and is then called
'loban, or finnkincense. The houses are built with the bones of fish, and
are covered with the skins of camels.

Leaving this place, we arrived in four days at the moimtain of ° Lomaan,
which stands in the middle of the sea. On the top of it is a strong edifice
of stone, and on the outside of this there is a reservoir for the rain-water.

After two days I arrived at the island of ^ Tair, in which there is not a
house: it abounds -with such birds as the '’sparrow. After this I came
to a large island, in which the inhabitants have nothing to eat but fish. I
then arrived at the city of Kulhat,t 'which is situated on the top of a
moimtain. The inhabitants are Arabs, whose language is far from elegant,
and •who are, for the most part, ' schismatics. This, however, they keep


•J


i<.r


• c


El Tarair^—Ayi of birds, Sj.


* This is the Greeks. See the Phaleg. of Bochart, lib. H. cap. IS, or. as

appcaded to the Monunienta Vetnitiora Arabics, bv Alfa. Schnltens, pp. 25-6.

f Tnis is written Kalhat cuLli hj the anthor of the Marasid El Itlaa, who says, ... ? - -’t

yUsj ijjt* A dty in

Amman upon the sea shore, which is well inhabited and popnlons : the inhabitants, howerer,
are all schismatics of the Ibazia sect, which thqr openly profess. As some fhrths- notices will
occur of this sect, I will here give what the anthor of the Kamoos with Jawhari says about it.

-jLsli OaVJl iJ\ ^ M ^ . H Ibaz...Abd Allah

Ihn Ibdz of the tribe of Beni Temlm, after whom the Ibazia schismatics are named. Jawha-
rfs explanation is : All o'* ilarVik i- e. “ the

Ibizia are a sect of the schismatics, the followers of Ahd AHah Ibn Ibaz El TemimI,” who, as
our traveEer will presently teE us, is, according to them, the saint who is to put an end to error.


62


ARABIA


secret, because they are subject to the King of Hormuz, who is of the
Sonnee sect

I then set out for the country of ^Amrahn, and after six days’ journey
through a desert, arrived there on the seventh It abounds with trees,
livers, gardens, with palms, and various fruit trees 1 entered one of the
principal cities of these parts, which is ' Nazwa * * * § This is situated on a
hill, and abounds with gardens and water The inhabitants are schismatics
of the 'Ibazia sect They fall in with the opinions of the base’’ Ibn Mol-
jam.t and say, that he is the samt who shall put an end to error They
also allow the Califats of Abu Beker and Omar, but deny those of Othmai


and All Their wives are most base , yet, without denying this, they ex

press nothing like jealousy on the subject 1 I q

The Sultan of Amman is an Arab of the tribe of *‘E1 Azd,J named ^Abu


Mohammed Ibn Nahbln , but Abu Mohammed is ^vlth them a general
title, given to any ruler, just as AtTibek, and other titles are, to Sultans of
other places § The inhabitants cat the flesh of the domestic "ass, which w
sold m the streets, and which they say is lawful | | ^ [.j | y


* This IS probably the ijji the Marasid El Itlaa ( ) w hicb is there said to be

a hill in Amman, there is, it is added, aswsber of largcviSlageson the shore near it, the whole
of which are called by this name The uhabitants are of the Ibdzia sect. ^ ijji
l^ejAsc* > jhf »>Xz rOufi (l read j^Ujo) jlJI

I»J}1 1 Our copy read* J^LJh ^ cannot understand, unless

it means that there is not a number of large Tillages, sea number of small ones I prefer
however, omitting

-{- See the Annales hluslemici, tom i , pp 332 3, &c.

{ See P Herbelot, under Azd

§ So the Pharaohs of Egypt, (s e Fe Ouro Copt ) the king the Abimeleks of Gerar among
the Philistines, &c According to Abulfeda, the title of Atabekwas first given by Malik Shah
to his Vizier Nizam £I Mulk, AD 1052 Annalea Musleinici, vol in, p 226 7


ARABIA.


63


CHAPTER X.

Hormuz — Harauna — Janja Sal — Ktizislan — Lar — Kaisa or Slr^ ~Fars — Pearl Fisheries —

Kosair and Hoair — El Kotaif- — Hajar or Hasa — Yemama — Ras Dawair — Aidhab — Egypt —

Cairo — Syria — El Ramla — Tripoli — Jahala — Ladhikia — Koom — El Alaya,

Frosi this place I went to Hormuz,* which is a city built on the sea-
shore ; opposite to which, but within the sea, is " New Hormuz. This is
an island, the city of which is called "Harauna. It is a large and beauti-
ful place, and here the King resides. The island is in extent about a day’s
journey : but the greatest part of it consists of salt earth, and of hills of
^’Darani salt.f The inhabitants subsist upon fish and dates, the latter of
which is brought from Basra or Amman. They have but little water. The
most strange thing I saw here, was the head of a fish, which might be com-
pared to a hill. Its eyes were like two doors, so that people could go in at
the one, and out at the other. The Sultan of Hormuz was at this time
’ Kotb Oddin Tamahtas, son of Turan Shah, J a most generous and brave
prince. Under his control were the pearl fisheries.

From Harauna I proceeded to * Janja Bal,§ for the purpose of visiting a

. al. P . al. ° "

• JV ^

* See an excellent geographical article on this place in Asseman’s Biblioth. Orient., tom. hi.,
P. 2, pp, dcclvii-viii. ; also Sir Wra. Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, pp. 12, 88, 138, 140, 141,
&c.; and D'Herbelot, art. Hormouz.

f According to the author of the Kamoos, this patronymic is irregularly formed, but refers to
il" Darayyat, a town in Syria, vol. i. p, fit" Ai ^dit. Calcutta. Jami tells us in the^^^l!!
that it is referred to Dara, one of the villages of Damascus: his words are: •••

(CLtii j\ . Sec also Mr. Haroaker’s « Liber de expugnatione Memphidis,”

&c., who derives it from J .

J De Guignes has given a list of the Kings of Ormuz (torn. i. p. 345), from Texeira, which
he had some suspicion was not vety correct. In this Touran Shah is placed in 1378 : but our
traveller places a son of this prince upon the throne before 1340, and gives him a name not to
be found in Texeira’s list ; the suspicion of De Guignes is therefore well-founded.

§ This is, perhaps, the of Mr. Ulenbroek, see his Irac. Persic, descriptio, p. 65.

In the Marasid El Itlaa this place is given Jarganban, and is said to be a large

village between Sawa and Aldl SjU aj ^5 .


64


PERSIA


certain saint I -accordingly crossed the sea, and then hired some Turko
mans, who inhabit these parts, and without whose assistance there is no
travelling, on account of their courage and knowledge of the roads 'We
have now a waterless desert, four days m extent, over which the Badawn
Arab carai'ans travel In this the Somoom blows during the months of
June and July, and kills every one it meets with, after which his limbs drop
off Oierthis I travelled, andamied at the country of ‘Kaunstan (Ku
zistan), which is small From this place I proceeded for three days oier a
desert like the former, till I came to ' Llr,* which is a large and beautiful
city, abounding with ram water and gardens I now went to the cell of the
holy Sheikh "Abu Dolaf, the person whom I intended toxisit at Janja Bal
In this cell was his son “Abd El Rahman, with a number of Fakeers In
the same place resides a Sultan, whom they call 'JaBl Oddm El Turko
mam

I next went to the city of Janja Bal, m which the Sheikh Abu Dolaf
resided I went to his cell, and found him alone sitting on the side of it
upon the ground, and clothed in an old woollen ^ garment f I saluted him,
he returned the salute, and then asked me about my coming thither, and
of my country He afterwards made me stay wth him, and, by one of his
sons, who IS a pious, humble, abstemious, and \erygood man, he sent
me meat and fruits This Sheikh is an astonishing man He has a very
large cell, and bestows costly presents , and moreover clothes and feeds
all who visit him I saw no one like him m these parts, nor is it known
whence his income is derived, unless it is brought to him by the brother
hood J Most people, however, think that it is fiom miraf'ulous operations §
The people of these parts are of the sect of Shafia

ATs*- * I— sJ J jjI " **

* The capital of Lanstan

f Jtbiah Suf Hence as it is generally believed, the Sufis have received their name
See Tholucks Ssufismus &c Berolini, 1821, p 26, Ac
I Of this brotherhood, or society, some notice will be taken hereafter
§ The passage is ^ A,\ ^here ^ is the only word which

can create any difficulty It is generally defined to mean, “ matter not existing from eternity
but produced in time (jjui. ! j-j j ^ probably means

money produced out of malter by some miraculous process


PERSIA.


65


I then bade farewell to the Sheikh, and travelled on to the city of ' Kaisa,
which is also called “Slraf.* It is situated on the shore of the Indian
ocean, and near to the sea of Yemen. ^Fars is a good and extensive dis-
trict : its gardens are wonderfully rich in scented herbs. The inhabitants
are Persians : those, however, who dive for the pearls are Arabs. The
pearl-fisheries which are between Siraf and ‘‘Bahrein are situated in a
quiet gulf of the sea, not unlike a large valley. To this place comes a
great number of boats, and in these are the divers, with the merchants of
Pars and Bahrein. When one of the divers intends to go down, he places
something upon his face made out of tortoise-shell, and in this a place for
the nose is cut out ; he then ties a rope round his middle and goes down.
The time they will remain under water varies ; some will remain an hour,
others two, others less. When the diver gets to the bottom of the sea, he
finds the shells firmly fixed in the sand among trees (of coral). He then
either tears them off with his hands, or cuts them away with an iron knife,
and puts them into a leathern bag which hangs to his neck. When he
begins to experience a difficulty of remaining under water, he shakes the
rope, and the man who holds it draws him up, and puts him into the boat.
The bag is then taken and the shells opened, and they find in each a piece
of flesh, which being cut away with a knife and exposed to the air, hardens
and becomes a pearl. After this both great and small are collected
together, and one-fifth goes to the King : the rest are sold to the merchants
present. To many of these merchants, however, the divers are generally
in debt, and in this case the pearls are taken by way of payment.

I next proceeded from Siraf to the city of ‘^Bahrein,! which is a large
and handsome place, abounding in gardens and water. It is wonderfully
hot, and so very sandy, that the houses will sometimes be over\vhelmed
with sand. There is at both the eastern and western side of it, a hill (or
bank): the one they call 'Kosair, the other -^Hoair, and on these they

■ * <— ° ”

* See Asseman’s Bib. Or., tom. iii. P. 2, p. dcclxxix ; Sir Wm. Ouseley’s Oriental Geography,
pp. 11, 82, 88, 104, 105, &c. ; and Edrisi, section 6 of the third Climate.

f See D’Herbelot, art. Baharein.

K


66


AB.ABI A


have an adage, and say " Kosairand Hoair, and, indeed, every opponent
brings advantage ’ *

I then travelled to the city of ^Kotaif.f (as if it were a word of the
diminutive form from * Kotf) It is, however, a large and handsome place
inhabited by Arabs of the Rafiza sect, extremely enthusiastic, publishing
their sentiments and feanng no one From this place I proceeded to the
city of ’Hajar, which, however, is now milled ■'El Hasa We have here
a greater abundance of dates than is to be found elsewhere, and which are
used as fodder for the beasts The inhabitants are Arabs of the tnbe of
‘Abd El Kais From this place 1 travelled to ^Yemama, which isalsocalled
"Hajr.J a beautiful and fertile city, abounding with water and gardens

jS? " J-c. * jSp * i_siu * CJ-bi!! ^


* Edrisl, in liii 6ili sect of the 2d climate mentions these h*lls >a the folIoviDg manner

u’'^ j y ^ W«

Ijb Sj tjj ^ *JJ“ ^

jijsj tj* «— tti-» Ji/ (J i-->^ aJI

jjA H I—— os’ I_^h*s3l A .— a!' ij't-Jl ilXL-J ![j

“The twohilliKosmr anflHoar

are dose to the shore of Yemen and opposite to these hdls is the place called the wr/er Tb«
sea here is called the sea of Azraf The vortex is a place lo which the water contmualljr whirls
toond like a mill stone without the least lemiM on or test , and ahould a vessel, or any thing else

come into it it would continue to whirl round until It would be lost This is a narrow place

near the twohills (or banks) Kosair and Hoair into whirh small ships may pass but not the
ships of China These two hills moreover, lie contealed under the water, so that no part of
them ts seeo The pilots know their pIsces and avoid them' — The meaning of the adage seems
to be, that public opposition tends to promote public good. Mention is made of these roAs by
the two Mahommedan travellers of the ninth century Pinkerton, vol vu p IB5

Edrlsi says of this place, sect vi Chin ui \^1 j \ji\j Uj

^jU!l jsOI ^ JI ijiiai Ui-sl Jl i-JuU! ^ ijJ

I e as to the city of Kotaif it is close to the sca, end is m itselflarge From Eotaifto Fl
Ahsa are two stages and from the same plan to Hamas a distance of two d^s and this
place IS also situated on the Persian Gulf

t In speaking of this place Edrlsi says J^Li Us>yi, jJ iity*

lyj *\< 3 Then to El Ahsl one stage, ihence

to Hamas one stage, thence to the shore of Hajar one stage, and all these stages, &c. latheflh
sect of the 2d climate this place is also mentioned, as is likewise kam^ma the words are


ARABIA.


67


The inhabitants are, for the most part, of the tribe " Beni Hanifa ; they
are the ancient possessors of this district. From this place I went on
pilgrimage and arrived at Mecca, in the year 733 of the Hejira (A. D.
1332). In this year the Sultan of Egypt El Malik El Nasir, also per-
formed the pilgrimage. After finishing the pilgrimage, I proceeded towards
“Judda, intending to go by way of Yemen to India ; but in this I failed.
I then proceeded by sea towards ^Aidbab, but was driven by the wind into
a port called ’Ras Dawair. From this place I travelled by land with the
''Beja, and passed over a desert, in which there was a great number of
ostriches and gazelles, and some Badawin Arabs subject to the Beja. After
a journey of nine days I arrived at *Aidhab ; and lea\nng this place, and

. i-->l ^ ^ ° • (_S^ "

..... cj ^-^1.3 ^^lii hjj ^1,;^

jji Js-Ul Sj^\ Ji-Lj . And with the northern country of

El Yemama, and of its cities is Hajar, which is now in ruins. In this country resided the queen

Yemama in her times From the shores of Hajar there is a road to Basra along the shore,

but uninhabited. See also Annales Muslemici, tom. i., p. 173. Abulfeda, however, places El
Ahsa (Lft-!!!) ia long, 73« (or 8) SO', lat. 22’ 8', and says ^

jjl ti li Lo-Sjj

j\ii 1.5^ tl I—

jAIJI ^ jJXj <eeUJl (_5!1 jAi)l u-iJaillj

^ . This is a small city abounding with palms and running water : its springs are
exceedingly hot, El Ahsa is in the desert, and is from Kotaif (Katif) in a south western direction
about two stages. Its palms are as numerous as those in the vale of Damascus, and they are all
round it. It is said in the Moshtarik, that Ahsa is the plural of Hisa, which means sand, into
which the water sinks, and proceeds until it comes to the hard earth, which retains it. In this the
Arabs dig and draw out the water. El Ahsa, therefore, has become the proper name of a
place among the districts of the Arabs. This is the Ahsa of the tribe Beni Saad of Hajar, and
is a residence of the Kararoata (heretics so called) in Bahrain. It is also said, that the Ahsa of
the Beni Saad, is a different place from that of the Karamata. El Ahsa has no walls. Between
It and Yemama is a distance of four days. The people both of Ahsa and Kotaif cany fruits to
El Khaj], a valley of Yemama, and for every camel-burden of fruit, they buy another of
wheat,

K 2


6S


ARABIA


passing through district after district m Upper Egypt, anived at last at
Cairo, where I remained some days Hence I proceeded to Syria, and
then to Jerusalem From this place I went to ‘ El Eamla, " Acca, 'Tripoli
"Jabala,* and *El Ladhikia (Laodieea) And from this I went by sea to the
country of ^Room, which has been so called, because it formerly belonged
to the Romans f and, even now, they are here m considerable numbers,
under the protection of the Mohammedans Here are also many Turko
mans I next arrived at *E1 A1 lya, which is a large city upon the sea
shore, inhabited by Turkomans The present Sultan is “Yusuf Beg, son
of ‘Karman I was introduced to him Our meeting was pleasant, and
he furnished us with provisions J


CHAPTER XI

Anatolia-^Burdur—Sa6artS’—Ain<lur—Ahhahar—Kara Huor—LSdhik—Fortreu ^ Ta\iiai
— Kuiita, the gme of iMaiptdnS ilumt^Larsntfa— A(jarS— Siva;— 4mam
— 5« liua—Kumaih—Arzanjan'^^Arzerrum—Btrh remariaile piece ifmeteoneilong teen hert^
Ttra-^At/usaluk^Yasmtr— Magnesia— Bergama-^Durvia—Yaznti—Butiunt—'BuliSaTlu
Kastamvma

From this place I proceeded to the distnct of * Anatolia, § which contains
some handsome cities In all the Turkoman to^vDS there is a Brotherhood
of ‘'youths, one of whom is termed (my brother, t e the word brother
joined ^vlth the pronoun of the 6rst person singular my) No people
are more courteous to strangers, more readily supply them ^vlth food

iwi' aX"’ uJjy.” iix“ aji'

* See Annales Muslenuci, tom in p 329, tom ir p 109
■{■ See D Herbelot, under the article Roum

Of this pnnce De Guignes gives us no account whatever
$ According to the Mara«id El Illda oHj

4 — Lk-iS! ^\j , a large, weU known and hand

some district of Room, situated on the sea shore it is strong, contains many 'villages and lohabi
tant«, and is near the gulf of Constantinople See also Annale^ Mnslemici, tom iv p 2 ’0-1


ROOM.


69


and other necessaries, or are more opposed to oppressors than they are. The
person who is styled the Brother is one, about whom persons of the
same occupation, or even foreign youths, who happen to be destitute, collect
and constitute their president. He then builds a cell, and in this he
puts a horse, a saddle, and whatever other implements may be wanting.
He then attends daily upon his companions, and assists them with whatever
they may happen to want. In the evening they come to him and bring all
they have got, which is sold to purchase food, fruit, &c. for the use of the
cell. Should a stranger, happen to arrive in their country, they get him
among them, and with this provision they entertain him ; nor does he leave
them till he finally leaves their country. If, however, no traveller arrive,
then they assemble to eat up their provisions, which they do with drinking,
singing, and dancing. On the morrow, they return to their occupations,
and in the evening return again to their president. They are therefore
styled “ the Youths” their president “ the Brother.”

In this city I went to the college of its Sheikh, 'Shahab Oddln El
Hamawi j and, on the second day, one of this society came to me. He
was addressed by the Sheikh in Turkish. The Sheikh told me that this
man came to invite us to a feast. I was much astonished, and said to the
Sheikh, This is a poor man, how can he afford to feast us, who are many.
The Sheikh was surprised at my reply, and said: This is one of the
Brotherhood, a society consisting of two hundred silk merchants, who have
a cell of their own. I consented, therefore, and went to the cell, and
witnessed the astonishing attention, kindness, and liberality which they
shewed their guests. May God reward them ! The Sultan of Anatolia was
•^Khazir Beg Ibn Yunus the Turkoman. I was presented to him. He
was then sick. He behaved very liberally towards us, gave us provisions,
and sent money for our travelling expenses.

I next proceeded to the town of ^Burdur, which is small, and surrounded
by trees and gardens. I first went to the house of the ^ Khatib (the preacher),
and there met the society of the Brotherhood, who invited us to their feast.


jf


* No mention of this prince occurs in De Guignes.


70


ROOM


The Khatib refused to go they therefore ga\e us a feast in a garden
without the town I was truly astonished at their wish to shew us e\ery
respect and attention, although we were ignorant of their language, and
they of ours

From this place I went to the to^vn of ’Sabarfi, which is handsomely
built, and has good streets I next went to the city of *‘Akndur, which is
large, and abounding wth trees and water A lake of sweet water adjoins
It, over which vessels pass, in the space of two days, to the town of* Aksha*
har, and to other places I here put up at the lecturer’s, "El Fiizil Moshh
Oddin, who treated me very respectfully The Sultan of this place was
"Abu Is h^ Beg, one of the greatest princes of these parts He gave us
protection in his distnct throughout the month of Ramadan During my
residence I was introduced to him , after this he sent me a horse and some
money He is a condescending and excellent prince

I then went to the city of "Kara Hisar * It is small, and surrounded by
water on every side The Sultan is ^Mohammed Chelebi He is the
brother of Abu Is hak, King of Akndur 1 was introduced to him, and he
treated me with great respect, and gave me some provisions After this I
proceeded to the city of ^Ladhik, which is a large and fine city, abound
log with water and gardens As soon as I had entered it, a number of
persons who were in the streets got up and seized upon the bndles of our
horses , after which others came and contested the point with them lYe
were much alarmed at this , but a person coming up who could speak
Arabic, said they were contending only as to who should entertain us, as
they were of the society of Youths Upon this I felt safe They then
cast lots, and we proceeded to the cell of the party on whom the lot fell,
and on the day following, to that of the other Both the parties shewed
us the greatest respect The Sultan * Yataj Beg, who is one of the greatest
princes of these parts, heanng of us, sent for us and treated us with great
respect


* According to the Maraaid El Itlaa a large farm on the north of Aleppo


IlOOM.


71


I then proceeded to the fortress of *Tawas, then to the city of 'Milas,
which is large and beautiful. Its Sultan is “Urkhan Beg, "Ibn El Man-
tasha. When I was introduced to him he treated me with great respect :
he is a very excellent prince.* I proceeded from this place to the city of
”Kunia,t which is large and handsome, and abounds with water and gar-
dens. This district belongs to the Sultan ^Badr Oddln Ibn Karman ; over
which, however, the King of Irak has occasionally had the rule, on account
of its proximity to some of his states which are in these parts. I put up at
the cell of its KazI, who is known by the name of ^ Ibn Kalam Shah. He
is a member of the society of Youths. His cell is most beautiful ; and he
has a great number of disciples, who trace the authorities for their judicial
decisions as high as Ali Ibn Abi Talib. They are clothed as the Sufis
are with the khirka, J and close trowsers.

In this place is the tomb of the holy Sheikh " Jalal Oddln, better known
by the title of “Mawlana§ (our Mawla). He is very highly esteemed. It
is said, that he was at first a mere lecturing doctor who had a large number
of pupils : but upon a certain day a stranger came into his lecture-room
with a basket of sweetmeats, which he had for sale, upon his head; the
Sheikh said to him, bring your basket here. The man took a piece of
sweetmeat and gave it to the Sheikh, who ate it. He then went out, no
one else having tasted the sweetmeat ; the Sheikh became agitated and went
out after him, giving up his reading, and leaving his pupils in a state of
expectation. At length, however, they set out in quest of him, but failed
to discover the place of his retreat. Some years after, he returned with
his mind deranged, and speaking nothing but Persian verses. These


. ^ *

* According to De Guignee, this Ottoman prince reigned from 1326 to 1369 (tom. 5. p. 271),
and consequently he must have been living when our traveller was in these parts,
f Iconium.

t A coarse ragged garment worn by the religious beggars' of the east.

§ See an interesting article on this writer in fourth Tabaka of Dawlatsbah, art.

and in the^^Ul cybcO by Jami, hot far from the end.


72


ROOM


his pupil", as they followed him, noted down and published under the title
of the * Mathnavi, a book highly esteemed m these parts

I next proceeded to the city of'Laranda,* the Sultan of which is '*EI
Malik Bade Oddin Ibn Karman, who makes this place his capital I met
him, and was entertained with the greatest kindness as his guest

I then proceeded to 'Aksara, which is one of the finest distnets of Room,
and subject to the king of Irak I next went to the city of -^Nikda, then to
® Kisana (Csesarea), both of which are subject to the king of Irak I next
proceeded to the cityof'Sivas, which is also subject to the kingoflrak It is a
large place, and now the rendez\oiis of the greater part of the king’s army
I next went to the city of ‘Amasia,t then to-^Sunusa, then to‘'Kumash,
then to * Arzanjan, then to Arzerrum , all of which ire subject to the king of
Irak In " Arzerrum I saw the brother " "nimrin, one of the Society of Youths,
whose age exceeded one hundred and thirty jears He was still in posses-
sion of all his faculties, and could walk where\er he wished After receiv-
ing his blessing I proceeded to the city of *Birki, the king of which was
Mohammed Ibn '’Aidm, I w'as, in company wnth the lecturer of this
place ^Mohyi Oddm, one of the most celebrated and reputable men of
his age, introduced to the presence

The king one day said tome, have joue^er seen a stone thatcame down
from heaven’^ I answ ered, No He continued, such a stone has fallen m
the environs of our citj He then called some men and ordered them to
bnng the stone, which they did It was a black, solid, exceedingly hard,
and shining, substance If weighed it v\ouId probably exceed a ■■ talent ^
He then ordered some stone-cutters to come in, when four came forward
He commanded them to stnke upon it They all struck together upon it

\j^\ al * (J^ o’ cBll ** tiJji * ^

'iiCl/

* See D Herbelot, under the article Afathnapui

\ See D Herbelot, under Aniasia.

X For some very interesting accounts of other phenomena of this sort, see the second edition
of M De Sacy a Chrestomathie Arabe, tom ut pp 437-441.

^ According to some 113, to others 120 pounds weight


ROOM.


73


accordingly "with an iron hammer four successive strokes, which, however,
made not the least impression upon it. I was much astonished at this.
The king then ordered the stone to be taken to its place. He sent fruit
and food to us during the time we remained there ; and, when I had bidden
him farewell, he sent me a thousand dirhems with one hundred mithkals
of gold, as also clothing, turn horses, and' a slave. He also sent for my
companions some dirhems and clothing separately.

I then proceeded to the city of ’Tira, which belongs also to this prince.
It is large, and abounds v\dth gardens and water. From this place I went to
the city of ‘Ayasuluk, the Emir of which is the Sultan “Mohammed Ibn
Aidin, son of the Sultan of '^Birki; then to the city of “"Yazmir, which
belongs to the Sultan of Birki ; its Emir is ""Omar Beg, one of the Sul-
tan’s sons, and a most excellent prince. I then proceeded to the city of
^Magnesia, the Sultan of which is called 'Saru Khan. I then went to the
city of “Bergama (Pergamos), of which the philosopher Plato is said to
have been an inhabitant. His house is still seen here. The Sultan of this
place is styled ^ Bakhshi Khan. I next went to the city of ‘’Bali Kasra,
which is large and beautiful. Its governor is called “^Damur Khan. I then
went to the city of ' Burusa,* which is a large place, and governed by
■^Ikhtiyar Oddin Urkh^ Beg, son of ^Othman Juk. This is one of the
greatest, richest, and most extensive in rule, and commanding the greatest
army of all the Turkoman kings. His practice is, constantly to be ^dsiting
his fortresses and districts, and to be inquiring into their circumstances. It is
said that he never remained a month in any one place. His father had con-


-jM''


. J .


-S'-


, e


* Mr. Kosegarten has here which he writes Burssa. Our copies add 7^

- ^ ^
a great city; and again uJAj Jiji 3 djUjl

Jfjlljj ki jLj Lcls psj Jlsj j ^ notice to shew,

that the copies differ considerably in some instances, and to warn the reader, that, where my
translation differs from Mr. Kosegarten's, he must not immediately conclude that either of us is


wrong.


L


74


ROODf


quered the city of Burusa, and had besieged that of '‘Yaznlk,* nearly
twenty years, but did not take it , after this his son besieged it for twelve
years and took it. In this place I met him; he received me very
respectfully, and provided me with a considerable number of dirhems
I next went to Yaznik It has a laige lake eight miles m length; the
city IS also surrounded with water and trees. I then left this place,
and after some days arrived at the city of ‘Bustum;f after this at the
city of •'Bull, the king of which is ‘Shah Beg I then went to the city
of 'Burlu, which belongs to the governor of "Kastamunia. I then went
to Kastamunia, which is a very laige and beautiful city, abounding with
every delicacy, which may be purchased at a \ery low rate. I saw an aged
Sheikh among its inhabitants, whose age, as I was told, amounted to that
of one hundred and sixty-two years Its Sultan ^vas "Suleiman Badshaw,
a splendid, but aged man , he is a respectable and respected person. I ^vas
introduced to him, and received very honourably.


CHAPTER XII

$anZb~^Cnm—‘Ktrash — The Desert Kt/jak—El Kafa, subject to Mohammed Uzbek K/iSn—

El Sarai—Asak—El Majar—Disk Tog, the Camp of Mohammed Uzbek^-Ceremomes observed
here — BulgSr — Mode oj travellirig here — AstraeJtan~.Permtssion to visit Constantinople-^
Ukak — Mountains the Russians— Sardak — Baba Saltuk

I THE'v went on to the city of "Sanub, which is large, and belongs to the
governor of Kastamunia, Soleiman Badshaw. I remained here some time
Leaving this place I proceeded by sea for the city of ’’ El Kiram (Cnm),


a! Muluml a) BosiSni)* . sea) *

.jljJ al. Jjj, ‘ ■jy.'Lli/-’

• ’’ • * . jliob yU-i-t "

» Mr. Kosegarten has ck-ijl which he wntes Isntk
■I- So Mr. Kosegarten, which he writes Matems.

t Mr K Boll. Our MSS present here lai^ additions to that of Mr Kosegarten.


TARTAR Y.


75


but suffered considerable distress in the voyage, and was very near being
drowned. We arrived, however, at length, at the port of ^ El Kirash, which
belongs to the desert country of ’'KiQak.^ This desert is green and pro-
ductive : it has, however, neither tree, mountain, hill, nor wood in it.
The inhabitants bum dung. They travel over this desert upon a cart,
which they call *Araba. The journey is one of six months ; the extent of
three of which belongs to the Sultan 'Mohammed Uzbek Klian;t that of
three more to the infidels. I hired one of these carts for my jomney from
the port of Kirash to the city of “El Kafa, which belongs to Mohammed
Uzbek. The greater part of the inhabitants are Christians, J Ihing under
his protection. From this place I travelled in a cart to the city of “El
Kiram, which is one of the large and beautiful cities of the districts of the
Sultan Mohammed Uzbek Khan. From this place I proceeded, upon a
cart which I had hired, to the city of “El Sarai,§ the residence of Mo-
hammed Uzbek. The peculiarity of this desert is, that its herbs serve
for fodder for their beasts : and on this account their cattle are numerous.
They have neither feeders nor keepers, which arises from the severity
of their laws against theft, which are these : When any one is con-

. ' . hjS ' . ®

. . 1^1 “

* On the origin of this name and people, see D’Herbelot’s very interesting article, under
Cabgiak.

f “ Uziei Khan, fils de Toghtagou, meurt, selon les Russes en 1341.” De Guignes, Hist,
gen. de Huns, tom. i. p. 287. He must, therefore, have been living when our traveller visited
these parts. In tom. iv, however, pp. 2S4-5, it is stated that he died’in 1335 or 6, and what is
Still more decisive the author proceeds : “ on remarque que I’epoque de sa mort est celle de
la naissance du iameux Tamerlan. Les Arabes ont design^ cette annee par ce mot de leur
langue Loudh qui signifie rrfuge, pour fair voir que les hommes avoient besoin d’asjle dans si
grandes calamites. Les lettres qui forment ce mot, en les prenent selon leur valeur numerique,
designent I’annee 736 de I’Hegire.” He was descended of the Mogul dynasty of Kifjak
(De Guignes, Captchaq). For some account of the movements of this prince about this time, see
D’Herbelot, art. Abou-Said, and of his successors, art. Uzbek.

J These Christians were generally Nestorians, and were well treated for the most part under
Mohammed Uzbek Khan. See Asseman’s Biblioth. Orient., tom. iii. P. 2, pp. ci. and cxxi, &c.,
where we have some very valuable notices respecting them. See also D’Herbelot, under the
articles Grim, and Solgat.

§ See D’Herbelot, under Sarai.

L 2


76


TARTARY.


victed of having stolen a beast, he is compelled to return it with nine others
of equal value But, if this is not in his power, his children are taken
If, however, he have no children, he is himself slaughtered just hke a
sheep.

After several days* journey I arrived at 'Azak,* which is a small toivn
situated on the sea-shore. In it resides an Emir on the part of the Sultan
Mohammed, who treated us with great respect and hospitality. From
this place I proceeded to the city of *EI Majar, which is a large and hand-
some place The Turkish women of these parts are very highly respected
particularly the wives of the nobles and kings These women are religious,
and prone to almsgiving and other good works They go unveiled, how-
ever, with their faces quite exposed

I next set out for the camp of the Sultan, which was then m a place
called *Bish Tag, or Five Mountains, and arrived at a station to which the
Sultan with his retinue had just come before us : at this place, which is
termed the urdu, or camp, we amved on the first of the month Rama-
dan. Here we witnessed a moving city, with its streets, mosques, and
cooking-houses, the smoke of which ascended as they moved along When,
however, they halted, all these became stationary. This Sultan Moham-
med Uzbek IS very powerful, enjoys extensive rule, and is a subduer of the
infidels He is one of the seven great kings of the world , which are, the
Sultan of the West, the Sultan of Egypt and Syria, the Sultan of the two
Iraks, the Sultan of the Turks Uzbek, the Sultan of Turkistan and “MS-
wara El Nahar, the Sultan of India, and the Sultan of China

It IS a custom with Mohammed Uzbek to sit after prayer on the Fnday,
under an alcove called the “golden alcove,” which is very much orna-
mented . he has a throne in the middle of it, overlaid with silver plate,
which IS glided and set with jewels The Sultan sits upon the throne, his
four wives, some at his right hand,i others at his left, sitting also upon the

. ^

* See D Herbelol, under Azac

f We have here a hoe illustration of theregnl pomp exhibited in the 45th Psalm, where we find
the queen also enjoying the honour due to her rank, very unlike the practice of the Mohamme-
dans, among whom they are never allowed to appear in public. We «ha!l hereafter find something
similar to this witnessed by our traveller in the island of Sumatra.


TART ARY.


77


throne. Beneath the throne stand his two sons, one on his right, the
other on his left ; before him sits his daughter. Whenever one of these
wives enters, he arises, and taking her by the hand, puts her into her place
upon the throne. Thus they are exposed to the sight of all, without so
much as a veil. After this, come in the great Emirs, for whom chairs are
placed on the right and left, and on these they sit. Before the King stand
the princes, who are the sons of his uncle, brothers, and near kinsmen. In
front of these, and near the door, stand the sons of the great Emirs ; and
behind these, the general officers of the army. People then enter, accord-
ing to their rank; and saluting the King, return and take their seats
at a distance. When, however, the evening prayer is over, the supreme
consort, who is Queen, returns ; the rest follow, each with their attendant
beautiful slaves. The women, who are separated on account of any un-
cleanness, are seated upon horses ; before their carriages are cavalry, behind
them beautiful Mamluks. Upon this day I was presented to the Sultan,
who received me very graciously, and aftei*wards sent me some sheep and
a horse, with a leathern bag of kimiz, which is the milk of a mare ; and
very much valued among them as a beverage.

The yives of this King are highly honoured. Each one has a mansion
for herself, her followers, and servants. When the Sultan wishes to visit
one of them, he sends word, and preparation is made. One of these -wives
is a daughter of ''Takfur, the Emperor of Constantinople. I had already
visited each of them, and on this account the Sultan received me : this is
a custom among them ; and whoever fails in observing it, suffers the impu-
tation of a breach of politeness.

I had formerly heard of the city of 'Bulgar,* and hence I had conceived
a desire to see it; and to observe, whether what had been related of it, as
to the extremity of the shortness of its nights, and again of its days, in
the opposite season of the year, were true or not. There was, however.


* According to the &c. ^ S

Bulgar is a city of Siberia, which is extremely cold ; the
cold scarcely ever leaves their country either in summer or winter. Their houses are built of


wood.


78


TARTARY


between that place, and the camp of the Sultan, a distance of ten days I
requested the Sultan, therefore, that he would appoint some one who would
bring me thither and back, which he granted

When, therefore, I was saying the prayer of sun set, in that place, which
happened in the month of Ramadan, I hasted, neveitheless the time for
evening prayer came on, which I went hastily through 1 then said that of
^midnight, as well as that termed 'El Witr, but was mertaken by the
dawn * In the same manner also is the day shortened m this place, m the
opposite season of the year I remained here three days, and then returned
to the King

In Bulgar, I was told of the land of darkness, and certainly had a great
desire to go to it from that place The distance, however, was that of forty
days I was diverted, therefore, from the undertaking, both on account
of its great danger, and the little good to be derived from it I was told
that there was no travelling tliither except upon little sledges, which
are drawn by la^ dogs, and, that dunng the whole of the journey, the
roads are covered with ice, upon which neither the feet of man, nor the
hoofs of beast, can take any hold These dogs, however, have nails by
which their feet take firm hold on the ice No one enters thefe parts
except powerful merchants, each of whom has perhaps a hundred of
such sledges as these, which they load with provisions, dnnks and
wood for there we have neither trees, stones, nor houses The guide
m this country is the dog, who has gone the journey several times
the price of which will amount to about a thousand dinars The sledge
IS harnessed to his neck, and with him three other dogs are joined, hut
of which he is the leader The others then follow him with the sledge
and when he stops they stop The master never strikes or repnmands
this dog , and when he proceeds to a meal, the dogs are fed first for if
this were not done, they would become enraged, and perhaps run away


* On the prayers and times for performiDg them generally among the Mahommedans see
M de Sacy s Chrestomath e Arabc tom i pp 161 168 Of the last

notice but in the lexicons we are told that it s gnifies prayer generally, and that wh ch is not
prescribed butspontaseous.


TARTARY.


79


and leave their master to perish. When the travellers have completed
their forty days or stages through this desert, they arrive at the land of dark-
ness; and each man, leaving what he has brought with him, goes back to
his appointed station. On the morrow they return to look for their goods,
and find, instead of them, sable, ermine, and the fir of the ^ sinjab.* If then
the merchant likes what he finds, he takes it away; if not, he leaves it,
and more is added to it; upon some occasions, however, these people will
take back their o%vn goods, and leave those of the merchant’s.! In this
way is their buying and selling carried on ; for the merchants know not
whether it is with mankind or demons that they have to do ; no one being-
seen during the transaction. It is one of the properties of these firs, that
no vermin ever enters them.

I returned to the camp of the Sultan on the 28th of Ramadan ; and,
after that, travelled vidth him to the city of ® Astrachan, which is one of his
cities. It is situated on the banks of the river '‘Athal,! which is one of
the great rivers of the world. At this place the Sultan resides during the
very cold weather ; and when this river, as well as the adjoining waters,
are frozen, the King orders the people of the country to bring thousands of
bundles of hay, which they do, and then place it upon the ice, and upon
this they travel.

When the King had arrived at Astrachan, one of his wves, who was daugh-
ter to the Emperor of Constantinople, and then big with child, requested to
be allowed to risit her father, with whom it was her intention to leave her
child and then to return : this he granted. I then requested to be permitted
to go with her, that I may see Constantinople ; and was refused, on account
of some fears which he entertained respecting me. I flattered him, how-
ever, telling him that I should never appear before her but as his servant
and guest, and that he need entertain no fear whatsoever. After this he
gave me permission, and I accordingly took my leave. He gave me fifteen

. Jll ^

See an interesting note by Mr. Kosegarten on this passage, p. 24.

+ Mr. Kosegarten has a small addition here, which he translates : “ Principes Sinenses bene ex
iis augurantur, et summopere eas appetunt, ita ut mille circiter dinaris ibidem Eestimuntur."
Immediately after this our text presents a large addition,
t The Volga. See D’Herbelot, under the article Etel.


80


tartahi


hundred dinars, a dress of honour, and several horses Each of his ladies
also gave me some pieces of bullion silver, whieli they call El Suwam
from the singular sawma as did also lus sons and daughters
I set out accordingly on the 10th of the month Shawal, m companywith
the royal consort ’Bailun, daughter to the Emperor of Constantinople
The Sultan accompanied us through the first stage, in order to encourai^e
her, and then returned The Queen was attended m her journey by
thousand of the King s army, about five hundred of which were cavalry as
her servants and followers In this manner we arrived at^’Ilkak,* which
IS a moderately sized town but excessively cold Between this place and
*E1 Sarai which belongs to the Sultan, there is adistance of ten days At
the distance of one day from this place are the mountains of the Russians
who are Christians, with red hair and blue eyes, an ugly and perfidious peo
pie They have silvermines and from their country is the 'suwam j e the
pieces of Sliver bullion brought "With these they buy and sell, each piece
weighing "five ounces After ten days journey from this place we armed
at the city of " Sud ik,t which is one of the cities of the desert of '’KiQak
and situated on the sea shore After this we arrived at a city known by
the name of '‘Baba Saltuk Saltuk, they say, was a’dmner This is
the last district (in this direction) belonging to the Turks , between which
however, and the distncts of Room, is a distance of eighteen days, eight
of which are over an uninhabited desert without water but as we entered
It during the cold season, we did not want much water

JjhLibli’’ at


* Mr Ko«egatlen has Ukftl Our copies here present a large add Uon
f This IS probably tlie Soudak of M D Herbelot


ROOM.


81


CHAPTER XIII.

Forires’: of Maktiili — Constantinople — Ceremonies, S[C . — Return to Taiiai y — Astiachan — El Sarui

IChavureznt — SarSi Jtd — Bokhara — El Kat — Wabkana — Jengiz Khans Origin and Progress

Kalhshab—Camp of Tarmashlrm Khan — Occurrence at the Mosque — The Yasak, or Regula-
tions of Jengiz Khun — Samarkand — Nasqf — Tirmidh — Balkh — Kuistan — lierut — Nisdbur —

Join Tits — Saralhas — Zdva — Bastdm — Ktindus — Baghtdn — Barwan — Hindu Kush — El

Jarkh — Ghizna — Af^ians — Kabul — Kirmdsk — Shish Nagar — The Panj Ab.

Ox the occasion of my preparing to enter this desert, I presented myself
before the Queen, and paid my respects to her both in the morning and
evening. She received me v^ery graciously, and sent to me a good part of
every present which then came to her. I then made known to her my want
of some horses : and she ordered fifteen to be given to me. After this we
arrived at the fortress of ‘ Mahtull, which is the first in the districts belong-
ing to Room, but between which and Constantinople is a distance of two
and twenty days.

Before this time, the news of her approach had reached her father, who
sent out ladies and nurses to meet her at this fortress, with a large army.
From this place to Constantinople they travel with horses and mules only,
on account of the unevenness of the roads ; she, therefore, left her car-
riages behind her. The Emir who attended her husband’s troops returned
when we had arrived at this place, and she was now attended by her own
followers only. At this place I also dismissed my carriages, and a number
of my attendants and companions, recommending them (to the returning
party), who received and treated them courteously.

The Queen had with her a mosque, which she set up at every stage, just
as her husband used to do. In this she had daily prayers. She left it, how-
ever, at the fortress. After this the office of the Mo’azin ceased : v\dne was
brought into the banquet and of this she drank. I was also told, that
she ate swine’s flesh Avith them : nor did one who prayed remain with her ;
some, however, of her Turkish sen'ants daily prayed with us. Thus were
the tastes changed by entering into the territories of infidelity. The Queen,
however, ordered the officer who had come out to meet her, to pay every
attention and respect to me. When we had arrived within a day’s journey
of the city, her younger brother came out to meet her, accompanied by

•

M


82


ROOM


about fi^ e thousand cavalry, all in armour He met her on foot, on account
of lus being her junior When she had kissed his head, he passed on uith
her On the next day her second brother, who \s the heir apparent, met
her, having with him ten thousand horse Both parties in this case dis
mounted , and after they had met they remounted and went on When
at length she approached Constantinople, the greatest part of its inhabi
tants, men, women, and children, came out attired m their best clothes
either walking or riding, beating drums and shouting as they proceeded
The Sultan, also, wth his queen, the mother of this lady, attended by
the officers of state and nobles, came to meet her When the Emperor
drew near both the parties mixed, and such \vas the pressure that it uas
impossible for me to pass between them I was therefore obliged, at the
peril of my life, to see to the carrying of our lady and her companions 1
was told, that when she met her parents she alighted and kissed the ground
before them, as well as the hoofs of their horses
We entered Constantinople about sun set, they were then ringing their
bells at such a rate, that the very horizon shook with the noise When
we came to the gate of the Emperor, the porters refused to admit us with
out a permission from the Emperor , some of her followers therefore, went
and told her our case, and she requested permission of her father, stat
mg our circumstances to him We were then allowed to enter, and uere
lodged in a house adjoining that of our lady, who sent our provisions
morning and evening The King also granted us a letter of safe conduct,
permitting us to pass wherever we pleased about the city On the fourth
day after our arrival, I was introduced to the 'Sultan Takfur, son of
George, kmg of Constantinople His father George was still living, but
had retired from the world, become a monk, and given up the kingdom
to bjs son * When I arrived al Ibe fifth ^te nf the palace^ which


• The retired Emperor must have beeo ilndronicus the elder, the present one Andromcui
junior his grandson In Mr Kosegartena extract we have Nicephorus, perhaps but
which or whether either of these names, is the true one, I have not been able to determ ne
It IS not improbable that the name of Nicephorus Gregoras has got in here by mistake
Kor liave I been able to find in any of the histonaos when or wliere this shameful mar
riage was contracted I am much templed tolielieve that the Byzantine writers have been
ashamed to mention it Gibbon, indeed, mentioDS such a marriage as this biought about by the


ROOM.


83


was guarded by soldiers, I was searched, lest I should carry any wea-
pon wth me ; which is submitted to by every citizen, as well as stran-
ger, who -svishes to be introduced to the King. The same is obsen^ed by
the Emperors of India. I was introduced, therefore, and did homage.
The Emperor was sitting upon his throne with his Queen, and daughter,
our mistress; her brothers were seated beneath the throne. I was kindly
received, and asked, as to my circumstances and arrival ; also about Je-
rusalem, the Temple of the Resurrection,'^ the Cradle of Jesus,t Bethle-

nianagenient of John Catacuzenus: but, then, this is said to have been of his oivn daughter. Vol. v.
p. 278, ed. 1826. We are told in Mr. Savage’s abridgment of Knolls and Rycaut’s Turkish
History, that Amurath the First married the Emperor of Constantinople’s daughter, but this
must be a totally different affair. The death of Andronicus the elder is placed by Gibbon in
1332. As Mr. Ulenbroek has given a very interesting note on this subject in bis Iracse Descrip-
tio, I may perhaps be excused in giving it in this place (p. 80, proleg.) “ Hinc semel iterumque,
affinitate etiam ablata, Impp. Graeci Principes Mohammedanos sibi devincire studuerunt. Sic
Imp. Andronicus Palaeologus senior filiam suam obtulit Cazano Mogolorum (vel uti Grseci agunt)
Tocharorum) Persicorum Khano, A. 1304. Cf. Pachymeres Andronici Hist. lib. v. c. 16. Fate-
mur interim dubitari posse, an Cazanus veris Moslerais sit annumerandus. Cf. de Guignes Hist,
des Huns, tom. iv. p. 267, 270. Graeci certe ilium Christianorum fautorem habuisse videntur. Cf.
Pachym. lib. vi. c. 1. At de Islamismo successoris Cazani fratrisque, Gai'atseddini Mohammedis
Khodabendeh, alias Kharbenda et corrupte a Pachyraere appellati, nulla certe dubi-

tatio eat. Huic tamen Maria Imperatoris soror A. 1308 desponsata fuit. Cf. Pachym, lib. vii. c.
33. Nec multo interjecto tempore nupserat etiam alia Maria filia notha Imp. Andronici Togh-
tagou Khano Mogolorum Kapschakensium Khano, Guignesio teste, tom. i. p. 350. Hujus quoque
successor! filioque Mohammed! Uzbekkhano, Moslemicis sacris deditissimo, uxorem fuisse filiam
Andronici Junioris colligas ex Kosegarteni V. C. Commentatione de Mohammedis Ibn Batirtw
Tingitani itjnerano...Hmc igitur acciderunt inter A. 1333 et 1341...Denique baud ita multo post,
decessorum exemplum imitatus Joannes Cantacuzenus, circa A. 1346, filiam suam Theodoram
sive Mariam. ..Orkhano uxorem dedit, &c.” Hence Mr. Ulenbroek thinks it probable, that Mo-
hammedan places of worship had been tolerated before and after this time at Constantinople. I
will merely remark, that if so, it is extraordinary that neither El Harawi, who visited this cit}'
in the thirteenth century, nor Ibn Batuta, who visited it in the fourteenth, has made any men-
tion of the fact.

* <uUi!! This church, according to EdrIsI, is large, and in his days was considered as a place
of pilgrimage. His words are 1,1

oil ^ IfJl ^ J— .-.G l. &c. The great church, known by “ the Church of

the Resurrection,” but which the Mohammedans call Kamama. This is the church to which
pilgrimages are performed from all the parts of Room, &c. Edit. Rosenmiiller, Lipsiae, 1 828.

t This is, according to El Harawi, in a cave under the temple of El Aksa ; his words are

(J^ Sj\k-a ... u:,~asrv .

M2


84


ROOM


hem, and the city of Abraham (or ‘Hebron), then of Damascus, Egypt,
Irak, and the country of Room, to all of which I gaie suitable replies
A Jew was our interpreter. The King was much surprised at my tale
and said to his sons Let this man be treated honourably, and gue him
a letter of safe conduct. He then put a dress of honour on me, and
ordered a saddled horse to be given me, with one of his own umbrellas,
which with them is a mark of protection I then requested that he
would appoint some one to nde about with me daily into the different
quarters of the citj , that I might see them He made the appointment
accordingly, and I rode about with the officer for some days, witnessing the
wonders of the place Its largest church is that of ' Saint Sophia * I
saw Its outside only Its interior 1 could not, because, just within the
door there was a cross which e\ety one who entered worehipped It is

“ hi ^opia ' jAs)l or Hebron

* £1 Har»ni, who visited Constantinople in the 13th century, thus speaks of it, and of this
church jWlj Lij

j-i j J ^ ^,5^'

^ Jb idll

jfjUj \aJx ^ IjUe aij Ui

jai 1 — Ui Uilyjlj UsU^^j UiL,Aj jjii u^iji

(j*-Usa!l AjUU Uj liU*— 11

I — I— jU^ j ^ tiJJtl Jw Uj ^

UV^^ jS\ tXbj .‘ti jjl l*At)

>dl1 >Ll In this place are statues of brass and marble, pillars and wonderful talismans
as well as the minarets already mentioned, and other moniimeots ^of greatness) to uhich no
equal can be found in the habitable world Here is also Ayia Sophia (\yi* which is the
greatest church they have I sias told by Yakut Ibn Abd Allah, the merchant of Mosul, that
he had entered it, and that it was just as I had desenbed lU In it are 360 doors, and they say,
that one of the angels resides in it Round about bis place they have made fences of gold , and
the story about him is very strange, which s/e shall relate in its place when I shall speak of the
arrangement of this church, its sue, height, its doors and their height, its length, breadth, and
the pillars that are in it also of the wonders of the city, its order, the sort of fish found in it
the gate of gold, the towers of marble, the brazen elephants, and all its monuments and won
ders and all the kindness shewn ine by the lung Emanuel (which I shall do), in the book of
wonders D. V. as already mentioned This city, which is greater than its fame,

may God of his bounty and grace make the capita] of Islamism '


ROOM.


85


said, that this church is one of the foundations of ’'Asaf, the son of Bara-
chias, and nephew of Solomon. The churches, '"monasteries, and other
places of worship within the city, are almost innumerable.

When it appeared to the Turks, who had accompanied our mistress, that
she still professed the religion of her father, and wished to remain with
him, they requested permission to return to their own country, which she
granted. She also gave them rich presents, and appointed persons to
accompany them to their homes. She also requested me, that she might
commend these attendants to me, giving me, at the same time, 300 dinars,
with 2,000 dirhems in money ; likewise dresses both of woollen and cotton
cloth, as well as horses, on the part of her father. I returned, therefore,
after a stay in Constantinople of one month and six days, to the place where
I had left my companions, carriages, and other goods : and, from this place
we travelled upon these carriages, until we arrived at Astrachan, where I
had formerly left the Sultan Mohammed Uzbek Khan. But here I found
that he had gone with his court to "'El Sarai, to which I also proceeded.
When I was admitted to his presence, he asked me of our journey, of
Constantinople and its king, of all which I told him. He then reimbursed
my travelling expenses, as is his usual custom. This city of ^E1 Sarai is
very handsome and exceedingly large. Of its learned men is the Imam,
the learned ' Nodman Oddin, “ El Khavarezmi. I met him in this place.
He is a man of the most liberal disposition, carries himself majestically
with the king, but humbly with the poor, and with his pupils. The sultan
visits him every Friday, sits before him, and shews him every kindness ;
while he behaves in the most repulsive manner.

I then travelled on to ** Khavarezm, between which and this place is a
journey of forty days, through a desert in which there is but little water
and grass. There are carriages in it, which are drawn by camels. After
ten days I arrived at the city of " Sarai Juk, which is situated upon the
banks of a large and full river, which they call the Ulu su or great
water. Over this is a bridge joining its nearest parts, like the bridge
of Bagdad. From this place I travelled for three days -with all the haste


9 9


-


.^Ipl


8G


TARTAKl


possible, and arrived at Khavare 2 m This is the largest city the Turks have
and IS very much crowded, on account of the multitude of its inhabitants.
It IS subject to the sultan Uabek Khan, and is governed on his part by a
great Emir, who resides within it I have never seen better bred, or more
liberal, people than the inhabitants of Khavirezm, or those who are more
friendly to strangers They have a very commendable practice with regard
to their worship, which is this When any one absents himself from his
place in the mosque, he is beaten by tbe priest in the presence of the con
gregation , and, moreover, fined in file dinars, which go towards repainng
the mosque In every mosque, therefore, a whip is hung up for this
purpose

Without this city is the river 'Gihon, one of the four rivers which flow
from Paradise This river, like the Athal, freezes over m the cold season
and remains frozen for five months, during which time people travel over it
Without this city also, is the grave of the Sheikh ^ l^ajm Oddm the Great
one of the great saints over which there is a cell Here also is tbe grave
of the very learned ^ J ir Allah El Zamakhshan * Zamakhshar is a nllage
at the distance of four days from Khavarezm The prevailing sect at Kha
vSrezm, is that of the * Schismatics t This, however, they keep secret,
because the Sultan Uzbek is a Soonnee

They have m Khav irezm a melon to which none, except that of ' Bok
hara, can be compared tbe nearest to it is that of Isphahln The peel of
this melon is green, the interior red It is perfectly sweet and rather hard
Its most remarkable property js, that it may be cut m oblong pieces and
dried, and then put into a case, like a fig, and earned to India or China
Among dried fruits there is none superior to this It is occasionally used as
a present to their kings


* See D Ilerbelot under Zamacicscliar aod Zantabdian

•}• On Ihe ongm and pecul ar lies of this sect sve Pococke s Specimen Hist Arab pp 20
214 ed 1806 ’ll de Sacy a Chrest Arab tom i p 85J Their principal dogma is a denial
oC and a bal«C VbaV raaw aaw do cither good or O'lvl jast aa plcasev- They

are also termed Kadantes because they deny predestination


TARTAR Y.


87


From Khavarezm I set out for Bokhara, and, after a journey of eighteen
days through a sandy and uninhabited desert, arrived at the city of Ei
Kiit* which is but small, then at 'Wabkana: then, after one stage, we
came to Bokhara, which is the principal city of the country beyond the
Gihon. After it had been ravaged by the Tartars, it almost entirely disap-
peared : I found no one in it who knew any thing of science.

It is said that Jengiz Khan,t who came with the Tartars into the coun-
tries of Islamism and destroyed them, was in his outset a blacksmith in
the country of Khota. J He was a liberal-minded, powerful, and corpulent

. \ks!' "" . al '■ .

» This is, perhaps, the Kath (tijK) of the Marasid El Itlaa, which it thus describes :

Kalh is a large city of Khavarezm (or Kharezm), on the eastern parts of tlie Jaihun (or Oxus),
nor is there any other eastward of it in the districts of Khavarezm.

Our copies constantly read not with Mr. Kosegarten’s. Whatever

might have been the intention of the copyist in writing his, I think there can be no doubt, that
our traveller did not intentionally write “ porcorum regem,” as he supposes, p. 25.

The accounts given of the origin of this extraordinary man by Abulfeda (Annales Musle*
mici, vol. iv. p. 278-9) and others, differ in many respects from this. It is not improbable,
however, that if we were in possession of all the particulars, they could be reconciled much
easier than accounts of much later date, and of events which have taken place much nearer
home. See the Rauzut El Safa, vol. v. ; the History of Ghengiz Khan, by Petis La Croix ;
and D'Herbelot, under Genghizhan ; also Marco Polo’s account, (Travels by Mr. Marsden, chap,
xliv. p. 194, with the notes). The accounts given by these travellers agree much better with one
another, than either of them does with the historians.

For accounts of the battles between Jengiz Khan, Khavarezm Shah, and his son Jalal
Oddin, see Abulfeda, vol. iv. pp. 294-5, 368-9, &c. Histoire des Mongols, Paris, 1824 : liv. i.
ch. v. &c.

^ In the very valuable notes of Mr. Marsden, on the Travels of Marco Polo, he gives it as
his opinion, that H-i., or Khota, Khotai, or Kotai, is the same with Chinese

Tartaiy, and appeals to the Oriental geographers as being of this opinion. I can only say
from all I have seen of them, that they speak very vaguely on the situation of these
places. Abulfeda, for example, who is no mean geographer, says (Ann. Mus. vol. iv. p. 228)

. Ik&H *• “ he passed the river (Gihon)

and went into Khota ; and there was beyond Khota on the borders of Chinese Tartary,” &c.
which plainly marks the places as distinct. Again, in our text, we have Khota and China men-
tioned as distinct places. EdrisT, too, speaks of Chinese Tartary, and the cJijUi as
distinct places, meaning the towns, &c. which are evidently to be found in Khota.


8S


T ARTARY


per'son His practice as, to assemble and feast the people , who m conse-
quence joined him m considerable ntnnbers, and made him their leader
He then conquered the district in which he lived , and, with this accession
of strength and followers, he next subdued the whole country of “ Khota
then China after this the countries of'Khashak, ^Kashgar, and *Malik •
At this time '"Jalal Oddm Sanjar, son of 'Khavarezm Shah, was king of
Khavarezm, *Khorasan, and “Mawarn El Nahr, a powerful and splendid
pnnee Jengiz Kh7m, on account of an affair which had happened among
the merchants, and m which some property had been taken, invaded his ter-
ritories f This IS well known AVlicn, however, Jengiz Khan had entered
upon the frontiers of Jalal Oddin’s countries, he was met by the king’s army,
winch, after some fighting, was put to the route After this Jalal Oddm
himself met him, and some such battles took place, as have never been wit-
nessed among the hloliammedans

In the event, however, Jengiz Khln got possession of Mawara El Nahr,
and destroyed Bokh'ira, Samarkand, and 'ElTirmidh, killed the inhabi
tants, taking prisoners the youth only, and leaving the country quite deso-
late He then passed over theGiIion, and took possession of all *Khorasan
and ’lr"ik, destroying the cities and slaughtering the inhabitants He then
perished, having appointed liis son ^ Hulaku to succeed him Hulaku (soon
after) entered Bagdad, destroyed it, and put to death the * Calif El Mostaa-

JIL?- ^ bI I ndiK *

j!/'*

Assenian seems to me to have determined this question just!/. Bibliolh Orient tom lu P 11,
p 512 “ Prime, pro>inaam Mangi, qua Abulpharagto iVon-i, aliis Jl/ann, ^ *.L

Masaa, et M<tcin dicitur, Sioam esse ptopm dielam, cujus notissims urbes J/antin,

et Confit Abulphamgio et Paulo memonintiir, Ac Secundo, Chatajs Sinieijue nomme a
S/ris Arabibus Persis, Turcisque senptonbus septentrionalem Sinam intelligi, hoc est, earn
Sms partem, qus ad celebernroura murum quo Tartan & Sinis dmduntur, acccdit. Tertio,
Chan Dalek urbem, in qua Coblaius sedem regni fixit, quam M Paulus Camialu vocat, eandem
esse ac Peiinam, ut Herbelotms et RenaudoUus lecte monent *

• Ahnahg, dans le voisinage des hauts montagnes Gueuk et de mont Coui, Ac Hlstoire des
Mongols, l»v u ch 1 p 376 7

f See an account of this affair m the Histoire des Mongols, tom i hv i chap v p U8-9,
Ac Pans, 1624


TARTARY.


89


sem of the house of Abbas, and reduced the inhabitants.* He then pro-
ceeded with his followers to Syria, until divine Providence put an end to
his career : for there he was defeated by the army of Egypt, and made
prisoner. Thus was their progress in the Mohammedan countries put an
end to.

The epitomator Ibn JazzI El Kelbl states, that he has been told by the
Sheikh “ Ibn El Haji, who had heard it from ^ Abd Allah Ibn Eoshaid,
who had met ' Nur Oddin Ibn El Zajaj one of the learned men of Irak,
with his brother’s son in Mecca, and who told him as they were con-
versing together, that in the war with the Tartars in Irak not fewer than
four and twenty thousand learned men perished ; and that himself, and
that man, pointing to his brother’s son, were the only learned men who had
escaped.

I next proceeded from Bokhara for the camp of the Sultan ^ Ala Oddin
Tarmashirin,! and, in my way, passed by Nakhshab, the place to which
the patronymic of the Sheikh Abu Turab El NakhshabiJ is referred.

. At ^ jjj ' . ^ ishl 0u£ ’’ . “

* For particulars respecting the butchery here alluded to, see the Annales Moslemici, vol.
iv.p, 550-1, &c.

+ This is, probably, the Tirim Siri Khan of Dow and Ferishta,, who

invaded Hindustan A. H. 727, with a numerous army, but retired without making a conquest
of it, after receiving great wealth from Mohammed Shah. Dow, vol. i. p. 314. See also the
extract from De Guignes a little lower down. Some account of the exploits of this prince in
the neighbourhood of Ghizna, is also to be found in the first volume of the by

(jjjjjll Ju£ under the date of 732 of the Hegira, A.D. 1331, This name is written
in the Tarlkhi Badayuni •

J A short account of this recluse is given in the of which the following is an

extract: ij:,....;!

Vj ^yi 1 X 4 ^ jJ) ^

J All y\^ uHrw alii Xy- y\ ula-sl «taA,l J l - .. ^,..^1 y\

oUp- alii ijj4XjLo lAj V ty b iy\ji y\ lc-.-)!

^ LSji^ ^ ct I! XxttS j\i iU>

y JIX

N


90


TARTARS


From this place I proceeded to the camp of the Sultan, the king of ]\lHA\ara
El Nahr This is a powerful pnnce, who has at his command a large armj,
and IS remarkable for the justice of hts laws The territories of this king
occupy a middle station among those of the four great kings of the world
who are, the king of China, that of India, that of Irik, that of the Turks
Mohammed Uzbek Khin all of whom send presents to him, gl^e him the
place of honour, and very highly respect him He succeeded to the king-
dom after his brother Jagatai, who was an infidel, and had succeeded to his
elder brother * Kobak, who was also an infidel he was, nevertheless, just,
and much attached to the Mohammedans, to whom he paid great respect
It IS said that this king Kobak was one day talking with the doctor and
preacher ''Badr Oddm El Maidani, when he said to him joii say that
God has left nothing unmentioned in his book The preacher replied, it is
even so Shew me, then, said he, where my name is to be found The reply
was, In the passage In which form he pleased

hath he fashioned thee ’ * Tins astonished him, and he said, ■’ Bakhshi, that
is, w ell done * I spent some days in the camp of Tarmashinn Upon a
certain day, however, I went to the mosque, which was in the camp (the
camp they call the Urdu) for I had heard that the Sultan was to be in the
mosque When the service was ended, I approached m order to pay my
respects to him, as he had heard of my arrival He was pleased with me,
and treated me very respectfully After this be sent for me I went to

i3Z»- (jju cjlaAl tlLf^


^ ^ sJki ULfW" L/h Abu Turab

Kakshab), maj’ God aanctif/ bis mjstery, was (a sainl) of the first class , his name n as Askar
Ibn Hasin they also say, that AsLar Ibn Rlohamoisd Ibn Hasia was one of the She JAs of
Rhorason, famous for his knowledge of decisions, piety, and faith He was associated with Abu
Hatim Attar of Basra, and Hatim Asamm He was also the preceptor of Abu Abd Allah
Jallad, and of Abu Obeid AUah Basan Th s Abu Turab went with three hundred Rukwah
Dais {i e I suppose persons dolbed in rags as religious) Two of these remained with lun,
namely, Abu Abd Allah JatUd, and Abu Obetd Basan, all the test returned It is one ofhislay
logs That IS an enlightened man, whom nothing perplexes and with whom every thing is clear
He was at his prayers m the desert, when be was scorched by the saraoom, and remained fora
whole jear standing on his feet , this happened lo the year 245, theyeir m which Dbu EIhun
departed this life

• This passage occurs a few lines from the beginning of the82d chapter of the Koran


TART ARY.


91


him’, and found him in his tent, and there paid my respects to him. He
then asked mp of Mecca, Medina, Jerusalem, Damascus, and Egypt; as
also of El Malik El Nash, the kings of Irak, and Persia. To all of which
I gave suitable answers, and received marks of distinction. One of the odd
things that happened respecting him, wms, that once when the hour of
pi-ayer had arrived, and the people were assembled in the mosque, the
Sultan delayed. One of his young men coming in, said to the priest ''Ha-
sam Oddln El Yaghl, the Sultan wishes you to wait a little. Upon this
the priest got up and said : I ask, are prayers had here for the sake of
God, or of Tarmashirln? He then ordered the Moazin to proclaim the
prayers. So the Sultan came in after two prostrations had been performed,
and went through his prayers at the extremity of the part in which the
people stand, and which is near the door of the mosque where they usually
leave their mules, and there went through what he had missed. He then
came and seized the hand of the priest, who laughed heartily at him. He
then sat down in the oratory, the priest by his side, and I by the side of the
priest. He then addressed me. When, said he, you go back to your own
country say, that a doctor of the Persians sat thus with the Sultan of the
Turks (al. that a poor man of the poor of the Persians thus did with the
Sultan of the Turks). This priest it was who succeeded in reducing the
King to the observance of all the positive and negative commands. The
Sultan very much respected, loved, and obeyed him. But the Sheikh
accepted of no gifts from the King ; nor did he eat any thing but what he
acquired by the labour of his own hands. This King, when I wished to
travel on, provided me with 700 dinars for my journey. We broke up our
intercourse, therefore, and I set out accordingly.

This Tarmashirln (it may be remarked) had broken some of the statutes
of his grandfather Jengiz Khan, who had published a book entitled
'El Yasak*, the prohibition, which enacted, that whosoever should oppose

.jUl'

* Makrizi mentions this work as containing the regulations of Jengiz Khan, and calls it
Lj\j yusa, and ^ < yasak. From this word, according to him, originated the word Siyasat,

now in use among the Arabs to signify government, or punishment. See the Chrestomathie
Arabe of M. de Sacy, tom. ii. pp. and 160, edit. 2, where we have a short account

N 2


92


TARTAEY


any one of these statutes, should be put out of office Now, one of iVie
statutes was this, that the descendants of Jengiz, the governors of the
se\eral distncts, the wives of the nobles, and the general officers of the
army, should assemble upon a certain day m the year which they call
"El Ta^va, i c the feast, and, £hat should the Emperor ha^e altered
any one of these statutes, the nobles should stand up and say. Thou
hast done so and so upon such and such a day, and hast made an altera
tion m the statutes of El Yasak (* e that which is not to be changed), and
therefore, thy deposition is a necessary consequence They are then to
take him by the hand, and remove him from the throne, and to place m
it another of the descendants of Jengiz Khan And, should any one of the
nobles have committed any crime, he is to be duly adjudged on this occasion
Now, Tarmashirm had entirely abolished the observance of this day,
which gave very great offence Some time, therefore, after we had left the
country, the Tartars, together with their nobles, assembled and deposed
him, appointing for a successor one of his relations and to such an extent
was the matter pressed, that Tarmashirin took to flight and was put to death *
I then proceeded to Samarkand, which is a very large and beautiful city
Without it IS the tomb of " Kotham, son of Abb's, who was martyred on
the day the city was taken After this I arrived at the city of ®Nasaf,f


of these regulations See also tom r des Kotices et Extroits des Manusents de la Biblio
theque du Eoi, pp 592 &c The author of the Elistoire des Mongols, Pans, 1824 says,
tom I p 295, ‘ Ses statuts nc sont point parvenus jusqud nous, on nen trouve que quel*
ques extraits dans les auteurs de cette (poque &c
* De Guignes (Hist gen des Huns, tom ir p SIl) gives us, under the date 1842, the fol
lowmg notice of this prince “ Apres morl (Dgelaleddin) 1 empire ful donnfe a Begin, qui
eut pour successeur Bougha timour, ensuile a Doizi khan fils de Barak Apr^s cux regnerent
Buccessivement Kendgik, &c et Daouatmour khan, &c. Celui ct eut pour successeur ion
frere Turmeschinn, qui se fit Musulman et qut le premier ordonna a tous ses sujets d embrasser
celle rel gion, dont il ne se trouvoit plus de traces panni Ics Mogols, depuis que Berrat khan en
avoit fait autrefois professtoo Ce prince fut detron5 par son frdre Butun*khan qui lui succeda
et qui ^prouva un pareil sort de la part de son frere Zenkechj ”

+ This place, according to the Marasid El Itlaa « ^

^ JbaJb ii ^ 0'^) ^


T ARTARY.


93


to which the patronjTnic of Abu Jaafar Omar El Nasafi is referred. I then
went on to the city of ^ Timndh, to which is referred the patronjunic of
Abu Isa Mohammed El TirmidhI, author of the « Jamia El Keblr.* This
is a large and beautiful city, abounding wth trees and water. 'We then
passed over the Gihon into Khorasan; and, after a journey of a day and
half over a sandy desert in -which there was no house, we arrived at
the city of Balkh,t -svhich now lies in ruins. It has not been rebuilt since
its destruction by the cmrsed Jengiz Khan. The situation of its buildings
is not very discernible, although its extent may be traced. It is now in
ruins, and -wdthout society.

Its mosque was one of the largest and handsomest in the wmrld. Its
pillars were incomparable : three of which w'ere destroyed by Jengiz Khan,
because it had been told him, that the -wealth of the mosque lay concealed

cl

4 tr^-J 4

jblil .*1 .ij a city great in inhabitants and independent villages, and situated

between the Jaihun (Osus river) and Samarcand. It has a citadel, suburbs, and four gates, and
it is in a plain. The liills are about two farsangs from it, and adjoining Kashar. It has many
villages but no river except one which runs through the middle of the city. It fails however in
some seasons of the year. Their tillage and gardens are near wells.

* Among the several works bearing this title in Haji Khalfa, I find none ascribed to this author.
Henoticesit, however, under the title . There appears also to be some notice

of him in the by JamI, under the name Abu Bekr El Warak El Tirmidhi, which is

as follows, ^ pb <5^11 ^ ilh cl

bcl jl

A- , , &C. Abu Bekr El Warak El Tirmidhi was (a saint) of the second rank.

His name was Mohammed Ibn Omar El Hakim El Tirmidhi. He was originally of Tirmidh
(Termed of our maps), and his grave is now there, but was in Balkh. He was the paternal uncle
of Abu Isa of Tirmidh, author of the Musnad ( or book of cases) ; which is probably the
work styled ^^1 j^VJl by Ibn Batuta. A copy of this work is to be found at Oxford. See
Uri’s Catalogue, No. clxxxvii ; D’Herbelot, art. Giame al. Kebir ; and Ann. Muslem. tom. ii-
p. 275.

■j- A well known city in Khorasan, famous in history and for its wealth : between this place and
Tirmidh is a distance of twelve farsangs. 1^3 uT”

^'il &c.


94


TABTABY


under them, provided as a fund for its repairs When, however, he had
destro>ed them, nothing of the kmd was to be found, the rest, therefore,
he left as they were

The story about this treasure arose from the following circumstance It
IS said, that one of the Cahfs of the house of Abb is was \ery much
enraged at the inhabitants of Balkh, on account of some accident which
had happened, and, on this account, sent a person to collect a heavy fine
from them Upon this occasion, the women and children of the city be
took themselves to thevvifeof their then governor, who, out of her own
money, built this mosque , and to her they made a grievous complaint She
accordingly sent to the officer, who had been commissioned to collect the fine,
a robe very richlj embroidered and adorned with jewels, much greater m
value than the amount of the fine impeded This, she requested might
be sent to tlic Calif as a present from herself, to be accepted instead of
the fine The officer accordingly took the robe, and sent it to the Calif,
who, when ho saw it, was surprised at her liberality, and said This
woman must not be allowed to exceed myself in generosity He then sent
back the robe, and remitted the fine When the robe was returned to her
she asked, whether a look of the Calif had fallen upon it , and being told
that It had, she replied ^o robe shall ever come upon me, upon which
the look of any man, except my own husband, has fallen She then ordered
it to be cut up and sold , and with the price of it she built the mosque,
with the cell and structure in the front of it Still, from the price of the
robe there remained a thud, which she commanded to be buned under one of
its pillars, in order to meet any future expenses which might be necessary
for its repairs Upon Jengiz Khln’s hearing this story, he ordered these
pillars to be destroy ed , but, as already remarked, he found nothing

In the front of the city is, as it is reported, the tomb of ‘Akisha Ibn
Jlohsin El Sah ibi , who, according to what is related in the 'Athar i^a
book so called), entered paradise without rendering up an account (of bis
deeds)

After this I travelled from Balkh for seven days, on the mountains of
"Kuhistan, which consist of villages closely built In these there are


KHORASAN.


95


many cells of religious, and others who have retired from the world. I
next came to the city of " Herat, which is the largest inhabited city in
Khorasan. Of the large cities of this district there are four ; two of these
are now inhabited, namely, Herat and ^INisabur; and two in ruins, namely
Balkh and =Meraw. The inhabitants of Herat are religious, sincere, and
chaste, and are of the sect of “ Hanifa. The King of Herat Avas at this
time the Sultan, the great Hosain son of the Sultan ''Giath Oddin El
Gauri, a man of tried valour.* From Herat I went to ‘'Jam, I Avhicb is a
moderate sized city, abounding with water and plantations. From ihis
place I Avent to “'Tus, one of the largest cities of Khorasan. In this the
Imam "Abu Hamed El Ghazrdi'J: was born, and in it we still find his tomb.
From this place I went to the Meshhed of -^El Riza, i. e. of ^Ali Ibn

• ' • j ^ '

.^J\f

* The dynasty, however, as such, ceased long before this time, according to Abulfeda, vol.
iv. p. 228-9, For the origin of it see Dow, vol. i. p. 143. This, however, is the “ Malefc
Azzeddin-houssa'in, filsde Gaiatheddin” of De Guignes, who reigned in Herat from about 1331 to
1370. Hist. gen. des Huns, tom. i. p. 416; also tom. iv. p. 313, &c. ; and D’Herbelot, under
Schamseddin. In the first volume of the jdKo Matlai Saadain, we have the following

account of this prince and his dependents : clAc iLtjiU JUjjO

yilAj <uj\j ji jju

^ (taJS ^ ..i.J I c^x.< ^ j

Jbj (.Jjstc jUj , &c. “ In

tlie year of the death of Abu Said, it was the fourth in which tl)e king Moiz Oddin Husain
had reigned in Herat. After the death of the Sultan (*. e. Abu Said), the Governors of Irak and
Khorasan refused submission to each other ; and hence a pretender set up his head in every
corner, as did every ultra beeome vain in every part, and hence the nobles and gentry of
every district betook themselves to Herat, a place where justice, kindness, and safety, was to
he found ; and under the shadow of the king Mo'iz Oddin Husain they were quiet. This
personage was of laudable and prepossessing manners, and protected and amply provided for all
who sought refuge with him.” This confirms Ibn Batiita’s account, see p. 48.
t Die birth-place of the celebrated Jami, author of various Persian and Arabic works,
f A celebrated writer on the Mohammedan sects, often cited by the author of the Dabistiin and
the learned Pococke. See Specimen Hist. Arab, p. .356, edit. 1806.


KHORAS AN


9G

Musa El Kazim son of Jaafar Sadik It is a large and ^\elI peopled
citj, abounding ^ith fruits 0\er the Meshhed is a large dome, adorned
%Mth a co\ering of silk, and golden candlesticks Under the dome, and
opposite to the tomb of El Riza, is the gra\e of the Calif Harun El
Rashid.* Over this they constantly place candlesticks with lights But
when the followers of All enter, as pilgnms, they kick the grave of El
Rashid, but pour out their benedictions over that of El Riza From this
place I went to the city of ‘Sarakhas.f then to 'Zlva, the town of the
Sheikh Kotb Oddm Havdar, from whom the Fakeers of the sect called the
Haidaria.J take their name These men place an iron ring on their hands
and their necks , and, what is still more strange, on their viriha, vn order
to prevent intercourse with women

From this place I went to ^Nmbur, one of the four pnncipal cities of
Khorasan It is also called the Little Damascus, on account of the abun-
dance of its fruits The city is handsome, and is intersected by four nvere
I here met the Sheikh "Kotb Oddin El Nislbun, a learned and accom
plished preacher, and he took me to his house It happened that 1 had


* He d ed in TS<, during an expedition he liad undertaken into those parts His general
character is, that he nas any thing but religious, but nevertheless a bigotted Soonnee

t ntten according to the Sarakhas and Sarkhas and It u

It IS added, an ancient and large city in Khorasin, in the mid way between Nuabur and Merair
ft IS much subject to drought, having only one river, which is dry a great part of the year The
people generally drink water from wells ^

^ J^3 '-J ^ V ioXe yJ ^1

{ I have not been able to find any other particular account, either of this Sheikh or of h s
sect In M de Sacy s Chie^loiDathie Anbe we have an account of a Sheikh Haider, who
appears to have been the leader of a sect in Khorasan, and who discovered the use of the intoxi
eating herb called the khashisha, but it may be doubted whether this is the person meant by
Ibn Batuta, because we have 8 diflerent name given here from that given by him See
direst. Arabc tom i p VV,i e lo Ibn Batuta we have^Jus*- t-— L>> hut in M
de Sacy ^ .Ujs* ^ JI , if the title in the traveller is not a

mere epithet M de Sacy says m his notes {p 244) that he has not been able to find any
particulars respecting the life of this shetfah


KHORASAN.


97


purchased a slave. The Sheikh said to me : Sell him, for he will not suit
you ; and I sold him accordingly. I was told, after a few days, that this
slave had killed some Turkish children, and had been executed in conse-
quence. This was one of the Sheikh’s great miracles.

From this place I proceeded to "Bastam, the town to which the patro-
nymic of "Abu Yezid El Bastami is referred.* His grave is also here, under
the same dome with that of one of the sons of Jaafar Sadik. I next pro-
ceeded to ^ Kundus and Baghlan, which are villages with cultivated lands
adjoining each other. In each of these is a cell for the sainted and recluse.
The land is green and flourishing, and its grass never withers. In these
places I remained for some time for the purpose of pasturing and refreshing
my beasts.

After thi^ I proceeded to the city of ’> Barwan,! in the road to which is a
high mountai'., covered with snow and exceedingly cold ; they call it the
’’Hindu Kush, i. e. Hindoo-slayer, because most of the slaves brought thi-

• jiW!) ’’ , vl\, al. j) ^ ^ .Ji ‘VJt! "

* Some account will be found of this devotee in Pococke’s Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 372,
edit. 1806, and also in the of Jami, of which the following is an extract :

*0 iS'.Xi) ..0

^ 3

Sfb <— sfjj ob-)i j\ ^

OuUi Jjja ijTjO oIaS', d:c. Abu Yezid Bastami, may God sanctify his spirit,

was (a saint) of the first class. His name was Taiafur (Pococke Taifur) Ibn Isa Ibn Sarushan.
His grandfather was a Guebre, but became a Mussulman. He was contemporary with Ahmed
Ibn Khizrawa, Abu Hafiz, and Yahya Maadh ; and he saw Shakiki Balkhi. His death happened
in the year 261. They also say in the year 234, but the first is the most correct. His pre-
ceptor was Kardawl. He mentioned it as his will, that his grave should be made deeper
than that of his master ; this was done out of respect to him. He was a man of opinion,
and the leader of a sect, which however never became general. Notices of the other persons here
mentioned occur within a page or two in the same work.

t Perhaps the Budaoon of Dow (vol. i. p. 157) and the ujljo of Ferishta.

f This Mr. Burckhardt gives in his abstract of these Travels in Nubia, p. 535, Hindvialcsh,
where he has not only disregarded the vowels given in the MSS., but has shewn that he must
have been an entire stranger to the Persian language, as accurately given and translated here by
our traveller.


o


98


KABUI.


ther from India die on account of the mtenscness of the cold After this
we passed another mountain, which is called ’ Bashai In this mountain
there is a cell inhabited by an old man, whom they call ‘ Ata Evlia, that is
the Father of the Saints It is said that lie is three hundred and hfty years
old When I saw him he appeared to be about fifty years old The peo
pie of these parts, lioweier, \ery much love and revere him. I looked at
lus body it was moist, and I never saw one more soft He told me, that
every hundredth year he had a new growth of hair and teeth, independently
of the first, and that he was the Raja “Aba Rahim Ratan of India, who
had been buried at 'Multan,* in the province of Sindia I asked him of
several things , but very much doubted as to what he was, and do so still
I next arrived at the city of Banvan In this place I met the Turkish
Emir ^ Barantay, the largest and fattest man 1 had ever seen He treated
me very respectfully, and gave me some provisions I then went on to the
village of El Jarkh, and thence to “Ghizna, the city of the warrior of the
faith, and against India, the victorious Mahmud, son of * Subiiktagm f
His grave is here The place is exceedingly cold it is ten (al three) stages
distant from ' Kandalur It was once a large city , but is now mostly in
rums I then went on to ‘'Kabul, which was once a large city, but is
now, for the most part, in rums It is inhabited by a people from Persia
whom they call the 'Afgirmst Their mountains are difficult of access,

al * try bl “ » W * *

jjUiSl * JjI^ ' jGjusJI * ^ litsr* ^

* See a note on this place in Mr KosegorteD, p 27

f An abridgment of reri&hla» reign of ^^a)l^loo<l will be found in Dow s Hmdostan, vol i
p b-S, &c

J These people, according to tlieir own statements, are descended from the house of Israel
and of the family of Saul the first IsraeliUsh king Ibn bhah Adlam of the tribe of Kot li Khail,
author of the KlioUsut El Ansab, himself an Afghan, and a most sedulous enquirer, as he tells
us, into their history, gravely affirms, that nothing can be more certain than that this is their
origin He then goes on to say, that they ongmally resided on Solomon s mount in Syria . but
upon some emergency migrated to Candahar, whence many of them made their waj into Hm
dustan, and were of considerable use in assisting Mahmud of Ghizna, to make his first conquest
in that country He also tells us, that his ancestors, hearing in Candahar of the teaching of
Mohammed, sent a deputation to him into Arabia, to inquire whether he was or not, the last


KABUL.


99


having narrow passes. These are a powerful and violent people ; and the
greater part of them highway robbers. Their largest mountain is called the
mountain of Solomon. It is said that when Solomon had ascended this
mountain, and was approaching India from it, and saw that it was an op-
pressive country, he returned refusing to enter it. The mountain was there-
fore called after his name : upon this the king of the Afghans resides.

We next left Kabul by the way of ' Kirmash which is a narrow pass
situated between two mountains, in which the Afghans commit their rob-
beries. We, thank God, escaped by plying them with arrows upon the
heights, throughout the whole of the way. The next place we arrived at
was “ Shish Naghar, which is situated at the extremity of the Turkish domi-
nions. From this place we entered the great desert, which is fifteen days
in extent. In this no one can travel except in one season out of the four,
on account of the Samoom, by which putrefaction takes place, and the body
as soon as dead falls to pieces in its several members. We got to the *’Panj
Ab, (i. e. the five waters,) in safety. This is the junction of five different
rivers, and which waters all the agriculture of the district. We were
comfortable enough when we got on the river, which happened in the begin-
ning of the month Moharram, A.H. 734, (A.D. 1332). From this place the
informers wrote of our arrival to the court of the Emperor of India. It is a
custom with them, that every one who enters India with a wish to see the
Emperor, must be described in writing from this place, stating the particu-


Prophet mentioned in the law and the gospels ; and that, upon being assured of this, the whole
nation at once received the faith. If there were the least possible appro.ximation to truth in the
story of their descent, it is reasonable to suppose, that their language would either be pure Hebrew,
or a dialect very nearly^ approaching it : but the truth is, as far as I can learn, that nothing like
this is the fact : hut quite the contrary. This boasted descent is, therefore, a fable ; as very proba-
bly their early attachment to the faith of Mohammed is. Some, indeed, have been credulous
enough to believe this story of descent ; and thence to imagine, that in them they had dis-
covered the ten tribes of the house of Israel ; which, however, is more than the Afghans them-
selves imagine. That part of all the twelve tribes of Israel returned from the captivity, except
such has had become real heathens, the New Testament will not allow us for a moment to doubt.
(See Acts xxvi. 7. James i. 1.) I do not, therefore, see the least probability of finding them
either in Candaharor elsewhere. Some part of the modem history of the Afghans may probably
be true.

O 2


100


HINDUSTAN


lars of his person and the objects he has m view, which is sent off by a
courier For no one is allowed to appear at court, unless the Emperor has
been previously acquainted with all the circumstances of his case


. , fv CHAPTER XIV

LiS 11b Miy

The River Stnde — Multan — Jarai—Rt Samira a Jltndu. Sect — Sivattan^Satural Produdiont
^Description of Couriers — Lahart — DaiSr — Vja — Tie Dow a measure of Sirenvih—
j^liuhar^— Natural Productions of Hindustan— Passes a Desert infested by Hindu Robbers—
Ajudohan — The Custom of burning jyulouu— Drowning in the Ganges— Sarsati — MasSd Abad
—Dehli, description tf

The n\er (just mentioned) is the Smde it is the greatest nver m the
world, and otcrflows during the hot weather just as the Nile does, and
at this time they sow the lands Here also commence the temtones of the
Emperor of Sindia and India, who was at this time Mohammed Shah
From this place also is the description of persons arriving sent m writing to
the Emu of ‘Sindiato Multan TlieirEmlr, at this time, was one of the
Mamiuks of tlie Sultan ‘‘Mohammed Sar Tiz Shah, t e sharp head, by
name, who renews the armies of the Emperor I next proceeded to the
city of * Janu,* in which is a people called El S’lniira f Theyneiereat


* I do not find any place in the geogmphera corresponding suScienlly near to this in name and
situation to determine irhere it is

•|- The name of a sect of Hindoos, of vhich we Hod occasional mention m the Dahistan Ihey
are perhaps called Samira, as being a sort of legalists samurat accord ng to the

Dabutan, signifymg law We are told by the author of that work, that he saw one of

them, and him he describes very nearly in the words of Ibn Batuta <uIj AwHr

ij\Li bj jj Ias jjlUi— < j\ eS ojJ jfsi i^N.bL.!l j'j jJ

kiW «^1^1 jl

this sect the writer saw Sn hlanl Rama the Brahman in the capital of Lahore, who would
take no eatable from a Mohammedan, nor would associate with any of another persuasion They
said too, that one of tlie Mussulman Emirs ofiered him three lacks of rupees, which, howerer,
he would not accept of.


HINDUSTAN.


101


with strangers, nor are seen eating by them : nor do they contract affinities,
or suffer any one to contract affinities with them. It was here I met the
Sheikh »E1 Salih El Aabid the religious Bahii Oddin El KorashI (see p. 7),
one of the three, of whom the Sheikh El Wall Borhan Oddin El Aahraj said
in Alexandria, that I should meet them in my travels : and I certainly did
meet them. May God be praised.

I then proceeded to the city of Sivastan, which is large. Without it is
a desert, and in this is there no tree except the ’Egyptian thorn, nor do
they sow any thing on the banks of its river except the ■’melon. They
generally live upon a sort of ^millet, ‘peas, fish, and milk of the buffalo :
for the buffalo is here in great abundance. The place is exceedingly
hot : from Multan, the capital of Sindia, it is at a distance of ten days; but
from Multan to Dehli, the residence of the Emperor of Hindustan, is a
distance of fifty ; which, however, will be traversed by the courier with his
despatches in five.

There are in Hindustan two kinds of couriers ; horse and foot : these they
generally term "El Wolak.* The horse courier, which is part of the Sul-
tan’s cavalry, is stationed at the distance of every four miles. As to the
foot couriers, there will be one at the distance of every mile, occupying three
(consecutive) stations, which they term "El Daviih, and making (in the

• (*^ ^ bj ^

* i, e. Quid, hasting, &c. from the Arabic root properavit, &c. The Eastern couriers

are generally some part of the King’s forces, and when the despatches are important are officers

of distinction, as it is the case in our own military affairs. These among the ancient

Hebrews were generally termed D'UI runners, a term perfectly synonymous with that

r ’■

used here, or rijJ (which is perhaps an erroneous reading for the Persian word for
runner.) This will elucidate an obscure passage in the 19th Psalm, v. 5. where we have “rejoiceth
as a strong man to run a race.” The word answering to strong man, is in the original 1133, which
means hero. In the translation too we have a race-, but, as we know of no races among the
Hebrews, we are reduced to some difficulty as to what could here have been intended by the
writer. In the original, however, we have which means nothing more than a way, road,
or path : and the sense is, rejoiceth as a hero to run the road; i. e., to bear the despatches of his
master with the greatest possible celerity and safety. This makes the whole passage easy and
plain ; it exhibits the sun as an officer honoured by the Almighty to bear the announcement
of his powers, through every clime of his dominion, in a language silent but expressive, and
equally intelh'gible to all.


102


Hindustan


whole) three miles so that there is, at the distance of every three miles
an inhabited village , and wthont this, three sentry-boxes, m which the
couriers sit, prepared for motion, wth their loins girded In the hand of
each IS a whip about t^o cubits long, and upon the head of this are small
bells "SVhenever, therefore, one of the couriers leaves any city, he takes
his despatches in the one hand, and the whip which he constantly
keeps shaking in the other In this manner he proceeds to the
nearest foot-courier , and, as be approaches, he shakes his whip Upon
this out comes another, who takes the despatches, and so proceeds to the
next For this reason it is, that the Sultan recen es his despatches in so
short a time In Sivnstan I met the aged Sheikh Mohammed of * Bagdad,*
who told me, that his age was then one hundred and forty years , and, that
he \vas present when the Calif ^El Mostaasem was killed by the Tatars in
the ennrons of Bagdad

I then, proceeded by the Smde to the city of ’Ldhari,| which is situated
upon the shores of the Indian sea, where the Smde joins it It has a large
harbour, into which ships from Persia, Yemen, and other places put At
the distance of a few miles from this city, are the rums of another, in which
stones in the shape of men and beasts almost innumerable are to be found
The people of this place think, that it is the opinion of their histonans, that
there was a city formerly in this place, the greater part of the inhabitants
of which were so base, that God transformed them, their beasts, their herbs,
even to the very seeds, into stones , and indeed stones m the shape of seeds
are here almost mnumerabJe

I next proceeded to ' Bakar,:{; which is a handsome city, divided by an

al al "

* Instead of th>3 -we tiave ra Mr "kosegaTten, '* in ea incidi m lYlmsloti concionalottsn
cut notnen Esschetbani Exhibuit nnhi Iitiera'^ quibus fidelium pnnceps Omar ben abd el asis
Ommanda, quodam illius ab avo cooctonaloris SsenresUnici munus contulit Fosten hered tano
jure munus retment, litleras seirant fau^taque sibi ex us auguraniur

■j- This js, no doubt, the Larry Bundur of Major Bennell, see his map of Hindustan, wiili
the Memoir, pp 285, &c Mr Kosegarten has Lnhanf>t

J Of this place we have no notice id Major Rennell, either in Ihe Memoir or the nap
It may have been destroyed, however, since the times of Ibn Batuta, and the name onlysunve
in the Pueiar nver, one of the arms of the Sude which meets the sea in those parts, and
which may have run through the town when <nir traveUec was there


HINDUSTAN.


103


arm of the river Sinde. Here I met the religious and pious Sheikh * Shams
Oddin Mohammed of Shiraz. This was one of the men remarkable for
age. He told me that he was something more than one hundred and twenty
years old. I then proceeded on to the city of ' Uja,* which is a large city,
situated on the Sinde. The governing Emir, at the time of my arrival,
was ’"El Malik El Fazil El Sharif Jalal Oddin El Kabji, a very brave
and generous prince. Between myself and him a friendship arose and was
confirmed. After this we met in Dehli. I next travelled on to ^Multan,
which is the principal city of Sindia, before the Emir of which the Sultan’s
soldiers are obliged to appear.

This Emir had always before him a number of bows of various sizes, and
when any one, who wished to enlist as a bowman, presented himself, the
Emir threw one of these bows to hiraj which he drew with all his might.-f"
Then, as his strength proved to be, so was his situation appointed. But
when any one wished to enlist as a horseman, a drum was fixed, and the
man ran with his horse at full speed, and struck the drum with his spear.
Then, according to the effect of the stroke, was his place determined.

There were many persons, Emirs, nobles, and learned men, who
came to this place before us, and with us, all intending to be presented to

Jlhj- al. ijuAJii *


* The Dutch of Major Rennell, probably; Mr. Kosegarten has Aja.

f We find an allusion to this custom in the 18th Psalm, where David says that his
arms can break a how of steel. The word, however, rendered steel, means in the original
copper and, probably, should be understood only as a part of the bow, either the mid-

dle limb, to which pieces of horn, or of any other elastic substances were fastened, or the firula,
or clasps, by which this and the horn, &c. were combined.

The bow was among our own ancestors considered as a criterion of strength, as we find in
one of the songs in Robin Hood’s Garland ; vol. ii. London, 1795, p, 13.

That ever a boy so young.

Should bear a bow before our king,

That’s not able to draw one string.

See also Bishop Hall’s preface to his “ Revelation unrevealed.”

That the strength of a man was thus measured among the ancient Arabians, may be seen
in the “ Historia imperii vetustissimi Joctanidarum in Arabia Felice,” by A. Schultens, pp. 133-5.


104


HINDUSTAN


the Emperor. After a few days, tlierefore, one of the chamberlains of the
Sultan arri\ed here, in order to conduct these persons to the presence We
then hasted on to Dehli, between which and Multan there is a distance of
forty days , throughout which, however, are many contiguous houses, and
at these we were honoured by being invited ev^^’-y morning and eiening to
feasts, prepared by those who came out to meet such as were proceeding
to be presented to the Emperor The first city we entered belonging to
Hindustan was J'Abuhar, which is the first Indian city (m this direction)
It IS small and closely built, and abounds with water and plantations

There are not m Hindustan any of the trees peculiar to our country, if
>ve except the 'lote tree, which, however, is larger in the trunk than it is
with us , and, its seeds are like those of a great “ gall apple, exceedingly
sweet They have likewise large trees not known among us Of their
fruit trees, the grape* is one, which resembles the orange tree, except that
its stem is larger, and its leaves more numerous Its shade, too, is exten
sive and \ ery dense, and is apt to affect with fever those who sleep under it
The fruit is about the size of the large * Damask prune*! , which when green
and not quite ripe they take, of those which happen to fall, and salt and
thus preserve them, just as the lemon is preserved with us In the same
manner they preserve the gmgei while green, as also the pods of pepper
and this they eat with their meals When the grape is ripe, which is in
the autumn, its seed becomes yellow, and this they eat like the apple it
IS sweet, but during mastication acquires some aciditj It has rather a
large stone, which they sow like the orange seed, and from this a tree
grows up

Of their fruits are those termed the *ShakIJandBarki, the trees of which


* This is probably the mango f So Mr Kosegarten

if. This 13 commonly called the jack, or bread^fratt Crawfurd says, in hts History of the
Indian Archipelago, vol i p 422 “ of the jack fruit (autocarpus integrifolia) two species

occur in the Indian islands, the common jaci and the ChSmpaclak These two fruits of
monstrous size grow, uolike most others, from the tnink and larger branches of the tree
The first grows often to an enormous size the taste, tliough too strong to be agreeable to
Europeans, is remarkably suited to tbe native palate Containing a large quantity of saccharine
and glutinous matter, the jack is highly nutritious* He tells us a little lower down, thatiU


HINDUSTAN.


105


are ‘‘high, and their leaves are like the Jawz (or' Indian nut) : the fruit
grows out from the bottom of the tree, and that which grows nearest to the
earth is called the Bark! ; it is extremely sweet and well flavoured in taste ;
what grows above this is the ® Shakl.' Its fruit resembles that of the great
gourd, its rind the skin of an ox (leather ?) When it grows yellow in the
autumn, they gather and divide it : and in the inside of each is from one to
two hundred seeds. Its seed resembles that of a cucumber, and has a
stone something like a large bean. When the stone is roasted, it tastes like
a dried bean. These, i. e. the Shakl and BarkT, are the best fruits found in
Hindustan.

They have another sort of fruit, which they call ^ El Tarid : this is the
fruit of the '‘Pipercula. Its ‘seed is the size of that of an -^Armenian peach, to
which its colour may also be compared ; it is exceedingly sweet. They
also have the ^Jummun,t which is a high tree; the fruit resembles that of
the olive, and is black ; as does likewise its stone. They have also the
sweet orange in great abundance ; but the acid orange is more esteemed
They also have one between the sweet and sour, which is exceedingly good.
They have too the fruit called the ‘Mahwa ; the tree is tall, and the leaves

. * .. al. al. ^ ^


name in the archipelago is probably a corruption of the Telinga jaha : our word Shaki (or
shaka, perhaps) seems to be another corruption of the same word. Mr. Kosegarten has

Shala. Mr. Marsden adds, in his History of Sumatra, p. 99; “ The outer coat is rough,
containing a number of seeds or kernels (which- when roasted, have the taste of chesnuts)
inclosed in a fleshy substance of a rich, and to strangers, too strong a smell and flavour, but
which gains upon the palate." The Champadak of Mr. Crawfurd is, probably, the Barki (,_^)
of our traveller : the name, however, is preserved in Knox’s Ceylon, in the word Warracha.
“ Before they be full ripe,” says he, “ the inhabitants call them Cose; and when ripe Warracha
or Kellas : but with this difference, that the Warracha is hard, but the Kellas as soft as pap,
both looking alike to the eye, but they are distinct trees." p. 26, edit. 1817.

* Mr. Kosegarten also reads El Tand jiisfl p. 18.

t This is, probably, the Jambu (Eugenia) of Mr. Crawfurd. See History of the Indian
Archipelago, vol. i. pp. 428-9. See also Marsden’s Hist. Sumat. p. 99. Mr. Kosegarten has here
Jj^l, which he gives Dschatth. It is, no doubt, an error.

P


106


HINDUSTAN.


are like those of the " J awz, except that there is a mixture of yellow and red in
them. The fruit resembles the small "prune, and is very sweet. Upon the
head of each of its bemes is a small seed, not unlike the grape both in shape
and taste , but they who eat it generally experience the "head-ache. "When
dried in the sun, its taste is like that of the fig. This berry they call ®EI
Angur. The grape, however, is seldom found in Hindustan, and then only
in Dehh and a few other places. It produces fruit Uvice in the year. The
fig is not found m Hindustan.

They also have a fruit, which they call 'Kosaf,* which is round and very
sweet About the tree they dig (and heap) the earth, just as they do about
the chesnut. They also ha\e in India fruit common with us which is the
pomegranate, and which bears fruit twice m the year. The grain which
they sow for subsistence, is so\vn twice in the year ; and, that which is for
the autumn, about Midsummer when the rams fall, which they reap in sixty
days from the time of sowng it Of this grain one is termed the »Kodru,
which IS a sort of 'millet. This is the most plentiful grain in use among
them ; and of it are the * Kfil and the ‘ Shamakb, the latter of which is
smaller than a bean. The Shamakh however often grows wthout culture,
and IS the food of the religious, the abstemious, the fakeers, and the poor
generally, who go out and gather what thus grows spontaneously, and live
upon It the year round. When this is beaten in a wooden mortar, the rind
falls off, and then the kernel, which is white, comes out. This they boil m
the milk of the buffalo, and make it into a stew, which is much better than
when baked. Of their gram, one is the " Mash,-^ which is a sort of peas

.JUIU

* Mr. Kosegartea has here kasird, vhicb he writes kesstra doubling the s.
f To the valuable note of M. de Sacy on this vegetable (Relat. de I’Egypte, p. 1 19), the follow,
mg may be added from the medicinal dictionary of Hosato. j Jlj!^ ^ (_pt«

J_j! Jo ^JT Jyj ijy ijl u~ u'f/

SJU jl Jjl jO jjyS-

J_jj Jjl jU-f Ucl .^J jLLc . The mask they also call maj,

but in the Shtrazi (dialect) iitumash, and iUuayah. They say that its matter is nearly allied to


HINDUSTAN.


107


and of this the ^ Munjam* is a species. The seed is oblong, and of a clear
green colour. This they cook with rice, and then eat it with oil. It is
called ^E1 Koshira and taken daily for breakfast. Another species of this
is the 'Lubia,! and another the “ Murut, which resembles the Kodru, ex-
cept that its seed is smaller, and is used for fodder for cattle : it is pulse.
They also feed the beasts with the leaves of the mash, instead of green corn.
All these are their autumnal grains. And when they cut these, they sow
the spring grain, which consists of *wheat, 'barley, ‘'lentiles, and 'pulse, J


that of the bakila (bean) but is less flatulent. The best time to use it is the summer : and the
best of it, are those which are large, green, and plump. Its nature is cold at first, but moderate.
Of its skin they make the cMn mukashshar, and say that it is dry at first. Tlie ch 3 ’le produced by
it is good; and it digests sooner than the bakila (or bean). The property of its chun mukashshar
is, to be advantageous in poulticing for pains in the limbs, Ac. The term chiin mukashshar, means
Uhe something barked or peeled j but here seems to be applied as a compound word, as the name
of something, but what it is I have not been able to discover. Nor am I quite certain about the
syllables hitu, in bitusiyith, as the diacritical points in the MS. are not very plainly written : but
as I could find nothing else so suitable, I have taken that, which according to Meninski means
exposed to the sun, Ac.

* IVefindin Golius, under ^ Pers. .... Ltidtanis nvuco. Is not this raungothe
munjam of Ibn Batuta ?

f To M. de Sacy’s notes on the Loubia (Relat. de I’Egypte, p. 38, Ac.) may be added the
following from the dictionary of Hosain. j\ Ji jp Vjb

‘v- (^) J “VJ UJjxlj

(*J‘^ hfj ... J30 j mo

Co jJb ^\j} Joj ^ cJb . The lubia, which they

also call luba and ihamar, is easier of digestion and ejection than the mash. It is less productive
of flatulency than the bakila (bean). The best of it is that which is red, but is not eaten. Its
nature is warm at the first, but in moisture and dryness is moderate. They also say, that it is cold

and dry The second property of the red sort is, that it assists in puerperal complaints,

expels the urine and makes the body plump. It is also valuable in pulmonary diseases.

t Of this, according to Hosain, there is, the white, the black, the karsani, the wild, and the
garden, pulse. The wild is the most scarce, and the garden pulse is eaten.

&c. Then follow its medicinal properties.

P 2


108


HINDUSTAN


on ihe ground from which the autumnal gram had been gathered The soil
of the country is exceedingly good

As to the nee, they sow it three times during the year on the same
ground it is much m use among them The sesamJ: and sugar cane they
cultivate along \vith the autumnal grain

I at length left the town of Abuhar, and proceeded for one day through
a desert enclosed on both sides by mountains upon whicn were infidel ana
rebel Hindoos The inhabitants of India are m general infidels , some
of them In e under the protection of the Mohammedans, and reside either
m the villages or cities others, however, infest the mountains and rob by
the highways 1 happened to be of a party of two and twenty men, when
a number of these Hindoos, consisting of two horsemen and eighty foot, made
an attack upon us We, however, engaged them, and by God s help put
them to flight, having killed one horseman and twelve of the foot

After this we arrived at a fortress, and proceeding on from it, came at
length to the city of>f Ajudahan* which is small Here I met the holy Sheikh
^Fand Oddm El Bodhawondi, of whom the Sheikh El Wah Borhan Oddin
El Aaraj had spoken to me m the poit of Alexandria, telling me that I
should meet him I therefore did meet him, and presented him with the
Sheikh’s salutation, which surprised him , He said, I am unworthy of
this The Sheikh was very much broken by the temptations of the Devil
He allowed no one to touch his hand or to approach him , and, wheneier
the clothes of any one happened to touch his, he washed them immediately
His patronymic is referred to ‘Bodhawond, a town of *E1 Sambal

In this part, I also saw those women who burn themselves when their
husbands die t The woman adorns herself, and is accompanied by a


* The Adjodtn of Major Renneli

+ It will not be necessary here to not ce what hag been written on this inhuman practice by
more modem travellers or by our own coontiymen re« dent m Hindustan but as some curious
matter is found in the Dabistan, a Persian book not yet translated, it may not be amiss here to
give an extract on this subject ^ ^ iJii*

b Ojj j j jiyji, ju>U j J i-Jj iMsaj iJU. 1^1

LT-* ^ Ally J> jyjJ j\ i_^'\ 0,T ^


HINDUSTAN.


109


cavalcade of the infidel Hindoos and Brahmans, with drums, * trumpets,
and men, following her, both Moslems and Infidels for mere pastime. The
fire had been already kindled, and into it they threw the dead husband.
The wife then threw herself upon him, and both were entirely burnt. A
woman’s burning herself, however, with her husband is not considered as
absolutely necessary among them, but it is encouraged; and when a woman
burns herself with her husband, her family is considered as being ennobled,
and supposed to be worthy of trust. But when she does not burn herself,
she is ever after clothed coarsely, and remains in constraint among her-rela-
tions, on account of her want of fidelity to her husband.

The woman who burns herself with her husband is generally surrounded
by women, who bid her farewell, and commission her with salutations for


lijtj jliJ ij JjA

b f' "“! y (./“i t tiki j'^j^y^ V

jl ii\j^ ojl \)y^ ‘^y^ ^ (Sj

^ j^y^ ^ y^y^ eii ^

*sj y} LVy^ L^y y^

. c-wj 1 sOji«cb yT “ They say, that the woman who becomes a Sattee after the death of her
husband, obtains pardon both for her own and her husband’s sins, so that they may both remain
long in paradise : and even if the husband should have gone to hell, just as a snake-catcher draws
out a snake from his hole, so would the woman draw her husband out of hell, and place him in
paradise. Every woman, too, who becomes a Sattee, should she again have a body, would
have that of a man, not that of a woman. But, if she did not become a Sattee, but remain a
widow, she would never in the metempsychosis have any other body but that of a woman. It
is considered the duty of a woman to enter the fire in which her husband is burning, unless she
be pregnant. A Brahman’s wife must burn with her husband in the same fire, and so become a
Sattee ; others may burn elsewhere. It is not considered right, however, to force a woman into
the fire : and, in like manner, a woman desiring to become a Sattee, is not to be kept back from
her purpose. The doctors have said, that the original intention of becoming a Sattee was this :
that a woman should, after the death of her husband, consume all her desires, and thus die (to
the world) before her natural death : for in the language of mysticism 'woman means desire ;
and the intention is, that she should cast away her desire, not that she should throw herself as a
dead carcase into the fire, which is abominable,” The word Sattee (in the Sanscrit Hrft)
means saint, &c.


no


HINDUSTAN


their former friends, while she laughs, plays, or dances, to the very time m
winch she is to be burnt

Some of the Hindoos, moreover, drown tficmsehes in the river Ganges
to which they perform pilgrimages, and into which they pour the ashes of
those who have been burnt When any one intends to drown himself he
opens his mind on the subject to one of his companions, and says You are
not to suppose that I do this for the sake of any thing worldly, my only
motive IS to draw near to "Kisu, vvUtcli is a name of God with them
And when he is drowned, they draw him out of the vratcr, bum the body,
and pour the ashes into the Ganges

After four day’s journey, I arrived at the city of "Sarsati*. It is large
and abounds with nee, which they carry hence to Delhi And after this at
Hrinsi,-f which is a very beautiful and closely built city, with extensive
fortifications I next came to^Masfid Ab‘id,J after two days travelling,
and remained there three days The Emperor Mohammed, whom it was
our object to see, had at this time left lus residence in Dchli, and gone to
Kinnojc,^ w hicli is at tlic distance of ten day s from that place lie sent
Ins Vizier, however, ’Kli'ijaJalunll Ahmed Ibn AyTis, a native of Room,
witli a number of kings, doctors, and grandees, to receive the travellers,
(an Emir is w ith them termed king ) The Vizier then so arranged the pro
cession, that each one liad a place according to ins rank
We tlien proceeded on from Masud Ab"id till w e came to Dehh, the capi*


obi at

0-h>- ’

* The Sutvsle of Major ncnncll

f Perhaps the Ilasscngur of ItcDnell, or the 'U ®f Peruhtfl, which is certainly near the
river Surustc, mentioned in the account of the battle between Shahjb Oddm and the Hindoo
chiefs. A II 588 Dow writes it irafsi, p ICO (A H 753)
t This place I do not find in the maps

f lliisis, probably, the expedition noticed by Dow, Hindustan, voL i p 333
|[ Chaja Jehan was, according to Dow, high in power with Mohammed Shah at this time
Hindustan, vol i p 318, and Pcrislita says, that Ahmed AjSi received the title of KhljaJahao,
and was made commander of the forces of Gutcrot upon the long s accession Ijjbl
.0^1.^ jSL— * s»>W


HINDUSTAN.


Ill


tal of the empire. It is a most magnificent city, combining at once both
beauty and strength. Its walls are such as to have no equal in the whole
world. This is the greatest city of Hindustan; and indeed of all Islamism in
the East. It now consists of four cities, which becoming contiguous have
formed one. This city was conquered in the year of the Hejira 584 (A.D.
1188).* The thickness of its walls is eleven ’’cubits. They keep grain in
this city for a very long time without its undergoing any change whatever.
I myself saw rice brought out of the treasury, which was quite black, but,
nevertheless, had lost none of the goodness of its taste. The same was the
case wth the kodru, which had been in the treasury for ninety years.
Flowers, too, are in continual blossom in this place. Its mosque is very
large; and, in the beauty and extent of its building, it has no equal.
Before the taking of Dehli it had been a Hindoo temple, which the Hindoos
call ’El Bur Khana (But Khanaf) ; but, after that event, it was used as a
mosque. In its court-yard is a ‘cell, to which there is no equal in the cities
of the Mohammedans ; its height is such, that men appear from the top of
it like little children. In its court, too, there is an immense pillar, which
they say, is composed of stones from seven different quarries. Its length is
"thirty cubits ; its circumference eight: which is truly miraculous.;}: With-
out the city is a reservoir for the rain-water; and out of this the inhabitants
have their w'ater for drinking. § It is two miles in length, and one in width.


• According to Ferishta, however, it was not conquered by the Mohammedans before A. H.
5S8. His words, which I do not find in Dow, are these;

j j\ <qU vA-j ^ ,_5ljb J

... cJjLo . When Pithura was slain m the

field of battle of Shahab Oddln, Dehli, as will hereafter appear, in the latter part of the year 588
passing from the power of infidels, went into the government of the kings, of Ghaur and their
followers. According to the Aini Akbarl, however, Dehli was first taken by Mahtnood of
Ghizna :

f This sort of temple is constantly termed But khana (iOIA- li-o , n hut house or house of
Budda) by Ferishta.

+ Is it the pillar of Firozshah ?

f The waters of the Jumna, it should seem, are so impregnated with natron as to be unfit for
drinking. Col. Fitzclarence tells us, in his “ Journal or Route across India, through Egypt to


112


HINDUSTAN


About it are pleasure-gardens to which the people resort (al the nobles of
the city )


CHAPTER XV

Conquest of Oehlt—Alslracl of the History of HmdTslan,/rom this time to that in suhich
Ibn Balula tmled this place

Th£ City of Dehli ivas conquered by tlic Emir “Kotb Oddin Aibak, one
of the Mamluks of the Sultan 'Shahab Oddin Mohammed Ibn Sam El
Ghaun* king of Gliizna and Khorasln, who had o\ ercome ^ Ibrahim Ibn
Mahmood Ibn Subuktagint the beginner of the conquest of India This
Emir Kotb Oddin resided here as go\emor, on the part of Shahab
Oddin but when Kotb Oddin died, his son, ‘Shams Oddin Lalmish.J
became go\emor After this, Shams Oddin became possessed of the king-
dom here, having been appointed thereto by the general consent of the
people , and he governed India for twenty jeaxs He was a just, learned,
and religious prince After his death, his son, ^Rokn Oddin, took posses-
sion of the throne , but polluted his reign by killing his brothers, and ^^as,

^3)1 j^\*

^


England,' (p 236) that " the water of the Jumoa, and of the wdh, which tbe^r are now
obliged to dnnk (< e the inhabitants of Delhi) is so much impregnated with natron, otherwise
called soda, as to prove at tunes very injurious Our traveller was an India before the tine of
Shdh Jahan, and consequently before the canal for supplying purer water (mentioned in the same
page by the Colonel) had been made and hence the necessity for this reservoir
• The taking of Dehli by Kotb Oddin Aibak (liLil «— J»i) ^ho was then a servant

of Shahab Oddin, is placed by Ferishta in the year of Hegira 58S. See Dow, vol i p 166,
where we are also told that Kotb Oddin made Dehli the seat of his government
t An outline of these events will be found in Dow, vol i pp 146 7-8.
i This 1 $, no doubt, a mistake of the copyist Shams Oddin Altamish^^p^i
was, according to Fenshta, the name of this Ling, see Dow, p 176 And by this account
he reigned twenty-six years The word for six, however, might have been omitted by our
traveller s copyists


HINDUSTAN.


113


therefore, killed himself.^ Upon this, the army agreed to place his sister
''El Malika Razia, upon the throne, who reigned four years. This woman
usually rode about among the army, just as men do. She, however, gave
up the government, on account of some circumstances that presented them-
selves.

After this, her younger brother, 'Nasir Oddin,t became possessed of
the government, which he held for twenty years. This was a very religious
prince; and so much so, that he lived entirely on what he got by writing
out and selling copies of the Koran. He was succeeded by his Nawab,
''Ghiath Oddin Ahmed, one of his fathers’ Mamluks, who murdered him.J
This man’s name was originally ‘ Balaban ; his character had been just,
discriminating, and mild : he filled the office of Nawab of India, under
Nasir Oddin, for twenty years : he also reigned twenty years. § One of his

. ‘ . jjj '' eiw\ al. i^\) ’’


* The account of this reign is found in Dow, p. 182 ; and in p. 183 commences the account
of his sister’s reign noticed by Ibn Batuta, and perfectly agreeing with it. The Emperor,
according to Ferishta, said of her;

“ Although Kazia is a woman in form, she is a man in understanding.”

f A similar account of him is given by Dow from Ferishta, where (p. 203) we have an
anecdote about one of the copies of the Koran, which in his industry he had copied out ; and
another in which we are told, that his queen (for he had but one, and no concubines) one day
complaining of her hands being injured ^ which Dow translates, “ burnt her

fingers, ” in baking his bread, and requesting to have a maid to help her, was told, “ that he was
only a trustee of the state, and that he was determined not to burthen it with needless
expenses. He therefore exhorted her to proceed in her duty with patience, and God would
reward her in the end.” Two reigns, according to Ferishta and the Tabakati Akbarl, intervene
here, of which Ibn Batuta makes no mention : the reason probably is, that vhey possess no parti,
cular interest.

J Nothing of this is mentioned in Ferishta.

§ According to Ferishta he ascended the throne A. H. 664 and died in 685. See Dotv,
p. 208-221. At the outset of this section, we have an abstract of his origin according to the his-
torians of Hindustan, which differs in some respects from that of our traveller. Here, as already
remarked, he is erroneously named Balin for Balabnn. Ferishta thinks, that as several persons
of the name of Balaban occur in history, it probably may be the name of a Turkish tribe. His
words are: ^

It is curious enough, that in the Tabakati Akbari, which was composed before the
times of Ferishta, Balaban is said to have been called Balaban the Dviarf : the words are

Q


114


HINDUSTAN


pious acts was, his building a house which was called the ^ House of Safetj) *
for whenever any debtor entered tha, his debt was adjudged, and
in like manner, every oppressed person found justice , every man slayer
deliverance from his adversary , and every person in fear, protection
When he died he was buried m this house, and there I myself visited his
grave The history of his beginnings is surprising, which is this When a
child he lived at Bokhara in the possession of one of the inhabitants, and
was a little despicable ill-looking wretch Upon a time, a certain Fakeer
saw him there, and said “You htUe^Turk’ which is considered by them
as a very reproachful term The reply was I am here, good Sir This
surprised the Fakeer, who said to him Go and bring me one of those pome
granates, pointing to some which had been exposed for sale m the street
The urchin replied Yes, Sir, and immediately, taking out all the money
he had, went and bought the pomegranate When the Fakeer received it, he
said to Balaban We give you the kingdom of India Upon winch the boy
kissed his own hand, and said I have accepted of it, and am quite
satisfied

It happened, about this time, that the Sultan Shams Oddm sent a
merchant to purchase slaves from Bokhara and Samarkand He accord
ingly bought a hundred, and Balaban was among them When these
Mamluks were brought before the Sultan, they all pleased him except
Balaban, and him he rejected, on account of his despicable appearance

be

j'i 1 ^ ^ ^ (0 to L- -iij ^ jii

I « ^ y \ — . ‘ Id the year 664 Aligh Khan, whom they called

Salchan the Dwaf, the whole of the Eours and Goremora of the city placed upon the throne of
empire, m the whitepalace This appellation » not given to him by Ferishta butmustbavebeen
fresh in memory in the times of our traveller, and perhaps when the Tabakati Akbari was
composed

■* In a note p 42, some notice will be found of an inscnption brought from Ceylon by Sr
Alexander Johnston and translated by me Upon referring to that inscription it will be found
that an asylum is spoken of the passage alluded to in our text in this place seems to me lo
signify gn institution perfectly similar to that in the inscription and appears to be conbr
matory of the view there taken of the inscnption We have no account of this establish
raent in Dow but in the Tabakati Akbari and Fenshta, it is said
*' He was buried in the House of Safety


HINDUSTAN.


115


Upon this, Balaban said to the Emperor: Lord of the world! why have
you bought all these slaves ? The Emperor smiled, and said : For my
'own sake, no doubt. The slave replied : Buy me then for God’s sake. I
will, said he. He then accepted of him, and placed him among the rest ;
but, on account of the badness of his appearance, gave him a situation
among the cup-bearers.

Some of the astrologers, who were about the king, were daily in the
habit of saying to him: “ One of the Mamiuks will one day overcome thy
son, and take the kingdom from him. To this the Emperor, on account of
the justice and excellency of his own character, paid no regard, till they
also told it to the Queen-Mother ; who soon made an impression on his
mind respecting it. He accordingly summoned the astrologers before
him, and' said: Pray can you tell which of the Mamiuks it is, who
is to take the kingdom from my son, if you see him? They said,
we have a mark whereby we can distinguish him. The Emperor
then ordered all the Mamiuks to be present; who came accordingly, sta-
tion after station, as commanded. Upon these the astrologers fixed
their eyes; but did not discover the person looked for, until* the day
began to draw towards the close. At this time the cup-bearers said
one to another, we are getting rather hungry, let us join and send some
one into the street to buy us something to eat. They did so ; and Balaban,
as the most despicable, was sent to make the purchase. Balaban accord-
ingly sallied forth, but could find nothing in that street which would suit
him ; he then went on into another, during which time the turn of the
cup-bearers came on to be presented. But, as Balaban was not forthcom-
ing, they took a little pitch and whatever else was necessary for their
purpose, and daubing it over a child, took him wdth them in the place of
Balaban ; and when his name was called over, this child was presented ;
and the business of the day was closed, without the astrologers finding their
mark upon any one ; which was a prowdential circumstance for Balaban.


* The force of the particle (until) is worth remarking in this place, as it is obvious

that no inference whatever can here be drawn, that the circumstance hinted at did afterwards
take place. The same often takes place in the scriptural usage of the terms &c.

veiy unlike the usage of our particle until. See Noldius, p. SSI', edit. 1734.

Q 2


11(5 HINDUSTAN

At last Balaban made his appearance , but not till the business of the day
was o\er The cleverness of Balaban was afterwards noticed, and he was
made head of the cup bearers After this he was placed in the armj,
and soon became a general officer After tins the Sultan Jul'il Oddm mar«
ried his daughter, vv Inch was before he had been made king But when he
was, he appointed Balaban to the office of NawTib or Viceroy, which he
filled for twenty years lie then killed Ins master, and seized the em
pire This Balaban bad two sons, one of these, namely, *E1 Klnn El
Shahid, he appointed as Ins own succcs^r, and governor on his part
in the provinces of Sindia he resided at Jlultln He wus killed,
however, m an afiair with the Tartars,* leaving two sons, Kaikobad|
and 'Kaikhosru Balaban s second son, named *X'isir Oddm, was ap
pointed to govern the districts of 'LaknoutI and "Bengal When, however,
the hcir*apparent El Klim El Shahid had been killed, Balaban appointed
E! Khan El Shahids son Kaikliosni, his successor, passing over his own
son Nasir Oddm

Nasir Oddin, liowcvcr, had a son named "Moizz Oddm residing at the
court of his grandfather at Dehh, the person who eventually became sue*
ccssor to Balaban This at length came to pass on account of Gialh
Oddm Balaban s dying in the night, when his own son Jvasir Oddm was out
of the way m the district of Laknouti On this occasion he appointed
Kaikhosru his grandson, the son of El Kliln El ShahTd, as already men-
tioned

The king, however (or clucO of the Emirs and Nawab to the Sultan
Balaban, happened to have conceived a strong enmity against Kaikhosru,

• 1 p -(rtVniviriAKurocBccoam

f The Tabiikiiu Akbarl and Fansbla give the name of Kaikobld to tlic ton of tbii Nisir
Oddm, and who here termed Mata Oddm All agree, Ixqwctct, m making the »on of S^sir
Oddia eventually to succeed to Dalabao in the empire Whicli of our wnicrs is correct m the
other particulars I have not the means of determining, nor is it of much importance , but, from
the accounts given below by Ibn Baiuto, and no where else to be found, I am disposed to
bebeve, that Jic had access to documents not in existence la the times of the histonans referred
to and if so, his story bids the fairest for being the true one The title of Balaban s second
son Baghew Khan as given by Fenshta and Dow, is constantly in the Tabakati

Akbarl Bakerd KhSn 1^)


HINDUSTAN.


117


on this account he had recourse to a stratagem, which gained him his end :
it was this : He forged a letter in the name of the Emirs, stating that they
had declared Moizz Oddin son of Nasir Oddin, king. With this he goes
to Kaikhosru by night, as if wishing to advise with him, and says ; The
Emirs have proclaimed thy nncle’s son ; and I very much fear for thy
safety. The reply was: What am I to do? He said, save thyself by
escaping to the districts of Sindia. But, replied he, how am I to get through
the gates of the city, which are already barred. The keys, answered the
Emir, are here in my possession. I will open the gates for you. The
young man thanked him for this, and then kissed his hand. The Emir
said : Mount immediately. He accordingly did, with his nobles and slaves ;
and the Emir opened the gates, let them out, and immediately closed them
again.

He next went to Moizz Oddin, son of Nasir Oddin, and asked permission
to enter; which being granted, he proclaimed him Emperor. “ But, how
is this,” replied Moi'zz Oddin, “ since Kaikhosru my uncle’s son was
appointed successor ?” The Emir told him of his stratagem, and how he
had got rid of Kaikhosru. Moi’zz Oddin thanked him for this, and then
took him to the palace; where, sending for the rest of the Emirs and
nobles, they invested him with the supreme authority during the night.
In the morning this was confirmed by the people generally ; and Moizz
Oddin took possession of the throne.

His father, however, was living at this time in the provinces of Bengal
and Laknouti ; and, when the news of his son’s being made Emperor
reached him, he said : I am heir to the cro^vn, how then can my son
exercise this authority during my lifetime ? He accordingly set out with
his army for Dehli, in order to make war upon his son Moizz Oddin. Moizz
Oddin too marched out with his troops to give battle to his father. They
both arrived at the same time at the city of "Karra,* which is situated on
the banks of the Ganges, took their stations on opposite sides of the river,
and prepared for the onset. It was the will of divine Providence, how-
ever, to spare the blood of the faithful ; and hence the heart of the father


* The Currah of Major EennelJ.


118


HINDUSTAN


Nasit Oddm began to relent tovrards his son , for he said to himself, surely
as long as my son is king, I shall partake of his glory Moizz Oddm too
felt in his mind that someting of submission was due to his father. Each
of them, therefore, as if by instinct, left his army and rode directly into
the middle of the nver and met there Here the Emperor kissed the feet
of his father, and asked his forgiveness His father replied, I give you ray
kingdom , and so invested him wiUi the authority of Emperor. He then
wished to retire to his districts , but his son said Nay, but you must come
with me to mine He accordingly accompanied him to Dehli , and,
entering the palace, seated his son upon the throne, and took his own sta-
tion before him This day is therefore called, the day of meeting, because
they had this happy rencontre in the middle of the river, no blood beino-
shed, and the kingdom mutually given and accepted *

After this, Nasir Oddm returned to his districts, where after two years he
died, leaving a family behind him The kingdom was thus confirmed to
Moizz Oddm, which continued for four years, during which the inhabitants

* The account of this trsnsaction is given in a manner somewhat diSerent in the Tabsluti
Akban, Ferishta and after the latter, by Dow, vol i p 225, £c, the former, stating, as Fe
nshta does, that Nasir Oddm did not think of leaving Luknouli for Dehli for tMo years, until he
had heard of the great proHigacy ofhis son, proceeds thus U elll-t yllsL

b jm!^ ui— i-b 1 ~ ^ ji

J3J ^ t. f ^ ^ jbti laf

cJbik* ii-L> (iX»

*,^^1 Ut* jt ^b ^

jjl^ lilblU ^ “ The Sultan, at the instigation of the Vizier Nisam Oddm, pro-
viding himself with an army, and other appurtenances of royalty, set out for Oude When the
Sultan NdSir Oddm was acquainted with this, knowing that the Vizier Nizam Oddm had origi
nated it, he also set out with an army, dephants, and great pomp towards his son Each of the
armies took its station on each side of the Sirve (Soorjew or Gogra} 'When three days were spent
in sending and receiving letters, as to how the meeting was to be arranged it was at length
agreed, that the son should retain the throne, and that Nasir Oddm should pa«s the river, and
do homage to his son upon it I make tbu extract, because Dow introduces certain matters
into the account not to be found either in Fenshta or the author cited Such as the armies
waiting for some days in hourly expectation of an action , the old man finding his army inferior
to that of bis son, and the like when the fact serais to be, that a negociation was set on foot im
mediately, and that the father had no intention or wish to give his son battle What authority
our traveller had for placing this meeting upon the Ganges it is not easy to say


HINDUSTAN.


119


may be said to have enjoyed a continual holiday. After this he was
affected by a complaint, by which one of his sides became quite withered,"^
and for which the physicians could find no remedy. At this time, his
Nawab, 'Jalal Oddin Firoz Shah El Khilaji, revolted, taking his
station upon a high mount without the city. Moizz Oddin sent his
Emirs for the purpose of giving him battle; but they all, one after
another, joined him, and proclaimed him Emperor. Jalal Oddin then
entered the city, and enclosing Moizz Oddin within his palace for three
days, overcame him, put him to death, and took possession of his
kingdom.! This Jalal Oddin was a mild and well-informed prince; he
governed India for two years. He had a son and a daughter. The
daughter he married to his brother’s son Ala Oddin, a daring, bold,
and powerful man. His wife, however, so much harassed him, that he
was obliged to complain to her father, in order to have an end put to their
disputes.!

The uncle had given him the government of ’ Karra and Manikbur,§
containing two of the most populous districts in India. Ala Oddin, how-
ever, had an eye to the kingdom. The only difficulty he had to contend
with was, his want of money ; for he had none, except what he got by
his sword in making new conquests. Upon one of these expeditions, his
horse happened to stumble against a stone as he went along, and from this
a kind of ringing noise proceeded. He immediately ordered his men to
dig; and here they found an immense quantity of wealth. || This he divided
among his followers, and hence acquired considerable power. It happened
that his uncle undertook an expedition against him, and summoned him
before him, but he refused to appear. The uncle then prepared to go to


. j •jXsU jj ^

* Dow, ib. p. 229.

f Here the KhilijJ dynasty originated, and that of Ghaur ended. Dow, ib. pp. 229-231.

t Noticed by Dow, p. 243.

} The Currah and Manicpoor of Major Rennell.

II This wealth seems to have been acquired in an expedition into the Deccan. Dow, ib. p.
245 and 247. In countries like those of the East, however, subject to a perpetual change ot
masters, it is not at all to be wondered at, that much treasure is often buried; and, perhaps, this
"'ill in some measure account for the stories we so often meet with, of great treasures being found
in the earth.


120


HINDUSTAN.


him , for he said, This young man is as my son, I will therefore go to
him The nephew accordingly met him, which happened upon the banks
of the Ganges, m the lery place where Moizz Oddin and Nasir Oddm had
formerly met and, like them, each rode into the middle of the nver
AlTi Oddm, howeser, had commanded his followers, that, at the time he
should embrace his uncle Jalal Oddm, they were to kill him 'When,
therefore, the parties met, and the nephew was m the act of embracing
the uncle, the followers of the nephew killed him, which put AH Oddm
m possession of his uncle’s army, and all proclaimed him Emperor *
After this he governed Hindustan for twenty years He was just, and
looked to the affairs of his subjects in person Now he also had a nephew
named "Soleimln Shah, and as he was one day engaged m the chase,
this nephew conceued the intention of destroying him, just as he had of
destroying his o\\n uncle He shot him, accordingly, with an arrow in an
unguarded moment, and the uncle fell from his horse 1 The nephew was


* Fenshta s account of thu transaction will be found m Dow, vol i pp 25S iSi But here
the Pcrenn historians represent the affair as haring taken place in the Gimgea and aslbn
Batuta says, it took place where the fonner one did, he must have written theGangtii

on that occasion

f Dow, lb pp 267 2t)9 But here the name of Aiif Khan occurs if, however, we turn
to Fenshta, n e shall find Soleiman Shah, just as we have it in our traveller and as we have
another variety, it may not be ami»s to ale tbe passage j-'

(nl Jj) t— w

liy iJjJJ \jS^ ^ 3CiJ,

t— >bjl jjj xV* ijyj^ iXii (^al i\Cj) I'ij

sf 1 •• * - ' jij b X Jbi ^

if y b ^ijSl j!L-j ml A.X >y^j}

tfxJj jl J^jjUaL, uyf - UyT jjlbLi Xsj_j X«1 j>i jjLf y~i Xi^

»X«T O , '* The Sultan was enraged, and tn his own person proceeded towards that part

in regal pomp When he amveA at Titrt (according to the Tabakati Akban at Ttl
had resided there a few days, and went daily into tbe desert to hunt the kamurgah, upon one
of these he happened to have lost tune, so that he could not get to the army, but remained out.
On the next day, before sun rising be ordered the hunting to commence, while he, with a


HINDUSTAN.


121


about to make up to him, when he was told by his slave that he need not
(Jo so, as he was quite dead. He left him, therefore, and returned to the
palace, and took possession of the government. A little while after Ala
Oddin, recovering from his stupor, got up and mounted a horse, which
the army perceiving joined him. He then entered the city, and besieged
his nephew Soleiman Shah in the palace ; who, feeling his weakness,
betook himself ‘to flight, but was taken and put to death by his uncle
Ala Oddin. After this he never rode a hunting, to divine service, or to the
celebration of any public holiday.

He had five sons, the younger of whom were *Shahab Oddin and Kotb
Oddin: the eldest he had, during his life time, ordered to be kept in prison.*
When taken -with his last sickness (the anger of the young man on account
of his imprisonment not having abated), and when the disease was making
rapid advances, he sent for this son in order to name him as his successor ;
but, he delaying to come in consequence of this irritation, the Mamluks, the
head of whom hated this sou, together with the principal Nuwab, placed
the younger son Shahab Oddin upon the throne, as soon as the Emperor was
dead : and the appointment was confirmed by the people. The three elder
children, howeyer, were ordered to be imprisoned and their eyes to be put
out: and thus was the government established.

few others, went aside and sat upon a height, so that when the Kamurgah should be started he
might engage in the hunt. All on a sudden, however, Soleiman Shah the Sultan’s nephew,
who was styled Alikh Khan, and was keeper of the Door, having in his mind the affair of Jalal
Oddin and Ala Oddin, with a few horsemen who were his old servants and liad lately
become Mohammedans, parading as it were for his amusement, made for the Sultan ; who, when
they had attacked him with their arrows, fell from the height, &c.” The place where this
occurred is called Jilput, by’ Dow, which is, perhaps, an error of the press for Tilput, as found
in the Tabakati Akbarl. Of the Vakeel Muttalufc, as in Dow, we have in both histories
Vaklii Uar.

* This, we have, I suppose, in the temporary banishment mentioned by Dow, vol. i. p. 292.
Ferishta, however, mentions it not as a command, as given by Dow, but merely as a per-
mission to go to Amrohe, on a hunting excursion : his words are,

• \j^ j\Lii j ca— ^ He gave

permission to Khazir Khan to make a hunting excursion to Amrohe, saying, when I shall have
recovered my health, I will' send for you. See also ih. p. 293, where Ferishta does not say one

R


122


HlUDUSTAJJ


Upon this the Queen sent for two of the most powerful of her husband’s
Mamluks, the name of one of whom was 'Bashir, that of the other
'‘Muhashsbir, and \vith tears complained of the conduct of the pnncipal
Nuwab towards her children, soliciting their assistance, and stimulatin'^
them to put the chief Nuwab to death , and affirming, that it was his inten-
tion to murder her jounger son Kotb Oddm They accordingly agreed to
kill him, which they did by stratagem while he was in his house * They
then brought forth Kotb Oddm to bis brother Shahab Oddm, who held the
reins of goiernment Kotb Oddm remained for some time in the situation
of his Nuwab, but at length deposed his brother, and took possession of
the kingdom , which he held for some time.

After this he took a journey to ‘Dawlat Abad, beUveen which and Behli
IS a distance of forty days The road is from first to last inclosed with
’'willow and other trees, so that a traieller seems to be m a garden
throughout all this distance f Besides, there are at the distance of every
three miles the stations of the foot couriers, at which there are also inhabi-
tants, as already mentioned From this place to El TelmgAna,'J and *E1
Maabar,^ is a distance of six months In all these stations there is a


word about trying his offectioos or seeing him weep, as stated Dow, but that the Emperor em
braced him affectionately, and allowed bim to go into the haram to see his mother, &c

* lapp. 295 6 Theaccount of the Queens proceeding differs a IiUle in Fenshta from that in
Ibn Batuta andbere Dowisiocorrect *‘TherootherofMob<trickShaw acquainted Sbech
>nzain ul Dien,” &c , but Fensbta says it was the Shdkh Najm Oddm . And a

little lower down he tells us, ]ust as our traveller does, that this affairwas communicated to both the
Mubashshir and the Bashir his words arc tzsi ouoy ^ -f ■> — ti * jU

Jic r t ■ftrey Ttftumciicnivdi'ftieiffiKfrVo ftieWdWdirfWtt
of the Eunuchs Where we also learn that these are names of office.

f We are told byhenshta, and after him by Dow, Hind to! i p 319, that the emperor
planted both sides of the road irom Debit to Dawlatabad with trees, for the purpose of shading
the inhabitants when passing from the one place to the other
t This IS, no doubt, the ciJj ofFenshlaand r*ffi(^ofDow, the reading of our MSS dX
B evidently wrong

f It will scarcely be necessary to add any thing to the valuable notes of M de Sacy end Mr
Marsden on this place , Relat del£gypte,p 112,and IVavels of Marco Polo, p 626 But as a
few notices of it are to be found m Abulfedas Geography, not mentioned by them, I shall here
give them (^U!) i_*’^


HINDUSTAN.


123


lodging foi ^He Emperor, with cells for his suite, and for travellers generally.
There is no necessity, therefore, for a poor man’s carrying any provisions
with him on this road.

When, therefore, the Sultan Kotb Oddin was on this journey, and had
with him “Khazir Khan, the son of his elder brother who was in prison,
some of the Emirs formed a conspiracy, by which it was their intention to
depose the Emperor, and to proclaim this son of his elder brother. But
the Emperor dif overing this, instantly put his nephew and his nephew’s
father to death, as well as his other brothers, who were then confined in the
fortress of ''Kallyur.*

This fortress is situated on the top of a high hill, and seems as if it
had been cut o-.t of the rock: opposite to it is no other mount. Within
it are reservoirs filled with rain-water ; and about it are numerous walls.


. ^J\ <id^. l*V.'

has said, that the Maabar is well-known and often mentioned. From it is brought the Las (un-
washed silk), on the washing of which a proverb has been formed. On the north of this place are
the mountains adjoining the districts of Balhara king of the kings of India. On the west of
it does the river Sulian discharge itself into the sea. The Maabar is to the east of Kawlam
(Coulan), about three or four day's journey : to the south of which it must be necessarily placed.
Again, the longitude and latitude are said to be, according to Ibn Said, east 142° 8'; lat.
17° 45'. Wliere the first, allowing about 17° west for the difference of calculation, is evidently
too great. And if any reliance can be placed on the last, the conjecture of M. de Sacy, that
the Maabar probably extends as far north as the mouths of the Ganges, cannot be true. If we
could ascertain where the districts of \j^ Balhara commence, we may, probably, be able to
determine this question. The reader should be informed, that in many cases in which Ferishta has
Maabar, Col. Dow not knowing, I suppose, what to make of the word, has translated it
by Malbar. Hist. Hind. vol. i. p. 300, &c. Again, it is said, ^ tSlb Jjlj Jli'

has said, the first (part) of the districts of El Maabar, on the part of Manibar (Malabar), is
CapeKomhori (Comorin), with o after m without any vowel, o after h, i after r, &c. In this
case Cape Comorin is the southern limit, and the latitude given above, the northern.

* The Gwalior of Rennell. Some account of this expedition, mutiny, and murder of the
king s brothers, is to be found in Dow, vol. i. pp. 298-9. An abstract of the history of this cele-
brated fortress will be given from the Gwalior Namah (<uU in an Appendix to this chapter.

R 2


124


HINDUSTAN


Upon which warlike engines are planted This is their strongest fortress
beneath it, is a small town

When, however, Kotb Oddin had killed his brother-?, and so purified his
kingdom that no one seemed left to contend with him, divine Providence
gave the supreme power to one of his most powerful and choice friends
namely, ^ Nasir Oddm Khosiu Kh m, who killed him, and took possession
of the empire but this he held only for a short time * Thf reason was
that when he had taken possession of the throne, he sent dresses of honour
to the gov ernors ot the several provinces , which they all put on, asamark
of obedience, if we except ''Toglik Shlli, father of the present Em
peror of Hindustan Mohammed Shah Tins person was then governor of
*DebaIbur,f and would neither put on the dress, nor tender his obedience
The consequence was, an army was sent against him, which he put to
flight The Emperor then sent his brother against him him also he routed,
and put to death and so far did matters proceed, that Toglik also slew
Ndsir Oddm Khosru KU m and seized his empire

This Nasir Oddm had originated some great abominations during his
reign, of which the forbidding oxen to be slaughtered is one, and which is
one of the regulations of the mfldcl Hindoos For among them, no one is
allowed to slaughter an ox , and, in case he should do so, he is ordered to
be stitched up in its skin, and to be burnt Tiie reason is, they so much
esteem the ox that they drink its urine, both to promote prosperity and
to recover health They also daub their walls with the dung of these am


jjJLiJ al J * jl2» ^ *


• The rise of this wretch will be found in Dow, pp 300 4 , and at p 307 wc are told that
hi3 reign continued only five months , but according to my copies of Fcnshta his re gii was
some days short of this jU&u ^ J}J *

f The province of this name We have in Dow, to! i p 305, the first intimation of this
where we are told, that this chief was governor of Lahore and Debalpur, and that his son
was appointed master of the horse m Debit, as noUccd by our traveller a litiJe lower down
Toglik, however, is styled in Dow, Ghazi Malluk

f Nothing IS said in Dow of this but in Ferisfata some lotimations of it are found, iir

. da—tj t/JIllj JjJyy JS c/lsf ly—CS!" sol^ jlcT u'j'H' '*

to practise idolatry with the Hindoos, so that the Koran was occasionally placed as a stool and
sat upon '


HINDUSTAN.


125


mals. Hence it was that Hasir Oddin became so hateftd to the iMoham-
medans, that they stimulated -'Toglik Ghiath Oddin, to put him to death,
and to take possession of the kingdom.

This Toglik was originally descended from the Turks who inhabit the
mountains in the district of Sindia.*" He was verj' poor ; but, betaking
himself to the cities of these parts, he got employment in feeding cattle.
After this he became a foot soldier, and then a horse soldier : in the next
place, as his abilities appeared he was made a 'commanding officer.
.After this the Emperor Kotb Oddin appointed him governor of Debrdbur;
and his son, who is now Emperor, keeper of the horse. Toglik was
brave, warlike, honourable, and just: and, as his son was stationed at
Dehli as keeper of the horse, when the father had determined to rebel.


* Ferishta tells us, that he could find nothing upon which he could rely as to the origin of
Toglik Shah. His words are these: UU .A.'w< •

bsliiU; JL.51


^ > o.


• j * V '


yL-jXi ili ob ^L‘ j* j'


1“


tJij


CiL.' J'K dU U!


-✓ - V”«


•O


.fJuT J


^ ^ly- cJj

“ The historians of Hindustan, both
ancient and modern, have neglected to give any particular acca-iut of the origin and descent of
Toglikshjh. Jlohanimed Kasim Ferishta, however, the writer of these pages, when he arrived at
Lahore, during the times of the Emperor Nur Oddin Mohammed Jahangir, on the part of the
Saltan of hfs time Ibrahim Aadil Shah, enquired of the persons of that place, whose desire it was
to investigate the history of the Kings of Hindustan, what was the origin and descent of the famib’
of Toglikshah. They said : We have found no clear account of it in any book whatever. In this
State, however, there is a report, that the King Toglik, father of the Emperor Ghiath Oddin
Toglikshah, obtained a situation among the Turkish slaves of the Sultan Baiaban : and contract-
ing an intimacy with the Jit tribe, who are stipendiaries upon this kingdom, married a daughter of
one of them ; and from him descended the Sultan Gbiatli Oddin.” We have a sketch of
this in Dow, vol. i. p. 308, where, instead of Baiaban we read Balm. My two copies of Ferishta,
however, the Tabakati Akbari, and Ibn Batutu, are constant in giving Baiaban, which is
nndoubtediy the true reading: and, as Ibn Batuta lived much nearer the time of Toglikshah than
Ferishta did, it is very likely that bis account of his origin is the true one.


126


HINDUSTAN


he corresponded with this son, who cajoled the Emperor Khosru Khan
sometimes, for example, appeanng at his post without the city, and then
returning to his father After some days, however, he was missing till
after sunset, which gmng some suspicion to Nasit Oddm, he sent for him,
but could not find him * on this occasion he had escaped, and taken all
the best of the Emperor s horses to his father *

The Emir of Multan, ’‘Kashlu Khan, joined Toglik m his rebellion, m
order to avenge Kotb Oddm, son of Nasir Oddin, their common master
When, however, the two conspirators entered Dehli, and Niisir Oddm had
betaken himself to flight with only a few Hindoo fakeers, Toghk said to
Kashlu Khan . You shall be Emperor But he refused , and Toglik took
possession of the government After this, NTisir Oddm was taken and put
to death , and the kingdom was purged, and remained so for four years
After this the Emperor sent his son, who is now Emperor, to reduce the
provinces of Telmga.t which are at the distance of three months from

* This IS Dow 8 Mallsck Fuchir ul Dien Jonah Penshta tells us, that the escape of this young
man to his father, was the Arse thing that awakened this king to the danger of his situation aad
as his words veiy much conhrin the account given by Ibn Batuta I shall here give them Ul

I— JjU Jljiy ^1 jIaj <r, .lar J\

&c In the mean time, after two months and a half, Juna, finding an opportunity in the middle of
the night, mounted with two or three confideotial fnends, and took the road from Dehli to Debal
pur with ad haste Khosru Khan being (thus) awakened from his sleep of negligence, became
anxious as to the decline of his power, Sec Tlie particulars, however, diifer a little

f Our MSS here read which is a maoilest mistake of the copyist, for (AUj the

orthography of Ferishta, and which Dow writes TtlUng, vol t p 809, where we have an
abridgment of the account given by Fenshta of tins rebellion But as Dow s mode of writing
the proper names, Ac differs very iDatenally from that found in my MSS it may not he amiss to
notice It Fenshta s words are these, Oy (al ly>-) jsJ diU ,

Jjb " But Malik Fakhar Oddm

Juivdla (al Juna^ his eldest eon, be appointed as W successor, and lifted his head almost to
the skies, by giving him a royal umbrella. He also gave him the title of Alif Khan Witli
this my MSS agree, Dow, however, gives Abgh Khan, (he probably read jJl where I
have

For some account of TehngSna, (occasionally written by Fenshta) the place here

meant, see Ilennells Memoir to his Map of Hmdustan, p cx! &c


HINDUSTAN.


127


Dehli ; but when he had arrived at a certain part of the way, one of the
courtiers thought proper to rebel, and to possess himself (if possible) of the
kingdom. For this purpose he circulated a report, that the Emperor was
dead; supposing that the Emirs would now immediately proclaim him
king. When they heard this, however, every one of them struck his drum,
and betook himself to his own part (i. e. to rebellion) so that the prince
was left with his particular friends alone.f The Emirs, moreover, intended


* This appears to- be equivalent to the scriptural expression, “ Every man to his tent, O
Israel,” which seems to have been the watch-word for rebellion.

t As the account of this mutiny is not given correctly by Dow (vol. i. p. 309, &c.) I shall
here give it in the words of Ferishta. Jf <_jT ^

jjjA I_iij jV.O

^Js a-j kh-iiyj u- cAisj jCi,!

aiAS jO (JW-j (<sj) *b4.^_

JfAcl li)' J'^ ^ ytbii

ijbaLj l?*

^^ibj ejob» hcij j) islijby axtt CJji xbiJiUj

^ tilLoj (ilLoj bssSl

j\ ijUi ^^b>- v_£Jlj ei — >1 ^ ^ tiij •iidy *^4.=

^ ijio o«a- c^iILo ^

^Jbi\ iX3aA> ji

C)\u isi^ &c. During this interval, from the corrupt state of the water and air of

those parts, and as various diseases had appeared, a great number of men, horses, and ele-
phants, perished ; and, besides, the soldiers had circulated false reports. At the same
juncture, as the roads had been stopped up, and no news had arrived from Dehli for about a
month (two couriers usually arriving weekly) the Sheikh Zada DimashkT, and Obeid the
Poet, who had lately come to Hindustan, and waited on the prince’s person, raised an insolent
and false report, that the Emperor Toglik Shah was dead, that another king was already upon
the throne, and that the greatest confusion was prevailing in Dehli; but not content with this,
the two insurgents went to the quarters of Malik Timur, Malik Mai Afghan, Malik Kafur, the
keeper of the seals, and Malik Tagin, who w’as chief in command, and said : The affairs of
Dehli are in this state ; and, as Alif Khan knows you to have been the great men of Ala Oddln,
and participators in his rule, he has made up his mind to seize upon you all four in one day, and
to strike off your heads. When they heard this, they were much alarmed ; and, as great fear
already existed in the army, each of them made up his mind and fled. The account given in
the Tabakati Akbarl agrees tvith this as to matter, except that it gives jj) Aligh Khan,
iar e_aj) Alif Khan.


128


HINDUSTAN


to kill him, but from this they were diverted by one of the great men, of
their body, whose name vv as ' Timur The prince then fled to his father
with ten of his friends, whom he styled ‘Yaran (z e friends m the Persic),
but, when he came to him, was immediately sent back on his journey with
a large army Upon this, the Emirs, who had intended to put him to
death, fled, but some of them were taken, and put to death Thus the
matter terminated, and he returned to his father
The father himself then undertook an expedition against the province of
^Laknouti,* in. which resided at that time the SultanSliamsOddin sonof Ghuth
Oddin Balaban to whom had fled the Emirs of Toglik, as just mentioned
About this time, however. Shams Oddin died, having first bound his son
Shahab Oddin (by contract), who accordingly took possession of the
throne His younger brother, however, "Ghmth Oddin Bahadur Burn
overcame him, and seized upon the kingdom He then killed all the rest
of his brothers, except Shahab Oddin, who had been bound to mount
the throne, and Nasir Oddm for they fled to Toglik imploring assistance
He allowed them, therefore, to march with his army, m order to give battle
to Glinth Oddm Toglik had also appointed his son Mohammed to the
office of Nuw lb in Dehh during his own absence on this expedition He
proceeded therefore, and gamed possession of the province of Laknouti,
having put Ghulh Oddm to the lout, after whicli, however, he took bun
prisoner, and carried him to Dehli


• Some account of this expedition is giren by Dow, vol i p SIl, where we also find the
appomiment ot the Emperor s eldest son to tbe office of Nuwab of Dehli Fenshta places this
expedition m the year of the Hejira 724, A D 1324, and as Dow s account is in some respects
inaccurate, I shaJI gne Fenshtaa words luUwj t’jl ^

sliUf.l*.' uhaLi jL-J uljkJ ^

CL- i' ZUtilu Ojs*-

^ ^, 1 ^! OU I.\3j Ju^ t,=-v^ <0 &C ‘ In the year 724

accounts came from Lakhnouli and Sanarganw, staling that the Cmirs and magistrates of
that place were exercising great cruelties and injustice upon the inhabitantt Upon this the
Emperor Toglikshah getting an army (egetber and appointing Alif Khan for his Viceroy in DeWi,
set out for the eastern parts of Hindustan and when he arrived at Turhat, the Sultan NSsir
Oddin, son of the Sultan Ghlatli Oddm Balaban, &e


HINDUSTAN.


129


When he had got near to Dehli, he sent to his son Mohammed, request-
ing him to build him a "kuShka, that is, a palace, which he did, and
constructed one, well built of wood, in the space of three days. But
Mohammed the son made an agreement with the geometrician who planned
it, that the steps leading to it should be made sufficiently oroad to allow
the elephants * to ascend them, in order to their being presented to the


• We read in Dow (vol. i. p. 311) that forty elephants had been sent from Jagenagur, by
AlifKhan, for the Emperor; and it is probable these were the elephants intended to be presented
on this occasion, if there is any truth at all in this part of the story. In p. 312 of Dow, vol. i,
we have a very short account of this event ; but there the scene is placed at Afghanpoor, a place
of which Rennell gives no account, but which must be very near Dehli. This has been token
from Ferishta, whose words are as follows : c:-.oi 3 LJ\

^ ^ g.h ^ I ji 1^,5*^

iX.^ bsC'l

fcXxAb ^^>1 ^ .Xjq ujujj

Is^l ^HaJuo iXvl *X^b tFtXA

sliiJb j jiJi

^Uh

iUj Ij Jii jij \j (jllaLjj ubil itjbi- L-g-fi-a bJ! JJW; bsTl

ylbLj eiikl ‘Jyt “taA-lMj y jtoi ^ ^J\y cJ^ J^}^>

t” y\ y ty

.Xib J«ii Cili OoUo “ He made for his capital, using every possible

endeavour to expedite his progress, not at all aware that his end was so hear. When Alif
Khan had heard that his father was coming in great haste, he erected a palace for him near
Afghanpur, in the space of three days; so that when tlie Sultan should have arrived at that
place, he might lodge there for the night; and ip the morning, when the city should be adornedj
and every thing prepared to receive him, he should enter it with great pomp. The Sultan
accordingly arrived there, knd believing the reason given for erecting this palace to be the true
one, he took up his lodging there. On the day following Alif Khan, with the rest of the
Emirs of Dehli, happy at the intimation of the king’s arrival, with the company who came tp
welcome him sat down in the palace to a feast. When the eatables were removed, and the
company was aware that the Sultan would soon mount, they got up, not waiting even to
wash their hands. The Sultan, however, delayed as long as washing his hands would require,

s


130


HINDUSTAN


Emperor Toglik A place also was so constructed, that when the foot of
the elephant should come m contact with it, the whole palace should fall
down upon all who may happen to be in it When, therefore, the Emperor
arrived at his palace, he had it carpetted and furnished, and took up his
residence within it Now, the Emperor had a second son, who was a
great favounte with him In consequence of this, the elder brother,

but (luring this tune the roof of the palace fell in and the Sultan with Uve others perished.
In some of the histones it is said, that since the palace was new and fresh built, and as some
persons made the elephants which the Emperor had brought with him from Bengal race round
it, as the weight of the elephants made the ground sinL, the palace on this account fell
Others say, that this useless palace was built merely because Alif Khan Iiad a design upon b»
father This opinion, however, Fenshta rejects as improbable, and inclines to another, given
by the Hdji Mohammed of Kandahar, that the palace was struck by lightning The author
of the Tabakati Akban, however, who is followed by the Farhat El Nazirin JsUl •_
after giving the «ame account with Fenshta of tins circumstance, concludes by ascribing it to
the same cause with Ibn Batuta His words are j\ if iXtLi fxJLy ^

jyj-i jjUaL jOt ^Li i—

«yUS j\ jP» ,^1 jii ikw-lLv lyu jla-sl Jc

It will not be concealed from the minds of lotelhgeot men, that the making of this otherwise
useless palace, was for the purpose of furthering a scheme which Ahgh Khan had devised against
his father, and which is evident enough And, as the author of the Tarikhi Firoz Shahi, published
hiswork in the time of Firoz Shah, whohad a veiy unreasonable faith in Mohammed Sh.ih, it is on
tins account, as I have oAen heard from credible persons, that he said nothing about tins circum
stance Abul Fazl speaks of this event in the following terms JJIJ ivllu! iJlC)

ub!/ ^>0- •iAjs* M

liji

dh L?W^ y i

■^■Having arranged maUers m ^eng^, W came to Debit 'Mo’tiammea'K'han, bis son, att’iie
head of a party m Dehh, built a palace in three days, and with much solicitation got the Sultan
to come to It The roof, however, fell in, and his matters were brought to a conclusion , and
although Zicl BarnI labours to give a good name to this prince, yet to have built such a
receptacle, and to have used such diligence to get the Sultan to it, must bring to imnd ti e
badness of his character ’ (A ini ALbari ) Tina Zia Bami, it should be remembered, was
a favounte with Mohammed Shah, and wrote his lustory under the immediate inspection of
Mohammed i son Firoz Shah, as the author of the Tabaluti Akban has judiciously remarked
There can be no doubt, therefore, that Ibn Batutaa account of this event is the true one An
account of this transaction, similar to those above given, is also found in the^^^^4>»yyU
Maathari Rahtmi, by Abd £1 Bliki


HINDUSTAN.


131


Mohammed, very muc|i feared lest he should be appointed successor to the
throne. When, therefore, the different orders, as well as those who had
come to welcome the Sultan, had concluded the banquet, the elephants
were presented before him : but, when the elephant’s foot came in contact
with the place appointed, down came the palace upon the head of the
Sultan Toglik, his favourite son, and the courtiers who were assembled
before him, and all perished. Mohammed, the present Emperor, accord-
ingly took possession of the throne, having been proclaimed by the Emirs
and people, and thus was the kingdom purged of his enemies.


APPENDIX.

An Abstract of the History of the Fortress of Gwalior, from the Gwalior
Namah of "Heraman Ibn Kardhar Das the Munshi.

As this fortress* is one of the greatest curiosities in Hindustan, I may perhaps be
excused in giving some extracts from a book entitled the ^Gwalior Namah respecting its
histoiy and governors.

The hill, it is said, was originally called ’Kumatat, and that its neighbourhood
abounded in wild beasts. Upon the hill a devotee named ’^Gawall Pa made his resi-
dence, just thirty-two years before the reign of Bikramajlt. Some time after this a
Zemindar named Suraj Sin, happening to come to this place while engaged in the chase,
applied to the devotee for water to drink, which was granted. Upon this and some
other occasions, the powers of these waters turned out to be so wonderfully beneficial,
that the Zemindar requested to be permitted to enlarge the well, and to build a fortress on
the hill, which was also granted. The Daivesh, after blessing the Zemindar, and ^ving
him a casket, which had the supernatural property of supplying him with gold, gave him
the name of Suraj Pal, adding, that as long as his descendants retained the name of
Pal, so long would they hold this fortress, and succeed in reducing their neighbours to


* For some good views of this fortress, see Colonel Fitzclarence’s Journey overland from
India ; and Bernier’s Voyage to Hindustan, in Pinkerton’s Collection of Voyages and Travels, vol.
viii. p. e^.


132


FORT OF GWALIOR.


their obedience. The consequence of which was, this Zemindar and his posterity became
the propnetors of all the neighbounng -country, and, after him, the well ’^Sura.j Kimd
receiTcd its name

After this King, eightj-four of his posterity reigned in the fortress of Gwalior* the
fourth of whom, ‘Bhim Pal, built the pagoda called *BhTin Absar: the seventh
" Bhuj P il built, the pagoda called ' Chatar Bhuj Eae at the top of the fortress : the
eighth, ^Padam Prd, built the pagoda of * Lachhml NarSjan* the ninth, “Anang Pa],
skilled, as it should seem, in the chemical art, struck golden ashrafs of five tola in wei'^'ht.
Nothing remarkable is recorded of the rest until we come to the last, -who received the
name of *'Yataj Karan, and who, conibrniable with the prophecy of the Hmdu sage, lo't
the government of the fort, together with thatof the adjacent countries. Theaccoimtof
this event is shortly this

A neighbouring Raja, named Rhan Mai, had no son, and only one daughter; this prince
therefore of the Pal family offered himself as her suitor, and was accepted Before he
could return to Gwalior, he was adopted son and successor to the Raja Rhan hlal , and,
as this Raja's dominions neie greater than his own, he was easily persuaded by his Vice-
roy, Rum Deo, whom he had left at Gwalior, to make over the government of the coun-
try and fortress to him

Seven of Ram Deo's successors held the fortress accordingly, until the time of the Sul-
tan Shams OddTn, who vvas originally a slave of Turkish extraction, belonging to the
Sultan Kotb OddTn Aipak This king, when returning from an expedition to the Deccan,
saw, for the first time, this smgulariy strong fortress , and, upon finding that none of its
governors had paid tnbute to the Emperors of Dchli, swore upon the Koran that be
would subdue it , which he soon after accomplished.

Upon this occasion, which happened A H. 630, A.D. 1232, a mosque was erected in
the fort, and prayers offered up m the name of the Sultan. Some time after, the Sultan
surveyingthe place, found that it contained only two wells of water, and that the part at
which he had entered was rather weak ; he ordered a wall, therefore, to be built, joining it
to the hill, and in thy area hemade eight wells, and 'mnebadnes ; all of which are still in
being One of these wells is very famous for its waters, which are earned to a great
distance, and are found very usefol to invalids.

After the Sultan had made all his arrangements he returned to Dehli, leaving the for-
tress m the hands of one** Bahadur Khan From this time to that of the Sultan AIT
OddTn, noofficerhad been sent fixrni Dehli to Gwalior, some time after his accession,
however, it was given to two Rajputs of the ‘puigunna of DimdarnlT, as a reward for
faithful service. These men, however, being muiA, envied by their neighbours, the Raj-


■J'icr’"

■J’ii*".’


FORT OF GWALIOR.


13a


puts of Tunur, ■were at length, imrited to a feast, at a little distance from the fortress, and
kilJed by treachery. The fortress then fell into their hands ; and eight persons of that
tribe held it in succession. Several wells, pagodas, and bowers, were made by this race;
the last of whom was BikramajTt The fortress then reverted to the Moslems;

From this time to the reign of Ibrahim, grandson of the Sultan Bhalul Eudij.the
fortress was held by Bikramajit, upon pa^g tribute to the kings of Dehli.. Ibrahim,
however, forced the power, not without considerable loss, out of the hands of Bikramajit,
who being sent to the presence a prisoner, received the jagir of Shams Abad ; the govern-
ment of the fortress then fell into the hands of Aazam Humaynn, Ibrahim’s general.

Some time after this, Ibrahim suspecting the fidelity of his nobles, and thinking it par-
ticularly dangerous to retain Aazam Humayun, who had a large and powerful- drcle of
friends, had him suddenly put to death ; upon which Selim Khan, son of the murdered'
general, rebeUed, and betook himself to the east of Hindustan ; but was taken and put
to death by Darya Khan, who had been appointed Governor of the province of Bahar;-

Soon after, the Ludi family fled to the Panj Ab, and presented themselves and their
services to Zahir Oddin Mohammed Baber, in Kabul; here they represented the’pel-
turbed state of Hindustan, and formed a treaty ■with him, which ended in its final subju-
gation ; for soon after a battle took place, in which Ibrahim was slain; with Bikramajit
fighting at his side. Khaja Rahim Dad, one of Baber’s servants, was now appointed to
the government of Gwalior, but in a little time got out of favour ; when a Rajput named*
Dakar Mankad, a Zemindar of that quarter, became Governor of the fortress.

Upon this occasion, -^Sheikh Mohammed Ghauth, a man of considerable influence,
represented to the king the great impropriety of an infidel’s holding this fortress, under a>
sovereign ■who professed the true faith ; and Khaja Rahim Dad ■was restored to the
government ; which he held but a short time, and ■was succeeded by ^Ahul Rath, who held
it till the death of Baber.

BTien Mohammed Humayun succeeded to the throne, he took up his residence for
some time in the fortress of Gwalior; and at that time built the ’‘Humayun temple, a
place commanding an extensive prospect, and enjoying the most wholesome air. He
then returned to his capital.

When * Shir Shah came to the throne, he took up his residence for some"' time at
Gwalior, and' then built the ’‘Shir temple, and also constructed a large- tank in its
area.

After the death of Shir Shah, which happened at this place, his son ’jalal Khan,
succeeded- to the throne, and took the name of Islam Shah. He also took up his
residence in this fortress, and in it he died.

During the next reign, which was short and troublous, the possession of the fort of


. J>\ ^


134


FORT OF GWALIOR


Gwal or remained in the hands of "Bahbal, a slave of ShTr Shall, who held it until
Akbar came to the throne

The Rajputs, howeier, desirous of regaunng Ibeir ancient ascendancy m these parts
with Ram Sah, a son of Bikramajit, assembled a large force and attacked the fortress
Upon this occasion, "Kaya Khan, one of Akbars generals, was despatched to relieve
and tale possession of it When Kaya amved at Gwalior, he was met by the
forces of ^Ram Sah, and an obstinate battle of thiee days continuance ensued but which
ended in favour of Akbai a troops After this Bahbal remained to be subdued, and the
fort to be taken, which after a short siege was completed The servants of Akbar held
the fortress after this for fifty years

When Jahangir came to the throne, the government of Gwalior was put mto the hands
of his servants, who seem to have advised him to destroy the building termed the Shir
Mandar, to erect another in its place, and to name it the JdhangiT Mandar^ which ts
said to he very beautiful

When ’ Shah Jahan succeeded to the empire, the government of Gwalior fell to the
lot of one of his greatest favourites and bravest generals, MuzafBrKhan, who, on this
occasion, received the title of IVala Khani Jahan , and m his hands it reisamed during a
space of nineteen years

This Governor was a great encourager of good and learned men, and very remarkable
for hisju«tice and liberality to all He ts said to have bad an elephant so powerful and
courageous, that he would destroy whole ranks of the enemy at once , which he did so
effectually upon a battle happening with the house of Ludi, that he was the principal
cause of the victory, and for which the Governor obtained the title of Kham Jahan.
On this and other accounts he had a statue of this elephant carved m stone, and set up
at the north gate of the fort Ifear the same spot he erected and peopled a village , and
this he called, aftei his former name, MuzafEr Pur In the vianity of this he planted
a garden, and here he made two wells, and erected some seats for the accommodation of
the inhabitants A few trees of this garden still remain

Besides this, he built a lofty mansion for himself, containing some large rooms of state,
with other apartments in the court of which he made a deep tank, and in the front
of this court four gardens In this mansion the Governors of the fort still reside
It is also said, that duruig this man s government, his son Alansur planted a gaiden on
the banks of the nver 'Sun Righ, which he called after his own name, and which still
IS used as a promenade for the town , he built too four walls of stone, in the middle
of which seats were constructed He also built and peopled the village Hlansur Pur,
which he called after his own name , and this still remams

After the expiration of nmeteen years, Kham Johan took a journey to Lahore, and
there died Upon this occasion Sayyad Solar Khan, who had been his confidential
servant, asked for, and obtained the government of the fort of Gwalior He then resided


•4^j


tL ^ L» * J-tj "


FORT OF GWALIOR.


135


in it for two years : after this his brother governed the fort, and he himself was appointed
to the government of the provinces. This brother, named Sayyad Aalam, held the fort for
five years, during which time he made and beautified a garden near the Sarai of ® Meher
Ali ; and in the ground known by the name of KTsu Pur, he built and peopled the village
Shah Kunj. It is said, that at that time the foundations of the gates of the fort, called
'BadalKadda and "Hiata Pul, had become much decayed, and that he repaired them,
covering the gates with iron, and so firmly nailing them, that the rush of an elephant
would not make the least impression on them.

Soon after this, he was put out of office for some crime which had better not be men-
tioned (as our author tells us), and was succeeded by "^Loharhasp Khan, son of Muhabat
Khan, who appointed ^Karehasp Khan his lieutenant; but after two years took up his
residence himself in the fortress. He is said to have been a brave and liberal man, chari-
table to the poor, and most anxious for information, both from travellers and others. He
erected a court of justice without the gate called Badal Kaddah, and close to the northern
wall of the fort, in which, on certain days, he administered justice to the people. The
kettle-drum of royalty, which formerly was placed at the gate termed Haita Pul, he
removed to the east of the fort, and nearer to the city, where it still remains. He com-
menced the removal of the ^ Shah Kunj to the east of the fort, but left the work mi-
finished. He also erected a lofty state-room in the “ArwahT, and made two wells of
exceeding good water in its court-yard. After the space of six ygars, however, he was sent
on an expedition into the Deccan, from which he returned with success. He then pre-
sented himself before the Emperor in Dehli, who appointed him to the government of
the Subah of Kabul. Upon this occasion, his lieutenant at Gwalior was a person named
Akhairaj, an officer in whom he placed great confidence. This happened A. H. 1067 ;
A.D. 1656.

During the sickness of the reigning king, which happened at this time, and the troubles
which arose on account of the rebellion of Darah Shikoh and his brothers, we hear
scarcely any thing of the fortress of Gwalior ; because, perhaps, it happened to lie almost
entirely out of the scene of action ; it remained, however, for some time in the hands of
Akhairaj ; but as he had the imprudence to close it on one occasion against the royal
standard, it was at length given to Obaid Allah Khan ; and soon after this, several of
the rebels falling into the king’s power, were put into confinement in the fortress, and
there kept.

In the next year, i. e. A. H. 1068, A. D. 1657, Darah Shikoh was carried prisoner to
Dehli, and there lost his life; and upon this, his son, “^Sipehar Shikoh, with several of
his friends, were all placed in the fortress of Gwalior, in the custody of Obaid Allah
Khan. The fort was now closely guarded, and no stranger permitted to enter it


. J jb ‘ *

e_ ’


13C


FOnT or GWALIOR.


About thi9 time a great scarcity took place, probably in consequence of the preceding
wars, when Obaid Allah Khan made a pronsioo, for the first time, for the pious, for
travellers, and the poor, this was given m tiie court-house built by the former Governor
where Mohammed, a Sherif and Mansabdur, presided. Soon after, several other of the
rebels, namely, Mohammed Sultan, Soleiman Shikoh, and several nobles, then friends
fell into the hands of the Emperor, and were consigned to the Governor of Gwalior, who
now was Muatamid. Khan, Obaid Allah having been commanded to give up the fortress
to him Soleiman Shikoh, however, soon after died , and Morad Bakhsh, one of the
nobles, was put to death by the law of retaliation. The graves of both are on the top of
the fort

The first two years of the government of Muatamid Khan m the fortress of Gwalior
were marked with the utmost liberality and regard to public good , particularly so, as a
great scarcity prevailed during this time He also erected a lofty hall for the transaction
of public business, adjoining the Shah Jahan Mandar, as also a bath which was a great
public convenience A wall too, which had long ago been commenced, sti etching out before
the gate termed Badal Kadda, and which had been intended to obstruct a ready egress
from the fort, was completed by him , to which he added another, somewhat higher than
•the gateway, end joining the walls of the castle A sixth gateway, leading from the fort
to the plain, was also constructed by him , and this received the name AalamgTr. Upon
both angles of the wall he likewise erected a lofty tower, and over the gates of each of
these, a ‘^Chhaten On the left side of the gate Badal Kadda, a large hall of justice
was also built, in which the business of state was ever after to be transacted , from all of
which, the appearance and strength of the fort were greatly augmented The inscription
then vmtten on the Aalamgiri gale, was this*

jbl jb Jji JL)

In the happy tunes of AnUmglr,

From whose bounty tune washiest,

Muatamid Khsn from his lofty mind,

Opened a door of prosperity upon the face of the fortress
Hatif said, on the year of its date,

« Let the place Jong remain the resideuce of plenty.”

Tlie sum of the letters, according to the Abjad, found in the last line of these verses
will give the date of the Hejira m which this event took place, which is A H 1071,
AD 1660.

The Mandm, looking towards the city eastward, and commenced by Muhabat Khan,
was completed by this Governor, and called Awrang Kunj Abad. He also constructed


FORT OF GWALIOR.


137


tte sLops 'wHoB. nm in botii directions, end in ■which the h'osiness of the city and markets
Li carried on. Orer this place he constructed s high ■wall which joins the fort, and which
receirsd the name of "‘'The fort, the asylom of the city.” Encompassing thi~ is the
ygd Kmij Abad, also erected by him for the reception and support of the pions. He
she repaired, and very much strengthened, the court of the Kachhari : and, as the inhabi-
tants of this part were ■very mnch in want of water, he obtained leave from the court to
cocstmet three stone cisterns, ■with seats, gates, and whatever else was necessary to pro-
Exte the con^venience and pleasure of the people : all of which he completed ; and the
hJhTnnz is the inscription which -was placed over one of the gates at this time.


$

$


l-JL-


cL£,l. Lj^* 1 1 ^

r j ^

_i;b JjS- j' JU

During the reign of the great prince A^amglr,

From whose Justice the world is peopled,

Muatamid Khan erected a strong building.

From the -water of which the sick are healeA
By ■wisdom, says Hatif, I sought the year of its erection ;

It is a fonntain of light, (t. c. the sum of the letters in the four last words,
which is, A.H. 1073— AJD, 1602.)

The tank, which stood in the -way to the fort, and was situated near the Bhairun Pul,
grocring old, -was by the heavy rains which feU about this time utterly destroyed; and the
stones of which it had been built were carried to some distance. This Governor thoroughly
repaired it ; and the idol-temple standing near it, which had originally belonged to GawalT
Pa, and -was now much frequented by the Hindoos, he converted into a mosque for the use
cf strangers and travellers. The follo'wing is the inscription which -was then fixed upon it :


(•W

inA-L-


.U


* >< -■

urtV ‘^r c*-


-jy


$

$

$

$

$


r


U, <ri_ir ill

jy Vlri;

enrolls 5jlA jL*—


■jy


In the reign of the great prince Aalamgir,

Like the full shining moon, the enlightener of the world.
Praise to God, that this happy place.


.obT


i^jy^'


. rUj


isli '


13S


FORT 6F GWALIOR.


Wu bj MuatamK! Khlo completed, as an alms

It was the idol temple of the sale GawalT

He made it a mosque liLe a manstoo ofPondise

The Khan of enlightened heart, nay light (itseU) from head to foot,

Displayed the disme light like that of nud day.

He closed the idol temple.

Exclamations (of snrpnse), rose from earth to Iiearen
IVhen the light put far away the abode of darkness,

Hatif said, let the light be a blessing

N B The sum of the letters compoung the three last « ords, counted according to the Ahjad,
(see Sir Ullliam Jones’s Persian Grammar, p 14, edit. 9), amounts to 1075, and this gives the year
of the Hejira in which this took place — A D 1664

He also repaired and deepened a tank m the grounds called the Khabutar Khana, or
Pigeon-house , and to this he gave the name of Hun SSkir Another tank, too, situated
on the top of the fort, and near the Shah Jah^ Mandar, which had grown so much out
of repair as to lose its water, notmthstanding its having been cut out of the solid rock, he
thoroughly repaired, and enclosed with a wall firmly built with bnck and mortar, so that
not a drop of its water was lost To each of these last a copy of verses was attached,
ginng the date of the repairs, and the name of the Khan , which 1 do not think U worth
while to copy out and translate

The same Goienior, it is said, so adorned and planted the ^Arw^T, which appeared
like a girdle about the mount, that it presented fountains, tanks, a ^chabuterah, grapes,
melons, and other fruits , such, that many of the fruits were, on account of their superla-
tive excellence, freijuently sent to the Presence at BebU The melons were occasionally
so large, that some of them exceeded foorteen of the ser of 5h^ Job In Abad, m weight.

Besides this, a mosque was erected in the 'Chok Bazar, with three immensely high
towers and some minarets, having also a tank of water with other fountains always
filled with water, and surrounded with seats for the convenience of ablution. Before this
IS an area with a very high gate, on the top of which is a ^Bankla, hnd on both sides tno
beautifully constructed halls Another tank was also made, and named after his son,
^ Jamah Sarur, which was surrounded by stone walls, and provided with seats

In the year 1078 of theHejira,A D 1667, an order came from the court, command-
ing Muatamid Khan to give up the fort, ti^ther with the prisoners it contained, which
were then three, to Khidmalgar Khan, and to proceed to the Presence, in order to receive
the government of Akberabad With this the Khan complied, and proceeded to Shah
Jahan Abad, where he was loaded with favours, and dismissed to his station And, as
the writer of this history, Heruman Ibn Kardhar Das, the Mimshi, was a servant of
Muatamid Khan, hu account of Gwalior closes with the removal of his master from
that place


HINDUSTAN.


139


CHAPTER XVI.

IbnEiaiita arrives at the Queen Mother s Palace— His Daughter s death and funeral— The Em-
perors return to Dehli— Appoints Ibn Baiuta Judge of Dehli— Character of the Emperor-
Quarrels vdth the Inhabitants of DehU, and commands then to quit the city for Danlaiab ad—

Emir of FargSna put to death — The Kdzi Jaldl Oddin and others put to death Cruelties of

the Emperor— Arabic panegyric composed by our traveller for him— In danger of losing
his life — Gives up his office, and joins the Religious.

Let us now return to the description of our arrival Dehli. When we
arrived at this place, the Vizier ha\ring previously met us, we came to the
door of the Sultan’s haram, to the place in which his mother, ’"El Makh-
duma Jahan* resides, the Vizier, as also the Kazi of the place, being
still vrith us. These paid their respects at the entrance, and we all followed
their example. We also, each of us, sent his present to her, which was
proportionate to his circumstances. The Queen’s secretaries then registered
these presents, and informed her of th6m. The presents were accepted,
and we were ordered to be seated. Her viands were then brought in ; we
received the greatest respect and attention in their odd way. After this,
dresses of honour were put upon us, and we were ordered to wthdraw to
such places as had been prepared for each of us. We made our obeisance
and retired accordingly. This service is presented, by one’s bowing the
head, placing one of the hands on the earth, and then retiring.

When I had got to the house prepared for me, I found it furnished with
every carpet, vessel, couch, and fuel, one could desire. The victuals which
they brought us consisted of flour, rice, and flesh, all of which was brought
from the mother of the Emperor. Every morning we paid our respects to
the Vizier, who on one occasion gave me two thousand dinars, and said :
This is to enable you to get your clothes washed. He also gave me a large
robe of honour ; and to my attendants, who amounted to about forty, he
gave turn thousand dinars.


* This, according to the Tabakati Akbarl and Ferishta, was the name of the Emperor s mo-
ther, and to her was consigned the care of the household.

T 2


140


HINDUSTAN.


After this, the Emperor’s allosvance was brought to us, which amounted
to the weight of one thousand Dehlv-Ritls of flour, \^here every Ritl* is


* This word, which occordmgto the author of the KSmoos &c may be pronounced either Ritl or
Rati or Jl^) 19 constantly given by M de SacyRori (as if written for what reason

I know not As it is important that the readershouldhavesome idea of the value of this measure
of weight, I shall hero put down what the author of the Kamoos has said about it (sub voce
ViL«) and, as it is here connected with several others, I shall copy the whole of the ailicle

S' iSi) <— S '"'‘^3 ^ *— ir^ J3^

L Li_u ji if Ia. ‘"j' j' i-'/

iMj\ ^U-il UUj jl— jI l—JI ^1) ^

>» ^ s »» # v» 'u ** * *•

^ lT ih O'— ^

Makkuk, of the form Taonur, is a cup out of which one drinks it is also a measure containing
a s^a and a half, or (which is the same thing) from half a ntl to eight ounces , or, half the waibat
And the waibat contains either two and twenty or four and twenty modds according to the
modd of the prophet (t e of Hegaz], or three Lailajes, and the kaila; containsthe maund and
seven eighths of a maund , and the maund contains two ntls, a ml twelve ounces, and an ounce
contains an istar and two thirds, and an rstor contains Aiur mathkals ond a half, a mathkal equals
a dram and three sevenths of a dram , and a dram six damks , and a danik contains two kirdt
(carats) , and a kirat two tassujes , and a tassu) two grains , and a gram the sixth of the eighth
of a dram , which is a part of forty eight parts of a dram 1 abularly thus *


1 Makkuk = 1 Saa + J = 1 ““L to 6ozs
_ 1

1 Waiba Si, 21i or 24 Modds = S Kailajes
1 Kailaj = 1 Maund + i
1 Maund = 2 Ritls
1 Uitl 5= 12 Ounces
1 Ounce as 1 IsUr + |

1 istetr a: 4 Mathkal + i

The ounce, I believe, is our ounce troy, and hence the value of any other of the weights
may be found The value of weights, jewels, and metals, as used in Hindustan, are thus given


1 Mathkal = 1 Dram + f
I Dram £= 6 DanJes
1 Danik = 2 Kirats
1 Kinlt != 2 Tassuj
1 Tassuj X 2 Grams
1 Gram = of ^ of a Dram
s: ^ of a Dram


(a) Since writing this, I find that it has been also extract^ by M, de Sacy m his Chrestomathie,
tom I p 36, edit 2 Uut, as his extract u without a translation, and otherwise incomplete,
I shall retain it


Hm DU ST AN.


141


equal to live and twenty Ritls of Egypt. We also had one thousand Ritls

in the Tijarat Namah : ^ <s^!o

f i t (jLiUs j tXAb Juib tXul^A. (^JCuS

^ .. / 1 4AI-c Ciljlo

. Cjlpj ‘.''4‘b Know that 8 rice grains make I red grain, which in the Hindee is

called a Ratti : 8 of these grains make 1 Masha; 3J Mashas, I Dram; 4^ Mashas, 1 Mathkal ; 4
barleycorns, 1 Dang; 12 Mashas a Tola ; 16 Mashas, 1 Dam; I Ritl is equal to half a Ser; 1 Maund
to 1 Ser. See also Shakespear’s Hindustani Dictionary under Sjj’ , iiU , ijj , , and :

and Hamilton's India.

The following are the names and values of measures used in Hindustan, in measuring grain
and other heavy substances, as given in the Tijarat Namah. cJol5^ cJj i~s=~

jW’J WJi “Hj ^

jT^ iJt^ liib (iT*^. d-'Aibj J-ib jW5“J ^

olaAjs tsbl ^L> t^ * ^<i\ jrt^

^ tibl f}\i\ jjb

jii a^ (y) \,p^^ aaAt^ a^^.!

obi a^ obijs obi aiLj ^O o'aAb

jO ^o b* 0 !> ) obwujl aa^)^ ^0 ^^^b obAa^^^^^ a^L&o ^o j*^b ob*. &>

aiU^ oiib cubf^j^ J'^i ^ ji^l t-r’y^ aCa a^o

ca-«jl aslair' (*^ i^} J'b aibs.-^ ^J•j^\ J-i JUi jOj

to..— — ijjiU |_jib . /. e. a sixteenth of a ser makes one ch^hatank; two chjiatanks, half apao;
three ch,hatanks, a pao, minus one-fourth ; four ch^hatanks, one pao : two paos will be half an
athar : three paos will be an athar, minus one-fourth : four paos will be one ser : five athars, one
paseri ; eight paseri, one maund, which will contain forty ser. But the ser every whei-e varies, so
that in Shah Jahan Abad the ser will be equal to eighty current rupees ; in Akbar Abad, eighty
sicca rupees ; in Farakh Abad, it will equal eighty-two sicca rupees in heavy articles : but in
grain, to two and thirty takkas .) In Luknow the ser is equal to ninety-six rupees ; in

Mirzapur, to ninety-seven sicca rupees ; in Benares it is equal to seventy-two rupees. In Aazim
Abad the ser equals seventy-six sicca rupees ; in Murshed Abad it equals eighty-one rupees,
minus one-fourth; in Dakka eighty-one rupees, minus one-iburth; and in Calcutta, the ser
equals eighty-two sicca rupees. In the South, the ser is, for the most part, equal to eighty sicca
rupees. But in country places it is taken as a measure, not as a weight. In the North also it
varies in weight, and is also used as a measure. In the country places of these parts (Farakh
Abad) also the weights vary, no one having been established. According to Mr. Shakespear,
the Calcutta rupee was by an order of the English government in India, in 1793, fixed to the
weight of 179§ grains (troy) ; but, whether our writer reckons by this standard or not, it is more
than I can positively say; it is most likely that he does, as the work was written for a servant
of the Company ((ju^b lL-j^ - Mr. Robert Batiras? perhaps Patterson) 'in 1806.


142


HINDUSTAN


of flesh, and of fermented liquors, oil, oil-ohie, and the betel-nut, many
Ritls , and also many of the betel-leaf.*

Dunng this time, and in the absence of the Emperor, a daughter of mine
happened to die, which the Vizier communicated to him The Emperor’s
distance from Dehli ^vas that of ten stages , nevertheless, the Vizier had aa
answer from him on the morning of the day, on which the funeral was to
take place His orders were, that what was usually done on the death of
any of the children of the nobility, should be done now On the third day,
therefore, the Vizier came with the judges and nobles, who spread a carpet
and made the necessarj preparations, consisting of incense, rose-water,
readers of the koran, and panegyrists When I proceeded with the funeral,

I expected nothing of this , but upon seeing their company I was much
gratified The Vizier, on this occasion, occupied the station of the Emperor,
defraying every expense, and distributing victuals to the poor, and others ,
and giving money to the readers, according to the order which he had
received from the Emperor

After this, the Emperor s mother sent for the mother of the child, and
gave her dresses and ornaments, exceeding one thousand dinars in value
She also gave her a thousand dinars m money, and dismissed her on the
second day Dunng the absence of the Emperor, the Vizier shewed me
the greatest kindness, on the part of himself, as well as on that of his
master

Soon after, the news of the Emperor’s approach was received, stating that
he was within seven miles of Dehli, and ordenng the Vizier to come and
meet him He went out, accordingly, accompanied by those who had
arrived for the purpose of being presented , each taking his present with
him In this manner we proceeded till we arrived at the gate of the palace
in which he then was At this place the secretaries took account of the
several presents, and also brought them before the Emperor The pre-
sents were then taken away, and the travellers were presented, each
according to the order in which he had been arranged When my turn
came, I went m and presented my service in the usual manner, and was very


* Jj— Jl Of this the Kmg of Oudes Persian Dictionary says ^ if

It is alcafnhidiinHndustdn they call p n and which they eat with the
betel out and quick lime.


HINDUSTAN.


143


graciously received, the Emperor taking my hand, and promising me every
kindness. To each of the travellers he gave a dress of honour, " embroidered
with gold, which had been worn by himself, and one of these he also
gave to me. After this, we met wthout the palace, and viands were
handed about for some time. On this occasion the travellers ate, the
Vizier, -with the great Emirs, standing over them as sen^ants. We
then retired. After this, the Emperor sent to each of us one of the
horses of his own stud, adorned and caparisoned with a saddle of silver.
He then placed us in his front with the Vizier, and rode on till he arrived
at his palace in Dehli. On the third day after our arrival, each of the tra-
vellers presented himself at the gate of the palace ; when the Emperor sent
to inquire, whether there were any among us who wished to take office,
either as a writer, a judge, or a magistrate ; saying, that he would give such
appointments. Each, of course, gave an answer suitable to his wishes.
For my o'wn part, I answered, I have no desire either for rule or ^vritership ;
but the office both of judge and of magistrate, myself and my fathers have
filled. These replies were carried to the Emperor, who commanded each
person to be brought before him, and he then gave him such appointment
as would suit him ; bestowing on him, at the same time, a dress of honour,
and a horse furnished with an ornamented saddle. He also gave him
money, appointing likewise the amount of his salary, which was to be
drawn from the treasurJ^ He also appointed a portion of the produce of
the villages, which each was to receive annually, according to his rank.

When I was called, I went in and did homage. The Vizier said : The
Lord of the world appoints yo” to the office of judge in Dehli. He also
gives you a dress of honour with a saddled horse, as also twelve thousand
dinars for your present support. He has moreover appointed you a yearly
salary of t^velve thousand dinars, and a portion of lands in the ^ullages,
which null produce annually an equal sum. I then did homage according
to their custom, and withdrew.

We shall now proceed to give some account of the Emperor Mohammed
son of Ghiath Oddin Toglik: then of our entering and leaving Hindustan.

This Emperor was one of the most bountiful and splendidly munificent
men (where he took) ; but in other cases, one of the most impetuous and


144


HINDUSTAN


inexorable . and very seldom indeed did it happen, that pardon followed
his anger On one occasion he took offence at the inhabitants of Dehh, on
account of the numbers of its inhabitants who had revolted, and the liberal
support which these had received from the rest, and, to such a pitch did
the quarrel rise, that the inhabitants wrote a letter consisting of several
pages, m which they very much abused him they then sealed it up, and
directed it to the Real Head and Lord of the world, adding, “Letnoother
person read it ” They then threw it over the gate of the palace Those
who saw It, could do no other than send it to him , and he read it accord-
ingly The consequence was, he ordered all the inhabitants to quit the
place , and, upon some delay being evinced, he made a proclamation
stating, that what person soever, being an inhabitant of that city, should be
found m any of its houses or streets, should receive condign punishment
Upon this they all went out * But, his servants finding a blind man m

• We liave no mention of llm circumstance, either in iheTabakati Akban, Ferishta, or any
atber history accessible to me Dow ascribes the intcniion of making Deoglr (afterwards called
Davilaldbad) iho seat of government, lo the Emperor i being pleased iviih its jituafion and
Utenglh, of which Fenshta, Ac take no notice Ferishta however, states that his reason was
Its being more central than Dehh, and farther removed from the Persians and Tartars but of
Its strength nothing is said, except that the Emperor set about fortifying it as soon as he had
settled himself in it That Dehh was desolated on this occasion nil attest, and from the manner
m which the author of the Tabakati Akbarl mentions the migration, there is reason to suppose
that something more than the central position of Deoglr wos the cause His words are these
joU Ll-fb

tiJ!) J-sr* j'ijl j} ijlJU-

oIiJai ^1/1 l*b

(J'sljI ‘b*' <— ib if u!/y

olj AiU ufVy “ And this matter (i e the

arrangements made ID the Doab) became the cause of rain and destruction to the inhabitants
Hence agriculture was neglected , and a drought happening at the same time, a terrible famine
appeared m Dehh , so that the greater part of ils houses fell off (from their allegiance) and
such confusion took place that the kingdom was shatoi Another of his whims was to name
Deoglr DawlaUbdd, and as tt was central, lotutkert the seat of empire Hence Dehh which
was the rival of Bagdad or Damascus, he entirely ruined, commanding its inhabitants to whom
Its air and water had become almost a second nature, to proceed with their families to Deogir
furnishing them with expenses for a house and for travelhngout of the treasury And again,
L. ^ iS JaiX«l ^ ‘■'A if iUllo


HINDUSTAN.


145


one of the houses, and a bed-ridden one in another, the Emperor com-
manded the bed-ridden man to be projected from a °balista, and the blind
one to be dragged by his feet to ^ Dawlatabad, which is at the distance of
ten days, and he was so dragged ; but, his limbs dropping off by the
way, only one of his legs was brought to the place intended, and was
then thrown into it ; for the order had been, that they should go to this
place. When I- entered Dehii it was almost a desert. Its buildings were
very few ; in other respects it was quite empty, its houses having been
forsaken by its inhabitants. The King, howmver, had given orders, that
any one who wished to leave his own city, may come and reside there.*
The consequence was, the greatest city in the world had the fewest inha-
bitants.

Upon a certain occasion, too, the principal of the preachers, wlio was
then keeper of the jewellery, happened to be outwitted by some of the
infidel Hindoos, who came by night and stole some jewels. For this he
beat the man to death %vith his o^A^l hand.


. ubT ^


. X . .It » . f - I .t «


t • \ 1? .,.1


jl cAlUc j^\ d Iaa jJs. j\


. aiU iz,^ uJbbl “ He made some regulations, which will he particu-

larly mentioned, by which those who had but little wealth were entirely ruined; and those who
had power sufficient to do so, rebelled openly. And, as Mohammed was naturally a bloody and
fierce man, he made no hesitation whatever in punishing and slaughtering (all such), and as his
commands were enforced, vast numbers were put to death, and tlie country almost desolated ;
in so far, that ho lost a great part of the kingdom : nay, in Dehii itseJfi which was then the
capital, there was open rebellion. The revenues from other parts were stopped, and the treasury
remained empty.” Immediately after this follows the above extract, which seems to put the
matter out of all doubt, that the account given by our traveller, although not mentioned by
Ferishta, is the true one, as it respects the cause of Dehli’s being ‘deserted. Ferishta, indeed,
gives a similar account of the evacuation, and states that not so much as a slave was left
behind; but in such words as not to favour the reason ascribed by Ibn Batuta: I have, there-
fore, been induced to give these extracts from an earlier historian.

* The same is said both by Ferishta and the author of the Tabahati Akbari. See Dow, p. 333.


u


14G


HINDUSTAN


Upon another occasion, one of tiie Umirs of ^Fargana came to pay him
a temporary visit The Emperor recened him very kindly, and bestowed
on him some ricli presents After this the Emir had a ivish to return, but
was afraid the Emperor wcinld not allow him to do so, he began, there
fore, to think of flight Upon this a whisperer gave intimation of his
design, and the Emir was put to death the whole of his wealth was
then given to the informers For this is their custom that when any one
gives private intimation of the designs of another, and his information turns
out to be true, the person so informed of is put to death, and his property
js given to the informer

There was at that time, in the city of ’’Kambaya* on the shores of
India a Sheikh of considerable power and note, named the Sheikh Ah
Haidari to whom the merchants and seafaring men made many votne
offerings This Sheikh was in the habit of making many predictions
for them * But when the Kazi Jalal Oddin Afg mi rebelled against the
Emperor, it ivas told him that the Sheikh Haidan bad sent for this KIzi
Jaldl Oddm, and giien him the cap off his oivn head Upon this the
Binperor set out for the purpose of making war upon the Kaii Jalal Oddm,
whom he put to flight He then returned to his palace, leaving behind him
an Emir, who should make inquiry respecting others who had joined the
Kazi the inquiry accordingly went on, and those who bad done so were
put to death The Sheikh was then brought forward , and when it was
proved that he had given his cap to the Kazi he was also slam The
Sheikh H id, son of the Sheikh Baba Oddm Zakarya, was also put to death,
on account of some spite which he would ivreak upon him This was one
of the greatest Sheikhs His crime was, that his uncle s son had rebelled
against the Emperor, when he was acting as governor m one of the pro
Vinces of India So war was made upon him, and being overcome, his
flesh, was roasted with some nee, and thrown to the elephants to be devoured
hut they refused to touch it J

Upon a certain day, when I myself was present, some men were brought

* Tlie Cambay of Rennell f One of the Hwdaree sect already not ced

i None of the matter given here is to he found m Tenshta or any other histor an to vihom I
have access


HINDUSTAN.


147


out who had been accused of ha^^ng attempted the life of the Vizier.
They were ordered, accordingly, to be thrown to the elephants, which had
been taught to cut their victims to pieces. Their hoofs were cased with
sharp iron instruments, and the extremities of these were like knives. On
such occasions the elephant-driver rode upon them : and, when a man was
thrown to them, they would w-ap the trunk about him and toss him up,
then take him with the teeth and throw him between their fore feet upon
the breast, and do just as the driver should bid them, and according to the
orders of the Emperor. If the order was to cut him to pieces, the elephant
would do so with his irons, and then throw the pieces among the assembled
multitude : but if the order was to leave liim, he would be left lying
before the Emperor, until the skin should be taken off, and stuffed \vith
hay, and the flesh given to the dogs.*^

On one occasion one of the Emirs, viz. the Ain El Mulk, who had tne
charge of the elephants and beasts of burden, revolted, and took away the
greater part of these beasts and went over the Ganges, at the time the
Emperor was on his march towards the Maabar district, against the Emir
Jaliil Oddin. Upon this occasion the people of the country proclaimed
the runaway emperor : but an insuri-ection arising, the matter soon came
to an end. f

Another of his Emirs, namely * Halajun, also revolted, and sallied out of
Dehli with a large army. The Viceroy in the district of “Telingana also
rebelled, and made an effort to obtain the kingdom ; and very nearly suc-
ceeded, on account of the great number who were then in rebellion, and
the weakness of the army of the Emperor ; for a pestilence had carried off


* Ferishta tells us, on one occasion, of a man having been flead alive, which is mentioned in
Dow : but as Ferishta, the Tabakati AkbarT, and perhaps all the rest of the historians of Hindus-
tan, generally follow the accounts of Zia El Barm who wrote for Firoz Shah, son of

this Emperor, it is probable that he did not record half the cruelties of this man. — Knox tells us
that the kings of Ceylon also use elephants as executioners, and that on these occasions, “ they
have sharp iron with a socket with three edges, which they put on their teeth at such times.”
Ceylon, p. 44.

f An account of this insurrection will be found in Dow, vol. i. pp. 327-8. This happened
about A.H. 746.

U 2


148


HINDUSTAN


the greater part From his extreme good fortune, howe\ er, he got the
victory, collected his scattered troops, and subdued the rebellious Emirs,
killing some, torturing others, and pardoning the rest He then returned
to his residence, repaired his affairs, stiengthened his empire, and took
vengeance on his enemies — ^But let me now return to the account of my own
affairs with him

When he had appointed me to the office of Judge of Dehli, had made
the necessary arrangements, and given me the presents already mentioned,
the horses prepared for me, and for the other Emirs who were about his
person, were sent to each of ns, who severally kissed the hoof of the horse
of him who brought them, and then led our own to the gate of the palace ,
we then entered, and each put on a dress of honour , after which we came
out, mounted, and returned to our houses

The Emperor said to me, on this occasion. Do not suppose that our office
of Judge of Debit will cost you little trouble on the contrary, it will
require the greatest attention I understood what he said, but did not
return him a good answer He understood the Arabic, and was not pleased
with my reply I am, said I, of the sect of Ibn M ilik, but the people of
Dehh follow Hanafl,* besides, I am ignorant of their language He
leplied, I have appointed two learned men your deputies, who will advise
With you It will be your business to sign the legal 'instruments f He
then added If what I have appointed prove not an income sufficient to
meet your numerous expenses, I have likewse given you a cell, the bequests
appropriated to which you may expend, taking this in addition to what is
already appointed I thanked him for this, and returned to my house

A few days after this he made me a present of twelve thousand dinars
In a short time, however, I found myself involved in great debts, amounting
to about fifty five thousand dinars, according to the computation of India,


* Two of the celebrated leaders who are at the head of the four larger sects of the Mohamtne
dans Tbej differ from one another, however, only m some legal points.

t On the office and requitemenU of sucli persons, see the Chrestom. Arabe of M de Sacy,
tom I pp S8-41, edit 2 These officers, which are there called JjAc Justices, are styled by
Abul Fazl Jjtf officers of justice )


HINtJUSTAN.


149


whicli with them amounts to five thousand five hundred ^tankas but
which, according to the computation of the west, will amount to thirteen
thousand dinars. The reason of this debt was, the great expenses incurred
in waiting on the Emperor, during his journies to repress the revolt of the
Ain El Mulk (p. 147). About this time, I composed a panegyric in praise
of the Emperor, which I wrote in Arabic, and read to him. He translated
it for himself,t and was wonderfully pleased with it : for the Indians are
fond of Arabic poetry, and are very desirous of (being memorialized in) it.
I then informed him of the debt I had incurred ; which he ordered to be
discharged from his own treasury, and said : Take care, in future, not to
exceed the extent of your income. May God reward him.

Some time after the Emperor’s return from the Maabar districts, and his
ordering my residence in Dehli, his mind happened to change respecting a
Sheikh in whom he had placed great confidence, and even visited, and
who then resided in a cave without the city. He took him accordingly and
imprisoned him, and then interrogated his children as to who had resorted
to him. They named the persons who had done so, and myself among the
rest; for it happened that I had visited him in the cave. I was conse-
quently ordered to attend at the gate of the palace, and a council to sit
within. I attended in this way for four days, and few were those who did
so, who escaped death. I betook myself, however, to continued fasting ,
and tasted nothing but water. On the first day I repeated the sentence.


* On the value of the dinar, direm, &c. of Arabia, see the notes to Professor Carlyle’s Maured
Allatafet, p. 3. The king of Oude’s Persian Dictionary tells us, that the tanka (or rather aXij
tangah) is a certain quantity of gold or money, according to the technical usage of any place ;
and that they call two fulus a tangah: his words are, jAb ttSlj

. joj ^ j^3 Shakespear says in his Hindustani Dictionary

tanga (see b3) two paisas.

"I- According to Ferishta this Emperor either had, or was proud to he thought to have, consider-
able pretensions to learning in the Arabic and Persic. His words are:

. ti'JdAibc jU For the encouragement of polite literature he was quite proverbial. His

Arabic and Persian letters were so elegant, that the regular scribes and munshis were all
astonishment.


150


HINDUSTAN


“ God IS our support, and the most excellent patron,'’ * three and thirty
thousand times , and after the fourth day, by God’s goodness was I delii ered ,
but the Sheikh, and all those who had -visited him, except myself, were put
to death

Upon this I gave up the office of Judge, and bidding farewell to the
world, attached myself to the holy and pious Sheikh, the saint and phcemx
of his age, “Kamal Oddm Abd Ullah El Gazi, who had wrought many open
miracles All I had I gave to the Fakeers, and, putting on the tunic of
one of them, I attached myself to this Sheikh for five months.f until I
had kept a fast of fiv e continued days , I then breakfasted on a little nee


* El Koran Surat HI

As the nystical nonsense to which the religioua of the East pay so much regard is but
little known, and, perhaps, less understood m this country, I hare thought that it might not be
unacceptable here to give some account of it, which I shall do, from a work of great authority
hy the very celebrated poet Jami, ok the Nqfuhui El Ins The mysticism winch

IS termed by them Sufttsm, is treated yust like any saence It has its various ranks and degrees,
and when one has gone through them all, he is supposed to have become an integral part of the
Deity, which they hold, indeed, that he always Has but that sow he is not only assured of this,
but IS endued with powers sufficient to give proof of it They generally set out with fastings,
mortifications, and silence, just as the anaent I^lhagoreans did, which seems to be the state in
which our traveller had placed himself, and in these they persevere till they have fully persuaded
themselves, that heaven and earth are entirely at their command According to Jami, then, the
degrees of this science (or umty ju?^) are four, tiz Jjl

j m-,^1 1.^1.^ >3^ tXJ (jlcl i3^y i_^^ ^^y

Joj jJ AtltCU (Ji>-

ijLrl jiXisc' jijb j*S-»l

Jul JuP-y e " The first isa onenewo/yaiM,

the second, ofoMuronce, thethird, a owaas of arcmnstance , and the fourth, the oneness
Almightt/ The oneness of faith is that, by which the servant of God believes m his heart, and
confesses with his tongue, the unity of the dmne character of God, and the sole right which be
possesses to dinne worship, as derived from the intimations of holy wnt. This ascription of the
divme oneness is the medium whereby belief is placed m the revealer, and faith in the thing
revealed, which denves its proof from (the next stage, or) open assurance The embracing of
this, therefore, effectually liberates the behever from manifest idolatry, and hastens his intro-
duction to the true religion The candidate, however, for Sufiisra is necessarily situated as


HINDUSTAN.


151


CHAPTER XVII.

Sint on an Embassy to China — Einhasst/ Jrom China to the Emperor—Gold Mines on the mountain of
Kora — Sets out on the Embassy — Arrives at Bidna — Kvl — War with the Hindoos — Tahen prisoner
— Brought back to Behli — Returns to Ytih Bura — Meraia — GwSlior — Bardn — Account cf the
Jogies — Witch burnt — Juggling of thejogies — Arrives at Kajmara — Chanden — Description of
Gwalior — Dawlatdbdd — Nazar Abdd — Mahrattas — Sugar — Kambaya — Goa — Bairam — Kuka —
Dankul — Sindabur — Hinaur — King of Hinaur not subject to the Emperor of Dehli — Malabar,
customs — Kings of Malabar — Law of Succession — Account the growth of Pepper.

After this, the Emperor sending for me, I went to him in my tunic,
and he received me more graciously than ever. He said. It is my wish to

others are in holding the (divine) unity; it is in other respects that he is particular, and stands
alone. As to the next degree, it is said : ^ \y\ si ^ jl U1

ci.jU. 1^ cubo )!!

ut.’Lajyj] u3^1?

iZJjtijj jji i/' ^ Jjio

oJSj y'" ^ &c. It receives its proof from inward csiurance, which is called tAe

assurance of knowledge ; and it is said, that the candidate knows from the beginning of his entering
Sufiism assuredly, that there is no real being or agent except the Lord of the world : that all
essences, attributes, and works, are nothing with him (or end with him) ; that every existence is
but a ray of light from him, and every attribute an emanation of those which in him are absolute;
so that wherever he finds knowledge, power, will, the faculties of hearing or of sight, he recog-
nizes the vestiges of that assurance, power, will, faculty, and the like, which centre in the divinity.
The third stage is thus described: culj t:,— 11

Jf jy jfj

jii ‘~ypj |*(Lc ^ jy Ays\ ^iLjb $ Syo

iiyii J&j jii <ZJ\a.!>j lSj\6jap <5^

^ \j (^JoA iO JA-Ij tC-S-g \f I^zto-y (^1 ^ ^

^

oneness cf slate is that, by which an union cf state must be a character of the person to be united
(with the Deity), and in this all the black characters of human existence, excepting the small
part still remaining (i. e. I suppose those to be abolished by still further approximations) are to
vanish and be lost in the rising of the light of the divine unity; and the light of the divine oneness


152


HINDUSTAN


send jou a'? ambassador to the Emperor of China, for I know you love
travelling m \anous countries. Iconsented, and he sent dresses of honour,
horses, money, , with every thing necessary for the journey.


1$ to be £ndosed and concealed in tbe light acquired by this his state, just as the light of the stars
IS lost in the light of the sun verse,

Vi hen the bright mom renews its fires,

Every tvinkhog star expires.

And, at (his stage, the essence of the person thus united, tvitnessing the essential beauty of the
only one, becomes so overwhelmed in the veiy all rv all, that nothing but fits being and
attributes meet his perception, or call forth bis lestimonj, (and this) to such u degree, that he
considers this oneness as an attribute of the omly okc, and not of self This very perception
too hebehevea to be one of ins attributes and his existence, thus given up to the agitations of
the waves of the sea of unity, falls away, and becomes overwhelmed in the all ik all.

The last stage is thus described jy jj A«bc)- (Zsi' vi— <T Ju>’w U1

Jjl

jbH! JjI Uy ^J^ Uf Klj Vi— 1 O/J Vi-iw j) i^Usr** ^

*>,i V >-»j &c " Ai to the Dmtt« Umly, it is that property by which the True

Object of worship has been characterized and described from oH eternity, es contained within
himself ond withcnt union with any other, viz ‘ God was, nnd with him did nothing exist.* So
even now, by his eieroal attnbutes, ho is ohe and alonz, or (in other words) even as he was,
so shall he for ever bo

The following extract will shew what powers and privileges those are supposed to posses*, who
arrive at the state of sainiship here mentioned aU)

PJjlj Vi— I Jb Ailsu, .JujIuls- i—alf (-jLf

iiU— |Ju.j aIs Alii jjl-s Lib" .

^ I ^riy Vi—

■*lisr litlj ojI jl

j— .'-ij uUjaC« A} All vivV tjlUL-

■ ■ - -I i.^l» A — 1) jJjlj A«jIjj vJl^ vJ^*^J

J*l aJjLI Uy Vi— ri f All AA3e*<^x« '^j*3

vJ’^y A.al^ aJ All s-tg— All Jl>- aI lilsj

&..J Ajlji. jUjI ^ Asilj^ j^l j\ ^J>3 Vir.* ^ AjIj^ JIaI

«C< Vi3l>-jiS l—lls^ w-Ua ... A>ilo^ ^.«V*v l^ iS AXily=“ Lti lyjjlljl A? A

JIaI l^.Ail^ajii i-AS J\ j\ ^-A>J Ajij Ae t-jb j\ ^ (_S^J

j\ Ijj Vi.iJS ^Isl Ui A ^ Vi— I A:aj

ilCi ^jj ViAb jjl j\ J'aI J


HINDUSTAN.


153


The Emperor of China had, at this time, sent presents to the Sultan,
consisting of a hundred Mamluks, fifty slave girls, five hundred dresses of
*EI Kamanjah, five hundred m minds of musk, five dresses wrought with
jewels, five quivers wrought with ‘'gold, and five swords set with jewels. His
request with the Emperor was, that he should be permitted to rebuild an


. jyt, ‘ *


. <sUb lAi) ^ b..*-! 5-1 ‘-^•b ^ liT^ Vj

« On the d^erent classes of the Awlia or Saints. The Lord who is the object of worship has, in the
revelation, made the proof of Mohammed’s mission permanent; and to shew this have the saints
been constituted, and that tliis proof should be constantly apparent. These he has in- the
Scripture appointed to be Lords of tbe World, so that they are set apart entirely for his service,
and for following up the requirements of the soul. It is to bless their tracks that the rains of
heaven descend, and to purify their state that the herbs of the earth spring up ; and it is from
their care, that the Moslems obtain victory over idolaters. Now these, which are invisible,
are four thousand; of each other they know nothing, nor are they aware of the dignity of their
mvn state. In every case, too, they are concealed from one another and from mortals. To this
effect have relations been given, and to the same have various saints spoken ; and for this, to the
praise of God, have sages instructed. But of those who have this power of loosing and binding,
and are officers of the court of the true God, there are three hundred whom they style Akhyar.
Forty others of them they call Abdal, seven others Abrar, four others Awtad, three others
Nokaba, and one whom they name Kotb and Ghauth.... The author of the Fatuhati Mecca,
chap. 198, sect. 31, calls the seven-stated men Abdab, and goes on to shew, that the Almighty
has made the earth consisting of seven climates, and that seven of his choice servants he has
named Abdal ; and, further, that he takes care of these climates by one or other of these seven
persons. He has also stated, that he met them all in the temple at Mecca ; that he saluted
them, and they returned the salute ; and conversed with them, and that he never witnessed any
thing more excellent or more devoted to God’s service.” From what has here been said, I think there
cannot remain the least doubt, that the mysteries of Sufiism are those of Heathenism. These
matured saints agree so perfectly with the Daimones (Aaifitn;) of the Greeks, the Boodhas ol
the Boodhists, the inferior deities of the Hindoos, the angels of the ancient Persians and Chal-
deans, and the Powers &c.) of the ancient heretics, that it is scarcely possible, they

can have any other than a common origin. The same, perhaps, may be said of the Druzes on
Mount Libanus, who worship one of the Sultans of Egypt as their favourite Avatar. And gene-
rally, it is impossible to read the works of Irenmus and Epiphanius on the heresies, with the ac-
counts given of Sufiism by the Arabs and Persians, without being convinced that Gnosticism
and Sufiism present one and the same thing, a mere continuation of the idolatry of Chaldee
and Egypt, wrapt up just as that was, in the scarcely intelligible jargon of a wretched philosophy ;
and I may perhaps here remark, that wherever a similar mysticism presents itself, we are to look
for its origin in the same source.


X


154


HINDUSTAN


jdol-temple m the country about the mountain of ^Kora, on which inhdel
Hindoos resided, on the top of which and on the heights was a plain
of three months journey, and to which there was no approach Here,
too, resided many infidel Hindoo kings The extremities of these parts
extend to the confines of Thibet, where the musk gazelles are found
There are also mines of gold on these mountains, and ‘poisonous grass
growing, such, that when the rams fall upon it, and run m torrents to the
neighbouring nvers, no one dares m consequence drink of the water during
the time of their rising and should any one do so, he dies immediately
This idol-temple they usually called the -^Bur Khana It stood at the foot
of the mountam, and was destroyed by the Mussulmans, when they became
masters of these parts Nor were the inhabitants of the mountain in a con-
dition to fight the Mohammedans upon the plain But the plain was neces-
sary to them for the purposes of agnculture, they had, therefore, requested
the Emperor of China to send presents to the King of India, and to ask
this favour for them Besides, to this temple the people of China also
made pilgrimages It was situated m a place called ^Samhal The reply
of the Emperor was, that this could not be permitted among a people who
were Mohammedans , nor could there exist any church whatsoever, in
countries subject to them, except only where tribute was paid, but if they
chose to do this, their request would be complied with for the place m
which this idol-temple was situated had been conquered, and had, m
consequence, become a distnct of the Mohammedans The Emperor also
sent presents much more valuable than those he had received, which were
these following, namely one hundred horses of the best breed saddled
and bridled, one hundred Mamluks, one hundred Hindoo singing slave-
girls, one hundred *Bairarai dresses,* the value of each of which was a
hundred dinars , one hundred silken dresses, five hundred saffron coloured
dresses , one hundred pieces of the best cotton cloth , one thousand dresses
of the various clothing of India , with numerous instruments of gold and

(Butkhana^ t ^

* according to Mecmski is a species of silk, and in the King of Oudes Persian Die
tionary it is said to be j j\ ^ sjU— i j

' " ~ ® thread cloth like the Methkali of Irak, but finer and softer than it I find

no Tnention whatever of this kind of cloth among tho^ given in the A Ini Akban


HINDUSTAN.


155


silver, swords and quivers set with jewels, and ten robes of honour wrought
with gold, of the Sultan’s own dresses, with various other articles.

The Emperor appointed the Emir ’Zahir Oddin El Zanjani 'one of the
Ulema, with '‘El Fati Kafur, with whom the present was entrusted, to
accompany me. These were favourite officers with the Emperor. He also
sent with us a thousand cavalry, who were to conduct us to the place at
which we were to take shipping. The servants of the Emperor of China, who
amounted to about one hundred, and with whom there was a great Emir, also
returned with us. So we left the presence of the Emperor on the 17th day of the
month Safar, in the year seven hundred and forty-three (A.D. 1342), and,
after a few days, arrived at the cityof 'Biana,* which is large. We next arrived
at ’"Kul,j' which is a beautiful city, the greatest part of the trees of which
are vines. When we had arrived here, we were informed that the infidel
Hindoos had besieged the city " El Jalali, which is seven days from Kul.
The intention of these infidels was, to destroy the inhabitants ; and this
they nearly effected. We made such a vigorous attack upon them, however,
that not one of them was left alive. But many of our companions
suffered martyrdom in the onset, and among them was El Fati Kafur, the
person to whom the presents had been confided. We immediately trans-
mitted an account of this affair to the Emperor, and waited for his answer.
During this interval, whenever any of the infidel Hindoos made an attack
on the places in the neighbourhood of El Jalali, either all or a part of us,
gave assistance to the Moslems. Upon a certain day, however, I turned
into a garden just without the city of Kul, when the heat of the sun was
excessive : and while we were in the garden, some one cried out, that the
Hindoos were making an attack upon one of the villages : I accordingly
rode off with some of my companions to their assistance. When the infidels
saw this they fled ; but the Moslems were so scattered in pursuing them,
that myself and only five others were left. Some of their people saw this,
and the consequence was, a considerable number of cavalry made an attack

• jM'" • J/” .43^'

* The Biana of Rennell.

f No trace of this place is to be found in any of the maps, although frequently occurring in
books written in Hindustan. According to the A-Ini Akbari is a sircar, and

has a citadel built of brick

X 2


156


HINDUSTAN


upon us When we perceived their strength we retreated, while they
pursued us, and m this we persevered I observed three of them coming
after me, when I was left quite alone It happened at the same time
that the fore-feet of my horse had stuck fast between two stones, so that T
was obliged to dismount and set him at liberty I was now m a way that
led into a valley between two hills, and here I lost sight of the infidels I
was so circumstanced, however, that I knew neither the country, nor the
roads I then set my horse at liberty to go where he would

While I was in a valley closely interwoven with trees, behold I a party
of cavalry, about forty in number, rushed upon me and took me prisoner,
before I was well aware of their being there I was much afraid they
would shoot me with their arrows I alighted from my horse, therefore,
and gave myself up as their pnsoner They then stripped me of all I had,
bound me, and took me with them for two days, intending to kill me Of
their language I was quite ignorant but God delivered me from them, for
they left me, and I took my course I knew not whither I was much
afraid they would take it into their heads to kill me , I therefore hid
myseif m a forest thickly interwoven with trees and thorns, so much so,
that a person wishing to hide himself could not be discovered Whenever
I ventured upon the roads, I found they always led, either to one of the
villages of the infidels, or to some ruined village I was always, therefore,
under the necessity of returning, and thus I passed se\en whole dajs,
dunng which I expenenced the greatest horrors My food was the fruit
and leaves of the mountain trees At the end of the se\ enth day, however,
I got sight of a black man, who had unth him a “walking staff shod with
iron, and a small water vessel He saluted me, and I returned the salute
He then said. What is your name ’ I answered, Mohammed I then asked
Aim ins name fie repfiecf, K^afb £?f ATariA (* e tfie wounded fieart) fife
then gave me some * pulse, which he had with him, and some water to
dnnk He asked me whether I would accompany him 1 did so , but I
soon found myself unable to move, and I sunk on the earth He then
carried me on his shoulders , and as he walked on with me, I fell asleep
I awoke, however, about the time of dawn, and found myself at the
Emperor’s palace gate A courier had already brought the news of what


HINDUSTAN.


157


had happened, and of my loss, to the Emperor, who now asked me of all
the particulars, and these I told him. He then gave me ten thousand
dinars, and furnished me for my return. He also appointed one of his
Emirs ’’El Malik Sumbul* to present the gift. So we returned to the city
of Kul. From this we proceeded to the city of *Yuh Burah; and
then descended to the shores of a lake called “'the water of life.”
After this we proceeded to “Kinoj, which is but a small town. Here I
met the aged Sheikh Salih of Farganah. He was at this time sick. He
told me, that he ■was then one hundred and fifty years old. I was informed
that he would constantly fast, and that for many successive days.

We next arrived at the city of "^Merwa, which is a large place, inhabited
for the most part by infidels, who pay tribute to the Emperor. We next
arrived at the city of ^ Kalyur,'(' which is large, and which has a fortress
on the top of a high mountain. In this the Emperor imprisons those of
whom he entertains any fear. We next arrived at the city of 'Barun,
which is small, and inhabited by Moslems : it is situated in the midst of
the infidel districts. In these parts are many wild beasts, which enter the
town and tear the inhabitants. I was told, however, that such as enter
the streets of the town are not wild beasts really, but only some of the
magicians called “Jogees, who can assume the shape of ivild beasts, and
appear as such to the mind. These are a people who can work miracles,
of which one is, that any one of them can keep an entire fast for several
months.J


■yjJ'i’

* This is probably a name of office. In the beginning of the reign of Shahab Oddin Khiliji,
as given by Ferishta, speaking of the promotions, it is said : (Alhv Jj

jIj On the first day he gave the office of Barbegi (or Master of the Ceremonies accord-

ing to Dr. Wilkins) to Meliki Sumbul {perhaps the Master of the Spikenard or perfiimes gene-
rally.) But Sumbul is also a district of Hindustan, and this might have been this officer’s suba or
district. I do not find this officer mentioned in the A-Ini Akbarl.

-{• Gwalior of Rennell, of which some account has already been given.

J We are often told of the wonders done by the Jogees in the popular tales of Hindustan, of
which some specimens may be seen in the tales published in the Nagarl character by Mr.
Professor Shakespear (in his Muntakhabati Hindi). The author of the Dabisfan gives, perhaps,


158


HINDUSTAN


Many of them will dig houses for themsehes under ground, over which
any one may build, leaving them only a place for the air to pass through


the best account of them, tracing their creeds and practices up to their original sources. It is
^his al ) 1 ||

jl (j»~ rJj jSji ohuebj

Lr*i Jiiy J' al ) liii lt^j ‘^^0/

W ^1 y* , H J 1*^

ui>s^ asjlh jjjlj (.*^J * - L^ji*

j1 i_^iX^ ^J3 '3^.f b'Hr’ *• jjI

aulla ^1 isji£j .>^1 jjI ob it^t Al! c-tUjf jj^ UjIj L^!

|4^«ai JuL« jjbUL^ A^SVi I** .*• *U1 iJ-r

?}j^ ! {J^ cyb«^isr* j! A-if *JiJ^ ^ J A-Ab tZJj^j

“ bi,^'^b c^/^3 ^_y>A> ‘iH* J '^JS^

A^b j\ auCmsI |»feb Jb* A « * i— h jiij ^ A»*^!

jji! Jp^lcj ajIj jAj oy Uy c}jj) b»;!^ j> J.« jrf! J^U A-,<lib sAKibiif

J^j Al! JfAi . « A. * ..< j! \^! ^ 40 <ly J^! iAJU jij Ajjf S-»!

Aaf^ Sa^bJ j! ^ Ai-Si^ I I ; ~*j ’ ub^ LS*^

^Isbilib KiXmiif) J J I jjl—rf^b yj 4^ Omi! ^!— I j*A ^ J'^J

k_^ jJ A-f jbo jyfli j3 yXJt^ ^Ko jJj

4iKo j! 4.^^ o^-^b aiIa ajjj b^be

ii-->! ojb->-j oj\4ib.a *?>■*' ‘■^ \^3 iJ'3J \J^J^ y! i_5^ J y"

Otf 4AJj 4>^ A^ cb^ ^b J^3 V^A ‘^b^ ui^

ur'j^y u‘i/ u*^ ‘?y 'y *ir=*’y '■^ ‘*ry ui' u)f-

utf" ^ y * — ^ v* 3jLj ^U-ij

j>yb* J*** ^ '.i— *’. Ji-A oijsj %4{y tAii/'

All iJl J ^^jb» ^ '43^ vy V; b o^J jflj ‘>«>/ ^

j/^ j\ uuiIa ^L*^1o ijl^. . I Ly^y o-<~>! a.- ^ ^ ijbia «x.^ ojb^Ls

Jjij b‘^y=^ A~-a ^ 4^ ^ yU jAibf ^b ,J-i3 ^ , &C. » e. The Jogeea are a

well known class of people The worJyi^they use in the Sanscrit (language) to signify jowrag>
odhenng This people suppose themselTes to be umted with God, whom they bcheve to he One
The select, or rather the person himself of God, they hold to be Kurkhanat Majhan
darnat and Hirankunat are also great saints or perfect beings With them, Brahma,

Vishnu, and Mahish, are angels, but also pupils or disciples of Kurkhanat, and some of
them do now name themselves afler one or other of these. Now this class of people consists of


HINDUSTAN,


159


In this the Jogee will reside for months without eating or drinking any
thing. I heard, that one of them remained thus for a whole year. I saw


twelve Pantas, as follows, &c., and Pant signifies a class or tribe. According to their per-

suasion, the authors of every religion, sect, and belief, whether prophets or saints, were disciples
of Kurkhanat; and that whatever these persons might have known, they must have known
from him. It is also their belief, that Mohammed was brought up by a disciple of Kurkhanat.
Many of them will, when with the Mohammedans, attend to prayer and fasting, which they also
do with the Hindoos. None of the things forbidden for food, are considered so among them ; for
they will eat swine’s flesh after the manner of the Hindoos and Christians, as well as beef, as
the Mohammedans and others do. They will also kill and eat a man ...... and will drink wine

like the Guebres. There are too among them, those who will mix their urine and dung together,
which they will then pass through a cloth and drink. The person who does this, they say, will be
able to perform great feats, and to know wonderful things. Such persons they term Anlla. In the
belief of this people, although they hold all to be derived from Kurkhanat, and that those of
eveiy religion may finallj' be united with Kurk, still they proceed in the path of one of those
persons, who have been united by one or other of the twelve links of Jogeeism. In their belief it
is considered of great importance to be able to hold the breath ; just as it is among the Parsees of

Adhar Hoshenk : for the kings among them would constantly hold their breath ^Vhen one

draws (his breath), he will picture the moon towards the left, i. e. he will consider the moon’s
disk as visible on his left side, and that of the sun on his right. Some of the Sanasi in each
of the seven stages, will thus picture one or other of the planets, which, with the Hindoos,
exceeds every other species of worship or alms ; for they say, that he who does this will
be able to fly, never to be sick, to free himself from death, and never to be subject to

either hunger, or thirst Those who have been thoroughly initiated, say, that when

this work is perfectly performed, the fear of death is no more felt ; and that as long as such an
one is in the body, he will be able to put it off, and again to put it on, never to be sick, and to

have power to do all things Among the Jogees, it is constant, that when disease runs high,

they bury themselves alive. It is also one of their practices, to open the eyes, and fix them
in a direction between the eyebrows, until they see a figure. If the image appear without a
hand or foot, or any other member, for each one of these they lay it down, that he has now a
sign how many years, months, or days, he shall live. But if it appear without a head, they have
no doubt, that but little of life remains : and on the strength of this, they will bury themselves
alive,”; &c. — These Jogees will, according to some, commit themselves occasionally to the flames,
for no other end, perhaps, than to gratify the strongest of all passions, vanity. The following
statement is taken from the Heft Ikllm a very interesting collection of geo-

graphical and biographical notices in the Persic. This extract is taken from the notice
of Hindustan, and is there given on the authority of one Mohammed Yusuf of Herat.

j\ ^


IGO


HINDUSTAN


too, in the city of ‘Sanjarur, one of the Moslems \\ho had been taught by
them, and who had set up for himself a lofty cell like an obelisk Upon
the top of this he stood for fi\e and twenty da>s, during which time he nei-
ther ate nor drank In this situation 1 left him, nor do I know how long he
continued there after I had left the place People saj, that they mix cer-
tain seeds, one of which is destined for a certain number of days or months,
and that they stand in need of no other support during all this time They
also foretel events

The Emperor of Hindustan very much respects them, and occasionally
sits m their company Some of them will eat nothing but herbs and it
is clear from their circumstances, that they accustom themsehes to absti-
nence, and feel no desire either for the world or its show Some of them
will kill a man with a look but this is most frequently done by the
women The woman who can do so is termed a 'Goftar It happened
when I was Judge of Dehli, and the Emperor was upon one of hisjournies,
that a famine took place * On this occasion, the Emperor ordered, that

(Pen jLif speech, perhapf ) '

j\j AASj ‘ j*]/ ^ (-jy-f

iv/j

,^1 b J'y if

j > Aa.— , “I was (says he) m ooe of the purgupnas of India, when I beard that

a Jogee had appeared, and wished to burn himself id the presence of one of the Rajas of that
district The Raja employed three days in banqueting and pleasure (upon this occasion) On
the morning of the fourth, when the sun of the Jc^e had onsen, having left the regiois
of the west, and risen >n power over the carpet of the dust, a great company of the
professors of Istanusni, as well as of the followers of idolatrj, came together, when the
oTore-mentioncd Jogee escaping from the instability of being, clung to the annihilation which is
incorruptible Having the eclipse of annihilation on his breast and the cap of retirement upon
his head, he came up to the Raja, end having paid his respects with lips closed like the
rose bud, and with eyes on his feet like the narcissus, he stood still , and then, by his signal,
the Raja s servants collecting sheep and cow’s dung set it on fire, until the flames arose from
every part When he grew warm, and the Are, like the flame of a taper, approached his
neck, he turned towards the Raja and uttered something" — A similar account of men burning
themselves is given in the Commentary of Abu Zaid El Hasan, in the two Arabian Travellers,
translated by Renaudot Pinkerton s Voyages, Ac vol vii p 216
* Perhaps the famine noticed by Dow, vol i> pp 322 3


HINDUSTAN,


161


the poor should be divided among the nobles for support, until the famine
should cease. My portion, as affixed by the Vizier, amounted to five
hundred. These I sustained in a house which I built for the purpose. On
a certain day, during this time, a number of them came to me, bringing a
woman with them, who, as they said, was a Goftiir, and had killed a child,
which happened to be near her. I sent her, however, to the Vizier, who
ordered four large water vessels to be filled with water, and tied to her.
She was then thrown into the great river (the Jumna). She did not sink
in the water, but remained unhurt: so they knew that she was a Goftar.
The Vizier then ordered her to be burnt, which was done ; and the people
distributed her ashes among themselves, beliewng that if any one would
fumigate* himself with them, he would be secure from the fascinations of a
Goftar for that year. But if she had sunk, they would have taken her out
of the water ; for then they would have known that she was not a Goftar.

I was once in the presence of the Emperor of Hindustan, when two of
these Jogees, wrapt up in cloaks, with their heads covered (for they take
out all their hairs, both of their heads and arm-pits, \vith powder), came in.

* Fumigations for the purpose of driving away, or otherwise invalidating the power of evil
spirits, seem to have been used in very ancient times, and hence, perhaps, Tobit’s use of the
fish. See Tobit, vi. 8, 18 ; and the use of perfumes, &c., as alluded to by Pliny, for performing
cures. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 24 cap. xi.

f That some of our own supposed witches have been treated very nearly in the same manner,
is too well known to need proof. There has generally been a story current in Europe, too, that
Mohammed’s coffin was suspended in a temple at Medina, by a loadstone placed in the roof for
that purpose. It is cuilous enough to remark, that they have a similar story in the East relating
to St. Peter. It is thus told by El Harawl: ji ^jj 4 1^1 •••

. jdcl t- V .V ..1 4 ... ti “SirnonCephas(therock)

is in the city of great Rome, in its largest church, within an ark of silver which is suspended by
chains to the roof. But God knows best.” The following account of “ the man in the moon,”
I had from the mouth of a New Zealander : “ A man named Celano once happened to be thirsty,
and coming near a well by moonlight he intended to drink, but a cloud coming over the moon
prevented him. He then cursed the moon, because it refused to give him its light ; but upon
this the moon came down and took him up forcibly, together with a tree on which he had laid
hold; and there he is now seen, continued the Zealander, with the tree, just as he was taken upl
I would merely remark, that it is by no means surprising that vulgar credulity should be much
the same all the world over; but, that it should arrive at almost precisely the same results, is
curious enough.

Y


162


HINDUSTAN


The Emperor caressed them and said, pointing to me. This is a stranger,
shew him what he has ne\er yet seen They said, we will One of them
then assumed the form of a cube and arose from the earth, and in this
cubic shape he occupied a place in the air o\er our heads I \ias so much
astonished and terrified at this, that I fainted and fell to the earth The
Emperor then ordered me some medicine which he had with him, and
upon taking this I Teco\ered and sat up this cubic figure still remaining m
the air just as it had been His companion then took a sandal belonging
to one of those who had come out with him, and struck it upon the ground
as if he had been angry The sandal then ascended, until it became oppo
site in situation with the cube It then struck it upon the neck, and the
cube descended gradually to the earth, and at last rested in the place
which it had left The Emperor then told me that the man who took the
form of a cube was a disciple to the owner of the sandal and, continued
he, had I not entertained fears for the safety of thy intellect, I should
ha\e ordered them to show thee greater things than these From this,
however, I took a palpitation at the heart, until the Emperor ordered me
a medicine which restored me

We then proceeded from the city of Barun to the stage of *Kajwani,* at
which there i$ a lake about a mile m length , and round this are temples, m
which there are idols At this place resides a tribe of Jogees, with long and
clotted hair-^ Their colour inclines to yellow, which an«es from their
fasting Many of the Moslems of these parts attend on them, and learn
(magic) from them

We next came to the city ^ Genden.-t- winch is large , after this to that of
*Tahar, between which and Dehli is a distance of twenty four days , and
from which leaves of the betel nut are carried to Dehli From this place
we went to the city of ‘Ajbal, then to *Dawlatrtbld, which is a place of
great splendour, and not inferior to Dehli The lieutenancy of Dawlat
abad extends through a distance of three months Its citadel is called
^

• The Kitchwara of Rennell i3 a province, and seems to be too far to the south west to be the
place here intended Gajara or Kurrera, seems more immediately in the route of our traveller

t Perhaps the Chanderee of Rennell, and of the Tabakati Akbarl


HINDUSTAN.


163


'El Dawiglr.* It is one of the greatest and strongest forts (in India). It is
situated on the top of a rock which stands in the plain. The extremities
are depressed, so that the rock appears elevated like a mile- stone, and
upon this the fort is built. In it is a ladder made of hides ; and this is
taken up by night, and let down by day. In this fortress the Emperor
imprisons such persons as have been guilty of serious crimes. The EmTr
of Dawlatabad had been tutor to the Emperor. He is the great Emir
“Katlukhan.'l' In this city are vines and pomegranates which bear fruit
twice in the year. It is, moreover, one of the greatest districts as to
revenue. Its yearly taxes and fines amount to seventeen "karors. A
karor is one hundred lak ; and a lak one hundred thousand Indian dinars.
This was collected by a man (appointed to do so) before the government of
Katlukhan ; but, as he had been killed, on account of the treasure which

'Jij‘ " • *

*■ This citadel is mentioned by Dow, vol. i. p. 320. The word here used is, no doubt, the
Deoglr of the Persian historians, the author of the Tabakati Akbari, Ferishta, &c. An
extract from the history of this fortress (Gwalior) has already been given.

f This person is named in the Tabakati Akbari Ferishta , which

last is read by Dow “ Cuttilich Chan” (vol. i. p. 313) Ferishta says on this subject ^

Op 3 c

Cuttilich Khan (adopting the orthography of Dow), who had read the Koran and some Persian
books to him, and from whom he had learned to write, he appointed to the office of deputy
Vizier. It is curious enough, however, that Ferishta gives the name of a tank called after him
jlcj , Katlu, where he tells us, that the last letter has been changed to j. His words are
•o'j (• We are not quite certain, there-

fore, whether as given by Ibn Batuta, is not the correct mode of writing this name, as it is not
so likely that the name given to a place would change in the mouths of the inhabitants, as that the
scribes should vary in their mode of writing out the copies of Ferishta, &c. in Hindustan. It
seems certain, however, that this word did in Ferishta’s time end in otherwise, he could not
have said, that ^had been changed into ^ ; but even this change might have been made before
his time, and the true pronunciation of the word have been retained in the name of the place, as
given above. As no good explanation of the term is given in the common dictionaries, I
shall here give one from the King of Oude’s. After giving the vowels it is said, j\jj j
. vVvjj? Jjj <— J JJwcT It is used in the sense of minister of the court, whom they also

call the Nrnbi Munab, or deputy of the deputed (». e. of the prime minister). Meninski, indeed,
gives us “ administrator, gubernator, prmfectus,” but this only leaves us where it found us.

Y 2


164


HINDUSTAN


was wth him, and this taken out of his effects after his death, the govern
ment fell to Katlnkhan The most beautiful market place here is called
the^Tarab Abid, in the shops of which sit the singing women ready
dressed out, with their slave girls m attendance , over these is an Emir,
whose particular business it is to regulate their income

AVe next came to the city of ’'Nazar Abad It is small, and inhabited
by the ’ Mahrattas a people well skilled m the arts, medicine, and astrology
their nobles are Brahmins The food of the Mahrattas consists of nee,
green ■vegetables, and oil of sesam^ They do not allow either the punishing
or sacrificing of animals They carefully wash all their food, just as one
washes after othef impurities , and never intermarry with their relations,
unless separated by the interval of seven generations at least They also
abstain from the use of urine

Our next place of arrival was the city of ''S igar which is large, and is
situated on a river of the same name Near it are inilJs which are worked
for their orchards, i e to supply water The inhabitants of this place are
religious and peaceable

We next arrived at the city of *Kamblya,* which is situated at a mouth
of the sea which resembles a valley, and into which the ships ride here
also the flux and reflux of the tide is felt The greatest part of its inha-
bitants are foreign merchants We next came to 'Goa, which is subject to
the infidel king “Jalansi, king of ^Candahnr who is also subject to the
Emperor of Hindustan, and to whom he sends an annual present We next
came to a large city situated at a mouth of the sea, and from this we took
shipping and came to the island of ’’Bairam, which is without inhabitants
We next arrived at the city of ‘Kiika, the king of which is an infidel,
named “Dankul, and subject to the Emperor of Hmdiistm

After some days we came to the island of ‘Sindabur, in the interior of
which are six and thuty villages By this we passed, however, and dropped
anchor at a small island near it, m which is a temple and a tank of water
On this island we landed and here I sijiw a Jogee leaning against the wall
of the temple, and placed between two idols , he had some marks about


’ 4>L-S' .oLi'* All


HINDUSTAN.


165


him of a religious warfare.* I addressed him, but he gave me no answer.
We looked too, but could see no food near him. When we looked at him,
he gave a loud shout, and a cocoa-nut fell upon him from a tree that was
there. This nut he threw to us : to me he threw ten dinars, after I had
offered him a few, of which he would not accept.f I supposed him to be
a Moslem ; for, when I addressed him, he looked towards heaven, and
then towards the temple at Mecca, intimating that he acknowledged God,
and believed in Mohammed as his prophet.

We next came to the city of 'Hinaur, which is situated at an estuary of
the sea, and which receives large vessels. The inhabitants of this place are
Moslems of the sect of '^Shafia, a peaceable and religious people. They
carry on, however, a warfare for the faith by sea, and for this they are
noted. The women of this city, and indeed of all the Indian districts
situated on the sea-shores, never dress in clothes that have been stitched,
but the contrary. One of them, for example, will tie one part of a piece
of cloth round her waist, while the remaining part will be placed upon her
head and breast. They are chaste and handsome. The greater part of the
inhabitants, both males and females, have committed the Koran to memory.


* Mr. Apetz translates this passage, “ cui castigationum vestigia impressa erant. The original

is . ( A r j in his copy and mine. Mr. Apetz seems to have thought, that this Jogee

had felt the effects of the religious wars of the Mohammedans. It is my opinion, that,
as Ibn Batuta believed him to be a Mohammedan, as he says he did, he thought
he recognized in him those characters or marks, which are common to those who are
thus engaged. It is not necessaiy, however, that there should be scars, wounds; or the like,
but a promptness, Jitness, &c. to contend for the faith, as well by argumait as by the
sioord: and hence, Mohammedan professors of theology are sometimes termed Mujtahids

. This word, too, is occasionally used in the same connexion with abstinence, as

in the Tarlkhi Aalam Arai, when speaking of the education of the Sheikh Safi Oddin it is said,
Jlf jO he placed his foot in the valley of abstinence and religious

viaifare. See also M. de Sacy, direst. Arab. tom. i. p. 169, edit. 2. I think, therefore, that
Mr. Apetz is wrong.

t According to the author of the Dabistan, it is a rule with the Jogees to accept of no presents
whatever. His words are: l5 j\ not to ask any

thing of any one, and when offered unasked, not to accept of it.


106


HINDUSTAN


The inhabitants of ‘Malabar* generally pay tribute to the King of-^Hmaur,
fearing as they do his bra\ety by sea His army too, consists of about six
thousand men They are, nevertheless, a brave and warlike race The pre*
sent king is ^ Jamal Oddin Mohammed Ibn Hasan He is one of the best of
princes , but is himself subject to an mhdel king, whose name is * Horaib

We next came into the country of Malabar, which is the country of black
pepper Its length is a journey of two months along the shore from 'Sm-
d ibtir to *“ Kawlam The whole of the way by land lies under the shade of
tiees, and at the distance of every Iialf mile, there is a house made of wood,
m which there are chambers fitted up for the reception of comers and goers,
whether they be Moslems or infidels To each of these there is a well,
out of which they drink , and over each is an infidel appointed to give
drink To the infidels he supplies this in vessels, to the Moslems he pours
It in their hands They do not allow the Moslems to touch their vessels, or
to enter into their apartments, but if any one should happen to eat out of
one of their vessels, they break it to pieces But, in most of their districts,
the Mussulm'in merchants have houses, and are greatly respected So that
Moslems who are strangers, whether they are merchants or poor, may
lodge among them But at any town in which no Moslem resides, upon
any one s arriving they cook, and pour out drink for him, upon the leaf of
the ‘banana, and, whatever he happens to leave, is given to the dogs
And m all this space of two months’ journey, there is not a span free from

^ *

• Id the account of Malabar translated and published by Mr Apetz, we have this word written

j\'A^ Mahbar, after which we have this account of it and its inhabitants j) J
ju-f j S' V* ^

Jlj UjjX-9 I — j ^ Su ^

It is a country situated on the shore of tlie sea of Amman, all the men of which have no respect
whatever for the chastity of their wives, every one of whom will have more than ten husbands
When a child is bom, and has arrived at the age of one year, they all assemble in one place,
each taking something in his hand , they then call the child, and that man towards whom he first
turns IS considered as his father, and therefore nndettakes the charge of bis bringing up


HINDUSTAN.


167


cultivation. For every body has here a garden, and his house is placed in
the middle of it ; and round the whole of this there is a fence of wood, up to
which the ground of each inhabitant comes. No one travels in these parts
upon beasts of burden ; nor is there any horse found, except wth the
King, who is therefore the only person who rides. When, however, any
merchant has to sell or buy goods, they are carried upon the backs of men,
who are always ready to do so (for hire.)

Every one of these men has a long staff, which is shod with iron at its
extremity, and at the top has a hook. When, therefore, he is tired with
his burden, he sets up his staff in the earth like a pillar, and places the
burden upon it; and when he has rested, he again takes up his burden
without the assistance of another. With one merchant, you will see
one or two hundred of these carriers, the merchant himself walking. But
when the nobles pass from place to place, they ride in a dula*^ made
of wood, something like a box, and which is carried upon the shoul-
ders of slaves and hirelings. They put a thief to death for stealing a
single nut, or even a grain of seed of any fruit, hence thieves are unknown
among them ; and, should any thing fall from a tree, none, except its proper
owner, would attempt to touch it.

In the country of Malabar are twelve kings, the greatest of whom has
fifty thousand troops at his command ; the least, five thousand or there-
abouts. That which separates the district of one king from that of another,
is a wooden gate upon which is written: “ The gate of safety of such an
one.” For when any criminal escapes from the district of one king, and
gets safely into that of another, he is quite safe ; so that no one has the
least desire to take him, so long as he remains there.f

Each of their kings succeeds to rule, as being sister’s son, not the son


^ Mr. Apetz says, XJjJ per ferculum redidi. In Lexicis non reperitur,

&’C. The word is Hindustani, and therefore not very likely to occur in the Arabic Lexicons. Dow

says. Hind. vol. i. p. 280 “ concealed themselves in doolies or close chairs, in which women

are always carried.” And, in Gilchrist’s Vocabulary we have, “ Dola (ee) litter, and in Mr.
Shakespear’s Dictionary ^ j dola, and ^oli, a kind of sedan (for women).” Mr. Apetz is
very right, therefore, for it is a mere palanquin, or, as it is called in Hindustani, a palld or doli,
f This custom seems nearly allied to that which obtained among the Israelites, by which the
man who happened to kill another accidentally, saved his life by escaping to one of the cities of
refuge, and remaining there until the death of the high priest.


168


HINDUSTAN


to tlie last Their country is that from Tvhich black pepper is brought
and this is the far greater part of their produce and culture The pepper
tree resembles that of the dark grape They plant it near that of the
cocoa nut, and make frame-work for it, just as they do for the grape tree
It has, however, no tendrils, and the tree itself resembles a bunch of
grapes The leaves are like tlie ears of a horse , but some of them resem-
ble the leaves of a "bramble "When the autumn arrives, it is npe , they
then cut it, and spread it just as they do grapes, and thus it is dried by
the sun As to what some have said, that they boil it in order to dry it,
it IS without foundation

I also saw, in their country and on the sea shores, aloes like the seed
aloe, sold by measure, just as meal and millet is •


• This passage is very imperfect m the edition of ApeU The words are j \^\j iXij
^ \f^ Of iite aloe, according to the Medical

Dictionary of Ibo £1 Hosflio of Bagdad, tliere are three sorts His words are ^

ijTj ^ j-f Uas• **j ‘ Of the aloe there are three sorts, the

SocolTtne, the Arahtc, and the Humj/ina The two first are well known, but what the last u,
it IS out of my power to say I suspect, however, that the proper word has been omitted by
the transcriber, and the for and thus for he goes on to say, the Socotnne

IS the best We are then told, that Alexander colonized this island from Greece, for the
purpose of cultivating the aloe, bv people who are horribly addicted to magic, 4c We are then
told, that the best of the Socotrinc is that which is of the colour of liver, and which smells like
mynh, and is shining juiU j Cy OuU y-s

jAb then have the methods of nakiog up and using it, which need not be

detailed here

Of the millet he says ^ j J ^Tj _ja-s f}<i

&c liy ■>-« ^ >U-ij A.a.., 1 e Dbors is the Indian millet, which, m the dialect of

Shiraz, they pall zorat It is of two sorts, the white and black but the white is the best.


HINDUSTAN.


169


CHAPTEU XVm.

Arrival at Ait Sardar — KaJcantuar — Manjarun — Mohammedan merchants here — HiR — Jurhhannan
— Dadkannan — Miraculous Tree — Fatten — Fandaraina — Kalikut — Chinese Junks — Embassy
goes on board, and is wrecked — Proceeds to Kawlam after his property } arrives at Karyarkara;
returns to Kalikut — Joins an expedition against Sindabur — The place carried by assault —

Arrives at Hinaur — Fakanaur — Manjariir — HiR — Jarafattan — Badafattan — Fandaraina

Shuliat ; returns to Sindabur, and sets out for the Mptdive Islands.

The first town we entered in the country of Malabar was that of ”Abi
Sardar which is small, and is situated on a large estuary of the sea. We
next came to the city of “ Kakanwar, which is large, and also upon an
estuary of the sea. It abounds in the sugar-cane. The Sultan is an
infidel. He sent his son as a pledge to our vessel, and we landed accord-
ingly, and were honourably received. He also sent presents to the ship,
as marks of respect to the Emperor of India. It is a custom with them,
that every vessel which passes by one of their ports shall enter it, and
give a present to its Sultan ; in this case they let it pass, but otherwise
they make war upon it with their vessels, they then board it out of con-
tempt, and impose a double fine upon the cargo, just in proportion to the
advantage they usually gain from merchants entering their country.

We next arrived at the city of ^Manjarun, which is situated upon a large
estuary of the sea, called the “ ^estuari/ of the wolf,” and which is the
greatest estuary in the country of Malabar. I n this place are some of the
greatest merchants of Persia and Yemen. Ginger and black pepper are
here in great abundance. The king of this place is the greatest of the
kings of Malabar, and in it are about four thousand Mohammedan mer-
chants. The king made us land, and sent us a present.

We next came to the town of ’ Hill, which is large and situated upon an
estuary of the sea. As far as this place come the ships of China, but
they do not go beyond it ; nor do they enter any harbour, except that of
this place, of ' Kalikut, and of * Kawlam.*

* This name often appears in our MSS. as well as in that of Mr. Apetz, thus : ^fKawkam.
It is given correctly by Abulfeda , and in the long. \j , 132° 8' ; lat. i , ^ 12° 8' ;

z


170


HINDUSTAN


The City of Hili is much revered both by the Mohammedans and inhdels,
on account of a mosque, the source of light and of blessings,* which is
found in it To this seafaring persons make and pay their vows, ^\hence
its treasury is derived, which is placed under the control of the principal
Moslem The mosque maintains a preacher, and has within it several
students, as well as readers of the Koran, and persons who teach writing
We next arrived at the city of "Jurkannan, the king of which is one of
the greatest on these coasts We next came to 'Dadkannan, which is a
large city abounding with gardens, and situated upon a mouth of the sea
In this are found the betel leaf and f nut, the cocoa-nut and colocassia|
Without the city is a large pond for retaining water , about which are gar-
dens The king is an infidel His grandfather, who had become Moham-
medan, built Its mosque and made the pond The cause of the grandfa-
thers receiving Islamism was a tree, over which he had built the mosque
This tree is a \ery great wonder, § its leaies are green, and like those of
the fig, except only that they are soft The tree is called Darakhu Sha-
hadet (the tree of testimony), daiakht meaning tree I was told m these

y-»'

bylbnSaid, aad in the Atwdl^^,^ 110*6, bt IS^SO* ItistheCou/an

of the maps

* I am not at all satiated with my own translation of this passage It stands thus
ID the original jy}\ in two oflbe MSS

Nothing of tins occurs in the edition by Mr Apetz. I hare given, however, the only tolerable
sense I can find in it

-j- This, according to the Medical Dictionary of Jbn £1 Hosain,

Cy iy &c Itisafrait

w. w® A'iw.j VJiA *i}K. vwAV. wmA Va tw w ^ 'A/t ‘HifiRti, t/A , V, v, vt. -la

nature cold and dry, &c

tu-'AJt

§ Mr Apetz thinks he finds a descnption of the banyan tree here , his words are “ arborem
istam vere singularem jam veteres mirati sunt,* after which we have a citation from Strabo in
the words of Onesicritus, aud another from Plmy, and then we are told, that it is the Bengal
fig tree (Ficus Bengalensis), &c How Mr Apetz got to this conclusion it is extremely difficult
to say, unless he supposed the wonder of our traveller to have risen from the same cause wnh
that of the ancients but, as the ground of bis wonder is explained to be the leafs clnnging its
colour, Ac thdre appears to be very little reason for supposing, that this is the tree mentioned by
Onesicntus and Plmy


HINDUSTAN.


171


parts, that this tree does not generally drop its leaves; but, at the season of
autumn in every year, one of them changes its colour, first to yellow, then
to red; and that upon this is written, with the pen of power, “ There is no
God but God; Mohammed is the Prophet of God;” and that this leaf
alone falls. Very many Mohammedans, who were worthy of belief, told
me this ; and said, that they had witnessed its fall, and had read the
writiiig; and further, that every year, at the time of the fall, credible
persons among the Mohammedans, as well as others of the infidels, sat
beneath the tree waiting for the fall of the leaf : and when this took place,
that the one half was taken by the Mohammedans, as a blessing, and for
the purpose of curing their diseases ; and the other, by the king of the infi-
del city, and laid up in his treasury as a blessing ; and that this is con-
stantly received among them. Now the grandfather of the present king
could read the Arabic ; he witnessed, therefore, the fall of the leaf, read the
inscription, and, understanding its import, became a Mohammedan ac-
cordingly, At the time of his death he appointed his son. who was a
violent infidel, to succeed him. This man adhered to his own religion, cut
down the tree, tore up its roots, and effaced every vestige of it. After two
years the tree grew, and regained its original state, and in this it now is.
This king died suddenly ; and none of his infidel descendants, since his
time, has done any thing to the tree.

We next came to the city of ^Fattan (Pattan), the greater part of the
inhabitants of which are Brahmins, who are held in great estimation among
the Hindoos. In this place there was not one Mohammedan. Without it
was a mosque, to which the Mohammedan strangers resort. It is said to
have been built by certain merchants, and afterwards to have been destroyed
by one of the Brahmins, who had removed the roof of it to his own house.
On the following night, however, this house was entirely burnt, and in it
the Brahmin, his followers, and all his children. They then restored the
mosque, and in future abstained from injuring it ; whence it became the
resort of the Mohammedan strangens.

After this we came to the city of "Fandaraina, a beautiful and large
place, abounding with gardens and markets. In this the Mohammedans
have three districts, in each of which is a mosque, with a judge and preacher.

•. ^

Z 2


172


HINDUSTAN


We next came to “Kalikut, one of the great ports of the district of Malabar,
and m which merchants from all parts are found The king of this place
IS an infidel, who shaves his chin just as the * Haidan Fakeers of Hoom do
When we approached this place, the people came out to meet us, and with
a large concourse brought us into the port The greatest part of the Mo-
hammedan merchants of this place arc so wealthy, that one of them can
purchase the whole freightage of such v^sels as put m here , and fit out
others like them Here we waited three months for the season to set sail
for China for there is only one season m the year in which the sea of
China IS navigable Nor then is the voyage undertaken, except in vessels
of the three descriptions following the greatest is called a 'junk, the
middling sized a ‘‘zaw, the least a 'kakam The sails of these vessels are
made of cane-reeds, woven together like a mat , which, when they put into
port, they leave standing in the wind In some of these ves«!els there will
be employed a thousand men, six hundred of these sailors, and four
hundred soldiers Each of the lai^r ships is followed three others,
a middle sized, a third, and a fourth sized These vessels are no where
made except in the citj of £) Zaitun m China, or in Sm Kil m, which
IS Sm El Sin * They towf m these «hips with large oars, which may
be compared to great masts, over some of which five and twentj men
will be stationed, who work standing The commander of each vessel
IS a great Emir In the large ships too they sow garden herbs and


* This place, according to the Arabic geographers, is situated on the eastern coa't of China.
Editsi says, that the tenth part of the second chmate i^\) contains the

eastern districts of China, the city Susat El Sin and Siniat El Sin I I oUj

A— ffj Ac And Ibn El Wardi U1

j£i\'i\ i\jj to Sm El Sin, it is the extiCToe eastern part

which IS inhabited, and beyond which there is nothing but the ocean
f TIte verb seems here to be used in rather an unusual sense and were it not

repeated, it might be supposed to bcanenor of the copyists for which is generally taken

in this sense The passige is s— j jjs tk -J

&c


HINDUSTAN,


173


ginger, which they cultivate in cisterns (made for that purpose), and placed
on the sides of them. In these also are houses constructed of wood, in
which the higher officers reside with their wives : but these they do not hire
out to the merchants. Every vessel, therefore, is like an independent city.
Of such ships as these, Chinese individuals will sometimes have large num-
bers : and, generally, the Chinese are the richest people in the world.

Now, when the season for setting out had arrived, the Emperor of Hindus-
tan appointed one of the junks, of the thirteen that were in the port, for our
voyage. El Malik Sambul, therefore, who had been commissioned to pre-
sent the gift, and Zahir Oddin, went on board ; and to the former was the
present carried. I also sent my baggage, servants, and slave-girls on
board, but was told by one of them, before I could leave the shore, that the
cabin which had been assigned to me Avas so small, that it would not take
the baggage and slave girls. I went, therefore to the commander, who
said, There is no remedy for this ; if you wish to have a larger, you had
better get into one of the kakams (third-sized vessels) : there you will find
larger cabins, and such as you want. I accordingly ordered my property
to be put into the kakam. This Avas in the afternoon of Thursday, and
I myself remained on shore for the purpose of attending divine service on
the Friday. During the night, however, the sea arose, when some of the
junks struck upon the shore, and the greatest part of those on board
Avere droAvned ; and the rest Avere saA'ed by swimming. Some of the junks,
too, sailed off, and what became of them I knoAV not. The vessel in Avhich
the present Avas stowed, kept on the sea till morning, when it struck on the
shore, and all on board perished, and the Avealth Avas lost. I had, indeed,
seen from the shore, the Emperor’s servants, with El Malik Sambul and
Zahir Oddin, prostrating themselves almost distracted : for the terror of the
sea AA'as such as not to be got rid of. I myself had remained on shore,
having Avith me my prostration carpet and ten dinars, Avhich had been giA’en
me by some holy men. These I kept as a blessing, for the kakam had
sailed offAvith my property and folloAvers. The missionaries of the King of
China Avere on board another junk, Avhich struck upon the shore also.
Some of them AA^ere saved and brought to land, and afterwards clothed by
the Chinese merchants.

I Avas told that the kakam in AAffiich my property Avas, must haA'e put


174


HINDUSTAN


into-^Kawlam I proceeded, therefore, to that place by the river It is
situated at the distance of ten days from ^K'llikut; After five daj^ I came
to Kanjarkara, which stands on the top of a lull, is inhabited by Jews,
and governed by an Emir who pays tnbute to the King of ‘ Kawlam All
the trees (we saw) upon the banks of this river, as well as upon the sea
shores, were those of the cinnamon and bakam,* which constitute the fuel
of the inhabitants and vvith this we cooked our food Upon the tenth
day we arrived at Kawlam, vrhich is the last city on the Malabar coast
In this place is a large number of Mohammedan merchants, but the king
IS an ii^fidel In this place I remained a considerable time, but heard
nothing of the kakam and my property I was afraid to return to the
Emperor, who would have said. How came you to leave the present, and
ste.y upon the shore ’ for I knew what sort of a man he was, in cases of
this kind I also advised with some of the Mohammedans, who dissuaded
me from returning, and said He will condemn you because you left the
present you had better, therefore, return by the nver to ‘Kalikut
I then betook myself to ^Jamal Oddin, King of "Hinaur, by sea, who,
when I came near, met me and received me honourably, and then appomted
me a house with a suitable maintenance He was about to attend on dmne
service in the mosque, and commanded me to accompany him I then
became attached to the mosque, and read daily a kbatma or two -f At
this time the King was preparing an expedition against the "island of
Smdabur For this purpose he had prepared two and fifty vessels, which,

JU:- ‘ ^


♦Mr Apetz translates th spaisage,“8rboresannaiiioinietC<rsaIp niarSappan Theorg nal s,
That the first a gn fiea cinnamon there is perhaps little doubt but I know
not whether Mr Apetz is right or not in his interpretation of the second It ma} not be am ss
however, to give an extract respecting it from the med cal dictionary already c ted ^

c ** -"— ^

&c Bakam is the wood of a tree which grows on the shores of Ind a It is used by dyers m
dyeing black It is in its nature warm and diy
f The passage is J, ]y]}f which nieana that he daily read the Koran

through once or twice


HINDUSTAN.


175


when ready, he ordered me to attend with him for the expedition. Upon
this occasion I opened the Koran, in search of an omen ;* and, in the first
words of the first leaf which I laid my hand upon, was frequent mention of
the name of God, and (the promise) that lie would certainly assist those
who assisted him. I was greatly delighted with this^ and, when the King
came to the evening prayer, I told him of it, and requested to be allowed to
accompany him. He was much surprised at the omen, and prepared to set
out in person. After this he went on board one of the vessels, taking me
•ndth him, and then we sailed. When we got to the island of Sindabur, we
found the people prepared to resist us, and a hard battle was accordingly
fought. We carried the place, however, by dhane permission, bjl assault.
After this the King gave me a sla%-e girl, with clothing and other neces-
saries ; and I resided with him some months. I then requested permis-
sion to make a journey to Kawlam, to inquire after the kakam with my
goods. He gave me permission, after obtaining a promise that I would
return to him. I then left him for"Hinaur, and then proceeded to
^Fakana^T, and thence to ^Manjarur, thence to ’’Hlli, Uarafattan, Bada-
fattan, “Fandaraina, and Kalikut, mention of which has already been
made. I next came to the city of ^ Shaliat, where the shaliats are made,
and hence they derive their name. This is a fine city : I remained at it
some time, and there heard that the kakam had returned to China, and
that my slave girl had died in it : and I was much distressed on her ac-
count. The infidels, too, had seized upon my property, and my followers
had been dispersed among the Chinese and others.

I then returned to Sindabur to the King Jamal Oddin, at the time when
an infidel king was besieging the town vidth bis troops. I left the place,
therefore, and made for the -''Maidive Islands, at which, after ten days, I
arrived.


•cT-yr


9 ^


•J.


■J.


* -I; . This seems to be a very favourite practice in the East. The

omen is termed z.fal ((Jls), and the verses which direct how it is to be obtained, are called a
_falnamah jjli). A copy of this is generally found in most of the fine copies of the
Korin.


176


MALDIVE ISLANDS


CHAPTER XIX.

Dtscnptton ofthe Maldive Islands— NatuTulprodttettoas~-People— Customs — Ttade— Currency-
Origin of Mohammedanumhtre— A Queestgooenang the principal island — Theywnte gtnerallyon
palm leaves, viith an iron style — Poioer o/* the Judge his revenue — Isle KalnZs— Voyage to

the p-incipal isle— Introduced la the htsshand and vtzxer of the Queen— Food of the islanders—
Takes ike ^ceqf Judge— Marries threesawes—Suspeeied by ike Vitter— Divorces kis tiaws, and
visits the other islands — Muluk Island— Its fertility — Distance from the coast rf Coromandel

These islands constitute one of the wonders of the world , for their
number is about two thousand, nearly a hundred of which are so close to
each other as to form a sort of ring, each of which, nevertheless, is sur-
rounded by the sea When vessels approach any one of them, they are
obliged to show who they have on board , if not, a passage is not permitted
between them , for such is their proximity to each other, that the people of
one are recognized by those of another
The greatest trees on these islands are those of the cocoa nut, the fruit
of which they eat with fish Of this sort of trees the palm will produce
fruit tweUe times m the year, each month supplying a fresh crop so that
you will see upon the trees, the fruit of some large, of others small, of
others dry, and of others green And this is the case always From these
they make palm-wine, and oil olive , and from their honey, sweetmeats,
which they eat with the dried fruits This is a strong incentive to venery
I had some slave girls and four wives dunng my residence here,* The
people are religious, chaste, and peaceable They eat what is lawful, and
their prayers are answered Their bodies are weak They make no war ,
and their weapons are prayers They are by no means terrified at the
robbers and thieves of India, nor do they punish them , from the experience


• The passage, which will not bear tran<!ating. is this ‘^3

jiLU! J \j*^ 4—^1 This tree is no doubt, the kettule of

Knox, who says, “ It groweth straight, but not so tail or b g as the cocoa nut tree It vieldeth
a sort of liquor, which they call tellegie it is rarely sweet and pleasing to the palate, and is
wholesome to the body, but no stronger than water they take it down from the tree twice, and
from some good trees thrice in a day An ordinary tree will yield some three, some four gallons
in a day— the which liquor they boil, and make a land of brown sugar, called jaggory but if
they use their skill, they can make it as white as the second best sugar, and fit for any use, &c
—Knox's Ceylon, p 30, edit 1617


MALDH'^E ISLANDS.


177


that every one who steals, will be exposed to some sudden and grievous
calamity. When any of the war-vessels of the infidel Hindoos pass by
these islands, they take whatsoevei they find, without being resisted by
any one. But if one of these infidels should take for himself (surrepti-
tiously) but a single lemon, his chief* will not only severely punish him,
but vdll impress most seriously upon his mind, the fear of some horrible
consequence to folloAv. Excepting this one case onlj', they are the most
gentle people possible towards those who nsit them : the reason probably
is, the delicacy of their persons, and their ignorance of the art of war

In each of these islands are several mosques, which, with the rest of
their buildings, are constructed of wood. They are a cleanly people, each
individual washing himself tudce dail}q on account of the great heat of the
sun. They very much use perfumes, such as the galia,f and scented oils.
Every woman must, as soon as her husband has arisen and said his prayers,
bring him the box of colyrium for his eyes, wth the perfumes, and Muth
these he anoints and perfumes himself. Both the rich and poor walk bare-
foot. The whole countr}”- is shaded nith trees, so that a person walking
along, is just as if he were walking in a garden. The water of their wells
is not more than two cubits from the surface of the earth.

Whenever a traveller enters these islands, he may marry for a very small
douTy one of the handsomest women for any specific period, upon this
condition, fhat he shall divorce her when he leaves the place ; because the
women never leave their respective districts. But, if he does not wish to
marrj', the woman in whose house he lodges will cook for him, and other-
■ndse attend on him, for a very small consideration. The greatest part of
their trade consists in a sort of hemp, that is, thread made of the fibres of
the cocoa-nut. It is made by macerating the nut in water, then by beating


* The Maidive chief governor is probabb’ heie meant.

t According to Golius, “ odoramenti genus : /line galia dieium, et vulgo gab'a moscata.” Gi.
The Medical Dictionary of Ibn Hosain ascribes to it the properties of reducing hard swellings,
and, when mixed with oil, particularly that of the ban seed, is effectual in removing the ear-
ache : he states that its scent is delightful, and that when mixed with any drink, has the property
of intoxicating ; that it is good for the epilepsy, and to cure barrenness. The words are;


•••


criv 'i (V (*W u-ir'

• Oo f ^ -I «.« < ft

w V-/ - .y ^ Vi.5 -y •J


178


MALDIVE ISLANDS.


it vath large mallets till it is quite soft , they then spin it out, and after-
wards twist it into ropes * AVith this thread the ships of India and Yemen
are sewn together, of which, when they happen to stnke against a rock,
the thread will yield a little, but will not soon break, contrary to what
happens when put together with iron nails This is the best sort of hemp |
Each population catches the fish of its own island only, which they salt,
and send to India and China The currency used instead of coin, is the
’Wada J This is sea shell-fish, which they take upon the shore, and then
bury m the earth till the flesh is entirely wasted away, the hard part
still remaining This is the Wada which is so abundant in India it is
carried from these islands to the province of Bengal , and there also passes
instead of com


* Knoxi speaking of the kcttuh tree of Ceylon, says, * n bears a leaf like to that of a betel*
nut tree, which is fastened to a skin as the betel nut leaves were , only this skm is hard and
stubborn, like a piece of board The skm is full of strings as strong as wire, they use them to
make ropes withal -.Ceylon, p SO

f We have the following account respecting these islands in the tvro Mohammedan travellers
of the ninth century (Pinkerton, vol vu p 162) “ Between this sea and that of Delarowi are

many islands, to the number, as they say, of nineteen hundred, which divide those two seas
from each olher, and are governed by a queen To this last particular the editor objects in a
note , yet it is curious enough, that a queen held (he supreme power when our traveller resided
there It is also remarkable, that our traveller makes the islands two thousand in number ,
but he mentions nothing about the ambei^s, said to be found there in the ninth centuty,
while botli agree in stating, that a sort of palm tree bearing cocoa nuts is found, and that the
fibres of these are used as hemp 'VVe arc told, in a note by the editor, that these islands are,
by the best writers, made to amount to about twelve thousand , and it is then said, that Male dive
means in the Malabar tongue a thousand islands That Dweep, means an island m the
Sanscrit there can be no doubt but it is very doubtful whether the other etymology is true
Ibn Batuta derives their name from the pnocipal island, Mohl, as a proper name, and tf this
be true, the meaning of their name will be the iVfoM islands That the Lakadives are so
called from their number is highly probable, LnMcka or Lakzha meaning a hundred thou-
sand in Sanscrit, and Dweep an island, as bdbre and the name implying an indefimtely large
number of isles generally.

i According to Gohus, the Concha Venens, but according to the author of the KSmoos
i\^\ ^ Uio jjs- A white shell winch is

taken out of the sea, the fissure of which is white like that of the date stone It is hung (about
(he neck) to avert the evil eye


MALDIVE ISLANDS.


179


The women of the islands of India cover their faces, and also their bodies,
from the navel dowmvards : this they all do, even to the wives of their
kings. When I held the office of judge among them, I was quite unable
to get them covered entirely. In these islands the women never eat with
the men, but in their own society only. I endeavoured, while I was judge,
to get my wives to eat with me, but I could never prevail. Their conver-
sation is very pleasing ; and they, themselves, are exceedingly beautiful.

The cause of these islands becoming Mohammedan was, as it is gene-
rally received among them, and as some learned and respectable persons
among them informed me, as follows. When they were in a state of infi-
delity, there appeared to them every month a spectre from among the genii.
T his came from the sea. Its appearance was that of a ship filled with can-
dles. When they saw him, it was their custom to take and dress up a
young woman who was a virgin, and place her in the “ idol-temple which
stood on the sea-shore, and had windows looking towards him. Here they
left her for the night. When they came in the morning, tliey found her
vitiated and dead. This they continued doing month after month, casting-
lots among themselves, and each, to whom the lot fell, giving up and dress-
ing out his daughter for the spectre. After this there came to them a west-
ern Arab, named ^ AbuT Barakat the Berber. This was a holy man, and
one who had committed the Koran to memory. He happened to lodge in
the house of an old woman in the 'island of Mohl.* One day, when he
entered the house, he saw her with a company of her female inmates weep-
ing and lamenting, and asked them what was the matter. A person who
acted as interpreter between him and them said, that the lot had fallen upon
this old woman, who was now adorning her daughter for the spectre : for
this it was she was crying: this too was her only child. The Mogrebine,
who was a beardless man, said to her : I will go to the spectre to-night
instead of thy daughter. If he takes me, then I shall redeem her : but
if I come off safe, then that will be to the praise of God. They carried
him accordingly to the idol-house that night, as if he had been the daugh-
ter of the old woman, the magistrate knowing nothing whatever of the

* The principal island of the group.

2 A 2


180


MALDIVE ISLANDS


matter The Mogrebine entered, and sitting down in the window, began
to read the Koran By and bye the spectre came, with eyes flaming like
fire , but when he had got near enough to hear the Korin, he plunged into
the sea In this manner the Mogrebine remained till morning, reading his
Koran, when the old woman came with her household, and the great per
sonages of the distnct m order to fetch out the young woman and bum
her, as it was their custom But when they saw the old man reading the
Koran, just as they had left him, they were greatly astonished The old
woman then told them what she had done, and why she had desired him to
do this They then earned the Mogrebine to their King whose name avas
‘*Shanwan, and told him the whole of the affair, and he was much asto-
nished at the Arab Upon this the Mogrebine presented the doctnne of
Islamism to the King, and pressed him to receive it, who replied Stay
with us another month, and then, if you will do as you now have done,
and escape from the spectre with salet), I will become a Mohammedan
So God opened the heart of the King for the reception of Islamism before
the completion of the month, — of himself, of his household, his children,
and his nobles "When, however, the second month came, they w ent witi
the Mogrebine to the idol house, according to former custom, the King
himself being also present, and when the following morning had arrived,
they found the Mogrebine sitting and reading his Koran, having had the
same rencontre with the spectre that he had on the former occasion
They then broke the images, rased the idol house to the ground, and all
became Mohammedans The sect into which they entered w as that of the
Mogrebine, namely, that of Ibn Malik Till this very day they make
much of the Slogrebines, on account of this man I was residing for some
time m these islands, without having any knowledge of this circumstance ,
dfpow s certain nigkt, wAen I saw* them exi!}ti[i^ and praising

God, as they were proceeding tow'ards the sea, with Korins on their heads,

I asked them what tliej were about , when they told me of the spectre
They then said Look towards the sea, and you will see him I looked,
and behold, he resembled a ship filled with candles and torches This, said
they, is the spectre, which, when we do as you have seen us doing goes
away and does us no injury


MALDIVE ISLANDS.


181


When I first came to the island of Mohl, a woman was sovereign, because
the King mentioned above had left no male issue ; the inhabitants therefore
gave to his eldest daughter, Khodija, the supreme rule. Her husband,
^Jamal Oddin, the preacher, then became her prime minister.

It is a custom with them to write out copies of the Koran and other books
on paper only. Letters, orders,- and legal decisions, they inscribe on palm
leaves of the cocoa-nut tree, with a crooked sharp-pointed instrument some-
what like a knife. The army of this Princess consists of foreigners, to the
number of about one thousand men. Their laws mostly originate with the
judge, who, for the authority with which his orders are obeyed, is more like
a king. He enjoys, by right of his office, the revenue of three islands ; a
custom which originated with their king ^ Shanwaza, whose proper name
was '’Ahmed, and this still remains in force.

When I first arrived at these islands, the ship in which I was, put into
port in the island 'Kalnus, which is a beautiful' place, containing several
mosques. Upon this occasion some of the learned and pious inhabitants
took me to their houses, and entertained me with great hospitality. The
commander of the ship in which I had been, then went with me to the
island in which the Queen resided ; and after which, the other islands of
these parts are named. I sailed with him in order to see her; and after
passing by many of the islands, came to it. Our practice was, to sail in a
large boat during the morning ; about the middle of the day we said our
prayers, and then dined in the boat. And thus, after ten days, we came
to the island Zablah El Mohl, i,e. the Maidive island. In this I landed, and
a report was made to the Queen’s vizier, Jamfil Oddin, who was also her
husband. Upon this he sent for me. I went to him, and was very honourably
received and entertained. He also appointed a house for my residence, sent
me a present of victuals, fruits, clothing, and an *alms-gift of the^Wada
for shells), which are the currency of these parts, and used instead of coin.

The food of tlje greater part of the inhabitants of these parts is rice,
which they cook and lay up in saucers, and small potted plates, with
spiced flesh, fowl, and fish. Upon this, in order to assist digestion, they


182


MALDIVE ISLANDS


drink El Kurblni , that is, the honey of the cocoa nut made into spiced
wne, this easily digests, excites the appetite, and communicates strength
to the frame

After this the Vizier desired me to take the office of Judge, and to remair
among them He gave me a house, and a large garden, m which were
built many other houses He also sent me a carpet, vessels, a dress of
honour, and made me ride upon a horse, although it is a custom with them,
that none except the Vizier should thus ride The rest of the nobles and
others either ride in a " palanquin, a machine formerly described, or walk
on foot He also sent female slaves for my service , and I married three
wives The Vizier also frequently came himself and conferred his favours
upon me for which may God reward him

When, however, I had manied my wives, and my relations became,
through them, numerous and powerful jn the island, the Vizier began to
be afraid of me, lest I should get the upper hand of him, when no such
thought had entered my mmd This resulted purely from their weakness,
the fewness of their troops, and their inexperience in tlie art of war, as
already noticed He hated me mortally m his own mind, began to inquire
into my affairs, and to watch my proceedings This was all known to me,
and it became my intention to leave the place but this was also a matter
of dread with him, because I might then possibly bring an army upon him
from the Maabar districts of Hindustan, the king of those parts '^GHth
Oddm, having married a sister to one of my wives when I resided m Dehli,
and with whom I was on terms of fnendship

1 then divorced all my wives except one, who had a young child, and I
left that island for those which stretch out before it These form numerous
’groups, each ^ group containing many islands In some of these I saw
women who had only one breast, which much astonished me Of these
islands, one is named Muliik In this, large ships destined for the districts
of Maabar put into harbour It is an island exceedingly nch in vegetation
and soil, so that when you cut a branch from any of its trees, and plant it
either on the road or on a wall, it will grow, throw out leaves, and become
a tree In this island I saw a pomegranate tree, the fruit of which ceased


MALDIVE ISLANDS.


1 QO
iCi/

not to shoot during the -svhole year. Between the Maidive islands and the
Maahar districts there is a distance of three days, with a moderate ■n'ind.


CHAPTER XX.


AtttccI in Ceyhn — Visits ihe Kingct BattSla — Kclurd productions — Pearh — Obtains permission
toxisit Adam's Peal: — Arrixes at Manor McndaP — Port of Salthzai—Kanhar, the capital rj'
Ceylon, described — Mosque of the Sheikh Othman — The Emperor Kinar : his xchke elephant

large rubies found all oxer Ceylon — Description of the eaxe Ista Mahmud- — Buzhia

Monkies — Estuary of reeds — Old xcomans house — Caxe of Baba Tahir — Of SibaJ: — The ferce
leech — The sezen caxes — Ridge cf Alexander — Description of Adam’s Peck — Customs of Pil~
grims—Pish Port — Village of KarlAn — Of Dildinuh — Of At Kalcnja — City of Dinaur — Great
Idol-Temple, xcith Brahmins, Jogees, and daughters of the Nobility — Kali — Kdambu —
BattSla-.

"Whex we sailed, however, the wind changed upon us, and we were
near being lost : but arrived at last at the ^ island of Ceylon, a place well
known, and in which is situated the mountain of ’’Serendib. This appeared
to us like a pillar of smoke, when we were at a distance of nine days from
it.^ “When we got near the land, we saw a harbour, into which we endea-
voured to put, but were threatened by the Pieis, who was in a ship. The
reason of this was, the harbour was in a district belonging to an infidel
prince, who had no intercourse with the captains of Mohammedan vessels,
as other infidel princes had. He was likewise a very stupid being. He
had also ships with which he occasionally transported his' troops against
the Mohammedans. Beside all this, we were in danger of drowning,
unless we could enter the port: I said to the Reis, therefore, Allov.'
me to come on shore, and I will ensure thy safety, and that of those
about thee, with the King. To this he consented, and myself, with some
of my followers only, were brought on shore. The infidels then came about
us and said : "Wliat are you ? I answered, I am a relation of the King of
the Maabar districts, and am on a voyage to visit him : whatever is in the


.'A.--:


* Knox says, “ it is sharp like a sagar-Ioaf.'" — Ceylon, p. 5.


184


CEYI.ON


ship, IS a present for the King of the Maabar They then went to their
king, and told him this He therefore sent for me, and I went to him
He IS king of the city of 'Batflla,* which is small, and surrounded by two
wooden fences The whole of its shore abounds with ‘cinnamon wood,
bakam» and the "kalanji aIoe,'f which, however, is not equal to the
’’Kamiri, or the^Kakuli, m scent The merchants of Malabar and the
Maabar districts transport it without any other price than a few articles of
clothing which are given as presents to the king This may be attributed
to the circumstance, that it is brought down by the mountain torrents, and
left m great heaps upon the shore Between this city and the Maabar
districts, there is a voyage of one day and night The king of Ceylon,
Ayan Shakarti, by name, has considerable forces by sea When I was
first admitted to his presence, he rose and received me honourably, and


* Perhaps the Badiculaw of Knox which he expressly tells us lies to the u.f’itoard of the
island while the maps place Oatticaloa (which I suppose must mean the sane place) to the
eastward ->CeyIon, p S

f The Medical Dictionary of Ibn Mosain spealca of the Kakuh m the following terms
kU/U ol/** ^ oujU

Jy L ^ The Kakuli is a plant like the Alkaii In

taste It IS salt and astringent its stone os Ibn Imran says, 15 like the Dodder plant in operation
It is of a warm and dry nature and Ednsi, speaking ofFandaraina says (Bth part of the Sd cl mate},
iixa Ua>l jw_JI At koc*

jILjI J- fcaT Lf<j rflabfll a*j1j=- 1 — wJ j yt \£ jWl

i^L-j Lilil ArWl ciaLi y Into this place put th? merchant vessels from

the islands of India and Sindia On the north of it is a very h gh lull abounding in trees wiin
villages and cattle about the skirts of it grows the kakula, and hence is transported to other
parts of the earth This plant is of ail things the most hke to the shahranj (,‘^y^ placentarum
genus^ Castell) The i_^Uj ham rt or Aimirt, is, according to Golius, so called from a place
namedjUj Kimar, in India Ibn Batuta tells ns, a little farther on, that boih aliU Kuiula
and ^Uj Kam.ara^ the places where these plauU are produced, are situated in Java (^W
Mul J^va)

Knox tells us that the cinnamon tree grows wild in the woods as other trees, and by them
no more esteemed It is as much in plenty as hazel ui England, &c —Ceylon, p 31 On the
aloes, &c , see Rnox, pp 36, &c edition by Philalethes, p 5 and 7, &c


CEYLON.


185


said : You are to be my guest for three days. Security shall be forwarded
to the people of the ship, because your relation, the King of the Maabar,
is my friend. After thanking him, I remained with him, and was treated
•with increasing respect.

One day, when I was admitted to his presence, he had with him a great
number of pearls, which had been brought from the pearl-fishery, and
these his companions were sorting. He asked me, whether I had ever seen
pearl-diving, in any country which I had visited. I said, yes, I had, in
the island of “Finas. He said: Do not be shy; ask for what you wish.

I answered : My only desire in coming to this island was, to visit the
blessed foot of our forefather Adam;* whom these people call Baba, while
they style Eve, Mama. This, replied he, is easy enough. We will send
some one with you, who shall conduct you thither. The ship (said I)
which brought me here, shall return to the Maabar ; and when I return, you
shall send me there in one of your ships. He answered. It shall be so.
When I told this to the commander of the ship, he refused to accede to it;
and said, I will wait for you, should you be absent a whole year. This I
told to the King, who said: He may stay at my charge until you return.
He then gave me a palanquin, which his servants carried upon their
shoulders. He also sent with me four Jogees, who were in the habit of
visiting the foot-mark every year ; with these went four Brahmins, and ten
of the King’s companions, with fifteen men carrying provisions. As to
water, there is plenty of it to be found on the road. We then proceeded
on our journey; and on the first day crossed a river in a boat made of
reeds, and entered the city of ^ Manar Mandali, which is handsome, and
situated at the extremity of the territory of the infidel king, who had
entertained and sent us out. We then proceeded to the port of 'Salawat,

• This is, without doubt, the foot of some Buddh, as already noticed, p. 30. Knox says
of this hill, “ On the south side of Conde Uda is a hill, supposed to be the highest on this
island, called in the Chingulay language Hamalell, but by the Portuguese and European nations
Adam’s Peak. It is sharp like a sugar-loaf, and on the top a flat stone, with the print of a
foot like a man’s on it, but far bigger, being about two feet long. The people of this land count
it meritorious to go and worship this impression,” &c., — Ceylon, p. 5. The Cingalese assert,
that the foot-mark is that pf Buddh* Ib. p. 14'4' ; Addition, pp. 2 JO, 215.

2 B


186


CEYLON


which IS a small town The roads, however, over which we travelled,
were rough and abounding with water * In these there were many ele-
phants but they never touched either pilgrims or strangers, m conse-
quence of the blessing obtained by the Sheikh “^Abu Abd Allah Ibn
Khafif, the first who opened this road of pilgrimage to the foot The infidels
would not formerly allow the Mohammedans to make this pilgrimage, but in-
jured them, nor would they either sell, or give them any thing to eat ^ut
when it happened that the elephants killed all the companions of this Sheikh,
one of them spanng and carrying him on his back from among the moun-
tains to an inhabited district, tbe infidels ever after thought highly of the
Mohammedans, admitted them into their houses, and fed them And to
this very day they speak of the Sheikh in the most extravagant terms of
respect, and call him *“ the greatest Sheikh "t After this we arrived at tbe
city of -^KankarjJ; which is the seat of the Emperor of Ceylon It is built
in a valley between two hills, upon an estuary called the estuary of rubies,
and m which rubies are found Without the city is the mosque of the
^Sheikh Othman of Shinlz, which both the Emperor and the people of tbe
city visit, and for which they have great respect
The Emperor is an infidel, and is known by the name of ^Kinar ^ He
has a white elephant, upon which he rides on feast days, having first
placed on his head some very large rubies This is the only white elephant


* Knox says, the king careth not to make bis country easy to travel, but desires to keep it
intricate ’ —Ceylon, p 5

f According to Knox, a certain former kug granted pennission to the Mohammedans to
build a mosque at Candy, with other pnvilcges —Ceylon, p 171 See the notes, p 42

j; This IS, perhaps, a corruption of the Tattanourof Knox, “ m which,” he says, “ stands
the royal and chief city Candi ” — Ceylon, p 3 Tbe distnct of Canducorre (which approaches
nearer in sound to our word), might, indeed, bare been the seat of royalty in his times

J According to the list of Emperors subjoined (o Knox’s Ceylon, p S40, Dalam Agah Raja
must have ruled Ceylon at this time , hu reign continuing from A D 1327 to 1347 The name
Jgall, however, seems much nearer in sotmd to our Ayarl (^^1) In that case, either our
traveller or the author of that list has mistaken a Governor for the Emperor All that can
be said, perhaps, is that the coincidence in the name is curious Knox tells us, however, that
this country formerly consisted of nine kingdoms,— Ceylon, p 63


CEYLON.


187


I had ever seen.* The ruby and ’carbuncle are found only in this country.
These are not allowed to be exported, on account of the great estimation in
which they are held : nor are they elsewhere dug up. But the ruby is
found all over Ceylon. It is considered as property, and is sold by the
inhabitants. When they dig for the ruby, they find a white stone abound-
ing with fissures. Within this the ruby is placed. They cut it out, and give
it to the polishers, who polish it until the ruby is separated from the stone.
Of this there is the red, the yellow, and the cerulean. They call it the
'"Manikam.f It is a custom among them, that every ruby amounting in
value to six of the golden dinars cmrent in those parts, shall go the Em-
peror, who gives its value and takes it. What falls short of this goes to hi"'
attendants. All the women in the island of Ceylon have traces of coloured
rubies, which they put upon their hands and legs as chains, in the place of
bracelets and ancle-rings. I once saw upon the head of the white elephant
seven rubies, each of which was larger than a ben’s egg. I also saw in the
possession of the king * Ayari Shakarti, a saucer made of ruby, as large as the
palm of the hand, in which he kept oU of aloes. I was much surprised at
it, when the King said to me. We have them much larger than this.

We then proceeded from Kankar, and came to a cave known by the name
of "Ista Blahmud, then to the estuary of “Buzata,J which in their language
signifies monkies, animals which are in great numbers in the mountains of
these parts. These monkies are black, and have longtails : the beard o^tbe
males is like that of a man. I was told by the Sheikh Othman and his son,
two pious and credible persons, that the monkies have a leader, whom
they follow as if he were their king. About his head is tied a turban com-

» Knox saw an elephant in the ting’s possession “ spotted or spectied all the hcdj orer.”
Ceylon, p. 41.

-{• This is most likely a Sanscrit or Pali word, although we do not find it in Jlr. Wilson’s
Sanscrit Dictionary. It is to be found, however, in the Bengali Yocahulary of Sir. Forster, as
well as in the Bengali Dictionary of Dr. Carey, the latter of whom gives it in the two following
forms, riz. *4.1 and *4.1p1<?J maniho and mmi^o, a fTedous sione, a Every tra-

veller, I believe, hears testimony to the production of precioas stones of this sort in this island,
bat I believe they are not very valuable.

This appears to me to he a corruption of the Persian word ijj} Su^c, a monkey. See
Knox’s C^lon, pp. 49-50, who describes them as exceedingly daring and mischieToas.

2 B 2


188


CEYLON


posed of the leaves of trees , and he reclines upon a staff At his and
left hand are four monkies, with rods in their hands, all of which stand at
his head \vhene\er the leading monkey sits His wives and children are
daily brought in on these occasions, who sit down before him , then comes
a number of monkeys, which sit and form a sort of assembly about him
One of the four monkeys then addresses them, and they disperse After this
each of them comes with a *nut, a lemon, or some of the mountain fruit,
which he throws do^vn before the leader He then eats, together with his
wi\es, children, and the four principal monkeys, they then all disperse
One of the Jogees also told me, that he once saw the four monkeys standing
in the presence of the leader, and beating another monkey with rods , after
this they plucked off all his hair I was also told by respectable persons,
that if one of these monkeys happens to attack, and be too strong for a
young woman, he will ravish her

We next proceeded to the ^estuary of reeds, where rubies are also
found The next place we arrived at is known by* “The house of the
old woman,” which is the farthest inhabited part of the island of Ceylon
Our next stage was the cave of 'Baba Tahir, who was one of the pious
the next, the cave of 'Sibak, an infidel king, who retired to this place for
the purposes of devotion Here we saw the ‘fierce leech, which they call
the“zalaw It remains in trees, or m the grass near water When any
one comes near to it, it springs upon him, and the part of the body attacked
will bleed profusely People generally provide themselves with a lemon
for this occasion, which they squeeze over him, and then he drops off
The place upon which the leech has fastened they cut out with a wooden
knife made for that purpose

It IS told of a pilgrim who passed by this place, that a leech fastened
upon him, so that the skin swelled , and, as he did not squeeze the lemon
on him, the blood flowed out and he«died *

tiJ— Jl * jiilj III ''

“ jUi\ yiJi '


* Knox describes these leeches as being rather troublesome than dangerous his ivords are
“ There is a sort of leeches of tlie nature of ours, only diffenng in colour and bigness , for they
are of a dark reddish colour like the slim ofbacon, and as big as agoose quill, in length some
tn'o or three inches At first, when they are young, they are no bigger thau a horse>hair, so that


CEY-LON.


JS9


"We next came to a place called the ■'seven caves, and after this to the
-'ridge of Alexander, in vrhich is a cave and a -well of -vrater. At tMs
place is the 'entrance to the mountain. This mountain of Serendlb is one
of the highest in the vrorld : -vre sa-sv it from the sea at the distance of nine
days. When vre ascended it, vre saw the clouds passing- between us and
its foot. On it is a great number of trees, the leaves of which never fall.
There are also flowers of various colours, with the red rose,* about the size
of the palm of the hand, upon the leaves of which they thinl- they can
read the name of God and of his Prophet. There are two roads on the
mountain leading to the foot (of Adam) ; the one is known by “ the way of
Baba,” the other, by “ the way of Mama,” by which they mean Adam
and Eve. The way called that of Mama is easy : to it the travellers come
upon their first visiting the place ; but every one who has travelled only
upon this, is considered as if he had not made the pilgrimage at all. The
way named Baba is rough, and difficult of ascent. At the foot of the
mountain where the entrance is, there is a minaret named after Alexander,
and a fountain of water. The ancients have cut something like steps,
upon which one may ascend, and have fixed in iron pins, to which chains
are appended ;'f and upon these those who ascend take hold. Of these
chains there are ten in number, the last of which is termed ““ the chain
of witness,” because, when one has arrived at this, and looks down, the
frightful notion seizes him that he shall fall. After the tenth chain is the
cave of ^ Khizr, J in which there is a large space ; and at the entrance a


190


CEYLON.


■well of water,* full of fish, which is also called after his naroe Of those,
however, no one takes any Near this, and on each side of the path, is a
cistern cut m the rock In this cave of Khizr the pilgrims leave their
provisions, and whatever else they have, and then ascend about two miles
to the top of the mountain, to the place of (Adam’s) foot. The holy foot
(mark) is in a stone, so that its place is depressed The length of the
impression is eleven 'spans The Chinese came here at some former time,
and cut out from this stone the place of the great toe, together •with the
stone about it, and placed it m a temple in the city of Zaitun. and pil-
grimages are made to it from the most distant parts of Chma In the
rock, too, m which the impression of the foot is, there are nine excavations
which have been cut out into these the infidel pilgrims put gold, rubies,
and other jewels and hence you will see the Fakeers, who have come as
pilgrims to the well of Khizr, racing to get first to the excavations, m order
to obtain what may be in them We, however, found nothing but a little
gold with some rubies, which we gave to our guide.

It IS customary for the pilgrims to remain in the cave of Khizr for three
days, and during this time to visit the foot both morning and evening
This we did , and when the three days were expired we returned by the
path of Mama, and came down to the cave of Shisham, who is'Sheth,
the son of Adam After this we arrived at the-^fish port, then at the vil-
lage of ^Karkun, then at the village of ‘Dildinuh, then at the village of
‘At Kalanja, -where the tomb of ‘Abu Abd Allah Ibn Khafif is situated
All these villages and tilled lands are upon the mountain At its foot,
and near the path, is a ‘cypress, which is "large and never drops the leaf
But as to its leaves, there is no getting to them by any means , and these
people s heads are turned with some strange and false notions respecting

, ‘ ^ ^ 2 /" *
iioU ‘ iUI O-cyr . Arcvb till ’

still on the earth, but invisible Mr Hamaker, u hu notes on the “ Liber de expugnatione
Memphidiset Alexandria?, ’ has perhaps given the greatest and most authentic variety o*“ opinions
about him See pp 161 2 , with the aulbonues there oted, and the Katnoos, sub voce
which he has not noticed

* This IS, probably, the well mentioned by Fhdaletbes m his Additions to Knoxs Ceylon,
p 212


CEYLON.


191


them. I saw a number of Jogees about the tree, waiting for the falling of
one ; for they suppose that any person eating one of them, will grow
young again, however old he may be.* Beneath this mountain is the
great estuary at which the rubies are obtained; its water appears wonder-
fully blue to the eye.

From this place we proceeded, and in two days arrived at the city of
" Dinaur, which is large, and inhabited by merchants. In this is an idol,
known by the same name, placed in a large temple ; and in which there
are about a thousand Brahmins and Jogees, and five hundred young
women, daughters of the nobility of India, who sing and dance all night
before the image. The officers of the city revenue attend upon the image.
The idol is of gold, and as large as a man. In the place of eyes it has two
large rubies ; which, as I was told, shine in the night-time like two lighted
candles.

From this place we travelled to "Kali, which is a large toAvn; then to
^’Kolambu (Colombo), which is the finest and largest city in Serendib.
After three days we arrived at the city of ^Battala, from which we had
been sent by its king, with his servants, to visit (Adam’s) foot. This we
entered, and were received honourably by the king, who furnished us with
provisions.


<01^7 .JU"


*■ This is, probably, the Bagauhah, or god-tree of Knox, which, he says, “ is very great and
spreading ; they have a very great veneration for these trees, worshipping them upon a tradition
that the Buddou, a great god among them, when he was upon the earth, did use to sit under
this kind of trees.” It is held meritorious to plant them, which they say he that does, s/iafl die
tvilhin a short while after, and go to heaven. That is, as our traveller, perhaps, understood it,
shall be re-born into another and better state of being ; the Buddhists holding the metempsychosis.


192


HINDUSTAK.


CHAPTER XXI.


Return to the coast of Coromandel— Arrival at the palace GhlSth Oddln—Shori account of the
governors (f those parti — H'ar ii.tA the Hindus — The Hindu king lalen and slain— FciiaTt—
Different animals iept in the tame cage — Mataroh — Ghtalh Odiin diet— Succeeded it/ hu hro-

tier’s ton, Nustr Oddin — Fattan — Katrlam — ^inaur — Taken pnsonerlp the Hindus Kalikut—

Arrival at the I^Taldive ulandt — Bengal — SadtSman — Mountains of Kamrdi — The Sheiih
TeSnsJ — Miracles estnied to iim—Jainai: — Blue Riter — Satarkatian—Barahnahor— Pro-
duce— Character o/" Aepeople — Cudonts

After this, v?e sailed TiTth the vessel, which had vvaited for us, to the
Maabar districts But when we had made half the voyage, the wind
rose upon us, and we were near drowning We then cut down our mast,
and eierj moment expected death. Prondence, howe^e^, wtis fa\ourable
to us , for there came boats from the infidel inhabitants of the Maabar,
which brought us to land. I then told them, that I was the messenger of
their King, and that he was my relation , upon which they landed us, and
treated us very honourably. They wrote to the King on this, as I also did,
telling him what had happened. After three days came an Emir from the
Sultan, with a number of cavalry , for me they brought a palanquin and
ten horses, to carry me. We then set out for the presence of the King,
'^Ghldth Oddm El DamgSni, who at this time enjoyed the supreme power
in the Maabar districts. These parts formerly belonged to the Emperor of
Hindustan, the Sultan Jlohammed. They w ere then seized by the Shenf,
'Jalal Oddm Hasan Shah, who held them for five years After this he
appointed * Alai Oddm, one of his Emirs, as his successor, but he was
killed in a warlike excursion by an accidental arrow. After this, his
brother’s son, Kotb Oddin, came to the supreme rule; but he was killed, m
consequence of his bad conduct. After this, one of the Emirs of the Shenf
Jalal Oddm came into power, that is, this Ghlath Oddm, who married a
daughter of Jalal Oddin , the mother of which daughter was sister to my
wife when I was Judge m Dehli.

When I had got near his house, he sent one of his chamberlains to meet
me , and, when I entered, he received me graciously, and gave me a seat
He wTis at this time m his camp , so he erected three tents for me opposite


. itti


HINDUSTAN.


193


those of his Judge, "Sadar El Zamiln. He also sent me a carpet, provisions,
and presents.

This was a very warlike prince ; and as he happened to be in the neigh-
bourhood of an infidel, whose army amounted to one hundred and twenty
thousand men, an attempt was made to take these Maabar districts out of
the hands of the Mohammedans. This infidel prince accordingly made an
attack on the town of ^Kian, which belongs to the Maabar, and in which
there were six thousand soldiers, put them to the rout, and besieged it.
This was reported to the Sultan, and that the town was nearly lost. He
then marched out with his forces, which amounted to seven thousand, every
man of whom took off his turban, and hung it upon the neck of his horse,
which is, in India, an intimation that they are bent upon death. They
then made a charge upon the infidel king, while his men were taking their
mid-day repose and besieging ^'Kian, and put them to the rout. The
greater part of them was killed ; nor did one, except the cavalry, or those
who concealed themselves in the woods, escape. The Sultan was taken
prisoner, his wealth seized, himself afterwards killed, and I saw his body
hanging against a wall in the town.

I then left the King's station, until he should return from his expedi-
tion, and came to the.city of *Fattan, which is large and beautiful, and
situated upon the sea-shore. Its harbour is truly wonderful. In this city
there are grapes and good “pomegranates. I saw in this place the ^Sheikh
Salih Mohammed of Nisabur, one of the fanatical Fakeers who suffer
their hair to flow doAvn loosely upon their shoulders. This man had seven
foxes with him, all of Avhich ate and sat with the Fakeers. There were
also with him thirty other Fakeers, one of whom had a gazelle with a lion
in the same place, which was unmolested by the lion, I then proceeded
for the purpose of presenting myself to the Sultan at the city of “Maturah,
Avhich is large, and not unlike Dehli. In this I found a great mortality,
which had destroyed the greatest part of the inhabitants. The King,
Ghiath Oddln returned at this time to his palace sick, and soon after died.
He appointed his brother’s son, “^Nasir Oddln, to be his successor. In this


•

20"


194


HINDUSTAN


place, too, I caught a fever which nearly destroyed me , but, as Providence
restored me to health, I requested permission of the King Nasir Oddm to
proceed on my journey, which Avas granted I then returned to the city
of 'Fattan (Pattan), and tlience by sea to-'Kawlam, one of the cities of
Malabar, where I remained three months, on account of the sickness which
had happened to me From this place I set out to visit the Sultan ^ Jamal
Oddm of Hmaur, who bad received a promise from me to return The
infidel Hindoos, however, came out against us in twelve war vessels, be
tween (the last place mentioned and) *Fdkanun , and, giving us severe
battle, at length overcame us, and took our ship They then stripped us
of all From me they took all the jewels and rubies given me by the King
of ‘Battala, as well as the additional presents of the pious Sheikhs, leaving
me only one pair of trowsers and thus were we landed nearly naked I
then returned to ^ KMikut, and entered one of the mosques When some
of the lawyers and merchants, who had known me m Dehh, heard of my
situation, they clothed and received me honourably. I then thought of
returning to the Emperor of Hindustan but 1 was afraid of his seventy,
and that he might ask me, why I had separated from the present I then
went on board another ship, and this pleased me, and returned to the
^Maldive Islands, on account of the little boy 1 had left there When 1
had seen him, however, I left him m kindness to his mother The Vizier
then furnished me with provisions, and 1 sailed for "Bengal, which is an
extensive and plentiful country I never saw a country in which provi
sions were so cheap I there saw one of the religious of the west, who
told me, that he had bought provisions for himself and his family for a
whole year with eight dirhems The first town I entered here vvzis "Sad
kawan,* which is large and situated on the sea shore

it.'

” ihrsa) ” oo * tyilh ^

* The name of this place is Variously written in some cases we have Sutirkawan

in others according to onr MSS In the we have

It was, no doubt, the name of a place then in Bengal but whether it is still in existence or not
the geographers do not inform us We are told m the author just mentioned, that Mohammed
Shah made an expedition, in A H 741, A D 134(h to this place, and took Fakhr Oddm, the king


HINDUSTAN.


195


The king of Bengal was at this time “Fakhr Oddin : he was an eminent
man, kind to strangers and persons of the Sufi persuasion : but I did
not present myself to him, nor did I see him, because he was opposed to
the Emperor, and was then in open rebellion against him. FromJ’Sad-
kawan I travelled for the mountains of ’ Kamrii, which are at the distance
of one month from this place. These are extensive mountains, and they
join the ’'mountains of Thibet, where there are musk gazelles. The inhabi-
tants of these mountains are, like the Turks, famous for their attention to
'magic. My object in visiting these mountains was, to meet one of the
saints, namely, the Sheikh 'Jalal Oddin of Tebriz. This Sheikh was one
of the greatest saints, and one of those singular individuals who had the
power of working great and notable miracles. He had also lived to a
remarkably great age. He told me, that he had seen “ El Mostaasim the
Calif in Bagdad : and his companions told me afterwards that he died at
the age of one hundred and fifty years ; that he fasted through a space of
about forty years, never breaking his fast till he had fasted throughout ten
successive days. He had a cow, on the milk of which he usually break-
fasted ; and his practice was to sit up all night. It was by his means
that the people of these mountains became Mohammedans ; and on this
account it was, that he resided among them. One of his companions told
me, that on the day before his death he invited them all to come to him ;
he then said to them : To-morrow I depart from you, Deo volente, and my
vicegerent with you is God besides whom there is no other God. When
the evening of the following day had arrived, and he had performed the
last prostration of the evening prayer, he was taken by God. On the side
of the cave in Vhich he had resided was found a grave ready dug, and by
it a winding sheet and burial spices. The people then washed and buried
him in them, and said their prayers over him. When I was on my jour-


SI; W. * ■? 1.:^' JUr ^ ^ A" "

mentioned by our traveller, prisoner, carried him to Laknouti, and there put him to death.
The words are

. J . There must be a trifling error in one or

both of these dates.


2 C2


19G


HINDUSTAN.


ney to see this Sheikh, four of his companions met me at the distance of
two days, and told me, that the Sheikh had said to the Fakeers who were
with them, A western religious traveller is coming to you . go out and
meet him. It was, said they, by the order of the Sheikh that we came
to you , notwithstanding the fact, that he had no knowledge whatei er of
my circumstances, except what he had by dnme revelation. I went with
them accordingly to his cell without the cave, near which there was no
building whatever. The people of this country are partly Mohammedans,
and partly infidels , both of whom visit the Sheikh and bring valuable
presents On these the Fakeers, and other persons who arrne here,
subsist As for the Sheikh himself, he confines himself to the milk of his
cow, as already mentioned "When 1 presented myself to him, he arose
and embraced me. He then asked me of my country and travels, of which I
informed him He then said to the Fakeers: Treat him honourably They
accordingly carried me to the cell, and kept me as their guest for three
days On the day I presented myself to the Sheikh he had on a reli*
gious 'garment, made of fine goat's hair I was astonished at it, and said
to myself, I wish the Sheikh would give it me. When I went in to bid him
farew ell, he arose and went to the side of the cave, took off the goat a
hair garment, as well as the fillet of his head and his sleeves, and put
them on me

The Fakeers then told me, that it was not his practice to put on this
garment • and that he had put it on only on the occasion of ray coming,
for he had said to them • This garment will be wished for by a Mogrebine ,
but an infidel king shall take it from him, and shall give it to our brother
^ Borhan Oddin of Sagirj , whose it is, and for whose use it has been made
Whe.0. 1 •vK^s. toJ/i thw by ttje Fakeoca, I sa.vi . Aa I haxe, a. ftciro.

the Sheikh, and as he has clothed me with his oivn clothes, I will never
enter with them into the presence of any king either infidel or Moslem

After this I left the Sheikh It happened, however, after a considera-
ble time, that I entered the country of China, and went as far as the city
of 'Khansa. Upon a certain occasion, when my companions had all left
me on account of the press of the multitude, and I had this garment on, and


Lj'Xt’


HINDUSTAN.


197


was on the road, I met the Vizier with a large body. He happened
to cast his eyes upon me, and called me to him. He then took me by the
hand, and asked me why I had come to this country; nor did he leave me
until we came to the King’s palace. I wished to go, but he would not
allow me to do so, but took me in to the King, who interrogated me about the
Mohammedan sovereigns; to all which I gave answers. He then cast his
eyes upon the garment, and began to praise it, and said to the Vizier :
Take it off him. To this I could offer no resistance, so he took it; but
ordered me ten dresses of honour, and a horse with its furniture, and
money for my necessities. This changed my mind. I then called to mind
the words of the Sheikh, that an infidel king should take it; and my won-
der was increased.

After a year had elapsed, I entered the palace of the King of China at
“Khan Biilik,* my object was to visit the cell of the Sheikh Borhan Oddin
of Sagirj. I did so, and found him reading, and the very goat’s-hair gar-
ment I have been mentioning was on him. I was surprised at this, and
was turning the garment over in my hand, when he said. Why do you turn
the garment over, do you know it ? I said, I do ; it is the garment which
the King of Khansa took from me. He answered : This garment was made
for me by my brother Jalal Oddin, for my own use, who also wrote to me
to say that the garment would come to me by such a person. He then
produced the letter, which I read, and could not help wondering at the
exactness of the Sheikh. I then told him of the origin of the story. He
answered. My brother Jalal Oddin was superior to all this : he had a perfect
control over human nature ; •)■ but now he has been taken to God’s mercy.
He then said, I have been told, that he performed the morning prayer every
day in Mecca; that he went on the pilgrimage annually, because he was
never to be seen on the two days of ^Arafat and the feast, no one knowing
whither he had gone.

When, however, I had bid farewell to the Sheikh Jalal Oddin, I travelled
to the city of “Jabnak, which is very large and beautiful ; it is divided by

• i}h=r ' • ’’ •

* Cambalu, or Pekin, as will be she^vn hereafter.

f ti I— j/ajy See the note at page 64.


198


HINDUSTAN


the river which descends from the mountains of Kamru, called the ‘^Blue
River By this one may travel to Bengal and the countries of 'Laknouti
Upon It are gardens, mills, and villages, which it refreshes and gladdens
like the Nile of Eg 3 Tit The inhabitants of these parts are infidels, tribu-
tary to the Mohammedans By this nver I travelled for fifteen days, pro-
ceeding from road to road, till I came to the city of-^Sutirkavvan * Here I
found a junk, which was proceeding to^Java (Sumatra), between which
and this place there is a distance of forty days I proceeded, therefore,
and after a v oyage of fifty days, came to the countries of the * Barahnakarjt
a people who have mouths like those of dogs This is a vile race They
have no religion, neither that of the Hindoos nor any other They live m
houses made of reeds upon the sea shore Their trees are those of the ‘ba
nana, the fawfel and the * betel nut Their men are of the same form with
ourselves, except that their mouths are like those of dogs but the women
have mouths like other folks The men go naked, without the least cover
ing whatever one only among them (1 saw) who had put his vinlia into a
painted hollow reed, which was hung to his belly The women cover them-
selves with the leaves of trees Ono who had had much intercourse with them,
told me that they copulate like beasts, without the least concealment
The men will have thirty or more wives , but adultery is not committed
Should any one, however, be convicted of this crime, his punishment is, to
be hanged till he is dead, unless he brings either a friend or slave who is
willing to be hanged for him he may then go free The sentence for the
woman is, that the King shall command all his servants to trample upon

Jy)l> ^,11 ■

* See the note al p 194

t Neatest in sound to this, as far as I can see, appears to he the Camacobar of our maps
but then we must by rather a violent metathesis make the k and b change places, and other
wise vaiy the orthography. The descnplion, however, seems to answer sufficiently near to
suit the inhabitants of the Nicobar islands, of which this i$ one if, indeed our Barahnahor i»
pot the Barnagul or Bamagar of Hamilton, chap xxxiv , but this seems scarcely possible

^ Among some of the inhabitants of the Eastern Archipelago, I believe tliey have a custom
of making their hps project outwards bymransof a stick so fixed m their teeth as always to
keep Its place Not long ago a family thus disfigur^ was exhibited in London


INDIAN ARCHIPELAGO.


199


her one after another, till she dies : she is then thro^vn into the sea. The
women resist the men to a degree beyond their nature. But the men, from
their baseness of character, and fear about the women, will not allow any
one of the merchants to proceed on the sea in the front of their houses.
They will merely consult and trade with them, carrying them fresh water
on the backs of elephants. When we put into their port, their King came
to us riding upon an elephant, upon which there was something like a
saddle-cloth made of skin. The King himself was dressed in goat-skin,
the hairy part of which he had turned outwards ; upon his head was a
turban of coloured silk, and in his hand a short silver spear. With him
was a number of his relations riding upon elephants, and using a language
which no one could understand, unless he had been some time among
them. We sent him the usual present : for every ship putting into any
port of India is expected to send a present to the magistrate of the place.
Now these people buy and receive as presents, she elephants, over which
they put their saddle-cloth, but do not completely ” clothe them. But any
ship not giving them their present, they will so work upon with their magic,
that the sea will rise upon it, and it will perish ; or they will return upon
and injure it.


CHAPTER XXII.

Arrival at Sumatra — Fruits — Currency — City of Sumatra — Introduction to the King — Royal
bounty — Religion — Shifa sect of Mohammedans — Provisions for a voyage to China — Arrival at
Java — Natural productions — Camphor — Cloves — Aloes — Frankincense — Superstitious custom for
the production tf good Camphor — Description of Nutmeg — Mace — Arrival at Kakida — Customs
in Java — Voyage in the Pacific — Arrival at the country of Tawalisi — Warlike character oj
its inhabitants; and of the Women in particular — Kailiika — Reigning Queen — Apparently of
Turkish extraction — Regiment of Women.

We then left this place, and in fifteen days arrived at the island of "Java,
the place from which the “incense of Java receives its name.* This is a


* We are told in Crawford’s History of the Islands of the Indian Archipelago, vol. i. p. •‘>17,
&c. that the frankincense or benzoin is produced only in Sumatra and Borneo, and (p. 516) that


200


SUMATRA


green and blooming island The greater part of its trees are, the cocoa, the
fawfel, and the betel nut, clo%es, the Indian aloe, the ^shaki, the ^baran-
saki (barki^),* grapes, the sweet orange, and the camphor reed The in
habitants traffic with pieces of tm and gold, not melted, but in the ore
(as com) They have not many nch perfumes More of these are to be
found in the countries of the mfidels (Hindoos perhaps) Nor are there
many m the Mohammedan countries

When we had arrived at the shores of this place we put into the port,
which IS a small ullage, in •which there are some houses, as well as maga-
zines for the merchants , and from this the city of 'Sumatra-t is at the di*:-
tance of four miles At that place resides the King When we had got
into port the magistrate of the place vrrote to the King, informing him
of my arrival, who sent one of his nobles, and the judge who attended the
presence, to meet me With them was sent one of the King s own saddle
horses for myself, and other horses for my companions I mounted, there
fore, and set out for Sumatra The King, at that time, was'El Malik
El Zahir JamTil Oddtn, one of the most eminent and generous of princes
of the sect of Sh ida, and a loier of the professors of Mohammedan law
The learned are admitted to his societj, and hold free converse with him,
while he proposes questions for their discussion lie is a great hero for the

faith , and so humble, that he walks to his prayers on the Friday He is
too strong for his infidel neighbours, they therefore pay tribute to him
The inhabitants of his districts are of the sect of Shafia , and they attend

the camphor is found only in the same places i( we except Japan In another part of his
work \ol II p 481 &c we find that no Mohammedan prince reigned in Java so early as the
times of our traveller and tram the mention of Sumatra in our next paragraph, it seems rea
sonable to conclude that the Java here mentioned must be Sumatra A 1 ttle farther on we have
some account of Mul Java (ijU- J^) which must be the Java of our maps See also the
H stoire des Mongols tom i p 612—13 note Mr Marsden tells us, Hist Sumat., p 148
that the camphor is produced in Sumatra only

* These have already been described as growing in Hmdustan, see p 105, where a passage is
adduced from Mr Crawfurd to shew that they are also produced in these islands

f Sometimes written m our MS 3^^ ShvmtilraA

J See History of the Indian Archipelago vol 11 pp 304-13


SUMATRA.


201


him willingly on his warlike expeditions. When I came to his residence,
his Viceroy met me in an obliging manner, bringing with him dresses of
honour,* which he put upon me and upon my companions. They then
brought us victuals, with the fawfel-nut and betel-leaf. After this, I
returned to the lodgings which they had prepared for me in a garden, and-
had completely furnished with couches, and every necessary utensil. Morn-
ing and evening they brought us the tamarisk and other fruits from the
Vizier. On the third day, which was the Friday, they told me that the
King was coming to the mosque, and that my first interview with him
would be there. I accordingly went thither; and at last the Sultan came.
I saluted him ; he then took me by the hand, and asked me of the King of
India, and of my travels ; and I answered him accordingly. After prayers
he sat and discussed religious questions with the professors of divinity,
being dressed as they were, until the evening. This is his and their usual
practice ; nor does he ever come to the mosque, except in the garb of a
^professor of divinity. When the evening is past, he enters a vestry in the
mosque, and there changes his robes for those of royalty, with an upper
garment of richly embroidered silk. He then rides to his residence.

I remained partaking of his hospitality for fifteen days, and then requested
permission to pursue my journey to China : a thing which he is not always
prepared to grant. He gave me permission, however, and fitted me out
with provisions, fruit, and money. May God reward him. He also put me
on board a junk bound for China.

I then proceeded for one and twenty days through his dominions, after
which we arrived at the city of “Mul Java,! which is the first part of the
territories of the infidels. The extent of these territories is that of two
months’ journey. In these is found almost every sort of perfume. They pro-
duce the "'aloe, the ^kakuli, and the 'kamari, “Kakula and ''Kamara being
situated in these countries.J But in the territories of ‘‘El Malik El Zahir

t This is, no doubt, the Java of our maps.

t See notes to page 184. Mr. Crawfurd, in his History of the Indian Archipelago, vol. i. p.
519, says, speaking of the lignum aloes, “ if it be a native- of the Indian islands, the countries

2 D


202


JAVA


m Java, there is only the frankincense of Java, camphor, some cloves, and
Indian aloes But we will now say what perfumes we ourselves witnessed,
in the territories both of the Moslems and the infidels Of this is the ‘‘frank-
incense, the tree of which is small, and about the height of a man its
branches are like those of the 'artichoke The leaves are small and thin ,
and the incense is a gum which is formed in the branches More of this,
however, is found in the territories of the Mohammedans than in those of
the infidels. As to the camphor, its tree isa-^reed, like the ^ reed of our
own countries, except only that it is thicker, and the knots are longer The
camphor is formed within it and when the reed is broken, both camphor
and myrrh are found within the knot, and of the same form with it • But
the camphor will not form within the reed until some animal be sacrificed
at the root The best camphor is exceedingly cooling, and one dram of it
will kill by bringing on suffocation This is called with them the *Khar-


wluch produce it liavc sot yet been lucertained ' In Abu Zeid El Hasan't Coacnentaty os the
two Arab Irarellers traniUted byUensudot, (hie place » termed the " country of Komar,
from whence, it is said, they brin^ the wood aloes CAlled aX ioman —Pinkerton s Voyages,
dc VOl VII p ZOS

* I have <ome doubts whether this » correctly translated The passage stands thus
^ A«-asl| I jb It appears to me very pro-

bable that some mistaken account of tbe camphor reed or tree, as it » here called, gave rise
to Dr Darwin s extravagant story of the upas tree of Java Avicenna thus describes it (p 189)
lsL.^1 jSj ^ Ls^y

d—Jl j Si IfJl tl'-y Sj AtJbj bdj w , ^JLi Jb <0,^

4 5;^^' «» U jjii ^ jjs , dc “Of the camphor there are

various sorts, tbe Elkansuri the Ruji, m the next place the Azad, the Aspharak, and tbe
Azrak It is mixed with its wood, and is extracted by being sublimed Some say that its tree
13 large, and will shade many meu The leopard u found near it People do sot go near it
except at a certain time of the year This is vrhat some think This tree grows in parts of
China Dr Darwin tells us that criminals are employed to get the gum, and that they can get
it only when the wind u in certain quarters Kow, if there is a superstitious behef that men
must be sacrificed m order to produce the camphor, it i$ probable that criminals are selected
for that purpose and if the tree can be frequented only at certain times of the year, on account
of the wild beasts, this may have furnished the other port of the story , but, as the Arabs saj
on occasions like this, aJJlj hut God hums best.


JAVA.


203


dana ; it is that, at the roots of which a man has been sacrificed. Young
elephants, however, are sometimes sacrificed instead of a man.* As to the
Indian ‘aloe, its tree resembles that of the •'oak, except only that its bark
is thin. Its leaves are like those of the oak, but it has no fruit ; nor does
the tree grow large. Its roots are long and extended, and are scented
within. The leaves and trunk, however, have no perfume within them.
Among the Moslems this tree is considered property; but, among the
infidels, the greatest part of it is not so considered. That which is private
property is found at Kakula, and is the best sort. This they sell to the
inhabitants of Java for clothing. Of the Kamarl species, some is soft
enough to receive an impression like wax. With regard to the ‘ Atas, when
one cuts off any of its roots, and buries it in the earth for some months,
none of its strength will be lost : this is the most wonderful property of it.
As to the clove, it is a thick and high tree. It is found in greater numbers
in the countries of the infidels than of the Moslems. It is not claimed as
property, on account of its great abundance. That part of it which is taken
into different countries is the "Idiin (wood)t What is called the "flowers
of the clove in our countries, is that which drops from its blossom, and is
like the blossom of the orange. The fruit of the clove is the "nutmeg,
which is known by ^ the scented nut ; the bark which forms upon it is the
’mace.J All that has here been related, I saw with my own eyes.

al. .ri-L-* .UJi-''

. ^ J ^ • \y jy>- ° ■ "


* The MSS. differ in this place ; the only one which is intelligible gives it thus: yt)

j\xJi\ 3^1 cJSi (•'i-c I* Ju j ^ Mr. Crawfurd, however, describes

the tree as being very large, just as Avicenna has done. See his History of the Indian Archi-
pelago, vol. i. p. 515, iii. p. ^IS.

f It is said in a note in the margin of one of the MSS. Cilo JjJ J|*il

“til

t El Basbasa, of which our word mace is no doubt a corruption. Mr. Crawfurd describes
the nutmeg-tree as resembling that of the clove (vol. i. p. 503), and hence, perhaps, our traveller
has been mistaken. “ Appearing through the interstices of the mace,” says Mr. Crawfurd, “ is
the nutmeg, which is loosely enclosed in a thin shell of a black glossy appearance, not difficultly
broken ”—P. 504', ib.


2 D 2


204


JAVA


From this place we ^\ent on to the port of '"Kakula it is a beautiful city
surrounded with a stone wall of such a breadth, that three elephants may
walk abreast upon it The first thing I saw upon its shores was the wood
of the Indian aloe, placed upon the backs of elephants , this they lay up
\n their houses, just as we do fire wood, except that it is cheaper among
them The merchants will purchase a whole elephant-load of it for one
cotton dress, which is, with these people, more precious than silk * Ele-
phants are m very great abundance here, and are used for riding and burden
Each man ties his elephant to his door The shopkeepers tie them to
their shops , and in the enmg they will nde out, purchase, and bnno-
home, any thing they may want, upon them This is the custom of all the
people of China and ’ Khot i

The King of 'Mul JTwat an infidel I w’ns introduced to him without
his palace, he nas then sitting on the bare ground, and his nobles uere
standing before him His troops are presented before him on foot, no one
m these parts having a horse except the King, for they nde on elephants
generally The King, on this occasion, called me to him, and I went He
then ordered a carpet to be spread for me to sit upon I said to his inter-
preter, how can I sit upon a carpet, while the Sultan sits upon the ground’'
He answered This is his custom, and he practises it for the sake of humi
hty but you are a guest , and, besides, you come from a great Pnnee
It is, therefore, right that you should be distinguished I then sat, and
he asked me about the King Jamal Oddin, to which I gave suitable replies
He then said You are now ray guest for three dajs , you may then return
I one day saw, in the assembly of tins pnnee, a man with a knife m his
hand, which he placed upon bis own neck, he then made a Jong speech,
not a word of which I could understand , he then firmly grasped the
knife, and its sharpness and the force with which he urged it were such, that
he severed his head from his body, and it fell on the ground + 1 was wonder-

SjW- tk* * Uasllj ' ibli '

* According lo Mr Crawford, China at thia Ume aSbrd& one of the best marbets for cotton
in the world ->Vol iii p S50, Ac.

It appears from Mr Crawford a work, Tol n p 481, Ac that the reigmng princes of Java
roust have been Pagans at this time

t A similar act is recorded by Mr Ctawfiird, but ascribed to a diSerent cause, vol i.p 41
‘ About ten years ago, says he, ‘ the son of a chief of the province of Jipang, possessed


JAVA.


205


ing much at the circumstance, when the King said to me : Does any among
you do such a thing as this? I answered, I never saw one do so. He
smiled, and said : These our servants do so, out of their love to us. He then
ordered the body to be taken up and burnt. He next went out in proces-
sion to the burning, in front of his prime minister, the rest of his nobles, his
army, and the peasantry ; and on this occasion he made provision for the
family and relations of the deceased, whose memory is greatly honoured in
consequence of this act. One who had been present at the assembly, told
me that the speech he made was a declaration of his love to the Sultan,
and that on this account he had killed himself, just as his father had done
for the father of the present King, and his grandfather for the King’s grand-
father. I then returned ; but was sent for by the King, to be his guest for
the three days. After this I proceeded by sea ; and after a voyage of four
and thirty days, came into the “ calm,” that is, the still, “ sea.” It has a
red appearance, which is thought to be occasioned by the lands near it.
This sea has neither wind, wave, nor motion, notwithstanding its extent.
It is on account of the calm state of this sea, that three other vessels are
attached to each of the Chinese junks, by which these junks, together with
their own cargoes, are carried forward by oars..* Of these there are twenty
large ones, which may be compared to the masts of ships. To each oar
thirty men are appointed, and stand in two rows. By this means they
draw the junks along, being connected by strong ropes like ^cables.
This sea we passed in seven and thirty days, which we did with the greatest


with a belief of his own invulnerability, put the matter to the test, and drawing his kris, killed
himself on the spot.”

* The MSS. have here, as well as in the former description given of these vessels.

From the description here given of this sea, there can be no doubt that it received its name
from the Arabian merchants (t. e. the still sea) for the same reason that Magellan called it the
Pacific. What the island was at which our traveller touched, it is impossible to say with
certaintj'. I suppose, however, it might have been that of the Celebes, as the distance and
situation seems sufficiently to answer the time and description of his voyage. Of the word
Taw'allsl I can make nothing, because, as this seems to have heen the name of the king then
reigning, that name may have died with him. I leave it to others, however, to determine what
place this is.


206


TAWALISL


^ase We then came to the country of ^Tawllisi, which is thus named
after its King, as is also his whole country It is extensive , and the King
will oppose the Empeior of China. He possesses a great number of junks ,
and with these he will fight the Chinese, until they offer conditions of
peace The people are all idolaters, handsome in appearance, and re
sembling the Turks They are much inclined to a copper colour They
have great bravery and strength Their women ride on horseback, they
excel m throwng the javelin, and will fight like men in battle We put
into one of their ports which is near ’Kailuka, one of their largest and
most beautiful cities The magistrate of this place is a daughter of the
King “Wahl Arduja

She sent for the persona who were m the ship, and entertained them ,
and when she was informed of my being there, she also sent for me I
went to her, and saw her upon the throne of government Before her were
her women with papers m their hands on the affairs of state, which they
presented to her She saluted and welcomed me m Turkish , she then
called for ink and paper in my presence, and wrote with her own hand the
^Bismilla, and shewed it to me She then inquired about the countries
1 had seen, and of these I gave her suitable information She said, I
wonder at the great wealth of India but, I must conquer it for myself
She then ordered me some dresses with money and provisions for my
journey, and treated me with great politeness

I was told that in the army of this Queen there is a regiment of women,
who fight with her like men that she made war upon a certain king, who
was her enemy , and that, when her army was near being put to the rout,
she made so furious an onset upon the king with her regiment, that she
overcame him, put him to death, and routed lus whole force She then
took possession of all he had, and brought the slaughtered king’s head to
her father, who accordingly gave her the gov emment of these parts The
neighbouring princes have made her offers of marriage, which she has
refused to accept, except on one condition only, namely, that such person
shall overcome her in the tournament Of this, however, they have always
been afraid, dreading the reproach of being vanquished by her


CHINA.


207


CHAPTER XXIII.

Arrival in China — Its great River: its course — Culture — Population — Plenty — Porcelain —
Idolaters — Reigning Monarch a descendant of Jengiz Khan — Mohammedan Colleges, S^c.

Luxury of the Chinese — Wealth — Paper Money — Revenue — How the Porcelain is made —

Skill of Chinese Artificers — Painters — Pictures f Travellers — Registry of Ships' Crews — Care
taken of Merchants’ Property at Inns, S^c. — Female Slaves cheap — Inns subject to the Magistrate

77^2 Port El Zaitun — Meets an Officer of the Emperor of Dehli — Provided with a House,

Sets out to visit the King — Sin Kilan — Mohammedan Town — Meets with a Jogee ; return

to El Zaitun — Arrives at Fanjarfur : Decription of it — Bairam Katlu — El Khansa — Jews and
Christians here — Jugglers — The Khan killed in battle — Funeral — Successor — Disaffection —
Return.

\Ye then left the countries of ‘TiallsT, and arrived, after a voyage of
seven days ■with a favourable wind, at the first of the Chinese provinces.
This is a most extensive country, and abounds in good things (of every
description) fruits, agriculture, gold, and silver : and in these it is without
a parallel. It is divided by a river called the “^water of life. It is also
called the 'river of Sibar,* like the name of a river in India. It has its rise
in the mountains which are in the neighbourhood of the city-^Khan Balik,t

* This river, according to the lexicon of Baudrandius cited by Asseman, is called “ Flu-
vius Caramoranus.”

f This is, as Asseman has shetvn (Biblioth. Oriental, tom. Hi. P. II. p. 512-13) the Cambalu
of Marco Polo, and the Pekin of the Chinese. At this place, according to a citation made by
Nicolaus Trigautius, from the Commentaries of Mathseus Ricius, was the usual residence of the
Tartar Khans, after they had obtained the supreme power in China. Our traveller, as we
shall presently see, also makes this place the residence of the Emperor in his times. The
extract is as follows : “ Hoc nostrorum in hanc urbem regiam (Pekinum) adventu constare
denique certo ccepit, quod jamdiu opinati fuerant, hoc regnum illud ipsum esse, quod magnum
Chatajum apud reliquos auctores appellatur, et hanc urbem Pechinensem regiam esse illius,
quem magnum Can vocant, qui nunc est rex Sinarum, quae urbs ah iisdem Cambalu nominatur...
Sins quippe scriptis libris queries Tartaros nominabant, Lu dicunt, et septentrionis plagam Pa,
nec solum Pe. Tartaris vero Cam, a nobis magnus redditur: quam vocem ne ipsi quideni Sinae
ignorant : et quoniam eo tempore, quo se Tartar! in Sinarum regnum intruserunt, rex Tartarus
sedem Pechini fixit, ideo Campalu appellabit ; et quoniam apud varies p consonans in h com-
mutatur, ideo Cambalu coepit appellari.” And, in the next page, “ Apud Aytonum in lib. de
Tartaris, cap. 19. Jons appellari his verbis : Iste Cobila Can quadraginta duobus annis tenuit
imperium Tartarorum ; Christianus fuit, et fundavit civitatem qum vocatur Jons in regno


CHINA


20 «^

called the « mountain of the apes It then proceeds through the middle of
China, for a distance of six months, until it passes by Sm El Sm, both
banks of which are co\ered with villages and farms, just like the Nile of
except that this is much more populous In China grows the
sugar-cane, and is much better than th'vt of Egypt ill] the fruits of our
countries are found m China, but they are much more plentiful and cheap
than they are with us

As to the China earthenware it is made only in the districts of El
Zaitun, and '‘Sm Kikn It is made of earth of the mountains of those
parts, which is burnt through like charcoal To this they add a stone
«hieh they keep in the fire for three days They then pour water upon it
and It becomes like dust it is then fermented for some days the best of
it, for fi\e and thirty days , that which is inferior, for fifteen, ten, or fewer
Of tins ware, some is transported to other countries The Chinese hen is
large, but the cock is stiH larger, and greater than (our) goose its eggs
are proportionately large

The Chinese are all infidels they worship images, and burn their dead
just like the Hindoos The King of China is a Tartar, and one of the
descendants of Jengiz Kh in, who entered the Mohammedan countries,
and desolated many of them In all the Chinese piovmces, there ig a
tONvn for the 3Iohammedans, and m this they reside They also ha>e cells
colleges, and mosques, and are made much of by the Kings of China
The Chinese, generally, will eat the flesh of dogs and swine, both of which
are sold in their markets They are much addicted to the comforts and
pleasures of life but they do not much differ, either m their luxuries or
their dress for you will see one of their merchants, whose wealth is almost
immense, clothed m the coarsest cotton The only difference generally
observable among the inhabitants of China, consists m the gold and silver
phte which they se^eraIlJ possess In the hand of every one of them is


Call ay fiuje major est Roma ut d citur et iq ilia a«tate morom traxit Cohila Can Imperalor
Tartarorum ustjue ad ultimam d em vit« suae Asseman adds that Cobila renewed rather than
rep3 red this city, and then c tes Marco Polo to slietr that the Kan resided here and that the
city was s tuated upon the great tiver


CHINA.


209


a '‘staff, upon which he supports himself in walking; and this they call
the third leg.

Silk is most plentiful among them, for the silkworm is found sticking
and feeding upon the trees in all their districts ; and hence they make
their silk, which is the clothing of the poorest among them. Were it not
for the merchants, it would bring no price whatever, and still, a cotton
dress will purchase many silken ones.

It is a custom with their merchants, for one to melt down all the gold and
silver he may have, into pieces, each of which will weigh a talent or more,
and to lay this up over the door of his house. Any one who happens to have
five such pieces will put a ring upon his finger; if he have ten, he will
put on two. He who possesses fifteen such, is named 'El Sashi ; and the
piece itself they call a ” Rakala. Their transactions are carried on with
paper : they do not buy or sell either with the dirhem or the dinar ; but,
should any one get any of these into his possession, he would melt them
down into pieces. As to the paper, every piece of it is in extent about
the measure of the palm of the hand, and is stamped with the King’s
stamp. Five and twenty of such notes are termed a "shat; which means
the same thing as a dinar with us. But when these papers happen to be
torn, or worn out by use, they are carried to their house, which is just like
the mint with us, and new ones are given in place of them by the King.
This is done without interest; the profit arising from their circulation
accruing to the King. When any one goes to the market with a dinar or
a dirhem in his hand, no one will take it until it has been changed for
these notes.

With respect to the earth which they lay up, it is mere tempered clay,
like the dry clay with us. It is carried upon elephants, and then cut into
pieces just like charcoal ; they then harden it with fire, but in a more
intense heat than that of charcoal. When it is reduced to ashes they
knead it with water, dry it, and again burn it in the same manner, until
the particles entirely disappear. Of this they make the china vessels, as
we have formerly stated. The people of China are, in other respects, the
most skilful artificers. In painting, none come near to them. Of what I


.^ 1 '


2 E


210


CHINA


myself witnessed was the following I once scarcely entered one of their
cities some time after, I had occasion again to visit it, and what should I
see upon its walls, and upon papers stuck up in the streets, but pictures of
myself and my companions 1 This is constantly done with all who pass
through their towns And should any such stranger do any thing to make
flight necessary, they would then send out his picture to the other pro
Vinces, and wherever he might happen to be, he would be taken

It IS also a practice with them, that when a vessel leaves China, an
account, as well of the names, as of the forms of the men m it, is taken
and laid up When the vessel returns, the servants of the magistrates
board it, and compare the persons m it with the descriptions taken , and
if one should happen to be missing, the commander of the vessel is taken,
unless he can prove that the man has died by some sickness or other cir
cumstance, or that he has left him, with his own consent, m some other of
the Chinese provinces After this, they require of the commander a regis
ter of all the goods in the vessel, which they obtain The people of the
vessel then leave it, and the King’s servants take possession of, and clear
it, and if they find any thing m it not entered m the register, the vessel,
together with its freightage, is forfeited to the King This is a species of
oppression which I witnessed no where else
When any Mohammedan merchant visits those Mohammedan towns
which are among the Chinese, it is left to his choice whether he will lake
up his lodgings with a native merchant, or whether he will go to an *inn
If he prefers lodging with a merchant, an account of all he has is taken, and
the native merchant is made surety for the amount, who spends upon his
guest just as much as is proper When the foreign merchant wishes to go,
an inquiry is set on foot with respect to his property, and if any thing is
found to have been made away with, the merchant who was made surety
makes it good by fine But should the stranger prefer going to an inn,
his property is delivered up to the inn-keeper, who is made surety for it
He then expends what is necessary upon him, and this is put down to
account When he wishes to leave, an account of the property is taken, and
should any thing be missing, the mn-keeper who is surety is forced to


CHINA.


211


make it good. If however, he wishes to have a concubine, he may buy a
female slave and reside with her in the inn. Female slaves are very cheap
in China ; because the inhabitants consider it no crime to sell their chil-
dren, both male and female. They do not, however, force them to travel
with their purchasers ; nor, on the other hand, do they hinder them from
doing so, should they prefer it. In like manner, if one wishes to marry, he
may do so ; but, in any case, he is not allowed wantonly to destroy his own
property : for they say, we are unwilling that it should be reported among
the Mahommedans, that our country is a place of wantonness and profligacy ;
or, that merchants lose their wealth among us.

The care they take of travellers among them is truly surprising ; and
hence their country is to travellers the best and the safest : for here a man
may travel alone for nine months together, with a great quantity of wealth,
without the least fear. The reason of this is, there is in every district an
inn, over which the magistrate of the place has control. Every evening the
magistrate comes with his secretary to the inn, and registers in a book the
names of all the inmates who are strangers : he then locks them up. In
the morning he comes again with his secretary, and compares the name
written down, with the person of every one in the inn. The register so
made out he sends by a messenger to the presiding magistrate at the next
station : from whom he also brings back vouchers that such and such persons
have safely arrived with their property. This is done at every station.
When any person happens to be lost, or any thing is stolen, and this is
discovered, the magistrate who has the control over the inn in which the
loss is sustained, is taken into custody on that account. In all the inns
every thing that a traveller can want is provided.

The first city I came to in China was ^ El Zaitun ; there are, however, no
olives here,* nor indeed in all China or India ; this is merely the name of
the place. It is a large city, and in it they make the best flowered and


* As this word in Arabic signifies the olive, the writer, perhaps, thought it necessary to
warn his reader against mistaking it. The longitude and latitude of this place are according to
Abulfeda 114° 8', 17° 8'. Mr. Apetz thinks it is tlte same with the “ Saunt yo Tawn,’’ men-
tioned in Lord Macartney’s voyage.


2 E 2


212


CHINA


coloured silks,* as^\eIl as satms, vrhicb are therefore preferred to those
made m other places Its port is one of the finest in the world I saw m
it about one hundred large junks, the small vessels were innumerable It
IS a large estuarj of the sea, running into the land until it meets the great
mer In this, and other Chinese towns, each inhabitant has a garden and
some land, in the centre of which is his house , and on this account it is
that their cities are so large 'I'

On the day of my arrival at this place, I saw the Emir who had been
sent ambassador to the Emperor of Indin, and who returned with us (to
Malabar) when the junk foundered and went down, he, however, escaped
with his life He told the officer of the Pivvan of me, who placed me in a
very handsome house I was afterwards visited in this by the Mohamme
dan judge, the Sheikh El Islam, and a number of the Mohammedan mer
chants, who treated me with great respect, and made a feast for me, These
merchants are, on account of their residing m an infidel country, extremely
glad whenever a Mohammedan comes among them on such occasions
they give him alms of their wealth, so that he returns rich like themselves

■VVTien the magistrate of the city heard of my arrival, he wrote imme
diately to the Khan, who is their Emperor, to acquaint him of my having
come from India I requested of him, however, that he would send a
person to bring me to < Sm Kilan, to the Emir of that place, until he should
receive the Khan s answer To this the magistrate agreed, and sent a person
with me, who conducted me to him I embarked, therefore, in a vessel on
the river, and made a voyage of twenty seven days, in each of which we
put into some village about noon, bought what we happened to want, then
said our prayers, and proceeded on m the evening On the next this was

* As the word here used, ti* Ue*^i does not occur m the common diet ooar es it may not be
amiss to gire an explanation of it The fellowiDg » taken from the King of Oude s Persian
Dictionary, entitled theSeven Seas ^

I e kimkha, &c meaning a flowered garment, whtdi they weave with various colours When
pronounced kamkha it means a flowered garment of colour only

+ Such seems to have been ancient Babylon, v»»th us hwgitig gardens and graz ng lands
See Rennell s Geography of Herodotus


repeated, and so on till we got to Sin Kllan. At this place, as well as El
Zaitun, the earthenware is made : at the latter of which, the river called
the ’'water of life enters the sea; and which they, therefore, call the 'con-
junction of two seas.

This Sin Kllan is one of their greatest and best formed cities. In the
middle of it is a great temple, which was built by one of their kings. This
lie endowed with the revenue of the city and of the surrounding villages.
In this are apartments for the sick, the aged, the blind, and the great
Fakeer Sheikhs, and the endowment affords them provisions in great
plenty, A picture of this king is painted in the temple, and worshipped
by the inmates. In a certain part of this province is a town in which the
Mohammedans reside. It has a market, a mosque, and a cell for the poor.
Here is also a Judge and a Sheikh El Islam : nor is there any doubt that
there must be, in all the towns of China, Mohammedan merchants who have
a Judge and a Sheikh El Islam, to whom their matters are referred. In
this place I resided with one of the merchants, and remained among them for
fourteen days ; during which time, not a day passed without my receiving
presents from them. Beyond this city, neither the Mohammedans nor
infidels of China have another. Between it and the obstruction of Gog
and Magog* there is, as I was told, a distance of sixty days The people
who inhabit that place eat all the men they can overcome ; and hence it
is that no one goes to those parts, I did not see any one, however, in
these parts, who had either seen the obstruction himself, or who had seen
one who had seen it.

I was also told in ‘Sin Kllan, that a considerable personage was in that
neighbourhood, who was upwards of two hundred years old ; that he never
ate, drank, spoke, or took any delight whatever in the world, his powers
were so great and so perfect ; and that he lived in a cave without the city,
in which also his devotions were carried on, I went to the cave, and sa-w
him at the door ; he was exceedingly thin, and of copper colour. He had
marks of a devotional character about him ; but had no beard. 'When I
I saluted him, he seized my hand and .smelled it. He then said to the

* Some have thought th.at by this expression is meant the great v/ali. .See Asscmaii, Bib.
Orient, tom. iii. P. 2, p. dxiv.


214


CKIK \


interpreter This man isjust as much attached to this world, as we are to
the next He said to me "iou h'ne seen a wonder Do jou remember
when }ou came to an island in which there was a temple, and a man
sitting among the images, who gn\c jou ten dinars of gold ^ I answered,
I do He rejoined I am the man I then kissed his hand He then
considered for a little time, and went mto the cave, seeming to repent of
what he had said And as he did not come out again, we forced oursehes,
and went in after him Him, however, we did not find, hut there was
one of 1 i*s companions, who had before him n number of the paper notes
These, *!iid he, are jour feast, so go back I said, "We wait for the old
man He replied If joustaj here for ten jears, jou will not see him,
for It is his practice, that when he has exhibited one of lus mjstcnesto
any one, that man sees him no more Nor suppose that he is absent, the
fact IS, he is now present 1 much wondered at thi«, and returned I
have, on a former occasion, related the affair of the Jogec, who gave us the
dinars when among the images m the temple of a certain island •

After this, I told the storj of the old man to the Judge of the town, and
the Sheikh El IsUm, who snid Such is Ins general practice with those
strangers who go to see him, but no one knows what religion he is of
The person, continued he, that jou supposed to be one of his companions,
was the old man himself I have been told, too, that he had disappeared
for about fifty jears, but returned to this place within the last j ear, that
the Sultan and others beneath him, visit the old man, and that he gives
each of them presents suitable to his station He gives presents, m like
manner, to the poor who visit him In the cave in which he lives there is
nothing to attract the attention, and his discourse is of times that are past
He will occasional!} speak of the Prophet, and <5ay Had I been ^v^th him,
I would have assisted him He also speaks of "Omar Ibn Khafib, and
with peculiar respect of *AIi son of Abu Tdhb I was told by^Auhad
Oddm of Sanjar, the head of the merchants, that he one daj entered the
cave, when the old man took him by the hand I had, said he, imme-
diately the idea that I wtis m a large palace, that the Sheikh was sitting
in it upon a throne, with a crown on his head, and his servants standmg

* See p^e 164


CHI N A.


215


before him. I thought I saw the fruits falling into streams there ; and
taking one to eat, I found myself in the cave standing before him, and him
laughing at me. I had, however, a severe fit of sickness in consequence of
this, which did not leave me for some months. After this I visited him no
more. The people of this country think he is a Mohammedan, but no one
has seen him pray, though he is constantly fasting.

I now returned to the city of El Zaitun by the river ; and, soon after my
arrival, came the answer of the Khan to his Lieutenant there, in which it
was ordered, that I should be honourably provided for, and sent to the
presence, either by land or by the river, as I might choose. They accord-
ingly provided me with vessels and servants, and I proceeded at the charge
of the Sultan by the river, leaving one village in the morning, and arriving
at another in the evening. This we did for ten days, and then arrived at
the city of 'Fanjanfur, which is a large and handsome place situated in a
plain, and surrounded with gardens, something like the plain of Damascus.
Here I was met by the Judge, the “Presbyters of Islamisra, and the mer-
chants, with the Emir of the city and the officens of his forces, by whom
the Emperor is entertained in the most honourable manner. I accordingly
entered the city. It has four walls. Between the first and second of
these are the Emperor’s servants, who watch the city ; between the second
and the third, are the troops of cavalry, and the city magistrate ; between
the third and fourth are the Mohammedans ; where also I took up my resi-
dence with their Sheikh, ''Zahir Oddin. Within the fourth wall are the
Chinese ; and this is the largest part of the city. It was strange enough
that, one day, when I was at a feast which they had made for me, in came
one of the great Mohammedan Fakeers, whom they -welcomed by the title
of the ' Sheikh Kawam Oddin. After the salutation, and his joining oitr
society, I was wondering at his appearance, and had looked on him for some
time, when he said : Why do you continue looking at me, unless you know
me? I then asked him of his native place. He said, it was '^Subta (Ceuta),

I said: Well, I am from ^Tanjiers. He then renew'ed his salute and wept;,
and at this I wept too,* I then asked, whether he had been in India, He


. tevb'


* We here recognize Something like the simple anti affecting scene between Jacob and Racltcl


216


CHINA.


said : Yes , at the palace m Behli. When he said this, he came to my
recollection; and I said, are you-^El Bashin He said: Yes. He had
come to Dehli with my uncle, ^Abul Kasim El MursI, when he was youno-
and before a beard had appeared on his cheek. He was then one of the most
clever at retaining the Koran by memory, and of those termed * benchers.
I had mentioned him to the Emperor of India, who accordingly wished to
retain him in office. But this he did not accept of. His wish was to go to
China. The Emperor had given him three thousand dinars, and he had
then set out for China. In China he ivas put in office among the Moham-
medans, and became possessed of great wealth. After this, he sent me
several presents. His brother I met, some time after, m Sudan ; what a
distance between these two brothers I In 'Kanjura I resided fifteen days:
I then proceeded by the nver, and after four days arrived at the city of
''Bairam Katlu, which is a small place, the inhabitants of which are \ery
hospitable. In this place there were not more than four Mohammedans,
with one of whom I resided for three days, and then proceeded by the
river a voyage of ten days, and armed at the city of ^E1 Khansa. The name
of this place is similar to that of the poetess "‘El Kbansajf but I do not
know whether the word is Arabic or not, or whether the Arabic has any
agreement or not with their language.

Tins IS the largest city I had ever seen on the face of the earth : its length
IS a journey of three days, in which a traveller may proceed on and find
lodgings. It IS, as we have already said of the manner of building among
the Chinese, so constructed, that each inhabitant has his house in the middle
of his land and garden-ground. This city is divided into six cities : all of
which are surrounded by a wall, and of which vve shall presently say more.

ftr' us-N?/


at the well Gen. SS, 10 — 12 “ And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Hachel the daughter
of T<aban, his mother' s brother, &c he hfted up his voice and wept."

* According to Ferishta and other*, ihis should seem to be the name of an office m the court
of Dehli.

t For some account of this poetess, see M. de Sacy's Chrestomathie Arabe, tom. ii p.^lS,
edit. 2. The place is probably the Cheosi of the maps. See also Assemani, Biblioth Orient
tom. in. P. n. p. 51i.


CHINA.


217


When we approached this city we were met by its judge, the presbyters
ofislamism, and the great merchants. The Mohammedans are exceedingly
numerous here. This whole city is surrounded by a wall : each of the six
cities is also surrounded by a wall. In the first reside the guards, with their
commander. I was told that, in the muster-rolls, these amount to twelve
thousand. I lodged one night in the house of the commander. In the
second division are the Jews,* Christians,! and the Turks who worship the
sun : these are numerous, their number is not known : and theirs is the
most beautiful city. Their streets are well disposed, and their great men
are exceeding wealthy. There are in the city a great number of Mohamme-
dans, with some of whom I resided for fifteen days ; and was treated most
honourably. The third division is the seat of the government. In this resides
the chief "commander of all China, with the forces. When I entered its
gate, my companions were separated from me, on account of the press, and
I remained alone. I was here met by the prime minister, who carried me to

• tr*' "


* It does not seem possible, without positive history on the subject, to ascertain at what
period the Jews entered China. Some fix upon the year 224 before Christ : others on other
periods less ancient ; but, as far as I can see, not much reliance is to be placed on any one of
them. The reader may, however, consult the tract by Christoph. Theoph. de Murr, con-
taining the Notitiae S.S. Bibliorura Judmorura in Imperio Sinensi, with the Diatribe de Sinicis
S.S. Bibliorum Versionibus, Halae ad Salam, 1805, and the works there mentioned.

f These were, probably, some of the Nestorian Syrian Christians, who seem to have been
first sent into China for the purpose of propagating the Christian faith, from the churches in
Malabar, commonly styled the Christians of St. Thomas, &c See the Bibliotheca On'entalis of
Asseman, tom. iii. P. II. pp. 512-552, where every particular relating to the history of these
Christians is discussed in a very able and interesting manner. We are told, in p. 519, that the
Chinese call the Christians Terzai or Tenai, which, according to a conjecture of Trigautius,
must be either Arabic or Persic, not Armenian. The truth is, it is the Persic L:j' tarsa,
a general name given to Christians by the Persians, as may be seen in the Dabistan, the
Gulistan of Sadi, &c. ; and if it be true that the Chinese so terra them, one would be led to
Suppose, that Christianity must first have gone from Persia to China. Asseman concludes upon
the irords of Trigautius : “ Christianos in Sinarum regno Nestorianos fuisse, non Armenios,
neque ex Armenia, sed partira ex Assyria et Mesopotamia, parfim ex Sogdiana, Bactriana et
India illuc convolasse, eo maxinie tempore, quo Tartar! in illud regnuni invaserunt, ipse Marcus
Paulus Venctus, qui a Trigautio citatur, pluribus in locis affirmat, ubi quoties Christianorum
in Sinis meminit, eos Nestorianos vocat.” Asseman argues, however, that Christianity was not
originally Nestorianism in China. But his interesting article should be read throughout.

2 F


218


CHINA


the house of the commander of the forces, the Emir ' Karti This was the person
of whom I have already given some account, who cast his eyes upon the goat s*
hair garment which had been given me by the friend of God, the ' Sheikh
Jahl Oddin of Shiriz This fourth city is the most beautiful of all the six
It IS intersected by three rivers I ^va9 entertained by the Emir Karti, m
his own house, in a most splendid manner he had brought together to this
feast the great men of both the Mohammedans and Chinese "We had also
musicians and singers I stayed with him one night At the banquet were
present the Khan s jugglers the chief of whom was ordered to shew some
of his wonders He then took a wooden sphere m which there were holes,
and in these long straps, and threw it up into the air till it went out of
sight, ^ I myself witnessed, while the strap remained in his hand He
then commanded one of his disciples to take hold of, and to ascend by, this
strap, which he did until he also went out of sight His master then
called him three times, but no answer came he then took a kmfe in his
hand, apparently m anger, which he applied to the strap This also as
cended till it went quite out of sight he then threw the hand of the boy upon
the ground then his foot, then his other hand, then his other foot, then
his body, then his head He then came down, panting for breath, and his
clothes stained >vith blood The man then kissed the ground before the
General, who addressed him m Chinese and gave him some other order
The juggler then took the limbs of the boy and applied them one to another
he then stamped upon them, and it stood up complete and erect I was
astonished, and was seized in consequence by a palpitation at the heart but
they gave me some drink, and I recoiered The judge of the Jlohamme
dans was sitting by my side, who swore, that there was neither ascent, des
cent, nor cutting away of limbs, but the whole was mere juggling

On Vhw. vwy nvgVA \ tAy, 'ifhreh va Win eA AVimi

It IS inhabited by the common Chinese people, among whom are the most
ingenious artificers In this place are made the ’Khans'mia garments The
most wonderful things they make, are dishes composed of reeds glued together,
and painted over with colours, such that when hot meat is put mto them
they do not change their colour Ten of these may be put into one another ,


CHINA.


219


and the person seeing them would suppose them to be only one. For these
they have a cover, which contains them all ; and their softness is such, that
should they fall from a height they would not break. They are wonderful

I entered the sixth city, which is inhabited by sailors, fisher-
men, ship-caulkers, and carpenters. I was told after this by the wealthy
Mohammedans, that some of the relations of the great ’’Khan had revolted,
and that they had collected an army, and gone out to give him battle ;
they had collected an hundred companies of cavalry, each company of
which amounted to ten thousand. The Sultan had on this occasion, of his
own particular friends and stipendiaries, fifty thousand cavalry ; and of foot
soldiers, five hundred thousand. He was also opposed by the greater part
of the nobles, who agreed that he ought to abdicate the throne, because he
disregarded the regulations of the Yasak,* laid down by his ancestor Jengiz
Khan. They accordingly went over to the side of his uncle’s son, who had
set up a claim against him. They also wrote to the Khan, advising him to
abdicate the throne; and promising that the province of *E1 Khansa should
be apportioned to him. This he refused to accede to, and gave them bat-
tle ; but after a few days he was put to the rout and killed, before I had
arrived at his palace.f The news of this soon came to the city, and dmms


productions.
After this,


* jLJl ajU. See p. 91, note.

f I can find no account whatever in De Guignes or others of the death of this Emperor ;
but, as no change seems to have happened in the dynasty, and, according to our traveller, the
uncle’s son succeeded to the throne, no notice might generally have been taken of the
circumstance. The dynasty of Yuen seems to have reigned from the latter end of the
thirteenth century of our era to 1369, during which period nine Emperors of the descendants of
Jengiz Khan are said to have held the supreme power in China. Now, it is very remarkable,
that, of the first eight of these the longest reign is only thirteen years, while the ninth is made
to continue through a period of thirty-six, i. e. from 1333 to 1369. It strikes me, therefore,
that this reign is too long, and that the reign of another Emperor ought to be inserted between
the eighth and ninth of them, in order to make the account probable ; and if the relation
of our traveller be true, such reign actually took place : and with the close of this the
Yuen dynasty ceased. See Asseman, Biblioth. Orient, tom. iii. P. II. p. 535. De Guignes, tom.
>■ P. I. p. 279. In the last of which we are informed of several rebellions having taken place

2 F 2


220


CHINA


and trumpets were sounded accordingly during the space of two months,
for joy at the accession of the new Khan The Khan who had been killed,
with about a hundred of his relatives, was then brought, and a large sepul-
chre ^vas dug for him under the earth, in which a most beautiful couch wag
spread, and the Khin was wrth his weapons laid upon it With him they
placed all the gold and siUer vessels he had in his house,* together with
four female slaves, and six of his faiounte Mamluks, with a few vessels of
drink They were then all closed up, and the earth heaped upon them to
the height of a large hill They then brought four horses, Mhich they
pierced through at the hill, until all motion m them ceased , they then
forced a piece of wood into the hinder part of the animal till it came out at
his neck, and this they fixed m the earth, leaving the horses thus impaled
upon the hill

The relatives of the Khan tlTey buned m the same manner, putting all
their vessels of gold and silver in the grave with them At the door of the
sepulchres of ten of these, they impaled three horses in the manner just
mentioned At the gTa^ es of each of the rest, only one horse was impaled
This was a notable day, all the people of the city, Chinese, Mohamme-
dans, and others, were present on the occasion, and had on their moummg,
which consists of a sort of white hood. I know of no other people who do
so on such occasions

When, however, the former Emperor was killed, and Firun, the son of
his uncle who had made war against him, had been put in power, he chose
to fix his residence at ‘Kora Karum,t on account of its nearness to the


rv>-'


during the reign of the lost prince of the Yueo djnasty and one of these is, perhaps, that
related by our traveller

* See a very curious note on this sobject in Mr Marsden s Translation of Marco Polo,
n 878, p 451, whence it appears that the Russians found great quantities of plate arms, &c
in the graves of the Tartar chiefs, an J Bell s Travels in Asia Pinkerton vol vii pp 835 6

f According to D Herbelot, Caracoram, ville qui Octai Kaan fils de Genghizkhan bItit dans
le pays de Cathai aprls qu d I cut aubyugui die fnt aussi nomtnCe Ordtl Balik, et c est peut
5tre la mSme que Marc Paul appclle Cambalu Mungaca ou Mangu Caan, fils de Tuh Kan, et
petit 6!s de Genghizkhan, quatrieme Empereurdes Mogols faisoit son s^jour ordinaire dans cette
ville Voycs le litre de Cara Khotan See also Histoire des Mongols, Liv II chap t p 347


CHINA.


221


territories of his uncle the “King of Turkistan and *Mawara El Nahr. But
those nobles, who had not been present at the death of the former Khan,
revolted. Upon this occasion they stopped up the roads, and the disaffec-
tion spread itself like a flame. The leading men among the Mohammedans
advised me to return to the city of El Zaitun, before the confusion should
become general: and accordingly, they petitioned the minister of King
Firun.to give me permission, which he did, with an order for my mainte-
nance, according to custom.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Returns ly the river to El Zaitun — Sails for Sumatra : driven hy adverse tvinds: at length gets to
Sumatra — Marriage ceremony — Sails for Hindustan : arrives at Kavalam. — Kalikut — Zafar in
Arabia — MasJcit El Torayut — Port rf Shiah : Kdba — Telhan — Hormuz — Kuzistan — Ear —
Janja Bui — Kaldiin — Hakan — Saman — Saba — Shi'^uz —Isphahan — Basra — Kifa — Ambar —
Damascus — Aleppo — El Khalil — Damietta — Cairo — Aidhah — Judda — Mecca — Jenisalem~
Cairo — Alexandria — Jarba — Fez — Tanjiers — Gibraltar — Andalusia.

I THEN returned by the river, descending from El Khansa to ^Kan-
janfiir, ■ and thence to the city of El Zaitun. When I got there I
found some junks bound for India, and got into one belonging to El
Malik El Zahir King of Sumatra, whose sei'vants are Mohammedans. In
this we sailed with a good wind for ten days. The sky then became ob-
scure and dark, and a storm arose, in consequence of which the vessel got
into a sea unknown to the sailors. The people in the junk were all
terribly afraid, and wished to put back : but it was impossible. After
this we saw, one morning at day-break, a mountain in the sea, at the dis-
tance of about twenty miles, and towards this the wind was carrying us.
The sailors wondered at this, because we were far from land ; and because
no mountain had been obsen'ed in that part of the sea. It was certain
that, if the wind should force us to it, we should be lost. W e then betook
ourselves to repentance and prayer to Almighty God, with all our hearts ;
snd, in addition to this, the merchants made many vows. The wind then


.^\ \jjL


222


SUMATRA


became calmed m some degree when, after sun-nse, -we perceived that
the mountain we had seen was m the air, and that we could see light
between it and the sea I was much astonished at this but, seeing the
sailors in the utmost perturbation, and bidding faTewell to one another, I
said. Pray what is the matter^ They said, What we supposed to be a
mountain, is really a Rolch,* * and if he sees us, we shall assuredly perish,
there being now between us and him a distance of ten miles only But
God, in his goodness, gave us a good wind, and we steered our course in a
direction from him, so that we saw no more of him , nor had we any know-
ledge of the particulars of his shape

After two months from this day, we got to ‘Java, and shortly after
landed at "Sumatra Here we met with the King of the place El Malik
El Zahir, just returning from a victory, and bringing many captives with
him He received us very honourably, and supplied us with every thing
necessary He was then about to many his son and heir I was present
at the wedding, and witnessed the ^closeting It was a strange ceremony,


* Ihe name of a bird so large that be is able to take up and By away with a whole
rhinoceros at once TheKinjof Oudes Persian Dictionary (sub voce gives the foIlowiD|
account of it juj jl af i - - jjji''*** j*!!

■Y lAe 5u*l» J J-a si It IS the name of an

animal, which like the Anka (or Simurg, the fabulous bird said to be on the mouDtain Kaf )
has no external existence The one, connuonly beliercd to feed its young with the elephant and
rhmoceros, is known to exist only in enor and falsehood
In Mr Marsden’s interesting edition of the Travels of Marco Polo, we have a similar, but
more particular, account of this bird Persons, says the traveller, “ who have seen this bird
assert, that wheu the wings ate spread they measure sixteen paces in extent from point to point ,
and that the feathers are eight paces in length, and thick in proportion ’ We are told, a little
lower down, that the Grand Khan having heard of this extraordinary bird, sent messengers to
the island of Magastar, or San Lorenzo, to inquuw about it, and that they brought back a
feather of it, which highly gratified his majesty This, however, the traveller states on the report
of others (p 107) Mr Marsden s opinion on the subject is slated in note 1440, where he says,
be believes it to be the albatross magnified into a monster Tlie bird, he thinks, might occa
sionally migrate from more southern latitudes to the island of hladagascar What Ibn Batuta
saw was, probably, a realmountam, Ihelight he saw undent, might perhaps have been occasioned
by what 13 termed the mirage


SUMATRA.


223


I never saw any thing like it elsewhere. It was this : They set up a large
sort of pulpit in the court-yard of the palace, and covered it with silk.
The bride then came from the inner apartments on foot; with her were
about forty ladies, carrying >her train ; these were the ladies of the Sul-
tan, his nobles, and ministers. They were all unveiled and exposed to the
gaze of high and low. This, however, is not customary among them,
except on the occasion of some noble marriage. The bride now ascended
the pulpit, preceded by musicians and singers, male and female, who
danced and sang. After this came the bridegroom, who was the King’s
son, mounted on an elephant, and sitting on a throne placed on the back of
the animal. Over his head was an awning. He had a crown on ; and on
his right and left were about a hundred young men, sons of Governors,
Ministers, and Generals. These were all clothed in white, and riding on
horses caparisoned. On their heads were caps set with gold and jewels;
and every one of them was beardless. When the prince came in, dirhems
and dinars were scattered among the people. The Sultan himself sat and
wtnessed the whole. The prince then alighted and walked to his father ;
and taking hold of his foot kissed it. He then ascended the pulpit to the
bride, who rose to him and kissed his hand. He then sat by her side ; the
ladies standing before them richly dressed out. The fawfel-nut and betel-
leaf were then brought in, and the bridegroom taking some in his hand
put it into her mouth. The bride next took some, and put it into his
mouth. The bridegroom then took a betel-leaf, and put it into his mouth,
then into her’s. The bride did the same to him. The covering of the pul-
pit was then let down upon them, and the whole was carried into the in-
terior of the palace.* When the people had feasted themselves, thev all
dispersed.

I remained in this island for two months as the King’s guest. I then
was put on board one of the junks, the Sultan having presented me with
some lignum aloes, camphor, cloves, sandal-wood,'|‘ and provisions. I then
set sail for Kawlam, where I arrived after a voyage of forty days. After


* See Marsden’s History of Sumatra, p. 266, &c. ; Cranfurd’s description of marriage ceremo-
nies in Java, vol. i. pp. 88-93.

t On this wood as found in the islands of the Indian Archipelago see Mr. Crawfurd’s work,
vol. i. pp. 519-20.


224


IKDIA, ARABIA, PEUSU.


this I went to Kdlikut m Malabar. I then went aboard a vessel, and after
a ^oyage of eight and twenty days came to 'Zafar. This was in the month
of Moharram, m the year forty-eight (*. e. A. H. 748 ; April, A.D. 1347.)
At this time I found its King, ‘‘El MaliL El Nasir, son of El Malik El
Moghith, the same person who reigned when I formerly visited this place.*
From this place I sailed to ‘Maskit El Torayat, then to the port of Shiah,
then to the port of ^ Kelba, the name of which is the feminine form of Kelb
(a dog), then to ^Tclhan, all which places ai;e subject to the government of
•Hormuz, but are considered as belonging to Amman. I then proceeded
to ‘Hormuz, and stajed there three days From this place I went to
Kuristan (Kuzistan), and from thence to "LTir, then to "Janja Bal, from this
place to '’Kaldun, where I remained threedajs. I then proceeded to ’’Hakan,
then to 'Saman, then to the city of ‘Saba, and thence to ‘Shiraz, when I
found “Abu Is-hak, the reigning king ;t butwho was then absent from Shiraz.
I then went on to 'Mam, then to *Bazdkhash (Yezdkhas), thento'Kahl,
then to • Kansak, then to * Isphahan, then to'Tostar, then to ** ElHawair, (Ha-
waiza^) then to ‘Basra, then to-^Meshhed All Ibn Abi TTilib, then to ^Kufa,
then to ^Sarsar, then to 'Bagdad, where I armed m the month of Shawfil
m the year 48 (i. e. 748), the King of which was at that time the ^Sheikh
Hasan, son of the aunt of the Sultan Abu Said. After this I proceeded
to the city of ‘Ambar, then to "Hit, then to "Haditlm, then to "Ana, then
to^El Rahba,t then to ^El Saklma, then to 'Tadmor, then to ‘Damascus of


. J-Ul UJW ■'


■JV^' • *


Olixi ' ** *


* Seep 54.

-j- Abu Is-hak was, according to Jlirkbond, the reigmng King in Persia at this time , and, m
this >ery year he undertook an expedition against Karman, see p 40

J £I Harawi, after stating that this was one of the districts belonging to Emesia, proceeds
to say, that there is in the Meshhed of this place, asli is.- jjsi


SYRIA, EGYPT.


22.5


S)Tia; the -whole time of my absence from -w-hich had been twenty full
years. The chief judge of the sect of Shafia was now ‘ Taki Oddin El SabkI.
From this place I went to “Aleppo, and then returned to Damascus, then to
Jerusalem, and to the city of ^E1 Khalil (Hebron), then to -“Gaza, then to
‘Damietta, then to “ Fariskur, then to ^E1 Mahalla El Kobra (or the great sta-
tion), then to “Damanhur, then to "^Alexandria, then to 'Cairo. At this time
there was a general plague throughout Egypt. I was told that the number
of those who died daily in Cairo amounted to one and twenty thousand.
The reigning prince at the time I entered Egypt was ^ El Malik El Nasir
Hasan Ibn El Malik El Nasir Mohammed Ibn Kala-wun. I then proceeded
from Cairo on the way to Upper Egypt, for^Aidhab. There I took ship-
ping, and got to ^ Judda, then to ‘Mecca, may God ennoble it ! I arrived
at this place in the month of Shaaban, in the nine and fortieth year (i. e.
A. H. 749) ; and in this year I performed the pilgrimage. I then returned
with a Syrian caravan to ‘Taiba, the city of the prophet. I visited his grave,
and returned with them to Jerusalem. I then hired a passage back to
Cairo ; but, as a desire of seeing my native country now came upon me, I
prepared to take my journey to the west. I travelled, accordingly, to
Alexandria : and, in the month Safar, A. H. 750, I set sail and arrived at
the island of "Jarba. From this place I sailed in another vessel to “Fez,
then to"Saf-dkus, then to ^Milyana, then to the city of ’Tunis, then to


s-~y

. ^


e


• d cJJil


• Cr-ls"

. Aj ^ . (d-A Medina) ^


4^' (7,' .tUWl Jjij ((^?=^-hj) “HtJ

fj-f d ^ ^

A thighbone of one of the giants, the length of which is three cuhits: its
width is that of two spans. It is said that its weight is five-and thirty ratls (of Rahha). Some of
the learned, however, say that there is no monument of antiquity in Rahha, and that it was first
built by Malik Ibn Tank ; which is not true : for it was built by Nimrod, son of Kush ; and it is
a city mentioned in the Bible. — It is, probably, thedty Rehoboth, which we are told, Gen.x. II,
was built by Ashur. This is, no doubt, the truth : and, if so, the historians mentioned here, as
well as by Mr. Ewald in his Mesopotamia of El W^edl (p. xiii) are to be treated as fabulous,

2 G


226


BARRARY


'TiUmsan then to the 'palace of Fez, vrhefe 1 arrived in the latter part of
the month Shaaban, in the year 750 The reigning king at this time was
the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Abu Anan I presented myself to him,
and was honoured by a sight of him The awe that surrounded him, made
me forget that of the King of "Irak, his elegance, that of the Emperor of
India, his politeness, that of the King of 'Yemen, his bravery, that of
the King of the Turks , his mildness, that of the Emperor of Constantino
pie, his religious carnage, that of the Emperor of s' Turkistan, his know-
ledge, that of the King of 'Sumatra, for he so overwhelmed me with his
favours, that I found myself quite unequal to express my gratitude In Fez,
too, I terminated my “travels, after I had assured myself, that it is the
most beautiful of countries The poet has truly said of it
f Ask me my proof Why in the west
Countries you find the sweetest, best?

’Tis this Hence rides the full orbed moon,

And hither hastes the sun at noon

It was now my wish to visit the tomb of my father, and accordingly I
left Fez for Tanjiers From that place I went to ^Subta It then occurred
to me, that I should hate pleasme in the warfare for the faith , I therefore
set sail from Subta to Spam, and the first place I saw was the “Hill of
Victory This is one of the greatest refuges of Islamism, and one which
forced sorrow dovm the necks of the idolaters From this place com
menced Islamism, m the grtat victory ^ for here landed ‘‘Tank Ibn Ziad,
the slave of Musa Ibn Nasir, at the time of his passing over to Spam
From this circumstance it was named after him, and called 'JabalTank

JJj ^ (_yll

aJI

• See the Histoire ggnerale des Huns by De Guignes, tom i p S47 See also “ Histoire
de la Domination des Arabes et des Maores eo Espagne et en Portugal, depuu 1 invasion de ces
peuplesjusqu^ leur expulsion definitive, redigfe sur lliistoire traduite de 1 Arabe en Espagnol
de M Joseph Conde, Fans, ]825, tonui pp 68-105, and the Annales Muslemici, tom >
np S62-3, and 426 7, tom tu p 583


SPAIN.


227


(corniptedly Gibraltar) . It is also called the Hill of Victory, because his
beginnings had their commencement here. But, a despicable foe had had
possession of this place for about twenty years, until our Lord the Sultan
Abu El Hasan reduced him, and sent his son with an army, which he
strengthened with many reinforcements, and obtained a complete victory.
He then rebuilt and strengthened its fortifications and walls, and stored it
with cavalry, treasure, and warlike machines. This was one of his good
deeds, the effects of which still remain.*

I proceeded from the hill of victory (Gibraltar), which is one of the most
extensive and handsome strongholds of Islamism, where I had met its cele-
brated and learned men, of whom one was my maternal uncle’s son, ^ Abu
El Kasim Ibn Batuta, after I had remained there some days, and then went
to the city of Marbella, which is a strong and handsome place. From this
place I went to the city of ' Malaga, one of the chief cities of Andalusia.
Its charming districts lie together, and enjoy the advantages both of sea and
land. It abounds with excellent productions, so that eight ratls of grapes
are sold for a small dinar. Its figs and pomegranates are unequalled.

From this place I travelled to the city of *‘Tabsh, from that to *Hama,
which is a small town, and in which there are warm springs. I then went
to Granada, the chief city of ’"Andalusia, which, for its structures and

* Abu’l Hasan, according to Mr. Conde, mounted the throne of Fez in 1330, and held Gibral-
tar during the greater part of his reign. At what time he gained possession of it, we are not
told; but that he was in the habit of supplying bis friends and allies in Spain with troops and
ammunition, there can be no doubt. The French translator and editor of Mr. Conde’s work is
most likely correct when he says, “ Cet Abul Hasan ne fut point roi de Maroc, comme on I’a dit,
mais roi de Fez.” Tom. iii. p. 187. But, whether he is so, when he further saj's, ib. “ 11 n’est
pas non plus exact de dire, avec quelques historiens Espagnols, qu’ Abul Hasan envoya en Espagne
son fils AbdelmSlek avec une armfie ; Abdelmelekn’etait point fils, mais general du roi de Fez — "
Ibn Batuta has not informed us ; for he has said nothing about the name of this son of the King of
Fez : he has only told us, that he Sent his son : and so far it is probable the Spanish historians
are correct. In a note a litlld lower down (p. 213), we are told that, “ Plusieurs historiens
Espagnols disent qu’a cette occasions Abul Hasan envoya une arm€e sous la conduite d’Aly, un
de ses fils...Les Arabes alErment positivement un fait bien different, puis qu’ils disent qu’ Abul
Hasan n’efivoya point de secours.” I merely remark, that Ibn Batuta here agrees with the
Spanish historians in the fact of a son of Abul Hasan's having been sent : and by them he is
here named Ali, not Abdelmllek.


2 G 2


228


SPAIN


suburbs is unequalled m the whole world It is divided by the ell known
ri\er"Sheml, besides this, ho\\e>er, there are many other rners, as well
as cisterns, gardens, orchards, and palaces, surrounding it on all sides
The King of Granada was at this time "Abu El ^Valid lusuf Ibn
Nasir Ine>er met him, on account of a disease under which he then
laboured * His noble and excellent mother, howeier, sent mesome dinars
for my support I here met some of the learned men of the place, of
whom the most surprising was a ^oung man named ''Abu Jaafar Ahmed Ibn
Rizwan El Jadhani His astonishing peculiarity w as this, that although
heivas brought up in a desert, and had never either studied or given himself
any trouble about learning, )et he produced poetry so good as scarcely
to be equalled by the most accomplished writers The following is a
specimen t

Friend, from whom 'tis pnin to part,

Take thy station in my heart
Through my eye, its lucid door,

View the structure o’er and o’er.

There enthroned thou’Il always see
Every chamber filled with thee
But when from thee, with pain distrest
I feel the void within my breast,

My vacant eyes too well declare
Their favourite inmate is not there
But, when thy charms my spirits fill,

I close my lids to keep thee sull

jJjW y\’’

* This pnnee, who is styled by Mr Conde (tom m p 229) " le vertueux Jusef Abul KIgag
was assassinated at Granada in 1354', and was succeeded in the throne by his son Mohammed the
Fifth

b’l'

l^UI

(a) One of the MSS reads and for Ihe speciesis thanermed

and consists of six feet, of the measure - repeated, with us variations See

Clarke s Prosody, p 55, dc


AFRICA.


229


CHAPTER XXV.


Gibraltar — Suita — Aslla — Sala — Morocco — Mihiasa — Fez — Sigilmasa — Thagm — Tas-hala —
The great Desert — Abu-Latin — Mali — Zaghan — Karsanju — Hippopotami — Customs at court
— Tambactu — Kawkavi — Nahda or Tukadda — Hahar — Sigilmasa — Fez.

Froji Granada I went to the Hill of Victory, and from that place took
shipping and sailed to’Subta; then to ’’Asila, then to* Sala.* I then
travelled from that place by land to ‘Marrakish (Morocco), which is a most
beautiful city, of extensive trade and territory. One of its poets has thus
described it.

f Morocco blest, in site, in health.

Brave in nobles, great in wealth :

Here will the homeless wand’rer find.

Welcome to cheer his drooping mind :

One only doubt can now remain.

Such as to give a moment’s pain :

Whether the eye or ear can boast,

The privilege of blessing most.


t


* This is, according to Abulfeda, an ancient and thickly inhabited city, having on its west the
ocean, and on its south a river, with gardens and vineyards. It is said that Abd El ilumin, its
high priest, built a large palace on the bank of the river on its south and adjoining the sea : and,
that his followers choosing the parts adjoining, built the city which was called El Mehdiya. Sala,
it is added, is a moderate-sized district of the extreme western division, and the nearest part of
it to Spain, Its soil consists mostly of red sand : the river is large, and is subject to the reflux of
the tide. The city abounds with provisions. The districts subject to its rule are on its south, and
are called Tamasna, abounding with cultivation and pasturage. J


_

1: — cb y Jlsj Ls ^.y-^r *-s AcU.< LJj U- Jl &c. See also

D’Herbelot, sub voce “ Sala.”


^ ^ CJI-'UI 1^1
vfi l-**'


*=^ 1 '


This verse is of the sort termed k Jl, and is of the measure . ^ lib

- • C' w ti.

repeated. See Clarke’s Prosody, p. 53, Ac.


230


AFRICA


From this place I went to “Miknlsa,* then to the palace of “Fez, and
presented myself to the Coramanderof the Faithful, the Sultan J'Abu Anan,
may God give him happiness j" After this I bade him farewell, with an


* 11)13 place 13 near Fez, and situated on its north It is remarkable Tor the great number of
Us olives Ibn Said has said that Miknasa consists of two white cities, separated from each
other the distance of a horses course It it one stage Horn Fez Its river is called the Fulfal
O'*} \)i^ L5*J li t/-b a-iLC* Ljx* ^ U«j

Jb Ifcj A4f< ,j— »j (— fiJlj jjjJj a-iLC*

JA» ,jA_j ^ ^ ^ tyi ^Uj ijLjd- dre See

also Ulenbroeks Iracx Descriptio Proleg, p 13
f Fez IS, according to Abulfeda, placed in the difierent longitudes and latitudes of &•,
34» 8 , 8* 8, 35* 35/, 20* 50', 38* 8 He then describes « ^ jii,

^ U>**

^ a-*-< Ja> j L*U> iiaaf* Jua^ j t^b

Jb ^

V.\<> 'lJ.b jji5 iUs-i jbc* J^b

i^s. *v).,s ^b iSy j V

<-jL^ J Jb U-*- )i ^ (*y

4sn.i; ^b^ JljbUl, &c Fez consists of two cities, between which runs a river, and con*
tains several springs which supply streams Both aties have m all thirteen gates Ibc water
thus supplied runs into the streets, houses, and bath«, a thing witnessed neither in the east nor
the west The place was founded since the tunes of Islamism Ibn Said has related after
£l Hijazi, that when they began to dig (or the foundations they found an axe ({^b ^v) m the
excavations, and hence it Cook Us name It is said, that there are within the cUy and upon its
nver about three hundred water mills constantly worked by the stream The people are remarkable
for the comforts of life which they enjoy El Fas u its citadel, which Is situated on the highest
spot in It, and through which the river runs There are here three mosques, in which there is
preaching , and from it to Subta is a distance of ten days The source of Us river is half a
day B journey from the city . it then runs through meadows and among Bowers until U enters
the place Fez is said, m the Atwal, to be a village of Tanjiers See also I) Herbelot, under
Fas

X There is so much confusion and error in 3fr Conde s history of these times, that it seems
quite impossible to determine from him who this Abu Anan was, or when his reign commenced
The French translator and editor of this work says (p 339), il est vraiscmblahle que cet Abu
Salem eat !e in4tnc que Fanz , que son ftSte Omar, ilu dans un premier moment de trouble, ne


AFRICA.


231


intention to visit = Sudan (Nigritia), and came to Sigilmasa, which is a
very handsome city. It produces many very good dates (fruit), and in the
abundance of these it may be compared with Basra, except only that
those of this place are the best. I lodged at this place with the theologian,

* Mohammed El Bashiri, the brother of him I had seen in the city of
'Kanjanfur, in China. I proceeded from this place in the beginning of the
month Moharram, and of the year 753 (February 1352), with a large com-
pany of merchants and others ; and, after a journey of five and twenty
days, arrived at “^Thaghari,* a village in which there is nothing good, for
its houses and mosque are built with stones of salt, and covered with the
hides of camels. There is no tree in the place ; it has nothing but sand
for its soil ; and in this are mines of salt.j' For this they dig in the earth,
and find thick tables of it, so laid together as if they had been cut and
placed under ground. J No one, however, resides in these (houses) except

conserva point la couronne, et qu’elle passa a Abu Zeyan. Ce qui augmente I’embarras, c’est
que d’autres font succeder d Abut Hasan un autre de ces enfans nommS Abu Hanan ou Aluan.
M. Conde dte meme ce dernier comme regnant a Ceuta,” &c. From the work of Ibn Khaldun,
however, the history of the Berbers, which now Ues before me, it appears that Abu Anan was
a son of the Sultan Abul Hasan, and that he left the lieutenancy of Tih’msan and succeeded to
the supreme power in Fez, A.H. 749, A.D. 1348. As it is my intention to edit and translate
this work, I shall forbear giving any extracts from it at present, merely stating, that it is
full and particular on the circumstances of these times in Africa.

* One of the MSS. has ^j\ju Tagaza constantly, Mr. Kosegarten ljUj Taguza.

EdrisI, however, tells us that the only salt mines known in Sudan are situated in the
island of Awlil, which is in the sea; and that from this place ships bring the salt, which is
thence carried to the different parts of Sudan ; that these ships enter the Nile, and pass on to
Sail, Takrur, BarlsI, Ghana, Nakara, Kugha, S:c. ^ tS JJjl

^5>-lLc jdxJ 'ij ijjitX]

_J (JJl ^ I-

^Isij J. ,_Sj^

J»_J\ jUj How this can all be true I know not ; I merely give it to shew the opinions of the
Arabs in the times of EdrisI. — Sect. i. dim. i.

J Mr. Kosegarten’s copy adds,. .“ quarum binre (r. c. tabulae) cameli onus efficiunt” (p. 46).
See his notes, p. SO. In Major Denham’s Narrative, p. 24, we have an account of some very
extensive salt-pits.


232


ATUICA


the sen ants of the merchants, who dig for the 'salt, and li\ e upon the dates
and other things which are brought from 'Sigilm isa,* as well as upon the
flesh of camels To them come the people of-^Sudan from their different
districts, and load themselves with the salt, which among them passes for
money, just as gold and silver does among other nations , and for this
purpose they cut it into pieces of a certain weight, and then make their
purchases with it f The water of ^TaghariJ is poisonous, we found it
injurious Of this they take, howeier, to carry them over the desert,
winch is twenty stages in extent, and is without water § After passing
this we arrued at*Tas-hMAll a stage at which the cara\ans slop and rest


o-UUr-*


* Abulfeda gives the longitude and latitudeof this place from tbe KanCin 20*8, Sl^SO",
from Ibn Said 18*34', 36*34 and describes it tlius jjiaU itji ^

aL^UI! ^^3 ^3x» j\

Ao-i JU jjUa {f^j£ 3j 1^3 ^

AfU \^J '3 V ^^3 ^*^1 Sigi)ni3sa is eosnrard of Darba, and is the capital of the dii
trict so called It has a river which comes from the south east, divides, and passes \>y the east
end western parts of the city It abounds in gardens, and has eight gates at which gate soever
of these you go out, you will see the river, the palms, and other trees Around all the gardens aod
palms there is a wall intended to keep off the predatory Arabs, and this encloses a space of forty
miles The city adjoins (he desert which divides between the western districts and Sudan No
budding IS to be seen either to the south or west of it Ibn Said has said that its inhabitants
poison dogs and eat them, and (hat its soil is soft and easy of culture See also O Herbelot,
under Segelmessah

f *' A handful of salt (purchased) four or five good sized fish —Denham s Narrative, p 46
t TogASsa, as before

§ Mr Kosegarlen s MSS adds here V

I^I-* 1 ^.i^U lLj>. fcS, Ac which he translates thus “Tuberibus vero abundat,

magna eliam in eo ncinorum copia, quamobrem homines cervici imponunt virgam argento vivo
rounitam, qua illos occidant '

D OneoftheMSS readslL^lj Ta^ahla Mr Kosegarten s copy .


AFRICA.


233


three days,* and then prepare to enter the great 'desert, in which there is
neither water, bird, nor tree; but only sand and hills of sand, 'which are
so blown about by the wind, that no vestige of a road remains among
them-t People can travel, therefore, only by the guides from among the
merchaiits, of which there are many. The desert is, moreover, exposed
to the light, and is dazzling. J We passed it in ten days.§ We then came
to the city of ''Abu Latin, |1 in the beginning of the month Rebia El


* Mr. Kosegarten adds ijjO ^ Jls!! jlsdil (--=.0

Ljj— c Jjsl A'C. “Inde etiam Utteras dant raercatores ad incolas

urbis Eiwelaten, quibus dotnus sibi conducere jubeant, et aliquem Messofitarum mercede con-
ducunt, qui Ktferas ferens ipsos pr$cedat," &c. I have no doubt, however, that for / i j . ^
in this extract we should read (in one MS. a word often used for merchants in our

MSS. and in some cases where Mr. Kosegarten’s has^hsill . Instead of “ Messofitarum,” then
we should have Mercatorum in the translation, and in the several places in which this word occurs.
See his notes, p. 50. jUj is with us (_jUj , which is, no doubt, correct.

I So in Denham’s Narrative, p. 13.

t So Major Denham in his journey to Mourzuk, Narrative and pp. xix, lii., 28.

J Mr. Kosegarten’s copy has tivo months, which is probably the true reading. Mr.

Kosegarten has a very extraordinary passage here, which I cannot forbear noticing, it is this :
(J-sj IJl Sji < " 3 ^; "-.-' 1

(*V.' ^

Which he translates (Desertum, &c.) : “ deemoniis frequentatum, quee ssepe virum litteras ferentem
ita fasciitant, ut mortem obeat ; quo facto major etiara agminis pars interire solet. Nam si
vir salvus ad Eiwelaten pervenit, Eiwelatenis incolarum multi, aquam ferentes, ad quatuor
dierura iter agmini obviam eunt, si vero perierit, obviam iis fit nemo, et plerique eorum absu-
muntur siti.” Having met with nothing like this, either in Ibn Batuta or any other Oriental

traveller, I very much suspect there is some error in the text. Now if we read a

instead of we shall have all clear and consistent. The translation will then be, Et

sestas est in eo maxima, ita ut qui iter cum litteris fecerit smpe errare inducatur atque intereat :
idcirco pars maxima agminis peribit quoque, quippe qui, &c. Tire want of water being
evidently assigned as the cause why numbers of the caravan perish. I have no doubt, therefore,
that there is an error in Mr. Kosegarten's MS.

it ^ 9 %

II One of the MSS. constantly redds Aytdatin, not declining the word, as the others do

as if compounded of Abu and Eatin. Mr. Kosegarten has occasionally this word. See Mr.
Kosegarten's notes, p. 50.

2 H


234


SUDAN


Awwal This is the first district of ^Sudan , which, as they say, belongs
to a lieutenant of the Sultan of the countries of ” Faiba (which means a
lieutenant) When we had got to this place, the merchants stowed their
goods in an open area, and charged some blacks with the custody of them * * * §
At this place I lodged with a man from "Sala But it was my wish to
return from "Abu Latin as soon as I had witnessed the nle dispositions of
the blacks, and the contempt in which they held the white people It then
occurred to me, however, that I would complete my knowledge of these
countries, and accordingly we remained at ''Abu Lvtm fifty days It is
an exceedingly hot place, with a few small palm trees in it, under the
shade of whicli they sow the melon The water of the place is found in
pits, having been absorbed by the sand t Mutton is in great plenty J
Their clothing is all brought from Egypt The greater part of the inhabi-
tants are merchants Their women are exceedingly beautiful, and more
respectable than the men The character of these merchants is strange
enough, for they are quite impervious to jealousy No one is named after
his father, but after his maternal uncle , and the sister s son always suc-
ceeds to property in preference to the son a custom I witnessed no
where else, except among the infidel Hindoos of Malabar But these are
Mohammedans, who retain their prayers by memory, study theology, and
learn the Korin by rote As to their women, they are not shy with
regard to the men, nor do they veil themselves from them, although they
constantly accompany them at prayers § Any one who wishes to marry
one of them may do so , but he roust not take her with him out of the
country , and, even if the woman should wish to go, her family will not
allow her It is a custom among them, that a man may have a mistre<?s,
of women strangers to him, who may come and associate with him, even
m the presence of her own husband and of his wife In like manner, a


• See Rfr Kosegarten s Kotes, p 50, aod Major Denhaais Narrative, p 20

i UjUj

4 Major Denham frei^uentlf speaks of the sheep he saw and partook of in Sudan Narr
p 107, &c

§ A simJar account is given of the Tuanck women in Major Denham a Narrative, p 65, as
well as of others generally throughout this narrative


SUDAN.


235


man will enter his own house, and see the friend of his wife with her alone,
and talking with her, without the least emotion or attempt to disturb them ;
he will only eome in and sit down on one side, till the man goes.^ Upon a
certain day I went in to the Judge of ’Abu Latin, who was an eminent
man, at that time my host, and with whom I had formed a friendship. I
saw with him a handsome young woman, and wshed to leave him ; for I
knew his wife, and that this was a different person. The woman smiled
at me, but did not blush. He said : This is my female friend ; she is no
stranger. I remonstrated with him, and said ; This is a strange woman ;
you are an eminent Kazi, and Judge of the Mohammedans : how, then, can
you be alone with her? He said: This is our custom; nor is there any sus-
picion from our being in society together. He did not, however, benefit
(by my advice), nor did I visit him after this.f

I then proceeded from ’’Abu Latin J to the distance of which is a

journey of four and twenty days, made with 'effort. The roads are safe,
so I hired a guide and proceeded with three of my companions. These
roads abound with trees, which are high, and so large that a caravan may
shade itself under one of them.jl As I passed by one of these trees, I saw
a weaver weaving cloth within a cleft of its trunk. Some of these will
grow so corrupt,^ that the trunk will become like a well and be filled with

.1^' .JU'

* Two of our MSS. differ here from Mr. Kosegarten’s ; our passage is,

&C. tajj zJl (J\j LA\ lij

This is noticed to warn the reader not to conclude, that either Mr. Kosegarten or myself is
wrong, because our translations do not happen to agree. I shall not think it necessary to notice
all the varieties, but only those which seem to be of moment.

f See Mr. Kosegarten’s notes, p. 50.

J Mr. Kosegarten's ^1 is sometimes with us or as the case may require.

In one place Mr. Kosegarten gives {p. 42, line 9), which I have no doubt is intended

for ^1 . It is impossible to say which reading is the true one.

§ Ibid, p. 51. This is the Melli of Leo Africanus, and Major Denham’s Narrative, p. 179.

II Major Denham speaks of immensely large tamarind and other trees in Sudan, p. 159, &c.

^ The original, with Mr. Kosegarten, is aLi-'.J jJ , which he translates, “ interiora

ita sunt excavata,” &c. With me it is . - Uj j , 'The last word here is the only

2 H 2


236


SUDAN


the ram-water, and from this the people will drink Sometimes the bees
will be in these m such numbers that they will be filled with honey,
which travellers take for their use It is affirmed by Ibn Jazzi El Kelbi,
the Epitomator (ot thiswork), that there are m Andalusia two chesnut trees
such, that a weaver may sit and weave cloth in them Ibn Batuta pro-
ceeds • The gourd grows so large m “Sudan, that they will cut one into
halves, and out of these make two large dishes* The greatest part of
their vessels, moreover, are made of the gourd After ten days from our
leaving Abu LMm we came to the village * Zaghari which is large, and
inhabited by black merchants Among these lives a number of white peo-
ple, of the ^Ibazia sect of hereticsf

We then left this place and came to the great river, which is the Nile
Upon it IS the town of K3rsanju,J from which the Nile descends to

JS ' JUebl ^ "

one about whicli there can be an/ d fficuit/ and if our MSS ns/ be relied on, our word muit
itgBtfy iecamt corrupt, taking the root to be which Golius gives as equivalent to
eorrupil and prefixing the t/llable to tlie tenth conjugation, we shall have fem

, which toust mean it fiecame torrupl, rolltn, {ft , as in fie htome or

governor, jj^\he became vmer, and the like But Mr Kosegarten hai|j_>!for the root,
and then the verb must also mean it became eorni^, aod sot excavated the general meaning,
however, is tolerabi/ near But what are we to aa/ to Mr BurcVhardt, who has taken this for
the name of the tree, and has called it the Istaset ? See Appendix in to his Travels in Nubia,
p 536

* Go irds are in abundance m Sud3a Denham a Narrative, p 14> &C.

Mr Kosegarten has a passage here, which I deem worth/ of transcription it is this
If-* (J-a=c; I* jrjifj

a—* Uj U«- iyS lols lOa-aklj

fil** transJfttiOD n " qui per hoc dcserlum iter fa
ciunt, neque aquam neque comeatum secom vebuot, ntst frusta salts, et mercimonia arumatica,
quorum grstissima incolis sunt car/oph/lla et luastiche Quum ad urbem acccsserint, Nigrorum
mulieres aSerunt lae, gallinas, oi/zam et farinara, (he should have added, atque istis salem
et aroma emunt) ** or/za eorum vero alboram valetudini infesta ' On the gourd see bis note,
p 51, and Major Denham's Narrative, p 25.

\ Mr Kosegarten adds “ et aliquot Sunnitffi Malikitae "

J Mr Kosegarten has Seehis note on th» place, p 5l, who seems to have nodoubt

that Ibn Batuta s account of the course of the Nigcir must be the true one See also Leo
Africanus, who doubts this , edit 1632, p 7


SUDAN.


237


‘Kabara, then to *Zaga,* the inhabitants of which were the first (in these
parts) to embrace Islamism.f They are religious, and fond of learning.
From this place the Nile descends to ‘Tambactu,J then to '*Kawkaw,§ of


• This is probably the Zagawa (ifjlc j) of Abulfeda, who thus describes it after Ibn Said :

ic\b bW jJuji liJj (? Jo) Jj (• ^ ^ SJkclij tV*-" (Jla

tji c;.5iL5i^

cry 4 cr* hy^ cr^^ lt^' (*^

c:^-*-3 li ‘->ib ^1. The principal city pf the people of Zagawa is
where the longitude is 55° (15?) and the latitude 54° (14?). They have emb’-eed Islamism, and
are subject to those of El Kanam. In the south of this district is the city of Zagawa. Tlie villages
of the people of Zagawa and Taju are extended through the space situated upon the windings
of the Nile. They are people of the same stock, except that those of Tajii are the hand-
somest and best behaved. It is said in the Azizi, that from Dongola to the country of Zagawa
westward is a distance of twenty stages.

f Our MSS. have here (i UjJ is^j Jj)ij , &c. Mr. Kosegarten divides one of the
words thus ; |*)L!\ to ki.\j Jjs'j , &c, which he thus translates. “ Sagha, cujus incolte
sacra islamitica non nimis curant,” &c., which, as far as I can see, is erroneous.

J Mr. Kosegarten writes this word TumbuMu, but without any authority mentioned for doing
so. Mr. Burckhardt always wTites it Timhuctoo, just, I suppose, as he heard it pronounced by

/C/ yOo-

the Arabs. Our MSS., however, when they have the vowel points write , »’• e. Tambactu,

f XO/ / Xl*/

or , Tumbaktu, but never Timbuctu. Mr. Kosegarten’s MS. probably had ( j-t'.-.T .
Leo Africanus writes the first syllable with o, and in Bello’s Map we have Tonbacktoo. Denham,
p. 109.

§ Abulfeda says of this place (j. e. yJSj oLll lillJ ^ Jli

J yi cry Jolw

4 4^ 4j^' 4^' ^ 4 4^

jkbj . It is said by Ibn Said that Kawkaw is the residence of the Sultan of

these parts, and that he is an infidel: opposite to him on the west are the Moslems of Ghana,
and on the east, those of El Kanam. This place has a river named after itself: but the place
itself is to the eastward of this its river. It is said in the Kanun that Kawkaw is situated between the
equinoctial fine, and the beginning of the first climate. It is said in the AzTzi, that the latitude of
Kawkaw is 10 degrees ; and that the inhabitants are Moslems. Of the Ghana just mentioned he says :

<0U Jlj (.Ul Ufelc ^ J_j ^ lOlc Si) itilc

liXv ij icjl yar t C ^ .hr . JjiLaj jiZv tj <U:UJ.^ i) U^I jlsUI


238


SUDAK


both which "we shall give some account It then proceeds to the town of
*MuU, which IS the extreme distnct of It then goes on to ^Yuwi,*

the greatest district of Sudln, and the king of which is the most potent No
white person can enter here , for, if he attempt to do so, they will kill him
before he reaches it The Nile then descends from this place to the coun
tries of ^Nubia, the inhabitants of which are Christians, then to ‘Dongola,
which IS the largest distnct they possess, the king of which is named ‘‘Ibn
Kanz Oddin, who became a Mohammedan in the times of ‘El Malik El
Nasir The Nile then descends to the cataracts, which terminate the regions
of Sudan, dividing them from Upper Egypt -f

From "Karsanju, I went to the river "Sansara,f which is about ten miles
from 'Mall I then went to the city of '’Mali, the residence of the King


^ AiUj ^\s. 5^ Jjb iX-

A»Uj 43^ LT^ Ghana w

the residence of the King of th'' districts of Gh<iiu, who lays tlatm to being a descendant of
Hasan son of AIi To this place trarel the western niercbaots from Sig Imasa through an
immense desert of fifty days and from it they bring nothing but red gold Ibn Said has said
that It has a Nile, which is a branch of the Nile of Egypt, end that it flows into the ocean in the
longitude of 10^ and in the latitude of 14% so that between this place and Gh^na is a
distance of about 4 degrees Gh4na stands on both sides of its riser It is also said that Ghana
contains two cities, one of which is inhabited by Moslems, and the other by infidels Our MSS
give the former of these places kaukau, not kuku Abulfeda is silent on the subject. Mr K
has which he writes kfik

• One of our MSS give Buwi Mr Kosegarten has , but no rowels, he writes
however Joi This is, most probably, the “ Yeoo of Major Denham, which he places on the
bank of a river, Narr p 147

Mr Kosegartea has a remarkable addiUoa here, which is this “ hoc loco in littore flammis
crocodilum Tidi, scaphic minon simileio J*-Ul

Major Denham also saw crocodiles in Sudan pp 156, 228, and perhaps on the very same river
^ See Mr Kosegartensnote on this nver,p 51


SUDAN.


239


I there inquired for the residence of the white people, and lodged with
them;* they treated me very honourably. The Mohammedan Judge of
the blacks, who was a celebrated Haji, made me his guest, and sent
me a present and a cow.f I was sick two months in ’Mali. But God
restored me.

It happened that ’ Mansi Soleiman,J the Sultan of 'Mali, a most avari-
cious and worthless man, made a feast by way of kindness. I was present
at the entertainment with some of our theologians. When the assembly
broke up, I saluted him, having been brought to his knowledge by the
theologians. When I had left the place he sent me a 'meal, which he for-
warded to the house of the Judge. Upon this occasion the Judge came
walking hastily to me, and said : Up, for the Sultan has sent you a pre-
sent. I hastened, expecting that a dress of honour, some horses, and
other valuables, had been sent ; but, behold ! they were only three crusts
of bread, with a piece of fried fish, and a dish of sour milk. I smiled at
their simplicity, and the great value they set on such trifles as these. I
stayed here, after this meal, two months ; but saw nothing from him,
although I had often met him in their friendly meetings. I one day, how-
ever, rose up in his presence, and said : I have travelled the world over,
and have seen its kings ; and now, I have been four months in thy territo-
ries, but no present, or even provision from thee, has yet reached me. Now,
what shall I say of thee, when I shall be interrogated on the subject here-
after? Upon this, he gave me a house for my accommodation, with suitable
provisions. After this, the theologians visited me in the month of ’“Ramadan,
and, out of their whole number, they gave me three and thirty ^methkals of
gold. Of all people, the blacks debase themselves most in presence of their
king ; for when any one of them is called upon to appear before him, he


.JU'


\ \


* We have some notices of white people in this neighbourhood by Major Denham, which were
supposed to be Christians. See his Narrative, p. 178, 145, &c.

f Oxen seem to be plentiful in Sudan. Denham’s Narr. p. 107, &c.

One of our MSS. reads with Mr. Kosegarten ^ pointing however the first

which he writes in Latin Menassi, which, I suppose, he must have done by conjecture.


240


SUDAN


■Will immediately put off his usual clothing, and put on a worn out dress,
with a dirty cap , he will then enter the presence like a beggar, with his
clothes lifted up to the middle of his legs , he will then beat the ground
with both his elbows, and remain in the attitude of a person performing a
prostration When the Sultan addresses one of them, he will take up
the garment off his back, and throw dust upon his head , and, as long as
the Sultan speaks, every one present will remain with his turban taken off *
One of the best things m these parts is, the regard they pay to justice, for,
m this respect, the Sultan regards neither little nor much The safety, too,
IS very great , so that a traveller may proceed alone among them, without
the least fear of a thief or robber f Another of their good properties is,
that when a merchant happens to die among them, theyivill make no effort
to get possession of his property but will allow the lawful successors to it
to take it Another is. their constant custom of attending prayers with the
congregation , for, unless one makes haste, he will find no place left to say
his prayers in Another is, their insisting on the Koran s being committed
to memory for if a man finds his son defective m this, he will confine
him till he is quite perfect, nor will he allow him his liberty until he is
so As to their bad practices, they will exhibit their little daughters,
as well as their male and female slaves, quite naked ^ In the same man
ner will the women enter into the presence of the King, which his own
daughters will also do Nor do the free women ever clothe themselves till
after marriage The greatest part of them will eat stinking dead bodies,
dogs and asses §

I travelled, in the next place, from ’’Mali, the Sultan having given me a
hundred *methkals of gold, which place I left m the month Moharram, in


* These customs were witnessed by Major Denlum and I is companions See his Nanati'e
pp 118 168 237, &c

f See Mr Kosegarten s note p 51 Afneanus says, speaking of the parts about the

Nger ‘ Longa est admodum via secoralanien aiqne tuta (P II, edit 1632)
t bo Major Denham attests, Narr pp 145, 147, 162, i-c
5 See aUo Denhams Namtivc p 145


SUDAN.


241


the year fifty-four (A. D. February, 1353), and came to a “gulf which
branches out of the Nile, and upon the banks of which there were very
large beasts. I wondered at them, and thought they were elephants from
the great numbers there are in those parts :* but when I saw them enter
the water I enquired about 'them, and was told, that they were * sea-
horses, t which go out to graze, and then return to the water. They are
larger than the land horses, and have manes and tails : their heads are like
those of horses, and their legs like those of elephants. I was told by some
credible black 'Hajis, that the infidels of some parts of Sudan will eat men;
but that they will eat none but blacks, because, say they, the white are
injurious on account of their not being properly matured ; and, that when
their Sultan happens to send his ambassadors to one of the Kings of the
black Mohammedans, and intends to honour them with a feast, he also
sends to them a black slave, whom they kill and eat, and then return
their thanks for the honour and favour done them.j:

After some days I arrived at the city of ‘*Tambactu,§ tbe greater part
of the inhabitants of which are merchants from * Latham, which is a district
of ^ Mali. Here is also a black magistrate, on the part of the Sultan of
•^Mali. I next arrived at the city of ®Kawkaw, which is large, and one of
the most beautiful in Sudan. They here transact business with the ''cowrie H
(see p. 178), like the inhabitants of Mali. After this, I arrived at the
city of 'Bardama,^ the inhabitants of which protect the caravans. Their

. ^ al. and ^ ^ ”

.//«

* Major Denham witnessed large numbers of these animals, p. 187, &c.

j- See Mr. Kosegarten’s note, p. 51, and Major Denham’s Narrative, pp. 154, 162, 177, 231, &c.

■J; There must he some error in the text here.

§ Mr. Kosegarten’s work adds

, &c. which he translates, “ a Nilo quatuor milliaribus distat. E Tumbuctu in
scapha, qua? e unius arboris trunco confecta erat, per Nilum invecti, singulis diebus in oppida
divertimus, commeatumque sale et aromatibus coemimus, donee ad urbem Kuku appulimus.’’
See his note also, p. 51.

II So in the Journal of an excursion from Murmur to Kano, Denham’s Narrative, p. 51, &c.

^ Mr. Kosegarten has Burdama.

2 I


242


SUDAN


women are chaste and handsome I next arrived at the city of ‘ Nakda,*
which IS handsome, and built iNith red stone Its water runs o\er copper
mines, which changes its colour and taste The inhabitants are neither
artizans nor merchants The copper mme la without Nakda, and in this
their slaves are employed, who melt the ore and make it into bars The
merchants then take it into infidel and other parts of Sudan The Sultan
of Nakdti is a Berber I met him, and was treated as his, guest, and was
also provided by him with necessaries for my journey I was afterwards
visited by the commander of the faithful m Nakd“i, who ordered me to
wait on him, which I did, and then prepared for my jonmey I then left
this place J in the month 'Shaaban, m the year fifty-four (A D 1353),
and travelled till I came to the territories of "Hakar, the inhabitants of


yUi ‘ ^


* One MS readel^ Mr Kosegartcn ha» Ukadda wich a consider

able addition to the text the translation of which is “ Tekedda scorpiis abundat Segetes
ibi rars Seorpii morsu repentinum infanlibus adfenint mortem, cui remtdio occurntur nullo
viros tamen raro perimunt Ucbis incols m sola nercatura versantur , ^gyptum adeunc, indeque
vestes pretiosas afTerunt , de servorum et nancipiorutn multitudine inter se gloriantur

f Sec on these people the note at p 17, that these are a part of the same people is highly
probable with me and the reason of their being found so far in the interior might have originally
been necessity, arising from their inability to cope with the powerful Arab dynasties of the
north Mr Seetzen supposed the Berbers of Libya and Nubia to be of the same race \rr
Burckbardt doubts this See Travels m Nubia Appendix ui p 535, note

J Mr Kosegarten has ‘ Deinredituad Sedschclousseparalo, cumviatorumagmineTekeddaTn
reliqui, et Tewat petii Septuaginta ab illti stationibus distat quibus m trajiciendis viatores
comineatum secum v^nunl, enm in via uftift ejusmofri TepwiUtirr, Tifti Vac vi VraVyrtim, qti®
vestibus emunlur Accessimus Kalior qu® e terns Sultani Kerkenci est, pabu

loque abundat Inde profecti, per dies tre» iter fecimus per desertum habitacuhs vacuum
aqua careos dein per dies qumdecim iter fecimus per desertum aqua non carens, sed habitacuhs
vacuum Tnde m locum bivii pervenimus, obi via quae in/Egyptum tendit, de«cedit a via, quae ad
Tewiit ducit Ibidem putei, quorum aquiS super femim decumt , si quis ve«tem its lavat nigra
fit Inde, post iter per dies decern institutuio, penrenimus ad Dehkar, (jKsJ * e our
above) " Per eorum terras in quibus herb® rar® mensem unam iter prosecuti, accessimus Buda
— ex urbibus Tcvk-ati majonbusesC Qua relicta, in urbem ^edsclielmassc ven mus, fngi
clam, nivibus abundantem, &c


AFRICA.


243


whicli are a tribe of the Berbers, but a wortliless people. I next came to
"Sigilmasa, and from thence to "Fez, the residence of the commander of
the faithful, to whom I presented myself and kissed hands. 1 now finished
my travels, and took up my residence in this country. May God be
praised.


THE END.
