Treaty of Rio de Janeiro
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Treaty_of_Rio_de_Janeiro_%281825%29>. Public domain.

In the name of the Most Holy and Indivisible Trinity
His Most Faithful Majesty, having constantly in his real heart the most lively desires to restore peace, friendship and good harmony among fraternal peoples, which the most sacred bonds must reconcile and unite in perpetual alliance; to achieve such important ends, to promote general prosperity and to secure the political existence and future destinies of Portugal, as well as those of Brazil; and wishing at once to remove all obstacles that could prevent the said alliance, concord and happiness of one and the other State, by his diploma of May 13 of the current year, he recognized Brazil in the category of an independent Empire, and separated from the kingdoms of Portugal and Algarves, and to his most beloved and dear son Dom Pedro by emperor, ceding and transferring of his own free will the sovereignty of the said Empire to his son, and his legitimate successors, and taking only, and reserving for the your person the same title.
And these august lords, accepting the mediation of His British Majesty for the settlement of the whole question incident to the separation of the two States, have appointed plenipotentiaries, namely:
His Imperial Majesty, to the most illustrious and excellent Luís José de Carvalho e Mello, of the Council of State, dignitary of the Imperial Order of the Cruzeiro, Commander of the Orders of Christ, and of Conceição, and Minister and Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; to the most illustrious and most excellent Baron of Santo Amaro, great of the Empire, of the Council of State, gentleman of the Imperial Chamber, dignitary of the Imperial Order of the Cruzeiro, and Commander of the Orders of Christ, and of the Tower and Sword; and to the most illustrious and most excellent Francisco Vilella Barbosa, of the Council of State, Grand Cross of the Imperial Order of the Cruzeiro, Knight of the Order of Christ, Colonel of the Imperial Corps of Engineers, Minister and Secretary of State for Navy Affairs, and Inspector General of the Navy .
His Majesty Most Faithful to the Most Illustrious and Most Excellent Gentleman Sir Carlos Stuart, Private Counselor to His British Majesty, Grand Cross of the Order of the Tower and Sword, and of the Order of the Bath.
And having seen and exchanged their full powers, they agreed that, in accordance with the principles expressed in this preamble, the present Treaty should be formed.
Art. 1st: His Most Faithful Majesty recognizes Brazil as an independent Empire, separate from the kingdoms of Portugal and Algarves; and to his much-loved and dear son Dom Pedro by emperor, yielding and transferring of his own free will the sovereignty of the said Empire to his own son, and to his legitimate successors. His Most Faithful Majesty takes only, and reserves for his person, the same title.
Art. 2nd: His Imperial Majesty, in recognition of respect and love for his august father, Dom João VI, agrees that His Most Faithful Majesty take the title of Emperor for himself.
Art. 3rd: His Imperial Majesty promises not to accept proposals from any Portuguese colonies to join the Empire of Brazil.
Art. 4th: From now on there will be peace and alliance, and the most perfect friendship between the Empire of Brazil and the Kingdoms of Portugal and Algarves, with total oblivion of past disagreements between the respective peoples.
Art. 5th: The subjects of both nations, Brazilian and Portuguese, will be considered and treated in the respective states as those of the most favored and friendly nation, and their rights; and property religiously guarded, and protected; it being understood that the current owners of real estate will be kept in peaceful possession of the same assets.
Art. 6th: All ownership of real property, or movables, and shares, seized or confiscated, belonging to the subjects of both sovereigns, of Brazil and Portugal, will be immediately returned, as well as their past income, deducting the expenses of the administration. , or their owners reciprocally indemnified in the manner stated in article 8.
Art. 7th: All vessels, and seized cargo, belonging to the subjects of both sovereigns, will be similarly returned, or their owners indemnified.
Art. 8: A commission appointed by both governments, composed of Brazilians and Portuguese in equal numbers, and established where the respective governments deem most convenient, will be charged with examining the matter of articles 6 and 7; understanding that complaints must be made within
one year, after the commission is formed, and that in the event of a tie in votes, the matter will be decided by the representative of the sovereign mediator. Both governments will indicate the funds through which the first settled claims will be paid.
Art. 9th: All public claims from government to government will be reciprocally received, and decided, either with the restitution of the objects claimed, or with an indemnity of their fair value. For the settlement of these claims, both high contracting parties agreed to make a direct and special agreement.
Art. 10: Trade relations between both nations, Brazilian and Portuguese, will be re-established immediately, paying each other fifteen percent of consumer duties provisionally, with transhipment and re-export duties remaining in the same way as was practiced before the separation.
Art. 11: The reciprocal exchange of ratifications of the present treaty will take place in the city of Lisbon, within a period of five months, or shorter, if possible, from the day of signature of the present treaty.
In witness whereof, we, the undersigned plenipotentiaries of His Imperial Majesty, and of His Most Faithful Majesty, by virtue of our respective full powers, have signed the present treaty with our fists, and have signed it with the seals of our arms.
Done in the city of Rio de Janeiro on the twenty-ninth day of the month of August in the year of the birth of Our Lord Jesus Christ, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-five.
[Signature]
